==PAGE:1==
Link prediction in dynamic
networks with node metadata
Simon Thordal
Kongens Lyngby 2016
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
With the increased focus on modeling and analyzing complex networks over
the last 20 years a lot of work has been done in predicting how networks grow
and what links will form between its nodes.
This problem of link predition
has many practical uses, from suggesting friends on social networks, potential
hires for companies and analyzing interactions in networks of proteins.
The
problem has been approached in many diﬀerent ways and diﬀerent methods have
been suggested for diﬀerent types of networks exploiting structural information,
temporal information or content not intrinsic to the network itself.
In this thesis the methods used in link prediction will be applied to a network
of verdicts from the Court of Justice of the European Union in an attempt to
ﬁnd out what citations diﬀerent verdicts choose to make.
The problem will
be approached from diﬀerent angles and we attempt to use methods that take
advantage of all the information available for the network by both incorporating
structural information, temporal information and metadata in the form of the
text content of the verdict.
The methods will then be experimentally tested using standard machine learn-
ing best practices and eventually show relatively good prediction results with
performance that could be used in a real-life classiﬁer or recommender engine.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute – Department of Applied Mathemat-
ics and Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulﬁllment
of the requirements for acquiring a M.Sc. in Mathematical Modeling and Com-
puting.
The thesis deals with the prediction of citations in a complex network of court
verdicts using the methods put forward in the related literature.
The thesis consists of an introduction to the subject including the goals for the
thesis, a literature review and an introduction to the dataset, 1. After that the
similarity indices that will form the building blocks of our supervised methods
are introduced in 3, the unsupervised methods are introduced in chapter 4 and
ﬁnally the results in chapter 6
Barcelona, 06-June-2016
Simon Thordal
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors Sune Lehmann and Enys Mones for excel-
lent advice on everything from methods, schedule and the direction of my thesis
and also to the group at iCourt who created and provided the content database
that part of the thesis builds on.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Goals and problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.1
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2.1
Topological indices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2.2
Non-topological indices
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.2.3
Supervised methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Preprocessing and data analysis
9
2.1
Predictive domains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Similarity indices
13
3.1
Topological features
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.1.1
Common Neighbors (CN) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.1.2
Adamic/Adar (AA)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1.3
Resource Allocation (RA) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1.4
Jaccard (JA) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.1.5
Leicht-Holme-Newman, one-step (LHN1)
. . . . . . . . .
17
3.1.6
Preferential Attachment (PA) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.1.7
Triadic Closeness (TC) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1.8
Common referrers (CR) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2
Node based features
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2.1
TF-IDF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
3.2.2
Communities as features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2.3
Temporal features
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4
Supervised methods
27
4.1
Logistic Regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.1.1
Feature selection and hyper-parameter tuning . . . . . . .
29
4.2
Random Forests
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2.1
Decision trees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2.2
Ensembles of trees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.3
Training and testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.4
Data imbalance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5
Evaluation methods
35
6
Results
37
6.1
Similarity indices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.2
Supervised methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
7
Future work
45
8
Conclusion
47
Bibliography
49
References
49
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
The science of complex networks seeks to model the networks that are found
everywhere in the world, from social networks such as Twitter or Facebook, in-
teractions between proteins or the for scientists familiar network of citations be-
tween published papers or co-operation between their authors. These networks
play a large role in our day-to-day lifes with the average Swedish woman spend-
ing 84 minutes per day on Facebook (Denti et al., 2012) and surveys stating that
89% of asked companies had hired employees on linkedin (Jobvite, 2011). Net-
works are also useful models outside of human relations and the ability to model
and analyze the fragility of networks of interactions among animals, plants and
bacteria as a complex, ecological network becomes important in a world where
the number of threatened species rises exponentially (Montoya, Pimm, & Solé,
2006). The only real requirement for something to be modeled as a network is
that it has actors that can be modeled as the nodes or vertices of the network
and that these actors have interactions that can be modeled as links. In this
paper the relatively novel dataset of verdicts in the Court of Justice of the Eu-
ropean Union (CJEU) is used, where each verdict can be represented as a node
and each citation between them is a link.
There are several applications of modeling the verdicts as a networks such as
being able to separate diﬀerent verdicts into diﬀerent communities that corre-
spond to a speciﬁc area of law and showing how diﬀerent areas of law inﬂuence
each other over time. In this thesis however we will focus on predicting the cita-
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
tions that a verdict makes or equivalently, what links will form between nodes.
This problem of link prediction has been subject of several papers and several
of the methods developed have turned into real life applications. An example of
this is the Facebook feature that recommends new friends to its users, a closely
related method called collaborative ﬁltering is behind the algorithm that recom-
mends movies on Netﬂix and the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
(DARPA) maintains their Evidence Extraction and Link Discovery program to
be able to discover links that can identify potential terrorists and whoever else
might be considered a threat by US agencies. For the network of verdicts this
is interesting both as an academic undertaking, but it is also easy to imagine
concrete uses, most notably in making recommendations to verdict authors on
what citations to make.
To get a clearer deﬁnition of the purpose of this thesis we try to make a more
rigid deﬁnition of link prediction and a more formal problem statement in chap-
ter 1.1. An overview of the existing literature is then given in 1.2 followed by
an introduction to the dataset, the assumptions that we make based on our
problem statement in section 2. After this the unsupervised methodologies are
introduced in chapter 3 along with some experimental results of these methods,
followed by a combination of the similarity indices using supervised learning in
chapter 4.
1.1
Goals and problem statement
In this chapter an outline of the purpose of this thesis will be given and the
fundamental problem will be formulated.
The purpose of this thesis is to explore the general problem of predicting what
links will appear in a network and to apply the methods found speciﬁcally to the
network of cited verdicts in the Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU).
As mentioned in the introduction link prediction has been widely studied over
the last 10 years, but since the dataset in question is not publicly available it has
not been the subject of any of these studies. This presents a good opportunity
to validate previously proposed methodology as well as develop methods that
are somewhat tailored to the this speciﬁc domain.
Apart from the theoretical value of the thesis there are clear practical appli-
cations of link prediction in citation networks. Previous work by Derlén et al.
(Derlén, Lindholm, Rosvall, & Mirshahvalad, 2013) use a simple method of triad
completion to infer hidden links in the network of CJEU cases as part of their
work on separating cases into speciﬁc areas of law. This inference could be im-
==PAGE:13==
1.1 Goals and problem statement
3
proved by applying more complex and, possibly more importantly, better tested
link prediction methods.
As mentioned by Derlén European case law is also a, "sprawling, extenstive and
continuously expanding system" and even for the most experienced practicioners
knowing all the deatils is diﬃcult if not impossible. Link prediction could help
alleviate the confusion, for instance if implemented as a recommender system
that could suggest citations as a verdict is being written.
1.1.1
Problem statement
Edited for conciseness, the deﬁnition of link prediction as given by Liben and
Nowell (Liben-Nowell & Kleinberg, 2003) is that
"Given a snapshot of a network at time t predict the edges that will be added
to the network during the interval from time t to a given future time t′"
where prediction is the outcome of the function p for a pair of nodes x, y deﬁned
as
p(x, y) =
(
True,
if score(x, y) ≥τ
False,
if score(x, y) ≤τ
(1.1)
with τ being the score threshold value used to determine whether an edge will be
predicted for the candidate pair or not and score being some arbitrary scoring
function.
The deﬁnition by Liben and Nowell is loose in the sense that edges can be added
to any node in the network during the interval, which is reasonable when nodes
continuously interact as in the case of social networks where a user at any point
can choose to add new friends, not only when she creates her account. For the
network of verdicts however all edges are added when the node is created as it
is not possible to add citations to a verdict after it has been written. This leads
to the following deﬁnition
"Predict the outgoing edges of a node created at time t′ given the network at
time t, when no changes has been made to the network between t and t′"
or when Vt is the set of nodes of the network G evaluated at time t and xt′ is a
==PAGE:14==
4
Introduction
node added at time t′
p(xt′, y) ∀y ∈Vt
(1.2)
In practice this means that when evaluating a potential edge between nodes xt
and yt′ added at respectively time t and t′ the predictors are computed based
on the network at time t. It also restricts the number of potential edges to be
considered since it is assumed that verdicts only can cite verdicts that are older
than themselves.
It should be noted that if the problem is formulated as a recommendation prob-
lem the raw output of the score function is used instead of the predictions as it
is necessary to rank candidate pairs based on our conﬁdence in them forming
an edge.
An alternative deﬁnition of link prediction focuses on uncovering hidden struc-
ture in the network, meaning links that should exist in the network but for some
reason do not. The subtle diﬀerence from Liben and Nowells deﬁnition is that a
node added at time t is able to perceive the entire network, not only the struc-
ture added before time t, i.e. given a candidate pair x and y that are both cited
by a younger node, z, the scoring function will have access to the information
about the incoming links to x and y when the score is calculated. This problem
is not rigorously examined in this thesis, however the methods developed here
will be applicable in both cases.
1.2
Literature review
In this section we will try to give a short summary of how link prediction has
evolved and what approaches that have been put forward in academic litterature
over the past years. Not all of the investigated methods are relevant to the
problem of predicting links in the dataset of verdicts and not all the relevant
methods will be tackled in this thesis, but hopefully it will provide some clarity
to where the ﬁeld is coming from and what direction it is heading in.
The
basic premise of link prediction is that similar nodes are more likely to form
connections than non-similar nodes and its fundamental question is how to best
quantify the similarity between pairs of nodes.
The approaches taken can in general be split between similarity indices that
consider only the structure of the networks, i.e. its nodes and their connections,
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Literature review
5
and indices that look at extragenous information such as the text similarity of
the documents the nodes represent in a citation network.
1.2.1
Topological indices
In their 2003 paper Liben-Nowell and Kleinberg (Liben-Nowell & Kleinberg,
2003) looked only at the structural, topological features "intrinsic to the net-
work itself" and found that relatively simple predictive methods could improve
upon randomly guessing future links by large factors. A number of these topo-
logical features are introduced in the excellent survey papers by Lü et al. (Lü
& Zhou, 2011) who investigate several indices for undirected networks and test
them on publicly available datasets and Wang et al. (Wang, Xu, Wu, & Zhou,
2014) whose paper is a comprehensive introduction to both topological indices
and more advanced approaches.
One of the more signiﬁcant indices used in
the network of verdicts is the preferential attachment index, which is based on
the principle that nodes with many links are more likely to form new links, the
idea behind scale free networks put forward by among other Newman (Newman,
2009) and Barabasi et al. (Barabási et al., 2002). Other signiﬁcant topological
indices are based on the number of neighbors shared by a candidate pair multi-
plied by some weighting factor, such as the Adamic / Adar index which weighs
rare connections higher than common connections (Adamic & Adar, 2003).
While the indices based on the common neighborhood were found to work well
by among other Liben-Nowell and Kleinberg they are unable to predict links
where the length of the shortest path between the nodes is greater than 2, since
these will not share common neighbors. To predict these a number of global and
semi-global indices have been developed which extends the investigated neigh-
borhood beyond the immediate neighbors, such as the path based Katz index
(Katz, 1953) and indices based on random walks such as the average commute
time (Fouss, Pirotte, Renders, & Saerens, 2007). These indices have been shown
to work well in other works, but they are usually only implemented for undi-
rected networks. Additionally their closed form solutions include inverting the
adjacency matrix, which becomes untractable when the network changes over
time, leading to a unique matrix inverse every time a node is added to the
network.
An alternative to these are the semi-global indices which are a compromise be-
tween the global and local indices and include indices such as the local path
index, which is a limited version of the Katz index (Zhou, Lü, & Zhang, 2009),
and the Superimposed Random Walk which scores edges based on the probabil-
ity that a random walker starting from the source node will end up at the target
node after a ﬁnite number of steps (Liu & Lü, 2010). The advantage with both
==PAGE:16==
6
Introduction
of these indices compared to global indices is that they are less computationally
heavy and that they can be modiﬁed to work with directed networks.
1.2.2
Non-topological indices
While topological features exist in every network many include "side-information"
such as liked pages on social networks, keywords for scientiﬁc articles and for
the network of verdicts the date the verdict was written and the text in the
verdict. This extra information is valuable, particularly when considering edges
that have no or little topological information available.
Examining the text similarity of two verdicts requires some way of measuring
text similarity. Chang and Blei (Chang & Blei, 2009) used topic models to show
that for some networks links can be predicted using only text content and oth-
ers have achieved good results using term-frequency inverse document-frequency
(TF-IDF) similarity as a feature in supervised models (Shibata, Kajikawa, &
Sakata, 2012).
This thesis focuses on TF-IDF due to its simplicity and be-
cause the average similarity of the verdicts is quite high, something that can be
addressed using TF-IDF.
Apart from the text content the verdict network has access to the publication
times of the verdicts. Temporal networks like these have been investigated by
several authors and methods ranging from time series modeling of topological
features (Soares & Prudêncio, 2012) to exploiting periodic patterns (Dunlavy,
Kolda, & Acar, 2011) have been proposed, but often the structure is more com-
plex than ours with links that disappear over time or existing nodes in the
network creating new connections. Instead we focused simply on the diﬀerences
in publication time and included that as an index.
1.2.3
Supervised methods
All the mentioned methods for link prediction are completely unsupervised,
but there has also been much focus on the application of supervised methods
to link prediction.
This is done by treating the link prediction problem as
a binary classiﬁcation problem and using the before mentioned unsupervised
indices as features in a classiﬁer. Cukierski et al. (Cukierski, Hamner, & Yang,
2011) did this using a Random Forest model for the classiﬁer with very good
results on the Kaggle Link Prediction challenge and ended up ﬁnishing second
on the leaderboards with a model trained exclusively on topological features.
Supervised learning in general is not a new problem and there is extensive
==PAGE:17==
1.2 Literature review
7
literature as well as excellent textbooks such as Elements of Statistical Learning
by Hasties et al. (Hastie, Tibshirani, & Friedman, 2001) which has been the
general reference point for basic techniques such as cross validation, feature
selection, etc.
==PAGE:18==
8
Introduction
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2
Preprocessing and data
analysis
In this chapter the fundamental properties of the verdict datasets will be ex-
plored and the assumptions made about the network will be introduced. Since
the goal of this thesis is to predict links based on node and topology features,
choosing what features to include requires knowledge of the structure of the
network and its relation to the properties of the nodes, i.e. predicting links
based on the degree of the source and the target node only makes sense if link
formation is correlated to this.
There are some basic assumptions we will make about the nature of the network
to make the link prediction problem more constrained. The full network is a
directed, acyclic graph, G(V, E) where V are the nodes in the network and E are
the edges between nodes. Each edge in E consists of one verdict citing another,
making the graph directed with each edge pointing from a source node, x, to a
target node, y. All nodes also have a timestamp and Gt consists of all nodes
and edges existing in the network at time t. It is also assumed that verdicts only
can make citations to verdicts that are older than themselves or more formally
t1 > t2 ∀(xt1, yt2) ∈E
==PAGE:20==
10
Preprocessing and data analysis
CJEU
Total nr. of edges
43787
Total nr. of nodes
9646
Self loop edges
87
Non causal edges
12
Pre-processed nr. of edges
43694
Pre-processed nr. of nodes
8574
Edge mean shortest path length
2.28
Non-edge mean shortest path length
5.45
Table 2.1: Table of basic properties of the network
this also makes the network acyclic since any cycle would break causality. Finally
it is assumed that verdicts cannot cite themselves, eliminating self-loops from
the graph.
The basic statistics for the CJEU network can be seen in the table in 2.1 where
the edge and node counts for each pre-processing step is shown. As can be seen
in table 2.1 not all assumptions are upheld.
Non-causal links appear in the
graph, either due to mislabeling or some process for altering citations unknown
to us.
These and the small number of a self-loops are removed as there is
little chance of predicting them and they may introduce unwanted noise in the
predictive models.
During preprocessing the largest connected component of the undirected version
of each network is extracted and nodes belonging to any other components are
removed from the network. This is reasonable since many of the features used
depend on an existing connection between the nodes, making inter-component
edges non-trivial to predict.
2.1
Predictive domains
An interesting property of performing prediction in networks is that not every
feature is relevant for every candidate pair. If for example we are evaluating a
potential link, (x, y), where the source node has no connections to other nodes,
then this candidate pair is guaranteed to have a score of 0 on all local indices
as the local neighborhood of the source node is empty. For these particular
nodes the only relevant indices are those that work on node properties. By only
evaluating methods on the candidate pairs for which they can be useful we avoid
computational overhead, speciﬁc methods can be targeted for speciﬁc domains
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Predictive domains
11
and methods can be evaluated on their relevant domains, giving a better idea
of their performance.
Figure 2.1: Shortest undirected path lengths for representative sample of the
CJEU network
The domains that are relevant to the dataset of verdicts can be found from the
shortest paths between candidate pairs. The ﬁrst domain holds all potential
edges where the shortest undirected path length between the source and the
target node is greater than two or equivalently all candidate pairs that do not
share common neighbors. For these pairs all indices except the ones based on
common neighbors are relevant. The second domain are then the candidate pairs
that have a shortest undirected path length of 2, meaning that the pair shares
common neighbors. In this domain all the introduced indices are relevant. The
shortest path lengths can be seen in ﬁgure 2.1 and it is quite obvious that most
of the true edges fall in the domain where the shortest path length is two (72%)
and that more than 99% of the non-edges fall in the domain where the shortest
path length is larger than two.
==PAGE:22==
12
Preprocessing and data analysis
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 3
Similarity indices
Most approaches in link prediction have fallen in either of two categories, similar-
ity based indices or learning based methods, where the similarity based indices
assign a score to each node pair given some metric and selects the top scoring
candidates as potential links, whereas learning based methods ﬁt a model to a
set of features and based on this predicts whether a candidate will form a link
or not (Wang et al., 2014). The features of the learning models are usually
taken from the unsupervised similarity indices and can be classiﬁed as either
topological- or node-based.
Node based features describe attributes that are independent of the network
structure such as similarities in the text of two verdicts or the diﬀerence between
publication time of articles. Topological features are centered around properties
of the graph itself, such as common neighbors between nodes, the product of
node degrees or whether two nodes belong to the same community of nodes.
Following is an overview of the diﬀerent features used for link prediction in
the network of verdicts, roughly divided in topological and node-based features
along with motivations for why the diﬀerent methods were chosen.
==PAGE:24==
14
Similarity indices
3.1
Topological features
Most topological features are similarity indices and can be categorized by how
large a neighborhood they operate on.
If for a given candidate pair, (x, y)
only the immediate neighborhoods, Γ(x) and Γ(y), are investigated the index is
local, if it takes the entire network into account it is global and if it operates
on some ﬁnite neighborhood greater than the 1-neighborhood it is quasi-global
(Lü & Zhou, 2011). Similarity based methods with local indexing only look
at the 1-neighborhood of any given node making them fast to compute, but
they potentially lose information found in the extended neighborhood. A good
indicator for the predictive power of local indices can be seen in in ﬁgure 2.1
which shows the shortest path length excluding direct links for both edges and
non-edges. If a candidate pair has a shortest path length of 2 it means that they
have common neighbors and a large part of the edges fall into this category with
72% of all edges sharing at least one common neighbor compared to 1% of the
non-edges.
The following indices were all developed for undirected networks, but where
applicable directed versions have been created. The notation used is Γin(x) and
Γout(x) which are the in- and out-neighborhoods of x, Γ(x) which is their union
and kx which is the degree of x with corresponding versions that give the in-
and out-degree. It should be noted that Γ(x) always defaults to Γout(x) since
nodes do not have any incoming edges when they are added to the network.
3.1.1
Common Neighbors (CN)
Common neighbors or the intersection of the 1-neighborhoods of the nodes in
the candidate pair (x, y) is the most commonly used index in link prediction
and it has been shown that the likelihood of a link between two nodes correlates
highly with the distance between the nodes as well as the number of neighbors
shared (Lü & Zhou, 2011). Formally the score is found by
CN(x, y) = |Γ(x) ∪Γ(y)|
where Γ(x) is the function returning the 1-neighborhood of x.
For a directed graph either out- or incoming edges as well as their unions can be
used for the 1-neighborhood, but since the source node by deﬁnition only knows
about its own outgoing edges and there are no loops in the graph the two used
neighborhoods are
==PAGE:25==
3.1 Topological features
15
Figure 3.1: Distribution of common neighbors for edges and non-edges that
share at least one common neighbor
CNin(x, y) = |Γout(x) ∪Γin(y)|
CNout(x, y) =
Γout(x) ∪Γout(y)

The usefulness of this index can be seen in ﬁgure 3.1 where the distribution of
common neighbors for edges and a sub-sample of non-edges with at least one
shared neighbor is shown.
While the graph shows that edges have a higher
probability of sharing more neighbors it should be noted that there are far more
non-edges in the graph than edges, so if candidate pairs sharing many common
neighbors are labeled as edges there will still be a large number of false positives
among the predictions.
In the following sections the several weighting schemes have been introduced to
improve upon the common neighbors metric will be introduced.
==PAGE:26==
16
Similarity indices
3.1.2
Adamic/Adar (AA)
The Adamic/Adar index was developed by Adamic and Adar (Adamic & Adar,
2003) to mine relationships on the web and has since been repurposed by many
authors as a general purpose link prediction index. Its rationale is that neighbors
that are shared by only a few nodes are more signiﬁcant than neighbors that
are shared by many nodes. In link prediction for undirected networks this is
AA(x, y) =
X
z ∈Γ(x)∪Γ(y)
1
log |Γ(z)|
where the Γ(z) term is the number of node pairs for which z is a common
neighbor. Following the same thought of weighting by the inverse frequency the
following directed measures are used
AAin(x, y) =
X
z ∈Γout(x)∪Γout(y)
1
log(
Γout(z)
Γout(z)
)
AAout(x, y) =
X
z ∈Γout(x)∪Γin(y)
1
log(|Γout(z)||Γin(z)|)
3.1.3
Resource Allocation (RA)
Resource Allocation is similar to Adamic/Adar in that it penalizes connections
through high degree neighbors. Conceptually it describes ﬂow of information
from a source node to a target node through their shared neighborhood (Adamic
& Adar, 2003) and the undirected version is
RA(x, y) =
X
z ∈Γout(x)∪Γin(y)
1
kz
The choice of neighborhoods for the directed version shown above is based on
the concept of information ﬂow used for the original index, but it takes into
account the direction of the edges.
RAout(x, y) =
X
z ∈Γout(x)∪Γin(y)
1
kout,z
==PAGE:27==
3.1 Topological features
17
3.1.4
Jaccard (JA)
The Jaccard index is based on the well-known Jaccard similarity, which is the
intersection of two sets divided by the union of the sets (Jaccard, 1912). In link
prediction it states that two nodes are similar if the number of shared neighbors
is a large portion of the combined neighborhood of the two nodes.
JA(x, y) = |Γout(x) ∪Γ(y)|
|Γout(x) ∩Γ(y)|
3.1.5
Leicht-Holme-Newman, one-step (LHN1)
The similarity index proposed by Leicht, Holme and Newman (Leicht, Holme, &
Newman, 2006) is yet another variant of the common neighbors index, but here it
is proposed that the similarity is inversely proportional to the expected number
of paths between the source and the target node, which itself is proportional to
the degree product of the nodes
LHN1(x, y) = |Γ(x) ∪Γ(y)|
kout,xky
where ki is the total degree of i’th node and kout,i is the out-degree of the i’th
node.
3.1.6
Preferential Attachment (PA)
Based on ideas championed by among other Albert and Barabasi (Albert &
Barabási, 2002) the Preferential Attachment index states that the likelihood of
a link forming between two nodes is proportional to the degree of both nodes if
the network is scale-free. The assumptions for scale-free networks are that the
network grows over time and that nodes are more likely to connect to higher
degree nodes, both of which hold for the verdict network if authors are more
likely to cite well-known or important verdicts than unknown ones.
As an index preferential attachment is particularly interesting because it is easily
calculated and in contrast to the preceding indices, independent on the number
of common neighbors. In directed networks the probability of a link forming
between a candidate node pair, (x, y), is dependent on the out-degree of the
source node and the in-degree of the target node (Krapivsky, Rodgers, & Redner,
2001; Tadić, 2001), leading to the following index
==PAGE:28==
18
Similarity indices
PA(x, y) = kout,x × kin,y
It should be noted that preferential attachment refers to a situation where both
source and target node are chosen at random, e.g. when discovering hidden
links in the network. When link prediction is applied as a recommender engine
the source node will always be known and in that case the likelihood of a link
between x and y only depends on kin,y (Bollobás, Borgs, Chayes, & Riordan,
2003).
==PAGE:29==
3.1 Topological features
19
3.1.7
Triadic Closeness (TC)
Figure 3.2: Possible open triad conﬁgurations
Figure 3.3: Possible closed triad con-
ﬁgurations
For non-random networks it can be
found that some connection patterns
are more common than others, with
the most common pattern being the
triad which is any combination of
three nodes in the network where at
least two of the nodes are connected.
For a general directed network with-
out self-loops the potential triads are
shown in ﬁgures 3.2 and 3.3.
Triadic closeness is an unsupervised
method proposed by Schall (Schall,
2014) that exploits the fact that some
triadic patterns are more likely to ap-
pear in a given network than others,
so if you have a potential link between
nodes x and y that have the common
neighbor z the likelihood of the cre-
ated triad appearing in the network
can be used as a score. In other words, the likelihood for a link between x and
y depends on how common the triad formed from adding the link is compared
to how common the triad formed by the unconnected x and y is.
The actual triadic closeness score is calculated as
TC(x, y) =
X
z ∈Γ(x)∪Γ(y)
F(δ(x, y, z) + 10) + F(δ(x, y, z) + 30)
F(δ(x, y, z))
==PAGE:30==
20
Similarity indices
where sx,y is the score for the x, y node pair, Γ(x) returns the neighborhood of
x, δ(x, z, y) returns the triad produced by the nodes x, y and z and F(t) returns
the frequency of the triad t. Note that the neighborhood consists of both in-
and out-going links.
Since verdicts cannot cite into the future only a subset of the potential triads
shown here are possible. Assuming x is the source node the only open triads
that it can form are T04 and T06 from ﬁgure 3.2 and the only closed triads are
T14 and T16 from ﬁgure 3.3. This reduced complexity of the network might
mean that the eﬀectiveness of the method is reduced.
Since a triad requires that the nodes x and y are joined through an extra node
z nodes that are linked but do not share neighbors will not be found by this
method. If the network being examined has important structure beyond the
1-neighborhood more general motif analysis methods can be used.
3.1.8
Common referrers (CR)
Figure 3.4: Common referrers for can-
didate pair (x,y) with the
common referrers marked
in red
Common referrers is an expansion of
the common neighbors metric which
assumes that if x is connected to z
through u, then x is also more likely
to connect to other nodes that z is
connected to.
Speciﬁc to the ver-
dict citation networks this indicates
that verdicts that have the same cita-
tions are similar and that similar ver-
dicts tend to have the same citations.
If a possible link between the node
pair (x, y) is being evaluated then the
common referrers index takes the fol-
lowing form
CR(x, y) =
Γin(y) ∩Γin(u)
 ∀u ∈Γout(x)
The neighborhood is also shown in ﬁgure 3.4 where the common referrers are the
z-nodes marked in red for a potential connection between x and y. As can be
seen from the ﬁgure the considered nodes extends beyound the 1-neighborhood
of x, making common referrers the only quasi-global index considered in this
thesis.
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Node based features
21
It is possible to use this index in conjunction with weighting schemes such as
Adamic/Adar or Resource Allocation just like it is done with Common Neigh-
bors, however its computation time is high and experiments have shown poor
results with the index, so for the purpose of this thesis the unweighted version
is used.
3.2
Node based features
3.2.1
TF-IDF
To evaluate the text content of two verdicts they are represented as word vectors,
weighted by their term frequency inverse document frequency (TF-IDF) and
their similarity is found as the cosine diﬀerence of the vectors. Diﬀerent TF-
IDF parameters are evaluated using a cross-validated grid search. Both the raw
similarity score and weighted versions were evaluated using a logistic regression
model.
3.2.1.1
TF-IDF based similarity
Behind TF-IDF lies the idea that rarer words give more information about a
verdict than common words. For a single term, t, in a verdict, d, this can be
formalized as
idf = log
N
f(d ∈D : t ∈d)
(3.1)
tf = f(t ∈d)
(3.2)
tf-idf = tf × idf
(3.3)
where N is the size of the collection of verdicts, d ∈D is a single verdict in the
collection and f returns the frequency (Salton & Buckley, 1988). This approach
builds on the bag-of-words method where documents are represented as simple
term-frequency vectors by penalizing terms that appear in many diﬀerent doc-
uments in the collection. To get a measure of the similarity of documents the
cosine diﬀerence between the individual TF-IDF vectors is found, producing a
n × n matrix of similarity scores where n is the number of documents in the
collection.
score(x, y) = 1 −
XY
∥X∥∥Y ∥
==PAGE:32==
22
Similarity indices
where x and y are nodes in the network and X and Y are the tf-idf weighted
word vectors of the content of x and y. Diﬀerent versions of TF-IDF exist and
this particular version is chosen as it is descriptive and has been shown to have
good performance (Salton & Buckley, 1988).
3.2.1.2
Pre-processing and parameter evaluation
Computing the TF-IDF scores without any pre-processing is problematic as
documents tend to have many words carrying little signiﬁcance and only con-
tributing to noise in the ﬁnal score. To improve the quality of the similarity score
pre-processing was performed which includes removing common terms known as
stop-words from the corpus, removing punctuation and digits and ensuring all
words were in lower-case. Apart from this the TF-IDF implementation in the
sklearn package allows for specifying parameters to control for the maximum
and minimum frequencies of included terms. These parameters were optimized
using a full grid search and based on AUC values the optimal parameters are
found to be a max. df. of 0.75 and no minimum document frequency, meaning
that term includeds in more than 75% of the documents are removed while there
being no lower limit on the term frequency. Since this removes more common
terms it eﬀectively increases the speciﬁcity of the feature while decreasing recall.
Additional possible pre-processing steps include principal components analysis
for dimensionality reduction which was tested but did not lead to any immediate
improvements.
3.2.2
Communities as features
Many networks naturally form communities where nodes are grouped together
based on their topological properties in groups that often reﬂect some real-world
connections such as research ﬁelds for citation networks or groups of friends in
social networks. For the network of verdicts work has been done on community
detection that found communities mapping to relevant areas of law (Derlén et
al., 2013).
Since sharing a community is an expression of similarity and we
assume that nodes tend to form connections to other similar nodes it has use
as a feature in supervised learning, either as a boolean feature capturing if
two nodes belong to the same community or as a distribution capturing the
probability of a node in community a forming a link to a node in community b.
The method for discovering communities in the network is Infomap developed
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Node based features
23
Figure 3.5: Distribution of outgoing links among the 100 largest communities
with the diagonal indicating self loops
by Rosvall, Axelsson and Bergstöm (Rosvall, Axelsson, & Bergstrom, 2009)
as implemented in the Python igraph package, which is based on ﬁnding an
optimal compression of a random walk performed on nodes in the network.
To use this feature it is necessary to know both what community the source and
target node belongs to. This is not practically possible since a new community
structure would need to be computed for every node. Instead the community
structure for nodes added in preceding years is used and the new node is assigned
a label based on a majority vote among its already added edges.
To get an idea of how the link distribution in and between communities looks
a new network Gc is created where each community is collapsed into a single
node while retaining the edges from the original network, G resulting in a graph
with 476 nodes, one for each community. The mean ratio of in-community to
==PAGE:34==
24
Similarity indices
out-of-community links is 0.48 with a standard deviation of 0.4 indicating that
all the communitites are dominated by self loops, i.e. most nodes in G create
links to nodes in their own communities. This can also be seen in ﬁgure 3.5,
which shows the adjacency matrix for the 50 largest communitites which hold
57% of the nodes in the original network.
3.2.3
Temporal features
For networks that evolve over time another dimension of features open up com-
pared to networks that are treated as being static or non-temporal.
These
features include looking at repeating patterns in the activity between nodes
(Dunlavy et al., 2011) time-series based methods of predicting network features
in the future (Soares & Prudêncio, 2012), burstiness of incoming links and link
probabilities that decay over time.
Unlike social networks the verdict citation network is semi-static since once
inserted a node cannot add more outgoing links and once created it is not
possible to remove a link. This limits the usefulness of many temporal methods
studied in the literature, leaving decaying link likelihoods and burstiness as
possible features.
3.2.3.1
Decaying likelihoods
The intuition behind deprecating likelihoods is that it is plausible that a verdict
will make references that are close in time as older verdicts might be less relevant
or further in memory for the judge making the verdict. In the histograms in
ﬁgure 3.6 distributions are shown for diﬀerent years, where it is easy to see
that shorter links in time are preferred over longer links. This can be used to
create a per year probability distribution and weighing all potential links by
that probability.
Since it is technically not possible to use the distribution for the current year
for new nodes the distribution for the preceding year is used, i.e. for a node
inserted at time t the distribution for the t −1 is used. That this is a decent
approximation can be validated by looking at the correlation between the dif-
ferent time distributions, where the average for each year is found to be 0.82
with all correlations post year 2000 higher than 0.9.
A simpler version is also used where the diﬀerence in publication times and the
log of the diﬀerence is used to measure the similarity between nodes
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Node based features
25
Figure 3.6: Distribution of years linked to for diﬀerent years
s(xt, yt′) = −(t −t′)
(3.4)
s(xt, yt′) = −log(t −t′)
(3.5)
3.2.3.2
Burstiness
The idea of burstiness is that many natural phenomena tend to appear in bursts
- many events appearing in rapid succession followed by longer pauses with
no activity.
This can be seen in for instance earthquakes where aftershocks
often follow larger shakes, in crime where a neighborhood or a single house is
more likely to be victimized after having been robbed once (Johnson, Bowers, &
Hirschﬁeld, 1997) or in neurology where neurons exchange signals in spike trains,
short bursts of activity followed by longer pauses. Mathematically this means
that the process is not a pure Poisson process as the interarrival time of events
is not independent and it is instead described by a Hawkes process, a type of
self-excited Poisson process. For the verdict network incoming links could have
==PAGE:36==
26
Similarity indices
Figure 3.7: Distribution of the log interarrival times + 1, showing a small peak
at an interarrival time of 0
a bursty distribution if related verdicts tend to be written at the same time. A
standard test of this is to create a histogram of the log of event interarrival times
which will tend to cluster in two peaks if the signal exhibits burstiness, with
the ﬁrst peak being interarrival times during bursts and the second peak being
the longer interarrival times between bursts. Such a histogram can be seen in
ﬁgure 3.7 where a small peak can be seen when there is an interarrival time of
0, however there is little large scale pattern that suggests a bursty signal.
A second test is the Burstiness parameter found in Goh and Barabasis paper on
burstiness in complex systems (Goh & Barabási, 2008)
B = στ −µτ
στ + µτ
where στ and µτ respectively are the standard deviation and mean of the in-
terarrival times. For bursty signals this will be close 1, Poisson signals will be
close to 0 and periodic signals will be close to -1. For the CJEU network this
parameter comes out as 0.04, which leads us to assume that the interarrival time
does not exhibit burstiness and therefore we do not use it as a parameter.
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 4
Supervised methods
Using supervised methods to combine and improve on the performance of single
predictors of node similarity is a logical step for link prediction and diﬀerent
methods such as logistic regression, random forests, support vector machines
(SVM) and gradient boosting machines (GBM) have all been used and shown
as capable of producing good prediction results.
In general supervised classiﬁcation methods take as input a feature of vectors for
a given potential edge and outputs the probabilities for assigning the candidate
pair to E+ or E−, where E+ are all pairs in the graph that share an edge and
E−are the pairs that do not share an edge. The features given to the supervised
method in this case consists of the similarity indices developed in chapter 3.
In this chapter the used supervised methods are introduced along with the
parameters passed to the methods and how they are selected and methods for
constructing the training and testing sets are shown.
All supervised methods used in this thesis are taken from the sklearn Python
package, meaning that any parameter shown here is meant for sklearn functions
and not necessarily directly applicable to other packages or libraries.
==PAGE:38==
28
Supervised methods
4.1
Logistic Regression
Among the simpler supervised learning methods logistic regression models the
probability of a random variable taking some categorical value by applying the
logistic function to a set of weighted feature inputs where the weights are learned
through maximum likelihood estimation. The function itself takes the form
p(x) =
eβT x
1 + eβT x
(4.1)
where β is a vector of weights with β0 being the intersection and x being a
vector of feature values with x0 = 1.
Logistic regression does not require that the independent variables are normally
distributed and works well with both ordinal and nominal variables, making it a
good candidate for the verdict dataset, however the output of logistic regression,
p(x), is linear in x, so the decision boundary created by logistic regression is
also linear meaning that non-linear relationships will not be captured (Hastie
et al., 2001). It is however possible to get around this by including polynomial
terms such as the square of speciﬁc features.
An extension to standard logistic regression is the addition of a regularization
term which helps reduce model overﬁtting to the training set when the features
are not mutually independent (Ng, 2004). For example, given two features x1
and x2 that are perfectly correlated in the training set, the output of equation
4.1 will have the same output whether β1 = 1, and β2, β1 = 2 and β2 = 0 or
β1 = 3 and β2 = −1. However, if the two features are not perfectly correlated
in the test set the pairs of weights are no longer equivalent and the larger the
absolute value of the chosen coeﬃcients are, the more the output of the logistic
regression will be distorted. Regularization seeks to combat this by adding an
additional term to the loss function to be minimized. One popular choice is L1
regularization which takes the form
Err + λ
n
X
j=1
|βj|
where Err is classiﬁcation error, β is a feauture weight and λ is a free parameter
that determines the regularization strength. In addition to decreasing overﬁtting
L1-regularization can reduce weights to 0, thus completely excluding features
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Random Forests
29
from the model, a useful trait as it means that no separate feature selection step
needs to be performed.
Apart from L1-regularization, Tikhonov or L2 regularization is also in use. It
takes a form similar to L1, but minimizes the sum of squares of the feature
weights instead of just the weights. As it will try to spread the regularization
eﬀect over as many weights as possible it will not force weights to 0 in the same
way that L1-regularization does.
Err + λ
n
X
j=1
|βj|
Both regularization schemes are included in the parameter selection stage.
4.1.1
Feature selection and hyper-parameter tuning
Selecting the parameters for logistic regression boils down to a choice between
L1 and L2-regularization and what the regularization strength should be. Using
3-fold cross validation that measures the PR-AUC the chosen model ends up
using L1-regularization with a regularization strength of 10.
4.2
Random Forests
Another classiﬁer which has shown good performance in machine learning tasks
in general and link prediction tasks in particular (Cukierski et al., 2011) is
the random forest model which itself consists of decision trees. Compared to
logistic regression they are better at capturing non-linear relationsships which
comes at a trade-oﬀof longer training and prediction times.
Following is a
short introduction to how random forests and their decision tree components
work and how the hyper-parameters for the model was chosen.
4.2.1
Decision trees
Decision trees work by splitting the input data into regions by posing a series
of conditional statements, where the datapoints in each segment has the same or
approximately
the
same
class
label.
==PAGE:40==
30
Supervised methods
Figure 4.1: Example data for random
forest classiﬁer
An example can be seen in ﬁgure 4.1,
where we wish to classify whether
data points are either blue or yellow
based on the features x1 and x2. It
is clear that we can ﬁnd all the data
points in the lower left segment by
asking whether x1 is less than 4 and
x2 is less than 2 and similar condi-
tional statements can be posed to ﬁnd
the other regions. This series of state-
ments can be represented as tree of
questions, which gives the method its
name. To classify a data point it sim-
ply needs to pass through each state-
ment and in the end it will be labeled
as either blue or yellow based on the
values of its predictors, x1 and x2.
Sadly real world datasets are not as easily separable as in the example with
most regions holding a mixed number of classes, so decision trees need to have
a splitting criterion to decide at which feature value the split will be made.
This criterion needs to maximize the purity of each segment, making sure that
the class distribution is as homogenous as possible within each region and two
common measures that achieve this is the Gini index and the cross-entropy. The
Gini index of a given region takes the form
G =
K
X
k=1
ˆpk(1 −ˆpk)
where k sums over each class and ˆpk is the proportion of class k in the region.
The closer the proportions are to 1 or 0, the lower the Gini index will be,
indicating a good split. Cross-entropy is found as
D = −
K
X
k=1
ˆpk log ˆpk
which is a measure of how unpredictable or heterogenous the data in the region
is. Choosing the correct splitting criterion is not obvious based on the data, so
it is included as one of the hyper-parameters to be cross validated.
Usually growing a decision tree until every data point is correctly classiﬁed
means that the model overﬁts and performs poorly on the test set. For this
reason trees are pruned after construction in a process that removes splits from
the bottom of the tree and up, until some acceptable prediction accuracy is
reached.
==PAGE:41==
4.2 Random Forests
31
4.2.2
Ensembles of trees
While decision trees are easy to understand and interpret as well as functional
classiﬁers in their own right, they suﬀer from high variance due to a tendency
to overﬁtting. A common solution to high variance models is to use ensembles
of models where the ﬁnal prediction is based on the majority prediction of the
individual models and for decision trees such an ensemble is a random forest.
Random forests of size b are trained on a single training set which is resampled
with replacement to create b unique samples in a technique known as bootstrap-
ping, in that way avoiding the issue of needing b separate datasets for training,
which would restrict random forests to very large datasets.
Apart from using multiple trees random forests also decorrelate the individual
trees to reduce variance. This is done by restricting the number of features
available at each split to a subset of the full feature set, forcing the tree to
choose to split on one of the chosen features. Using this method enforces greater
variation between the trees, further reducing the variance in the ﬁnal output.
The number of features considered at each split is usually chosen as
p
(n) where
n is the total number of features, but in our case it is included in the hyper-
parameters and chosen through cross-validation.
4.2.2.1
Feature selection and hyper-parameter tuning
Setting up a random forest requires choosing a set of hyper-parameters that
directly inﬂuences the predictive performance of the model.
The three that
have already been mentioned are the number of individual trees to include, the
splitting criterion and the number of features to consider for each split. Apart
from this there are also parameters that control the size to which a tree can
grow and the minimum number of nodes required to make a split, both of which
control the variance of the individual trees.
All parameters are chosen based on a full grid search, except for the number of
individual trees in the forest, which is chosen based on the out-of-bag (OOB)
error, a measure of the error rate when testing individual trees on samples not
chosen during bootstrapping. The results for the number of individual trees
is seen in ﬁgure 4.2, where it is seen that the rate of change of OOB-error is
quite small after reaching forests built with 50 estimators. For models trained
on the full dataset it was necessary to tune this number down to 30 due to long
computations times, however this seemed to have little eﬀect on the test error.
==PAGE:42==
32
Supervised methods
Figure 4.2: Out-of-bag error rate for random forests trained with diﬀerent
number of estimators
In contrast to logistic regression it is not possible, or at least not common, to
incorporate feature selection in the model training step using regularization.
Instead a greedy stepwise selection algorithm is used to choose what features
to include. As mentioned in chapter 2 it is possible to divide the network into
diﬀerent domains depending on the shortest path length between nodes. To take
advantage of this three models are trained, one for each domain and one that
is evaluated across all path lengths. In all three cases all the relevant features
are used and in ﬁgure 4.3 the importance of each feature is shown based on the
region purity of the splits made on the feature. It can be seen that when available
the local similarity indices dominate, while TF-IDF is the most important index
when edges that do not share a length 2 path are considered.
4.3
Training and testing
Normally supervised methods are trained on a subset of the available samples
and then evaluated on a testing set, where the training and testing set are found
from splitting the available data randomly through cross-validation. In the case
of the verdicts it is also necessary to respect causality, so instead of randomly
splitting the data, the training set must consist of edges that are older than the
test set. To achieve this the network is split into years and for a given test year,
τ a training set is constructed of data from the three preceding years, resulting
==PAGE:43==
4.4 Data imbalance
33
Figure 4.3: Importances for two random forests, one trained on the domain
of samples with a path length of 2 and one on the domain with a
path length greater than 2
in the two graphs
Gtest = (xt, y), t = τ
Gtrain = (xt, y), τ −3 < t < τ
4.4
Data imbalance
When creating the dataset of potential edges the naïve approach is to include
every possible edge between verdicts in Gtrain. There are (|V | −1)2 potential
edges in the network, a much greater number than the number of actual edges
leading to an extremely imbalanced dataset. Imbalanced datasets are a common
issue in supervised learning and can lead to long training times as well as models
that bias for the overrepresented class. Additionally a large part of the potential
edges will be trivially false as they might be very far from each other in the
network.
The common approaches to combating data imbalance are
• Oversampling the minority class consisting of true edges
==PAGE:44==
34
Supervised methods
• Undersampling the majority class consisting of non-edges
• Adding weights to samples during training to make minority class samples
more important
For the verdict network oversampling of the minority class is a poor choice since
the number of potential edges is already large and increasing the number of
samples in the minority class would further increase training times.
Undersampling is a more realistic approach, but because of the large number
of trivially false edges uniform sampling tends to miss the decision boundary
resulting in poor models.
To avoid this the sample of the majority class is
skewed towards diﬃcult candidate pairs that are close in the graph or at least
retains the shortest path distribution of the original dataset. The best results
were obtained by creating a sample of the majority class that was 10 times the
size of the minority class and for the domain where the shortest path length is
equal to 2 the probability for selecting a sample was
p(x, y) =
CN(x, y)
P
i CN(xi, yj), xi ∈E −{yi}, yi ∈E −{xi}
while for the domain of potential edges with path lengths larger than two the
proability for selecting a sample was set to
p(x, y) =
PA(x, y)
P
i PA(xi, yj), xi ∈E −{yi}, yi ∈E −{xi}
since number of common neighbors in this domain is guaranteed to be 0.
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 5
Evaluation methods
When evaluating classiﬁer performance on link prediction problems there are
several issues that need to kept in mind such as the imbalance of the dataset,
what metrics are illustrative of performance and in what context the predictions
will be used.
The requirements made of the evaluation methods are that it
should both be able to accurately compare diﬀerent methods, give a reasonable
idea about how far the classiﬁer is from ideal and show how well it would perform
in an applied setting.
To achieve this we use a combination of the receiver
operating characteristic, precision / recall and edge positions when sorted by
score.
As shown earlier the class balance for link prediction problems on most naturally
occurring graphs is skewed toward the negative class. For evaluation this means
that using the standard accuracy as a measure of performance is a poor choice
since a classiﬁer trained on a dataset with 99% of the cases belonging to the
majority class and 1% belonging to the minority class can get a 99% accuracy
by simply labeling everything as belonging to the majority class.
This issue has caused many in the machine learning community to use the area
under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC-ROC) instead, where the
receiver operating characteristic curve plots the true positive rate (TPR) versus
the false positive rate (FPR), so labeling everything 0 gives a TPR and FPR of
0.0 and labeling everything 1 gives a TPR and FPR of 1.0. This is unaﬀected
==PAGE:46==
36
Evaluation methods
by class imbalance in the sense that a random classiﬁer always will occupy a
straight line through the diagonal where TPR equals FPR and optimizing for
AUC-ROC will penalize methods that label every case to the majority class,
which accurracy is unable to do (Lichtenwalter, Lussier, & Chawla, 2010).
In imbalanced datasets ROC-curves have the issue that since the number of
negative cases is very large even a very large change in false positives can have a
very small eﬀect, making two classiﬁers seem similar (Davis & Goadrich, 2006)
whereas looking at the area under the precision-recall curve (AUC-PR) will
correctly report the diﬀerence in performance. Apart from this the AUC-ROC
will often be very large due to correct classiﬁcation of negative cases, which
however does not say anything about the actual predictive performance of the
model.
Due to these class-imbalance related issues every method will be presented both
with a PR- and ROC-curve, where precision-recall eﬀectively compares diﬀerent
classiﬁers and gives an indicator of how much the classiﬁer can be improved
compared to the ideal, while the receiver operating characteristic shows how
much better the methods do than random guessing.
Since a possible real world use case of the model is to produce ranked recom-
mendations it is also interesting to see what the average position of true links
are when all potential links are sorted by their prediction score. This ﬁnal eval-
uation method does not provide a single number that there can be optimized
for, but it does give a good visual indication of how a realistic application of the
model would perform.
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 6
Results
The results for the diﬀerent classiﬁers are reported in separately. First the results
of the similarity indices used alone is reported. The results for the supervised
methods is then reported with the best performing single similarity index used
as a baseline. The evaluation method is as described in section 5. To gauge
the performance on sparser networks classiﬁers are trained and run on networks
where a number of the edges have been removed. Classiﬁers are also trained
and evaluated at diﬀerent points in time to see the evolution of the network.
6.1
Similarity indices
To evaluate the performance of the introduced similarity indices the area under
the precision-recall and receiver operating characteristic curves are used, which
were introduced in chapter 5. This measure is useful for all indices that produce
some score that the potential edges can be ranked by, such as TF-IDF or the
common neighbors index, but not for binary measures such as the "in-cluster"
feature.
In table 6.1 the area under the PR- and ROC-curves for the diﬀerent similarity
indices can be seen. The data points for these are generated by varying a score
threshold, t, so that min S ≤t ≤max S where S is the set of scores for all
==PAGE:48==
38
Results
PR-AUC
ROC-AUC
Common In Neighbors
0.134
0.763
Common Out Neighbors
0.125
0.770
Common Neighbors
0.197
0.889
Common Referrers
0.068
0.841
Adamic Adar
0.220
0.890
Adamic Adar In
0.155
0.763
Adamic Adar Out
0.132
0.770
Resource Allocation
0.219
0.889
Resource Allocation Out
0.132
0.770
Leicht Holme Newman
0.077
0.888
Preferential Attachment
0.005
0.786
Table 6.1: ROC and PR performances for the diﬀerent similarity indices with
the best performer marked in bold
evaluated edges. For each threshold edges with a score larger or equal to the
threshold are predicted as part of E+ and all edges with a lower score are
predicted as part of E−.
From the ROC-curve in ﬁgure 6.1 it can be seen that the similarity indices
in general perform better than the random guess represented by the center
line of the plot and that particularly the indices derived from the common
neighbor index produce good results, with Adamic Adar having slightly better
performance than the other indices. For the directed methods the indices that
count the neighbors that both source and target node refer to (The one with
the keyword ’in’ in the table) are the better predictors, however in all cases
the undirected versions of the similarity indices are better than the directed
versions.
On the other hand the scores the scores that do not derive from the number
of common neighbors perform worse, particularly TF-IDF, which is otherwise
often used on its own in recommender engines, performs quite badly in our case.
The same goes for the LHN and preferential attachment index, both which are
based on the network being scale-free, indicating that this property might not
hold completely for the verdict network. In chapter 3, ﬁgure 3.1 we showed that
72% of the edges in the network have neighbors in common so the remaining
28% will be hard to ﬁnd for any combination of indices.
Apart from high predictive power the independence of diﬀerent indices and
features is important, particularly when the diﬀerent indices are combined in
supervised methods. This means that if the TF-IDF score is able to predict edges
that cannot be predicted by for instance Adamic / Adar, then a combination of
==PAGE:49==
6.1 Similarity indices
39
Figure 6.1: Chart of correlations between indices showing clusters around in-
dices based on the same methods. Correlations computed on po-
tential edges in the years 2012 to 2010
those two features has more predictive power than a combination of Adamic /
Adar and Resource Allocation, two similar indices that will tend to have high
overlap in what edges that they predict.
A clear picture of the independence of the diﬀerent features can be seen in ﬁgure
6.1 where the correlation of diﬀerent features is shown for the data from 2013-
2010. As expected all the indices derived from common neighbors are highly
correlated with less correlation among the features based on node properties
such as time diﬀerence and TF-IDF.
==PAGE:50==
40
Results
Figure 6.2: Comparison of performance between random forests, logistic re-
gression and the adamic/adar index
6.2
Supervised methods
In this section the supervised methods of Random Forest and Logistic Regres-
sion are evaluated based on diﬀerent metrics. To compare them with the single
similarity indices Adamic/Adar, the best performing index, is included in the
plots. In ﬁgure 6.2 the ROC curves show the performance compared to randomly
guessing links where both random forests and logistic regression performs far
better. In the same ﬁgure the PR curves and the associated summary statis-
tic, which was found through 5 fold cross validation, show that while random
forests outperform Adamic/Adar by a large margin, logistic regression is only
marginally better. That logistic regression is unable to make better predictions
is probably mainly due to non-linear eﬀects that cannot be captured by logistic
regression as discussed in chapter 4 and the high correlation of the features. It
also underlines what was seen in the table of index performances 6.1, where it
was shown that non-local indexes have low predictive power.
One possibility for why the scores are relatively low is that the supervised meth-
ods are overﬁtting on the training set, resulting in a large error due to variance.
When evaluated on the training set itself the random forest classiﬁer is able
to get a PR-AUC of 0.62. While it is no deﬁnitive measure for estimating the
variance / bias tradeoﬀ, models that score much higher on training set than
on the test set are in risk of being overﬁt. For random forests however, the
most important parameter for decreasing variance is the number of trees used
==PAGE:51==
6.2 Supervised methods
41
as well as the number of included features and as seen in chapter 4 these have
already been tuned. The performance of random forest models trained on dif-
Figure 6.3: Performance of classiﬁers trained on either potential edges that
share common neighbors or those that do not
ferent domains mentioned in chapter 4 is investigated in ﬁgure 6.3 where each
classiﬁer attempt to classify edges within their own domain. Not surprisingly
the classiﬁer that performs the best is the one that works on potential edges that
share common neighbors, whereas the results on the remaining edges is close
to random guessing. This again indicates that to perform better predictions
on the verdict network it is necessary to either ﬁnd stronger classiﬁers for the
text content or use similarity indices that the take the global neighborhood into
account.
While ROC- and PR-curves are useful for performing classiﬁcation it can be
diﬃcult to interpret them when link prediction is seen as a ranking problem
since there is no indication of where in a sorted list true edges would appear.
To evaluate the rank of true edges more clearly the histogram of the median
positions of true edges in ﬁgure 6.4 is used. The position is found by sorting
the potential edges for each source node according to their probability score and
recording the median position of true edges. As can be seen in the histogram
76% of the nodes have their true edge within the top 10 positions for the classiﬁer
evaluated on potential edges that share common neighbors, which is a promising
==PAGE:52==
42
Results
Figure 6.4: Median position per node of true edges when predictions are sorted
by score
result if the classiﬁer was to be used in for instance a recommender engine.
The previous results all assumed that perfect knowledge of the past network
is available when calculating features for potential edges. This corresponds to
predicting edges for a node x with e edges under the assumption that we know
e −1 edges already. Both when predicting new edges and ﬁnding hidden edges
in the network this is rarely the case. When predicting future edges it is useful
to know how well the classiﬁer performs when only a subset of the edges are
known, as would be the case when recommending edges while a verdict is being
written and only a part of the citations have been added. In ﬁgure 6.5 30%
of the networks edges have been removed both from training and testing set.
Not surprisingly the predictor that is trained and tested on the network with
removed edges performs worse than the one working on the full network as can be
seen from the precision recall curves, however it is still able to make meaningful
predictions and with the right threshold decent precision/recall values can be
found. The median positions of the predictions were also found as in ﬁgure 6.4
and for 68% of all nodes the median position was in the top 10.
==PAGE:53==
6.2 Supervised methods
43
Figure 6.5: Results for the random forest on the original network and the
network after 30% of the edges are removed.
Only edges with
common neighbors considered
==PAGE:54==
44
Results
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 7
Future work
While the results achieved for predicting links in the network of verdicts shows
promise and at least in part could be used in a real life setting, there are still
several venues that are open for improving the accuracy of the classiﬁers. To
improve results on the 28% of the edges in the network that consist of nodes-
further apart than two steps, it could be possible to apply more quasi-global
indices since the only one used in this thesis is common referrers. Additional
work can also be done on ﬁnding document similarity based on the text con-
tent such as experimenting Latent Dirichlet Allocation for ﬁnding topics or by
adding additional levels of pre-processing to alleviate the problem of noise.
Finally some authours have had luck with performing dimensionality reduction
using singular value decomposition directly on the adjacency matrix and then
altered their similarity indices to work on the new, reduced matrix. This ap-
proach was not considered for this thesis, however it might improve results by
removing noise directly from the network.
Finally global indices could be used on an undirected version of the network,
and while it requires a lot of computation time for testing this would not be
an issue in a real life system where there is a natural lag between nodes being
added to the network in which new adjacency matrices could be computed.
==PAGE:56==
46
Future work
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 8
Conclusion
In this thesis we have investigated the potential for performing link prediction
in the network of verdict citations from Court of Justice of the European Union.
To perform predictions we have developed several similarity indices, both based
on the topology of the network and on properties of the verdicts themselves
such as the text content and the publication time of the verdicts. These indices
were then used as features in diﬀerent supervised methods and the predictive
quality of the methods was evaluated. Promising results have been found for
both prediction tasks and ranking tasks with illustrated by high values for the
area under PR- and ROC-curves as well 76% percent of links being in the top
10 positions when the classiﬁer output is sorted by score. It is found that the
majority of the links reside in the domain of nodes sharing common neighbors
which is also where the classiﬁers perform best, while it is not possible to get
good results for edges between nodes that do not share common neighbors. This
suggests that any further work in this ﬁeld needs to focus on either indices that
take the global neighborhood into account or reﬁnements of the indices based
on content similarity.
==PAGE:58==
48
Conclusion
==PAGE:59==
References
Adamic, L. A., & Adar, E. (2003). Friends and neighbors on the web. Social
networks, 25(3), 211–230.
Albert, R., & Barabási, A.-L. (2002). Statistical mechanics of complex networks.
Reviews of modern physics, 74(1), 47.
Barabási, A.-L., Jeong, H., Néda, Z., Ravasz, E., Schubert, A., & Vicsek, T.
(2002). Evolution of the social network of scientiﬁc collaborations. Physica
A: Statistical mechanics and its applications, 311(3), 590–614.
Bollobás, B., Borgs, C., Chayes, J., & Riordan, O. (2003). Directed scale-free
graphs. In Proceedings of the fourteenth annual acm-siam symposium on
discrete algorithms (pp. 132–139).
Chang, J., & Blei, D. M. (2009). Relational topic models for document networks.
In International conference on artiﬁcial intelligence and statistics (pp. 81–
88).
Cukierski, W., Hamner, B., & Yang, B.
(2011, July).
Graph-based fea-
tures for supervised link prediction.
In Neural networks (ijcnn), the
2011 international joint conference on (p. 1237-1244).
doi:
10.1109/
IJCNN.2011.6033365
Davis, J., & Goadrich, M. (2006). The relationship between precision-recall and
roc curves. In Proceedings of the 23rd international conference on machine
learning (pp. 233–240).
Denti, L., Barbopoulus, I., Nilsson, I., Holmberg, L., Thulin, M., Wendeblad,
M., . . . Davidsson, E.
(2012).
Sweden’s largest facebook study (GRI-
rapport No. 2012:3).
University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg Research
Institute GRI. Retrieved from http://EconPapers.repec.org/RePEc:
hhb:gungri:2012_003
Derlén, M., Lindholm, J., Rosvall, M., & Mirshahvalad, A. (2013). Coherence
out of chaos : mapping european union law by running randomly through
==PAGE:60==
50
References
the maze of cjeu case law. Europarättslig tidskrift, :3, s. 517-535.
Dunlavy, D. M., Kolda, T. G., & Acar, E. (2011). Temporal link prediction
using matrix and tensor factorizations. ACM Transactions on Knowledge
Discovery from Data (TKDD), 5(2), 10.
Fouss, F., Pirotte, A., Renders, J.-M., & Saerens, M. (2007). Random-walk
computation of similarities between nodes of a graph with application
to collaborative recommendation. Knowledge and data engineering, ieee
transactions on, 19(3), 355–369.
Goh, K.-I., & Barabási, A.-L.
(2008).
Burstiness and memory in complex
systems. EPL (Europhysics Letters), 81(4), 48002.
Hastie, T., Tibshirani, R., & Friedman, J. (2001). The elements of statistical
learning. New York, NY, USA: Springer New York Inc.
Jaccard, P.
(1912).
The distribution of the ﬂora in the alpine zone.
New
phytologist, 11(2), 37–50.
Jobvite. (2011). Social recruiting survey. Retrieved from http://web.jobvite
.com/rs/jobvite/images/Jobvite-SRP-2011.pdf
Johnson, S. D., Bowers, K., & Hirschﬁeld, A. (1997). New insights into the
spatial and temporal distribution of repeat victimization. British Journal
of Criminology, 37(2), 224–241.
Katz, L. (1953). A new status index derived from sociometric analysis. Psy-
chometrika, 18(1), 39-43. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
BF02289026 doi: 10.1007/BF02289026
Krapivsky, P., Rodgers, G., & Redner, S. (2001). Degree distributions of growing
networks. Physical Review Letters, 86(23), 5401.
Leicht, E. A., Holme, P., & Newman, M. E. (2006). Vertex similarity in net-
works. Physical Review E, 73(2), 026120.
Liben-Nowell, D., & Kleinberg, J.
(2003).
The link prediction problem for
social networks.
In Proceedings of the twelfth international conference
on information and knowledge management (pp. 556–559).
New York,
NY, USA: ACM. Retrieved from http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/956863
.956972 doi: 10.1145/956863.956972
Lichtenwalter, R. N., Lussier, J. T., & Chawla, N. V. (2010). New perspectives
and methods in link prediction. In Proceedings of the 16th acm sigkdd in-
ternational conference on knowledge discovery and data mining (pp. 243–
252). New York, NY, USA: ACM. Retrieved from http://doi.acm.org/
10.1145/1835804.1835837 doi: 10.1145/1835804.1835837
Liu, W., & Lü, L. (2010). Link prediction based on local random walk. EPL
(Europhysics Letters), 89(5), 58007.
Lü, L., & Zhou, T.
(2011).
Link prediction in complex networks: A sur-
vey.
Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 390(6),
1150 - 1170. Retrieved from http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S037843711000991X
doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j
.physa.2010.11.027
==PAGE:61==
References
51
Montoya, J. M., Pimm, S. L., & Solé, R. V. (2006). Ecological networks and
their fragility. Nature, 442(7100), 259–264.
Newman, M. E. (2009). Random graphs with clustering. Physical review letters,
103(5), 058701.
Ng, A. Y.
(2004).
Feature selection, l1 vs. l2 regularization, and rota-
tional invariance.
In Proceedings of the twenty-ﬁrst international con-
ference on machine learning (pp. 78–).
New York, NY, USA: ACM.
Retrieved from http://doi.acm.org.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/10.1145/
1015330.1015435 doi: 10.1145/1015330.1015435
Rosvall, M., Axelsson, D., & Bergstrom, T. C.
(2009).
The map equa-
tion. The European Physical Journal Special Topics, 178(1), 13–23. Re-
trieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.1140/epjst/e2010-01179-1
doi:
10.1140/epjst/e2010-01179-1
Salton, G., & Buckley, C. (1988). Term-weighting approaches in automatic text
retrieval. In Information processing and management (pp. 513–523).
Schall, D.
(2014).
Link prediction in directed social networks.
Social Net-
work Analysis and Mining, 4(1). Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/
10.1007/s13278-014-0157-9 doi: 10.1007/s13278-014-0157-9
Shibata, N., Kajikawa, Y., & Sakata, I. (2012). Link prediction in citation
networks. Journal of the American society for information science and
technology, 63(1), 78–85.
Soares, P. R. d. S., & Prudêncio, R. B. C. (2012). Time series based link predic-
tion. In Neural networks (ijcnn), the 2012 international joint conference
on (pp. 1–7).
Tadić, B. (2001). Dynamics of directed graphs: the world-wide web. Physica
A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 293(1), 273–284.
Wang, P., Xu, B., Wu, Y., & Zhou, X. (2014). Link prediction in social networks:
the state-of-the-art.
Science China Information Sciences, 58(1), 1–38.
Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11432-014-5237-y
doi:
10.1007/s11432-014-5237-y
Zhou, T., Lü, L., & Zhang, Y.-C. (2009). Predicting missing links via local
information. The European Physical Journal B, 71(4), 623–630.
