==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Architectural Modeling in RED
Jesper Byrdal Kjær (s142978)
Kongens Lyngby 2016
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone ￿45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
In the face of constant change, software development teams need to be prepared to adapt
both requirements and design continually, if they wish to deliver a product that fits user
needs. This thesis sets out to modify a requirements tool with architectural modeling
capabilities, allowing teams to effortlessly alternate between requirements specification
and architectural design.
The project adds a number of basic architectural concepts to the application. It
adapts the existing metamodel, so the new concepts fit seamlessly in with the existing
elements. Facilities for describing internal properties of elements are added, along with
a framework for consistency checking of models, allowing users to work on their designs
with confidence.
Overall the project reaches its goals.
In only a few areas were the implemented
solutions lacking some minor functionality, most notably user documentation for the
new concepts. The new features are however functional and ready for use.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This MSc thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for
acquiring a MSc degree in Computer Science and Engineering. The thesis was written
between February 1st and July 1st 2016, under the supervision of Prof. Dr. Harald
Störrle. The workload of this thesis was 30 ECTS.
I would like to thank Harald Störrle for going through the trouble to supervise this
thesis under my particularly difficult circumstances, and providing excellent and patient
guidance throughout the project.
I would also like to thank my wife, Helene Kjær, for her continued support and
advice to help me through the tough periods of the project. This would have been a
much tougher ordeal without you to motivate me.
Utrecht, July 1, 2016
Jesper Byrdal Kjær (s142978)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Contents
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Twin Peaks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Architectural description languages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
RED . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Analysis
5
2.1
Domain Requirements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Technological Constraints
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Personas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Design
11
3.1
RED’s Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Adding new Concepts to RED . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
A New Bundle Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4
Creating the System and Port Elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.5
Creating the Signature element . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.6
Creating Quantitative Properties
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.7
Creating Consistency Checks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4
Implementation
49
4.1
Managing bundles in RED . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.2
Integration with Diagrams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.3
Implementing QuantityItem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.4
Deletion of referenced objects
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.5
Creating the Port and Signature editors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.6
Creating the checking system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.7
Refactoring
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
4.8
Bug Fixes and Improvements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
4.9
Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
5
Evaluation
67
5.1
System Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
5.2
Case study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
5.3
Evaluation of Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
5.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
6
Conclusion
73
6.1
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
Bibliography
75
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
In this chapter we will introduce the background for the project.
We will describe
the Twin Peaks model, in which the project concept is rooted.
We will also briefly
discuss architectural description languages, which in part is what we strive to implement.
Finally, we will introduce RED, the application we will be working to extend.
1.1
Twin Peaks
Often an organization will start a software project with a waterfall-like analysis and
design process. Such a process will typically either start with an elaborate exploration
and documentation of requirements, after which a solution is designed based on these
requirements; or it may start with creating a basic design based on a perfunctory under-
standing of the user’s requirements, followed by adapting more detailed requirements to
fit with this initial design.
Both these approaches suffer from one of the core problems with the waterfall model
of development: New information and changing requirements tend to be suppressed to
avoid the cost of revisiting a “completed” project phase. Either way early requirements
become rigid, and as early requirements often do not reflect the user’s actual needs,
this can be very detrimental to the usefulness of the delivered system. For example,
users often do not fully understand what they want until the problem and various solu-
tions have been extensively analyzed and prototyped (the “I’ll Know It When I See It”
problem[Boe00]).
The Twin Peaks model was first presented by Nuseibeh[Nus01] as a metaphor for
the need to let requirements and architecture develop iteratively and concurrently. The
model is visualized in figure 1.1. The idea is to start with some initial fundamental
requirements. When these are agreed upon, the process moves on to create one or more
candidate architectures that meet these requirements. At this point in any iteration,
there may turn out to be architectural constraints that make a certain combination of
requirements impossible to fulfill, e.g. a requirement of scalability can be in opposition
to a requirement to only use the client’s existing hardware. Thus the architecture leads
to an adaption in requirements, which can then be elaborated further. This process
repeats continually throughout the project.
As with most other aspects of the software development progress, software has been
developed to facilitate requirements engineering. An important focus for these tools is
managing requirements, allowing documentation of their evolution, and describing their
==PAGE:10==
2
1 Introduction
Requirements
Architecture 
Specification
General
Detailed
Level 
of 
Detail 
Independent
Dependent
Implementation 
Dependence
Figure 1.1: The Twin Peaks model shows how an iterative approach allows require-
ments and architecture to develop concurrently.
relation to the visions and use cases of the proposed system.
Designing an architecture is a different problem however. Here one needs to consider
the form and behavior of the system that is to fulfill these requirements. For example,
which actors will the system need to interact with, which physical layout will best allow
these interactions, which software components should the system consist of, and what
will their individual responsibilities be?
Other software tools exist to aid this process. Typically, these high-level designs are
realized as various types of UML diagrams, for which numerous tools exist. However,
only few tools integrate both requirements engineering and architectural design, to allow
fluid movement between elaboration of requirements and system design.
The goal of this project is realize the idea of Twin Peaks in one software tool, em-
phasizing the interdependence between project requirements and design. Specifically,
the tool should allow the description of requirements as well as architecture, and the
relations between the two. In practice, the concept will be implemented as a GUI-based
architectural description language for a requirements tool RED.
1.2
Architectural description languages
Historically the formal definition and description of software architecture has been done
with architectural description languages (ADLs). Generally ADLs attempt to be a more
formal tool to describe high-level systems, to avoid the ambiguity and superficiality of
the informal sketches that are normally used[Cle96].
==PAGE:11==
1.3 RED
3
The simpler early ADLs concerned themselves mostly with structural modeling, in
particular how the various high-level components of system connected to each other[ISO11].
Later languages also incorporated stronger behavioral modeling and other concerns.
In this project we will confine ourselves to structural modeling. This is the natural
place to start, as one would typically describe the parts of system, before beginning a
discussion of the behavior of these parts.
Most variations of architectural modeling notations share the same few elements,
and mainly differ in the exact interpretation of each element and the possibilities for
adding additional information. Taylor et al. identify four such basic concepts that are
of interest to us[TMD10, p. 188]:
Components serve as a black box around a part of a system’s functionality or data,
that other components can interact with and use through a clearly defined inter-
face. Components allow architects to step-wise refine their architecture, and avoid
prematurely creating detailed designs.
Interfaces define what options components offer for interaction with them. Generally,
a component has one or more interfaces, with distinct concerns.
Connectors facilitate interaction between components. In the most basic cases they
represent a simple, direct connection between two components (e.g. a procedure
call), while they in more advanced cases may provide functionality that supports
the relationship (e.g. synchronization mechanisms).
Configurations are sets of components and connectors that are interconnected.
A
configuration can represent both the context of an entire system, or the internal
structure of any given component, which will consist of subcomponents related
by connectors.
By allowing the specification of the internals of a component,
configurations help facilitate a step-wise refinement approach.
1.3
RED
RED (Requirements EDitor)[SCS14] is an open-source tool for requirements engineering
(RE). It has been under development for a number of years, having reached version 3.2.1
by the beginning of this project. The developers are mainly students and faculty at the
Technical University of Denmark, where it is heavily used as a teaching aid for a course
on RE.
The tool allows modeling of most concepts necessary in RE, including actors, per-
sonas, use cases, assumptions, visions and requirements. It also has a diagram editor
supporting a number of diagram types, including UML class diagrams and context dia-
grams.
On the technical side, RED is based on the Eclipse platform and implemented in
Java. Most of the model layer of the application is automatically generated from Eclipse
Modeling Framework (EMF) models.
==PAGE:12==
4
1 Introduction
Summary
In this section we introduced the context of the project. We described the Twin Peaks
model, architectural description languages, and the RED application.
In the next chapter we will specify what the goals of our project is.
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Analysis
In this chapter we will discuss the idea for our project, and specify a number of high-
level goals. We will also briefly describe some of the technological constraints involved
when working on a project like RED. Finally, we will describe a number of personas, to
personify the goals.
2.1
Domain Requirements
The overall goal of this project is to facilitate architectural modeling on a platform that
already facilitates requirements engineering.
Figure 2.1 shows two architectural design sketches, drawn according to a traditional
visual syntax for structural software architecture. Stick figures represent human actors,
larger boxes represent components, and small boxes on the edges of these represent ports.
The lines connecting these represent connectors. We want to allow the user to model
software systems visually, add semantic details, and verify that the described system
is consistent, to make it easier for the user to continuously evolve his design without
introducing fatal flaws.
We also want to uphold and possibly improve the technical quality of the implemen-
tation platform, as well as validate the usefulness and quality of the new contributions.
Thus our goals are the following:
1. Provide users with architectural modeling concepts
The application must have the necessary facilities to describe system designs. If
the application has no notion of the basic concepts, it cannot support the user in
a meaningful way.
a) Provide concepts to represent components, ports, connectors and
configurations
The user must be able to describe and relate these basic building blocks
of software architecture. These all have distinct and fundamental roles in
describing architecture.
b) Adapt existing concepts to fit with the new additions
We must ensure that the above additions fit naturally in with the existing
elements and features of the implementation platform. Some elements may
need to change, and some features and tools may need to accommodate the
new additions.
==PAGE:14==
6
2 Analysis
(a) System context
(b) System internals
Figure 2.1: Two sketches showing a system from different views. Figure (a) shows the
context of a library management system, with UI ports for two types of
users. Figure (b) shows the internals of the same system as components
with ports related by connectors.
2. Provide simple consistency checks for architectural descriptions
The user must be able to request the application to check the consistency of the
described architecture, so as to help him detect fundamental design issues. The
focus should be on creating a framework for such checks, and on creating basic,
but helpful checks. For consistency checks to be meaningful, the user must also be
able to describe properties of elements, so these can be subject to such checks.
a) Allow the description of quantitative properties of elements
Providing explicit facilities for defining quantitative properties will serve to
add consistency to such definitions, and opens up for their use in consistency
checks and other supporting tools.
b) Allow the description of data structures
The user must be able to describe the interfaces of ports. Typically interfaces
specify operations that can be activated on or by that port. These operations
may very well require data input in the form of parameters, which are part
of their definitions.
Thus we need an element or facility that allows the
description of such operation definitions.
==PAGE:15==
2.2 Technological Constraints
7
3. Ensure continued maintainability of the platform
The platform is expected to continually evolve and improve. Thus it is important
that future maintenance is taken into consideration during design and implemen-
tation of the extensions.
a) Create easily extensible implementations
As the platform is expected to grow with more features in the future, it is im-
portant during design and implementation to consider how a given component
is expected to be extended in the future, and design accordingly.
b) Ensure consistency in implementation patterns
If the application’s behavior and quality is to remain consistent in the future,
it is important to consistently use existing implementation patterns.
If a
common case has no pattern, or the existing pattern is problematic, we must
strive to resolve this.
4. Validate the thesis contributions
We must validate that the contributions are functional, and work in a way accept-
able to the users.
a) Perform acceptance testing based on personas
We must perform basic acceptance testing according to a set of personas,
covering common use cases for implemented application features.
b) Create automatic tests for model logic
We must ensure that any non-trivial logic in the concept models is thoroughly
tested using automated testing, to increase trust in the application.
2.2
Technological Constraints
Since this project will be developed as an extension of existing software, a number of
technical factors will inhibit development.
The main issue is RED’s size. At the start of this project, a metric tool counted
115.000 non-empty, non-comment lines of Java code, distributed across approx. 2.000
files. In addition to this comes XML configuration files and meta-files for the approx.
100 sub-projects that implement RED’s various features. It can be expected that it will
take a significant amount of time for a developer to get into a codebase of this size,
especially if the developer has little experience as a user of the software, as is the case
here.
In addition to this, RED makes use of a number of frameworks that a developer
will also need to learn. The GUI is built with Eclipse SWT and GEF, and the model
layer is created with EMF. EMF in particular takes a slightly different approach to class
definitions and hierarchies than Java, requiring different approaches to design. EMF
offers several advantages to offset this problem, but nonetheless challenges developers
with a background in plain Java.
==PAGE:16==
8
2 Analysis
2.3
Personas
While the goals above specify what features we want the application to support by the
conclusion of the project, they are little help with regards to how users should be able
to use these features. Therefore, to represent the users’ needs, we will develop a number
of personas. This will help us to imagine how the application will eventually be used,
and thus guide our design. Eventually, we will be able to use the persona stories to test
our extensions.
The persona portraits are provided by Placeit Blog[Pla16].
2.3.1
Jens Gadegaard
Age: 24
Occupation: MSc student
Jens Gadegaard, a student majoring in computer science, is currently
taking a course on requirements engineering, where he and six fellow
students have been tasked with designing an online booking system
for a travel agency. They use RED as an analysis and design tool for
the project.
Early on, the group realizes that the new system is not created in a vacuum, but needs
to interact with several existing systems, in particular a bank for payment transactions,
and individual service providers such as hotels and airlines, to perform bookings. Jens
and a fellow group member take responsibility for mapping out these relations, while
other group members model the data to be passed around the system.
They start by creating a context diagram.
They use the diagram tool’s element
creation facilities to create the principle actors, systems, ports and connectors.
In the diagram’s editor they find a command for “checking” the diagram. The appli-
cation informs them that the type of diagram they are using does not support ports, so
they change the diagram type. They rerun the test, and the issue is gone.
But they need to add more details to these models. After some clicking around, they
find a command that creates dedicated project elements for all their visual models. As
they study these elements, they see that even their various relations have been converted,
saving them the trouble.
A few weeks later, the project has grown considerably. Having grown comfortable
with the application, Jens discovers a menu option that allows him to see a list of all the
issues in the project, and even order checks for the entire project. This makes the group
establish a new workflow, where all checks are carried out after adding new content.
Since the issues vary a lot in seriousness, Jens often uses the application’s feature for
filtering issues according to their seriousness, allowing him to focus on the most serious
issues.
As they design the components of their system in the diagram editor, they find a
feature for creating domain architecture diagrams. Jens is not a confident user of these
diagrams, having only been introduced to them at a lecture earlier that year, but he is
==PAGE:17==
2.3 Personas
9
grateful that he can create and assign use cases visually, rather than through the editors
of individual elements.
2.3.2
Bashar Malik
Age: 27
Occupation: BSc student
Bashar Malik, a bachelor student majoring in computer science, is
currently working on his bachelor project. In his spare time, he vol-
unteers for an organization that helps searching for missing persons.
This gives him an idea for a software system that can help organize
these searches with an app and a web interface.
He proposes the
concept to a professor, who agrees to supervise it as a bachelor project. His supervisor
suggests that he uses RED for the initial domain modeling and design.
Bashar, experimenting a bit with the program, starts by creating a few actors. His
domain experience allows him to pick the most significant ones. He also creates two
system elements representing the server and client systems he wishes to implement. In
the editor for the system element, he notices he can add external ports, so he creates a
few ports for UI and communication between the systems. He then adds these ports to
the systems.
He starts to wonder whether it is possible to visualize all these parts together. He
finds out he can create diagrams, and picks a context diagram. On being presented with
a blank diagram, he tries to drag and drop one of the actors onto the diagram, and is
happy to see that a similarly named actor is created in the diagram. He proceeds to
drag his other elements into the diagrams, with a similar result. He is also satisfied to
see that ports he marked as external to the systems are drawn as parts of these systems.
In the diagram editor he finds a tool to create connectors between elements. He
therefore proceeds to connect his different elements in the diagram. Having previously
noticed an option to convert diagrams to elements, he tries this, and sees that his new
connections have been created as connector elements, with the relevant sources and
targets set.
While designing the systems, Bashar juggles with various possible configurations of
their components. He is still unsure which will serve his purpose best, so he creates a con-
figuration for each. As he continues to adapt each with the evolution of his requirements,
he changes and checks these configurations.
==PAGE:18==
10
2 Analysis
2.3.3
Sofie Hansen
Age: 48
Occupation: Nurse
Sofie Hansen is a nurse, who for the past three years has worked as a
domain expert for a large software company specializing in electronic
medical records (EMR) software. Her work day is usually spent ad-
vising the development team on domain processes, and augmenting
requirements documentation with domain information.
Sofie’s company has recently started using RED for project documentation, and
she is still learning the possibilities the program offers. She is currently working on
expanding the business process descriptions the team has created in RED. One day one
of the developers asks her to use RED’s feature to specifically set certain processing time
requirements for parts of the business process model. After being pointed to the right
part of the program, she finds that she is able to easily add and change various values
for an organization, and is satisfied that she can indicate these specifics in a way that
is directly useful to the developers, rather than writing them into the descriptive texts.
When she continues working, she finds out she can add these values not only to groups
and organizations, but also to the use cases the she has helped create previously. She
proceeds to make these changes, and informs her colleagues that in the future she will
use this feature to provide this type of information.
The following week she is asked to write some paper forms into the project as a data
structure. She has little knowledge of that type of task, but does know the forms well.
Her supervisor shows her how she can create a data structure element, and instructs her
to create attributes corresponding to the fields on the form. She has no problem adding
the fields and giving them names. She is uncertain about types however, so she uses the
application’s “Explain” function. She does not understand all the type concepts, but it
helps her inserting most of the basic types she needs. Later the developers work with
her to create more detailed types for the remaining fields, and she feels more confident
in working with it on her own the next time.
Summary
In this chapter discussed our idea for the project based on some classic architectural
design sketches. From these, we formulated four overall goals for the project. To help
guide us towards these goals, we developed three personas: two students and a domain
expert.
In the next chapter we will start designing the components necessary to realize these
goals.
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 3
Design
In this section we will describe the design for various elements and extensions, and in part
the process to reach this design. We will start by giving some background information
on RED’s architecture. Then we will proceed to discuss the necessary extensions of
RED’s metamodel, after which we will discuss design of individual components for the
remainder of the chapter.
Note that all bundles, packages and classes in RED’s source code are prefixed with
dk.dtu.imm.red (third-party libraries retain their own names). For improved readabil-
ity, this prefix is often omitted when referring to such constructs in the coming chapters.
3.1
RED’s Architecture
In the following we will give a brief overview of relevant components of RED, to allow a
better understanding of what will need to be changed and added as part of this project.
At the highest level, RED can be divided into a small number of component cate-
gories, with the most relevant for this project being:
• core components are concerned with the highest levels of the model object hierarchy
of RED; notably Element, of which most other model classes are subclasses. core
also contains abstract classes that form a basis for RED’s specialized GUI editors
and wizards, and classes and XML files configuring the overall application layout.
• specificationelements is concerned with the models and UI related to RED’s specifi-
cation elements, the elements used as building blocks in RED projects, e.g. Actor,
Requirement and Use case. Note that we will use small caps when referring
to specification elements at a conceptual level. At the technical level, all speci-
fication elements are subclasses of the SpecificationElement class, which itself
is an indirect subclass of Element. These generalizations are omitted from most
diagrams for the sake of simplicity.
• visualmodeling implements a diagram tool, with support for creating a range of
different diagram types, including UML class diagrams and use case diagrams.
==PAGE:20==
12
3 Design
3.1.1
Eclipse Modeling Framework
Most of RED’s metamodel is described using the Eclipse Modeling Framework, which
is designed specifically for such situations. The models are expressed in XML (typically
via a graphical editor), and from that EMF can generate Java files representing those
models. The generated code includes several features to make the model more power-
ful, in particular dynamic getters and setters, subscription to update notifications and
factories. EMF also facilitates persistent storage of the described models.
While working with EMF we will usually manipulate two types of files:
Ecore files contain model descriptions.
Models consist mainly of packages, classes,
operations, references and attributes. References can point to other Ecore files.
Generator model files are partially generated files, describing how to generate Java
code from a set of Ecore files.
3.2
Adding new Concepts to RED
In this section we will discuss how we intend to extend RED’s metamodel with the
concepts necessary to support architectural modeling. We will in most cases not get
into the structure of individual models, as this will be treated in detail in later sections.
At the outset of this project, RED already contained a metamodel with several
elements pertaining to requirements engineering. A portion of the model is shown in fig-
ure 3.1. We want to extend this metamodel with the elements pertaining to architecture
discussed earlier.
First of all, we do not wish to create separate logic or workflows for the new ele-
ments. They should instead exist seamlessly alongside the existing elements, making
switches between specification and design phases natural and effortless. Therefore, the
new elements should also be subclasses of SpecificationElement.
3.2.1
The System Element
To begin with we will make a decision on naming. It is our intention to add a component
concept to RED. However, the term component carries the implication of being part of
a larger system.
The term system on the other hand may both refer to a top-level
software system, or a subsystem, which is a type of component. Since we intend to use
the same concept to model both top-level and lower-level systems (they are semantically
very similar), we will name this concept system.
Prior to this project, RED grouped systems together with other types of actors. El-
ements have a elementKind attribute, and the various specification elements may allow
the user to select a “kind” from a predefined list. Actor’s list of kinds include Person,
Role, Organization, and more relevant, System and Port. Thus RED already offers the
possibility of creating a system, but Actors of the kind System are functionally no
==PAGE:21==
3.2 Adding new Concepts to RED
13
Figure 3.1: Part of RED’s metamodel.
different from other Actors. We not only want to indicate the existence of a system,
but also describe its characteristics, such as internal structure and external interfaces.
So the System concept should certainly be a specification element of its own.
So in the context of architecture, systems are certainly different from actors. However,
in the context of requirements, systems are still just kinds of actors.
For example,
systems can be part of use cases just like other actors. To accommodate both these
situations we will make System a subclass of Actor.
==PAGE:22==
14
3 Design
3.2.2
The Port Element
Most of the considerations for ports are similar to those discussed for systems in the
above. Ports are also a kind of Actor, with no additional functionality. When dis-
cussing architectural design, ports have properties distinct from those of human and
organizational actors, and from systems. In particular, ports provide and require in-
terfaces. In a requirements engineering context, ports also essentially remain a kind of
actor. Therefore, as with System, we will create a Port specification element, that is
a subclass of Actor.
3.2.3
The Connector Element
The main purpose of a connector is to facilitate communication between ports. When
discussing system context, connectors may also facilitate communication with human
actors.
It is important to remember that the connector concept can not only represent simple
procedure calls, but also advanced communication mechanisms, such as TCP, RPC and
DNS. We will by no means get into a detailed definition of connectors, but only mention
this to underline the importance of having connectors as independent elements, rather
than as simple associations between other classes. Recall that we want to facilitate the
definition of quantitative properties for elements. A connector may very well have such
properties, and thus we want a Connector specification element.
In most cases, a connector will connect only two elements, making direction is unim-
portant. In a few cases, a user may wish to model a “broadcasting” situation, where
one port simultaneously interacts with a set of other ports. In such a situation it is
meaningful for the connector to differentiate between source and target ports, so as to
know which port is a sender, and which are receivers. Thus a connector element should
have separate source and target attributes.
Fortunately, RED already contains such an element. The specification element Ac-
tor relation is meant to describe interaction relationships between actors. It has
list-type attributes for both sources and targets, to give the user maximum freedom.
The name however, is unfortunate, as it diverges from the conventional name for such
an element, and thus hides which concept the element represents. We will therefore
rename Actor relation to Connector.
3.2.4
The Configuration Element
Already before this project, RED’s metamodel contained a Configuration element.
The reasoning was that even during requirements analysis, it is worth considering the
target system in varying contexts. For example, one might want to model the various
configurations a large system goes through during a longer, multi-phase project.
Configuration has list-type attributes for internal Connectors and Actors,
which is enough to represent the internal structure or context of a system. Thus we
==PAGE:23==
3.3 A New Bundle Structure
15
have no reason to make any changes to this element. Nonetheless, Configuration did
go through an evolution over the course of this project.
Initially Configuration was renamed to System structure to better commu-
nicate the idea of it representing the internals of a system. Later in the project, we
introduced the concept of a glue connector, representing the link between the external
port of a system, and the port of an internal system that realizes that port. We initially
made glue connectors part of System structure, but later moved them to System,
to prevent a configuration from having knowledge of the system it is part of. We will
discuss glue connectors more in section 3.4.2. Finally, we decided to change the name
of System structure back to Configuration, since RED is first and foremost a
learning tool, and thus has a vested interest in sticking to established terminology.
3.2.5
Data Structures
In order to check consistency in the communication between ports, our goals specify that
the user must be able define data structures to represent these messages. There is already
an established term for the concept that describes an operation and its parameters, a
signature[RJB05, p. 593]. Thus we will create an element called Signature.
Interfaces are not limited to specifying operations, but may for example also specify
attributes.
While we will not spend time on this during this project, it would help
facilitate this future extension (and thus support one of our goals) if we prepare for
this. We will create a model class that these future elements can extend. We named
this class Model element, as these classes will directly support the definition of
individual models, in the same way Specification elements support the definition
of the specification as a whole.
However, Model elements are still complex elements in themselves, and just as
much part of the entire specification as the Specification elements they support.
Thus we will also let Model element be a subclass of Specification element.
An overview of all the discussed changes to the metamodel can be seen in figure 3.2.
As previously mentioned, the internal design of the added elements will be discussed in
the following sections.
3.3
A New Bundle Structure
Before we can begin to realize the additions to the metamodel, we need to reevaluate
parts of RED’s project structure. RED is built as a large number bundles (i.e. plug-ins
based on the OSGi framework[Ecl]) extending a basic Eclipse-based application. At the
beginning of this project, there were approx. 100 of such bundles, of which about half
are concerned with the specification elements. A specification element will typically be
split over four or five bundles, e.g. in the case of the Requirement element:
• specificationelements.requirement contains the EMF Ecore model and gener-
ator model files, along with the Java source files created from these. In particular,
==PAGE:24==
16
3 Design
package dk.dtu.imm.red.specificationelements
Signature
ModelElement
Port
System
Connector
Actor
SpecificationElement
Figure 3.2: Overview of the high-level changes made to RED’s metamodel, as de-
scribed in section 3.2. The color blue indicates a renaming, green indicates
added elements, black elements remain unchanged.
these source files are Java interfaces and classes representing the modeled concepts.
Any necessary adjustments to the functionality of the model classes are made in
these files.
• specificationelements.requirement.edit also contains source files generated
from the EMF model, but these are concerned with boilerplate functionality of the
plug-in, and rarely requires manual editing.
• specificationelements.requirement.feature contains meta-information about
the relation between the bundles of the specification element, and does not require
manual editing beyond ensuring names used for referencing the bundles are correct.
• specificationelements.requirement.ui contains all the necessary source code
for editors and commands related to the specification element. This code is in
general manually written.
==PAGE:25==
3.3 A New Bundle Structure
17
• specificationelements.requirement.ui.tests contains manually written unit
tests for the UI code.
The structure can also be seen in figure 3.3. When referring to bundles rather than
ordinary Java packages in diagrams, we will use the bundle stereotype shown in figure 3.4.
Figure 3.3: The bundles for the Requirement specification element, as shown in the
Eclipse project explorer. The internal structures of the different types of
bundles are fairly similar to each other.
Judging from the existing structuring of bundles, the principle so far has been to
give each specification element its own set of bundles, with the notable exception of
Connector and Configuration existing alongside Actor in the actor bundles.
3.3.1
A Cyclic Dependency Issue
Working from the above principle, the new System and Port specification elements
should also each have their own bundles, and this was the approach taken initially.
However, it turned out that the existing structure caused dependency issues that were
==PAGE:26==
18
3 Design
«stereotype»
Bundle
«metaclass»
Package
Figure 3.4: Definition of bundle stereotype for packages, to clarify when the package
syntax refers to an OSGI bundle. OSGI bundles are the project format
for Eclipse plug-ins[Ecl], and serve as the highest-level structure in RED’s
source code.
hidden as Eclipse tried to resolve them automatically. The fundamental problem is that
cyclic dependencies are not allowed between generator model files. Thus the generator
model file in the bundle of specification element A will require a reference to the generator
model file of specification element B if A’s model file contains a reference to B. But
then B’s model file is not allowed to reference A as this will create a cyclic dependency
between A’s and B’s generator model files.
This situation emerged in RED, as the
specification elements Actor, Use case and Use case scenario all reference each
other, as shown in figure 3.5. EMF’s automatic solution to this problem is to copy one of
the conflicting model files into the bundle of the other, so they can share one generator
model file.
package dk.dtu.imm.red.specificationelements
«bundle»
usecase
«bundle»
ucscenario
UsecaseReference
«bundle»
configuration
Usecase
Actor
UsecaseReference
secondary
UcScenario
primary
UsecaseRelation
Figure 3.5: Cyclic dependencies between the classes in the usecase, configuration
and ucscenario bundles. Note that elements and dependencies that are
not part of the problem have been left out.
Thus the model files for Actor and Use case scenario had been copied into
the specificationelements.usecase bundle, with their generated Java source code
==PAGE:27==
3.3 A New Bundle Structure
19
also being placed in this bundle. Thus their own specificationelements.actor and
specificationelements.ucscenario bundles were going unused, and only served to
misrepresent the actual project structure.
3.3.1.1
Solution Alternatives to the Dependency Problem
It was decided to resolve this problem at once. While it would have been possible to
create the new elements under the existing structure, System’s and Port’s definitions
as subclasses of Actor would only create more dependencies, which would make a later
fix even more difficult.
A number of different designs would alleviate the problem:
Create a single bundle for relations
Occasionally an association between two classes
will have properties of its own, which makes it necessary to create a class representing the
association. UML calls this an association class[RJB05, pp. 179–183], and it is a fairly
common pattern in RED. E.g. Actor has a collection of related Configurations,
where each relation is augmented with a kind attribute, making it necessary to use a
ConfigurationRelation class holding the kind attribute, along with the reference to
the relevant Configuration object.
Keeping in mind that most of RED’s associations are facilitated through variations
over such association classes, a solution to our dependency problem would be to lump
all these associations in a specificationelements.associations bundle, and realize
them as bi-directional associations (having fields for both source and target). With this
structure all dependencies between specification element bundles will be replaced with
dependencies coming from a single bundle. The design is visualized in figure 3.6.
This solution is arguably more elegant, as the specification elements can be kept
completely independent. It also prevents this particular problem from resurfacing, as
new relations between specification elements will be placed into the same bundle.
However, it will also complicate program logic, as specification elements will no longer
hold direct references to their own associations. Instead, they will have to iterate over a
global collection of associations to find the relevant ones. Furthermore, all relations will
have to be realized with association classes, even ones that could have been associated
with direct references, leading to even more complexity.
Merge opposing relations
Most instances of the dependency problem stem from pairs
of specification elements holding separate references to each other. These instances of
the problem can technically be eliminated by creating a single bidirectional relation in
place of the two separate unidirectional relation, and let this new relation reside in one
of the bundles.
This approach has several issues. Most importantly, two opposing relation instances
in the model rarely represent two directions of the same conceptual relationship, but
rather two distinct relationships. I.e. if specification element A can have a relation of
==PAGE:28==
20
3 Design
package dk.dtu.imm.red.specificationelements
«bundle»
relations
ScenarioReference
isSecondary: Boolean
«bundle»
usecase
«bundle»
ucscenario
«bundle»
configuration
Usecase
Actor
source
source
source
UsecaseRelation
UsecaseReference
UcScenario
Figure 3.6: A design that avoids the cyclic dependency problem by placing all associ-
ation classes in a single bundle, and replacing the incoming associations
pointing to them with outgoing associations (labeled source). Compare to
figure 3.5.
type rab to specification element B, and B can have a relation of type rba, then A may
have an instance of rab towards B, without B having an instance of rba towards A.
Thus taking this approach would be letting technical issues degrade the metamodel,
which should be avoided whenever possible. Aside from that, the approach would re-
quire careful reworking of the UI code for all the affected specification elements, a
time-consuming proposition.
Dependency inversion
An established method for eliminating cyclic dependencies is
using the dependency inversion principle, formally described by Martin[Mar03]. The
idea is to replace direct dependencies among classes with interfaces, which should break
up the chains of dependencies. In our case, this can be realized in two ways:
• Put the dependee interface in the bundle of the depender.
• Put all dependee interfaces in a common package. This is visualized in figure 3.7.
Both these approaches fail to facilitate our overall purpose, to separate the specifi-
cation element models into individual bundles. Since the interfaces obviously need to
define the necessary public methods of their underlying specification elements, we will
==PAGE:29==
3.3 A New Bundle Structure
21
package dk.dtu.imm.red.specificationelements
«bundle»
specificationelement
«interface»
UcScenario
«interface»
Usecase
«interface»
Actor
«bundle»
usecase
«bundle»
ucscenario
UsecaseReference
«bundle»
configuration
Usecase
Actor
UsecaseReference
secondary
UcScenario
primary
UsecaseRelation
Figure 3.7: A design that avoids the cyclic dependency problem through dependency
inversion. Separate interfaces are created for the model classes involved in
the dependency cycle. These interfaces are placed in one common package.
Compare to figure 3.5.
still have several model descriptions in one bundle, and thus in reality this approach
offers little gain.
Group specification elements together
A final minimum-effort solution is to em-
brace the necessity of bundling specification elements together, based on their interde-
pendencies (visualized in figure 3.8). The main task of this approach would be to deter-
mine how to group the specification elements together, and ensure that these groupings
are properly realized, i.e. if Actor and Use case are colocated in specificationele-
ments.usecase, then their respective UI source code files should also be colocated in
specificationelements.usecase.ui.
This approach is more about cleaning up after Eclipse’s “forced” resolution of the
cyclic dependency problem, and does not result in a more elegant and simplistic structure
for the project. It will be more difficult for future developers to find the affected specifi-
cation elements, and future specification elements will have to have their dependencies
carefully considered, so they can be created at the appropriate place in the dependency
==PAGE:30==
22
3 Design
package dk.dtu.imm.red.specificationelements
«bundle»
usecase
UsecaseReference
Usecase
Actor
UsecaseReference
secondary
UcScenario
primary
UsecaseRelation
Figure 3.8: A design that avoids the cyclic dependency problem by grouping all in-
volved class together in one bundle. The issue of conflicting use of the
identifier UsecaseReference will resolved at a later stage. Compare to fig-
ure 3.5.
hierarchy.
3.3.1.2
Removal of the Dependency Problem
In spite of its shortcomings, it was decided that the final option of leaving the spec-
ification elements grouped together (see figure 3.8) was the most acceptable solution.
The other options would be significantly more time-consuming to implement, and would
increase project complexity without significant gain. Particularly, there are only few
plans for future specification elements, so the issue of the scalability of this solution is
fairly small.
The original issue concerns Actor, Use case and Use case scenario. These
three will therefore be grouped together in the specificationelements.usecase bun-
dles. However, these are not the only changes worth considering, as two specification
elements, Configuration and Connector, are co-located with Actor in a single
model file. This issue will be discussed in section 3.3.2.
While doing this reorganization, we will also rename Use case scenario’s model
class – currently called UcScenario – to Scenario. Since there are no other concepts
named “scenario”, and the prefixed abbreviation adds little information for developers
unfamiliar with the system, there is no reason to keep the current, aesthetically unpleas-
ing name. The packages in which the corresponding Java files reside will be renamed to
specificationelements.usecasescenario, making their purpose more clear to new
developers.
==PAGE:31==
3.4 Creating the System and Port Elements
23
3.3.2
Updating the configuration Bundle
Currently, the EMF models for the specification elements Actor, Configuration and
Connector reside in the file Configuration.ecore. This file is – following the reor-
ganization discussed in section 3.3 – located in the specificationelements.usecase
bundle.
One issue here is that Configuration and Connector are related to each other
as elements for describing system architecture and context, but only vaguely relate to
Actor. Actor is mainly concerned use cases, modeling of organizational roles etc.
Therefore, we decided to place Configuration and Connector together in a bundle
focused on architecture-related specification elements. Thus Actor will be moved to
its own Actor.ecore model file in specificationelements.usecase, while the other
two will be moved to a different bundle.
Originally all the elements were defined in the same Ecore file. A quirk of this design
is that all the elements will use the same package prefix, which is defined in that file.
The file was originally concerned with Configuration, and thus named and structured
thereafter. Actor and Connector were added later, and just put inside their own
packages in the configuration package. Since these elements (and the future System
and Port) are equal, we will put each in their own package, by putting each in their
own Ecore file.
The bundle is named for the Configuration element, but soon we will introduce
the System element which will go into same bundle. Since the term “system” is bit more
clearly related to architecture than “configuration” (which can be concerned exclusively
with external contexts), we will rename the bundle to system. The changes are shown
in figure 3.9.
3.4
Creating the System and Port Elements
Like all the other specification elements in RED, we will create System and Port
as EMF models.
However, unlike other specification elements which are created as
subclasses of SpecificationElement, we will create System and Port as subclasses
of Actor, to retain the “is-a” relationship between them.
We will start by taking a look at the structure of Actor itself, as it has a number
of issues. Following that, we will discuss the design of System and Port individually.
3.4.1
Updating Actor
Prior to the beginning of this project, a new editor for describing element associations
had been added. The idea is that elements can associate with each other in all kinds
of more or less vague ways, that may have meaning when describing the system, e.g.
“is part of”, “justifies” or “supersedes”. Previously individual element implementations
contained collections of references to other elements to represent these loose associations,
==PAGE:32==
24
3 Design
package specificationelements
«bundle»
configuration
configuration
actor
connector
Actor
Connector
Configuration
(a) Old structure
package specificationelements
«bundle»
system
configuration
connector
Connector
Configuration
(b) New structure
Figure 3.9: Old and new structures of the bundle formerly named configuration.
The bundle was renamed, and Actor was moved to different bundle. The
package structure was also simplified.
but these collections were created on a case-by-case basis, where a specification element
would only allow references to types of specification elements that the developer believed
to be relevant at the time.
This design leaves little flexibility for the user to describe arbitrary associations, and
fills the user interface with several lists. For example Actor has collections of references
to Configurations, Personas and Use cases, which resulted in the main editor tab
shown in figure 3.10.
To mitigate these problems, a more generalized approach was implemented, where
any specification element could hold various types associations to any other. From the
user perspective, this feature is realized in the Tracing tab. However, some of the old asso-
ciation lists, like those of Actor shown in figure 3.10 remain after the implementation
of this feature.
==PAGE:33==
3.4 Creating the System and Port Elements
25
Figure 3.10: The main editor tab for Actor, prior to the redesign undertaken in
this project. The reference lists used to indicate associations to other
elements are visible in the bottom half. Components of this type are
used throughout RED’s UI.
Since a redesign of Actor is due, we will grab the chance before we start creating
new important elements as subclasses of it. In particular, since System and Port
remain specializations of Actor, it seems reasonable to base their editors on that of
Actor. This will be much easier if we start by cleaning up the Actor editor.
First of all, Actor contains a collection of associated Personas. Since actors have
no inherent special relationship with personas, this collection can easily be replaced by
the new Tracing feature. Thus that relationship and its association class will be dropped
completely.
Structures will be dropped as well, since the purpose of that collection is
to list possible internal configurations of that Actor. This only makes sense when
==PAGE:34==
26
3 Design
that Actor is a system, and since we are creating a separate System element, such a
collection is no longer needed in Actor. We will keep Behavior, since the Use cases
contained in this list give important context to role of an Actor in a modeled system.
However, actor behavior is restricted to be expressed by use cases, but could for example
also be modeled using state machines. Thus we will change the type of these relations to
SpecificationElement. This will leave the users freedom to describe behavior however
they want.
It should also be noted that Actor’s model turned out to contain a containedIn
property of type Actor. A usage search revealed that the property was never accessed,
and the thesis written by the original author (according to git blame) provided no
documentation for its purpose[Nie14]. This property was therefore also removed.
The old and new structures of Actor are shown in figure 3.11.
3.4.2
Creating System
To be able to properly define systems, we need the System element to have a number
of attributes in addition to the ones it inherits.
A user may want to model multiple variations of a system’s configuration.
For
example, she might plan to add new components in a later iteration of the system, or
the configuration might dynamically change as part of its operation. We therefore want
to allow multiple configurations for the same system.
Externally, systems can be modeled as components, with one or more ports providing
or requiring interfaces. This makes sense for most use cases. When viewing the context
of a modeled system, a port may represent a user interface for interacting with human
actors, or a service interface for interacting with external system actors. When modeling
the internals of a system, a system represents a subsystem, with its ports representing
APIs for interacting with other subsystems.
There is a special kind of connectors that we also need to consider. Figure 3.12 show
connectors in a variety of different situations. Connectors a, c and e are all traditional
connectors, as they connect external ports of systems that are part of the same context.
a and e connect the three elements in the outermost context, while c connects T and U,
who are both top-level internal systems of S. b and d however are special cases, as they
signify the realization of S’ external ports by internal ports. f is a special case of these
connectors, where an external port of S is realized by another of S’ ports.
These special relations are much simpler than a connector, which may embody some
very complex mechanisms. We will therefore model them separately. We decided on the
term “glue connector”, implying that they bind a system with its internal configurations.
The glue connectors could be modeled both as belonging to a System or a Config-
uration. We decided to place them in System, since Configuration can be used
in situations where glue connectors do not make sense, specifically when they represent
system contexts. Glue connector principally always make sense in System, even when
they are not used.
==PAGE:35==
3.4 Creating the System and Port Elements
27
package dk.dtu.imm.red.specificationelements.actor
«enumeration»
ConfigurationKind
unspecified
internal
external
ConfigurationRelation
+configuration: Configuration
+kind: configurationKind
PersonaRelation
+persona: Persona
UsecaseRelation
+role: String
+usecase: Usecase
Actor
+containedIn: Actor
*
*
*
(a) Old structure
package dk.dtu.imm.red.specificationelements.actor
Actor
+behaviorElements: SpecificationElement [*]
(b) New structure
Figure 3.11: Old and new structures of Actor. Note that some minor, unchanged
properties have been left out for brevity. PersonaRelation has been super-
seded by a higher-level component, UsecaseRelation has been replaced with
the behaviorElements attribute, as the role attribute was not needed. Re-
lations to Configurations are moved down to the System subclass,
and is therefore not needed either.
==PAGE:36==
28
3 Design
A
U
T
V
S
f
d
c
b
e
a
Figure 3.12: Conceptual diagram showing various cases of connectors. a, c and e are
traditional connectors, while b, d and f indicate a simpler realization
relationship.
The design for the System specification element is fairly trivial. Its class diagram is
shown in figure 3.13. The configuration is represented by the Configuration element
discussed in section 3.2.4. Note that we use an association class, as we want to allow
the user to add a name that signifies the role of that configuration in that system.
3.4.2.1
Editor for System
The editor for System should allow the user to edit the special properties of that element.
All these properties are list-types, so in keeping with the established patterns of RED,
we will realize these as tables in the user interface. We need three tables: External ports,
Configurations and Glue connectors.
Since System is a subclass of Actor, we will base its editor on that of Actor. That
editor has a large unused area on its Summary page, where class-specific UI elements are
normally placed in RED. The space is too narrow to effectively show three additional
tables side-by-side. However, we can put two tables on top of each other, and the third
next to them.
A system will rarely have more than a few configurations and a few
ports, so the tables for these members need less vertical space. The number of glue
connectors will approximately be nports × nconfigurations, and thus much larger.
This
layout is visualized in figure 3.14.
3.4.3
Creating Port
As with a system, a port is a specific type of actor in many modeling contexts. But
a port differs from other actors by having a special purpose: It facilitates communi-
cation between the system to which it is attached, and other actors. As discussed in
section 3.2.5, ports require and provide a number of signatures. These are collectively
called the port’s role. Thus a Port specification element needs a collection attribute for
==PAGE:37==
3.4 Creating the System and Port Elements
29
«bundle»
system
GlueConnector
+source: Port
+target: Port
«bundle»
usecase
package dk.dtu.imm.red.specificationelements
ConfigurationReference
+configuration: Configuration
+label: String
Actor
System
*
*
Figure 3.13: Class diagram for the System specification element.
holding signatures. Since a signature is a complex type that may have several attributes,
we will design a separate class to represent these – this will be discussed in section 3.5.
But there are a few more attributes worth considering, aside from the signature itself.
Particularly the signature is either incoming (provided) or outgoing (required) from the
port in question. This property is obviously specific to the relation between a particular
signature and a particular port, as a signature has to serve as both outgoing from one
port and incoming to another port. Thus we will need a new association class to describe
the relation between a port and a signature.
There may be situations where the input accepted by a port can best be described
as multiple instances of a particular signature, e.g. if the port is part of low-level data
transmission system, where the port will accept an arbitrary number of data packets in
a single interaction. This again is property that is specific to the individual port’s use
of the signature, not something general to all uses of that signature. E.g. a subsystem
of the transmission system may have the responsibility of decoding individual packets,
and might therefore only accept one packet signature at a time. We will therefore add
a multiplicity property to the association class as well.
To make it easier for the users to communicate their intention with using a certain
signature on a certain port, it would be helpful if the association could add a textual
==PAGE:38==
30
3 Design
Figure 3.14: The proposed layout for System’s editor. Black components are inher-
ited from Actor’s editor, blue components are new additions.
hint to that effect. When modeling a system a signature might be used several times
(for example an HTTP response), and it may be easy to lose track of why two particular
ports communicate that signature. We will therefore also add a string property to the
association class for these descriptions.
A multiplicity definition language
While we could easily make the multiplicity a
string attribute, we still plan to allow RED to check for inconsistencies in the design. If
we want RED to help with ensuring consistency in multiplicities, we need to create a
system where the user defines semantically meaningful multiplicities. Multiplicities are
commonly described textually with a simple syntax, so a natural approach was to create
a formal language for the user, that RED can parse. This has the added advantage of
avoiding to have to implement a new GUI component from scratch for this purpose. The
language created is simple:
1 multi
= multiPart {",", multiPart} ;
2 multiPart
= int, "..", upLim
3
| upLim ;
4 upLim
= int | "*" ;
5 int
= ? any integer ? ;
Listing 3.1: The multiplicity definition language expressed in EBNF.
This grammar allows three types of multiplicity:
==PAGE:39==
3.4 Creating the System and Port Elements
31
• A single-valued multiplicity, e.g.
2 sets a requirement of exactly two items. A
value of ∗represents unbounded multiplicity.
• A ranged multiplicity, e.g. 3..5 sets a requirement of three, four or five values. The
upper limit may be ∗, again meaning unbounded.
• A compound of multiple multiplicities. E.g. 1, 3..5 sets a requirement of one, three,
four or five items.
We will represent these with the classes SingleValuedMultiplicity, RangedMultiplicity and
CompoundMultiplicity, all inheriting from an abstract Multiplicity to make them interchange-
able. We will use integers for the values, and let -1 symbolize ∗. A class diagram shows
this structure in figure 3.15. Note that we will place these classes in a new bundle,
specificationelements.modelelement, which we will discuss later.
package dk.dtu.imm.red.specificationelements.modelelement.multiplicity
CompoundMultiplicity
+parts: Multiplicity [2..*]
RangedMultiplicity
+minimum: Integer
+maximum: Integer
SingleValueMultiplicity
+value: Integer
Multiplicity
+inRange(Integer): Boolean
+inRangeUnbounded(Integer): Boolean
Figure 3.15: Class diagram for the Multiplicity classes used by Port. The specifica-
tionelements.modelelement bundle will be discussed in a later section.
Multiplicity will require its subclasses to implement the methods inRange() and inRange-
Unbounded(), which test whether a particular value or range fall within the multiplicity
represented by the callee. inRange() accepts a single value as a parameter, while inRange-
Unbounded() takes the minimum value of an unbounded range. These methods will be
used later for verifying the compatibility of two ports.
3.4.3.1
Final design
The final structure of Port is shown in figure 3.16.
RoleTableRow was named for the
notion that Port’s role is designed as table with an association to a signature in each
row. The design of Signature will be discussed in section 3.5. We will place System and
Port in the specificationelements.system bundle, going with the new notion that
==PAGE:40==
32
3 Design
this bundle is concerned with architecture. System and Port are also closely related
to Configuration and Connector.
package dk.dtu.imm.red.specificationelements
«bundle»
usecase
«bundle»
system
«enumeration»
SignatureDirection
in
out
RoleTableRow
+signature: Signature
+description: String
+multiplicity: Multiplicity
+direction: SignatureDirection
Actor
Port
*
Figure 3.16: Class diagram for the Port specification element.
3.4.3.2
Editor for Port
Like System editor, the editor for Port will be based on that of Actor. Port however,
only needs one additional table, Role, to represent its lone additional property. This
table will need columns for signature name, multiplicity, direction and description. Since
especially description can be longer strings, this table should be given the entire empty
space in the editor. This is visualized in figure 3.17.
3.5
Creating the Signature element
Our earliest design of Signature created it as a minimalist class belonging to a given
Port, somewhat akin to the quantitative properties (see section 3.6). In EMF’s persis-
tence scheme, object instances are stored in a hierarchy where an instance is stored as
==PAGE:41==
3.5 Creating the Signature element
33
Figure 3.17: The proposed layout for Port’s editor. Black components are inherited
from Actor’s editor, the blue component is a new addition.
part of a containing object instance. An instance can only have one owner, and here
the problem with signature lies. A signature may be referenced by several Ports, but
only owned by one. Should the user decide to remove the signature from the original
owning Port (e.g. due to a change in requirements), the signature would be lost to
other referencing Ports.
Creating a mechanism for transferring the signature instance’s ownership would re-
quire listening for a number of changes in state, including deletion of the signature
reference, and deletion of the Port, followed by a search for another referencing Port
to transfer ownership to. This will quickly become quite complicated, and probably
quite brittle as RED evolves.
A much simpler solution is to store signatures independently of Ports. Specifica-
tion elements, which conceptually have no owners, are contained by special file objects,
that serve as root elements when the object hierarchy is stored in physical files. So the
solution would be to store signatures at the same level in the hierarchy as specification
elements. This led us to wonder how we could ensure that disused (completely deref-
erenced) signatures would be deleted. And this finally led us to the approach we will
implement.
Signatures are not necessarily small ad hoc tuples that become irrelevant when their
owning port is dropped from the design.
A signature may represent an established
message format, e.g.
an HTTP request or a TCP packet.
Thus signatures can be
reusable, and play an important role in modeling the structure of data moving around
==PAGE:42==
34
3 Design
in the modeled system. It therefore seems reasonable to create a specification element
Signature, that can be created and reused independently of any particular port.
Bundle location and super class
As discussed earlier, it is expected that future version
of RED will feature more elements akin to Signature, such as State and Action. It
is the intention that users should be able to use these all these interchangeably, e.g. as
part of a Port’s role. These classes are going to inherit from the new ModelElement,
which will itself inherit from SpecificationElement. Currently ModelElement has
no attributes of its own. ModelElement, Signature and any future subclass will be
placed in a new specificationelements.modelelement bundle set.
3.5.0.1
Structure
As a subclass of Element, Signature will have attributes called name and kind. In
RED a specification element’s kind is chosen from a limited set of options specific to
that element. For Signature we decided on an initial choice between type, class and
interface.
Characteristic for a signature is that it contains a number of named and typed
members. Types can for example be primitives, data structures, and functions. We will
get back to creating a system for this in section 3.5.0.2.
Aside from name and type, we decided to also give the members options for visibility
(e.g. public and private), access mode (i.e. read-write or read-only) and multiplicity.
While data types such as list and array certainly describe multiplicity at a technical
level, we chose to also allow defining it at a conceptual level, in the interest of giving
users more freedom. The overall reason for adding these additional properties, is to
let Signature mirror VisualClassElement. In RED’s visualmodeling component,
VisualClassElement is the model class representing classes in UML class diagrams.
Unlike many other model elements in visualmodeling, VisualClassElement does not
have a “sibling” specification element that represents the same concept. The signature
concept is similar enough to the UML class, that they can easily represent each other.
But in order to not lose information (and provide the user with options), we will add the
attributes of UML class properties to Signature’s properties, despite them not being
inherent to that construct.
The final design for Signature is shown in figure 3.18.
3.5.0.2
A type definition language
We want to allow users plenty of freedom when defining property types in Signatures.
However, in the interest of allowing RED to perform consistency checks on the models,
we also want type definitions to be semantically meaningful. This essentially gives the
choice between defining types using a graphical or text-based system.
To cover as many use cases as possible we decided on the following basic constructs
for a type system:
==PAGE:43==
3.5 Creating the Signature element
35
package dk.dtu.imm.red.specificationelements.modelelement
«enumeration»
AccessMode
read_write
read_only
«enumeration»
Visibility
unspecified
public
private
package
protected
SignatureItem
+name: String
+type: DataType
+multiplicity: Multiplicity
+visibility: Visibility
+accessMode: AccessMode
ModelElement
Signature
*
Figure 3.18: Class diagram for the Signature specification element.
• Primitives (e.g. integer, float, string etc.)
• Enumerations
• Type variables
• Signatures
• Arrays
• Data structures (e.g. list)
• Tuples
• Functions
These can of course be combined in an infinite number of ways. A GUI for defining
such complex types would have to be created from scratch, and usability would be an
important consideration. This consideration, along with the fact that most of these
types already have established textual syntaxes, moves us to create a textual definition
language, rather than a graphical editor.
The language is fairly simple:
1 type
= "(", type, ")"
2
| typePart , "*", type
(* tuples *)
3
| typePart , "->", type (* functions *) ;
==PAGE:44==
36
3 Design
4 typePart = baseType , typeMod , { typeMod } ;
5
6 baseType = "int" | "float" | "string" | "char" | "boolean" | "unit"
7
| typeVar
8
| vals, "choice" (* enumerations *)
9
| ? signature name ? ;
10 typeVar
= "'", ? identifier string ? ;
11 vals
= "{", val, { ",", val }, "}", "choice" ;
12 val
= ? identifier string ? ;
13
14 typeMod
= struct
(* data structures *)
15
| "array", dims (* arrays *) ;
16 struct
= "list" | "opt" | "set" ;
17 dims
= "[", int, { ",", int }, "]" ;
18 int
= ? integer ? ;
Listing 3.2: The type definition language expressed in EBNF.
Now we only need a selection of classes to realize these constructs and build a syntax
tree. These are fairly straight forward, and shown in figure 3.19.
We have made a few simplifications in relation the grammar:
• BaseType represents all the named primitives, e.g. “int” and “string”. The name of
the primitive in question will be assigned to the name property. Checking whether
the name is valid will be handled by the parser.
• DataStructure represents complex data structures such as lists. Since they at this level
only differ by name (we will not consider internal details of individual structures),
they are represented by one class with a name property. Note they can be nested,
like most of the other structures.
Since DataType and Multiplicity represent some very general concepts, and will be used
in several parts of RED, we will place these two components in specificationele-
ments.modelelement as a kind of general utility components.
3.5.1
Integration with the Diagram Component
In section 3.5.0.1 we discussed how Signature was designed to be similar to Visual-
ClassElement from the visual modeling component, to allow easy conversion between
the two. We will however have to consider one non-trivial question: how to transfer
UML relations to signatures. UML classes (and thus VisualClassElement) can relate
to each other through association, composition and generalization, while signatures can
only relate through association.
Since a design principle of RED is to give the user more choice rather than less,
we decided to let the user decide on a case-by-case basis.
When trying to convert
a VisualClassElement that is part of a relation, RED will present the user with a
selection of options, and generate the Signature based on their choice.
==PAGE:45==
3.5 Creating the Signature element
37
package dk.dtu.imm.red.specificationelements.modelelement.datatype
Tuple
+elementTypes: DataType [2..*]
FunctionType
+input: DataType
+output: DataType
ArrayType
+elementType: DataType
+dimensions: int [1..*]
ChoiceType
+options: String [1..*]
SignatureReference
+signature: Signature
TypeVariable
+name: String
NestedType
+containedType: DataType
DataStructure
+elementType: DataType
+name: String
BaseType
+name: String
DataType
Figure 3.19: Class diagram for the DataType classes used by Signature.
There are two ways to represent a class A that is a generalization of class B, without
using inheritance:
• Use composition instead, by embedding B into A, i.e. creating a member of type
B in A.
• Copy all properties of B into A, making A an independent class with the same
functionality.
The same two methods can be applied to composition relationships. If A is composed
of B, we can:
• Simply embed B into A, in the form of a member of type B.
• Copy the properties of B into A.
Again in the interest of user choice, we will also offer the option to not do anything,
and let the user handle these questions manually.
==PAGE:46==
38
3 Design
Both the “embed” and “inline” approach can result in a problematic structure. A
number of situations can lead to conflicting naming and operation signatures. Again we
will to let the user decide how to handle this, but rather than presenting them with the
choice explicitly, it will be easier for the user to judge the question when looking at the
issue in context. We will therefore simply not handle this problem, except in one case:
properties local to the class being converted, will overrule conflicting properties being
imported from other classes.
As a final note, VisualClassElement currently stores types and multiplicities as
strings. Since it will work together with Signature, which uses our new expression
languages for these properties, we will update VisualClassElement to use them as
well.
3.5.2
Editor for Signature
Signature’s editor will, like the other specification elements, build upon Element’s
base editor. This editor leaves the lower half of the Summary tab empty, for specification
elements to add UI components specific to their properties.
Signature only has one property to manage, its list of member items. Each member
has a name, type, privacy modifier, multiplicity and read-mode. All these will need their
own column, and a few may contain fairly long strings, in particular the type column.
Thus it seems reasonable to let this table fill the entirety of the empty space. This is
visualized in figure 3.20.
3.6
Creating Quantitative Properties
One of our goals is to allow the definition of quantitative properties of individual ele-
ments. For example, when describing system behavior, a subsystem may have a certain
throughput of data, or an organization (a kind of actor) may introduce a certain la-
tency in a business process. We therefore want to introduce the ability to define these
properties.
An important feature of these properties is that they should be represented in a way
that is semantically meaningful to the application. The reasoning is that RED at a later
state should be able aggregate these properties and provide the user with information
on the model as a whole, e.g. if a business process involves a number of actors that
each introduce a certain amount of latency to the process, the process as a whole has
a total latency of x time units. It is therefore not enough to let the list of quantitative
properties be a collection of strings.
That being said, we could create a textual grammar for describing such properties,
and then let RED parse it into a semantic object, but since the structure of such a
property is fairly simple, it seems more user friendly to facilitate its definition using
graphical user interface elements.
A quantitative property can be seen as a triple with these elements:
==PAGE:47==
3.6 Creating Quantitative Properties
39
Figure 3.20: The proposed layout for Signature’s editor. Black components are in-
herited from Element’s editor, the blue component is a new addition.
• The kind of property (e.g. “latency” or “throughput”). In the implementation we
have chosen to call it QuantityLabel, to avoid confusion with the kind property of
Element.
• The numerical value of the quantity, i.e. a floating point number.
• The unit with which the numerical value describes the property, e.g. megabytes
per second.
Since we want RED to be able to aggregate all properties of a certain kind, and we
generally only intend for some very specific quantitative properties to be defined, the kind
element can be limited to a few fixed options, e.g. “latency”, “throughput”, “capacity”
and “delay”. Future developers should be able to easily add new kinds. Therefore, this
is an obvious candidate for an enumeration.
The numerical value should be represented as such, i.e. not simply as a string, to
allow performing arithmetic on it. We also need to be able to define units, a problem
that we will discuss in the following section.
The QuantityItem class is visualized in figure 3.21.
==PAGE:48==
40
3 Design
package dk.dtu.imm.red.core.element
«enumeration»
QuantityLabel
latency
throughput
capacity
delay
QuantityItem
+value: Float
+unit: Unit
+label: QuantityLabel
+getValidUnits(): Unit [1..*]
Element
*
Figure 3.21: Class diagram for the QuantityItem class.
3.6.1
A System for Units
Different kinds of quantitative properties require different categories of units, e.g. latency
is measured in time units and throughput is measured in rate units (some arbitrary unit
over time).
Since the quantities can vary widely in scale, we have to offer a choice
between a number of units within each unit category. Since we expect RED to sum
up these values at a future point, the units also need to be semantically meaningful, so
RED is able to determine compatibility of units and convert between them. Finally, we
want to be able to compose units from other units, in particular creating divisional units
(e.g. kilometers per hour or megabytes per second). This will allow easy extension of
the unit set, if future developers wish to add new kinds of quantitative properties.
Initially we tried to use a library to fill this role. The JScience library is designed to
provide facilities for scientific programming, including a very flexible framework for units
of measurement[JSc]. However, while that library theoretically fulfilled our requirements,
it contained a bug that we were unable to work around, and the project has not been
updated since 2011. We were unable to find another library with the necessary capability
and maturity. Instead we created the unit system outlined in figure 3.22.
Unit
This superclass allows polymorphic behavior, and provides default implementa-
tions for common operations. Most importantly it requires subclasses to provide the
properties symbol and conversionFactor.
• The string property symbol is the visual representation of a unit, for example “m”
for meter or “MB/s” for megabyte per second.
• The float property conversionFactor is quantitative relationship between this unit
and the reference unit of its category. For example, we can choose seconds as the
==PAGE:49==
3.6 Creating Quantitative Properties
41
package dk.dtu.imm.red.core.element.unit
DivisionalUnit
+nominatorUnit: Unit
+denominatorUnit: Unit
«enumeration»
SizeUnit
kilobyte
megabyte
gigabyte
terabyte
«enumeration»
TimeUnit
millisecond
second
day
week
Unit
+symbol: String
+conversionFactor: Float
+getSiblingUnits(): Unit [*]
+isCompatibleWith(Unit): Boolean
+convertTo(Float, Unit): Float
BaseUnit
+symbol: String = "unit"
Figure 3.22: Class diagram of the unit system implemented for Actor’s quantitative
properties.
reference unit for time units. Then the conversion factor for seconds would be 1,
for minutes it would be 60, for hours it would be 3.600 etc.
Unit also provides three common operations:
• getSiblingUnits() returns a list of available units of the same category, e.g. all length
units known to the system. This method will be used for creating drop-down lists
of units in the quantity editor.
• convertTo() takes a float and unit, and attempts to convert the given value from the
called unit to the provided unit.
• isCompatibleWith() takes another unit, and returns true if they are both from the same
category. E.g. meter and kilometer are both length unit and thus compatible,
second and megabyte are not. This method is intended to ensure a conversion
attempt is valid before the conversion is undertaken.
==PAGE:50==
42
3 Design
BaseUnit
This unit represents “dimensionless” quantities. Its symbol is “unit”.
TimeUnit and SizeUnit
These units represent two basic categories of units. By cre-
ating a type for each category of units, we get a rigorous system for using the correct
units, i.e. one cannot use a time unit where a size unit is expected.
DivisionalUnit
This is currently the only compound unit. It is defined through two
properties of type Unit, nominatorUnit and denominatorUnit. The intention is that it can
derive both symbol and conversion factor from these two members.
3.7
Creating Consistency Checks
Our goal here is to have RED perform simple checks on project elements, to find issues
that the user will want to know about. The potential for various advanced checks is large,
but out of scope for this project. Instead, we will create the framework that facilitates
consistency checks, and implement a number of basic checks, that will be invaluable to
the users as their projects evolve.
There can be two kinds of issues:
• Issues internal to a particular element
• Issues concerned with the relation between two or more elements
Given the elements we have available in RED, all issues can be said to be contained
inside one particular element, even issues that result from element relations. Two ports
having mismatching signatures is only a problem if they are linked by a connector, and
thus the issue can be said be contained in the connector. More complex issues between
several interconnected systems and their ports are contained in the configuration of which
they are part. Remember that in our understanding of a configuration, it can represent
both the context of the system being designed, or the internals of any system in the
design. Thus all elements interacting with other elements will be part of a configuration.
3.7.1
Checking Operations
Since all issues can be related to one particular element, the simplest way to implement
checks for a type of element, is to create an operation that performs all checks for that
type. There is a special case however, the Folder element. A Folder is unique in
that it can contain other elements. It is very likely that users would want to perform
checks on each individual element in a folder, when commanding a check on that folder.
This is a different kind of operation, so we give it a different name. This results in two
operations, which we will name checkStructure() and checkChildren().
These operations naturally belong to the Element class, with several checks concern-
ing all of its subclasses, e.g. checking whether an element has a name. We did however,
==PAGE:51==
3.7 Creating Consistency Checks
43
decide to place these operations in a Checkable interface which Element implements.
This in part helps keep the Element model more tidy, and in part allows us let other
classes implement checking (e.g. the visual modeling classes), should the need arise.
3.7.2
Checking Severity
Issues have varying severity. The advantage of ranking issues according to severity, is
to help the user prioritize which issues to resolve immediately, which can be resolved at
a later date, and which can be ignored completely, should the user wish to. With the
project supervisor, we defined six severity levels:
OK A satisfied check, a defect avoided
Observation A potential defect under some circumstances
Warning A likely defect under probable circumstances
Weakness A minor defect that that can be tolerated for the moment/with a justifica-
tion
Mistake A defect that should be rectified as soon as conveniently possible
Error A serious and undisputed defect, must be corrected before we can go on
These are encapsulated in an enumeration, IssueSeverity.
3.7.3
Running and Viewing Checks
There should of course also be a facility to present any detected issues to the user. RED
already has a facility for annotating individual elements with user-created comments.
This will be a natural place to also list any issues with that element, if we do not wish
to overload RED’s UI with additional frames. There is potential to present the issues
where relevant in the editor, but we will not spend time on this here. We will however
want to store some additional information aside from that supported by the Comment
class, in particular a severity level for the issue. We will therefore extend that class with
an IssueComment class, that has a severity attribute. The checking system will add
such a comment to the element in question every time it detects an issue. The final
structure is shown in figure 3.23.
We will create three ways to perform checks, visualized in figure 3.24:
• A button on the Summary page of every element editor. This allows the user to
continuously request checks as they edit an element.
• An option in the right-click menu of the element explorer. This allows the user to
request a check of any particular element or group of elements.
==PAGE:52==
44
3 Design
package dk.dtu.imm.red.core
comment
element
«enumeration»
IssueSeverity
ok
observation
warning
weakness
mistake
error
«interface»
Checkable
checkStructure()
checkChildren()
clearIssues()
IssueComment
severity: IssueSeverity
Comment
Element
Figure 3.23: Class diagram for the model classes added to facilitate the checking sys-
tem. Element and Comment are not among these additions, but existed in
RED prior to this project.
• An option in the Tools menu of RED. This will lead to a centralized tool for working
with checks and viewing issues. It will allow the user to run checks on the entire
project, clear all issue comments, and view all issue comments. The tool should
also allow filtering of the issue list according to severity, which will make it easier
for users to focus on the most severe issues.
3.7.3.1
Design of the Checking Tool
To avoid cluttering main RED interface with additional content, the checking tool should
be realized as a dialog. We want three distinct elements:
• A table showing all issues in the project.
• A button to check the entire project.
• A button to delete all issue comments in the entire project.
It is clear that the table will dominate this dialog, so we will group the other com-
mands around it. In the style of most other table components in RED, we will add some
item manipulation buttons below the table, specifically a button to delete the selected
comments, and a button to open the element to which the selected issue belongs. Obvi-
ous columns for the table itself are the issue text and severity. We will also addcolumns
for the element names and types, to give context to the issues.
==PAGE:53==
3.7 Creating Consistency Checks
45
Figure 3.24: The three ways we will implement to activate a consistency check. A
button in the editor at a to check the open item, an option in the context
menu at b to check all selected items, and an option in the menu at c to
open a more comprehensive checking tool.
We will create the “check” and “clear” buttons separately from the “open” and
“delete” buttons, as they do not directly concern the table. Thus we place these on a
line below the others, with a little spacing. To the right of these, we will leave room for
future command buttons.
Finally, we want to be able to filter by minimum severity. We will use a dropdown
menu, which is ideal for choosing between a few fixed values. We will place this to
the right of “open” and “delete”, just below the table. The final design is visualized in
figure 3.25.
3.7.4
Checks Supported
The checks we will add as part of this project are listed in table 3.1. Several additional
checks are planned for future development, but these have been left out of the table,
thus the skips in ID numbering.
==PAGE:54==
46
3 Design
Figure 3.25: The proposed layout for the checking tool. Issue comments will be a table
showing comments, Severity filter will be a dropdown menu, and the other
four components will be buttons.
Summary
In this chapter we created designs for the various additions we need to make to the
application.
We extended RED’s metamodel, and created class designs for the new
elements. We also created some overall designs for the editors and other UI components
we will need to implement. Finally, we created a list of checks to be implemented.
In the next chapter we will discuss the implementation of these designs.
==PAGE:55==
3.7 Creating Consistency Checks
47
Table 3.1: Consistency checks implemented in this project. The ID refers to an iden-
tifier given to each check in an external design document. Severity can be
one of the levels described in section 3.7.2.
ID
Model Class
Issue description
Severity
1a
Element
The name field is empty
Weakness
1b
Element
The label field is empty
Warning
1c
Element
Both name and label are empty
Mistake
2a
System
Circular path of containment (caused by systems
and configuration being able to contain each other)
Error
2b
System
Glue connector is not connected to at least one of
the system’s external ports
Error
2c
System
Internal connector has endpoints outside the sys-
tem
Error
2f
System
System has no external ports
Warning
3a
Signature
Signature has no members
Mistake
3b
Signature
Member has an invalid multiplicity or type defini-
tion (signified by the relevant parser failing)
Mistake
3c
Signature
Member’s name is empty
Mistake
3d
Signature
Member’s type is empty
Mistake
5a
Connector
One or both endpoints are not attached
Error
5b
Connector
No matching signature at opposite endpoint
Mistake
5c
Connector
Signatures at endpoints do not have opposite di-
rections
Mistake
5d
Connector
The multiplicity of the outgoing signature is not a
subset of the incoming signature’s multiplicity
Mistake
17c
Structure dia-
gram
Diagram with the kind “Domain architecture” con-
tains ports (This diagram kind is discussed in sec-
tion 4.8)
Weakness
==PAGE:56==
48
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 4
Implementation
In this chapter we will discuss select aspects of implementing our designs from the
previous chapter. For the sake of brevity, we will focus on a few implementation problems
that were either particularly interesting or important.
4.1
Managing bundles in RED
In section 3.3 we designed a new structure for certain specification elements, and the
bundles to which they belong. Here we will describe the process of creating and changing
bundles in the RED source code.
As previously mentioned, “bundle” is an OSGI-specific term for a plug-in. Each bun-
dle is a compilable unit structured as a Maven project, that requires careful configuration
to work with the larger project. Unfortunately, the process of creating or reconfiguring
a bundle is only partially documented, so implementing the design in practice involved
some trial and error. In brief, the process is as follows:
1. When creating a new specification element, it is easiest to copy the bundles of an
existing element with similar characteristics. This ensures that common project
settings are already correct.
During the process the projects should be placed
correctly in RED’s folder hierarchy, which is not Eclipse’s default copy destination.
2. All project files should be edited to reflect the name of the new bundle. Unfor-
tunately, Eclipse’s rename functionality does not extend to renaming the project
in the configuration files, e.g. pom.xml (Maven project file), plugin.xml (Eclipse
plug-in configuration file) and MANIFEST.MF (JAR configuration file). If the bundle
has any dependencies, these will also have to be specified in MANIFEST.MF. This
process needs to be repeated across all the bundles.
3. A new EMF model file needs be created and configured with the correct name
space. One also needs to create a new generator model file, and adjust a number
of settings for model source code to be generated correctly.
4. For the new bundles to be built as part of RED, references to them need to be
added to the pom.xml in the specificationelements folder.
==PAGE:58==
50
4 Implementation
5. For the new specification element to show up in RED’s New Specification Element
menus, the necessary commands need to be written into the specicationele-
ments.ui bundle’s plugin.xml file.
During the process, it was considered automating some of these steps with scripts,
but it was eventually decided that the variation from project to project was too large
for the entire process to be scripted, and scripting individual steps would not be worth
the time spent.
The process also involved updating source code wherever the involved specification
elements were used, to bring package names, class names and attribute names up to
date. Finally, hand-written source code located in otherwise generated files needed to
be moved from the old files to newly generated ones, and updated with respect to new
attribute names.
4.2
Integration with Diagrams
As we strive to integrate our new elements with existing components, we should also
integrate Port and System with the diagrams. Fortunately, they already have diagram
counterparts (Configuration’s counterpart is arguably a context diagram), so we just
need them to work together. As mentioned earlier, in RED specification elements can be
linked to corresponding visual elements, and one can perform a conversion from either
to the other.
The code necessary to realize this connection is very straightforward.
The most
notable part is the code necessary to copy information from one element to the other,
but this is mainly the name string. System has external ports which can be represented
in diagrams, but we chose to down-prioritize this as the user can drag and drop the
individual ports into the system themselves.
4.3
Implementing QuantityItem
Each element will be able to have several quantity items defined. The most optimal
method of presentation will therefore be some type of list component. RED has one
such component that we expect to use a lot, so we will give it a short introduction.
A widely used UI component in RED is EAGComponent. This component is designed
to represent a list attribute of a specification element, according to a provided array of
ElementColumnDefinition instances. Much of the behavior of a EAGComponent object
is controlled by a EAGPresenter object. This is of particular interest because one can
override EAGPresenter to refine certain behaviors of EAGComponent. Three buttons –
Add, Open and Delete – are built into the component to allow the user to manipulate the
underlying list.
The Behaviour of Actor’s Summary page uses a default EAGPresenter with no un-
usual requirements. Since this list may contain all types of specification elements, the
==PAGE:59==
4.3 Implementing QuantityItem
51
generic type of EAGPresenter is set to SpecificationElement. The instantiation is
shown in listing 4.1.
Note the methods setReflectedEClassByName() and setRe-
flectedClass(), which configure the EAGPresenter to use reflection when creating
and searching for objects to add to the list.
1 behaviourPresenter = new EAGPresenter <SpecificationElement >();
2 behaviourPresenter.setReflectedEClassByName(
3
"dk.dtu.imm.red.specificationelements", "SpecificationElement");
4 behaviourPresenter.setReflectedClass(SpecificationElement.class);
Listing 4.1: A default instantiation of an EAGPresenter.
We will use the same components for the qualitative properties that we are adding
to all elements. We will add the components to the Cost & Risk tab, which is defined in
the BaseEditor class, and thus present in all concrete editors in RED. We rename the
tab to Quantities, and add the EAGComponent beneath the existing components.
Here however, we use the EAGComponent in a slightly different way. When the user
presses Add, we want RED to create a new QuantityItem, rather than showing a list of
existing ones to reference. Furthermore, since one element can only have one value for
a particular kind of quantity (e.g. only one value for latency), we need to ensure the
user is limited to creating quantities with unused labels. One option would be to make
the UI element for setting the label field (we called it Name) a drop-down menu with
the options changing dynamically according to the label of the other QuantityItem
instances of that Element. But changing the label of an existing item is probably a rare
use case, as the label is the defining feature of that item.
A simpler solution is to prompt the user with a choice of unused labels, when creating
a new item. For this we will create a wizard by overriding BaseWizard, the superclass of
all wizards in RED. Our new CreateQuantityItemWizard will take the Element’s list of
QuantityItem instances, and only give the user a choice of the unused labels. To apply
this wizard, we will override the component’s EAGPresenter, as shown in listing 4.2.
1 quantityPresenter = new EAGPresenter <QuantityItem >(){
2
@Override
3
public void AddItem() {
4
QuantityItem item = getNewItem();
5
QuantityLabel label = CreateQuantityItemWizardFactory
6
.createQuantityItem(actor.getQuantities());
7
if (label != null) {
8
item.setLabel(label);
9
super.AddItem(item);
10
}
11
}
12 };
Listing 4.2: EAGPresenter overridden to use a special wizard for object creation.
==PAGE:60==
52
4 Implementation
4.3.1
Implementing units
The interfaces for QuantityItem’s unit classes have been described in section 3.6. Here
we will describe the nontrivial aspects of their implementation.
We decided to use Java’s BigDecimal for floating point values. While it is slightly
more verbose to use than a traditional double, it offers arbitrary-precision decimal
arithmetic[Ora15]. Thus we avoid the risk of exposing the user to any of the unexpected
results one might encounter when using float-point arithmetic. Performance should not
be an issue, as the number of calculations at any one time is expected to be fairly small.
To facilitate later summation of quantitative properties across a system, it is nec-
essary to support conversion between units of the same category. We therefore imple-
mented the convertTo() method of the Unit class. The implementation is shown in
listing 4.3.
1 public BigDecimal convertTo(BigDecimal value, Unit outputUnit) {
2
if (!this.isCompatibleWith(outputUnit)) {
3
throw new IllegalArgumentException(
4
String.format("Units %s and %s are not compatible.",
5
this.toString(), outputUnit.toString()));
6
}
7
8
BigDecimal thisConvFactor =
9
((UnitImpl) this).getConversionFactor();
10
BigDecimal thatConvFactor =
11
((UnitImpl) outputUnit).getConversionFactor();
12
13
int scale = getCalculationScale(
14
thisConvFactor.scale(), thatConvFactor.scale());
15
16
BigDecimal baseValue = thisConvFactor.multiply(value);
17
BigDecimal result = baseValue.divide(thatConvFactor , scale,
18
BigDecimal.ROUND_HALF_UP).stripTrailingZeros();
19
20
return result;
21 }
Listing 4.3: The convertTo() method of UnitImpl.
The getCalculationScale() in lines 13-14 is used to determine the number of signif-
icant digits of the result. Despite BigDecimal’s precision-focused design, testing showed
an issue where precision would be lost when dividing large numbers. getCalculation-
Scale() returns the largest of either the two parameters, or the MIN_VALUE_SCALE
constant defined in UnitImpl. MIN_VALUE_SCALE is defined as a fairly large arbitrary
integer, that ensures precision is only lost in very extreme situations.
The division in lines 17-18 uses the determined scale, and rounds the result according
to the provided rule. Finally we reduce the number the smallest necessary scale again
with stripTrailingZeros().
DivisionalUnitImpl requires a bit of additional logic. The conversion factor of a
divisional unit is the quotient of the conversion factors of its component units, as shown
==PAGE:61==
4.3 Implementing QuantityItem
53
in listing 4.4.
1 @Override
2 public BigDecimal getConversionFactor() {
3
BigDecimal nomConvFactor = ((UnitImpl) getNominatorUnit())
4
.getConversionFactor();
5
BigDecimal denConvFactor = ((UnitImpl) getDenominatorUnit())
6
.getConversionFactor();
7
8
int scale = getCalculationScale(nomConvFactor.scale(),
9
denConvFactor.scale());
10
11
return nomConvFactor.divide(denConvFactor ,
12
scale, BigDecimal.ROUND_HALF_UP);
13 }
Listing 4.4: The getConversionFactor() method of UnitImpl.
Similarly (but not shown here), determining compatibility for two DivisionalUnit
instances using the isCompatible() method requires testing compatibility both between
the nominators and the denominators; and retrieving the related units using getSiblin-
gUnits() requires creating a list of all the divisional combinations between the sibling
units of the nominator, and the sibling units of the denominator.
A final noteworthy detail we will discuss here, is the creation of basic units. The
design calls for enumerations, but EMF does not allow enumerations to extend classes
or implement interfaces, which mainly leads to the problem that we cannot use the
enumeration values as polymorphic types. The problem with constants is that our EMF
model allows only one QuantityItem to own a particular Unit instance.
If we try
to avoid EMF, RED will be unable to serialize QuantityItem on save. Instead, we
created methods that can be used in a similar way, but always return a new instance.
Furthermore, we provide the static function units() that returns an array with all the
available units of that category. These methods are shown in listing 4.5, as they are
implemented in TimeUnitImpl.
1 public static TimeUnit MILLISECOND() {
2
return new TimeUnitImpl("ms", "0.001"); }
3 public static TimeUnit SECOND() {
4
return new TimeUnitImpl("s", "1"); }
5 public static TimeUnit DAY() {
6
return new TimeUnitImpl("d", "86400"); }
7 public static TimeUnit WEEK() {
8
return new TimeUnitImpl("w", "604800"); }
9
10 public static Unit[] units() {
11
return new Unit[]{
12
MILLISECOND(),
13
SECOND(),
14
DAY(),
15
WEEK()}; }
Listing 4.5: The individual unit methods and units() method of TimeUnitImpl.
==PAGE:62==
54
4 Implementation
4.4
Deletion of referenced objects
The editor for System is a fairly simple extension of ActorEditorImpl. In essence
it was created by overriding that class, and adding the necessary code to create the
additional EAGComponent needed to show System’s list of referenced Configurations.
Recall that in section 3.4.2 we decided to reference these objects using an association
class named ConfigurationReference. Since EAGPresenter is only designed to create
direct references to other specification elements, we will need to override it to create
the association class as a reference holder. While testing this a bug in RED’s design
emerged.
When an EMF object is deleted (i.e. dereferenced from its containment reference),
it will remain in memory, but it will not be saved to persistent storage. If the project is
closed and reopened, EMF will be unable to recreate the object and all non-containing
references to that object will be set to null, or removed if it is in a list. This is a situation
one needs to consider while working with EMF objects.
The initial bug we discovered was related to association classes. When the reference
to the deleted object is located in an instance of an association class, that instance
becomes meaningless, but will not cease to exist.
The user will have to remove it
manually, and if the possibility of the reference being null is not handled in the code, it
will cause trouble for EAGComponent trying to access information through the reference.
This problem does seem to have been considered in RED before, but it is definitely
unacceptable. An ideal solution would solve the problem once and for all, so future
developers would not have to handle it. Unfortunately, the association classes generally
share no common characteristics that makes it possible to create a generalized solution.
We discerned two possible options:
1. Create a superclass (e.g. named AssociationClass) for all association classes. It
might then be possible to iterate over all EObject instances (the root of EMF’s
inheritance tree) in the project and have instances of AssociationClass that
reference the deleted element dereference themselves. This would also require a
generic pattern for storage of these objects, if we want to avoid writing specific
code for each specification element.
2. Use an observer (i.e. listener in Java) pattern, where the referencing specification
element subscribes as a listener to deletion events from the referenced element. It
can then immediately remove the corresponding association class. This requires
separate implementation for all involved association classes.
We decided to use the second option. If the first option was implemented optimally,
it would avoid a lot of the repetitive code necessary for the second option, but future
developers would still have to actively keep the system in line, by ensuring that the
necessary classes are extended. So not much is gained.
The second option is simple and uses a well-known pattern. Furthermore, it easily ex-
tends to allowing undo actions, by providing an additional “undo notification”. Finally,
==PAGE:63==
4.4 Deletion of referenced objects
55
and importantly, the necessary code will located in the specification element’s UI code,
where we earlier overrode EAGPresenter to create the association class instance. This
is an advantage because the UI code is generally the most complex part of RED. Later
developers are likely to peruse existing UI code for conventions, before creating their own
implementations. Thus, it is likely they will notice the use of our new DeletionLis-
tener, and use it themselves, which works towards our goals of common implementation
patterns and extensibility. It is less likely that they will notice the need to extend a
certain superclass in a way similar to other models.
To implement this, we create an EMF interface and implementation named Dele-
tionListener and DeletionListenerImpl respectively. The notification methods are
notifyOfDelete() and notifyOfUndo(). A typical pattern for creating listeners in
Java is to create an anonymous implementation of an interface. This is problematic
in our situation however. The listeners have to be created when objects are added by
the UI, and persist across sessions. Anonymous classes are unsuitable for persistence,
since their behavior cannot be recreated when RED loads them from storage. Instead,
EMF offers a different approach. As part of code generation, EMF creates methods
and constants that can be used to access class members dynamically. Thus, instead of
writing static code in an anonymous class to add and remove a particular object from a
member of another object, we can give the listener an object that represents the object
attribute we wish to manipulate. We therefore design the listener with three additional
members: hostingObject, hostingFeature and handledObject. The use of these in
the implementation of notifyOfUndo() is shown in listing 4.6.
1 public void notifyOfDeletion() {
2
Object feature = hostingObject.eGet(getHostingFeature());
3
4
if (feature instanceof EList) {
5
EList <?> featureList = (EList <?>) feature;
6
featureList.remove(handledObject);
7
}
8
else {
9
hostingObject.eSet(getHostingFeature(), null);
10
}
11
12
if (hostingObject instanceof Element) {
13
((Element)hostingObject).save();
14
}
15 }
Listing 4.6: A general implementation of DeletionListener, using EMF’s dynamic
getter feature.
Note that this implementation works both in situations where the storing attribute
is a list, and where it is a simple variable. Use of the listener in context is shown in
listing 4.7
1 this.configurationPresenter = new EAGPresenter <ConfigurationReference
>(){
2
@Override
==PAGE:64==
56
4 Implementation
3
public void AddItem() {
4
Configuration configuration =
5
(Configuration) CreateElementReferenceWizardFactory
6
.createElementReference(Configuration.class,
7
"Create Reference to a Structural Element",
8
"Select a structural element , "
9
+ "for example a Configuration.");
10
if (configuration != null) {
11
ConfigurationReference reference = getNewItem();
12
reference.setConfiguration(configuration);
13
14
DeletionListener listener = ElementFactory.eINSTANCE
15
.createDeletionListener();
16
17
listener.setHostingObject(system);
18
listener.setHostingFeature(SystemPackage.eINSTANCE
19
.getSystem_ContainedConfigurations());
20
listener.setHandledObject(reference);
21
22
configuration.getDeletionListeners().add(listener);
23
24
super.AddItem(reference);
25
}
26
}
27 };
Listing 4.7: Overriding EAGPresenter to create a reference to a Configuration.
In this case we use an association class, ConfigurationReference.
We also add a deletion listener, so reference will be removed from
system.containtedConfigurations if configuration is deleted.
The Element class already has methods handling deletion and undoing deletion,
so we only need to add a little code that iterates over the element’s listeners, and
notify each on deletion. The model definition for DeletionListener is located in the
dk.dtu.imm.red.core.model along with Element.
An additional advantage to this system is that it makes UI more responsive, even
when applied to situations where direct referencing – rather than association objects – is
used. Ordinarily, the “deleted” object remains in memory until the RED project is closed
entirely, and thus it remains in the various tables referencing them. But if one applies
the DeletionListener in these situations, all references are removed immediately upon
deletion.
4.5
Creating the Port and Signature editors
The implementation of Port’s editor classes is fairly similar to those of System. We
add an EAGComponent in the middle slot of the editor, and use it to display Port’s list
of RoleTableRow association class instances. We also create DeletionListeners when
creating these instances.
==PAGE:65==
4.5 Creating the Port and Signature editors
57
A slight difference that PortPresenterImpl uses a slightly modified wizard when
prompting the user for a reference to a ModelElement, called GetModelElementRefer-
enceWizard. This wizard gives the user the option – through a button – to create a new
Signature element from the wizard. We deemed it likely that users would regularly
need to create new signatures “on-the-fly” while defining new ports, thus this feature was
added. The wizard is an extension of CreateElementReferenceWizard used elsewhere.
As new model elements are added, more buttons may be added to the wizard.
Signature has only a single special property, a list of SignatureItem instances. No
DeletionListener is needed for the references to SignatureItem, as a SignatureItem
belongs exclusively to one Signature.
The most noteworthy part of Signature’s implementation is the implementation of
two expression languages for defining multiplicities and data types.
4.5.1
Creating the Data Type and Multiplicity Parsers
When creating the parsers for these two languages, we decided to use a parser combinator
library. We wanted to avoid introducing more complexity into the build process of the
project, and thus decided to avoid using parser generators. Another option is writing
a parser from scratch, for example by using regular expressions, but such a solution is
more likely to be error-prone and would almost certainly take longer.
Parser combinators are functions that take one or more parsers as input, and returns
a single parser that combines or uses the input in a particular way. For example, we may
have a parser pfoo, that only accepts the string “foo” as input, and a parser pbar that
only accepts the string “bar” as input. We also have the parser combinators sequence
and or.
The output of sequence(p, q) is a parser that accepts an input if p and q accepts the
input in sequence, i.e. p accepts the first part of the input, and q accepts the remaining
part. Thus sequence(pfoo, pbar) will output a parser that only accepts “foobar” as input.
The output of or(p, q) is a parser that accepts an input if either p or q accepts the
entire input. Thus or(pfoo, pbar) outputs a parser that accepts either “foo” or “bar” as
input.
Other combinators typically provided by combinator libraries are many (Kleene star)
and many1 (Kleene plus). They will also provide a map function that defines how a
given expression should be handled and returns the result, typically an object or value
representing that expression. Finally, combinator libraries typically provide facilities for
creating the most basic parsers, e.g. a parser that accepts a particular string.
The library we used is jparsec[jpa15], inspired by the Haskell parser combinator
library Parsec. listing 4.8 shows the parser for a single-valued multiplicity. This parser
accepts as input either an integer or the string “∗” (indicating unbounded multiplicity).
The input may be surrounded by an arbitrary amount of whitespace.
1 Parser<Integer > intParser =
2
Scanners.INTEGER.map(new Map<String , Integer >() {
3
public Integer map(String s) {
==PAGE:66==
58
4 Implementation
4
return Math.abs(Integer.parseInt(s));
5
}
6
});
7
8 Parser <Integer > unboundedSymbolParser =
9
Scanners.string("*").map(new Map<Void, Integer >() {
10
public Integer map(Void arg0) {
11
return -1;
12
}
13
});
14
15 Parser <Integer > unboundedOrIntParser = Parsers.between(
16
Scanners.WHITESPACES.skipMany(),
17
Parsers.or(intParser , unboundedSymbolParser),
18
Scanners.WHITESPACES.skipMany()
19 );
Listing 4.8: A parser for a multiplicity value that may either be a single integer, or an
asterisk for unbounded. This snippet has been slightly changed from the
version in the codebase, to ease explanation of the parser concepts.
Lines 1-6 define a parser that reads an integer using Scanners.INTEGER, a parser
defined in the library.
Using map we define it should return the absolute value of
that integer, since multiplicities cannot be negative. Lines 8-13 define a parser that
consumes an asterisk, and returns −1, which we use to symbolize unbounded multi-
plicities. Finally the two are combined with Parsers.or() in line 17, making them
alternatives to each other.
Parsers.between() returns the result returned by the
parser given as its second argument, thus the results from the two instances of Scan-
ners.WHITESPACES.skipMany() (which have void as return type anyway) is discarded.
The purpose of these two is to consume any whitespace surrounding the input.
listing 4.9 shows the parser creating a SingleValueMultiplicity object, based on
the value returned by the parser in listing 4.8. We simply assign a new mapping to that
parser, which takes the integer result and assigns it to a new SingleValueMultiplicity,
created by its factory.
1 Parser <Multiplicity > singleValueMultiplicityParser =
2
integerParser.map(new Map<Integer , Multiplicity >() {
3
public Multiplicity map(Integer value) {
4
5
SingleValueMultiplicity multiplicity =
6
MultiplicityFactory.eINSTANCE.createSingleValueMultiplicity();
7
8
multiplicity.setValue(value);
9
return multiplicity;
10
}
11
});
Listing 4.9: A parser that creates a SingleValueMultiplicity instance based on an
integer.
==PAGE:67==
4.6 Creating the checking system
59
The full parsers for both these languages are created using these techniques. A few
final notes on these languages: If the parser fails, it returns the original input string inside
an UnparsedMultiplicity or UnparsedType object to signify the failure. Currently
there is no visualization to the user of the failure, due to the limited customization
options of EAGComponent, but a check has been implemented to point out any such
problem. If the parse succeeds, the input field will show the toString() representation
of the Multiplicity/DataType, which resembles the expected syntax of that expression
language. By using the generated representation of the expression, all expressions will
appear with uniform formatting. This frees the users who value consistency in formatting
from spending time on adjusting it manually.
4.6
Creating the checking system
Following the creation of the basic classes discussed in section 3.7, the individual checks
can be implemented in the relevant elements. A simple example is the checkStruc-
ture() method of ElementImpl, shown in listing 4.10.
1 public void checkStructure() {
2
clearIssues();
3
4
//Check 1c
5
if ((getLabel() == null || getLabel().equals(""))
6
&& (getName() == null || getName().equals(""))) {
7
addIssueComment(IssueSeverity.MISTAKE ,
8
"Both 'Label' and 'Name' are empty");
9
}
10
//Check 1a
11
else if (getName() == null || getName().equals("")) {
12
addIssueComment(IssueSeverity.WEAKNESS , "'Name' is empty");
13
}
14
// Check 1b
15
else if (getLabel() == null || getLabel().equals("")) {
16
addIssueComment(IssueSeverity.WARNING , "'Label' is empty");
17
}
18 }
Listing 4.10: The three basic checks implemented for ElementImpl. The identifiers
1a, 1b and 1c refer to IDs given to the checks in an external document
listing all checks.
The addIssueComment() method allows easy creation and storage of issue comments,
and is used in all subclasses of Element. We added clearIssues() to the Checkable
interface to allow the Checking tool dialog – on request from the user – to iterate over all
elements and remove their issue comments. We also remove all existing issue comments
from an element before performing checks, to avoid duplicates and fixed issues from
showing up.
==PAGE:68==
60
4 Implementation
4.6.1
Checking Tool Dialog
The main component of the checking tool dialog is a table showing all issue comments
in the project. We continued to stick to the established patterns and used an EAGCom-
ponent. However, for this case we needed to add a dropdown menu to allow the user
to filter items by severity, and the Add button normally present in EAGComponent is
meaningless here. So we created a new class that extends EAGComponent, called Check-
ingToolEAGComponent. This class rearranges the original controls during initialization,
and adds the filter control.
We also created a matching subclass of EAGPresenter, CheckingToolEAGPresenter.
This was necessary as EAGPresenter normally holds a direct reference to the list object
being manipulated, but in this case the handled list is an ad hoc instance, populated by
iterating over all the project elements’ comment lists. So for example we need to override
the DeleteItem() method, and add a different approach to deletion. Specifically, we
determine the comment’s parent element, and remove the comment from its comment list.
This is possible using EMF’s eContainer() method, which gets the object containing
the callee.
EAGPresenter has a method for filtering which objects are displayed in the table,
called getFilterDataSourceRec (it works recursively on elements containing other ele-
ments, hence the name). It is used for excluding elements that are not of a certain type,
but that is not relevant here. So instead we override this method and use it to compare
an issue’s severity with the filter severity.
The Check all and Clear all buttons are trivial to implement. They simply call checkChil-
dren() or clearIssues() on the Workspace singleton, which has all project files as its
children. This leads to the entire project being recursively checked/cleared. We added
tool-tips to each button to make their functionality clearer.
4.7
Refactoring
While working with implementing the functionality discussed so far, we have also worked
to improve the code base. This has first of all taken the form of refactoring, where old
source code was cleaned up as work with the implementation lead us to update them.
The main improvements have been in the form of:
• Removal of commented out code. As generations of developers have worked on
fixing bugs and extending functionality, older code segments get commented out,
but not deleted. Sometimes this is meant as a temporary measure until other
changes are made, but in many cases it should have been deleted immediately. We
generally removed such code when we met it, but it was judgment call in each
case. In a few instances the commented code had clearly not been replaced by new
code, but simply commented out while waiting for a yet-to-happen fix. In such
cases we left it. Best practices stipulate that code should be deleted rather than
commented out, because it remains saved in version control. However, in a project
==PAGE:69==
4.8 Bug Fixes and Improvements
61
like RED continuity is an issue, since the few developers are replaced frequently.
There is therefore a high chance that any deleted code will be forgotten, and the
functionality it represents will eventually be recreated from scratch by a developer
who is unaware of the old implementation.
• Fixing warnings. Eclipse points out several hundred warnings in RED. Several
of them are for unused dependencies, which we removed as we met them. Some
indicated methods that have gone into disuse, and these were generally removed
as well, except in a few cases where we judged that they may be needed by future
functionality.
• Removal of dead files. One of the unfortunate side effects of EMF’s code generation
is that renaming a class leads to new files for that class are generated, while the
old ones remain. We occasionally encountered and deleted such files.
• A common problem in RED’s UI classes is that every UI component object has
been made a member of the class they appear in, and have often even been assigned
getters and setters. This is meaningless as nearly none of them are accessed from
outside the class, and most are never accessed outside the method in which they
are declared. In these cases we demoted them as much as possible, usually turning
them into local variables in the one method they are part of.
We estimate these steps to have led to the removal of many hundred lines of code,
though it is difficult to say exactly how much. They are all fairly simple to perform,
but they have nonetheless helped improve the RED codebase, without taking significant
time from the main goals of the project.
4.8
Bug Fixes and Improvements
While working with RED, we also encountered several issues with the original code. We
generally fixed these as we discovered them. Below is a list of issues we resolved. All of
these were present in the code base prior to this project.
Unexpected behavior from Link commands for visual elements Visual elements
can be linked and unlinked from specification elements using the commands Link
and Unlink in their context menu. Ideally the first should be enabled and the sec-
ond disabled when the element was not linked, and vice versa. However, there
was a problem with the context menu not being updated after a linking/unlinking,
making the user unable press the command relevant for the element’s state. We
resolved this by doing a slight reorganizing of the redrawing code.
Double-clicking on visual elements While working with the above, we encountered
this improvement suggestion in RED’s issue tracker. When double-clicking a vi-
sual element RED should either open the linked specification elements editor (if
==PAGE:70==
62
4 Implementation
the visual element is linked), or open a dialog offering a selection of specification
elements to link to (if it is unlinked). There were commands for this in the context
menus, but these could not be applied to double-click events for technical reasons.
Instead we moved the code used by the commands into the elements themselves,
and let both commands and double-click events call the relevant methods on the
elements.
Visual element linking on specification element deletion While working with the
above, we discovered that visual elements were not notified when their linked ele-
ment was deleted. The problem is related to the one discussed in section 4.4, and
we solved it with the same mechanism.
Some visual elements did not show the linking icon When any visual element is
linked to a specification element, it should indicate this with a small icon in its
upper-left corner.
This did not work for several elements.
It turned out the
functionality had only been implemented for a few specific elements. We moved the
necessary code up into their common superclass, VisualSpecificationElement.
Generated Connectors are unnamed When creating connectors in the context di-
agrams, the users are not prompted to give them a name, which may be fine in
some situations. However, this means that when Connectors are generated from
diagrams they may remain unnamed, which is considered an issue in specification
elements. Our fix was to generate a name from the endpoints if the connector is
unnamed. This way each connector gets a unique, if not very elegant name.
Opening elements from tables In RED we want the user to be able to double-click
an element in a table where it is referenced to open it in an editor. However, this
did not work when the elements were referenced through an association class. We
added a method to ElementColumnDefinition that allows one to specify how a
referenced object should be accessed.
Element explorer filter not functional The user can write a string in the element
explorer to search for a particular object. This filter was non-functional, as the
filtering logic had not been written.
Dynamic text in element selector wizards Several parts of RED’s UI uses a par-
ticular wizard to retrieve a reference to an element of the user’s choice. All of these
shared the same generic title and descriptive text. This is a missed opportunity to
guide the users towards using the application correctly. We adapted the wizard’s
code so the calling method can specify custom text for it.
Changed layout of Connector’s editor The Connector element has two main at-
tributes: a list of sources and a list of targets. Since either has the potential to
contain several elements, the editor has allocated plenty of vertical space to each
list. However, this may inadvertently imply to the user that this is the normal
case. So we put the two lists on top of each other in the layout, allowing only a
few rows to show in each.
==PAGE:71==
4.9 Testing
63
Categorized the New menu The element explorer’s context menu allows one the choice
to create one of the several specification elements. As the number of elements has
grown during this project, the list started to become quite confusing. We there-
fore sorted the items into some categories (architecture-related, use case-related
etc.), and separated them by spacers. This should serve to make the menu more
manageable.
Diversification of context diagram To better differentiate between context diagrams
concerned with the actual system context and diagrams concerned with the sys-
tem’s internal structure, we introduced diagram kinds. We renamed the diagram
type to the more general System structure. We then added three kinds: system
context, internal structure and domain architecture. The last one is a special type
of context diagram that shows the use cases of the various components. Unfortu-
nately, due to time constraints we were unable implement a use case element for
these diagrams, and the feature has been left unfinished.
4.9
Testing
We tested the implemented features using acceptance testing and unit testing.
The UI logic has generally been tested using informal acceptance testing only. This
has the disadvantage of not involving a systematic approach to regression testing, but
is fairly inexpensive to perform. Automatic testing of UI is often a difficult proposition.
RED has several tests of various UI components, but most of these fail, since they have
not been maintained. This means RED is due for an overhaul of its UI testing. Due
to these factors we decided to stick to acceptance testing for the UI and focus our unit
testing on model logic (as per goal 4B). Issues encountered during acceptance testing
that has not been resolved are discussed in section 5.2.
Due to the poor state of RED’s test suites, we were initially unable to perform
proper regression testing on our own work. We therefore went through all test suites,
and marked failing tests with JUnit’s @Ignore annotation and a message stating that
the test is in need of maintenance.
We focused our tests on the parts of the models containing non-trivial, non-generated
logic. Of particular interest was the checking methods for the various elements. By the
end of the project, all active tests succeeded.
To get an idea of how thorough our testing was, we gathered code coverage statistics
from selected parts of RED. Table 4.1 shows code coverage metrics for methods related
to checking. Instruction coverage refers to how many Java byte code instructions have
been covered, and Branch coverage refers to how many branches of execution have been
covered (e.g. how many possible outcomes of an if statement have been covered). The
coverage was measured by the tool EclEmma[Mou16].
Table 4.2 shows metrics from testing of three other fairly logic-heavy classes. DataType-
Parser and MultiplicityParser are complex utility classes written from scratch, so
==PAGE:72==
64
4 Implementation
Table 4.1: Code coverage for check-related methods, summarized by element.
Instruction
Branch
Element
coverage
coverage
Element
100%
88%
Signature
100%
93%
System
94%
75%
Connector
98%
85%
Configuration
100%
100%
Diagram model
100%
100%
automatic testing of these is clearly important. QuantityItem contains some code for
ensuring that the unit is always of the correct type for the current quantity label.
Table 4.2: Code coverage for various classes with large amounts of non-generated logic.
Instruction
Branch
Element
coverage
coverage
QuantityItem
71%
66%
Signature
99%
86%
System
97%
100%
Code coverage is not a definite metric for thoroughness of one’s tests, but it can help
point to units that are certainly not tested enough, or just point to areas that should be
considered further. There are no definite rules, but most of the shown coverage metrics
are fairly high. QuantityItem had somewhat lower coverage than the others, prompting
further examination. There are two contributing factors: First, QuantityItem has a high
chance of being extended later, so it has been programmed more defensively to prevent
future programmers from inadvertently introducing bugs. For example, one statement
handles unknown labels, but these cannot be created dynamically (since QuantityLabel
is an enumeration), so we cannot reach that statement in testing. The second reason for
the relatively low coverage is that the class is partially generated, and some generated
code handles rare cases that are difficult and uninteresting to test.
Overall we are satisfied with the code coverage in these focus areas. This does not
leave is with much faith in RED as a whole, but we can be fairly confident in the most
complex elements we have developed. It is not possible for EclEmma to measure coverage
for all of RED at once, but it is likely to be below 10%, largely due to the non-functional
UI tests and large amounts of generated code, that does not need testing.
Summary
In this section we discussed the implementation of our project by going over various
interesting aspects of it. We also summed up some refactoring and improvements we
==PAGE:73==
4.9 Testing
65
made along the way, and finally we described our approach to testing, and the code
coverage of our tests.
In the following chapter we evaluate our extensions, and determine whether we have
reached our goals.
==PAGE:74==
66
==PAGE:75==
CHAPTER 5
Evaluation
In this chapter we will do two things: We will evaluate to what degree we have satisfied
our personas by performing a series of acceptance tests, and we will discuss to what
degree we have fulfilled our initial goals.
5.1
System Testing
To help us evaluate whether we have reached our goals, we will need to perform some
system testing. Specifically, we will disseminate the stories of our personas, and turn
them into series of steps for using the application. These will become acceptance tests,
which we will carry out on the finished application, and document whether each step
succeeds.
To test the application more fully, we would ideally have conducted some usability
testing. Here the general idea is to let real users interact with the application, which
tends to result in more realistic and thorough use of the application. However, this was
not an option, mainly due to time constraints, but also due to the difficulty in finding
actual users outside the seasonal university course in which it is being used.
5.2
Case study
In the following we will use RED in ways similar to how our personas (see section 2.3)
were expected to use it. This will serve as an overall acceptance test for our goals.
5.2.1
Jens Gadegaard
Task
Result
Notes
Create context diagram
YES
Now called a system structure diagram
Create actors, systems, ports and
connectors in diagram
YES
Connectors called association in the di-
agram tool
Check diagram from element edi-
tor
YES
—
Resolved issues disappear when
check is rerun
YES
—
==PAGE:76==
68
5 Evaluation
Create elements from diagram
YES
—
Conversion from diagram retains
relations
YES
—
Checking tool lists all project is-
sues
YES
—
Checking
tool
checks
entire
project
YES
—
Filter issues by severity in check-
ing tool
YES
—
Create domain architecture dia-
grams
NO
The option exists, but the tool does not
offer use case creation
5.2.2
Bashar Malik
Task
Result
Notes
Create actors
YES
—
Create systems
YES
—
Create ports
YES
—
Mark ports as external to system
YES
—
Drag-drop actors, systems and
ports to context diagram
YES
—
Drag-drop automatically places
ports in their respective systems
NO
Ports have to be explicitly dropped on
the system they are part of
Create connectors from diagram
YES
—
Converted connectors link to rele-
vant items
YES
—
Create configuration
YES
—
Check configuration
YES
—
5.2.3
Sofie Hansen
Task
Result
Notes
Add and edit values for organiza-
tions
YES
Organizations are a kind of Actor.
Values are named quantitative proper-
ties.
Add and edit values for use cases
YES
—
Create data structures
YES
Data structures are named signatures
Add items to data structure
YES
—
Explain tool offers help to the
type language
NO
There is no help text for signatures
==PAGE:77==
5.3 Evaluation of Goals
69
Checking tool can detect data
structure type errors
YES
—
5.2.4
Results
As shown above, most test steps succeed. The four items we set out to create – systems
(components), ports, connectors and configurations – are present in the application. It is
possible to describe data structures (signatures) and quantitative properties of elements.
The failed test steps point to three lacking areas:
• The domain architecture diagram has only been partially implemented, and is
essentially non-functional.
• Conversion from specification elements to diagrams is possible, but nesting of
elements cannot be done automatically.
• All new elements lack help files, leaving users to guess and experiment in order to
gain understanding of their usage.
Considering our goals, these are relatively minor issues. Domain architecture dia-
grams are less essential than the ordinary context diagrams, and were never explicitly
required by our goals. Conversion from elements to diagrams was down-prioritized, as
we believed conversion from diagrams to be the more common use case, since it is easier.
Lack of documentation is a fairly serious usability issue, that should be prioritized
for future resolution.
5.3
Evaluation of Goals
In the following we will evaluate our goals from section 2.1.
1. Provide users with architectural modeling concepts
Section 5.2 shows that it is possible to create and edit the basic architectural mod-
eling concepts, giving the user the necessary tools to model system configurations.
a) Provide concepts to represent components, ports, connectors and
configurations
The four concepts are all present in the application (components under the
name system). Their models, along with the editing UI, allow realizing com-
mon relationships between them. However, they are still lacking user docu-
mentation.
b) Adapt existing concepts to fit with the new additions
In section 3.4.1 we move responsibilities from Actor to System, and in
==PAGE:78==
70
5 Evaluation
section 4.2 we adapted existing diagram elements to work together with Sys-
tem and Port. In section 3.6 we added quantitative properties to Element.
These are the most important instances of direct contact between existing
and new concepts. As mentioned in the case study, conversion from elements
to diagrams can still be improved.
2. Provide simple consistency checks for architectural descriptions
The case study shows that the application offers consistency checking, that can be
used in three different ways. This includes a tool for viewing and manipulating
issues for the entire project.
Section 4.9 shows that the checks are subject to
thorough automatic testing.
a) Allow the description of quantitative properties of elements
The case study shows that it is possible to create and edit preset quantitative
properties for elements. They are limited to a predefined set of properties,
but this is to allow automatic aggregation and evaluation of these values in
later versions of the application.
b) Allow the description of data structures
The case study shows that it is possible to describe data structures (in the
form of Signatures), with a flexible type system, and checks to ensure their
consistency.
3. Ensure continued maintainability of the platform
Section 4.7 describes how we performed considerable cleaning operations in the
source files we worked with, making these overall more readable for future devel-
opers. Section 4.9 describes how we created unit testing for key application logic,
allowing future developers more confidence when making changes to these parts.
a) Create easily extensible implementations
We have continually strived to allow extensibility where we believed it nec-
essary. The unit system described in section 3.6.1 was specifically designed
to be extended with new units, including more complex units. The deletion
listeners described in section 4.4 were designed to solve a continuously occur-
ring problem, in way that makes it as easy as possible for future developers
to use them to solve that problem.
b) Ensure consistency in implementation patterns
Throughout the project we tried to solve problems by studying existing so-
lutions in RED to similar problems.
For example, we have continued to
use EAGComponent extensively, thus contributing to uniformity across both
the codebase and the user interface. We have also applied deletion listeners
across the project, resolving all instances of the broken reference problem we
are aware of.
==PAGE:79==
5.4 Summary
71
4. Validate the thesis contributions
We have performed acceptance testing and limited model unit testing on our ex-
tensions. Automatic testing of UI and usability testing remain lacking areas.
a) Perform acceptance testing based on personas
We developed three personas in section 2.3 and created a series of acceptance
tests for them in section 5.2. The results were for the most part satisfactory.
b) Create automatic tests for model logic
As described in section 4.9 we performed extensive testing of select parts of
our models. These tests succeeded, and were measured to have solid coverage.
Code coverage for RED as whole remains extremely low, but that problem is
out of scope for this project.
5.4
Summary
In this chapter we performed a series of acceptance tests. These were overall successful,
with a few small issues, and a larger one concerning lacking user documentation. We also
evaluated to what degree we fulfilled the goals we set out with. While most could be said
to be completely fulfilled, a few had residual issues, or room for further improvement.
In the following chapter we will conclude on the project.
==PAGE:80==
72
==PAGE:81==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
In this project we attempted to implement architectural modeling capabilities into a
tool originally designed for requirements engineering. The background for the idea was
to facilitate the development cycle stipulated by the Twin Peaks model. The chosen
application was RED, an open-source tool that has been in development for a number
of years.
We specified a number of goals for our extensions, and formulated three personas
inspired by these goals.
These would in combination guide our design, and help us
evaluate the result.
We determined a way to extend the existing metamodel, that made extensive use of
existing functionality. We designed model classes and editor UI for several new elements
– System, Port and Signature – and redesigned existing elements to fit with the
additions. We created a number of new features, including a consistency checking system,
with basic checks to help users maintain the quality of their design.
We implemented our designs, and made several improvements, especially to the dia-
gram UI. We also refactored many of the existing source files along the way, removing
hundreds of lines of dead and commented out code. A number of test suites ensure the
functionality of key parts of the models’ logic. Test coverage remains in issue in the
project as whole though.
To evaluate the project, we conducted an acceptance test for each persona, which was
overall successful with only a few failed steps. These were not related to core functionality
of the project, though user documentation is an issue that must be resolved.
The goals of the project were generally considered to have been met, with a few
caveats in relation to user documentation and element to diagram-conversion.
6.1
Discussion
Overall we believe the project is successful in what it set out to achieve. These new
features expanded RED’s scope considerably, and opened new avenues of improvement.
Future users of RED should be able to effectively define complex systems, using the
basic building blocks we have provided. They should also benefit from the new checking
system, that will help them retain continual consistency in their projects.
That being said, there is plenty of potential for future work. The relationship be-
tween specification elements and visual elements is not exactly one-to-one, with certain
properties not transferring between the two when converting from one to another. It
==PAGE:82==
74
6 Conclusion
currently works when converting from diagrams, but constant consistency between the
two should be goal if users are to trust the tool fully.
An overhaul of the test suites should also be a priority task. These suites have the
potential to make entire project more robust, and minimize the negative impact of new
extensions.
Finally, the checking system implemented here is heavily focused on very simple
checks, in part to prove the functionality of the framework. Future work should take
advantage of the large potential to help users, by adding more advanced checks that can
help users find complex, unintuitive issues in their designs.
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
[Boe00]
Barry Boehm. “Requirements that handle IKIWISI, COTS, and rapid change”.
In: Computer 33.7 (July 2000), pages 99–102. issn: 0018-9162. doi: 10.1109/
2.869384.
[Cle96]
P. C. Clements. “A survey of architecture description languages”. In: Soft-
ware Specification and Design, 1996., Proceedings of the 8th International
Workshop on. March 1996, pages 16–25. doi: 10.1109/IWSSD.1996.501143.
[Ecl]
Eclipse Foundation, The. Plug-ins and bundles. Accessed on May 20th, 2016.
url: http://help.eclipse.org/mars/index.jsp?topic=%5C%2Forg.
eclipse.platform.doc.isv%5C%2Fguide%5C%2Fruntime_model_bundles.
htm.
[ISO11]
ISO – International Standards Office. “ISO/IEC/IEEE Systems and software
engineering – Architecture description”. In: ISO/IEC/IEEE 42010:2011(E)
(Revision of ISO/IEC 42010:2007 and IEEE Std 1471-2000) (December
2011). doi: 10.1109/IEEESTD.2011.6129467.
[jpa15]
jparsec. jparsec. Accessed on June 7th, 2016. 2015. url: https://github.
com/jparsec/jparsec.
[JSc]
JScience. JScience. Accessed on May 26th, 2016. url: http://jscience.
org/.
[Mar03]
Robert Cecil Martin. Agile Software Development: Principles, Patterns, and
Practices. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall PTR, 2003. isbn: 0-135-
97444-5.
[Mou16]
Mountainminds GmbH & Co. KG and Contributors. Java Code Coverage
for Eclipse. Accessed on June 30th, 2016. 2016. url: http://www.eclemma.
org/.
[Nie14]
Johan Paaske Nielsen. “Tool Support for the Business Perspective in Require-
ments Engineering”. Master’s thesis. Kongens Lyngby: Technical University
of Denmark, 2014.
[Nus01]
Bashar Nuseibeh. “Weaving Together Requirements and Architectures”. In:
Computer 34.3 (March 2001), pages 115–117. issn: 0018-9162. doi: 10.1109/
2.910904. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/2.910904.
==PAGE:84==
76
Bibliography
[Ora15]
Oracle. Java™Platform Standard Ed. 6: Class BigDecimal. Accessed on
June 6th, 2016. 2015. url: http://docs.oracle.com/javase/6/docs/
api/java/math/BigDecimal.html.
[Pla16]
Placeit. Free Avatar Pack. Accessed on June 28th, 2016. July 2016. url:
https://blog.placeit.net/free-avatar-pack/.
[RJB05]
James Rumbaugh, Ivar Jacobson, and Grady Booch. The Unified Modeling
Language Reference Manual. 2nd edition. Boston, MA: Addison-Wesley, 2005.
isbn: 0-321-24562-8.
[SCS14]
Houari Sahroui, Bernard Carré, and Harald Störrle, editors. Proceedings of
the joint track “Tools”, “Demos”, and “Posters” of ECOOP, ECSA, and
ECMFA, 2013. eng. 2014.
[TMD10]
R. N. Taylor, N. Medvidovic, and E.M. Dashofy. Software Architecture :
Foundations, Theory, and Practice. John Wiley & Sons, 2010. isbn: 9780470167748.
