==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
i 
 
ABSTRACT 
Analysis of touch-points in healthcare service shows lack of coherency between 
information meetings and literature provided during the meeting in the fertility 
service of Region Hovedstaden. Redesigning the literature to create a visual link 
between the meeting and the literature by utilizing the illustrations used during the 
meeting improves the learning of the patients. Creating an overview of the 
treatment in the literature creates an improved experience of the treatment. 
Introducing infographics in the literature gives the opportunity for the facilitator 
of the meeting to use the illustrations as an artefact for graphic facilitation. 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
ii 
 
PREFACE 
This thesis is made as a completion of the master education in Design and 
Innovation at the Technical University of Denmark. The thesis counts for 30 
ECTS points and has been conducted in the period from January 25th 2016 to June 
25th 2016 
 
Great thanks to the people who have contributed to this thesis.  
 
First to be mentioned is head supervisor of this thesis, professor Anja Maier and 
PhD student Julia Rosemary Thorpe who has provided guidance and support 
throughout the entire process 
 
Patrick James Leese for discussions and keeping me motivated during the process. 
 
Hanne Bendtsen for insight in the large world of healthcare service and fertility 
knowledge 
 
And a great thanks to the doctors, nurses, and patients who have contributed with 
their stories, time and crazy ideas, your work is appreciated. 
 
==PAGE:4==
 
iii 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
ABSTRACT ............................................................................................................. i 
PREFACE ................................................................................................................ ii 
TABLE OF CONTENTS ....................................................................................... iii 
1 Introduction........................................................................................................... 1 
1.1 
Background, motivation, need ................................................................. 1 
1.2 
Aim of the thesis ...................................................................................... 1 
1.3 
Short case description .............................................................................. 1 
1.4 
Methological approach ............................................................................ 1 
1.5 
Structure ................................................................................................... 2 
2 Background ........................................................................................................... 3 
2.1 
Service design .......................................................................................... 6 
2.2 
Communication...................................................................................... 11 
2.3 
Graphic facilitation ................................................................................ 13 
2.4 
Learning ................................................................................................. 14 
2.5 
Theory conclusion ................................................................................. 16 
3 Case study ........................................................................................................... 17 
3.1 
Fertility clinics ....................................................................................... 17 
3.2 
Interview ................................................................................................ 20 
3.3 
Observations .......................................................................................... 24 
3.4 
Patients Journey ..................................................................................... 26 
3.5 
Need ....................................................................................................... 28 
4 Redesing ............................................................................................................. 30 
4.1 
Used material ......................................................................................... 30 
4.2 
Redesign of existing material ................................................................ 33 
4.3 
Value creation ........................................................................................ 35 
4.4 
Conceptualizing ..................................................................................... 36 
CONCLUSIONS ................................................................................................... 38 
REFERENCES ...................................................................................................... 39 
==PAGE:5==
 
1 
 
1 INTRODUCTION 
1.1 
Background, motivation, need 
Communicating information from the healthcare system to the patients is an 
important task when patients have to make decisions regarding their health. 
Patients are in need of precise information on the subject they are experiencing 
problems. Healthcare services need to communicate this information in a way that 
the patients understand both regarding the overall perspective and the detailed 
information. 
The healthcare system is a large service provider, providing healthcare service to 
all humans experiencing problems with their health, being either life threatening 
or issues with life quality. 
1.2 
Aim of the thesis 
To improve healthcare service communication, in order to increase learning 
through graphic facilitation. 
1.3 
Short case description 
Couples and women who experience problems with becoming pregnant seek help 
at fertility clinics, who are specialized in the fertility of men and women. The 
fertility clinics provide a service for women to become pregnant through artificial 
fertilization. The process include a number of visits to the hospital to have eggs 
extracted and reinserted, different hormone treatments to prepare the body for the 
different steps of the treatment, and a mental rollercoaster ride as the couple tries 
to grasp the new information while preparing for a life changing event. 
1.4 
Methological approach 
Through interviews and observations a patient journey is created. The analysis of 
this showed a breakdown between the expected journey and the actual journey 
creating confusion for the patient. The analysis of this confusion lead to two 
unprovided needs for the patient. Through artefact communication, graphic 
facilitation, and learning theories a redesigned pamphlet is designed and suggested 
to the stakeholders at the fertility clinics. 
==PAGE:6==
 
2 
 
1.5 
Structure 
 
The report is written from the two perspectives towards the redesigned material. 
Perspective one is the theoretical approach with the combination of theories to 
create the redesigned material. The second is a case description to specify the 
needs of the touch-point. The redesigned material is build on existing literature 
that covered the two of the four needs found during the case analysis. 
Figures are used throughout the report to illustrate the content of the text. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1 
Structure 
 
==PAGE:7==
 
3 
 
2 BACKGROUND  
Healthcare is a system of information about illnesses utilized by doctors and 
nurses to treat humans (patients). The system is vast and extends beyond country 
boarders to a global pool of information to which each country is accepting parts 
of this information.  
 
Information accepted in western countries is based on extended research and 
testing of treatment methods. A large part of treatments depends on the patients to 
perform certain parts of the treatment by themselves, most often taking 
medication in the right amount at the right times. This information is to be 
conveyed through a stakeholder in the healthcare system to the patient. 
Figure 2 
Healthcare system 
 
==PAGE:8==
 
4 
 
 
The healthcare service is this communication/interaction platform between the 
two types of stakeholders (healthcare system and patients). The service is as vast 
as the system itself, ranging from reading pamphlets about how to feed your baby, 
to restarting a patient’s heart. The service can be divided onto two categories; one 
category where the patient is involved in the decisions about treatment 
procedures, and a category where the healthcare stakeholder is making the 
decisions about the treatment.  
 
 
 
Figure 3 
Communication platform  
 
Figure 4 
Patient involvement 
 
==PAGE:9==
 
5 
 
This project will only focus on improving the healthcare service through 
communication where the patient is part of the decisions taken about the 
treatment, and helping the patients learn the information through graphic 
facilitation. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5 
Patient on journey getting 
information from 
healthcare service 
==PAGE:10==
 
6 
 
2.1 
Service design 
Service design is an approach to design services that build on five principles 
described by Jacob Schneider and Marc Stickdorn in their book “This is service 
design thinking” 
The five principles are User centred, Co-creative, sequencing, evidencing, and 
holistic.  
 
These are designed to analyze a service from all angles with the focus of the 
interaction between the service provider and the user 
 
 
Figure 6 
The five principles of 
service design (Stickdorn 
& Schneider, 2011) 
==PAGE:11==
 
7 
 
2.1.1 The five principles 
 
User centred design is to analyze the service through the eyes of the 
users. The users (or customers) of the service is of the biggest value for 
the service provider as these are the ones who will choose to use the 
service.  
 
 
 
Co-Creative is a method to create value for the user, giving the users 
the possibility to be part of developing the service to their needs. This 
method helps the designers to understand the values of the users and 
measure these against each other.  
 
 
 
Sequencing is a method of defining all the interaction steps between 
the user and the service provider through a service. 
 
 
 
 
 
Evidencing is a test phase with ‘finished’ tangible boundary objects to 
give evidence for the service. ”evidencing aims to give the experience of 
how the service will be experienced when completed” (Clatworthy, 2008) 
 
 
 
 
Holistic is an approach to understand the service in a broader sense, 
and define the effects of the service on other systems.  
==PAGE:12==
 
8 
 
 
Where all five principles are important when designing new services, one of them 
is extra important when it comes to analyzing a service. The Sequencing of the 
service captures almost all of the designed features in one platform. The 
Sequencing shows all the different touch-points between the user and the service 
provider while at the same time tells the story of the user journey. Identifying and 
defining the interaction in the touch-points helps locating the expectations of the 
users and analyzing if these expectations are fulfilled in the following step. The 
sequence provides a holistic view of the service, obtained from a detailed 
description of the touch-points. 
 
 “Touch-points are one of the central aspects of service design” (Clatworthy, 
2011) 
 
2.1.2 Touch-points 
Touch-points are the meeting between a user and the service and are best analyzed 
through the user experience of the service. As a touch-point can be everything 
from a smell, to the text font on a sign, to the information in a pamphlet, to a 
conversation with an employee of the service provider the experience of each is 
defined by a lot of different factors. The touch-points can be divided into two 
categories, the ones the user does not know he or she is experiencing, such as 
background noise, and smell, and the touch-points the user is fully aware of. 
When a user is aware of a the interaction, the user has three steps of experiencing 
the interaction, the actual experience of the interaction together with an 
expectation before the interaction and the fulfillment of this after the interaction. 
Figure 7 
Sequence of touch-points 
 
==PAGE:13==
 
9 
 
 
Analyzing the user journey, the different touch-points are illustrated in sequence 
with the journey. From ServiceDesignTools.org (Tassi, 2016) we have three tools 
that illustrate the sequence of the touch-points 
 
Story Board 
 “The service storyboard shows the manifestation of every touchpoints and the 
relationships between them and the creation of the experience” (Tassi, 2016) 
This tool is the least analytical tool, it is a great tool for communicating the 
journey to outside stakeholders, but does not contain a lot of information about the 
experience from the user perspective. This tool is also used in the startup phase as 
a prototype when proposing new services. 
 
Blueprint 
“the blueprint is an operational tool that describes the nature and the 
characteristics of the service interaction in enough detail to verify, implement and 
maintain it.” (Tassi, 2016) 
This tool displays the “behind the scenes” processes as well as the user 
journey, creating a more holistic view of the journey by mapping out the journeys 
of the service provider stakeholders and their touch-points with the user. 
 
Customer Journey Map 
”The customer journey map is an oriented graph that describes the journey of a user 
by representing the different touchpoints that characterize his interaction with the 
service” (Tassi, 2016) 
This tool emphasizes on information and the platforms of the touch-points, 
making these the basis of the map, and mapping the user touch-points through a 
graph. 
 
 
 
Figure 8 
Experience of interaction 
 
==PAGE:14==
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
Fixing a breakdown in a touch-point sequence, such as the dissatisfaction with the 
experience created by an expectation, requires knowledge of the type of touch-
point. In most cases these types of touch-points involves some kind of 
communication that helps the user progress to the next touch-point. Analyzing this 
specific touch-point to the origin of the breakdown will create the basis of a 
problem statement. 
 
Figure 9 
Customer journey map 
example 
 
==PAGE:15==
 
11 
 
2.2 
Communication 
 
Good communication around an artefact requires the same interpretation of the 
artefact. Crilly, Maier, & Clarkson (2008) describes when trying to communicate 
through an artefact the experience of an artefact is affected by the users 
experience, beliefs, motivations, expectations, capabilities, and culture. Together 
with the environment within the artefact is placed.  
 
The experience is further defined by Crilly, Moultrie, & Clarkson (2004) here the 
user is defined as the senses through which the user is perceiving the artefact and 
the response of the user to the artefact. Even though Crilly et al., (2004) is basing 
the framework for design on Shannons model of communication (Shannon 
Claude, 1948) a small step towards the later publication of Crilly et al., (2008) is 
seen with the phrase “If products are to be considered as signs that are interpreted by 
users, it is useful to consider consumer response to product appearance as one stage in a 
process of communication”(Crilly et al., 2004) Where the communication model is 
based on individual understanding of an artefact instead of communicating 
through the artefact.  
 
Figure 10 
Combination of 
illustration and text 
creating artefact 
communication 
Figure 11 
Model of communication 
Crilly, Maier, & Clarkson 
(2008) 
==PAGE:16==
 
12 
 
 
 
 
In their paper Crilly et al., (2004) describes the user responses in three categories; 
Cognition as the judgment of the artefact based on the perceived information 
through the senses, Affect as the emotional response, and Behavior as a 
psychological response.  
The experience of the artefact can lead to unexpected interpretations to which the 
user can be misinformed by the artefact. To overcome some of these problems, 
using predefined inscribed tools for the communication, where the tool format is 
well known by both the user and designer, parts of the interpretations can be 
expected for the user. Examples of this could be pamphlets, illustrations, posters, 
or other artefacts known by the general public in the sense of how to interact with 
them and what to expect prior to using the artefact. 
 
 
Figure 12 
Model of consumer 
Crilly, Moultrie, & 
Clarkson (2004) 
==PAGE:17==
 
13 
 
2.3 
Graphic facilitation 
 
The idea of graphic facilitation or visual facilitation is used to describe facilitating 
a meeting with a graphical tool such as a whiteboard or similar. The graphical 
element is used to create a shared understanding of the content of the meeting 
while creating a holistic perspective of the issue. Graphic facilitation is used to 
help groups focus on the subjects, while understanding the connection to a main 
issue. (Sibbet, 2013) 
 
Using visuals during a meeting improves the learning of the information. “Hear a 
piece of information, and three days later you’ll remember 10% of it. Add a picture and 
you’ll remember 65%” (Medina, 2009)  
Figure 13 
Combination of 
facilitation and illustration 
creating graphic 
facilitation 
Figure 14 
Man facilitating with 
whiteboard 
 
==PAGE:18==
 
14 
 
2.4 
Learning 
 
Learning theory is the theory of how people is acquiring knowledge, this being 
either Declarative knowledge, consisting of the knowledge of an information is 
either true or false, or Procedural knowledge, made up of rule based information 
creating a set of “If-Then” conditions. (Kihlstrom, 2004) The two knowledge 
types are further divided into two sub-categories. For declarative knowledge the 
sub-categories is; episodic knowledge, memories of times and places, and 
semantic knowledge, declarative knowledge based on the knowledge of others 
such as names of the planets. For procedural knowledge  the sub-categories is; 
motor procedures in the knowledge of physiscs based “If-Then” states like: 
walking to move from one point to another, flicking a switch to turn the light on 
or off, or changing the gear in the car. Mental procedures are rules in areas such as 
math and grammar which allows us to build knowledge of certain elements based 
on knowledge of other. 
 
Learning style theory is the theory that people acquire knowledge through 
different channels. The Building Excellence Survey (Dunn and Rundle, 2000) 
defines the channels or learning styles into five to six perceptual channels; Visual 
pictures, Visual text, Auditory, Tactile and/or kinesthetic, and verbal kinesthetic 
(renamed Auditory Verbal in 2007). And in combination with physiological, 
psychological, sociological, environmental, and emotional aspects defines 
individual learning styles to individuals. 
Figure 15 
The four kinds of 
knowledge 
 
==PAGE:19==
 
15 
 
 
The Building Excellence Survey defines the major perceptual channel for the 
person taking the test. A major perceptual channel is the most pronounced channel 
for a person, giving an idea to how that person should seek out information in 
order to learn the information in the best possible way. 
When creating information, channeling this through multiple channels would not 
only capture a broader user base, but would at the same time increase how well a 
person learn the information. “Those in multisensory environments always do better 
than those in unisensory environments. They have more recall with better resolution that 
last longer, evident even 20 years later” (Medina, 2009)  
Learning from an artefact with a combination of visual pictures and visual words 
increases the learning compared to the artefact containing only the one. 
 
Figure 16 
Learning, thinking, and 
working style by Rundle 
and Dunn (2000) 
Figure 17 
Perceptual elements 
combined  
 
==PAGE:20==
 
16 
 
2.5 
Theory conclusion 
 
Having multiple communication platforms in one touch-point tied together to 
work as one increases the patients understanding of the information as more 
learning channels are provided.  Having the Graphic facilitation and artefact 
communication telling the same information tied together with the same 
illustrations, links the memory between the facilitation and the information of the 
artefact. 
 
 
Figure 18 
Communication channels 
from touch-point to 
patient 
==PAGE:21==
 
17 
 
3 CASE STUDY 
 
[Illustration: Healthcare departments] 
Within the healthcare system are a number of different departments all specialized 
in different areas in relation to human health. The case presented is the fertility 
department, which is specialized in the fertility of men and women. They help 
couples and women become pregnant when traditional methods have shown 
themselves insufficient or impossible. They help the couples and women by 
inseminating them, mostly done through the In Vitro Fertilization method (IVF) 
and the Intra Cytoplasmic Sperm Injection method (ICSI). 
The case is done in collaboration with Helle Bendtsen who is a bioanalyst at 
Rigshospitalet while researching on fertility, quality and patient safety. 
 
Helle is the contact point between this case 
and three different hospitals all part of 
“Region Hovedstaden” who manages the 
healthcare in Copenhagen. Each hospital has a 
fertility clinic with similar treatments. The 
three hospitals are Rigshopitalet, Herlev 
Hospital, and Hvidovre Hospital.  
The case has been analyzed trough interviews and observations of patients with 
the focus of locating any breakdowns in the patient journey seen from the patient 
perspective. 
3.1 
Fertility clinics 
The fertility clinics specializes in inseminating women by extracting eggs from 
the ovary and in a laboratory fertilize the eggs with sperm from either the 
Figure 19 
Fertility clinics in the 
healthcare system 
 
Figure 20 
Helle Bendten 
 
==PAGE:22==
 
18 
 
woman’s partner or from a donor. A fertilizes egg is then placed back in the uterus 
to grow normally. Throughout the treatment the patient has to inject different 
hormones to help the body prepare and accept the pregnancy 
 
The two mostly used treatments are IVF and ICSI. They differ from each other by 
the way the fertilization is done. The IVF is done by placing the eggs and some 
sperm in a petri dish to let the fertilization happen naturally. The ICSI treatment is 
fertilizing the eggs by injecting one sperm cell through a thin glass pipette directly 
into the eggs. 
    
 
People normally have a 5 - 60% chance of becoming pregnant through traditional 
means and normally 85% of couples trying to become pregnant will succeed 
within a year (Andersen, 2014b) if this fails the couple seek out their private 
doctor who will test what is the reason for the infertility and refer the couple to a 
fertility clinic. From the results from the fertility test the fertility clinic will decide 
on a treatment procedure. In most cases the IVF treatment is used, in cases where 
the man’s sperm count is very low the ICSI treatment will be used. Before the 
treatment is begun, the couple have a “first meeting” with the fertility clinic, at 
this meeting the treatment process is explained together with other essential 
information about the treatment, such as the reason for why the couple have 
problems becoming pregnant, success rates of the treatment, and the opportunities 
of the treatment. The treatment starts on the first menstruation day, where the 
woman contacts the fertility clinic to let the clinic know that the treatment is 
starting. A couple days later the woman meets up at the clinic to receive the first 
hormone injection. This hormone tricks the body to prepare additional eggs for 
fertilization. On the 6th day a hormone injection is taken to mature the eggs for 
extraction. On day 8 the woman has the eggs extracted at the clinic. The eggs are 
then fertilized by the sperm the man has provided on the same day either by IVF 
or ICSI. After 2 days the eggs are inspected for fertilization. If just one egg is 
Figure 21 
IVF and ICSI fertilization 
methods 
 
==PAGE:23==
 
19 
 
fertilized the woman comes back to the clinic and have teh egg placed back in her 
uterus, additional fertilized eggs can be frozen for up to five years for later use. 
From this day to day 15 the woman has to be treated with a hormone vaginally to 
help the body accept the pregnancy.  
Statistics shows between 25 - 30% chance of having a baby through this treatment 
and if frozen eggs are used for additional pregnancies the chance is 15 - 20%. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 22 
Blueprint of treatment 
 
==PAGE:24==
 
20 
 
3.2 
Interview 
Understanding the touch-points of the patient journey from the patient’s 
perspective has been done through interviews with different stakeholders. A 
couple of interviews were conducted with patients at either the start of the 
procedure and a patient who had been through the treatments twice for qualitative 
data, and interviews with fertility clinic personnel to gather a quantitative data 
perspective.  
 
3.2.1 Interview 1 
 
The first interview with the woman who had been through the treatment twice, the 
second time because of the first did not result in a pregnancy. The interview was 
structured as an open interview, with an approach to learn the journey of the 
interviewee told from the patient’s perspective. The interviewee told the story of 
how she and her boyfriend had tried to become pregnant for some time until her 
mother, who works as a nurse at Rigshopitalet, had asked whether it had taken a 
bit long.  
 
The interviewee and her boyfriend started their fertility procedure with getting 
tested at “Fertilitetsklinikken” a private clinic with Peter Lundstrøm as the chief 
physician. From the test they learned that the boyfriend had a very low sperm 
count, making the fertility treatment very hard, and something that 
“Fertilitetsklinikken” could not perform. The interviewee and her boyfriend then 
had to wait for a spot on Rigshospitalet to get their treatment. This waiting time 
Figure 23 
Scene of interview 1 
 
==PAGE:25==
 
21 
 
was from May to November, where they entered an experimental program due to 
the mother’s knowledge about it, and asked whether they could be part of it. The 
procedure started around mid December, and ended between Christmas and New 
Year. The second procedure started in the beginning of January and ended with 
the interviewee being pregnant on the 24th of January. 
 
Her experience with the first treatment process was not great, mostly, in 
retroperspective, due to not getting pregnant, and it all being very alien to her. She 
did note that the procedure, as it was experimental, used a lot of extra time on the 
patients, making it possible for her to call the nurse who did the experiment, to get 
answers on questions she might have. This is not an opportunity for the normal 
treatment. Beyond this were planned different meetings where she could talk 
about how she felt both mentally and physically. Her experience with the second 
treatment was felt a lot safer due to her knowledge of the procedure and the 
personnel at the clinic had a lot more experience at the different steps of the 
procedure. 
 
Her search for information started on the day they were told about the sperm 
count. Where she would search about all sort of information about the subject on 
google.com getting all kinds of contradicting information, together with getting all 
kinds of stories and old wife tales from people she know, among others her 
mother. Depending on the information she found (good or bad, true or not true), 
she would be affected by the information. She was not very critically about the 
source of this information.  
At the time for their first meeting at Rigshopitalet, they had a lot of questions, and 
at this meeting they would get the answers they had been looking for, together 
with a lot of new information about the treatment process they were about to 
begin. From this day they felt care for, and safe.  
 
From this interview an important touch-point is seen as the “first meeting” where 
essential information is communicated to the patient.  
 
 
==PAGE:26==
 
22 
 
 
 
3.2.2 Interview 2 
 
The second interview with a couple was performed right after their “first meeting” 
was conducted with the focus of understanding how the “first meeting” was 
experienced.  During the meeting the couple had realized they had forgotten the 
results of a sperm test which had affected their focus during the meeting. Whether 
this was the reason of them being overwhelmed by the amount of information to 
consume during the meeting is unknown, but the couple were exited to get home 
to read the material provided by the fertility clinic during the meeting.  
Figure 24 
Placement of first meeting 
in patient journey 
 
Figure 25 
Scene of interview 2 
 
==PAGE:27==
 
23 
 
 
This interview shows the importance of the material provided by the fertility 
clinic to speak for itself as the meetings contains a condensed amount of 
information which is difficult for a patient to understand all at once. 
3.2.3 Interviews with fertility clinic personnel 
Interviews with the personnel at the different fertility clinics could confirm that 
the amount of information during the “first meeting” is very condensed, and 
excused this with not having enough time for each patient to let them understand 
all of the information. 
 
 
Figure 26 
Patient receiving material 
during “first meeting” 
 
==PAGE:28==
 
24 
 
3.3 
Observations 
 
 
Through an observation of the “first meeting” information on the structure, 
content, and how the information were facilitated during the meeting were 
acquired. 
The subject of the meeting was a woman who would donate eggs to her sister, 
who had problems with her own. The doctor told me before the meeting that the 
content of this meeting did not differ significantly from a meeting about a 
fertilization process, as the process of having eggs extracted is the main issue of 
the fertilization treatment seen from the doctors perspective. 
The meeting began with a short introduction about who the facilitators were. Then 
a questionnaire about the health of the woman, questions about any family 
illnesses, and risk areas such as tattoos and piercings were discussed. From this 
the meeting moved into information about the treatment with detailed descriptions 
on each step of the treatment. The egg extraction is explained with the help of 
illustration of the uterus in the book “ufrivillig barnløshed” (Involuntary 
childlessness) and on printouts. 
 
Figure 27 
Scene of observation 
Patient, Doctor, and 
Nurse 
Figure 28 
Illustration of uterus 
during egg extration 
 
==PAGE:29==
 
25 
 
The effects of the hormones is discussed and described figuratively to help the 
patient understand the importance of the treatment. Risks of the procedures were 
again explained through illustrations and mental images. During this part of the 
meeting, literature is placed in front of the patient by the doctor on the various 
parts of the treatment containing the same information as in the meeting. The 
patient is scanned to see how her ovaries look, to check if it is possible to extract 
the eggs and is explained afterwards. From this point the meeting moved into 
information about the uniting of the patient and her sister’s menstrual cycle and 
the importance of this. The meeting finished with questions from the patient. 
 
From this observation it was seen that the amount of information given during the 
40 minutes meeting became very condensed and difficult to comprehend. The 
material given during the meeting was hardly used during the meeting but only 
handed out as the “conversation” went through that step of the process. The 
amount of information observed during this meeting could explained why the 
couple at interview 2 was feeling overwhelmed at the time of the interview. 
 
 
==PAGE:30==
 
26 
 
3.4 
Patients Journey 
The information on the touch-points from the patient in interview 1 supplied with 
information on the steps of the treatment process by Helle Bendten defined the 
patient journey of this case. 
The patient journey is separated into five different communication channels.  
 
 
Conversation between the patient(s) and the healthcare personnel (private 
doctor and fertility clinic doctor).  
 
 
Conversation during a physical treatment 
 
 
 
Telephone communication with the fertility clinic 
 
 
 
Mail from the hospital 
 
 
 
Articles on fertility 
 
 
==PAGE:31==
 
27 
 
 
The two dotted lines define the starting point and the end of the fertility treatment. 
This shows how much of the patient journey is placed outside of the treatment 
itself. On the patient journey is illustrated the experience of the patient, this ranges 
from negative to positive to illustrate where in the patient journey important 
touch-points occur. Because the patient went through the treatment twice, two 
experience lines are shown. Red for the first time and green for the second time. 
The second treatment is rising throughout the treatment, where the first treatment 
falls throughout the treatment. The reason for this is the patient had a greater 
knowledge about the structure of the treatment during the second treatment 
together with the knowledge about how each step of the treatment was 
experienced. 
Knowledge of the treatment structure should be seen as an important part of the 
information to the patient. The structure is described during the “first meeting” 
but, as it is seen in later, is not presented in the material handed out to the patient. 
There are a couple of jumps in the experience at two distinct points. The first is 
the “first meeting” where the patient feels that the treatment is “starting” coming 
from half a year on the waiting list. The second is the pregnancy test at the end of 
Figure 29 
Patient journey with 
experience graph 
 
==PAGE:32==
 
28 
 
the treatment. The patient felt depressed after the failed treatment, which is why 
the second treatment start lower than the first 
3.5 
Need 
Coming from a period of waiting time with a lot of individual information seeking 
on the subject of fertilization from all kinds of sources, the patient experiences  
the “first meeting” as a point of action, where the journey is focused to their 
specific path. During the meeting the patient receives this information verbally in 
combination with some visuals to help with the patients understanding of this 
information. Together with the verbal information the patient is provided with 
literature of the treatment.  
As the patients have difficulties processing all the information given during the 
meeting they rely on the literature to contain the information as well. 
 
The patients expect the literature to contain information on the treatment from a 
general perspective giving the patient a holistic understanding of the treatment to 
a detailed description on each step of the treatment. 
From the fertility clinic point of view, who is coping with long waiting lists, 
patients that either forgets to take their medication, or forgets to cancel a meeting 
waste time for the clinic. Of the four planed observations of the “first meeting” 
two did not show and though the doctors at the meetings told that this did not 
happen that often, they implied that patients often had a tendency to forget to take 
the egg releasing injection 36 hours before the scheduled procedure. The 36 hours 
is important as the hormones need the time to function. In many cases the fertility 
Figure 30 
Expected touch-point 
after “first meeting” 
 
==PAGE:33==
 
29 
 
clinic experience that the patient have taken the injection to late, or not at all, 
making the egg extraction procedure difficult or impossible. Helping the patients 
remember these deadlines will benefit the clinic and the system to shorten the 
waiting list 
 
Needs of the material 
 
Patients need to be able to understand the information. 
That this problem has not been observed is a sign of the system being 
able to communicate properly to the patients. It still though is a need 
for the patients to be able to understand the information. 
 
 
Patients must be able to acquire an overview of the treatment. 
Having an overview of the treatment, and seeing how different steps 
of the treatment is connected helps the patient understand the need 
for these steps, creating a sense of safety for the patient. 
 
 
Patients must be able to acquire a detailed understanding of the 
treatment. Understanding the details of how the treatment works let 
the patient know that it is a difficult task to fertilize and impregnate a 
woman through these methods and helping the patients understand 
why the fertility chance is so low. 
 
Patients must be able to remember important dates in the 
schedule. Helping the patients remember the schedule of the 
treatment, helps the fertility clinic to lower their waiting time, by 
reducing wasted time on patients. 
 
 
==PAGE:34==
 
30 
 
4 REDESING 
From the case study the expectations of the handed out material needs to be 
valued against already existing material, how this is experienced and which is 
used the most. 
4.1 
Used material 
 
Material from the three fertility clinics is largely characterized by departments in 
medical treatment areas have a tendency to focus on their specific area instead of 
having a user centered approach (Ben-tovim, Dougherty, Mcgrath, & Medical, 
2008) 
 
 
Material is often written in a highly medical language, and with a lot of emphasis 
on what happens in the laboratory at the clinic.  
Through interviews and observation with both patients and facilitators of the “first 
meeting” at Rigshospitalet, two pieces of material was pointed out as great 
material for either facilitation, or understanding; a book “Ufrivillig Barnløshed” 
(Involuntary childlessness) for facilitation and a booklet “In Vitro Fertilisation” 
Figure 31 
Material placed in 
meeting room at 
Rigshopitalet 
Figure 32 
Hospital organisation and 
the patient journey 
Ben-tovim et al. (2008) 
==PAGE:35==
 
31 
 
pointed out during interview 1 as the information piece she had liked and used the 
most.  
“Ufrivillig barnløshed” by Anders Nyboe Andersen was used during the “first 
meeting” as a tool while explaining the procedure of egg extraction as it contained 
some great imagery of the uterus and how the eggs is extracted 
 
Images from this book are also used in explaining how a normal pregnancy starts 
from the maturing of an egg to the attachment of the fertilized egg in the uterus. 
“In Vitro Fertilisation” also by Andersen, (2014a) is a booklet about the In IVF 
and ICSI containing practical information about the treatment and is one of the 
handouts during the “first meeting”. A lot if the information is repetition of what 
have been said during the meetings. The booklet is setup into chapters: General 
information, the treatment, Problems – side effects – risks, research results – 
pregnancy chance, practical information, and appendixes. It is written in such a 
way that it is possible to read individual segments of each chapter to either refresh 
the memory of that particular area, or to dive deeper into the information 
regarding this area. On the back of the booklet are printed three schedules of the 
three treatments connected with IVF and ICSI. A short treatment, a long treatment 
and a Elonva treatment. These schedules are the documentation the fertility 
personnel use to document the treatment process of each patient. With information 
about how much medications is to be taken of which day, how the growth of the 
eggs is improving and so forth.  
 
 
Figure 33 
Egg extraction at IVF 
treatment in “Ufrivillig 
barnløshed” 
==PAGE:36==
 
32 
 
4.1.1 “In Vitro Fertilisation" compared against the needs 
Needs of the material: 
 
Patients need to be able to understand the information 
 
Patients must be able to acquire an overview of the treatment 
 
Patients must be able to acquire a detailed understanding of the treatment 
 
Patients must be able to remember important dates in the schedule. 
 
The “In Vitro Fertilisation” succeeds in two of the needs. “Patients need to be able 
to understand the information” and “Patients must be able to acquire a detailed 
understanding of the treatment”. The test is written in an easy to read language, 
with emphasis on detail in each step of the treatment. Where the text comes short 
of the needs is creating an overview of the treatment due to the text is structured 
as individual detailed steps, which is great for looking up each of the steps to 
acquire specific information on that point but bad for getting a holistic 
perspective. The structure gives the opportunity to acquire information when the 
patient is in need of the information removing the need for the patient to 
remember the information. This creates the lack of the fourth need, with less 
emphasis on the timeline of the treatment, important dates can be forgotten. A 
redesign of this pamphlet would need to create a holistic model of the treatment, 
with emphasis on the dates where the patient needs to actively do stuff. 
 
When redesigning the “In Vitro Fertilisation” the material could, if done right, 
replace the “Ufrivillig barnløshed” the facilitator uses during the “first meeting” 
creating a visual connection between the material information and the meeting 
information. 
 
 
==PAGE:37==
 
33 
 
4.2 
Redesign of existing material 
When publishing in collaboration with Region Hovedstaden a Design manual is 
presented as a guideline for the layout. A design manual provides the basic tools 
for a company or institution to streamline the visual context to a specific direction. 
This visual direction can support the vision and values of the company or 
institution. 
A design manual consists of guidelines and rules about how to use the company 
logo, color schemes, text fonts and general layouts. And can be found to include 
very detailed descriptions of various areas such as documents, presentations, 
emails, business cards etc. 
 
The design manual provided by Region Hovedstaden, as it is an institution 
divided onto several departments, is working with one main visual direction 
divided into four color schemes for four divisions. The divisions are the region 
itself represented by a dark blue, the hospitals represented by a light blue, a bright 
green for psychiatry departments, and a faded green for company operations.  
 
The fertility clinic is part of the hospital department, giving the redesigned 
material the light blue color scheme to work with. 
 
The layout of Region Hovedstaden is focused on the placement and the size of the 
logo together with various setups of document texts and definitions of visual 
elements. The placement and size of the logo is an important part as it is the 
primary element of the visual element, defining the department from which the 
material is published. For publications the front page is strictly defined by seven 
rules: 
 The ‘H’ is placed against the left side 
 Vertical stripes has the width of a leg in the ‘H’ 
 The 5th element, a beam going across the page, is aligned with the ‘H’ 
 Using the Font “Mari” 
Figure 34 
The four colors of Region 
Hovedstaden 
 
==PAGE:38==
 
34 
 
 Dividing the publication into a “Hovedstaden-grid” 
 Colors is either in shades of gray or a shade of the color of the logo 
The last rule is the size of the logo on the front and back page. On the front page 
of publications the logo should be 1/10 of the height of the publication and on the 
back the logo should be 1/15 of the height.  
 
For the text of a publication the layout is less defined, the font of the text is to be 
in “Press” and the headlines in “Mari”. 
Figure 35 
Front page layout 
description from Region 
Hovedstaden 
==PAGE:39==
 
35 
 
4.2.1 Content 
As described earlier the content of “In Vitro Fertilisation” is great for two of the 
four needs. This is done in pure text, which is best for detailed descriptions. 
Adding infographics to this would help the patient learn the information quicker, 
as more perceptual channels creates a higher impact. This would also act as an 
artefact for the facilitator to use during the “first meeting”. 
4.3 
Value creation 
Additional content in the material should create value to the last two needs 
defined earlier. “Patients must be able to acquire an overview of the treatment” 
and “Patients must be able to remember important dates in the schedule”. The 
overview would be best communicated with a graphical timeline of the treatment 
process with headlines to name and describe the step. This would give a holistic 
perspective of the treatment, making it possible to see the entire process and how 
the steps are connected. 
The timeline of the patient journey and the timeline of the treatment process 
differs with the steps happening in the laboratory, These steps are not part of the 
patient journey and is therefore not important for the patient to remember, but it 
creates an understanding of the process as a whole helping the patient understand 
the touch-points of the patient journey. 
 
The graphic supporting this could create a visual link to the detailed description 
illustrations and a page number in the pamphlet. This would then act as an index 
for the pamphlet as well. Having the timeline placed in the start of pamphlet 
would add the value for the facilitator during the meeting to be able to find the 
overview quickly to help with describing the treatment process. 
Figure 36 
Visual link between 
timeline and description 
 
==PAGE:40==
 
36 
 
The scheduled overview would serve as a platform to inform on the dates the 
patient needs to remember in a structured way, making it easy to locate this 
information. 
To underline the steps that the patient have to remember and to separate this 
information from the rest, the information need to be placed in its own section of 
the timeline. 
The value of a timeline would serve as a solution for the two needs; while at the 
same time would help the facilitator during the “first meeting” 
4.4 
Conceptualizing 
Creating the concept for this case, the material needs to be valued by the 
facilitators of the “first meeting” as it is those who are to use the material in the 
meeting. The redesigned material needs to follow the rules defined by Region 
Hovedstaden Design manual, and further follow the four key values of Region 
Hovedstaden; Professionalism, Robustness, Trustworthiness and Forward 
Thinking (Region Hovedstaden, 2016). These four key values define much of the 
style in the redesign. Having professional and robust illustrations means that the 
icons and layout needs to be sharp and use icons that is interpreted the same way 
by all stakeholders. This is done by using already known icons from the western 
culture, such as the male and female on toilet doors. 
 
Using headlines in combination with the icons, specify further the meaning of the 
icon. 
Having a sharp layout means that using straight or circular lines, removing the 
sketchy look wobbly lines can create. 
 
Figure 37 
Icons of male and female 
defining male and female 
toilets 
Figure 38 
Sketchy look and sharp 
look 
 
==PAGE:41==
 
37 
 
4.4.1 Examples of timelines 
Timelines can be done in a number of different styles even within the boundary of 
professional and robust values. The timeline can be created with the timeline in 
focus, as a straight line, with points on the line to define the structure and even the 
time spacing between the steps of the treatment. Or it can be created with the steps 
in focus, connected by a line or arrows, defining the sequence of the steps. 
 
A big problem in this case is creating the timeline with enough space between the 
steps to separate them visually, as a lot of information is needed on the timeline. 
This is where icons with a headline are good, as they can tell the basis of a step, 
and with the link to the detailed description the icons only need to be made 
distinguishable from each other to separate the steps from each other. 
 
Figure 39 
Timeline in focus (left) 
Steps in focus (right) 
 
==PAGE:42==
 
38 
 
CONCLUSIONS 
Service design defines means of communication in touch-points to convey 
information from the service provider to the customer. In a healthcare system the 
information is used to make decisions on patient’s health issues. In decision 
taking processes, having correct information is necessary to make correct 
decisions. Informing the patient to a degree where he or she can make these 
decisions require communication through different channels. Combining 
communication channels will lead to increased learning, as the communication 
channels is understood as one and the learning channels from the information is 
spread out on multiple channels. This increases the target group as different 
people lean best through different channels while at the same time increases the 
learning of the target groups as learning through multiple channels increases the 
understanding of the information. 
 
The case shows how touch-point analysis can identify breakdowns in the service 
design, In this case how a touch-point failed to provide the needed information 
expected by the patients. Creating a visual link between the verbal information 
and the literature, while adding an overview of the information removes this 
breakdown as the facilitation and literature is part of the same communication 
channel. 
Figure 40 
Patient on journey 
receiving  information 
from healthcare service 
==PAGE:43==
 
39 
 
REFERENCES  
Andersen, A. N. (2014a). In Vitro Fertilisation. 
Andersen, A. N. (2014b). Ufrivillig barnløshed. Merck Serono. 
Ben-tovim, D. I., Dougherty, M. L., Mcgrath, K. M., & Medical, T. (2008). 
Patient journeys : the process of clinical redesign. MJA, 188(6), 1–4. 
Clatworthy, S. (2008). Evidencing AT-ONE. Retrieved June 13, 2016, from 
http://www.service-innovation.org/evidencing-at-one/ 
Clatworthy, S. (2011). Service Innovation Through-Touch-points: Development 
of an Innovation Toolkit for the First Stages of New Service Development. 
International Journal of Design, 5(2), 15–28. 
Crilly, N., Maier, A., & Clarkson, P. J. (2008). Representing artefacts as media: 
Modelling the relationship between designer intent and consumer experience. 
International 
Journal 
of 
Design, 
2(3), 
15–27. 
http://doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/17506200710779521 
Crilly, N., Moultrie, J., & Clarkson, P. J. (2004). Seeing things: Consumer 
response to the visual domain in product design. Design Studies, 25(6), 547–
577. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.destud.2004.03.001 
Dunn and Rundle. (2000). Building Excellence ( BE ) ® Survey BE 2000 Research 
Manual. 
Kihlstrom, J. F. (2004). How Students Learn. RoutledgeFalmer Key Guides for 
Effective Teaching in Higher Education. 
Medina, J. (2009). Brain Rules: 12 Principles for Surviving and Thriving at Work, 
Home, and School. Pear Press. 
Region Hovedstaden. (2016). Værdier for Region Hovedstaden. Retrieved April 
15, 2016, from https://www.regionh.dk/om-region-hovedstaden/udgivelser-
fra-regionen/politikker-og-strategier/Sider/Vaerdier-for-Region-
Hovedstaden.aspx 
Shannon Claude. (1948). A Mathematical Theory of Communication. The Bell 
System 
Technical 
Journal, 
27(B-1598), 
379–423, 
623–656. 
http://doi.org/10.1.1.161.4366 
Sibbet, D. (2013). Visual leaders. John Wiley & Sons, inc. 
Stickdorn, M., & Schneider, J. (2011). This is service design thinking. John Wiley 
& Sons, inc. 
Tassi, R. (2016). Service Design Tools. Retrieved June 13, 2016, from 
http://www.servicedesigntools.org/ 
 
 
