==PAGE:1==
 
Management of urban 
nutrient cycles and sinks in 
the city of Copenhagen 
MSc Thesis 
 
 
 
 
Leire Díez Larrea 
June 2016 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
Management of urban nutrients flows and sinks in the city 
of Copenhagen 
 
Author 
Leire Díez Larrea 
 
MSc student  
 
DTU Environmental Engineering 
 
 
Supervisors 
Benjamin Goldstein 
 
PhD student 
 
DTU Management Engineering 
 
 
 
Pradip Kalbar 
 
Postdoc 
 
DTU Management Engineering 
 
 
 
Morten Birkred 
 
Associate Professor 
 
DTU Management Engineering 
 
 
Credits: [30 ECTS]  
Level: Master 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
i 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
Abstract 
Future global food supply will become a challenge considering the depletion of phosphate rock 
reserves, the finiteness of land, changes in global population and the decoupling of rural and urban 
systems. Closing the nutrient loop becomes essential, not only to ensure food security, but also to 
avoid mineral fertilizer production and reduce its related environmental pressures. The present 
study focuses on the nutrients (nitrogen and phosphorus) in the food waste generated in the city 
of Copenhagen and aims at finding the most sustainable balance to treat the food waste, 
considering the recyclability and the environmental impacts of the management of this food 
waste. To do this, Material Flow Analysis and Life Cycle Assessment were combined. A robust 
model was developed with EASETECH software, representing a potential waste management 
system based on incineration, anaerobic digestion and composting. In addition to the current 
scenario, other scenarios were considered based on the share of each treatment technology. It was 
estimated that annually 900 tons of nitrogen and 120 tons of phosphorus enter Copenhagen’s 
waste management only in the food waste and above 90 % of these nutrients are accumulated in 
the incineration ashes. Shifting towards higher share of biological treatment would increase 
mainly 
phosphorus 
recyclability, 
but 
it 
would 
result 
in 
higher                               
nitrogen emissions leading to environmental impacts. The substitution of energy and the use on 
land were key factors in the modelling. Incineration and biogas resulted in big savings to climate 
change due to the energy production from the waste. The use on land of the compost and digestate 
offered savings related to the avoidance of mineral fertilizer production and net impacts to 
eutrophication. The most sustainable balance for managing the nutrients could not be determined, 
but the two combined tools were proved successful in complementing each other for the nutrient 
recyclability assessment. Future research lines were suggested. 
 
Key words: Food waste, nitrogen, phosphorus, life-cycle assessment, material flow analysis 
 
 
 
ii 
 
==PAGE:4==
 
Table of Contents 
 
List of Tables 
1 
List of Figures 
4 
Abbreviations 
6 
1 
Introduction 
8 
1.1. 
Challenges in feeding the planet 
8 
1.1.1. 
Drivers 
8 
1.1.2. 
Solutions 
9 
1.2. 
The importance of nitrogen and phosphorus 
10 
1.2.1. 
Biogeochemical cycles 
10 
1.2.2. 
The role of mineral fertilizers 
11 
1.2.3. 
Environmental stresses from current nutrient regime 
11 
1.3. 
Food waste 
12 
1.3.1. 
Definitions 
13 
1.3.2. 
Food waste hierarchy 
13 
1.3.3. 
Food waste management technologies 
14 
1.4. 
Aim 
16 
1.5. 
Study area: Copenhagen 
16 
1.5.1. 
Waste management system in Copenhagen 
17 
1.5.2. 
Targets and future plans 
18 
1.6. 
Tools to assess nutrient substainability 
18 
1.6.1. 
Material Flow analysis 
18 
1.6.2. 
Life cycle assessment of waste management systems 
19 
1.6.3. 
Combining MFA and LCA 
20 
2. 
Methodology 
21 
2.1. 
System boundaries 
21 
2.2. 
Data collection 
22 
2.3. 
Description of the scenarios 
23 
2.4. 
Developing the model 
24 
2.4.1. 
Waste generation and composition 
24 
2.4.2. 
Incineration 
26 
2.4.3. 
Composting 
27 
2.4.4. 
Anaerobic digestion 
28 
2.4.5. 
Use on land 
29 
iii 
 
==PAGE:5==
 
2.5. 
Life Cycle Impact Assessment (LCIA) 
30 
2.6. 
Material Flow Analysis 
31 
3. Results 
33 
3.1. Food Waste and Nutrients Flows 
33 
3.2. Environmental Impacts of Food Waste Management 
36 
3.2.1. LCA Results 
36 
3.2.2. Sensitivity analysis 
41 
4. Discussion 
43 
4.1. General discussion 
43 
4.2. Limitations of the model 
46 
4.3. Future work 
47 
5. Conclusions 
48 
6. Acknowledgements 
49 
7 References 
50 
8. Appendixes 
60 
Appendix A: Food waste generation data 
60 
8.1.1. Households 
60 
8.1.2. Waste from services 
62 
8.1.3. Final values: summary 
65 
Appendix B: Chemical characterization of food waste fractions 
66 
Appendix C: Input data to the EASETECH model 
68 
Appendix D: MFA results 
71 
Appendix E: LCA results 
76 
 
 
 
iv 
 
==PAGE:6==
 
List of Tables 
 
Table 1: Types of data sources used in the study, including the degree of reliability and the type 
of data provided: A) data on current practice and future plans; B) data on food waste 
generation; C) data on food waste composition; and D) data on technology and waste 
management parameters. 
22 
Table 3: Percentage of food waste handled by each of the three options (Incineration (IN); 
Anaerobic Digestion (AD; Composting (CO).)in each of the 21 scenarios and in the 
current (C) scenario 
24 
Table 4: Amounts of food waste in tones per year and percentage of the total, generated by each 
source. VFW and AFW ratio is given for the waste from each source and the reference 
source is provided. 
24 
Table 5:EASETECH default data used in the model for total solids, volatile solids, nitrogen and 
phosphorus. Values from the literature used to validate the used data and their sources: 
a: Naroznova et al. (2015); b: Kumar et al. (2010); c: Christensen (2011); d: Götze 
(2016); e: Hansen et al. (2007); f: Götze et al. (2016). 
25 
Table 6: Default values from EASETECH used in the model and literature values to validate 
them, including the source. 
26 
Table 7: Values used in the modeling of the composting processes and the validation values and 
references: a: Christensen (2011); b: Bernstad and la Cour Jansen (2011); c: Stutter 
(2015); d: Boldrin et al. (2009). Validation done considering 1 tonne of waste from MF 
households. 
27 
Table 8: Final N and P content after the modelling of food waste and green waste composting 
(1:1) and values from the literature representing the same based on Ward et al. (2005) 
and Boldrin et al. (2009). 
28 
Table 9: TBMP and methane content in biogas from the literature to calculate the value of 
C_bio_and. Selected values and final C_bio_and value 
29 
Table 10: Values of the digestate after anaerobic digestion modelling and literature values: a: 
Tampio et al. (2016); b: Rigby and Smith (2013); c: Sheets et al. (2015) 
29 
Table 11: C, N and P distribution coefficients considered when applying on land the compost and 
the digestate. Values taken for a sandy loam soil. 
30 
Table 12: Summary of the best and worst scenario in each of the impact categories considered.
 
41 
Table 13: Data on population taken from Statistics Denmark (2016). In the study the values 
selected are for the last quarter of 2015 
60 
Table 14: Total SF and MF households by type and total number of residents in each type of 
household. Values based on data for “type of household and type of resident” and 
corrected based on total population in Copenhagen. (Statistics Denmark, 2016) 
60 
Table 15: Food waste generation per type of household. Numbers in italics are provided by the 
source; the rest are calculated based on population data. Numbers in bold are the ones 
chosen in the study 
61 
Table 16: Other reported values on household FW generation for Copenhagen (Cph) or Denmark 
(DK). Numbers in italics are provided by the source; the rest are calculated based on 
population data. 
62 
Table 17:Data taken from Statistics DK: “Accounts statistics (DB07) by time, region, industry 
and items”. Ratios were calculated for number of “establishments” (E) and “full-time 
1 
 
==PAGE:7==
 
employees” (FTE) in Denmark and Copenhagen. In the study ratios for “full-time 
employees” were used. 
62 
Table 18: Ratio for hospitals. Unit: number of patients 
63 
Table 19: Ratio for students. Unit: students per 1st October 
63 
Table 20: Ratio for nursing homes, day care and kindergartens. Unit: number of clients 
63 
Table 21: Total avoidable (AV) and unavoidable (UN) food waste by service in Denmark (from 
Miljøstyrelsen, 2014b) and calculation of total amounts for Copenhagen using the ratios
 
64 
Table 22: Total avoidable (AV) and unavoidable (UN) food waste for institutions by type in 
Denmark (Miljøstyrelsen, 2014b) and calculation of total amounts for Copenhagen 
using the ratios. 
64 
Table 23: Summary of the final estimated values for food waste generation in Copenhagen city.
 
65 
Table 24: Chemical characterization of the VFW and AFW fractions. Default values from 
EASETECH except for the C_bio_and, which was modified. 
66 
Table 25: Summary of the input data to EASETECH to model the anaerobic digestion option. 68 
Table 26: Summary of the input data to EASETECH to model the composting option.. 
69 
Table 27: Summary of the input data to EASETECH to model the incineration option. 
70 
Table 28: LCA characterized results for climate change in kg CO2-eq. Total contribution of each 
process, total contribution of each option and total contribution are included for the 21 
scenarios and the current scenario. To see the contribution of each sub-process look at 
the EASETECH file. 
77 
Table 29: LCA characterized results for terrestrial eutrophication in AE. Total contribution of 
each process, total contribution of each option and total contribution are included for 
the 21 scenarios and the current scenario. To see the contribution of each sub-process 
look at the EASETECH file. 
78 
Table 30: LCA characterized results to freshwater eutrophication in kg P-eq. Total contribution 
of each process, total contribution of each option and total contribution are included for 
the 21 scenarios and the current scenario. To see the contribution of each sub-process 
look at the EASETECH file. 
79 
Table 31: LCA characterized results to marine eutrophication in kg N-eq. Total contribution of 
each process, total contribution of each option and total contribution are included for 
the 21 scenarios and the current scenario.To see the contribution of each s sub-process 
look at the EASETECH file. 
81 
Table 32: LCA characterized results to ecotoxicity in CTU. Total contribution of each process, 
total contribution of each option and total contribution are included for the 21 scenarios 
and the current scenario.To see the contribution of each sub-process look at the 
EASETECH file. 
82 
Table 33: LCA characterized results to fossil resource depletion in MJ. Total contribution of each 
process, total contribution of each option and total contribution are included for the 21 
scenarios and the current scenario. To see the contribution of each sub-process look at 
the EASETECH file. 
83 
Table 34: LCA characterized results to reserve base resource depletion in kg Sb-eq. Total 
contribution of each process, total contribution of each option and total contribution are 
included for the 21 scenarios and the current scenario. To see the contribution of each 
sub-p sub-process look at the EASETECH file. 
85 
Table 35: Summary of the sensitivity analysis. Sensitivities are calculated by dividing the 
percentage of the change in the outputs by the percentage of the change in the inputs. 
2 
 
==PAGE:8==
 
Exceptions are the last two, where the percentage of the change is shown after changing 
the type of soil. 
87 
 
 
 
3 
 
==PAGE:9==
 
List of Figures 
 
Figure 1: Nitrogen cycle. Source: Wikipedia 
10 
Figure 2: Phosphorus flow. Source: Wikipedia. 
11 
Figure 3: Representation of the food waste hierarchy with examples for each level. Adapted from 
Parfitt et al. (2010) 
14 
Figure 4: Location of Copenhagen in Denmark and boundaries of the city considered. Location 
of Amagerforbrændig (A) and Vestforbrænding(V) incineration plants. 
17 
Figure 5: Boundaries of the analysed system. 
21 
Figure 6: System boundaries of the MFA including the flows and the processes 
32 
Figure 7: TS flows of food waste in scenario 1. 
33 
Figure 8.P flows of food waste in current scenario. 
34 
Figure 9: N flows of food waste in scenario 15. 
35 
Figure 10: Pathways of N and P flows in scenarios 1, 8, 15 and the current scenario. 
35 
Figure 11: Characterized results to climate change for the 21 scenarios and the current scenario, 
including contribution of each treatment option. 
37 
Figure 12: Characterized results to ecotoxicity for the 21 scenarios and the current scenario, 
including contribution of each treatment option. 
37 
Figure 13: Characterized results to terrestrial eutrophication for the 21 scenarios and the current 
scenario, including contribution of each treatment option. 
38 
Figure 14: Characterized results to freshwater eutrophication for the 21 scenarios and the current 
scenario, including contribution of each treatment option. 
38 
Figure 15: Impacts and savings to freshwater eutrophication in the use on land of compost and 
digestate in scenario 1 (both biological treatments handling 10 % of the food waste).
 
39 
Figure 16: Characterized results to marine eutrophication for the 21 scenarios and the current 
scenario, including contribution of each treatment option. 
39 
Figure 17: Impacts and savings to marine eutrophication in the use on land of compost and 
digestate in scenario 1 (both biological treatments handling 10 % of the food waste).
 
39 
Figure 18: Characterised results to fossil resource depletion for the 21 scenarios and the current 
scenario, including contribution of each treatment option. 
40 
Figure 19: Characterized results to reserve base resource depletion for the 21 scenarios and the 
current scenario, including contribution of each treatment option. 
41 
Figure 20: Characterized impact results to climate change of scenario 5 considering coal and 
biomass as marginal substitution. 
44 
Figure 21: Sankey diagram showing the final estimated values for food waste generation in 
Copenhagen. 
65 
Figure 22: TS flows and sinks in current scenario. 
71 
Figure 23: N flows and sinks in current scenario. 
71 
Figure 24: P flows and sinks in current scenario. 
72 
Figure 25: N flows and sinks in scenario 1. 
72 
Figure 26: P flows and sinks in scenario 1. 
73 
Figure 27: N flows and sinks in scenario 8. 
73 
Figure 28: P flows and sinks in scenario 8. 
74 
Figure 29: N flows and sinks in scenario 15. 
74 
Figure 30: P flows and sinks in scenario 15. 
75 
4 
 
==PAGE:10==
 
Figure 31: Screen shot of the LCA model in EASETECH 
76 
 
 
5 
 
==PAGE:11==
 
Abbreviations 
 
AD 
Anaerobic Digestion 
AE 
Accumulated Exceedance 
AFW 
Animal derived Food Waste 
ATP 
Adenosine Triphosphate  
APC 
Air Pollution Control  
C 
Carbon 
Cbio 
Biological carbon 
CC 
Climate Change 
CH4 
Methane 
CHP 
Combined Heat and Power 
CO2 
Carbon dioxide 
CTU 
Comparative Toxic Units 
DH 
District Heating 
EtE 
Emissions to the Environment 
EPA 
Environmental Protection Agency 
EU 
European Union 
FE 
Freshwater Eutrophication 
FRD 
Fossil Resource Depletion 
FW 
Food waste 
GDP 
Gross Domestic Product 
GW 
Global Warming 
GHG 
Greenhouse gas 
GJ 
Gigajoule 
H2 
Hydrogen gas 
ILCD 
International Reference Life Cycle Data System 
ISO 
International Organization for Standardization 
K 
Potassium 
LCA 
Life Cycle Assessment 
LCIA 
Life Cycle Impact Assessment 
LHV 
Lower Heating Value 
ME 
Marine Eutrophication 
MF  
Multi-family  
MFA 
Material Flow Analysis 
MFE 
Mineral Fertilizer Equivalent 
MJ 
Megajoule 
MSW 
Municipal Solid Waste 
N 
Nitrogen 
N2 
Nitrogen gas 
NH3 
Ammonia 
6 
 
==PAGE:12==
 
NOx 
Nitrogen oxides 
N2O 
Nitrous oxide 
O 
Oxygen 
P 
Phosphorus 
PM 
Particulate Matter 
RBRD 
Reserve Base Resource Depletion 
S 
Sulphur 
Sb 
Antimony 
SF 
Single-family 
t 
tonne 
TE 
Terrestrial Eutrophication 
TBMP 
Theoretical Biomethane Potential 
TS 
Total Solids 
UOL 
Use On Land 
US 
United States 
VS 
Volatile Solids 
VFW 
Vegetable Food Waste 
VFA 
Volatile Fatty Acid 
WtE 
Waste to Energy 
ww 
Wet weight 
WWTP 
Waste Water Treatment Plant 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
==PAGE:13==
 
1 Introduction 
1.1. Challenges in feeding the planet 
With about half of the ice-free land on Earth used for food production nowadays (FAO, 2015b), 
there is enough food to feed the more than 7 billion of people on this planet; despite this, still 795 
million people are undernourished in the world (FAO et al., 2015). On top of this, future food 
supply will become even a larger and more serious challenge due to the finiteness of land and 
nutrients, changes in global population, shifts in diets and nutrient losses related to lack of 
recycling or ineffective food supply chain. The main drivers and trends for the global food crisis 
are explained below. 
1.1.1. Drivers 
Increased urban population 
Global population is predicted to reach approximately 10 billion people by 2050 (UN, 2015) and 
world urban population is increasing even more rapidly; today, 54 % of the world population lives 
in cities, significantly higher share than in 1950, when 30 % of the people lived in urban areas 
(UN, 2014). This trend is generally stronger in developed countries than in developing ones: in 
North America and Europe respectively, 82 and 73 % of the population lives in cities in contrast 
with the 40 and 48 % of Africa and Asia (UN, 2014). Urban population is expected to continue 
growing and reach 66 % by 2050 (UN, 2014). 
Decoupling of rural and urban systems 
While urban population increases, the demand for nutrients gets more and more geographically 
disconnected from the land where the nutrients come from. This disconnection is also happening 
in terms of nutrient recycling as most of the human excreta and food waste generated in cities is 
burnt or landfilled. Moreover, a decoupling between consumers and the way food is produced is 
taking place as well (Parfitt et al., 2010) and it is making us, mainly the people in developing 
countries, often regard food as something produced “out there” that we take for granted. 
Change in diets 
During the last years, global diets have shifted towards higher consumption of animal-derived 
products; in the past 30 years world production of meat and dairy has increased by about 40 % 
(Bowman et al., 2005) and as urbanization and income are major drivers for global dietary 
changes (Kearney, 2010; Tilman et al., 2011), this trend is predicted to continue (Tilman and 
Clark, 2014). But diets based on high meat intake have significantly higher environmental impacts 
than other types of diets. First, feeding livestock demands high amounts of resources including 
water, arable land and fertilizer; in fact, 70 % of global crop production is derived to livestock 
according to Smil (2001) and Eisler et al. (2014). Second, GHG emissions of animal-derived 
products relative to plant-based foods are significantly higher (Tilman and Clark, 2014). Third, 
these products are generally inefficient from a nutrient perspective, meaning that the nutrients in 
animal products are significantly lower compared to nutrients in animals’ feed. Smil (2002) 
estimated that about 7 kg of feed N are needed to produce 1 kg of edible N in meat, but not all 
types of meats have the same efficiency; beef followed by pork, are the most inefficient ones 
(Smil, 2002). The growing demand for meat has led to an increase in livestock productivity 
through mixed and landless systems which depend on food concentrates (Bouwman et al., 2005). 
This type of systems often rely on far-off feed sources and involve inefficient manure 
management (Chatzimpiros and Barles, 2013). On the other hand, when animals graze or are fed 
8 
 
==PAGE:14==
 
crop residues, the nutrient loss into ecosystems decreases significantly because no additional 
fertilizer is needed because of their manure (Eisler et al., 2014; Smil, 2002). 
Food losses and food waste 
According to FAO (2011) one third of the total food produced is lost or wasted every year 
throughout the food supply chain. These yearly 1.3 billion tons lost constitute 23 % of both 
cropland area and fertilizer production and 24 % of total freshwater resources (Kummu et al. 
2012). Lost and waste food amounts are higher in developed countries than in developing 
countries: in Europe and North America 95-115 kg of food waste are generated per person, while 
the range is 6-11 kg per year in Southeast Asia and sub-Saharan Africa (FAO, 2011). The causes 
also differ: while in developing countries the losses occur mostly at early-middle stages of the 
food supply chain, in high income countries they mainly take place at early stages and at consumer 
level (Parfitt et al., 2010; FAO, 2011). The higher disposal rates of food in high-income countries 
has also been observed in some studies, which found a correlation between per capita GDP and 
urban food waste (Adhikari et al., 2006; Goldstein et al., 2016), also been observed for GDP and 
general waste (Adhikari et al., 2006). It has also been pointed out that the most accessible food 
products in wealthy areas are the ones most commonly wasted (Goldstein et al., 2016). 
Climate Change 
Climate change and water stresses resulting from it and from the increasing use of water, are 
expected to have a negative impact on crop yields, especially in the places where food security is 
lowest (WRI, 2015). 
Biofuels 
Increased demand on biofuels is diverting arable lands for food production to biofuel production 
instead (Trostle, 2008), together with resources needed to grow those crops; it is estimated that 2 
% of the mineral P fertilizer is consumed by biofuels (Hein and Leemans, 2012). 
 
1.1.2. Solutions 
The possible measures presented below not only contribute substantially to ensure future food 
security, but also have a number of positive synergies with other sustainability challenges  like 
nutrient scarcity, climate change and water management and pollution (Neset and Cordell, 2011). 
Shifts in diets towards less meat and dairy intake would certainly reduce fertilizer demand, land 
use, water resources and GHG emissions. Several studies predict a decrease of about 65 % of N 
fertilizer by 2030 if the US population adopted a Mediterranean diet (Howarth et al., 2002; Smil, 
2002). Regarding P, the demand could decrease by 50 % if the “smart vegetarian” model of Smil 
(2007) is followed (Cordell et al, 2009b). Tilman and Clark (2014) predict 30 %, 45 % and 55 % 
reduction in GHG emissions if respectively Mediterranean, pescetarian and vegetarian diets 
would be adopted in instead of a predicted 2050 income-dependent diet. In addition to change in 
diets, more efficient food chains are needed in order to minimize food losses.  
Sustainable food chains involve systems which produce food closer to where the demand is 
highest (i.e. cities), like urban and peri-urban agriculture. Closing the nutrient cycle between rural 
and urban systems is also essential. Recovery of nutrients from human excreta and organic wastes 
for their application on land is therefore basic for a sustainable agronomic system (Neset and 
Cordell, 2011; Jones et al., 2013). Besides, more efficient agricultural practices like permaculture, 
organic farming, polycropping and the integration of livestock and crop production can help 
closing on-farm nutrient cycles (Wilkins, 2007; Cordell et al., 2009b). Plant factories can achieve 
9 
 
==PAGE:15==
 
faster production of vegetables by artificially controlling the parameters of the internal 
environment where the plants grow. Another possible solution is the use of the genetically 
engineered crops which are, for example, resistant to a pesticide or to environmental conditions. 
Economic strategies like taxes on meat products can also be a determinant part of the solution.  
1.2. The importance of nitrogen and phosphorus 
Nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P) are together with carbon (C), oxygen (O) and sulphur (S) 
essential elements for life (Galloway et al. 2003). Nitrogen is present in amino acids that make 
up proteins and in nucleic acids responsible for the hereditary material. Phosphorus is also a 
necessary element in nucleic acids present in their phosphodiester bonds. Besides, P is used as 
energy transfer (adenosine triphosphate -ATP-) in all living forms and it is abundant in bones and 
teeth (Smil 2000). 
1.2.1. Biogeochemical cycles 
Nitrogen is the most abundant element in the atmosphere comprising 78 % of this compartment 
in the form of nitrogen gas (N2). The majority of nitrogen on Earth is found in this inert form. 
Reactive nitrogen forms involve several processes explained below. Only a reduced number of 
bacteria living in symbiosis with leguminous plants or present in soil are able to fix the 
atmospheric nitrogen as ammonia (NH3) into soils and water. NH3 is then converted to more 
soluble nitrate forms by nitrifying bacteria and these nitrates as well as the ammonia can be 
assimilated by plants to synthesize their amino acids. When manure, organic wastes and dead 
organic matter return to soil, the organic nitrogen is decomposed into ammonia by saprophyte 
bacteria. The closing process of the cycle is the nitrification step, when denitrifying bacteria 
reduce nitrate to ultimately release N2. Figure 1 shows the nitrogen cycle. 
 
Figure 1: Nitrogen cycle. Source: Wikipedia 
Although phosphorus is present in a number of small-scale biochemical reactions (Figure 2), on 
a global perspective its cycle, which is part of the long sedimentary-tectonics, takes over ten to 
hundreds of years (Neset and Cordell 2011). Earth’s crust is therefore the largest P reservoir where 
P is mainly found in the form of phosphate mineral. Plants are able to uptake soluble compounds 
released after weathering of phosphates and mineralization of biomass. However, due to the rapid 
10 
 
==PAGE:16==
 
conversion of these soluble forms to insoluble ones (immobilization) and the low solubility of 
phosphates, P is generally the growth limiting nutrient for plants, especially in aquatic ecosystems 
where the particulate P sinks and forms sediments. Despite the rapid biochemical recycling of P 
at small-scale, the global primary cycle is only closed when the marine sediments are re-exposed 
through tectonic uplift. 
 
Figure 2: Phosphorus cycle. Source: Wikipedia. 
1.2.2. The role of mineral fertilizers 
Traditionally in agriculture, N and P were applied to soils through the recycling of plant wastes, 
animal manure and human excreta (Olson, 1987; Smil, 2000; Cordell, 2010). In the case of 
nitrogen, rotation of crops including leguminous species and the use of green manure were also 
common practice (Smil, 2002). However, with the discovery of phosphate rock in the 19th century 
and the Haber Bosch process at the beginning of the 20th century, the naturally balanced cycles of 
N and P have been altered (Smil, 2007), making plant-accessible what had been before limiting 
nutrients.  Not only did this help to improve crop yields but also it made possible to extend arable 
lands into regions not so fertile before (Smit et al. 2009). The use of mineral fertilizers was one 
of the main drivers of the Green Revolution (Borlaug, 1970) and is considered one of the key 
factors for the increase in global population (Smit et al. 2009). 
Synthetic fertilizer consumption rate has increased drastically since then (Smil, 2001; IFA, 2015) 
and it is predicted to continue growing (FAO, 2015). Present agriculture and hence global food 
supply, are strongly dependent on mineral fertilizers: a large part of the global population is 
sustained because N and P are provided by mineral fertilizers (Smil 1999; Smit et al. 2009); in 
fact, only half of today’s population could be fed by pre-industrial farming practices following 
intense vegetarian diets (Smil, 2001). 
1.2.3. Environmental stresses from current nutrient regime 
In spite of the increase in food security and food production achieved with synthetic fertilizers, 
their use has led to significant and worrisome environmental impacts. First, phosphate rock is a 
limited resource and with its increasing extraction the reserves are being depleted (Reijnders, 
2014). Nowadays between 80 and 90 % of the extracted phosphate is used for P fertilizer 
production (Kroiss et al. 2011; Heffer et al. 2006) and the remaining part is utilized for food 
additives, detergents and other minor industrial purposes (Smit et al. 2010). The difference 
11 
 
==PAGE:17==
 
between the terms reserve and stock resource is important regarding phosphorus: reserve refers 
to the part of the existing phosphate rock that can be extracted with the available technology; the 
rest is called stock. There is high uncertainty on the exact lifetime of phosphorus reserves due to 
differences in the modelling methods (Reijnders, 2014); some studies estimate the peak in several 
decades (Cordell et al. 2009), while others suggest lifetimes of around a hundred years (Kroiss et 
al. 2011; Rosmarin, 2004; Steen, 1998) and even up to hundreds of years (EFMA, 2000). Other 
than the quantity of the reserves, the continuous decline in the quality of the extracted rock should 
also be considered. Furthermore, global reserves are restricted to a few countries which could lead 
to a geopolitically unstable situation (Kroiss et al. 2011). Morocco and West Sahara, China and 
the US control around 75 % of the reserves (Smit et al. 2009) and several studies (van 
Kauwenbergh, 2010; Jasinki, 2011) even suggest that Morocco alone has around 80 % of the 
global reserves. In addition, all the environmental costs of the mining industry as well as 
phosphate losses in the range of 30 to 50 % in the mining stage (Villaba et al. 2008; Zhang et al. 
2008) should be considered.  
Regarding nitrogen, its scarcity is not an issue; however, the conversion of N2 into NH3 requires 
considerably high energy inputs, above 40 GJ/ton (Smil and Cutler, 2007). Around 85 % of the 
ammonia from the Haber Bosch process is used in mineral fertilizers (Galloway et al. 2003), 
comprising almost 2 % of the world energy demand (Smil and Cutler, 2007). 
Second, breaking the natural cycles implies the release of significant amounts of reactive nitrogen 
and phosphorus into ecosystems (Galloway et al. 2003). When fertilizers, both organic and 
inorganic, are applied on land there are nutrient losses to water bodies through leaching, runoff 
and erosion and in the case of N, to the atmosphere through volatilization (Smil, 2002; Smit et al. 
2009). These losses are even higher under excessive fertilizer application regimes (Galloway, 
2003), which are often the case (Römer, 2009). Enrichment of water bodies with growth-limiting 
nutrients allows the massive growth of primary producers (plants and alga). When these 
organisms die, the decomposition of the organic matter consumes oxygen, leading to depletion of 
the dissolved oxygen concentration which may cause fish kill and other biodiversity problems. 
This phenomenon of algal blooms is called eutrophication and while in lakes and other kinds of 
freshwaters is mainly due to excess of P, in estuaries and coastal waters is often N the limiting 
nutrient and therefore the source of eutrophication. There are other sources of eutrophication that 
are not directly linked to the application of fertilizers but related to the current management of 
nutrients, such as the discharge of untreated or poorly treated sewage and wastewaters. Excess of 
nutrients in soils (terrestrial eutrophication) is also a critical problem which may lead to 
biodiversity loss if for instance some plant species can take advantage of the higher nutrient 
availability causing the loss of other less competitive natural species (Pullin, 2002). Moreover, 
the conversion of natural ecosystems into arable lands and settlements has increased erosion and 
runoff, which further intensify the release of reactive P; According to Smil (2000) losses of P by 
erosion are nowadays twice as high as in the pre-industrial period. 
In addition to the problems derived from the ineffective and unsustainable management of N and 
P (also potassium (K)), trace elements (e.g. manganese, copper, zinc, selenium) have been largely 
ignored when considering replenishment of nutrients in soils (Jones et al. 2013). The imbalance 
of these micronutrients in some soils is related to lower yields and to the malnutrition of 2 billion 
people (WHO, 2007; FAO, 2009). 
1.3. Food waste 
12 
 
==PAGE:18==
 
Previously, the important role food waste plays in the global food crisis and in the nutrient cycles 
has been highlighted. There is a huge room for improvement in this field: first and with priority 
on reducing food losses and waste, and second, on properly managing the inevitable share that 
would be discarded. As stated by Smil (2002), some losses throughout the whole supply chain 
will always be inevitable, but any amount above 20 % is definitely immoral. This study has its 
focus on food waste as a potential actor in nutrient recycling. 
1.3.1. Definitions 
A number of definitions exist for “food waste”: FAO (1981) defined food waste as “wholesome 
edible material intended for human consumption, arising at any point in the food supply chain 
that is instead discarded, lost, degraded or consumed by pests.” Stuart (2009) completed this 
definition by including the edible material used to feed animals and the diverted by-products of 
food processing. In some cases the terms “food losses” and “spoilages” are used for the decrease 
in food quantity or quality which makes it unsuitable for human consumption. While these terms 
are generally used to refer to post-harvest food in the early stages of the food supply chain, food 
waste is more commonly used at later stages, more related to behavioral questions (Parfitt et al., 
2010). In the present study the term “food waste” will be used to refer to both kinds of wastes. In 
order to properly address and combat food waste, the distinction between several terms is 
important: 
Food surplus is often wrongly called food waste. Food surplus is the food produced above our 
nutritional requirements and within certain limits, it is necessary to ensure food security (Parfitt 
et al., 2010). Therefore it is important to differentiate between “desired” food surplus, excessive 
food surplus and food waste, which is a product of the first two (Papargyropoulou, 2014). 
Food waste can be divided into two types: avoidable and unavoidable food waste. Avoidable food 
waste refers to discarded food that is edible or was edible at some point. Unavoidable food waste, 
on the other hand, involves the food waste arisen from food preparation which is not, nor was, 
intended to be eaten, like eggshells and coffee grounds. 
Finally, the distinction between waste prevention and waste management is also relevant. While 
waste prevention involves activities to avoid and reduce generation of waste, waste management 
refers to the possible actions to deal with the waste once it is generated. 
In the waste management field, the food waste fraction is usually included within the organic or 
biowaste fraction, which in addition to food waste also includes other biodegradable wastes like 
kitchen paper or plant residues.  
1.3.2. Food waste hierarchy 
According to the EU Directive 2008/98/EC), the following hierarchy should be applied to every 
waste type: (1) prevention; (2) preparing for re-use; (3) recycling; (4) other recovery, like energy 
recovery; and (5) disposal. The Directive highlights the importance of getting the best whole 
environmental result in waste generation and its management; hence, some waste streams may be 
diverted from the hierarchy provided that under a life-cycle perspective the alternative has lower 
overall environmental impacts. 
As mentioned before, food waste arises at every stage throughout the food supply chain. First of 
all, efforts should be put on waste prevention. The possible actions in this field are numerous and 
range from enhancing agricultural infrastructure and distribution systems, to increasing awareness 
of the impacts of food waste in the environment for more sustainable consumption. Surplus food 
adequate for human consumption can be re-used through food redistribution networks and food 
banks for people affected by poverty. Inevitably discarded food that is not adequate for human 
13 
 
==PAGE:19==
 
consumption should be recycled as animal feed and as a secondary option, through composting 
or anaerobic digestion. The next preferable option would be the recovery of e.g. energy, via 
thermal treatments like incineration, gasification or pyrolysis. Finally, the very last option, which 
should be avoided, is the disposal of waste on landfills; landfills are responsible of 8 % of the 
total anthropogenic world methane emissions and food waste is the major contributor to them 
(Adhikari et al. 2006). The EU landfill directive (Directive 1999/31/EC) aims at avoiding 
landfilling of biodegradable waste by setting some limits on the amounts that can be dumped. 
Figure 3 shows the food waste hierarchy. 
 
 
Figure 3: Representation of the food waste hierarchy with examples for each level. Adapted from Parfitt et al. (2010) 
 
1.3.3. Food waste management technologies 
This study focuses on composting, anaerobic digestion and incineration of food waste and 
therefore a general description of each of the processes can be found below. 
Composting 
Composting refers to the microbial degradation of organic matter under aerobic conditions and 
solid state which results in a stabilized and sanitized product beneficial for plant growth called 
compost (Christensen, 2011). First, in the mesophilic phase, degradation of the easily degradable 
organic matter takes place and the heat released as a consequence of the quick material decay 
raises the temperature and hence the degradation rates, leading to the thermophilic phase. The 
high temperatures reached in this phase allow reduction of pathogens. The last stage is the 
maturation phase, when mineralization and humification processes take place.  
During the process, different microbial communities take part, new biomass is formed and a big 
release of heat takes place. C, S, N, P and K are all essential macro-nutrients for microorganisms 
but C and N have generally the largest influence in the composting process and a proper balance 
between them normally means adequate amounts of the rest of the nutrients (Graves, 2000). One 
part of the C is used as energy source and is released as carbon dioxide (CO2), while the rest is 
together with N, used for growth of microorganisms. The N used for synthesis of the cellular 
material is continuously recycled in the microorganism and becomes available when it dies. 
Although N losses can take place during the composting process through gaseous emissions 
(primary path), leaching and denitrification, in general C decreases more than N, leading to a 
14 
 
==PAGE:20==
 
declining C:N ratio during the process. In addition to nutrient availability, temperature, moisture 
and oxygen availability are also important parameters in the process.  
Composting technologies vary from simple home-composting systems to large-scale enclosed 
systems where process parameters are highly controlled. The final compost is a soil-like product 
rich in nutrients that can be used as fertilizer or soil amendment. 
Anaerobic digestion 
Anaerobic digestion or biogasification is a series of processes by which organic matter is degraded 
by microorganisms in the absence of oxygen. The two main outputs of the process are biogas, a 
gas rich in energy composed mainly by CH4 and CO2; and a liquid effluent or slurry rich in 
nutrients called digestate. Shortly, anaerobic digestion consists of four processes led by different 
groups of microorganism: in the hydrolysis, carbohydrates, proteins and lipids are broken down 
to smaller and soluble forms like sugars, aminoacids and glycerol and long chain fatty acids 
respectively. In the acidogenesis process, the sugars and aminoacids are converted to hydrogen, 
alcohols, volatile fatty acids (VFA) and CO2.  Then, in the acetogenesis step, alcohols and VFA 
are oxidized to acetate producing hydrogen (H2) at the same time. The last step is the 
methanogenesis, in which acetate and H2 are converted to methane, carbon dioxide and water. 
As oppose to the composting process, in anaerobic digestion the energy available is relatively 
limited and therefore very low biomass is produced. Thus, nitrogen demand is very low and C:N 
ratio is seldom a limiting factor. The rest of the nutrients rarely limit the anaerobic digestion in 
the solid waste field (Christensen, 2011). 
Technologies available for anaerobic digestion vary a lot depending on some factors. Regarding 
moisture, the digestion can be dry or wet, influencing the consistency of the digestate. According 
to the temperature selected for the process, digestion can be mesophilic or thermophilic. In some 
technologies the process can take place at several stages and/or phases.  
The biogas produced in the process can either be directly used to produce electricity and heat, or 
upgraded to a biofuel after desulfurization. The use of the digestate can vary but in food waste 
context, it will be normally applied on land as a fertilizer. 
Incineration 
Incineration of waste is its thermal treatment with excess of air. The outputs of the process are 
energy released by the waste, solid residues and flue gas emitted to the atmosphere. The process 
starts when the moisture of the waste is evaporated and pyrolysis and gasification of the solids 
produce combustible gases. These gases undergo ignition and combustion until complete burnout. 
The resulting flue gas is cooled down transferring the energy to the water in a boiler and the steam 
produced goes through a steam turbine normally connected to a power generator. The energy 
recovered in the process can be a combination of heat and power (CHP), only power or even in 
some cases power and a process with industrial applications. 
Moisture content, Lower Heating Value (LHV) and ash content are relevant parameters when 
considering the waste as a fuel. The higher the moisture content of the waste is, the larger the 
energy used to evaporate it. The LHV expresses the amount of energy released by the waste when 
it is dry and the ashes or inorganics represent the solids that cannot be combusted.  
The flue gas cleaning system (or Air Pollution Control -APC-) is an important unit of the 
incineration plant; it is responsible for the reduction of pollutants like acid gases, particles, heavy 
metals and organic pollutants in the flue gas to acceptable levels.  
After incineration, the main part of the remaining ashes of the waste are found in the furnace and 
are called bottom ash. After a treatment to remove metals, this bottom ash can be used in road 
15 
 
==PAGE:21==
 
construction, as a filling or foundation materials or as landfill cover, among others (CEWEP, 
n.d.). A smaller part of the ash mixes with the flue gas and is then removed by the APC system: 
it is called fly ash. As opposed to the bottom ash, fly ash is considered hazardous and although 
there is no global consensus on the best management solution, in most of the countries it is 
landfilled after a special treatment (Astrup, 2008). 
 
 
1.4. 
Aim 
Closing the nutrient loops is essential to reduce scarcity and environmental pressures and ensure 
food security. This becomes especially important in the cities, where increasing number of people 
live today and therefore where the demands for goods, including food are highest.  
The aim of this study is to analyze current management of the food waste generated in the city of 
Copenhagen and compare it with some potential scenarios in terms of nutrient recyclability and 
several environmental impacts, in order to identify the most sustainable balance among the 
treatment options considered: incineration, anaerobic digestion and composting. A novel tool 
combining MFA and LCA methods is applied for this. This study takes the city of Copenhagen 
as a case study because despite being worldwide leader in many environmental aspects, it still 
recovers too little nutrients from food waste. 
The total food waste generated annually in Copenhagen is first estimated, as it is the input flow 
to the system. N and P flows and sinks within the waste management system will be then 
calculated for the current scenario as well as for the analyzed scenarios. Based on the food waste 
flows, the proposed waste management system will be modelled with the LCA software 
EASETECH. This will allow to evaluate some of the environmental impacts of the analyzed 
scenarios and hopefully lead us to the most sustainable balance. 
1.5. Study area: Copenhagen 
Selected European Green Capital in 2014 or designated the most livable city in the world (EIU, 
2012): the capital of Denmark, Copenhagen (København in Danish) is experiencing a green 
revolution and it is worldwide recognized for its environmental policies. 
2 million people out of the 5.6 millions in Denmark live in Great Copenhagen but the present 
study considers the city of Copenhagen which in this case is supposed to consist of Copenhagen 
and Frederiksberg municipalities. 694,300 people live in these two municipalities and the majority 
(90 %) lives in multi-family (MF) households (Statistics DK, 2016). 
Also in some aspects of the waste management has Denmark been pioneer. For instance, it was 
the first country banning completely the disposal of combustible waste on landfills in 1997 and 
Danish waste incineration plants (WtE) are worldwide famous for their efficiency. In fact, 
Denmark, together with Sweden are leaders in using the energy recovered from the waste; 
currently about 5% of the electricity and about 20% of the domestic heat  in the country are 
supplied by these facilities (Danish Government, 2013). However, Denmark is one of the 
countries producing most waste per capita (Danish Government, 2013) and although the numbers 
are lower in the capital, they are still higher than the European. 
16 
 
==PAGE:22==
 
1.5.1. Waste management system in Copenhagen 
In Denmark, the overall environmental policies are set out by the Ministry of Environment and 
the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) determines the general framework for waste matters 
among others. The municipalities are the ones deciding how to implement the national guidelines 
by setting out the waste management system (collection, treatment of household waste, etc.). 
Before the liberalization of the waste sector in 2010, the municipalities were in charge of both 
household and commercial waste management, but now the latter is managed by private 
companies. 
Recent numbers on waste generated in Copenhagen show that 58 % of the waste is recycled, while 
40 % is incinerated and the rest is landfilled or undergoes special treatment (City of Copenhagen, 
2014). Food waste compromises 40 % of the waste generated in an average Danish household. In 
Copenhagen, although multi-family households are equipped for the source-separation of some 
fractions like hard plastic, metal and electronics; food waste is disposed of together with the 
residual waste. In the case of single-family (SF) households, citizens are given the chance to 
source-separate garden waste for composting, cardboard and biowaste. In this case biowaste 
involves all kinds of food leftovers, kitchen paper and cut flowers (Københavns Kommune, 2016). 
This program was started in September of 2015 by Copenhagen municipality and has already 
been extended to the villas in Vanløse, Valby and Brønshøj. It is estimated that 50 % of the 
approximately 20.0000 households are participating (Winberg, 2016). Similarly, Frederiksberg 
municipality is carrying out a pilot project for source separation of organic waste concerning 
around 1850 villas (Nielsen, 2016).  
As the source separation of the biowaste is minimal, the majority of the food waste generated in 
the city is incinerated. Copenhagen and Frederiksberg together with some other municipalities 
send their waste to two incineration facilities, Amagerforbrændig and Vestforbrænding located in 
the east side of the city and in Glostrup, respectively. Figure 4, shows the exact location of the 
facilities. The separately collected biowaste is sent to a biogasification plant in Hedehusene 
(Winberg, 2016), 25 km away from Copenhagen, which is ran by Solum Gruppen (Solum, 2016). 
 
 
Figure 4: Location of Copenhagen in Denmark and boundaries of the city considered. Location of Amagerforbrændig 
(A) and Vestforbrænding(V) incineration plants. 
A 
V
17 
 
==PAGE:23==
 
1.5.2. Targets and future plans 
Denmark aims to become independent from fossil fuels by 2050 (Danish Government, 2013). 
Among the strategies to achieve this ambitious target, the Government mentions the utilization of 
the energy contained in organic waste through biogas production. This also supports the strategy 
for P recovery in Denmark (EPA, n.d.). The specific objectives involve recovering 80 % of the P 
from sewage sludge and to reach above 50 % of source separation of organic waste. 
In the waste management plan the municipalities have to develop every six years, Copenhagen 
and Frederiksberg also aim to increase the separation of organic waste at the source (City of 
Copenhagen, 2014; Frederiksberg kommune, 2014). Specific targets for Copenhagen are: 1) 
achieving 50 % recycling of household waste by 2018, with a separation rate of 33 % of the 
organic waste; and 2) separating 60 % of the organic waste from stores and restaurants by 2018. 
Despite these targets for source-separation of organic waste, Copenhagen municipality is 
currently involved in a pilot project called REnescience whose purpose is to separate the mixed 
waste fraction, including food waste, from households into different outputs: 1) a bioliquid 
suitable for biogas production; 2) a 2-dimensional fraction containing plastics and textiles; 3) a 
3-dimensional fraction containing plastics and metals; 4) a dry organic digestate and 5) an inert 
fraction (REnescience, 2016). Currently the technology is not able to successfully separate 
phthalates from the digestate and as the Danish limits for this compound are lower than those in 
the digestate, it cannot be applied on land. If the technology is further developed and proves to be 
successful and fulfill the Danish standards, a plant for dealing with the mixed waste generated in 
all the households from the city center would possibly be built (Winberg, 2016). Source separation 
in this area is considered difficult to achieve and therefore this project is considered a potential 
solution to it. 
Besides, a new incineration plant is being built next to Amagerforbrændig. Amager Bakke will 
be the best performing European WtE plant in terms of efficiency (28 % electrical energy) and 
capacity (can treat around 400,000 tons of waste annually) (Volund, 2016). This might lead some to 
question until which extent the source-separation of the organic waste which accounts for 40 % 
of the total waste, is a desirable target. 
In the last years concern about the amounts of wasted food has increased thanks to the efforts of 
organizations like “Stop Wasting Food” (Stop Spild af Mad ) and different initiatives like Det 
Runde Bord in festivals (Det Runde Bord, 2016) or Wefood, a supermarket selling the surplus 
food or products with damaged packaging from other supermarkets (Wefood, 2016). Reducing 
food losses and waste from households and businesses is also among the targets of the Danish 
government. As a starting point, the EPA carried out a number of studies to account all the food 
waste produced in Denmark: in MF households (Miljøstyrelsen 2012), in SF households 
(Miljøstyrelsen 2014b) and in the service sector (Miljøstyrelsen 2014) and final overall numbers 
were gathered in the document called Madspild i Danmark (Landbrug & Fødevarer 2015). 
1.6. 
Tools to assess nutrient substainability 
1.6.1. Material Flow analysis 
Material flow analysis is a tool to quantify the flows and stocks of materials or substances within 
a defined system in space and time (Baccini and Brunner, 2012).This instrument can describe the 
metabolism of a system and therefore it is widely used in the field of Industrial Ecology. The first 
step of the method involves the definition of the system analysed: determining the system 
boundaries and identifying the system’s components and subsystems. After this, data are gathered 
to develop the model and finally the results are analysed and interpreted. When inputs and outputs 
18 
 
==PAGE:24==
 
are balanced, the flows of wastes and flows or emissions into the environment can be observed 
and their sources can be identified. 
One of the most consistent and thorough MFAs of a human settlement is the study developed by 
Baccini and Brunner (2012). The authors introduce the MFA tool and provide a guideline on how 
to use it. Basic activities and common materials within the regional anthroposphere are analysed 
and finally, four case studies are provided where an optimal metabolic system is designed. Baccini 
and Brunner (2012) highlight the great potential of MFA and claim that standardisation of the 
method and gathering in a database all the information obtained in individual studies would enable 
completely new forms of utilizing resources. 
Studies applying MFA can focus on a single material flow, like a nutrient, or can account broader 
lists like food, water or fuels. The scale of the boundaries analysed in the studies can also very 
varied. For instance, P flows were analysed at European level (van Dijk et al., 2016) concluding 
that in general, Europe is highly dependent on primary imports and providing abundant 
opportunities to increase the low use efficiencies. Klinglmair and colleagues (2015) also 
considered P flows but at both national and regional levels in Denmark with the purpose of 
evaluating the differences within the country which are not seen when performing MFA at country 
level. The growth in population and complexity of the cities and its decoupling from agricultural 
systems, has increased the attention to nutrient flows and sinks within cities. The major source of 
N and P input to cities is the food system; thus, some urban studies only focus on this system 
(Færge et al., 2001; Forkes, 2007) although others also consider more inputs like detergents and 
storm water runoff (Kalmykova et al., 2012; Thitanuwat et al., 2016; Wu et al., 2016). The outputs 
normally considered are solid food waste, domestic waste water and sewage sludge. In addition, 
MFA has also been applied to smaller systems like farms (Abdulkadir et al., 2015) or municipal 
solid waste management systems (Zhou et al., 2015).  
1.6.2. Life cycle assessment of waste management systems 
As set by ISO 14040 (2006), Life Cycle Assessment is an internationally standardised method 
that quantifies all the resources consumed (inputs), the emissions (outputs) and the associated 
potential environmental impacts of a product or system throughout its whole life-cycle (from 
cradle to grave) (ILCD, 2010). This methodology consists of four basic steps. The first is the 
definition of the goal and scope of the study, including the description of the objectives, the 
system boundaries and the functional unit. The latter specifies quantitatively and qualitatively the 
system analysed; comparisons of different systems are possible because they are based on the 
same functional unit. The second phase is the inventory analysis, when the data collection and 
modelling of the system is done. In the life-cycle impact assessment phase the input and outputs 
from the inventory are grouped in relation to their impact categories and converted into the same 
impact units. The final step is the interpretation of the results from the impact assessment in 
accordance with the defined objectives. LCA provides an estimate of the environmental effects 
that the analysed system can have, providing therefore “impact potentials”. 
This decision support tool is particularly useful for the waste management sector (Hellweg and 
Mila i Canals, 2014). As it has been mentioned before, the Waste Framework Directive (Directive 
2008/98/EC) considers shifts in the waste hierarchy provided that LCA studies support them by 
showing that the overall environmental impacts are reduced. In recent years specialised models 
able to perform entire waste management systems have been developed (Manfredi et al. 2011). 
LCA studies regarding biowaste and food waste management have been developed in the past 
years and the use of LCA in this field is predicted to increase in the next years (Bernstad and la 
Cour Jansen, 2012). The studies vary a lot regarding the goal and scope. Some aim at identifying 
19 
 
==PAGE:25==
 
the most sustainable full management system for the waste by comparing different treatment 
options (Eriksson et al. 2005; Lee et al. 2007; Manfredi et al. 2011; Bernstad and la Cour Jansen, 
2011; Fruergaard and Astrup, 2011) or scenarios where different treatments are combined 
(Kirkeby, 2006; Khoo et al. 2010). Others just focus on a specific part of the management like 
biogasification (Börjesson and Berglund, 2006), use on land of digestate (Hansen et al., 2006) or 
collection and pretreatment (Bernstad and la Cour Jansen, 2012). In other cases LCA is used to 
provide a historical perspective of the waste management in a specific place (Habib et al., 2013). 
Although generally studies cover most of the impact categories, climate change is in some cases 
the only considered impact (Bernstad and la Cour Jansen, 2012b; Habib et al., 2013; Bernstad et 
al., 2016). However, studies only accounting for climate change are called “carbon footprint” and 
they cannot be denominated LCA according to ISO. Regarding the results and conclusions, 
landfilling of food waste is in most of the cases the least beneficial option, although according to 
Manfredi et al. (2011) its environmental performance is comparable to that of composting 
provided that exhaustive control of gas and leachate and high efficiencies are achieved for gas 
collection and utilization. Biological processes often involve higher impacts on acidification, 
eutrophication and ecotoxicity due to the use on land of the compost or digestate (Kirkeby, 2006; 
Lee et al., 2007; Bernstad and la Cour Jansen, 2011). Conclusions change completely from study 
to study. For instance, regarding GW, incineration, composting and anaerobic digestion have all 
been defined as the best and worst treatment options (Bernstad and la Cour Jansen, 2012b). This 
is mainly due to large differences in the selection of the system boundaries, variations in the input 
data and methodological choices. To avoid this and be able to compare studies, Bernstad and la 
Cour Jansen (2012b) highlight the importance of establishing more detailed guidelines in this 
area. 
1.6.3. Combining MFA and LCA 
A successful management of nutrients in cities can only be accomplished through mapping and 
understanding of their flows (Kennedy, 2007) and MFA is the proper tool for that. However, this 
instrument only quantifies flows and it does not provide the actual environmental impacts 
embodied in those flows. Combining MFA and LCA methodologies can therefore overcome this 
gap and provide a broader and more complete environmental assessment of the studied system. 
This novel tool was first suggested by Pincelt et al. (2012) and Goldstein et al. (2013) applied it 
to five cities concluding that it can be a powerful instrument for developing urban policies. 
 
 
20 
 
==PAGE:26==
 
2. Methodology 
2.1. 
System boundaries 
Defining the boundaries of the system to be studied is the first basic step to develop an LCA-
MFA model. In this case, the focus is on the management system of food waste: the input stream 
to the system is the total food waste generated in Copenhagen, which can undergo the three 
different treatments considered: incineration, anaerobic digestion and composting. Figure 5 
illustrates the system boundaries of the case study. The model considers the collection and 
transportation of the waste and the outputs; the energy and resource inputs to the system; and the 
direct emissions to the environment. It also accounts for the substitution of energy and material 
production and application. 
 
Figure 5: Boundaries of the analysed system. 
The present study only considered food waste, therefore impurities and other waste streams were 
disregarded in the system; they are known to be present but their contribution was not considered. 
Impurities exist in every waste stream and they can have a negative effect in some treatment 
processes, especially in the biological ones. Generally these bio-facilities include a pretreatment 
process where the energy and resources consumed depend on the total input weight. These 
processes were considered in the studied system and the input was considered to be only food 
21 
 
==PAGE:27==
 
waste assuming that the presence of impurities could be neglected from the total weight of the 
input.  
Regarding other waste streams, the three analyzed treatment processes were assumed to deal with 
more waste streams than food waste: in addition to food waste, the incineration plant handles the 
“rest fraction” of the waste, the biogas plant treats manure and the composting facility 
incorporates garden waste. But these wastes were disregarded in terms of emissions, energy 
produced and consumed, nutrients in the outputs and modelling of the processes.  
The total food waste generated in Copenhagen was assumed to be treated, meaning that (i) there 
was no food waste in other waste streams and (ii) there were neither food waste losses nor rejects 
in processes of the waste management system. This assumption would lead to accounting for 
higher flows and hence, higher impacts since the real flows would always be lower than the 
considered. Food waste was assumed to be generated in households, wholesale, retail trade, 
restaurants and hotels, canteens and catering and institutions such as schools and hospitals. 
Agricultural and industrial food waste was considered negligible in Copenhagen city. Food waste 
disposed through the kitchen sinks or the sewer was not considered in the study and home-
composting was neglected as well. 
2.2. 
Data collection 
Data collection is a core part of this project; the robustness of the developed model and the 
representativeness of the results depend on the quality of the data used. However, data collection 
is a demanding task and in a broad field as the management of the food waste in a city, a balance 
needs to be found between getting sufficiently representative data and the time spent in collecting 
them. Four different types of data can be differentiated: (A) general information on current 
practices and future plans; data on food waste (B) generation and (C) composition; and (D) data 
on the technology and processes involved in the food waste management system. Different kinds 
of sources were consulted to get the information. Table 1 lists the different classes of sources, 
including their reliability and the type of data they provided. 
Table 1: Types of data sources used in the study, including the degree of reliability and the type of data provided: A) 
data on current practice and future plans; B) data on food waste generation; C) data on food waste composition; and 
D) data on technology and waste management parameters. 
Types of data sources 
Reliability 
Provided data 
Resource and Waste Management Plans 
Low 
A, B 
Personal communications 
Medium 
A, B 
National Statistics 
High 
B 
Studies by institutions (EPA) 
High 
B, C 
Scientific papers 
Very high 
C, D 
Part of the information on current practices and future plans (type A) was found on national and 
municipal reports on resource and waste strategies and some missing points were completed with 
personal communications via email or meetings. It was especially hard to find information on 
commercial waste (waste from the service sector: wholesale, retail trade, restaurants and hotels, 
institutions and canteens and catering) due to the privatisation of the sector therefore estimates 
were made. 
The most complete information on food waste generation (type B) is provided by several studies 
carried out by the Danish EPA (Miljøstyrelsen). Figures are given at national level and hence they 
22 
 
==PAGE:28==
 
were scaled-down to Copenhagen-level using national and municipal statistics (see Appendix A 
for detailed explanation). As no detail explanation on how the waste data were obtained at national 
level, there could be an over- or under-estimation of the estimated waste generated in 
Copenhagen.  In the case of households, it was possible to validate the obtained amounts with 
data from different sources (see Appendix A for data comparison). This was not the case of 
commercial waste where the estimated amounts could not be compared to other values due to the 
limited information available and consequently the values on commercial waste used in this study 
are more uncertain. Although the term waste generation is used all along this study, it should be 
kept in mind that waste generation is very difficult to measure since there is always waste diverted 
from the official collection system, meaning that numbers often represent collected waste and not 
necessarily generated waste (Christensen, 2011). 
Selection of fractional and chemical composition waste data (type C) is a key task when 
developing MFA and LCA models since the results are linked to the input data (Slagstad and 
Brattebø, 2013; Laurent et al. 2014). For instance in LCA, part of the emissions, known as input-
specific emissions, are directly dependent on the composition of the waste; the same applies to 
the substitution of primary resources, material and energy. The importance of using appropriate 
waste composition data in the current study is therefore clear. However, obtaining these data is a 
challenging task due to heterogeneity of the waste and its temporal and spatial variations 
(Christensen, 2011; Götze et al. 2016). Thus, efforts were focused on selecting appropriate data 
reflecting the spatial and temporal scope of the study and consequently preference was given to 
data from studies fulfilling the following: a) studies focusing on food waste (trying to avoid those 
referring to organic waste); b) Danish data, preferably from studies developed in Copenhagen or 
in similar big cities; c) as recent as possible and c) more than one data source in order to be able 
to validate them. Section 2.4 includes the different data used. 
Type D data were used to develop a representative LCA model of the food waste management 
system of Copenhagen. This type of information includes from transport and treatment 
technologies to process specific parameters. Also for these data, all the relevant values inserted 
in the model were validated (see Section 2.4) and in the cases where uncertainty was higher, 
sensitivity analyses were performed and discussed (Chapter 3). 
 
2.3. 
Description of the scenarios 
In order to compare the three studied treatment technologies and analyze different combinations 
of them, the current scenario and 21 new scenarios were considered. All of them were based on 
the present yearly food waste amounts and composition. The share of food waste undergoing each 
treatment option was the only differing parameter among the new scenarios. Table 2 summaries 
the value the parameter takes in each scenario. 
It was estimated that at present (current scenario), 92 % of the waste generated in Copenhagen is 
incinerated, the remaining 8 % is sent to anaerobic digestion and composting of food waste is 
negligible. These numbers indicate that currently 17 % of the biowaste from the service sector 
(Danish Government, 2013) and 3 % of the biowaste from households (calculations based on 
Winberg (2016)) is recycled through anaerobic digestion and the rest is incinerated. 
23 
 
==PAGE:29==
 
 
Table 2: Percentage of food waste handled by each of the three options (Incineration (IN); Anaerobic Digestion (AD; 
Composting (CO).)in each of the 21 scenarios and in the current (C) scenario 
 
Scenario 
% 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
C 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN. 
80 
70 
60 
50 
40 
30 
20 
10 
10 
10 
10 
10 
10 
10 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
92 
AD 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
70 
60 
50 
40 
30 
20 
10 
10 
10 
10 
10 
10 
10 
8 
CO 
10 
10 
10 
10 
10 
10 
10 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
70 
60 
50 
40 
30 
20 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.4. 
Developing the model 
The system under study was modelled with EASETECH (acronym for Environmental 
Assessment System for Environmental TECHnologies), a software developed by the Technical 
University of Denmark. It is mainly used to evaluate different environmental technologies, 
particularly in the field of waste management; under the LCA perspective, it models the use and 
recovery of resources as well as the emissions to the environment of the system. The main 
advantage of this software is that the modelling and the LCA calculations are based on flows 
composed by different material fractions with a particular mass and composition. As the model 
allows getting track of the flows’ composition and mass throughout the system, this was 
particularly useful for the development of the MFA. Besides, as this tool is being developed in a 
Danish university, most of the processes and default data are based on studies carried out in 
Denmark, which in the case of the present study was highly helpful; in most of the cases the 
values were validated though. All the data inserted to the model are summarized in Appendix C. 
2.4.1. Waste generation and composition 
The 97,837 tons of food waste generated per year in Copenhagen were the input to the model. 
Waste streams are defined by fractions in EASETECH and each fraction has a default chemical 
composition. Food waste was modelled considering the Vegetable Food Waste (VFW) fraction 
and the Animal Food Waste fraction (AFW) and the ratio between them was defined for each of 
the waste sources, as displayed in Table 3.  
Table 3: Amounts of food waste in tones per year and percentage of the total, generated by each source. VFW and 
AFW ratio is given for the waste from each source and the reference source is provided. 
Food waste source 
[tons/year] 
[%] 
VFW:AFW  
Reference 
 
 
 
 
 
MF Households 
56,947 
58.2 
 79:21 
Miljøstyrelsen (2012) 
SF Households 
4,730 
4.8 
 80:20 
Miljøstyrelsen (2014) 
Wholesale 
497 
0.5 
 85:15 
Mogensen et al (2013) 
Retail trade 
24,119 
24.7 
 89:11 
Mogensen et al (2013) 
Hotels and restaurants 
3,462 
3.5 
 79:21 
* Assumed same as MF 
Institutions 
2,970 
3.0 
 77:23 
Miljøstyrelsen (2014b) 
Canteens and catering 
5,112 
5.2 
 73:27 
Miljøstyrelsen (2014b) 
Total 
97,837 
 
 
 
 
24 
 
==PAGE:30==
 
As mentioned in Section 2.2. and shown in detail in Appendix A, estimations on amounts of waste 
from each source were based on national figures reported in several Danish EPA studies. The 
percentages of vegetable and animal food waste were also based on these references. In the case 
of both, single- and multi-family households, different values were reported in other studies 
(Riber et al. 2009; Edjabou et al. 2015; Naroznova et al. 2016) and although they were similar to 
the ones used in the model, sensitivity analysis was performed to validate them (Chapter 3). The 
share of VFW and AFW for hotels and restaurants was assumed to be the same as for MF houses 
due to the lack of data and the ratio for institutions was based on a single-study in one nursery in 
Copenhagen. 
The importance of appropriate data selection for the chemical composition of the analyzed waste 
has been remarked in the previous section. Default chemical composition of VFW and AFW 
fractions in EASETECH is based on Riber et al. (2009). To ensure the suitability of these default 
values, they were validated with other values from the literature as shown in Table 4.  Chemical 
characterization includes up to 47 elements (see detail characterization in Appendix B), however, 
only the most relevant ones for the study were included, that is, those which were relevant in the 
treatment processes considered. 
Table 4:EASETECH default data used in the model for total solids, volatile solids, nitrogen and phosphorus. Values 
from the literature used to validate the used data and their sources: a: Naroznova et al. (2015); b: Kumar et al. 
(2010); c: Christensen (2011); d: Götze (2016); e: Hansen et al. (2007); f: Götze et al. (2016). 
Parameter 
EASETECH 
(default)* 
Literature 
Reference 
Total Solids [%] 
VFW 
23 
24 
a 
AFW 
42.9 
41  
a 
Food waste 
27.1 
20; 34 
b, c  
Volatile Solids [% TS] 
VFW 
94.8 
89; 93 
a, d 
AFW 
91.3 
76; 84 
a, d 
Food waste 
90 
91.6 
e 
N [% TS] 
VFW 
1.9 
1.9; 2.01 
d, f 
AFW 
7 
4.4; 10.4 
d, f  
Food waste 
3.59 
2.5; 3; 1.6-7 
d, e, f 
P [% TS] 
VFW 
0.231 
0.212; 0.221 
d, f  
AFW 
0.996 
1.178; 1.2 
d, f 
Food waste 
0.48 
0.4 ; 0.52 
e, f 
*Default values are based on Riber et al. (2009). To calculate the values for the default FW a ratio of 79:21 between 
VFW and AFW was defined. 
 
The default values for food waste represent the food waste from the MF houses (79 % VFW and 
21 % AFW). In general, all the values seemed to agree with other studies and in the cases where 
one of the values was relatively higher or lower, e.g. VS in AFW, the value of the total food waste 
agreed with other studies, therefore default values provided by EASETECH were used in the 
model. 
The Lower Heating Value (LHV) and the Biomethane Potential (BMP) are also relevant 
parameters in the case of incineration and anaerobic digestion respectively and the selection of 
the final values used is discussed in the description of the modelling of the corresponding process.  
25 
 
==PAGE:31==
 
2.4.2. Incineration 
The incineration process was modelled based on the current incineration practices in Denmark. It 
was assumed that the incineration of food waste takes place in the two incineration facilities in 
the city: Amagerforbrænding and Vestforbrænding. The waste is collected and directly 
transported to the incineration facility. The rest fraction is incinerated in these facilities together 
with food waste and electricity and district heating are produced. The generic process Waste 
Incineration in Denmark 2012 from EASETECH was selected for the simulation. 
Energy production is calculated as percent of the energy content of the waste. The energy content 
is generally expressed by the LHV, which represents the energy provided by the combustion of 
the dry matter minus the energy needed to vaporize the water contained in the material. The total 
net energy supplied by the material can be calculated following Equation 1. 
 
 
𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸 [𝑀𝑀𝐽𝐽] = 𝑘𝑘𝑘𝑘 𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤 ∙𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿 ൤𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀
𝑘𝑘𝑘𝑘 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇൨∙% 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇 𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆 
 
(1) 
Default values from EASETECH based on Riber et al. (2009) were used for the LHV. These 
values were validated comparing them with values provided by other studies which are shown in 
Table 5. 
Table 5: Default values from EASETECH used in the model and literature values to validate them, including the source. 
LHV 
 [MJ/kgTS] 
EASETECH (default) 
Literature 
Reference 
VFW 
10.12 
17.11 
Götze (2016) 
AFW 
21.29 
18.86 
Götze (2016) 
Food Waste 
20.37* 
20.8 
Hansen et al. (2007) 
* Calculated for food waste from MF households 
The efficiencies for electricity and district heating production were set to be respectively 20 and 
80 %, based on Vestforbrænding (2016). The substitution of the energy is the most critical 
parameter in the modelling of the incineration because it would have the largest impact on the 
level of credits from this process. In this case, energy produced in the facilities is assumed to 
substitute marginal energy in Denmark, which is produced with coal and oil. 
Both facilities were assumed to consume 65 kWh of electricity and 0.5 L of fuel oil per tonne of 
waste (Fruergaard and Astrup, 2010). Other inputs accounted in the generic process include the 
chemicals of the flue-gas cleaning system. This system is very important in the incineration 
process since it determines the level of emissions to air. A good technological scope is therefore 
crucial in order to get realistic results. In this case, the flue-gas cleaning system of the generic 
incineration process is based on the one in Vestforbrænding facility. The solid outputs of the 
process are bottom ash, fly ash, iron and aluminium scraps and waste water. They are modelled 
as input specific emissions via transfer coefficients, although emission control systems remove 
part of them. Emissions to air are modelled mainly like process-specific, where they are governed 
by the flue-gas cleaning systems. 
After the incineration process, the solid outputs are recycled, utilized or treated before final 
disposal. To model this, existing processes in EASETECH were used for the sorting and 
recycling, while transport means and distance were specified. Waste water treatment process was 
not modelled since the generic incineration process already accounts for it. 
26 
 
==PAGE:32==
 
Bottom ash is reprocessed and utilized as a filler material in road construction (Vestforbrænding, 
2016). Bottom ash is sent to a sorting facility in Amager where metal scraps are recovered. The 
final bottom ash aggregate is utilized as a filler material in road construction in Denmark 
(Vestforbrænding, 2016).  
Fly ash, is considered a hazardous waste and its landfilling is prohibited in Denmark. The fly ash 
from the Danish incineration plants is shipped to Langoya, an island close to Oslo, where it is 
used as a neutralizer for acid waste (Astrup, 2008). 
2.4.3. Composting 
Food waste collected for composting is transported to a centralized composting plant in Zealand, 
about 40 km away from Copenhagen. In the facility garden and food waste (called green waste) 
are degraded together in windrows placed on an enclosed pad. Food waste is normally composted 
with bulking agents such as wood chips, sawdust or garden waste to adjust the moisture content 
and the C/N ratio (Haug, 1993; Adhikari et al., 2009; Iqbal et al., 2010). Before the composting 
process, the waste was assumed to be pre-treated to remove impurities. The energy input for the 
facility was assumed to be 150 kWh of electricity and 1 L of diesel per tonne of waste based on 
default values taken from Komilis and Ham (2004). However, significantly lower values were 
found for the electricity consumed by enclosed composting facilities (Boldrin et al., 2009), 
therefore sensitivity analysis was performed. 
There are several composting facilities modelled in EASETECH: windrow composting of green 
waste in the US, windrow composting of garden waste in Aarhus, Denmark and reactor 
composting of organic waste in Sweden, among others. As none of the existing processes in 
EASETECH was representing exactly the case study, a new composting process was created. 
However, data on energy consumption and air emissions (the plant incorporates a biofilter for air 
emission control) were taken from the process windrow composting in the US, since the 
composting facility of the study case was assumed to be similar to that one. 
Table 6 shows values from relevant papers about food waste composting. For the modelling in 
EASETECH, degradation rates of the material fractions needed to be specified for each 
compound. Thus, degradation values from literature were considered for the modelling rather than 
final concentrations in the compost.  
Table 6: Values used in the modeling of the composting processes and the validation values and references: a: 
Christensen (2011); b: Bernstad and la Cour Jansen (2011); c: Stutter (2015); d: Boldrin et al. (2009). Validation done 
considering 1 tonne of waste from MF households. 
 
Model 
Value 
Literature 
 
Value 
Reference 
 
 
 
 
Loss of TS (%) 
42.5 
40 
a 
% TS in compost 
57.0 
57.6 
b 
Loss of VS (%) 
48.9 
47 
a 
44 
b 
VS in compost (%TS) 
83.3 
75 
a 
Loss of N (%) 
30.3 
30 
a 
N in compost (%TS) 
4.1 
0.9-2.8 
a, b, c, d 
Loss of P (%) 
0.0 
0 
a 
P in compost (%TS) 
2.1 
0.18-0.9 
a, b, c, d 
27 
 
==PAGE:33==
 
 
Compared to the literature values, the concentrations in the compost of the case study were 
significantly higher, especially for N and P. Our model only considered food waste; nevertheless, 
in the real process both food and garden waste were inputs to the process and the final compost 
would have different characteristics than a compost from only FW. To validate our model, 
composting of both wastes was simulated using the same data for food waste. Branches from 
garden waste were added (ratio 1:1) and degradation of 26.23 % was assumed for VS and Cbio 
(default value from EASETECH) in the garden waste. 
As it can be seen in Table 7, nutrient content of the final compost is similar to values obtained in 
studies about green waste composting and therefore the data inserted in the model can be 
validated. 
Table 7: Final N and P content after the modelling of food waste and green waste composting (1:1) and values from 
the literature representing the same based on Ward et al. (2005) and Boldrin et al. (2009). 
 
Model 
Literature 
N (% TS) 
1.8 
0.7-1.55 
P (% TS) 
0.19 
0.15-0.73 
After the composting process, the compost is transported to farms in Zealand (average 
transportation distance is assumed to be 20 km) where it is applied on land substituting mineral 
fertilizers. The modelling of this process is further described in section 2.4.5. 
2.4.4. Anaerobic digestion 
The anaerobic digestion plant is assumed to be located 40 km away from Copenhagen and before 
the process the waste is pre-treated to remove impurities. The facility treats both manure and food 
waste. The selected anaerobic digestion process in EASETECH is based on a one-step wet 
thermophilic (53 – 55 °C) anaerobic digestion plant and the outputs from the process are biogas 
and digestate. This facility consumes 0.049 kWh/kg ww of electricity for pumps, ventilators and 
heating and 0.0009 L/kg ww of diesel for the machinery. 
The Theoretical Biomethane Potential (TBMP) represents the amount of carbon 
susceptible of undergoing anaerobic degradation and therefore of producing biogas. In 
EASETECH it is expressed by a parameter called Cbioand which can be calculated with 
Equation 2.  
 
𝐶𝐶𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑜𝑜𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎(%𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇) = 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇 (𝑚𝑚3 𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡) ∙𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉 (%𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇) ∙ 10−6(𝑡𝑡𝑔𝑔) ∙12 (𝑔𝑔𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚)
⁄
⁄
⁄
% 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶4(𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏) ∙0.0224 (𝑚𝑚3/𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚)
 
 
(2) 
For our model, Cbioand values were calculated for both VFW and AFW following this 
equation.  Values for TBMP and percentage of methane in biogas were taken from the 
literature (Table 8). 
However, the biodegradability of the waste needs to be considered, that is, the percentage of the 
TBMP that is actually degraded and produces biogas. A loss of biogas of 1 % was assumed and 
the final biogas is utilized to substitute marginal electricity and district heating production. Biogas 
utilization is supposed to have an efficiency of 46 % and 39 % for district heating and electricity 
production, respectively (Jørgensen, 2009). The obtained digestate is utilized in farms in Zealand 
as substitution of mineral fertilizer. Its final composition is displayed in Table 9. 
 
28 
 
==PAGE:34==
 
Table 8: TBMP and methane content in biogas from the literature to calculate the value of C_bio_and. Selected values 
and final C_bio_and value 
Parameter 
 
EASETECH 
Literature 
Selected 
value 
 
Value 
Reference 
TBMP 
(Nm3/ton VS) 
VFW 
- 
518 
Naroznova et al. (2016) 
518 
AFW 
582 
Naroznova et al. (2016) 
582 
General FW 
472 -550 
Browne et al. (2013) 
- 
Degradability (%) 
VFW 
70 
82 
Naroznova et al. (2016) 
82 
AFW 
70 
98 
Naroznova et al. (2016) 
98 
General FW 
- 
86 - 97 
Browne et al. (2013) 
Hansen et al. (2007) 
- 
% methane in biogas 
63 
53-70 
Christensen (2011) 
Banks et al. (2011) 
63 
Cbioand 
VFW 
42.3 
- 
- 
42* 
AFW 
36 
- 
- 
44* 
Methane losses (%) 
- 
0.5-1 
Bernstad and la Cour 
Jansen (2011) 
1 
* These values were calculated with Eq. 2 and the selected values for TBMP and %CH4 in biogas and the VS content 
of each fraction. 
Table 9: Values of the digestate after anaerobic digestion modelling and literature values: a: Tampio et al. (2016); b: 
Rigby and Smith (2013); c: Sheets et al. (2015) 
Parameter 
Output 
Literature 
Value 
Reference 
Digestate 
   TS (%) 
10 
 8 - 17 
a, b, c 
   VS (% TS) 
84 
81-86 
a,b 
   N (%TS) 
5.6 
3.5-15.7 
a, b, c 
   P (%TS) 
0.8 
0.2 – 1.6 
a, b, c 
Biogas 
   CH4 (m3/tonne ww) 
73.48 
 
 
   CO2 (m3/tonne ww) 
42.3 
 
 
2.4.5. Use on land 
The nutrient-rich outputs from the biological treatments are transported to farms in Zealand, 
where they are applied on land. To spread the liquid digestate (moisture content of 90 %) and 
soil-like compost, a farm tractor is needed.  
The type of soil is one of the key parameters in nutrient appliance; in this case a sandy loam soil 
is assumed based on Greve et al. (2006), although different types were considered through a 
sensitivity analysis. Modelling of the application on land considers the distribution of C, N and P 
to different compartments. In the case study default values from EASETECH were considered on 
sandy loam soil and high crop rotation in Denmark. The fate of C and N in EASETECH has been 
simulated by Daisy, one dimensional, deterministic agro-ecosystem model. The distribution is 
assumed to be representative of Danish agricultural practices. Table 10 summarizes the 
distributions considered in the model. 
29 
 
==PAGE:35==
 
Table 10: C, N and P distribution coefficients considered when applying on land the compost and the digestate. Values 
taken for a sandy loam soil. 
DISTRIBUTION OF C (%) 
 
 
 
 
 
CO2 
CH4 
C (soil storage) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Compost 
88.68 
0.01 
11.31 
 
 
 
 
Digestate 
86.75 
0.05 
13.2 
 
 
 
 
DISTRIBUTION OF N (%) 
 
N2 
N2O 
NH3 
NO3(leaching 
to GW) 
NO3(runoff 
to SW) 
N (plant 
uptake) 
N (soil 
storage) 
Compost 
12.485 
4.45 
1.61 
10.915 
10.1 
27.01 
33.43 
Digestate 
4.295 
2.78 
7.5 
17.675 
19.58 
21.23 
26.94 
DISTRIBUTION OF P (%) 
 
 
 
 
P 
(soil 
storage) 
PO3 (leaching 
to GW) 
PO3 (runoff 
to SW) 
P 
(plant 
uptake) 
 
 
 
Compost 
14.96 
0.47 
0.47 
84.1 
 
 
 
Digestate 
14.96 
0.47 
0.47 
84.1 
 
 
 
 
When applied on land, compost and digestate substitute the use of commercial fertilizers. The 
avoided emissions considered involve: i) emissions from fertilizer production and ii) emissions 
from the use on land of mineral fertilizers (selected values are default values from EASETECH). 
The emissions from mineral fertilizers are different than the emissions from compost and 
digestate. As the nutrients in organic fertilizers are not readily available for plants, nutrient 
substitution is only partial. The substitution ratio or Mineral Fertilizer Equivalent (MFE) 
determines the ratio between the plant accessible nutrients in organic fertilizers and plant 
accessible nutrients in mineral fertilizers. A maximum amount of nutrients is set for each farm 
depending on the agricultural system, type of soil and treatment of the organic waste (Hansen et 
al., 2006). The application of the nutrients can be then done by combining different types of 
fertilizer and attending to the MFE. Regarding nitrogen, field measurements in Denmark showed 
a substitution up to 30 % for composted MSW (Bundgaard et al. 1993, Nielsen 1994) and although 
no measurements have been made for anaerobically digested MSW, between 60 and 100 % of the 
nitrogen is assumed to be substituted (Bundgaard et al. 1993). Despite these experimental MFE, 
regulation in Denmark indicates MFE values of 20 and 40 % for composted and anaerobically 
digestated MSW respectively (Plantedirektoratet, 2003). In the case of phosphorous, substitution 
of 100 % can be assumed (Bundgaard et al. 1993) for both compost and digestate. In the model, 
the regulatory MFE values are considered, although the effect of considering experimental values 
was also analyzed and discussed.   
2.5. 
Life Cycle Impact Assessment (LCIA) 
As mention before in the goal, the functional unit of the system is treatment of all the food waste 
generated in the city of Copenhagen. The LCIA is the third step of the LCA method. Here the 
elementary flows from the inventory are assigned to the impact categories selected according to 
their ability to cause different environmental problems and then through characterization factors, 
all contributions within an impact category are expressed in common units as an impact score 
(e.g. kg CO2 equivalents for the impact category climate change). Normalization and weighting 
30 
 
==PAGE:36==
 
allow respectively comparison across categories and ranking of the impacts in terms of their 
relative importance and they are both optional steps in LCA as opposed to the previous ones. 
Although they might provide more communicative and understandable results, these two steps 
are not applied in the present study due to the multiple assumptions they are based on, for instance 
the weighting factors which determine the relative importance of each impact.  
There are a number of LCIA methodologies that differ in the impacts considered and the 
modelling of the impact assessment; ReCiPE, Impact 2002+ and EDIP are some examples. For 
this study the ILCD recommended method was adopted, which selects a particular methodology 
for each impact category. 7 impact categories were considered according to the scope of the study: 
climate change (CC), terrestrial eutrophication (TE), freshwater eutrophication (FE), marine 
eutrophication (ME), ecotoxicity and both fossil (FRD) and reserve-based (RBRD) resource 
depletion. 
2.6. 
Material Flow Analysis 
The system considered in the MFA is shown in Figure 6. And the mass balance equation followed 
is explained by Equations 3-7. It is a simple model input, storage, recycling and output. The input 
to the model is the total food waste generated in Copenhagen. There are two types of stock 
considered: the ashes form incineration and the soil. The flow that reaches the plant uptake is 
considered to be recycled. Finally, the outputs are the emissions to the environment. 
𝐴𝐴01 = 𝐴𝐴10 + 𝐴𝐴13 
(3) 
A13 = A40 + 4+ A47 
(4) 
𝐴𝐴02 = 𝐴𝐴20 + 𝐴𝐴25 + 𝐴𝐴26 
(5) 
𝐴𝐴03 = 𝐴𝐴30 + 𝐴𝐴37 
(6) 
A37= A70 + 7 + A79 
(7) 
The MFA model is based on the EASETECH model developed since it allows tracking of the 
elements in the different flows. In the case of composting, degradation of N and P had to be 
specified in EASETECH and the numbers were based on several references mentioned above. In 
the anaerobic digestion treatment there is no degradation of N and P (Mitchell et al., 2015) and 
the process was modeled accordingly. For the incineration process, although default values from 
EASETECH determine that 100 % of N and P end up in the bottom ash, more accurate values 
were found for P in Belevi and Moench (2000) and therefore those numbers were used in the 
MFA. Finally, the flows that reach the use on land process were based on numbers from 
EASETECH for a sandy loam soil, which are obtained through simulation with DAISY. Leaching 
of nutrients when the ash is used in road construction or as waste neutralizer was disregarded. 
31 
 
==PAGE:37==
 
 
Figure 6: System boundaries of the MFA including the flows and the processes 
 
 
 
32 
 
==PAGE:38==
 
3. Results 
3.1. Food Waste and Nutrients Flows 
The flows of TS, N and P (in annual tons) in the current scenario as well as in scenarios 1, 8 and 
15 are analyzed below. The three scenarios represent the case with a share of FW treatment of 
80-10-10; i.e. 80 % incineration in scenario 1; 80 % AD in scenario 8 and 80 % composting in 
scenario 15. Only one graph for each substance is shown below (Figures 7-9), the rest of the 
graphs are displayed in Appendix D. The input considers the total food waste generated in 
Copenhagen per year, which corresponds to 26,169 tons of TS, 900 tons of N and almost 121 tons 
of P. These values are in line with results from previous MFA studies: 152 t P y-1 were estimated 
in the FW in Stockholm (considering 21 % larger population) (Wu et al., 2016) and 125 t P y-1 in 
the FW in the city of Gothenburg (Kalmykova et al., 2012). Regarding N, more than three times 
higher value was found in Toronto (3070 t N y-1) (Forkes, 2007), but annual food waste generation 
rate in this city is estimated to be 276 t, which is almost three times as high as the one assumed 
for Copenhagen in this study. 
 
Figure 7: TS flows of food waste in scenario 1. 
When food waste is incinerated, the majority of the mass ends up in the off gas and is emitted to 
the atmosphere, but the fate of the two nutrients is different: N and P are mainly found in the 
bottom ash. When bottom ash and fly ash are utilized as road construction material and as waste 
neutralizer, some leaching of the nutrients takes place; however, this is disregarded in this model. 
In the anaerobic digestion process, almost 40 % of the mass input is degraded into biogas and 
some minor emissions. N and P however, do not undergo degradation and are therefore found 
entirely in the digestate. When the latter is applied on land, about half of the N is lost through 
gaseous emissions (15 %), leaching (18 %) and run off (20 %), around 21 % is absorbed by plants 
and the remaining N stays in the soil. On the other hand, above 80 % of the P in the digestate can 
be taken up by plants and the emissions to the environment are almost negligible. Regarding 
33 
 
==PAGE:39==
 
composting, above 40 % of the TS are degraded and emitted to the atmosphere. While 30 % of 
the N is degraded, all the input P stays in the compost. When used on land, 40 % of the N is lost 
to the environment through leaching (11 %), run off (10 % and gaseous emissions (19 %); 33 % 
stays in the soil and the rest is taken up by crops. Regarding P, more than 80 % is taken up by 
crops and the rest is mostly accumulated in the soil, except for a negligible part that is emitted. 
 
Figure 8.P flows of food waste in current scenario. 
Considering the four possible fates of nutrients (recycling as crop uptake, soil storage, incineration 
ashes and emissions), significant differences can be seen in the scenarios analyzed. At present 
(Figure 8), less than 2 % of the N and less than 7 % of the P in the food waste reaches the crops 
and above 90 % of both nutrients is accumulated principally as bottom ash aggregate, which 
corresponds to 828 tons of N and 98 tons of P. In this case, the ashes from incineration are 
considered a sink since the nutrients embedded are not available for plants. Shifting from current 
scenario to scenario 1 increases the recyclability of N and P to 4 % and 16 % respectively. The 
nutrients in the ashes are reduced by 13 % and the nutrients accumulated in the soil duplicate. 
Soils are another sink for nutrients, but in this case, they can become plant accessible after 
mineralization. 
Comparing scenarios 8 and 15, where anaerobic digestion and composting are respectively the 
main treatments, no difference can be seen regarding the pathway of P. Scenario 8 achieves the 
largest share of N reaching the crops and the highest accumulated N levels in the soil. Emissions 
to the environment are highest in scenario 15 due to the degradation of N during the composting 
process. 
34 
 
==PAGE:40==
 
 
Figure 9: N flows of food waste in scenario 15. 
Figure 4 shows the amount of N and P that reach each fate in the analyzed scenarios. A great 
reduction in nutrient sinks can be seen shifting towards scenarios with larger share of biological 
treatment of food waste. This shift would lead to up to 75 % of P recovery by plants, while only 
around 19 % and 17 % of the N would be recovered under scenarios 8 and 15, respectively. 
Besides, an increase in the biological treatment of food waste increases the emissions of N 
significantly:  around half of the N is emitted to the environment under scenarios 8 and 15. On 
the contrary, emissions of P are almost negligible in all the scenarios, where less than 1 % of the 
total P is emitted. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0,0
50,0
100,0
150,0
Current
1
8
15
[t /year]
Scenario
P
Recycled
Soil
Ashes
Emissions
0,0
500,0
1000,0
Current
1
8
15
[t /year]
Scenario
N
Figure 10: Pathways of N and P flows in scenarios 1, 8, 15 and the current scenario. 
35 
 
==PAGE:41==
 
3.2. Environmental Impacts of Food Waste Management 
3.2.1. LCA Results 
Environmental impacts for the 21 scenarios and the current scenario are presented in the 
following. The impacts are given per functional unit i.e. the food waste generated annually in 
Copenhagen. The contribution of each treatment alternative (incineration, AD and composting) 
is included, together with the overall environmental performance of the scenario. In most of the 
cases the options involve both net impacts and savings but only the overall impact is represented 
in the graphs. The current scenario is also represented for all the impacts; the results for the present 
scenario are very similar to those for scenario 1, as this is the most similar case. All the LCA 
results are included in Appendix E. 
Figure 11 presents the characterized results for climate change expressed in kg CO2-eq. Scenario 
8 shows the best environmental performance with large savings (-3.84·107 kg CO2-eq), while 
scenario 15 is the worst one in terms of climate change, presenting net impacts (6.10·106 kg CO2-
eq). AD is the most preferable alternative due to biogas utilization process: electricity substitution 
from the biogas offers the biggest savings (-3.75·107 kg CO2-eq in scenario 8, i.e. 80 % AD), 
followed by DH production (-6.64·106 kg CO2-eq. Incineration also offers net savings because of 
the marginal energy substitution. However, if incineration and AD are compared when both 
processes are dealing with the same amount of FW, e.g. comparing scenario 1 and 8, it can be 
seen that AD treatment has almost twice as many savings as incineration treatment (-2.00·107 kg 
CO2-eq). Finally, composting seems to be the least preferable option with regard to climate 
change. The major impact of this option comes from the composting facility: 86 % of the impact 
is related to electricity consumption of the composting facility, while the rest is attributed to NO2 
and CH4 emissions during the composting process. Application on land of the organic fertilizers 
has higher impacts than savings to CC; but the resulting net impact is relatively small compared 
to the above mentioned processes: maximum values of 3.92·105 from digestate application in 
scenario 8 (80 % AD), and 5.27 ·106 from compost application in scenario 15 (80 % composting). 
The savings from the use of both types of organic fertilizer are related to avoidance of emissions 
in use on land (40 %) and avoidance of mineral fertilizer production (60 %), from N fertilizer 
production mainly (93 % and 83 % in digestate and compost, respectively). Compost offers less 
savings than digestate since the substitution ratio of N fertilizer assumed is lower (20 % compared 
to the 40 % assumed for digestate). The impacts from the use on land come from N2O and CH4 
emissions and in the case of digestate application, a small part (3 %) is due to the diesel consumed 
in spreading the digestate: applying digestate has 9 times higher impact than application of 
compost due to the fact that the former is in liquid form. The impacts are, however the same for 
both organic fertilizers since compost has more related gaseous emissions. 
36 
 
==PAGE:42==
 
 
Figure 11: Characterized results to climate change for the 21 scenarios and the current scenario, including 
contribution of each treatment option. 
Figure 12 shows the impacts to ecotoxicity in CTU (Comparative Toxic Units). The contribution 
of the incineration process is negligible (maximum value of 1.45·105 CTU in the current scenario 
with 92 % of incineration) relative to the two biological treatment options, what makes present 
scenario the preferable one. The primary drivers to ecotoxicity are the heavy metals present in the 
FW (zinc, copper, nickel and chromium) that are released to the soil when applying the digestate 
and the compost. Scenario 15 is the one with the highest impact (1.91·107 CTU), although 
scenarios in the range 8 to 15 have very similar impacts: scenario 8, the lowest in this range, is 
only 2.9 % lower than scenario 15. This small difference shows that digestate application has 
slightly lower impact than compost due to the higher substitution ratio assumed for the former. 
 
 
Figure 12: Characterized results to ecotoxicity for the 21 scenarios and the current scenario, including contribution 
of each treatment option. 
Regarding terrestrial eutrophication, current scenario is the one with lowest impacts (2.17·105 AE 
(Accumulated Exceedance)), while scenario 8 shows the highest (7.74·105 AE). Nitrogen-related 
gaseous emissions are the driver for terrestrial eutrophication. As it can be seen in Figure 13, AD 
is the option contributing the most: comparing the three options dealing with the same amount of 
food waste, AD option shows 3.4 and 5.2 times higher impact than composting and incineration, 
respectively. These large impacts are related to NH3 emissions during the use on land of the 
digestate. However, part of the impacts is balanced with the avoidance of N fertilizer production 
(minimum value of -6.31·104 AE in scenario 8). In the case of compost, the savings are lower 
-4,00E+07
-3,00E+07
-2,00E+07
-1,00E+07
0,00E+00
1,00E+07
2,00E+07
3,00E+07
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 C
[kg CO2-eq]
Climate change
Incineration
Composting
Anaerobic digestion
total
0,00E+00
5,00E+06
1,00E+07
1,50E+07
2,00E+07
2,50E+07
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 C
[CTU]
Ecotoxicity
Incineration
Composting
Anaerobic digestion
Total
37 
 
==PAGE:43==
 
than in digestate (minimum value of -2.32·104 AE in scenario 15) due to the lower substitution 
ratio of N fertilizer production, but the impacts are also lower since NH3 emissions from compost 
are 4.6 times lower than from digestate. The impacts from incineration come from NOx related to 
process specific emissions and 38 % of these emissions are balanced with NOx savings from DH 
production. 
 
 
Figure 13: Characterized results to terrestrial eutrophication for the 21 scenarios and the current scenario, including 
contribution of each treatment option. 
As shown in Figure 14, scenarios in the range 8 to 15 offer the highest savings in freshwater 
eutrophication: -4,895 kg P-eq; this is more than 11 times higher savings than the current scenario. 
Substitution of P mineral fertilizer is the reason for relatively high savings of composting and AD 
options. In this case, as Figure 15 shows both biological alternatives have the same performance: 
85 % of the savings come from P emissions to water in the production of conventional fertilizers. 
The rest of the savings balance the impacts related to the emissions from the use on land. Impacts 
of incineration to FE are negligible; the maximum contribution is 0.69 kg P-eq in the current 
scenario). 
 
 
Figure 14: Characterized results to freshwater eutrophication for the 21 scenarios and the current scenario, including 
contribution of each treatment option. 
0,00E+00
1,00E+05
2,00E+05
3,00E+05
4,00E+05
5,00E+05
6,00E+05
7,00E+05
8,00E+05
9,00E+05
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 C
[AE]
Terrestrial Eutrophication
Incineration
Composting
Anaerobic digestion
Total
-6000,00
-5000,00
-4000,00
-3000,00
-2000,00
-1000,00
0,00
1000,00
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 C
[kg P-eq]
Freshwater eutrophication
Incineration
Composting
Anaerobic digestion
Total
38 
 
==PAGE:44==
 
 
Figure 15: Impacts and savings to freshwater eutrophication in the use on land of compost and digestate in scenario 1 
(both biological treatments handling 10 % of the food waste). 
 
 
Figure 16: Characterized results to marine eutrophication for the 21 scenarios and the current scenario, including 
contribution of each treatment option. 
 
Figure 17: Impacts and savings to marine eutrophication in the use on land of compost and digestate in scenario 1 
(both biological treatments handling 10 % of the food waste). 
Scenario 1  
Looking at marine eutrophication (Figure 16), scenario 8 offers the largest impacts (1.81·105 kg 
N-eq), which means that AD option is the least preferable option in this case: it has 3.4 and 13.6 
times higher impacts than composting and incineration, respectively. Similarly to TE, the main 
drivers for ME are also N-related compounds, but this time in the form of nitrate to surface and 
ground water. As it can be seen in Figure 17, the impacts of nitrate emissions when applying 
-700
-600
-500
-400
-300
-200
-100
0
100
200
COMPOSTING
AD
[kg P-eq]
FE
UOL
Subst. UOL
Subst. P fertilizer
Subst. N fertilizer
Total
0,00E+00
2,00E+04
4,00E+04
6,00E+04
8,00E+04
1,00E+05
1,20E+05
1,40E+05
1,60E+05
1,80E+05
2,00E+05
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21
C
[kg N-eq]
Marine eutrophication
Incineration
Composting
Anaerobic digestion
Total
-1,00E+04
0,00E+00
1,00E+04
2,00E+04
3,00E+04
4,00E+04
COMPOSTING
AD
[kg N-eq]
ME
UOL
Subst. UOL
Subst. N fertilizer
Total
39 
 
==PAGE:45==
 
organic fertilizers are 2.5 times higher for digestate than for compost and the savings are also 2.9 
times higher for digestate. In this case, for both organic fertilizers 96 % of the savings are due to 
avoidance of emissions from land application; the rest is related to avoiding N fertilizer 
production. The relatively low impacts from incineration are related to NOx emissions from the 
facility. 
The impacts to the depletion of fossil resources are shown in Figure 18. Both AD and incineration 
offer net savings, while composting has net impacts. Scenario 8 offers the largest savings (-
3.36·108 MJ) due to the better performance of AD compared to the other alternatives. The main 
savings is the substitution of coal through electricity production, for which biogas utilization 
offers 2.3 times higher savings than incineration (maximum savings of -4.16·108 MJ in scenario 
8 from biogas, compared to -1.81·108 MJ in scenario 1 from incineration). The net impacts from 
composting are related to coal consumption through the use of electricity (75 %) and diesel 
consumption (25 %) in the composting facility. 
 
Figure 18: Characterised results to fossil resource depletion for the 21 scenarios and the current scenario, including 
contribution of each treatment option. 
Scenario 8 is the best option if reserve base resource depletion (Figure 19) is considered. AD and 
composting, both offer net savings as opposed to incineration. The largest savings (-8 kg Sb-eq) 
are related to substitution of P (75 %) and sylvite (due to K substitution) (25 %), when the two 
organic fertilizers are applied on land. In the case of digestate, these savings decrease by 7 % due 
to barite consumption from the diesel consumed by the tractor. Biogas utilization accounts for 
savings in AD option (maximum savings of - 4 kg Sb-eq in scenario 8), while electricity mix 
consumed by the composting plant is considered a burden (3.7 kg Sb-eq in scenario 15); both 
related to barite extraction from diesel. Besides, collection of the waste is also a burden in all the 
scenarios due to the consumption of oil and coal (2.25 kg Sb-eq in all the scenarios). Regarding 
the incineration option, the main impacts are related to FW collection and several minor factors 
like the use of process water and activated carbon in the incineration process (maximum of 1.1 
kg Sb-eq in scenario 1). 
-4,00E+08
-3,50E+08
-3,00E+08
-2,50E+08
-2,00E+08
-1,50E+08
-1,00E+08
-5,00E+07
0,00E+00
5,00E+07
1,00E+08
1,50E+08
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
C
[MJ]
Fossil r. depletion
Incineration
Composting
Anaerobic digestion
Total
40 
 
==PAGE:46==
 
 
Figure 19: Characterized results to reserve base resource depletion for the 21 scenarios and the current scenario, 
including contribution of each treatment option. 
Table 14 summarizes the best and worst performing scenarios (excluding the current scenario) 
for the 7 impact categories considered. Except for FE where the best performing scenarios are 
within the range 8 to 15, in the rest of the cases only scenario 1, 8 and 15 appear as the best and/or 
worst options; these scenarios consider the largest contribution of each of the three options (i.e. 
handling 80% of the FW); consequently, they mainly reflect the environmental performance of 
that major option. Scenario 15, which considers mainly composting of the FW, appears to be the 
worst option in three impact categories, while it is among the best scenarios in terms of FE. 
Scenario 1 is the preferred option in three cases but the worst in two. Finally, scenario 8 also 
performs the worst in two impacts, but it is the one offering the best environmental performance 
in more cases, four. 
Table 11: Summary of the best and worst scenario in each of the impact categories considered. 
Impact category 
Scenarios 
Best 
Worst 
Climate change 
8 
15 
Ecotoxicity 
1 
15 
Terrestrial eutrophication 
1 
8 
Freshwater eutrophication 
 8-15 
1 
Marine eutrophication 
1 
8 
Fossil resource depletion 
8 
15 
Reserve base depletion 
8 
1 
 
3.2.2. Sensitivity analysis 
Sensitivity analysis was performed for those parameters considered uncertain or more likely to be 
variable or to have a significant weight in the results. This is important in order to ensure the 
robustness of the model. The parameters analyzed and their degree of sensitivity are described 
here and detailed results are shown in Table 34 in Appendix E. 
Literature values for electricity consumption in the composting facility vary significantly. 65 kWh 
per tonne of waste (maximum value in the range reported by Boldrin et al. (2009)) was considered 
in the sensitivity analysis, which is 2.3 times lower than the value assumed in the model. This 
parameter can only be considered sensitive to RBRD:  a 10 % decrease lowers RBRD results by 
-10,00
-8,00
-6,00
-4,00
-2,00
0,00
2,00
4,00
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
C
[kg Sb-eq] 
Reserve base r. depletion
41 
 
==PAGE:47==
 
17 % for the composting option (Table 34 in Appendix E); the rest of the impacts are only reduced 
by less than 10 %. If the value from Boldrin et al. (2009) is used in the model, the impacts of the 
composting option are reduced by 37 % for CC, by 40 % for FRD and 94 % for RBRD. Although 
this change does not affect the ranking of the scenarios, it reduces significantly the contribution 
of the composting option in the impacts mentioned above. 
Sensitivity was tested for VFW and AFW ratio for several reasons: first, the difficulty of getting 
a representative measure of this parameter; second, the differences in the values reported in the 
literature; and third, the assumptions behind the values used in this study. In this case, VFW:AFW 
ratio in the food waste from MF households (this waste accounts for 58 % of the total FW) was 
increased by 10 % and the results show no significant effects in any of the impacts; in all cases 
the change of the total score did not exceed 5 %. 
As mentioned before, the type of soil where the fertilizer is applied can affect significantly the 
nutrient emissions to the environment; therefore, the effect of applying the digestate in both a 
heavy clay soil and a coarse sand soil were analyzed. Only the results for CC and FE impact 
categories were affected by the type of soil. In the case of CC the impact increased by 1.5 % for 
both soils, while impacts to FE are significantly more affected by the type of soil: applying the 
digestate on a heavy clay soil increases the impact of AD option by almost 20 %, while its use on 
a coarse sand soil shows 24 % lower impacts. 
It has been previously mentioned that the Danish recommended N substitution ratio is different 
from the ratio estimated by several studies. Results presented above consider the Danish standards 
but results were also obtained considering the experimental MFEs: 0.6 and 0.3 for digestate and 
compost, respectively. Assuming higher MFE values lowers the impacts of composting and AD 
options by around 5 % for CC and TE and by 1 % for ME. Ecotoxicity is decreased by 2.5 % in 
AD option. 
Sensitivity of transportation of the waste was analyzed; transportation distance was increased by 
10 % for both the truck carrying the compost and the container ship taking the fly ashes. Increasing 
the distance resulted in negligible effects in the results. 
Finally, sensitivity of electricity efficiencies of both incineration and biogas utilization were 
tested.  In the case of incineration, an increase by 10 % has a small effect in the results, affecting 
the most CC, TE and ME: it lowers the impacts by 5 %, 8 % and 8 %, respectively. The effect of 
increasing the electricity efficiency of the biogas utilization process is relatively higher: decreases 
CC by 11 %, FRD by 13 % and RBRD by 5 %. 
These results suggest that except for the type of soil, a change in the rest of the parameters would 
not have a significant effect on the results and therefore, the model developed can be considered 
robust. 
 
 
42 
 
==PAGE:48==
 
4. Discussion 
4.1. General discussion 
Food is the major input of nutrients to a city. Considering that 90 % of the nutrients humans ingest 
are excreted (Forkes, 2007), it is obvious that the major part of the N and P in a city ends up in 
the sewage sludge. In the case of Copenhagen, the sewage sludge is anaerobically digested in the 
two WWTP (Waste Water Treatment Plant) and the resulting sludge is incinerated. The Danish 
EPA estimated that there are 5,000 t of P in the sewage sludge of the whole country. Taking these 
nutrients back to soil is in the agenda of the Danish Government; in fact, a technology to recover 
both nutrients from sewage sludge has been in use in Aarhus since 2013 (Grundfos, 2016). The 
amount of nutrients embedded in organic waste is not as large as in the sewage sludge; however, 
the P present in the organic waste generated in Denmark (2,000 t P /y) would be enough to cover 
two thirds of the import of mineral P fertilizer in Zealand, where 22 % of the Danish agricultural 
land is located (Klinglmair, 2015). As shown in the MFA, every year 120 t of P and 900 t of N 
end up in the food waste generated in Copenhagen. The present study estimates that avoidable 
food waste accounts for 69 % of the total food waste generated in the capital city. Efforts should 
be done first towards food waste reduction; a decrease of 50 % in avoidable food waste would 
prevent 19 t of P and 82 t of N from entering the waste management system every year. However, 
there will always be part that needs to be treated. 
As mentioned before, according to the Waste Hierarchy AD and composting options are 
preferable to incineration for handling food waste, although a shift in the hierarchy is allowed 
provided that the overall environmental performance is proved to be better in another way. The 
LCA results do not lead us directly to the best scenario or technology: some scenarios perform 
better than others in some categories, and the opposite, a quantitative ranking of the scenarios 
would normally require normalization of the results. However, as previously mentioned in 
Chapter 2, this step was avoided since it induces some bias in the results. 
In general all the impacts analyzed are related to two issues: energy and the use on land of organic 
fertilizers. Energy generated through AD and incineration results in the largest savings to CC and 
FRD. In both cases AD option performs better than incineration: the net energy generated through 
incineration of FW is larger than the energy generated through biogas combustion; however, co-
generation efficiencies are determinant in this case since the impacts (or savings in this case) are 
allocated based on the exergy, that is, the “quality” of the energy rather than e.g. the quantity 
(total MJ) is considered; thus, more credits are given to substitution of electricity than to 
substitution of DH. The efficiencies used in this model are based on Danish data. Besides, the 
sensitivity analysis shows that the two electric efficiencies, which are critical for the results, are 
not very sensitive parameters. Thus, these results can be considered representative.  
Shifting from the present situation, where 82 % of the FW is incinerated, to a scenario with greater 
anaerobic digestion of food waste could have some consequences not covered in the model. 
Copenhagen’s district heating system is one of the largest and most successful systems, providing 
98 % of the heat consumed in the city (Ramboll Group, 2016). Deriving food waste from 
incineration to anaerobic digestion would therefore have an effect on the amount of heat supplied 
by the incinerator if food waste is not substituted by other fuel. In addition, the incineration plant 
that is currently being built should also be considered, as it is expected to have larger capacity 
and create a lock-in. However, a widely discussed issue is the low efficiency incineration of FW 
has compared to other wastes or fuels, due to its high moisture content (around 70 %) and 
relatively low LHV, which makes it an inappropriate fuel. In any case, the obtained results, which 
43 
 
==PAGE:49==
 
point at incineration and AD as the preferred option in terms of CC and FRD, are very likely to 
change in the future. Denmark aims at being fossil fuel independent by 2050 and hence, the use 
of fossil-based energy is going to decrease. In this way, marginal energy is likely to come from 
other sources than coal, for instance biomass. A first and rough example of this is provided in 
Figure 20, which compares this future scenario to current practice in terms of climate change. 
According to the results, both incineration and AD would result in net impacts to CC and FRD 
and the impacts of AD would be almost 4 times higher due to CH4 and N2O emissions during the 
biogas utilization process. All this suggests that obtaining energy from food waste will not 
probably have as many credits as it has now, what makes the energy “argument” weaker. 
 
The other key factor is the recycling of nutrients in the form of organic fertilizer. This only applies 
to AD and composting, since recycling of nutrients from incineration ashes was not considered 
in the present study. In fact, current research is mainly focused on the recovery of nutrients from 
sewage sludge ashes and little is reported about recovery from incineration ashes. As some studies 
state, incineration ashes cannot be directly used as fertilizer replacement due to the high heavy 
metals and salts content (Lam et al., 2010).  
As seen in the MFA, much higher recycling rate of P can be achieved compared to N: up to 75 % 
of the P in scenarios with 80 % share of biological treatments, compared to the almost 20 % of N. 
This is due to the larger emissions of N compared to P during the application on land of the 
organic fertilizers. These difference in the amounts emitted results in net impacts in the case of 
N-related emissions and in savings in the case of P. The LCA accounts for the emissions from 
both the application on land of the organic fertilizers and the substitution of commercial fertilizers. 
In the case of N, the gaseous emissions in the form of NH3 contributing to TE, and the leaching 
and run off of nitrate contributing to ME, are considered a burden for two reasons: first, because 
mineral fertilizers are considered to have significantly lower N emissions than compost and 
digestate (the latter shows the largest emissions) and thus, when substituting synthetic fertilizers 
these greater emissions result in a net impact since the avoided emissions are lower. The second 
reason is that the MFE estimated for compost and digestate is 20 and 40 % respectively, which 
lowers even more the saved emissions. On the other hand, in the case of P, mineral fertilizers and 
organic fertilizers are considered to have the same phosphate emissions when applied on land. 
With this, the savings in the emissions related to the production of commercial fertilizers have a 
different role in both nutrients: the savings to FE from avoiding P fertilizer production result in 
-3,50E+07
-3,00E+07
-2,50E+07
-2,00E+07
-1,50E+07
-1,00E+07
-5,00E+06
0,00E+00
5,00E+06
1,00E+07
Coal
Biomass
[kg CO2-eq]
CC
AD
Composting
Incineration
Total
Figure 20: Characterized impact results to climate change of scenario 5 considering coal
and biomass as marginal substitution. 
44 
 
==PAGE:50==
 
an overall saving; and this saving is relatively higher than the contribution of the emissions from 
the use on land (since they are very low). However, the savings to ME from avoiding N fertilizer 
production are almost negligible compared to the impacts of the emissions from the use on land. 
As seen in the results, the MFE has an effect in the results. The model is based on Danish 
regulation, where a maximum N amount is defined. This substitution ratio is a direct indicator of 
the real savings in mineral fertilizer, since the amounts of the latter to be applied discount this 
MFE if it is combined with organic fertilizer. However, as mentioned in Chapter 2, higher 
substitution ratios have been measured for N in Denmark than those reported by regulation. This 
underestimation can lead to more N losses since excessive N in plant-available form would be 
applied to soil. 
In addition to N and P emissions contributing to TE, ME and FE, the use on land of organic 
fertilizers has also other impacts related. N2O and CH4 emissions from organic fertilizers 
contribute to climate change. The GHG emissions from compost are higher than from digestate, 
but as spreading digestate is more energy-demanding than applying compost, the final impact to 
climate change is similar for both. Toxicity is another related issue. As seen from the results, just 
food waste contributes to ecotoxicity. Heavy metals in “pure” food waste can come from food 
additives, but normally the presence of these substances is low. However, impurities present in 
food waste can largely contribute to ecotoxicity problems and some limiting standards are applied 
to avoid them. In the study, impurities were disregarded from the flow but in every source 
separating scheme, the sorting efficiencies never reach 100 %, what means that impurities will 
always exist and therefore, ecotoxicity problems can arise from the use of compost and digestate 
as fertilizers. Pretreatment of the biowaste fraction before it undergoes biological treatment is 
hence essential to remove impurities. However, in this type of pretreatment only the largest 
impurities are removed what implies that public awareness to maximize sorting efficiencies at the 
source is key. Apart from missorting problems, shifting to source-separation of biowaste would 
imply changes in the collection scheme, effort from the citizens, campaigns to increase awareness 
or provide appropriate bags, etc. The present study disregards all this implications that apply to 
both AD and composting options.  
Considering all this, it seems that in terms of emissions from reactive N, GHG and heavy metals, 
mineral fertilizers are preferred to organic fertilizers. The only main difference between compost 
and digestate is the higher N emissions from the latter, what can suggest that compost is preferred 
to digestate; however, more N is recycled if digestate is applied because N is not degraded during 
the anaerobic digestion as opposed to composting. Considering this, it could be interesting to 
analyse the performance of a combined anaerobic-aerobic treatment to handle food waste. This 
type of process is already applied in Denmark to treat source-separated organic waste and it is 
called AIKAN technology: it is based on a dry AD and has biogas and compost as outputs (Solum, 
2016). 
On the other hand, substitution of synthetic fertilizers has also benefits. The problem of phosphate 
rock reserves depletion has already been introduced in Chapter 1. As mentioned there and as 
reflected in the LCA results, avoiding phosphate rock extraction is a crucial saving. Nevertheless, 
it is likely that the results from the LCA underestimate this impact: the model considers that 1 kg 
of P in organic fertilizer avoids 1 kg of P extracted from the ground. This assumption does not 
consider P losses during the manufacturing of commercial P fertilizer, for example in the mining 
stage. In any case, until now little attention has been paid to depletion of phosphate reserves 
compared to, for instance, the depletion of fossil fuels; and while alternatives exist to the latter, P 
cannot be replaced. Regarding N, avoiding N fertilizer production offers savings to climate 
change due to the energy saved. The model considers that 6.3 kg of CO2 are emitted per kg of N 
45 
 
==PAGE:51==
 
produced; 4 and 9.5 times more than P and K fertilizer production. Besides, application of organic 
fertilizers has other benefits that are not considered in the model. They are mainly related to the 
improved soil quality in the long term, due to the increased in organic carbon and micronutrients 
in the soil and because they provide structure to the soil. 
A clear conclusion from all this is that taking the nutrients back to the soil is crucial considering 
the depletion of phosphate rock reserves and its irreplaceability. From this point on, the 
alternatives to do so are various: composting and anaerobic digestion are already existing options 
that allow closing the nutrients loop. Their major drawback is however, the reactive nutrient 
emissions, mainly from N, contributing to eutrophication and climate change. Research on how 
to lower these impacts and regulation and control on fertilization regime to avoid malpractices 
and maximize the nutrients reaching the crops would be needed. Regarding incineration, research 
on how to recover the nutrients from the ashes would certainly be needed, considering that 
incineration will probably still be a part of the Danish scenery, although burning food waste would 
steadily lose its credits. 
Due to the system boundaries considered in the present study, only the impacts related to the 
management of the food waste can be estimated. In this way, all the upstream impacts related to 
food waste cannot be accounted for. All these impacts would cover/involve the (in)efficiency of 
the current food supply chain and would consider (avoidable) food waste as a loss of all the 
nutrients, giving credits for the nutrients that get back to crops, i.e. that are recycled. However, 
although the LCA developed fails to cover this, the MFA helps to assess the recyclability. 
4.2. Limitations of the model 
First of all, the contribution of the modelling of the use on land to both the LCA and MFA models 
should be highlighted. The data used in the model are based on Danish average estimates for a 
certain type of soil. In addition to the soil type, these numbers are also based on data on weather, 
type of crops, etc. Besides, other more specific factors like the geography of the land where the 
fertilizers are applied are also determinant for the nutrient flows. The sensitivity analysis already 
shows that the results greatly depend on the type of soil even without considering the rest of the 
parameters related. In the present study, the use on land was modelled for a generic area in 
Denmark, therefore the data used are valid for that, but involve great uncertainty; thus, the results 
should be always look at keeping this in mind. 
Regarding the LCA model, most of the parameter were validated with literature data, with good 
spatial and temporal resolution, as shown in Chapter 2. In addition, the results from the sensitivity 
analysis suggest that in general the developed model is robust regarding most of the parameters. 
However, a number of simplifications were made in the model: among others, the presence of 
impurities and implications of a source separation-scheme were disregarded. On top of this, 
uncertainty and assumptions within the modelling by EASETECH software, as well as 
uncertainties in the LCIA method used should also be considered. 
The results on food waste amounts are particularly uncertain: first, because measuring unit 
generation rates is a difficult task that already implies a degree of uncertainty; and second, because 
some of the data were scaled down to city-level, leading to higher uncertainty. Regarding the 
LCA, changes in the amount of waste handled by the system would only change the overall impact 
of the scenarios affecting all the scenarios in the same way, therefore it would not have an effect 
on the ranking of the scenarios in any of the impact categories analyzed. As for the MFA, although 
the recycling rates of each scenario would remain constant, the provided numbers on actual N and 
P embedded in the food waste would be different. However, as mentioned before in Chapter 3, 
46 
 
==PAGE:52==
 
since the estimated numbers are in line with others from similar studies, the results can be 
considered realistic. 
4.3. Future work 
The results from the LCA model were only based on one LCIA methodology; applying other 
different methodologies, like ReCipe or Impact 2010, would be interesting in order to validate the 
results. Besides, land use and water use are also considered critical in the context of this study; 
therefore, analyzing the impacts to these categories could also result in relevant conclusions.  
The model presented here is based on assumptions and simplifications; a more complete 
modelling of the system, focusing primarily on the use on land of the fertilizers could certainly 
provide more realistic results. In the same way, considering the uncertainty propagation 
throughout the model would also help to support the results. 
The main objective of this study was to find the most sustainable solution to handle food waste 
and the nutrients present in it but this was not possible with the current modelling. Thus, future 
lines of this study can involve assessment of the considered scenarios through a multi criteria 
analysis. This would allow taking into account all the options at the same time. 
 
 
47 
 
==PAGE:53==
 
5. Conclusions 
The main objective of this study was to find the most sustainable balance for managing the 
nutrients in the food waste generated in Copenhagen, considering three waste management 
technologies: incineration, anaerobic digestion and composting. The results from the LCA and 
the MFA complemented each other, in the sense that both the impacts associated to the 
management and the recyclability of the nutrients could be assessed; in this way, a conclusion of 
the present study is that this novel combination of LCA and MFA is successful.  
It was estimated that yearly 900 tons of N and 120 tons of P in the food waste enter the waste 
management system of Copenhagen. Above 90 % of these amounts end up in the incineration 
ashes and are not recovered. Increasing the share of biological treatment of food waste would 
increase recycling of P, but would also significantly increment N emissions, which contribute to 
climate change and terrestrial and marine eutrophication. The most sustainable balance could not 
be found with the characterized results from the LCA. Savings from marginal energy substitution 
and the modelling of the use on land of the nutrients were found to be key in the results.  
Another conclusion to be highlighted is the necessity of closing the nutrient loops. As at the 
moment a preferred technology does not exist, research should focus on minimizing nutrient 
losses from organic fertilizer application and on recovering the nutrients from the incineration 
ashes. 
 
 
48 
 
==PAGE:54==
 
6. Acknowledgements  
First of all, I would like to thank my supervisors Benjamin Goldstein, Pradip Kalbar and Morten 
Ryberg for their continuous support and guidance during the last five months. I would also like 
to show my gratitude to Anders Damgaard for giving me the chance to participate in the 
EASETECH course and to Tina Winberg for answering all my questions. Thank also my family 
and friends in Denmark and Bilbao who have always supported me. Finally, special thanks to 
Unai for being so patient during these months and for all his help and love. 
 
 
49 
 
==PAGE:55==
 
7 References 
 
Abdulkadir, A., Leffelaar, P., Agbenin, J. and Giller, K. (2013). Nutrient flows and balances in 
urban and peri-urban agroecosystems of Kano, Nigeria. Nutrient Cycling in Agroecosystems, 
95(2), pp.231-254. 
 
Adhikari, B., Barrington, S. and Martinez, J. (2006). Predicted growth of world urban food waste 
and methane production. Waste Management & Research, 24(5), pp.421-433. 
 
Astrup, T. (2008). Management of APC residues from W-t-E plants. ISWA-WG Thermal 
Treatment of Waste. Copenhagen. 
 
Baccini, P. and Brunner, P. (2012). Metabolism of the anthroposphere. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT 
Press. 
 
Banks, C., Chesshire, M., Heaven, S. and Arnold, R. (2011). Anaerobic digestion of source-
segregated domestic food waste: Performance assessment by mass and energy balance. 
Bioresource Technology, 102(2), pp.612-620. 
 
Belevi, H. and Moench, H. (2000). Factors Determining the Element Behavior in Municipal Solid 
Waste Incinerators. 1. Field Studies. Environmental Science & Technology, 34(12), pp.2501-
2506. 
 
Bernstad, A. and la Cour Jansen, J. (2011). A life cycle approach to the management of household 
food waste – A Swedish full-scale case study. Waste Management, 31(8), pp.1879-1896. 
 
Bernstad, A. and la Cour Jansen, J. (2012). Separate collection of household food waste for 
anaerobic degradation – Comparison of different techniques from a systems perspective. 
Waste Management, 32(5), pp.806-815. 
 
Bernstad, A. and la Cour Jansen, J. (2012b). Review of comparative LCAs of food waste 
management systems – Current status and potential improvements. Waste Management, 
32(12), pp.2439-2455. 
 
Bernstad Saraiva Schott, A., Wenzel, H. and la Cour Jansen, J. (2016). Identification of decisive 
factors for greenhouse gas emissions in comparative life cycle assessments of food waste 
management – an analytical review. Journal of Cleaner Production, 119, pp.13-24. 
 
Boldrin, A., Andersen, J., Moller, J., Christensen, T. and Favoino, E. (2009). Composting and 
compost utilization: accounting of greenhouse gases and global warming contributions. Waste 
Management & Research, 27(8), pp.800-812. 
 
Boldrin, A., Hartling, K., Laugen, M. and Christensen, T. (2010). Environmental inventory 
modelling of the use of compost and peat in growth media preparation. Resources, 
Conservation and Recycling, 54(12), pp.1250-1260. 
 
50 
 
==PAGE:56==
 
Börjesson, P. and Berglund, M. (2006). Environmental systems analysis of biogas systems—Part 
I: Fuel-cycle emissions. Biomass and Bioenergy, 30(5), pp.469-485. 
 
Borlaug, N. 1970. The Green Revolution: Peace and Humanity. A speech on the occasion of the 
awarding of the 1970 Nobel Peace Prize in Oslo, Norway, December 11 
 
Bouwman, A., Van der Hoek, K., Eickhout, B. and Soenario, I. (2005). Exploring changes in 
world ruminant production systems. Agricultural Systems, 84(2), pp.121-153. 
 
Browne, J., Allen, E. and Murphy, J. (2013). Evaluation of the biomethane potential from multiple 
waste streams for a proposed community scale anaerobic digester. Environmental Technology, 
34(13-14), pp.2027-2038. 
 
Bundgaard, S., Carlsbæk, M., Juul, U. & Jørgensen, E. (1993) Jordbrugsmæssigværdi af 
produkter fra organisk dagrenovation Agricultural value of products form organic household 
waste). Arbejdsrapport nr. 64, The Danish Environmental Protection gency, Copenhagen, 
Denmark. 
 
Cewep.eu. (n.d.). CEWEP | Confederation of European Waste-to-Energy Plants | Homepage. 
[online] Available at: http://www.cewep.eu/ [Accessed 28 May 2016]. 
Chatzimpiros, P. and Barles, S. (2013). Nitrogen food-print: N use related to meat and dairy 
consumption in France. Biogeosciences, 10(1), pp.471-481. 
 
Christensen, T. (2011). Solid waste technology & management. Chichester, West Sussex, U.K.: 
Wiley. 
 
City of Copenhagen (2014). Resource and waste management plan 2018. City of Copenhagen, 
Technical and Environmental Administration, Copenhagen. 
 
Cordell, D., Drangert, J. and White, S. (2009). The story of phosphorus: global food security and 
food for thought. Global Environmental Change, 19, pp. 292-305. 
 
Cordell, D., Neset, T., White, S. And Drangert, J.O. (2009b). Preferred future phosphorus 
scenarios: A framework for meeting long-term phosphorus needs for global food demand. 
International Conference on Nutrient Recovery from Wastewater Streams. IWA, London, UK. 
 
Cordell, D. (2010). The story of phosphorus: sustainability implications of global phosphorus 
scarcity for food security. Doctoral thesis. Collaborative PhD between the Institute for 
Sustainable Futures, University of Technology, Sydney (UTS) & Department of Thematic 
Studies–Water and Environmental, Linköping University, Sweden. No.509. Linköping 
University Press, Linköping. 
 
Danish Government (2013). Denmark without waste. Online publication available at danmark-
uden-affald.dk  
 
Det Runde Bord (2016). Det Runde Bord formidler gratis overskudsmad via innovative løsninger 
(The Round Table intermediary free surplus food through innovative solutions) [online] 
Available at: http://www.detrundebord.dk/da/drb/ [Accessed 24 Feb. 2016]. 
51 
 
==PAGE:57==
 
 
Directive 1999/31/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 April 1999 on the 
landfill of waste.1999 Official Journal of the European Union 182. 
 
Directive 2008/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 November 2008 on 
waste and repealing certain Directives. 2008 Official Journal of the European Union 312. 
 
Edjabou, V. M. E., Petersen, C., Scheutz, C., & Astrup, T. F. (2015). Seasonal variation of 
household food waste in Denmark. Paper presented at International Conference on Solid 
Waste 2015 (ICSWHK2015), Hong Kong. 
 
EFMA (2000). Understanding phosphorus and its use in agriculture. European Fertiliser 
Manufacturer’s Association (EFMA), Brussels, Belgium. 
 
Eisler, M., Lee, M., Tarlton, J., Martin, G., Beddington, J., Dungait, J., Greathead, H., Liu, J., 
Mathew, S., Miller, H., Misselbrook, T., Murray, P., Vinod, V., Van Saun, R. and Winter, M. 
(2014). Agriculture: Steps to sustainable livestock. Nature, 507(7490), pp.32-34. 
 
EPA, Environmental Protection Agency (n.d.). Strategy for phosphorus recovery in Denmark. 
Miljostyrelsen [online]. Available at: 
http://www.phosphorusplatform.eu/images/Conference/ESPC2-materials/Bagge%20-
%20Denmark%20strategy%20for%20phosphorus.pdf 
 
Eriksson, O., Carlsson Reich, M., Frostell, B., Björklund, A., Assefa, G., Sundqvist, J.-O., 
Granath, J., Baky, A. and Thyselius, L. (2005). Municipal solid waste management from a 
systems perspective. Journal of Cleaner Production, 13, pp.241-252. 
 
EUI, Economist Intelligence Unit (2012). The Green City Index. Siemens AG. Munich, Germany. 
 
FAO (1981). Food loss prevention in perishable crops. FAO Agricultural Service Bulletin, no. 43, 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), Rome. 
 
FAO (2009). Foot Insecurity in the World. Economic Crises – Impacts and Lessons Learned. 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), Rome. 
 
FAO (2011). Global food losses and food waste – Extent, causes and prevention. Food and 
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), Rome. 
 
FAO (2015). World Fertilizer Trends and Outlook to 2018. Food and Agriculture Organization 
of the United Nations (FAO), Rome. 
 
FAO (2015b). Food and Agriculture Organization Statistics, FAOSTAT [online] Available at: 
http://faostat.fao.org [Accessed 23 May 2016] 
 
FAO, IFAD and WFP. 2015. The State of Food Insecurity in the World 2015. Meeting the 2015 
international hunger targets: taking stock of uneven progress. Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations (FAO), Rome. 
52 
 
==PAGE:58==
 
 
Færge, J., Magid, J. and Penning de Vries, F. (2001). Urban nutrient balance for Bangkok. 
Ecological Modelling, 139(1), pp.63-74. 
 
Frederiksberg kommune (2014). Affalds- og ressourceplan 2014-2018. Frederiksberg kommune, 
Frederiksberg, Denmark. 
 
Forkes, J. (2007). Nitrogen balance for the urban food metabolism of Toronto, Canada. Resources, 
Conservation and Recycling, 52(1), pp.74-94. 
 
Fruergaard, T. and Astrup, T. (2011). Optimal utilization of waste-to-energy in an LCA 
perspective. Waste Management, 31(3), pp.572-582. 
 
Galloway, J. N., Aber, J. D.,  Erisman, J. W., Seitzinger, S. P., Howarth, R. W., Cowling, E. B., 
and Cosby, B. J. (2003). The Nitrogen Cascade. BioScience, 53 (4), pp. 341-356. 
 
Goldstein, B., Birkved, M., Quitzau, M. and Hauschild, M. (2013). Quantification of urban 
metabolism through coupling with the life cycle assessment framework: concept development 
and case study. Environmental Research Letters., 8(3), p.035-024. 
 
Goldstein, B., Birkved, M., Fernández, J. and Hauschild, M. (2016). Surveying the Environmental 
Footprint of Urban Food Consumption. Journal of Industrial Ecology, p.n/a-n/a. 
 
Götze, R., Boldrin, A., Scheutz, C. and Astrup, T. (2016). Physico-chemical characterisation of 
material fractions in household waste: Overview of data in literature. Waste Management, 49, 
pp.3-14. 
Götze, R. (2016). Composition of waste materials and recyclables. PhD Thesis. Technical 
University of Denmark, Department of Environmental Engineering. 
 
Graves, R. E. (2000). Composting. Part 637: Environmental Engineering National Engineering 
Handbook. Natural Resources Conservation Service, United States Department of Agriculture 
(USDA), Washington, D.C. 
 
Greve, M.H., Greve, M.B., Bøcker, P.K., Balstrøm, T., and Madsen, H.B., 2006. Generation of a 
raster based nationwide topsoil property map of Denmark combining choropleth maps and 
point information. Conference contribution to GeoEny 2006, 6th International conference on 
Geostatistics for Environmental Applications, Rhodos, Greece. 
 
Grundfos (2016). New hope for recycling phosphorus from wastewater sludge. Grundfos. [online] 
Available 
at: 
http://www.grundfos.com/about-us/news-and-press/news/new-hope-for-
recycling-phosphorus-from-wastewater-sludge.html [Accessed 12 Feb. 2016]. 
 
Habib, K., Schmidt, J. and Christensen, P. (2013). A historical perspective of Global Warming 
Potential from Municipal Solid Waste Management. Waste Management, 33(9), pp.1926-
1933. 
 
53 
 
==PAGE:59==
 
Hansen, T. (2006). Life cycle modelling of environmental impacts of application of processed 
organic municipal solid waste on agricultural land (Easewaste). Waste Management & 
Research, 24(2), pp.153-166. 
 
Hansen, T., Cour Jansen, J., Spliid, H., Davidsson, Å. and Christensen, T. (2007). Composition 
of source-sorted municipal organic waste collected in Danish cities. Waste Management, 
27(4), pp.510-518. 
 
Haug, R.T., 1993. The Principal Handbook of Compost Engineering. Lewis Publishers, Boca 
Raton, FL, USA 
 
Heffer, P., M., Prud’homme, M., Muirheid, B. and Isherwood, K. F. (2006). Phosphorus 
Fertilization Issues and Outlook. Proceedings no 586, International Fertilizer Society, York 
UK, pp. 32. 
 
Hein, L. and Leemans, R. (2012). The Impact of First-Generation Biofuels on the Depletion of 
the Global Phosphorus Reserve. AMBIO, 41(4), pp.341-349. 
 
Hellweg, S. and Mila i Canals, L. (2014). Emerging approaches, challenges and opportunities in 
life cycle assessment. Science, 344(6188), pp.1109-1113. 
 
Howarth R. W., Boyer E., Pabich W., Galloway J.N. (2002). Nitrogen use in the United States 
from 1961–2000 and potential future trends. Ambio 31: 88–96. 
 
IFA, International Fertilizer Industry Association (2016). World Fertlizer Consumption. 
IFADATA [online] Available at: http://ifadata.fertilize r.org/ucSearch.aspx [Accessed 22 May 
2016]. 
ILCD (2010). International Reference Life Cycle Data System (ILCD) Handbook. Luxembourg: 
Publications Office. 
 
ISO, International Organization for Standardization, The New International Standards for Life 
Cycle Assessment: ISO 14040. ISO, Geneva, Switzerland, 2006).  
 
Iqbal, M.K., Shafiq, T., Ahmed, K., 2010. Characterization of bulking agents and its effects on 
physical properties of compost. Bioresour. Technol. 101 (6), 1913– 1919. 
 
Jasinski, S. M. (2011). Phosphate Rock, Mineral Commodity Summaries 2011. U.S. Geological 
Survey 
Jones, D., Cross, P., Withers, P., DeLuca, T., Robinson, D., Quilliam, R., Harris, I., Chadwick, 
D. and Edwards-Jones, G. (2013). Nutrient stripping: the global disparity between food 
security and soil nutrient stocks. Journal of Applied Ecology, 50(4), pp.851-862. 
 
Jørgensen, P. (2009). Biogas - green energy. Plan energy and Researcher for a Day- Faculty of 
Agricultural 
Sciences, 
Aarhus 
University, 
2nd 
edition, 
[online] 
Available 
at: 
http://www.lemvigbiogas.com/ 
 
Kalmykova, Y., Harder, R., Borgestedt, H. and Svanäng, I. (2012). Pathways and Management 
of Phosphorus in Urban Areas. Journal of Industrial Ecology, 16(6), pp.928-939. 
54 
 
==PAGE:60==
 
Kearney, J. (2010). Food consumption trends and drivers. Philosophical Transactions of the 
Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 365(1554), pp.2793-2807. 
 
Kennedy, C., Cuddihy, J. and Engel-Yan, J. (2007). The Changing Metabolism of Cities. Journal 
of Industrial Ecology, 11(2), pp.43-59. 
 
Khoo, H., Lim, T. and Tan, R. (2010). Food waste conversion options in Singapore: 
Environmental impacts based on an LCA perspective. Science of The Total Environment, 
408(6), pp.1367-1373. 
 
Kirkeby, J. (2006). Evaluation of environmental impacts from municipal solid waste management 
in the municipality of Aarhus, Denmark (EASEWASTE). Waste Management & Research, 
24(1), pp.16-26. 
 
Klinglmair, M., Lemming, C., Jensen, L., Rechberger, H., Astrup, T. and Scheutz, C. (2015). 
Phosphorus in Denmark: National and regional anthropogenic flows. Resources, Conservation 
and Recycling, 105, pp.311-324. 
 
Komilis, D. and Ham, R. (2004). Life-Cycle Inventory of Municipal Solid Waste and Yard Waste 
Windrow Composting in the United States. J. Environ. Eng., 130(11), pp.1390-1400. 
Københavns Kommune. (2016). Københavns Kommune. [online] Available at: http://www.kk.dk/ 
[Accessed 3 Mar. 2016]. 
 
Kroiss, H., Rechberger, H. and Egle, L. (2011). Phosphorus in Water Quality and Waste 
Mangement – Volume II, Mr. Sunil Kumar (Ed.). 
 Kumar, M., Ou, Y. and Lin, J. (2010). Co-composting of green waste and food waste at low C/N 
ratio. Waste Management, 30(4), pp.602-609. 
 
Kummu, M., de Moel, H., Porkka, M., Siebert, S., Varis, O. and Ward, P. (2012). Lost food, 
wasted resources: Global food supply chain losses and their impacts on freshwater, cropland, 
and fertiliser use. Science of The Total Environment, 438, pp.477-489. 
 
Lam, C., Ip, A., Barford, J. and McKay, G. (2010). Use of Incineration MSW Ash: A Review. 
Sustainability, 2(7), pp.1943-1968. 
 
Landbrug & Fødevarer (2015) Madspild i Danmark (Food waste in Denmark). Danish 
Agriculture and Food Council, Denmark. 
 
Laurent, A., Clavreul, J., Bernstad, A., Bakas, I., Niero, M., Gentil, E., Christensen, T. and 
Hauschild, M. (2014). Review of LCA studies of solid waste management systems – Part II: 
Methodological guidance for a better practice. Waste Management, 34(3), pp.589-606. 
 
Lee, S., Choi, K., Osako, M. and Dong, J. (2007). Evaluation of environmental burdens caused 
by changes of food waste management systems in Seoul, Korea. Science of The Total 
Environment, 387(1-3), pp.42-53. 
 
55 
 
==PAGE:61==
 
Manfredi, S., Tonini, D. and Christensen, T. (2011). Environmental assessment of different 
management options for individual waste fractions by means of life-cycle assessment 
modelling. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 55(11), pp.995-1004. 
 
Miljøstyrelsen (The Danish Environmental Protection Agengy) (2012). Kortlægning af 
dagrenovation i enfamilieboliger (Mapping of municipal waste in single-family households). 
Miljøprojekt nr. 1414 The Danish Environmental Protection Agency, Denmark. 
 
Miljøstyrelsen (The Danish Environmental Protection Agengy) (2014) Kortlægning 
af dagrenovation i Danmark med fokus på etageboliger og madspild (mapping 
of municipal waste in Denmark with a focus on multi-family households and food waste). 
Miljøprojekt nr. 1414 The Danish Environmental Protection Agency, Denmark. 
 
Miljøstyrelsen (The Danish Environmental Protection Agengy) (2014b) Kortlægning af 
madaffald i servicesektoren (Mapping of food waste in the service sector). Miljøprojekt nr. 
1414 The Danish Environmental Protection Agency, Denmark. 
 
Mitchell, S., Kennedy, N., Ma, J., Yorgey, G., Kruger, C., Ullman, J. and Frear, C. (2015). 
Anaerobic digestion effluents and processes. Washington State University Extension 
Publication FS171E. ext.wsu.edu. 
 
Mogensen L., Hermansen J. and Knudsen M.T. (2011) Madspild i fødevareproduktionen – fra 
primærproduktion til detailed (ood waste in food production - from primary production to the 
retail). DCA - Nationalt Center for Fødevarer og Jordbrug. 
 
Naroznova, I., Møller, J. and Scheutz, C. (2016). Characterisation of the biochemical methane 
potential (BMP) of individual material fractions in Danish source-separated organic household 
waste. Waste Management, 50, pp.39-48. 
 
Neset, T. and Cordell, D. (2011). Global phosphorus scarcity: identifying synergies for a 
sustainable future. Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture, 92(1), pp.2-6. 
 
Nielsen, L.K. (1994) Dyrkningsforsøg med kompost 1989–1993 (Growth Experiments with 
compost 1989–1993). Miljøprojekt nr. 258, The Danish Environmental Protection Agency, 
Denmark 
 
Nielsen, O. (2016). Special consultant in Spatial and Environmental department in Frederiksberg 
municipality, personal communication. 
 
Olson, R. A. (1987). The Use of Fertilizers and Soil Amendments. Land Transformation and 
Agriculture. Edited by M. G. Wolman and F. G. A. Fournier, John Wiley & Sons Ltd., 
Chichester and New York. 
 
Papargyropoulou, E., Lozano, R., K. Steinberger, J., Wright, N. and Ujang, Z. (2014). The food 
waste hierarchy as a framework for the management of food surplus and food waste. Journal 
of Cleaner Production, 76, pp.106-115. 
56 
 
==PAGE:62==
 
Parfitt, J., Barthel, M. and Macnaughton, S. (2010). Food waste within food supply chains: 
quantification and potential for change to 2050. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society B: Biological Sciences, 365(1554), pp.3065-3081. 
 
Pincetl, S., Bunje, P. and Holmes, T. (2012). An expanded urban metabolism method: Toward a 
systems approach for assessing urban energy processes and causes. Landscape and Urban 
Planning, 107(3), pp.193-202. 
 
Plantedirektoratet (2003): Vejledning og skemaer 2003/2004 (Intructions and Tables 2003/2004). 
Ministeriet for Fødevarer, Landbrug og Fiskeri, Denmark. 
 
Pullin, A. S. (2002). Conservation biology. Cambridge University Press. 
Ramboll Group (2016). District heating system in the Copenhagen Region. [online] Available at: 
http://www.ramboll.com/projects/group/district-heating-system-in-the-copenhagen-region 
[Accessed 12 May. 2016]. 
 
Reijnders, L. (2014). Phosphorus resources, their depletion and conservation, a review. 
Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 93, pp.32-49. 
 
REnescience (2016). REnescience [online] Available at: http://www.renescience.com/ [Accessed 
22 Feb. 2016]. 
 
Riber, C., Petersen, C. and Christensen, T. (2009). Chemical composition of material fractions in 
Danish household waste. Waste Management, 29(4), pp.1251-1257. 
 
Rigby, H. and Smith, S. (2013). Nitrogen availability and indirect measurements of greenhouse 
gas emissions from aerobic and anaerobic biowaste digestates applied to agricultural soils. 
Waste Management, 33(12), pp.2641-2652. 
 
Römer, W.(2009). Concepts for a more efficient use of phosphorus based on experimental 
observations (Ansätze für eine effizientere Nutzung des Phosphors auf der Basis 
experimenteller Befunde). Berichte über Landwirtschaft 2009 Vol. 87 No. 1 pp. 5-30 
 
Sheets, J., Yang, L., Ge, X., Wang, Z. and Li, Y. (2015). Beyond land application: Emerging 
technologies for the treatment and reuse of anaerobically digested agricultural and food waste. 
Waste Management, 44, pp.94-115. 
 
Slagstad, H. and Brattebø, H. (2013). Influence of assumptions about household waste 
composition in waste management LCAs. Waste Management, 33(1), pp.212-219. 
Smil, V. (1999). Nitrogen in crop production: An account of global flows. Global Biogeochem. 
Cycles, 13(2), pp.647-662. 
 
Smil, V. (2001). Enriching the earth. Fritz Haber, Carl Bosch, and the Transformation of World 
Food Production. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
 
Smil, V. (2000). Phosphorus in the Environment: Natural Flows and Human Interferences. Annual 
Review of Energy and the Environment, 25(1), pp.53-88. 
 
57 
 
==PAGE:63==
 
Smil, V. (2002). Nitrogen and Food Production: Proteins for Human Diets. AMBIO: A Journal of 
the Human Environment, 31(2), p.126. 
 
Smil, V. (2007). Policy for Improved Efficiency in the Food Chain, SIWI Seminar; Water for 
Food, Bio-fuels or Ecosystems? In World water Week 2007, August 12th-18th 2007 Stockholm. 
 
Smil, V. and Cutler J. C. (2007). Global material cycles. Encyclopedia of Earth. Washington, 
D.C.: Environmental Information Coalition, National Council for Science and the 
Environment. 
 
Smit, A.L., Bindraban, P.S., Schröder, J.J., Conijn, J.G. and van der Meer, H.G. (2009). 
Phosphorus in Agriculture: global resources, trends and developments. Plant Research 
International B.V., Wageningen. 
 
Solum (2016). Home - Solum Gruppen. [online] Available at: http://www.solum.com/ [Accessed 
15 Feb. 2016]. 
 
Statistics Denmark (2016). Statistics Denmark [online] Available at: https://www.dst.dk/en 
[Accessed 7 Mar. 2016]. 
 
Stop 
spild 
af 
mad 
(2016). 
Stop 
Wasting 
Food 
[online] 
Available 
at: 
http://www.stopspildafmad.dk/inenglish.html [Accessed 24 Feb. 2016]. 
 
Stuart, T. (2009). Waste, uncovering the global food scandal. London, UK: Penguin. 
 
Stutter, M. (2015). The composition, leaching, and sorption behavior of some alternative sources 
of phosphorus for soils. AMBIO, 44(S2), pp.207-216. 
 
Tampio, E., Salo, T. and Rintala, J. (2016). Agronomic characteristics of five different urban 
waste digestates. Journal of Environmental Management, 169, pp.293-302. 
 
Thitanuwat, B., Polprasert, C. and Englande, A. (2016). Quantification of phosphorus flows 
throughout the consumption system of Bangkok Metropolis, Thailand. Science of The Total 
Environment, 542, pp.1106-1116. 
 
Tilman, D., Balzer, C., Hill, J. and Befort, B. (2011). Global food demand and the sustainable 
intensification of agriculture. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108(50), 
pp.20260-20264. 
 
Trostle, R. (2008). Global agricultural supply and demand. U.S. Dept. of Agriculture, Economic 
Research Service, Washington, D.C. 
 
UN, United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division (2014). 
World Urbanization Prospects: The 2014 Revision, Highlights (ST/ESA/SER.A/352). 
 
UN, United Nations (2015). World Population Prospects.  Population Division - United Nations. 
[online] Available at: http://esa.un.org/unpd/wpp/DataQuery/ [Accessed 24 May 2016]. 
 
58 
 
==PAGE:64==
 
van Dijk, K., Lesschen, J. and Oenema, O. (2016). Phosphorus flows and balances of the 
European Union Member States. Science of The Total Environment, 542, pp.1078-1093. 
van Kauwenbergh, S. J. (2010) World Phosphate Rock Reserves and Resources. IFDC Report. 
MuscleShoal, AL, USA. 
 
Vestforbrænding 2016. Available at http://www.vestfor.dk/ [Last access 23 April 2016] 
 
Villalba, G., Y. Liu, H. Schroder & R.U. Ayres (2008).  Global Phosphorus Flows in the Industrial 
Economy From a Production Perspective. Journal of Industrial Ecology 12(4): 557-569. 
 
Volund 
(2016). 
ARC, 
Amager 
Bakke. 
[online] 
Available 
at: 
http://www.volund.dk/Waste_to_Energy/References/ARC_Amager_Bakke_Copenhagen 
[Accessed 23 Mar. 2016]. 
 
Ward, C., Litterick, A. & Stephen, N. (2005) Assessment of the Potential for Site and Seasonal 
Variation of Composted Material Across the UK.WRAP, Banbury, UK. 
 
Wefood (2016). Wefood: Mindre madspild – mere overskud til verdens fattigste!. [online] 
Folkekirkens 
Nødhjælp. 
Available 
at: 
https://www.noedhjaelp.dk/vaer-med/wefood-
danmarks-foerste-butik-med-overskudsmad [Accessed 5 March 2016]. 
 
WHO (2007). Preventing and Controlling Micronutrient Deﬁciencies in Populations Affected by 
an Emergency. Joint statement by the World Health Organization, the World Food 
Programme, and the United Nations Children’s Fund. World Health Organization, Geneva. 
 
Wilkins R.J. (2007). Eco-efﬁcient approaches to land management: a case for increased 
integration of crop and animal production systems. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society. B12:517–525 
 
Winberg, T. (2016). Project worker in the Technical and Environmental Department in 
Copenhagen municipality. Personal communication. 
 
WRI, World Resources Institute (2016). The Global Food Challenge Explained in 18 Graphics. 
World Resources Institute. [online] Available at: http://www.wri.org/blog/2013/12/global-
food-challenge-explained-18-graphics [Accessed 25 May 2016]. 
 
Wu, J., Franzén, D. and Malmström, M. (2016). Anthropogenic phosphorus flows under different 
scenarios for the city of Stockholm, Sweden. Science of the Total Environment, 542, pp.1094-
1105. 
 
Zhang, W., W. Ma, Y.Ji, M. Fan, O. Oenema & F. Zhang (2008).  Efficiency, economics, and 
environmental implications of phosphorus resource use and the fertilizer industry in China. 
Nutrient Cycling in Agroecosystems 80(2): 131-144. 
 
Zhou, C., Huang, H., Cao, A. and Xu, W. (2015). Modeling the carbon cycle of the municipal 
solid waste management system for urban metabolism. Ecological Modelling, 318, pp.150-
156. 
 
 
59 
 
==PAGE:65==
 
8. Appendixes 
Appendix A: Food waste generation data 
8.1.1. Households 
Population data 
Table 12: Data on population taken from Statistics Denmark (2016). In the study the values selected are for the last 
quarter of 2015 
(Number) 
 2013Q4 
2014Q3 
2015Q4 
Denmark 
5230310 
5232854 
5240143 
Copenhagen 
569000 
579513 
589699 
Frederiksberg 
102751 
103405 
104612 
Total Copenhagen city 
671751 
682918 
694311 
 
 
Residents: MF and SF households: 
Table 13: Total SF and MF households by type and total number of residents in each type of household. Values based 
on data for “type of household and type of resident” and corrected based on total population in Copenhagen. (Statistics 
Denmark, 2016) 
 
 
Total households 
Residents 
Residents 
(%) 
Households 
(%) 
SF 
Houses 
* Detached houses/farmhouses 
16005 
46099 
0.10 
0.07 
* Terraced, linked or semi-detached 
houses 
8663 
24219 
Cottages 
91 
147 
50% Other 
511 
1040 
TOTAL 
25269 
71504 
  
 
MF 
Houses 
* Multi-dwelling houses 
316956 
610909 
0.90 
0.93 
* Student hostels 
8301 
10578 
Residential 
buildings 
for 
communities 
164 
280 
50% Other 
511 
1040 
TOTAL 
325931 
622807 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
60 
 
==PAGE:66==
 
Table 14: Food waste generation per type of household. Numbers in italics are provided by the source; the rest are 
calculated based on population data. Numbers in bold are the ones chosen in the study 
HOUSEHOLDS 
Place 
% (w/w) 
kg/hou
sehold/
week 
Cph 
Total 
[tons/yea
r] 
kg/capi
ta/year 
HOUS
EHOLD
S 
Reference 
Single-family 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Food Waste 
DK 
 
---- 
---- 
---- 
---- 
Madspild i Danmark 
Food waste 
 
 
2 
---- 
36.8 
---- 
Madspild i Danmark 
Organic/Food waste (FRACT) 
DK 
45 ( 1.3) 
 
 
 
 
Edjabou et al. 2015 
Food Waste  
 (AVOID. - UNAVOID.) 
DK 
44 (17) 
 
 
 
 
Edjabou et al. 2016 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Non-processed VFW 
DK 
12.6 
1.1 
1445 
23 
1645 
Miljostyrelsen 2014 
Processed VFW 
 
3.7 
0.32 
420 
7 
501 
Other VFW 
 
16.8 
1.46 
1918 
31 
2217 
Non-processed AFW 
 
3.4 
0.3 
394 
6 
429 
processed AFW 
 
3.2 
0.28 
368 
6 
429 
Other AFW 
 
1.6 
0.14 
184 
3 
215 
Total Avoidable FW 
 
22.9 
2 
2628 
42 
3003 
 
Total Unavoidable FW 
 
18.4 
1.6 
2102 
34 
2431 
 
TOTAL 
 
41.3 
3.6 
4730 
76 
5434 
 
ratio Avoidable/Unavoidable 
 
1.24 
1.25 
1.25 
1.24 
1.24 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Multy-family 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Food Waste 
DK 
 
---- 
---- 
 
---- 
Madspild i Danmark 
Food waste 
 
 
1.95 
---- 
53.1 
---- 
Madspild i Danmark 
Organic/Food waste  
DK 
36.2  
 
 
 
 
Edjabou et al. 2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Non-processed VFW 
DK 
12.2 
0.96 
16270 
29.2 
18186 
Miljøstyrelsen (2012) 
Processed VFW 
 
5.6 
0.44 
7457 
13.3 
8283 
Other VF refuse (Unavoidable) 
15.9 
1.24 
21016 
37.9 
23604 
Non-processed AFW 
 
3.1 
0.25 
4237 
7.5 
4671 
Processed AFW 
 
3.8 
0.3 
5085 
9.2 
5730 
Other animal food refuse (Unavoidable) 
2.2 
0.17 
2881 
5.3 
3301 
Total Avoidable FW 
 
24.7 
1.95 
33049 
59.2 
36870 
Total Unavoidable FW 
 
18.1 
1.41 
23897 
43.2 
26905 
TOTAL 
 
42.8 
3.36 
56947 
102.4 
63775 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
61 
 
==PAGE:67==
 
 
Table 15: Other reported values on household FW generation for Copenhagen (Cph) or Denmark (DK). Numbers in 
italics are provided by the source; the rest are calculated based on population data. 
Waste type 
Place 
% 
(w/w) 
Total 
[tons/year] 
kg/househol
d/week 
kg/capita/year 
Source 
Food 
Waste 
generation 
Cph 
---- 
21000 
1.1 
30.2 
Resource and waste 
Management 
Plan 
2018 
Food 
Waste 
generation 
Cph 
---- 
27394 
1.5 
39.5 
Resource and waste 
Management 
Plan 
2018 
Biowaste 
generation 
Cph 
---- 
20000 
---- 
---- 
Resource and waste 
Management 
Plan 
2018 
Food Waste  
DK 
 
716942 
---- 
---- 
Madspild i Danmark 
Food Waste  
DK 
 
32633 
1.8 
47 
Madspild i Danmark 
Food Waste  
DK 
 
260942 
---- 
49.8 
Madspild i Danmark 
Organic/Food 
waste  
DK 
40.96 
61045 
3.3 
87.9 
Riber et al. 2009 
Organic/Food 
waste  
DK 
42.2 
62893 
3.4 
90.6 
Edjabou et al. 2015 
Organic/Food 
waste (FRACT) 
DK 
28 
41730 
2.3 
60.1 
Petersen 
and 
Domella 2003  
 
8.1.2. Waste from services 
 
Calculation of ratios to scale-down: 
Commercial waste:  
Table 16:Data taken from Statistics DK: “Accounts statistics (DB07) by time, region, industry and items”. Ratios were 
calculated for number of “establishments” (E) and “full-time employees” (FTE) in Denmark and Copenhagen. In the 
study ratios for “full-time employees” were used. 
 
All Denmark 
Province Byen København 
RATIO 
Category 
 
Number 
of E 
Number 
of 
FTE 
Number 
of E 
Number 
of 
FTE 
Number 
of FTE 
Numb
er of 
FTE 
46 
Wholesale 
trade, 
except 
of 
motor vehicles etc. 
17793 
140039 
1888 
13388 
9.4 
10.5 
Wholesale 
47 
Retail 
trade, 
except 
of 
motor 
vehicles etc. 
29757 
126313 
4699 
18232 
6.3 
6.9 
Retail 
I 
Accommodation 
and food service 
activities 
16939 
51749 
3808 
15183 
4.4 
3.4 
Hotels 
& 
Restaurants 
J Information and 
communication 
16323 
76999 
4993 
29349 
3.3 
2.6 
* 
M 
Knowledge-
based services 
34314 
115161 
8026 
30500 
4.3 
3.8 
* 
N 
Travel 
agent, 
cleaning, and other 
operationel 
services 
17797 
74646 
2685 
20384 
6.6 
3.7 
* 
Total J, M, N 
  ----- 
266806 
  ----- 
80233 
 
3.3 
Canteens/ 
Catering 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
62 
 
==PAGE:68==
 
*Numbers used to calculate the category canteens and catering 
Institutional waste: 
 
Table 17: Ratio for hospitals. Unit: number of patients 
 
Province Byen København 
Copenhagen 
Frederiksberg 
TOTAL 
TOTAL DK 
RATIO 
Number of patients 
83863 
64422 
12453 
76875 
648415 
8.43 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 18: Ratio for students. Unit: students per 1st October 
 
Copenhagen 
Frederiksberg 
TOTAL 
TOTAL DK 
RATIO 
Students per 1st October 
142184 
22190 
164374 
1254039 
7.63 
 
 
Table 19: Ratio for nursing homes, day care and kindergartens. Unit: number of clients 
Type 
 
Copenhagen 
Frederiksberg 
TOTAL 
TOTAL DK 
RATIO 
Day care 
TOTAL 
8780 
381 
9161 
103714 
11.32 
 
0 year 
277 
6 
 
4559 
 
 
1 year 
754 
29 
 
19162 
 
 
2 years 
367 
18 
 
16889 
 
 
3 years 
70 
0 
 
244 
 
 
4 years 
69 
0 
 
119 
 
 
5 years 
40 
0 
 
111 
 
 
6 years 
0 
0 
 
0 
 
 
total 
1577 
53 
1630 
41084 
 
Nurseries 
0 year 
326 
18 
 
787 
 
 
1 year 
1903 
76 
 
4172 
 
 
2 years 
1462 
73 
 
3511 
 
 
3 years 
113 
0 
 
171 
 
 
4 years 
16 
0 
 
48 
 
 
5 years 
0 
0 
 
3 
 
 
6 years 
0 
0 
 
0 
 
 
total 
3820 
167 
3987 
8692 
 
Kindergartens 
0 year 
0 
0 
 
6 
 
 
1 year 
4 
0 
 
29 
 
 
2 years 
201 
6 
 
2362 
 
 
3 years 
1034 
43 
 
16744 
 
 
4 years 
1185 
58 
 
18530 
 
 
5 years 
897 
51 
 
15571 
 
 
6 years 
62 
3 
 
696 
 
 
TOTAL 
3383 
161 
4079 
53938 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
63 
 
==PAGE:69==
 
Calculation of amounts:  
. 
Table 20: Total avoidable (AV) and unavoidable (UN) food waste by service in Denmark (from Miljøstyrelsen, 2014b) 
and calculation of total amounts for Copenhagen using the ratios 
(tons/year) 
 
 
 
 
 
Scaled-down (RATIOS) 
AV 
UN 
TOTAL 
ratio AV/UN 
RATIOS 
AV 
UN 
TOTAL 
Retail trade 
162660 
4440 
167100 
0.97 
6.93 
23478 
641 
24119 
Whole sale 
4900 
300 
5200 
0.94 
10.46 
468 
29 
497 
Hotels 
8400 
3400 
11800 
0.71 
3.41 
2465 
998 
3462 
Restaurants 
20100 
40700 
60800 
0.33 
3.41 
5897 
11941 
17839 
Institutions 
21000 
5100 
26100 
0.80 
*** 
2457 
512 
2970 
Canteens/catering 
10200 
6800 
17000 
0.60 
3.33 
3067 
2045 
5112 
TOTAL 
SERVICES 
59700 
 
120900 
 
 
 
 
53999 
***Calculation for Institutions is Table 21. 
 
Table 21: Total avoidable (AV) and unavoidable (UN) food waste for institutions by type in Denmark (Miljøstyrelsen, 
2014b) and calculation of total amounts for Copenhagen using the ratios. 
(tons/year) 
 
 
 
 
 
Scaled-down RATIOS 
 
AV 
UN 
TOTAL 
ratio AV/UN 
RATIOS 
AV 
UN 
TOTAL 
Institutions 
21000 
5100 
26100 
0.80 
 
2457 
512 
2970 
Schools etc. 
10700 
600 
11300 
 
7.63 
1403 
79 
1481 
Hospitals 
1100 
300 
1400 
 
8.43 
130 
36 
166 
Nursing homes etc. 
3700 
900 
4600 
 
8.43* 
439 
107 
545 
Day-care centers 
5500 
3300 
8800 
 
11.32 
486 
291 
777 
*Data for nursing homes assumed the same as hospitals since no total data were available for Denmark. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
64 
 
==PAGE:70==
 
8.1.3. Final values: summary 
 
Table 22: Summary of the final estimated values for food waste generation in Copenhagen city. 
[tons / year] 
MF 
househol
ds 
SF 
househol
ds 
Retail 
trade 
Whole
sale 
Hotels 
/ 
restaurant
s 
Instituti
ons 
Canteen
s 
/ 
catering 
TOTAL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Avoidable FW 
33049 
2628 
23478 
468 
2465 
2457 
3067 
67613 
Unavoidable 
FW 
23897 
2102 
641 
29 
998 
512 
2045 
30224 
VFW 
44744 
3784 
21466 
423 
2720 
2287 
3732 
79156 
AFW 
12203 
946 
2653 
75 
742 
683 
1380 
18682 
TOTAL 
56947 
4730 
24119 
497 
3462 
2970 
5112 
97837 
 
 
Figure 21: Sankey diagram showing the final estimated values for food waste generation in Copenhagen. 
 
 
65 
 
==PAGE:71==
 
Appendix B: Chemical characterization of food waste fractions 
Table 23: Chemical characterization of the VFW and AFW fractions. Default values from EASETECH except for the 
C_bio_and, which was modified. 
 
VFW 
AFW 
 
VFW 
AFW 
 
VFW 
AFW 
Water (%) 
76.99 
57.14 
Mg (%TS) 
0.121 
0.103 
NMVOC (%TS) 
0 
0 
TS (%) 
23.01 
42.86 
Mn (%TS) 
0.00861 
0.000678 
VC (%TS) 
0 
0 
VS (%TS) 
93 
84 
Mo (%TS) 
8.75E-
05 
2.99E-05 
DCE (%TS) 
0 
0 
Ash 
(%TS) 
7 
16 
Ni (%TS) 
0.00025
7 
6.91E-05 
TCE (%TS) 
0 
0 
Energy 
(MJ/kgTS
) 
18.3 
24.55 
Pb (%TS) 
0.00010
4 
7.00E-06 
PCE (%TS) 
0 
0 
C 
bio 
(%TS) 
47.5 
55.4 
Pd (%TS) 
0 
0 
Benzene (%TS) 
0 
0 
C bio and 
(%TS) 
42 
44 
Pt (%TS) 
0 
0 
Chlorobenzene 
(%TS) 
0 
0 
C 
fossil 
(%TS) 
0.239 
1.13 
Sb (%TS) 
0 
0 
Dichlorobenzen
e (%TS) 
0 
0 
Ca (%TS) 
0.555 
4.09 
Se (%TS) 
0 
0 
Trichlorobenzen
e (%TS) 
0 
0 
Cl (%TS) 
0.56 
1.63 
Si (%TS) 
0 
0 
Ethylbenzene 
(%TS) 
0 
0 
F (%TS) 
0.01 
0.01 
Sn (%TS) 
0 
0 
Trichloroethylbe
nzene (%TS) 
0 
0 
H (%TS) 
6.6 
7.9 
Sr (%TS) 
0 
0 
Tetrachloroethyl
benzene (%TS) 
0 
0 
K (%TS) 
1.27 
0.533 
Ta (%TS) 
0 
0 
Propylbenzene 
(%TS) 
0 
0 
N (%TS) 
1.9 
7 
Ti (%TS) 
0 
0 
Ethylchloride 
(%TS) 
0 
0 
Na (%TS) 
0.312 
1.08 
V (%TS) 
0 
0 
Chloromethane 
(%TS) 
0 
0 
O (%TS) 
39.5 
18.2 
Zn (%TS) 
0.0025 
0.00492 
Dichloromethan
e (%TS) 
0 
0 
P (%TS) 
0.231 
0.996 
Zr (%TS) 
0 
0 
Chloroform 
(%TS) 
0 
0 
S (%TS) 
0.184 
0.378 
CH4 
(m^3/kgTS) 
0 
0 
Carbon 
tetrachloride 
(%TS) 
0 
0 
Ag (%TS) 
0 
0 
CO2 
(m^3/kgTS) 
0 
0 
Xylenes (%TS) 
0 
0 
Al (%TS) 
0.103 
0.0289 
H2 
(m^3/kgTS) 
0 
0 
Toluene (%TS) 
0 
0 
Ar (%TS) 
0 
0 
CO 
(m^3/kgTS) 
0 
0 
Phenol (%TS) 
0 
0 
As (%TS) 
2.62E-
05 
6.67E-05 
H2S (%TS) 
0 
0 
Naphtalene 
(%TS) 
0 
0 
Au (%TS) 
0 
0 
HF (%TS) 
0 
0 
NH3 (%TS) 
0 
0 
B (%TS) 
0 
0 
HCl (%TS) 
0 
0 
PO4 (%TS) 
0 
0 
Ba (%TS) 
0 
0 
COD (%TS) 
0 
0 
SO4 (%TS) 
0 
0 
Be (%TS) 
0 
0 
DOC (%TS) 
0 
0 
CFC11 (%TS) 
0 
0 
Bi (%TS) 
0 
0 
BOD (%TS) 
0 
0 
CFC12 (%TS) 
0 
0 
Br (%TS) 
0 
0 
TOC (%TS) 
0 
0 
CFC113 (%TS) 
0 
0 
Cd (%TS) 
9.46E-
06 
1.13E-05 
TIC (%TS) 
0 
0 
HCFC21 (%TS) 
0 
0 
Co (%TS) 
0 
0 
TC (%TS) 
0 
0 
HCFC22 (%TS) 
0 
0 
66 
 
==PAGE:72==
 
Cr (%TS) 
0.00052
4 
0.000118 
TSS (%TS) 
0 
0 
DEHP (%TS) 
0 
0 
Cu (%TS) 
0.00125 
0.000609 
Lignine 
(%TS) 
0 
0 
LAS (%TS) 
0 
0 
Fe (%TS) 
0.031 
0.00516 
Cellulose 
(%TS) 
0 
0 
NPE (%TS) 
0 
0 
Ga (%TS) 
0 
0 
Hemicellulo
se (%TS) 
0 
0 
PAH (%TS) 
0 
0 
Hg (%TS) 
2.00E-
06 
2.00E-06 
Lipids 
(%TS) 
0 
0 
PCB (%TS) 
0 
0 
In (%TS) 
0 
0 
Carbohydra
tes (%TS) 
0 
0 
Yb () 
0 
0 
Li (%TS) 
0 
0 
Proteins 
(%TS) 
0 
0 
MST (%TS) 
0 
0 
 
 
 
 
  
 
67 
 
==PAGE:73==
 
Appendix C: Input data to the EASETECH model 
Table 24: Summary of the input data to EASETECH to model the anaerobic digestion option. 
Parameter 
Value 
Units 
COLLECTIO
N, 
TRANSPORT 
and 
PRETREATM
ENT 
Collection 
Collection Vehicle, 10t Euro6, urban traffic, 1 liter 
diesel, 2012 
0.00307 
l kg Total 
Wet Weight 
Transport 
to 
a 
facility 
40 
km 
away 
Truck, 28t-32t, Euro5, highway 
40*0.00006 
kg*km 
kg 
Total 
Wet 
Weight 
Pretreatment 
(sorting 
impurities) 
Electricity mix, 1-60kV, DK, ELCD, 2002 - 
corrected 
0.02 
kWh 
kg 
Total 
Wet 
Weight 
Transport of the 
digestate to farms 
20 km away 
Truck, 14t-20t, Euro5, highway 
20 
kg*km 
kg 
Total 
Wet 
Weight 
ANAEROBIC 
DIGESTION 
AD 
Methane yield of each fraction 
VFW 
82 
% 
AFW 
98 
% 
Partitioning of CO2 between gas and liquid 
phases 
63 
% 
Loss of VS related to loss of biogenic carbon 
1 
(1.89 before) 
Electricity consumption 
0.049 
kWh 
Diesel consumption  
0.0009 
L 
Gas leakage 
% of biogas leaking 
  
(What leakes then is emitted 
1 
% 
Emissions to air 
 ---- 
 ---- 
Gas utilization 
Emissions to the environment as 
transformation of substances 
%CH4 to (i) CO2 nf (ii) CH4 nf; % of CO2 to 
CO2 nf 
District Heating  
Marginal 
average 
 -0.6 
(/3.6*CH4_
LHV) 
kWh 
per 
m^3 CH4 
Marginal electricity Production 
Marginal, 
Fuel 
production, 
Coal 
 -
0.25/3.6*C
H4_LHV 
kWh 
per 
m^3 CH4 
Specific emissions per m^3 of 
CH4 
NOx, SO2, N2O, CO  
kg per m^3 
CH4 
Water addition 
Set the water content of the output 
90 
% 
Use on land 
Distribution of biogenic C, N and P 
  *** 
% in air, soil, 
leaching, 
etc. 
Farm tractor 
0.00063 
L per kg of 
Total Weight 
Metal emissions 
---- 
kg 
Type of soil 
  
Sandy loam 
soil 
  
Avoided 
emissions 
Substitution of N, P, K 
N 
0.4 
  
P 
1 
 
K 
1 
 
Distribution of biogenic C, N and P 
 *** 
% in air, soil, 
leaching, 
etc. 
Fertlizer production (include substitution) 
  
kg 
Farm tractor (include substitution) 
0.00001 
L per kg of 
Total Weight 
Metal emissions (include substitution) 
  
kg 
*** EASETCH default data used. Look in the EASETECH file. 
 
68 
 
==PAGE:74==
 
Table 25: Summary of the input data to EASETECH to model the composting option.. 
Parameter 
Value 
Units 
COLLEC
TION, 
TRANSP
ORT and 
PRETRE
ATMENT 
Collection 
Collection Vehicle, 10t Euro6, urban 
traffic, 1 liter diesel, 2012 
0.00307 
l kg Total Wet 
Weight 
Transport to a facility 40 
km away 
Truck, 28t-32t, Euro5, highway 
40*0.00006 
kg*km kg Total 
Wet Weight 
Pretreatment 
(sorting 
impurities) 
Electricity mix, 1-60kV, DK, ELCD, 2002 - 
corrected 
0.02 
kWh kg Total 
Wet Weight 
Transport of the compost 
to farms 20 km away 
Truck, 14t-20t, Euro5, highway 
  
20 
kg*km kg Total 
Wet Weight 
COMPOS
TING 
Composting 
Type of technology 
Windrow composting plant for 
Green W. (adapted) 
VS, 
C, 
N 
degradation 
VS 
47 
% 
C_bio 
47 
% 
N 
30.3 
% 
Air emissions 
Emissions to the 
environment (air) 
Biofilter (as 
in the US) 
 
Distribution of TS 
after degradation 
Transfer 
coefficient to each 
output 
100 
% to compost 
Water content 
  
43 
% 
  
Use on land 
Distribution of biogenic C, N and P 
  *** 
% in air, soil, 
leaching, etc. 
Farm tractor 
0.00063 
L per kg of 
Total Weight 
Metal emissions 
  *** 
kg 
Avoided emissions 
Substitution of N, 
P, K 
N 
0.2 
Plantedirektor
atet, 2003 
P 
1 
 
K 
1 
 
Distribution of biogenic C, N and P 
  *** 
% in air, soil, 
leaching, etc. 
Fertlizer production (include substitution) 
  *** 
kg 
Farm tractor (include substitution) 
0.00001 
L per kg of 
Total Weight 
Metal emissions (include substitution) 
  
 *** 
kg 
  
*** EASETCH default data used. Look in the EASETECH file. 
 
69 
 
==PAGE:75==
 
Table 26: Summary of the input data to EASETECH to model the incineration option. 
Parameter 
Value 
Unit 
FW 
COLLECTIO
N 
Collection vehicle, 10t, Euro 6, urban traffic 
  
0.00307 
L per kg of 
waste ww 
INCINERATI
ON 
Waste 
to 
Energy 
Substance transfer 
to outputs 
Transfer coefficients 
 *** 
% 
Marginal electricity 
Production, 
Coal, 
energy Quality, DK 
2006 
Efficiency 
-0.06 
kWh per MJ 
energy 
District Heating, marginal average 
-0.20 
kWh per MJ 
energy 
Electricity consumption 
0.065 
kWh per kg of 
waste ww 
Fuel oil consumption 
0.0005 
L per kg of 
waste ww 
Others (NaOH; Activated Carbon, Lime, etc) 
 *** 
kg per Total 
Wet Weight 
Process specific emissions (CO, dioxins, etc) 
 *** 
kg per Total 
Wet Weight 
FLY 
ASH 
Transport of Fly ash 
to Norway 
Container ship, 350 TEU, domestic 
transportation - Denmark 
500 
kg*km per kg 
Total 
Wet 
Weight 
AL 
SCRAP 
Trasnport 
of 
Al 
scrap to SE 
Freight train, electrical 
180 
kg*km per kg 
Total ww 
BOTTO
M ASH 
Sorting facility 
marginal electricity consumption 
for Fe and Nfe sorting 
*** 
  
Sorting facility 
Diesel combustion 
*** 
 
Utilization of Fe and NFe scrap 
0 
 
Utilization 
of 
Bottom ash in road 
  
Truck, 28t-32t, Euro5, highway 
1*50 
kg*km 
Marginal Electricity Consumption 
incl. Fuel Production, Coal, Energy 
Quality, DK, kWh, 2006 
-0.00065 
kWh 
Combine, combustion 1L of diesel, 
2003/2011 
-0.00027 
l 
Truck, 28t-32t, Euro5, highway 
-20 
kg*km 
 *** EASETCH default data used. Look in the EASETECH file. 
 
70 
 
==PAGE:76==
 
Appendix D: MFA results 
 
Figure 22: TS flows and sinks in current scenario. 
 
 
Figure 23: N flows and sinks in current scenario. 
71 
 
==PAGE:77==
 
 
 
Figure 24: P flows and sinks in current scenario. 
 
 
Figure 25: N flows and sinks in scenario 1. 
72 
 
==PAGE:78==
 
 
 
 
Figure 26: P flows and sinks in scenario 1. 
 
 
Figure 27: N flows and sinks in scenario 8. 
73 
 
==PAGE:79==
 
 
 
Figure 28: P flows and sinks in scenario 8. 
 
Figure 29: N flows and sinks in scenario 15. 
 
74 
 
==PAGE:80==
 
 
Figure 30: P flows and sinks in scenario 15. 
75 
 
==PAGE:81==
 
Appendix E: LCA results 
The following tables 27-33 present the total contribution of each process to the impact category 
considered. A screen shot of the system in EAETECH is provided below in Figure 31. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 27: Climate Change 
Figure 28: Terrestrial eutrophication 
Figure 29: Freshwater eutrophication 
Figure 30: Marine eutrophication 
Figure 31: Ecotoxicity 
Figure 32: Fossil resource depletion 
Figure 33: Reserve base resource depletion 
 
 
Figure 31: Screen shot of the LCA model in EASETECH 
76 
 
==PAGE:82==
 
Table 27: LCA characterized results for climate change in kg CO2-eq. Total contribution of each process, total contribution of each option and total contribution are included for the 21 scenarios 
and the current scenario. To see the contribution of each sub-process look at the EASETECH file. 
kg CO2-Eq 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
C 
AD. 
Anaerobic 
digestion 
5.25E
+05 
1.05E
+06 
1.58E
+06 
2.10E
+06 
2.63E
+06 
3.15E
+06 
3.68E
+06 
4.20E
+06 
3.68E
+06 
3.15E
+06 
2.63E
+06 
2.10E
+06 
1.58E
+06 
1.05E
+06 
5.25E
+05 
5.25E
+05 
5.25E
+05 
5.25E
+05 
5.25E
+05 
5.25E
+05 
5.25E
+05 
4.20E
+05 
AD. Biogas utilization 
-
5.13E
+06 
-
1.03E
+07 
-
1.54E
+07 
-
2.05E
+07 
-
2.56E
+07 
-
3.08E
+07 
-
3.59E
+07 
-
4.10E
+07 
-
3.59E
+07 
-
3.08E
+07 
-
2.56E
+07 
-
2.05E
+07 
-
1.54E
+07 
-
1.03E
+07 
-
5.13E
+06 
-
5.13E
+06 
-
5.13E
+06 
-
5.13E
+06 
-
5.13E
+06 
-
5.13E
+06 
-
5.13E
+06 
-
4.10E
+06 
AD. UOL digestate 
1.03E
+06 
2.06E
+06 
3.09E
+06 
4.12E
+06 
5.15E
+06 
-9.41 
E+06 
7.21E
+06 
8.24E
+06 
7.21E
+06 
6.18E
+06 
5.15E
+06 
4.12E
+06 
3.09E
+06 
2.06E
+06 
1.03E
+06 
1.03E
+06 
1.03E
+06 
1.03E
+06 
1.03E
+06 
1.03E
+06 
1.03E
+06 
8.24E
+05 
AD. 
Substitutuion 
UOL digestate 
-
9.82E
+05 
-
1.96E
+06 
-
2.94E
+06 
-
3.93E
+06 
-
4.91E
+06 
-
5.89E
+06 
-
6.87E
+06 
-
7.85E
+06 
-
6.87E
+06 
-
5.89E
+06 
-
4.91E
+06 
-
3.93E
+06 
-
2.94E
+06 
-
1.96E
+06 
-
9.82E
+05 
-
9.82E
+05 
-
9.82E
+05 
-
9.82E
+05 
-
9.82E
+05 
-
9.82E
+05 
-
9.82E
+05 
-
1.25E
+06 
C. UOL composting  
1.03E
+06 
1.03E
+06 
1.03E
+06 
1.03E
+06 
1.03E
+06 
1.03E
+06 
1.03E
+06 
1.03E
+06 
2.05E
+06 
3.08E
+06 
4.10E
+06 
5.13E
+06 
6.16E
+06 
7.18E
+06 
8.21E
+06 
7.18E
+06 
6.16E
+06 
5.13E
+06 
4.10E
+06 
3.08E
+06 
2.05E
+06 
0 
I. Utilization of f.a  
3661 
3203 
2746 
2288 
1830 
1373 
915.2 
457.6 
457.6 
457.6 
457.6 
457.6 
457.6 
457.6 
457.6 
915.2 
1373 
1830 
2288 
2746 
3203 
3752 
I. Recycling Al  
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
I. FW Collection Cph 
7.12E
+05 
6.23E
+05 
5.34E
+05 
4.45E
+05 
3.56E
+05 
2.67E
+05 
1.78E
+05 
8.90E
+04 
8.90E
+04 
8.90E
+04 
8.90E
+04 
8.90E
+04 
8.90E
+04 
8.90E
+04 
8.90E
+04 
1.78E
+05 
2.67E
+05 
3.56E
+05 
4.45E
+05 
5.34E
+05 
6.23E
+05 
7.30E
+05 
C. FW C, T and Pretr. 
2.37E
+05 
2.37E
+05 
2.37E
+05 
2.37E
+05 
2.37E
+05 
2.37E
+05 
2.37E
+05 
2.37E
+05 
4.74E
+05 
7.10E
+05 
9.47E
+05 
1.18E
+06 
1.42E
+06 
1.66E
+06 
1.89E
+06 
1.66E
+06 
1.42E
+06 
1.18E
+06 
9.47E
+05 
7.10E
+05 
4.74E
+05 
0 
AD. FW C, T, Pretr. 
2.37E
+05 
4.74E
+05 
7.10E
+05 
9.47E
+05 
1.18E
+06 
1.42E
+06 
1.66E
+06 
1.89E
+06 
1.66E
+06 
1.42E
+06 
1.18E
+06 
9.47E
+05 
7.10E
+05 
4.74E
+05 
2.37E
+05 
2.37E
+05 
2.37E
+05 
2.37E
+05 
2.37E
+05 
2.37E
+05 
2.37E
+05 
1.89E
+05 
C.Transport 
of 
compost 
3181 
3181 
3181 
3181 
3181 
3181 
3181 
3181 
6361 
9542 
1.27E
+04 
1.59E
+04 
1.91E
+04 
2.23E
+04 
2.55E
+04 
2.23E
+04 
1.91E
+04 
1.59E
+04 
1.27E
+04 
9542 
6361 
0 
C. Substitution UOL 
compost 
-
3.67E
+05 
-
3.67E
+05 
-
3.67E
+05 
-
3.67E
+05 
-
3.67E
+05 
-
7.34E
+05 
-
1.10E
+06 
-
1.47E
+06 
-
1.84E
+06 
-
2.20E
+06 
-
2.57E
+06 
-
2.94E
+06 
-
2.57E
+06 
-
2.20E
+06 
-
1.84E
+06 
-
1.47E
+06 
-
1.10E
+06 
-
7.34E
+05 
-
3.67E
+05 
-
3.67E
+05 
-
3.67E
+05 
0 
I. Transport. F.A 
2376 
2079 
1782 
1485 
1188 
890.8 
593.9 
296.9 
296.9 
296.9 
296.9 
296.9 
296.9 
296.9 
296.9 
593.9 
890.8 
1188 
1485 
1782 
2079 
2435 
I. Transport of Al 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
I. BA sorting and 
recycling 
8012 
7011 
6009 
5008 
4006 
3005 
2003 
1002 
1002 
1002 
1002 
1002 
1002 
1002 
1002 
2003 
3005 
4006 
5008 
6009 
7011 
8212 
AD. 
Transport 
of 
digestate 
1.90E
+04 
3.80E
+04 
5.70E
+04 
7.61E
+04 
9.51E
+04 
1.14E
+05 
1.33E
+05 
1.52E
+05 
1.33E
+05 
1.14E
+05 
9.51E
+04 
7.61E
+04 
5.70E
+04 
3.80E
+04 
1.90E
+04 
1.90E
+04 
1.90E
+04 
1.90E
+04 
1.90E
+04 
1.90E
+04 
1.90E
+04 
1.52E
+04 
C. Composting 
1.32E
+06 
1.32E
+06 
1.32E
+06 
1.32E
+06 
1.32E
+06 
1.32E
+06 
1.32E
+06 
1.32E
+06 
2.64E
+06 
3.96E
+06 
5.27E
+06 
6.59E
+06 
7.91E
+06 
9.23E
+06 
1.06E
+07 
9.23E
+06 
7.91E
+06 
6.59E
+06 
5.27E
+06 
3.96E
+06 
2.64E
+06 
0 
77 
 
==PAGE:83==
 
I. Waste Incineration 
-
2.15E
+07 
-
1.88E
+07 
-
1.61E
+07 
-
1.34E
+07 
-
1.07E
+07 
-
8.04E
+06 
-
5.36E
+06 
-
2.68E
+06 
-
2.68E
+06 
-
2.68E
+06 
-
2.68E
+06 
-
2.68E
+06 
-
2.68E
+06 
-
2.68E
+06 
-
2.68E
+06 
-
5.36E
+06 
-
8.04E
+06 
-
1.07E
+07 
-
1.34E
+07 
-
1.61E
+07 
-
1.88E
+07 
-
2.20E
+07 
TOTAL 
-
2.37E
+07 
-
2.58E
+07 
-
2.79E
+07 
-
3.00E
+07 
-
3.21E
+07 
-
3.42E
+07 
-
3.63E
+07 
-
3.84E
+07 
-
3.20E
+07 
-
2.57E
+07 
-
1.93E
+07 
-
1.30E
+07 
-
6.61E
+06 
-
2.65E
+05 
6.10E
+06 
1.84E
+06 
-
2.43E
+06 
-
6.68E
+06 
-
1.10E
+07 
-
1.52E
+07 
-
1.95E
+07 
-
2.50E
+07 
total 
INCINERATION 
-
2.07E
+07 
-
1.81E
+07 
-
1.55E
+07 
-
1.30E
+07 
-
1.04E
+07 
-
7.77E
+06 
-
5.18E
+06 
-
2.59E
+06 
-
2.59E
+06 
-
2.59E
+06 
-
2.59E
+06 
-
2.59E
+06 
-
2.59E
+06 
-
2.59E
+06 
-
2.59E
+06 
-
5.18E
+06 
-
7.77E
+06 
-
1.04E
+07 
-
1.30E
+07 
-
1.55E
+07 
-
1.81E
+07 
-
2.12E
+07 
total COMPOST 
1.67E
+06 
1.67E
+06 
1.67E
+06 
1.67E
+06 
1.67E
+06 
1.67E
+06 
1.67E
+06 
1.67E
+06 
3.34E
+06 
5.02E
+06 
6.69E
+06 
8.36E
+06 
1.00E
+07 
1.17E
+07 
1.34E
+07 
1.17E
+07 
1.00E
+07 
8.36E
+06 
6.69E
+06 
5.02E
+06 
3.34E
+06 
0.00E
+00 
total AD 
-
4.69E
+06 
-
9.38E
+06 
-
1.41E
+07 
-
1.87E
+07 
-
2.34E
+07 
-
2.81E
+07 
-
3.28E
+07 
-
3.75E
+07 
-
3.28E
+07 
-
2.81E
+07 
-
2.34E
+07 
-
1.87E
+07 
-
1.41E
+07 
-
9.38E
+06 
-
4.69E
+06 
-
4.69E
+06 
-
4.69E
+06 
-
4.69E
+06 
-
4.69E
+06 
-
4.69E
+06 
-
4.69E
+06 
-
3.75E
+06 
 
Table 28: LCA characterized results for terrestrial eutrophication in AE. Total contribution of each process, total contribution of each option and total contribution are included for the 21 
scenarios and the current scenario. To see the contribution of each sub-process look at the EASETECH file. 
AE 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
Curre
nt 
AD. 
Anaerobic 
digestion 
3027 
6054 
9081 
1.21E
+04 
1.51E
+04 
1.82E
+04 
2.12E
+04 
2.42E
+04 
2.12E
+04 
1.82E
+04 
1.51E
+04 
1.21E
+04 
9081 
6054 
3027 
3027 
3027 
3027 
3027 
3027 
3027 
2422 
AD. 
Biogas 
utilization 
-
1.73E
+04 
-
3.45E
+04 
-
5.18E
+04 
-
6.90E
+04 
-
8.63E
+04 
-
1.04E
+05 
-
1.21E
+05 
-
1.38E
+05 
-
1.21E
+05 
-
1.04E
+05 
-
8.63E
+04 
-
6.90E
+04 
-
5.18E
+04 
-
3.45E
+04 
-
1.73E
+04 
-
1.73E
+04 
-
1.73E
+04 
-
1.73E
+04 
-
1.73E
+04 
-
1.73E
+04 
-
1.73E
+04 
-
1.38E
+04 
AD. 
UOL 
digestate 
1.12E
+05 
2.24E
+05 
3.35E
+05 
4.47E
+05 
5.59E
+05 
-
4.73E
+04 
7.82E
+05 
8.94E
+05 
7.82E
+05 
6.71E
+05 
5.59E
+05 
4.47E
+05 
3.35E
+05 
2.24E
+05 
1.12E
+05 
1.12E
+05 
1.12E
+05 
1.12E
+05 
1.12E
+05 
1.12E
+05 
1.12E
+05 
8.94E
+04 
AD. Substitutuion 
UOL digestate 
-7885 
-
1.58E
+04 
-
2.37E
+04 
-
3.15E
+04 
-
3.94E
+04 
6.71E
+05 
-
5.52E
+04 
-
6.31E
+04 
-
5.52E
+04 
-
4.73E
+04 
-
3.94E
+04 
-
3.15E
+04 
-
2.37E
+04 
-
1.58E
+04 
-7885 
-7885 
-7885 
-7885 
-7885 
-7885 
-7885 
-6308 
C. 
UOL 
composting  
1.67E
+04 
1.67E
+04 
1.67E
+04 
1.67E
+04 
1.67E
+04 
1.67E
+04 
1.67E
+04 
1.67E
+04 
3.34E
+04 
5.01E
+04 
6.67E
+04 
8.34E
+04 
1.00E
+05 
1.17E
+05 
1.34E
+05 
1.17E
+05 
1.00E
+05 
8.34E
+04 
6.67E
+04 
5.01E
+04 
3.34E
+04 
0 
I. Utilization of fly 
ash  
31.28 
27.37 
23.46 
19.55 
15.64 
11.73 
7.821 
3.91 
3.91 
3.91 
3.91 
3.91 
3.91 
3.91 
3.91 
7.821 
11.73 
15.64 
19.55 
23.46 
27.37 
32.06 
I. Recycling Al  
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
I. FW Collection 
Cph 
3225 
2822 
2419 
2016 
1613 
1210 
806.3 
403.2 
403.2 
403.2 
403.2 
403.2 
403.2 
403.2 
403.2 
806.3 
1210 
1613 
2016 
2419 
2822 
3306 
C. FW C, T and 
Pretr. 
1290 
1290 
1290 
1290 
1290 
1290 
1290 
1290 
2579 
3869 
5159 
6448 
7738 
9027 
1.03E
+04 
9027 
7738 
6448 
5159 
3869 
2579 
0 
78 
 
==PAGE:84==
 
AD. FW C, T, 
Pretr. 
1290 
2579 
3869 
5159 
6448 
7738 
9027 
1.03E
+04 
9027 
7738 
6448 
5159 
3869 
2579 
1290 
1290 
1290 
1290 
1290 
1290 
1290 
1032 
C. Transport of 
compost 
41.25 
41.25 
41.25 
41.25 
41.25 
41.25 
41.25 
41.25 
82.5 
123.7 
165 
206.2 
247.5 
288.7 
330 
288.7 
247.5 
206.2 
165 
123.7 
82.5 
0 
C. 
Substitution 
UOL compost 
-2898 
-2898 
-2898 
-2898 
-2898 
-2898 
-2898 
-2898 
-5796 
-8693 
-
1.16E
+04 
-
1.45E
+04 
-
1.74E
+04 
-
2.03E
+04 
-
2.32E
+04 
-
2.03E
+04 
-
1.74E
+04 
-
1.45E
+04 
-
1.16E
+04 
-8693 
-5796 
0 
I. 
Transportation 
of Fly Ash 
300.3 
262.7 
225.2 
187.7 
150.1 
112.6 
75.07 
37.53 
37.53 
37.53 
37.53 
37.53 
37.53 
37.53 
37.53 
75.07 
112.6 
150.1 
187.7 
225.2 
262.7 
307.8 
I. Transport of Al 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
I. BA sorting and 
recycling 
161.9 
141.6 
121.4 
101.2 
80.94 
60.7 
40.47 
20.23 
20.23 
20.23 
20.23 
20.23 
20.23 
20.23 
20.23 
40.47 
60.7 
80.94 
101.2 
121.4 
141.6 
165.9 
AD. Transport of 
digestate 
246.6 
493.2 
739.8 
986.3 
1233 
1480 
1726 
1973 
1726 
1480 
1233 
986.3 
739.8 
493.2 
246.6 
246.6 
246.6 
246.6 
246.6 
246.6 
246.6 
197.3 
C. Composting 
1.20E
+04 
1.20E
+04 
1.20E
+04 
1.20E
+04 
1.20E
+04 
1.20E
+04 
1.20E
+04 
1.20E
+04 
2.40E
+04 
3.60E
+04 
4.80E
+04 
5.99E
+04 
7.19E
+04 
8.39E
+04 
9.59E
+04 
8.39E
+04 
7.19E
+04 
5.99E
+04 
4.80E
+04 
3.60E
+04 
2.40E
+04 
0 
I. 
Waste 
Incineration 
1.36E
+05 
1.19E
+05 
1.02E
+05 
8.53E
+04 
6.82E
+04 
5.12E
+04 
3.41E
+04 
1.71E
+04 
1.71E
+04 
1.71E
+04 
1.71E
+04 
1.71E
+04 
1.71E
+04 
1.71E
+04 
1.71E
+04 
3.41E
+04 
5.12E
+04 
6.82E
+04 
8.53E
+04 
1.02E
+05 
1.19E
+05 
1.40E
+05 
TOTAL 
2.58E
+05 
3.32E
+05 
4.06E
+05 
4.79E
+05 
5.53E
+05 
6.27E
+05 
7.00E
+05 
7.74E
+05 
7.10E
+05 
6.46E
+05 
5.82E
+05 
5.18E
+05 
4.54E
+05 
3.90E
+05 
3.26E
+05 
3.16E
+05 
3.06E
+05 
2.97E
+05 
2.87E
+05 
2.78E
+05 
2.68E
+05 
2.17E
+05 
total 
INCINERATION 
1.40E
+05 
1.23E
+05 
1.05E
+05 
8.76E
+04 
7.01E
+04 
5.26E
+04 
3.50E
+04 
1.75E
+04 
1.75E
+04 
1.75E
+04 
1.75E
+04 
1.75E
+04 
1.75E
+04 
1.75E
+04 
1.75E
+04 
3.50E
+04 
5.26E
+04 
7.01E
+04 
8.76E
+04 
1.05E
+05 
1.23E
+05 
1.44E
+05 
total COMPOST 
2.71E
+04 
2.71E
+04 
2.71E
+04 
2.71E
+04 
2.71E
+04 
2.71E
+04 
2.71E
+04 
2.71E
+04 
5.42E
+04 
8.13E
+04 
1.08E
+05 
1.36E
+05 
1.63E
+05 
1.90E
+05 
2.17E
+05 
1.90E
+05 
1.63E
+05 
1.36E
+05 
1.08E
+05 
8.13E
+04 
5.42E
+04 
0.00E
+00 
total AD 
9.12E
+04 
1.82E
+05 
2.74E
+05 
3.65E
+05 
4.56E
+05 
5.47E
+05 
6.38E
+05 
7.30E
+05 
6.38E
+05 
5.47E
+05 
4.56E
+05 
3.65E
+05 
2.74E
+05 
1.82E
+05 
9.12E
+04 
9.12E
+04 
9.12E
+04 
9.12E
+04 
9.12E
+04 
9.12E
+04 
9.12E
+04 
7.30E
+04 
 
Table 29: LCA characterized results to freshwater eutrophication in kg P-eq. Total contribution of each process, total contribution of each option and total contribution are included for the 21 
scenarios and the current scenario. To see the contribution of each sub-process look at the EASETECH file. 
Kg P-eq 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
C 
AD. 
Anaerobic 
digestion 
0.010
6 
0.021
19 
0.031
79 
0.042
39 
0.052
99 
0.063
58 
0.074
18 
0.084
78 
0.074
18 
0.063
58 
0.052
99 
0.042
39 
0.031
79 
0.021
19 
0.010
6 
0.010
6 
0.010
6 
0.010
6 
0.010
6 
0.010
6 
0.010
6 
0.008
478 
AD. 
Biogas 
utilization 
-
0.040
55 
-
0.081
09 
-
0.121
6 
-
0.162
2 
-
0.202
7 
-
0.243
3 
-
0.283
8 
-
0.324
4 
-
0.283
8 
-
0.243
3 
-
0.202
7 
-
0.162
2 
-
0.121
6 
-
0.081
09 
-
0.040
55 
-
0.040
55 
-
0.040
55 
-
0.040
55 
-
0.040
55 
-
0.040
55 
-
0.040
55 
-
0.032
44 
AD. 
UOL 
digestate 
95.59 
191.2 
286.8 
382.4 
478 
-3837 
669.2 
764.7 
669.2 
573.6 
478 
382.4 
286.8 
191.2 
95.59 
95.59 
95.59 
95.59 
95.59 
95.59 
95.59 
76.47 
79 
 
==PAGE:85==
 
AD. Substitutuion 
UOL digestate 
-
639.5 
-1279 
-1918 
-2558 
-3197 
573.6 
-4476 
-5116 
-
4476 
-
3837 
-
3197 
-
2558 
-
1918 
-
1279 
-
639.5 
-
639.5 
-
639.5 
-
639.5 
-
639.5 
-
639.5 
-
639.5 
-
511.6 
C. 
UOL 
composting  
95.59 
95.59 
95.59 
95.59 
95.59 
95.59 
95.59 
95.59 
191.2 
286.8 
382.3 
477.9 
573.5 
669.1 
764.7 
669.1 
573.5 
477.9 
382.3 
286.8 
191.2 
0 
I. Utilization of fly 
ash  
0.000
1598 
0.000
1399 
0.000
1199 
9.99
E-05 
7.99
E-05 
5.99
E-05 
4.00
E-05 
2.00
E-05 
2.00
E-05 
2.00
E-05 
2.00
E-05 
2.00
E-05 
2.00
E-05 
2.00
E-05 
2.00
E-05 
4.00
E-05 
5.99
E-05 
7.99
E-05 
9.99
E-05 
0.000
1199 
0.000
1399 
0.000
1638 
I. Recycling Al  
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
I. FW Collection 
Cph 
0.171
5 
0.15 
0.128
6 
0.107
2 
0.085
73 
0.064
3 
0.042
87 
0.021
43 
0.021
43 
0.021
43 
0.021
43 
0.021
43 
0.021
43 
0.021
43 
0.021
43 
0.042
87 
0.064
3 
0.085
73 
0.107
2 
0.128
6 
0.15 
0.175
7 
C. FW C, T and 
Pretr. 
0.024
34 
0.024
34 
0.024
34 
0.024
34 
0.024
34 
0.024
34 
0.024
34 
0.024
34 
0.048
69 
0.073
03 
0.097
38 
0.121
7 
0.146
1 
0.170
4 
0.194
8 
0.170
4 
0.146
1 
0.121
7 
0.097
38 
0.073
03 
0.048
69 
0 
AD. FW C, T, 
Pretr. 
0.024
34 
0.048
69 
0.073
03 
0.097
38 
0.121
7 
0.146
1 
0.170
4 
0.194
8 
0.170
4 
0.146
1 
0.121
7 
0.097
38 
0.073
03 
0.048
69 
0.024
34 
0.024
34 
0.024
34 
0.024
34 
0.024
34 
0.024
34 
0.024
34 
0.019
48 
C. Transport of 
compost 
0.000
7722 
0.000
7722 
0.000
7722 
0.000
7722 
0.000
7722 
0.000
7722 
0.000
7722 
0.000
7722 
0.001
544 
0.002
317 
0.003
089 
0.003
861 
0.004
633 
0.005
406 
0.006
178 
0.005
406 
0.004
633 
0.003
861 
0.003
089 
0.002
317 
0.001
544 
0 
C. 
Substitution 
UOL compost 
-
639.5 
-
639.5 
-
639.5 
-
639.5 
-
639.5 
-
639.5 
-
639.5 
-640 
-
1279 
-
1918 
-
2558 
-
3197 
-
3837 
-
4476 
-
5116 
-4476 
-3837 
-3197 
-2558 
-1918 
-1279 
0 
I. Transportation 
of Fly Ash 
0.000
5211 
0.000
456 
0.000
3909 
0.000
3257 
0.000
2606 
0.000
1954 
0.000
1303 
6.51
E-05 
6.51
E-05 
6.51
E-05 
6.51
E-05 
6.51
E-05 
6.51
E-05 
6.51
E-05 
6.51
E-05 
0.000
1303 
0.000
1954 
0.000
2606 
0.000
3257 
0.000
3909 
0.000
456 
0.000
5342 
I. Transport of Al 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
I. BA sorting and 
recycling 
0.428
5 
0.375 
0.321
4 
0.267
8 
0.214
3 
0.160
7 
0.107
1 
0.053
57 
0.053
57 
0.053
57 
0.053
57 
0.053
57 
0.053
57 
0.053
57 
0.053
57 
0.107
1 
0.160
7 
0.214
3 
0.267
8 
0.321
4 
0.375 
0.439
3 
AD. Transport of 
digestate 
0.004
616 
0.009
232 
0.013
85 
0.018
46 
0.023
08 
0.027
7 
0.032
31 
0.036
93 
0.032
31 
0.027
7 
0.023
08 
0.018
46 
0.013
85 
0.009
232 
0.004
616 
0.004
616 
0.004
616 
0.004
616 
0.004
616 
0.004
616 
0.004
616 
0.003
693 
C. Composting 
0.028
81 
0.028
81 
0.028
81 
0.028
81 
0.028
81 
0.028
81 
0.028
81 
0.028
81 
0.057
63 
0.086
44 
0.115
3 
0.144
1 
0.172
9 
0.201
7 
0.230
5 
0.201
7 
0.172
9 
0.144
1 
0.115
3 
0.086
44 
0.057
63 
0 
I. 
Waste 
Incineration 
0.076
58 
0.067
01 
0.057
44 
0.047
86 
0.038
29 
0.028
72 
0.019
15 
0.009
573 
0.009
573 
0.009
573 
0.009
573 
0.009
573 
0.009
573 
0.009
573 
0.009
573 
0.019
15 
0.028
72 
0.038
29 
0.047
86 
0.057
44 
0.067
01 
0.078
5 
TOTAL 
-
1.09
E+03 
-
1.63
E+03 
-
2.17
E+03 
-
2.72
E+03 
-
3.26
E+03 
-
3.81
E+03 
-
4.35
E+03 
-4895 
-
4.89
E+03 
-
4.89
E+03 
-
4.89
E+03 
-
4.89
E+03 
-
4.89
E+03 
-
4.89
E+03 
-
4.89
E+03 
-
4.35
E+03 
-
3.81
E+03 
-
3.26
E+03 
-
2.72
E+03 
-
2.17
E+03 
-
1.63
E+03 
-
4.34
E+02 
total 
INCINERATION 
6.77
E-01 
5.93
E-01 
5.08
E-01 
4.23
E-01 
3.39
E-01 
2.54
E-01 
1.69
E-01 
8.47
E-02 
8.47
E-02 
8.47
E-02 
8.47
E-02 
8.47
E-02 
8.47
E-02 
8.47
E-02 
8.47
E-02 
1.69
E-01 
2.54
E-01 
3.39
E-01 
4.23
E-01 
5.08
E-01 
5.93
E-01 
6.94
E-01 
total COMPOST 
-
5.44
E+02 
-
5.44
E+02 
-
5.44
E+02 
-
5.44
E+02 
-
5.44
E+02 
-
5.44
E+02 
-
5.44
E+02 
-
5.44
E+02 
-
1.09
E+03 
-
1.63
E+03 
-
2.18
E+03 
-
2.72
E+03 
-
3.26
E+03 
-
3.81
E+03 
-
4.35
E+03 
-
3.81
E+03 
-
3.26
E+03 
-
2.72
E+03 
-
2.18
E+03 
-
1.63
E+03 
-
1.09
E+03 
0.00
E+00 
total AD 
-
5.44
E+02 
-
1.09
E+03 
-
1.63
E+03 
-
2.18
E+03 
-
2.72
E+03 
-
3.26
E+03 
-
3.81
E+03 
-
4.35
E+03 
-
3.81
E+03 
-
3.26
E+03 
-
2.72
E+03 
-
2.18
E+03 
-
1.63
E+03 
-
1.09
E+03 
-
5.44
E+02 
-
5.44
E+02 
-
5.44
E+02 
-
5.44
E+02 
-
5.44
E+02 
-
5.44
E+02 
-
5.44
E+02 
-
4.35
E+02 
 
80 
 
==PAGE:86==
 
 
 
Table 30: LCA characterized results to marine eutrophication in kg N-eq. Total contribution of each process, total contribution of each option and total contribution are included for the 21 
scenarios and the current scenario.To see the contribution of each s sub-process look at the EASETECH file. 
kg N-eq 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
Curre
nt 
AD. 
Anaerobic 
digestion 
276.3 
552.6 
829 
1105 
1382 
1658 
1934 
2211 
1934 
1658 
1382 
1105 
829 
552.6 
276.3 
276.3 
276.3 
276.3 
276.3 
276.3 
276.3 
221.1 
AD. 
Biogas 
utilization 
-1574 
-3148 
-4722 
-6295 
-7869 
-9443 
-
1.10
E+04 
-
1.26
E+04 
-
1.10
E+04 
-9443 
-7869 
-6295 
-4722 
-3148 
-1574 
-1574 
-1574 
-1574 
-1574 
-1574 
-1574 
-1259 
AD. 
UOL 
digestate 
3.56
E+04 
7.13
E+04 
1.07
E+05 
1.43
E+05 
1.78
E+05 
-
7.71
E+04 
2.50
E+05 
2.85
E+05 
2.50
E+05 
2.14
E+05 
1.78
E+05 
1.43
E+05 
1.07
E+05 
7.13
E+04 
3.56
E+04 
3.56
E+04 
3.56
E+04 
3.56
E+04 
3.56
E+04 
3.56
E+04 
3.56
E+04 
2.85
E+04 
AD. Substitutuion 
UOL digestate 
-
1.29
E+04 
-
2.57
E+04 
-
3.86
E+04 
-
5.14
E+04 
-
6.43
E+04 
2.14
E+05 
-
9.00
E+04 
-
1.03
E+05 
-
9.00
E+04 
-
7.71
E+04 
-
6.43
E+04 
-
5.14
E+04 
-
3.86
E+04 
-
2.57
E+04 
-
1.29
E+04 
-
1.29
E+04 
-
1.29
E+04 
-
1.29
E+04 
-
1.29
E+04 
-
1.29
E+04 
-
1.29
E+04 
-
1.03
E+04 
C. 
UOL 
composting  
1.43
E+04 
1.43
E+04 
1.43
E+04 
1.43
E+04 
1.43
E+04 
1.43
E+04 
1.43
E+04 
1.43
E+04 
2.86
E+04 
4.30
E+04 
5.73
E+04 
7.16
E+04 
8.59
E+04 
1.00
E+05 
1.15
E+05 
1.00
E+05 
8.59
E+04 
7.16
E+04 
5.73
E+04 
4.30
E+04 
2.86
E+04 
0 
I. Utilization of fly 
ash  
2.855 
2.498 
2.141 
1.785 
1.428 
1.071 
0.713
8 
0.356
9 
0.356
9 
0.356
9 
0.356
9 
0.356
9 
0.356
9 
0.356
9 
0.356
9 
0.713
8 
1.071 
1.428 
1.785 
2.141 
2.498 
2.927 
I. Recycling Al  
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
I. FW Collection 
Cph 
296.9 
259.8 
222.6 
185.5 
148.4 
111.3 
74.22 
37.11 
37.11 
37.11 
37.11 
37.11 
37.11 
37.11 
37.11 
74.22 
111.3 
148.4 
185.5 
222.6 
259.8 
304.3 
C. FW C, T and 
Pretr. 
117.9 
117.9 
117.9 
117.9 
117.9 
117.9 
117.9 
117.9 
235.8 
353.6 
471.5 
589.4 
707.3 
825.1 
943 
825.1 
707.3 
589.4 
471.5 
353.6 
235.8 
0 
AD. FW C, T, 
Pretr. 
117.9 
235.8 
353.6 
471.5 
589.4 
707.3 
825.1 
943 
825.1 
707.3 
589.4 
471.5 
353.6 
235.8 
117.9 
117.9 
117.9 
117.9 
117.9 
117.9 
117.9 
94.3 
C. Transport of 
compost 
3.775 
3.775 
3.775 
3.775 
3.775 
3.775 
3.775 
3.775 
7.55 
11.33 
15.1 
18.88 
22.65 
26.43 
30.2 
26.43 
22.65 
18.88 
15.1 
11.33 
7.55 
0 
C. 
Substitution 
UOL compost 
-8835 
-8835 
-8835 
-8835 
-8835 
-8835 
-8835 
-8835 
-
1.77
E+04 
-
2.65
E+04 
-
3.53
E+04 
-
4.42
E+04 
-
5.30
E+04 
-
6.18
E+04 
-
7.07
E+04 
-
6.18
E+04 
-
5.30
E+04 
-
4.42
E+04 
-
3.53
E+04 
-
2.65
E+04 
-
1.77
E+04 
0 
I. Transportation 
of Fly Ash 
27.43 
24 
20.57 
17.14 
13.71 
10.28 
6.856 
3.428 
3.428 
3.428 
3.428 
3.428 
3.428 
3.428 
3.428 
6.856 
10.28 
13.71 
17.14 
20.57 
24 
28.11 
I. Transport of Al 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
81 
 
==PAGE:87==
 
I. BA sorting and 
recycling 
14.8 
12.95 
11.1 
9.252 
7.401 
5.551 
3.701 
1.85 
1.85 
1.85 
1.85 
1.85 
1.85 
1.85 
1.85 
3.701 
5.551 
7.401 
9.252 
11.1 
12.95 
15.17 
AD. Transport of 
digestate 
22.57 
45.14 
67.7 
90.27 
112.8 
135.4 
158 
180.5 
158 
135.4 
112.8 
90.27 
67.7 
45.14 
22.57 
22.57 
22.57 
22.57 
22.57 
22.57 
22.57 
18.05 
C. Composting 
721.3 
721.3 
721.3 
721.3 
721.3 
721.3 
721.3 
721.3 
1443 
2164 
2885 
3607 
4328 
5049 
5771 
5049 
4328 
3607 
2885 
2164 
1443 
0 
I. 
Waste 
Incineration 
1.24
E+04 
1.08
E+04 
9270 
7725 
6180 
4635 
3090 
1545 
1545 
1545 
1545 
1545 
1545 
1545 
1545 
3090 
4635 
6180 
7725 
9270 
1.08
E+04 
1.27
E+04 
TOTAL 
4.07
E+04 
6.07
E+04 
8.07
E+04 
1.01
E+05 
1.21
E+05 
1.41
E+05 
1.61
E+05 
1.81
E+05 
1.66
E+05 
1.50
E+05 
1.35
E+05 
1.20
E+05 
1.04
E+05 
8.91
E+04 
7.39
E+04 
6.91
E+04 
6.44
E+04 
5.96
E+04 
5.49
E+04 
5.01
E+04 
4.54
E+04 
3.03
E+04 
total 
INCINERATION 
1.27
E+04 
1.11
E+04 
9.53
E+03 
7.94
E+03 
6.35
E+03 
4.76
E+03 
3.18
E+03 
1.59
E+03 
1.59
E+03 
1.59
E+03 
1.59
E+03 
1.59
E+03 
1.59
E+03 
1.59
E+03 
1.59
E+03 
3.18
E+03 
4.76
E+03 
6.35
E+03 
7.94
E+03 
9.53
E+03 
1.11
E+04 
1.30
E+04 
total COMPOST 
6.33
E+03 
6.33
E+03 
6.33
E+03 
6.33
E+03 
6.33
E+03 
6.33
E+03 
6.33
E+03 
6.33
E+03 
1.27
E+04 
1.90
E+04 
2.53
E+04 
3.16
E+04 
3.80
E+04 
4.43
E+04 
5.07
E+04 
4.43
E+04 
3.80
E+04 
3.16
E+04 
2.53
E+04 
1.90
E+04 
1.27
E+04 
0.00
E+00 
total AD 
2.16
E+04 
4.33
E+04 
6.49
E+04 
8.65
E+04 
1.08
E+05 
1.30
E+05 
1.51
E+05 
1.73
E+05 
1.51
E+05 
1.30
E+05 
1.08
E+05 
8.65
E+04 
6.49
E+04 
4.33
E+04 
2.16
E+04 
2.16
E+04 
2.16
E+04 
2.16
E+04 
2.16
E+04 
2.16
E+04 
2.16
E+04 
1.73
E+04 
 
Table 31: LCA characterized results to ecotoxicity in CTU. Total contribution of each process, total contribution of each option and total contribution are included for the 21 scenarios and the 
current scenario.To see the contribution of each sub-process look at the EASETECH file. 
CTU 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
Curre
nt 
AD. 
Anaerobic 
digestion 
1528 
3056 
4584 
6112 
7640 
9167 
1.07
E+04 
1.22
E+04 
1.07
E+04 
9167 
7640 
6112 
4584 
3056 
1528 
1528 
1528 
1528 
1528 
1528 
1528 
1222 
AD. 
Biogas 
utilization 
-9879 
-
1.98
E+04 
-
2.96
E+04 
-
3.95
E+04 
-
4.94
E+04 
-
5.93
E+04 
-
6.92
E+04 
-
7.90
E+04 
-
6.92
E+04 
-
5.93
E+04 
-
4.94
E+04 
-
3.95
E+04 
-
2.96
E+04 
-
1.98E
+04 
-9879 
-
9879 
-
9879 
-
9879 
-
9879 
-
9879 
-
9879 
-
7903 
AD. 
UOL 
digestate 
2.63
E+06 
5.26
E+06 
7.90
E+06 
1.05
E+07 
1.32
E+07 
-
3.53
E+06 
1.84
E+07 
2.11
E+07 
1.84
E+07 
1.58
E+07 
1.32
E+07 
1.05
E+07 
7.90
E+06 
5.26E
+06 
2.63E
+06 
2.63
E+06 
2.63
E+06 
2.63
E+06 
2.63
E+06 
2.63
E+06 
2.63
E+06 
2.11
E+06 
AD. Substitutuion 
UOL digestate 
-
5.88
E+05 
-
1.18
E+06 
-
1.77
E+06 
-
2.35
E+06 
-
2.94
E+06 
1.58
E+07 
-
4.12
E+06 
-
4.71
E+06 
-
4.12
E+06 
-
3.53
E+06 
-
2.94
E+06 
-
2.35
E+06 
-
1.77
E+06 
-
1.18E
+06 
-
5.88E
+05 
-
5.88
E+05 
-
5.88
E+05 
-
5.88
E+05 
-
5.88
E+05 
-
5.88
E+05 
-
5.88
E+05 
-
4.71
E+05 
C. 
UOL 
composting  
2.63
E+06 
2.63
E+06 
2.63
E+06 
2.63
E+06 
2.63
E+06 
2.63
E+06 
2.63
E+06 
2.63
E+06 
5.26
E+06 
7.89
E+06 
1.05
E+07 
1.32
E+07 
1.58
E+07 
1.84E
+07 
2.11E
+07 
1.84
E+07 
1.58
E+07 
1.32
E+07 
1.05
E+07 
7.89
E+06 
5.26
E+06 
0 
I. Utilization of fly 
ash  
183.4 
160.5 
137.5 
114.6 
91.69 
68.77 
45.85 
22.92 
22.92 
22.92 
22.92 
22.92 
22.92 
22.92 
22.92 
45.85 
68.77 
91.69 
114.6 
137.5 
160.5 
188 
I. Recycling Al  
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
I. FW Collection 
Cph 
1.85
E+04 
1.62
E+04 
1.39
E+04 
1.16
E+04 
9254 
6941 
4627 
2314 
2314 
2314 
2314 
2314 
2314 
2314 
2314 
4627 
6941 
9254 
1.16
E+04 
1.39
E+04 
1.62
E+04 
1.90
E+04 
82 
 
==PAGE:88==
 
C. FW C, T and 
Pretr. 
4928 
4928 
4928 
4928 
4928 
4928 
4928 
4928 
9857 
1.48
E+04 
1.97
E+04 
2.46
E+04 
2.96
E+04 
3.45E
+04 
3.94E
+04 
3.45
E+04 
2.96
E+04 
2.46
E+04 
1.97
E+04 
1.48
E+04 
9857 
0 
AD. FW C, T, 
Pretr. 
4928 
9857 
1.48
E+04 
1.97
E+04 
2.46
E+04 
2.96
E+04 
3.45
E+04 
3.94
E+04 
3.45
E+04 
2.96
E+04 
2.46
E+04 
1.97
E+04 
1.48
E+04 
9857 
4928 
4928 
4928 
4928 
4928 
4928 
4928 
3943 
C. Transport of 
compost 
921.4 
921.4 
921.4 
921.4 
921.4 
921.4 
921.4 
921.4 
1843 
2764 
3686 
4607 
5529 
6450 
7372 
6450 
5529 
4607 
3686 
2764 
1843 
0 
C. 
Substitution 
UOL compost 
-
5.22
E+05 
-
5.22
E+05 
-
5.22
E+05 
-
5.22
E+05 
-
5.22
E+05 
-
5.22
E+05 
-
5.22
E+05 
-
5.22
E+05 
-
1.05
E+06 
-
1.57
E+06 
-
2.09
E+06 
-
2.61
E+06 
-
3.13
E+06 
-
3.66E
+06 
-
4.18E
+06 
-
3.66
E+06 
-
3.13
E+06 
-
2.61
E+06 
-
2.09
E+06 
-
1.57
E+06 
-
1.05
E+06 
0 
I. Transportation 
of Fly Ash 
40.36 
35.31 
30.27 
25.22 
20.18 
15.13 
10.09 
5.045 
5.045 
5.045 
5.045 
5.045 
5.045 
5.045 
5.045 
10.09 
15.13 
20.18 
25.22 
30.27 
35.31 
41.37 
I. Transport of Al 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
I. BA sorting and 
recycling 
8.14
E+04 
7.13
E+04 
6.11
E+04 
5.09
E+04 
4.07
E+04 
3.05
E+04 
2.04
E+04 
1.02
E+04 
1.02
E+04 
1.02
E+04 
1.02
E+04 
1.02
E+04 
1.02
E+04 
1.02E
+04 
1.02E
+04 
2.04
E+04 
3.05
E+04 
4.07
E+04 
5.09
E+04 
6.11
E+04 
7.13
E+04 
8.35
E+04 
AD. Transport of 
digestate 
5508 
1.10
E+04 
1.65
E+04 
2.20
E+04 
2.75
E+04 
3.31
E+04 
3.86
E+04 
4.41
E+04 
3.86
E+04 
3.31
E+04 
2.75
E+04 
2.20
E+04 
1.65
E+04 
1.10E
+04 
5508 
5508 
5508 
5508 
5508 
5508 
5508 
4407 
C. Composting 
2.01
E+04 
2.01
E+04 
2.01
E+04 
2.01
E+04 
2.01
E+04 
2.01
E+04 
2.01
E+04 
2.01
E+04 
4.03
E+04 
6.04
E+04 
8.06
E+04 
1.01
E+05 
1.21
E+05 
1.41E
+05 
1.61E
+05 
1.41
E+05 
1.21
E+05 
1.01
E+05 
8.06
E+04 
6.04
E+04 
4.03
E+04 
0 
I. 
Waste 
Incineration 
4.14
E+04 
3.62
E+04 
3.11
E+04 
2.59
E+04 
2.07
E+04 
1.55
E+04 
1.04
E+04 
5175 
5175 
5175 
5175 
5175 
5175 
5175 
5175 
1.04
E+04 
1.55
E+04 
2.07
E+04 
2.59
E+04 
3.11
E+04 
3.62
E+04 
4.24
E+04 
TOTAL 
4.32
E+06 
6.35
E+06 
8.38
E+06 
1.04
E+07 
1.24
E+07 
1.45
E+07 
1.65
E+07 
1.85
E+07 
1.86
E+07 
1.87
E+07 
1.88
E+07 
1.89
E+07 
1.90
E+07 
1.905
E+07 
1.914
E+07 
1.70
E+07 
1.49
E+07 
1.28
E+07 
1.07
E+07 
8.56
E+06 
6.44
E+06 
1.78
E+06 
total 
INCINERATION 
1.42
E+05 
1.24
E+05 
1.06
E+05 
8.85
E+04 
7.08
E+04 
5.31
E+04 
3.54
E+04 
1.77
E+04 
1.77
E+04 
1.77
E+04 
1.77
E+04 
1.77
E+04 
1.77
E+04 
1.77E
+04 
1.77E
+04 
3.54
E+04 
5.31
E+04 
7.08
E+04 
8.85
E+04 
1.06
E+05 
1.24
E+05 
1.45
E+05 
total COMPOST 
2.13
E+06 
2.13
E+06 
2.13
E+06 
2.13
E+06 
2.13
E+06 
2.13
E+06 
2.13
E+06 
2.13
E+06 
4.27
E+06 
6.40
E+06 
8.54
E+06 
1.07
E+07 
1.28
E+07 
1.49E
+07 
1.71E
+07 
1.49
E+07 
1.28
E+07 
1.07
E+07 
8.54
E+06 
6.40
E+06 
4.27
E+06 
0.00
E+00 
total AD 
2.05
E+06 
4.09
E+06 
6.14
E+06 
8.19
E+06 
1.02
E+07 
1.23
E+07 
1.43
E+07 
1.64
E+07 
1.43
E+07 
1.23
E+07 
1.02
E+07 
8.19
E+06 
6.14
E+06 
4.09E
+06 
2.05E
+06 
2.05
E+06 
2.05
E+06 
2.05
E+06 
2.05
E+06 
2.05
E+06 
2.05
E+06 
1.64
E+06 
 
Table 32: LCA characterized results to fossil resource depletion in MJ. Total contribution of each process, total contribution of each option and total contribution are included for the 21 scenarios 
and the current scenario. To see the contribution of each sub-process look at the EASETECH file. 
MJ 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
Curre
nt 
AD. 
Anaerobic 
digestion 
5.88
E+06 
1.18
E+07 
1.77
E+07 
2.35
E+07 
2.94
E+07 
3.53
E+07 
4.12
E+07 
4.71
E+07 
4.12
E+07 
3.53
E+07 
2.94
E+07 
2.35
E+07 
1.77
E+07 
1.18
E+07 
5.88
E+06 
5.88
E+06 
5.88
E+06 
5.88
E+06 
5.88
E+06 
5.88
E+06 
5.88
E+06 
4.71
E+06 
AD. 
Biogas 
utilization 
-
5.20
E+07 
-
1.04
E+08 
-
1.56
E+08 
-
2.08
E+08 
-
2.60
E+08 
-
3.12
E+08 
-
3.64
E+08 
-
4.16
E+08 
-
3.64
E+08 
-
3.12
E+08 
-
2.60
E+08 
-
2.08
E+08 
-
1.56
E+08 
-
1.04
E+08 
-
5.20
E+07 
-
5.20
E+07 
-
5.20
E+07 
-
5.20
E+07 
-
5.20
E+07 
-
5.20
E+07 
-
5.20
E+07 
-
4.16
E+07 
83 
 
==PAGE:89==
 
AD. 
UOL 
digestate 
3.92
E+05 
7.85
E+05 
1.18
E+06 
1.57
E+06 
1.96
E+06 
-
178.5 
2.75
E+06 
3.14
E+06 
2.75
E+06 
2.35
E+06 
1.96
E+06 
1.57
E+06 
1.18
E+06 
7.85
E+05 
3.92
E+05 
3.92
E+05 
3.92
E+05 
3.92
E+05 
3.92
E+05 
3.92
E+05 
3.92
E+05 
3.14
E+05 
AD. Substitutuion 
UOL digestate 
-
29.76 
-
59.51 
-
89.27 
-119 
-
148.8 
2.35
E+06 
-
208.3 
-238 
-
208.3 
-
178.5 
-
148.8 
-119 
-
89.27 
-
59.51 
-
29.76 
-
29.76 
-
29.76 
-
29.76 
-
29.76 
-
29.76 
-
29.76 
-23.8 
C. 
UOL 
composting  
4.38
E+04 
4.38
E+04 
4.38
E+04 
4.38
E+04 
4.38
E+04 
4.38
E+04 
4.38
E+04 
4.38
E+04 
8.75
E+04 
1.31
E+05 
1.75
E+05 
2.19
E+05 
2.63
E+05 
3.06
E+05 
3.50
E+05 
3.06
E+05 
2.63
E+05 
2.19
E+05 
1.75
E+05 
1.31
E+05 
8.75
E+04 
0 
I. Utilization of fly 
ash  
4.56
E+04 
3.99
E+04 
3.42
E+04 
2.85
E+04 
2.28
E+04 
1.71
E+04 
1.14
E+04 
5705 
5705 
5705 
5705 
5705 
5705 
5705 
5705 
1.14
E+04 
1.71
E+04 
2.28
E+04 
2.85
E+04 
3.42
E+04 
3.99
E+04 
4.68
E+04 
I. Recycling Al  
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
I. FW Collection 
Cph 
9.47
E+06 
8.29
E+06 
7.10
E+06 
5.92
E+06 
4.74
E+06 
3.55
E+06 
2.37
E+06 
1.18
E+06 
1.18
E+06 
1.18
E+06 
1.18
E+06 
1.18
E+06 
1.18
E+06 
1.18
E+06 
1.18
E+06 
2.37
E+06 
3.55
E+06 
4.74
E+06 
5.92
E+06 
7.10
E+06 
8.29
E+06 
9.71
E+06 
C. FW C, T and 
Pretr. 
2.22
E+06 
2.22
E+06 
2.22
E+06 
2.22
E+06 
2.22
E+06 
2.22
E+06 
2.22
E+06 
2.22
E+06 
4.45
E+06 
6.67
E+06 
8.89
E+06 
1.11
E+07 
1.33
E+07 
1.56
E+07 
1.78
E+07 
1.56
E+07 
1.33
E+07 
1.11
E+07 
8.89
E+06 
6.67
E+06 
4.45
E+06 
0 
AD. FW C, T, 
Pretr. 
2.22
E+06 
4.45
E+06 
6.67
E+06 
8.89
E+06 
1.11
E+07 
1.33
E+07 
1.56
E+07 
1.78
E+07 
1.56
E+07 
1.33
E+07 
1.11
E+07 
8.89
E+06 
6.67
E+06 
4.45
E+06 
2.22
E+06 
2.22
E+06 
2.22
E+06 
2.22
E+06 
2.22
E+06 
2.22
E+06 
2.22
E+06 
1.78
E+06 
C. Transport of 
compost 
4.26
E+05 
4.26
E+05 
4.26
E+05 
4.26
E+05 
4.26
E+05 
4.26
E+05 
4.26
E+05 
4.26
E+05 
8.52
E+05 
1.28
E+06 
1.70
E+06 
2.13
E+06 
2.56
E+06 
2.98
E+06 
3.41
E+06 
2.98
E+06 
2.56
E+06 
2.13
E+06 
1.70
E+06 
1.28
E+06 
8.52
E+05 
0 
C. 
Substitution 
UOL compost 
-
20.51 
-
20.51 
-
20.51 
-
20.51 
-
20.51 
-
20.51 
-
20.51 
-
20.51 
-
41.03 
-
61.54 
-
82.05 
-
102.6 
-
123.1 
-
143.6 
-
164.1 
-
143.6 
-
123.1 
-
102.6 
-
82.05 
-
61.54 
-
41.03 
0 
I. Transportation 
of Fly Ash 
2.84
E+04 
2.49
E+04 
2.13
E+04 
1.78
E+04 
1.42
E+04 
1.07
E+04 
7105 
3552 
3552 
3552 
3552 
3552 
3552 
3552 
3552 
7105 
1.07
E+04 
1.42
E+04 
1.78
E+04 
2.13
E+04 
2.49
E+04 
2.91
E+04 
I. Transport of Al 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
I. BA sorting and 
recycling 
1.03
E+05 
9.01
E+04 
7.72
E+04 
6.43
E+04 
5.15
E+04 
3.86
E+04 
2.57
E+04 
1.29
E+04 
1.29
E+04 
1.29
E+04 
1.29
E+04 
1.29
E+04 
1.29
E+04 
1.29
E+04 
1.29
E+04 
2.57
E+04 
3.86
E+04 
5.15
E+04 
6.43
E+04 
7.72
E+04 
9.01
E+04 
1.06
E+05 
AD. Transport of 
digestate 
2.55
E+06 
5.09
E+06 
7.64
E+06 
1.02
E+07 
1.27
E+07 
1.53
E+07 
1.78
E+07 
2.04
E+07 
1.78
E+07 
1.53
E+07 
1.27
E+07 
1.02
E+07 
7.64
E+06 
5.09
E+06 
2.55
E+06 
2.55
E+06 
2.55
E+06 
2.55
E+06 
2.55
E+06 
2.55
E+06 
2.55
E+06 
2.04
E+06 
C. Composting 
8.18
E+06 
8.18
E+06 
8.18
E+06 
8.18
E+06 
8.18
E+06 
8.18
E+06 
8.18
E+06 
8.18
E+06 
1.64
E+07 
2.45
E+07 
3.27
E+07 
4.09
E+07 
4.91
E+07 
5.73
E+07 
6.54
E+07 
5.73
E+07 
4.91
E+07 
4.09
E+07 
3.27
E+07 
2.45
E+07 
1.64
E+07 
0 
I. 
Waste 
Incineration 
-
1.63
E+08 
-
1.42
E+08 
-
1.22
E+08 
-
1.02
E+08 
-
8.13
E+07 
-
6.10
E+07 
-
4.06
E+07 
-
2.03
E+07 
-
2.03
E+07 
-
2.03
E+07 
-
2.03
E+07 
-
2.03
E+07 
-
2.03
E+07 
-
2.03
E+07 
-
2.03
E+07 
-
4.06
E+07 
-
6.10
E+07 
-
8.13
E+07 
-
1.02
E+08 
-
1.22
E+08 
-
1.42
E+08 
-
1.67
E+08 
TOTAL 
-
1.83
E+08 
-
2.05
E+08 
-
2.27
E+08 
-
2.49
E+08 
-
2.71
E+08 
-
2.92
E+08 
-
3.14
E+08 
-
3.36
E+08 
-
2.84
E+08 
-
2.32
E+08 
-
1.81
E+08 
-
1.29
E+08 
-
7.69
E+07 
-
2.50
E+07 
2.69
E+07 
-
3.12
E+06 
-
3.31
E+07 
-
6.31
E+07 
-
9.31
E+07 
-
1.23
E+08 
-
1.53
E+08 
-
1.89
E+08 
total 
INCINERATION 
-
1.53
E+08 
-
1.34
E+08 
-
1.15
E+08 
-
9.56
E+07 
-
7.65
E+07 
-
5.73
E+07 
-
3.82
E+07 
-
1.91
E+07 
-
1.91
E+07 
-
1.91
E+07 
-
1.91
E+07 
-
1.91
E+07 
-
1.91
E+07 
-
1.91
E+07 
-
1.91
E+07 
-
3.82
E+07 
-
5.73
E+07 
-
7.65
E+07 
-
9.56
E+07 
-
1.15
E+08 
-
1.34
E+08 
-
1.57
E+08 
total COMPOST 
1.09
E+07 
1.09
E+07 
1.09
E+07 
1.09
E+07 
1.09
E+07 
1.09
E+07 
1.09
E+07 
1.09
E+07 
2.17
E+07 
3.26
E+07 
4.35
E+07 
5.43
E+07 
6.52
E+07 
7.61
E+07 
8.70
E+07 
7.61
E+07 
6.52
E+07 
5.43
E+07 
4.35
E+07 
3.26
E+07 
2.17
E+07 
0.00
E+00 
84 
 
==PAGE:90==
 
total AD 
-
4.10
E+07 
-
8.20
E+07 
-
1.23
E+08 
-
1.64
E+08 
-
2.05
E+08 
-
2.46
E+08 
-
2.87
E+08 
-
3.28
E+08 
-
2.87
E+08 
-
2.46
E+08 
-
2.05
E+08 
-
1.64
E+08 
-
1.23
E+08 
-
8.20
E+07 
-
4.10
E+07 
-
4.10
E+07 
-
4.10
E+07 
-
4.10
E+07 
-
4.10
E+07 
-
4.10
E+07 
-
4.10
E+07 
-
3.28
E+07 
 
 
 
Table 33: LCA characterized results to reserve base resource depletion in kg Sb-eq. Total contribution of each process, total contribution of each option and total contribution are included for 
the 21 scenarios and the current scenario. To see the contribution of each sub-p sub-process look at the EASETECH file. 
Kg Sb-eq 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
Curr
ent 
AD. 
Anaerobic 
digestion 
0.118
4 
0.236
7 
0.355
1 
0.473
4 
0.591
8 
0.710
1 
0.828
5 
0.946
8 
0.828
5 
0.710
1 
0.591
8 
0.473
4 
0.355
1 
0.236
7 
0.118
4 
0.118
4 
0.118
4 
0.118
4 
0.118
4 
0.118
4 
0.118
4 
0.09
468 
AD. 
Biogas 
utilization 
-
0.494
4 
-
0.988
8 
-
1.483 
-
1.978 
-
2.472 
-
2.966 
-
3.461 
-
3.955 
-
3.461 
-
2.966 
-
2.472 
-
1.978 
-
1.483 
-
0.988
8 
-
0.494
4 
-
0.494
4 
-
0.494
4 
-
0.494
4 
-
0.494
4 
-
0.494
4 
-
0.494
4 
-
0.39
55 
AD. 
UOL 
digestate 
0.074
33 
0.148
7 
0.223 
0.297
3 
0.371
7 
-
5.984 
0.520
3 
0.594
6 
0.520
3 
0.446 
0.371
7 
0.297
3 
0.223 
0.148
7 
0.074
33 
0.074
33 
0.074
33 
0.074
33 
0.074
33 
0.074
33 
0.074
33 
0.05
946 
AD. Substitutuion 
UOL digestate 
-
0.997
3 
-
1.995 
-
2.992 
-
3.989 
-
4.986 
0.446 
-
6.981 
-
7.978 
-
6.981 
-
5.984 
-
4.986 
-
3.989 
-
2.992 
-
1.995 
-
0.997
3 
-
0.997
3 
-
0.997
3 
-
0.997
3 
-
0.997
3 
-
0.997
3 
-
0.997
3 
-
0.79
78 
C. 
UOL 
composting  
0.008
29 
0.008
29 
0.008
29 
0.008
29 
0.008
29 
0.008
29 
0.008
29 
0.008
29 
0.016
58 
0.024
87 
0.033
16 
0.041
45 
0.049
74 
0.058
03 
0.066
32 
0.058
03 
0.049
74 
0.041
45 
0.033
16 
0.024
87 
0.016
58 
0 
I. Utilization of fly 
ash  
0.001
725 
0.001
509 
0.001
293 
0.001
078 
0.000
8623 
0.000
6467 
0.000
4311 
0.000
2156 
0.000
2156 
0.000
2156 
0.000
2156 
0.000
2156 
0.000
2156 
0.000
2156 
0.000
2156 
0.000
4311 
0.000
6467 
0.000
8623 
0.001
078 
0.001
293 
0.001
509 
0.00
1768 
I. Recycling Al  
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
I. FW Collection 
Cph 
1.794 
1.57 
1.346 
1.122 
0.897
2 
0.672
9 
0.448
6 
0.224
3 
0.224
3 
0.224
3 
0.224
3 
0.224
3 
0.224
3 
0.224
3 
0.224
3 
0.448
6 
0.672
9 
0.897
2 
1.122 
1.346 
1.57 
1.83
9 
C. FW C, T and 
Pretr. 
0.277
4 
0.277
4 
0.277
4 
0.277
4 
0.277
4 
0.277
4 
0.277
4 
0.277
4 
0.554
8 
0.832
3 
1.11 
1.387 
1.665 
1.942 
2.219 
1.942 
1.665 
1.387 
1.11 
0.832
3 
0.554
8 
0 
AD. FW C, T, 
Pretr. 
0.277
4 
0.554
8 
0.832
3 
1.11 
1.387 
1.665 
1.942 
2.219 
1.942 
1.665 
1.387 
1.11 
0.832
3 
0.554
8 
0.277
4 
0.277
4 
0.277
4 
0.277
4 
0.277
4 
0.277
4 
0.277
4 
0.22
19 
C. Transport of 
compost 
3.56
E-08 
3.56
E-08 
3.56
E-08 
3.56
E-08 
3.56
E-08 
3.56
E-08 
3.56
E-08 
3.56
E-08 
7.12
E-08 
1.07
E-07 
1.42
E-07 
1.78
E-07 
2.14
E-07 
2.49
E-07 
2.85
E-07 
2.49
E-07 
2.14
E-07 
1.78
E-07 
1.42
E-07 
1.07
E-07 
7.12
E-08 
0 
85 
 
==PAGE:91==
 
C. 
Substitution 
UOL compost 
-
0.997
3 
-
0.997
3 
-
0.997
3 
-
0.997
3 
-
0.997
3 
-
0.997
3 
-
0.997
3 
-
0.997
3 
-
1.995 
-
2.992 
-
3.989 
-
4.986 
-
5.984 
-
6.981 
-
7.978 
-
6.981 
-
5.984 
-
4.986 
-
3.989 
-
2.992 
-
1.995 
0 
I. Transportation 
of Fly Ash 
2.33
E-08 
2.04
E-08 
1.75
E-08 
1.46
E-08 
1.17
E-08 
8.74
E-09 
5.83
E-09 
2.91
E-09 
2.91
E-09 
2.91
E-09 
2.91
E-09 
2.91
E-09 
2.91
E-09 
2.91
E-09 
2.91
E-09 
5.83
E-09 
8.74
E-09 
1.17
E-08 
1.46
E-08 
1.75
E-08 
2.04
E-08 
2.39
E-08 
I. Transport of Al 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
I. BA sorting and 
recycling 
0.016
87 
0.014
76 
0.012
65 
0.010
55 
0.008
436 
0.006
327 
0.004
218 
0.002
109 
0.002
109 
0.002
109 
0.002
109 
0.002
109 
0.002
109 
0.002
109 
0.002
109 
0.004
218 
0.006
327 
0.008
436 
0.010
55 
0.012
65 
0.014
76 
0.01
729 
AD. Transport of 
digestate 
2.13
E-07 
4.25
E-07 
6.38
E-07 
8.51
E-07 
1.06
E-06 
1.28
E-06 
1.49
E-06 
1.70
E-06 
1.49
E-06 
1.28
E-06 
1.06
E-06 
8.51
E-07 
6.38
E-07 
4.25
E-07 
2.13
E-07 
2.13
E-07 
2.13
E-07 
2.13
E-07 
2.13
E-07 
2.13
E-07 
2.13
E-07 
1.70
E-07 
C. Composting 
0.471
4 
0.471
4 
0.471
4 
0.471
4 
0.471
4 
0.471
4 
0.471
4 
0.471
4 
0.942
8 
1.414 
1.886 
2.357 
2.828 
3.3 
3.771 
3.3 
2.828 
2.357 
1.886 
1.414 
0.942
8 
0 
I. 
Waste 
Incineration 
1.115 
0.975
8 
0.836
4 
0.697 
0.557
6 
0.418
2 
0.278
8 
0.139
4 
0.139
4 
0.139
4 
0.139
4 
0.139
4 
0.139
4 
0.139
4 
0.139
4 
0.278
8 
0.418
2 
0.557
6 
0.697 
0.836
4 
0.975
8 
1.14
3 
TOTAL 
1.67 
0.28 
-1.11 
-2.50 
-3.88 
-5.27 
-6.66 
-8.05 
-7.27 
-6.48 
-5.70 
-4.92 
-4.14 
-3.36 
-2.58 
-1.97 
-1.36 
-0.76 
-0.15 
0.45 
1.06 
2.18 
total 
INCINERATION 
2.93
E+00 
2.56
E+00 
2.20
E+00 
1.83
E+00 
1.46
E+00 
1.10
E+00 
7.32
E-01 
3.66
E-01 
3.66
E-01 
3.66
E-01 
3.66
E-01 
3.66
E-01 
3.66
E-01 
3.66
E-01 
3.66
E-01 
7.32
E-01 
1.10
E+00 
1.46
E+00 
1.83
E+00 
2.20
E+00 
2.56
E+00 
3.00
E+00 
total COMPOST 
-
2.40
E-01 
-
2.40
E-01 
-
2.40
E-01 
-
2.40
E-01 
-
2.40
E-01 
-
2.40
E-01 
-
2.40
E-01 
-
2.40
E-01 
-
4.81
E-01 
-
7.21
E-01 
-
9.60
E-01 
-
1.20
E+00 
-
1.44
E+00 
-
1.68
E+00 
-
1.92
E+00 
-
1.68
E+00 
-
1.44
E+00 
-
1.20
E+00 
-
9.60
E-01 
-
7.21
E-01 
-
4.81
E-01 
0.00
E+00 
total AD 
-
1.14
E+00 
-
2.04
E+00 
-
3.06
E+00 
-
4.09
E+00 
-
5.11
E+00 
-
6.13
E+00 
-
7.15
E+00 
-
8.17
E+00 
-
7.15
E+00 
-
6.13
E+00 
-
5.11
E+00 
-
4.09
E+00 
-
3.06
E+00 
-
2.04
E+00 
-
1.14
E+00 
-
1.14
E+00 
-
1.14
E+00 
-
1.14
E+00 
-
1.14
E+00 
-
1.14
E+00 
-
1.14
E+00 
-
9.12
E-01 
 
 
 
86 
 
==PAGE:92==
 
Sensitivity analysis 
Table 34: Summary of the sensitivity analysis. Sensitivities are calculated by dividing the percentage of the change in the outputs by the percentage of the change in the inputs. Exceptions are the 
last two, where the percentage of the change is shown after changing the type of soil. 
Parameter 
Affected option  
CC 
TE 
FE 
ME 
Ecotox. 
FRD 
RBRD 
VFW:AFW ratio for households 
Incineration 
-0.2 
0.2 
-0.1 
0.2 
-0.1 
-0.2 
0.1 
Composting 
-0.1 
-0.2 
-0.3 
-0.2 
-0.1 
0.0 
-0.8 
AD 
-0.1 
-0.3 
-0.3 
-0.3 
-0.1 
-0.1 
-0.2 
Electricity used in the composting facility 
Composting 
0.7 
0.2 
0.0 
0.1 
0.0 
0.7 
-1.7 
MFE N in digestate 
AD 
-0.1 
0.1 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
Trasnportation distance of truck 
Composting 
0.0019 
0.0015 
0.0000 
0.0006 
0.0004 
0.0391 
0.0000 
Transportation distance of ship 
Incineration 
-0.0001 
0.0022 
0.0008 
0.0022 
0.0005 
-0.0003 
0.0000 
Incineration electricity efficiency 
Incineration 
0.5 
-0.8 
0.0 
-0.8 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
Biogas utilization electric. Efficiency 
AD 
1.1 
-0.2 
0.0 
-0.1 
0.0 
1.3 
0.5 
(% of change) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Type of soil: heavy clay 
AD 
-1.9 
0.0 
0.0 
19.5 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
Type of soil: coarse sand 
AD 
-1.5 
0.0 
0.0 
-24.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
 
87 
 
==PAGE:93==
 
 
 
88 
 
