==PAGE:1==
Spring 2016
Technical University of Denmark
Master thesis
Cost-Beneﬁt Analysis with
Agglomeration - A Case
Study
Author
Jakob Skovgaard Koed, s112842
Supervisor
Associate Professor, Ismir Mulalic
==PAGE:2==
Cost Beneﬁt Analysis with Agglomeration - A Case Study
Cost Beneﬁt Analyse med Agglomeration - Et Case Studie
Master Thesis, June 2016
By
Jakob Skovgaard Koed
Copyright: Fully or partly reference to this thesis is permitted with proper source
Front page picture: http://www.drcoell.com/our-services/consultation/cost-beneﬁt-analysis/
Published by: Institute of Management Engineering, Produktionstorvet Building 424, 2800
Kgs. Lyngby
Obtained: www.man.dtu.dk
Preface
This master thesis has been written by Jakob Skovgaard Koed (s112842) with
Associate Professor Ismir Mulalic as supervisor at DTU Management Engineer-
ing. This thesis conclude the two year education within the Master program at
DTU. The thesis is part of the research to quantify the broader economic eﬀects
within the Cost-Beneﬁt Analysis here with focus on agglomeration economics
in a Danish context.
i
==PAGE:3==
Summary
The purpose of this master thesis is to compute an agglomeration eﬀect for the
light rail in Ring 3 Greater Copenhagen, Denmark. Agglomeration is a pro-
ductivity gain from increased density of jobs here the three eﬀects ”matching”,
”sharing” and ”learning” increases the productivity of workers. This agglomer-
ation eﬀect is an externality which is not included by a conventional Cost-Beneﬁt
Analysis. The eﬀect will as an externality be an extra beneﬁt for infrastructure
system.
The existing Cost-Beneﬁt Analysis computed for the light rail by ”Hovedstadens
Letbane” has a negative net present value (NPV) of 8.3 billion kroner. The ag-
glomeration beneﬁt was computed with two diﬀerent scenarios - with and with-
out job growth. To account for the relocation of jobs where a loss elsewhere in
the system gives a lower net beneﬁt, the beneﬁt was downsized by 50% as sensi-
tivity analysis to the main results. The parameters presented in the sensitivity
analysis includes the agglomeration elasticity, the income growth, an decay fac-
tor estimating access to jobs, job growth and change in travel time.
The main results without job growth show a beneﬁt of 700.359 million DKK or
350.179 million DKK with 50% of the beneﬁts. This represents a share of 18%
and 9% respectively of the combined conventional beneﬁts.
The main results with job growth show a beneﬁt of 1,277.155 million DKK
or 638.577 million DKK with 50% of the beneﬁts. This represents a share of
33% and 17% respectively of the combined conventional beneﬁts. Most other
projects with computed agglomeration lies between 10-20% of the conventional
beneﬁts. Therefore the overall analysis is in the same region however with some
results above these levels.
The sensitivity analysis also includes an additional Monte Carlo simulation.
The simulation shows results slightly lower than the two main scenarios of
681.160 and 1,269.474 million DKK as the agglomeration eﬀect for the two
scenarios.
Overall agglomeration has an eﬀect on the Cost-Beneﬁt Analysis and improves
the NPV which in the best scenarios would be obtain the value -5.1 billion DKK
if including agglomeration. Because of only one other project in Denmark with
computed agglomeration, the calculation has some uncertainties and assump-
tions which calls for the need of further research to decrease uncertainty of the
agglomeration eﬀect.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Sammenfatning
Form˚alet med dette speciale er at beregne en agglomerations eﬀekt som en del af
Ring 3 letbanen i Storkøbenhavn. Agglomeration er en produktivitetsforbedring
ved en forøgelse af job densiteten, hvilket fremkommer af de tre eﬀekter ”shar-
ing” ”matching” og ”learning”, der øger produktivteten. Agglomeration er en
eksternalitet, som ikke indg˚ar i den konventionelle samfundsøkonomiske anal-
yse. Derfor vil agglomeration som en eksternalitet være en ekstra gevinst for
samfundet ved anlæg af ny infrastruktur.
Den eksisterende samfundsøkonomiske analyse udregnet af ”Hovedstadens Let-
bane” viser en negativ netto nutidsværdi p˚a kr. 8.3 millarder. I dette speciale
blev agglomerations eﬀekten udregnet med to overordnede scenarier - med og
uden job vækst.
For at tage højde for omlokaliseringen af jobs, da et job,
der ﬂytter fra et omr˚ade, skaber en negativ værdi blev eﬀekten nedskaleret
med 50% som en følsomhedsanalyse til hovedanalysen. Parameterne benyttet
i følsomshedsanalysen inkluderer agglomerations elasticitet, indkomst vækst,
en forfaldsfaktor i adgangen til arbejdspladser, jobvækst og ændring i rejse-
tider.
Resultaterne uden implementeret jobvækst viser en eﬀekt p˚a kr. 700.359 mil-
lioner eller kr. 350.179 millioner med 50% af eﬀekten. Dette repræsenterer en
andel p˚a 18% eller 9% af de samlede konventionelle gevinster.
Resultaterne med implementeret jobvækst viser en eﬀekt p˚a kr. 1,277.155 mil-
lioner eller kr. 638.577 millioner med 50% af eﬀekten. Dette repræsenterer en
andel p˚a 33% eller 17% af de samlede konventionelle gevinster. De ﬂeste an-
dre projekter med indregnet agglomeration har en andel imellem 10-20% af de
konventionelle gevinster, hvilket ogs˚a gælder for dette speciale dog med enkelte
resultater over dette niveau.
Følsomhedsanalysen indeholder desuden en tilføjelse med Monte Carlo simula-
tion. Simulationen viser en lidt lavere agglomerations eﬀekt p˚a kr. 681.160 og
kr. 1,269.474 millioner for de to scenarier.
Overordnet set har agglomeration en eﬀekt p˚a den samfundsøkonomiske analyse
og har en positiv eﬀekt p˚a nutidsværdien, der i de bedste scenarier ville antage
en værdi p˚a -5.1 milliarder DKK med agglomeration. Som følge af et projekt
med agglomerations erfaringer i Danmark, er der nogle usikkerheder ved meto-
den, hvilket nødvendigør mere forskning for at nedbringe usikkerhederne ved
udregningen af agglomerations eﬀekter.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Cost-Beneﬁt Analysis and agglomeration economics . . . . . . . .
3
2
Theory
5
2.1
Cost-Beneﬁt Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Agglomeration as a wider economic eﬀect
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Agglomeration and the theory of urban development . . . . . . .
9
3
Case
14
4
Results
21
4.1
Computation of Agglomeration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2
Sensitivity analysis with Monte-Carlo Simulation . . . . . . . . .
33
5
Discussion
38
6
Conclusion
44
References
47
iv
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
Cost-Beneﬁt Analysis (CBA) is one of the most common tool for economic ap-
praisals of transport projects and is widespread throughout the world. In Den-
mark a standardized method from the Ministry of Transport exists improving
the ability to compare transport projects in the country [Transportministeriet,
2015]. A CBA is a systematic method to cover beneﬁts and costs by quantifying
impacts in monetary values to asset investments [Transportministeriet, 2015].
This thesis will cover transport investment by a case of a public transport system
and the CBA used for this case. The methods in the CBA can vary through-
out diﬀerent countries. This thesis will focus on the aspects set by the Danish
manual for CBA by the Danish Ministry of Transport [Transportministeriet,
2015].
The CBA method assumes a perfect market situation which implies an equi-
librium between demand and supply where prices are set at the cost of the
product [Kernohan et al., 2011].
This requires a large number of competi-
tors, perfect information of the products plus entry barriers to the market are
non-existing. The perfect market situation is however purely theoretical and
ﬁrms has a gap (the price margin) between the optimal demand curve and the
marginal revenue curve [Kernohan et al., 2011]. The margin between optimal
price and the marginal revenue curve is resulting in economic beneﬁts which
are not captured by the assumption of perfect market equilibrium making the
foundation for wider economic beneﬁts. The price margin implies a beneﬁt not
captured from usually practised CBA method [Kernohan et al., 2011].
Because of the diﬀerence between the theoretical and real-world situation there
is a potential for unaccounted beneﬁts to the CBA, and this thesis will focus on
analysing these eﬀects in a case study. The CBA practise is under development
after a call for quantiﬁcation of agglomeration. In Denmark, the Commission of
Productivity [Produktiviteteskommisionen, 2014] calls for increased research in
a Danish context because of the low computed economic gain especially seen in
public transport projects. The wider economic eﬀect has a potential to improve
the value of the CBA for transport projects as seen in other countries.
Often references to the English practice is mentioned in the literature about
agglomeration [Venables and Overman, 2014], and New Zealand also includes
agglomeration in transport appraisal [Kernohan et al., 2011]. Copenhagen Eco-
nomics [Copenhagen Economics, 2014] discuss an increase in the use of agglom-
eration eﬀects, as English material shows a great potential. However, many
disagree in the results because of adding existing eﬀects with double calcula-
tions and the mix of median and sector speciﬁc values [Venables and Overman,
2014]. In Danish context a post analysis of the agglomeration eﬀect of the Great
Belt Bridge was published in 2014 [Transportministeriet og Sund & Bælt, 2014],
which was build on the English practice [Department of Transport, 2005] and
their Transport Appraisal Guidance [Department of Transport, 2014]. The re-
1
==PAGE:7==
sults of the Great Belt Bridge post analysis is described in later parts of the
report.
The Danish Ministry of Transport has in its latest manual for CBA [Trans-
portministeriet, 2015] included the tax distortion factor to counter some of the
eﬀects not captured in the CBA. The manual also discuss a further use of wider
economic eﬀects including agglomeration as a supplement for the CBA in the
future. The element of wider economic works on number of markets with im-
perfections and diﬀerent wider economic eﬀect is part of the causation of the
imperfections. The three most well-known markets with imperfections within
the CBA practise are listed [Copenhagen Economics, 2014]:
• The commodity- and service market,
• the input market, and
• the labour market.
In the English practise the wider economic eﬀects are quantiﬁed in three eﬀects
[Department of Transport, 2014]:
• Eﬀect on the commodity- and service market,
• eﬀects on the labour market, and
• agglomeration.
Each of these three wider economic eﬀects depends on the market in focus. The
input and commodity- and service market have the same eﬀect but on diﬀerent
groups.
A transport project has an eﬀect on the commodity market which
potentially increase competition between ﬁrms, and thereby drives down the
price margin. At the same time the input market aﬀects the consumers welfare
by lower prices of the products [Copenhagen Economics, 2014].
The labour market is known to be imperfect because of taxes cause a wedge
between demand and supply moving the equilibrium wage away from optimum.
A transport project could increase the pool of workers by aﬀecting the term
called matching, leading to a better workforce and reducing the cost of produc-
tion thereby a possible wider economic eﬀect. This is also the case in Denmark
which has a relatively high level of income taxes which aﬀects the equilibrium of
supply and demand. The CBA practise in Denmark aims to correct for this eﬀect
by the implemented tax distortion factor in the Danish CBA manual [Trans-
portministeriet, 2015]. Transport projects can aﬀect the labour market by lower
transport cost as people will have higher incentive to work more hours.
By this motivation, this thesis aims to analyse the wider economic eﬀect of
agglomeration by describing the eﬀect theoretically, and applying the eﬀect to
an existing CBA case, the light rail in O3, Greater Copenhagen, Denmark.
The literature for the background of this project will focus on empirical and
meta studies of agglomeration in urban areas. Furthermore, literature regarding
2
==PAGE:8==
the Danish practice as described in the manual from the Danish Ministry of
Transport and papers from the Technical University of Denmark (DTU).
1.1
Cost-Beneﬁt Analysis and agglomeration economics
Direct beneﬁts or user-beneﬁts are together with a number of externalities im-
plemented in the CBA today. User-beneﬁts include positive beneﬁts to people
in the system by a decrease in travel cost due to shorter travel time after a new
transport system is implemented. These beneﬁts are assumed countered by in-
creases in cost such as higher housing expenses leaving an overall equilibrium
and net gain of zero. Externalities are a reason for the imperfection, and for
an eﬀect to be an externality it cannot be reﬂected in the direct eﬀects of the
CBA [Transportministeriet, 2015].
The simpliﬁcation of the CBA has made it user-friendly and successful, but
also with possible false estimations since studies suggest that wider economic
eﬀects have an impact. Although, with the given knowledge it is well estab-
lished that no alternative to the perfect market assumption exist at this point,
it would require extensive datasets and knowledge of causality between many
markets. One of the wider economic eﬀects is agglomeration which is deﬁned as
higher industrial/labour density leads to an increase in productivity, meaning
more output with same amount of resources [Brueckner, 2011]. Agglomeration
includes the two terms proximity and clustering which arise from the situation
where areas are being linked closer together, and the density of areas increases
because of transport projects. This clustering eﬀect can have an impact on pro-
ductivity and people in the system are not acting within this knowledge since it
is an externality and therefore not captured in user-beneﬁts. Agglomeration also
includes natural eﬀects which are not wider economic eﬀects and localization
eﬀects are also not accounted as a wider eﬀect, both these eﬀects are described
under the theory section.
For agglomeration to be considered as an wider economic eﬀect it has to be
caused by externalities (market failures), while conventional eﬀects are known
as the direct eﬀects such as the user beneﬁts. Eﬀects must have an impact on
productivity in order to be an agglomeration eﬀect [Venables and Overman,
2014], and agglomeration is a wider economic eﬀect, but more importantly not
all wider eﬀects is agglomeration. In the theory section the report will focus on
three diﬀerent eﬀects estimated to be causes of agglomeration [Rosenthal and
Strange, 2004]:
• Sharing,
• matching or labour pooling, and
• learning or knowledge-spillovers.
These three eﬀects describe causes of market imperfections when a transport
project improves density, and it is described in a body of literature includ-
3
==PAGE:9==
ing [Rosenthal and Strange, 2004] and [Puga, 2010].
Firstly, the sharing of
facilities which creates larger variance of products and an increase in density
of jobs increases the ability to specialize creating higher productivity. Match-
ing is an improvement of the equilibrium between the demand and supply of
labour. Often it is assumed that people optimize earning by choosing better
jobs and improved access to jobs can increase eﬀectiveness og the matching
process [Puga, 2010].
Finally, the learning or the knowledge-spillover eﬀect
is knowledge spreading between the ﬁrms and increasing productivity [Puga,
2010].
The complexity of agglomeration arises because an increase in productivity can
have other reasons than agglomeration such as natural beneﬁts and these two
eﬀects can be hard to separate. Natural beneﬁts are deﬁned as the location
itself, being decisive for the relocation of the ﬁrm such as ﬁrms relocating to
natural resources or harbours etc. [Puga, 2010].
The natural eﬀects should
not be compared to agglomeration eﬀects as agglomeration arises from an in-
crease in productivity due to a clustering and proximity of ﬁrms and jobs. In
addition, underlying eﬀects on productivity work in negative and positive direc-
tions as many eﬀects besides agglomeration have an inﬂuence on productivity.
It presents a challenge to separate all underlying results, both agglomeration
and non-agglomeration eﬀects. The agglomeration results obtained does po-
tentially not describe all eﬀects on productivity. The theory of agglomeration
and the imperfection of the market are described in more details in the theory
section.
Section 2 of this thesis focuses on the theory which has been introduced in this
section while section 3 presents the case. Section 4 presents the results with
section 5 and 6 as discussion and conclusion of the results.
4
==PAGE:10==
2
Theory
This section describes the theory behind CBA and the reasons for agglomeration
being useful within this context.
Furthermore, the theory of agglomeration
which is closely linked to the theory of urban development is elaborated.
2.1
Cost-Beneﬁt Analysis
Because of the massive investment in infrastructure an eﬀective method to assets
the usefulness and eﬀect of the investment is needed. CBA reports are useful in
this sense since it quantify all impacts in monetary values, allowing comparisons
of beneﬁts and cost, giving the ability to prioritize between diﬀerent possible
investments [Transportministeriet, 2015]. In the CBA, the assumption of perfect
competition on the aﬀected markets is used. This implies that the full eﬀects
can be estimated by the impact on the markets [Transportministeriet, 2015].
An hour, which is saved for eg. a business related traveller on transport, is
assumed to count as one more hour of work instead [Kernohan et al., 2011].
The perfect market implies that the price of the product is the same as the cost
of production. Other assumptions are that many suppliers exist in the market,
consumers have perfect knowledge of the products and new competitors have
easy access to the market [Kernohan et al., 2011]. In this case ﬁrms have no
proﬁts.
The use of the perfect market situation generally allows the analysis of transport
infrastructure to include traﬃc numbers, cost of travel in the scenarios and the
cost of construction/operation. Other eﬀects such as increase in housing prices
are only considered as a reﬂection of the beneﬁt, being relocated into increased
housing prices by landlords, giving a system-wide sum of zero [Transportminis-
teriet, 2015]. The direct eﬀects include the cost of transport such as vehicles,
fuels and wages. These assumptions make it possible to generate CBA on the
basis of a traﬃc model which measures impacts on the system [Transportmin-
isteriet, 2015].
All monetary values are found from research and quantiﬁed in unit prices pub-
licised by DTU Transport. These include the generalised cost of travel (GRO)
covering fuel, maintenance and ticket for public transport.
Time values are
also set for diﬀerent types of travel, commuting, work related travel and leisure
travel where the highest value is set on work related travel. The equilibrium
between the combined price and demand gives a certain number of travellers
reﬂecting how many are willing to pay the price for the use of transport. The
consumer surplus is one of the welfare changes which measure the beneﬁts. If
price is decreased by a change in the transport system more users will be willing
to use the transport system increasing the consumer surplus. The net gain is
calculated by ”rule of a half” which assumes a linear demand curve, and the
gain from the new users can be calculated by a triangle [Transportministeriet,
5
==PAGE:11==
2015].
The perfect market is however theoretical because of the existence of market
failures or externalities which are eﬀects that users do not include in their choices
when acting within the market. Externalities are eﬀects which can not be traded
as a normal good within the market and aﬀects other parts of the system which
is not involved in the market. Some of these externalities are implemented in the
Danish CBA practise by estimating a value on eﬀects such as accidents, noise
pollution, air pollution and climate eﬀects.
This is implemented to correct
for some of the market failures caused by externalities [Transportministeriet,
2015].
All costs and beneﬁts are discounted back to a present value. This allows the
beneﬁts and costs to be compared over the whole period, which is useful since
cost will be signiﬁcantly larger than the beneﬁts in the ﬁrst number of years
after an investment.
The discount factor reﬂects the return an comparable
investment would have been expected to return including a buﬀer to allow some
uncertainty [Transportministeriet, 2015]. The net present value is a sum of the
discounted costs/beneﬁt and is calculated as all of the future beneﬁt subtracted
all future cost in a present monetary value. The discount factor is set by the
Danish Ministry of Finance to:
• 4% between year 1 and 35.
• 3% between year 36 and 70
• 2% from year 71 and thereafter.
The manual recommends discounting periods to continue until year 50 which
arises from the designed life span of the transport system. The discount rate is
decreasing because of the increased uncertainty over the years, and the decreas-
ing factor leads to a lower discounting of the cost/beneﬁt in the later years of
the discounting period [Transportministeriet, 2015].
2.2
Agglomeration as a wider economic eﬀect
The price cost margin causes a wedge between demand curve and the marginal
revenue curve pulling the equilibrium up to a higher price than the optimum.
Between the marginal revenue curve and the demand curve there exist an area
which contain the wider economic impacts. This area is deﬁned by the change
in demand coming from the adjustment in the system by the transport project
[Kernohan et al., 2011]. In a perfect market the marginal revenue curve and the
demand curve is the same, but in a imperfect market ﬁrms aim to maximize
proﬁts at the level where marginal revenue equals marginal cost of production
[Kernohan et al., 2011].
From Figure 1, the eﬀect of the price cost margin is illustrated with the area of
the wider economic eﬀect. The size of the eﬀect depends on the elasticity of the
6
==PAGE:12==
demand.
Figure 1: Wider Economic Impacts from imperfect competition
[Kernohan et al., 2011]
This price margin is caused by market failures or externalities which are eﬀects
the users do not take into account when acting in the market. The economic
optimal equilibrium of the perfect market are represented by the blue area which
be the only beneﬁt. Externalities lead to an economic wider economic impact
which is determined by the size of the wedge between the cost of production
and the value set by the market [Kernohan et al., 2011].
The three markets as mentioned in the introduction section is used to quantify
wider economic eﬀects along with the three types of wider economic eﬀects which
is described by the English practise [Department of Transport, 2014]:
• Eﬀects on commodity- and service market by imperfect competition,
• eﬀects on labour market because of imperfections, and
• eﬀects by agglomeration
In the commodity and service market it is assumed that no price margin exist,
meaning that ﬁrm sell products at its production price. However, it has been
stated that in Denmark product prices is set on average 10-30% over the cost of
production [Produktiviteteskommisionen, 2013]. Therefore a potential gain on
other markets also exist when cost of travel decreases. The input market has
the same eﬀect as the commodity market although it is consumers welfare which
is aﬀected by the change in prices. This eﬀect is not included in this thesis but
is discussed as an other wider eﬀect which could be implemented in the CBA
7
==PAGE:13==
as seen in the UK.
In the labour market, it is assumed that there is a perfect match between em-
ployer and workers, resulting in people taking a job in the system if a match
is available. [Transportministeriet, 2015] aims to correct for this assumption by
the implementation of the tax distortion factor1. This factor aﬀects the size of
the labour force when travel cost changes. It is assumed to aﬀect the labour
force, just as the changes in taxes does it, calculated by the tax distortion fac-
tor. If the travel cost decreases the labour force will increase, caused by the
larger incentive to work when travelling cost is lower [Copenhagen Economics,
2014]. The gain in labour force can arise from both prolonged work days from
people already working and people entering the workforce. Some people might
even change to a more productive job because of lowers travelling cost. The last
scenario is mainly relevant in larger construction projects connecting distant
areas such as the Great Belt Bridge.
In Denmark, one larger analysis regarding wider economic eﬀects has been
published.
The analysis was an economic post analysis of the Great Belt
Bridge [Transportministeriet og Sund & Bælt, 2014]. The analysis focused on
the three listed wider economic eﬀects: The eﬀect on the commodity and ser-
vice market, the eﬀect on the labour market and the agglomeration eﬀect. The
eﬀect on the labour market was implemented by the tax distortion factor of
20% from the CBA manual [Transportministeriet, 2015]. The commodity and
service market was adjusted by increasing the beneﬁts for ﬁrms by 10% which
is English practise [Department of Transport, 2014]. This increase arises from
the assumption of perfect competition between ﬁrms where in reality ﬁrms ex-
perience a higher beneﬁt. Finally, agglomeration was estimated by the English
practise and was found to result in 32 billion DKK in a net present value cal-
culated in 2014 prices. The combined beneﬁt of wider economic eﬀects covered
30% of the conventional beneﬁts in the Great Belt Bridge case which is com-
parable with analysis from other European countries [Copenhagen Economics,
2014].
A problem with the English practise is the use of access to jobs because of the
new infrastructure. Some of the newly reachable jobs have to be new jobs, oth-
erwise other areas in the system will experience a loss and the net value will
be zero [Venables and Overman, 2014]. If one can reach jobs which was moved
from another location it cannot be implemented in the estimation of agglomer-
ation since it deals with increase in jobs density leading to more productivity
overall. Another parameter eﬀecting the beneﬁt is the agglomeration elasticity.
Both eﬀects are described in more detail by the next part of this section. In
General, it is hard to estimate the quantity of the jobs being created due to the
new infrastructure. This is implemented in the result section and discussed in
the discussion section.
1An factor of 20% implemented to adjust for the change in the labour force by change in
the level of the taxation [Transportministeriet, 2015]
8
==PAGE:14==
2.3
Agglomeration and the theory of urban development
Productivity is deﬁned as achieving more output with the same amount of re-
sources [Brueckner, 2011]. The reason of the existence of cities arises from the
beneﬁcial eﬀect of density leading to productivity. However, cities seem to not
have an unlimited growth since counter eﬀects such as congestion and pollu-
tion sets a limit for peoples willingness to live in cities, and cities often are
bigger than the optimal equilibrium because of the high cost of starting af new
city [Brueckner, 2011].
The literature of agglomeration goes back to the theory of urban development
and the reasons for people to move together in urban areas.
Depending of
the perspective, diﬀerent answers would be given. From an economic point of
view economic forces make employment concentrated and thereby leading to
residential concentration, resulting in a city [Brueckner, 2011].
Other views
might include social perspectives of humans or the need for protection.
Two overall theories exist about of the expansion of cities: Economics of scales
and agglomeration [Brueckner, 2011]. Economics of scale works internally in
ﬁrms and beneﬁts the larger enterprises while agglomeration economics is an
external eﬀect on the ﬁrm.
Economics of scale describes that more workers
increase the output because of division of labour. Within a ﬁrm workers can
specialise in the single parts of the production process and thereby increase pro-
ductivity. Economics of scale explain why workers locate in cities near the larger
factories but in order for cities to evolve into metropolis areas, the agglomeration
beneﬁt must exist since it induces incentives for proximity of ﬁrms. [Brueckner,
2011] describes how a system with relatively strong economics of scale and a
developed transport system leads to a preference of centralized larger factories
which ship products with a transport cost. A good transport system induces
larger factories since it would drive down transport cost. Meanwhile, a system
with high transport cost and relatively low economics of scale in production cost
leads to a scattered production with more smaller ﬁrms [Brueckner, 2011].
Agglomeration is not guaranteed to exist because of the location of ﬁrms but
economic concentration can lead to agglomeration, some research show that
agglomeration mainly exist in areas with a large degree of highly educated in-
habitants [Fosgerau et al., 2014]. For agglomeration to be considered as a wider
economic eﬀect, it should not work internally in the market as reduced trans-
port cost but instead be an externality [Kernohan et al., 2011]. From [Puga,
2010] agglomeration as an wider economic eﬀect arises from the three terms:
sharing, matching and learning which does not work internally in the market.
If a eﬀects work as an externality they are not a part of the ﬁrms consideration
when acting within the market and thereby is not captured by the CBA when
acting as a wider economic eﬀect.
[Melo et al., 2009], ﬁnds by a meta study on former empirical literature on
agglomeration, that agglomeration eﬀects are mainly positive.
Country and
9
==PAGE:15==
sector speciﬁc eﬀects are found, but overall there is broad empirical evidence
that productivity eﬀects exist however the underlying mechanisms can be very
hard to separate and quantify. Eﬀects which aﬀect productivity include agglom-
eration eﬀects, natural eﬀects, direct eﬀects and localization eﬀects. The results
for agglomeration eﬀect on productivity suggested that elasticities of density
and productivity was 0.03, meaning an doubling in city size lead to an increase
in productivity by around 3%. The Melo article was a meta study and single
studies suggested higher values between 3-8% increase in productivity [Rosen-
thal and Strange, 2004]. The meta estimates also diﬀerentiate depending on the
time period of the research with the estimates from 1970ies being lower than
the 1990ies [Melo et al., 2009]. The elasticity found by [Melo et al., 2009] is a
combined value from many sectors. Since a variation within some sectors ex-
ist with service sectors as obtaining the highest values, some areas have higher
elasticities above 0.03. Because of the general uncertainty in Danish context
with elasticities, lower values of 0.02 is used in this report as an elasticity over
all sectors. This lower number also arises from studies in the Melo article that
suggest Sweden, which in many areas are comparable to Denmark, has a mean
elasticity of 0.017. To compare with the Swedish value the US mean elasticity
is estimated at 0.036 [Melo et al., 2009].
As people move from one location to another, it often includes a change of job.
People often moves to areas depending of their income and housing prices which
leads to concentration of people with a similar income. If people are moving to
an area which has a higher degree of productivity and they also see an increase
in productivity, it is considered an example of agglomeration. However, if a
negative agglomeration eﬀect exists in the area where highly productive people
are moving away from, it also has to be accounted for in the calculation since
agglomeration can work both ways. This reﬂects some of the complexity of ag-
glomeration because of the potential negative eﬀects in other areas as opposed
to the areas which has a gain from better transport system. Some research sug-
gest that this eﬀect does not give statistical signiﬁcant changes in the existing
empirical estimates of urban agglomeration elasticities. The research adjust for
the eﬀect by using instrumental variables such as long lagged values of popula-
tion density when computing elasticities [Melo et al., 2009]. Even though the
elasticity may not be aﬀected, a negative agglomeration beneﬁt also potentially
exist which would need to be implemented in the computations.
Agglomeration includes the two eﬀects proximity and cluster eﬀect [Venables
and Overman, 2014]. When a new ﬁrm within an industry relocate, the area
becomes more attractive for other ﬁrms within the same sector making a cluster
formation. A large number of examples have been seen, the car industry near
Detroit and the Silicon Valley in California.
In Denmark, examples can be
seen in diﬀerent industries, but because of the relative small size this might
not be as clear as in the US. One example was the foundation of the ”Medicon
Valley” inspired by Silicon Valley in a cooperation between Copenhagen and
Southern Sweden. This beneﬁt from the cluster eﬀect should be considered as
10
==PAGE:16==
a externality and not a direct eﬀect captured in the CBA. The two eﬀects arises
from the old debate concerning if agglomeration arises from concentration of an
industry (localization eﬀects) or the size of the city (urbanization eﬀects). [Melo
et al., 2009] suggest that light and knowledge heavy industries mainly beneﬁt
from the urbanization eﬀect, and that the two eﬀects depends on the industrial
context.
The proximity eﬀect is the eﬀective distance between ﬁrms which is reduced by
a new transport system. The cluster eﬀect is the transport system enabling
employment to concentrate in a location [Venables and Overman, 2014]. These
two eﬀects are connected since a transport system, as the light rail in O3, will
enable more employees to reach a business district along the alignment which
again makes the ﬁrms expanding the existing cluster. Projects can enable only
one eﬀect or both. A bridge project will often create the proximity eﬀect and
might not increase a cluster eﬀect in the same scale.
A proximity eﬀect is an expanding of cities while the cluster eﬀect is the internal
eﬀect in the city. To quantify the economic activity, the term economic mass is
used. The access to economic mass ATEM is deﬁned in equation 1 as a function
of eﬀective distance d and economic activity represented by employment Emp.
This economic density is also described in the English practise [Department of
Transport, 2005] and the Transport Appraisal Guidance (TAG) [Department of
Transport, 2014]. In these example the eﬀective density provides a measure of
the economic activity in a speciﬁc modelling area.
ATEMi =
X
j
f(dij)Empj
(1)
The eﬀective distance between the ﬁrms dij is aﬀected by the changes in the
proximity eﬀect by transport improvements as the distance decreases by better
transport systems. The economic activity measured by employment Empj is
aﬀected by the cluster eﬀect as economic activity, and by the number of employ-
ees that will increase if the cluster of ﬁrms is expanded [Venables and Overman,
2014]. The indexes are the zones in the system dij that would be the distance
from a given zone i to zone j. The function f is a decreasing function as e−γ
which is used in this thesis. The function is reﬂecting the increased distances
to jobs which leads to lower ATEM determined by a decay factor γ.
Under the eﬀects on proximity and cluster lies the three agglomeration eﬀects:
matching, sharing and learning which can lead to one or both of these eﬀects.
All three eﬀects are described in a body of literature.
Commonly used are
[Duranton and Puga, 2003] and [Puga, 2010].
• Sharing: Because of sharing of facilities in an area ﬁrms can increase
variation of their products and the possibility for increased division of
labour potentially leads to higher productivity. The sharing of facilities
gives advantages such as lower cost per user and sharing gives options for
11
==PAGE:17==
a group of producers that they would not have had individually. Some
trade-oﬀ’s exist within sharing as many users in one area limits capacity
of the facilities, and increased congestion/pollution because of the need for
one location of the facility. In addition, some ﬁrms may not be interested
in a large degree sharing because of competition, especially for larger ﬁrms
which has the possibility to cover ﬁxed cost themselves would not have
the same interest in sharing of facilities. This eﬀect of sharing especially
connect to the cluster eﬀect since it is the sharing of facilities that has its
eﬀect within a concentrated area.
• Matching: Matching reduces the market imperfection between employers
and workers by having a larger pool of workers. This increases the quality
of the labour by the workers and the ability to cover jobs. In a imperfect
market unemployed workers and free jobs exist without this match, the
optimal equilibrium on the labour market is not reached.
The perfect
matching situation would only exist on a very local scale but an improved
transport system can decrease the imperfection on regional/national scale.
Even in a situation with no free jobs within a ﬁrm, the matching eﬀect
can increase the quality of the workforce and thereby increase productivity.
Matching is mainly connected with the proximity eﬀect with new transport
projects giving a better connection to a larger workforce.
In addition,
matching reduces the cost of the ﬁrm if they have less cost in the searching
process for the candidates and reduced relocating cost for the new worker.
• Learning: Learning or technology spill-overs is an eﬀect if ﬁrms are con-
centrated in a area.
New knowledge makes it possible for workers to
specialize and implement new methods in working practices and thereby
increase productivity.
Often new learning and innovative thinking has
historically been expanding in the cities. Learning is harder to quantify
than sharing and matching and fewer empirical studies have been made.
Just as for sharing, larger ﬁrms might not have an interest in knowledge
spillover because of competition and fear for industrial espionage. How-
ever, learning can also be more casual giving general ideas and direction
for new ways of thinking.
Three eﬀects is often mentioned as eﬀects which are not equal to agglomeration
eﬀects, and which would need to be known in order to separate them from the
wider economic eﬀects.
• Internal eﬀects: Internal eﬀects are the direct beneﬁts to users and which
is accounted for in the system. Less travel cost due to a new transport sys-
tem is an internal eﬀects which is taken into account in the users decision
to act within the market.
• Natural eﬀects: Natural eﬀects are working within the market as part of
user beneﬁts. A relocation of a ﬁrm due to natural eﬀects are harbours
and raw materials which attract certain types of ﬁrms. This eﬀect should
not be mistaken with wider economic eﬀects since they do not work as an
12
==PAGE:18==
externality.
• Localization eﬀects: Relocation of people is the movement of activities and
not an expansion of the productivity. For an agglomeration eﬀect to exist,
relocation has to improve the overall productivity of the system while
sometimes a relocation is only an internal movement of activities from one
area to another. People move because of diﬀerent preferences and if people
move because of education and jobs, it is important to diﬀerentiate. The
eventual computation has to divide between eﬀects making people more
productive, or if it is only because of one area being a higher preference
for more productive people.
Besides these internal eﬀects, other externalities than just agglomeration do
exist and not all are broader economic eﬀects. Pollution, accidents, noise and
climate eﬀects are all externalities implemented in the Danish CBA practise.
Other broader economic eﬀects such as imperfection on the labour market and
imperfect competition on the commodity market are examples of broader eco-
nomic eﬀects which are not agglomeration.
Because of the overlap between localization eﬀects and agglomeration, it is im-
portant to distinguish between the two in order to avoid double calculations.
Some residential models exist but this still present a challenge in many cases.
The problem of using externalities which already have been included in the di-
rect eﬀects is an potential cause of double calculations. An example is increases
in housing prices which would not be a gain for the combined system but instead
is reﬂected by a decrease in travel cost.
Since cities do not rise to an unlimited level, counter eﬀects to agglomeration
must exist and some people start moving away from cities when other eﬀects
begins to rise. These eﬀects include congestion, pollution, noise and housing
prices. When these eﬀects, which could be a direct consequence of agglomera-
tion eﬀects, starts to rise as a consequence of the higher population density, a
equilibrium is found between the agglomeration eﬀects which increase density
and the negative eﬀects which decrease density. If no counter eﬀects existed
almost everyone would live in cities today, which is not the case.
13
==PAGE:19==
3
Case
The case chosen for the purpose of adding agglomeration economics, is the
light rail in the Ring 3 corridor, Greater Copenhagen in Denmark which is the
area outside central Copenhagen. This case is interesting because of the long
alignment of 27 km with 27 stops, (see Figure 3) which passes existing and
developing industrial areas. Many municipalities has in their decision process
invested in industrial development along the light rail alignment. One exam-
ple include is the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) in Lyngby-Taarbæk
municipality which is planned to be developed and thereby increase density
in jobs and inhabitants [Lyngby-Taarbæk Kommune, 2015]. In addition, the
industrial park along Ring 3 (alignment illustrated in Figure 2) in Gladsaxe
municipality is one of the oldest dedicated industrial areas in Denmark and has
a long history of higher density which is projected to rise with modern type of
ﬁrms [Gladsaxe Kommune, 2011]. Finally, the Ring 3 corridor is not serviced
by high class public transport and is passing the 5 S-train lines. These factors
makes it ideal to analyse the agglomeration of the light rail alignment because
of the potential for increased industrial density and the existing plans to de-
velop the areas. This analysis is done on the basis of the existing CBA from
2013 [Ringby/Letbanesamarbejdet, 2013].
The existing CBA for the light rail described in this project results in a negative
net present value which makes it harder to argue for the construction of such
an investment of more than 4 billion kroner. The decision has although been
made and the construction law is planned passed during the spring/summer
2016 by the national parliament2. The construction is planned to start after the
contract process in the beginning of 2017 which arises from a political agreement
in 2009 and the deal between the municipalities, the Capital Region and the
state in 2013 [Hovedstadens Letbane, 2013].
The projected ﬁnal opening is
planned in 2023. The light rail is governed from a interest-company owned by
the state, the capital region and the 11 municipalities who all are aﬀected by the
light rail in Greater Copenhagen. The municipalities involved are all located
around central Copenhagen.
These consist of: Lyngby-Taarbæk, Gladsaxe,
Herlev, Rødovre, Glostrup, Albertslund, Brøndby, Høje-Taastrup, Hvidovre,
Vallensbæk and Ishøj. Some of these municipalities are not directly aﬀected by
the alignment, but are still part of the project. After the construction the state
withdraws from the ownership and the municipalities and the Capital Region
ﬁnance the operation of the light rail [Hovedstadens Letbane, 2013].
The light rail begins in the municipality of Lyngby-Taarbæk in the area of
Lundtofte. After passing through DTU campus it goes to Lyngby Station which
is one of the most used S-train stations in the Greater Copenhagen area. From
Lyngby it passes through Gladsaxe, Herlev, Rødovre, Glostrup, Brøndby, Al-
bertslund, Vallensbæk and Ishøj. The alignment can be found in Figure 3. In
2Although problems during the political negotiations in the parliament has postponed the
passing of the construction law, but it was passed May 31 2016
14
==PAGE:20==
later stages of the process the alignment was adjusted to run inside the DTU
campus area. All of these municipalities contain S-train lines which was planned
from the ”Fingerplan” [Miljøministeriet, 2007].
The ﬁrst draft of the ”Fingerplan” was presented in 1947 and most recently up-
dated in 2007. After this plan, the rail lines followed ﬁve ﬁngers out from the cen-
tre of Copenhagen and the areas between ﬁngers were projected as recreation ar-
eas with low density. During the years, these areas have been expanded and the
light rail was projected to give better public transport service to these areas and
connecting the 5 S-train lines with a new rail line [Ringby/Letbanesamarbejdet,
2013].
Figure 2: The light rail at Gladsaxe Boulevard
15
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3: Alignment of the light rail in O3 (without DTU campus alignment) - Copenhagen,
Denmark [Ringby/Letbanesamarbejdet, 2013]
16
==PAGE:22==
Table 1: CBA results [Ringby/Letbanesamarbejdet, 2013]
Construction cost
-4,545 million DKK
Operation and maintenance
-2,678 million DKK
User beneﬁts
465 million DKK
External eﬀects
299 million DKK
Tax correction
-331 million DKK
Tax distortion loss
-1,584 million DKK
Total net present value
-8,368 million DKK
The main results from the existing CBA are presented in Table 1. The Table
shows the CBA made in 2013 [Ringby/Letbanesamarbejdet, 2013] which was a
part of the ﬁrst larger report describing the light rail, and in addition to the
part involving the CBA it described the construction, changes in traﬃc and the
general planning process. The construction cost of the light rail is estimated
to 4.55 billion DKK and the operating cost is set to be 400 million DKK each
year, some of which is covered by ticket revenue and the whole expenditure
for the coverage of operation and maintenance is 2.678 billion DKK. The CBA
itself shows a negative net present value of 8.4 billion DKK and therefore leads
to a negative internal rent. The large cost of the project come from the time
loss of cars due to a decrease in speed limits in some parts of the alignment
and because of the prioritization of the light rail in crossings. This decreases
the user beneﬁts to 465 million DKK [Ringby/Letbanesamarbejdet, 2013]. The
externalities which consist of climate, noise, accidents and pollution result in a
beneﬁt of 299 million DKK because of the light rail. The tax distortion loss is
set at 1.58 billion DKK and the fee loss due to less driving from fuel fees etc. is
set at 331 million DKK - all leading to a net present value of -8.4 billion kroner.
The project has an internal rent because of the negative net present value of
-8.4 billion DKK, since it requires a higher value of the positive internal rent to
be calculated. The sensitivity results to the CBA is shown in Table 2.
The used discounting factor was 5%, and the discounting period used is 2020-
2069. In order to estimate a comparable result the same parameters are used
in this report for the computation of agglomeration eﬀects.
The sensitivity analysis: The original CBA contained some sensitivity analy-
sis which included no time loss for cars, faster passenger eﬀect due to expansion
of areas around the alignment and lower economic buﬀer og 15 instead of 30%,
which are presented in Table 2:
17
==PAGE:23==
Table 2: CBA sensitivity results [Ringby/Letbanesamarbejdet, 2013]
Scenario
Net present value (billion)
Internal rent
Main scenario
kr. -8.368 DKK
Negative
No time loss for cars
kr. -6.860 DKK
Negative
Full passenger eﬀect of expansion
kr. -7.893 DKK
Negative
No pendulum line and 15% buﬀer
kr. -6.780 DKK
Negative
All three scenarios
kr. -4.789 DKK
0.2%
The sensitivity results presented in the CBA from 2013 and shown in Table
2 consist of diﬀerent scenarios. The ﬁrst scenario is an no time loss for cars
which arises from the possibility of increasing travel times for cars would also
be a reality due to congestion without the light rail. Another reason is traﬃc
safety which makes it likely that the speed limits would have been decreased
along Ring 3 even without the light rail project because of the expansion of the
municipalities. Not including time loss for cars would result in a negative net
present value of -6.860 billion DKK which is an improvement of 1.5 billion DKK
compared to the main scenario. In the main scenario, it is assumed that the
municipalities have not fully expanded the areas along the light rail before 2032.
The second sensitivity scenario is therefore a passenger eﬀect if the expansion is
fulﬁlled before 2032. This gives an extra eﬀect of 0.5 billion DKK compared to
the main scenario. The last scenario contains exemption of a pendulum line in
Glostrup from the construction cost and a general buﬀer of 15% instead of 30%.
It was decided not to construct a pendulum line between Glostrup st. and the
Park Alle Øst stop in this ﬁrst stage of the project but it could be added later on.
This scenario assumes that it is removed from the project, and a decrease of the
buﬀer implemented in the construction costs which together gives a 1.6 billion
DKK eﬀect on the net present value. Finally, all three scenarios combined would
add 3.5 billion DKK eﬀect on the project and would give a positive internal rent
of 0.2%. These scenarios have been carried out in adjustment of the CBA and
have not been run in models which would properly induce changes to the time
eﬀect on cars.
These results of the CBA present a negative net present value, but as it is
stated in the report from 2013, many factors are not included in the CBA
[Ringby/Letbanesamarbejdet, 2013]:
• Barrier-eﬀect along the alignment,
• eﬀects on the the fauna og ﬂora,
• aﬀection by the experienced city environment and aesthetics,
• comfort beneﬁt by moving bus passenger to the light rail,
• savings in maintenance of the road network,
• regional competitiveness,
• value of the plant of the light rail on the city structure and quality,
• city development potential of the light rail,
• the value of saved travel time is converted to increase in labour hours, and
18
==PAGE:24==
• rise in housing prices.
Some of the eﬀects as the increase in housing prices should not be explicitly
included with current practise in the CBA because of the relocation of the ben-
eﬁt. The issue arises from the assumptions of perfect market situation and the
possibility of double calculation. As described in the theory section, some eﬀects
are not captured by current CBA assumptions. Other eﬀects such as external-
ities are diﬃcult to quantify and would be to small to collect with a reliable
method and contain to much uncertainty to include in the CBA. Agglomeration
is not explicitly mentioned in the list but is an underlying part of some of the
eﬀects omitted from the analysis. The thesis will not focus speciﬁcally on every
excluded wider economic beneﬁt of the CBA besides agglomeration.
The negative net present value in the CBA has been reason for debate about the
decision of the light rail. The Commission of Productivity mentioned in 2014
the light rail as an bad investment [Produktiviteteskommisionen, 2014] from a
societal perspective and that prioritized buses should be preferred over the light
rail. While other argues to also view the light rail as a city development project
instead of only a transport project.
Other cities, such a Bergen in Norway,
have experience with constructing a light rail and the increasing amount of
investment that follows from ﬁrms in the system and the increase in residence
density [Engebretsen et al., 2015]. Many plans and investment have been made
from ﬁrms and municipalities especially in the mentioned areas in Lyngby and
Gladsaxe. As illustrated in Figure 2, the part of the O3 road next to the 60
years old industrial park in Gladsaxe is planned to be reorganized as a boulevard
with smaller roads parallel to the main road with the light rail centralized. The
investment both from the public sector and private companies would likely not
be as intensive if a bus rapid transit system were to be implemented instead.
This is also partly due to the legislation of station proximity from the Ministry
of Environment, which states that areas near rail stations are allowed to build
in higher density [Miljøministeriet, 2007].
It should be mentioned in this report, that from the CBA an excluded aspect
is the comfort factor to the light rail, also known as a ”railfactor”, which is a
wide term that can contain comfort, image, attractiveness, investment potential
and visibility [Olesen, 2012]. This factor leaves some advantage to rail based
transport such as light rails over buses. In some contexts, one or only few of these
elements is a part of the factor and research is divided whether the factor exist
or not. The magnitude of the factor depends on local and cultural conditions for
the speciﬁc projects. Some elements of agglomeration is indirectly contained in
the railfactor by how ﬁrms invest and relocate to areas with rail lines. However,
the railfactor contains more aspects than agglomeration and would alone not be
a good parameter for the measure of agglomeration and therefore is not dealt
with explicitly in this report.
These excluded elements which are hard to quantify created room for the de-
cision of light rails since in many cases both in Denmark and Europe, CBA
19
==PAGE:25==
analysis has disqualiﬁed light rail projects. This increases the need for the abil-
ity to quantify the broader economic eﬀects which agglomeration is a part of.
When broader economic eﬀects are discussed in the public, it is often a wide
variety of eﬀects which are mentioned, as for this case the focus has been on the
rail factor of the light rail leading to city development. This report focuses solely
on agglomeration, which is a part of the general discussion of wider economic
eﬀects.
20
==PAGE:26==
4
Results
This section describes the results of the computation of agglomeration eﬀects,
which is an addition to the existing CBA for the light rail in Ring 3.
The computation is based on existing theory and parameters used are founded
in empirical studies or data collected from DTU and the Ministry of Finance.
A key parameter is the measure of productivity. Here income is used which is a
common measure because of the good data accessibility and the strong connec-
tion to productivity. Regarding income, data sets from Statistics of Denmark
are used. The base year of 2013 is used in the computation, as for the CBA for
light rail, the discounted factor is 5% and the period is 2020-2069 which is the
same for the existing CBA [Ringby/Letbanesamarbejdet, 2013].
The study looks upon access to jobs in 9 municipalities aﬀected by the alignment.
Data of travel times and incomes are found for these 9 municipalities:
• Lyngby-Taarbaek,
• Gladsaxe,
• Herlev,
• Rødovre,
• Glostrup,
• Albertslund,
• Brøndby,
• Vallensbæk and
• Ishøj.
The municipality of Albertslund is not directly associated with the alignment of
the light rail. However, since the station of ”Hersted Industripark” is in the very
near proximity of an industrial park in Albertslund, this municipality is used in
the analysis. Rødovre is only slightly aﬀected by the light rail as the alignment
only has 1 km at the border of the municipality. These 9 municipalities will form
the geographical base of this analysis and the estimation of the agglomeration
eﬀect.
Parameters and values for the estimation of agglomeration and their background
is listed are listed here:
• Agglomeration elasticities between access to jobs and productivity. The
foundation is the theory from [Melo et al., 2009] and the agglomeration
elasticity estimate of 0.02 between job density and productivity (measured
by increase in income) is used as the main value. If an increase in accessi-
bility to new jobs is 4% due to the light rail in a certain year the increase
in productivity (income) would be 0.02*0.04 = 0.08% for each person.
The sensitivity analysis uses higher values of the elasticity since studies
from the UK and New Zealand uses higher values up to 0.05-0.07 in their
appraisals. In Denmark, there is a challenge with limited experience with
agglomeration and a general uncertainty of the level of productivity gain
21
==PAGE:27==
which also aﬀects the elasticity of 0.02 which is lower than other foreign
practises. This analysis do not use sector speciﬁc elasticities but use an
average value for all jobs.
• Job growth is estimated from the DTU paper of [Brems and Pedersen,
2016]. The paper is based on the Ministry of Finance and their prediction
of the growth from 2010-2030 for each municipality. It is however a chal-
lenge to estimate how many of these jobs are newly created and not just
moved from other areas which experience a loss of jobs. The assumption
of perfect competition in the CBA is under the condition that moved jobs
has no net beneﬁt since other areas experience a negative beneﬁt. The
basis assumption in this estimation uses no job growth because of the
high uncertainty especially on the long term and many of the new jobs
are moved from other areas. In the analysis, there is an adjustment for
the uncertainty of jobs moving from one municipality to another which
is discussed in a separate part of this section. Finally, the analysis also
includes a scenario with a diﬀerence in job growth for the scenario without
a light rail which is set at 20%. This estimate arises from estimates by the
municipalities, but has some uncertainty to it. It is however very likely
that a nonlight rail scenario would mean fewer jobs along the alignment
which is used in the sensitivity analysis.
• Growth in number of travellers is provided from DTU and is estimated
to be 1% yearly for cars [Brems, 2010]. An important notice is that this
number does not estimate changes in the travel time which is the main
focus in the computation. The CBA [Ringby/Letbanesamarbejdet, 2013]
for the light rail assumes 1.85% growth in number of travellers in the
public transport system. The light rail would still operate under the same
schedule over the years and does not deal with congestion. Only travel
time of buses could possibly be aﬀected by congestion on the roads and
that eﬀects would be minor on a yearly basis. The sensitivity analysis
estimate the eﬀect of an increase in travel time and a small diﬀerence in
travel time growth for the two scenarios. The main scenarios assumes no
increase in travel time. In the English practise [Department of Transport,
2014], generalised travel costs, GRO, is used as the measure of access from
one zone to another. However, as elaborated later in this thesis travel time
is used instead as a measure of access to jobs between municipalities.
• A proportion of the jobs which are reachable as a result of the light rail
have been relocated from other places in Denmark and since the CBA re-
gards the whole system these jobs do not create a net beneﬁt. To calculate
the exact proportion of jobs which are not relocating presents a challenge.
With this background, it is estimated that 50% of the jobs are created
and did not exist before the light rail. This percentage is an estimated
value and not found by detailed calculation which was not possible to
make. Other projects in UK and New Zealand do not diﬀerentiate by this
parameter [Department of Transport, 2014], which is discussed further in
22
==PAGE:28==
the discussion section.
• For the parameter of income, the average increase for all income and job
groups is set at yearly 1.25% which is based on data from Statistics of
Denmark [Danmarks Statistik, 2016c].
Additionally, the combined in-
come of all inhabitants from the municipalities, is found from Statistics
Denmark [Danmarks Statistik, 2016a]. It is assumed that all residents in
the municipalities experience a productivity beneﬁt as the practise is in
the UK, although GDP is used as a measure in the UK practise [Depart-
ment of Transport, 2014]. When estimating agglomeration the goal is to
estimate the eﬀect on the production function for the ﬁrm. In this case
the change is estimated by the light rails eﬀect on income.
• Finally, the decay factor mentioned in the theory section as γ, which
determine the accessibility of jobs, is set at 0.05. Figure 4 shows percentage
of jobs reachable depending on the distance (minutes) to the job. With
a travel time of one hour, only 20% of jobs in that area are counted as
reachable. A longer distance generally lowers the incitement for workers
to commute for the job. A 30 minute travel time with an decay factor of
0.05 results in 22.5% of the jobs as reachable. A decay factor of 0.03 would
results in 40% of the jobs being reachable. From the Figure the report
choose the value of 0.05 as it estimates the access to jobs in a realistic
scale. However, these estimates are very subjective and the other values
are used in the sensitivity analysis.
23
==PAGE:29==
Figure 4: The decay of access to jobs (minutes) depending on three decay factors
4.1
Computation of Agglomeration
The foundation of the method is the average travel times between the munic-
ipalities from the scenario with and without the light rail. The data includes
average travel time to the municipalities from DTU in 2013 and 2020 which
is before and after the light rail. The formula to calculate access to jobs used
is based on equation 1, from the theory section. As stated in equation 1 the
function f is calculated as e−0.05 with the decay factor of 0.05 as a main sce-
nario. The decay factor ensures a decrease in reachable jobs as the distance
increases. For each municipality, the number of reachable jobs along the align-
ment is calculated. This change in reachable jobs is computed from a scenario
with and without light rail which is calculated for each year between 2020-2069.
The diﬀerence of reachable jobs for each municipality is multiplied to the ag-
glomeration elasticity. This percentage is used with the combined income in
each municipality from Statistics Denmark [Danmarks Statistik, 2016a]. The
result is a computation of the agglomeration eﬀect which is summarized over
all 9 municipalities and discounted for the speciﬁc year to 2013-prices.
The
practise from England [Department of Transport, 2014] is as mentioned to use
GDP pr. worker and Generalised Cost of Travel (GRO) instead of income and
travel time. This project uses income because of the good datasets i Denmark
24
==PAGE:30==
and income is a common measure of productivity. A fundamental assumption
is that all inhabitants in the municipalities experience a productivity increase
due to the light rail which is discussed in the discussion section. The GDP also
has accessible datasets and is like income a measure of productivity, but this
report uses wage as a reﬂection of the inhabitants in the municipalities instead
of workers in the municipalities which are measured by GDP. Regarding travel
time, it is not sensitive to fuel cost changes, and travel time is a very direct
measure of reasoning for peoples travel choice. GRO is also a reﬂection of travel
time with other monetary parameters, but travel time is used because of the
more direct association with accessibility between zones.
In the theory section of this thesis, the components of agglomeration was de-
scribed as matching, sharing and learning. By the practise used in this thesis
it is assumed that people get more productive by having shorter travel time to
workplaces. The analysis can however not separate the three eﬀects. The pro-
cess of matching is closely related to travel time since it deals with the increased
pool of labour for ﬁrms along the light rail alignment. The eﬀect increases the
ability for ﬁrms to access new workers and to ﬁnd more qualiﬁed workers. The
assumption of all people being more productive does not allow the analysis to
separate the eﬀects. Instead the analysis contains all three eﬀects within the
agglomeration elasticity which is also a part of the method in the UK and New
Zealand. In general, it presents a challenge to separate the three eﬀects with a
reliable method. The sharing, matching and learning part of the agglomeration
estimation is discussed further in the discussion section.
The reduction of 50% of the beneﬁts is implemented to adjust for lost jobs
elsewhere in the system. Newly created jobs and already existing jobs which
stay at their location are counted within the increase in access to jobs, while
the jobs moving from elsewhere gives a negative eﬀect. In order to estimate this
eﬀect in more details an analysis containing all municipalities would have to be
established which would be an extensive task. Additionally, the margin of error
would increase in the estimation. This eﬀect is likewise discussed further later
in the report.
The results are calculated in steps.
First, the results for access to jobs are
presented before and after the light rail in Figure 5 and 6:
25
==PAGE:31==
Figure 5: The access to jobs before the light rail
Figure 6: The access to jobs after the light rail
Figure 5 shows the access to jobs estimated by Equation 1 for the main sce-
nario parameters and the decay factor of 0.05. Central municipalities as Herlev
and Glostrup have a larger access to jobs because of geography while Lyngby-
Taarbaek and Ishøj at the edge of the Greater Copenhagen has less job in the
near proximity. The map in Figure 6 shows the access to job calculated by the
same method. Using the new average travel times after the light rail is running in
2020. This report assumes, as the report from 2013 [Ringby/Letbanesamarbejdet,
2013], that the light rail is running in 2020/2021, although this date has later
been postponed to 2023/2024. Figure 6 that all of the municipalities except
Rødovre experience an increase in accessible jobs. Rødovre is on the edge of the
alignment with other factors such as minor changes in buses or congestion on the
roads could be the reason for the increase in average travel time. Even though
other factors have an inﬂuence on the travel time data, the main component is
26
==PAGE:32==
the light rail. This leaves some uncertainty to the calculation since the eﬀects
of the light rail are the most extensive change to the system. Other changes of
buses etc. are minimal compared to the eﬀect of the light rail.
The diﬀerence in the reachable jobs is seen at Figure 7:
Figure 7: The decay of access to jobs (minutes) depending on three decay factors
Before and after the light rail the biggest increase is seen in Albertslund and
Vallensbæk. A large industrial area in Albertslund has a station near the mu-
nicipality border which has an eﬀect in the reachable jobs.
Vallensbæk has
the alignment through the center of the municipality and has increased access
to other areas after the light rail. Rødovre experience a decrease in reachable
jobs since the light rail hardly aﬀects the main part of the municipality and
congestion could worsen conditions for travellers.
27
==PAGE:33==
The assumption of job growth is shown in Figure 8:
Figure 8: The predicted growth in jobs from 2010 - 2030 from DTU Tranports ”National
Traﬃc Model” [Brems and Pedersen, 2016]
No speciﬁc estimation of job growth on municipality level exists.
DTU has
therefore calculated the growth on geographical zones ﬁtted to the National
Traﬃc Model (NTM). The zone layer is more detailed than the municipality
areas which has been divided into smaller areas. Table 3 shows an estimation
of the yearly job growth based on the zones in Figure 8 and the base number of
jobs is found from [Danmarks Statistik, 2016b]:
28
==PAGE:34==
Table 3: Yearly job growth 2010-2030 and number of jobs
Municipality
Yearly growth
Jobs 2013
Lyngby-Taarbæk
0.75%
34,844
Gladsaxe
0.75%
39,971
Herlev
0.38%
20,948
Rødovre
0.75%
17,169
Glostrup
0.75%
21,765
Albertslund
0.13%
19,812
Brøndby
0.38%
23,698
Vallensbæk
1.25%
4,836
Ishøj
0.75%
8,801
After 2030
Yearly growth decreased by 10%
Figure 8 shows that the main growth is predicted in the central Copenhagen
although many of the areas along the light rail alignment are also estimated to
experience moderate growth. Albertslund, which is only slightly aﬀected by the
light rail, has the estimated lowest growth rate while Vallensbæk in the southern
part of Copenhagen has the highest. The high growth in Vallensbæk is possibly
linked to the new rails, and city development in the municipality.
Most of
the municipalities have a moderate job growth of 0.75%. Geographical smaller
municipalities has less jobs and especially Vallensbæk which mainly consists of
parcel houses has a low number of workplaces in 2013. The larger municipalities
as Gladsaxe and Lyngby have the highest number of workplaces because of the
old industrial areas and their geographical sizes.
The growth in travel time is estimated on the basis of growth in number of
travellers. The CBA of the light rail estimates 1.85% yearly increase in travellers.
The yearly increase in travel time is dependent on the growth in vehicles on the
roads and the number of travellers in the public system. The light rail is only
aﬀected minimally by increased congestion on the roads and the models today
does not deal with congestion in public transport. In real life a light rail would
be aﬀected slightly in longer crossing times where crossings with priority is not a
possibility. The main parameter aﬀecting travel time is the other modes such as
buses between the municipalities since not all travellers use the light rail or shift
to the light rail from another mode of transport. As stated earlier, the basis
estimation assumes no change in travel time but the sensitivity analysis does
work with a slight increasing in average travel times and with a diﬀerentiated
change in travel time with and without a light rail.
The parameters for the estimation and the sources are summarized in Table
4:
29
==PAGE:35==
Table 4: Parameters for agglomeration
Elasticity
0.02 from [Melo et al., 2009]
Job growth
See Table 3 and Figure 8, estimated from Danish Ministry of Finance
Job relocation
Estimation of 50 % of jobs has relocated
Income growth
Average of 1.25% yearly increase from [Danmarks Statistik, 2016c]
Travel time growth
No growth in basis assumption due to light rail unaﬀected by congestion
Decay factor
0.05 based on estimates from Figure 4
With these parameters implemented, the results are presented in Tables 5 and
6. The basic assumptions of no travel time growth and constant number of jobs
are presented in Table 5 together with the assumption of 50% jobs being relo-
cated cutting the beneﬁt in half and the new net present value (NPV) with the
computed agglomeration for both cases. These assumptions are implemented
because of the uncertainty in job growth and especially in how many of the new
jobs is created and not just relocating.
Table 5: Results for agglomeration with basic assumptions and the analysis with 50% of jobs
which is relocating from other areas (2013 prices)
Beneﬁt (Million)
50% Beneﬁt (million)
Net present value (billion)
Main Scenario
kr.
700.359
kr.
350.179
kr. -7.668/-8.018
0.01 elasticity
kr.
350.179
kr.
175.089
kr. -8.018/-8.193
0.05 elasticity
kr. 1,750.898
kr.
875.449
kr. -6.617/-7.493
0.07 elasticity
kr. 2,451.258
kr. 1,225.629
kr. -5.917/-7.142
50% higher growth in income
kr.
815.203
kr.
407.601
kr. -7.553/-7.960
50% lower growth in income
kr.
605.193
kr.
302.596
kr. -7.763/-8.065
Decay factor of 0,03
kr.
493.528
kr.
246.764
kr. -7.874/-8.121
Decay factor of 0,07
kr.
847.796
kr.
423.796
kr. -7.520/-7.944
The basis results from Table 5 show the computed agglomeration eﬀect and the
new net present value with the newly estimated eﬀect added to the CBA. The
results diﬀerentiate on four parameters: Agglomeration elasticity, increase in
income, the decay factor and the 50% of jobs being relocated. The net present
value is shown for both case with and without 50% of all jobs has been relocated.
All values are shown in 2013 prices and is the eﬀect for the whole discounted
period 2020-2069.
The elasticity of 0.05 and 0.07 is the highest used in projects in countries as UK
[Department of Transport, 2014] specially within the service sector. The higher
elasticity values also gives the highest agglomeration estimates with eﬀects of
1.75 billion and 2.45 billion DKK and should be used carefully as seen in the
results. These results would cover half of the construction costs, and is compared
to the budget very high. The lowest eﬀect comes from the use of a lower elasticity
of 0.01 instead of 0.02 and with a decay factor of 0.03 instead of 0.05 leading
to eﬀects of 350 million and 493 million DKK. The change in income growth
from 1.25% does not seem to change the beneﬁt by a signiﬁcant amount. The
30
==PAGE:36==
decay factor has an impact on the estimated eﬀect but not as much as the
elasticity.
The assumption of 50% of jobs relocating results in half of the eﬀect being
countered by a similar negative eﬀect in other areas of the system. In this case
the highest eﬀect would be 1.23 billion DKK, and the lowest 175 million DKK.
Overall the diﬀerent parameters aﬀects the results in the same amount with
50% assumption.
With a main scenario result of 700 million and 350 million DKK, the beneﬁt
would in the best case result in a net present value of -7.7 billion DKK or -8.0
billion DKK if assuming 50% jobs being relocated. With the sensitivity analysis
from the CBA in Table 2 the eﬀect from the result Table would not bring the
NPV near zero, and at the best case the NPV would be around minus 2 billion
DKK. However, this is an overall change to the NPV, but the scenario from
Table 5 assumes no job growth which has an eﬀect of the access to jobs and
thereby agglomeration.
The estimated agglomeration eﬀect from the main scenario would consist of
18.2% or 9.1% of all the existing beneﬁts for the light rail depending on the 50%
of jobs assumption. The combined beneﬁts from [Ringby/Letbanesamarbejdet,
2013] consists of 3,855 billion DKK. These values are comparable to the cal-
culations with the Great Belt Bridge [Transportministeriet og Sund & Bælt,
2014]. In this case, agglomeration covered approximately 11% of conventional
beneﬁts, and in other European examples between 15-25% as the HS2 project
in the UK [Department of Transport, 2013]. Even with a low elasticity of 0.02
compared to these other projects, which often use around 0.05, the share of
agglomeration of the beneﬁts is not far from the same level. This perspective is
elaborated further in the discussion section.
The results with the use of job growth from Table 3 and the assumption of 20%
lower job growth without an light rail is presented in Table 6.
31
==PAGE:37==
Table 6: Results for agglomeration with the use of job growth estimates, and the analysis
with 50% of jobs which is relocating from other areas (2013 prices)
Beneﬁt (million)
50% Beneﬁt (million)
Net present value (billion)
Main scenario
kr. 1,277.155
kr.
638.577
kr. -7.091/-7.729
0.01 elasticity
kr.
638.577
kr.
319.288
kr. -7.729/-8.049
0.05 elasticity
kr. 3,192.889
kr. 1,596.444
kr. -5.175/-6.772
0.07 elasticity
kr. 4,470.045
kr. 2,235.022
kr. -3.898/-6.113
50% higher growth in jobs
kr. 1,564.334
kr.
988.986
kr. -6.804/-7.586
50% lower growth in jobs
kr.
988.986
kr.
494.493
kr. -7.379/-7.874
50% higher growth in income
kr. 1,518.933
kr.
759.466
kr. -6.849/-7.609
50% lower growth in income
kr. 1,080.673
kr.
540.336
kr. -7.287/-7.828
10% decrease in jobs without light rail
kr.
987.903
kr.
493.951
kr. -7.380/-7.874
30% decrease in jobs without light rail
kr. 1,560.187
kr.
780.093
kr. -6.808/-7.588
No decrease in job growth without light rail
kr.
692.258
kr.
346.129
kr. -7.676/-8.022
0.02% diﬀ. in yearly increase in travel time
kr. 1,385.734
kr.
692.867
kr. -6.982/-7.675
Decay factor of 0,03
kr. 1,075.156
kr.
537.578
kr. -7.293/-7.293
Decay factor of 0,07
kr. 1,422.806
kr.
711.403
kr. -6.945/-6.945
The new main scenario beneﬁt is estimated at 1.277 billion DKK or 638 million
DKK with the 50% job relocation which is signiﬁcantly higher than before.
The results again shows that increasing the agglomeration elasticity has the
biggest eﬀect of all tested parameters on the estimated agglomeration eﬀect
with computed results up to 4.47 billion DKK. The diﬀerence between growth
in jobs between light rail and non-light rail scenario also has a large impact with
an eﬀect of 692 million instead of 1.277 billion DKK. The change in job growth
thereby only has an signiﬁcant eﬀect if there also would be a diﬀerence in the
job growth.
With the main scenario the net present value would be -7.091/-7.729 billion
DKK. With the sensitivity analysis from Table 2 and a higher elasticity, the
cases with a high elasticity would bring the NPV near zero and the internal
rent would thereby be near the used discount rent of 5% percent. This would
although only happen if one or more of the original CBA sensitivity scenarios
from Table 2 would also be realised.
The minimum eﬀect of the light rail
regarding agglomeration is estimated to 319 million kroner which is an eﬀect on
the level of the existing environmental eﬀects for the light rail.
The large diﬀerence from the base scenario in Table 5 arises from the increasing
job growth in the scenario with a light rail contra a non light rail scenario. If
that diﬀerence do not exist, the beneﬁt would be estimated at 692.258 million
DKK, a bit lower than the basis assumptions. An overall job growth does not in
itself result in a higher agglomeration eﬀect, but an increase in job growth from
a light rail does. A smaller diﬀerence in change in travel time of 0,02% would
increase the beneﬁt slightly but not aﬀect the results as much as the diﬀerence
in job growth.
The decay factor has some inﬂuence on the results but the income growth has a
32
==PAGE:38==
larger inﬂuence because of the new assumptions. The two parameters still have
less inﬂuence on the beneﬁt than the elasticity which is still the main component
when computing the estimate.
The share with these expanded beneﬁts is estimated at 33.1% or 16.6% for the
main scenario which is higher than in the basis scenario and the level of most
other agglomeration studies. Although, the share of 33.1% without the assump-
tion of 50% jobs relocation is high compared to high classed railway projects.
The results are discussed and summed up in the discussion and conclusion sec-
tion of the report.
All of tested parameters has an eﬀect especially the elasticity and job growth,
which gives some uncertainty to the results. Therefore the sensitivity analysis
is used to give a better estimate.
4.2
Sensitivity analysis with Monte-Carlo Simulation
In order to ﬁnd the most likely agglomeration beneﬁt for the light rail a Monte
Carlo simulation is used. Three parameters was chosen with a deﬁned mean and
standard deviation: Elasticity (0.02,0.01), income growth (1.125%,0.15%) and
the decay factor(0.05,0.02). The 1000 simulations were by random draws follow-
ing a standard normal distribution. The purpose of the Monte Carlo simulation
is to ﬁnd the beneﬁt with diﬀerent combinations of the three input parameters.
The means have been chosen from the main scenario estimates and the standard
deviation is implemented on the background plausible values from theory and to
ensure no or few negative values. The parameters should not become negative,
and the general theory suggests that a positive agglomeration elasticity do exist.
Additionally, a negative decay factor would imply an increased accessibility to
jobs with larger travel time. The income growth standard deviation is based
on the underlying values from [Danmarks Statistik, 2016c]. This simulation is
carried out for the basis assumptions with no job growth, the scenario with
job growth and 20% increase in job growth with the light rail. For these two
simulations the most likely beneﬁt is found and the distribution of the beneﬁt
is presented.
33
==PAGE:39==
Figure 9: The distribution of beneﬁts with basis assumptions and kernel
distrubution
Figure 10: The distribution of beneﬁts with job growth assumptions and
kernel distriburtion
In the histograms in Figure 9 and Figure 10, the kernel density estimate is
shown as an estimate of the density of observations. The kernel density can,
compared to a histogram, allow the observed intervals to overlap and hereafter
assign a function which estimate density with weights between 0 and 1. The
kernel density creates an interval which do not consist of divided bars as the
histogram. From this estimate, it can be seen that it follows the normal distri-
bution which was expected because of the normal-distribution of the variables
in the Monte-Carlo simulation. The distributions is however slightly screwed to
the right with the basis more oﬀthan the other, but close to a normal distribu-
tion. As the random draws was based on a normal distribution, it was expected
to see a histogram following this distribution. The scatterplots from Appendix
1 show a highly linear tendency between the beneﬁt and elasticity and a smaller
but also clear linear tendency between the beneﬁt and the decay factor. The
income growth only has a slightly positive tendency and is close to independent
from the estimated beneﬁts. This connection was visible from earlier results
since the income growth did not eﬀect the results as much as other parameters.
In addition, in the scatterplots a diﬀerence between the two scenarios also be-
comes visible since the tendency of the decay factor is smaller than for the basis
scenario while the elasticity and income growth factors are close to completely
comparable.
Table 7: Mean beneﬁt values after simulations - 2013 prices
Beneﬁt (million)
50% Beneﬁt (million)
Net present value (billion)
Basis assumptions
681.160
340.580
kr. -7.687/-8.027
Assumptions with job growth
1,269.474
634.737
kr. -7.099/-7.733
After the simulations, the mean values are calculated to be 681.160 and 1,269.474
34
==PAGE:40==
million DKK (See Table 7) which is both slightly lower than the estimates in Ta-
ble 5 and Table 6. The simulation indicates the same results as presented before
and agglomeration would therefore consist of approximately the same share of
all beneﬁts. The results has the same scale because of the chosen means based
on the same values, but this also gives an indication of the robustness of the
results. Combined with the sensitivity analysis from the two result tables, the
Monte-Carlo simulation indicates the level of beneﬁts with diﬀerent assumptions
which are summed up in the conclusion section.
The resulting NPV values are shown for the Monte Carlo simulation in Table
8, and the NPV with all added sensitivity analysis from Table 2 is presented in
Table 9:
Table 8: Mean NPV values with min/max values after simulations without CBA sensitivity
scenarios- 2013 prices
NPV
Mean (billion)
Min/Max value (billion)
Min/Max value (billion) 50% beneﬁt
Basis assumptions
kr. -7.687
kr. -8.640/-6.470
kr. -8.504/-7.419
Assumptions with job growth
kr. -7.099
kr. -8.750/-5.130
kr. -8.559/-6.749
In Table 8 the results show a mean NPV of -7.687 billion DKK with basic
assumptions and -7.099 billion DKK with job growth. The minimum and max-
imum values deﬁnes the interval and are shown for both the full agglomeration
beneﬁt and for the 50% of job relocating. In the best simulations, the NPV de-
crease to negative 5-6 billion DKK while the simulations with the lowest beneﬁt
leaves the NPV unchanged. Some few scenarios leave a negative beneﬁt which
is reﬂected in lowest NPV values which are lower than the base NPV of -8.368
billion DKK.
To investigate the level of the NPV with job growth estimates, the NPV levels
is presented in Table 9:
Table 9: Mean NPV values with min/max values after simulations with CBA sensitivity
scenarios- 2013 prices
NPV
Mean (billion)
Min/Max value (billion)
Min/Max value (billion) 50% beneﬁt
Basis assumptions
kr. -4.110
kr. -5.060/-2.890
kr. -4.925/-3.84
Assumptions with job growth
kr. -3.520
kr. -5.170/-1.550
kr. -4.979/-3.170
From Table 9 it is assumed that the base NPV is -4.789 billion DKK instead
of -8.368 billion DKK which arises from sensitivity scenario in the CBA from
2013 [Ringby/Letbanesamarbejdet, 2013]. The results show a mean NPV of
-4.110 billion DKK with basic assumptions and -3.520 billion DKK with job
growth. In the best simulations, the NPV decrease to -1.5 billion DKK while
the simulations with the lowest beneﬁt leaves the NPV at -5 billion DKK. This
result show the overall level of the NPV depending on the assumptions used
from the CBA.
35
==PAGE:41==
A visual look of the dependency of the three parameters and the values of the
NPV can be found from two angles in Figure 11 and Figure 12, whereas the job
growth assumptions are presented in Figure 13 and Figure 14, where the red
colour representing the highest values.
Figure 11: 3D plot 1 for basis assumptions
Figure 12: 3D plot 2 for basis assumptions
Figure 13: 3D plot 1 with job growth assumptions
Figure 14: 3D plot 2 with job growth assumptions
The colour of the data represent the value of the NPV with red colours being
the less negative values. The ﬁrst x-value represent the decay factor scaled up
by 1000. The second y-value is also a 1000 scaled up version of the income
growth. Finally, the z value is the elasticity also scaled by 1000, the scaling was
necessary for an optimal visualization. As seen in the colour of the data in the
Figures, there is a shift to a higher NPV with a scenario with job growth as all
of the results show. There is a clear tendency if one moves out on the z-axis
36
==PAGE:42==
with increasing values of the elasticity, the value of beneﬁt increase. Likewise, a
positive tendency with an increasing decay factor along the x-axis. The y-axis
is evenly distributed which is expected since there seems to be slightly positive
tendency between the income growth parameter and the NPV. The parameters
aﬀect the two scenarios evenly with the NPV value being overall higher for the
job growth scenario. These results follows the tendency from the results tables
as the elasticity and decay factor aﬀects the beneﬁt and NPV most signiﬁcantly,
and the income growth only has a slightly positive inﬂuence.
The results from the Monte Carlo simulation gives a better visualisation of the
eﬀect the parameters has on the NPV. The change in income growth and the
decay factor aﬀected the results by some amount in the ﬁrst two scenario Tables
but has a less signiﬁcant eﬀect in the simulation results, this is seen for both
scenarios with and without job growth. The average beneﬁt results from the
Monte Carlo simulation is more robust due to the amount of generated data with
respect to the chosen mean and standard deviation chosen for the parameters.
However, the average beneﬁts from the simulation are only slightly lower than
the results presented earlier. With the results presented the thesis now discuss
on conclude on the computed results. The scatterplots for the three parameters
and the beneﬁt is presented in Appendix 1.
37
==PAGE:43==
5
Discussion
This report describes estimation of agglomeration eﬀects for the case of the light
rail at O3 in Greater Copenhagen, Denmark. The estimation and computations
are built on the theory in international studies and practises from governments
especially in the United Kingdom (UK). Throughout the report, criticisms and
points of uncertainty have been addressed and referred to this section of the
report for further elaboration. The discussion is divided into diﬀerent sections
regarding the results and parameters of the estimation, the overall method, the
link to theory, the overall method and ﬁnally how the results compare with
other results from comparable cases.
Discussion of the results and the value it adds to the CBA. The results
in this thesis focus on the net present value (NPV) which is a main parameter
of the CBA but not the only useful representation of the CBA. The focus on
the NPV arises from the good comparability with the existing CBA and that
the NPV often is being used as a main result from the CBA along with the
internal rent and Cost-Beneﬁt ratio. Other measures could have been chosen
but in a case comparability is important and other measures would likely have
shown the same overall picture of the CBA.
The NPV has changed in a positive direction by the agglomeration eﬀect but
it still leaves the value on negative 6-7 billion in most scenarios. In the best
scenarios the NPV would be -1.5 billion DKK. Therefore, with the present as-
sumptions of the CBA more beneﬁts would have to be computed for a positive
NPV. A negative NPV is not uncommon since the Metro City Ring was passed
on the basis of a negative NPV (although, with a positive operating cost), but
criticism has risen the later years as the Productivity Commission in 2014 [Pro-
duktiviteteskommisionen, 2014] stated that investments should beneﬁt society
and the light rail was a case which did not. To strictly follow the CBA as they
are presented today would be problematic, especially since a public transport
investment would be challenging to ﬁnance because of the value of travel time
which often is aﬀected for private traﬃc which would result in a societal value
loss. CBA has its beneﬁts in comparing individual projects, but when evalu-
ating a CBA on one project more material are needed to take a well founded
decision. Agglomeration seems from this case to be a valid additional input
with potential to be a considerable beneﬁt, but more aspects would be needed
to be implemented in the CBA than just agglomeration.
The values of the results do not reach extreme values, but stays within 10-30% of
the combined beneﬁts from the CBA. In this report, some results were presented
with an assumptions of 50% jobs being relocated, meaning 50% of the beneﬁt
is lost elsewhere in the system. In that case, most results are a share between
10-20% of the combined beneﬁt which is a comparable level to other projects as
discussed later in this section. The results without this assumption lies between
20-35% of the combined beneﬁts which is at a higher level compared to other
38
==PAGE:44==
projects. These results suggest that the assumption of jobs relocation should
be used to some extent, otherwise agglomeration would have a very high share
of the conventional beneﬁts.
This thesis diﬀerentiates between two overall scenarios one with job growth and
one without. The reasoning for this design was to ensure minimal uncertainty
in the ﬁrst scenario, and a scenario which had more parameters implemented.
The yearly job growth estimated has a high degree of uncertainty especially
after 2030 and the uncertainty regarding how the many of the job which are
just relocated over time increases the uncertainty. Therefore, on scenario does
not regard job growth in order to obtain a base result with minimal uncertainty
and the results do show lower computed values in this scenario. The job growth
scenario overall has higher results but with greater uncertainty and variety in
the values.
Discussion of the results and parameters with the validity of their
estimates. The results show the eﬀect from the parameters inﬂuence the ag-
glomeration results.
Furthermore, the results show an independence in the
Monte Carlo simulation between income growth and beneﬁt and a dependency
between job growth and elasticity. At the same time, the dependency for the
decay factor is smaller than the dependency of the elasticity which arises from
the overall theory where the agglomeration elasticity is the main component in
the computation. The elasticities are determining the productivity gain from a
density increase and since productivity here is set equal to wage the monetary
beneﬁt is highly dependent on the chosen value of the elasticity.
The other
parameters do not have this straight dependency on the estimated beneﬁt since
they can easier be counteracted by other parameters, except for the decay factor
has some eﬀect because of the determination of access to the amount of jobs.
Even though the income growth, is close to being randomly distributed in the
Monte Carlo simulation it still aﬀects the main results if adjusted with other
parameters kept at a constant value.
The agglomeration elasticity is not used sector speciﬁc as seen in international
literature, and the case for the Great Belt Bridge where especially the service
sector has high values up to 0.08 [Transportministeriet og Sund & Bælt, 2014]
which arises from English research. Instead the overall lower elasticity value of
0.02 was used because of the uncertainty with the values for the Danish sectors,
which has not been researched to a great extent. Research generally suggest
lower values when controlling for parameters such as sectors, education and
geography which was not used in earlier studies [Melo et al., 2009]. To cover
the potential eﬀect for larger (and lower) elasticities, the sensitivity analysis
and the Monte Carlo simulation are used to investigate the change of the ben-
eﬁt in the computations of agglomeration. For further Danish elaboration of
agglomeration beneﬁts, the elasticity would need more Danish sector speciﬁc
values.
The job growth is not aﬀecting the estimation to a large extent since it requires
39
==PAGE:45==
that a diﬀerence in the growth exist. This happens because the density increase
would be counteracted by a similar job growth increase in a non light rail sce-
nario. A discussion of the validity involves some uncertainty, especially on the
longer scale, which is why the growth is downscaled by 10% after 2030 according
to the estimate from DTU Transport, and the Ministry of Finance. Changes
to the global economy can aﬀect this factor dramatically and these numbers
therefore are not precise, but the best estimate with the given knowledge. The
growth is estimated on the basis of a light rail being implemented and this report
assumes 20% lower growth without the light rail in the second scenario. As for
the job growth this number is an estimate which arises from ﬁrms moving and
their reasoning and estimates from the municipalities. With this background
it is assumed that some diﬀerence in job growth exist. The diﬀerentiation has
therefore been set conservatively at 20% which is used in the sensitivity anal-
ysis and the results shows a large inﬂuence on the estimate. Many ﬁrms have
stated the light rail partly as their reason for the relocation decision to areas
along the alignment which includes MOE, Novozymes and Microsoft [Loop City,
2016]. This was also mentioned in the case section by the change of planning
for municipalities. In a situation with the light rail not being implemented less
job growth could be expected, and a proportion of the growth would have been
elsewhere in the system. The question is how much growth does the light rail
create then, without relocation from other municipalities. As stated in this re-
port, a computation would have to include all areas of the country to capture
loss of jobs in the system which would be an extensive task for this thesis, and
was not done. Instead the assumption of 50% of the newly accessible jobs was
relocated from elsewhere was used which is an estimate with a large degree of
uncertainty. However it is a necessary method to ensure no double calculations
which has not been implemented in other of the known cases. The measure
of the 50% is used to check sensitivity of the results and the magnitude of the
beneﬁts.
Discussion of the estimation of agglomeration and it limits. If a re-
liable method was used to estimate the number aﬀected workers the potential
for double calculations would also be present, since the newly reachable ﬁrms
could have moved from other parts of the system. To ﬁnd the ﬁrms resulting
in a net beneﬁt would also be challenging as already described in the report.
These main components which require assumptions/simpliﬁcations does weaken
the estimate, but measures are taken to decrease the margin of error by imple-
menting a sensitivity results with 50% of newly reachable jobs sorted out. This
reports does not use other new methods to overcome the assumptions, but aims
to corrects and reduce some uncertainty. Conservative estimates of elasticity
and future job growth and the focus on the weakness in the method also makes
the estimate and conclusions more robust in order to make the best estimate
with the current practise and theory.
As mentioned in the theory section the overlap between localisation eﬀect and
agglomeration has to be divided into separate eﬀects. Sorting models uses the
40
==PAGE:46==
information of ﬁrms and people moving to areas with the productivity level equal
to their own. An example is highly educated people which often tend to move
near other people with the same education level [Fosgerau et al., 2014]. One
part of the research within wider economic eﬀects is the relocalisation eﬀects and
sorting models which has potential to decrease the risk of double calculations,
but the topic of more advanced sorting models was not used in this thesis.
This method uses wage as a measure of agglomeration because of the good
datasets with large variety, also the wage in an imperfect market wages would
be higher in more productive areas because of the labour being paid for the
value of the marginal product. In [Rosenthal and Strange, 2004] other measures
of agglomeration is listed which include growth, ﬁrm births and rents. These
methods all has uncertainties which include bias from other eﬀects and datasets
would not be as good as for wages, especially rent cost for ﬁrms has proven
diﬃcult to obtain. In addition ﬁrm birth would be problematic because of the
uneven distribution of births over areas in some periods.
Discussion of theory by matching, sharing and learning in the esti-
mation. The theory of this project states the included agglomeration as an
externality which consist of underlying eﬀects of sharing, matching and learn-
ing since these three parameters aﬀect productivity. As mentioned in the result
section, this method does not separate the three eﬀects similar to most cases
where agglomeration is computed. The assumption that the inhabitants in the
municipalities experience a productivity increase due to better accessibility of
ﬁrms does not make it possible to compute the share of the three eﬀects at the
same time. Because of matching being related to travel time with a better job
pool for ﬁrms, it should be a considerable part of the improvement the light rail
gives. The light rail is faster than the existing bus and slightly slower than the
express bus with fewer stops, but still the light rail gives a better overall service
with frequency and expanded hours of service. This gives a ﬁrm improved access
to more workers, increasing productivity but it is not possible to give a precise
estimate of how large an amount of the beneﬁts is from matching. The eﬀect
is bound on the proximity eﬀect which is better access between two areas. The
other eﬀect inducing agglomeration which is the cluster eﬀect is related to the
increased density which primarily arises after construction of the light rail. The
sharing and learning eﬀects are more closely related to the cluster eﬀect and
matching to the proximity eﬀect, but not solely related to one of the eﬀects.
Sharing of facilities and knowledgde spill-overs are both induced by the light
rail because of the increased number of ﬁrms along the light rail, but again to
separate the computed values of the two eﬀects is not possible with the method
used.
In the basis scenario where no job growth exist (Table 5), the cluster eﬀect
would be smaller and therefore matching eﬀect assumingly would be the main
component. Some sharing and learning would already exist due to industrial
areas and the two eﬀects would be expanded as more people can reach existing
ﬁrms and new ﬁrms join the industrial areas due to the light rail. In the second
41
==PAGE:47==
computed scenario (Table 6), the eﬀect would be more divided since an increased
job growth also would increase the cluster eﬀect and induce more sharing and
learning eﬀect. This is just overall estimations of the eﬀects and not a detailed
estimation of their share of agglomeration, but indicating their comparable share
and connection with the cluster- and proximity eﬀect. Methods in the future
could deal with elaborating the eﬀects into the matching, sharing and learning
category but it would be an additional information next to the total productivity
gain which still would be the most important result because of the call for
estimation of wider economic beneﬁts.
Comparison to other results. In the result section, the share of the agglom-
eration beneﬁts was in the same level but a bit lower than in Great Belt Bridge
case with a beneﬁt of 32 billion kroner and a share of 11% of all beneﬁts. In the
case of HS2 from London to Birmingham, an agglomeration beneﬁt of 23 billion
kroner which was 12% of the combined beneﬁts [Department of Transport, 2013]
was presented as the result. Some diﬀerences do exist in the comparison, the
elasticities and other parameters, as the calculation of job density and job access
has diﬀerences. Therefore, a direct comparison should be done with caution.
In addition, compared to the scale of the Great Belt bridge and the HS2 line,
the light rail is a relatively small project with a smaller traﬃc impact. The ag-
glomeration beneﬁts could have a bigger impact compared to the conventional
beneﬁts for the light rail where the overall conventional beneﬁts are lower val-
ues. From [Copenhagen Economics, 2014] a list of infrastructure project with
computed agglomeration beneﬁts of the rail/road projects lies between 10-25%
of the combined CBA beneﬁts, which leaves the results of this thesis lower than
most other rail and road projects in Europe3 which could be explained with the
reasons listed above.
Other wider economic beneﬁts. As mentioned in the theory section agglom-
eration was one of the wider economic beneﬁts. Other areas aﬀected includes
the commodity and service market and the labour market. These are also the
eﬀects included in the Great Belt Bridge post analysis [Transportministeriet og
Sund & Bælt, 2014] which follow the English practise and the [Transportmin-
isteriet, 2015] regarding the labour market eﬀect. The overall wider economic
beneﬁt consisted of 30% of the conventional beneﬁts. The eﬀect on the labour
market was approximately 44% of the wider economic beneﬁts which follows
the tax distortion factor of 20% [Transportministeriet, 2015]. The eﬀect was
not implemented in 2013 when the CBA for the light rail was presented and
therefore is not contained in the light rail CBA. A potential beneﬁt for light
rail is this eﬀect, but it depends on the magnitude of the increase in the labour
force which follow from the decrease in the travel costs. The increase in labour
force has to counteract for the loss in labour force due to the construction cost.
The theory of the CBA assumes in the long term that the cost is covered by
3Copenhagen Economics present a share of 44% for the agglomeration beneﬁt in the HS2
project, this share was not veriﬁed, and the economic cases presented a share of 10-12% for
the HS2 rail [Department of Transport, 2013]
42
==PAGE:48==
increased taxes which decreases the labour force.
The eﬀect on the commodity and service market was the smallest of the three
wider economic eﬀects and consisted of 19% of the wider economic beneﬁts in the
Great Belt Bridge case. From English practise, a beneﬁt of 10% is added to ﬁrms
because of the imperfect competition which exist on most markets [Transport-
ministeriet og Sund & Bælt, 2014]. The Danish value has not been investigated
thoroughly, but as mentioned in the theory section the Productivity Commis-
sion suggests a value between 10-30% [Produktiviteteskommisionen, 2013]. A
wider economic beneﬁt with some magnitude is therefore possible in the context
of the light rail.
Other strategic eﬀects including city development has been a main argument for
the light rail. Often increase in housing prices is stated as an economic argument
but as mentioned earlier this eﬀect is only a relocation of demand and not a net
beneﬁt [Transportministeriet, 2015]. It is important to distinguish between an
increased investment in one area which become more attractive and other areas
which might become less attractive because of the investment just being moved.
The CBA looks at the system as a whole, and when an area becomes more
attractive, it is not necessarily a beneﬁt for the whole system. These conditions
makes it challenging to compute a reliable city development eﬀect with eﬃcient
indicators.
The eﬀect following city development and thereby increased density of ﬁrms and
inhabitants is an improvement of the market situation and can lead to increased
productivity (agglomeration). City development is a wide term that is contained
in multiple eﬀects which can be hard to separate but with the computation of
agglomeration, a part of the city development beneﬁt has been included.
43
==PAGE:49==
6
Conclusion
This thesis describes agglomeration economics in the case of the light rail at
Ring 3, Greater Copenhagen, Denmark.
The results of the agglomeration was computed as an addition to the Cost
Beneﬁt Analysis (CBA) from 2013 [Ringby/Letbanesamarbejdet, 2013]. The
CBA concluded a negative Net Present Value (NPV) of -8.368 billion kroner with
a negative internal rent. The sensitivity analysis of the existing CBA showed
three diﬀerent scenarios including no time loss for cars, increased passenger
eﬀect and lower economic buﬀer reserve. None of these presented a positive
NPV, but the three combined showed a positive internal rent of 0.2% and a
NPV of -4.789 billion kroner.
The agglomeration eﬀect was computed by estimating the access to jobs which
in this case is dependent on average travel time between municipalities and a
decay factor which exponentially decreases the number of reachable jobs as the
travel time increases. From the diﬀerence in access to jobs in the two scenarios
with and without the light rail, the agglomeration eﬀect was computed with the
agglomeration elasticity. The elasticity determines the productivity gain from
a density gain, and in this thesis used as access to jobs, and was set at 0.02.
Productivity was described as wage in this thesis with the yearly increase based
on data from Statistics Denmark and the computation looked at all inhabitants
in the municipalities.
With two scenarios relying on diﬀerent job forecasting, one without job growth
and one based on the 2010-2030 predictions from the Danish Ministry of Fi-
nance, the agglomeration was computed in the period from 2020-2069 and dis-
counted back to 2013 prices to compare with the conventional beneﬁts. The
sensitivity analysis looked upon diﬀerent values of the parameters and the sen-
sitivity analysis looked upon the part of the agglomeration which is overlapping
the relocalisation eﬀect. When ﬁrms are relocating they leave a negative beneﬁt
in the origin municipality which creates a net beneﬁt of zero for the system as
a whole. To estimate the number of jobs which are not existing in the munici-
pality or are newly created goes beyond this thesis and was therefore tested by
including a 50% lower beneﬁt representing 50% of newly reachable jobs being
relocated.
The computed results showed a beneﬁt of 700.359 million DKK if it is assumed
that there is the same amount of jobs throughout the period which leaves a
beneﬁt of 350.179 million DKK if 50% of jobs is relocating. This beneﬁt is the
base scenario with no job growth and dependent on the elasticity, decay factor
and the income growth. For the results with a job growth and an addition with
a 20% diﬀerence in job growth with and without the light rail resulted in a
beneﬁt of 1,277 million DKK or 639 million DKK with 50% of job relocating.
The diﬀerentiation of job growth by 20% addition was based on estimates from
municipalities and the ﬁrms which use the light rail as a reason for moving but
44
==PAGE:50==
it still has some uncertainty build in it.
The sensitivity results show that the agglomeration elasticity has the greatest
impact on the beneﬁt with results more than double up to 4 billion DKK with
a elasticity of 0.07. The decay factor also aﬀects the beneﬁt, but with changes
around 15% in the beneﬁt. The parameter of the change in income has a slightly
lower eﬀect on the beneﬁt but still eﬀects the results.
The job growth value is dependent on the diﬀerence in job growth with and
without the light rail. The beneﬁt is almost unchanged by a change in job growth
without a diﬀerentiation and at the same time the beneﬁt is highly dependent
on the value of the diﬀerentiated growth which resulted to be the main eﬀect
in the diﬀerence between the two main scenario beneﬁts.
A scenario where
travel time would increase with a diﬀerentiation does not aﬀect the results by a
signiﬁcant amount which leaves the elasticity and the diﬀerentiated job growth
as the factors which have the biggest eﬀect on the results.
In order to ﬁnd the median of the sensitivity analysis for the two scenarios,
an Monte Carlo simulation with 1000 random simulations was used with the
elasticity, decay factor and the income growth as the parameters. The results
showed a slightly lower beneﬁt of 681 million and 1,269 million DKK for the two
scenarios. With the results implemented added to the NPV, it would result in a
value between negative 7-8 billion DKK. However, if adding both the best results
from the sensitivity analysis, the NPV is around negative 5-6 billion kroner. In
the best of the scenarios with all the sensitivity parameters implemented from
the original CBA and for agglomeration, the NPV would be -1.5 billion DKK
although this would not be very likely.
The level of the agglomeration beneﬁts goes from consisting of 9% to 33% of the
combined conventional beneﬁts compared to other cases as the Great Belt bridge
and HS2 in England showing between 10-20%. The results show a higher level of
agglomeration if the 50% relocation part is not used while the results lies on the
same scale with the 50% of the eﬀect. However, the cases are not comparable in
scale and the methods diﬀerentiate by some of the parameters used. The main
component of the agglomeration beneﬁt was the agglomeration elasticity which
also has uncertainty due to no research in a Danish context regarding sector
speciﬁc values which now relies on English values. For further investigation of
agglomeration in Denmark these parameters would need increased examination
to obtain reliable results.
The results relies on a method with assumptions and uncertainties. When fore-
casting values up to the year of 2069, uncertainties are always large, and the
method uses the assumption of all inhabitants being aﬀected by the productivity
gain. The results from both this case and the Great Belt bridge show potential
for agglomeration beneﬁt in Danish transport infrastructure investments but
further research is needed and development of the method in order to compute
more precise estimates of the agglomeration beneﬁt. The overall CBA method
would be improved by the adding agglomeration economics. For the case of the
45
==PAGE:51==
light rail, the results would most likely not be changed in a scale that would
aﬀect the overall results of the CBA signiﬁcantly.
46
==PAGE:52==
References
[Brems, 2010] Brems, C. (2010). Prognoseforudsætninger for traﬁkmodelbereg-
ninger. DTU Transport, Juli 2010.
[Brems and Pedersen, 2016] Brems, C. R. and Pedersen, S. H. (2016). Forud-
sætninger for basis 2020 og basis 2030. DTU Tranport, Januar 2016.
[Brueckner, 2011] Brueckner, J. K. (2011). Lectures on Urban Economics. The
MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, London, England, Chapter 1, pp. 1-
23.
[Copenhagen Economics, 2014] Copenhagen
Economics
(2014).
Bredere
økonomiske eﬀekter af eﬀekter af transportinvesteringer. Detbatoplæg for
Transportministeriet, Maj 2014.
[Danmarks Statistik, 2016a] Danmarks Statistik (2016a).
Danmarks Statis-
tik AINDK1:
A-indkomst efter omr˚ade, enhed, køn og A-indkomsttype.
http://www.danmarksstatistik.dk/da/Statistik, 2016-15-03.
[Danmarks Statistik, 2016b] Danmarks
Statistik
(2016b).
Danmarks
Statistik
ERHV2:
Arbejdssteder
og
job
efter
omr˚ade,
branche.
http://www.danmarksstatistik.dk/da/Statistik, 2016-15-03.
[Danmarks Statistik, 2016c] Danmarks Statistik (2016c).
Danmarks Statistik
Lønindeks 4 kvt. 2015. http://www.dst.dk/da/Statistik/NytHtml?cid=23386,
2016-15-03.
[Department of Transport, 2005] Department of Transport (2005). Transport,
Wider Economic Beneﬁts, and Impacts on GDP. Discussion Paper for De-
partment of Transport, July 2005. Chapter 3, pp 19-31.
[Department of Transport, 2013] Department of Transport (2013).
The Eco-
nomic Case For HS2. Department of Transport, October 2013, Chapter 5,
pp. 85.
[Department of Transport, 2014] Department of Transport (2014). Transport
Analysis Guidiance (TAG) Unit A2.1 Wider impacts. Department of Trans-
port, January 2014. Chapter 4-5, pp 3-13.
[Duranton and Puga, 2003] Duranton,
G. and Puga,
D. (2003).
Micro-
foundations of urban aggloemration economics. Handbook of Regional and
Urban Economics, Volume 4, August 2003.
[Engebretsen et al., 2015] Engebretsen,
y.,
Christiansen,
P.,
and
Strand,
A.
(2015).
Positiv faktor for tranport og areautviklingen. Samferd-
sel Magasinet. https://samferdsel.toi.no/nr-10/positiv-faktor-for-transport-
og-arealutviklingen-article33210-2189.htm. 2016-25-04.
47
==PAGE:53==
[Fosgerau et al., 2014] Fosgerau, M., Pilegaard, N., and Mulalic, I. (2014). Ag-
glomeration - en bredere økonomisk eﬀekt p˚a transportomr˚adet. DTU Trans-
port, December 2015.
[Gladsaxe Kommune, 2011] Gladsaxe Kommune (2011). Helhedsplan for Glad-
saxe Ringby. Gladsaxe Kommune og Hasløv & Kjærsgaard, 2011.
[Hovedstadens Letbane, 2013] Hovedstadens Letbane (2013). Principaftale om
anlæg og drift af en letbane p˚a Ring 3. Hovedstadens Letbane, Juni 2013.
[Kernohan et al., 2011] Kernohan, D., Rognlien, L., and Gleave, S. D. (2011).
Wider economic impacts of transport investments in New Zealand. NZ Tran-
port Agency reserach report 448, September 2011.
[Loop City, 2016] Loop City (2016). Transport- og Bygningsudvalget 2015-16 L
102 Bilag 19. Loop City, April 2016.
[Lyngby-Taarbæk Kommune, 2015] Lyngby-Taarbæk Kommune (2015). Kom-
muneplantilæg 14/2013 for Traceet langs Helsingør motorvejen. Lyngby-
Taarbæk Komune, Juni 2015.
[Melo et al., 2009] Melo, P. C., Graham, D. J., and Noland, R. B. (2009).
A Meta-Analysis of Estimates of Urban Agglomeration Economies. Regional
Sceince and Urban Economics, 39, pp 332-342.
[Miljøministeriet, 2007] Miljøministeriet (2007). Fingerplan 2007 - Landsplans-
direktiv for hovedstadsomr˚adets planlægning. Skov- og Naturstyrelsen, Udgivet
af Miljøministeriet, 2007.
[Olesen, 2012] Olesen, M. (2012).
Skinnefaktor eller systemfokus.
Traﬁk og
Veje, December 2012, pp. 4-7.
[Produktiviteteskommisionen, 2013] Produktiviteteskommisionen
(2013).
Analyseraport 2: Konkurrence, Internationalisering og regulering. Produk-
tivitetskommisionen, August 2013 revideret udgave, Del 1: Konkurrence.
[Produktiviteteskommisionen, 2014] Produktiviteteskommisionen
(2014).
Analyserapport 5: Infrastruktur. Produktivitetskommisionen, Januar 2014,
Chapter 2, pp. 10-35.
[Puga, 2010] Puga, D. (2010). The Magnitude and Causes of Agglomeration
Economies. Journal of Regional Scenice, Vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 203-219.
[Ringby/Letbanesamarbejdet, 2013] Ringby/Letbanesamarbejdet
(2013).
Udredning om Letbane p˚a Ring 3. Ringby/Letbanesamarbejde, Marts 2013.
[Rosenthal and Strange, 2004] Rosenthal, S. S. and Strange, W. C. (2004). Ev-
idence on the Nature and Sources of Agglomeration Economics. Urban and
Regional Economics, Vol 4.
[Transportministeriet, 2015] Transportministeriet (2015).
Manual for sam-
fundsøkonomisk analyse p˚a transportomr˚adet. Transportministeriet, Maj
2014.
48
==PAGE:54==
[Transportministeriet og Sund & Bælt, 2014] Transportministeriet og Sund &
Bælt (2014). Ex post samfundsøkonomisk analyse af Storebæltsforbindelsen.
Tetraplan og Incentive for Transportministeriet og Sund & Bælt, 2014.
[Venables and Overman, 2014] Venables, A. J. and Overman, H. (2014). Trans-
port investment and economic performance. Implications for project appraisal.
Paper commissioned for UK Department of Transport, October 2014.
49
==PAGE:55==
Appendix
Included in the appendix are the scatterplots which show the data used in the
Monto Carlo Simulation. For further data and sheets used in computation of Ag-
glomeration, contact author Jakob Skovgaard Koed (jakob.1992@hotmail.com).
Appendix 1 - Scatterplots
Figure 15: Plot with Beneﬁt Basis and elasticity factor
Figure 16: Plot with Beneﬁt Job Growth and elasticity factor
Figure 17: Plot with BeneﬁtBasis and decay factor
Figure 18: Plot with Beneﬁt Job Growth and decay factor
50
==PAGE:56==
Figure 19: Plot with BeneﬁtBasis and income growth factor
Figure 20: Plot with Beneﬁt Job Growth and income growth factor
51
