==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Department of 
Wind Energy 
Master Report 
 
 
 
Sensitivity testing and technical implementation 
of mesoscale generalisation procedure for the 
WRF model 
 
 
David Chris J. Schillebeeckx 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0101 
June 2016 
==PAGE:2==
Authors: David Chris J. Schillebeeckx 
Title: Sensitivity testing and technical implementation of mesoscale 
generalisation procedure for the WRF model 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0101 
June 2016 
Project Period: 
January – June 2016 
ECTS: 30 
Education: Master of Science
Supervisors: 
Andrea N. Hahmann 
DTU Wind Energy
Rory Donnelly 
3E Belgium 
Detlev Heinemann
University of Oldenburg 
Remarks: 
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark. 
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind Energy 
Frederiksborgvej 399 
4000 Roskilde 
Denmark 
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk 
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Numerical Weather Prediction (NWP) models are increasingly being used for the
estimation of wind resources over large regions. The large-scale wind resource maps
resulting from such models are useful to identify favourable regions for wind energy
deployment in the prospection phase. However, due to the relative low resolution
of most mesoscale models, the earth surface is represented in an unrealistic manner.
This misrepresentation of the environment impacts the flow near the surface. Hence,
the output from mesoscale models cannot be compared directly with on-site measure-
ments or used directly for wind farm site selection and long-term energy production
estimation, unless over water or very simple terrain.
As a solution, mesoscale outputs are ‘generalised’ to a wind climate by removing
the topographical effects from the mesoscale model terrain description. Such gener-
alised wind climates can then be used as an input for linear microscale models such
as WAsP to model the local terrain effects and create wind resource maps at a high
spatial resolution. A procedure to generalise the output wind data from the Weather
Research and Forecast (WRF) mesoscale model has been developed for the creation
of the South African wind atlas.
This study performs an in depth and extensive validation of this WRF general-
isation procedure. It is based on a comparison of the generalised WRF simulated
climates with observed wind climates obtained from measurements masts with differ-
ent site conditions and geographical locations. Observations from masts spread over
Europe and Thailand are used. For every mast full years of data are selected from
which observed wind climatologies are constructed that are generalised with WAsP.
WRF simulations are performed over the same area and covering the same time pe-
riod as the measurements. The output from these simulations are generalised using
the WRF generalisation procedure and compared with the generalised observed wind
climates from on-site measurements. The comparison is done by evaluating the errors
of the predicted wind roses, mean wind speeds and annual energy production.
A sensitivity analysis of the generalisation procedure is performed. This study
shows that both the histogram bin sizes of the WRF wind data and the chosen atmo-
spheric stability correction method can have a large impact on the generalised wind
climate. It is found that the sensitivity is highly linked to the size of the simulated
time series and that the generalisation parameters have to be chosen accordingly. The
validation of these wind climates demonstrates the added value of the generalisation
procedure when compared to the large errors of the ‘raw’ WRF time series.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
First, I would like to thank my supervisors Detlev Heinemann, Andrea Hahmann
and Rory Donnelly for giving me the opportunity to work on this thesis.
Detlev
Heinemann and Rory Donnelly helped me to come up with this interesting thesis
topic and gave me the opportunity to gain some ‘real life’ experience in the wind
energy sector. Many thanks to Andrea Hahmann for her close support and follow-
up.
I received many helpful suggestions, ideas and guidance because of her large
experience in the topic.
I gratefully acknowledge all the valuable work Grégoire Leroy has done to help
me complete this thesis. He always made time for me whenever I had a problem or
question, big or small. I cannot stress enough my appreciation for this help. I wish
to thank Nicolaz Guidon for providing me the measurement data and helping me
processing it. Also many thanks to my other colleagues at 3E for the nice working
environment during my thesis work.
Finally, thanks to my family and friends who always supported me throughout
my entire education. Your entertainment and encouragement were especially useful
during the stressful and difficult moments. A special thank to my girlfriend Eefke,
your endless support did not have any boundaries, both literally and figuratively
speaking.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
i
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
v
List of Figures
vi
List of Tables
x
List of Symbols and Abbreviations
xi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
NWP model studies for wind resource estimation . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Goals and Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Theoretical background
7
2.1
Mesoscale NWP modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.1
Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Mesoscale wind climate generalisation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.1
Topographic models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.2
Generalised wind climate
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
Data
25
3.1
Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2
WRF simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2.1
WRF configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2.2
Input
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2.3
Output
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4
Sensitivity study
33
4.1
Validation criteria
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.1.1
Wind rose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.1.2
Mean wind speed and AEP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
==PAGE:8==
4.2
Effect on wind rose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.3
Effect on mean wind speed and AEP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.4
Identifying optimal generalisation set-up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5
Results and Discussion
45
5.1
Weibull parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.2
WRF temporal resolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.3
WRF topography description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.3.1
Influence of terrain complexity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.3.2
Influence of roughness length difference
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6
Conclusions and Outlook
59
6.1
Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
Appendix A
63
Appendix B
65
Bibliography
67
List of Figures
2.1
Typical atmospheric processes described by a mesoscale NWP model [3]. .
8
2.2
Scheme of the WRF Software Framework with its principle components
[20]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Vector sketch of the background flow vector u0 with bearing angle θ. The
velocity perturbation imposed by the terrain u′ is expressed in cylindrical
coordinates and shown as red vectors.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4
Sketch of the ‘zooming’ grid defined by a maximum radius R, a zooming
factor, the number of radial station Nr and the number of azimuth angles
Nϕ.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.5
Sketch of a velocity perturbation (red) on a background flow over flat
terrain with wind direction θ (blue) induced by terrain height differences.
The total wind vector (green) is the result of the vector sum of the red and
blue vectors. The real and imaginary axes define the radial and azimuthal
directions, respectively.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
==PAGE:9==
List of Figures
vii
3.1
WRF simulation domains for the France and Belgium simulation (a) and
for Thailand (b). Nested domains are used with a 1:3 ratio between parent
and child domains: D01 (45 km resolution), D02 (15 km resolution) and
D03 (5 km resolution). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.1
Graphical representation of how the errors are defined for the calculation
of the dRMSE of the WRF wind rose. The grey wind rose is obtained from
observations, while the green is the result from the WRF generalisation. .
35
4.2
Example of a wind rose shift by an angle θ = 10.5◦. The original (green)
wind rose has a larger dRMSE than the shifted wind rose (blue). The
offset is defined as the shift angle that yields the lowest dRMSE compared
to the observed wind rose. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.3
Effect of wind speed and direction bin sizes on the dRMSE [%] of the WRF
generalised wind rose for z0 = 0.03 m. The solid lines are from Method 4,
the dashed lines from Method 3. The black dot-dashed line represent the
dRMSE of the WRF wind rose without generalisation compared to the
observed wind rose. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.4
Effect of wind speed and direction bin sizes on the absolute offset of the
generalised wind rose for z0 = 0.03 m. The solid lines are from Method
4, the dashed lines from Method 3. The black dot-dashed line represent
the offset of the WRF wind rose without generalisation from the observed
wind rose. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.5
Effect of wind speed and direction bin sizes on the mean generalised wind
speed for z0 = 0.03 m and z = 80 m. The solid lines are from Method
4, the dashed lines from Method 3. The black dot-dashed line represent
the mean wind speed error from a comparison between the raw WRF
simulation and the raw measurements. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.6
Effect of wind speed and direction bin sizes on the AEP from the gener-
alised wind for z0 = 0.03 m and z = 80 m. The solid lines are from Method
4, the dashed lines from Method 3. The black dot-dashed line represent
the AEP error from a comparison between the raw WRF simulation and
the raw measurements. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.7
Taylor-inspired diagram to represent the mean wind speed errors of the
generalisation procedure for different wind speed and direction sizes. Green
dots are from Method 3, blue dots from Method 4. The black dot repre-
sents the errors when the ‘raw’ WRF simulations are compared with the
observations. The generalised wind climate is calculated for z0 = 0.03 m
and z = 80 m. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.8
Taylor-inspired diagram to represent the AEP errors of the generalisation
procedure for different wind speed and direction sizes. Green dots are from
Method 3, blue dots from Method 4. The black dot represents the errors
when the ‘raw’ WRF simulations are compared with the observations. The
generalised wind climate is calculated for z0 = 0.03 m and z = 80 m.
. . .
43
==PAGE:10==
viii
List of Figures
5.1
Normalised mean wind speed error from the raw WRF simulations (red
bars) and generalised WRF wind climates (blue bars) at all masts. The
generalised winds are at a height z = 80 m and for a homogeneous surface
of z0 = 0.03 m.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.2
Normalised AEP error from the raw WRF simulations (red bars) and
generalised WRF wind climates (blue bars) at all masts. The generalised
winds are at a height z = 80 m and for a homogeneous surface of z0 = 0.03 m. 46
5.3
Box plots of the errors on the A (a) and k (b) Weibull parameters from
a comparison between the generalised wind climates at different standard
roughness lengths (z0) at z = 80 m of the WRF simulations and the ob-
servations. The first box plot (‘Raw’) represents the relative error on the
Weibull parameters from a comparison between a raw simulations and
observations.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.4
Box plots of the errors on the A (a) and k (b) Weibull parameters from
a comparison between the generalised wind climates at different standard
roughness heights (z) for a uniform roughness of z0 = 0.03 m of the WRF
simulations and the observations. The first box plot (‘Raw’) represents
the relative error on the Weibull parameters from a comparison between
a raw simulations and observations.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.5
Effect of wind speed and direction bin sizes on the dRMSE (a) and absolute
offset (b) of the generalised wind roses for z0 = 0.03 m from the WASA
project. The solid lines are from Method 4, the dashed lines from Method 3. 52
5.6
Effect of wind speed and direction bin sizes on the mean WASA generalised
wind speed for z0 = 0.03 m and z = 100 m. The solid lines are from Method
4, the dashed lines from Method 3. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.7
Box plots of the errors on the A (a) and k (b) Weibull parameters from
the comparison between the generalised wind climates at z = 100 m for a
uniform roughness of z0 = 0.03 m of the WASA WRF simulations and the
observations. The errors are determined for both the original WRF output
frequency (10 min) and the resampled one (1 h) and for both stability
correction methods (Method 3 and Method 4).
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.8
Normalised MAE of the mean wind speed at each site as a function of the
roughness length complexity, σ(z0)/ ¯z0, in the surrounding area. In (a) the
error from the raw WRF wind speeds is shown, (b) shows the error from
the generalised WRF wind speed. The Spearman correlation coefficient ρ
with its respective p -value are given in the blue box. . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.9
Normalised MAE of the mean wind speed at each site as a function of the
orographic complexity, max(δ|Aoro|), in the surrounding area. In (a) the
error from the raw WRF wind speeds is shown, (b) shows the error from
the generalised WRF wind speed. The Spearman correlation coefficient ρ
with its respective p -value are given in the blue box. . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
==PAGE:11==
5.10 Normalised MAE of the mean wind speed at each site as a function of the
roughness length difference at the site between WRF and WAsP, z0WRF −
z0WAsP. In (a) the error from the raw WRF wind speeds is shown, (b)
shows the error from the generalised WRF wind speed. The Spearman
correlation coefficient ρ with its respective p -value are given in the blue
box. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
A.1 Box plots of the errors on the A (a) and k (b) Weibull parameters from
a comparison between the generalised wind climates at different standard
roughness lengths (z0) at z = 80 m of the WRF simulations and the ob-
servations. The generalisation is performed using Method 3. The first
box plot (‘Raw’) represents the relative error on the Weibull parameters
from a comparison between a raw simulations and observations. A very
large underestimation is observed for the two parameters, independent of
the standard roughness length. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
A.2 Box plots of the errors on the A (a) and k (b) Weibull parameters from
a comparison between the generalised wind climates at different standard
roughness heights (z) for a uniform roughness of z0 = 0.03 m of the WRF
simulations and the observations. The generalisation is performed using
Method 3. The first box plot (‘Raw’) represents the relative error on
the Weibull parameters from a comparison between a raw simulations and
observations. It appears that the Method 3 stability correction is able to
better represent the profiles of the Weibull parameters. . . . . . . . . . . .
64
B.1
Effect of wind speed and direction bin sizes on the mean generalised wind
speed for z0 = 0.03 m and z = 80 m. Three different generalisation pro-
cedures are tested. The original procedure on the original hourly WRF
data (1 h, fmin = 5), the original procedure on a resampled 10 min WRF
data (10 min, fmin = 5) and the procedure without the minimum bin size
requirement on the original hourly WRF data (1 h, fmin = 0). The solid
lines are from Method 4, the dashed lines from Method 3.
The black
dot-dashed line represent the mean wind speed error from a comparison
between the raw WRF simulation and the raw measurements. It is clear
that both solutions substantially improve the results from Method 3, but
for Method 4 only at low wind speed bin sizes an improvement is observed. 65
==PAGE:12==
x
List of Tables
B.2
Box plots of the errors on the A (a) and k (b) Weibull parameters from
the comparison between the generalised wind climates at z = 80 m and for
a uniform roughness of z0 = 0.03 m of WRF simulations and the observa-
tions. Three different generalisation procedures are tested. The original
procedure on the original hourly WRF data (1 h, fmin = 5), the origi-
nal procedure on a resampled 10 min WRF data (10 min, fmin = 5) and
the procedure without the minimum bin size requirement on the original
hourly WRF data (1 h, fmin = 0). The first box plot (‘Raw’) is of the
errors on the Weibull parameters from the comparison between the raw
simulations and observations. The bias of the k parameter is reduced with
the proposed solutions, but increased for the A parameter, resulting in a
higher error of the mean wind speed. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
List of Tables
2.1
Stability classes for seven stability ranges with their associated typical
Obukhov length ˜L. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1
Measurement masts used for the validation of the generalisation procedure.
For each mast number the measurement period, the period expressed in
full years, the height AGL and the mean observed wind speed is given.
Masts 1 to 31 are located in France or Belgium and masts 32 to 36 are
located in Thailand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2
Physical parametrisation schemes for the WRF model. . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.3
WRF output variables sorted by their dimensions.
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.1
Normalised MAE [%] of the mean wind speed U and AEP as calculated in
Equation (4.7) from both the raw and the generalised data. The average
is taken for all masts (1 to 36) and for the masts without the ones located
in Thailand (1 to 31).
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
==PAGE:13==
List of Symbols and
Abbreviations
α
power law exponent
χ
velocity potential field
δϕoro
flow perturbation on wind speed due to orography
δAoro
flow perturbation on wind direction due to orography
δArou
flow perturbation on wind speed due to a roughness change
η
terrain-following hydrostatic-pressure level
ˆz0
height-independent sectorwise uniform upstream roughness length
κ
von Kármán constant
ϕG
geostrophic wind direction
ψ
stability correction function
ρ
Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient
u′
flow perturbation introduced by complex terrain
u0
reference background flow
cfσ
stability correction factor on the standard deviation of the wind speed
cfu
stability correction factor on the mean wind speed
ε
relative error
A
Weibull scale parameter
cj
j’ th zero of the first order J-Bessel function
D
decay-length
==PAGE:14==
xii
List of Tables
fW
Weibull distribution function
G
geostrophic wind speed
Hoff, land average surface heat flux over land
Hoff, sea average surface heat flux over water
Hrms, land root-mean-square of the surface heat flux over land
Hrms, sea root-mean-square of the surface heat flux over water
Jn
J-Bessel function of order n
k
Weibull shape parameter
L
Monin-Obukhov length
Nϕ
number of wind direction sectors
PW T
wind turbine power curve
U
mean wind speed
u∗
friction velocity
zi
standard height
zm
height of minimum stability-induced variations
z0j
standard roughness length
ABL
Atmospheric Boundary Layer
AEP
Annual Energy Production
AGL
Above Ground Level
AROME Application of Research to Operations at Mesoscale
ARW
Advanced-Research WRF
COSMO Consortium for Small Scale Modelling
dRMSE directional Root Mean Square Error
ESMAP Energy Sector Management Assistance Program
EWA
European Wind Atlas
GWC
Generalised Wind Climate
IBL
Internal Boundary Layer
==PAGE:15==
List of Tables
xiii
IQR
Interquartile Range
KAMM Karlsruhe Atmospheric Mesoscale Model
MC2
Mesoscale Compressible Community Model
MCP
Measure-Correlate-Predict
MM5
Fifth-Generation Penn State/NCAR Mesoscale Model
MYJ
Mellor-Yamada-Janjic
NCAR National Center for Atmospheric Research
NCEP National Centers for Environmental Prediction
nMAE normalised Mean Absolute Error
NMM Non-hydrostatic Mesoscale Model
NWP
Numerical Weather Prediction
OWC
Observed Wind Climate
RB
Relative Bias
SRTM Shuttle Radar Topography Mission
WASA Wind Atlas for South Africa
WAsP Wind Atlas Analysis and Application Program
WPS
WRF Preprocessor System
WRF
Weather Research and Forecasting
YSU
Yonsei University
==PAGE:16==
xiv
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Because of the increasing need and demand for clean and sustainable energy, many
regions and countries set up renewable energy targets to define a new energy landscape
[1]. Wind energy plays a significant role in meeting these targets, because of their cost
efficiency, global availability and the maturity of the wind industry [2]. Since wind
turbines need wind as their ‘fuel’ for power production, the search for profitable wind
resources is comparable with the search for oil fields during the twentieth century by
the petroleum industry.
To enable governments, project developers and policy planners to evaluate and
optimally benefit from the available wind energy potential, reliable and accurate wind
resource maps are crucial. Knowledge of the wind speed and direction distribution
is required to identify the favourable areas for wind energy deployment. Candidate
wind project sites can then be investigated further with a more detailed and advanced
wind study. This hunt for potential sites for wind energy deployment can be referred
to as macro-siting [3].
These wind climates over large areas for national or regional wind resource as-
sessment typically use wind data from the synoptic weather stations maintained by
meteorological and public services [4]. Results of such measurements are then cor-
rected for local terrain effects such as obstacles, roughness, orographic and thermal
effects to obtain a regional wind climate. For the construction of the European Wind
Atlas (EWA) [5] this method was also used and a detailed description of this proce-
dure and the required models can be found in [5]. In the EWA this method is referred
to as the ‘Wind Atlas Methodology’. It requires long-term wind speed measurements
spread around the area of interest to account for temporal and spatial variability.
However, a sufficient coverage of high quality observations in a region is not always
available. Long-term data can be obtained from existing weather station networks
but the network is often too coarse to evaluate a local wind climate. In addition, their
measuring height is generally only 10 m above ground level (AGL) since they serve
general meteorological applications. Due to a lack of maintenance and calibration
of the measurement sensors, the accuracy and availability is not always guaranteed
either [6]. On the other hand, setting up large regional measurement campaigns by
erecting tall masts are costly and require long measuring periods to account for the
seasonal and annual variability. Recently, due to the increase of computational speed
and power, these issues are solved by the development of numerical wind atlases [4].
They are constructed using Numerical Weather Prediction (NWP) models and give
==PAGE:18==
2
1 Introduction
an estimation of the wind resource at a mesoscale level. It is influenced by large
terrain features such as mountains and large surface features, containing phenomena
such as land-sea breezes, hurricanes and convective storms. The scale of atmospheric
phenomena at the mesoscale level lie in between the microscale and the synoptic scale,
with a horizontal scale ranging from a few kilometres to several hundred kilometres.
The synoptic scale contains large weather systems such as cyclones, anti-cyclones,
pressure systems and fronts. The wind regimes have a spatial scale above 200 km and
temporal scales longer than a few days, which is clearly too large to study the wind
resource conditions [3]. At the microscale level the local wind regime is described. It
contains short-lived phenomena that are smaller than 1 km in size. They are influ-
enced by the local topographical features such as vegetation, obstacles, atmospheric
stability and orography.
Mesoscale NWP models use reanalysis data as boundary conditions to simulate
time series and weather climates down to a resolution of a few kilometres [7]. Re-
analysis data is gridded data that combines the information from global circulation
models with measurements from weather stations or satellites [8]. Typically, a large
area of thousand of kilometres can be modelled. Therefore, NWP models can act as
a valuable, low-cost alternative for wind data from weather stations which led to the
development of several numerical wind atlases using different mesoscale models.
The accuracy of these models is of course limited by the representation of the earth
topography by physical equations and parametrisations and by the model grid cell size
[7]. The model’s effective resolution where the wind flow variations are captured is
even a factor higher than the model grid spacing [9], [10]. Because of this mismatch
between the actual topographic features and the model terrain representation, the
mesoscale simulated winds do not directly agree with on-site measurements at the
same location. A proposed solution is to ‘generalise’ the mesoscale outputs to a wind
climate by removing the topographical effects from the mesoscale model [11]. The
removal of the mesoscale description of the terrain creates generalised wind climates
which are specified for standard uniform roughnesses and flat terrain. These can be
used as input for microscale models (e.g. WAsP) where more detailed information on
the roughness and orography is provided. Such a model is able to model the local,
small-scale effects of the terrain and introduce these into the generalised wind climate
to create a wind resource map with a high resolution for a specific site.
The generalisation procedure also allows for an appropriate validation of the
mesoscale output winds by comparing the generalised mesoscale wind climate with a
similar wind climatology determined from the generalisation of site measurements us-
ing a microscale model. Moreover, linking mesoscale model outputs with microscale
models through generalised wind climates gives the opportunity to create large re-
gional wind resource maps at high resolution.
==PAGE:19==
1.1 NWP model studies for wind resource estimation
3
1.1
NWP model studies for wind resource estimation
The limitations of using wind measurements for wind energy resource assessment
over large areas together with the growth in computational speed contributed to the
increased popularity of using NWP for macro-siting. Therefore, many different NWP
mesoscale models are nowadays used for the development of national, regional or
offshore numerical wind atlases. Some examples of such studies and methodologies
are given here. A review of NWP models used for wind resource assessment is given
in [6]. In that study the advantages and uncertainties of NWP are discussed.
The MM5 model [12] is used for the development of the Portuguese [13] and Greek
[14] wind atlas as well as for an offshore wind resource assessment in Japanese and
Danish waters [15]. The study in [16] shows that the Consortium for Small Scale
Modelling (COSMO, http://cosmo-model.cscs.ch/) was suitable to evaluate the
wind resource in Oman, even in the southern part which is characterised by complex
terrain. Other examples of mesoscale models for wind resource studies are described in
[17], [18], [19]. Recently the Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF, http://wrf-
model.org/index.php) model [20] gained a lot of popularity. A number of studies
apply this mesoscale model for the construction of both on- and offshore wind atlases
[21], [22], [23]. In [24] a verification and comparative study of near surface winds
is performed between the WRF and MM5 mesoscale models. Domain resolutions
ranging from 27 km to 333 m were used. The validation of the mesoscale models is
done by comparing the raw model output with 10 min wind speed measurements at
10 m and 50 m AGL at 4 sites in western U.S. for July and December. The winds
at 50 m from the MM5 model had a negative bias of -14% and -20% in July and
December, respectively. The biases from the WRF model were +10% for both months.
The fine, sub-kilometre grid resolution did not improve the absolute error or bias,
but did improve the simulated vertical wind shear and temporal variability for both
models. In general, the study concludes that for dynamical downscaling the WRF
model performs better than the MM5 model.
For the national wind atlas of Ireland [25], [26], the Karlsruhe Atmospheric
Mesoscale Model (KAMM) [27] was used. To validate the atlas, the KAMM model
output was compared with generalised observations from the EWA. This was done by
generalising the wind climate resulting from the weighted mean of multiple simula-
tions with different constant geostrophic wind speeds. This led to the KAMM/WAsP
method in [28] as a first meso/microscale coupling procedure. The method combines
the capability of KAMM to model the physical processes of the atmospheric system
over large regions at a kilometre scale resolution with the WAsP microscale model
to predict the local wind resource below the mesoscale model grid size, using more
detailed orographic and land cover maps. The method was tested for sites in Den-
mark, Ireland, the Faroe Islands, Northern Portugal and Galicia. It was found that
the KAMM/WAsP method yielded much better predictions of the observations than
when the KAMM simulations were directly interpolated to the measurement loca-
tions. Because of its accuracy, the method was used for many wind resource studies
such as for North-East China [29]. Further details of the KAMM/WAsP method and
==PAGE:20==
4
1 Introduction
a more extensive description of the mesoscale and microscale modelling can be found
in [10].
In [30] the importance of a proper application of the mesoscale output is stressed.
To correctly verify the mesoscale model winds with observations, a microscale model
is required to account for the local unresolved effects. The KAMM/WAsP method
became the basis for the development of many other meso/microscale coupled models.
AWS Truepower developed the commercial MesoMap system [31]. It combines
the MASS NWP model [32] with their in-house mass-conserving WindMap microscale
wind flow model [33]. In [34] some limitations of this system are listed, such as a lack of
a land-surface coupling in MASS, incorrect temperature gradients, no parametrisation
of the subgrid-scale forcing in the boundary layer and the fact that it is a proprietary
model and thus not open-source as many other NWP models. Therefore, a coupling
of the prognostic MM5 mesoscale model with the diagnostic CALMET microscale
model was developed to compute the wind energy potential in the complex terrain of
Hong Kong. The MM5 simulations with a resolution of 1.5 km were ingested every
hour in the higher resolution CALMET model to resolve the finer scale topographic
effects on the wind.
Another meso/microscale coupling method is the Wind Energy Simulation Toolkit
(WEST) developed by the Meteorological Service of Canada (MSC) [35]. It couples
the Canadian Mesoscale Compressible Community Model (MC2) [36] at a 5 km resolu-
tion with the MSMicro model to increase the resolution to 200 m. Later, the method
was tweaked to be able to couple MC2 with WAsP, which reduced the predicted
mean wind speed error due to an improved modelling of the Atmospheric Boundary
Layer (ABL) [37]. As in the KAMM/WAsP method, a set of weather situations are
classified based on NCEP/NCAR
reanalysis data. Each class is then used to ini-
tialise the MC2 model and the mesoscale wind climate is obtained by weighting the
outputs based on the class occurrence frequency. The microscale model then uses
this wind climate together with a more detailed terrain description to refine the re-
sults. The results were validated against twenty-nine 40 m high masts in the Gaspé
region of Canada. It was found that the MC2 simulation had a mean absolute error
of 0.83 m/s, which decreased to 0.69 m/s when combining both models, due to the
enhanced topographic resolution. The MC2/MsMicro procedure was later also used
in [38] to produce a 200 m high resolution wind atlas for provinces in Thailand. It
was validated at 10 sites and a mean absolute relative wind speed error of 13% was
found.
For the production of the Finnish Wind Atlas, the Application of Research to
Operations at Mesoscale (AROME) convective-scale model [39] was used to simulate
winds at a 2.5 km resolution [40]. For the initial and boundary conditions of AROME,
the output of the hydrostatic HIRLAM model with a 7.5 km resolution, initialised
with ERA-Interim reanalysis data, was used. The AROME winds were generalised to
make the surface winds independent of the roughness and orography of AROME. By
statistical analysis, the sectorwise generalised wind climates were obtained and could
be used as input for WAsP to retrieve the local wind climate. The study also points
out the enormous time gain when using a computationally cheap linear model to take
==PAGE:21==
1.2 Goals and Objectives
5
the local terrain into account down to a 250 m horizontal resolution (∼8 months)
instead of running the AROME model at the same high resolution (∼600 years).
Recently, a generalisation procedure for the popular WRF model output was devel-
oped in the Wind Atlas for South Africa (WASA) project [41]. The so-called ‘WRF
Wind Atlas Method’ is based on the general mesoscale post-processing procedure
described in [11] with further details on the generalisation of mesoscale wind clima-
tologies in [10]. In addition, the KAMM/WAsP method is used to create a numerical
wind atlas. The two numerical wind atlases are compared and validated against gen-
eralised wind climates from 10 WASA masts. At a height of 100 m and with a uniform
roughness of z0 = 0.03 m this validation showed an average bias of −8.2% and a mean
absolute error of 9.3% for the mean wind speed when the KAMM/WAsP method was
used. The WRF-based results showed an improvement of both errors, reducing them
to +2.5% and 4.8%, respectively. Apart from the high accuracy, another asset of
the generalisation procedure is that it combines the nowadays widely used WRF
mesoscale model with WAsP. The latter is still the standard resource analysis tool
for micrositing in the wind industry. Therefore, the WRF generalisation procedure is
now used in many wind resource studies in Africa and Asia provided by the Energy
Sector Management Assistance Program (ESMAP) [42], [43], [44], [45], [46], [47].
1.2
Goals and Objectives
Lots of research is done on the impact of the different WRF inputs and settings on
the simulated wind climate [48], [49], [50]. These studies and sensitivity tests are per-
formed to improve the estimated WRF wind resource estimation. However, the WRF
simulations cannot be compared directly with observations because of the mismatch
between the WRF topography description and the reality [10], [30]. Generalisation
of the WRF simulations is thus essential for validating or estimating the local wind
climate. Therefore, the generalisation procedure is an important step as well on the
road to obtaining reliable numerical wind atlases.
In the WASA project four different generalisation methods were tested [41]. They
were validated against the generalised winds at the 10 WASA masts and this showed
a great impact of the methods on the mean generalised wind speed. Later studies
typically adapted the same generalisation parameters as chosen in WASA. Although
the WRF generalisation procedure was tested in the WASA project, the amount of
masts were limited and located in relatively simple terrain conditions.
This study will perform a more in depth and extensive validation of the WRF
generalisation procedure by comparing the generalised WRF simulated climates with
generalised observed wind climates. Based on previous publications, a complete de-
scription of the generalisation procedure is given which is implemented in the Python
programming language [51].
Observations from measurements masts at different site conditions and geograph-
ical locations are used. For every mast, complete years of data are selected which are
generalised with WAsP. WRF simulations covering the same area and period as the
==PAGE:22==
6
1 Introduction
observations are then performed. The output from these simulations can be gener-
alised and compared to the generalised wind climates from on-site measurements. By
varying the different parameter choices, their influence on the generalised simulated
wind climate can be analysed. The results of this sensitivity study can also be used
to select an optimal configuration for the generalisation parameters. The added value
of generalising the mesoscale wind climate is evaluated by comparing the mean wind
speed and Annual Energy Production (AEP) errors of the ‘raw’ WRF simulations
with the ones resulting from the comparison of the generalised wind climates. An
analysis of the errors and their sources can clarify the impact of the generalisation
procedure and lead to recommendations and further improvements.
1.3
Outline
Hereafter, the thesis is divided into five chapters.
In Chapter 2, the two models that are applied for the WRF mesoscale generalisa-
tion procedure are described. This comprises an explanation on mesoscale modelling
with the WRF model in more detail and an exhaustive description of the theory and
models behind the generalisation method.
The data used in this thesis are summarised in Chapter 3. The WRF set-up and
the simulations used as input for the generalisation are given. Details on the different
measurement campaigns used for the validation are also listed.
Chapter 4 presents a sensitivity study on the different parameters for the gener-
alisation procedure. The size of the wind speed and direction bins, required for the
generalisation, are varied and two stability correction algorithms are tested. This will
lead to a better knowledge of the parameters influence and gives an estimation for
the optimal generalisation set-up.
In Chapter 5, this optimal set-up is used and the results are presented and dis-
cussed. The errors of the generalised wind climates are compared with those of the
‘raw’ WRF simulations to show the value of the generalisation procedure. In addi-
tion, the influence of the terrain characteristics and WRF simulation on the results
are studied.
Finally, the main conclusions and outcomes from the thesis study are summarised
in Chapter 6. Recommendations on the use of the generalisation procedure are given
together with some ideas for future work.
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 2
Theoretical
background
In this chapter more information is given about the models used for the mesoscale
generalisation method.
Two main models are required for this procedure.
First,
the wind resource over a large region is predicted with the WRF mesoscale model.
This model is used since this model recently gained a lot of popularity for wind
resource studies. Subsequently, the mesoscale winds are ‘generalised’ with the WRF
generalisation procedure developed in [41] that corrects for the mesoscale topography
description.
2.1
Mesoscale NWP modelling
Mesoscale NWP models are developed to conduct weather forecasts based on the cur-
rent situation. They describe the evolution of the atmospheric processes in time. This
is done by solving the governing equations of the atmospheric flow dynamics. These
equations originate from the conservation of mass, momentum, energy, water and gas
principles [52]. The resulting equations are non-linear and have to be solved numer-
ically. Apart from these flow equations, they describe the atmosphere by modelling
or parametrising the thermal effects, Coriolis force, heat balance, surface friction, etc.
This allows the mesoscale NWP model to consider atmospheric phenomena such as
land-sea breezes, mountain-valley circulations, solar radiations and cloud effects as
sketched in Figure 2.1.
The large amount of equations are simplified and numerically solved by discretis-
ing the atmosphere into 3D cubes. The horizontal resolution of the model sets the
accuracy of the topography representation and a lower resolution will set a limit on
the accuracy of the simulated wind. On the other hand, finer grids also require more
computational power or calculation time. As a compromise, nested grids are often ap-
plied such that the output of a coarser and larger grid is used as a boundary condition
for a smaller domain, with a fine resolution of a few kilometres. The high-resolution
is then only used at the sites of interest to limit the computational time. The atmo-
sphere is horizontally divided into unequally spaced layers, with more levels closer to
==PAGE:24==
8
2 Theoretical background
Figure 2.1: Typical atmospheric processes described by a mesoscale NWP model [3].
the surface where more weather phenomena occur [6]. For each grid point the NWP
model solves the set of atmospheric equations for different variables. The unresolved
sub-grid scale atmospheric processes are parametrised to account for their impact on
the larger scale weather. The model is initialised using global reanalysis data to esti-
mate the initial state of the atmosphere. Additionally, the mesoscale model requires
information on the orography and roughness of the terrain derived from the land use.
As discussed in the introduction, many different NWP models are used for wind re-
source assessment [6]. The for wind applications very popular WRF mesoscale model
is selected to conduct the simulations in this study and will therefore be discussed in
more detail.
2.1.1
Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF)
The Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) model developed by the National
Centre for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) is a NWP model that simulates the at-
mosphere and is the successor of the MM5 mesoscale model [20]. The tool is freely
available and is designed for both research and operational purposes.
Because of
its high flexibility it is suitable for many different applications. The WRF system
consists of many modules combined in a WRF Software Framework. It consists of
a dynamical solver (Advanced Research WRF (ARW) or Non-hydrostatic Mesoscale
Model (NMM)) which requires input from initialisation programs and physical and
chemical models. A schematic representation is shown in Figure 2.2.
The WRF Preprocessor System (WPS) pre-processes the terrestrial and meteoro-
logical data to provide the ARW with the necessary input for real-data simulations.
It defines the physical domain and interpolates the static terrestrial fields (terrain
height, surface albedo, land use, etc.) to the grid. For every grid point it computes
the latitude, longitude, map scale factors and Coriolis parameter. The time-varying
==PAGE:25==
2.1 Mesoscale NWP modelling
9
Analyses /
Forecasts
Observations
Post Processors
Verification
WRF Software Infrastructure
DynamicsSolvers
ARW
NMM
PhysicsInterface
PhysicsPackages
WRF-Var Data
Assimilation
WRF-
Chem
Digital
Filter
WRF
Preprocessing
System
Figure 2.2: Scheme of the WRF Software Framework with its principle components
[20].
meteorological variables (horizontal winds, surface temperature, relative humidity,
etc.) are read, typically from NCEP GRIB libraries, and projected onto the specified
domain.
In addition, a vertical interpolation of the fields to the terrain-following
hydrostatic-pressure levels (η) is done [53].
The WRF calculations are initialised with the preprocessed data from the WPS.
ARW solves a set of fully compressible and non-hydrostatic flux-form Euler equa-
tions. The vertical coordinate of the equations is defined with a terrain-following
hydrostatic pressure coordinate. For the horizontal grid an Arakawa C-grid stagger-
ing is used. For the time integration a 2nd- or 3rd-order Runge-Kutta scheme is used.
The spatial discretisation applies 2nd- to 6th-order advection schemes [20]. Many
physics packages can be used within WRF to model microphysics (vapour, cloud and
precipitation processes), cumulus parametrisation (sub-grid scale effects of convec-
tive and/or shallow clouds), planetary boundary layer (sub-grid scale vertical fluxes
due to eddy transport throughout the atmospheric column), atmospheric radiation
(surface radiative fluxes and atmospheric tendency temperature profile), surface layer
and land-surface (friction velocities, exchange coefficients for heat, moisture and mo-
mentum, vegetation processes and heat and moisture fluxes) [20]. For each of these
physics schemes, different model options can be chosen. They are listed in the ARW
users’ guide [53].
The WRF output contains many dimensional variables. Most of them are three
or four dimensional, including wind components, moisture, temperature, pressure
perturbations, rain, etc. For the post-processing of these results, the required vari-
ables are extracted. The vertical coordinate of the variables is defined according to
the η-levels, which depend on pressure and does not have a constant altitude. By a
well-chosen interpolation they can be calculated for a set of defined heights AGL.
==PAGE:26==
10
2 Theoretical background
2.2
Mesoscale wind climate generalisation
For the creation of a generalised wind climate, the effects of the model topography de-
scription on the mesoscale winds need to be removed. This is needed to determine the
wind climate under ‘idealised’ circumstances, i.e. flat terrain with uniform roughness.
After correcting the simulated winds for the topographic effects, the corrected winds
are used to generate wind climates for a set of pre-defined standard roughness lengths.
These wind climates are represented in the form of sectorwise Weibull parameters and
wind roses. As a final step, a stability correction is applied on the Weibull parameters
to account for the effect of the on- and offshore varying surface heat flux.
The generalisation procedure is described here in detail and is implemented in
the Python programming language [51]. First, the roughness and orographic model
used to correct for the topographic effects on the wind flow are described. Then,
the procedure to generate generalised wind climates from the corrected wind data is
explained. The applied procedure is based on the ‘Wind Atlas model’ described in
[5], where it was used on observations from weather stations for the construction of
the European Wind Atlas. The generalisation procedure was also used to develop a
numerical wind atlas with the KAMM/WAsP method [10], [28]. Later, this procedure
was extended to the ‘WRF Wind Atlas Method’ for the generalisation of WRF model
winds in [41]. An extensive description of this method with attention to its practical
implementation is given.
2.2.1
Topographic models
Before calculating generalised wind climates from results of WRF simulations, the
influences of the mesoscale model terrain conditions need to be removed. The im-
pact of topography on the wind flow is split up into two effects, i.e. orographic and
surface roughness effects. It is assumed that they influence the simulated wind in-
dependently. Their influences on the wind are modelled as local flow perturbations
using the mesoscale site description of height and surface roughness. The modelled
flow perturbations can then be removed from the simulated mesoscale wind speed to
obtain an intermediate wind speed for a homogeneous upstream roughness and flat
terrain.
Roughness change model
A roughness change model determines the influence of upstream roughness length
variations on the wind speed. The roughness model used in this work is taken from
[5] and [54].
The basic principles and equations are explained in this section.
It
calculates two parameters at a specified grid point from the time averaged surface
roughness length of the WRF mesoscale model grid:
• ˆz0(ϕ) is a height-independent sectorwise uniform upstream roughness length;
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Mesoscale wind climate generalisation
11
• δArou(z, ϕ) = |umeso|
|uˆz0| −1 is a factor that accounts for the impact of the upstream
roughness length variations on the wind speed depending on the wind direction
(ϕ) and the height AGL (z). Here, |umeso| is the mesoscale modelled wind speed
and |uˆz0| the theoretical wind speed over a homogeneous terrain with roughness
length ˆz0.
Obviously, the wind speed at a site is not only influenced by the local roughness
length. It also depends on the different upstream roughnesses due to the formation
of an internal boundary layer (IBL) at a roughness change. To apply the logarith-
mic wind profile and the geostrophic drag law, an equilibrium, height-independent
upstream roughness length, ˆz0(ϕ), is defined. It depends on the wind direction and
is calculated from averaging the logarithms of the upstream roughnesses. A rough-
ness length at a distance x from the site of interest is first weighted by a weighting
function exp(−x/D), with D = 10 km the decay-length or equilibrium distance. This
way, terrain conditions lose importance when being further from the site. For every
wind sector ϕ the uniform upstream roughness length can be calculated as follows:
log(ˆz0) =
∫R
0
log(z0(x)) · exp(−x/D) d
( x
D
)
,
(2.1)
where z0(x) is the time averaged WRF roughness length at a distance x from the site
and R the distance up to which the roughness changes are taken into account.
For the calculation of the flow perturbation, δArou, all upstream roughness changes
are identified in each sector from the origin point (= downstream) up to a distance
R together with their corresponding distances from the origin where they occur. Fol-
lowing the nomenclature of [54], u0 refers to the far upstream unperturbated wind
speed and un is the wind speed at the site after n roughness changes. Each upstream
roughness length is first weighted using the exponential weighting, exp(−x/D). The
successive roughness changes for each sector are all handled independently and the
perturbation of a roughness change from z0i to z0i+1 is determined from the following
steps.
• When the wind flows from a surface with roughness z0i to a different roughness
length of z0i+1, an IBL develops downstream of this roughness change. The
height, h, of this growing IBL at a distance x from the surface discontinuity is
calculated by solving:
h · [log(h/z0max) −1] = 0.9 · x,
(2.2)
with z0max = max(z0i, z0i+1).
• By assuming that the equilibrium wind profiles for both roughness lengths
match at a the IBL height, the ratio of the downstream and upstream friction
velocities is determined by:
u∗i+1
u∗i
=
log(h/z0i)
log(h/z0i+1),
(2.3)
==PAGE:28==
12
2 Theoretical background
where u∗i and u∗i+1 are the friction velocities upstream and downstream of the
roughness change, respectively.
• The ratio between the downstream and upstream wind speed at a height z is
computed by a 3-part log-law. An inner profile is assumed that extends up to
z = c2h and an outer profile that extends down to z = c1h. The inner profile is
in equilibrium with the downstream roughness and friction velocity. The outer
wind profile follows the neutral profile determined by z0i and u∗i. A log linear
interpolation of the wind speeds is assumed between heights c1h and c2h. With
the friction velocities ratio of Equation (2.3) the ratio between the perturbated
wind speed after a roughness change, ui+1, and the upstream wind speed, ui,
at a height, z, is calculated by:
ui+1
ui
(z) =











1
for z ⩾c1h
ui+1
ui
(c2h) +
[
1 −ui+1
ui
(c2h)
] log(z/c2h)
log(c1/c2)
for c2h < z < c1h
u∗i+1
u∗i
log(z/z0i+1)
log(z/z0i)
for z ⩽c2h
,
(2.4)
with ui+1
ui
(c2h) = u∗i+1
u∗i
log(c2h/z0i+1)
log(c2h/z0i)
and c1 = 0.3 and c2 = 0.09 [5].
The product of all n roughness change ratios account for the perturbation due to
all upstream roughness changes of a wind direction sector [54]:
un
u0
(z) =
n
∏
i=1
ui
ui−1
(z) =
un
un−1
· un−1
un−2
· · · u1
u0
,
(2.5)
where u0 is the unperturbated upwind wind speed belonging to the uniform upstream
roughness ˆz0 and un is the perturbated downstream wind speed due to the roughness
discontinuities. Equation (2.5) reveals that each roughness change perturbation ratio
is handled independent as previously described.
Finally, the local flow perturbation on wind speed due to roughness discontinuities
δArou as defined in [10] is calculated as:
δArou = |umeso|
|uˆz0|
−1 = un
u0
−1
(2.6)
Orographic model
The WRF orography description will also have an influence on the wind flow and
needs to be modelled as well. For example, the flow will experience a speed-up on
top of a hill due to the compression of the streamlines and will have a deviation of
the wind direction in valleys because of the channelling effects [55]. The effect of
the orography on the boundary layer flow can be modelled by solving the linearised
==PAGE:29==
2.2 Mesoscale wind climate generalisation
13
equations of motion for a neutral flow. The total wind speed, u, is defined as the sum
of a reference state wind profile, u0, and a small flow perturbation, u′, introduced by
the complex terrain:
u = u0 + u′,
(2.7)
where u = (u, v, w), u′ = (u′, v′, w′) and u0 = (u0, v0, w0). The latter is the back-
ground flow that is in equilibrium with a flat terrain with a uniform surface roughness.
By neglecting the vertical advection, the equations of motion in Cartesian coordinates
can be linearised around u0:
u0
∂u′
∂x + v0
∂u′
∂y = −1
ρ
∂p′
∂x + ∂τx
∂z ,
u0
∂v′
∂x + v0
∂v′
∂y = −1
ρ
∂p′
∂y + ∂τy
∂z ,
u0
∂w′
∂x + v0
∂w′
∂y = −1
ρ
∂p′
∂z + ∂τz
∂z ,
∂u′
∂x + ∂v′
∂y + ∂w′
∂z = 0.
(2.8)
The solution of Equation (2.8) can be numerically obtained from different ap-
proaches. In the linear flow model LINCOM [56] the equations are solved in a spec-
tral manner by applying a Fourier transformation over the two horizontal coordinates.
This orographic flow model is implemented in the KAMM/WAsP method [10] and
the ‘WAsP Downscaling’ DTU software package for the WRF mesoscale model gener-
alisation [57]. In the WAsP program, the flow perturbation is calculated by defining
a potential flow problem in a polar coordinate system instead of a rectangular grid as
in LINCOM. This BZ (Bessel Expansion on a Zooming Grid) model is incorporated
in WAsP and is described in [5], [58]. However, both orographic flow models will lead
to approximately the same solution, partly due to the low resolution of the mesoscale
grid. Evidently, a lot of other numerical modelling techniques for flow over complex
terrain exists but a detailed description goes beyond the scope of the thesis. A com-
parison of different surface boundary-layer flow model over complex terrain can be
found in [59], [60].
In this thesis the BZ-model is implemented for the generalisation procedure and
is explained in more detail.
The model is described in a step by step approach
to accentuate the numerical implementation of the model.
For a more thorough
description of the physical and mathematical details, the reader is referred to [58].
The orographic model calculates the effect of terrain height differences on the
wind speed and wind direction from the mesoscale elevation grid description. At each
grid point two correction factors, which depend on both the height AGL (z) and the
incoming wind direction (ϕ), are calculated:
• δAoro(z, ϕ) = |umeso|
|uflat| −1 is a factor that accounts for the impact of the orography
on the wind speed depending on the wind direction and the height AGL. Here,
==PAGE:30==
14
2 Theoretical background
|umeso| is the mesoscale modelled wind speed and |uflat| the wind speed over a
flat terrain;
• δϕoro(z, ϕ) = ϕmeso −ϕflat is a local wind direction change due to the orogra-
phy depending on the wind direction and the height AGL. Here, ϕmeso is the
mesoscale modelled wind direction and ϕflat is the wind direction over a flat
terrain.
These factors are calculated by solving the neutral flow equations of Equation (2.8)
to determine the flow perturbation induced on a background flow. The background
flow is the flow over a flat terrain with a uniform roughness length z0. The vertical
profile for the horizontal velocity components in Cartesian coordinates for a certain
inflow direction is:
u0 = u∗
κ log(z/z0) · e,
(2.9)
with e = (−cos(θ), −sin(θ), 0), where θ is the bearing angle using the North as a
reference line. This inflow angle is varied to model the influence of the terrain for
different upstream wind directions in order to calculate the correction factors δAoro
and δϕoro for every wind sector. When choosing a different inflow direction, z0 is
changed accordingly using the roughness rose, ˆz0(ϕ), determined with the roughness
change model. The result of the BZ-model is the horizontal velocity perturbation
expressed in cylindrical coordinates:
u′ = u′
r · er + u′
ϕ · eϕ,
(2.10)
with er and eϕ unit vectors in the radial and azimuthal direction, respectively. A
vector sketch for a certain background flow (u0 and θ) is drawn in Figure 2.3 to
clarify the general procedure and the definitions of the angles and coordinates.
In a first step, the surface friction is neglected for flow far enough from the surface
and the stress terms in Equation (2.8) disappear. The solution is then obtained by
solving an inviscid flow problem.
Secondly, the flow is corrected for the effect of
surface friction near the ground.
As already mentioned, the BZ-model relates the velocity perturbation at the centre
point of a polar grid to the velocity potential for inviscid flow by:
u′ = ∇χ,
(2.11)
with χ the potential field. The solution for the horizontal velocity perturbation is
obtained in polar coordinates by assuming a vanishing potential far away from the
area of interest, i.e. ∇χ = 0 at r = R. The solution for the centre point r = 0 is a
linear combination:
u′ = ∇χ =
∑
j
∇χj =
∑
j
1
2(1 + ı)αj
cj
R exp
(
−cj
z
R
)
,
(2.12)
==PAGE:31==
2.2 Mesoscale wind climate generalisation
15
Figure 2.3: Vector sketch of the background flow vector u0 with bearing angle θ. The
velocity perturbation imposed by the terrain u′ is expressed in cylindrical coordinates
and shown as red vectors.
where j enumerates the terms of the Fourier Bessel expansion, αj are arbitrary ex-
pansion coefficients, cj is the j’ th zero of the J-Bessel function of order 1, J1, and
z is the height AGL for which the perturbation is calculated. Each term j is ac-
companied with an outer length scale Lj = R/cj. The coefficients αj contain the
information of the terrain height. They are split up into two sets of expansion co-
efficients: αj = u0 αx
j + v0 αy
j . The different calculation steps to obtain these two
coefficients αx
j and αy
j are the following:
• For the solution numerical integration is required. Therefore, a polar ‘zooming’
grid is created based on a maximum radius R (e.g. 40 km), a zooming factor
(e.g. 1.06), a number of polar rays or azimuth angles (e.g. Nϕ = 72) and a
number of radial stations (e.g. Nr = 100). A sketch of such a grid is shown in
Figure 2.4.
• Using the resolution of the zooming grid, the matrix M [NFB × Nr] defined in
[58] is constructed. NFB = 2500 is the approximate number of non-vanishing
terms in the Fourier-Bessel expansion. The matrix elements are defined as:
Mjk =
−2
cjJ2
2(cj)
∫1
0
ρCk(ρ)J1(cjρ)dρ,
(2.13)
with Jn the J-Bessel function of order n, cj the j’ th zero of J1, ρ = r/R, Ck is
a continuous and linear ‘chapeau function’ in each of the radial intervals such
that: Ck(rm/R) = δkm, j represents the terms in the Fourier-Bessel expansion
==PAGE:32==
16
2 Theoretical background
Figure 2.4: Sketch of the ‘zooming’ grid defined by a maximum radius R, a zooming
factor, the number of radial station Nr and the number of azimuth angles Nϕ.
(∼2500 non-vanishing terms) and k the radial stations. With the definition of
Ck the integral in Equation (2.13) can be rewritten as:
Mjk =
−2
cjJ2
2(cj)
[∫rk/R
rk−1/R
ρ
(
ρ −rk−1/R
rk/R −rk−1/R
)
J1(cjρ)dρ
+
∫rk+1/R
rk/R
ρ
(
ρ −rk+1/R
rk/R −rk+1/R
)
J1(cjρ)dρ
]
.
(2.14)
Since the matrix is independent of the terrain heights it only needs to be com-
puted once after defining the radial zooming grid.
• The ‘zooming’ grid is used to evaluate the WRF terrain height at each point of
the grid using linear interpolation. Then, three integrals are calculated at each
radial distance rk from the center:
Icc(rk) =
∫2π
0
h(rk, ϕ) · cos2(ϕ)dϕ,
(2.15)
Ics(rk) =
∫2π
0
h(rk, ϕ) · cos(ϕ) sin(ϕ)dϕ,
(2.16)
Iss(rk) =
∫2π
0
h(rk, ϕ) · sin2(ϕ)dϕ,
(2.17)
with h(rk, ϕ) the terrain height at a radial distance rk and azimuth angle ϕ of
the zooming grid. These integrals will have values for rk from 0 up to R.
==PAGE:33==
2.2 Mesoscale wind climate generalisation
17
• The integrals are used to calculate vectors Hx and Hy with Equations (2.18)
and (2.19). The derivative in the equations are approximated using a two-point
backward difference scheme.
Hx = 1
2π
[ d
dr(Icc −ıIcs) + 1
r ((Icc −Iss) −2ıIcs)
]
,
(2.18)
Hy = 1
2π
[ d
dr(Isc −ıIss) + 1
r (2Ics −ı(Iss −Icc))
]
.
(2.19)
• Finally, with the constant matrix M and the grid point dependent Hx and
Hy arrays, the coefficients (αx
j , αy
j ) (for each Fourier-Bessel term j) can be
calculated by simple matrix multiplication:
αx
j = R
∑
k
MjkHx(rk),
(2.20)
αy
j = R
∑
k
MjkHy(rk).
(2.21)
With the sectorwise uniform upstream roughness rose determined in the roughness
model and the (αx
j , αy
j ) arrays, the perturbation correction factors, δAoro and δαoro,
can be calculated. By varying the inflow angle θ of the unit background wind vector
the perturbation factors are obtained for every incoming wind direction. Since the
perturbations are relative to the background flow, the length can be set to |u0(z)| = 1.
So, after defining the inflow angle θ, the series of coefficients αj can be calculated:
αj(θ) = −cos(θ) · αx
j −sin(θ) · αy
j .
(2.22)
Now, all the terms in Equation (2.12) are available to obtain u′. However, near the
surface a correction on the solution is required to account for the previously neglected
stress terms. The correction is applied in the inner layer which extends up to a height
lj << Lj. It is calculated according to [61]:
lj = 0.3z0.33
0
L0.67
j
.
(2.23)
In [5] the correction factor is calculated as:
fj(z) =
|u0(Lj)|2
|u0(max(z, lj))|2 =
log (Lj/z0)2
log(max(z, lj)/z0)2 .
(2.24)
Using the correction factors of Equation (2.24) in Equation (2.12) the perturbation
at height z relative to a background wind speed of |u0(z, θ)| = 1 becomes:
u′(z, θ) =
∑
j
fj(z) · ∇χj(z, θ) = u′
r(z, θ) + ı · u′
ϕ(z, θ).
(2.25)
==PAGE:34==
18
2 Theoretical background
Finally, the perturbation corrections can be calculated from the sketch in Fig-
ure 2.5 and using the definitions in [10]:
δAoro(z, θ) = |u0(z, θ) + u′(z, θ)|
|u0(z, θ)|
−1 = |u0(z, θ) + u′(z, θ)|
1
−1
= | −cos(θ) + ı · sin(θ) + u′
r(z, θ) + ı · u′
ϕ(z, θ)| −1,
(2.26)
δαoro(z, θ) = 180◦−θ −∠(−cos(θ) + ı · sin(θ) + u′(z, θ))
= 180◦−θ −arctan
( sin(θ) + u′
ϕ(z, θ)
−cos(θ) + u′r(z, θ)
)
.
(2.27)
Figure 2.5: Sketch of a velocity perturbation (red) on a background flow over flat
terrain with wind direction θ (blue) induced by terrain height differences. The total
wind vector (green) is the result of the vector sum of the red and blue vectors. The
real and imaginary axes define the radial and azimuthal directions, respectively.
2.2.2
Generalised wind climate
After determining the influences of the WRF topography model grid, they need to
be subtracted from the simulated flow. From the previously calculated topography
correction factors, the intermediate wind speeds at all model output levels zi can
be determined.
Using the assumption that the roughness and orographic effects
are independent, the reaction of the WRF simulated wind speed, |umeso(zi)|, and
==PAGE:35==
2.2 Mesoscale wind climate generalisation
19
direction, ϕmeso(zi), time series on the mesoscale terrain conditions are removed by
using [10]:
|ˆu(zi)| =
|umeso(zi)|
[1 + δAoro(zi, ϕmeso)] [1 + δArou(zi, ϕmeso)],
(2.28)
ˆϕ(zi) = ϕmeso(zi) −δϕoro(zi, ϕmeso).
(2.29)
The perturbation factors (δAoro, δϕoro and δArou) used depend on the height AGL, zi,
and the wind direction sector, ϕmeso, from which the wind flow comes. These corrected
wind speed, ˆu, and wind direction, ˆϕ, time series are as if the surrounding terrain
was flat and with a homogeneous upstream roughness length, ˆz0(ϕ), on which the
geostrophic drag law applies. The influence of the model roughness length is removed
by moving to a set of standard roughness lengths z0j (typically 0.0002 m (water),
0.03 m, 0.1 m, 0.4 m and 1.5 m) with the use of the logarithmic and geostrophic drag
laws. Since the latter assumes stationarity [62], the formulas cannot directly be ap-
plied to the mesoscale simulation time series, but are rather applied to wind classes
from a histogram to ensure stationarity. Therefore, the time series of the corrected
wind speed and direction are first binned based on wind speed and direction bin
widths. Bins that contain less than 5 observations are rejected to avoid that out-
liers influence the statistical results. The minimum number of samples in a bin is
referred to as ‘fmin’. For each bin, the mean wind speed, ¯ˆu, wind direction, ¯ˆϕ, and
frequency are calculated. When a stability correction on the logarithmic wind speed
profile is used, an additional binning based on the Monin-Obukhov length is required.
Seven stability classes are used for this, each with a typical Monin-Obukhov length
˜L assigned to it. These stability classes are given in Table 2.1.
Table 2.1: Stability classes for seven stability ranges with their associated typical
Obukhov length ˜L.
Stability class
Obukhov length
range [m]
Typical Obukhov
length ˜L [m]
Very unstable
−50 < L < −100
-75
Unstable
−10 < L < −200
-150
Near unstable
−200 < L < −500
-350
Neutral
L < −500; L > 500
10000
Near stable
200 < L < 500
350
Stable
50 < L < 200
125
Very stable
10 < L < 50
30
To go from the uniform upstream roughness length ˆz0 to a standard roughness
length z0j following steps are undertaken on the mean wind speeds and directions of
each bin. This is done for each standard height zi and standard roughness length z0j:
==PAGE:36==
20
2 Theoretical background
1. The intermediate friction velocity for each wind speed bin ˆu∗i is determined
from the log-law:
ˆu∗i =
κ · ¯ˆu(zi)
log(zi/ˆz0),
(2.30)
with κ = 0.4 the von Kármán constant. Alternatively, it is also possible to use
the WRF simulated Monin-Obukhov length, L, by adding a stability correction
to the logarithmic wind profile [61]:
ˆu∗i =
κ · ¯ˆu(zi)
log(zi/ˆz0) −ψ(zi/˜L),
(2.31)
with ψ the stability correction function which is calculated using [41], [63]:
ψ(z/L) =
{
−31.58[1 −exp(−0.19 z/L)]
if z/L ≥0
2 log[0.5(1 + x)] + log[0.5(1 + x2)] −2 tan−1(x) + 1.5746
if z/L < 0 ,
(2.32)
with x = (1 −19z/L)
1
4 . This function is used with the typical Obukhov length
from each wind class bin.
The naming as in [41] is followed in this thesis.
‘Method 3’ refers to the application of the stability correction on the logarith-
mic profile, i.e. Equation (2.31) and ‘Method 4’ to the usage of the neutral
logarithmic wind profile, i.e. Equation (2.30).
2. The friction velocities are then used to calculate the geostrophic wind speeds ˆGi
and directions ˆϕGi by applying the geostrophic drag law for neutral conditions:
ˆGi = ˆu∗i
κ
√(
log ˆu∗i
|f|ˆz0
−A
)2
+ B2,
(2.33)
ˆϕGi = ¯ˆϕ + arcsin
(Bˆu∗i
κ ˆGi
)
,
(2.34)
where f is the Coriolis parameter, A = 1.8 and B = 4.5 (Northern Hemisphere)
or B = −4.5 (Southern Hemisphere).
3. The geostrophic drag law is solved iteratively to obtain the generalised friction
velocity u∗gi,j for the standard roughness length z0j:
ˆGi = u∗gi,j
κ
√(
log u∗gi,j
|f|z0j
−A
)2
+ B2.
(2.35)
4. Finally, the generalised friction velocity is used to get the generalised wind speed
and direction at the standard height zi and standard roughness z0j:
ug(zi, z0j) = u∗gi,j
κ
log(zi/z0j),
(2.36)
==PAGE:37==
2.2 Mesoscale wind climate generalisation
21
ϕg(zi, z0j) = ˆϕGi −arcsin
(Bu∗gi,j
κ ˆGi
)
.
(2.37)
These 4 steps are taken for each histogram bin during which the frequency of
each bin is conserved. The WAsP Wind Atlas ‘lib’ file typically stores the Weibull
parameters together with a wind rose distribution for 12 direction sectors. Therefore,
the frequencies of each bin are redistributed from the bin centres ϕg(zi, z0j) into the 12
standard wind directions around multiples of 30◦(0◦, 30◦, ..., 330◦). During the wind
direction redistribution, the generalised wind speed values ug(zi, z0j) are weighted
according to their bin frequency. Based on the wind speed histograms for each wind
direction, the Weibull scale (A) and shape (k) parameters are determined using the
moment fitting method as described in [5].
These generalisation calculations are performed for the WRF output heights zi and
the 5 standard roughness lengths z0j. All the WRF heights are considered separately.
By using the same height zi in Equation (2.30) as in Equation (2.36), no logarithmic
profile is imposed and the features of the WRF wind profile are somewhat preserved
[40].
Stability correction
In order to create lib files that are consistent with the implementation in WAsP, the
effects of the geostrophic-scale surface heat flux need to be accounted for. This is
done by using the stability model described in the EWA [5]. The model applies a
perturbation on the wind statistics (mean and variance of the wind speed) based on
the climatological average and root-mean-square of the surface heat flux over land and
over water. The same surface flux values as in the EWA are adopted, i.e.: Hoff, land =
−40 Wm−2, Hoff, sea = 15 Wm−2, Hrms, land = 100 Wm−2 and Hrms, sea = 30 Wm−2.
From these corrected means and variances, the perturbed Weibull parameters are
calculated.
The following description of the stability model is based on the one in [64]. For
each standard height zi, roughness length z0j and wind direction sector ϕ, the correc-
tion factors that act on the mean and standard deviation of the wind speed, cfu and
cfσ, are calculated. For this, the uniform surface roughness, ˆz0, is also needed. The
factors are determined by calculating the ratio between the stability contamination
on the ‘receiver’ (standard heights zi and roughnesses z0j) and the contamination on
the ‘source’ (standard heights zi and uniform upstream roughness ˆz0):
cfu = 1 + p′(zrec, zrec
0 , Hoff, Hrms, G)
1 + p′(zsrc, zsrc
0 , Hoff, Hrms, G) ,
(2.38)
cfσ = 1 + p′′(zrec, zrec
0 , Hrms, G)
1 + p′′(zsrc, zsrc
0 , Hrms, G) ,
(2.39)
where p′ and p′′ are the dimensionless stability perturbation on the mean wind speed
and standard deviation of the wind speed, respectively. They depend on the height
==PAGE:38==
22
2 Theoretical background
AGL, roughness length, geostrophic wind speed G, average Hoff and root-mean-square
Hrms of the surface heat flux. The two dimensionless stability perturbations can be
calculated by:
p′ =
z/zm
log(z/z0)
[
aG
CrmsHrms
fG2
log(zm/z0) −(ψ(zm/Loff) + ψ(zm/Lrms))
]
+ aG
Hoff
fG2 ,
(2.40)
p′′ = aGHrms
fG2
1 −z
zm
log(zm/z0)
log(z/z0)
 ,
(2.41)
where zm is the height above ground where the first order effects of surface heat
flux modulations vanish, Crms = 0.6 and the constant value aG =
cGg
ρcpT0
.
With
cG = 0.5, g = 9.81 ms−2, ρ the air density, cp the constant pressure heat capacity of air
and T0 the surface absolute temperature. The correction factors in Equations (2.38)
and (2.39) are calculated for every A(zi, z0j, ϕ) and k(zi, z0j, ϕ) couple. They start
from the wind speed corresponding to the maximum available power density from the
unperturbed Weibull parameters:
Umpd = A(1 + 2/k)1/k
(2.42)
Next, the corresponding friction velocity and geostrophic wind speed are determined:
u∗=
κ · Umpd
log(zi/z0j),
(2.43)
G = u∗
κ
√(
log
u∗
|f|z0j
−A
)2
+ B2.
(2.44)
It is assumed that this geostrophic wind speed is the same for the source as for the
receiver. Using the respective surface roughness, the Rosby number Ro, is calculated
for both the source and the receiver:
Ro = G
fz0
.
(2.45)
This is used to estimate the height of minimum stability-induced wind deviations zm
by:
zm = α · Roβ · z0,
(2.46)
with α = 0.0002. The Obukhov lengths used in the stability correction function ψ,
Loff and Lrms, follow from the corresponding heat fluxes H:
L = −
c
κ aG
u3
∗0
H ,
(2.47)
with u∗0 =
0.5G
log(Ro) −A from the simplified neutral geostrophic drag law. For the
calculation of Lrms, the heat flux Hrms is multiplied with a form factor, Crms, that
accounts for the bias towards higher values of wind speed at height zm.
==PAGE:39==
2.2 Mesoscale wind climate generalisation
23
Now all terms in Equations (2.40) and (2.41) for the perturbations p′ and p′′
are known and thus the correction factors cfu and cfσ can be calculated.
From
the original Ao and ko Weibull parameters the mean wind speed ( ¯Uo) and standard
deviation (σuo) are calculated using following moment relationships:
¯U = AΓ(1 + 1/k),
σu =
√
A2Γ(1 + 2/k) −¯U 2.
(2.48)
The correction factors are applied to obtain the corrected mean wind speed, ¯Uc, and
standard deviation, σuc:
¯Uc = cfu · ¯Uo,
(2.49)
σuc = cfσ · σuo
(2.50)
The new, corrected Ac and kc are obtained from solving Equation (2.48) inversely
using ¯Uc and σuc.
For the calculation of p′ and p′′ on the ‘receiver’ side, the previously specified
heat fluxes are always used. I.e. for z0j(ϕ) < 0.0003 Hoff, sea and Hrms, sea are used
and if z0j(ϕ) > 0.0003 the heat fluxes over land are used. On the ‘source’ side, the
heat fluxes depend on the choice whether or not a stability correction is applied on
the logarithmic wind profile. When Method 3 is used, i.e. applying Equations (2.31)
and (2.32), it is assumed that the generalised wind speed from Equation (2.36) is
already corrected for stability and all the heat fluxes will be equal to zero and thus
p′,src = p′′,src = 0.
However, p′,rec = p′′,rec ̸= 0 and there is still a perturbation
introduced due to the standard reference stability conditions in the wind atlas that
are not neutral. When using Method 4, i.e. applying Equation (2.36), the default
heat flux values are used for the source as well. Again the heat fluxes over land are
used when ˆz0 > 0.0003 and for water when ˆz0 < 0.0003.
==PAGE:40==
24
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 3
Data
To test the WRF generalisation method, WRF simulations need to be performed. For
the validation of the generalisation procedure performance, wind data measurements
located in the simulation domains are also required. The wind speed and direction
measurements are obtained from wind farm project studies. These studies used wind
data recorded for 1 year or more for the assessment of the wind resource and energy
production at the site. The data used in this thesis result from measurements located
in France, Belgium and Thailand. The measurements are generalised with WAsP
to the same standard wind climate as done in the WRF generalisation, allowing to
compare both wind climates.
Two WRF simulations are conducted, one covering
France and Belgium and another over Thailand. Both simulations use a similar WRF
set-up and simulate hourly wind data for multiple years.
3.1
Measurements
In France and Belgium, data from 31 measurement masts are used for the validation.
These masts have a measuring height above 60 m. These relatively tall masts lower
the uncertainty in the wind climate at typical wind turbine hub heights and have
a reduced influence of the surrounding surface and obstacles on the measurements.
In Thailand, five 120 m high masts are used.
The masts are located at different
geographical locations representing different terrain characteristics.
All masts are
numbered and summarised in Table 3.1. Due to confidentiality, the locations of the
measurement masts cannot be published.
==PAGE:42==
26
3 Data
Table 3.1: Measurement masts used for the validation of the generalisation procedure.
For each mast number the measurement period, the period expressed in full years, the
height AGL and the mean observed wind speed is given. Masts 1 to 31 are located
in France or Belgium and masts 32 to 36 are located in Thailand.
Met mast
Period
# years
Height
[m AGL]
¯Uobs
[m/s]
Mast 1
01/08/2005 - 31/07/2007
2
65
5.85
Mast 2
13/06/2009 - 12/06/2011
2
68.7
5.38
Mast 3
05/01/2006 - 04/01/2007
1
60
5.83
Mast 4
01/12/2006 - 30/11/2007
1
60
6.06
Mast 5
01/01/2006 - 31/12/2006
1
60
5.94
Mast 6
01/01/2013 - 31/12/2013
1
80
6.76
Mast 7
01/01/2010 - 31/12/2010
1
68.7
5.64
Mast 8
01/01/2012 - 31/12/2012
1
80
5.67
Mast 9
21/10/2007 - 20/10/2008
1
86
6.30
Mast 10
04/04/2006 - 03/04/2007
1
60.6
4.98
Mast 11
01/05/2009 - 30/04/2010
1
100
6.53
Mast 12
27/07/2012 - 26/07/2013
1
80
5.91
Mast 13
01/10/2011 - 30/09/2012
1
81.2
6.32
Mast 14
01/07/2011 - 30/06/2012
1
60.2
4.90
Mast 15
01/07/2008 - 30/06/2009
1
66
4.88
Mast 16
25/05/2012 - 24/05/2014
2
80
6.47
Mast 17
01/06/2008 - 31/05/2009
1
60
7.65
Mast 18
08/07/2011 - 07/07/2013
2
80
5.78
Mast 19
01/11/2009 - 31/10/2011
2
80
5.62
Mast 20
04/01/2008 - 03/01/2009
1
60
6.04
Mast 21
30/04/2007 - 30/04/2008
1
85.5
6.11
Mast 22
14/10/2005 - 13/10/2006
1
85
6.13
Mast 23
10/04/2012 - 09/04/2013
1
80
5.62
Mast 24
12/09/2009 - 06/09/2010
1
80
6.93
Mast 25
01/10/2007 - 30/09/2008
1
60
5.76
Mast 26
20/08/2004 - 19/08/2006
2
60
6.49
Mast 27
01/08/2007 - 31/07/2009
2
65
5.35
Mast 28
02/07/2010 - 01/07/2011
1
102
6.63
Mast 29
01/05/2008 - 30/04/2011
3
78
6.16
Mast 30
01/05/2005 - 30/04/2006
1
60
5.31
Mast 31
13/02/2011 - 12/02/2012
1
99.5
5.98
Mast 32
24/01/2014 - 31/08/2014
0.6
120
3.74
Mast 33
24/01/2014 - 31/08/2014
0.6
120
5.61
Mast 34
24/01/2014 - 31/08/2014
0.6
120
5.28
Mast 35
24/09/2013 - 31/08/2014
1
121.1
5.03
Mast 36
23/09/2013 - 31/08/2014
1
121.1
4.27
==PAGE:43==
3.1 Measurements
27
All measurement campaigns were carried out by following the industry standards
and best practices [65], [66] as closely as possible to ensure a proper calibration and
mounting of the anemometer and evaluation of the data. Two divergences from these
best practices occur at some sites. For some masts only one anemometer is available
at each height, so no mast effect correction can be applied. Another divergence is
that the measuring period does not cover an entire year for some masts in Thailand.
For masts 32, 33 and 34 the wind data has an insufficient quality and regression
MCP (Measure-Correlate-Predict) [66] was used to reconstruct some of the missing
data. Masts 35 and 36 have a sufficient measurement quality and period. However,
considering the relatively difficult site characteristics, the masts measurements are
not necessarily representative for the wind conditions at the surrounding area.
The wind regime at each mast is characterised by the wind speed distribution,
which is approximated by a Weibull function defined by a scale parameter A and
a shape parameter k. These observed wind climates (OWC) are obtained from the
cleaned masts data sets. To mitigate the seasonal variability of the wind, complete
years of data (where possible) are selected from the total measuring campaign as can
be seen in Table 3.1. The OWC are generalised to obtain omni-directional Weibull
parameters for a specified set of reference heights and roughness lengths, which is
called a generalised wind climate (GWC). These are computed for every mast with the
software programs WindPRO [67] and WAsP [68] and are stored in a so-called wind
atlas file with the ‘.lib’ name extension. WAsP models the influence of the surrounding
terrain using information on the elevation, roughness and relevant obstacles of the
site. For these inputs, the WAsP recommendations are followed [69].
The terrain elevation data at the sites is obtained from various sources. For the
masts located in France or Belgium the height contour lines come from the Digital
Elevation Model over Europe from the GMES RDA project (EU-DEM) [70], the
Shuttle Radar Topography Mission (SRTM) [71] or from digitised orographic maps
of the region. For the masts in Thailand the information from the SRTM is used.
To represent the terrain roughness, information on the land cover is used since
both quantities are closely related.
The Corine Land Cover (2006) database [72]
provides the land cover for Europe based on satellite remote sensing images and is
used to construct the roughness map for the sites in France and Belgium. The land
use is related to a specific roughness length by using the methodology specified in
[73]. For the masts located in Thailand, the Thailand Land use and forest cover was
used [74]. This provides information on the land cover (2000) database over the whole
country at a 30 m resolution made from Landsat TM satellite images.
The terrain roughness model in WAsP does not properly take into account the
strong disturbance of the wind flow in areas very close to large isolated obstacles.
These obstacles should be modelled separately if they impact the wind flow. Following
the WAsP recommendations, isolated obstacles are taken into account when they are
located within a radius of 50 times their height from the mast and in case their height
exceeds one third of any mast or hub height.
WAsP then removes the influencing effect of the sites topography on the recorded
wind data and a GWC specified for a number of reference roughnesses and heights
==PAGE:44==
28
3 Data
AGL is calculated.
For both reference quantities the same sets are chosen as in
the WRF generalisation procedure discussed in Section 2.2. The standard roughness
lengths are z0 = 0.0002 m, 0.03 m, 0.1 m, 0.4 m and 1.5 m and the standard heights
correspond to the output heights from the WRF simulations which are z = 50 m,
80 m, 100 m, 140 m and 200 m (see next section). The same heat flux values are also
chosen as the default values mentioned in Section 2.2.
3.2
WRF simulations
The Advanced-Research WRF (ARW) model version 3.5.1 is chosen to conduct the
simulations. Two WRF simulations are used in the thesis, one covering France and
Belgium and one over Thailand. Both simulations have a very similar WRF set-up
and are discussed together. Differences between them are explicitly mentioned.
3.2.1
WRF configuration
The model applies two-way nesting and the grid consists of a parent and two nested
domains. The parent domain D01 has a horizontal resolution of 45 km × 45 km, the
first nested domain D02 a resolution of 15 km×15 km and 5 km×5 km for the second
nested domain D03 that includes all of the masts listed in Table 3.1. Maps of the
grids for the two simulations with their nested domains are shown in Figure 3.1. The
regions of interest are France and Belgium for the domain in Figure 3.1a and Thailand
for the domain shown in Figure 3.1b.
The top of atmosphere is defined at 50 hPa for all domains. The atmosphere is
vertically divided into 36 unequally spaced η-levels with a higher vertical resolution
closer to the ground in order to resolve the planetary boundary layer (PBL) with
sufficient accuracy for wind energy purposes.
As discussed in Section 2.1.1, the WRF model offers a great spectrum of models
to represent the physical processes in the atmosphere. The physics and dynamics
options chosen to account for the effect of these sub-grid phenomena during the
WRF simulations are summarised in Table 3.2.
The parametrisation schemes are the same for all domains. Except for the cumu-
lus parametrisation which is only used in D01 and D02 since the cumulus physics are
resolved in D03 with the higher resolution of 5 km. Many studies showed the impor-
tance of the PBL and surface layer parametrisation choice for wind energy assessment
applications [49], [50], [84]. The study in [49] points out that the performance of these
parametrisation schemes depends on the geographical area and time period of the sim-
ulation. Although the PBL and surface layer schemes are set independently, they are
closely related to each other. In this work, the revised MM5 surface layer scheme [80]
is selected because of its improvements regarding atmospheric stability, friction ve-
locity limits and topographic effects compared to the old MM5 scheme. This choice
also leads to the selection of the Yonsei University (YSU) PBL scheme since it is
compatible with the chosen surface layer scheme.
==PAGE:45==
3.2 WRF simulations
29
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.1: WRF simulation domains for the France and Belgium simulation (a) and
for Thailand (b). Nested domains are used with a 1:3 ratio between parent and child
domains: D01 (45 km resolution), D02 (15 km resolution) and D03 (5 km resolution).
Table 3.2: Physical parametrisation schemes for the WRF model.
Parameter
Physical scheme
Cumulus
(only for D01 & D02)
Betts-Miller-Janjic [75]
Cloud Microphysics
Eta Microphysics [76]
PBL
Yonsei University Scheme (YSU) [77]
Land Surface
NOAH Land Surface Model [78], [79]
Surface Layer
Revised MM5 surface layer scheme [80], [81]
Long-wave radiation
RRTM scheme [82]
Short-wave radiation
Dudhia scheme [83]
3.2.2
Input
WRF simulations also require the initialisation and boundaries of the meteorolog-
ical and geographical conditions to be defined. The meteorological conditions are
described using the ERA-Interim global atmospheric reanalysis produced by the Eu-
ropean Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF) [85]. The dataset is
available from 1979 to the present date with a horizontal resolution of 0.75◦× 0.75◦
and 60 vertical levels. Every 6 hours data is taken from this reanalysis to drive the
==PAGE:46==
30
3 Data
WRF model. ERA-Interim is chosen instead of the other third generation reanaly-
sis datasets, NASA-MERRA [86] and NCEP-CFSR [87], because of its high quality,
uninterrupted consistency and easy integration within the WRF model. In [8] sev-
eral reanalysis datasets are tested based on 13 measuring stations in Portugal. They
concluded that the Era-Interim provides the best estimate of the wind regime.
Information regarding the geographical conditions such as the topography and
land cover is taken from the US Geological Survey (USGS) global coverage, at a
resolution of 10 min (∼18.5 km), 5 min (∼9.25 km) and 2 min (∼3.7 km) for domains
D01, D02 and D03, respectively. This data can be downloaded for free from the WRF
users’ page [88]. The model sea surface temperature (SST) data are taken from the
ERA-interim data.
3.2.3
Output
The WRF simulations are run from 01/01/2004 to 31/12/2013 for France and Belgium
and from 01/01/2001 to 31/08/2014 for Thailand. Hourly time series for different
variables are produced during these simulation periods. Apart from the standard
WRF output variables, typical properties for wind energy purposes such as the inverse
Monin-Obukhov length (1/L) and the friction velocity are also obtained from the
surface layer model. The temperature, humidity, pressure and wind components are
vertically interpolated from the model levels to 50 m, 80 m, 100 m, 140 m and 200 m
AGL. For the horizontal wind speed components the vertical interpolation is done
using the power law:
u = uref
( z
zref
)α
,
(3.1)
where u is the interpolated wind speed, uref the reference wind speed, z the interpo-
lated height, zref the reference height and α the power law exponent. This exponent
is determined from the output at the closest model level above and below z. For
the other variables a linear interpolation is used. The output variables obtained at
all the grid points are summarised in Table 3.3. They are sorted according to their
dimensionality: the constant variables (2 dimensions: latitude and longitude), the sur-
face variables (3 dimensions: time, latitude and longitude) and the height dependent
variables (4 dimensions: time, height, latitude and longitude).
For every mast site, the necessary information for the WRF generalisation proce-
dure is extracted from the total simulation. This is done by extracting smaller grids
around each mast site with 19 × 19 grid points from the model domain and by select-
ing the variables during the same period as the respective mast measurement period
listed in Table 3.1. This matching between the modelling and measurement period
is recommended when verifying the simulation results [10], given that the wind can
have a considerable annual variability [7].
==PAGE:47==
3.2 WRF simulations
31
Table 3.3: WRF output variables sorted by their dimensions.
Constant
Surface
Heights
Landuse index
Downward shortwave radiation
2 m
Surface geopotential height
Friction velocity
Relative humidity
Planetary boundary layer height
Temperature
Roughness length
Surface pressure
10 m
Inverse Monin-Obukhov length
Wind speed
Wind direction
50 m, 80 m, 100 m, 140 m, 200 m
Pressure
Relative humidity
Temperature
Wind speed
Wind direction
==PAGE:48==
32
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 4
Sensitivity study
From the discussion of the WRF generalisation methodology in Chapter 2, it is clear
that there is no single procedure to construct generalised wind climates from WRF
simulations. This sensitivity study evaluates the influence of the construction of the
histogram from the WRF simulated time series on the resulting generalised wind cli-
mate. The histogram depends on the wind direction and speed bin widths and both
values are varied in this test. Moreover, the WRF generalisation procedure has the
possibility to exploit the simulated Monin-Obukhov lengths and use a stability cor-
rection on the logarithmic wind profile. For the use of these non-neutral logarithmic
wind profiles, a further binning based on the Monin-Obukhov length is required. The
influence of these bin width sizes and stability correction are identified by varying
following three parameters:
• Wind direction bin width: 7.5◦, 10◦, 15◦, 30◦;
• Wind speed bin width: 0.5 m/s, 1 m/s, 1.5 m/s, 2 m/s, 2.5 m/s, 3 m/s, 3.5 m/s;
• Logarithmic wind profile: with (Method 3) or without (Method 4) stability
correction.
All combinations for the specified parameter values are tested, which results in
56 (= 4·7·2) wind climate files per wind mast site. These can then be verified against
the generalised wind climates from the observations. This sensitivity study will also
help to find a robust set-up for these parameters yielding results which agree well
with the observations.
4.1
Validation criteria
Both the WRF and the observed generalised wind climates are stored as WAsP lib-
files.
They contain information about the wind rose and the sectorwise Weibull
A and k parameters for each standard roughness length and height. The wind rose
frequencies, A and k parameters are stored for 12 direction sectors. For the validation
of the WRF wind climate, the frequency distribution of the wind rose will be compared
with the observed wind climate. The Weibull parameters are not validated directly
since they are not the main point of interest for a wind resource study. However,
==PAGE:50==
34
4 Sensitivity study
they are used together with the wind rose to estimate the annual mean wind speed
U [ms−1] and the Annual Energy Production AEP [MWh] as follows:
U =
12
∑
i=1
fi · AiΓ
(
1 + 1
ki
)
,
(4.1)
AEP = 8760 h ·
12
∑
i=1
fi ·
∫∞
0
PW T (u) · fW (u)du,
(4.2)
where i denotes the sector number, fi is the frequency of occurrence of sector i, Ai
and ki the respective Weibull scale and shape parameters, Γ is the gamma function,
PW T (u) is the power curve of a specific wind turbine and fW (u) is the Weibull wind
speed distribution function depending on the two Weibull parameters A and k:
fW (u) = k
A
( u
A
)k−1
exp
[
−
( u
A
)k]
.
(4.3)
For the wind turbine power curve a standard Vestas V90 2 MW is selected [89]. Ev-
idently, the choice of the wind turbine power curve will have an influence on the
result due to a different rated power and different cut-in, rated and cut-out wind
speeds. Nevertheless, the behaviour of the error is not sensitive to the exact PW T
curve. In many wind resource studies, the wind power density is used as a validation
criterion instead of the AEP. However the power density puts more weight in the
tail of the wind speed distribution where high winds occur. On the other hand, the
AEP evaluates the correctness of the wind speed distribution in the region of interest,
i.e. between cut-in and cut-out wind speed, which supports the choice of AEP as a
validation parameter.
The statistics used for the comparison between the WRF results and the observa-
tions are explained in the following subsections.
4.1.1
Wind rose
For the comparison of a WRF simulated and observed wind rose, two error measures
are used: the directional Root Mean Square Error (dRMSE) and an offset. To de-
termine the offset of the wind rose, a novel calculation procedure is developed and
applied in this thesis. The dRMSE is defined as:
dRMSE =
1
Nϕ
v
u
u
t
Nϕ
∑
i=1
( ˆfi −fi)2,
(4.4)
where Nϕ is the number of sectors, ˆfi the observed frequency of sector i and fi the
WRF simulated frequency of sector i. The dRMSE is calculated for the wind roses
stored in the wind climate .lib files for which Nϕ = 12. A graphical representation of
the dRMSE error is shown in Figure 4.1, where the errors ei = ˆfi −fi are indicated.
==PAGE:51==
4.1 Validation criteria
35
Figure 4.1: Graphical representation of how the errors are defined for the calcula-
tion of the dRMSE of the WRF wind rose. The grey wind rose is obtained from
observations, while the green is the result from the WRF generalisation.
The simulated wind rose can also have an overall offset compared to the observa-
tions. This offset is determined by minimizing the previously defined dRMSE using a
shift angle θ as free parameter. The frequency of each wind direction is redistributed
over two neighbouring wind directions bins defined by the shift angle. The redistribu-
tion of the frequencies assume a uniform distribution of the frequency over each bin.
The frequencies of the new, shifted wind rose, fi(i = 1, ..., Nϕ), can then be obtained
by:
fi = (ϕ −θ) mod ϕ
ϕ
· fj1 + θ mod ϕ
ϕ
· fj2,
(4.5)
with ϕ = 360◦/Nϕ the width of a sector.
The indices of the two redistributed
neighbouring wind direction bins are j1 = ⌈(i −2) · ϕ + θ⌉mod Nϕ + 1 and j2 =
⌈(i −1) · ϕ + θ⌉mod Nϕ + 1, where ⌈⌉maps the real number to the smallest following
integer (= ceiling function).
The offset is then defined as the shift angle that yields the minimum dRMSE
between the shifted WRF wind rose and the observed one. In Figure 4.2 an example
of this wind rose offset is given. It shows the same wind roses as in Figure 4.1 but
==PAGE:52==
36
4 Sensitivity study
including a shifted wind rose that results in a minimum dRMSE. From the figure it
is clear that a shift of 10.5◦of the WRF wind rose, shown in blue, yields a better
agreement with the observed wind rose.
Figure 4.2: Example of a wind rose shift by an angle θ = 10.5◦. The original (green)
wind rose has a larger dRMSE than the shifted wind rose (blue). The offset is defined
as the shift angle that yields the lowest dRMSE compared to the observed wind rose.
4.1.2
Mean wind speed and AEP
The mean wind speed U and the AEP are validated by the relative error ε at each
mast i:
εi = Pi −Oi
Oi
,
(4.6)
where Pi and Oi are the predicted and observed value (mean wind speed or AEP),
respectively, for mast i. This error is evaluated with three criteria: the normalised
Mean Absolute Error (nMAE), the Relative Bias (RB) and the Interquartile Range
==PAGE:53==
4.2 Effect on wind rose
37
(IQR) of the error. They are defined by [90]:
nMAE = 1
N
N
∑
i=1
|εi| ,
(4.7)
RB = 1
N
N
∑
i=1
εi,
(4.8)
IQR = Q3(|ε|) −Q1(|ε|),
(4.9)
where N is the number of observation masts. Q3(|ε|) and Q1(|ε|) are the third and
first quartile of the absolute error, respectively.
The IQR is chosen a measure of
scale because it is a robust estimator for the spread of the absolute error, being less
sensitive to outliers as compared to the standard deviation [91]. A low IQR indicates
a small dispersion of the absolute errors which implies a high precision of the tested
generalisation procedure.
4.2
Effect on wind rose
The sensitivity of the generalised wind rose on the different bin widths and stability
corrections is analysed. The statistical values defined in Section 4.1.1 are used for this
study. The WRF generalised wind roses are compared with the generalised observed
wind roses at every mast site for the uniform roughness length of 0.03 m. For all
the bin width and stability correction choices, the mean value of the dRMSEs and
absolute offsets at all sites are then determined. The dRMSE and offset values are
plotted as a function of the wind speed bin size for each wind direction bin size in
Figures 4.3 and 4.4, respectively. The resulting wind rose errors when the stability
correction on the wind profile is applied (Method 3), are plotted with dashed lines,
while the errors resulting from Method 4 are plotted as solid lines. As a reference,
the dRMSE and offset obtained from a comparison of the wind roses of the ‘raw’ (i.e.
non-generalised) WRF wind directions and observed wind directions are also shown.
A first observation from these plots is that the dashed and solid lines are nearly
the same, which indicates that the stability correction method has no influence on
the generalised wind rose. This is expected since the stability correction acts on the
wind speed profile.
By examining the sensitivity of the wind direction binning on the dRMSE of the
wind rose in Figure 4.3 it is seen that smaller wind direction bins yield lower dRMSE
values, except for the wind direction bin size of 15◦which has a different behaviour.
However, the scale of the dRMSE values is relatively narrow so this influence of the
wind direction bin on the wind rose is minor. An interesting behaviour is observed
for low wind speed bin size values. Here, the dRMSEs of the lowest wind direction
bins (7.5◦and 10◦) increase drastically. This is the result of the minimum number
of samples within a bin (= 5). When both the wind speed and direction bin widths
are small, too many observations are removed and the simulated wind rose is not
==PAGE:54==
38
4 Sensitivity study
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
Wind speed bin size [m/s]
2.15
2.20
2.25
2.30
2.35
2.40
2.45
2.50
RMSE [%]
sector width
Raw
30 ◦
15 ◦
10 ◦
7. 5 ◦
Figure 4.3: Effect of wind speed and direction bin sizes on the dRMSE [%] of the
WRF generalised wind rose for z0 = 0.03 m. The solid lines are from Method 4, the
dashed lines from Method 3. The black dot-dashed line represent the dRMSE of the
WRF wind rose without generalisation compared to the observed wind rose.
represented correctly any more. Apart from this behaviour of too narrow bins, there
is a tendency of smaller dRMSE values with reducing wind speed bins sizes for all
wind direction bins.
The influence of the binning on the wind rose offset is comparable as on the
dRMSE. Again, the choice of 15◦wind direction bin sizes yielded the largest errors,
while the other have a very similar behaviour. There is even less influence of the
wind direction bin size on the offset. The rather large mean absolute offset values
in Figure 4.4 are due to the influence of a few sites in complex terrain where offsets
larger than 20◦are sometimes observed. At these sites the wind direction is greatly
influenced by the local orography such that the flow cannot be fully resolved using
simple linear models.
4.3
Effect on mean wind speed and AEP
The sensitivity of the bin widths and stability correction methods on the mean wind
speed and AEP are tested. In Figures 4.5 and 4.6 the nMAE of both values for a
roughness length of 0.03 m and at a height of 80 m are plotted as a function of the
wind speed bin size for all wind direction bin sizes. Again, the dashed lines represent
the Method 3 stability correction and the solid lines Method 4. The standard height
of 80 m is chosen since it is a standard wind turbine hub height and agrees well with
==PAGE:55==
4.3 Effect on mean wind speed and AEP
39
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
Wind speed bin size [m/s]
8.0
8.5
9.0
9.5
10.0
10.5
Offset [ ◦]
sector width
Raw
30 ◦
15 ◦
10 ◦
7. 5 ◦
Figure 4.4: Effect of wind speed and direction bin sizes on the absolute offset of the
generalised wind rose for z0 = 0.03 m. The solid lines are from Method 4, the dashed
lines from Method 3. The black dot-dashed line represent the offset of the WRF wind
rose without generalisation from the observed wind rose.
the measurement heights of the met masts. The black dot-dashed line represent the
nMAE of the WRF simulations compared to the raw observations.
Although the nMAE values of the AEP in Figure 4.6 are larger than the errors of
the mean wind speed in Figure 4.5, the behaviour of both nMAEs is very similar. The
differences in the nMAE values for different bin widths and stability corrections are
more pronounced for the AEP. This is expected from the cubic relationship between
wind speed and power.
When comparing the nMAE from Method 3 (dashed lines) with those from Method
4, a clear difference is observed. The reason for this difference is again the minimum
number of samples within a bin. When Method 3 is applied, an additional binning
of the simulated time series is required, which causes many bins to contain only few
samples. Since the WRF simulations are hourly data and the measurements are con-
ducted for 1 or 2 years, the amount of WRF data for the verification is limited. As
can be seen on Figures 4.5 and 4.6, this causes a constraint on the usage of Method
3, where even very large wind speed and direction bins still yield large nMAE values.
Therefore, the discussion will concentrate on the results from Method 4, i.e. not us-
ing the Monin-Obukhov length simulations and thus using a neutral logarithmic wind
profile. When numerical wind atlases are constructed, simulations for more than 10
years are typically performed. For these large datasets the Method 3 could be used
but a validation of the wind climate is not possible without the availability of high
quality wind speed measurements over the same long period.
==PAGE:56==
40
4 Sensitivity study
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
Wind speed bin size [m/s]
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
|U error| [%]
sector width
Raw
30 ◦
15 ◦
10 ◦
7. 5 ◦
Figure 4.5: Effect of wind speed and direction bin sizes on the mean generalised wind
speed for z0 = 0.03 m and z = 80 m. The solid lines are from Method 4, the dashed
lines from Method 3. The black dot-dashed line represent the mean wind speed error
from a comparison between the raw WRF simulation and the raw measurements.
For wind speed bins larger than 1.5 m/s, a smaller nMAE is observed for narrower
wind direction bins, as was observed for the dRMSE of the wind rose. For smaller
wind speed bins, it is again observed that the generalisation procedure ‘breaks down’
for narrow wind direction bins due to the minimum number of samples within a bin.
It is clear that the combination of both small wind direction bins and small wind
speed bins is not possible for a limited number of simulation data.
Apart from the high errors for the (too) low wind speed bins, the nMAE are not
very dependent of the wind speed bin size. The lines indicate rather constant errors,
with a small increase at the higher wind speed bins.
To visualise the influence of the different bin sizes and stability correction on
the different errors summarised in Section 4.1.2 a new graph inspired on a Taylor
diagram [92] is created in this thesis.
This diagram summarises the performance
of the generalisation method for different parameter choices in a single, polar like
graph. For the mean wind speed and AEP, the Taylor-inspired diagrams are shown in
Figures 4.7 and 4.8, respectively. Each parameter combination listed at the beginning
of the chapter is plotted as a point on the graph, where its position is determined
by the validation criteria in Section 4.1.2. The cosine of the azimuth angle from the
abscissa represent the IQR, ranging from 0, for a very precise model, to 1 indicating
an imprecise model. The accuracy of the model is represented by the radial distance,
==PAGE:57==
4.3 Effect on mean wind speed and AEP
41
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
Wind speed bin size [m/s]
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
|AEP error| [%]
sector width
Raw
30 ◦
15 ◦
10 ◦
7. 5 ◦
Figure 4.6: Effect of wind speed and direction bin sizes on the AEP from the gener-
alised wind for z0 = 0.03 m and z = 80 m. The solid lines are from Method 4, the
dashed lines from Method 3. The black dot-dashed line represent the AEP error from
a comparison between the raw WRF simulation and the raw measurements.
r, from the origin as follows:
r = 1
N
N
∑
i=1
Pi
Oi
= 1 + RB.
(4.10)
A model without any bias would thus lie on the arc with unit radius. Finally, the
diameter of each model point is proportional with its nMAE, i.e.
smaller points
represent parameter choices that yield lower nMAE values. Therefore, a good model
has a circle with a small diameter, a low IQR value and lies close to the unit arc
radius. A perfect model would thus lie on the star-symbol with a diameter of zero.
From both Taylor diagrams it is again clear that the choice of the bin width size
and stability correction has a substantial impact on the result. The diagrams also
reveal that the stability correction with Method 3 yields large errors for the small
WRF verification data set. It should therefore not be applied with a limited WRF
simulation size.
On the other hand, it is also clear that with a proper choice of
the bin widths there is a possibility to significantly improve the WRF simulations
correspondence with reality by generalising the wind climate.
==PAGE:58==
42
4 Sensitivity study
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.05
0.01
Interquantile Range
0. 00
0. 15
0. 30
0. 45
0. 60
0. 75
0. 90
1. 05
1. 20
Relative Bias
0. 00
0. 15
0. 30
0. 45
0. 60
0. 75
0. 90
1. 05
1. 20
Relative Bias
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.05
0.01
Interquantile Range
0. 00
0. 15
0. 30
0. 45
0. 60
0. 75
0. 90
1. 05
1. 20
Relative Bias
0. 00
0. 15
0. 30
0. 45
0. 60
0. 75
0. 90
1. 05
1. 20
Relative Bias
Method 3
Method 4
Raw
Figure 4.7: Taylor-inspired diagram to represent the mean wind speed errors of the
generalisation procedure for different wind speed and direction sizes. Green dots are
from Method 3, blue dots from Method 4. The black dot represents the errors when
the ‘raw’ WRF simulations are compared with the observations.
The generalised
wind climate is calculated for z0 = 0.03 m and z = 80 m.
4.4
Identifying optimal generalisation set-up
From the sensitivity tests one concludes that there is an influence of the binning and
stability correction on the generalised wind climate. The highest errors arise from
the choice of too narrow bin sizes. Therefore, it is of great importance that bin sizes
for wind speed and direction are chosen appropriately and in correspondence with
the length of the simulated time series. By selecting large enough bin widths, it is
avoided that the requirement of minimum bin samples has a big influence on the result.
On the other hand, too wide bins cause that all simulations are selected, including
extreme values which might have a too large influence on the result. Additionally,
too large wind speed bins will not represent the Weibull distribution well any more.
==PAGE:59==
4.4 Identifying optimal generalisation set-up
43
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.05
0.01
Interquantile Range
0. 00 0. 15 0. 30 0. 45 0. 60 0. 75 0. 90 1. 05 1. 20 1. 35
Relative Bias
0. 00
0. 15
0. 30
0. 45
0. 60
0. 75
0. 90
1. 05
1. 20
1. 35
Relative Bias
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.05
0.01
Interquantile Range
0. 00 0. 15 0. 30 0. 45 0. 60 0. 75 0. 90 1. 05 1. 20 1. 35
Relative Bias
0. 00
0. 15
0. 30
0. 45
0. 60
0. 75
0. 90
1. 05
1. 20
1. 35
Relative Bias
Method 3
Method 4
Raw
Figure 4.8: Taylor-inspired diagram to represent the AEP errors of the generalisation
procedure for different wind speed and direction sizes. Green dots are from Method
3, blue dots from Method 4.
The black dot represents the errors when the ‘raw’
WRF simulations are compared with the observations. The generalised wind climate
is calculated for z0 = 0.03 m and z = 80 m.
This causes growing errors for the wind rose and AEP. Moreover, it is shown that
smaller wind direction bins results in both lower dRMSE of the wind rose and lower
nMAE for mean wind speed and AEP.
To identify the optimal point in the Taylor diagrams of Figures 4.7 and 4.8 a
parameter choice that performs well for both the mean wind speed and the AEP is
required. The point also needs to be stable such that a slightly smaller bin does
not yield a large increase in the error as could be observed in the sensitivity tests.
This optimal generalisation set-up is selected by defining a cost function based on the
previously defined validation criteria. The bin widths and stability correction method
that yields the minimum of this function is then the optimal set-up condition. The
==PAGE:60==
44
4 Sensitivity study
cost function is given in Equation (4.11) and comprises three validation criteria for
the mean wind speed and the AEP and the dRMSE of the wind rose (wr), all weighted
equally:
cost(ws bin, wd bin, stab. method) =
nMAEU + RBU + IQRU
min(nMAEU + RBU + IQRU)
+
nMAEAEP + RBAEP + IQRAEP
min(nMAEAEP + RBAEP + IQRAEP )
+
dRMSEwr
min(dRMSEwr)
(4.11)
The five combinations that yield the minimum values for this cost function are:
1. 7.5◦, 3 m/s, Method 4;
2. 7.5◦, 3.5 m/s, Method 4;
3. 7.5◦, 2.5 m/s, Method 4;
4. 10◦, 2.5 m/s, Method 4;
5. 30◦, 0.5 m/s, Method 4.
From this list, the parameter combination 7.5◦with 3 m/s and Method 4 is chosen.
Not only because it results in the minimum value for the cost function defined in
Equation (4.11) but also because a wind speed bin size of plus or minus 0.5 m/s still
has a good result which demonstrates the stability of the set-up. This parameter
set-up is then used for generalisation procedure for which the results are discussed.
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 5
Results and Discussion
The results from the generalisation methodology with the optimal set-up are eval-
uated and discussed.
The WRF generalised climatologies are compared with the
observed generalised climates at every mast. This is done using the normalised error
of the mean wind speed and AEP calculated as described in Section 4.1.2. These
are determined by comparing the WRF generalised climate with the generalised wind
climates obtained from the generalisation of the measurements with WAsP.
For every mast, the normalised error from the ‘raw’ WRF simulations is also
calculated to identify whether or not the generalisation procedure is able to improve
the results. These raw WRF simulations are compared with the measurements by
doing a log-linear interpolation of the simulated data between the WRF heights to
the met mast height. From the raw interpolated simulation and measurement results
the mean wind speed, Weibull parameters and AEP can de calculated.
In Figures 5.1 and 5.2 the relative errors of the mean wind speed and AEP from the
raw WRF simulations and generalised wind climates are presented for all mast sites.
Note that the 5 last met masts (32 to 36) are located in Thailand. The generalised
results are for a standard roughness length of z0 = 0.03 m and at a height z = 80 m.
This generalisation height is chosen because it is close to the measurement heights of
all met masts (listed in Table 3.1) which justifies the comparison with the raw errors.
Besides the fact that the absolute errors of the AEP are generally larger than
those of the mean wind speed, a similar behaviour of both errors is observed from a
comparison of Figures 5.1 and 5.2. It can be seen that both the mean wind speed
and the AEP errors decrease at almost every site when the generalisation procedure
is applied. The raw WRF simulations often show large errors and have the tendency
to overestimate the wind speed and AEP. This overestimation of the wind speed in
the lower part of the planetary boundary layer (PBL) is also observed in previous
studies [24], [49], [81], [84], [93]. An often cited reason for this positive wind speed
bias is the smoother representation of the topography by WRF. On the other hand, it
can be seen that even at sites where the WRF simulations do not agree well with the
observations, the generalisation procedure is able to reduce these errors, sometimes
even quite substantial. Only at masts 35 and 36 the normalised absolute wind speed
error is larger than 20% after generalisation. Both masts are located close to each
other in Thailand at very complex site conditions which cannot be well resolved in
the linear microscale model WAsP. Moreover, the quality of the reanalysis data is
questionable and the Coriolis force is low at low latitudes. When the model is forced
==PAGE:62==
46
5 Results and Discussion
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36
Mast number
20
10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
U error [%]
Raw
Generalised
Figure 5.1: Normalised mean wind speed error from the raw WRF simulations (red
bars) and generalised WRF wind climates (blue bars) at all masts. The generalised
winds are at a height z = 80 m and for a homogeneous surface of z0 = 0.03 m.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36
Mast number
0
50
100
150
200
AEP error [%]
Raw
Generalised
Figure 5.2: Normalised AEP error from the raw WRF simulations (red bars) and
generalised WRF wind climates (blue bars) at all masts. The generalised winds are
at a height z = 80 m and for a homogeneous surface of z0 = 0.03 m.
with too low wind speeds, the influence of the parametrisation increases and biases in
the simulation can occur [94]. This explains the large errors of the WRF simulations
which cannot be completely corrected by the generalisation. However, despite the
poor simulations, the generalisation procedure is still able to partly correct these er-
rors and improve the results. This observation is remarkable since the generalisation
procedure applies the geostrophic drag law which is in principle not valid at low lati-
tudes such as in Thailand [62]. Nonetheless, application of the theory still seems to
yield good results. At site 6, the generalisation procedure worsens the underestima-
==PAGE:63==
5 Results and Discussion
47
tion of the simulated wind speed. The reason for this is not clear but it shows that
the generalisation procedure does not yield better results at each individual point,
but rather improves it on average. It is also possible that either the measurements
are of poor quality or the topography description in the WAsP project is inaccurate
which would have an effect on the generalised observed wind climate that is used as
a reference for the relative error.
To evaluate the generalisation procedure, the nMAE for the mean wind speed
and AEP from the raw and generalised data are shown in Table 5.1. The nMAE is
calculated with Equation (4.7) for all the masts with (N = 36) and without (N = 31)
the ones sited in Thailand. The nMAE values excluding the Thailand masts are also
calculated since the Thailand WRF simulations are questionable and some do not
have a full year of measurements available. This gives an estimation of the error for
the generalisation of the WRF simulation over France and Belgium.
Table 5.1: Normalised MAE [%] of the mean wind speed U and AEP as calculated in
Equation (4.7) from both the raw and the generalised data. The average is taken for
all masts (1 to 36) and for the masts without the ones located in Thailand (1 to 31).
Masts
Uraw
UGen
AEPraw
AEPGen
1 to 36 (All)
17.5
6.6
46.0
17.9
1 to 31 (w/o Thailand)
15.5
5.5
39.0
11.8
The table clearly shows the added value of the generalisation procedure.
The
nMAE between the raw WRF simulations and measurements of the mean wind speed
is 17.5%. In contrast, the nMAE in the generalised mean wind speed, at a height
z = 80 m with a homogeneous roughness length of z0 = 0.03 m, between the simula-
tions and observations is reduced to 6.6%. In terms of the AEP, the generalisation
procedure improves the result significantly as well. While the raw simulations and
observations have a large mean error of 46%, this decreases to a reasonable 17.9%
when comparing the AEP estimated from the generalised climates.
When the average error is restricted to the 31 masts located in France and Belgium,
thus excluding the Thailand masts, both the raw and the generalised errors decrease.
The generalised WRF wind climate agrees well with the generalised observed climate
with a maximum absolute AEP error of 33.3% (Mast 10) and a mean error of only
11.8%. The reason for the lower errors for the WRF simulation in France and Belgium
is twofold. The WRF simulations are at mid latitudes where the atmospheric motion
is close to geostrophic flow and both the mesoscale simulations and the generalisation
procedure perform well. Additionally, the reliability of the measurement data used
as reference to determine the errors is higher.
To have a better idea on how the generalisation method improves the wind resource
estimation, a more detailed analysis of the errors and error sources is carried out in
the next sections. This will also provide useful information on how to improve the
generalisation results. The Weibull parameters from the generalised wind climate
==PAGE:64==
48
5 Results and Discussion
statistics are first investigated. Then, the influence of the WRF output frequency is
discussed and finally the effect of the WRF topography description on the results are
analysed.
5.1
Weibull parameters
Up to now, the results are discussed in terms of the errors of the mean wind speed
U and AEP. These values are estimated either directly from the raw simulations and
observations or based on the Weibull parameters (A and k) from the generalised
wind climates. The generalised wind climates are stored as Wind Atlas lib-files which
contain the omni-directional Weibull A and k parameters for each standard height
and roughness length. Hence, errors in U and AEP, determined from Equations (4.1)
and (4.2), originate directly from errors in the A and k parameters. It is therefore
interesting to investigate these as well.
For the raw observations and simulations, the parameters are fitted on the whole
time series to obtain a single A and k value for each site. For the generalised wind
climates a Weibull parameters pair is obtained for each standard height and roughness.
This is done with the combined Weibull distribution where the total mean wind
speed and power density is matched with the frequency weighted sum of the sector-
wise mean speeds and power densities. The combined Weibull distribution can be
inaccurate in cases where there are large variations in the sector-wise wind speed
distributions [68]. Such a case is however not observed for the 36 mast sites used in
this work.
The relative error on the Weibull parameters, both raw and generalised, are calcu-
lated with Equation (4.6). From the errors at the 36 masts, box plots are created to
display information on the centre value and the range of the errors [90]. On Figure 5.3
the box plots of the A and k errors for the generalised winds at 80 m height are given
as a function of the standard roughness length z0. As a reference, the box plot of
the errors of the Weibull parameters between the raw simulations and observations
is also plotted.
The box plots in Figure 5.3 show that the relative errors of both parameters are
almost independent of the standard roughness length for which the generalisation
is applied.
Apparently, the generalisation corrects for the large overestimation of
the A parameter by the simulations. The generalisation also reduces the spread of
the errors. The positive bias of the scale parameter is of course expected from the
mean wind speed overestimation observed in Figure 5.1 since the mean speed U and
A parameter relate very closely for k > 1.5. Figure 5.3b illustrates that the WRF
simulations have the tendency to underestimate the k parameter at the met mast
heights. This was also observed in [48] for nudged WRF simulations at heights above
100 m. Without nudging the underestimation increased even more. Unfortunately, the
underestimation by the simulations is not corrected by the generalisation procedure.
On the contrary, the bias of the shape parameter is even increased.
==PAGE:65==
5.1 Weibull parameters
49
Raw
0.0002
0.03
0.1
0.4
1.5
z0
20
10
0
10
20
30
40
A error [%]
(a)
Raw
0.0002
0.03
0.1
0.4
1.5
z0
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
10
20
k error [%]
(b)
Figure 5.3: Box plots of the errors on the A (a) and k (b) Weibull parameters from
a comparison between the generalised wind climates at different standard roughness
lengths (z0) at z = 80 m of the WRF simulations and the observations. The first box
plot (‘Raw’) represents the relative error on the Weibull parameters from a comparison
between a raw simulations and observations.
Figure 5.4 shows similar box plots of the relative errors on the Weibull parameters,
as a function of the standard heights z for a homogeneous roughness length of z0 =
0.03 m. Again, the box plots for the errors on A and k from the comparison between
the simulations and observations are plotted. However, it should be noted that these
errors are at the mast height, i.e. between 60 m and 100 m for the masts in France
and Belgium and 120 m for the 5 masts in Thailand.
In Section 2.2 it is explained that the WRF generalisation is carried out for each
simulation output height independently. This is done to retain the WRF profile to
some extent. Whereas the generalisation of the observations is calculated with WAsP,
where the measurements at a single height are first used to determine the Weibull
parameters over standard conditions at 10 m. Subsequently, the parameters are ex-
trapolated to standard heights assuming a logarithmic profile [5]. This will of course
lead to different profiles of the Weibull parameters from the generalised wind climates.
Indeed, the errors of the A parameter in Figure 5.4a show ta dependency on height
AGL. Except for z = 200 m, the scale parameters are well estimated with the gener-
alisation method at all heights. It also shows that the WRF A parameter gradually
decreases compared to the observations above 80 m. This growing underprediction
by WRF of A with increasing height is also observed in [48]. It is the reason for a
relatively large negative bias at 200 m.
The k parameters from the WRF generalisation show less correspondence with
the ones from the generalised observations, as can be seen in Figure 5.4b. Moreover,
the k profile shape is also incorrect which cause the errors to increase with increasing
==PAGE:66==
50
5 Results and Discussion
Raw
50
80
100
140
200
z
30
20
10
0
10
20
30
40
A error [%]
(a)
Raw
50
80
100
140
200
z
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
10
20
k error [%]
(b)
Figure 5.4: Box plots of the errors on the A (a) and k (b) Weibull parameters from
a comparison between the generalised wind climates at different standard roughness
heights (z) for a uniform roughness of z0 = 0.03 m of the WRF simulations and the
observations. The first box plot (‘Raw’) represents the relative error on the Weibull
parameters from a comparison between a raw simulations and observations.
height as well.
The k profile has a characteristic bowed shape: k increases with
height up to a certain maximum value, zm, after which it decreases again [95]. As
mentioned in [96] the YSU PBL scheme used for the WRF simulations is unable to
model this characteristic profile. This is the reason for the growing underestimation
of k with height. A similar behaviour is also observed for the WRF simulations in
this work. The k parameter from the raw WRF simulations decreases as a function
of height already from z = 50 m upwards at nearly every site. Exceptions of this
general trend are observed at Mast 24 (zm = 100 m), Mast 31 (zm = 80 m) and Mast
32 (zm = 140 m). However, measurements show that this reversal height for k is
generally located between 100 m and 200 m [48]. The box plots in Figure 5.4b show
that this profile mismatch is not corrected by generalising the wind climate.
By choosing a more appropriate PBL scheme or adjusting the parametrisation
of the k-profile, the WRF simulations can be improved in terms of the k parameter
[96]. In [97] it is shown that the k profile, as predicted with the EWA perturbation
model, can deviate from the measurements above 100 m. Currently there are studies
to extend the EWA model by developing ‘tall’ profiles for the mean wind speed and
shape parameter [64], [97]. Implementation of these models in WAsP and adapting
the stability correction in Section 2.2.2 of the mesoscale generalisation accordingly
can also lead to improved results, in particular for the AEP estimation where both
Weibull parameters are important.
Since the wind profile is largely influenced by the stability correction, the gener-
alisation with Method 3 is tested as well. The results are shown in Appendix A. A
==PAGE:67==
5.2 WRF temporal resolution
51
larger underestimation of the two Weibull parameters is found. However, the error is
less dependent of the height, especially for the shape parameter, which indicates that
the profile agrees better with the generalised observed wind climate.
5.2
WRF temporal resolution
The sensitivity testing in Chapter 4 shows that the size of the WRF simulation data
set has a large influence on the parameter choice for the generalisation procedure. For
the validation of the generalisation procedure, the WRF simulations were restricted
to the same period as the measurements. This limited the simulations data set size,
especially since the WRF simulation has an hourly output. The results in Chapter 4
show that this restricts the use of the ‘Method 3’ stability correction and leads to the
use of large wind speed bin widths in the generalisation procedure. Evidently, the
limitation on the use of Method 3 is due to the requirement of an additional binning
based on the Monin-Obukhov length.
To resolve this problem two solutions are tested. A first solution is to remove the
requirement of a minimum number of observations within a bin (fmin = 0). A second
one is to re-sample the hourly simulated horizontal wind speed components, u and
v, to 10 minute data by applying a linear interpolation between the hourly values.
The inverse Monin-Obukhov lengths are re-sampled to 10 minute data by using the
nearest hourly value. Both proposals yield similar results and the sensitivity to the
bin widths is largely reduced. The results obtained from Method 3 clearly improved
compared to the original set-up. However, neither of them could improve the results
obtained from the ‘best’ generalisation set-up and are therefore not used. Some plots
of the results from these two ‘solutions’ can be found in Appendix B.
In the WASA project WRF simulations with a 10 minute temporal resolution were
used [41]. The WRF simulations and measurements from that project are used in
this work to analyse the influence of a higher temporal resolution. Generalised OWC
are available from ten measurement sites. Therefore, the statistics from the errors
have a higher uncertainty than the ones in this work. A similar sensitivity test is
performed on the WASA WRF simulation as performed in Chapter 4. Unfortunately,
due to the unavailability of the raw measurement data it is not possible to compare
the generalised errors with raw wind speed errors. Figure 5.5 shows the influence
of the wind speed and direction bins sizes on the generalised wind rose error, both
dRMSE and offset, by comparing the generalised WASA WRF simulations with the
generalised observed wind climates from the 10 masts.
The effect of the applied
stability correction is also shown. Figure 5.6 shows the same plot for the mean wind
speed error.
Here, the influence of the wind speed bin size is found to be a lot less than
for the WRF simulations with an hourly resolution discussed in Chapter 4.
For
the wind speed error, no large dependency on the wind direction sectors is found
either. However, for the error on the wind rose, Figure 5.5 clearly shows that smaller
wind direction bins yield more accurate wind roses. This preference for narrow wind
==PAGE:68==
52
5 Results and Discussion
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
Wind speed bin size [m/s]
2.4
2.6
2.8
3.0
3.2
3.4
3.6
3.8
RMSE [%]
sector width
30 ◦
15 ◦
10 ◦
7. 5 ◦
(a)
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
Wind speed bin size [m/s]
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
8.5
9.0
9.5
10.0
10.5
Offset [ ◦]
(b)
Figure 5.5: Effect of wind speed and direction bin sizes on the dRMSE (a) and
absolute offset (b) of the generalised wind roses for z0 = 0.03 m from the WASA
project. The solid lines are from Method 4, the dashed lines from Method 3.
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
Wind speed bin size [m/s]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
|U error| [%]
sector width
30 ◦
15 ◦
10 ◦
7. 5 ◦
Figure 5.6: Effect of wind speed and direction bin sizes on the mean WASA generalised
wind speed for z0 = 0.03 m and z = 100 m. The solid lines are from Method 4, the
dashed lines from Method 3.
direction bins is even more pronounced than previously observed in Figure 4.3. These
observations show that the high sensitivity on the wind speed bin widths observed in
the sensitivity study result from the lack of simulation data due to the low temporal
resolution combined with the short simulation period (1 or 2 years). Figure 5.6 also
==PAGE:69==
5.2 WRF temporal resolution
53
shows that when having enough data, Method 3 is capable to use the information of
the Monin-Obukhov length to reduce the absolute mean wind speed error.
To investigate the effect of the temporal resolution on the A and k parameters,
the 10 minute WASA WRF simulations are averaged to hourly data. The averaging
is done for the two horizontal wind speed components. The inverse Monin-Obukhov
length is kept constant over an hour based on the 10 minute simulated value at the
start of that hour. In Figure 5.7 the error box plots of the Weibull parameters for
a generalised climate at z = 100 m and over a uniform roughness of z0 = 0.03 m are
shown. The generalisation is done with Method 3 (with 2.5 m/s wind speed bins and
7.5◦wind direction bins) and Method 4 (with 3 m/s wind speed bins and 7.5◦wind
direction bins) for both the original (10 min) and the resampled (1 h) WRF output.
10 min 
 Method 4
1h 
 Method 4
10 min 
 Method 3
1h 
 Method 3
20
15
10
5
0
5
10
A error [%]
(a)
10 min 
 Method 4
1h 
 Method 4
10 min 
 Method 3
1h 
 Method 3
25
20
15
10
5
0
5
10
15
20
k error [%]
(b)
Figure 5.7: Box plots of the errors on the A (a) and k (b) Weibull parameters from
the comparison between the generalised wind climates at z = 100 m for a uniform
roughness of z0 = 0.03 m of the WASA WRF simulations and the observations. The
errors are determined for both the original WRF output frequency (10 min) and the
resampled one (1 h) and for both stability correction methods (Method 3 and Method
4).
Figure 5.7 shows that the higher temporal resolution also has an effect on the
A and k parameters. It can be seen that by lowering the temporal resolution both
generalised Weibull parameters decrease, independent of the stability correction used.
This results in a larger bias for the A and k parameters when using the hourly wind
time series. This is especially disadvantageous for the shape parameter since the WRF
model already has the tendency to underestimate its value as previously discussed.
The reason is again the high impact of the requirement for a minimum number of
samples within a bin for a limited data set. Moreover, the generalised observed wind
climate statistics are also obtained from 10 minute wind speed measurements. It is
thus recommended to either use 10 minute WRF simulations or to simulate for a long
period, i.e. multiple years, when an hourly temporal resolution is chosen. This also
==PAGE:70==
54
5 Results and Discussion
allows the use of the Method 3 stability correction.
Comparing Figures 5.4b and 5.7b with each other, it can be seen that the bias of
the generalised k parameter is smaller for the WASA generalised climates, even for the
1 h resampled data. Although no raw k-error is available for the WASA simulation,
the lower bias supports the hypothesis made in Section 5.1 that the PBL-scheme can
improve the estimation of k. Given that the WASA WRF simulations are performed
using the Mellor-Yamada-Janjic (MYJ) PBL scheme, while the WRF simulations in
this thesis used a YSU scheme.
5.3
WRF topography description
The generalisation of WRF winds is used to ‘clean’ the simulated wind with respect to
the WRF description of the topography. Therefore, it is interesting to investigate the
influence of the orography and roughness length representation by the WRF model on
the errors in wind speed. By again comparing the errors from the raw and generalised
WRF results, it is possible to identify the influence of the generalisation procedure.
In the next sections a possible relationship between the WRF terrain complexity
and the wind speed error is investigated. In addition, the influence of the difference
in roughness length description between WRF and WAsP on the wind speed error is
studied. To identify the statistical dependence between two variables, the Spearman’s
rank correlation coefficient is used. It has some interesting features such as identifying
non-linear relationships and a low sensitivity to outliers. For its calculation, the n
values of two variables Xi and Yi are ranked to xi and yi by sorting with respect to
the X data. The Spearman correlation coefficient, ρ, can then be calculated with
[90]:
ρ = cov(x, y)
σxσy
,
(5.1)
where cov(x, y) = n ∑n
i=1 xiyi −(∑n
i=1 xi) (∑n
i=1 yi) is the covariance between two
variables x and y, and σx =
√
cov(x, x) the standard deviation of a variable x. To
determine the significance of the ρ value, the p -value for the null hypothesis that the
two variables are uncorrelated is estimated.
5.3.1
Influence of terrain complexity
As in [29] the influence of the mesoscale surface roughness and orography on the wind
speed error is studied.
The surface roughness terrain complexity is represented by the ratio between
the standard deviation of z0 and the mean (σ(z0)/ ¯z0) over an area of 11 × 11 grid
points around the site. This value is referred to as the roughness length complexity.
Figure 5.8 shows the nMAE of the mean wind speed from the raw and generalised
WRF simulations as a function of the roughness complexity around the site. Both
==PAGE:71==
5.3 WRF topography description
55
plots show a more or less random scatter which is supported with their high p -
value indicating that no significant correlation is found. Although the errors from
raw WRF simulations are already relatively independent of the z0 description by
the WRF model, practically no dependence found (ρ ≈0) after generalisation. The
plots indicate that the correction for the roughness change with the model roughness
change model described in Section 2.2.1 corrects for the roughness heterogeneity but
only has a minor influence on the result.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
σ(z0)/z0
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
|Uraw error| [%]
ρ =  0.213
p =  0.212
(a)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
σ(z0)/z0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
|Uraw error| [%]
ρ =  0.003
p =  0.986
(b)
Figure 5.8: Normalised MAE of the mean wind speed at each site as a function of
the roughness length complexity, σ(z0)/ ¯z0, in the surrounding area. In (a) the error
from the raw WRF wind speeds is shown, (b) shows the error from the generalised
WRF wind speed. The Spearman correlation coefficient ρ with its respective p -value
are given in the blue box.
Figure 5.9 shows the influence of the orographic complexity as described by
WRF on the error of the mean wind speed. The orographic complexity is not rep-
resented as previously done with the roughness using the ratio between the stan-
dard deviation and the mean value and is used in [29].
The reason is that this
method will classify sites at low heights as being ‘complex’ due to the division by
¯h. Therefore, the maximum absolute value of the generalisation factor for orography,
max(|δAoro(ϕ)|), is used. More mountainous areas will then correspond with high val-
ues of max(|δAoro(ϕ)|). Although the p -value is still relatively large, a trend between
the error and the orographic complexity can be observed in Figure 5.9a. It shows
that the WRF simulations have higher errors for sites with a higher complexity of
the terrain height. The correlation coefficient ρ derived from the data in Figure 5.9b
even increases, indicating that the trend is not removed by the orography model.
The increase of ρ is probably due to the reduced accuracy of wind flow modelling by
WAsP [98] which affects the generalised OWC used as reference for the calculation
of the relative error in Figure 5.8b. Since it is likely that complex sites in the WRF
==PAGE:72==
56
5 Results and Discussion
description are complex as well in WAsP.
It can be concluded that the orography model, as described in Section 2.2.1, has
almost no influence on the result. Although the model itself is tested and found to
be accurate for attached flows [58], the large kilometre scale representation of the
orography in the mesoscale model results in very low correction factors. Despite this
observation, the use of generalised wind climates as import for a microscale model
has the advantage to model the local orography with a much higher resolution. It
has a larger influence on the wind climate than the mesoscale model heights, which
have a low grid resolution. This shows the value of using generalised wind climate
statistics together with microscale models instead of direct application of the WRF
output. It should be noted that the accuracy of linear microscale models like WAsP
remains limited by the complexity of the terrain [62], [98], [99], [100].
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
max(|δAoro|)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
|Uraw error| [%]
ρ =  0.281
p =  0.097
(a)
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
max(|δAoro|)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
|UGEN error| [%]
ρ =  0.377
p =  0.023
(b)
Figure 5.9: Normalised MAE of the mean wind speed at each site as a function of the
orographic complexity, max(δ|Aoro|), in the surrounding area. In (a) the error from
the raw WRF wind speeds is shown, (b) shows the error from the generalised WRF
wind speed. The Spearman correlation coefficient ρ with its respective p -value are
given in the blue box.
5.3.2
Influence of roughness length difference
WRF initialises the surface roughness length by mapping land cover databases to
roughness length classes. During the mesoscale simulation the roughness length varies
due to seasonal effects. For the generalisation procedure, the time average of these
roughness lengths is calculated. In WAsP a constant roughness length map is used.
The map often requires digitising by hand from a paper map, satellite images or aerial
photos or it is constructed from land cover data bases of a country or region [69]. Due
to the difference in roughness length classification and resolution, the representation of
==PAGE:73==
5.3 WRF topography description
57
the surrounding roughness at a site is not the same in WAsP as in WRF. In this section
the influence of this difference in roughness length representation is investigated.
The difference is quantified with the use of a uniform upstream roughness rose
calculated from the surface cover from WRF and WAsP. The sectorwise roughness
lengths are subtracted and their differences are weighted with the respective frequency
from the wind direction rose by:
z0WRF −z0WAsP =
Nϕ
∑
i=1
fi · [log(ˆz0WRF,i −log(z0WAsP,i)] ,
(5.2)
where Nϕ is the number of wind direction sectors considered, fi the frequency of wind
sector i, ˆz0WRF,i the uniform upstream roughness length and z0WAsP,i the ‘reference
roughness’ [68] at the site for direction i.
This difference does not have a direct
physical meaning but it allows to indicate whether there is, on average, an over- or
underestimation of the roughness representation by WRF.
In Figure 5.10 the mean wind speed error of the raw WRF winds and the gen-
eralised WRF winds are plotted as a function of the roughness length difference
obtained from Equation (5.2).
The Spearman correlation coefficient between the
roughness length difference and the mean wind speed error together with its p -value
are given.
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
z0WRF −z0WAsP
10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Uraw error [%]
ρ =  -0.438
p =  0.008
(a)
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
z0WRF −z0WAsP
20
10
0
10
20
30
UGEN error [%]
ρ =  0.014
p =  0.937
(b)
Figure 5.10: Normalised MAE of the mean wind speed at each site as a function of
the roughness length difference at the site between WRF and WAsP, z0WRF −z0WAsP.
In (a) the error from the raw WRF wind speeds is shown, (b) shows the error from
the generalised WRF wind speed. The Spearman correlation coefficient ρ with its
respective p -value are given in the blue box.
Figure 5.10a shows that there is a significant negative correlation of ρ = −0.438
between z0WRF −z0WAsP and the raw wind speed error. This means that an underes-
==PAGE:74==
58
5 Results and Discussion
timation of the roughness length by WRF compared to the roughness map in WAsP,
leads to an overestimation of the simulated wind speed, as expected. It can also be
seen that at most sites WRF has a lower z0 than WAsP. This has a big influence on
the previously observed overestimation of the wind speed.
On the other hand, no correlation can be observed for the scatter plot in Fig-
ure 5.10b. This is reflected by a very low and non significant ρ -value. This indicates
that by generalising the simulated winds to a set of standard roughness lengths one
almost completely corrects for the difference in surface length representation between
the mesoscale and the microscale model.
When comparing Figures 5.8 to 5.10 it is clear that the main reason for the
improved results after the generalisation results from the use of the geostrophic drag
law to go from the WRF roughness to a set of standard roughness length values.
==PAGE:75==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusions and
Outlook
In this work a mesoscale generalisation procedure for the WRF model was investi-
gated. An exhaustive and thorough description of the whole procedure based on a
combination of previous publications is formulated in this work. This led to a suc-
cessful implementation of the method using the Python programming language. An
advantage of the implemented methodology is that the output of the generalisation
procedure is in the form of wind atlas ‘.lib’ files, which can directly be used as an
input for the microscale model WAsP to estimate the local wind climate.
The WRF generalisation procedure was tested on two WRF simulations, one
covering Western Europe and another one covering Thailand. The procedure was
evaluated by using measurement data from dozens of high wind masts spread around
Belgium, France and Thailand.
The masts were located at different geographical
locations and terrain conditions. The procedure was evaluated based on the errors of
the wind rose, mean wind speed and AEP.
A sensitivity test was performed on the method prior to the validation of the
generalisation procedure. This was done by varying the wind speed and direction
bin sizes of the histograms and testing two different stability correction methods.
The result of the sensitivity study showed that the wind rose, mean wind speed
and AEP errors can be very sensitive to the bin size choice. It was found that the
combination of narrow bins for both the wind speed and the wind direction resulted
in a drastic increase of the errors. This is due to the limited size of the data set
resulting from a combination of a low temporal resolution (hourly output) and a
short period (1 or 2 years of simulations) of the WRF simulation. In addition, too
wide bins should be avoided since they do not allow a correct description of the
Weibull distribution, causing slowly growing errors for the wind rose and AEP. The
length of the simulated time series also puts a restriction on the use of a stability
correction applying the Monin-Obukhov length (i.e. ‘Method 3’ in this thesis). This
would require an additional binning for which enough data is needed to construct
statistically valuable histograms. Nevertheless, good estimations of the wind climates
are possible when the bin widths and stability correction method are selected in
correspondence with the time series length. By a proper evaluation of the errors from
the sensitivity test, an optimal set-up for the generalisation procedure was established.
==PAGE:76==
60
6 Conclusions and Outlook
This generalisation set-up was used throughout the rest of the study.
To evaluate the added value of the WRF generalisation procedure, the generalised
simulated wind climates were compared with the observations from the masts which
were generalised by the linear microscale model WAsP. The errors of the ‘raw’ WRF
simulations were determined by comparing them to directly with the ‘raw’ wind mea-
surements. The normalised MAE of the raw mean wind speed was 17.5% while for the
generalised mean wind speed, this value was only 6.6%. When only the sites located
in France and Belgium, where both the WRF simulations and the measurements were
of a higher quality, were used for the validation these errors are reduced to 15.5%
and 5.5%, respectively.
Despite the good results in terms of mean wind speed and AEP, the method failed
in representing the shape parameter k. The WRF raw output mostly underestimates
this Weibull parameter. This negative bias even increases when the generalisation
procedure was applied. A study on the temporal resolution of the WRF simulations
showed that the estimated k values improved by using a higher temporal resolution.
Furthermore, vertical profiles of both Weibull parameters were not well represented
either.
For this, the main room for improvement lies in the selection of a more
appropriate stability correction method. Some solutions to compensate for the lack
of simulation data and/or temporal resolution were also proposed and tested, but a
simple solution was not found. It is therefore recommended to simulate for a long
enough period and/or with a high temporal resolution. Another benefit is that it
would also allow to use the Monin-Obukhov length.
The influence of the WRF topography description on the generalised wind speed
error was investigated. It revealed that both the roughness change and orographic
model have a marginal influence on the result. This is probably due to the area-
averaged environmental representation by WRF, yielding low correction factors. Thus,
the modelling of the flow disturbance by the WRF (smoothed) orography does not
allow to correct for the correlation found between orographic complexity and WRF
wind speed error. On the other hand, the study showed that the underestimation
of the roughness length by WRF compared to WAsP was largely responsible for the
positive bias of the raw wind speed by the WRF simulation. Nevertheless, the im-
plemented WRF generalisation procedure was able to correct for this difference in
terrain representation and removed the overestimation of the wind speed.
From the analysis of the mean absolute errors it can be concluded that:
• the WRF simulated wind speeds cannot be compared directly with on-site mea-
surements due to the difference between the WRF environmental representation
and the reality,
• the WRF generalisation procedure discussed in this thesis is able to correct for
this ‘topography difference’ enabling to downscale the generalised wind climate
and drastically reducing the errors.
==PAGE:77==
6.1 Outlook
61
6.1
Outlook
In this study the results from the WASA project were used to test the influence of the
WRF temporal resolution due to the absence of high temporal resolution simulations.
It would however be valuable to test the observations presented in this study against
WRF simulations with a 10 min resolution. With more WRF simulation data, the
stability treatment ‘Method 3’ that uses the Monin-Obukhov length information can
be tested as well.
For future work it would be interesting to study the estimation of the Weibull
parameters by the WRF generalisation.
An improvement of the estimated shape
parameter could further reduce the AEP error.
The Weibull parameters profiles
require a more detailed study as well.
It was shown that the stability correction
method has the capability to improve the profiles. Alternative stability corrections
to improve the profiles of the A and k parameters, especially at higher heights, are
being studied and proposed in [64], [97]. The implementation of such new stability
corrections in both WAsP and the WRF generalisation methodology could improve
the generalised wind climates.
Finally, it would be valuable to have an estimate of the uncertainty for the gen-
eralised wind climates. This would allow numerical wind atlases to be accompanied
with a certain measure of confidence. Information on the WRF topography descrip-
tion could be used to determine a variable uncertainty depending on the terrain
condition since it has been shown that higher errors occur where the WRF terrain is
more complex.
==PAGE:78==
62
==PAGE:79==
APPENDIX A
Weibull parameters errors for Method 3 generalisation
Raw
0.0002
0.03
0.1
0.4
1.5
z0
40
30
20
10
0
10
20
30
40
A error [%]
(a)
Raw
0.0002
0.03
0.1
0.4
1.5
z0
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
10
20
k error [%]
(b)
Figure A.1: Box plots of the errors on the A (a) and k (b) Weibull parameters from
a comparison between the generalised wind climates at different standard roughness
lengths (z0) at z = 80 m of the WRF simulations and the observations. The gener-
alisation is performed using Method 3. The first box plot (‘Raw’) represents the
relative error on the Weibull parameters from a comparison between a raw simulations
and observations. A very large underestimation is observed for the two parameters,
independent of the standard roughness length.
==PAGE:80==
64
A
Raw
50
80
100
140
200
z
50
40
30
20
10
0
10
20
30
40
A error [%]
(a)
Raw
50
80
100
140
200
z
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
10
20
k error [%]
(b)
Figure A.2: Box plots of the errors on the A (a) and k (b) Weibull parameters from
a comparison between the generalised wind climates at different standard roughness
heights (z) for a uniform roughness of z0 = 0.03 m of the WRF simulations and the
observations. The generalisation is performed using Method 3. The first box plot
(‘Raw’) represents the relative error on the Weibull parameters from a comparison
between a raw simulations and observations. It appears that the Method 3 stability
correction is able to better represent the profiles of the Weibull parameters.
==PAGE:81==
APPENDIX B
Temporal resolution solutions
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
Wind speed bin size [m/s]
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
|U error| [%]
Raw
1h, fmin = 5
10min, fmin = 5
1h, fmin = 0
Figure B.1: Effect of wind speed and direction bin sizes on the mean generalised
wind speed for z0 = 0.03 m and z = 80 m. Three different generalisation procedures
are tested. The original procedure on the original hourly WRF data (1 h, fmin = 5),
the original procedure on a resampled 10 min WRF data (10 min, fmin = 5) and the
procedure without the minimum bin size requirement on the original hourly WRF
data (1 h, fmin = 0). The solid lines are from Method 4, the dashed lines from Method
3. The black dot-dashed line represent the mean wind speed error from a comparison
between the raw WRF simulation and the raw measurements. It is clear that both
solutions substantially improve the results from Method 3, but for Method 4 only at
low wind speed bin sizes an improvement is observed.
==PAGE:82==
66
B
Raw
1h 
 fmin = 5
10min 
 fmin = 5
1h 
 fmin = 0
20
10
0
10
20
30
40
A error [%]
(a)
Raw
1h 
 fmin = 5
10min 
 fmin = 5
1h 
 fmin = 0
50
40
30
20
10
0
10
20
k error [%]
(b)
Figure B.2: Box plots of the errors on the A (a) and k (b) Weibull parameters from
the comparison between the generalised wind climates at z = 80 m and for a uniform
roughness of z0 = 0.03 m of WRF simulations and the observations. Three different
generalisation procedures are tested. The original procedure on the original hourly
WRF data (1 h, fmin = 5), the original procedure on a resampled 10 min WRF data
(10 min, fmin = 5) and the procedure without the minimum bin size requirement on
the original hourly WRF data (1 h, fmin = 0). The first box plot (‘Raw’) is of the
errors on the Weibull parameters from the comparison between the raw simulations
and observations. The bias of the k parameter is reduced with the proposed solutions,
but increased for the A parameter, resulting in a higher error of the mean wind speed.
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
[1]
G. Kieffer and T. D. Couture, “Renewable Energy Target Setting,” Interna-
tional Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA), Tech. Rep., 2015.
[2]
EWEA, Pure power - wind energy targets for 2020 and 2030. European Wind
Energy Association, 2011.
[3]
M. H. Zhang, Wind Resource Assessment and Micro-Siting. Wiley Online Li-
brary, August 2015.
[4]
L. Landberg, L. Myllerup, O. Rathmann, E. L. Petersen, B. H. Jørgensen,
J. Badger, and N. G. Mortensen, “Wind resource estimation—an overview,”
Wind Energy, volume 6, number 3, pages 261–271, 2003.
[5]
I. Troen and E. L. Petersen, European wind atlas. Roskilde: Riso National
Laboratory, 1989, 1989. [Online]. Available: http://orbit.dtu.dk/files/
112135732/European_Wind_Atlas.pdf.
[6]
S. Al-Yahyai, Y. Charabi, and A. Gastli, “Review of the use of numerical
weather prediction (NWP) models for wind energy assessment,” Renewable
and Sustainable Energy Reviews, volume 14, number 9, pages 3192–3198, 2010.
[7]
E. L. Petersen and I. Troen, “Wind conditions and resource assessment,” Wi-
ley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Energy and Environment, volume 1, number 2,
pages 206–217, 2012.
[8]
D. Carvalho, A. Rocha, M. Gómez-Gesteira, and C. S. Santos, “WRF wind
simulation and wind energy production estimates forced by different reanalyses:
Comparison with observed data for Portugal,” Applied Energy, volume 117,
pages 116–126, 2014.
[9]
W. C. Skamarock, “Evaluating mesoscale NWP models using kinetic energy
spectra,” Monthly weather review, volume 132, number 12, pages 3019–3032,
2004.
[10]
J. Badger, H. Frank, A. N. Hahmann, and G. Giebel, “Wind-climate esti-
mation based on mesoscale and microscale modeling: Statistical–dynamical
downscaling for wind energy applications,” Journal of Applied Meteorology
and Climatology, volume 53, number 8, pages 1901–1919, 2014.
==PAGE:84==
68
Bibliography
[11]
J. Badger, X. G. Larsén, N. G. Mortensen, A. N. Hahmann, J. C. Hansen, and
H. Ejsing Jørgensen, “A universal mesoscale to microscale modelling interface
tool,” in 2010 European Wind Energy Conference and Exhibition, 2010.
[12]
G. A. Grell, J. Dudhia, D. R. Stauffer, et al., “A description of the fifth-
generation Penn State/NCAR mesoscale model (MM5),” Mesoscale and Mi-
croscale Meteorology Division, National Center for Atmospheric Research,
Tech. Rep., 1994.
[13]
V. Kotroni, K. Lagouvardos, and S. Lykoudis, “High-resolution model-based
wind atlas for Greece,” Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, volume 30,
pages 479–489, 2014.
[14]
P. Costa, P. Miranda, and A. Estanqueiro, “Development and validation of the
Portuguese wind atlas,” in EWEC’2006-European Wind Energy Conference,
2006, pages 1–9.
[15]
T. Ohsawa, A. Hashimoto, S. Shimada, J. Yoshino, T. De Paus, D. Heinemann,
and B. Lange, “Evaluation of offshore wind simulations with MM5 in the
Japanese and Danish coastal waters,” in Proc. of EWEC, 2007.
[16]
Y. Charabi, S. Al-Yahyai, and A. Gastli, “Evaluation of NWP performance for
wind energy resource assessment in Oman,” Renewable and Sustainable Energy
Reviews, volume 15, number 3, pages 1545–1555, 2011.
[17]
M. Gastón, E. Pascal, L. Frı́as, I. Martı́, U. Irigoyen, E. Cantero, S. Lozano,
and Y. Loureiro, “Wind resources map of Spain at mesoscale. methodology
and validation,” in Proceedings of European wind energy conference, 2008.
[18]
H. Bergström, Wind mapping of Sweden: Summary of results and methods
used. Elforsk, 2008.
[19]
K. M. Nor, M. Shaaban, and H. A. Rahman, “Feasibility assessment of wind
energy resources in Malaysia based on NWP models,” Renewable Energy, vol-
ume 62, pages 147–154, 2014.
[20]
W. C. Skamarock, J. B. Klemp, J. Dudhia, D. O. Gill, D. M. Barker, M. G.
Duda, X.-Y. Huang, W. Wang, and J. G. Powers, “A description of the ad-
vanced research WRF version 3,” Mesoscale and Microscale Meteorology Di-
vision, National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR), Tech. Rep., Jun.
2008. [Online]. Available: http://www2.mmm.ucar.edu/wrf/users/docs/
arw_v3.pdf.
[21]
N. Nawri, G. N. Petersen, H. Bjornsson, A. N. Hahmann, K. Jónasson, C. B.
Hasager, and N.-E. Clausen, “The wind energy potential of Iceland,” Renew-
able Energy, volume 69, pages 290–299, 2014.
[22]
A. N. Hahmann, J. Lange, A. P. Diaz, and C. B. Hasager, “The NORSEWInD
numerical wind atlas for the South Baltic,” DTU Wind Energy, Tech. Rep.,
2012.
==PAGE:85==
Bibliography
69
[23]
C. Mattar and D. Borvarán, “Offshore wind power simulation by using WRF
in the central coast of Chile,” Renewable Energy, volume 94, pages 22–31, 2016.
[24]
K. Horvath, D. Koracin, R. Vellore, J. Jiang, and R. Belu, “Sub-kilometer
dynamical downscaling of near-surface winds in complex terrain using WRF
and MM5 mesoscale models,” Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres,
volume 117, number D11, 2012.
[25]
H. P. Frank and L. Landberg, “Modelling the wind climate of Ireland,”
Boundary-Layer Meteorology, volume 85, number 3, pages 359–377, 1997.
[26]
——, “Numerical simulation of the Irish wind climate and comparison with
wind atlas data,” in EWEC ‘97, 1997, pages 309–312.
[27]
G. Adrian and F. Fiedler, “Simulation of unstationary wind and temperature
fields over complex terrain and comparison with observations,” Contributions
to atmospheric physics, volume 64, number 1, pages 27–48, 1991.
[28]
H. P. Frank, L. Landberg, O. Rathmann, N. G. Mortensen, and E. L. Petersen,
“The numerical wind atlas. the KAMM/WAsP method,” in Windpower 2001,
American Wind Energy Association (AWEA), 2001.
[29]
J. Badger, X. G. Larsén, A. N. Hahmann, Z. Rong, and Y. Chunhong,
“Mesoscale modelling in China: Risø DTU numerical wind atlas calculation
for NE China (Dongbei),” Risø National Laboratory for Sustainable Energy,
Technical University of Denmark, Tech. Rep., 2010.
[30]
J. Badger, A. N. Hahmann, X. G. Larsen, A. Pena Diaz, E. Batchvarova, S.-E.
Gryning, R. Floors, and H. Ejsing Jørgensen, “Comprehensive utilization of
mesoscale modelling for wind energy applications,” EWEA Annual Event 2011,
2011.
[31]
M. Brower, J. Zack, B. Bailey, M. Schwartz, and D. Elliott, “Mesoscale model-
ing as a tool for wind resource assessment and mapping,” in 14th Conference
on Applied Climatology, TrueWind Solutions, 2004.
[32]
J. Manobianco, J. W. Zack, and G. E. Taylor, “Workstation-based real-time
mesoscale modeling designed for weather support to operations at the Kennedy
Space Center and Cape Canaveral Air Station,” 1996.
[33]
M. Brower, “Validation of the WindMap program and development of Me-
soMap,” in AWEA’s WindPower conference. Washington, DC, USA, 1999.
[34]
S. H. Yim, J. C. Fung, A. K. Lau, and S. Kot, “Developing a high-resolution
wind map for a complex terrain with a coupled MM5/CALMET system,”
Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, volume 112, number D5, 2007.
[35]
W. Yu, R. Benoit, C. Girard, A. Glazer, D. Lemarquis, J. Salmon, and J.-P.
Pinard, “Wind energy simulation toolkit (WEST): A wind mapping system
for use by the wind energy industry,” Wind Engineering, volume 30, number
1, pages 15–33, 2006.
==PAGE:86==
70
Bibliography
[36]
R. Benoit, M. Desgagné, P. Pellerin, S. Pellerin, Y. Chartier, and S. Desjardins,
“The canadian MC2: A semi-lagrangian, semi-implicit wideband atmospheric
model suited for finescale process studies and simulation,” Monthly Weather
Review, volume 125, number 10, pages 2382–2415, 1997.
[37]
N. Gasset, M. Landry, and Y. Gagnon, “A comparison of wind flow models
for wind resource assessment in wind energy applications,” Energies, volume
5, number 11, pages 4288–4322, 2012.
[38]
J. Waewsak, M. Landry, and Y. Gagnon, “High resolution wind atlas for
Nakhon Si Thammarat and Songkhla provinces, Thailand,” Renewable energy,
volume 53, pages 101–110, 2013.
[39]
Y. Seity, P. Brousseau, S. Malardel, G. Hello, P. Bénard, F. Bouttier, C. Lac,
and V. Masson, “The AROME-France convective-scale operational model,”
Monthly Weather Review, volume 139, number 3, pages 976–991, 2011.
[40]
B. Tammelin, T. Vihma, E. Atlaskin, J. Badger, C. Fortelius, H. Gregow, M.
Horttanainen, R. Hyvönen, J. Kilpinen, J. Latikka, et al., “Production of the
Finnish wind atlas,” Wind Energy, volume 16, number 1, pages 19–35, 2013.
[41]
A. N. Hahmann, C. Lennard, J. Badger, C. L. Vincent, M. C. Kelly, P. J.
Volker, B. Argent, and J. Refslund, “Mesoscale modeling for the wind atlas of
south africa (WASA) project,” 2015. [Online]. Available: http://orbit.dtu.
dk/files/107110172/DTU_Wind_Energy_E_0050.pdf.
[42]
J. Badger, A. N. Hahmann, P. J. H. Volker, and J. C. Hansen, “Wind
resource mapping in Papua New Guinea : Mesoscale modelling report,”
The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / World
Bank Group, Tech. Rep., August 2015. [Online]. Available: http : / /
www - wds . worldbank . org / external / default / WDSContentServer /
WDSP / IB / 2015 / 08 / 17 / 090224b08307700a / 2 _ 0 / Rendered / PDF /
Wind0resource00ale0modelling0report.pdf.
[43]
M. Purcell and T. Gilbert, “Wind resource mapping in Maldives : Mesoscale
modelling report,” The International Bank for Reconstruction and Develop-
ment / World Bank Group, Tech. Rep., Jul. 2015. [Online]. Available: http:
/ / www - wds . worldbank . org / external / default / WDSContentServer /
WDSP / IB / 2015 / 08 / 05 / 090224b083052646 / 1 _ 0 / Rendered / PDF /
Renewable0ener0las0for0the0Maldives.pdf.
[44]
C. Houston, D. Rife, and R. Whiting, “Wind resource mapping in Zam-
bia : Mesoscale modelling report,” The International Bank for Reconstruc-
tion and Development / World Bank Group, Tech. Rep., Jul. 2015. [On-
line]. Available: http : / / www - wds . worldbank . org / external / default /
WDSContentServer / WDSP / IB / 2015 / 08 / 05 / 090224b08305017c / 2 _ 0 /
Rendered/PDF/Wind0resource00wind0modeling0report.pdf.
==PAGE:87==
Bibliography
71
[45]
J. Badger, A. N. Hahmann, P. J. H. Volker, and J. C. Hansen, “Wind re-
source mapping in Pakistan : Mesoscale modelling report,” The International
Bank for Reconstruction and Development / World Bank Group, Tech. Rep.,
January 2015. [Online]. Available: http : / / www - wds . worldbank . org /
external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2015/04/15/000406484_
20150415152454/Rendered/PDF/957700ESMAP0P10ng0Report02015001008.
pdf.
[46]
G. Ebsworth, J. Ma, and S. Pearson, “Wind resource mapping in Tanza-
nia : Mesoscale modelling report,” The International Bank for Reconstruc-
tion and Development / World Bank Group, Tech. Rep., Jul. 2015. [On-
line]. Available: http : / / www - wds . worldbank . org / external / default /
WDSContentServer / WDSP / IB / 2015 / 07 / 16 / 090224b082ffdc5f / 2 _ 0 /
Rendered/PDF/Wind0resource00cale0modeling0report.pdf.
[47]
J. Badger, A. N. Hahmann, P. J. H. Volker, J. C. Hansen, and B. O. Hansen,
“Wind resource mapping in Vietnam : Mesoscale modelling report,” The Inter-
national Bank for Reconstruction and Development / World Bank Group, Tech.
Rep., August 2014. [Online]. Available: http://www-wds.worldbank.org/
external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2015/04/17/000442464_
20150417133656/Rendered/PDF/958020ESM00P140eling0Report02014008.
pdf.
[48]
S.-E. Gryning, E. Batchvarova, and R. Floors, “A study on the effect of nudg-
ing on long-term boundary layer profiles of wind and weibull distribution pa-
rameters in a rural coastal area,” Journal of Applied Meteorology and Clima-
tology, volume 52, number 5, pages 1201–1207, 2013.
[49]
D. Carvalho, A. Rocha, M. Gómez-Gesteira, and C. S. Santos, “Sensitivity of
the WRF model wind simulation and wind energy production estimates to
planetary boundary layer parameterizations for onshore and offshore areas in
the Iberian peninsula,” Applied Energy, volume 135, pages 234–246, 2014.
[50]
A. N. Hahmann, C. L. Vincent, A. Peña, J. Lange, and C. B. Hasager, “Wind
climate estimation using WRF model output: Method and model sensitivities
over the sea,” International Journal of Climatology, volume 35, number 12,
pages 3422–3439, 2015.
[51]
Python 2.7.11 documentation, Python Software Foundation. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://docs.python.org/2/index.html.
[52]
R. A. Pielke Sr, Mesoscale meteorological modeling. Academic press, Elsevier,
2013.
[53]
NCAR, “Weather research and forecasting ARW version 3 modeling systems
user’s guide,” Mesoscale and Microscale Meteorology Laboratory (MMM) of
National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR), Tech. Rep., January 2014.
[Online]. Available: http://www2.mmm.ucar.edu/wrf/users/docs/user_
guide_V3.5/ARWUsersGuideV3.pdf.
==PAGE:88==
72
Bibliography
[54]
A. M. Sempreviva, S. E. Larsen, N. G. Mortensen, and I. Troen, “Response of
neutral boundary layers to changes of roughness,” Boundary-Layer Meteorol-
ogy, volume 50, number 1-4, pages 205–225, 1990.
[55]
M. Lange and U. Focken, Physical approach to short-term wind power predic-
tion. Springer, 2006.
[56]
P. Astrup, N. O. Jensen, T. Mikkelsen, and T. Mikkelsen, Surface roughness
model for LINCOM. Risø, 1996.
[57]
WAsP Downscaling, DTU Wind Energy. [Online]. Available: http : / / www .
wasp.dk/DataandTools#wasp-downscaling.
[58]
I. Troen, “A high resolution spectral model for flow in complex terrain,” in
Ninth Symposium on Turbulence and Diffusion, Roskilde, 1990, pages 417–
420.
[59]
——, “On diagnostic wind field models,” in College on Atmospheric Boundary
layers Physics, ICTP Trieste, Italy, 1990.
[60]
J. L. Walmsley, I. Troen, D. P. Lalas, and P. J. Mason, “Surface-layer flow in
complex terrain: Comparison of models and full-scale observations,” Boundary-
Layer Meteorology, volume 52, number 3, pages 259–281, 1990.
[61]
N. O. Jensen, E. L. Petersen, and I. Troen, “Extrapolation of mean wind
statistics with special regard to wind energy applications,” World Climate
Programme Report No. WCP-86, 1984.
[62]
E. L. Petersen, N. G. Mortensen, L. Landberg, J. Højstrup, and H. P. Frank,
“Wind power meteorology,” Risø National Laboratory, Roskilde, Denmark,
Technical Document No. Risø-I-1206 (EN), 1997.
[63]
C. A. Paulson, “The mathematical representation of wind speed and temper-
ature profiles in the unstable atmospheric surface layer,” Journal of Applied
Meteorology, volume 9, number 6, pages 857–861, 1970.
[64]
M. Kelly and I. Troen, “Probabilistic stability and ‘tall’ wind profiles: Theory
and method for use in wind resource assessment,” Wind Energy, volume 19,
number 2, pages 227–241, 2016.
[65]
B. M. Pedersen, R. S. Hunter, T. F. Pedersen, H. Klug, N. van der Borg, N.
Kelley, and J. A. Dahlberg, “Recommended practices for wind turbine testing
and evaluation.,” in, R. S. Hunter, Ed., second. International Energy Agency
(IEA), 2003, ch. 11. Wind speed measurement and use of cup anemometry.
[66]
Measnet, “Evaluation of site-specific wind conditions,” MEASNET, Tech. Rep.,
2016. [Online]. Available: http://www.measnet.com/wp-content/uploads/
2016/05/Measnet_SiteAssessment_V2.0.pdf.
[67]
P. Nielsen, WindPRO 2.7 user guide 3. edition, 2010.
[68]
N. Mortensen, D. Heathfield, O. Rathmann, and M. Nielsen, Wind atlas anal-
ysis and application program: WAsP 11 help facility, 2014.
==PAGE:89==
Bibliography
73
[69]
N. G. Mortensen, Wind resource assessment using the WAsP software, 2014.
[70]
The digital elevation model over europe (EU-DEM), European Environment
Agency (EEA) of the European Union. [Online]. Available: http://www.eea.
europa.eu/data-and-maps/data/eu-dem.
[71]
Shuttle radar topography mission (srtm), The National Aeronautics, Space Ad-
ministration (NASA), and the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA).
[Online]. Available: https://lta.cr.usgs.gov/SRTM.
[72]
Corine land cover 2006 seamless vector data, European Environment Agency
(EEA) of the European Union. [Online]. Available: http://www.eea.europa.
eu/data-and-maps/data/clc-2006-vector-data-version-3.
[73]
Y. Cabooter, K. De Ridder, J. Van Ypersele, and C. Tricot, “Improved pre-
diction of wind power in belgium. cp/54.,” in Scientific support plan for a
sustainable development policy Part 1: Sustainable production and consump-
tion patterns. the Belgian Science Policy, 2007.
[74]
Thailand land use and forest cover, Asian Institute of Tehcnology, Thailand.
[Online]. Available: http://www.rsgis.ait.ac.th/~souris/thailand.htm#
THAILANDUSE.
[75]
Z. I. Janjic, “The step-mountain eta coordinate model: Further developments
of the convection, viscous sublayer, and turbulence closure schemes,” Monthly
Weather Review, volume 122, number 5, pages 927–945, 1994.
[76]
E. Rogers, T. Black, B. Ferrier, Y. Lin, D. Parrish, and G. DiMego, “Changes
to the NCEP meso eta analysis and forecast system: Increase in resolution,
new cloud microphysics, modified precipitation assimilation, modified 3DVAR
analysis,” NWS Technical Procedures Bulletin, volume 488, page 15, 2001.
[77]
S. Hong and J. Dudhia, “Testing of a new nonlocal boundary layer vertical
diffusion scheme in numerical weather prediction applications. 20th conf,” in
On Weather Analysis and Forecasting/16th Conf. On Numerical Weather Pre-
diction, Seattle, WA, Amer., Amer. Meteor. Soc., Session, volume 17, 2003.
[78]
F. Chen and J. Dudhia, “Coupling an advanced land surface-hydrology model
with the Penn State-NCAR MM5 modeling system. part I: Model imple-
mentation and sensitivity,” Monthly Weather Review, volume 129, number
4, pages 569–585, 2001.
[79]
——, “Coupling an advanced land surface-hydrology model with the Penn
State-NCAR MM5 modeling system. part II: Preliminary model validation,”
Monthly Weather Review, volume 129, number 4, pages 587–604, 2001.
[80]
P. A. Jiménez, J. Dudhia, J. F. González-Rouco, J. Navarro, J. P. Montávez,
and E. Garcı́a-Bustamante, “A revised scheme for the WRF surface layer for-
mulation,” Monthly Weather Review, volume 140, number 3, pages 898–918,
2012.
==PAGE:90==
74
Bibliography
[81]
P. A. Jiménez and J. Dudhia, “Improving the representation of resolved and
unresolved topographic effects on surface wind in the WRF model,” Journal
of Applied Meteorology and Climatology, volume 51, number 2, pages 300–316,
2012.
[82]
E. J. Mlawer, S. J. Taubman, P. D. Brown, M. J. Iacono, and S. A.
Clough, “Radiative transfer for inhomogeneous atmospheres: RRTM, a vali-
dated correlated-k model for the longwave,” Journal of Geophysical Research:
Atmospheres, volume 102, number D14, pages 16 663–16 682, 1997.
[83]
J. Dudhia, “Numerical study of convection observed during the winter mon-
soon experiment using a mesoscale two-dimensional model,” Journal of the
Atmospheric Sciences, volume 46, number 20, pages 3077–3107, 1989.
[84]
C. Wang, S. Jin, J. Hu, F. Zhang, S. Feng, and C. Liu, “Comparing different
boundary layer schemes of WRF by simulation the low-level wind over com-
plex terrain,” in Artificial Intelligence, Management Science and Electronic
Commerce (AIMSEC), 2011 2nd International Conference on, IEEE, 2011,
pages 6183–6188.
[85]
D. Dee, S. Uppala, A. Simmons, P. Berrisford, P. Poli, S. Kobayashi, U. An-
drae, M. Balmaseda, G. Balsamo, P. Bauer, et al., “The ERA-Interim reanal-
ysis: Configuration and performance of the data assimilation system,” Quar-
terly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society, volume 137, number 656,
pages 553–597, 2011.
[86]
M. M. Rienecker, M. J. Suarez, R. Gelaro, R. Todling, J. Bacmeister, E. Liu,
M. G. Bosilovich, S. D. Schubert, L. Takacs, G.-K. Kim, et al., “MERRA:
NASA’s modern-era retrospective analysis for research and applications,” Jour-
nal of Climate, volume 24, number 14, pages 3624–3648, 2011.
[87]
S. Saha, S. Moorthi, H.-L. Pan, X. Wu, J. Wang, S. Nadiga, P. Tripp, R.
Kistler, J. Woollen, D. Behringer, et al., “The NCEP climate forecast sys-
tem reanalysis,” Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society, volume 91,
number 8, pages 1015–1057, 2010.
[88]
WRF source codes and graphics software download page, WRF Users’ Page.
[Online]. Available: http://www2.mmm.ucar.edu/wrf/users/download/get_
sources_wps_geog.html.
[89]
V90 2MW at a glance, Vestas. [Online]. Available: https://www.vestas.com/
en/products/turbines/v90-2_0_mw#!at-a-glance.
[90]
D. Zwillinger and S. Kokoska, CRC Standard probability and statistics tables
and formulae. Crc Press, 1999.
[91]
F. R. Hampel, F. R. Hampel, and F. R. Hampel, Robust statistics: A brief
introduction and overview, Seminar für Statistik, Eidgenössische Technische
Hochschule Switzerland, 2001.
==PAGE:91==
Bibliography
75
[92]
K. E. Taylor, “Summarizing multiple aspects of model performance in a single
diagram,” Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, volume 106, number
D7, pages 7183–7192, 2001.
[93]
S. Shimada, T. Ohsawa, S. Chikaoka, and K. Kozai, “Accuracy of the wind
speed profile in the lower PBL as simulated by the WRF model,” Sola, volume
7, pages 109–112, 2011.
[94]
R. Floors, C. L. Vincent, S.-E. Gryning, A. Peña, and E. Batchvarova, “The
wind profile in the coastal boundary layer: Wind lidar measurements and
numerical modelling,” Boundary-layer meteorology, volume 147, number 3,
pages 469–491, 2013.
[95]
J. Wieringa, “Shapes of annual frequency distributions of wind speed observed
on high meteorological masts,” in Boundary Layer Studies and Applications,
Springer, 1989, pages 85–110.
[96]
S.-E. Gryning, E. Batchvarova, R. Floors, and A. Pena Diaz, “Some challenges
of wind modelling for modern wind turbines: The Weibull distribution,” in
16th International Symposium for the Advancement of Boundary-Layer Remote
Sensing, 2012, pages 194–197.
[97]
M. Kelly, I. Troen, and H. E. Jørgensen, “Weibull-k revisited:“tall” profiles
and height variation of wind statistics,” Boundary-Layer Meteorology, volume
152, number 1, pages 107–124, 2014.
[98]
A. J. Bowen and N. G. Mortensen, “Exploring the limits of WAsP the wind
atlas analysis and application program,” in 1996 European Wind Energy Con-
ference and Exhibition, 1996, pages 584–587.
[99]
N. G. Mortensen and E. L. Petersen, “Influence of topographical input data
on the accuracy of wind flow modelling in complex terrain,” in 1997 European
Wind Energy Conference, 1997, pages 317–320.
[100]
I. Troen, A. Bechmann, M. C. Kelly, N. N. Sørensen, P.-E. Réthoré, D. Cavar,
and H. Ejsing Jørgensen, “Complex terrain wind resource estimation with
the wind-atlas method: Prediction errors using linearized and nonlinear CFD
micro-scale models,” in European Wind Energy Conference & Exhibition 2014,
2014.
==PAGE:92==
 
 
DTU Wind Energy is a department of the Technical University of Denmark with a unique integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind energy. Our activities develop new opportunities and technology for the global and Danish 
exploitation of wind energy. Research focuses on key technical-scientific fields, which are central for the development, innovation and use of wind 
energy and provides the basis for advanced education at the education. 
 
We have more than 240 staff members of which approximately 60 are PhD students. Research is conducted within nine research programmes 
organized into three main topics: Wind energy systems, Wind turbine technology and Basics for wind energy. 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind Energy 
Frederiksborgvej 399 
4000 Roskilde 
Denmark 
Telephone  46 77 50 85 
 
info@vindenergi.dtu.dk 
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk 
 
 
