==PAGE:1==
Carlos Moreno López
Adoption of risk management
within projects in an organizational
context
Master’s Thesis, June 2016
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
ADOPTION OF RISK MANAGEMENT WITHIN PROJECTS IN
AN ORGANIZATIONAL CONTEXT
AUTHOR:
Carlos Moreno López
SUPERVISORS:
Melanie Kreye
Joana Geraldi
Jesper Lyng Jensen
Engineering Management
Technical University of Denmark
June 2016
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
“Accidents are no longer accidents at all.
They are failures of risk management.”
— Sidney Dekker
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
It is commonly accepted that all organizations should practice risk management. This
need for risk management has led to the creation of risk management systems (standards,
frameworks, procedures and other guidelines). However, when risk management systems
are implemented in organizations, they are not always adopted by the employees. This
thesis aims to understand why certain risk management systems achieve adoption while
most do not, focusing its analysis on projects within an organizational context. This was
done through a case study on a project with a potentially successful adoption of a risk
management system based on Structural Risk Management. Structural Risk Management
is a relatively new risk management approach based on Enterprise Risk Management that
introduces the impact of the structural cost as part of the risk magnitude.
The assessment of adoption was done by four criteria: scope, process, documentation and
communication. The adoption assessment revealed the importance of top management
on adoption, the beneﬁts of the holistic systems, the advantages of the understanding of
risks’ structural cost, and the importance of understanding the gap in performance between
having an implemented risk management system and an adopted risk management system.
This thesis must be seen not only as an illustrative case study that sheds light into the
problem of adoption, but also as a initial step for future research on a vaguely explored
ﬁeld.
Keywords: risk management, implementation, adoption, project, enterprise, structural
i
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
Above all, I want to express my gratitude to my supervisors: Melanie Kreye, Joana Geraldi
and Jesper Lyng Jensen. It has been truly enriching and inspiring to work with the three of
them. I highly appreciate all the thoroughly discussions and wise advice.
I would also like to thank the people from the case company. Thanks to the employees
inside and outside the case project for their collaboration. A special thanks goes to the
QHSE department for the months that we shared.
Thanks. To my family. For their unlimited support. To Sandra. To all my friends in the
university, but also outside it. To all my friends in Spain, but also all over the world, and
specially here in Denmark.
To all of you that have made this project possible, sincerely: Gracias.
Carlos Moreno López. Lyngby, Denmark. June 26, 2016.
iii
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
Table of Contents
Abstract
i
Acknowledgements
iii
List of Figures
vii
List of Tables
viii
Glossary
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research Question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Literature
5
2.1
Risk and Uncertainty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Risk Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.1
Project Risk Management (PRM)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.2
Enterprise Risk Management (ERM)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.3
Structural Risk Management (SRM) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.4
Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3
Risk Management Systems Adoption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3.1
Implementation and Adption of an Organizational Change
. . . .
16
2.3.2
Risk Management Systems Implementation and Adoption
. . . .
17
2.3.3
Assessing Implementation and Adoption . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.4
Conceptual Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3
Research Methodology
27
v
==PAGE:12==
vi
TABLE OF CONTENTS
3.1
Case Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2
Data collection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.3
Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4
Results
33
4.1
Case Company
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2
Case Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3
Risk management before SRM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.4
Risk Management after SRM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.5
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5
Discussion
59
5.1
Scope
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.2
Process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5.3
Documentation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5.4
Communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5.5
Adoption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
6
Conclusion
67
6.1
Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
6.2
Future Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
References
69
Appendices
75
A Interview Questions
77
==PAGE:13==
List of Figures
2.1
Relationships between risk and uncertainty. Image adapted from (Samson
et al., 2009). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Structures in an organization according to SRM. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
Kotter’s eight accelerators for organizational change implementation. Image
from Kotter (2012). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4
Five steps risk management process (a) proposed by Alali and Pinto (2009)
and the same model with the addition of an extra context step (b). . . . . . . .
20
2.5
Risk matrix example. Image from Perera and Holsomback (2005). . . . . . .
21
2.6
Gantt Chart example. Image from Gantt.com (2016).
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.7
Risk management systems’ process comparison. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.1
Barrel oil price from 2009 to 2016. Image from FXCM (2016). . . . . . . . .
34
4.2
Case project’s organizational environment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3
Project’s life-cycle in the case company. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.4
Risk-related processes around the case project.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.5
Example of cost risk analysis graphical output.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.6
Example of graphical forecast output.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.7
Case project’s team diagram. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.8
Steps of the case company’s Project Risk Management process. . . . . . . . .
44
4.9
Risk information template example from PIMS. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.10 Impact and Probability time-stamp template from PIMS.
. . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.11 PIMS’s risk matrix example from one of the case project’s risks. . . . . . . .
49
4.12 Diagram that illustrates the transition from one risk register to ﬁve. . . . . . .
54
4.13 Risk naming formulation template. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.14 Example of one of the drafts of the new risk matrix. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.15 Risks over time visual representation.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
vii
==PAGE:14==
5.1
Risk management systems’ process comparison including the case company
process. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
List of Tables
1.1
Overview of Risk Management Systems adoption stages. . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1
Examples of Risk and Uncertainty deﬁnitions in literature.
. . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Social impact of structural risk management decision making.
. . . . . . . .
14
2.3
Comparison of scope and risk equation between PRM, ERM and SRM.
. . .
14
2.4
Example Risk Management Systems relation with PRM, ERM and SRM.
. .
15
2.5
Example Risk Management Systems’ scope. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.6
Documentation, deliverables and communication in the example Risk
Management Systems.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.1
Roles of the employees interviewed in the case company. . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2
Secondary data. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.1
Examples of risk formulation from the case project’s risk register.
. . . . . .
50
4.2
Results overview. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
viii
==PAGE:15==
Glossary
Abbreviations
RM
Risk Management
PRM
Project Risk Management
ERM
Enterprise Risk Management
SRM
Structural Risk Management
NASA
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
ISO
International Organization for Standardization
COSO
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission
PRAM
Project risk analysis and management
APM
Association Of Project Managers
QHSE
Quality Health Safety and Environment
Deﬁnitions
Adoption: the action or fact of choosing and following (a plan, technique, curse of action,
etc).
Adoption (of a risk management system): action or fact of choosing a risk management
system and pro-actively using it due to its positive impact in performance. This is, going
beyond the compliance with the guidelines for conformance, and internalising the system
as part of all endeavours.
Conformance: the action or process of complying with certain accepted standards or
norms.
ix
==PAGE:16==
x
GLOSSARY
Performance: the action or process of carrying out a task or function aiming its success.
Risk: threat on something valued. It is a combination of likelihood and consequence.
Risk Management: coordinated activities to direct and control an organization with
regard to risk (ISO 31000, 2009).
Risk Management System: set of principles or procedures according to which risk
management is meant to be done.
Uncertainty: state, even partial, of deﬁciency of information related to, understanding or
knowledge of an event, its consequence, or likelihood (ISO 31000, 2009).
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Uncertainty and risk are inherent to all human endeavors, and the decision-making that
these involve. Organizations, as collectives of humans, are driven by their decisions and
therefore cannot avoid dealing with risk (Olson and Wu, 2010).
Habbard (2009) claims that, although risk always existed, an unprecedented global risk
awareness appeared in the ﬁrst years of the 21st century due to the natural, geopolitical
and ﬁnancial disasters that occurred during these years. Now, more than ﬁfteen years
inside the century, the immediate availability of massive quantities of data is allowing both
individuals and organizations to have an increasingly better risk picture (Zurich, 2014).
Despite of the discrepancies in literature about the deﬁnition of risk and how it should be
managed (Williams, 1995), it appears to be commonly accepted that all organizations need
to do risk management (Olson and Wu, 2010). In the words of Habbard (2009): “a weak
risk management approach is effectively the biggest risk in the organization”.
The need for risk management has evolved in the existence of risk management systems. A
risk management system can be deﬁned as the set of principles or procedures according to
which risk management is meant to be done in an organization (Oxford University Press,
2010, Raydugin, 2013).
Risk management standards, frameworks, procedures and other kind of guidelines are
considered risk management systems in the scope of this thesis.
Although risk management is known to be needed, the implementation of risk management
systems can be an arduous process (Kutsch et al., 2013). In the words of Perera and
Holsomback (2005), leaders of a risk management team of the NASA, “there are many
1
==PAGE:18==
2
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
challenges and obstacles in implementing a risk management system”.
As a result from these challenges, the implementation of risk management systems do not
always achieve a complete adoption (Soltanizadeh et al., 2014). This problem has been
widely discussed in the literature, but it still appears to remain unsolved.
Adoption is deﬁned as the action or fact of choosing and following (a plan, technique,
curse of action, etc) (Collins, 2011, Oxford University Press, 2010). In this context, the
adoption of a risk management system will be deﬁned as follows:
Adoption (of a risk management system): action or fact of choosing a risk management
system and pro-actively using it due to its positive impact in performance. This is, going
beyond the compliance with the guidelines for conformance, and internalising a single
corporate wide system as part of all endeavours.
Having a clear deﬁnition of adoption is essential in this context; as a risk management
system can be implemented in a company (and even become compulsory) but not really
adopted by its employees afterwards.
Beasley et al. (2005) classiﬁes the stage of enterprise risk management (ERM) in companies
into ﬁve groups: 1) No plans to implement ERM, 2) Investigating ERM; no decision
yet, 3) Planning to implement ERM, 4) Partial ERM in place, 5) Complete ERM in
place. Extrapolating this classiﬁcation to the stage of any risk management system in an
organization, the following grouping can be done:
1. Without intention of implementation
2. Assessing the possibility of implementation
3. Planning implementation
4. Implementation
5. Adoption
Table 1.1 relates this classiﬁcation to the deﬁnition of adoption introduced before. These
stage groups can be seen as the different steps followed until the adoption of a risk
management system. Once getting to the Implementation stage, many companies face
numerous challenges going one step further and achieving adoption (most of them never
succeeding).
==PAGE:19==
1.1. RESEARCH QUESTION
3
Studies about adoption have been performed on many different risk management
approaches, having most of them results that point towards a predominant lack of it.
Beasley et al. (2005) study on the implementation of ERM highlights that little is know
about its adoption factors. The results of the study show that, according to their assessing
factors, 82% of the reviewed ﬁrms with ERM implemented did not have it fully adopted.
Following a similar approach, Soltanizadeh et al. (2014) identiﬁes 60% of ﬁrms reviewed
in Malaysia with ERM implemented but not full adoption. The results of Kutsch et al.
(2013) about adoption of risk management in projects highlight that "in most projects
the formal stages of a risk management process were followed up until the process was
no longer inspected", in other words, risk management implemented (conformance) but
not adopted (performance). These studies can be an illustrative example of the material
present in the literature on this topic.
Table 1.1 – Overview of Risk Management Systems adoption stages.
Risk Management System
Status of Risk Management System
Considered
Chosen
Implemented
(Conformance)
Adopted
(Performance)
Without intention of implementation
Assessing the possibility of implementation
X
Planning implementation
X
X
Implementation
X
X
X
Adoption
X
X
X
X
Furthermore, it must be borne in mind that the implementation and adoption of a risk
management system in a organization can be studied in the different entities that comprise
it. Projects, therefore, are a more reduced and manageable environment where adoption
can be studied, being still representative enough to withdraw useful insights for the whole
organization.
1.1
Research Question
Aiming to understand the inﬂuence of the system being implemented on the successfulness
of its implementation, and trying to shed light on the problem of adoption of risk
==PAGE:20==
4
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
management systems, the following research question has been formulated:
Why do certain risk management systems achieve adoption while most do not?
The objective of this thesis is to answer the research question. Having acknowledged
projects as a representative context to measure adoption, the present study will be focused
on them as the whole organization might be too extensive for a detailed study in the scope
of a thesis.
In the process of answering the research question, the following activities will be carried
out: 1) The concepts of risk and uncertainty in the area of management and ﬁnances will
be introduced 2) Risk management and risk management systems will be explained 3)
Implementation and adoption of risk management system will be discussed 4) Effective
measuring factors for implementation and adoption of risk management systems in an
organizational context will be chosen 5) A real-life example of implementation and
adoption of a risk management system will be analysed.
1.2
Structure
This thesis report is divided in six chapters. The following points give a short description
of the content of each chapter after this introductory one:
• Chapter 2 discusses the background literature. This is done starting with the
concepts of risk and uncertainty, reviewing risk management and its approaches,
introducing risk management systems and ﬁnally implementation and adoption of
risk management systems are addressed.
• Chapter 3 describes the research methodology, data collection and analysis.
• Chapter 4 introduced the case company and case project and presents the results.
• Chapter 5 discusses the results.
• Chapter 6 presents the conclusions, gives recommendations and discusses further
development of the work carried out.
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 2
Literature
With the objective of contextualizing this study, this chapter presents a review of the
literature on the topic of risk. Moreover, a review of risk management practices will be
carried out and a number of risk management systems will be presented. On top of that, the
problem of adoption of risk management systems will be explored. Finally, the theoretical
framework for the thesis will be presented.
It must be borne in mind that risk and uncertainty are terms used in a broad number of
ﬁelds (Williams, 1995). Due to the scope of this thesis, this chapter will have its main
focus on literature related to management and ﬁnances.
2.1
Risk and Uncertainty
Risk and uncertainty are related terms. However, their deﬁnitions and boundaries are
not always clear. This ambiguity is present both in common speech (Willett, 1951) and
in the researching literature (Williams, 1995). In the words of Alessandri et al. (2004):
“deﬁnitional issues regarding risk and uncertainty have haunted both strategic management
and ﬁnance academic disciplines for decades”. Already in the second decade of the 20th
century, Knight (1921) highlighted the existence of this deﬁnitional misalignment that was,
even then, not new.
As pointed out by Samson et al. (2009), the literature discussing uncertainty and risk is
extremely broad, which makes close to impossible to discuss it all. This section reviews a
list of publications that aims to represent different and relevant currents on the ﬁeld.
The present deﬁnitional review follows the structure depicted in ﬁgure 2.1. This structure
5
==PAGE:22==
6
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE
is an adaptation from the one proposed by Samson et al. (2009), which is built around
different relationships between risk and uncertainty.
Figure 2.1 – Relationships between risk and uncertainty. Image adapted from (Samson
et al., 2009).
Uncertainty is risk
As pointed out by Alessandri et al. (2004), risk and uncertainty are “frequently used
interchangeably in the literature”. The following quote from James Pickford’s book
“Mastering Risk: Concepts” (2001) is an illustrative example of this phenomenon:
“There are two general types of risk, economic and ﬁnancial. Economic risk is the
uncertainty regarding the production of real goods and services in the economy. Financial
risk is the uncertainty regarding the price of ﬁnancial contracts that act as claims on these
goods and services (such as stocks, bonds and even currency itself).”
This semantic circumstance have also been highlighted by Samson et al. (2009), as he
indicated that a large group of scholars deﬁne uncertainty as risk and/or risk as uncertainty,
especially in the world of economics and ﬁnance. A few examples of it can be found in
table 2.1. More examples can be found in (Thunnissen, 2003).
According to Samson et al. (2009), it is remarkable that some of these deﬁnitions assume
that uncertainty follows a distribution and, therefore, it can be quantiﬁed. A good example
of this assumption can be recognized in this quote from Jorion (2000): risk is “the
uncertainty of outcomes. It is best measured in terms of probability distribution functions.”
==PAGE:23==
2.1. RISK AND UNCERTAINTY
7
Uncertainty and risk are different concepts
Besides acknowledging the existence of literature that equate risk and uncertainty,
Alessandri et al. (2004) emphasized that they are distinct constructs. Like them, many
authors from different ﬁelds have acknowledged the difference between these two terms
(Bedford and Cooke, 2001, Knight, 1921, Morgan et al., 1990, Willett, 1951).
Frank Knight in his treatise “Risk, Uncertainty, and Proﬁt” (1921) reviewed the concepts
of risk and uncertainty, aiming to deﬁne them. His work set the foundations of the modern
deﬁnitions of these terms in ﬁnances (Guerron-Quintana, 2012, Holton, 2004, Thunnissen,
2003).
Knight highlighted the fact that risk and uncertainty are different concepts,
describing them as “objective” probability and “subjective” probability respectively.
Although sharing a common ground of considering risk and uncertainty different concepts,
authors still do not agree on how they are related, if at all (Samson et al., 2009). This
divergence in the literature can be observed in table 2.1.
Overview
With the aim of having an overview of the deﬁnitional misalignment described in this
section, table 2.1 presents a list of deﬁnitions of risk and uncertainty. An engineering
author (Modarres, 2006) has been added to the table as representative of its ﬁeld to allow
the readers to compare its point of view with the one chosen in this literature review. Some
of the authors gathered in this comparing table were proposed by Kreye (2011) due to their
relevance in the ﬁeld.
==PAGE:24==
8
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE
Table 2.1 – Examples of Risk and Uncertainty deﬁnitions in literature.
Relation
Risk
Uncertainty
Reference
Risk is Uncertainty
“The uncertainty of the happening of an unfavorable
contingency has been termed risk. Risk is present when
there is a chance of loss.”
(Magee, 1961)
“[...] risk is deﬁned as uncertainty. It has reference to the
uncertainty of a ﬁnancial loss and little to do with the loss
itself, the cause of the loss, or the chance of loss. [...]. The
degree of risk is measured by the probable variation of actual
experience from expected experience.”
(Mehr et al., 1961)
Risk is not
Uncertainty
Independent
"Risk is a state of the world"
[...]
Risk is "measured by
objective probability"
"Uncertainty is a state of the
mind" [...] Uncertainty is a
"subjective degree of belief"
(Pfeffer, 1956)
"risk
is
deﬁned
as
the possibility that a sentient
entity will incur loss"
"uncertainty is a state of
mind whereby a sentient entity
experiences doubt"
(Crowe and Horn, 1967)
“Risk is a measure of the
potential loss occurring due
to natural or human activities.
Potential
losses
are
the adverse consequences of
such activities in form of loss
of human life, adverse health
effects,
loss of property,
and damage to the natural
environment.” p1
“Uncertainty is a measure of
the ‘goodness’ of an estimate,
such as performance of a
hazard barrier. Without such
a measure, it is impossible to
judge
how
closely
the estimated value relates
to or represents reality [...].
Uncertainty arises from lack
of or insufﬁcient knowledge.”
p197
(Modarres, 2006)
“The ‘risk’ may be deﬁned
in some such way as follows.
[...]
E measures the net
immediate
sacriﬁce
which
should be made in the hope of
obtaining A (amount of good);
q is the probability that this
sacriﬁce will be made in vain;
so that qE is the ‘risk’.” p. 315
"By "uncertain" knowledge,
let me explain,
I do not
mean merely to distinguish
what is known for certain
from what is only probable."
[...]
In uncertainty "there
is
no
scientiﬁc
basis
on
which to form any calculable
probability whatever.
We
simply do not know.”
(Keynes, 1921, 1937)
==PAGE:25==
2.1. RISK AND UNCERTAINTY
9
Risk is not
Uncertainty
Dependent
“effect
of
uncertainty
on
objectives"
“state,
even
partial,
of
deﬁciency of information
related to, understanding or
knowledge of an event, its
consequence, or likelihood”
(ISO 31000, 2009)
"Events
with
a
negative
impact represent risks, which
can prevent value creation or
erode existing value."
"Uncertainty presents both
risk and opportunity, with the
potential to erode or enhance
value."
(COSO, 2004a)
“risk, therefore, involves both
uncertainty and some kind of
loss or damage that might be
received.
Symbolically, we
could write this as:
risk=
uncertainty + damage.”
"state of uncertainty" is when
"you are not sure" about an
exact value.
(Kaplan and Garrick,
1981)
“risk is the chance that an
undesirable event will occur
and the consequences of all its
possible outcomes.” p139
“Uncertainty
is
reﬂected
in the ‘newness’ of the
project, inaccurate time and
cost
estimates,
technical
unknowns, unstable scope,
and
problems
not
anticipated.” p223
(Gray and Larson, 2000,
2006)
Risk
is
"measurable
uncertainty" [...]
risk is
""objective" probability" p233
Uncertainty is "unmeasurable
uncertainty" [...] Uncertainty
is ""subjetive" probability"
p233 [...]
"We shall [...]
restrict the term "uncertainty"
to cases of the non-quantitive
type" p. 20
(Knight, 1921)
“probability distribution of
the consequences of each
alternative” p. 137
“the consequences of each
alternative belong to some
subset
of
all
possible
consequences,
but
that
the decision maker cannot
assign deﬁnite probabilities
to
the
occurrence
of
particular outcomes” p. 137
(March
and
Simon,
1958)
"Risk, in the sense in which
we are to use the term, is
[...] the objectiﬁed uncertainty
as to the occurrence of an
undesired event." p9-10
"The area of uncertainty" [...]
is "the number of cases lying
between the largest probable
nurnber of losses,
or the
average plus the probable
variation, and the smallest
probable
number,
or
the
average minus the probable
variation" what means: the
area that contains a value
which we do not know exactly.
(Willett, 1951)
==PAGE:26==
10
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE
2.2
Risk Management
Having many different ways of viewing and deﬁning risk can only lead to the existence of
also several ways of managing it. As indicated by Williams (1995), how risk management is
performed is mostly dependent on the perception of risk. A deﬁnition of risk management
can be built from a meaning of management that can be found in an English dictionary:
the process of dealing with or controlling (Collins, 2011, Oxford University Press, 2010).
Therefore, risk management is the process of dealing with or controlling risks.
Other deﬁnitions or Risk Management can be found in the literature, however, most of
them are aligned with the one presented above. The ISO 31000 (2009) deﬁnes Risk
Management within an organizational context as the “coordinated activities to direct and
control an organization with regard to risk.” Likewise, other publications have adapted the
general deﬁnition of Risk Management to their own ﬁelds (see Williams (1995), Dionne
(2013), McNeil et al. (2005) for discussions on the topic).
In the scope of the present thesis, however, risk management will be understood as deﬁned
by ISO 31000 (2009).
Beyond the theoretical understanding of risk management, there are a number of different
concepts derived from how and where it is applied. A description of the risk management
approaches with a higher relevance in the context of this thesis will be presented in the
following subsections: Project Risk Management (PRM), Enterprise Risk Management
(ERM) and Structural Risk Management (SRM).
2.2.1
Project Risk Management (PRM)
Before speaking about risk; project management is deﬁned by ISO 21500 (2012)
as “the application of methods, tools, techniques and competences to a project”.
Many other deﬁnitions can be found in the literature, although most of them share a
common understanding of the term. Introducing more details, Perera and Holsomback
(2005) deﬁned it as “the function of planning, overseeing, and directing the numerous
activities required to successfully achieve the requirements, goals, and objectives of the
project/program, within the speciﬁed cost and schedule constraints”.
As Perera and Holsomback (2005) alludes, the ultimate aim of project management must
be to make the project successful. The success of a project is often deﬁned as “meeting
==PAGE:27==
2.2. RISK MANAGEMENT
11
cost, schedule and performance targets” (Williams, 1995). Therefore, a project will fail if
any of them is unmet (Williams, 1993). Risks, due to its ubiquitous nature, can threaten
any of these three areas (Fischhoff and Kadvany, 2011). As a result, the need for project
risk management in order to achieve success has been widely recognized (Cooper et al.,
1985, PMI, 2009, Stringer, 1987, 1992, Whittaker, 1999, Williams, 1995).
That said, the objective of Project Risk Management have to be no other than “seek to
anticipate and address uncertainties that threaten [. ..] a project” (Alali and Pinto, 2009).
On top of that, most of the reviewed project risk management proposals understand risk as
a combination of probability and impact (risk = probability × impact).
Although its objective and risk understanding appears to be shared, it should not be
forgotten that “there have been a number of distinctive approaches to project risk
management since the discipline emerged in 1950s” (Perminova et al., 2008). However,
these proposals will not be further discussed here as it goes beyond the scope of the present
thesis.
2.2.2
Enterprise Risk Management (ERM)
While Project Risk Management has aims to manage risks within a project, Enterprise
Risk Management ﬁxes it objective in a higher level (corporate ﬁnance): to protect the
capital and future earnings of the company (COSO, 2004a, Jensen et al., 2015).
Considering the risks for the higher level of the company as the risks of the whole company,
Enterprise Risk Management is meant to be applied across the enterprise, at every level
(COSO, 2004a). That characteristic of the system has led many authors to consider
Enterprise Risk Management as a holistic Risk Management approach, going beyond the
silo-based view of risk (Gordon et al., 2009) present in many ﬁrms (Group Russell, 2011,
Schlottmann et al., 2005). A good example of silo-based view of risk occurs when the
projects of a company perform project risk management individually, without having a
common system in place.
The COSO (2004a), considered by many the most inﬂuential entity in the ﬁeld, deﬁnes
Enterprise Risk Management as follows:
“Enterprise risk management is a process, effected by an entity’s board of directors,
management and other personnel, applied in strategy setting and across the enterprise,
==PAGE:28==
12
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE
designed to identify potential events that may affect the entity, and manage risk to be
within its risk appetite, to provide reasonable assurance regarding the achievement of
entity objectives.”
In other words, it is an across organizational approach that aims to identify possible risks
(to the capital and future earnings) that a ﬁrm would encounter and select appropriate
responses that matches the company’s risk appetite (Soltanizadeh et al., 2014).
Risk, in this context, is again mostly understood as a combination of probability and impact
(risk = probability × impact).
2.2.3
Structural Risk Management (SRM)
Structural Risk Management is a modiﬁcation of Enterprise Risk Management introducing
the structural risk component. The concept of structural risk considered in this thesis was
ﬁrst introduced by Jesper Lyng Jensen in 2012 in his publication “Risk, resources and
structures: Experimental evidence of a new cost of risk component — The structural risk
component and implications for enterprise risk management”. To understand that concept,
the meaning of structure and risk in the context should be stated:
Structure – every entity (personal or organizational) that can own ﬁnancial capital and
long term development activities.
Risk – any threat to the ﬁnancial capital or the long term development activities of the
structure.
A structure can be contained within another structure; for example, in an organizational
context: a person (structure), can belong to a project (structure), that can belong to a
department (structure), that can belong to the ﬁrm (structure). A diagram depicting this
situation can be observed in ﬁgure 2.2.
Rather than focusing on the actual risk event, the Structural Risk Management approach
focus its attention on the effects of the ﬁnancial resource ﬂuctuation that the risk owner
experiences following a risk event (Jensen et al., 2012).
==PAGE:29==
2.2. RISK MANAGEMENT
13
Figure 2.2 – Structures in an organization according to SRM.
As it considers nested structures across the whole organization, SRM differentiates itself
from the silo-based view of PRM and the high level objective setting of the ERM. For that
reason, Jensen et al. (2012) adds the cost derived from the structure (denoted structural
cost) to the often used (Kaplan and Garrick, 1981, Keynes, 1921, March and Simon, 1958)
deﬁnition of risk as a combination of probability and impact. Keynes (1921), among
others, understands risk mathematically as the product of these two terms. Following this
representation, Jensen et al. (2012) adds structure to the formula: risk = (probability ×
impact) + structural cost, highlighting that a risk is different depending on the structure
that owns it.
Knowing which structure owns the risk also helps the company deciding what to do with
the risk and maybe paying for it when the moment comes (own the consequences). For
example, if a project (structure) takes a risk that is bigger than its capital it will have to
employ long term investments to pay it and for the company it will be a double loss, the
capital of the project and its long term investments, which can be solved by just paying the
debt by a higher structure with a bigger capital. (Jensen, 2015)
The value of a structure’s long term investments is not always quantiﬁable; and it is neither
always worth to preserve them, but decisions based on structural risk management ensure
a better outcome for the company interests on risk-materializing situations at the lower
levels. (Jensen, 2015)
On top of that, Jensen et al. (2015) studies the social impact of taking decisions based
==PAGE:30==
14
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE
on structures and paying debts with long term investments. As can be seen in table 2.2,
when paying with capital, the creditor earns what the structure loses, leaving society in
balance; however, when paying with long term investments the structure loses something
that nobody gets, resulting in a loss to society as a whole. (Jensen, 2015)
Table 2.2 – Social impact of structural risk management decision making.
Structure
Creditor
Society
Capital Payment
-1
+1
0
Long Term Investments Payment
-2
0
-2
2.2.4
Overview
Aiming to give an overview of the concepts introduced in this section, table 2.3 compares
them according to scope and risk equation. In the table, it can be observed that both ERM
and SRM offer a holistic view of risk in an organization in contrast with the silo-based
view of PRM (in the sense of holistic risk management proposed by Gordon et al. (2009));
however, SRM introduces the concept of structural cost.
Table 2.3 – Comparison of scope and risk equation between PRM, ERM and SRM.
PRM
ERM
SRM
Scope
silo-based
holistic (top management)
holistic (structures)
Equation
risk = probability × impact
risk = probability × impact
risk = (probability × impact) + structural cost
For each of these applications of risk management exists different proposals. These
proposals are the already introduced risk management systems (standards, frameworks,
procedures and other kind of guidelines). This term appears repeatedly in the literature,
although it is not always used to refer to the same concept. A deeper discussion about
the meaning chosen for the present thesis can be found in "Project Risk Management:
Essential Methods for Project Teams and Decision Makers" (Raydugin, 2013).
With the aim of giving a few examples of risk management systems, the following list
introduces ﬁve proposals from ﬁve different organisms:
• An Integrated Risk Management Tool and Process - National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA) - (Perera and Holsomback, 2005)
• ISO 31000:2009 Risk management: Principles and guidelines - International
Organization for Standardization (ISO) - (ISO 31000, 2009)
==PAGE:31==
2.3. RISK MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS ADOPTION
15
• Enterprise Risk Management: Integrated Framework - Committee of Sponsoring
Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO) - (COSO, 2004a,b)
• Project risk analysis and management: PRAM the generic process - Association Of
Project Managers (APM) - (Chapman, 1997)
The choice of these examples aims to represent the diversity of proposals; however, it
must be kept in mind that there are many more. Table 2.4 relates the ﬁve risk management
system examples to the three risk management approaches introduced at the beginning of
the section: PRM, ERM and SRM.
Table 2.4 – Example Risk Management Systems relation with PRM, ERM and SRM.
General RM
PRM
ERM
SRM
NASA
X
ISO
X
COSO
X
APM
X
The rich diversity of risk deﬁnitions, risk management approaches and risk management
systems is sometimes neglected by advocates of certain of them, too focused on their own
(Fox, 2014).
2.3
Risk Management Systems Adoption
Having employees that have a risk management oriented mindset does not imply having
an holistic system in place, even if the projects succeed. Quoting Kutsch et al. (2013): “In
order to obtain the maximum beneﬁt from risk management, it needs to be implemented in
a systematic and disciplined manner”. In other words, there needs to be a risk management
system in place.
Bringing a new risk management system to a company constitutes an organizational
change. The amount of literature about organizational changes and change management
is outstandingly wide and goes beyond the scope of the present thesis. However, a small
introduction to organizational change with a spotlight on implementation will be given
in the following lines to lay the foundation of the risk management systems adoption
discussion.
==PAGE:32==
16
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE
2.3.1
Implementation and Adption of an Organizational Change
Hayes (2014), identiﬁes ﬁve steps in any organizational change: 1) Recognition and start,
2) Diagnosis, 3) Plan, 4) Implement (and review), 5) Sustain.
A decided change is executed in the implementation phase. As indicated in literature
(Hayes, 2014, Palmer et al., 2008), this phase is rarely a one-off activity, being often
interrelated and simultaneous with other activities such as review, diagnosis and planning.
When it comes to change implementation, organizations often face resistance from their
own employees, which are reluctant to abandon the status quo.
Kotter (1996), considered a reference work in the ﬁeld of change management (Aiken and
Keller, 2009), highlights that the implementation of most major change initiatives generate
only moderately successful results, while a considerable amount of them fail. Kotter’s
discourse is built around his model of steps for change implementation, later transformed
into change accelerators (see ﬁgure 2.3) (Kotter, 2012, 2014, LeStage, 2015). Kotter’s
understanding of implementation seems to correspond to the meaning of adoption in the
present thesis. For that reason, in this context, Kotter’s model will be considered as: eight
accelerators for organizational change adoption.
Figure 2.3 – Kotter’s eight accelerators for organizational change implementation. Image
from Kotter (2012).
==PAGE:33==
2.3. RISK MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS ADOPTION
17
2.3.2
Risk Management Systems Implementation and Adoption
As with any organizational change, the problem of adoption also strikes the implementation
of risk management systems (Kutsch et al., 2013).
Perera and Holsomback (2005) highlight that, in many cases, after a risk management
system is chosen and attempted to be implemented, it is not fully adopted. In these cases,
only its basic framework is used, with the sole purpose of satisfying oversight requirements
levied. Although implemented, risk management standards “often act as basic benchmarks
to be checked off against and often ended up as just checks in the Compliance Box”
(Pickett, 2005). As indicated by Kutsch et al. (2013): “despite implementing prescribed risk
management practices and identifying signiﬁcant risks, project managers often disengage
from risk management”.
This also refers to the already mentioned duality in the use of risk management systems in
organizations: its use to comply with requirements (referred as conformance in this thesis)
and its use because of its performance beneﬁts (referred as performance in this thesis).
This phenomenon appears to be also taken into account when designing most of the risk
management state of the art surveys, as they frequently ask about the motivation behind
the use of risk management systems. Habbard (2009) analyse three of the major sources
of these surveys in 2007: Aon Corporation (surveyed 320 organizations from 29 countries
and 103 individual risk managers), Protiviti (surveyed 150 C-level individuals (CEO’s,
CFO’s, etc.)) and The Economist Magazine Intelligence Unit (survey of 218 executives,
mostly C-level). Interestingly enough, according to these surveys, “for many ﬁrms the
reason for having risk management is because they are told they are required to have it”.
The conformance attitude towards guidelines and the lack of adoption of risk management
systems are not unknown by the literature (Beasley et al., 2005, Hoyt et al., 2008,
Liebenberg and Hoyt, 2003, Pagach and Warr, 2011, Soltanizadeh et al., 2014,
Subramaniam et al., 2011). However, how and why adherence or deviation from prescribed
risk management practices occurs is not always fully explained by the existing theories of
risk management in an organizational context (Kutsch et al., 2013). Attempts to shed light
into the reasons behind the lack of adoption have been done (i.e. Beasley et al. (2005)),
although the research in this ﬁeld is still arguably limited.
==PAGE:34==
18
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE
2.3.3
Assessing Implementation and Adoption
The implementation and adoption of a risk management systems can be assessed according
to different factors. The literature presents examples of different assessing proposals, both
quantitative and qualitative (i.e. Beasley et al. (2005), Kutsch et al. (2013), Soltanizadeh
et al. (2014)), but there is not agreement on an optimal set of factors.
Aiming to have a qualitative approach, the following four areas have been chosen as
comparing factors: scope, process, documentation and communication.
The choice of scope as assessing factor is motivated by the duality between silo-based
and holistic approaches introduced earlier in this chapter. The extent to what the risk
management system is applied is key for its understanding (Gordon et al., 2009).
According to Kutsch et al. (2013), “Studies [...] have long demonstrated that a singular
preoccupation with directive risk management processes, control and compliance are often
insufﬁcient in achieving high levels of reliability”. What leads to consider processes
and documentation (control and compliance) assessing factors for the existence of a risk
management system implemented in the organization, but not enough to demonstrate its
success (adoption).
Aiming to ﬁnd an ultimate assessing factor for the adoption of a risk management
system, the words of Perera and Holsomback (2005) can be enlightening: “success of risk
management is reliant on organizational culture and the interactions of personnel involved”.
Both organizational culture and communication seem to qualify as adoption assessing
factor. However, due to the challenges on the assessment of organizational culture (Papke,
2014) and having the focus of this thesis in projects, only communication will be the last
assessing factor.
Scope
The scope of a risk management system can be deﬁned as the organizational area that it
covers (adapted from Collins (2011)).
Quoting McShane et al. (2011):
“Traditionally,
risk management has been
compartmentalized and uncoordinated within a ﬁrm. Risk had been managed in silos
with corporate risk managers focusing on pure risks,whereas the treasury department used
derivatives to reduce ﬁnancial risks, such as interest, rate, credit, market, and foreign
==PAGE:35==
2.3. RISK MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS ADOPTION
19
exchange risk”. However, authors like Stulz (1996), Schrand and Unal (1998) and Barney
(1991) highlight the value of holistic approaches, which became more and more used by
companies with the apparition of ERM (McShane et al., 2011).
Literature has shown that these two main approaches are preferred by the authors and
organisms behind the creation of risk management systems: silo-based scope (projects)
and holistic scope (whole enterprise). Other approaches may be possible but, due to the
lack of material exploring them, they will not be considered in this thesis.
Process
Using a broad deﬁnition, a risk management process is the systematic application of a risk
management system (ISO 31000, 2009). According to Alali and Pinto (2009), there is
a major current in risk management literature that distinguish ﬁve main steps in the risk
management process. This is, considering that the risk management that contextualizing
the risk management to the organization is not a step of the process itself, but something
previous. However, many authors and organisms agree on considering the contextualizing
stage part of the process ( i.e. Chapman (1997), COSO (2004a), ISO 31000 (2009)), as
they understand risk management as a dynamic, iterative and responsive to change (ISO
31000, 2009).
The present thesis will use as reference a six steps model built from adding a
contextualization step to the ﬁve steps proposed by (Alali and Pinto, 2009):
1. Contextualization of Risk Management: Objectives articulation, external and
internal parameters deﬁnition. The scope and risk criteria of the process are set.
2. Identiﬁcation of Risk: Recognition of potential threats. It is the answer to “what
can go wrong?”.
3. Analysis: To assess and evaluate the possible risks. It the answer to “what is the
likelihood?” and “What are the consequences?”.
4. Plan: To decide and develop an appropriate curse of action to eliminate the threat
of risk or to mitigate its consequences.
5. Tracking: To suggest methods to address the effectiveness of the proposed action
against risk or to take action on the risk under monitoring that starts to be more risky.
6. Control: Feedback stage. Evaluation of what actions should be considered for the
risks and take them if needed.
==PAGE:36==
20
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE
(a) 5 steps
(b) 6 steps
Figure 2.4 – Five steps risk management process (a) proposed by Alali and Pinto (2009)
and the same model with the addition of an extra context step (b).
Documentation
Risk management documentation is understood in this context not as the documents about
risk management guidelines, but the documents used as part of the risk management
process. A few concepts from risk management documentation will be deﬁned in the
following lines.
Most risk management systems consider the risk register the document around which the
risk management process ﬂows (Anderson, 2013). The risk register is deﬁned as follows:
Risk Register: is a repository for all risks identiﬁed (ISO 31000, 2009). It contains
information about each risk (i.e. name, probability, impact, owner, project area).
As it has been introduced before, risk is often deﬁned as a combination of probability and
impact. Based on that deﬁnition risks are often visualized using risk matrices. Risk Matrix
is deﬁned as follows:
Risk Matrix: graphic representation of risk as a matrix where one of the axis corresponds
to probability of the risk and the other to its consequences. It uses discrete categories of
consequence and likelihood; having the appearance of a table. The cells of the table are
often grouped in risk categories represented by different colors. An example of risk matrix
can be seen in ﬁgure 2.5. More information available in “Recommendations on the use
and design of risk matrices” (Duijm, 2015).
==PAGE:37==
2.3. RISK MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS ADOPTION
21
Figure 2.5 – Risk matrix example. Image from Perera and Holsomback (2005).
Although these two are the most common documentation tools used in risk management,
others exist (see examples in COSO (2004b)). Also, project management documentation
tools can be used with risk management purposes. An example of it would be the Gantt
Chart, which could include risk information about the different stages of the project life-
cycle. The Gantt Chart is deﬁned as follows:
Gantt Chart: type of bar chart that illustrates a project schedule. The different project
tasks are broken down showing the start and end date of each of them and how they relate.
An example of Gantt chart can be seen in ﬁgure 2.6. More information available in “Gantt
charts: A centenary appreciation” (Wilson, 2003).
Figure 2.6 – Gantt Chart example. Image from Gantt.com (2016).
Other documents as risk reports, compliance check-lists or risk deliverables will be
considered part of the documentation discussion; although its use to spread risk knowledge
will be reviewed in the communication discussion.
==PAGE:38==
22
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE
Communication
Risk management communication is understood in this context as the imparting or
exchange of information that has an impact on the risk management activities of the
organization (adapted from Collins (2011)).
Examples of risk communication activities in this context are: deliverables, reporting and
alignment of risk information within different entities.
The value or risk communication in organizational risk management is repeatedly
highlighted by most risk management systems (i.e. Chapman (1997), COSO (2004a), ISO
31000 (2009), Perera and Holsomback (2005)).
Literature about organizations and project management have widely explored the
importance of communication for the organization’s internal performance (which has
an impact in its external one). Examples of it can be Badiru (2008), Pritchard (2013),
Zajac (2013), Zulch (2014). A more in depth study of techniques to assess communication
in an organization can be seen in the work of Hargie and Tourish (2000); most of these
techniques can be extrapolated to the assessing communication of risk within a project or
an organization.
Overview
Having introduced the assessing factors for evaluating the adoption of a risk management
systems aiming to understand how it is achieved, a short overview of the risk management
systems introduced in this chapter will be given. These risk management systems are:
• An Integrated Risk Management Tool and Process - National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA) - (Perera and Holsomback, 2005)
• ISO 31000:2009 Risk management: Principles and guidelines - International
Organization for Standardization (ISO) - (ISO 31000, 2009)
• Enterprise Risk Management: Integrated Framework - Committee of Sponsoring
Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO) - (COSO, 2004a,b)
• Project risk analysis and management: PRAM the generic process - Association Of
Project Managers (APM) - (Chapman, 1997)
==PAGE:39==
2.3. RISK MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS ADOPTION
23
Table 2.5 introduces the scope of the presented risk management systems.
Table 2.5 – Example Risk Management Systems’ scope.
Silo-based
Holistic
NASA
X
ISO
X
COSO
X
APM
X
Figure 2.7 depicts the steps of the process of the process of the four management system
on top of the 5+1 steps introduced before, aiming to shed light on what is done in the steps
of each risk management system process.
Figure 2.7 – Risk management systems’ process comparison.
From the simplest model to the most detailed one all systems cover the same main actions,
although they distribute them in different stages. The transition between stages and
recursiveness is also distinct, although all of them show a cyclic structure in one way or
another.
==PAGE:40==
24
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE
Table 2.6 brieﬂy presents the view of the example risk management systems on
documentation tools, deliverables (part of both documentation and communication) and
communication.
Table 2.6 – Documentation, deliverables and communication in the example Risk
Management Systems.
System
Documentation
Deliverables
Communication
NASA
- Risk Register (risk database)
- Risk Matrices (scoring matrices)
- Likelihood * Consequence
- Deliverables made from
information in risk database
- Relates the documentation
to the stages of the process
- Communication = key
enabler for effective risk
management
- Should take place during
all stages of the process
ISO
- Highlights the importance of
documentation but does not
specify any tool
- Likelihood * Consequence
- Relates the documentation
to the stages of the process
- Planned from the
beginning
- Should take place during
all stages of the process
COSO
- Tools in “Application
techniques” document
- Importance of data quality
- Likelihood * Impact
- Importance of overview
(risk portfolio)
- Compliance
- Need of means to
communicate signiﬁcant
information upstream
- Organization’s existing
reporting lines
APM
- Risk Register (risk list)
- Visual representation of risks
- Gantt Charts
- Likelihood * Impact
- Relates the documentation
to the stages of the process
- Communication =
fundamental to change the
company risk culture
- Based on reporting
This superﬁcial review of the chosen risk management systems already show that they
share a common ground, although the focus may be different. The process, even with
different steps, aims to achieve the same. The documentation, described with higher or
lower level of detail in the systems, appears to share a lot of elements and motivation. The
risk management communication is considered key by all the systems.
On top of that, there seems to be a lack of agreement in the literature about any risk
management system presenting better adoption results than the others (Kutsch et al., 2013).
The systems reviewed above provide guidelines and processes that aim to ensure efﬁcient
risk management practices, but they give almost no information on how to achieve adoption
==PAGE:41==
2.4. CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK
25
when implementing them.
As indicated by Pickett (2005), risk management is not fully useful if consists on checking
boxes to comply with the guidelines of a risk management system. Risk management is
only adopted when it is proactively followed looking for a better performance.
2.4
Conceptual Framework
This study will attempt to understand why certain risk management systems achieve
adoption after being implemented while most do not. The systems implemented but not
adopted are used for conformance, whereas the systems implemented and also adopted
are used for increase performance. To assess both the implementation and adoption of a
risk management system in a project the following factors will be used: scope, process,
documentation and communication.
==PAGE:42==
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 3
Research Methodology
The case study has been chosen as research method for the present thesis. According to
Yin (2009), the case study is the preferred method when “(a) “how” and “why” questions
are being posed, (b) the investigator has little control over events, and (c) the focus is
on a contemporary phenomenon within a real-life context”. Having a “why” research
question and the aim to answer it by studying an empirical case within a real-life context,
the present thesis appears to qualify for the chosen research methodology.
Within the scope of this thesis, case study is understood as described by Yin (2009): “an
empirical inquiry that investigates a contemporary phenomenon in depth and within its
real-life context, especially when the boundaries between phenomenon and context are
not clearly evident”. It should be highlighted that the empirical inquiry is a process that
extends over time.
3.1
Case Selection
A project from within an oil and gas company has been chosen as case project for the
study research.
It is acknowledged across the literature that the construction projects of the oil and gas
industry tempt to be highly regulated macro projects, where the risks’ consequences can
be really expensive. For that reason, Williams (1995) highlights the oil and gas industry,
together with construction and defence, when speaking about industries with major projects
with high risks that need to control risk and uncertainty with risk management activities.
The case project is a construction project from the oil industry.
27
==PAGE:44==
28
CHAPTER 3. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
Not only the kind of project but also its risk management situation has been determinant
when choosing the case project. A new risk management system based on Structural Risk
Management started being implemented in the case company at late 2014 and early 2015.
During the whole 2015 the system was implemented across different projects, departments
and management levels reporting probable sings of adoption.
The implementation of the risk management system in the case project started
approximately coinciding with the start of the present thesis, being a good opportunity to
study the successful adoption of a risk management system.
3.2
Data collection
The present case study research has three main sources of data: interviews, secondary data,
and empirical ﬁndings. The following lines explain in depth these three data sources.
It must be highlighted that the masculine gender will be used to refer to both male and
female employees of the case company in the present thesis, aiming to anonymize them.
Interviews
There has been two rounds of individual semi-structured interviews with key employees
from the company QHSE department, the case project, the case project’s asset, the case
asset’s country unit and other cross-organizational roles.
Semi-structured interviews are interviews that combine a predeﬁned set of open questions
with other situational ad-hoc questions aimed to further explore certain topics that are
interesting for the interviewer (Flick, 2014). This interview format has been chosen
because it allows both to have a common ground for all the interviews, and at the same
time gives ﬂexibility to the interviewer to adapt to the circumstances of the interview in
order to explore interesting topics or get information that was not given as answer to the
predeﬁned questions.
Table 3.1 presents a list of the organizational roles of the employees interviewed indicating
the dates of the interviews. The job titles have been reformulated in some cases to give a
better idea of the employee’s responsibilities.
==PAGE:45==
3.2. DATA COLLECTION
29
Table 3.1 – Roles of the employees interviewed in the case company.
Job Title
Group
Interview Date
Case Asset Manager
Asset
21/04/2016
Case Asset Commercial Manager
Asset
06/04/2016
Asset Management Responsible
Country
06/04/2016
Risk & Portfolio Analyst
Country
09/03/2016
Cost Estimator
Cost Estimation
18/03/2016
Financial Analyst
Finances
20/04/2016
PIMS Responsible
PIMS
16/03/2016
Case Project Planner
Project
18/04/2016
Case Project Quality & Risk Manager
Project Team
08/03/2016
Case Project Drilling Manager
Project Team
13/04/2016
Case Project Procurement Manager
Project Team
12/04/2016
Case Project Manager
Project Team
20/04/2016
QHSE Manager
QHSE
07/03/2016
QHSE Environmental & CSR Responsible
QHSE
07/03/2016
QHSE Safety & Technical Risk Management Responsible
QHSE
07/03/2016
QHSE Emergency Response & Security Responsible
QHSE
08/03/2016
QHSE Doccumentation Responsible
QHSE
11/03/2016
QHSE Quality Responsible
QHSE
09/03/2016
QHSE Risk Management Responsible
QHSE
01/03/2016
External Risk Management Consultant
QHSE
12/04/2016
All the employees in the list participated in the ﬁrst round of interviews whereas only the
QHSE Safety & Technical Risk Management Responsible, the Case Project Quality & Risk
Manager, the QHSE Manager and the QHSE Risk Management Responsible participated
in a follow-up second round to clarify some of the information they gave in the ﬁrst round
and ask new relevant questions. The questions where grouped into four parts:
Introduction: Introductory questions about the interviewee, his job role and his role
within the project.
Case Project before change of risk management approach: Questions about the case
project workshops and other risk management activities related to the project before the
change.
==PAGE:46==
30
CHAPTER 3. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
Case Project after change of risk management approach: Questions about the case
project workshops and other risk management activities related to the project after the
change.
Final: Closure open questions in case the employee can provide other useful insights or
suggestions about other potential interviewees.
The actual questions from each part of the interview can be seen in A. These questions
where mainly thought for employees that had participated in the risk workshops of the
case project team. When interviewing employees that were not part of the workshops the
questions related to them were changed to more general ones on their knowledge about
the risk management process in the project.
The questions listed above acted as safe structure to develop the conversation. Most of
them are aimed to understand the role of the employee in the case project risk management
and his perception of it. Within this structure, open questions about the documentation
and communication activities were asked, going in depth about its motivation and trying
to obtain information about conformance and performance related activities within risk
management.
Due to the changing situation of the company and how it affected the case project and the
context of the interviews, even within the ﬁrst round, more questions were added to the
interviews that took place later than the ﬁrst of April. After that date, questions about the
closure of the project were also asked.
Secondary Data
Other data not directly collected or generated by the author of this thesis was used for the
development of this thesis. Table 3.2 presents a list of the gathered secondary data with a
short description of each one.
Research Involvement
During the ﬁve months that lasted the present thesis the author had a desk in QHSE
department of the case company, collaborating in some of its activities. Being present in
the organization on a daily basis allowed the author to participate in small talks with the
employees, be present on risk management workshops of the case project, interact with the
project members and other project stakeholders, get further secondary data and in general
==PAGE:47==
3.3. DATA ANALYSIS
31
to be direct witness of what happened in the organization during these months. Most of
this unstructured insides were stored through handwritten notes.
Table 3.2 – Secondary data.
Data
PIMS Risk register (Nov 2015, Jan 2016, Mar 2016)
PIMS Case Project Log-ins Timestamp
Project Gantt Chart (Mar 2016, Apr 2016)
Organizational Chart (Jan 2014, June 2015, Mar 2016)
Risk Survey (Nov 2015)
ExCom - QHSE Risk Management Workshop (Mar 2012)
Hand Over Procedure from Project to Operation
Project Management Manual
Project Management Standard
Risk Management in Investment Projects Proccedure
Risk Management Policy
Risk Management Standard
Case Project Concepts Documentation
Case Project Risk Management Workshop MOMs
Case Project Risk Timeline Visualization (Mar 2016)
Cost Risk Analysis Report
Estimating Guideline
Technical Information Input Sheet
Financial Analysis Output
Uncertainty, Risks & Portfolio Analysis 2016
Quality: ISO9001
Emergency Preparedness & Response Document
QHSE Risk Documentation
Other Project Documentation
3.3
Data Analysis
The data gathered in the interviews, the secondary data and the empirical ﬁnding notes
were organized according to the chosen factors for measuring adoption: scope, process,
documentation and communication. This was facilitated by the fact that the interview
==PAGE:48==
32
CHAPTER 3. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
questions were focused on getting information about these topics.
Furthermore, information about risk management in case company and the case project
were separately organized in chronological order to build the storyline that contextualizes
the case study.
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 4
Results
This section introduces the case company and presents the results gathered in the case
study. The results are presented in two phases: ﬁrst the situation of the project before the
implementation of the risk management system based on Structural Risk Management,
and then the situation of the project after its implementation. The results from each of
the phases will provide information about the scope of the risk management system in
place, its process, its documentation and its communication procedures. Each of the phases
will provide objective data about the project situation and subjective input from relevant
stakeholders.
4.1
Case Company
The case company is an energy producer that operates in the Oil and Gas business.
The company has more than forty years of experience in the ﬁeld and several hundred
employees.
The oil price drop of 2014 (see ﬁgure 4.1) had a big impact in the Oil and Gas industry,
affecting the case company, among many others. However, the company’s revenue stayed
stable during 2014 and 2015 due to their previous long term oil selling agreements with a
static barrel price higher than the market one after its drop (but lower than the market one
when making the agreement). This contractual situation, called hedging, helped offsetting
the effects of the low oil price. However, these agreements start coming to an end from
2017.
On top of the impact of the oil situation, challenges on one of their projects delayed its
ﬁrst oil forecasts and required unplanned investments, affecting the company’s available
33
==PAGE:50==
34
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
capital.
For the present year, the case company set its objectives being aware the oil market situation
and the foreseeable end of the hedging agreements, trying to be economically appealing
for a potential IPO. These objectives leaded the company to a major restructuration during
the spring of 2016 that deviated the focus from business risk management, stopping the
most activities in that regard.
Figure 4.1 – Barrel oil price from 2009 to 2016. Image from FXCM (2016).
4.2
Case Project
The present case study has set its focus to one of the projects of the case company: the
case project. The case project belongs to an asset that administrate the license of an oil
production area. The case project’s objective is the construction of an oil production unit
in the area. Once the project is ﬁnished, the Operations department will take care of the oil
production, as it is speciﬁed in the company’s “Projects Hand-Over Procedure”. The case
asset belongs to a one of the different country assets that the case company has. Figure 4.2
presents a tentative diagram of the project and the structures surrounding it.
==PAGE:51==
4.2. CASE PROJECT
35
Figure 4.2 – Case project’s organizational environment.
The company’s procedure “Project Management Manual” describes the company’s set
process for projects development. A tentative diagram showing the stages of that process
can be seen in ﬁgure 4.3.
Figure 4.3 – Project’s life-cycle in the case company.
==PAGE:52==
36
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
After having crossed DG1 to Feasibility the case project went back to Business Planning
inﬂuenced by the unstable situation of the Oil and Gas industry among other things, as
indicated by the Case Project Planner. In December 2015 the case project was midway
through the Business Planning phase, having four main concept options into consideration.
When crossing the gates of the project life-cycle the team would have to discard three of
them and execute the remaining one.
At the very end of March 2016, the case project suffer a major change, being now merged
with other projects in a department that would take responsibility of the building of the oil
production units of a greater area. Some considered it the closure of the project, but not the
Case Project Manager: “case project is not closed, it continues in another format”. He also
highlights that in asset level “all the agreements with the license partner are continuing”.
The Case Asset Manager pointed out that this change was motivated by a strategic decision
of top management, concerned about the unstable situation of the Oil and Gas industry,
speciﬁcally taking the responsibility away from the asset or project risk register. The
Asset Management Responsible pointed to the same direction when relating the decision
to the risk register of the asset management “it was not the risk register at the project or
asset level, but on top of that, the asset management risk register; that captured the most
business related risk for the various assets”. He pointed out that besides other changes
in the company that affected the business case of some of the project concept options, it
was mostly triggered by the overall viability of the business case of the project. This was
a described risk in the risk register that referenced “the oil price and the economy in the
project”.
Among the wide amount of activities performed within the company related to the case
project during its existence, three of them will be described in the following lines due to
its relation with the case project risk management that will be introduced later. Figure
4.4 aims to map these three processes in the organizational structure of the case company.
Ultimately, the top ten risks of the project risk register will be reported to asset, which will
report its top ten overall risks to asset management. Project, asset and asset management
will also receive the Cost Risk Analysis, the Financial Analysis and the Analyst Forecasts.
==PAGE:53==
4.2. CASE PROJECT
37
Figure 4.4 – Risk-related processes around the case project.
Cost Risk Analysis
The cost estimation group is a team of employees that operates across the case company
doing, among other things, cost risk analysis in projects.
Project cost estimates are approximated project cost calculations made by knowledgeable
people from the project (Collins, 2011, Hulett, 2016). According to the case company
"Estimating Guideline", a cost risk analysis aims to examine the impact of individual risks
and uncertainties on these project cost estimates, giving a more accurate cost estimation.
To do such an analysis, the team uses as input:
• Cost Estimated by the engineers
• Uncertainties
• Risks
• Other items
As indicated by the Cost Estimator that worked with the case project, the main output of
the analysis is a new expected cost for the project, “with a conﬁdence level of 80%”. This
information is given both in a table and graphically (see an example in ﬁgure 4.5), with a
==PAGE:54==
38
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
cost distribution plot where the expected cost is the P50 and the P10 and P90 values are
given as they enclose the range of conﬁdence (80%). This reﬂects what the company’s
“Estimating Guideline” states that should be done.
Figure 4.5 – Example of cost risk analysis graphical output.
The Cost Estimator highlighted that “when estimating, you take a different approach
depending on what phase you are at, what technical information you have, how well
deﬁned the project or the concept is... so you have different classes of estimates as you
walk your way through the project model and the decision gates”. Because of that, Cost
Risk Analyses are performed at speciﬁc points of the project lifecycle, like before the
crossing of certain Decision Gates. The Cost Risk Analysis level of detail and reliability
depends on the stage of the project when it is performed (in early phases the cost risk
analysis if often deterministic and in later phases probabilistic). The output of this analysis
is part of the Technical Input of the Financial Analysis. Both of these analyses have a high
inﬂuence on important project and asset decisions (i.e. gate crossing, project viability).
Complying with the procedure “Risk Management in investing projects” the cost estimation
group takes into consideration the latest version of the project risk register. As the Cost
Estimator pointed out, “the risks from the latest version of the risk register that affect the
execution cost will be taken into account”, knowing that “there are risks in the risk register
that won’t affect your CAPEX”.
==PAGE:55==
4.2. CASE PROJECT
39
He also pointed out that they have to run their own risk identiﬁcation workshops with
the team leads from the project to obtain detailed data about the risks potential impact in
the CAPEX and their probability, instead of range values. In his experience, these risk
workshops are done without anybody from QHSE and can be considered Quantitative,
while ones performed by the project group Qualitative.
Financial Analysis
One of the duties of the ﬁnances fepartment is to perform ﬁnancial analysis of the assets.
Quoting one of the ﬁnancial analysts of the department: “our team was doing all the
ﬁnancial analysis related to the case asset in collaboration with the Case Asset Commercial
Manager”. The ﬁnancial analysis of an asset aims to evaluate its economic viability. To do
such an analysis, the team uses as input:
• Cost Estimated by the cost estimation group
• P90, P50 and P10 from the reserve proﬁle from subsurface
• Financial information (i.e. exchange rates, ﬁnancial distribution, assumptions)
The Cost Estimated and the data from the reserve proﬁle are considered the Technical
Information input, as can be seen in the Technical Information input template. The main
points from the output of the analysis are:
• Asset value
• Breakeven (from what oil price the project is viable)
• Sensitivity
• Cash ﬂow
According to the Financial Analyst, the output of the ﬁnancial analysis helps “to see
whether or not it is a feasible project or asset”. As indicated before, it is a key element
for the decision making of the steering committee and the project and asset management.
Also, as pointed out by the Risk & Portfolio Analyst doing them, it is used to perform a
production forecast for asset management.
In regard to risks, the ﬁnances department inputs ﬁnancial risk to the analysis as part of
the ﬁnancial information. On the other hand, as the Financial Analyst said referring to
ﬁnances “we never get to see the risk register”, as these risks are assumed to be already
part of the input through the Cost Estimated by the estimation group.
==PAGE:56==
40
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Production forecasts
As complementary source of information for the decision making of the Assets
Management of the country of the case asset, the effects of uncertainty and risks in
production forecasts were modelled by a Risk & Portfolio Analyst.
For doing such a thing, the Risk & Portfolio Analyst used PetroVR, a complex modelling
software for the Oil and Gas industry.
As the Risk & Portfolio Analyst pointed out: “I focus on ﬁve main things: I focus on
production differences, CAPEX, OPEX, ABEX and delays”; for him “these are the main
independent variables you have” and with these you can calculate other valuable variables.
He receives the CAPEX, OPEX and ABEX ﬁnances, the schedule from project and
Estimated Production from subsurface. Then he output the same input functions modiﬁed
by the risks and other variables; according to him, the risks constitute “deviations you have
with respect to forecasts”. An example of how one of these modiﬁed outputs can look like
can be seen in ﬁgure 4.6.
Figure 4.6 – Example of graphical forecast output.
The Risk & Portfolio Analyst did risk workshops with the team-leads of the project team
to reﬁne the risk data from the risk register as he needed detailed data about the risks
potential impact in the CAPEX and the risk probability, instead of range values. He also
acknowledges to ignore how the ﬁnancial values he was using were calculated.
==PAGE:57==
4.3. RISK MANAGEMENT BEFORE SRM
41
4.3
Risk management before SRM
Risk Management is applied differently depending on its scope and objectives. According
to both the QHSE Safety & Technical Risk Management Responsible and QHSE Risk
Management Responsible, the case company mainly deals with two different kinds of risk
management: technical risk management and business risk management.
It must be borne in mind that there are regulatory requirements regarding technical risk
management, but not for business risk management. According to the QHSE Safety &
Technical Risk Management Responsible; the company wide experience in the industry
and its expertise in technical risk management was not matched with a wide expertise in
business risk management practices in the recent years. This matches with the results of
the “Risk Survey” performed in the company on Oct-Nov of 2015.
During 2010, motivated by safety, the company gave a higher priority to all kinds of risk
management. On late 2010, the QHSE Manager hired a new employee as Risk Advisor
aiming him to lead the risk management spin of the organization, having a main focus
on Technical Risk Management. When doing such a task, he was often supported by a
consultant.
He brieﬂy introduced the concept of Enterprise Risk Management on his otherwise mostly
Technical Risk Management themed workshops, as can be seen in the “13/03/12 QHSE
Risk Management Workshop” documentation.
After a year and a half, in mid 2013, the Risk Advisor’s workings in the company ended.
He left behind him what the QHSE Safety & Technical Risk Management Responsible
described as a good technical risk management policy for projects. One of the outputs of
his work was the need out a holistic system in place in the company, which only had a
“Risk Management Policy” of less than a page written by the CEO.
After that, the QHSE Safety & Technical Risk Management Responsible, together with a
graduate employee of QHSE, started working on the creation of a holistic risk management
standard for the company. According to the QHSE Safety & Technical Risk Management
Responsible, their main output while doing this task was recognizing the need of expertise
in business risk management.
Aiming to describe the risk management activities in place in the case company’s projects
by 2015, information about risk management in the case project is detailed in the following
==PAGE:58==
42
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
subsections. The description has been structured in four sections that correspond with the
factors chosen to measure adoption when describing the situation of the risk management
activities after the implementation of a Structural Risk Management system.
Scope
The case company stores its organizational documentation in an online repository.
The repository contains: standards, procedures, guidelines, work instructions and job
descriptions. By 2014, the only risk management procedure for projects among these
documents was “Risk management in investing projects”, which describes the company’s
established way of doing risk management in projects.
The mentioned procedure’s Scope section says:
“Risk Management is a management tool and shall be implemented according to this
procedure for all case company’s investment, development and execution projects;
including modiﬁcation and repair projects.
The principles outlined in this procedure may also be used for special consultancy work,
outside the normal project framework.”
Although it does suggest that it can be used in outside the normal project, the ﬁrst paragraph
quite clearly indicates that the scope of the risk management detailed in the procedure are
the individual projects.
Highlighting the sense of having a project scope, the procedure sets the objective of risk
management “to increase the attention towards potential project development threats and
opportunities” and “provide a common platform to ensure identiﬁcation, ownership and
follow up of risks at every level”.
Looking at the results from the “Risk Survey” performed in the company on Oct-Nov
of 2015, the high diversity of answers to the question “what is risk?” suggests the silo-
based view of risk was accompanied by a lack of a common understanding of risk in the
organization.
Within the project scope, the company’s “Risk management in investing projects”
procedure describes the following risk management responsibility roles:
==PAGE:59==
4.3. RISK MANAGEMENT BEFORE SRM
43
• Project Owner: “shall decide the level of implementation of RM and initiate such
activities in investment development phases.”
• Project Manager: “responsible for establishment and maintenance of the risk
management in the project, and shall document the results.”
• QHSE: “is the RM process owner. The department has the overall responsibility for
methods and tools, and shall be proactive in following up the RM implementation
according to the CVP. The department shall maintain a pool of risk assessment
facilitators.”
• Quality Manager: “shall facilitate and coordinate the continuous RM within the
project. In larger projects this responsibility may be delegated to designated persons
in each group that handle the individual contract packages or areas.”
• Risk Owner: “Each risk will have an owner – usually in the project’s management
team – who is responsible for the followup on the risk and its associated actions, and
who reports status to the Project Manager.”
• All project team members and other project stakeholders: “are responsible for
communicating new, potential risks to the Quality Manager.”
The responsibility roles presented in the procedure were reﬂected in the case project,
which was intended to comply with the minimums set by the procedure.
The Case Project Manager was the main responsible of risk management in the project,
but he was not alone with it; as he described it: “at the end of the day it is, of course, my
responsibility; but I have a team to help me”.
The Case Project Manager was the owner of the risks, knowing that he was responsible
for them, but being able to delegate risk mitigating actions to members of his team (see
project team diagram in ﬁgure 4.7). With a support role, the Case Project Quality &
Risk Manager of the project was responsible for the coordination and facilitation of the
project risk management process, the maintenance and management of the risk register
and keeping the Case Project Manager informed about the project’s risks situation.
==PAGE:60==
44
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.7 – Case project’s team diagram.
Process
The case company’s “Risk management in investing projects” procedure proposes the Risk
Management process depicted in ﬁgure 4.8. This process is meant to be aligned with the
PMI (2009) recommendations.
Figure 4.8 – Steps of the case company’s Project Risk Management process.
The process steps are described as follows:
1. “Prepare for risk management by determining RM schedule and detailed contents.”
2. “Identify events that may inﬂuence the project, to establish a risk register. Both the
project team and personnel from the Owner’s organisation shall participate to draw
on their common experience and expertise.”
3. “Evaluate these events with respect to their probability and consequence, to deﬁne
the most critical downsides and most promising potential upsides.”
4. “Develop action plans to minimize the probability of unwanted events, and/or their
consequences if they should occur. Potential upsides shall also be explored.”
==PAGE:61==
4.3. RISK MANAGEMENT BEFORE SRM
45
5. “Respond to risks as they occur, according to the risk plans.”
6. “Communicate the risks and actions status to the project team, management and
other stakeholders throughout the process.”
In practice, the case project complied with these steps, which are considered by the case
company as “the minimum requirements for an acceptable risk management process” (as
can be read in the procedure “Risk management in investing projects”). As indicated by
the Case Project Quality & Risk Manager when speaking about the steps of the process,
“we follow our procedure”. He also points out “we are a small company and not very often
we make projects, it will be the same team again and again”, referring to how interiorized
the project team had the company’s risk management procedure.
However, one of the interviewed project team members (which prefers to remain
anonymous) acknowledged: “I believe we could do better at risk assessment, I think
50% of the risk management we were doing is probably done because we have to do it”.
On top of that, two other team members recognized that “the communication could be
improved”.
The following lines describe how these steps were performed in practice:
Prepare:
With the aim of building the foundation for risk management in the project, an initial
interdisciplinary risk management workshop was performed and the risk register was
created.
The date of creation of the risk register (March 2011), the log-ins time-stamp demonstrates
the early start of risk management activities in the project, matching the company’s risk
management procedure advice “the process shall be started as early as possible, and prior
to the DG3 review at the very latest” (as can be read in the “Risk management in investing
projects” procedure). The risk register log-ins time-stamp suggests that in the early phases
the risks were added whenever they were detected, heterogeneously.
It should be pointed out that, as the Case Asset Manager highlighted in his interview, the
risk register was shared between the case project and the case asset (and therefore the
preliminary workshop was also shared).
Analyse (Identify and Evaluate):
It was responsibility of the different subteams (i.e. Drilling, Subsurface, among others)
==PAGE:62==
46
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
to identify the risks related to their ﬁeld. They shared and evaluated them on monthly
workshops coordinated and facilitated by the Case Project Quality & Risk Manager.
Quoting him: “it has always been the position of the company for the projects where you
have risks to deal with them in a monthly basis and it is up to the Project Manager, actually,
to design how we will run this sessions”.
These meetings allowed the risk register to be updated at least in a monthly basis, following
the procedure proposes, “the risk register shall be updated at regular intervals, as the project
develops”.
Plan:
The project team (and sometimes higher management levels after receiving the top 10
risks of the project), would suggest plans to mitigate the risks. These plans are considered
actions that need to be taken. As indicated by the Case Project Manager, “each risk have
associated actions which are related to the mitigations, and these actions have a responsible
and a deadline”.
The Case Project Manager would assign the actions to members of the project team. It
was responsibility of the Case Project Quality & Risk Manager to keep track of the status
of the actions, although they were often reviewed in the monthly workshops. As the Case
Project Manager said: “it was one of the Quality Manager tasks to keep the risk register
updated but also to inform me if there were actions close to overdue”.
Respond:
The mentioned actions are intended to mitigate the risks, when this happens the risk register
is updated.
Documentation
The company’s “Risk management in investing projects” procedure indicates that “the
Risk Management related documents are archived by the Quality Manager on behalf of
Project Manager”. This procedure suggestion matched the activities of the Case Project
Quality & Risk Manager in practice.
The risk management process proposed in the procedure “Risk management in investing
projects” is built around the use of the risk register. The use of it is facilitated by a
risk management software called PIMS Risk, used across the organization. As the Asset
Management Responsible said “we have used PIMS all the way through the company”.
==PAGE:63==
4.3. RISK MANAGEMENT BEFORE SRM
47
The software is described by its creators as “a qualitative tool to help us describe, log, and
communicate risks” (OMEGA, 2016).
When asking the Case Project Manager if PIMS makes things easier for him to keep the
risk register he admitted that “it certainly is”; adding as well, “we use the risk register
actively”. At the same time, the Case Asset Commercial Manager acknowledges its value,
but points out that “the tool that we have in PIMS is not necessarily really good” at
comparing risks from different concepts of the same project.
Figure 4.9 – Risk information template example from PIMS.
The software allows to save detailed information about each risk. The information saved
for each risk can be chosen depending on the project; ﬁgure 4.9 presents an example of the
==PAGE:64==
48
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
risk information saved in the case project.
The history and time-stamp of the mitigation actions are stored under "Actions". Under
"Assesments", the history and time-stamp of probability and consequence assessments
are presented as indicated in ﬁgure 4.10. Figure 4.11 shows the visual depiction of these
assessments through a Risk Matrix.
Figure 4.10 – Impact and Probability time-stamp template from PIMS.
Figure 4.11 – PIMS’s risk matrix example from one of the case project’s risks.
There were no guidelines on an agreed formulation for the risk naming in the system, as the
Asset Management Responsible said “we had risk described but it was not in a consistent
way, and the problem with that is that the you are comparing maybe pears and apples,
which does not make sense”, making reference to the high heterogeneity in the formulation
of the risk naming. Referring to the same problem, the Case Asset Commercial Manager
pointed out, “one of the most important issues about risks registers, is trying to make them
sort of consistent”.
==PAGE:65==
4.3. RISK MANAGEMENT BEFORE SRM
49
A wide variety of different formulations was used when adding the risks to the register of
the case project, some examples of it can be seen in table 4.1.
Table 4.1 – Examples of risk formulation from the case project’s risk register.
Risk Formulation Examples
Barriers more extensive than anticipated
Share infrastructure costs with potential host development
Increased Oil Recovery
Hole instability in the tertiary interval
Inability to run screen / swell packer completion to depth
Failure of completion screens
Bring on board Personnel
There are risks in the table that are not even a risk as they are formulated (i.e. “Bring on
board Personnel”), others do not specify the thing risked or the threat.
Beyond the risk register itself few risk documents exist. In compliance with the case
company meeting guidelines, there are MOM from all risk management workshops
performed by the team; however, as indicated by the Case Project Quality & Risk Manager,
such documents had no further use.
Although they used Gant Charts keep record of the project progress visually, they were not
applying a similar visualization to the risks, which could be an improvement, according to
the Case Project Quality & Risk Manager: “we should have been reporting the risk over
time”.
Communication
The company’s “Risk management in investing projects” procedure highlights the
importance of communication as part of the risk management process by making it
one of the steps of the risk management process (see ﬁgure 4.8), and therefore minimum
requirement. On top of that, the procedure makes everybody related to the project (“all
project team members and other project stakeholders”) responsible for the communication.
However, it does not contain speciﬁc information about how the communication should be
handled or what are the communication minimums.
==PAGE:66==
50
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
The only established deliverable about risks in the company was the reporting of the top
ten risks of the project to the Asset, and a similar system from the asset to the layers
above it. Although the differences in the formulation of risks made them hard to relate, as
indicated by the Asset Management Responsible.
It should be highlighted that there was not compulsory risk-speciﬁc deliverables for any of
the decision gates according to the Project Management Manual. As a consequence of this,
the Case Project Quality & Risk Manager of the project “my suggestion for improvement
is also: it should be a requirement for making the risk report for each decision gate, that
is not what is required now but it is one thing I think it should be a improvement for the
future”.
It is true that the risk register was reviewed by Cost Estimation group and the Risk &
Portfolio Analyst, but that review of documentation is not considered communication
according to the deﬁnition of it used in this thesis.
Speaking about the communication of risk across the organization the Case Project Quality
& Risk Manager pointed out that “it is something we have to be better, to draw the picture
of risk in the bigger overview, and that is not very easy I think, to do that”. The Assets
Management Country Responsible’s was in the same line, as one of the three things he
answered to the question “If you could change 3 overall elements in the way we deal with
risk and uncertainty in the company, what would they be?” from the “Risk Survey” was
“Ensure corporate overview/gathering of information”.
4.4
Risk Management after SRM
On November 2014, aiming to have a general risk management system in place, the QHSE
Manager brought the Risk Advisor from Assets Management to the organization QHSE as
new QHSE Risk Management Responsible. The new QHSE Risk Management Responsible
started then the implementation process of Structural Risk Management across the whole
organization. It should be highlighted that the new QHSE Risk Management Responsible
was the creator of the concept of Structural Risk Management, having a great knowledge
of it and strong believes about its potential.
During the whole 2015 the QHSE Risk Management Responsible progressively
implemented Structural Risk Management to the different structures, from the higher
==PAGE:67==
4.4. RISK MANAGEMENT AFTER SRM
51
organizational levels to the lower ones. Some of his decisions during this time had an
indirect effect on the case project, but it would not be until December 2015 when the
implementation on the case project fully started.
Coinciding with the closure of the project, the case company carried out a redundancy
process where one third of its employees were laid off. Being among these employees, the
QHSE Risk Management Responsible was requested to stay for another month to transmit
some of its business risk management knowledge.
Scope
The arrival of the implementation of a risk management system based on Structural Risk
Management implied a complete change of scope introducing a holistic view. As many
others, the Assets Management Country Responsible reacted positively to the change,
which set a consistent way of viewing risks across the company; quoting him: “you might
have such a risk in a large project that makes everything else unimportant, so you need to
ﬁnd a comparable scale; sometimes for people working in minor assets a minor issue is
important, but in the large picture is like nothing”.
On top of the change of scope, the new system introduced the concept of structure as entity
with capital and future investments. Once the project is considered a structure and the
structures around it are acknowledged (i.e. assets, departments, organization), the way
the risks threat each of them is seen differently. Quoting the words of the Case Project
Quality & Risk Manager “there is a big difference in the way you manage risk once you
understand that the same risk is different depending on the structure that owns it”.
A practical effect of that change was the splitting of the risk register that before stored the
risks of both the asset and the project, which are different structures with different capital,
future investments and objectives.
According to the Case Project Quality & Risk Manager, the new risk management system
set a big picture where the organization structures and their risks relate to each other.
More practically, to make sure that the new risk management system was truly holistic, the
QHSE Risk Management Responsible did introductory workshops with all the structures
of the organization (projects, assets, departments, country management, top management)
to set common ground on the risk understanding of the company.
==PAGE:68==
52
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
The new risk management system did not seem to directly affect the responsibility roles
proposed in the “Risk management in investing projects” procedure. However, according
to the words of the Case Project Quality & Risk Manager, it gave the project roles the
sense of having a role in the companies risk management in a bigger picture.
Process
The new risk management system did not propose a speciﬁc risk management process, so
the already existing process kept being used. As the QHSE Risk Management Responsible
pointed out “we do not need to change the process or the software system; we can work
with what we have we just need to change the way people views it”.
Therefore, the steps of the process did not change, but how some of them were performed.
Analyse (Identify and Evaluate):
To help the transition from a silo-based view to a holistic approach, a member of the
company QHSE runs now the monthly project risk management meetings (that before only
have the members of the project team), aiming to provide a view or the big picture of risk
in the company.
The presence of an employee from outside the project team had mixed reception. Several
team members acknowledge the value of it, valuing both the new view and across-
organizational knowledge. The Case Project Manager valued the alignment with the
rest of the company: “I think it was good to have the QHSE Risk Management Responsible;
and he also tried to align the way we were doing the risk assessment in different projects”.
Also, he pointed out: “if you are doing the same task, month after month with the same
group of people then you start to feel conﬁdent, so it is good to have somebody from
the outside to come in and challenge what we are doing”. Also, he highlighted that
risk magnitude can be sometimes subjective and, therefore, discussed without reaching a
conclusion; having an external moderator with a greater view leading the workshop made
it more efﬁcient.
On the other hand, a member of the project team that speciﬁed he was saying this off the
record pointed out: “the members of the project team are experts in their ﬁelds and we
could feel attacked by somebody external to the project questioning what we say”. He felt
that somebody external to the project does not have the knowledge about it to challenge
the members of it. He acknowledged not seeing any value in adding an external member
to the meetings; however, he did value the existence of a new general way of formulating
==PAGE:69==
4.4. RISK MANAGEMENT AFTER SRM
53
risks in the company.
Documentation
After the change on risk management systems, the Case Project Quality & Risk Manager
was still on charge of the risk documentation of the project. The arrival of SRM neither
modiﬁed the software used to handle the risk register and the risk matrices, however, the
way it was used changed.
Figure 4.12 – Diagram that illustrates the transition from one risk register to ﬁve.
The new approach introduced three main concerns regarding the documentation:
• Need of a established risk naming formulation
• Need of organizing the risk register
==PAGE:70==
54
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
• Need of higher accuracy on the probability and impact of risks
First, the asset risk register and the project risk register were separated, as they are separated
structures. After that, a risk register for each concept and a general project risk register
was created with the aim of creating the possibility of comparing the concepts according
to their individual risks and help in the decision making. Figure 4.12 introduces a diagram
that represents this process. In the words of the Case Project Quality & Risk Manager
“now they are much better organized, so that gives you a better view of the risks situation”.
A common standard for risk formulation allowed the risks to be compared more effectively,
as the Assets Management Responsible said “Now I have a brilliant comparable overview
of the risks in my unit”. Figure 4.13 introduces the naming formulation. Which was mostly
used in all the new risks of the project.
Figure 4.13 – Risk naming formulation template.
Aiming to have documentation that could be useful for structures of the organization (i.e.
Cost Estimation Group, Finances, Risk & Portfolio Analysts), a higher level of accuracy
on the values of probability and impact was demanded to be given. Also, to facilitate this
task; changes in the probability axis of the risk matrix were requested, running away from
disproportionate ranges (there is a big difference between 1% probability and 25%), trying
to make them logarithmic-like (steadily increasing wider ranges as the number go closer
to 100%). A similar operation was requested to be done with the impact ranges. Figure
4.14 introduces a risk matrix whose probability axis has been modiﬁed following these
parameters.
Figure 4.14 – Example of one of the drafts of the new risk matrix.
==PAGE:71==
4.4. RISK MANAGEMENT AFTER SRM
55
On top of that, a new way of presenting the risk information was introduced, documenting
risks over time in a sort of Gantt chart of the risks in the project showing in which stages
they were impacting. Quoting the Case Project Quality & Risk Manager: “it gives much
better understanding for the management about when is going happen and how the risk is
moving”. An example of this representation can be seen in ﬁgure 4.15.
Figure 4.15 – Risks over time visual representation.
Communication
When the performed of the last round of interviews there was still not compulsory risk-
speciﬁc deliverables for any of the decision gates; however, such a document was requested
by the Assets Management Responsible because of its value in the decision making. In the
words of the Case Project Quality & Risk Manager, “it is giving the decision makers a
better understanding of the risk in each phase of the project”.
Other attempts to improve both the communication and the efﬁcient use of resources were
done by contacting the Cost Estimation Group and the Risk & Portfolio Analyst, which
==PAGE:72==
56
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
were conducting their own Risk workshops to see how their tasks and objectives could be
coordinated.
Firstly, the arrival of a risk naming convention shared across the company helped
the communication and understanding of them across different structures, as was
acknowledged by the Risk & Portfolio Analyst.
The Case Asset Manager highlighted that the communication of risks between project and
asset already changed positively. As the Case Project Quality & Risk Manager pointed
out, these seem to be the ﬁrst steps in the needed improvement in communication.
4.5
Overview
Table 4.2 summarizes the results presented above. The most important changes have been
highlighted in bold.
==PAGE:73==
4.5. OVERVIEW
57
Table 4.2 – Results overview.
Before
After
Scope
- Project (silo based view)
- Lack of common understanding of risk
- Responsibility roles (Project Owner, Project
Manager, QHSE, Quality Manager, Risk Owner,
Everybody else)
- Structures (holistic view)
- Alignment on risk understanding
- Same responsibility roles
Process
- Company’s procedure process (Prepare,
Analyse (Identify and Evaluate), Plan, Respond,
Communication)
- Analise: project team monthly meetings
- 50% of Risk Management is conformance
- Same process
- Analise: project team & QHSE
workshop
Documentation
- Risk register in PIMS
- Risk matrices with linear axes
- Heterogeneus risk formulation
- MOM of the risk meetings
- No risk visualization over time
- Risk register in PIMS
- Separation Project and Asset risk
register
- Separation of Project concepts risk
registers
- Risk matrices with logarithmic axes
- Homogeneous risk formulation
- Same MOM of the risk meetings
- Risk visualization over time
Communication
- Importance of Communication on the paper
- Top 10 risks reporting
- No Risk Management deliverables in Decision
Gates
- Recognized room for improvement
- Importance of communication in
practice
- Still top 10 risks reporting
- Requested risk document
performance-driven
- First improvements
==PAGE:74==
==PAGE:75==
CHAPTER 5
Discussion
In this chapter, the implementation and adoption of the case study’s risk management
system is discussed according to the chosen factors. Furthermore, it will be extrapolated to
other risk management systems and organizational environments.
5.1
Scope
Although risk management in the case company projects was done before in accordance
with shared company documentation, it had a local scope (project risk management). The
new SRM scope is holistic and based on structures. There exist other risk management
systems with a holistic scope, but none of them are built on the SRM’s concept of structure.
The advantages of a holistic view against a silo-based one have already been widely
covered in the risk management literature. Authors like Gordon et al. (2009) highlight that,
if adopted, a holistic (systematic and consistent) approach is presumed to lower a ﬁrm’s
overall risk of failure and thus increase the performance.
The concept of structure and structural cost have been previously neglected by the literature,
but the work of Jensen et al. (2012) has unveiled the concept and its potential positive
impact on risk management.
In the case project, the positive impact of this holistic view based on structures was
widely recognized by the interviewed employees. As indicated by the Assets Management
Responsible, the new approach allows them to see the risks of speciﬁc projects in the big
picture, gaining a shared understanding of the risk magnitudes, interdependencies and
correlations. With the concept of structure, it is not about a narrow versus a general view
59
==PAGE:76==
60
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
anymore, but about a general view that takes into account all the narrow views within it
and how they relate.
Moreover, the lack of change in the responsibility roles within the projects highlights the
fact that the problem is not their role in relation to the project, but understanding their role
in the big picture of overall risk management.
The change of scope to one based on structures also changes the deﬁnition of risk (risk =
(probability × impact) + structural cost Jensen et al. (2012)). Both the new holistic view
and the new risk deﬁnition are meant to have direct impact on the risk management’s
process, documentation and communication.
All in all, the positive answers of the interviewees to the new scope cannot be considered
as adoption unless it also implies a pro-active use of risk management, which will be
proven and discussed with the other factors.
It can be summarized that: 1) Holistic risk management systems are better for an
organization performance than silo-based ones 2) The change of scope to a holistic view
based on structures impacts the process, documentation and communication.
5.2
Process
Figure 5.1 presents the comparison of system processes presented in the literature (see
ﬁgure 2.7), with the addition of the company’s process. The literature does not agree
on any of them being better than the others, nor on any of them being most likely to be
adopted. The fact that, although having different steps, they all cover the same stages;
can lead to the thinking that the steps of the process are not important as long as some
minimum activities are covered.
This idea is reinforced by the fact that there are risk management systems that do not
propose a process as part of their framework (i.e. Pickett (2005)), considering its speciﬁc
steps unimportant in the big picture.
In the case project, the words of the QHSE Risk Management Responsible subscribe this
line of thinking: “we do not need to change the process [. . . ] just the way people view it”.
The new risk management system arrived without a change in the process.
==PAGE:77==
5.2. PROCESS
61
Figure 5.1 – Risk management systems’ process comparison including the case company
process.
On the other hand, the fact that there is a process in place might imply that there is a system
implemented, but it does not necessarily mean that it has been adopted. This is supported
both by the publications and the data gathered from the case project. As indicated by
Kutsch et al. (2013), it has been widely demonstrated by studies that the existence of a
process does not imply reliability in its use. Quoting one of the project team members: “I
think 50% of the risk management we were doing is probably done because we have to do
it”; denoting the use of the process only for conformance before the change.
The arrival of SRM implied a change of the scope and risk deﬁnition. Although the
process remained the same, its steps got a meaning in the big picture of the company’s
risk management activities. The small steps of the case project’s ten people risk meetings
got a sense across the organization, which implies a greater sense of responsibility. The
participation of a QSHE employee seemed to help with the understanding of the new
situation, bringing cross-organizational knowledge to the discussions. On average, the
==PAGE:78==
62
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
change was well received by the interviewed employees.
It can be summarized that: 1) The speciﬁc steps of the process are not important, 2) The
existence of a process in place does not mean that the employees have adopted the risk
management system, as they can be using the process for conformance, 3) The way the
process is used determines adoption (pro-active use towards performance).
5.3
Documentation
The importance given to the risk register by most risk management systems across the
literature appears to be supported by the words of the employees interviewed in the case
project.
Following the same logic as with the process: the fact that there are risk documentation
tools and risk documents might imply that there is a system implemented, but it does not
necessarily mean that it has been adopted. This is again supported by both the literature
and data from the interviews. As indicated by Kutsch et al. (2013), it has been widely
demonstrated by studies that the existence of a documentation does not imply reliability
in its use. Both the Cost Risk Analyst and the Risk & Portfolio Analyst pointed out the
unusefulness of the risk documentation, which correlates with the above quoted words of
one of the project team members on the risk management activities done for conformance.
Before the arrival of SRM, compulsory documentation was produced to comply with the
requirements but not used afterwards. This creates a paradox: the documentation had poor
quality because it was not going to be used and it was not used because it had poor quality.
The arrival of SRM made the different parts of the organization be perceived as structures.
As a risk changes its magnitude depending on which structure contains it, the risk registers
were separated according to the different structures and in the case of the case project,
the organization of different risk registers for the different concept proposals. The new
organization of the risks of the company in structures and the new standard risk formulation
made possible the understanding of the risks across the organization.
The change of scope highlighted the role of the documentation on the risk management
activities across the company, not only in the project.
Poor and non-standard risk
documentation makes impossible its sharing across the company.
This made some
==PAGE:79==
5.4. COMMUNICATION
63
employees proactively improve the production of documentation (i.e. visual reporting of
risks by the Case Project Quality & Risk Manager). Based on the interviews data, the
change was noticed and valued by employees from different structures.
Having documentation fulﬁls a system conformance, but is does not allow performance
improvements unless it is good.
It can be summarized that: 1) The existence of a risk management documentation tools and
risk documentation does not mean that the employees have adopted the risk management,
2) The way documentation is produced and used determines adoption (pro-active use
towards performance).
5.4
Communication
Before the change to SRM, the importance given to communication on the risk management
literature was unmatched with the communication activities in reality. The narrow scope
contributed to the neglect of the importance risk alignment across the organization,
a conformance use of the steps of the process and a conformance production of
documentation.
The narrow view used when going through the process steps and
the resultant poor quality of deliverables and other documentation resulted in poor or
sometimes none risk communication activities in the case company.
The arrival of SRM enlarged the scope to a holistic view based on structures that directly
affected the process and documentation, spinning them towards performance. This
ultimately affected communication, that now could also be proactive and focused on
the improvement of performance.
The communication changed to be seen as something needed in a great risk management
process where many risk management activities were interrelated and dependent. Better
documentation translated into better communication thanks to the shared risk formulation
and the visual documentation of risks over time. The proactive request of risk deliverables
can be seen as the main sign of the spin towards performance. On top of that, the start of
communication activities of the people producing risk documentation with the people that
could use it show the path going forward.
However, the fact that the project was closed (for reasons from asset level and above),
==PAGE:80==
64
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
interrupted some of the improving activities and prevented some new to be developed. It
cannot be said that communication changed completely to a functioning proactive system
focused on performance, but the ﬁrst steps towards it were taken.
The existence of this proactive communication (motivated by the changes on the before
mentioned factors), should be understood as a sign of adoption. This is supported by the
words of Perera and Holsomback (2005) “success of risk management is reliant on [...] the
interactions of personnel involved”.
It can be summarized that: The performance-orientation of communication is the main
indicator of adoption.
5.5
Adoption
Summarizing the discussion of the factors used to assess adoption: 1) The change of scope
is what changed process, documentation and ultimately, communication, 2) The existence
of a process and documentation is not enough to assume adoption, 3) The way the process
and documentation indicates adoption, 4) The change from conformance to performance
on process and documentation fostered the change of communication to performance, 5)
The performance-orientation of communication is the main indicator of adoption.
It should be highlighted that the project was closed, pausing the adoption process. It can
be argued that up to the date of the closure, the new risk management system achieved
adoption of the changes implemented. However, complete adoption was not achieved, as
the system was not either completely implemented. Aiming to understand the reasons
behind these initial stages of adoption (in the project) of the risk management system
based on SRM, Kotter’s eight accelerators can be brought up (see section 2.3).
According to the results and the discussion, it can be said that the change of scope was
the main trigger towards performance and adoption. The change of scope to a holistic
view based on structures revealed a gap in the risk management activities of the company.
The QHSE Risk Management Responsible used this gap to create a sense of urgency and a
change vision. His deep understanding and trust on the system helped him in creating a
guiding coalition of QHSE employees and top management of the project. The early signs
of the system being useful (short-term wins) helped with onboarding more employees to
the change. The employees never let up and kept learning from experience, but the closure
==PAGE:81==
5.5. ADOPTION
65
of the project prevented the change to ﬁnish its complete institutionalization in the project.
It can be said that the risk management system was adopted in the project as much as it
could be adopted at the implementation stage it was. However, it was not adopted in the
company as a whole. This can be said due to the dismissal of the QHSE Risk Management
Responsible and the relaxation on business risk management activities; although more
in-depth data would be needed to discuss this hypothesis.
The main difference between the project adoption and the organization non-adoption is the
‘buy-in’ of its top management. The top management of the project embraced the change
while the top management of the company paralysed it.
From this, it can be said that, as indicated by Perera and Holsomback (2005): “The ﬁrst
and foremost requirement to ensure successful implementation of risk management is the
need for management ‘buy-in’; understanding he meant adoption when saying “successful
implementation”. However, having the “buy-in” of management is not enough; Kotter’s
accelerators need to be considered.
Beyond the management “buy-in”, the adoption of the risk management system in the
project is motivated, primarily, by the scope change. The holistic scope based on structures
made the employees understand their role in the risk management activities across the
organization, giving them a vision and a sense of responsibility that they did not have
before; leading them towards performance-oriented risk management.
==PAGE:82==
==PAGE:83==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
The problem addressed in this thesis is the lack of adoption of risk management systems,
with the aim to answer the question “Why do certain risk management systems achieve
adoption while most do not?”. A case study has been chosen as the research method, with
focus on a project from a company in the Oil & Gas industry.
Adoption has been deﬁned in this context and then assessed on the case project through
scope, process, documentation and communication. The main ﬁndings are summarized as
follows:
• Top management “buy-in” is essential for adoption.
• Holistic risk management systems are better for an organization’s performance than
silo-based ones. The change of scope to a holistic view, based on structures, impacts
the process, documentation and communication; being the trigger for adoption.
• The existence of a process and documentation is not enough to assume adoption.
• The way the process and documentation are viewed indicates adoption.
• The change from conformance to performance on process and documentation fosters
the same change in communication.
• The performance-orientation of communication is a signiﬁcant indicator of adoption.
This said, the present case study may shed light on the adoption problem, although a
categorical answer for the research question is not possible. Reasons for the adoption
of certain risk management systems are mostly: 1) Making top management “buy-
in”, 2) Making the employees realize the performance gap between having a risk
management system implemented and one adopted, 3) Having a change guiding coalition
67
==PAGE:84==
68
CHAPTER 6. CONCLUSION
that understands and believes in the risk management system, 4) Finding a compromise
on adapting both the company to the risk management system and the risk management
system to the company.
6.1
Recommendations
Upon reaching these conclusions, the following recommendations can be given to the case
company and other companies in a comparable situation:
• Embrace business risk management acknowledging its value for a better performance
of the organization
• Choose a holistic-scoped organizational risk management system
• Consider the structural cost of risks
• Focus on the adoption of the risk management system rather than in its
implementation
6.2
Future Research
Although more is known now about the adoption problem, the research question cannot be
fully answered within the scope of a master thesis alone. However, the research performed
can be seen as the ﬁrst steps on a long path towards this end.
Assessing the adoption of a risk management system in a whole organization instead of a
project should be seen as the next step in this research path.
In the future, new implementation and adoption assessment factors can be explored, aiming
to reveal the most representative ones. Also, the use of company culture as an assessing
factor should be taken into account in future research.
As future prospects to build upon the current project are explored, this thesis must be seen
not only as an illustrative case study that sheds light into the problem of adoption, but also
as a initial step for future research on a vaguely explored ﬁeld.
==PAGE:85==
References
Aiken, C. and Keller, S. (2009). The Irrational Side of Change Management.
Alali, B. and Pinto, A. (2009).
Project, systems and risk management processes
interactions. In 2009 Portland International Conference on Management of Engineering
& Technology, pages 1377–1386.
Alessandri, T. M., Ford, D. N., Lander, D. M., Leggio, K. B., and Taylor, M. (2004).
Managing risk and uncertainty in complex capital projects.
Quarterly Review of
Economics and Finance, 44(5 SPEC.ISS.):751–767.
Anderson, E. (2013). What is risk management? In Business Risk Management, chapter 1,
pages 1–21. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester.
Badiru, A. B. (2008). Triple C model of project management: Communication, cooperation,
and coordination.
Barney, J. B. (1991). Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage. Journal of
Management, 17:99–120.
Beasley, M. S., Clune, R., and Hermanson, D. R. (2005). Enterprise risk management: An
empirical analysis of factors associated with the extent of implementation. Journal of
Accounting and Public Policy, 24(6):521–531.
Bedford, T. and Cooke, R. (2001). Probabilistic Risk Analysis, Foundations and Methods.
Chapman, C. (1997). Project risk analysis and management—PRAM the generic process.
International Journal of Project Management, 15(5):273–281.
Collins (2011). Collins English Dictionary. Collins, 11th edition.
Cooper, D. F., MacDonald, D. H., and Chapman, C. B. (1985). Risk analysis of a
construction cost estimate. Project Management, 3(3):141–149.
69
==PAGE:86==
70
REFERENCES
COSO (2004a). Enterprise Risk Management - Integrated Framework.
COSO (2004b). Enterprise Risk Management – Integrated Framework: Application
Techniques.
Crowe, R. M. and Horn, R. C. (1967). The meaning of risk. Risk & Insurance, 34(3):459–
474.
Dionne, G. (2013). Risk management: History, deﬁnition, and critique. Risk Management
and Insurance Review, 16(2):147–166.
Duijm, N. J. (2015). Recommendations on the use and design of risk matrices. Safety
Science, 76:21–31.
Fischhoff, B. and Kadvany, J. (2011). Risk: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford University
Press.
Flick, U. (2014). An introduction to qualitative research. Los Angeles.
Fox, C. (2014). 10 Easy Steps to Implement Enterprise Risk Management. RIMS.
FXCM (2016). DailyFX.
Gantt.com (2016). Gantt.com.
Gordon, L. A., Loeb, M., and Tseng, C.-Y. (2009). Enterprise risk management and ﬁrm
performance: A contingency perspective. Journal of Accounting and Public Policy,
28(4):301–327.
Gray, C. F. and Larson, E. W. (2000). Project Management: The Managerial Process.
McGraw-Hill, Boston, mcgraw-hil edition.
Gray, C. F. and Larson, E. W. (2006). Project Management: The Managerial Process.
McGraw-Hil, Boston.
Group Russell (2011). Specialty models too silo-based. Reactions.
Guerron-Quintana, P. A. (2012). Risk and uncertainty. Business Review, (Q1):9–18.
Habbard, D. W. (2009). The failure of Risk Management. John Wiley & Sons, New Jersey.
Hargie, O. and Tourish, D. (2000). Handbook of Communication Audits for Organisations.
Psychology Press.
Hayes, J. (2014). The theory and practice of Change Management. Macmillan and Co.
==PAGE:87==
REFERENCES
71
Holton, G. A. (2004). Deﬁning risk. Financial Analysts Journal, 60(6):19–25.
Hoyt, R. E., Moore, D. L., and Liebenberg, A. P. (2008). The Value of Enterprise Risk
Management : Evidence from the U.S Insurance Industry. Unpublished Paper, pages
1–22.
Hulett, D. (2016). Integrated Cost-Schedule Risk Analysis. Gower.
ISO 21500 (2012). ISO 21500:2012 Guidance on project management.
ISO 31000 (2009). ISO 31000:2009 Risk management – Principles and guidelines.
Jensen, J. L. (2015). Økonomien bag den røde telefon.
Jensen, J. L., Ponsaing, C. D., and Thrane, S. (2012). Risk, resources and structures:
Experimental evidence of a new cost of risk component - The structural risk component
and implications for enterprise risk management. Risk Management-an International
Journal, 14(2):152–175.
Jensen, J. L., Winther, J. A. B., and Ponsaing, C. D. (2015). Risk and return : The red
phone problem of risk in structures. Number October 2015.
Jorion, P. (2000). Value at Risk: The New Benchmark for Managing Financial Risk.
Kaplan, S. and Garrick, B. J. (1981). On The Quantitative Deﬁnition of Risk. Risk Analysis,
1(1):11–27.
Keynes, J. M. (1921). A Treatise on Probability. Macmillan and Co.
Keynes, J. M. (1937).
The General Theory of Employment.
Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 51:209–223.
Knight, F. (1921). Risk, uncertainty and proﬁt.
Kotter, J. P. (1996). Leading Change. Harvard Business Review Press.
Kotter, J. P. (2012). Accelerate!
Kotter, J. P. (2014). Accelerate: Building strategic agility for a faster moving world.
Harvard Business Review Press, Boston.
Kreye, M. E. (2011). Uncertainty analysis in competitive bidding for service contracts.
Kutsch, E., Denyer, D., Hall, M., and Lee-Kelley, E. L. (2013).
Does risk matter?
Disengagement from risk management practices in information systems projects.
European Journal of Information Systems, 22(6):637–649.
==PAGE:88==
72
REFERENCES
LeStage, G. (2015). How Have Kotter’s Eight Steps for Change Changed? Forbes.
Liebenberg, A. and Hoyt, R. (2003). Determinants of Enterprise Risk Management:
Evidence from the Appointment of Chief Risk Ofﬁcers. Risk Management and Insurance
Review, 6:37–52.
Magee, J. H. (1961). General insurance. Richard D. Irwin Inc, Homewood, Illinois, 6th
edition.
March, J. G. and Simon, H. A. (1958). Cognitive limits on rationality. In Organizations.
John Wiley & Sons, New York.
McNeil, A. J., Embrechts, P., and Frey, R. (2005).
Quantitative Risk Management:
Concepts, Techniques and Tools, volume 101.
McShane, M. K., Nair, a., and Rustambekov, E. (2011). Does Enterprise Risk Management
Increase Firm Value? Journal of Accounting, Auditing & Finance, 26(4):641–658.
Mehr, R. I., Cammack, E., and Rose, T. (1961). Principles of insurance. Richard D. Irwin
Inc, Homewood, Illinois, 3rd edition.
Modarres, M. (2006). Risk Analysis in Engineering. CRC Press, Florida.
Morgan, M. G., Henrion, M., and Small, M. (1990). Uncertainty: A Guide to Dealing with
Uncertainty in Qualitative Risk and Policy Analysis.
Olson, D. L. and Wu, D. (2010). Enterprise risk management models, volume 12. Springer-
Verlag Berlin Heidelberg.
OMEGA (2016). Pims Risk Management.
Oxford University Press (2010). Oxford Dictionary of English. Oxford University Press,
3rd edition.
Pagach, D. and Warr, R. (2011). The characteristics of ﬁrms that hire chief risk ofﬁcers.
Journal of Risk and Insurance, 78(1):185–211.
Palmer, I., Dunford, R., and Akin, G. (2008). Managing Organizational Change: A
Multiple Perspectives Approach. McGraw-Hill Education, 2nd edition.
Papke, E. (2014). True Alignment : Linking Company Culture with Customer Needs for
Extraordinary Results. AMACOM, New York.
Perera, J. and Holsomback, J. (2005). An Integrated Risk Management Tool and Process -
NASA. In 2005 IEEE Aerospace Conference, pages 129 – 136.
==PAGE:89==
REFERENCES
73
Perminova, O., Gustafsson, M., and Wikström, K. (2008). Deﬁning uncertainty in projects
- a new perspective. International Journal of Project Management, 26(1):73–79.
Pfeffer, I. (1956). Insurance and economic theory. Richard D. Irwin Inc, Homewood,
Illinois.
Pickett, K. H. S. (2005). Auditing The Risk Management Process.
Pickford, J. (2001). Mastering Risk: Concepts.
PMI (2009). Practice Standard for Project Risk Management.
Pritchard, C. (2013). Project Management Communications Toolkit. Artech House.
Raydugin, Y. (2013). Project Risk Management: Essential Methods for Project Teams and
Decision Makers.
Samson, S., Reneke, J. A., and Wiecek, M. M. (2009). A review of different perspectives
on uncertainty and risk and an alternative modeling paradigm.
Schlottmann, F., Mitschele, A., and Seese, D. (2005). A Multi-objective Approach to
Integrated Risk Management. In Evolutionary Multi-Criterion Optimization, pages
692–706.
Schrand, C. M. and Unal, H. (1998). Hedging and coordinated risk management: Evidence
from thrift conversions. Journal of Finance, 53:979–1013.
Soltanizadeh, S., Rasid, S. Z. A., Golshan, N., Quoquab, F., and Basiruddin, R. (2014).
Enterprise Risk Management Practices among Malaysian Firms. Procedia - Social and
Behavioral Sciences, 164(August):332–337.
Stringer, J. (1987). Risk and uncertainty in the formulation of major projects. In Risk
Analysis and Management, Conference Chartered Inst. Mgmt. Acc. and Opl. Res. Soc.
Stringer, J. (1992). Risk in large projects. In Tutorial Papers from Operations Research
Conference, pages 29–46. Operational Research Society, Birmingham.
Stulz, R. M. (1996). Rethinking risk management. Journal of Applied Corporate Finance,
9:8–24.
Subramaniam, N., Collier, P., Phang, M., and Burke, G. (2011). The effects of perceived
business uncertainty, external consultants and risk management on organisational
outcomes. Journal of Accounting & Organizational Change, 7(2):132–157.
==PAGE:90==
74
REFERENCES
Thunnissen, D. P. (2003). Uncertainty Classiﬁcation for the Design and Development of
Complex Systems. 3rd Annual Predictive Methods Conference, page 16.
Whittaker, B. (1999). What went wrong? unsuccessful information technology projects.
Information Management & Computer Security, 7(1):23–29.
Willett, A. H. (1951). The Economic Theory of Risk and Insurance. University of
Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia.
Williams, T. (1993). Risk Management Infrastructures. (1):5–10.
Williams, T. (1995). A classiﬁed bibliograpy of recent research relating to project risk
management. 85(93):18–38.
Wilson, J. M. (2003). Gantt charts: A centenary appreciation. European Journal of
Operational Research, 149(2):430–437.
Yin, R. K. (2009). Case study research : design and methods, volume 5.
Zajac, J. (2013). Communication in Global Corporations. Peter Lang GmbH.
Zulch, B. G. (2014). Communication: The foundation of project management. Procedia
Technology, 16(16):1000–1009.
Zurich (2014). Using Big Data to improve Risk Management. Risk Management, 61(9):28–
33.
==PAGE:91==
Appendices
75
==PAGE:92==
==PAGE:93==
APPENDIX A
Interview Questions
Introduction
1. Name and Job title:
2. What are your job responsibilities within the organization?
3. For how long have you been working in the organization?
4. How is your work related to the case project?
5. For how long have you been working the case project?
Case Project before change of risk management approach
6. Did you participate in any Case Project Risk Workshop? If so, how many?
7. Can you describe the steps that you followed in these Risk Workshops?
8. How were these workshops useful for you?
9. Were you aware of which were the main risks for the project?
10. Were you aware of which risks you were responsible for?
11. How did you use the Risk Register?
12. How did you use the documentation of the risks in the Case Project (such as the risk
register)?
13. How did other people within the Case Project use the risk documentation?
14. How did other people outside of the Case Project use the risk documentation?
77
==PAGE:94==
78
APPENDIX A. INTERVIEW QUESTIONS
15. How often did you use PIMS to: 1) Check the Risk Register? 2) Change the Risk
Register?
Case Project after change of risk management approach
16. Did you participate in any Case Project Risk Workshop? If so, how many?
17. Can you describe the steps that you followed in these Risk Workshops?
18. How were these workshops useful for you?
19. Were you aware of which were the main risks for the project?
20. Were you aware of which risks you were responsible for?
21. How did you use the Risk Register?
22. How did you use the documentation of the risks in the Case Project (such as the risk
register)?
23. How did other people within the Case Project use the risk documentation?
24. How did other people outside of the Case Project use the risk documentation?
25. How often did you use PIMS to: 1) Check the Risk Register? 2) Change the Risk
Register?
Final
26. Is there anything else that you think may be helpful or related to the topic?
27. Do you think there is somebody else relevant that I should ask about this topic?
