==PAGE:1==
Security models and exploitations
in theory and practice for
unmanned aerial vehicles
Martin Verup and Mikkel Olin
Kongens Lyngby 2016
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
The goal of the thesis is to create a secure model for unmanned aerial vehicles
with focus on both security, safety, and privacy aspects.
To perform a risk
analysis for a drone in its environment the ISO 27005 and CORAS tools are used
to identify threats and vulnerabilities that, if left unattended, can be exploited,
compromising security, safety or privacy. The thesis look at a couple of popular
recreational drone models to evaluate and experiment on trying to ﬁnd any
vulnerabilities. Finally a model is created using the results from the analysis
and is compared to real-life drone attacks. Evaluating the model against these
attacks show that they could have been identiﬁed and prevented using this
model, ensuring security for the drone system thus indirectly ensuring safety
and privacy. To ensure safety and privacy more directly, the use of a dedicated
drone legislation is needed.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
Målet med dette speciale er at skabe en sikkerhedsmodel for ubemandende ﬂy-
vende fartøjer med fokus på både systemsikkerhed, fysisk sikkerhed og privatliv.
Til at udføre en risikoanalyse for en drone i dens naturlige miljø er ISO 27005
og CORAS værktøjerne benyttet til at identiﬁcere trusler og sårbarheder, der,
hvis der ikke sættes ind imod, kan blive udnyttet til at kompromittere både sy-
stemsikkerhed, fysisk sikkerhed og privatlivets fred. I dette speciale vil der blive
kigget på nogle populære hobbydronermodeller og evaluere og eksperimentere
på dem, for at forsøge at ﬁnde nogle sårbarheder. Til sidst, bliver der lavet en
model, ved hjælp af resultaterne fra analysen og denne sammenlignes med vir-
kelige droneangreb. Ved at evaluere modellen i forhold til disse angreb, ses det,
at disse kunne være blevet identiﬁceret og forhindret ved at bruge denne model
og derved sikre systemsikkerhed for dronesystemet samt indirekte sikre fysisk
sikkerhed og privatliv. For at sikre fysisk sikkerhed og privatliv mere direkte, er
en speciﬁk dronelovgivning nødvendig.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁlment of the requirements for
acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering.
==PAGE:8==
vi
Preface
The aim of the project is twofold as there is a theoretical and practical part.
The theoretical part is focusing on creating a security model of generic drones.
To do this it is essential to understand the internals of how drones work, includ-
ing:
• Understand the protocols used in drone communication.
• Identify drone positioning and navigation.
• Map out the sensor arrays and their applications.
From this analysis a security model including a threat- and attack model is
created, which creates the basis of the practical part.
The practical part concerns working on one speciﬁc drone using the theory and
models gained in the ﬁrst part. During this part it is needed to:
• Identify and create a security evaluation including a model of vulnerabil-
ities and exploits.
• Create a practical exploitation of an identiﬁed vulnerability.
Lyngby, 25-June-2016
Martin Verup and Mikkel Olin
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
First of all we would like to thank our supervisor Christian Damsgaard Jensen
for the continuous support, ideas and feedback throughout the entire thesis
project period.
In addition we would like to thank our co-supervisor Michael Linden-Vørnle for
proposals on how to approach the issues in the thesis and sharing his expertise
in drones.
Finally we would like to thank Jakob Jakobsen for the opportunity to work
in the DTU Space DroneCenter Lab and ideas on how to approach the drone
experimentation.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Abbreviations
AES
Advanced Encryption Standard
AFHDS
Automatic Frequency Hopping Digital System
AHTD
Active Human Threat Deliberate
ARF
Almost-Ready-to-Fly
BNF
Bind-and-Fly
BVLOS
Beyond Visual Line of Sight
CIA
Conﬁdentiality, Integrity and Availability
COTS
Commercial-Of-The-Shelf
ESC
Electronic Speed Control
GCM
Galois/Counter Mode
HTA
Human Threat Accidental
HTD
Human Threat Deliberate
IMU
Inertial Measurement Unit
ISR
Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance
NHT
Non-Human Threat
NIST
National Institute of Standards and Technology
OSI
Open Systems Interconnection
PHTD
Passive Human Threat Deliberate
==PAGE:12==
x
RPAS
Remotely Piloted Aircraft System
RPV
Remotely Piloted Vehicle
RTF
Ready-To-Fly
SDK
Software Development Kit
SDR
Software-Deﬁned Radio
TCP
Transmission Control Protocol
UAS
Unmanned Aerial System
UAV
Unmanned Aerial Vehicle
UDP
User Datagram Protocol
VLOS
Visual Line of Sight
==PAGE:13==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
Abbreviations
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Deﬁnition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.1.1
Military Drones . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.1.2
Commercial Drones
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.1.3
Recreational Drones . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2
Drone legislation in Denmark
13
2.1
Proposed Danish drone legislation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2
Adopted Danish drone legislation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3
Technologies in UAV’s
21
3.1
Wireless Remote Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.1.1
Communication Protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2
Sensors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2.1
Navigation sensors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2.2
Data collecting sensors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
==PAGE:14==
xii
CONTENTS
4
Risk Management
31
4.1
Security, Safety, and Privacy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2
Origins of Attacks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.2.1
Attackers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.2.2
Types of attacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2.3
Attack vectors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.2.4
Network layers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.3
Risk Management Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.3.1
ISO 27005 - Information Security Risk Management . . .
51
4.3.2
CORAS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
4.4
Countermeasures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
4.4.1
Cryptography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
4.5
Hardware and software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
5
Risk Assessment
73
5.1
Context Establishment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
5.2
Risk Identiﬁcation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
5.2.1
The Drone as a stakeholder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
5.2.2
The Pilot as a stakeholder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
5.2.3
The Bystanders as stakeholders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
5.2.4
Visualization of identiﬁed risks using CORAS . . . . . . .
91
5.3
Risk Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
5.4
Risk Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
6
Model Experimentation
99
6.1
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
6.1.1
Sensor speciﬁc attacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
6.1.2
Replaying a control signal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
6.1.3
Fabrication of control signal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
6.1.4
Spooﬁng . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
6.1.5
WiFi speciﬁc attacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
6.2
Proof of concept: Replay attack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
6.3
Equipment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
6.4
Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
6.4.1
Software-deﬁned radio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
6.4.2
Replay attack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
6.4.3
Analyzing the control signal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
6.4.4
WiFi-based attacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
7
Risk treatment and
model evaluation
117
7.1
Risk Treatment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 118
7.1.1
Conﬁdentiality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 118
7.1.2
Integrity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
==PAGE:15==
CONTENTS
xiii
7.1.3
Availability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
7.1.4
Authenticity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
8
Discussion
125
9
Conclusion
129
A Popular drone models
131
B Screenshots
135
C Listings
137
Bibliography
141
==PAGE:16==
xiv
CONTENTS
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Unmanned aerial vehicles have existed for a long time. The technology today
have made it possible to mass produce smaller and cheaper versions for use
outside of the military. This opens up a whole new world of possibilities and
practical applications for both industrial and public purposes. With this wave of
cheap technology some concerns have come to light. Namely safety, security and
privacy. To have a ﬂying object that is a threat to its environment can become
a big problem especially if the adaptation is continually rising. In this project
we will take look at these ﬂying drones to determine their role in both today’s
and tomorrow’s society and map out practical uses and possible consequences
identiﬁed through extensive risk- and threat analysis to create a thorough model
of the typical drone, its components, information ﬂows, to identify potential
vulnerabilities and how to secure them.
==PAGE:18==
2
Introduction
Any vulnerabilities that could possibly be used the aﬀect the navigation system
and either take over control of the drone or get access to any payload. These
could potentially be found in either the remote control communication or in
the built-in sensors used to navigate autonomously. The goal is to create an
extensive model of the drone and by including an attacker model and a risk
assessment, map out all possible risks, consequences, and threats to both safety,
security and privacy by looking at potential vulnerabilities or known exploita-
tions. Finally a practical application of the theory from the security model will
be executed to try and create a proof of concept that exploitation is possible
and how it could have been identiﬁed using our secure model.
==PAGE:19==
3
This thesis contains nine chapters:
In Chapter 1 a deﬁnition of a general drone and the diﬀerent types of drones
described.
Chapter 2 looks at the current and upcoming drone legislation in Denmark and
it’s relation to safety, security, and privacy.
Chapter 3 describes some of the diﬀerent technologies available to be imple-
mented and used in drones while also looking at the general drone model.
In Chapter 4, diﬀerent risk management methodologies will be looked at and
used to model threats and vulnerabilities in a drone system.
Chapter 5 uses the risk management from chapter 4 and create a risk assessment
that identiﬁes the diﬀerent stakeholders, their assets and motivations for safety,
security, and privacy.
Chapter 6 describes a few real-life test on vulnerabilities in drones, using WiFi
based attacks and a Software-Deﬁned Radio (SDR) to look at control signals.
In Chapter 7 a reﬂection on the risk assessment and experimentation will be
described and used to give recommendations for a secure model for drones in
general.
Chapter 8 reﬂects on the results from the model- recommendations and evalu-
ation. Chapter 9 features concluding remarks and lessons learned during this
project work.
==PAGE:20==
4
Introduction
1.1
Deﬁnition
How to deﬁne a drone? The term ’drone’ is borrowed from insects living in
colonies such as bees, ants etc.
with the drones being all males.
Roughly
speaking they are expendable due to their huge quantity. For drones as a ﬂying
vehicle this is also true in some cases for instance when they are used in war
scenarios.
Other names for drones used by more technologically oriented are Unmanned
Aerial Vehicle (UAV) and Remotely Piloted Vehicle (RPV). In cases where sev-
eral drones are linked together in a network it can be called Unmanned Aerial
System (UAS) or Remotely Piloted Aircraft System (RPAS).
The deﬁnition for a drone, or rather UAV, is looked up in the Oxford Dictionaries
webpage is as follows:
- an aircraft piloted by remote control or onboard computers 1
This deﬁnition gives a good fundamental understanding of what a drone is
and how it is controlled however in order for the drone to function interaction
between several components is required. Generally speaking a drone is build up
of the parts shown in Fig. 1.1.
1http://www.oxforddictionaries.com/deﬁnition/english/uav
==PAGE:21==
1.1 Deﬁnition
5
Figure 1.1: Model of a general drone system
Each of these parts each play an essential role in being able to get the drone to
be working as intended, which basically is the ability to ﬂy and communicate
with the pilot:
Propulsion The mechanics keeping the drone airborne
Avionics System that controls the ﬂying mechanisms
Sensors Sensors measuring various parameters used for either navigation or
collection of data. Can often be the same sensors for both purposes
Remote Control Real time control by a pilot
Programmed Control Autonomous pre-programmed control
Freight Any objects that can be carried onboard
==PAGE:22==
6
Introduction
Telemetry Data send between the drone and the pilot or stored in the storage.
Storage An onboard storage containing data either telemetry data or pre-
programmed control instructions.
As mentioned this description of a drone is general and the purpose of the
drone is of great importance to which parts the drone consists of. The purpose
of drones varies according to the ﬁeld in which they are used. These ﬁelds are
commonly known as:
• Military,
• Commercial, and
• Recreational
As one might think use of drones between the ﬁelds varies extensively
1.1.1
Military Drones
For decades drones have been used for surveillance and bombing raids in times
of war.
The reason this has mostly been to avoid losing pilots, but also in
order to optimize the vehicle (or plane) in terms of weight, wind resistance fuel
consumption etc..
The idea of using UAVs started during World War I with the development of
the Kettering Bug in the US. The Kettering Bug was noting more than a ﬂying
torpedo in a wooden frame making it a predecessor for both UAVs and guided
weapons such as cruise missiles. With a range up to 120 km it was able hit
targets much further than any artillery at the time [1], but in order to do so it
was required to calibrate each unit mechanically according to wind speed and
direction. Even though about 50 units were ordered by the US military the war
ended before they were used.
==PAGE:23==
1.1 Deﬁnition
7
It was not until a few years before World War II that the idea was brought up
again though it was for training anti aircraft personnel. The development of
these UAVs was made by the company Radioplane who where ready with their
ﬁrst model RP-1 in 1935 [2]. The technology evolved during the following years
and with the development of the RP-4 the US army chose to purchase the UAVs
under the designation OQ-1. In 1939 the model OQ-2 was developed and due
to World War II an estimated 15.000 units [2] were ordered by the US military
making it the ﬁrst mass produced drone. In Germany during World War II
was late to use rather sophisticated drones in the form of the Vergeltungswaﬀe
1, better known as the V1 rocket, and its successor the V2 rocket. They both
used the same principle of a mechanical ’autopilot’ which included a magnetic
compass and a gyroscope [3], even though the V2 autopilot was much more
complex, to help guiding the missile to it destination.
Today the technology used in military UAVs are a lot more complex due to the
development of the jet engine, computer etc.. As opposed to the early UAVs
the modern models are controlled by an operator located in an airbase. The
navigation is supported by a number of sensors in the drone such cameras and
GPS which also makes it possible to order the drone to a speciﬁc location using
auto-pilot. An example of these modern military drone is the RQ-1 Predator
which were active in Iran and Afghanistan.
Sometimes it is not suitable however to use a drone at the size of a manned
aircraft. For that reason the appearance of mini drones on the battleﬁeld is
increasing. One of the advantages of using mini drones is that they are able to
ﬂy into buildings to locate enemies. The PD-100 Black Hornet PRS [4] is such
a mini drone. According to the company ProxDynamics who produce them the
Black Hornet weighing 18 grams in total is able to ﬂy 25 min with a maximum
speed of 5 m/s (= 18 km/h) and contain a GPS and steerable camera.
==PAGE:24==
8
Introduction
1.1.2
Commercial Drones
In an investigation made by PwC in 2016 it was estimated that the total ad-
dressable value of drones in commercial context was $127,3 billion. In Table 1.1
is listed the values for each industry as estimated by PwC.
2015
Infrastructure
45,2
Tranport
13,0
Insurance
6,8
Media & Entertainment
8,8
Telecommunication
6,3
Agriculture
32,4
Security
10,5
Mining
4,3
Total
127,3
Table 1.1: The value of drone powered solutions in all applicable industries in
$ billion [5]
The obvious beneﬁts of using drones is that they have a low response time and
they are able to access areas which might be inaccessible to humans. This can
be used in several ﬁelds to improve safety and quality of life as well as optimizing
management of cities and the surrounding areas. As discussed by [6] there are
several opportunities for drone integration by both the industry and by the
public for use in cities.
Measure ground and sea levels:
A drone with a number of sensors can be used to ﬂy over areas, take
pictures and utilize other sensors to collect various information about a
land- or sea mass. GIS surveying can potentially be done cheaper when
using a drone over a pilot ﬂying a plane over the same area. There are
however still challenges to this. A research team have done experiments on
this and even though they had diﬃculties with unstable image acquisition,
==PAGE:25==
1.1 Deﬁnition
9
they still conclude drones to be a much more ﬂexible solution with more
advantages than traditional methods, when studying river processes [7].
Inspection of constructions:
Once in a while constructions such as buildings and bridges needs to be
inspected in order to locate damages. This can be done by using drones
with cameras which can get to areas otherwise diﬃcult to access.
Overview of accidents:
To get a quick overview of an accident the authorities could use drones.
This will also help guiding the police and rescue teams before they arrive
at the accident.
Deﬁbrillator transport:
The initiative of placing easily accessible deﬁbrillators in populated areas
has been around for years, but it is not always the case that there is
a deﬁbrillator within reasonable range. Using drones as transportation
device the help can get to any location within minutes [8] by contacting
the emergency hotline with an app which send the coordinates where the
deﬁbrillator is needed.
Civil Security Control:
Drones could be used to help the police or national guard in cases such
as demonstrations, man hunts etc.. The advantage of using drones is that
there are multiple eyes in the sky instead of a handful of helicopters.
Natural Disaster Control and Monitoring:
At times it is diﬃcult to enter areas aﬀected by natural disasters. There-
fore it makes sense to send drones in the area to locate survivors or possible
routes into the area. In case of injured persons the drones could also carry
==PAGE:26==
10
Introduction
emergency aid packages.
Agriculture Management and Surveillance:
Using drones in agriculture can help with spreading fertilizer over a vast
area. Using cameras attached to drones it is also possible to keep an eye
on the crops and estimate the harvest.
Environmental Surveillance:
Attaching air sensors to drones they could be used survey areas where
there is a possibility for leaks such as oil and gas reﬁneries. In addition
they could be used in cities to monitor the level of exhaust gases.
Traﬃc Management:
With the increasing world population and thereby increasing number of
transportation vehicles (such as cars) become a problem in relation to
transportation time. By using drone to monitor the traﬃc ﬂow during for
instance rush hour the traﬃc can be guided in order to optimize the ﬂow
allowing the drivers to get to their destination faster.
1.1.3
Recreational Drones
For recreational use there exist three main types of drones [9]:
Ready-To-Fly (RTF)
Also known a Commercial-Of-The-Shelf (COTS) drones, this type is ready
to be used as soon as the owner has charged it. This type of drones are
mostly "toy" drones with none or few sensors and limited ﬂy-time. To ﬂy
the the drone a dedicated controller is needed.
Bind-and-Fly (BNF)
These drones does not have a dedicated controller and are instead con-
==PAGE:27==
1.1 Deﬁnition
11
trolled by binding a device (smartphone, tablet, etc.) to the drone. This
also gives more possibilities for the use of sensors.
Almost-Ready-to-Fly (ARF)
This type of drone is assembled by the user and therefore requires extended
knowledge of the underlying technology. The number of sensors on the
drone is only limited by their energy consumption and weight.
In a lot of cases, specially for BNF and ARF, the drone will have a camera
attached to allow video recording and taking pictures from a perspective not
possible before. Taking photos and videos from angles not easily accessible is
fun for hobbyist and a new opportunity for professional photographers.
This however raises a big privacy concern as it opens up the possibility to look
into windows high above ground or without being on the property of the building
as well as more discretely spying on other people.
Additionally there the whole issue about the drone itself and the safety about
it ﬂying around in the sky. Consequences of what could happen if it were to fall
down and hit something or just it’s presence in the airspace in unwanted places
are just a few of the many concerns this rising trend is imposing on today’s and
tomorrow’s society. Another perspective to consider is the that the cheap mass
produced drones probably aren’t properly secured which opens up the possibility
for exploitation.
To ensure the public interest of safety and privacy some legislation is in place
for use of drones. The legislation is an important part in how to deal with these
issues.
==PAGE:28==
12
Introduction
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 2
Drone legislation in
Denmark
Before drones were introduced on the Danish market for recreational and com-
mercial purposes there already existed provisions called Regulations for Civil
Aviation BL 9-4 last modiﬁed January 9. 2004. These regulations addresses
unmanned aircrafts below 25 kg and establishes 7 general provisions:
a. The ﬂight must be performed in such a way that lives and property are not
endangered, and so that the environment is applied as little inconvenience
as possible.
b. The distance to the course / courses at a public airﬁeld as indicated on
National Survey and Cadastre maps must be at least 5 km.
c. The distance to the course / courses at a military airbase as indicated on
==PAGE:30==
14
Drone legislation in Denmark
the National Survey and Cadastre maps must be at least 8 km.
d. The distance to urban areas and greater public roads must be at least 150
metre.
e. The ﬂight altitude must not exceed 100 m above ground.
f. Densely populated areas, including holiday home areas and inhabited
camping sites, as well as areas where a greater number of people are gath-
ered in the open air shall not be overﬂown.
g. The particularly sensitive natural areas mentioned in BL 7-16 shall not be
overﬂown.
which concerns aircrafts below 7 kg. If the aircraft is above 7 kg then there are
4 special provisions which must also be met:
a. The aircraft must be equipped with radio control equipment.
b. Flights shall only be made from an approved model airﬁeld and must take
place within the limits of the airspace to a notiﬁed model airﬁeld.
c. Flights must not take place unless there is liability insurance in accordance
wit the Danish Aviation Act.
d. The ﬂight must be conducted under an organization approved by the State
Aviation Administration, which is designed to operate ﬂights with model
aircraft amateur basis and in accordance with regulations approved by
Civil Aviation Administration.
Even though the Regulations for Civil Aviation BL 9-4
==PAGE:31==
2.1 Proposed Danish drone legislation
15
Figure 2.1: The number of cases reported to the Danish Trans-
port Authority each year relating to drones [10]
As the graph show the number of reported incidents involving drones has been
increasing in the period 2011 to 2014 and it is expected to keep increasing in
the coming years [10]. Even though it is not clariﬁed what kind incidents the
drones have been involved in it is thought that ﬂying over populated areas and
ﬂying near airports has been the main cause for the reports.
2.1
Proposed Danish drone legislation
To counter the increasing number of incident an inter-ministerial working-group
consisting of:
• The Ministry of Justice including
– the Danish Security and Intelligence Service (PET)
– the Danish National Police
• The Ministry of Business and Growth represented by
==PAGE:32==
16
Drone legislation in Denmark
– the Danish Business Authority
• The Ministry of Defence represented by
– the Danish Defence Intelligence Service
– the Danish Defence Acquisition and Logistics Organisation
• The Ministry of Transport
was formed to come up with recommendations for a new drone legislation. The
result was a report published in March 2015 with focus on drones weighing less
than 25 kg and ﬂying below 150 m.
The working-group recommend that the existing provisions in BL 9-4 should
be retained but also that it is necessary to introduce some modiﬁcations and
additional regulations, including a triviality threshold and a drone register.
For drones having a weight of at most 250 g the triviality threshold should be
introduced as they are not considered to be a threat to the safety of the citizens
by the working-group.
Drones weighing more than 250 g a ’driving’ license
should be acquired in order to legally operate them.
Creation of a register should initially involve all professional drones, giving them
a drone ’number plate’1 , and issued driving ’licenses’. Later on the ’number
plate’ registration should also be applied to the recreational drones.
The table below sums up the recommendations put forth by the working groups
1Expression used in [10] page 8, Box 1.
==PAGE:33==
2.1 Proposed Danish drone legislation
17
Permission
ID
GPS
Logging
Liability
Insurance
Training
Reqs
Airworthiness /
Technical Reqs
Up to 250 g
without camera
or similar device
Up to 250 g
with camera
or similar device
X
Recreational
0.250 kg
to 1.5 kg
X
X
Drone
permit
1.5 kg
to 7 kg
X
X
Drone
permit
7 kg
to 25 kg
X
X
Drone
permit
Commercial &
Emergency
Response
Up to 250 g
without camera
or similar device
Up to 250 g
with camera
or similar device
X
0.250 kg
to 1.5 kg
X
X
X
Drone
License A
1.5 kg
to 7 kg
X
X
X
X
Drone
License B
7 kg
to 25 kg
X
X
X
X
Drone
License C
BVLOS
up to 2.5 kg
X
X
X
X
Drone
License D
X
>25 kg
X
X
X
X
Case by
case basis
X
Table 2.1: The recommended framework for regulation of recreational, com-
mercial and emergency response drones [10].
Permission
A permission is needed for companies if they wish to use a drone
in a populated area. To get such a permission the drone must be identiﬁable
and the operation must be logged in case of future accusations of misuses.
ID
The identiﬁcation of a drone is transmitted through a radio signal which
can be picked up by the authorities. It is expected that the signal will contain
the name, address and phone number of the owner. If the drone weighs below
==PAGE:34==
18
Drone legislation in Denmark
250 g and has no camera then it would not be required.
GPS Logging
All drones used in commercial or emergency response context
should be tracked using GPS logging. The main reason is ’to safeguard citizens
and for use as documentation in connection with complaints, accidents, etc.’
[10].
Liability Insurance
At the moment only professional drone users are obliged
to acquire a third-party liability insurance. However the working-group has the
opinion that all drone users who owns a drone above 250 g should be obliged to
acquire an insurance.
In BL 9-4 only professional users of UAVs were instructed to acquire a third-
party liability insurance.
However, since family insurance policies does not
cover the recreational use of drones the working-group recommend introducing
liability insurance for all users of drones.
Training Requirements
The training required for an operator is dependent
on the category in which he/she is going to operate a drone in. For recreational
purposes the operator only needs to acquire a drone permit (also known as a
drone ’driving’ license). The operators for commercial or emergency response
drones is obliged to acquire a drone license in the range A to D depending on
the weight of the drone.
Airworthiness / Technical Requirements
For professional users the level
of airworthiness of the drone needs to be documented and approved by the
authorities before the drone is able to ﬂy. In addition the drone should fulﬁll
some technical requirements which as a ﬁrst instance should include electronic
==PAGE:35==
2.2 Adopted Danish drone legislation
19
’number plates’ and lights. In time the requirement could be extended to meet
future needs.
2.2
Adopted Danish drone legislation
The Danish Minister of Transport and Construction, Hans Christian Schmidt
has stated that:
We take the necessary respect to safety and privacy, so that the
citizens can feel safe as the industry and technology evolves [11]
As such the recommendations are not followed with respect to a triviality thresh-
old and special requirements only for professional drone pilots. Instead the it
is required that all drone pilot, including those who have a recreational drone,
acquire a drone ’license’, an insurance and registration of the drone. In a consul-
tation letter send out by the Danish Transportation and Construction Agency
on June 8. [12] the proposed new legislation is summarised. The letter lists the
requirements that must be met before, during and after the ﬂight for drones
weighing less than 25 kg ﬂying in a populated area.
Requirements before ﬂight:
• Registration and labeling of drone
• Insurance
• Age limit of 18 years
• Drone ’license’
• Experience
• Creating ﬂight and safety area
• Obtaining information on airspace
==PAGE:36==
20
Drone legislation in Denmark
• Obtaining special permits for ﬂights with elevated ﬂight safety risk
• Orientation of residents and obtaining other licenses
Requirements during ﬂight:
• The drone and drone system
• Monitoring of airspace
• Right of way rules
• Flight altitudes and distances
Requirements after ﬂight:
• Imports into the logbook of ﬂight information
In the original decree on ﬂight with drones in populated areas the punishment
for violating the provision set out to ﬁnes unless another penalty is prescribed
[13]. As such the pilot can only be ordered to pay a ﬁne or more depending on
the violation extent unless any aviation laws are being violated.
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 3
Technologies in UAV’s
As drone is widely speciﬁc term, creating a model of the internal design and
mapping the technologies of one is not that simple. There is, however, a minimal
set of requirements in order to make a drone airborne, keeping it steady in air
and to control it from a ground control. In Fig. 3.1 a model of a drone in its
general form has been created to better understand the internal works, the data
ﬂow and to specify the speciﬁc technologies used both internally and externally.
==PAGE:38==
22
Technologies in UAV’s
Figure 3.1: Model of components in a drone
Battery The power source feeding power to all the components.
ESC Electronic Speed Control. Adjusts the power going to the motors based
on data from the IMU to keep the drone steady in air. One for each motor:
4 in a quadcopter, 6 in a hexacopter etc.
Flight Controller The main component responsible for calculating and relay-
ing sensor data to both the telemetry module, ESCs and on-board storage.
IMU Inertial Measurement Unit.
Collection of sensors, typically gyroscope
and accelerometer but sometimes also magnetometer and GPS. Measures
aviation speciﬁc data such as g-force, angular rate and sometimes actual
position.
Motor Purpose of spinning propellers to create propulsion making the drone
airborne.
Power Supply Ensures the correct amount of power goes to the components.
Radio Transmits and receives radio waves used for navigation by remote control
and to supply telemetry data.
==PAGE:39==
3.1 Wireless Remote Control
23
Sensor Array Collection of additional sensors, either used for navigation or
data collection - sometimes both. Can be sensors such as altimeter, prox-
imity sensor or a camera.
Storage On-board storage to store sensor speciﬁc data.
Telemetry Module Collects sensor data in real-time and transmit back to the
ground control.
Transceiver Deals with radio signals received and data to be transmitted.
Responsible for data processing such as compression, digital/analog con-
version and modulation.
3.1
Wireless Remote Control
If a drone is not autonomous it must be remotely controlled somewhere. This
means that there’s some wireless communication going to the drone from the
ground control using a remote. Often there will also be some communication
going the other way, typically a video feed. To transfer data back and forth
the devices needs to establish a connection, usually done with a handshake.
How the handshake works diﬀer from protocol to protocol but some of the most
known are the 3-way- and the 4-way handshake used by the TCP and WPA
protocols respectively. There exists numerous protocols for wireless communi-
cation, however in case of drones it isn’t just a pick and chose scenario. Drones
often have very limited computational power, limited power supply but need to
communicate at a reasonable distance preferably without line of sight while still
be able to communicate in real time.
==PAGE:40==
24
Technologies in UAV’s
3.1.1
Communication Protocols
Using radio waves for wireless communication is the standard today. The fre-
quencies of radio waves span from 3 kHz to 300 GHz but a lot of these are
restricted and requires permission to use.
There are however some frequen-
cies open for free use which are obvious choices to use. These frequencies are
called the Industrial, Scientiﬁc and Medical bands, or ISM bands. Some of these
frequencies are [10, Section 6.1]
• 27/35/40 MHz
• 433 MHz
• 2.4 GHz
• 5 GHz
There exists more open frequencies, both higher and lower but these are gener-
ally not used or considered outside special cases and not viable in devices such as
consumer electronics. Each of these frequencies have their own advantages and
disadvantages. Lower frequencies have better penetration power but requires
longer antennas and can carry less data, while the higher frequencies are more
easily obstructed than the lower frequencies, can carry more data but consumes
more power. Some regional restrictions are also in place where some frequencies
are open in some places of the world while not in others. Manufactures will
have to take this into account depending on where they want to sell their RF
devices.
Region 1
Region 2
Region 3
27/35/40 MHz



433 MHz



915 MHz



2.4 GHz



5 GHz



Table 3.1: The ISM bands and regions
==PAGE:41==
3.1 Wireless Remote Control
25
Generally the ITU regions can be described as follows.
Region 1 is Europe
and Africa, Region 2 the Americas and Region 3 Asia and Australia. This is
important to take into account as a device using the 433 MHz frequency can be
sold within Europe but not in the USA, while the opposite is true for the 915
MHz frequency.
WiFi
IEEE 802.11
Choosing WiFi is an obvious choice. WiFi is proven standard and is found in
over 10 billion devices in the world [14]. WiFi typically operates on the free
2.4 GHz frequency but also 5 GHz have been gaining ground. The strength
of WiFi is that it is a proven, reliable protocol already implemented in most
mobile devices. WiFi however have the disadvantage of a relatively high power
consumption [15] which decreases the battery life signiﬁcantly in an already
lightweight device. The data rate is however high enough to transmit a live
video feed in uncompressed form back to the device.
Bluetooth
IEEE 802.15.1
Bluetooth also operates on the 2.4 GHz frequency and with version 4 and up-
wards oﬀers signiﬁcant low power usage. Especially compared to WiFi. The
range is however a limiting factor thus making Bluetooth only usable to com-
municate over short distances. The longest range for Bluetooth is Class 1 with
a range of 100 meter. The low data rate of Bluetooth compared to WiFi is
however the biggest bottleneck. Bluetooth 2.0 have a data rate of only 3 MBps
and Bluetooth 4.0 at 24 MBps which is not suﬃcient for a video stream back to
the device.
RF
A generic term for all communication with radio frequencies. Other IEEE
standards exists for wireless communication, e.g. IEEE 802.15.4 ZigBee that
==PAGE:42==
26
Technologies in UAV’s
have a really low power consumption but a data rate so low that it isn’t feasible
for most drones. As more bandwidth and range requires more power it really
is a trade oﬀthe manufacturer has to deal with. Looking at the currently most
popular recreational drones seen in Fig. A.1, it seems that most have settled on
using 2.4 GHz as evident in Table A.1. The drawback on this frequency is that
is often will require a line of sight as higher frequencies struggle to penetrate
objects such as buildings. Also there’s the risk of interference from other devices
using the same frequency. At the 2012 World Radiocommunication Conferences
the member countries agreed to reserve the 5030-5091 MHz frequencies for inter-
nationally standardised aeronautical systems including recreational drones [10,
Section 6.5]. It appears that most manufactures are settled on using the 2.4
GHz frequency even though that this frequency is heavily used by a lot of de-
vices as this is an ISM band. One way to limit the interference of other devices
can be by using what is called frequency hopping. As thr 2.4GHz is more of a
range than a very speciﬁc frenquency it has been divided into diﬀerent channels
with each their own little varying frequency. By detecting if a channel is used
by other devices frequency hopping can be used to switch to another channel
without as much interference.
3.2
Sensors
The number of sensors which can be put on an UAV is limited by the size and
price range. The cheapest of them available for everyday people may only have
a camera or maybe no sensors at all. This also restrict the use of the UAV to
within the visual range of the operator. Since the range of the application of
UAVs is nearly unlimited the number of sensors available is too. Sensors can be
divided into two categories: Navigational or Data collecting. The navigational
sensors are used to ease the controlling of the drone either for the operator or
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Sensors
27
the auto pilot. The data collecting sensors on the other hand are only used
to gather information which are send to the operator or stored until the drone
return to the operator.
3.2.1
Navigation sensors
In order to use sensors to navigate a drone it is essential to maintain a commu-
nication channel between the operator and the drone. Alternatively using an
auto pilot this is not required but it is comforting to get the navigation data all
the same to make sure that the drone is functioning.
Camera
Most UAVs are equipped with some kind of camera no matter the
application. This is because the camera can be used to control the UAV by a
real time video link. Otherwise the camera can be used to take photographic
images.
GPS
Short for Global Positioning System this sensor is used to identify the
geological position of the drone. To do this the GPS makes contact with several
satellites orbiting Earth.
Proximity sensor
A relatively new technology (in private drones) the prox-
imity sensor measures the distance to surrounding objects. The ﬂight path can
then be corrected to prevent collision with the objects and damaging the drone.
Thermal sensor
The application of thermal sensors are mostly for vehicles
operated during nighttime to detect warm objects or people.
==PAGE:44==
28
Technologies in UAV’s
Magnetometer
An electronic form of a compass this sensor is able to measure
the direction of magnetic ﬁelds such as the magnetic ﬁeld of the Earth. This
makes it usable for cross-referencing with GPS information.
Accelerometer
The G-force working on the drone can be detected by an
accelerometer.
Gyro Sensor
In case the drone begin to rotate about its own axis a gyro
sensor is able to detect it. The rotation might be the result from a failure or
damage to the drone and can give the operator an idea whether the drone is ﬁt
for service or not.
Altimeter
This sensor measures the altitude of the drone
Ultrasound
An ultrasound or ultrasonic sensor can be used to measure the
distance to objects or the ground in order to maintain a certain altitude.
3.2.2
Data collecting sensors
As mentioned the data collecting can be done in two ways:
1. send the data directly to the operator or
2. save the data on some storage device in the drone.
Air quality sensor
The ability to measure the air quality in diﬀerent heights
in the atmosphere. The sensor can for instance be used to measure CO, CO2
==PAGE:45==
3.2 Sensors
29
or O3 in an area giving the information required to make precautions for the
population.
Hyperspectral sensor
A hyperspectral sensor works like a camera but is
able to process information from a wide range in the electromagnetic spectrum.
This makes it useful for detecting areas or objects which may be diﬃcult to
identify on an ordinary photography.
LIDAR
As an alternative to take pictures one can use a LIDAR which can
make 3D models of objects or areas by using a laser.
Electro-optical Sensor
A light sensor that detects the presence or absence
of light to act accordingly such as turning on light when its dark.
Photoelectric sensor
Using light, often infrared, to determine the presence
or absence of an object but also distance of that object.
With all of these sophisticated technologies - sensors and wireless protocols
- the overall drone system becomes susceptible to the same vulnerabilities as
the individual components. The system is not more secure than the weakest
link. As such, it is of utmost importance to identify any possible vulnerabilities
and create a thorough risk analysis to limit the possibility of exploitation.
==PAGE:46==
30
Technologies in UAV’s
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 4
Risk Management
As drones are becoming more mainstream the safety, security, and privacy aspect
are more relevant than ever. If security measures are not properly implemented,
drones are now a bigger risk for both safety and privacy. As the sheer volume of
drones are rising so are the associated risk imposed by various vulnerabilities.
No system is free of vulnerabilities but if no eﬀort are done in order to minimize
them the threats to our safety and privacy might become a rising problem in our
society. There have already been drone incidents that has aﬀected safety[16],
security[17] and privacy[18].
For private drones data can be diﬀerentiated by control data and information
data [19]. The control data is the data used for navigational parts of the drone,
while the information data contains the state of the drone and is also called
telemetry data.
==PAGE:48==
32
Risk Management
In order to make a risk management it is important to understand the drone
and its surroundings. An example of such is shown on Fig. 4.1 containing:
Figure 4.1: An example of a drone environment containing a drone, pilot,
attacker and bystander.
Drone environment The area within the ﬂying radius of the drone.
Drone The UAV controlled by the pilot or the attacker.
Pilot The person in control of the drone unless it is taken over by the attacker.
Attacker A malicious person who tries to attack the drone logically.
Bystander Any person in the drone environment who are not the pilot or the
attacker.
These deﬁnitions will be used without the rest of this thesis.
4.1
Security, Safety, and Privacy
Most of the time when a system is analysed within the ﬁeld of information
technology the only interesting matter is to ensure security. This is however not
==PAGE:49==
4.1 Security, Safety, and Privacy
33
true for a drone environment since a four party is included; the bystanders. For
them the security of the drone is of no interest unless it leads to a violation of
safety or privacy. For that reason it is equally important to talk about safety
and privacy when talking about drone risk management.
Security
When we talk about information security there are 3 primary properties that
need to be addressed before we call a system secure.
The 3 properties are
Conﬁdentiality, Integrity and Availability, also known by its short form CIA. In
addition we would like to add safety and privacy. But more properties which
are also often desired exists and also needs to be addressed in order to maximize
the security of a system.
Conﬁdentiality
Ensuring the message can only be read by the rightful sender
and recipient. Usually done by encrypting the message.
Integrity
Ensuring the message has not been altered on its way from sender
to recipient. Usually done by comparing checksums by hashing the message on
both ends.
Availability
Ensuring the message can reach its destination. If the recipient
never receives the message either because the system is too heavily guarded by
other security measures or it is vulnerable to interference or denial-of-service
attacks, the system is no good.
Usually availability can be hard to protect
against but there exists methods such as changing communication channels.
==PAGE:50==
34
Risk Management
Authenticity
Ensuring authentication is to be sure that the message is really
from the acclaimed sender. Usually done by having a shared secret that can be
hashed and sent. If the recipient can recreate the same hash, the sender must
be valid.
Safety
The term safety in the drone environment means to protect the environment
against the drone in a physical sense. This include both human safety as well
as safety for any property which might be within the environment. In addition
the safety of the drone should be considered since drones are highly movable
vehicles able to do damage to itself in collision with the ground or walls in the
environment.
Privacy
As with safety privacy is a matter of protecting the environment from the drone
but in diﬀerent way as privacy is a matter of information gathering without the
consent of the aﬀected people. The compromise of privacy will usually be seen
as spying, but the purpose can be varying from reconnaissance for a break-in to
sneak peeking on the neighbour for fun.
4.2
Origins of Attacks
To properly understand what to prevent and protect against it is important to
know where the attacks might come from. Who wants to attack the system and
==PAGE:51==
4.2 Origins of Attacks
35
what is their motivation for doing so. Understanding this is a crucial step in
discovering any likely attack vectors, their impact and likelihood.
4.2.1
Attackers
There exist several kinds of attackers which are determined by the amount of
resources available and the motive. Of course the level of experience is also a
vital part, but it is not the dominant factor in attacker determination for most
of the attackers.
Script kiddies
The lowest kind of attacker in terms of both resources and mostly also experi-
ence. The reason for them to do the attacks are basic since they want to impress
their friends or simply because they are able to do the attack.
Hackers
The challenge and/or the fame which may follows are what the plain hacker
strives for. In addition the experience gained from doing the attack may also
be a reason for do it.
Criminals
In recent year the number of cases involving computer criminals have been
increasing and it often turns out that it is on a organized level. The only goal
for them is to gain money from their victims by using methods such as phishing
or blackmailing.
==PAGE:52==
36
Risk Management
Insiders
Contacted by third parties they hand over information or search for information
in the organization in exchange for money. Otherwise they could do it on their
own initiative to do damage to the organisation.
Spies
The use of spies to gain knowledge of your enemies and competitors have always
existed. Today however the means to get the information is also involve getting
access to their systems since most modern organizations make use of some kind
of electronic storage device linked up to their computer network.
Terrorists
The main goal for terrorist are to spread terror using their ideological believes as
the argument to do so. The attacks are meant to be publicly known otherwise
it would be nearly as eﬀective as intended. Alternatively the terrorists could try
to get information which can be used in attacks.
Activist
Hacking activists, or hacktivists for short, are hackers who has an interest to
spread a message, gain information or do harm to organizations that the hack-
tivists are convinced have done something illegal either in the context of law or
ethics.
All attackers must be accounted for in order to produce a secure an thorough
risk analysis, however some may be more relevant than others. In regards to
drones, the biggest concern is evaluated be terrorists and spies.
==PAGE:53==
4.2 Origins of Attacks
37
4.2.1.1
Abusers
An attack on safety and privacy might not come from an attacker. The mo-
tivation of the pilot can be just as malicious as an attackers. The pilot could
be interested in ﬁlming inside other peoples windows, violating their privacy, or
ﬂy over restricted areas, for example airﬁelds or company buildings to gather
intelligence on an area. Drones can also be used to transport items, for example
to smuggle drugs or other contraband inside prisons. These kinds of abusers
often have a criminal motive.
Other abusers can be thoughtless people that have no regards to other people’s
or property safety. This is often the cause of insuﬃcient training.
Safety and privacy violations from an abusing pilot and not attackers are diﬃcult
to prevent. The best way is probably to deter this behaviour by a special drone
legislation.
4.2.2
Types of attacks
Attacks may come from anywhere and in any form. All attackers have diﬀerent
motivation for doing what they do and each have a purpose.
When attacking the network communication it can happen in multiple ways,
each method with a diﬀerent purpose. These attacks are all man-in-the-middle
attacks.
==PAGE:54==
38
Risk Management
Deletion
Sender
Receiver
Attacker
Figure 4.2: Basic concept of a deletion attack
Simply deleting the network packets will prevent the recipient from ever receiv-
ing anything and unaware that anything was tried to be sent.
The availability is violated.
Drone example: This attack could prevent remote control as the packets would
never reach it.
==PAGE:55==
4.2 Origins of Attacks
39
Fabrication
Sender
Receiver
Attacker
Figure 4.3: Basic concept of a fabrication attack
Creating new fake network packets and sending them to a recipient can make
them act as they received legitimate packets from someone else, someone they
trust.
The authentication is violated.
Drone example: This attack could allow someone otherwise unauthorized to
take control over it.
==PAGE:56==
40
Risk Management
Modiﬁcation
Sender
Receiver
Attacker
Figure 4.4: Basic concept of a modiﬁcation attack
Modifying a packet sent to the recipient could allow an attacker to alter the
data received and could result in unexpected behaviour from the sender.
The integrity is violated.
Drone example: This attack could allow someone to hijack the control so the
operator’s commands are misinterpreted by the drone resulting the drone in
being uncontrollable.
==PAGE:57==
4.2 Origins of Attacks
41
Eavesdropping
Sender
Receiver
Attacker
Figure 4.5: Basic concept of an eavesdropping attack
Eavesdropping is a passive attack that may let the eavesdropper learn how
packets are crafted in order to later perform one the active attacks mentioned
above or to simply get a copy of the data.
The conﬁdentiality is violated.
Drone example: This could allow an attacker to learn how the drone speciﬁc
packets are crafted and use that knowledge later in an active attack.
==PAGE:58==
42
Risk Management
Traﬃc analysis
Sender
Receiver
Attacker
Figure 4.6: Traﬃc Analysis
Traﬃc analysis is a passive attack that collects meta data in order to reveal
speciﬁc patterns about the communication. It can be all sorts of things such as
how commands look, frequency of communication, size of packets etc.
Traﬃc analysis is not really a violation of any of the CIA properties but a method
to gather information that potentially can be used in other attacks later that
does.
Drone example: This method can allow the analyst to know certain semantics
of the drone’s ﬂying patterns. A drone used for surveillance could easily be
avoided if it is known where and when it will be.
4.2.3
Attack vectors
Attacks can aﬀect diﬀerent types of a system. An attack is often focused on a
speciﬁc part, such as a speciﬁc sensor or the communication parts. Attacking
a sensor is very dependent on the sensor itself and its type [20], while the
communication focused attacks can be more widespread.
==PAGE:59==
4.2 Origins of Attacks
43
Message replaying
If it can be observed the a system responds in a certain way to certain behaviour
it may be possible to recreate the action and then the same reaction, essentially
performing a replay attack.
Applying this on sensors could include showing
certain images to a camera navigated drone, crafting speciﬁc radio- or light
waves for drones using this information in its avionics parts.
Information theft
If an attacker uses eavesdropping on data being transmitted he could steal po-
tentially value information. If the drone is used to collect sensitive or valuable
data it could end in the hands of an undesired person. It could be data that
is valuable for one company that is stolen by another, competitive company -
either sensor data or videos and images.
Radio jamming
In this kind of deletion attack the wireless signal is "blocked" by sending out
radio signals at the same frequency as the target make use of.
This cause
interference which eﬀectively eliminates the original signal send from or to the
target making communication impossible. Usually jamming is done over a wide
spectrum of frequencies since it can be diﬃcult to identify a single frequency
amongst many. Of course jamming also aﬀect everything else using a wireless
signal in the spectrum unless the attacker uses a tube of some kind to make a
directional jamming attack.
Message injection
When doing this kind of attack a message, which can be of any kind, is send
out continuously. This is done either to saturate the network, like in a radio
jamming attack, or to send information for corrupting messages.
==PAGE:60==
44
Risk Management
Message alteration
The attacker receives a message which he modify and then sends oﬀagain.
Depending on the goal of the attack the attacker can modify a couple of things:
The sender information, receiver information or packet content. For some cases
the attacker may change the information or he may delete parts of it.
4.2.3.1
WiFi speciﬁc attacks
WiFi is a protocol for wireless communication and a lot of WiFi speciﬁc attacks
already exists with purpose of either gaining access to a device or an access
point or to prevent others from accessing the access point thus eliminating the
availability aspect of the CIA triad. Some of the known WiFi speciﬁc attacks
could be relevant when looking for vulnerabilities and exploits in WiFi-based
drones [21].
De-authentication
Broadcasting a de-authentication frame to both the WiFi access point and the
client containing the MAC address of both stations will terminate the connection
between them. If for example a mobile phone is used to control a drone with
a WiFi connection, such an attack will make it impossible to maintain the
connection and thus controlling the drone. This attack will compromise the
availability of the drone. To perform this attack only a WiFi network card and
the right software is needed. The software could be mdk3 or aircrack-ng both
available for most Linux systems. After a successful de-authentication attack
the stations can re-establish a connection and continue again. The attack is
only valid as long as the de-authentication frames are broadcasted. A resilient
hacker can continue the attack as long as he likes and the availability suﬀers as
a result.
==PAGE:61==
4.2 Origins of Attacks
45
Shared Key Guessing
Often when you buy a wireless router the login credentials for the WiFi access
point is set to vendor speciﬁc default value.
The same scenario is possible
with WiFi-based drones. If there even is a password associated with the WiFi
hotspot it may very well be a default one which only requires an attacker to
look up the speciﬁc vendor’s manual. Other possibilities are trying some of the
most passwords, such as ’root’ or ’admin’. Even if the default password has been
changed it may still be worth it to try some of the most common passwords used.
There exists many lists of such and trying some of those might prove successful
anyway. If an attacker gain access to the access point simply by guessing the
password for the WiFi hotspot it is to be seen as a breach of authentication.
WEP Key Cracking
If the WiFi hotspot is password proctected with the WEP algorithm it may be
easy for an attacker to crack the password as this standard uses very weak en-
cryption. An attacker simply needs the right software and a WiFi network card
in order to capture the packets sent from the base station. The WEP standard
uses RC4, a stream cipher and an initialization vector of only 24 bit. As this
is not enough bits to prevent re-use of keys the WEP standard is vulnerable to
related-key attacks statistically after only around 10,000 packets. Attacking the
key to gain access to a WiFi hotspot is an attack on the authentication. Most
systems today have abondoned WEP for the newer and more secure WPA algo-
rithm but some systems using WEP are still not uncommon. A weak encryption
is not much better than no encryption at all.
WPA handshake sniﬃng
The WPA algortihm was developed as a more secure solution and is the replace-
ment for WEP.
==PAGE:62==
46
Risk Management
Often used in conjunction with the de-authentication attack in order to quicken
the process of the access point and device performing a 4-way handshake that
can be captured. After successfully capturing a WPA 4-way handshake it may
be possible to crack the pre-shared key for the access point. If the access point
uses a pre-shared key as authentication method, capturing the handshake might
make it possible to crack the key with a dictionary attack. The WPA2 algorithm
is the current and more secure standard that all devices today most support. It
has support for TKIP and AES encryption, speciﬁcally the latter is considered
very strong and is the recommended encryption algorithm by NIST[22, PR:7.1].
As the security of WPA2 is considered very strong, especially when using AES,
a dictionary attack on the handshake may not be worth the time and resources.
Twin Access Point
Setting up an access point with the same SSID as one trusted by the user with
the purpose of luring them in and connect to it can compromise the conﬁdential-
ity. An attacker could use this to capture traﬃc sent and received by the user
and anything not encrypted would be visible to the attacker. For a WiFi-based
drone this could control signals, what do they look like, do they contain any
necessary information to connect and control it such as a session- or unique ID
and perhaps a pre-shared key. In any case it can lead an attacker to reverse
engineer the control signal or even worse just see it in plain text.
Clear channel assessment
The way WiFi shares it’s capacity is using the Carrier Sense Multiple Access
with Collision Avoidance (CSMA/CA) algorithm. It works by having a pre-
set interval called the Distributed Inter-Frame Space (DIFS) interval. When
someone wants to send frames on the network channel the device will ﬁrst wait
the DIFS interval and if no other traﬃc has occurred then send the frame. If
==PAGE:63==
4.2 Origins of Attacks
47
the channel is not clear it will chose a random value called the backoﬀinterval.
For every slot time it will listen for traﬃc on the channel. If the channel is
clear the backoﬀinterval will be reduced by one. If the channel is busy the
backoﬀinterval will freeze during that slot time. When the backoﬀinterval are
decreased all the way to zero it will send the frame is the channel must be empty
in order to reach zero. An attacker could however attack the algorithm and keep
sending frames on the channel to make it appear busy. That way the backoﬀ
interval will not decrease to zero and the frames will not be sent. This attack
is compromising the availability of the network connection.
4.2.4
Network layers
When looking for exploits in a network it is important to know where an attack
would be most likely to succeed. Looking at the network structure in Table 4.1
there are 7 diﬀerent layers in the OSI model and 4 in the Internet Protocol
Suite, also known as TCP/IP, to look at.
OSI Model
Internet Protocol Suite
Host
7
Application
Application
6
Presentation
5
Session
4
Transport
Transport
Media
3
Network
Internet
Link
2
Data Link
1
Physical
Table 4.1: The OSI Reference Model and Internet Protocol Suite
Each layer has their own advantages and disadvantages but it all comes down
to what type of attack is desired.
Implementing security measures in the diﬀerent layers each have their advan-
==PAGE:64==
48
Risk Management
tages and disadvantages. As the OSI model is only a reference model while the
Internet Protocol Suite (TCP/IP) is actually in use, the focus will be on this.
Looking at the security in each layer in the search for exploits these points are
some interesting parameters to look at. If the security aspects are complex to
implement or does not provide suﬃcient protection or if headers are exposed it
may be possible to ﬁnd a vulnerability to exploit.
Physical layer
Conﬁdentiality
On link
Integrity
On link
Authentication
None
Replay Attack
No protection
Traﬃc Analysis
Protection on link
The physical layer is the most low-tier layer and the most simple. There is no
authentication and thus no replay protection, but does secure the entire traﬃc
on a single link. Even source and destination addresses are secured by this.
The drawback is the security is only on the link and is therefore vulnerable in a
switching node, where it might be possible to launch an attack.
Internet layer
Conﬁdentiality
Between hosts and sites
Integrity
Between hosts and sites
Authentication
Hosts and sites
Replay Attack
Hosts and sites
Traﬃc Analysis
Host and site information exposed
==PAGE:65==
4.2 Origins of Attacks
49
The internet layer is the one responsible for exchanging IP packets over the
network and where the IP resides. Security properties can only happen between
hosts and sites. Might not be the best option to try application speciﬁc replay
attacks but may reveal possibly useful patterns in a traﬃc analysis.
For drones, traﬃc analysis in this case might not be this relevant as the meta
data of a packet is not as interesting as the payload.
Transport layer
Conﬁdentiality
Between apps, hosts and sites
Integrity
Between apps, hosts and sites
Authentication
Both user, host and site
Replay Attack
Between apps, hosts and sites
Traﬃc Analysis
Protocol and host and site info exposed
The transport layer builds on top of the internet layer and handles the protocols
used on top of the IP packets such as TCP or UDP.
Application layer
Conﬁdentiality
Only between apps
Integrity
Only between apps
Authentication
User
Replay Attack
Only between apps
Traﬃc Analysis
Only payload is protected
The protection is probably easiest to implement in the application layer as
it is on a per application basis. This however makes it vulnerable to replay
attacks and traﬃc analysis while the apps is handling conﬁdentiality, integrity
==PAGE:66==
50
Risk Management
and authentication separately.
On a drone there may not be diﬀerent apps and may just be a system on a
chip but attacking the application layer could be a good ﬁrst step with passive
attacks by eavesdropping and traﬃc analysis.
Even if the content is encrypted and therefore unreadable it might still be subject
to a replay attack.
4.3
Risk Management Methods
When performing a risk management operation there exist a variety of diﬀerent
modelling methods and tools each having focus on their own niche. Choosing
between these methods is a choice of which viewing angle is preferred. Some of
the methods are standardised and more used than others.
• AGRA
• CORAS
• DREAD
• ISO 27000
• ISO 31000
• ISRAM
• OCTAVE
• OWASP
• STRIDE
In this thesis the selected methods are ISO 27000, more speciﬁcally the subsec-
tion ISO 27005 because it’s an international standard and describes information
security risk management.
==PAGE:67==
4.3 Risk Management Methods
51
The CORAS method will also be used because of its tools to create diagrams to
create a visual impression of the stakeholders, risk and consequences associated
with the risk management.
4.3.1
ISO 27005 - Information Security Risk Management
The ISO 27005 is drafted by the International Organisation for Standardisation
to give guidelines for organizations, mainly businesses, in Information security
risk management.
CONTEXT ESTABLISHMENT
RISK IDENTIFICATION
RISK ANALYSIS
RISK EVALUATION
RISK TREATMENT
RISK ACCEPTANCE
RISK COMMUNICATION AND CONSULTATION
RISK MONITORING AND REVIEW
RISK ASSESSMENT
RISK DECISION POINT 1
Assessment satisfactory
RISK DECISION POINT 2
Treatment satisfactory
END OF FIRST OR SUBSEQUENT ITERATIONS
No
Yes
No
Yes
Figure 4.7: Risk management chart recreated after the one in ISO 27005
==PAGE:68==
52
Risk Management
Figure 4.7 show an information security risk management process which can be
used both in risk assessment and risk treatment. The process can, and should,
be conducted iteratively in order to get as much information out of the process as
possible. The iterative process may also lead to new information about ﬁndings
in previous iterations.
The management process consists of the 8 phases:
1. Context Establishment
2. Risk Identiﬁcation
3. Risk Analysis
4. Risk Evaluation
5. Risk Treatment
6. Risk Acceptance
7. Risk Monitoring and Review
8. Risk Communication and Consultation
where the phases from 2 through 6 concerns the actual risk management.
4.3.1.1
Context establishment
In this phases the all the relevant information regarding the organisation is
gathered in order to do the risk management. The purpose of the information
security risk management should be deﬁned, setting up the scope and bound-
aries, as well as creating a suitable organization to operate the process.
Apart from the information gathering the Context establishment phase also
include setting up basic criteria for the risk management process:
Risk management approach
==PAGE:69==
4.3 Risk Management Methods
53
A risk management approach should be selected or developed such that a
set of basic criteria regarding evaluation, impact and acceptance of risks
can be set up. The approach chosen should be depending on the scope
and objectives identiﬁed.
Risk evaluation criteria
In order to evaluate the information security risk of the organization a risk
evaluation criteria should be developed. To do this some considerations
needs to be made including: critically of information assets, legal and
regulatory requirements, and stakeholder expectations and perceptions.
Impact criteria
The impact criteria should be speciﬁed with respect to how severely the
organization is aﬀected in terms of damage and/or cost in case of a infor-
mation security incident taking place. During this process several consid-
erations should be made including classiﬁcation levels, loss of value and
damage of reputation.
Risk acceptance criteria
The organization should develop and specify its risk acceptance criteria
considering the policies, goals, objectives and interests of stakeholders of
the organization. Whether a risk should be accepted or not is depending
on business criteria, legal and regulatory aspects, operations, technology,
ﬁnance, and social- and humanitarian factors.
4.3.1.2
Risk Identiﬁcation
As the ﬁrst part of the Risk Assessment the purpose of risk identiﬁcation is to
get an understanding of the risks as to what causes them, how it is possible and
what they aﬀect.
In order to identify the risks the organization should identify:
==PAGE:70==
54
Risk Management
• Assets
• Threats
• Existing controls
• Vulnerabilities
• Consequences
which, when viewed as a whole, makes up the risks.
In a drone environment however the assets are depending on who or what is
considered. If the focus is on the pilot he will most likely be interested in the
security and safety of the drone, but this is not true for the bystanders who
prioritises safety for humans and property, and privacy above all else.
This
deviation in how assets should be interpreted in a drone environment compared
to the norm in asset identiﬁcation aﬀects the rest of the risk identiﬁcation.
Identiﬁcation of assets
An asset is anything which have a value for the organisation [23] and for that rea-
son they are (to some extend) worth protecting against inner and outer threats.
The assets of an organisation are are divided between eight groups:
• Hardware
• Software
• Data
• People
• Documentation
• Supplies
• Intellectual
• Reputation
==PAGE:71==
4.3 Risk Management Methods
55
For each asset and owner should be identiﬁed, who may give information as to
the value of the asset for the organization. The reason that a owner should be
identiﬁed is to provide responsibility and accountability for the assets.
In a drone environment however the groups listed above are not enough to
describe the assets as the privacy and safety need to be considered as well.
They can be seen as external assets from the drones perspective but are just as
important since they are of value to individuals in the environment. For this
reason they should also be included when talking about assets in relation to
drones.
Identiﬁcation of threats
A threat is an action leading to unwanted incidents which may harm one or
more assets. The source of the threat should also be identiﬁed in addition to a
likelihood estimation. The threat can either be of human or non-human origin
and in case it is human then the threat could be accidental or deliberate. The
likelihood estimation should be made in cooperation with the identiﬁed asset
owners in order to give ﬁtting estimate the occurrence of each threat.
Identiﬁcation of existing controls
The controls which may be already implemented should be identiﬁed and checked
to make sure that they work as intended. The reason for doing this is to prevent
unnecessary work later on if the existing control mechanisms are found to be
functioning acceptably. If however a control is found to be insuﬃcient, ineﬃcient
or unjustiﬁed then considerations should be made whether the control should
==PAGE:72==
56
Risk Management
be removed, replaced or stay because removing or replacing it would cost more
than what is gained.
If there are any controls that are planned to be implemented then they should
be treated as the already implemented control.
Identiﬁcation of vulnerabilities
The vulnerabilities of an organization are not by themselves harmful but they
can be exploited by threats in order to harm the organizations assets. How the
vulnerabilities have emerged are depending on where in the organization they
are located such as:
• Organization
• Processes and procedures
• Management routines
• Personnel
• Physical environment
• Information system conﬁguration
• Hardware, software or communications equipment
• Dependence on external parties
If there does not exist a threat that are found to exploit a certain vulnerability
then a control mechanism may not be needed but monitoring of the vulnerabil-
ity should be established. This of course is a list of the known possible threats.
Unknown threats are not possible to identify, as they are unknown, but they
might still exist. The goal is to create the most thorough vulnerability identi-
ﬁcation as possible to later eliminate most threats even some of the unknown
unknowns.
==PAGE:73==
4.3 Risk Management Methods
57
Identiﬁcation of consequences
The consequences that losses conﬁdentiality, integrity or availability of assets
due to a threat exploiting one or more vulnerabilities in the organization should
be identiﬁed. The eﬀect of a consequence on an assets may be temporary or of
a more permanent nature depending on the asset itself and the threat.
The organization should also identify the operational consequences involved,
including:
• Investigation and repair time
• Work time lost
• Opportunity lost
• Health and Safety
• Financial cost of speciﬁc skills to repair the damage
• Image reputation and goodwill
When identifying the impact of the consequences the impact criteria created in
the Context Establishment should be taken into consideration.
4.3.1.3
Risk Analysis
The ﬁrst step of the risk analysis is to determine how the analysis should be per-
formed. When the organization has found a suitable analysis the consequences
and incident likelihood for each risk are assessed. The ﬁnal step of risk analysis
is to make a level-of-risk determination.
Risk analysis methodologies
A risk analysis methodology can be qualitative, quantitative or combination of
==PAGE:74==
58
Risk Management
them. Both of the analysis uses scales in the form of a risk matrix in order to
rank the risks giving an idea of which of them would harm the organization the
most either by the consequences, incident likelihood or both.
Qualitative
In a qualitative analysis the scale is made from qualifying at-
tributes, for instance [Low, Medium, High], assigned to the impact and like-
lihood. The values are based on the expected impact and likelihood for each
risk through communication with the asset owners. Due to the kind of ranking
a qualitative analysis can be used as a initial screening to identify risk which
require further or a more detailed analysis.
Quantitative
In a quantitative analysis the scale is made from numerical val-
ues assigned to the impact and likelihood. The values are based on previous
documented incidents either registered by the organization or third parties. Be-
cause of this this kind of analysis is not suited to handle new threats.
For
known risks which may already have been documented by the organization a
quantitative analysis has an advantage since these risks may have been analysed
previously.
Assessment of consequences
The assets identiﬁed are valuated according to how important they are for the
organization to reach the goals set by the organization. In case an asset is found
to be very valuable then the impact on the organization in case an unwanted
incident occurs which aﬀect the asset will be great. The criteria on which the
impact is measured may be based on the loss of money, reputation or that which
the company counts as a key factor to their business processes.
From the valuation the incidents that may harm one or more assets can then be
==PAGE:75==
4.3 Risk Management Methods
59
ranked according to the aﬀected asset having the highest value to the organiza-
tion. Thus an incident aﬀecting both low and high valued assets will be ranked
in accordance with the high valued assets.
Assessment of incident likelihood
The likelihood of an incident occurring is determined by identifying how often
a threat may occur and how easy it is to exploit a vulnerability. This can be
done from experience or by consulting third parties who may have some kind of
statistical data concerning the occurrence of certain threats.
Level of risk determination
From the assessment of the consequences and incident likelihood the estimated
level of risk is determined for each threat. This is a combination of the two
values depending on whether the risk methodology chosen was qualitative or
quantitative. If the quantitative methodology was chosen then the result will be
numeric value derived from the consequence and likelihood values whereas if the
qualitative methodology was chosen then values derived from both consequences
and likelihood can be kept intact.
4.3.1.4
Risk Evaluation
In this phase the estimations determined for each threats, as a result of the Risk
Analysis, are evaluated in accordance with the risk evaluation criteria and the
risk acceptance criteria deﬁned in the Context Establishment. The evaluation
can advantageously be carried out by using a risk matrix in which all the risk
a placed according to the ranking from the Risk Analysis. The risk evaluation
criteria and the risk acceptance criteria should be integrated in the risk matrix
to give an overview of which risks are acceptable and which are not.
==PAGE:76==
60
Risk Management
The Risk Evaluation is used for decision-making on future activities in the treat-
ment of the risk which are found to be on a not acceptable level. In following
iterations of Risk Management the results from the Risk Evaluation may be
used as a basis for comparison for the Risk Assessment to identify risk which
may have changed since the last Risk Management process was conducted.
4.3.1.5
Risk Treatment
In the Risk Treatment phase control are introduced in order to bring the level
of risk of down to an acceptable level in accordance with the risk acceptance
criteria. Controls should only be implemented for risk which do not meet the
risk acceptance criteria to prevent use of unnecessary resources.
When implementing a control mechanism the following should be taken into
consideration:
• The result from the Risk Assessment
• The cost of implementing the control
• The advantage of implementing the control
The controls can be of four diﬀerent types being: Modiﬁcation, Retention,
Avoidance and Sharing.
==PAGE:77==
4.3 Risk Management Methods
61
SATISFACTORY 
ASSESSMENT
RISK TREATMENT OPTIONS
RISK 
MODIFICATION
RISK
RETENTION
RISK
AVOIDANCE
RISK
SHARING
RESIDUAL 
RISKS
SATISFACTORY 
TREATMENT
RISK 
ASSESSMENT 
RESULTS
Risk treatment
Risk decision point 1
Risk decision point 2
Figure 4.8: Risk treatment chart recreated after the one in ISO 27005
Risk Modiﬁcation
The purpose of the risk modiﬁcation is to introduce controls meeting the re-
quirements which were identiﬁed during the risk assessment and risk treatment.
==PAGE:78==
62
Risk Management
This is done in order to get an acceptable risk level during the reassessment
procedure with respect to the risk acceptance criteria.
The modiﬁcation of a risk can include one or more of the following:
• Correction
• Elimination
• Prevention
• Impact minimization
• Deterrence
• Detection
• Recovery
• Monitoring
• Awareness
Which of them to choose depend on several constraints which must be consulted
before implementing the risk modiﬁcation procedure:
• Time
• Financial
• Technical
• Operational
• Cultural
• Ethical
• Environmental
• Legal
• Ease of use
• Personnel
The constraints may not always be the same modiﬁcations since the internal
procedures and the environment the organization is operating in also have an
==PAGE:79==
4.3 Risk Management Methods
63
eﬀect on which of the constraints will be present.
Risk Retention
In case a risk for some activity does not exceed the level of risk acceptance
then there is no need for implementing risk treatments to handle the risk. This
decision should be made on the basis of where in the risk evaluation matrix the
risk is located.
Risk Avoidance
The decision to avoid a risk by stopping an exiting or planned activity may be
the best action to make if the cost of implementing risk treatments are to high
or the beneﬁts of doing so are minimal. The avoidance of a risk often means
that the activity is changed such that the risk is not existing, minimal or under
some kind of control.
Risk Sharing
If the competences for managing a risk are not present then sharing the risk
with an external third party is an option in order to handle the risk. However
doing so new risks may arise or existing risks are modiﬁed which could require
additional risk treatment.
Residual Risk
When the plan for the control implementations have been made the residual
risks should be determined. This a part of the output from the Risk assessment
process along with a risk treatment plan.
The residual risk consists of the
expected level of risk following the implementation of the risk treatment.
==PAGE:80==
64
Risk Management
4.3.1.6
Risk Acceptance
In the Risk Acceptance phase the acceptance of the risks and the person re-
sponsible for making the decision are registered such that in the event of an
unwanted incident the treatment can be inspected and the responsible can be
held accountable.
For a risk to be accepted it must primarily fulﬁll the risk acceptance criteria
made in the Context Establishment but it is possible to accept it if for instance
the cost of lowering the level of risk is to high in relation to the beneﬁts. In
such cases it is important to document why the risk is accepted for use in future
Risk Management processes and in case of an unwanted incident.
4.3.2
CORAS
CORAS is a UML based risk assessment model originally developed as an EU-
funded project between 2001 and 2003 but have seen further development after
being open-sourced.
CORAS is consist of three parts:
1. The CORAS Language
2. The CORAS Tool
3. The CORAS Method
4.3.2.1
The CORAS Language
The CORAS language consists of symbols and connections, where some of the
connections are shown in Fig. 4.9.
==PAGE:81==
4.3 Risk Management Methods
65
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
Figure 4.9: The symbols in CORAS: 1. Stakeholder, 2. Stakeholder (grey),
3. HTA, 4. HTD, 5. Risk, 6. Treatment, 7. NHT, 8. Asset, 9.
Unwanted Incident, 10. Vulnerability
CORAS distinguish between two kinds of assets: Direct and Indirect. An indi-
rect asset is an assets which can only be harmed through other assets [24]. In
addition the source of threats is divided between three kinds: Human Threat
Accidental (HTA), Human Threat Deliberate (HTD) and Non-Human Threat
(NHT).
The symbols are used to create ﬁve kinds of diagrams:
Asset diagram Contain the direct and indirect assets as well as the party
which the analysis is made on behalf of. How the assets aﬀect each other
in case of a unwanted incident is shown with arrows.
Threat diagram Contain the sources, vulnerabilities and unwanted incidents
related to the threats, as well as the assets aﬀected.
Risk diagram Used to give the customer an overview of the results in the
Threat diagrams and can also be used to show the aﬀected Indirect assets.
Treatment diagram A kind of Threat diagram that contains the proposed
treatments going to be implemented as controls to modify the risks.
==PAGE:82==
66
Risk Management
Treatment Overview diagram A combination of the Risk diagram and Treat-
ment diagram which is used to give the customer an overview of the risks
and the treatments.
4.3.2.2
The CORAS Tool
In order to create the diagrams the CORAS tool is needed. It is written in the
java language
The tool, shown on Fig. 4.10, is build up by 6 elements:
1. A canvas, where the CORAS diagrams are created, placed in the middle
of the window.
2. A symbol and connection palette located in the left side of the window.
3. A mini clipboard giving an overview of the entire clipboard. It is located
in the upper right corner of the window.
4. A project list showing the currently open projects and the diagrams in
them. It is located in the lower right of the window.
5. A properties view showing information about the diagram, symbol and
connection currently selected. It is located in the bottom of the window.
6. A toolbar containing editing options for the diagrams, symbols and con-
nection. It is located in the top of the window.
==PAGE:83==
4.3 Risk Management Methods
67
Figure 4.10: Screenshot of the CORAS tool
The tool is primarily meant to be used in brainstorming sessions to give a
visualized understanding of the risk assessment, but also as a way to present
the results to the customer.
The tool is available for free on the CORAS website http://coras.sourceforge.
net.
==PAGE:84==
68
Risk Management
4.3.2.3
The CORAS Method
The CORAS method consists of 8 steps
Figure 4.11: The eight steps of the CORAS Method [24]
Step 1
In the ﬁrst step considerations are made such as making a roughly
deﬁned scope and focus of the analysis. Preparations for the actual risk analysis
is also made so that the analysis team is ready to start their work.
Step 2
In the second step an information meeting is set up with the customer
who should put forward such as their goals and targets of the analysis. Agree-
ments are also made between the analysis team and the customer as to what
should be protected, a joint terminology and which assumption there is to be
made.
==PAGE:85==
4.3 Risk Management Methods
69
Step 3
In the third step a more thoroughly understanding of the target and
customer goal is reached.
To do this a second meeting might be set up in
which the analysis team should make a presentation for the customer. This
presentation should include:
1. Target presentation as understood by the analysis team
2. Asset identiﬁcation
3. High-level risk analysis
On the basis of the presentation the customer is able to give feedback to help
the analysis team to reﬁne the understanding of the target, assets and goal of
the risk analysis.
In this step one or more Asset diagrams are created.
Step 4
In the fourth step the target and goals of the analysis is agreed upon
between the analysis team and the customer. This could involve creating a risk
analysis description which include all the information gathered by the analysis
team in the previous steps. In addition the analysis team should create scales for
likelihood and consequences as well as risk evaluation criteria. The description
should then be approved by the customer in order for the analysis team to move
forward to the next steps.
Step 5
In the ﬁfth step people with diﬀerent competencies are gathered to
participate in a workshop with the goal to identify unwanted incidents, threats,
vulnerabilities and threat scenarios. In the workshop a technique called struc-
tured brainstorming is used which, in connection with the multi-competencies
group, increases the number of risks identiﬁed.
In this step one or more Threat diagrams are created.
==PAGE:86==
70
Risk Management
Step 6
In the sixth step the likelihood and consequences for the unwanted
incidents, threats, vulnerabilities and threat scenarios identiﬁed in Step 5 are
estimated. The process can be conducted as a in Step 5 with a structured brain-
storming where each participant make a likelihood and consequence estimation
which is to be discussed with the rest of the group. The collective result of the
likelihood and consequence estimation is used to make decisions as to whether
a risk is acceptable or some treatment is needed to handle it.
In this step the Threat diagram created in Step 5 is used.
Step 7
In the seventh step the results from Step 5 and 6 are presented to
the customer to give them a overall picture of the risk analysis. The goal is to
determine the risks which are to be considered necessary to introduce treatments
against. The presentation to the customer may give some extra inputs and/or
adjustments of the analysis so far. An additional goal of this step is also to
estimate and evaluate the risks which may harm indirect assets.
In this step one or more Risk diagrams are created.
Step 8
In the eighth step treatments are found in order to reduce the likelihood
and/or consequences of the identiﬁed risks from Step 7. Each of the treatments
are addressed with respect to the cost of introducing them prior to the ﬁnal
treatment plan construction.
In this step one or more Treatment diagrams are created by using the Risk
diagrams from Step 6. When presenting the risks and proposed treatments to
the customer a Treatment Overview diagram could be made.
==PAGE:87==
4.4 Countermeasures
71
4.4
Countermeasures
It is important to realize that it never possible to make a system secure. The
only factor which prevent access to the system, is time.
By applying more
resources the time needed to penetrate the defences can be reduced. If the time
needed is too long it will deter more attackers from attempting to gain access
to the system. In order to counter penetrations one can introduce one or more
measures to increase the diﬃculty of gaining access if you are not authorised.
There are several ways to so, whether it may be added layers of complexity that
takes time to circumvent or strong authentication where brute forcing will not
be possible in a lifetime.
4.4.1
Cryptography
A method used to make data unreadable by applying one or more algorithms.
These algorithms often makes use of mathematical problems such as the discreet
logarithm problem or the factoring problem. The reason for using these problem
is that they are easy to compute one way but hard to compute the other way.
In cryptography the use of one or two keys is required to do the decryption
in order for the authorized person to get access to the system or some data.
The number of keys needed is determined by whether the algorithm used is
symmetric or asymmetric. If the encryption is symmetric then only one key is
used whereas two key are used for asymmetric encryption.
By using a cryptographic algorithm the system needs to use energy, compu-
tational power and memory. If the system is already lacking these resources
then problems such as power shortage, CPU- and memory overload most likely
will arise.
To avoid these problems the concept of lightweight cryptography
==PAGE:88==
72
Risk Management
can be used to lower the resource requirements at the cost of the cryptographic
strength.
When doing lightweight cryptography one must choose only one of the following
resources to to focus on:
• Power
• CPU
• RAM
The usage change of one of the resources will inevitably also have an impact on
the other two resources, but it can be either positive or negative. The reason
for this is that sometimes it is possible to somewhat improve the usage of one
other of the resources. Which of the three resources to choose is depending on
the system and the the resources available. It is clear that in system with plenty
of power and memory the best choice would be to optimize the CPU usage.
4.5
Hardware and software
In the process of discovering vulnerabilities in a system communicating wire-
lessly some properties are needed to be known. Firstly, the frequency the com-
munication is using is needed. For example, WiFi often use 2.4 GHz while GSM
often use 900 MHz or 1800 MHz. This is needed in order to use an antenna
capable of transmitting and receiving the desired frequency. Once an antenna
is acquired it is possible to use an application such as Wireshark to scan the
frequency in order to perform a traﬃc analysis.
==PAGE:89==
Chapter 5
Risk Assessment
The results of this chapter will be the ﬁrst part of the model developed to
manage the risks that may occur when ﬂying with drones. The second part
being Risk treatment will be examined later on in .
To analyse the risks, which may rise when handling drones, mainly the ISO 27005
approach will be used whereas CORAS only is used in an auxiliary manner to
give a visual understanding of the diﬀerent parts of the analysis and how they
are related. However some of the terminology used in CORAS will also be used
in the analysis to make a more clear connection between the two models.
None of the models however have the support for multiple stakeholders because
they are created for a commercial context. Since the environment for a drone
is not of such a kind, some changes needs to be made in the analysis to be able
to include the identiﬁed elements in a drone environment.
==PAGE:90==
74
Risk Assessment
For this reason most of the Risk Assessment is divided into three part each of
them focusing on one of the stakeholders shown in Fig. 4.1: the drone, the pilot
and the bystanders. For good measure, the three stakeholders deﬁned as follows:
Drone
The system which makes up a fully functional UAV
Pilot
The person ﬂying the drone whether it is the owner or not.
Bystander
Any person within the ﬂight radius of the drone.
The Context establishment can be applied for each of the stakeholders and
therefore it is only made once.
5.1
Context Establishment
The analysis methodology that is going to be used is a qualitative and is there-
fore a survey of the security risks involving drones in general. The scales for the
consequences and incident likelihood are divided into ﬁve levels:
• Very Low
– The consequences are not notable
– An incident may occur years apart
• Low
– The consequences are mentionable
– An incident may occur within months or a few years
• Medium
– The consequences are signiﬁcant
– An incident may occur months apart
• High
– The consequences are severe
– An incident may occur within weeks or a few months
==PAGE:91==
5.1 Context Establishment
75
• Very High
– The consequences are devastating
– An incident may occur within days or weeks
The following color-coded table will be used to classify the risks identiﬁed in the
analysis:
Incident likelihood
Very Low
Low
Medium
High
Very High
Very Low
Low
Medium
High
Consequences
Very High
Table 5.1: Risk Matrix
The green colored indices are considered to be low priority risk-level. Risks that
are placed here should not be handled unless the cost and time involved are
minimal. The yellow colored indices are considered to be medium priority risk-
level. Each risk placed here should be seen as potential candidates for control
modiﬁcation. The red colored indices are considered to be high priority risk-
level. For any risk placed here controls should be introduced unless the cost and
time are to great in relation to the beneﬁts.
==PAGE:92==
76
Risk Assessment
5.2
Risk Identiﬁcation
In this section the risk identiﬁcation will be divided into three parts each focusing
on either the drone, the pilot or the bystanders as the stakeholder. This include
identifying assets, threats, controls, vulnerabilities and consequences for each
stakeholder.
In the end of the section CORAS will be used to visualize the ﬁndings of the
three risk identiﬁcation parts.
5.2.1
The Drone as a stakeholder
Even though the drone is not a alive it should be seen as a stakeholder as it has
dependencies in order to function properly.
Identiﬁcation of assets
To identify the assets for a drone, Fig. 3.1:
Hardware
Battery, Power supply, IMU, Sensor array, Radios,
Transceiver, Telemetry module, Flight controller, On-
board data storage, ESCs, Motors and Propellers
Software
Internal Algorithms
Data
Control signal, Telemetry data and Sensor data
==PAGE:93==
5.2 Risk Identiﬁcation
77
Figure 5.1: Asset diagram of a drone
Identiﬁcation of threats
Battery depleted
A sudden loss of power can be catastrophic for the drone as an impact
after a fall to the ground can damage the components of it. A power loss
also makes the drone inoperable.
The unwanted incident originating from power loss are:
• Unusuable battery
• Drone crash
Invalid input
The drone getting invalid input - either from the control signal, telemetry
module or from the sensor array - can make the drone behave in unex-
pected ways. The invalid input can arise in diﬀerent forms; malformed
==PAGE:94==
78
Risk Assessment
data, too much data during a time frame, corrupt data, unexpected data
when awaiting other data or not receiving data when it is expected. In
another scenario the drone could get invalid data without knowing before
its to late to rectify the mistake speciﬁcally thinking of the drone crashing
and damaging hardware.
The unwanted incident originating from invalid input are:
• Internal system crash
• Drone crash
Identiﬁcation of controls
Some controls have been identiﬁed:
Battery monitor Can be used in further controls
Return to starting point when low on battery The starting position which
is stored in the drone is used along with the GPS to get back to the pilot.
Identiﬁcation of vulnerabilities
Some vulnerabilities have been identiﬁed:
Poor quality battery Most batteries cannot support extended ﬂight which
may be due to the battery being of a poor quality.
No energy optimization Most batteries cannot support extended ﬂight which
may be due to the energy usage not being optimized.
No input validation The data received from both the control signal and the
telemetry link is often not validated before used or stored.
==PAGE:95==
5.2 Risk Identiﬁcation
79
Identiﬁcation of consequences
The consequence originating from both the identiﬁed threats is that the drone
crashes. In the crash some individual parts of the drone may be damaged such
as the propellers, radios or other of the identiﬁed hardware assets.
5.2.2
The Pilot as a stakeholder
In the drone environment the stakeholder who has the most to lose is the pilot.
The main reason for this is because of the relation between the pilot and the
drone which is of a very special kind. The pilot is, in some cases, the owner of the
drone and this makes the drone an asset to the pilot. Since the pilot is controlling
the drone the control signal and the telemetry data, which could be stored on an
onboard storage device, are assets as well as the packages which may be carried
by the drone. The pilot also have assets connected to safety specially the drone,
himself and also bystanders. This is because not just the drone environment is
important in this matter as the world beyond the environment should also be
taken into account. To be considered are the reputation of drones in general
and the pilot, and also the legal liability of the pilot.
Below the identiﬁed assets are summarised:
Hardware
Drone and Packages
Data
Telemetry data (streamed video, GPS, etc.),
Control signal and Stored data
Reputation
Legal liability of pilot, Reputation of drones and
Reputation of pilot
Safety
Human safety and Drone safety
==PAGE:96==
80
Risk Assessment
The connection between the identiﬁed assets for the pilot is shown in Fig. 5.2.
Figure 5.2: Asset diagram for the pilot and how the assets aﬀect each other
On the ﬁgure it is seen that the drone is aﬀected by the control signal and
telemetry data. The drone then aﬀect the rest of the assets either directly or
through other assets. One should specially notice that Human safety aﬀect the
legal liability and reputation of the pilot as well as the reputation of drones. This
makes Human safety the most import indirect asset. Furthermore by harming
the Reputation of the pilot the Legal liability of the pilot may also be harmed
in case someone choose to report the incident to the authorities.
==PAGE:97==
5.2 Risk Identiﬁcation
81
Identiﬁcation of threats
A number of threats and unwanted incidents have been identiﬁed:
Pilot has insuﬃcient competencies
For a pilot to ﬂy a drone he needs the competencies for ﬂying them such
that anybody or anything gets damaged. When ordinary people buy a
drone they usually do not have the skills to ﬂy them in a proper manner
and it may take some time to get these skills. In addition some technical
knowledge may also be required to for instance calibrate the drone or set
up the telemetry link.
The unwanted incident originating from insuﬃcient competencies are:
• Drone crashes
• Flying in populated area
Poor password management
If the drone has some for of encrypted communication then the pilot should
know about proper password management. For ordinary people this is not
always the case which could cause some trouble for drones having a pass-
word protected connection specially because the standard password used
often can be found on the Internet. Having a poor password management
does not directly cause unwanted incident but it can be an important
factor in both active and passive attack.
Drone looses power
Most drones for sales in shops do not have a ﬂying time above 10 minutes
which can cause it to crash in case the pilot keep in mind that it needs to
be recharged.
The unwanted incident originating from the drone losing power are:
• Drone crashes
==PAGE:98==
82
Risk Assessment
System crash during ﬂight
Many drones on the market are cheaply made so the hardware and software
in the drone are not of the best quality. The internal system of the drone
can because of this have undiscovered defects which can lead to a system
crash.
The unwanted incident originating from a drone system crash are:
• Drone crashes
Drone link problems
The data link between the pilot and the drone can be of a poor quality do to
low construction budgets. This can potentially cause the data transferred
from the drone to the pilot and the other way around to be corrupted.
The unwanted incident originating from problems in transferring data are:
• Compromise of availability of control signal
• Compromise of availability of telemetry data
Eavesdropping
A passive attack performed to get data from the control signal or telemetry
link. Even though the attack is not particularly harmful by itself it can
be used in further attacks of a more malicious nature.
The unwanted incident originating from eavesdropping are:
• Compromise of conﬁdentiality of control signal
• Compromise of conﬁdentiality of telemetry data
Traﬃc Analysis
An attacker can get meta-data from analysis the traﬃc between the pilot
and the drone. This may lead to information gathering on the links them-
selves which can be used in malicious attacks. Performing traﬃc analysis
does not directly lead to unwanted incidents.
Fabrication Attack
Performing a fabrication requires that the attacker have extended knowl-
edge about how the pilot and the drone communicate which can be achieved
==PAGE:99==
5.2 Risk Identiﬁcation
83
by having performed Eavesdropping and Traﬃc analysis attacks. The at-
tack violates the integrity of the control signal and/or telemetry data, and
can possibly lead to a hostile takeover of the drone.
The unwanted incident originating from a fabrication attack are:
• Compromise of integrity of control signal
• Compromise of integrity of telemetry data
Modiﬁcation Attack
As with the Fabrication attack the Modiﬁcation attack requires some
knowledge about the communication between the pilot and the drone but
not necessarily as extensive. This is because the modiﬁed data is not re-
quired to make sense to the receiver. In the worst cases the attacker is
able to take control of the drone.
The unwanted incident originating from a modiﬁcation attack are:
• Compromise of integrity of control signal
• Compromise of integrity of telemetry data
Deletion Attack
Making sure that the pilot and the drone are unable to communicate
either by the control signal and/or the telemetry link are an eﬀective way
of sabotaging the control over the drone. To do it eﬀectively a Traﬃc
analysis attack may be required to identify the frequency used in the
communication.
The unwanted incident originating from a deletion attack are:
• Compromise of availability of control signal
• Compromise of availability of telemetry data
The direct assets and the unwanted incidents are now linked in the list below:
• Drone
D1 Crash of drone
• Control signal
==PAGE:100==
84
Risk Assessment
C1 Compromise of conﬁdentiality of control signal
C2 Compromise of integrity of control signal
C3 Compromise of availability of control signal
• Telemetry data
T1 Compromise of conﬁdentiality of telemetry data
T2 Compromise of integrity of telemetry data
T3 Compromise of availability of telemetry data
• Reputation of pilot
R1 Flying in populated area
The table below summarise the threats, unwanted incidents and their source for
each direct asset:
Unwanted Incident
Threat
Source
Drone
D1
Drone looses power
No power on battery
D1
Insuﬃcient competencies
Pilot
Control Signal
C1
Eavesdropping
Passive attacker
C2
Fabrication attack
Active attacker
C2
Modiﬁcation attack
Active attacker
C3
Deletion attack
Active attacker
C3
Drone link problems
Poor quality tech.
Telemetry Data
T1
Eavesdropping
Passive attacker
T2
Fabrication attack
Active attacker
T2
Modiﬁcation attack
Active attacker
T3
Deletion attack
Active attacker
T3
Drone link problems
Poor quality tech.
Reputation of pilot
P1
Flying in populated area
Pilot
Table 5.2: The unwanted incidents, threats and source which can aﬀect the
Direct Assets.
==PAGE:101==
5.2 Risk Identiﬁcation
85
Identiﬁcation of controls
Some controls already exist in order to modify the threats against the identiﬁed
assets.
Frequency hopping Hopping between frequencies within a spectrum can pre-
vent loss of connection to the controller.
Unique controller ID Having a unique ID for the controller the drone can
check if the received data is genuine.
Handshaking protocol Using a handshake protocol when the drone is turned
on can be used to check if the received data is genuine.
Return to starting point This can happen in two cases:
• when the drone is low on battery power
• when the signal from the controller is lost
Identiﬁcation of vulnerabilities
Vulnerabilities which can be exploited by the identiﬁed threats are found to be:
Poor quality technology Drones build with a low budget often also apply
the poor quality parts.
Standard password on control signal and telemetry data Instead of mak-
ing a unique password for each manufactured drone companies tend to use
the same password for all drones.
Unstable connection Can occur as a side eﬀect of the drone being created
on a low budget.
The pilot has limited technological knowledge True in some cases the buyer
of the drone do not have the technological skills to for instance calibrate
==PAGE:102==
86
Risk Assessment
the drone.
The pilot has insuﬃcient competencies To ﬂy a drone it takes a lot of
experience but this is almost never the case.
Insuﬃcient connection protection Drones do often not have a protected
communication link to the controller.
Identiﬁcation of consequences
If case the drone crashes then it may be damaged to such an extend that it is
broken making it unusable. Another possibility is that the drone is not broken
but is stolen after the crash landing removing it from the possession of rightful
owner. In case the pilot do not have the required competences to ﬂy a drone he
may cause the drone to crash or ﬂy over a populated area unintentionally. If the
pilot is identiﬁable in these cases his reputation will most certainly be harmed
and may lead to legal consequences ranging from a ban on ﬂying drones to ﬁnes
and imprisonment.
By attacking the drone with a fabrication or modiﬁcation attack the Active
attacker may be able to use the drone with malicious intent such as ﬁlming
bystanders. In case the attacker is not a experienced drone pilot the drone may
crash possibly harming humans or property. If the attack can not be proved to
have happened then the owner of the drone may be harmed in a legal sense.
==PAGE:103==
5.2 Risk Identiﬁcation
87
5.2.3
The Bystanders as stakeholders
To look at the bystanders as stakeholders is a little special as they have nothing
directly to do with the drone, but are a part of the drone environment. As such
they do focus only on the privacy and safety of themselves and their property.
The assets of the bystanders are identiﬁed to be:
Privacy
Human privacy, Behavioral patterns
Safety
Human safety and Property safety
Only the Behavioral patterns are depending on another asset namely the Video
recording covering both video and pictures.
Figure 5.3: Asset diagram for bystanders
==PAGE:104==
88
Risk Assessment
Identiﬁcation of threats
The following threat and connected unwanted incidents have been identiﬁed for
the identiﬁed assets:
Pilot has insuﬃcient competencies
The pilot in this sense can be either the owner or an attacker who has
gained control over the drone. If either of them have the required compe-
tencies to ﬂy the drone in a safe manner then the bystander or property
can be harmed.
The unwanted incident originating from insuﬃcient competencies are:
• Human injury
• Property damage
Drone run out of power
Flying a drone with limited power supply in a populated area can pose
a serious threat depending on the weight of the drone. If the drone only
have a maximum ﬂying time of 10 min and the pilot does not remember
to ﬂy the drone to a spot with no people then human safety can be at risk.
The unwanted incident originating from the drone losing power are:
• Human injury
• Property damage
System crash during ﬂight
If the internal system in the drone crashes during ﬂight in populated area
it could cause injuries to humans and damage property. The cause for this
may be that the drone is of low quality such as a toy drone or the like
produced with a very limited budget.
The unwanted incident originating from a system crash during ﬂight are:
• Human injury
• Property damage
==PAGE:105==
5.2 Risk Identiﬁcation
89
Filming without permission
For a bystander the thought of being ﬁlmed without knowing it can be
terrifying. Mostly this due to the violation of privacy and with a drone it
is possible
The unwanted incident originating from ﬁlming without permission are:
• Compromise of privacy
Which of the identiﬁed direct assets which are being aﬀected by the unwanted
incidents are listed below:
• Human safety
HS Human injury
• Property safety
PS Property damage
• Human privacy
HP1 Compromise of bystander privacy
The table below summarise the threats, unwanted incidents and their source for
each direct asset.
Unwanted Incident
Threat
Source
Human safety
HS
Insuﬃcient competencies
Pilot
HS
Drone run out of power
No power on battery
HS
System crash during ﬂight
System failure
Property safety
PS
Insuﬃcient competencies
Pilot
PS
Drone run out of power
No power on battery
PS
System crash during ﬂight
System failure
Human privacy
HP1
Filming without permission
Pilot
Table 5.3: The unwanted incidents, threats and source which can aﬀect the
Direct Assets.
==PAGE:106==
90
Risk Assessment
Identiﬁcation of controls
For ordinary people there exists no legal controls to handle the identiﬁed threats
other than the legislation in the country where the incident occurred.
Identiﬁcation of vulnerabilities
For threats regarding safety the following vulnerabilities are to be considered:
Poor quality technology If the drone is of a poor quality then there is a
greater chance of it crashing
Unstable connection In case the drone do not have a return to starting point
mechanism then it could crash.
Pilot has Insuﬃcient training For inexperienced pilots ﬂying in a populated
area there is a chance for the drone ﬂy into someone.
Pilot has limited technological knowledge If the drone is not calibrated
properly then the drone could potentially crash.
However for threats against privacy it is more diﬃcult to identify where the
vulnerabilities are located; is it the recklessness of the pilot or perhaps the
lifestyle of the bystanders. For some cases it might be considered to be both such
as if the pilot is ﬁlming into the neighbors backyard where he/she is sunbathing
naked. This is a subject which will not be covered here but are open for further
discussion.
==PAGE:107==
5.2 Risk Identiﬁcation
91
Identiﬁcation of consequences
The consequence of people getting injured can be anything from minor scratches
to more serious injuries such as concussions, ﬂesh wounds and in worst cases,
the injured person losing his life. This depends largely on how much the drone
weighs and how unfortunate the crash is. The consequences of damaging prop-
erty will in worst case render the property unusable depending on the fragility
of the property.
By ﬁlming bystanders without them knowing the pilot is able to get footage
of their private matters include how they live, private doings, etc.. In worst
case this could lead to psychological problems for the bystanders depending on
the content of the footage and whether it is published in social media or other
sites on the Internet. Furthermore by ﬁlming the bystanders on their private
property the pilot may also be able to analysis the behavioral patterns of the
bystanders which can be used in break-ins.
5.2.4
Visualization of identiﬁed risks using CORAS
The ﬁndings from the Risk identiﬁcation can be visualized by using the CORAS
tool. More precisely the ﬁndings from the Asset identiﬁcation, Threat identiﬁ-
cation and Vulnerability identiﬁcation are used to create Threat diagrams. Four
diagrams are going to be made:
1. A HTA diagram showing the risks having the pilot a source
2. A HTD diagram showing the risks having an active attacker as source
3. A HTD diagram showing the risks having a passive attacker as source
4. A NHT diagram showing the risks having parts of the system as a source.
==PAGE:108==
92
Risk Assessment
HTA diagram
On Fig. 5.4 is shown the threats, unwanted incident, vulnerabilities and aﬀected
assets involved in the risks originating from the pilot.
Figure 5.4: A CORAS Threat diagram showing the vulnerabilities, threats,
unwanted incidents and aﬀected assets for a HTA source
==PAGE:109==
5.2 Risk Identiﬁcation
93
HTD diagram
On Fig. 5.5 and Fig. 5.6 the threats, unwanted incident, vulnerabilities and
aﬀected assets are shown for risks either from a active or passive attacker.
Figure 5.5: A CORAS Threat diagram showing the vulnerabilities, threats,
unwanted incidents and aﬀected assets for a active HTD source
==PAGE:110==
94
Risk Assessment
Figure 5.6: A CORAS Threat diagram showing the vulnerabilities, threats,
unwanted incidents and aﬀected assets for a passive HTD source
==PAGE:111==
5.2 Risk Identiﬁcation
95
NHT diagram
On Fig. 5.4 is shown the threats, unwanted incident, vulnerabilities and aﬀected
assets involved in the risks originating from the system.
Figure 5.7: A CORAS Threat diagram showing the vulnerabilities, threats,
unwanted incidents and aﬀected assets for a NHT source
==PAGE:112==
96
Risk Assessment
5.3
Risk Analysis
Now that the risks have been identiﬁed the impact and likelihood should be
identiﬁed for each of the threats. In the table below estimates are made for each
of the identiﬁed threat regrading their impact and likelihood with the impact
rated from the perspective of the stakeholders. To identify each threat and the
aﬀected stakeholder the ID is made up from the ﬁrst letter of the stakeholder
and a number.
ID
Threat
Impact
Likelihood
Drone
D0
Battery depleted
Medium
Medium
D1
Invalid input
Medium
Low
Pilot
P0
Insuﬃcient competencies
Medium
High
P1
Poor password management
High
Very High
P2
Drone looses power
Medium
Medium
P3
System crash during ﬂight
Medium
Low
P4
Drone link problems
Very High
Low
P5
Eavesdropping
Low
High
P6
Traﬃc analysis
Low
High
P7
Fabrication attack
Very High
Medium
P8
Modiﬁcation attack
Very High
Low
P9
Deletion attack
Very High
Medium
Bystander
B0
Human injury
High
Low
B1
Property damage
Medium
Medium
B2
Filming without permission
Very High
High
Table 5.4: The identiﬁed threats for each of the stakeholders with impact and
likelihood rating
==PAGE:113==
5.4 Risk Evaluation
97
5.4
Risk Evaluation
The estimated threat impacts and likelihoods for each stakeholder can now be
located in the table created in the Context establishment.
Likelihood
Very Low
Low
Medium
High
Very High
Very Low
Low
P5, P6
Medium
D1, P3
D0, P2, B1
P0
High
B0
P1
Impact
Very High
P4, P8
P7, P9
B2
Table 5.5: Risk Matrix
In the table it should be noted that none of the threats identiﬁed are considered
to be low-priority risks, 11 threat are medium-level risk and four threat are
high-level risks. The high-level risks include:
• Poor password management,
• Fabrication attack,
• Deletion attack, and
• Filming without permission
where the ﬁrst three of them concern the pilot and the last concern the by-
standers.
==PAGE:114==
98
Risk Assessment
==PAGE:115==
Chapter 6
Model Experimentation
6.1
Method
There exists several method and approaches one could take in order to test
the security mechanisms implemented in a speciﬁc drone model. The following
options are the methods considered for use in this project.
6.1.1
Sensor speciﬁc attacks
As mentioned in the analysis section of this thesis it could be possible to utilize
sensor speciﬁc attacks, for example GPS spooﬁng if a drone navigates using
GPS. However, this was not looked further into, instead the focus is directed
towards attack vectors on the control signal.
==PAGE:116==
100
Model Experimentation
6.1.2
Replaying a control signal
One of the most simple methods is the replay attack. If the drone is not secured
against replay attacks one could record the radio signals coming from the drone
controller and without trying to decipher it, replay it at a later time to gain the
same eﬀect as the original signal was sent to do. In theory the way to do it is to
identify the frequency on which the communication between the drone itself and
the drone’s controller is transmitted. Once the frequency is located one would
have to wait for the signal to be transmitted from the drone controller to the
drone and using a radio record and save the signal. At a later point the saved
signal can be transmitted with the radio and while the drone have no protection
against it, is active and turned on, in range and on the same frequency it should
be susceptible to the attack and perform the same action as the original signal
sent from the authentic controller earlier.
6.1.3
Fabrication of control signal
Perhaps the most eﬀective method is to try and replicate the control signal. If
successful it means that a total takeover is possible. If it is possible to reverse
engineer the messages between the drone itself and the controller to discover
what actually is sent back and forth one could craft his own messages and
send them to the drone as if it was from the controller. This method however,
may be the most diﬃcult as it requires knowledge of how radio signals are
working, speciﬁc details about frequency, modulation, bandwidth and other
potential unknown factors. It also requires access to some equipment capable
of both receiving radio signals and transmit them. Receiving radio waves is
needed when trying to reverse engineer a radio signal to observe and analyze
it. It is also needed if the drone and the controller uses a connection oriented
protocol meaning that they keep sending signals to each other at a certain
==PAGE:117==
6.1 Method
101
interval to ensure there’s still a connection between the two.
Sending radio
signals is required when fabricated command is to be sent.
Sometimes it is
needed to be able to send and receive simultaneously depending on the drone
model and the protocol it uses. A device that does both is called a transceiver.
6.1.4
Spooﬁng
If the signalling system between the drone and drone controller requires a con-
tinuous connection in order to work a replay attack will probably not work.
Other methods are then needed. Having reverse engineered the protocol used
in the communication scheme between the drone and drone controller it should
be possible to initiate the handshake from a transceiver radio pretending to be
the drone controller. The down side of spooﬁng is that it is really hard to do
properly. Finding out exactly what to send when certain conditions are met and
signals received and in the right order and time delay requires a lot of work and
patience to ﬁgure out and reverse engineer.
6.1.5
WiFi speciﬁc attacks
As the most popular drones communicates between itself and the drone con-
troller over radio waves at 2.4GHz frequency, some drone models may use the
WiFi protocol. If WiFi is in fact used for communicating control signals it could
be vulnerable to speciﬁcs exploits that speciﬁcally targets WiFi.
==PAGE:118==
102
Model Experimentation
6.2
Proof of concept: Replay attack
Performing a replay attack is relatively simple given the right tools. As a proof of
concept a simple replay attack was performed locally on a test machine sending
UDP packets. Tools used:
• Netcat [25]
• Wireshark [26]
• Tcpreplay [27]
Scripts are written in Bash and Python. The Python scripts are used to encrypt
and decrypt text with AES-128 in CBC mode, the recommended method by
NIST [22, PR:7.1], with the key
Crypto is funny!
and the initialization vector
IV is important!
as seen in the two scripts found in Listing 1 and Listing 2.
The bash scripts found in Listing 3 and Listing 4 are used to send UDP packets
and continuously listen for incoming ones accordingly. The send script takes a
string from stdin, runs it through the Python script to decrypt it and encode
it as hexadecimal. It then uses Netcat to send it over the network in a UDP
packet. The receiving script also uses Netcat and listens for incoming UDP on
the same port. In this example, port 6666 is used. When receiving a packet it
runs it through the Python script to decode the content from hexadecimal and
decrypt it using the same cryptographic key and initialization vector used the
==PAGE:119==
6.2 Proof of concept: Replay attack
103
encrypt it. It then just prints the string and it should be the same string as
entered on the sending side. The string was successfully send over the network,
encrypted so the content was unreadable.
If an attacker were to place himself between the two devices communicating
he could intercept the packet in an eavesdropping attack as in Fig. 4.5. Even
though the content is encrypted as seen in Fig. B.1, he could still just send the
packet at a later time, unedited, to perform a replay attack. If the receiver
has not implemented any protection against it, the packet will decrypt to an
understandable command as though it was coming from the original sender
and the receiver will execute it as such. This means that the attacker could
intercept packages, replay them at any time and observe the behavior to ﬁgure
out the command. He could do this several times to build a load of packets
to replay at any time and essentially taking over control without ever breaking
the encryption. In this test, using Tcpreplay out the packet intercepted with
Wirehark the packet will reach the receiver and he will decrypt it normally,
showing of the concept.
One way to protect against replay attacks is by using a nonce or a timestamp
that is sent along with the message and is used to verify that this message is
new. In Listing 5 and Listing 6 the scripts from before are modiﬁed to include a
timestamp. If the receiver receives a message where the timestamp is more than
1 second old, the message is rejected. How long one should allow for messages
to be accepted depends on the application. In this concept 1 second is suﬃcient
to deter any manual replay attacks with previously intercepted packets.
It is also possible to replay TCP packets but that requires extra work as some of
the header ﬁelds have to be changed, including the sequence number. If ta TCP
packet is desired to be replayed at a later point, the payload may be extracted
==PAGE:120==
104
Model Experimentation
and put into a new packet and a new 3-way handshake have to be established.
This is because TCP is a connection oriented protocol which has focus on having
a reliable transmission. UDP is connectionless and have focus on speed.
Replaying other protocols is probably also possible, however the amount of
work required depends on the protocol itself and if it is connection oriented or
connectionless.
6.3
Equipment
For the real life practical experimentation some equipment is required in order
to test the theory.
BladeRF x40
Software deﬁned radio with transceiver capability
2.4GHz WiFi antenna
Antenna mounted on the radio to capture and transmit radio waves on
the 2.4GHz frequency
Drone controller
The controller used to transmit and possibly receive data to and from the
drone
Drone
The drone itself. What it’s all about. Used to monitor radio signals from
the controller and if fabricated or replayed signals have an eﬀect
Laptop
A laptop where the software deﬁned radio is connected. The laptop con-
tains a Linux image with the drivers for the BladeRF installed
GNURadio
Software used in the software deﬁned radio. Used to create ﬂow charts
==PAGE:121==
6.4 Experiments
105
describing how to process data either received or or before transmission
Osmocom SDR
Plugin to GNURadio connecting the software deﬁned radio with the drivers
for the BladeRF
6.4
Experiments
With the equipment in place it was time to perform some real life tests on
a recreational drone marketed for consumers. Two diﬀerent drones were used
in this experiment, both manufactures from the list of popular retailed drone
models in Table A.1.
The two models used were the Syma X5SW[28] and Hubsan X4[29], both com-
municating on the 2.4GHz frequency and both RTF-drones.
6.4.1
Software-deﬁned radio
When the equipment was equipped on a Linux machine, the GNURadio software
was set up.
GNURadio is the software for the SDR and works by creating
ﬂowcharts in a drag-and-drop environment.
==PAGE:122==
106
Model Experimentation
Figure 6.1: GNURadio ﬂowchart connecting the input from the SDR to two
diﬀerent chart types
Figure 6.1 shows the ﬂowchart used to create an FFT plot and a waterfall plot
from the input of the BladeRF using the OsmocomSDR plugin and set to listen
on the 2.4GHz frequency. The resulting plots can be seen in Fig. 6.2 and Fig. 6.3
respectively.
==PAGE:123==
6.4 Experiments
107
Figure 6.2: FFT plot of the 2.4GHz spectrum
Figure 6.3: Waterfall plot of 2.4GHz spectrum with drone controller turned
oﬀ
Turning on the drone controller to try and ﬁnd a signal was diﬀerent for both
drone models. On the Hubsan drone it was clear to see something being trans-
mitted on the 2.4GHz frequency as seen in Fig. 6.4. For the Syma drone however,
it was much more diﬃcult. Nothing appeared directly on the 2.4GHz frequency.
==PAGE:124==
108
Model Experimentation
Scanning frequencies a little higher such as 2.485GHz showed something being
transmitted but as 2.4GHz is an ISM band it could’ve been a lot of things and
not the drone and it’s controller speciﬁcally. The same frequency did not always
yield results, so it is possible that the signal were not from the Syma drone but
something else or it is using frequency hopping to shift to less used frequencies
in the 2.4GHz band.
Figure 6.4: Waterfall plot of 2.4GHz spectrum with drone controller turned
on
As the documentation for both drones are very limited the reverse engineering
process involved a lot of trial-and-error and guess work. None of the models
described any modulation type, bandwidth or other parameters only the use of
the 2.4GHz frequency thus making the process diﬃcult.
Furthermore as the 2.4GHz frequency is so heavily used it is diﬃcult to isolate a
signal from the drone and to know that the signals the radio are picking up are
actually from the drone or it’s controller and not something else communicating
in the same band.
Another obstacle is that both drone models seems to be using some sort of hand-
==PAGE:125==
6.4 Experiments
109
shake to initiate and maintain the connection between the drone and the drone
controller. This complicates the process of reverse engineering as it requires a
continuous connection from the BladeRF and to to able to send and receive
simultaneously with the right timing and sequences as it appears to be using a
connection oriented protocol.
6.4.2
Replay attack
The replay attack is an obvious choice to try out ﬁrst. There are multiple ways
to do this at diﬀerent points in time depending on what communication part
is wanted to be attacked. It could be the setup phase by replaying a previous
handshake or simply replaying a previously sent command in an ongoing session.
Constructing the ﬂow graph in GNURadio is a simple matter of taking the raw
input signal and saving it to a ﬁle as seen in Fig. 6.5.
Figure 6.5: GNURadio ﬂowchart of raw signal received being saved
==PAGE:126==
110
Model Experimentation
The raw signal were captured for both the handshake protocol and for general
controls of the drone during an already establish session between the drone and
the drone controller.
Replaying the signal with GNURadio was as simple as capturing as the saved
ﬁle now is used as the source and the radio is now used to transmit the signal
as seen in Fig. 6.6.
Figure 6.6: GNURadio ﬂowchart of previously saved raw signal being re-
transmitted
Experiments included both capturing and replaying the initial handshake com-
munication and a command signal in an ongoing connection between the drone
and drone controller.
However, as observed earlier the drone and the drone controller seems to use a
reliable connection protocol possibly numbering packets thus oﬀering protection
from the most basic replay attacks - the ones that just replay the raw signal.
==PAGE:127==
6.4 Experiments
111
As suspected neither of the replay attacks has any visible eﬀects on the drone.
Even the replaying of a command signal in an ongoing connection proved un-
successful. If a session ID is randomised for every session this attack should at
least use the correct ID and format as the connection is still established. It did
however not produce any visible eﬀects on the drone thus further strengthening
the theory that a reliable protocol that possibly numbers the packets are used.
Without completely reverse engineering the signal it seems that a replay attack
is not useful in this context.
6.4.3
Analyzing the control signal
Trying to analyse the also proved diﬃcult as the documentation, as mentioned
earlier, is very lackluster. Trying diﬀerent types of demodulation such as FM,
AM, PSK, QPSK and GFSK with diﬀerent parameters the Syma drone did not
yield anything that looked like it could be a control signal from the drone.
Figure 6.7: GNURadio ﬂowchart of signal being AM demodulated and saved
in a wave ﬁle
However, the Hubsan drone, when amplitude demodulated and saved in a wave
ﬁle (Fig. 6.7), showed something interesting. Several segments of sequences of
==PAGE:128==
112
Model Experimentation
little bumps on the wave were revealed, as seen in Fig. 6.8, zoomed in on one of
the segments.
Figure 6.8: Wave ﬁle of AM Demodulated signal on the 2.4GHz spectrum with
drone controller turned on
It is unknown what this sequence actually is but it could possibly be a bit string
where the little bumps represent 1 and no bump represents 0.
But without knowing the actual protocol and connection schema the experi-
ments stops here. Maybe this signal is actually something used by the drone
controller, maybe not. This is deﬁnitely something that could be looked further
into.
At an internet forum of remote control hobbyists, a user have made an initial
analysis of the Hubsax drone and it’s communication protocol [30]. This veriﬁes
the theory of the drone using some sort of handshake protocol to establish and
maintain a connection in addition to adaptive channel using. This only adds up
to the diﬃculty of the reverse engineering and hacking of the drone, however
given the right know-how, tools and time it indeed seems likely to actually ﬁnd
one or more exploits in security of the Hubsan drone.
==PAGE:129==
6.4 Experiments
113
6.4.4
WiFi-based attacks
As neither of the drones in possession are WiFi-based it is diﬃcult to actually
test some of the possible vulnerabilities. The Syma[28] drone however have a
camera that can be mounted on the drone and the way to view the images
from the camera is to connect a WiFi access point it creates and open their
application on a smart phone.
Authentication
First observation was that the WiFi access point the drone creates is not en-
crypted, meaning that everyone in proximity can connect to it. When connecting
to the access point and starting up the smart phone application a connection
is established between the camera and the phone. The camera data is then
transmitted via TCP to the phone as seen in Fig. B.2.
De-authentication attack
Performing a de-authentication attack on the drone camera was a simple ex-
periment. Using the command line tool ’aircrack-ng’[31] it was possible to ﬁrst
establish the MAC address and channel of the camera using the following com-
mand.
airodump-ng wlxe84e062e0d39
In this case ’wlxe84e062e0d39’ is the name of the wireless network interface put
into monitor mode.
The name is describing that it’s a wireless module and
it have appended it’s MAC address, however the actual name is not important
other than to know the correct network interface top use. In other cases it could
have a name like ’wlan0’.
==PAGE:130==
114
Model Experimentation
The output will be a live listing of wireless networks nearby, their base station
MAC address, channel number, SSID and more information. When the channel
number is revealed a dedicated scan on that channel can begin to ﬁnd the MAC
address of connected devices., using the following command.
airodump-ng -c 2 wlxe84e062e0d39
Where the -c parameter is the channel number, in this case 2. The output shows
a live listing of found WiFi frames on that particular channel. As shown in the
screen shot in Fig. 6.9 the MAC address is found for the access point with SSID
of ’FPV_WIFI__0186’ and a connected device. Using the MAC address of
both base station and connected device, the attack can begin. Using the follow
command the de-authentication frames are transmitted.
aireplay-ng -0 0 -a 3C:33:00:22:01:86 -c <Device MAC> wlxe84e062e0d39
This command continues to transmit de-authentication frames until terminated
by the user making the device unable to reconnect as long as the attack is
ongoing.
As seen in Fig. 6.9, when launching the attack the the terminal windows will out-
put the current status of the program. As soon as the directed de-authentication
frames were sent the mobile application lost connection to the camera on the
drone and were thus unable to watch the live images from the camera, proving
this attack method successful.
==PAGE:131==
6.4 Experiments
115
Figure 6.9: De-authentication attack on drone camera WiFi
The MAC address of the phone and other nearby devices have
been masked
WiFi-controlled drone
A short experimentation was conducted on a popular drone model, the Parrot
AR.Drone 2.0[32]. This drone is fully WiFi-controlled and uses an application on
a smartphone to navigate. Furthermore the manufacturer provides an SDK for
Linux making navigation and live video feed possible from the Linux computer
with a WiFi-enabled network card. It was found that WiFi the drone creates
is no password protected leaving it open for anyone to join it.
Opening up
the SDK made it possible to receive some information from the drone but not
control it as it seemed to require some extra steps and be in physical possession
of the drone. It was however possible to conduct a de-authentication attack and
disconnect the smartphone from the drone.
==PAGE:132==
116
Model Experimentation
==PAGE:133==
Chapter 7
Risk treatment and
model evaluation
Using the results from Chapter 5 recommendations for treating the risk can be
proposed. The recommendations will be based on theory Section 4.4 and the
identiﬁed controls from Chapter 5. When the treatments have been proposed
the created model which include the ﬁndings in Chapter 5 and the proposed
treatments will be evaluated in relation to real world incidents. The reason for
doing this is to ﬁnd out whether or not the model that has been constructed
would be able to detect real life incidents.
==PAGE:134==
118
Risk treatment and
model evaluation
7.1
Risk Treatment
As it stands, there are three primary ways a drone get input for navigation as
seen in Fig. 3.1:
• The control signal
• Telemetry data
• Sensors
Each input source must be properly protected to prevent unwanted incidents.
The identiﬁed threats in Chapter 5 and the experimentation performed in Chap-
ter 6 leave us with the following recommendations to properly ensure security
in a drone system thus eliminating as many risks as possible and feasible.
As both the control signal and telemetry data is communicated using radios it
is essential that the transfer of signals are done in a secure way that preserves
both conﬁdentiality, integrity and provides proper authentication.
7.1.1
Conﬁdentiality
Encrypting the signals before transmission will ensure conﬁdentiality but it is
important to use both a strong key and a strong encryption algorithm. The
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) recommends using the
AES-128 algorithm which is considered amongst the best and strongest sym-
metric key encryption algorithms. The mode of operation to use is dependent
on what is desired.
If only conﬁdentiality is wanted then the Cipher-Block-
Chaining (CBC)[22, PR:7.1] mode is recommended. If both conﬁdentiality and
authenticity is wanted then the Galois/Counter-Mode (GCM)[22, PR:7.3] is
recommended.
==PAGE:135==
7.1 Risk Treatment
119
Key exchange
To ensure conﬁdentiality the key exchange between the drone and the controller
should be managed properly such that the key will remain a secret between
the drone and the controller. This can for instance be done by integrating a
security module into the drone or by using the RSA encryption algorithm. These
solutions however would be to costly both in terms of implementation cost and
power consumption. For this reason a simpler method is recommended by using
a cable to transfer the key preferably generated by the controller to save energy
in the drone. Additionally it is recommended to use a cryptographically secure
pseudo-random number generator to generate the encryption key.
7.1.2
Integrity
As we want to ensure integrity we recommend using AES with the GCM mode
of operation as it ensures authenticity and integrity. GCM works by in addition
to encryption the signal it adds an authentication code along the ciphertext and
initialisation vector. The authentication code is used to create an authentication
tag that is used as a method of validating the integrity of the message.
The integrity of sensors need proper integrity. Invalid data and malformed data
should be discarded. The system also needs to compare data with previous data
in order to identify and ignore outlier data - whether it is a measuring error
or sensor spooﬁng. Spooﬁng sensors can be diﬃcult to protect against but is
possible given enough resources, for example GPS spooﬁng countermeasures[33].
==PAGE:136==
120
Risk treatment and
model evaluation
7.1.3
Availability
To ensure availability it is important to distinguish between whether the drone
is unavailable internally or externally. Being unavailable externally can happen
if for some reason the signal never reaches the drone, for example by a deletion
attack, interference on the frequency, or the drone being out of range. Internally
unavailability can happen if the drone does not have enough resources to process
the messages either because of denial-of-service attacks, improper handling of
invalid data causing a system crash, or batter depletion.
To ensure the external availability we recommend using mechanisms to detect
crowded channels and dynamically allowing changing this. Using a frequency
hopping spread spectrum the drone and the drone controller can change chan-
nels in order to prevent unavailability. Frequency hopping algorithms such as
AFHDS2 is already used by several drone manufactures but not all.
Internal availability is ensured by having a proper message handling. The system
should check for invalid data and correct formatting before doing anything with
it, such as storing in the buﬀer. This prevents packet ﬂooding and malformed
packets causing buﬀer overﬂow and system crashes. Furthermore the system
should include a battery monitor that check the battery charge. If the drone
system is running low on battery, does not have more space in the buﬀer, or
lose connection to the controller it should always have a fail safe to land safely
instead of blindly trusting and storing the received data - be it from the drone
controller, telemetry module or the sensor array.
==PAGE:137==
7.1 Risk Treatment
121
7.1.4
Authenticity
The GCM mode of operation ensures authenticity on the transmitted signals but
can still be vulnerable to replay attacks. To combat this every message should
include parts to prevent this. It can either be a time stamp that the receiving
unit validates that it is a new message - requires the unit to have an accurate
or synchronised clock. Another solution is to include a nonce - a number only
used once so the unit can know that the message is new - requires storage space
for used numbers.
Looking at actual real life incidents it becomes clear that most of these attacks
are due to poor security policy.
List of known real life attacks:
• GPS spooﬁng [17][34]
• No encryption [35][36]
• No authentication [36][37]
• Brute forcing weak password [38]
• Cracking weak encryption in telemetry module [39]
• ID spooﬁng [37]
• Packet ﬂooding [40]
• Large packets causing stack overﬂow [40]
• Packet injection [40]
• Jamming [41]
• De-authentication [Section 6.4.4]
Evaluating the attacks against our model the leads to the following results:
GPS spooﬁng
Would be ’catched’ by the model as a Fabrication attack. Invalid data
==PAGE:138==
122
Risk treatment and
model evaluation
should be detected and discarded per Section 7.1.2
No encryption
Would be ’catched’ by the model as the vulnerability ’Insuﬃcient connec-
tion protection’. Strong encryption is required per Section 7.1.1
No authentication
Would be ’catched’ by the model as the vulnerability ’Insuﬃcient con-
nection protection’. Authentication should always be required per Sec-
tion 7.1.4
Brute forcing weak password
Would be ’catched’ by the model as the vulnerability ’Poor password man-
agement’. Strong encryption key is required per Section 7.1.1
Cracking weak encryption in telemetry module
Would be ’catched’ by the model as the vulnerability ’Insuﬃcient connec-
tion protection’. Strong encryption key is required per Section 7.1.1
ID spooﬁng
Would be ’catched’ by the model as a Fabrication attack. Authentication
should always be required per Section 7.1.4
Packet ﬂooding
Would be ’catched’ by the model as a Deletion attack. When the buﬀer
is full because of too many requests the drone should not cause a system
crash but land safely per Section 7.1.3
Large packets causing stack overﬂow
Would be ’catched’ by the model as a Fabrication attack. Too large packets
should not cause a system crash but cause the drone to land safely per
Section 7.1.3
Packet injection
Would be ’catched’ by the model as a Fabrication attack. Authentication
should always be required per Section 7.1.4 and invalid data should be
discarded per Section 7.1.3
==PAGE:139==
7.1 Risk Treatment
123
Jamming
Would be ’catched’ by the model as a Deletion attack. Without contact
to the controller, the drone should land safely per Section 7.1.3
De-authentication
Would be ’catched’ by the model as a Deletion attack. Without contact
to the controller, the drone should land safely per Section 7.1.3
It should be noticed that not all real life attacks are ’catched’ by the model as
being threat but instead vulnerabilities. Despite not being the original intention
the ’catching’ of vulnerabilities is not a problem as they should be attended never
the less since they can be exploited by the ’catched’ threats.
==PAGE:140==
124
Risk treatment and
model evaluation
==PAGE:141==
Chapter 8
Discussion
As the model now have been established and evaluated against real-life attacks
we can see that these vulnerabilities would have been discovered. There are
however some drawbacks to this model. First of all the model’s only goal to
ensure security - not safety and privacy. These are only ensured indirectly from
attackers through security of the drone. When the pilot himself is malicious
on have a purpose of violating the safety or privacy of others, this model is
not suﬃcient. The only way to prevent illegitimate uses of a drone is through
legislation. The adopted legislation in Denmark have good opportunity to ensure
safety and privacy by dissuade possible pilots wishing to threaten the safety
and/or privacy of others. This of course will not be a complete solution as in
some cases the pilot might do it anyway.
Through the work with the ISO 27005 method it was found to be insuﬃcient in
relation to how the drone environment was constructed which meant that the
==PAGE:142==
126
Discussion
method had to be adapted to handle multiple stakeholders. The usage of the
CORAS tool in the risk assessment process has turned out to be a good idea,
as it helped to increase the understanding of the adapted ISO 27005 method.
The CORAS method was not used however so it is hard to tell whether it would
have been a preferred choice instead.
The model is proved to oﬀer better security but at a cost. Oﬀering conﬁden-
tiality, integrity, and availability through the means of our model is not free.
Whether the cost is extra power consumption, or extra implementation cost or
extra components making the drone heavier, it is a balance the manufacturer
must consider. Adding a secure module to store and generate keys is probably
the most secure solution, but an expensive one in both cost and power consump-
tion which is why we recommend other methods. Adding an encryption module
is again extra implementation cost and the whole encryption-decryption and in-
tegrity checking can add delay which is undesired in a real-time communication
session plus use extra power from the drones already limited battery. As for
the AES encryption, many modern processors today have an integrated AES
instruction set that makes it more eﬃcient. Using the GCM mode of operation
with AES is also a very eﬃcient and fast mode as it can be parallelised.
We don’t have a recommendation on the communication protocol itself as one
may be just as good as another. Only recommendation is to use connection
oriented protocol as reliability is always desired and thus the drone can detect
if the signal to the controller is lost. In case of lost connection the drone should
land safely so an established connection is preferred.
Whether to use RF, WiFi, or other communication technologies is also a matter
of preference. WiFi is a proven reliable standard that requires no extra hardware
than a laptop computer or a smartphone. Thus the manufacturer can save on
the production cost as they does not have to include a drone controller - the user
==PAGE:143==
127
already have one: his smartphone. Using WiFi instead of RF however leaves
it open to WiFi speciﬁc attacks - for example de-authentication attacks. As
WiFi is the de-facto standard for wireless Internet communication it have many
known attack vectors - some of them hard to protect against. And as WiFi
is in every laptop computer and smartphone today, an attacker would need no
extra equipment to perform attacks as he already have a WiFi network card on-
board his device. If using RF an attacker would need extra equipment, which
costs money, and more know-how in the ﬁeld of wireless communication than a
command line tool in Linux requires. RF is not more secure than WiFi but adds
an extra layer of complexity which may deter some attackers from attacking.
As always when talking about information security, securing systems is a trade-
oﬀbetween security and convenience. The user does not want to go through
a long process of authentication and other setup every time he wants to ﬂy
his drone - but on the other hand he does not want others to take over the
control of it. The other trade-oﬀis the implementation of the security measures
- the cost and power it requires when the manufacturer is competing against
other companies on price and ﬂying time. It is a ﬁne balance that is have to be
considered carefully.
==PAGE:144==
128
Discussion
==PAGE:145==
Chapter 9
Conclusion
By using the risk management method ISO 27005 as a template a model was
created assessing the topics of security, safety and privacy in a drone environ-
ment. This have been done through distinguishing the stakeholders, being the
drone, the pilot and the bystanders, in the environment in order to create a
more accurate model. To improve the understanding of the mutual inﬂuence
between the identiﬁed assets and the courses of the risks, the tool from the
risk assessment method CORAS, has been used. The model produced showed
that there could exist several risks which needed to be handled in the drone
environment.
A series of experiments was then conducted in order to ﬁnd any vulnerabilities
and threat against drones. These experiments showed that drones using RF for
communication is more complex as it requires more know-how on the topic of
wireless communication and extra equipment, while WiFi based drones are more
==PAGE:146==
130
Conclusion
easily attacked with simple tools. Common for all drones is that security does
not seems to be high on the list of priorities and some manufactures outright
have no security implemented. If the drone popularity continues to rise this
is certainly to cause more attacks in the future potentially compromising our
safety and privacy.
Finally risk treatments has been proposed focusing on the identiﬁed risks in
the model with a primary focus on the area of security. Real life drone attacks,
including the conducted experiments, where then examined and identiﬁed in the
model, and treatment plans to handle the real life risk on basis of the proposed
risk treatments were then recommended.
It was found that the model was able to ’catch’ the real life attacks which
supported the reliability of the model not just theoretically but also from a
practical point of view.
==PAGE:147==
Appendix A
Popular drone models
==PAGE:148==
132
Popular drone models
Figure A.1: Drone
best
sellers
on
Amazon
(Date:
March
4
2016)
http://www.amazon.com/
Best-Sellers-Toys-Games-Hobby-RC-Helicopters/zgbs/
toys-and-games/166591011
==PAGE:149==
133
#
Drone
Price
Frequency
Camera
Live
Fly time
Weight
1
SYMA X5C
$41.99
2.4GHz (RF)
Yes
Yes
7 min
953 g
2
Cheerson
CX-10
$14.97
2.4GHz (RF)
No
-
4-8 min
91 g
3
Holy Stone
HS170
$39.99
2.4GHz (RF)
No
-
6-8 min
408 g
4
UDI
Discovery
HD+
$99.99
2.4GHz (WiFi)
Yes
Yes
7-9 min
130 g
5
DJI
Phantom 3
Standard
$499
2.4GHz (WiFi)
Yes
Yes
25 min
1216 g
6
AKASO
X5C
$49.99
2.4GHz (RF)
Yes
No
5-7 min
82 g
7
Hubsan X4
(H107L)
$34.90
2.4GHz (RF)
No
-
9 min
590 g
8
Hubsan X4
(H107C)
$39.75
2.4GHz (RF)
Yes
No
7 min
499 g
9
DJI
Phantom 3
Advanced
$766
2.4GHz (WiFi)
Yes
Yes
23 min
1280 g
10
UDI U818A
$75.55
2.4GHz (RF)
Yes
No
7-9 min
119 g
Table A.1: The 10 most sold hobby drones on Amazon.com (Date: March 4 2016), with speciﬁcations
from drones.specout.com
==PAGE:150==
134
Popular drone models
==PAGE:151==
Appendix B
Screenshots
Figure B.1: Wireshark captured UDP packet with encrypted payload
==PAGE:152==
136
Screenshots
Figure B.2: TCP connection between drone camera and smartphone
==PAGE:153==
Appendix C
Listings
1
from Crypto.Cipher import AES
2
import sys
3
4
data = sys.argv[1]
5
6
# Add padding
7
length = 16 - (len(data) % 16)
8
data += chr(length)*length
9
10
obj = AES.new("Crypto is funny!", AES.MODE_CBC, "IV is important!")
11
12
ciphertext = obj.encrypt(data)
13
14
print ciphertext.encode(’hex’)
Listing 1: Encryption - Python script
==PAGE:154==
138
Listings
1
import sys
2
from Crypto.Cipher import AES
3
4
data = sys.argv[1].decode(’hex’)
5
6
obj = AES.new("Crypto is funny!", AES.MODE_CBC, "IV is important!")
7
8
cleartext = obj.decrypt(data)
9
pad = ord(cleartext[-1])
10
11
print cleartext[:-pad]
Listing 2: Decryption - Python script
1
while read line
2
do
3
enc=$(python encrypt.py "$line")
4
echo $enc | nc -4u -w1 127.0.0.1 6666
5
done
Listing 3: Send - Bash script
1
while true
2
do
3
response=$(nc -w 1 -vvul 0.0.0.0 6666 2>&1)
4
python decrypt.py $response
5
done
Listing 4: Receive - Bash script
1
while read line
2
do
3
timestamp=$(date +%s)
4
data="$timestamp:$line"
5
enc=$(python encrypt.py "$data")
6
echo $enc | nc -4u -w1 127.0.0.1 6666
7
done
Listing 5: Send with replay protection - Bash script
==PAGE:155==
139
1
while true
2
do
3
response=$(nc -w 1 -vvul 0.0.0.0 6666 2>&1)
4
decrypt=$(python decrypt.py $response)
5
timestamp=$(date +%s)
6
IFS=’:’ read -r -a array <<< "$decrypt"
7
diff="$(($timestamp - ${array[0]}))"
8
if [ "$diff" -le "1" ]; then
9
echo ${array[1]}
10
# Obey command ...
11
fi
12
done
Listing 6: Receive with replay protection - Bash script
==PAGE:156==
140
Listings
==PAGE:157==
Bibliography
[1] J.
Stamp.
Unmanned
Drones
Have
Been
Around
Since
World
War
I.
Accessed:
2016-02-22.
[On-
line].
Available:
http://www.smithsonianmag.com/arts-culture/
unmanned-drones-have-been-around-since-world-war-i-16055939/?no-ist
[2] The Radioplane OQ-2 aerial target drone was the ﬁrst quantitative UAV
purchase for the United States. Accessed: 2016-02-22. [Online]. Available:
http://www.militaryfactory.com/aircraft/detail.asp?aircraft_id=331
[3] (2015,
apr)
The
V
Weapons.
Accessed:
2016-06-24.
[On-
line].
Available:
http://www.historylearningsite.co.uk/world-war-two/
world-war-two-in-western-europe/the-v-revenge-weapons/the-v-weapons/
[4] PD-100
PRS.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.proxdynamics.com/
products/pd-100-black-hornet-prs
[5] M. Mazur, A. Wiśniewski, and J. McMillan, “Clarity from above,” 2016.
[Online]. Available:
http://www.pwc.pl/pl/pdf/clarity-from-above-pwc.
pdf
[6] F. Mohammed, A. Idries, N. Mohamed, J. Al-Jaroodi, and I. Jawhar, “Uavs
for smart cities: Opportunities and challenges,” in Unmanned Aircraft Sys-
tems (ICUAS), 2014 International Conference on.
IEEE, 2014, pp. 267–
273.
==PAGE:158==
142
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[7] J. Lejot, C. Delacourt, H. Piégay, T. Fournier, M.-L. Trémélo, and
P. Allemand, “Very high spatial resolution imagery for channel bathymetry
and topography from an unmanned mapping controlled platform,” Earth
Surface Processes and Landforms, vol. 32, no. 11, pp. 1705–1725, 2007.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/esp.1595
[8] Ambulance drone. Accessed:
2016-02-23. [Online]. Available:
http:
//www.alecmomont.com/projects/dronesforgood
[9] Dronewallah.
(2015)
Knowledge
Base:
What
are
RTF,
BNF
and
ARF drone kits?
Accessed:
2016-04-15. [Online]. Available:
http:
//www.rcdronearena.com/2015/02/23/what-is-rtf-bnf-arf-drone-kit/
[10] Danish
Transport
Authority.
(2015)
Future
regulation
of
civil
drones.
Accessed:
2016-02-29.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.traﬁkstyrelsen.dk/~/media/Dokumenter/05%20Luftfart/
01%20Publikationer%20luftfart/Report%20on%20civil%20drones.ashx
[11] (2016,
apr) Enkle og klare regler på droneområdet (only Danish).
Accessed:
2016-06-24.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.trm.dk/da/
nyheder/2016/enkle-og-klare-regler-paa-droneomraadet
[12] K. Andersen, “Høring over udkast til ny dronebekendtgørelse (only Dan-
ish),” 2016. [Online]. Available:
http://prodstoragehoeringspo.blob.core.
windows.net/700c13e0-3aac-40e6-807e-68d4d27d4367/Dronebekendtg%
C3%B8relse%20h%C3%B8ringsbrev%200806.pdf
[13] UDKAST til: Bekendtgørelse om ﬂyvning med droner i bymæssigt område
(only Danish). [Online]. Available:
http://prodstoragehoeringspo.blob.
core.windows.net/700c13e0-3aac-40e6-807e-68d4d27d4367/Bekendtg%
C3%B8relse%20om%20ﬂyvning%20med%20droner%20i%20by_H%C3%
98RINGSUDKAST.pdf
[14] Wi-Fi
Alliance.
(2015)
Total
Wi-Fi R⃝
device
shipments
to
surpass
ten
billion
this
month.
Accessed:
2016-02-29.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.wi-ﬁ.org/news-events/newsroom/
total-wi-ﬁ-device-shipments-to-surpass-ten-billion-this-month
[15] J. M. Tjensvold. (2007) Comparison of the IEEE 802.11,
802.15.1,
802.15.4
and
802.15.6
wireless
standards.
Accessed:
2016-03-
==PAGE:159==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
143
01.
[Online].
Available:
https://janmagnet.ﬁles.wordpress.com/2008/
07/comparison-ieee-802-standards.pdf
[16] (2015,
dec)
Skier
Marcel
Hirscher
escapes
injury
as
drone
smashes
behind
him
during
race.
Accessed:
2016-06-24.
[On-
line].
Available:
https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/23/
champion-skier-marcel-hirscher-has-near-miss-as-drone-falls-out-of-sky
[17] (2011,
dec) How Iran hacked super-secret CIA stealth drone. Ac-
cessed:
2016-06-15.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.rt.com/usa/
iran-drone-hack-stealth-943/
[18] (2015, oct) UK police see spike in drone incidents. Accessed: 2016-06-24.
[Online]. Available: https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/
11/drone-incidents-reported-to-uk-police-on-the-rise
[19] A. Shoufan, H. AlNoon, and J. Baek, Information Systems Security
and Privacy:
First International Conference, ICISSP 2015, Angers,
France, February 9-11, 2015, Revised Selected Papers.
Cham: Springer
International Publishing,
2015,
ch. Secure Communication in Civil
Drones,
pp. 177–195. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-319-27668-7_11
[20] D. Martins and H. Guyennet, “Wireless sensor network attacks and secu-
rity mechanisms: A short survey,” in Network-Based Information Systems
(NBiS), 2010 13th International Conference on, Sept 2010, pp. 313–320.
[21] A
list
of
wireless
network
attacks.
Accessed:
2016-06-
08.
[Online].
Available:
http://searchsecurity.techtarget.com/feature/
A-list-of-wireless-network-attacks
[22] E. Barker, M. Smid, and D. Branstad, “A Proﬁle for U. S. Federal
Cryptographic Key Management Systems,” NIST Special Publication 800-
152, 2015. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-152
[23] Organización Internacional de Normalización, DS/ISO/IEC 27005: Infor-
mation technology-Security techniques-Information security risk manage-
ment, 2nd ed.
DS, 2011.
[24] M. S. Lund, B. Solhaug, and K. Stlen, Model-Driven Risk Analysis: The
CORAS Approach, 1st ed.
Springer Publishing Company, Incorporated,
2010.
==PAGE:160==
144
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[25] Netcat. [Online]. Available: http://netcat.sourceforge.net
[26] Wireshark. [Online]. Available: https://www.wireshark.org
[27] Tcpreplay. [Online]. Available: http://tcpreplay.synﬁn.net
[28] SYMA X5SW. [Online]. Available:
http://www.symatoys.com/product/
show/1927.html
[29] Hubsan X4. [Online]. Available: http://www.hubsan.com/productinfo_16.
html
[30] PhracturedBlue.
Hubsan
X4
protocol
analysis
-
RC
Groups.
Ac-
cessed:
2016-05-30.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.rcgroups.com/
forums/showthread.php?t=1773853
[31] Aircrack-ng. [Online]. Available: http://www.aircrack-ng.org
[32] Parrot AR.Drone 2.0. [Online]. Available:
http://www.parrot.com/usa/
products/ardrone-2/
[33] J. S. Warner and R. G. Johnston, “GPS Spooﬁng Countermeasures,”
Homeland Security Journal, vol. LAUR-03-6163, pp. 22–30, 2003, [On-
line]. Available: http://permalink.lanl.gov/object/tr?what=info:lanl-repo/
lareport/LA-UR-03-6163.
[34] L. Vaas. (2012, jul) Drone hijacked by hackers from Texas college
with $1,000 spoofer. Accessed:
2016-06-15. [Online]. Available:
https:
//nakedsecurity.sophos.com/2012/07/02/drone-hackedwith-1000-spoofer/
[35] J. Cook. (2015, jan) This Hacker Figured How to Hijack One of the Most
Popular Drones. Accessed: 2016-06-15. [Online]. Available: http://www.
slate.com/blogs/business_insider/2015/01/27/hacking_drones_parrot_
drones_can_now_be_hijacked_mid_air_through_malware.html
[36] L. Kelion. (2013, dec) Parrot drones ’vulnerable to ﬂying hack attack’.
Accessed:
2016-06-15. [Online]. Available:
http://www.bbc.com/news/
technology-25217378
[37] B. Benchoﬀ. (2015, oct) Hijacking Quadcopters with a MAVLink Exploit.
Accessed: 2016-06-15. [Online]. Available: http://hackaday.com/2015/10/
15/hijacking-quadcopters-with-a-mavlink-exploit/
==PAGE:161==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
145
[38] R. Krishnan. (2016, feb) NASA HACKED! AnonSec tried to Crash
$222 Million Drone into Paciﬁc Ocean. Accessed:
2016-06-15. [Online].
Available: http://thehackernews.com/2016/02/nasa-hacked-drone.html
[39] J.
Murdock.
(2016,
mar)
Drone
hack:
Weak
encryption
leaves
high-end
UAVs
wide
open
to
remote
hijacking.
Ac-
cessed:
2016-06-15.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.ibtimes.co.uk/
drone-hack-weak-encryption-leaves-high-end-uavs-wide-open-remote-hijacking-1547356
[40] P. Sneiderman. (2016, jun) Johns Hopkins scientists show how easy it is
to hack a drone and crash it. Accessed: 2016-06-15. [Online]. Available:
http://hub.jhu.edu/2016/06/08/hacking-drones-security-ﬂaws
[41] (2016,
jun)
British
drone-freezing
ray
gets
US
airports
trial.
Ac-
cessed:
2016-06-01. [Online]. Available:
http://www.bbc.com/news/
technology-36425879
