==PAGE:1==
Production of Omega-3 PUFA Delivery Systems
by Electrohydrodynamic Processing
Submitted by
Cecilie Damberg
Master thesis
June 2016
Supervisors: Charlotte Jacobsen & Pedro Jesús García Moreno
Secondary supervisors: Karen Boutrup Stephansen & Ioannis S. Chronakis
National Food Institute
Technical University of Denmark
DTU
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Enriched food products are increasing in numbers, and there is a demand by consumers for natural
functional food products. Encapsulation by electrospinning of bioactive components by utilizing bio-
polymers has the last decade received an increasing interest by researchers, due to the increasing demand
by consumers. It is therefore of high interest to explore natural bio-polymers for new application for e.g.
food enrichment.
The aim was to optimize the morphology and oxidative stability of electrospun nanoﬁbers when using
Pullulan PI-20 for encapsulation of ﬁsh oil. The effect of different ﬁsh oil concentrations and the effect of
adding Tween 20 as co-surfactant was investigated. Fish oil encapsulated by other methods like emulsion
spray-drying have already shown to be applicable and is seen in different food products like bread and
milk. The second part of this study explores the antioxidative effect of δ-tocopherol and rosemary extract
in inhibiting oxidation of the encapsulated ﬁsh oil by electrospinning.
This study found that encapsulation of ﬁsh oil in pullulan ﬁbers by electrospinning of a 17.5% pullulan
polymer solution did not provide protection against oxidation to reach the maximum limit at PV < 5 meq
O2 / kg lipid. The PV of the ﬁbers with no antioxidants were in the range of 4.6 meq O2 / kg lipid to
15.8 meq O2 / kg lipid after production of the ﬁbers. During storage the PV increased rapidly, though
addition of 1000 ppm of the two antioxidants in total improved the oxidative stability. In addition to this a
high concentration of antioxidant at 3000 ppm were investigated which showed prooxidative effect by a
high rate of degradation of both peroxides and secondary oxidation products. Lastly was formic acid as a
solvent for the polymers solution explored, which indicated that the oxidative stability could be improved
by substitute the water with formic acid.
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis entitled "Production of Omega-3 PUFA Delivery Systemsby Electrohydrodynamic Processing"
were submitted to fulﬁll the requirements to obtain a Master Degree in food technology at the National
Food Institute, Technical University of Denmark. The experimental part of this study was carried out at the
Technical University of Denmark. The study was supervised by Professor Charlotte Jacobsen, National
Food Institute, Technical University of Denmark and Postdoc Pedro Jesús García Moreno, National
Food Institute, Technical University of Denmark as the main supervisors, and Associate Professor Ionnis
S. Chronakis, National Food Institute, Technical University of Denmark, and Postdoc Karen Boutrup
Stephansen, National Food Institute, Technical University of Denmark, as secondary supervisors.
I would like to thanks all my supervisors for being very helpful and for supervising me in making
this thesis, and sharing their knowledge with me about Lipid Oxidation and Electrospinning. Moreover I
would like to thank Charlotte Jacobsen and Pedro Jesùs Garcia Moreno in showing me trust by unassisted
work in the lab on experiments for future publication.
Furthermore I would like to thank the laboratory technicians at, the National Food Institute, Techni-
cal University of Denmark, for always being of assistance if needed.
A special thanks to Thi Thu Trang Vu and Sevda Ekici Seker, for performing a great deal of the peroxide
value analysis and volatile analysis respectively.
Also a thank all the employees and students in building 221 for a good and social environment.
Cecilie Damberg - s142950
2016
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.0.1
Objective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.0.2
Hypothesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theory
3
2.1
Lipid Oxidation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.1
Autoxidation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.2
Photooxidation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.3
Enzymatic oxidation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.4
Secondary oxidation products
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Fish Oil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Electrohydrodynamic Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3.1
Electrospinning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Pullulan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.5
Surfactants
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5.1
Tween20
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.6
Antioxidants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.7
Scanning Electron Microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.8
Dynamic Headspace Gas Chromatograph Mass Spectrometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
Method and Material
17
3.1
Solution Preparation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Viscosity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3
Electrospinning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.4
Morphology - SEM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.5
Oil Content Determination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.6
Peroxide Value
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.7
Encapsulation Efﬁciency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.8
Secondary Oxidation Products - Dynamic Headspace GC-MS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.9
Statistical Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4
Results & Discussion
23
4.1
Results of Preliminary Experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.1.1
Sonication
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.1.2
Stirring method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.1.3
Tween20 concentration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2
Effect of encapsulation during storage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
==PAGE:8==
4.3
Effect of antioxidants during storage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3.1
Fibers with water as solvent
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.3.2
Fiber with formic acid as solvent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5
Conclusion
46
6
Further Study
48
Bibliography
49
Appendix
I
A Data table of the results of the preliminary experiments
I
B
Band-like structure of the formic acid sample in the oil content experiment
II
C SEM images for the bead count in the oil content experiment
III
D Impurities observed in the 96% formic acid from Sigma Aldrich
IV
E
Volatiles from oil content experiment
V
F
SEM images of the morphology of the water samples with and without antioxidants at
day 0
IX
G SEM images of the morphology of the water samples with and without antioxidants after
20 days of storage + Diameter analysis
X
H SEM defects observed in the water samples without antioxidants
XII
I
Volatiles from the water samples with and without antioxidants
XIII
J
Volatiles from the formic acid samples with and without antioxidants
XVI
==PAGE:9==
Abbreviations
ALA : Alpha Linolenis Acid
B&D : Bligh and Dyer
CPP : Critical Packaging Parameter
DHA : DocosaHexaenoic Acid
EPA : EicosaPentaenoic Acid
EU : European Union
GC : Gas Chromatograph
GC-MS : Gas Chromatograph Mass Spectrometer
GMP : Good Manufacturing Practice
MS : Mass Spectrometer
PUFA : PolyUnsaturated Fatty Acid
PV : Peroxide Value
SEM : Scanning Electron Microscope (or Microscopy)
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
1 Introduction
Food is much more than energy. The primary reason for eating is to get fuel for your body to function,
but the body have other requirements besides energy intake. The nutrition of the food intake should be
properly balanced for the body to function. A differentiated diet should contain all the essential building
block for the body, but it can be difﬁcult to make sure that everything is ingested in the sufﬁcient amount.
Essential building blocks such as some lipids and vitamins, are important for maintaining a healthy
body and to reduce the risk of illnesses [1, 2]. It is therefore of signiﬁcant interest for the society to
communicate and educate about what a healthy lifestyle is. Here, a major player is the diet, due to the
direct effect of reduction in number of cases or the severity of lifestyle diseases. By e.g. a sufﬁcient intake
of omega-3 fatty acids it is possible to prevent diseases such as coronary heart disease [1], cardiovascular
disease [3] and type 2 diabetes [4]. Thereby expenses to the health care system can be reduced.
The health aspect of food is not only to educate people in which food products are healthy and which
are not, but also how to guide people to make healthy food choices. It takes time to change a populations
eating habits, and it is therefore of interest to develop functional food products. Well known food products
that are highly accepted by the consumer are a good choice for enrichment, as it is a smaller change in food
choice for the consumer. The main taste and texture of an enriched food product has to stay consistent to
the original, but essential nutrients are implemented [5]. Many functional foods enriched with vitamins
or omega-3 fatty acids have already reached the market [6], and are well accepted by consumers, some
nationalities to a higher extent than others [5]. Some examples of enriched foods are dairy, bread, juice,
egg and meat products [6].
Fish oil is a well known source of eicosapentaenoic acid, EPA and docosahexaenoic acid, DHA, and
have numerous beneﬁcial health effects, such as improving the anti-inﬂammatory responses in the human
body, as well as preventing cardiovascular disease. It is also important for development of the brain and
retina in infants. [7, 8, 9]
EPA and DHA can be synthesised in the human body, by elongation and desaturation of fatty acids.
However this requires ingestion of the essential fatty acid α-linolenic acid, as animals and humans are not
able to synthesise it. Plants on the other hand, possess the enzyme ∆15 desaturase which is necessary for
the conversion of linoleic acid to α-linolenic acid. The desaturase enzymes are named by the position
of the newly inserted double bond counted from the carboxyl end. In the further metabolising steps of
α-linolenic acid to EPA and DHA, ∆6 and ∆5 desaturase along with elongase are needed. Here the
ﬁrst step which ∆6 desaturase catalyse is rate-limiting due to the direct competitions of the enzyme also
used in conversion of linoleic acid to arachidonic acid. Since linoleic acid is much more prevalent in
human diets, the omega-6 arachidonic acid is produced in signiﬁcantly greater quantities. Therefore when
enriching food products with ﬁsh oils, it is because of the desired omega-3 fatty acids. [6]
Foods enriched with ﬁsh oil, high in content of omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) like
EPA and DHA, have challenges with protection of the oil. If the oil is added in its neat form, it is highly
exposed to oxidation and will cause a rancid ﬂavour of the enriched food product. This would not be
accepted by the consumer, and oxidation decreases the nutritional value of the oil. Thus there is a need
1 of 52
==PAGE:12==
Technical University of Denmark
for a protection mechanism for the ﬁsh oil when added to the food matrix. A widespread method for
protection of ﬁsh oil is by encapsulation. Fish oil capsules is a well known supplement and a great source
of EPA and DHA, with an uptake of around 30% of the fatty acids in the capsule [6]. These capsules
are not very convenient due to their size and the consumer must remember to ingest them every day.
Therefore, it is of interest to incorporation ﬁsh oil into regularly ingested food products. If the ﬁsh oil
could be encapsulated in a micro- or nano-structure, it would be protected by a physical barrier, as the
one the capsule coat provides in the ﬁsh oil capsules. Furthermore, the small size of such a structure of
less than 100µm would make it possible to incorporate in food product without it being noticed [10].
A widespread technique of encapsulation is spray-drying [11], where an emulsion is sprayed through a
nozzle followed by rapid drying by applying heat. This approach is problematic for encapsulation of ﬁsh
oil, due to ﬁsh oil is exposed to oxidation during the preparation of the emulsion and in the drying step
where heat is applied.
1.0.1
Objective
There is a need for an alternative encapsulation method for ﬁsh oil, to maintain a high quality ﬁsh oil to
food enrichment. This is desired to obtain the health beneﬁts of the ﬁsh oil, without compromising on
the ﬂavour of the enriched food. Thereby could enriched food be a step towards increasing the health
of the population around the world. Therefore alternative encapsulation methods should be explored
for protection of ﬁsh oil in combination with addition of components like surfactants and antioxidants.
Electrohydrodynamic processing has been suggested to increase oxidative stability of ﬁsh oil [12], and
it is of interest to ﬁnd cheap shell material which is food approved. In this study, the polysaccharide,
pullulan PI-20 is explored for its ability to protect ﬁsh oil as a shell material. The aim is to investigate the
oxidative stability of encapsulated ﬁsh oil in pullulan ﬁbers.
1.0.2
Hypothesis
It is hypothesised that the shell material, here pullulan, will exhibit a protective effect of the encapsulated
ﬁsh oil, as it present a physical barrier towards oxygen. Furthermore, addition of antioxidants is expected
to increase the oxidative stability.
2 of 52
==PAGE:13==
2 Theory
A lipid is a molecule with a hydrophobic behavior, which means that the structure consist of many carbon
atoms often arranged in long chains like fatty acids, see Figure 2.1. Saturated fatty acids like the ﬁrst
three in Figure 2.1 are solid at room temperature, while the unsaturated fatty acids are more liquid like.
This is due to the their structure include one or more double bond in the carbon chain. The abbreviated
designation in Figure 2.1 are a common nomenclature for fatty acids. The ﬁst number relates to the
number of carbon atoms in the chain. The following number give information on how many double bonds
are present in the chain, and lastly the number in parentheses show where in the chain the double bonds
are placed counting the carboxylic carbon as number one. When the double bond is present at position 15
in Linolenic acid, the fatty acid is an omega-3. This is due to another nomenclature where the fatty acid
chains are described by counting the methyl carbon as the ﬁrst one.
2.1
Lipid Oxidation
Lipids play an important role regarding the sensory properties of food products, as they contribute to the
aroma proﬁle as well as the texture. The chemical composition of fatty acids in food have a major inﬂuence
on the ﬂavor. This is due to reactions like lipid oxidation, which will give different aroma compounds
depending on which fatty acids are present in the food. A fatty acids position in the triglyceride have
inﬂuence on the rate of reaction, as the α-position is more exposed than the β-position . In addition, the
type of fatty acid inﬂuence which reactions will occur, as different levels of unsaturation will lead to
different secondary oxidation products. The undesirable rancid ﬂavour from lipid oxidation is a result of a
collection of different secondary oxidation products. Prevention of lipid oxidation is therefore important
to reduce off ﬂavour and thereby increase shelf life of food products. Not only does lipid oxidation result
in an undesired ﬂavour, it may also produce harmful components and reduce the nutritional value of
PUFAs due to degradation. Lipid oxidation is inﬂuenced by many factors such as temperature, oxygen
availability, surface area, water activity, light, and trace metals. By controlling these factors, and knowing
the oxidation pathways, lipid oxidation can be controlled. There are three different reaction routes for
oxidation of lipids: Autoxidation, Photooxidation, and Enzymatic oxidation.[13, 9]
Figure 2.1: Structure and nomenclature of fatty acids. [13]
3 of 52
==PAGE:14==
Technical University of Denmark
2.1.1
Autoxidation
Autoxidation is a free radical induced chain reaction during which lipids are oxidised in 3 steps: initiation,
propagation and termination.
Initiation:
During the initiation step a hydrogen atom is removed from the lipid molecule (LH) by a initiator, and
thereby an alkyl radical is (L·) produced (Equation (2.1)). Heat and metals can initiate the autoxidation
by decomposition of hydroperoxide, while light excite oxygen from triplet state to singlet state and can
thereby form hydroperoxides rapidly for initiation of radical production.
LH −→L · +H·
(2.1)
The reactivity is determined by the type of fatty acid, i.e. the number of double bonds and the position in
the alkyl chain. The hydrogen at a carbon atom next to a double bond is more reactive than one at a carbon
atom next to a single bond, due to the polarizability of the π-bond. Thereby a bis-allylic hydrogen in an
polyunsaturated fatty acid is even more reactive due to the two double bonds surrounding it. The bond
strength is decreased for the bis-allylic hydrogen, resulting in oxidation at this site being in favour. When
comparing oxidaizabillity of linoleic acid to that of oleic acid, linoleic acid is 40 times more oxidaizable
due to the presence of one bis-allylic site in linoleic acid. The oxidizability from thereon increases linearly
with the number of bis-allylic positions present in the PUFA esters. Bis-allylic hydrogens are equally
reactive, as the oxidizability is doubled when a bis-allylic site is added.[9]
Propagation:
Following initiation, the alkyl radical reacts quickly with molecular oxygen to form a peroxyl radical,
which then reacts more slowly with hydrogen from another unsaturated lipid molecule. Thereby the chain
reaction can continue as showed here in Equations (2.2) and (2.3):
L · +O2 −→LOO·
(2.2)
LOO · +LH −→LOOH + L·
(2.3)
The step in Equation (2.3) is determining the rate of oxidation, and is selective towards the weakest bound
hydrogen. But it is the step in Equation (2.2) that determines the different possible isomere outcome
of the reaction, due to the partially free radical at each end of the allylic system where the oxygen can
attack. This implies that linoleic acid can be oxidized to two different isomere of monohydroperoxides,
see Figure 2.2. Since both double bonds can be in cis and trans conformation, a total of 4 stereoisomeres
are possible products. These are primary oxidation products, which are odor and tasteless, and it is due to
further degradation that food quality will be affected, see Section 2.1.4. [9]
Termination:
There are two options for termination of lipid oxidation. One is an antioxidant acting as a radical scavenger
by reacting with a peroxyl radical and forming a stable radical due to resonance stability. The other
4 of 52
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.2: Autoxidation mechanism of linoleic acid, which leads to two sterioisomere, 9- and 13-
hydroperoxide. [9]
possibility is two radicals reacting with each other at both low (Equation (2.5)) and elevated temperature
(Equations (2.6) and (2.7)).
LOO · +AH −→LOOH + A·
(2.4)
2LOO· −→LOOL + O2
(2.5)
LO · +L· −→LOL
(2.6)
2L· −→LL
(2.7)
The reaction with an antioxidant is more favourable than the removal of a hydrogen atom from a fatty
acid. Therefore, antioxidants effectively inhibit lipid oxidation by quick termination. Thus, addition of an
antioxidant is an easy way for food producers to control autoxidation whereas light, heat, oxygen and
trace metals, are factors which are difﬁcult to control in food production.[9]
2.1.2
Photooxidation
If a food item is exposed to light, available oxygen can be excited from the ground state to a short lived
singlet state that can attack a lipid double bond directly. For linoleic acid this means that the two double
bonds can be attacked at all four carbon atoms (9, 10, 12 and 13) creating 4 different monohydroperoxide
isomeres [13, 14], see Figure 2.3. In contrast, autoxidation only produce 2 monohydroperoxide isomeres
(9 and 13) as described above in Section 2.1.1, meaning that photooxidation produces other and more
diverse oxidation products. Photooxidation is more reactive than autoxidation [9, 14], and it also initiates
the chain reaction of autoxidation. It is therefore of great importance to prevent light to reach with the
food product, both during production and in the storage period. Storage of a food product in a light
impermeable container can increase the shelf life considerably, and is an important factor to consider
when studying oxidative stability. Thus, additional important to consider in this study. If the effect of
antioxidants are to be explored, controlling of the light should be considered by storage and production in
darkness.
5 of 52
==PAGE:16==
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 2.3: Photooxidation mechanism of linoleic acid, which leads to 4 sterioisomere, 9-, 10-, 12- and
13-hydroperoxide [13]
2.1.3
Enzymatic oxidation
Lipoxygenases (LOX) are enzymes that catalyse lipid oxidation of polyunsaturated fatty acids by reducing
the activation energy. The reaction site is also at the bis-allylic hydrogen in the fatty acid, which means
that the fatty acid must contain this element in order for LOX to be able to catalyse the oxidation. There
are many types of LOXs, each specialized to oxidise under different conditions, and on different substrates.
As LOXs are present in most plants and animals they should be considered when making food products
that are not processed or where the processing does not inactivate the enzymes, e.g. by heat treatment.[13]
This means that this type of oxidation does not have to be considered when encapsulating ﬁsh oil, as the
reﬁned ﬁsh oil does not contain any enzymes.
2.1.4
Secondary oxidation products
Further degradation of monohydroxyperoxides produced by the above oxidation reactions, leads to the
formation of secondary oxidation products. These are compounds like ketones, aldehydes, alcohols, and
hydrocarbons, which often have low threshold value for sensory properties. This means at even very
low concentration they can give the food item a rancid smell and taste. One of the main mechanisms of
the degradation of monohydroperoxides is the β-scission mechanism . There are two pathways in the
β-scission mechanism, A and B, see Figure 2.4. The cleavage in the A option is the most energetically
favourable since it cleaves the C-C bond on the side of the alkoxyl group furthest apart from the double
bond, thereby create the possibility for resonance stability of the radical [13, 9].
The food matrix that the volatile compound are within determines the organoleptic experience. Some
volatile compounds are more present in the sensory perception when in a lipid matrix and vice versa [15].
Secondary oxidation products from omega-3 fatty acids
The result of the secondary oxidation of omega-3 fatty acids, is rancid ﬂavoured compounds like those
listed here in Table 2.1 [16, 9, 17]. These volatile compound can be further oxidized and degrade to
smaller compounds.
6 of 52
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.4: Degradation of monohydroperoxides by β-scission mechanism, A and B. [9] with modiﬁca-
tions by adding name tags.
2.2
Fish Oil
Fish oil is a slightly yellow/orange oil obtained from whole ﬁsh or by-products from the ﬁsh ﬁlleting
industry [6]. It contain high amounts of omega-3 fatty acids like EPA and DHA, which makes ﬁsh oil
particular vulnerable to oxidation. The main stages of oil production is grinding, pressing and reﬁning of
the oil. Heat is applied at some of the steps to increase the yield, but this can also induce oxidation and
thereby reduce the quality of the oil. The reﬁning process, where impurities that can lead to oxidation
during storage are removed, is important for ﬁsh oil of high quality. On the other hand many natural
occurring antioxidants are removed in the reﬁning process, which leaves the oil signiﬁcantly more exposed
to oxidation. Production of high quality ﬁsh oil is therefore a complicated process, where light, heat
and oxygen level has to be controlled. This is done in a way where it is also taken into consideration to
maintain as many natural occurring antioxidants as possible to protect the oil during the process, as well
as in the following storage of the oil. The Global Organisation for EPA and DHA (GOED) states that ﬁsh
oil for human consumption should have a PV value less than 5 meq/kg oil, and a Anisidine value (AV)
7 of 52
==PAGE:18==
Technical University of Denmark
Aldehydes
Other compounds
Propanal
1-penten-3-ol
2-Propenal
1,5-octadien-3-ol
trans-2-butenal
1-penten-3-one
trans, 2-pentenal
1-penten-3-ol
trans-2,-hexenal
cis-1,5-octadien-3-one
cis-3-hexenal
2-ethyl furan
cis-4-heptenal
trans,trans-2,4-hexadienal
4-heptenal
trans,trans-2,4-heptadienal
trans,cis-2,4-heptadienal
trans,cis-2,6-nonadienal
trans,trans,cis-2,4,7-decatrienal
trans,cis,cis-2,4,7-decatrienal
Table 2.1: Secondary oxidation products with Omega-3 fatty acids as precursor.
of less than 20 [16]. In the presence of both peroxides (PV) and secondary oxidation products (AV) the
TOTOX value are the limiting factor. This is deﬁnde as 2× PV + AV. The color of the ﬁsh oil should be
from pale, light yellow to orange by the description in the monograph from GOED, along with an odour
of bland to mild ﬁsh-like. Therefore when the ﬁsh oil is produced, it is of great interest to maintain the
low PV and AV until consumption. Thereby, the nutritional value is maintained and the health beneﬁts
described in Chapter 1 are obtained by the consumer. When adding ﬁsh oil to food as an additive to enrich
the food, then the oxidative stability must be considered. Encapsulation of the ﬁsh oil in a protective shell
of polymer could be an option, e.g. by electrohydrodynamic processing, as this study explore.
2.3
Electrohydrodynamic Processing
Electrohydrodynamic Processing can be divided into two types of processing methods electrospinning,
and electrospraying. Electrospinning is processing of thin micro to nano size ﬁbers, where the end product
of electrospraying are capsules of similar size. Biopolymeres have increased in interest for application in
the food and pharmaceutical industry in recent years [18]. The basic system is the same for electrospinning
and electrospraying, where a high voltage power supply is connected to a container with polymer solution
such as a syringe with conducting tip. All this is connection to a grounded plate collector which then
completes the circuit [19], see Figure 2.5. This allows for a static electrical ﬁeld between the tip of the
syringe and the collector, that the solution is dragged through as it is pumped out of the syringe. The
shape the solution takes when traveling through the air determines whether the product end up being ﬁbers
or capsules. If there is a continuous ﬂow, a ﬁber is produced and if the solution beaks up into smaller
droplets capsules are formed at the collector.
2.3.1
Electrospinning
The ﬁbers produced in electrospinning depend on many physical as well as chemical properties. As the
solution leaves the tip of the syringes, the shape changes due to the electrical charge build-up at the surface
of the droplet [19]. If no electrical ﬁeld is applied the shape of the droplet would be hemispherical, but as
8 of 52
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.5: Typical experimental electrospinning system setup, modiﬁed from [19]
the ﬁeld strength increases the shape changes towards a more conical shape. This phenomenon is known
as the taylor cone and when the electrical force created by the charge build-up exceeds the force of the
surface tension, a jet is ejected from the tip of the taylor cone. To continue producing ﬁbers over longer
time a stable taylor cone is desired. When solution is ejected by the jet towards the collector, a ﬂow of
new solution must supply the taylor cone. To make sure the ﬂow into the taylor cone is equal to the mass
of solution leaving by the jet, a pump is required to maintaining it. If the taylor cone is not stable the jet
can break up and capsules will be formed instead of ﬁbers. Instability is observed when the ﬂow into
the tayleor cone exceeds the ﬂow leaving the cone, resulting in dripping from the tip. This will decrease
the yield as the solution is not spun into ﬁbers. Polymer solutions with high surface tension can result
in production of beads, due to a more spherical shape of the taylor cone. Especially solutions with low
viscosity have a tendency to produce beads, due to the surface tension having a more dominant effect than
the polymer-polymer interaction. On the other hand if the viscosity get to high, the jetting of the polymer
solution might be inhibited.
Another part of the spinning process to take into consideration when designing the polymer solution,
is the shearing and whipping of the jet. In this process the jet stretches and solvent evaporate. Thereby
is a thin solidiﬁed ﬁber formed upon impact with the collector. This means that on the way from tip to
collector adequate evaporation of the solvent must occur to avoid merging of moist ﬁbers. If the solvent is
to volatile, premature solidiﬁcation can occur and prevent stretching of the ﬁber. In addition, issues may
arise from a clogged tip, due to vast evaporation and formation of a solid shell around the taylor cone.
The shearing and whipping motion of the ﬁber is due to the charge at the surface of the jet interacting
with the electrical ﬁeld between tip and collector. If the conductivity of the solution is high, the charge
can slip through the ﬂuid in the spinning process, reducing the stretching due to lower surface charge.
It is equally important for the jet to have time to perform the stretching, which implies that the distance
9 of 52
==PAGE:20==
Technical University of Denmark
between tip and collector are of importance. The further away the collector is from the tip, the more time
and space are available for stretching, resulting in thinner ﬁbers. Voltage may also affect the stretching,
as a higher voltage increase the velocity of the jet. This results in less stretching if the collector is not
moved corresponding to that, even though a higher voltage implies increase in surface charge density [18].
In addition to all these processing factors, the environmental conditions have impact on the spinning as
well. Viscosity of the polymer solution change with the temperature, resulting in an alternating diameter
of the ﬁber. Furthermore, the solvent evaporation dependent on the temperature, which will affect the
stretching as described above. Lastly, the relative humidity (RH) affects the evaporation of the solvent.
A high RH implies an increase in the wetting of the taylor cone thereby avoiding clogging due to shell
formation. Since temperature and RH both have an impact on the evaporation of the solvent, it would
result in different porosity of the ﬁber morphology [20].
The electrospinning system setup can be placed in a vertically or horizontal conﬁguration, with
different pros and cons. When placed vertical, the ﬁbers is below the tip in risk for being destroyed by
dripping from an unstable taylor cone. When placed horizontally, gravity works perpendicular to the
ﬁber jet which can lead to reduced yield as the ﬁber might deposit on the surface in between the tip
and collector. In a laboratory scaled system, a few syringes are used resulting in a low production rate.
However, up-scaling is simple with addition of more syringes in parallel connection.
Electrospinning is conducted in industrial scale, and it would therefore be possible to produce large
quantities of a ﬁber as food ingredient. Therefore is electrospinning with food graded bio materials of
interest to encapsulate and protect bioactive components such as ﬁsh oil. Studies with microencapsulation
of ﬁsh oil by spray drying[21] and omega-3 fatty acids by electrospraying[22] have provided promising
results in protection of the oils. Electrospun ﬁbers have previously been used to encapsulate other bioactive
components such as vitamins [23] and antioxidants [24].
2.4
Pullulan
Pullulan is a food graded bio-polymer which has been used for microencapsulation of ﬂavour. Before
that was the commercial application hard capsules for the pharmaceutical industry. It is approved as a
food additive by EFSA [25], with the E-number, E1204. It is very applicable as a food additive, as it is
non toxic, odour- and tasteless. It is soluble in water, but insoluble in organic solvents like ethanol and
methanol. The molecule are uncharged along the branched structure. Pullulan is commercial available
as a white powder with the name, pullulan PI-20. The structure of pullulan is seen in Figure 2.6, and
consist of maltotriose units which are connected through α-1,6 glycosidic bonds to long polysaccharide
chains. Branching by other glycosidic bonds can occur. Pullulan as a powder is stable up to around 70%
in relative humidity, and has a moisture content of 10-15%. This gives a wide range of relative humidity
where pullulan can be used for encapsulation material. When utilize pullulan as a 100µm ﬁlm the oxygen
permeability is as low as 0.4 cm3/m2/day. Compared to gelatin at 3.3 cm3/m2/day which as well is often
used for capsules and etc. This implies pullulan as a good choice for protection of bio active components
like ﬁsh oil against oxygen. [26, 27]
10 of 52
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.6: The structure of a pullulan segment with a α-1,6 glycosidic bond, [26]
2.5
Surfactants
Encapsulation of ﬁsh oil could be performed to prevent oxidation as it has the potential for minimizing
the access of oxygen to the vulnerable lipids, and there by protecting it. To control the encapsulation
of the hydrophobic lipid into a hydrophilic polymer like pullulan, an amphiphilic molecule is used as a
borderline between the immiscible phases. The amphiphilic molecule has preference for both the water
soluble pullulan and the hydrophobic ﬁsh oil. This is due to the structure of the amphiphilic molecule,
which consist of a hydrophobic tail at one end and a hydrophillic head at the other as seen in Figure 2.7.
Depending on the size of each end, the formed structure could be either micelles, hexagonal, lamellar,
cubic, reversed hexagonal or reversed miceller, see Figure 2.8. The critical packaging parameter (CPP) is
a quantiﬁcation of the head and tail relative size to each other. If the CPP is less than one, the hydrophilic
head is largest. If CPP is equal to one, then head and tail are equal in size, and if the CPP is more than
one, then the tail is larger (Figure 2.8). For the purpose of encapsulating the hydrophobic ﬁsh oil, a CPP
of the surfactant should be below 1. If the CPP is less than 1/3 then micelles are formed which would
encapsulate the ﬁsh oil in small droplets dispersed in the polymer solution as an emulsion. This would be
desired to receive maximum protection of the oil.[28]
Figure 2.7: schematic illustation of an amphiphilic molecule
with hydrophilic head and a hydrophobic tail [28].
Emulsion
Two or more immiscible liquids mixed together is called an emulsion, where the dispersed phase consists
of small droplets distributed in a continuous phase. At the interface between these two phases, surfactants
are present as described above. These act as a bridge between the two different phases and increase the
stability due to reduction in surface tension. An emulsion of a water and an oil phase can be constructed
in two ways, water-in-oil or oil-in-water. The oil-in-water emulsion is a continuous phase of water with
droplets of oil dispersed in the water. The water-in-oil emulsion is where the continuous phase is oil and
water droplets are dispersed. A classical examples of oil-in-water emulsions is milk and a water-in-oil
emulsion, is margarine. When droplets of oil are dispersed in water, the solution changes from transparent
11 of 52
==PAGE:22==
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 2.8: Critical packaging parameters as surfactants and their preferred geometrical aggregation
structure [28]. V is the volume of the cone, a is the area of the bottom of the cone and lmax is the side
length of the cone
to white. This is due to the reﬂectance of the light, as the droplets are bigger in size than the wavelength
of visible light. If the droplet were smaller than this, the solution would appear transparent.[28] For this
study the surfactant and oil were stirred together to increase the interaction between the polymer and
the oil. No homogenisation step were performed which would result in a rather unstable emulsion but
sufﬁcient for the electrospinning.
12 of 52
==PAGE:23==
2.5.1
Tween20
Tween is a fatty alcohol ethoxylate in the class of surafctans named polyols [28]. The number connected
with the Tween e.g. Tween20 refers to the number of repeated polyethylene glycol units added to the basic
structure, see Figure 2.9. Tween20 is approved as food additive by EFSA [29], and has the E number
E432.
Figure 2.9: Basic structure of Tween20 (Sigma Aldrich), where w + x + y + z = 20
2.6
Antioxidants
To further avoid oxidation of ﬁsh oil, antioxidants can be utilised. An antioxidant is any substance that
can prevent oxidation. Some antioxidants have the function of being radical scavengers and thereby
inhibit the propagation of the lipid oxidation, others inhibit the initiation by chelating metal ions, while
some antioxidants inhibit oxidation by being more likely to oxidize than the substance it is added to for
prevention. A radical scavenger is often a big molecule with many conjugated double bonds, as they have
high stability because they can spread the charge of the received electron over the network of conjugated
double bonds. The more resonance structures the higher stability, and therefore better antioxidative effect
[9]. Metal chelators have the ability to hinder the metal ions to initiate lipid oxidation, by trapping them
inside a molecule like EDTA, see Figure 2.10.
The last mentioned antioxidant EDTA is a synthetic antioxidant, and many consumers have concerns
about synthetic compounds when added to food. Consumers have developed a growing interest for
food products with a clean label and no artiﬁcial ingredients. Consequently natural antioxidants have
woken a great deal of interest for manufactures to please the increasing demand for natural food products.
Therefore it is of interest for this study to follow this demand, and use natural antioxidants like rosemary
extract and δ-tocopherol. Addition of antioxidants to ﬁsh oil is regulated by the Codex Alimentarius
General Standard for Food Additives in food category "Lard, tallow, ﬁsh oil, and other animal fats" [16].
Figure 2.10: Structure of EDTA with at metal ion trapped in the center [30].
13 of 52
==PAGE:24==
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 2.11: Structure of carnosol and carnosic acid [].
Figure 2.12: Structure of tocopherol [31].
A list of food approved antioxidants are available in the Codex and the limit for tocopherols is 6000 mg/kg
oil[16]. Rosemary extract can be used in accordance with good manufacturing practice, GMP, in the
United States[32]. This means that the level used should not exceed the intended use. Within EU, use of
rosemary extract is regulated in accordance with the scientiﬁc journal from EFSA [33], and is assigned
the E-number, E392. This makes rosemary extract a safe, natural and effective alternative to synthetic
antioxidants on the market. The active components in rosemary extract are carnosol and carnosic acid,
see Figure 2.11 for their structure [31]. These structures implies hydrophilic behaviour of the rosemary
extract. Commercial production of rosemary extract is made by organic solvent extraction of the plant
parts, followed by deodorization and bleaching. Rosemary extract have shown to be effective in bulk
vegetable oils and ﬁsh oils [31]. The antioxidative effect of carnosol and carnosic acid at the interface
between oil and water is limited, due to 90% presence of the active components in the aqueous phase[31].
Due to this it is of interest to make a blend with the hydrophilic rosemary extract which is present in the
aqeous phase with δ-tocopherol, which is hydrophobic, see Figure 2.12. Thereby, this antioxidant would
mainly be present in the oil phase. Antioxidant activity of tocopherols is mainly by scavenging peroxyl
radicals, thus interrupting chain propagation[34].
2.7
Scanning Electron Microscopy
Microscopy is very useful when studying thin ﬁbers as those produced with the method described in
Section 2.3.1. The size and what type of information is desired to obtain from the sample, reﬂect the
choice of microscope. The light microscope has a natural resolution limit around a couple of hundred
14 of 52
==PAGE:25==
nanometers as the illumination source is visible light. When it is desired to study smaller details, like
the topography of ﬁbers, a source with smaller wavelength is in need. By utilizing that electrons can be
accelerated to high energy, resulting in a short wavelength, it is possible to obtain higher resolution. An
electron microscope employs the same basic principles as a light microscope with lenses to focus the
illumination source, but unlike in a light microscope where the lenses are made of curved glass, lenses in
an electron microscope consist of electron lenses conducting an electromagnetic ﬁeld onto the electron
beam and thereby forcing the electron beam to a small spot. The scanning electron microscope (SEM) uses
a scanning motion to create the image of the sample pixel by pixel. This means that a SEM illuminates one
pixel at a time, and instead of the eyes which is used to detect the image in a light microscope, an electron
detector attracts the electrons scattered from the surface of the sample. The number of electrons determine
the brightness of the speciﬁc pixel, and all the pixels combine into the SEM image. The contrast in the
image is directly proportional to the number of electrons captured by the detector. When the incident
beam enter the sample, some electrons are scattered elastically and some inelastically. The elastically
scattered electron does not change in energy when reﬂected by the sample surface, these are backscatter
electrons. The inelastically scattered electrons interfere with the sample by transferring the energy to an
atom at the surface causing it to emit an electron. These electrons are much lower in energy and are named
secondary electrons. A SEM detector can distinguish between the two type of electrons by their energy.
A bacscatter detector is circular, and placed above the sample where the density of bacscatter electrons
are the highest. A detector for secondary electrons are placed to one of the sides, where it attracts the
electrons by an electrical ﬁeld. As the electrons are from the surface of the sample, SEM is excellent for
studying morphology. Around edges the image will appear brighter due to the increased surface area from
where electrons can escape Figure 2.13.
Figure 2.13: The edge effect for secondary electrons. Edges appear brighter due to the increased surface
area from where electron can escape.[35]
When analysing biological samples like bio-polymer ﬁbers, the sample surface should be coated with
a metal to reﬂect the electrons. This help minimizing the charging of the surface, which can disturb the
image. The metal used for coating could be gold, which then is applied by sputter coating of the ﬁbers.
[36, 37]
15 of 52
==PAGE:26==
Technical University of Denmark
2.8
Dynamic Headspace Gas Chromatograph Mass Spectrometry
A great part of the experience when eating food is due to the aroma proﬁle of the speciﬁc food being
consumed. The aroma is determined by the volatile components released from the food. Not all volatile
components in food are desired, for instance a rancid ﬂavour from lipid oixidation will not result in a good
experience. This provides a need for an analysis method that can determine which volatile components
are causing the rancid ﬂavour. Here, dynamic head space is a useful method, due to the high sensitivity of
ppb [38] and is applicable towards both solid and liquid food matrices. The method can be divided into
four steps: purging, trapping, desorbing and separation [9, 16].
Purging: The sample is purged with an inert gas like nitrogen to carry the released volatiles away
from the sample to displace the equilibrium of volatiles in the head space, resulting in a concentration of
volatiles can be collected from the sample. To increase the release of volatiles, gentle heat is applied.
Trapping: The volatiles are then lead by the inert gas into a tube containing a porous polymer such
as Tenax, where they are trapped. Tenax is a useful material when analysing liquid or moist samples, as
water does not affect it.
Desorbing: When volatiles are trapped in the Tenax tube, they can be transferred to the inlet of the
column in the gas chromatograph, GC. When the Tenax tube is exposed to elevated temperature, the
volatiles are released and transported by a ﬂow of inert carrier gas to the column.
Separation: The last step is then separating the volatile compounds by the GC and detecting it by a
mass spectrometer MS.
Quantiﬁcation of the volatile compounds are based on addition of a known amount of an internal standard
to the samples before analysis, or along with a calibration curve. A calibration curve is created by
direct injection of a known amount of volatiles in different concentrations to a Tenax tube, then analysed
by GC-MS. The peaks in the chromatogram obtained can be integrated and since the area beneath the
peaks are directly proportional to the injected amount, a calibration curve can be created. The range
of compounds which can be analysed is dependent on the Tenax ability to trap them [16]. Tenax is
often used for trapping of volatiles from lipid oxiation, and binds in the range of ﬁve carbon atoms to
approximately 11. Within this range most lipid oxidation products are covered, and is therefore very
useful for determining secondary oxidation products.
16 of 52
==PAGE:27==
3 Method and Material
3.1
Solution Preparation
17.5 % pullulan polymer solution was prepared with the main constituents as:
- Pullulan (200 kDa, food grade pullulan, Hayashibara Co., Ltd., Okayama, Japan)
- Water (deionized water, DTU, Lyngby, Denmark)
- Formic acid (96%, Sigma Sldrich, Brøndby, Denmark)
- Tween20 (Sigma Aldrich, Brøndby, Denmark)
- Fish oil (cod liver oil, Maritex A/S, Sortland, Norway)
The amount of ﬁsh oil added was in relation to the solid content of the ﬁber, which means when a
solution with 10% ﬁsh oil were prepared, the ﬁnal ﬁsh oil content of the ﬁber was 10%. The amount of
Tween20 added was in relation to the ﬁsh oil content, which means e.g. a solution with 20% of Tween20
result in a ﬁber with 2% of the total solids being Tween20. As Tween20 is partly lipid, the total lipid
content of the ﬁber would then be 12%.
The composition of the cod liver oil can be seen in Tables 3.1 and 3.2 The pullulan waw dissolved in
water or formic acid at 50 ◦C and sonicated at 40 kHz (Branson 2510), the ﬁrst day, except one solution as
control of the soncation. Solutions were stored at room temperature for one day before Tween20 and ﬁsh
oil were stirred in for 10 min and 25 min respectively. The stirring method were explored in the beginning
of the study, and both mechanical stirring (Janke & Kunkel, IKA-Labortechnik)and magnetic stirring
(Heidolph) were used. The polymer solutions were prepared in brown glass beakers of 300 mL, and
loaded with nitrogen. The solutions were stored at 5 ◦C until used for electrospinning, though maximum a
few days.
Solutions prepared with antioxidants had an extra step added. The two antioxidants chosen were lipid
soluble δ-tocopherol and water soluble rosemary extract. The Two antioxidants were dissolved in ethanol
to make a stock solution. A ﬁnal concentration of 500 ppm or 1000 ppm were added of each antioxidant to
the polymer solutions of medium and high antioxidants concentration, respectively. The polymer solution
of high concentration of antioxidant ended up containing 1000 ppm of rosemary extract and 2000 ppm
δ-tocopherol, due to a calulation mistake. The two polymer solutions (water and formic acid as solvent)
of medium antioxidants having 500 ppm of each antioxidant.
3.2
Viscosity
The viscosity of the polymer solutions determined by the polymer-polymer interaction, were measured due
to the great impact on the electrospinning process. A stress controlled rheometer Stresstech (Reologica
Instruments AB, Lund, Sweden) with a CC25 standard bob cup probe were used. approximately 15
mL of polymer solution was used for the analysis. The temperature was controlled around the bob cup
by circulating water. Measurements were done at 20 ◦C over a shear stress range from 0.10 to 100 Pa.
17 of 52
==PAGE:28==
Technical University of Denmark
Table 3.1: Composition of the ﬁsh oil. [12]
% (w/w)
Name
Nomenclature
9.5%
Palmitic acid
C16:0
8.7%
Pamitoleic acid
C16:1n-7
2.0%
Stearic acid
C18:0
16.3%
Oleic acid
C18:1n-9
4.8%
vaccenic acid
C18:1n-7
1.8%
linoleic acid
C18:2n-6
2.6%
α-linolenic acid
C18:3n-3
12.6%
Gadoleic acid
C20:1n-11
9.2%
Eicosapentaenoic acid
C20:5n-3
6.0%
Cetoleic acid
C22:1n-11
11.4%
Docosahexaenoic acid
C22:6n-3
15.1%
others
-
Table 3.2: Natural tocopherol content in the ﬁsh oil. [12]
[µg/g oil]
Tocopherol
α
200 ± 3
β
5 ± 1
γ
96 ± 3
δ
47 ± 1
Viscosity measurements were made in duplicate one day after the solution was prepared. The obtained
data was analysed in Excel (Microsoft Excel, 2010) and the viscosity expressed in Pa · s.
3.3
Electrospinning
The polymer solution was placed in two syringes placed parallel in a syringe pump (NewEra Pump
Systems, Inc., USA). Each syringe had a 16 G needle (Proto Advantage, Canada) attached. The ﬂow
rate of the pump was 0.015 mL/min, and the voltage applied between needle and stainless steel collector
was 20kV (Gamma High Voltage Research, USA) and the distance were 15 cm. The collector was
approximately 15 cm × 15 cm, and covered with aluminium foil which was changed each 30 min of
spinning. The ﬁbers were removed and put into a brown glass beaker loaded with nitrogen every 30 minutes
to prevent oxidation. Between batches of 30 min, the beaker was stored at -18 ◦C. The electrospinning
was conducted at room temperature with a relative humidity changing during the experiment. In the
last experiment with the antioxidants the relative humidity was ranging between 25-31%. The polymer
solution in formic acid has a lower conductivity [19], viscosity, solvent boiling point and surface tension,
where only the viscosity was measured. These characteristics had an impact on the setup, as the collector
was moved a bit closer to obtain the same pattern of two circular ﬁber mats. The applied voltage and ﬂow
rate were kept the same. 5 samples of each ﬁber type were produced, to make a storage experiment over
20 days. This implies a sample for day 0, day 5, day 10, day 15, and day 20.
18 of 52
==PAGE:29==
3.4
Morphology - SEM
Samples for morphology analysis were prepared by electrospinning a thin ﬁber mat onto foil. To
ensure only ﬁber from a stable taylor cone would be analysed, the ﬁrst 30 seconds of ﬁber production
was discarded. Immediately after production the ﬁbers were transferred to a beaker and placed in a
desiccator whit relative humidity of either 0% for the day 0 samples, or 33% for the storage experiment.
The morphology of the ﬁbers were determined by two different SEMs (Phenonm Pro, BSE detector,
PhenomWorld, The Netherlands ; FEI inspect, ETD detector, Hillsboro, OR, USA). Carbon tape covered
sample holders had approximately 0.5 cm × 0.5 cm piece of foil containing ﬁber adhered on top. For
the Phenom microscope no coating of the sample was conducted. Magniﬁcation of ×5000, ×10000 and
×15000 were used, and an initial electron beam voltage of 5kV and 10 kV. For the other micropscope (FEI
inspect) the samples were coated with gold, 10s, 40 mA utilizing a Cressington 208HR Sputter Coater
(Cressington Scientiﬁc Instruments, Watford, England). Magniﬁcations were the same, but the beam
voltage were 3kV. The mean diameter of the ﬁbers was determined by image analysis of the SEM images
from the phenom microscope, using the software ImageJ, National Institutes of Health. 100 ﬁbers were
selected and measured, and if any beads were present they were measured separately. The FEI inspect
microscope were used to analysisng the topography of the samples, to investigate whether or not the dark
spots detected in the images from the Phenom was due to beam damage or irregular topography of the
ﬁber.
3.5
Oil Content Determination
Bligh and Dyer is a method used for extractions to determine oil content of biological samples [39]. It
was developed to be used for ﬁsh tissue, with a concentration of total lipid content at 1%, and a water
content of 80%. This method were modiﬁed to ﬁt the pullulan ﬁbers whit a much lower lipid content,
produced in this study and is described below.
The analysis were performed in duplicate for the preliminary study, but the standard deviation was
higher than expected, so it was subsequently performed in triplicates, by making 3 extracts of ﬁber of the
same type.
200 mg of ﬁber were dissolved in 20 mL of distilled water, followed by addition of 15 mL of
chloroform and 30mL of methanol. For the ﬁbers produced with formic acid, the chloroform was added
before the water, since the solubility of these ﬁbers in water was low. Then the solution was blended for
30s with an ultraturrax (IKA T25 digital ULTRA-TURRAX) at 14 000 rpm. Then 15 mL of chloroform
was added while the ultraturrax was running, and continued to run for additional 30 s. At this point the
extract was monophasic, as that gives the best extraction of the lipids into the chloroform phase which
was formed as the extract was diluted with 15 mL of distilled water and centrifuged for 10 min at 2800
rpm at 18 ◦C. Instantly the water/methanol phase on top was removed by suction using a vacuum pump
and followed by ﬁltration through a ﬁlter for separating the aqueous phase from the organic which contain
the lipids. 30 mL of the extract was evaporated to dryness over night in a tared beaker. The sample was
then dried in a heating cabinet for 1-2 hours at 105◦C, and transferred to an exsicator to cool down to
room temperature. The weight of the oil was calculated by:
goil = beakerwith oil −beakerempty
(3.1)
19 of 52
==PAGE:30==
Technical University of Denmark
Then the percentage of oil was calculated as follows:
% oil =
goil · 41g · 100
(gextract −goil) · gfiber
(3.2)
Here gextract is the amount of extract in grams, gfiber is the amount of ﬁber in grams, and 41 is the
total weight of the chloroform phase.
Since the oil content of the ﬁbers was low, and only a small amount of ﬁber was used, the Bligh and
Dyer method [39] might not be precise as the concentration of oil in the chloroform extract was calculated
to 0.66 mg/mL for ﬁbers with 10% ﬁsh oil, while the concentration performed by the original method on
ﬁsh tissue is 3.5 mg/mL. Therefore was the increased amount of extract of 30 mL used in this study, to
cope with this issue.
The extract can further be used for determining peroxide value by the following analysis
3.6
Peroxide Value
The Peroxide Value (PV) is a measurement of how oxidized a lipid containing sample is. The value
is determined spectrophotometrically at 500nm, by taking advantage of peroxides abillity to oxidize
ferro(II) ions to ferric(III) ions, which then react with thiocyanate to form a reddish colored compound
ferri-thiocynate-complex [40].
As mentioned above, the extract from the Bligh and Dyer method was used for this analysis, in
order to get access to the oil encapsulated in the ﬁbers. Since the oil concentration of the extract was
low, a relatively large amount of extract was needed, around 6 grams, to obtain a desirable level of oil.
The extract has to be kept cold and dark to avoid any further oxidation, and during the evaporation to
acquire the oil from the extract N2 is in a constant ﬂow on top of the sample to replace the oxygen in the
atmosphere and increase the evaporation rate. 10mL of 70/30 (v/v) chloroform/methanol solution was
added to the acquired oil, plus into two empty tubes to make a blank measurements of the reagents. Then
N2 atmosphere above the sample was resumed before mixing. 50µ L of 30% Ammoniumthiocyanate
soultion is added, and the N2 atmosphere is resumed before mixing. Then 50µ L Fe(II)chloride solution
was added, and the N2 was once again added before mixing. All the samples were incubated in darkness
for 5 min at room temperature. The 5 min incubation time, must be obeyed as the color intensity is
dependent of it [40]. Intensity changes could be due to further oxidation or instability of the colored
compound[41]. The absorbance of samples and the blanks were measured at 500nm, and from this the PV
was calculated by the following formular:
PV = (As −Ab) · k
55.84 · moil · 2
(3.3)
Where the As is the absorbance of the sample, Ab is the absorbance of the blank, k is the slope of
the calibartion curve which is determined to 40.6, m is the weight of oil in the extract in grams, and
the division by 2 is the factor between expressing the value in meq oxygen to meq peroxide. Expected
standard deviations is around 0.1-0.05. And a lower limit of lipid in accordance to [40] is lower than 300
mg. The amount if lipid in the extract from the ﬁbers are less than 300 mg, but consistent PV has been
obtained even though the mass of the ﬁber has been increased. For the samples only containing Tween20
there could be an uncertainty due to the low lipid content.
20 of 52
==PAGE:31==
3.7
Encapsulation Efﬁciency
Encapsulation efﬁciency (EE) was determined by measuring the non-entrapped ﬁsh oil at the surface
of the ﬁbers according to [42] with some modiﬁcation to ﬁt this study. 50 mg of the electrospun ﬁbers
were submerged in in 10 mL heptane, and gently shaken at 1200 rpm for 15 minutes. The mixture was
ﬁltered to separate the ﬁbers from the heptane solution containing the non-entrapped oil from the ﬁbers.
Absorbance of the solution was measured at 250 nm (UV-1800, Shimadzu, Japan). The amount of oil
present in the solution was determinde by a claibration cure with a R2 =0.99. The claibartion curve was
made by dissolving variour quantities of ﬁsh oil in heptane. The EE was calculated as follows:
EE% = A −B
A
· 100
(3.4)
Where A is the total theoretical amount of ﬁsh oil, B is the free amount of ﬁsh oil in the heptane solution.
Measurements were carried out in duplicate or triplicate.
3.8
Secondary Oxidation Products - Dynamic Headspace GC-MS
For each sample 300 mg of ﬁber was spun, to be able to make the analysis of the secondary oxidation
products in triplicate. This means that approximately 100 mg of ﬁbers was weighed in a 100 mL purge
bottle. 30 mg of internal standard (4-methyl-1-pentanol, 30 mg/g water) along with 5 mL of distilled water
and 1 mL antifoam (Synperonic 800 mL/L water) were added. Fiber samples containing only Tween20
had an additionally 2 mL of stronger antifoam (Synperonic 8 g / L water) added. Fibers produced with
formic acid as solvent were dissolved in 1 mL formic acid instead of 5 mL water in the second experiment
where addition of antioxidants were studied. This was in order to increase the release of the volatiles,
due to that insolubility of the formic acid ﬁber in water. The ﬁbers were dissolved by gently shaking that
samples. The bottle was gently heated in a water bath at 45 ◦C while purging with the inert nitrogen gas
at a ﬂow of 250 mL/min. The volatiles released were trapped in Tenax GR tubes connected to the purge
bottle, see Figure 3.1. For the samples with formic acid a S-shaped glass tube with KOH and glass wool
was inserted between the purge bottle and the Tenax tube to collect the acid, see Figure 3.2. The tubes
were dried for 20 min with a nitrogen ﬂow of 50 mL/min. The tubes were placed in an Analytical thermal
desorption (ATD-400, Perkin Elmer, Norwalk, CN) which desorb the trapped volatiles from the Tenax
tubes to the GC by heating the Tenax tubes to 200 ◦C. Before entering the GC (HP 5890IIA, Hewlett
Packard, Palo Alto, CA, USA; Column: DB-1701, 30 m × 0.25 mm × 1.0 mm; J&W Scientiﬁc, CA,
USA), the volatiles were cryofocused on a cold trap at 30 ◦C. Hereafter, the volatiles were released by
heating it to 220 ◦C. The outlet split ﬂow of the carrier gas was 5 mL/min. The oven program used in the
GC had an initial temperature of 45 ◦C for 5 min, and increased with 1.5 ◦C/min until 55 ◦C, then with
2.5 ◦C/min until 90 ◦C and lastly by 12.0 ◦C/min until 220 ◦C, where the temperature was kept constant
for 4 min. The compounds leaving the GC were analyzed by mass spectrometry (HP 5972 mass-selective
detector, Agilent Technologies, USA; electron ionization mode, 70 eV; mass to charge ratio scan between
30 and 250). The individual volatile components were identiﬁed from the obtained chromatograms by
both MSlibrary searches (Wiley 138 K, John Wiley and Sons, Hewlett-Packard) and by external standards.
The external standards used for the calibration curve were 2-ethylfuran, 1-penten-3-one, 1-penten-3-ol,
hexanal, heptanal, octanal, (E,E)-2,4-heptadienal, and nonanal (Sigma-Aldrich, Brøndby, Denmark).
These compounds were dissolved in 96% ethanol and the solutions were diluted to concentrations of
21 of 52
==PAGE:32==
Technical University of Denmark
approximately 1, 5,10, 25 and 100 mg/g. Each diluted concentrate were directly injected onto a Tenax
tube and dried for 5 min with a ﬂow of nitrogen at 50 mL/min.
Figure 3.1: Purge and trap setup for the GC-MS
analysis.
Figure 3.2: Purge and trap setup for the GC-MS
analysis with samples containing acid.
3.9
Statistical Analysis
For statistical data analysis, Statgraphics Centurion XV (Statistical Graphics Corp., Rockville, MD,
USA) was used. Data was expressed as mean and standard deviation with three analytical replicates.
Experimental replicates were carried out by ﬁbers produced for the three replicates used in the methods
above, but the same solution is used for production of these three replicates, which means that the statistics
would only give information of the electrospinning process and not the solution preparation. Multiple
sample comparison analysis was performed to identify signiﬁcant differences between samples. Then
followed by Tukey’s test to ﬁnd the speciﬁc samples that are signiﬁcantly different. The statistical
signiﬁcance is when the p-value < 0.05.
22 of 52
==PAGE:33==
4 Results & Discussion
4.1
Results of Preliminary Experiments
Initially some important conditions for the production of ﬁbers were optimized. For the electrospinning
process, the voltage applied, distance to the collector, and the ﬂow rate of the spinning solution, were
selected from earlier experience of spinning of pullulan ﬁbers. Other parameters like the sonication of the
pullulan solution, stirring method, and the concentration of the surfactant Tween20 were determined in
preliminary studies. The conditions were evaluated based on the PV, oil content, and morphology, of the
resulting ﬁbers. PV dependent of the start values of the ingredients. Therefore, PV was measured for the
pure ﬁsh oil and the Tween20, and the results are shown in Table 4.1. As expected the values are low, but
some oxidation has occurred already.
Table 4.1: PV of pure ﬁsh oil and Tween20.
PV [meq O2/kg oil]
Fish oil
0.32±0.003
Tween20
0.71±0.004
4.1.1
Sonication
As described in method and material Chapter 3, sonication was applied in the solution preparation to
remove air bubbles. Therefore sonication was tested to investigate if it had an effect on the morphology
and protection properties of the ﬁbers. This was done by preparing two solutions of 17.5% pullulan in
water, one treated with ultrasound for 30 min, and one without. The ﬁbers produced from these two
solutions were similar in morphology with slim ﬁber containing no beads along the ﬁber, see Figure 4.1.
The viscosity of both solutions was similar with a P-value of 0.93. The diameter of the ﬁbers was measured
and compared in Figure 4.2, blue bars. The difference between them was not signiﬁcant, and therefore the
sonication treatment of the pullulan solution was applied on all solutions throughout the study.
23 of 52
==PAGE:34==
Technical University of Denmark
(a) Sonicated
(b) Not sonicated
Figure 4.1: SEM images of pullulan ﬁbers with 17.5% pullulan and no oil, Tween20 or water.
Figure 4.2: Diameters of the ﬁbers and beads produced in the preliminary study. Blue = Comparison
of soncation vs. non-sonicated ﬁbers with 17.5% pullulan, no oil, Tween20 or water, Red and green =
Comparison of stirring method used on the spinning solution with 17.5% pullulan, 10% ﬁsh oil, 20%
Tween20 and no water; ﬁber and beads respectively, Yellow and Purple = Comparison of 10%, 20% and
30% Tween20 concentrations in the spinning solution with 17.5% pullulan, 10% ﬁsh oil, and no water;
ﬁber and beads respectively. P-value for ﬁbers = 0.15, P-value for beads = 0.12
24 of 52
==PAGE:35==
4.1.2
Stirring method
Another parameter that could inﬂuence the morphology, and oil encapsulation was the stirring method
used while dispersing the surfactant and ﬁsh oil in the spinning solution. The study of the concentration of
Tween20 needed for proper encapsulation was made in parallel, see section below. Therefore, 6 different
polymer solutions was prepared:
- 17.5% pullulan + 10% ﬁsh oil + 10% Tween20 stirred magnetically.
- 17.5% pullulan + 10% ﬁsh oil + 20% Tween20 stirred magnetically.
- 17.5% pullulan + 10% ﬁsh oil + 30% Tween20 stirred magnetically.
- 17.5% pullulan + 10% ﬁsh oil + 10% Tween20 stirred mechanically.
- 17.5% pullulan + 10% ﬁsh oil + 20% Tween20 stirred mechanically.
- 17.5% pullulan + 10% ﬁsh oil + 30% Tween20 stirred mechanically.
The 10% ﬁsh oil are in relation to the total solid mass for the ﬁber after electrospinning, and the
Tween20 concentration is in relation to the ﬁsh oil concentration, meaning 20% Tween20 take up 2% of
the ﬁnal solid mass, as it is 20% of the mass of the ﬁsh oil.
It was observed that the magnetic stirring was not as powerful as the mechanical, due to that the
highly viscous pullulan solution exert a high resistance towards the magnet at the bottom of the beaker.
This resulted in non-circular movement of the magnet, which could lead to improper distribution of
the oil. Results of the analysis of the polymer solutions along with their associated ﬁbers, are listed in
Table 4.2. When comparing the PV it is seen that the solutions stirred with a magnet in general have higher
standard deviations for the PV than the mechanically stirred. Due to the high standard deviation there
are no signiﬁcant difference observed. The large standard deviation could be due to inhomogeneously
distribution of the ﬁsh oil and Tween20. Thereby, exerted the pullulan a weak encapsulation which lead to
reduced protection against oxidation. The lipid content of the ﬁbers seemed similar for the two stirring
methods, and was close to the theoretical lipid content shown in parentheses. This means that the oil is
present in the ﬁber, but to investigate if the oil is encapsulated or not, an encapsulation efﬁciency analysis
should be performed. This would be performed in the studies following the preliminary experiments.
The viscosity is around the same for all the polymer solution which was expected as they contain
the same amount of pullulan and ﬁsh oil. The morphology of the ﬁbers showed in the SEM images in
Figure 4.3 showed some differences. In Figure 4.3a, it was seen that the ﬁbers were merged together
to a inter connected network, whereas the ﬁbers in Figure 4.3b produced by mechanical stirring were
much more separate and ﬁbers were crossing each other. This could indicate that the oil is not properly
encapsulated in the ﬁber spun from the magnetic stirred solution, and was therefore present on the surface.
In addition the moisture content of the ﬁber upon impact with the collector could have an effect on the
shape of the ﬁber, as described in Section 2.3.1. The two polymer solutions contained the same amount
of water and were spun under same conditions, which means that it most likely was due to an improper
encapsulation that the morphology shown in Figures 4.3a and 4.3b were different from each other. When
analysing the diameter of the two types of ﬁber produced with 20% Tween20, shown in Figure 4.2 by
the red bars, then there is no signiﬁcant difference. From these results, it was concluded that the stirring
method for the following studies should be mechanical stirring. This decision was based on the fact that
the standard deviations for the PV-values seemed lower, and the morphology indicated a better distribution
of the surfactant leading to more homogeneous looking ﬁbers due to lowering the surface tension, as
25 of 52
==PAGE:36==
Technical University of Denmark
described in Section 2.3.1.
Table 4.2: Result of preliminary studies with polymer solution made with 17.5% pullulan + 10% ﬁsh oil.
Polymer
Stirring method
Tween20
Lipid content
PV [meq O2/kg oil]
viscosity [Pa · s]
pullulan 17.5 %
Magnetic
10%
10.43% ± 0.52 (11%)
32.73 ± 17.68
2.06
20%
10.34% ± 2.08 (12%)
21.68 ± 5.46
2.00 ± 0.15
30%
12.16% ± 0.03 (13%)
11.66 ± 5.69
2.12 ± 0.10
Mechanical
10%
8.68 % ± 1.56 (11%)
30.23 ± 12.96
1.90 ± 0.03
20%
11.37% ± 0.07 (12%)
13.47 ± 1.69
2.07 ± 0.08
30%
12.04% ± 0.06 (13%)
9.22 ± 2.94
1.99 ± 0.03
(a) Stirred with a magnetic stirrer
(b) Stirred with a mechanical stirrer
Figure 4.3: SEM images of pullulan ﬁbers with 17.5% pullulan, 10% ﬁsh oil and 20% Tween20.
4.1.3
Tween20 concentration
The 6 solutions from above were as described earlier also used for studying the effect of the Tween20
concentration. Since the mechanically stirred solutions was preferred over the magnetically stirred, only
the mechanically stirred would be assessed in this section. The lipid content of the 3 types of ﬁber, seen
in Table 4.2, are close to the theoretical lipid content stated in the parentheses. The PV are high for the
ﬁber containing 10% Tween20 (30.23meq O2/kg), which indicate that this amount of Tween20 are not
sufﬁcient for encapsulation of the ﬁsh oil. Using 20% Tween20 made a reduction of the PV to 13.47
± 1.96, but a further and signiﬁcant reduction compared to 10% Tween20 were seen (9.22 meq O2/kg)
when adding 30% of Tween20 (P-value=0.041). The PVs are though still high, as it is the aim to obtain a
PV < 5 meq O2/kg oil. This is the maximum level of peroxides for reﬁned ﬁsh oil applicable to human
consumption, as described in Section 2.2. No statistical signiﬁcance were seen between the diameter of
26 of 52
==PAGE:37==
the ﬁbers (P=0.15), and the only difference seen between the ﬁbers were in the qualitative analysis of
the morphology, see Figure 4.4. When assessing the images it seems as the morphology of the ﬁbers in
Figure 4.4b are more homogeneous along the ﬁber compared to the other two. In Figures 4.4a and 4.4c the
ﬁbers are more merged together where they cross, which could be due to an inhomogeneous distribution
of the Tween20, as described in the section above. The Tween20 is one of the more expensive materials
used in the production of these ﬁbers, and it is important to control the cost for later applicability. The PV
of the three ﬁber types was high, but the ﬁber containing 20% Tween20 had the lowest standard deviation,
and the most homogeneous morphology. It was therefore decided to use 20% of Tween20 in the following
studies, as the beneﬁt observed in the PV by increasing to 30% was insigniﬁcant.
(a) 10% Tween20
(b) 20% Tween20
(c) 30% Tween20
Figure 4.4: SEM images of pullulan ﬁbers with 17.5% pullulan, 10% ﬁsh oil and differing concentrations
of Tween20.
27 of 52
==PAGE:38==
Technical University of Denmark
From the preliminary studies it was concluded to continue with the sonication treatment and utilize
the more powerful mechanical stirring method. For the Tween20 concentration it was decided that 20%
would allow for properly dispersion of the ﬁsh oil in the polymer solution. For the following study these
conditions were decided to be the most optimal out of the explored conditions. Moreover, it was decided
to stop the spinning of the ﬁber every 30 min to remove the ﬁbers as described in Section 3.3, this reduced
the oxidation of the ﬁber by minimizing the exposure of oxygen of the oil at the surface.
4.2
Effect of encapsulation during storage
In this part of the study ﬁbers with 10%, 20% and 30% ﬁsh oil were explored for their oxidative stability
over a period of 20 days. 6 polymer solutions were prepared:
Two control solutions:
- 17.5% pullulan in water
- 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 in water.
Four ﬁsh oil solutions:
- 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 10% ﬁsh oil in water.
- 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 20% ﬁsh oil in water.
- 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 30% ﬁsh oil in water.
- 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 10% ﬁsh oil in formic acid.
It is of interest to ﬁnd out where the limit is for oil content in the ﬁbers. It would be much more
efﬁcient to add ﬁbers with 30% ﬁsh oil to enrich food products than ﬁbers only containing 10%.
It is expected that the encapsulation would provide some protection of the ﬁsh oil, but the ﬁrst thing to
address is the effect on oxidation during the production of the ﬁbers. The sample from day 0 represent the
oxidation taking place during the preparation of the solution and production of the ﬁbers. It is expected
that some oxidation would have occurred, since oxygen were impossible to eliminate completely, as well
as production were conducted at room temperature. This would lead to an increase in the initial PVs
of reﬁned ﬁsh oil and Tween20 listed in Table 4.1. The PVs from day zero of the ﬁve types of ﬁber are
shown in Figure 4.5. Here it is seen that the control sample (dark blue) have a PV at zero, this is due to
how the calculation of the PV are performed. The PV is expressed in meq O2/ kg lipid, and since the
sample does not contain any lipid in the form of ﬁsh oil or Tween20, the calculation would not make
sense. But in addition to this the absorbances measured were very low, which means that the pullulan
does not oxidize and cannot interfere with the PVs in the other samples, see Appendix A. The PV of the
sample with pullulan + 20% Tween20 might not be correct due to the very low amount of lipid in the
sample (2%). In accordance with the theory in Sections 3.5 and 3.6, this low oil content is difﬁcult for the
PV analysis to cope with. When comparing the rest of the samples, there are no statistical signiﬁcance
between them. The standard deviation of the samples, 10% ﬁsh oil in water and 20% in water are high,
which could indicate a inhomogeneous sample. Apart from these two samples the PV are close to 5 meq
O2 / kg lipid, which as mentioned earlier is the approval limit for human consumption. Compared to
previous study with 10.5% and 13.5% polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) emulsion blend, these PVs obtained at
28 of 52
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.5: PV-values of the 5 types of ﬁber at day 0. Dark blue = Pullulan, Red = Tween20, Green = 10%
ﬁsh oil in water, Purple = 10% ﬁsh oil in formic acid, Light blue = 20% ﬁsh oil in water, Orange = 30%
ﬁsh oil in water.
day 0 are signiﬁcantly improved [12]. This result give incentive to continue with the study, because the
production conditions can be optimized.
Comparing the standard deviation of these PVs to the morphology of the ﬁbers, see Figure 4.6, the
high standard deviation are no explainable by the morphology. The two control ﬁbers, pullulan and
pullulan + Tween20, are straight thin ﬁbers with no beads. The ﬁber with 10% ﬁsh oil in formic acid have
a more band like structure, rather than circular. This was observed by a few twisted ﬁbers, and a more
narrow bright edge, see Figure 4.6d, coated ﬁber, and Appendix B uncoated. The circular shaped ﬁber
appeared with a soft gradient from white to dark gray across the ﬁber as e.g. seen in Figure 4.6c, while a
band like structure would have a fast gradient from the edges and across the ﬁber as seen in Figure 4.6d.
This is due to the increased surface areas at the edges, see Section 2.7. Fibers with 10%, 20% and 30%
ﬁsh oil in water, Figures 4.6c, 4.6e and 4.6f have similar morphology with beaded ﬁbers, as also observed
in previous study with PVA ﬁbers when increasing the oil concentration above 1.5% [12]. Theses beads
are different from the beads defects described in Section 2.3.1, and observed by [43]. The diameter of
the ﬁbers of these three ﬁber types are equal in size, and the beads are not signiﬁcantly different from
each other in size Figure 4.7. This implies that more beads should be present when the oil content were
increased. This were veriﬁed with P-value of 0.0002, by counting the beads in three ×5000 magniﬁed
SEM image of the three types of ﬁber, see Figure 4.8, and Appendix C for the images. The ﬁsh oil in
the ﬁber type 10% in formic acid, must be evenly distributed within the ﬁber, and not as beads as in the
three other ﬁbers with ﬁsh oil. This would lead to an increase in the average diameter, but also due to
the band like structure an increase would be expected. The higher standard deviation for the diameter
is due to the twisting of the ﬁbers, since the ﬂat side of the ﬁber is broader than the edges of the band.
The diameter of the formic acid ﬁber is signiﬁcantly different from the others with a P-value of 0.0005.
The viscosity and lipid content were also measured for all polymer solution and ﬁbers respectively. The
viscosity was increasing with the amount of oil in the polymer solution, and the lipid content of the ﬁbers
were close to the theoretical see Appendix A. When comparing the viscosity of the pullulan polymer
solutions to other studies [20, 12], it is in accordance with the trend of higher viscosity resulting in thicker
ﬁber. Nezarati et al. (2013) studied found that poly carborate urethane, at concentration of 15%, 18% and
20% PCU (poly carborate urethane) dissolved in DMAc (N,N-dimethylacetamide) resulted in a viscosity
29 of 52
==PAGE:40==
Technical University of Denmark
(a) Control pullulan ﬁber
(b) Control pullulan + Tween20 ﬁber
(c) 10% ﬁsh oil in water ﬁber
(d) 10% ﬁsh oil in formic acid ﬁber
(e) 20% ﬁsh oil in water ﬁber
(f) 30% ﬁsh oil in water ﬁber
Figure 4.6: SEM images of pullulan ﬁbers with 17.5% pullulan, 20% Tween20 and differing concentrations
of ﬁsh oil. Solvent are water or formic acid.
30 of 52
==PAGE:41==
of 7000, 13000, and 23000 mPa·s respectively. This gave ﬁber diameters ranging from 1.2 ± 0.6 µm
to 3.5 ± 0.9 µm [20]. García-Moreno et al. (2016) found that ﬁbers produced of 10.5% PVA [12] had
viscosity around 550mPa·s and results in diameters of 160nm to 170nm. In this study the pullulan ﬁbers
with water as solvent (17.5%), had a viscosity in between the two reported from the other studies, ranging
from 2000mPa·s to 3000mPa·s depending on the oil content Appendix A, which resulted in diameter
ranging from 600nm to 800nm. The viscosity of the 17.5% pullulan in formic acid + 10% ﬁsh oil is
compared to the polymer solution i water lower in viscosity. Thereby should the ﬁbers from the formic
acid polymer solution be smaller in diameter, but as described above, have the band-like structure see in
the SEM images Figure 4.6d the reason for the thicker diameter shown in Figure 4.7 The PV shown in
Figure 4.5 where close the the 5 meq O2 / kg lipid which as described above are the maximum limit for
human consumption, but the peroxides can be formed into other compounds, and a more correct measure
to use to see if the oil is applicable for human consumption are the TOTOX. Here the volatile compounds
are also taken into consideration, and it would therefore of interest to seen if the low PV observed could
be due to degradation of the peroxides to other compounds like the ones listed in Section 2.1.4.
Figure 4.7: Average diameter of: Blue = Pullulan ﬁbers , Red = Tween20 ﬁbers , Light green = Fiber
diameter of 10%, 20% and 30% ﬁsh oil in water, Dark green = diameter of 10% ﬁsh oil in formic acid,
Yellow = Bead diameter of 10%, 20% and 30% ﬁsh oil in water. P-value for ﬁbers = 0.0005, P-value for
beads = 0.73.
Volatiles measured at day 0 show some high levels of the aldehydes hexanal, heptanal, octanal and
nonanal, but the same aldehyldes are present in the control sample with only pullulan in the ﬁbers
Figures 4.9 and 4.10. This implies that the aldehydes are impurities in the pullulan, or formed from the
pullulan during the production process. The other volatile compounds at day 0 are low throughout all the
samples. 1-penten-3-one and trans,trans-2,4-heptadienal are know from oxidation of omega-3 fatty acids
like ALA, EPA, and DHA [13, 44, 9], and are found in ﬁsh products which gives them the rancid odour.
This could therefore indicate no further oxidation of the peroxides which were shown in Figure 4.5. The
31 of 52
==PAGE:42==
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 4.8: Bead count of the three ﬁber types: Blue = 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 10% ﬁsh oil in
water, Red= 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 20% ﬁsh oil in water and Green = 17.5% pullulan + 20%
Tween20 + 30% ﬁsh oil in water, P-value = 0.0002.
10% ﬁsh oil in formic acid ﬁber have higher heptanal value than the other samples, due to impurities in
the formic acid see Appendix D. It is also seen that the formic acid contribute to the nonanal, but it is
probably the Tween20 which contributes the most with nonanal. This is seen by the red bar in Figure 4.9,
which is higher that the others, due to the calculation of the volatile is done based on the lipid content.
The other samples have added ﬁsh oil which then dilute the concentration of nonanal pr gram of lipid.
This is also why the volatile level seem lower for 20% and 30% ﬁsh oil. The concentration of volatiles pr.
gram of ﬁber were also calculated (data not shown) but due to the PVs are calculated pr. gram lipid, the
results from the two analysing methods are more comparable.
The obtained condition of the ﬁber after production are acceptable, and it is expected that only a
moderate increase in the peroxides and volatiles would happen during storage due to the protecting effect
of the encapsulation. In Figure 4.11, is the encapsulation efﬁciency (EE) high for the sample containing
Tween20 only, which indicate that this amphiphilic molecule are well distributed within the ﬁber. The
two types of ﬁbers with 10% ﬁsh oil in water or formic acid, show similar EE, which means that most
of the ﬁsh oil is encapsulated in the ﬁber. The ﬁbers with 20% and 30% are on the other hand very low
in EE even though the amount of Tween20 added were relative to the oil content. When comparing this
with the PV in Figure 4.12 it would have been expected that the ﬁbers with 20% and 30% ﬁsh oil would
have been more oxidized. However, the 10% ﬁsh oil in water had the highest PV throughout the storage
period followed by the 10% ﬁsh oil in formic acid. The lower concentration of peroxides in ﬁbers with
20% and 30% ﬁsh oil could be due to faster degradation of the peroxides to secondary oxidation products.
When comparing the PV and the secondary oxidation products seen in Figure 4.13 and Appendix E, there
are similar high concentrations of the volatiles for the 10% ﬁsh oil in water, or similar concentrations of
volatiles in the three ﬁbers 10%, 20% and 30% ﬁsh oil in water. This indicated that the ﬁber with 10%
ﬁsh oil in water were more oxidized, and not that the ﬁbers with 20% and 30% ﬁsh oil had oxidized faster.
One explanation could be that an error have occurred in the encapsulation efﬁciency analysis of the 20%
and 30% ﬁsh oil ﬁbers, so that more oil are actually encapsulated. A second explanation could be the low
amount of oil in the ﬁber with 10% increase the interface between the oil and pullulan+Tween20 where
the oil is exposed to oxidation. However due to these non conclusive results, the ﬁbers with 10% ﬁsh oil
32 of 52
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.9: Volatile compounds measured at day 0, Red = 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 in water, Green
= 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 10% ﬁsh oil in water, Purple = 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 +
10% ﬁsh oil in formic acid, Blue = 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 20% ﬁsh oil in water, Orange =
17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 30% ﬁsh oil in water.
in water and formic acid were chosen for the following experiment, due to the PV ere lower for the ﬁber
with 10% ﬁsh oil in formic acid compared with the 10% ﬁsh oil in water. The 10% ﬁsh oil in formic acid
have a less steep increase in PV from day 0 to day 5, compared with the 10% ﬁsh oil in water. This could
be due to the different morphology of the ﬁber seen above, Figure 4.6d, as they have similar EE. The
Tween20 does not seem to oxidize even though it contain a lipid like carbon chain Figure 2.9, as the ﬁber
with only Tween 20 had shown constant tendency through out all three analysis Figures 4.11 to 4.13. The
tendency for all the samples between day 0 and day 5 continue until day 15, where they seem to level
out. This could be due to further oxidation of the peroxides, and the rate of peroxide formation equals the
degradation to volatile compounds. This is veriﬁed by the volatile compounds seen in Figure 4.13 and
Appendix E.
The stabilization of the level of volatiles at day 10 and further on could be due to further degradation
of the volatile compounds, to other smaller compounds. The tendency seen in Figure 4.13 for 1-penten-
3-one, was similar for the other secondary oxidation products from omega-3 fatty acids, 2-ethyl-furan,
1-penten-3-ol, and trans,trans-2,4-heptadienal, see Appendix E. The aldehydes discussed for day zero
in Figures 4.9 and 4.10, are stable throughout the storage period except heptanal for the 10% ﬁsh oil in
formic acid Figure E.6. The intitial concentration are extremely high compared to the others, and then
decrease to a level similar to those of the other samples. The high concentration of heptanal could be a
product of a reaction with formic acid.
From the analysis of the 4 ﬁbers containing ﬁsh oil during the storage of 20 days, it can be concluded
33 of 52
==PAGE:44==
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 4.10: Volatile compounds measured at day 0 for the control sample with only pullulan in water.
Figure 4.11: Encapsulation efﬁciency of the ﬁbers produced in the oil concentration experiment, Red
= 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 in water, Green = 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 10% ﬁsh oil in
water, Purple = 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 10% ﬁsh oil in formic acid, Blue = 17.5% pullulan +
20% Tween20 + 20% ﬁsh oil in water, Orange = 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 30% ﬁsh oil in water.
that the encapsulation by itself does not provide good protection. This could be due to oil at the surface of
the ﬁbers, as not all the oil were encapsulated as seen in Figure 4.11. It would therefore be of interest to
explore antioxidants effect on the oxidative stability of the encapsulated ﬁsh oil. For the following study it
was decided to continue with ﬁbers containing 10% ﬁsh oil in water and formic acid, based on that ﬁber
with 10% ﬁsh oil in formic acid showed promising results as the PV were lower than the 10% ﬁsh oil in
water, and similar or lower for the volatiles except, trans,trans-2,4-heptadienal. For the following study
the effect of antioxidants were explored in ﬁbers containing 10% ﬁsh oil in water and formic acid.
34 of 52
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.12: PV during 20 days of storage, Red = 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 in water, Green =
17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 10% ﬁsh oil in water, Purple = 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 10%
ﬁsh oil in formic acid, Blue = 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 20% ﬁsh oil in water, Orange = 17.5%
pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 30% ﬁsh oil in water.
Figure 4.13: 1-penten-3-one after 20 days of storage at 33% relative humidity, Red = 17.5% pullulan +
20% Tween20 in water, Green = 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 10% ﬁsh oil in water, Purple = 17.5%
pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 10% ﬁsh oil in formic acid, Blue = 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 20%
ﬁsh oil in water, Orange = 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 30% ﬁsh oil in water.
4.3
Effect of antioxidants during storage
The new types of ﬁber produced for this study were:
Two control solutions:
- 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 10% ﬁsh oil in water
- 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 10% ﬁsh oil in formic acid.
Three solutions containing antioxidants:
- 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 10% ﬁsh oil + medium antioxidants (1000 ppm) in water.
35 of 52
==PAGE:46==
Technical University of Denmark
- 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 10% ﬁsh oil + medium antioxidants (1000 ppm) in formic acid.
- 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 10% ﬁsh oil + high antioxidants (1000+2000 ppm) in water.
The ﬁbers produced from these solutions are analysed in two separate sections Sections 4.3.1 and 4.3.2.
One concerning the ﬁbers with water as solvent, and one concerning the formic acid as solvent. The ﬁber
with medium antioxidants contain equally amounts of rosemary extract and δ-tocophorol, 500 ppm each.
The ﬁber with high concentration of antioxidants contain 1000 ppm of rosemary extract and 2000 ppm
of δ-tocopherol. The high concentration of antioxidants should have been twice as high as the medium
concentration. How these solution were prepared were described in Section 3.1. A reduction in oxidation
for the samples added antioxidants would be expected. In addition, the volume of antioxidants added was
small, and it was therefore not expected to have an inﬂuence on the process parameters like tip-collector
distance or applied voltage, and would therefore be kept the same as in the previous study above. The
morphology of the ﬁber is therefore expected to be that same. The antioxidants could contribute to a
reduction in the oxidation during the production of the ﬁbers as well as during storage.
4.3.1
Fibers with water as solvent
The morphology of the ﬁbers all appear similar, see Appendix F, and the quantiﬁcation of the morphology
by the average ﬁber diameter support this similarity Figure 4.14. The P-values of the ﬁber diameter are
0.46, and for the bead diameter it is 0.16. This indicate that the polymer solution are not altered by the
addition of the antioxidants dissolved in ethanol, and the ﬁbers produced are comparable with the ones
described in the section above.
In Figure 4.15 is shown the PV from day 0, and it is seen that the values are in similar range as the PV
from the previous section at day 0. The difference between the control ﬁber, 10% ﬁsh oil in water and the
same type of ﬁber shown above in Figure 4.5 (green bar), are statistical insigniﬁcant with a P-value = 0.43.
The ﬁber in Figure 4.15 compared to each other are statistically signiﬁcant different (P-value=0.003).
the ﬁber containing medium concentration of antioxidants are not signiﬁcatly different from the ﬁber
without antioxidant. The ﬁber with high concentrations of antioxidants are on the other hand statistical
signiﬁcantly different from the one without antioxidants. This could indicate that the incorporation of the
antioxidants have to be in high concentration in order to have an effect during the production of the ﬁbers
in a positive way.
The encapsulation efﬁciency of the ﬁbers produced with water as solvent shown in Figure 4.16,
indicate in addition to the PV an morphology, that the antioxidants have a minor effect on the physical
state of the ﬁber. This is seen as the encapsulation is around 85% for the samples with no antioxidant and
the one with medium concentration of antioxidants. The sample with high concentration of antioxidant
seems similar, but have a high standard deviation compered to the other two. This could indicate some
inhomogeneities in the sample, and that the antioxidants are affecting the incorporation of the lipids into
the ﬁbers.
The morphology appear similar with and without antioxidants, and the PV and EE have only minor or
non differences between the ﬁbers with antioxidants and the one without. It would therefore be expected
to see the same tendency for the volatiles as in the section above. The volatiles for the three water samples
are shown in Figure 4.17, and share pattern with the one seen in Figure 4.9 in the previous section, where
the aldehydes are present in higher amounts than the other compounds. This is due to impurities in the
pullulan and Tween20 as was seen in the experiment above, where the samples which only contained
36 of 52
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.14: Average diameter of ﬁber and beads respectively at day 0 for samples with water as solvent,
Dark blue/green = 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 10% ﬁsh oil, Medium blue/green = 17.5% pullulan
+ 20% Tween20 + 10% ﬁsh oil + medium antioxidants (1000 ppm), Light blue/green = 17.5% pullulan +
20% Tween20 + 10% ﬁsh oil + high antioxidants (1000+2000 ppm) P-value ﬁber = 0.46, P-value beads =
0.16.
Figure 4.15: PV at day 0 for ﬁbers with water as solvent, Dark blue = 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20
+ 10% ﬁsh oil, Medium blue = 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 10% ﬁsh oil + medium antioxidants
(1000 ppm), Light blue = 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 10% ﬁsh oil + high antioxidants (1000+2000
ppm) P-value = 0.003.
37 of 52
==PAGE:48==
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 4.16: Encapsulation efﬁciency of the ﬁbers produced in the oil concentration experiment, Dark
blue = 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 10% ﬁsh oil in water, Red = 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 +
10% ﬁsh oil in formic acid, Green = 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 10% ﬁsh oil + medium antioxidant
in water (1000 ppm) , Purple = 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 10% ﬁsh oil + medium antioxidant
(1000 ppm)in formic acid, Light blue = 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 10% ﬁsh oil + high antioxidant
(1000+2000 ppm) in water.
these two constituents had these high concentrations of aldehydes.
Then when turning the focus to the antioxidants effect on the oxidation of the water ﬁbers during
storage, it is seen that the medium concentration of antioxidants have the same level of oxidation from
day 0 to day 5. This could be due to oxidation of oil at the surface which is highly exposed. Then when
looking at day 10, a lower amount of peroxides are seen in the ﬁber with medium antioxidant. It seems like
the oxidation in the ﬁber containing medium antioxidants stabilizes, whereas the ﬁber without antioxidant
keep increasing. This it most likely due to inhibition of the oxidation by the antioxidants due to the curve
starts to increase again at day 15. If the stabilization was due to degradation of the peroxides a drop in the
curve would have been expected. This is in accordance with a study [45], where adding antioxidants to
ﬁsh oil before microencapsulating by spray-drying were performed. In this study they added among other
1000 ppm δ-tocopherol and 1250 ppm rosemary extract. A reduction by adding δ-tocopherol alone were
seen, but a synergistic effect were observed as well when both of them together.
The morphology of the ﬁber look similar after the 20 day of storage at 33% relative humidity
Appendix G, but for the control sample with no antioxidant some defects were observed Appendix H.
This could also explain the higher PV during storage than the ﬁber containing medium antioxidants, due
to improper encapsulation after the production would leave the oil more exposed to oxidation. On the
other hand should the antioxidants not have an effect on the stability of the physical state of the ﬁbers, due
to the low volume added. This implies that it is most likely the effect of inhibition of oxidation which is
seen in Figure 4.18.
The ﬁber sample containing the high concentration of antioxidants has a very step increase of peroxides
compared to the other two samples. This could indicate that one or both antioxidants act as a prooxidant
instead of an antioxidant. Another study [46] show the effect of α-tocopherol added to herring oil
emulsions before spray-drying. Here it was shown that a smaller amount of α-tocopherol (100 ppm)
has a higher antioxidative effect than 500 ppm, which is in accordance with what is seen in Figure 4.18
38 of 52
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.17: Volatiles for the three water samples at day 0, Dark blue = 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 +
10% ﬁsh oil, Medium blue = 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 10% ﬁsh oil + medium antioxidants (1000
ppm), Light blue = 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 10% ﬁsh oil + high antioxidants (1000+2000 ppm).
The fast decline seen after day 5 is probably due to degradation of the peroxides to volatile compounds.
When comparing the PV with the volatile 1-penten-3-one it is seen that the pattern was some what similar.
The sample with no antioxidants increased to high concentrations, the sample with medium antioxidant
seemed to stabilize at day 5, 10 and 15 for then increase again, and the sample with high concentration
increased from day 0 to 5, and then decreased. The other volatile compound from secondary oxidation
of omega-3 fatty acid show similar pattern as the one seen for 1-penten-3-one (Appendix I). This could
indicate that the formation of volatile compounds from peroxides are occurring, but subsequently tertiary
oxidation is happening in the same rate, which means that the secondary oxidation products does not
accumulate.
The possible prooxidation effect of one of the antioxidants imply that there are no need for huge
amounts of antioxidants to see an effect, which is good for the ﬁnal cost of the enriched food product. The
medium concentration on the other hand show a stabilizing effects, which is promising for the success of
enriching food products with ﬁsh oil.
4.3.2
Fiber with formic acid as solvent
The ﬁbers produced with formic acid as solvent are different in morphology compared with the water
samples, as explained above in Section 4.2. It was also described how it affected the oxidative stability.
When comparing the PV of the samples with formic acid from Section 4.2, Figure 4.5, and the one
without antioxidants shown here in Figure 4.20 (both shown in dark purple), the PV of the ﬁber from this
experiment is signiﬁcantly higher than the previous produced ﬁber (p-value of 0.0007) These two ﬁbers
were supposed to be the same as they both are 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 10% ﬁsh oil and with
formic acid as solvent. It is not known which process conditions that made an impact on the production
39 of 52
==PAGE:50==
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 4.18: PVs during 20 days of storage for the three ﬁbers with water as solvent, Dark blue = 17.5%
pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 10% ﬁsh oil, Medium blue = 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 10% ﬁsh oil +
medium antioxidants (1000 ppm), Light blue = 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 10% ﬁsh oil + high
antioxidants (1000+2000 ppm).
Figure 4.19: 1-penten-3-one for the water samples during storage at 33% relative humidity, Dark blue =
17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 10% ﬁsh oil, Medium blue = 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 10%
ﬁsh oil + medium antioxidants (1000 ppm), Light blue = 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 10% ﬁsh oil +
high antioxidants (1000+2000 ppm).
40 of 52
==PAGE:51==
Figure 4.20: PV at day 0 for ﬁbers with water and formic acid as solvent, Dark blue = 17.5% pullulan +
20% Tween20 + 10% ﬁsh oil, Medium blue = 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 10% ﬁsh oil + medium
antioxidants (1000 ppm), Light blue = 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 10% ﬁsh oil + high antioxidants
(1000+2000 ppm),Dark purple = 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 10% ﬁshoil, Light purple = 17.5%
pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 10% ﬁshoil + medium antioxidants (500 ppm of δ-tocopherol and 500 ppm
rosemary extract).
causing this difference, but temperature and relative humidity during the production were not controlled.
The relative humidity and temperature were monitored during the production of the ﬁbers produced in the
last experiment with antioxidant, but it was not recorded during the ﬁrst one where the oil content of the
ﬁbers were studied. Therefore would further experiment with this type of ﬁber be in need, in order to
conclude what has caused this difference.
Conclusions drawn from these ﬁbers can only be in comparison with the ﬁbers produced in the
same experiment. The morphology of the ﬁbers Figure 4.21 apper however similar to the one seen from
the experiment above in Section 4.2. Which indicate that the production of the ﬁber has been running
normally.
When comparing the tow types of ﬁber with formic acids as solvent shown in Figures 4.21a and 4.21b
they appear similar, which indicate that the addition of antioxidants in the one to the right did not have
any physical effect in the morphology. This was also seen for the ﬁber types with water as solvent, and
was not expected either due to the small volume the antioxidants represent in the total polymer solution.
Due to this a signiﬁcant difference between the formic acid ﬁbers was not expected, which was also
seen in Figure 4.22 with p-value of 0.92 (purple colors). Compared to the water ﬁbers in blue it would
have been expected to see some differences in form of higher standard deviations or thicker ﬁber as
observed earlier in this study Figure 4.7. This was not the case which further supports the difference of
the formic acid ﬁber from the one seen in the previous experiment.
The formic acid ﬁber seem promising the the oxidative stability during storage earlier on, where it
showed the lowest PVs during the 20 days storage period. In continuation of this was the PV measured for
the formic acid ﬁber in this experiment, which did not appeared as low Figure 4.23. Here in this ﬁgure the
formic acid ﬁber with no antioxidants added (dark purple) show similar protection property of oxidation of
the water ﬁber with no antioxidants (dark blue), except at day 20 where the formic acid ﬁber get extremely
oxidized. When comparing the PV of the formic acid ﬁber without antioxidants (in dark purple) with
41 of 52
==PAGE:52==
Technical University of Denmark
(a) no antioxidants
(b) medium antioxidants (500 ppm of δ-tocopherol and
500 ppm rosemary extract)
Figure 4.21: SEM image of ﬁbers produced from polymer solution of 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 +
10% ﬁsh oil in formic acid.
Figure 4.22: Average diameter at day 0 for samples with formic acid as solvent, Dark purple = 17.5%
pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 10% ﬁshoil, Light purple = 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 10% ﬁshoil
+ medium antioxidants (500 ppm of δ-tocopherol and 500 ppm rosemary extract), p-value between the
purple ones = 0.92 and the p-value between all 5 ﬁbers = 0.80.
the formic acid ﬁber with medium antioxidants (in light purple), there is a signiﬁcant reduction of the
PV from day 10 to 20. This could be due to the inhibition of the oxidation by the antioxidants, which
were also seen for the water ﬁber with medium concentration (medium blue). Same trends were observed
by other studies as described in the section above for the water samples. The physical state of the ﬁber
seemed stable due to no alteration in the ﬁber diameter after 20 days of storage Figure 4.24.
During the 20 days of storage volatile compounds are formed from degradation of the peroxides.
These secondary oxidation products all listed in Appendix J, seem in addition with the antioxidants to be
42 of 52
==PAGE:53==
Figure 4.23: PVs during 20 days of storage, Dark blue = 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 10% ﬁsh oil,
Medium blue = 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 10% ﬁsh oil + medium antioxidants (1000 ppm), Light
blue = 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 10% ﬁsh oil + high antioxidants (1000+2000 ppm),Dark purple
= 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 10% ﬁshoil, Light purple = 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 10%
ﬁshoil + medium antioxidants (500 ppm of δ-tocopherol and 500 ppm rosemary extract).
Figure 4.24: Average diameter at day 20 Dark blue = 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 10% ﬁsh oil,
Medium blue = 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 10% ﬁsh oil + medium antioxidants (1000 ppm), Light
blue = 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 10% ﬁsh oil + high antioxidants (1000+2000 ppm),Dark purple
= 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 10% ﬁshoil, Light purple = 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 10%
ﬁshoil + medium antioxidants (500 ppm of δ-tocopherol and 500 ppm rosemary extract). P-value ﬁber =
0.258.
the reason for the low PV of the formic acid ﬁber with medium antioxidant, see Figure 4.26. A higher
amount of 2-ethyl-furan and 1-penten-3-ol were observed for the ﬁber containing antioxidant. This is
different from the water sample with medium antioxidant, where the secondary oxidation products were
similar with the water sample without antioxidant between day 0 and 10, Figure 4.19. This could indicate
that the oxidation of the formic acid ﬁber with antioxidant had occurred at a higher rate than the ﬁber with
formic acid and no antioxidation which thereby made the PV lower. Figures 4.19 and 4.26
43 of 52
==PAGE:54==
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 4.25: 2-ethyl-furan for the formic acid samples during storage at 33% relative humidity. Dark
purple = 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 10% ﬁshoil, Light purple = 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 +
10% ﬁshoil + medium antioxidants (500 ppm of δ-tocopherol and 500 ppm rosemary extract).
Figure 4.26: 1-penten-3-ol for the formic acid samples during storage at 33% relative humidity. Dark
purple = 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 + 10% ﬁshoil, Light purple = 17.5% pullulan + 20% Tween20 +
10% ﬁshoil + medium antioxidants (500 ppm of δ-tocopherol and 500 ppm rosemary extract).
44 of 52
==PAGE:55==
Over all did the antioxidants have a positive effect on the protecting properties of the encapsulated
ﬁsh oil when added in moderate concentrations. Here 500 ppm were use for δ-tocopherol and 500 ppm
for rosemary extract. When reaching values of up to a 1000-2000 ppm the antioxidant effect can change
to a prooxidative effect instead. This is not desired, and it is therefore of importance to know the behavior
of the utilized antioxidants when stabilizing electrospun encapsulated ﬁsh oil.
45 of 52
==PAGE:56==
Technical University of Denmark
5 Conclusion
It was seen that the 17.5% pullulan solution was very useful to spin ﬁbers by electrospinning. The
ﬁbers obtained were regular in size and shape between batches, which resulted in acceptable standard
deviations on the diameters. The encapsulation of the ﬁsh oil was successful for 10% ﬁsh oil in the
ﬁbers, as the encapsulation efﬁciency was around 85% to 90%. When the oil concentration was increased
the encapsulation efﬁciency decreased to 50%. During the preparation of the polymers solution and
production of the ﬁbers, the protection against oxidation were improved to ranging from 4.6 meq O2 /kg
lipid to 15.8 meq O2 /kg lipid compared to earlier studies [12] with PVA (polyvinyl alcohol) which had
PVs for 13% PVA at 64.5 ± 1.1 meq O2 /kg lipid and for 10.5% PVA a PV at 16.1 ±2.2 meq O2 /kg lipid.
During the storage of the ﬁber the PV of the ﬁber containing 10% ﬁsh oil with water as solvent
increased from 11.75 meq O2 /kg lipid at day 0 to 62.66 meq O2 /kg lipid at day 5, which is a massive
increase and indicate only minimal protection of the ﬁsh oil by the pullulan ﬁber. It was also seen that the
peroxides were degraded to volatile compounds which would give the ﬁber a rancid odour. The ﬁber with
10% ﬁsh oil in formic acid showed a smaller increase in the PV from day 0 to day 5, from 4.59 meq O2
/kg lipid to 31.28 meq O2 /kg lipid. The PV of ﬁbers containing 20% and 30% ﬁsh oil were inconclusive
as the encapsulation efﬁciency were only 50% compared to the 85% to 90% for the ﬁber with 10% ﬁsh
oil both in formic acid and water, while the PV and secondary oxidation products were lower from the
20% and 30% ﬁsh oil in water ﬁbers during the 20 days of storage. The poor stability could be due to an
increased interface between the oil and pullulan/Tween20 as well as some oil not encapsulated, and there
by exposed oxygen from the air. The ﬁbers with 10% ﬁsh oil in water and formic acid were chosen for the
following experiment as the ﬁber with 10% ﬁsh oil in formic acid had low PV and high encapsulation
efﬁciency.
Addition of antioxidants were performed in order to increase the oxidative stability of the encapsulated
ﬁsh oil. The two antioxidants chosen were δ-tocopherol and rosemary extract, which were both added to
the polymer solution before electrospinning. These two antioxidants were chosen for their solubility in
lipid and water respectively, and are thereby present in the different phases of the ﬁber. The antioxidants
were added in medium and high concentration, 1000ppm and 3000ppm respectively to ﬁbers where water
was used as solvent and in medium concentration to ﬁbers where formic acid was used as a solvent. From
the PV analysis of ﬁbers with no, medium or high concentrations of antioxidants, a positive effect of the
high concentration of antioxidants in ﬁbers with water as solvent, was observed during the production of
the ﬁber.
The ﬁbers were stored for 20 days, and here the medium concentration of antioxidant showed positive
effects on the oxidative stability of the encapsulated ﬁsh oil for both the ﬁbers with water and formic acid
as solvent. From day 0 to day 5 the PV were similar for the ﬁber with no antioxidant and water as solvent
and the one with medium antioxidant and water as solvent, but from day 5 to 20 a lower concentration of
peroxides were observed.
The ﬁber with medium antioxidant and formic acid as solvent, had lower PV in general compared
to the ﬁber with no antioxidants and formic acid as solvent. The volatile proﬁle for the ﬁbers with and
46 of 52
==PAGE:57==
without antioxidants for both types of ﬁber (water and formic acid) showed further degradation of the
peroxides to volatile compounds, and for the ﬁbers containing antioxidants, an indication of further
degradation to tertiary oxidation products were observed.
Electrospinning of pullulan ﬁbers with ﬁsh oil is a possible encapsulation method, and addition
of antioxidants showed indication of oxidative stabilization. For application in food products further
optimization of the process, solvent and concentration of antioxidants should be executed.
47 of 52
==PAGE:58==
Technical University of Denmark
6 Further Study
It was seen in this study that encapsulation of ﬁsh oil in pullulan ﬁbers by electrospinning of a 17.5%
pullulan polymer solution were not very sufﬁcient in decreasing oxidation. The PV after production of the
ﬁber were in the range of 4.6 to 15.8 ± 4 meq O2 /kg lipid, which leave room for further optimization, as
the maximum limit of peroxides are 5 meq O2 /kg lipid for ﬁsh oil approved for human consumption.
In the process the temperature and relative humidity were not monitored or controlled, which is known
for having an impact on the spinning process of the ﬁber. So for increasing the applicability of this
encapsulation method these factors must be considered to lower the oxidation of the encapsulated ﬁsh oil
during the production process.
For the storage of the ﬁber, it would be of interest to investigate the porosity of the pullulan ﬁber, as
this could have a direct effect on the accessibility of the oxygen to the encapsulated oil. Furthermore,
was the exact localization of the ﬁsh oil not possible in this study, but only indications of it being mainly
present in the beads. By utilizing other microscopic methods e.g. transmittance electron microscopy
(TEM), a deaper look into the ﬁber could maybe give information of the distribution of the oil within the
ﬁber or at the surface of the ﬁber in some cases.
Lastly did this study open the interest to the complete separate study of the interaction between the
formic acid and the pullulan ﬁber. The ﬁbers have a different morphology and solubility than the pullulan
ﬁbers made with water as a the solvent. Many of these improvements are obtainable in the laboratory, and
only time is the limit.
The future of these pullulan ﬁbers could be in many food products for adult people as well as infants.
And the applicability of this product is not only for the food industry, but the pharmaceutical industry uses
encapsulation for many medical products already where this one could just as well be one of them.
48 of 52
==PAGE:59==
Bibliography
[1]
Frank B Hu and Walter C Willett. Optimal diets for prevention of coronary heart disease. Jama,
288(20):2569–2578, 2002.
[2]
Margaret A Honein, Leonard J Paulozzi, TJ Mathews, J David Erickson, and Lee-Yang C Wong.
Impact of folic acid fortiﬁcation of the us food supply on the occurrence of neural tube defects.
Jama, 285(23):2981–2986, 2001.
[3]
Philip C Calder. n–3 fatty acids and cardiovascular disease: evidence explained and mechanisms
explored. Clinical science, 107(1):1–11, 2004.
[4]
Frank B Hu, RM Van Dam, and S Liu. Diet and risk of type ii diabetes: the role of types of fat and
carbohydrate. Diabetologia, 44(7):805–817, 2001.
[5]
Tino Bech-Larsen, Klaus G Grunert, Jacob Poulsen, et al. The acceptance of functional foods in
denmark, ﬁnland and the united states: A study of consumers’ conjoint evaluations of the qualities
of functional foods and perceptions of general health factors and cultural values. Technical report,
University of Aarhus, Aarhus School of Business, The MAPP Centre, 2001.
[6]
Charlotte Jacobsen, Nina Skall Nielsen, Anna Frisenfeldt Horn, and Ann-Dorit Moltke Sørensen.
Food enrichment with omega-3 fatty acids. Elsevier, 2013.
[7]
Ricardo Uauy-Dagach and Alfonso Valenzuela. Marine oils: The health beneﬁts of 12-3 fatty acids.
Nutrition Reviews, 54(7):1, 1996.
[8]
Owen P Ward and Ajay Singh. Omega-3/6 fatty acids: alternative sources of production. Process
Biochemistry, 40(12):3627–3652, 2005.
[9]
Edwin Nessim Frankel. Lipid oxidation. Elsevier, 2014.
[10] L Truelstrup Hansen, PM Allan-Wojtas, Y-L Jin, and AT Paulson. Survival of ca-alginate microencap-
sulated biﬁdobacterium spp. in milk and simulated gastrointestinal conditions. Food Microbiology,
19(1):35–45, 2002.
[11] Sebastien Gouin. Microencapsulation: industrial appraisal of existing technologies and trends.
Trends in food science & technology, 15(7):330–347, 2004.
[12] Pedro J García-Moreno, Karen Stephansen, Jules van der Kruijs, Antonio Guadix, Emilia M Guadix,
Ioannis S Chronakis, and Charlotte Jacobsen. Encapsulation of ﬁsh oil in nanoﬁbers by emulsion
electrospinning: Physical characterization and oxidative stability. Journal of Food Engineering,
183:39–49, 2016.
[13] HD Belitz, W Grosch, and P Schieberle. Food chemistry, 4th revised and extended edn. Heidelberg,
Germany, pages 62–63, 2009.
49 of 52
==PAGE:60==
Technical University of Denmark
[14] John M DeMan et al. Principles of food chemistry. AVI Publishing Co., Inc., 1976.
[15] Elisabeth Guichard. Interactions between ﬂavor compounds and food ingredients and their inﬂuence
on ﬂavor perception. Food Reviews International, 18(1):49–70, 2002.
[16] Charlotte Jacobsen and Min Hu. Oxidative stability and shelf life of foods containing oils and fats.
Elsevier, 2016.
[17] Mette Bruni Let. Production of oxidatively stable ﬁsh oil enriched foods. DTU Food, national food
institure, pages 7–9, 2007.
[18] J Weiss, K Kanjanapongkul, S Wongsasulak, and T Yoovidhya. Electrospun ﬁbers: fabrication,
functionalities and potential food industry applications. Nanotechnology in the food, beverage and
nutraceutical industries, 1:362–397, 2012.
[19] Loong-Tak Lim. 18 encapsulation of bioactive compounds using electrospinning and electrospraying
technologies. Nanotechnology and Functional Foods: Effective Delivery of Bioactive Ingredients,
page 297, 2015.
[20] Roya M Nezarati, Michelle B Eifert, and Elizabeth Cosgriff-Hernandez. Effects of humidity
and solution viscosity on electrospun ﬁber morphology. Tissue Engineering Part C: Methods,
19(10):810–819, 2013.
[21] Stephan Drusch, Yvonne Serfert, and Karin Schwarz. Microencapsulation of ﬁsh oil with n-
octenylsuccinate-derivatised starch: Flow properties and oxidative stability. European Journal of
Lipid Science and Technology, 108(6):501–512, 2006.
[22] Laura G Gómez-Mascaraque and Amparo López-Rubio. Protein-based emulsion electrosprayed
micro-and submicroparticles for the encapsulation and stabilization of thermosensitive hydrophobic
bioactives. Journal of colloid and interface science, 465:259–270, 2016.
[23] Pattama Taepaiboon, Uracha Rungsardthong, and Pitt Supaphol.
Vitamin-loaded electrospun
cellulose acetate nanoﬁber mats as transdermal and dermal therapeutic agents of vitamin a acid and
vitamin e. European Journal of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics, 67(2):387–397, 2007.
[24] Marysol Aceituno-Medina, Sandra Mendoza, Beatriz A Rodríguez, José María Lagaron, and Amparo
López-Rubio. Improved antioxidant capacity of quercetin and ferulic acid during in-vitro digestion
through encapsulation within food-grade electrospun ﬁbers. Journal of Functional Foods, 12:332–
341, 2015.
[25] EFSA.
Opinion of the scientiﬁc panel on food additives, ﬂavourings, processing aids
and materials in contact with food on a request from the commission related to pullu-
lan pi-20 for use as a new food additive.
EFSA Journal (2004) 85, 1-32; available at :
https://www.efsa.europa.eu/sites/default/ﬁles/scientiﬁc_output/ﬁles/main_documents/opinion_afc15
_ej85_pullulan_en1,3.pdf [accessed June 2016], 2004.
[26] Glyn O Phillips and Peter A Williams. Handbook of hydrocolloids. Elsevier, 2009.
[27] HAYASHIBARA CO., LTD. Pullulan - development potential in global market, 2015.
50 of 52
==PAGE:61==
[28] Bengt Kronberg, Krister Holmberg, and Bjorn Lindman. Surface chemistry of surfactants and
polymers. John Wiley & Sons, 2014.
[29] EFSA.
Scientiﬁc opinion on the re-evaluation of polyoxyethylene sorbitan monolaurate (e
432), polyoxyethylene sorbitan monooleate (e 433), polyoxyethylene sorbitan monopalmi-
tate (e 434), polyoxyethylene sorbitan monostearate (e 435) and polyoxyethylene sorbi-
tan tristearate (e 436) as food additives.
EFSA Journal 2015;13(7):4152; available at :
https://www.efsa.europa.eu/sites/default/ﬁles/scientiﬁc_output/ﬁles/main_documents/4152.pdf, 2015.
[30] Wikipedia. EDTA methal chelator, 2016.
[31] PKJPD Wanasundara and F Shahidi. Antioxidants: science, technology, and applications. Bailey’s
Industrial Oil and Fat Products, 2005.
[32] Amy S Logan, Uwe Nienaber, and Xiangqing Shawn Pan. Lipid oxidation: Challenges in food
systems. Elsevier, 2015.
[33] EFSA. Use of rosemary extracts as a food additive. The EFSA Journal (2008) 721, 1-29; available at
:http://www.efsa.europa.eu/sites/default/ﬁles/scientiﬁc_output/ﬁles/main_documents/721.pdf, 2008.
[34] Etsuo Niki. Antioxidants in relation to lipid peroxidation. Chemistry and Physics of Lipids,
44(2):227–253, 1987.
[35] Bob
Hafner.
Scanning
electron
microscopy
primer,
available
at
:http://www.charfac.umn.edu/instruments/se_primer.pdf.
[36] Joseph Goldstein, Dale E Newbury, Patrick Echlin, David C Joy, Alton D Romig Jr, Charles E
Lyman, Charles Fiori, and Eric Lifshin. Scanning electron microscopy and X-ray microanalysis: a
text for biologists, materials scientists, and geologists. Springer Science & Business Media, 2012.
[37] Karen Stephansen. Development and characterization of nano-micro structures as carrier for bioactive
compounds, phd thesis. DTU Food, national food institure, pages 27–28, 2015.
[38] Thomas P Wampler. Analysis of food volatiles using headspace-gas chromatographic techniques.
Techniques for analyzing food aroma, pages 27–58, 1997.
[39] E Graham Bligh and W Justin Dyer. A rapid method of total lipid extraction and puriﬁcation.
Canadian journal of biochemistry and physiology, 37(8):911–917, 1959.
[40] Nalur C Shantha and Eric A Decker. Rapid, sensitive, iron-based spectrophotometric methods for
determination of peroxide values of food lipids. Journal of AOAC International, 77(2):421–424,
1994.
[41] Zhen-Yue Jiang, James V Hunt, and Simon P Wolff. Ferrous ion oxidation in the presence of xylenol
orange for detection of lipid hydroperoxide in low density lipoprotein. Analytical biochemistry,
202(2):384–389, 1992.
[42] Khalid Moomand and Loong-Tak Lim. Oxidative stability of encapsulated ﬁsh oil in electrospun
zein ﬁbres. Food Research International, 62:523–532, 2014.
51 of 52
==PAGE:62==
Technical University of Denmark
[43] A1 Arecchi, S Mannino, and J Weiss. Electrospinning of poly (vinyl alcohol) nanoﬁbers loaded with
hexadecane nanodroplets. Journal of food science, 75(6):N80–N88, 2010.
[44] C Karahadian and Robert Clarence lindsay. Evaluation of compounds contributiong characterizing
ﬁshy ﬂavours in ﬁsh oils. Journal of the American Oil Chemists’ society, 66(7):953–960, 1989.
[45] Y Serfert, S Drusch, and K Schwarz. Chemical stabilisation of oils rich in long-chain polyunsaturated
fatty acids during homogenisation, microencapsulation and storage. Food Chemistry, 113(4):1106–
1112, 2009.
[46] SA Hogan, ED O’riordan, and M O’sullivan. Microencapsulation and oxidative stability of spray-
dried ﬁsh oil emulsions. Journal of microencapsulation, 20(5):675–688, 2003.
52 of 52
==PAGE:63==
Appendices
==PAGE:64==
==PAGE:65==
APPENDIX A
Data table of the results of the preliminary experiments
Figure A.1: Data table of the results from the oil content experiment. *percent with respect to the oil
content, **percent with respect to solid content of the ﬁbers, ***Not enough solution to make duplicate,
extra solution used during the spinning process. "," as a decimal separator instead of "."
I of XVIII
==PAGE:66==
Technical University of Denmark
APPENDIX B
Band-like structure of the formic acid sample in the oil content experiment
Figure B.1: SEM images from Phenom SEM, where the ﬁber produced from 17.5% pullulan + 20%
Tween20 + 10% ﬁsh oil in formic acid, clearly showed band like structure.
II of XVIII
==PAGE:67==
APPENDIX C
SEM images for the bead count in the oil content experiment
Figure C.1:
SEM image for
bead count of pullulan ﬁbers
with 10% ﬁsh oil in water
Figure C.2:
SEM image for
bead count of pullulan ﬁbers
with 10% ﬁsh oil in water
Figure C.3:
SEM image for
bead count of pullulan ﬁbers
with 10% ﬁsh oil in water
Figure C.4:
SEM image for
bead count of pullulan ﬁbers
with 10% ﬁsh oil in water
Figure C.5:
SEM image for
bead count of pullulan ﬁbers
with 10% ﬁsh oil in water
Figure C.6:
SEM image for
bead count of pullulan ﬁbers
with 10% ﬁsh oil in water
Figure C.7:
SEM image for
bead count of pullulan ﬁbers
with 10% ﬁsh oil in water
Figure C.8:
SEM image for
bead count of pullulan ﬁbers
with 10% ﬁsh oil in water
Figure C.9:
SEM image for
bead count of pullulan ﬁbers
with 10% ﬁsh oil in water
III of XVIII
==PAGE:68==
Technical University of Denmark
APPENDIX D
Impurities observed in the 96% formic acid from Sigma Aldrich
Figure D.1: Volatile impurities in 96% formic acid.
IV of XVIII
==PAGE:69==
APPENDIX E
Volatiles from oil content experiment
Figure E.1: 2-ethul-furan
Figure E.2: 1-penten-3-one
V of XVIII
==PAGE:70==
Technical University of Denmark
Figure E.3: 1-penten-3-ol
Figure E.4: trans,trans-2,4-heptadienal
VI of XVIII
==PAGE:71==
Figure E.5: Hexanal
Figure E.6: Heptanal
VII of XVIII
==PAGE:72==
Technical University of Denmark
Figure E.7: Octanal
Figure E.8: Nonanal
VIII of XVIII
==PAGE:73==
APPENDIX F
SEM images of the morphology of the water samples with and without antioxidants at day 0
Figure F.1: SEM image of the morphology of ﬁbers
produced from 10% ﬁsh oil in water and no antiox-
idants
Figure F.2: SEM image of the morphology of ﬁbers
produced from 10% ﬁsh oil in water + medium
antioxidants
Figure F.3: SEM image of the morphology of ﬁbers
produced from 10% ﬁsh oil in water + high antiox-
idants
IX of XVIII
==PAGE:74==
Technical University of Denmark
APPENDIX G
SEM images of the morphology of the water samples with and without antioxidants after 20 days of
storage + Diameter analysis
Figure G.1: SEM image of the morphology of
ﬁbers produced from 10% ﬁsh oil in water and no
antioxidants, stored for 20 day at 33% RH
Figure G.2: SEM image of the morphology of
ﬁbers produced from 10% ﬁsh oil in water +
medium antioxidants, stored for 20 day at 33%
RH
Figure G.3: SEM image of the morphology of
ﬁbers produced from 10% ﬁsh oil in water + high
antioxidants, stored for 20 day at 33% RH
X of XVIII
==PAGE:75==
Figure G.4: Average diameter at day 20 for samples with water as solvent.
XI of XVIII
==PAGE:76==
Technical University of Denmark
APPENDIX H
SEM defects observed in the water samples without antioxidants
Figure H.1: SEM image of a defect in the morphol-
ogy of ﬁbers produced from 10% ﬁsh oil in water
and no antioxidants after 20 days of storage at 33%
RH
Figure H.2: SEM image of a beads like defect in
the morphology of ﬁbers produced from 10% ﬁsh
oil in water and no antioxidants after 20 days of
storage at 33% RH
XII of XVIII
==PAGE:77==
APPENDIX I
Volatiles from the water samples with and without antioxidants
Figure I.1: 2-ethul-furan
Figure I.2: 1-penten-3-one
Figure I.3: 1-penten-3-ol
XIII of XVIII
==PAGE:78==
Technical University of Denmark
Figure I.4: trans,trans-2,4-heptadienal
Figure I.5: Hexanal
Figure I.6: Heptanal
XIV of XVIII
==PAGE:79==
Figure I.7: Octanal
Figure I.8: Nonanal
XV of XVIII
==PAGE:80==
Technical University of Denmark
APPENDIX J
Volatiles from the formic acid samples with and without antioxidants
Figure J.1: 2-ethul-furan
Figure J.2: 1-penten-3-one - the formic acid peak in the chro-
matogram interfered with the peak from 1-penten-3-one, so it
was not possible to due the integration properly
Figure J.3: 1-penten-3-ol
XVI of XVIII
==PAGE:81==
Figure J.4: trans,trans-2,4-heptadienal
Figure J.5: Hexanal
Figure J.6: Heptanal
XVII of XVIII
==PAGE:82==
Technical University of Denmark
Figure J.7: Octanal
Figure J.8: Nonanal
XVIII of XVIII
