==PAGE:1==
Eye Tracking and AI as a Game
Mechanic
Rasmus Jensen
Anders Wessberg
Kongens Lyngby 2016
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
Measurement of where a person is looking at on a screen have been researched for
a long time and the technique have mainly been used to analyse user interfaces
to perfect the design of these.
Now as the technology is becoming cheaper,
small units are beginning to appear on the market and the technology can be
used for other things without a big investment. This is thanks to companies
such as TheEyeTribe, which produces cheap eye trackers that private people can
aﬀord and design software which makes it easy for developers til make use of
the technology for other purposes than the previously used main purpose. The
goal of the thesis is to research the opputuinity of using eye tracking to analyse
gamers of computer games in such a way that artiﬁcial intelligence can make
use of the data. To research this the eye tracker produced at TheEyeTribe is
used and integrated in a quickly developed game made in Unity. This Thesis
will clarify some of the possibilities eye tracking has within data mining on user
behaviour and experience for utilization inside Artiﬁcial Intelligens.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
Måling af hvor en person kigger hen på en skærm er blevet undersøgt længe og
teknikken er hovedsageligt blevet brugt til analyse af bruger ﬂader til at opnå
de beste design a disse. Nu hvor teknologien er blevet billigere og mindre er
små enheder begyndt at komme ud på market og teknologien kan blive brugt til
andre ting uden en stor invistering. Dette er takket være ﬁrmaer som TheEye-
Tribe, som nu producere billige øjen målere som privat personer har råd til og
designer software der gør det nemt for udviklere at benytte sig af teknologien til
andre formål end de førhen brugte. Målet for denne afhandling er at undersøge
muligheden for at benytte en øjen måler til at analyserer spillere af compu-
terspil på en sådan måde at kunstig intelligens kan benytte sig af dataen. For
at undersøge dette bliver øjen måleren fra TheEyeTribe benyttet og integreret
i et hurtigt produceret gyser computerspil udviklet i Unity. Denne afhandling
vil klargøre mulighederne øjen måling har for data mining af bruger adfærd og
oplevelse til benyttelse i kunstig intelligens.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁlment of the requirements for
acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering. A thesis is traditionally written individually,
but since the work we have done leans so much up against each other we have
chosen to write this thesis together. This bring up some issues regarding contri-
bution to the written thesis itself. We have therefore come up with a system to
clearly state which part of the thesis has been written by whom. Each chapter
will start with an introduction to the chapter stating what we will be explaining
within, in that introduction we will also state whom wrote the speciﬁc sections
of that chapter, should a section or an entire chapter not be assigned to anyone
of us, then it should be assumed that we have each contributed equally to that
part of the thesis. The thesis deals with researching the opportunities integra-
tion of eye tracking has to improve or include AI in computer games. The thesis
consists of a introductory part, which introduces the current uses of eye track-
ing, and state of the usage of such devices in artiﬁcial intelligence, a theoretical
part ,which discusses the role and design of our solution to research eye track-
ing, a part concerning our implementation describing how we implemented at
tested, a presentation of our outcome and the analysis of these ﬁndings as well
as a conclusion upon these.
==PAGE:8==
vi
Lyngby, 25-June-2016
Rasmus Jensen
Lyngby, 25-June-2016
Anders Wessberg
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
This Thesis would not have been possible without the help of key people within
the establishment of DTU. First of all we would like to thank our main adviser
Michal Rose for guiding us, helping us ﬁnding a relevant subject to research
for our thesis and allowing us to write the thesis together.
Additionally we
would like to give a huge thanks to Per Bækgaard for his continues help with
questions regarding eye tracking and overseeing the shared eye trackers DTU
made available during the period of the thesis. Also we would like to thank Per
Bækgaard together with Michael Kai Petersen to meet with us in the ﬁrst weeks
of the project to give us a crash course in eye tracking as well as Micheal rose
for setting it up.
Finally we would like to thank all the testers: Family, friends and random
testers on DTU for testing our game, even though it’s was supposed to scare
and chock them.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Eye tracker devices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Todays games . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Thesis problem formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
State of the art
4
2.1
Applications with eye tracking
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
AI in horror games . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Games making using external devices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Design and Tools
9
3.1
3D Horror Game . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
The Eye Tribe Eye Tracker
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3
Unity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3.1
Unity Interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3.2
C#, IDE and Scripts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.4
The A-Eye Game . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
3.4.1
Environment of the game . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4.2
Game entities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.4.3
Ready for testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.5
Python
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.6
Github . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4
Implementation
23
4.1
Iteration 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.1.1
Level Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.1.2
EyeTribe implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.1.3
Blink detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.1.4
Ghoul behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.1.5
Trigger Events
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2
Iteration 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2.1
Data visualization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.3
Iteration 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5
Results
35
5.1
EyeTribe Tracker Integration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2
Monster AI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.3
Pupil Dilation - Dynamic
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.3.1
Events by eyesight . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.3.2
Events by Colliders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.3.3
Trigger events . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.3.4
Additional results and tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.4
Pupil Dilation - Static . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6
Analysis
44
6.1
Iteration 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.1.1
EyeTribe Eye Tracker Integration . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.1.2
Ghoul AI
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.1.3
Possible ways to integrate the eye tracker in the ghoul . .
46
6.2
Iteration 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.2.1
Data analysis with Python
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.2.2
Eyesight and collider . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.2.3
Trigger events . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6.3
Iteration 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
==PAGE:13==
CONTENTS
xi
6.3.1
Level managing AI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
7
Conclusion
55
7.1
Future possibilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
A Appendix
57
==PAGE:14==
xii
CONTENTS
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Eyes have been used to communicate since before humans evolved into the
species that exists today, but we have yet to implement this into our mainstream
technology. If this can be achieved we will have established yet another line of
communication with our devices, such that our computers, tablets or phones
will be able to understand and help the average individual even more in today’s
world.
1.1
Eye tracker devices
Traditionally, performing eye tracking personally has been an expensive aﬀair
and because of that the use of this technology has been limited.
Now with
new technology from companies like Tobii1 and TheEyeTribe2 we are seeing eye
trackers that drop below the 100$ mark, and therefore expand on the usability
of this technology and start thinking of new ways to implement this technology
into computational units purchased by the ordinary consumer.
In general the Eye tracking devices has been used on interfaces to generate
heat maps and saccade pathways, to help developers of interfaces get a better
1http://www.tobii.com/
2https://theeyetribe.com/
==PAGE:16==
2
Introduction
understanding of where the users are looking, such that they are able to improve
the user experience and usability of their product. In this thesis it is of more
interest utilizing the data in real time and to what extend, the data from the
eye tracker can beneﬁt us in such a scenario.
1.2
Todays games
With the low cost of eye trackers we are starting to see games being developed
around this technology and how others are trying to implement it into existing
games. Taking a look at some of the applications available today, then it is
clear that there already exists a lot of diﬀerent ways to utilize the technology in
games.
Tobii oﬀers at their website3 a lot of diﬀerent applications.
With their
application to the popular game Tom Clancy’s The Division4 they give the
player a lot of new options utilizing the eye tracking technology. The player is
able to aim with the eyes, target and tag enemies for cooperative play and scan
areas to name a few. Other games enables the player to move the main camera
around, by looking at the edge of the screen to turn in the direction in which
the player is looking. These are all way to implement eye tracking that removes
the need of the mouse since those are the inputs that it replaces.
User interface enhancements does also exist with diﬀerent properties, one
of these could be the add-on to XSplit, which is a streaming service program.
With this add-on streamers are able to show their viewers exactly what you
are looking at, at all times. The add-on gives viewers a much higher insight
in how the streamer perceive and play the game they’re watching, hence giving
the person watching to learn a much higher value from watching the stream and
will therefore most likely come again. Tobii also oﬀers games with implemented
dynamic depth of ﬁeld, which lets players focus only on the thing, which they
are looking at, instead of the entire scene at once, such that players experience
the behavior of the human eyes in the game. Replacing the mouse input and
utilizing the eye tracker for interface enhancements in games has been done in a
lot of diﬀerent ways, but few developers has chosen to work with the eye tracker
as an input device for an Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI). Because of this we have
come up with the below described thesis problem formulation.
3http://www.tobii.com/xperience/apps/
4http://tomclancy-thedivision.ubi.com/game/en-ca/home/
==PAGE:17==
1.3 Thesis problem formulation
3
1.3
Thesis problem formulation
With the development within eye trackers and AI in digital games we have
decided to investigate the possibility of utilizing the technology of the eye tracker
within games. We have therefore come up with the following research question:
How can data from the EyeTribe tracker or eye tracking data in
general be utilized to aﬀect Artiﬁcial Intelligence behavior in digital
games?
To answer the question we are going to develop a 3D world horror game. The
game will make use of the information given by the eye tracker to eﬀect events
within the game. While the game is being played we will record all relevant data
and visualise this in graphs such that we can determine if we have succeeded.
Since this question is rather wide we have created the following sub questions
to narrow down the possible ﬁelds of research.
• Is it possible to tell an AI in real time, what the player is looking at
without latency or precision issues and make the AI act on basis of that?
• Is the data from what players are looking at reliable enough to perform
data mining on user behavior?
• Can it be determined how frightened a player is in a horror game by
measuring pupil dilation, to help possible player-experience modeling?
• Is it possible to tell when a scaring part of a game looses it eﬀect and
become unnecessary?
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 2
State of the art
This chapter takes a look at other games that makes use of scanners for your
body in games, to have an impact inside the game world based on the mon-
itoring system.
As well as taking a closer look at how the eye trackers are
being utilized in already developed games where the eye tracker is not serving
a speciﬁc functionality for the player, but indirectly acts with the environment
depending on where the player gazes in the scene.
2.1
Applications with eye tracking
Eye tracking have been and are still used for User Experience. By tracking the
eyes you have the knowledge of where a person is looking, and therefore what
might interest the person more than other things, for example in commercials or
on websites. Eye tracking is also being used to improve and learn what others
do. In professional gaming players have used an eye tracking device, and then
used the data to see how diﬀerent a professional gamer looks compared to an
ordinary gamer. In games eye tracking is mostly used for controls. A popular
integration is to combine eye tracking and simulator games. If you for example
drive a car, looking out the window of the car could easily be registered by an eye
tracker. It could also check if you remember to check the back- or side mirrors
==PAGE:19==
2.2 AI in horror games
5
when making a turn. Other types of genres is the adventure/shooting games.
Games where you see the player in a ﬁrst person or third person view. With one
of these views, the controls to look around in the game could be controlled by
the eye tracker. If you move your head in any direction, the person in the game
would look in that direction. In 2D games eye tracking can be used for aiming
where to shoot, or you would have to look at an object to interact with. If there
are rocks falling from the sky, you would have to look at them for two seconds
to blow them up. These features are not in particular to make the game easier,
but maybe more realistic and interactive, the player is the one controlling the
game and not the keyboard, mouse, controller or hands to make the player feel
more involved in the game.
2.2
AI in horror games
AI today is much diﬀerent than it used to be. Because of the development within
hardware and software, it has been made very easy to implement simple minded
None Player Characters (NPC) controlled by AI using Final State Machines
(FSM). When creating smaller games without a high complexity in mobility,
then movement is usually controlled within the FSM. As soon as a game has a
3D world with several possible directions to move in, then it is required for AI’s
that move to have an algorithm determining the best possible route. A* is the
most commonly used path-ﬁnding algorithm to determine path for an AI, other
algorithms such as shortest route by Dijkstra’s Algorithm is also fairly popular.
In between movement comes the behavior of an AI, these are largely controlled
by FSM’s, but when a lot of diﬀerent AI entities are added to a system then
they will become very incomprehensible. If you create a simple zombie game
you might only need one FSM used by all the zombies and altering the behavior
of them all is the same as altering it for one, but if you have diﬀerent kinds of
zombies or human helpers then suddenly changing something for all the AI’s
would require alteration by many FSM’s. This is where the technique planning
becomes powerful. Planning is an action-goal based AI which will state its goal
and then utilize its available actions to get there. This means you can completely
remove the FSM, since the AI is no longer bound by how the programmers have
determined it to act in any given situation. [Ork]
Player experience modelling is something else an AI can do. This AI analyses
the players emotional state as they play the game to ﬁgure out how the player
==PAGE:20==
6
State of the art
wants to play the game. The AI will then attempt to tailor the game for that
speciﬁc player with the available resources .
Procedural-content generation can be controlled by an AI. At its basic form
it will generate content into the game of diﬀerent sort at random. The content
can be maps, terrain, enemy monsters getting summoned or lights turning oﬀ
and on.
An AI can also perform data mining on user behaviour, this is how an AI can
learn about the players in-game behavior and increase or decrease the diﬃculty
for each individual player dynamically. This AI will also be able to tell which
features of a game is used the most or least, such that developers can determine
how to improve gameplay and or monetization of the game.[Wik]
2.3
Games making using external devices
To make a great game developers have to be able to create a game where players
get emotional, because without getting a players emotions involved, they would
never care for the game the right way or play it. This is why games are created
the way they are. Developers are trying to control the ﬂow of chemicals in the
brain of players, such that you feel good playing the game. Dopamine, Oxytocin
and Endorphins are all released in the brain and are essential for the experience
of a game [Fis] . None of these chemicals can be easily tracked in real time, such
that the game will know if it’s doing the "right" thing for the player. Therefore
developers are scanning other bodily functions, that we can measure, to provide
their AI’s within games with insight in how the player is behaving while playing
the game.
"Nevermind"1 is a horror game that has been developed with the help of a
KickStarter campaign. Nevermind utilizes bio feedback to enhance the gaming
experience for the player. The developers of the game makes use of a heart mon-
itor which the player attaches to the chest. By measuring the heart-rate of the
player, the game estimates how scared the player is. Depending on how scared
the game estimates players to be and what situation players ﬁnd themselves in,
then the game will act out from that. The more rattled up you are, the harder
the game will be, which means you will have to stay calm, throughout the horror
game. Otherwise players will have a hard time trying to complete it without the
1https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/reynoldsphobia/nevermind-biofeedback-horror-
game
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Games making using external devices
7
game constantly trying to slow you down or defeat you. A heart rate monitor
that’s integrated with the game can be acquired for around $55 - $652. This is
a low price compared to the current available eye trackers, but the device can
only perform one task and has little to no games developed around it, because
of that it’s a very high price.
Figure 2.1: One of the diﬀerent heart rate monitors integrated with the game
"Nevermind".
Beyond the above example, games with external devices analysing you pas-
sively is not very popular. The market is currently dominated by devices that
gives the player new input options and makes the game more immersive. Devices
such as the Kinect sensor for X-box One and Virtual Reality (VR) headsets are
more popular because of their direct connection to the game world and ways
to integrate those into a game. With VR becoming more and more aﬀordable
for the ordinary gamers, developers are aiming to create a lot more games aim-
ing to make the player feel fully integrated in the world of the game. These
games are typically horror games and roller coaster simulators. Even shooting
games are being developed for the VR-experience, which will without a doubt
be the cause of a lot of debate in the near future. With the development of these
games, consumers will most likely see an increase in demand for technology that
helps the developers make the player more and more integrated in the game,
such that players wont feel disconnected within scenarios of the game. We are
2http://nevermindgame.com/sensors/
==PAGE:22==
8
State of the art
already seeing the development of such with the FOVE VR headset3, where eye
tracking is an integrated part of the headset.
3http://www.getfove.com/
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 3
Design and Tools
In this thesis it’s the use of eye tracking and AI as a game mechanic that’s the
goal. In order to track the eyes, an EyeTribe eye tracker has been acquired, so
we can get data from a players eyes. To combine the eye tracking and an AI as
a game mechanic, we have used a 3D game engine to develop our own horror
game. In the next sections we will go through the project design process and
what tools we have used.
3.1
3D Horror Game
The reason behind developing a horror game along with an eye tracker, was
that in horror games it’s the goal to make the player feel intensely immersed
and frightened. Using the eye trackers data, it is presumably possible to see if a
player is afraid or exited during the game. The eye tracker also gives the option
to create a Level Management AI, which controls the actions of the game, by
knowing where the player is looking and what they interact with. A typical
horror feature is to have a monster chasing you, which will be another AI in our
game.
==PAGE:24==
10
Design and Tools
3.2
The Eye Tribe Eye Tracker
There is a lot of diﬀerent eye tracking devices on the market. The EyeTribe
eye tracker is being used in this thesis because DTU is cooperating with them,
so an EyeTribe eye tracker was available, which could be borrowed from DTU
and with that EyeTribe provided access to their eye tracking software and API.
A private eye tracker was later purchased, to become independent by others
borrowing the limited amount of eye trackers DTU had available during our
testing phases.
The EyeTribe eye tracker make use of inferred illuminated frames. To per-
form eye tracking correctly it has to be placed under your screen as seen on
ﬁgure 3.1. Then the EyeTribe UI software will determine and show if your eyes
are correctly positioned in the Trackbox. The Trackbox is an area that indicates
your eyes location with red or green colors, as seen on ﬁgure 3.2. Because of
this users can visually position themselves, in order for the eye tracker to track
their eyes in the best possible way. When users eyes are in the green area, a
calibration can be run where the user will have to follow a circle on the screen
with their eyes only. The calibration takes around 20 seconds and will then be
rated with stars of 0-5 where 5 is a very precise calibration, which means that
the eye tracker is registering where your eyes are looking. The screen will look
like the ﬁgure 3.3 and the white dots will turn red when you look at them.
==PAGE:25==
3.2 The Eye Tribe Eye Tracker
11
Figure 3.1: Picture
showing
the
user
in
front
of
a
screen
and
the
correct
placement
of
the
EyeTribe
tracker.
Source:
http://dev.theeyetribe.com/general/
Figure 3.2: The trackbox provides live feedback on the four cases of
tracking:
good, limited, bad or an error message.
Source:
http://dev.theeyetribe.com/start/
Figure 3.3: Screen
showing
the
9
calibration
points
the
EyeTribe
tracker uses to check if the calibration is good.
Source:
http://dev.theeyetribe.com/general/
==PAGE:26==
12
Design and Tools
The eye tracker sends data through a Tracker Server and developers can
get this data using an Open API. Developers can access to this API through
outside applications or directly from the EyeTribe UI. The EyeTribe UI has an
API console which streams all the data for every frame it records, in our case
it’s 30 frames per second (FPS). Every frame it stores, contains the time, gaze
coordinates which is a 2D point in pixels on your screen from the top-left, and
also the coordinates for your left and right eye in pixels. Furthermore, it gets
the pupil size of each eye. This pupil size is relative to the distance from your
eyes to the eye tracker. You can save the data directly from the API console
into a .txt ﬁle in JSON format.
3.3
Unity
There are a ton of diﬀerent game engines on the market whereas some of the
most used are Unreal Engine, Blender, GameMaker and Unity. We chose Unity
because we both have a lot of experience working with it. During our studies
at DTU we have both encountered Unity in various courses such as DADIU12
and Computer Game Prototyping3. Anders did his Bachelor Project in Unity
creating a 3D multiplayer game for multiple devices and Rasmus have used
Unity for a 3D modelling job at DTU.
3.3.1
Unity Interface
When you open Unity you have diﬀerent windows. A Hierachy Window which
shows all the GameObjects (GO) in your scene. You can group these GOs to
make a better overview. We have a group "House" in our hierarchy and within
it we have diﬀerent ﬂoors, roof and a stairs grouped in the "House"-group.
During a Unity project you also have a lot of ﬁles outside the scene that goes
in the Project Window. The Project Window is your folder structure of the
whole project, it contains all your scenes, models, textures, materials, sounds
and code.
Unity has a Scene Window which is a 3D coordinate-system. In the scene
it’s been made easy to organize your GOs. A GO can be models, light sources,
sounds or cameras. The models, light sources and sounds is what ultimately
1http://www.kurser.dtu.dk/2015-2016/02841.aspx?menulanguage=en-gb
2http://www.kurser.dtu.dk/2015-2016/02840.aspx?menulanguage=en-gb
3http://www.kurser.dtu.dk/2015-2016/02823.aspx?menulanguage=en-gb
==PAGE:27==
3.3 Unity
13
determines the environment of a game. The camera shows what the player sees
on the screen.
Figure 3.4: Unity interface where a GO is marked, with its accompanied com-
ponents showing in the inspector window.
Unity’s data structure is Component-Based Development. A highlighted GO
is visible on ﬁgure 3.4. On the right side is an inspector window that contains
all the diﬀerent components connected to the GO. The ﬁrst component is a
Transform component and consist of the position, rotation and the scale of the
GO. We have two Mesh components, which is what makes the table appear in
the scene, so when Unity is rendering the scene, the table will be shown. A
collider makes the table solid, such that the player or other objects can’t go
through it. The last component is a Shader. It controls how the object should
absorb light in the scene and also how the shadows appear. It also contains the
material and texture that the object should have, in this case the table have been
given a wooden look. This is a static object so the components used here are
very sparse. There are over hundreds of components in Unity. some components
are always used, some are rarely used and some are never used. Throughout
this chapter we will encounter some of these components and explain the use of
them.
==PAGE:28==
14
Design and Tools
3.3.2
C#, IDE and Scripts
Unity can handle three diﬀerent programming languages: JavaScript, Boo and
C#. Our experience with Boo and JavaScript is little to none existing. All the
times we have worked with Unity we have made use of C#, so there was no ques-
tion to what language we would programme and develop in. For the Integrated
Development Environment (IDE) two options was possible: MonoDevelop and
Visual Studio. MonoDevelop is Unity’s own IDE, and what diﬀers is that Visual
Studio have a better format. It also notiﬁes and shows where errors are located,
if there is any. There are many shortcuts in Visual Studio which help increase
the output of functional code such as: AutoComplete, formatting, outlining and
much more. We therefore chose to work in Visual Studio which is compatible
with Unity.
One of the core components is the Script component. This is where you
write all your code for your project. When you create a Script it starts with
two built-in functions from Unity: Start() function which is called once at the
start-up of the game and Update() which is called every frame of the game. A
modern movie runs at 24 FPS whereas modern games run at a minimum of 60
FPS. If a game runs less than 60 FPS, you most likely encounter what gamers
call "lag". This is because you lose frames, so it looks like your game stutters
and doesn’t run smooth. The Update() is used for continues calculations that
has to happen every frame, if you for example have an input key to move forward
then you can check if the button is pressed under the Update() function, causing
you to move forward, and when you release the button it will stop moving.
3.4
The A-Eye Game
When you look at Software Development Processes there are for example Wa-
terfall, Iterative and other methods to use, but when you are looking at game
development - Agile Development (AD) is the best method.
When you are
making a game, you often only know small mechanics about your game. What
AD makes possible is the form of constant testing throughout the development
process, by making small portions and then see if it works. If it does keep it and
move on, if not then it’s possible to quickly start looking for other solutions. For
most games some mechanics even work better than expected in the ﬁrst place,
so being able to test it as fast as possible, just makes the game progress so much
better.
==PAGE:29==
3.4 The A-Eye Game
15
This was our process to design a 3D horror game, with the implementation
of an eye tracker to control an AI and work as a game mechanic.
3.4.1
Environment of the game
The environment of a horror game is basically the key factor to the feeling players
will have during the gameplay. We thought of three diﬀerent environments to
make our game hit the horror genre: a forest, a cave or a house. To make these
environments a lot of models would be needed. We’ve had little experience in 3D
modelling from the DTU course: Computer Animation and Modelling4 where we
worked with the modelling programme Softimage. Producing the models needed
for these environments would take too much time, it was therefore decided to
use Unity’s Assets Store (UAS). UAS have all kinds of models and it is possible
to import them into your Unity scene. Some assets are free and some have to
be payed for. Free forest assets on the UAS were very sparse and unusable. The
trees and bushes in those assets were designed to make a forest during a sunny
summer day, instead of a dark cold night. There weren’t any cave assets that
matched our requirements, only some but they were to expensive. We looked for
house interiors, since we could make the house ourselves, and it was full of them.
All the assets we have used are free and they are all from the UAS. Lacking in
outdoor decorative assets, forced the game to be the inside of a house.
Figure 3.5: The designed house from above.
4http://www.kurser.dtu.dk/02565.aspx?menulanguage=da
==PAGE:30==
16
Design and Tools
We wanted the architecture of the house to satisfy some needs. You should
be able to go into diﬀerent small rooms, in order to hide from a monster. We
also wanted an open path that would allow you to get chased by the monster
and preferably run from it around the house. There is only one entrance in the
house and therefore only one exit.
A second ﬂoor was intended with a staircase in the lobby, but it was too time
consuming, it would take too much time to decorate the entire house. The game
ended up with six rooms, a lobby and a living room. The entire house: ﬂoor,
walls and roof are made of cubes where their transforms have been manipulated
to satisfy the needs for the diﬀerent room sizes and positions. The decorating of
the house is dependent of what assets we could ﬁnd and get for free. The house
is designed with an oﬃce, hobby room with a piano, a bedroom, entrance and
a living room. All the rooms are separated with long dark hallways that can
act as a scary element for the player. There is no windows in the house because
this would put on a requirement of outside vegetation, which was not available.
After the decorating we also needed to put light in the scene. Unity have
three predeﬁned light sources that you can use. A directional light which works
like the sun, a spotlight which is a spotlight and at last a point light which
emits light from a point. Within this scene only point lights were used, to get
the feeling from a light bulb in a lamp. A point light is a point surrounded by a
sphere, where the size of the sphere indicates the spread of the lightening. We
have put at least one lamp in each room, in order to make a light eﬀect in all
areas. The light is a key factor in bringing out the scary setting for the horror
genre and it ended up looking really creepy, see ﬁgure 3.6.
Figure 3.6: Screenshots from the game, showing the mood and environment
in which the player moves.
==PAGE:31==
3.4 The A-Eye Game
17
3.4.2
Game entities
The game consists of the player and two AI units. The player is a standard ﬁrst
person controlled unit that you control with your keyboard and mouse. The ﬁeld
of view for the player can be seen on ﬁgure 3.6 as those pictures have been taken
while inside the game. The two AI controlled entities; one is the monster, which
is supposed to chase and catch you, the other is the management of the level
using Player Experienced Modelling (PEM) and Data Mining on User Behavior
(DMOUB).
The ﬁrst AI
This AI is a ghoul that is designed to chase players as they attempt to ﬁnd the
way out of the house. Figure 3.6 shows the ghoul in the bottom left picture.
The ghoul is controlled by making use of Unity’s NavMesh (NM). The NM is a
tool Unity oﬀers for generating invisible terrain that entities controlled by the
system has to move around on. By generating the NM terrain from the ﬂoor of
the house, the ghoul can quickly learn where it is allowed to walk around within
the house, without it passing through walls and other interior. This works as
long as those GOs have what is called a NavMeshObstacle attached to it. To
make the ghoul move a component called a NavMeshAgent is added to the
ghoul. By applying this component it allows any script to give it a destination
and it will then walk to the destination within the limits of the NM. With the
movement and limitations in place, only the behavior needs to be addded to the
AI. As a result a fully functional enemy ghoul chasing the player will be in place.
To create this behavior we decided to implement the AI with a behavior tree.
This would allow quick changes and alterations to the way the AI acts within
the game. Furthermore it also leaves a lot of possible ways of implementation
for the eye tracking to eﬀect the monster. Any eﬀect wished upon the AI would
be to add a decision from any given state within the behavior tree.
==PAGE:32==
18
Design and Tools
Figure 3.7: A simpliﬁed version of the enemy AI decision tree.
Because of the nature of decision trees the complete design of the behavior
tree is quite extensive and the AI behavior will be explained in further detail
in the section regarding the implementation of the ghoul. The overall design
of the ghouls behavior is rather simple and can be easily modelled using a life
cycle state machine.
==PAGE:33==
3.4 The A-Eye Game
19
Figure 3.8: A life cycle state machine modelling the behavior of the enemy
ghoul.
As we can see in the state machine the ghoul will simply patrol within the
house looking for the player at random positions, and should the player be
detected then it will start chasing. The design of the AI behavior is simple and
we chose to have it that way, because it leaves us with much more freedom to
implement possible ways to include the eye tracker, should we discover clever
ways to include it in the ghouls behavior.
The second AI
The second AI in the game is invisible to the player. It oversees the level and
manage it while the player is playing the game. It is designed to record and be
able to make use of the data from the eye tracker, such that it would enable it
to perform PEM and DMOUB.
By integrating the Unity plug-in from The Eye Tribe we could quickly give
the AI knowledge of where and if the player was looking, as well as if the
players eyes were untraceable. The code for Unity integration provided by The
Eye Tribe has been extend, such that the AI can make qualiﬁed guesses to when
the player is blinking, and if the eye tracker isn’t tracking. The AI will do this
by looking in the cached information sent to Unity and check if there exists a
time interval within it, which correlates with the average time it takes to blink.
==PAGE:34==
20
Design and Tools
A blink takes on average 150-400 milliseconds, which is a small amount of time,
such that if a break in the tracking of the eye is detected, then it’s usually a
blink, since a disconnect is much longer, and something disturbing the view of
the tracker will usually move much faster or slower past the eye tracker. To
avoid confusing, the AI has been told that a person will not blink more than
every 0.3 seconds. This is to avoid the AI detecting rapid blinking, which does
not normally occur. Without the limit to blinking there is the possibility the
eye tracker start disconnecting and connecting the eyes rapidly, this could then
be misinterpreted by the AI as rapid blinking. With this design the AI will
detect most blinks, but still struggle to detect blinks that last longer than the
maximum value of 400 ms. Blinks that last longer than the standard length are
in most cases also forced and not done subconsciously. [oUBN]
With the information of where the player is looking, the AI is able to ﬁgure
out what the player is looking at. The AI can therefore trigger events in the
game world, that it’s conﬁdent the player is looking at or have looked at, such
that it knows the player will see, hear or understand the triggered event. This
could be pulling out a chair without anyone else than the player being near and
making sure the player sees it done, because the AI knows the player is looking
at it as it happens. This is known as PEM. Another example of this could be
playing a piano sound and knowing the player knows where the piano is because
the AI knows the player has seen it earlier. These are small things that the AI
can make use of to increase the tensity of the game, since the AI can manage
the events such that they are all triggered in an order that secures the player
isn’t getting the wrong experience and miss out on a scary eﬀect. Because the
AI has this oversight of events, then they can also be used to guide the player to
a place that the game designer wishes for them to go at speciﬁc times, because
the AI will know the best way of guiding them towards something they have
seen or can relate to.
The AI is also keeping track of the pupil dilation to help PEM, the idea
being that it can detect when and if a player get scared from an event. Should
a category of events prove to be more scary than the others, then the AI will
know to sort out in them and use only those with the highest impact on the
current player instead of other potential ones. This is to keep the player on the
edge of their seat for as long as possible, which is the point of horror games, and
can be ruined if you as a player encounter to many scenarios within the game,
which you don’t ﬁnd horrifying. All of these events can also be analysed by the
==PAGE:35==
3.5 Python
21
AI by performing DMOUB to improve the selection of events triggered. All
the data the AI knows is saved in .txt ﬁles, such that it can be visualised with
Python and enable us to see, which parts of the data, the AI should be able to
use.
3.4.3
Ready for testing
The story of the game is made out from the mechanics within in the game.
The player is located in a house and starts in the bedroom in a very bright
environment. The player can then walk around inside the house to ﬁnd the exit.
When the player ﬁnds the exit and attempts to open the door all the lights goes
out and come back up, but in a very dark setting. A sound from a big metal
door is heard from a distance in the house, which is the door to the ghouls room
opening. In order to get out of the house, the player now have to ﬁnd a hidden
key. The key is not actually in the house from the beginning, but the point is
that the player is forced to go around the house to ﬁnd the key, and therefore
triggering the events hidden inside the house. When the events have triggered
the key spawns in the bedroom, and the player can pick it up and run to the
exit to escape the house.
Unity have their own feature to create builds. It is able to build to all kinds
of platforms. Since the current project is using the eye tracker we have built
the game for Windows. The way every single test have been performed, is by
placing the person in front of a laptop, so their eyes is in the green trackbox
area. After a quick explanation they would take the calibration test with The
EyeTribe UI, if they got below four stars, they would have to try again and sit
still with their head, so they only move their eyes.
3.5
Python
For our data analyses and visualization we have chosen the dynamic program-
ming language Python. The reason for this is that we have a lot of experience
with it from courses at DTU such as Social Data Analyses5 and Visualization
and Social Graphs and Interactions6.
The installment of Python used is Jupyter Notebook. It allows you to use
iPython Notebook, which is a web-based version of Python, this gives you a great
5http://www.kurser.dtu.dk/2015-2016/02806.aspx?menulanguage=en-gb
6http://www.kurser.dtu.dk/2015-2016/02805.aspx?menulanguage=en-gb
==PAGE:36==
22
Design and Tools
interface outlining your code. While working with Python it is normal to import
a large variety libraries. To plot data a library MatPlotLib has been used. From
this library a function called "plot" which creates a simple line between points,
to illustrate the size of the pupils is used. For triggers and blinking detection a
function called "bar" is used, where the trigger values are high enough to exceed
the pupil dilation graph, so it is clear exactly what happens to the pupil dilation
after a triggered event.
3.6
Github
Developing software requires version control, so you can share code and project
ﬁles between multiple members. We have used the repository GitHub, which is
very common among software programmers. It gives the ability to merge ﬁles
which is very useful when you code. It also improves the AD method by having
the possibility of going back to earlier versions of your project. Since we both
run on Windows PC we have used the application SourceTree, which gives a
great interface for using GitHub.
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 4
Implementation
The implementation can roughly be separated into three iterations. Each iter-
ation is subject to a new goal, which reﬂects what has been learned from the
previous iteration. This chapter will not go through every line of code imple-
mented, but only the essential parts of the project and what they contribute to
the game. Furthermore the exact code will not be used, Pseudo-code will be
utilised. The entire code is available for review at the public github repository1,
should such be of interest.
4.1
Iteration 1
In the ﬁrst iteration focuses is on the modelling of our game, and implemen-
tation wise focused on applying the EyeTribe tracker to the game and making
the functionality available to us, as well as making all other standard game
mechanics. The goal of this iteration was mainly to test the usability of the im-
plemented eye tracker and the accuracy at which it can detect when and what
a player is looking at.
1https://github.com/TheSayvior/Thesis-Eye-Tracking-and-AI-as-a-GameMechanic
==PAGE:38==
24
Implementation
4.1.1
Level Management
To control the level we have created a GO that keeps track of the level progres-
sion, which events have been triggered and which haven’t. The LevelManager
is a central unit used to maintain order and have a single place from which we
handle or record game changes.
Figure 4.1: Picture of the LevelManager within our Unity project.
The light eﬀects in the game is made by a Script LightController, accessed
by the LevelManager. Every lightsource in the game have a tag "LightSource".
The script have two main methods, one that targets a speciﬁc lightsource and
one that takes all lightsources. Both methods alters the light and adjust the
intensity of the light very fast so it gives a jitter eﬀect.
==PAGE:39==
4.1 Iteration 1
25
Figure 4.2: Example of a light component within the game.
4.1.2
EyeTribe implementation
Implementing the tracker is fairly straight forward. By having access to the
publicly shared EyeTribe github proﬁle, from which they share many Software
Development Kits (SDK), implementing the eye tracker was done without much
diﬃculty. To implement the EyeTribe assets from within the AirCraft Unity
Sample2 for the EyeTribe SDK was used, since it was made for Unity 5, which
is the version used doing this project. Necessary components was extracted and
could be placed within the game scene and this gave access to all the information
2https://github.com/eyetribe
==PAGE:40==
26
Implementation
granted by the tracker by using the API provided by EyeTribe.
Gaze data
became available in the game and the frame data is speciﬁed as shown in the
appedix A.2.
With this frame data we can now tell what, where and when the player is
looking at, at the screen as well as determining the players pupil size.
4.1.3
Blink detection
To implement blink detection, the code provided by EyeTribe to the Unity
plug-in had to be expanded. Below is a listing of the pseudo-code for the script
"GazeDataValidator" from the plug-in:
RepeatEachFrame{
GetGazeFrameCacheArrayFromEyeTracker ()
resetEyetrackerData ( ) ;
f o r
( int
i = GazeFrameCache . Count ; −−i >= 0;
)
{
gazeData = _GazeFrameCache . ElementAt ( i ) ;
SetEyeTrackerStateFail ( f a l s e ) ;
SetMillisTimeBetweenFrames ( ) ;
i f
( no tracking
problems ,
then cache eye data )
{
i f
( Data has been
r e s e t ) then saveEyeTrackerData ( ) ;
e l s e
i f
( only
l e f t
eye can be tracked ) then
saveLeftEye ( ) ;
e l s e
i f
( only
right
eye can be tracked ) then saveRightEye ( ) ;
i f
( gaze
coordinates
available ,
cache them)
{
saveGazeCoords ( ) ;
saveGazeCoordsSmooth ( ) ;
}
}
i f
( valid
values
found break
loop )
{
i f
( WithinBlinkLimit ( i ))
then _UserBlinked = true ;
e l s e
then _UserBlinked = f a l s e ;
break ;
==PAGE:41==
4.1 Iteration 1
27
}
_EyeTrackerStateFail = true ;
}
SaveValuesFromValidValuesToDefinedConstants ( ) ;
}
The eye tracker will send cached data sets that the script will look through. The
code will run every single frame within Unity, therefore the validation of data is
bound by the frame rate of the game, and look for valid eye gaze data. If the eye
tracker successfully sends a cached frame set with valid data to Unity, this will
be saved. This is what is used to detect if a user has blinked. We can calculate
the time between each set of cached gaze data because we have the default time
between the cached frame sets from the eye tribe tracker in milliseconds, which
is calculated by:
DefaultCacheTimeFrameMillis/GazeFrameCache.Count
In the above Pseudo-code, if we ﬁnd valid values then we will check if the
series of cached data set we had to go through is either above or below the
limit. An average blink will take somewhere between 150 - 400 milliseconds
[oUBN]. The average time between the cached frame data is 500 milliseconds,
this is within the standard blinking time.
By multiplying with the average
time between cached gaze data with the amount of gaze data we have to go
through to ﬁnd valid data it is possible to tell if a blink has occurred. This
method leaves open a possibility of a blink being undetected if it lies within two
cached frame sets. We have yet to implement a method for this, but from user
testing this didn’t seem to happen a lot. This solution also only detects standard
inattentive blinks, long conscious blinks to adjust eye dryness will automatically
be discarded by the length requirement and forced rapid blinking would not be
of our interest so we have implemented the timer that secures a reasonable 0.3
seconds in between blinks.
4.1.4
Ghoul behavior
The ghoul is controlled by one single script which handles the possible states
the ghoul can be in. Several other scripts will handle its body functions, such
as seeing or making noise. By doing this we get a very lean script that is easy
to understand and correlate to a FSM. Expanding upon an AI designed like
this isn’t very complicated, if the ghoul should be acceptable to new input it is
==PAGE:42==
28
Implementation
easy to implement and create possible new states the ghoul can ﬁnd itself in.
Because of the design decisions, our actual code look very much like pseudo-
code, because of its simplicity. See ﬁgure A.1 in the appendix for visualisation
of the code.
Hunting is a boolean that is set, to ensure the ghoul does nothing for as long
as the player hasn’t attempted to open the door, at which point the boolean
value will be set to true. The value for PlayerInSight is controlled by the script
acting as the ghouls eyes. This script will only be active if the player is within
∼6.5 meters of the enemy. This is controlled by a collider within Unity acting
as a trigger. The script will then check if the player is within the ﬁeld of view
of the ghoul, such that you are able to sneak behind it. Should the player be
in sight of the ghoul, then it will chase the player. To chase the player the
ghoul utilises the NM mentioned earlier in the design of the ghoul, by setting
the ghouls destination to be the players position and the ghouls survey status is
reset to false. This means the ghoul will always survey the area that the player
has seen last regardless of what it was doing.
If the ghoul is currently surveying and can’ see the player then it continues
to do nothing else, if it has a location to move to and believes it should survey,
it will do so. It will only believe it should survey when it has reached a desired
destination, this is done by making sure the remaining distance to the destina-
tion is zero. Once a survey starts it will remove the target location and turn
around a few times looking in the area it’s positioned, to see if it can spot the
player. Should the ghoul not be able to spot the player then we reach the ﬁnal
case where it will choose a new destination and look for the player there. The
destination is chosen from a preset of destinations in an array so it is sure the
ghoul moves between diﬀerent rooms.
4.1.5
Trigger Events
Five diﬀerent trigger events have been made for the game.
• Chair: This event drags the chair backwards, while playing a dragging
sound and making the light ﬂicker in the room.
• Toilet: This event make the toilet ﬂush, while playing a ﬂush sound and
making the light ﬂicker in the room.
• Mirror: This event makes a head appear between the towels on the other
==PAGE:43==
4.1 Iteration 1
29
side of the mirror, and plays a scary voice sound saying "I see you." and
making the light ﬂicker in the room.
• Piano: This event makes a body pop up at the wall in front of the piano,
while playing three high sound to then begin to play a piano melody, and
making the light ﬂicker in the room.
• Television: This event turns on the TV making it "snow", while playing
a static sound, after four seconds a screamer appears on the screen, while
playing a loud screaming sound, and making the light ﬂicker in the room.
The triggers are very similar in form of implementation, the only diﬀerence
is what happens when the event is triggered.
The appearance of the key is
dependent of what events you have triggered. Events have been implemented
in such a way that some are ordinary and other are core events. Among the
diﬀerent events the TV, the piano and the mirror are those we have labelled as
core events and only after those have been triggered the key spawns, since they
are more impact full than the chair and the toilet.
To trigger a trigger event a script EyeRayCaster was implemented.
The
script sends out a raycast in the direction the player is are looking. By adding
a tag to the various objects it was possible to tell which objects or triggers the
player was looking at. If the object has a trigger tag, we check what GO is
getting hit by the ray and sets a bool to true inside a script that is placed on
all tagged trigger objects. All this are run in an Update(), so it is possible to
trace what the player is looking at, at any given time during the game.
CastRayInDirOfLook ( ) ;
i f
( Raycast . hit = ObjectWithTag )
ObjectTriggerEventStart ( ) ;
ObjectTriggerEventStart () {
i f
( TimeLookedAt > TimeToTrigger )
StartCoroutine ( ) ;
}
A script have been applied to the tagged GO’s controlling event which checks
if the bool is set to true by the EyeRayCaster script in the Update(). In order to
not just trigger the events at a glance, there has been set a time for how long a
player has to look at a GO to trigger it. The time to trigger an event diﬀers from
==PAGE:44==
30
Implementation
each event, but is between a half of a second and one second. When a player
have looked at the GO for enough time, a coroutine is started and a light eﬀect
from the LightController script is enabled. The coroutine consist of what the
event should do. Coroutine was used because of the integrated Unity function
WaitForSeconds(). This makes it possible for developers to control the event
and time the happenings within the event. Coroutines empowers the developer
to make what they want to happen at a speciﬁc time after the coroutine has
been started. A coroutine for an object looks like this ﬁgure 4.3:
Figure 4.3: Implementation of the piano coroutine.
4.2
Iteration 2
With the second iteration we wanted to explore the possibility of using pupil
dilation as another aspect of the game. This was to create a way to detect
whether or not the player became frightened when experiencing diﬀerent events
within the game or encountering the ghoul.
To get the pupil dilation it is best to make use of the EyeTribe API. By
using that we can get the pupil size from each eye. First it is checked if the
data from the eyes is Null, and if not the data is saved. Data from both eyes is
==PAGE:45==
4.2 Iteration 2
31
received, and therefore we add the pupil sizes together and divide by two to get
an average for both eyes.
With the acquiring and saving of the pupil size it was possible to start test
the game and get pupil dilation data.
After some test runs the events was
altered to trigger by a collider instead of eyesight, this was done to see if it
would make a diﬀerence in the players experience and perception of the game.
This is done by adding a child GO to all the objects that can trigger. We then
give the added child GO a collider and a script CollisionController. The collider
is the space in the 3D world, where the player have to be in order to trigger the
event. This is controlled by predeﬁned Unity Functions OnTriggerEnter() and
OnTriggerExit. We check if the collider collides with the collider of the player
by using its tag, if it is the player then the event is started.
Figure 4.4: The colliders to trigger the diﬀerent events around the house.
==PAGE:46==
32
Implementation
4.2.1
Data visualization
We save the data using the System.IO.File library to create .txt ﬁles and save
the data in them. The data for the pupil size is stored with the value followed
by a newline and so on. There are two kinds of data for the triggers. The ﬁrst
one saves a value at the given time an object is looked at. The other trigger
value we have, is for when the event has started. This is when you press the
door and trigger the events around the house. The last data we save is the
blinking detection. We save the value ten if you blink and ﬁve for a disconnect
and zero otherwise, this is shown in the bottom with black bars. These .txt ﬁles
are then initialized into python lists and then used with Matplotlib to visualize
the plots.
Figure 4.5: Clean playthrough from a test person using the collider trigger.
The x-axes is time in seconds and the y-axes is the size of the pupils in
millimeters times ten to scale. The blue graph is the pupil size. The highest
red bar is when players press to open the door. The additional high red bars
are at what time the trigger event has started. The red low bars shows if you’re
looking at the objects with trigger events around the house. This gives us an
idea of where players are in the house. The very small red bars are when you
look at ghoul, which is why they occur much more frequently than the others.
The black bars are when players blink.
In the playthrough ﬁgure 4.5 there are some outliers and in order to remove
==PAGE:47==
4.3 Iteration 3
33
these, a library Numpy in Python have used. This is done to get the median and
standard deviation of our data, in order to perform a median ﬁlter. The median
ﬁlter calculates the median and the standard deviation. Then it checks if the
absolute value of the data subtracted the median is higher than a constant times
the standard deviation. If the absolute value is higher, then it is an outlier and
it is replaced with the median. This results in a small areas of ﬂat lines, but they
are not suﬃcient enough to ruin the data samples. Below is the playthrough
of ﬁgure 4.5 where a median ﬁlter has been run ten times, to make the data as
clean as possible, see ﬁgure 4.6.
Figure 4.6: Same playthrough but applied with the median ﬁlter with constant
three.
4.3
Iteration 3
With the third iteration we wanted to test the pupil dilation in a more static
environment. This test was to get a more clear view of the reaction from the
pupils when we try to scare people. In order to make it static we made a test
that showed eighth diﬀerent colors in order: white, yellow, red, magenta, green,
cyan, blue, black. The purpose of the test was to see which color that inﬂuenced
the pupil dilation the least and therefore made it the most stable.
==PAGE:48==
34
Implementation
Figure 4.7: The red bars shows every time the color changed throughout the
color test.
Based on the color test the scare test would consist of a cyan background
color, because it was that color where the eyes rested the most out from the
tests performed. To scare the person we made a coroutine that would play a
high scream sound for half a second. The sound would come in intervals of
8-12 seconds after each other, for a total of three times. The randomness was
implemented to make sure the user would not know the speciﬁc timing of the
scream and therefore make the surprise element bigger.
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 5
Results
This chapter presents the results gained from the 3 main iterations.
5.1
EyeTribe Tracker Integration
Throughout the ﬁrst iteration we had great luck integrating interaction with
eyesight in our ﬁrst iteration. The accuracy of detecting what the user is looking
at is very precise is the conditions of the eye tracker is met. This made us able to
require a user to look at a speciﬁc object for a required amount of time without
diﬃculties, too trigger the implemented events. Furthermore the system is able
to detect when the player is not looking at the screen. Blinking is also working
fairly, but some issues have been there because of sources of error such as, head
movement causing disconnection from the tracker, light in the environment of
the positioned user and connection errors to the EyeTribe tracker.
5.2
Monster AI
The implementation of the ghoul has proven to be in some cases too hard and
others too easy. If the player whom found themselves playing the game was
familiar with ﬁrst person shooter games, then they would very quickly learn how
==PAGE:50==
36
Results
to move around in the game and avoid the ghoul. If the player was inexperienced
the ghoul would quickly catch the player and end the game. Which would result
with a small amount and in most cases useless data.
5.3
Pupil Dilation - Dynamic
In the second iteration we measured pupil dilation during the experience of the
game. In this section we will present the results of that. A median ﬁlter for
some of the results been applied, if that is the case it will be implied. Some
of the results have a lot of spikes or a too big of a spike after an event, so the
median ﬁlter doesn’t have an impact. We have therefore sorted the results, all
the results are in the appendix.
5.3.1
Events by eyesight
Figure 5.1: Playthrough of the game with the use of eyesight.
==PAGE:51==
5.3 Pupil Dilation - Dynamic
37
Figure 5.2: Playthrough of the game with the use of eyesight, median ﬁlter
has been applied.
Playing with events triggered by eyesight we saw that players would have
a much harder time completing the game, this was because players would not
necessarily look long enough on the required objects but quickly passing by
them or simply not know what to do.
5.3.2
Events by Colliders
==PAGE:52==
38
Results
Figure 5.3: Playthrough of the game with the use of colliders, median ﬁlter
has been applied.
Figure 5.4: Playthrough of the game with the use of colliders.
Players that tried our game where collision with the player was a requirement
for the event to happen would progress much faster through the game, because
they would trigger them all by simply walking everywhere in the house. This did
==PAGE:53==
5.3 Pupil Dilation - Dynamic
39
however sometimes lead to players leaving an area before events was completed
or started, which caused some confusion to the players because they did not
understand or see things happen, in contrast to players where we triggered by
eyesight. More people would understand and see more events when playing with
the eyesight trigger requirement than people playing with the collision trigger
requirement.
5.3.3
Trigger events
Below we have gathered snippets of diﬀerent playthroughs with the trigger event
from the TV, in order to get a better comparison of the reaction in the pupil
dilation. We have only chosen to do this with the TV, since this trigger was the
most often activated by the testers in a playthrough we didn’t have to discard.
==PAGE:54==
40
Results
Figure 5.5: Diﬀerent tests of individual testers with pupil reactions being
scared by our TV event. The ﬁrst red line indicates turning on the
TV and the other is when the screamer appears. They are named
from top left to bottom right: A, B, C, ..., H.
==PAGE:55==
5.3 Pupil Dilation - Dynamic
41
These snippets show us that the TV event of the game regardless of how
we trigger it will show either no real eﬀect and sometimes similar reoccurring
incidents. This is true for all the events.
5.3.4
Additional results and tests
Here are some additional results from our tests.
Figure 5.6: Testing the scare of the TV with sound only, green box indicates
the pupil size after the TV event starts.
==PAGE:56==
42
Results
Figure 5.7: Some results would cause an extreme amount of noise, even with
a ﬁlter these spikes are occurring too often to get a clear view.
Figure 5.8: Another color test.
The red lines shows every time the color
changed throughout the color test.
==PAGE:57==
5.4 Pupil Dilation - Static
43
5.4
Pupil Dilation - Static
In the third iteration we decided to test if we would be able to see a more
common response from the pupils in a static environment. Below is the results
of two scare tests. These are without a median ﬁlter.
Figure 5.9: Testing alteration in pupil size under random scares.
Figure 5.10: Testing alteration in pupil size under random scares.
==PAGE:58==
Chapter 6
Analysis
In this chapter we will go over the results of the data we have gathered, evaluate
and present the usability of these, for further study and to direct implementation
of eye tracking data in an AI.
6.1
Iteration 1
With the ﬁrst iteration we aimed to test the limits and precision of the eye
tracker. If the precision of the eye tracker is of good enough quality, then in
short, data analysis upon the elements the player is looking at within the screen
can be performed and an AI will be able to act on the results of these using
DMOUB.
6.1.1
EyeTribe Eye Tracker Integration
The eye tracker is fairly precise and provides data at a pace possible for game
integration, since it can run at up to 75 Hz, which means the system shouldn’t
experience any frame rate issues. These issues could take form of frame syn-
chronisation errors, hence causing the system to think the player is looking at
something else then what the player is actually watching.
==PAGE:59==
6.1 Iteration 1
45
The usability of the eye tracker does come with a series of precautions, which
will without a doubt aﬀect the value of the eye tracker. The eye tracker has
to be placed below your screen as seen on ﬁgure 3.1, this means the player of
any game using the eye tracker will have to sit still to allow the eye tracker to
properly track ones eye movement. The issue with the potential head movement
is a big issue, continuing disconnections to the eye tracker will cause problems
when attempting to estimate or evaluate the users intentions from what the
player is looking at. Requiring the users to sit still is not an option, because
even at testing phases in this project, where we asked our testers to sit still,
we experienced testers moving their head causing the eye tracker to disconnect.
An example of this can be seen in ﬁgure 5.4, the tester have moved their head
which caused the eye tracker to be unable to detect the pupil dilation and as
a result, are unable to see their pupil behavior prior to our game starting and
what they have seen or looked at.
As a result of this we believe that to make proper use of the eye tracking
technology within games, then it is a requirement that the person in front of
the tracker stays in the same position relative to the eye tracker at all times.
The EyeTribe does not support this, which is why we suggest creating a mount
or glasses, that can assure the tracker continuously tracks the eyes and head
movement. With this it could be possible to estimate where the user is looking
at the screen, even if the users turns or moves the head out of the original
calibration area. That said the eye tracking technology can most suddenly be
used for estimating or evaluate the users intentions from what the player is
looking at as long as it fulﬁlls the requirements.
Detection of blinks can only be used as a rough estimate because of the
limited access to how the trackers fail state to track the eyes. The way it is
calculated makes it so, should the user move their head on the border of eyes
that can be tracked or if the eye tracker keeps disconnecting, then the system
will believe the player is blinking all the time. An example of this can be seen
in ﬁgure 5.7, here according to the results the tester is deﬁnitely blinking an
unrealistic amount of times. Some physical or mental issues would be able to
cause rapid blinking, but we tested no person with such condition. A way to
improve the blinking detection would perhaps be to include it in the calibration
of the device, since every person blinks in diﬀerent ways and with diﬀerent
lengths.
==PAGE:60==
46
Analysis
6.1.2
Ghoul AI
With the implemented version of the ghoul a lot of people died before triggering
all the events or simply never managed to ﬁgure out what was going on before
the ghoul caught them. The performance of the player was mainly a measure
for how experienced the person testing the game was with ﬁrst person shooter
games, since people familiar with that type of gameplay would quickly adapt
to the games environment and limitations, and ﬁgure out how to complete the
game where players with less experience would need help in diﬀerent aspects of
the game, such as controls, objective or visual understanding.
The logical way to handle this issue would be to make several diﬃculties.
Easy diﬃculty would be a monster that walks randomly, and when it comes near
you, it slows down in speed, whereas a medium diﬃculty would be the monster
we have now. The hard diﬃculty would be the same as now, but maybe also
have the knowledge of when a trigger is activated and where. Follow sounds
from footsteps or light ﬂickering. Furthermore accessing the information graded
by the eye tracker to aﬀect diﬃculty and the behavior of the AI is a possibility.
6.1.3
Possible ways to integrate the eye tracker in the
ghoul
If the goal is to make the game easier, analysing the eye movement behavior
and attempt to help the player is a possibility. If the eyes start to move panicky
around the screen and the ghoul is rendered in our picture, then we could slow
the ghoul down and give the player more time to react and get away.
If the player is looking for a long time in one direction without using input
devices, then it would be possible to attempt to turn the player in a direction
that helps them progressing through the game.
Our game is very dark and
turning a player towards a light source could be of great help for a new player
that has lost sense of position and direction.
To make the game increasingly diﬃcult there exists a lot of opportunities.
As mentioned above the player might show signs of panic when getting to close
to the ghoul, in this case we could increase the speed of it in an eﬀort to stress
out the player even more. The second alteration to the ghoul could be a sense
of awareness.
The ghoul could be made aware of you when you’re aware of
it, meaning every time you see it, then it sees you. This would make it much
harder looking around for your objective in the game, because you would have
==PAGE:61==
6.2 Iteration 2
47
to notice the ghoul with the edge of your vision instead of direct visual contact.
Another way of extending the knowledge of the ghoul could be by giving it the
information of what the player is looking at. Should the player look at an object
such as the bed and then at the toilet, then the ghoul could try and predict which
way the player is going. The destination of the next patrol position for the ghoul
would then be a weighted decision based on these calculations. The ghoul could
with above example guess the player will go to the room with the piano.
Figure 6.1: Example of the potential implementation of ghoul attempting to
predict the players next move.
6.2
Iteration 2
After the possibility of knowing where the player looks with help from the eye
tracker, we wanted too see if the eye tracker could give us more information.
We therefore began too look at the pupil dilation of the players, too see what
reactions would come out of a horror game. What we got from adding pupil
dilation was whether how much it increases or decreases. This could be during
a time period or at speciﬁc events throughout that time period. We found out
that the values of the pupil dilation was relative to your distance from the eye
==PAGE:62==
48
Analysis
tracker. This means that from the results we have, we can only take the size
into account from that speciﬁc player, in that speciﬁc run. It is possible to get
an estimated distance by looking at the distance between your pupils, because
it would change accordingly if you move your head closer or further away from
the eye tracker. The reason its only estimated, is that you can still turn your
head and therefore manipulate the distance between your pupils.
If we look at all the playthroughs of the game, we can see that every result
is very diﬀerent. This is because every run is diﬀerent. Every player moves
and thinks diﬀerently, which makes what the player looks at dynamic and un-
predictable. What happens from the beginning of the game, is entirely up to
each individual that plays the game. The ghoul also has an impact to the run
because it moves randomly inside the house.
One thing that appears in almost all the results, is that the pupil dilation
increases when you ﬁrst try and open the door. This is because we start in a
very bright setting, as it was day, and when you press the door all light starts
to ﬂicker and you end in a very dark setting, as it was night. The iris in the
eye controls how much light that enters through the pupil of your eye. During
the day its very bright, so the amount of light needed is not very much which
makes your pupil size small. Then when it switches to night time, the amount
of light needed to see is suddenly higher, and that is why your pupils dilate to
absorb more light.
Figure 6.2: Start of game to the left. After you ﬁrst press on the door to the
right.
6.2.1
Data analysis with Python
As we can see on the blue graphs that shows the pupil dilation, there is a lot
of noise to be found. Some of the runs are very stable with a small amount of
==PAGE:63==
6.2 Iteration 2
49
notable outliers, whereas most of the results are showing spikes that makes it
impossible to see whats going on (see ﬁgure 5.7). The median ﬁlter only deals
with the worst outliers from a result without noise. If there is a slightly bit
of noise the median ﬁlter becomes useless, since it would detect all the spikes
as not outliers.
We tried to make a Hampel ﬁlter instead, but couldn’t get
the implementation to work. What makes the Hampel ﬁlter better is that it
detects outliers from the result by splitting it in samples. This way the median
diﬀers from what samples are looked at. Other possibilities could be to use
the Exponential Weighed Moving Average (EWMA) and Pearsons Coeﬃcient
(PeC). PeC gives you a percentage of how good, the value you got, is. In our
case it would measure if the value of the left eye, was approximately the same
as the right eye and therefore give you 80%+ which indicates that the value is
good. If you for some reason blinked with one of the eyes, so the value would
diﬀer a lot from each eye it would give you a low percentage. Combine this with
EWMA and our events, so if you see a big value change in both eyes and an
event have been triggered, it is probably a correct value. Where if you see a
big value change without an event e.g. noise, the EWMA would detect this as
noise because it wouldn’t make sense for such a big reaction without anything
special happening. The PeC and EWMA would run on the data real time, and
then further to replace outliers the Hampel ﬁlter would be applied just like the
median ﬁlter.
6.2.2
Eyesight and collider
The time to trigger an event by looking at an object was set by ourselves. The
value of the time changes depending on what event you’re going to trigger. Some
players were very thorough, looking around slowly and curious in order to ﬁne
the key. These players were perfect for the trigger by eyesight, because when
they looked at an object, the event would seem natural for them in the current
situation. Then there was players which were the exact opposite, where they
just rushed around in the house looking for the key, which only appeared when
you would have triggered the piano, TV and mirror. Sometimes we had to tell a
player where to look, to help them get further in the game, because they would
be stuck running in circles.
This is why we implemented the events to trigger by a collider. This would
still work most of the times with a thorough player. It also helped with the
more rushy players, in the case that the key would appear. The events however,
==PAGE:64==
50
Analysis
didn’t exactly go as planned most of the times, because a player would be able
to enter a collider with their backs to the event, and therefore not be able to
see the event and know what was going on behind them.
A solution to this could be a combined trigger, where you would have a
collider around an object and when you looked at the object from inside that
collider, the event would trigger instantly. That way we would get rid of the
time to trigger by eyesight, and that the player always would face the front
towards the event.
6.2.3
Trigger events
There are a lot of parameters to consider when you look at the pupil dilation,
which is why we have taken the eighth snippets from the TV event, because
we know what happens during the event. What happens after the ﬁrst red bar,
is that you have triggered the TV, which makes it turn on with a picture of
"snow" and a 3D static sound. The next red bar indicates a screamer, where a
picture of a screamer appears on the TV and a loud screaming sound plays.
Figure 6.3: The three stages of the TV event.
Looking at the snippets we can see that after every turn on of the TV
except C, the pupil dilation decreases which indicates a form of reaction. The
decreasing diﬀers in both size and length, which can depend on many aspects.
The fact that you can look where ever you want after the TV is triggered, is
probably the reason why we get so diﬀerent reactions from the pupil dilation.
A quick spike might indicate a form of shock, by the sound from the TV when
its turned on which is also shown in the ﬁgure 5.6. Although if you look at
the snippet E and G, the decreasing of the pupil size stays at that level, which
could be because the player is looking at the TV. When the TV is turned on
with the "snow" giving a very bright light, which already leads to smaller pupil
size. After the second red bar spikes might occur to go upwards or multiple
==PAGE:65==
6.3 Iteration 3
51
spikes, this is because the player would react on the "jumpscare" and look away
from the screen or move their head, which would lead to a dramatic changes in
your pupil dilation leaving it unpredictable. In B, C, D, F and G you can also
see some black lines which is a blink, where in B, C and D the ﬂat black bar
indicates no visual eyes from the eye tracker. The reaction at the second red
bar in snippet E is almost non existence. This may be that the pupil size is so
low, from looking at the white color from the TV, instead of around the dark
room, so when the big "jumpscare" comes it has no eﬀect on the test person.
The A snippet is what we expected to see more of, since our idea with the
trigger was to get a little shock when the TV turned on and then a big one when
the screamer came. The reason for these diﬀerent outcomes is the fact that it
happens in a dynamic environment. The pupil dilation is changing depending
on what color the player is looking at, is it a lamp, a dark corner, black wall
or a TV. A sound can also change the pupil dilation, and the same with a
"jumpscare". People think diﬀerent from others, they act diﬀerently, some even
scare easier than others, and because of this the results are not the same.
6.3
Iteration 3
To create more snippets that look like snippet A, a test to scare people in a
static environment was made. Dark colors like blue and black gave some noise,
and dark colors is what appears in the game where most of the results also
have a lot of noise. After every red bar which indicates a color swift, a little
spike appear. So a drastic change of color can also give a reaction in the pupil
dilation.
Together with the cyan background the test person would have to be scared
while looking at the background. In ﬁgure 5.9 and 5.10 a high red bar indicates
a scream, and the half red bar indicates the mean of the pupil size after looking
at the cyan color for 14 seconds.
In this test you can see a clear result at
every event. We believe we are observing the reaction called the Fight-or-Flight
response. It is a physiological reaction that occurs in the brain of a victim being
attacked, threaten or shocked. This response comes from the nervous system,
which sends a signal to the pupils and therefore dilates them.
According to scientiﬁc studies there is a relationship between the pupil size
and Locus Coeruleus (LC) activity.
LC is a part of the brain that involves
physiological responses such as stress or panic.
The way it response it that
==PAGE:66==
52
Analysis
it sends out Norepinephrine (NE) which works like a hormone. When NE is
realised by the sympathetic nervous system LC response to this and sends a
signal that correlates with the pupil dilation. [AJC05]
Figure 6.4: The Yerkes-Dodson Relationship between LC activity and perfor-
mance, source [AJC05].
Knowing this and looking at the 6.4 that shows the Yerkes-Dodson Relation-
ship, the AI would use PEM to try and keep the player in the "Task engaged"
state throughout the game, by knowing the players pupil dilation. Here you
can also see that if the player feels distracted, the pupil dilation would begin
to spike and have a lot of noise. This is what happened in the game because
of the dynamic environment. With enough data of the pupil size, the AI can
determine how the game should act, whether its the color of what the person is
looking at, or how to scare the person to get the best reactions.
In the two ﬁgures you can also see two kinds of reactions. In ﬁgure 5.9 we can
see a reappearance of the same reaction at each scream. The scream is played
randomly in an interval, but the tester doesn’t know the same scream comes
==PAGE:67==
6.3 Iteration 3
53
three times. This test person reacts with the same response all three times,
which indicates that the person is easily frighten. In ﬁgure 5.10 we see a more
adapting reaction to the scare. At the ﬁrst scream the person is responding with
"What is going on!?", whereas the second scream response is "That again?" and
then the third response is "Go away already..".
In a static environment it is possible to get common reactions in the pupil
dilation, which could be use full information for an AI. With these results you
could tell the AI to scare a person, then wait for the pupils to go back to normal,
and then try to scare the person again. If it is the same reaction, that kind of
scare will make the player think the game is exiting. If the reaction lowers a
little bit, the AI would know that the player needs some other kind of event, to
keep the player on the toes. It would end up working in a way, where the game
would act out from the level of the players adrenalin/attention level.
6.3.1
Level managing AI
Plug-ins allow gamers to use the eye tracker in a variety of diﬀerent ways on top
of their game, some game companies have even integrated it into the game itself.
As we have tested our self and seen among many implementations of the eye
tracker it is able to provide the gamer with a lot of diﬀerent information. All of
this information could also be given to an AI controlling a level or game a player
is currently playing to perform PEM. The AI would depending on the diﬃculty
settings and play style of the players adjust the game, such that players would
get the best possible game experience. The AI would know what items you have
seen in a game it would know how to hint you better, an example could be if
a game tells you to pick up the hammer. If you as a player haven’t seen the
hammer then this can be a tedious task if you have missed it and cant seem to
ﬁnd it. The AI would know you hadn’t seen it and could therefore give your
better hints that the player needs in the potential situation.
Being able to see when a person or at least his body gets scared/ready for
ﬁght proves that we can in a static environment detect whether or not the
player gets scared and we can therefore attempt to predict which scenarios will
have the highest impact on the player of our game. A level managing AI that
analyses you during gameplay and alters the game based on its analytics is
therefore theoretically possible. This AI could use any given tool to make the
experience of the game the scariest one for each individual player. Many games
have alternative routes, endings or ways to achieve the same goal. This way of
==PAGE:68==
54
Analysis
creating multiple events, for the same thing, would allow the AI to activate the
event that it believes to be the one the player will react to the strongest such
that the player gets the best experience possible.
==PAGE:69==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
Based on the ﬁndings in this thesis eye tracking can be utilised in many ways
to improve AI within games. The data acquired from where users are looking
can improve not only standard behavior in NPC’s but also help AI’s attempting
to perform player-experience modeling, Procedural-content generation or data
mining on user behavior.
The technology that has been made use of in our thesis, can detect based on
the pupil size when the player becomes frightened and gets into ﬁght or ﬂight
response mode in a static environment, and when the adrenaline eﬀecting the
size of the pupil disappears. Furthermore a decline in the intensity of adrenaline
released in the brain as the individual players become less scared, has been
detected together with a consistent release rate of adrenaline in test persons,
that stated they where equally scared through all the scares. The change in pupil
size seem to be the same, which means we can’t from our results determine the
factor of how frightened a player becomes from and event meant to frighten
them, but we are able to tell if the persons body triggers the ﬂight or ﬁght
response, meaning their body got frightened and at which degree this happens.
This allows us to tell when a potential scary eﬀect of a game becomes tedious
and perhaps annoying to player, because if it doesn’t trigger the ﬂight or ﬁght
response in the brain it would mean the player was expecting it or just doesn’t
==PAGE:70==
56
Conclusion
care for it anymore. With the EyeTribe eye tracker we were only able to do
this in the static environment and not in a dynamically changing scene within
a game.
We believe that with a more closed environment like the one the FOVE VR
headset provides, then there could be done more research into making use of the
pupil size in a dynamic environment. That is why, if the diﬃculties of measuring
the pupil size had been clear from the beginning of the project to us, then we
would have chosen to develop with a device like that. Our hypothesis is that
it would be possible to record players pupil dilation to a color, and compare
that value to whatever color they are looking at in a dynamic environment, to
attempt to estimate the persons current pupil state, e.g. normal, concentrated,
sleepy or scared. By doing that we would hope to process that actual data with
the recorded data and be able to segregate hills in the pupil size as in the static
environment.
7.1
Future possibilities
To further study analysing the player doing gameplay it would be beneﬁcial
to remove some of the sources of error in our study. This could be done by
attempting to use the FOVE VR headset and the technology this device oﬀers.
It measures your eyes in a closed environment, because of the closed VR headset
design, which means you can remove all speculations of outside light interference.
Another beneﬁt is the position, the tracker will be able to track your eyes unless
closed and it will always keep the same positions relative to the subjects eyes,
since its clamped to your head.
With these outside sources of errors in the
measured data, then it should be possible to make some big data analytics on
peoples pupil size on diﬀerent colors and get an estimated resting pupil size
state at any given color in a scene and therefore be able to detect if a person
have experienced a shock even in a dynamic environment.
==PAGE:71==
Appendix A
Appendix
Code Snippets
The whole implementation can be found in our GitHub Repository: https://
github.com/TheSayvior/Thesis-Eye-Tracking-and-AI-as-a-GameMechanic
==PAGE:72==
58
Appendix
Figure A.1: Our C# code for the ghoul behavior
==PAGE:73==
59
Figure A.2: Speciﬁcation of frame data received from the EyeTribe tracker,
source: from http://dev.theeyetribe.com/api/
==PAGE:74==
60
Appendix
Python implementation
This is the python code we have taken from iPython Notebook.
Figure A.3: This is the initialization of the data with plot.
==PAGE:75==
61
Figure A.4: This is the implementation of the median ﬁlter applied to the
data.
Figure A.5: This is the implementation to see the pupil size for each eye.
==PAGE:76==
62
Appendix
TestResults
Playing with colliders
These are all playthroughs of diﬀerent people playing our game where they
would activate the events with colliders instead of eye sight. We didn’t get all
of their names, which is why only some of them have the name connected to the
test result.
Figure A.6: Collider test
==PAGE:77==
63
Figure A.7: Collider test
Figure A.8: Collider test
==PAGE:78==
64
Appendix
Figure A.9: Collider test
Figure A.10: Collider test
==PAGE:79==
65
Figure A.11: Collider test
Figure A.12: Collider test
==PAGE:80==
66
Appendix
Figure A.13: Collider test
Figure A.14: Collider test
==PAGE:81==
67
Figure A.15: Test person: David
Figure A.16: Test person: Ellen
==PAGE:82==
68
Appendix
Figure A.17: Test person: Julie
Figure A.18: Test person: Line
==PAGE:83==
69
Figure A.19: Test person: Louise
Figure A.20: Test person: Mette
==PAGE:84==
70
Appendix
Figure A.21: Test person: Steen
Playing with eyesight
These are all playthroughs of diﬀerent people playing our game where they
would activate the events with eyesight instead of colliders.
Figure A.22: Test person: Anders
==PAGE:85==
71
Figure A.23: Test person: Ida
Figure A.24: Test person: Jeppe
==PAGE:86==
72
Appendix
Figure A.25: Test person: Marcus, ﬁrst try
Figure A.26: Test person: Marcus, second try
==PAGE:87==
73
Figure A.27: Test person: Oliver
Playing Scare test
These are playthroughs of people playing our static scare test.
Figure A.28: Test person: Jeppe
==PAGE:88==
74
Appendix
Figure A.29: Test person: Benjamin
Color testing
These are playthroughs where testers will look at diﬀerent colors so that we
could see where the pupil would rest the most.
Figure A.30: Test person: Anders
==PAGE:89==
75
Figure A.31: Test person: Rasmus, ﬁrst try
Figure A.32: Test person: Rasmus, second try
TV sound test
Playthrough testing sound experience of the TV event only.
==PAGE:90==
76
Appendix
Figure A.33: Test TV event with sound only
==PAGE:91==
Bibliography
[AJC05] Gary Aston-Jones1 and Jonathan D. Cohen2. An integrative theory
of locus coeruleus-norepinephrine function: Adaptive gain and optimal
performance. pages 404–450, 2005.
[Fis]
Big Fish. How the best video games are designed to make us feel.
[Ork]
JeﬀOrkin. Three states and a plan: The a.i. of f.e.a.r.
[oUBN] Harvard Database of Useful Biological Numbers. Average duration of
a single eye blink.
[Wik]
Wikipedia. Artiﬁcial intelligence (video games).
