==PAGE:1==
Combining Beamforming and
Blind Source Separation for
Improving Source Separation
Performance
Master Thesis
by:
Andras Palfi
s131160
Date of Submission:
June 5th, 2016
Supervisors:
Andreas Schuhmacher &
Karim Haddad
Brüel & Kjær A/S
Skodsborgvej 307
DK-2850 Nærum
Efren Fernandez Grande &
Finn T. Agerkvist
Technical University of Denmark
Acoustic Technology, DTU Elektro
Ørsteds Plads, Building 352
DK-2800 Kongens Lyngby
==PAGE:2==
b
==PAGE:3==
Gombining Beamforming and Blind Source Separation for improving source separation
performance
Report written by:
Andras palfi
Advisor(s);
Efren Fernandez Grande
Finn T. Agerkvist
Andreas schuhmacher
karim Haddad
DTU Elektro
Technical University of Denmark
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
studieadministration@elektro, dtu.dk
Prqect period: 
04.01.2016 - 05.06.2016
ECTS; 
30
Education: 
MSc.
Field; 
Engineering Acoustics
Class: 
Offentlig
Edition: 
1. edition
Remarks: 
This report is submitted as partialfulfillment of the requirements
for graduation in the above education at the Technical
University of Denmark.
Copyrights: 
@ Andras Palfi, 20'16
?{r í*{^-
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Beamforming is a well-established array-based method that is often used for
identifying sources of noise e.g.
in machines.
However, its dynamic range,
resolution and working frequency range is limited by the array geometry. In-
dependent Component Analysis (ICA) is a family of Blind Source Separation
(BSS) algorithms that can be used to separate sources based on their statistical
properties, by knowing only their mixtures. Recovering sources from convolu-
tive mixtures - such as acoustical sources mixed in a room - can be done by
utilizing ICA in the frequency domain, solving the problem for one frequency at
a time. This approach arises additional issues though, one of which is known as
the permutation ambiguity: as sources are returned in diﬀerent orders at each
frequency bin, a realignment of signals across bins is necessary. ICA can not
determine the number of sources present in a set of mixtures - which might also
vary across frequency - which is though important for good source separation
performance. Applying frequency-domain ICA for stationary sources arises even
more issues, as the frequency components are uncorrelated with each other, as
well as their temporal distribution poses a challenge to the separation algorithm.
The goal of this thesis was to combine beamforming and frequency-domain ICA
in a way so that they counteract each other’s limitations. The issues arised by
the permutation ambiguity, estimation of the number of sources and the station-
arity of signals have been addressed. Various methods have been investigated,
implemented and tested both by means of simulations and array measurements.
Keywords: Beamforming, Blind Source Separation, Independent Com-
ponent Analysis, frequency-domain ICA, permutation ambiguity, es-
timation of number of sources
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
List of Abbreviations
AIC
Akaike Information Criterion
BF
Beamforming
BSS
Blind Source Separation
DOA
Direction of Arrival
EVD
Eigenvalue Decomposition
HOS
Higher Order Statistics
ICA
Independent Component Analysis
ISTFT
Inverse Short-Time Fourier Transform
LI
Linear Instantaneous
MDL
Minimum Description Length
MSL
Maximum Sidelobe Level
NAH
Nearﬁeld Acoustic Holography
NSI
Noise Source Identiﬁcation
PC
Principal Component
PCA
Principal Component Analysis
pdf
Probability Distribution Function
rpm
Rotations Per Minute
SIR
Signal-to-Interference Ratio
STFT
Short-Time Fourier Transform
SVD
Singular Value Decomposition
TDOA
Time Diﬀerence of Arrival
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
iii
List of Abbreviations
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Main Objectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Prior Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Beamforming
5
2.1
Delay-and-Sum Beamforming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Performance measures, limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.1
Resolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.2
Sidelobe levels
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.3
Frequency limits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Blind Source Separation
13
3.1
ICA for linear instantaneous mixtures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.1.1
General problem formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.1.2
Ambiguities inherent to the ICA solution
. . . . . . . . .
14
3.1.3
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1.4
Algorithms for solving ICA for LI mixtures . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
ICA for convolutive mixtures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2.1
Steps for solving ICA in the frequency domain
. . . . . .
24
3.2.2
Methods for solving the permutation ambiguity . . . . . .
26
3.3
Evaluating separation performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.4
Estimating the number of components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.4.1
Estimation by PCA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.4.2
ICA-by-Blocks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.4.3
Detecting reﬂected components after ICA . . . . . . . . .
44
3.4.4
Information Theroetic Criteria
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.4.5
Estimation by beamforming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
3.5
Eﬀect of signal stationarity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
3.5.1
Eﬀect on separation performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
3.5.2
Eﬀect on permutation realignment . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4
Implementation
55
4.1
Beamforming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.2
Estimation of Number of Sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.2.1
PCA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.2.2
ICA-by-Blocks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
4.2.3
Estimation by Beamforming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
4.3
STFT, ISTFT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
4.4
JADE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
4.5
Mapping back to the microphone space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
4.6
Permutation realignment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
4.7
Evaluation of separation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
5
Simulations
67
5.1
Simulation setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
5.2
Source signals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
5.2.1
Car signals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
5.2.2
Speech signals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
5.2.3
Generated signals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
5.3
Simulation results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
5.3.1
Estimation of number of components . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
5.3.2
Separation performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
6
Measurements
83
6.1
Measurement setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
6.2
Measurement results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
6.2.1
Estimation of number of components . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
6.2.2
Separation Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
7
Conclusion
95
7.1
Summary of work carried out . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
7.2
Summary of results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
7.3
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
A Matlab Code
99
A.1 ﬁndmaxima.m . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
A.2 Calculating AIC and MDL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
A.3 calculateSIR.m . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
A.4 unmix_recordings.m . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
A.5 Choosing frequencies to be solved by Envelope Continuity . . . . 104
A.6 generate_mic_signals.m . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
B Additional results
107
Bibliography
111
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
The functionality of machinery, including motor vehicles is often monitored by
measuring the sound they emit, as undesired or faulty operation can in many
cases be diagnosed and the source of the problem pinpointed from the noise the
machine generates.
Beamforming is a technique often used in Noise Source Identiﬁcation (NSI). The
sound ﬁeld is sampled by an array of microphones, and by measuring the time
delays it takes for the arriving sound to reach each microphone, a noise-map
can be generated, from which the locations of sources are inferred. However,
the method has a limited dynamic range and is restricted to work within a
limited frequency range. These limitations can be diminished by optimizing the
array geometry, but can never be fully eliminated.
Blind Source Separation (BSS) is a collection of signal processing methods that
aim at separating sources solely from their mixtures. The term "blind" means
that the separation is performed with no prior knowledge of either the sources
or the mixing environment, and relies on the single assumption of the original
sources being statistically independent. A way of solving BSS is by performing
Independent Component Analysis (ICA) on a set of mixtures of the sources.
Basic ICA algorithms solve the separation for cases when the mixing is just a
simple linear combination of the sources. However, in a real acoustical environ-
ment - such as a room - the mixtures will be convolutive, as each source will be
convolved with the room’s impulse response between the source and the respec-
tive sensors. One way of solving convolutive ICA with the tools developed for
linear ICA is to transform the problem formulation to the time-frequency plane
by means of Short-Time Fourier Transformation (STFT). This way, the problem
becomes linear at each frequency line and can be solved for one frequency at a
time. However, new issues arise with this approach, as there will be an inherent
ambiguity of the scaling and permutation of separated signals at each frequency
bin. Since the order and scaling of signals is diﬀerent at each bin, these issues
have to be addressed before returning to the time domain.
As beamforming and ICA essentially aim to solve the same task - separating
sources from a set of mixtures - the idea naturally arises, whether they can
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
be combined for improved separation performance and for reduced limitations.
The goal is to circumvent the frequency and dynamic range limitations of beam-
forming by separating the sources with ICA prior to mapping them - while at
the same time, using beamforming as a helping tool in ICA for solving the
permutation realignment.
In the majority of literature concerning acoustical BSS applications, the number
of sources is known in advance. However, even if one knows the number of actual
sources in the mixtures, the number of dominant components can change across
frequency, therefore a method for automatic estimation is needed for frequency-
domain ICA.
The combined separation method is intended to be used for NSI applications in
the automotive industry. Therefore, the main focus of this thesis was directed
towards separating noise signals emitted by cars, such as the sound of an en-
gine, or noise coming from the tyres touching the road. As these signals are
often stationary, it is important to know how signal stationarity inﬂuences the
performance of the method. It turns out that additional, serious issues arise
when applying the method for stationary signals.
1.1
Main Objectives
In this thesis, methods for combining beamforming and frequency-domain ICA
have been examined, implemented and tested by simulations and measurements
with a microphone array. The main focus of the work was directed towards:
• Diﬀerent ways of solving the permutation ambiguity.
• Various approaches of estimating the number of components
• Eﬀects of signal stationarity on separation performance.
A dedicated section in this report is given to each of the above three focus areas.
1.2
Prior Work
The present thesis is a continuation of a project conducted by Mathias Immanuel
Nielsen in 2013 [1], in which an idea for approaching the permutation problem
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Prior Work
3
by means of beamforming was suggested. This method has been turned into
a working solution and has been implemented in this project.
Parts of the
MATLAB implementation of the BSS part from [1] was available, some of which
have been modiﬁed and used in this thesis.
An MSc thesis considering pure BSS for convolutive mixtures has been written
by Rémi Decorsière in 2009 [2]. A MATLAB implementation of the frequency-
wise ICA method was available from his work, parts of which have been reused
in this project with the necessary modiﬁcations and restructuring of the code.
==PAGE:14==
4
Introduction
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Beamforming
Beamforming is an established array-based measurement technique for Noise
Source Identiﬁcaton (NSI), which relies on estimating the contributions from
incident sound waves from a set of directions in front of a microphone array.
The localization of sources is achieved by applying appropriate time delays to
the recorded signals from each microphone before a subsequent summation,
thereby "steering" the sensitivity of the array towards a chosen direction. By
scanning through several directions and estimating the amplitude of incoming
waves from each incident angle, it is possible to generate a "noise-map", from
which the locations of sources can be inferred.
There are several existing algorithms for performing beamforming calculations
from microphone array recordings (for an evaluation and comparison of a few,
see [4]). The most fundamental of them is the delay-and-sum algorithm, which
is the technique that got implemented in this thesis.
The following section
introduces this method in detail.
2.1
Delay-and-Sum Beamforming
The concept of the delay-and-sum algorithm is based on the fact that sound
waves originating from diﬀerent angles will arrive at diﬀerent time instants at
each microphone in the array. By delaying the recorded signals with carefully
chosen values prior to a subsequent summation, it is possible to direct the sen-
sitivity of the array in a given direction. If the delays are chosen properly, only
the sound arriving from one speciﬁc direction will add up coherently in the re-
sulting sum, and therefore have a larger amplitude - while sound from any other
direction will partially cancel out due to phase misalignments. The summed
signal at the output of the beamformer can be written as
b(κ, t) = 1
M
M
X
m=1
wmpm(t −∆m(κ)),
(2.1)
==PAGE:16==
6
Beamforming
where M is the number of microphones in the array, pm are the individual
pressure signals recorded by the m’th microphone, wm are individual weightings
or so called shading coeﬃtients applied to each signal individually, and ∆m(κ)
are the delays applied to the recordings.
In eq.
2.1, κ represents a vector
pointing towards the direction of interest. It is common practice to normalise
the sum by the number of microphones in the array, hence the
1
M factor in 2.1.
The core of the delay-and-sum method lies in ﬁnding the appropriate delays in
order to enhance the response in a speciﬁed direction of interest 1. Assuming
that the incident waves are plane waves, the delays can be calculated from κ
(the vector pointing in the direction of interest) by
∆m(κ) = κ · rm
c
,
(2.2)
where rm is the position of the m’th microphone and c is the speed of sound.
One can also assume the incoming sound ﬁeld to originate from monopole
sources radiating spherical waves, located at ﬁnite distances in front of the array
(assuming plane waves is equivalent to saying that the sources are inﬁnitely far
away). In this case, the delays are given by
∆m(r) = |r| −|r −rm|
c
,
(2.3)
where r is the position of the point source that the array focuses on. Thus,
focusing the array at a ﬁnite distance is simply done by exchanging the delay
term in eq. 2.1 to the expression above. Figure 2.1 illustrates the geometrical
considerations taken for deriving the formulas for the delay values for the plane
wave and the spherical wave assumptions.
Beamforming can also be done in the frequency domain, in which case the
expression equivalent to eq. 2.1 is
B(r, ω) = 1
M
M
X
m=1
wmPm(ω)e−jω∆m(r),
(2.4)
where Pm(ω) are the Fourier transforms of the microphone signals pm. Ob-
taining the sum in the frequeny domain makes it straightforward to perform
beamforming for a single frequency line or a chosen frequency range, by plot-
ting only the frequencies of interest. This is illustrated in Figure 2.2:
1One can draw an analogy between a beamformer and a FIR ﬁlter, as these two aim at
accomplishing similar goals: a beamformer provides a linear combination of delayed spatial
samples of the sound ﬁeld with appropriately chosen coeﬃtients so as to enhance signals arriv-
ing from a speciﬁc direction. Compare this to a FIR ﬁlter, which combines temporal samples
of a signal with appropriately chosen coeﬃtients in order to enhance a chosen frequency range.
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Delay-and-Sum Beamforming
7
(a)
Beamforming
with
plane
incident
waves arriving from the far-ﬁeld
(b) Beamforming with spherical incident
waves generated in the near-ﬁeld.
Figure 2.1: Illustration of the geometrical considerations used to derive equations 2.2
and 2.3.
(a) fc = 452 Hz.
(b) fc = 850 Hz
(c) fc = 1335 Hz
Figure 2.2: Beamforming on a set of recordings only at chosen frequency ranges.
The width of the plotted frequency bands is 11 Hz, with center frequencies as indicated.
Colors represent dB values normalised relative to the maximum value in the image.
One drawback of performing beamforming in the time domain is that the cal-
culated delays will be rounded to the nearest integer multiple of the sampling
interval, as the smallest amount that the signals can be delayed with is 1/fs2.
This will show up as a quantization error in the resulting sum, the amount of
which will be inversely proportional to the sampling frequency. This quanti-
zaition noise doesn’t appear in the result, when performing beamforming in the
frequency domain, as the applied phase shift can be chosen arbitrarily, and no
rounding is involved. Figure 2.3 illustrates the diﬀerence between time- and
frequency domain beamforming on the same set of recordings. Notice how the
image resulting from the time-domain approach is more "grainy" due to the
2Fractional delays have not been implemented in this thesis.
==PAGE:18==
8
Beamforming
added quantization noise.
(a) Beamforming performed in the
time domain.
(b) Beamforming performed in the
frequency domain.
Figure 2.3: Diﬀerence in the result of beamforming when performed in the time- or
the frequency domain (when fractional delaying of time signals is not implemented).
Colors represent dB values normalised relative to the maximum value in the image.
2.2
Performance measures, limitations
There are certain performance limitations inherent to the beamforming method.
It is important to be aware of these restrictions, as obtained results might not be
valid outside these limits. These limitations and certain performance measures
will be introduced in the following section.
2.2.1
Resolution
The resolution of a beamformer is deﬁned as the smallest distance between
closely located sound sources, which can still be distinguished. According to [3],
the resolution R(θ) is given by
R(θ) =
a
cos3 θ
z
Dλ,
(2.5)
where θ is the angle of incidence relative to the on-axis angle, a = 1.22 is
correction factor for arrays with a circular aperture, z is the distance from the
array to the focus plane in the z-direction, D is the diameter of the array and
λ is the wavelength of the incident wave. Notice that the resolution gets larger
(worse) with increasing wavelength and increasing source to array distance, but
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Performance measures, limitations
9
becomes better with increasing array size. The ratio between oﬀ-axis and on-
axis (θ = 0◦) resolution is equal to
R(θ)
R(0) =
1
cos3 θ,
(2.6)
which is a factor that grows above 1.5 for incidence angles larger than ±30◦,
meaning that above this angle, the resolution is 50% worse than for on-axis inci-
dence. Therefore, in practical applications, the opening angle of a beamformer
is usually restricted to ±30◦. With this in mind, the width of the measurement
surface L that can be covered by a microphone array at a distance z is given by
L = 2 tan(30◦)z ≈1.15z.
(2.7)
2.2.2
Sidelobe levels
An ideal directivity of a beamformer would be a dirac-delta, meaning that if
sound arrives from a single direction only, then maximal contribution is ob-
served from that direction, and zero everywhere else. However, in reality, such
ideal directivity cannot be achieved. Beamforming can be looked upon as a dis-
crete sampling of the sound ﬁeld (microphones are located at discrete locations
and not continuously distributed in space) with a ﬁnite spatial window applied
(as the size of the array is ﬁnite), of which a spatial DFT is taken. From this, it
is apparent that the directivity pattern will not be perfect, and "leakage" will
appear in the form of extraneous peaks in the beamforming image, where no
actual source is present3. These peaks are called ghost images or sidelobes, and
their size relative to the main lobe is of crucial importance to good performance.
The location and the size of the sidelobes (often called the Array Pattern) will
depend on the shading coeﬃtients wm (see Eq. 2.1), and on the geometry of
the array. Using a smooth shading window (such as a Hamming-window) will
result in reduced sidelobe levels, but a broadened mainlobe, thereby choosing
the window is always a tradeoﬀbetween resolution and dynamic range. For the
rest of this thesis we will assume uniform shading for all beamforming calcula-
tions, in which case, the array pattern will solely depend on the array geometry.
It is possible to design array geometries that substantially suppress sidelobes,
but this is not a straightforward task [3]. Figure 2.4 shows 3 diﬀerent array
geometries and the corresponding sidelobe structures. The size and density of
the arrays, number of microphones and the sampled sound ﬁeld was kept the
same in the three simulations.
3Compare this with what happens when taking the temporal DFT of a windowed discrete
time signal: "leakage" to frequency components will appear, where there is no actual energy.
==PAGE:20==
10
Beamforming
(a) Uniform
(b) Random
(c) 60-channel "Pizza"
Figure 2.4: Three diﬀerent array geometries and corresponding sidelobe structures.
In the simulation, a point source was placed at a distance of 3m in front of the array,
emitting a 2000 Hz pure tone. The color axis was set to a 30 dB dynamic range to
exaggerate the visibility of the patterns.
A quantity called the Maximum Sidelobe Level (MSL) is one of the main perfor-
mance descriptors of the microphone array, as it is not possible to unambiguously
recover sources that are lower in level than the strongest sidelobe. Therefore,
this will determine the usable dynamic range of the array as a function of fre-
quency. The MSL is calculated from the sidelobe structure and is usually done
by numerical methods for irregular arrays. For a uniform geometry, a sharp
cutoﬀis seen in the MSL curve already at a relatively low frequency, while a
good array design is characterized by a gradually increasing MSL curve [3].
2.2.2.1
Grating lobes
A special case of sidelobes is called grating lobes. These are sidelobes that have
the same level as the main lobe and are characteristic of uniform array geome-
tries. Their appearance is due to a phenomenon called spatial aliasing, which
is an eﬀect that is analogous to temporal aliasing. When temporally sampling
signals, the Nyquist-theorem states that frequencies higher than fs/2 cannot
be distinctly reconstructed (fs being the temporal sampling frequency), analo-
gously, when spatially sampling the sound ﬁeld with a distance d between the
microphones, reconstructing plane waves with a wavelength shorter than twice
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Performance measures, limitations
11
the microphone spacing will not be possible. Thereby, the highest frequency
that can be reconstructed with a uniform array is
fmax = c
2d,
(2.8)
where c is the speed of sound in air. This imposes an upper frequency limit
on beamforming with uniform arrays. However, the disturbing eﬀect of grating
lobes can be diminished by using irregular array geometries [3]. The eﬀect of
spatial undersampling is illustrated in 2.5.
Figure 2.5: Spatial aliasing. The only real source in the simulation was the one in
the bottom right corner, emitting a 4500 Hz sine wave. The rest of the apparent sources
are grating lobes.
2.2.3
Frequency limits
Beamforming has both an upper and a lower frequency limitation due to the
insuﬃcient resolution at low frequencies and the appearance of sidelobes at high
frequencies, as described earlier. At low frequencies, phase diﬀerences between
the recorded signals by the individual microphones - which the method relies
on - will be too small, thus the beamformer will lose its abiliy to locate sources.
Depending on the resolution requirement of a particular measurement, diﬀerent
lower frequency limits can be formulated. A general rule of thumb ([3]) is that
the wavelength of the recorded signal should be shorter than the array width.
As for the upper frequency limit, we have seen that for uniform array geometries,
a very strict limit is imposed by the eﬀect of spatial undersampling, given by
==PAGE:22==
12
Beamforming
eq. 2.8. However, for irregular arrays, there is no such hard limit. Depending
on the requirements, a threshold can be set on the desired dynamic range, from
which an upper frequency limit can be inferred from the array’s MSL curve. In
general, the more gradual the increase of the MSL curve of an array, the higher
the upper frequency limit can be set.
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 3
Blind Source Separation
Blind Source Separation (BSS) is a wide ﬁeld of signal processing, aiming at re-
covering unknown source signals solely from their mixtures. There exist a wide
variety of algorithms that can perform BSS, and applications range from acous-
tics through chemistry to biomedical problems. A popular and well-established
method for solving BSS problems is the Independent Component Analysis (ICA)
- the method chosen for this thesis -, which aims at recovering N unknown source
signals from M mixtures of those. This chapter will introduce the ICA method,
along with the hardships involved in using ICA in the frequency-domain for
separating source signals from convolutive mixtures.
3.1
ICA for linear instantaneous mixtures
The easiest way to introduce the ICA problem is through the simplest case,
namely when the mixtures of signals are linear instantaneous (LI). "Instanta-
neous" means that the mixtures of signals at any time instant will be a function
of the source signals at the very same time instant only, while "linear" means
that the mixtures are constructed as linear combinations of the sources.
3.1.1
General problem formulation
Consider a vector of N unknown source signals {si(t)}, 1 ≤i ≤N, which are
combined to produce a vector of M observations (mixtures) {xj(t)}, 1 ≤j ≤M,
where each xj is constructed as
xj(t) =
N
X
i=1
ajisi(t),
(3.1)
==PAGE:24==
14
Blind Source Separation
where each aji is a time-invariant mixing coeﬃtient. It is practical to formulate
the above expression in matrix form as
x = As,
(3.2)
where x and s are the vector of mixtures and sources respectively as described
above, and A is an M × N matrix containing the aji mixing coeﬃtients, which
we call the mixing matrix.
In the general case, N ̸= M, which means that
the number of sources and the number of observations are not necessarily the
same. If N > M (more sources than mixtures), then the problem is said to be
underdetermined and then the problem becomes substantially more diﬃcult [5].
The opposite case, when N < M is called an overdetermined problem, and this
is the case which will be considered for the rest of this thesis - the reason being
that using an array consisting of a large number of microphones for obtaining
the mixtures (as was done in this thesis) would ensure having more observations
than sources for most practical cases.
The goal of the ICA separation process is to estimate an N × M matrix W,
which if multiplied by the vector of mixtures x, yields a vector y that will be
an estimate of the vector of original sources s:
y = Wx, with y ≈s.
(3.3)
We call W the unmixing matrix. The estimation is done "blindly", that is,
without knowing either A or s in eq.
3.2.
The separation is based on the
single assumption that the source signals are statistically independent. There
are existing algorithms that perform the estimation of the matrix W based on
the sole assumption of independence - two of which will be presented later in
section 3.1.4.
3.1.2
Ambiguities inherent to the ICA solution
Unfortunately, the original vector s cannot be reconstructed unambiguously by
the estimation process, as there are certain ambiguities inherent to the ICA
problem. Since both A and s are unknown in eq. 3.2, multiplying the members
of s by arbitrary constants and then dividing the corresponding columns of A
by the same constants would also be a solution to the ICA problem. This means
that the original amplitudes (variances) of the sources can not be determined
by the estimation, and is referred to as the scaling ambiguity. Likewise, if we
permute the order of elements in s and reorder the columns of A with the
inverse of the same permutation, the result will still be a solution. Therefore,
the original order of the sources can not be determined.
This is referred to
==PAGE:25==
3.1 ICA for linear instantaneous mixtures
15
as the permutation ambiguity.
Mathematically, the scaling and permutation
ambiguities can be formulated as
x = As = (AΛΠ)(Π−1Λ−1s),
(3.4)
where Λ is a matrix containing arbitrary constants in the diagonal and zeros
elsewhere, while Π is a identity matrix with permuted rows (also called a per-
mutation matrix). As both the mixing matrix and the vector of sources are
unknown, permuting and scaling both of them will just lead to another un-
known matrix and an unknown source vector - which are the terms in brackets
in eq. 3.4. These ambiguities are illustrated in ﬁgure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Ambiguities inherent to the ICA process - the original scaling and per-
mutation of the sources cannot be determined. The ﬁgure depicts an example of what
an ICA solution might look like after the unmixing process.
For an LI problem, these ambiguities do not seem to cause a serious headache
- however, when solving ICA for convolutive mixtures in the frequency domain,
these ambiguities introduce severe challenges and will deﬁnitely need to be ad-
dressed. Sections 3.2.1 and 3.2.2 deal with the scaling and permutation ambi-
guities in more detail.
==PAGE:26==
16
Blind Source Separation
3.1.3
Limitations
Unlike beamforming, the operation of ICA is not restricted to a frequency range
(see section 2.2.3 for frequency limitations of beamforming), nevertheless, ICA
has another limitation that has to be taken into account. This limitation has
to do with the allowed statistical distributions of the original source signals.
As mentioned earlier, the ICA separation is done without knowing either the
mixing matrix or the vector of sources, and is solely based on the assumption of
statistical independence. The deﬁnition of a set of n signals being statistically
independent is that their joint probability distribution function (pdf) equals the
product of their marginal pdf’s:
p(x1, x2, ..., xn) = p(x1)p(x2)...p(xn).
(3.5)
However, using this deﬁnition in practice is problematic, therefore ICA formu-
lates statistical independence through the Central Limit Theorem instead. This
theorem states that the distribution of a sum of independent random variables
will tend towards a gaussian distribution as the number of terms in the sum in-
creases, regardless of the initial distributions of the variables. From this follows,
that even when summing two independent variables, the distribution of the re-
sulting sum will be closer to a gaussian distribution than that of the original
variables. The word "gaussianity" is often used in the literature to describe how
well a particular distribution resembles a gaussian distribution.
There are several quantiﬁcations of gaussianity, one of which is a higher order
statistics (HOS) measure called kurtosis. The kurtosis is a descriptor of a dis-
tribution’s shape, measuring how heavy the "tails" of the distribution function
are (that is, a measure of the amount of extreme outliers that the distribution
produces). It is deﬁned as the fourth moment about the mean normalized by
the fourth power of the standard deviation (also called the fourth standardized
moment):
kurt(X) = µ4
σ4 =
E[(X −µ)4]
(E[(X −µ)2])2 .
(3.6)
For ﬁnite signals of length L, the kurtosis is estimated by the sample kurtosis:
kurtsample(x) =
1
L
PL
i=1(xi −x)4
( 1
L
PL
i=1(xi −x)2)2 ,
(3.7)
where xi refers to the i’th sample of the signal x and x is the sample mean.
As the kurtosis is the measure of outliers in a distribution, it is obviously very
sensitive to signal length, as the correct amount of outliers might not be observed
if the sample length is too short.
==PAGE:27==
3.1 ICA for linear instantaneous mixtures
17
The kurtosis of a gaussian distribution with unit variance is 3. Distributions with
a kurtosis less than 3 are called platykurtic and are characterized by a "ﬂatter"
shape (less outliers than for a gaussian distribution), while distributions with
a kurtosis higher than 3 are called leptokurtic and typically have a "peaky"
shape, meaning that a larger fraction of the samples are centered around the
mean (more outliers than for a gaussian distribution).
A consequence of deﬁning statistical independence through the Central Limit
Theorem is that ICA will not be able to recover source signals that initially
have gaussian distributions. This is because in reality, the ICA algorithm solves
the separation problem by looking for "less gaussian" source components in the
mixtures than the mixtures are themselves - but if the signals have had gaussian
distributions to begin with, this will not be possible. As a consequence, at most
one gaussian distributed source signal is allowed in the mixtures, the rest of
them have to be non-gaussian. The reason why one gaussian source is allowed
is that the ICA algorithm will sequentially recover all the non-gaussian sources
ﬁrst, while ﬁnding the one remaining gaussian source at the last step.
It is concluded that the "prohibition" of gaussian source signals is a limitation
of ICA. Later in section 3.5, it will be seen why this imposes a major issue.
3.1.4
Algorithms for solving ICA for LI mixtures
There are numerous existing algorithms that perform the ICA separation de-
scribed in section 3.1.1 (for a very extensive collection of diﬀerent ICA algo-
rithms, see [6]). In this thesis, two algorithms were investigated in depth: the
FastICA algorithm [7] and the JADE algorithm [8], [9]. Both of these algorithms
start out by performing certain preprocessing steps on the observed mixture sig-
nals, which are introduced in the following.
Preprocessing steps
In order to perform the ICA separation, it is necessary to assume that the mix-
ture signals have zero mean and unit variance [7]. Since the mixtures are pure
recordings of the observed sound ﬁeld, these assumptions are seldom fulﬁlled
to begin with. However, applying some simple preprocessing steps to the pure
mixtures can ensure that these assumptions are fulﬁlled - moreover, these steps
are linear operations, therefore they will not aﬀect the result of the separation.
Centering
It is easy to ensure that the mixtures have zero mean: one simply estimates the
==PAGE:28==
18
Blind Source Separation
mean of the recordings by their sample mean and subtracts it from the vector
of mixtures. This results in a new vector of centered data xm = x−E[x], which
will be used for the subsequent steps (note that the E[ ] operator refers to the
sample mean here). After the estimation process, the mean of the data can be
restored by y = ym + W · E[x].
Whitening
ICA works under the assumption that the vector of observed mixtures is white.
The expression "white" means that the elements in vector x are uncorrelated,
and have unit variance. Making the recordings uncorrelated is actually the ﬁrst
step in ﬁnding the independent components, as uncorrelatedness is a necessary
but not suﬃcient criterion for statistical independence. Forcing unit variance on
the recordings is a "trick" that makes the rest of the separation process easier:
due to the scaling ambiguity, the original variances of the sources can not be
recovered anyway, therefore one might as well just scale them arbitrarily during
the process. It turns out that choosing this additional scaling in such a way
that the recordings have unit variance will ensure that the mixing matrix is
an orthogonal matrix, which has substantially fewer degrees of freedom than a
generic matrix. Forcing unit variance to the mixtures thus reduces the search
space of the algorithm signiﬁcantly and increases eﬃciency [7]. The whiteness
of x is achieved if its covariance matrix is the identity matrix:
Cov(x) = E[xxH] = I
(3.8)
where H denotes a Hermetian transpose. The covariance matrix having zeros
outside the diagonal means that there is no cross-correlation between any pair
of elements in the vector, and the diagonal containing only 1’s means that the
variance of each recording is unity. Note again that the operator E[ ] in this
context refers to the sample mean, as in a practical application the covariance
matrix is approximated by the sample covariance.
The purpose of the whitening step is to ﬁnd a matrix Q so that xw = Qx and
Cov(xw) = I. This is typically done by eigenvalue-decomposition (EVD) of the
covariance matrix of x, which results in a matrix E containing the eigenvectors of
Cov(x) and a matrix D with the corresponding eigenvalues as Cov(x) = EDEH.
It can be shown 1 that from E and D, the whitening matrix Q is obtained as
Q = D−1/2EH.
(3.9)
Eq. 3.3 can also be written as
y = VQx, with VQ = W,
(3.10)
therefore, the last thing left to do is to estimate the matrix V.
1See proof in [10].
==PAGE:29==
3.1 ICA for linear instantaneous mixtures
19
Dimensionality reduction
Normally, ICA returns as many independent components as there are recordings
- that is, by default it estimates a square unmixing matrix - but this is not always
desired. In fact, for an underdetermined case, it is of crucial importance that
the algorithm is forced to return the right number of estimated sources, which
in certain cases is much fewer than the number of mixtures (this topic will be
examined in further detail in section 3.4). Reducing the number of components
that the algorithm returns can be done in two ways. One of them is to discard
some of the recordings so that the remaining number of mixtures matches the
desired number of returned components. In this case, the unmixing matrix will
be a square matrix, and nothing has to be changed in the algorithm or the
data - however, it is not straightforward to decide which subset of recordings to
discard for optimal performance.
The other way to reduce dimensionality is through performing Principal Com-
ponent Analysis (PCA) on the raw observations. PCA is a statistical method
that decomposes a dataset into a combination of a set of uncorrelated compo-
nents called Principal Components (PC). This is done by sequentially projecting
the data into orthogonal directions of maximal variance, and then restricting
any further search to the remaining orthogonal directions - that is, extract-
ing the maximum remaining variance from the data with each step. The PC’s
are orthogonal vectors pointing in the directions of these "maximal variances",
which in this context is assumed to be equivalent to "directions of maximal
importance".
The original dataset can be reassembled from these PC’s by recombining them.
However, one can also choose only to inlcude the ﬁrst n PC’s in the reassembly,
and by doing so, only the n "most important dimensions" will be kept in the
reassembled dataset 2.
Since PCA is a method that is directly based on EVD (or alternatively, Singular
Value Decomposition - SVD), it can be done as an optional part of the whitening
step. Note however that this is not equivalent to determining the number of
original sources in the mixtures: the algorithm has to be told speciﬁcally the
extent of the desired dimensionaliy reduction.
Automatic estimation of the
number of sources in the mixtures is a much more challenging issue, and will be
covered in section 3.4.
FastICA
The FastICA algorithm achieves the estimation of the unmixing matrix by esti-
2For a detailed explanation on how to perform directionality reduction with PCA, see [11]
==PAGE:30==
20
Blind Source Separation
mating one row at a time by an iterative optimization algorithm. Let yi describe
the i’th element of the vector y of independent components, which can be writ-
ten as
yi = vT
i xw
(3.11)
where vT
i is the i’th row of the matrix V from eq. 3.10 and xw is the vector
of centered and whitened observations. By formulating an appropriately chosen
cost function G( ) on vT
i xw and ﬁnding the maximum of G( ) by an iterative
process, an estimation of vT
i can be obtained. This is repeated for all of the
rows until the full unmixing matrix is constructed.
A very brief step-by-step summary of the FastICA algorithm can be given as
follows (as described by [2]):
• Choose an appropriate cost function G(vT
i xw) which is a measure of non-
gaussianity. Finding the maximum of this function will ensure that the
separated components are maximally non-gaussian. Such a cost function
can be the kurtosis for instance.3.
• For each vector vi in the matrix V, start the search with a vector of
random values vi,0.
• Iteratively update vi by the following rule:
vi,n+1 ←E[xwg(vT
i,nxw)] −vi,nE[g′(vT
i,nxw)],
(3.12)
where g( ) and g′( ) are the ﬁrst and second derivatives of G( ), respec-
tively. This update rule is derived from ﬁnding the maximum in the cost
function by Newton’s method of root ﬁnding.
• After each update step, apply the Gram Schmidt orthogonalization scheme
to vi,n+1 [2] in order to ensure that the currently estimated vector is
orthogonal to all other vectors found previously.
• Normalize vi,n+1 after each update iteration to ensure unit variance.
• Keep updating vi until the result has converged.
There are two problems with the FastICA algorithm.
The ﬁrst one is that
the choice of the cost function can largely aﬀect the quality of the result and
without suﬃcient insight, making the right choice might not be straightforward.
The second problem is that the estimation of each unmixing vector starts with
random values and therefore running the algorithm several times in a row often
yields diﬀerent results, as the search might end up converging to local maxima
3For other cost functions ensuring maximal non-gaussianity, see [7]
==PAGE:31==
3.1 ICA for linear instantaneous mixtures
21
instead of a global optimum. For this latter reason, it has been decided not to
use the FastICA for the rest of this thesis, as results were not reproducible.
Joint Approximate Diagonalization of Eigenmatrices (JADE)
The JADE algorithm aims to estimate the matrix V in eq. 3.10 by a method
that can essentially be regarded as a generalisation of the whitening process
described earlier to higher order statistics. Whitening operates on the covari-
ance matrix of the raw observations - a matrix containing the auto-covariances
and cross-covariances (second order auto- and cross-cumulants[9]) of mixtures.
Decorrelation of the signals is done by eliminating the cross-cumulant terms in
the covariance matrix.
JADE brings this idea to higher order statistics.
A four dimensional tensor
(an object that is a generalization of a matrix to higher dimensions) is con-
structed, containing the fourth order auto- and cross cumulants of the whitened
observation vector. The fourth-order cumulants are given by the formula [9]:
κ4(xi, xj, xk, xl, ) = E[xixj · xkxl] −E[xixj] · E[xkxl]−
E[xixk] · E[xjxl] −E[xixl] · E[xjxk],
(3.13)
where the argument of κ4 are diﬀerent possible combinations of elements from
the whitened set of recordings. The fourth order auto-cumulant of a variable
corresponds to its kurtosis. Signals in a dataset are independent if their fourth
order cross-cumulants are zero and their fourth order auto-cumulants are max-
imal [9]. Again, compare this with the idea of eliminating cross-covariances in
order to achieve decorrelation of signals.
JADE thus constructs a 4 dimensional tensor of size M ×M ×M ×M (M being
the number of elements in x) that contains the fourth order auto-cumulants
in the main diagonal and cross-cumulants elsewhere.
Just as the covariance
matrix is decomposed by eigenvalue decomposition during whitening, JADE
decomposes the cumulant tensor into n(n + 1)/2 eigenmatrices. This is done by
generating symmetrical orthogonal matrices with certain special properties [9],
which the cumulant tensor is then being projected onto.
Finally, these eigenmatrices are jointly diagonalized by a method that is based
on the Jacobi Algorithm [8]. This will ensure that the oﬀ-diagonal terms will
be minimal and the diagonal terms maximal, leading to independent vectors.
Unlike FastICA, the JADE algorithm yields reproducible results as it is a deter-
ministic process and does not initiate with random vectors. For this reason, the
JADE algorithm was used for performing separation in the rest of this thesis.
==PAGE:32==
22
Blind Source Separation
Regaining the mixing matrix
The above described algorithms perform the estimation of the unmixing matrix
W, but often, knowledge of the mixing matrix A is needed. This can be done
by taking the inverse of the unmixing matrix, A = W−1.
However, even if the matrix W is a square matrix (that is, the number of sources
N and mixtures M are the same), it is not guaranteed that it is invertible. For
the overdetermined case where N < M, the Moore-Penrose pseudoinverse W+
is taken instead of W−1, which possesses certain properties that make it a good
estimation of the mixing matrix [12].
3.2
ICA for convolutive mixtures
The method described in the previous section yields good separation of sources
if the assumptions about independence and non-gaussianity are fulﬁlled and if
the mixtures are linear instantaneous. However, in a real-world scenario - such
as source signals mixed in a physical room - the assumption about the mixtures
being LI will not hold. In this case, the mixtures will be convolutive, where each
source is convolved with the room’s impulse response between the source and a
respective receiver. Therefore eq. 3.1 will not hold, and the mixing can instead
be modelled by
xj(t) =
N
X
i=1
L−1
X
l=0
hji(l)si(t −l), j = 1..M,
(3.14)
where hji is the impulse response between the i’th source and the j’th receiver.
In the model, it is assumed that the impulse responses have a maximal length
of L samples. The problem gets much more diﬃcult in this case, as instead of
having to estimate a matrix of unmixing coeﬃtiens, one needs to estimate a set
of unmixing ﬁlters.
There exist a myriad of approaches aiming to solve this problem (a very good
overview on convolutive ICA methods can be found in [13]). One can choose to
solve the estimation directly in the time domain - however, a common property
of the existing time domain approaches is that they are computationally very
expensive, especially for long impulse responses like one would encounter in
physical rooms[12].
A workaround to this problem can be achieved by solving the separation in the
frequency domain instead.
The idea behind the frequency domain approach
==PAGE:33==
3.2 ICA for convolutive mixtures
23
is that convolution in one domain corresponds to multiplication in the other
domain, which means that the convolution operator can be eliminated by trans-
forming the entire problem formulation to the frequency domain and thus the
tools for solving the linear problem can be utilized.
However, by doing so,
a linear problem has to be solved at each frequency bin. Moving entirely to
the frequency domain would mean losing all time information in the signals,
which would render any ICA algorithm useless (as correlations are not deﬁned
on variables that have no time history) - therefore a compromise is made: the
problem is transferred into the time-frequency plane with the aid of the Short-
Time Fourier Transform (STFT) operation. This way, the information about
the variation of frequency components over time is preserved.
By transforming the convolutive problem to the time-frequency plane by STFT,
the following equation results describing the mixing process:
Xj(ω, t) =
N
X
i=1
Hji(ω)Si(ω, t), j = 1..M,
(3.15)
where Hji(ω) is the frequency response from source i to receiver j, while Xj(ω, t)
and Si(ω, t) are the STFT’s of the observations and the sources, respectively.
Note that eq. 3.15 is of the same form as eq. 3.1, the only diﬀerence being that
the terms are complex. Solving the ICA problem for LI mixtures of complex
valued signals can be achieved by slight modiﬁcations of the previously presented
algorithms, which is described in detail in [7].
Although the tools for solving LI separation problems are well-established, ap-
plying them in the frequency domain approach does not come without a cost:
the scaling ambiguity and the permutation ambiguity, which seemed like negli-
gible nuisances in the linear mixture case now become major issues. Since the
separated components can get scaled by diﬀerent factors at each bin with no
consistency across frequency, a random spectral colorization is added to the sep-
arated sources. This scaling therefore has to be addressed in order to remove this
colorization. Likewise, the order of the resulting components can be diﬀerent at
each bin without the permutations being consistent across frequency. Without
the permutations being realigned prior to returning to the time domain, one
would still end up with signals that contain contributions from multiple sources
- that is, the results are still mixtures of the underlying individual sources.
In the following, the workﬂow for solving the ICA problem on convolutive
mixtures in the frequency domain is outlined step-by-step.
==PAGE:34==
24
Blind Source Separation
3.2.1
Steps for solving ICA in the frequency domain
STFT
As a ﬁrst step, a time-frequency representation of the mixture observations are
calculated by an STFT operation. The consecutive windows have to overlap
with each other in order for the operation to be reversible by Inverse-STFT
(ISTFT) without information loss [2], and a window overlap of at least 50% will
in most cases ensure a suﬃcient continuity of the frequency components across
time. Choosing the length of the window however is always a tradeoﬀbetween
frequency and time resolution: short windows will result in a better time- but
a coarse frequency resolution and vica versa.
One thing to bear in mind when choosing the window length for a given set of
mixtures is that the window length has to be large enough to cover the length
of the impulse response of the mixing environment. If this is not fulﬁlled, the
Hji(ω) term in eq. 3.15 will not represent the hji(t) term in eq. 3.14, but just
a truncation of it - and in that case, the two equations will not be equivalent,
which in the end will result in erroneous estimation of the ﬁlters, leading to bad
separation performance.
Separation
At the "core" of the frequency domain approach, an algorithm is sitting that
performs ICA separation for LI mixtures on complex valued signals. This can be
technically any ICA algorithm that is able to do the separation, but for reasons
mentioned earlier, the JADE algorithm was chosen for this thesis.
When the time-frequency representations of the mixtures are obtained, an LI
ICA separation is performed at each frequency bin (including all preprocessing
steps) individually. The ICA solution at one frequency bin in no way aﬀects the
solution at any other bin.
Solving the ambiguities
Since the ICA problem is solved at each bin independently from the other bins, it
follows that the scaling ambiguity and the permutation ambiguity will also alter
the solutions in diﬀerent ways at each bin, with no consistency across frequency.
These issues have to be addressed before returning to the time domain in order
to obtain truthful representations of the independent components.
The scaling ambiguity is relatively easy to ﬁx, and is done by mapping the
separated sources back to the observation space.
As the cause of the scaling
==PAGE:35==
3.2 ICA for convolutive mixtures
25
ambiguity necessarily originates from the unmixing matrix W, mapping the
signals back to the microphone space by "remixing" can reverse this eﬀect.
Obviously, this has to be done one separated component at a time in order to
preserve separation, but eliminate the scaling error. To see that this operation
ﬁxes the scaling ambiguity, let us look at the proof from [14]. Let
x =
x1
x2

=
a11
a12
a21
a22
 s1
s2

(3.16)
denote the mixing of two sources into two observations.
If only one source
signal was "on" at a time, then the two microphones would receive the following
observations of them:
xs1 =
a11
a21

s1, xs2 =
a12
a22

s2,
(3.17)
with x = xs1 + xs2, the full mixture being the sum of the two "individual"
observations. After the ICA algorithm has estimated the unmixing matrix W,
there is a scaling ambiguity included in the matrix as W = (AΛ)−1, as also
noted by eq. 3.4 (we look apart from the inherent permutation ambiguity for
now). If separation is performed with this unmixing matrix, the resulting signals
are scaled versions of the original sources:
y1
y2

= Wx = (AΛ)−1As = Λ−1s =
s1/λ1
s2/λ2

(3.18)
where λ1 and λ2 are the scaling factors introduced by Λ. By mapping these
scaled signals back to the observation space - that is, calculating xs1 and xs2
from eq. 3.17 - the arbitrary scaling can be removed, as
xs1 =

(W −1)11
(W −1)21

y1 =

a11λ1
a21λ1

s1/λ1 =

a11
a21

s1
(3.19)
and similary for xs2. Comparing equations 3.17 and 3.19, we can see that the
mapping has removed the scaling introduced by W. It is also easy to show that
the above proof also holds for more than 2 sources and mixtures, and also if the
permutation ambiguity has not been solved [14].
Solving the permutation ambiguity is a much more challenging task than solving
the scaling ambiguity. As the permutation problem is one of the main focus areas
of the present thesis, an entire section is devoted to the discussion of various
approaches aiming at realigning the permutations. A detailed description of
these can be read in section 3.2.2.
ISTFT
After having performed the separation at each frequency bin and having resolved
the issues from the scaling and permutation ambiguities, the separated signals
==PAGE:36==
26
Blind Source Separation
have to be transformed back to the time domain. This is done by an ISTFT
operation.
If the requirements about a suﬃcient window overlap have been
respected during the STFT and the same parameters are used during the inverse
transformation (window length, window overlap and window shape), then the
ISTFT will return the signals to the time domain without any information loss.
3.2.2
Methods for solving the permutation ambiguity
Solving the permutation ambiguity is the most diﬃcult challenge that is in-
troduced by the frequency domain ICA approach. Realigning the permutations
across frequency bins is not a straighforward task, and extensive research is being
conducted on the topic [12], [15], [16]. Dealing with the permutation problem
was one of the main objectives of the present thesis and several methods for
overcoming the issue have been investigated. These methods are introduced in
what follows.
3.2.2.1
Envelope Continuity
One of the most often used and well-established methods for overcoming the
permutation ambiguity is the so called envelope continuity method. The ap-
proach relies on the assumption that any amplitude modulation present in the
signal will aﬀect individual frequency components similarly, provided that they
are suﬃciently close in frequency. In other words, the method assumes that the
temporal envelopes of the sources are continuous across frequency. The method
therefore re-permutes frequency components in such a way that the best con-
tinuity of envelopes across frequency is achieved. The concept is illustrated in
ﬁgure 3.2.
The method compares the time-series of all separated sources at a frequency
fp with the time-series of all separated sources at the neighbouring frequency
bin fp+1. Correlations between the temporal envelopes of neighbouring bins
are calculated for every possible permutation of sources at frequency fp+1, and
a permutation is chosen that maximizes the sum of correlations between the
neighbours. Afterwards, the next two frequency bins, fp+1 and fp+2 are com-
pared similarly, and the permutation at fp+2 is chosen that leads to maximal
correlations. This is continued until the last frequency is reached.
One drawback of the method is that it only compares adjacent frequencies and
does not check the resulting correlations across a wider span of frequency bins.
Thus, if an erroneous permutation is chosen at a frequency bin, that error will
==PAGE:37==
3.2 ICA for convolutive mixtures
27
Figure 3.2: Realigning permutations based on continuity of temporal envelopes. Il-
lustration taken from [13].
propagate to the following bins. As every possible permutation at every fre-
quency bin has to be tried, the algorithm grows as O(N!) in the number of
separated sources N. Although the search could be extended to any number of
frequency bins at each step, in practice, that would result in an algorithm that is
computationally even more expensive. An implementation, where a wider span
of frequencies is compared at a time is presented in [12].
The envelope continuity method is used most widely for separating speech sig-
nals, for which the assumption of continuous temporal envelopes is often ful-
ﬁlled. As speech signals are highly non-stationary, it seems natural to assume
that the amplitude modulation of time-series at closely located frequency bins
will be similar, if the signals originate from the same source. However, in case
of stationary signals, this assumption will not hold due to a complete lack of
amplitude-modulation [17]. This is illustrated in ﬁgure 3.3, where correlations
between each pair of frequency bins for the same signal have been calculated
and plotted.
The left ﬁgure shows these correlations for a car tyre noise signal from a car
moving at a constant speed, while the right ﬁgure shows the same plot for a
speech signal. The main diagonal shows high correlation values in both cases,
as each frequency bin obviously correlates well with itself. However, in case of
a car signal, low correlation can be seen for any other pair of bins, which is
==PAGE:38==
28
Blind Source Separation
(a) Car signal (rear tyre noise)
(b) Speech signal
Figure 3.3: Correlation between frequency bins for tyre noise from a car moving at
a constant speed (left) and a speech signal (right). Colors show how well each pair of
time-series of the same signal at diﬀerent frequency bins correlate with each other.
seen from the correlation values being low everywhere else apart from the main
diagonal. For a speech signal though, a pattern of correlations between diﬀerent
bins is seen. The thickness of the red area around the neighbourhood of the
main diagonal means that frequency bins close to each other correlate well for
speech signals. Also, it is seen that frequencies further away from each other
can have good correlation. This is believed to be caused by the special harmonic
structure of speech signals and is also exploited in the method implemented in
[12].
In [16], correlations of a metric other than the temporal envelopes of frequency
bins have been used to improve the performance of the method. Calculations
have been run to investigate whether changing the metric from temporal en-
velopes of time-series to the metric suggested in [16] would improve performance,
but unfortunately, almost identical results have been obtained.
We conclude that the envelope continuity method has a good potential for per-
forming well for speech signals, but not so much for stationary car noise signals.
Also, increasing the number of frequency bins being compared at each step
from just immediate neighbours to a larger span of frequencies might improve
the performance of the method for speech signals, but not for car signals.
3.2.2.2
Time Diﬀerence of Arrival
Another popular method for realigning permutations is based on estimating the
directional patterns formed by the estimated mixing matrices at each individual
frequency bin, and using that information to group bins together [1], [5], [12],
==PAGE:39==
3.2 ICA for convolutive mixtures
29
[13]. By analyzing the mixing matrices, the time diﬀerences of arrival (TDOA)
between microphones or the directions of arrival (DOA) of sources can be in-
ferred. By grouping frequency bins based on similarities in their TDOA’s or
DOA’s, the permutations can be realigned.
However, the method is fairly unstable, as it is very sensitive to reverberant mix-
ing environments, since the assumptions about the form of the mixing matrices
will not hold under such conditions [1]. Even very short tails in the impulse
responses can cause erroneous estimations of TDOA’s or DOA’s, which in the
end leads to errors in the permutation.
The TDOA method has great potential of working well in an anechoic mixing
environment, but due to its bad performance in the presence of reverberance,
the method has not been implemented in this thesis.
3.2.2.3
Bin-wise Beamforming
Another way to extract spatial information instead of calculating TDOA’s from
the mixing matrices is to perform beamforming calculations at each frequency
bin. Sources are separated by the ICA algorithm at each frequency, followed by
bin-wise beamforming for each separated source, as described in section 2.1. The
assumption is made that signals belonging to the same source will have similar
angles of incidence at each frequency, thereby similarities in the locations of
maxima in the beamforming images can be used to group them across frequency
bins.
The approach is suggested in [1], where it is shown that the highest
peak in the bin-wise beamforming images is a more robust descriptor of the
source locations than the TDOA. It is assumed that the maximum in each image
is directly related to the location of the source, even though various artifacts
might be present in beamforming images obtained this way (sidelobes, reﬂecions,
leakage from other sources after separation, noise, etc.). Figure 3.4 shows how
the locations of maxima at each bin are used for realigning permutations.
After obtaining the beamforming images at every bin and for every source, the
maxima are located and are sorted by a grouping operation such as the k-means
clustering algorithm. The k-means algorithm is a data analysis tool that aims
at partitioning a data set into distinct clusters in such a way that the sum of
squared distances between points and cluster centroids are minimized within
each cluster. Let (x1, x2, ...xn) be a set of n vectors of dimension d, which are
regarded as n observations.
The k-means algorithm aims at grouping the n
==PAGE:40==
30
Blind Source Separation
(a) Separated source 1
(b) Separated source 2
(c) Separated source 3
Figure 3.4: Beamforming images of 3 separated sources at neighbouring frequency
bins. It is seen that the order of the sources at a frequency fp (top) are diﬀerent from
the order at a neighbouring frequency, fp+1 (bottom). By locating the maxima in each
image, the permutations can be realigned across bins. Note that the separation is not
perfect in all cases, as there is "leakage" from other sources in some of the images.
observations into k < n clusters C = {C1, C2, ...Ck} by ﬁnding
arg min
k
X
i=1
X
x∈Ci
|x −µi|2
(3.20)
where µi is the centroid of the i’th cluster Ci.
The algorithm can be realized by using the following iterative update rule: ﬁrst,
k random points are chosen as the initial cluster centroids µi.
The squared
distances |x −µi|2 between each data point and each centroid are calculated.
Data points are reassigned to belong to the cluster with the closest centroid.
Subsequently, the centroid locations are updated by calculating the mean of
coordinates of data points assigned to the same cluster. Squared distances are
calculated again, and data points are reassigned to the nearest cluster. This
procedure is continued until the algorithm converges - that is, if there are no
more changes in assignments.
Figure 3.5 illustrates the result of realigning
permutations with the aid of a clustering procedure. After separation, peak
locations appear in a random manner at each frequency, but it is seen that they
are all gathered into 3 cohesive groups in the X-Y plane. Clustering can identify
these spatially coherent groups and realign the permutations accordingly.
==PAGE:41==
3.2 ICA for convolutive mixtures
31
(a) Before clustering
(b) After clustering
Figure 3.5: 3D plot showing the locations of the highest peak in each beamforming
image of each separated source across frequency bins. The mixture consists of 3 spa-
tially well separated sources. The X and Y axes correspond to x-y locations in the focus
plane, while the Z axis corresponds to frequency. The k-means clustering algorithm has
been used to group data points that belong together. For some outlier data points, the
assignments are ambiguous.
The quality of a partitioning obtained from the k-means clustering algorithm
can be quantiﬁed by a metric called the silhouette, which is a measure of how
consistently the data points belong to their respective clusters. Its deﬁniton
is as follows: suppose that an observation xi is assigned to cluster Cj by the
k-means algorithm. Let a(xi) denote the average squared distance from xi to
all other data points belonging to the same cluster Cj:
a(xi) =
1
K −1
X
y∈Cj,y̸=xi
|xi −y|2
(3.21)
where K is the number of elements in Cj. We call a(xi) the dissimilarity of
point xi to cluster Cj, as high value of a(xi) means that the point does not
resemble the rest of the cluster. Let b(xi) denote the smallest dissimilarity of
xi to members of a cluster other than Cj. Since b(xi) denotes the smallest of
dissimilarities of point xi to any other cluster, this cluster is the "second best
match" for point xi. The silhouette s(xi) is then deﬁned as
s(xi) =
b(xi) −a(xi)
max{a(xi), b(xi)}.
(3.22)
which can take on values between −1 ≤s(xi) ≤1. A high silhouette value
means that an observation "lies well" within its cluster, as it is "less dissimilar
to its own cluster than to its second best choice", while a low value suggests low
resemblance. A negative silhouette value means that the object resembles an-
other cluster better than its own. The silhouette value can be used to formulate
==PAGE:42==
32
Blind Source Separation
thresholds on the desired "tightness" of a partitioning achieved by the k-means
algorithm.
A common feature of the TDOA approach and the bin-wise beamforming method
is that both of them rely on spatial information of the sources at diﬀerent fre-
quencies. Since this information is extracted at each bin individually, a per-
mutation decision at one frequency will not in any way aﬀect the decision at
another bin - therefore, the method is free of the error propagation that was
experienced in the envelope continuity method. Also, the spatial approach is
unaﬀected by source signal characteristics, whereas the performance of the en-
velope continuity method is highly aﬀected by signal stationarity. On the other
hand, both the TDOA and the beamforming method rely on the sources being
spatially separated and will fail for closely located sources - for which case the
envelope contuity method would be unaﬀected.
However, while TDOA infers the direction of source locations by a given prop-
agation model and analyzing the mixing matrices estimated by ICA, bin-wise
beamforming relies on the actual mapping of the observed sound ﬁeld at each
bin, which is independent of the results of ICA and does not involve any as-
sumptions on the mixing environment. This makes the bin-wise beamforming
method more robust than TDOA, as it will not be as sensitive to reﬂections,
but is still free of the error propagation problem. The drawback of the bin-wise
beamforming method is though, that it is computationally expensive, since a
beamforming map at each frequency and for each source has to be generated.
Also, the method will not work outside the frequency limits of the array.
3.2.2.4
Combined method of beamforming and envelope continuity
As the previously listed methods for solving the permutation ambiguity have
diﬀering advantages and drawbacks, one would naturally get the idea of us-
ing a combination of them in a such way that their weaknesses are counter-
acted. Of the previously introduced methods, the bin-wise beamforming ap-
proach has exhibited the best realignment performance - however, the method
only works within the frequency limits of the array and fails for spatially overlap-
ping sources. At the same time, the envelope continuity method is unaﬀected by
spatial characteristics of sources, although it suﬀers from the error propagation
problem and performs badly for stationary signals.
A permutation realignment scheme that combines the TDOA method and the
envelope continuity method is suggested in [12] and a similar approach is used
in [1]. The method used in this thesis is based on the idea presented in these
references with the exception that the TDOA method is exchanged to the bin-
==PAGE:43==
3.2 ICA for convolutive mixtures
33
wise beamforming approach. The combined method used in the present thesis
is outlined in the following:
• Deﬁne the lower and upper frequency limits of the array fl and fu respec-
tively by the considerations outlined in 2.2.3. Let F = {fl, ..., fu} denote
the subset of frequency bins falling within these limits.
• Deﬁne a conﬁdence measure on the permutations obtained from the bin-
wise beamforming approach by setting a threshold on the minimal ac-
cepted silhouette value.
• For ∀f ∈F, make an attempt to realign the permutations by bin-wise
beamforming and clustering of peak locations.
• If the silhouette value of cluster assignments at the current frequency bin
are below the set threshold, realign the permutations by the envelope
continuity instead, as the decision made by the bin-wise beamforming is
not suﬃciently conﬁdent.
• For ∀f /∈F, realign the permutations by the pure envelope continuity
method.
Note that by changing the threshold for the minimal accepted silhouette value
can ﬁne-tune the balance between the bin-wise beamforming and the envelope
continuity method. If the threshold is set high, permutations from the bin-wise
beamforming approach will only be accepted if the beamforming maxima "lie
well" within their clusters, and envelope continuity is used otherwise. On the
other hand, if the threshold is set low, then even the "loosely assigned" bins will
be realigned by the beamforming approach, and envelope continuity will only
take over if the beamforming approach completely fails. It is a good idea to set
this threshold to a low value for stationary signals, where envelope continuity
has diﬃculties performing the realignment and the beamforming approach is
preferred, while for speech signals, the threshold can be set to a somewhat
higher level, since envelope continuity is expected to perform better.
It is expected that the mixed method combines the advantages of the beam-
forming and the envelope continuity approach:
• It is robust, as the beamforming approach does not suﬀer from the error
propagation problem.
• It is "self-correcting", since if the envelope continuity makes an error at
a frequency bin, the beamforming method is expected to correct it at the
nearest frequency where it takes over.
==PAGE:44==
34
Blind Source Separation
• It is not restricted to conﬁned frequency limits, as outside the frequency
limitations of the array, envelope continuity takes over.
• It is customizable, as the balance between the beamforming and the enve-
lope continuity methods can be adjusted by setting the silhouette threshold
accordingly.
Note however that there are still situations where the method is unable to
realign the permutations, namely where both the beamforming and the envelope
continuity approach fails. This will happen in case of stationary signals outside
the frequency limits of the array, and for stationary sources that overlap spatially
or are closely located.
3.3
Evaluating separation performance
In order for the quality and the performance of diﬀerent source separation meth-
ods to be comparable, one must come up with a way of evaluating source sepa-
ration performance. An ICA procedure that is applied on sound signals, such as
the one in this thesis, the most intuitive way of evaluating performance would
be to listen to the resulting signals. However, this can not be regarded as a "se-
rious" evaluation procedure for many reasons. First of all, it is not obvious how
to quantify a listening experience objectively. Human impressions like "good
separation" and "not so good separation" are diﬃcult to compare. Secondly,
noticing faulty separation of car noise signals is rather diﬃcult for the human
perception compared to speech signals - it is not easy to hear whether the noise
coming from the rear tyre or the front tyre of a car have been separated prop-
erly, while deciding whether a speech signal from one talker still has leakage
from another talker is much more clearly heard. Listening to the results is im-
portant for a basic "sanity check", but can not be regarded as a serious way of
evaluating performance.
An often used objective quantiﬁer of separation performance is the Signal-to-
Interference Ratio (SIR). There is no clear consensus on the deﬁnition of the
SIR ([18]), but in the majority of the literature (e.g. [5]), the same deﬁnition is
used, which is also the version used in this thesis.
The Input SIR of a source signal si(t) is deﬁned as the dB ratio between the
power contribution of si(t) in a recording observed by a reference microphone
with index J and the contribution of all other sources in the same microphone:
==PAGE:45==
3.3 Evaluating separation performance
35
InputSIRi = 10 log10
P
t |xJi(t)|2
P
t | P
k̸=i xJk(t)|2
(3.23)
where xJi(t) denotes the observation of the i’th source by the J’th microphone.
The index J is chosen arbitrarily, but must be kept the same for all SIR calcula-
tions. The Input SIR is evaluated on the pure recordings, before the separation
process.
Let us assume that after the separation process, the separated signal yj cor-
responds to the original source si. The signal yj contains a contribution from
si, but might also contain contributions from other sources sk̸=i in the form
of "leakage". The Output SIR of the original source si is deﬁned as the ratio
between the contribution of si in the observation of yj in the reference micro-
phone, and the contributions of all other sources in the observation of yj in the
reference microphone:
OutputSIRi = 10 log10
P
t |yJji(t)|2
P
t | P
k̸=i yJjk(t)|2
(3.24)
A clariﬁcation of the triple index might be appropriate: yJji denotes the contri-
bution of the i’th source signal to the j’th separated source observed by the J’th
microphone. As the i’th original source corresponds to the j’th separated source
(as assumed), yJji is actually the "valuable signal" in the j’th output, after the
scaling ambiguity has been solved4. Ideally, the rest of the original sources sk̸=i
should not contribute to the j’th separated source, therefore yJjk is a term that
describes the contribution of interfering sources in the j’th output. A negative
Output SIR value means that a source has a larger contribution in an output
that it is not associated with.
Separation performance is quantiﬁed by the diﬀerence between the Output SIR
and the Input SIR:
∆SIRi = OutputSIRi −InputSIRi,
(3.25)
which essentially describes the increase of the contribution of si in the reference
microphone before and after the separation.
It is not straightforward how it is decided which separated source is assigned
to which original source. This gets especially ambiguous when the separation
algorithm performs poorly, as all separated sources might sound alike, poten-
tially containing contributions from every original source. In this thesis, the
assigment between original and separated sources was decided by the "highest
4Recall that the scaling ambiguity is solved by mapping the separated sources back to the
observation space.
==PAGE:46==
36
Blind Source Separation
RMS contribution rule", described in [19]. An M × N "contribution matrix"
R is constructed that contains the RMS values of the contributions from each
source to each output:
rji =
v
u
u
t 1
L
L
X
i=1
yJji(t)2
(3.26)
where rji is the element in R at the j’th row and the i’th column, and L is the
length of the separated source signal. The element with the highest value in R
is found, let us assume that this element is rmn. A match is made between the
n’th original source and the m’th separated source, as the highest contribution
appeared between these two. Next, the row m and the column n is deleted from
the matrix R. The element with the highest value in this remaining matrix is
found, and a match is made between the original source corresponding to its
column index and the separated source corresponding to its row index. This is
continued until all rows and columns are deleted from the matrix. Excluding a
row and a column from the search space after each step ensures that the same
source can not be assigned to more than one output, and that more than one
source can not be assigned to the same output. The following example illustrates
the process, where the assignment between s1 −→y2, s2 −→y1 and s3 −→y3
are made:
R =




s1
s2
s3
y1
2.43
6.92
1.49
y2
8.26
2.55
1.67
y3
0.76
1.21
4.51



−→


s2
s3
y1
6.92
1.49
y3
1.21
4.51

−→

s3
y3
4.51

When solving ICA in the frequency domain, a linear instantaneous ICA is solved
at each bin, therefore one can calculate a SIR value at each frequency. Obtaining
SIR as a function of frequency is very useful as it helps in the evaluation of how
well diﬀerent frequency contents of the signals have been recovered, which is
much more descriptive than just putting a single-number value on the quality
of the performance. The biggest virtue of the bin-wise SIR however is its ability
to diagnose problems with the permutation realignment, as a permutation error
will show up as a large excursion in the SIR curve. This can be explained the
following way: if the separation at an individual frequency bin is good, then
the SIR will be large in absolute value.
However, if at this same frequency
bin a wrong decision about the permutation has been made, the SIR will have
a negative sign, since the source will be associated with the wrong output.
This is best illustrated through an example in ﬁgure 3.6. Two speech signals
undergoing a convolutive mixing process have been separated in the frequency
domain and the permutation of bins were realigned by the envelope continuity
method. The bin-wise SIR curves of the two separated signals are shown along
with their respective spectrograms. It is clear from the ﬁgure that the envelope
==PAGE:47==
3.3 Evaluating separation performance
37
continuity method has realigned the permutations correctly up to about 1kHz,
where an error was made, which propagates to the subsequent frequencies all
the way until about 4.8kHz. A new error is made, and permutations are correct
again, until yet another error at 6.5kHz. This is also conﬁrmed by looking at
the spectrograms, which clearly show the permutation error - there are thick
"stripes" in both spectrograms, which clearly belong to the other source.
(a) Separated Source 1
(b) Separated Source 2
Figure 3.6: Bin-wise SIR increase of two separated signals (top ﬁgure) and their
spectrograms (bottom ﬁgures). The signals in the mix are speech signals and permuta-
tions are realigned by the envelope continuity method. The error propagation property
is clearly seen both in the SIR curves and the spectrograms.
In order to be able to quantify separation performance with the SIR metric, the
original sources have to be known, as technically every term in eq. 3.23 and 3.24
is obtained by mapping an original source - with no other sources present - to a
reference microphone before and after separation. This is of course not possible
in a real-world scenario, as the point in performing blind source separation
is that one does not know the sources.
Therefore, evaluation by the SIR is
only applicable for tests of the method in a controlled environment, where the
individual sources are available individually.
==PAGE:48==
38
Blind Source Separation
3.4
Estimating the number of components
An ICA algorithm normally returns as many separated sources as there are
observations. However, as discussed in section 3.1.4, it is possible to reduce
the number of returned components by dimensionality reduction. By explicitly
specifying the number of desired sources, the algorithm will either discard some
of the observations to match the number of mixtures with the number of de-
sired sources, or it will perform dimensionality reduction by PCA. However, the
number of sources to be separated has to be speciﬁed by the user, as the ICA
algorithm can not determine it by itself. In the majority of literature consider-
ing BSS problems, the number of sources is considered to be known in advance.
Even if one has the luxury of knowing the number of physical sources in the
mixtures, the actual number of components can change across frequency. As
ICA is solved in the frequency domain, a way of automatically estimating the
number of sources present in the mixtures is necessary.
Indentifying the correct number is very important for good separation perfor-
mance. If the mixtures are separated into too few components, then some - or
all - of the resulting separated sources will still be mixtures of several original
sources. On the other hand, if too many components are extracted, some - or
all - of the resulting signals will be noise or artifact components, as the original
sources are split up into several parts.
When solving the ICA problem in the frequency domain, the problem of es-
timating the number of components gains a whole new dimension.
A linear
instantaneous ICA problem is being solved at every frequency bin and likewise,
the number of components has to be estimated at every frequency bin. As the
frequency content of the original sources might be widely diﬀerent, the number
of components can change as a function of frequency. Looking for the wrong
number of sources at diﬀerent frequencies can severely degrade separation per-
formance. This is illustrated in 3.7, where the diﬀerence between looking for the
same number of sources at all frequencies versus looking for a varying number
of sources is compared.
Identifying the correct number of components in a set of mixtures is not a
straightforward task, and numerous methods have been suggested in literature
for overcoming this problem [20], [21], [22], [23].
In this thesis, various ap-
proaches have been investigated on ﬁnding the correct amount of components
present in a set of mixtures as a function of frequency (as depicted by the mid-
dle plots in ﬁgure 3.7). As the estimation of number of components was the
second main focus area of the present thesis, this entire section is dedicated to
the presentation of the various methods tested.
==PAGE:49==
3.4 Estimating the number of components
39
(a) Constant estimation
(b) Varying estimation
Figure 3.7:
Eﬀect of estimating the number of components on separation perfor-
mance. If there are non-overlapping frequency ranges in the source signals, looking
for a constant number of components at all frequencies (left) can degrade separation
quality.
A varying estimation of components at each frequency (right) can lead to
better results. Top ﬁgures show the spectra of the two original signals, the middle ﬁg-
ures show the number of sources extracted at each bin, while bottom ﬁgures show the
resulting signals after the separation process.
3.4.1
Estimation by PCA
One method for estimating the number of components is by using PCA. As
discussed in section 3.1.4 , PCA decomposes a set of mixtures into orthogo-
nal and uncorrelated Principal Components through eigenvalue decomposition.
The result is a set of eigenvalues and the corresponding eigenvectors. Plotting
the eigenvalues in descending order (sometimes called the eigenvalue spectrum)
can give an idea about the number of sources in the mixtures, as the n most
signiﬁcant eigenvalues will correspond to actual signals, while the rest of the
eigenvalues correspond to noise. Ideally, one should see a clear "knee" in the
eigenvalue spectrum appearing at the correct number of sources n. Unfortu-
nately, if reﬂections are present in the mixing, reﬂected components will also
appear as signiﬁcant eigenvalues [23], making the identiﬁcation of the knee-point
in the curve much less clear. This is illustrated in ﬁgure 3.8, where the eigen-
value spectrum of a set of mixtures with and without reﬂections are compared.
The mixtures contained the same two signals in both cases.
==PAGE:50==
40
Blind Source Separation
Figure 3.8: Eigenvalue spectrum of a set of mixtures. The same two signals were
mixed in an anechoic enviroment (blue curve) and with reﬂections present in the mix-
tures (red curve). The presence of reﬂections makes the identiﬁcation of a knee-point
ambiguous.
(a) No reﬂections
(b) With reﬂections
Figure 3.9: Ten highest eigenvalues at each frequency bin for two diﬀerent simulated
sets of mixtures. Left: a low-pass ﬁltered and a high-pass ﬁltered signal mixed in an
anechoic environment, right: the same signals mixed with reﬂections added.
When solving ICA in the frequency domain, the eigenvalue spectrum at each
frequency bin can be calculated. This is illustrated in ﬁgure 3.9, showing the
ten highest eigenvalues at each frequency bin for a mixture with and without
reﬂections. Two signals were mixed together by simulations, to which a high-
pass and a low-pass ﬁlter have been applied, respectively, so that there is a
narrow section around 1kHz where they overlap.
The number of sources at
==PAGE:51==
3.4 Estimating the number of components
41
each frequency can be clearly inferred from the eigenvalues when there are no
reﬂecions. By setting an appropriate threshold (which can be determined from
the Signal-to-Noise Ratio of a measurement), the number of sources can be
estimated by the number of eigenvalues exceeding the threshold. However, the
same is not possible in the case of a reverberant mixing environment, as the
reﬂected components lead to more evenly distributed eigenvalue spectra, where
it is ambiguous where a threshold should be set.
3.4.2
ICA-by-Blocks
Another method for estimating the number of sources in a set of mixtures is
suggested in [20] and is called the "ICA-by-Blocks" method - a slightly modiﬁed
version of which has been tested in this thesis.
The method starts by splitting the set of observations x = {x1, x2, ..., xM} into
two subsets xA and xB containing ⌈M/2⌉and ⌊M/2⌋observations, respectively.
The members of the xA and xB can be picked randomly from the original set
of recordings to ensure that both subsets are statistically representative. An
upper limit Nmax ≤⌊M/2⌋is chosen, for which it is expected that the number
of true sources N in the mixtures does not exceed Nmax 5.
Subsequently, Nmax rounds of ICA are run on both xA and xB with the number
of Independent Components (IC’s) that are to be extracted increasing from 1 to
Nmax, incremented by 1 in each round. It is believed that if fewer components
are extracted from the blocks than the true number of sources N, then the IC’s
extracted from the two blocks will have a high correlation, as they are all believed
to represent the same original sources - though possibly still mixtures of several
true source signals, and possibly in diﬀerent permutations.
However, if the
number of extracted IC’s exceeds N, then the excess IC’s will not correspond
to true sources in the mixtures, but instead to noise contributions that are
only characteristic of the particular block they have been extracted from (that
is, either xA or xB).
Hence, excess IC’s extracted from xA will have a low
correlation with IC’s extracted from xB, as they represent diﬀerent noise signals.
After each round of ICA on the two blocks of data, a matrix R containing the
absolute correlations (the absolute value of the Pearson correlation coeﬃtient)
5The method can only be used if the original number of recordings M exceeds twice the
number of maximally expected sources Nmax.
This assumption is though believed to be
fulﬁlled when obtaining the recordings with an array containing many microphones.
==PAGE:52==
42
Blind Source Separation
between each pairs of IC’s originating from diﬀerent blocks is constructed:
R =



r1,1
· · ·
r1,p
...
...
...
rp,1
· · ·
rp,p


,
(3.27)
where the cell ri,j contains the absolute correlation between the i’th IC extracted
from xA and the j’th IC extracted from xB, and p is the number of sources the
ICA extracted from the blocks in the current round. Taking the absolute value
of the correlations is necessary as there is an ambiguity in the sign of IC’s due
to the scaling ambiguity.
According to the assumptions, at most N values in R will have a high value. It
is not known in advance which cells will contain the high values, as there the
permutations of the IC’s extracted from the two blocks might be diﬀerent. The p
highest values from R are sorted in descending order and saved. This is repeated
for each step with p = 1, .., Nmax. At the iteration where p exceeds the true
number of sources N, a large drop is expected to be seen for the last correlation
value, as the ﬁrst N correlations correspond to the N sources extracted from
both blocks, while the last one represents uncorrelated noise from each block.
This is illustrated in ﬁgure 3.10, where these correlations after each iteration
of the algorithm have been plotted for a mixture containing two signals. The
curves in the ﬁgure exhibit a large drop after the second IC, which suggests that
there are two IC’s in each iteration that correlate well with each other, while
the rest correspond to uncorrelated noise.
Figure 3.10: Correlations of IC’s extracted from the two data subsets for each itera-
tion of the ICA-by-Blocks method. A clear drop in value is seen for all the curves after
the second IC.
Notice that as the number of extracted IC’s increases, the highest values in
the correlation curves start to decrease. This is because if the ICA algorithm
==PAGE:53==
3.4 Estimating the number of components
43
looks for too many sources in a set of mixtures, the results will be individual
sources split into several signals, which will have a lower correlation than when
extracting the correct number of components.
Unfortunately, [20] does not suggest a way to infer the number of sources from
the correlation curves, such as the ones seen in ﬁgure 3.10. It concludes by
stating that in most cases, the location of the drop in values will correspond to
the number of sources. This is though not always the case, as such a clear drop
is not always seen in the values, and inferring the number of sources becomes
more ambiguous. 3.11 shows two problematic cases, where a drop in the curves
is seen at multiple locations. The correct number of sources is indicated below
the ﬁgures. Such problematic cases are often experienced especially if the mixing
environment contains reﬂections.
(a) N = 3
(b) N = 2
Figure 3.11: Correlation curves from the ICA-by-Blocks estimation method. Drops
in the curves are seen at several locations.
Several ways of estimating the number of sources from curves like the ones in
the above ﬁgures have been investigated. These included taking the mean of the
curves and looking for the largest drop or looking for the curve with the largest
mean value. After extensive experimentation, it turned out that the curve with
the largest median value in most cases corresponds to the correct number of
sources in the mixtures.
The ICA-by-Blocks method relies highly on the reproducibility of results pro-
duced by the particular ICA algorithm used in the process. Therefore, perform-
ing estimation by ICA-by-Blocks in conjunction with the FastICA algorithm
will fail most of the time, as FastICA often converges to local maxima - whereas
the results provided by JADE are reproducible.
Using the ICA-by-Blocks method in conjunction with a frequeny-domain ICA
solution has the disadvantage of potentially being very slow. Since the number
of components has to be estimated for all F frequency bins, 2∗Nmax ∗F rounds
of ICA have to be solved, which can take a long time.
==PAGE:54==
44
Blind Source Separation
3.4.3
Detecting reﬂected components after ICA
Most estimation methods perform poorly under reverberant mixing conditions,
overestimating the true number of sources due to the presence of reﬂections. A
method suggested in [23] aims to cope with this problem by detecting reﬂected
components in the mixtures.
The method starts out by performing a round of ICA on the pure mixtures,
where the number of sources to be extracted is set much higher than the expected
number of true sources (though at most to M, the number of mixtures). After
the scaling ambiguity has been solved, the resulting independent components at
each bin yi(f, t) are compared to each other. The assumption of the approach is
that if an IC yi(f, t) represents a true source and another IC yj(f, t) corresponds
to a reﬂected component of the same source, then these two IC’s should have
a similar time structure, just time-delayed. Therefore, the correlation of each
pair of IC’s are calculated as
r(yi, yj) =
⟨vi(τ) · vj(τ −∆τ)⟩τ
p
⟨v2
i (τ)⟩τ ·
q
⟨v2
j (τ −∆τ)⟩τ
(3.28)
⟨⟩τ denotes the temporal mean and vi(τ) = |yi(f, τ)| −⟨|yi(f, τ)|⟩τ is the cen-
tered temporal envelope. [23] does not speciﬁy how to ﬁnd the appropriate time
delay ∆τ in eq. 3.28, but in this thesis the time shift corresponding to the
maximum in the cross-correlation between vi(τ) and vj(τ) have been used. The
cross-correlation between two real valued time signals is deﬁned as
xcorr(x(t), y(t)) =
∞
X
−∞
x(t) · y(t + n),
(3.29)
which is essentially a descriptor of how well two signals are aligned for diﬀerent
time-lags. The cross-correlation exhibits a peak if one signal contains a time-
delayed version of the other one. Therefore, ∆τ in eq. 3.28 has been calculated
as
∆τ = arg max{xcorr(vi(τ), vj(τ)}
(3.30)
If the correlation calculated by eq. 3.28 is too high between two IC’s, it suggests
that one of them is a reﬂected component. By removing the reﬂected compo-
nents found this way from the eigenvalue spectrum (see ﬁgure 3.9), the number
of true sources can be estimated.
The drawback of the method - similarly to the PCA method - is that setting a
subjective but crucial threshold for the maximal allowed correlation is necessary.
==PAGE:55==
3.4 Estimating the number of components
45
3.4.4
Information Theroetic Criteria
The true number of components contributing to a set of mixtures can also
be estimated based on informational theoretic criteria. Two such metrics are
suggested in [21], which are called the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) and
the Minimum Description Length (MDL). Both of these metrics provide a mean
for model selection by comparing statistical models that describe a dataset.
Instead of only looking at the goodness of ﬁt of the possible models, AIC and
MDL also take into account the complexity of the models. In most cases, making
a model more complex will provide better ﬁt to the data. However, AIC and
MDL both contain a "penalty term" which increases as the models get more
complex. The most preferred model is the one that is not too complex but still
provides a good ﬁt - thus the one having the smallest AIC or MDL value.
As opposed to the PCA approach, AIC and MDL have the advantage of not
having to set a subjective threshold. The outcome of the PCA is a monotonically
decreasing series of eigenvalues, from which it is often diﬃcult to decide where a
threshold should be set without suﬃcient knowledge about the mixtures. On the
contrary, the location of the minimum in an AIC or MDL curve is unambiguous.
The formula for the AIC and MDL are:
AIC(p) = −2(M −p)L · log





M
Q
i=p+1
d1/(M−p)
i
1
M −p
M
P
i=p+1
di




+ 2p(2M −p)
(3.31)
MDL(p) = −(M −p)L · log





M
Q
i=p+1
d1/(M−p)
i
1
M −p
M
P
i=p+1
di




+ 1
2p(2M −p) · log(L) (3.32)
where p is the running variable for the number of components, M is the num-
ber of recordings, L is the length of the recordings in samples and di are the
eigenvalues from the EVD of the correlation matrix, sorted in descending order
(the eigenvalue spectrum).
As pointed out by [22], AIC and MDL will though always overestimate the actual
number of sources in practice, if the number of samples L is ﬁnite, as AIC and
MDL are asymptotical estimators, which converge to the correct number of
sources as the number of samples grows to inﬁnity.
==PAGE:56==
46
Blind Source Separation
3.4.5
Estimation by beamforming
The number of components at each frequency can also be estimated by perform-
ing bin-wise beamforming, as described in section 2.1. Beamforming calculations
are done one frequency bin at a time, and the peaks in the image are counted,
which will be an estimation of the number of sources present in the image. A
peak is deﬁned as a point that has a larger value than all of its neighbors. A
one-dimensional illustration of this is shown in 3.12.
Figure 3.12: 1D section cut of a beamforming image with peak positions indicated by
red circles.
However, a number of artifacts can be present in a beamforming image that
make estimating the number of components slightly more diﬃcult than just
counting all the peaks in the image. First of all, due to noise in the recordings
and the quantization noise added by the time-domain beamforming calculation
(see ﬁgure 2.3 in section 2.1), a large number of peaks will appear in the image
that correspond to noise. Secondly, sidelobes in the beamforming image will
also appear as peaks, which do not represent true sources either.
To overcome the issue of ﬁnding too many peaks in the image, some thresholds
must be set to exclude the erroneous ones and only include "valuable" peaks in
the estimation. Based on the MSL (section 2.2) of the array used for obtaining
the recordings, a threshold on the dynamic range can be formulated. One should
not count peaks that are lower in level than the MSL of the array, as these
probably correspond to sidelobes or noise. The MSL of an array is an increasing
function of frequency, therefore this threshold has to be frequency-dependent.
Due to noise in the measurements and the added quantization noise by the beam-
forming algorithm, small extraneous peaks can appear that are superimposed
on the "clean" beamforming image. This is illustrated in 3.13.
==PAGE:57==
3.4 Estimating the number of components
47
Figure 3.13: 1D section cut of a beamforming image with added noise. Peak locations
are indicated by red circles.
In order to avoid ﬁnding multiple peaks in the image where there is only one
"true" peak, a threshold on the minimum allowed distance between peaks has
to be set. Setting this threshold to an appropriate value can be based on the
resolution of the array and also has to be a function of frequency. As lower
frequency sources result in broader peaks, a larger minimum allowed distance
has to be set for beamforming images at lower frequency bins.
Figure 3.14
illustrates the eﬀect of setting these thresholds on the resulting peaks
(a) No threshold
(b) Threshold on dynamic
range
(c) Threshold on dynamic
range and minimum dis-
tance
Figure 3.14: Finding peaks in a beamforming image that represent true sources. A
threshold on the dynamic range and on the minimum allowed distance between peaks
can be set based on the MSL and the resolution of the array. White circles indicate the
peaks that the search has found.
Counting the peaks the above described way can be an estimation of the number
of sources at each frequency bin. However, there are still several problems with
this approach:
• The method will only work within the frequency limits of the array. At
==PAGE:58==
48
Blind Source Separation
too low frequencies, the number of sources will be underestimated due to
a lack of resolution, while at high frequencies, overestimation will occur
due to grating lobes.
• Since a dynamic range threshold has been set, sources that are lower in
level than the MSL of the array will not be found.
• Even though the dynamic range has been set according to the MSL, side-
lobes from several sources can add upp constructively, producing a lobe
that is higher in level than the MSL.
An improved method for estimating the number of components by use of beam-
forming could include the following features:
• Automatic detection of sidelobes. The position of physical sources will
remain the same across all frequencies, while sidelobes will "move around"
with changing frequency. Identifying "moving peaks" could be used to
discard peaks that correspond to sidelobes. This could potentially be done
by clustering, where a "tight" cluster (with a high silhouette value) could
correspond to static peaks, while "loose" clusters correspond to peaks that
move around.
• Performing beamforming on separated sources instead of the original mix-
tures.
Similarly to the idea of the ICA-by-Blocks method, a series of
ICA operations could be run and beamforming calculations could be done
on the resulting separated sources. Increasing the number of extracted
sources in every new round of ICA, IC’s corresponding to true sources
could be distinguished from excess IC’s. If a peak keeps appearing at a
consistent location for changing number of extracted sources, one can con-
clude that it represents a true source, while inconsistent peaks are believed
to correspond to noise.
3.5
Eﬀect of signal stationarity
In the majority of literature concerning BSS for acoustic applications, the signals
in question are speech or music signals, or other highly non-stationary signal
types. However, the focus of the present thesis is on noise signals originating
from cars, which often only have little variation and therefore can be regarded as
stationary signals. It turns out that using the frequency-domain ICA method
for separation of sources gets even more challenging if the source signals are
stationary.
==PAGE:59==
3.5 Eﬀect of signal stationarity
49
As the investigation of the eﬀect of stationarity on separation performance was
the third main focus of this thesis, the entire present section is dedicated to
its discussion. In what follows, the eﬀect of signal stationarity on separation
performance and permutation realignment will be discussed.
3.5.1
Eﬀect on separation performance
In section 3.1.3, the limitation of ICA regarding source signals with a gaussian
distribution was discussed. An ICA algorithm based on HOS relies on maxi-
mizing non-gaussianity of components during separation, which in case of the
original sources having gaussian distributions will be futile. Solving the ICA
problem in the frequency-domain involves solving an LI ICA problem at each
frequency bin. It is therefore of crucial importance to investigate the distribution
of the frequency-domain time series at individual frequencies.
The sample kurtosis (as given in eq.
3.7), a quantiﬁer of non-gaussianity is
shown in ﬁgure 3.15 for each frequency bin of two generated white noise signals
and two speech signal samples. For all four signals, the sampling frequency was
16384 Hz, the window length used in the STFT was a Hamming window with
a length of 2048 samples, and the length of signals was 20 seconds. The two
stochastic noise signals had Laplacian (leptokurtic) and uniform (platykurtic)
temporal distributions, respectively.
(a) Generated stationary white noise
(b) Speech
Figure 3.15: Sample kurtosis of the frequency-domain time series at each frequency
bin. The value of deviation from 3 (dashed line) is a measure of non-gaussianity.
It is seen that in case of the generated noise signals, the sample kurtosis of all
frequency bins is very close to 3, which indicates that the distributions of the
time-series are gaussian. On the other hand, the frequency-domain time series of
speech signals exhibit kurtosis values generally much larger than 3 throughout
the majority of the frequency range. It is interesting to note that the stationary
signals become gaussian in the time-frequency plane when only looking at one
frequency at a time, even though the original temporal distribution of the signals
==PAGE:60==
50
Blind Source Separation
was non-gaussian. It has been found that this phenomenon keeps appearing if
the signals are stationary, regardless of the original distribution of the signal.
The explanation of these results is believed to be the following: when performing
STFT on a time signal, the windowing operation takes a ﬁnite fragment of the
signal, and estimates the frequency content of the signal by calculating the FFT
of this fragment. The window is then slided, a new fragment of the signal is
taken, and the FFT is calculated.
For a highly non-stationary time signal like speech, each of these signal fragments
will be diﬀerent from each other - since the signal exhibits large amplitude
variations over time. This is illustrated in ﬁgure 3.16. Therefore, it is expected
that large temporal variations will be present in the FFT components too. As
speech signals contain a large proportion of silence, it is expected that most
of the values will be centered around zero. Combining the expectations about
most of the signal being centered around zero together with the prediction on
large variations in the values, one would expect the time-series to have strongly
leptokurtic distributions. This is conﬁrmed by ﬁgure 3.15, where kurtosis values
reach up to the neighbourhood of 100 at certain frequency bins.
However, for stationary time signals that do not exhibit large amplitude varia-
tions over time, it is expected that the windowed signal fragments will be similar
to each other (see ﬁgure 3.16) and therefore also their FFT’s. However, it is
understood that the resulting spectra will not be the same at each time slot, as
that would mean that there are periodic components in the signal (as the anal-
ysis window is slided with a ﬁxed number of samples every time). This is not
possible since stochastic signals do not contain periodic components. If the time
signal is generated by a stationary process (with any probability distribution),
then every windowed fragment will be a ﬁnite sample of this stationary process.
The distribution of a ﬁnite sample of a random process will though always devi-
ate from its theoretical distribution, and this deviation will be gaussian. This is
what is seen when looking at the temporal distributions of individual frequency
bins: the content of the signal at a certain frequency deviates gaussianly from
one windowed segment to the other.
Car noise signals - which is in the main focus of this thesis - are though not com-
pletely stationary, since even when the engine is running at a constant rotation
speed, there are slight variations in the resulting time signal. This is illustrated
in ﬁgure 3.17, where it is shown that even though the kurtosis values at single
frequency are very close to 3, they slightly deviate from it.
We have seen that it is the variation in frequency content between subsequent
fragments of a signal during the windowing operation that determines the devi-
ation of the resulting frequency-domain time series from being gaussian. There-
==PAGE:61==
3.5 Eﬀect of signal stationarity
51
(a) Speech
(b) Stationary noise
Figure 3.16: Windowing operation on a highly non-stationary signal (speech) and a
generated white noise with uniform distribution. The fragments of the speech signal
analyzed by the diﬀerent windows are very diﬀerent from each other, while they are
much more similar in case of a stationary signal.
Figure 3.17: Sample kurtosis of frequency-domain time series for the engine noise
and rear tyre noise from a car. Even when the engine is running at a constant speed,
the signals are not completely stationary, which can be seen as the kurtosis slightly
deviates from 3. The window length in the STFT was 2048 samples
fore, the eﬀect of the window length on the result is interesting to investigate.
It turns out, that for the car noise signals used in this project, shortening the
window length results in slightly larger variations in the subsequent signal frag-
ments, resulting in more non-gaussianly distributed frequency components. This
is seen in ﬁgure 3.18, where the kurtosis of the same two car noise signals are
shown, just when the STFT is performed by windows of only 64 samples in
length. It is seen that shortening the window length results in the kurtosis val-
ues deviating slightly more from 3 (though nearly not as much as for speech
signals), which is expected to lead to better separation performance by bin-wise
ICA. However, in order to achieve this change in gaussianity, the window length
had to be kept extremely short, which would probably not be a feasible setup in
a practical application. For a sampling rate of 16384 Hz, a window length of 64
samples corresponds to around 4 ms, and for most real-world measurement envi-
ronemnts, the impulse responses would be far longer than that. Trunctation of
==PAGE:62==
52
Blind Source Separation
the impulse response in the windowing operation leads to erroneous estimation
of ﬁlters, and in the end, bad separation performance.
Figure 3.18: Sample kurtosis of frequency-domain time series for the engine noise
and rear tyre noise from a car. The window length was 64 samples.
We conclude that the stationarity of car noise signals will pose a problem for
the separation process, as the mixtures which are to be separated will have a
distribution in the frequeny domain that is close to gaussian. Non-gaussianity
of signals can only be ensured under conditions that are unrealizable in practice.
3.5.2
Eﬀect on permutation realignment
One of the most often used methods for realigning permutations across fre-
quency bins is the envelope continuity method, as described in section 3.2.2.
The main assumption of the method is that the frequency-domain time series of
signals originating from the same physical source will undergo similar amplitude
modulations, if they are suﬃciently close in frequency [17]. This is a good as-
sumption for non-stationary signals, with a lot of amplitude modulation present
in the signals. However, the lack of amplitude modulation in stationary signals
makes this assumption weak - in fact,the Fourier-coeﬃtients of a completely
stationary signal will be completely uncorrelated for all times [17].
Therefore, stationarity imposes a serious challenge when trying to solve the per-
mutation ambiguity. In case there is no correlation between temporal envelopes
across frequency, the envelope continuity method will fail at realigning the per-
mutations. From the combined permutation realignment method presented in
section 3.2.2, only the bin-wise beamforming approach is expected to yield useful
results - however, this presumes that the sources are spatially separated.
As we have seen in section 3.5.1, keeping the window length extremely short can
==PAGE:63==
3.5 Eﬀect of signal stationarity
53
"capture" the slight amount of non-stationarity in the car noise signals used in
this project. This slight non-stationary also shows up as increased correlation
of envelopes across frequency bins.
This is illustrated in ﬁgure 3.19, where
the correlation of temporal envelopes between each pair of frequency bins is
plotted for the same signal. For a longer window length of 2048 samples, the low
correlation between frequency bins is clearly seen by the low values everywhere
except for the main diagonal. If the window length is kept extremely short, the
slight non-stationarity in the tyre noise signal is captured, and correlations of
neighbouring envelopes gets larger.
(a) Window length = 2048 samples
(b) Window length = 64 samples
Figure 3.19: Eﬀect of window length on the correlation of temporal envelopes across
frequency bins. The correlation of each pair of frequencies is plotted for the same car
tyre noise signal for a long and for a short window length.
We conclude that the stationarity of signals has a detrimental eﬀect on both
the separation performance at individual frequency bins and on the ability of
the envelope continuity method to realign permutations. In case of car noise
signals, it is possible to counteract these negative eﬀects by keeping the window
length extremely short, however the use of such short window lengths will not
be possible in practical situations.
==PAGE:64==
54
Blind Source Separation
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 4
Implementation
The combined source separation method has been implemented in MATLAB.
The steps involved in the full processing chain is outlined in ﬁgure 4.1.
A
detailed theoretical description of each of the individual steps can be found in
chapters 2 and 3.
Figure 4.1: Flowchart of the steps involved in the implemented separation process.
The main MATLAB script performing the chain of operations is partly based on
the workﬂow implemented by Rémi Decorsière that performs frequency-domain
ICA for two sources and two outputs[2]. However, major modiﬁcations of the
code had to be implemented, as the code had to work for an arbitrary number of
sources and outputs. Restructuring of the code was also necessary as the number
of separated sources can change with frequency due to the estimation of the
==PAGE:66==
56
Implementation
number of components, therefore the size of the output vectors and the estimated
unmixing matrices car vary over frequency, which also had to be accounted for.
Moreover - as explained later - the scaling ambiguity had to be solved before the
permutation ambiguity in the present thesis, therefore additional modiﬁcations
of the source code had to be realized. Altogether, the main script of the full
chain of steps included over 700 lines of code.
In what follows, the implementation of each of the steps in the chain is described
with snippets of MATLAB code included as examples. Appendix A contains
additional MATLAB code.
4.1
Beamforming
Although beamforming is not the ﬁrst processing block in ﬁgure 4.1, it can po-
tentially appear three places in the chain - in the estimation of number of sources,
the permutation realignment, and at the ﬁnal beamforming step. Therefore it is
practical to start the desciption of the implementation with beamforming before
moving on to the rest of the steps.
In this thesis, the most fundamental of beamforming algorithms, the delay-and-
sum algorithm got implemented, which is described in detail section 2.1. The
focus of the present project was on investigating the possibilities of combining
blind source separation with any beamforming method in general, therefore the
choice of the beamforming algorithm itself was of second priority. Exchanging
the beamforming steps in the workﬂow used in this thesis to another algorithm
should be fairly straightforward, though.
As mentioned in section 2.1, beamforming can be performed either in the time-
domain or the frequency domain. Using the time-domain approach results in
some quantization noise being added to the results (unless fractional delays are
implemented, which were not in this thesis). However, obtaining the results in
the time-domain makes it possible to listen to the results, which was desired
in this case.
Moreover, the amount of quantization noise in the results was
negligible. For these reasons, time-domain beamforming got implemented in
this project.
The delay-and-sum calculations are performed by beamforming.m and has
the following function call:
1
function [ X,Y,sum ] = beamforming(rm,p,z,res,Fs)
==PAGE:67==
4.1 Beamforming
57
The input argument rm is an array holding the x and y coordinates of the
microphones in the array (the term rm in equation 2.3). The input p is a matrix
holding the recorded time signals by the array, the i’th row of the matrix being
the time signal of the i’th microphone. The parameters z, res and Fs are
the focus distance, the resolution (number of points on the focus plane) and the
sampling frequency of the time signals, respectively. The output sum is an array
with res × res rows, each holding the resulting beamformed time signal for
each of the points on the focus plane. X and Y are both 2D arrays containing
the x and y coordinates of the points on the focus plane, respectively.
The function calculates the delays from each microphone to each point of the
focus plane from equation 2.3 in the following loop:
1
for i = 1:length(rm) %for all mics
2
dist = sqrt((X−rm(1,i)).^2 + (Y−rm(2,i)).^2 + z^2); %|r−rm|
3
delays(:,:,i) = (r−dist)/c; % (|r|−|r−rm|)/c
4
end
after which the function loops over all points on the focus plane and over all
microphones, applying the delays to each microphone signal. This results in a
threefold-nested loop:
1
for i = 1:res
2
for j = 1:res
3
for k = 1:length(rm)
4
y = delaysig(p(k,:),delays(i,j,k),Fs); %delay signals
5
sum(res*(j−1) + i,:) = sum(res*(j−1) + i,:) + y; %sum signals
6
end
7
%normalize with the number of mics
8
sum(res*(j−1) + i,:) = sum(res*(j−1) + i,:)/(length(rm));
9
end
10
end
which unfortunately makes the code run very slow. To speed up runtime, the
supervisors of this thesis have made a C implementation of the above described
function available. The C code can be compiled by MEX and can be called from
a MATLAB script with an ordinary function call.
If a color map is to be generated of the full frequency range of the signals, then
the value at each point of the map is simply the RMS value of the beamformed
signal in dB:
1
map(j,i) = 20*log10(rms(sum(M*(i−1) + j,:))/2e−5);
where map(j,i) is the point on the color map in the j’th row and the i’th
column. Color maps for a single frequency line (see 2.2) can be generated as
==PAGE:68==
58
Implementation
1
map(j,i) = 20*log10(rms(sum_fft(fl:fu))/2e−5);
where sum_fft is the FFT of the respective beamformed signal, while fl and
fu are the indices of the lower and upper limiting frequencies of the frequency
bin in question. The frequency span of a given bin depends of course on the fre-
quency resolution of the analysis (that is, the window length used in the STFT),
so the limiting frequency between a bin at frequency f1 and the neighboring bin
at f2 will be (f2 −f1)/2.
4.2
Estimation of Number of Sources
Before separation, an estimation of the number of components at each frequency
can be run, as explained in section 3.4. The estimation step is optional, as there
is a possibility of specifying the number of components explicitly, in which case,
the separation will look for the same number of sources at all frequencies.
If the vector containing the frequency bins is F, then the goal of this step is to
generate a vector dim of size length(F) containing the number of sources at
each frequency, as illustrated in ﬁgure 3.7. If the algorithm should look for the
same number of sources at every frequency, then this vector can be speciﬁed as
dim = n_src*ones(1,(wl/2)+1), where n_src is the speciﬁed number of
sources and wl is the window length used in the STFT operation.
Looking for varying numbers of sources at each frequency results in vectors of
separated sources y and unmixing matrices W (see eq. 3.3) of varying sizes.
Let us suppose that the maximal estimated number of sources throughout the
frequency range is Nmax. At frequency bins, where the estimated number is
N < Nmax, there will be "missing data" for the remaining Nmax−N time-series.
Returning to the time domain is done by simply equating the time-series at these
frequency bins to zero, and performing ISTFT on these "partial spectrograms".
No "smoothing" of these partial spectra before ISTFT has been implemented
in this thesis. For better comprehensibility, ﬁgure 4.2 illustrates the concept.
In this example, the estimated number of souces was 2 throughout most of the
frequency range, however there are two sub-bands where the estimated number
is 3.
In the following, the implementation of a few investigated estimation approaches
is described in detail. Additional code is found in Appendix A.
==PAGE:69==
4.2 Estimation of Number of Sources
59
Figure 4.2: Resulting frequency-domain time series when looking for diﬀerent num-
bers of sources across frequency. One of the spectrograms has "missing" time series at
certain frequencies.
4.2.1
PCA
In the PCA estimation approach, the number of components is estimated based
on an EVD of the covariance matrix of the data. First, STFT is performed on
the recordings (see the next section 4.3), and EVD of the covariance matrix is
performed at each frequency bin. This is done by the following code snippet:
1
for i = 1:length(F)
2
Pf_m = Pf{i} −mean(Pf{i},2)*ones(1,size(Pf{i},2)); %remove mean
3
CovP = (Pf_m * Pf_m') / (size(Pf_m,2)−1); %covariance matrix
4
[~,D] = eig(CovP);
%EVD
5
e = flipud(diag(D));
6
eigvals(:,i) = e(1:n_e);
7
end
where Pf is a cell array, in which Pf{i} holds the i’th frequency bin of each
recording. The data is centered by subtracting the sample mean, after which the
covariance matrix is generated as in eq. 3.8. The vector e holds the eigenvalues
sorted in descending order, after which the n_e highest eigenvalues are collected
in eigvals for each frequency.
The estimation is done by setting a threshold dB_abs_thresh relative to the
maximum value in the eigenvalue spectrum. The estimated number of compo-
nents is the number of eigenvalues at each frequency, that exceed this threshold:
==PAGE:70==
60
Implementation
1
for i = 1:length(F)
2
temp = (10*log10(eigvals(:,i)) −...
3
(max(max(10*log10(eigvals(:,:)))) −dB_abs_thresh));
4
dim(i) = sum(temp>0);
5
end
4.2.2
ICA-by-Blocks
The ICA-by-Blocks method has been implemented based on the theory described
in section 3.4.2. First, the dataset is split into two halves, where the elements
are chosen randomly:
1
inds = randperm(M,round(M/2));
2
P1 = Pf{i}(inds,:);
3
P2 = Pf{i}(setdiff(1:M,inds),:);
where M is the number of recordings. Subsequently, Nmax rounds of ICA is per-
formed on both sets by the JADE algorithm (for the implementation of JADE,
see section 4.4), where Nmax is the maximal expected number of components.
The correlations between the results from the two blocks are generated and
sorted in descending order, then collected into the array C_vectors for each
run:
1
for i = 1:N_max
2
[~,Y1]=jade(P1,i);
3
[~,Y2]=jade(P2,i);
4
C_v = reshape(corr(Y1',Y2'),1,i^2);
5
C_v = sort((abs(C_v)),'descend');
6
C_vectors(i,1:i) = C_v(1:i);
7
end
The C_vectors array corresponds to the curves plotted in ﬁgure 4.3.
As
discussed in section 3.4.2, there are several ways to estimate the number of
components from such a set of data. One of them is to calculate the mean of
all the curves in C_vectors and locate the steepest slope, as the number of
components should ideally correspond to a large drop in the correlation values
[20]. This is illustrated by ﬁgure 4.3 and is done by the following code:
1
C_mean = sum(C_vectors)./(N_max:−1:1);
2
dim = find(diff(C_mean) == min(diff(C_mean)));
However, after some experimentation it turned out that a more robust estimate
of the number of sources is the curve with the highest median value:
==PAGE:71==
4.2 Estimation of Number of Sources
61
Figure 4.3: Correlations of separated components by ICA-by-Blocks. The largest drop
in the mean curve is as estimation of the number of sources.
1
for i = 1:N_max
2
m(i) = median(C_vectors(i,1:i));
3
end
4
[~,dim] = max(m);
4.2.3
Estimation by Beamforming
Estimation of the number of sources by beamforming is done by generating
the beamforming map of the original recordings as described in section 4.1 and
counting the occurring peaks in the image as described in section 3.4.5. This is
done by the findmaxima.m function, which is used in the following way:
1
for i = fl:fu
2
[~,~,I] = findmaxima(X,Y,maps{i},peak_thresh,mindist);
3
dim = length(I);
4
end
Here, maps{i} is a 2D array containing the beamforming image of the i’th
frequency bin, while X and Y contain the meshgrid of x and y coordinates of
the points of the focus plane. The dynamic range threshold and the minimum
allowed distance between peaks is speciﬁed in the variables peak_thresh and
mindist, respectively. The estimation is only calculated between fl and fu -
which are the indices of the lower and upper frequency limits of the array - since
there is no need to do the calculations for frequencies outside the working range.
In the ﬁrst two output arguments, the function returns the x and y coordinates
of the peaks that it had found, while in the third argument it returns the same
locations with linear indexing.
The length of this vector corresponds to the
number of peaks found, which is the estimation of the number of sources.
==PAGE:72==
62
Implementation
The full code of findmaxima.m can be found in Appendix A.
4.3
STFT, ISTFT
A MATLAB implementation of the Short-Time Fourier Transformation oper-
ation and its inverse transformation was taken from MathWorks’ online File
Exchange community, implemented by Hristo Zhivomirov1. The STFT func-
tion has the following function call:
1
function [stft, f, t] = stft(x, wlen, wtype, h, nfft, fs)
where x is the time-domain signal, and stft is the resulting time-frequency
representation.
The function returns the corresponding frequency and time
vectors in f and t, respectively. Adjustable parameters are the length of the
window wlen, window type wtype (uniform, Hanning or Hamming), hop size h
(distance of the window slide in samples), the number of ﬀt points nfft which
in this case is the same as the window length, and the sampling frequency fs.
The inverse transformation has a similar interface:
1
function [x, t] = istft(stft, wtype, h, nfft, fs)
which returns the signal in the time-domain together with the respective time
axis. The implementation has been tested with various parameter settings, and
functional operation has been veriﬁed. Figure 4.4 illustrates the operation on a
short snippet of a speech signal - it is seen that the reconsructed signal overlaps
completely with the original, except for the ﬁrst and last segments, since there
is no window overlap in the beginning and at the end.
4.4
JADE
A MATLAB implementation of the JADE algorithm by its inventor, Jean-
Francois Cardoso is available online2. The code performs source separation for
complex valued signals including all the preprocessing steps discussed in section
3.1.4. The function has the following call:
1
function [A,S]=jade(X,m)
1Code
available
at:
http://www.mathworks.com/matlabcentral/ﬁleexchange/45577-
inverse-short-time-fourier-transformation–istft–with-matlab-implementation
2URL: http://perso.telecom-paristech.fr/ cardoso/Algo/Jade/jade.m
==PAGE:73==
4.5 Mapping back to the microphone space
63
Figure 4.4: Original and reconstructed signals after performing STFT and ISTFT.
where X is a matrix containing the mixtures row-wise and m speciﬁes the num-
ber of sources that the algorithm will return. The returned variables are the
estimated mixing matrix A and a matrix S containing the separated signals.
After performing STFT on the mixtures, the jade.m function is called for every
frequency bin as
1
[A{k},Y{k}]=jade(X{k},dim(k));
where A{k}, Y{k} and X{k} are the mixing matrix, separated sources and orig-
inal mixtures at the k’th frequency respectively, and dim(k) is the estimated
number of components at the same frequency.
4.5
Mapping back to the microphone space
As discussed in section 3.2.1, each separated source is mapped back to the
microphone space by multiplying with the respective column of the estimated
mixing matrix. The purpose of this step is two-fold: ﬁrstly, as seen earlier, it
solves the scaling ambiguity. Secondly, by mapping each separated component
back to the microphone space, the resulting set of signals will provide the input
for the beamforming algorithm. As an example, let us assume that yi and is
the i’th separated signal and A is the estimated mixing matrix that the ICA
algorithm returns. Let xyi denote a vector containing the mappings of yi in
each of the M microphones. Then xyi is calculated as
xyi = ai · yi
(4.1)
where ai is the i’th column of the mixing matrix. It is seen that xyi is a vector
containing M signals, which are all versions of yi that have been corrected
==PAGE:74==
64
Implementation
for the random amplitude and phase scalings added by the separation process.
Therefore, xyi will function as the input for the beamforming algorithm.
Note that the mapping is done one frequency bin at a time, therefore there will
be M resulting mappings of all N separated sources at each of the F frequencies.
4.6
Permutation realignment
The permutation realignment step is solved by the combined method outlined
in section 3.2.2.4. Normally, this step comes before solving the scaling ambi-
guity, but it has been shown in section 3.2.1, that the order of these two steps
are interchangeable. In this case it is necessary to map the outputs back to
the microphone space ﬁrst, as beamforming calculations have to be performed
during the permutation realignment step. However, mapping the outputs to
microphones results in M versions of each separated source, therefore the per-
mutation now has to be solved on N × M scale-corrected signals instead of N
separated sources. The adapted workﬂow for achieving this is the following:
• Apply ISTFT on the scale-corrected - but yet not permutation-aligned -
signals mapped back to the microphone space.
• Apply bin-wise beamforming on the resulting time-signals. Save the x-y
coordinates of the maxima in each of the resulting beamforming images.
• Apply k-means clustering on the vector of these peak locations and calcu-
late the silhouette value of each assignment. If the silhouette at a given
frequency bin is below a threshold, consider the assignment being "weak".
• At frequency bins where k-means assigns multiple peaks to the same clus-
ter (i.e. the assignment is not a permutation), consider the assignment
"unconﬁdent".
• At frequency bins with "weak" or "unconﬁdent" assignments, or which fall
outside the working range of the array, ignore the permutation returned
by k-means and apply the envelope continuity method instead.
• Finally, after obtaining the new permutations, permute the bins of the
"raw" (unscaled) output signals yi in the time-frequency plane. Make a
new set of mappings of them (this time with the permutation ambiguity
resolved), and perform ISTFT again. Performing the ISTFT step twice
during the permutation realignment step might seem senseless, but it has
been found that it is quicker to permute N signals and map them again,
than applying the permutations to the N × M scaled signals individually.
==PAGE:75==
4.7 Evaluation of separation
65
K-means clustering was done by the built-in function kmeans in MATLAB’s
Statistics Toolbox:
1
[perms,C] = kmeans(peaks',max(dim),'Replicates',10,'EmptyAction','drop');
where peaks is a 2 × length(F) array containing the x-y coordinates of peaks
and max(dim) is the maximal estimated number of sources, the number of clus-
ters that the algorithm should partition the dataset into. The ’Replicates’,’10’
parameter pair makes the function run the partitioning 10 times and choosing
the best clustering. This is in order to avoid that the algorithm converges to a lo-
cal optimum. During these 10 iterations, some of the results might be erroneous
with clusters that do not have any assigned peaks. ’EmptyAction’,’drop’
will ensure that the algorithm does not stop with an error in this case, but
continues running. perms and C are the cluster assignments and the cluster
centroid locations, respectively. Calculating the silhouette values is also done
by a built-in MATLAB function:
1
sils = silhouette(peaks',perms);
"Unconﬁdent" frequencies where the envelope continuity method should be used
instead are chosen as described in the list above. The code for deciding the
conﬁdence of a frequency bin can be found in Appendix A. The function used
for performing the envelope continuity method is a slightly modiﬁed version of
the implementation made by Mathias Immanuel Nielsen [1].
4.7
Evaluation of separation
The evaluation of the separation performance is done by calculating the SIR
increase (eq.3.25) both as a single-number value and frequency-wise for each
bin. This type of evaluation can only be done for controlled tests, where the
individual sources are available without the presence of the others.
The SIR calculations are done by calculateSIR.m:
1
[inSIR, inSIR_f, outSIR, outSIR_f, SIR_i] = calculateSIR( x_ind, ...
2
An, Wn, J_ref, dim, Fs, wl, wtype, hop)
The input x_ind is a cell array, where x_ind{i} holds the individual record-
ings in each microphone of the i’th source alone. These are obtained by switch-
ing oﬀall other sources and making a recording. An and Wn are the mixing
==PAGE:76==
66
Implementation
and unmixing matrices estimated by the BSS, J_ref is the index of the ref-
erence microphone J in the array, and the rest of the input parameters are as
explained earlier. The ﬁrst four outputs are the input- and output SIR values
both as single-number values and as functions of frequency, while the last out-
put is a vector holding a permutation of the source indices, which describe the
assignment of original sources to separated sources as explained in section 3.3.
The function starts out by calling unmix_recordings.m, which performs the
"unmixing" of the individual recordings x_ind{i} by the unmixing matrices
estimated by BSS. The function call is
1
[yfi, Ypfi, Xsp_ind] = unmix_recordings(x,An,Wn,J_ref,Fs,wl,wtype,hop)
where x is the vector of recordings to be unmixed and all other input pa-
rameters are as before.
The ﬁrst two outputs are the time signals and the
time-frequency representations of the unmixed sources, while the last output
is the time-frequency representation of the recordings in the reference micro-
phone J, which is used for calculating the frequency-wise InputSIR (eq. 3.23).
unmix_recordings.m function is a modiﬁed version of the code from [2].
Subsequently, the function calculates the contributions from each original source
to each separated output and assigns them to each other on a highest RMS basis
(as described in section 3.3). Finally, SIR values are calculated for both the full
signals and for individual frequency bins from formulas 3.23 and 3.24.
The full code of the calculateSIR.m and unmix_recordings.m functions
can be found in Appendix A.
==PAGE:77==
Chapter 5
Simulations
In order to examine the performance of the implemented separation method
described in chapter 4, simulations have been designed and written in MATLAB.
This chapter describes these simulations and presents the obtained results.
5.1
Simulation setup
To be able to verify the separation method, the geometrical aspects of a real
measurement environment have to be simulated, including the geometry of the
microphone array, locations of sources and potential reﬂections from surfaces.
A set of signals have to be generated, which are simulated recordings from a
microphone array. The code for performing the simulation is presented below,
and explained step-by-step afterwards.
1
rm = create_array('Pizza');
2
z = 3;
3
Fs = 16384;
4
5
%point source positions
6
source_pos = [
7
1.1
1.2 z;...
8
−1.2
1
z;...
9
0.9 −1.1 z;...
10
]';
11
plane_pos = [−1.2, 3, −1.4, 2.1, 8, −2]; %coordinates of reflective planes
12
orient = [2 2 1 1 3 3]; %orientation of planes (x = 1, y = 2, z = 3);
13
14
%generate mic signals
15
[p,p_ind] = generate_mic_signals(rm,source_pos,plane_pos,orient,Fs);
First, the geometry of the array has to be decided. This is speciﬁed in a 2D
vector rm containing the coordinates of the microphones - which is the same
geometry that beamforming.m uses when generating the mappings (see section
4.1). The vector rm can either be speciﬁed manually, if the array geometry is
regular or simple to describe, or it can be loaded e.g. by parsing an XML ﬁle
containing the array data. Such an XML ﬁle for the 60-channel "Pizza" array
was made available by the supervisors. The function create_array.m parses
==PAGE:78==
68
Simulations
this XML ﬁle and ﬁlls up the rm vector with the mic positions.
Next, virtual point sources are placed in front of the microphone array. This
is done by creating a 2D vector source_pos containing the x-y-z coordinates
of the sources. It is assumed that the array is located in the z = 0 plane. For
correct results, it is important to ensure that the z coordinate of every virtual
point source is equal to the focus distance z used in beamforming.m.
There is a possibility to include a number of reﬂections in the simulated sound
ﬁeld. In the above code, this is done by specifying a number of reﬂective surfaces
plane_pos, which contain the distance of the reﬂective plane from the origin.
The orientation of these planes can only be chosen to be parallel to the main
coordinate axes. For example, the position of the plane is 1.2 and the corre-
sponding element in orient is 3, then the plane will be located at a distance
of z = 1.2 and will be parallel to the x-y plane. If no reﬂective surfaces are
speciﬁed, then the simulated measurement conditions will be anechoic.
Reﬂections are modelled by carefully positioned image sources. A microphone
sees a reﬂection from a ﬂat surface just as if it was radiated by an identical
source, mirrored to the surface. This is illustrated in ﬁgure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Reﬂections modelled by image sources. There is one real source in front of
the array and two reﬂective surfaces. The source is mirrored to each reﬂective surface,
and the resulting image sources radiate the same signal.
Modelling reﬂections by image sources assumes full and specular reﬂections from
the reﬂective planes. This means that no absorption of energy, scattering or any
other eﬀect from a realistic surface impedance is included in the model. In the
present implementation, only ﬁrst order reﬂections are modelled, which means
that reﬂected waves do not get reﬂected again. Modelling higher order reﬂections
==PAGE:79==
5.1 Simulation setup
69
would involve having to mirror every image source again to all reﬂective surfaces,
which would quickly result in a very high number of sources and would increase
runtime drastically. It is believed that excluding higher order reﬂections from
the model does not have a serious eﬀect on the results.
Finally, the function generate_mic_signals.m is called with the speciﬁed
parameters. The full MATLAB code of the function can be found in Appendix
A. The function calculates the positions of the (ﬁrst order) image sources and
loads a set of sound signals from a ﬁle, which the sources in the model will
radiate. Afterwards, the distances between every microphone and every source
(both true and image sources) are calculated, and the radiated signals from the
respective sources are delayed assuming spherical waves, based on the same ge-
ometrical considerations as when performing delay-and-sum beamforming. The
resulting signal in the microphones are thus
pi =
n
X
j=1
Aj
rji
sj(t −∆t), with ∆t = rji
c
(5.1)
where pi is the signal observed by the i’th microphone, Aj is the amplitude of
the signal radiated by the j’th source, rji is the distance between the j’th source
and the i’th microphone, c is the speed of sound, sj(t) is the signal radiated by
the j’th source and n is the number of sources including image sources.
The generate_mic_signals.m function returns the observed mixtures of
sources in the array p as well as the individual recordings of each source alone
in the cell array p_ind (when only one source and its corresponding image
sources are active). The latter are to be used for SIR calculations.
After the generation of the microphone signals it is possible to add noise to each
recording to make the simulated signals more realistic. In the simplest case, this
can be gaussian random noise generated by MATLAB, i.e.
1
x = p + a*randn(size(p,1),size(p,2));
and the same for p_ind. The variable a is the desired amplitude of the noise.
After the simulated recordings from the array are ready, they serve as the input
to the chain of operations outlined in chapter 4.
==PAGE:80==
70
Simulations
5.2
Source signals
The source signals used in the simulations were chosen in a way that facilitates
testing of the method’s performance in the main focus areas of the project - that
is, permutation realignment, estimation of number of components and eﬀect
of stationarity. Based on the theory and considerations described throughout
chapter 3, the following signal properties are of relevance:
• Non-gaussianity (deviation of kurtosis from 3) of frequency-domain time
series for ensuring good bin-wise ICA separation
• High correlation between neighboring frequency bins for ensuring accept-
able permutation realignment by envelope continuity
• Known frequency content for verifying the performance of the number of
components estimation per frequency bin
Note that the ﬁrst two elements both depend on the stationarity of signals
compared to the length of the analysis window. For details, see section 3.5.
All signals in the simulations were 7 seconds in length, and the sampling fre-
quency was 16384 Hz in all cases. The length of the analysis window of the STFT
operation is 2048 samples in all the presented results, unless stated otherwise.
5.2.1
Car signals
As the main objective of the project is to investigate the usability of the method
for NSI applications in the automotive industry, the performance was tested for
sounds emitted by cars. Three types of recordings were chosen: 1) the sound of
an engine, 2) noise generated by the front tyre touching the road, 3) the same
road-noise from the rear tyre. An important feature of these recordings was that
each signal originated from a diﬀerent car and a diﬀerent measurement session.
The point of this is that if the three signals were simultaneous recordings of
the same running car, then leakage between microphones would occur - i.e the
sound of the engine would leak into the microphones recoding the tyres and vica
versa. Such crosstalk between the recordings is deﬁnitely undesired, as it will
make the signals correlated and ICA will not be able to separate them. In the
work of Mathias Immanuel Nielsen, this is exactly what happened [1].
The eﬀect of stationarity on separation and on the permutation realignment can
also be tested by car signals. Cars running with constant rpm (rotations per
==PAGE:81==
5.2 Source signals
71
minute) generate noise that is more or less stationary, whereas signals from cars
that accelerate or slow down are more non-stationary. By testing the method for
both types of car signals (constant and varying rpm), the eﬀect of stationarity
can be examined.
Figure 5.2 shows the three relevant signal properties for constant running car
and accelerating car recordings.
Figure 5.2:
Frequency spectra, kurtosis and correlation of frequency bins for car
noise signals at constant running speed (above) and for acceleration (below).
The
three signals in both cases were: engine noise, front tyre noise and rear tyre noise.
Each individual signal is taken from a diﬀerent car measurement to avoid leakage
and therefore correlatedness between the recordings. The right ﬁgures show the inter-
frequency correlations of the engine recordings.
The frequency spectra of the three signals are basically overlapping in both
cases. The stationarity of the constant rpm recordings result in the bin-wise
kurtosis being very close to 3 throughout most of the frequency range and causes
low correlation between temporal envelopes. For an accelerating car though,
the additional non-stationarity results in increased kurtosis values - for some
frequencies, up to a value of 60, but on average between 5 and 15 throughout the
frequency range. Correlations between neighboring bins are somewhat better,
but still relatively low.
==PAGE:82==
72
Simulations
5.2.2
Speech signals
Applying the method for separating speech signals is though not the primary
objective of the thesis, however it is interesting to investigate the eﬀect of this
signal type on performance, as the majority of the related literature concerns
BSS applications on speech signals.
As seen in section 3.5, the highly non-
stationarity nature of speech signals is expected to result in better separation of
signals at each bin. Moreover, the envelope continuity method for solving the
permutation ambiguity is also expected to yield better results.
Figure 5.3 shows the relevant properties of the speech signals used for the sim-
ulations.
Figure 5.3:
Frequency spectra, kurtosis and correlation of frequency bins for the
speech signals used in the simulations. The used signals were 7-second long recordings
of three diﬀerent male talkers.
As for the car signals presented previously, the frequency spectra of the three
speech samples are also overlapping. Kurtosis values deviate from one frequency
bin to another, but are much higher than 3 for the entire frequency range. The
third ﬁgure shows that there is a good correlation between neighboring frequency
bins.
5.2.3
Generated signals
Test signals can also be generated in MATLAB, in which case one can be sure
that the signals are uncorrelated, while also having full control on the rest
of the desired signal properties. Particularly for testing the performance of the
estimation of number of components methods, it is good idea to generate signals
with appropriately deﬁned frequency contents, so that one knows the "right
answer" for the number of sources at each frequency.
This can be achieved
==PAGE:83==
5.2 Source signals
73
by generating random white noise signals in MATLAB and band-limiting them
by appropriately chosen ﬁlters. Care must be taken though, since generating
white noise with any distribution will result in a perfectly stationary signal -
therefore a bit of non-stationarity has to be added to the signal by applying some
amplitude modulation on the pure white noise. The goal in this simulation was
to generate signals, which have similar properties to the accelerating car signals
with regard to inter-frequency correlations and kurtosis, but have well-deﬁned
frequency contents.
Figure 5.4 shows the applied envelopes for the present
simulation purposes. In the ﬁgures, w(t) denotes a generated white noise signal
with a laplacian distribution.
Figure 5.4: Applied amplitude modulations for simulation purposes. All three signals
consist of random white noise with a laplacian distribution, applied diﬀerent envelopes.
Subsequently, appropriate band limiting ﬁlters can be applied to "shape" the
frequency content. Figure 5.5 shows the resulting properties of the generated
signals.
Figure 5.5: Frequency spectra, kurtosis and correlation of frequency bins for the gen-
erated signals used in the simulations. The three signals were the amplitude-modulated
noise signals proposed in ﬁgure 5.4. The right ﬁgure shows the inter-frequency corre-
lations of the ﬁrst signal (denoted by s1(t) above).
==PAGE:84==
74
Simulations
The properties of the generated signals resemble the accelerating car in the sense
that the inter-frequency correlation of envelopes is weak, and that the kurtosis
values are higher than 3 - around the neighbourhood of 8 on average. However,
the spectra have clear overlapping and non-overlapping sections, which is good
when testing the estimation of number of components method. Below 600 Hz,
there are two sources present, between 600 and 1700 Hz, all three sources are
active, while above 1700 Hz, there is only one source.
5.3
Simulation results
This section presents the results of the above described simulations. Simula-
tions have been run both for anechoic conditions and with reﬂections present.
Results for both the estimation of number of components and for the separation
performance are presented.
5.3.1
Estimation of number of components
Anechoic Conditions
Testing the methods for estimating the number of components have yielded
the results shown in ﬁgure 5.6. The signals used for the simulation were the
three band-limited noise signals presented in the previous section, where the
"right answer" for the number of components is known. The three point sources
were positioned 3m in front of the array, well-separated from each other with
a distance of 1,7m, 2,5m and 3.4m between them, respectively. For the ICA-
by-Blocks method, the median estimator was used. AIC and MDL yielded the
exact same results, therefore only AIC is plotted.
It is seen in the curves, that the PCA, ICA-by-Blocks and the AIC methods
yielded the right results. Apart from a little shift in the "transition" frequencies
where the number of components is changing, they all estimate the same number
throughout the entire frequency range. The ICA-by-Blocks estimator has a few
"outliers" at certain bins. This can be ﬁxed by "smoothing" the estimation
curves by a sliding average window.
The beamforming estimator underestimates the number of components below
800 Hz. Even though the sources are relatively far apart, the resolution of the
pizza array is not suﬃcient to distinguish the peaks below these frequencies.
Above 800Hz, the estimation is good.
==PAGE:85==
5.3 Simulation results
75
Figure 5.6: Estimated numbers of components at frequency bins by the implemented
estimation methods. The test signals were the band-limited nonstationary random noise
signals. Simulation conditions were anechoic. Some of the curves were slightly dis-
placed in the vertical direction for better visibility.
The method detecting reﬂected components by measuring correlations (denoted
as "ICA Corr." in the ﬁgure) highly overestimates the numbers. This is under-
standable, since the method relies on excluding components that are thought to
correspond to reﬂections, and keeping the rest. Since there are no reﬂections to
exclude, the method estimates the maximal number at every frequency - which
in this case was ﬁve, but depends on the run parameters of the algorithm.
Reﬂections present in the simulation
The estimators were tested in an environment, where reﬂections are present.
Every parameter was kept the same as in the previous simulation, except that 18
reﬂective surfaces were added to the model. The resulting number of reﬂections
is expected to be much lower than in a real-world case, as every wave only gets
reﬂected once from each surface. However, simulated reﬂections were deﬁnitely
stronger than in reality, since no energy absorption at the surfaces is modelled.
The results are shown in ﬁgure 5.7.
As seen from the plot, the presence of reﬂections have degraded the performance
of every estimator drastically. The beamforming estimation method gets "con-
fused" because of the extra peaks present in the images. The AIC and MDL
estimators highly overestimate the number at every frequency - although this
was expected for signals of ﬁnite length, as explained in section 3.4.4. The PCA
method also overestimates, since reﬂections appear as dominant values in the
eigenvalue spectrum and ﬁnding a "knee point" becomes impossible, no mat-
ter how the threshold is set. The detection of reﬂections method overestimates
as well. The method is very sensitive to the threshold on the allowed correla-
==PAGE:86==
76
Simulations
Figure 5.7: Estimated numbers of components at frequency bins by the implemented
estimation methods. 18 reﬂective surfaces were included in the model
tion value and the choice of that threshold is rather arbitrary. The fact that
the shape of the curve from the detection of reﬂections estimator is inverted
compared to the others, is not well understood.
The estimator that comes closest to the "right answer" is the ICA-by-Blocks
(with the median estimator). However, in this setup it also fails above 1700
Hz, where it sees two sources instead of only one. On the other hand, it has
been found that when the source spectra are relatively overlapping in the entire
range (such as for the car and speech signals used), then the ICA-by-Blocks
estimator gives a decent and stable estimation of the number of components at
the majority of the frequency range. Therefore, for the rest of the tests, this is
the only estimator used.
5.3.2
Separation performance
Separation was tested for the anechoic and reverberant setups. Cases with 2 and
3 sources were simulated, however, since the same conclusions could be drawn
from both cases, results from the 3-source simulations will be presented only.
The eﬀect of looking for a ﬁxed number of sources or estimating it automatically
have been investigated in each case. However, it was found that major improve-
ment in the separation is only achieved if the signal spectra are non-overlapping.
On the other hand, substantial degradation of separation performance is expe-
rienced, even if there is a slight error in the estimation. The results presented in
this section for the car and speech signals were obtained by keeping the number
==PAGE:87==
5.3 Simulation results
77
of sources ﬁxed for all frequencies - the eﬀect of automatic estimation of the
ﬁnal results is investigated in detail in section 6.2.
Anechoic Conditions
The best case scenario for the developed separation method is if the sources
are spatially well separated, the signals are non-stationary and the conditions
are anechoic. In such a setup, separation is expected to yield good results due
to the high kurtosis, the envelope continuity and the beamforming permutation
approach will work due to the good inter-frequency correlations and the spatial
separation, and there are no reﬂections that "disturb" the measurement. Figure
5.8 shows the results for the bin-wise SIR increase (equation 3.25) for such a
setup with speech signals used. The permutation has ﬁrst been resolved by the
pure envelope continuity method and afterwards, the combined method.
Figure 5.8: Bin-wise SIR increase for three spatially well-separated speech sources.
The envelope continuity method (top) and the combined permutation realignment
method (bottom) have been tried.
We recall from section 3.3 that the absolute value of the bin-wise SIR is a
measure of the quality of the separation at an individual frequency bin, while a
negative sign means an error in the permutation. The absolute values in both
ﬁgures are close to 20 dB, which suggests good separation quality. For the pure
envelope continuity method, the error propagation property is clearly seen by the
permutation mismatch at broad, consecutive frequency ranges. The combined
realignment method is seen to remove the eﬀect of error propagation and the
==PAGE:88==
78
Simulations
permutation realignment is essentially perfect. Listening to the separated signals
conﬁrms this: sounds are clear and understandable, almost no leakage from other
sources can be heard. The single-number SIR values were around 8-11 dB for
the envelope continuity case and around 15-17 dB for the combined method.
Much worse performance is anticipated, if the signals are stationary; both the
separation and the permutation realignment is expected to be poor. However,
as discussed in section 3.5, there is a slight amount of non-stationarity in the car
signals used, which can be "captured" if the window length is kept extremely
short. Figure 5.9 illustrates the SIR results for three constant speed car signals
for an analysis window length of 2048 samples and for 256 samples.
Figure 5.9: Bin-wise SIR increase for spatially well-separated car sources. The used
window lengths were 2048 (top) and 256 (bottom) samples
The absolute values in the SIR curves are generally lower than for speech signals,
which suggests worse separation quality at individual frequencies. This can be
conﬁrmed by taking a look at the beamforming images of the separated sources
at a single bin, where substantial leakage from the other sources is seen:
For a longer analysis window, the SIR values change sign randomly, which means
that neither beamforming nor envelope continuity was able to realign the per-
mutations. However, when using a much shorter window length, all the SIR
values are positive, which means that the permutation could be realigned per-
fectly. Listening to the signals gave the impression of essentially no separation
for the long window, and fairly acceptable separation for the short window -
==PAGE:89==
5.3 Simulation results
79
Figure 5.10: Bin-wise beamforming images of the three separated car sources at 1400
Hz. Substantial leakage from other sources is seen.
although some crosstalk could still be heard.
We conclude that keeping the window length extremely short can help the is-
sue of stationarity. However, the previous simulations were run for completely
anechoic conditions. In a real environment, reﬂections will always be present,
therefore the window length can not be kept so short, since that would result in
a severe truncation of the impulse responses, leading to erroneous estimations
of the ﬁlters.
For the accelerating car signals, the results are expected to be better, as the
signals are non-stationary. It is interesting to see how the spatial separation
of sources aﬀects the performance. Figure 5.11 shows the SIR results for the
accelerating car signals where the distance between the two nearest sources was
1.6m and 0.5m in a distance of 3m in front of the array, respectively.
The absolute SIR values are around 15 dB, which suggests better separation than
for the constant running car, but worse than for speech. This is understandable,
since the signals are not as heavily non-stationary as the speech signals, but
deﬁnitely less stationary than the constant running car signals, so the separation
quality is expected to be inbetween those two.
At the same time, it is interesting that the amount of non-stationarity of the
signals is suﬃcient to yield better bin-wise separation, but the inter-frequency
correlations are still poor.
This is seen by the permutations being correctly
realigned above around 500Hz for the well-separated sources, whereas this only
starts happening at around 800-900 Hz for closely located sources. The reason
for this is that the envelope continuty method does not work for these car sig-
nals, while the beamforming method does. If there is a larger distance between
the sources, beamforming can tell the peaks apart starting from a lower fre-
quency, than if the sources are placed close together, where the peaks are still
"merged together" up to a higher frequency. The same eﬀect was not observed
for the speech signals, since at frequencies where the beamforming approach
fails, envelope continuity takes over and solves the permutation.
==PAGE:90==
80
Simulations
Figure 5.11: Bin-wise SIR increase for accelerating car signals for good spatial sep-
aration (top) and closely located sources (bottom)
One should note that in the second setup, even though only two of the sources
were located close to each other, the third source could not be separated properly
either. The reason for this is that the implementation disregards the obtained
permutation completely for frequency bins, where the clustering is weak. The
method could be improved by ﬁxing "partial permutations" for sources that are
further away and using envelope continuity for the rest of the sources.
Reﬂections present in the simulation
Including reﬂections in the model is expected to worsen the separation perfor-
mance, mainly because beamforming will not be able to detect peaks as unam-
biguously as for anechoic conditions. When solving the permutation ambiguity
by beamforming, it is important that the maxima in each image has a clear
location, as the clustering algorithm will sort frequency bins based on this in-
formation. Figure 5.12 show 3-dimensional plots of the locations of maxima for
the separated components across frequency for an anechoic simulation and a
case where reﬂections were included. The two setups included the same three
accelerating car signals, well-separated spatially.
It is seen that the presence of reﬂections adds a major amount of "confusion"
in the beamforming images.
The clusters are still clearly identiﬁable in the
second image as well, however, there are numerous frequency bins where it is
ambiguous, which source the peak belongs to.
==PAGE:91==
5.3 Simulation results
81
Figure 5.12: Locations of maxima in beamforming images of separated components
at each frequency bin.
Left: anechoic conditions.
Right: reﬂections present in the
model.
Apart from the hardships imposed to the permutation realignment, the sepa-
ration is generally not expected to deteriorate too much from the presence of
reﬂections. However, the performance was found to be ruined by the added re-
ﬂections, as shown in ﬁgure 5.13. The ﬁgure shows the SIR values for the three
accelerating car signals in a reverberant environment.
Figure 5.13: Bin-wise SIR increase for accelerating car signals when separated from
a mixture that includes reﬂections.
It is seen that the absolute values of the SIR are low, and the signs change
randomly throughout the entire frequency range, which suggest that both the
separation and the permutation realignment failed. This result is substantially
worse than for the anechoic conditions with the same source setup. The reason
for such a big degradation in performance is not well understood. However, one
has to keep in mind that the reﬂections modelled in the simulations were unre-
alistically strong, as no absorption of energy at the boundaries was modelled.
Later, in the measurement results section 6.2, it will be seen that reﬂections
encountered in a real, physical room do not degrade performance to this extent.
==PAGE:92==
82
Simulations
==PAGE:93==
Chapter 6
Measurements
Apart from running simulations, measurements with a microphone array were
conducted for a realistic test of the method. This chapter presents the measure-
ment setup and the obtained results.
6.1
Measurement setup
The measurements were conducted in Brüel & Kjær’s "Experimentarium", which
is a big hall where usually exhibitions of equipment are held and measurements
are conducted.
The array used for the measurements was a 60-channel "Pizza" array, which has
an irregular geometry that is optimized for beamforming measurements in the
nominal frequency range of 360 Hz-10kHz. The array is made up of ﬁve "slices"
that are arranged symmetrically to the center point - hence the name "Pizza".
The sound sources were 3 identical loudspeakers with a cylindrical housing and
a relatively ﬂat frequency response (±3.5dB between 100Hz and 6400 Hz). The
sources were not omnidirectional, therefore the assumption of point sources
radiating spherical waves did not hold for middle to high frequencies. Figure
6.1 shows a speaker and its output, when white noise is played through it.
As the measurments were conducted indoors, reﬂections from a large number of
surfaces could not be avoided. However, to minimize the eﬀect of reﬂections as
much as possible, the array was placed in a doorway between two big rooms in
order to avoid too many reﬂections from behind the array. Back reﬂections are
especially problematic, because the array will not be able to distinguish between
sound coming from the front and the back. Figure 6.2 shows the measurement
arrangement.
Several test cases were deﬁned, which included the sources being positioned
far apart or close together, certain sources being lower in level than the oth-
==PAGE:94==
84
Measurements
(a)
Loudspeaker
used
as
source
(b) Frequency response
Figure 6.1: Speakers used in the measurements and their frequency response. The
response is obtained by playing white noise through the speaker and measuring with a
microphone a few centimeters in front of it.
Figure 6.2: Measurement arrangement. The array is placed in a doorway between
two big halls to diminish the eﬀect of back reﬂections.
ers, sources being further or closer to the microphone array, and even some of
the sources located behind each other. The signals used for the measurements
were speech signals, the generated bandlimited signals and the accelerating car
signals. Signals from the constant running car were excluded from the measur-
ments due to the poor performance obtained in the simulations. The sampling
frequency was 16384 Hz throughout the measurement session.
==PAGE:95==
6.2 Measurement results
85
6.2
Measurement results
Measurements were conducted for two and three source setups, but in the fol-
lowing section, mainly the results from the 3-sources cases will be presented, as
the same conclusions and results were obtained from the 2-source cases.
6.2.1
Estimation of number of components
Measurements were conducted with the same three band-limited non-stationary
noise signals that were used in the simulations for testing the performance of
the number of sources estimation methods. The results are shown in ﬁgure 6.3.
Figure 6.3: Estimated numbers of components at frequency bins by the diﬀerent esti-
mators. Estimation was done on measurements of the three generated signals proposed
in section 5.2.3. Sources were placed 3m in front of the array and were spatially well-
separated.
The conclusions are very similar to the simulated case where reﬂections were
included. The PCA, AIC/MDL and detection of reﬂections methods all over-
estimate the number of sources. This is expected from AIC/MDL due to the
ﬁniteness of recordings and also from PCA due to the appearance of extra domi-
nant eigenvalues caused by reﬂections. The bad performance of the detection of
reﬂections method is not understood. The beamforming estimator only gives the
correct answer in a narrow frequency range, between 500Hz and 2200Hz. Below
500Hz, insuﬃcient resolution results in underestimation, and above 2200Hz, the
==PAGE:96==
86
Measurements
appearance of both reﬂected components and the eﬀect of spatial aliasing leads
to overestimation. The ICA-by-Blocks method gives the estimation closest to
the truth, although there are narrow frequency ranges where it is slightly oﬀ.
The previously presented results for estimation of number of components were
obtained from measurements, where the sources were placed 3m in front of the
array. In order to reduce the contribution of the room’s reverberant ﬁeld in the
resulting observations - which was found to be the main disturbing factor, when
estimating the number of components - another setup has been tried, where
the sources were moved closer to the array. As a general rule of thumb, the
minimum allowed distance between the array and the sources, when perform-
ing beamforming, is about 80% of the array width. The pizza array was 1m
in width, therefore, the sources were placed 90cm in front of the array. How-
ever, estimating the number of components gave results very similar to the ones
presented previously. These estimator results can be found in Appendix B.
6.2.2
Separation Performance
Speech Signals
Figure 6.4 shows the SIR results from measurements, where the sources were
three speech signals located 3m in front of the array. In the ﬁrst setup, sources
were spatially well-separated (the distance between sources was 2.2m, 1.1m and
0.9m, respectively), whereas in the second case, two of the sources were located
close to each other (30cm). A photo of the two setups taken by the build-in
camera of the microphone array is shown in ﬁgure 6.5.
The separation results are fairly good in both cases. The absolute SIR values
reach up to the neighbourhood of 20 dB for most of the frequency range, which
suggests good ICA separation at indivudual bins. There are only a few frequen-
cies with negative values, which describes very good permutation realignment
performance. If the sources are closely located, the beamforming permutation
approach will not be able to locate the sources up to a higher frequency due
to insuﬃcient resolution of the array. However, the permutation realignment
performance seems to be good even if the sources are close, which suggests that
envelope continuity takes care of the frequency range, where beamforming is
unable to realign permutations.
A roll-oﬀtowards 0 dB in SIR values is seen at low frequencies in both ﬁgures,
which means that separation at individual frequencies gets worse and worse
as the frequency decreases. This eﬀect is even more pronounced for the case
where two of the sources are closely located. The reason for this phenomenon is
==PAGE:97==
6.2 Measurement results
87
Figure 6.4: SIR results from measurements with the three sources being 7 second long
speech signals. Top: sources are well-separated spatially. Bottom: two of the sources
are closely located.
Figure 6.5: Measurement setup with three sources placed far from each other, and
with two sources being closely placed.
believed to be the following: if the sources are located relatively close together
in the same room, then the impulse responses between the sources and the
microphones will become more and more similar at low frequencies. If the signals
are run through similar ﬁlters, then their observations in the recordings will not
be as independent as if they were ﬁltered through diﬀerent impulse responses.
This resemblance of ﬁlters reduces the ability of independent component analyis
to distinguish sources, as the frequency decreases.
==PAGE:98==
88
Measurements
In general, the measured results for speech signals resemble the simulated results
very much, apart from the roll-oﬀin SIR values towards low frequencies, which
was not present in the simulations. This is believed to be because the impulse
responses in the simulations were sparse due to the low number of reﬂective
surfaces included and only ﬁrst order reﬂections modelled. In such a case, the
impulse responses that the sources are being ﬁltered with will not be as similar,
as if all the impulse responses are dense, and when number of reﬂections is high.
It is believed that if higher order reﬂections had been included in the simulation,
similar eﬀects would have been observed.
Single-number SIR values were in the range of 12.5 - 14 dB. Listening to the
separated signals sounded very convincing and performing beamforming con-
ﬁrmed good separation performance, as essentially no leakage between sources
were seen. Beamforming results on the separated speech signals can be seen in
Appendix B.
Car Signals
When conducting the measurements, it has been decided to exclude the constant
rpm car signals from the investigated test cases. All simulation results have
conﬁrmed the hypothesis that constant speed car signals are ill-suited for the
frequency-domain ICA separation method due to their stationarity.
As the
measurement session already included measuring over 90 diﬀerent test-cases, it
has been decided only to work with accelerating car signals.
Figure 6.6 shows the SIR results for the accelerating car signals for the same
two measurement setups as was used for the speech signals earlier. In the ﬁrst
case, the three sources were positioned far apart, whereas in the second case,
two of the sources were located close together.
In the simulations section, separation performance for car signals in an ane-
choic environment was found to be acceptable inside the frequency range, where
beamforming is able to realign permutation. Simulations that included reﬂec-
tions yielded unacceptably poor results for both separation and permutation
realignment. However, the results depicted in ﬁgure 6.6 are much more promis-
ing, in fact, they remind much more of the simulated results without reﬂections.
This is believed to be because the power of the reﬂections in the simulations
was irrealisticly high.
The crossover-frequency between the beamforming and the envelope continuity
method is clearly seen in both ﬁgures - when the sources are far apart, this
frequency is at around 450 Hz, while if two of the sources are close together, it
becomes as high as around 1.1 kHz. Above this frequency, beamforming is able
==PAGE:99==
6.2 Measurement results
89
Figure 6.6: SIR results from measurements with the three sources being 7 second long
signals from accelerating cars. Top: sources are well-separated spatially. Bottom: two
of the sources are closely located.
to realign the permutations, while at lower frequencies where the resolution is
insuﬃcient, envelope continutity takes over. Note that one of the three signals
(depicted by the red curve in both ﬁgures) could be realigned by envelope con-
tinuity - seen by the positive SIR values - whereas the other two could not. It
turns out that the inter-frequency correlation of envelopes was just enough in
one of the signals, while in the other two, the correlation of neighboring bins
was insuﬃcient.
A roll-oﬀin the absolute SIR values is seen towards low frequencies, just like
in the case for the speech signals. This is again believed to be caused by the
resemblance of impulse responses at low frequencies. Both the separation and
the permutation performance is good above 1.1 kHz for both cases.
Single-number SIR values were in the range of 7-9 dB for the signals that were
far apart, while values were as low as 3.5 - 4.5 dB for the closely located signals.
Listening to the separated signals was not particulary informative, as it was
hard to hear "which noise belongs to what". The results of beamforming for
both the well-separated and the closely located sources can be seen in Appendix
B. In the images, leakage between the sources can be seen - even more so, when
the sources are closely located.
==PAGE:100==
90
Measurements
Eﬀect of estimation of number of sources
The eﬀect of correct or incorrect estimation of the number of components on the
separation performance is best illustrated on an example with the band-limited
generated noise signals, where the correct number of sources at each frequency
is known. Figure 6.7 shows results obtained from the same set of measurements.
In the ﬁrst case, the number of sources was set to be 3 throughout the entire fre-
quency range, while in the second case, the number of sources was automatically
estimated by the ICA-by-Blocks method.
Figure 6.7: SIR results from measurements with the three sources being the 7 sec-
ond long band-limited generated non-stationary random noise signals. Looking for a
constant number of three sources throughout the entire frequency range (top) versus es-
timating the number of sources automatically by the ICA-by-Blocks median estimator
(bottom).
In the ﬁrst ﬁgure, it is seen that the SIR values for all three sources are positive
with a high absolute value between around 700 and 1700 Hz, which corresponds
to the range where all three sources are active. This is because at this frequency
range, every "link in the chain" worked well: the number of components was
set correctly (three is the right answer here), separation performance was good
and permutations were realigned well. However we see that below 700 Hz and
above 1700 Hz, some of the separated signals have negative SIR values. This is
because at this range extraneous component(s) are being separated from the the
mixtures, which actually do not correspond to any of original sources. When
returning to the time domain by ISTFT, all these erroneous noise or artifact
components are "blended into" the resulting signals, which degrade the outcome.
==PAGE:101==
6.2 Measurement results
91
On the other hand, when automatically (and correctly!) estimating the number
of components, results are substantially better. In the second ﬁgure, it is seen
that all three SIR curves have high absolute values - in some ranges, up to
40 dB - and values are positive at all frequencies. Note that not all the three
curves cover the entire frequency axis, as these SIR curves are not deﬁned at
certain frequency bins (there are only as many curves at each frequency as the
estimated number of sources).
This is indeed a very positive and promising result. Estimating the number of
components at each frequency can drastically improve the performance of the
separation method. However, the above presented examples were "fabricated",
as we knew the "right answer" that we expected the estimator to return and we
knew which estimator performs the best. In a real-world scenario however, one
very likely does not know the "true" number of sources, therefore has no idea
whether the estimator in question has returned a correct or an incorrent result.
By running extensive tests, it has been found that the separation method is
extremely sensitive for a correct estimation of the number of sources: it can be
concluded that if the estimation of sources is incorrect, the separated signals
will always be incorrect. In test cases, where the signal spectra were more or
less overlapping, using a constant number for the number of sources always gave
a much better separation result, than estimating the number of components by
any method. This is exempliﬁed in ﬁgure 6.8, where the result of the estimator
and the SIR values are shown for the three car signals, placed far from each
other. Comparing this ﬁgure with 6.6 - which is the result from the exact same
measurements, where the number of components was set to constant three -
reveals that even a tiny error in the estimation of components can have a fatal
eﬀect on the separation, even for cases where the separation would have given
good results otherwise.
Sources behind each other
An extreme situation is when the sources are "behind" each other, so that they
have identical incident angles to the array. In this case the separation is a pure
BSS problem, as beamforming will not provide any information.
Measurements were conducted with two sources, having identical angles of in-
cidence. Figure 6.9 shows the SIR results for 2 speech and for 2 car signals,
respectively.
In the ﬁgure for speech signals, the error propagation property of the envelope
continiuity is recognized by the broad, consecutive frequency ranges with neg-
ative amplitudes. Results are acceptable, but sub-optimal: it is clear that the
lack of the ability of beamforming to realign permutations worsened the results.
==PAGE:102==
92
Measurements
Figure 6.8: Estimated number of components and SIR results for three well-separated
sources emitting accelerating car signals. Even a small error in the estimated number
of components can have a detrimental eﬀect on the separation.
Figure 6.9: SIR results for sources with identical angles of incidence. Top: speech
signals. Bottom: accelerating car signals.
In the bottom ﬁgure for car signals, the results are poor. Although the SIR
values are high in absolute value (good separation at bins), since neither the
beamforming nor the envelope continuity approach will be able to realign per-
mutations, the ﬁnal results are poor.
==PAGE:103==
6.2 Measurement results
93
Improved Separation Performance
Finally, the potential of the combined beamforming/BSS method for improving
separation performance is illustrated through an example.
The presented case is from the measurements, and is the "best case scenario",
when the sources are three speech recordings and are spatially well-separated.
As shown earlier, BSS performs well in this case both in terms of separation
and permutation realignment. The number of sources was ﬁxed to a constant 3
throughout the frequency range, since (unfortunately) this is what resulted in
the best separation performance.
In ﬁgure 6.10, the original beamforming image is shown on top, where the pres-
ence of the three sources is ambiguous: the bottom source has a distinguished
peak in the image, the source on the right is less obvious, while the peak be-
longing to the source on the left is almost masked entirely by the others.
However, if one utilizes the combined method instead of pure beamforming, the
three images in the bottom result.
It is seen clearly, that the three sources
have been successfully separated, and each of them appear in their respective
beamforming images without the presence of the others. Moreover, the source
on the left, which was ambiguous in the original image due to the dynamic range
limitation of beamforming has been uncovered by the BSS process.
Figure 6.10 depicts the beamforming results for the full frequency range, and
already a major improvement is seen there. However, the improved separation
is even more pronounced if looking at distinct frequency bins. This is illustrated
in ﬁgure 6.11, where the results are plotted for the frequency bin at 1000Hz. At
this frequency, one of the sources is dominating in the original mixtures, and the
other two are almost completely covered. However, after the separation, both
of them have been uncovered unambiguously by BSS.
For such good results as the ones shown here, all "links in the chain" have
to work well - the number of components, separation and the permutation re-
alignment - but unfortunately, in most cases, something goes wrong along the
process. However, it is positive to see that there are certain setups, where the
combined method has a great potential of majorly improving source separation
performance.
==PAGE:104==
94
Measurements
Figure 6.10:
Improved separation performance of the combined BF/BSS method
as opposed to pure beamforming. Top: beamforming on original mixtures. Bottom:
Beamforming on separated sources. The three signals were 7-second long speech signals.
The images show the full frequency range, and the color bar has been restricted to a
6dB range for better visibility.
Figure 6.11:
Improved separation performance of the combined BF/BSS method
as opposed to pure beamforming. Top: beamforming on original mixtures. Bottom:
Beamforming on separated sources. The three signals were 7-second long speech signals.
The images are shown for the frequency bin at 1000Hz.
==PAGE:105==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
7.1
Summary of work carried out
In this thesis, a method combining Blind Source Separation and beamforming
for improved separation performance of source signals has been investigated, de-
signed, implemented and tested by means of simulations and measurements. The
objective of combining these two methods was to counteract the various limita-
tions of beamforming used as a tool for Noise Source Identiﬁcation applications
in the automotive industry.
By separating the sources by performing Blind
Source Separation prior to mapping them by beamforming, "hidden" sources
can be potentially uncovered, which pure beamforming is unable to identify due
to limitations in resolution or dynamic range.
The method used for performing Blind Source Separation was frequency-domain
Independent Component Analysis. Observations of mixtures are transformed
into the time-frequency plane by Short-Time Fourier Transformation, and an
ICA problem is solved one frequency bin at a time.
The arising additional
challenges when solving the problem in the time-frequency domain - such as the
permutation ambiguity, automatic estimation of the number of sources and the
eﬀect of signal stationarity - have been discussed and addressed.
Simulations have been designed and implemented in MATLAB. An array of
microphones is modelled together with a sound ﬁeld consisting of monopole
sources emitting spherical waves. Reﬂections in the mixing environment were
modelled by image sources. The eﬀect of various signal properties - such as
gaussianity of frequency components, inter-frequency correlations of time-series
and frequency content - were investigated.
Measurements have been conducted in a large hall with a 60-channel "Pizza"
microphone array and a set of loudspeakers emitting various types of source
signals. The performance of the automatic estimation of number of components
and the separation procedure have been investigated and interpreted.
==PAGE:106==
96
Conclusion
7.2
Summary of results
Preliminary investigations of various signal properties have anticipated poor
source separation performance for stationary source signals. As the temporal
distribution of stationary signals becomes gaussian in the frequency domain,
an ICA algorithm will fail at separating the underlying sources. It was shown
to be possible to exploit the small amount of non-stationary present in the
investigated car noise signals by keeping the analysis window length extremely
short. By doing so, the method yielded excellent results in anechoic conditions,
however truncation of the impulse responses by a too short window leads to
erroneous separation in a real acoustic environment.
The lacking correlation between adjacent frequency bins for stationary signals
hinders the popular envelope continuity approach in being able to solve the per-
mutation ambiguity. A suggested permutation realignment method relying on
extracting spatial information by performing beamforming on frequency com-
ponents has been implemented. The method was shown to work well for any
source signal type, provided that they are spatially well-separated.
A permutation realignment method utilizing both the beamforming- and the
envelope continuity approach has been designed and implemented. The method
was shown to improve performance in every scenario, except if the sources have
identical angles of incidence to the microphone array. Results for non-stationary
signals such as speech were close to perfect even in the presence of reﬂections,
whereas the performance for stationary signals was shown to be dependent on
the spatial separation of the sources.
Automatic estimation of the number of sources has been attempted by ﬁve dif-
ferent methods, based on widely diﬀerent principles. The majority of estimators
have shown to perform well if the mixing environment is anechoic, while their
performance is highly degraded in the presence of reﬂections. One particular
method, the ICA-by-Blocks median estimator gave somewhat stable, although
not perfect results.
Separation of sources has shown to be extremely sensitive to the estimation of
the number of sources. A correct estimation can potentially result in a sub-
stantial boost in separation performance, whereas an erroneous estimation will
undoubtedly lead to a drastical degradation of results. Knowing in advance,
whether a certain estimator will give a correct or an incorrect result is not pos-
sible. Finding a conﬁdence measure on the trustworthiness of an estimator has
not been attempted in this thesis.
==PAGE:107==
7.3 Future work
97
The frequency-domain ICA method for blindly separating sources yields good
results when dealing with non-stationary sources; however, the method is essen-
tially rendered useless if the source signals are stationary.
7.3
Future work
The envelope continuity method for realigning permutations relies on the as-
sumption that the time-structure of adjacent frequency bins are correlated,
which is not fulﬁlled for stationary signals. Several methods are suggested in [5],
[6], [13] which rely on an assumption of inter-frequency correlations in the ﬁlters
instead of the source signals. It is natural to assume that sources located close
to each other in the same room will be ﬁltered by similar impulse responses. A
potential way of realigning permutations for stationary signals could be achieved
by exploiting this similarity in ﬁlters across frequency.
The estimation of number of components by bin-wise beamforming was shown
to work well only for a very narrow frequency range due to resolution issues at
low frequencies and the presence of sidelobes and reﬂections at high frequen-
cies. The method could be improved by detecting sidelobes and reﬂections in
the beamforming images, and distinguishing these from true sources. As side-
lobes "move" with changing frequency, they could be detected by comparing
the beamforming images at diﬀerent frequencies and excluding "moving peaks"
from the estimation. Reﬂections could be detected by calculating the corre-
lations between the time-structures of signals. If a signal originating from a
peak has a high correlation with a signal from another peak, it is most likely a
reﬂection of the same source.
Frequency-domain ICA is just one way of performing BSS, however, myriads of
other approaches exist. If the performance of beamforming for NSI applications
is to be improved by separating sources prior to locating them, it would be
beneﬁcial to utilize a diﬀerent BSS algorithm than frequency-domain ICA, in
case the source signals are stationary.
==PAGE:108==
98
Conclusion
==PAGE:109==
Appendix A
Matlab Code
A.1
ﬁndmaxima.m
1
function [x,y,locs] = findmaxima(X,Y,A,thr,mindist)
2
%
Finds peaks in a 2D beamforming image and returns them in descending
3
%
sorted order. It is possible tp specify a threshold relative to the
4
%
maximum in the image, below which no peaks will be extracted. The minimum
5
%
allowed distance between the peaks can also be specified. In that
6
%
case, peaks with the largest values will be kept, that are at least the
7
%
set distance away from each other
8
9
%resolution
10
res = size(X,1);
11
12
%extract indexes of points above threshold
13
thresh = max(max(A))−thr;
14
I_thr = find(A > thresh);
15
16
%the trend in the X−direction (growing or falling)
17
%if it was growing but now falling: we found a maxima
18
trendX = zeros(res,res−1);
19
trendX = sign(diff(A,1,2));
20
idx
= find(diff(trendX,1,2) == −2) + res;
21
%same for the Y−direction
22
trendY = zeros(res+1,res);
23
trendY(1:res−1,:) = sign(diff(A,1,1));
24
idy
= find(diff(trendY,1,1) == −2) + 1;
25
26
%locations are the intersections of those indexes that are peaks
27
%in both the x and y directions, and are also above the threshold
28
locs = intersect(idx,idy);
29
locs = intersect(locs,I_thr);
30
31
%sort the peaks according to size
32
[~,sI] = sort(A(locs),'descend');
33
locs = locs(sI);
34
35
%distances between each pair of peaks
36
dist = zeros(length(locs));
37
for i = 1:length(locs)
38
for j = 1:length(locs)
==PAGE:110==
100
Matlab Code
39
dist(i,j) = sqrt((X(locs(i))−X(locs(j)))^2 + (Y(locs(i))−Y(locs(j)))^2);
40
end
41
end
42
43
%starting from the largest peak: delete peaks that are inside a radius
44
%of mindist. Then continue with the next largest (that remains after
45
%the first round of deletion) and so on
46
idel = [];
47
for i = 1:length(locs)
48
for j = i:length(locs)
49
if (dist(i,j) < mindist) & (dist(i,j) > 0)
50
idel = [idel j];
51
dist(:,j) = zeros(1,length(locs));
52
dist(j,:) = zeros(length(locs),1);
53
end
54
end
55
end
56
57
%Delete the appropriate peaks from the array
58
if ~isempty(idel),
59
locs(idel) = [];
60
end
61
62
%x−y coordinates of peaks
63
x = X(locs);
64
y = Y(locs);
65
66
end
A.2
Calculating AIC and MDL
1
%AIC
2
for k = 1:length(F)
3
tmp = zeros(1,size(p,1));
4
for i = 1:n_e−1
5
num = 1;
6
den = 0;
7
for j = i+1:n_e
8
num = num * eigvals(j,k)^(1/(n_e −i));
9
den = den + eigvals(j,k);
10
end
11
den = den*(1/(n_e −i));
12
tmp(i) = −2*(n_e −i)*smp*log2(num/den) + 2*i*(2*n_e −i);
13
end
14
15
AIC(:,k) = tmp(1:n_e);
16
end
17
18
%MDL
19
for k = 1:length(F)
20
tmp = zeros(1,size(p,1));
21
for i = 1:n_e−1
==PAGE:111==
A.3 calculateSIR.m
101
22
num = 1;
23
den = 0;
24
for j = i+1:n_e
25
num = num * eigvals(j,k)^(1/(n_e −i));
26
den = den + eigvals(j,k);
27
end
28
den = den*(1/(n_e −i));
29
tmp(i) = −(n_e −i)*smp*log2(num/den) + 0.5*i*(2*n_e −i)*log2(smp);
30
end
31
32
MDL(:,k) = tmp(1:n_e);
33
end
A.3
calculateSIR.m
1
function [inSIR, inSIR_f, outSIR, outSIR_f, SIR_i] = calculateSIR(x_ind,...
2
An, Wn, J_ref, dim, Fs, wl, wtype, hop)
3
% Calculates Input−and Output SIR values both as single numbers and as
4
% functions of frequency.
5
%
6
%
Input Parameters:
7
% −
x_ind: Cell array holding the individual source observations
8
%
Example: x_ind{2}(6,:) is the time signal
9
%
of the 2nd source recorded by the 6th microphone.
10
% −
An: Cell array holding the mixing matrices at each frequency bin
11
% −
Wn: Cell array holding the unmixing matrices at each frequency bin
12
% −
dim: Vector holding the number of sources the BSS algorithm looked
13
%
for at each frequency bin
14
% −
n_src: Number of actual, physical sources
15
% −
J_ref: Index of the reference microphone
16
% −
Fs: Samping frequency
17
% −
wl: STFT window length
18
% −
wtype: Window type for the STFT ('Hamming' or 'Hann')
19
% −
hop: Window hop size for the STFT in samples
20
%
21
%
Output parameters:
22
% −
inSIR: Vector containing the single−number InputSIR for every source
23
% −
inSIR_f: N x F array containing the the InputSIR of all N sources at
24
%
each of the F frequencies
25
% −
outSIR: Vector containing the single−number OutputSIR for every source
26
% −outSIR_f: N x F array containing the the OutputSIR of all N sources at
27
%
each of the F frequencies
28
% −
SIR_i: Vector holding the indexes of the separated sources that each
29
%
original source is assigned with. Example: SIR_i(3) == 5 means
30
%
that the 3rd original source is associated with the 5th
31
%
separated output.
32
33
%% UNMIXING SOURCE OBSERVATIONS
34
%cell array holding the time signals of the contributions of each source in
35
%each separated output. Each cell contains a matrix with as many rows as
36
%extracted IC's
and there are as many cells as original
37
%sources.
==PAGE:112==
102
Matlab Code
38
y_ik = cell(1,n_src);
39
40
%cell array holding the spectrograms of the contributions of each source in
41
%each separated output. Each cell in this array contains yet another cell
42
%array, where the specrograms are sorted by frequency, and not by source.
43
%There are as many cells in this array as origial sources, and as many
44
%spectrorams in each cell, as there are extracted IC's. %Example: the j'th
45
%row of the k'th cell contained in the i'th cell of this array
46
%/ Ysp_ik{i}{k}(j,:) /is the time series signal at the k'th frequency in the
47
%spectrogram of the i'th source's contribution to the j'th separated output.
48
Ysp_ik = cell(1,n_src);
49
50
%cell array holding the spectrograms of the contributions of each source
51
%signal at the reference mic. For calculating bin−wise InputSIR.
52
Xsp_ind = cell(1,n_src);
53
for i = 1:n_src
54
[y_ik{i}, Ysp_ik{i}, Xsp_ind{i}] = unmix_recordings(x_ind{i},An,Wn,...
55
J_ref,Fs,wl,wtype,hop);
56
end
57
58
%% CALCULATE SIR
59
c = zeros(max(dim),n_src); %RMS contribution from each source to each output
60
61
%Deciding which source corresponds to which separated output in a largest
62
%RMS contribution sense.
63
%First, the RMS of the contribution from each
64
%source to each output is calculated. Then, for the highest contribtuion,
65
%a match is made, and the corresponding source and output are removed from
66
%the search space.
67
for i = 1:n_src
68
c(:,i) = rms(y_ik{i},2); %RMS contributions
69
end
70
%Removing columns and rows from the search space where highest RMS is found
71
for i = 1:n_src
72
[~,mi] = max(c(:));
73
[I,J] = ind2sub(size(c),mi);
74
SIR_i(J) = I;
75
c(:,J) = zeros(1,max(dim));
76
c(I,:) = zeros(1,n_src);
77
end
78
79
%Calculating SIR values
80
for i = 1:n_src
81
82
%sum of interfering contributions (denominator in the SIR formula)
83
interf_in = zeros(1,length(x_ind{1}(1,:)));
84
interf_out = zeros(1,length(y_ik{1}(1,:)));
85
for k = setdiff(1:n_src,i)
86
interf_in = interf_in + x_ind{k}(J_ref,:);
87
interf_out = interf_out + y_ik{k}(SIR_i(i),:);
88
end
89
90
%SIR −single number value
91
inSIR(i) = 10*log10( sum(x_ind{i}(J_ref,:).^2) / sum(interf_in.^2) );
92
outSIR(i) = 10*log10( sum(y_ik{i}(SIR_i(i),:).^2) / sum(interf_out.^2) );
==PAGE:113==
A.4 unmix_recordings.m
103
93
94
%SIR −bin−wise
95
for j = 1:length(Ysp_ik{1})
96
97
interf_in = zeros(1,length(Xsp_ind{1}(1,:)));
98
interf_out = zeros(1,length(Ysp_ik{1}{1}(1,:)));
99
for k = setdiff(1:n_src,i)
100
interf_in = interf_in + Xsp_ind{k}(j,:);
101
interf_out = interf_out + Ysp_ik{k}{j}(SIR_i(i),:);
102
end
103
104
inSIR_f(i,j) = 10*log10( sum(abs(Xsp_ind{i}(j,:)).^2) / ...
105
sum(abs(interf_in).^2) );
106
outSIR_f(i,j) = 10*log10( sum(abs(Ysp_ik{i}{j}(SIR_i(i),:)).^2) /...
107
sum(abs(interf_out).^2) );
108
end
109
110
end
111
end
A.4
unmix_recordings.m
1
function [yfi, Ypfi, Xsp_ind] = unmix_recordings(x,An,Wn,J_ref,Fs,wl,...
2
wtype,hop)
3
% Performs the unmixing of signals with the unmixing matrices provided by a
4
% frequency−domain BSS algorithm. Use in conjunction with SIR calculations
5
% where the same unmixing has to be performed on different takes.
6
n_rec = size(x,1);
7
n_src = size(An{1},2);
8
9
%% STFT
10
%spectrograms of all the n_rec recordings
11
X = cell(n_rec,1);
12
for i = 1:n_rec
13
[X{i}, F, T] = stft(x(i,:), wl, wtype, hop, wl, Fs);
14
end
15
Xsp_ind = X{J_ref};
16
17
%% REARRANGE
18
%rearranging the n_rec spectrograms −group by frequency and not by source
19
Xn = cell(length(F),1);
20
for i = 1:length(F)
21
Xn{i}= zeros(n_rec,length(T));
22
for j = 1:n_rec
23
Xn{i}(j,1:length(T))=X{j}(i,1:length(T));
24
end
25
end
26
27
%% UNMIX RECORDINGS AT EACH BIN
28
Yn = cell(n_src,1);
29
for i = 1:length(F)
30
Yn{i} = Wn{i}*Xn{i};
==PAGE:114==
104
Matlab Code
31
end
32
33
%% SCALING CORRECTION / MAPPING OF SEPARATED SOURCES
34
Ypfi = cell(length(F),1); %cell array for the returned signals
35
temp = zeros(n_rec,size(T,2));
36
37
%initialization
38
for i = 1:length(F)
39
Ypfi{i} = zeros(n_src,length(T));
40
end
41
%Calculating the mapping of each source in the microphone with the index
42
%'J_ref' −by multiplying with the appropriate column of the mixing matrix
43
%and picking the row with the index 'J_ref'.
44
for k = 1:length(F)
45
for j = 1:n_src
46
temp = An{k}(:,j)*Yn{k}(j,:);
47
Ypfi{k}(j,:) = temp(J_ref,:);
48
end
49
end
50
51
%% REARRANGE
52
%cell array for the scaling−corrected IC's
53
Yfi = cell(1,n_src);
54
%Initialisation of variables
55
for i = 1:n_src
56
Yfi{i} = zeros(length(F),length(T));
57
end
58
for k = 1:length(F)
59
% Grouping the obtained IC's by separated sources (and
60
% not by frequency) to prepare them for the inverse stft
61
for i=1:n_src
62
Yfi{i}(k,:)=Ypfi{k}(i,:);
63
end
64
end
65
66
%% ISTFT
67
for i = 1:n_src
68
[yfi(i,:), ~] = istft(Yfi{i}, wtype, hop, wl, Fs);
69
end
70
end
A.5
Choosing frequencies to be solved by Enve-
lope Continuity
1
confidence = zeros(1,length(F));
2
for i = fl:fu %only between frequency limits of the array
3
%check for repetitions and silhouette threshold
4
if ((length(unique(perms(F==i))) == length(perms(F==i))) & ...
5
(min(sils(F==i)) > siluthresh))
6
confidence(i) = 1;
7
end
==PAGE:115==
A.6 generate_mic_signals.m
105
8
end
A.6
generate_mic_signals.m
1
function [p,p_ind] = generate_mic_signals(rm,source_pos,plane_pos,orient,Fs)
2
%
Generates signals recorded by a virtual microphone array
3
%
4
%
Point sources are placed in the virtual space, emitting sound signals
5
%
loaded from a file. The resulting recordings at the mic positions are
6
%
calculated by delaying and attenuating the source signals accordingly.
7
%
The function also generates individual recordings of each source −
8
%
mic signals are generated when only one source is playing at a time.
9
%
10
%
Input parameters:
11
%
12
%
rm −x,y,z coordinates of microphones (array geometry)
13
%
source_pos −2D vector containing the x,y,z positions of sources
14
%
plane_pos −Coordinates of reflective planes
15
%
parallel to one of the three main coordinate axes.
16
%
orient −Orientation of the reflective planes (1: x, 2: y, 3:z)
17
%
Fs −sampling frequency
18
%
19
%
Output parameters:
20
%
21
%
p −2D array holding the mixtures recorded by the microphones
22
%
p_ind −cell array containing the individual recordings.
23
24
c = 344; %speed of sound
25
n_src = size(source_pos,2); %number of sources
26
Amp = ones(1,n_src); %amplitudes of radiated signals −default is 1 for each
27
n_refl = length(plane_pos); %number of reflections
28
29
%load cell array of source signals from file
30
load('sounds.m');
31
32
%initializing image source array
33
img = zeros(size(source_pos,1),(n_refl+1)*n_src));
34
img(:,1:n_src) = source_pos; %original sources
35
36
%adding image source positions
37
for i = 1:n_refl
38
img(:,i*n_src+1:(i+1)*n_src) = source_pos;
39
img(orient(i),i*n_src+1:(i+1)*n_src) = ...
40
source_pos(orient(i),:) + 2*(plane_pos(i) −...
41
source_pos(orient(i),:));
42
end
43
source_pos = img;
44
45
%distances from true & image sources to each mic (|s−rm|)
46
R = zeros((n_refl+1)*n_src),length(rm));
47
%for all mics, calculate the distances to every source (true & image)
48
for i = 1:length(rm)
==PAGE:116==
106
Matlab Code
49
R(:,i) = sqrt((source_pos(1,:)−rm(1,i)).^2 + ...
50
(source_pos(2,:)−rm(2,i)).^2 + (source_pos(3,:)).^2);
51
end
52
53
%%MIXTURES
54
p = zeros(length(rm),length(t));
55
for i = 1:length(rm)
56
for j = 1:n_src
57
%true sources −delay mic signals
58
p(i,:) = p(i,:) + (Amp(j)/R(j,i))*delaysig(source{j},R(j,i)/c,Fs);
59
60
%same for image sources
61
for k = 1:n_refl
62
p(i,:) = p(i,:) + (Amp(j)/(R(k*n_src + j,i)))*...
63
delaysig(source{j},R(k*n_src + j,i)/c,Fs);
64
end
65
end
66
end
67
68
%%INDIVIDUAL RECORDINGS −ONE SOURCE ON AT A TIME
69
p_ind = cell(1,n_src);
70
for j = 1:n_src
71
p_ind{j} = zeros(length(rm),length(t));
72
for i = 1:length(rm)
73
%true sources −delay mic signals
74
p_ind{j}(i,:) = p_ind{j}(i,:) +...
75
(Amp(j)/R(j,i))*delaysig(source{j},R(j,i)/c,Fs);
76
77
%same for image sources
78
for k = 1:n_refl
79
p_ind{j}(i,:) = p_ind{j}(i,:) +...
80
(Amp(j)/R(k*n_src + j,i))*...
81
delaysig(source{j},R(k*n_src + j,i)/c,Fs);
82
end
83
end
84
end
85
end
==PAGE:117==
Appendix B
Additional results
Figure B.1: Result of estimation of number of components by the diﬀerent estimation
methods from measured signals.
Sources are placed 90cm in front of the array in
an attempt to reduce the contribution from the reverberant ﬁeld and thereby improve
estimation performance. Results are nearly identical to the case where sources were
placed 3m in front of the array.
Figure B.2: Beamforming images on separated signals. Sources emit speech signals
and are spatially well-separated. Locations of sources are clearly identiﬁable and no
cross-talk between sources is seen. The image shows the beamforming result for the
full frequency range and the color bar is limited to an 8 dB dynamic range for better
visibility. A transparent photo of the measurement setup is included in the image for
reference.
==PAGE:118==
108
Additional results
Figure B.3: Beamforming images on separated signals. Sources emit speech signals.
Two of the sources are located close to each other (30 cm). Locations of sources are
clearly identiﬁable and no cross-talk between sources is seen. The image shows the
beamforming result for the full frequency range and the color bar is limited to an 8 dB
dynamic range for better visibility. A transparent photo of the measurement setup is
included in the image for reference.
Figure B.4: Beamforming images on separated signals. Sources emit noise signals
from accelerating cars and are spatially well-separated. There is leakage between the
sources, seen by the extra peaks in some of the images. The image shows the beamform-
ing result for the full frequency range and the color bar is limited to an 8 dB dynamic
range for better visibility. A transparent photo of the measurement setup is included
for reference.
==PAGE:119==
109
Figure B.5: Beamforming images on separated signals. Sources emit noise signals
from accelerating cars. Two of the sources are located close to each other (30 cm).
There is leakage between the sources, seen by the extra peaks in some of the images.
The image shows the beamforming result for the full frequency range and the color bar
is limited to an 8 dB dynamic range for better visibility. A transparent photo of the
measurement setup is included for reference.
==PAGE:120==
110
Additional results
==PAGE:121==
Bibliography
[1] M. I. Nielsen, “Combining beamforming and blind source separation,” Mas-
ter’s thesis, Technical University of Denmark, August 2013.
[2] R. Decorsière, “Separation of mixed sound sources using independent
component analysis,” Master’s thesis, Technical University of Denmark,
September 2009.
[3] J. J. Christensen, J. Hald, Technical Review Beamforming. Brüel & Kjær
Sound and Vibration Measurement A/S, 2004.
[4] D. J. Allred, “Evaluation and comparison of beamforming algorithms for
microphone array speech processing,” Master’s thesis, School of Electrical
and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, August 2006.
[5] S. Makino, T.-W. Lee, H. Sawada, Blind Speech Separation. Springer, 2007.
[6] P. Comon, C. Jutten, Handbook of Blind Source Separation - Independent
Component Analysis and Applications. Academic Press, Elsevier, 2010.
[7] A. Hyvärinen, E. Oja, “Independent component analysis: Algorithms and
applications,” Neural Networks, April 1999.
[8] J. F. Cardoso, A. Souloumiac, “Blind beamforming for non-gaussian sig-
nals,” in IEE Proceedings-F, Vol. 140, No. 6, 1993.
[9] D. N. Rutledge, D. Jouan-Rimbaud Bouveresse, “Independent component
analysis with the jade algorithm,” Trends in Analytical Chemistry, 2013.
[10] T. Zeman, “BSS - preprocessing steps for separation improvement,” May
2000.
[11] L. I. Smith, “A tutorial on principal components analysis,” February 2002.
[12] H. Sawada, R. Mukai, S. Araki, S. Makino, “A robust and precise method
for solving the permutation problem of frequency-domain blind source sep-
aration,” 2004.
[13] M. S. Pedersen, J. Larsen, U. Kjems, L. C. Parra, “A survey of convo-
lutive blind source separation methods,” in Springer Handbook on Speech
Processing and Speech Communication, 2008.
[14] N. Mitianoudis, Audio Source Separation using Independent Component
Analysis. PhD thesis, Department of Electrical Engineering, University of
London, April 2004.
==PAGE:122==
112
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[15] H. Sawada, S. Araki, S. Makino, “Measuring dependence of bin-wise sepa-
rated signals for permutation alignment in frequency-domain BSS,” 2007.
[16] L. Wang, H. Ding, F. Yin, “An improved method of permutation correction
in convolutive blind source separation,” Archives of Acoustics, 2010.
[17] N. Murata, S. Ikeda, A. Ziehe, “An approach to blind source separation
based on temporal structure of speech signals,” 1998.
[18] D. Schobben, K. Torkkola, P. Smaragdis, “Evaluation of blind signal sepa-
ration methods,” 1998.
[19] E. Vincent, R. Gribonval, C. Févotte, “Performance measurement in blind
audio source separation,” IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech and Lan-
guage Processing, 2006.
[20] D. Jouan-Rimbaud Bouveresse, A. Moya-González, D. N. Rutledge, “Two
novel methods for the determination of the number of components in inde-
pendent components analysis models,” Chemometrics and Intelligent Lab-
oratory Systems, 2012.
[21] M. Wax, T. Kailath, “Detection of signals by information theoretic criteria,”
IEEE Transactions on Acoustics and Signal Processing, Vol. ASSP-33, No.
2, 1985.
[22] B. Dong, Spatial Separation of Sound Source. PhD thesis, l’Institut Na-
tional des Sciences Appliquées de Lyon, April 2014.
[23] H. Sawada, R. Mukai, S. Araki, S. Makino, “Estimating the number of
sources using independent component analysis,” Acoustical Science and
Technology, Vol. 26, 5, 2005.
