==PAGE:1==
Topic Modelling for
domain-specic documents and
translators
Junqing Qian
Kongens Lyngby 2016
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
The goal of the thesis is to ...
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fullment of the requirements for
acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering.
The thesis deals with ...
The thesis consists of ...
Lyngby, 21-June-2016
Junqing Qian
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my....
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background and Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Project Overview and Revisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2.1
Topic Modelling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2.2
Machine Translation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Overall Theory
7
2.1
EasyTranslate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.1
Business Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.2
Workow
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Topic Modeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.1
Latent Dirichlet Allocation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.2
Tool For LDA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.3
Document Similarity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
Machine Translation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3.1
RNN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3.2
Tools for Deep Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Iteration 1
17
3.1
Hypothesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.4
Partial Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
4
Iteration 2
23
4.1
Hypothesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2.1
Character Ambiguity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2.2
Logical Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2.3
Word Segmentation and Sentence Decomposition . . . . .
25
4.2.4
Processing Segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2.5
Traditional and Simplied Chinese . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2.6
Stopwords and non-Chinese ltering . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2.7
Modifying Gensim preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.3.1
Segmentation Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.3.2
Conversion Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3.3
Filtering results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.3.4
Updated Preprocessing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.4
Partial Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5
Iteration 3
33
5.1
Hypothesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.3.1
Comparison test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.3.2
Similarity test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.4
Partial Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6
Iteration 4
47
6.1
Hypothesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.2
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.3.1
Information Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6.3.2
Translator matching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.3.3
Chinese Landing Page . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.4
Partial Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
7
Iteration 5
59
7.1
Hypothesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
7.2
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
7.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
7.3.1
TensorFlow Attempt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
7.4
Partial Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
8
Updated Business Canvas
65
==PAGE:11==
CONTENTS
ix
9
Discussion
67
9.1
Machine vs. Human
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
9.2
Technical Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
9.3
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
9.3.1
Parallel Model Suggestion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
10 Conclusion
73
A Stu
77
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
This chapter presents the background and motivation behind this project, as
well as the general structure of the project.
1.1
Background and Motivation
As the modern world gradually becomes more familiar and comfortable with
the usage of computer and smartphones, the amount of digital data explodes
exponentially. Every text, picture, video, audio or even nancial management
is digitally stored, creating the endless possibilities to study and understand the
nature and behaviour of various aspects in the society.
To computer scientists, these possibilities formed the base to explore possi-
ble machine tasks to mimic human opearations, as described by terms such as
Machine Learning or Articial Intelligence. Upon revealing ndings of various
researches, the reception of the concept is divided - The scientists are intrigued
by the results while the general public seem to reserve a misunderstood portion
of scepticism. A product of decades of intelligent machine being portrayed as
the dangerous and uncontrollable threat in Hollywood lms and ctional works.
In reality, many processes on the internet already have implemented machine
learning tools to enhance experiences, and so far no world destruction. These
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction
research led to functionalities such as pattern recognition as seen in Google im-
age search or collaborative ltering recommendation systems as used in Spotify.
These processes have improved the functionalities of the product as well as the
user acknowledging it to be "convenient" or "smart". Which is exactly the inten-
tion behind developing such processes to expand the technological possibilities
in functionality and usability.
Language as we know is a complex yet structured system created to communi-
cate with each other. It is also a subject closely related to human intelligence and
cognitive functions. One of the most intriguing scientic eld is the subject of
teaching machines the logics and context to allow them to perform autonomously
to mimic human performance and decisions. Naturally the ability to identify,
learn and use language became an area of interest for computer scientists. In
written language, the human brain is able to identify a general theme or subject
by understanding the vocabulary and patterns in the document. This opera-
tion allow human to manually categories a quantity of documents into dierent
logical labelled domains.
The degrees of this domain level can vary such as
"Computer science" and "Physics" would be two separate domains on a same
arbitrary level. As the degree denition shifts, these domains can either be com-
bined into a single, larger domain of "Science" or divided into several smaller
domains such as "App development", "Website design", "Quantum mechanism"
and "Nano technology". Despite the variations of the domains, the approach
to identify and assign documents into these domains remains the same - Un-
derstand the vocabulary and contextual patterns that represent the document.
This particular function is the basis aim for what topic modelling should be able
to mimic. Successful topic modelling could produce various products such as
automatic recommendation systems.
In the realm of translation businesses, dierent agencies have various approaches
to attract and retain customers as well as professional linguists. EasyTranslate,
as one of the fastest growing companies in the market, has a vision to expand and
conquer their markets. With a focused attention on technology, their stream-
lined workow has create the edge to overtake their competitors with a fresh
and open attitude. Their eciency is evident in their dedicated IT backend
and continuous maintenance and improvements of the system. In recent events,
they have created a collaboration relationship with DTU to explore the idea of
implementing topic modelling into their current system. The vision is to be-
come the success and functional equivalence of the Uber app, as they have the
common position as being a media responsible for the matching between clients'
requests and the suppliers skill set. To do so, it is necessary to eciently and
automatically identify the requests property and features to form the criteria
used to identify the correct suppliers with the appropriate skill set. To further
push the technological boundary, they also expressed the intention to provide
an enhanced machine translation tool for their linguists in attempt to improve
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Project Overview and Revisions
3
translation quality.
These visions and goals created the background to this thesis, to explore and
implement the technology as well as analyse the impact of these products to
their business and market strategies.
1.2
Project Overview and Revisions
This thesis is divided into the functional aspects of the required exploration
areas. This structure is shown in the gure 1.1
Beside from the technical work on the dierent models, the structure and work-
ow for EasyTranslate is also analysed and presented. A updated analysis on
the business canvas is presented in chapter 8 to resonate with the early analysis
to emphasize the impact of these functionalities.
1.2.1
Topic Modelling
First subject is the topic modelling, which dominates the main proportion of this
thesis. This process executed in parallel with two other teams, each working on
the French and German version of the topic modelling with successful results and
ndings prior to this project, which will focus on the Chinese version. Certain
experiences and ndings are exchanged to reach a polished result on the same
level. This subject is described in iteration 1 to iteration 4.
In iteration 1, a basic LDA model is constructed and met a critical problem
cause by the language dierence between Chinese and English. This problem
is solved in iteration tool by creating a language specic preprocessing method
for Chinese and adding it to the package.
In iteration 3, a comprehensive test is run to compare and test LDA models with
dierent dimensions to determine the optimal parameter to use. Important cases
are presented to discuss the decision of the nal parameters.
In iteration 4, the constructed model is integrated into the current web app
prototype that exist on the domain of EasyTranslate. Concurrently a Chinese
landing page concept design is created aiming to combine the in development
new homepage design and certain aspects from the topic model prototype.
==PAGE:16==
4
Introduction
Figure 1.1: User Story Map
==PAGE:17==
1.2 Project Overview and Revisions
5
1.2.2
Machine Translation
Second subject is the machine translation. In this subject, the process is to
explore the available sources to create such a module based on EasyTranslate's
abundance of parallel data stream.
This is described in iteration 5 in two experiments to present what is attempted
in this projects time constraints. Due to the largely time dependent nature of
these model constructions, the results are not in the practical stage as the topic
modelling subject. The rst experiment with Theano proves the power and po-
tential of Recurrent Neural Networks and the second experiment of TensorFlow
could not be completed with its enormously large time consumption. However
the concept is understood and presented as a directional guide for long term
goals. This is also the reason the report proportion of this subject is adjusted
to t the successful practical ndings and usage, while the time consumption of
these two subjects are approximately equal.
==PAGE:18==
6
Introduction
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2
Overall Theory
This chapter introduces the structure and workow of EasyTranslate and indi-
cates the specic steps of which this thesis is focusing to enhance.
2.1
EasyTranslate
EasyTranslate as one of the fastest growing translation agencies has a enormous
focus on their IT backend system. This system allows the project managers to
control every aspect of each case with ease and creates a uent and eective
working process.
This is also one of the areas that forms the edge against
the competitors in the market. Their vision is to become the norm of media
between the client market and the professional linguist market - similar to the
phenomenon of Uber.
2.1.1
Business Model
To further understand the environment, attitude and position of the company,
a business canvas is constructed to showcase the product and market of the
translation agency eld.
==PAGE:20==
8
Overall Theory
Figure 2.1: test gure one
The business canvas g.2.1 is constructed with a splitline in the middle, the left
side of the canvas summarizes the product or service provided by EasyTranslate;
the right side focus on describing the market.
As a translation agency, EasyTranslate faces a strongly competitive environment
among its peers. The competition for winning clients over other agencies as well
as the loyalty of highly qualied translators upholds the quality and eciency
standard for EasyTranslate.
To attract and retain customers, the company
promises fast delivery and diverse services. The customer-base then becomes the
main appeal to provide consistent and well priced work for the translators. This
delicate dependence relationship between the customers and suppliers mutually
benet each other whenever one of them is improved. Which leads to the second
main problem: to maintain a large customer-base, the quantity grows along
with the time required to attend to all of the tasks eectively. EasyTranslate
solves this problem by utilizing a dedicated web-based system that provides the
platform to enhance the eectiveness of each project manager. In this platform,
the most notable aspects is the project management, overview and task/client
storage as well as the communication platform for direct interactions with the
clients. This system is named MyTranslation and will be referred to as so for the
rest of this thesis. The last problem focus on the return rate of the customer.
EasyTranslate has voiced the wish to create returning customers who would
ideally become the "Branch Advocaters" that would recommend the company
and its products through their network.
To achieve this, apart from obtain
consistent high satisfaction feedback, is to follow up with each clients over a
set period of time to ask for available new tasks as well as providing certain
==PAGE:21==
2.1 EasyTranslate
9
discounts or other advantages as encouragement.
EasyTranslate's unique value proposition is summarized into "Costumized so-
lution with adaptive and open attitude". The diversity of the dierent services,
as well as the focus on the technological aspects sets the company apart from
its competitors. The best example of this is the interest and collaboration that
created this project. Another example is the mobile app solution for real time
interpretor connection, eectively reducing the process of translators transporta-
tion time and the extra fee attached. This exploration attitude for technology
also constructed the unique advantage that no competitors can easily copy - a
dedicated IT-system with active management and maintenance.
2.1.2
Workow
The structure of EasyTranslate is composed by assigning one or several project
managers to control sales in each market - a geological region. Each project
manager handles contact with the clients as well as the linguists associated with
the language in the market. The number of tasks per market is therefore also
dynamic and can peak at a very high quantity during certain time periods. It is
not possible to predict a large task ow and therefore creates pressures on the
project managers and even the company leaders to decide expanding the team
on extreme cases.
Each order is based on interactions through EasyTranslate's web interface be-
tween the client and the project manager of the assigned market. The trans-
lation process is then progressed through the MemSource platform. Both of
the platforms revolve around interactive formulas. (ATTACH as APPENDIX
XXX)
In the MyTranslation interface, the client can request a "Quote" with a source
document that the project manager can use to calculate price and time frame
based on the length of the document. These information are then shared with
the client for approval, once approved the project manager can create a ocial
task and choose the correct translator. In the process of choosing the correct
translator the project manager is required to review the source le to gain an
understanding of the topics in the document to attempt to match a translator
with the corresponding expertise.
Once the task is created in MyTranslation, the progression is moved to the
MemSource platform. The project manager is required to create a project with
each source document as a separate Job. Translators assigned to the project can
use the built-in editor to translate the source document divided into segments.
==PAGE:22==
10
Overall Theory
This process automatically updates the percentage progression for the project
manager.
When the documents are translated into the target language, the
project manager conducts a proof read before delivering the result document to
the client as a product. The entire order ow chart is visualized on gure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: The order ows shows the interaction between clients and the
project manager on the MyTranslation platform, as well as be-
tween the project manager and the translator on the MemSource
platform
This thesis focus on the opportunity to optimize two areas in this work ow -
Matching the correct translator using topic modeling on the source document;
and seek enhancements to the translation process with the application of ma-
chine translation powered by deep learning approaches.
In the workow, two cogs are marked as the identied locations for optimiza-
tion. The rst cog is placed during the assignment of the translators, indicating
the process for the project manager to manually evaluate the source document
and assign it accordingly to the most suitable translator. This process aim to
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Topic Modeling
11
enhance quality and accuracy of the translation product. However it is also one
of the most time consuming aspects within the workow. The rst optimization
will be attempted with topic modelling to attempt and automate this process
and enhance eciency while maintaining a high accuracy.
The second cog is placed during the translation process. In this process the
translator have to rely on their professional knowledge while MemSource pro-
vides a generic translation module. This modules accuracy and usage varies
signicantly between the dierent translators and thus the reason to attempt
to create a better machine translation that can enhance this process. A ma-
chine translation requires parallel data, meaning a corpus of documents in two
dierent languages assuming the meaning and semantic values are maintained.
Each day a set amount of translated documents are nished and stored in Mem-
Source which could potentially create the ideal parallel dataset to train a tailor
made machine translation. Most important of all is the fact that these data are
continuously streaming in thus giving the possibility of a machine translation
process that can grow and learn for each increase in data corpus. This is ar-
guably the aspect that has the most potential and value as continous growth
of a parallel data made by professional translators is a privilege viewed from a
machine learning perspective.[?]
2.2
Topic Modeling
Topic model is the type of statistical model that handles natural language pro-
cessing in the machine learning domain. It's origin is to counter the problem
that concerns understanding a large quantity of documents takes a daunting
amount of time by qualitative methods. Due to the nature of large data sam-
ples, the model is associated with the unsupervised classication models within
machine learning. These models are used to discover the abstract topics that
occur in a collection of documents. Each topic discovered by the model will
have a certain set of words frequently used and signicantly associated with
this topic, these can also be described a domain specic vocabulary. Often a
document will concern multiple topics in dierent proportions. The application
of topic modeling in this thesis focus on the ability to identify and categorize
an unseen document with the correct topics.
==PAGE:24==
12
Overall Theory
2.2.1
Latent Dirichlet Allocation
Within the eld of topic modelling, the LDA approach is the most acknowledged
as well as most frequently used method. The intuition behind the LDA approach
is that each document exhibit multiple topics, or a distribution of probable top-
ics. This can also be simulated by manually inspecting each word and predict
this word with an arbitrary domain with intuition. At the end the collection of
predictions is calculated statistically to generate the overview of the entire doc-
ument. However this mentioned process require a contextual understanding and
background knowledge to identify each word with a subject. In the construction
of the LDA model, the idea is to generate a statistical overview of a training
corpus with a specied amount of categories to cluster each empirical data into.
These clusters then are called topics which simulates the human intuition of a
belonging subject when viewing a word.
2.2.2
Tool For LDA
Gensim is the open source tool that has been chosen to perform the construction
of LDA models in this thesis1. This tools features scalability using streaming
techniques and is robust on independent platforms. Prior to this thesis satis-
able results are already achieved by the French and German groups showing
the viable usage of this tool.
To construct the models, a backend corpus is
required to train and gather the a diverse baseline for written texts. In this
project the backend corpus uses the article dump data in the Chinese version
of the wikipedia. The reason behind this choice is the accessibility, reasonable
size and diversity in content due to the nature of wikipedia's descriptive writing
style.
2.2.2.1
TF-IDF matrix
To construct the LDA model, the wikipedia text corpus is processed using tok-
enization methods to create a bag of words for each document, and the bag of
words is transformed into a tf-idf matrix. The tf-idf matrix stands for "term fre-
quency, document inverse frequency" that is designed to reect the importance
of each words to a document in a corpus. The tf-idf increases the value pro-
portionally to the frequency of occurrence in the document, but is oset by the
frequency of the word in the corpus, which adjusts for the fact that some words
appear more frequently in general.
Examples can be presented as the word
1https://radimrehurek.com/gensim/index.html
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Topic Modeling
13
"Computer" would appear frequently in every article in a computer magazine,
but does not hold any signicant value to understanding each article.
The full vocabulary in the corpus is then transformed into a referential matrix
that converts each word to a numeric id. The tf-idf matrix makes its adjustment
upon a bag of words colelction, and therefore maintain the same dimensionality,
except the adjustment have the eect of increasing values of rare features and
decrease values of frequent features.
The calculations in this process will be handled by the gensim "TdfModel"
function.
The construction of the LDA model is created by the gensim "LdaModel" func-
tion.
2.2.3
Document Similarity
Each document is preprocessed into a bag of words representation before send to
the LDA model. The output of the LDA model contains pairs of topic number
and distribution value. These vector outputs can be compared by applying the
cosine similarity computation to measure the cosine angle between these vectors,
ranging from 0 to 1.
The mathematical formula to measure the cosine angle between vector a and b
is:
The measurement value between two documents LDA output vectors indicates
the similarity in term of the topics triggered. 1 is the valued for highly similar
documents while 0 is the value for highly dissimilar documents.
==PAGE:26==
14
Overall Theory
2.3
Machine Translation
Modern machine translation is based on the application of the deep learning
approach. Deep learning is a branch in the domain of machine learning, there-
fore it inherits the main functional aspects as in classifying and forecasting data
based on a set of training data. The main characteristics of deep learning is
the fact that it contains multiple layers of nonlinear processing units for feature
extraction and transformation, as well as the supervised or unsupervised learn-
ing of feature representations in each layer. These layers exist in a hierarchical
order from low abstraction level to high abstraction level features, similar to the
"feature net" used in cognitive science.
The core functional advantage that depp learning advocates is the ability and
performance to handle unsupervised data.
Deep learning algorithms rely on
distributed representations, which indicates that observed data is generated by
the interactions of many dierent factors on dierent levels.
The specic approach from deep learning applied in this thesis is the Recurrent
Neural Networks(RNN).
2.3.1
RNN
The idea behind the RNNs is to make use of sequential information. Normal clas-
sication processes handle information as a single entity without dependencies
of context. An simple example of the sequential scenario is the manual process
of understanding each frame in a video. Single frames might not present infor-
mation or clues to understanding the correct context to understand the content,
however if additional clues can be provided from previous frames in the video,
the understanding of that specic frame is strengthened.
The RNN is called recurrent because they perform the same task for every
element of a sequence, with the output being depended on the previous compu-
tations. This simulates the human memory process to aid in understanding and
specifying the context of a information given.
The diagram shows a RNN being expanded into a full network. If the data
length is 5 in this particular case, the RNN would be expanded to a 5-layer
neural network. In the formula, xt is the input at the time step t, st is the hidden
state at time step t - representing the "memory" of the network, the function f
is a nonlinear function such as tanh or a Rectied Linear Unit(ReLU), ot is the
output at step t often utilizing a probabilistic value.
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Machine Translation
15
Figure 2.3: A RNN and the unfolding in iteration of computations involved in
its forward computation
2.3.2
Tools for Deep Learning
The tools chosen to construct the deep learning algorithms are split to Theano
and TensorFlow.
Theano is a Python Library that allows mathematical processing involving
multi-dimensional arrays. This library contains functionalities to control, de-
ne, and optimize this data format.
TensorFlow is released in November 2015 by Google as a Open Source software
library designed for working with machine intelligence. The vision behind this
library is to unify one set of tools for machine learning applications, allowing
easier knowledge exchange and peer interactions as well as collaboration within
the eld. Tensor is the name for multidimensional array, which indicates the
similarity between the two libraries.
==PAGE:28==
16
Overall Theory
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 3
Iteration 1
Prior to the initiation of this project, the LDA models are already partially
implemented by a collection of DTU students using dierent languages to prove
its usability and value. These results received positive feedback and encour-
agement to further development as well as a vision for web interface aiming to
be integrated into the existing IT-system. This project focuses on the Chinese
language as an installment to the LDA model, as well as following the structures
of current solutions to preserve consistency and accuracy in the results.
3.1
Hypothesis
The LDA models for French and German languages have reached satisfying
results. Therefore it is desirable to recreate the success by applying the same
approach on the Chinese version. It is expected that the nished model in this
iteration will need certain level of enhancement to polish as they other groups
have encountered during their early implementations. However the model should
show the rst stage of usability in identifying documents and their related topics.
This iteration also serves as the testing phase for applying natural language
processing on the Chinese language.
It is known that Chinese as its origin
from a dierent language family than English might provide challenge to the
==PAGE:30==
18
Iteration 1
usual natural language processing steps previously learned and used during the
courses. The question and goal is to see how well the traditional process can
handle Chinese texts and provide clues to how to modify or enhance the process
in the following iterations to come.
3.2
Method
For the LDA model to be constructed, the machine requires a set of data, in
this case a corpus of text to be able to generate the rules and logic within a
language. These rules and logic will be applied when constructing a LDA model
for the desired goal.
The LDA models are constructed by following the Gensim tutorial chapter -
Experimenting with wikipedia data1.
An article corpus is collected from wikipedia's static html dumps for the Chinese
version of wikipedia. The compressed bz2 le is 1.21 gb large and serves as the
backend corpus to construct the LDA models. This corpus is kept in its original
form without modifying the preprocessing, this decision is made due to the feed-
back and experiences of the current groups development progress. The French
group has had successful implementations without altering the preprocessing
stage but rather focus on ltering the input le while the German group have
had similar results but is in the process of creating a more sophisticated prepro-
cessing in order to polish their results. In future iterations the modication of
preprocessing will depend on the results achieved.
Gensim contains the function that directly works with the compressed bz2 le
types:
(use image instead) python−mgensim.scripts.makewikizhwiki−latest−page−
articles.xml.bz2zhwiki (document time consumption)
This function process the text corpus and generate three separate les:
1. zhwiki_bow.mm contains the information stored in bag of words format
2. zhwiki_tdidf.mm contains the all the documents transformed into tdidf
sparse matrix
1https://radimrehurek.com/gensim/wiki.html#latent-semantic-analysis
==PAGE:31==
3.3 Results
19
3. zhwiki_wordid.mm contains all the words in the model and their corre-
sponding numeric IDs.
The wordid and tdidf les are used directly in the command to create the LDA
model, the next step is to dene the parameter that controls the number of
topics for the model generation.
Due to the advices of the other groups as
well as reviewing their ndings, the decision is to create several version of LDA
model containing dierent number of topics to understand the scope of the
accuracy.
The numbers chosen are 50, 100, 150 and 200, resulting in three
dierent LDA models of corresponding topic numbers for testing. (document
time consumption)
3.3
Results
The rst step of testing is to review the topics created. Each topics in the LDA
models are printed along with the top 20 most signicant words attached as a
queue to gain an understanding of the content within the topics. The rst glance
of this result revealed numerous problems in the current stage of the model. It
is very dicult to describe each topic as the words printed seem random and
even incomprehensible. This dees the original prediction that the theme of the
topics should be intuitive, for example a science related topic will contain words
normally related to science.
A small sample of the result is shown in the gure xxx. The marked words are
divided into color coded categories.
Figure 3.1: .....
Blue marks the words written in Traditional Chinese. This is caused by the
source data from wikipedia contain both Traditional and Simplied Chinese
articles.
Traditional Chinese is the written language used by the Cantonese
==PAGE:32==
20
Iteration 1
speakers while the Simplied Chinese is used by the Mandarin speakers. These
written languages are parallel in nature to each other, meaning that a word exists
in both versions have very similar structure and is readable by the majority
across the dierent language speakers. However this creates a vital problem in
term of natural language processing as one word in the two versions are being
considered as two separate tokens due to their unique unicode is dierent. This
then leads to the uctuation of frequency calculation caused by noise distortion.
In comparison this would be similar to attempt on calculating frequency within
a corpus containing both Danish and Swedish texts.
Green marks the words written in other language than Chinese - for example En-
glish phrases. It is a trend to use English phrases occasionally in Chinese written
language, these normally does not have an signicant eect on frequency based
models. However in this case, the English phrases also indicates the amount of
meta data within the article corpus. The words detected in this sample shows
that a lot of markup text or structural meta data was not correctly removed
during the preprocessing. What is more alarming is the fact that in the more
ne grained topic model le(such as the 200 topic LDA model), several topics
are written in languages other than Chinese. For example a topic exclusively
containing Japanese is discovered during manual inspection, as well as several
topics exclusively containing Korean. This indicates a possible administration
issue within wikipedia that some articles are misplaced in the language specic
domains.
Red and purple marks the words that does not make logical sense as an unique
token. The red marked words are the combined version of the last half segment of
a word and the rst half segment of another word - resulting in a word that does
not exist in the dictionary. The purple marked words have stopwords attached to
them, creating the same scenario as the red category. Most signicantly on the
last row, a long phrase is treated as a single token. The phrase in translated form
is "Modern signicant landmarks and representative buildings". This problem
leads to the realization of one of the most prominent dierence between written
Chinese and Western written languages - There are no space separating words
in written Chinese. This means that the traditional tokenize function designed
for western languages is completely useless for Chinese. To present this issue in
the English equivalence, a sample text is create in gure xxx.
The built-in tokenize function in Gensim is not designed to deal with this type
of documents correctly. This means that most tokens are entire sentences or
even entire paragraphs. While actual words will only be registered as a single
token in situations such as if they are surrounded by symbols or they appear in
headlines or titles separated from their surrounding context.
==PAGE:33==
3.4 Partial Conclusion
21
Figure 3.2: .....
3.4
Partial Conclusion
In the current stage of the model, the general process of obtaining a backend text
corpus and creating the LDA model is attempted with success. However, several
critical problems are found in the models topic results, all of which points to the
importance of preprocessing. It is apparent that to be able to create a usable
Chinese LDA, a dedicated preprocessing for the language must be created. In
this preprocessing steps, the focus should turn to how to correctly tokenize
Chinese documents as well as the possibility of conversion between Traditional
and Simplied Chinese. To achieve this, the next iteration should search and test
available packages that can handle these tasks as the built-in python libraries
will not suce to solve these issues.
Another issue at this phase is the amount of available material from EasyTrans-
late's database related to Chinese. China is not currently one of the markets
in the company and therefor there are only a limited resource on both the doc-
uments as well as the amount of translators concerning Chinese. This could
provide a problem once the LDA is improved and require testing data to com-
plete the translator matching.
Close to the completion of the rst iteration in this project, the French and
German team are working on a interactive prototype to be installed on Amazon
Web Service provided by EasyTranslate, the goal is to stabilize the Chinese LDA
to become on pair with the other versions and be added to this prototype.
==PAGE:34==
22
Iteration 1
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 4
Iteration 2
This iteration will focus on the critical problems encountered during the previous
iteration and create a dedicated preprocessing for the Chinese text corpus. To
be able to properly preprocess the corpus, it is necessary to address several key
dierences between Chinese language and Western languages. Each of these
dierences will reveal the correct approach to modify the preprocessing that
can apply on Chinese.
4.1
Hypothesis
The LDA model in the previous iteration is concluded as not usable due to
the incorrect preprocessing. In this iteration the prediction is that if the pre-
processing can produce the correct tokenized corpus comparable to the English
tokenized corpus, the LDA model should reach a usable level. This is due to
the mechanism of construction in the LDA model is reliant on the tdf matrix.
There are solid proof for the English LDA model to work in consistent fashion
with the tdf matrix created from the wikipedia corpus. Which indicates the
possibility of the same consistent result obtainable by the Chinese wikipedia
corpus if the correct preprocessing is applied.
==PAGE:36==
24
Iteration 2
4.2
Method
The most important dierence mentioned in the previous iteration is the innate
structural dierence in written format. Chinese does not have the space between
words to distinguish words in a sentence. This means the identication of each
word is purely based on the reader's recognition of the word in the sentence. To
recreate this recognition process on a computer, it is important to understand
the basic rules and forms in the construction of a word in Chinese.
4.2.1
Character Ambiguity
Words in Chinese are constructed by combining dierent characters together.
Each character in chinese have one or several meanings attached to be used in
dierent context. As an example, the word Physcis is shown in gure xxx,
it is puzzled together with the characters that contains meanings of physics,
products, theory, and subject. Not every character in Chinese have multiple
meanings but for the ones that have, their actual meaning will be determined by
their neighbouring words that creates the context to choose the correct meaning.
Figure 4.1: .....
4.2.2
Logical Construction
Most of the words in Chinese are constructed with a logical sense. Some of these
are shown in the gure xxx.
It is clear to interpret the logical sense of translating the Electric Brain as
Computer, and once it is related to Hand and Lift, it is then a portable
laptop. This is also one of the exibility factor in Chinese, if an unnamed object
==PAGE:37==
4.2 Method
25
Figure 4.2: .....
can be described with very few characters containing the features of this object,
this description could become the ocial name of this object.
4.2.3
Word Segmentation and Sentence Decomposition
Facing a language where each character have a meaning and each word have
a certain exibility in its construction it is critical to segment the sentence
correctly to secure the understanding of a sentence.
Incorrect segmentation
can drastically change the meaning of the sentence, in gure xx there is a very
interesting example of the segmentation problem. Both of these interpretations
are correct in term of segmenting the sentence, but their meaning have changed.
Figure 4.3: .....
This problem is caused by the last four characters of the sentence.
These four characters contain multiple overlapping interpretations that the only
possibility to determine its true meaning is to read the context surrounding the
sentence.
In term of natural language processing, the bag of words and tdf matrix will
look very dierent if the corpus contain signicant amount of these sentences.
Which emphasis the fact that choosing the correct segmentation tool have direct
impact on the accuracy of the preprocessing results.
==PAGE:38==
26
Iteration 2
Figure 4.4: .....
4.2.4
Processing Segmentation
The Chinese segmentation problem is such a complex issue that it is a eld of
study on its own. Most notably researched by the Stanford Natural Language
Processing Group, who also have released a word segmenter to handle Chinese
and Arabic texts 1. Unfortunately this tool is designed to run in java, whereas
in the current implementation process it is more favorable to be able to run
the segmentation process in Python as it should be run during the Gensim
processing of wikipedia dump. One of the possible alternatives that can run in
Python is the jieba package2. This package will be the rst iteration test tool
to segment the Chinese wiki corpus.
4.2.5
Traditional and Simplied Chinese
The main dierence between the two set of Chinese characters is the simpli-
ed version has replace approximately 2000 characters of the traditional version
with characters that contains fewer strokes and is easier to write.3 This direct
replacement reveals the fact that conversion between the two does not alter the
meaning or the sentinent of the content. On the other hand there are numer-
ous region specic phrases that might not make sense to use direct conversions.
However these region specic phrases is not exclusive for the dierence of tradi-
tional and simplied Chinese, each province in China may have a set of phrases
that no other regions use. It is also important to note that these region specic
slangs are more keen to appear in speech rather than ocial documents, which
is the data type that EasyTranslate focus on in their work. Therefor the de-
cision in the implementation is to fully convert the entire corpus to simplied
Chinese as it is the ocial language used by mainland China. This decision
1http://nlp.stanford.edu/projects/chinese-nlp.shtml
2https://pypi.python.org/pypi/jieba/
3http://www.yamagata-europe.com/en-gb/blog/the-dierence-between-traditional-and-
simplied-chinese
==PAGE:39==
4.3 Results
27
is exible as if the market shift from mainland China to Hong Kong or other
Cantonese areas, the entire corpus can be converted to traditional Chinese as-
suming no information or sentiment is altered during the conversion. (TRY TO
REFERENCE THIS 4)
4.2.6
Stopwords and non-Chinese ltering
Similar to any other language processing procedures, the stopwords poses little
to no benet in statistical models in Chinese. The stopword list is downloaded
from the Kevin Boungé's collection of stopwords in dierent languages5. This
stopword list is in simplied Chinese and will be used in the preprocessing.
As for the non-Chinese words found in the wikipedia data, it is necessary to run
a check similar to the stopword ltering to examine each word before they land
into the LDA model backend.
4.2.7
Modifying Gensim preprocessing
Since Gensim generate the necessary les directly from the wikipedia bz2 le,
it is desirable to modify the existing preprocessing within the Gensim package
rather than implement the preprocessing elsewhere. This step is also done by the
German group as a part of polishing result topic categories to reach a higher
and more reasonable accuracy.
This modication process is replicated after
dialogues with the German group.
The les related to the preprocessing steps are: utils.py; make_wikicorpus.py;
wikicorpus.py.
4.3
Results
Individual tests are applied to tackle each of the problems mentioned. At the
end the solutions are bound together to modify the preprocessing codes in Gen-
sim to create the second iteration of the LDA model. In the testing phrase, a
package named "mafan"6 is discovered as an alternative to the aforementioned
4http://pinpinchinese.com/blog/simplied-vs-traditional-chinese-characters/
5https://sites.google.com/site/kevinbouge/stopwords-lists
6https://github.com/hermanschaaf/mafan
==PAGE:40==
28
Iteration 2
"jieba" segmentation package. "mafan" is a multifunctional package that con-
tains functionalities from both "jieba" for segmentation as well as "jianfan" for
traditional/simplied Chinese conversion.
4.3.1
Segmentation Results
Using the split_text function from the mafan package, a test is run on 10
sentences collected from the documents that EasyTranslate is working on. For
the purpose for clarity each sentence and each word have their translated English
version in the row below.
Figure 4.5: .....
The results shows the correctness of segmenting Chinese sentences corresponding
to the English tokenization process. Certain word segmented can be discussed
but no denitive errors are found. These marginal doubt originates from the
exibility of Chinese word construction, such as the word 计算机软件(Computer
software) from the second sentence as well as the word 无国界(No national bor-
der) from the seventh sentence being understood as a single token. The problem
is traced to the fact that the word 计算机软件(Computer software) as well as
both 计算机(Computer) and 软件(Software) all exist in the word dictionary.
This is also the reason that the argument for the word being a independent
token is not incorrect, nor is the decision to divide the word into its two com-
ponents as separate tokens. In the process of segmentation, this test shows that
the function will consider the longest connected word as a higher priority rather
than stop the segmentation on the rst word match in the dictionary. This fea-
ture is, despite the room for dispute, benecial for the purpose of topic modeling.
This argument is based on the fact that many words, especially domain-specic
words require the entire phrase instead of the separate components to maintain
its accuracy. This can also explained by saying the exibility of Chinese word
==PAGE:41==
4.3 Results
29
construction is allowing a more accurate tokenization process because it can
retain contextual content.
4.3.2
Conversion Results
The package mafan includes wrapper for "jianfan"7 that handles the conversion
between simplied and traditional Chinese characters, as well as the "Hanzi
Identier" 8 that handles the identication of the two types Chinese in a string.
In the conversion test, the second sentence from the segmentation test is chosen.
Both the simplied and traditional versions of this sentence is stored to test the
conversion is both directions and the results are compared.
Figure 4.6: .....
The results shows the direct parallel nature of the two variations of Chinese as
well as direct matches between the results in both conversions. This test also
conrms the parallel nature of the two languages in two main aspects:
1. The characters are the same in term of meaning but the written structure
is slightly altered - such as 计and (Calculate)
2. Many characters is shared in the two versions of Chinese, they do not
require conversion - such as 生意(Business)
The last aspect of the testing is to understand how well it operates when faced
with a mixed sentence. This will provide a clue to how the function process
through each word within the sentence and how this process might impact a
document.
7https://pypi.python.org/pypi/Jianfan
8https://github.com/tsroten/hanzidentier
==PAGE:42==
30
Iteration 2
Figure 4.7: .....
From the test above it is clear that process converts the characters one at a
time and mixing the two languages together does not have an impact on the
result. This leads to the decision of unifying the process for all documents in
the preprocessing.
4.3.3
Filtering results
Following the usual procedures natural language processing, it is desirable to
lter out the stopwords that does not have signicant meaning to minimize noise
in the nal model. Due to the ndings in the rst iteration of the project, many
non-Chinese characters are found and they distort the nal topic categories. To
counter this issue, an extra check is performed simultaneously as the stopword
checking. If the word is a stopword or a non-Chinese character, they are not
included in the nal result. This step created an additional perk which was not
expected - all the meta data from wikipedia are also ltered. In the previous
iteration, words such as "jpg", "html" or any other English based words used
in the meta data is being processed as a part of the document content.
At
one point the removal of these meta data are considered as an separate step to
enhance data accuracy. However with the ltering of non-Chinese characters,
these are automatically removed from the main content and no longer posses a
threat to the accuracy of the results.
4.3.4
Updated Preprocessing
To integrate this preprocessing into Gensim, it is necessary to fork the Gensim
repository and install it in develop mode. This allows the modication of the
package les and use the modied version to t into the usual processing steps.
The modication process alters two les: the utils.py and wikicorpus.py.
The utils.py contains the standard tokenization method which is replaced by
the tokenzation designed for Chinese documents. In this step all input articles
are converted to simplied Chinese before any other process to ensure the nal
==PAGE:43==
4.3 Results
31
model contains uniform data type. The stopwords and non-Chinese entities are
ltered after the segmentation process to ensure the preservation of the original
content. The wikicorpus.py le is altered in the minimalistic fashion to only
alter the argument passing during the call of the tokenization function.
The new preprocessing introduces extra operations on every articles in the cor-
pus, which increased the original run time of producing the output les. In
the rst iteration, the function make_wiki spent approximately 1.5 hour to exe-
cute. In the updated version the total execution time is approximately 4.5 hours
- tripling the original run time.
Upon reviewing the topic results, the content shows higher consistency and
accuracy in describing the individual topics. In comparison with the results
achieved from the rst iteration, all the critical issues have been adressed:
1. The occurrences of random and incorrect words are eliminated
2. There are no topics containing non-Chinese characters
3. All words are in simplied Chinese
These improvements indicates that the LDA model is nally able to produce
reliable results for identifying topics. However it is still dicult to explain and
attempt to categorize the topics, but this is not an error as labeling the topics
is not a benecial step to test the model.
To understand the capability of the model, a document is used to feed to the
model as a test case. This document is the ocial iPhone 6 manual collected
from Apple's support.
The threshold for topic results is above 5% correlation, which returns three dif-
ferent topics. For the purpose of clarication each words' English translation is
added. The highest correlated topic with 63% correlation describes technology.
Which is tting with the nature of a product manual. The other two topics
triggered describes Society(23%) and Software(7.7%) also ts the content that
can include certain copyright statements as well as software related words on a
smartphone manual.
==PAGE:44==
32
Iteration 2
Figure 4.8: .....
4.4
Partial Conclusion
This iteration focused on understanding the Chinese text structure and create
solutions to process Chinese text in the familiar procedure for English text pro-
cessing. The dierence between the text structures has lead to the development
of a language-specied preprocessing procedure. This procedure is capable to
segment Chinese text into correct tokens and convert the two version of Chinese
into one and another. Each of the critical issues in the previous iteration have
been thoroughly investigated and each solution is tested for conrmation which
leads to the conclusion that a LDA model is nally implemented with success.
The enhanced preprocessing have produced a LDA model that on the rst sam-
ple test is doing the correct identication of topics. This is also the rst step
towards a LDA model that is on the same level as the French and German groups
product. The immediate next step is to test the LDA models capabilities and
limits to understand which aspects can be polished to reach the nal result.
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 5
Iteration 3
In the previous iteration, a usable model is created using a enhanced prepro-
cessing procedure for Chinese text. During the rst impression test, the model
returned promising results.
However many aspects still require attention to
polish the results.
In this iteration, the focus is to test LDA models to determine the best number
of topics.
5.1
Hypothesis
Although the backend text corpus is being processed correctly, it is still insuf-
cient to draw conclusions on the LDA models accuracy and usability. One of
the vital parameters for the LDA model is the number of topics. This param-
eter controls the categories that the model is required to separate the backend
corpus into. The question is which value would be ideal for the usage and how
to validate the results. This iteration will tackle these problems to polish the
model.
==PAGE:46==
34
Iteration 3
5.2
Method
During the construction of the LDA model, a parameter that controls the num-
ber of topics is set to determine the range of the model. This parameter is set
to 200 in the previous iteration. However a range of dierent values will be
set to determine the optimal setting and understand how this value impact the
results.
The approach to determine the number of topics is to use qualitative inspection
on comparing the results produced by dierent valued models. Models with 50,
100, 150, 200, 250 and 300 topics will be constructed. A set of documents will
be used to acquire results from the dierent sized models. These results can be
compared and reveal behavior and limitations of each of the models.
When a preferable number of topic is determined, it is also desirable to test
the models capability. The idea is to inspect the results from the model while
processing logically similar documents, if 3 product manuals of similar length
is feed to the model, they should return similar results. Another test is to nd
niche category texts and inspect how the model reacts on them.
5.3
Results
In search of the appropriate documents for the test, the focus is leaned towards
diversity of the market as well as possible niche areas. In the German version of
LDA, one of the ndings is that some specic topics are only detectable using
models that are created on large number of topics, e.g. articles describing the
topic of tooth.
5.3.1
Comparison test
Five documents are chosen for this test to compare the dierent models results.
The chosen documents are:
• iPhone 6 manual1
• Popular Medicine "BanLanGen" Description2
1https://goo.gl/8Xrr5m
2http://goo.gl/9Ym60Y
==PAGE:47==
5.3 Results
35
• Lenovo Commercial3
• Chinese Foreign Company Law4
• NetDoctor for Toothache5
The manual for iPhone 6 will be used as a representative case to show a consis-
tent nding of this test. The number of topic can drastically change the output
of the model, especially on the less dominant portions. The dominant portions
have a tendency to stay consistent but varying in percentage. The test is set to
return only topics that has a 1% or higher match rate. To clarify the result, each
topic is attached to the top ve most signicant words to indicate the content
within. It is important to emphasize that the topic number at the beginning
of each topic is not universal for all models as generation of each model is not
restricted by the order of the topics.
5.3.1.1
Case: iPhone 6 Manual
The test starts at the low end of the range of possible number of topics, which
is 50.
Figure 5.1: test gure one
3http://goo.gl/UQ1ibM
4http://goo.gl/5uxg8E
5http://goo.gl/IPFWdy
==PAGE:48==
36
Iteration 3
The positive side of this result is that the dominant part describes technology.
Which is expected for the highly descriptive nature of manuals. However the
less dominate portions triggers the skepticism. In this case the second largest
portion contains words hinting towards business related topic, but also contains
the word "Bus" as its top ve words. The last portion contains words within
the general entertainment area. While these ts the expectation to a certain
level, containing technology, business and entertainment which are the known
qualities by Apple's products, the results does not seem sucient enough for
detail. For example certain law related text is in the bottom of the original text
which is often seen to conclude the document and declare lawful restrictions.
For such a low value of K, the issue is that topics cover a larger amount of words,
as well as more diversity within each topic. Which could be the reason behind
the low number of topics triggered and the result seem generalized and vague.
This number of topics is then doubled to 100 for further inspection.
Figure 5.2: test gure one
At K=100, the number of triggered topics have increased. However the dominant
portion has increased its range covering 85% of the document as technological
words. The business portion has vanished and instead a political topic covers
the second largest portion. This could be a step towards the law related words
described earlier. Entertainment topic remains and two new topics have emerged
to trigger this document. Language and Vehicle related topics have just passed
the triggering threshold, these two topic seem weakly connected to the purpose
of this document. The topics are denitely getting more details which counters
the previously issue of being vague. However the triggered topics are less logical
and the vague issue still persist on the entertainment topic. It would be useful
==PAGE:49==
5.3 Results
37
to see this topic split into movie and music as separate topics to show the more
rened borders between subjects and topics.
K value is increased again to 150.
Figure 5.3: test gure one
It's reassuring to see the technology/software topic remains at the top of the
results. The attention is once again directed to the less dominant components.
It is a relief to see the word "design" and "production" triggered in the second
topic, as it is some of the most emphasized quality by Apple.
But the rest
of the words seem less related and ags this topic as suspicious. Politics and
Entertainment are triggered once again, this time it is important to notice that
the entertainment topic does not include music related words in its top ve.
This could indicate a more rened topic division.
So far the models shows consistent result in its dominant segment while varying
the sub-components in both domain and percentage. The K value is increased
further to understand the behavior change.
This result is thus far the most surprising. The topics triggered are reduced to
three and domain wise to two: Software system and Economy. In this test the
result dees the logic of increase in lesser, detailed components. One positive
trait is the topics show indication of being less vague comparing to the previous
encounters. One of the possible explanations for this result could be that topics
are being so ne grained and they no longer trigger as easily as before. Due to
the higher amount of topics dened, each topic potentially contain less diversity
in words and more focused on the actual subject. The removal of movie and
==PAGE:50==
38
Iteration 3
Figure 5.4: test gure one
politics can be viewed as logical for a user manual.
As the topics show tendency of being more focused on their actual domain and
subject, the decision is to further push the value of K higher.
Figure 5.5: test gure one
In this test, the result shows a return of the amount of sub-components. Once
again the dominant component remains techonology/software, which is expected.
Each of the sub-component has urged the reevaluation of the original docu-
==PAGE:51==
5.3 Results
39
ment. In this reevaluation process, one nding is most signicant. The words
described in the top ve is not necessarily the words triggered by the document
itself, they're simply the most prominent words within the topic and only give a
clue to what the topic contains. The focus should rather be on the general vo-
cabulary used in a boarder picture. In the original document, the text contains
numerous disclaimers to responsibilities of user actions as well as citing dierent
legislation rules. Due to this the topic of politic is suitable second component
for this document. The repeated mention of damage and repair could be reason
for the third and fourth topics. In this case none of the topics triggered are
excluded in the reasonable range.
Each increase of K has lead to a stronger reasonable result, as well as revealing
the behavior of the model. The last step is to test the highest value included in
this test.
Figure 5.6: test gure one
The result is strikingly similar to the previous K value, which indicates the
stabilization of the model. Most importantly, the percentage of the distribution
is similar to the previous chart and it seems to be an actual higher detailed
version. In the other K value adjustment the topics and percentage experienced
uctuation, in this iteration the model shows signs of stabilization. Another
improvement is the less likelihood of a "out of place word" in the top ve words.
Such as the co-existence of "Locomotive" and "Function" in the same topic
within the previous result. Words in these topics shows a higher consistency of
describing a single arbitrary subject.
This process is done for all of the ve documents, due to the spacial restrictions
==PAGE:52==
40
Iteration 3
the results are not all evaluated in this chapter. However all of the output can
be viewed in the APPENDIX XXX.
To summarize the results for the other documents, similar trends tend to occur.
At low K values the results include a low amount of vague, generalized and
potentially multi-subject topics.
Once the K values reaches 200, uctuation
and change in the results are clearly noticeable. While the stabilization occurs
between the K=250 to K=300 mark. At the highest K values, the topics tend to
become focused on single subject and certain division of a previously vague topic
is divided. The clearest instance of this is the topic of entertainment being split
into movie specic and music specic topics. Another signicant nding is the
uctuation of topic tend to happen more drastically for the shorter documents.
In the test case the Lenovo commercial text is the shortest, with the length of 212
tokens. Throughout the test this document has generated topic output ranging
from technology to entertainment to sport and at last to business. This result
can also be aected by the nature of commercial writing style being drastically
dierent from descriptive documents. Which lead to the schizophrenic behavior
of the LDA models. Also noteworthy is the inconclusive dominance of a specic
topic in the shorter documents. These result contain a more even distribution
as compared to the skewed dominance of a specic topic which can be used to
label the document. (Should i include more cases?)
5.3.2
Similarity test
In the previous test the stabilization limit of the K value is found. Furthermore
the LDA is capable of describing each individual document with a distribution
of topics that creates the overview of the content within the document. The
interest is shifted to the ability of similarity comparison between documents.
To be able to decipher more about each document, the perspective should be
expanded. New documents are added on top of the ones from previous test.
These documents are intentionally picked from similar areas to test whether the
result will concur with logical reasoning.
The new added documents are:
• Samsung Galaxy S4 Manual6
• Sony Xperia Z Manual7
6http://goo.gl/b6dZhn
7http://goo.gl/ez04vq
==PAGE:53==
5.3 Results
41
• Oil Production Sales Guideline8
• Foreign Company Cooperation Rules9
The smartphone manuals are intended to compare with the current iPhone
manual for comparison. Each of the law related texts are extracted from the
same legislation website, although there are dierence in length and subject
between law, rules and guidelines. In total there are 9 documents for a similarity
comparison.
The similarity metric chosen is the Cosine Similarity, which is widely acknowl-
edged for calculating distance between two vectors. This test is performed on
the K value equal to 300, as it shows most promising results from the compar-
ison test. Each document will have a vector with 300 dimensions, one for each
predened topic, and their matched values. The vectors representing the doc-
uments are then used to calculate the cosine distance to produce an adjacency
matrix as seen in gure XXX.
Figure 5.7: test gure one
The similarity score range from 0 to 1; 1 being the highest similarity value.
Each text is color coded into arbitrary categories.
Manuals are coded blue,
medicine and Toothache are coded purple, law documents are coded red. The
Lenovo commercial is also coded blue as it is still technology related even though
the vocabulary for commercial document might be dierent.
The matrix is
generated into a heatmap as higher similarity values have the warmer reddish
color as highly dissimilar values have cold light blue color.
Upon observing the heatmap, it is clear to see the all the smartphone manuals
have very high similarity scores, as well as all the law documents. The medicine
8http://goo.gl/DKybjV
9http://goo.gl/5w7ncn
==PAGE:54==
42
Iteration 3
and toothache documents are very dissimilar from all other documents except
with each other, shaping all the cold color cells in the heatmap. This is expected
as no other documents would include chemistry related vocabulary. The Oil
product sales guide document has triggered an above average similarity with
all of the technology related documents while maintaining a high similarity
score with all other law texts. This indicate the possibility that the Oil guide
document has an interesting topic distribution, that resembles both the law
documents and the technological documents.
This distribution is shown on
gure XXX.
Figure 5.8: test gure one
A couple of interesting facts is evident in the Oil guide topic distribution. First
aspect is the quantity of topics triggered is much higher than the other docu-
ments. The second aspect is the proportion of the topics, there is no generally
dominant topic but rather an interesting pattern of topics. Approximately a
quarter of the document describe politics and economy, another quarter describe
software and system, while the rest half of the document describes a variety of
topics in similar proportions. This could be caused by the subject property of
this document. The Oil guide document is a guideline for lawful actions when
conducting sales on Oil related products. From the purpose behind the docu-
ment it is possible to deduct the assumed vocabulary coverage: scientic terms
used to describe the oil product; law paragraphs to cite the proper legal and
illegal actions; rules concerning to the import and transportation of the product;
==PAGE:55==
5.3 Results
43
names of the geographical location and route etc. In term of subject coverage
this is truly a diverse document, which strikes a chord with the topic distribu-
tion output from the LDA model. It is also within reason to consider the two
largest portions of the topics, each corresponds to a quarter of the distribution,
are also the two dominant topics for law and manual documents respectively.
The topic number 33 in the K=300 model is the same dominant topic in iPhone
manual distribution in gure XXX, similarly to the topic number 57 is the same
dominant topic in the Foreign company law result in Appendix XXX. Which
conrms the high similarity scores of the Oil guide compared to both law and
technological documents.
As discussed during the comparison test, the number of topics can suer from
being too vague or too specic. One question is how would this distribution af-
fect the similarity comparison between documents within logical domains. This
leads to the reconstruction of the heatmap using K=200 model. The result is
shown in gure XXX.
Figure 5.9: test gure one
The two dominant clusters of high similarity score remains, among the smart-
phone manuals and the law documents. However the dierence between this
heatmap and the previous one is far more interesting to look at. The colors of
this heatmap shows a slight change and to make this dierence easier to read,
a dierence matrix is constructed as shown in gure XXX.
The dierence matrix showcase the two dominant areas to be focused on: The
purple documents and the Oil guide documents.
As described earlier the purple documents contain chemistry related vocabulary
which should dierentiate them from the other documents. However the simi-
larity between these purple documents and the smartphone documents is much
higher in the K=200 model results. This can be viewed as an evidence to the
==PAGE:56==
44
Iteration 3
Figure 5.10: test gure one
fact that certain topics in this model contains both chemistry related vocabu-
lary as well as other technological vocabulary, thus blurring the line between the
two clearly dierent scientic elds. In other words this is a conrmation that
the K=200 model does not contain a sucient amount of topics to distinguish
the specic subject in a larger domain. It would indicate the topic concerning
science in this model is too vague.
The Oil document once again become the contributor of this investigation. Each
of the largest dierence in similarity values, emphasized by the darker red color,
all belong to the comparison of this document. In the K=200 model this docu-
ment have receive a signicantly lower score when comparing with technological
documents.
According to this model the document is much more dominant
on the law related vocabulary rather than its diverse nature in subjects. The
distribution of this document in the K=200 model is shown on gure XXX.
The interesting note is that there are still a large amount of topics triggered in
this distribution. However the landscape has changed to be dominated by the
economy focused topic. Logically speaking, this can be perceived as correct, due
to the fact that this document is collected from the same collection as the other
law documents. Upon reviewing the source document, the K=300 model result
describes the distribution more accurately as the dierent proportion of topics
are represented with a higher precision. This can be served as an extra evidence
to show the topics in the K=200 model contain words that are very dierent
from its purposed domain. In this case a large portion of the words within the
topic number 50 should be distributed into more subject-specic topics.
==PAGE:57==
5.4 Partial Conclusion
45
Figure 5.11: test gure one
5.4
Partial Conclusion
In this iteration the main focus is to thoroughly investigate the optimal number
of topics to be used in the LDA model. Six dierent values are chosen ranging
from 50 to 300 and their respective models are constructed to test the behavior
and output of these models. In the comparison test, each model's result showcase
the uctuation of the distribution at lower K value and stabilization of the
distribution between the K values 250 and 300. This phenomena is described
as the insucient topics at lower K values that causes portions of the words to
be assigned into a generalized, vague topic resulting the incapability to detect
the detail or avor of a text beside its dominant component.
One of the most prominent question for the LDA model is whether it has the
capability to recognize similar documents to mimic the human cognitive function
of the same nature.
The similarity test intentionally chose documents from
dierent domains with high likelihood of being similar to the documents within
the same domain. In this test, the LDA model successfully detects the similarity
between the documents according to logical human perceptions. Furthermore
the similarity test provides a strong evidence to strengthen the argument of
==PAGE:58==
46
Iteration 3
models with higher K values is superior in detecting the detail and subject
specic avor.
The Oil guide document's diversity have served as the main
contributor of this nding.
The conclusion of this iteration is the conrmation of the K value to be used in
the nal version of the LDA model - 300. There is no intention for even higher
values model to be tested as the value can always be increased to innitely zoom
into each topic, similar to the science topic being divided into computer science
and chemistry found in this chapter, each sub-topic can further delegated into
ne grained sub-subjects. However it will not be useful to further partition as
the dierent subject within computer science will unlikely contribute to the main
goal behind the construction of LDA model - to be able to assign a document
to the most suitable translator.
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 6
Iteration 4
As the LDA model is slowing forming towards the envisioned functionality, which
means the immediate task is to implement the functions into a usable prototype.
In this iteration the focus is to present the current prototype as well as discuss
the possible improvements and alterations to change it into a usable component
in the EasyTranslate back-end system.
6.1
Hypothesis
The LDA model would not be useful for EasyTranslate if it does not have an in-
ferface. Project managers should be able to access its functionality with simple
navigation and receive an insightful output that will aid their working process.
The core process in the project managers work ow revolve around using the
dedicated backend system called MyTranslation. During the recent upgrades of
this system, the workow is enchanced to allow project managers perform more
operations without changing domain. Evidence of this is the previous analysis of
document length and repetition require the project manager to manually create
a task in MemSource and acquire the output to be used back in MyTranslation;
The upgrade allows the project manager to access this analysis function with-
out leaving MyTranslation to tidy up the workow. Following this intuition,
==PAGE:60==
48
Iteration 4
the LDA analysis should also be accessible within the MyTranslation domain,
available in each project created.
When the project manager views the prototype, it should indicate the important
insights about a document in a clear and easy to understand fashion. When
the model has found suitable similar documents, the decision and operation of
picking a translator should be performed automatically by the model.
6.2
Method
Two previous prototypes were created prior to the initiation of this project
by the French and German teams. Both are presented to EasyTranslate and
evaluated. A third prototype emerged to combine the two previous versions.
In this prototype each of the language is merged into the backend, making it
capable of handling documents with dierent languages. Development of this
prototype is handled mainly by the French team member Valentin.
The main purpose of this prototype is to showcase the capability of the LDA
model and the possibility it can bring to enhance the project managers work-
ow. EasyTranslate has voiced intentions to implement the LDA model into
their dedicated system upon successful prototype evaluation. During this im-
plementation certain visual aspect are expected to be change due to the possi-
bility of integrating some of the result output inside each project view on the
current dedicated system. The test prototype utilizes the Amazon Web Service
to create a web app within EasyTranslate's domain. The address for the web
app is lda.easytranslate.com.
For the Chinese version, the LDA model le generated by Gensim is added to
the current prototype as well as a dedicated Chinese tokenization script. It is
important to note that the LDA model contains Simplied Chinese data, which
the tokenization also controls by converting any input document in Traditional
Chinese into Simplied Chinese. If the documents are targeting South China or
Hong Kong area, where Traditional Chinese is used, the model can also handle
them by a quick modication.
As discussed in iteration 2, the two written
languages are parallel to each other. This means that it will not be necessary
to create a dedicated model for Traditional Chinese as the structure and the
content will be identical to the Simplied model. These characters does not
change the meaning, sentiment or structure of the words in the conversion, which
is the main component used to create the LDA model. In short a Traditional
Chinese LDA model will be a redundant copy of the Simplied Chinese model.
The mentioned modication will focus on converting all input into Simplied
==PAGE:61==
6.3 Results
49
Chinese for matching and similarity calculation, then convert all the output
result back to Traditional Chinese if necessary.
Another dierence in the Chinese LDA prototype compared to the other lan-
guages is the vision of EasyTranslate to expand their market into the China
using a automated landing page. This landing page will be served to test the
response of the market as well as the rst attempts to handle Chinese clients.
This idea sets the prototype into a dierent arena comparing to the current
prototype due to the dierence of possible users: The current prototype will
be used mainly by EasyTranslate project managers while the Chinese landing
page will be viewed by Chinese clients who might have no prior knowledge to
EasyTranslate. The Chinese landing page should therefor draw closer relations
to the current web page with an extra functionality of uploading and evaluate
the le. As such the landing page will become a hybrid between the current
website and the LDA model prototype.
6.3
Results
The existence of a current LDA prototype means that the implementation of
the Chinese model is a question of adding this model into the current backend
system. Because the Chinese has such a dierence language structure, the plugin
process is not as eortless as adding another western language.
The most important modication is the dedicated tokenization script, which
contains the same tokenization method as the preprocessing of Wikipedia corpus
mentioned in iteration 2. The main purpose is to secure the input format is in
Simplied Chinese, corresponding to the model used, as well as the segmentation
process for word recognition.
This prototype aim to provide two main aspect of a certain document to the
project managers:
• Information overview for the input document
• Assign/Suggest the most suitable translator for this document
==PAGE:62==
50
Iteration 4
6.3.1
Information Overview
With the current prototype, each statiscal property of the document is presented
in three main segmentions.The tester is able to choose between uploading a new
document or view a previously uploaded document. To add further dimensions
to the test results, it is also possible to view the overall analysis of the entirety
of document corpus in each language combination.
The rst segment is the general overview as shown in gure XXX.
Figure 6.1: test gure one
At the top of the result view, the le name is display as well as the language
combination and upload timestamp. To show the general complexity of the doc-
ument a collection of statistical numbers are calculated such as total document
length, unique words and the ratio of these values is labelled as lexical diver-
sity. The last three values in the Simple statistics box indicate the number of
sentences, average length of sentences and average word length. These values
serve as an additional evidence for the dierence between Chinese and western
languages. The Chinese period sign has a dierent unicode assigned compared
to the western period. Similarity to all other symbols usually served to indicate
the termination of a sentence. This causes the information of sentence struc-
ture to be incorrect in the screenshot. However the word length is reasonable
as Chinese words have a highly skewed distribution, two character words is the
most frequent word structure and therefor dominants the vocabulary. Another
dierence is the information designed for showing readability scores. Readabil-
ity score can be calculated in English using calculation methods such as Flesch
Kincaid1. This readability test is highly language dependent as evident from
the fact that it is yet to be implemented for the French and German teams. For
Chinese language processing, the question of readability measurement is not as
comprehensive as the English equivalent. Discussion about dierent methodolo-
gies has not reached a conclusive result to which method would be superior to
1Something here
==PAGE:63==
6.3 Results
51
its peers2. The existing methods of readability can be based on general language
frequency or number of strokes used to draw the character, and even the num-
ber and degree of dierent meaning and sentiment behind a specic character
or word. Each of these methods focus on dierent aspects of the language, such
as familiarity of common words, diculty to hand draw and recognize words
and degree of possible misjudgment of the sentiment. The decision of which
method should be most suitable is up for debate and due to the lack of widely
acknowledge handling of this issue, it is currently postponed for solution. These
values have a high impact on the the perception and understanding of the doc-
ument, especially with the possible vision of dynamic price adjustment for the
translation task.
The second segment in the view provides visualizations for the actual LDA
result using a batch by batch method to create a streamline view of the topic
distribution in the progression of the document.
Figure 6.2: test gure one
Progression overview allows the user to understand the change of topics over
time in the document.
In the screenshot on gure XXX, it is clear to see
the red topic dominates the rst portion of the document while the blue topic
has multiple peaks during the second half of the document.
This overview
could provide clues to the decision of assigning multiple translators for a single
document.
The third segment is a large word cloud allowing the user to view the most
frequent words and the coloring of the words is based on the color of topics
shown in the distribution progression chart. Words shown in this chart have the
eect of quickly understand the general concepts and subjects in the document
as well as clues to what the colored topic is describing.
2http://goo.gl/GrbX7w
==PAGE:64==
52
Iteration 4
6.3.2
Translator matching
The information and charts above reveals the properties of a document to the
project managers. Which by itself is not a functionality that signicantly boost
the project managers' work ow. However the ability to describe a document
with data vectors allow the possibility of matching the most suitable translators.
This matching process can be done in dierent approaches. Two of the main
usable approaches are considered during the development:
• Industry identication approach.
• Direct doc to doc comparison approach
6.3.2.1
Industry Identication Approach
This approach is designed upon the discovery of a category based data cell within
the EasyTranslate supplier database. Each supplier, a freelancer translator, has
one or multiple industries attached in this database. Some examples of this
are Fiance, Science, Legal and Marketing. Upon inspecting the full database,
a total of 11 unique industries are found attached to the dierent translators.
Assuming these are the main areas that EasyTranslate work with and use to
dierentiate tasks while manually assigning translators, they can be used to
generate a relation ratio between the topic IDs in the model and the actual
industry it was assign to.
A simplied visualization is created to show the
concept of this approach:
Figure 6.3: test gure one
In this scenario the translator Bob has translated two documentions Doc_1
and Doc_2. Both of these documents have been manually evaluated as tting
==PAGE:65==
6.3 Results
53
for the industry Marketing. The LDA results of these two documents returns
the dominant topic triggered to be topic #41, #56 and #250. These can then
be assumed to be the topics related to the industry Marketing.
Any input
documents with a high LDA topic distribution of these specic topics are then
automatically assigned to translators in the Marketing industry, namely Bob in
this scenario.
The main idea is to use a set of manually evaluated documents to construct a
logic able to identify the most probable topics for each of the industries. While
this approach oers a potential solution for the matching problem, it is dismissed
upon discovery of several issues. The rst issue is the lack of clear boundaries
of the industries as they were not constructed with a consistent methods, which
reduces the usefulness of the industry tags found. The second issue is the require-
ment of manual evaluation of a corpus of documents, considering that quantity,
diversity and precision are all unknown variables. The last issue is the fact that
a document could contain multiple evenly distributed topics, complicating the
process of the assignment between topics and industries.
6.3.2.2
Direct Comparison Approach
The second approach is to compared the input document with all the previously
translated documents of the translators available with the correct language com-
binations. In this approach the input document and a previously seen document
are directly compared using cosine similarity as mentioned in iteration 3. This
comparison will also indicate similar topic combination patterns which is one of
the issues of directly assigning topics to a industry.
This approach emerged from the meeting with EasyTranslate where they voiced
intentions of acquiring translated documents from all their translators as a part
of the prole. Direct comparison would give a precise score to indicate which
translator has translated the most similar document in the past thus most suit-
able for the job.
With the goal to test this method, all les with Chinese as the source language
is obtained from MemSource. A total of 43 les are collected and can be viewed
in the Appendix XXX. Unfortunately due to the current lacking of Chinese as
an ocial market, these documents have not yet assigned translators. For the
purpose of validating the test, ctional translators are assigned after manual
evaluation of the source text. One example of such is a legal report of an explo-
sion accident with the MemSource project ID 6651. This document is collected
and modied into an alternative version with the assigned ctional transla-
tor "Law_patent". This ctional translator handles the legal documents and
==PAGE:66==
54
Iteration 4
patent formula in the test corpus. The alternative versions have been uploaded
to the current LDA prototype to provide information of possible translators3.
These les provides the prototype with knowledge of previously seen data and
translators, allowing the prototype to perform on unseen documents.
This approach is the current implemented version on the prototype and have
performed tests on the documents collected in iteration 3. On the testing of
the "Foreign Company Law" le4, the translator matching is able to identify
the previously mentioned ctional translator "Law_patent" as one of its most
suitable translators. The visualization of this chart can be viewed on appendix
XXX.
6.3.3
Chinese Landing Page
As earlier mentioned, the LDA prototype serves as a proof of concept for pos-
sibility of integrating the automated document analysis as well as translator
matching into the current EasyTranslate backend system.
This automation
process increase the accuracy and eciency of the workow thus peaking the
interest of testing the market in China or Hong Kong regions. To summarize
the idea of the landing page, the aim is to present the company and allow the
clients to access an unmanned app that can receive, analyze and assign their
documents through interactions on this website. The second aspect is to log
the statistics of usage as well as the navigation process to gain an insight of the
market as well as the elements that attracts or repels the clients.
In reality the construction of the landing page concerns two components: an
alternate version of the EasyTranslate website to represent the company in
Chinese; an automated interface that replaces the quote/request interaction
between the client and project manager by utilizing the LDA models.
The current EasyTranslate website is undergoing developments and a newer
version is being constructed to enhance the presentation of the company. During
the tech meetings a sneak peak of the new website hints toward the emphasize
on the technological aspects as the main matter on the frontpage will be an
animation of a robotic head turning and winking to show the collaboration
between the computer and human aspects of the workow. Certain usability
and visual alterations are also noticed as the website will show its content in
a continuous down scroll, with collapsible buttons that shows detail without
navigation the user away from the main page.
3The altered les only exist on the personal computer for testing purposes, none of the
actual MemSource projects were modied
4http://lda.easytranslate.com/report/ChineseForeignCompanyLaw.txt
==PAGE:67==
6.3 Results
55
The design of the landing page draws inspiration from the directions hinted by
the new website as well as cooperating the output and visualizations as seen
in the LDA model prototype. A conceptual prototype is created using a scroll
based template5.
Upon opening the landing page, the user is greeted with the robotic head(not
yet animated) and a slogan "智能系统, 以最快的速度, 做最准的翻译" with
translates to "Intelligent system, with the fastest speed, achieve most precise
translation".
This specic slogan is designed using a typical structure often
seen in Chinese commercials - Punchline, and a symmetric follow up to reinforce
the punchline. Both the animation and the slogan is designed to capture the
attention of the user and achieve a positive rst impression. This component
can be viewed in gure XXX.
Figure 6.4: test gure one
Upon immediate scrolling, the user is able to expand the collapsible component
for company overview, client feedback and categories of services. Immediately
followed by the real time statistical overview. These components aim to deliver
a compact and precise message, engaging the user without losing interest. This
is shown in gure XXX.
Less than one full page scroll from the top, the user is presented with the option
to upload or view a existing analysis of a document, increasing the interactivity
and attempt to further captivate their interest. In this segment, the idea of re-
taining simplicity and clarity is maintained to avoid usage of complicated terms,
data and graphs. The information is restricted to character count, word count,
topic pie chart and wordcloud. Each color used in the topic pie chart should be
identical to the colors used in wordcloud to unify and provide clear indication of
5http://junqingqian008.wix.com/easytranslate
==PAGE:68==
56
Iteration 4
Figure 6.5: test gure one
relation. Right below the visualizations, the top matched translators are shown
with a percentage score. The idea is to let the user view a pop-up of the docu-
ments or topics that this translator have worked on, conrming the connection
between this translator and the current document. At the bottom an "Order
now" button is present to engage the user to create the order of this translation.
The rest of the scroll contain a list of previous clients and contact information.
Structure wise, the landing page is designed aiming to impress and impact the
user and let the user view and upload texts as quickly as possible. The scrolling
processing from the rst component to the upload, analyze and order component
is extremely compact. If the user is not yet convinced after the LDA component,
they're presented with previous clients and contact information allowing the
interested users to make contact and generate a potential client through direct
conversation.
As the nature of conceptual prototype, this webpage is not yet rened for actual
usage. The end product heavily relies on the new ocial website design. This
landing page prototype simply serves as a point of direction and quick overview
of how the Chinese landing page could look like.
Functionality wise, this website will require access to the LDA webapp's database
for translator information, as well as the LDA webapps calculation output for
the visualizations. The order button will require access to the MyTranslation
backend to construct projects that keeps track of the document and client in-
formation concerning each order. Statistical logging such as visitation count,
source of navigation access, which checkpoint the user terminated the naviga-
tion could provide valuable insights of how to improve the website as well as
how to prepare for the ocial expansion of market in China.
==PAGE:69==
6.4 Partial Conclusion
57
Figure 6.6: test gure one
6.4
Partial Conclusion
In this iteration, the Chinese LDA model is added to the current webapp pro-
totype and tested for functionality and accuracy. Original concerns about the
language dierence is eliminated by using a decidated tokenization script for
Chinese which allows the webapp to function similarly to the other languages.
However certain issues remain unsolved cause by the language dierence, namely
the sentence count, sentence length and most importantly the readability cal-
culation. The most important functionality is the matching between an input
document and the most suitable translator. Two matching approaches are pre-
sented conceptually and the second approach is applied in actual testing. Avail-
able Chinese source documents are collected from MemSource and modied
locally to construct the necessary components of a translator database. This
database is then used to compared documents used in iteration 3 to control the
translator candidate output. In this matching process, which can be viewed on
appendix XXX. The result translators corresponds with the human logic of most
==PAGE:70==
58
Iteration 4
suitable translators, conrming the correctness and accuracy of this function.
A conceptual Chinese landing page is also constructed by combining inspirations
from the yet to publish new EasyTranslate website as well as the informative
output from the LDA prototype. The result is a possible webpage template
that can be used for the purpose of generating the rst wave of Chinese clients
as well as testing the response of potential clients. The main feature of the
landing page is the streamlined navigation of continuous downscroll combined
with several collapsible parts and a compact structure to guide the user straight
to the case of interacting with the document analysis and order process.
At this iteration the Chinese version is on parallel progress with the other LDA
models, the vital unresolved issue, namely the readability score in dierent
languages would require a further group discussion to nd a collective solution.
The landing page has formed the rst impression of the product that will be
available for the users. Further implementation of the landing page the details
require the conclusion of the new website as well as the ocial evaluation of the
LDA functionalities.
==PAGE:71==
Chapter 7
Iteration 5
As the LDA model is reaching the usable stage on pair with the concurrent
models, the focus is shifted to exploring enhancements in translation accuracy.
A machine translation module will be explored to test the possibility of utilizing
the potential of the parallel data stream. This iteration covers a brief description
of the process and ndings of the machine translation attempt.
7.1
Hypothesis
As mentioned in chapter XXX the privilege of a growing parallel data corpus
made by professional translators have signicant potential and value. Which is
the motivation behind attempting to create a machine process that can contin-
uously enhance itself by expanding the backend corpus.
Machine translation is acknowledged as a product of the popularization of Neu-
ral Networks.
Dierent tool and tutorials will be explored to construct the
rst iteration machine that can translate sentences and capable of potentially
outperform generic machine translation modules such as Google translate.
==PAGE:72==
60
Iteration 5
7.2
Method
To explore the capabilities of RNN, several tools and methods are considered to
learn the behavior of constructing a RNN for machine translation. A tutorial
from WildML1 is used to construct the rst iteration RNN based language
model.
In this basic model, the RNN is constructed by using Theano2. This model
enables the scoring of arbitrary sentences based on the likelihood they would
occur in the real world, which allows the measurement of the grammatical and
semantic correctness. An extra module is included to automatically generate
new sentences.
The backend data used in this model is a collection of 15.000 reddit coments
from a dataset on BigQuery3. This data set is processed and built into data
matrices using word indexing similar to the word-ID index system used in the
LDA model. A basic version of RNN is then constructed together with a forward
propagation function to predict the next word by calculating the word with
highest probability.
To measure the error of the RNN, a cross-entropy loss
function is used. Finally the model is optimized using SGD(Stochastic Gradient
Descent) and backpropagation through time to minimize the loss.
After gaining the familiarity of the RNN and its behaviour, it is suitable to
explore practical approaches that targets the machine translation. This lead to
the decision of using TensorFlow, which has a specic model and a tutorial to
train and utilize machine translation. This model uses parallel language data
available from a web source called Statistical Machine Translation4. Unfortu-
nately this source does not include an English - Chinese parallel data, thus the
original combination of English - French is used as it remains relevant to the
current processes for EasyTranslate.
7.3
Results
In the rst implementation of the Theano tutorial presented on WildML, the
basic version of RNN is trained similarly to the author's version to recreate
the results in the purpose of learning. This training process took 25 hours to
1http://www.wildml.com/2015/09/recurrent-neural-networks-tutorial-part-1-
introduction-to-rnns/
2http://deeplearning.net/software/theano/
3https://goo.gl/wDExY6
4http://www.statmt.org/wmt15/translation-task.html
==PAGE:73==
7.3 Results
61
train using the Amazon EC2 instance access. The sentence generation process
produced poor results as corresponding to the ndings presented on the tutorial.
Even the superior results within this language generation are not well adjusted
for actual usage. Due to the backend training data is from reddit, the output
creates similar language patterns. In certain cases it even mimic the internet
speech such as slang words, excessive use of exclamation marks and smileys.
Even the best of the results can be grammatically or semantically incorrect upon
inspection:
• anyway , to the city scene you're an idiot teenager .
• screw tness , you're saying https
• yep , please disappear with the terrible generation .
The RNN in this stage is not capable of generating meaningful text because
it's only capable of learning dependencies between neighbouring words. In this
tutorial, this long term dependencies are failed and identied as being caused
by the notorious vanishing gradient problem. To counter this issue, the model
expands by adding two stacked GRU(Gated Recurrent Units) layers in the net-
work. Each GRU component consist of two gates, a resetgate and an update
gate.
The reset gate determines how to combine the new input with previ-
ous memory while the update gate denes how much of the previous memory
should be kept or altered. This layer stacking process is the main attraction
of the exibility of RNN systems, as more context and rened methods can be
added by adding extra layers to collaborate within the system to generate possi-
ble enhanced output. Testing of the upgraded RNN is done by using the model
presented in the tutorial, as the time consumption of producing such a model
would be redundant eort as the result model is likely similar if not identical to
this available model.
Test output from the upgraded version is superior to the previous output in the
sense that increased amount of the sentences are readable and less amount of
sentences are incomprehensible.
Some of the decent outputs are shown below:
• i would n't do it .
• the approaches is denitely a new one .
• because there is no joke at all .
==PAGE:74==
62
Iteration 5
• read about this system .
However still a signicant portion is incomprehensible, here are some examples:
• you pony that desire to trilogy you to yourself .
• ) they are bold , but not somewhere good than something else .
• it should n't have wanted much much more capable of weed trigger lion
sounds
7.3.1
TensorFlow Attempt
In the Theano test, the rst clue modelling language using RNN is revealed. To
get back on the track of creating a machine translation, the sequence2sequence
experiment5 is attempted from TensorFlow. TensorFlow has a comprehensive
collection of predened components to simplify the process of constructing a
RNN network. An example of this is the possibility of using GRU or LSTM
components by simply calling the predened function. The experiment utilizes
multiple layers of GRU and LSTM as well as a embedding component that
transforms inputs into dense representations, as opposed to the one-hot vector
approach used in the Theano experiment. The vector outputs from the embed-
ding layer carry semantic meaning and can provide information to the network
of which words are similar in semantic values to reduce the workload for the
network to learn the entire language scope.
The entire experiment seem promising, as the backend data is well documented
parallel data of a decent size and the network have diverse and complimen-
tary layers to reach the complicity required for the task. But a critical prob-
lem is encountered during the training and recreating of this model. After 30
hours undisturbed runtime the training process only reached to step 1000 out
of 340.000. The rst 18 hours are spent to process the source data, creating
vocabulary and handling tokenization. While the last 12 hours of runtime only
reached 1000 steps of the training.
As shown in gure 7.1, the step time is 46 seconds. The process is terminated as
the simple calculation indicate the total required time to nish the 340000 steps
is appromixated to take 181 days of straight runtime. This led to the realization
that a personal computer is not well equipped for this task.
5https://goo.gl/MCbJzm
==PAGE:75==
7.4 Partial Conclusion
63
Figure 7.1: Snippet of TensorFlow training log
7.4
Partial Conclusion
Each of the experiments shows signs of revealing viability and possible solutions
to create RNN in language modelling processes. The Theano experiments out-
put shows the construction of internet based speech patterns using just 15.000
sentence samples. Theoretically, expanding the data sample to the factor of the
document corpus by EasyTranslate would allow the model to generate contex-
tual specic sentences. This can be viewed as the evidence of how powerful
a RNN model can become even in a simplied version. This expansion would
however indicate the requirement to train the data with a large time consump-
tion, thus appropriate equipments as well as optimization methods should be
applied to reach a practical stage.
The TensorFlow experiment on paper seemed to be the exact t for the task
required - to create a machine translation that improves upon the expansion
and enhancements in the backend parallel dataset. Due to the enormous time
consumption, this experiment has yet to reach a conclusive stage. On the surface
it is a promising process to create machine translation and captivate the value
of the translation database that EasyTranslate holds. But in practical cases,
the question remains that is whether it will become superior than the generic
translation service such as Google translate or Microsoft translation module used
in MemSource. As translation quality measurement is a debatable subject6 of
whether to measure the transformation of meaning, sentiment or the correctness
of the translated text.
Even if the machine translation RNN becomes comparable or superior to the
competitors, practical problems remains in implementing this system.
The
MemSource only supports one machine translation module, namely the Mi-
crosoft with Feedback7. As it states on the information site, MemSource and
Microsoft has a partnership that provides this service. If the RNN module be-
comes usable and is implemented using EasyTranslate's dataset, the problem is
to integrate its functionality into MemSource. It remains uncertain whether if
MemSource will allow the users to select a customized module. In the scenario
which the module will not be able to integrate into MemSource, it will have
6https://goo.gl/pefMzt
7http://goo.gl/P57Eqf
==PAGE:76==
64
Iteration 5
to replace MemSource in the current company workow. In this comparison
the product required is no longer a machine translation module but a multi-
functional platform. This leads to diverse time and nancial related issues for
the purpose of its still uncertain potential.
==PAGE:77==
Chapter 8
Updated Business Canvas
As the experiments with topic modelling and machine translation reach their
conclusions, the implementation of these would enhance EasyTranslate against
its competitors. This can be presented in a new conceptual business canvas that
contains these advantages as shown in gure 8.1
In the solution for competitive environments, the topic modelling and translator
matching creates a attraction on both the clients as well as the translators. Aside
from the eciency improvement due to the fast, precise matches and instant
document detail analysis, it also opens the possibility of dynamic pricing. This
would become a tremendous attraction especially for the translators as they
would be able to progressively build up their prole.
This is also the rst
clue to the vision in achieving similarity with the Uber app. Each analysis and
translator matched creates a strong argument for clients to choose EasyTranslate
from the otherwise competitive market.
The automated document handling also allows market strategies such as using
landing pages to gather information and test a potential market.
Statistics
collected from the landing page becomes a new metric to measure the market as
well as the company's position comparing to its competitors, allowing insights
for further improvements.
The LDA system would also become the second unfair advantage on top of the
==PAGE:78==
66
Updated Business Canvas
Figure 8.1: New Business Canvas with the technological advantages
dedicated IT-system. These two could also be merged into a comprehensive
advantage that is simply "Technology drive".
To summarize the integration of advanced technological modules, the unique
value proposition can be altered to "Combining Human Professionalism with
computer processing power to achieve optimal results", corresponds to the di-
rection that EasyTranslate wish to put a certain emphasize on the top end
technology.
From the perspective of a student in Digital Media Engineering, this also serves
as the prime example of how a software product can impact a company's struc-
ture as well as its reach to the market.
==PAGE:79==
Chapter 9
Discussion
As the development of dierent functionalities and explorations of various sub-
jects has reached the nal stage for the current project, many further develop-
ment ideas or new insights appeared. This chapter describes the benet and
consequences of these functionalities as well as a review of the remaining issues
and possible future works.
9.1
Machine vs. Human
The original theme of this paper is the construction of programs that can mimic
human abilities. As the project progressed, dierent degrees of proof are found
to this subject. In term of topic modelling, the model is able to identify and
cluster documents based on their content to a level that is similar to the manual
human handling. Meaning that using a quantied approach this model would be
able to handle a large amount of documents in a short amount of time, surpassing
the eciency of manual human approach. It is also evident that the prototype
would be able to identify the most suitable translators using the topic modelling
output as potentially become fully automated. In term of eciency, using this
automated process would be signicantly faster than traditional approach.
The problem of fully automated process when handling large amount of data
==PAGE:80==
68
Discussion
is the accuracy rate. Users are likely to judge functionality degree in binary
manners.
As example in the context of handling clients requests, if a client
triggers an incorrect response from the machine as their rst attempt in using
it, they're likely to condemn the machine as unusable, disregarding the amount
of successful cases for other clients. As the service and the user does not share
the human bond, it is prone to cause distrust.
This argument is signicant
due to the importance of a trust worthy reputation as a media as the link
between the client and linguist. In this perspective the eciency of the process
does not equal to viability of a conversion to fully automated data handling.
Fortunately, it was never the intention of EasyTranslate to replace their sta
with machines that handles data autonomously. The reoccurring comparison
between the model result and human aspect is simply to measure the rate of
success in the implementation, not to be confused with the suggestion of total
automation. In practical use, the human aspect is a vital marketing aspect as
it promotes the trust relationship between EasyTranslate and their clients, as
well as actively attempt to encourage the clients to return. The results in this
paper is to present a viable optimization approach, as mentioned in the workow
graph in gure ??. It functions as a tool for the project manager to quickly gain
an overview of the document as well as creating suggestions for the assignment.
The human vs. machine paradigm is further highlighted in the context of ma-
chine translation. One of the main attraction and promises by EasyTranslate
is the amount of certied, professional linguists available for the clients. This
count is even shown on the homepage next to the real time counter for number
of words translated. In this context, the term machine translation is a taboo
for the clients and the linguists as this is a computer science eld colliding with
their profession. In practical vision, this is designed to create higher precision in
the machine translation suggestions that can be enable within the MemSource
platform. A generic translation module might have issues in term of domain
specic language that has a specic avour. While the original idea of training
on EasyTranslate's parallel data stream seemed to be an possibility of capital
value, this could be self criticised in two arguments:
• It is possible that the current machine translation module is expanding its
knowledge on new data and adding them into the knowledge base of the
system
• Data size on dierent language combination varies and can therefore cause
the module to drastically alter behaviour
The rst argument is based on the fact that the current machine translation
system is highly likely to be constructed on similar machine learning principles
and therefore achieve the growth that has been the main idea of replacement.
==PAGE:81==
9.2 Technical Issues
69
The second argument is based on the fact that the parallel data requires a certain
threshold to become usable and achieve the value in discussion. Specics about
the threshold remains a subject to future investigation.
9.2
Technical Issues
During the construction and testing of dierent development processes, an array
of technical issues are discovered and require attention.
The rst issue is the backend corpus of the LDA. Wikipedia article dumps serve
as an excellent starting point to construct and test LDA due to the nature
of wiki articles.
However the LDA model generates logical exclusively from
this corpus and can cause issues. The main concern is the uniform descriptive
writing style of these articles. As a probability model, this lack of variety in
writing style could cause increased error rate in the topic identication.
In
many documents requested by clients, the descriptive logic will not cause issue
as it corresponds to the nature of the document. However it could be benecial
to test a large amount of commercials and review the results.
This is due
to the fact that commercials often utilize creative writing properties such as
metaphors, personication of objects where the face value of words does not
represent the main intend behind the text.
These higher level writing style
could potentially become the next research subject to upgrade the LDA model.
At the current moment the usage of commercials triggers another issue which
is the length of the document - commercials tend to be less than one full page
of content. In several tests, short documents can cause uctuations in topic
identication across the dierence models with varied number of topics as well
as varied language base.
The degree of expansion of the backend corpus is also a debatable subject. Dur-
ing early investigations of the LDA construction, a comprehensive web page
collection is found distributed by Sogou1. This was not considered in construc-
tion phase as a 5 terabyte data set would require specic equipment as well as
a extremely optimized processing to handle.
The second technical issue regarding the Chinese LDA is the lack of Chinese
related data. Although all 43 documents from MemSource are utilized for the
LDA test, only one of the document has a translator assigned. This issue was
bypassed as ctional translators are assigned in an alternative version of these
documents for testing purposes.
1http://www.sogou.com/labs/dl/t-e.html
==PAGE:82==
70
Discussion
The third and most important issue regarding the machine translation is the
fact that even with open source options such as TensorFlow, the degree of time
and eort into replicating experiments causes it to be less viable in limited term
projects such as this thesis.
9.3
Future work
In the current stage, many aspects in this thesis are still undergoing continuous
construction.
The rst and foremost process is the established contact with a Chinese com-
puter science professor Bin Cao2 at the Zhejiang University of Technology3 to
conrm and possibly improve the Chinese language processing.
The second process is to collect Chinese text corpus to recreate the Theano
experiment and review the result.
The third process is the idea of directly consulting a scope of linguists in term
to nd further clues on how to improve their working process.
Apart from the mentioned processes, there are also possible improvements for
the current results. One of such is the concept of exploring another possibility
in translation enhancement.
9.3.1
Parallel Model Suggestion
The concept is to create a database containing topic related vocabulary across
the topic models.
Each nished translation data would be used to provide
topic distribution in both language models to draw relations between the topics
across the language barrier. If certain topics in the Chinese model draws strong
connect with a specic topic in English, these vocabulary could be considered
as a reference point to the translation. This idea is conceptualized as many
synonyms or semantically similar words would describe a common objective,
these synonyms does not necessarily have the same position in the topic model.
If the main context of the document is identied by the topic model, it could be
considered as the "avour" of the document and therefore limit the translated
vocabulary into a similar "avour".
2http://goo.gl/FR2Thr
3http://www.zjut.edu.cn/
==PAGE:83==
9.3 Future work
71
This idea is currently being experimented on. Upon successful attempts this
will be included in the thesis presentation.
==PAGE:84==
72
Discussion
==PAGE:85==
Chapter 10
Conclusion
This project initiated as the exploration and investigation of the needs to opti-
mize EasyTranslate's vision of integrating automated processed to enhance the
eciency and quality of their product. During this exploration, two technical
aspects namely the topic modelling as well as the recurrent neural networks for
machine translation are utilized and tested.
The development spans over 5 iterations. Before the project started, the parallel
development of the French and German LDA models have already reached a
satisable level of results for EasyTranslate.
Aiming to keep the uniform structure with the existing models, the construction
of Chinese LDA initiated by drawing inspiration from the current state of the
parallel models as well as their unresolved issues. However the previous experi-
ences in LDA model construction did not directly apply to the Chinese model
as evident in the results from iteration 1. Upon reviewing the results in this
iteration, several critical issues are found. First critical issue is the lack of word
boundaries between the characters in a text, followed by the second critical issue
of the discovery that the Chinese Wikipedia corpus contains articles or contents
in other languages than Chinese as well as the lack of separation between tradi-
tional and simplied Chinese content. These issues heavily distorted the LDA
results to a degree that only a very small portion of the result is comprehensible.
Which nulies the idea of even evaluating the correctness of the topic generation
==PAGE:86==
74
Conclusion
process.
In the second iteration, the focus is to completely understand Chinese text
processing as well as develop approaches to unify the two existing versions of
Chinese written language. During this iteration, Chinese language character-
istics are investigated and each potential issue is countered with a designated
solution. The rst solution is to understand and resolve the segmentation and
decomposition issue of the language. Each sentence should be tokenized into the
correct format uniform to the traditional English language tokenization. The
library found and tested for this solution proves the usability and correctness
in a small scale test.
As an additional bonus, this library also contains the
functionality for the second critical issue - conversion between the two formats
of Chinese. To complete the language specic preprocessing module, a desig-
nated stopword lter is constructed and the combined preprocessing steps are
integrated into the Gensim library's preprocessing scripts. Results of this itera-
tion shows resonance with the ndings of the parallel teams' conclusions. All of
the issues found in iteration 1 are resolved and the model shows signs of actual
usage potential for the rst time. However the preprocessing time for handling
the backend corpus data has been tripled.
To continue improving the models in iteration 3, the combined solutions from
iteration 1 and iteration 2 are used to construct multiple LDA models with
varying number of topics. This value, also known as K, is responsible to control
the dimensionality of the model, which drastically changes the result quality.
With the purpose to understand the behaviour of the model as well as evaluate
and determining the optimal model, a comprehensive test is designed and per-
formed. During this test, a total of six models are constructed and 5 distinct
documents are used for comparison. Each of these documents contains infor-
mation from distinct area of semantic domains as well as dierence in length to
thoroughly determine the capability of the models. To showcase the behaviour,
one text is chosen to represent the alterations in output when applying dierent
models. In this case study, the output uctuates and describes the same docu-
ment in various dierent topic distributions until the K value is above 250. The
distribution and topic content then stabilises between the K=200 and K=300
models with minor dierences. All of the models at each K value indicate the
dominant topic is related to Computer and Software, which indicate that the
uctuation is most prone to happen the sub-topics of the text. To further un-
derstand the consequences of altering the K value, the documents are tested in
a new experiment with three additional texts. This experiment is designed to
create a sucient context to assist the decision of choosing the correct param-
eter for the nal prototype. All of the collected documents are measured with
cosine similarity to generate a similarity matrix. In this matrix, the separation
between the dierent domains became apparent as each of the high similarity
clusters describes a logical domain such as computer, health and biology and
==PAGE:87==
75
law. The most signicant nding lays within a comparison of the similarity ma-
trix using a smaller K value. Which can be describes briey as the separation
between a general science related topic into respectively computer related topic
and chemistry related topic. This nding is crucial and stands as the strongest
argument to use 300 as the K value in the Chinese LDA model construction.
Higher values are not desired as the possibility to introduce overtting into the
model.
As the LDA model's behaviour pattern is clear and the correct K value is chosen,
the process proceed into the 4th and last iteration of the topic modelling. In it-
eration 4, the Chinese LDA model is integrated into the current web application
prototype. As the testing of the prototype started it was clear that there is a
lack of sucient Chinese related documents in EasyTranslate's database as well
as the lack of translator information required to test the matching method. To
counter this issue, all of the existing Chinese documents available are evaluated
and assigned to a ctional base of translators. Which allows the prototype to
execute unseen data and generate the visualizations as well as the translator
match result. This LDA model is also concluded as reaching the same level of
sophistication as the parallel models. In addition to the prototype integration,
a Chinese landing page is also constructed by combining the principles of a
under development new home page to EasyTranslate and the most informative
visualizations from the LDA prototype.
To complete the vision of optimizing two separate process in t
==PAGE:88==
76
Conclusion
==PAGE:89==
Appendix A
Stu
This appendix is full of stu ...
==PAGE:90==
78
Stu
