==PAGE:1==
Development of Airport Security Platform
Author: Kolbrún Birna Bjarnadóttir, s142898
Supervisor: Niels Henrik Mortensen
Design & Innovation
Department of Mechanical Engineering 
Technical University of Denmark
Master Thesis, 25th of June 2016
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
3
Abstract 
This thesis evaluates the applicability of platform and modular architecture 
development in the company WO Airport Interior A/S. The company is a 
subsidiary of the furniture company WO Interior A/S, and supplies interior 
solutions for airport security checkpoints. WO Airport Interior A/S has been 
experiencing challenges fulfilling requirements from airports and being com­
petitive on the market for airport security checkpoints. The procurement 
process of security checkpoints is carried out through public tenders where 
airports submit specifications and the supplier fulfilling those specifications 
the best wins the tender. Developing flexible security solutions applicable for 
various airports on a competitive price, has been the motivation for platform 
and modular architecture development for a supplier of airport security check­
points. The methodology applied in this thesis is based on “Developing prod­
uct families based on architectures” (Harlou, 2006) and lectures of Professor 
N.H. Mortensen, Department of Mechanical Engineering at DTU related to 
the course Technology platforms and architectures. 
This thesis investigates two approaches for improving the product provided 
by WO Airport Interior A/S. A short term approach analysis the benefits of 
applying standardisation principles on a component level for the current prod­
uct. A long term approach analysis the development of a new product program 
by means of modular architecture and product platform and which type of 
modularity is applicable for security checkpoints. Furthermore, it is analysed 
how modularity can be introduced without compromising WO Airport Interi­
or A/S core competencies of providing high quality, interior-like security 
solutions.
The first phase of the project involves research of the airport security process 
and requirements for security checkpoints. Furthermore, analysis of the mar­
ket, customers, competitors and the company’s current product being offered 
to the market is carried out. The second phase involves a clear focus with goal 
and scope based on the analysis phase where two approaches of improving 
the product program at WO Airport Interior A/S are investigated involving 
component standardisation principles and platform development based on 
modular architecture. Finally, benefits related to the two approaches are val­
idated with focus on validating the proposed platform concept; The security 
lane platform. 
With applying conservative principles on relevant components in the current 
product, a component cost reduction of 2% is obtained. Further benefits are 
achieved by the security lane platform where various checkpoint solutions can 
be derived based on the hidden modularity presented with the modular archi­
tecture. The security lane modular architecture and platform can improve the 
performance of the security lane by a possibility of 60% increase in passenger 
flow rate through security and 40% reduction in footprint. Furthermore, a cost 
reduction of 10-36% for various solutions is achieved along with increasing 
flexibility in the security lanes’ structure and ease maintenance and cleaning 
procedures associated with the security checkpoints. 
Generally, it is concluded that significant improvements related to the product 
program can be achieved for a supplier of airport security checkpoints by 
applying the methodology based on the theory used for this thesis. 
Keywords: Security lane, security island, modular architecture, platform, 
modules, standard designs, design units.
==PAGE:4==
4
Prephase
Kolbrún Birna Bjarnadóttir
	
s142898
This report documents the Master Thesis “Development of Airport Security 
Platform” and is conducted by Design and Innovation Master student Kolbrún 
Birna Bjarnadóttir with supervision from Professor Niels Henrik Mortensen 
at DTU Mechanical Engineering, Technical University of Denmark. The the­
sis was written in the period January 25th to June 25th and corresponds to 30 
ECTS points. The thesis was conducted in collaboration with WO Airport 
Interior A/S in Randers, Denmark. 
The author wants to express her gratitude to the supervisor Niels Henrik 
Mortensen and PhD student Martin Løkkegaard for profound supervision and 
feedback throughout the entire project and Søren Jangaard, Managing Direc­
tor at WO Airport Interior A/S, for a great help and cooperation and support 
during the stay in Randers. Furthermore, a gratitude is expressed to Niels 
Flemming Troelsen and other employees at WO Interior A/S for help and 
support during the project and to security specialists Lars Finn Hansen from 
Copenhagen airport, Bjørn Erik Larsen from Oslo airport and Árni Gísli Árn­
son from Keflavík airport in Iceland, for providing valuable information through 
interviews.
The content of this thesis aims to fulfil academic requirements for a DTU 
Master Thesis along with benefit WO Airport Interior A/S by proposing ways 
to improve the product program by introducing modularity by the means of 
modular architecture and platform development. 
==PAGE:5==
5
Abstract
Preface
Introduction
•	 The company and security checkpoints
•	 Problem statement and research questions
•	 Approach and scope of the study
•	 Process overview
Literature review and research
•	 Introduction
•	 Product platform and architectures
•	 Methodology
•	 Terminology
•	 Interviews and observation
•	 Conclusion on literature review and research
Analysis
•	 Introduction
•	 Market analysis
•	 Market potentials for security lanes
•	 Specifications for security lanes
•	 Competitors
•	 Summary on market analsys
•	 Product and cost analysis
•	 Product analysis
•	 Cost analysis
•	 Summary on product and cost analysis
•	 Conclusion on analysis phase
Focus
•	 Introduction
•	 Goal
•	 Approach
•	 Scope
Conceptualisation 
•	 Introduction
•	 Short term vision
•	 Component standardisation
•	 Component optimisation
•	 Current situation at WO Airport Interior A/S
7
•	 Introduction
Table of contents
8
8
10
10
11
13
14
14
16
17
21
18
20
22
22
23
23
28
31
34
35
35
41
45
46
47
48
51
48
50
52
53
53
50
56
==PAGE:6==
6
Validation
Discussion
•	 Cost reduction achievements
•	 Summary on short term vision
•	 Long term vision 
•	 Modular architecture development
•	 Platform development
•	 Security lane platform
•	 Summary on long term vision
•	 Conclusion on conceptualisation
•	 Benefits related to short term vision
•	 Benefits related to long term vision
•	 Conclusion on validation
•	 Interpretation on results
•	 Limitation of the study
Conclusion and Recommendation
•	 Conclusion
•	 Further work and recommendation
56
58
59
59
67
73
76
76
77
78
79
87
84
85
88
89
90
91
==PAGE:7==
7
INTRODUCTION
==PAGE:8==
8
The company and security checkpoints
With increased integration of the world economy the connections between 
countries and continents has become an essential element for people and or­
ganisations. The flight-traffic worldwide is increasing every year leading to 
expansion of the whole business area and infrastructure around it. Due to 
regulations, a security check on every passenger and luggage is required in 
the airports. Large airports with a high number of passengers are constantly 
seeking to increase the flow rate of passenger through those security check­
points in order to avoid bottlenecks in the overall passenger flow through the 
airport. Requirements and specifications for security checkpoints do, howev­
er, differ between airports. Providing security checkpoints fulfilling require­
ments from various airports without introducing to much complexity and cost 
in the organisation is a challenge many suppliers of security checkpoints are 
facing.  
The development of a common product platform based on modular architec­
ture has proven to be a successful tool in many companies to provide the right 
variety to customers, without introducing complexity and high cost. 
This thesis gives an example of a platform and modular architecture develop­
ment in WO Airport Interior A/S, a small one-man company providing inte­
rior solutions for airport security checkpoints. The thesis researches and 
evaluates how the methodology can be applied in a business area rather new 
and inexperienced to the platform and architecture development theory. 
WO Airport Interior A/S (WO) was established in 2013 as a subsidiary of the 
furniture company WO Interior A/S, located in Randers Denmark. WO Inte­
rior A/S focuses on producing tailor-made fixtures and furniture for high 
quality offices and premises (WO Interior A/S, 2016). WO Interior A/S, and 
later WO Airport Interior A/S, has supplied customized security checkpoints 
for one of the most efficient and modern airports in the world; Copenhagen 
airport (CPH) since 2007 and Oslo airport (Gardemoen) since 2008 (Jangaard, 
2016). WO’s core competencies are in creating high quality, interior-like 
solutions for security checkpoints. 
The purpose of a security checkpoint is to scan all flight passengers and their 
hand luggage before entering the departure hall of the airport. The X-Ray 
scanner search for metal objects that might be considered dangerous, explosives 
and liquids. Since a terrorist plot in 2006 detonating suicide bombs in seven 
airplanes, the EU LAGs screening regulations have been tightened. The com­
ponent of the bombs was to be liquid explosives injected into 500ml bottles 
of soft drinks. Currently no LAGs (gels, lotions, pastes and other liquid-based 
items) are allowed in hand luggage carried in containers greater than 100ml. 
Containers must also be placed in a single transparent plastic bag not exceed­
ing 1 litre in capacity. Each customer may only carry one bag of liquids and 
it must be scanned separately from other hand luggage (Rapiscan systems, 
2013). Many suppliers of X-Ray scanners are developing CT screening tech­
nology allowing reduction of the LAGs restrictions. Those scanners allow 
LAGs, and also complex electronics, to be kept in the bag when screening 
which will lead to more streamlined and effective checkpoint security. No 
regulations have been formulated yet regarding screening processes with those 
new CT scanners, but they are expected in the next two years (Smiths Detec­
tion, 2016). 
Introduction
==PAGE:9==
9
X-Ray scanner
Unpacking 
Control system
Passport control
Waste handling
Repacking 
Rechecking
Diverter lane
Automatic tray return
Extra unpacking 
Scanner position
A security checkpoint is located between the check-in area and the departure 
hall in an airport. The product WO Airport Interior A/S is providing is all the 
physical structure around the X-Ray scanner and a control and electrical sys­
tem, but not the actual X-Ray scanners. The physical structure is referred to 
as a security lane and consists of a table for unpacking, repacking and recheck­
ing hand luggage as well as trays, a transport system for moving the trays 
through the scanner, a return system for returning the trays to the front of the 
lane and a diverter lane for rejected hand luggage. A part from the core lane 
a control system and a cabinet around it, a position for a security staff member 
screening images from the X-Ray and a waste-handling unit is also provided. 
Those units are referred to as stand-alone units associated with the core secu­
rity lane. The core security lane along with stand-alone units is referred to as 
a security lane in the rest of the report. Figure 1 shows WO’s security lane 
provided for Copenhagen airport in 2015 and 2016, along with X-Ray scanner 
from Smiths Detection.
WO Airport Interior A/S participated in developing the first automatic tray 
return system in security lanes in 2007 in co-operation with Copenhagen air­
port (Jangaard,2016). Since then many suppliers have joined the business area 
of security checkpoints, providing variances of automatic tray return systems 
on a lower price than WO. This has led to increasing competition on the mar­
ket, introducing WO with challenges selling their security system to more 
airports. The purchasing process of airport security checkpoints consists of a 
public tender including requirements suppliers need to fulfil in order to par­
ticipate in the tender process. The supplier fulfilling those requirements and 
the decision criteria the best, wins the tender. The price of a lane is often the 
most important decision criteria in a public tender. 
Figure 1: WO’s security lane
==PAGE:10==
10
Problem statement and research questions
Approach and scope of the study
WO Airport Interior A/S has been facing challenges with gaining more cus­
tomers and being competitive on the market for airport security checkpoints. 
Introducing flexible security lanes to the market, fulfilling requirements from 
various airports on a competitive price, is the focus point and argumentation 
for platform and modular architecture development in this thesis.
Based on this the following questions were formulated defining the framework 
for the thesis:
•	 Is it possible, by standardising the component structure, to reduce the     	
cost of the current security lane provided by WO Airport Interior A/S?
•	 Which type of modular architecture can be identified for security lanes, in 
order to provide flexible solutions for different customers?
•	 How can modularity be introduced to the product system without com­
promising WO’s core competencies; creating high quality, interior-like 
solutions for security checkpoints?
In order to answer the research questions both top-down and bottom-up ap­
proaches in research and analysis were carried out. 
Relevant literature was studied and industries that have benefit from introduc­
ing platform and architecture thinking were investigated. Three airports were 
visited; Copenhagen airport (CPH), Gardemoen airport in Oslo and Keflavík 
airport in Iceland. Security checkpoint solutions in those airport were careful­
ly investigated along with comprehensive interviews with security managers 
and specialists. The Passenger Terminal Exhibition 2016 in Cologne was at­
tended where suppliers for airport interior solutions and systems from all 
around the world were presenting their products. On the exhibition a lot of 
discussions and exploration was carried out with both competitive suppliers, 
suppliers of scanners and possible customers.
Along with literature review and interviews, WO’s offerings to the market 
have been analysed in comparison with the most important competitors. Eval­
uation of the cost structure and complexity within the current product program 
was carried out along with identification of possible improvement areas. Based 
on the analysis, and with clear focus and goals, conceptualisation was carried 
out in a close collaboration with employees within WO. Finally, based on the 
theory, research and analysis, architecture synthesis and platform creation was 
carried out. 
The scope of the study is limited to investigating airports within Europe and 
WO´s latest project in Copenhagen airport in 2016, where relevant data is 
obtained from. Limitations to the study is that the project is product related, 
leaving out fundamental aspects such as the company’s situation, organisa­
tional strategies and supplier relations. 
==PAGE:11==
11
Process overview
Literature review 
and research
Analysis
Focus
Conceptualisation
Validation 
Discussion 
Interviews
Literature review
Exhibition
Visit airports
Data
Current challenges
Market analysis
Product analysis
Cost analysis
Goal setting 
Scope
Short term approach
Long term approach
Evaluation
Quantiﬁcation
Cost reduction
Architecture development
Platform development
Discussion
Conclusion and
further work
Conclusion
Further work
Interpretation of results
Limitation of the study
Figure 2: Process overview
The process overview in Figure 2 illustrates the processes carried out during 
the execution of the project. The process plan and the project structure shifted 
and evolved during the work. After the research and analysis phase it was 
clarified what data could be obtained for further work and where it would be 
relevant to aim the focus of the project. The actual process was not complete­
ly linear, it consisted of several iterations between the research, analysis, focus 
and conceptualisation phases, as illustrated in Figure 2.
==PAGE:12==
12
==PAGE:13==
13
LITERATURE REVIEW AND RESEARCH 
==PAGE:14==
14
In order to gather relevant information for execution of the thesis literature on 
platform and architecture was reviewed. Experience from companies gaining 
form applying platform and modular architecture thinking was also investi­
gated. The methodology applied in this thesis is described along with expla­
nation of platform and architecture terms frequently used in the thesis. Final­
ly, insights from interviews with airport security specialists and observation 
from fieldwork is presented. 
In the high-consumption, modern societies, customers’ needs are constantly 
evolving and shifting, increasing the need for product variety and fast devel­
opment of new versions of products. In order to stay competitive, companies 
need to provide customers with variety of products, competitive price and 
short lead time. Those three factors; increased product variety, decreased cost 
and faster time to market, are the main motives for pursuing platform-based 
development (Simpson, Jiao, Siddique, & Höltta-Otto, 2014). Those trends, 
especially increased product variety and cost reduction, are very applicable 
in the airport security business area. Suppliers need to be able to provide a 
security checkpoint solution fulfilling requirements from the airport in question 
and at a lower price than competitors. 
Platform development is an initiative to implement in order to improve prod­
uct development within organisations. The term platform development means 
to develop subsystems, or modules, that can be used in different products 
without or with only minor adjustments (Harlou, 2006). In order to develop a 
successful platform, the use of an architecture is crucial to ensure re-use of 
the platform across products and product families and to prepare products for 
future development. Product architecture describes the building principles of 
a product and with a well-defined and standardised interfaces it generates the 
foundation for achieving modularisation and flexibility (Simpson & Siddique, 
2007). Modularity is a term for the decomposition of components and functions 
into independent groups. By dividing a product into modules, flexibility is 
introduced by the mean of effective upgrading and changing out individual 
units without altering the entire product design (Mortensen, Introduction to 
architectures and platforms, 2015) .With a well-defined modular architecture 
Introduction
Product platform and architectures
==PAGE:15==
15
Both Black & Decker and Volkswagen experienced large cost benefits, more 
free capacity in R&D and faster delivery to the market when implementing 
platform and modular architecture thinking to their product families. A critical 
lesson that can be learned from successful companies is the importance of 
involvement of top management and allocation of sufficient resources to the 
platform development process.  
and a common platform indicating re-usable unit across products, companies 
obtain a clear strategy for producing entire family of products. Re-using parts 
reduces cost due to higher volumes and lower degree of component variety. 
It also leads to higher quality due to more experience with the re-used parts 
(Mortensen, Vocabulary for architecture and platforms, 2015). 
With a clear strategy of what to provide to the market and by re-using parts 
across products, companies can achieve fast development and short lead time, 
making them first to introduce a new technology or a product variant to the 
market on a competitive price. 
Many success stories have been reviled about companies applying platform 
development based on architectures. An example of such a company is Black 
& Decker who drove most of its competitors out of the power tool customer 
segment by developing effective product platforms for its major product fam­
ilies (Meyer & Lehnerd, 1997). Another example is Volkswagen (VW) which 
introduced platform development as a means to launch more product variants 
to the market but still utilise standardised components. Their platform consist 
of components customer cannot see, which is 60% of a car module. The rest 
is the outer structure or body. This ensures that variety is provided to custom­
ers and at the same 60% of components are re-used between similar car mod­
ules (Harlou, 2006). In beginning of 2012 VW introduced the MQB platform 
for producing the “global car”, i.e. the same design can be sold, with minor 
modification, in all world markets. The MQB platform standardises the engine 
positioning and distance between the front axle and pedal box. Other parts are 
non-fixed variables, allowing MQB to support everything from small cars to 
SUVs (AMS, 2015). 
==PAGE:16==
16
The platform and architecture development methodology applied in this the­
sis is a method taught in the course 41083 Technology platforms and archi­
tectures with professor Niels Henrik Mortensen, Department of Mechanical 
Engineering at DTU. The theory of Ulf Harlou, “Developing product families 
based on architectures.” (2006), is also utilised as methodology, based on the 
Product Family Master Plan. The process of developing product platform is 
managed in two sections. The first section being the analysis of the market 
and company’s product program and identification of possible improvement 
areas and goal setting. The second section is the conceptualisation and syn­
thesis of alternative architectures and platform, a proposal for an improved 
product program based on the identified improvement areas. 
The possibility for developing a common product platform based on architec­
tures is supported by two hypotheses presented by Ulf Harlou (2006). Hypoth­
esis no. 1 states that it is possible to identify a model, called architecture, that 
describes and documents building principle for individual products within a 
product family. The architecture consists of design units, standard design, 
interfaces and application characteristics and the re-use of design entities is 
enabled by means of this model, the architecture. Hypothesis no. 2 states that 
it is possible to describe re-usable solutions. Those solutions are called standard 
designs and consist of structural elements; organs and parts, functional prop­
erties; functional unit able to deliver an effect, and application characteristics; 
new processes and organisational initiatives ensuring that R&D re-uses stan­
dard designs across products and/or product families (Harlou, 2006). 
Various tools have been developed to use in the process of creating a product 
platform based on architecture. Tools that have been selected to utilise in this 
thesis are; the Power Tower presented by Meyer and Lehnard (1997) and the 
Product Family Master Plan (PFMP) presented by Ulf Harlou (2006). The 
application of those tools will be described in more details in later chapters. 
The argumentation for developing a platform for security lanes is the hypoth­
esis that a small supplier of airport security lanes; a product with a low pro­
duction rate serving a limited market, can benefit from platform and modular 
architecture thinking as companies with larger production volumes and wider 
market range. The benefits being decreased component complexity, decreased 
cost and more variety of solutions provided to customers. 
Methodology
==PAGE:17==
17
Several terms are frequently used in the theory’s literature and are not always 
distinguished and/or the meaning has been defined diversely. The terms plat­
forms and architectures along with several other terms necessary for under­
standing the methodology, are described below as they are used in the report. 
Architecture: An architecture will be specified as a product architecture in this 
thesis. A product architecture defines how functional elements of a product or 
family of products are arranged into physical units and the way in which these 
units interact. An architecture can be defined as the specifications of the in­
terfaces among physical units and with the surroundings (Ulrich & Eppinger, 
1995). Those physical units are referred to as design units and standard designs 
(Harlou, 2006). 
Platform: A platform, or product platform in this thesis, is a set of common 
components, modules or parts from which a stream of derivative product can 
be efficiently created and launched (Harlou, 2006). A platform is an instance 
of the product architecture and the subsystems and components that are reused 
across several products. 
Product family: A product family is a set of similar products derived from a 
common platform or architecture targeted to serve a certain market. A product 
within a product family is referred as an instance or product variant developed 
to address specific customer needs of the market segment (Simpson & Siddique, 
2007).
Product variety: Product variety is the diversity of products that a production 
system provides to the market (Simpson & Siddique, 2007).
Module: A module refers to a clearly defined building block, consisting of 
physical or conceptual grouping of components that share some characteristics. 
The term modularity means to separate a system into independent parts, or 
modules, that can be treated as logical units (Simpson & Siddique, 2007). 
Standard designs and design units: A module can be considered as standard 
design or a design unit. Standard design is a design entity that is re-use across 
products within a product family or across product families. Design units are 
building blocks with unique features related to a single product variant 
(Mortensen, Vocabulary for architecture and platforms, 2015). 
Interfaces: An interface is a key connection between modules. The definition 
of stable interfaces is a fundamental element in platform and architecture 
development (Mortensen, Vocabulary for architecture and platforms, 2015)
Terminology
==PAGE:18==
18
Boarding card 
       control
Unpacking
Metal detector
  X-Ray 
scanner
Passenger
Tray
Body scanner
Repacking
Tray return
Main ﬂow 
Random - 10%
Random- 10%
Rescanning
Rechecking
Suspisious 
luggage
To gain understanding of the security process in an airport three airports were 
visited; Copenhagen airport, Gardemoen airport in Oslo and Keflavík airport 
in Iceland. Interviews were carried out with Lars Finn Hansen Supervisor in 
Central Security Operations in Copenhagen airport, Bjørn Erik Larsen Project 
Manager in security processes in Oslo airport and Árni Gísli Árnson Airport 
Security Manager in Keflavík airport in Iceland. 
Insights from observation in Copenhagen airport
During the visit in CPH airport the security process and behaviour of passen­
ger and staff was observed carefully. Currently there are 27 security lanes 
operating in CPH and the no. of lanes open depends on forecast of amount of 
passengers travelling through the airport at each time during the day. The 
entire security process is illustrated in Figure 3, where red boxes indicate the 
flow of passengers and green boxes the flow of trays. 
Majority of passengers follow the main flow, while random 10% are taken 
aside for scanning in body scanner and random 10% of trays are rescanned. 
The amount of trays that need rechecking depends on the X-Ray image qual­
ity and how well passengers are instructed on what is allowed in hand-luggage. 
CPH airport emphasises the importance of good communication skills of the 
security staff as research have shown that passenger experience the most stress 
of the airport journey in the security check (WO Airport Interior, 2014). High 
stress and bad instructions can have a large impact on the overall passenger 
flow through security. 
Figure 3: Security process
Interviews and observation
==PAGE:19==
19
In CPH airport there are always four security staff persons located at each 
security lane, each with a specific role.
The first position is located in front of the lane and is responsible for instruct­
ing the passengers what to put in the tray and take out of their bags, e.g. belts, 
shoes, electronics and LAGs. He/she also has to ensure that every passenger 
has put their LAGs inside a plastic see-through bag, not exceeding 100 ml per 
container. This security staff member plays a large role in terms of good in­
structions and improving the passenger flow. 
The second position indicates when passengers can walk through the body 
scanner and search passengers that activate the alarm. 
The third position is the screener, sitting close to the X-Ray scanner in front 
of a screen, viewing images of luggage. He/she gives a sign when identifying 
something suspicious from the images and sends the relevant tray to recheck­
ing. 
The fourth position is located at the repacking area and has the role of recheck­
ing suspicious luggage, identified by the staff in third position, and ensuring 
that empty trays are placed in the tray return system.  
Insights from interviews
Three interviews were carried out; in CPH airport, Gardemoen airport and 
Keflavík airport. The interviews were all arranges in a similar way, where the 
following topics were discussed:
Current security checkpoints and experience
Both the security lanes from WO in CPH and the newly purchase lanes from 
Herbert Systems in Oslo have introduce problems with cleaning. The cleaning 
problems arise due to difficult access to internal parts of the lanes and due to 
choice of material for rollers and panels on the lane that collect dust easily. 
Another problem is not sufficient space for the passenger to unpack their hand 
luggage before the scanner and also to repack after the scanning process. A 
chaos can formulate when passenger feel like they are being pushed due to 
lack of space, leading to slowing down the passenger flow through security. 
Typical bottlenecks in the security process
According to all interviewees from the three airports, the main bottlenecks is 
the capacity of the unpacking and repacking area and the utilization of trays 
per passenger. If passengers only use one tray the throughput is much higher 
than if they use two or three trays. 
Areas for improvements in the security process
According to the interviews, areas for improvements are all associated with 
improving the flow rate of passenger through security. The main factors af­
fecting the flow rate is the level of automation in the system, utilization of 
trays and the capacity of unpacking and repacking areas. 
==PAGE:20==
20
Flexibility and modularity in terms of security checkpoints 
When interviewees where presented with the terms flexibility and modular 
security checkpoints, their definition on the terms where similar. According 
to Bjørn Erik Larsen from Oslo there is not a need for fully modular system, 
as too many interfaces on the surface can cause problems with cleaning and 
can damage trays. The interviewees all mentioned that flexibility was crucial 
in terms of being prepared for future technology and to be able to change out 
or add modules to increase the capacity of the unpacking and repacking areas. 
Platform and modular architecture development is an initiative applied in 
order to increase product variety and faster time to market and to decrease 
cost in companies. This initiative has proved to be beneficial for many com­
panies where they have gained leading position on the market and increased 
profitability. 
The argumentation for developing a platform based on modular architecture 
for solutions for airport security checkpoint is based on the hypothesis pre­
sented by Ulf Harlou (2006), that it is possible to identify an architecture 
describing a building principle for products and modules that can be re-used 
across products. Another argumentation is the hypothesis that a small suppli­
er of security lanes can benefit from platform and architectural thinking in 
terms of increasing product variety, decreasing component complexity and 
decreasing cost. 
From observation in airports and interviews with airport specialists the im­
portance of security staff responsibilities and the design and layout of securi­
ty lanes was realised, in terms of the whole passenger flow through security. 
According to security specialists, areas of improvements for future development 
of security checkpoints are mainly associated with increasing passenger flow 
rate and introduce flexibility in terms of upgrading the security lane. 
Conclusion
==PAGE:21==
21
ANALYSIS
==PAGE:22==
22
The purpose of the analysis phase is to understand the current situation at WO 
Airport Interior A/S and identify areas of interest for a platform and modular 
architecture development for airport security checkpoints. Experience shows 
that the analysis phase is crucial in order to obtain the right focus and delim­
itation for radical changes (Lebech & Holmskov, 2012). 
This chapter will investigate and describe current challenges at WO Airport 
Interior A/S and then focus on understanding the European market for airport 
security lanes. The public tender process and specifications from airports will 
be investigated along with other competing suppliers on the market. WO’s 
current product will be analysed with  help of the Product Family Master Plan. 
The cost distribution in WO’s latest project is analysed with focus on the 
component cost and cost allocation to sub-systems. Finally, areas for improve­
ments are presented to form the basis for the next step of the process; the 
conceptualisation and synthesis of a modular architecture and platform devel­
opment. 
The analysis is based on interviews with employees within WO Airport Inte­
rior A/S and other relevant stakeholders in the airport security business area. 
Data and product drawings provided by WO were also crucial material for the 
execution of the analysis. 
Current challenges at WO Airport Interior A/S
The competition within the business area of airport security checkpoints has 
become tougher since WO sold their first product to CPH Airport in 2007. 
Currently there are approximately 12 companies supplying security lanes to 
European airports (Passenger Terminal Exhibition, 2016). 
WO Airport Interior A/S is a subsidiary of a furniture company, consisting of 
one employee with a lot of ambition. With the ambition and hard work alone 
it is difficult to compete with companies with large resources in engineering, 
R&D and manufacturing. WO has been facing challenges of not being able to 
fulfil airports’ requirements for security lanes, both related to functionality 
and price. The consequences have led to WO losing sales to competitive sup­
pliers.
Lacking behind competition in launching new solutions and struggling with 
cost is a known problem in many companies. “But what characterises com­
panies experiencing those problems?” In the creation of new products com­
panies tend to design one product at a time. Meaning that products have to 
compete for resources within the company, and separate development team 
constantly justifying their products importance. By designing one product at 
a time the product portfolio ends up lacking commonality, standardisation and 
modularity across products and production lines. This can lead to various 
products using different material and solutions for fulfilling the same purpose 
(Meyer & Lehnerd, 1997). Another factor characterising struggling companies, 
is the constant “quick-fixing” of problems and multiple handovers due to lack 
of quality in the original specifications. 
Introduction
==PAGE:23==
23
The situation in WO can in many ways relate to those characteristics. The 
security lanes projects in Oslo airport and Copenhagen airport where developed 
as separated projects with few structured commonalities or standardisation. 
For each project, negotiation with suppliers need to be carried out and new 
solutions developed based on the airport specifications. Developing single 
products and individual projects will drain all R&D resources and leave little 
time for innovation (Harlou, 2006). In growing business areas, such as airports, 
there is a constant need for new technologies and solutions.When innovation 
is lacking, companies providing products for those business areas will end up 
losing to competition. 
The market analysis investigates and describes the market for airport security 
lanes, beginning with realization of passenger traffic through European airports. 
The market size for airport security lanes is calculated based on statistics from 
Copenhagen airport and estimates from WO Airport Interior A/S. The market 
is divided into segments and WO’s products and current customers are analysed 
in context with the segmentation. The procurement process through public 
tenders is explored as well as the most important requirements for a security 
lane, expressed as the core customer values. Finally, main competitors are 
analysed and their solutions compared to WO’s security lanes. 
Market analysis
Market potentials for security lanes
As the world is becoming more integrated and the global economy expanding, 
air traffic is constantly increasing and is estimated to grow 10-15% every year 
(WO Airport Interior, 2014). With increased air-traffic the whole business area 
around it expands. Airports are becoming larger with more passenger flow 
each year. In Copenhagen airport the passenger traffic increased by 3,8% 
between the years 2014 and 2015 (Copenhagen Airport, 2016). According to 
ACI Europe 1,8 billion flight passengers pass through European airports every 
year and the flight traffic in Europe counts for approx. 44% of the flight traffic 
in the world (ACI Europe, 2016) . 
In Europe there are approx. 470 airports in total and they can be divided into 
three market segments depending on their yearly passenger flow. Large airports 
indicate those with traffic higher than 15 million passengers/year, medium-size 
airports with traffic between 4-15 mil passengers/year and small airports with 
less than 4 mil passengers/year. Figures 4 and 5 illustrate the division of air­
ports into market segments, the amount of airports in each segment and the 
total passenger flow. 
0
200000000
400000000
600000000
800000000
1000000000
1200000000
   Large Airports Mid-size Airports   Small Airports 
Passenger ﬂow per year [pax/year]
Figure 4:Passenger flow related to airport segments 
==PAGE:24==
24
Based on the traffic criteria for the segmentation it can be found that 32 airports 
in Europe are considered large airports, i.e. with traffic exceeding 15 mil pas­
sengers/year, where London Heathrow is the largest with approx. 73 mil 
passengers/year (Airlines Rankings, 2014). Approximately 80% of the total 
passenger flow in European airports pass through the 32 large and 65 mid-size 
airports, with 62% and 18% of the total traffic respectively. The remaining 
373 airports are small airports all around Europe accounting for 20% of the 
combined passenger traffic.
When investigating the market potential for airport security lanes the amount 
of lanes required in an airport, their lifetime and price, needs to be calculated.
The passenger traffic through Copenhagen airport in 2015 was 26,6 mil. pas­
sengers/year (Copenhagen Airport, 2016) and currently CPH is operating with 
27 security lanes which corresponds to capacity of approx.1 mil passengers/
lane every year. To calculate the average capacity for a security lane in Euro­
pean airports the capacity in CPH is estimated as an index of 62% based on 
   Large Airports 
            #32
   Mid-size Airports
               #65
   Small Airports
          #373
Figure 5:Number of airports in each segment
WO’s market- and customer analysis (2013). From this the average capacity 
for a security lane in European airports is estimated as 620.000 passengers/
lane per year. With the amount of 1,8 billion flight passengers a year and the 
estimation of 620.000 passengers/security lane per year it can be calculated 
that in Europe exists approx. 3.000 security lanes in total for all airports. The 
amount of security lanes is on average 52 in large airports, 11 in medium-size 
airports and 1,6 lanes in small airports (Jangaard, Kunde- og markedsanalyse., 
2013). 
From WO’s experience with security lanes projects the following prerequisites 
can be utilized for calculating the total market potential for airport security 
lanes in Europe. 
Security lanes in large airports: 
•	 Amount of lanes on average: 52 lanes
•	 Lifetime: 5 years
•	 Price for one security lane: approx. 1,2 mil DKK
Security lanes in medium size airports
•	 Amount of lanes on average: 11 lanes
•	 Lifetime: 7 years
•	 Price for one security lane: approx. 1,5 mil DKK
Security lanes in small airports
•	 Amount of lanes on average: 1,6 lanes
==PAGE:25==
25
Airports in Europe
Small Airports
0-4 mil. pax/year
   High-end
Fully automatic
  
Mid-range
Semi-automatic
   
Low-end
    
 Manual
 Medium Airports
  4-15 mil. pax/year
   
Large Airports
>15 mil. pax/year
Oslo 2008
CPH 2007
CPH 2012
CPH 2015
CPH 2016
Oslo 2013
56
14
11
150
400
20
$ 
$ 
$
$
$ 
$ 
$
$
$ 
$ 
$
$ 
$ 
$
$ 
$ 
$
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
                   WO’s Products
CPH 2007: 16 security lanes
CPH 2012: 7 security lanes 
CPH 2015: 2 security lanes 
CPH 2016: 2 security lanes 
Oslo 2008: 16 security lanes 
Oslo 2013: 3 security lanes 
        
  Market Attractiveness
High attractiveness
Low attractiveness
$
$
Amount of projects 
per year
Size of market 
segment in mil DKK/year
WO’s competitiveness
Market development
Positive market growth
Neautral
Negative market growth
High competitiveness
Low competitiveness
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
Figure 6: Power Tower - Segmentation of the market for security lanes in European airports
•	 Lifetime: 10 years
•	 Price for one security lane: approx. 0,3 mil DKK
Based on the prerequisites above and the amount of airports in Europe the 
total yearly market size of security lanes in European airports can be calcu­
lated as approx. 570 mil. DKK. 
The total market size in European airports is calculated as the sum of the 
market sizes of all segments. Market size calculations are elaborated in Ap­
pendix 1.  
In order to gain a better overview of the market for airport security lanes the 
market segmentation is presented with the Power Tower framework introduced 
by Meyer and Lehnard (1997). The power tower in Figure 6 illustrates the 
different airport segments as column and the rows represent high-end, mid or 
low-end products. In the case of a security lane, the level of automation in the 
system assesses if the product is a high or low-end product. 
==PAGE:26==
26
In the power tower WO’s projects are placed in their relevant segment, im­
plying WO’s current market focus on the large airports segment. The yearly 
size of each airport segment is presented as well as the amount of projects 
carried out every year. The market attractiveness is evaluated based on project 
sizes in market segments and how competitive WO is in providing solutions 
to the relevant market. An airport security lane project ranges from approx. 
400.000 DKK to 30 mil. DKK (Jangaard, Kunde- og markedsanalyse., 2013). 
Projects in large airports are much bigger than in smaller airports, as they 
require higher amount of lanes which are expensive with high level of auto­
mation. As can be seen from Figure 6 there are many projects available in the 
small airport segment, or around five times more project in a year than in large 
airports. Those projects are, however, often minor projects including only one 
or two manual security lanes, reflecting in a low market potential in the small 
airport section. The small airports are also often looking for a simple and in­
expensive solution, while WO’s strongest competences are within automatic, 
interior design solution which are expensive features. Development of new 
CT scanner technology, expected to be launched within the next 2-3 years, has 
delayed investment projects for security lanes in airports due to the uncertain­
ty of those scanners. Those scanners will most likely by larger than current 
scanners. That will force airports to upgrade their entire security checkpoints 
in the next years, as current security lanes are not prepared for integrated al­
ternative scanners. The new CT scanners will be a great benefit for airports 
with high passenger traffic as it will provide faster and more streamline flow 
through security. This indicates great opportunities for suppliers of security 
lanes offering competitive solutions for medium and large airports. Those 
arguments set the basis for WO to focus on high- and mid range solutions for 
airports with high passenger traffic. 
Currently WO has two customers; Copenhagen airport (CPH) and Oslo airport 
(Gardemoen), which are placed in the large airport segment as they have pas­
senger flow exceeding 15 mil pax/year. WO has provided security lanes for 
CPH four times and Oslo airport two times. As illustrated in figure 6 those 
security lanes differ in level of automation from fully manual lanes provided 
to Oslo in 2008 to fully automatic lanes provided to CPH in 2012 and Oslo in 
2013. Apart from Copenhagen and Oslo airports WO Airport Interior A/S is 
unknown as a potential supplier for security lanes and have not emphasized 
on sales and marketing.  
==PAGE:27==
27
Public tenders 
The nature of procurement processes for airport security checkpoints differs 
from the more traditional consumer products. This is due to a EU utilities 
directive on procurement by entities operating in the water, energy, transport 
and postal service sectors, applicable for both public and private own compa­
nies. The directive declares that the procurement procedures should be managed 
through public tenders for contracts above the value of 440.000 EUR within 
those sectors (EUR-Lex, 2014). According to the European Parliament and 
the Council of the European Union (2014), it is appropriate to maintain rules 
on procurements to influence the behaviour of the entities within the water, 
energy, transport and postal sectors and to open up to competition.  
All projects with greater value than 440.000 EUR (or 3,27 mil DKK) needs 
to be carried out through a public tender. According to WO’s experience, all 
large projects in the segment of large and medium-size airports can be acces­
sible for every supplier through a public tender. 
In airport’s procurement process for security lanes, internal and/or external 
experts in security operation and public purchasing, control generation of the 
tender material. Tenders are published via TED (Tenders Electronic Daily) 
where all interested suppliers can subscribe within a specific category. The 
publishing of tenders can go through few different steps. The first step is often 
where airports announce their intention for a tender and specify deadlines that 
should be meet by suppliers. The second step is a prequalification-process 
where companies fulfilling specific requirements are filtered out to continue 
participating in the process. Airports can than decide to invite 3-5 suppliers 
to participate in the tender and arrange a visit and a Q&A-meeting. The cho­
sen companies receive a lot of requirements for preparing a response and price 
offer. Finally, there is a negotiation and evaluation process where all suppliers 
are invited to present their offerings. The airports use the selection criteria 
presented in the tender for selection of a security lane supplier (Jangaard, 
2016). 
==PAGE:28==
28
Customer View 
Part-of
Kind-of
Flow rate
> 250 pax/hour/lane (large airports)
Small footprint
> 100 pax/hour/lane
Compact solution
Service and maintenance agreement
Regular maintenance (3-4 times/year)
First line support 
Right and left hand set-up
Area for unpacking
Unpacking in parallel
Unpacking in a row
Specifications for security checkpoints
The tender material consists of specifications often divided into mandatory 
requirements for the security system and nice-to-have features and function­
alities. In the tender the decision factors are also stated and their weighing, 
e.g. how much the price weighs. However, the product systems shall fulfil all 
the mandatory requirements stated in the tender to be taken into consideration. 
It can be difficult for suppliers of security lanes to prepare their products be­
cause of the variations in specifications from airports. It can be challenging 
to be aware of exactly what to expect before receiving the actual tender ma­
terial. However, by analysing previous specifications from tenders that WO 
has participated in and from a discussion with airport security specialists, a 
trend of requirements could be realized. For realisation and gathering of re­
quirements, tender material from Oslo, CPH, Keflavík, Munich, Brussels and 
Lyon airports was investigated. 
The customer view structure from the Product Family Master Plan (PFMP) is 
utilized (Harlou, 2006) for listing up requirements related to main stakehold­
ers of security lanes; airports, security staff, passengers and maintenance and 
cleaning staff . The left side of the customer view is the part-of structure de­
scribing features and sub-features and the right side is the kind-of structure 
describing variants of those features or requirements. Figure 7 presents an 
example from the customer view, where the full customer view can be found 
in Appendix 2. 
Figure 7: Customer view for security lanes
==PAGE:29==
29
When observing tenders, it can be notice that many airports claim they require 
a modular security checkpoint but do not clarify in what way or to what extend 
the product system be modular. When interviewing security specialists, Bjørn 
Erik Larsen from Oslo and Árni Gísli Árnason from Iceland, it came clear that 
by modularity customers are implying that security lanes should be flexible. 
Flexibility in security lanes is required in order to upgrade or change out cer­
tain elements without needing to scrap the entire structure. The main areas 
where flexibility is required for elongating unpacking and repacking areas and 
introduce remote screening. Moving the screening position away from the 
lane, for remote screening, requires changes in the control system and ass­
sembly of additional parts such as sensors and RFID readers for identifying 
trays. 
Another element of interest for the customers, not included as a requirement 
in the tender specifications, is the price for a security lane. Airports use the 
price as a decision criterion when selecting a supplier for their security lanes. 
The weighing of price has shown to range from 30% - 80% of the decision. 
This variation is due to different prioritization in airports. Some airports main­
ly focus on achieving the core functionalities required for a security lane while 
others emphases more on extra features as ergonomics, automation technol­
ogies and design features. 
Apart from the typical analysis of customer requirements, based on experience 
from former projects, another approach is to identify needs that customers 
have not yet learned to articulate. The ability to accurately predict those latent 
needs and design a platform ready to address those yet unknown needs, can 
generate fast innovation and increased sales (Meyer & Lehnerd, 1997). In the 
case of security lanes for airports, it is important to be aware of the future 
trends in security checkpoint technology. The suppliers of X-Ray scanners 
have claimed that new legislations will be published in the next two years due 
to development of the new CT scanning technology for hand-luggage (Smiths 
Detection, 2016). Due to the extensive functionalities of the CT scanners, they 
will most likely be longer, wider and heavier than currently used scanners. 
The X-Ray scanners from Smiths Detection currently used to scan hand-lug­
gage in Copenhagen airport are approx. 1 meter in length and 0,83 meter in 
width. The CT scanners currently in development are approx. 3 meters long 
and 1,5 meters in width (Smiths Detection, 2016). This adds additional re­
quirement for the security lanes to be flexible for integration of various scan­
ners. 
The requirement trends attained from creation of the customer view in Ap­
pendix 2, based on tender material and interviews with security specialists, 
are summarised and described as the core customer values of security lanes. 
Core customer values 
Flow rate: The main focus in middle sized and large airports is to constant­
ly increase the flow rate of passengers through security. Air traffic is always 
growing and a requirement from many large airports is to receive a performance 
of more than 250 passengers/hour/lane through security (Passenger Terminal 
Exhibition, 2016). The flow rate of passengers through security checkpoints 
affects the entire revenue of the airport, as it affects the time spent in the duty 
free area. Copenhagen airport has calculated one-minute waiting in security 
for one passenger as a loss of approx. 6 DKK/minute per passenger (Jangaard, 
==PAGE:30==
30
2016). Closely related to flow rate is the requirements of high level of auto­
mation in the security lane. A fully automatic tray return system and automat­
ic diverting of rejected trays, without blocking the main flow, is crucial for 
maintaining a high flow rate through security. 
Footprint: Floor space is valuable commodity in airports. In some airports 
the area for security check points is really limited and often restricted by poles 
and walls. The development of the new CT scanners, which are expected to 
be installed in all major airports within the next 2-3 years, will most likely be 
significantly larger than current X-Ray scanners. Those new scanners will 
encourage even more the need for a compact solution. The possibility of in­
troducing remote screening, where the screener position is moved away from 
the security area, is an important feature for reducing the total footprint.  
Flexibility: Installing flexible security lanes in the security area is a great 
value for airports. Flexibility is important to be able to upgrade the security 
lanes without the need to scrap the entire system and buy a new one. Most 
important areas of flexibility within the lanes are in elongating unpacking and 
repacking area, introducing remote screening technology and integrate various 
scanners. Closely related to flexibility is the requirement of customising the 
security lane in order to adapt to the airport’s atmosphere.
Passenger experience: Passenger experience is extremely important in a 
security area of an airport. Research show that the security process is the most 
stressful part of the airport journey (WO Airport Interior, 2014). Passengers 
often get nervous and irritated throughout the security check. They often feel 
forced to hurry through the process and don’t receive good instructions on 
what to leave in the trays and what to take out of bags. A well instructed and 
well-designed security check point can ease the atmosphere and ensure smooth­
er flow of passenger and less waiting time. Design and aesthetic features are 
parameters in the security lane design that can serve as initiatives to make the 
security experience better. 
Ergonomics (for security staff): In the western countries in Europe ergo­
nomics is a large focus area in every business field due to strict labour regu­
lations (Ergoweb, 2016). At security checkpoints 4-10 employees are working 
on every lane, standing by a table, sitting in front of screen, instructing pas­
sengers, moving trays around and rechecking luggage and passengers. In order 
for the employees to perform their best and to prevent injuries, ergonomic 
aspects need to be considered.  
Cost: The cost of a security lane, both investment cost (CAPEX) and opera­
tional cost (OPEX), is an extremely important parameter in the airport business 
area. In the public tenders for a security check point the price is always a large 
factor ranging from 30% to 80% of the decision factor. The operational cost 
depends, to a large extent, on the amount of staff members working on every 
security lane.  
Maintenance and cleaning: Easy maintenance and cleaning are important 
requirements from customers that are often forgotten to consider in the design 
process. Easy access to internal parts of the security lane and avoiding corners 
and materials that collects dust are essential parameters worth considering in 
the design process. 
==PAGE:31==
31
Competitors
Currently there are approximately 12 suppliers providing security lanes for 
European airports, including WO Airport Interior A/S. Those suppliers differ 
in size, experience and amount of resources within the company. Many of the 
competitors are large companies providing variety of product systems, such 
as hold baggage solutions and transport systems for other industries.  
The solutions provided by these companies do vary in many ways. They range 
from being cheap solutions focusing on fulfilling core functionalities to being 
expensive, highly automatic and design-based security lanes. The level of 
modularity does also differ, where some suppliers provide a fully modular 
system while others are considered totally integrated. An example of suppliers 
providing extreme solutions in regards to cost savings, modularity and expen­
sive design solutions are described below: 
ALFYMA – French supplier providing a low cost security solution. The secu­
rity lanes from ALFYMA fulfil the requirements of an automatic tray return 
system at a low price. It is constructed of low budged material with no design 
features or focus on quality surfaces (Passenger Terminal Exhibition, 2016).
Selfcare – French supplier providing fully modular solutions constructed of 
standard 60 cm long modules. Due to the high degree of modularity, the se­
curity lane can be configured in various set-ups, providing high flexibility and 
customization of the final system (Passenger Terminal Exhibition, 2016). 
According to Bjørn Erik Larsen, Project Manager in security processes in Oslo 
airport, security lanes consisting of small modules with many visible inter­
phases is not a good choice for airport security. The visible interphases reduce 
the robustness of the lane and can collect dirt easily, making the cleaning job 
difficult.
Scarabee – Dutch company providing high quality, design-based solution. 
Scarabee’s security lane is tailor-made for Schiphol Airport in Amsterdam 
designed with capacity and passenger experience as the main priority. The aim 
was to make the security check as comfortable as possible for the passenger 
by utilizing automation technology as well as creating a calming atmosphere 
by the means of aesthetic design features (Passenger Terminal Exhibition, 
2016). 
Based on investigation of each competing supplier and their values and focus, 
two suppliers have been chosen for further analysis in comparison with WO 
Airport Interior A/S. WO’s main competitors are considered to be: Herbert 
Systems and Vanderlande Dynamic. Those companies focus on the same 
market segment as WO and emphasize similar customer values. They all 
supply large and mid-sized international airports with highly automatic, qual­
ity solutions including aesthetic features. 
Herbert Systems is a British company providing and supporting hold baggage 
solutions and security checkpoints for airports since 2005. Currently they are 
providing 18 airports with their hold baggage and security solutions, including 
Heathrow in London, the largest airport in Europe. Herbert System provides 
three different security checkpoint series which differ in terms of flow rate, 
level of automation and footprint. The security lanes from Herbert Systems 
are available for either parallel or serial unpacking and the width of the lanes 
enables usage of large trays (73 cm x 57 cm x 16 cm). The large trays are 
claimed to increase the flow rate of passenger due to better utilization of the 
X-Ray scanner’s capacity (Herbert Systems, 2015). Known installations of 
the Herbert System security lanes are in Oslo airport, Heathrow, Dubai, Stanst­
ed and Luton (Jangaard, 2016). 
==PAGE:32==
32
1
2
4
5
WO Airport Interior
Herbert Systems
Vanderlande Dynamic
Flow rate
Small footprint
Automation
Customization
Remote screening
Ergonomics
Design experience
Available resources
Flexibility
Service and maintenance
agreement
3
Vanderlande Dynamic is a Spanish company providing baggage handling 
systems for airports, sorting systems for parcel and postal service along being 
a leading supplier of warehouse automation solutions. Vanderlande Dynamic 
is a large company consisting of 4.000 employees and with their systems 
active in 600 airports around the globe. The security checkpoint solution is 
only a small part of the organization where they provide the Scannojet systems. 
Scannojet is a security lane based on a group of constantly moving conveyor 
belts, pulling the passengers forward with a constant rhythm. Scannojet pro­
vides four different security lane set-ups, with various levels of automation 
(Vanderlande Dynamic, 2016). Known installations of the Vanderlande Dy­
namic security lanes are in airports in Brussels, Palma, Cyprus and Rome 
(Jangaard, 2016). 
The comparison of competing solutions and WO’s products is carried out by 
comparing solutions based on ten requirements evaluated to be of high rele­
vance in the market segment for large and medium-sized airports. Those re­
quirements are related to the customers’ core values, with the addition of 
“Available resources” referring to how much the company is capable of 
providing resources for projects and “Service and maintenance agreement” 
indicating how accessible it is for the airport to form an agreement for on-site 
maintenance and service of the lanes. In the specifications from airports they 
often require an agreement for regular maintenance and/or a first line support, 
i.e. maintenance assistant available within a short period from breakdowns.  
Figure 8 illustrates the comparison where 1 indicates the lowest value and 5 
the highest for the relevant requirement. The requirements marked with red 
are those in which the main competing solutions are stronger than the securi­
ty lane provided by WO.
Figure 8: Competition comparison 
The customers core value related to the cost of the security lane and mainte­
nance and cleaning is not included in the comparison in Figure 8 above. The 
price of competing solutions is confidential information and could not be 
obtained and the accessibility for maintenance and cleaning is hard to compare. 
WO’s strengths lie within designing and manufacturing high quality, interi­
or-like security lanes with ergonomics features. Those factors are a great 
value for many modern airports. WO requires, however, strengthening in 
other aspects highly required from large airport with high passenger traffic. 
Those being flow rate, small footprint, flexibility and the availability of pro­
viding service and maintenance for the systems. For a reliable quantification 
on actual flow rate through security lanes, on-side measurements and simula­
==PAGE:33==
33
tions need to be carried out for lanes in operation. Oslo airport has recently 
started operating with security lanes provided by Herbert Systems. Bjørn Erik 
Larsen, Project Manager in security processes in Oslo airport, claims that those 
new lanes can reach a flow rate of approx. 270 passengers/hour per security 
lane. Keflavík airport in Iceland has recently bought new security lanes from 
Vanderlande Dynamic and Árni Gísli Árnason, Airport Security Manager, 
states that they provide a flow rate of approx. 210 passengers/hour per secu­
rity lane. Based on those statements from Oslo and Iceland it can clearly be 
noticed that WO falls behind competitors in terms of flow rate as the flow rate 
from WO’s security lanes in CPH is approx. 175 passengers/hour per securi­
ty lane (Jangaard, 2016). Figure 8 indicates that WO is a little bit behind main 
competitors in automation technology. The fully automatic solution provided 
by WO consists of an automatic tray return system and automatic diverter for 
rejected trays. What Herbert Systems and Vanderlande Dymanic have both 
provide extra in terms of automation is that the trays move automatically into 
the tray return feeder at the end of the security lane. This function is done 
manually in WO’s lanes where passengers or a staff member has to push the 
trays to the tray return system.  
In terms of providing compact solutions for reducing footprint, Herbert Sys­
tems has designed a curved security island, as illustrated in Figure 9. The 
actual security island measurements are hard to obtain from competitors, but 
in the comparison Herbert System is considered to exceed WO and Vanderlande 
Dynamic in terms of initiatives for reducing footprint. Vanderlande Dynamic 
receives a higher score for small footprint than WO in the comparison in 
Figure 8, as they provide tray return underneath the scanner which reduces 
Figure 9: Herbert System’s solution for reducing footprint
the width of the security island. WO only provides trays to return underneath 
an additional diverted lane next to the main lane. 
Flexibility is a requirement none of the companies; WO, Herbert Systems or 
Vanderlande, are really competitive whereas it requires a lot of effort upgrad­
ing or changing out units in all of the systems. Herbert Systems and Vanderlande 
Dynamic have, however, both contributed to increase flow rate and reduce 
footprint by the means of introducing various unpacking set-ups, large trays, 
highest level of automation and utilization of space by returning trays under­
neath the scanner. Those competitors are also large organizations consisting 
of a lot more resources than WO Airport Interior A/S and with a good support 
base allowing them to provide a full-on service and maintenance agreement 
with the airports. The service and maintenance agreements often require a 
maintenance person to be available within close reach of the airport. This has 
been hard for WO to fulfil, as they lack resources for taking care of those 
responsibilities. 
==PAGE:34==
34
Summary on market analysis
The market size for security lanes in European airports was calculated as 570 
mil. DKK/year where the market is divided into three segments; small airports, 
medium-size airports and large airports. The passenger traffic in large and 
medium-size airports accounts for approx. 80% of the total passenger flow in 
European airports. 
The analysis of the market indicates that WO should keep their focus within 
the growing market segments of high-end and mid-range solution for medium 
and large airports in Europe. WO’s core competencies are in providing high-qual­
ity, automatic or semi-automatic solutions which do not apply for small airports 
as they require more simple and cheaper solutions. Another argument for re­
maining in the market segments of medium-sized and large airports is the 
accessibility of projects. Projects in those airports are accessible through 
public tenders, when attaining projects in small airports would require a lot 
of marketing and visiting airports all around Europe. Based on the current 
employee situation at WO it would be hard to manage these marketing and 
sales tasks. The uncertainties regarding the new CT scanners, currently in 
development, indicate that airports with high passenger traffic will change out 
their security checkpoints within the next years. This will benefit suppliers of 
security lanes offering competitive solutions for the large and medium-size 
airports. 
A trend of requirements can be obtained from previous public tenders WO has 
participated in. Those trends can be considered as a common core values for 
customers of security checkpoints. Those core values being; flow rate, footprint, 
flexibility, passenger experience, ergonomics, cost and maintenance and clean­
ing. Those core values are considered to be essential elements in the develop­
ment process of a modular architecture and platform development for a secu­
rity lanes.
Approximately 12 companies are providing security lanes for European air­
ports. Two companies are considered as WO’s main competitors as they are 
focusing on the same market segments and values as WO. Those competitors 
being Herbert Systems and Vanderlande Dynamic. WO is competitive within 
design experience, ergonomics features and the availability of providing remote 
screening, but they fall behind competition when it comes to flow rate, footprint 
and the availability of providing service and maintenance agreement. Flexi­
bility is a feature that is lacking in all security lanes provided by those three 
companies. 
For WO Airport Interior A/S to stay competitive in the medium-size and large 
airport market segments, initiatives need to be implemented to increase flow 
rate, reduce footprint, reduce cost and provide service and maintenance agree­
ment. Additional to improvements in those areas, introducing a flexible secu­
rity lane prepared for future upgrading would be a great selling point for WO’s 
products to excel competition. Applying modularity within WO’s security 
lanes is an initiative that is believed to introduce flexibility and ease the de­
velopment of alternative structures and functionalities of the lanes, improving 
flow rate and compactness. 
==PAGE:35==
35
The purpose of the product and cost analysis is to attain an overview of exist­
ing component variety in WO’s products along with product cost structure. 
The overview is essential for identifying non-value adding variety in the 
current product structure and for decision making in development processes. 
In the product analysis WO’s projects with CPH airport and Oslo airport are 
analysed with focus on the differences in product structure and functionalities 
between projects. The security lane is divided into sub-systems including 
functional organs. The core functions, necessary for the security lane to oper­
ate properly, are identified. The physical structure of the security island, i.e. 
two security lanes, provided for CPH in 2016 is broken down and analysed 
on component level. The number of component variances in the security island 
is calculated along with identification of non-value adding variety with assis­
tant of the Product Family Master Plan (PFMP). Finally, the cost structure of 
the security island provided to CPH in 2016 is analysed with focus on cost of 
components and cost allocation to sub-systems.  
The product and cost analysis is supported by data and drawing from WO of 
existing security islands in CPH and external data from component suppliers. 
Product analysis
WO Airport Interior A/S has participated in six projects in total for two cus­
tomers, CPH airport and Oslo airport. The company product portfolio consists 
of four different security lanes. As for many companies WO’s product port­
folio has evolved over the years introducing new variants in each product, 
leading to few commonalities across products. 
The projects are listed from the first to the latest project and product common­
alities and differences are identified. 
CPH 2007 – 16 semi-automatic lanes provided for Copenhagen airport. Those 
security lanes were the first lanes in the world to include automatic tray return 
system, where the trays move automatically underneath the diverter lane from 
the end of the lane to the front. The supportive frame is constructed of weld­
ed steel bits, which requires complicated on-side assembly work in the airport. 
Oslo 2008 – 16 fully-manual lanes provided for Oslo Airport. Those lanes 
differ in many ways from the ones provided to CPH a year earlier, both in 
structure and functionalities. In those lanes the trays are stacked on a trolley 
at the end of the lane and moved manually to the front. 
CPH 2012 – 7 fully automatic lanes provided for Copenhagen Airport. The 
lanes are an upgraded version of the lanes provided in 2007. The structure is 
similar in many ways including the same automatic tray return system but the 
functionality of an automatic diverter is introduced. The rejected trays move 
automatically from the main lane to the diverter lane for rescanning or re­
checking. 
Product and cost analysis
==PAGE:36==
36
Oslo 2013 – 3 fully automatic lanes provided for Oslo Airport. Similar prod­
uct as provided for CPH Airport in 2012. 
CPH 2015 – 2 semi-automatic lanes (one island) provided for Copenhagen 
Airport. Those lanes include the same functionalities, design features and 
overall layout as the lanes in 2007. They have, however, been upgraded a lot 
in the physical structure and ergonomic features. New, less noisy and more 
robust, rollers were introduced and the entire frame was changed out, intro­
ducing aluminum frame constructed in four units. Sliding doors were placed 
on the staff side of the security lane, making the internal par. 
CPH 2016 -  2 semi-automatic lanes (one island provided for Copenhagen 
Airport). Similar product as provided for CPH Airport in 2015. 
Data and structural drawings could only be obtained for WO´s latest project. 
For this reason, the six projects could only be compared on a generic level in 
order to gain some insights in the company’s product portfolio. 
In the following phases of the product and cost analysis, WO’s latest project; 
one security island, i.e. two security lanes, for CPH in the beginning of 2016, 
is utilised for execution of the analysis. 
Functional overview
The first step in analysing WO’s current product is breaking a security lane 
down into sub-systems and identifying functional organs. By analysing WO’s 
security lanes along with security checkpoints in general, the division into 
common sub-systems for security lanes can be carried out as illustrated in 
Figure 10. 
Scanning
Unpacking 
Control system
Passport control
Waste handling
Repacking 
Rechecking
Diverting
Ergonomics
Supporting structure
Tray return
Figure 10: A security lane broken down into sub-systems
The sub-systems can be divided into two different groups, sub-systems which 
can be clarified with clear interfaces and sub-systems that overlap or interact 
with other systems. In Figure 10, the dashed-lined boxes indicate overlapping 
sub-systems and the red boxes are sub-systems that can be recognized with 
clear interfaces. The supporting structure in Figure 10 represents both the 
supporting inner frame and outer sides and panels of the security lane. The 
==PAGE:37==
37
Partition from 
   passengers
Unpacking
Scanning
Additional
functions
Unpacking area
Tray serving
   Scanner 
integration
 Decision zone 
   (delay zone)
    Transfer trays
      to scanner
Trays for 
luggage
Tray tracking
(RFID codes)
Collect small
       items
     Core
 functions
Sub-systems
   Tray return
under scanner
   Screening
Diverting
Diverter area
Rescreening
Transfer trays to 
   diverter lane
Tray return under
    diverter lane
Rechecking
Recheck area
ETD detector
Repacking
Transfer of trays
      to repackig
Repacking area
Returning trays
Waste handling
      Area  for
waste handling
Control system
Speed control
Tray tracking
Space control
Emergency
     stops
Management
      system
Alarm system
Passport control
      Area  for
passport control
Ergonomics
Supporting structure
Weight control
Noice control
Optimal working
         height
Optimal working
         position
Supporting
     frame
   Supporting
outer structure
 Design features
Emtpy tray
 detection
Tray return
Tray return
    system
outer sides and panels can include customised design features. Ergonomics 
are features that interact with other sub-systems such as features for adjusting 
height of tables and integrating weight control. The control system is integrat­
ed with all sub-systems in the main lane and diverter lane, as it controls the 
speed of conveyers and all automatic functions within the lane. The sub-sys­
tems all consists of different functions which make up the overall functional­
ity of the security lane. 
Figure 11: Functional overview 
The functional organs are the main building blocks of a security lane which 
define its functionalities (Harlou, 2006). For identifying the functional organs, 
the product is broken down into small units each representing its own function. 
This can serve as the basis for platform and modular architecture development. 
In Figure 11 the functional organs are represented as squares, within their 
relevant sub-system. The functions are divided into core functions and addi­
tional functions. The connections between functions and sub-systems are il­
lustrated, where the control system, ergonomics and supporting structure and 
their functionalities interacts with the entire system. 
==PAGE:38==
38
The core functions are the functions considered crucial for the security lane 
to fulfil its expected performance and in the absence of them the system will 
serve as no value for any customer. The additional functions are those who 
could be considered as optional functions as they are not crucial for the secu­
rity lane to operate but might be considered value-adding or preferable to some 
customers. The functional overview can serve as the basis for identification 
of modules that can be re-used across different products in the architecture 
and platform development. 
Physical structure 
Listing up components within a product or family of products provides an 
overview of the product structure and level of complexity related to amount 
of variants (Mortensen, Introduction to architectures and platforms, 2015). 
The last viewpoint of the Product Family Master Plan (PFMP); the part view, 
is utiliaed as a structural approach for listing up components for WO’s secu­
rity island. The view is basically the bill of material for the product showing 
assemblies or parts and sub-parts on the left side and their variations on the 
right side. The part view represents 80-90% of components in the security 
lane, leaving out minor components such as screws and bolts. As WO Interi­
or’s core competencies are manufacturing furniture parts, the components 
manufactured within WO are wooden tables and panels covered with high 
quality linoleum material. The parts provided by external suppliers are black 
steel, stainless steel and aluminium parts along with rollers, conveyers and 
control systems. An example of the part view is presented in Figure 12 and 
the entire part view can be found in the last view of the Product Family Mas­
ter Plan (PFMP) in Appendix 3. The part view illustrates the variation in the 
physical structure where value-adding and non-value adding variety is iden­
tified. Understanding the relation between customer requirements, functional 
organs and the physical structure is important for identifying non-value adding 
variety in the product structure. For realising the relations between various 
viewpoints of the security island, a security lane PFMP was created including 
connections between elements of all viewpoints. The entire security island 
PFMP, representing the three views and its connections, is presented in Ap­
pendix 3.
==PAGE:39==
39
Part view
Roller bed - Left wing
Before X-Ray - 1923 mm - left hand side
Before X-Ray - 1923 mm - right hand side
Position
After X-Ray - 2300 mm - left hand side
After X-Ray - 2300 mm - right hand side
Repacking - 2324 mm - left hand side
Repacking - 2324 mm - right hand side
Diverted luggage - 2074 mm - left hand side
Diverted luggage - 2074 mm - right hand side
Rescreening - 2503 mm - left hand side
Rescreening - 2503 mm - right hand side
Tray return - 1100 mm 
Roller bed - Right wing
Before X-Ray - 1923 mm - left hand side
Before X-Ray - 1923 mm - right hand side
After X-Ray - 2300 mm - left hand side
After X-Ray - 2300 mm - right hand side
Position
Repacking - 2324 mm - left hand side
Repacking - 2324 mm - right hand side
Diverted luggage - 2074 mm - left hand side
Diverted luggage - 2074 mm - right hand side
Rescreening - 2503 mm - left hand side
Rescreening - 2503 mm - right hand side
Tray return - 1100 mm
Left and right variances due to 
hole patterns and bends
Left and right variances due to 
hole patterns and bends
Figure 12: An example of the part view for components in WO’s security island
When a security island is designed, one core lane and stand-alone units are 
designed and then the lane is mirrored in order to provide left and right set-up 
of the lane to create the entire security island. (see Figure 13)
Figure 13: Security island
When generating the PFMP based on the security island in CPH, it was real­
ized that a lot of component variety is created due to slight variation in left 
and right set-up. Components serving the exact same purpose in a left and 
right lane differs from another due to non-symmetric features such as unequal 
hole pattern, cut-outs patterns and due to bending. As can be seen in Figure 
12 the left and right variations in components are considered as a non-value 
adding variety in the product structure. Those components are similar and 
fulfil the same functions in a right and left lanes, but introduce complexity in 
the production due to their minor differences. Every time a different component 
is produced extra set-up time for machines and man hours are needed in the 
production process. This is a complexity that customers do not feel or value 
at all. In Figures 14 and 15, examples of components with slight differentiation 
in right and left lanes are presented. 
Figure 14: Rolle bed wing
Figure 15: Partitioned glass
==PAGE:40==
40
Figure 14 illustrates a roller bed in the security lane, before trays are transferred 
through the X-Ray scanner. All roller beds in the security lane consists of a 
right and left wing protecting and fastening rollers and conveyers. Currently 
there are 20 different wings in total in one security island, 10 variants for each 
lane. Those variants are due to unsymmetrical hole patterns and cut-outs for 
fastening the rollers. Bending of the plate (represented with a yellow dashed 
line in Figure 14) also generates variation.
Figure 15 illustrates a partitioning glass for protecting the delay zone, right 
after the X-Ray scanner, from unauthorized access. Two different glasses need 
to be produced for the security island as the cut-out, indicated in figure 15, 
makes the glass unsymmetrical. 
Another non-value adding variety identified from the security island PFMP is 
variation in height and/or length for similar components. An example of this 
variety is the outer panes and edges on the staff side of the security lane illus­
trated in Figure 16. The length and height differenced do not contribute to 
increasing value for any stakeholders of the security lane. 
Figure 16: Sides and panels
The security island provided to CPH in 2016 contains approx. 970 components 
with 250 variants, i.e. 250 different components. Approximately 20% of the 
variation is caused by differences in left and right hand set up. In Appendix 4 
components comprising non-value adding variety to the product structure are 
listed along with the reason for variation. 
==PAGE:41==
41
Cost analysis
The cost related to security lanes is divided into investment cost (CAPEX) 
and operational cost (OPEX) of the lane. The investment cost represents the 
price for a security lane and plays a large role in the decision making in pub­
lic tenders for projects in large and medium-size airports. The operational cost 
of a security lane is the cost related to labour cost and regular maintenance 
and cleaning of the lane. The cost for security staff members accounts for 
majority of the operational cost. In countries where labour cost is expensive, 
the amount of staff members working on each security lane is an important 
decision factor when selecting a security lane (Árnason, 2016). In the cost 
analysis the operational cost will not be considered further. 
One of WO’s main challenges is not being competitive in price. WO has re­
cently lost a security lane project for Terminal 2 in Oslo airport, due to being 
10% more expensive than an alternative solution from Herbert Systems (Jan­
gaard, 2016). The price of a security lane (CAPEX) is directly related to the 
cost of producing, delivering and assembling the product. The cost structure 
from WO’s latest project in Copenhagen airport in April 2016 was analysed 
and the cost of providing one security island, i.e. two lanes, was distributed 
as illustrated in Figure 17. The total cost of producing one security island for 
the project in CPH 2016 was 1,14 mil. DKK. 
Figure 17:  Total cost distribution for one security island for CPH in April 2016
Figure 17 demonstrates that the total cost of transporting, travelling and pro­
gramming the control system is a minor part of the total project cost, and 
therefore not relevant for further consideration. The cost of components and 
assembly is responsible for majority of the total cost. The cost of assembling 
the security lanes on-site in the airport accounts for 10% of the total cost. 
Based on experience from the project in CPH 2016, it takes six working days 
for two employees from WO to assemble one security island. Those six full 
working days include a lot of overtime as well as accommodation expenses 
for the employees. 
By isolating the cost of purchasing and manufacturing components it could 
be calculated that cost of components accounts for 55% of the total cost, or 
627 thousand DKK. (see Figure 18)
==PAGE:42==
42
     Cost of
components
         55%
Other cost
      45%
Figure 18: Cost of components for one security island for CPH in April 2016
Cost of components is calculated from the purchasing cost from suppliers and 
estimated cost of producing the in-house furniture components. Cost calcula­
tions for components can be found in Appendix 5. The price of components 
is based on prices from a component suppliers or estimated price for in-house 
production of parts.
Figure 19  presents the 22% of components in the security lane accounting for 
80% of the total cost of components, with the most expensive component 
being the aluminium frame. The cost of the aluminium frame alone accounts 
for approx. 14% of the total cost of components. 
Figure 19: Components accounting for 80% of the total cost of components
The aluminium frame is the inner supportive structure of the security lane, 
assembled in four different parts as illustrated in Figure 12. 
Figure 20: Aluminum frame
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
35000
40000
45000
50000
Alumium frame
X-Ray conveyer
Extra components for…
Tray return conveyours
Top plate re-check
Frame for front table
Table body re-check
Table body ETD
PV Table entire body
Cabinet
Top plate corner
Weight
Plate between tray…
Inner frame waste unit
Plate between diverter…
Rounded table
Table body
Top plate waste unit
Plate between tray…
Plate between diverter…
Steel top edge after X-…
Wood construction -…
Door waste unit
Steel top ednge by…
Steel top edge by…
Shielding wall hole plate…
Steel top edge by…
Bracket for sniffer
Shielding plate right
Shielding plate left
Steel top edge after X-…
Vertical glass
Steel top edge by tray…
Steel top edge before X-…
Horizontal glass
Frame for tray serving…
Socekt by control cabinet
Socket
Socket
Table top ETD
Socket
Stand for glassdoor
Table plate
80% of cost of components
==PAGE:43==
43
The aluminum frame for WO’s security lanes is purchased from Linear Mod­
ule A/S, a supplier for automation solutions located in Odense in Denmark. 
The total price for aluminum frame for one security lane is 45.000 DKK. The 
cost drivers for the frame is mainly high meter price for raw aluminum profiles 
and complicated assembly. Based on Søren Jangaard, Managing Director of 
WO Airport Interior, the frame is over engineered in many ways, including 
unncessary amount of material and connections.
Other expensive components are the conveyers before and after the X-Ray, 
the furniture components manufactured in-house in WO Interior and various 
stainless steel parts provided by the supplier Lars Broe, located in Odense in 
Denmark. 
Stainless steel is an important competence in the security lanes from WO, 
accounting for approx. 18% of the component cost. According to Bjørn Erik 
Larsen Project Manager in security processes in Oslo airport, WO has a great 
stainless steel work in their products with smooth bends, nice texture and few 
interfaces. This adds value for the products and is a great selling point where­
as those factors increase the robustness of the product. By visiting Lars Broe 
and analysing the processes and cost structure of the stainless steel parts in 
the security lane, many improvement areas could be identified. Currently many 
stainless steel parts have not been designed with optimisation of utilising 
material as a focus point. In many cases material is wasted, leading to an in­
crease in price for that specific component. Examples of expensive stainless 
steel components where material is wasted, are presented in Figures 21 and 
22 below. Figure 21 presents a stainless steel edge on the recheck table and 
figure 22 a stainless steel edge in the waste handling unit. 
Figure 21: Stainless steel edge on recheck table                          
Figure 22: Stainless steel edge on waste unite                          
The shape of both edges introduces difficulties in production where a lot of 
material is wasted. The price for the recheck table edge is 1.077 DKK/pcs 
where 32% of the price is due to material that is wasted. For the edge in the 
waste handling unit, the price is 272 DKK/pcs where 17% is due to waste of 
material. 
==PAGE:44==
44
Supporting structure
Control system
Scanning
Rechecking
Ergonomics
Unpacking
Repacking
Tray return
Passport control
Waste handling
Diverting
40%
10%
12,8%
14,2%
Figure 23: Cost allocation to sub-systems
The cost drivers for the scanning, rechecking and control sub-systems are 
related to functionalities that is hard to influence, due to requirements from 
airports and regulations. The most expensive sub-system includes, however, 
components and functions that could be influenced as an attempt to reduce 
overall cost of the security lane. 
The consequences of manufacturing two different components for left and 
right set-up serving the same function is higher production cost, leading to 
higher prices from suppliers providing those components. Man hours in pro­
duction are valuable and time spent in set-up time of machine is expensive. 
As realised in the product analysis, 20% of components include variations in 
right and left set-up. The cost of those components account for approx. 40% 
of total cost of components. By re-designing those components to be symmet­
ric the advantages of scale of economy can be utilised when negotiating price 
of component from suppliers. According to suppliers of black steel and stain­
less steel, the cost reduction due to scale of economy could range from 20-50% 
for components (Jangaard, 2016).    
Cost allocation to sub-systems 
A cost allocation to sub-systems is presented in Figure 23. The supporting 
structure, including the frame and outer sides and panels, is responsible for 
40% of the total component cost. As mentioned before, the aluminium frame 
is the most expensive component within the product structure. The sides and 
panels include expensive design features and a high-quality material produced 
in-house in WO Interior.
The control system is responsible for 14,2% of the component cost, including 
the entire system for controlling automotive functions within the lane along 
with sensors placed along the lane. Other expensive sub-systems are scanning, 
encapsulation the position for the screener and the delay zone, and the re­
checking area including an expensive ETD detector for detecting explosives.
==PAGE:45==
45
Summary on product and cost analysis
WO has participated in six projects the last nine years where they have pro­
vided four different security lanes. Their product portfolio has evolved between 
projects leading to few commonalities across projects due to quick-fixing of 
solutions and introduction of new functions or structures in every project. 
A security checkpoint can be divided into ten sub-systems which all consists 
of core functions and additional functions. Those sub-system being; Passport 
control, Unpacking, Scanning, Diverting, Rechecking, Repacking, Waste 
handling, Control system, Supporting structure and Ergonomics. The sub-sys­
tems can either be clarified with clear visible interphases or are integrated with 
other sub-systems. 
By listing up the components along with customer requirements and functions 
of  WO’s security island provided to CPH in 2016, the complexity and non-val­
ue adding variety could be obtained. Currently the security lane is structured 
from 250 different components where 20% of the variation is due do slight 
variation in right and left set-up of the lanes, which is considered as non-val­
ue adding variety. 
The total cost for the security island in CPH in 2016 was 1,4 mil. DKK where 
cost of components accounted for 55% of the total cost. The supporting struc­
ture, including the aluminium frame and outer panels and sides, accounts for 
40% of the total component cost. Components with variation in right and left 
set-up accounts for approx. 43% of the component cost. 
Areas for improvement in the product structure are associated with reducing 
component complexity and reducing price of components. Standardising 
components to eliminate right and left variations is initiative to reduce com­
plexity as well as introducing scale of economy for reducing cost of those 
components. From cost allocation to sub-systems an improvement area can 
be identified to reduce the cost of the aluminium frame and the outer sides and 
panels by re-designing and/or decouple the functions from the rest of the 
product structure. 
==PAGE:46==
46
The analysis phase provided insights into the current situation in WO Airport 
Interior A/S related to the focused market segment of medium and large airports 
and the current product and cost structure. With visualisation of coherence 
among the viewpoints touched upon throughout the analysis, i.e. viewpoint 
from the customer, functional view and the physical structure, non-value 
adding variety related to the product structure could be identified along with 
possible improvement areas for obtaining more competitiveness on the market. 
WO has been facing problems with providing too expensive security island 
to the market that lacks competitiveness related to flow rate and footprint. No 
flexibility is built in the product structure and the entire product is really in­
tegrated in terms of upgrading and introducing new functionalities or require­
ments. Furthermore, the component structure consists of non-value adding 
variety due to variation in right and left set-up which results in complexity 
and high cost of components. 
From insights of current challenges related to WO’s security island and its 
position on the market in comparison with competitors and the core customer 
values, a clear focus can be obtained which will be elaborated in the next 
chapter.
Conclusion on analysis phase
==PAGE:47==
47
FOCUS
==PAGE:48==
48
In order to develop a platform and modular architecture applicable for secu­
rity checkpoints, a clear focus needs to be defined with well-defined goals and 
scope. In the analysis chapter before, possible improvement areas were iden­
tified. With identification of those areas, the project can be narrowed down to 
improve the areas of investment cost, flow rate through security, footprint and 
flexibility in the product structure. In addition to focusing on those parameters, 
the remaining key performance indicators related to the core customer values 
should be carefully considered throughout the development phase. The pas­
senger experience, ergonomics, maintenance and cleaning requirements should 
not be compromised in the new product program. 
In order to attain the right focus for the development process of the project, a 
workshop with Søren Jangaard, Managing Director of WO Airport Interior 
A/S, was conducted based on insights from the analysis. In the workshop the 
vision for platform and modular architecture development for security lanes 
was discussed in context with the identified improvement areas. The outcome 
of the workshops was a focused goalsetting for the project and discussion 
regarding how the goals should be approached. 
This chapter will begin with defining goals for cost reduction and modular 
architecture and platform development for WO’s security lane. The quantified 
goals will serve as key performance indicators used as reference for validation 
of the platform. The structural approach for achieving the goals will be pre­
sented as a short term and long term visions. Finally, the project’s scope is 
presented based on the clarified focus on short term cost reduction and long 
term modularisation and development of security lane platform.
Introduction
Goal
Based on the analysis and from discussions in workshop, quantified goals were 
defined with the aim for WO to win tenders and gain more customers. 
The overall goal for WO is to become competitive on the market and increase 
sales by acquiring more customers. In order to achieve the overall goal, other 
supporting goals need to be defined and quantified. The goals were defined 
based on the seven core customer values identified in the analysis and from 
the comparison with competitors providing security checkpoint solutions. The 
goals are related to cost reduction, flow rate, footprint, flexibility, passenger 
experience, ergonomics and maintenance, and are quantified based on under­
standing of the current performance of WO’s security lane. Figure 24 illustrates 
and quantifies the goals for the conceptualisation part of the project. 
Current 
performance
index
-20% 
+55% 
-20% 
+300% 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
-50% 
Maintenance 
Ergonomics
Passenger experience
Flexibility
Footprint
Flow rate
Cost
Figure 24: Quantified goals
==PAGE:49==
49
The current performance of WO’s security lane in those focus areas is pre­
sented as index of 100. The quantification can be explained as following;
Goal for cost reduction – This goalsetting is based on the argumentation 
that WO is providing a solution to the market that is not competitive in price. 
This was clearly realised when WO lost a project to a competitor with their 
current customer, Oslo airport, due to 10% price difference. This sets the ba­
sis for objective of 20% cost reduction of producing the security island, i.e. 
the investment cost.
Goal for flow rate – The goal of increasing the flow rate by 55% is based 
on the measured flow rate of 270 passenger/hour/lane in security lanes from 
WO’s main competitor, Herbert Systems. The average current flow rate in 
WO’s security lanes are approx. 175 passenger/hour/lane.  
Goal for footprint – Based on the comparison with main competitors, WO 
is behind competition on initiatives to reduce the security solution’s footprint. 
WO’s current security island is 104 m2 (13m length x 8m width) and based 
on Herbert System’s contribution to a compact solution, the goal should be to 
provide a solution with 20% reduction in total footprint of a security island, 
i.e. area of approximately 87 m2.
Goal for flexibility – The goal of increasing flexibility by 300% is based on 
the current areas of flexibility existing in WO’s security lane. It can be defined 
that currently WO’s security lane has one area of flexibility in terms of intro­
ducing remote screening to the system. Based on the analysis of requirements 
for flexibility within the system a goal for introducing three additional areas 
of flexibility was established. Those being; flexibility in elongating unpacking 
and repacking areas and flexible integration of various scanners. The intro­
duction of those three areas of flexibility means that the security lane can be 
upgraded in terms of unpacking and repacking areas and integration of new 
scanner, without the need of altering the entire system. 
Goal for passenger experience and ergonomics – Good passenger expe­
rience, in terms of aesthetic design features, along with ergonomics are con­
sidered WO’s core competencies. Those are considered as virtues that cus­
tomers and other stakeholders appreciate. The goal is to maintain the interior-like 
design features and ergonomics in the new product program. 	
Goal for maintenance – The maintenance goal is related to reducing the 
time needed for maintenance work on-side in the airport. WO has a mainte­
nance agreement with Oslo where they do maintenance 4 times a year for 
approx. 40 hours each time for their 19 security lanes. Additional an external 
technician spends similar amount of on-side maintenance on the lanes. Based 
on this, the current on-side maintenance is approximately 320 hours/year for 
19 lanes, or 17 hours/year/lane (Jangaard, 2016). WO ‘s current security lanes 
are really integrated and include many component variances, meaning that it 
is hard to dissasemble parts that require maintenance and many different spare 
parts are requires. The goal is set to reduce on-side maintenance hours by 50%. 
WO’s current security lane has experienced some challenges with cleaning 
due to difficulties accessing specific areas in the lane. The cleaning issues 
should be addressed in the development process of the new product structure, 
but is not defined as quantified goal. What influences cleaning is related to 
detailed design of components and material choice, which is out of the scope 
for this project. 
==PAGE:50==
50
Approach
The goals differ in how achievable they are in relation to time perspectives. 
The goal for cost reduction is mainly related to cost of components, due to 
data availability. Reducing cost of most components is a goal assumed to be 
achievable in a period of few months, while introducing flexibility to the 
system and improving parameters such as flow rate, footprint and maintenance 
are goals that requires changes to the entire product system. 
A structural approach is presented by a means to achieve the goals. The next 
part of the report will be structured as illustrated in Figure 25, beginning with 
the most conservative approach and moving to more innovative initiatives. 
Cost reduction can be implemented focusing on optimising the current prod­
uct structure in terms of reducing component cost. The short term vision in­
cludes cost reduction initiatives considered to be achievable within six months. 
A modular architecture development and platform development will be carried 
out as a means for introducing flexibility to the security lane, increasing flow 
rate and reducing footprint in the long term vision. For developing a common 
platform for various solutions, radical changes and re-design need to be im­
plemented to the product structure. The platform development is considered 
to be carried out in a period of one to two years.
Figure 25: Short term and long term approach
The scope of the project is re-defined for the conceptualisation phase based 
on insights from the first section of the project. This thesis provides proposals 
of cost reduction initiatives and modular architecture and product platform 
development, where detailed engineering and design of individual modules 
and components is out of scope of the project. Cost reduction initiative are 
focused on reducing cost of components in order to reduce the investment cost 
for customers. Operational cost of security lanes is assumed to be fully relat­
ed to labor cost associated with the lanes. 
In the platform development only the core structure of a security lane is con­
sidered, leaving out systems such as control and electrical systems which are 
connected to majority of the security lane. The control system includes sev­
eral factors that can vary depending on special requirements from airports. 
Scope
Platform
development
Modular 
architecture
development
Component cost
reduction
Short term
Long term
==PAGE:51==
51
CONCEPTUALISATION
==PAGE:52==
52
Introduction
The conceptualisation is the second section of the project, where initiatives 
are proposed for improvement areas identified in the analysis phase of the 
project. Various initiatives are applied in order to achieve the goals defined in 
the previous chapter. The aim of the conceptualisation is to propose an im­
proved product program for WO Airport Interior A/S. 
The short term approach will first be presented where principles for reducing 
cost of components for WO’s current security lanes are proposed along with 
quantified achievements. Principles for reducing cost of the most expensive 
component, the supporting frame structure, are not considered as a short term 
approach as the frame is integrated with majority of the functions in the se­
curity lane. Optimising the frame structure in terms of cost reduction is con­
sidered a radical change to the product system, and will be reflected in the 
long term approach in the second part of the conceptualisation phase. The long 
term approach for WO to develop a new product program by introducing a 
common product platform based on modular architecture is presented along 
with sales configurator of possible solutions.
The purpose of the conceptualisation phase is to introduce principles for 
achieving the desired goals of reducing cost and footprint and increasing flow 
rate and areas of flexibility. This chapter will also touch upon initiatives for 
improving other elements related to the core customer values.  
A guideline throughout the conceptualisation process, both regarding cost 
reduction principles and implementing modularity, is constant consideration 
of WO’s core competencies and what differentiates them on the market. This 
is to ensure that those valuable features of good ergonomics and interior design 
will not be compromised in the new product program. 
==PAGE:53==
53
Short term vision
The short term vision introduces principles for reducing cost of components 
that can be carried out in a conservative way, i.e. without the need of radical 
changes to the product system. Cost reduction principles are divided into 
component standardisation and component optimisation. For clarification of 
different principles, examples of black steel and stainless steel components in 
the current security island is utilised. Possible cost reduction achievements by 
applying those principles are evaluated based on negotiation with suppliers. 
Component standardisation
Analysis of the current product structure for WO’s security island, revealed 
that one security island is constructed from 250 different components, when 
minor components are left out. Every time variation is introduced to the 
product structure a complexity is introduced in terms of inventory, assembly 
and cost of producing different components. The balance between fully stan­
dardisation and diversity needs to be carefully considered as variety can 
contribute to value adding features. Some variation in WO’s security lane 
structure could be considered as a value adding variety, such as the height 
adjustable mechanism integrated in the rechecking position, initiating good 
employee ergonomics. However, other variety is considered as a non-value 
adding variety as it does not contribute to any value for the customer or oth­
er stakeholders. Identified non value adding variety in the product structure 
are components introducing variety in right and left set-up of the security 
lanes. Examples of components with right and left set-up variation is present­
ed in the product analysis chapter and a full list of those components can be 
found in Appendix 4. Another identified non-value adding variety is slight 
differentiation in height and/or length of similar components. 
As realised in the product analysis phase, the right and left variations are due 
to unsymmetrical hole patterns and cut-outs and bending in opposite directions. 
A comprehensive workshop was carried out with Managing Director Søren 
Jangaard in WO Airport Interior A/S in Randers. Principles for eliminating 
those non-value adding variations, without compromising WO’s core compe­
tencies of providing interior-design solution, were discussed. From the dis­
cussion five principles for component standardisation could be established: 
Standardising dimensions
Variety can be reduced by standardising dimensions of similar components 
providing related functions. An example are the stainless steel edges in the 
supporting structure on the staff side of the security island. Currently they are 
produced with three different heights and four different lengths. This height 
and length variation provides no value for the passengers or employees. An 
initiative is to standardise the height and divide the total length into four iden­
tical edges, as illustrated in Figure 26. 
1950 mm
1950 mm
1950 mm
1950 mm
Figure 26: Dimension standardisation
==PAGE:54==
54
Design for symmetry – symmetrical patterns
The principle entails designing, or re-designing existing components, for 
symmetry in left and right set-up. This includes standardising hole patterns 
and cut-outs so the same component can be utilised in the mirrored version of 
the security lane. Creating fully symmetric component might introduce some 
extra useless functions to the component in terms of extra holes or fixation 
points (see Figure 27). 
Figure 27: Symmetric hole patterns (rolled bed wing)
This principle can be applied on non-visible internal parts, as the roller bed 
wing in Figure 27. For parts on the outer structure of the lane, referred to as 
the design surface, holes can be moved to the central of the component in 
order to gain symmetry, as illustrated in Figure 28. Extra holes or patterns 
should not be added to parts on the design surface, as it reduces the overall 
interior-design quality of the product. 
Figure 28: Symmetric patterns on the design surface (Top plate)
Design for late variation creation – micro joints and outlines
Designing identical parts for the mirrored version of the security lane can be 
difficult for some components as they include bends and some unsymmetrical 
features. A principle for reducing variation in production for those parts is 
introducing micro joints for bends (Figure 29) and creating outlines for special 
patterns (Figure 30). This allows production of identical parts and creating 
variation in the assembly stage. 
Figure 29: Micro joints
Figure 30: Pattern outlines
==PAGE:55==
55
Divide complex components 
When analysing the security lane on a component level some components 
with complex physical structure where identified, causing challenges in pro­
duction resulting in high prices from the relevant suppliers. Initiative for 
simplifying those components and also for making them identical for right 
and left security lane set-up, is to split them into two components as illustrat­
ed for the explosive detector bracket in Figure 31. This principle will not reduce 
component variation, but can contribute to component cost reduction
Figure 31: Bracket for explosive detector machine (ETD)
Standardise connections 
There are several stainless steel edges in the security lane which are connect­
ed by bolts and nuts. When producing an edge for mirrored version of the lane, 
the hole patterns for connections have to be converted, introducing extra va­
riety in production. For eliminating this variety, connections can be standardised 
by introducing so called “male and female connections” in all steel edges, as 
illustrated in Figure 32. 
Figure 32: Male and female connections in edges
Applying those five standardisation principles on relevant black steel and 
stainless steel components, the component variation in the physical structure 
can be reduced by 15,2 %, from 250 component variants to 212 variants. 
==PAGE:56==
56
Component optimisation
From analysing the cost of components an improvement area was realised in 
terms of optimising stainless steel components in order to minimise waste of 
material. The prices from the stainless steel supplier are often high due to 
material waste when producing complex shaped components. Stainless steel 
edges assembled on the furniture parts in the lane are often designed with a 
complex shape, to follow the shape of the design-feature furniture. A principle 
for optimising the arrangement of those components on a stainless steel plate 
is to split those edges into two components. As illustrated in Figure 33, split­
ting up components can enable optimised utilisation of material. 
Figure 33: Minimise waste of material on a stainless steel plate
Cost reduction achievements
The principles presented, related to component standardisation and component 
optimisation, were applied on relevant steel components in the security island 
in order to estimate possible cost reduction. Suppliers of stainless steel and 
black steel were contacted for negation of new prices based on standardisation 
in production and minimising waste of material. From discussion and nego­
tiation with suppliers, a price reduction could be calculated. 
Cost reduction from standardisation 
Based on assessments from suppliers, the discount on unit price for individ­
ual black steel and stainless steel components range from 6% to 41% when 
principles of standardisation is applied for one security island. If scale of 
economy is considered, the unit price discount ranges from 20% to 81% for 
individual components, assuming that WO provides 24 identical security is­
lands, i.e. 48 security lanes. Figure 34 illustrates the total cost reduction on 76 
steel parts when applying standardisation principles, leading to variation re­
duction of 15,2% in the component structure of the security island. 
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
Combined unit price of 
   components [DKK]
Before standardisation
After standardisation
After standardisation
   Scale of economy
- 9%
- 29%
Figure 34: Unit price discount after standardisation
==PAGE:57==
57
The total cost reduction on steel parts when standardising 76 components in 
the security island is calculated as 9% and 29% when scale of economy is 
considered. Those steel parts account for approximately 13% of the security 
lane’s total component cost so the total component cost reduction from stan­
dardising those particular parts can be calculated as 1,2% for one security 
island and 3,8% when scale of economy is considered. 
Cost reduction from optimising utilisation of material
Optimising the production of steel edges by splitting up the shape, in order to 
utilise material, can result in unit price discount from 35% - 56% based on 
assessment form suppliers. Scale of economy does not have a large effect on 
price in this principle, as variation is not being reduced. Figure 35 illustrates 
total cost reduction on 10 steel edges when applying the principle of optimis­
ing utilisation of material. 
Figure 35: Unit price discount due to optimisation of material
 Combined unit price of 
     components [DKK]
Before material
optimisation
After material 
optimisation
100
2075
4050
6025
8000
-47%
A 47% cost reduction is achieved for the steel edges when less material is 
wasted in production. Those steel edges do, however, only count for 1% of 
the total component cost for the security island. This results in total component 
cost reduction of approx. 0,5%
Total component cost reduction 
As illustrated in Figure 36, when applying the standardisation and material 
optimisation principles on 86 black steel and stainless steel components a 
total component cost reduction of approx. 2% can be achieved for one secu­
rity island, corresponding to 1% reduction of the total cost. A component cost 
reduction of 4,3% can be achieved when scale of economy is considered, 
corresponding to approx. 2% reduction of the total cost. Cost reduction cal­
culations can be found in Appendix 6. 
0
140000
280000
420000
560000
700000
Cost of components 
 
[DKK]
Current cost of 
components
After standardisation
    and optimisation
   
-2%
-4,3%
After standardisation
    and optimisation
  (scale of economy)
Figure 36: Cost reduction achievements
==PAGE:58==
58
Summary on short term vision
Principles for reducing the cost of current components within WO’s security 
island are related to standardisation of components, by reducing variances in 
right and left set-up, and optimising component design related to minimising 
waste of material. Those principles being; standardising dimensions, design 
for symmetry, design for late variation creation, divide complex components 
and standardise connections. 
The cost reduction achieved by applying those principles on relevant compo­
nents resulted in 2% of the total component cost for one security island, and 
4,3% cost reduction of the total component cost when considering scale of 
economy. 
When estimating the total cost reduction achieved by component standardi­
sation and optimisation, existing suppliers were contacted. In order to increase 
the cost reduction further, negotiation with alternative suppliers should be 
carried out. 
The principles presented in the short term vision are not considered as a dif­
ficult engineering task and are only applied on components responsible for 
approx. 14% of the total component cost for a security lane. The principles 
can be applied in a short period of time and requires few resources. For further 
cost reduction more radical re-designs of components should be carried out. 
Those radical changes are considered to be included in the long term approach. 
Identifying simple principles contributing to cost reduction does not only 
contribute to quick-fixing of components in the current security lane, but can 
also serve as a guiding principle in future designs. The principles for compo­
nent standardisation are applied as a means for component cost reduction in 
this project. Utilising standardisation principles in the design process can, 
however, introduces further improvement areas such as less inventory, simpler 
assembly processes and decreased complexity in the bill of material, resulting 
in fewer failures and increased quality of the final product. By standardising 
components, those areas are assumed to be improved leading to further cost 
reduction of the total security island.
==PAGE:59==
59
Long term vision 
The long term vision for WO Airport Interior A/S includes the development 
of modular architecture and product platform. The current building principles 
in WO’s security lane is presented along with identification of challenges 
related to the product structure. Two modular architectures are presented, 
proposing alternative building principles for the security lane as a means to 
introduce modularity. The architectures are evaluated based on the key per­
formance indicators related to the goal setting and an architecture is selected 
to form the basis for platform development. 
A platform is presented as an instance of the modular architecture, consisting 
of modules that are designed for re-use across different security lane solutions. 
The standard designs formulating the platform are evaluated based on their 
influences on the key performance indicators; Cost, flow rate, footprint, flex­
ibility and passenger experience. 
As mentioned in the scope for the platform development process, a detailed 
design and engineering of individual modules is not considered. Design sug­
gestions will, however, be presented as well as initiatives for reducing the cost 
of the frame structure. The suggested initiatives can serve as guidelines for 
further design of individual re-usable modules within the security lane. 
Finally, a configurator is presented as a way to improve the coherence between 
sales and production and the platform along with derivative solutions is illus­
trated. 
Modular architecture development
A product architecture can either be defined as an integral architecture, where 
the product’s physical units along with their functionalities are mostly inte­
grated, or as a modular architecture where those units are separated with clear 
interphases (Simpson & Siddique, 2007). Product architecture based on mod­
ularity is the key element for developing common product platform utilising 
re-usable solutions across different products. 
Modularisation
Motives for modularisation can be expressed by various module drivers. Those 
drivers can serve as a guide for defining to which elements of the product and 
to what extent, it is relevant to introduce modularity (Harlou, 2006). For a 
security lane, many benefits of using modules can be identified. Those bene­
fits are related to carry-over of solutions to future generations of the product 
and style requirements related to costly design features that could be isolated 
to provide different appearances of the product. Further benefits of modular­
isation are the identification of units that are common in different security lanes 
and separate testing and maintenance of units. 
A modular security lane is assumed to ease the development process within 
the company as common solutions can be re-used across different products. 
Another important benefit assuming to rise from modularisation is the possi­
bility of providing various solutions for different customer needs. 
==PAGE:60==
60
Current integrated architecture
Based on the functional decomposition of security lanes and with analysis of 
WO’s security lane structure, the current building principle could be mapped 
up. Figure 37 illustrates how different functions are integrated due to restric­
tions of the supporting frame and the supporting outer structure; sides and 
panes. The middle part of the security lane, associated with the frame units, 
is referred to as the core structure of the security lane.  
Extra unpacking
Passport control
Unpacking area
Scanning
Tray return
  transfer
Diverter 
Control cabinent
Screening 
Waste unit
Delay zone
Repacking area
Front
End
Recheck
Extra recheck
Returning trays
End
Tray serving
Trays
Transfer to
  scanner
Weigh control
Optimal working
  height feature
Height adjustable
         features
Height adjustable
         features
Transfer to
 repacking
1
2
3
4
Rescanning
Supporting outer structure (sides and panels)
Functional units
Supporting frame
Stand-alone units
Figure 37: Current integrated architecture
As can be noticed in Figure 37, the core structure of the security lane is real­
ly combined with unclear interfaces. The frame is constructed from four units, 
as illustrated in Figure 37, where each unit is integrated with several functions 
which is conflicting with other frame units (see frame units 2,3 and 4). The 
outer sides and panels are integrated with several functions and frame units 
as illustrated with dashed line in Figure 37. The stand-alone units, e.g. passport 
control and waste unit, can be considered as separate units as they are not part 
of the core frame structure. Some of them do, however, represent various 
functions that cannot be removed from the unit without altering the design. 
==PAGE:61==
61
This is relevant for e.g. the ergonomic features integrated into the screening 
position, end table and the recheck table. Currently it is not possible to remove 
or add functions to the core security lane without altering the entire structure. 
A solution for adding additional unpacking area to the lane in CPH airport 
was to add a table as a separate unit in the front as presented in Figure 38 
Figure 38: Additional unpacking table
This table does not comply with the appearance of the security lane and is 
considered to have failed to succeed in increasing the unpacking capacity. The 
tray serving occurs later in the process and therefore this additional table is of 
no use for passengers. 
It can be concluded that the current architecture addresses no modularity in 
the core structure of the lane and does not consist of any standard designs that 
can be re-used for other products. When considering the key performance 
indicators from the goalsetting, it can be observed that functions within the 
security lane influencing those parameters are coupled in the current architec­
ture (see Figure 39). This implies that it is difficult to influence those param­
eters without altering the entire structure of the lane. 
Extra unpacking
Passport control
Unpacking area
Scanning
Tray return
  transfer
Diverter 
Control cabinent
Screening 
Waste unit
Delay zone
Repacking area
Front
End
Recheck
Extra recheck
Returning trays
End
Tray serving
Trays
Transfer to
  scanner
Weigh control
Optimal working
  height feature
Height adjustable
         features
Height adjustable
         features
Transfer to
 repacking
Flow rate
Footprint
Flexibility
Cost
Passenger experience
Ergonomics
Figure 39: Functions influencing key performance indicators
A modular architecture should decouple the functions affecting key perfor­
mance indicators of a product or system. The next step of the development 
process is proposing modular architectures for WO’s security lanes that aim, 
to a large extent, to decouple those functions and introduce more flexibility to 
the lanes’ structure. 
Modular architecture proposal
When developing a modular architecture, the functional decomposition and 
arrangement in sub-systems, identified in the analysis phase, can serve as 
basis for developing modularity within the security lane. In addition to the 
functional overview, the understanding of other domains of the product is 
important in the development process. Understanding relations between the 
domains of customer requirements, functions and physical structure, is essen­
tial for achieving modularity. 
==PAGE:62==
62
In a fully modular product system, the modules encapsulate aspects of all 
domains. Meaning that if e.g. a new requirement is introduced from the cus­
tomer, the module including the particular functions that are realised by a 
certain product structure, needs to be re-designed. With complete modulari­
sation, this can be executed without opening up the rest of the design. As could 
be identified when illustrating the current building principle, introducing 
additional requirement or functionality would lead to upgrading of the entire 
product structure. 
A framework for the development of modular architecture for WO`s products 
is defined related to the goalsetting and the development of standard designs 
which can be re-used between products with no or minor modifications.
Given the functional overview and their internal relations and relations with 
the key performance indicators, two modular architectures with different sub­
divisions were created.
Modular architecture proposal 1 – Hidden modularity
This architecture is based on introducing modularity that is not visible to the 
customer. As illustrated in figure 40, the supporting frame is partitioned into 
units where each frame unit is associates with certain physical sub-system and 
its functions. The frame units along with its functions and components are 
designed as re-usable standard designs. The outer supporting structure, referred 
to as the design surface, is assembled around the frame units as an optional 
add-on feature in the last assembly stage. This ensures no visible interfaces 
on the outer surface. The ergonomics features, e.g. weight control and height 
adjustable mechanisms, are encapsulated as a possible add-on features to 
other modules. The stand-alone units associated with the security lane are 
considered to be design units, specified for each project.
Design units
Functional units
Standard designs
Add-ons to standard designs and design units
Figure 40: Hidden modularity architecture
Extra unpacking
Passport control
Unpacking area
Scanner
Tray return
  transfer
Diverter 
Control cabinent
Screening 
Waste unit
Delay zone
Repacking area
Front
End
Recheck
Returning trays
End
Tray serving
Trays
Transfer to
  scanner
Ergonomics    
Extra repacking
Transfer to
 repacking
Design surface
Rescanning
==PAGE:63==
63
The proposal of hidden modularity is based on the importance of preserving 
the product’s virtues as interior-like security solution with emphasis on a 
high-quality design surface. Designing for hidden modularity is a known 
strategy in industrial companies for presenting the differentiation where cus­
tomers can see and feel it. The re-usable standardised components are hidden 
in the internal part of the product. This has e.g. been applied in Volkswagen 
where different cars are derived from a platform re-using 60% of components 
compromising the volume of a car where the rest, the outer-body, is customised 
(Harlou, 2006). 
Modular architecture proposal 2 – Complete modularity 	
 
The second architecture proposal is based on developing a fully modular se­
curity system. As illustrated on Figure 41, the product is constructed of in 
depended modules each representing a sub-system and its functions.
The difference between the complete modularity architecture and the hidden 
modularity architecture in Figure 40, is that the design surface is not considered 
as a separated add-on feature in the complete modular system. With the com­
plete modularity, the security lane is constructed of several modules assembled 
together in the latest assembly stage. 
Extra unpacking
Passport control
Unpacking area
Scanner
Tray return
  transfer
Diverter 
Control cabinent
Screening 
Waste unit
Delay zone
Repacking area
Front
End
Recheck
Returning trays
End
Tray serving
Trays
Transfer to
  scanner
Ergonomics    
Extra repacking
Transfer to
 repacking
Rescanning
Design units
Functional units
Standard designs
Add-ons to standard designs and design units
Figure 41: Complete modularity architecture
==PAGE:64==
64
Architecture evaluation 
Weighted Objective Method (Yoon, 2012) was utilised for the evaluation and 
selection of architecture to form the basis for platform development. Key 
performance indicators (KPI’s) from the goalsetting were scored with a weight 
from 1-5 according to their importance. The current product structure along 
with the proposed architectures were ranked based on their expected perfor­
mance related to the KPI’s in Table 1. The product building principle, i.e. the 
architecture, is considered to have no impact on the performance of flow rate 
and ergonomics. 
Architectures
Current
Hidden modularity
Complete modularity
KPI’s
Weight
Cost
Flow rate
Footprint
Flexibility
Passenger
experience
Maintenance
Cleaning
1
2
4
3
5
5
3
Total
Ergonomics
3
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
4
3
4
3
1
1
3
5
5
5
2
3
4
1
1
2
1
42
74
67
Cost of the security lane and flow rate through security receives the highest 
weight of the key performance indicators in the evaluation. The cost is a large 
factor in decision-making in public tenders and is therefore a critical param­
eter for winning tenders. The flow rate through security, especially in large 
airports, is a critical parameter for airports as the overall profit depends a lot 
on the time spent in the duty-free. A high flow rate through security implies 
more sales in the duty-free retails. The flow rate is, however, not considered 
to be influenced by the architecture as it depends on functionalities and concept 
designs of individual modules. The high weight of passenger experience is 
related to the importance of preserving the company’s virtues of interior-like 
security system. According to researches, the passengers’ stress factor rises a 
lot in the security process and WO believes that aesthetic features of the se­
curity checkpoint can contribute to a calmer environment and a good experi­
ence for the passenger. The weight of the footprint is based on the argument 
that the importance of this parameters varies between airports. For some airports 
the possibility of a compact solution is really important, due to space restric­
tion, whereas in other airports it is not important. A similar argument is relevant 
for ergonomics, as their requirements differs depending on airports and the 
ergonomics regulations in each country. The flexibility within the security lane 
is important, especially due to the uncertainties related to the development of 
new CT scanner technology. This parameter is, however, not considered as 
critical decision factor as the security lane’s cost and flow rate. Easy mainte­
nance and cleaning are factors that are considered to increase the quality of 
the product but are not critical for airports when selecting a supplier for their 
security checkpoints. Maintenance does receive a higher score than cleaning 
as it is considered to contribute more to the operational cost.
Table 1: Evaluation of architectures
==PAGE:65==
65
From Table 1, it can be observed that the new modular architecture proposals 
receive way higher scores than the current integrated architecture when com­
pared in terms of the KPI’s. The architecture representing hidden modularity 
was selected based on the Weighted Objective Method, and will be referred 
to as the security lane architecture throughout the rest of the report.  A “mod­
ularity behind the hinges” was considered to be the applicable type of modu­
larity for a security lane. By utilising this architecture, the performance in 
terms of cost reduction is considered strong, as the expensive design surface, 
i.e. the outer sides and panels, are provided as an optional add-on feature. The 
passenger experience in terms of aesthetic features is also preserved as no 
visible interfaces on the design surface can be noticed. The complete archi­
tecture exceeds the hidden architecture in terms of footprint, flexibility and 
maintenance. With complete modules it is easier to rearrange individual units 
which provides flexibility in the structure and availability to arrange the se­
curity lane as compact as possible. In terms of maintenance, the complete 
modularity allows modules to be repaired off-site and replaced with other 
units.  In Appendix 7 a presentation of the architectures along with their pros 
and cons can be found. 
Modules
The security lane architecture consists of several modules that can be divided 
into standard designs and design units. Figure 42 illustrates the architecture 
with its building blocks and interfaces and distinguishing between standard 
designs, design units, add-on features and external units. The scanner is an 
external unit because it is not part of WO’s offerings to airports. Trays should 
also be considered as an external unit in the development process, as airports 
can decide what kind of trays to use in their security processes. The external 
units are considered as fixed units that have an impact on the security system, 
underlining the importance of the modules’ interfaces to be prepared for those 
units. 
==PAGE:66==
66
Add-on features
Standard designs
Design units
External units
Connected to all modules
Unpacking
Delay zone
Repacking
Diverter
Ergonomics
Design surface
Front
End
Trays
Control system
Screening
Scanning
Waste handling
Passport control
Tray serving
Tray return
Rechecking
Extra unpacking
Ergonomics
Ergonomics
Extra repacking
Tray return
   transfer
The representation of the architecture in Figure 42 strives to describe the 
connections between different modules in order to understand their interfaces. 
Ergonomics are considered as add-on feature that can be applied to the screen­
ing position, rechecking and diverter lane Design surface, trays and control 
system are modules that are connected to the entire product structure. 
The security lane architecture lays the foundation for developing a common 
platform for security lanes and implies that the platform should consist of 
re-usable modules for the core structure of the security lane. 
Figure 42: Building blocks within the security lane architecture
==PAGE:67==
67
Platform development
The objective of platform development is to define a common product platform 
based on the security lane architecture and consisting of modules that can be 
re-used across different security lane solutions. Creating a common platform 
for producing security lanes is assumed to ease the development of various 
security solutions addressing different customer specifications. 
The platform is an instance of the security lane architecture only including the 
standard designs. Standard designs are traditionally defined in three dimen­
sions; structural, functional and application characteristics (Harlou, 2006). In 
the development and implementation of the security lane’s standard designs, 
those dimensions need to be considered carefully in order for WO to be able 
to utilise and adapt the platform. The standard designs need to encapsulate 
structures and functions that can be re-used in different products and those 
design entities require documentation in order to ensure that they are re-used. 
The platform does not include the design units represented in the architecture 
in Figure 42. It is however of great importance to include the interfaces among 
standard designs, standard designs and design units and with the surroundings 
(Harlou, 2006). If the standard designs are not designed to be prepared for the 
design units and the surroundings of the product, they might not be re-usable 
and therefore diminish the overall purpose of the product platform. 
The security lane platform consists of 8 standard design groups, each with a 
number of variances, illustrated in Figure 43. 
Standard designs
Variations of 
standard designs
Unpacking area
Delay zone
Repacking
Diverter
Tray return
In series
In series - push
In series,multiple
Shared
Parallel
Lane - manual
Lane - automatic
Automatic bend
In series
Stand alone
Around table
Parallel
1 meter
2 meters
Tray serving and
       returning
Extra repacking
Extra unpacking
Under diverter
1
End of lane
Under table
Under main lane
1 meter - table
1 meter - push
1 meter - table
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
3
3
4
4
4
4
4
5
5
Figure 43: Security lane platform
==PAGE:68==
68
The variations of the standard designs differ in how conservative they are in 
relation to the current product design. In Figure 43 they are given rankings 
from 1-5, with 1 representing designs most related to the current product 
structure. The platform is presented along with explanation on each standard 
design in Appendix 8. 
Evaluation of standard designs
Evaluation of each standard design is based on how the specific concept is 
assumed to influence relevant key performance indicators presented in the 
goalsetting. Parameters that are expected to be influenced by the standard 
designs are; flow rate, footprint, passenger experience and cost. In order to 
quantify the influence, measured performances of competing solutions ad­
dressing similar concepts is utilised. For quantifying effect on operational cost 
the expected amount of employees required for the specific concept is utilised, 
with 4 employees per lane as a baseline. The investment cost (CAPEX) is 
considered to increase relatively to level of automation and volume of mate­
rial used in the specific concept. In the evaluation green represents positive 
influence and red negative influence. When a parameter is not influenced, i.e. 
assumed to perform the same as in current concept, it is not mentioned in 
relation to that specific standard design. 
Unpacking area
By providing an extra unpacking area as an indi­
vidual module with standardised interfaces to the 
main unpacking area, a flexibility is introduced to 
the security lane. The flexibility is assumed to 
increase by 100% as a new area of flexibility is 
added. Different unpacking principles are assumed 
to influence the flow rate and footprint in a positive 
way, while parallel unpacking principles increases 
operational cost (OPEX). In Oslo airport the par­
allel principle has demonstrated more need for 
instructions, leading to the requirement of one 
additional staff member per security lane. The 
parallel unpacking does, however, improve the 
passenger experience as it is expected to reduce 
the stress. Each passenger can unpack on their own 
rate without anyone pushing them to move forward. 
The quickest one to unpack pushes the tray onto a 
conveyer and continues the security process. 
Unpacking area
In series
In series - push
In series,multiple
Shared
Parallel
Flow rate: +20%
Passenger experience: 
Passenger experience:
Passenger experience:
Flow rate: +30%
Flow rate: +30%
Flow rate: +55%
Footprint: -10%
Footprint: -10%
OPEX: +25%
OPEX: +25%
CAPEX: +1%
CAPEX: +2%
CAPEX: +2%
CAPEX: +5%
Flow rate: +10%
Flexibility: +100%
Extra repacking
1 meter - table
CAPEX: +1%
==PAGE:69==
69
Delay zone and diverter 
The length of the delay zone depends on the de­
cision time required for the screener to evaluate 
images from the scanner. Specifications from 
airports have shown the requirements for decision 
area varies between 1 meter or 2 meters of length. 
The length is often depending on if airports use 
remote screening or local screening, whereas re­
mote screening requires longer decision time. With 
a shorter delay zone, the flow rate is assumed to 
increased and footprint can be reduced. If the 
screener notices something suspicious in the lug­
gage, the tray is rejected and moves to a diverter 
lane. When the diverter function is done automat­
ically a need for a staff member is eliminated as 
well as the flow rate is assumed to increase slight­
ly. Avoiding additional lane for diverting, with a 
bend from the main lane, the overall footprint can 
be reduced as the total width of the security island 
is reduced. 
Flow rate: +20%
Footprint: -10%
Delay zone
1 meter
2 meters
Flow rate: +5%
Footprint: -10%
Diverter
Lane - manual
Lane - automatic
Automatic bend
OPEX: -12%
Flow rate: +5%
OPEX: -12%
CAPEX: +2%
CAPEX: +2%
Repacking area 
As well as for the unpacking are, an extra repack­
ing introduced flexibility to the security lane and 
by adding an additional repacking area the capac­
ity increases, leading to increased flow rate. A 
stand-alone repacking area, separated from the 
main lane, reduced the area of the security island, 
leading to a smaller footprint. Repacking around 
an end table and in parallel reduced the length of 
the security lane along with increasing the flow 
rate due to higher capacity in repacking. The pas­
senger experience is expected to improve when 
passengers are not pushed to repack their luggage 
based on the same assumptions as for parallel 
unpacking. For repacking in parallel an extra staff 
member is requires as the tracking of trays can be 
confusing. An initiative to reduce this confusion 
is to introduce a tray tracking system for the pas­
senger so it is more clear in what position of the 
parallel unpacking the relevant passenger’s trays 
will appear based on their location in the unpack­
ing area. 
Flow rate: +10%
Passenger experience: 
Passenger experience:
Passenger experience:
Footprint: -20%
OPEX: +25%
Repacking
In series
Stand alone
Around table
Parallel
Footprint: -10%
Flow rate: +10%
CAPEX: +5%
CAPEX: +2%
Flow rate: +10%
Flexibility: +100%
Extra repacking
1 meter - table
CAPEX: +1%
==PAGE:70==
70
Tray return and tray serving
WO’s current security lane includes  automatic 
tray return where trays are returned behind the 
scanner, underneath the diverter lane. By provid­
ing a solution of returning the trays underneath 
the main lane and the scanner, the width of the 
lane can be reduce leading to a reduced footprint. 
Currently passengers have to reach for and push 
the trays when they are served in the front and 
returned in the end of the lane. If trays are served 
automatically and move automatically to the return 
system, passenger experience would be improved 
and the flow rate slightly increased. Serving and 
returning trays underneath the table in parallel 
unpacking and repacking is also expected to in­
crease the flow rate but this has proven to be con­
fusing for passenger and therefore extra instruc­
tions are required. 
Tray serving and
       returning
End of lane
Under table
Flow rate: +5%
Passenger experience: 
OPEX: +25%
Flow rate: +5%
CAPEX: +1%
Footprint: -20%
Tray return
Under diverter
Under main lane
The influence on the parameters related to cleaning and ergonomics is difficult 
to evaluate based on the architecture and different concepts for standard de­
signs. Insights from interviews and observation on operating security lanes in 
Copenhagen and Oslo airports can however serve as a guidance for the detailed 
design in further stages of the development process. 
A factor generating cleaning problems is e.g. when security lane includes small 
caps between top plates and the roller bed, as illustrated in Figure 44, which 
prevents easy access for reaching dust. Another factor important to keep in 
mind in the design process, is to ensure that rollers can be removed. Figure 
45 shows an example from a security lane provided from Herbert Systems, 
where rollers cannot be removed for accessing the dust collecting underneath. 
An example of good initiative for improving cleaning processes is to leave a 
cap underneath the side panels for easy access for cleaning underneath the 
lane, as illustrated in Figure 46. 
  Figure 44         
  Figure 45         
  Figure 46         
==PAGE:71==
71
WO has contributed a lot in terms of initiatives for improving good ergonom­
ics for the security staff. Those initiatives are height adjustable functions in­
tegrated in the screener table and rechecking table and a weight integrated in 
the diverter lane for avoiding carrying of heavy trays. In the new architecture 
those ergonomic features are preserved as add-on functions that could be in­
tegrated into the security lane. This prevents compromising those valuable 
features in the new product program. 
Guidelines for re-usable designs
Before implementing detailed design of modules in the platform, some critical 
parameters need to be considered. In the process of designing re-usable mod­
ules, impacts from the surroundings, from design units and other re-usable 
standard designs needs to be carefully considered. Furthermore, the relations 
between requirements from customers, the required function from the standard 
designs and its physical units has to be understood to form the basis of the 
design. 
Standard designs within the security lane located around the scanner have to 
be prepared for various scanner integrations, in order to fulfil the requirement 
of flexible scanner integration. This parameter cannot be addressed by pro­
posing various concepts for the standard designs as it relates to flexibility 
integrated in the frame units around the scanner. For addressing the flexibili­
ty, an initiative is proposed to include adjustable profiles in the frame units 
for those standard designs. The end of the frame units should be standardised 
but the middle posts in the units can be adjustable and differ in length and 
shape, i.e. straight and curved profiles. 
500 mm
700 mm
Figure 47: Frame unit – two widths 
Another important factor is to provide various widths for all frame units. This 
addresses the external impacts from tray sizes. Currently around 20 different 
trays are in operation in European airports and it depends on individual airports 
which trays they want to operate with (Jangaard, 2016). This has introduced 
challenges for suppliers of security lanes as the trays size, especially the width, 
has a large impact on the entire system. The width of trays in European airports 
ranges from approximately 400mm to 600mm. A proposal is to provide two 
different widths for all standard designs,500mm and 700mm respectively, in 
order to address this challenge (see Figure 47). 
==PAGE:72==
72
As realised in the analysis phase, the supporting frame is the most expensive 
component in the current security lane, accounting for approx. 14% of the 
total cost of components. Cost initiatives for reducing the cost of the frame 
were considered as a long term approach coherent with the platform develop­
ment. The modular architecture partitioned the frame into modular units as­
sociated with standard designs. The frame units for each standard design should 
be standardised to a large extend, with variations in width for all units, and 
length and height for units integrated with the scanner. The end of the frame 
units and all connections within the frame units and with other units should 
be standardised. Besides standardising frame units, the material choice should 
be reconsidered as well as alternative suppliers. A proposal for using less 
expensive material is to laser-cut steel plates which are bended to receive 
strength. The amount of material used for each frame unit should also be 
optimised. By redesigning the frame based on those principles a cost reduction 
of 30% from the current price of the aluminium frame could be estimated 
based on discussions with steel suppliers and employees within WO. 
==PAGE:73==
73
The security lane platform for WO Airport Interior A/S is presented in Figure 48. The illustration presents a visualisation of how the elements of the platform along 
with additional design units and add-ons can be utilised to provide various solutions to the customer. 
Unpacking area
Delay zone
Repacking
Diverter
Tray return
In series
In series - push
In series,multiple
Shared
Parallel
Lane - manual
Lane - automatic
Automatic bend
In series
Stand alone
Around table
Parallel
1 meter
2 meters
Tray serving and
       returning
Extra repacking
Extra unpacking
Under diverter
End of lane
Under table
Under main lane
1 meter - table
1 meter - push
1 meter - table
Design surface
Ergonomics
Weight control
Wooden panels
Dark panels
Heigt adjustable
Stainless steel edge
Platform
Add-on features
Front
Passport control
Control system
Screening
Waste handling
Rechecking
End
Customisation
Standard designs
Design units
Rescanning
Figure 48: Visualisation of security lane platform
Security lane platform
==PAGE:74==
74
All possible configured solutions contribute to flexibility in terms of increasing capacity in unpacking and repacking and for various scanner integration. The 
flexibility is enabled due to height and width flexibility in the standard designs along with well-defined interfaces prepared for other standard designs, design units 
and external units. To address the parameters of flow rate, footprint, low cost, ergonomics and passenger experience, various solutions can be configured. 
Figure 49  illustrates how solutions can be configured to address different extreme performance levels in terms of high flow rate, small footprint and low cost. The 
configured solutions are evaluated in next chapter. Derivatives from platform are also illustrated in Appendix 9. 
High ﬂow rate
Small footprint
Low cost
Unpacking area
Delay zone
Repacking
Diverter
Tray return
Tray serving 
and returning
Extra repacking
Extra unpack
Front
Passport control
Control system
Screening
Waste handling
Rechecking
End
Design surface
Ergonomics
Rescanning
  Figure 49: Configured solutions derived from platform
==PAGE:75==
75
In order to obtain comprehensive overview of possible security lane solutions, 
for sales persons and customers, a configurator was developed illustrating 
various solution (see Figure 50). Developing a configurator is a way to improve 
the coherence between sales, engineering and production, illustrating possible 
solutions constructing from standard designs along with customised design 
units and add-ons. 
The configurator includes some constraints between selection of different 
concepts. Example is that the selection of returning trays underneath the di­
verter lane, behind the scanner, implies that concepts 1 or 2 need to be select­
ed for the diverter function where additional diverter lane is included in the 
concept. For involving those constraints in the sales process, an idea for WO 
is to invest in simple configuration software, as Configit, where concepts 
description along with constraints can be programmed and possible solutions 
presented to customers along with estimated price (Configit, 2016). The con­
figurator is presented along with constraints in Appendix 10. 
Figure 50: Sales configurator
Unpacking
Tray return
Repacking
Recheck
Concept 1
Concept 2
Concept 3
Concept 4
Concept 5
Diverter 
Rescanning
Waste handling
Screening
Control system
Scanner
Passport control
In series
In series - push
In series - multiple positions
Shared lane
Parallel unpacking
Under diverter - behind scanner
Under scanner
Manual diverter lane
Automatic diverter - lane
Automatic diverter - bend
Carry to rescanning
Trolley to rescanning
Slide after diverter lane
Automatically after diverter 
Adittional scanner
In series
stand-alone
Around table
Parallel repacking
Single position
Multiple positions
Local screening
Remote screening
Stand-alone unit
Integrated into lane
Stand-alone
In front of lane
==PAGE:76==
76
Summary on long term vision
From analysing the current building principles in WO’s security lane, it could 
be realised that the security lane includes no modularity as functions are re­
ally integrated and restricted by the supporting frame and outer structure. 
Two alternative architectures were presented, representing hidden modularity 
and complete modularity. The architecture representing hidden modularity 
was chosen as a basis for the platform development. The architecture intro­
duces modularity to the security system that is not visible for the customer, 
ensuring preservation of WO’s interior design features. 
The security lane platform consists of re-usable modules from the architecture 
for the core structure of the security lane; tray return, unpacking, delay zone, 
diverter and repacking. Security solutions addressing different key performance 
indicators can be created by configuring standard design from the platform 
with customised design units and add-on features. 
Conclusion on conceptualisation
The conceptualisation phase provided WO Airport Interior A/S with different 
strategies of improving their product, both related to improving the current 
product structure on a component level and developing a new product program 
based on a focused objectives. The goals included reduction of current cost 
of the lane and for WO to be able to provide solutions with reduced footprint, 
increased flow rate and with additional areas of flexibility compared to their 
current offerings. Additional objective was to preserve that passenger experi­
ence and staff ergonomics would not be compromised and provide a solution 
emphasising easy maintenance and cleaning. 
Two strategies were presented; a short term vision and a long term vision. The 
short term vision includes conceptual strategies for reducing the component 
cost structure by standardising and optimising components. The long term 
vision includes strategies for more radical changes where a modular architec­
ture was developed partitioned the security lane into standard designs, design 
units and add-on features. Based on the architecture a product platform was 
developed consisting of modules in the core lane structure that can be re-used, 
i.e. standard designs. 
The product improvement initiatives were divided into two different approach­
es in order to provide WO Airport Interior A/S with both conservative and 
radical strategies. Despite the division into short term and long term strategies, 
it is important to underline the coherence between them. The principles for 
component cost reduction, applicable to the current security lane within an 
expected period of six months, can also be utilised as guidelines for designing 
new individual re-usable modules for the security lane platform. 
Benefits from implementing the short term and long term approaches in WO 
Airport Interior A/S are described and validated in next chapter.
==PAGE:77==
77
VALIDATION
==PAGE:78==
78
The validation reflects on benefits from the conceptualisation approaches and 
evaluates to which extent the focused goals of the project could be achieved. 
The benefits of reducing component variety and cost in production and reduce 
lead time are the typical motivations for platform and architecture development 
in production companies (Mortensen, Introduction to architectures and plat­
forms, 2015). WO Airport Interior A/S differs from many production compa­
nies in terms of production volumes and the importance of short lead time. 
The demand for security checkpoints is low compared to consumer products 
meaning that elements of mass productions is not relevant in this business 
area. A short lead time is also not of high importance as the delivery phase 
consist of prototypes and testing and development in cooperation with the 
airport. 
The conventional benefits of platform and architecture methodology are ap­
plicable in many areas of the development of security lanes. The production 
cost and complexity in production plays an important role in the overall suc­
cess of the system. The objectives of developing platform based on modular 
architecture for a security lane are related to reducing cost of the product and 
improving the product’s key performance indicators related to core values for 
the customers. 
Principles related to component standardisation and optimisation were pre­
sented as a short term approach for WO Airport Interior A/S to reduce com­
ponent cost within the current security island. Calculations based on estimations 
and negotiations with current suppliers resulted in overall component cost 
reduction of 2% for one security island, i.e. two lanes, corresponding to 1% 
reduction in the total cost. When calculating the reduction based on scale of 
economy, by estimating a production of 24 identical security islands, the total 
component cost reduction is assumed to be approx. 4,3% and 2% reduction 
of the total cost. Applying the short term principled does not seem to introduce 
high cost reduction benefits for WO. However, it is important to consider that 
those benefits arise from conservative changes in the component structure, 
addressing components related to 14% of the total component cost for a se­
curity island. When calculating the discount price for those components, only 
current suppliers were contacted for negotiation. Based on this, the assumption 
is made that a further cost reduction can be achieved by launching more rad­
ical changes for the component structure and negotiate with alternative sup­
pliers to find the cheapest possible price. Apart from component cost reduction, 
the principles of standardising components have proved to introduce other 
benefits in companies, such as reduce component variety, reduce complexity 
in production, less inventory, simpler assembly processes, fewer failures in 
production and increased quality of the final product (Harlou, 2006). Those 
benefits of component standardisation are also assumed to apply for security 
lanes. Less inventory, fewer failures and simpler assembly leading to less 
assembly time is also assumed to further reduce the overall cost of the secu­
rity island. 
Benefits related to short term vision
==PAGE:79==
79
Platform development based on modular architecture is considered as a long 
term approach for WO Airport Interior A/S for achieving the main objectives 
presented in the goalsetting. 
Currently WO can provide one security lane solution for customers, which is 
lacking competitiveness in the key performance areas of high flow rate, foot­
print, flexibility and low cost. By implementing the security lane platform for 
WO it becomes possible to provide family of flexible security lanes to cus­
tomers, addressing those key performance areas. Based on evaluation on 
different standard designs from the platform and design units, solutions can 
be configured to address various performances. Security solutions configured 
to address extreme performances in terms of flow rate, footprint and cost are 
validated and compared to the performance of the current security lane. In 
Figures 51-56 the red lines indicate the performance level in WO’s current 
security island which is set as a baseline of 2,5 on the 0-5 scale (5 being the 
best performance), and the green line represents the estimated performance 
from the new solutions. 
Flow rate
1
2
3
4
5
Small footprint
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
5
4
Passenger experience
Low cost
1
2
3
5
4
Current solution
Solution from platform
Extreme flow rate solution – The solution illustrated in Figure 51 consists 
of parallel unpacking and repacking with position for four passengers, auto­
matic diverter function and tray return under the scanner. In addition, a re­
checking position is located at the end of parallel repacking and an addition­
al scanner is located in the middle of the security island. Utilisation of 
additional scanner for rescanning suspicious luggage contributes to high flow 
rate as the rescanning will not affect the main flow. The screening position 
does not have an impact on the flowrate as local screening requires shorter 
decision time than remote screening, but remote screening allows less space 
between trays. 
The solution is considered to increase the flow rate approx. 60% from the 
current security lane based on experience of parallel unpacking from compet­
itors and with the utilisation of additional scanner. 
Figure 51: Extreme flow rate solution
Benefits related to long term vision
==PAGE:80==
80
This solution cannot be considered compact as the island is really wide with 
a lot of unused space in the middle. The cost is also relatively high as high 
level of automation is utilised along with additional scanner. The operational 
cost is also high as additional staff member on each lane for instructing pas­
sengers in the parallel unpacking and repacking is required. The modularity 
in the product architecture allows flexibility in the island’s set-up. In order to 
increase the performance of this solution in terms of small footprint and low 
cost, a bend could be introduced in the lane to utilise the space in the middle 
and the design surface, i.e. outer sides and panels, could be excluded to reduce 
the investment cost. In terms of operational cost, utilisation of instruction signs 
and/or screens might eliminate the need for an extra staff member. Impacts 
from initiatives to improve small footprint and low cost is illustrated in Figure 
52, as a dashed line, where passenger experience is considered to decrease as 
the design surface is removed. 
Extreme compact solution – The configured solution illustrated in Figure 
53 is a contributing to a small overall footprint for the security island. The 
footprint is reduced by 40% compared to WO’s current security island as the 
width of the lane is reduced by 3 meters (now 5 x 13 meters). This large re­
duction in footprint is achieved by sharing an unpacking table for two lanes, 
repack around a table and returning trays under the scanner. A compact divert­
er function is solved by introducing a bend for the movement of rejected trays. 
Additional to standard designs derived from the platform a rechecking table 
is shared between the lanes and waste handling function is integrated into the 
diverter standard design. For minimising the footprint, a remote screening is 
required. 
Figure 52: Alternative high flow rate solution
Flow rate
1
2
3
4
5
Small footprint
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
5
4
Passenger experience
Low cost
1
2
3
5
4
Current solution
Solution from platform
==PAGE:81==
81
This solution receives high scores related to flow rate and passenger experience. 
The flow rate is considered relatively high as the passenger can choose the 
faster lane and the capacity for repacking is high. Passenger experience is 
considered to be good as passengers can repack their luggage in their own 
position without feeling pushed. In terms of investment cost the solution is 
quite expensive as remote screening is required, due to space restrictions, and 
the lane includes high level of automation. The operational cost is not consid­
ered to change from current security checkpoint. For reducing the investment 
cost, the design surface could be excluded. The impacts from excluding the 
design surface, i.e. outer sides and panels, is illustrated in Figure 54 with the 
dashed line. 
Flow rate
1
2
3
4
5
Small footprint
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
5
4
Passenger experience
Low cost
1
2
3
5
4
Current solution
Solution from platform
Figure 53: Extreme footprint solutions
Figure 54: Alternative small footprint solution 
Flow rate
1
2
3
4
5
Small footprint
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
5
4
Passenger experience
Low cost
1
2
3
5
4
Current solution
Solution from platform
==PAGE:82==
82
Extreme low cost solution – Figure 55 illustrates a solution configured with 
the aim of reducing cost. The security lane is really simple and is only con­
structed from frame units derived from the platform, without any design 
surface add-ons. The security system does not include automatic features and 
has a local position for the screener. The low cost solution is estimated to 
reduce investment cost by approx. 40% based on WO’s experience with pro­
ducing fully manual security lanes and the fact that the design surface accounts 
for 20% of the total component cost (Jangaard, 2016). 
Flow rate
1
2
3
4
5
Small footprint
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
5
4
Passenger experience
Low cost
1
2
3
5
4
Current solution
Solution from platform
Flow rate
1
2
3
4
5
Small footprint
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
5
4
Passenger expe
1
2
3
4
Current solution
Solution from plat
This solution performs badly in terms of flow rate due to no automation and 
low unpacking and repacking capacity. The footprint is considered to be a 
little bit smaller then for the current security lane and the passenger experience 
is worse, due to the lack of design surfaces. Initiatives to increase the perfor­
mance of those parameters is to introduce some automation functionalities 
and a design surface. This will, however, compromise the high cost reduction 
as illustrated in Figure 56. 
Figure 55: Extreme low cost solution
 Figure 56: Alternative solution
==PAGE:83==
83
For validation of the estimated cost reduction achieved by implementing the 
security lane platform, many aspects need to be considered. By evaluating the 
cost in relation to the cost structure from the project for CPH in 2016, it can 
be realised that many areas are influenced by introducing the modular archi­
tecture and platform. The component cost is reduced due to utilisation of 
standardisation principles and re-design of the frame. On-side assembly time 
can be reduced as the new product program consists of clearer interfaces and 
connections. Better assembly guidelines can be provided due to more coherence 
in the lanes’ physical structure, introduced due to the well-defined standard 
designs. Another important contribution to cost reduction is the decoupling of 
expensive functions and components. The expensive design surface and er­
gonomic features will no longer be integrated into the security lane. The 
current cost for WO to provide one security island is 1,4 mil DKK (Jangaard, 
2016). From the new security platform, various security solutions can be 
configured ranging from low-end to high-end solutions, with or without design 
surface and ergonomic add-on features. Figure 57 illustrates cost reduction 
for different security islands configured from the platform. High-end solutions 
represent fully automatic security islands including design surface and ergo­
nomic features. Low-end solutions represent manual security solutions ex­
cluding the add-on features. 
The calculations on cost reduction are based on the assumption that total 
component cost for one security island, i.e. two lanes, can be reduced by 10% 
by applying radical standardisation principles. Cost of the frame is estimated 
to reduce by 30% due to optimisation of material and re-design. This cost 
reduction is relevant for all configured solutions. Further, excluding the design 
surface and ergonomics, accounting for 25% of the island’s component cost, 
introduces further cost reduction. The cost reduction of excluding the auto­
mation features is related to reduce cost of control system and mechanical 
components. Cost calculations related to the graph in Figure 57 can be found 
in Appendix 11. 
The cost validation is exclusively related to the investment cost (CAPEX) and 
does not consider operational cost (OPEX) related to the security checkpoints. 
The operational cost does, however, play a large role in the overall cost for 
airport security process. It can be argued that fully automatic security lanes 
are a better investment for airports than semi-automatic or fully manual lanes. 
This is due to fewer staff members required in a fully automatic lane. 
Figure 57: Cost reduction 
0
300000
600000
900000
1200000
1500000
New solution - low end
New solution - Without add-on features
New solution - high end
Current security island
Cost of security island [DKK]
-10%
-22%
-36%
==PAGE:84==
84
Conclusion on validation
Validation of the security lane platform resulted in increase of approximately 
60% in flow rate and reduction of 40% in footprint of the security island, for 
extreme concepts related to those performance indicators. The platform allows 
for a wider range of investment cost as security lanes can be configured from 
a highly automatic lanes including expensive design features and ergonomics 
to a cheap manual solution excluding all expensive features. Cost reduction 
achieved with the platform and modular architecture development ranges from 
10-36% for different concepts (see Figure 58).
Passenger experience
Ergonomics
Maintenance
Cleaning
Flexibility
For the remaining key performance indicators presented in the goalsetting a 
quantified evaluation was more difficult. For all security solutions derived 
from the platform, WO’s current design features and ergonomics functionalities 
are preserved in terms of providing optional add-on features to the lane. Pas­
senger experience is considered to increase as the interior design features are 
preserved along with possibility of parallel unpacking and repacking. Flexi­
bility in the areas of unpacking, repacking and integrating scanners is ensured 
in all concepts by designing for variation in height and width and by standard­
ising interfaces. Simplification in maintenance work is ensured by simple 
connections between standard design units and standardisation of components, 
leading to easy disassembly and few variances of spare parts. Current cleaning 
issues can be prevented by choosing the right material and avoiding areas and 
corners for easy collection of dirt in the detailed design of the security lane. 
(see Figure 59) 
Figure 58: Performance validation on security lane platform
Figure 59: Improvements related to security lane platform
Flow rate
Footprint
CAPEX
40%
60%
10%-36%
==PAGE:85==
85
DISCUSSION
==PAGE:86==
86
Research questions were defined in the beginning of the project based on the 
challenges within WO Airport Interior A/S on being competitive on the mar­
ket for security lanes and gaining new customers. The first research question 
can be related to conservative changes as it considers if standardising com­
ponents would contribute to a cost reduction in the current security lane pro­
vided by WO. The two latter questions relate to architecture and platform 
development, considering which type of modular architecture can be identified 
for security lanes, in order to provide flexible solutions to different customers, 
and how modularity can be introduced without compromising WO’s core 
competencies. 
For providing answers to the research questions a comprehensive research and 
analysis was carried out. The research included literature review as well as 
interviews with stakeholders and observation in airports. From interviews and 
observations, it could be realised how many different factors influence a se­
curity process in an airport. As mentioned in the introduction of the project, 
WO provides all the physical structure for a security checkpoint, excluding 
the X-Ray scanner. The X-Ray scanner does, however, have a large impact on 
the entire security checkpoint and the overall process. The X-Ray scanner is 
the decision factor which security lanes has to be built around. Various dimen­
sions of scanners, and especially the uncertainty related to the CT scanners, 
causes challenges for suppliers of security lanes. 
The analysis phase was to a large extend defined by the data available. The 
market for security lanes was calculated based on statistics and data provided 
by WO Airport Interior A/S. For evaluating the core customer values, mate­
rial from previous public tenders and interviews with security specialist from 
CPH, Oslo and Keflavík airport, was utilised. The identification of the core 
customer values, carried out in the analysis phase, is an extremely important 
part of the project, as it influences the entire process due to the focused goal­
setting and performance indicators based on these core values. Another im­
portant factor influencing the overall procedure of the project is the compar­
ison with competing solutions for realising WO’s postion on the market and 
to aim for the right objectives with the new product program. However, when 
comparing WO’s solutions to competitors, several assumptions were made. It 
was difficult to receive quantified data from competitors related to cost and 
related to products’ functionalities and structure.
Limitations were introduced in the product and cost analysis due to lack of 
data. The analysis was based entirely on one product, a security island pro­
vided to CPH airport in 2016. Due to this, it was not possible to identify 
commonality between different products provided by WO since 2007. In order 
to identify commonality across security lanes, a general approach and estima­
tions was utilised based on drawings of assembled security checkpoints and 
general descriptions.  
For the conceptualisation phase of the project and validation, cost reduction 
evaluation was to a large extent based on discussion with current component 
suppliers and estimates from employees within WO. Validation on the secu­
rity lane platform and different concepts derived from the platform, included 
evaluation on performance indicators related to the core customer values and 
goalsetting. The performance was evaluated based on WO’s experience in 
former projects, comparison with simulated measurements of known concepts 
within the security checkpoint business area and from discussions with airport 
security specialists and component suppliers
==PAGE:87==
87
The validation chapter presented results related to performance of solutions 
derived from the security lane platform. The results presented increased flow 
rate of 60%, decreased footprint of 40% and decreased investment cost of a 
security island of 10-36%. However, it is important to consider that those 
results are related to the best configured solutions from the platform in terms 
of improving those key performance indicators. 
As mentioned before, the validation of the security lane platform included 
evaluation of the key performance indicators for different concepts derived 
from the platform. Many assumptions and estimations were utilised through­
out the evaluation process. Furthermore, the performance was only evaluated 
based on the product structure provided by WO. In reality, there are many 
other aspects influencing the performance of a security checkpoint. 
External factors influencing the flow rate through security are e.g., the behaviour 
of security staff members and passengers travel experience. Security staff can 
influence the process by their behaviour related to instructions and how they 
treat the passengers. The passenger experience of travelling and their amount 
of hand-luggage is also a factor influencing the entire flow through security. 
The amount of trays per passenger influences the flow, where one tray per 
passenger is the optimal tray utilisation. By utilising only one tray instead of 
two per passenger the X-Ray has to process 50% fewer images. The trade-off 
between minimising trays per passenger and stacking the trays is, however, 
that too full trays can lead to increase in recheck and rescanning due to falls 
alarms. Other influencing factor, not considered in this project, is the control 
system. The control system was black-boxed as a design unit and is not con­
sidered throughout the conceptualisation phase. The control system is con­
Interpretation of results
nected with the entire lane and is associated with many functions. Influences 
on the flow rate related to the control system are e.g. the space control between 
trays and placement of sensors on the lane. Wrong placement of sensors can 
lead to misread of trays and stop the conveyers. 
The cost reduction was based on reduction on component cost and assumptions 
related to simplified assembly on-side in the airport. However, by changing 
the entire product program by implementing modular architecture and platform 
development there are many other factors that can influence the overall cost 
structure. Those factors being e.g. inventory cost and overall production and 
assembly cost. Those factors were not considered in this project. 
The footprint reduction was based on measurements of rough concepts draw­
ings. Those dimensions could, however, change when detailed design is im­
plemented to the conceptual concepts. 
Passenger experience is utilised throughout the conceptualisation phase of the 
product as a key performance indicator. Passenger experience is assumed to 
be influenced based on aesthetic features of the security lane and by the layout 
of the physical structure. Even though furniture-look can be more appealing 
for the passenger than a machine-like security lane, many other aspects influ­
ence how passengers experience the security process. Those factors being e.g. 
behaviour of security staff, temperature and illumination in the security area 
and waiting time. Attempts to influence passenger experience, not touched 
upon in this project, is to introduce gamification in the security lane or enter­
tainment in the waiting line. 
==PAGE:88==
88
For reliable results on performance of the new product program a detailed 
design and engineering should be implemented based on the conceptual con­
cepts and a test security lane should be installed in the airport, where simula­
tion measurements can be applied on the lane in operation. 
Limitations of the study
Only focusing on one product provided by the company introduced limitation 
to the analysis phase and the entire project, as comparison of commonality 
between different products could not be utilised in the platform and architec­
ture development. Another important limitation is that the platform and archi­
tecture development is only product based, excluding all fundamental aspect 
of e.g. the company situation, organisational strategies and ability to provide 
after-sales services. Those aspects do, however, play a large role regarding 
applicability of implementing radical changes in the product program and to 
obtain customers. Furthermore, due to time and resource constraints it was 
necessary to limit the project to proposal of modular architecture and a prod­
uct platform on a conceptual level, leaving out detailed design on interfaces 
and modules. 
Throughout the entire project it has been necessary to make several assump­
tions, that might influence the results of the project, due to lack of data or 
insufficient level of details in available data. This is relevant for e.g. perfor­
mance of competing solutions, and cost reduction related to implementation 
of modularity. In order to cope with those assumptions a comprehensive 
analysis on solutions on the market should be carried out as long with creating 
detailed design concepts for the modular structure and negotiating with alter­
native suppliers. 
Despite several assumptions throughout the project and the many external 
factors in airport security process that cannot be influenced by the security 
lane product itself, it is believed that good recommendation have been pro­
vided throughout the project for WO Airport Interior A/S to improve their 
product program. 
==PAGE:89==
89
CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATION
==PAGE:90==
90
Conclusion
This master thesis project investigates the applicability of the platform and 
architecture methodology for WO Airport Interior A/S, a small company pro­
viding interior solutions for airport security checkpoints. The purpose of the 
project has been to propose strategical approaches for the company to improve 
their product in order to increase their competitiveness on the market. 
A conclusion based on the market analysis is for WO to focus on the market 
segments of mid- and high end products in European airports with high traffic, 
i.e. medium and large airports. The attractiveness of those market segments 
is high for WO as their core competencies of providing high-end interior-like 
security solutions is very applicable for those market segments. Furthermore, 
those high-traffic airports are assumed to change out their security checkpoints 
within next 2-3 years due to launching of new scanner technology. 
Two approaches were proposed for WO Airport Interior A/S; short term and 
long term. The short term approach presents conservative changes on compo­
nent level, focusing on standardising and reducing cost of components. The 
long term approach focuses on more radical changes of developing a security 
lane platform based on modular product architecture. 
Component standardisation and optimisation
Conclusion from the short term approach is that a component cost reduction 
of 2% for WO’s current security island, i.e. two security lanes, can be achieved 
by applying principles of standardisation or optimising the utilisation of ma­
terial for 86 black steel and stainless steel components in the security island. 
When the component cost reduction is calculated based on producing 24 
identical security island, the reduction increases to 4,3%. It can be concluded 
from the results that more radical changes need to be implemented in the 
product program for WO to receive further cost reduction improvements.
The security lane architecture and platform
A modular architecture was developed, setting the basis for development of 
security lane platform. Modularity is presented to the security lane by defining 
building blocks as standard designs, design units and add-on features with 
clear interfaces (see architecture in Figure 42). The modular architecture for 
WO’s security lanes represents modularity that is not visible to passengers or 
other stakeholders. This type of architecture is considered to be the most ap­
plicable for security lanes in order to introduce modularity without compro­
mising WO’s core competencies of providing high-quality, interior-like secu­
rity solutions. 
The developed security lane platform makes it possible to configure different 
security lane solutions addressing various customer requirements. The platform 
consists of 21 standard design, re-usable across products. Configurations from 
the platform along with customised design units enables multiple solutions 
addressing core customer values as cost, flow rate, footprint, passenger expe­
rience and ergonomics. Derived solutions from the platform are estimated to 
achieve up to 60% increase in flow rate, 40% reduce in footprint and 36% cost 
reduction. 
The security lane platform is considered to fulfil the defined goals of the proj­
ect. It focuses on providing wide variety of solutions on a competitive price 
==PAGE:91==
91
by re-using common units across products and decoupling special function­
alities and expensive components from the product’s core structure. 
Applicability of the methodology for suppliers of airport security 
checkpoints 
The conclusion is that the methodology of platforms and architectures, based 
on the theory used in this thesis, can be applied for a small supplier of airport 
security solutions with potential for significant improvements related to the 
product performance and the product cost structure. Additionally, the meth­
odology is considered to support the innovation and ease development within 
the company due to freeing up resources and the availability of introducing 
new standard designs and design units to the product program. 
Further work and recommendation
This master thesis has presented two different approaches for WO Airport 
Interior A/S to move forward in the direction of improved product program 
for airport security lanes. As mentioned in the conclusion, a short term approach 
of implementing conservative changes to the current product, does not result 
in significant cost reduction. The long term approach of introducing modular­
ity to the product structure does, however, result in more cost reduction along 
with increasing the variety of products applicable for different customers’ 
needs. The overall result is for WO is to focus on radical changes in the di­
rection of introducing modularity. 
The security lane platform needs further detailing in order to be ready for 
implementation. The standard designs need to be clarified better in terms of 
detailed design of the frame unit and interfaces between standard designs and 
with other units of the security lane have to be defined. The platform propos­
al provided in this thesis is, however, considered to be a good foundation for 
moving forward in the development process. 
This thesis investigates the platform and architecture development in relation 
to the product structure and the possible improvements related to the product. 
However, before implementing radical changes to the product program, it has 
to be analysed and considered carefully if the company is really ready for 
modularisation and the changes related to platform and modular architecture 
implementation. The product modularity cannot be an initiative in itself to 
provide the company with more customers. Even though the product structure 
can be improved to address various customer requirements and be competitive 
in relations to other security solutions on the market, more fundamental aspects 
need to be considered. WO Airport Interior A/S is a small company with few 
resources and a low support base related to competitive companies. With few 
==PAGE:92==
92
resources it has not been possible for WO to provide a first-line, on-side service 
and maintenance agreement many airports require. 
For WO to move forward into implementing radical changes to their product 
program, a recommendation is to combine the platform development with 
other initiatives such as provide more resources to the company and/or partner 
up with another organisation. An overall conclusion when considering the 
platform and architecture development in relation to WO’s situation and oth­
er competing companies, is that a better support base is needed along with 
more resources in order for WO Airport Interior A/S to implement modulari­
ty to their product program and to be able to provide service agreements to 
airports. 
Further recommendations are for WO to reconsider their current market focus. 
As mentioned in the analysis phase, WO has not emphasised on sales and 
marketing and is unknown as a supplier for airport security lanes apart from 
their two customers; Copenhagen airport and Oslo airport, and from public 
tenders they have participated in. It can be argued that marketing is not essen­
tial when focusing on large projects where the procurement process has to be 
carried out through public tenders. However, to be known as a possible sup­
plier for the large amount of projects in small airports all around Europe, sales 
and marketing strategies is crucial. With implementing the security lane plat­
form, WO has the ability to provide security solutions from low to high end 
products without major modifications. Currently, medium and large airports 
are slowing down their investments of security lanes due to uncertainties re­
garding the new CT scanning technology assuming to be launched in next 2-3 
years. An initiative for WO to cope with this decline in the market for high 
traffic airports is to move their focus to sales and marketing strategies in small 
airports and build up a good reference in that market segments while large 
airports are postponing their investments.  However, as for providing service 
agreements to airports, more resources are required in the company before 
they can implement marketing strategies for airports all around Europe. 
Recommendation for the next step, based on the experience form this project, 
is for WO Airport Interior A/S to implement initiatives for improving funda­
mental aspects of the company, in order to improve the company’s support 
base, and carefully estimate if the company is ready for radical changes, before 
moving in the direction of implementing a product platform based on modu­
larity. 
==PAGE:93==
93
ACI Europe. (2016). Airport Council International Europe. Retrieved from 
https://www.aci-europe.org/policy/fast-facts.html
Airlines Rankings. (2014). Airlines and Airports top rankings. Airlines statis­
tic MRO statistic. Retrieved from http://topairlinesrankings.blogspot.dk/
AMS. (2015, October 15). Automotive manufacturing solutions. Retrieved 
fromhttp://www.automotivemanufacturingsolutions.com/focus/plat­
forms-to-perform
Árnason, Á. G. (2016, May 30). Security checkpoints in Keflavík airport. (K. 
B. Bjarnadóttir, Interviewer)
Configit. (2016). Configit. Retrieved from http://configit.com/
Copenhagen Airport. (2016, January 13). Retrieved from CPH Airport: https://
www.cph.dk/en/about-cph/press/news/cph-copenhagen-airport-grew-passen­
ger-traffic-by-one-millions-in-2015/
Ergoweb. (2016). Ergoweb. Retrieved from https://ergoweb.com/ergonom­
ics-regulations-in-the-european-union-a-luxembourg-initiative/
EUR-Lex. (2014). EUR-Lex. Access to European Union Law. Retrieved 
fromhttp://eur-lex.europe.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=celex:32014L0025
Harlou, U. (2006). Developing product families based on architectures. Den­
mark: Technical University of Denmark.
Herbert Systems. (2015). Herbert Systems. Retrieved from TRS. An integrat­
ed tray return solution: www.herbertsystems.co.uk
Jangaard, S. (2013). Kunde- og markedsanalyse. Dansk Innovation A/S.
Jangaard, S. (2016).
Lebech, M., & Holmskov, L. (2012). Radikal Forenkling Via Design. Lyngby: 
DTU Mekanik.
Meyer, M. H., & Lehnerd, A. P. (1997). The power of product platforms. 
Building value and cost leadership. New York: Simon & Schuster Inc. .
Mortensen, N. H. (2015). Introduction to architectures and platforms. Lecture 
in course 41083 Technology platforms and architectures. Denmark: Technical 
University of Denmark.
Mortensen, N. H. (2015). Vocabulary for architecture and platforms. Lecture 
in course 41083 Technology platforms and architectures. Denmark: Technical 
University of Denmark.
Passenger Terminal Exhibition. (2016). Cologne.
Rapiscan systems. (2013). EU Aviation Security Regulations and Screening 
of Liquids, Aerosols and Gels (LAGS). Retrieved from www.rapiscansystems.
com: http://www.rapiscansystems.com
Simpson, T. W., & Siddique, Z. (2007). Product family design and plat­
form-based product development: A state-of-the-art review. Intelligent Man­
ufacturing, 5-29.
REFERENCES
==PAGE:94==
94
