==PAGE:1==
Master thesis
Van der Waals heterostructure
electronic devices
Martin Bjergfelt (s113075)
Supervisors:
Peter Bøggild, Professor, DTU Nanotech
Jose M. Caridad, Ph.D, DTU Nanotech
Bjarke Sørensen Jessen, M.Sc., DTU Nanotech
Johanna Zultak, M.Sc., DTU Nanotech
Master thesis in Physics and Nanotechnology, Nanocarbon group, DTU Nanotech
Technical University of Denmark, 22-06-2016
==PAGE:2==
Contents
1
Introduction
3
1.1
Problem statements and objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.1.1
Objective 1: vdW heterostructure assembly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.1.2
Objective 2: vdW heterostructure device fabrication . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.1.3
Objective 3: Characterization of the electronic transport . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2
Project work plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2.1
Phase 1 - Exfoliation and heterostructure assembly (week 1-8)
. . . . . . .
5
1.2.2
Phase 2 - Device fabrication (week 8-12) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2.3
Phase 3 - Characterization (week 12-17) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Electronic transport in graphene
7
2.1
The electronic band structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.1
Scattering time and mean free path
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.2
Phase coherence length
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Hexagonal Boron Nitride as dielectric for graphene devices . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Transport measurements in graphene devices
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3.1
Minimum conductance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3.2
Hysteresis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Characterization methods
16
3.1
Calculating the sheet resistance - The van der Pauw method
. . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1.1
Lock-in ampliﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Raman Spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
Device preparation
19
4.1
Assembly of the van der Waals heterostructure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.1.1
Exfoliation of graphene
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.1.2
Exfoliation of h-BN
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.1.3
Observing and selecting ﬂakes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.1.4
The hot pick-up technique for assembling vdW heterostructures . . . . . . .
22
4.2
Device fabrication
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2.1
Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2.2
Electron beam lithography
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
1
==PAGE:3==
4.2.3
Dry etching of hBN and graphene
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2.4
Second electron beam exposure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2.5
Metal deposition of Cr/Au
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.3
Characterizan by Raman Spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5
Electrical characterization
35
5.1
Setups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.1.1
Probe station setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.1.2
Cryostat setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.2
Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.2.1
Preliminary tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.2.2
4-terminal characterization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.3
Data processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.4
Data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.4.1
Residual doping of the graphene
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.4.2
Conductance ﬂuctuations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.4.3
Mobility temperature dependence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.4.4
Line shape of transconductance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.4.5
Application of the van der Pauw method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6
Discussion
49
7
Conclusion
50
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
In this thesis study, van der Waals heterostructure electronic devices of hexagonal Boron Nitride
encapsulated graphene, was successfully fabricated and characterized. This was achieved by as-
sembly of mechanically exfoliated 2D crystals of mono-crystalline graphene and hBN with the “hot
pick-up technique for batch assembly of van der Waals heterostructures”, recently published by
members of the Nanocarbon group at the Technical University of Denmark, in collaboration with
the research group of James Hone at University of Columbia. By using the referred technique
heterostructures with clean crystal interfaces where produced as well as heterostructures with con-
taminated interface. From this experience, a heterostructure with partially a clean and partially
a contaminated interface area was assembled. This was achieved from learning that the speed, at
which the crystals are assembled, is crucial for the interface cleanliness. A fast drop down will trap
contaminants in blister formations, whereas a slower assembly will squeeze the impurities away
from the interface. This heterostructure was used for studying the contamination’s inﬂuence on
the electronic transport properties of the encapsulated graphene. By applying the van der Pauw
strategy for 4-terminal electrical characterization of sheet resistance, two square shaped devices
with corner terminals were designed and fabricated using electron beam lithography. These de-
vice where subsequently characterized by Raman spectroscopy, from which a map of characteristic
peak intensities indicated a diﬀerence in extrinsic doping of the graphene between the two device
regions. Two setups were used for performing 4-terminal characterization. The ﬁrst setup, with
probe needles for contacting the device terminals, and a selection of multi and source meters, was
used for preliminary testing of the electronic transport. The second setup, a system with lock-in
ampliﬁcation, allowed accurate measurements of the device resistance while device could be cooled
in a cryostat. Measurements were performed in a temperature range from 300K to 2K in 9 steps.
In the low end of the temperature range (2-50K), the measurements showed negative resistances
and large re-traceable ﬂuctuations at high carrier densities, indicating the onset of quasi-ballistic
transport. The onset of such a transport regime, sets a lower limit for applying the van der Pauw
method. Measurements at 50K exhibited carriers mobilities at n=±1 × 1012 cm−2 up to 40,000
cm2/Vs for the cleaner device and up to 22,000 cm2/Vs for the more contaminated device. Anal-
ysis of the carrier mobility temperature dependence showed a temperature dependence for the
clean device down to 150K, while the carrier mobilities of the more contaminated device exhibited
temperature independence. This behavior may be connected to impurity limited scattering in the
more contaminated (doped) graphene, while the cleaner graphene instead is limited by scattering
on phonons.
1
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgments
I would like to thank the Nanocarbon group at the Technical University of Denmark allowing me
to perform my thesis study under their supervision. The meetings with Professor Bøggild has given
me a lot of essential insights into this enormous research ﬁeld. I would like to thank my supervisors
Johanna Zultak, Bjarke Jessen Sørensen, and Jose Caridad, as well a Lene Gammelgaard for aiding
me in performing the experimental work. A thanks also goes out to David Mackenzie for helping
me with Raman spectroscopy.
2
==PAGE:6==
Chapter 1
Introduction
While the vast majority of modern electronic devices still are based on the industrial scale semi-
conductor, silicon, a world-wide research eﬀort has since the experimental discovery of graphene
in 2004 aimed to develop electronics based on this new nanomaterial [1]. Graphene is a one-atom
thin zero-bandgap semi-metal consisting entirely of carbon atoms in a honeycomb lattice and is the
ﬁrst true two-dimensional material ever to be isolated. The material has an unprecedented range
of outstanding physical properties [2], but to realize graphene’s potential in practical applications,
such as high performance electronics, device designs must be rethought to take full advantage of
what graphene can do that conventional materials cannot. Especially transistors like the silicon
MOSFET is already a highly optimized and successful device, backed by a large industry. In order
to utilize the new functionalities that graphene oﬀer, some of the its famous properties, like bal-
listic transport, Klein tunneling and lack of current saturation [3],[4],[5], have to be investigated
in diﬀerent device designs. These properties are in fact all making realization of conventional ﬁeld
eﬀect transistors harder, as they complicate control of the fundamental on/oﬀswitching mecha-
nism [6]. In stead Ballistic transport of charge carriers in graphene enables instead development
of electronic analogues to optical components, “electron optics”. As an example, using graphene
as the electronic analogue to ﬁber-optic guiding, may lead to electrically reconﬁgurable wiring [7].
Graphene material technology made micron-scale ballistic lengths available at room temperature
half a decade ago [8], through layer-by-layer stacking of 2D materials. This stacking allows 2D
crystals with diﬀerent electrical properties and roles to be combined into so-called van der Waals
(vdW) heterostructures [9]. In such heterostructures, thin dielectrics, electrodes, active layers and
spacers stacked in various combinations enables unparalleled potential for customizing the device
functionality [9].
The resulting stacks represents artiﬁcial 3D materials assembled in a chosen
sequence — a bit like building with Lego bricks in diﬀerent colors, as illustrated in ﬁgure 1.1.
Figure 1.1:
Diﬀerent 2D
materials assembled into
an artiﬁcial van der Waals
heterostructure.
Illustra-
tion taken from [9].
3
==PAGE:7==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Figure 1.2:
a): van der Waals heterostructure with
a single layer of graphene encapsulated
by two layers of hexagonal Boron Ni-
tride on a Si/SiO2 substrate. Through
an etch process (b)) and metal depo-
sition (c)), one dimensional electrical
contact (d)) is made between metal
leads and the encapsulated graphene.
Illustration taken from [10].
Hexagonal Boron Nitride (hBN), a wide band gap 2D semiconductor, is a crystal that has been
found to perform well as graphenes dielectric counterpart in vdW structures [11]. It outperforms
SiO2 as substrate for graphene, which is more limited by extrinsic scattering on surface phonons
[12]. SiO2 also have a much larger surface roughness compared to the atomically ﬂat hBN. Encap-
sulation of graphene with hBN (ﬁgure 1.2a)) has been shown to exhibit very large mobilities (up
to 140.000 cm2
Vs ) and ballistic length over 15 µm at low (cryogenic) temperatures [10]. These results
by Wang et al were obtained along with the development of the one dimensional edge contact to
graphene (ﬁgure b)-d)), allowing electrical characterization to be performed on fully encapsulated
graphene, whereas earlier methods contacted the top surface of graphene [8].
1.1
Problem statements and objectives
A challenge for obtaining ballistic transport in large (>10 µm) graphene vdW heterostructure
devices above cryogenic temperatures, is the need for keeping the crystal interfaces clean during
manual assembly [10]. Contaminants trapped between the layers usually gather up as blisters and
deteriorate the adhesion between the layers and the electronic transport properties of graphene
[13]. Charged impurities are known to act as long-range scattering centers in graphene devices and
limits ballistic transport in being realized at room temperature for larger devices [14]. A recent
paper “The hot pick-up technique for batch assembly of van der Waals heterostructures” [15] by F.
Pizzocchero et al from the Nanocarbon group at the Technical University of Denmark, introduces
a high temperature assembly technique for faster and cleaner assembly of vdW heterostructures.
The technique utilizes the van der Waals adhesion between the 2D materials without exposing
the interfaces to polymers.
By this technique, it becomes possible to compare the electronic
properties of a blister-contaminated vdW heterostructure device to a blister-free device made from
the same heterostructure. This comparison is interesting as it provides information on how the
contamination aﬀects the electronic properties of graphene compared to when the batch assembly
technique is applied correctly. To acquire this information, the following objectives are set.
1.1.1
Objective 1: vdW heterostructure assembly
The ﬁrst objective is to assembly van der Waals heterostructures with a single layer of graphene
encapsulated between two layers of hexagonal Boron Nitride using the hot pick-up technique. The
aim is to assemble a heterostructure with partly a clean and partly a blister contaminated area,
so that the contamination can be characterized in comparison to a blister-free area in the same
heterostructure. Using the same heterostructure will sort away any eﬀects of hBN thickness vari-
ations between heterostructures as well as variations in plasma and thermal treatments performed
during the heterostructure assembly.
4
==PAGE:8==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
1.1.2
Objective 2: vdW heterostructure device fabrication
When the aforementioned heterostructure has been successfully assembled, the following objective
will be to isolate the two regions of interest into separate device areas, and establish metal leads
contacting the edge of the encapsulated graphene, like shown in ﬁgure 1.2d. This can be achieved
by using electron beam lithography, combined with dry etching and metal ﬁlm deposition.
1.1.3
Objective 3: Characterization of the electronic transport
After the device has been fabricated, the ﬁnal objective is to characterize the electronic transport in
both devices and compare the results. The aim is to perform the characterization in a temperature
range of room temperature (300 kelvin) down to cryogenic temperatures (a few kelvin), as to
suppress and isolate any contribution from phonons.
1.2
Project work plan
This section will describe a work plan was made for the 3 diﬀerent phases of the 22 weeks long
project. Each phase corresponds to one of the 3 main objectives and the tasks associated with
reaching each objective will be brieﬂy described here.
1.2.1
Phase 1 - Exfoliation and heterostructure assembly (week 1-8)
Goal: Follow the procedure of the hot pick-up technique for batch assembly of van
der Waals heterostructures and produce at least one heterostructure with a blister
contaminated area and a blister-free area.
The following tasks constitute the ﬁrst phase of the project:
• Perform mechanical exfoliation of graphene and h-BN on SiO2/Si wafer fragments.
• Produce PDMS pads with PPC coating to be glued onto microscope glass slides. These are
to be used for dry transfer and stacking of the 2D materials.
• Analyze the hot pick-up assembly technique and determine under what conditions the blisters
appear.
• Assemble hBN and graphene stacks with blister-contaminated and a blister-free regions.
• Characterize the stacks by Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) as to measure the thickness of
the hBN crystals.
1.2.2
Phase 2 - Device fabrication (week 8-12)
Goal: Fabricate vdW heterostructure devices with 1D contact to the graphene using
cleanroom fabrication technology.
• Prepare a fabrication process ﬂow for the device fabrication including the Electron Beam
Lithography (EBL) device design and operation ﬁles.
• Perform EBL for shaping the heterostructure. EBL involves spin coating the sample with
electron beam resist followed by an electron beam exposure, and ﬁnally a removal of the
exposed resist. The patterned resist will work as a mask in subsequent processing.
• Etch the stack layers with a dry etching process. This will serve to shape devices from the
assembled heterostructure.
5
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
• Perform another EBL procedure for introducing a matching metal leads pattern for the
devices.
• Deposit metal to facilitate that an electrical connection to the encapsulated graphene can be
made through the electrical leads.
1.2.3
Phase 3 - Characterization (week 12-17)
Goal: Characterize the electronic transport properties of the two devices and compare
them
• Perform Raman spectroscopy
• Test the electrical contact to the graphene.
• Perform 4-point terminal measurements, measuring the current between two terminals and
the voltage drop between two other terminals while applying a back gate voltage. Do this in
a range from room temperature to cryogenic temperatures.
6
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 2
Electronic transport in graphene
Most properties of graphene originates from its very unique electronic structure. While the charge
carriers of a conductor usually are described by electron waves governed by Schrödingers mass
dependent equation, the electron waves in graphene obey the laws of relativistic quantum physics,
described by the massless Dirac equation. This chapter will describe the electronic transport in
graphene by ﬁrst presenting the electronic band structure along with how it is related to the
methods used to characterize the transport. Afterwards diﬀerent scattering mechanisms are intro-
duced along with how the presence of substrates and adsorbed molecules inﬂuence the electronic
performance of graphene based devices.
2.1
The electronic band structure
Graphene is a single atomic sheet of carbon atoms arranged in hexagonal rings, forming a honey-
comb lattice (see ﬁgure 2.1). The atomic structure is characterized by two diﬀerent kinds of covalent
C-C bonds, σ-bonds and π-bonds, formed from the four valence orbitals of the carbon atom (2s,
2px, 2py, 2pz). Here the z-direction is deﬁned as being perpendicular to the sheet. In the plane,
the carbon atom is bound to 3 neighbor atoms by 120◦σ-bonds formed from the s-orbital and
two in-plane p-orbitals into sp2 hybridized orbitals. The remaining fourth p-orbital, pz creates a
π-bond that is delocalized on the entire graphene sheet. The π-bond allows its electron to move
freely and participate in an electrical current. For comparison, the fourth p-orbital in diamond is
instead used for bonding, making diamond a highly insulating material. The π-bonds in graphene
hybridize together and form the bonding π and the anti-bonding π∗bands which make up the
electronic valence and conduction bands. As indicated in ﬁgure 2.1, graphene has two carbon
atoms in each unit cell. The two atoms comprise two triangular sublattices, usually denoted A
and B. The extra degree of freedom associated with these sublattices, called pseudospin, causes
Figure 2.1:
Left: High Resolution Transmis-
sion Electron Microscope image
of graphene.
Right:
Ball and
stick model of graphene with the
carbon atoms arranged in the
hexagonal lattice.
The diﬀer-
ent colored carbon atoms indi-
cate the two identical sublattices,
here labeled A and B. The rhom-
bic area marks a unit cell and
dC-C is the interatomic distance.
Adapted from [16].
7
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 2. ELECTRONIC TRANSPORT IN GRAPHENE
Figure 2.2: Bandstructure of graphene
with a zoom-in on one of the Dirac
points
separating
the
linearly
dis-
persed conduction and valence bands.
Adapted from [18].
the electrons to behave like Dirac quasiparticles. Electrical current can be transported through
graphene’s honeycomb lattice by these Dirac quasiparticles, which have zero restmass. This is
in turn why electrons in graphene can be described by the relativistic massless Dirac equation,
as opposed to Schrödingers equation for massive spin-1/2 particles. Due to the hexagonal lattice
symmetry, the graphene band structure has a conical shape near the Dirac point (K-points), where
the Fermi level is small (ﬁgure 2.2). This band structure is quite diﬀerent from parabolic energy-
momentum relations usually observed in conventional semiconductors, like silicon [17].
The 6
points separating the valence and conduction band in the two-dimensional hexagonal Brillouin
zone are called the Dirac points. Since the two bands touch exactly in these points, the band gap
of intrinsic graphene is zero. Due to the symmetry of the hexagonal lattice in reciprocal space only
two (k,k’) of the six Dirac points are essentially diﬀerent, the four others being equivalent to any
of these two. This is often referred to as the valley degeneracy.
Near the Dirac points (k,k’), the dispersion equation E(k) can be described as:
E(k) = ±ℏvF
q
k2x + k2y
(2.1)
where the positive and negative sign describes the conduction and valence band, respectively. In
equation (2.1), ℏis the Dirac constant which is a reduced form of the Planck constant ℏ= h
2π ,
vF = 1×106 m/s is the Fermi velocity (the group velocity around the Dirac point), and k = (kx, ky)
is the in-plane wavevector.
The conical band structure is fundamental for understanding the
electronic transport measurements that will be described in following sections.
2.1.1
Scattering time and mean free path
For an electron moving in graphene (or any other conductor), the time between scattering events
where information about the electrons momentum is lost, is called the scattering time, τ.
In
isotropic scattering, the scattering time for this momentum “relaxation” is exactly equal to the
time between scattering events. The momentum will thus be fully randomized in every isotropic
scattering event. Scattering events where the momentum is lost can happen elastically, meaning
that the energy will be conserved (this can happen for scattering on charged impurities [19]),
or inelastically where energy is lost (this can happen in electron-electron interaction or phonon
scattering [20]). Scattering events are not necessarily isotropic, as can be the case for scattering
on charged impurities, where the deﬂection angle can be small enough to conserve the momentum.
This will mostly depend on the impurity size and relative position to the graphene sheet. The
mean free path, lmfp, is the average distance between isotropic collisions. It is linearly proportional
to the scattering time through the Fermi velocity:
lmfp = vF τ
(2.2)
Being directly related to the scattering time, one can also speak about elastic and inelastic mean
free paths, but what is important for electronic transport in devices is the distance over which the
8
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 2. ELECTRONIC TRANSPORT IN GRAPHENE
lmfp
W
L<<lmfp
lmfp
W
W<< lmfp
Diffusive
Quasi-ballistic
Ballistic
 
a)
b)
c)
Figure 2.3:
Sketches of 3 elec-
tonic transport regimes in a de-
vice channel of length L and
width W.
a) When the mean free path lmfp
smaller than W, the transport is
diﬀusive.
b) When lmfp is comparable with
W, the transport is considered
quasi-ballistic.
c) When lmfp
>>
W, L, the
transport is ballistic.
Adapted from [22].
electron looses its memory of the initial momentum. In the extreme case that the electron only
scatter on specular boundaries (where the angle of incidence equals the angle of reﬂection), it can
continue to have a strong correlation with its initial momentum. This implies that such scattering
events will not contribute to the mean free path. The phenomenon is known as ballistic transport.
The reigning electronic transport phenomenon in a device can now be described by one of three
transport regimes by comparing the devices length L and width W to the mean free path, lmfp
(ﬁgure 2.3) . When W and L are larger than lmfp, the electron current is controlled by diﬀusive
transport where isotropic scattering dominates. In contrast, if W and L are smaller than lmfp and
the scattering probability in the device is negligibly small, the electron transport is ballistic and
the current will be completely controlled by the carrier injection. Lastly, when W is smaller but
comparable to lmfp, the transport is characterized as being quasi-ballistic where electron transport
will be ballistic with few isotropic scattering events [21].
2.1.2
Phase coherence length
The phase coherence length lφ and phase coherence time τφ is the relaxation lengths and time
over which the electron loses information about its initial phase. Whenever an electron changes
to a diﬀerent energy state, the wave function and the phase changes as well. This means that any
inelastic (energy changing) collisions will reset the phase and destroy the phase coherence between
electrons [21]. In impurity free graphene, phonons are the main source of inelastic scattering at
room temperature, while at lower temperatures, the electron-electron collision will dominate. The
phase coherence is very temperature dependent and since quantum interference eﬀects depend on
phase coherence, these will more easily be observed at lower temperatures. Quantum interference
can cause the electrical conductance to ﬂuctuate aperiodically yet reproducibly with Fermi energy
(which can be controlling by capacitive gating as will be discussed later). When the sample size
is smaller than lφ, the conductance can ﬂuctuate and should saturate at a universal magnitude
of 2e2
h , the “universal quantum of conductance” [6]. Universal is, in this sense, understood as the
magnitude being irrespective of material properties, device geometry, or dimensionality. The con-
ductance ﬂuctuations have been observed for graphene devices at cryogenic temperatures [23][10].
9
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2. ELECTRONIC TRANSPORT IN GRAPHENE
Figure 2.4: Ball and stick model
of hexagonal boron nitride with
the Boron (white) and Nitro-
gen (blue) atoms arranged in the
hexagonal lattice. Adapted from
[16]
2.2
Hexagonal Boron Nitride as dielectric for graphene de-
vices
State of the art graphene devices have for a long time been made on standard SiO2 on Si sub-
strates [2]. On SiO2, the carrier mobility in graphene is limited by a variety of surface induced
scattering mechanisms [12]. From the list of limitations is here mentioned charged surface states,
charged impurities, surface roughness, and surface optical phonons. As a consequence of these lim-
itations, graphene on SiO2 exhibits characteristics far inferior to the expected intrinsic properties
of graphene [6]. A new and better suited standard substrate has been found in hexagonal boron
nitride (hBN)[11]. This BN polymorph is remarkably similar to graphite (from which graphene
is a single atomic layer) as the alternating B and N atoms form two-dimensional layers of strong
sp2 bonds within a honeycomb arrangement and a lattice constant which diﬀers by less than 2%
from that of graphene [24]. The electronic structure, however, is very diﬀerent from graphene
(a semi-metal [25]) as the chemically inequivalent sublattices makes hBN a semiconductor with a
band gap of 6.0 eV. For many applications (e.g when combined with graphene [11]), it is considered
an insulator. The relevant dielectric properties of h-BN are in this case the relative permeability
ϵr ≈3−4 and Vbreakdown 0.7 V nm−1 [11]. The surface optical phonon modes of h-BN have energies
two times larger than similar modes in SiO2, which suggests an improved high-temperature and
high-electric-ﬁeld performance of h-BN [11].
10
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 2. ELECTRONIC TRANSPORT IN GRAPHENE
C1
C2
hBN (C1)
Graphene (top electrode)
SiO2(C2)
Doped Si (bottom electrode)
Metal 
lead
Figure 2.5: Sketch of hBN encapsulated graphene device where the two dielectric (hBN and SiO2)
are connected in series for capacitive gating. The corresponding electrical circuit diagram of two
capacitors in series is shown next to the graphen device.
2.3
Transport measurements in graphene devices
One way of exploring the electronic transport properties of semiconducting or semi-metal materials,
is by exploiting the electric ﬁeld eﬀect. By varying the strength of an electric ﬁeld, the carrier
concentration in the material can be tuned, thus modulating the conductance.
This involves
applying an external voltage, Vg, to a gate electrode which is separated from the active material
by a dielectric of thickness d, with capacitance per area C′ = ϵ0ϵr
d . Here ϵ0 is the permittivity of
free space, and ϵr is the relative permittivity. The applied gate voltage creates a potential drop
across the insulating layer and induces a surface charge density n, given by:
n = C′ Vg
e = ϵ0ϵrVg
de
(2.3)
Since hBN encapsulated graphene devices on SiO2 will have two diﬀerent gate dielectric (ﬁgure
2.5), the total capacitance per area (C′
tot) is calculated by treating the capacitance of the dielectric
as connected in series (equation 2.4):
1
C′
tot
= 1
C′
1
+ 1
C′
2
=
d1
ϵ0ϵr1
+
d2
ϵ0ϵr2
(2.4)
Using the total capacitance, the surface charge density becomes:
n = C′
tot
Vg
e =
ϵ0ϵr1ϵr2
d1ϵr2 + d2ϵr1
Vg
e = γVg
(2.5)
where the material parameters and constants are collected in a proportionality factor γ. Applying
a gate voltage to graphene, (now acting as the second parallel plate of the capacitor) allows us to
modify the charge carrier density and thus tune the Fermi level. In intrinsic graphene, the Fermi
level lies exactly at the Dirac point, not generating any allowed states (density of state equals
zero in a single point of a band structure).
If there are no states to occupy, there can be no
carriers that can contribute to the electrical transport (n = 0). The Dirac point thus separates
two regions of conduction. One region where electrons are majority carriers (Fermi level lies within
the conduction band) and one region where holes are majority carriers (Fermi level lies within the
valence band). In an electrical measurement of resistivity, the Dirac point will appear as the peak
value. When the Fermi level is shifted away from the Dirac point with the applied gate voltage
into either band, the resistivity will decrease with the increase of gate voltage. This behavior is
depicted in ﬁg 2.6.
Intrinsic graphene has a minimum conductivity at Vg = 0V, but whenever graphene is chemically
doped, the gate voltage for the minimum conductivity is shifted, depending on the doping level.
The excess charges originating from impurities are shifting the Fermi level away from the Dirac
point, and so Vg will be shifted by an oﬀset, VDirac, that compensates for this charge imbalance.
11
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2. ELECTRONIC TRANSPORT IN GRAPHENE
Figure 2.6:
Left: Resistivity as a function of gate. Inserts show energy bands for the diﬀerent conduction
regimes (electrons or holes as majority carriers) on either side of the Dirac point, VDirac.
Right: Conductivity as a function of gate voltage. Red lines are linear ﬁts of the two regions on
either side of the Dirac point, VDirac, with their angles to an orthogonal line with the x-axis marked
as α and β.
To correctly account for doping, equation (2.5) thus needs to be shifted by VDirac since the charge
carrier density induced by the gate will be diﬀerent from the actual charge carrier density in
graphene.
n = γ(Vg −VDirac)
(2.6)
The electronic transport properties of a graphene device can be characterized by its conductivity,
σ, and its ﬁeld eﬀect carrier mobility, µ. In the case of the capacitive gating, however, it is not the
intrinsic material conductivity σ that is measured, but rather the transconductance G which is the
materials conductance as a result of the electric ﬁeld. The ﬁeld eﬀect mobility µ is a measure of how
quickly a carrier can move through the material, when pulled by an electric ﬁeld. The conductivity
and ﬁeld eﬀect mobility are related through the Drude model from classical mechanics [26], as
stated in equation 2.7.
σ = nieµi
(2.7)
where i is an index for either electrons (e) or holes (h), e is the elementary charge, and ni is the
charge carrier concentration, as in eq. 2.6. In order to describe the conductance in graphene,
we have to introduce quantum mechanics and take into account that the Pauli principle prevents
electrons from being scattered into an already occupied state. This can be done with the semi-
classical Drude-Boltzmann equation, which is the derived from the Einstein diﬀusion relation (eq.
2.8).
σ = e2ν(EF ) · D
(2.8)
Here, ν(EF ) is the density of states per energy per area (DOS) at the Fermi energy which is
2EF
ℏ2πv2
F
for graphene [6]. D is the diﬀusivity ( 1
2v2
F τ), where vF is the Fermi velocity and τ is the time
between scattering events for the carrier. Inserting the Fermi energy from the dispersion relation
(eq 2.1) introduced in section 2.1, the conductance can be written as:
σ = e2
 2EF
ℏ2πv2
F

·
1
2v2
F τ

= 2e2
h kF l = 2e2
h vF τ√πn
(2.9)
12
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 2. ELECTRONIC TRANSPORT IN GRAPHENE
Here, the mean free path l = vF τ, the relation between the Planck and Dirac constant, and kF =
√πn is used to rewrite the equation. Equation 2.9 is called the Drude-Boltzmann equation, which
predicts the conductivity to be proportional to the square root of the carrier density. However,
for devices where the transport is dominated by impurity scattering, the conductance is known
to be linearly dependant on the carrier density [27]. This implies that the scattering time τ for
impurity dominated scattering also is proportional to √n, which will predict the linear behavior
for the conductance.
Returning to the Drude model, the mobility is found be diﬀerentiating the conductance with carrier
density, or with gate voltage if inserting equation 2.5 containing the capacitance. Both cases are
shown in equation 2.10.
µ = 1
e
∆G
∆ni
=
1
Ctot
∆G
∆Vg
(2.10)
Diﬀerentiation for adjacent increments in conductance ∆G data will, with even small signal ﬂuc-
tuations result in very distorted mobility data due to the rapid changes in the local incremental
slopes. A strategy to calculate less scattered mobility values is to use the minimum conductivity
as a reference point for the diﬀerentiation so that the mobility for each gate voltage is is calculated
as:
µ =
1
Ctot
∆G
∆Vg
≈
1
Ctot
Gi −Gmin
Vgi −VDirac
(2.11)
If the conductance is depending linearly on carrier density for transport limited by impurity scat-
tering, the mobility is predicted to be constant in carrier density. When we decrease the impurity
density towards having perfectly clean devices, the conductance dependency on carrier density
is expected to move towards a sub-linear regime, as has been observed for transport in clean
suspended graphene [28].
Revisiting the energy dispersion relation, eq. (2.1), the symmetry of the two bands implies equal
group velocity for both electrons and holes. This means that in homogeneous graphene (without
defects/impurities), whenever scattering mechanism aﬀect the carriers with the same strength, the
drift velocity vdrift = µiE will be the same for both type of carriers. As a direct consequence of this,
the electron mobility µe and the hole mobility µh will be the same. One way to experimentally
verify whether the electron and hole mobilities actually will be the same, is through the slopes
of the conductance σ (determined experimentally from the the inverse of the sheet resistance,
σ = 1/ρS) as a function of the applied gate voltage.
When plotting conductance as a function of gate voltage for graphene, there will be a minimum
conductance at the Dirac point and a linear behavior in both directions away from the Dirac point.
However, in experimental data from graphene devices, there will in most cases be asymmetry in
the conductivity originating from impurities and/or defects. These inhomogeneities will not have
the same scattering impact for electrons and holes, which is why one type of carrier will experience
higher mobility. The ratio of the slopes | cot β/ cot α| can in this case serve as a measure of the
disparity. In the case of the data in ﬁgure 2.6, the slope is larger for the electron regime with a
ratio of | cot β/ cot α| = 0.65. This is implying that µe > µh for this sample.
The mobility reﬂects the total inﬂuence of the carrier scattering mechanisms. This includes the
intrinsic scattering (such as scattering on longitudinal acoustic (LA) phonons in the graphene
lattice) and the extrinsic scattering (such as scattering on impurities, defects, adsorbates or phonons
from substrates). The overall mobility µ can be approximated by applying Matthiessen’s rule [29],
stating:
1
µ =
1
µimpurities
+
1
µLA phonons
+
1
µdefects
+
1
µsubstrate
+ ...
(2.12)
Here µimpurities is the mobility that the material would have if there was impurity scattering but
no other source of scattering, and µLA phonons is the mobility that the material would have if there
was LA phonon scattering but no other source of scattering, and so on.
13
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2. ELECTRONIC TRANSPORT IN GRAPHENE
A strategy to determine contributions from some of these mobility limiting sources, is to perform
electrical characterization at low temperatures. This way, the contributions from phonons will be
suppressed, and the dominating scattering will on be any charged impurities and defects in the
system. An example of this is seen in ﬁgure 2.7 for graphene on SiO2.
Figure 2.7: Temperature-dependent mobility in graphene on SiO2 for two samples at n = 1 × 1012
cm−2. Mobility limits due to longitudinal acoustic (LA) phonons (dark red solid line), substrate
surface phonons (green dashed line), and impurities/defects (red and blue dashed lines) are pre-
sented. Matthiessen’s rule was used to obtain the net mobility for each sample (red and blue solid
lines) [2].
2.3.1
Minimum conductance
In section 2, the Dirac point was presented as a point in the band structure where the DOS is
zero. Despite this, graphene exhibits a ﬁnite minimum conductance at the Dirac point instead of
vanishing as should be expected when the Fermi energy approaches the singular point. This is also
seen directly from the data in ﬁg 2.6 where the minimum value indeed is not zero. It has been
proved theoretically that this ﬁnite conductance is a characteristic property of Dirac chiral fermions
in 2D systems. When approaching the zero temperature limit with zero charge carrier density and
excluding scattering, the conductivity is predicted to be on the order of e2/h [30]. A common
proposal for the theoretical minimum is σmin = 4e2/hπ [6], but experimental data tend to cluster
around 4e2/h. This discrepancy can be understood when realising that the undoped, ungated
graphene device with Dirac cones is an idealised description, only valid for intrinsic graphene. The
intrinsic graphene model is abstract because even the slightest structural disorder (like ripples and
defects), doping, or any external potential ﬂuctuations will induce carriers in the system. As a
consequence, experiments are in fact performed on extrinsic graphene, where the charge carrier
density never becomes zero. The minimum conductance occurs instead at the charge neutrality
point (CNP), where the density of induced electrons in the conduction band equals the density of
holes in the valence band.
Several mechanisms can contribute to the conductance minimum [12]:
• structural corrugations (non-ﬂatness), locally shifting the position of the Dirac point.
14
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 2. ELECTRONIC TRANSPORT IN GRAPHENE
• doping by charge-transferring molecules
• doping by charge impurities, locally modifying the chemical potential (creating electron-hole
puddles [31])
• disorder eﬀects (crystal defects, egdes, etc.)
• thermal ﬂuctuations
• an applied gate voltage
This list also turns out to be a relevant overview of elements that can be optimized for improving
the overall conditions for electronic transport in graphene.
2.3.2
Hysteresis
Hysteresis when capacitively gating graphene devices can be observed. In this case, hysteresis can
be deﬁned as the diﬀerence in conductance minimum. The eﬀect was explained [32] as trapped
charges in the dielectric leading to a diﬀerent eﬀective gate voltage experienced by the graphene,
as compared to the applied gate voltage. This eﬀect is illustrated in ﬁgure 2.8. There are two
mechanisms which will shift the conductance with respect to gate voltage in the opposite direction.
One is the case of charge transfer, where positive charges are transferred from the graphene to the
dielectric where they are trapped. Another mechanism is an eﬀect of the capacitive gating, as it
increases the carrier density in graphene, and more charges can be pulled onto graphene from the
metallic contacts. The eﬀect changes the graphene conductance in the same way as gating the
transistor through a back gate. Charge transfer thus causes a positive shift in the gate voltage
of the minimum conductance, while capacitive gating can cause the negative shift of conductance
with respect to gate voltage.
Figure 2.8: Illustration explaining hysteresis eﬀects in a graphene device (graphene on Si2 in this
case.). Illustration taken from [32].
15
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 3
Characterization methods
3.1
Calculating the sheet resistance - The van der Pauw
method
A strategy for characterizing transport in graphene devices is to measure the device resistance
and from this approximate the sheet resistance. One way of designing devices for such electrical
characterizations is by applying the van der Pauw technique (abbreviated vdP henceforth) [33].
vdP is a 4 point measurement technique, which means that a small current is driven through two
terminals and voltage measurements are carried out between two other terminals. This avoids the
measurement of the contact resistance at the current injection points. From this data, one can
calculate the sheet resistivity of arbitrarily shaped disks. The van der Pauw method assumes the
sample must:
• have a uniform thickness (as compared to the area of the structure)
• be homogenous in composition
• the 4 contact terminals must be on the perimeter of the structure and be much smaller than
the area of the structure
The four terminals on the device are alternately being designated to either current (source S and
drain D) or potential (V+ and V−) in diﬀerent conﬁgurations. By either measuring the current at
a set bias, or measuring the voltage drop at constant current, the resistance can be determined by
Ohms law (R = V
I ).
The diﬀerent conﬁgurations for the van der Pauw characterization are set by changing how the
probes are connected to the multi meters and source meters. The 4 conﬁgurations are displayed in
ﬁgure 3.1. Resistances for diﬀerent conﬁgurations can be referred to by indices (like R12,34), where
the nomenclature is RSD,V+V−.
When the vdP conditions are met, the following relation between resistances in diﬀerent conﬁgu-
ration and the sheet resistance ρ holds [33]:
exp

−π R12,34
ρ

+ exp

−π R14,23
ρ

= 1
(3.1)
Using square shaped devices, symmetry can simplify equation because the conﬁgurations in this
case must be identical for homogeneous samples, and the sheet resistance ρ can then be evaluated
as:
ρ =
π
ln 2
R12,34 + R14,23
2
F
R12,34
R14,23

(3.2)
16
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 3. CHARACTERIZATION METHODS
Figure 3.1: Sketches of a square shaped device with terminals at each corner, fulﬁlling the van der
Pauw requirements and 4-terminal measurement conﬁgurations with the positions of the source
(S), drain (D), positive voltage probe (V+), and negative voltage probe (V−).
The function F is a form function determined from the ratio (R12,34/R14,24), and is approximately
1 in the case of a square.
3.1.1
Lock-in ampliﬁcation
AC lock-in ampliﬁcation systems are often used for measuring weak signals like the resistance of
graphene from I/V characterization. In order to explain how a lock-in ampliﬁcation system works,
a realistic picture of what terms constitutes the voltage signal, Vsignal(t), is ﬁrst presented. One
example of such a signal is measured a device is seen in equation 3.3[34].
Vsignal(t) = V0 + Voﬀset + Vwhite noise(t) + V1/f noise(t)
(3.3)
Here, V0 is the response of the system we want to measure, Voﬀset is any DC oﬀset that might be
introduced, Vwhite noise(t) is random noise usually described by a Gaussian distribution (usually
eliminated by time-averaging), and ﬁnally V1/f noise(t) which is environmental noise (temperature
drifts, creep in materials, etc.) or intrinsic noise that drifts in time. Detailed studies of many
diﬀerent types of electronic noise have shown that the frequency spectrum of these drifting noise
sources often is approximately proportional to 1/f, where f is the frequency [34]. In this case the
temperature is controlled in the cryostat which will reduce the drifting eﬀects from temperature
ﬂuctuations. The strategy is now to control the signal voltage V0 by amplifying Vsignal(t) and chop
the signal on and oﬀat a certain reference frequency and take the diﬀerence Von −Voﬀ. By using
this diﬀerence voltage, any voltage oﬀsets in the systems will disappear. The diﬀerence voltage
is subsequently time-averaged so the white noise also will be eliminated. If the chosen reference
frequency is high, the dominating noise drifts dominating at low frequencies (especially for longer
time-averaging) will be also reduced signiﬁcantly. This way, we will be left with the main noise
contribution being the one at the reference frequency [34]
A lock-in ampliﬁcation system can perform this “diﬀerence and averaging” procedure digitally. This
means that the input signal is ﬁrst ampliﬁed and preprocessed by ﬁltering away the noise above
and below a chosen frequency reference. Then, in addition to the input signal, a reference “clock”
signal containing a waveform is set to modulate the input signal. With the lock-in electronics, a
reference signal with a set frequency, phase and amplitude is chosen. From the preprocessed input
signal and the locked reference signal, the lock-in then manipulates the signals digitally to produce
the output. The manipulation involves converting the reference signal to a cosine wave with an
adjustable phase (cos(ωt + φ)) and multiplying it with the input signal. In the end the product is
averaged to form:
V0 = ⟨Vsignal(t) cos(ωt + φ)⟩
(3.4)
Determining the optimal reference frequency that produces the largest signal-to-noise ratio is a
trade oﬀbetween the risk of systematic errors at high frequencies (digitizing error) and more white
noise at lower frequencies. A long time average will reduce the white noise contributions, but the
longer we average, the more any low-frequency drifts inherent in 1/f noise will contaminate the
17
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 3. CHARACTERIZATION METHODS
signal. It is also noteworthy to avoid the 50 Hertz noise harmonics (eg. using 97 Hz instead of 100
Hz) from nearby equipment, as 50 Hz is the power line frequency.
3.2
Raman Spectroscopy
With vdW heterostructures at hand, the need arises for a fast, non-destructive, high resolution
method for measuring the quality of the structure in the areas of interest. To accommodate this
need, characterization by Raman Spectroscopy [35] was conducted. Raman Spectroscopy can give
a lot of information about the electronic structure of graphene with the eﬀects of perturbations,
such as strain, doping and disorder and can also be coming with other systems to information
about the eﬀects from electric and magnetic ﬁelds [36].
Raman spectroscopy on graphene relies on inelastic (Raman) scattering of monochromatic light
from a laser in the visible or near ultraviolet range. The laser light interacts with the phonons
in the sample, resulting in the energy of the laser photons being shifted up or down. The shift
in energy gives information about the vibrational modes in the system. These shifts are typically
reported in wavenumbers, which have units of inverse length, as this value is directly related to
energy. The data from a Raman spectroscopy is an intensity report for a range of wavenumbers
(in cm−1) where characteristic Raman peaks for the sample will appear. Raman scattering on
phonons is to a large extent determined by electrons: how they move, interfere and scatter. Thus,
any variation of electronic properties due to defects, edges, doping or magnetic ﬁelds aﬀects the
positions, widths and intensities of the Raman peaks, enabling one to probe electrons via phonons.
There are 3 main signature peaks in graphene; the D peak at ≈1350cm−1, G peak at ≈1580cm−1,
2D at ≈2700cm−1. The interesting quantities for this study is the doping and the strain in the
two device regions before and after fabrication. Information about the strain is obtained through
the Full Width at Half Maximum (FWHM) of the 2D peak, and information about doping is
gained through the intensity ratio between the 2D and G peak, I(2D)
I(G) . As opposed to the D peak,
which is originating from lattice defects, the G and 2D peak both are dependant of the carrier
density and thus sensitive to doping [37](ﬁgure 22). A high I(2D)
I(G) ratio implies a low doping level.
Another feature of the G peak is that it scales with the number of graphene layers. As a result, it
can support the observations of monolayer graphene by optical contrast, used in locating graphene
ﬂakes.
18
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 4
Device preparation
In this chapter I present the procedure of device preparation, pointing out the challenges that was
encountered as well as the solutions. The device preparation is presented in two phases; 1) assembly
of the van der Waals heterostructure and 2) device fabrication. The assembly (or stacking) of the
2D materials was performed in the Nanocarbon laboratory (coat and gloves cleanliness standard).
Here the nanomaterials (graphene and h-BN) was isolated using mechanical exfoliation. Since only
single layer graphene and 10-25 nm h-BN was of interest for this project, an important step was to
locate and assess the crystal thicknesses using optical microscopy (OM) and occacionally atomic
force microscopy (AFM). The assembly was performed with a hot pick-up and drop-down technique
using soft polymers developed in the group [15]. The device fabrication was done inside the DTU
Danchip Cleanroom (class 100) using various equipment to perform Electron Beam Lithography,
etching, and metal deposition. 9 heterostructures were sucessfully assembled during the project
and 6 assemblies failed.
The ﬁrst heterostructure that was moved into device fabrication was
successfully completed and characterized. Images and data from this heterostructure will be used
throughout most of the descriptions of the procedures for assembly and fabrication, so the reader
visually can follow the process.
4.1
Assembly of the van der Waals heterostructure
The most common method for depositing graphene and other 2D materials on SiO2, is mechanical
exfoliation. First published by Novoselov and Geim in 2004 [1], the procedure is to repeatedly
cleave bulk crystals using tape, until only few atomic layers remain. In the case of graphite, the
mechanical exfoliation can easily expose single layers of monocrystalline graphene. The procedure
for mechanical exfoliation of graphene and h-BN was done slightly diﬀerently in this project, as
will be presented in the following sections. It should be mentioned that all handling of the samples
are performed with tweezers to reduce the risk of contamination.
4.1.1
Exfoliation of graphene
Images of the steps involved in the procedure for exfoliation of graphene are collected in ﬁgure
4.1(a-i). First, both ends of a ≈15-20 cm long piece of scotch tape (adhesive side face up) is folded
so the piece can be handled without touching the glue. With a tweezer, a bulk natural graphite
crystal (NaturGraﬁt GmbH) is then placed in the middle of the tape (ﬁg. 4.1a). The ﬂake is pressed
down toward the tape, picked up and then moved to a diﬀerent position in the center. This way,
the graphite should now cover the center of the tape (ﬁg. 4.1b). If the bulk graphite ﬂake is large,
it will not be nessesary to use the whole ﬂake, and the remaining crystal can be used for later
exfoliations. The middle of the tape is now folded repeatedly (ﬁg. 4.1c), cleaving the graphite (ﬁg.
4.1d) and distributing the crystals until the tape is well covered (ﬁg. 4.1e). The graphite-covered
tape is then covered by smaller pieces of scotch tape where one end is folded for later handling
19
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 4. DEVICE PREPARATION
(ﬁg. 4.1f). From a 4" silicon wafer with a 90 nm top-layer of SiO2, smaller chips (≈4×4cm) are
diced out with a diamond scriber. 1-3 chips are then placed in the chamber of a plasma asher
(PlasmaEtch PE-50) and pre-treated with a oxygen plasma (300 mbar O2, 120W) for 5 minutes.
The pre-treatment is performed to increase the size and number of exfoliated single layers on the
chips. This is possible since the oxygen plasma removes ambient adsorbates and creates dangling
surface bonds and trapped charges that improves adhesion to the crystals. As soon as the plasma
treatment is completed, the chips are taken out of the chamber and quickly covered by the the
smaller pieces of tape (ﬁg 4.1g,h) that has been ripped from the larger graphite covered piece. The
timing of this step is crucial, as it was found that a higher yield usually was obtained when the
period between the completion of the plasma treatment and the covering of the surface was very
short. This is most likely because the free surface bonds created by the plasma quickly become
occupied by ambient molecules. The samples are subsequently rubbed for two minutes to ensure
good contact between the graphite and the SiO2 surface. Lifting with a low angle, the tape is then
removed from the chip (ﬁg 4.1i), which now should be covered with exfoliated graphite ﬂakes of
various thicknesses ranging from single layer (graphene) to bulk crystals.
Figure 4.1: Procedure for exfoliation of graphene.
4.1.2
Exfoliation of h-BN
For exfoliation of hBN, a diﬀerent type of tape along with an additional thermal treatment has
been found to produce a better yield than using scotch tape. Images of the steps involved in the
procedure for exfoliation of hBN are collected in ﬁgure 4.2(a-f). One shorter end of a ≈10×5 cm
piece of Nitto Denko SWT 20+ die sawing tape is ﬁxed to a plane surface with a piece of tape (ﬁg
4.2a). A bulk hBN crystal (HQgraphene) is carefully poured from the bottle (marked with a black
circle on ﬁg 4.2a). The bottle is kept in a desiccator to avoid moisture. Since the h-BN crystal
is signiﬁcantly smaller than the natural graphite ﬂakes, the crystal is not moved around with a
tweezer, but only distributed by folding (ﬁg 4.2b) and opening the tape in diﬀerent ways until a
high coverage is obtained (4.2c). Another piece of the tape (4.2d) is placed on top of the h-BN
20
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 4. DEVICE PREPARATION
covered counterpart (4.2). Same plasma treatment of oxidised silicon chips are then used and the
top tape is ripped from the counterpart and placed on top of the chips. The sample are then placed
on a hotplate (4.2f) set at 90◦C and thermally annealed until the tape is slightly melted and can
be released from the surface.
Figure 4.2: Procedure for exfoliation of hBN. The black circe in image “a” marks the bulk hBN
crystal.
4.1.3
Observing and selecting ﬂakes
Observing single atomic layers may to many sound as an incredible diﬃcult task, which usually
would call for advanced characterization equipment. Observing graphene on SiO2, however, turns
out to be possible using a optical microscope. This is explained by graphene having a high adsor-
bance of visible light and it was shown in 2008, that suspended graphene adsorbs 2.3% of all light
in the visible range [38]. This is another remarkable property, its thickness taken into account.
On SiO2, the contrast becomes ≈10%, which in a optical microscope is suﬃcient for distinguishing
single from multiple layers of graphene crystallites (see ﬁgure 4.3).
Crystal ﬂakes for devices are selected based on several criteria:
• Size - The crystal must be signiﬁcantly larger than the desired device size.
• Thickness - The thickness must be homogeneous in a region signiﬁcantly larger than the
device size.
• Crystal defects - Within that region there must be a defect-free area larger than the desired
device size.
• Cleanliness - That area must also be free from contamination, like glue residue.
21
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 4. DEVICE PREPARATION
Figure 4.4: hBN crystals of various thicknesses.
Once a ﬂake has met these criteria, a series of microscope images (ﬁg 4.5) are captured using the
following diﬀerent magniﬁcations (i.e. diﬀerent objectives): An image with x5 magniﬁcation (ﬁg
4.5a) is captured for getting an overview of the surroundings and more easily ﬁnd the selected
ﬂake again when preparing the pick-up. An image with x50 magniﬁcation (ﬁg 4.5b) is captured
for later image manipulation in PowerPoint, where the individual graphene and hBN crystals are
matched to one another in terms of size and shape.
The image manipulation is used to form
the assembling strategy of the heterostructures. An image with x100 magniﬁcation (ﬁg 4.5c) is
captured for detailed inspection of any thickness variation (revealed by color variation), and the
position of irregularities like polymer residues. An x100 magniﬁcation in dark ﬁeld mode (ﬁg 4.5d)
is collected for revealing the position of crystal defects (e.g. cracks) and polymer residues, if any.
In dark ﬁeld mode, only the scattered light is collected, which makes the contrast at cracks higher
compared to defect-free regions. Finally, drawing a map of the chip and the position of the selected
ﬂakes proved very time eﬃcient in terms of retrieving the ﬂakes.
4.1.4
The hot pick-up technique for assembling vdW heterostructures
As cleanliness of the interfaces between the individual layers is crucial for device performance [39],
a method for assembling the heterostructures without exposing the sides intended for interface to
polymers is desired. This has been achieved with The hot pick-up technique for batch assembly of
van der Waals heterostructures recently published by members of the Nanocarbon group at DTU
[15]. In this technique, an interplay between soft polymers and temperature control is used for
picking up the 2D nanomaterials and stacking them on one another. The overall concept is to pick
up graphene with hBN and drop the hBN/graphene stack down on another piece of hBN. This
method for assembling the heterostructures will described in the following.
Preparing glass handles with polymer pads
The basic tool for transferring the nanomaterials is a glass slide with a polypropylene carbonate
(PPC) coated block of polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) mounted in one end with epoxy. The PDMS
is prepared from SYLGARD R⃝184 by mixing (rapid stirring) a 10:1 ratio of base and curing agent.
The liquid mix is poured into a petri dishes (7 grams in each) and left in a desiccator until all
the air has left the polymer. This takes about 2 hours. The PDMS is subsequently cured in a
70◦C overnight. A solution of PPC (10 wt% in anisole) is prepared by mixing the solid PPC
and anisole in a glass ﬂask and stirring with a magnet until the polymer is dissolved after 3-4
22
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 4. DEVICE PREPARATION
Figure 4.5: Optical microscope images of an exfoliated single layer of graphene on SiO2 with
diﬀerent magniﬁcations as well as a dark ﬁeld mode image.
hours. A rectangular piece of PDMS (3×2 cm) is cut from the center region of the petri dish,
placed on a glass slide and treated with oxygen plasma for 5 minutes (same recipe as for the
exfoliation). The plasma treatment is performed to improve adhesion between PDMS an the PPC
that is subsequently spin coated on top (1 min, 1000 rpm). The PPC is solidiﬁed by baking the
slide at 110◦C for 10 minutes on a hotplate. An additional layer of PPC is spun on top using the
same procedure for spin coating and baking as for the ﬁrst layer. The PPC-coated PDMS block is
now cut into smaller pads (≈5×5 mm), which individually are mounted to one end of a glassslide
with epoxy glue. The epoxy is cured for 30 minutes at 80◦C. An image of a completed glassslide
is shown in ﬁgure 4.6.
Picking up hBN
The setup for performing the assembly is comprised of an optical microscope and a micromanip-
ulator (ﬁg 4.7). A combined vacuum and heating element is mounted on the stage for keeping
the sample in place and facilitating temperature control. The sample Si/SiO2 chip with exfoliated
hBN is mounted on the vacuum and heated to 50◦C1. The target hBN (ﬁg 4.8a) is located with
the use of the drawn map (and optionally the collected x5 microscope image, if needed). After
clasping a glass slide in the micromanipulator, the PDMS/PPC block is positioned between the
microscope objective and the sample. The reﬂection from a glass/PMDS/PPC stack is low, which
allows the sample to still be visible in the the microscope when focus is properly adjusted. Using
the micromanipulator, the polymer block can thus be centered above the hBN. The glass slide is
now slowly lowered (using the lever for vertical displacement of the micromanipulator) onto the
chip until full contact between polymer and chip is nearly made. The meniscus indicating the
contact between PPC and surface can be observed and followed through the microscope. The glass
slide is then quickly retracted from the sample and the hBN, favoring the adhesion to PPC, is
1hBN can be picked up regardless of temperature, but 50◦C seemed to work consistently with almost 100%
success rate.
23
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 4. DEVICE PREPARATION
Figure 4.7: Image of the setup at the microscope with Si chip mounted on the heating element and
a glass slide mounted in the micromanipulator. This setup for used for picking up and dropping
down the nanomaterials.
picked up from the SiO2 surface. The hBN can afterwards be examined on the PPC (ﬁg 4.8b. If
the ﬂake is folded during the pick-up (from contraction of the polymer), it sometimes helps to heat
the glass slide (melting the PPC enough to ﬂow) on a hot plate at 90◦C.
Dropping down hBN on graphene
After mounting a chip with exfoliated graphene on the stage, the hBN loaded glass slide is clasped
in the micromanipulator and positioned between the microscope objective and chip, like for the
pick-up. Now setting the heating element to 110◦C, the target graphene is located and aligned
to the hBN with respect to rotation (by turning the chip) and horizontal displacement (using
the micromanipulator). Afterwards, contact is made to the surface, quickly paced until just before
reaching the graphene. When the contact meniscus is in close proximity of the graphene, the contact
should mainly be advanced by elevating the stage temperature. When gradually increasing the
temperature, the decreasing viscosity enables the PPC to slowly ﬂow, which eﬀectively lowers the
hBN on the graphene. When this is done fast, interlayer contamination can be trapped, appearing
as blister formations. When the graphene is fully covered, the glass slide is slowly lifted again,
leaving the hBN/graphene stack covered with melted PPC on the chip. The PPC is dissolved in
acetone and the chip is ﬁnally rinsed in isopropyl alcohol (IPA) and placed on a hot plate @ 110◦C
to evaporate any remaining solvent. The result of the drop-down is seen in bright ﬁeld ﬁgure 4.8c
and dark ﬁeld 4.8d.
Picking up graphene/hBN heterostructure
The pick-up procedure is identical to that of picking up hBN. Because the drop-down is performed
at temperatures above 110◦C, the assembly is producing van der Waals forces between graphene
and hBN strong enough to tear up any graphene not covered by the hBN like illustrated in ﬁgure
4.9.
Dropping down a hBN/graphene stack on hBN
Completing the heterostructure by placing the hBN/graphene on another hBN crystal is performed
the same way as for the ﬁrst drop-down. The selected hBN crystal acting as bottom encapsulation
of the graphene is seen in ﬁgures 4.10a and b, in bright and dark ﬁeld, respectively. One crucial
diﬀerence for this drop-down was that the speed was initially very slow until reaching halfway over
the structure where the speed was increased. This was done to provoke the top hBN/graphene
24
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 4. DEVICE PREPARATION
Figure 4.8: Optical microscope image of a pick-up and drop-down procedure
Figure 4.9: Remaining graphene after the hBN covered graphene has been picked up. The adhesion
forces between hBN and graphene are strong enough to break the C-C bonds in the graphene sheet.
25
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 4. DEVICE PREPARATION
stack to snap down on top of the bottom hBN to trap impurites instead of slowly pushing them out.
The result of the drop down is seen ﬁgures 4.10c and d (bright and dark ﬁeld, respectively). The
left half was the part that was slowly assembled, which is easily seen in the dark ﬁeld image. The
substrate on which the bottom hBN was exfoliated was prior to the exfoliation patterned with a
grid of uniquely numbered alignment marks, as seen in ﬁgure 4.11. After completing the assembly
of the heterostructure, the thickness of the two hBN crystals were measured with an AFM. The
bottom hBN was measured to have a thickness of 12.9 nm and the top hBN crystal was measured
to have a thickness of 25.5 nm.
Figure 4.10: a) and b): Optical bright and dark ﬁeld images of the selected hBN crystal for bottom
encapsulation of the graphene. c) and d) Optical bright and dark ﬁeld images of an assembled
vdW heterostructure.
Figure 4.11: OM image of the assembled vdW heterostructure on the SiO2/Si chip with alignment
marks used for the device fabrication.
26
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 4. DEVICE PREPARATION
Figure 4.12:
1) An assembled hBN/graphene/hBN
heterostructure on a Si/SiO2 chip.
2) The result after EBL and dry etch-
ing.
The excess regions of the het-
erostructure is removed by the plasma.
3) The result after another round of
EBL, deposition of metal, and removal
of the excess metal by lift-oﬀ.
The
graphene is in edge contact with the
metal and a current can pass.
4.2
Device fabrication
Now having described how to assemble heterostructures of hBN encapsulated graphene, the next
step is to present how such structures can be processed into electrical devices using cleanroom
fabrication techniques. The overall purpose of the fabrication is to shape the heterostructure and
to add metal contacts to the graphene. The technique used for deﬁning the device shape and
the design of the metal contacts is electron beam lithography (EBL). Removing excess regions of
the heterostructure is performed with dry etching (using inductively couple plasma of either O2
or SF6). Metal deposition is done using a physical vapor deposition (PVD) system with electron
beam evaporation. The overall processing is summarized in 3 steps, depicted in ﬁgure 4.12. A
process ﬂow description for use in the cleanroom is found appended to the thesis.
4.2.1
Design
From the dark ﬁeld image in ﬁgure 4.10d, two regions (one blister-contaminated and one clear)
of the heterostructure were chosen as device regions. The device design ﬁles for use in EBL were
made in an IC-layout software (Tanners L-edit, in this case). The device designs could be aligned
to the heterostructures by importing a microscope image and manipulating it by edge detection in
an image software (ImageJ), as shown in ﬁgure 4.13. Diﬀerent layout layers of the design ﬁle are
marked with separate colors. Green outlines the heterostructure, grey outlines the etch pattern
and red outlines the metal leads pattern. Two square vdP devices of side length 10µm were ﬁtted
to the chosen regions.
4.2.2
Electron beam lithography
In this type of lithography, a focused electron beam is scanning an electron sensitive polymer
(electron beam resist) in a predeﬁned pattern. Coating the sample with an electron beam resist is
the ﬁrst step in performing the lithography. The system can be described as a scanning electron
microscope (SEM) with dedicate software for controlling the electron beam. Generated from an
electron source at the top of a vacuum column, a beam of electrons is focused using a series of
electromagnetic lenses (coils) and apertures. The ﬁnal electromagnetic lens (the objective lens) is
equipped with deﬂection coils that facilitate a scanning motion. Wherever electrons interact with
the polymer coating, polymer chains are broken. This locally increases the solubility of the polymer
and the electron exposed regions can be removed with a solvent. For historic reasons the solvent is
called the developer, originating from the chemical processing of photographs. The electron beam
exposure and chemical development creates well-deﬁned openings in the resist according to the
design input. The remaining resist now serves as a mask for further processing. In the processing
27
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 4. DEVICE PREPARATION
Figure 4.13: Print of the device designs made in the L-edit software. Green outlines the het-
erostructure, grey outlines the etch pattern and red outlines the metal leads pattern.
of the vdW heterostructures, two rounds of EBL are used. The ﬁrst round is dedicated to etch the
excess graphene and hBN and the second is dedicated to the deposition of metal electrodes. The
procedures for these processes will be describing in separate sections following this section.
Electron beam resist
Poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) dissolved in anisole is one of the solutions that can be used as
used as resist for EBL. The liquid resist is applied to the sample by spin coating and is subsequently
solidiﬁed by heating the sample on a hot plate at 180◦. In this study a solution of 4% PMMA in
anisole was used and spin coated at 1500 rpm for 60 seconds. This resulted in a resist thickness of
approximately 180 nm. The sample was heated on the hotplate for 30 minutes.
The Raith Elphy system
The tool is integrated with the a LEO (Zeiss) 1550 SEM, but is partially controlled through a
dedicated PC. The sample chip with the heterostructure is mounted in the dedicated holder 4.16
and inserted in the vacuum chamber of the SEM. Prior to the exposure, the electron beam current
must be measured in a Faraday (position indicated in ﬁgure 4.16). The beam current is needed
so the software can calculate the dwell time required at each point to reach the set exposure dose
D (D = 650 µC/cm2 in this case). By using an acceration voltage of 20 kV and an aperture of
10 µm, the current was measured to I = 35 pA. After measuring the current, the electron beam
is calibrated by focusing and shaping the beam (correcting for astigmatism) using stigmators and
aperture aligners. When a satisfactory resolution is obtained, the beam is moved towards the
heterostructures, navigating through the numbered alignment marks (like the ones seen in ﬁgure
4.11) until the area with the heterostructure is approached.
It is important not to image the
heterostructure, as this would expose the resist in a uncontrolled way. Instead, the bottom left
alignment mark is magniﬁed and an alignment procedure is performed. In this procedure, the
electron beam is set to scan the four alignment mark areas surrounding the heterostructure. At
each scan, the position of the cross mark center is suggested by the software, and the user can
28
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 4. DEVICE PREPARATION
Figure 4.14: Image of the spin coating system (hot plate and spin coater) used to coat the samples
with electron beam resist.
adjust the position, training the software to accurately predict the center position. The procedure
is repeated until the user ﬁnds that the software predicts the 4 center positions with satisfactory
accuracy. The design GDS ﬁle is now loaded into the software, choosing the ﬁle layer containing
the pattern to be written with the electron beam. In this case, the ﬁrst pattern was the etching
mask to be used in a subsequent dry etching process. From the previously measured beam current
I, the area of the pattern in the design ﬁle A, and the set dose D, the total exposure time T can
be estimated using equation 4.1.
T = DA
I
(4.1)
In this case the exposure lasted about 3 minutes. After the exposure has been performed, the
sample is unloaded from the system and now ready to be developed.
Figure 4.16
29
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 4. DEVICE PREPARATION
Development of the resist
The removal of the exposed resist is done with a mixture of isopropyl alcohol (IPA) and water
(1:3), which has been cooled to -17◦C in a freezer. The sample is subsequently rinsed in IPA,
which has been cooled in the same freezer. This “cold” development technique has been found
to increase the resolution of exposed patterns in PMMA compared to the resolution obtained at
room temperature [41]. The development was ﬁrst done for 60 seconds with 10 seconds rinse. This
resulted in a incomplete development as seen in ﬁgure 4.17a), where residual resist is found near
the edges of the electrode lanes. After developing for 10 seconds (again with a 10 seconds rinse),
the development was complete, as seen in ﬁgure 4.17b).
Figure 4.17: a) Slightly underdeveloped resist pattern. b) Fully developed resist pattern. c) After
dry etching. d) after removing the PMMA resist.
4.2.3
Dry etching of hBN and graphene
Now having openings in the resist all the way to the heterostructure, the exposed regions are etched
using plasma (a technique known as dry etching, as opposed to wet etching that uses wet chemistry).
The ethcing is performed in in an Inductively Coupled Plasma Reactive Ion Etching (ICP-RIE)
system, where a plasma is generated with an radio frequency (RF) powered magnetic ﬁeld. Separate
RF and ICP generators provide control over ion energy and ion density, enabling high ﬂexibility
with respect to etch rates and selectivity. In the case of hBN and graphene, plasmas formed from
SF6 (for hBN) and O2 (for graphene), can be used to selectively etch the crystals. SF6 etches with
a selectivity for hBN relative to PMMA with a >45:1 ratio, to graphene with a >90:1 ratio, and to
SiO2 with >90:1 [15]. This implies that etching a hBN layer of 20 nm would remove less than 0.5
nm of PMMA, which therefore serves as a very eﬃcient masking material. Utilizing the selectivities
of SF6 to graphene and hBN, the recipe for etching a hBN/graphene/hBN heterostructure ﬁrst
runs a SF6 plasma for removing the top hBN layer, an O2 plasma for removing the graphene, and
ﬁnally another SF6 for removing the bottom hBN layer. The recipe with processing parameters
30
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 4. DEVICE PREPARATION
is found in table 4.1. This recipe is chosen because it is frequently used by other members of the
research group for the same purpose of etching hBN and graphene. After the second hBN etch (step
5), the sample was taken out and examined in an optical microscope to ensure that the etching was
complete. Since there still was some residual parts of the crystals left in the patterned regions, the
sample was taken back to the ICP where step 6 and 7 was performed. The result is seen in ﬁgure
4.17c). The PMMA masking resist was ﬁnally removed with preheated (80◦C) acetone, revealing
the result of the ﬁrst electron beam lithography and etching process (ﬁgure 4.17d)).
Step
time
Gas
Flow (sccm)
Pressure (mTorr)
Power (W)
1
Conditioning
10 min
SF6
40
80
75
2
PMMA etch
5 sec
O2, Ar
5 (O2), 15 (Ar)
80
20
3
hBN etch
15 sec
SF6
40
80
75
4
graphene etch
15 sec
O2, Ar
5 (O2), 15 (Ar)
80
20
5
hBN etch
15 sec
SF6
40
80
75
6
graphene etch
15 sec
O2, Ar
5 (O2), 15 (Ar)
80
20
7
hBN etch
15 sec
SF6
40
80
75
Table 4.1: Table with etching recipe in the ICP system.
4.2.4
Second electron beam exposure
Following the dry etch, shaping of the vdW heterostructure into vdP devices, is another round
of EBL for fabricating the metal electrode pattern. The pattern consists of large (200×200µm)
square pads which is connected to heterostructure with 2-part electrodes, the ﬁrst part being 4µm
wide and the second part being 2µm wide contacting the corners of the heterostructures. As for
the ﬁrst round of EBL, the sample is spincoated with PMMA (same procedure and recipe - see
section 4.2.2). Since the area of the 8 square pads are quite large, it would take a long time to
complete the exposure with the same current as before. Therefore, an aperture of 30 µm was
used instead to write the square pads and the 4µm electrodes. The larger aperture increases the
current by approximately an order of magnitude and reduces the time it takes for the target dose
to be deposited in each spot. The 2µm wide electrodes were exposed with the 10µm aperture.
A larger aperture leads to a lower resolution of the exposed pattern, but this is not critical for
these larger structures. Changing the aperture involves another round of measuring the current
in the Faraday cup, focusing and shaping the beam, and aligning to the alignment marks before
running the exposure. After performing the two exposures (full pattern seen in ﬁgure 4.18a)) it
was observed that there was a misalignment between the two patterns (seen in ﬁgure 4.18b)). The
exposure then had to be redone, which meant removing the PMMA resist, spin coating a new one
and redo the EBL procedure. The result of the new exposure is seen in ﬁgure 4.18c) and d). For
mysterious reasons, only the corner of the top left pad got exposed the second time. There might
have been a error in reading the data ﬁle the second time.
4.2.5
Metal deposition of Cr/Au
The ﬁnal step of the device fabrication is the metal depositon for contacting the graphene in the
heterostructure. The metal deposition is performed with a Physimeca Electron Beam Physical
Vapor Deposition (EBPVD) system that uses an electron-beam to evaporate a metal source, called
the target. The electron bombardment causes atoms from the target to transform into a gaseous
phase. These atoms then precipitate into solid form, coating everything in the vacuum chamber
(within line of sight) with a thin layer of the target material. By timing the electron bombardment,
the deposited thickness can be controlled with nanometer precision. For contacting graphene a
3-layered metal stack of chromium (Cr), palladium (Pd) and gold (Au) has been reported to give
a low contact resistance of ([10] supplementary information table S1). Since Pd was unavailable in
the Physicmeca at the moment of fabrication, the second best solution of Cr/Au (5 nm Cr, 50 nm
Au) was used. The metal deposited on the PMMA resist was removed by dissolving the PMMA in
31
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 4. DEVICE PREPARATION
Figure 4.18: Optical images of developed PMMA resist with the electrode pattern: a) Low mag-
niﬁcation overview of the pattern after the ﬁrst exposure b) High magniﬁcation image of the
heterostructure area where misalignment between the two electrode parts is observed. c) Low
magniﬁcation overview of the pattern after the second exposure. d) High magniﬁcation image of
the heterostructure with aligned electrode pattern exposures.
32
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER 4. DEVICE PREPARATION
preheated (80◦) acetone (this is known as a lift-oﬀprocess). The remaining metal is seen in ﬁgure
4.19a). After several hours in the acetone, the excess metal was still not completely removed. The
metal thin ﬁlm was supposedly pinned to the surface in some points, and could be removed by
carefully lifting the ﬁlm with tape controlled by a tweezer. The result is seen in ﬁgure 4.19b).
High magniﬁcation bright and dark ﬁeld images of the completed vdW heterostructure devices are
showed in 4.19c) and d). The devices are named A and B, where B is the more impurity aﬀected
device. From the dark ﬁeld image, a diﬀerence in device homogeneity can be observed, as there
are more irregularities in device B.
Figure 4.19: a) Excess metal stuck to surface not lifted away by the acetone. b) Completed lift-oﬀ
of the excess metal. c) High magniﬁcation image of the completed vdW heterostructure devices.
d) Dark ﬁeld image of the heterostructure devices: Device A appears more homogeneous than
device B in the dark ﬁeld is therefore expected to have less impurities in the interface.
33
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 4. DEVICE PREPARATION
4.3
Characterizan by Raman Spectroscopy
Characterization by Raman spectroscopy was performed on the vdW heterostructures before and
after device fabrication. A 455 nm laser was used as source, mapping the heterostructure 60 times
with power = 9 mW, exposure time = 0.05 s and image pixel size = 0.6 um. Selected data is
shown in maps in ﬁgure 4.20, with optical images of the unprocessed (a)) and processed (b) vdW
heterostructures. Figures 4.20c) and d) shows the 2D/G peak intensity, where it is observed that
the intensity is higher (average peak intensity 6) in the device A area relative to device B area
(average peak intensity 4). The overall intensity has dropped after fabrication as it js observed that
no peak intensity is in the red color zone (intensity above 6) anymore. The 2D/G peak intensity
drops from 5 to background level in the lower right corner of device B. This led to the discovery
that this part of the heterostructure actually was stacked with a bilayer of graphene, and that the
device B region have an unfortunate overlap with this bilayer region.
a)
b)
c)
d)
A
B
Device A
Device B @ lower right 
corner
Device B @ center
2D
G D
e)
Figure 4.20: Raman spectroscopy of the vdW heterostructure before and after fabrication. a)-b)
Optical images of the hBN-graphene-hBN heterostructure before and after two device regions were
fabricated.
c)-d) 2D/G peak intensity for the unprocessed and processed heterostructure. e)
Single Raman spectras from 3 diﬀerent device regions.
34
==PAGE:38==
Chapter 5
Electrical characterization
As motivated in chapter 3 on characterization methods, a way to characterize the electronic trans-
port in graphene is by performing 4-terminal measurements of resistance in a van der Pauw device
design. The electrical characterization of the heterostructure devices fabricated in this project was
conducted with 2 diﬀerent setups of diﬀerent complexity and sensitivity. The ﬁrst set of mea-
surements were performed on a setup at room temperature with 5 needles as electrical probes
connected to Keithly 2000 multimeters and Keithly 2400 sourcemeters. The setup was used for
preliminary test of the device performance, because the sample can be characterized as without
preparation. The setup will be referred to as the “Probe station”. The second set of measurements
were conducted in a temperature controlled setup using a Oxford Instruments cryostat chamber
and a lock-in ampliﬁer. The “Cryostat setup”, as it will be referred to, allows higher sensitivity
and signal resolution as well as temperature control down to 2K (-271.15◦C). It requires a larger
eﬀort in terms of sample preparation in the sense that the sample needs to be mounted in a desig-
nated holder which involves manual bonding of Au wires with Ag epoxy. This chapter will present
details about the two setups, the series of 4-terminal measurements and the data processing of
these measurements. Finally an analysis of the results will be presented.
5.1
Setups
This section will describe the two diﬀerent setups for the 4-terminal characterization in terms of
equipment, circuit diagrams and measurement procedures. The naming of the devices and the
numbering of leads is shown in ﬁgure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Overview of the two vdW heterostructure devices, “A” being the blister-free and “B”
being the blister-contaminated device. The metal leads to the devices are numbered for easier
reference.
35
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 5. ELECTRICAL CHARACTERIZATION
Figure 5.2: Images of the probe station in the Danchip cleanroom. Image “a” shows two Keithleys,
the stage and microscope with two probes. Image “b” is a close up of two probe needles in their
holders.
5.1.1
Probe station setup
The probe station (ﬁg 5.2a) is a room temperature DC I/V characterization tool inside the Danchip
cleanroom dedicated to test electrical contacts, van der Pauw structures and other test structures.
The contact probes (ﬁg 5.2b) are tungsten carbide needles that can be connected to Keithley
multimeters and sourcemeters to form a circuit with the device by placing the needles on the metal
leads. A circuit schematic of the setup for device characterization is shown in ﬁgure 5.3.
The setup for performing 4-terminal measurements on the devices involves 5 probe needles; a pair
for source and drain leads, a pair for voltage probing leads, and one for the back gate. The Si
back gate was contacted by fracturing the SiO2 in the opposite corner of the chip and placing
the dedicated back gate needle on exposed Si. 4 Keithley multi/source meters were in use; one
for the source (S), one for voltage probing of the V+ and V−contacts (V1), one for controlling
the back gate voltage (Vg), and one for probing the potential between the source and drain leads
of the device (V2). The connection between the sourcemeter and the device source terminal goes
through a resistor with a resistance of 10MΩ. The magnitude of the current being led to the source
terminal of the device is therefore set by the source-drain voltage and the resistance of this resistor,
by Ohms law. The electrical connections in the setup are all established with coaxial cables to
help shield against electrical noise from the surroundings and for easier grounding of the signals
when changing conﬁgurations. The Keithleys are controlled with a Python script provided by Lene
Gammelgaard and Bjarke S. Jessen.
5.1.2
Cryostat setup
The cryostat setup consist of a cryostat chamber where the sample is kept in vacuum and can be
cooled to cryogenic temperatures as well as a lock-in ampliﬁer. The ampliﬁer serves both as an AC
source and as a voltmeter for the V + and V −terminals. A Labview program controls the lock-in
ampliﬁer and the Keithley for the gate voltage. A circuit schematic is displayed in ﬁgure 5.4.
The sample is mounted in a designated holder with electrode pads along the edge. Connections
between the device electrodes and the sample holder electrodes are made with Au wires (Ø25µm)
bonded to the electrodes with Ag conductive epoxy. Figure 5.5a shows the Au wires bonded to
device electrodes and ﬁgure 5.5b shows the Au wires bonded to the electrodes on the sample holder.
The sample holder is mounted at the end of a ≈1.5m long rod with electrical connections (ﬁg
5.5c) which is lowered into the cryostat (ﬁg 5.5d) from the top, placing the sample at the bottom
of the chamber.
.
36
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 5. ELECTRICAL CHARACTERIZATION
10 MΩ
V2
V1
Graphene
Vg
D
V+
V-
S
Cr/Au
Figure 5.3: Circuit schematic of the characterization setup on the Probe station.
An optical
microscope image of one of the devices is inserted to show how the device is connected. On the
right is a cross-sectional view of the vdW heterostructure on the Si/SiO2 substrate, showing how
the gate voltage is applied.
1 MΩ
V1
Graphene
Vg
D
V+
V-
S
S
lock in
Cr/Au
Cryostat
V2
Figure 5.4: Circuit schematic of the AC lock-in ampliﬁcation setup used to perform 4-terminal
measurements. The device is placed within a cryostat for temperature control.
37
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 5. ELECTRICAL CHARACTERIZATION
Figure 5.5: a) Au wires ﬁxed to the metal device leads with Ag epoxy. b) Au wires connected to
the sample holder electrodes with Ag epoxy. c) Sample holder with device chip mounted at the
end of the rod that is lowered into the cryostat chamber. d) Oxford instruments cryostat with
tubes from the liquid helium supply.
5.2
Measurements
This section will present results of preliminary measurements tests as well as the results of the
4-terminal characterization. The collected I/V (source-drain current and voltage probing) data
from these measurements are represented as resistances.
5.2.1
Preliminary tests
The characterization of the devices was initiated with testing of the edge contacts to the graphene.
This was done with series of 2-terminal measurements in the 4 source-drain conﬁgurations from
ﬁgure 3.1 in chapter 3. The measurements should ensure that all 4 contacts for both devices were
functional. The test was performed for both setups because the sample was mounted in the sample
holder with Au wire connections in between the setups and these needed testing as well. The
test found that all contacts in device A worked, but lead number 3 in device B could not be used
as a source or drain terminal (see ﬁgure 5.1 for numbering reference). This is the same corner
as the bilayer graphene, evidence of which was discovered by the Raman spectroscopy in section
4.3. The bilayer is thus suspected to be the cause of the current disruption. Although unable
to function as a source or drain terminal, the terminal could still be used as voltage terminal.
This left conﬁguration 1 and 4 as the measurements that were possible to conduct on this device.
The quality of the gate dielectrics (bottom hBN and SiO2) were tested by measuring the leakage
current for incrementally increasing gate voltages. A maximum of Vgmax = ±20V was tested the
probe station setup and Vgmax = ±40V in the cryostat setup. The gate leakage current was for
all gate voltages measured to be below 0.5 nA which indicates functional gate dielectrics.
5.2.2
4-terminal characterization
After the preliminary testing of the contacts and gate dielectrics, the 4-terminal characterization
was performed in the 4 conﬁgurations (ﬁgure 3.1) for both devices (A and B). Current and voltage
data from V1, V2 was collected while sweeping the gate voltage from 0V to +Vgmax, from +Vgmax
38
==PAGE:42==
CHAPTER 5. ELECTRICAL CHARACTERIZATION
to -Vgmax and from -Vgmax to 0V two times, all in steps of 0.25V. The motivation for sweeping
twice is the ability to detect hysteresis in the devices, as explained in section 2.3.2.
Probe station setup
The 4-terminal characterization in the probe station setup was performed for S-D currents of 5
nA, 50 nA, 500 nA and 5000 nA. The reason for using several diﬀerent currents is to investigate if
diﬀerent transport regimes in the devices occur at certain current magnitudes. 4 diﬀerent currents
in 4 conﬁgurations implies 16 measurements to be conducted on each of the devices. The resistance
data from these measurements with gate voltage sweeps Vg = ±20V , are collected in ﬁgure 5.6 for
device A and B.
Figure 5.6A1 & B1 shows measurements for the 4 constant currents of a single conﬁguration. The
measurements at a constant current of 5 nA are heavily aﬀected by noise indicating that the signal
is too weak to be resolved with the probe station setup. The measurements for currents > 5 nA
in are overlapping, with the I = 50 nA data being more ﬂuctuating than the two larger currents.
This behavior shows an increase in signal-to-noise ratio with increasing SD current. This behavior
is shown in ﬁgures 5.6A2-4 and B2-4 which compares the possible conﬁgurations at each constant
S-D current larger than 5 nA.
39
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 5. ELECTRICAL CHARACTERIZATION
A
B
1
2
3
4
Figure 5.6: Resistance (R(VG)) data from the 4-terminal measurements at the probe station setup
on device A (ﬁgures A1-A4) and device B (ﬁgures B1-B4). Figures A1 & B1 compares 4 diﬀerent
S-D currents; 5 nA, 50 nA, 500 nA and 5000 nA, for a single conﬁguration. Figures A2-4 & B2-4
compares the data from all possible conﬁgurations at constant S-D currents of 50 nA, 500 nA, and
5000 nA.
40
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER 5. ELECTRICAL CHARACTERIZATION
Cryostat setup
The characterization at the cryostat setup was initialized at room temperature, where several
4-terminal measurements were performed while setting diﬀerent AC voltages (for setting the SD-
current) and lock-in frequencies. Here, only the measurement series conducted at a SD current of
50 nA at a lock-in frequency of 13 Hz is shown for the sake of delimiting the amount of presented
data and analysis. Sweeping the gate voltage ±40V, the current and voltage was measured with
the 4 terminals set in conﬁgurations 1 and 4 for both devices. From these measurements, the
resistance could be calculated and plotted against the gate voltage. Using the temperature control
of the cryostat, the characterization at 50 nA was performed at diﬀerent temperatures ranging from
300K down to 2K in 9 steps; 300K, 250K, 200K, 150K, 100K, 50K, 25K, 5K, 2K. The resistance
measurements at these temperatures are plotted in ﬁgure 5.7. Figures 5.7A1-2 and B1-2 show the
measurements for conﬁgurations 1 and 4. Figures 5.7A3 and B3 compares the two conﬁgurations
at 2 diﬀerent temperatures.
A
B
1
2
4
4
Figure 5.7: Resistance (R(VG)) data from the 4-terminal measurements at the cryostat setup
comparing device A and B for a range temperature from 300K down to 2K.
41
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 5. ELECTRICAL CHARACTERIZATION
5.3
Data processing
After presenting the data from the characterizations at the two setups, the van der Pauw method
(introduced in section 3.1) is applied on the resistance measurements to calculate the sheet resis-
tance using equation 3.2. The results are shown in ﬁgure 5.8.
A
B
1
2
Figure 5.8: Sheet resistance as a function of gate voltage calculated from vdP for the room tem-
perature measurements (A1,B1) and the cryostat measurements (A2,B2).
The conductance is now calculated as the inverse of the sheet resistance (G = 1/ρs), and the carrier
mobility is ﬁnally calculated by diﬀerentiating the conductance and dividing by the capacitance
2.11. Using eq. 2.6, the applied gate voltage is converted to the corresponding carrier density n.
This common conversion makes the results easier to compare with other devices. The results of
this data processing are shown in ﬁgures 5.9 (conductance) and 5.10 (carrier mobility)
42
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 5. ELECTRICAL CHARACTERIZATION
A
B
1
2
Conductance (S)
Conductance (S)
Conductance (S)
Conductance (S)
Figure 5.9: Conductance as a function of carrier density calculated from the sheet resistance for
the room temperature measurements (A1,B1) and the cryostat measurements (A2,B2).
43
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 5. ELECTRICAL CHARACTERIZATION
A
B
1
2
Device A
Figure 5.10: Carrier mobilities calculated by diﬀerentiating the conductance as a function of carrier
density for the room temperature measurements (A1,B1) and the cryostat measurements (A2,B2).
44
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER 5. ELECTRICAL CHARACTERIZATION
a)
b)
4
4
Figure 5.11: Resistance (R(VG)) data from the 4-terminal measurements comparing device A and
B for two conﬁgurations at 300K in a) ambient (probe station) and b) controlled atmosphere
(cryostat chamber). Plotted with same gate scale to visually compare the shifts.
5.4
Data analysis
Having shown the measurements of the 4-terminal characterizations and processed the resistance
data by calculating the sheet resistance, conductance and carrier mobility, an analysis of some of
these results will be presented in the following. The analysis is divided in topical sections.
5.4.1
Residual doping of the graphene
The initial doping and diﬀerence in doping level of the graphene for both devices at room tem-
perature as well as the eﬀect of diﬀerent ambients can be analyzed by comparing resistance mea-
surements as shown in ﬁgure 5.11. Figure 5.11a) shows resistance curves for device A and B at a
SD current of 500 nA for two diﬀerent conﬁgurations in clean room ambient at the probe station.
Figure 5.11b) shows resistance curves for device A and B in the controlled atmosphere of the cryo-
stat vacuum chamber at 300K. As introduced in section 2.3 doping of graphene shifts the Fermi
energy away from the Dirac point, and the density of excess charge carriers causing this shift can
be calculated from the Dirac voltage VDirac, which is the applied gate voltage that compensates
for the initial doping. In the case of the clean room ambient measurements, the charge neutrality
point of device A is shifted VDirac_P_A = 2V (index P for probe station) from Vg = 0V, and device
B is shifted VDirac_P_B = −1.5V. In the case of the controlled ambient, the charge neutrality point
of device A is shifted VDirac_C_A = −6V and VDirac_C_B = −12.75V. As the relative positions
of the the charge neutrality points with respect to Vg = 0V indicate whether the graphene on
is n- or p-doped (VDirac < Vg = 0V or VDirac > Vg = 0V), device A and B are in the case of
5.11a) both n-doped. In the case of 5.11b), device A is slightly p-doped and device B slightly
n-doped. The corresponding carriers densities can be calculated from equation 2.6, when knowing
the capacitance of the gate dielectrics. The total capacitance of the 12.9 nm hBN and 300 nm
SiO2 gate dielectrics is calculated from equation 2.4), C′
tot = 1.11 × 10−4 C/Vm2. Dividing by
the elemental charge e, the proportionality factor γ is calculated (γ = 6.87 × 1014), and inserted
with Vg = 0V in equation 2.6. The calculated carrier densities as a result of initial doping are
shown in table 5.1. From these results, the diﬀerence in doping level in absolute values between
the two devices can be calculation for the two ambients. For clean room ambient, the diﬀerence
i is 2.4×1011 cm−2, while it is 4.63×1011 cm−2. Going from room ambient to vacuum seems to
induce a n-doping Fermi level shift for both devices. This could be explained by a gating eﬀect of
the water ﬁlm, that inevitably can be found on the hBN surface in room ambient. Water has been
reported to induce p-doping in graphene devices [42], consistent with the behavior seen here. As
45
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 5. ELECTRICAL CHARACTERIZATION
Device
Ambient
VDirac (V)
n (1011 cm−2)
A
Clean room
2
1.37
B
Clean room
-1.5
-1.03
A
Cryostat
-6
-4.12
B
Cryostat
12.75
-8.75
Table 5.1: Results of calculation of the carrier densities from residual doping of the observed in
both devices.
the eﬀect seems to be less prominent for device A, which might indicate a stronger coupling to the
water gating. Device B being more doped as device A (more than double the carrier density), is
an expected observation that very likely is owed to the contamination purposely trapped during
the faster drop-down assembly in the device B region.
5.4.2
Conductance ﬂuctuations
In the resistance data acquired at the cryostat setup (ﬁgure 5.7 A1-2 and B1-2), an onset of ﬂuc-
tuations at the lowest temperatures is observed for both devices in both presented conﬁgurations.
For device A, the ﬂuctuations are observed at 2, 5 and 25 kelvin, and for device B only at 2 and
5 kelvin. Figure 5.12 shows the resistance data plotted in the high gate range (20-40V), where
the mentioned ﬂuctuations stand out by having amplitudes up to 30 times larger than for higher
temperatures. The ﬂuctuations are following the same pattern during both directions of the gate
sweep. These characteristics can ﬁt the description of conductance ﬂuctuations given in section
2.1.2. If this description truly ﬁts the measurements, it means that the phase coherence length lφ is
larger than the sample size at these temperatures, changing the transport regime from being diﬀu-
sive to quasi-ballistic (introduced in section 2.1.1). The ﬂuctuations may thus reﬂect the quantum
interference between the carrier wave functions as a superposition of the trajectories traveled by
the phase coherent carriers.
a)
b)
Figure 5.12: Resistance measurements in the high gate voltage range
46
==PAGE:50==
CHAPTER 5. ELECTRICAL CHARACTERIZATION
5.4.3
Mobility temperature dependence
In ﬁgure 5.10, carrier mobilities up to 40,000 cm2/Vs is extracted for device A at 50K in the
range of n=±1 × 1012 cm−2 and up to 22,000 cm2/Vs for device B in the same carrier density
range.
These results are comparable with values reported by the authors of the “hot pick-up
technique for batch assembly of van der Waals heterostructure” paper [15]. From the the carrier
mobilities shown in ﬁgures 5.10A2 and B2, the mobility temperature dependence can be extracted
for carrier densities n = −0.75 cm−2 (holes) and n = 0.75 cm−2 (electrons) as shown in ﬁgure 5.13.
For temperatures between 150K-300K a linear increase by 9,000 cm2/Vs (from 21,000 to 30,000
cm2/Vs) is observed for decreasing temperatures in the data from device A. This happens while
mobility for device B keeps approximately constant (≈15, 000 ± 500 for holes). At temperatures
below 150K, the temperature dependence for device A ﬂattens out until the lower cryogenic (2-
50K) temperatures are reached. At these temperatures, the ﬂuctuations make the mobility values
diﬃcult to evaluate.
The temperature dependent mobility in device A could be an indication
of phonon limited scattering on the surface phonons in the hBN. The temperature independent
mobility in the graphene in device B, on the other hand could be a result of charged impurity
limited scattering like it was observed for the graphene device ﬁgure 2.7 from section 2.
Figure 5.13: Temperature-dependent carrier mobilities at n = 0.75 × 1012 cm−2 for the device A
and B.
5.4.4
Line shape of transconductance
The conductance data from device A shown in ﬁgure 5.9A2 exhibits asymmetry for temperatures
below 150K, with the electron regime changing from a positive slope to zero slope around n =
0.9 × 1012 cm−2 and returning to a positive slope. This could indicate that the device has few
larger areas with homogeneous doping and other larger area with homogeneous but opposite doping
sign. This slope proﬁle could in this case be a result of the energy barrier from the junctions between
these areas.
47
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 5. ELECTRICAL CHARACTERIZATION
5.4.5
Application of the van der Pauw method
As presented in section 3.1, the application of the vdP technique requires a homogeneous sam-
ple. This implies that the measurements for the diﬀerent terminal conﬁgurations should overlap
in order to fulﬁll the vdP prerequisites for calculating the sheet resistance. The measurements
shown from the probe station setup (ﬁgure 5.6) for the diﬀerent conﬁgurations are in this case in
agreement with each other, with the exception of conﬁguration 1. This deviating conﬁguration is
explained by the fact that metal lead number 1 turned out to be damaged when the probe was
placed for that round of measurements. The terminal was observed to be fully functional when
performing the preliminary tests, which indicates that the edge contact to the graphene is func-
tional. The defect metal contact was ﬁxed with Ag epoxy for subsequent characterization. In the
case of the measurements with the cryostat setup, the conﬁgurations overlap until the onset of the
ﬂuctuations at 2-25K for device A and 2-5K for device B. At these temperatures, the vdP method
is thus not applicable, which means that the conductance and carrier mobilities reported for these
temperatures should be disregarded. The lower limit of vdP application is then, in this case, 50K
for device A and 25K for device B. This is conﬁrmed by plotting proﬁles for the 2 conﬁgurations
as in ﬁgure 5.14a for device A and 5.14b for device B, compared to 300K.
4
4
4
4
Device B
a)
b)
Figure 5.14: Resistances at the lower temperature limit for vdP application compared to 300K.
48
==PAGE:52==
Chapter 6
Discussion
Having successfully assembled vdW heterostructures of hBN encapsulated graphene with the “hot
pick-up technique” just after a few weeks of training, indeed conﬁrms it to be a simple and eﬀective
stacking strategy. This is owed to the process ﬂow of simple procedures, which quickly can be
mastered even without prior experience in handling 2D materials, like in the case for the author
of this thesis. The position of contamination trapped in the interface between the assembled 2D
materials can be controlled by adjusting the speed by which the contact is made between the
crystals. A slow assemble, where it is estimated that the meniscus would only move a few microns
each second, any contamination is either moved in front of the contacted crystals or dispersed in
the interface. This can lead either to potentially clean interfaces or interfaces with homogeneously
dispersed contamination. In the case of device A (ﬁg. 4.10), the 2D/G peak intensity map from
the Raman spectroscopy indicates homogeneously dispersed contamination as the variation in peak
intensity is less than 0.5. A fast drop down (the ﬂakes snapping together) was found to trap more
contamination, as shown by the lower 2G/G peak intensity map.
The same raman map also
indicate that the variation of the doping introduced by the contamination in device B is larger
than for device with a intensity variation of roughly 3.5, suggesting more local doping from the
blister areas. As presented in the Raman analysis, bi-layered graphene in the corner of device B
was revealed by the 2D/G peak intensity map. Terminal 3 associated with that corner, turned out
not to work as a source-drain terminal which most likely is a direct consequence of the bi-layer.
A lesson from this observation, is that one should always consult the Raman 2D/G map when
choosing the positions of the devices on the heterostructure.
From the 4-terminal electrical characterization, the processed data of conductance and mobility
from the probe station is presented in ﬁgure 5.9A1,B1 and 5.9A1,B1, but not commented upon in
the analysis. The presentation of the results serve in this case as a comparison of accuracy between
the setups, the cryostat setup is more reliable in terms of signal ﬂuctuations, as is inherent from the
lock-in ampliﬁcation technique. From ﬁgure 5.9A2, it should be possible to show (by polynomial
ﬁtting) that the conductance does not depend linearly on carrier density in device A, as otherwise
predicted for impurity limited scattering by equation 2.9.
In the low temperature (2-50K) range, the four-terminal measurements were dominated by larger
(compared to the higher temperatures) re-tracable ﬂuctuations. These ﬂuctuations showed neg-
ative resistances in the high carrier density regimes. This could be explained by quasi-ballistic
transport, in which the carriers move between the terminals without changing their phase (scat-
tering inelastically). A phase coherence length larger than the device dimensions would lead to
such conductance ﬂuctuations. A future analysis of the magnitude of these ﬂuctuations should,
according to theoretical predictions grow to the same universal amplitude 2e2
h , as presented in
section 2.1.2.
49
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
In this thesis study, van der Waals heterostructure electronic devices of hexagonal Boron Nitride
encapsulated graphene, was successfully fabricated and characterized. This was done for the pur-
pose of comparing the electronic transport properties of contaminated graphene and clean graphene
crystals, both encapsulated by the same hBN crystals. The hope was that this comparison would
provide information on how the contamination aﬀects the electronic properties of graphene com-
pared to when the batch assembly technique is applied correctly. This was achieved from learning
that the speed, at which the crystals are assembled, is crucial for the interface cleanliness. A fast
drop down will trap contaminants in blister formations, whereas a slower assembly will squeeze
the impurities away from the interface. By applying the van der Pauw strategy for 4-terminal
electrical characterization of sheet resistance, two square shaped devices with corner terminals
were designed and fabricated using electron beam lithography. These device where subsequently
characterized by Raman spectroscopy, from which a map of characteristic peak intensities indi-
cated a diﬀerence in extrinsic doping of the graphene between the two device regions. Two setups
were used for performing 4-terminal characterization. The ﬁrst setup, with probe needles for con-
tacting the device terminals, and a selection of multi and source meters, was used for preliminary
testing of the electronic transport. The second setup, a system with lock-in ampliﬁcation, allowed
accurate measurements of the device resistance while device could be cooled in a cryostat. Mea-
surements were performed in a temperature range from 300K to 2K in 9 steps. In the low end of the
temperature range (2-50K), the measurements showed negative resistances and large re-traceable
ﬂuctuations at high carrier densities, indicating the onset of quasi-ballistic transport. The onset of
such a transport regime, sets a lower limit for applying the van der Pauw method. Measurements
at 50K exhibited carriers mobilities at n=±1 × 1012 cm−2 up to 40,000 cm2/Vs for the cleaner
device and up to 22,000 cm2/Vs for the more contaminated device. Analysis of the carrier mobility
temperature dependence showed a temperature dependence for the clean device down to 150K,
while the carrier mobilities of the more contaminated device exhibited temperature independence.
This behavior may be connected to impurity limited scattering in the more contaminated (doped)
graphene, while the cleaner graphene instead is limited by scattering on phonons.
50
==PAGE:54==
Bibliography
[1] K S Novoselov, A K Geim, S V Morozov, D Jiang, Y Zhang, S V Dubonos, I V Grigorieva, and
A A Firsov. Electric Field Eﬀect in Atomically Thin Carbon Films. Science, 306(5696):666–
669, oct 2004.
[2] Daniel R. Cooper, Benjamin D’Anjou, Nageswara Ghattamaneni, Benjamin Harack, Michael
Hilke, Alexandre Horth, Norberto Majlis, Mathieu Massicotte, Leron Vandsburger, Eric
Whiteway, and Victor Yu.
Experimental Review of Graphene.
ISRN Condensed Matter
Physics, 2012:1–56, 2012.
[3] Frank Schwierz. Graphene transistors. Nature Nanotech, 5(7):487–96, 2010.
[4] Andrea F. Young and Philip Kim. Quantum interference and Klein tunnelling in graphene
heterojunctions. Nature Physics, 5(3):222–226, 2009.
[5] Ms Jang and Hyungjun Kim.
Graphene ﬁeld eﬀect transistor without an energy gap.
Proceedings of the . . . , pages 2–5, 2013.
[6] SD D Sarma, Shaﬃque Adam, EH H Hwang, and Enrico Rossi. Electronic transport in two
dimensional graphene. arXiv preprint arXiv:1003.4731, pages 1–85, 2010.
[7] J R Williams, Tony Low, M S Lundstrom, and C M Marcus.
Gate-controlled guiding of
electrons in graphene. Nature nanotechnology, 6(4):222–225, 2011.
[8] a. S Mayorov, R. V Gorbachev, S. V Morozov, L. Britnell, R. Jalil, L. a Ponomarenko, K. S
Novoselov, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, and a. K Geim.
Direct evidence for micron-scale
ballistic transport in encapsulated graphene at room temperature. 1103.4510, pages 2396–
2399, 2011.
[9] a K Geim and I V Grigorieva. Van der Waals heterostructures. Nature, 499(7459):419–25, jul
2013.
[10] L Wang, I Meric, P Y Huang, Q Gao, Y Gao, H Tran, T Taniguchi, K Watanabe, L M
Campos, D a Muller, J Guo, P Kim, J Hone, K L Shepard, and C R Dean. One-dimensional
electrical contact to a two-dimensional material. Science (New York, N.Y.), 342(6158):614–7,
2013.
[11] C R Dean, a F Young, I Meric, C Lee, L Wang, S Sorgenfrei, K Watanabe, T Taniguchi, P Kim,
K L Shepard, and J Hone. Boron nitride substrates for high-quality graphene electronics.
Nature nanotechnology, 5(10):722–726, oct 2010.
[12] Jian-hao Chen, Chaun Jang, Shudong Xiao, Masa Ishigami, and Michael S Fuhrer. Intrin-
sic and extrinsic performance limits of graphene devices on SiO2. Nature nanotechnology,
3(4):206–9, 2008.
[13] A V Kretinin, Y Cao, J S Tu, G L Yu, R Jalil, K S Novoselov, S J Haigh, A Gholinia,
A Mishchenko, M Lozada, T Georgiou, C R Woods, F Withers, P Blake, G Eda, A Wirsig,
C Hucho, K Watanabe, T Taniguchi, A K Geim, and R V Gorbachev. Electronic Properties
of Graphene Encapsulated with Diﬀerent Two-Dimensional Atomic Crystals. Nano Letters,
14(6):3270–3276, 2014.
51
==PAGE:55==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[14] Suman Sarkar, Kazi Rafsanjani Amin, Ranjan Modak, Amandeep Singh, Subroto Mukerjee,
and Aveek Bid. Role of diﬀerent scattering mechanisms on the temperature dependence of
transport in graphene. Nature Publishing Group, (October):1–10, 2015.
[15] Filippo Pizzocchero, Lene Gammelgaard, Bjarke Sørensen Jessen, José M. Caridad, Lei Wang,
James Hone, Peter Bøggild, and Timothy J. Booth. The hot pick-up technique for batch
assembly of van der Waals heterostructures. page 32, may 2016.
[16] Manchester UoM P&AOER.
http://oer.physics.manchester.ac.uk/AQM2/Notes/Notes-
6.4.html.
[17] J. C. Phillips. Band Structure of Silicon, GerrsIanium, and Related Semiconductors. Physical
Review, 125(6), 1962.
[18] Webpage. http://cdn.shopify.com/s/ﬁles/1/0191/2296/ﬁles/graphene_bandgap.jpg?73 5.
[19] Tsuneya Ando. Screening eﬀect and impurity scattering in monolayer graphene. Journal of
the Physical Society of Japan, 75(7):1–7, 2006.
[20] N M R Peres, F Guinea, and A H Castro Neto.
Electronic properties of disordered two-
dimensional carbon. Phys. Rev. B, 73(12):125411, mar 2006.
[21] Supriyo Datta.
Electronic Transport in Mesoscopic Systems.
Cambridge University Press,
1995.
[22] David K. Ferry, Stephen M. Goodnick, and Bird Jonathan.
Transport in Nanostructures.
Cambridge University Press, 2009.
[23] Atindra Nath Pal, Vidya Kochat, and Arindam Ghosh. Direct Observation of Valley Hy-
bridization and Universal Symmetry of Graphene with Mesoscopic Conductance Fluctuations.
196601(November):1–5, 2012.
[24] J M Xue, J Sanchez-Yamagishi, D Bulmash, P Jacquod, a Deshpande, K Watanabe,
T Taniguchi, P Jarillo-Herrero, and B J Leroy. Scanning tunnelling microscopy and spec-
troscopy of ultra-ﬂat graphene on hexagonal boron nitride. Nature Materials, 10(4):282–285,
2011.
[25] A H Castro Neto. The electronic properties of graphene. 81(March), 2009.
[26] P Drude. Zur Elektronentheorie der Metalle. Annalen der Physik, 306(3):566–613, 1900.
[27] E. H. Hwang, S. Adam, and S. Das Sarma. Carrier transport in two-dimensional graphene
layers. Physical Review Letters, 98(18):2–5, 2007.
[28] Xu Du, Ivan Skachko, Eva Y Andrei, and Anthony Barker. Approaching ballistic transport
in suspended graphene. Nature nanotechnology, 3(8):491–5, 2008.
[29] F. C. Schwerer, J.W. Conroy, and Sigurds Arajs.
Matthiessen’s Rule And The Electrical
Resistivity Of Iron-Silicon Solid Solutions. J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 30(1513):991–1001, 1969.
[30] M. I. Katsnelson. Zitterbewegung, chirality, and minimal conductivity in graphene. European
Physical Journal B, 51(2):157–160, 2006.
[31] Xiaoyan Fan, Ryo Nouchi, and Katsumi Tanigaki. Eﬀect of charge puddles and ripples on
the chemical reactivity of single layer graphene supported by SiO2/Si substrate. Journal of
Physical Chemistry C, 115(26):12960–12964, 2011.
[32] Haomin Wang, Yihong Wu, Chunxiao Cong, Jingzhi Shang, and Ting Yu.
Hysteresis of
Electronic Transport in Graphene Transistors. ACS Nano, 4(12):7221–7228, 2010.
[33] Leo J. van der Pauw. A method of measuring the resistivity and Hall coeﬃcient on lamellae
of arbitrary shape. Philips Technical Review, 20:220–224, 1958.
52
==PAGE:56==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[34] K G Libbrecht, E D Black, and C M Hirata. A basic lock-in ampliﬁer experiment for the
undergraduate laboratory. (August 2002):1208–1213, 2003.
[35] C. V. RAMAN and K. S. KRISHNAN.
A New Type of Secondary Radiation.
Nature,
121(3048):501–502, 1928.
[36] Andrea C Ferrari and Denis M Basko. Raman spectroscopy as a versatile tool for studying
the properties of graphene. Nature nanotechnology, 8(4):235–46, 2013.
[37] Ryan Beams, Luiz Gustavo Canç Ado, and Lukas Novotny. Raman characterization of defects
and dopants in graphene. Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter J. Phys.: Condens. Matter,
27:83002–26, 2015.
[38] R R Nair, A N Grigorenko, P. Blake, K S Novoselov, T J Booth, N M R Peres, T. Stauber,
and A K Geim. Fine structure constant deﬁnes visual transparency of graphene. Science,
320(5881):1308, 2008.
[39] T Uwanno, Y Hattori, T Taniguchi, K Watanabe, and K Nagashio. Fully dry PMMA transfer
of graphene on h-BN using a heating/cooling system. 2D Materials, 2(4):041002, 2015.
[40] Danchip. http://labadviser.danchip.dtu.dk/images/5/52/RaithPC.jpg.
[41] Bryan Cord, Jodie Lutkenhaus, and Karl K. Berggren. Optimal temperature for development
of poly(methylmethacrylate). Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology B: Microelectronics
and Nanometer Structures, 25(6):2013, 2007.
[42] Jihye Shim, Chun Hung Lui, Taeg Yeoung Ko, Young-Jun Yu, Philip Kim, Tony F Heinz, and
Sunmin Ryu. Water-Gated Charge Doping of Graphene Induced by Mica Substrates. Nano
Letters, 12(2):648–654, 2012.
53
==PAGE:57==
Process flow title 
Revision 
vdW heterostructure Devices 
1.0 
 
Contact email 
Contact person 
Contact phone 
s113075@student.dtu.dk   
Martin Bjergfelt 
23 81 08 93 
Labmanager group 
Batch name 
Date of creation 
Date of revision 
Nanointegration 
Stack M15 
20150225 
 
 
Not confidential 
File name: Process_Flow_stacks_EBL_PMMA.docx 
Page 1 of 1 
Objective 
Batch name: Error! Reference source not found. 
This process is a guideline on how to spin, develop and rinse PMMA to create a pattern using Electron Beam Lithography 
on a SiO2/Si substrate with vdW heterostructures. Subsequently, dry etching is performed to shape the device(s) 
followed by another EBL process to pattern electrodes, which are then deposited and finally isolated by a lift off 
procedure. 
 
 
Step Heading 
Equipment 
 
Comments 
1 Spin coat of PMMA 
 
1.1 Coat wafers 
Spin Coater: 
Manual All 
Resist 
Resist: PMMA (4% in Anisole) 996k 
Spin: 60 sec @ 1500 rpm (for appr. 180 nm) 
Bake: 30 min @ 180 oC 
Use syringe with filter or 
disposable pipette (cleaned 
by N2 gun). 
2 E-beam exposure 
 
2.1 E-beam 
exposure 
SEM LEO 
Raith Elphy 
system 
Dose 650 µC/cm2, aperture 10 um 
 
 
3 Development & Rinse 
 
3.1 Develop-
ment 
Developer 
(E-beam 
fumehood) 
Develop with H2O:IPA (1:3), -17ºC (in freezer), 60 
sec 
Rinse in IPA, -17ºC (in freezer), 20 sec 
blow dry with N2 immediately, to avoid heating up 
 
 
4 Pattern transfer – Device shaping 
 
4.1 Dry Etch 
 
5 EBL 2 
 
 
  
Steps 1-3 are repeated here, with a 30 um aperture 
for a higher current. 
 
6 Metallization - Electrodes 
 
6.1 Metal 
deposition 
Physimeca  
Cr/Pd/Au deposition, thickness = 5/15/45 nm  
  
 
7 Lift-off and Strip  
 
7.1 Lift-off 
Fumehood  
Remover: Acetone, pre-heated to 80C 
Rinse in IPA  
 
 
 
 
III/V ICP
Etching of Boron Nitride 
Recipe: Lenga folder: Stack  
