==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Ductile Plate Tearing under Multi-Axial Loading
Rasmus Grau Andersen 
June 2016
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Rasmus Grau Andersen, s094558
Ductile Plate Tearing under
Multi-Axial Loading
Master Thesis
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Ductile Plate Tearing under Multi-Axial Loading,
This report is prepared by
Rasmus Grau Andersen, s094558
Supervisors
Internal:
Kim Lau Nielsen
Christian Lotz Felter
External:
Pawel Woelke
Release date:
June 4, 2016
Category:
1 (public)
Edition:
Edition 1
Comments:
This report is part of the requirements to achieve
the Master’s degree at the Technical University of
Denmark. This report represents 30 ECTS points.
Rights:
©DTU Department of Mechanical Engineering, 2016
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Niels Koppels Allé building 404
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
http://www.mek.dtu.dk
Tel:
(+45) 45 25 19 60
Fax:
(+45) 45 25 19 61
E-mail: info@mek.dtu.dk
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
This thesis will investigate the energy contribution to form a slant fracture in a steady
state consideration of crack propagation in a large scale shell structure. The aim is to
clarify the constitutive relation in a cohesive zone when considering mode mixity, that
is, Mode I-Mode II and Mode I-Mode III. Further, a ﬁnite element code is developed in
order to reduce the computational costs when a 3D ﬁnite element model is taken into
account.
The investigations on the cohesive relation in mode mixity are carried out in the
commercial ﬁnite element software Abaqus, where a 2D plane strain model is utilized
to evaluate the Mode I and the Mode I-Mode III load cases. The Mode I is introduced
to verify the Abaqus model against previous results from the literature. A 3D model is
utilized to evaluate the Mode I-Mode II load case. As a attempt to reduce the compu-
tational costs when going into 3D, a ﬁnite element code is developed, considering a 2D
plane element in a 3D space. The models are implemented with large deformation theory
and the Gurson porous ductile material model in order to observe the slant fracture.
The cohesive relation showed consistency to previous investigations and assumptions
for the Mode I-Mode II load case. However, the Mode I-Mode III load case shows a
diﬀerent tendency than the literature assumes.
A rapid decrease is observed in the
cohesive energy for a small increase in the shearing contribution.
Based on a linear elastic ﬁnite element program, the developed ﬁnite element code has
been extensively modiﬁed to consider large deformations and a porous material model.
The code is capable of examining a similar 2D model from Abaqus, and obtains a similar
material response.
Keywords
Cohesive fracture energy · Mode mixity · Finite element · 21⁄2D
i
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Resumé
Denne afhandling vil undersøge energibidraget til et duktilt brud i en ligevægtsbetragt-
ning af revneudbredelse i en stor-skala skalkonstruktioner.
Formålet er at klarlægge
konstitutive relationer i en såkaldt “cohesive” zone, når belastningen er ﬂerakset, dvs.
Mode I-Mode II og Mode I-Mode III. Endvidere er en ﬁnite element kode udviklet for
at reducere de beregningsmæssige omkostninger, når en 3D ﬁnite element model tages i
betragtning.
Undersøgelserne af de “cohesive” zoner under ﬂerakset belastning udføres i det kom-
mercielle ﬁnite element software Abaqus, hvor en 2D model med plan tøjning anvendes
til at vurdere Mode I og Mode I-Mode III. Mode I introduceres til at veriﬁcere Abaqus
modellen mod tidligere resultater fra litteraturen. En 3D-model anvendes til at vur-
dere Mode I-Mode II. Som forsøg påat reducere de beregningsmæssige omkostninger i
3D er en ﬁnite element kode udviklet, som betragter et 2D plant element i et 3D-rum.
Modellerne er implementeret med ﬁnite strain teori og Gurson porøse duktile materiale
model for at opnå et duktilt brud.
Den “cohesive” zone viste konsistens til tidligere undersøgelser og antagelser for Mode
I-Mode II. Men Mode I-Mode III viser en anden tendens end den, litteraturen antager.
En drastisk fald er observeret i den “cohesive” energi.
Baseret på et lineær elastisk ﬁnite element program, er den udviklede kode blevet
grundigt modiﬁceret til at kunne håndtere store deformationer og et porøst materiale.
Koden er i stand til at undersøge en 2D model tilsvarende den fra Abaqus, og opnår et
lignende materiale respons.
Keywords
Cohesive brudenergi · Mode mixity · Finite element · 21⁄2D
iii
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
Preface
This report represents the work of a master thesis conducted at Department of Mechan-
ical Engineering at Technical University of Denmark. The work load corresponds to
30 ECTS points and is equivalent to fulﬁl the requirements for acquiring a Master of
Science. The work has been carried out in the period from January 4th, 2016 to June
4th, 2016.
First and foremost I would like to thank my main supervisor Kim Lau Nielsen for
the competent supervision throughout the period of the project. The guidance have
been useful, fast responding and has lead to exciting investigations within the ﬁeld of
cohesive energy. It has been a pleasure to collaborate with Kim on this ﬁnal project on
my masters degree.
Secondly, a thanks to my co-supervisor Christian Lotz Felter for his assistance in the
development of the Fortran code and competent help in troubleshooting of the code in
the ﬁnal weeks of the project. Further, he was the supplier of a mesh generating tool for
the Mode I-Mode II model due that Abaqus could not make the job.
Lastly, thanks to Pawel Woelke for setting up a seminar at Thornton Tomasetti’s
oﬃce at Wall Street, New York, where I presented my preliminary results on cohesive
energy for interested employees at Thornton Tomasetti, and employees and students
from Columbia University. Also thanks for the hospitality during my stay in New York
and the insight in an engineer’s world outside Denmark.
The work is supported by the VILLUM FOUNDATION Young Investigator Pro-
gramme in the project “A New Phenomenon Yet to be Resolved in ductile PLATE
tearing”, grant VKR023451.
Kgs. Lyngby, June 2016
Rasmus Grau Andersen
v
==PAGE:12==
==PAGE:13==
Contents
Abstract
i
Resumé
iii
Preface
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Problem description
5
3
Theory
7
3.1
Fracture mechanics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Tensor notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
J2 incremental ﬂow theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.4
Gurson model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.4.1
Recent investigations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.5
Finite element . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.5.1
Incremental solution methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.5.2
Finite strain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.6
Cohesive law
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4
Cohesive fracture energy
21
4.1
Deﬁnition of cohesive energy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
Basis model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.3
Mode I . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.4
Mode I-Mode III . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.5
Mode I-Mode II . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.6
Numerical issues
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5
FE modeling in 21⁄2D
47
5.1
Finite strain and GTN implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.2
Veriﬁcation of the code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.2.1
Single element
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.2.2
Patch test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.3
Mode I . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.3.1
Model description
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.3.2
Element death
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6
Conclusion and future work
61
vii
==PAGE:14==
viii
CONTENTS
6.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
Appendices
65
A Cohesive fracture energy
67
A.1 Mode I . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
A.2 Mode I-Mode III . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
A.2.1
Convergence study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
A.2.2
Investigations on truncation point
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
A.2.3
Inﬂuence of shear . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
A.3 Mode I-Mode II . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
A.3.1
Investigations on truncation point
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
A.3.2
Inﬂuence of shear . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
B Flowchart
75
C Fortran source code
79
C.1
Module fea
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
C.2
Module fea
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
D Output from 21⁄2D code
103
E Gantt diagram
105
References
107
==PAGE:15==
1 Introduction
Large scale shell structures are seen in many applications. The automotive, marine,
and aerospace industries are examples of the industries, where large plate structures are
widely utilized. When dimensioning these structures, it is common to employ the ﬁnite
element theory due to the complexity in the structures to evaluate the displacement ﬁeld
and subsequently stresses. The large shell structures are often represented by ordinary
shell elements, as the in-plane thickness of the plate is much smaller than the other
dimensions of the structure. These shell elements are capable of describing the accurate
material behaviour following some kind of hardening law, but they cannot describe local
thinning, and this type of elements thereby inherits limited accuracy then it comes to
ductile failure prediction.
The engineering approach when trying to accommodate the inclusion of the duc-
tile fracture phenomena in ﬁnite element modeling is to embed cohesive elements into
the mesh deﬁning the shell structure. Cohesive elements are a phenomenological based
material model, which include parameters that need to be calibrated against e.g. exper-
imental data in order to provide accurate results. The cohesive elements are spring-like
elements that may be stretched, until a predeﬁned displacement has been reached or
until a certain energy is stored in the element.
At this point the element looses its
load carrying capacity and is excluded from the analysis. Subsequently, the crack has
advanced in the structure. It is clear, when cohesive elements are embedded, the engi-
neer needs to know the approximate location for where the crack will initiate and the
direction for the crack.
Also, it is evident, that not all details for a crack initiation and propagation through
a plate are captured with this phenomenological based material model. The crack is
forced to advance in the direction of the cohesive elements, and is not capable of taking
a detour, if the stress ﬁeld changes. A micro mechanics based material model such as
the Gurson porous material model is more suited to capture the necking and localization
phenomena in a slant fracture. However, since the Gurson model is mesh dependent,
the resolution for the mesh required for modeling a ductile fracture will be in the order
of around 100 µm for this micro mechanics based model. However, this mesh size is not
feasible in large scale structures which is typically modelled with shell elements having
an element size in the order of meters. Thus, the cohesive zone modeling is an inevitable
method for considering fracture mechanics in large scale shell structure analyses.
The experiments for calibrating the cohesive elements may be similar to those per-
formed by Simonsen and Törnqvist (2004). A large thin plate was subjected to a mono-
tonically increasing in-plane tension corresponding to a pure Mode I loading. A blunted
crack was initiated at the edge notch and the crack propagation through the plane of
the plate was investigated. Here, it was seen, that after the crack has propagated sev-
eral plate thicknesses through the plate, the advancing crack tip reached a steady state
1
==PAGE:16==
2
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
propagation, which ﬂipped from one 45° angle to the opposite 45° angle. This ﬂipping
mechanism under Mode I loading was investigated by Nielsen and Gundlach (2016),
where the phenomenon was investigated by X-Ray tomography.
The data from the plate tearing experiments by Simonsen and Törnqvist (2004) was
utilized by Woelke et al. (2015) to determine the cohesive energy needed from the initial
blunt crack to the fully developed crack. They found a great diﬀerence in the cohesive
energy from the crack initiation, where a plane stress may be assumed, and after the
crack has advanced several plate thicknesses. This diﬀerence was found to be a factor
of 40, approximately. The goal of the analysis was to calibrate the cohesive energy from
the initiation of a crack to a steady-state crack propagation. When the crack tip has
advanced several plate thicknesses, i.e. about 7 times the plate thickness, the cohesive
energy settled at a peak cohesive energy level.
The settlement of the cohesive fracture energy was investigated earlier by Nielsen
and Hutchinson (2012), where the constant level in energy beyond the point where the
crack tip has advanced several plate thicknesses was treated in a plane strain model.
This investigation also had its basis in the ﬁndings from Simonsen and Törnquist’s
investigations on the large thin plate.
The aim was to identify the contributions to
the cohesive fracture energy under a pure Mode I loading. The analysis was made for
various initial porosities, which emphasized the inﬂuence of this porosity to the material
response and consequently the cohesive energy. The outcome for the parameter study
was, that the energy necessary for developing the neck was the major contribution to the
total cohesive energy. Of less importance was the energy contribution to form the shear
localization and create the slant fracture. The analysis showed a mesh dependency on
the latter energy contribution.
All the above mentioned investigations consider plate tearing under Mode I loading.
It is evident, that other load scenarios exist for complex structures. Complex structures,
that with help from ﬁnite elements are analysed, may experience load contributions
corresponding to pure Mode II, Mode III or even a mixture of the modes. Attempts to
express a cohesive relation when considering this mode mixity have been made. van den
Bosch et al. (2006) describe how the mode mixity is considered. Two diﬀerent approaches
are made in order to describe the constitutive relation between the two inﬂuencing modes.
One approach is to consider an eﬀective displacement for the two displacements, which
was introduced by Tvergaard (1990a). Also Högberg (2006) has introduced a combined
constitutive relation. Another approach is to introduce a coupling parameter in order
to couple the normal and transverse separation.
This thesis will investigate the cohesive energy when a shearing fracture mode is
introduced to the model, i.e., when introducing the Mode II and Mode III to a Mode I
loading. On basis on the ﬁnite element model that Nielsen and Hutchinson investigated
in pure Mode I, this thesis will try to clarify the connection of the cohesive energy and
the shear contributions in Mode II and Mode III. The level of transverse tearing will
be an investigated parameter as ratios of Mode I/Mode II and Mode I/Mode III are
investigated in two diﬀerent models, a 3D model and a 2D model, respectively. Due to
the out-of-plane Mode II loading, an attempt will be made to simplify the 3D model
by developing a ﬁnite element code capable of handling 2D elements in a 3D space.
The code is written in Fortran, implemented with ﬁnite strain theory and the Gurson
porous material model so that the program is capable of capturing the slant fracture
phenomenon.
Chapter 3 describes the relevant theory which has been employed in this thesis. The
==PAGE:17==
3
chapter includes fracture mechanics, plasticity theory in metals, ﬁnite element theory
and cohesive relations.
In Chapter 4 the investigations on the mode mixity are presented. The analysis is
carried out in the commercial ﬁnite element software Abaqus, and a parameter study
is performed regarding the diﬀerent initial porosities and also the Mode I/Mode II and
Mode I/Mode III mode mixity in order to investigate the inﬂuences of these shearing
contributions to the cohesive energy. A discussion on how to impose the Mode II and
Mode III loading will be carried out. Since only a small section of the plate is considered,
it is crucial to ensure continuity from the model to the remainder of the plate. Further,
it is investigated if it still holds, that the cohesive energy is deﬁned from the onset of
necking until slant fracture as suggested by Nielsen and Hutchinson (2012).
Chapter 5 describes the composition of the “21⁄2D” code, that allows the treatment of
mode mixity in a much less computational expensive framework. The implementation of
the Gurson material model is described with the governing equations together with the
expanded element formulation, that makes it possible to consider the 2D plane element
in a 3D space. Further, a veriﬁcation of the code after implementation of the ﬁnite
strain theory is carried out from simple coupon test to verify that the code is providing
accurate displacement ﬁelds and is able to predict the onset of necking. Two examples
are utilized in the computations for this. Lastly in this chapter, the plate considered
in Chapter 4 is employed to the code and an attempt to replicate the results from the
aforementioned chapter is made.
Finally, in Chapter 6 a conclusion is given and remarks on future work on this topic
are outlined.
==PAGE:18==
==PAGE:19==
2 Problem description
This thesis is investigating the cohesive energy when considering mode mixity, i.e., Mode
I-Mode II loading and Mode I-Mode III loading. The outline for the thesis is described
in the following bullets:
• Analyze a plate subjected to uniaxial tension with use of the micromechanical
Gurson material model and investigate the inﬂuence of the diﬀerent material pa-
rameters on the behavior of the plate and the slant fracture and try to reproduce
results from the article “Cohesive traction-separation laws for tearing of ductile
metal plates”(Nielsen and Hutchinson (2012)).
The model will be a 2D plane
strain model.
→The aim is to gain insight in void growth and void coalescence described by the
Gurson model.
• Investigate the cohesive fracture energy in a plate subjected to a mixed Mode
I-Mode III loading. The computations are to be performed in Abaqus and are
planned to be carried out under a 2D plane strain assumption. The ﬁndings will
be compared with results obtained for pure mode I (uniaxial tension of plate) and
an elaboration will be made on the energy levels.
→The aim is to gain insight in the change in cohesive fracture energy when con-
sidering a Mode I-Mode III load case compared to a pure mode I load case.
• Investigate plate tearing under Mode I-Mode II loading. This will be performed in
Abaqus in a 3D environment with use of cyclic boundary conditions. The cohesive
fracture energy will be evaluated and the inﬂuence of the additional tearing in
mode II will be elucidated.
→The aim is to gain insight in the change in cohesive fracture energy when con-
sidering a Mode I-Mode II load case compared to a pure mode I load case.
• Develop a 2D element that is capable of capture the essence of a Mode I-Mode II
load case in plane strain. The diﬃculties are in the out-of-plane degree of freedom
that needs to be present but still trying to avoid the use of a 3D element. The
element will be compared to the analyses from Abaqus.
→The aim is to generate an element formulation capable of representing a 3D
model in 2D with use of only limited extra degrees of freedom per element in order
to speed up computations.
5
==PAGE:20==
==PAGE:21==
3 Theory
3.1
Fracture mechanics
In fracture mechanics a crack is deﬁned as a discontinuity in the displacement ﬁeld where
no cohesive forces are acting between the adjacent surfaces. Three diﬀerent modes are
considered in fracture mechanics. These modes are sketched in Figure 3.1 where the
crack tip is parallel to the x1-axis and the crack propagation is in the x3-direction.
Mode I fracture is illustrated in Figure D.1 and here the loading is perpendicular to
the crack propagation and parallel to the x2-axis, thus the free surfaces is dragged apart.
The Mode I is the most investigated fracture mode due to its simplicity.
Mode II is sketched in Figure 3.1b. For Mode II the loading is parallel to the x3-axis
and thus also the crack propagation. The free surfaces are here sliding on top of each
other. Both Mode I and Mode II is an in-plane mode as the loading and the crack
propagation take place in the plane of the plate. The Mode II may be characterized as
F
F
x1
x2
x3
(a) Mode I.
F
F
x1
x2
x3
(b) Mode II.
F
F
x1
x2
x3
(c) Mode III.
Figure 3.1: Modes for crack propagation, Anderson (2005).
7
==PAGE:22==
8
CHAPTER 3. THEORY
an in-plane shear mode.
The pure Mode III is visualized in Figure 3.1c.
Mode III diverges from the two
other modes as this mode is an out-of-plane shear mode. For Mode III the loading is
out-of-plane and the two adjacent surfaces beyond the crack tip is sliding on top of each
other to a certain point, contrary to Mode II where one surface always will be in contact
of the other.
3.2
Tensor notation
The tensor notation is employed in the Fortran code. The notation makes it possible
to work in the convected coordinate system, i.e., the coordinate system that follows the
deforming geometry. By use of some metric tensors it is possible to transfer results from
the convected coordinate system to the reference coordinate system and vice versa.
The metric tensor in the reference conﬁguration is denoted gij and is deﬁned as
gij = ei · ej, where ei is the covariant base vector in the undeformed coordinate system.
This could for instance be a Cartesian or a spherical coordinate system. Similar, the
metric tensor in the current convected coordinate system is denoted Gij and is deﬁned as
Gij = ¯ei·¯ej, where ¯ei is the covariant base vector of the current conﬁguration. As gij and
Gij is deﬁned from the covariant base vectors, one can transform to the contravariant
by inverting the tensors. The determinant of the metric tensors are denoted g and G,
respectively.
The diﬀerence between a covariant base vector and a contravariant base vector is,
that the ﬁrst mentioned is normal to the coordinate surface whereas a the latter is
tangent to the coordinate curves. In a Cartesian coordinate system all coordinate curves
are perpendicular, thus the covariant and the contravariant base vectors are coinciding.
3.3
J2 incremental ﬂow theory
Basically, the material considered in this thesis has elastic-plastic material behaviour
following the J2 ﬂow theory (Tvergaard (2001)). The material follows a power hardening
law expressed as
ε =





σe
E ,
σe < σy
σy
E

σe
σy
1/N ,
σe ≥σy
(3.1)
where σy is the yield stress, σe is the eﬀective true stress, N is the hardening exponent,
and E is Young’s modulus. The J2 ﬂow theory assumes isotropic hardening and that
the yield surface is shaped as the von Mises yield surface. The yield surface is deﬁned
as
σe =
q
3 (J2)max =
r3
2sijsij
(3.2)
where J2 is the second invariant of the stress tensor. The term “invariant” means that
it is independent of the orientation of the coordinate system. The stress deviator sij is
given by
sij = σij −Gij σk
k
3
(3.3)
==PAGE:23==
3.4. GURSON MODEL
9
where Gij is the contravariant of the metric tensor. As the equations are given with
tensor notation, the rule of summation at repeated indices is applied and Latin indices
range from 1 to 3.
The material is elastic as long as the current stress state is within the yield surface,
and elastic-plastic when the stress state reaches the yield surface. This is illustrated in
Figure 3.2, where the solid ellipse is the original von Mises yield surface and the dashed
ellipse is the subsequent yield surface given a stress path as depicted. The expanded
yield surface has the same shape as the original yield surface. When the stress path
reaches the original yield surface, this surface will expand if plastic loading continues
when assuming isotropic hardening. If the material subsequently unloads the response
will be elastic unloading since the yield surface cannot contract to the original size.
Thus, the new yield surface will be the dashed ellipse.
The total strain increment consists of contributions from the elastic and plastic strain
increment:
˙εij = ˙εE
ij + ˙εP
ij
(3.4)
where the elastic part is calculated directly from Hooke’s law ˙εE
ij = Mijkl ˙σkl. Here,
Mijkl is the elastic ﬂexibility tensor given by
Mijkl = 1
E
1 + ν
2

GikGjl + GilGjk

−νGijGkl

(3.5)
The plastic strain increment is deﬁned as
˙εP
ij = β 9
4σ2e
 1
Et
−1
E

sijskl ˙σkl
(3.6)
β =



1,
for σe = (σe)max
and
˙σe ≥0
0,
for σe < (σe)max
and
˙σe < 0
where Et is the tangent stiﬀness modulus. Incompressibility gives, that
εP
kk = 0
(3.7)
meaning that no volume change occur during load history in the elastic-plastic region.
This is applicable for the von Mises yield criterion.
3.4
Gurson model
The initial micromechanical studies on void growth in ductile materials was carried out
by McClintock (1968) and one year later by Rice and Johnson (1969). Gurson (1977)
σ11
σ12
Stress path
Figure 3.2: Illustration of the yield surface for isotropic hardening.
==PAGE:24==
10
CHAPTER 3. THEORY
developed a porous ductile material model with inspiration taken from work by Bishop
and Hill (1951). Generation of porosity was observed in ductile fracture, but at that
time engineering materials assumed plastic incompressibility meaning no volume change
will appear in the plastic region (εkk = 0). The evolution of porosity meant a volume
change through nucleation and growth of micro-voids. This phenomenon was the main
goal to predict through a new elastic-plastic porous constitutive material model.
The procedure for Gurson was ﬁrst to ﬁnd a suitable yield surface to predict the
plastic yield in a material for diﬀerent stress states. Next was to ﬁnd a ﬂow rule, that
connects the plastic strain with the stress state in the plastic region. To ﬁnalize the
constitutive model criteria for nucleation and growth have to be deﬁned as well.
Gurson modelled a unit cube consisting of a ductile matrix and an aggregate of
void. This was due to theoretical studies, that indicated occurrence of a macroscopic
dilation behaviour of a material together with an inﬂuence on the material response,
when a material consisting voids is subjected to a hydrostatic force. Gurson modelled
two diﬀerent cells; one consisting of a cylindrical void surrounded by a cylindrical cell of
the matrix material (illustrated in Figure 3.3a) and one consisting of a sphere surrounded
by another sphere (illustrated in Figure 3.3b). These two shapes were chosen based on the
shapes seen in experiments and since they provide the expected transverse isotropy for
the cylinder and isotropy for the sphere. Gurson assumed a rigid-plastic material model
for the cells and the upper bound theorem of plasticity was used to derive approximate
yield criteria that become useful for the material model.
The yield condition that Gurson eventually ended up with was
Φ = σ2
e
σ2
M
+ 2f cosh
 
1
2
σk
k
σM
!
−

1 + f2
= 0
(3.8)
where σe deﬁned in Equation (3.2) is the eﬀective stress. The stress quantity σM is
describing the microscopic stress state in the matrix material. As the porosity increases
in the material, the microscopic stress state in the material is expected to be diﬀerent
x3
x2
x1
(a) The cylindrical cell considered by Gur-
son.
x1
x2
x3
(b) The spherical cell considered by Gurson.
Figure 3.3: The two diﬀerent rigid-plastic cells considered by Gurson in the development of
the porous ductile material model
==PAGE:25==
3.4. GURSON MODEL
11
than the macroscopic stress state, σe, that is applied to the material. The void volume
fraction in the material is deﬁned by f.
It is noted, that when f is zero, the yield
criterion reduces to the von Mises yield surface and J2 ﬂow theory.
The original Gurson model was not widely used due the lack of accuracy at ﬁnal
failure where coalescence of voids were observed in experiments. The expression was not
capable of capturing this phenomenon as the rate of the porosity is constant which is not
the case when voids coalesce. Further, it is not possible to calibrate the yield criterion
to diﬀerent types of materials. Micromechanical studies carried out by Tvergaard (1981,
1982) investigated materials containing a periodic void distribution and compared this
to the yield criterion in Equation (3.8). Tvergaard found that by introducing two pa-
rameters, q1 and q2, to the yield criterion would make it possible to calibrate the model.
The improved yield criterion now is on the form
Φ = σ2
e
σ2
M
+ 2q1f∗cosh
 
q2
2
σk
k
σM
!
−

1 + (q1f∗)2
= 0
(3.9)
where q1 = 1.5 and q2 = 1.0 was concluded to improve the yield criterion.
This is
based on several experiments with sintered materials. In Tvergaard (1990b) the values
was conﬁrmed through several experiments as these values give reasonably accurate
predictions.
The parameter f∗incorporates the eﬀect of coalescence of voids in the original Gurson
model in order to predict ﬁnal failure more accurate and is a function of the void volume
fraction f. The expression was developed by Tvergaard and Needleman in 1984. The
function for f∗is deﬁned as
f∗(f) =



f,
for f ≤fC
fC + f∗
U−fC
fF −fC (f −fC),
for f > fC
(3.10)
where fC is the critical void volume fraction and fF is the void volume fraction at frac-
ture. These statements ensure an exponential evolution of the voids which corresponds
to coalescence of voids in the material. This happens when the void volume fraction
reaches the critical void volume fraction. This material model combining Equation (3.9)
and (3.10) is the model known as the GTN (Gurson-Tvergaard-Needleman) model. This
model is widely used and is incorporated in commercial ﬁnite element software such as
Abaqus. In this thesis, there is no diﬀerence between referring to the Gurson material
model and the GTN model.
In Figure 3.4, the yield criterion is depicted for various values of the void volume
fraction f∗, where σe/σM is plotted against the triaxility ((σk
k/3)/σM). For f∗= 0,
the yield criterion reduces to the von Mises yield surface, and then the stress in the
matrix equals the macroscopic stress disregard the triaxility. As the void volume fraction
increases, the yield surface slowly starts to decrease and the material looses its load
carrying capacity. Eventually, the yield surface has shrunk to a point for void fractions
approaching 1.
Voids in a metal form due to the plastic strain and hydrostatic pressure. At some
point the voids have grown to a critical size where the material between adjacent voids
will experience strain localization causing a neck in the material resulting in void coa-
lescence and fracture. The rate of void growth is deﬁned as
˙fgrowth = (1 −f)Gij ˙ηP
ij
(3.11)
==PAGE:26==
12
CHAPTER 3. THEORY
0
1
2
3
4
(σk
k/3)/σM
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
σe/σM
f∗= 0
f∗= 0.01
f∗= 0.1
f∗= 0.2
f∗= 0.5
f∗= 0.8
Figure 3.4: The yield surface from Equation (3.9) plotted for diﬀerent values of the void volume
fraction f ∗.
where ˙ηP
ij is the plastic strain rate.
Considering the yield criterion in isolation no increase in the void volume fraction
will occur if an initial damage is absent, i.e. f0 = 0. This is due that the yield crite-
rion reduces to the von Mises yield surface in this case and the von Mises material is
incompressible. Therefore, the trace of the plastic strain rate tensor is zero, which yields
˙fgrowth = 0. Thus, the need of a nucleation law appears. Void nucleation occurs when
a free surface forms at an inclusion or second-phase particles in the material. This free
surface either forms due to decohesion or particle cracking. In ﬁnite element a normal
distribution is used to express the nucleation of voids. Gurson already had discussed sev-
eral nucleation models, but Needleman and Rice (1980) proposed the following evolution
of void volume fraction due to void nucleation
˙fnucleation = A ˙σM + B ˙σk
k/3
(3.12)
where ˙σM is the rate of stress in the matrix material, and ˙σk
k is the rate of the hydrostatic
stress in the material.
If the void nucleation is controlled by the plastic strain, the
following expressions for A and B are employed
A =
 1
Et
−1
E

fN
s
√
2π exp

−1
2
 
εP
M −εN
s
!2
,
B = 0
(3.13)
for
εP
M = (εP
M)max
and
˙εP
M > 0
where εP
M is the microscopic plastic matrix strain, fN is the volume fraction of void
nucleation particles, εN is the mean strain for nucleation, and s is the standard deviation.
It is noted, that the strain-controlled nucleation is not dependent of the hydrostatic
pressure, which may cause some inconsistency. This occur as B = 0.
If void nucleation is controlled by the maximum normal stress at the interface between
the matrix and the particle, i.e., the inclusion, other expressions for A and B are
==PAGE:27==
3.4. GURSON MODEL
13
employed:
A = B =
fN
s
√
2π exp

−1
2
 
(σM + σk
k/3) −σN
s
!2

(3.14)
for
σM + σk
k/3 = (σM + σk
k/3)max
and
˙

σM + σk
k/3

> 0
where σM + σk
k/3 was suggested as the approximate measure of the maximum stress in
the interface. For materials where the nucleation is both strain- and stress-controlled a
mixture of the two sets of equations can be derived.
As described above, the Gurson model was developed on the basis of hydrostatic
components of the stress. This means the stress triaxility, which is deﬁned as the mean
stress or hydrostatic pressure (σk
k/3) divided by the eﬀective matrix stress (σM), needs
to obtain values other than zero in order for the void volume fraction to increase. The
stress triaxility obtains values diﬀerent from zero as long as the mean stress is diﬀerent
from zero. In the case where only shear stresses are present in a material, no evolution
of the void volume fraction will occur. Due to the absence of evolution in void volume
fraction in pure shear, Nahshon and Hutchinson (2007) suggested an extension to cap-
ture the behaviour of void growth in pure shear. It is important to notice that including
the Nahshon-Hutchinson shear parameter will change the deﬁnition of f going from a
void volume fraction to a damage parameter. This change originate in the fact that this
extended Gurson model go from being a micro mechanics based model to a phenomeno-
logical damage model as the Nahshon-Hutchinson parameter, which is introduced in the
extension, has no physical meaning.
The Nahshon-Hutchinson parameter, kω, predicts the rate of the damage growth on
behalf of the shear stresses in the material. The damage growth rate is deﬁned as
˙fshear = kωfω(σ)sij ˙ηP
ij
σe
(3.15)
where ω(σ) lies in the range of 0 and 1 corresponding to axisymmetric stress states and
pure shear stress states, respectively. The ω(σ) measure is computed as
ω(σ) = 1 −
 
27J3
2σ3e
!2
(3.16)
where J3 is the third invariant of stress deviator which is deﬁned as J3 = Gijskjsilslk/3.
For any axisymmetric stress state, ω(σ) equals zero since the following is valid
σI ≥σII = σIII
or
σI = σII ≥σIII
and compared with the third invariant of stress, this yields
J3 = ±2(σI −σIII)3
27
= ±2σ3
e
27
when it is assumed that the principal stresses are ordered as σI ≥σII ≥σIII. The
measure ω(σ) equals one when the stress state consists of a pure shear stress plus a
hydrostatic contribution
σI = τ + σm,
σII = σm,
σIII = −τ + σm
==PAGE:28==
14
CHAPTER 3. THEORY
where τ > 0.
The two ﬁrst mentioned contributions are added together to calculate the total rate
of void volume fraction:
˙f = ˙fgrowth + ˙fnucleation
(3.17)
and if the Nahshon-Hutchinson shear parameter is to be included, the ˙fshear is added to
˙f in the same manner.
The total rate of the void volume fraction may be either positive or negative. The
negative rate comes into play if a void is closing, which may appear at shear. However,
the void volume fraction cannot be negative.
3.4.1
Recent investigations
The Gurson model is far from a closed case. Still, scientists are expanding the theory
behind the porous ductile material model in order to capture the behaviour of ductile
materials more accurate. Gurson assumed simple shapes of the void, the sphere and the
cylinder, as this was convenient for the initial models. Later studies (see Benzerga and
Leblond (2010)) have investigated the inﬂuence of more complicated shapes such as an
oblate (see Figure 3.5a) or a prolate shaped void (see Figure 3.5b).
3.5
Finite element
Finite element modelling is the foundation for the investigations and results in this
thesis. Finite element is a numerical tool when structures are to be dimensioned and is
widely used when the analytical solutions, e.g. the Bernoulli-Euler beam theory, is not
adequate or when the structure is complex. In a ﬁnite element analysis the structure
is ﬁrst modelled using a CAD-program. This model is then simpliﬁed in the manner of
removing holes, ﬁllets etc. that are not of interest. A higher degree of model details
require smaller elements in order to represent the structure adequately. Obviously, the
x3
x2
x1
(a) Illustration of an oblate shaped void.
x3
x2
x1
(b) Illustration of a prolate shaped void.
Figure 3.5: Diﬀerent shapes of voids considered.
==PAGE:29==
3.5. FINITE ELEMENT
15
degree of detail in areas of interest needs to be high in order to capture any stress
gradients that might occur or other phenomena.
The model is then discretized, meaning a ﬁnite number of elements are employed to
describe the structure. Elements can have diﬀerent shapes, e.g. tetrahedral or quadri-
lateral shape, and may be represented as 2D plane or 3D cubic elements. Depending on
the topology of the structure, the extent of the structure in space, and areas of interest
only one type of element may be chosen or a mixture of diﬀerent element types and
shapes may be chosen. Diﬀerent ﬁnite element analyses can be carried out, e.g. modal
analysis, static analysis, thermal analysis or dynamic analysis.
The result from a ﬁnite element analysis on basis of the applied force acting on the
structure is a displacement ﬁeld describing the deformed structure. This ﬁeld is basis
for calculating stresses and strains.
The theory behind the ﬁnite element formulation is based on an energy consideration.
This consideration is built on the principle of virtual work, which basically relates the
variations in the external to the variations in the internal energy. The principle of virtual
work can be expressed in incremental form as
Z
V
˙τ ijδηijdV =
Z
S
˙T iδuidS
(3.18)
where V is the volume, S is the surface, δη is the variation of the strains, ˙τ is the rate of
the stresses, ˙T is the rate of the tractions and δu is the variation of the displacement ﬁeld.
The principle of virtual work should hold for any kinematically admissible displacement
variations δu. By this means continuity in the displacement ﬁeld of the structure.
The left hand side in Equation (3.18) is an expression for the strain energy in the
system and can be interpreted as the internal energy. The right hand side of the equation
takes the traction into account which is an external force and can be interpreted as the
external work. Thus, the equation is an equilibrium between the internal and external
energy and it is noted, that a small change in external energy yields a small change in
internal energy.
The principle of virtual work is considering the minimum of potential energy, Π, in
a structure. The ﬁnite element code will compute an approximate displacement ﬁeld to
the problem considered. This approximate solution will always provide a compliance of
the system less than of the real structure. Since the compliance is the inverse of the
stiﬀness, this yields the displacement ﬁeld for a stiﬀer structure than in reality. To avoid
this, more elements can be applied to the model and the ﬁnite element solution will
approach the real solution, but will almost never be equal to the real solution since this
require inﬁnite number of elements to represent the structure. However, in very simple
structures the ﬁnite element solution may equal the real solution.
Equation (3.18) cannot directly be used in a ﬁnite element framework, as this has
discretized the structure into a ﬁnite number of elements. Thus the integral may be
written as a sum over the elements:
X
e
Z
V e ˙τ ijδηijdV =
X
e
Z
Se
˙T iδuidS
(3.19)
When dealing with ﬁnite element analysis, an isoparametric element formulation is
often used. The isoparametric element is described in an intrinsic coordinate system
with ξ and η as the coordinates. Regardless of the physical shape of the element in the
x, y-coordinates, the element is a quadratic element ranging from -1 to 1 in each intrinsic
==PAGE:30==
16
CHAPTER 3. THEORY
coordinate direction, which also is one great advantage that the elements not necessarily
have to have a rectangular shape. Often it is diﬃcult to represent a complex structure
with rectangular elements only, therefore the isoparametric formulation is needed. In
Figure 3.6a an element is illustrated in the global coordinate system and it has curved
sides as an example on how an element may be described. In Figure 3.6b the same
element is illustrated, but now in the intrinsic coordinate system. As seen, the element
is quadratic with a side length of 2.
A link between the global coordinate system and the intrinsic coordinate system is
needed. The Jacobi matrix is thus introduced. This matrix transforms the coordinates
between the two coordinate systems.
The Jacobi matrix is in 2D derived from the
following equation



∂Φ
∂ξ
∂Φ
∂η


=


∂x
∂ξ
∂y
∂ξ
∂x
∂η
∂y
∂η


|
{z
}
[J]
(∂Φ
∂x
∂Φ
∂y
)
where Φ is any ﬁeld variable.
Equation (3.19) cannot be solved analytically and thus needs to be solved numerically.
The stiﬀness for each element is computed through a Gaussian quadrature, which is
another word for numerical integration. The quadrature evaluates the stiﬀness matrix
in an integration point and multiply the obtained value with a speciﬁed weighting factor.
The outcome is then added up over the entire element. The integration over the element
is thus rewritten as
Z 1
−1
Z 1
−1
(
)t|[J]|dξdη =
ng
X
i=1
ng
X
j=1
(
)WiWjt|[J]|
for a plane element where t is the thickness and |[J]| is the determinant of the Jacobian
matrix. Further, ng is the number of integration points and W are weighting factors.
The integration points are also called Gauss points since Gaussian quadrature is
used, and the number of integration point vary depending on the element type. For
plane elements, 1, 4, or 9 Gauss points may be used and for 3D elements, 1, 8, or 27
Gauss points may be used. The number of points are chosen from the desired degree
of precision in the calculations, the load case, and number of nodes. The rule of thumb
x1
x2
η
ξ
(a) An element in the global coordinate
system.
ξ
η
−1
1
1
−1
(b) An element in the intrinsic
coordinate system.
Figure 3.6: Element in diﬀerent coordinate systems.
==PAGE:31==
3.5. FINITE ELEMENT
17
for full integration is, that a n-order polynomial is exactly evaluated with 2n −1 Gauss
points.
An overview is given in Table 3.1 for diﬀerent element types. The 4-noded plane
element has a node in each corner, the 8-noded element has additional nodes in the
middle of the sides of the element and the 9-noded element has additional one node
in the center of the element.
The 8-noded 3D element corresponds to the 4-noded
plane element except for the extension in the third direction and the 20-noded element
corresponds to the 8-noded element.
Table 3.1: Overview of the number of integration points for various element types, Cook et al.
(2002).
Full integration
Reduced integration
2D
4 nodes
2x2
1x1
8 nodes
3x3
2x2
9 nodes
3x3
2x2
3D
8 nodes
2x2x2
1x1x1
20 nodes
3x3x3
2x2x2
By choosing reduced integration one reduce the computational expenses since con-
tributions to the stiﬀness matrix is calculated in each Gauss point. Thus, by choosing
only one Gauss point rather than four may have a positive inﬂuence on the computation
time, but it also has disadvantages.
Diﬀerent consequences of using too few or too many Gauss points exist and varies
depending on the element and load case. Two common instability modes are the shear
locking and hourglassing. Shear locking may occur in 4-noded plane elements subjected
to pure bending as illustrated in Figure 3.7. Assuming full integration for the element,
this load case will introduce shear stresses in the elements, since the accurate curvature
cannot be obtained. These shear stresses will cause underestimation of the displacement
ﬁeld.
One approach to avoid the shear locking is by choosing reduced integration in the
element as shown in Figure 3.8a. The element may suﬀer by hourglassing as the shear
stress cannot be predicted if the element is distorted. In Figure 3.8b hourglassing is
illustrated. Hourglassing is not an issue for a plane 8-noded element since it is noncom-
muncable in the sense that two adjacent elements cannot both experience hourglassing
and still stay connected at the nodes. If instead a 20-noded element in 3D is considered
the hourglassing may cause instability if the structure has only one element through two
of the dimensions.
Figure 3.7: Illustration of shear locking.
==PAGE:32==
18
CHAPTER 3. THEORY
(a) Shear locking mode.
(b) Hourglass mode.
Figure 3.8: Examples on diﬀerent instability modes for elements with reduced integration.
3.5.1
Incremental solution methods
Finite element is in its simplest form capable of solving linear system of equations. With
linear means the stress-strain relation for the material is linear, i.e. following Hooke’s law
(σ = Eε). If the material response is non-linear, e.g. if plasticity is to be implemented
or if the material is a rubber-like material, an incremental solution method is needed
in order to capture the material response. An incremental solution method is dividing
the load into smaller parts which are then applied one at the time and the displacement
ﬁeld is updated for each increment.
The solution methods are split into two parts: The implicit and explicit methods.
Implicit methods such as the Newton-Raphson algorithm, which is illustrated in Figure
3.9a, and the modiﬁed Newton-Raphson method ensure equilibrium of the external and
internal forces in each incremental step.
The method uses an iteration loop within
each increment to ensure this.
A force increment is applied and the corresponding
displacement increment is computed based on the residual force, i.e., the diﬀerence
between the internal and external forces. If the residual force is larger that some speciﬁed
value, a new iteration step is applied to the increment and the new value for the residual
force is utilized to calculate an additional displacement ﬁeld. This procedure is continued
until the residual force is less than the speciﬁed threshold value and a new force increment
is applied. This procedure is computational expensive as the tangent stiﬀness matrix is
calculated for each iteration. The modiﬁed Newton-Raphson algorithm only calculates
the tangent stiﬀness matrix for each increment but may need more iterations for the
converge to be fulﬁlled.
The explicit methods such as the Euler, which is illustrated in Figure 3.9b, and the
Euler with one-step-correction do not ensure equilibrium between external and internal
forces. As depicted in the ﬁgure, the solution method does not represent the correct
material response.
Thus the explicit methods require smaller load steps in order to
converge towards the real solution compared to implicit methods.
3.5.2
Finite strain
The above description of the ﬁnite element formulation assumes small strains, therefore
the Lagrangian strain tensor is expressed as ηij = (ui,j + uj,i) with ﬁrst order terms
only. The ﬁnite strain theory is adding second order terms to the strain tensor, ηij =
(ui,j + uj,i + uk
,iuk,j), in order to describe the non-linear displacement ﬁeld. Here, (),i is
the derivative with respect to the covariant coordinates. The principle of virtual work
==PAGE:33==
3.6. COHESIVE LAW
19
P
D
∆P
∆D
R
Diter
(a) The implicit Newton Raphson algorithm.
P
D
∆P
∆D
(b) The explicit Euler algorithm.
Figure 3.9: Graphic interpretations of diﬀerent solution methods.
for the incremental ﬁnite strain problem is deﬁned as
Z
V

˙τ ijδηij + τ ij ˙uk
,iδuk,j

dV =
Z
S
˙T iδuidS −
Z
V
τ ijδηijdV −
Z
S
T iδuidS

(3.20)
where V is the volume of the domain, S is the surface of the domain. T i is the surface
traction per original area. It is noted, that this expression has two terms on the left
hand side, which describes the internal energy whereas the aforementioned principle of
virtual work only has one. The bracketed term on the right hand side is a correction
term since the principle of virtual work tends to drift if the number of increments is not
adequate.
The ﬁnite strain theory is implemented in the Fortran code developed in this thesis
and Chapter 5 will present the elaborating details.
3.6
Cohesive law
In a ﬁnite element framework it is common to make use of phenomenological based ma-
terial models such as cohesive elements in order to describe crack propagation. Cohesive
elements are employed in a ﬁnite element model when the behaviour of a cohesive zone
is desired and the approximate direction of the crack is known. The traction-separation
relation for the cohesive element may have diﬀerent appearances depending on the de-
sired behaviour and the model. In Figure 3.10a and 3.10b two diﬀerent bilinear cohesive
relations are shown. A trilinear cohesive relation is shown in Figure 3.10c. In the ﬁgures
Γ is the cohesive fracture energy, δ is the separation at diﬀerent stages, and ˆT is the
peak traction.
The bilinear relation in Figure 3.10b is employed later in this thesis for the steady
state consideration of a plate. This relation can be expressed as
Γ = 1
2
ˆT(δ1 + δ2)
(3.21)
and is basically the area of a rectangle and a triangle as depicted in the ﬁgure.
Now, when considering mode mixity a rotational sweep of the cohesive relation is
assumed, see e.g. Högberg (2006) and van den Bosch et al. (2006). This is illustrated in
Figure 3.11, where a trilinear cohesive relation is sketched. Here, δn and δt is the nor-
mal and transverse separation, respectively, and T is the traction. Regardless whether
==PAGE:34==
20
CHAPTER 3. THEORY
Γ
T
ˆT
δ1
δ2
δ
(a) Bilinear relation.
Γ
T
ˆT
δ1
δ2
δ
(b) Bilinear relation.
Γ
T
ˆT
δ1
δ2
δ
δ3
(c) Trilinear relation.
Figure 3.10: Cohesive relations.
the transverse direction is a Mode II or a Mode III, the rotational sweep is adopted to
describe the cohesive behaviour. This signiﬁes identical cohesive relation and thus pro-
portional cohesive energy for every combination of the normal and transverse separation.
Although a trilinear cohesive relation is illustrated the sweep also holds for other shapes
of the cohesive relation.
T
δn
δt
Figure 3.11: Trilinear cohesive relation
==PAGE:35==
4 Cohesive fracture energy
4.1
Deﬁnition of cohesive energy
Each individual engineering material is following some sort of force-displacement curve
when subjected to loads.
An example of a force-displacement curve is illustrated in
Figure 4.1. This curve can be divided into diﬀerent states that the material is experi-
encing when the load is applied. First, when considering stresses below the yield stress,
the material behave elastic meaning the deformation is fully reversible and if unloaded
the material will obtain the original shape. This elastic region is the linear part to the
left of the dotted line. When the current stress state is above the yield stress and the
load is further increased, the material will behave elastic-plastic. The slope of the curve
decreases and the material starts to harden as illustrated on the right side of the dotted
line in Figure 4.1. Necking initiates at the peak force and continues until onset of shear
localization. The material will harden until failure, but the necking phenomenon causes
the cross sectional area to decrease signiﬁcantly and thus, the force in the material re-
sponse decreases. At onset of shear localization, the deformations will localize in the
material and consequently cause a fracture.
The area under the curve from the onset of necking until fracture of the specimen is
deﬁned as the cohesive fracture energy. The cohesive fracture energy which is denoted
Γ0 has contributions from ΓI and ΓII, and is the energy that goes into the necking of
the specimen and eventually shear localization and the ductile fracture. The necking
phenomenon is where the plastic deformations start to localize. At plane strain, the
Considère condition occur when the logarithmic strain or true strain reaches the strain
hardening exponent N for power law relations. The areas outside the necking region will
then elastic unload so that only the plastic deformation will remain. Necking continues
Onset of necking
∆
F
Onset of shear
localization
ΓII
ΓI
Figure 4.1: Force-displacement curve for an engineering material.
21
==PAGE:36==
22
CHAPTER 4. COHESIVE FRACTURE ENERGY
until the onset of shear localization and the energy that is required for this is deﬁned
as ΓI. From the onset of shear localization until fracture the plastic strains will localize
in a shear band which is in an angle of approximately 45° to the maximum principal
stress. The energy required for the shear band to occur is deﬁned as ΓII and is usually
much smaller than the ΓI energy. To have a well-deﬁned value for ΓII, the curve needs
to be truncated at some point as also depicted in Figure 4.1. This truncation point is
reached when the material clearly has lost its load carrying capacity, but not necessarily
when the force is at a speciﬁc level.
In order to capture the correct material response a porous ductile material model is
used. Engineering materials consist of a matrix material and alloying elements. These
alloying elements are small particles in the matrix material which customize the material.
The alloying elements are also the fertile soil for porosity in the material causing void
growth as described in Chapter 3.
4.2
Basis model
The analyses in this chapter have their base in a steady state approximation. Consider
a large thin plate structure where the in-plane thickness is much smaller than the other
dimensions. The plate has a precrack meaning a cut is made in the plate in order to
provoke and subsequent control evolution of a crack when the plate is subjected to in-
plane loading. When the crack has grown several plate thicknesses the crack growth can
be observed as a steady state. On basis of the steady state assumption a section of the
plate in the x1 −x2 plane is taken into consideration.
Four diﬀerent stages are depicted in Figure 4.2 which illustrates the steady state. At
point A the section of material is loaded to onset of necking. At point B the plate is
experiencing local thinning until the shear localization at point C takes place. In point
D a slant fracture occur.
x1
x2
x3
A
B
C
D
A
B
C
D
Figure 4.2: Illustration of the initial plate from where the models are considered.
==PAGE:37==
4.3. MODE I
23
4.3
Mode I
First load case to consider is the plate slice subjected to a uni-axial tension which is
illustrated in Figure 4.3.
The software used for the computations is the commercial
ﬁnite element program Abaqus/Explicit. The model is modelled as a plane model in 2D
which is possible due to in-plane motion only. The relation between the length and the
width of the plate is L0/W0 = 3 since the spread of the necking region is assumed to be
roughly two times the width of the plate. The out-of-plane thickness of the steady state
model is much larger than the other dimension (L0 and W0), thus the slice is considered
under plane strain conditions meaning the out-of-plane strain, ε33, equals zero.
The plate is constrained in all translational degrees of freedom in point (x1, x2) =
(0, 0) to avoid rigid body motion. Rotation of the plate is assumed not to be an issue
as no net moment is acting on the plate. A prescribed displacement is acting in the
x2-direction in top and bottom that yield a resulting force. The load is applied as a
prescribed displacement in order to capture the correct material response beyond onset
of necking. This material response is impossible to capture as the force decreases and
this yields instability in the computations.
The discretized plate presented in Figure 4.4 is modelled with 4-noded plane strain
elements with reduced integration1. It is not possible to employ a full integration element
as well as an 8-noded element in the Abaqus/Explicit software together with the plane
strain condition, which was the element type that Nielsen and Hutchinson (2012) em-
ployed. The GTN material model is applied to describe the void growth during increased
loading. In Abaqus this porous metal plasticity model is intended to deal with materials
with up to 10% damage. The void nucleation is not introduced in the ﬁnite element
model to keep the computations simple. To ensure void growth an initial porosity in the
material is introduced which is chosen as a parameter to investigate through the analysis.
The middle third of the plate is modelled with a very ﬁne mesh consisting of quadratic
elements with the size Le ×Le in order to capture the details of the slant fracture. When
using the GTN model, the ideal element size would be the spacing between voids which
∆
∆
W0
L0
Imperfection zone
x1
x2
Figure 4.3: Illustration of the model considered by (Nielsen and Hutchinson, 2012).
1Abaqus/Explicit element type: CPE4R
==PAGE:38==
24
CHAPTER 4. COHESIVE FRACTURE ENERGY
Figure 4.4: Discretization of the Mode I model.
is in the order of 100 µm, since the GTN model is a micromechanical material model.
The width of the shear band when the localization occur is also controlled by the mesh
size as the shear band’s width corresponds to the element length. According to Nielsen
and Hutchinson (2012), an adequate mesh size is 64 elements through the width of the
plate when using quadratic 8-noded elements, but for this analysis it is expected to use
much more elements due the 4-noded elements.
In Table 4.1 the parameters for the material and damage are listed. These parameters
are used throughout the report. All parameters are held constant by exception of the
initial porosity which obtain three diﬀerent values. The material considered is a high-
strength steel. The yield surface constants chosen is equal to what was suggested by
Tvergaard (1990b) as well as the values for the critical void volume fraction and the ﬁnal
void volume fraction.
The plate is symmetric around the x2-axis, therefore two symmetric shear bands will
occur when the plastic strains start to localize. To ensure only one active shear band,
an imperfection zone is embedded in the plate in a 45° angle crossing the center of the
plate. The yield stress in this region is 0.1% less than for the rest of the plate. The
Table 4.1: Material and damage parameters. These parameters are employed throughout this
thesis.
Parameters
Notation
Value
Density
ρ
7850 kg/m3
Young’s modulus
E
210 × 109 Pa
Poisson’s ratio
ν
0.3
Yield stress
σy
630 × 106 Pa
Hardening exponent
N
0.1
Initial porosity
f0
0.005-0.02
Yield surface constants
q1, q2, q3
1.5, 1.0, 2.25
Critical void volume fraction
fC
0.15
Final void volume fraction
fF
0.4
==PAGE:39==
4.3. MODE I
25
elements deﬁning the region is picked from the GUI. The imperfection is assumed to
have a negligible inﬂuence on the overall response for the plate.
Initially, the results from Nielsen and Hutchinson (2012) are replicated regarding the
traction-separation curves for a plate exposed to a uni-axial tension corresponding to
pure Mode I loading. This is also a convergence study to investigate an adequate mesh
when using the 4-noded element. The analysis carried out in this chapter is from a com-
mercial ﬁnite element program where as the results from Nielsen and Hutchinson (2012)
is obtained from an in-house code. Four diﬀerent meshes are used in the convergence
analysis starting from 36 elements through the width and ending with 144 elements.
In Figure 4.5 the slant fracture for the four diﬀerent meshes are compared. The
coarse mesh in Figure 4.5a has a very rough presentation of the slant fracture. This
representation is gradually improving as the element size decreases. A small diﬀerence is
observed between Figure 4.5c and 4.5d as both discretizations are capable of representing
the slant fracture.
In Figure 4.6 traction-separation curves from the analysis are presented. The force is
normalized with the yield stress and the initial stressed area in the x1 −x3-plane (recall
Figure 4.2 for orientation of the coordinate system) and the separation is normalized
with the initial length, L0, of the plate in order to obtain the engineering strain. The
thick solid line is representing the plate with no initial damage, which is reaching the
Considére condition given as:
Tmax
σy
=
2
√
3
 
2
√
3
NE
σy
!N
e−N
at the onset of necking. This is depicted with a red circle in the ﬁgure. With the material
parameters given above one obtains a maximal traction of 1.505 where the Considére neck
occurs. As the engineering strain is plotted on the horizontal axis, the corresponding
Considére separation is at 0.1052, since the relation between the true strain and the
engineering strain is εtrue = ln(1 + εeng). Even though the material response for f0 = 0
(a) Le = W0/36.
(b) Le = W0/72.
(c) Le = W0/120.
(d) Le = W0/144.
Figure 4.5: Slant fracture for the diﬀerent mesh sizes for Mode I.
==PAGE:40==
26
CHAPTER 4. COHESIVE FRACTURE ENERGY
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
∆/L0
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
F/(σyA0)
f0 = 0.005
f0 = 0
Consid`ere condition
Le = W0/36
Le = W0/72
Le = W0/120
Le = W0/144
Figure 4.6: Traction-separation curves for diﬀerent mesh sizes in Mode I at a initial porosity
of f0 = 0.005.
reaches the level for peak traction, the separation at the maximum traction is indicating
a discrepancy.
The remaining thin curves in Figure 4.6 represents the convergence analysis. The
curves are all at a lower level due to initial void volume fraction. For this analysis an
initial damage of f0 = 0.005 is chosen. In Figure A.1 and A.2 in Appendix A traction-
separation curves for f0 = 0.01 and f0 = 0.02 are presented.
All four curves in Figure 4.6 follow the same tendency until reaching a point beyond
necking. At this separation around ∆/L0 = 0.15, the curves start to diverge but not
signiﬁcantly. From the onset of shear localization, where the slant fracture initiates, the
diﬀerences in material response are expressed in the slope towards zero traction. For
the very coarse mesh, i.e. the dotted line, the discretization is not able to capture the
sudden slant fracture. After shear localization the force is decreasing steady towards
zero while the displacement still increases. When increasing the number of elements, the
material response after onset of shear localization is changed to a more rapid deletion of
the load carrying capacity. The response for Le = W0/120 and Le = W0/144 are very
similar, showing an almost vertical drop in traction.
From the traction-separation curve it can be concluded, that the energy going into
the neck, ΓI is not mesh dependent, but the energy going into the shear localization, ΓII,
is highly mesh dependent. This is evident, since the curves do not diﬀer signiﬁcantly
from the onset of necking until onset of shear localization, but beyond the latter the
diﬀerence is signiﬁcant.
The cohesive fracture energy Γ0 = ΓI + ΓII is depicted in Figure 4.7. The cohesive
energy presented is based on the data depicted in Figure 4.6, A.1, and A.2. As numerical
data is collected, no analytical expressions for the curves are known, hence a numerical
integration is necessary to compute the area. This is done by use of the trapezoidal
method, which is a numerical approximation and is deﬁned as
Γ0 =
Z b
a
f(x)dx ≈1
2
k
X
n=1
(xn+1 −xn) (fn + fn+1)
==PAGE:41==
4.3. MODE I
27
where a and b are the boundaries for the curve, here represented by the onset of necking
and at slant fracture, respectively, and k is the number of entries in the numerical data.
This method is used throughout the investigations.
The cohesive fracture energies for the four diﬀerent meshes are investigated in Figure
4.7 indicated with diﬀerent markers. Three curves are presented showing the energy
levels for three diﬀerent initial porosities, i.e., f0 = 0.005, f0 = 0.01 and f0 = 0.02. The
initial porosity of f0 = 0.005 has a higher energy level compared to f0 = 0.02 because
of a less damaged material.
The ﬁgure represents the convergence analysis showing
the energy level for each mesh and the extrapolated value when Le goes to zero. The
energy level is high for the coarsest mesh corresponding to the long tail beyond onset of
shear localization. When decreasing the mesh size, the slope of the tail becomes steeper
corresponding to a decreased area under the curve. This is emphasized in this plot as
the extrapolated lines converges towards a certain energy level corresponding to ΓI.
It was suggested by Nielsen and Hutchinson (2012), that when Le is zero, the only
contribution to Γ0 is the ΓI, due to the mesh dependency of ΓII. In Table 4.2 values
for ΓI for diﬀerent element sizes, Le, are presented. The energy level for each initial
porosity is approximately equal, except for the very coarse mesh.
This may be due
to the diﬃculties in determining the point for onset of shear localization and point for
truncation. At Le = W0/120 for f0 = 0.02 a smaller ΓI is observed, compared to the
others. The explanation is found in Figure A.2 where a break in the traction-separation
curve is observed. This is an example of the numerical issues associated with some of
the Abaqus models which is discussed in Section 4.6. The ΓI level from Table 4.2 show
good correspondence to the energy level when Le is going towards zero.
Table 4.2: Energy levels for ΓI for diﬀerent element sizes and initial porosities for the Mode I
analysis.
Le = W0/36
Le = W0/72
Le = W0/120
Le = W0/144
f0 = 0.005
0.5424
0.5273
0.5263
0.5340
f0 = 0.01
0.4518
0.4380
0.4360
0.4343
f0 = 0.02
0.3387
0.3357
0.3264
0.3306
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
Le/W0
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Γ0/(σyW0)
f0 = 0.005
f0 = 0.01
f0 = 0.02
Le = W0/36
Le = W0/72
Le = W0/120
Le = W0/144
Figure 4.7: Cohesive fracture energy for diﬀerent mesh sizes and initial porosities.
==PAGE:42==
28
CHAPTER 4. COHESIVE FRACTURE ENERGY
From Figure 4.7 it is evident, that the medium mesh (Le = W0/120) and the ﬁne mesh
(Le = W0/144) almost provide equal results. This is further emphasized in Figure 4.6
where the traction-separation curves are almost equal. The medium mesh is adequate to
capture the material behaviour and this mesh has a discrepancy between the extrapolated
and numerically obtained energy below 0.6 %. Basically, the ΓII energy can be evaluated
in order to investigate an adequate mesh size. This is however not the procedure in this
analysis.
This element size of Le = W0/120 is much smaller than the mesh from Nielsen and
Hutchinson (2012). This is due to the low quality elements used in the computations,
as these elements only have four nodes. The 4-noded elements only use linear shape
functions even though second order accuracy is imposed in the software. The use of
8-noded elements will give the opportunity of using quadratic shape functions.
4.4
Mode I-Mode III
An additional displacement is introduced to the analysis as illustrated in Figure 4.8. The
top quarter part of the plate is displaced in positive x1-direction and the lower quarter
part is displaced in negative x1-direction. This load case corresponds to a Mode I-Mode
III loading of crack propagation in a thin plate. The additional loading is applied in
the plane, thus the plane 2D model is still employed. Besides the additional prescribed
displacement, this model is identical to the Mode I model regarding material parameters
and physical size. The model is locked in all translational degrees of freedom in the mid
node, but this boundary condition may be redundant due to the introduced prescribed
displacement in the x1-direction.
The method of introducing the Mode III to the plate is to prescribe a displacement
at a plane in top and bottom which is perpendicular to the plane subjected to the pure
Mode I displacement as illustrated in Figure 4.9a. The length of this plane is L0/4. This
plane ensure continuity in the curvature between the plate section and the original plate
∆x2
∆x2
W0
L0
Imperfection zone
x1
x2
∆x1
∆x1
L0
L0/4
Figure 4.8: Illustration of the model employed to the analysis of the combined Mode I-Mode
III load case.
==PAGE:43==
4.4. MODE I-MODE III
29
∆x2
∆x2
∆x1
∆x1
(a) Current boundary conditions.
∆x1
∆x1
∆x2
∆x2
(b) Alternative boundary conditions.
Figure 4.9: Boundary conditions for Mode I-Mode III loading.
on top and below the considered plate, which is the hatched parts in the ﬁgure.
In Figure 4.9b another example of prescribed boundary conditions is illustrated.
Here, the plate section is displaced at the interfaces to the original plate for both the
Mode I and Mode III loading. The free surfaces show discontinuity in the transition
from the considered plate to the original plate and ambiguity exists on how much of the
Mode III loading that actually shear the plate. On this basis the prescribed boundary
conditions from Figure 4.9a is chosen, due that these boundary conditions reﬂect reality
the most.
The original GTN model is not able to describe void coalescence and nucleation
in pure shear due the lack of triaxiality as the hydrostatic pressure is zero. To take
care of this the Nahshon-Hutchinson parameter, kω, has been developed, although this
parameter is not implemented in Abaqus/Explicit. In absence of this parameter the
analysis has been performed. However, it is known that diﬃculties representing a real
like material response may occur when increasing the Mode III load contribution.
At ﬁrst, a convergence study is performed regarding the mesh size in the ﬁne dis-
cretized region. For the initial investigations on this Mode I-Mode III load case, the
ratio of the prescribed displacements is ∆x1/∆x2 = 0.1 and the diﬀerent mesh sizes are
equal to the ones for the uni-axial tension model. Additionally, another mesh size is
introduced having the element length Le = W0/100. The slant fracture for the diﬀerent
mesh is shown in Figure 4.10. The coarsest mesh, i.e., Le = W0/36 is not capable of
describing the slant fracture satisfactory. Indications on a slant fracture are present,
but the ratio aspect of the deformed elements is too high for the slant fracture to fully
evolve. As the mesh size decreases the representation of the slant fracture improves from
jagged surfaces for Le = W0/72 to a more homogeneous fracture for Le = W0/144.
Having a plane that controls the Mode III loading it is observed, that the active shear
band ﬂips, so that it does not follow the imperfection zone but instead is perpendicular
==PAGE:44==
30
CHAPTER 4. COHESIVE FRACTURE ENERGY
(a) Le = W0/36.
(b) Le = W0/72.
(c) Le = W0/100.
(d) Le = W0/120.
(e) Le = W0/144.
Figure 4.10: Slant fracture for the diﬀerent mesh sizes for Mode I-Mode III for ∆x1/∆x2 = 0.1
and f0 = 0.005.
to the zone. The mechanism behind this phenomenon is, that the shear band prefers
tension rather than compression. Introducing the prescribed displacement in the positive
x1-direction at the top part of the plate and in the negative x1-direction at the bottom
part of the plate will cause compression in the slant crack if it follows the imperfection
zone.
In Figure 4.11c traction-separation curves for the combined load case are presented
for diﬀerent meshes and for a initial porosity of f0 = 0.005. The curves are truncated
where a drop is observed in the response from the x1-direction, which is observed in
Figure 4.11a, where the response in the x1-direction is presented. In Figure 4.11b, the
response for the x2-direction is presented. The graphs for the remaining initial porosities
are shown in Figure A.3 in Appendix A. For Figure 4.11c, the displacements in the two
directions are converted into an eﬀective lengthen of the plate as ∆=
q
∆2x1 + ∆2x2 and
similar, the corresponding forces are converted into an eﬃcient force as F =
q
F 2x1 + F 2x2.
This procedure is providing a vectorized traction-separation plot of the mode mixity
loading. The graphs are normalized in an identical manner as for the Mode I analysis.
∆is normalized with L0, which is the height of the plate and F is normalized with the
yield stress and area. This area is employed as Fx1 is to be considered as a shear force,
thus is Fx1 also divided with the initial out-of-plane area.
The shape of the material response for all curves is identical to the Mode I analysis
until the onset of necking. The four responses in Figure 4.11c are approximately equal
until the onset of shear localization. From this point, a diﬀerence between the curves
is observed, where the decreasing element size causes a more step curve beyond onset
of shear localization, similar to the Mode I analysis. There is a slight indication of a
decrease in extent on the horizontal axis but the total force is reaching the same level
as for the Mode I loading. This further indicates a decrease in the cohesive energy for
the Mode I-Mode III load case. The mesh dependency on the ΓII is emphasized again
in these graphs where the course beyond the onset of shear localization is changing from
a soft transition for the coarse mesh to a sudden drop for the ﬁnest mesh.
In Figure A.3 in Appendix A, the traction-separation curves for f0 = 0.01 and
==PAGE:45==
4.4. MODE I-MODE III
31
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
∆x1/L0
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
Fx1/(σyA0)
Le = W0/36
Le = W0/72
Le = W0/100
Le = W0/120
Le = W0/144
(a) ∆x1 vs. Fx1.
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
∆x2/L0
0
0.5
1
1.5
Fx2/(σyA0)
Le = W0/36
Le = W0/72
Le = W0/100
Le = W0/120
Le = W0/144
(b) ∆x2 vs. Fx2.
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
∆/L0
0
0.5
1
1.5
F/(σyA0)
Le = W0/36
Le = W0/72
Le = W0/100
Le = W0/120
Le = W0/144
(c) ∆vs. F
Figure 4.11: Traction-separation curve for f0 = 0.005 from the convergence study for combined
mode I-mode III load case when ∆x1/∆x2 = 0.1.
f0 = 0.02 are presented. The maximum force is decreasing for increasing initial porosities
as also observed for the Mode I loading. This is expected as the porosities weaken the
plate, and thus the maximum force necessarily have to decrease. Also, the maximum
elongation of the plate is decreased for increasing initial porosity for the same reason.
Again the ﬁne mesh is most eﬃcient to describe the slant fracture of the plate regard-
less of the initial porosity. When utilizing this mesh in the computations, the material
curve is rapidly decreased to zero traction. Almost no diﬀerence is observed in the ma-
terial response between mesh size Le = W0/120 and Le = W0/144. A larger diﬀerence
is observed for Le = W0/100 and the two aforementioned element sizes.
The truncation of the data at the slant fracture at the end of the traction-separation
curve is unambiguous. This truncation is clearly deﬁned from Figure 4.11a, since the
material at this point has lost its load carrying capacity, meaning it is reasonable to use
the steep slope as one of the boundaries for ΓII. The onset of shear localization may
be discussed, but this is out of scope for this section as this point only inﬂuences the
contributions, i.e., ΓI and ΓII, to the total energy, but Γ0 does not change if the onset
of localization is changed. One crucial truncation point is the onset of necking especially
as this point has a major inﬂuence on the dominating ΓI. Therefore, it is important
to investigate if it is still reasonable to deﬁne the cohesive energy from the Considère
==PAGE:46==
32
CHAPTER 4. COHESIVE FRACTURE ENERGY
condition until slant fracture when considering the Mode I-Mode III loading.
In Figure 4.12 ﬁve points are marked, all located in the top of the plate. The points
A-E lie in the top third part of the plate coinciding with x1 = 0. The distance between
each point is W0/4 with point A at the top edge. Point A is a reference point as this
point is exposed to a prescribed displacement. The velocity of the remaining four points,
i.e., B-E, is compared to the velocity in point A in order to investigate when the top and
bottom third of the plate is elastic unloaded. This gives the opportunity to validate if the
data truncation at the maximum traction is a reasonable assumption when considering
diﬀerent ratios of ∆x1/∆x2.
The traction-separation curves for an initial porosity of f0 = 0.005 and for the
ratio ∆x1/∆x2 = 0 is plotted together with the rate of displacements of point B to
E relative to Point A in Figure 4.13. The top graph is the traction-separation curve
also presented above in Figure 4.6, but now the eﬀective normalized force is plotted
against the normalized displacement in the x2-direction. The bottom graph presents
the comparison of the velocities of the four points relative to point A as a function of
the normalized displacement in the x2-direction. Up until the onset of necking the four
curves are separated at diﬀerent levels below one. This can be interpreted as each of
the points B-E do not move with the same velocity as point A. Plastic deformation
thus occur not only in the middle third of the plate but also in the top.
Since the
model is symmetric is it seasonable to believe, that the response from the bottom part
is identical. At the onset of necking the response is changing. The normalized velocities,
˙∆/ ˙
∆A become unstable which may be inﬂuenced by the bifurcation from one stable
solution to another. The eﬀect of necking is subsequent emphasized in the sense that all
velocity curves are approaching one, meaning that the material has elastic unloaded and
no further plastic deformation takes place in the region of the points. This unloading
corresponds to a rigid body motion of the top and bottom. These ﬁndings corresponds
well to the procedure from Nielsen and Hutchinson (2012).
That no plastic deformation takes place in the top and bottom part of the plate can
be related to the necking of the plate. At necking, all energy will go into forming the
neck and thus no energy is left for the areas outside the necking region to plastic deform.
It is also noted, that the ratios of ˙∆/ ˙∆A are not increased to one rapidly at the onset
of necking. Instead the neck is evolving over a period of time.
With the response from the Mode I loading in mind, identical analyses have been
performed investigating the onset of necking at ratios of ∆x1/∆x2 diﬀerent from zero. In
Figure 4.14 graphs showing the development of the neck for ∆x1/∆x2 = 0.1 is presented
and identical tendency is observed as for ∆x1/∆x2 = 0, again with f0 = 0.005. At the
W0/4
A
B
C
D
E
W0
W0/2
Figure 4.12: Graphical explanation of the positions of the points A-E.
==PAGE:47==
4.4. MODE I-MODE III
33
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
∆2/L0
0
0.5
1
1.5
F/(A0σy)
∆x1/∆x2 = 0
f0 = 0.005
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
∆2/L0
0
0.5
1
˙∆/ ˙∆A
A-B
A-C
A-D
A-E
Figure 4.13:
Traction-separation curve and investigations on the onset of necking for
∆x1/∆x2 = 0 and f0 = 0.005.
maximum traction the plastic deformation of the plate takes place in the middle part of
the plate and the top and bottom part is unloaded.
Figure A.4 and A.5 in Appendix A repeat the comparison, but for ratios of ∆x1/∆x2 =
0.3 and ∆x1/∆x2 = 0.6. The conclusion is identical as these graphs also emphasize that
the entire plastic deformation goes into the necking zone beyond the onset of necking.
Thus, it is reasonable to utilize an identical approach for computing the cohesive fracture
energy for Mode I-Mode III as for Mode I.
The cohesive fracture energy is evaluated for all mesh sizes and initial porosities. In
Figure 4.15 the convergence study is presented, based on the curves in Figure 4.11b,
A.3c, and A.3d.
The energy presented in Figure 4.15a is the energy based on the
force and displacement in the x2-direction.
The energy is decreasing for decreasing
element size, identical tendency as for the Mode I analysis. In Figure 4.15b the cohesive
energy on basis on the total response from Figure 4.11c, A.3e, and A.3f is presented.
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
∆2/L0
0
0.5
1
1.5
F/(A0σy)
∆x1/∆x2 = 0.1
f0 = 0.005
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
∆2/L0
0
0.5
1
˙∆/ ˙∆A
A-B
A-C
A-D
A-E
Figure 4.14:
Traction-separation curve and investigations on the onset of necking for
∆x1/∆x2 = 0.1 and f0 = 0.005.
==PAGE:48==
34
CHAPTER 4. COHESIVE FRACTURE ENERGY
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
Le/W0
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Γ0/(σyW0)
f0 = 0.005
f0 = 0.01
f0 = 0.02
Le = W0/36
Le = W0/72
Le = W0/100
Le = W0/120
Le = W0/144
(a) Energy in x2-direction.
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
Le/W0
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Γ0/(σyW0)
f0 = 0.005
f0 = 0.01
f0 = 0.02
Le = W0/36
Le = W0/72
Le = W0/100
Le = W0/120
Le = W0/144
(b) Total energy.
Figure 4.15: Cohesive fracture energy levels for diﬀerent initial porosities from the combined
Mode I-Mode III load case when ∆x1/∆x2 = 0.1.
The diﬀerence between Figure 4.15a and 4.15b is not signiﬁcant. This implies a non-
signiﬁcant contribution to the total energy level from the Mode III loading, although
this has a great impact on the overall material response.
The energy level is lower for the Mode I-Mode III analysis than for the Mode I
analysis which also was indicated in the traction-separation curves where the extent in
the horizontal direction was larger for the latter analysis (recall Figure 4.7 on page 27).
The deviations between the energies in the two load scenarios are approximately 10%.
Thus, some indications on a change in cohesive energy are present, as the two diﬀerent
models are providing signiﬁcantly diﬀerent energy levels. The slope of the curves are
approximately equal.
In Table 4.3, the ΓI based on the eﬀective force and displacement is presented for the
diﬀerent discretization and initial porosities. Again, the level is approximately constant
for the diﬀerent discretizations if the mesh size Le = W0/36 is disregarded. However,
the energies diverge more severe than the energies from the Mode I analysis within
each initial porosity. It is observed, that only for an initial porosity of f0 = 0.005 the
extrapolated level for Le going towards zero is approximately equal to the ΓI level.
The remaining two initial porosities have a higher level of the energy of ΓI, however
no signiﬁcant diﬀerence is observed. When comparing these energy levels to the energy
from the Mode I analysis, the energy level may seem identical considering the unstable
tendency. However, for the ﬁnest mesh, i.e., Le = W0/144 indications is observed, that
the energy might be lower for the mixed mode.
On basis on earlier discussion, the convergence study found the mesh Le = W0/120
adequate to capture a satisfying material response for the analysis of the Mode I-Mode
Table 4.3: Energy levels for ΓI for diﬀerent element sizes and initial porosities for the Mode
I-Mode III analysis.
Le = W0/36
Le = W0/72
Le = W0/100
Le = W0/120
Le = W0/144
f0 = 0.005
0.5434
0.5199
0.5263
0.5066
0.5123
f0 = 0.01
0.4592
0.4413
0.4302
0.4304
0.4255
f0 = 0.02
0.3403
0.3396
0.3348
0.3253
0.3272
==PAGE:49==
4.4. MODE I-MODE III
35
III mixity. The mesh is utilized in the investigation of the inﬂuence of Mode III loading
by changing the amount of shearing introduced to the model. The shearing is changed
from ∆x1/∆x2 = 0.05 to ∆x1/∆x2 = 0.5 in the following pre-speciﬁed steps:
[0.05; 0.1; 0.15; 0.2; 0.25; 0.3; 0.35; 0.4; 0.5; 0.6]
for the three initial porosities. The aim is to investigate the evolution of cohesive fracture
energy as the load case is changing from a pure Mode I loading to also include the Mode
III loading. Until now, the general procedure when studying mode mixity is a rotational
sweep of the traction-separation curve from pure normal separation to pure transverse
separation disregard whether the transverse separation is the Mode III or the Mode II.
Representative traction-separation curves for an initial porosity of f0 = 0.005 from
the onset of necking to ﬁnal fracture is shown from diﬀerent views in Figure 4.17 in a
3D space. Similar plots for the remaining two initial porosities are included in Appendix
A in Figure A.6. The x1-axis shows the normal separation δn, the x2-axis shows the
transverse separation δt and the normalized traction is plotted in the x3-direction. The
asterisks indicates the ﬁrst indication on a shear localization (Figure 4.16a) and the
circles indicate the onset of shear localization (Figure 4.16b).
From Figure 4.17 a tendency appear which is diﬀerent from the uniform rotational
sweep assumed in the literature. Indications of this was observed in the comparison of
Table 4.2 and 4.3. The point for onset of shear localization is not having equal distance
to (δn, δt) = (0, 0) but instead the distance ﬁrst decreases, then stabilized and ﬁnally
increases again when approaching a ratio of ∆x1/∆x2 = 0.6. The traction-separation
curves presented is the basis for the cohesive energy, as the energy is exactly the area
under these curves. It is further noticed, that the distance from the ﬁrst indications
of the shear localization to the actual onset of shear localization become larger when
increasing the Mode III loading.
The development of the total cohesive fracture energy, Γ0, as a function of the ratio
∆x1/∆x2 is presented in Figure 4.18. It is noted, that some data points are missing at
∆x1/∆x2 = 0.15 and ∆x1/∆x2 = 0.6 for f0 = 0.02. This is due to convergence issues in
Abaqus, which will be discussed in Section 4.6.
For f0 = 0.005 the data points show a clear tendency; when increasing the amount
of prescribed displacement in the x1-direction corresponding to increase the Mode III
contribution, the energy initially drops, then settling at a plateau and lastly increases.
For the ratio ∆x1/∆x2 = 0.35 at f0 = 0.01 and f0 = 0.02 a small increase in the energy is
(a) First indication on shear lo-
calization.
(b) Onset of shear localization.
Figure 4.16: Graphical explanation on points in Figure 4.17.
==PAGE:50==
36
CHAPTER 4. COHESIVE FRACTURE ENERGY
0
0.05
δt
0
0
0.1
0.02
0.04
δn
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.5
0.14
F/(A0σy)
1
1.5
(a) View 1.
0
0.14
0.12
0
0.1
0.02
0.04
0.08
δt
0.06
δn
0.06
0.08
0.04
0.1
0.02
0.12
0
0.14
0.5
F/(A0σy)
1
1.5
(b) View 2.
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
δt
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
δn
(c) View 3.
Figure 4.17: Traction-separation curves for diﬀerent ratios of ∆x1/∆x2 and f0 = 0.005.
observed, but this may be due to the amount of data points from the numerical analysis.
At higher ratios, that is ∆x1/∆x2 ≥0.5, the energy levels increase for an initial porosity
of f0 = 0.005 and f0 = 0.01. For a initial porosity of f0 = 0.02 it is not possible to
comment on a potential increase in energy due to the missing data point although the
energy increases at ∆x1/∆x2 = 0.5 compared to the plateau.
Figure 4.18 indicates that when considering Mode I-Mode III the reality may be
diﬀerent from the until now assumed energy distribution.
This was also noticed in
Figure 4.17. The decreasing energy level for increasing ratios of ∆x1/∆x2 is in the order
of 10 % when comparing the maximum energy at pure Mode I and the minimum energy
at the mode mixity.
Though, some uncertainty follows the simulations for larger amount of ∆x1 due to
the absence of the Nahshon-Hutchinson parameter, kω. The increase in the cohesive
energy at larger values of ∆x1 may be due that the plate needs to elongate further for
the void growth and coalescence to reach the same level as for smaller ratios of ∆x1/∆x2.
The inﬂuence of the Nahshon-Hutchinson shear parameter is however not investigated
in this thesis.
The part of the plate that is prescribed in the x1-direction both in the positive and
negative direction represents the majority of the entire part. In fact only half of the plate
is not exposed to a shearing displacement. This may have an inﬂuence in the response of
the plate at higher ratios of ∆x1/∆x2, where the actual plate deﬂection can be diﬃcult
==PAGE:51==
4.4. MODE I-MODE III
37
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
∆x1/∆x2
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Γ0/(σyA0)
f0 = 0.005
f0 = 0.01
f0 = 0.02
Figure 4.18: Development of the cohesive fracture energy as a function of the ratio ∆x1/∆x2
for the three initial porosities.
to demonstrate. A solution to this is either to consider a plate with a larger extent in
the x2-direction or impose the prescribed displacement diﬀerently.
As the displacements have a major inﬂuence on the cohesive energy, the force is
not changing signiﬁcantly.
Figure 4.19 presents the maximum traction for diﬀerent
contributions from Mode III loading. A diﬀerence in level exists when the respective
initial porosity are compared. A small decrease in maximum traction is observed for each
initial porosity when increasing the ratio ∆x1/∆x2, but this change is non-signiﬁcant at
a deviation of well below 1%. For that reason, the evolution of the cohesive energy is
due to the diﬀerence in the extension of the plate and not to a decrease in maximum
traction. Thus, the change in cohesive energy has its base in how much the plate is
extended. The extension of the plate is clearly varying as emphasized in Figure 4.17c.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
∆x1/∆x2
1.4
1.42
1.44
1.46
1.48
1.5
Fmax/(A0σy)
f0 = 0.005
f0 = 0.01
f0 = 0.02
Figure 4.19: Comparison of the maximum traction in the Mode I-Mode III load case.
==PAGE:52==
38
CHAPTER 4. COHESIVE FRACTURE ENERGY
On basis of the traction-separation curves from Figure 4.17, a cohesive relation may
be outlined similar to Figure 3.11 on page 20. From Figure 4.19 it is assumed, that the
maximum traction is considered as constant, thus the peak traction from ∆x1/∆x2 = 0 is
deﬁning the level. If the maximum traction was signiﬁcantly diﬀerent when considering
the various ratios of ∆x1/∆x2, the bilinear cohesive relation described in Figure 3.10b
on page 20 will have problems at zero normal and transverse separation as the level of
traction only can obtain one value. Equation (3.21) is utilized to visualize the energy
from Figure 4.18 in a 3D graph, showing the development of the energy going from pure
normal separation to include transverse separation. The dashed lines indicates that the
cohesive constitutive relation continues until pure transverse separation here represented
by the Mode III contribution.
0
0.1
δt
0.2
0
0
0.05
0.3
0.1
δn
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.5
0.4
0.35
0.4
F/(A0σy)
1
1.5
(a) View 1.
0
0.4
0.35
0
0.3
0.05
0.25
0.1
δt
0.15
0.2
δn
0.2
0.15
0.25
0.1
0.3
0.05
0.35
0
0.4
0.5
F/(A0σy)
1
1.5
(b) View 2.
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
δt
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
δn
(c) View 3.
Figure 4.20: Cohesive relation for diﬀerent ratios of ∆x1/∆x2 and f0 = 0.005.
4.5
Mode I-Mode II
In Figure 4.21, the model from Mode I-Mode II mixity is illustrated together with
the discretized model.. When considering Mode I-Mode II, the ﬁnite element model is
represented in full 3D due to the out-of-plane movement which cannot be captured in 2D.
The dimensions of the plate are identical to the other models. Again, the displacements
in the x2-direction are prescribed on the top and bottom surface of the plate. Further,
the nodes on the upper horizontal edge on the plate’s front side are prescribed in the
==PAGE:53==
4.5. MODE I-MODE II
39
∆x2
∆x2
W0
L0
Imperfection zone
∆x3
∆x3
x1
x2
x3
Figure 4.21: Model employed in the Mode I-Mode II analysis.
positive x3-direction and the nodes on the lower horizontal edge on the back side are
prescribed in the negative x3-direction.
As for the combined Mode I-Mode III load case, the procedure for imposing the
boundary conditions has been investigated to ensure continuity. The nodes on the top
and bottom plane are prescribed in the positive and negative x2-direction, respectively.
This ensure, that these two planes at all time are parallel and thereby maintain the
continuity to the remaining plate. Further, due to the plane strain condition, the nodes
on the back and front side is subject to a periodic boundary condition meaning each node
on the back side will experience the same out-of-plane movement as the corresponding
node on the front side.
Due to the amount of nodes in the Abaqus model a small
Python script has been written to take care of this.
The nodes at the top edge on
the front side and the nodes at the bottom edge on the backside are exposed to a
prescribed displacement in the positive and negative x3-direction, respectively.
The
plane strain condition ensure in this matter a transfer of the prescribed displacement to
the entire plane at the top and bottom. Further, the top and bottom plane will always
be perpendicular to the Mode II loading.
Due to computational time, the discretized FE-model has one element through the
thickness and a mesh size of Le = W0/64 is chosen in the middle part of the plate. The
model is depicted in Figure 4.22. Compared to the earlier described models this mesh
size is coarse. In the previous analyses it was found that the mesh size has an inﬂuence
on the ΓII energy, i.e., the energy that goes in creating the shear band. The energy
needed to create the neck, ΓI, is not aﬀected by the element size. Since ΓI is much
larger than ΓII it is reasonable to believe that the obtained material response is fairly
accurate. However, it is expected, that the outcome is larger energy levels.
As the case for the Mode I-Mode III study, an eﬀective displacement and force have
been employed in order to calculate the cohesive fracture energy.
The displacement
is deﬁned as ∆=
q
∆2x3 + ∆2x2 and is normalized with L0.
The force is deﬁned as
F =
q
F 2x3 + F 2x2 and is normalized with the yield stress of the material and the area.
Since the analysis consider a 3D model, the thickness of the plate now corresponds to
==PAGE:54==
40
CHAPTER 4. COHESIVE FRACTURE ENERGY
Figure 4.22: The discretized model for the Mode I-Mode II analysis.
the extent of the plate in the x3-direction. For the 2D model the thickness was unity
due to the plane strain element formulation. Thus the area of the of the stressed area in
the x1 −x3-plane is deﬁned as the width of the plate times the thickness of the element
in the x3-direction.
The point of truncation is investigated, whether is it reasonable to believe, that
the onset of necking is at the peak traction. In Figure 4.23, the truncation analysis is
presented for the ratio ∆x3/∆x2 = 0.1. The analysis for ∆x3/∆x2 = 0.3 and ∆x3/∆x2 =
0.6 is presented in Figure A.8 and A.9 in Appendix A. The same tendency as for the
Mode I-Mode III analysis is observed, as the plate starts to unload in the top and bottom
region at the peak traction. Thus, the cohesive energy for the Mode I-Mode II is again
deﬁned from the onset of necking to the slant fracture. The curves are not as smooth
before onset of necking as for the Mode I-Mode III load case, but the transition to elastic
unloading is evident from the curves where the curves further seem to stabilize.
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
∆2/L0
0
0.5
1
1.5
F/(A0σy)
∆x3/∆x2 = 0.1
f0 = 0.005
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
∆2/L0
0
0.5
1
˙∆/ ˙∆A
A-B
A-C
A-D
A-E
Figure 4.23:
Traction-separation curve and investigations on the onset of necking for
∆x3/∆x2 = 0.1.
==PAGE:55==
4.5. MODE I-MODE II
41
A 3D visualization of the traction-separation curves from the onset of necking until
fracture for diﬀerent ratios of ∆x3/∆x2 is depicted in Figure 4.24 for an initial porosity
of f0 = 0.005.
Similar curves for f0 = 0.01 and f0 = 0.02 are depicted in Figure
A.10 in Appendix A. Again, asterisks and circles are employed to describe the ﬁrst
indications on shear localization and onset of shear localization, respectively, as described
in Figure 4.16. The development of the curves are alike the rotational sweep at least
when disregarding the two curves for ∆x3/∆x2 = 0.5 and ∆x3/∆x2 = 0.6. These two
curves are elongated farther than the other responses and do not follow the trend that
these curves exhibit. Where a diﬀerence was observed between the indications of shear
localization to the actual onset of shear localization in the Mode I-Mode III load case
for increasing ratios of ∆x1/∆x2, this tendency is not present for this model.
0.14
0.12
0.1
0.08
δt
0.06
0.04
0
0.02
0.14
δn
0.12
0.1
0.08
0.06
0
0.04
0.02
0
0.5
F/(A0σy)
1
1.5
(a) View 1.
0
0.14
0.12
0
0.1
0.02
0.04
0.08
δt
0.06
δn
0.06
0.08
0.04
0.1
0.02
0.12
0
0.14
0.5
F/(A0σy)
1
1.5
(b) View 2.
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
δt
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
δn
(c) View 3.
Figure 4.24: Traction-separation curves for diﬀerent ratios of ∆x1/∆x2 and f0 = 0.005.
From Figure 4.24 indications of a constant level of cohesive energy are observed. The
asterisks and circles form an arc with its center located at (δn, δt) = (0, 0). The curves
for ratios greater than ∆x3/∆x2 = 0.5 are elongated to a larger extend. Common for all
responses is, that the extension of the response beyond the onset of shear localization
is larger than for the Mode I-Mode III analysis due to the coarse mesh chosen for this
analysis. In Figure 4.25 the slant fracture is depicted. In Figure 4.25a and 4.25b the ini-
tial porosity is f0 = 0.005, and the slant fracture has diﬃculties going through the entire
plate. At some point, the fracture ﬂips and chooses to propagate in another direction ap-
proximately perpendicular to the imperfection zone. As Simonsen and Törnqvist (2004)
==PAGE:56==
42
CHAPTER 4. COHESIVE FRACTURE ENERGY
(a) ∆x3/∆x2
=
0,
f0 = 0.005.
(b) ∆x3/∆x2 = 0.15,
f0 = 0.050.
(c) ∆x3/∆x2 = 0, f0 =
0.01.
Figure 4.25: Slant fracture for diﬀerent ratios of ∆x3/∆x2 and initial porosities from the Mode
I-Mode II load case.
observed in their experiments, the steady state crack propagation had a tendency to ﬂip
back and forth from one shear band to another. This phenomenon was investigated by
Nielsen and Gundlach (2016), where cross sections in the ﬂipping region perpendicular
to the crack growing was examined. The X-ray tomography showed exactly the shape
in Figure 4.25a for a developing ﬂip. Further, for the model depicted in Figure 4.25b,
the ﬂipping is not fully adopted on the right side of the model. This may cause the
elongated responses for the ratios ∆x3/∆x2 = 0.15 to ∆x3/∆x2 = 0.4.
In Figure 4.25c, the slant fracture for the ratio ∆x3/∆x2 = 0 and initial porosity of
f0 = 0.01 is depicted. As seen, the chosen mesh size is capable of representing a slant
fracture as observed in the analyses for Mode I and Mode I-Mode III, although the clean
slant fracture require a certain amount of initial damage to appear.
The traction-separation curves are the basis for computation of the energy in the
plate. The cohesive fracture energy is depicted in Figure 4.26 for the three initial porosi-
ties and the various ratios of ∆x3/∆x2. The development of the energy is diﬀerent than
for the Mode I-Mode III analysis. The trend is that the energy is constant for smaller
ratios of ∆x3/∆x2 at identical level as for the Mode I analysis and at ∆x3/∆x2 = 0.4 the
energy starts to increases drastic. An increase in energy is observed for f0 = 0.005 at
∆x3/∆x2 = 0.15. It is noted in Figure 4.24 that beyond onset of shear localization the
material response is elongated for ∆x3/∆x2 = 0.15 to ∆x3/∆x2 = 0.4, which is causing
an increase in the ΓII energy and subsequent the increase in Γ0.
The drastic increase in energy for ∆x3/∆x2 may be caused by the lack of the Nahshon-
Hutchinson shear parameter kω although some triaxility is believed to be present in the
material at this rather low inﬂuence from the x3-direction. The reason for the existence of
triaxility is the plane strain condition, which allows a stress out-of-plane. The tendency
of increasing energy levels is also seen in the Mode I-Mode III analysis, but not in the
same extent. For f0 = 0.005 the increase is approximately 20%, which is drastic.
The maximum traction is evaluated for the diﬀerent ratios of ∆x3/∆x2 to clarify if
the increase in energy is due to this. In Figure 4.27 the development of the maximum
traction is depicted. The level of maximum traction when increasing the ratio of ∆x3/∆x2
==PAGE:57==
4.5. MODE I-MODE II
43
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
∆x3/∆x2
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Γ0/(σyA0)
f0 = 0.005
f0 = 0.01
f0 = 0.02
Figure 4.26:
The cohesive energy for the Mode I-Mode II analysis for increasing ratios of
∆x3/∆x2 at the three diﬀerent initial porosities.
is constant when considering ratios in the range [0;0.6]. Thus, the combined load from
the two directions end up being identical in magnitude as the pure Mode I load, even for
the higher ratios of ∆x3/∆x2. The change is caused by an increase in the displacement,
which already may have been manifested in Figure 4.24.
The traction-separation curves from Figure 4.24 are the basis for a cohesive sweep
from the normal separation in Mode I to a transverse separation in Mode II as depicted
in Figure 3.11 on page 20. The suggestion to a cohesive law is presented in Figure 4.28.
It is clear, that the mesh size in the ﬁne region is not small enough, as the ΓII energy
contributes signiﬁcant to the total cohesive energy.
Also the lack of the clean slant
fracture for the model with an initial porosity of f0 = 0.005 has a great inﬂuence on the
ΓII energy.
In Figure A.11 in Appendix A the cohesive laws are depicted for the initial porosities
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
∆x3/∆x2
1.4
1.42
1.44
1.46
1.48
1.5
Fmax/(A0σy)
f0 = 0.005
f0 = 0.01
f0 = 0.02
Figure 4.27: Maximum traction for the Mode I-Mode II model for varying ratios of ∆x3/∆x2.
==PAGE:58==
44
CHAPTER 4. COHESIVE FRACTURE ENERGY
0
0.1
0.2
δt
0
0
0.3
0.05
0.1
δn
1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.4
0.35
2
0.4
3
F/(A0σy)
×106
4
5
6
(a) View 1.
0
0.4
0.35
0
0.05
0.3
0.1
0.25
δt
0.15
0.2
δn
0.2
0.15
0.25
0.1
0.3
0.35
0.05
0.4
0
2
F/(A0σy)
×106
4
6
(b) View 2.
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
δt
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
δn
(c) View 3.
Figure 4.28: Cohesive relation for diﬀerent ratios of ∆x3/∆x2 for an initial porosity of 0.5%.
of f0 = 0.01 and f0 = 0.02. In these curves, the ΓII contribution is slightly less than for
f0 = 0.005, but the energy contribution still is signiﬁcant in the total energy.
4.6
Numerical issues
Some diﬃculties have been met in the parameter study of the mode mixity load cases.
For the Mode I-Mode III load case the ﬁne mesh has been used due to the consistency in
results and a relative good correspondence to the extrapolated “theoretical” Γ0 value. For
the Mode I-Mode II load case a predeﬁned mesh has been employed to the computations
due to the knowledge regarding cohesive fracture energy. The meshes have introduced
convergence issues in some analyses. The phenomenon observed is occurring at the onset
of shear localization. The plate seems to unload right before this point after which the
plate is loaded again. In Figure 4.29 this phenomenon is outlined with von Mises stress
plot from Abaqus.
For Figure 4.29a the computations have been evaluated correct.
The necking of the plate is evident and indications of a shear localization into a shear
band is appearing. Figure 4.29b shows the following step in which, what seems like an
unloading occur. For the ongoing step 142 in Figure 4.29c the computations continue,
but not directly from step 140 as the stress ﬁeld has changed.
The numerical issues are also seen in the traction-separation response. In Figure
==PAGE:59==
4.6. NUMERICAL ISSUES
45
(a) Step 140.
(b) Step 141.
(c) Step 142.
Figure 4.29: Von Mises stress plots of numerical issues from Abaqus.
4.30a the traction-separation curve is presented from one analysis that could not be
accomplished, i.e., for the ratio ∆x1/∆x2 = 0.15 and an initial porosity of f0 = 0.02.
The shape of the response is similar to the ones obtained earlier, but in the region of
onset of shear localization the material response show a discontinuity. This discontinuity
is shown in Figure 4.30b. The material recovers in gradually peaks until it achieves the
level of traction before the loss of carrying capacity.
Compared to Figure A.3f the
elongation is clearly extended, which leads to an increase in cohesive energy.
The solution to avoid this behaviour has been mass scaling. Working with an explicit,
dynamic FE-code the time step can be computed in terms of the smallest element size
h and speed of the stress wave c as
∆t ≤f
"
h
c
#
(4.1)
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
∆/L0
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
F/(A0σy)
∆x1/∆x2 = 0.15
(a) Full material response.
0.16
0.165
0.17
0.175
0.18
∆/L0
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
F/(A0σy)
∆x1/∆x2 = 0.15
(b) Close up.
Figure 4.30:
Traction-separation curve to illustrate the numerical issues.
The ratio of
∆x1/∆x2 = 0.15 and an initial porosity of f0 = 0.02 has been employed.
==PAGE:60==
46
CHAPTER 4. COHESIVE FRACTURE ENERGY
where c =
p
E/ρ in the simplest form. From this latter expression the dependency of the
density on the wave speed and subsequent also on the stable time step ∆t. By increasing
the density and thereby the mass the stable time step is increased and convergence has in
most cases been achieved. Though, in some analyses it has not been possible to achieve
convergence even with large increase in density, i.e., a factor of 5. These analyses is
absent in the graphs.
==PAGE:61==
5 FE modeling in 21⁄2D
The motivation for developing an in-house code is to investigate, if it is possible to avoid
the drastic increasing computation costs when dealing with 3D models. The compu-
tation time is controlled of primarily the amount of equations in an analysis which is
controlled by the degrees of freedom. It is secondary controlled by the type of analysis,
e.g. explicit/implicit analysis, modal analysis etc. When considering the Mode I-Mode
II load case it is inevitable to go into 3D due to the out-of-plane movement when making
the steady state consideration. This will cause an increase in nodes for a single element
from four in 2D to eight in 3D when considering an element with linear shape functions
as the ones used in the mode mixity analyses. Additionally the degrees of freedom will
increase from two to three for each node. When gathering this, the number of equations
for a single element will increase from 8 to 24. If a 20-noded 3D element is considered, the
degrees of freedom will increase to 60, and in conjunction with the necessity of a small
element size when dealing with the GTN model this will give unreasonable computation
times especially seen from an industrial point of view.
An approach to avoid this drastic increase in the system of equations is to introduce
a 2D element in a 3D space, which is the main idea in the code. The element is a plane
element with eight nodes each having three degrees of freedom. In Figure 5.1 the element
is presented and the degrees of freedom are depicted together with the node numbering,
which has been adopted from Tvergaard (1996). An 8-noded element is chosen due to the
better accuracy as this element has quadratic shape functions compared to the 4-noded
element used in Abaqus, which only has linear shape functions.
u7
v7
w7
u5
v5
w5
u2
v2
w2
u1
v1
w1
x1
x2
x3
u6
v6
w6
u4
v4
w4
u3
v3
w3
u8
v8
w8
Figure 5.1: 2D element with degrees of freedom in the 3D space and the local node numbering
for the element.
47
==PAGE:62==
48
CHAPTER 5. FE MODELING IN 21⁄2D
The initial framework for the code is taken from a ﬁnite element programming course
at DTU (41525 - FEM-heavy), where a linear elastic ﬁnite element code was developed
in 2D in the programming language Fortran. In the development of the new element
formulation that describes 2D behaviour in a 3D space, it has been necessary to rewrite
the majority of the code. The transformation from the linear elastic code with a 4-noded
element to the ﬁnite strain code with a porous ductile material model implemented
together with an 8-noded element is described in the following.
From the very beginning it has been known that a code capable of describing failure
due to void growth and coalescence is complicated. Thus it is necessary to take small
steps in the implementation in order to verify the code on the ﬂy in the development.
Step 1 was to expand the original code to consider a 2D element in 3D and to ﬁgure out
how to formulate the deformations of the element in 3D. Still, the code was assuming
elastic materials only, so in step 2 plasticity was implemented.
Step 3 was then to
implement the ﬁnite strain theory. This point was a crossroad for the code. Either
the matrix notation from the programming course and Cook et al. (2002) was to be
implemented or the entire code had to be rewritten with tensor notation. As the tensor
notation should be adopted at some point it was chosen to write the entire code with
this notation. Later, the 4-noded element was replaced with an 8-noded element, the
band solver was replaced with a skyline solver for un-symmetric matrices and the GTN
model theory was implemented.
The following section describes the equations employed in order to adopt the ﬁnite
strain formulation and the GTN model formulation together with the expanded element
formulation.
5.1
Finite strain and GTN implementation
As described above the code is extended in order to take into consideration the extra
degree of freedom for each node. The expanded nodal displacement vector, force vector,
stress vector and strain vector, respectively, are deﬁned as follows:
{d} = {u1
v1
w1
u2
· · ·
w8}T
{p} = {p1
p2
p3
p4
· · ·
p24}T
{σ} = {σ11
σ22
σ33
σ12
σ23
σ13}T
{τ} = {τ 11
τ 22
τ 33
τ 12
τ 23
τ 13}T
{η} = {η11
η22
η33
η12
η23
η13}T
where wi is the additional displacement component for node i. The corresponding force
p in the x3-direction is added to the force vector and the stress and strain vector are
expanded to include all stress and strain components, respectively. {σ} is the Cauchy
stress vector, {τ} is the Kirchhoﬀstress vector, and {η} is the Lagrangian strain vector.
The ﬁnite strain theory implemented in the code is described by Tvergaard (1990b,
1996). To implement the theory an Euler explicit incremental solver is implemented,
and to utilize the theory in an eﬃcient manner, the tensor notation is adopted. In ﬁnite
strain theory a total Lagrangian formulation is employed, meaning all computations are
conducted in the undeformed geometry. All strain measures are given as Lagrangian
==PAGE:63==
5.1. FINITE STRAIN AND GTN IMPLEMENTATION
49
strains and are deﬁned as:
ηij = 1
2

ui,j + uj,i + uk
,iuk,j

where it is noted, that the last term is non-linear.
This is the extension needed to
consider large deformations. Further it is noted, that some indices are raised and some
are lowered. The lowered index refers to the covariant tensor and the raised index refers
to the contravariant tensor. When working with tensor notation, equilibrium is needed
between the covariant and contravariant indices.
The work conjugate stress measure to the Lagrangian strain is the Kirchhoﬀstress.
The stress tensor is given as:
τ ij =
s
G
g σij
where
p
G/g describes the volume change and σij is the Cauchy stress tensor. Further,
the Jaumann rate of the Cauchy stress tensor is given as:
▽σij = ˙σij +

GikGjl + GjkGil
˙ηkl
(5.1)
where ˙ηkl is the strain increment and ˙σij is the Cauchy stress increment, both from the
current time increment. Normally, objective stress rates are considered in continuum
mechanics. The term objective stress rate means that the time derivative of the stress
is independent of the reference frame. In a large strain framework, an already stressed
volume subjected to a rigid body rotation will eventually experience a change of stress.
To avoid this, the stress rates needs to be considered independently of the coordinate
system, thus the Jaumann rate is introduced.
To obtain the strain rate in the current increment, the system of equations is solved
for the displacements. The system of equations consists of the stiﬀness matrix times
the displacement vector on the left hand side and the force vector on the right hand
side. Subsequent implementing the incremental solver both the displacement and the
force vectors contain incremental values. The link between the nodal displacements and
the strains is the strain-displacement matrix [B] = [L][˜Γ][ ˜N]. In order to compute the
strain-displacement matrix, shape functions have to be deﬁned for the element. Each
individual shape function has the property that it equals 1 in the corresponding node
and 0 in the remaining nodes. The shape functions for the 8-noded element, (Tvergaard
(1996)), are as follows:
Ni =









1
4 (1 + ξξi) (1 + ηηi) (ξξi + ηηi −1)
for
i = 1, 3, 5, 7
1
2

1 −ξ2
(1 + ηηi)
for
i = 2, 6
1
2

1 −η2
(1 + ξξi)
for
i = 4, 8
where (ξi, ηi) is the location of the i’th node in the intrinsic coordinate system and (ξ, η)
is the location of the Gauss points. Since a 2D element is considered, the shape functions
are not a function of the intrinsic ζ-direction corresponding to the x3-direction.
The [ ˜N] matrix links the nodal displacements to the displacements diﬀerentiated
with respect to the intrinsic coordinates. It consists of the shape functions diﬀerentiated
==PAGE:64==
50
CHAPTER 5. FE MODELING IN 21⁄2D
with respect to the intrinsic coordinates:



















u,ξ
u,η
v,ξ
v,η
w,ξ
w,η



















=


N1,ξ
0
0
N2,ξ
· · ·
0
N1,η
0
0
N2,η
· · ·
0
0
N1,ξ
0
0
· · ·
0
0
N1,η
0
0
· · ·
0
0
0
N1,ξ
0
· · ·
N8,ξ
0
0
N1,η
0
· · ·
N8,η


|
{z
}
[ ˜
N]
{d}
The [˜Γ] is the transformation matrix between the displacements diﬀerentiated with
respect to the intrinsic and the natural coordinate system. It consists of the inverted
Jacobian matrix deﬁned in 2D as:



















u,x1
u,x2
v,x1
v,x2
w,x1
w,x2



















=


[Γ]
[0]
[0]
[0]
[Γ]
[0]
[0]
[0]
[Γ]


|
{z
}
[˜Γ]



















u,ξ
u,η
v,ξ
v,η
w,ξ
w,η



















;
[Γ] =
1
|[J]|
"
J22
−J12
−J21
J11
#
Lastly, the [L] matrix calculates the strains from the derivatives of the displacements
in the natural coordinate system as:



















η11
η22
η33
η12
η23
η13



















=


1 + u1
,1
0
u2
,1
0
u3
,1
0
0
u1
,2
0
1 + u2
,2
0
u3
,2
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
2u1
,2
1
2(1 + u1
,1)
1
2(1 + u2
,2)
1
2u2
,1
1
2u3
,2
1
2u3
,1
0
0
0
0
0
1
2
0
0
0
0
1
2
0


|
{z
}
[L]



















u,x1
u,x2
v,x1
v,x2
w,x1
w,x2



















where it is noticed, that η33 has no contributions from the displacement ﬁeld due to the
plane strain condition. However, this strain component both has an elastic and plastic
contribution, even though the total strain is zero.
The analysis is carried out using time-independent plasticity, thus the relation be-
tween the stresses and strain is deﬁned as:
˙τ ij = Lijkl ˙ηkl
(5.2)
When using the incremental nodal displacements together with the strain-displacement
matrix, one obtains the incremental strains. Reconsidering Equation (5.2), the instan-
taneous moduli Lijkl is the relation between the stresses and the strains and is deﬁned
as:
Lijkl = L ijkl −µMij
G Mkl
F
(5.3)
which has contributions from several terms.
First, L ijkl is deﬁned as:
L ijkl =
s
G
g

Rijkl −1
2

σikGjl + σjkGil + σilGjk + σjlGik
+ σijGkl

(5.4)
==PAGE:65==
5.1. FINITE STRAIN AND GTN IMPLEMENTATION
51
The elastic moduli, Rijkl, was suggested in Hutchinson (1973) and is not derived
from a work potential and is thus hypo-elastic. Since the elastic strain contribution to
the total strain in an elastic-plastic analysis is very small, the following expression has
been adopted:
Rijkl =
E
1 + ν
1
2

GikGjl + GilGjk
+
ν
1 −2ν GijGkl

(5.5)
where E is the Young’s modulus and ν is the Poisson’s ratio. This expression is the
inverse of Mijkl in Equation (3.5).
The last term in Equation (5.3) only contribute to the moduli Lijkl when plastic
loading takes place, since
µ =





0
for elastic unloading
q
G
g

H + mF
ijRijklmG
kl
−1
for plastic loading
where
H = σM
2

−3α(1 −f)∂Φ
∂f −
 
∂Φ
∂f A + ∂Φ
σM
!
EEt
E −Et
1
1 −f
 
σ2
e
σ2
M
+ α σk
k
σM
!

mG
ij = 3
2
sij
σM
+ αGij
;
mF
ij = 3
2
sij
σM
+ βGij
α = f∗
2 q1q2 sinh
 
q2
2
σk
k
σM
!
;
β = α + BσM
6
∂Φ
∂f
where A and B are describing the nucleation of void in the material and may be deﬁned
as Equation (3.13) or (3.14). In the code, Equation (3.13) has been emplyed, thus the
last term in β disappear due to B = 0, and consequently α = β.
Lastly, Mij
G and Mkl
F is deﬁned as
Mij
G = RijklmG
kl
;
Mkl
F = mF
rsRrskl
The relation between the Kirchhoﬀstress rate and the Cauchy stress rate is:
˙τ ij =
s
G
g ˙σij + τ ijGkl ˙ηkl
For the material to initiate plastic yielding, the yield criterion from Equation (3.9)
has to be zero, and the rate of Φ is greater than zero. This means the present stress
state is on the yield surface and the following increment causes an expansion of the yield
surface. Afterwards, plastic loading requires a stress state Φ at the yield surface and
mF
kl
▽σkl/H ≥0.
From Equation (5.4) it is noted that the last term causes a non-symmetry, which
excludes use of the ordinary band solver to solve the system of equations. Therefore a
skyline solver for non-symmetric band matrix is implemented in the code.
The plastic strain rates are calculated from the following equation
˙ηP
ij = 1
H mG
ijmF
kl
▽σkl
==PAGE:66==
52
CHAPTER 5. FE MODELING IN 21⁄2D
where
▽σij is the Jaumann rate of the Cauchy stress vector.
The rate of the eﬀective stress in the matrix material is deﬁned as
˙σM =
EEt
E −Et
σij ˙ηP
ij
(1 −f)σM
where Et is the tangent modulus and σM is from the previous increment. The tangent
modulus is deﬁned as
Et = σyN
εy
 
σe
σy
! N−1
N
5.2
Veriﬁcation of the code
Selective ﬂowcharts for the ﬁnal code are presented in Figure B, where the composition
of the governing equation is outlined. Further, the main source code is presented in Ap-
pendix C to show the numerical implementation. The entire program consists of several
other modules, but only the modules, which have been modiﬁed extensively, have been
included in the appendix. The module “fea” contains the ﬁnite element analysis, where
the increment loop is performed and also the construction of the global force vector, the
stiﬀness matrix, imposing boundary conditions, and the stress and strain calculation.
The module “plane183rect” computes the element contribution to the stiﬀness matrix,
it contains the element formulation and computes the element contributions to the rates
of the stresses and strains based on the nodal displacements.
For the code, it has been chosen to use 2x2 Gauss points which yields reduced
integration for the elements. Further, the correction term in Equation (3.20) is not a
part of the analysis. Inclusion of this term may decrease the number of increments, but
in expense of increased computation time per increment.
5.2.1
Single element
When the code is up and running it is important to have the code veriﬁed against results
from another software. The code is compared to Abaqus where a simple coupon test
has been modelled and the investigations will concern the displacement ﬁeld since the
strain and stress calculations are based on this ﬁeld. This small example is illustrated in
Figure 5.2 and consists of a single element. The plate is quadratic with a side length of
1 m. The boundary conditions imposed are a fully locked node at lower left corner in all
translational degrees of freedom, and the remaining nodes on the lower edge are locked
in the x2- and x3-direction. The prescribed displacement ∆is imposed at the top edge
and is purely in the x2-direction. The corresponding Abaqus model is modelled in 2D
which is possible due the in-plane motion. Both models assume plane strain and void
growth is not included.
The material parameters applied to the models for the veriﬁcation are equal to the
parameters in Chapter 4 and are listed in Table 4.1. Six diﬀerent values for the prescribed
displacement have been chosen to ensure the code is providing accurate displacement
ﬁelds in a larger span of deformation.
In Table 5.1, the displacements for the upper right corner node in the x1-direction
are listed for various prescribed displacements in the x2-direction.
According to the
==PAGE:67==
5.2. VERIFICATION OF THE CODE
53
∆
x1
x2
Figure 5.2: Illustration of the small coupon test used to the initial veriﬁcation of the displace-
ment ﬁeld from the Fortran code.
yield criteria, the yield strain is εy = σy/E = 0.003.
The length of the plate is 1
m, thus the yield strain is 0.003 and thereby the chosen displacements dictate large
deformation theory. The comparison has been executed with an initial porosity of f0 = 0
and disregards void nucleation.
The number of increments have been adequate for
convergence in this analysis, i.e., nincr = 10000.
The achieved displacements, u1, are identical for almost all u2 displacements. Only
for u2 = 0.2 and u2 = 0.4 a small discrepancy is observed, but at a negligible level.
5.2.2
Patch test
The single element example is not capable of capturing the necking phenomenon. In
order to investigate the prediction of the onset of necking, another model needs to be
considered.
The new example is illustrated in Figure 5.3 and is a rectangular plate
modelled with symmetric boundary conditions at the lower and right edge, i.e., the
lower edge is locked in the x2-direction and the right edge is locked in the x1-direction.
The plate has the length L1 = 4 and height H1 = 1 and a geometrical imperfection is
modelled to provoke the necking to start at the desired location which is at the right
edge. The height in the imperfection zone is reduced to 99.9% of the original H1. The
prescribed displacement is imposed at the left edge in the negative x1-direction. The
Table 5.1: Comparison of the single element example in Abaqus and the Fortran code.
Abaqus
Fortran
Discrepancy [%]
u1 at u2 = 0.001
[m]
−4.28 × 10−4
−4.28 × 10−4
0.00
u1 at u2 = 0.1
[m]
−8.82 × 10−2
−8.82 × 10−2
0.00
u1 at u2 = 0.2
[m]
-0.1639
-0.164
0.06
u1 at u2 = 0.3
[m]
-0.2282
-0.2282
0.00
u1 at u2 = 0.4
[m]
-0.2835
-0.2833
0.07
u1 at u2 = 1.0
[m]
-0.4982
-0.4982
0.00
==PAGE:68==
54
CHAPTER 5. FE MODELING IN 21⁄2D
∆
x2
x1
Enlarged imperfection
H1
L1
L1/4
Figure 5.3: Illustration of the patch test used to verify the code.
material parameters for the plate are listed in Table 4.1. Further, an initial porosity of
f0 = 0 is chosen.
The discretization of the model is chosen to nex1 = 16 and nex2 = 4 for the ini-
tial investigations. At this discretization it should be possible to observe the necking
phenomenon in the force-displacement curve. The Euler incremental solution method
is employed in the code and an adequate number of increments is needed to provide
accurate results.
A convergence study is performed in order to investigate this adequate number of
increments. For convergence to be reached, the material response should have stabilized.
In Figure 5.4 the convergence study is presented as traction-separation curves. At too
few increments, the response overshoots, as also described graphically in Figure 3.9b.
When increasing the number of increments, the material response is decreasing and is
approaching a level, where convergence has been fulﬁlled.
It is known, that when f0 = 0, the onset of necking is going to be located at the point
(0.1052, 1.505) according to earlier calculations, when identical material parameters as
from Table 4.1 are applied. The peak traction is marked with asterisks in the ﬁgure
and the Considére condition is depicted as a circle in the graph.
The separation of
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
∆/L1
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
F/(σyA0)
nincr = 1000
nincr = 2000
nincr = 4000
nincr = 8000
nincr = 16000
Figure 5.4: Convergence study to determine an adequate number of increments for the patch
test.
==PAGE:69==
5.3. MODE I
55
the model at the peak traction is constant at the predicted separation for the Considére
condition and the predicted peak traction has also been reached. The diﬀerence between
the solution for nincr = 8000 and nincr = 16000 is not signiﬁcant, thus it is assumed that
convergence has been reached for 16000 increments. The onset of necking for this curve
is almost coinciding with the Considére condition. On this basis it is decided, that the
Fortran code is capable of predicting the onset of necking. Further, this prediction acts
as an veriﬁcation of the code so that the code now is providing accurate results.
5.3
Mode I
5.3.1
Model description
The mesh from Figure 4.4 is employed as a template for the mesh to be considered in the
Fortran program. It is not expected to reﬁne the mesh in the middle region to a similar
extend since the code employs 8-noded elements with 2x2 Gauss points. The expected
element size corresponds to the ﬁndings by Nielsen and Hutchinson (2012), where 64
elements through the width of the plate was found to represent the slant fracture. The
mesh applied to the computations is illustrated in Figure 5.5a and has been generated
in the commercial ﬁnite element software Ansys. The mesh transition is from 7 elements
through the width in the coarse region to 63 elements through the width in the ﬁne
region.
It is possible to implement two diﬀerent imperfections in the model: A geometrical
and a material imperfection. The geometrical imperfection is causing a constriction of
the plate in the ﬁne mesh region. The expression implemented in the code to generate
the constriction is
xgb
1 = x1

1 −α
2
 1 + cos (πx2)

(5.6)
for −1 ≤x2 ≤1
where α is the constriction factor. In Figure 5.5b the improved mesh is depicted for
α = 0.2 for ﬁguratively reasons to illustrate the constriction of the plate. A smooth
transition from the edge not inﬂuenced by the constriction to the edge that is, are
maintained to avoid sharp corners and stress singularities in the computations.
The material based imperfection is also implemented in the computations by Nielsen
and Hutchinson (2012). A material imperfection may be imposed to the yield stress or
the initial porosity. The following equation, here shown for the yield stress imperfection,
is employed to deﬁne the location and the imperfection level for the material parameter:
σb
y(x1, x2) = σy

1 −β
2
 
1 + cos

πx2 −x1
2b
!

(5.7)
for x1 −b ≤x2 ≤x1 + b
where β is the amplitude of the imperfection and b is the width of the imperfection
zone. If instead the imperfection is to be inﬂuencing the initial porosity, σy is replaced
by f0 and consequently σb
y is replaced by fb
0. In Figure 5.5c the imperfection zone from
the above equation is visualized with red as the larger value and with blue as the lower
value. The transition from the lowest yield stress to the highest is gradual through the
imperfection band. If it is desired to control the imperfection by the initial porosity it is
==PAGE:70==
56
CHAPTER 5. FE MODELING IN 21⁄2D
(a)
Discretization
of the plate for the
Fortran-code.
(b) Visualization of
the geometric imper-
fection.
(c)
Visualization of
the
material
imper-
fection.
Figure 5.5: The plate dealt with by the Fortran-code.
important to note, that the operational sign in the square brackets needs to be turned
as the initial porosity needs to be larger in the imperfection band and the yield stress
needs to be lowered. The two diﬀerent imperfections may be applied individually to the
model or in combination. However, the geometrical imperfection does not favour one
shear band over the other.
The prescribed displacements are imposed at the top and bottom edge of the plate,
identical to the case in Figure 4.3. These boundaries are displaced in the positive and
negative x2-direction, respectively. To avoid rigid body modes the nodes at the x2 −x3-
plane in the coarse region are locked in translation in the x1- and x3-direction. As earlier
described the code does not ensure equilibrium from one increment to the following,
consequently residual forces may exist in the model.
For the results from the Fortran code to be comparable to the analysis from Abaqus
in Chapter 4, the nucleation of voids have been excluded from the analysis and further,
only the material imperfection illustrated in Figure 5.5c is active. This imperfection is
adequate in order to provoke the necking and subsequent the slant fracture.
Diﬀerent initiatives have been implemented in the code in order to handle numerical
diﬃculties in the Gurson formulation.
As described in Figure 3.4, the yield surface
will shrink to a point when the void volume fraction reaches the ﬁnal void volume
fraction. Thus, an upper bound is set at f = 0.99fF . Further, a lower bound at f = 0
is introduced, since a negative void volume fraction is not physically possible.
The
derivative of the yield surface with respect to f is also utilized in the computations.
This factor is set to 0, when the upper bound is reached.
A convergence study is carried out to investigate the adequate number of increments
==PAGE:71==
5.3. MODE I
57
and to investigate the response from the code. Especially, the progression of the slant
fracture is interesting to observe for this code.
This response is being compared to
the response from the Abaqus analysis for Mode I loading with f0 = 0.01, although
this response was obtained with another element type and discretization.
Also, the
computations from Abaqus is performed in a time-dependent code (explicit). In Fig-
ure 5.6, the convergence study is presented. For an inadequate number of increments,
i.e., nincr = 1000, the material response overshoots the Abaqus response. The onset
of necking is predicted but beyond onset of shear localization, the response diverges
signiﬁcantly. The slant fracture is not captured by this number of increments.
By increasing the number of increments, the peak traction decreases and beyond
onset of shear localization, indications are observed of a slant fracture, where a smooth
transition is observed. The slant fracture is more evident for increasing number of incre-
ments. The responses seem to converge toward a peak traction above the level obtained
from Abaqus. Also, the fracture separation seems to be elongated further compared to
Abaqus. This may indicate that the void fraction in the material is underestimated.
However, the shear band occur in the material as depicted in Figure 5.7, where of
void volume fraction in the material is presented for the diﬀerent number of increments.
For nincr = 1000 in FIgure 5.7a it is evident, that the localization is absent due to the
large incremental step. Increasing the number of increments ensure localization in the
shear band, which are triggered by the material based imperfection zone.
5.3.2
Element death
As observed in Figure 5.6, the responses have a long tail, which is not representing
the progression of the slant fracture, although it is present.
Thus, element death is
introduced to the code in order to degrade elements, that experience larger void volume
fractions. In Table 4.1 a ﬁnal void volume fraction is deﬁned. When approaching this
ﬁnal fraction, f∗is approaching 1 and the yield surface shrinks to a point. To avoid
numerical diﬃculties, the maximum void volume fraction to be obtained in an element
is 99% of fF .
At this point, the element stiﬀness reduction starts.
The stiﬀness is
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
∆/L
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
F/(σyA0)
Abaqus response
nincr = 1000
nincr = 5000
nincr = 10000
nincr = 20000
Figure 5.6: Convergence study for the plate. The thin curve is the material response from
Abaqus for a initial porosity of 1%.
==PAGE:72==
58
CHAPTER 5. FE MODELING IN 21⁄2D
(a) nincr = 1000.
(b) nincr = 5000.
(c) nincr = 10000.
(d) nincr = 20000.
Figure 5.7: Slant fracture from the Fortran code.
decreased over a predeﬁned number of increments in order to lower the stresses in the
element gradually. The code considers time-independent deformation and for that reason
it is not possible to exclude one element from the model. Instead, the element stiﬀness
is reduced to almost zero, i.e., E ×10−9, and not zero due to computational singularities
in the equations. The number of increments deﬁning the diﬀerence between the original
stiﬀness and no stiﬀness may be discussed. For this purpose it has been chosen to employ
3 increments as the factor.
Still, the numerics may be ill-conditioned. Since the “dead” element is still part of
the discretized model, it will deform with the remaining structure. This may yield a
distorted element, that causes an ill-conditioned system of equation.
New analyses are carried out subsequent to the implementation of the element
“death”. Three diﬀerent models is considered: The Mode I, the Mode I-Mode II and the
Mode I-Mode III. The displacements in the shearing directions are at 10% of the normal
displacement. These analyses act as a control of the ability for the code to consider
other load cases than the pure tension.
The traction-separation curves are presented in Figure 5.8. For the Mode I and the
Mode I-Mode II load case, the progression of the ductile fracture is evident, but this
is not the case for the Mode I-Mode III load case. Also noted is the elongation of the
plates for each of the three load cases. If the Mode I-Mode II loading is compared to the
Mode I loading, the aforementioned is elongated further than the latter. According to
the investigations in Chapter 4 the traction-separation curves should align, due to the
identical cohesive energy. Also regarding the Mode I-Mode III load case, the response is
elongated compared to the Mode I load case, but not to the same extent as the Mode
I-Mode II load case. This also implies, that the energy level for the Mode I-Mode III
loading is at a higher level.
However, the explanation to the elongated Mode I-Mode III response may be found
in the graphical visualization of the slant fracture in Figure 5.9. A large concentration
of voids is observed in the center of the plate in Figure 5.9c indicating, that the energy
is larger. Further, it is noted, that the shear band aligns with the imperfection zone,
contrary to the Abaqus model. This may be inﬂuenced of the slightly diﬀerent prescribed
boundary condition in the x1-direction, which exist due to the diﬀerence in discretization.
==PAGE:73==
5.3. MODE I
59
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
∆/L
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
F/(σyA0)
Mode I
Mode I-Mode II
Mode I-Mode III
Figure 5.8: Traction-separation curves for Mode I, Mode I-Mode II and Mode I-Mode III. Also
indicated is the peak traction.
Diﬀerent prescribed displacements are also implemented in the Mode I-Mode II load case,
where the two top rows of nodes are displaced in the positive x3-direction, whereas the
two bottom rows of nodes are displaced in the negative x3-direction. This is implemented
to be consistent with the transition to the larger plate as discussed in Section 4.5.
A solution for the inconsistency in the energies may be to reﬁne the mesh further
and to ensure, that the boundary conditions can be identically imposed to the models.
Nevertheless, the code has shown its capabilities in computing pure Mode I loading, Mode
I-Mode II loading and Mode I-Mode III-loading with the improved element formulation.
In Appendix D, the displacement ﬁelds for the three models is presented.
(a) Mode I.
(b) Mode I-Mode II.
(c) Mode I-Mode III
Figure 5.9: Void volume fraction in the slant fracture for the three load cases.
==PAGE:74==
==PAGE:75==
6 Conclusion and future work
The aim of this thesis was to investigate the inﬂuence from a shear load component on
the cohesive energy. The model considered is a plane strain model corresponding to a
cross section in a plane perpendicular to an advancing crack tip in a large thin plate
structure. This shear load component may either be a Mode II or Mode III loading.
Further, a ﬁnite element code was to be developed, capable of reducing the computation
time when considering the Mode I-Mode II load case.
The material considered throughout the thesis is a hardened steel-like material. The
work of Nielsen and Hutchinson (2012) investigated the cohesive fracture energy in a
plate subjected to pure Mode I loading. The ﬁndings from this analysis was replicated
reasonably using the commercial ﬁnite element software Abaqus. The two models were
diﬀerent regarding element type, discretization and software. Therefore, reasonable re-
sults were the criterion before moving on to mode mixity.
The shearing Mode II and Mode III loading were then introduced to the Abaqus
model. The method of introducing shearing component was investigated in order to
avoid discontinuity from the plate section to the surrounding large scale plate.
The
loading was deﬁned by a ratio between the prescribed displacement in the shearing
direction to the prescribed displacement in the tension direction. These ratios equal
0 for pure Mode I and ∞for pure shear, regardless of whether the shear is Mode II
or Mode III loading. The Mode I-Mode II load case was modelled in 3D due to the
out-of-plane loading, and the Mode I-Mode III load case was modelled in 2D. The mode
mixity was introduced in predeﬁned ratios ranging in the span of [0;0.6].
The deﬁnition of the cohesive energy was investigated, as this was treated as the
area under the traction-separation curve from onset of necking to slant fracture. The
displacement rates for diﬀerent locations in the top third of the plate were investigated
and for both mode mixity models, no plastic deformation occurred beyond onset of
necking. Thus, the deﬁnition still holds.
The ﬁndings from the Mode I-Mode II analysis are that the development of the
cohesive energy follows a rotational sweep in the δn, δt plane in 3D. Here, δn and δt is
the normal and transverse separation, respectively. The rotational sweep is also dictated
by the literature. However, for larger shearing contributions in the Mode II direction,
i.e., at a ratio of Mode II/Mode I at and above 0.5, a tendency of postponed fracture was
observed. It was found, that the peak traction for all ratios were equal. Both regarding
the energy level and peak traction, this was the case for all three initial porosities
investigated, f0 = 0.005, f0 = 0.01, and f0 = 0.02. The tendency may originate in
the lack of the Nahshon-Hutchinson shear parameter (Nahshon and Hutchinson (2007)),
although a relatively high triaxility is present in the material due to the plane strain
condition. Therefore, it is possible, that the factual shape of the cohesive energy diverges
from the sweep, when the Mode II load contribution becomes signiﬁcant.
61
==PAGE:76==
62
CHAPTER 6. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
For the Mode I-Mode III load case, the level in cohesive energy was decreasing
signiﬁcantly at the smallest amount of Mode III loading applied to the model.
The
decreasing tendency continued until a steady level below the pure Mode I energy was
reached. At this point, the ratio of Mode III/Mode I was at around 0.15. This tendency
was observed for all three initial porosities, but was most signiﬁcant for the lower value
of f0, as the diﬀerence was around 10% for this initial porosity. Again, the energy tended
to increase when the shear became more signiﬁcant in the prescribed displacement. An
unsigniﬁcant decrease in peak traction was observed for all three initial porosities, thus
the diﬀerence in energy levels was subject to a change in the separation. The signiﬁcant
drop in energy, the subsequent settlement and ﬁnal increase when introducing Mode III
loading is diﬃcult to describe with the known theory within this ﬁeld.
For both the Mode I-Mode II and the Mode I-Mode III analysis, numerical insta-
bilities were experienced.
These numerical issues occurred as a sudden unloading of
the plate continued by reloading. This caused a break in the material response and a
elongation of the curve. To avoid these issues, mass scaling was employed in the form of
increasing the density of the material. This solved the majority of the aﬀected runs, but
still some runs were not able to be fulﬁlled, when a maximum factor multiplied on the
density of 5 was utilized. The Mode I-Mode III model was subject to the majority of
the failed simulations, which may be due to the much smaller element size in the model
compared to the Mode I-Mode II model.
When dealing with the Mode I-Mode II model, the necessity of going into 3D was
evident, as the Mode II loading is out-of-plane in the steady state model. This increased
the computation time signiﬁcantly and complicated the plane strain condition. Thus,
an attempt to make a 21⁄2D ﬁnite element program was made. This code considers a
2D plane 8-noded element in a 3D space. Normally, this element is considered in a 2D
space, but the element formulation is expanded to handle the extra degree of freedom.
The code is written in tensor notation and is implemented with ﬁnite strain and GTN
material model.
The code is capable to predict the onset of necking, which analytically can be de-
rived in form of the Considére condition for zero initial porosity. Also, it is capable of
predicting the onset of shear localization and eventually progression of ductile fracture
with the inclusion of element “death”. The code showed a fairly good correspondence to
the responses from the Abaqus simulation, but still a signiﬁcant diﬀerence is observed
between the two curves. The shape of the responses are similar, but the level of max-
imum traction and failure strain is not identical.
However, the code is able to deal
with out-of-plane loading, which was the main goal with the code in order to reduce the
computational costs.
6.1
Future work
At this point, some answers still need to be found both regarding the cohesive fracture
energy when considering mode mixity and also the developed code. Below is suggestions
to future work within the ﬁeld of mode mixity in cohesive fracture energy.
Investigations in Abaqus
An increase in the cohesive fracture energy was observed at relative large ratios of Mode
II/Mode I and Mode III/Mode I. The reason for these increases is subject to further
==PAGE:77==
6.1. FUTURE WORK
63
investigations. One way of approaching this, is to develop a VUMAT in Abaqus, that
can take into account the Nahshon-Hutchinson shear parameter and investigate the
inﬂuence of this parameter in the development of the energy. These investigations should
be compared to the already obtained results to examine, if there exists a diﬀerence.
Also, the ratio of Mode I-Mode II and Mode I-Mode III could be increased to inves-
tigate larger ratios. This may also clarify the triaxility in the plate section considered.
Fortran program
The Fortran program is developed in a quasi-static analysis independent of time. In
order to capture the slant fracture phenomenon suﬃciently, it is desired to eliminate
“dead” elements from the computation, which is possible in an explicit analysis. In the
implicit analysis it is not simple to remove an element from the mesh, as this yields
a renumbering of the mesh and reallocation of the system of equations, which is time
consuming in an analysis. If the code is time-dependent, the computations are based
on the Newtons second law and thus, the stiﬀness matrix is not applied. Therefore,
it is possible to eliminate “dead” elements by ramping down the internal forces in the
element.
There is still some depending debugging in the code, as the material response is at
a higher level than for the Abaqus solution and the response is elongated further. It
is believed, that the reason is due to the void growth, which may not be at the true
level. Also, the number of increments may be subject to investigations, as the maximum
number examined is 20,000, but the solution may improve when using e.g.
100,000
increments.
==PAGE:78==
==PAGE:79==
Appendices
65
==PAGE:80==
==PAGE:81==
A Cohesive fracture energy
A.1
Mode I
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
∆/L0
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
F/(σyA0)
f0 = 0.01
Le = W0/36
Le = W0/72
Le = W0/120
Le = W0/144
Figure A.1: Plot of the traction-separation curves for diﬀerent meshes at a initial porosity of
f0 = 0.01.
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
∆/L0
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
F/(σyA0)
f0 = 0.02
Le = W0/36
Le = W0/72
Le = W0/120
Le = W0/144
Figure A.2: Plot of the traction-separation curves for diﬀerent meshes at a initial porosity of
f0 = 0.02.
67
==PAGE:82==
68
APPENDIX A. COHESIVE FRACTURE ENERGY
A.2
Mode I-Mode III
A.2.1
Convergence study
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
∆x1/L0
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
Fx1/(σyA0)
Le = W0/36
Le = W0/72
Le = W0/100
Le = W0/120
Le = W0/144
(a) ∆x1 vs. Fx1.
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
∆x1/L0
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
Fx1/(σyA0)
Le = W0/36
Le = W0/72
Le = W0/100
Le = W0/120
Le = W0/144
(b) ∆x1 vs. Fx1.
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
∆x2/L0
0
0.5
1
1.5
Fx2/(σyA0)
Le = W0/36
Le = W0/72
Le = W0/100
Le = W0/120
Le = W0/144
(c) ∆x2 vs. Fx2.
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
∆x2/L0
0
0.5
1
1.5
Fx2/(σyA0)
Le = W0/36
Le = W0/72
Le = W0/100
Le = W0/120
Le = W0/144
(d) ∆x2 vs. Fx2.
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
∆/L0
0
0.5
1
1.5
F/(σyA0)
Le = W0/36
Le = W0/72
Le = W0/100
Le = W0/120
Le = W0/144
(e) ∆vs. F
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
∆/L0
0
0.5
1
1.5
F/(σyA0)
Le = W0/36
Le = W0/72
Le = W0/100
Le = W0/120
Le = W0/144
(f) ∆vs. F
Figure A.3: Traction-separation curve for f0 = 0.01 on the left side and f0 = 0.02 on the right
side from the convergence study for combined mode I-mode III load case when ∆x1/∆x2 = 0.1.
==PAGE:83==
A.2. MODE I-MODE III
69
A.2.2
Investigations on truncation point
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
∆2/L0
0
0.5
1
1.5
F/(A0σy)
∆x1/∆x2 = 0.3
f0 = 0.005
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
∆2/L0
0
0.5
1
˙∆/ ˙∆A
A-B
A-C
A-D
A-E
Figure A.4: Traction-separation curve and investigations on the onset of necking for ∆x1/∆x2 =
0.3.
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
∆2/L0
0
0.5
1
1.5
F/(A0σy)
∆x1/∆x2 = 0.6
f0 = 0.005
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
∆2/L0
0
0.5
1
˙∆/ ˙∆A
A-B
A-C
A-D
A-E
Figure A.5: Traction-separation curve and investigations on the onset of necking for ∆x1/∆x2 =
0.6.
==PAGE:84==
70
APPENDIX A. COHESIVE FRACTURE ENERGY
A.2.3
Inﬂuence of shear
0
0.02
0.04
δt
0.06
0
0.08
0
0.02
δn
0.04
0.1
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.5
0.12
F/(A0σy)
1
1.5
(a) View 1.
0
0.02
0.04
δt
0.06
0
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.08
δn
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.1
0.09
0.5
0.1
F/(A0σy)
1
1.5
(b) View 1.
0
0.12
0.1
0
0.02
0.08
0.04
δt
0.06
δn
0.06
0.04
0.08
0.02
0.1
0
0.12
0.5
F/(A0σy)
1
1.5
(c) View 2.
0
0.1
0
0.08
0.02
0.06
δt
0.04
δn
0.04
0.06
0.02
0.08
0
0.1
0.5
F/(A0σy)
1
1.5
(d) View 2.
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
δt
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
δn
(e) View 3.
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.1
δt
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.1
δn
(f) View 3.
Figure A.6: Traction-separation curves for diﬀerent ratios of ∆x1/∆x2 for an initial porosity
of 1% on the left side and 2% on the right side.
==PAGE:85==
A.2. MODE I-MODE III
71
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
δt
0.2
0
0
0.25
0.05
0.1
δn
0.15
0.3
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.5
0.35
F/(A0σy)
1
1.5
(a) View 1.
0
0.05
0.1
δt
0.15
0
0
0.05
0.2
δn
0.1
0.15
0.25
0.2
0.5
0.25
F/(A0σy)
1
1.5
(b) View 1.
0
0.35
0.3
0
0.25
0.05
0.1
0.2
δt
0.15
δn
0.15
0.2
0.1
0.25
0.05
0.3
0
0.35
0.5
F/(A0σy)
1
1.5
(c) View 2.
0
0.25
0
0.2
0.05
0.15
δt
0.1
δn
0.1
0.15
0.05
0.2
0.25
0
0.5
F/(A0σy)
1
1.5
(d) View 2.
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
δt
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
δn
(e) View 3.
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
δt
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
δn
(f) View 3.
Figure A.7: Cohesive relation for diﬀerent ratios of ∆x1/∆x2 for an initial porosity of 1% on
the left side and 2% on the right side.
==PAGE:86==
72
APPENDIX A. COHESIVE FRACTURE ENERGY
A.3
Mode I-Mode II
A.3.1
Investigations on truncation point
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
∆2/L0
0
0.5
1
1.5
F/(A0σy)
∆x3/∆x2 = 0.3
f0 = 0.005
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
∆2/L0
0
0.5
1
˙∆/ ˙∆A
A-B
A-C
A-D
A-E
Figure A.8: Traction-separation curve and investigations on the onset of necking for ∆x3/∆x2 =
0.3.
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
∆2/L0
0
0.5
1
1.5
F/(A0σy)
∆x3/∆x2 = 0.6
f0 = 0.005
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
∆2/L0
0
0.5
1
˙∆/ ˙∆A
A-B
A-C
A-D
A-E
Figure A.9: Traction-separation curve and investigations on the onset of necking for ∆x3/∆x2 =
0.6.
==PAGE:87==
A.3. MODE I-MODE II
73
A.3.2
Inﬂuence of shear
0.12
0.1
0.08
δt
0.06
0.04
0
0.02
0.12
δn
0.1
0.08
0.06
0.04
0
0.02
0
0.5
F/(A0σy)
1
1.5
(a) View 1.
0.1
0.08
0.06
δt
0.04
0.02
0
0.1
0.09
δn
0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0
0.03
0.02
0.01
0
0.5
F/(A0σy)
1
1.5
(b) View 1.
0
0.12
0.1
0
0.02
0.08
0.04
δt
0.06
δn
0.06
0.04
0.08
0.02
0.1
0
0.12
0.5
F/(A0σy)
1
1.5
(c) View 2.
0
0.1
0
0.08
0.02
0.06
δt
0.04
δn
0.04
0.06
0.02
0.08
0
0.1
0.5
F/(A0σy)
1
1.5
(d) View 2.
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
δt
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
δn
(e) View 3.
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.1
δt
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.1
δn
(f) View 3.
Figure A.10: Traction-separation curves for diﬀerent ratios of ∆x3/∆x2 for an initial porosity
of 1% on the left side and 2% on the right side.
==PAGE:88==
74
APPENDIX A. COHESIVE FRACTURE ENERGY
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
δt
0.2
0
0
0.25
0.05
0.1
δn
1
0.15
0.3
0.2
0.25
0.3
2
0.35
3
F/(A0σy)
×106
4
5
6
(a) View 1.
0
0.05
0.1
δt
0.15
0
0
0.2
0.05
δn
1
0.1
0.15
0.25
0.2
2
0.25
3
×106
F/(A0σy)
4
5
6
(b) View 1.
0
0.35
0.3
0
0.25
0.05
0.1
0.2
δt
0.15
δn
0.15
0.2
0.1
0.25
0.05
0.3
0
0.35
2
×106
F/(A0σy)
4
6
(c) View 2.
0
0.25
0
0.2
0.05
0.15
δt
0.1
δn
0.15
0.1
0.2
0.05
0.25
0
2
F/(A0σy)
×106
4
6
(d) View 2.
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
δt
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
δn
(e) View 3.
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
δt
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
δn
(f) View 3.
Figure A.11: Cohesive relation for diﬀerent ratios of ∆x3/∆x2 for an initial porosity of 1% on
the left side and 2% on the right side.
==PAGE:89==
B Flowchart
In this appendix, the ﬂowcharts from the Fortran code are presented. Together with the
element formulation described in Chapter 5, this form the majority of the ﬁnite element
program developed in order to have a fully functional 21⁄2D code.
First described is the main incremental loop from which the subroutines are called.
Secondly, the ﬂowchart for setting up the stiﬀness matrix is presented including the
equations. Lastly, the scheme for updating the stresses, strains, void volume etc. is
presented.
In Appendix C, the main source code from Fortran is presented.
Incremental solution:
initialization
do incr = 1, nincr then
build stiﬀness matrix
build force vector
impose boundary conditions
factorize and solve system of equations
calculate rates of stresses and strains
update displacement ﬁeld, stresses, and strains
end
75
==PAGE:90==
76
APPENDIX B. FLOWCHART
Stiﬀness matrix:
for e = 1, ne do
[ke]incr = 0
for i = 1, ngauss do
for j = 1, ngauss do
sij = σij −Gijσk
k/3 ,
sij = GikGjlskl
if f > fC then
f∗= fC + f∗
U−fC
fF −fC (f −fC)
∂f∗
∂f = 1/q1−fC
fF −fC
else
f∗= f
∂f∗
∂f = 1
end
α = f∗
2 q1q2 sinh

q2
2
σk
k
σM

,
β = α
∂Φ/∂f =
 
2q1 cosh

q2σk
k
2σM

−2q1q1f∗
!
∂f∗
∂f
∂Φ/∂σM = −2
σM

σ2
e
σ2
M + α σk
k
σM

mG
ij = 3
2
sij
σM + αGij ,
mF
ij = 3
2
sij
σM + βGij
Rijkl =
E
1+ν

1
2

GikGjl + GilGjk
+
ν
1−2ν GijGkl

if Φ < 0, mF
kl
▽σkl/H < 0
µ = 0 ,
Et = E
else
H = σM
2
"
−3α(1 −f)∂Φ
∂f −

∂Φ
∂f A + ∂Φ
σM

EEt
E−Et
1
1−f

σ2
e
σ2
M + α σk
k
σM
#
µ =
q
G
g [H + mF
rsRrsklmG
kl]−1
Et = σyN
εy

σe
σy
 N−1
N
end
Mij
G = RijklmG
kl ,
Mkl
F = mF
ijRijkl
L ijklq
G
g

Rijkl −1
2

σikGjl + σjkGil + σilGjkσjlGik
+ σijGkl

Lijkl = L ijkl −µMij
G Mkl
F
do m = 1, ndof then
do n = 1, ndof then
E(n)
ij
= 1
2

U(n)
i,j + U(n)
j,i + uk
,iU(n)
k,j + uk
,jU(n)
k,i

[ke](mn) = [ke](mn) +

LijklE(n)
kl E(m)
ij
+ τ ijU(n)
k,i U(m)
k,j

end
end
end
end
[k] = [k] + [ke]incr
end
==PAGE:91==
77
Updating stresses and strains:
do For each Gauss point in each element then
˙ηij = [B]{∆d}
˙τ ij = Lijkl ˙ηkl
˙σij =

˙τ ij −τ ijGkl ˙ηkl

/
p
G/g
▽σij = ˙σij + (GikGjl + GjkGil) ˙ηkl
if Φ < 0, mF
kl
▽σkl/H < 0 then
˙σM = 0
˙f = 0
elseif Φ ≥1, mF
kl
▽σkl/H ≥0 then
˙ηP
ij = 1
H mG
ijmF
kl
▽σkl
˙σM =
EEt
E−Et
σij ˙ηP
ij
(1−f)σM
˙εP
M =

1
Et −1
E

˙σM
˙fgrowth = (1 −f) Gij ˙ηP
ij
if ˙εP
M > 0 then
A =

1
Et −1
E

fN
s
√
2π exp
 
−1
2

εp
M−εN
s
2!
B = 0
else
A = 0 ,
B = 0
end
˙fnucleation = A ˙σM + B ˙σk
k/3
end
σe =
q
3
2sijsij
τ ij = τ ij + ˙τ ij
σij = σij + ˙σij
σM = σM + ˙σM
Φ = σ2
e
σ2
M + 2q1f∗cosh

q2
2
σk
k
σM

−

1 −(q1f∗)2
f = f + ( ˙fgrowth + ˙fnucleation)
if f > 0.99fF then
f = 0.99fF
initiate element death
end
end
==PAGE:92==
==PAGE:93==
C Fortran source code
In this appendix, the main source code is presented. The module “fea” contains the
ﬁnite element analysis with incremental loop, establishment of global stiﬀness matrix
and load vector and computations and update of the stresses and strains. The module
“plane183rect” contains the element formulation, the element stiﬀness matrix, the ele-
ment load vector, computation of the element nodal displacement, and other subroutines
for the element.
C.1
Module fea
Module fea
1
module
fea
2
3
i m p l i c i t
none
4
5
private
6
public
: :
displ ,
i n i t i a l ,
buildload ,
b u i l d s t i f f ,
enforce ,
build_Int_load ,
recover
7
8
contains
9
10
subroutine
i n i t i a l
11
12
!
This
subroutine
i s
mainly
used
to
a l l o c a t e
vectors
and
matrices
13
use
fedata
14
use
plane183rect
15
use
subsol
16
17
i n t e g e r
: :
e ,
i ,
j , NF,
damage
18
19
integer ,
parameter
: :
mdim = 24
20
integer ,
dimension (mdim)
: :
edof
21
r e a l (8)
: :
xe (2) ,
alpha ,
beta ,
b
22
23
!
This
subroutine
computes
the number
of
g l o b a l
equation
and
a l l o c a t e s
global
a r r a y s .
24
25
!
Calculate
number
of
equations
26
neqn = 3∗nn
! Number of
equations
27
nincr = 20000
! Number of
increments
28
NF = 100
! Number of
frames
in
the
r e s u l t
f i l e
29
30
!
Imperfection
parameters
31
damage = 1
! 1 :
y i e l d
s t r e s s ,
2 :
void
f r a c t i o n
32
b = 1 .d0 /10 .d0
! Width
of
imperfection
band
33
beta = 0 .001d0
! Imperfection
f a c t o r
34
alpha = 0 .0d0
! Constriction
f a c t o r
35
36
!
Gurson
parameters
37
q1 = 1 .5d0
38
q2 = 1 .0d0
79
==PAGE:94==
80
APPENDIX C. FORTRAN SOURCE CODE
39
fN = 0 .0d0
40
sN = 0 .1d0
41
epsN = 0 .3d0
42
f c = 0 .15d0
43
f f = 0 .40d0
44
45
!
Misc
46
t_ramp = 3
! Number of
increments
to ramp down Young ' s
Modulus
47
48
a l l o c a t e (ICON(8 , ne ) )
49
do e = 1 ,
ne
50
do
i = 1 ,
8
51
ICON( i , e ) = element ( e )%ix ( i )
52
end do
53
end do
54
55
!#########################################################
56
!
Optimize
Skyline
f o r
s t i f f n e s s
matrix
57
a l l o c a t e (NSLOAN(nn) )
58
do
i =1,nn
59
NSLOAN( i ) = i
60
end do
61
62
CALL REDUCE_SLOAN( ne , nn , 8 ,NSLOAN,ICON)
63
64
do e=1,ne
65
do
i =1,8
66
element ( e )%ix ( i ) = NSLOAN(ICON( i , e ) )
!
Re−number
c o n n e c t i v i t y
matrix
67
end do
68
end do
69
d e a l l o c a t e (ICON)
70
a l l o c a t e (x_temp(nn , 3 ) ,bound_temp(nb , 3 ) , loads_temp (np , 5 ) )
71
x_temp ( : , 1 : 3 ) = x ( : , 1 : 3 )
72
do
i =1,nn
73
x (NSLOAN( i ) , 1 : 3 ) = x_temp( i , 1 : 3 )
!
Re−number nodes
74
end do
75
bound_temp ( : , 1 : 3 ) = bound ( : , 1 : 3 )
76
do
i =1,nb
77
bound ( i , 1 ) = NSLOAN( i n t (bound_temp( i , 1 ) ) )
!
Re−number BC' s
78
bound ( i , 2 ) = bound_temp( i , 2 )
79
bound ( i , 3 ) = bound_temp( i , 3 )
80
end do
81
82
loads_temp ( : , 1 : 5 ) = loads ( : , 1 : 5 )
83
do
i =1,np
84
i f
( loads_temp ( i , 1 ) . e q . 1 )
then
85
loads ( i , 1 ) = loads_temp ( i , 1 )
86
loads ( i , 2 ) = NSLOAN( i n t ( loads_temp ( i , 2 ) ) )
!
Re−number BC' s
87
loads ( i , 3 ) = loads_temp ( i , 3 )
88
loads ( i , 4 ) = loads_temp ( i , 4 )
89
loads ( i , 5 ) = loads_temp ( i , 5 )
90
end
i f
91
end do
92
93
d e a l l o c a t e (x_temp , bound_temp , loads_temp ,NSLOAN)
94
95
a l l o c a t e (JDIAG( neqn ) )
96
a l l o c a t e (ICON(8 , ne ) )
97
do e = 1 ,
ne
98
do
i = 1 ,
8
99
ICON( i , e ) = element ( e )%ix ( i )
100
end do
101
end do
102
103
c a l l PREP(0 , neqn ,ICON, ne , 3 , 8 ,NTRM,KBW,JDIAG)
104
105
a l l o c a t e (A(NTRM) ,A2(NTRM) )
106
==PAGE:95==
C.1. MODULE FEA
81
107
!
Create
geometrical
imperfection
108
do
j = 1 ,nn
109
xe (1) = x( j , 1 )
110
xe (2) = x( j , 2 )
111
i f
( xe (2)
.GT. −1.d0 .AND. xe (2)
.LT. 1 .d0 )
then
112
x ( j , 1 ) = xe (1) ∗(1 .d0−alpha /2 .d0 ∗(1 .d0+cos ( pi ∗xe (2) ) ) )
113
end
i f
114
end do
115
116
a l l o c a t e
(dp ( 1 : neqn ) , p( neqn ) ,
corr ( neqn ) , dd( neqn ) , d( neqn ) ,
p_Int ( neqn ) )
117
a l l o c a t e
( s t r a i n ( ne ,
6 ,
4) ,
strain_p ( ne ,
6 ,
4) ,
strain_p_eff (4) ,
s t r e s s ( ne ,
6 ,
4) , FD( nincr , 6 ) )
118
119
! MODIFIED FOR WINDOWS COMPILER
120
do e=1,ne
121
s t r a i n ( e , 1 : 6 , 1 : 4 ) = 0 .d0
122
strain_p ( e , 1 : 6 , 1 : 4 ) = 0 .d0
123
strain_p_eff (4) = 0 .d0
124
s t r e s s ( e , 1 : 6 , 1 : 4 ) = 0 .d0
125
enddo
126
FD = 0 .d0
127
128
do e=1,ne
129
element ( e )%e p s i
= 0 .0d0
130
element ( e )%epsi_dot
= 0 .0d0
131
element ( e )%epsi_p
= 0 .0d0
132
element ( e )%epsi_p_dot = 0 .0d0
133
element ( e )%epsi_p_eff = 0 .0d0
134
element ( e )%epsi_p_eff_dot = 0 .0d0
135
element ( e )%sigm
= 1 .0d −20
136
element ( e )%sigmae_dot = 1 .0d −20
137
element ( e )%sigmae
= 1 .0d −20
138
element ( e )%sigmay
= mprop( element ( e )%mat)%sigmay
139
element ( e )%sigmaM_dot = 0 .0d0
140
element ( e )%Kirchhoff_contra = 0 .d0
141
element ( e )%L i j k l
= 0 .d0
142
element ( e )%mGcon
= 0 .d0
143
element ( e )%mFcon
= 0 .d0
144
element ( e )%MGco
= 0 .d0
145
element ( e )%MFco
= 0 .d0
146
element ( e )%young
= mprop( element ( e )%mat)%young
147
element ( e )%youngT
= mprop( element ( e )%mat)%young
148
element ( e )%H
= 0 .d0
149
element ( e )%Phi
= −1.d0
150
element ( e )%f
= mprop( element ( e )%mat)%f0
151
element ( e )%death
= 0 .0d0
152
element ( e )%death_t
= 0
153
element ( e )%p l a s t i c
= 0
154
155
i f
( damage .EQ.
1)
then
156
do
j = 1 ,
8
157
xe (1) = x( element ( e )%ix ( j ) ,1)
158
xe (2) = x( element ( e )%ix ( j ) ,2)
159
i f
( xe (1)−b .LE.
xe (2)
.AND. xe (1)+b .GE. xe (2) )
then
160
element ( e )%sigmay = element ( e )%sigmay ∗(1 .d0−beta /2 .d0 ∗&
161
(1 .d0+cos ( pi ∗( xe (2)−xe (1) ) /(2 .d0 ∗b) ) ) )
162
continue
163
end
i f
164
end do
165
e l s e i f
( damage .EQ.
2)
then
166
do
j = 1 ,
8
167
xe (1) = x( element ( e )%ix ( j ) ,1)
168
xe (2) = x( element ( e )%ix ( j ) ,2)
169
i f
( xe (1)−b .LE.
xe (2)
.AND. xe (1)+b .GE. xe (2) )
then
170
element ( e )%f = mprop( element ( e )%mat)%f0 ∗(1 .d0+beta /2 .d0 ∗&
171
(1 .d0+cos ( pi ∗( xe (2)−xe (1) ) /(2 .d0 ∗b) ) ) )
172
continue
173
end
i f
174
end do
==PAGE:96==
82
APPENDIX C. FORTRAN SOURCE CODE
175
end
i f
176
element ( e )%sigmaM
= element ( e )%sigmay
177
element ( e )%f s
= element ( e )%f
178
end do
179
180
!
A l l o c a t e s memory
f o r
saving−array
181
SFE = nincr /NF
182
NoG = 4
183
NoP = nincr /SFE∗NoG ! ng∗substep
184
a l l o c a t e ( sigmae_saved ( ne ,NoP) , e_plas_eff_saved ( ne ,NoP) , def_saved ( neqn , nincr /SFE) )
185
a l l o c a t e ( e_11_saved ( ne ,NoP) , e_22_saved ( ne ,NoP) , e_12_saved ( ne ,NoP) &
186
, e_33_saved ( ne ,NoP) , e_23_saved ( ne ,NoP) , e_13_saved ( ne ,NoP)&
187
, ep_11_saved ( ne ,NoP) , ep_22_saved ( ne ,NoP) , ep_12_saved ( ne ,NoP) , ep_33_saved ( ne ,NoP)&
188
, ep_23_saved ( ne ,NoP) , ep_13_saved ( ne ,NoP) , s_11_saved ( ne ,NoP) , s_22_saved ( ne ,NoP)&
189
, s_12_saved ( ne ,NoP) , s_33_saved ( ne ,NoP) , s_23_saved ( ne ,NoP) , s_13_saved ( ne ,NoP) )
190
sigmae_saved = 0 .0d0
191
def_saved = 0 .0d0
192
e_11_saved = 0 .0d0
193
e_22_saved = 0 .0d0
194
e_12_saved = 0 .0d0
195
e_33_saved = 0 .0d0
196
e_23_saved = 0 .0d0
197
e_13_saved = 0 .0d0
198
ep_11_saved = 0 .0d0
199
ep_22_saved = 0 .0d0
200
ep_12_saved = 0 .0d0
201
ep_33_saved = 0 .0d0
202
ep_23_saved = 0 .0d0
203
ep_13_saved = 0 .0d0
204
s_11_saved = 0 .0d0
205
s_22_saved = 0 .0d0
206
s_12_saved = 0 .0d0
207
s_33_saved = 0 .0d0
208
s_23_saved = 0 .0d0
209
s_13_saved = 0 .0d0
210
211
end
subroutine
i n i t i a l
212
213 !##############################################################################
214
215
subroutine
d i s p l
216
217
!
This
subroutine
c a l c u l a t e s
displacements
218
use
subsol
219
use
processor
220
use
fedata
221
use
ReadWriteModule
222
223
i n t e g e r
: :
e ,
i , m,
i d o f
224
r e a l (8) ,
dimension ( : ) ,
a l l o c a t a b l e
: :
p l o t v a l
225
r e a l (8) ,
dimension ( ne )
: :
sigmaVM ,
data1
226
r e a l (8) ,
dimension ( neqn )
: :
f
227
r e a l (8) ,
dimension ( nincr )
: :
disp
228
r e a l (8)
: :
f a c t o r
229
230
dp = 0 .d0
231
d = 0 .d0
232
count1 = 1
233
234
!
Pure
Euler
i t e r a t i o n
with one−step
c o r r e c t i o n
235
do
i n c r =1, nincr
236
print ∗, ' increment
no. :
' , i n c r
237
238
!
Build
s t i f f n e s s
matrix
239
c a l l
b u i l d s t i f f
240
241
!
Build
load−vector
242
c a l l
buildload
243
c a l l
build_Int_load
==PAGE:97==
C.1. MODULE FEA
83
244
245
!
Remove
r i g i d
body modes
246
c a l l
enforce
247
248
i f
( sqrt (FD( incr , 4 ) ∗∗2+FD( incr , 5 ) ∗∗2+FD( incr , 6 ) )
.LT. 0 .05d0 )
then
249
f a c t o r = 1 .d0
250
e l s e i f
( sqrt (FD( incr , 4 ) ∗∗2+FD( incr , 5 ) ∗∗2+FD( incr , 6 ) )
.LT. 0 .25d0 )
then
251
f a c t o r = 10 .d0
252
e l s e
253
f a c t o r = 1 .d0
254
i f
( sqrt (FD( incr , 4 ) ∗∗2+FD( incr , 5 ) ∗∗2+FD( incr , 6 ) )
.GT. 0 .4d0 )
e x i t
255
i f
( sqrt (FD( incr , 1 ) ∗∗2+FD( incr , 2 ) ∗∗2+FD( incr , 3 ) )
.LT. 5 .d7 )
e x i t
256
i f
( isnan ( sqrt (FD( incr , 1 ) ∗∗2+FD( incr , 2 ) ∗∗2+FD( incr , 3 ) ) ) )
e x i t
257
end
i f
258
259
dp ( 1 : neqn ) = f a c t o r ∗p ( 1 : neqn ) / r e a l ( nincr )
260
261
!
Solving
system
of
equations
262
c a l l BANSOL(A, A2, dp , 1 , neqn ,JDIAG)
263
264
dd ( 1 : neqn ) = dp ( 1 : neqn )
265
266
!
Recover
s t r e s s
267
c a l l
recover
268
269
!
Transfer
r e s u l t s
270
d ( 1 : neqn ) = d ( 1 : neqn ) + dd ( 1 : neqn )
271
272
!
saving
s o l u t i o n
f o r
each SFE i n c r
273
i f
(
i n c r . e q . ( Count1∗SFE)
)
then
274
!
Saving
sigmae and
p l a s t i c
s t r a i n
275
do e=1,ne
276
do
i =1,NoG
277
sigmae_saved ( e , i +(Count1−1)∗NoG) = element ( e )%sigmae ( i )
278
e_plas_eff_saved ( e , i +(Count1−1)∗NoG) = element ( e )%f ( i )
279
280
e_11_saved ( e , i +(Count1−1)∗NoG) = element ( e )%death ( i )
281
e_22_saved ( e , i +(Count1−1)∗NoG) = element ( e )%e p s i ( i , 2 )
282
e_12_saved ( e , i +(Count1−1)∗NoG) = element ( e )%e p s i ( i , 4 )
283
e_33_saved ( e , i +(Count1−1)∗NoG) = element ( e )%e p s i ( i , 3 )
284
e_23_saved ( e , i +(Count1−1)∗NoG) = element ( e )%e p s i ( i , 5 )
285
e_13_saved ( e , i +(Count1−1)∗NoG) = element ( e )%e p s i ( i , 6 )
286
287
ep_11_saved ( e , i +(Count1−1)∗NoG) = element ( e )%epsi_p ( i , 1 )
288
ep_22_saved ( e , i +(Count1−1)∗NoG) = element ( e )%epsi_p ( i , 2 )
289
ep_12_saved ( e , i +(Count1−1)∗NoG) = element ( e )%epsi_p ( i , 4 )
290
ep_33_saved ( e , i +(Count1−1)∗NoG) = element ( e )%epsi_p ( i , 3 )
291
ep_23_saved ( e , i +(Count1−1)∗NoG) = element ( e )%epsi_p ( i , 5 )
292
ep_13_saved ( e , i +(Count1−1)∗NoG) = element ( e )%epsi_p ( i , 6 )
293
294
s_11_saved ( e , i +(Count1−1)∗NoG) = element ( e )%sigm ( i , 1 )
295
s_22_saved ( e , i +(Count1−1)∗NoG) = element ( e )%sigm ( i , 2 )
296
s_12_saved ( e , i +(Count1−1)∗NoG) = element ( e )%sigm ( i , 4 )
297
s_33_saved ( e , i +(Count1−1)∗NoG) = element ( e )%sigm ( i , 3 )
298
s_23_saved ( e , i +(Count1−1)∗NoG) = element ( e )%sigm ( i , 5 )
299
s_13_saved ( e , i +(Count1−1)∗NoG) = element ( e )%sigm ( i , 6 )
300
end do
301
end do
302
303
do e=1,neqn
304
def_saved ( e , Count1 ) = d( e )
305
end do
306
307
Count1 = Count1 + 1
308
309
!
Output
r e s u l t s
310
c a l l
WriteOutput
311
! c a l l
MatlabOutput
312
end
i f
==PAGE:98==
84
APPENDIX C. FORTRAN SOURCE CODE
313
314
!
Observe
r e s u l t s
315
print ∗, sqrt (FD( incr , 1 ) ∗∗2+FD( incr , 2 ) ∗∗2+FD( incr , 3 ) ∗∗2)
316
317
end do
318
319
c a l l
output
320
321
end
subroutine
d i s p l
322
323 !##############################################################################
324
325
subroutine
buildload
326
327
!
This
subroutine
builds
the
g lob a l
load
v e c t o r .
328
329
use
fedata
330
use
plane183rect
331
332
i n t e g e r
: :
i ,
j ,
idof ,
e ,
eface ,
nen
333
integer ,
parameter
: :
mdim = 24
334
integer ,
dimension (mdim)
: :
edof
335
r e a l (8) ,
dimension (mdim)
: :
xe ,
de ,
re
336
r e a l (8)
: :
fe ,
thk
337
338
!
Build
load
vector
339
p ( 1 : neqn ) = 0 .d0
340
do
i = 1 , np
341
!
Build
nodal
load
contribution
342
i f
( i n t ( loads ( i ,
1) ) == 1)
then
343
i d o f = i n t (3∗( loads ( i ,
2) −1)+loads ( i ,
3) )
344
p( i d o f ) = loads ( i ,
4)
345
!
Build
uniformly
d i s t r i b u t e d
s u r f a c e
( pressure )
load
contribution
346
e l s e
i f
( i n t ( loads ( i ,
1) ) == 2)
then
347
e = loads ( i ,
2)
348
e f a c e = loads ( i ,
3)
349
thk = mprop( element ( e )%mat)%thk
350
nen = element ( e )%numnode
351
do
j = 1 ,
nen
352
xe (3∗j −2) = x ( element ( e )%ix ( j ) ,1)
353
xe (3∗j −1) = x ( element ( e )%ix ( j ) ,2)
354
xe (3∗j )
= x ( element ( e )%ix ( j ) ,3)
355
edof (3∗j −2) = 3 ∗element ( e )%ix ( j ) −2
356
edof (3∗j −1) = 3 ∗element ( e )%ix ( j ) −1
357
edof (3∗j )
= 3 ∗element ( e )%ix ( j )
358
de (3∗j −2) = d( edof (3∗j −2))
359
de (3∗j −1) = d( edof (3∗j −1))
360
de (3∗j )
= d( edof (3∗j ) )
361
end do
362
363
i f
( e f a c e == 2
. o r .
e f a c e == 3)
then
364
f e = −loads ( i ,
4)
365
e l s e
366
f e = loads ( i ,
4)
367
end
i f
368
369
re = 0 .d0
370
p( edof ) = p( edof ) + re
371
e l s e
i f
( antype == ' modal ' )
then
372
p( edof ) = 0 .d0
373
end
i f
374
end do
375
end
subroutine
buildload
376
377 !##############################################################################
378
379
subroutine
b u i l d s t i f f
380
381
!
This
subroutine
builds
the
g lob a l
s t i f f n e s s
matrix
from
==PAGE:99==
C.1. MODULE FEA
85
382
!
the
l o c a l
element
s t i f f n e s s
m a t r i c e s .
383
384
use
fedata
385
use
plane183rect
386
use
subsol
387
388
i n t e g e r
: :
e ,
i ,
j ,
t ,
nen
389
integer ,
parameter
: :
mdim = 24
390
integer ,
dimension (mdim)
: :
edof
391
r e a l (8) ,
dimension (mdim)
: :
xe ,
de
392
r e a l (8) ,
dimension (mdim, mdim)
: :
ke , me
393
r e a l (8)
: :
young (4) , nu ,
thk ,
dens ,
sigma (4 ,6) ,
tau (4 ,6) ,
sigmay (4) ,
sigmae (4) ,
sigmae_dot (4) ,
dpe (mdim)
394
395
!
Reset
s t i f f n e s s
matrix
396
A
= 0 .0d0
397
A2 = 0 .0d0
398
399
dp = 0 .d0
400
401
do e = 1 ,
ne
402
!
Find
coordinates
and
degrees
of
freedom
403
nen = element ( e )%numnode
404
do
i = 1 ,
nen
405
xe (3∗i −2) = x ( element ( e )%ix ( i ) ,1)
406
xe (3∗i −1) = x ( element ( e )%ix ( i ) ,2)
407
xe (3∗i )
= x ( element ( e )%ix ( i ) ,3)
408
edof (3∗i −2) = 3∗element ( e )%ix ( i ) −2
409
edof (3∗i −1) = 3∗element ( e )%ix ( i ) −1
410
edof (3∗i )
= 3∗element ( e )%ix ( i )
411
de (3∗i −2) = d( edof (3∗i −2))
412
de (3∗i −1) = d( edof (3∗i −1))
413
de (3∗i )
= d( edof (3∗i ) )
414
end do
415
416
!
Gather
material
p r o p e r t i e s
and
f i n d
element
s t i f f n e s s
matrix
417
young = element ( e )%young
418
nu = mprop( element ( e )%mat)%nu
419
thk = mprop( element ( e )%mat)%thk
420
dens = mprop( element ( e )%mat)%dens
421
tau = element ( e )%Kirchhoff_contra ( : , : )
422
sigma = element ( e )%sigm ( : , : )
423
sigmay = element ( e )%sigmay ( : )
424
sigmae = element ( e )%sigmae ( : )
425
sigmae_dot = element ( e )%sigmae_dot ( : )
426
c a l l
plane183rect_ke ( e ,
xe ,
de ,
young ,
nu ,
thk ,
dens ,
sigmay ,
sigmae ,
sigmae_dot ,
sigma ,
tau , me,
ke )
427
428
dpe = 0 .d0
429
430
c a l l ASSEMB(A, A2, dp , ke , dpe , mdim,JDIAG, edof )
431
end do
432
end
subroutine
b u i l d s t i f f
433
434 !##############################################################################
435
436
subroutine
enforce
437
438
!
This
subroutine
e n f o r c e s
the
support
boundary
c o n d i t i o n s .
439
440
use
subsol
441
use
fedata
442
443
i n t e g e r
: :
i ,
i d o f
444
445
!
Correct
f o r
supports
446
do
i = 1 , nb
447
i d o f = i n t (3∗( bound ( i , 1 ) −1) + bound ( i , 2 ) )
448
c a l l ESSBUR(A, A2, p , bound ( i , 3 ) , idof ,JDIAG, neqn )
==PAGE:100==
86
APPENDIX C. FORTRAN SOURCE CODE
449
i f
( bound ( i , 3 )
.GT. 0 .d0 )
then
450
i f
( bound ( i , 2 )
.EQ.
1)
then
451
FD( incr , 1 ) = FD( incr , 1 ) + p_int ( i d o f )
452
FD( incr , 4 ) = d( i d o f )
453
e l s e i f
( bound ( i , 2 )
.EQ.
2)
then
454
FD( incr , 2 ) = FD( incr , 2 ) + p_int ( i d o f )
455
FD( incr , 5 ) = d( i d o f )
456
e l s e i f
( bound ( i , 2 )
.EQ.
3)
then
457
FD( incr , 3 ) = FD( incr , 3 ) + p_int ( i d o f )
458
FD( incr , 6 ) = d( i d o f )
459
end
i f
460
end
i f
461
end do
462
end
subroutine
enforce
463
464 !##############################################################################
465
466
subroutine
build_Int_load
467
468
!
This
subroutine
builds
the
g lob a l
load
v e c t o r .
469
470
use
fedata
471
use
plane183rect
472
473
i n t e g e r
: :
e ,
i ,
nen , dummy10
474
i n t e g e r
: :
edof (24)
475
REAL( kind=8)
: :
xe (24) ,
de (24) ,
pe (24)
476
477
p_Int ( : ) = 0 .0d0
478
do e = 1 ,
ne
479
!
Find
coordinates
and
degrees
of
freedom
480
nen = element ( e )%numnode
481
do
i = 1 ,
nen
482
xe (3∗i −2) = x ( element ( e )%ix ( i ) ,1)
483
xe (3∗i −1) = x ( element ( e )%ix ( i ) ,2)
484
xe (3∗i
) = x ( element ( e )%ix ( i ) ,3)
485
486
edof (3∗i −2) = 3∗element ( e )%ix ( i ) −2
487
edof (3∗i −1) = 3∗element ( e )%ix ( i ) −1
488
edof (3∗i
) = 3∗element ( e )%ix ( i )
489
490
de (3∗i −2) = d( edof (3∗i −2))
491
de (3∗i −1) = d( edof (3∗i −1))
492
de (3∗i
) = d( edof (3∗i ) )
493
end do
494
495
!
Build
i n t e r n a l
load
vector
496
c a l l
plane183rect_pe ( e , xe , de , pe )
497
498
p_Int ( edof ) = p_Int ( edof ) + pe
499
end do
500
end
subroutine
build_Int_load
501
502 !##############################################################################
503
504
subroutine
recover
505
506
!
This
subroutine
recovers
the
element
s t r e s s ,
element
strain ,
507
!
and nodal
r e a c t i o n
f o r c e s
508
509
use
fedata
510
use
plane183rect
511
512
i n t e g e r
: :
e ,
i ,
i i ,
j ,
j j ,
ki ,
l i ,
nen ,
count ,
r ,
s
513
integer ,
parameter
: :
mdim = 24
514
i n t e g e r
: :
edof (mdim)
515
r e a l (8) ,
dimension (mdim)
: :
xe ,
de ,
dde ,
u
516
r e a l (8)
: :
young ,
nu ,
xi (2) ,
eta (2) , youngT ,
du (6) , Gcon (3 ,3) , Gco (3 ,3) , Gog&
==PAGE:101==
C.1. MODULE FEA
87
517
, mGco(3 ,3) , mFco(3 ,3) , H,
dot ,
mFkl_sigmakl ,
At ,
Bt , dummy2,
omega_0&
518
, k_omega ,
death_t ,
smooth
519
r e a l (8)
: :
sigmay (4) ,
sigmae (4) ,
sigmae_dot (4) ,
estrain_dot (6) ,
estress_dot (6)&
520
,
sigma (3 ,3) ,
sigma_dot (3 ,3) ,
sigma_jaucon (3 ,3) ,
scon (3 ,3) ,
sco (3 ,3)&
521
, sigmaM_dot ,
tau_prev (4 ,6) ,
tau_dot (3 ,3) ,
tau (3 ,3) ,
stresse_dot&
522
, sigmaM ,
stress_prev (4 ,6) ,
stress_Kirchhoff (4 ,6) ,
sigma_stress_dot (6)&
523
,
J3 ,
sigma_kco_kcon
524
r e a l (8)
: :
strain_p_dotTemp (3 ,3) , epsilon_P_M_dot ,
strain_prev (4 ,6) &
525
,
strain_p_eff_dot_prev (4) ,
strain_p_eff_prev (4)&
526
,
strain_p_dot_prev (4 ,6) ,
eta_strain_dot (3 ,3) ,
eta_strain (3 ,3) &
527
,
eta_strain_p_dot (3 ,3) ,
strain_p_dot (6)
528
r e a l (8)
: :
f ,
fs ,
f_d ,
f_d_growth ,
f_d_nucl ,
f_d_shear
529
530
!
Defining
number
of
Gauss
points
531
ng = 2
532
xi (1) = −1.d0 / sqrt (3 .d0 )
533
xi (2) = 1 .d0 / sqrt (3 .d0 )
534
eta (1) = −1.d0 / sqrt (3 .d0 )
535
eta (2) = 1 .d0 / sqrt (3 .d0 )
536
537
do e = 1 ,
ne
538
539
!
Find
coordinates
etc . . .
540
nen = element ( e )%numnode
541
do
i =1,nen
542
xe (3∗i −2) = x ( element ( e )%ix ( i ) ,
1)
543
xe (3∗i −1) = x ( element ( e )%ix ( i ) ,
2)
544
xe (3∗i )
= x ( element ( e )%ix ( i ) ,
3)
545
edof (3∗i −2) = 3∗element ( e )%ix ( i ) −2
546
edof (3∗i −1) = 3∗element ( e )%ix ( i ) −1
547
edof (3∗i )
= 3∗element ( e )%ix ( i )
548
de (3∗i −2) = d( edof (3∗i −2))
549
de (3∗i −1) = d( edof (3∗i −1))
550
de (3∗i )
= d( edof (3∗i ) )
551
dde (3∗i −2) = dd( edof (3∗i −2))
552
dde (3∗i −1) = dd( edof (3∗i −1))
553
dde (3∗i )
= dd( edof (3∗i ) )
554
end do
555
556
!
Find
s t r e s s
and
s t r a i n
557
stress_prev = element ( e )%sigm ( : , : )
558
tau_prev = element ( e )%Kirchhoff_contra ( : , : )
559
sigmay = element ( e )%sigmay ( : )
560
sigmae = element ( e )%sigmae ( : )
561
sigmae_dot = element ( e )%sigmae_dot ( : )
562
563
count = 0
564
do
i =1,ng
565
do
j =1,ng
566
count = count + 1
567
young = element ( e )%young ( count )
568
youngT = element ( e )%youngT( count )
569
H = element ( e )%H( count )
570
sigmaM = element ( e )%sigmaM( count )
571
mGco = element ( e )%mGco( count , : , : )
572
mFco = element ( e )%mFco( count , : , : )
573
f = element ( e )%f ( count )
574
f s = element ( e )%f s ( count )
575
576
c a l l
plane183rect_ss ( e ,
count ,
xe ,
de ,
dde ,
xi ( i ) ,
eta ( j ) ,
estress_dot ( : ) ,
estrain_dot ( : ) , du)
577
c a l l
plane183rect_Metric (du ,
Gco ,
Gcon ,
Gog)
578
579
eta_strain_dot ( 1 : 3 , 1 : 3 ) = estrain_dot (6)
580
eta_strain_dot ( 2 : 3 , 2 : 3 ) = estrain_dot (5)
581
eta_strain_dot ( 1 : 2 , 1 : 2 ) = estrain_dot (4)
==PAGE:102==
88
APPENDIX C. FORTRAN SOURCE CODE
582
eta_strain_dot (1 ,1)
= estrain_dot (1)
583
eta_strain_dot (2 ,2)
= estrain_dot (2)
584
eta_strain_dot (3 ,3)
= estrain_dot (3)
585
586
sigma ( 1 : 3 , 1 : 3 ) = stress_prev ( count , 6 )
587
sigma ( 2 : 3 , 2 : 3 ) = stress_prev ( count , 5 )
588
sigma ( 1 : 2 , 1 : 2 ) = stress_prev ( count , 4 )
589
sigma (1 ,1)
= stress_prev ( count , 1 )
590
sigma (2 ,2)
= stress_prev ( count , 2 )
591
sigma (3 ,3)
= stress_prev ( count , 3 )
592
593
tau_dot ( 1 : 3 , 1 : 3 ) = estress_dot (6)
594
tau_dot ( 2 : 3 , 2 : 3 ) = estress_dot (5)
595
tau_dot ( 1 : 2 , 1 : 2 ) = estress_dot (4)
596
tau_dot (1 ,1)
= estress_dot (1)
597
tau_dot (2 ,2)
= estress_dot (2)
598
tau_dot (3 ,3)
= estress_dot (3)
599
600
tau ( 1 : 3 , 1 : 3 ) = tau_prev ( count , 6 )
601
tau ( 2 : 3 , 2 : 3 ) = tau_prev ( count , 5 )
602
tau ( 1 : 2 , 1 : 2 ) = tau_prev ( count , 4 )
603
tau (1 ,1)
= tau_prev ( count , 1 )
604
tau (2 ,2)
= tau_prev ( count , 2 )
605
tau (3 ,3)
= tau_prev ( count , 3 )
606
607
!
Calculating
Cauchy
s t r e s s
rate
608
sigma_dot = 0 .0d0
609
do
i i =1,3
610
do
j j =1,3
611
do
r =1,3
612
do s =1,3
613
sigma_dot ( i i , j j ) = sigma_dot ( i i , j j ) +
Gcon( r , s ) ∗eta_strain_dot ( r , s )
614
end do
615
end do
616
sigma_dot ( i i , j j ) =
( tau_dot ( i i , j j )−tau ( i i , j j ) ∗sigma_dot ( i i , j j ) ) / sqrt (Gog)
617
end do
618
end do
619
620
!
Calculating
Jaumann
rate
of
the Cauchy
s t r e s s
621
sigma_jaucon = 0 .d0
622
do
i i =1,3
623
do
j j =1,3
624
do
r =1,3
625
do s =1,3
626
sigma_jaucon ( i i , j j ) = sigma_jaucon ( i i , j j )+(Gcon( i i , r )&
627
∗sigma ( j j , s )+Gcon( j j , r ) ∗sigma ( i i , s ) ) ∗eta_strain_dot ( r , s )
628
end do
629
end do
630
sigma_jaucon ( i i , j j ) = sigma_dot ( i i , j j ) + sigma_jaucon ( i i , j j )
631
end do
632
end do
633
634
sigma_kco_kcon = (Gco (1 ,1) ∗sigma (1 ,1) + Gco (1 ,2) ∗sigma (2 ,1) &
635
+ Gco (1 ,3) ∗sigma (3 ,1) )+(Gco (2 ,1) ∗sigma (1 ,2) &
636
+ Gco (2 ,2) ∗sigma (2 ,2) + Gco (2 ,3) ∗sigma (3 ,2) ) &
637
+(Gco (3 ,1) ∗sigma (1 ,3) + Gco (3 ,2) ∗sigma (2 ,3) &
638
+ Gco (3 ,3) ∗sigma (3 ,3) )
639
640
do
i i =1,3
641
do
j j =1,3
642
scon ( i i , j j ) = sigma ( i i , j j ) −Gcon( i i , j j ) ∗sigma_kco_kcon/3 .d0
643
end do
644
end do
645
646
do
i i =1,3
647
do
j j =1,3
==PAGE:103==
C.1. MODULE FEA
89
648
sco ( i i , j j ) =
Gco( i i , 1 ) ∗Gco( j j , 1 ) ∗scon (1 ,1)+Gco( i i , 1 ) ∗Gco( j j , 2 )
∗scon (1 ,2)+Gco( i i , 1 ) ∗Gco( j j , 3 ) ∗scon (1 ,3) &
649
+Gco( i i , 2 ) ∗Gco( j j , 1 ) ∗scon (2 ,1)+Gco( i i , 2 ) ∗Gco( j j , 2 )
∗scon (2 ,2)+Gco( i i , 2 ) ∗Gco( j j , 3 ) ∗scon (2 ,3) &
650
+Gco( i i , 3 ) ∗Gco( j j , 1 ) ∗scon (3 ,1)+Gco( i i , 3 ) ∗Gco( j j , 2 )
∗scon (3 ,2)+Gco( i i , 3 ) ∗Gco( j j , 3 ) ∗scon (3 ,3)
651
end do
652
end do
653
654
i f
( element ( e )%p l a s t i c ( count )
.GE. 1 .AND. ( sigmae_dot ( count )
.GE.
0 .d0 ) )
then
655
656
mFkl_sigmakl = mFco(1 ,1) ∗sigma_jaucon (1 ,1) +
mFco(1 ,2) ∗sigma_jaucon (1 ,2) + mFco(1 ,3) ∗sigma_jaucon (1 ,3) &
657
+mFco(2 ,1) ∗sigma_jaucon (2 ,1) +
mFco(2 ,2) ∗sigma_jaucon (2 ,2) +
mFco(2 ,3) ∗sigma_jaucon (2 ,3) &
658
+mFco(3 ,1) ∗sigma_jaucon (3 ,1) +
mFco(3 ,2) ∗sigma_jaucon (3 ,2) +
mFco(3 ,3) ∗sigma_jaucon (3 ,3)
659
660
eta_strain_p_dot (1 ,1) = mGco(1 ,1) ∗mFkl_sigmakl/H
661
eta_strain_p_dot (1 ,2) = mGco(1 ,2) ∗mFkl_sigmakl/H
662
eta_strain_p_dot (1 ,3) = mGco(1 ,3) ∗mFkl_sigmakl/H
663
eta_strain_p_dot (2 ,1) = mGco(2 ,1) ∗mFkl_sigmakl/H
664
eta_strain_p_dot (2 ,2) = mGco(2 ,2) ∗mFkl_sigmakl/H
665
eta_strain_p_dot (2 ,3) = mGco(2 ,3) ∗mFkl_sigmakl/H
666
eta_strain_p_dot (3 ,1) = mGco(3 ,1) ∗mFkl_sigmakl/H
667
eta_strain_p_dot (3 ,2) = mGco(3 ,2) ∗mFkl_sigmakl/H
668
eta_strain_p_dot (3 ,3) = mGco(3 ,3) ∗mFkl_sigmakl/H
669
670
sigmaM_dot =
young∗youngT/( young−youngT) ∗( sigma (1 ,1) ∗eta_strain_p_dot (1 ,1)
+ sigma (1 ,2) ∗eta_strain_p_dot (1 ,2) &
671
+sigma (1 ,3) ∗eta_strain_p_dot (1 ,3)+sigma (2 ,1) ∗eta_strain_p_dot (2 ,1)
+sigma (2 ,2) ∗eta_strain_p_dot (2 ,2) &
672
+sigma (2 ,3) ∗eta_strain_p_dot (2 ,3)+sigma (3 ,1) ∗eta_strain_p_dot (3 ,1)
+sigma (3 ,2) ∗eta_strain_p_dot (3 ,2) &
673
+sigma (3 ,3) ∗eta_strain_p_dot (3 ,3) ) /((1 .d0−f ) ∗sigmaM)
674
675
epsilon_P_M_dot = (1 .d0 /youngT −1 .d0 /young ) ∗sigmaM_dot
676
677
dot = mFkl_sigmakl/H
678
679
!
Void growth
680
i f
( element ( e )%epsi_p_eff_dot ( count )
.GE. 0 .d0 )
then
681
At =
(1 .d0 /youngT−1.d0 /young ) ∗fN /(sN∗sqrt (2 .d0 ∗pi ) ) ∗exp(−1 .d0 /2 .d0 ∗
(( element ( e )%epsi_p_eff ( count )−epsN ) /sN) ∗∗2)
682
Bt = 0 .d0
683
end
i f
684
685
f_d_growth = (1 .d0−f ) ∗(Gcon (1 ,1) ∗eta_strain_p_dot (1 ,1)+Gcon (1 ,2)
∗eta_strain_p_dot (1 ,2) &
686
+Gcon (1 ,3) ∗eta_strain_p_dot (1 ,3)+Gcon (2 ,1)
∗eta_strain_p_dot (2 ,1)+Gcon (2 ,2)
∗eta_strain_p_dot (2 ,2) &
687
+Gcon (2 ,3) ∗eta_strain_p_dot (2 ,3)+Gcon (3 ,1)
∗eta_strain_p_dot (3 ,1)+Gcon (3 ,2)
∗eta_strain_p_dot (3 ,2) &
688
+Gcon (3 ,3) ∗eta_strain_p_dot (3 ,3) )
689
690
f_d_nucl = At∗sigmaM_dot
691
692
!
Third
i n v a r i a n t
of
s t r e s s
d i v i a t o r
693
J3 = 0 .0d0
694
do
i i =1,3
695
do
j j =1,3
==PAGE:104==
90
APPENDIX C. FORTRAN SOURCE CODE
696
do
r =1,3
697
do s =1,3
698
J3 = J3 + Gcon( i i , j j ) ∗Sco ( r , i i ) ∗Sco ( j j , s ) ∗Scon ( s , r )
699
end do
700
end do
701
end do
702
end do
703
J3 = J3/3 .0d0
704
705
!
Nahshon and Hutchinson
2008
706
omega_0 = 1 .0d0 −( 27 .0d0 ∗J3 /(2 .0d0 ∗sigmae ( count ) ∗∗3) ) ∗∗2
707
708
k_omega = 0 .d0
709
710
f_d_shear =
k_omega∗f ∗omega_0∗( scon (1 ,1) ∗eta_strain_p_dot (1 ,1)+scon (1 ,2)
∗eta_strain_p_dot (1 ,2) &
711
+scon (1 ,3) ∗eta_strain_p_dot (1 ,3)+scon (2 ,1) ∗eta_strain_p_dot (2 ,1)
+scon (2 ,2) ∗eta_strain_p_dot (2 ,2) &
712
+scon (2 ,3) ∗eta_strain_p_dot (2 ,3)+scon (3 ,1) ∗eta_strain_p_dot (3 ,1)
+scon (3 ,2) ∗eta_strain_p_dot (3 ,2) &
713
+scon (3 ,3) ∗eta_strain_p_dot (3 ,3) ) / sigmae ( count )
714
715
i f
( element ( e )%p l a s t i c ( count )
.EQ. 2 .AND.
i n c r
.LT.
element ( e )%death_t ( count ) + t_ramp)
then
716
i f
( element ( e )%death ( count )
.EQ. 0 .d0 )
then
717
element ( e )%death ( count ) = 1 .d0
718
end
i f
719
720
f_d = 0 .d0
721
722
death_t = r e a l ( incr −element ( e )%death_t ( count ) ) / r e a l (t_ramp)
723
smooth = 1 .d0−death_t ∗∗3∗(10 .d0+death_t∗(−15 .d0+6.d0 ∗death_t ) )
724
element ( e )%young ( count ) = smooth∗mprop( element ( e )%mat)%young
725
i f
( i n c r
.EQ.
element ( e )%death_t ( count ) + t_ramp)
then
726
element ( e )%young ( count ) = mprop( element ( e )%mat)%young∗1 .d −9
727
end
i f
728
print ∗, ' element : ' , e , 'E: ' , element ( e )%young ( count )
729
e l s e
730
f_d = f_d_growth !+ f_d_nucl + f_d_shear
731
end
i f
732
733
e l s e
734
sigmaM_dot = 0 .d0
735
dot = 0 .d0
736
epsilon_p_M_dot = 0 .0d0
737
eta_strain_p_dot = 0 .0d0
738
f_d = 0 .d0
739
end
i f
740
741
sigmae ( count ) =
sqrt (3 .d0 /2 .d0 ∗( sco (1 ,1) ∗scon (1 ,1)+sco (1 ,2) ∗scon (1 ,2)
+sco (1 ,3) ∗scon (1 ,3)+sco (2 ,1) ∗scon (2 ,1) &
742
+sco (2 ,2) ∗scon (2 ,2)+sco (2 ,3) ∗scon (2 ,3)+sco (3 ,1) ∗scon (3 ,1)
+sco (3 ,2) ∗scon (3 ,2)+sco (3 ,3) ∗scon (3 ,3) ) )
743
744
strain_p_dot (1) = eta_strain_p_dot (1 ,1)
745
strain_p_dot (2) = eta_strain_p_dot (2 ,2)
746
strain_p_dot (3) = eta_strain_p_dot (3 ,3)
747
strain_p_dot (4) = eta_strain_p_dot (1 ,2)
748
strain_p_dot (5) = eta_strain_p_dot (2 ,3)
749
strain_p_dot (6) = eta_strain_p_dot (1 ,3)
750
751
sigma_stress_dot (1) = sigma_dot (1 ,1)
752
sigma_stress_dot (2) = sigma_dot (2 ,2)
753
sigma_stress_dot (3) = sigma_dot (3 ,3)
754
sigma_stress_dot (4) = sigma_dot (1 ,2)
755
sigma_stress_dot (5) = sigma_dot (2 ,3)
756
sigma_stress_dot (6) = sigma_dot (1 ,3)
==PAGE:105==
C.2. MODULE FEA
91
757
758
!
Update
of
globa l
s t r a i n s
and
s t r e s s e s
759
element ( e )%e p s i ( count , : ) = element ( e )%e p s i ( count , : ) + estrain_dot ( : )
760
element ( e )%epsi_dot ( count , : ) = estrain_dot ( : )
761
element ( e )%epsi_p ( count , : ) = element ( e )%epsi_p ( count , : ) +
strain_p_dot ( : )
762
element ( e )%epsi_p_dot ( count , : ) = strain_p_dot ( : )
763
element ( e )%epsi_p_eff ( count ) = element ( e )%epsi_p_eff ( count ) +
epsilon_p_M_dot
764
element ( e )%epsi_p_eff_dot ( count ) = epsilon_p_M_dot
765
766
element ( e )%Kirchhoff_contra ( count , : ) =
element ( e )%Kirchhoff_contra ( count , : ) + estress_dot ( : )
767
element ( e )%sigm ( count , : ) = element ( e )%sigm ( count , : ) +
sigma_stress_dot ( : )
768
element ( e )%sigmae ( count ) = sigmae ( count )
769
element ( e )%sigmaM( count ) = element ( e )%sigmaM( count ) + sigmaM_dot
770
element ( e )%sigmaM_dot ( count ) = sigmaM_dot
771
element ( e )%sigmae_dot ( count ) = dot
772
773
element ( e )%Phi ( count ) =
element ( e )%sigmae ( count ) ∗∗2/ element ( e )%sigmaM( count ) ∗∗2 &
774
+2.d0 ∗q1∗f s ∗cosh ( q2/2 .d0
∗sigma_kco_kcon/ element ( e )%sigmaM( count ) )
−(1 .d0+(q1∗f s ) ∗∗2)
775
element ( e )%f ( count ) = element ( e )%f ( count ) + f_d
776
777
i f
( element ( e )%p l a s t i c ( count )
.EQ.
0)
then
778
i f
( element ( e )%Phi ( count )
.GE. 0 .d0 )
then
779
element ( e )%p l a s t i c ( count ) = 1
780
e n d i f
781
e l s e i f
( element ( e )%p l a s t i c ( count )
.EQ.
1)
then
782
i f
( element ( e )%f ( count )
.LE.
0 .99d0 ∗f f )
then
783
i f
( element ( e )%Phi ( count )
.LT. 0 .d0 )
then
784
element ( e )%p l a s t i c ( count ) = 0
785
e n d i f
786
e l s e
787
element ( e )%p l a s t i c ( count ) = 2
788
element ( e )%death_t ( count ) = i n c r
789
print ∗, ' element ' , e
790
e n d i f
791
end
i f
792
793
i f
( element ( e )%f ( count )
.LT. 0 .d0 )
then
794
element ( e )%f ( count ) = 0 .d0
795
e l s e i f
( element ( e )%f ( count )
.GT. 0 .99d0 ∗f f )
then
796
element ( e )%f ( count ) = 0 .99d0 ∗f f
797
end
i f
798
799
end do
800
end do
801
end do
802
end
subroutine
recover
803
804
end module
fea
C.2
Module fea
Module plane183rect
1
MODULE plane183rect
2
3
!
This module
contains
subroutines
s p e c i f i c
to
the PLANE183 element.
==PAGE:106==
92
APPENDIX C. FORTRAN SOURCE CODE
4
5
IMPLICIT NONE
6
7
PRIVATE
8
PUBLIC
: :
plane183rect_ke ,
plane183rect_shape ,
plane183rect_ss ,
plane183rect_cmat ,
plane183rect_Metric &
9
,
YieldSurface_derivatives ,
plane183rect_pe
10
CONTAINS
11
12
SUBROUTINE plane183rect_ke ( e ,
xe ,
de ,
young ,
nu ,
thk ,
dens ,
sigmay ,
sigmae ,
sigmae_dot ,
sigma ,
tau , me,
ke )
13
14
!
This
subroutine
constructs
the
s t i f f n e s s
matrix
f o r
15
!
a
rectangular 8−noded quad
element.
16
17
IMPLICIT NONE
18
19
INTEGER : :
i ,
j ,
ki ,
l i ,
i i ,
j j , m,
n ,
ng ,
count
20
REAL(8)
: :
xi (2) ,
eta (2) , Wi(2) , Wj(2) ,
jac (2 ,2) ,
detjac , Em(3 ,3) , En(3 ,3) ,
L(3 ,3 ,3 ,3) , dN(6 ,24) , Bmat(6 ,24) , du (6)
21
INTEGER, INTENT(IN)
: :
e
22
REAL(8) , INTENT(IN)
: :
young (4) , nu ,
thk ,
dens ,
sigmay (4) ,
sigmae (4) ,
sigmae_dot (4) ,
sigma (4 ,6) ,
tau (4 ,6)
23
REAL(8) , DIMENSION( : ) , INTENT(IN)
: :
xe ,
de
24
REAL(8) , DIMENSION ( : , : ) , INTENT(OUT)
: :
ke , me
25
26
ke = 0 .d0
27
28
!
Defining
number
of
Gauss
points
29
ng = 2
30
xi (1) = −1.d0 / sqrt (3 .d0 )
31
xi (2) = 1 .d0 / sqrt (3 .d0 )
32
eta (1) = −1.d0 / sqrt (3 .d0 )
33
eta (2) = 1 .d0 / sqrt (3 .d0 )
34
Wi = 1 .d0
35
Wj = 1 .d0
36
37
!
Calculating
c o n s t i t u t i v e
matrix
f o r
plane
s t r a i n
38
count = 0
39
do
i i =1,ng
40
do
j j =1,ng
41
count = count + 1
42
c a l l
plane183rect_shape ( xe ,
de ,
xi ( i i ) ,
eta ( j j ) ,
jac ,
detjac , dN,
Bmat ,
du)
43
c a l l
plane183rect_cmat ( e ,
count ,
du ,
sigma ( count , : ) ,
sigmay ( count ) ,
sigmae ( count ) ,
sigmae_dot ( count ) ,
young ( count ) , nu , L)
44
45
do m=1,24
46
do n=1,24
47
Em = 0 .d0
48
Em(1 ,1) =
0 .5d0 ∗(dN(1 ,m)+dN(1 ,m)+du (1) ∗dN(1 ,m)+du (3) ∗dN(3 ,m)+du (5) ∗dN(5 ,m)
+du (1) ∗dN(1 ,m)+du (3) ∗dN(3 ,m)+du (5) ∗dN(5 ,m) )
49
Em(1 ,2) =
0 .5d0 ∗(dN(2 ,m)+dN(3 ,m)+du (1) ∗dN(2 ,m)+du (3) ∗dN(4 ,m)+du (5) ∗dN(6 ,m)
+du (2) ∗dN(1 ,m)+du (4) ∗dN(3 ,m)+du (6) ∗dN(5 ,m) )
50
Em(1 ,3) = 0 .5d0 ∗(dN(5 ,m) )
51
Em(2 ,1) =
0 .5d0 ∗(dN(3 ,m)+dN(2 ,m)+du (2) ∗dN(1 ,m)+du (4) ∗dN(3 ,m)+du (6) ∗dN(5 ,m)
+du (1) ∗dN(2 ,m)+du (3) ∗dN(4 ,m)+du (5) ∗dN(6 ,m) )
52
Em(2 ,2) =
0 .5d0 ∗(dN(4 ,m)+dN(4 ,m)+du (2) ∗dN(2 ,m)+du (4) ∗dN(4 ,m)+du (6) ∗dN(6 ,m)
+du (2) ∗dN(2 ,m)+du (4) ∗dN(4 ,m)+du (6) ∗dN(6 ,m) )
53
Em(2 ,3) = 0 .5d0 ∗(dN(6 ,m) )
54
Em(3 ,1) = 0 .5d0 ∗(dN(5 ,m) )
55
Em(3 ,2) = 0 .5d0 ∗(dN(6 ,m) )
56
57
En = 0 .d0
==PAGE:107==
C.2. MODULE FEA
93
58
En(1 ,1) =
0 .5d0 ∗(dN(1 , n)+dN(1 , n)+du (1) ∗dN(1 , n)+du (3) ∗dN(3 , n)+du (5) ∗dN(5 , n)
+du (1) ∗dN(1 , n)+du (3) ∗dN(3 , n)+du (5) ∗dN(5 , n) )
59
En(1 ,2) =
0 .5d0 ∗(dN(2 , n)+dN(3 , n)+du (1) ∗dN(2 , n)+du (3) ∗dN(4 , n)+du (5) ∗dN(6 , n)
+du (2) ∗dN(1 , n)+du (4) ∗dN(3 , n)+du (6) ∗dN(5 , n) )
60
En(1 ,3) = 0 .5d0 ∗(dN(5 , n) )
61
En(2 ,1) =
0 .5d0 ∗(dN(3 , n)+dN(2 , n)+du (2) ∗dN(1 , n)+du (4) ∗dN(3 , n)+du (6) ∗dN(5 , n)
+du (1) ∗dN(2 , n)+du (3) ∗dN(4 , n)+du (5) ∗dN(6 , n) )
62
En(2 ,2) =
0 .5d0 ∗(dN(4 , n)+dN(4 , n)+du (2) ∗dN(2 , n)+du (4) ∗dN(4 , n)+du (6) ∗dN(6 , n)
+du (2) ∗dN(2 , n)+du (4) ∗dN(4 , n)+du (6) ∗dN(6 , n) )
63
En(2 ,3) = 0 .5d0 ∗(dN(6 , n) )
64
En(3 ,1) = 0 .5d0 ∗(dN(5 , n) )
65
En(3 ,2) = 0 .5d0 ∗(dN(6 , n) )
66
67
ke (m, n) = ke (m, n)+(L(1 ,1 ,1 ,1) ∗En(1 ,1) ∗Em(1 ,1) +
L(1 ,1 ,1 ,2) ∗En(1 ,2) ∗Em(1 ,1) + L(1 ,1 ,1 ,3) ∗En(1 ,3) ∗Em(1 ,1) &
68
+L(1 ,1 ,2 ,1) ∗En(2 ,1) ∗Em(1 ,1) +
L(1 ,1 ,2 ,2) ∗En(2 ,2) ∗Em(1 ,1) +
L(1 ,1 ,2 ,3) ∗En(2 ,3) ∗Em(1 ,1) &
69
+L(1 ,1 ,3 ,1) ∗En(3 ,1) ∗Em(1 ,1) +
L(1 ,1 ,3 ,2) ∗En(3 ,2) ∗Em(1 ,1) +
L(1 ,1 ,3 ,3) ∗En(3 ,3) ∗Em(1 ,1) ) &
70
∗Wi( i i ) ∗Wj( j j ) ∗detjac ∗thk
71
72
ke (m, n) = ke (m, n)+(L(1 ,2 ,1 ,1) ∗En(1 ,1) ∗Em(1 ,2) +
L(1 ,2 ,1 ,2) ∗En(1 ,2) ∗Em(1 ,2) + L(1 ,2 ,1 ,3) ∗En(1 ,3) ∗Em(1 ,2) &
73
+L(1 ,2 ,2 ,1) ∗En(2 ,1) ∗Em(1 ,2) +
L(1 ,2 ,2 ,2) ∗En(2 ,2) ∗Em(1 ,2) +
L(1 ,2 ,2 ,3) ∗En(2 ,3) ∗Em(1 ,2) &
74
+L(1 ,2 ,3 ,1) ∗En(3 ,1) ∗Em(1 ,2) +
L(1 ,2 ,3 ,2) ∗En(3 ,2) ∗Em(1 ,2) +
L(1 ,2 ,3 ,3) ∗En(3 ,3) ∗Em(1 ,2) ) &
75
∗Wi( i i ) ∗Wj( j j ) ∗detjac ∗thk
76
77
ke (m, n) = ke (m, n)+(L(1 ,3 ,1 ,1) ∗En(1 ,1) ∗Em(1 ,3) +
L(1 ,3 ,1 ,2) ∗En(1 ,2) ∗Em(1 ,3) + L(1 ,3 ,1 ,3) ∗En(1 ,3) ∗Em(1 ,3) &
78
+L(1 ,3 ,2 ,1) ∗En(2 ,1) ∗Em(1 ,3) +
L(1 ,3 ,2 ,2) ∗En(2 ,2) ∗Em(1 ,3) +
L(1 ,3 ,2 ,3) ∗En(2 ,3) ∗Em(1 ,3) &
79
+L(1 ,3 ,3 ,1) ∗En(3 ,1) ∗Em(1 ,3) +
L(1 ,3 ,3 ,2) ∗En(3 ,2) ∗Em(1 ,3) +
L(1 ,3 ,3 ,3) ∗En(3 ,3) ∗Em(1 ,3) ) &
80
∗Wi( i i ) ∗Wj( j j ) ∗detjac ∗thk
81
82
ke (m, n) = ke (m, n)+(L(2 ,1 ,1 ,1) ∗En(1 ,1) ∗Em(2 ,1) +
L(2 ,1 ,1 ,2) ∗En(1 ,2) ∗Em(2 ,1) + L(2 ,1 ,1 ,3) ∗En(1 ,3) ∗Em(2 ,1) &
83
+L(2 ,1 ,2 ,1) ∗En(2 ,1) ∗Em(2 ,1) +
L(2 ,1 ,2 ,2) ∗En(2 ,2) ∗Em(2 ,1) +
L(2 ,1 ,2 ,3) ∗En(2 ,3) ∗Em(2 ,1) &
84
+L(2 ,1 ,3 ,1) ∗En(3 ,1) ∗Em(2 ,1) +
L(2 ,1 ,3 ,2) ∗En(3 ,2) ∗Em(2 ,1) +
L(2 ,1 ,3 ,3) ∗En(3 ,3) ∗Em(2 ,1) ) &
85
∗Wi( i i ) ∗Wj( j j ) ∗detjac ∗thk
86
87
ke (m, n) = ke (m, n)+(L(2 ,2 ,1 ,1) ∗En(1 ,1) ∗Em(2 ,2) +
L(2 ,2 ,1 ,2) ∗En(1 ,2) ∗Em(2 ,2) + L(2 ,2 ,1 ,3) ∗En(1 ,3) ∗Em(2 ,2) &
88
+L(2 ,2 ,2 ,1) ∗En(2 ,1) ∗Em(2 ,2) +
L(2 ,2 ,2 ,2) ∗En(2 ,2) ∗Em(2 ,2) +
L(2 ,2 ,2 ,3) ∗En(2 ,3) ∗Em(2 ,2) &
89
+L(2 ,2 ,3 ,1) ∗En(3 ,1) ∗Em(2 ,2) +
L(2 ,2 ,3 ,2) ∗En(3 ,2) ∗Em(2 ,2) +
L(2 ,2 ,3 ,3) ∗En(3 ,3) ∗Em(2 ,2) ) &
90
∗Wi( i i ) ∗Wj( j j ) ∗detjac ∗thk
91
92
ke (m, n) = ke (m, n)+(L(2 ,3 ,1 ,1) ∗En(1 ,1) ∗Em(2 ,3) +
L(2 ,3 ,1 ,2) ∗En(1 ,2) ∗Em(2 ,3) + L(2 ,3 ,1 ,3) ∗En(1 ,3) ∗Em(2 ,3) &
==PAGE:108==
94
APPENDIX C. FORTRAN SOURCE CODE
93
+L(2 ,3 ,2 ,1) ∗En(2 ,1) ∗Em(2 ,3) +
L(2 ,3 ,2 ,2) ∗En(2 ,2) ∗Em(2 ,3) +
L(2 ,3 ,2 ,3) ∗En(2 ,3) ∗Em(2 ,3) &
94
+L(2 ,3 ,3 ,1) ∗En(3 ,1) ∗Em(2 ,3) +
L(2 ,3 ,3 ,2) ∗En(3 ,2) ∗Em(2 ,3) +
L(2 ,3 ,3 ,3) ∗En(3 ,3) ∗Em(2 ,3) ) &
95
∗Wi( i i ) ∗Wj( j j ) ∗detjac ∗thk
96
97
ke (m, n) = ke (m, n)+(L(3 ,1 ,1 ,1) ∗En(1 ,1) ∗Em(3 ,1) +
L(3 ,1 ,1 ,2) ∗En(1 ,2) ∗Em(3 ,1) + L(3 ,1 ,1 ,3) ∗En(1 ,3) ∗Em(3 ,1) &
98
+L(3 ,1 ,2 ,1) ∗En(2 ,1) ∗Em(3 ,1) +
L(3 ,1 ,2 ,2) ∗En(2 ,2) ∗Em(3 ,1) +
L(3 ,1 ,2 ,3) ∗En(2 ,3) ∗Em(3 ,1) &
99
+L(3 ,1 ,3 ,1) ∗En(3 ,1) ∗Em(3 ,1) +
L(3 ,1 ,3 ,2) ∗En(3 ,2) ∗Em(3 ,1) +
L(3 ,1 ,3 ,3) ∗En(3 ,3) ∗Em(3 ,1) ) &
100
∗Wi( i i ) ∗Wj( j j ) ∗detjac ∗thk
101
102
ke (m, n) = ke (m, n)+(L(3 ,2 ,1 ,1) ∗En(1 ,1) ∗Em(3 ,2) +
L(3 ,2 ,1 ,2) ∗En(1 ,2) ∗Em(3 ,2) + L(3 ,2 ,1 ,3) ∗En(1 ,3) ∗Em(3 ,2) &
103
+L(3 ,2 ,2 ,1) ∗En(2 ,1) ∗Em(3 ,2) +
L(3 ,2 ,2 ,2) ∗En(2 ,2) ∗Em(3 ,2) +
L(3 ,2 ,2 ,3) ∗En(2 ,3) ∗Em(3 ,2) &
104
+L(3 ,2 ,3 ,1) ∗En(3 ,1) ∗Em(3 ,2) +
L(3 ,2 ,3 ,2) ∗En(3 ,2) ∗Em(3 ,2) +
L(3 ,2 ,3 ,3) ∗En(3 ,3) ∗Em(3 ,2) ) &
105
∗Wi( i i ) ∗Wj( j j ) ∗detjac ∗thk
106
107
ke (m, n) = ke (m, n)+(L(3 ,3 ,1 ,1) ∗En(1 ,1) ∗Em(3 ,3) +
L(3 ,3 ,1 ,2) ∗En(1 ,2) ∗Em(3 ,3) + L(3 ,3 ,1 ,3) ∗En(1 ,3) ∗Em(3 ,3) &
108
+L(3 ,3 ,2 ,1) ∗En(2 ,1) ∗Em(3 ,3) +
L(3 ,3 ,2 ,2) ∗En(2 ,2) ∗Em(3 ,3) +
L(3 ,3 ,2 ,3) ∗En(2 ,3) ∗Em(3 ,3) &
109
+L(3 ,3 ,3 ,1) ∗En(3 ,1) ∗Em(3 ,3) +
L(3 ,3 ,3 ,2) ∗En(3 ,2) ∗Em(3 ,3) +
L(3 ,3 ,3 ,3) ∗En(3 ,3) ∗Em(3 ,3) ) &
110
∗Wi( i i ) ∗Wj( j j ) ∗detjac ∗thk
111
112
ke (m, n) =
ke (m, n)+tau ( count , 1 ) ∗(dN(1 , n) ∗dN(1 ,m)+dN(3 , n) ∗dN(3 ,m)+dN(5 , n) ∗dN(5 ,m) )
∗Wi( i i ) ∗Wj( j j ) ∗detjac ∗thk
113
ke (m, n) =
ke (m, n)+tau ( count , 4 ) ∗(dN(1 , n) ∗dN(2 ,m)+dN(3 , n) ∗dN(4 ,m)+dN(5 , n) ∗dN(6 ,m) )
∗Wi( i i ) ∗Wj( j j ) ∗detjac ∗thk
114
ke (m, n) =
ke (m, n)+tau ( count , 4 ) ∗(dN(2 , n) ∗dN(1 ,m)+dN(4 , n) ∗dN(3 ,m)+dN(6 , n) ∗dN(5 ,m) )
∗Wi( i i ) ∗Wj( j j ) ∗detjac ∗thk
115
ke (m, n) =
ke (m, n)+tau ( count , 2 ) ∗(dN(2 , n) ∗dN(2 ,m)+dN(4 , n) ∗dN(4 ,m)+dN(6 , n) ∗dN(6 ,m) )
∗Wi( i i ) ∗Wj( j j ) ∗detjac ∗thk
116
end do
117
end do
118
end do
119
end do
120
END SUBROUTINE plane183rect_ke
121
122 !##############################################################################
123
124
SUBROUTINE plane183rect_shape ( xe ,
de ,
xi ,
eta ,
jac ,
detjac , dN,
Bmat ,
du)
125
126
!
This
subroutine
c a l c u l a t e s
function
matrix ,
strain −displacement
matrix ,
inverted
Jacobian
127
!
and the
determinant
of
the
Jacobian
128
129
INTEGER : :
i ,
i i ,
i i i
130
REAL(8)
: :
invJ (2 ,2) ,
dphi (16) ,
Gammatilde (6 ,6) ,
Ntilde (6 ,24) , L(6 ,6) ,
sign_r (2 ,8) , U(8)
131
REAL(8) , INTENT(IN)
: :
xi ,
eta
132
REAL(8) , DIMENSION( : ) , INTENT(IN)
: :
xe ,
de
==PAGE:109==
C.2. MODULE FEA
95
133
REAL(8) , INTENT(OUT)
: :
detjac ,
jac (2 ,2) , dN(6 ,24) , Bmat(6 ,24) , du (6)
134
135
sign_r ( 1 , : ) = (/ −1.d0
,
1 .d0 ,
1 .d0
, −1.d0
,
0 .d0
,
1 .d0
,
0 .d0
, −1.d0
/)
136
sign_r ( 2 , : ) = (/ −1.d0
, −1.d0 ,
1 .d0
,
1 .d0
, −1.d0
,
0 .d0
,
1 .d0
,
0 .d0
/)
137
138
!
Defining
shape
f u n c t i o n s
139
do
i =1,4
140
!
f o r
i =1 ,2 ,3 ,4
141
U( i ) = 0 .25d0 ∗(1+ xi ∗sign_r (1 , i ) ) ∗(1+ eta ∗sign_r (2 , i ) ) ∗( xi ∗sign_r (1 , i )
+eta ∗sign_r (2 , i ) −1)
142
143
!
f o r
i =1 ,2 ,3 ,4
144
i i = 4∗i −2
145
dphi ( i i −1) = 0 .25d0 ∗sign_r (1 , i ) ∗(1+ eta ∗sign_r (2 , i ) ) ∗(
eta ∗sign_r (2 , i ) +
2 .0d0 ∗xi ∗sign_r (1 , i )
)
146
dphi ( i i
) = 0 .25d0 ∗sign_r (2 , i ) ∗(1+
xi ∗sign_r (1 , i ) ) ∗(
xi ∗sign_r (1 , i )
+
2 .0d0 ∗eta ∗sign_r (2 , i ) )
147
end do
148
149
do
i =1,2
150
i i =2∗i
151
!
f o r
i =5,7
152
U( i i +3)=0.50d0 ∗(1−xi ∗xi ) ∗(1+ eta ∗sign_r (2 , i i +3))
153
154
!
f o r
i =6,8
155
U( i i +4)=0.50d0 ∗(1−eta ∗eta ) ∗(1+ xi ∗sign_r (1 , i i +4))
156
157
!
f o r
i =5,7
158
i i i
= 2∗i+3
159
i i
= 8∗i −4
160
dphi ( i i −1) = −1.0d0 ∗xi ∗(1+ eta ∗sign_r (2 , i i i ) )
161
dphi ( i i
) = −0.50d0 ∗sign_r (2 , i i i ) ∗( xi −1)∗( xi +1)
162
163
!
f o r
i =6,8
164
i i i
= 2∗i+4
165
i i
= 8∗i
166
dphi ( i i −1) = −0.50d0 ∗sign_r (1 , i i i ) ∗( eta −1)∗( eta +1)
167
dphi ( i i
) = −1.0d0 ∗eta ∗(1+ xi ∗sign_r (1 , i i i ) )
168
end do
169
170
! Elements
in
Jacobi
matrix
are
c a l c u l a t e d
from
shape
f u n c t i o n s
and
dimensionless
coordinates
171
jac =0.0d0
172
do
i =1,8
173
jac (1 ,1) = jac (1 ,1) + dphi (2∗i −1)∗xe (3∗i −2)
174
jac (1 ,2) = jac (1 ,2) + dphi (2∗i −1)∗xe (3∗i −1)
175
176
jac (2 ,1) = jac (2 ,1) + dphi (2∗i ) ∗xe (3∗i −2)
177
jac (2 ,2) = jac (2 ,2) + dphi (2∗i ) ∗xe (3∗i −1)
178
end do
179
180
! Determinant
of
the
Jacobi
matrix
181
detjac = jac (1 ,1) ∗jac (2 ,2)−jac (1 ,2) ∗jac (2 ,1)
182
183
! Inverse
of
J
184
invJ (1 ,1) =
jac (2 ,2)
/
detjac
185
invJ (1 ,2) = −jac (1 ,2)
/
detjac
186
invJ (2 ,1) = −jac (2 ,1)
/
detjac
187
invJ (2 ,2) =
jac (1 ,1)
/
detjac
188
189
!
Building
Gammatilde
190
Gammatilde = 0 .0d0
191
Gammatilde ( 1 : 2 , 1 : 2 ) = invJ
192
Gammatilde ( 3 : 4 , 3 : 4 ) = invJ
193
Gammatilde ( 5 : 6 , 5 : 6 ) = invJ
194
195
Ntilde = 0 .d0
196
do
i =1,8
197
Ntilde (1 ,3∗i −2) = dphi (2∗i −1)
==PAGE:110==
96
APPENDIX C. FORTRAN SOURCE CODE
198
Ntilde (2 ,3∗i −2) = dphi (2∗i
)
199
Ntilde (3 ,3∗i −1) = dphi (2∗i −1)
200
Ntilde (4 ,3∗i −1) = dphi (2∗i
)
201
Ntilde (5 ,3∗i
) = dphi (2∗i −1)
202
Ntilde (6 ,3∗i
) = dphi (2∗i
)
203
end do
204
205
dN = MATMUL( Gammatilde , Ntilde )
206
du = MATMUL(dN, de )
207
208
L = 0 .d0
209
L(1 ,1) = 1 .d0 + du (1)
210
L(1 ,3) = du (3)
211
L(1 ,5) = du (5)
212
213
L(2 ,2) = du (2)
214
L(2 ,4) = 1 .d0 + du (4)
215
L(2 ,6) = du (6)
216
217
L(4 ,1) = 0 .5d0 ∗du (2)
218
L(4 ,2) = 0 .5d0 ∗(1 .d0 + du (1) )
219
L(4 ,3) = 0 .5d0 ∗(1 .d0 + du (4) )
220
L(4 ,4) = 0 .5d0 ∗du (3)
221
L(4 ,5) = 0 .5d0 ∗du (6)
222
L(4 ,6) = 0 .5d0 ∗du (5)
223
224
L(5 ,6) = 0 .5d0
225
226
L(6 ,5) = 0 .5d0
227
228
Bmat = MATMUL(L ,MATMUL( Gammatilde , Ntilde ) )
229
230
END SUBROUTINE
231
232 !##############################################################################
233
234
SUBROUTINE plane183rect_ss ( e ,
count ,
xe ,
de ,
dde ,
xi ,
eta ,
estress_dot ,
estrain_dot ,
du)
235
236
use
fedata
237
238
!
This
subrotuine
constructs
the
element
s t r e s s
and
s t r a i n
239
INTEGER, INTENT(IN)
: :
e ,
count
240
REAL(8) , INTENT(IN)
: :
xi ,
eta
241
REAL(8) , DIMENSION( : ) , INTENT(IN)
: :
xe ,
de ,
dde
242
REAL(8) , INTENT(OUT)
: :
estrain_dot (6) ,
estress_dot (6) , du (6)
243
REAL(8)
: :
jac (2 ,2) , Bmat(6 ,24) ,
detjac , dN(6 ,24) , L(3 ,3 ,3 ,3) , Gcon (3 ,3) ,
Gco (3 ,3) , Gog
244
245
estrain_dot = 0 .0d0
246
estress_dot = 0 .0d0
247
248
c a l l
plane183rect_shape ( xe ,
de ,
xi ,
eta ,
jac ,
detjac , dN,
Bmat ,
du)
249
c a l l
plane183rect_Metric (du ,
Gco ,
Gcon ,
Gog)
250
251
!
Compute element
s t r a i n
252
estrain_dot = MATMUL(Bmat ,
dde )
253
254
L = element ( e )%L i j k l ( count , : , : , : , : )
255
256
!
Compute element
s t r e s s
257
estress_dot (1) =
L(1 ,1 ,1 ,1) ∗estrain_dot (1)+L(1 ,1 ,1 ,2) ∗estrain_dot (4)+L(1 ,1 ,1 ,3)
∗estrain_dot (6)+L(1 ,1 ,2 ,1) ∗estrain_dot (4)&
258
+L(1 ,1 ,2 ,2) ∗estrain_dot (2)+L(1 ,1 ,2 ,3) ∗estrain_dot (5)+L(1 ,1 ,3 ,1)
∗estrain_dot (6)+L(1 ,1 ,3 ,2) ∗estrain_dot (5)&
259
+L(1 ,1 ,3 ,3) ∗estrain_dot (3)
260
==PAGE:111==
C.2. MODULE FEA
97
261
estress_dot (2) =
L(2 ,2 ,1 ,1) ∗estrain_dot (1)+L(2 ,2 ,1 ,2) ∗estrain_dot (4)+L(2 ,2 ,1 ,3)
∗estrain_dot (6)+L(2 ,2 ,2 ,1) ∗estrain_dot (4)&
262
+L(2 ,2 ,2 ,2) ∗estrain_dot (2)+L(2 ,2 ,2 ,3) ∗estrain_dot (5)+L(2 ,2 ,3 ,1)
∗estrain_dot (6)+L(2 ,2 ,3 ,2) ∗estrain_dot (5)&
263
+L(2 ,2 ,3 ,3) ∗estrain_dot (3)
264
265
estress_dot (3) =
L(3 ,3 ,1 ,1) ∗estrain_dot (1)+L(3 ,3 ,1 ,2) ∗estrain_dot (4)+L(3 ,3 ,1 ,3)
∗estrain_dot (6)+L(3 ,3 ,2 ,1) ∗estrain_dot (4)&
266
+L(3 ,3 ,2 ,2) ∗estrain_dot (2)+L(3 ,3 ,2 ,3) ∗estrain_dot (5)+L(3 ,3 ,3 ,1)
∗estrain_dot (6)+L(3 ,3 ,3 ,2) ∗estrain_dot (5)&
267
+L(3 ,3 ,3 ,3) ∗estrain_dot (3)
268
269
estress_dot (4) =
L(1 ,2 ,1 ,1) ∗estrain_dot (1)+L(1 ,2 ,1 ,2) ∗estrain_dot (4)+L(1 ,2 ,1 ,3)
∗estrain_dot (6)+L(1 ,2 ,2 ,1) ∗estrain_dot (4)&
270
+L(1 ,2 ,2 ,2) ∗estrain_dot (2)+L(1 ,2 ,2 ,3) ∗estrain_dot (5)+L(1 ,2 ,3 ,1)
∗estrain_dot (6)+L(1 ,2 ,3 ,2) ∗estrain_dot (5)&
271
+L(1 ,2 ,3 ,3) ∗estrain_dot (3)
272
273
estress_dot (5) =
L(2 ,3 ,1 ,1) ∗estrain_dot (1)+L(2 ,3 ,1 ,2) ∗estrain_dot (4)+L(2 ,3 ,1 ,3)
∗estrain_dot (6)+L(2 ,3 ,2 ,1) ∗estrain_dot (4)&
274
+L(2 ,3 ,2 ,2) ∗estrain_dot (2)+L(2 ,3 ,2 ,3) ∗estrain_dot (5)+L(2 ,3 ,3 ,1)
∗estrain_dot (6)+L(2 ,3 ,3 ,2) ∗estrain_dot (5)&
275
+L(2 ,3 ,3 ,3) ∗estrain_dot (3)
276
277
estress_dot (6) =
L(1 ,3 ,1 ,1) ∗estrain_dot (1)+L(1 ,3 ,1 ,2) ∗estrain_dot (4)+L(1 ,3 ,1 ,3)
∗estrain_dot (6)+L(1 ,3 ,2 ,1) ∗estrain_dot (4)&
278
+L(1 ,3 ,2 ,2) ∗estrain_dot (2)+L(1 ,3 ,2 ,3) ∗estrain_dot (5)+L(1 ,3 ,3 ,1)
∗estrain_dot (6)+L(1 ,3 ,3 ,2) ∗estrain_dot (5)&
279
+L(1 ,3 ,3 ,3) ∗estrain_dot (3)
280
281
END SUBROUTINE
282
283 !##############################################################################
284
285
SUBROUTINE plane183rect_cmat ( e ,
count ,
du ,
sigma_stress ,
sigmay ,
sigmae ,
sigmae_dot ,
young ,
nu , L)
286
287
use
fedata
288
289
!
This
subrotuine
constructs
the
c o n s t i t u t i v e
tensor
f o r
the
element
290
INTEGER : :
i ,
j ,
ki ,
l i
291
INTEGER, INTENT(IN)
: :
e ,
count
292
REAL(8) , INTENT(IN)
: :
sigma_stress (6) ,
sigmay ,
sigmae ,
sigmae_dot ,
young ,
nu ,
du (6)
293
REAL(8) , INTENT(OUT)
: :
L(3 ,3 ,3 ,3)
294
REAL(8)
: :
alpha ,
beta ,
hardex ,
Gcon (3 ,3) , Gco (3 ,3) , Gog ,
scon (3 ,3) ,
sco (3 ,3) ,
sigma (3 ,3) , Rt (3 ,3 ,3 ,3) ,
Lt (3 ,3 ,3 ,3) &
295
, MGcon(3 ,3) , MFcon(3 ,3) , mGco(3 ,3) , mFco(3 ,3) , H, mu,
sigmaM ,
sigma_kco_kcon ,
dPhi_df ,
dPhi_dsigmaM &
296
, youngT ,
At ,
Bt ,
fs ,
f
297
298
sigmaM = element ( e )%sigmaM( count )
299
f = element ( e )%f ( count )
300
301
hardex = 0 .1d0
302
303
mu
= 0 .0d0
304
MGcon = 0 .0d0
305
MFcon = 0 .0d0
306
307
sigma ( 1 : 3 , 1 : 3 ) = sigma_stress (6)
308
sigma ( 2 : 3 , 2 : 3 ) = sigma_stress (5)
309
sigma ( 1 : 2 , 1 : 2 ) = sigma_stress (4)
310
sigma (1 ,1)
= sigma_stress (1)
==PAGE:112==
98
APPENDIX C. FORTRAN SOURCE CODE
311
sigma (2 ,2)
= sigma_stress (2)
312
sigma (3 ,3)
= sigma_stress (3)
313
314
c a l l
plane183rect_Metric (du ,
Gco ,
Gcon ,
Gog)
315
316
sigma_kco_kcon = (Gco (1 ,1) ∗sigma (1 ,1) + Gco (1 ,2) ∗sigma (2 ,1) +
Gco (1 ,3) ∗sigma (3 ,1) ) &
317
+(Gco (2 ,1) ∗sigma (1 ,2) + Gco (2 ,2) ∗sigma (2 ,2) +
Gco (2 ,3) ∗sigma (3 ,2) ) &
318
+(Gco (3 ,1) ∗sigma (1 ,3) + Gco (3 ,2) ∗sigma (2 ,3) +
Gco (3 ,3) ∗sigma (3 ,3) )
319
320
do
i =1,3
321
do
j =1,3
322
scon ( i , j ) = sigma ( i , j )−Gcon( i , j ) ∗sigma_kco_kcon/3 .0d0
323
end do
324
end do
325
326
do
i =1,3
327
do
j =1,3
328
sco ( i , j ) = Gco( i , 1 ) ∗Gco( j , 1 ) ∗scon (1 ,1)+Gco( i , 1 ) ∗Gco( j , 2 ) ∗scon (1 ,2)
+Gco( i , 1 ) ∗Gco( j , 3 ) ∗scon (1 ,3) &
329
+Gco( i , 2 ) ∗Gco( j , 1 ) ∗scon (2 ,1)+Gco( i , 2 ) ∗Gco( j , 2 ) ∗scon (2 ,2)
+Gco( i , 2 ) ∗Gco( j , 3 ) ∗scon (2 ,3) &
330
+Gco( i , 3 ) ∗Gco( j , 1 ) ∗scon (3 ,1)+Gco( i , 3 ) ∗Gco( j , 2 ) ∗scon (3 ,2)
+Gco( i , 3 ) ∗Gco( j , 3 ) ∗scon (3 ,3)
331
end do
332
end do
333
334
c a l l
YieldSurface_derivatives ( q1 ,
q2 ,
fc ,
f f ,
f ,
sigma_kco_kcon ,
sigmaM ,
Gco ,
&
335
sco ,
sigmae ,
dPhi_df ,
dPhi_dsigmaM ,
alpha ,
beta , mGco,
mFco ,
f s )
336
337
element ( e )%mGco( count , : , : ) = mGco
338
element ( e )%mFco( count , : , : ) = mFco
339
element ( e )%f s ( count ) = f s
340
341
do
i =1,3
342
do
j =1,3
343
do
ki =1,3
344
do
l i =1,3
345
Rt( i , j , ki , l i ) = young /(1 .d0+nu) ∗(1 .d0 /2 .d0 ∗(Gcon( i , ki ) ∗Gcon( j , l i )
+Gcon( i , l i ) ∗Gcon( j , ki ) ) &
346
+nu/(1 .d0 −2.d0 ∗nu) ∗Gcon( i , j ) ∗Gcon( ki , l i ) )
347
end do
348
end do
349
end do
350
end do
351
352
i f
( element ( e )%p l a s t i c ( count )
.GE. 1 .AND. ( sigmae_dot
.GE. 0 .d0 ) )
then
353
youngT = element ( e )%sigmay ( count ) ∗hardex /0 .003d0
∗( sigmae / element ( e )%sigmay ( count ) ) ∗∗(( hardex−1.d0 ) /hardex )
354
355
i f
( element ( e )%epsi_p_eff_dot ( count )
.GE. 0 .d0 )
then
356
i f
( element ( e )%p l a s t i c ( count )
.EQ.
1)
then
357
At = (1 .d0 /youngT−1.d0 /young ) ∗fN /(sN∗sqrt (2 .d0 ∗pi ) ) &
358
∗exp(−1 .d0 /2 .d0 ∗(( element ( e )%epsi_p_eff ( count )−epsN ) /sN) ∗∗2)
359
e l s e i f
( element ( e )%p l a s t i c ( count )
.EQ.
2)
then
360
At = 0 .d0
361
dPhi_df = 0 .d0
362
end
i f
363
364
Bt = 0 .d0
365
end
i f
366
367
H = sigmaM/2 .d0 ∗(−3 .d0 ∗alpha ∗(1 .0d0−f ) ∗dPhi_df−(dPhi_df∗At+dPhi_dsigmaM)
∗young∗youngT/( young−youngT) ∗1 .d0 /(1 .d0−f ) &
368
∗( sigmae ∗∗2/sigmaM∗∗2+alpha ∗sigma_kco_kcon/sigmaM) )
==PAGE:113==
C.2. MODULE FEA
99
369
370
element ( e )%youngT( count ) = youngT
371
element ( e )%H( count ) = H
372
do
i =1,3
373
do
j =1,3
374
do
ki =1,3
375
do
l i =1,3
376
MGcon( i , j ) = MGcon( i , j ) + Rt( i , j , ki , l i ) ∗mGco( ki , l i )
377
MFcon( i , j ) = MFcon( i , j ) + mFco( ki , l i ) ∗Rt( ki , l i , i , j )
378
379
mu = mu + mFco( i , j ) ∗Rt( i , j , ki , l i ) ∗mGco( ki , l i )
380
end do
381
end do
382
end do
383
end do
384
mu = sqrt (Gog) ∗(H + mu) ∗∗(−1)
385
end
i f
386
387
do
i =1,3
388
do
j =1,3
389
do
ki =1,3
390
do
l i =1,3
391
Lt ( i , j , ki , l i ) = sqrt (Gog) ∗(Rt( i , j , ki , l i )−1.d0 /2 .d0 ∗( sigma ( i , ki )
∗Gcon( j , l i )+sigma ( j , ki ) ∗Gcon( i , l i ) &
392
+sigma ( i , l i ) ∗Gcon( j , ki )+sigma ( j , l i ) ∗Gcon( i , ki ) )
+sigma ( i , j ) ∗Gcon( ki , l i ) )
393
L( i , j , ki , l i ) = Lt ( i , j , ki , l i ) −mu∗MGcon( i , j ) ∗MFcon( ki , l i )
394
end do
395
end do
396
end do
397
end do
398
element ( e )%L i j k l ( count , : , : , : , : ) = L
399
400
END SUBROUTINE
401
402 !##############################################################################
403
404
SUBROUTINE plane183rect_Metric (du ,
Gco ,
Gcon ,
Gog)
405
406
use
fedata
407
408
INTEGER : :
i
409
REAL(8) , DIMENSION( : ) , INTENT(IN)
: :
du
410
REAL(8) , INTENT(OUT)
: :
Gog
411
REAL(8) , DIMENSION ( : , : ) , INTENT(OUT)
: :
Gco ,
Gcon
412
REAL(8) : :
e1_t (3) ,
e2_t (3) ,
e3_t (3) , detG
413
414
!
Basis
vectores
f o r
deformed−frame :
ebar_i=e_i+u^k_, i ∗e_i
415
e1_t ( 1 : 3 ) = (/
1 .d0+du (1)
,
du (3)
,
du (5)
/)
416
e2_t ( 1 : 3 ) = (/
du (2)
,
1 .d0+du (4)
,
du (6)
/)
417
e3_t ( 1 : 3 ) = (/
0 .d0
,
0 .d0
,
1 .d0
/)
418
419
!
Metric
tensor
f o r
deformed−frame
( covariant )
420
Gco (1 ,1) = e1_t (1) ∗e1_t (1) + e1_t (2) ∗e1_t (2) + e1_t (3) ∗e1_t (3)
421
Gco (1 ,2) = e1_t (1) ∗e2_t (1) + e1_t (2) ∗e2_t (2) + e1_t (3) ∗e2_t (3)
422
Gco (1 ,3) = e1_t (1) ∗e3_t (1) + e1_t (2) ∗e3_t (2) + e1_t (3) ∗e3_t (3)
423
Gco (2 ,1) = e2_t (1) ∗e1_t (1) + e2_t (2) ∗e1_t (2) + e2_t (3) ∗e1_t (3)
424
Gco (2 ,2) = e2_t (1) ∗e2_t (1) + e2_t (2) ∗e2_t (2) + e2_t (3) ∗e2_t (3)
425
Gco (2 ,3) = e2_t (1) ∗e3_t (1) + e2_t (2) ∗e3_t (2) + e2_t (3) ∗e3_t (3)
426
Gco (3 ,1) = e3_t (1) ∗e1_t (1) + e3_t (2) ∗e1_t (2) + e3_t (3) ∗e1_t (3)
427
Gco (3 ,2) = e3_t (1) ∗e2_t (1) + e3_t (2) ∗e2_t (2) + e3_t (3) ∗e2_t (3)
428
Gco (3 ,3) = e3_t (1) ∗e3_t (1) + e3_t (2) ∗e3_t (2) + e3_t (3) ∗e3_t (3)
429
430
!
Determinant
of
metric
tensor G
( OK −maple
)
431
detG =
Gco (1 ,1) ∗Gco (2 ,2) ∗Gco (3 ,3)+Gco (1 ,2) ∗Gco (2 ,3) ∗Gco (3 ,1)+Gco (1 ,3) ∗Gco (2 ,1) ∗Gco (3 ,2)
&
432
−Gco (1 ,3) ∗Gco (2 ,2) ∗Gco (3 ,1)−Gco (1 ,1) ∗Gco (2 ,3) ∗Gco (3 ,2)−Gco (1 ,2) ∗Gco (2 ,1) ∗Gco (3 ,3)
433
==PAGE:114==
100
APPENDIX C. FORTRAN SOURCE CODE
434
!
Contra−variant
components
of
Gij
( OK −maple
)
435
Gcon (1 ,1) = ( Gco (2 ,2) ∗Gco (3 ,3)−Gco (2 ,3) ∗Gco (3 ,2) ) /detG
436
Gcon (1 ,2) = (−Gco (1 ,2) ∗Gco (3 ,3)+Gco (1 ,3) ∗Gco (3 ,2) ) /detG
437
Gcon (1 ,3) = ( Gco (1 ,2) ∗Gco (2 ,3)−Gco (1 ,3) ∗Gco (2 ,2) ) /detG
438
Gcon (2 ,1) = (−Gco (2 ,1) ∗Gco (3 ,3)+Gco (2 ,3) ∗Gco (3 ,1) ) /detG
439
Gcon (2 ,2) = ( Gco (1 ,1) ∗Gco (3 ,3)−Gco (1 ,3) ∗Gco (3 ,1) ) /detG
440
Gcon (2 ,3) = (−Gco (1 ,1) ∗Gco (2 ,3)+Gco (1 ,3) ∗Gco (2 ,1) ) /detG
441
Gcon (3 ,1) = ( Gco (2 ,1) ∗Gco (3 ,2)−Gco (2 ,2) ∗Gco (3 ,1) ) /detG
442
Gcon (3 ,2) = (−Gco (1 ,1) ∗Gco (3 ,2)+Gco (1 ,2) ∗Gco (3 ,1) ) /detG
443
Gcon (3 ,3) = ( Gco (1 ,1) ∗Gco (2 ,2)−Gco (1 ,2) ∗Gco (2 ,1) ) /detG
444
445
!
Gog
i s G/g
(
detg = 1
)
446
Gog=detG
447
448
END SUBROUTINE plane183rect_Metric
449
450 !##############################################################################
451
452
SUBROUTINE plane183rect_pe ( e , xe , de , pe )
453
454
!
This
subroutine
constructs
the
i n t e r n a l
force −vector
f o r
455
!
a
isoparametric 20−noded
s o l i d
element.
456
457
use
fedata
458
459
INTEGER, INTENT(IN)
: :
e
460
REAL(8) , DIMENSION( : ) , INTENT(IN)
: :
xe ,
de
461
REAL(8) , DIMENSION( : ) , INTENT(OUT)
: :
pe
462
INTEGER : :
i ,
j ,
count
463
REAL(8)
: :
detjac ,
tau (6) ,
jac (2 ,2) ,
xi (2) ,
eta (2) , Wi(2) , Wj(2)
464
REAL(8)
: :
Bmat(6 ,24) , du (6) , dN(6 ,24)
465
466
!
building
element
s t i f f n e s s
matrix
467
pe
= 0 .0d0
468
count = 0
469
470
!
Defining
number
of
Gauss
points
471
ng = 2
472
xi (1) = −1.d0 / sqrt (3 .d0 )
473
xi (2) = 1 .d0 / sqrt (3 .d0 )
474
eta (1) = −1.d0 / sqrt (3 .d0 )
475
eta (2) = 1 .d0 / sqrt (3 .d0 )
476
Wi = 1 .d0
477
Wj = 1 .d0
478
479
! Calculating
element
i n t e r n a l
load
vector
by gauss
i n t e g r a t i o n
480
do
i =1,ng
481
do
j =1,ng
482
count = count+1
483
!
Kirchhoff
s t r e s s e s
( Contravariant
components )
484
tau ( 1 : 6 ) = element ( e )%Kirchhoff_contra ( count , 1 : 6 )
485
tau ( 4 : 6 ) = tau ( 4 : 6 ) ∗2 .0d0
486
487
!
Shape−f u n c t i o n s
e c t .
488
c a l l
plane183rect_shape ( xe ,
de ,
xi ( i ) ,
eta ( j ) ,
jac ,
detjac , dN,
Bmat ,
du)
489
pe = pe +
Wi( i ) ∗Wj( j ) ∗MATMUL( transpose (Bmat) , tau ) ∗detjac ∗mprop( element ( e )%mat)%thk
490
end do
491
end do
492
END SUBROUTINE plane183rect_pe
493
494 !##############################################################################
495
496
SUBROUTINE YieldSurface_derivatives ( q1 ,
q2 ,
fc ,
f f ,
f ,
sigma_kco_kcon ,
sigmaM ,
Gco , &
497
sco ,
sigmae ,
dPhi_df ,
dPhi_dsigmaM ,
alpha ,
beta , mGco,
mFco ,
f s )
498
!
This
routine
returns
the
y i e l d
s u r f a c e
d e r i v a t i s
and
i t s
normal.
==PAGE:115==
C.2. MODULE FEA
101
499
500
REAL(8) , INTENT(IN)
: :
q1 ,
q2 ,
fc ,
f f ,
f
501
REAL(8) , INTENT(IN)
: :
sigma_kco_kcon ,
sigmaM ,
sigmae
502
REAL(8) , DIMENSION ( : , : ) , INTENT(IN)
: :
Gco ,
sco
503
504
REAL(8) , INTENT(OUT)
: :
dPhi_df ,
dPhi_dsigmaM ,
alpha ,
beta ,
f s
505
REAL(8) , DIMENSION ( : , : ) , INTENT(OUT)
: :
mGco,
mFco
506
507
INTEGER : :
i ,
j
508
REAL(8)
: :
dfs_df
509
!
Void
c o a l e s c e n c e
510
f s = f
511
dfs_df = 1 .0d0
512
i f
(
f
.GT.
f c
)
then
513
dfs_df = (1 .0d0 /q1−f c ) /( f f −f c )
514
f s = f c + dfs_df ∗( f−f c )
515
end
i f
516
517
alpha = f s /2 .0d0 ∗q1∗q2∗sinh ( q2/2 .0d0 ∗sigma_kco_kcon/sigmaM)
518
beta = alpha
519
520
do
i =1,3
521
do
j =1,3
522
mGco( i , j ) = 3 .0d0 /2 .0d0 ∗sco ( i , j ) /sigmaM + alpha ∗Gco( i , j )
523
mFco( i , j ) = 3 .0d0 /2 .0d0 ∗sco ( i , j ) /sigmaM + beta ∗Gco( i , j )
524
end do
525
end do
526
dPhi_df =
(2 .0d0 ∗q1∗cosh ( q2/2 .0d0 ∗sigma_kco_kcon/sigmaM)−2.0d0 ∗q1∗q1∗f s ) ∗dfs_df
527
528
dPhi_dsigmaM = −2.0d0 /sigmaM∗( sigmae ∗∗2/sigmaM∗∗2+alpha ∗sigma_kco_kcon/sigmaM)
529
530
END SUBROUTINE YieldSurface_derivatives
531
END MODULE plane183rect
==PAGE:116==
==PAGE:117==
D Output from 21⁄2D code
(a) Deﬂection x1.
(b) Deﬂection x2.
(c) Deﬂection x3.
Figure D.1: Mode I
103
==PAGE:118==
104
APPENDIX D. OUTPUT FROM 21⁄2D CODE
(a) Deﬂection x1.
(b) Deﬂection x2.
(c) Deﬂection x3.
Figure D.2: Mode I-Mode II
(a) Deﬂection x1.
(b) Deﬂection x2.
(c) Deﬂection x3.
Figure D.3: Mode I-Mode III
==PAGE:119==
E Gantt diagram
The Gantt diagram is presented below. The original plan was outlined with two main
tasks, investigations in Abaqus and developing a code. Even though the two tasks was
separated in the Gantt diagram, the they overlapped each other. A good quick start
was made with the Abaqus simulations and after 2 months, the programming task was
initiated.
The parameter study in Abaqus was extensive with a lot of simulations and results.
This is also the reason for the rather coarse resolution of the traction-separation curves
which is at a fairly good level.
The programming task was more time demanding than ﬁrst anticipated, and the
present stage for the code was obtained the day before deadline. The struggle can be
isolated to the implementation of the tensor notation and a inaccurate displacement ﬁeld
when using the 4-noded element. The latter was solved by implementing the 8-noded
elements. The late ﬁnish of the code has inﬂuenced the amount of investigations and
simulations carried out by the program. Also, the remaining debugging is lacking due
to the deadline.
Further work, which has not been added to the Gantt diagram nor is included in
this thesis is a presentation of the preliminary results from Abaqus, that was prepared
for a talk at Thornton Tomasetti’s oﬃce at Wall Street, New York. The work was based
on the ﬁrst 3 months results together with an introduction to the improved element
formulation.
105
==PAGE:120==
Gantt Chart
0
Title: Ductile Plate Tearing
            under Multi-Axial Loading
Date:
lørdag
(vertical red line)
Start date:
mandag
[42]
Last revision:
mandag
First Day of Week (Mon=2):
2
#
# # # # # ## #
# # # ## # # # # # # # # # #
WBS
Tasks
Task
Lead
Start
End
Duration (Days)
% Complete
Working Days
Days Complete
Days Remaining
1
Article reading
04-01-2016
17-01-2016
14
0%
10
0
14
2
Abaqus modelling
18-01-2016
14-02-2016
28
0%
20
0
28
2.1
Plate, 2D uniaxial tension
18-01-2016
24-01-2016
7
0%
5
0
7
2.2
Plate, 2D Mode I-Mode III
25-01-2016
13-02-2016
20
0%
15
0
20
2.3
Plate, 3D Mode I-Mode II
14-02-2016
14-03-2016
30
0%
21
0
30
3
Programming
05-03-2016
13-04-2016
40
0%
28
0
40
3.1
Element formulation
05-03-2016
14-03-2016
10
0%
6
0
10
3.2
Plasticity
15-03-2016
24-03-2016
10
0%
8
0
10
3.3
Large displacement
25-03-2016
13-04-2016
20
0%
14
0
20
3.4
Gurson implementation
14-04-2016
03-05-2016
20
0%
14
0
20
4
Report writing
04-05-2016
02-06-2016
30
0%
22
0
30
04 - apr - 16
11 - apr - 16
18 - apr - 16
25 - apr - 16
02 - maj - 16
09 - maj - 16
16 - maj - 16
23 - maj - 16
30 - maj - 16
06 - jun - 16
28 - mar - 16
11 - jan - 16
18 - jan - 16
25 - jan - 16
01 - feb - 16
08 - feb - 16
15 - feb - 16
22 - feb - 16
29 - feb - 16
07 - mar - 16
14 - mar - 16
21 - mar - 16
04 - jan - 16
04-06-2016
04-01-2016
11-01-2016
==PAGE:121==
References
Anderson, T. L. (2005). Fracture mechanics - Fundamentals and applications. Tayler &
Francis, third edition.
Benzerga, A. A. and Leblond, J.-B. (2010). Ductile fracture by void growth to coa-
lescence. Advances in Applied Mechanics, Adv Appl M, Adv Appl Mech, Advan Appl
Mech, Adv. Appl. Mech, 44:169–305.
Bishop, J. F. W. and Hill, R. (1951). A theory of the plastic distortion of a polycrystalline
aggregate under combined stresses. Philosophical Magazine, 42:414–427.
Cook, R. D., Malkus, D. S., Plesha, M. E., and Witt, R. J. (2002).
Concepts and
Applications of Finite Element Analysis. Wiley.
Gurson, A. L. (1977).
Continuum theory of ductile rupture by void nucleation and
growth. Journal of Engineering Materials and Technology.
Högberg, J. L. (2006). Mixed mode cohesive law. International Journal of Fracture, Int.
J. Fract, Int J Fract, Int J Fracture, 141(3-4):549–559.
Hutchinson, J. W. (1973). Finite strain analysis of elastic-plastic solids and structures.
Numerical Solution of Non-Linear Structural Problems.
McClintock, F. A. (1968). A criterion for ductile fracture by growth of holes. Journal
of Applied Mechanics, J App Mech, J Appl Mech, J Appl Mechanics, 35(2):363–&.
Nahshon, K. and Hutchinson, J. (2007). Modiﬁcation of the Gurson Model for shear
failure. Science direct.
Needleman, A. and Rice, J. R. (1980). Plastic creep ﬂow eﬀects in the diﬀusive cavitation
of grain boundaries. Acta Metallurgica, 28(10):1315–1332.
Nielsen, K. and Gundlach, C. (2016). Crack tip ﬂipping under Mode I tearing: Investi-
gated by X-Ray tomography.
Nielsen, K. L. and Hutchinson, J. W. (2012).
Cohesive traction-separation laws for
tearing of ductile metal plates. International Journal of Impact Engineering, Int J
Impact Eng, Int J Impac, Int. J. Impact Eng, 48:15–23.
Rice, J. R. and Johnson, M. A. (1969). On ductile enlargement of voids in triaxial stress
ﬁelds. J Mechanics and Physics of Solids, 17(3):201–17.
Simonsen, B. C. and Törnqvist, R. (2004). Experimental and numerical modeling of duc-
tile crack propagation in large-scale shell structures. Marine Structures, Mar Struct,
Marine Structures Design Construction and Safety, Mar. Struct, 17:1–27.
107
==PAGE:122==
108
REFERENCES
Tvergaard, V. (1981). Inﬂuence of voids on shear band instabilities under plane-strain
conditions. International Journal of Fracture, Int. J. Fract, Int J Fract, Int J Fracture,
17:389–407.
Tvergaard, V. (1982). On localization in ductile materials containing spherical voids.
International Journal of Fracture, Int. J. Fract, Int J Fract, Int J Fracture, 18:237–
252.
Tvergaard, V. (1990a). Eﬀect of ﬁbre debonding in a whisker-reinforced metal. Materi-
als Science and Engineering a (Structural Materials: Properties, Microstructure and
Processing), A125(2):203–213.
Tvergaard, V. (1990b). Material failure by void growth to coalescence. Advances in
Applied Mechanics.
Tvergaard, V. (1996). Notes on ﬁnite element formulations for ﬁnite strain plasticity or
viscoplasticity.
Tvergaard, V. (2001). Plasticity and creep in structural materials. DTU Mekanik.
van den Bosch, M., Schreurs, P., and Geers, M. (2006). An improved description of the
exponential xu and needleman cohesive zone law for mixed-mode decohesion. Engi-
neering Fracture Mechanics, Eng. Fract. Mech, Eng Fract M, Eng Fract Mech, Eng
Fracture Mech, 73(9):1220–1234.
Woelke, P. B., Shields, M. D., and Hutchinson, J. W. (2015). Cohesive zone modeling
and calibration for Mode I tearing. International Journal of Impact Engineering.
==PAGE:123==
==PAGE:124==
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Section of Solid Mechanics
Technical University of Denmark 
Nils Koppels Allé, Bld. 404
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark
Phone (+45) 4525 4250
Fax  (+45) 4593 1475
www.mek.dtu.dk
