==PAGE:1==
Master thesis-Graph querying
with a multi-valued logic
Martin Bøje Rasmussen
Kongens Lyngby 2016
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The goal of the thesis is to deﬁne and implement a sequential version of the Soft
Mu-calculus for computational ﬁelds. The implementation is written in Java,
and the idea is for a user to be able to write their own deﬁnitions of functions
and types. The theory behind SMuC is extended with a type system, deﬁn-
ing how the diﬀerent rules of SMuC interact when multiple types can occur
in a query. The implementation itself is based on parse trees, and the execu-
tions is performed through walking them. Throughout the thesis, some diﬀerent
examples of queries are given, including PageRank, steady state probabilities,
spanning trees, and shortest paths. SMuC is a tool which can be used to solve
many problems, but being this generic has its disadvantages as well.
While
many problems can be solved, there are more specialized algorithms that can
solve some problems faster. An example of this is the steady state query, which
in SMuC is performed by approximation through the simulation after a number
of steps.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract
i
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Thesis Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Soft Mu-calculus for Computational ﬁelds
3
2.1
Computational Fields in SMuC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Fixed Point . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
SMuC Formula . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3.1
Abstract Syntax
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3.2
Semantics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Extensions to SMuC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4.1
Scope Rules for Formula Variables . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4.2
Types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4.3
Undirected Queries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4.4
Binary Operators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.5
SMuC Query Examples
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.5.1
Steady Probabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.5.2
Computation Tree Logic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
Implementation
21
3.1
Graph Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.1.1
Vertex . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.1.2
Edge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2
Syntax . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2.1
Parser Generator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2.2
Grammar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3
Parse Trees and Abstract Syntax Trees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.4
Semantics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.5
Datatypes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.5.1
Annotations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.5.2
Calling a SMuC Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
==PAGE:6==
iv
CONTENTS
3.5.3
Type Checking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.5.4
Type Inference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.6
Edge Capabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.6.1
Syntax of Edge Capability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.7
Executing Queries
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.7.1
Edge Capabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.8
Fixed Point Computation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.8.1
Stop Conditions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.8.2
Nested Fixpoint
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4
Case study
45
4.1
Shortest Path Tree . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.1.1
Domain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.1.2
Example Using LFP and GFP
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.1.3
Secure Shortest Path Tree . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.2
Minimum Spanning Tree . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.2.1
Domain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.2.2
Using The Adjacency List . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.3
Counting Occurrences
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.4
Sharing Values
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.5
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5
Discussion
63
6
Conclusion
65
A Class diagram
67
Bibliography
69
==PAGE:7==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Graphs provide a model of entities with connections or relations, in the form
of vertices and edges between them. Vertex and node is used interchangeably
throughout the thesis. Graphs can be used in many diﬀerent applications, such
as to represent road networks, Internet communication, connections between
web pages, social networks, and much more.
Graphs are used for analysis of many diﬀerent sorts–PageRank which is used to
rank websites in search engines [BP98], ﬁnding a route between two points on a
map, and fraud detection to name a few. Graphs can grow very big as shown by
Facebook, who performed an analysis of a graph with a trillion edges [CJK+13].
Figure 1.1 shows some examples of graphs, and what they are used for.
1.1
Problem Statement
The goal of the thesis is to implement a tool which can be used to evaluate
queries of SMuC (Soft µ-calculus for Computations ﬁelds), a variant of modal
µ-calculus, focusing on graph based ﬁelds.
The user must be able to create
deﬁnitions of data structure and operators.
The implementation gives a unique opportunity, and approach to analyze graph
based problems. While the solution to some problems may be slower when using
this more generic tool, many problems can be solved.
1.2
Thesis Structure
The thesis is split into six chapters, the ﬁrst being the introduction which this is
a part of. Chapter 2 deﬁnes the theory behind SMuC, and additions to SMuC.
The implementation of the tool, described in Chapter 3, is based on the theory.
Chapter 4 describes a case study.
The case study revolves around counting
occurrences of a property in a big graph. While the problem itself is simple,
especially if solved conventionally, it raises some interesting problems in SMuC.
Several solutions are proposed to solve the case study. Three diﬀerent queries
are shown to ﬁnd a parse tree of a graph, each with their own beneﬁts and
problems.
==PAGE:8==
2 of 70
Introduction
(a) A
social
network
diagram
by
Daniel
Tenerife
distributed
under a GFDL 1.2
license.
(b) A diagram showing
a shortest path from
A to F, by Artyom
Kalinin
distributed
under a Attribution-
ShareAlike
3.0
Unported license.
Head-office
Regional 
Office
Regional 
Office
Remote / roaming users
Internet VPN
Internet
(c) A
diagram
the
toplogy
of
a
VPN,
by
Ludovic
Ferre
distributed
under
a
Attribution-
ShareAlike
3.0
Unported license.
Figure 1.1: Three examples of graphs used for diﬀerent purposes.
Chapter 5 is a discussion of the implementation, and the results. The discus-
sion includes some early thoughts, which had an impact on how the tool is
implemented. Chapter 6 concludes the thesis with the results.
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 2
Soft Mu-calculus for
Computational ﬁelds
Soft Mu-calculus for Computational ﬁelds (SMuC) is an approach to deﬁne and
perform queries on a graph-shaped ﬁeld. Sections 2.1, 2.3 and 2.2 are taken
and adapted from [LLM15], as these are the foundation on which this thesis is
made.
2.1
Computational Fields in SMuC
In SMuC, computational ﬁelds are networks of connected agents, where both
agents and connections have attributes. The computational ﬁeld is represented
as a graph, where nodes represent agents, and directed edges represent their
directed connectivity.
Interaction between nodes is only possible if they are
connected by an edge. Node labels are used for the attributes of agents, and
edge labels contain functions associated with the connection the edge creates,
between two nodes.
The domain of attributes in nodes is partially ordered. Some examples of par-
tially ordered domains, is the set of natural numbers N, ordered by ≥or ≤, or
sets of nodes ordered by containment. The underlying structure used in SMuC
is a complete partial order (CPO), with a top and bottom element.
A partial order is a binary relation ⊑: A × A →{true, false} [NNH99], which is
reﬂexive, transitive and anti-symmetric.
∀a1, a2, a3 ∈A:
• (Reﬂexive) a1 ⊑a1
• (Transitive) a1 ⊑a2 and a2 ⊑a3 then a1 ⊑a3
• (Anti-symmetry) a1 ⊑a2 and a2 ⊑a1 then a1 = a2
A partially ordered set is a set A with a partial relation ⊑, written as (A, ⊑).
Not all elements in a partially ordered set are comparable. For a1, a2 ∈A, a1
and a2 are comparable iﬀa1 ⊑a2 or a2 ⊑a1, otherwise they are incomparable.
A totally ordered set is a set which satisﬁes the conditions of the partially
ordered set, along with comparability condition [Wei]:
==PAGE:10==
4 of 70
Soft Mu-calculus for Computational ﬁelds
• (Comparability) ∀a, b ∈A, a ≤b or b ≤a.
A partial order can have a bottom element ⊥∈A, if there exists an element
⊥∈A such that ∀a : ⊥⊑a. Conversely it can have a top element ⊤∈A such
that ∀a : a ⊑⊤
An ω −chain of a partial order (A, ⊑) is an inﬁnite sequence of elements of A,
a0, a1, ... ∈A such that a0 ⊑a1 ⊑.... Thus the ω −chain is totally ordered.
A partial order (A, ⊑) is a complete partial order if every ω−chain a0, a1, ... ∈A
has a top (⊤∈A) element, such that a0 ⊑a1 ⊑... ⊑⊤
Deﬁnition 2.1 (Field domain). SMuC ﬁeld domains are tuples ⟨A, ⊑, ⊥, ⊤⟩
where (A, ⊑) is an ω −chain complete partially ⊑−ordered set A with bottom
element ⊥∈A and top element ⊤∈A, and (A, ⊒) is an ω −chain complete
partially ⊑−ordered set A with bottom element ⊤∈A and top element ⊥∈
A.[LLM15]
Using ﬁeld domains, it is possible to deﬁne arbitrary types which the SMuC
queries should operate on. A Cartesian product of domains can be useful when
a combination of domains are needed.
Deﬁnition 2.2 (Cartesian product). Let ⟨A1, ⊑1, ⊥1, ⊤1⟩and ⟨A2, ⊑2, ⊥2, ⊤2⟩
be two ﬁeld domains. Their Cartesian product ⟨A1, ⊑1, ⊥1, ⊤1⟩×⟨A2, ⊑2, ⊥2, ⊤2⟩
is the ﬁeld domain ⟨A1×A2, ⊑, (⊥1, ⊥2), (⊤1, ⊤2)⟩, where ⊑is deﬁned as (a1, a2) ⊑
(a′
1, a′
2) iﬀa1 ⊑1 a′
1 and a2 ⊑2 a′
2.[LLM15]
Example 2.1 gives some examples of domains which are used, and more fully
described later in the thesis.
Example 2.1. There are many deﬁnitions of ﬁeld domains, the following are
some examples used later in this thesis:
• ⟨N ∪{∞}, ≤, 0, ∞⟩, the totally ordered set of natural numbers, which is
used for counting occurrences of elements in Section 4.3. Similar sets can
be deﬁned using real numbers, such as the domain used for page rank
⟨R ∪{∞}, ≤, 0, ∞⟩as described in Section 2.5.1.1.
• The domain of Boolean values ⟨{true, false}, →, false, true⟩which is de-
ﬁned in Section 2.5.2.
• Domains can be deﬁned as powersets of values such as, ⟨P(N ∗), ⊆, ∅, N ∗⟩
which is used to evaluate the shortest path tree as deﬁned in Section 4.1.
They can also be multisets such as ⟨2A, ⊆, ∅, A⟩.
• In Section 2.5.1.2, the steady state probability of a Markov chain is cal-
culated. Since using an initial distribution is not trivial, the Cartesian
product of real numbers and a binary value is used, ⟨[0..1] × {0, 1}, ⊑
, (0.0, 0), (1.0, 1)⟩where ⊑is the ordering (n1, m1) ⊑(n2, m2) iﬀ(m1 < m2)
or (m1 = m2 and n1 ≤n2). The binary value is used as an indicator of
whether an operation has been done or not.
==PAGE:11==
2.2 Fixed Point
5 of 70
• Section 4.1.3 describes a shortest path query containing the total distance
and the neighboring node, ⟨N × N0, ⊑, ⊥, ⊤⟩.
The deﬁnition of computational ﬁelds in Deﬁnition 2.3 is slightly diﬀerent from
the deﬁnition in the paper.
I have changed the deﬁnition of interpretation
functions for edges, to use edge functions, which is described in the next Section.
Deﬁnition 2.3 (Field). A ﬁeld is a tuple ⟨N , E, A, L = LN ⊎LE, I = IN ⊎IE ⊎
IEF⟩, where ⊎represents the disjoint union of two sets.
• a set N of nodes
• edges E ⊆N × N
• a ﬁeld domain ⟨A, ⊑, ⊥, ⊤⟩
• a set L of node labels LN and edge labels LE
• interpretation function IN : LN →N →A associating function from nodes
to values to every node label in LN
• interpretation function IE : LE →E →A association function from edges
to values to every node label in LE
• interpretation function IEF : LE →E →Ψ′ association function from
edges labels to edges to edge functions.
where node, edge and label sets are drawn from their corresponding universes;
N ⊆N, E ⊆E, LN ⊆L and LE ⊆L′.
Here the components of ﬁeld F are referred using sub-scripted symbols such as
LE and IN .
The user of SMuC should be able to deﬁne arbitrary functions, to operate on
values in a query. These arbitrary functions should be usable from function calls
and aggregate operators, which are described later. They are an important part
of calculating a ﬁxpoint, as described in the following Section.
2.2
Fixed Point
A ﬁxed point, sometimes shortened to ﬁxpoint, is reached when a function of
an input results in the same value as its input.
Let f be a function f : A →A. I.e. performing f on input type A will result in an
output of the same type. Then performing the same function on a value multiple
times is written with f and the number of times the function is performed in
superscript, such that
f 0(a) = a
f n+1(a) = f (f n(a))
and so on. In other words f k(a) represents performing function f on the value
a ∈A, k amount of times.
==PAGE:12==
6 of 70
Soft Mu-calculus for Computational ﬁelds
Deﬁnition 2.4 (Fixpoint). A ﬁxpoint of the function f on a value a ∈A, is
a point where f (a) = a. The least ﬁxpoint a, is the ﬁxpoint such that for any
other ﬁxpoint b, then a ⊑b. The greatest ﬁxpoint a, is the ﬁxpoint such that
for any other ﬁxpoint b, then b ⊑a.
To compute a well deﬁned ﬁxpoint, the function may need to be monotone
and continuous.
A monotone function, is a function which either is entirely
nonincreasing or nondecreasing [Sto].
Section 2.5.1.2 gives an example of a
query where the query is not monotone, and explains how this is a problem.
The least upper bound of the chain ⊥⊑f (⊥) ⊑f 2(⊥) ⊑... is the least ﬁxpoint
of f , while the greatest lower bound of chain ⊤⊒f (⊤) ⊒f 2(⊤) ⊒... is the
greatest ﬁxpoint of f .
A desirable property is for the ﬁxpoint to be computable in iterations, which is
utilized in the implementation of the ﬁxpoint computation. The least ﬁxpoints
and greatest ﬁxpoint of f are f n⊤and f m⊥respectively, for some n, m ∈N.
[LLM15]
2.3
SMuC Formula
Soft µ-calculus for Computational ﬁelds (SMuC) is meant for global computa-
tions on ﬁelds. Using SMuC it is possible to evaluate quantitative properties of
graph-based structures. Such structures can involve transition systems, network
topologies or social networks. Section 4 discusses a case study of using SMuC
on an anonymized graph gathered from a social network.
2.3.1
Abstract Syntax
Given a ﬁeld domain A, the functions f and g on A are called attribute opera-
tions.
• Functions f : A∗→A or f : mset(A) →A are used to combine values,
• functions g : mset(A) →A are used to aggregate values, where mset(A)
is the domain of ﬁnite multisets of A.
The idea behind the latter, is to aggregate values of neighboring nodes using
associative (i.e. g(x, g(y, z)) = g(g(x, y), z)) and commutative (i.e. g(x, y) =
g(y, x)) functions, thus the order of computation does not matter.
Let L be the set of atomic node labels, M be the set of function symbol and Z
be the set of formula variables.
Deﬁnition 2.5 (Syntax of SMuC formulas).
Ψ ::= i | z | f (Ψ, ..., Ψ) | g a Ψ | g a Ψ | νz.Ψ | µ z.Ψ
where i ∈L, a ∈L′, z ∈Z, and f , g ∈M.
==PAGE:13==
2.3 SMuC Formula
7 of 70
a
b
c
d
Figure 2.1: A graph with four nodes illustrating how node a connects with the
other nodes, using the ingoing
, and outgoing
operators. The
circles next to the nodes b, c, d represents which of the neighboring
nodes of a are reached using the two diﬀerent aggregate operators.
The i rule represents a node attribute. Nodes in a graph can have attributes,
representing a value. This attribute can then be used as a part of the query.
ν z.Ψ and µ z.Ψ are the ﬁxpoint operators for least ﬁxpoint and greatest ﬁxpoint
respectively. The formula variable z can be used as a part of the query.
Modal operators a and a are used to aggregate nodes following outgoing or
ingoing edges respectively. Figure 2.1 illustrates which of the diﬀerent nodes in
a graph can be reached using the two operators. Edge capability a is used on
the result of the right hand side of the modal operator.
When writing SMuC queries, edge capabilities are not always required. There-
fore let id be the identity function id(x) = x,
id
id
can be abbreviated as
and
.
Edge functions are not a feature deﬁned in the original deﬁnition of SMuC,
however I think they make a nice addition, in giving the user more control over
the deﬁnition of edge capabilities. The edge functions are deﬁned in the edges,
allowing edge capabilities to perform diﬀerent actions between the edges in the
graph. When an edge capability is called in one of the aggregate operators, the
edge function with the given edge capability name in the edge is called. The
grammar deﬁned for edge functions is limited to a subset of the rules used in
the grammar, but with the addition of rules to refer the nodes comprising the
edge, and the argument.
Deﬁnition 2.6 (Syntax of edge functions). A × N × N →(AF →AF)
Ψ′ ::= i′ | source | target | arg | f (Ψ′, ..., Ψ′)
where i′ ∈L, and f ∈M.
Similar to nodes, edges can have edge attributes denoted as i′. An example
of an edge attribute is the weight of following the edge, or the probability of
following it.
==PAGE:14==
8 of 70
Soft Mu-calculus for Computational ﬁelds
An edge only has the knowledge of its edge attributes, and the identity of the
nodes at each end. The identity of the source and target edge can be accessed
through the source and target rules.
An edge function is always called with an argument. This argument can be
accessed through arg.
Common for both SMuC and edge functions is the function call.
2.3.2
Semantics
This section deﬁnes the semantics of SMuC, in other words the meaning of the
syntax deﬁned in Deﬁnition 2.6 is formally deﬁned. The deﬁnition is given by
using lambda notation.
Deﬁnition 2.7 (Update). Updating the environment ρ is done through the
function
ρ[f /z] =
(
ρ ∪[z 7→f ]
if ρ(z) is undeﬁned.
ρ[z 7→f ]
otherwise
where ρ(z) is a lookup of value z in environment ρ.
Deﬁnition 2.8. (Semantics of SMuC formulas) Let F be a ﬁeld as deﬁned in
Deﬁnition 2.3, and ρ is an environment. Given a formula Ψ and the environment
ρ, then Ψ is ρ closed if ρ gives deﬁnitions for the free variables of Ψ. The seman-
tics is given for SMuC is ρ−closed under the environment ρ. The interpretation
function J∗KF
ρ : Ψ →NF →AF is deﬁned below:
JiKF
ρ
=
IF(i)
JzKF
ρ
=
ρ(z)
Jf (Ψ1, ..., Ψk)KF
ρ
=
λ n.Jf KAF (JΨ1KF
ρ n, ..., JΨkKF
ρ n)
Jg a ΨKF
ρ
=
λ n.JgKAF ({JIEF(a)K(n, n′)(JΨKF
ρ (n′)) | (n, n′) ∈EF})
Jg a ΨKF
ρ
=
λ n.JgKAF ({JIEF(a)K(n, n′)(JΨKF
ρ (n′)) | (n′, n) ∈EF})
Jµ z.ΨKF
ρ
=
lfp λ f .JΨKF
ρ[f /z]
Jνz.ΨKF
ρ
=
gfp λ f .JΨKF
ρ[f /z]
where lfp and gfp stands for greatest ﬁxpoint and least ﬁxpoint respectively.
JiKF
ρ is the interpretation of node attribute i deﬁned in ﬁeld F using the inter-
pretation function IF.
JzKF
ρ is the value of formula variable z deﬁned in the environment of ρ.
Jf (Ψ1, ..., Ψk)KF
ρ , perform function f deﬁned in domain A of ﬁeld F on the
interpretation of Ψ1 to Ψk in node n.
Jg a ΨKF
ρ Given a node n, all edges between n and other nodes n′ in the set
of all edges in the ﬁeld EF are found, thus ﬁnding all the nodes which have an
==PAGE:15==
2.4 Extensions to SMuC
9 of 70
edge originating from n. Evaluate the result Ψ for each node n′, and perform
edge capability a on the results.
Jg a ΨKF
ρ is similar to the previous rule, but ﬁnds the edges which originate from
n′ and targeting n.
The idea behind the ﬁxpoint calculations Jµ z.ΨKF
ρ and Jνz.ΨKF
ρ in SMuC, is
to perform them in iterations. Fixpoints are deﬁned in Deﬁnition 2.4. During
each iteration, the ﬁxpoint is approximated based on the rules used in the query,
using the values of the previously completed iteration.
Deﬁnition 2.9 (Semantics of edge functions). The interpretation function is
on the form J∗KF
ρ : Ψ′ →A × (N × N ) →(AF →AF), the edge functions
themselves are called as
λ(source, target). λ arg.JIF(a)K(n, n′)
The interpretation functions are deﬁned below:
JsourceK(n, n′)
=
n
JtargetK(n, n′)
=
n′
JargK(n, n′)
=
arg
Ji′K(n, n′)
=
IF(i′)(n, n′)
Jf (Ψ1, ..., Ψk)K(n, n′)
=
Jf KAF (JΨ1K(n, n′), ..., JΨkK(n, n′))
2.4
Extensions to SMuC
This section deﬁnes and discusses some extensions to SMuC. The ﬁrst of these
extensions is a type system, deﬁned in Section 2.4.2, the second is the addition
of an undirected aggregate operator as deﬁned in Section 2.4.3.
2.4.1
Scope Rules for Formula Variables
This section describes the scope rules of formula variables, speciﬁcally when
using nested ﬁxpoints.
A scope is a region of the query where a deﬁned formula variable is being
evaluated. In the query µ x.x + 1, the underlined formula variable x is inside
the scope of the ﬁxpoint calculation where the ﬁxpoint of x is being calculated.
While a formula variable is inside a scope where it is being calculated, the
formula variable has access to the previously fully complete ﬁxpoint iteration
result.
When there are nested ﬁxpoint, or a formula variable is used outside the scope
of the ﬁxpoint it belongs to, such as in the query f (µ x. +
1, x), then the
underlined formula variable x is able to access the ﬁnal result of the ﬁxpoint
calculation. This is because the previously fully completed ﬁxpoint iteration is
the last iteration of the ﬁxpoint calculation.
==PAGE:16==
10 of 70
Soft Mu-calculus for Computational ﬁelds
Operation
Input type
Output type
1 + 1
Integer
Integer
1 == 1
Integer
Boolean
5 + (4 > 3)
Integer
???
Table 2.1: An example of how diﬀerent operators on a type can result in a
diﬀerent type.
The third operation shows an example where an
error would occur in the most common programming languages.
2.4.2
Types
In programming there are diﬀerent kinds of data, each represented diﬀerently on
the system. These diﬀerent kinds of data are called types. Examples of diﬀerent
types of data are boolean, integer and ﬂoating point numbers. The type of a
value determines what operations that can be performed on a value, and what
type the operation returns. Table 2.1 shows an example of diﬀerent operations
performed on integers, and how they result in diﬀerent output types. The third
example shows where an error would occur in a typed language.
If an operation is performed on two types which are incompatible with each
other, a run-time error will occur. By performing a static type analysis during
compile time, it is possible to catch most errors involving incompatible types.
By doing this, it is possible to catch most errors before performing the query.
2.4.2.1
SMuC Type System
SMuC as deﬁned in [LLM15] only allows the use of one type (A as deﬁned in the
ﬁeld domain), however there are cases where being able to use multiple types
at the same time is preferred. Therefore the type A of ﬁeld F is interpreted as
being a combination of values with diﬀerent types in the implementation, and
thus a type system needs to be deﬁned.
This thesis does not introduce types to the syntax of SMuC similar to that of
Java or C, such as integers and booleans. The type system should be able to
handle arbitrary types, as deﬁned in ﬁeld domains.
In this section, the type system, and the notation used to deﬁne it, is described.
The notation used is inspired by [Hüt10].
Deﬁnition 2.10 (Type environment). The type environment is a partial func-
tion E : L ∪Z ∪M 7→Types assigning types to variables.
The type environment is a partial function because not all values and variables
have their type deﬁned.
Deﬁnition 2.11 (Type environment lookup). Let x be the variable which is
==PAGE:17==
2.4 Extensions to SMuC
11 of 70
looked up,
is the undeﬁned type, then
E(x) =
(
T
[x →T] ∈E
[x →T] ̸∈E
Deﬁnition 2.12 (Update type environment). Updating the type environment
is written as E[x 7→T] where the updated type environment E ′ is deﬁned by
E ′ = E ∪[x 7→T]
Deﬁnition 2.13 (Type transformation). T1 →T2 represent a transformation
where the input is of type T1 and the output is of type T2.
In some cases a rule can have multiple types, for examples with pairs or in
functions. Deﬁnition 2.14 shows how multiple types can be represented. This
is used in Equation 2.1, deﬁning the type inference rules for functions, and in
Equations 2.2 and 2.3 deﬁning the inference rules for the aggregate operators.
Deﬁnition 2.14 (Multiple types). T1 × T2 represents two elements, where the
ﬁrst is of type T1 and the second is of type T2. The multiset mset(T) represents
a set of unspeciﬁed length where all elements have the type T.
Deﬁnition 2.15 (Type judgement). Let E be the type environment, e an
expression, and T a type, then a type judgement of the form E ⊢e : T reads
as: "given environment E, the expression e is of type T".
2.4.2.2
Type Inference
The idea behind a type inference system, is to determine the type of one variable
or value for which the type is undeﬁned, based on the type of other values. This
allows for queries and variables where the types are omitted.
One of the fundamental ideas in SMuC is that the user is able to deﬁne their
own ﬁeld domains as described in Section 2.1. Therefore there are no predeﬁned
simple types such as double, integer and ﬂoats, used in common programming
languages as Java and C#. This results in some constraints to how the type in-
ference can be done. The result is that there can be multiple ﬁeld domains using
the same data type, with their own functions, transformations, and restrictions.
For example the two domains ⟨R ∪{∞}, ≥, −∞, ∞⟩and ⟨R ∪{∞}, ≥, 0, ∞⟩.
While both domains are using real numbers, the ﬁrst is unlimited while the
second is restricted to the non-negative real numbers.
A more concrete example is using a data type commonly used in programming
such as the double data type. A function fun(1.0, x) can have diﬀerent results,
based on which of the double types it is. As shown in type Equation 2.1 in
Figure 2.2, all parameters of a function have the same type. I have chosen to
implement the type rules for functions like this, in order to easily infer the types
==PAGE:18==
12 of 70
Soft Mu-calculus for Computational ﬁelds
∃i ∈{1, ..., k}.E ⊢Ψi : T1
∀i, j ∈{1, ..., k}.E ⊢Ψi : T ∧E ⊢ΨJ : T ′ ⇒T = T ′ ∨T =
∨t′ =
E ⊢f (Ψ1, ..., Ψk) : T2
where E(f ) = mset(T1) →T2
(2.1)
E ⊢a : T →T
E ⊢Ψ : T
E ⊢g a Ψ : T ′
E(g) = mset(T) →T ′
(2.2)
E ⊢a : T →T
E ⊢Ψ : T
E ⊢g a Ψ : T ′
E(g) = mset(T) →T ′
(2.3)
E ⊢Ψ : T
E ⊢µ z.Ψ : T
E[z 7→T]
(2.4)
E ⊢Ψ : T
E ⊢ν z.Ψ : T
E[z 7→T]
(2.5)
E ⊢z : T
E(z) = T
(2.6)
E ⊢i : T
E(i) = T
(2.7)
Figure 2.2: Type inference rules for the syntax of SMuC.
==PAGE:19==
2.4 Extensions to SMuC
13 of 70
func(x, y) : T1 ×
: T2
x : T1
y :
→
func(x, y) : T1 × T1 : T2
x : T1
y : T1
func(x, y) :
× T1 : T2
x :
y : T1
→
func(x, y) : T1 × T1 : T2
x : T1
y : T1
Figure 2.3: Two examples of how, given knowledge of at least one parameters,
the type of the second parameter can be inferred.
func(x, func2(y, z)) : T1 ×
→T2
x : T1
func2(y, z) :
×
→
y :
z :
→
func(x, func2(y, z)) : T1 × T1 →T2
x : T1 func2(y, z) : Td × Td →T1
y : Td
z : Td
Table 2.2: An example of how the types of func2 can be inferred if there is
no deﬁnition of its functionality in the ﬁeld for T1. A deﬁnition is
found for func2 which takes parameters of type Td and results in
type T1. Another possibility is that there are multiple deﬁnitions
of func2, which result in the same output type T1. In this case the
ambiguity must be resolved.
of the parameters of a function, and at the same time this allows aggregate and
normal functions to be used in both places. Based on this, it is easy to infer
the type of elements used in a function which are untyped, as long as one of
the other parameters have a type. This is shown below, where
represents a
parameter where the type is undeﬁned. This is also shown in Figure 2.3 where
the type of y can be inferred to be the same type as x.
If none of the parameters of a function are typed, then it is impossible to infer
anything without more knowledge of the context.
Following from Equation 2.1, a function receiving two diﬀerent types results in
an error, f (T1, T2) →error
A problem occurs if a scenario as shown in Figure 2.2 happens. It is possible to
infer that func2 should return a value of type T1, but what if there are multiple
functions deﬁned with the name func2 which return a value of type T1? They
==PAGE:20==
14 of 70
Soft Mu-calculus for Computational ﬁelds
may take diﬀerent types as input, thus we do not know what the types of y
and z are. This would result in ambiguity, resulting in unknown behavior when
running a query. If such an ambiguity occurs, a priority must be deﬁned to
choose which deﬁnition to use.
2.4.3
Undirected Queries
In a directed graph, there are instances where it is useful to interact with the
neighbors following both outgoing and ingoing edges in a simple query.
Example 2.2. Let us say the goal of a query is to ﬁnd the smallest value in one
of the neighboring nodes connected with either an outgoing node or an ingoing
node, a possible query would be
min(min
value, min
value)
Where min returns the smallest of the given values.
While this query is suﬃcient to complete the goal, it is a simple example, where
three operators are required. In a more complex query such a construction can
subtract readability from the query. The following is syntactic sugar, as it does
not add functionality, but is an alternative way to write a combination of rules.
Deﬁnition 2.16 (Syntax of undirected aggregate function). The syntax deﬁned
in Deﬁnition 2.6 is extended with the rule as follows:
Ψ ::= ... | g a Ψ
Deﬁnition 2.17 (Undirected aggregate function). The undirected aggregate
operator is equivalent to combining both the ingoing and the outgoing aggre-
gate operators with the same values and performing aggregate function g on the
results.
g a Ψ ≡g(g a Ψ, g a Ψ)
Given that the aggregate function is associative and commutative, the order of
operators does not have any eﬀect on the results of a query.
Example 2.3. With this new syntax, it is possible to write the query used in Ex-
ample 2.2 min(min
value, min
value) with a single operation min
value
2.4.4
Binary Operators
The four binary operators +, −, ∗, and/, which are often used in many high level
programming languages, for arithmetic operations, have been added as binary
operators, in addition to functions. The four operators +, −, ∗, / ∈M can be
used as binary inﬁx operators. The equivalence of these operators in original
deﬁnition of SMuC is to call a function with the operator as the function name,
as shown below:
==PAGE:21==
2.5 SMuC Query Examples
15 of 70
Ψ1 + Ψ2
≡
+(Ψ1, Ψ2)
Ψ1 −Ψ2
≡
−(Ψ1, Ψ2)
Ψ1 ∗Ψ2
≡
∗(Ψ1, Ψ2)
Ψ1/Ψ2
≡
/(Ψ1, Ψ2)
2.5
SMuC Query Examples
This sections shows how SMuC can be used to perform queries with similar
functionality as other tools, such as model checking where CTL is used [BK08a].
2.5.1
Steady Probabilities
In the following two sections, Markov chains are an integral part of their evalua-
tion. The ﬁrst one is the evaluation of page ranks in Section 2.5.1.1, an algorithm
used by Google to rank websites in their search index. The second one is calcu-
lating the steady state probability in Section 2.5.1.2, which is used to calculate
the steady state probability given an initial distribution of probabilities.
A Markov chain is a state diagram, where the transition between states is taken
at random. The chosen transition to follow is based on the probability of fol-
lowing the edge. The sum of probabilities for leaving a node over all outgoing
edges must be 1. A Markov chain has an initial distribution, which must sum
to 1 as well. All nodes with an initial value are considered as possible initial
states, and the probability of starting in one of these nodes is based on the
initial probability.
2.5.1.1
Page Rank
Page ranking is a method to rank websites based on citations from other web-
sites. This algorithm is used by Google to index their searches, and was in fact
developed by the co-founders of Google [BP98].
Deﬁnition 2.18. Let page A have the pages T1, ..., Tn pointing to it, C(A) is
the number of links going out of page A. The parameter d is a damping factor
which can be set between 0 and 1. The PageRank of a page A is given as follows
[BP98]:
PR(A) = (1 −d) + d(PR(T1)/C(T1) + ... + PR(Tn)/C(Tn))
The domain used to calculate the page rank, is the domain of totally ordered
real numbers.
⟨R ∪{∞}, ≤, 0, ∞⟩
The operators used in the query are the arithmetic operators addition, subtrac-
tion, multiplication and division (+,-,* and /). The SMuC query to calculate
the page rank of a graph is very similar to the deﬁnition of the page rank given
in Deﬁnition 2.18:
µ PR.(1 −d) + d ∗(+
(PR/ +
1))
==PAGE:22==
16 of 70
Soft Mu-calculus for Computational ﬁelds
Graph
0
1
2
3
...
218
a
b
c
d
a
0.0
0.1500
0.2775
0.5484
1.4901
b
0.0
0.1500
0.2137
0.2679
0.7833
c
0.0
0.1500
0.1500
0.1500
0.1500
d
0.0
0.1500
0.4687
0.5771
1.5766
Figure 2.4: Fixpoint calculations of a simple graph using the query for page
rank.
1
0
1
1
Figure 2.5: A simple Markov chain with an initial distribution of everything in
the left node. This graph does not have a steady state distribution.
where d is the damping factor.
The remaining of this section explains the query in detail, and draws parallels
to the PageRank algorithm. +
1 retrieves the integer literal 1 from all out-
going edges extending from the current node. Notice how no node attributes
are used in this case. Using the addition as the aggregate function, sums all
the literals, and the result is the number of outgoing edges from the given node.
This corresponds to C(A) of the original algorithm. PR/ +
1 corresponds
to PR(T)/C(T). PR is a formula variable, which stores a value in each node
through the ﬁxpoint. To sum the PR(T)/C(T) of all pages pointing to the
current page, we want to use another aggregate operator. +
(PR/ +
1)
calculates the sum of PageRank divided by outgoing links of all ingoing edges.
This corresponds to PR(T1)/C(T1) + ... + PR(Tn)/C(Tn). The ﬁxpoint cal-
culation, in this case the least ﬁxpoint, performs the calculation in iterations,
until a ﬁxpoint is reached. In this case an approximation is made.
Figure 2.4 shows an example of running the query on a simple graph. The table
shows the iterative nature of evaluating the ﬁxpoint.
2.5.1.2
Steady State Probability
The steady state probability of a Markov chain, calculate the probability distri-
bution by repeatedly multiplying the probability of following an edge with the
probability of being in a node, until an equilibrium has been found if one ex-
ists. Not all Markov chains have a steady state probability for any given initial
distribution, for example the Markov chain in Figure 2.5. Do note that there
are other more eﬃcient methods to calculate the steady probability of a graph,
using matrix calculations.
==PAGE:23==
2.5 SMuC Query Examples
17 of 70
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
1
2
3
4
5
6
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.50.5
0.5
0.5
1
1
1
1
1
1
Figure 2.6: An example of a discrete Markov chain used to calculate the prob-
ability of rolling any number of a six faced die. This example was
deﬁned by [BK08b, p.740]. The initial distribution is such that a
has the probability 1 while the rest have the probability 0.
Figure 2.6 shows a Markov chain which is used to evaluate the probability
distribution of a six faced die landing on a number from 1 to 6.
The ﬁeld domain used to calculate the steady state probability of a graph is
deﬁned as A = ⟨[0..1]×{0, 1}, ⊑, (0, 0), (1, 1)⟩, where ⊑is the ordering (n1, m1) ⊑
(n2, m2) iﬀ(m1 < m2) or (m1 = m2 and n1 ≤n2).
A challenge with this example, is to set the value of the formula variable to the
initial distribution. If a simple addition is done such as µ x.i +x, where i is the
initial distribution, then the initial distribution is added the the formula variable
every single iteration. The goal is to create some form of addition which sets the
initial value of a formula variable to the initial distribution of some probability.
This should only be done once however, during the ﬁrst iteration of the ﬁxpoint
calculation. To perform this operation, the function +i has been deﬁned:
+i((x, i1), (y, i2)) =





((x + y), 1)
if i1 = i2
(x, 1)
if i1 > i2
(y, 1)
if i1 < i2
+i uses the second part of the Cartesian production as a status indicator, such
that only when the indicator is equals in all parts of the operation, is the +
operation performed. No matter which condition is true in +i, the indicator is
==PAGE:24==
18 of 70
Soft Mu-calculus for Computational ﬁelds
set to 1. Therefore, when combined with the µ ﬁxed point calculation, which
initializes the formula variable to (0, 0), and an initial distribution such as (1, 0),
the formula variable is set to the initial distribution of some variable. However
in the next step, where the initial distribution stays the same (1, 0), the formula
variable is (1, 1) following the deﬁnition of +i results in (1, 1). As the result has
the second value set to 1 in all cases, the addition is only done once.
The normal addition and multiplications are deﬁned similarly, though without
the checks on the second value, but always setting it to 1:
+((x, i1), (y, i2)) = ((x + y), 1)
∗((x, i1), (y, i2)) = ((x ∗y), 1)
The edge capability is deﬁned as the multiplication of the given value, with the
probability of following an edge:
p(x) = x ∗pr
where pr is an edge attribute, expressing probability of following an edge.
The query itself is simple, however it is not monotonic. It is therefore possible
that there is no ﬁxpoint given an initial distribution. The lack of ﬁxpoint can
in this case depend on either the initial distribution, or the probabilities on the
edges.
µ steady. + p +i (initial, steady)
where initial is the initial distribution of probabilities.
2.5.2
Computation Tree Logic
Computation tree logic (CTL) is used in formal veriﬁcation, typically in model
checkers [Com16]. It can be used to verify properties in a transition system,
such as lack of deadlocks, or the possibility of reaching a state. The ﬁeld used
to evaluate CTL is deﬁned as the boolean domain as follows;
⟨{true, false}, →, false, true⟩
then Table 2.3 shows the diﬀerent temporal operators of CTL as they could be
deﬁned in SMuC.
Combinations of CTL statements can be written in SMuC as nested ﬁxpoint
queries. The CTL statement EFEG p, which reads "There exists a path where
eventually there exists a path where p will always hold". This query is inter-
preted as EF(EG p), i.e. the results of EG is used for EF. From Table 2.3 we
have the EF p is µ Z. ∨(p, ∨
Z) and EG p is νZ. ∧(p, ∨
Z). The idea now
is to nest the results of the innermost part of the CTL statement as a nested
==PAGE:25==
2.5 SMuC Query Examples
19 of 70
CTL
Description of CTL
SMuC query
EF p
There exists a path where eventually p
will hold.
µ Z. ∨(p, ∨
Z)
EG p
There exists a path where p will always
hold.
νZ. ∧(p, ∨
Z)
EX p
There exists a path where in the next
step p will hold.
µ Z. ∨
p
AF p
For all paths, p will eventually hold.
µ Z. ∨(p, ∧
Z)
AG p
For all paths, p will always hold.
νZ. ∧(p, ∧
Z)
AX p
For all paths, p will hold in the next
step.
µ Z. ∧
p
E(q ∪p)
There exists a path where q will hold
until p holds.
µ Z. ∨(p, (∧(q, ∨
Z)))
A(q ∪p)
For all paths, q will hold until p holds.
µ Z. ∨(p, (∧(q, ∧
Z)))
Table 2.3: Examples of how the diﬀerent CTL operators can be written in
SMuC.
ﬁxpoint. Thus the p of EF p is substituded with EG p in the SMuC query. The
resulting query is shown below:
µ Z. ∨(ν Z ′. ∧(a, ∨
Z ′), (∨
Z))
==PAGE:26==
20 of 70
Soft Mu-calculus for Computational ﬁelds
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 3
Implementation
This chapter outlines the design of the implementation, and some of the choices
behind it. Some of the choices made in this chapter is inﬂuenced by the early
goal of creating a parallel implementation. The implementation is written in
Java.
Section 3.1 describes how the graphs are represented.
Section 3.2 describes
how the syntax is implemented, and what tools are used for it.
Section 3.4
describes the semantics checker, and Section 3.5 describes the implementation
of the datatypes, type checker and annotations. Section 3.6 describes the im-
plementation of edge capabilities. Finally Section 3.7 describes how the query
is rune, followed by a more detailed description of ﬁxpoint calculations.
Figure 3.1 shows an overview of the diﬀerent stages of parsing a SMuC query.
Syntax
Semantics
check
Type check
Run query
Figure 3.1: An overview over the stages of the parser.
3.1
Graph Implementation
The graphs used in the implementation are represented using the graph library
JGraphT [jgr]. An important aspect of how graphs are represented is the ability
to split them into smaller parts. This is important in a case where a parallel
version of the implementation is created. JGraphT gives access to the graph
through a successor and predecessor list. This works very well with the aggregate
operators, which works with ingoing and outgoing edges of a node, and should
be simple to extend into a parallel version.
3.1.1
Vertex
Each vertex has a unique identiﬁer, stored as a Long. This identiﬁer is in some
cases used to order vertexes lexicographically.
Node attributes are stored in the vertex. These attributes remain unchanged
==PAGE:28==
22 of 70
Implementation
while a query is running. On the other hand, formula variables are stored in
the vertexes as well, but these can be changed through the ﬁxpoint operations.
Two iterations of formula variables are stored in vertexes, one for the current
iteration, and one for the previous iteration. Initially all iterations were stored
in a map, which was good for debugging, however it used an excessive amount
of memory, on values which would not be used again. The current iteration
number is stored for each formula variable. The iteration number is used to
keep track of which of the two formula variables to return when they are called
for.
Sometimes it happens that a formula variable is used, where an item with the
same name already exists. In this case a formula variable alias is used.
The choice whether the formula variables of a ﬁxpoint are diﬀerent is done in
the vertex. This is used during the ﬁxpoint calculation to determine when to
stop, which is further described in Section 3.8.1.
3.1.2
Edge
An edge connects two vertexes in a graph, and as such contains a reference to
the source and target vertex. Similar to vertexes, does edges contain attributes.
These are called edge attributes, and are available through edge capabilities.
Edge capabilities are stored in edges as parse trees, which are described further
in Section 3.4, which can be accessed using the name of the edge capability.
3.2
Syntax
Syntax
Semantics
check
Type check
Run query
Figure 3.2: This section focuses on how the syntax is parsed.
3.2.1
Parser Generator
To parse the SMuC language, the parser generator ANTLR4 has been used.
ANTLR uses LL(*) for parsing the context free grammar, meaning that it parses
its input from left to right, and uses the leftmost derivation. I have chosen to
work with ANTLR4, as I have experience with it.
ANTLR4 generates lexer and parser which is then expanded with the deﬁnitions
of semantics, type check and computation.
As the name of this section suggests, ANTLR4 is a parser generator, and as such
it is used to generate code, including lexer, parser and means to traverse a parse
tree. Two ways of traversing the parse tree are available, a parse tree visitor,
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Syntax
23 of 70
following the visitor pattern, and a parse tree listener. The use of these visitors
and listeners, is the ability to extend them, which keeps the generated code, as
well as the grammar, separated from the implementation speciﬁc code. This is
good because it separates implementation speciﬁc code from the grammar itself.
A syntax checker is automatically generated as a part of the process.
Both the visitor and listener traverse the parse tree, the diﬀerence between
them is how they do it. The listener methods are called by a parse tree walker
provided by ANTLR4, while visitor methods must walk their children explicitly.
The children must be traversed by invoking the method visit(), otherwise
the sub-trees are not visited [ant].
Both the listener and the visitor are generated based on the syntax, and as such
will have method stubs for entering or leaving the diﬀerent nodes in the parse
tree. Listing 3.1 shows an example of both the generated stub for a visitor and
listener class.
1
@Override
public Object visitVariable(GrammarParser.VariableContext ctx) {
3
return visitChildren(ctx);
}
5
@Override
7
public void enterVariable(GrammarParser.VariableContext ctx) {
9
}
11
@Override
public void exitVariable(GrammarParser.VariableContext ctx) {
13
}
Listing 3.1: An example of the diﬀerence between the generated stubs of the
visitor and listener. Line 2 shows how the variable rule of the
grammar, which is further described later in this section, is tra-
versed using the visitor pattern. Notice how the method calls visit
for its own children. Line 7 and 12 show the method stubs for the
same rule generated for a listener class. Notice how there are two
methods, one which is called when entering the rule in the parse
tree, and the other when leaving the rule.
Both the listener and the visitor has been used as a part of the implementation.
There are three diﬀerent stages where a tree walker is needed: semantics check,
type check and executing the query.
The semantics check is implemented using the listener. The listener is used in
this case because it is simpler to use, but limits how the tree can be traversed.
As described earlier, the listener walks the tree using a tree walker class, which
in turn calls the diﬀerent listener methods, once when entering a node in the
==PAGE:30==
24 of 70
Implementation
query
:
’(’ query ’)’
|
func name ’(’query (’,’ query)* ’)’
|
func name edge direction query
|
query (’/’|’*’) query
|
query (’+’|’-’) query
|
(gfp|lfp) VARNAME ’.’ query
|
value
func name
:
VARNAME | ’+’ | ’-’ | ’*’ | ’/’
value
:
number | VARNAME | STRING
number
:
[’-’](INTEGER | DOUBLE)
edge direction
:
’<’ [VARNAME] ’>’ | ’>’ [VARNAME] ’<’ | ’[’ [VARNAME] ’]’
VARNAME
:
[a-zA-Z]([a-zA-Z]|[_]|[0-9]+)*
INTEGER
:
[0-9]+
DOUBLE
:
[0-9]+ [.] [0-9]+
STRING
:
"([^"]|\s|\\")*"
Table 3.1: The syntax of SMuC as deﬁned in the implementation.
parse tree, and once when leaving a node in the parse tree.
The type checker and executing the query is implemented using the visitor.
The visitor has the ability of returning values when ﬁnishing methods, which is
needed for both the type checker and the execution. The type checker uses this
functionality to propagate the type of the children, to the caller, while the SMuC
execution propagates the values calculated. The visitor gives more control over
the traversal of the parse tree, as the children are visited explicitly. This allows
for the possibility to visit the same children multiple times, which is used when
traversing the tree when running a query as described in Section 3.7.
3.2.2
Grammar
Table 3.1 shows an abstract grammar of the implementation of SMuC. Terminals
are shown in bold font, and non terminals in italics. Literals are surrounded by
’single quotes’ and are in bold font. Parenthesis indicate grouping, and the
star * represents zero to many occurrences. Vertical bars | represent a choice.
Optional rules are surrounded by square brackets.
Lexer rules are in typewriter font, and all capital. Lexer rules are deﬁned as
regular expressions.
Whitespaces, including space, newline and tabs, which are not a part of a string
are ignored.
The implemented syntax uses diﬀerent symbols that the ones deﬁned in the
original SMuC paper, deﬁned in Section 2.3.1.
This is done as some of the
symbols are hard or impossible to using a normal text editor and keyboard.The
==PAGE:31==
3.3 Parse Trees and Abstract Syntax Trees
25 of 70
Level
Query
Description
1
f (Ψ, ..., Ψ)
Function call
2
g a Ψ, g a Ψ, g a Ψ
Aggregate functions
3
∗, /
Multiplication and division symbols
4
+, −
Plus and minus symbols
5
νz.Ψ, µ z.Ψ
Fixpoint
5
,
Comma (of function calls)
Table 3.2: This table shows the precedence of the operators in SMuC. Those
with a lower level, have a higher precedence, and will thus be eval-
uated ﬁrst.
least ﬁxpoint µ, and the greater ﬁxpoint ν are represented by their acronyms
lfp and gfp respectively.
To indicate which direction of an edge, an aggregate function uses, pointy brack-
ets and square brackets are used. These are used as it is rather inconvenient to
draw circles and squares when writing code with a normal keyboard. Instead the
"direction" of the pointy brackets indicate the direction of the edges observed by
the aggregate function. The brackets with the points pointing outwards e.g. in
the query (sum<>1) follows all the outgoing edges as deﬁned for (g
Ψ), while
the brackets with the points pointing inwards (sum><1) follows the ingoing
edges as deﬁned for (g
Ψ). Square brackets represent the aggregate function
following both outgoing and ingoing edges (sum[ ]1) as deﬁned for (g
Ψ).
Table 3.2 shows the precedence of operators of the implementation of SMuC.
The precedence of operations is also known as the order of operations, and is
important to be well deﬁned. If all operators have the same precedence, then all
queries would be parsed from left to right, which is counter-intuitive compared
to what is taught from math and programming languages.
3.3
Parse Trees and Abstract Syntax Trees
A parse tree is a tree derived from a string on a grammar, as the one described
in Section 3.2.2. The tree is rooted in the grammars start symbol. Leaf nodes
of the parse tree are called terminal nodes, and internal nodes are called non-
terminal nodes. Each internal node is a non-terminal, and each leaf is a terminal
node. The terminal nodes of the parse tree represent symbols of the input string.
[FCL09, p. 117]
Most of the phases described in the introduction, and shown in Figure 3.1 of
this section traverse a parse tree.
An abstract syntax tree (AST) is an abstract representation of the input as a
tree. It leaves out many of the nodes which are in the parse tree, as they can
be inferred from the grammar itself, while still keeping the essential structure.
==PAGE:32==
26 of 70
Implementation
Fixpoint
Function
Aggregate
Function2
1
+
z
dir
>
a
<
min
goal
min
z
gfp
Figure 3.3: AST of the query gfp z.
min(goal, min<a> +(z,1)).
An AST is a good tool to use when developing a parser, as it shows the order
in which rules are executed, and is relatively easy to read.
Figure 3.3 shows an AST of the query gfp z.
min(goal, min<a> z+1).
Notice how the syntax tree only contains nodes which have functionality, and
none of the intermediate nodes, such as query and value, which a parse tree
contains.
In the following sections, ASTs will be used to illustrate how the
trees are traversed instead of parse trees, as there is much redundancy removed,
however the actual implementation works on the parse tree itself.
3.4
Semantics
Syntax
Semantics
check
Type check
Run query
Figure 3.4: Annotate the parse tree with variable types through the semantics
checker.
The semantics check is done by traversing the parse tree extending the generated
listener. The goal of the semantics check is to ensure that the used variable
names are available, and deﬁned in the right context. The result of the semantics
check is an annotated parse tree, where the type of the diﬀerent variables are
deﬁned. Note that these are not the data types as deﬁned in Section 2.4.2, but
rather what semantic rule the variable belongs to.
There are four diﬀerent variable types the semantics checker looks out for:
• Node attributes,
• Formula variables,
• Edge capabilities,
• Formula variables of a previous query.
==PAGE:33==
3.5 Datatypes
27 of 70
Tree
Variable
Type of variable
Fixpoint
Function
Aggregate
Function2
1
+
z
dir
>
a
<
min
goal
min
z
gfp
z
Formula variable
goal
Node attribute
a
Edge capability
Table 3.3: The resulting annotations for the query described in Figure 3.3.
Node attribute is an attribute which is deﬁned in the nodes of a graph. All
nodes must have the node attribute deﬁned, otherwise the semantics checker
stops and returns an error.
Formula variables are the variables deﬁned as a part of the ﬁxpoint rule. If the
formula variable has already been deﬁned in a node with an identical name,
then an alias is given to the formula variable in the given node. Each time the
formula variable is then addressed in the current query, it is done through the
alias.
Edge capabilities refers to the edge capabilities deﬁned in the edges of the given
graph. At least one edge in the graph must have a deﬁnition for a given edge
capability. If all edges do not have the given edge capability deﬁned, then a
message should be shown to the user, warning them about a possible error.
The last variable type is formula variables deﬁned in queries previously run on
the same graph. This type is checked if there is no formula variable, and no node
attribute with the given name. If this is the case, then the previous formula
variables are checked.
In the end, go through the graph, and make sure each node contains a deﬁnition
of the diﬀerent variable types, and the edges have the required edge capabilities
deﬁned.
Table 3.3 shows how the variables in the parse tree shown in Figure 3.3, are
annotated. Each node with a variable name is annotated with the type shown
to the right of the given variable name.
3.5
Datatypes
Syntax
Semantics
check
Type check
Run query
Figure 3.5: Now it is time to ﬁnd the types of the diﬀerent symbols of the
parse tree.
==PAGE:34==
28 of 70
Implementation
The data types are designed to represent ﬁeld domains as described in Deﬁnition
2.1. Recall the ﬁeld domain is deﬁned as ⟨A, ⊑, ⊥, ⊤⟩, where A is the set of
elements which are available in the domain, ⊑is the ordering of elements in A,
and ⊥and ⊤are the bottom and top elements of A respectively.
Datatypes are implemented using an abstract class, where some default be-
havior is deﬁned, while subclasses implement the required code for the given
datatype. The idea is to have one class which all user deﬁned data types ex-
tend from; AbstractDataType.
The set elements A is represented in the
abstract datatype as a generic value to the class. This allows for ﬂexibility with
regards to what kind of information can be used in a query, while still having
some of the type checking deﬁned for Java when deﬁning datatypes. ⊑is im-
plemented through the Comparable Java interface, on the generic type of the
AbstractDataType. The default behavior of the abstract class includes calls
to methods in the datatype, which correspond to a given function of a SMuC
query. The thoughts behind this implementation is further described in Section
3.5.1.2. This method invokes the methods deﬁned in the datatype, with the
same name as the ones given in a SMuC query using the Java reﬂection API
[Inv]. Other default behavior is deﬁned in the abstract datatype, such as in-
stance creation, type information, and checks that functions required by SMuC
queries exist in the given datatype.
While the abstract class provides some default behavior to subclasses, it also
deﬁnes abstract methods, which subclasses have to implement. Two of these
methods are getTop and getBottom. These two methods correspond to ⊤
and ⊥as described in the beginning of this section. These two methods are
called at the initialization of the ﬁxpoint calculations, which is further described
in Section 3.8.
The interpretation functions deﬁned in Deﬁnition 2.3 where the ﬁeld domain
is deﬁned, are also implemented as a part of the datatype. The interpretation
functions have a default implementation where the strings top and bottom
return the top element and bottom element respectively. These methods should
however be overridden if strings and numbers needs to be interpreted. The in-
terpretation functions receive the values which should be interpreted as strings,
and it is the responsibility of the implementation to transform it to the appro-
priate type A. The elements which need interpretation are INTEGER, DOUBLE,
and STRING, of the syntax as deﬁned in Table 3.1.
Data is disconnected from nodes, allowing for nodes to have multiple attributes,
each with their own datatype. An early version of the implementation had the
datatype extend the node itself, but this led to problems with more complex
queries where multiple types were required.
Figure 3.6 shows a class diagram of some of the implemented datatypes. Com-
mon between all the datatypes is that they are subclasses of AbstractDataType.
==PAGE:35==
3.5 Datatypes
29 of 70
Figure 3.6: Class diagram just showing the AbstractDataType class and
its subclasses. This diagram does not show the methods of the
diﬀerent classes, just the inheritance.
Recall that in Example 2.1 a list of diﬀerent ﬁeld domains were deﬁned, in the
following some of these are described as how they can be deﬁned as a datatype.
Example 3.1. This example explains where some of the examples from Exam-
ple 2.1 are deﬁned as DataTypes.
• The sets of totally ordered numbers are implemented in the IntDataType
and DoubleDataType. The generic type of the implementing method is
set to Integer, and Double respectively.
• The domain of boolean values is implemented in BoolDataType.
• The domains containing sets are implemented in SetDataType.
This
is implemented by extending the AbstractDataType using a set as the
generic type. As shown in Figure 3.6, this datatype can easily be extended
to be a set of paths or a set of nodes.
• The combination of values can be implemented using a composition of
values. An example of this is the MSTDataType which extends
AbstractDataType<MSTTuple>.
• Another way to combine values is the Cartesian product as deﬁned in
Deﬁnition 2.2. An example of this is the PairDataType, which takes
a pair of values as the generic type. This can further be extended with
individual datatypes for each element in the pair.
3.5.1
Annotations
Annotations in Java, are interfaces which can be applied to declarations classes,
methods and parameters. Annotations are often used to deﬁne metadata for
classes and methods to be used during compile time or during reﬂection. Anno-
tations diﬀer from normal interfaces in that parameters can be deﬁned in them,
and they are not limited to classes.
For data types, two annotation interfaces are deﬁned.
1. SmucDataType is used to tag classes as datatypes used by SMuC.
2. SmucFunction is used to tag methods in SMuC datatypes as functions
==PAGE:36==
30 of 70
Implementation
which can be used in a query.
3.5.1.1
SmucDataType
SmucDataType is used to tag classes as SMuC datatypes. This class can be
used to easily distinguish between helper classes and datatypes.
3.5.1.2
SmucFunction
One of the more interesting parts of the implementation of SMuC, is the idea
that the user should be able to deﬁne custom functions and aggregate functions.
The SmucFunction annotation is used to tag the methods of a datatype as
SMuC functions, and allows them to be used as a part of a query. The annotation
is conﬁgured such that it is available at run-time, and as such is readable using
the reﬂection API, thus allowing the datatype to diﬀerentiate SMuC functions
from the other methods deﬁned in the datatype.
SmucFunctions receive their parameters through an array of values with a
given type. This allows for the functions to work with both function calls and
aggregate operators.
Methods tagged with the SmucFunction annotation can be called by either
SMuC functions or the aggregate operators. While it is possible to make sure
that these do not intersect, I have chosen to give the user the responsibility
to use them as intended.
This was partly done to keep the implementation
simpler. However, as all SmucFunctions can be used as aggregate functions,
they can take a variable amount of values as input. If a function is designed
to be used by an aggregate operator, then it should be able to take 0 to many
values as input.
Listing 3.2 shows an example of a SMuC function deﬁned
for DoubleDataType. While this method is simple, it shows how the plus
method is annotated with the SmucFunction annotation in Line 1, and what
format the input comes in, in Line 2. The input comes in the form of an array,
with a size depending on the number of inputs. In case of a function call, then
the number of elements in the array corresponds with the parameters of the call
to the function, and for aggregate operators, then the size corresponds to the
number of edges.
@SmucFunction(symbol = SmucFunction.Symbols.PLUS)
2 public Double plus(Double[] values) {
Double result = 0d;
4
for (Double val : values) {
result = result+val;
6
}
return result;
8 }
Listing 3.2: An
example
of
an
aggregate
plus
deﬁned
in
the
DoubleDataType.
The goal of this function is to calcu-
late the sum of all the inputs.
==PAGE:37==
3.5 Datatypes
31 of 70
The annotation has three attributes, and their uses are described in the fol-
lowing: The annotation is inherited, but can be overwritten which is further
described in Section 3.5.2.
returnType
With type checking as deﬁned in Section 2.4.2, and the ability
to create custom datatypes, some kind of type conversion is required. This is
done through the annotation method returnType. When a datatype should
return a value of a diﬀerent data type, this attribute is set to the class of
the diﬀerent datatype. This attribute has to extend the AbstractDataType.
Type checking is further described in Section 3.5.3. Listing 3.3 shows an example
of how the return type can be changed to that of another datatype. Do note
however, that there are currently no static checking that the actual signature of
the method follow the information given in the annotation tags. It is currently
just assumed that the signature is correct, and if it is not, then a run-time error
occurs.
@SmucFunction(returnType = IntDataType.class)
2 public Integer plus(Double[] values)
Listing 3.3: The signature of the plus method from Listing 3.2, after deﬁning
the return type as integer.
symbol
As described in Section 2.4.4 about binary operators, the four oper-
ators (+, −, ∗, /) are added to the syntax. Three choices were considered for
deﬁning the functionality of the symbols: an interface, some speciﬁc method
names or annotation attribute. The two ﬁrst are somewhat similar, as an inter-
face would deﬁne some method names which would be used.
The problem with using an interface is that all methods deﬁned in the interface
must be implemented. This problem can be solved by having an interface for
each of the symbols. Using interfaces adds a contract telling the class that a
given symbol is deﬁned in the method deﬁned by the method. This ensures that
there is only one deﬁnition of each symbol.
Using just method names seems like a poor design choice, as there is no con-
tractual way for the user to know that a given method name has the side eﬀect,
that makes it work with a symbol in a SMuC query.
The last choice is to use the annotation to specify whether a SmucFunction is
called with a symbol in the SMuC query. This way uses the annotation already
speciﬁed to tag SMuC functions in the datatype, however checks need to be
made that there is only one speciﬁcation of each symbol in the given datatype.
This last method has been chosen as it reuses the already existing annotation,
and the mentioned check is relatively simple to make. One of four symbols can
be chosen: + PLUS, - MINUS, * STAR, and / SLASH, Listing 3.2 shows how the
addition of doubles has been deﬁned to use the plus symbol. If a symbol has
==PAGE:38==
32 of 70
Implementation
not been deﬁned, it defaults to not using a symbol at all, and the name of the
method has to be used when calling a function.
takesNodeId
In some queries, where the domain contains a reference to
nodes, the ability to refer to the current node is required. An example of this
is the minimum spanning tree which is described in Section 4.2. The property
takesNodeId adds long containing the identiﬁer of a node to the method
signature. An example of how the new signature would look is shown in Listing
3.4.
@SmucFunction(symbol = SmucFunction.Symbols.PLUS, takesNodeId = true)
2 public Double plus(Long nodeID, Double[] values)
Listing 3.4: The signature of the plus method from Listing 3.2 with the
takesNodeId of the annotation set to true.
3.5.2
Calling a SMuC Function
SMuC functions are invoked through the AbstractDataType class. This is
done because in order to invoke a method of a class, an instance of the class is
needed. By having it in the abstract class, then it is guaranteed that an instance
of the given datatype is available.
A problem when using reﬂection to search for methods which have a speciﬁc
annotation, is inheritance and overloading. When a method with an annotation
is overloaded, it does not transfer the annotation from the overloaded method.
This was not the intended behavior. The goal was to be able to inherit the an-
notation from overloaded methods, while being able to specify a new annotation
if needed. For this behavior to work in the implementation, a walk through the
superclasses of the class hierarchy is performed. This walk is continued until
the AbstractDataType is reached. The idea is then to ﬁnd the ﬁrst instance
of the given method where the annotation is deﬁned.
Once the method is found, and an annotation is speciﬁed, then it is possible to
perform the invocation of the method. As described in Section 3.5.1.2, methods
are always called with at least a single parameter, which is an array of values.
Depending on whether the value of takesNodeId is set to true or false, the
method is invoked with or without the identiﬁer of the current node, as a part
of the parameters. Listing 3.4 shows an example where the node identiﬁer is a
part of the parameters, along with the array of doubles. Listing 3.3 shows an
example where just the array of doubles is used as an parameter.
3.5.3
Type Checking
The type checker is implemented by extending the visitor generated by ANTLR.
It acts in a recursive manner, using divide and conquer to split the parse tree
up in more manageable parts. As described in Section 3.2.1, the visitor gives
==PAGE:39==
3.5 Datatypes
33 of 70
more control over the parse tree traversal than the listener, which helps dividing
and controlling the parse tree. The type checking is done in multiple iterations,
where the ﬁrst iteration discovers all the existing type deﬁnitions in the query,
and the following iterations are inferring the types of the nodes of the parse tree
without any easily discernible type. The ultimate goal of the type checker is to
make sure the rules deﬁned in Section 2.4.2 are followed, and to annotate the
parse tree with types. The goal of annotating the parse tree is similar to that
of the semantics checker, however the type checker adds annotation to most of
the nodes in the parse tree, where the semantics checker only annotated the
variables. For the type checker to complete without errors, the root node of the
parse tree must have a type.
Datatypes of node attributes are assumed to be deﬁned as a part of the attributes
in each given node, prior to performing the type checking. If no type is assigned
to an attribute, then type inference is used to infer the type, this is further
described in Section 3.5.4.
The annotations contain a reference to the input datatype, and the output
datatype.
By default the output type is equals to the input type, because
it is only in two special cases where the output type can diﬀer.
Aggregate
operators and functions can have an output which diﬀers from the input. The
output in these cases are found by reading the SmucFunction annotation for
returnType, which is described in Section 3.5.1.2.
The type checker is given a default datatype, which the type inference falls back
on, in case no other types can be inferred using the inference strategies. This is
discussed further in Section 3.5.4.
A part of the type checking is to make sure that the functions and aggregate
operators which are used in the SMuC query, are deﬁned in the given datatypes.
The deﬁnition of a SmucFunction for the given SMuC function is searched for
in two locations, and the ﬁrst of the two deﬁnitions found is used for the query.
Recall the SMuC operators: f (Ψ1, ..., Ψk), g a Ψ, and g a Ψ, the ﬁrst datatype
checked is the resulting datatype of the underlined part of the SMuC operators.
As deﬁned in the deﬁnition of the type rules, we know that all parameters of
the function are of the same type, the result of performing an edge capability
on a value does not change the type. Therefore we know that the deﬁnition of
the function might be deﬁned in the datatype of the parameters shown with the
underline. The second case is when the operator is a child of another SMuC
rule. An example of this can be found in Figure 3.3 or the ﬁgure in Table 3.4,
where the min function is a child of the ﬁxpoint operator.
In this case the
deﬁnition for the operator is searched for in the type of the parents datatype.
Table 3.4 shows the AST of Figure 3.3, with a slight alteration, with the anno-
tated types after performing a type check. In this case we assume that the type
of the goal attribute in the nodes of the tree are of type Double. The function
==PAGE:40==
34 of 70
Implementation
Tree
Node
Input type
Output type
Fixpoint
Function
Aggregate
Function2
1
+
z
dir
>
a
<
min
goal
min
z
gfp
ﬁxpoint
Integer
z
Integer
Function(min)
Integer
Function(asInt)
Double
Integer
goal
Double
Aggregate
Integer
<>
Integer
a
Integer
Function2(+)
Integer
1
Integer
Table 3.4: The resulting type annotation for the query described in Figure
3.3. Assume that goal is of the type Double, however we want
to perform the calculation using Integers. For this purpose a slight
alteration has been made to the query, including a function which
transforms the double to interger.
asInt transforms the type of its parameters into Integers, or in case of the type
checker, the function takes a double as input and outputs an integer. This is the
result after performing type inference on the parse tree, but shows the resulting
annotations of the parse tree, given the AST. In the table, most of the output
types are blank, this is because in the cases where the input and output are the
same, the output types are omitted for readability.
Figure 3.7 shows an example of ﬁnding the types of a sub-tree of the AST in
Table 3.4. Figure 3.7a is the initial state of the sub-tree. To ﬁnd the type of
the function, it must ﬁrst ﬁnd the type of its parameters. In this case there
is just one parameter, the goal node. In Figure 3.7b the type of the goal is
found be checking its deﬁnition in the given graph. Now that the type of the
parameters are found, it is possible to search for the deﬁnition of the asInt
SmucFunction, in the deﬁnition of the double datatype. Figure 3.7c shows
that the deﬁnition is found, and has the signature Double →Integer, or in other
words, the deﬁnition of asInt takes a double as input, and returns an integer.
Figure 3.7d shows the resulting annotation of the sub-tree, as the annotation is
propagated to the root.
3.5.4
Type Inference
As described in Section 2.4.2.2 about type inference, the idea behind type in-
ference is to determine the type of a variable, or other rule, based on the types
of its peers. The descriptions in this section are a bit closer to the code, as
it is more complex. The type inference is implemented as a part of the type
checking described in Section 3.5.3. The type inference is most involved in the
type checking of SMuC function calls, but there is some interaction with the
==PAGE:41==
3.5 Datatypes
35 of 70
func
asInt
goal
(a) A sub-tree of the AST given in Ta-
ble 3.4.
func
asInt
goal
Double
(b) Get type of goal, found by reading
the graph.
func
asInt
Double →Integer
goal
Double
(c) Find deﬁnition of asInt in Double
datatype, in this case it takes an
input of type Double, and returns
an integer.
func
Double →Integer
asInt
Double →Integer
goal
Double
(d) The function node is annotated
with the type found for asInt.
Figure 3.7: An example of how a function is annotated based on its children.
remaining rules as well. The implementation for the variable and literal rules
are described ﬁrst, and ending with describing the rule for function calls.
An integral part of the implementation of the type inference is the ﬁeld variable
inferAs. This variable references to a class which must extend the
AbstractDataType class. It is initially set to null.
Section 3.5.3 describes brieﬂy the use of a default datatype. This datatype is
used in cases where inferAs is set to null when reaching a literal, or in some
cases when reaching a variable.
The default datatype is a parameter of the
constructor of the type checker, and as such is set by the user for the given
query.
The inference of number literals and string literals are identical.
If
inferAs is set to null, then the node is annotated with the default datatype,
otherwise the inferred datatype is used.
A HashMap is maintained to keep track of datatypes of variables names. This
map initially contains the node attributes of a graph, and their datatypes. When
trying to infer the type of a variable, ﬁrst the map must be checked, and only
if the variable is not deﬁned, and inferAs is not null, is the type of the variable
inferred to be the one deﬁned in the inferAs ﬁeld. The inferred datatype of the
variable is added to the map as well.
The function rule (f (Ψ1, ..., Ψk)) is split into function name f and parameters
Ψ1, ..., Ψk. Parameters are of the same type as deﬁned in Equation 2.1, therefore
we are able to infer types. The initial pass over the pass tree is done with the
variable inferAs set to null.
This annotates all the nodes in the parse tree
with types, which are pre-deﬁned. These are stored in the previously mentioned
==PAGE:42==
36 of 70
Implementation
map. Once this is done, the type inference can be done. The strategy is to
divide and conquer, using the functionality of the visitor generated by ANTLR.
Each parameter of the function is a sub-tree of the parse tree, and as such the
type for each parameter is found independently from each other.
The next step is to try to infer the type of the parameters. Only the parameters
without a type are visited again.
Four outcomes can come of checking the
parameters:
• All the parameters are undeﬁned, then the resulting type of performing
the function on the given parameters is undeﬁned. In this case, if there
is no outer function to infer the types from exists, then the type checker
falls back on a default datatype.
• some parameters have the same type, and the rest are undeﬁned, then the
datatype of the undeﬁned parameters are inferred to be the same type as
the rest. In this case, the ﬁeld variable inferAs is set to the type of those
which have their type deﬁned.
• all parameters have the same type, then there’s nothing to infer.
• or some parameters have mismatching types, then there is a type error,
and an exception is thrown.
Figure 3.8 shows an example of type inference, knowing one parameter of a
function. For this example, assume that the ﬁrst pass over the parse tree has
been performed, and only the type of asInt was found, while the rest remains
untyped.
Since we know the type of one of the elements in the function of
Figure 3.8a, the type inference can be started on the remaining parameters. In
Figure 3.8b, we want to ﬁnd the type of performing the plus function on its two
parameters. The deﬁnition of the plus function is searched for in the inferred
datatype. At this point, however the two parameters are untyped, but since we
know there is a deﬁnition in the integer datatype for the plus symbol, which
takes integers as input, inferAs remains unchanged. In Figure 3.8c and Figure
3.8d the types for the formula variable z, and the literal 1 are inferred to be
integer. It is now possible to deﬁne the return type of the plus function in Figure
3.8e to be an integer. Figure 3.8f shows the fully annotated example.
3.6
Edge Capabilities
The edge capability is implemented similarly to the rest of the SMuC imple-
mentation, using a listener to check semantics, and a visitor to perform the type
checking. If no edge capability is used as a part of the aggregate operators in a
SMuC query, then all steps of edge capabilities are skipped. Not performing any
operations is similar to having an identity edge capability such as id(Ψ) = Ψ,
but is much simpler to implement.
When an edge capability is used in an aggregate operator, all edges in the graph
must have a deﬁnition of the edge capability, otherwise an error occurs when
==PAGE:43==
3.6 Edge Capabilities
37 of 70
func
min
asInt
Integer
+
z
1
inferAs : null
(a) The function node is annotated
with the type found for asInt,
which was found in Figure 3.7. Up
until this point, it has been im-
possible to infer anything, as the
inferAs variable is null.
func
min
asInt
Integer
+
z
1
inferAs : Integer
(b) The resulting type of performing
the plus function on its two param-
eters is unknown, as neither of the
children have types, therefore the
inferAs is unchanged.
func
min
asInt
Integer
+
z
Integer
1
inferAs : Integer
(c) As the type of z is unknown, it is
now possible to infer the formula
variable z as an integer.
func
min
asInt
Integer
+
z
Integer
1
Integer
inferAs : Integer
(d) Similar to z, the literal 1 can now
be inferred as an integer.
func
min
asInt
Integer
+
Integer
z
Integer
1
Integer
inferAs : Integer
(e) The deﬁnition of the plus symbol
is found in the deﬁnition of the in-
teger datatype.
func
Integer
min
Integer
asInt
Integer
+
Integer
z
Integer
1
Integer
inferAs : Integer
(f) In the end, all the nodes in the tree
are annotated with the types.
Figure 3.8: An example of how a function is annotated based on its children
using type inference.
==PAGE:44==
38 of 70
Implementation
querye
:
’(’ querye ’)’
|
func name ’(’querye (’,’ querye)* ’)’
|
querye (’/’|’*’) querye
|
querye (’+’|’-’) querye
|
value
edge capability
:
VARNAME(VARNAME, VARNAME, VARNAME) ’:=’ querye
|
VARNAME(VARNAME)(VARNAME, VARNAME) ’:=’ querye
Table 3.5: The syntax of edge capabilities, using some of the lexer rules from
table 3.1.
trying to call it. Some diﬀerent actions are possible in the case where an edge
capability is not deﬁned:
• Use the identity edge capability,
• Have a global deﬁnition for edge capabilities, which each individual node
then is able to override,
• Stop the execution with an error.
I have chosen to implement the action where the identity capability is used if it
is not deﬁned for an edge. There are some dangers with this approach, the ﬁrst
is the danger of the edge capability not being deﬁned in all edges when they
should be, but no error is given. To deal with this, a warning is printed to the
console during the semantics check. Another thing is as follows: what if a query
requires some edge capability to be used at least once in the query. If a query
requires the use of edge capabilities, I would expect it to be deﬁned in at least
one edge. Therefore an exception is thrown if no edges deﬁne an edge capability
used in a query.
3.6.1
Syntax of Edge Capability
Table 3.5 shows the syntax for deﬁnitions of edge capabilities in edges. The
same notation is used as the one deﬁned for Table 3.1 which deﬁnes the syntax
of SMuC. The parse tree generated from this syntax is stored in the edges the
edge capability is deﬁned for, as described in Section 3.1.2.
3.7
Executing Queries
Syntax
Semantics
check
Type check
Run query
Figure 3.9: The last step is to execute the query.
Now that the parse tree is annotated, the semantics and types are checked, it
is time to perform the query on the given graph. The execution of queries is
==PAGE:45==
3.7 Executing Queries
39 of 70
Figure 3.10: A simple class diagram, just showing the classes of the visitors
used when executing a query, and their relation.
done through another implementation of the parse tree visitor, with a similar
structure to that of the type checker, however with a diﬀerent goal in mind.
Using visitor makes it possible to run the query without having to compile
new code, but I believe the code would be faster using generated code. The
goal of generating code was discarded after problems with the proposed frame-
work to generate code for, was being problematic as discussed in Chapter 5.
At this point the semantics and types are correct, assuming the semantics and
type checkers are correct. Figure 3.10 shows the classes which implements the
execution of queries.
The diagram only shows the names of the classes for
simplicity. The diagram shows that the implementation of the SmucVisitor
and the EdgeFunctionVisitor contains shared code through the inheri-
tance of AbstractSmucVisitor. The shared visitors of the two classes are:
function, literals and psi. The following describes the implementation of the
SmucVisitor, and the edge capabilities are described in Section 3.7.1.
The visitor methods have been implemented such that they perform their oper-
ation on one node at a time. The visitor is a top-down, recursive descent parser.
Each method of the visitor does a part of the actual SMuC computation. A
ﬁeld is used to keep track of the node currently being processed. How the nodes
to be processed are chosen, is described later in this section.
The implementation of literals (numbers and strings) is straightforward. An
instance of the datatype deﬁned in the annotation generated by the type checker
is created. The value of this datatype is then set to the result of interpreting the
contents of the node in the parse tree, using the interpretation function deﬁned
in the datatype. The interpretation function is described further in Section 3.5.
The visitor of the function rule is split into two diﬀerent visitors, the func-
tion itself, and then the inner function which contains a list of its parameters.
The visitor method for the inner function visitor is simple. It creates a list of
datatypes, and adds the result of evaluating each sub-tree comprising the pa-
rameters. The function visitor takes the list of values from the inner part of the
function, and calls the method of the given function as deﬁned in Section 3.5.2.
The variable visitor uses the annotation from the semantics checker, which is
==PAGE:46==
40 of 70
Implementation
described in Section 3.4. Recall that variables can have the three diﬀerent types
(the edge capability is handled by the aggregate visitor), where each variable
type is handled slightly diﬀerently, however they all retrieve a value from the
current node being processed:
• Node attributes, read the attribute of the node with the given name.
• Formula variables, read the formula variable of the previously completed
iteration.
• Formula variables of a previous query.
The aggregate visitor is slightly more involved than the previous three visitors.
Similar to the function, this visitor has an inner visitor. The inner visitor is the
part of the syntax which keeps track of the direction of the aggregate operation.
The result of the inner aggregate visitor is a list of neighbors which the outer
visitor performs the aggregate operator on. The neighbors are retrieved from the
predecessor- or successor list of the current node, for ingoing and the outgoing
aggregate rules respectively.
In the case of the undirected aggregate rule, a
union of the two lists is returned.
Now that the aggregate visitor has a list of neighbors to work with, it can
start evaluating the right hand side of the rule (Ψ). To evaluate the right hand
side of the aggregate, from the point of view of the neighboring node, the ﬁeld
storing the current node is updated to contain the neighbor node. This allows
the subsequent visitor functions to evaluate their visits using the value of the
given node. The right hand side is evaluated by calling the visit of the sub-tree.
The edge capability is evaluated at this point, by calling the edge capability
of the given edge. As mentioned with the variable visitor, the edge capability
variable is handled at this point. The edge capability variable is extracted, and
the name is sent with the argument to be evaluated by the edge. Performing
the edge capability is done using the edge capability visitor, further described
in Section 3.7.1. All results are stored, so they can be evaluated similar to that
described for the function visitor. In the end, the ﬁeld with the current node is
restored to what it was initially.
The implementation of ﬁxpoint calculation is described in Section 3.8.
3.7.1
Edge Capabilities
The implementation of edge capabilities uses many of the methods already de-
ﬁned for SMuC queries.
The biggest diﬀerence is which variables the edge
capability have access to, and how many of the semantic rules are available.
For edge capabilities, variables can be of four diﬀerent types.
The ﬁrst two
are the source and target variables. When one of these are referenced as
the variable, then a new VertexDataType instance is created with the value
of the respective node identiﬁer. The third is the ability to reference the in-
put parameter.
The parameter is passed by reference.
The last is the edge
==PAGE:47==
3.8 Fixed Point Computation
41 of 70
attributes. Similar to that of node attributes, edges can have attributes, which
are referenced through the variable.
3.8
Fixed Point Computation
As described in Section 2.2, the idea behind the ﬁxed point calculation, is to
perform the same operation on a value, until it reaches a point where performing
another operation triggers a stopping condition, which is described in Section
3.8.1. This operation is performed in iterations.
The ﬁxpoint visitor returns a reference to a formula variable, which diﬀers from
most of the other visitors, which return an instance of an AbstractDataType.
This is because the ﬁxpoint visitor operates on values across the entire graph,
while the other visitors operate on the currently selected vertex.
Before performing the ﬁrst iteration, the formula variable of all vertices in the
graph are instantiated with ⊤for greatest ﬁxpoint, or ⊥for least ﬁxpoint.
Iterations are run such that all vertices run the operation on its values before
allowing for the next iteration to begin. The state of each vertex n ∈N where
k = |N | changes after each iteration as shown below, where →represents the
transition from iteration i to i + 1:
n1
→
n′
1
n2
→
n′
2
...
nk
→
n′
k
The stopping condition of the ﬁxpoint computation is given by global stop:
global stop if
^
n∈N
stop(n, n′)
which in words means that the ﬁxpoint computation stops once the stopping
conditions for all vertices in the graph hold, given the previous state n, and the
newly calculated n′.
3.8.1
Stop Conditions
As described above, the ﬁxpoint computation stops once all nodes reach a state
in which they deem the diﬀerence between two iterations is small enough to
stop, or a maximum number of iterations has been reached. There are currently
three diﬀerent kinds of stop conditions for the ﬁxed point computation.
• Equality
• Diﬀerence
• Iterations
==PAGE:48==
42 of 70
Implementation
The default behavior is to use equality as the stopping condition, with no limit
to the amount of iterations.
The equality and diﬀerence stopping conditions are mutually exclusive. Iteration
as stopping condition can be used with either of the two.
3.8.1.1
Equality
When using equality as a stopping condition, the analysis will keep going until
the formula variable does not change in two successive iterations, for all vertices
in the graph. The stopping call is deﬁned as follows:
stop(a,b) : a = b
It is implemented using the equals method inherited from the Object class.
When using a custom class as the elements of data types, equals and hashCode
of the class have to be overloaded for it to work.
3.8.1.2
Diﬀerence
The diﬀerence, or epsilon, stopping condition occurs when the diﬀerence between
two iterations is less than or equals to some value ε.
This is shown in the
following:
stop(a,b) : |difference(a,b)| ≤ε
I thought of using the comparable interface of java, however it does not have
the functionality needed. Comparable is used to deﬁne an order of objects, but
what I need is an interface which measures the diﬀerence between two objects.
Instead of the comparable interface, the interface DataTypeDifference<T>
has been deﬁned. It has a single method, which is called to measure the dif-
ference between two values of the given datatype Double difference(T a,
T b). The interface can be added to a datatype in two ways, the ﬁrst being
through interface implementation, and the second through a ﬁeld.
AbstractDataType searches for the implementation of the interface in the
following order, thus if an instance is found in the ﬁrst step, then the second
instance will not be called.
1. If the ﬁeld containing the DataTypeDifference<T> is not null, then
use this one.
2. Check if the implementing data type class implements the interface.
3. If none of the above are found, then throw a DataTypeDifference-
NotDefinedException.
Doing the implementation this way, allows for the use of a default implemen-
tation of the DataTypeDifference interface, while still allowing the user to
deﬁne a new version without having to overwriting the implemented data type
class.
==PAGE:49==
3.8 Fixed Point Computation
43 of 70
Example 3.2. Some examples of how the diﬀerence method can be deﬁned for
diﬀerent domains:
• First let us consider the domain of real numbers, which could be used to
evaluate PageRank.
difference(a,b) : a −b
a
• or in the case where the domain is sets of values:
difference(A,B) : |A\B ∪B\A|
|A ∪B|
It is also possible not to implement the interface in cases where it does not make
sense to measure the diﬀerence, for example when using boolean values, or data
types where the diﬀerence can not be easily measured. In this case the diﬀerence
stop condition can not be used.
3.8.1.3
Iterations
If a maximum number of iterations has been set as a stop condition, the ﬁxpoint
analysis will run until the iteration cap has been reached. Otherwise it will run
until the diﬀerence or equality has reached their condition, depending on which
of the two has been chosen for the primary stopping condition.
The iteration stop condition is deﬁned as following:
stop(i) : i > max iterations
where i is the current iteration.
3.8.2
Nested Fixpoint
When a query contains a ﬁxpoint operator within another ﬁxpoint operator, it
is called a nested ﬁxpoint. This is a similar concept to that of nested loops
in most modern programming languages.
Below is a simple query with two
ﬁxpoint calculations, where the inner ﬁxpoint is µ y. while the outer is µ x..
A more detailed query with nested ﬁxpoints is given in the case study when
calculating MST, described in Section 4.2.
µ x. µ y.x
This query has no interesting functionality, other than to illustrate nested ﬁx-
points.
There are some problems which needs to be addressed when implementing nested
ﬁxpoints:
• What kind of values do ﬁxpoint queries return?
==PAGE:50==
44 of 70
Implementation
a
b
c
Figure 3.11: A simple graph with three nodes.
• How many times should the inner ﬁxpoint queries be evaluated, for each
iteration of the outer ﬁxpoint?
As described in Section 3.8, ﬁxpoints perform operations on all nodes in a graph,
and stores the resulting value in each node.
This is diﬀerent from all other
elements of the query, which perform an operation on one value or more values,
but returns a single result, based on the current node. So when the result of
a ﬁxpoint is needed, it should be looked up in the current node. So instead
of returning a single result, ﬁxpoints return a reference to the formula variable
stored in the nodes.
In the case of how many times the inner ﬁxpoint of a query should be evaluated,
the answer is relatively simple. The inner ﬁxpoint should only be computed once
for each iteration of the outer ﬁxpoint. During the computation of an iteration
of a ﬁxpoint, the newly evaluated values are not used before the iteration is
complete. It is the values from the previous iteration that are used, and therefore
not matter how far into an iteration the inner ﬁxpoint is calculated, it will
always work with the same values as it worked with at the beginning of the
outer ﬁxpoint’s iteration. If the inner ﬁxpoint was evaluated once for each node
in the graph, then the same computation would be done for each node in the
graph.
Performing the nested query µ x. µ y.x on the graph in Figure 3.11, would do
the following with an implementation where care is not taken.
During each
iteration of µ x., the following calls are made:
1. a calls µ y.x
2. b calls µ y.x
3. c calls µ y.x
Each of these ﬁxpoint operations in turn, iterate over the entire graph. Instead
the inner ﬁxpoint should be evaluated once as shown below:
1. a calls µ y.x
2. b returns the value evaluated in the ﬁrst call.
3. c returns the value evaluated in the ﬁrst call.
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 4
Case study
SMuC provides a versatile query language to evaluate graph problems. While
some problems can be easier to solve, others are more complicated than using
conventional graph algorithms. An example of this is the problem of counting
occurrences of a value in a graph. For example counting how many people there
are of each gender in a social network graph as the Facebook ego graph from
SNAP [LK14], or counting the number of computers of one type connected to
a network.
When talking about networks, security is often an issue that arises, for example
take the Internet. Let us say we work with a network of computers connected to
the Internet through a single node as illustrated in ﬁgure 4.1. In this ﬁgure there
is a private domain on the left, which could be the network used by a business.
The private network is connected with the a public domain on the right, through
a ﬁrewall, or ﬁlter of some sort. The job of the ﬁlter would be to ensure that
no information about the private domain is leaked to the public domain. For
this example, assume that the ﬁeld domain is a set of nodes, then the ﬁlter
which does not allow any information about nodes in the private network to
pass, would look something like
λ(n, n′). λ x.x ∩(n ∪n′)
where x is the information to be transferred.
In the following sections, the
results of such a ﬁlter, and the problems of not having it will be discussed with
each of the queries.
There may be a query which can solve this problem by itself, however I was
unable to come up with one, which also meet the demands of the security con-
cerns. This is an interesting case as it covers some diﬀerent problems one can
occur when using SMuC.
First let us take a look at some of the problems that can occur when counting
with SMuC, and after that, a strategy to solve the problem.
The following
examples are explained using the graph in ﬁgure 4.2. The goal is to count how
many nodes the value of n = 1 is in.
The ﬁrst strategy is to count in the domain of natural numbers, ⟨N ∪{∞}, ≤
==PAGE:52==
46 of 70
Case study
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
h
i
j
k
Filter
Private
Public
Figure 4.1: This is an example of a private domain connected to the public
domain, which is a common occurrence when networks between
computers, such as the Internet. In the ﬁgure, the dashed line
acts as a ﬁlter, or a ﬁrewall protecting information about what
happens in the private domain.
a
n = 1
b
n = 0
c
n = 1
Figure 4.2: This is a simple graph, used to help showing the problems of count-
ing occurrences.
, 0, ∞⟩, using the query:
µ x.n + (+
x)
There is a major problem using this query, in cases where loops or cycles are
present, which is the case in ﬁgure 4.2. The table below shows what would
happen in the given graph. The ﬁrst couple of iterations are ﬁne, a and c count
themselves, and b combines them. But since we have a cycle, now a and c will
count themselves along with the formula variable of b, which already counted a
and c. As we have a cycle, this will continue to inﬁnity.
a
0
1
1
3
3
7
7
...
b
0
0
2
2
6
6
14
...
c
0
1
1
3
3
7
7
...
Well, that did not work, but what if we use a domain with an indicator value,
similar to that deﬁned when calculating the steady state in Section 2.5.1.2?
Let the domain be ⟨N ∪{∞} × {0, 1}, ⊑, (0, 0), (∞, 1)⟩, where ⊑is the ordering
(n1, m1) ⊑(n2, m2) iﬀ(m1 < m2) or (m1 = m2 and n1 ≤n2). Let + be deﬁned
as following:
+((x, i1), (y, i2)) =





(x, 1)
if i1 = i2 = 1
(x + y, 0)
if i1 = 0 ∧i2 = 0 ∧x + y = 0
(x + y, 1)
if i1 = 0 ∨i2 = 0
==PAGE:53==
47 of 70
then the query
µ x.n + (+
x)
results in the iterations shown below.
a
(0, 0)
(1, 1)
(1, 1)
b
(0, 0)
(0, 0)
(2, 1)
c
(0, 0)
(1, 1)
(1, 1)
But wait a minute, that seems to work! Now all that is left to do is to propagate
the value to the rest of the graph, and we are done. However, this only works
for the given example. Consider the same graph as the one deﬁned in ﬁgure 4.2,
but this time n = 1 in all nodes. The table below shows that no node count
anything but themselves.
a
(0, 0)
(1, 1)
(1, 1)
b
(0, 0)
(1, 1)
(1, 1)
c
(0, 0)
(1, 1)
(1, 1)
This time, let us consider the domain of sets of nodes, ⟨2N , ⊆, ∅, N ⟩. Let the
operator = be deﬁned as follows:
= (a, a′)(n) =
(
{n}
if a = a′
∅
otherwise
where n is the node in which the function is evaluated. ∪is the union of two
sets. The query is deﬁned as
µ x.(n = 1) ∪(∪
x)
and the resulting computation is shown in the ﬁgure below:
a
∅
{a}
{a}
{a, c}
b
∅
∅
{a, c}
{a, c}
c
∅
{c}
{c}
{a, c}
All that remains to be done is to count the number of elements in the formula
variable, and the counting is complete. This last approach is all ﬁne and good,
for small graphs where security is as deﬁned earlier is not required. If the ﬁlter
deﬁned earlier was applied to the links between two nodes, and there is no way
around, then the count would be incomplete. The other problem is the problem
of the size of the graph, and the amount of information used to evaluate it. In
the worst case, all nodes would end up with a reference to all other nodes. In
this case the memory required to compute the query would be N ×N . This was
especially a problem in early development, where the nodes stored all iterations
of a ﬁxpoint computation.
As mentioned earlier, we got all these problems in graphs where loops, or cycles
are present, but what if we had a graph where no cycles are present, or more
speciﬁcally, what if the graph was a tree instead. Figure 4.3 shows a simple tree.
This tree contains a subset of nodes and edges of the graph in ﬁgure 4.2.
==PAGE:54==
48 of 70
Case study
a
n = 1
b
n = 0
c
n = 1
Figure 4.3: This is a simple tree, used to help explain how to solve the prob-
lems of the graph in ﬁgure 4.2.
Now we can use the ﬁrst strategy where the domain of natural numbers was
used, ⟨N ∪{∞}, ≤, 0, ∞⟩, using the query:
µ x.n + (+
x)
The table below shows the iterations of performing the query on the tree in
ﬁgure 4.3.
a
0
1
1
2
b
0
0
1
1
c
0
1
1
1
Now all that remains to be done, is to share the highest values in the graph
with all nodes.
With all this in mind, we can now develop a strategy to solve the problem of
counting occurrences of a value in a graph.
1. Compute a spanning tree of the graph.
2. Every node computes the number of occurrences of the values of its de-
scendants in the spanning tree.
3. The root broadcasts the resulting number of occurrences to all other nodes.
The following will detail two diﬀerent queries to compute a spanning tree with
SMuC. Section 4.2 discusses how to compute a minimum spanning tree (MST),
and Section 4.1 discusses how to compute a shortest path tree. Common for
both methods, is that they will only calculate the spanning tree for the nodes
which are connected to the root node through some path.
Based on a spanning tree, it is simple to count occurrences as we saw earlier, and
propagate the value to all nodes connected to the root as described in Section
4.3 and 4.4.
4.1
Shortest Path Tree
Now that we have had a look at the MST problem, another solution is to create
a shortest path tree (SPT). A shortest path tree, is computed by selecting a
root in a graph, and calculating the shortest path from each node in the graph
to the root. This results in a spanning tree of the original graph. While this
does not create a MST, it still serves the purpose of creating a tree of the graph.
==PAGE:55==
4.1 Shortest Path Tree
49 of 70
4.1.1
Domain
The domain A of the shortest path tree problem, is the power set of nodes.
A = ⟨P(N ∗), ⊑, {}, ⊤⟩
where ⊑is deﬁned as a ⊑a′ iﬀ|a| ≤|a′|, and ⊤= {p | p, p′ ∈A, p′ ⊑p}. Top
is the set containing all the longest possible paths, in other words, ⊤is always
greater or equal to any other set of paths.
The ﬁrst function is used to append a node to a path.
addNode(a, a′) =





⊤
if a = ⊤or a′ = ⊤
a′
if length(a) = 0
{ﬁrst(a′) ∪p | ∀p ∈a}
otherwise
Interpret the string this as a set containing a single path, which is the identiﬁer
of the vertex it is called in.
IF(”this”)(n) = {n}
The function isNodeOne is used to check if a node is marked as the goal. In this
case I assume that the goal node, is the node with identiﬁer 1. The goal node
is the node which results in ⊥.
isNodeOne(a)(n) =
(
⊥
if id(n) = 1
⊤
otherwise
The idea is that we only want the shortest path found, for that the following is
deﬁned:
ba = {∀p ∈a | ∀p′ ∈a, p ⊑p′}
such that when min is used, it will ﬁnd the smallest set of paths.
min(∅) = ⊤
min(a) = ba
min(⊤) = ⊤
min(⊤,⃗a) = min(⃗a)
min(⃗a) = ba1 ∪... ∪c
ak
V
The functions are now combined to create the query:
ν short.min(isNodeOne(1), min
addNode(short, ”this”))
==PAGE:56==
50 of 70
Case study
a
{}
b
{{c, a}, {c, d}}
c
{{a}, {d}}
d
{{c}}
e
{{c, d}}
Figure 4.4: The shortest path tree evaluated for a graph with the ﬁlter repre-
sented as the dashed line. Node b and c have two goal nodes.
This query is much faster than the MST query, however there are some com-
plications with regards to the security discussed at the beginning of the case
study. The ﬁlter ensures that the full path to the goal node is not shown to the
outside world. The problem is that the ﬁlter eﬀectively makes the node on the
far end of the edge it is attached to a goal node. This is ﬁne for the nodes on
the opposite side of the ﬁlter compared to the goal, however on the inside, there
will now be two goals. The ﬁrst goal node being the initial goal node, but the
second is the far side of the ﬁlter. Therefore the nodes which are on the same
side as the goal, may contain a path to both the goal and the far side of the
ﬁlter. This is illustrated in Figure 4.4.
4.1.2
Example Using LFP and GFP
I would like to show how the the diﬀerent ﬁxpoint calculations, LFP and GFP,
can result in diﬀerent results. I will do this using the query for shortest path
trees, deﬁned in the previous section. First let us take a look at a simple graph,
in the case where a goal node is available, and is not available. Table 4.1 shows
the iterations of the shortest path tree query using the greatest ﬁxpoint. Notice
how in Table 4.1a the path grows out from node a, and is added upon in each
iteration. Table 4.1b shows that if there is no goal node, then no computation
needs to be done.
Now let us consider the same graph, but where the query uses least ﬁxpoint.
This is shown in Table 4.2. Instead of growing a path from the goal node, the
query using LFP, tries to guess a path to the goal in each iteration. This works
ﬁne in Table 4.2a, however in Table 4.2b where there is no goal, a wrong answer
is given.
Now let us examine what happens if a graph has cycles. This is done in tables
4.3 and 4.4, which show the LFP and GFP versions respectively.
From the
previous tables we saw that the LFP did not come to an expected answer given
a simple graph, however the answer could be interpreted as there being no path.
In the case of cycles, as in table 4.3, a wrong answer is found. Similar to that of
the previous graph, the LFP will try to create a path based on all its neighbors.
==PAGE:57==
4.1 Shortest Path Tree
51 of 70
Graph
0
1
2
3
a
b
c
⊤
{}
{}
{}
⊤
⊤
{a}
{a}
⊤
⊤
⊤
{ba}
(a) Node a is the goal node.
Graph
0
1
a
b
c
⊤
⊤
⊤
⊤
⊤
⊤
(b) There is no goal node.
Table 4.1: The shortest path tree query run on a simple graph using GFP,
where in 4.1a there is a goal node, but not in 4.1b.
Graph
0
1
2
3
a
b
c
⊥
⊥
⊥
⊥
⊥
{a, c}
{a}
{a}
⊥
{b}
{ba, bc}
{ba}
(a) Node a is the goal node.
Graph
0
1
2
a
b
c
⊥
{b}
{ba, bc}
⊥
{a, c}
{ac, cb}
⊥
{b}
{ba, bc}
(b) There is no goal node.
Table 4.2: The shortest path tree query run on a simple graph using LFP,
where in 4.2a there is a goal node, but not in 4.2b. Notice that when
there is no goal node, compared to the GFP, more computations
are done.
==PAGE:58==
52 of 70
Case study
Graph
0
1
2
3
4
a
b
c
d
a
⊥
⊥
⊥
⊥
⊥
b
⊥
{a, c, d}
{a}
{a}
{a}
c
⊥
{b, d}
{ba, bc, bd, db, dc}
{ba, bd, cd}
{ba, dc}
d
⊥
{b, c}
{ba, bc, bd, cb, cd}
{ba, bc, dc}
{ba, cd}
Table 4.3: The shortest path tree query run on a graph where a cycle is present
using LFP. Notice how the query in this case ﬁnds paths that do
not lead to the goal node. This is caused by the cycle bcd.
Graph
0
1
2
3
a
b
c
d
a
⊤
⊥
⊥
⊥
b
⊤
⊤
{a}
{a}
c
⊤
⊤
⊤
{ba}
d
⊤
⊤
⊤
{ba}
Table 4.4: The shortest path tree query run on a graph where a cycle is present
using GFP. Despite having the same cycle as table 4.3, the correct
result is found.
Already in iteration 2, the amount of paths is great for such a small graph. The
problem comes in iteration 3 and 4, where the wrong paths are not removed
through the ba function. Table 4.4 shows how GFP performs the query without
any problems.
4.1.3
Secure Shortest Path Tree
This next query is inspired by the shortest path tree query deﬁned in the pre-
vious section. The idea behind the secure shortest path tree (S-SPT) is to only
refer to neighboring nodes, along with the total cost to the goal. The secure
part of the query revolves around how much knowledge is available to each node.
Each node only know the identity of its neighbors.
A = ⟨(N × N ∪{∞}), ⊑, (N0, 0), (Nk, ∞)⟩where ⊑is the ordering (n1, m1) ⊑
(n2, m2) iﬀ(m1 < m2) or (m1 = m2 ∧n1 ≤lex n2), where ≤lex is the lexicograph-
ically ordering of nodes. A is totally ordered in this domain. N0 represents the
lexicographically smallest node in the graph. Let k ∈N, then k is the number
of nodes in the graph, then Nk represents the lexicographically largest node in
the graph.
This query only requires two functions, both of which focus on ﬁnding the
==PAGE:59==
4.2 Minimum Spanning Tree
53 of 70
minimum of some value. The idea behind the ﬁrst, is to choose the smallest of
the two values m1 and m2, but always choose the node n1.
minValue((n1, m1), (n2, m2)) =
(
(n1, m1)
if m1 ≤m2
(n1, m2)
otherwise
The next function is just to choose the smallest of the two values, compared
using ⊑.
min((n1, m1), (n2, m2)) =
(
(n1, m1)
if (n1, m1) ⊑(n2, m2)
(n2, m2)
otherwise
The interpretation of the string this is interpreted as follows:
IF(”this”)(n) = (n, ∞)
For this, we assume that the weight of all edges are 1, then the edge capability
is deﬁned as follows:
a : λ(n, n′). λ(n, m).(n, m + 1)
ν result.min(goal, min a minValue(”this”, result))
This query is both faster than the MST query, and works with the security ﬁlter
deﬁned in the beginning of the chapter without problems.
4.2
Minimum Spanning Tree
This section describes a query to ﬁnd the minimum spanning tree (MST) of a
graph. The query is inspired by the Distributed Algorithm for Spanning Trees
deﬁned in [GHS83]. Similar to that of the paper, the idea is to create fragments.
The SMuC perform its evaluation diﬀerently than that described in the paper,
as all nodes in the graph have to be able to perform all actions simultaneously
(All in the same iteration). Each node will search for their best edge, which does
not point to an element of the same fragment which it belongs to. This best
edge is stored as a potential edge. The fragments are identiﬁed by the smallest
node lexicographically. The fragments then work to ﬁnd the smallest potential
edges. Each fragment can only have one smallest edge, which is chosen based on
an ordering. Once the smallest edge is shared in the fragments, we ﬁnally have
to consider how fragments connect. For two fragments to connect, they have
to agree on the best edge. If two fragments agree, then the two fragments are
connected using the shared potential edge, and the identiﬁer of the combined
fragment is chosen, and propagated.
==PAGE:60==
54 of 70
Case study
a
k = (1, 1)
b
k = (1, 2)
c
k = (1, 3)
d
k = (5, 4)
Figure 4.5: A graph with four nodes, each containing an attribute of the type
Z × Z.
4.2.1
Domain
The domain consist of an integer value z, a root node n, a potential edge e, and
a set of nodes s.
A = ⟨Z × N × E × N ∗, ⊑, (0, N0, E0, ∅), (0, Nk, Ek ′, N )⟩
where ⊑is deﬁned by (z, n, e, s) ⊑(z ′, n′, e′, s′) if z ≤z ′, if z = z ′ then
n ≤lex n′, if z = z ′ ∧n =lex n′ then e ≤lex e′. Where ≤lex of nodes is the
lexicographical ordering of nodes, and ≤lex of edges is deﬁned as (n1, n2) ≤lex
(n′
1, n′
2) iﬀn1 ≤lex n′
1 or n1 =lex n′
1 ∧n2 ≤lex n′
2. N0 and E0 represent the
lexicographically smallest node and edge respectively. Let k, k ′ ∈N, then k is
the number of nodes in the graph, and k ′ is the number edges in the graph. Nk
and Ek ′ then represents the lexicographically largest node and edge respectively.
The following deﬁnes and describes the functions used in the MST query. First
there is the function asSet, which instead of taking the usual aggregate func-
tionality of A∗→A, returns a set containing the values used in the aggregate
operation. One of the problems with evaluating the MST using an identiﬁer, is
how much knowledge the aggregate operation has access to. For example, let us
say that we have the graph in ﬁgure 4.5, from the point of view of node a, we
want to calculate the sum of values where the ﬁrst value of the Cartesian prod-
uct is equals to the one of node a, using an aggregate operator. The operation
would look something like sum
k, however since the operator has no knowl-
edge of the node it is called from, it is not possible. In the ﬁgure, the aggregate
operator evaluated from the point of view of a should sum to 2 + 3 = 5.
Instead the idea is to take all the nodes from the aggregate operator, and add
them to a set. This set is then used in the functions, and the minimum is found
manually.
asSet(A∗) = A∗
The functions takes a value along with the set of values, and results in a value
of type A. ﬁndSmallest : A × A∗→A
==PAGE:61==
4.2 Minimum Spanning Tree
55 of 70
The function ﬁndSmallest is used to ﬁnd the smallest edge a node is connected
to, but which is not already a part of the spanning tree. This function is inspired
by how minimum weight edges are found in the paper. In the following, I use
subscript such as bn, to refer to diﬀerent elements of the domain. In this case
it refers to the node identiﬁer of b.
ﬁndSmallest(a, B) =





(bz, an, (nb, na), as)
if b ⊑b′, ∃b ∈B′, ∀b′ ∈B′
where B′ = {b | b ∈B ∧bn ̸= an}
a
otherwise
Now that we have identiﬁed the smallest edge which connects each edge to
another fragment, we want to share the discovery with the nodes in the fragment.
For this the shareSmallest function is deﬁned. The idea is to identify the the
edge with the smallest value in the fragment, and propagate the value. The
function takes the current node, the value of the current node and a set of
values: shareSmallest : N × A × A∗→A
shareSmallest(n, a, B) =
(
a
if an = ∅
(bz, an, be, as)
∃b ∈B, ∀b′ ∈B ∧n ∈bs ∧bz ≤b′
z
The last step is to combine all the fragments which agree on a smallest edge.
After ﬁnding the ﬁxpoint for shareSmallest, we know that the edge selected in
a fragment, is the smallest edge connecting it to another fragment. For two
fragments to connect, the fragments must have diﬀerent fragment identiﬁers,
otherwise a cycle would be created in the resulting graph. The potential edge
between two fragments must be the same. And the target node or the source
node have to be a part of the potential edge, for the edge to be created. To
create the edge, the other end of the edge is added to the neighbor list of the
node.
connect(n, a, B) =





(az, an, ae, as ∪nb)
n ∈ae ∧b ⊑b′, ∃b ∈B′, ∀b′ ∈B′
where B′ = {b | b ∈B ∧an ̸= bn ∧ae = be}
a
otherwise
Interpret the literal 1 as follows:
IF(1)(n) = (⊥z, n, ⊥e, ⊥s)
Now that the functions are deﬁned, we can combine them to create the query.
The query consists of three nested ﬁxpoint calculations. This computation can
be done using just one ﬁxpoint operator, however the query would become much
larger. In the query the result of the ﬁxpoint calculations are used in the same
scope as they are deﬁned, using the scope rules as deﬁned in Section 2.4.1.
==PAGE:62==
56 of 70
Case study
µ z.connect(
ν y.shareSmallest(
µ x.ﬁndSmallest(z + 1, asSet a z + 1),
asSet
x),
asSet
y)
With regards to the security constraints deﬁned in the beginning of the chapter,
this query would not work. The ﬁlter would block the ability to share informa-
tion about fragments, such as the fragment identiﬁer and potential edges.
4.2.2
Using The Adjacency List
Once the spanning tree has been generated, there are two ways to use the results;
1. Using SMuC, where a datatype which only reads elements which are re-
ceived from nodes in the adjacency list,
2. or modify the graph itself based on the result.
While it is possible to use SMuC for this task, I chose to go with the second
choice in which the graph is modiﬁed. This allows me to use the datatypes
that have already been deﬁned, and reduces the amount of edges needed to be
computed. It also allows me to showcase how a combination of SMuC queries
and java code can be used to complete a task.
JAVA code:
SMuC.performQuery(MSTDataType.class, graph,
2
"lfp z. connect(" +
"lfp y. shareSmallestPotentialInGroup(" +
4
"lfp x. findSmallest(z+1, asSet[]z+1)," +
"asSet[]x)," +
6
"asSet[]y)");
8 SMuC.performQuery(MSTDataType.class,graph,
"lfp adjList. asNodeSet(z)");
10
HashMap<Long, MyVertex> vertexes = new HashMap<>();
12 Multimap<Long, Long> edgeMap = TreeMultimap.create();
for (MyVertex v : graph.vertexSet()) {
14
//Populate a hashmap with the vertexes,
//so it’s easier to find them given an ID
16
vertexes.put(v.getId(), v);
HashSet adjList = (HashSet) v.getFormulaVariable("adjList").getValue();
18
for (Object adj : adjList) {
20
Long value = (Long)adj;
edgeMap.put(v.getId(), value);
22
}
==PAGE:63==
4.3 Counting Occurrences
57 of 70
}
24
//Remove all the edges
26 HashSet<MyEdge> edges = new HashSet<>(graph.edgeSet());
for (MyEdge e : edges) {
28
graph.removeEdge(e);
}
30
//Add the edges from adjList
32 for (Map.Entry<Long,Long> e : edgeMap.entries()) {
graph.addEdge(vertexes.get(e.getKey()), vertexes.get(e.getValue()));
34 }
Listing 4.1: This snippet shows a combination of using SMuC queries and java
code to create a minimum spanning tree.
Listing 4.1 shows a snippet using a combination of SMuC queries and java code
to create an MST. The ﬁrst part of the code is running the SMuC query. The
query is run on a given graph graph. The result of the query is stored in all
vertexes in the graph, in the formula variable z.
Line 8 is a quick query which extracts the adjacency list from the MSTDataType
and stores it in the formula variable adjList as a set.
The following loop is use to populate a map with the vertexes of the graph,
making it easier to access them given their identiﬁer, this is used later when
adding new edges. In line 17 the adjList is extracted from the graph, and the
inner loop then stores the edges in a multimap.
The loop at line 27 removes all the edges in the graph, and the loop at line 32
then adds the edges stored in the multimap.
This snippet results in an undirected MST of the original graph, containing the
original nodes, but with redeﬁned edges.
On a subset of the facebook social circles graph from [CJK+13], the number of
edges is reduced from 5038 edges to 661 edges. This makes it faster to perform
any of the next queries on the graph.
4.3
Counting Occurrences
To count occurrences, the domain of positive natural numbers is used, ⟨N ∪
{∞}, ≤, 0, ∞⟩.
For the counting query to work, it is assumed that the graph is a tree. The idea
behind the query is to sum the value of a node’s children, and add the value of
the node itself. This is done recursively. This way the root will end up with the
sum of all its children and their sub-children
The attributes of the graph is stored as Boolean values, the function asInt is
==PAGE:64==
58 of 70
Case study
Graph
0
1
2
3
a:1
c:0
g:0
f:1
b:1
e:1
d:1
a
0
1
2
5
b
0
1
3
3
c
0
0
1
1
d
0
1
1
1
e
0
1
1
1
f
0
1
0
0
g
0
0
0
0
Table 4.5: Counting query performed on a simple tree. In this example each
node is given a name and a value, and the goal is to sum up value,
and store it in the root node.
used to translate Boolean values into integers as deﬁned below.
asInt(b) =
(
1
if b = true
0
otherwise
The plus symbol is used as addition of integers.
The query only looks at outgoing edges, taking the sum plus the value of the
current node.
µ result.value + (+
result)
Initially each node has the value of 0. For each iteration, the nodes add their
own value to the sum of the values of their children in the previous iteration.
Therefore in the ﬁrst iteration, all leaf nodes know the sum of all their children
and themselves. As there are no children of leaf nodes, then the result is just
their value. In the next iteration, the parents of the leaf nodes will sum the
value of their children, and add their own value to it. This goes on, moving up
the tree in a wave from the leaves, until the root node is reached, resulting in
the total sum of the result.
Table 4.5 shows an example of a simple tree with values. Initially the ﬁxpoint
value starts at 0, as least ﬁxpoint is used.
In iteration 1, the value in each
node represents the values in the graph. In iteration 2 the sum of the value of
the children in the previous iteration is added to the value of the node. This
example shows how the values of the nodes are combined through each iteration.
Already in the second iteration, we see that node b and c has calculated the
number of occurrences in their subtrees.
4.4
Sharing Values
Similar to counting occurrences described in Section 4.3, the domain of sharing
a value is the domain of natural numbers. ⟨N, ≤, 0, ∞⟩. The max function, takes
==PAGE:65==
4.5 Results
59 of 70
Graph
0
1
2
3
a:5
c:1
g:0
f:1
b:3
e:1
d:1
a
0
5
5
5
b
0
3
5
5
c
0
1
5
5
d
0
1
3
5
e
0
1
3
5
f
0
1
1
5
g
0
0
1
5
Table 4.6: Propagate max value
two integers, and returns the one with the highest value, as deﬁned below:
max(a, a′) =
(
a
if a ≥a′
a’
otherwise
The query is similar to the counting query described in Section 4.3, but instead
of using the addition of values, the maximum, and undirected aggregation is
used:
µ result.max(value, max
result)
The value is the value in the nodes of the graph that the query ﬁnds the
maximum of.
This query is not limited to trees, unlike the counting query.
Table 4.6 shows an example graph with a maximum value. This graph uses the
results from table 4.5. Similar to the counting query, this query starts with all
values set to 0, and in the ﬁrst iteration the result is set to the value in the node.
Notice how in iteration 2, node b and c have taken the 5 from node a as their
results, while node d and e have taken the value of node b. This shows how the
maximum value is propagated through the graph, from the highest value.
4.5
Results
Three approaches to making a spanning tree have been deﬁned. This section
will have a look at how long the three queries take to compute the same tree.
First let us take a sub-graph of the Facebook ego graph. Table 4.7 shows the
query run on the same graph ﬁve times, with the average at the end. The table
shows that the MST takes far longer than the other two, but is still comparable.
The fastest of the three queries is the SPT query. All the query times shown in
this Section are computed on my laptop.
The complexity of the graph has a big impact on the runtime of the diﬀerent
queries, so I generated a number of random graphs, and compared how long it
takes to run the queries on them. First let us take a look at Figure 4.6. This
graph shows the results of running the MST and S-SPT queries on 10 diﬀerent
==PAGE:66==
60 of 70
Case study
Query
Avg.
MST
43.5s
42.8s
39.6s
41.3s
35.6s
40.56s
SPT
2.3s
1.9s
2.1s
1.9s
1.8s
2.0s
S-SPT
16.7s
17.3s
16.8s
15.4s
12.8s
15.8s
Table 4.7: Runtime comparison of the three diﬀerent queries, on the same
graph.
The graph is a sub-graph of the Facebook ego graph
[CJK+13], with 347 nodes and 2519 edges. There is a clear dif-
ference in how long each of the queries take to complete.
0
200
400
600
800
1,000
0
20
40
60
80
100
Size of graph in number of nodes
Time in seconds
Query comparison on random graphs
MST
S-SPT
Figure 4.6: 10 graphs were generated, each with a 100 additional nodes com-
pared to the previous. There is an average of 2 edges per node.
graphs, each with an average of two edges per node.
SPT is not shown in
the graph, as it is faster than S-SPT. This graph shows that the MST query is
aﬀected much faster than the other two queries, even when the graph is relatively
simple, with regards to edges per node.
Figure 4.7 shows how long it takes to run the three queries on the Facebook
ego graph. The graph is distributed in several pieces, and each step from left to
right in the graph appends a piece of the entire graph, such that once reaching
the far right, the entire graph is present. The ﬁrst step after 0 represents the
graph used for Table 4.7. This graph shows that the MST can take a very long
time once the graph gets too complicated.
In the case of counting occurrences, any kind of tree can be used, in which case
==PAGE:67==
4.5 Results
61 of 70
0
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
0
50
100
150
200
250
Size of graph in number of nodes
Time in seconds
Query comparison on Facebook ego graphs
MST
SPT
S-SPT
Figure 4.7: The Facebook graph has an average of 18.6 edges per node, how-
ever in the ﬁrst step it is around 7. On the step with around 1500
nodes, it took the MST hours compared to the other two which
can be measured in seconds.
==PAGE:68==
62 of 70
Case study
the shortest path tree query should be used due to how much faster it is. If
security such as the ﬁlter described is required, then the secure shortest path
should be used, even though it is slower than the SPT query. MST should only
be used if the graph is not too complicated, or time is no issue.
The ﬁnal result of counting occurrences of the two genders is as shown in Table
4.8, on the entire Facebook ego graph.
The graph contains 4039 nodes and
88234 edges. The diﬀerence between the total of the two genders and the size
of the graph, comes from the inability to count nodes which are connected to
the root in some way. Do note that the gender is anonymized:
gender1
1509
gender2
2404
total
3913
Table 4.8: Results of counting genders on the Facebook ego graph.
==PAGE:69==
Chapter 5
Discussion
One of the early goals of the thesis, was to create a version of SMuC which
performs the execution of the queries in parallel. Some diﬀerent frameworks
were explored, and I came to the conclusion that Google’s Pregel system would
be ideal for this purpose [MAB+09]. Pregel implements the Bulk Synchronous
Parallel (BSP) model. BSP is a model used to design parallel systems. One
of the main reasons why BSP seems to ﬁt SMuC very well, is the concept
of computing in global supersteps, or in other words, all processes performs
their computation as a part of the superstep, and then waits at a barrier for
synchronization. Pregel implements BSP with a focus on graphs, such that in
each superstep, all nodes in the graph performs a user deﬁned function. The
superstep completes once all nodes in the graph have completed their step.
Now I will draw some parallels between SMuC and Pregel, which explains why
Pregel seems an obvious choice for a parallel implementation of SMuC. Both
Pregel and SMuC focus on the computation from the point of view of a node in
a graph. Nodes in Pregel only send messages through outgoing edges to nodes
which they are connected to, but it is possible to change the topology of the
graph to include ingoing edges. The idea of supersteps would work well with the
implementation of ﬁxpoints, and their execution in iterations. Each superstep
could correspond to an iteration in the ﬁxpoint.
Pregel itself is not available for public use, so for the implementation Apache
Giraph was chosen. Giraph is an open source framework using BSP, based on
Pregel. However during the setup for a development environment for Giraph,
there was a lot of problems. Long story short, much time was wasted, trying
to get Giraph working properly. While I did not manage to get this part of the
implementation working, many design decisions were made with code generation
for Giraph in mind. One of the main decisions was that nodes should be able
to compute their own values, based on what they have access to, either through
their own attributes, or what they have gotten through a message. Another
was that attributes should have access to an instance of the datatype they are
deﬁned as, which in turn deﬁnes the available functions of the datatype.
When the idea of generating code for a framework was discarded, another focus
had to be found for the thesis. I chose to create the case study described in
==PAGE:70==
64 of 70
Discussion
Chapter 4.
The case study shows some interesting results, especially when
comparing the three diﬀerent spanning tree queries with each other.
SMuC is a generic tool to solve problems, and there are more specialized tools for
some which do it faster and better. A clear example of this is the computation
of steady states as described in Section 2.5.1.2.
The SMuC implementation
performs an approximation, by emulating what happens after an amount of
iterations. A faster and more eﬃcient implementation of a steady state tool,
would perform matrix multiplications to come to the same result.
==PAGE:71==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
I set out to understand the details of SMuC, and implement a tool to perform
the queries on graphs. While the initial ﬁnal goal of creating a parallel version
was not reached, a sequential implementation was made. The goal of the user
being able to create data structures and operators working on them, has been
implemented as the concept of datatypes, where the implementation has to
extend the AbstractDataType class.
The implementation is done using parse tree generated by ANTLR4, based on
the grammar. While the parse tree works well, there is some overhead which
can be reduced.
The case study shows how the three queries for ﬁnding spanning trees diﬀer in
how long they take to evaluate, and how they work with security concerns. With
the shortest path tree being the fastest, but having some security concerns. The
security concerns can be dealt with using the secure shortest path query, however
the trade-oﬀis the computation time. The query for minimum spanning tree
is by far the slowest, and if the query is to be considered for use, some work
should be put into making it perform better.
==PAGE:72==
66 of 70
Conclusion
==PAGE:73==
Appendix A
Class diagram
==PAGE:74==
68 of 70
Class diagram
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
[ant]
antlr4/listeners.md
at
master
·
antlr/antlr4
·
github.
https://github.com/antlr/antlr4/blob/master/doc/
listeners.md. (Accessed on 06/07/2016).
[BK08a]
C. Baier and J.P. Katoen. Principles of Model Checking. MIT Press,
2008.
[BK08b]
Christel Baier and Joost-Pieter Katoen. Principles of Model Check-
ing. The MIT Press, 2008.
[BP98]
S. Brin and L. Page. The anatomy of a large-scale hypertextual web
search engine. In Seventh International World-Wide Web Conference
(WWW 1998), 1998.
[CJK+13]
Avery
Ching,
Nitay
Joﬀe,
Maja
Kabiljo,
Greg
Malewicz,
Ravi
Murthy,
and
Alessandro
Presta.
Scal-
ing
Apache
Giraph
to
a
trillion
edges.
https://
www.facebook.com/notes/facebook-engineering/
scaling-apache-giraph-to-a-trillion-edges/
10151617006153920/, 2013. [Online; accessed 2016-02-23].
[Com16]
Computation tree logic. Computation tree logic — Wikipedia, the
free encyclopedia, 2016. [Online; accessed 2016-04-05].
[FCL09]
Charles N. Fischer, Ronald K. Cytron, and Richard J. LeBlanc.
Crafting A Compiler. Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, USA,
1st edition, 2009.
[GHS83]
Robert G. Gallager, Pierre A. Humblet, and Philip M. Spira. A
distributed algorithm for minimum-weight spanning trees.
ACM
Transactions on Programming Languages and systems (TOPLAS),
5(1):66–77, 1983.
[Hüt10]
H. Hüttel.
Transitions and Trees: An Introduction to Structural
Operational Semantics. Cambridge University Press, 2010.
==PAGE:76==
70 of 70
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Inv]
Invoking methods (the javaTM tutorials > the reﬂection api >
members).
https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/
reflect/member/methodInvocation.html.
(Accessed on
06/10/2016).
[jgr]
Jgrapht. http://jgrapht.org/. (Accessed on 06/10/2016).
[LK14]
Jure Leskovec and Andrej Krevl. SNAP Datasets: Stanford large
network dataset collection. http://snap.stanford.edu/data,
June 2014.
[LLM15]
Alberto Lluch Lafuente, Michele Loreti, and Ugo Montanari. Co-
ordination Models and Languages: 17th IFIP WG 6.1 International
Conference, COORDINATION 2015, Held as Part of the 10th In-
ternational Federated Conference on Distributed Computing Tech-
niques, DisCoTec 2015, Grenoble, France, June 2-4, 2015, Proceed-
ings, chapter A Fixpoint-Based Calculus for Graph-Shaped Compu-
tational Fields, pages 101–116. Springer International Publishing,
Cham, 2015.
[MAB+09] Grzegorz Malewicz, Matthew H. Austern, Aart J.C. Bik, James C.
Dehnert, Ilan Horn, Naty Leiser, and Grzegorz Czajkowski. Pregel:
A system for large-scale graph processing. In Proceedings of the 28th
ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing, PODC
’09, pages 6–6, New York, NY, USA, 2009. ACM.
[NNH99]
Flemming Nielson, Hanne R. Nielson, and Chris Hankin. Principles
of Program Analysis. Springer-Verlag New York, Inc., Secaucus, NJ,
USA, 1999.
[Sto]
Christopher Stover. Monotonic function. From MathWorld–A Wol-
fram Web Resource, created by Eric W. Weisstein.
[Wei]
Eric W. Weisstein. Totally ordered set. From MathWorld—A Wol-
fram Web Resource. Last visited on 29/05/2016.
