==PAGE:1==
Communicating eHealth
information within the dementia
care service system
Patrick James Leese, s141275
Kongens Lyngby 2016
==PAGE:2==
Supervisors: Anja Maier, Julia Rosemary Thorpe
Technical University of Denmark
DTU Management Engineering
Building 424
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 45 25 48 00
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
In recent years we have seen a surge in popularity for wearable technologies
that has created a vast array of opportunities and possibilities for healthcare
to unobtrusively gather patient data. These wearables can be used to monitor
daily activities and assess trends that can challenge the established workﬂows
currently in place. However, widespread use of such data is yet to be imple-
mented and is rarely fully utilised. One key reason behind this is the ineﬀectual
visualisation of the enormous extent of raw data on oﬀer. The visualisation
of data is of immense importance in communicating eHealth information eﬀec-
tively but it’s design and development is not trivial. With the increasingly rapid
rise of wearable technology, adoption of such digital devices within healthcare
is inevitable and it can be argued that we are already past a stage in which
wearable technologies provide not only nice to have opportunities but essential
solutions.
Therefore, the goal of the Master’s Thesis has been to establish how wearable
derived data can be portrayed to health care professionals, speciﬁcally within the
dementia care system, in an eﬀective and meaningful manner. This culminated
in the development of a fully functional prototype in the form of a website, that
visualises accelerometer and GPS data. This was achieved by working iteratively
through usability testing and interacting directly with healthcare professionals
in a workshop.
Ultimately this process showed how healthcare professionals
understand visualisations of accelerometer and GPS data and what measures
they consider to be clinically relevant.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
Gennem de senere år er der set en popularitetsstigning inden for ’wearable tech-
nologies’, som har skabt en bred vifte af muligheder i form af diskret indsamling
af patient data for sundhedsplejesystemet. Disse wearables kan bruges til at
overvåge daglige aktiviteter og vurdere trends, som udfordrer den nuværende
arbejdsgang. Imidlertid er udbredt brug af sådanne data endnu ikke implemen-
teret, og dets potentiale bliver sjældent udnyttet fuldt ud. En vigtig årsag bag
dette er ineﬀektiv visualisering af den enorme mængde rå data, som er tilgæn-
gelig. Visualisering af data er af enorm betydning, når eHealth informationer
skal kommunikeres eﬀektivt, men designet og udviklingen af disse data er ikke
triviel. Med den stadig hurtigere stigende udbredelse af wearable teknologi vil
implementeringen af sådanne digitale enheder i sundhedssystemet være uund-
gåelig, og det kan diskuteres, om vi allerede er forbi det stadie, hvor wearable
teknologier ikke kun er udtryk for gode muligheder men simpelthen bidrager
med essentielle løsninger.
Målet med specialet er derfor at fastslå, hvordan data aﬂedt af wearables kan
portrætteres til sundhedspersonale, specielt inden for demensplejesystemet, på
en eﬀektiv og meningsfuld måde. Dette kulminerede i udviklingen af en fuldt
funktionel prototype i form af en hjemmeside, som visualiserer accelerometer og
GPS-data. Dette blev opnået ved at arbejde iterativt gennem brugervenlighed-
stests samt direkte interaktioner med sundhedspersonale i en workshop. I sidste
ende viste denne proces, hvordan sundhedspersonale forstår visualiseringen af
accelerometer og GPS-data, samt hvilke målinger og information de anser for
at være klinisk relevante.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared under the supervision of Anja Maier and Julia Rose-
mary Thorpe at DTU Management Engineering, fulﬁlling the requirements for
30 ECTS points in order to acquire a Master of Engineering degree. The fol-
lowing learning objectives have been established:
• Gain a comprehensive understanding of dementia care system whilst ex-
ploring current boundaries within eHealth communication
• Provide a comprehensive literature review within the visualisation of health-
care data and determine areas which have yet to be explored in research
• Perform analyses of literature and user needs to identify requirements that
can be utilised throughout a development and testing phase
• Communicate accelerometer and GPS data to a HCP in a clear, meaning-
ful and understandable manner through well developed prototypes and a
proof of concept
• Provide insight into how accelerometer and GPS data should be visualised
and detail what measures provide clinically relevant information
Lyngby, 24-June-2016
Patrick James Leese, s141275
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost I would like to thank my supervisors for this Master’s Thesis
project, Anja Maier and Julia Rosemary Thorpe. The feedback, guidance and
inspiration they have given me throughout this project has been invaluable and
for continuously pushing me in order to make this project the best that it can
be, I thank you.
Secondly I would like to thank Michael Kai Petersen and Per Bækgaard from
DTU Compute, who have always provided strong motivation via a continuous
positive outlook throughout my studies. Your availability and advice is always
gratefully appreciated.
A special thanks goes to Karin Eva Bjerregaard from Rigshospitalet Glostrup
who has been my point of contact within the dementia care unit throughout this
project. Many thanks for the coordination of the workshop and an extended
thanks to all of the healthcare professionals who attended the workshop and
gave such valuable feedback.
Last but not least, I thank all of the students who have been involved in provid-
ing feedback to me at various stages of the project, especially those who were
involved in the usability testing.
A full list of participants for both usability testing and the workshop can be
seen in Appendix A.10.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Abbreviations
AC - Area Coverage
DC - Daily Cycle
DCS - Dementia Care System
EHR - Electronic Health Record
GPS - Global Positioning System
HCP - Health Care Professional
PA - Physical Activity
PWD - Person With Dementia
POI - Points of Interest
PT - Path Trajectory
UCD - User-Centered Design
UX - User Experience
WB - Wandering Behaviour
==PAGE:12==
x
==PAGE:13==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
Abbreviations
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Prior Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
Scope of this Master’s Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2.1
Thesis Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2.2
Research Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.2.3
Thesis Constraints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.3
Thesis Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Context - Clinical and Technical
9
2.1
Clinical Context
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.1.1
Dementia in Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.1.2
eHealth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2
Technical Context
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.1
Wearable Technology and Healthcare . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.2
Communication Through Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3
Chapter Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
==PAGE:14==
xii
CONTENTS
3
Literature Background
21
3.1
Healthcare Visualisation of Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2
Sub-Conclusion - Healthcare Visualisation . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.3
Commercial Visualisation of Accelerometer and GPS data . . . .
32
3.4
Sub-Conclusion Commercial . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.5
Chapter Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4
Towards Requirements
43
4.1
Establishing Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.2
Establishing Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.2.1
User-Centered Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.2.2
Communication through User Experience . . . . . . . . .
48
4.2.3
Lean User Experience . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.3
Chapter Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5
Development and Testing
51
5.1
Requirements in Action
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.2
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.3
Prototype V1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.4
Validation through Usability Testing 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.4.1
Physical Activity V1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.4.2
Area Coverage V1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.4.3
Wandering Behaviour V1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.4.4
Daily Cycle V1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.4.5
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.5
Prototype V2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.5.1
Validation through Usability Testing 2 . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.5.2
Physical Activity V2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.5.3
Area Coverage V2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5.5.4
Wandering Behaviour V2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5.5.5
Daily Cycle V2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5.5.6
Combination V2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5.5.7
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5.6
Prototype V3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
5.6.1
Validation through Rigshospitalet Workshop
. . . . . . .
67
5.6.2
Physical Activity V3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
5.6.3
Area Coverage V3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
5.6.4
Wandering Behaviour V3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
5.6.5
Daily Cycle V3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
5.6.6
Combination V3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
5.6.7
Dashboard V3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
5.6.8
Chapter Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
==PAGE:15==
CONTENTS
xiii
6
Result
73
6.1
Final Visualisations - Prototype V4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
6.2
Findings Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
6.3
Proof of Concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
6.4
Chapter Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
7
Discussion
81
7.1
Research Question’s Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
7.1.1
Communicating the Possibilities of eHealth Information .
82
7.1.2
The Understanding of eHealth Communication . . . . . .
82
7.1.3
The Clinical Relevance of eHealth Communication . . . .
83
7.2
Contribution through Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
7.3
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
8
Conclusion
89
Bibliography
93
==PAGE:16==
xiv
CONTENTS
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 1
Introduction
“Excellent visualisations are those that give the viewer the greatest number of
ideas in the shortest amount of time, with the least ink and in the smallest
space.” Edward Tufte
This Master’s Thesis demonstrates how eHealth information can be communi-
cated to healthcare professionals (HCP’s) through the visualisation of accelerom-
eter and global positioning system (GPS) data attained from a smartwatch. The
context of this Master’s Thesis lies directly within the dementia care system
(DCS) and visualisations are focused on behavioural measures that are speciﬁ-
cally associated to dementia care.
The utilisation of wearable technology within healthcare to assist HCP’s is be-
coming increasingly common and although minor acceptance of this technology
has been warranted [Apa16], there is still debate over it’s true beneﬁts and
how it can be implemented to an overwhelmingly positive eﬀect [Jam15]. One
plausible explanation of this hesitation is that the eHealth information wearable
technology can gather, is not communicated in an eﬀective manner to HCP’s.
Pertinent data visualisations facilitate the understanding of trends in data and
therefore in the context of healthcare can inform HCP’s on a patients progress
over time, sudden changes in behaviour and assist in decision making processes.
One of the current challenges is that the visualisation of data is still presented
==PAGE:18==
2
Introduction
in it’s rawest form [LP16]. Figure 1.1 simplistically depicts where the health-
care industry, with regards to wearable technology sits today, and subsequently
where it is trying to get to.
Figure 1.1: Current Data Analysis vs Potential Data Analysis [LP16]
The advancements in wearable technology have provided the ability to monitor
large amounts of real-time data unobtrusively that can pave the way for greater
personalised patient care within the DCS. It is now we need to begin to visualise
the data which is available from the latest sensors and explore how to commu-
nicate this eﬀectively to help HCP’s, so they can make better decisions on a
daily basis. Key to understanding this, is the two temporal states associated
with changes in condition or status:
1. Baseline measures - Monitoring the dementia patient with regards to be-
havioural and physiological states as early as possible will give the baseline
values needed for comparison at a later date.
2. Dynamic measures - Represents changes over time as to whether there is
deterioration or improvement, showing if these changes were sudden or
gradual.
Two sensors that have the potential to compliment baseline and dynamic mea-
sures and therefore aid a personalised healthcare approach are the accelerometer
and GPS. They can provide insights into data such as, activities of daily liv-
ing, that can leverage greater information on a dementia patients current state
than is currently seen. Therefore, there is potential for wearable technology to
cause a huge shift in healthcare, not least by elevating the understanding HCP’s
have of their patients. Another huge advantage wearables technologies oﬀer is
their ability to monitor health behaviours over time, allowing HCP’s to observe
trends in a patients behaviour [CDKI15]. By assessing trends, the HCP can
gain instant impressions on functional and cognitive well-being, providing the
==PAGE:19==
3
opportunity to act quickly in order to diagnose, treat and potentially prevent
further problems [ALKY11]. If HCP’s can unobtrusively and pervasively mon-
itor patients over time this creates the opportunity to provide actionable steps
that can ascertain whether particular treatments, therapies or medication are
having the desired eﬀect.
However, whilst sensor capabilities continue to improve, their representation
through visualisation of the data they collect is being left behind. For wearable
technology to make a true impact on the healthcare system, the communication
of this information needs to be developed in parallel to the establishment of
the latest sensors. If a HCP can not interpret the meaning of how this data is
communicated or if the data presented does not meet their requirements, then
the usefulness of even the most advanced sensor technology is limited.
It is therefore, highly apparent that the communication of information is vital,
yet the healthcare sector as a whole is built up of ineﬃcient systems which have
been quickly designed and developed, resulting in a lack of approvement from
HCP’s [Joy12]. The majority of electronic health records (EHR’s) in place have
yet to consider visualisation, remaining faithful towards paper records, due to an
inability and reluctance to implement any form of drastic change [BD11]. The
usability of eHealth records present a huge barrier for adoption, often leading
to confusion and frustration [Sch10], yet this barrier is only created due to
poor communication of the message it is trying to portray. A HCP’s familiarity
with data is considerable enough to suggest that visualisation’s should be fully
understandable. However, this involves taking into account when and why a
HCP would need speciﬁc measurements and creating visualisations that are
intuitive and adaptable [BD11]. This is particularly apparent in the context of
dementia as the inherent nature of the syndrome means that the patient’s ability
to perform everyday tasks will decrease over time. Therefore the visualisation
and understanding of this data is paramount for proactive care, which reacts to
a patients needs, creating opportunities for personalised preventative measures
to be taken.
This Master’s Thesis therefore explores the boundaries and current state of
eHealth communication and looks towards how they can be broken down through
eﬀective visualisation. eHealth has the potential to hold the key for revolution-
ising healthcare delivery by minimising error rate, improving collaboration and
enhancing the overall quality of care [KN10] and the visualisation of the infor-
mation it endeavours to communicate is highly inﬂuential within this.
==PAGE:20==
4
Introduction
1.1
Prior Work
This Master’s Thesis is written in conjunction with the ongoing research by
Anja Maier and Julia Rosemary Thorpe into ’Engineering Systems Design in
Healthcare: Smart Wearables for Dementia Monitoring’.
In co-operation with the dementia and memory clinic at Rigshospitalet Glostrup,
they are exploring how smart wearables can both support and generate be-
havioural data from a person with dementia (PWD) [MÖBB15]. Their research
has shown how service design in dementia care can beneﬁt from behavioural mea-
sures taken from GPS and accelerometer data [TFM16]. They explore how a
thorough understanding of user needs, in co-operation with data driven insights,
can allow for adaptable, personalised healthcare services that provide clinically
relevant information [MÖBB15], [TFM16]. Figure 1.2 depicts the possibilities
accelerometer and GPS data provide. Information that could be beneﬁcial to a
HCP has been explored and mapped across the three main themes of:- Func-
tional Capacity, Lifestyle Patterns and Dangerous Behaviour. The next phase of
the project is to begin to model a connected care system in which data insights
are fed back to various HCP’s in the DCS, which is where this Master’s Thesis
sits. More information on the overall project can be viewed on the websites
below:
http://www.cachet.dk/research/projects/wearables-for-dementia
http://www.es.man.dtu.dk
Figure 1.2: Established information of interest for HCP’s, provided by Julia
Thorpe [TFM16]
==PAGE:21==
1.2 Scope of this Master’s Thesis
5
1.2
Scope of this Master’s Thesis
The speciﬁc focus of this Master’s Thesis within the greater project can be seen
in ﬁgure 1.3. This ﬁgure clearly shows the focus on visualisation for this Master’s
Thesis. The prior work previously mentioned has determined speciﬁc areas of
interest for HCP’s and therefore the following measures have been chosen from
ﬁgure 1.2 for further exploration:
1. Physical Activity (PA) - How physical active is a PWD over a chosen time
period.
2. Daily Cycle (DC) - How much routine a PWD has in their daily life
3. Area Coverage (AC) - In what area does the PWD’s life revolve within
4. Wandering Behaviour (WB) - How far does a PWD wander from their
normal route
These particular measures have been chosen, as they provide the most meaning-
ful data with regards to functional capacity and lifestyle patterns, which have
been established as interesting areas for exploration during the prior work.
Data
Analysis
Visualisation
HCP
Wearable
Patient
Greater Project
This Thesis
Figure 1.3: Area of focus for this Master’s Thesis, within the greater project.
A project plan and gantt chart can be seen in appendix A.1 and A.2 respectively.
1.2.1
Thesis Objectives
Research and design objectives have been established that underpin the goal of
this Master’s Thesis.
==PAGE:22==
6
Introduction
The research objective for this Master’s Thesis is as follows:
"The aim is to communicate behavioural measures based on data attained from
the accelerometer and GPS sensors of a smartwatch in a clear and concise man-
ner to healthcare professionals, within the dementia care system, at Rigshospi-
talet Glostrup."
The design objective is:
’The aim is to create a visualisation tool in the form of a website that commu-
nicates behavioural measures from accelerometer and GPS data’.
The research and design objective will be achieved by answering the following
three research questions:
1. Does the visualisation of accelerometer and GPS data raise awareness of
the possibilities wearable technology can provide to the dementia care
system?
2. Is the choice of graph detailing speciﬁc measures of accelerometer and GPS
data understandable to HCP’s at Rigshospitalet Glostrup?
3. Can the visualisation of accelerometer and GPS data provide clinically
relevant information to HCP’s at Rigshospitalet Glostrup?
1.2.2
Research Methods
This research has been conducted by ﬁrstly gaining a thorough understanding
of dementia, the surrounding care system and the current wearable technology
solutions. This was followed by an in-depth literature review which provided
the base knowledge for creating a meaningful prototype.
From here a user-
centered design (UCD) approach has been utilised, that has involved working
with methodology from both UCD and user experience (UX). Initial prototypes
were developed and validated through usability testing at the Technical Uni-
versity of Denmark. From the feedback gathered during the usability testing,
the prototype was developed further and presented at a workshop with HCP’s
from the dementia care unit at Rigshospitalet Glostrup, Denmark. The results
from the workshop, provided the information for the development of a proof of
concept in the form of a website, that is presented in chapter 6.
==PAGE:23==
1.3 Thesis Structure
7
1.2.3
Thesis Constraints
There are a number of constraints that should be taken into account for this
Master’s Thesis. First and foremost the scope of the literature review extends
beyond dementia care. Although the visualisation of accelerometer and GPS
data is vast, speciﬁc studies for the visualisation of accelerometer and GPS
data within dementia care are limited. Therefore visualisation of information to
HCP’s within healthcare as a whole and the visualisation of accelerometer and
GPS data in a commercial setting, are the areas covered. The focus has also
been on single patient data visualisations, as this relates directly to workﬂow and
assessment of a patients status at Rigshospitalet Glostrup. Therefore, systems
which endeavour to show visualisations for multiple patients have been not been
used.
Furthermore, the focus has been on desktop based applications with
visualisation for other devices analysed through the understanding that they
would translate directly across to a desktop platform.
1.3
Thesis Structure
This Master’s Thesis consists of the following chapters:
• Chapter 2 - Contextual Background
• Chapter 3 - Literature Background
• Chapter 4 - Towards Requirements
• Chapter 5 - Development and Testing
• Chapter 6 - Result
• Chapter 7 - Discussion
• Chapter 8 - Conclusion
Chapter 2 will now detail the clinical and technical areas in which this Master’s
Thesis is bound, to provide an understanding of dementia, eHealth, wearable
technology and communication through design.
==PAGE:24==
8
Introduction
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 2
Context - Clinical and
Technical
This chapter gives an understanding of the context in which this Master’s Thesis
sits within. There are four key themes that run concurrently throughout the
Thesis, which are:
1. Dementia and the surrounding care system in Denmark
2. eHealth
3. Wearable Technology
4. Communication through Design
The chapter starts with the clinical aspects of dementia and eHealth. This gives
an understanding of dementia as a syndrome and the care system in Denmark,
before going on to detail what is meant by the term eHealth and how it is used
within the scope of this Master’s Thesis.
The second section of this chapter presents the technological aspects related
to this Master’s Thesis which gives an overview of how wearable technology
is utilised within the DCS. Furthermore there is a focus primarily on the ad-
vantages and challenges wearable technologies face in a healthcare setting and
ultimately how communication is directly aﬀected by design and visualisation.
==PAGE:26==
10
Context - Clinical and Technical
2.1
Clinical Context
"If you learn to listen for clues as to how I feel, instead of what I say, you will
be able to understand me much better." Mara Botonis - A dementia patient
2.1.1
Dementia in Denmark
Dementia is not a speciﬁc disease and is a term used to describe a wide array of
symptoms. These symptoms typically lead to the diagnosis of alzheimer’s disease
in 60 - 80 percent of cases, although there are more than 200 diﬀerent dementia
diseases [Chr09], appendix A.3. The common symptoms seen throughout the
majority of dementia cases are short term memory loss, personality changes
and decreased social activity [Vid16]. All of these problems relate to functional
capacity and how this eﬀects lifestyle patterns. The symptoms vary vastly from
patient to patient which stems from the progressive nature of the syndrome.
A patient is likely to live between 4-8 years after diagnosis, with this gradual
regression mainly seen through a distinct lack of memory, communication and
inability to focus [Dia13]. The stages are summarised in appendix A.4. The
likelihood of having dementia increases with age and is distinguishable from
age related symptoms, such as a decline in short term memory by the severity
in which it eﬀects a persons daily life [Alz16]. This is why it is particularly
important for the visualisation of accelerometer and GPS data to show how the
daily routine of the PWD is eﬀected on a temporal basis.
There is currently no found cure for dementia and since the end of the 1990’s
doctors have prescribed medication which can decrease symptoms. Treatments
vary dependent on which type of dementia has been diagnosed and what the
suspected cause is [Ris16], appendix A.5. The visualisation of daily routines and
an understanding of a PWD’s functional capacity may help create considerably
better treatment plans, which could help a PWD adopt to change, causing as
little emotional distress as possible [Ris16].
The Danish DCS involves a number of stakeholders, ﬁgure 2.1, who can each
provide a wealth of knowledge on a patients condition from very diﬀerent per-
spectives. Therefore, it can only be an advantage to provide each of these HCP’s
with selected data measurements, that can aid their assessments.
After a person is diagnosed with dementia the nurse oversees the coordination of
care and refers the PWD to a dementia coordinator, who is speciﬁcally trained
to help within this area [Vid16]. Nurses are available in nursing homes to give
medications, take blood pressure and also oﬀer relief and guidance, in areas
==PAGE:27==
2.1 Clinical Context
11
Figure 2.1: Danish dementia care system stakeholder overview
such as mental and physical stress. Once medication is started by a patient
they are monitored at diﬀerent time periods to assess how they are progress-
ing. In all stages of this process there are a number of HCP’s working with
the PWD. Dementia coordinators will work directly with the patients and in
tandem with the nurses, who feed information to the doctor when needed. The
ﬁrst contact comes after 4 weeks of starting the medication and consists of a
phone consultation with the contact nurse, who is primarily checking how the
medication is eﬀecting the patient. After 3 months the patient will have a con-
sultation with their doctor, which will again look to assess how the medication
is working. 6 months later another consultation will occur between the PWD
and the doctor, whom at this stage will determine which level of dementia a
patient has and what future care plan should be taken [Vid16]. This structure
gives solid background knowledge as to what time intervals the visualisations
could be presented within and how this would best suit the HCP’s preferences.
==PAGE:28==
12
Context - Clinical and Technical
2.1.2
eHealth
The following deﬁnition of eHealth ﬁts the role it plays within this Master’s The-
sis as it covers the broad range of stakeholders involved in the communication
of health information and how eHealth can be used to optimise care:
"The goals of e-Health can be summarised to include increased eﬃciency in
healthcare, improved quality of care, increased commitment to evidence-based
medicine, empowerment of patients and consumers, and the development of new
relationships between patients and health professionals." [Jef16]
From this deﬁnition, eHealth can be thought of as an umbrella term for a number
of sub-domains which are illustrated in ﬁgure 2.2 with EHR’s, a digitised version
of a patients record [Hea13], being of key focus in this Master’s Thesis.
Figure 2.2: The variety of sub-domains in eHealth
It is envisaged that this project will create an extra module that add’s on to
the EHR system at Rigshospitalet Glostrup, to display accelerometer and GPS
data. This will look to support the 4 P’s of health (P4); Prediction, Person-
alisation, Prevention and Participation [Eri15]. Working in unison they aspire
to create radically diﬀerent healthcare models that move away from a reactive
approach, towards a preventative approach, where each patient is treated more
==PAGE:29==
2.2 Technical Context
13
individually.
This is particularly suited to dementia as each and every case
is diﬀerent, appendix A.3. Diﬀerences also include the stage of dementia the
PWD currently has, their genetics, their vital stats and their lifestyle. All of this
works in conjunction in a very intricate manner to deﬁne each individual case.
By adopting the P4 health principles we can allow HCP’s to work more closely
together, improve consultations between the HCP and the PWD and create the
ability to make adaptable care plans, showing the importance of eHealth within
the DCS [Aer15].
2.2
Technical Context
"By using devices carried on the body, wearable computers allow the
exploration of the principles of pervasive computing immediately instead of
waiting for the deployment of the ubiquitous infrastructure often associated
within the ﬁeld." Thad E. Starner [Sta02]
2.2.1
Wearable Technology and Healthcare
One of the key areas of interest for wearable technology has been it’s utilisation
within healthcare in ubiquitous form, allowing for a new structure of pervasive
healthcare that can revolutionise the way in which patient data is utilised and
how HCP’s work on a daily basis. Behavioural insights alongside improvements
in sensor technology are two reasons why wearables are becoming increasingly
apparent in healthcare applications and this creates a number of beneﬁts and
challenges for wearable technology. Figure 2.3 shows a standard two way com-
munication between a HCP and PWD and by the addition of a smartwatch and
smartphone a further communicational option is created. The accelerometer
and GPS sensors are used to collect data which is then processed through the
established algorithms. Finally, this data is visualised and presented directly to
HCP’s and not for the PWD themselves. This Master’s Thesis aims to under-
stand how this data should be visualised and what data is of most importance
to HCP’s.
2.2.1.1
Beneﬁts of wearables in dementia care
There are a vast amount of potential beneﬁts that wearables can oﬀer which
can be particularly advantageous from a dementia perspective. Maetzler et al
==PAGE:30==
14
Context - Clinical and Technical
HCP
PWD
Visualisation 
Smartwatch and
Smartphone
Accelerometer
GPS
Processing of Data
Figure 2.3: Overview of how wearable technology is used within the dementia
care system and subsequently how visualisation is incorporated for
this project.
showed the possibilities of wearables in assessing parkinson’s disease [MDS+13]
showing that even if data trust is a problem, the eﬀectiveness of measuring data
continuously much outweighs the current methods of snapshot interpretations.
Caprani [CDKI15] showed that HCP’s see strong value in wearable technology
monitoring from a trend perspective and that the cognitively impaired elderly
who live alone could vastly beneﬁt. Further conclusions made by Merilahti et
al [MVK15] also emphasise the plausibility of detecting trend changes using
wearables through long-term daily usage, whilst Anantharam et al showed that
patient data can be processed from a contextual perspective resulting in im-
proved decision making due to actionable information [ABS+15]. Below is a list
of advantages wearable technology provides with regards to dementia care:
• Consistent feedback - Consistent monitoring of a dementia patients
status could allow a HCP to have a much clearer understanding of how a
PWD’s condition is developing before they even meet for the ﬁrst consul-
tation after 3 months
==PAGE:31==
2.2 Technical Context
15
• Remote monitoring - Monitoring PWD remotely will mean less in house
consultations for the patient and HCP
• Improved use of HCP’s - The proactive approach could enable the
intervention of a nurse or dementia coordinator at an earlier stage, before
the need for a doctor
• Personalised treatment - HCP’s will gain a much deeper insight into
how the patient is functioning both physically and psychologically. There-
fore steps of prevention can be taken earlier than is currently seen.
• Greater Accuracy - HCP’s will have the continuous data needed to
aid decision making and will not have to solely rely on qualitative feed-
back from a dementia coordinator or subjective feedback from the patient
themselves
2.2.1.2
Challenges of wearable implementation
There are a number of challenges that present themselves from both a patient
and HCP perspective when looking into the implementation of wearable tech-
nology within healthcare, which have been summarised below:
• Integration into workﬂow - A change in interface will mean a change
in workﬂow. A seamless change is unlikely, so eﬀorts need to be taken to
ensure new systems are as intuitive as possible.
• Privacy and security concerns - Privacy issues are of a high concern
to both patients and HCP’s, as it has been shown that security is easily
penetrable and could even provide an access point to a user’s smartphone
[Jam16].
• Human compliance - 50% of Americans who own a smartwatch do not
use it on a daily basis and 33% stop using it within the ﬁrst 6 months
[LP14]. If the general public can not remember to use their own smart-
watch then this poses serious questions as to how this will be utilised for
a dementia patient.
• Trust and Consistency - It only takes measurements to be wrong once
before all trust is lost in a device and subsequently the system. Further-
more one wearable generally oﬀers diﬀerent readings to another.
==PAGE:32==
16
Context - Clinical and Technical
2.2.1.3
Wearable Sensors - Accelerometer and GPS
It has been shown that accelerometers can distinguish between activity and
rest [QKR+15] and can be done so accurately [LTH+15]. Therefore there is
potential to gain a lot of information through states and movements and these
activity’s can be further divided into time of day.
Further exploration can
then be used to determine how consistent these activities are during the day
and night which oﬀers enormous potential with dementia care to unobtrusively
determine time spent within each state. A study by Kirste et al even suggests
that accelerometer sensors can be used to detect changes in daily behaviour
before dementia is diagnosed [KHK+14] and this is backed up by Hoﬀmeyer et
al who shows that monitoring behavioural patterns can give pre-indicators of
alzheimer’s disease [HYTK12] which is particularly encouraging for determining
early signs of dementia.
GPS also provides an abundance of useful information. The primary information
that could be of use for a HCP is the Point’s of Interest (POI’s) and path
trajectories (PT’s), which allow them to further understand a PWD’s daily
activities [YQYR14]. POI’s can provide interesting insights such as where and
how a PWD is spending their outdoor time, do they take the same route and is
their total travelled time the same as what has previously been seen in routine
events. PT’s enable us to understand the life space of a PWD [BKB15] which
is deﬁned as the geographical area a person covers in their daily life. It oﬀers
a strong indicator of cognitive and physical functioning [TRG+14] as well as
wandering habits which could be seen as dangerous. A decrease in life space can
be attributed to a cognitive decline [JBB+11] and research indicates that this
could be further explained by psychosocial factors such as depression, anxiety,
fear and diﬃculty speaking, which are common amongst PWD. This conﬁrms
that GPS monitoring of life space in dementia care to assess behaviour, could
provide very valuable information.
2.2.2
Communication Through Design
Design in eHealth is considered to be imperative as it directly inﬂuences com-
munication [Aak07]. Design principles and guidelines have been published that
provide the ‘best practices’ for the visualisation of data, which is seen as highly
important in eﬀective communication [LM15]. Studies show that judgements of
information are already made after the ﬁrst 50 milliseconds [LFDB06]. This con-
ﬁrms that not only does the information need to be useable, it needs to displayed
in a fashion that is visually appealing immediately, in order to limit the possi-
bilities of initial negative judgements. One method of establishing more trust is
==PAGE:33==
2.2 Technical Context
17
through aesthetically pleasing design [Kar00]. As early as 1933, Birkhoﬀshowed
that aesthetic information (m) is an interplay between order (o) and complexity
(c) with his equation [Iva04]:
M = o/c
This perceived usability is important [AL11] and is part of the building blocks
that Tufte suggested in his work with quantitative display [Tuf01]. Tufte puts
strong emphasise on simplicity, showing that decorating graphs with features
such as pattern, gradients or 3d features is unnecessary.
This complements
Tufte’s Data-Ink Ratio [Tuf01]:
DataInkRatio = DataInk/TotalInkUsed
The aim is to remove as much non-data-ink as possible in order to create simple
visualisation’s that allow for greater meaning and understanding. Further guide-
lines also show that the attractive visual display of quantitative information by
Tufte should also: [Tuf01]:
• Have a properly chosen format and design
• Use words, numbers, and drawings in unison
• Reﬂect a balance, proportion and a sense of relevant scale
• Display an accessible complexity of detail
• Provide a narrative quality
• Be drawn in a professional manner
• Avoid content-free decoration such as graph junk
These guidelines give the framework for the creation of visually appealing, well
considered graph designs that can have a profound eﬀect on perceived aesthetics.
In a study by Kurosu et al they show the importance of apparent aesthetics and
that if the interface is not perceived to be highly useable, then inherent usability
will be ﬂawed from the outset, giving strong indication of the importance of
design principles [KK95].
This is also shown in research by Sonderegger et
al’s whose ﬁndings on the eﬀect of user performance and perceived usability
showed that perceived usability was higher for appealing design, than it was
==PAGE:34==
18
Context - Clinical and Technical
for unappealing ones. Subsequently, there was an increased motivation eﬀect
for working with the appealing prototype [SS10]. We also see the importance of
aesthetics in visually appealing design correlating to decreased error rate [SS10].
This shows visual appeal does have a pronounced eﬀect on performance, which
is a strong motivation for increased trust and adoptance. Lazard et al reiterates
that visual design within the development of eHealth communication is integral
to the improvement of healthcare and as such, dedicated research would be of
high beneﬁt to ongoing development [LM15]. Therefore there is a need for a
focus on aesthetics and designers should strongly consider objective aesthetics
principles when designing eHealth solutions [LM15].
Another key principle for design seen throughout research is level of visual com-
plexity, showing that most positive responses are seen when suﬃcient levels of
arousal and pleasure are met. Visual complexity therefore plays a key role in
the likely adoptance of a visualisation, with relatively low complexity levels not
providing enough depth and high complexity levels becoming disengaging to a
user. This backs up evidence that it is essential to ﬁnd the sweet spot in which
visual complexity both entices yet challenges the user [TBAOW09]. Reinecke
et al shows when looking to predict a user’s ﬁrst impressions of visual appeal,
that complexity plays a much larger role than colour, giving further insights in
design methods that should be applied [RYM+13].
It is clear that visual perception through appeal and complexity is hugely im-
portant in information design, which could be due to the fact that 70% of our
sensory receptors are located in our eyes [CH11]. Humans are extremely good
at recognising patterns if they are presented in a visually appealing manner. At
the same time we are also extremely good at missing patterns if information is
not presented in a manner we are accustomed too, meaning information can be
missed, which should not be a possibility within healthcare.
It is therefore essential to understand what eﬀective communication strategies
have been utilised for the visual design of tables and graphs.
The book by
Stephen Few ‘Simple Visualisation techniques for Quantitative Analysis’ [Few09]
has been highly inﬂuential in this Master’s Thesis. Few shows that there are
best practices which should be adhered to for optimal understanding of graphs.
Therefore numerous guidelines have been developed which stem from Few’s work
and an example of this can be seen in ﬁgure 2.4.
Few’s work gives a solid guideline for how to use data most eﬀectively but
further interactive design properties also need to be considered to ensure that
a dynamic interface can be developed. In the majority of cases interfaces need
to provide more information than is possible to present understandably on one
screen. Therefore various interactive techniques are available to allow the user to
switch between focused and contextual views [CKB08]. Cockburn et al provide
==PAGE:35==
2.3 Chapter Conclusion
19
Figure 2.4: Graph Overview by Digital Inspiration - [Ami16]
four diﬀerent approaches for this:
1. Overview + Detail - Use of spatial separation to show both an overview
and detailed view at the same time
2. Zooming - Allowing users to magnify or de-magnify, promoting temporal
separation
3. Focus + Context - Removes temporal and spatial separation to oﬀer a
combination of both overview and detail
4. Cue-based Techniques - Modiﬁes focal points to direct the users attention
2.3
Chapter Conclusion
This chapter has shown that wearable technology can provide a number of ben-
eﬁts that can be applied within the DCS to leverage a new form of care that is
more personalised. This compliments eHealth initiatives but also presents chal-
lenges such as trust, accuracy and consistency of data collection. However, the
==PAGE:36==
20
Context - Clinical and Technical
last section of this chapter shows that design principles have been established
that aid the visualisation of data and these will be utilised to communicate
information in a visually appealing and suitably complex manner. Therefore,
it is envisaged that this combination of decisive graph choice and interactive
opportunities will ultimately provide an eﬀective visualisation. Chapter 3 will
now explore the visualisation of healthcare data in literature.
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 3
Literature Background
“Science is simply common sense at its best, that is, rigidly accurate in
observation, and merciless to fallacy in logic.” - Thomas Henry Huxley
This literature review is a comprehensive analysis of the literature within the
visualisation of healthcare data.
In order to ascertain precisely the area of
interest for my research, a detailed literature and commercial literature search
was made. It has endeavoured to highlight the key areas of current research,
whilst showing how this project intertwines within it. This literature review
has also provided a theoretical background and solid understanding of how the
visualisation of healthcare data has progressed over the years and where it is
likely to go. The success criteria with regards to this literature review is wether
or not a substantial understanding has been developed, with regards to how
information has been eﬀectively communicated through visualisation. Therefore
an emphasis on what graphs have been used within literature has been of key
focus.
Furthermore the visualisations have been evaluated according to the
design principles in section 2.2.2. It is assumed that combination of relevant
graph choice and good use of design principles will allow for the creation of an
understandable ﬁrst prototype. The literature review is split into the following
two sections:
1. Healthcare visualisation of data
==PAGE:38==
22
Literature Background
2. Commercial visualisation of accelerometer and GPS data
In order to ﬁnd the required material to give a full assessment of the current state
of the literature, a number of electronic databases were used, with Scopus[Els16],
DTUFindIt [DTU16] and PubMed [Pub16] being of predominant use. The most
successful search criteria involved the use of the keywords visualisation, health
and eHealth records, with a reference search on the early work done by LifeLines
[PMS+98] and Tufte[Tuf01] also proving to be very useful as base parameters
for a search.
3.1
Healthcare Visualisation of Data
“Graphical elegance is often found in simplicity of design and complexity of
data” - Edward R. Tufte [Tuf01]
LifeLines was one of the earliest reports of visualising medical records through
graphical timelines [Shn98]. The project provides a visualisation environment,
ﬁgure 3.1, for personal histories and is described as seminal in it’s oﬀerings for
the importance of visualisation within healthcare.
It focuses on using a bar
chart to visualise events in a patients life which can be interacted with by the
user through zooming and panning. The use of LifeLines achieved a 50% faster
response rate when compared to tabular representations and the timeline fashion
oﬀers a global view of a patients history. This allows a HCP to quickly discover
temporal patterns, which is only helped by the close proximity of parameters,
relative timescale and the ability to aggregate data [PMS+98]. Lifelines ability
to facilitate the discovery of trends is clear and the multi-view capabilities with
added design interactions based around colour and thickness of a line to highlight
importance, are still very much applicable for use today.
Tufte also describes timelines as a powerful form of visual design. Alongside
Tufte, Powsner developed a graphical summary of a patient’s status using point
plots, seen in appendix A.6.1. Tufte and Powsner show the simplicity of putting
years of data into a small graphical output that can be used for trend analysis. It
promotes user interaction in order to ﬁnd relationships between data sets that
can allow for diﬀerent diagnostic perspectives to be taken or an adjustment
of a care plan [POW94].
As the name suggests (’Summary Of A Patient’s
Status’) the visualisation provides a very eﬃcient overview of a patent’s status
yet this snapshot is quite limited. The vertical axis is made up from ﬁve points
- critically reduced, reduced, normal range, elevated and critically elevated,
giving immediate meaning to the point plots. The horizontal axis runs from the
==PAGE:39==
3.1 Healthcare Visualisation of Data
23
Figure 3.1: LifeLines - aspects of the record are grouped into facets running
down the left hand side of the page. The lines on the top show
problems associated with the patient, with colour used as an in-
dicator for severity and the stopping of a line to indicate that the
issue is resolved - [Shn98]
submission date until the present day, showing intermediate timings in between.
These overview visualisations are highly valuable but more detail should be
available, similarly to the timeline browser by Cousins [CK91].
Sparklines are another visualisation technique suggested by Tufte for quick as-
sessment of data by HCP’s seen in ﬁgure 3.2.
Bauer studied the eﬀects of
sparklines within healthcare showing physician assessment was faster with the
graph display as opposed to a table display [BGB10].
However similarly to
Tufte’s work with point plots, they have limitations due to size. This is how-
ever, highly dependant on the context in which they are used within, as from
a glanceability perspective they are highly beneﬁcial. Additional colours or the
inclusion of an extra line could also be an option for improvement, which is
backed up by their adoption into various Apple Watch apps, proving there are
beneﬁt’s for this method of visualisation.
Another interesting visualisation technique was seen in the development of VIE-
VISU, which use glyph graphs that can show data changes over time, seen
in Appendix A.6.2. The multiple view allows for easy recognition of stability
similarly to what is seen in Sparklines [HPU01]. The use of change in colour
and size to stipulate values is highly intriguing in giving maximum information
in a relatively small graphic. Each glyph supports up to 15 variables split into
==PAGE:40==
24
Literature Background
Figure 3.2: Sparklines - Made up of a speciﬁed time period with selected time,
in this instance at 8 hours. The line in itself shows the test results,
with a grey bar showing normal limits and min / max ranges of
reference limits - [BGB10]
categories, which are read dependent on the colour and size of each individual
element. Therefore larger graphs with darker colours give a completely diﬀerent
reading to that of smaller glyphs with lighter colours.
MIVA looks to engage the user through incorporating visualisation techniques,
ﬁgure 3.3. This prototype provides data visualisations of temporal information
to enhance contextual knowledge through a point plot approach but does so with
the inclusion of various interactivity functionalities [FN11]. HCP’s can use a
drag and drop process for the inclusion of new parameters into the visualisation,
which is designed so that 5 temporal resolutions can be oﬀered on the screen
at any one time. Results showed that HCP’s were faster and more accurate in
answering questions using this interface, showing a high level of understanding.
Figure 3.3: MIVA - The gray band within each parameter shows normal ranges
and the smaller plots on the right hand side show most recent
information. The arrows on the bottom allow for timeline control
and the icons at the top represent messages - [FN11]
==PAGE:41==
3.1 Healthcare Visualisation of Data
25
The combination of design principles is also seen in Midgaard with the combina-
tion of event and numerical data through extensive zoom functionality seen in
ﬁgure 3.4. Similar to glyph graphs they use a combination of height and colour
to guide emphasis and do so on timelines to give more information. Midgaard’s
novel approach for visualising time orientated data is interesting as they utilise
a number of visualisation techniques such as turkey box plots, box plot bars,
information murals and point plots which are represented dependant on zoom
level [BSM04]. Abstraction is utilised through focus + context, as mentioned in
section 2.2.2, allowing users to change perspectives to aid quick understanding
of a patients data [CKB08]. This allows Midgaard to display large amounts
of data both quantitatively and qualitatively but the learning curve for under-
standing of these visualisations may be much longer than that of visualisations
such as sparklines.
Figure 3.4: Midgaard oﬀers 5 diﬀerent levels of abstraction: A. coloured back-
ground B. coloured background with labels C. coloured bars D.
coloured area graphs E. augmented line graphs - [BSM04]
VisuExplore [RAM+11] utilises the box plots, colour coding, zooming and focus
+ context features that have been seen in Midgaard. It focuses on the use of
event graphs for categorical data and line graphs for numerical data, as seen
in ﬁgure 3.5, similarly to that of Lifelines. By using a collection of these well
established visualisation techniques, they oﬀer a very eﬀective interface that is
simple and intuitive to understand. The use of text could be enhanced through
highlighting eﬀects as it creates ’clutter’ when it it layered over the graphs.
VisuExplore also uses time-series graphs which have been seen in a number of
other studies to positive eﬀect [FRG09], [AF08b].
CareVis gave a novel approach when exploring the integration of numerical data
==PAGE:42==
26
Literature Background
Figure 3.5: VisuExplore - As seen previously the time-series graphs are used
to spot trends and the event graph’s are used to express nominal
data though the use of shape and colour.
All of these aspects
share a common time axis and hoovering over speciﬁc data points,
gives greater detail, otherwise known as a tooltip. They also use
a measure tool that allows a user to determine the time interval
between any two data points within the visualisation - [RAM+11]
visualisation with treatment information through a combination of visualisation
techniques seen in appendix A.6.3.
They utilise a multiple views approach,
through the focus + context technique, which allows for a number of represen-
tations that can be explored by the user when needed [AM06]. The interface
is divided up through quick view panels at the top for most important infor-
mation, logical views on the left hand side for treatment plans and temporal
views on the right hand side for representation of measured data. This multiple
views approach allows CareVis to structure underlying data accordingly, so that
they can achieve their goal of time-saving through intuitive navigation. Buono
et al also visualises two diﬀerent ways of showing a patients history with both
overview + detail and zoomable interfaces [ABCL06]. These approaches show
that interaction is enhanced when interactivity and navigational techniques are
applied meaningfully.
The web based interactive visualisation system [PFH07] uses both time plots
for numerical data and matrix plots for categorical data, for lung transplant
patients, appendix A.6.4. They oﬀer a number of interactive graphs that include
the ability to mark points for comparison, turn on and oﬀa ﬁve day moving
average and hover over a point to gain more information, whilst also seeing the
high and low values over the selected period. The results of their research shows
that graphical visualisation of temporal data does decrease decision making time
and that HCP’s highly prefer graphical interfaces over text based ones. The ﬁve
==PAGE:43==
3.1 Healthcare Visualisation of Data
27
day moving average and ability to connect to any data plots for comparison
are very interesting and can deﬁnitely be applied within the visualisation of
accelerometer data within dementia care.
KNAVE II, ﬁgure 3.6, is also a well known visualisation for time-orientated
data [SGBBT06]. They work on the premise that time orientated data that
is presented in a visually meaningful manner can give great beneﬁts to a HCP,
especially when looking at trends. They show the value of temporal abstractions
in time-orientated data and granularity is enabled through the use of the slide
bar.
An evaluation paper in 2008 showed the HCP’s ranked KNAVE II as
superior to both paper records and electronic spreadsheets [AF08a].
Figure 3.6: Knave II - The left hand side can be used to load parameters into
the main view, content can be searched for in the bottom left panel
and all 6 temporal displays can be interacted with through diﬀer-
ent features such a granularity zoom or ﬁnd similar functionality
- [SGBBT06]
KNAVE II show’s the importance of granularity which is now heavily empha-
sised in a number of healthcare data visualisation research. Homecare shows
temporal information at diﬀerent granularity levels through bar charts and point
plots with the ability to identify comparisons between events with connecting
lines [Chi06]. ‘An Interactive Real-Time Visualization Environment For Patients
With Heart failure’ looked to fully engage the HCP through scrolling tools whilst
quick determination of events was achieved through a one-day granularity se-
lection [PRRF05]. Furthermore KOSHPAD looked to visualise sets of temporal
objects and explore their relationship, focusing on diﬀerent levels of granularity
[CPP99].
==PAGE:44==
28
Literature Background
One approach that is also becoming more common is the utilisation of a dash-
board to provide snapshots of information for HCP’s.
Hartzler showed that
patient reported outcome dashboards are a promising approach within prostate
care [HID+15]. Caprani et al [CDKI15] have explored HCP’s preferences for
the visualisation of sensor data showing that HCP’s are highly interested in
monitoring patterns and trends such as whether or not medication is having the
desired eﬀect and when patient’s are deviating from their normal routine, ﬁgure
3.7. Their visualisation consisted of a more modern dashboard approach which
was inclusive of individual cards for diﬀerent parameters such as home activity
and sleep quality, that could be adjusted on a temporal level. They also show
that time spent walking, number of steps and the times of day walking were of
interest to HCP’s and interestingly, results showed that this system would pro-
vide most value to those who have a cognitive impairment. Furthermore they
felt that it is vital that wording and meaning of content is given with respect to
which HCP is using the interface, as they do not have a common language or
understanding of diﬀerent parameters.
Figure 3.7: Dashboard visualisation from Caprani et al showing simplistic and
easy to understand views of sleep, health, activity and gait score
- [CDKI15]
Alongside the common utilisation of time-series graphs and bar charts a number
of researchers have also explored unique visualisation techniques. Rasmussen
and Starren [RS07] proposed starﬁeld displays, which are scatterplot graphs, to
help manage large data sets in healthcare. Sliders are used to speciﬁcally adjust
time frames which have proved to very successful in allowing direct manipulation
of an interface by Ahlberg et al [AWS92]. This allows for the direct manipulation
of two separate data sets on the same display meaning the user can focus on
speciﬁc time periods whilst at the same time see the overall picture. Vertical
==PAGE:45==
3.2 Sub-Conclusion - Healthcare Visualisation
29
timepoint lines are also used to show telehealth events and point plots can be
individually selected to gain more thorough information. A similar method was
also seen in the multivariate time-series amalgam, which shows an untraditional
approach for the visualisation of data within a neonatal intensive care unit. They
show a patients status through 2 star plots which encompasses 12 variables, one
for each edge of the 2 hexagons. A vertical slider on the right allows for temporal
exploration and data values are represented for vital organs such as the heart,
lungs, kidneys, liver amongst others [LRH10].
Another interesting concept was presented by Falkman with ’The Cube’ which
was developed to assist in pattern recognition for HCP’s through 3d visuali-
sation of numerical data. In contrast to the aforementioned design principles,
Falkman argues that 3D parallel diagrams are a natural concept for HCP’s to
relate to for the visualisation of data. The cube can be transformed in a number
of ways through rotation, hiding planes, zooming, colour coding and grouping
[Fal01]. Whilst elements of this approach are appealing, such as the interac-
tion with zooming and rotation, the 3D visualisation is diﬃcult to understand,
which could add cognitive load to a HCP. Further interesting visualisations that
have been explored also include Filoot who combine an interactive visualisa-
tion table, matrix tables, p-value bars and group views [ZSS13], AnamneVis
[ZAR+11] who display data through radial sunbursts and Prima [GRSS02] who
use both scatter plots and histograms. The VALMA project utilises both GPS
and accelerometer sensors in order to capture user behaviours of PWD to as-
sess their level of risk in dementia progression [TSW+11]. They show how a
multidimensional system is useful in assessing the correlation between factors,
which is also recommended by a recent report from the Cambridge Institute of
Public health [OCBB15]. This report shows that the building of preventative
trials for dementia favour multimodal and individually tailored approaches. The
eHealth monitor from Schaller et al was one of the ﬁrst to provide insight into
how personalised interfaces can aid decision making for HCP’s [SMSG+15]. 78
% of HCP’s indicated that the solution is highly eﬃcient in providing relevant
information. Interestingly HCP’s noted that the feature of diary notes was es-
sential which shows a need for qualitative informative. This is supported by
Pﬁtzner who valued it’s importance to help disregard outliers and invalid data
[PGH+13].
3.2
Sub-Conclusion - Healthcare Visualisation
In conclusion, the research has proved to be highly informative with regards to
how data has been visualised in previous work. The research has been evaluated
with regards to understanding which graphs and visualisation techniques have
==PAGE:46==
30
Literature Background
previously been utilised. This enables an informed decision to be made when
establishing requirements for the development stage.
LifeLines’s proved to be particularly important as a groundwork for research
in this area showing for the ﬁrst time how medical histories can be presented
through a timeline. Sparklines epitomised the design principles of simplicity
and the fact they are increasingly used today more than ever, shows the validity
of early research and the design principles in question. The graphical summary
of a patients status by Powsner and Tufte showed how we can represent years
of data in a small single graphic, similar to glygh graphs. Midgaard ensured
we continue to utilise interactive techniques with the use of a powerful semantic
zoom and multivariate time-series amalgam to name one of a few provided
original visualisation methods and techniques.
Overall 25 research studies have been summarised in ﬁgure 3.8, which are related
to the visualisation of single patient eHealth data directly within the literature
for healthcare. Figure 3.8 shows the key ﬁndings with an extensive overview
given in appendix A.7. Figure 3.8 and appendix A.7 provide the basis on which
a conclusion will be made in this chapter of which graphs should be used to
visualise accelerometer and GPS data.
It is clear that time-series graphs, point plots and bar charts are the most
utilised graphs through healthcare visualisation. On top of this, the majority of
visualisations have incorporated some level of data separation through focus +
context or overview + detail interactive techniques.
In assessing all of this research there are two studies in particular that have
been picked out as speciﬁcally interesting with regards to this Master’s Thesis,
due to their focus on level of understanding.
The VisuExplore system provides an overview of a diabetes patient through
time-series graphs, bar charts and event graphs in multiple views. Rind et al
use a combination of visualisation techniques to test HCP understanding, show-
ing that HCP’s have a distinct appreciation for line plots and bar charts. It is
very clear that they have not tried to re-create the wheel as the visualisation
utilises established techniques, such as timelines seen in LifeLines and interac-
tive features such as the zooming capabilities seen in Midgaard. This simplicity
appeals to the principles which support visual complexity and perception. Sim-
plistic data is represented in well recognised graphs and therefore the learning
curve, trust and acceptability of the system is much higher than that of an in-
terface, in which you have to learn a new way of reading data such as glyph
graphs.
==PAGE:47==
3.2 Sub-Conclusion - Healthcare Visualisation
31
Figure 3.8: Overview of Literature Studies and the graphs and interactive
techniques they utilised
The second paper which this Master’s Thesis will look to build upon is from
Caprani et al, where they explored HCP’s preferences for visualising data. They
provided a dashboard which was achieved through a UCD approach and devel-
==PAGE:48==
32
Literature Background
oped through many iterations. Their work uses many design principles that
relate to this Master’s Thesis. The mock-up interface they oﬀer is highly appli-
cable to the data this project aims to present as they already visualise elements
such as activity patterns. The dashboard ensures that diﬀerent features will
be broken down into digestible information, ensuring the user is not overloaded
with information and can utilise the high glanceability of the design. Caprani et
al also indicate that particular attention should be given the use of terminology
when understanding is of key importance. On top of this, Caprani showed that
the use of sparklines with very little text, plus arrows to indicate the direction
of a patients status is particularly useful for HCP’s. Overall there is adequate
room to build on top of this dashboard representation with a more detailed
graph, whilst keeping the same level of simplicity and visual appeal.
3.3
Commercial Visualisation of Accelerometer
and GPS data
“There is a communication revolution brewing in the modern health care
system fueled by the growth of powerful new health information technologies,
that hold tremendous promise for enhancing the delivery of health care and the
promotion of health.” - Kreps / Neuhauser [KN10]
After giving an in-depth overview of single patient visualisation within health-
care, evidence of commercial based approaches of how accelerometer and GPS
data have been visualised will now be presented.
In the last year, a wealth
of new wearable technology has become available and there has been a surge
in popularity of activity trackers. A thorough search of the current wearable
market has therefore been made. 15 companies have been assessed on how they
visualise accelerometer and GPS data. The focus has been on determining which
graphs have been chosen to display diﬀerent kinds of information in order to
establish which graphs aid understanding from a commercial perspective.
Garmin [Gar16] oﬀer a number of high proﬁle wearable technologies for varying
activities but they are all directed to the Garmin Connect dashboard which
visualises the uploaded data, ﬁgure 3.9. Garmin oﬀers a comprehensive overview
of activity which is fully customisable dependant on user preference. Stacked bar
charts are used to visualise step count, with green representing goal completion
for the day and blue representing the total number of steps if the goal was not
completed, which is backed up by a grey bar indicating how far the user was from
their goal. Partial donut graphs are used to represent goals and progression, with
the bottom third of the graph cut oﬀto allow for more text. GPS data is shown
==PAGE:49==
3.3 Commercial Visualisation of Accelerometer and GPS data
33
directly on a map of where the user went and alongside this their distance, pace
and time are included in text format.
Figure 3.9: Garmin - A very detailed yet highly manageable dashboard which
predominantly utilises stacked bar charts and partial donut graphs
to represent the data - [Gar16]
The Shine 2 [Shi16], appendix A.8.1, is an advanced ﬁtness and sleep monitor.
The main design revolves around the use of thin donut graphs to represent how
much of a current task is completed. The background to these donut graphs
changes between activity and sleep from a solid background colour and graphic
which is confusing and detracts from the main information which is trying to be
communicated. The main activity and sleep values are given under the donut
graph and below this, a timeline is given of all activity and recorded data.
The Jawbone Up 3 [Jaw16], appendix A.8.2, has both activity tracking and
advanced sleep monitoring to name but a few of the features with deep, light and
REM sleep being visualised through a bar chart, which uses diﬀerent colours for
the diﬀerent levels. This is way too complex to comprehend quickly which comes
down to the immense use of diﬀerent colours that creates clutter even though
the interface is fairly minimal. The icons used within the top half of the interface
are also very diﬃcult to see, making misinterpretation a high possibility.
Omron [Omr16] oﬀers a number of wearable healthcare solutions, with activity
tracking being one of them. Omron’s accelerometer sensor detects and measures
in three directions which allows for calculation of calories burned even when
resting. This is visualised through very simple and easy to understand time-
series graphs in their dashboard with steps, distance and calories represented
through diﬀerent colours and interacted with through various granularity points,
ﬁgure 3.10. This could be very interesting to visualise to a HCP for dementia
==PAGE:50==
34
Literature Background
as they oﬀer clear insight into how the PWD is performing on a daily basis.
Figure 3.10: Omron - Omron shows a time-series graphs of steps over a 1
week period, which is speciﬁed by the blue colour. Granularity
settings can be changed in the top right corner and personal bests
are shown in the bottom left through the use of colour, icons and
varying text sizes to emphasise important data - [Omr16]
Spire is a wearable that tracks activity and respiration patterns and in turn can
give insights in current state of mind and other stress notiﬁcations appendix
A.8.3. It is a clip on device that can reduce stress levels by up to 50% [Spi16].
Spire visualises activity, focus and calmness levels through a petal design which
ﬁlls up dependent on the level of the parameter in question, therefore a full
petal would indicate 100 % achievement. The visualisations are very minimal
with icons, text size and colour all being used to enhance the most important
information. A time-series graph is used to represent how the user is progressing
over a speciﬁed time period and green, orange and blue are directly related to
calmness, activity and focus respectively. The petal oﬀers an original design
perspective but one which is intuitive enough to learn instantaneously. How-
ever the background image does cause clutter and whilst it may be included in
order to promote a calming eﬀect, a solid background colour could be less of a
distraction.
Another wearable that aims to incorporate a mental aspect alongside activity
tracking is Hexoskin [Hex16], ﬁgure 3.11. Hexoskin is a specially designed piece
of clothing that can measure breathing rate, steps, pace and calories which can
all give valuable insights to a HCP. Hexoskin’s dashboard allows for easy under-
==PAGE:51==
3.3 Commercial Visualisation of Accelerometer and GPS data
35
standing of such parameters as breathing rate, cadence and activity and due to
the vertical stacking, a user can compare data sets naturally. Interactive zoom
is also included to add depth to the interface and allow the user to manipulate
timescales and gain a deeper understanding of speciﬁc points. This interactive
design method has advantages in that it provides the big picture and allows
for immediate detail upon discovery of something that could prove to be impor-
tant. However, the glanceability capabilities are very minimal for the dashboard
and an end-user would have to explore the data in order to ﬁnd what they are
looking for.
Figure 3.11: Hexoskin - Vertical stacking allows for easy comparison between
parameters. Colour is used to diﬀerentiate parameters and gran-
ularity levels can be adjusted through the zoom - [Hex16]
GoBe tracks any activity and combines accelerometer data with continuous heart
rate monitoring to measure calorie burn [GoB16], appendix A.8.4. GoBe has
a very simplistic design to show sleep cycle over one night or a number of
nights and uses both column charts and point plots to show where speciﬁc
events occurred. On top of this it measures and visualises the quality of sleep.
The GoBe dashboard utilises an event based visualisation to show diﬀerent
events during the sleep cycle which creates a very minimalistic solution. Tooltip
capabilities are enabled to gain more detail and the column charts not only
give depth to the visualisation but allow for simple comparisons over time. One
criticism of the dashboard would be that it does not utilise the space available
in an eﬀective manner, as there is generally too much white space.
The visualisation of sleep is also paramount for Basis [Bas16] who have developed
a sleep activity tracker that can give a sleep score, which is determined from
the amount of deep sleep you get compared to REM sleep and how much you
toss and turn, ﬁgure 3.12. When compared to the visualisation by GoBe the
overall design of Basis provides much more information on a single page without
being overpowering. This makes the Basis dashboard aesthetically pleasing in
==PAGE:52==
36
Literature Background
accordance with the design principles and the use of colour strength to depict
whether a user was in REM sleep (light blue) or deep sleep (dark blue) is smart.
Toss and turns are indicated through an event based timeline and an overall
sleep score percentage is given in the top left hand corner, which shows that
simplicity and high levels of detail are manageable within visualisation.
Figure 3.12: Basis - Visualises sleep patterns through bar charts, that are
backed up by percentage values, text and numbers in the top
and bottom rows, enabling quick glanceability - [Bas16]
Google Fit [Goo16] allows you to eﬀortlessly track any activity such as walking,
running, or cycling whilst recording the speed, route and elevation, ﬁgure 3.13.
Google Fit utilises donut graphs to show just how far or behind a user is with
their levels. Similarly to Omron a text based percentage value is used to back
up the donut graph visualisation and neither would be as eﬀective without each
other. Icons are strongly utilised and icon colours are represented through col-
umn charts which interestingly do not have a y-axis and are instead represented
through a text based overview of what the vertical bar is showing. This provides
a very easy to learn interface but the use of both text and a column chart is
not eﬃcient, especially when the text is reiterated on the left-hand side of the
dashboard.
Moves [Mov16] is an activity diary of the user’s life and is an increasingly popular
app due to the minimal interaction between device and user as it automatically
adjusts to track activities such as walking, running and cycling, appendix A.8.5.
This data is turned into a storyline of the day, which shows precisely what a user
was doing throughout the day. The simplicity of the timeline, enables instant
understanding for the viewer, whilst at the same time giving information which
could be very powerful to a HCP within the DCS. Bubble charts are used to
emphasis the amount of activity, with larger bubbles equating to more exercise
for that particular parameter.
FitBit Alta [Fit16b] is a wearable that includes automatic sleep and activity
==PAGE:53==
3.3 Commercial Visualisation of Accelerometer and GPS data
37
Figure 3.13: Google Fit - Automatically detects walking, running and walking
activities. Visualised through column charts and utilisation of
colour - [Goo16]
recognition and is visualised through a dashboard, ﬁgure 3.14. Step activity
is shown through a column chart with green indicating that a target has been
met and yellow indicating when minimal steps were taken. Interestingly this is
given through 2 hour increments, so you can precisely see when most activity
has taken place. A series of donut graphs, similar to those of Google Fit are
then used to show distance, calories and sleep.
Figure 3.14: Fit Bit Alta - Similarly to Garmin, Fit Bit oﬀers a dashboard
overview with a strong use of donut graphs and column charts -
[Fit16b]
FitPort [Fit16a] is the ﬁtness dashboard for Apple Health app’s, collecting data
from a number of apps and combining them in one location. This includes steps,
==PAGE:54==
38
Literature Background
calories, sleep and water intake. It oﬀers a very minimal design which shows only
the most necessary of information, which is represented through either donut
charts, time-series graphs or column charts, ﬁgure 3.15. Although minimalistic,
the attention to detail is highly viewable which can be seen through intricate
lines within the donut graphs to represent trends and the moving average line
seen on the column chart. Smiley faces are also used to represent good and
bad values with regards to weekly totals and granularity levels can be changed
between days and weeks. The light grey text against the dark grey background
is however diﬃcult to read yet this information is generally never of high priority
and could in turn only emphasise the more important data.
Figure 3.15: Fit Port - Fit Port creates an identity through the use of black
and blue as predominent colours.
Column charts, time-series
graphs and donut charts are utilised - [Fit16a]
3.4
Sub-Conclusion Commercial
In conclusion, the visualisation of accelerometer and GPS data on the latest
smartphones and smartwatches is becoming increasingly apparent. The latest
wearable technology visualises accelerometer and GPS data and focuses pre-
dominately on level of simplicity. The use of either time-series graphs, donut
charts and bar charts was highly apparent throughout the majority of applica-
tions. Layout, colour, text and icons diﬀerentiated enough in each application
to ensure they had their own identity. On top of this, whilst each application
visualised some form of accelerometer or GPS data, they were reﬁned enough
to ensure that the content was highly applicable to what the end user wanted.
15 wearable technologies have been reviewed that visualise accelerometer and
GPS data and similarly to the ﬁrst section of this chapter, an overview of the
graph types used within each, as well the interactive visualisation techniques
==PAGE:55==
3.4 Sub-Conclusion Commercial
39
that were used, can be seen below ﬁgure 3.16. This information from ﬁgure 3.16
will be used in the overall evaluation of the literature and compared directly
against the ﬁndings from the healthcare visualisation review. This comparison
is looking predominantly at which graphs were most commonly used throughout
healthcare and commercial perspectives.
Figure 3.16: This commercial overview shows which graphs and charts are
utilised by the aforementioned applications
It is clear that the graphs utilised within healthcare and commercial settings
vary. Donut graphs have been strongly used in this commercial setting, whereas
they were not used in the previous healthcare visualisation review. Time-series
graphs and bar charts were once again highly utilised as were the interactive
techniques of focus + context and overview + detail.
Overall, Basis and FitPort oﬀer the most convincing solutions in terms of level
of understanding, for the visualisation of accelerometer and GPS data. The
visualisation of sleep activity from Basis is highly detailed yet simple enough
to understand instantly. The simplicity, selective use of a few colours and the
varying degree of text sizes, create a very intuitive design that gives an overview
of a users daily patterns very quickly. This type of activity could be highly useful
for a HCP within the DCS in assessing their overall daily performance. All of
the required information is present and the information which can not be gained
from the bar chart visualisations is displayed either on the top or bottom parts
of the interface. This combination of graphs and text compliments each other
very well.
==PAGE:56==
40
Literature Background
FitPort also present a highly eﬀective solution that would translate instantly
to the visualisation of accelerometer and GPS data. The column charts and
time-series graphs give immediate recognition of important information but also
entice a user to explore the visualisations in more detail. The added inclusion
of a sparkline within the donut graph works seamlessly and it oﬀers the only
visualisation of trend and goal analysis within the same visualisation.
3.5
Chapter Conclusion
A comprehensive search and evaluation of both literature and commercial vi-
sualisations has been made, within the scope of the stated search terms. The
overall aim of the literature review was to ﬁnd out what graphs have been used
in both healthcare and commercial settings. This gives a concrete base for the
establishment of requirements and development of the ﬁrst prototype. In as-
sessing which graphs have been used throughout literature, further assessments
were also made as to how the design principles stated in 2.2.2 were utilised.
The two sub-conclusions in this chapter have provided insight into which graphs
and interactive techniques have been utilised in the speciﬁed domains. Findings
from these conclusions have now been compared and ﬁgure 3.17 shows the top
5 charts of use throughout the literature review. Furthermore a table show-
ing a comparison between what graphs were used for visualisation across both
healthcare speciﬁc and commercial parts of the literature review can be seen in
appendix A.9.1. The methodology approach towards this research has also been
evaluated and appendix A.9.2 clearly shows UCD is strongly favoured for the
development of visualisations, with 72% of studies using this approach.
These ﬁgures show that time-series graphs proved to be the most utilised graph
across both commercial and literature based research. Point plots have been
highly used within the healthcare research appearing in 36%, appendix A.9.1,
of the solutions, which was similar to bar charts which appeared in 32% of
the visualisations studied. However when looking at the use of point plots and
bar charts for accelerometer and GPS data from a commercial perspective then
their usage is relatively minimal in comparison with only just over 13% for both.
Another interesting result from the literature review was that donut graphs were
rarely seen throughout all research of healthcare visualisation but when it came
to the commercial visualisation of accelerometer and GPS data then they were
highly visible, featuring in over 33% of the reviewed material. This could be
attributed to the limited amount of information they can provide and their
inability to show trends.
==PAGE:57==
3.5 Chapter Conclusion
41
Figure 3.17: Overview of top 5 charts within healthcare and commercial re-
search
In conclusion the ﬁndings from this literature research show that time-series
graphs, bar charts, column charts and point plots should be the graphs used for
the visualisation of accelerometer and GPS data in prototype V1. Time-series
graphs and point plots however do generally show the same trend information
and therefore one should be chosen for further exploration. In addition to this a
selective use of colour, minimalistic design and careful choice of terminology are
also essential in communicating information eﬀectively. With regards to interac-
tive techniques, varying levels of detail should be provided through overview +
detail and focus + context interactivity methods, which will be provided in the
proof of concept. Furthermore it was clear a UCD approach should be adopted
for the development of visualisations.
This literature review has clearly shown that the research into visualisation
of eHealth data is vast. However there are a number of areas which are not
extensively covered throughout the literature. The main areas in which this
Master’s Thesis will add to existing literature below are detailed below:
1. Provide insight into how the visualisation of accelerometer and GPS data
can aid HCP’s speciﬁcally within the dementia care system.
2. Provide insight into what measures of accelerometer and GPS data HCP’s
deem to be clinically relevant
3. Provide insight into what visualisation methods and techniques present the
highest level of understanding of accelerometer and GPS data to HCP’s.
==PAGE:58==
42
Literature Background
The following chapter will detail the requirements that have been established
directly from the literature review. These requirements will form the basis for
the development and testing phases and will need to be fulﬁlled to successfully
visualise accelerometer and GPS data to HCP’s at Rigshospitalet Glostrup. The
theoretical frameworks which have been chosen based on this literature and the
requirements will also be established.
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 4
Towards Requirements
“We spend a lot of time designing the bridge, but not enough time thinking
about the people who are crossing it.” – Dr. Prabhjot Singh, Director of
Systems Design at the Earth Institute
This chapter describes the requirements which have been established from the
evidence seen in the literature review. Furthermore the use of established the-
oretical frameworks are detailed.
4.1
Establishing Requirements
From the literature review it was established that the use of time-series graphs,
column charts, bar charts and point plots are highly preferential in the visu-
alisation of accelerometer and GPS data. Furthermore the key requirements
for adding to research are to understand what type of visualisations give most
meaning to a HCP and what measures are most clinically relevant.
A successful visualisation would therefore be seen as one that is fully compre-
hensible to a HCP and one that would provide great assistance to their daily
==PAGE:60==
44
Towards Requirements
workﬂow. Therefore ﬁve key areas have been derived, which will set the plat-
form to develop visualisations for accelerometer and GPS data. Ultimately these
requirements provide an evaluation criteria for the testing of a prototype which
is predominantly focused on the level of understanding of the visualisations. By
following these requirements a meaningful and functional proof of concept will
be developed in the form of a website.
1. Utilise time-series graphs, bar charts, column charts and point plots
• Time-series graphs were the most utilised graph throughout the liter-
ature review. They were used to visualise trends which is paramount
in communication to HCP’s.
Time-series graphs will support the
communication of behaviour over time and will provide the opportu-
nity to show gradual and sudden changes in behaviour. Time-series
graphs also provide a great way to visualise comparisons between dif-
ferent categories which is a point of exploration. Bar charts, column
charts and point plots also proved to be of high use throughout the
literature review, once again giving a strong sense of understanding
across multiple stakeholders. These graphs need to be utilised for the
the visualisation of accelerometer and GPS data.
2. Build on existing design principles to ensure simplicity and minimise cog-
nitive load
• The literature review showed that design principles oﬀer a wide array
of enhancements for the visualisation of data. It was primarily seen
that the type of data and what information is of most importance to
the end user, determined the selection of graph choice. However, fol-
lowing design principles to then build on top of these with the use of
colour, wording, and consistency has proved to be very advantageous
in terms of understanding and acceptance. Colour was commonly
used to show intensity levels, which could be utilised in the visual-
isation of the DC of a PWD and length could be also be used to
simulate time. On top of this the prototype should be simplistic,
have no clutter and should use text appropriately.
3. Use a UCD approach to ensure relevant and meaningful feedback
• There was an extremely high use of UCD approaches within the re-
search which can been seen in appendix A.9.2. The ﬁgure shows that
72% of the explored literature studies, utilised a UCD approach. This
approach was mainly utilised because by applying design principles
and strategies early in the design process, eﬀective visualisation of
eHealth data can facilitate analysis. In doing so, information is visu-
alised and subsequently communicated in a far more beneﬁcial man-
ner than if the end-users were to be included at a later stage. It was
==PAGE:61==
4.1 Establishing Requirements
45
clear that visualisations need to thoroughly adopt a UCD approach,
in order to produce optimal designS that gain acceptance from HCP’s
[HSJ+12].
4. Use interactive techniques to assist abstraction
• The importance of the inclusion of interactive techniques was clear
throughout the research. They have proved to be essential in cre-
ating an intuitive visualisation that is naturally useable by HCP’s.
The most common techniques applied within the research are focus
+ context and zooming as one or the other has been seen in over
90%, ﬁgure 3.8 and 3.16, of the studies. Whilst all of the interactive
techniques appear to provide an additional positive eﬀect to visuali-
sation, the ability for the user to explore, abstract or elaborate and
connect are most beneﬁcial [YYSJ07]. By designing an prototype
that promotes exploration, it immediately entices a user to ﬁnd out
more by the means of trial and error, naturally allowing them to
learn how to navigate through the visualisation. Therefore providing
graphs for varying time periods is a requirement for the prototype.
5. Use a combination of commercial and healthcare data visualisations
• The literature review showed that in some instances, such as donut
graphs from a commercial perspective, a visualisation was highly ap-
parent in one context and not in the other. Furthermore the design of
commercially based visualisations is diﬀerent to healthcare as the end
user is diﬀerent. Interestingly a number of early visualisation meth-
ods from healthcare are now dominant in commercial visualisation
of the data collected from the most advanced wearables. The work
done by Tufte on simplicity is shown to be as powerful as ever, with
his Sparklines in use in a number of high proﬁle applications. Time-
Lines, one of the early trendsetters in visualisation research have also
been represented through hugely popular modern apps like Moves
who track and visualise a user’s day through GPS recognition. From
a commercial perspective the use of a dashboard to give a holistic
overview is hugely apparent, whereas from the healthcare visualisa-
tions a dashboard was not as common. This goes a long way to show
that although there may be diﬀerences in visualisations in healthcare
and commercial perspectives there is a crossover between them. At
the same time it is also assumed that HCP’s are highly familiar with
understanding varying graph types and data. This provides a level
of ﬂexibility when developing graphs which could be beneﬁcial when
exploring how to visualise these speciﬁc measures.
The research objectives of providing insights of how to ensure eHealth infor-
==PAGE:62==
46
Towards Requirements
mation is communicated in an understandable manner and how to determine
what information is clinically relevant, have been key for consideration when es-
tablishing requirements from the literature review. Therefore the requirements
below are established through what information needs to be visualised and how
this should be done. These requirements will be used as the base for the devel-
opment of the ﬁrst prototype and consequently a proof of concept in the form
of a website.
The prior work on this project, section 1.1, dictates that visualisations will be
made for accelerometer and GPS data. Furthermore it has been established that
the four particular measures of PA, DC, WB and AC will be the measurements
for visualisation. Therefore these requirements were previously considered. On
top of this, the literature review has showed that time-series graphs, column
charts, bar charts and point plots should be used for visualisation. In order to
extend upon these requirements the following will be visualised:
• Trends in the data
• Changes over time of a patient in the following time periods - week, month,
3 months, 6 months and 1 year
• Sudden and gradual changes in data
The technological background in chapter 2 has also helped establish the high
level design requirements of the prototype. These design principles were ex-
plored throughout the literature review and it is considered that the following
design principles should be adhered to in the visualisation of accelerometer and
GPS data:
• Consistent colours
• Concise, understandable language and tone
• Consistent layout and design
• High glance-ability
• Minimalistic design with no clutter
4.2
Establishing Methodology
The literature review has provided strong reasoning behind the choice of ap-
proach for this Master’s Thesis.
UCD was highly apparent throughout the
==PAGE:63==
4.2 Establishing Methodology
47
literature, allowing for meaningful design and validation. This is only enhanced
through the further use of user experience (UX) and lean user experience ap-
proaches. These approaches not only aid the visualisation of information and
how it is communicated but strive for optimised systems which healthcare can
continuously learn from. They promote design that requires equal considera-
tion of humans, machines and context, which aids actionable insights and the
creation of intelligent visualisations.
4.2.1
User-Centered Design
A UCD approach helps understand the needs, wants and limitations of com-
municating eHealth information to HCP’s as it endeavours to ask and answer
user speciﬁc questions. Furthermore it involves embracing ambiguity as a pre-
requisite for new design, creating a very empathetic approach, in which a so-
lution can be developed that takes into account the HCP perspective. The 7
phases of UCD are illustrated in Figure 4.1:
Figure 4.1: The 7 Stages of User Centered Design - [Bri16]
==PAGE:64==
48
Towards Requirements
4.2.2
Communication through User Experience
UX is a broad term which indicates the look, feel and overall acceptance of a
system. It works hand-in-hand with UCD as even beautiful visualisations will
quickly be abandoned if they do not give the user the information they require.
Figure 4.2 visualises an all encompassing UX model [Cao16] which incorporates a
number of existing UX frameworks that will be utilised throughout development
and testing.
Figure 4.2: A UX model for Project Success - [Cao16]
4.2.3
Lean User Experience
UCD and UX give a clear direction for methodology but to limit the time
constraints generally associated with these approaches a lean UX approach has
been adopted to prototyping. This allows for the creation of a minimum viable
==PAGE:65==
4.3 Chapter Conclusion
49
product, that forms the skeleton of the end goal. An iterative process is then
utilised to ﬁll in the missing pieces. The key here lies within the importance
of early validation to ensure that the time associated with the development of
design intricacies are avoided so that fast, eﬀective prototyping can take place.
This approach can be seen in Figure 4.3:
Figure 4.3: Adopted from the ’Importance of Early Validation’ by Laura Klein
- [Kle13]
4.3
Chapter Conclusion
In conclusion this chapter has established the requirements for this Master’s
Thesis. It was established that the utilisation of graphs (time-series, column,
bar, point plots), interactive techniques and design principles are essential to
communicate eﬀectively. These requirements will be followed throughout devel-
opment and testing of the prototype. UCD has been chosen as the theoretical
approach and is extended upon through the use of UX and Lean UX design.
The theories mentioned throughout this chapter help establish communicative
strategies and visualisations in a structured yet highly explorative manner and
are formed purposely through an iterative process in which feedback from the
end-user is of vital importance. Chapter 5 will now document the development
and testing phases of this Master’s Thesis.
==PAGE:66==
50
Towards Requirements
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 5
Development and Testing
“Fail often so you can succeed sooner” – Tom Kelley, IDEO
5.1
Requirements in Action
This chapter describes the development and testing phases of this Master’s The-
sis. Prototypes are developed and iteratively tested through two usability tests
before being presented in a workshop at Rigshospitalet Glostrup. Details of all
participants can be seen in Appendix A.10 and methodology is listed below.
Each phase of testing has a strong emphasis on validation in order to gain feed-
back that aids the development of the prototype. The ﬁnal validation is made
directly with HCP’s during the workshop and this forms the proof of concept.
The evaluation criteria for the usability tests and workshop are focused on the
understanding of the presented visualisations and whether or not the measures
are clinically relevant.
Figure 5.1 shows the plan that has been developed as to how the requirements
established in chapter 4 will be developed over the course of usability testing
and the workshop.
==PAGE:68==
52
Development and Testing
Figure 5.1: Overview of iterative plan to gain feedback for graph visualisations
The programs that will be utilised to design, develop and present visualisations
of accelerometer and GPS data are listed below. These programs have speciﬁ-
cally been chosen as they will compliment the UCD and iterative approach.
• Sketch
– Sketch is a design tool that allows for the creation of prototypes and
aids the user experience. It is built to perform iteratively in order to
gain fast feedback.
• High Charts
– High Charts is a website that allows developers to setup interactive
charts for their web-pages. This will be utilised to include interactive
techniques.
• JSFiddle
– JSFiddle creates an environment for rapid testing of javascript. The
interactive techniques are coded here in javascript before they are
exported for later use.
• Tableau
==PAGE:69==
5.2 Method
53
– Tableau is a data visualisation product which allows a user to drag
and drop data directly into speciﬁed ﬁelds for easy creation of charts.
The interface is quick and simple to use and it can handle large
amounts of data. This is used alongside Sketch and High Charts for
creation of the visualisations.
• Wix
– Wix is the website that oﬀers website development. Graphs will be
embedded on individual webpages so that HCP’s can interact with
the website.
5.2
Method
The visualisations from usability testing 1 and 2 were presented to 5 students
at the Technical University of Denmark on the 22nd and the 29th of April
2016 respectively.
Details of all participants can be seen in Appendix A.10.
Participants received an overview of the project as a whole and each individual
measure but no detail was given as to what the measure was trying to show. The
purpose of the usability test was to gain insights into the participants immediate
understanding of the graphs that were presented. Participants were asked what
they believed to be the purpose of each graph and what they felt were the
positive and negative elements of the information they were viewing. The data
collected was done so by receiving direct feedback from the participant and
taking notes. Students use accelerometer and GPS sensors in various devices
on a daily basis so they most certainly qualify as an appropriate test group. It
was therefore envisaged that the views and opinions of these participants would
translate to that of the HCP’s at this early stage of prototyping. Findings were
compared against each other to ﬁnd a common theme and each comment was
judged to whether or not it had minor or major signiﬁcance.
For the workshop, participants were recruited directly in co-ordination with
Rigshospitalet Glostrup.
A poster, appendix A.11, explaining this Master’s
Thesis was developed and distributed between HCP’s within the dementia care
unit. The poster called for HCP’s within the DCS to explore a prototype which
visualised accelerometer and GPS data that was applicable to dementia patients.
The workshop took place on the 4th May 2016 between 12:30 and 13:00 at
Rigshospitalet Glostrup, Denmark and included 3 doctors and 5 nurses from
the dementia clinic.
A short introduction (5 minutes) was given to explain the Master’s Thesis and
set the scene for the workshop. This included establishing the overall aims and
==PAGE:70==
54
Development and Testing
an introductory question was asked, to gather how much knowledge partici-
pants currently had on accelerometer and GPS sensors. This was followed by
an overview of some of the possibilities accelerometer and GPS data can oﬀer.
Participants were then asked to open a pre-printed handout, appendix A.12,
within which visualisations for the dashboard, PA, WB, AC, DC and a com-
bination chart were documented. This formed the base for a group discussion.
Pictures directly from the workshop can be seen in Appendix A.13. Participants
were asked 5 questions for each of these visualisations, with the questions used
to steer the workshop in the right direction and ultimately create discussion
points:
1. What information is being presented in this graph?
2. What would you change if you had the possibility?
3. Would you ﬁnd this information valuable to your work?
4. Why would you use it? Why wouldn’t you?
5. If you could add any other data what would that be?
5.3
Prototype V1
From the requirements established in chapter 4 the following graphs have been
developed for the selected measures for the ﬁrst prototype, ﬁgures 5.2 - 5.5.
Figure 5.2: Yearly PA - Prototype V1 - This time-series graph shows the
amount of active time spent in minutes over a selected time period
and shows the yearly active time per month and a sudden decrease
in activity from July.
==PAGE:71==
5.3 Prototype V1
55
Figure 5.3: Yearly AC - Prototype V1 - This can quickly show if the life space
of the PWD is decreasing, so the HCP can gain a quick overview.
Figure 5.4: Weekly WB - Prototype V1 - WB is visualised through a bar
chart. This shows the weekly behaviour of the PWD through how
far they have wandered from their routine distances.
Figure 5.5: Yearly DC - Prototype V1 - A diﬀerential column chart was chosen
as it gives the opportunity to visualise the diﬀerence between two
sets of data through a column chart.
==PAGE:72==
56
Development and Testing
5.4
Validation through Usability Testing 1
The results below detail the key ﬁndings of this usability test one, which includes
direct quotes from the participants.
5.4.1
Physical Activity V1
The main feedback received for the visualisation of PA was there was not a huge
understanding of what the data was actually showing. Is was therefore not clear
what ’active’ stood for and what level of activity this included. However the
algorithms which provide an overall ’active time’ value are outside the scope of
this project and it is assumed that a value will be created that is inclusive of
all PA. It was established that the key aim with this visualisation should be to
show a trend of PA over time, which can show whether a decrease was rapid or
gradual.
5.4.2
Area Coverage V1
Overall the AC was received well. One confusion that arose was whether life
space should be measured in area rather than distance. Life space is measured
through area, perimeter, mean distance from home and time away from home
[Tun13]. The use of distance came under scrutiny as one participant commented:
"Distance does not provide the information as to whether a PWD took 1x 5km
trip or 5x 1km trips"
It was therefore suggested that area should be chosen for further utilisation as
distance and time could be misleading if a PWD is going to and from their
neighbours house 10x a day. This would therefore not show that this particular
patient is more reclusive than somewhere who travels to the shops, the church
or any other POI. It was suggested that if AC was measured by area then this
would provide an interesting solution in showing the overall area as it could
naturally grow and deﬂate to simulate the life space. Three participants also
felt that having so many columns, especially one for each week, was excessive
and suggested that another graph should be chosen.
==PAGE:73==
5.4 Validation through Usability Testing 1
57
5.4.3
Wandering Behaviour V1
A mixed opinion was received for the bar chart visualisation for WB. The bar
chart was understandable and it was clear that there was a comparison of data.
However three participants questioned whether a HCP would be interested in
what POI’s each patient has:
"Wouldn’t a doctor just want to know how much the individual has been wander-
ing over a speciﬁc time period and not if it happened on the way to the church?"
This prompted a productive discussion which tried to established which infor-
mation HCP’s such as doctors and nurses would most likely be interested in. It
was agreed that overall values and how drastically they are deviating from their
normal range is of highest importance. It was also suggested that the graph
does not account for impromptu trips, with one comment saying:
"What would happen if the dementia patient went for a walk or to anywhere
other than a stated POI?"
This was again a valid point and one that would be looked into in the following
iteration.
5.4.4
Daily Cycle V1
Validation of DC showed that the visualisation of information during the evening
was too ambiguous as it was diﬃcult to accurately track out of bed information.
The diﬀerential column chart, ﬁgure 5.5, was in fact very well received due to
it’s high understandability and level of detail but the discussion concluded that
visualisation should be based around the overall DC of the PWD, so unfortu-
nately it would be unavailable for use. However visualising the DC from when
the PWD has the watch on, can show routines and patterns which are highly
valuable so the next iteration should show how structured a PWD’s life is.
5.4.5
Conclusion
In conclusion the ﬁrst iteration gave valuable insights through validation into
how to progress further with each visualisation.
The following lists the key
points for each measure for what needs to be changed:
==PAGE:74==
58
Development and Testing
• PA - Focus solely on trends and active time as an overall value
• AC - Concentrate on area instead of distance
• WB - Remove speciﬁc POI categories
• DC - Visualise routine and not nighttime behaviour
• A further interesting addition that was suggested by a number of partici-
pants was to merge measures to give a combination of data in one chart
==PAGE:75==
5.5 Prototype V2
59
5.5
Prototype V2
Feedback from usability testing 1 has been incorporated into the visualisations
for prototype V2 which are presented below, ﬁgures 5.6 - 5.10.
Figure 5.6: Yearly PA - Prototype V2 - Minor changes to PA from V1 but
participants were updated that the data would come as an overall
PA value.
Figure 5.7: Yearly AC - Prototype V2 - AC is now represented through an
area range chart, which is inclusive of an average life space line
plot. If the range starts on 0 then this means they only went out
once that day. If they went out more than once, the lowest range
is equal to the shortest distance they travelled.
==PAGE:76==
60
Development and Testing
Figure 5.8: Yearly WB - Prototype V2 - WB is now visualised through an area
chart taking away the POI’s which are too speciﬁc and not needed
by the HCP’s. It keeps the ability to see how much you deviate
from the norm and it can be made relevant to each patient.
Figure 5.9: 6 Month Overview DC - Prototype V2 - DC is now visualised
through an area chart with a spline, to show the amount of time
the PWD goes to bed within speciﬁed time periods.
Two plot
bands are included to give an understanding of the routine times
the patient goes to bed and therefore you can immediately see how
much they deviate from this.
==PAGE:77==
5.5 Prototype V2
61
Figure 5.10: Combination of monthly accelerometer and GPS data - Proto-
type V2 - On request of the previous feedback PA and DC have
now been joined together to list the amount of hours of sleep, ac-
tive and sedentary behaviours on an average basis, over a month.
5.5.1
Validation through Usability Testing 2
The results below detail the key ﬁndings of usability testing two which includes
direct quotes from the participants.
5.5.2
Physical Activity V2
With a renewed understanding of the PA graph, participants thought that whilst
the graph clearly showed a trend, the level of detail was minimal and there was
no need to make the granularity so big. It was felt that it was still possible to
include lots of data points and at the same time see a trend. This was reiterated
by a comment from one participant who said:
"You lose a lot of resolution with just one point for each month".
By visualising the data in this manner you can easily miss extremes in data
which could be important. Furthermore greater detail will only help in providing
a more eﬀective overall picture of the PWD’s functional routines.
Another
suggestion from two participants was that it would be helpful to zoom in on
particular points, which will be a key feature when looking into the addition of
interactivity.
==PAGE:78==
62
Development and Testing
5.5.3
Area Coverage V2
Feedback showed that the choice of area for the visualisation of AC was wise
as it relates directly to mobility. The choice of graph in itself was received very
well by all participants who felt that the ability to see the range of life space
as well as the monthly average gave the most important information within
one view. It was thought that the area graph gives both range and average
in a very understandable manner, much more understandable than the double
y-axis graph previously shown. The graph was criticised however for failing to
include a legend which stopped some participants immediately understanding
what they were looking at. The use of a subtitle was also suggested to provide
even greater clarity.
5.5.4
Wandering Behaviour V2
Similarly to AC the overall conclusion from discussions about the WB graph
was that it provided a large amount of information within one graph. It showed
quickly and clearly if someone is beginning to wander a lot more than they
used to and therefore whether or not they require more assistance. Furthermore
participants liked the graph as it showed how much the patient is wandering
in total and not on individual trips. Therefore, even if the patient wandered
on each individual trip, it would still be accounted for as it gives an overall
distance. However, the meaning of routine distance was questioned by a number
of participants and because it is derived from an assumption there could be an
expectation that the HCP’s would have the same question. Routine distance
was also questioned with regards to why would that not show a consistent value
but this is due to the amount in kilometers, and therefore a lower number would
mean that the PWD is going out less. It was suggested that as this graph does
provide an appropriate amount of detail no further changes would be needed
before presentation to HCP’s.
5.5.5
Daily Cycle V2
The overall feedback received from the visualisation of DC was not as positive
when compared to the other charts. The time period in which the current data
and plot bands work within was diﬃcult to discern. Therefore a chart showing
the last 6 months of activity was meaningless when comparing to the plot bands,
as the time frame was not relative and diﬃcult to understand what the estab-
lished activity patterns were currently. Overall it was thought that the graph
==PAGE:79==
5.5 Prototype V2
63
deﬁnitely shows how consistent a PWD is but it does not give much informa-
tion about a trend as it focuses on an average over a long period. Therefore this
graph should be reconsidered and a new visualisation should be made.
5.5.6
Combination V2
Overall, participants liked how the combination of accelerometer and GPS data
is shown. Participants understood that the focus with this graph is to show if
a person is becoming less active. It was thought by a number of participants
that the hours could relate directly to states, so it is understandable to see
what activities took place and generally at what time do they do so, instead of
just stating number of hours. However a contradictory opinion did state that
just by stating the number of hours you can clearly see a change on a monthly
basis. Another comment was that WB should not be included within this graph
as the out of home and in home activities are both saying something about
mobility whereas WB goes into the category of safety. It was suggested by three
participants that colour should be used to distinguish between level of activity
and therefore sedentary and more active states. Furthermore, it was thought
that this glanceable graph shows how things are changing in a very holistic way
and would be highly beneﬁcial.
5.5.7
Conclusion
Overall it was viewed that the graphs chosen were appropriate and provided
clear understanding of the information they endeavoured to portray. However
they lacked substance on a number of occasions and it was considered that
overall more detail should be given in the appropriate circumstances. It was
accepted that the HCP would not want to go into detail for each and every
patient but maybe this would be beneﬁcial for every 30th patient, so the option
should be there. This would provide an enhanced level of ﬂexibility to the HCP
and promote more personalised and individual care. It was also considered that
this level of detail could also be enhanced with the inclusion of a dashboard,
which could give an overall view of how the patient is progressing. The key
changes that need to be made and included are:
• PA - More detail is needed in order not to loose resolution
• AC - Include legend and subtitle
• WB - Ready to present to the workshop
==PAGE:80==
64
Development and Testing
• DC - New visualisation needed as plot bands were too diﬃcult to under-
stand
• Combination - Remove WB from the graph
• Include a dashboard
==PAGE:81==
5.6 Prototype V3
65
5.6
Prototype V3
“Graphics and design are basic to how we communicate the meaning of data” -
Edward Tufte
Feedback from usability testing 2 has been incorporated into the visualisations
for prototype V3 which are used for the workshop at Rigshospitalet Glostrup,
ﬁgures 5.11 - 5.16.
Figure 5.11: Yearly PA - Prototype V3 - Level of detail has been greatly en-
hanced for the PA graph. There are now more data points, mean-
ing resolution is not lost, giving a more comprehensive trend.
Figure 5.12: Yearly AC - Prototype V3 - A legend and subtitle has been in-
cluded to ensure that it was possible to immediately understand
the range area and average life space line
==PAGE:82==
66
Development and Testing
Figure 5.13: Yearly WB - Prototype V3 - No changes made
Figure 5.14: Yearly DC - Prototype V3 - Now visualised through a column
range chart showing if their day is getting shorter or longer.
Figure 5.15: Combination of accelerometer data and GPS data over 6 months
- Prototype V3 - Wandering behaviour has been removed.
==PAGE:83==
5.6 Prototype V3
67
Figure 5.16: Dashboard overview for HCP’s - Prototype V3 - Gives the HCP
the option to quickly see an overview of the PWD without having
to got into too much detail
5.6.1
Validation through Rigshospitalet Workshop
Feedback was received directly at this stage from HCP’s at Rigshospitalet Glostrup
which is detailed in the validation feedback below.
5.6.2
Physical Activity V3
The graph for PA was seen as highly understandable. HCP’s could immediately
see and understand how active the PWD had been and furthermore it was seen
as clinically relevant. The HCP’s naturally understood the time-series graph
which gave a quick overview within a selected timeframe. One of the HCP’s
commented:
"This information would be of interest as it would document levels of activity
and this could be used by us to see a sign of sickness - so deﬁnitely yes, it is
useful."
The HCP’s went on to explain that the lack of PA would be seen as an expres-
sion for general weakness and lack of motivation which could be a by product of
cognitive problems such as depression. Whilst the graph did display PA eﬀec-
tively it was criticised for not displaying enough meaning behind the data. The
HCP’s suggested that whilst they could see that PA was decreasing they would
have to seek further knowledge from the caregiver or spouse to fully compre-
hend why the PWD has been particular inactive on certain days or in certain
time periods. The visualisation of diﬀerent time periods however was seen as
==PAGE:84==
68
Development and Testing
very beneﬁcial, with information from 1 week up to 1 year being highly useful.
An extra comment was made that said the positioning of the legend should be
used just as it is with AC and WB so that there is more consistency, helping to
establish a recognition eﬀect.
5.6.3
Area Coverage V3
The HCP’s understanding of AC was initially very low. They felt that the AC
was showing the same data as PA and could not diﬀerentiate between both of
them. This assumption was however questioned by one HCP who commented:
"Does this graph show area coverage?
What happens if a PWD is walking
100km’s in circles then it does not relate and that would not tell us anything?"
Interestingly this relates directly back to previous feedback in which distance,
as the unit of measurement for AC, is irrelevant and therefore area should be
used. After the initial misunderstandings, the graph was received very well.
It was accepted as a very useful graph for understanding the range in which
a PWD travels regularly, which was seen as particularly useful information for
the caregiver or dementia co-ordinator.
One area for improvement that was
suggested, was to include more detail such as elements of PA, as it was thought
that AC as a stand alone graph was limited in what it could show. The overall
suggestion was therefore that AC and PA should be incorporated into one graph.
5.6.4
Wandering Behaviour V3
HCP’s felt that this graph of WB was in fact more important than AC. They
felt that this high level of importance was due to the fact that is was very
informative to know how far a patient can walk oﬀfrom their normal route.
This data would give much greater insight into what was currently available as
one HCP particularly pointed out:
"WB is something you cannot know when they just walk around - you don’t know
the distance - I think that is very important."
There was however, a large discussion on the meaning of routine distance. This
was expected and there was very mixed feelings which both showed understand-
ing and misunderstanding of what was meant by routine distance:
"I think that the actual distance is what he has actually walked and then it is
==PAGE:85==
5.6 Prototype V3
69
compared to routine distance."
"I cannot see what the diﬀerence is between routine and actual distance so that
would need to be explained or changed. It is just that he has been more active in
these weeks than he has been in the past and he has been more active than the
year before, that is not likely, it is just not clear what it means, absolutely not,
is it average for the last year or what is it?"
This feedback showed that there was not an acceptable level of understanding
for this graph. Furthermore it was too easy to speculate over the true meaning
of data for this graph and they felt it would be diﬃcult to diﬀerentiate when the
PWD is taking a routine trip to the supermarket or an impromptu walk with
their daughter. However, it was accepted by all HCP’s that this information
was clinically relevant and the trend of the data over time is highly beneﬁcial,
that could further be improved with more detail in the graph.
5.6.5
Daily Cycle V3
The use of the term daily cycle was an initial confusion point as a number of
HCP’s felt that this related to hours spent on a bicycle. However, the following
discussion showed that their understanding by the end was very clear in that
the graph showed what time the PWD went to bed and got up. The information
was seen as interesting:
"I like that you can see whether a patient is becoming more and more conﬁned
to their bed."
It was suggested the activities during the night would provide a greater source
of insight but this led to the discussion that it is assumed that the PWD would
charge their watch overnight. This was seen as very much a weak point for this
particular measure as the HCP’s believed it was highly likely that the watch
could come oﬀat any particular moment and it could not be expected that they
will take the watch oﬀjust before bed and when they get up. The HCP believed
that the gap in between charging the watch provided a lot of information and
the data visualised does not show whether the PWD is awake all night, feeling
lonely and depressed or actually sleeping. One of the comments was:
"You have no idea when they actually go to bed or sleep? It is just when they
take the watch oﬀ? What if he is wandering around all night?"
However, overall it was accepted that if the information could be gathered pre-
cisely of the times they go to bed and get up then this would still be interesting
==PAGE:86==
70
Development and Testing
data.
5.6.6
Combination V3
This graph was seen to be very appealing to the HCP’s with one comment
saying:
"This is a great graph, it is very very useful."
The usefulness was attributed to the combination of data on one graph and
the fact that you can quickly see how diﬀerent categories such as sedentary
behaviours are increasing or decreasing alongside the amount of sleep was very
attractive as a data set. However one HCP did question the validity of this data
as we can not fully measure when and how much a person is actually sleeping,
so that data is meaningless in her opinion. On top of this, the HCP’s would
prefer much more detailed information with regards to sedentary behaviours as
they felt it was important to understand what particular state the PWD was
in. One of the comments was:
"I need to know precisely what this sedentary behaviour covers. It doesn’t show
at all if they are lying awake feeling lonely or scared - Therefore it is a limited
amount of information."
5.6.7
Dashboard V3
The level of understanding was mixed with regards to the dashboard visualisa-
tion. The HCP’s were immediately focused on the numbers and understanding
precisely what they meant and this is where the majority of the confusion came
from. The percentage values did not provide much insight as they did not know
what time period this was relative to. They questioned whether it a decrease
in AC over the past week or the past month. Another suggestion was that the
percentage values related to the average levels normally seen of a patient within
that age range and condition. They understood naturally that green related
to an improvement and red to a worsening measure but the utilisation of the
colour green for the arrow to show that WB had in fact decreased and therefore
was improving was seen as highly illogical when compared to the other arrows
and colours used. One HCP commented:
"If red means decrease and green means increase then why is wandering be-
haviour green and going down - It is not logical - it does not work."
==PAGE:87==
5.6 Prototype V3
71
Interestingly they also looked for the relation between measures to try and
understand how the diﬀerent values of PA and AC matched up.
5.6.8
Chapter Conclusion
It is concluded that the PA graph was highly understandable and provided clin-
ically relevant information that could be used to understand a patients well
being in a number of ways.
The understanding for AC was low and it was
felt that this should not be a stand-alone measure. However this graph would
have a very small learning curve and one which could be less confusing if either
the term AC or life space was chosen and not used interchangeably. The visu-
alisation of WB was seen to be of higher importance than AC but the graph
lacked understanding from the perspective of some HCP’s, due to the choice of
wording with ’routine distance’. The DC measure came under strong criticism
as it left too much up to assumption. It was accepted that it would provide
useful information but the method of attaining this data is very ambiguous and
should therefore should not be considered clinically relevant at this stage. Fur-
thermore, as clinical relevance is a key research objective it is felt that this may
be too confusing to HCP’s if another iteration was made of DC without further
conﬁrmation of data collection.
The combination graph received mixed opinions as again the HCP’s felt it oﬀered
great information but were hesitant to trust the measurements for levels of
sleep. They suggested this could be improved by including levels of detail for
sedentary behaviours. By removing sleep from the graph as suggested, seen in
ﬁgure 5.15, then 3 categories are left:- active, sedentary and out of house. Active
behaviour is the direct opposite to sedentary and therefore it was unnecessary to
visualise both and PA already presented varying levels of activeness. Therefore
a new behaviour overview graph should be visualised in the next prototype
which visualises sedentary behaviour. On top of this a new chart should also be
visualised that shows a combination of PA and AC data.
The key changes that need to be made and included are:
• PA - Be consistent with positioning of legend and axis details
• AC - Should not be a stand alone graph. It should incorporate PA data
for comparison and enhance the level of detail
• WB - Improve terminology as ’routine distance’ is not understandable and
enhance the level of detail
==PAGE:88==
72
Development and Testing
• DC - Trust issues means this measure should be removed
• Combination - Remove sleep as a category
• Dashboard - Remove percentage values and arrows
• Add a combination graph combining PA and AC
• Add a behaviour overview graph visualising sedentary behaviours
These ﬁndings will be used to update the current graphs which will be translated
into a proof of concept in the form of a website in chapter 6.
==PAGE:89==
Chapter 6
Result
“Design is a response to speciﬁc problem. You are given a problem and then
you let the problem itself tell you what your solution is.” Chipp Kidd
This chapter documents the ﬁnal outcome of the visualisation of accelerometer
and GPS data to HCP’s.
6.1
Final Visualisations - Prototype V4
A number of changes have been made following the ﬁndings taken from the
workshop in chapter 5. The visualisations below, ﬁgures 6.1 - 6.6, provide the
ﬁnal iteration of these Master’s Thesis and form the proof of concept.
==PAGE:90==
74
Result
Figure 6.1: Yearly overview of PA - Proof of Concept - A legend has been
added to ensure consistency between graphs. The suggested ad-
dition of a notation system was seen as outside the scope of this
project and therefore not visualised.
Figure 6.2: Monthly Overview of AC - Proof of Concept - More detail has
been added greatly amplifying the amount of information which
can be seen on a monthly basis. "Area Coverage" is also now used
consistently, and any reference to life space has been removed.
==PAGE:91==
6.1 Final Visualisations - Prototype V4
75
Figure 6.3: Monthly Overview of WB - Proof of Concept - The wording of
’routine distance’ has been changed to ’normal distance’ to in-
crease understanding. Much more detail has been added to the
monthly overview so it is very clear when trips to speciﬁc POI
were made and how much the PWD deviated from their normal
route.
Figure 6.4: Yearly Overview of PA and AC - Proof of Concept - A new com-
bination graph that visualises PA and AC. This was seen as a
necessary addition by HCP’s who felt that the information would
be much more powerful through a combination of the data. It is
visualised through a dual axis time-series graph to make compar-
ison of the data as quick and intuitive as possible.
==PAGE:92==
76
Result
Figure 6.5: Monthly Overview of Patient Behaviours - Proof of Concept - The
behaviour overview graph visualises a combination of data that
includes the states - lying, stepping, sitting and out of home. This
gives HCP’s the ability to compare and evaluate the PWD’s data.
It is assumed that a patient would be wearing the smartwatch for
at least 8 hours.
Figure 6.6: Dashboard - Proof of Concept - Changes have been made to make
the dashboard as simple to understand as possible. The percent-
age values and arrows previously seen have been removed as they
caused too much confusion and the card to DC has also been re-
moved.
6.2
Findings Overview
Figure 6.7 shows an overview of the ﬁndings from the workshop. It clearly shows
how each measure performed against the set criteria of level of understanding
==PAGE:93==
6.2 Findings Overview
77
and clinical relevance. These levels are determined directly from observations,
note taking and listening to a recording of the workshop with HCP’s. Further-
more a prototyping development overview can be seen in appendix A.14 showing
how the prototypes developed through the iterative process.
Figure 6.7: An overview of the ﬁndings for each measure, detailing the level
of understanding and clinical relevance.
With regards to the requirements speciﬁed in chapter 4, it can be seen that the
use of time-series graphs, column charts and bar charts were extremely useful
in the visualisation of accelerometer data but not so much for GPS data. A
UCD design approach was highly beneﬁcial in establishing quick and relevant
feedback from students and for the presentation of a prototype to HCP’s. By
working directly with the HCP’s in this workshop, it provided this research with
invaluable input as to how and what information should be visualised. Further-
more aiming to follow the established design principles worked extremely well,
especially with the direct focus on simplicity. However, HCP’s did not receive
the use of new terminology well and it created immediate misunderstandings of
what the data was trying to represent.
When looking at ﬁndings against the research objectives, it can be seen that PA,
visualised through a time-series graph, had the highest success rate being both
highly understandable and clinically relevant. PA was the only graph that was
judged to be of a high understanding. AC, DC, the combination chart and the
dashboard all had minor issues which meant that the HCP could not instantly
decipher what the graph was trying to show. However, a quick learning curve is
expected and it is felt that if the HCP’s were presented with the updated graphs
seen here in chapter 6 then there would be a strong chance of a much higher level
of understanding. WB had a low level of understanding which was primarily due
to the HCP’s not understanding the terminology used. WB, the combination
graph and the dashboard were also considered to be highly clinically relevant.
AC was seen to be clinically relevant but HCP’s were not convinced that it
should be a stand alone graph and that is why the clinical relevance is set to
medium. Due to the inconsistencies in DC, HCP’s did not feel this measure was
==PAGE:94==
78
Result
clinically relevant at this stage.
6.3
Proof of Concept
Following the iterative process of the usability testing and validation from
the workshop at Rigshospitalet Glostrup, a website has been developed, that
showcases the chosen visualisations for communicating speciﬁc measures of ac-
celerometer and GPS data within the DCS.
http://patrickjleese.wix.com/ehrmodulepostw
Figure 6.8: Screenshot from the front page of the website depicting the dash-
board overview - Proof of Concept
The home page of the website consists of the dashboard seen in ﬁgure 6.8. Here
you can click on each one of the overview cards to go into a more detailed
overview of that particular measure.
Each measure can be viewed from the
time periods of 1 week, 1 month, 3 months, 6 months and 1 year. Users can
hover over data points to gain more information for each measure and all pages
==PAGE:95==
6.4 Chapter Conclusion
79
can also be accessed through the menu bar which consists of accelerometer, GPS
and combination graph links.
6.4
Chapter Conclusion
This chapter presents the main ﬁndings for this Master’s Thesis which are doc-
umented in ﬁgure 6.7. Furthermore a proof of concept in the form of a website
for this Master’s Thesis Project is given. The ﬁndings show the high success
rate against the criteria for PA but a low success rate for DC. Furthermore
the chapter shows the importance of providing detail to each of the individual
measures and the value of providing a combination of accelerometer and GPS
data in the same graph. The results can be viewed online through a website
and online brochure:
http://patrickjleese.wix.com/ehrmodulepostw
http://joom.ag/T76Q
This leads into chapter 7 which discusses the ﬁndings of this Master’s Thesis,
how they ﬁt within current research and presents a number of recommendations
for future work.
==PAGE:96==
80
Result
==PAGE:97==
Chapter 7
Discussion
"Design is a funny word. Some people think design means how it looks. But of
course, if you dig deeper, it’s really how it works." - Steve Jobs
This chapter discusses and evaluates the results gained from the workshop at
Rigshospitalet Glostrup whilst also discussing the methodology used to get these
results. Furthermore the contribution this Master’s Thesis gives to research and
the wider scope of this project are discussed and recommendations and future
work suggestions are put forward.
7.1
Research Question’s Evaluation
This Master’s Thesis endeavoured to communicate eHealth information eﬀec-
tively to HCP’s by seeking answers to the following questions:
1. Does the visualisation of accelerometer and GPS data raise awareness of
the possibilities wearable technology can provide to the dementia care
system?
==PAGE:98==
82
Discussion
2. Is the visualisation of speciﬁc measures of accelerometer and GPS data
understandable to healthcare professionals at Rigshospitalet Glostrup?
3. Can the visualisation of accelerometer and GPS data provide clinically
relevant information to HCP’s at Rigshospitalet Glostrup?
Therefore the 3 main themes established within this Master’s Thesis have been
to communicate possibilities, communicate in an understandable manner and
communicate clinically relevant information and therefore this discussion is di-
vided within these 3 themes.
7.1.1
Communicating the Possibilities of eHealth Infor-
mation
Communicating the possibilities that accelerometer and GPS data can oﬀer to
HCP’s was very positive. The workshop showed that HCP’s only had a vague
understanding of what an accelerometer was and what it could measure, there-
fore from that perspective they are now much clearer on what these sensors
could provide them on a daily basis.
Furthermore the possibilities both ac-
celerometer and GPS can provide with regards to dementia care have strongly
been enhanced showing that this type of data can be used advantageously and
productively. It is therefore clear HCP’s are both open and interested in learn-
ing about the possibilities measurable sensors can oﬀer. In an era in which the
technology advancements happen almost overnight it is essential that the pre-
sentation of what they can oﬀer is revealed in a manner in which the audience
can understand. HCP’s at Rigshospitalet Glostrup were relatively new to some
of these concepts and it was imperative that in order for them to envisage a new
method of data collection, that they understood the various aspects of what this
technology had to oﬀer.
7.1.2
The Understanding of eHealth Communication
The understanding of the presented graphs varied drastically dependant on the
measure in question. Time-series graphs used for PA were instantly recognisable
and provided no external knowledge or detail for understanding, which was as
to be expected from the literature review conclusions.
However area graphs
that have been used for both WB and AC proved to be diﬃcult to understand.
One might say that this could also be due to a misunderstanding of what the
measure was trying to detail but an eﬀective graph should immediately portray
==PAGE:99==
7.1 Research Question’s Evaluation
83
information in an understandable manner so from that perspective it can not
be excused as a mere misunderstanding. However, area graphs should still be
used for the visualisation of GPS data. Interestingly the main ﬂaws did not
seem to come from the design itself and more so from the fact that the graphs
did not provide enough detail. It was said the the AC could not be visualised
as a stand alone feature, which may be a by-product of the confusion that led
some HCP’s to believe it showed the exact same information as PA. Levels of
detail also caused understanding issues with the measure WB. The high level
data which detailed average values of WB made it very confusing as to where
and what this data was. It is therefore seen that adequate levels of detail are
essential to ensure that enough data is provided to make each individual measure
important. On top of this there was issues with wording and terminology for
both AC and WB. AC and life space have the same meaning and therefore it
was unnecessary to use both. WB caused confusion by the use of the wording
’routine distance’. This shows the importance of word choice that explains and
backs-up the data instantaneously. Furthermore, one aspect of the workshop
that particularly eﬀected the understanding was the background assumptions
that were made with regards to the presentation of this data. It is expected that
POI’s and therefore normal walking distances are calculated automatically and
not knowing this information could have a strong impact on what you believe
the graph is trying to portray. The understanding of the dashboard as a glance-
able feature for the HCP was also relatively low. The use of percentage values
and arrows was not eﬀective, which showed that design styles employed in more
commercial products did not translate directly to healthcare in this instance.
Therefore it should be concluded that simplicity is key.
If the measure can
be boiled down to one single value in a particular unit, then that is enough
to provide the information in that particular context. How this diﬀered from
another timeframe is therefore considered irrelevant as further details can be
given if the context involves a deeper understanding.
Understanding of the
combination graph was however very high. The bar chart provided an accepted
method for visualisation and the categories were clearly stated which made it
easy for the HCP to understand.
7.1.3
The Clinical Relevance of eHealth Communication
Similarly to the understanding of the visualisations, the clinical relevance of
the measures in question, ranged from highly clinically relevant to a very low
level of clinical relevance. PA was very clinically relevant as HCP’s see this as
a sign of weakness, lack of energy or a signal that the patient may be about
to get ill.
This shows that monitoring behavioural aspects of a PWD’s life
such as PA, can be highly relevant to HCP’s. AC was seen to be of clinical
relevance and particularly important to home caregivers who would know the
==PAGE:100==
84
Discussion
daily behaviours of the PWD much more in depth. Interestingly however, WB
was said to be of more importance than AC from a clinical relevance perspective.
It was also evidently clear that the combination of data was highly relevant to
HCP’s who seen potential in providing a holistic overview, that was meaningful
and detailed. These results show that clinical relevance is highly dependant on
context. Each measure is seen as clinically relevant to HCP’s and this is due
to the fact that they require a range of data to assess the overall well-being of
a PWD. One measure which is clinically relevant for one patient may not be
clinically relevant for another and this is important to remember. The discussion
of privacy was also discussed during the workshop, showing ethical issues are
still very much at the forefront of the HCP’s minds and this directly eﬀects
clinical relevance. It is therefore essential to ensure that there is a high level of
data validity so that HCP’s know that data can be collected anonymously and
therefore it is not necessarily that speciﬁc POI’s are detected each and every
time a PWD goes out of the house.
7.2
Contribution through Recommendations
The research and ﬁndings from this Master’s Thesis have contributed directly
to literature which are presented through the recommendations below. This
Master’s Thesis shows what information an accelerometer and GPS can provide,
how they can be visualised and what particular aspects of this data are clinically
relevant, all within the DCS. Therefore research into dementia care can strongly
utilise this information for further visualisation exploration or implementation.
Furthermore, although this information has been speciﬁcally developed from a
dementia care perspective, there is no reason to suggest that the ﬁndings could
not be translated to other areas of healthcare. The signiﬁcance of these ﬁndings
provide a substantial base from which further research can build upon.
1. Use time-series graphs and area charts
• A number of graphs were explored for use throughout this Master’s
Thesis and it was clearly evident that time-series graphs and area
charts were most preferable.
Therefore the recommendation from
this research is that time-series graphs should be utilised for the vi-
sualisation of accelerometer data and area graphs should be used for
the visualisation of GPS data.
2. UCD approach is fundamental for successful visualisation
==PAGE:101==
7.2 Contribution through Recommendations
85
• In order to eﬀectively communicate eHealth information within the
DCS a UCD approach is needed that allows for the evolution of vi-
sualisation through HCP feedback. The feedback gained from the
workshop with HCP’s was invaluable and imperative to the proof of
concept development. It is therefore seen as essential to work closely
with the DCS to understand the needs of the various stakeholders.
3. Reduce cognitive load as much as possible
• It was highly apparent that the HCP’s craved simplicity.
All in-
stances of a misinformed use of colour, wording and graphs were
met challengingly and reﬂected badly upon the understanding of the
graph in question. Time-series graphs produced a very low cognitive
load when compared to that of the area charts used for the visuali-
sation of AC and WB.
4. Visualise a combination of accelerometer and GPS data
• Visualising a combination of both accelerometer and GPS data is
highly preferable to HCP’s. These graphs were seen as highly useful
in the workshop. This is because they provide the option of both
glancing to see an overall trend and the option to take a relatively
large amount of detail from one graph.
This also creates the op-
portunity to combine information that is captured from the PWD’s
life from both inside and outside of their home, giving insight into
behavioural and cognitive well being.
5. Understand that there is not a one size ﬁts all approach
• The results showed that both the presentation of individual compo-
nents and holistic views are important.
Combination charts were
highly valued and individual measures presented information in a
much more detailed form. It is therefore clear that there is not a
one size ﬁts all solution.
The information needed by the HCP is
highly dependant on what a HCP is looking for. Exploration of indi-
vidual measures to gain more detail and dashboard’s for glanceable
overviews both have a place and therefore a detail on demand ap-
proach is very much suggested.
6. Visualise single patient data
• The development of dementia is vastly individual for each patient.
It is therefore essential to understand that each patient will adapt
diﬀerently to dementia and various measures will provide varying
levels of clinical relevance for that individual PWD and visualisations
should be able to adapt to this.
==PAGE:102==
86
Discussion
7.3
Future Work
As an explorative area of research there is ample opportunity for future research
within the communication of eHealth data to HCP’s through accelerometer and
GPS data. It is therefore essential to clearly deﬁne the explorative nature of
this research area against what is genuinely realistic in order to give clarity to
HCP’s who want to challenge the viability of what they see. This creates a
tricky situation as visualisations not only allow us to understand communica-
tion but allow us to communicate information that may not even be imaginable
to the end user. It is precisely here that clariﬁcation is needed to ensure that
communication of new eHealth information is explorative yet at the same time
realistic. These intricacies in developing visualisations for eHealth data show the
need for working with HCP’s in a UCD approach. It is an approach that means
high adaptability is essential from both perspectives in order to create optimal
visualisations. Innovation in healthcare is needed and will only happen through
the collective acceptance and co-operation of technology. Healthcare needs to
be more ambidextrous in accepting the positives new technologies oﬀer, just as
much as appreciating established systems. Acceptance that this technology can
prove beneﬁcial needs to be a pre-requisite for establishing a working relation-
ship. The literature review and results showed that it is becoming increasingly
apparent that this kind of approach holds signiﬁcant value in healthcare [LM15].
HCP’s crave simplicity whilst designers work with increasingly complex data so
it is more important than ever to develop eﬀective communication strategies be-
tween designers and HCP’s. Future work opportunities have been listed below:
1. Make an in-depth assessment of the prototype
• The prototype developed in this Master’s Thesis has been validated
with HCP’s at the V3 stage. The feedback gained at V3 has been
used to make a proof of concept which has not been validated further
with HCP’s. It would therefore be highly beneﬁcial to extend upon
this research and thoroughly test the proof of concept which will in
all likeliness not oﬀer a ﬁnal solution of how this data should be
visualised. The workshop should therefore be used as a base to build
on for further testing and validation.
2. Depth of detail research
• Future work should include research into the varying levels of detail
a HCP needs and when they are most likely to need an overview of
a PWD’s condition as opposed to a detailed understanding.
3. Combination of visualisations
==PAGE:103==
7.3 Future Work
87
• Future work should continue to explore the challenges in visualising
both accelerometer and GPS data on the same graph.
The ﬁnd-
ings suggest that a combination of this data is highly optimal and
a suggestion has been put forward in this Master’s Thesis after the
workshop that has not been validated with HCP’s. Therefore further
exploration would be highly beneﬁcial in assessing the challenges of
combining both accelerometer and GPS data in the same visualisa-
tion.
4. Visualisation of threshold and trigger scenarios
• Exploring the potenital for the HCP to set individual thresholds for
PWD could also be a highly interesting area for future research.
These thresholds could act as trigger points for making proactive con-
tact with a PWD or caregiver. Research into the area would involve
understanding how a threshold would be established and whether it
would come directly from a HCP or would be determined automati-
cally. It would then be essential that the number of false alarms were
limited and information would need to be provided of how individual
HCP’s would react to above threshold data.
5. Exploration of a convergence of sensors
• It is envisaged that complexity levels of visualisations will only evolve
with the release of new wearable technologies.
It is highly likely
that a convergence of sensors will become available on a single de-
vice. Therefore, heart rate monitoring could be included alongside
accelerometer and GPS data which would be highly beneﬁcial as a
support function, whilst providing the opportunity to collect data
from new measures. An example of this would be that the DC mea-
sure would be more concrete, as a classiﬁcation of activities could
be justiﬁed in the detection of various behavioural states, potentially
diﬀerentiating between sleeping and lying awake. Furthermore, this
includes the ability to monitor a person’s resting heart rate, which
could be visualised alongside PA data. Heart rate could also be used
as an indicator for stress and therefore it could be determined in
which situations or time of day does a PWD struggle psychologically.
6. Note addition to visualisations
• The ability for HCP’s to comment directly on the data in a man-
ner which is accessible to all HCP’s would also be a notable area for
research. In the workshop it was suggested that some of the informa-
tion presented was valuable but it would be used to ask a caregiver
the circumstances in which this data happened. Therefore the graphs
==PAGE:104==
88
Discussion
seem static without any qualitative input which could give reasoning
behind the data.
==PAGE:105==
Chapter 8
Conclusion
"Even a minor change in the eﬃciency of treatment or care can signiﬁcantly
decrease costs and improve the QOL of people with dementia" Ulla Elloniemi
This Master’s Thesis has iteratively developed visualisations that were evalu-
ated through two usability tests and a workshop with HCP’s at Rigshospitalet
Glostrup. The aim of this was to provide insights into how one can meaningfully
visualise accelerometer and GPS data from a smartwatch and smartphone. The
research question formed the basis for an explorative study that endeavoured
to present visualisations that were both understandable to HCP’s and clinically
relevant. This resulted in the development of a website that formed a ’proof of
concept’ for this research.
Chapter 2 provides a base knowledge for the key areas this Master’s Thesis
revolves within:- dementia, eHealth, wearable technology and communication
through design. This gave the foundation and level of understanding needed to
conduct a comprehensive search of the literature for chapter 3. The literature
search highlighted the complexities involved in this area of research and the
challenges that it presents. This was used to establish a direction to take this
Master’s Thesis, in order to add to the literature. It was concluded that the
visualisation of accelerometer and GPS data speciﬁcally for dementia care was
limited. Therefore, it was decided that research into understanding what visu-
alisations are suitable within dementia care and ultimately what data will prove
==PAGE:106==
90
Conclusion
to be clinically relevant were highly interesting and suitable topics for further
exploration. The knowledge derived from chapter 3 showed that visualisations
should be made through time-series graphs, column charts, bar charts and point
plots and these should be visualised in a very minimal manner to achieve max-
imise understanding.
This allowed for the establishment of requirements in
chapter 4 of how to conduct the research, which was carried out through a UCD
approach that incorporated elements of lean UX.
Usability testing 1 provided the ﬁrst opportunity to test the initial visualisa-
tions with 5 participants from the technical university of Denmark.
It was
established that time-series graphs were highly preferential for the visualisation
of PA and AC should be represented through area and not mean distance from
the home.
WB showed that high level information was favoured over single
measures, meaning stating individual POI’s was unnecessary. It was also estab-
lished that DC should have a focus on the time of day a PWD would go to bed
and get up instead of trying to include nighttime activity which was challenging
data to capture.
Usability testing 2 built on the feedback from usability testing 1 and therefore
the time-series graph for PA was developed further. AC and WB were both
represented through area graphs and both graphs were reported to be diﬃcult
to understand due to the choice of terminology used within each graph. The
plot bands used within the DC visualisation also proved diﬃcult to understand
as there was no sense of relatively to what they should be compared to. The
graph depicting the combination of accelerometer and GPS data was very well
received, although it’s design was seen as unappealing due to the choice of
colours.
Prototype V3 was presented to HCP’s at Rigshospitalet Glostrup where fruitful
feedback was received. PA, WB and a combination of PA and AC proved to
be of most interest to HCP’s and all measures were seen to have some form of
clinical relevance. The level of clinical relevance was seen as highly dependant
on the patient, referring once again to the importance of personalised care.
It was found that accelerometer data is visualised very productively through
time-series graphs whereas area graphs have been used eﬀectively to visualise
GPS data. The acceptance of these graphs was possibly due to their ability
to paint a picture of how the PWD was developing over time, showing trends
and patterns are of the utmost importance. The ﬁndings show the need for
a deep understanding of the HCP with regards to when and why they would
use particular information.
This is presented through the level of detail in
which visualisations are presented and it is seen that both high level trends and
detailed data are both needed. The ﬁndings also showed that a combination of
data gathered from the accelerometer and GPS is highly preferable to HCP’s,
which provides the option to give glanceable and detailed data in one graph.
==PAGE:107==
91
All of this suggests that there are numerous elements which should be taken
into consideration when visualising eHealth information. This information does
however give strong indication that research into these kinds of visualisation’s
is both relevant and meaningful.
The ﬁndings show that the measures chosen for the visualisation of accelerom-
eter and GPS data do provide clinically relevant information for HCP’s at the
dementia care unit of Rigshospitalet Glostrup. Chapter 6 shows the updated
graphs as per the HCP’s comments and links to a website which forms the proof
of concept.
It is therefore concluded that the visualisation of behavioural measures can
provide a key source of information within the DCS and healthcare as a whole
due to the amount of clinically relevant information they can provide. Applicable
visualisations have the potential to create a paradigm shift of both what and how
we learn. It is essential to continue to understand dementia, how it eﬀects each
person individually and how the onset can be impeded which can be strongly
aided by the visualisation of eHealth data. The visualisation of accelerometer
and GPS data to assist dementia care is still yet to be implemented but the
opportunities it provides could cause a huge change in what HCP’s look for with
regards to a decline in well-being. This could help understand the progression of
dementia from a completely new perspective. If these measures can be seen early
in the diagnosis of dementia then there is strong reasoning to hope that a delay in
the onset of severe dementia is a possibility. The element of predictive analytics
is also a strong incentive which can aid better care planning and envisage when
an HCP should assist a PWD [Pri14]. The visualisation of data is therefore key
in providing the right data in an understandable manner to HCP’s and it will
only become more and more important.
==PAGE:108==
92
Conclusion
==PAGE:109==
Bibliography
[Aak07]
Mark Aakhus. Communication as Design. Communication Mono-
graphs, 74(1):112–117, mar 2007.
[ABCL06]
Carmelo Ardito, Paolo Buono, Maria Francesca Costabile, and
Rosa Lanzilotti. Two diﬀerent interfaces to visualize patient his-
tories on a PDA. In Proceedings of the 8th conference on Human-
computer interaction with mobile devices and services - MobileHCI
’06, page 37, New York, New York, USA, 2006. ACM Press.
[ABS+15]
Pramod Anantharam,
Tanvi Banerjee,
Amit Sheth,
Krish-
naprasad Thirunarayan, Surendra Marupudi, Vaikunth Sridharan,
and Shalini G. Forbis. Knowledge-Driven Personalized Contex-
tual mHealth Service for Asthma Management in Children. In
2015 IEEE International Conference on Mobile Services, pages
284–291. IEEE, jun 2015.
[Aer15]
Aer.
E-health
for
the
regions
AER
e-health
Net-
work.
http://aer-www.ameos.net/knowledge-centre/
thematic-expertise-thematic-issues/health/e-health.
html, 2015. Online; accessed 29 Mar 2016.
[AF08a]
Michael D Angelica and Yuman Fong. Evaluation of an Archi-
tecture for Intelligent Query and Exploration of Time-Oriented
Clinical Data Susana. October, 141(4):520–529, 2008.
[AF08b]
Michael D Angelica and Yuman Fong. Evaluation of an integrated
graphical display to promote acute change detection in ICU pa-
tients. October, 141(4):520–529, 2008.
==PAGE:110==
94
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[AL11]
Ahamed Altaboli and Yingzi Lin. Investigating Eﬀects of Screen
Layout Elements on Interface and Screen Design Aesthetics. Ad-
vances in Human-Computer Interaction, 2011:1–10, 2011.
[ALKY11]
Louis Atallah, Benny Lo, Rachel King, and Guang-zhong Yang.
Sensor Positioning for Activity Recognition Using Wearable Ac-
celerometers. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Circuits and Sys-
tems, 5(4):320–329, aug 2011.
[Alz16]
Alzheimer’s Association. Treatment of Dementia. www.alz.org/
alzheimers_disease_standard_prescriptions.asp, 2016. On-
line; accessed 01 Feb 2016.
[AM06]
Wolfgang Aigner and Silvia Miksch.
CareVis: Integrated visu-
alization of computerized protocols and temporal patient data.
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Medicine, 37(3):203–218, jul 2006.
[Ami16]
Amit
Agarwal.
Choose
the
Right
Chart
Type
for
your
Data.
http://www.labnol.org/software/
find-right-chart-type-for-your-data/6523/, 2016. Online;
accessed 27 May 2016.
[Apa16]
Apadmi Enterprise. Wearable Tech For Healthcare Orgs. http:
//www.apadmi.com, 2016. Online; accessed 07 Apr 2016.
[AWS92]
Christopher Ahlberg, Christopher Williamson, and Ben Shneider-
man. Dynamic queries for information exploration. In Proceedings
of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems
- CHI ’92, pages 619–626, New York, New York, USA, 1992. ACM
Press.
[Bas16]
Basis.
Heart rate monitor and ﬁtness tracker.
http://www.
mybasis.com, 2016. Online; accessed 29 Feb 2016.
[BD11]
Blake J. Lesselroth and David S. Pieczkiewicz. Data Visualization
Strategies for the Electronic Health Record, volume 16. 2011.
[BGB10]
David T Bauer, Stephanie Guerlain, and Patrick J Brown.
The design and evaluation of a graphical display for laboratory
data. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association,
17(4):416–424, jul 2010.
[BKB15]
Tanusri Bhattacharya, Lars Kulik, and James Bailey. Automati-
cally recognizing places of interest from unreliable GPS data using
spatio-temporal density estimation and line intersections. Perva-
sive and Mobile Computing, 19:86–107, may 2015.
==PAGE:111==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
95
[Bri16]
Brit Wilcox.
User Centered Design.
https://kybritt.
wordpress.com/category/user-centered-design/, 2016. On-
line; accessed 10 Apr 2016.
[BSM04]
Ragnar Bade, Stefan Schlechtweg, and Silvia Miksch. Connecting
time-oriented data and information to a coherent interactive visu-
alization. In Proceedings of the 2004 conference on Human factors
in computing systems - CHI ’04, volume 6, pages 105–112, New
York, New York, USA, 2004. ACM Press.
[Cao16]
Caorey
Stern.
A
UX
Model
for
suc-
cess.
http://uxmag.com/articles/
cubi-a-user-experience-model-for-project-success,
2016. Online; accessed 01 Mar 2016.
[CDKI15]
Niamh Caprani, Julie Doyle, Yusuke Komaba, and Akihiro Ino-
mata. Exploring healthcare professionals’ preferences for visualis-
ing sensor data. In Proceedings of the 2015 British HCI Conference
on - British HCI ’15, pages 26–34, New York, New York, USA,
2015. ACM Press.
[CH11]
Rebecca Carr and Mary Harrington.
Eﬀective Communication
Through Visual Design: Tables and Charts. pages 1–9, 2011.
[Chi06]
Luca Chittaro. Visualization of patient data at diﬀerent temporal
granularities on mobile devices.
In Proceedings of the working
conference on Advanced visual interfaces - AVI ’06, page 484, New
York, New York, USA, 2006. ACM Press.
[Chr09]
Christine Kennard.
How Does Alzheimer’s Diﬀer from Other
Types
of
Dementia?
http://www.healthcentral.com/
alzheimers/c/57548/77542/alzheimer-types/, 2009. Online;
accessed 07 Apr 2016.
[CK91]
Steve B Cousins and Michael G Kahn. The visual display of tem-
poral information. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Medicine, 3(6):341–
357, dec 1991.
[CKB08]
Andy Cockburn, Amy Karlson, and Benjamin B Bederson. A re-
view of overview+ detail, zooming, and focus+ context interfaces.
ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), pages 1–42, 2008.
[CPP99]
Carlo Combi, Luisa Portoni, and Francesco Pinciroli. Visualizing
Temporal Clinical Data on the WWW. Proceedings of the Joint
European Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Medicine and
Medical Decision Making (AIMDM99), pages 301–311, 1999.
==PAGE:112==
96
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Dia13]
Diane Carbo. Advanced Dementia–the Last Stages of Dementia.
http://caregiverrelief.com/2013/04/advanced-dementia/,
2013. Online; accessed 07 Apr 2016.
[DTU16]
DTU. DTU FindIt. http://findit.dtu.dk, 2016. Online; ac-
cessed 16 May 2016.
[Els16]
Elsevier B.V.
Welcome to Scopus.
https://www.scopus.com,
2016. Online; accessed 16 May 2016.
[Eri15]
Erin Horan. How precision medicine will transform healthcare.
http://vector.childrenshospital.org/2015, 2015.
Online;
accessed 07 Apr 2016.
[Fal01]
G??ran Falkman. Information visualisation in clinical Odontol-
ogy: Multidimensional analysis and interactive data exploration.
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Medicine, 22(2):133–158, 2001.
[Few09]
Stephen Few. Now You See It: Simple Visualization Techniques
for Quantitative Analysis. Analytics Press, Oakland, California,
2009.
[Fit16a]
Fit Port.
Fit Port.
https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/
fitport-your-fitness-dashboard/id914413310?mt=8,
2016.
Online; accessed 17 May 2016.
[Fit16b]
FitBit. Fit Bit Alta. https://www.fitbit.com/dk/alta, 2016.
Online; accessed 17 May 2016.
[FN11]
Anthony Faiola and Chris Newlon. Advancing Critical Care in the
ICU: A Human-Centered Biomedical Data Visualization Systems.
In Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including subseries Lecture
Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformat-
ics), volume 6779 LNCS, pages 119–128. 2011.
[FRG09]
Telmo Fonseca, Cristina Ribeiro, and Cristina Granja. Vital signs
in intensive care: Automatic acquisition and consolidation into
electronic patient records. Journal of Medical Systems, 33(1):47–
57, 2009.
[Gar16]
Garmin.
Garmin Activity Trackers.
http://www.garmin.com/
en-US, 2016. Online; accessed 17 May 2016.
[GoB16]
GoBe.
The only way to automatically measure calorie intake.
https://healbe.com/us/, 2016. Online; accessed 29 Feb 2016.
[Goo16]
Google Fit. Google Fit. https://www.google.com/fit/, 2016.
Online; accessed 17 May 2016.
==PAGE:113==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
97
[GRSS02]
D.L. Gresh, D.A. Rabenhorst, A. Shabo, and S. Slavin. PRIMA: A
case study of using information visualization techniques for patient
record analysis. In IEEE Visualization, 2002. VIS 2002., pages
509–512. IEEE, 2002.
[Hea13]
HealthIT.
What is an Eletronic Health Record?
https:
//www.healthit.gov/providers-professionals/faqs/
what-electronic-health-record-ehr,
2013.
Online;
ac-
cessed 29 Mar 2016.
[Hex16]
Hexoskin. Know more live better. http://www.hexoskin.com,
2016. Online; accessed 29 Feb 2016.
[HID+15]
Andrea L Hartzler, Jason P Izard, Bruce L Dalkin, Sean P Mikles,
and John L Gore. Design and feasibility of integrating personal-
ized PRO dashboards into prostate cancer care. Journal of the
American Medical Informatics Association, page ocv101, 2015.
[HPU01]
W. Horn, C. Popow, and L. Unterasinger. Support for fast com-
prehension of ICU data: Visualization using metaphor graphics.
Methods of Information in Medicine, 40(5):421–424, 2001.
[HSJ+12]
Jan Horsky, Gordon D. Schiﬀ, Douglas Johnston, Lauren Mercin-
cavage, Douglas Bell, and Blackford Middleton. Interface design
principles for usable decision support: A targeted review of best
practices for clinical prescribing interventions. Journal of Biomed-
ical Informatics, 45(6):1202–1216, dec 2012.
[HYTK12]
Andre Hoﬀmeyer, Kristina Yordanova, Stefan Teipel, and Thomas
Kirste.
Sensor Based Monitoring for People with Dementia:
Searching for Movement Markers in Alzheimer’s Disease for a
Early Diagnostic. In Constructing Ambient Intelligence, volume 1,
pages 137–145. 2012.
[Iva04]
Ivars Peterson. Science news - A measure of beauty. https://
www.sciencenews.org/article/measure-beauty, 2004. Online;
accessed 21 Mar 2016.
[Jam15]
Jamie
Hartford.
Wearables
-
Fad
or
Fu-
ture.
http://www.mddionline.com/article/
wearables-fad-or-future-02-06-15, 2015.
Online; accessed
07 Apr 2016.
[Jam16]
James
A.
Martin.
Security
ﬂaw
in
Wearables.
http:
//www.cio.com/article/3017995/wearable-technology/
13-wearable-tech-trends-to-watch-in-2016.html?page=2,
2016. Online; accessed 23 Feb 2016.
==PAGE:114==
98
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Jaw16]
Jawbone Up 3. Jawbone Up 3. https://jawbone.com/store/
buy/up3, 2016. Online; accessed 17 May 2016.
[JBB+11]
Bryan D James, Patricia a Boyle, Aron S Buchman, Lisa L Barnes,
and David a Bennett. Life space and risk of Alzheimer disease,
mild cognitive impairment, and cognitive decline in old age. The
American journal of geriatric psychiatry : oﬃcial journal of the
American Association for Geriatric Psychiatry, 19(11):961–9, nov
2011.
[Jef16]
Jeﬀrey P. Harrison. The Role of E-Health in the Changing Health
Care Environment.
http://www.medscape.com/viewarticle/
551712_2, 2016. Online; accessed 07 Apr 2016.
[Joy12]
Phil Joyce. Designing and Visualising Healthcare Delivery Sys-
tems. AMCIS 2012 Proceedings, 2012.
[Kar00]
Kristiina Karvonen. The beauty of simplicity. In Proceedings on
the 2000 conference on Universal Usability - CUU ’00, pages 85–
90, New York, New York, USA, 2000. ACM Press.
[KHK+14]
Thomas Kirste, André Hoﬀmeyer, Philipp Koldrack, Alexandra
Bauer, Susanne Schubert, Stefan Schröder, and Stefan Teipel. De-
tecting the eﬀect of Alzheimer’s disease on everyday motion be-
havior. Journal of Alzheimer’s disease : JAD, 38(1):121–32, 2014.
[KK95]
Masaaki Kurosu and Kaori Kashimura.
Apparent usability vs.
inherent usability. Conference companion on Human factors in
computing systems CHI 95, pages 292–293, 1995.
[Kle13]
Laura Klein. UX for Lean Startups. O’Reily, USA, 2013.
[KN10]
Gary L. Kreps and Linda Neuhauser. New directions in eHealth
communication: Opportunities and challenges. Patient Education
and Counseling, 78(3):329–336, mar 2010.
[LFDB06]
Gitte Lindgaard, Gary Fernandes, Cathy Dudek, and J. Brown.
Attention web designers: You have 50 milliseconds to make a good
ﬁrst impression! Behaviour & Information Technology, 25(2):115–
126, mar 2006.
[LM15]
Allison J Lazard and Michael S Mackert. e-health ﬁrst impressions
and visual evaluations. Communication Design Quarterly Review,
3(4):25–34, sep 2015.
[LP14]
Dan Ledger and Endeavour Partners. Inside Wearables - Part 2.
(June), 2014.
==PAGE:115==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
99
[LP16]
Dan Ledger and Endeavour Partners. Inside Wearables - Part 3.
(1), 2016.
[LRH10]
Christoph U Lehmann, Patricia Ordóñez Rozo, and Kathryn
Holmes. Practical Visualization of Multivariate Time Series Data
in a Neonatal ICU. Vahc, pages 1–4, 2010.
[LTH+15]
Kam Yiu Lam, Nelson Wai Hung Tsang, Song Han, Joseph
Kee Yin Ng, Sze Wei Tam, and Ajit Nath. SmartMind: Activ-
ity tracking and monitoring for patients with Alzheimer’s disease.
Proceedings - International Conference on Advanced Information
Networking and Applications, AINA, 2015-April:453–460, 2015.
[MDS+13]
Walter Maetzler, Josefa Domingos, Karin Srulijes, Joaquim J. Fer-
reira, and Bastiaan R. Bloem. Quantitative wearable sensors for
objective assessment of Parkinson’s disease. Movement Disorders,
28(12):1628–1637, oct 2013.
[MÖBB15]
Anja M Maier, Ali Gürcan Özkil, Maria M Bang, and Bir-
gitte H. Forchhammer.
Remember to remember: A Feasibility
Study Adapting Wearable Technology to the Needs of People
Aged 65 and Older with Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) and
Alzheimer’s Dementia. International Conference on Engineering
Design (ICED15), (1), 2015.
[Mov16]
Moves. Moves - Activity Diary. https://www.moves-app.com,
2016. Online; accessed 17 May 2016.
[MVK15]
Juho Merilahti, Petteri Viramo, and Ilkka Korhonen. Wearable
monitoring of physical functioning and disability changes, circa-
dian rhythms and sleep patterns in nursing home residents. IEEE
Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics, PP(99):1–1, 2015.
[OCBB15]
Olawale Olanrewaju, Linda Clare, Linda Barnes, and Carol
Brayne. A multimodal approach to dementia prevention: A re-
port from the Cambridge Institute of Public Health. Alzheimer’s
& Dementia:
Translational Research & Clinical Interventions,
1(3):151–156, nov 2015.
[Omr16]
Omron.
Motivating
to
increase
activity.
http://www.
omron-healthcare.com, 2016. Online; accessed 29 Feb 2016.
[PFH07]
David S Pieczkiewicz, Stanley M Finkelstein, and Marshall I
Hertz. Design and evaluation of a web-based interactive visualiza-
tion system for lung transplant home monitoring data. AMIA ...
Annual Symposium proceedings / AMIA Symposium. AMIA Sym-
posium, pages 598–602, 2007.
==PAGE:116==
100
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[PGH+13]
Rebecca Pﬁtzner, Lukas Gorzelniak, Joachim Heinrich, Andrea
von Berg, Claudia Klümper, Carl P. Bauer, Sibylle Koletzko, Di-
etrich Berdel, Alexander Horsch, and Holger Schulz.
Physical
Activity in German Adolescents Measured by Accelerometry and
Activity Diary: Introducing a Comprehensive Approach for Data
Management and Preliminary Results. PLoS ONE, 8(6), 2013.
[PMS+98]
C Plaisant, R Mushlin, A Snyder, J Li, D Heller, and B Shnei-
derman. LifeLines: using visualization to enhance navigation and
analysis of patient records. Proceedings / AMIA ... Annual Sym-
posium. AMIA Symposium, pages 76–80, 1998.
[POW94]
S POWSNER. Graphical summary of patient status. The Lancet,
344(8919):386–389, aug 1994.
[Pri14]
PriceWaterhouseCoopers. Healthcare delivery of the future:. Pwc,
2014.
[PRRF05]
Barbara Purin, Manuela Rigo, Samantha Riccadonna, and Stefano
Forti. An interactive real-time visualization environment for pa-
tients with heart failure. AMIA ... Annual Symposium proceedings
/ AMIA Symposium. AMIA Symposium, page 1088, 2005.
[Pub16]
PubMed.
PubMed.
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed,
2016. Online; accessed 16 May 2016.
[QKR+15]
Mirja Quante, Emily R. Kaplan, Michael Rueschman, Michael
Cailler, Orfeu M. Buxton, and Susan Redline. Practical consider-
ations in using accelerometers to assess physical activity, sedentary
behavior, and sleep. Sleep Health, 1(4):275–284, 2015.
[RAM+11]
Alexander Rind, Wolfgang Aigner, Silvia Miksch, Sylvia Wiltner,
Margit Pohl, Thomas Turic, and Felix Drexler.
Visual Explo-
ration of Time-Oriented Patient Data for Chronic Diseases: De-
sign Study and Evaluation. In Information Quality in e-Health.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, volume 7058, pages 301–320.
2011.
[Ris16]
Risk Alzheimers Association.
Risk Factors.
http://www.alz.
org/alzheimers_disease_causes_risk_factors.asp,
2016.
Online; accessed 29 Mar 2016.
[RS07]
L Rasmussen and J Starren. Augmented interactive starﬁeld dis-
plays for health management, 2007.
[RYM+13]
Katharina Reinecke, Tom Yeh, Luke Miratrix, Rahmatri Mardiko,
Yuechen Zhao, Jenny Liu, and Krzysztof Z. Gajos.
Predicting
==PAGE:117==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
101
users’ ﬁrst impressions of website aesthetics with a quantiﬁcation
of perceived visual complexity and colorfulness. In Proceedings of
the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
- CHI ’13, page 2049, New York, New York, USA, 2013. ACM
Press.
[Sch10]
R M Schumacher. Commentary: Electronic Health Records and
Human Performance. Journal of Oncology Practice, 6(3):125–126,
may 2010.
[SGBBT06]
Yuval Shahar, Dina Goren-Bar, David Boaz, and Gil Tahan. Dis-
tributed, intelligent, interactive visualization and exploration of
time-oriented clinical data and their abstractions. Artiﬁcial Intel-
ligence in Medicine, 38(2):115–135, oct 2006.
[Shi16]
Shine 2. Misﬁt Shine 2. http://misfit.com/products/shine2,
2016. Online; accessed 17 May 2016.
[Shn98]
Ben Shneiderman. Visualizing Personal Histories. ACM SIGCHI
Bulletin, 30(1):34–35, jan 1998.
[SMSG+15]
Sandra Schaller, Velislava Marinova-Schmidt, Jasmin Gobin, Man-
fred Criegee-Rieck, Lena Griebel, Sabine Engel, Veronika Stein,
Elmar Graessel, and Peter L Kolominsky-Rabas.
Tailored e-
Health services for the dementia care setting: a pilot study of
‘eHealthMonitor’. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Mak-
ing, 15(1):58, dec 2015.
[Spi16]
Spire. Spire the wearable that makes you calm everyday. https:
//www.spire.io, 2016. Online; accessed 29 Feb 2016.
[SS10]
Andreas Sonderegger and Juergen Sauer.
The inﬂuence of de-
sign aesthetics in usability testing: Eﬀects on user performance
and perceived usability. Applied Ergonomics, 41(3):403–410, may
2010.
[Sta02]
T.E. Starner. Wearable computers: no longer science ﬁction. IEEE
Pervasive Computing, 1(1):86–88, jan 2002.
[TBAOW09] Alexandre N. Tuch, Javier A. Bargas-Avila, Klaus Opwis, and
Frank H. Wilhelm. Visual complexity of websites: Eﬀects on users’
experience, physiology, performance, and memory. International
Journal of Human Computer Studies, 67(9):703–715, 2009.
[TFM16]
J R Thorpe, B H Forchhammer, and A M Maier.
Measuring
user behaviour from sensor data for service design in pervasive
healthcare. 2016.
==PAGE:118==
102
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[TRG+14]
James Yungjen Tung, Rhiannon Victoria Rose, Emnet Gammada,
Isabel Lam, Eric Alexander Roy, Sandra E. Black, and Pascal
Poupart.
Measuring Life Space in Older Adults with Mild-to-
Moderate Alzheimer’s Disease Using Mobile Phone GPS. Geron-
tology, 60(2):154–162, 2014.
[TSW+11]
James Y. Tung, Jonathan F L Semple, Wei X. Woo, Wei Shou
Hsu, Mathieu Sinn, Eric A. Roy, and Pascal Poupart. Ambulatory
assessment of lifestyle factors for Alzheimer’s disease and related
dementias. AAAI Spring Symposium - Technical Report, SS-11-
04(February):50–54, 2011.
[Tuf01]
Edward Tufte. The Visual Display of Quantitative Information
(TVDQI). Graphics Press LLC, Connecticut, USA, 2001.
[Tun13]
James Tung. Measuring Life Space in Older Adults with Mild-to-
Moderate Alzheimer’s Disease Using Mobile Phone GPS. Geron-
tology, 2013.
[Vid16]
Viden Center for Dementia. Dementia in Denmark. http://uk.
videnscenterfordemens.dk/dementia-in-denmark/, 2016. On-
line; accessed 28 Feb 2016.
[YQYR14]
Hua Yuan, Yu Qian, Rui Yang, and Ming Ren. Human mobility
discovering and movement intention detection with GPS trajecto-
ries. Decision Support Systems, 63:39–51, jul 2014.
[YYSJ07]
Yi, Youn ah Kang, J.T. Stasko, and J.a. Jacko. Toward a Deeper
Understanding of the Role of Interaction in Information Visualiza-
tion. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graph-
ics, 13(6):1224–1231, nov 2007.
[ZAR+11]
Zhiyuan Zhang, Faisal Ahmed, Arunesh Mittal1 I V Ramakrish-
nan, Rong Zhao, Asa Viccellio, and Klaus Mueller. AnamneVis:
a framework for the visualization of patient history and medical
diagnostics chains. IEEE VAHC Workshop, pages 1–4, 2011.
[ZSS13]
Mahshid Zeinaly, Mina Soltangheis, and Chris D. Shaw. FilooT:
a visualization tool for exploring genomic data. page 901702, dec
2013.
==PAGE:119==
Appendices
A.1 Project Plan
==PAGE:120==
FEB
APR
JUN
MAR
MAY
==PAGE:121==
A.2 Gantt Chart
Appendix A
Task
Duration (days)
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
Context Exploration
Final Report
Understand the dementia care system
4
Understand Dementia as a syndrome
4
Define learning goals
3
Understand design aspects of the project
4
Meet with health professionals at Glostrup
1
Clarify my methods and why I am using chosen techniques
3
Make initial prototypes that I can use as a base to build from
2
Make initial conclusions / evaluations as to what has been achieved
2
Assess what healthcare professionals need to view in specific situations
2
Understand what health professionals are looking for
3
Understand what they would like to see before, during and after consultations
5
Read literature within scope of the project
14
Explore how I can build on top of current research
5
Write my literature review
14
Make concrete decision of where to take project from literature review
2
Write 3-5 hypothesis which I will try to validate
2
Write my research objectives
2
Define my research question for the project
2
Make initial wireframes for web based personal profiles
5
Develop visualisation through 2 iterations
14
Turn wireframes into mockups with a storyboard
10
Consider back-end through micro-interactions
3
Make more initial conclusions / evaluations as to what has been achieved
1
Meet with healthcare professionals to present my findings and suggestions
1
Write-up for report with regards to prototyping
5
Write-up findings
3
Offer my opinion on how communication can be enhanced in healthcare
1
Write-up discussion and selected areas for future research and improvement
3
Write my conclusion
2
Meet with healthcare professionals to present my findings (Workshop 2)
1
Make final adjustments with regards to feedback
4
Rephrase and rewrite report for final hand-in + check grammar
5
Literature Review
Idea development
Initial proof of concept
Idea further development
Proof of concept
==PAGE:122==
A.3 Classiﬁcation of Dementia1
 http://www.alz.org/dementia/types-of-dementia.asp
1
==PAGE:123==
A.4 Stages of Alzheimer's Dementia 2
 http://caregiverrelief.com/2013/04/advanced-dementia/
2
==PAGE:124==
A.5 Treatment of Dementia3
 http://www.alz.org/alzheimers_disease_causes_risk_factors.asp
3
==PAGE:125==
A.6 Literature Review - Healthcare speciﬁc 
visualisations
A.6.1 Point Plots from Tufte and Powsner 4
A.6.2 Vie Visu - Glyph Graphs 5
 Powsner, Graphical summary of patient status, The Lancet, 344 (8919): 386 - 389, Aug 1994
4
 W. Horn, C. Popow, and L. Unterasinger. Support for fast comprehension of ICU Data: 
5
Visualisation using metaphor graphics. Methods of Information in medicine, 40 (5): 421-424, 2001.
==PAGE:126==
A.6.3 Care Vis 6
A.6.4 Web Based Interactive Visualisation System - 
WBIVS 7
 Wolfgang Aigner and Silvia Miksch.  CareVis: Integrated visualisation of computerised protocols 
6
and temporal patient data, Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Medicine, 37 (3): 203-218, Jul 2006.
 David S Pieczkiewicz, Stanley M Finkelstein, and Marshall I Hertz. Design and evaluation of 
7
WBIVS for lung transplant home monitoring data. AMAI, Annual Symposium proceedings / AMIA 
Symposium.Pages 598 - 602, 2007.
==PAGE:127==
A.7 Overview of all articles used in the Healthcare 
Literature Review
==PAGE:128==
==PAGE:129==
==PAGE:130==
==PAGE:131==
A.8 Literature Review - Commercial Speciﬁc 
Visualisations
A.8.1 Misﬁt Shine 2 8
A.8.2 Jawbone Up3 9
 Misﬁt Shine 2. http://misﬁt.com/products/shine2, 2016. Online; accessed 17 May 2016.
8
 Jawbone Up 3. Jawbone Up 3. http://jawbone.com/store/buy/up3 , 2016. Online; accessed 17 
9
May 2016.
==PAGE:132==
A.8.3 Spire 10
A.8.4 GoBe 11
 Spire. Spire the wearable that makes you calm everyday. https://www.spire.io , 2016. Online; 
10
accessed 29 Feb 2016.
 GoBe.  The only way to automatically measure calorie intake. https://healbe.com/us/ , 2016. 
11
Online; accessed 29 Feb 2016.
==PAGE:133==
A.8.5 Moves 12
 Moves. Moves - Activity Diary. https://www.moves-app.com , 2016. Online; accessed 17 May 
12
2016.
==PAGE:134==
A.9 Literature Review Conclusions
A.9.1 Comparison of Graph Use
==PAGE:135==
A.9.2 UCD Usage
==PAGE:136==
A.10 Participant List
Usability Testing 1
Andre Castro Lundin - MSc Digital Media Engineering
Christopher Schenk - MSc Digital Media Engineering
Jesper Bitsch Østergaard - MSc Digital Media Engineering
Jospehine Robert - MSc Digital Media Engineering
Stine Eiersholt - MSc Nanotechnology
Usability Testing 2
Andre Castro Lundin - MSc Digital Media Engineering
Christopher Schenk - MSc Digital Media Engineering
Jesper Bitsch Østergaard - MSc Digital Media Engineering
Jospehine Robert - MSc Digital Media Engineering
Joseph Luk - BSc Design and Interaction
Workshop
Elsebeth Iversen – Doctor 
Eva Bjerregaard – Doctor
Inge Bendix – Doctor 
Mette Møllebæk – Nurse 
Ulla Lind – Nurse 
Charlotte Skærbæk – Nurse 
Hanne Råschou – Nurse 
Mette Nybo – Nurse
==PAGE:137==
A.11 Poster 
==PAGE:138==
A.12 Workshop Handout
Communicating eHealth Information within the 
Dementia Care System
Patrick Leese, DTU
04/05/16 
==PAGE:139==
==PAGE:140==
==PAGE:141==
==PAGE:142==
A.13 Workshop Pictures
==PAGE:143==
==PAGE:144==
A.14 Prototyping Development
Measure
Prototype V1
Prototype V2
Prototype V3
Prototype V4
Physical Activity
Area Coverage
Wandering 
Behaviour
Daily Cycle
Combination Graph
Dashboard
Combination - 
Physical Activity and 
Area Coverage
Behaviour Overview
==PAGE:145==
A.15 - Website Link
The iterative process lead to the development of a 
visualisation tool in the form of a website which can be seen 
at the following link:
http://patrickjleese.wix.com/ehrmodulepostw
A.16 - Online Brochure
The ﬁndings have also been made available online through 
an online brochure:
http://joom.ag/T76Q
==PAGE:146==
A.17 - Manuscript for the ‘International Conference on 
Engineering Design’
1.
INTRODUCTION 
In recent years the surge in development and popularity of wearable technologies has created a vast array of 
possibilities for the healthcare industry to unobtrusively gather patient data. However, widespread use of 
such data is yet to be implemented and is rarely fully utilised. Minor acceptance of wearable technologies in 
healthcare has been warranted (Apadmi n.d) yet there is still debate over it's true benefits and how it can be 
implemented to an overwhelmingly positive effect (Martin 2016). One plausible explanation of this 
hesitation, is the ineffectual visualisation of the enormous extent of raw data on offer. Pertinent data 
visualisations facilitate the understanding of trends in data, which can inform HCP’s on a patients progress 
over time and sudden changes in behaviour. However, the healthcare industry is stuck in understanding how 
to communicate raw data through meaningful visualisations (Ledger2016). Therefore this beckons the 
question: How do we utilise visualisation to communicate sensor data more effectively to healthcare 
professional’s (HCP’s)? 
This paper reports a research study which explores the boundaries and current state of communicating 
accelerometer and GPS data specifically within the dementia care system (DCS) at Rigshospitalet Glostrup, 
Denmark. The research endeavours to understand how communicational barriers can be broken down 
through the effective visualisation of specific measures. The main objectives of this study is therefore: 
‘How do we communicate behavioural measures based on data attained from the accelerometer and GPS 
sensors of a smartwatch in a clear and concise manner to healthcare professionals within the dementia care 
system at Rigshospitalet Glostrup?’ 
This research objective is explored by gaining insights into how a user-centered design (UCD) process can 
help visualise accelerometer and GPS data to HCP’s. The success criteria is the level of understanding a HCP 
has with these visualisations and wether or not they are clinically relevant. This objective is then realised 
through a proof of concept in the form of a website, which will act as a visualisation tool for HCP’s. 
The structure of this paper is as follows: Section 2 provides an overview of the scope of the project before 
section 3 describes the visualisation of data in both healthcare and commercial settings. From this literature 
review, requirements are established and documented in section 4, before development and testing of a 
prototype is given in chapter 5. Chapter 6 details the results of the testing phase and chapters 7 and 8 provide 
recommendations for future work and a conclusion respectively.  
2. BACKGROUND 
2.1 Project Scope 
This paper is written in conjunction with ongoing research by Anja Maier and Julia Rosemary Thorpe into 
‘Engineering Systems Design in Healthcare: Smart Wearables for Dementia Monitoring’. Their previous 
work (Maier 2015) (Thorpe 2016), has determined that the accelerometer and GPS sensors offer the ability to 
collect data of high interest to HCP’s. An overview of the specific focus on this project and where it sits 
within the greater project scope can be seen in figure 2.1. 
Data
Analysis
Visualisation
HCP
Wearable
Patient
Greater Project
This Thesis
==PAGE:147==
Figure 2.1 - Area of focus for this study within the greater project 
2.2 Utilising Accelerometer and GPS Sensors 
Accelerometers can distinguish between activity and rest (Quante 2015) and can be done so accurately 
(Lam2015). Further exploration can also determine how consistent these activities are, which offers 
enormous potential with dementia care to unobtrusively determine time spent within each state. A study by 
Kirste et al shows that accelerometer sensors can also be used to detect changes in daily behaviour (Kirste 
2014) and further studies also show that monitoring behavioural patterns can give pre-indicators of 
alzheimers disease (Hoffmeyer 2012). Within this paper, the accelerometer sensor is used to gather data for 
the following measures: 
1.
Physical Activity (PA) - Assessing how physically active a PWD is over a given time period. 
2.
Daily Cycle (DC) - Assessing how much routine a PWD has in their daily life. 
The GPS sensor provides point of interest and path trajectories data, which allow HCP’s to understand a 
PWD’s daily activities (Yuan 2014). Point’s of interest can provide interesting insights such as where and 
how a PWD is spending their outdoor time. Path trajectories enable us to understand the life space of a PWD 
(Bhattacharya 2015) which is defined as the geographical area a person covers in their daily life. Both of 
these data sets offer a strong indicator of cognitive and physical functioning (Tung 2014). Therefore, the GPS 
sensor is used to gather data for the following measures: 
1.
Area Coverage (AC) - Understanding the area in which a PWD’s life revolves within 
2.
Wandering Behaviour (WB) - Assessing how far/often a PWD deviates from their normal route 
An overview of how these sensors are envisaged to be included within the DCS is seen in figure 2.2. By 
addition of a smartwatch and smartphone a further communicational option is created between the HCP and 
PWD. Accelerometer and GPS sensors are used to collect data which is processed and subsequently 
visualised to a HCP. 
Figure 2.2 - Overview of how wearable technology is used within the DCS and subsequently how 
visualisation is therefore incorporated in our research 
2.3 Communication Through Design 
In communicating accelerometer and GPS data efficiently design needs to be strongly considered as it 
directly influences communication (Aakhus 2007). Design principles and guidelines have been published 
that provide the ‘best practices’ for the visualisation of data (Lazard 2015). These guidelines are taken from 
the work by Edward Tufte (Tufte 2001) who states that the visualisation of quantitative information should: 
HCP
PWD
Visualisation 
Smartwatch and
Smartphone
Accelerometer
GPS
Processing of Data
==PAGE:148==
•
Have a properly chosen format and design  
•
Use words, numbers, and drawings in unison  
•
Reflect a balance, proportion and a sense of relevant scale  
•
Display an accessible complexity of detail  
•
Provide a narrative quality 
•
Be drawn in a professional manner 
•
Avoid content-free decoration 
3. ELICITING REQUIREMENTS FROM LITERATURE 
This section documents a comprehensive analysis of the literature within the visualisation of healthcare data. 
It extends beyond dementia care with the visualisation of information to HCP’s within healthcare and the 
visualisation of accelerometer and GPS data, being the areas covered. Furthermore the focus is on single 
patient data visualisations which relates directly to the assessment of a patients status at Rigshospitalet 
Glostrup. The success criteria with regards to this literature review is based around what graphs have been 
utilised within both healthcare and commercial settings to convey data. By evaluating previous research in 
this manner a calculated decision can be taken on how to visualise accelerometer and GPS data in the first 
prototype, in a way that is highly understandable to HCP’s. 
3.1 Healthcare State of Visualisation 
25 research studies were reviewed from a healthcare perspective. LifeLines’s showed for the first time how 
medical histories can be presented through a timeline (Shneiderman 1998). Sparklines, a very small line 
chart, epitomised the design principles of simplicity and are increasingly used today. Bauer studied the 
effects of sparklines within healthcare showing physician assessment was faster with the graph display as 
opposed to a table display (Bauer, 2010). Research by Powsner and Tufte showed how we can represent 
years of data in a small single graphic (Powsner, 1994), similar to glygh graphs (Horn, 2001). Midgaard 
showed the importance of interactive techniques within visualisation with the use of a powerful semantic 
zoom (Bade, 2004) and Lehmann et al, explored practical visualisation of time-series data (Lehmann, 2010). 
The research seen in the VisuExplore system was also particularly interesting (Rind, 2011). Rind et al use a 
combination of visualisation techniques to test HCP understanding, showing that HCP’s have a distinct 
appreciation for time-series graphs and bar charts. Overall this proved to be indicative of the preference for 
visualisation throughout healthcare visualisation research. 
3.2 Commercial State of Visualisation 
15 wearable technologies were also reviewed that visualised accelerometer and GPS data from a commercial 
perspective. Basis utilises an adapted bar chart as a timeline for a user’s status, which allows for a large 
amount of information on one screen (Basis, 2016). Google Fit uses stacked column charts to show a 
division of data as well as a constant use of colour between categories (Fit, 2016). Omron uses a 3 way 
accelerometer sensor to measure steps and calories which are represented through the use of line plots to 
show trends and donut graphs to show level of completion (Omron 2016). FitPort offered a particularly 
convincing solution in terms of level of understanding when compared to the design principles previously 
listed (Fport, 2016). The simplicity, selective use of a few colours and the varying degree of text sizes creates 
a very intuitive design that gives an overview of a patients daily patterns very quickly. The column charts 
and time-series graphs give immediate recognition of important information and the added inclusion of a 
sparkline within the donut graph works seamlessly. It was clear that the visualisations of accelerometer and 
GPS data focused predominately on a level of simplicity in their design. The use of either time-series graph, 
donut charts and column charts were highly apparent throughout the majority of applications yet layout, 
colour, text and icons differentiated in each application enough to ensure they had their own identity. 
3.3 Visualisation preferences in Literature 
Figure 3.1 shows the top five most utilised graphs across all of the literature reviewed. Time-series graphs 
proved to be the most utilised graph across both commercial and literature based research. Point plots have 
been highly used within the healthcare research appearing in 36% of the studies and column charts appeared 
in 32%. However when looking at the use of point plots and column charts for accelerometer and GPS data 
from a commercial perspective then their usage is relatively minimal in comparison with only 13% for both. 
Donut graphs were rarely seen throughout all research in healthcare visualisation but when it came to the 
commercial visualisation of accelerometer and GPS data then they were highly visible, featuring in over 33% 
of the reviewed material.  
==PAGE:149==
Figure 3.1 - Overview of top 5 charts within healthcare and commercial research 
3.4 Addition to Literature 
There are a number of areas which are not extensively covered throughout the literature which this work will 
explore. The main areas are detailed below:  
•
The visualisation of accelerometer and GPS data for HCP's specifically within the DCS. 
•
The visualisation methods used to aid understanding of accelerometer and GPS data. 
•
The clinical relevance of specific measures of accelerometer and GPS data for HCP's 
4. ESTABLISHING REQUIREMENTS 
4.1 Literature Derived Requirements 
A number of key areas have been derived from the literature review which set the platform to develop 
visualisations for accelerometer and GPS data. A successful visualisation is seen as one that is fully 
comprehensible to a HCP and one that would improve their ability to assess a PWD’s condition. The list is 
used as a point of reference for evaluation, validation and testing during development. 
•
Use time-series graphs, bar charts, column charts and point plots 
•
Use a UCD approach to ensure relevant and meaningful feedback 
•
Use a combination of commercial and healthcare data visualisations 
•
Use interactive techniques to assist abstraction 
•
Use existing design principles to ensure simplicity and minimise cognitive load 
4.2 Visualisation Requirements 
The following requirements have been established with regards to what needs to be visualised within the 
choice of graphs: 
•
Trends in the data 
•
Changes over time in the following time periods - 1week, 1month, 3months, 6months & 1year 
•
Sudden and gradual changes in data 
4.3 Design Requirements 
In order to ensure a high level of understanding it is also believed that the following design principles should 
be adhered to during the development phase: 
•
Consistent colours 
•
Concise, understandable language and tone 
•
Consistent layout and design 
•
High glance-ability 
•
Minimalistic design with no clutter 
==PAGE:150==
5. DEVELOPMENT AND TESTING 
5.1 Method 
A UCD approach was taken towards the establishment of a proof of concept. Prototypes were developed and 
iteratively tested through two usability tests, before being presented to HCP’s in a workshop at 
Rigshospitalet Glostrup. The development of the prototypes can be seen in table 1. 
Table 1 - An overview of how the prototype developed through iterative testing 
The visualisations for prototype V1 and V2 were presented to 5 students at the Technical University of 
Denmark on the 22nd and the 29th of April 2016 respectively for usability testing. Participants received an 
overview of the project and each individual measure but no detail was given as to what the measures were 
trying to show. The purpose of the usability test was to gain insights into the participants immediate 
understanding of the graphs that were presented. Participants were asked what they believed to be the 
purpose of each graph and what they felt were the positive and negative elements of this information. 
Measure
Prototype V1
Prototype V2
Prototype V3
Prototype V4
Physical Activity
Area Coverage
Wandering 
Behaviour
Daily Cycle
Combination
Dashboard
Combination of 
Physical Activity 
and Area 
Coverage
Behaviour 
Overview
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
==PAGE:151==
Following the usability testing the visualisations were presented to HCP’s at Rigshospitalet Glostrup during a 
workshop with 5 doctors and 3 nurses. The workshop took place on 04.05.16 between 12:30 and 13:00. 
Participants were asked to open a pre-printed handout, which documented the visualisations. This formed the 
base for a group discussion which revolved around the level of understanding of the graphs and wether or not 
they were clinically relevant. 
6. RESULTS 
Table 2 shows an overview of the findings from the workshop. It clearly details how each measure performed 
against the set criteria of level of understanding and clinical relevance. 
With regards to the requirements specified in chapter 4 it can be seen that the use of time-series graphs, 
column charts and bar charts were extremely useful in the visualisation of accelerometer data but not so 
much for GPS data. A UCD approach was highly beneficial in establishing quick and relevant feedback from 
students and for the presentation of a prototype to HCP's. Furthermore aiming to follow the established 
design principles worked extremely well, especially with the direct focus on simplicity. It was clearly seen 
that HCP's did not receive the use of new terminology well and it created immediate misunderstandings of 
what the data was trying to represent. 
When looking at findings against the research objectives, it can be seen that PA, visualised through a time-
series graph, had the highest success rate, being both highly understandable and clinically relevant. PA was 
the only graph that was judged to be of a high understanding. AC, DC, the combination chart and the 
dashboard all had minor issues, which meant that the HCP could not instantly decipher what the graph was 
trying to show. WB had a low level of understanding which was primarily due to the HCP's not 
understanding the terminology used. WB, the combination graph and the dashboard were also considered to 
be highly clinically relevant. AC was seen to be clinically relevant but HCP's were not convinced that it 
should be a stand alone graph and that is why the clinical relevance is set to medium. Due to the 
inconsistencies in DC, HCP's did not feel this measure was clinically relevant in that particular visualised 
format. 
The final results can be seen on this website:- http://patrickjleese.wix.com/ehrmodulepostw 
Table 2 - An overview of findings from the workshop 
7. DISCUSSION 
7.1 Recommendations 
The findings from this study have contributed directly to literature especially with regards to the visualisation 
of accelerometer and GPS data for dementia care. Furthermore, there is no reason to suggest that the findings 
could not be translated to other areas of healthcare. Therefore, the significance of these findings provide a 
substantial base from which further research can build upon, which has been discussed below. 
7.1.1 Utilise time-series graphs and area charts 
A number of graphs were explored for use throughout this study and it was clearly evident that time-series 
graphs and area charts were most preferable. Therefore the recommendation from this research is that time-
series graphs should be utilised for the visualisation of accelerometer data and area graphs should be used for 
the visualisation of GPS data.  
Measure
Understanding
Clinical Relevance
Physical Activity
High
High
Area Coverage
Medium
Medium
Wandering Behaviour
Low
High
Daily Cycle
Medium
Low
Combination Chart
Medium
High
Dashboard
Medium
High
==PAGE:152==
7.1.1 UCD is fundamental for successful visualisation 
A UCD approach proved to be essential in understanding the HCP’s needs in this study. The feedback gained 
from the short workshop with HCP's was invaluable and imperative to the proof of concept development. It 
is therefore seen as essential to work closely with the HCP’s to understand the needs of the various 
stakeholders. 
7.1.1 Reduce cognitive load as much as possible 
It was highly apparent that the HCP's craved simplicity. All instances of a misinformed use of colour, 
wording and graphs were met challengingly and reflected badly upon the understanding of the graph in 
question. Time-series graphs produced a very low cognitive load when compared to that of the area charts 
used for the visualisation of AC and WB. 
7.1.1 Visualise a combination of accelerometer and GPS data 
Visualising a combination of both accelerometer and GPS data is highly preferable to HCP's. This provides 
the options of both glancing to see an overall trend and seeing a large amount of information in one graph. 
This also creates the opportunity to combine information that is captured from the PWD's life, giving insight 
into both behavioural and cognitive well being.   
7.1.2 Understand that there is not a one size fits all approach 
The results showed that both the presentation of individual components and holistic views are important. It is 
therefore clear that there is not a one size fits all solution. The information needed by the HCP is highly 
dependant on what they are looking for. Exploration of individual measures to gain more detail and 
dashboard's for glance-able overviews both have a place and therefore interactive features should be utilised 
to provide detail on demand. 
7.1.3 Visualise single patient data 
The development of dementia is vastly individual for each patient and their lifestyle preceding diagnosis is 
hugely different for each patient. It is therefore essential to visualise single patient data, to understand that 
each patient will adapt differently to dementia and various measures will provide varying levels of clinical 
relevance. 
7.2 FUTURE WORK 
As an explorative area of research there is ample opportunity for future research within the communication 
of eHealth data to HCP's.  
7.2.1 Make an in-depth assessment of the prototype 
The prototype developed has only been validated with HCP's once. The feedback gained at this stage has 
been used to make a proof of concept which has not been validated further with HCP's. It would therefore be 
highly beneficial to extend upon this research and thoroughly test the proof of concept. 
7.2.2 Depth of detail research 
Future work should include research into the varying levels of detail a HCP needs and when they are most 
likely to need an overview of a PWD's condition as opposed to a detailed understanding. 
7.2.4 Understanding of threshold and trigger scenarios 
Exploring the potential for the HCP to set individual thresholds for a patient, could also be a highly 
interesting area for future research. These thresholds could act as trigger points for making proactive contact 
with a PWD or caregiver. Research into the area would involve understanding how a threshold would be 
established and subsequently visualised. 
7.2.5 Explore the convergence of sensors 
If the opportunity to attain data from an accelerometer, a GPS and a heart rate monitor became available on 
the same smartwatch then this could provide numerous opportunities. The DC measure would be more 
concrete as a classification of activities could be justified in the detection of various behavioural states. 
Furthermore, a PWD’s resting heart rate could be visualised alongside PA data. 
==PAGE:153==
7.2.6 Notation addition to visualisations 
The ability for HCP's to comment directly on the data in a manner which is accessible to all HCP's would 
also be a notable area for research. The workshop showed that it would be highly beneficial for quantitative 
data to be backed up with qualitative input, which could give reasoning behind the data. 
8. CONCLUSION 
This work explored how specific measures attained from accelerometer and GPS sensors can be 
communicated effectively to HCP’s. Success criteria was dependant on visualisations being both 
understandable and clinically relevant. The findings conclude that specific measures chosen for the 
visualisation of accelerometer and GPS data do provide clinically relevant information for HCP's at the 
dementia care unit of Rigshospitalet Glostrup. Accelerometer data should be visualised through time-series 
graphs and GPS data should be visualised through area charts. The measures of PA and WB proved to 
provide a high level of clinical relevance, as did the inclusion of a combination chart and dashboard showing 
that HCP’s do depend on varying levels of detail in visualisation. There is room for improvement on level of 
understanding with regards to the majority of measures but it is felt that if HCP’s were presented with the 
proof of concept then an even greater level of understanding would be present. It is therefore concluded that 
wearable technologies will become a key source of information for dementia care due to the high level of 
clinical relevance apparent in the results. 
As a final comment, for wearable technology to make a true impact on the healthcare system, the 
communication of this information needs to be developed in parallel to the latest sensors. If a HCP can not 
interpret the meaning of how this data is communicated or if the data presented does not meet their 
requirements, then the usefulness of even the most advanced sensor technology is limited. Visualisation of 
data will only become more complex, so understanding how this data can be understood and what data is of 
clinical relevance could have far reaching implications. The communication of eHealth information should 
therefore be considered vital. It is now we need to begin to visualise the data which is available from the 
latest sensors and explore how to communicate this effectively to help HCP’s, aiding decision making 
processes on both a short and long term basis. 
REFERENCES 
Aakhus, M. (2007a) ‘Communication as design’, Communication Monographs, 74(1), pp. 112–117. doi: 
10.1080/03637750701196383. 
Bade, R., Schlechtweg, S. and Miksch, S. (2004) ‘Connecting time-oriented data and information to a coherent 
interactive visualization’, Proceedings of the 2004 conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’04, . 
doi: 10.1145/985692.985706. 
Basis | heart rate monitor & fitness Tracker (2016) Available at: http://www.mybasis.com (Accessed: 14 June 2016). 
Bauer, D.T., Guerlain, S. and Brown, P.J. (2010) ‘The design and evaluation of a graphical display for laboratory data’, 
Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 17(4), pp. 416–424. doi: 10.1136/jamia.2009.000505. 
Bhattacharya, T., Kulik, L. and Bailey, J. (2015) ‘Automatically recognizing places of interest from unreliable GPS data 
using spatio-temporal density estimation and line intersections’, Pervasive and Mobile Computing, 19, pp. 86–
107. doi: 10.1016/j.pmcj.2014.08.003. 
Enterprise, A. (2016) Consumer & enterprise mobile App development. Available at: http://www.apadmi.com 
(Accessed: 14 June 2016). 
Fit, G. (2016) Google fit. Available at: https://www.google.com/fit/ (Accessed: 14 June 2016). 
Fport (2016) FitPort for iPhone. Available at: http://flaskapp.com/fitport/ (Accessed: 14 June 2016). 
Hoffmeyer, A., Yordanova, K., Teipel, S. and Kirste, T. (2012) ‘Sensor Based Monitoring for People with Dementia: 
Searching for Movement Markers in Alzheimer’s Disease for a Early Diagnostic’, in Constructing Ambient 
Intelligence. pp. 137–145. 
Horn, W., Popow, C. and Unterasinger, L. (2001) ‘Archive (2005–1962)’, Methods Archive, 40(5), pp. 421–424. 
Kirste, T., Hoffmeyer, A., Koldrack, P., Bauer, A., Schubert, S., Schröder, S. and Teipel, S. (2014) ‘Detecting the effect 
of Alzheimer’s disease on everyday motion behavior.’, Journal of Alzheimer’s disease : JAD, 38(1), pp. 121–32. 
doi: 10.3233/JAD-130272. 
Lam, K.Y., Tsang, N.W.H., Han, S., Ng, J.K.Y., Tam, S.W. and Nath, A. (2015) ‘SmartMind: Activity tracking and 
monitoring for patients with Alzheimer’s disease’, Proceedings - International Conference on Advanced 
Information Networking and Applications, AINA, 2015-April, pp. 453–460. doi: 10.1109/AINA.2015.221. 
Lazard, A.J. and Mackert, M.S. (2015) ‘e-health first impressions and visual evaluations’, Communication Design 
Quarterly Review, 3(4), pp. 25–34. doi: 10.1145/2826972.2826975. 
Ledger, D. and Partners, E. (2016) ‘Inside Wearables - Part 3’, (January). 
Lehmann, C., Rozo, P., Facker, J. and Holmes, K. (2010) ‘Practical Visualization of Multivariate Time Series Data in a 
Neonatal ICU’, Vach, , pp. 1–4. 
==PAGE:154==
Maier, A.M., Özkil, A.G., Bang, M.M. and Birgitte H. Forchhammer (2015) ‘Remember to remember: A Feasibility 
Study Adapting Wearable Technology to the Needs of People Aged 65 and Older with Mild Cognitive Impairment 
(MCI) and Alzheimer’s Dementia’, International Conference on Engineering Design (ICED15), (Mci). 
Martin, J.A. (2015) 13 wearable tech trends to watch in 2016. Available at: http://www.cio.com/article/3017995/
wearable-technology/13-wearable-tech-trends-to-watch-in-2016.html?page=2 (Accessed: 14 June 2016). 
Omron, H. (2016) Activity monitoring | Omron healthcare. Available at: http://www.omron-healthcare.com/en/products/
activitymonitoring (Accessed: 14 June 2016). 
Powsner, S. (1994) ‘Graphical summary of patient status’, The Lancet, 344(8919), pp. 386–389. doi: 10.1016/
s0140-6736(94)91406-0. 
Quante, M., Kaplan, E.R., Rueschman, M., Cailler, M., Buxton, O.M. and Redline, S. (2015) ‘Practical considerations 
in using accelerometers to assess physical activity, sedentary behavior, and sleep’, Sleep Health, 1(4), pp. 275–
284. doi: 10.1016/j.sleh.2015.09.002. 
Rind, A., Aigner, W., Miksch, S., Wiltner, S., Pohl, M., Turic, T. and Drexler, F. (2011) ‘Visual exploration of time-
oriented patient data for chronic diseases: Design study and evaluation’, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, , pp. 
301–320. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-25364-5_22. 
Shneiderman, B. (1998) ‘Visualizing personal histories’, ACM SIGCHI Bulletin, 30(1), pp. 34–35. doi: 
10.1145/280571.280585. 
Thorpe, J.R., Forchhammer, B.H. and Maier, A.M. (2016) ‘Measuring user behaviour from sensor data for service 
design in pervasive healthcare’, . 
Tufte, E.R. (2001) The visual display of quantitative information. 2nd edn. United States: Graphics Press USA. 
Tung, J.Y., Rose, R.V., Gammada, E., Lam, I., Roy, E.A., Black, S.E. and Poupart, P. (2014) ‘Measuring Life Space in 
Older Adults with Mild-to-Moderate Alzheimer’s Disease Using Mobile Phone GPS’, Gerontology, 60(2), pp. 
154–162. doi: 10.1159/000355669. 
Yuan, H., Qian, Y., Yang, R. and Ren, M. (2014) ‘Human mobility discovering and movement intention detection with 
GPS trajectories’, Decision Support Systems, 63, pp. 39–51. doi: 10.1016/j.dss.2013.09.010. 
==PAGE:155==
Manual
Communicating eHealth
Information within
the Dementia Care System
Patrick Leese
Master Thesis Findings 2016
Supervisors:  Anja Maier  & Julia Rosemary Thorpe
==PAGE:156==
Communicating eHealth Information Within The Dementia Care System
patrickjleese@gmail.com
Technical University of Denmark
http://patrickjleese.wix.com/ehrmodulepostw
Communicating eHealth information within the dementia care system
p. 2
==PAGE:157==
Communicating eHealth Information Within The Dementia Care System
patrickjleese@gmail.com
Technical University of Denmark
http://patrickjleese.wix.com/ehrmodulepostw
Communicating eHealth information within the dementia care system
p. 3
==PAGE:158==
Communicating eHealth Information
Within the Dementia Care System
08
50
table
of 
contents
06 Introduction
07 Physical Activity
08 Area Coverage
09 Wandering Behaviour
10 Quote
11 Physical Activity +
Area Coverage
12 Behaviour Overview
13 Dashboard
15 Contact
Communicating eHealth Information Within The Dementia Care System
patrickjleese@gmail.com
Technical University of Denmark
http://patrickjleese.wix.com/ehrmodulepostw
p. 4
==PAGE:159==
Communicating eHealth Information Within The Dementia Care System
patrickjleese@gmail.com
Technical University of Denmark
http://patrickjleese.wix.com/ehrmodulepostw
Communicating eHealth information within the dementia care system
p. 5
==PAGE:160==
THE
PROJECT
Communicating eHealth information within the dementia care system
              his brochure provides an overview of the
proof of concept visualisations made for the
Master's Thesis project on 'Communicating
eHealth information within the dementia care
system'. It focuses on the visualisation of
accelerometer and GPS data attained from a
smartwatch and smartphone. Specific measures
have been chosen for visualisation which are
documented in the following pages.
The utilisation of wearable technology within
healthcare to assist healthcare professional's
(HCP's) is becoming increasingly common, yet
even though minor acceptance of this
technology has been warranted, there is still
debate over it's true benefits and how it can be
implemented to an overwhelmingly positive
effect. One plausible explanation of this hesitation,
stem's from the fact that the eHealth information
wearable technology can gather, is not
communicated in an effective manner to HCP's.
Pertinent data visualisations facilitate the
understanding of trends in data and therefore in
the context of healthcare can inform HCP's on a
patients progress over time, sudden changes in
behaviour and even help in decision making
processes. One of the challenges is that
visualisation of data is still presented in it's rawest
form. It is now we need to begin to visualise the
data which is available from the latest sensors and
explore how to communicate this effectively to
help HCP's make better decisions on a daily basis.
T
http://patrickjleese.wix.com/ehrmodulepostw
p. 6
==PAGE:161==
PHYSICAL
ACTIVITY
             hysical Activity is measured through the
accelerometer of the device. Primarily the
collection of physical activity data is taken to
understand how active a person with dementia
is. These activities levels are a culmination of
various activity types such as walking, cycling
and any other form of activity. It is represented
through the amount of minutes a person with
dementia is active on a daily basis. 
Plotting this through a time-series graph is
highly understandable and can instantly give
indications as to wether the patient is
consistently active during the day or wether
they are becoming less and less active over
time. HCP's find this information to be highly
clinically relevant as decreasing levels of
activities can show weakness, lack of
motivation and signs of depression.
P
Communicating eHealth information within the dementia care system
p. 7
http://patrickjleese.wix.com/ehrmodulepostw
==PAGE:162==
AREA
COVERAGE
               rea coverage represents the area in
which the person with dementia’s life revolves
within. The graph shows the area range in km2
which is derived from GPS data. This data can be
translated into determining specific point’s of
interest and can show how far a patient travels
from the home. In monitoring this data over time
it can quickly show if a person with dementia is
becoming more and more reclusive.
This information is particular relevant for HCP's
who would see a gradual or sudden decrease in
area coverage as a sign of deteriorating
physical and psychological condition.   
The average area coverage is also included
to show how often a patient is travelling
within specific area ranges. A high range but
low average could be indicative of a one-off
trip and therefore both data points are
needed to give an overall understanding of
patient behaviour. 
A
Communicating eHealth information within the dementia care system
p.8
http://patrickjleese.wix.com/ehrmodulepostw
==PAGE:163==
WANDERING
BEHAVIOUR
                andering behaviour shows how far a
person with dementia deviates from their normal
route. The GPS sensor is used to collect the data
needed to establish points of interest. Normal
distance is the distance a person with dementia
would normally travel to go to a particular
point of interest whereas actual distance is how
far they actually travelled.
It is therefore assumed that the wearable will  
automatically establish these place of
interests and normal amount of time it takes
to reach them. 
This information is seen as highly clinically
relevant to healthcare professionals as it can
show a strong deterioration in a person with
dementia and can give valuable assistance
with regards to the safety of the patient. 
W
Communicating eHealth information within the dementia care system
p. 9
http://patrickjleese.wix.com/ehrmodulepostw
==PAGE:164==
EXCELLENT
VISUALISATIONS ARE
THOSE THAT GIVE THE
VIEWER THE GREATEST
NUMBER OF IDEAS IN THE
SHORTEST AMOUNT OF
TIME, WITH THE LEAST INK
AND IN THE SMALLEST
SPACE
EDWARD ROLF
TUFTE
Data visualisation pioneer
Communicating eHealth information within the dementia care system
p. 10
==PAGE:165==
PHYSICAL ACTIVITY
+  AREA
COVERAGE
              hysical activity data derived from the
accelerometer and area coverage data derived
from the GPS are visualised within the same
graph on direct request of the HCP's. It was felt
that the combination of this data was much
more powerful than their stand alone charts.
It is evisaged that the stand-alone charts for
physical activity and area coverage will be
utilised and are meaningful but a combination of
this data provides the option for easy
comparison of data which HCP's consider
extremely helpful.
Aligning data in this manner within the same
graph provides the opportunity to learn more
about the patient. If physical activity is high
and daily area coverage is low then this may
not provide too much cause for alarm.
If both data sets begin to fall gradually or
suddenly then this could represent a shift
in psychological and / or physical well being,
which would be highly valuable information
for a HCP to know and ultimately act upon.
P
Communicating eHealth information within the dementia care system
p. 11
http://patrickjleese.wix.com/ehrmodulepostw
==PAGE:166==
BEHAVIOUR
OVERVIEW
              aily behaviour patterns have been
visualised in this area graph. The behaviour
overview graph visualises a combination of data
that includes the states - lying, stepping, sitting
and out of home. It was considered that lying,
sitting and stepping would offer very interesting
data and the inclusion of out of home data
would only add to the HCP's ability to compare
and evaulate the person with dementia's data.
Furthermore by using percentage values,
trends can quickly be seen as to how much
time is being spent within each state and
how quickly this is increasing or decreasing.
Naturally an increase in percentage values
for lying would be worrying signs for a HCP.
It is assumed that the person with dementia
would have the watch on during their daily
cycle to make this data representative. 
D
Communicating eHealth information within the dementia care system
p. 12
http://patrickjleese.wix.com/ehrmodulepostw
==PAGE:167==
DASHBOARD
OVERVIEW
           he dashboard is envisaged as the
homepage of the module. It allows a HCP to
gain a quick overview of a current status of the
patient in question. The 3 measures of area
coverage, physical activity and wandering
behaviour are shown and they are represented
through a number which, dependent on status,
is green or red.
Trendlines are also utilised to show how the
patient has been progressing over time and the
time intervals for this is set to one month. 
HCP's see the dashboard as a particularly
important visualisation as they can quickly
understand patient progression without
having to dig deeper into the data. At the
same time if they are particularly interested in
why a measure changed they can click
directly on the image to get more detailed
information. 
T
Communicating eHealth information within the dementia care system
p. 13
http://patrickjleese.wix.com/ehrmodulepostw
==PAGE:168==
Communicating eHealth Information Within The Dementia Care System
patrickjleese@gmail.com
Technical University of Denmark
http://patrickjleese.wix.com/ehrmodulepostw
Communicating eHealth information within the dementia care system
p. 14
==PAGE:169==
CONTACT
?
Write to me:
patrickjleese@gmail.com 
N E E D  T O  G E T  I N
This Master's Thesis is written in conjunction with the
ongoing research by Anja Maier and Julia Rosemary
Thorpe into - Engineering Systems Design in Healthcare:
Smart Wearables for Dementia Monitoring.
More information on the overall project can be viewed
on the websites below:
http://www.es.man.dtu.dk
http://www.cachet.dk/research/projects/wearables-for-
dementia
C O M M U N I C A T I N G  E - H E A L T H  I N F O R M A T I O N
W I T H I N  T H E  D E M E N T I A  C A R E  S Y S T E M
p. 15
==PAGE:170==
Communicating eHealth Information Within The
Dementia Care System
patrickjleese@gmail.com
Technical University of Denmark
http://patrickjleese.wix.com/ehrmodulepostw
Communicating eHealth information within the dementia care system.
Master Thesis Project 2016
