==PAGE:1==
1
Fluid simulation based on the combination of
particles and a deformable simplicial complex
Jeppe Troelsgaard Bentzen, s142947
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
Abstract—In this paper a particle based ﬂuid simulation
is combined with the Deformable Simplicial Complex (DSC)
method. The paper investigates the possibilities of preserving
volume on a projected velocity ﬁeld from the particles to the
simplicial complex. However, results show that the methods used
had fundamental ﬂaws e.g. one of these methods do not take
the overall volume loss or gain into account when doing the
calculations. The particle based ﬂuid simulation is implemented
with a well known method in research called Smoothed Particles
Hydrodynamics (SPH). To solve the problem of incompressibility
without the use of the DSC method newest research in the area
where used to ensure a divergence free velocity ﬁeld and minimize
the density error. Interesting ﬁndings from this paper includes
that it is possible to track a particle based ﬂuid simulation
with a highly deformable interface using the DSC method. The
DSC method can then represent the larger volume of ﬂuid while
particles has the possibility to escape to produce spray or foam
effects.
Index Terms—Fluid simulation, Smoothed Particle Hydro-
dynamics, Deformable Simplicial Complex, Incompressibilty,
Divergence-free ﬂuids.
I. INTRODUCTION
Fluids exists everywhere around us, whether we pour a glass
of water, go sailing, ﬁll the car tank with gasoline, or just
go outside in the wind. Fluids are something we encounter
everyday but its a phenomenon that has proven to be difﬁcult to
simulate on a computer. Fluid simulation is used in a variety of
industries and research areas e.g. visual effects in movies and
computer games, catastrophe prevention by simulating ﬂoods
before they happen, testing for leakage in pipeline systems, or
to simulate the aerodynamics of an airplane. The research ﬁeld
of Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) has been around for
a long time and has presented a lot of different methods for
simulating complex ﬂuid systems [32]. However, there are still
a lot problems to be solved and new ways of doing things
left to be discovered. In this paper we will focus on ﬂuid
simulation for computer graphics purposes. One of the main
goals is to simulate a realistic looking ﬂuid which should
resemble how water reacts in the real world, both in a 2D
and a 3D environment. To simulate this ﬂuid a well known
method in CFD called Smoothed Particles Hydrodynamics
(SPH) will be used. However, research show that simulating
a ﬂuid using only particles can result in increase or decrease
in the ﬂuid volume, which is not how liquid ﬂuids like water
reacts out in the real world [7]. Researches has solved this
problem by combing grid-based methods with particle based
simulations like SPH, but often these solutions introduces
other issues, like severe smoothing [7]. Therefore, it could be
interesting to combine a SPH particle based simulation with a
highly deformable grid of triangles/tetrahedra (2D/3D). In the
Deformable Simplicial Complex (DSC) method it is possible
to use a deformable triangulated space where the interface
between inside and outside triangles/tetrahedra can represent
the ﬂuid surface. Interesting aspects of this combination is to
discover whether it is possible to perform volume preserving
algorithms on the triangles/tetrahedra of the DSC method and
apply it back to the SPH particles. Furthermore, the DSC
vertices should somehow be able to track the particles in the
ﬂuid simulation. The area/mesh (2D/3D) in the DSC method
can then represent the larger volume of ﬂuid and could be
interesting to let particles ’escape’ the ﬂuid domain in high
detail areas to produce spray and foam effect. To sum up, the
goals for this paper is to
• Implement a realistic looking ﬂuid simulation using the
Smoothed Particles Hydrodynamics method, both in 2D
and 3D. The main ﬂuid which we will try to resemble
will be water.
• Solve the problem of incompressibility of the particle
based simulation. Either using the DSC method or di-
rectly on the particles.
• Let a DSC area/mesh (2D/3D) track the ﬂuid simulation.
This area/mesh should represent the larger volume of ﬂuid
while particles should be able to escape producing spray
or foam effects.
• Minimize visual artifacts and instabilities in the ﬂuid
simulation.
• Maximize efﬁciency to simulate the ﬂuid as fast as
possible.
Some of these goals can be evaluated quantitatively while
others can be evaluated qualitatively. To measure on incom-
pressibility one can calculate the volume for every time step
to see if any change is happening, if the volume is constant
the ﬂuid is incompressible. Determining the volume of a
particle based simulation can be a bit tricky, however, using the
density error gives an identiﬁcation of whether the particles are
incompressible or not [5], we will describe this in more details
later. On the DSC area/mesh it is a more simple approach
where it is possible calculate the area or volume of each
triangles or tetrahedra to determine the overall volume of
the ﬂuid. Performance of the ﬂuid simulation can easily be
measured in the average milliseconds it takes to calculate one
time step. This way we can determine how much impact on
==PAGE:2==
2
performance it has to for example apply volume preserving
operations. The rest of the goals is a bit more tricky to
quantitatively determine whether they are successfully solved
or not, e.g. to determine if the ﬂuid simulation has a realistic
appearance cannot be determined by a number. These goals
will be evaluated qualitatively.
This paper will try to describe the choices made and why
they where made to implement a particle based ﬂuid simula-
tion combined with a deformable simplicial complex. Previous
research will be examined to get a better understanding of the
fundamental problems investigated in this paper, especially the
incompressibility issue. Furthermore, a detailed description of
how the ﬂuid simulation where implemented will be given,
and lastly showing results which will evaluate the main goals.
II. RELATED WORK
The research area of Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD)
dates back to the 19th century where the famous Navier-Stokes
equations where deﬁned by Claude-Louis Navier 1822 and
George Stokes 1845. The Navier-Stokes equations describes
ﬂuid ﬂow and also the conservation of momentum and mass
[32]. The Navier-Stokes equations is deﬁned by
ρ( ∂
∂t + u · ∇u) = −∇p + µ∇· (∇u) + f
(1)
∇· u = 0.
(2)
Solving these equations numerical on computers has led to
the ﬁeld of CFD and since then a large number of methods
has been presented on simulating ﬂuids.
A. Particle based ﬂuid simulations
In 1977 Lucy [27] and 1977 Gingold and Monaghan [16]
solved the Navier-Stokes equations numerically by using a set
of spatially smoothed particles. They both used this method to
solve problems in astrophysics. More speciﬁc Lucy [27] used
this method to solve problems regarding galaxial collision and
the dynamics of star formation. Because these particles move
under the inﬂuence of hydrodynamics and their quantities
where spatially smoothed the method where named Smoothed
Particles Hydrodynamis (SPH). SPH will be used in this
paper to implement our particle based ﬂuid simulation. The
interesting thing about SPH in 1977 was that it did not
use a grid to calculate spatial derivatives unlike other ﬂuid
simulation techniques at the time, e.g. the particle in cell
method (PIC) presented by 1955 Harlow [18] and 1957 Evans
and Harlow [12]. SPH was an interesting research area and
noteworthy examples of research papers includes [30] and
[31].
In 1983 T. Reeves [35] made a breakthrough in particle
based simulations where he introduced particle systems for
modeling a class of fuzzy objects. Since then a lot of different
particle-based ﬂuid simulation methods has been researched,
but particles has been used to other things related to ﬂuids
like to control an implicit surface [42], to animate surfaces
[24], and to animate soft objects [41]. SPH made its way into
computer graphics in 1995 where Stam and Fiuem [38] used
a modiﬁed version of SPH to simulate gaseous ﬂuids and later
by Desbrun and Gascuel [9]. Since then SPH has been used
a lot in computer graphics e.g. 1999 Stora [39], 2007 Adams
[1], 2007 Becker [4], 2011 Ihmsen [19], and 2014 Ihmsen
[21]. Just to name a few.
B. Eulerian vs. Langrangia viewpoints
When looking at ﬂuids moving there are two different forms
of viewpoints, the Langrangian and the Eulerian viewpoints
[7]. The Eulerian viewpoint is a grid based approach where
we look at ﬁxed points in space to see how ﬂuid quantities
change over time (like density, pressure etc.). The ﬂuid simply
pass through the ﬁxed points which results in some kind of
change, e.g. the density at a ﬁxed point is rising when more
water is passing by. The Langrangian viewpoint looks at how
points or particles move with the ﬂuid. The ﬂuid quantities
can then be measured at the position of these particles instead
of ﬁxed points in space. SPH is for example a Langrangian
method because ﬂuid quantities are measured at the position
of particles. The Eulerian approach is a popular choice in ﬂuid
simulation due to the fact that it is easier to work with spatial
derivatives on a ﬁxed grid than a set of arbitrarily moving
particles [7]. In the last 15 years a lot of research about ﬂuid
simulation using an Eulerian approach has been published and
examples of these are 1999 Stam [38], 2001 Foster et. al. [15],
2002 Takahashi et. al. [40], and 2004 Losasso et. al.[25]. It is
interesting to investigate the differences of the two viewpoints
and how they connect to each other to fully understand their
advantages and disadvantages.
To connect the Eulerian viewpoint with the Langrangian
viewpoint we can use what is called the material derivative.
Imaging a point in space with the position x and an arbitrary
quantity q. Then the function q(x, t) tells us the value of q
at time t. this is an Eulerian viewpoint. In a Langrangian
viewpoint we can pretend that a particle happens to currently
be at position x and to ﬁnd out how fast q is changing we can
use the material derivative of q(x, t) (Chain Rule)[7].
∂
∂tq(t, xi) = ∂q
∂t + ∇q · ∂xi
∂t
= ∂q
∂t + ∇q · u
≡Dq
Dt
(3)
We can then set the material derivative to zero, Dq
Dt = 0,
(an advection equation) which will mean that the quantities
is not changing only moving around. This is a Langrangian
viewpoint.
There are deﬁnitely pros and cons with both the Lan-
grangian and the Eulerian approaches. One of the most chal-
lenging issues with Langrangian particle-based methods is to
enforce an incompressible ﬂuid simulation [5]. Realistic ﬂuids
like water does not in normal conditions change volume at
any time so it is essential that a ﬂuid simulation is able to
mimic this property. For Eulerian approaches its more simple
to simulate incompressibility than for Langrangian methods.
One of the reason for this is the use of a grid where the
volume preserving operations becomes much more simple.
==PAGE:3==
3
One method for ensuring incompressibility in an Eulerian
based method can be seen in the book about ﬂuid simula-
tion for computer graphics by Bridson from 2008 [7]. The
Langrangian approach has a huge advantage when it comes
to advection due to the fact that the particles move the ﬂuid
quantities, while most grid-based Eulerian methods has serious
distortion problems in quantity ﬁelds when trying to simulate
advection [7]. The reason for this is that the advection scheme
for Eulerian methods often starts by sampling quantities at grid
points, then the quantity ﬁeld is reconstructed based on the
samples, then advection is applied to the reconstructed quantity
ﬁeld, and lastly resampling is done on the advected ﬁeld on the
grid. The problem is when introducing incompressibility then
distortion may appear. When we then resample the distorted
ﬁeld it may result in loss of information [7]. It can be described
as local magniﬁcation out of one axis and miniﬁcation along
the others. Then when sampling a miniﬁed ﬁeld it may result
in loss of information. A brute solution for this problem is
to use a high resolution grid, however, this has proven to be
very computational expensive [7]. This has also been a topic
in research where a lot of different methods of dealing with
this problem has been proposed. An example is Losasso et al.
[25] using octrees to create an adaptive grid where the grid
resolution is increased in high density areas. However, with a
high level of implementation complexity and a maximum roof
for grid resolution, results show that it is not an ideal solution
[7].
To put it in a simple sentence, particles are good to simulate
advection and with a high degree of details while enforcing in-
compressibility is difﬁcult. Grid-based methods are very good
at enforcing incompressibility but has its limits when it comes
to advection and simulating with a high degree of details.
The interesting topic is then to implement a hybrid method
that takes the best from both methods. In this paper we will
investigate how particles can be combined with a deformable
simplicial complex to simulate incompressible ﬂuids while
keeping the high degree of details. Before dwelling into details
of this combination lets look at previous research in the ﬁeld
of hybrid particle-grid methods.
C. Hybrid particle-grid methods
Using particles together with a grid dates back to the 1950s.
In 1963 a method called particles-in-cell (PIC) was described
in a journal article by Harlow [17]. In PIC all quantities
are stored in particles placed in a ﬁxed grid. In computer
graphics eight particles per grid-cell seems to do the work.
For each time step the quantities are then transferred unto the
grid. All the non advection terms like gravity, viscosity, and
pressure are then integrated on the grid as in a fully Eulerian
approach. After the necessary computations the quantities
are interpolated back from the grid to the particles. Lastly
advection is performed using the particles. In PIC it is worth
noting that it is possible to insert or remove particles from the
system if too many or too few particles exists in one grid-
cell. In this way it is very different from fully Langrangian
methods where particles should not be removed unless some
of the actually ﬂuid should be removed. PIC works very well
at solving the problem of incompressibility and advection
but it also suffers from severe numerical dissipation [7]. The
problem is when particle quantities are interpolated unto the
grid and back again it introduces a lot of smoothing for each
time step. This smoothing happens even if the particles is
completely still and is the biggest drawback of the PIC method.
In 1986 Brackbill and Ruppel [6] presented a simple but
very efﬁcient variation of the PIC method called the ﬂuid
implicit particle (FLIP) method. The major difference in
PIC and FLIP is that instead of interpolating and replacing
quantities back to the particles they interpolate the change of
quantities. This change then increment the quantities on the
particles instead of replacing them. This way the smoothing is
restricted to one time per time step and thus virtually removing
all numerical dissipation. The FLIP method, as described by
Bridson [7], can be interpreted as:
• Transfer particle values qp to the grid qi,j,k.
• Save the grid values qi,j,k.
• Compute all non-advection term on the grid like pressure,
viscosity, and gravity to get an updated value qnew
i,j,k.
• Interpolate the change ∆qi,j,k = qnew
i,j,k −qi,j,k from
the grid. Then for each particle: Add the change to the
particle’s value qp = qp + ∆qi,j,k.
• Use the velocity ﬁeld to advect the particles.
FLIP has been further developed since then and one notice-
able research paper by Zhu and Bridson [43] uses FLIP to
simulate incompressible ﬂuid ﬂow, more speciﬁcally simulat-
ing sand as a ﬂuid. Results show that it removes all numerical
dissipation from advection, is trivial to implement, and it
can produce a high degree of details on a fairly coarse grid.
However, FLIP may introduce noise in the form of velocity
errors. Velocity ﬂuctuations may be averaged out in some time
steps while in others they may result in unexpected artifacts.
Basic PIC does not have this problem because the velocities
are just interpolated. Therefore, it can be beneﬁcial to blend
in some PIC into FLIP to ﬁlter out the noise. This however,
results in some numerical dissipation so one needs to ﬁnd a
perfect balance between the two. Another issue with the FLIP
method is that it is limited to ﬁrst-order accuracy [7]. This can
in most cases be sufﬁcient but e.g. to get a smooth level sets
surface one may need a higher order accuracy.
In 2001 Foster and Fedkiw [15] presented a solution that
combines a Eulerian level set method with marker particles
that can track the free surface of a liquid. Enright et al. furter
fully developed this method in [10] and [11]. The method
is called the particle level set (PLS) method. This method
provides the full accuracy possible for a grid-based method
with the help from particles. PLS can only work with geometry
that can be represented by level sets and it suffers from some
of the same fundamental limits as a pure Eulerian method
described earlier in this section [7]. To read more about level
sets the book by Fedkiw and Osher [13] gives a detailed
description of level set methods. In 2008 Lasasso et al. [26]
uses a combination of PLS together with SPH. To simulate the
large volume of ﬂuids they used PLS and in high detail areas,
like areas with spray and foam effects, SPH particles where
used. Other hybrid particle-grid methods has been presented
==PAGE:4==
4
through out the years for example in 2011 Raveendran et al.
[34] uses SPH together with a coarse grid. They preserve
density directly on SPH particles while using the grid to solve
for a divergence free velocity ﬁeld. Results show that they are
able to get similar results as other research but with a larger
time step. In 2013 Ando et al. [2] simulates SPH on tetrahedra
meshes instead of a normal grid.
Research show that there deﬁnitely are interesting aspects
of combining particles with some sort of grid to get the best
from both Langrangian and Eulerian approaches. This paper
will, as mentioned before, simulate ﬂuid ﬂow using the SPH
method. The reason for this is that it has in previous research
proved to be a very solid solution to simulate highly detailed
ﬂuids. However, a normal SPH method falls short when it
comes to keeping the simulation incompressible. Therefore, it
would be interesting to combine SPH particles with a grid to
be able to perform volume preserving operations on the grid
and apply them to the particles. Research show that a ﬁxed
grid has huge limitations when it comes to smoothing valuable
information in interpolation of quantities. Because of this we
will use the Deformable Simplicial Complex (DSC) method
presented by Misztal and Bærentzen [29] in 2012. With the
DSC method a triangulation (in 2D) and tetrahedralization (in
3D) of a space can be used instead of a ﬁxed grid. This space
is highly deformable and the interface that will track the ﬂuid
simulation can be moved in a Langrangian way.
D. The Deformable Simplicial Complex
The DSC method is a topology adaptive method for de-
formable interface tracking [29]. in DSC the space is tri-
angulated in 2D or tetrahedralated in 3D and these trian-
gles/tetrahedra can either be marked as inside or outside. The
interface is deﬁned to be the lines or faces between inside and
outside triangles/tetrahedra. From a ﬂuid simulation point of
view this interface can represent the free surface of the ﬂuid.
This is believed to be a powerful substitute of a ﬁxed grid due
to the fact that the interface can adaptively track the particles
and therefore eliminate any form of grid while still have the
beneﬁts from an Eulerian approach. Beneﬁts from using The
DSC method is that DSC in its nature can represent the ﬂuid
as an explicit surface, the DSC interface can be moved in
a Langrangian way with little numerical diffusion, and it is
highly deformable so the resolution can depend on the level
of details in speciﬁc areas of the simulation. When moving
interface vertices the DSC method will do topology adaptive
operations like degenerate triangle/tetrahedra removal, edge
ﬂips, and smoothing operations to enforce a certain quality
of the domain. For a detailed description of the DSC method
see [29]. On Figure 1 one can see the triangulated space in
the DSC method (2D) where a random group of triangles are
marked as inside (the blue triangles) and others outside (the
grey triangles). The lines between the inside and outside are
colored red to indicate that they represent the piece-wise linear
interface.
E. Volume preservation using the DSC method
The original idea for this paper was then to combine SPH
particles with the DSC method to keep a constant volume
Fig. 1. The Triangulated space in the DSC method (in 2D). The blue triangles
are inside and the grey are outside while the red lines are the interface.
throughout the simulation using triangles/tetrahedra. However,
the implementation and testing of two methods of preserving
the volume with DSC showed severe issues when trying to
simulate realistic looking ﬂuids. To understand why these
methods failed lets start by describing how they work. For
simplicity we will describe them in a 2D space.
Both methods needs to get the velocity ﬁeld from the SPH
particles unto the DSC triangles to be able to do the volume
preserving calculations. For each particle inside a triangle the
velocity would be projected unto its three vertices by interpola-
tion using barycentric coordinates. This way each vertex would
weigh the velocity of close particles more than the velocities
of far particles. As the Eulerian methods described earlier
this introduced some smoothing of the velocity ﬁelds. With
the velocity ﬁeld of the particles projected unto the triangle
vertices it is now possible to do volume preserving operations
and then interpolate the velocities back onto the particles.
Furthermore, the velocities on the DSC method would be used
to move the vertices in a Langrangian way with the particles.
If we look at a single triangle with the projected velocities
unto its vertices. Then it is possible to deﬁne a condition that
will enforce a constant area of this triangle by using the dot
product of the normal and the velocity of each of the three
vertices. Putting this area preserving condition into a matrix
equation yields

n0
n1
n2

·


v0
v1
v2

= 0.
(4)
It is possible to correct the projected velocities to keep a
constant area of the triangles in the ﬂuid simulation by solving
equation 4. In our ﬂuid simulation it is more likely that the
ﬂuid volume spreads out over more than one triangle so we
need to collect all triangles inside the ﬂuid to create a large
matrix equation. This matrix equation can then be solved
to correct the velocities that upholds a constant area of all
triangles. We deﬁne the area of all these triangles to be the
volume of the ﬂuid so with the condition 4 true for all triangles
the volume of the ﬂuid should be constant. Results show that
this method does a good job at preserving volume of the
ﬂuid from one time step to another. However, there are often
numerical imprecision when solving such large equations and
other small errors which over time results in huge volume
loss or gain. Another issue with this method for preserving
==PAGE:5==
5
volume is that when we solve the matrix equation to get the
corrected velocity we do not take the direction of the ﬂuid into
account. A velocity may turn 180 degrees to uphold the area
preserving condition which results in non realistic ﬂuid ﬂow
when projected back to the particles. These major drawback
renders this method useless in simulating an incompressible
ﬂuid.
The other method for preserving volume on the DSC
triangles, unlike the other, takes the loss or gain of the overall
volume into account in its calculations. The idea of this method
is to use all interface vertices to calculate the change of volume
and then correcting the velocities by solving for the loss or
gain of volume. To be more precise for every interface edge
we calculate the change of volume the projected velocity
would apply by ∆V = 1
2lu · n, where l is the length of the
interface edge. We can then construct a large matrix equation
consisting of these changes in volume while considering the
overall gain or loss of the volume. Lastly we solve for the
corrected velocities that should ensure these changes sum up
to be equal to the overall volume difference from the initial
volume. Results show that this method, unlike the other, have
large ﬂuctuations from one time step to another, but does a
good job preserving volume over time by correcting it based
on the initial volume. The method only uses velocities from the
interface of the ﬂuid and not in its center to perform volume
correction so projecting the velocities back to the particles
suddenly becomes a problem. Because of this there is only a
one way coupling which results in a compressible SPH particle
simulation that is tracked by a volume preserving grid, which
is not an optimal solution. Furthermore, this method introduces
quite a lot of artifacts on the DSC interface.
The conclusion based on implementation and testing of the
two mentioned volume preserving methods above is that it is
difﬁcult to get a reasonable two way coupling of SPH particles
and DSC vertices. The reasons for this is the following:
• Interpolating velocities from particles to vertices and back
again results in smoothing of the velocity ﬁeld.
• The volume preserving methods does not take the ﬂuid
ﬂow into account which can result in a non realistic
looking ﬂuid.
• The ﬁrst volume preserving method described does not
take the overall loss or gain of volume into account.
• The second method described only uses the interface ver-
tices to do volume preserving operations which eliminates
the two way connection between particles and vertices
(Velocities are only interpolated unto the vertices but not
back again).
Combining the SPH particles and DSC method still does
have interesting aspects even though the volume preservation
methods did not produce satisfying results. For example it can
be interesting to let the DSC ﬂuid domain represent the larger
volumes of a ﬂuid while particles can escape and produce
spray and foam effects. This has in research proven to be
interesting for adaptable Eulerian grids [26], but using the DSC
method may be a better choice because it renders out the use
of a grid for interpolating quantities.
F. Incompressible SPH
The problem of simulating an incompressible ﬂuid is un-
fortunately still a big issue in our ﬂuid simulation. Without
the use of the DSC method the volume preserving operations
needs to be applied directly on the SPH particles. This problem
has been a part of SPH research for many years and a lot
of different approaches has been presented. Early works by
Monaghan [31] in 1994 weakly enforces incompressibility
using a stiffness-weighted pressure term to minimize density
errors. Since then the issue of incompressible particles has
been investigated by [9], [1], and [4] among others. In 2007
Becker et al. [4] restricts the maximum compression by
predetermined stiffness-coefﬁcients, but this often resulted in
high stiffness coefﬁcients which restricted the time step [5].
In 2009 Solenthaler and Pajarola [36] presented an iteratively
pressure solver that minimized the density error to a user
deﬁned tolerance level. This method was called predictive
corrective incompressible SPH (PCISPH). In 2013 Macklin
and M¨uller [28] presented their position based ﬂuid scheme
where they correct the position to correct for density errors
and thus enforcing incompressiblity. In [28] larger time steps
where used suitable for real-time applications. Up until this
point most methods only use some sort of density correction
scheme or enforcing incompresibility by using a divergence
free velocity ﬁeld. However, in 2014 Kang and Sagong [22]
presented a method that uses both a density correction scheme
and a divergence free velocity ﬁeld. They extended the position
based ﬂuid method by Macklin and M¨uller [28] and added a
divergence free velocity ﬁeld scheme. Another method called
the implicit incompressible SPH (IISPH) by Ihmsen et al.
[20] was recently presented in 2014. This method decrease
the density deviation considerably to around 0.01%, but does
not correct for velocity divergence. In 2015 Bender and
Koschier [5] presented their method for simulating SPH with
a divergence free velocity ﬁeld while correcting for density
errors. The method is called divergence-free SPH (DFSPH)
and results show that it is a robust and efﬁcient solution [5].
The DFSPH method will be used in this paper to enforce
incompressibility in the SPH ﬂuid simulation. Next section
will try to describe this method, the standard SPH method we
use to simulate ﬂuid, and how DSC vertices track the SPH
particles.
III. METHOD
A. Divergence free velocity ﬁeld
The divergence free condition from equation 2 of the Navier
Stokes equations must at any time be true to simulate a true
incompressible ﬂuid. One of the difﬁcult parts of simulating
incompressible ﬂuids is to keep the velocity ﬁeld divergence
free. To achieve this we start by taking the material derivative
and set it to zero.
Dq
Dt = 0
∂q
∂t + u · ∇q = 0
(5)
==PAGE:6==
6
It is possible to use the density ρ of the particles as
the quantity q and get an equation often referred to as the
continuity equation[23].
∂ρ
∂t + u · ∇ρ = 0
(6)
When the ﬂuid has a constant density throughout all parti-
cles it is implied that ∂ρ
∂t = 0. Using the continuity equation
and equation 2 from the Navier Stokes equations we can then
state that
ρ∇· u = ∇· u.
(7)
The ﬂuid now has a divergence free velocity ﬁeld and can
be called incompressible[23][7][5].
Equation 7 shows that the density ﬁeld of the particles needs
to be constant throughout the simulation to keep the divergence
free velocity ﬁeld. The goal is then to fulﬁll that ∂ρ
∂t = 0 is true
for each time step. In the DFSPH method [5] they compute
a set of pressure forces on each particle and its neighborhood
to correct for any density divergence error.
The current density change of particle i can be computed
with its derivative as presented in [21].
ρi =
X
j
mjW(xi −xj, h)
Dρi
Dt =
X
j
mj(ui −uj)∇W(xi −xj, h)
(8)
This statement should be zero for each time step and to
ensure this we can apply some pressure forces on each particle
and its neighborhood. Lets deﬁne these forces as Fi for the
pressure force on particle i and Fj←i for the pressure force on
its neighborhood particle j. As presented in [5] the pressure
force and the pressure gradient for particle i can be deﬁned
as.
Fi = −mi
ρi
∇pi, where
∇pi = κi
X
j
mj∇W(xi −xj, h)
(9)
Where κi is the stiffness parameter which we will use later
to ensure that
Dρ
Dt = 0. This stiffness parameter is used to
calculate the pressure for particle i with the ideal gas equation
suggested by [9].
pi = ki(ρi −ρ0)
(10)
Where ρ0 is the rest density. We still need to deﬁne Fj←i
which can be done in a similar way as in equation 9 with the
difference that we differentiate the pressure with respect to the
neighborhood particle position xj as presented in [5].
Fj←i = −mi
ρi
∂pi
∂xj
= mi
pi
κimj∇W(xi −xj, h)
(11)
When applying these pressure forces they cause a velocity
change which can be deﬁned as this [5].
∆ui = ∆t Fi
mi
∆uj = ∆tFj←i
mi
(12)
Inserting these velocity changes into Dρi
Dt from equation 8
yields.
Dρi
Dt = −∆t
X
j
mj( Fi
mi
−Fj←i
mi
)∇W(xi −xj, h)
(13)
To determine the stiffness parameter κi it is possible to
insert equation 9 and 11 into 13 and solve for κi [5].
Dρi
Dt = −∆t
X
j
mj( Fi
mi
−Fj←i
mi
)∇W(xi −xj, h)
Dρi
Dt = ∆t
ρi
X
j
mj

κi
X
j
mj∇Wij + κimj∇Wij

∇Wij
Dρi
Dt = κi
∆t
ρi

∥
X
j
mj∇Wij∥2 +
X
j
∥mj∇Wij∥2

.
(14)
We then solve for κi.
κi = 1
∆t
Dpi
Dt ·
ρi
| P
j mj∇Wij|2 + P
j |mj∇Wij|2
(15)
This divergence free solver is implemented by ﬁrst calcu-
lating the average density divergence error and then iterative
correcting this error until it is under some user speciﬁc
threshold. To do this we ﬁrst calculate Dρi
Dt for every particles
in one iteration and in the next iteration we calculate κi and
κj using equation 15 and then correct the velocity like this.
ui := ui −∆t
X
j
mj(κi
ρi
+ κj
ρj
)∇W(xi −xj, h)
(16)
Note that equation (16) comes from one way of calculating
symmetric pressure forces as done in [23] among others.
B. Density correction
The divergence free method as described in the last section
should in theory keep a constant density and thereby simulate
an incompressible ﬂuid. In practice however, this is impossible
due to numerical errors and therefore it is necessary to
implement a density correction method to stabilize the density
at a constant level. As the divergence free correction method
the density correction method also aims to ﬁnd individual
stiffness coefﬁcients κi for each particle.
The density of an incompressible ﬂuid at a given time
should be very close the rest density. In fact SPH is all about
calculating pressure forces based on how much the mass-
density deviates from the rest density. The density error for
a particle i can therefore be deﬁned as ρi −ρ0, where ρ0 is
the rest density. A truly volume preserving and incompressible
ﬂuid should therefore have a density error of zero at any given
==PAGE:7==
7
time, however, in practice we will be satisﬁed with a small
error.
The method presented in [5] corrects in density error by
a predictor-corrector scheme. This scheme uses iterations to
ﬁrst predict the density error and then corrects it until the
average error is below some user speciﬁed threshold. The
density prediction is done using an Euler integration step on
equation 8 to predict the density error.
ρ∗
i = ρi + ∆tDρi
Dt = ρi + ∆t
X
j
mj(ui −uj)∇Wij
(17)
Where ρ∗
i is the predicted density. It is now possible to
correct the density error ρ∗
i −ρ0 using equation 13 by solving
for κi, which minimizes the density error.
ρ∗
i −ρ0 = ∆t2 X
j
mj( Fi
mi
−Fj
mj
)∇Wij
κi =
1
∆t2 (ρ∗
i −ρ0)αi
(18)
Where αi is deﬁned as
ρi
| P
j mj∇Wij|2+P
j |mj∇Wij|2 and
is already calculated in the density divergence correction
method. Note that α does not change during these schemes
and can therefor with beneﬁt only be calculated once. For
each correction iteration the velocity can then be corrected by
ﬁrst calculating κi for particle i and κj for each neighborhood
particle j. The new velocity for particle i can then be corrected
in the same way as with the divergence free velocity ﬁeld
method using equation 16. This scheme iteratively corrects
the velocities to minimize the density error until it is at an
acceptable level.
Fig. 2. Image to the left shows how particles are compressed together in the
standard SPH method. Image to the right shows the same amount of particles
using the DFSPH method.
Correcting for both density errors and velocity ﬁeld di-
vergence should minimize the compressible problem of the
standard SPH method and implementations show promising
results. On Figure 2 one can see the ﬂuid particles with and
without the correction schemes. It is obvious that it improves
the issue of particles being compressed in the bottom of the
container. Both images consist of 1000 particles, however,
when using the correction scheme they occupy around twice
as much space. The next section will describe the standard
SPH method used in this paper to simulate ﬂuid ﬂow.
C. Smoothed Particles Hydrodynamics
Using particles instead of a stationary grid has the beneﬁt
that it is possible to simplify the Navier Stokes equations 1. In
SPH the mass of each particle is constant and we can therefore
completely look past equation 2. Furthermore, the expression
∂
∂t + u · ∇u in equation 1 is simply the material derivative of
the velocity ﬁeld Du
Dt . The right hand side of equation 1 can
be split up into more manageable parts. These parts are the
pressure term −∇p, viscosity term µ∇· (∇u), and external
forces f. Summing up these forces determines the change of
momentum F = −∇p + µ∇· (∇u) + f. Using these forces it
is possible to get the acceleration of particle i [8].
ai = ∂ui
∂t = Fi
ρi
(19)
1) Density
SPH is an interpolation method which uses the integral
interpolation of arbitrary quantity functions. This integral
interpolation is deﬁned by [30]
A(x) =
Z
A(x′)W(x −x′, h)dx′.
(20)
Where the integral is over the entire space. The numerical
approximation of 20 is deﬁned by this [23]
A(x) =
X
j
AjVjW(x −xj, h).
(21)
Where j is iterated over all particles, xj is the position, Aj
is the value of the arbitrary quantity A, and Vj is the volume at
particle j. W(x, h) is a smoothing kernel with radius h which
determines the smoothness or roughness of the kernel, this
smoothing kernel will be explained more in detail in section
III-C2. The volume in 21 can be replaced using the relationship
between volume, density, and mass.
V = m
ρ
(22)
Where m is mass and ρ is density. Rewriting equation 21
yields
A(x) =
X
j
mj
Aj
ρj
W(x −xj, h).
(23)
To calculate the density ﬁeld of the particles SPH uses equa-
tion 23 by inserting the density ρ as the arbitrary quantity[32].
ρ(x) =
X
j
mj
ρj
ρj
W(x−xj, h) =
X
j
mjW(x−xj, h) (24)
ρ(x) deﬁnes the density ﬁeld of the whole particle simula-
tion. On Figure 3 one can see the density ﬁeld of a particle
ﬂuid simulation where the green area indicates high density
while the black area indicates low density.
==PAGE:8==
8
Fig. 3. Image to the left shows a particle simulation. The image to the right
shows the density ﬁeld of the particle simulation. Green indicates high density
while black indicates low density.
2) Smoothing kernels
There are many different choices of smoothing kernels when
it comes to SPH, however, it is required for all of them that
they fulﬁl these two requirements [30].
Z
W(x −x′, h)dx′ = 1
(25)
and
lim
h→∞W(x −x′, h) = δ(x −x′).
(26)
Where δ is the Dirac’s delta function meaning that the
integral of the weighting function W is one when h →∞.
Equation 25 ensures that the weighting function is normalized.
The weighting function should be an averaging function which
implies that
W(x −x′, h) ≥0
(27)
The kernel should also be even to have a more stable kernel
and to ensure invariance under rotations of the coordinate
system [23].
W(x, h) = W(−x, h)
(28)
One ﬁnal property of the smoothing kernels which ensures
that the kernel inﬂuence is 0 outside of its radius is that it
should have a compact support radius.
W(x −x′, h) = 0, when∥x −x′∥> h
(29)
The smoothing kernel has a big impact on the stability,
performance, and accuracy of the simulation so one should
be chosen with great care. Accordingly to Monaghan (1992)
[30] the kernel should be a Gaussian. However, just using an
isotropic Gaussian kernel is not the ideal choice because it
does not have a compact support radius and consists of an
expensive exponential function [23].
The kernel used in this project in all cases but two is
one presented by M¨uller, Charypar, and Gross (2003) [32]
called the 6th degree polynomial kernel (Poly6). Another
popular choice is the Spline Gaussian kernel which mimics
the Gaussian bell curve and has a compact support radius.
However, the poly6 kernel has been implemented and used
with no issues and has proven to be a good choice for this
project.
Wpoly6(x, h) =
315
64πh9
 (h2 −x2)3
0 ≤x ≤h
0
otherwise,
(30)
An important performance efﬁcient feature of this kernel is
that x is evaluated squared without the use of the expensive
square root when dealing with distance computations. The
weight of the poly6 kernel with a radius of one can be seen
on Figure 4.
Fig. 4. The poly6 kernel in 1D with h = 1.
In SPH it is necessary to ﬁnd the gradient and the Laplacian
of different quantity ﬁelds. This means that the kernel we
choose should be ﬁrst and second order differentiable. Let
us start by deﬁning how to compute a gradient ﬁeld of an
arbitrary quantity in SPH. Lets deﬁne the partial derivative
with respect to x for equation 21, but only consider it with
two particles i and j [23].
∂
∂xA(xi) = ∂
∂x

Aj
mj
ρj
W(xi −xj, h)

(31)
Then using the product rule.
∂
∂x

Aj
mj
ρj
W(xi −xj, h)

= Aj
mj
ρj
∂
∂xW(xi −xj, h)
(32)
Equation 32 shows that Aj
mj
ρ
does not depend on the x-
component and can be considered a constant. Because of the
derivative only affects the smoothing kernel we can then say
that the gradient of the smoothed quantity ﬁeld from equation
23 is
∇A(x) =
X
j
mj
Aj
ρj
∇W(x −xj, h).
(33)
The same principal can be used on the Laplacian of the
smoothed quantity ﬁeld and therefore just becomes [23]
∇2A(x) =
X
j
mj
Aj
ρj
∇2W(x −xj, h).
(34)
Knowing that the gradient of the smoothed quantity ﬁeld
in SPH only affects the kernel we need to ﬁnd gradient and
Lapalacian kernels. The obvious choice would be to use the
gradient of the 6th degree polynomial kernel.
==PAGE:9==
9
∇Wpoly6(x, h) = −945
34πh9 x(h2 −∥x2∥)2
(35)
However, the gradient of the poly6 kernel has shown to
let particles cluster together at high pressure [32]. The reason
for this is that when particles gets very close to each other
the repulsive pressure force vanishes because the gradient of
this kernel approaches zero at the center. This can be seen on
Figure 5.
Fig. 5. The gradient of the poly6 kernel in 1D with h = 1.
This problem was solved by Desbrun (1996) [9] by using a
kernel with a non vanishing gradient at the center. This kernel
is called the spiky kernel and it is deﬁned, together the gradient
of the kernel, by
Wspiky(x, h) = 15
πh6
 (h −∥x∥)3
0 ≤∥x∥≤h
0
otherwise,
(36)
∇Wspiky(x, h) = −45
πh6
x
∥x∥(h −∥x∥)2.
(37)
The gradient of the spiky kernel in 1D can be seen on Figure
6 where it is obvious that the kernel ﬁxes the vanishing issue
at the center of the kernel.
Fig. 6. The gradient of the spiky kernel in 1D with h = 1.
The last kernel needed for SPH is the Laplacian of some
smoothing kernel that handles the viscosity term. An easy
approach would be to use either the poly6 or spiky kernel, but
there are a common problem with both of them. Viscosity is
caused by friction where the ﬂuids kinetic energy is decreased
by converting it into heat . If we use one of the two kernels
described above this property would not always be true. When
the particles gets closer to each other the Laplacian of both
kernels can get negative which result in an increase of their
relative velocities [32]. This problem has been solved by
M¨uller et al. (2003) [32] where they presented a new kernel,
Wv(x, h), to handle the viscosity term:
Wv(x, h) =
15
2πh3
(
−∥x∥3
2h3 + ∥x∥2
h2
+
h
2∥x∥−1
0 ≤∥x∥≤h
0
otherwise,
(38)
And the Laplacian of this kernel is [23]
∇2Wv(x, h) = 45
πh6 (h −∥x∥)
(39)
This kernel fulﬁll the requirement of ∇2W(x, h) ≥0 for
x ≤h. The weight of this kernel in 1D with radius 1 can be
seen on Figure [7].
Fig. 7. The Laplacian of the viscosity kernel in 1D with h = 1.
The size of the kernel is an important factor in the sim-
ulation. The kernel should not cover too many particles and
should not cover too few. An ideal size for a kernel cannot
be given because it depends on several different factors, e.g.
the chosen mass of the particles. The size of the kernel for
this project was found by trial and error and can be seen on
Figure 8 where the blue circle indicates the inﬂuence of the
smoothing kernel for the blue particle.
Fig. 8. The blue circle indicates the size of the smoothing kernel for the blue
particle.
3) Pressure
The pressure term from the Navier Stokes equation 1 was
deﬁned to be −∇ρ. Translating this term into SPH content the
pressure force yields [32]
Fpressure
i
= −∇ρ(xi)
= −
X
j
mj
pj
ρj
∇W(xi −xj, h).
(40)
==PAGE:10==
10
This pressure force is unfortunately not symmetric which
gets obvious when only two particles interact. The gradient
kernel is zero at its center meaning that particle i only uses
the pressure from particle j to compute its pressure force and
the same the other way around. The local pressure at the
different locations of the particles is in general not equal which
results in an asymmetric pressure force[9]. Different methods
of symmetrizing the pressure force has been presented in
research, e.g in [30] and [32]. For this paper we will use the
one from [32]
Fpressure
i
= −
X
j
mj
pi + pj
2ρj
∇W(xi −xj, h).
(41)
Where p is the local pressure. This solution uses the arith-
metic mean of the local pressure of the particles to symmetries
the force.
Particles in SPH only travel with information of mass,
position, and velocity. Therefore, it is necessary to determine
the local pressure at the position of the particles. Using the
density from equation 23 one can calculate the local pressure
using the ideal gas state equation [32]
p = kρ.
(42)
Where k is a gas constant depending on temperature. Using
equation 42 together with 41 to calculate pressure results in
only repulsive forces between particles. This is not desired
for liquids which should also have attractive pressure forces
in locations with low density. To counter this Desbrun [9]
suggested an alternative ideal gas state equation that includes
a rest density (or rest pressure) ρ0.
p = k(ρ −ρ0)
(43)
This equation results in both attractive and repulsive pres-
sure forces depending on the difference between the density
and the rest density. When the difference between the rest
density and the density is high the pressure forces rises (either
attractive or repulsive), when the difference is low the pressure
forces vanishes. The calculated pressure forces on a ﬂuid
simulation can be seen on Figure 9. The pressure force on each
particle is indicated with a yellow line, the longer the line the
stronger the pressure forces. One can see how pressure forces
are higher in the transaction area between the two rooms, in
the button of the ﬂuid, and on particles pushed into the wall.
Fig. 9. Yellow lines indicates the calculated pressure force for each particle.
4) Viscosity
Viscosity is the phenomenon of molecules internal friction
that decreases its kinetic energy by converting it into heat. If
a ﬂuid has a high viscosity it has a high resistance to ﬂow and
vice versa, e.g. honey has a higher viscosity than water. In SPH
the viscosity term of equation 2 is deﬁned by µ∇2v, where
µ is the viscosity coefﬁcient that determines how viscous the
ﬂuid is.
Fviscosity
i
= µ∇2u(xi)
= µ
X
j
uj
mj
ρj
∇2W(xi −xj, h).
(44)
With the viscosity force we have the same problem as with
the pressure force, the force is not symmetric. The reason
for this is that the velocities varies from particle to particle.
To solve this problem M¨uller et al. (2003) [32] presented a
symmetric viscosity term by using the velocity differences
instead of the velocity vectors of the neighboring particles.
Fviscosity
i
= µ
X
j
mj
uj −ui
ρj
∇2W(xi −xj, h)
(45)
5) External forces
The ﬁnal component of equation 2 is external forces f. In
this paper this will consist of gravity and collision with the
environment. The gravity is simply just a force pulling each
particles downwards. Collision handling is a bit more compli-
cated, however, only collision boxes has been implemented as
it is sufﬁcient for the purpose of this paper. When particles
enter a collision box it will be detected as inside, then an
impulse force is applied to the particle that takes into account
how far the particles has traveled into the box. This way the
particles will be prevented entering the collision boxes while
adding subtle bounce and friction forces. The method of how
these impulse forces are calculated can be seen in [33].
With all the forces (pressure, viscosity, and external forces)
it is possible to calculate the acceleration ai using equation
19. The velocity can then be calculated for each particle ui =
ui +ai. The velocities for all particles in a particle simulation
can be seen on Figure 10 as green lines.
Fig. 10. The green lines indicates the velocities for each particle.
6) Implementation
An important aspect of ﬂuid simulations is performance.
SPH requires a lot of iterations over all particles to calculate
the different forces which gets quite expensive when the
==PAGE:11==
11
number of particles rises with a complexity of O(n2). To
handle this a spatial data structure where implemented. Instead
of having all particles in one container all particles are stored
in a grid of containers depending on their position in space.
When a particle then needs to ﬁnd its neighborhood of particles
it only needs to look in the container it is located in itself and
the neighbor containers. The size of one container is set to
the radius of the smoothing kernel. This way we will be sure
to iterate all particles that could be of interest and minimize
particles that have no interest. It has a small cost to update
the spatial data structure every frame, but the performance
gained outweighs this cost by many times when the number
of particles are high.
We implement an explicit SPH for this paper, however,
implicit solutions of SPH is also a possibility as in [20] and
could be a topic of future implementations. Discoveries while
implementing SPH shows that the time step size has a huge
impact of how stable the ﬂuid simulation is. Therefore, as
a minimum a roof for the allowed time step size needs to be
implemented to prevent instabilities. Implementing an adaptive
time step size scheme has proven to improve numerical
stability. The time step size is adapted using the Courant-
Friedrich-Levy (CFL) condition [30] [5]
∆t ≤0.4
d
∥umax∥.
(46)
Where umax is the max velocity and d is the diameter of a
particle. For this implementation d has been chosen to be a
sufﬁcient small number.
To get a good looking result using SPH some user deﬁned
constants needs to be chosen, e.g. the mass of particles,
the viscosity coefﬁcient, gas constant, kernel radius, and rest
density. One could look at real life parameters, for example for
water, to do the simulation as done in [23]. However, the goal
for this project is not to simulate realistic ﬂuids but to simulate
ﬂuids that looks realistic. Therefore, the choice of these
parameters has been decided by tweaking them individually
until ending with a realistic looking result. The gas constant
and rest density is especially important in SPH. They are both
used in the calculation of local pressure in equation 43 and
local pressure is used to determine the strength of the pressure
forces. Ideally the gas constant should be very high but this
often results in instabilities unless a very small time step is
chosen [5], which is not desirable. The difﬁcult part is then
to choose a good balance between the gas constant and the
rest density to simulate a stable ﬂuid simulation with a decent
time step size.
D. Isosurface tracking
Last aspect of our ﬂuid simulation is to let DSC vertices
track an implicit isosurface representing the large volume of
ﬂuid. To do this we will let the ﬂuid simulation be simulated
untop of a DSC triangulated/tetrehedralated space. For sim-
plicity the method for tracking particles will be described in
2D. First task is then to deﬁne which triangles of the DSC
domain that is inside the ﬂuid and which is outside. Using
the density ﬁeld of the particles it is possible for each triangle
to identify whether the ﬂuid density is high enough to call it
inside. The other way around it should also be possible for
triangles that are inside to be changed to outside if there is
a low ﬂuid density. We simply calculate this density in the
barycenter of each triangle. On Figure 11 some triangles are
identiﬁed as inside while others outside, note that we do not
track any particles yet.
Fig. 11.
Example of how triangles are labelled inside or outside based on
the ﬂuid density calculated in the barycenter of each triangle.
The interface, the red lines separating inside with outside,
needs then to track the particles. To do this we again use the
density ﬁeld of the particles where it is possible to deﬁne an
isosurface given by the density ﬁeld with a speciﬁc iso-value.
By taking the gradient of the density ﬁeld one should be able
to get a vector pointing in the direction of the greatest change
in the density ﬁeld. The magnitude of this gradient is the slope
of the density ﬁeld in that particular direction. If we look at
a point in space with position x with density ρ(x). We can
then deﬁne a vector pointing in the direction of the greatest
change in the density ﬁeld from this point by ∇ρ(x). The
density ﬁeld deﬁnes an implicit surface of the particles where
ρ0 is a user-deﬁned iso-value. It is this implicit surface the
DSC vertices will be tracking, and to do this we can linear
approximate the distance from the point x to the point x0
with the density value equal to ρ0 in the direction of ∇ρ(x)
by ρ(x)−ρ0
∥∇ρ(x)∥. It is now possible to deﬁne a velocity vector u
that linear approximates the distance and direction from the
point x to the implicit isosurface by
u = −∇ρ(x)
∥∇ρ(x)∥
ρ(x) −ρ0
∥∇ρ∥
u = −∇ρ(x)ρ(x) −ρ0
∥∇ρ∥2 .
(47)
To illustrate the accuracy of this method a speciﬁc point
is marked as a blue dot on Figure 12. Note that the blue dot,
unlike the red ones, are not a particle but just a point. The blue
line indicates the approximated velocity from that point to the
isosurface of the density ﬁeld. One can see that it overestimates
the isosurface in the leftmost image, while when the surface
are much closer it gets more accurate. The iso-value is chosen
in a way that the isosurface should be just above the particles
in Figure 12.
To tackle these over and underestimations it is ensured
that the velocity length is always under some user speciﬁed
threshold. This way we also make sure that the ﬂuid does not
move too fast, which results in a non realistic ﬂuid.
==PAGE:12==
12
Fig. 12. Image to the left shows how the calculated velocity of the blue point
would overestimate the isosurface. Image to the right shows that the velocity
are much more accurate when closer to the isosurface.
Fig. 13. DSC vertices tracks the density ﬁeld of the particles. The green lines
indicates the direction of which the vertices are moving.
On Figure 13 one can see how the interface tracks an
isosurface of the density ﬁeld. The green lines indicates the
direction of which the DSC vertices are moved, note that the
green lines are the calculated velocities but magniﬁed with a
factor of 10 for visualization purposes.
As stated before an interesting aspect of the combination of
the DSC and SPH method is that the deformable area/mesh
can represent the larger volume of ﬂuid while particles can
escape to create spray or foam effect. This is done by choosing
the right threshold of when triangles are marked as inside
or outside, choosing the right iso-value, and by letting the
tracking of the isosurface be a bit slower than the actually
particle simulation. This effect can be seen on Figure 14 where
some particles escape the ﬂuid after a wave hits the left most
wall.
Fig. 14. DSC vertices tracks the density ﬁeld of the particles. Some particles
escape the ﬂuid creating a spray effect.
IV. RESULTS
One of the main ideas of this project is to simulate an
incompressible ﬂuid. Results showed that using the DSC
triangles/tetrahedra to do these volume preserving operations
was not a good choice. So a choice where made to do these
operations directly on the particles. Using DFSPH showed
huge improvements on the visual side, where particles where
prevented cluster together under high pressure as seen on
Figure 2. It is difﬁcult to deﬁne the volume of a ﬂuid
simulation that only consist of particles because there are no
clear surface that deﬁnes how much ﬂuid there is. However, in
the SPH method we can look at differences in the rest density
and the calculated density to see whether the simulation
upholds the constant density condition ρ −ρ0 = 0 [5]. If this
condition is true, the ﬂuid can be deﬁned as incompressible.
We implemented the DFSPH which uses a predictor-corrector
scheme to get a divergence free velocity ﬁeld and minimizes
the density deviation. In SPH it is impossible to ensure
the constant density condition because pressure forces are
calculated based on the density deviations from the rest density
and because of this we will be satisﬁed with a small density
error. Figure 15 shows the percentage difference from the rest
density to the calculated density using the standard SPH and
DFSPH. Both simulations used 900 particles in a breaking
dam simulation: All particles start in a container, then one of
the container walls disappear at time step 200, and then the
ﬂuid ﬂows into a larger container.
Fig. 15. The density deviation from the rest density for a simulation using
SPH and a simulation using DFSPH.
Figure 15 shows that DFSPH seems to halve the density
error when the particles are in the smaller container (time step
0 to 200) and minimizes the error with around 1.0 percentage
point in the end. This improvement in the density error is
mostly because of the density correction scheme, while the
divergence free scheme only contributes with a small amount.
However, ensuring a divergence free velocity ﬁeld seems to
stabilize the ﬂuid. E.g. when simulating without the divergence
free velocity ﬁeld the ﬂuid sometimes bounce a lot and under
high pressure center particles could become unstable, these
issues where minimized by implementing the divergence free
scheme. Note that the ﬂuid can still become a bit unstable at
times.
To measure the efﬁciency of the implemented solution we
can use the computation time in milliseconds per time step
as an indicator. All timings has been done on a computer
with a Intel i5 dual core 2450 processor with 2.50Ghz and
==PAGE:13==
13
4GB of RAM. As mentioned in section III-C6 a spatial data
structure where implemented to ﬁnd neighboring particles
without looping over all particles in the system. The timing
on table I has been done on a breaking dam simulation in 2D
with 700 particles and the numbers indicates the compute time
in milliseconds.
TABLE I
COMPUTATION TIMES IN MILLISECONDS FOR THE DIFFERENT PARTS OF
THE FLUID SIMULATION.
SPH
DIV
DEN
DSC
Other
Total
With spatial
data structure
11.34
54.25
3.93
110.68
5
185.2
Without spatial
data structure
57.78
350.39
49.46
323.03
6.05
786.713
The columns DIV and DEN in table I are the divergence free
solver and the density correction scheme, respectively. The
’Other’ column is everything else, e.g. rendering of particles,
collision boxes, and the DSC domain. It is obvious that using
the spatial data structure has a huge impact on performance.
just the standard SPH takes in average 11.34 ms to compute
with spatial data structure and 57.78 without. The density
correction schemes computation time has a difference on more
than 12 times the ms it takes when using the spatial data
structure compared with when not using it. The two parts
which are most computational expensive are the diverge free
solver and the DSC method. The DSC method is expensive
because a lot of topology optimization operations is performed,
each triangle needs to identify whether the particle density is
high or low, and each interface vertex is tracking the isosurface
of the density ﬁeld. Comparing the algorithms for the diver-
gence free solver and the density correction scheme they are
where similar, but their computation time is very different. The
reason for this is probably that the divergence free solver has
a bit more complicated mathematical calculations and more
importantly the divergence free solver needs more iterations
to ensure the divergence free velocity ﬁeld.
The particle based ﬂuid simulation combined with the
DSC method has been implemented both in 2D and 3D.
Results show that the particles simulate a ﬂuid that looks
realistic, however, still with a few unnatural errors. It has some
bouncing effects and some particles that becomes unstable at
times but these issues has been minimized, using DFSPH and
the CFL condition. The isosurface tracking works very well
especially in the 2D environment. The DSC area follows the
particles with a smooth surface and particles can escape to
produce spray or foam effects. There can occur some visual
artifacts that looks unrealistic, e.g. DSC vertices trying to track
two different close isosurfaces. In 3D the DSC mesh tracks the
particles well, but the ﬁnal mesh can appear very rough. The
3D DSC representation of a ﬂuid simulation can be seen on
Figure 16.
V. CONCLUSION
This paper presented a combination of a particle based ﬂuid
simulation and a deformable simplicial complex. The ﬂuid
ﬂow where simulated with the Smoothed Particles Hydrody-
namics method which is a well known method in research.
Fig. 16. DSC mesh that tracks a ﬂuid simulation.
It is a fully Langrangian method which, as research states,
has the problem of keeping the ﬂuid incompressible through
out the simulation. The idea of this paper was to combine the
DSC method with SPH to do volume preserving operations
on the DSC triangles/tetrahedra (2D/3D) instead of on the
particles. Two methods for preserving volume where presented
in this paper but both of them had severe issues with unac-
ceptable results. The ﬁrst method interpolated velocities unto
the DSC vertices and then for all triangles/tetrahedra of the
ﬂuid ensured a constant volume for each time step. It did a
very good job at keeping a constant volume from one time
step to another, but small ﬂuctuations led to huge volume loss
or gain when time passed. Another issue with this method
was that the volume preserving algorithm did not take the
direction of the ﬂuid into account when simulating the ﬂuid
so the output velocity ﬁeld resulted in unrealistic looking ﬂuid.
The other method did take the overall loss and gain into
account when preserving volume and where somewhat able to
keep a constant volume, with some ﬂuctuation. However, this
method only performed these algorithm on the interface edges
of the ﬂuid domain so the output velocity ﬁeld could not be
projected back to the particles. This ended in a DSC area/mesh
(2D/3D) that preserved volume but tracked a compressible
particle simulation. it can be concluded that these methods are
not optimal, but there may be other solutions to this problem.
E.g. research show that grid-particle combinations has been
successfully implemented with incompressible schemes, and
this should also be a possibility with particles and a deformable
simplicial complex. Important ﬁndings from this paper shows
that the overall loss or gain in volume should be considered
and that the volume preserving algorithms should not change
the velocity ﬁeld too much. Interpolating from particles to
DSC vertices and then back again resulted in a lot of smooth-
ing and often results in loss of too much information. A well
known successful method from research called FLIP [6] solved
this problem by interpolating the change of quantity instead
of replacing it completely. This idea could be applied to the
SPH and DSC combination as well.
Because of the unsuccessful results with the volume pre-
serving operations on the DSC method it was decided to try
to keep an incompressible ﬂuid only using particles. This way
==PAGE:14==
14
there would be a one way connection between particles and
the DSC method and thus preventing the smoothing problem.
A recent presented method in research called Divergence
Free Smoothed Particles Hydrodynamics (DFSPH) solved this
problem in a simple and efﬁcient way. The method calculates
a divergence free velocity ﬁeld and corrects the density error
in an iterative predictor-correction scheme. This method where
implemented to keep the SPH particles incompressible for this
paper. Results showed that it did a good job in preventing
particles from clustering together in high pressure areas and
greatly reduced the density error. Furthermore, the divergence
free velocity ﬁeld calculated using DFSPH seemed to make
SPH more stable. Implementing the CFL condition further
improved the stability of the ﬂuid by correcting the time step
size depending on the max velocity.
The combination of SPH and DSC is still interesting even
though the volume preserving methods was not successful.
Particle based ﬂuid simulations are very good at simulating
high detailed ﬂuid effects, however, they do not have an
explicit surface representation and thus does a somewhat bad
job at representing larger volumes of ﬂuid. This is where the
DSC method comes into play and is perfect at representing the
large volume of ﬂuid. The SPH method where implemented in
the DSC framework where it was possible to track an implicit
surface of the particle density ﬁeld with the DSC vertices. This
showed good results where the interface tracks the particle
simulation very well with a smooth representation of the ﬂuid.
The DSC tracking is implemented in a way that particles can
still escape to produce high detailed effects like spray and
foam. In the 3D implementation the DSC mesh looks a bit
rough with some visual artifacts. This may be solved by simply
performing subdivision schemes or another form of smoothing
of the mesh.
Performance where improved greatly with the use of spatial
data structures where particles are stored in a grid of container
depending on their position. This way when a particle needs
to ﬁnd it neighbors it does not need to iterate over all particles
in the simulation. Results showed that this had a huge impact
on performance. In the divergence free solver and the density
correction scheme they both uses a component α in their
calculations. α can with beneﬁt be calculated once instead
of in each iteration of the correction schemes to decrease
computation times.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
I would like to thank my supervisor Jakob Andreas
Bærentzen for providing the initial idea and his help, support,
and advises during this project. Furthermore, I would like
to thank Tuan Nguyen Trung for advises and help specially
regarding the DSC method.
REFERENCES
[1] Adams, B., Pauly, M., Keiser, R., & Guibas, L. J. (2007, August).
Adaptively sampled particle ﬂuids. In ACM Transactions on Graphics
(TOG) (Vol. 26, No. 3, p. 48). ACM.
[2] Ando, R., Threy, N., & Wojtan, C. (2013). Highly adaptive liquid sim-
ulations on tetrahedral meshes. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG),
32(4), 103.
[3] Becker, M., & Teschner, M. (2007, August). Weakly compressible
SPH for free surface ﬂows. In Proceedings of the 2007 ACM SIG-
GRAPH/Eurographics symposium on Computer animation (pp. 209-217).
Eurographics Association.
[4] Becker, M., & Teschner, M. (2007, August). Weakly compressible
SPH for free surface ﬂows. In Proceedings of the 2007 ACM SIG-
GRAPH/Eurographics symposium on Computer animation (pp. 209-217).
Eurographics Association.
[5] Bender, J., & Koschier, D. (2015, August). Divergence-free smoothed
particle
hydrodynamics.
In
Proceedings
of
the
14th
ACM
SIG-
GRAPH/Eurographics Symposium on Computer Animation (pp. 147-
155). ACM.
[6] Brackbill, J. U., & Ruppel, H. M. (1986). FLIP: A method for adaptively
zoned, particle-in-cell calculations of ﬂuid ﬂows in two dimensions.
Journal of Computational Physics, 65(2), 314-343.
[7] Bridson, R. (2008). Fluid simulation for computer graphics. CRC Press.
[8] Bridson, R., & M¨uller-Fischer, M. (2007, August). Fluid simulation:
SIGGRAPH 2007 course notes Video ﬁles associated with this course
are available from the citation page. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2007 courses
(pp. 1-81). ACM.
[9] Desbrun, M., & Gascuel, M. P. (1996). Smoothed particles: A new
paradigm for animating highly deformable bodies (pp. 61-76). Springer
Vienna.
[10] Enright, D., Fedkiw, R., Ferziger, J., & Mitchell, I. (2002). A hybrid
particle level set method for improved interface capturing. Journal of
Computational physics, 183(1), 83-116.
[11] Enright, D., Marschner, S., & Fedkiw, R. (2002). Animation and
rendering of complex water surfaces. ACM Transactions on Graphics
(TOG), 21(3), 736-744.
[12] Evans, M. W., Harlow, F. H., & Bromberg, E. (1957). The particle-in-cell
method for hydrodynamic calculations (No. LA-2139). LOS ALAMOS
NATIONAL LAB NM.
[13] Fedkiw, S. O. R., & Osher, S. (2002). Level set methods and dynamic
implicit surfaces. Surfaces, 44, 77.
[14] Foster, N., & Fedkiw, R. (2001, August). Practical animation of liquids.
In Proceedings of the 28th annual conference on Computer graphics and
interactive techniques (pp. 23-30). ACM.
[15] Foster, N., & Fedkiw, R. (2001, August). Practical animation of liquids.
In Proceedings of the 28th annual conference on Computer graphics and
interactive techniques (pp. 23-30). ACM.
[16] Gingold, R. A., & Monaghan, J. J. (1977). Smoothed particle hydrody-
namics: theory and application to non-spherical stars. Monthly notices of
the royal astronomical society, 181(3), 375-389.
[17] Harlow, F. H. (1962). The particle-in-cell method for numerical solution
of problems in ﬂuid dynamics (No. LADC-5288). Los Alamos Scientiﬁc
Lab., N. Mex..
[18] Harlow, F. H., & Evans, M. W. (1955). A machine calculation method
for hydrodynamic problems. Los Alamos, Rapport.
[19] Ihmsen, M., Akinci, N., Becker, M., & Teschner, M. (2011, March). A
Parallel SPH Implementation on Multi-Core CPUs. In Computer Graphics
Forum (Vol. 30, No. 1, pp. 99-112). Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
[20] Ihmsen, M., Cornelis, J., Solenthaler, B., Horvath, C., & Teschner,
M. (2014). Implicit incompressible SPH. Visualization and Computer
Graphics, IEEE Transactions on, 20(3), 426-435.
[21] Ihmsen, M., Orthmann, J., Solenthaler, B., Kolb, A., & Teschner, M.
(2014). SPH ﬂuids in computer graphics.
[22] Kang, N., & Sagong, D. (2014, October). Incompressible SPH using the
Divergence-Free Condition. In Computer Graphics Forum (Vol. 33, No.
7, pp. 219-228).
[23] Kelager, M. (2006). Lagrangian ﬂuid dynamics using smoothed particle
hydrodynamics. University of Copenhagen. Denmark.
[24] Lombardo, J. C., & Puech, C. (1995). Oriented particles: A tool for shape
memory objects modelling. In Graphics Interface’95 (pp. 255-262).
[25] Losasso, F., Gibou, F., & Fedkiw, R. (2004, August). Simulating water
and smoke with an octree data structure. In ACM Transactions on
Graphics (TOG) (Vol. 23, No. 3, pp. 457-462). ACM.
[26] Losasso, F., Talton, J. O., Kwatra, N., & Fedkiw, R. (2008). Two-way
coupled SPH and particle level set ﬂuid simulation. Visualization and
Computer Graphics, IEEE Transactions on, 14(4), 797-804.
[27] Lucy, L. B. (1977). A numerical approach to the testing of the ﬁssion
hypothesis. The astronomical journal, 82, 1013-1024.
[28] Macklin, M., & M¨uller, M. (2013). Position based ﬂuids. ACM Trans-
actions on Graphics (TOG), 32(4), 104.
[29] Misztal, M. K., & Bærentzen, J. A. (2012). Topology-adaptive interface
tracking using the deformable simplicial complex. ACM Transactions on
Graphics (TOG), 31(3), 24.
==PAGE:15==
15
[30] Monaghan, J. J. (1992). Smoothed particle hydrodynamics. Annual
review of astronomy and astrophysics, 30, 543-574.
[31] Monaghan, J. J. (1994). Simulating free surface ﬂows with SPH. Journal
of computational physics, 110(2), 399-406.
[32] M¨uller, M., Charypar, D., & Gross, M. (2003, July). Particle-based ﬂuid
simulation for interactive applications. In Proceedings of the 2003 ACM
SIGGRAPH/Eurographics symposium on Computer animation (pp. 154-
159). Eurographics Association.
[33] Physically
Based
Modeling
-
Particle
Collision
and
Contact.
(1997).
Retrieved
June
25,
2015,
from
http://www.cs.cmu.edu/afs/cs.cmu.edu/project/graphics-1/15-863-
www/collision1.pdf
[34] Raveendran, K., Wojtan, C., & Turk, G. (2011, August). Hybrid
smoothed particle hydrodynamics. In Proceedings of the 2011 ACM
SIGGRAPH/Eurographics symposium on computer animation (pp. 33-
42). ACM.
[35] Reeves, W. T. (1983). Particle systemsa technique for modeling a class
of fuzzy objects. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 2(2), 91-108.
[36] Solenthaler, B., & Pajarola, R. (2009, July). Predictive-corrective incom-
pressible SPH. In ACM transactions on graphics (TOG) (Vol. 28, No. 3,
p. 40). ACM.
[37] Stam, J. (1999, July). Stable ﬂuids. In Proceedings of the 26th annual
conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques (pp. 121-
128). ACM Press/Addison-Wesley Publishing Co..
[38] Stam, J., & Fiume, E. (1995, September). Depicting ﬁre and other
gaseous phenomena using diffusion processes. In Proceedings of the 22nd
annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques (pp.
129-136). ACM.
[39] Stora, D., Agliati, P. O., Cani, M. P., Neyret, F., & Gascuel, J. D. (1999).
Animating lava ﬂows. In Graphics Interface (GI’99) Proceedings (pp.
203-210).
[40] Takahashi, T., Ueki, H., Kunimatsu, A., & Fujii, H. (2002, July). The
simulation of ﬂuid-rigid body interaction. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2002
conference abstracts and applications (pp. 266-266). ACM.
[41] Tonnesen, D. L. (1998). Dynamically coupled particle systems for
geometric modeling, reconstruction, and animation (Doctoral dissertation,
University of Toronto).
[42] Witkin, A. P., & Heckbert, P. S. (1994, July). Using particles to sample
and control implicit surfaces. In Proceedings of the 21st annual conference
on Computer graphics and interactive techniques (pp. 269-277). ACM.
[43] Zhu, Y., & Bridson, R. (2005, July). Animating sand as a ﬂuid. In ACM
Transactions on Graphics (TOG) (Vol. 24, No. 3, pp. 965-972). ACM.
