==PAGE:1==
                    
                                                                                                                                                 
          
 
Investigation of the Heat Storage Potential in 
the District Heating of Copenhagen 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
1 
 
 
Investigation of the Heat Storage Potential in                   
the District Heating of Copenhagen 
 
 
MSc. Thesis 
Submitted the 1st of July 2016 
at the 
Technical University of Denmark 
for the Master of Science in Sustainable Energy 
 
 
Author                   Marios Vlaikidis 
 
Supervisors              Brian Elmegaard, Associate Professor, 
                                 Department of Mechanical Engineering – Thermal Energy   
                                 Technical University of Denmark 
 
                                 Torben Schmidt Ommen, Postdoctoral Researcher, 
                                 Department of Mechanical Engineering – Thermal Energy 
                                 Technical University of Denmark 
               
Remarks                  This report is submitted as partial fulfillment of the     
                                 requirements for accomplishing a master’s degree (MSc)  
                                 in Sustainable Energy at the Technical University of Denmark. 
 
                                This thesis corresponds to 30 ECTS-points for the author.  
 
Copyright                ©Marios Vlaikidis, 2016 
 
==PAGE:3==
2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To my father, 
who would be proud of me. 
 
==PAGE:5==
4 
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
5 
 
Acknowledgments 
 
This thesis is the final part before obtaining my MSc degree. Working on this project was a 
challenging experience, with ups and downs, after which I feel enriched both from a 
professional and from personal point of view. Many people helped me for the completion of 
this project and I would like to acknowledge their contribution. 
I am grateful to my main supervisor, Brian Elmegaard, for giving me the opportunity to work 
on this project and guiding me with his very valuable advice. 
My special thanks to my co-supervisor, Torben Schmidt Ommen, for all his help along the 
project, his guidance, advice and feedback. 
Also, I would like to thank Kristian Honore from HOFOR, for our meeting and his valuable 
input. 
Furthermore, I would like to thank all my friends here at DTU for making these last months  
more pleasant with their company, the funny discussions and relaxing coffee breaks. 
Sincere thanks to my girlfriend for what she has done during all this time and not only. She 
encouraged me to believe in myself and my strengths and never give up no matter the 
difficulties that can be found on the way.   
Last, I would like to express deeply appreciation and thank my family in Greece for 
supporting me and helping me to follow my dreams. Και στα ελληνικά, για τη μητέρα μου : 
σε ευχαριστώ για όλα όσα μου έχεις προσφέρει όλα αυτά τα χρόνια, ηθικά και υλικά, που με 
βοήθησες σε κάθε μου βήμα και μου έδωσες τη δυνατότητα να ακολουθήσω τα όνειρά μου. 
 
 
==PAGE:7==
6 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:8==
7 
 
Abstract 
 
In the present study the integration of heat storage technology in the form of hot water storage 
tanks inside the district heating of Copenhagen was investigated utilizing an optimization 
model for the simulation of the energy system.  
In the first part, the operation of hot water storage tanks inside district heating systems was 
studied together with important parameters for the design of the tanks. Following, the 
modeling of stratified hot water storage took place so as to examine the performance of the 
tanks and calculate the efficiency of the storage systems. It was shown that the geometry, the 
insulation and the storage temperature can affect the performance of the tank. The calculated 
efficiencies were used as input for the optimization model in order to simulate the operation 
of the tanks inside the system.  
In the second part, the integration of heat storage technology was investigated in two cases 
where a new district heating network has been added to the existing energy system. For the 
first case, where a back-pressure combined heat and power plant was employed together with 
a peak load boiler, the integration of heat storage enhanced the power generation from the 
plant as well as the thermal energy production, thus leading to less utilization of the peak load 
technology reaching maximum changes for an optimal storage capacity. For this capacity, the 
cost of the system reached a maximum reduction. For the second case where an extraction 
plant was employed together with a peak load boiler, the integration of heat storage capacity 
did not clearly affect the contribution of the technologies but resulted in the reduction of 
system cost due to more flexible operation. The fuel price as well as the forward temperature 
of the district heating network were examined and found to have important influence on the 
operation of the system and the utilization of the heat storage. 
In the third part, the district heating system of Copenhagen was investigated. Different storage 
capacities were integrated in the system and found to have an influence on the final 
contribution of the generation technologies as well as the economy of the system. Further, the 
system operation was examined without storage capacity and the impact found to be 
important. Moreover, different scenarios of electricity prices were examined and it was found 
that the heat storage can contribute with offering flexibility in the system and lower the total 
system cost. Particularly, increased storage capacity compared to the initial found to have 
greater influence on the system. 
Keywords: thermal energy storage, combined heat and power, district heating system, 
electricity decoupling. 
 
 
==PAGE:9==
8 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:10==
9 
 
Table of contents 
 
 
Acknowledgments .............................................................................................................................. 5 
Abstract .............................................................................................................................................. 7 
Nomenclature ................................................................................................................................... 11 
Chapter 1: Introduction .................................................................................................................... 13 
1.1 
Motivation ........................................................................................................................ 13 
1.2 
Aim of the project ............................................................................................................. 14 
1.3 
Approach .......................................................................................................................... 14 
Chapter 2: Thermal energy storage and district heating systems ..................................................... 15 
2.1 
Introduction ...................................................................................................................... 15 
2.2 
Methods for thermal energy storage (TES) ...................................................................... 15 
2.3 
Use of water in sensible thermal energy storage systems ................................................ 21 
2.4 
The principle of District Heating and integration of thermal energy storage systems ..... 25 
Chapter 3: Energy system modeling ................................................................................................. 33 
3.1 
Introduction ...................................................................................................................... 33 
3.2 
Energy systems representation ......................................................................................... 33 
3.3 
The optimization model .................................................................................................... 34 
Chapter 4: Thermal energy storage in district heating systems ........................................................ 38 
4.1 
Introduction ...................................................................................................................... 38 
4.2 
Hot water storage tanks in the DH networks .................................................................... 38 
4.3 
Thermal storage in the optimization model ...................................................................... 39 
4.4 
Modeling of hot water storage tank for DH application ................................................... 41 
4.5 
Design of hot water storage tank for integration in DH ................................................... 48 
4.6 
Results from hot water storage tank modeling ................................................................. 50 
4.7 
Discussion ........................................................................................................................ 57 
Chapter 5: Case studies .................................................................................................................... 58 
5.1 
Introduction ...................................................................................................................... 58 
5.2 
Methodology .................................................................................................................... 58 
5.3 
Back-pressure combined heat and power plant ................................................................ 59 
5.4 
Extraction combined heat and power plant ...................................................................... 71 
5.5 
Discussion ........................................................................................................................ 80 
Chapter 6: Heat storage in District Heating of Copenhagen ............................................................ 81 
6.1 
Introduction ...................................................................................................................... 81 
==PAGE:11==
10 
 
6.2 
Methodology .................................................................................................................... 82 
6.3 
Results .............................................................................................................................. 84 
6.4 
Discussion ........................................................................................................................ 97 
Chapter 7: Discussion ....................................................................................................................... 99 
Chapter 8: Conclusion .................................................................................................................... 101 
Bibliography ................................................................................................................................... 103 
Appendix ........................................................................................................................................ 107 
A.1 Sensible thermal energy storage systems ................................................................................ 107 
A.2 Principles of water storage tanks for sensible heat storage ..................................................... 110 
A.3  Categorization of water storage tanks .................................................................................... 113 
A.4 Thermal energy storage for cold applications ......................................................................... 115 
A.5 EES code for stratified hot water storage tank ........................................................................ 115 
 
 
 
==PAGE:12==
11 
 
Nomenclature 
 
Abbreviations 
 
DH 
District Heating 
TES            
Thermal Energy Storage 
ATES     
Aquifer Thermal Energy Storage 
UTES 
Underground Thermal Energy Storage 
PTES 
Pit Thermal Energy Storage 
BTES 
Borehole Thermal Energy Storage 
PCM 
Phase Change Materials 
CHP   
Combined Heat and Power 
LP              
Linear Programming 
MIP            
Mixed Integer Programming 
NLP   
Non Linear Programming 
 
Symbols 
 
Q 
Thermal energy                                 [J] 
ρ 
Density                                              [m3/kg] 
V 
Volume                                             [m3] 
Cp 
Specific heat                                     [J/kgK] 
ΔT 
Temperature difference                    [°C] 
m 
Mass                                                 [kg] 
Δh 
Enthalpy difference                          [J/kg] 
T 
Temperature                                     [°C] 
H 
Height                                               [m] 
D 
Diameter                                           [m] 
η 
Efficiency                                         [-] 
C 
Heat storage capacity                       [J/K] 
k 
Heat loss coefficient                         [W/K] 
λ 
Thermal conductivity                       [W/mK] 
e 
Insulation thickness                          [m] 
R 
Surface resistance                             [m2K/W] 
h 
Height of layer                                  [m] 
A 
Cross section area                             [m2] 
L 
Transport coefficient                         [mW/K] 
Δτ 
Time step                                           [sec] 
E 
Thermal Energy                                 [J] 
U 
Internal Energy                                  [J] 
S 
Entropy                                              [J/kgK] 
 
Subscripts 
 
HS 
Heat storage 
sto 
Storage 
ex 
Exergy 
 
 
 
==PAGE:13==
12 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
     
 
         
  
         
 
         
          
 
        
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:14==
13 
 
Chapter 1: Introduction 
1.1 
Motivation  
 
District heating technology is an efficient way to supply thermal energy to residential as well 
as industrial users. The fundamental idea that lies behind this technology is the recovery of 
fuel and heat flows that would be wasted into the environment in any other case. The thermal 
energy that is provided in the district heating network is most commonly produced from 
plants that are designed to cover simultaneously the demand of the system for heat and power, 
or else combined heat and power plants, in this way improving the efficiency of the system. 
District heating has been used in Denmark for more than a century and ever since it started its 
operation never stopped to evolve and further expand. However, in modern energy systems, 
the growing importance of renewable energy sources and the ongoing integration of 
intermittent technologies such as wind and solar, challenge the system  and the grid as the 
production has to meet the demand despite the fluctuations that may occur assuring this way 
the security of supply. 
Furthermore, for the case of Denmark the operation of the system and mainly the generation 
technologies such as the combined heat and power plants is made with an approach to 
enhance the production from renewable sources and especially wind energy but at the same 
time ensure that energy demand is covered during all times. Moreover, the interconnections 
with neighboring networks and more particularly the well-developed NordPool electricity 
market gives to the possibility of power exchange between the countries involved in order to 
balance the potential fluctuations that occur.  
Thermal energy storage technology can contribute in the future district heating system as 
fluctuations between the production and demand side can be efficiently addressed and at the 
same time the energy demand of the system can be covered. Therefore, this technology can 
have an important role in the future district heating of Denmark, improving the operation of 
the energy system and enhancing the utilization of renewable technologies. 
The district heating of Copenhagen consists mainly of combined heat and power plants and a 
district heating network designed to provide the thermal energy produced to the users. 
Nonetheless, in such a system where the demand for power and heat has to be covered 
simultaneously, the exploitation of the available generation technologies with the optimal 
efficiency possible is required. Among others, heat storage technology offers the possibility to 
decouple the production of power and heat and thus make the operation of the plant and its 
utilization from the system more flexible and efficient.  
The basic principle that lies behind this decoupling is that during hours that the combined heat 
and power plants operates generating electricity and providing it to the grid the excess heat 
that may be not utilized from the network can be stored. Thus in later period of time when the 
electricity prices are low and not beneficial for the electricity generation the stored heat can 
be discharged and the heat demand can be covered. Therefore, fluctuations between the heat 
demand and production can be efficiently exploited and at the same time enhancing the power 
generation during profitable hours for the system. Furthermore the stored thermal energy can 
be used for covering part of the heat demand during peak load hours of the system and hence 
==PAGE:15==
14 
 
enhance the decreased utilization of the peak load technologies that are employed in the 
energy system. 
1.2 
Aim of the project 
This project aims to investigate the integration of heat storage technology in district heating 
systems and more specifically the DH of Copenhagen. The influence of the heat storage 
technology on the decoupling of heat and power during the operation of the system will be 
examined and the effect on the contribution of the employed generation technologies that are 
utilized for covering the energy demand of the system.  
1.3 
Approach 
Initially, an introductory literature review is conducted in order to offer an overview of the 
thermal energy storage technologies that are generally utilized in energy systems and their 
operation having a focus though on sensible thermal energy and specifically hot water storage 
tanks for the employment with district heating energy systems. Also an introduction to the 
district heating of Copenhagen is made. In the last part of this introductory review, the 
employment of thermal energy storage inside district heating systems in certain studies in 
discussed. 
Afterwards, the computer tool that will be utilized for the simulation of the district heating 
system is described regarding basic information on the structure of the model, the 
technologies that are included as well as the inputs that are used and the constraints that 
control the operation of the system.  
Following the modeling of hot stratified hot water storage tanks is made in order to examine 
the effect of certain design parameters and also calculate the efficiency of the hot water 
storage tanks for using it as input in the optimization model. 
Afterwards, two cases of district heating networks are examined in which heat storage 
capacity is integrated. The operation of the system is analyzed concerning the contribution of 
each technology towards covering the energy demand, the thermal energy storage utilization 
as well as the cost of the system. Furthermore, a fuel price sensitivity analysis is performed so 
as to examine the effect on the operation of the system. Also the effect of lowering the district 
heating temperature on the operation of the system is studied. 
In the last part, the current district heating system of the Greater Copenhagen is investigated. 
The integration of different storage capacities is done and the operation of the utility 
technologies is examined as well as the economy of the system. Moreover, the system 
performance is also examined with the absence of heat storage. Following, the operation of 
the system as well as the contribution of the different storage capacities are examined for 
different future electricity price scenarios in the system as well as the influence on the 
economy of the system.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:16==
15 
 
Chapter 2: Thermal energy storage and 
district heating systems 
2.1 
Introduction 
The continuous changes that take place in the energy sector worldwide considering the 
availability of fossil fuels, the security of energy supply as well as the effects in the 
environment have been the main driving forces for many countries to consider the importance 
of renewable energy. Renewable energy sources are having an increasingly important role as 
many countries have set targets in order to promote future energy systems which will be 
based on them to a significant extent (1), (2).  However, due to the nature of these energy 
sources, their intermittent production and availability can challenge the energy grids as 
fluctuations in the supply and demand are introduced. Energy storage technologies can 
enhance the large scale integration of renewable energy sources in future energy systems as 
they can contribute towards a more balanced operation, offering also higher efficiency and 
flexibility in the system. 
Specifically, thermal energy storage technology is a means of accumulating thermal energy 
under various conditions, such as the temperature or the place, for later utilization. Systems of 
this technology can be categorized based on the form of the stored heat. Several applications 
employ thermal energy storage systems however with different properties as well as 
requirements. Characteristics for some of these systems as well as specific information 
concerning their operation will be presented in the present chapter. Moreover, the 
contribution of such systems in modern energy systems will be pointed out. 
2.2 
Methods for thermal energy storage (TES) 
The purpose of thermal energy storage systems is to store heat or cold loads and provide them 
in later time periods when it is required. As the present study is focused on heat storage 
systems, it is intended to provide more information on this kind of technology. Generally, the 
use of such systems can enhance the efficient use and arrangement of thermal energy when 
there is an imbalance between the energy generation and the energy use (3). Although the 
idea of thermal energy storage is not new as it can be found back to 1970s (4), it has received 
much attention and further research is being made due to the potential that it can offer to 
present and future energy systems. In these storage systems the route of the energy flow can 
be observed in the following steps, giving in this way a complete storage cycle:  
 
Charge: the thermal energy is provided to the system  
 
Storage: the thermal energy is stored for later use 
 
Discharge: the thermal energy that has been stored is provided to the system. 
At a starting level, thermal energy storage can be classified depending on the duration of the 
storage. Therefore, there is the long-term and the short-term thermal energy storage. The first 
can be also met in the literature as seasonal thermal energy storage, as surplus of thermal 
energy can be stored during some months of the year and can be used later in another period 
when the load is required.  
Long-term thermal energy storage has big potential regarding future application as due to  
higher capacity it can cover a large share of annual thermal energy demand. However, long-
==PAGE:17==
16 
 
term thermal energy storage is considered to be more technologically challenging, compared 
to the short-term, because it needs big storage volumes, it involves higher risks regarding the 
heat losses and additionally the materials that are used should be trustworthy, friendly 
towards the environment and for sure economical (4). 
A further discretization of thermal energy storage is based on the mechanisms that are 
involved and can describe the processes that take place. Thus, there is the sensible, latent and 
chemical thermal energy storage.  
2.2.1 Sensible thermal energy storage systems 
In sensible heat storage systems the energy that is received is used in order to change the 
temperature level of selected materials and then it can be later retrieved when it is needed. 
The amount of thermal energy that can be stored can be determined by the properties of the 
materials, the volume of the system used and the temperature difference. It should be 
mentioned that the density and the specific heat capacity of the materials involved are 
determining factors of the energy density of the storage system, which is an important 
parameter from which the system can be evaluated. The thermal energy stored can be 
calculated by the following equation: 
                    
Therefore, the selection of the proper materials for the required application is of critical 
importance. This category of thermal energy storage is regarded to be a relatively mature 
technology, more simplified compared to other storage technologies and also characterized as 
low-cost. Furthermore, as it is considered to be very reliable, it has been widely used in many 
applications. As the materials that are involved in the systems have a significant role, several 
technologies have been evolved using different storage mediums such as water, rock and soil. 
Regarding water as storage medium, water tank storage systems, pit thermal energy storage 
systems (PTES) and aquifer thermal energy storage systems (ATES) are commonly known 
and employed. Furthermore, rock-bed thermal energy storage systems employ rock as 
medium. Lastly for the case of soil, borehole thermal energy storage systems (BTES) are the 
most known for utilizing the ground as storage medium and belong to the category of 
underground thermal storage systems (UTES). For more information regarding the operation 
as well as the main properties for these sensible thermal energy technologies that employ 
different storage mediums the reader can address to the Appendix section A.1, where an 
analysis of the most commonly applied technologies is situated with some schematic 
illustrations. 
2.2.2 Latent thermal energy storage systems 
This kind of thermal energy storage systems can provide higher energy densities compared to 
the sensible systems and they are regarded to be an option for energy storage with quite high 
efficiency (4). The materials that are involved are called phase change materials (PCMs) due 
to transition phase they go through during the charging and discharging processes. In detail, 
these materials are subject to a phase changing process while they absorb or release heat by 
means of latent heat of fusion but with no change in their temperature during each occasion. 
This main difference that discriminates the latent from sensible thermal energy storage 
systems can be observed in Figure 1, where the heat that is stored is depicted in accordance to 
the temperature profile of the storage medium.  The great share of the interest in PCMs is 
==PAGE:18==
17 
 
attracted by the solid-liquid phase materials, and to a lower extent some solid-solid phase (5). 
The temperature range under which the PCMs can undergo phase transition is quite expanded; 
therefore they can be used in numerous applications. The amount of heat that can be stored is 
determined by the mass of the material and the phase change enthalpy that characterizes each 
one of the materials. The following equation indicates the calculation of the heat that can be 
stored: 
                
Since the operational temperature range is quite expanded, as previously mentioned, 
depending on the application different materials are used in order to provide the required 
thermal energy load with a desired performance. Therefore, for applications that the 
temperature does not exceed the 130 °C often the materials that are used are paraffins, salt 
hydrates, fatty acids as well as sugar alcohols (5). For applications that require temperatures 
above 150 °C, the materials that are usually used are salts as well as other inorganic 
substances.  In Figure 2, the different PCMs are categorized based on their phase change 
temperature and phase change enthalpy respectively. 
 
Figure 1: Thermal energy storage in sensible and latent form (5). 
==PAGE:19==
18 
 
 
Figure 2: Classification of PCM materials based on their melting temperature and melting enthalpy (6). 
As it can be observed many substances have been investigated for their implementation in 
latent thermal energy storage applications, however only a limited number has been used for 
commercial use. Although the temperature range that these materials can operate is quite 
expanded, certain parameters are setting constraints for their use. The most important 
parameters that could be mentioned are the availability as well as the cost, therefore setting 
limitations in the final selection of materials that are suitable from a technical point of view. 
Furthermore, ongoing research is taking place in order to overcome other important issues 
that are also involved in the proper operation and performance of PCMs such as the process 
of phase separation and the low heat conductivity. Moreover, long-term stability and 
corrosion of such systems are also challenging factors (5). 
Latent thermal energy storage is used mainly for short-term storage basically due to the 
problems in the controllability of the systems. However, a lot of research is taking place in 
order to achieve the design of systems with seasonal operation together with the desired 
performance (4).  
2.2.3 Chemical thermal energy storage systems 
Any chemical reaction that is characterized by high heat of reaction could be utilized for the 
purpose of thermal energy storage. However, two necessary requirements have to be met; the 
reactants as well as the products of this chemical reaction can be stored and furthermore the 
heat that is stored while the reaction takes place can be delivered back when the reaction is 
reversed (5).  
The chemical changes that can occur in the materials have often higher energy densities 
compared to other physical changes. Additionally, due to the fact that heat losses are 
considered to be very low, this kind of thermal energy storage is regarded as the most 
promising for the future. Moreover, with chemical storage the energy that is stored can be 
==PAGE:20==
19 
 
conserved at temperature levels very close to ambient temperature for very long periods of 
time (4). Therefore, for all the above advantageous characteristics this kind of thermal energy 
storage has attracted a lot attention for research and further development. 
Chemical thermal energy storage can be categorized in chemical reactions as well as the 
thermochemical sorption storage (4). The principle that lies behind the chemical reaction is 
the reversibility in the reaction of two substances A and B. In order for these two substances 
to compose a new one, thermal energy is released therefore the process of the synthesis is 
called exothermic. On the contrary in order for the composed substance to be decomposed in 
the initial A and B, thermal energy is required thus the process of this separation is 
endothermic. Thus the system can operate in a cycle which consists of charging, storage and 
then discharging periods. Furthermore, the initial substances A and B can be stored in 
separate storage parts and this can be achieved by isolating their connection while the system 
operates in storage mode. Taking into consideration that the effect of sensible heat is 
significantly smaller than the effect of the reaction heat, the heat losses of the system are 
minor. As far as the thermochemical sorption storage is concerned, this category also consists 
of the absorption as well as the adsorption. During the process of adsorption gas molecules 
make bonds with the surface of the molecules of the solid but there is no formation of any 
new material. To the contrary, in absorption the same process takes place, but there is the 
formation of a new compound (4). 
Also in this category of thermal energy storage the proper selection of the materials is an 
important parameter for the operation and performance of the whole system. Certain 
properties have to be met in order for a material to be used in such systems. To begin with, 
the high thermal conductivity, the appropriate permeability as well as the high storage density 
are critical factors for the system. Moreover, the efficient collaboration of the substances is 
something desired thus the high uptake of working substances, the proper operating pressure 
as well as the stability are determining factors. Last but not least, it should be mentioned that 
the system should be environmentally friendly and have as lower cost as possible (4). A lot of 
research has been done and will continue to face these challenges and make the technology 
technically and economically applicable in the near future. 
Chemical thermal energy storage systems can be found mainly in systems for short-term use. 
There are many parameters that have to be further investigated in order to make this 
technology appropriate for long-term thermal storage and mainly have to do with the overall 
efficiency and the stability of the system as well as the cycle operation after a longer period of 
time (4).  
2.2.4 Comparison between the different thermal energy storage 
concepts 
Sensible storage has been a mature and a high-level developed alternative for short-term as 
well as long-term thermal energy storage. Different available systems comprising of water, 
rock as well as soil for storage media, have been investigated quite thoroughly and it has been 
proven that they can be employed even in large scale applications (4). Especially water-based 
storage systems are appropriate for wide range use, even residential scale, even though there 
is a temperature limitation considering their operation. The use of water tanks is a 
straightforward and accessible way to store thermal energy. However, the stratification inside 
the tank is an important parameter, so that the water layers that are characterized by different 
==PAGE:21==
20 
 
temperatures do not mix with each other. Furthermore, during the last years underground 
thermal energy storage systems UTES (involving aquifer as well as ground storage systems), 
have been an attractive selection among the sensible storage technologies. Nevertheless, the 
geological formation and characteristics can set limitation to the realization of such systems, 
as investigations have to be carried out before building the system. The quantity of the heat 
stored is proportional to the temperature difference that is achieved as well as the specific heat 
capacity of the storage medium that is used. Therefore, in order to increase the heat storage 
using the same mass of storage medium, the temperature difference should be increased. 
Thus, higher operational temperature range leads to also greater risks concerning heat losses 
that are involved. It should be mentioned that it is important to determine an appropriate 
storage temperature by finding a balance between the load that is required and the thermal 
energy that is stored. 
Latent thermal energy storage that involves the characteristic phase change materials is 
described by higher energy densities compared to the sensible storage. Furthermore, the 
thermal energy that is stored can be provided at constant temperature level while the phase 
changing takes place. Despite of its promising potential latent thermal energy storage is 
mainly used in short-term applications. The main reason for that are the complications and the 
difficulties that are involved when it is required to design a control strategy for long-run 
operation as well as the performance of the materials that are involved. Moreover, other 
parameters that set certain constraints to the large scale application of this technology are 
under investigation and research such as the melting temperature of the materials, the 
flammability and the co-operation with other materials as well.  
Chemical thermal energy storage is the one described for the most promising future 
concerning the energy storage. The heat losses of the system meanwhile the storage phase are 
considered to be minor and additionally the whole system can have reduced size comparing to 
other available options, thus being more compact. These properties make this technology 
advantageous for future use; however certain issues regarding the heat and mass transfer 
inside the system are under further investigation.    
As far as latent and chemical thermal energy storage are involved, the processes that take 
place in the systems should be able to run also in a reversed way but maintaining the systems 
performance at the same level even after a big number of cycles. Because finally the costs of 
the materials together with their performance are of critical importance, further research has 
to be done in order to make them technically and economically feasible. On the other hand, 
sensible storage can be still the leading technology as its reliability together with the cost-
effectiveness makes it dominant in the storage field.    
Worth to mention, the last few years apart from storing and delivering heat that was the initial 
purpose of the thermal energy storage systems, these systems have been also used for 
delivering required cooling loads (7). Many of the above mentioned thermal energy storage 
technologies are also applied for covering the need for cooling in several occasions. For 
further information and how these technologies are utilized for cooling the reader can address 
to Appendix A.4.  
 
==PAGE:22==
21 
 
2.3 
Use of water in sensible thermal energy storage systems 
Sensible heat storage is a technology that is widely used in several applications due to its 
solid performance combined with the competitive cost for its operation. Since the temperature 
difference of the materials is used in order to achieve the energy storage, certain properties 
are desired for enhancing the system performance. Therefore, so as to reach a high level of 
heat storage density for the volume that is used, the storage medium that is used should be 
characterized by high specific heat together with increased density. Based on these criteria, 
water seems to have relatively high heat storage density both in terms of weight and volume 
in comparison to other materials used for sensible storage. These advantageous properties of 
the water can be also observed in Table 1. Moreover, water is a substance that is not harmful, 
can be found in abundance in the environment, it is relatively inexpensive and generally can 
be handled easily in a temperature range between the freezing and boiling point (0-100 °C) 
(8).  
Table 1: Specific heat capacity and heat density per volume for different storage materials (8). 
 
Furthermore, additional physical properties of water have made it a favorable storage 
medium. To start with, the density of the water decreases with increasing water temperature. 
As a result, the water with higher temperature will follow an upward flow and on the contrary 
the water with lower temperature will have a downward flow. This means that in hot water 
storage systems, the formation of layers of water with distributed temperature takes place, 
which is called also stratification. Thus, the density of the water can enhance the thermal 
stratification inside a hot water storage system, meaning that high temperatures can be met at 
the top of the storage while lower temperatures at the bottom. In fFigure 3, the density of the 
water can be depicted for different operational temperatures between the freezing and boiling 
point. 
==PAGE:23==
22 
 
 
Figure 3: Density of water as function of the temperature (8). 
Moreover, another property of the water, the thermal conductivity is getting increased with 
higher temperature. This means that increased heat can be transferred in a time unit at higher 
temperature levels compared to lower ones. Furthermore, the temperature differences inside 
hot water storage can be balanced more quickly, at regions with high temperature, enhancing 
in this way the thermal stratification (8). The variation of the water thermal conductivity as 
function of the temperature can be observed in Figure 4.  
 
Figure 4: Thermal conductivity of water as function of the temperature (8). 
Lastly, concerning the specific heat capacity of the water, it can be considered as almost 
constant in the temperature range between the freezing and boiling point. As it can be 
depicted in Figure 5 the deviation of the size related to the temperature change is very limited.  
 
==PAGE:24==
23 
 
 
Figure 5: Specific heat of water as function of the temperature (8). 
A substantial share of hot water storage systems that are used today is based on water storage 
tank applications that were mentioned previously as one of the basic sensible heat storage 
method (8), (9). Usually the tanks that are used employ materials like steel or stainless steel, 
concrete or even plastic. Depending on the application and the purpose of the use, a suitable 
selection of materials is made and also quite often some additional equipment is used in order 
to enhance the operation of the tanks. Thus, certain stratification devices are used in order to 
improve the distribution of the water into several levels. Furthermore, under normal 
circumstances there is an insulation layer in order to reduce the heat losses from the tank. For 
this reason the materials used for insulation purposes should have low thermal conductivity. 
For more information regarding certain principles involved in the operation of the storage hot 
water tanks like the heat storage capacity of the storage system, the occurring heat loss to the 
environment as well as more details about the piping and the thermal bridges, the reader can 
address in the Appendix part A.2. However, heat loss from the storage tank and the 
stratification inside the tank will be mentioned also in detail in next chapter. 
2.3.1 Thermal stratification in a water storage tank 
The thermal stratification inside a water storage tank is a subject that has been under 
investigation since the 1970’s due to the potential benefits that can provide in a storage 
system (10), (11).  
In order to build up a thermal stratification in a tank it is desired that the inlet water will enter 
the tank at a level that its density is similar to the surrounding water fluid. However, because 
this is not always possible, based on the physical properties of the water and the phenomena 
that take place inside the tank, the formation of the stratification is naturally enhanced. Hence, 
because of the density and the buoyancy effects, water that is characterized by different 
temperature compared to the surrounding will deposit in the corresponding height inside the 
tank in accordance to the density difference. Therefore, in the case of light density the hot 
water will follow a flow towards the upper layers of the tank. On the contrary, the cold water 
with heavier density will move towards the bottom layers of the tank. The result out of this 
process is the formation of a thermal stratification that basically works as a thermal barrier 
inside the tank. Thus, the water with the higher temperature is separated from the colder and 
in this way a constant vertical temperature is maintained and respectively a density gradient 
inside the tank (12).  
==PAGE:25==
24 
 
The destruction of the thermal stratification can occur under certain circumstances but that is 
always something undesirable and it should be avoided. In the case that the hot water inside 
the tank is permitted to mix with the cold one, the temperature of the water that can be 
supplied is lowered which results in the degrading of the quality of the energy stored. 
Additionally, due to the mixing effect, there is the tendency for the temperature of all the 
water included inside the tank to be even.  
As it has been found that a fully stratified water tank can significantly increase the energy 
storage efficiency of a system, it is important that a stable thermal stratification is formed. 
This means that any mixing between hot and cold water should be minimized and moreover 
the longer the period that the stratification is preserved the better for the system (12). The 
methods that can be followed in order to build up a stratification inside a tank are several: 
 
The heating of the storage tank vertical walls can result in forming hot boundary 
layers and so hot water leading to the upper parts of the storage tank. 
 
Using a heat exchanger either inside or outside of the tank. In this way heat exchange 
is achieved between the water fluid that is contained inside the tank and the fluid that 
is circulating in the heat exchanger. 
 
Directly leading hot water inside the storage tank but at appropriate height in order to 
match with the surroundings. 
Furthermore, based on the above mentioned methods there can be a categorization of the 
stratified water tanks in indirect and direct heated tanks. The basic principle behind this 
classification is the existence or not of a heat exchanger in order to supply the heat to the 
storage tank. For more details on the different categories and the operation principles the 
reader can address to the Appendix part A.3.   
The movement of the water inside the storage tank is taking place mainly due to the effects of 
forced and natural convection. The heat loss that occurs in the system can influence these 
effects 
and 
thus 
alter 
the 
thermal 
stratification 
inside 
the 
tank. 
 
The heat loss from the tank and especially the losses that derive from the sides of the tank can 
contribute in the formation of the thermal stratification (13). Because of the heat loss to the 
environment, the water that is close to the wall of the tank has a lower temperature compared 
to the water in the center. Thus, the nearly colder water moves downwards along the wall of 
the tank. On the contrary the fluid in the center that has a relatively higher temperature flows 
upwards in the center of the tank.  
Several parameters can affect the heat loss that takes place in the storage tank, thus affecting 
also thermal stratification. The geometry of the tank is an important parameter therefore 
certain investigations have been conducted considering the effect on the systems 
performance. 
The height to diameter ratio (H/D) is an influential parameter on the stratification of the tank 
(13). As this ratio increases, the temperature difference between the top and the bottom parts 
of the tank also increases. Thus, the thinner the tank gets the stronger becomes the thermal 
stratification. This can be justified as the increased height of the colder surface of the wall 
leads to larger buoyancy forces. However, with increasing H/D ratio the total area of the sides 
of the tank is increasing, which leads to greater heat losses and decreased temperature of the 
==PAGE:26==
25 
 
water. Therefore, it could be mentioned that with an increasing H/D ratio there is a trade-off 
between the improved thermal stratification and the heat losses from the tank. Moreover, the 
influence of the H/D ratio is expected to be lower when the volume of the tank is increased. 
Last but not least, the thickness of the insulation that is used at the tank can be a contributing 
factor. In detail, with small insulation thickness the heat loss is increased as expected. 
Therefore, also in this case the buoyancy effect is increased and higher flow takes place 
towards the lower parts of the tank. Thus the stratification is enhanced but at the expense of 
lowering the water temperature. 
Overall, certain parameters like the H/D ratio, the total volume of the tank as well as the 
insulation can affect the heat loss of the system and thus establish a strong thermal 
stratification. In addition to this, a recent investigation showed that also the shape of the 
storage tank can have a contributing effect on the stratification and the thermal storage 
efficiency of the system (14).  The shapes of sphere and barrel proved to have the best 
thermal energy storage efficiency while the cylinder that is the most commonly used showed 
the lowest. Lastly, shapes that employ sharp corners demonstrated the best stratification due 
to the velocity arrangement inside the tank. 
2.4 
The principle of District Heating and integration of thermal 
energy storage systems 
The basic idea that lies behind the development and operation of district heating is the 
utilization of regional fuels or heat resources that would be wasted in any other case. 
Consequently, various local demands for heating can be covered by managing a heat 
distribution network. This idea encloses three mandatory features of a district heating system 
that operates inside a competitive market: an appropriate heat source which is as cheap as 
possible, heat needs stemming from a heat market and a suitable piping that bridges the 
demand and the source sides (15). It is desired that these three essential features are local so 
as to reduce the initial investment of the distribution network. The heating needs that can be 
covered can be relevant to the need for domestic hot water in residential, industrial or public 
buildings as well as the need for space heating. Thus, the driving force for the utilization of 
district heating is based on the synergies that emerge from the connection of local heat 
demands with accessible and convenient local heat sources. District heating energy systems 
basically transfer recycled heat to customers that have needs for heat. 
The resources that are available and also applicable for district heating operation can be 
categorized in five main types (15): 
 
Useful upgraded surplus heat that comes from thermal power stations. This kind of 
technology is commonly known as combined heat and power (CHP). 
 
Useful heat that derives from waste incineration. This approach can be met in Waste-
to-Energy plants. 
 
Useful surplus heat that comes from fuel refineries and other possible industrial 
processes. 
 
Fuels that are quite hard to manage and use, containing also renewables that can be 
used for combustion process such as wood waste. 
 
Geothermal heat sources that can be found in nature. 
==PAGE:27==
26 
 
These key resources of the district heating operation should have the lowest possible cost so 
as to pay back the capital investment concerning also the network for the distribution as well 
as the necessary existence of supplementary heat generation plants. These plants are focused 
on covering peak demands as well as providing some backup heat supplies. The last are 
required so as to cover the heat demands in extreme cases and when the regular resources are 
not available. In the near future it is highly possible that solar thermal energy as well as large 
heat pumps will be included as resources for district heating systems, since for the moment 
their use is quite limited. 
District heating is a technology that is continuously developing and significantly contributes 
in covering energy demands in a practical and efficient way. Furthermore, district heating 
inside energy systems can offer several advantages (15). Some of them are the flexibility 
provided as market conditions and fuel prices are not constant. Moreover, the environmental 
effect that is made as far as the local region is concerned is quite significant, due to the 
reduction of pollutant emissions compared to the case of individual fuel usage. Lastly, the 
security of energy supply is increased as the fossil fuel usage is replaced from a high level of 
heat recycling and from wider use of the renewable sources inside the district heating system. 
2.4.1 Introduction to the District heating of Copenhagen 
The technology of district heating in Denmark started over a century ago. On the 1st of 
December in 1903, the first waste incineration plant started its operation handling large 
quantities of waste but at the same time producing and delivering heat in the municipality of 
Frederiksberg (16) . Steam was driven through underground tunnels, providing in this way 
heat in a new hospital and few houses.  
After this first successful attempt, district heating has been ever since an immerging 
technology which was continuously developing and expanding. Slowly small district heating 
substations started to be built together with the development of big housing areas. It could be 
also mentioned that in the early 30’s, when the power stations shifted from diesel to steam-
driven, a lot of them were operating as combined heat and power plants. 
However, the energy crisis that took place in 70’s together with some innovations considering 
the design of the district heating network such as the pre-insulation of the network piping, 
gave a great boost for further development of the technology. The organized planning of the 
heat supply in the involved regions, the increased potential for combined heat and power 
production focused on that planning as well as the construction of a remarkably effective 
piping network upgraded significantly the district heating. 
For the following 40 years and until today the district heating turned into a trustworthy, cost 
effective and green source of energy which Copenhagen and generally Denmark has used 
beneficially. The solid energy policy of the Danish governments together with the companies 
involved with the heat supplying have been strong contributing factors towards this progress. 
Today the district heating network that is installed in Copenhagen employs a significantly big 
area and future plans target in expanding this area even more as well as introducing ideas for 
further improvement (17). 
==PAGE:28==
27 
 
 
Figure 6: Map of the district heating network in Copenhagen (18). 
As it can be depicted in Figure 6 an extended pipeline district heating network delivers heat 
loads coming from various resources, as mentioned in the previous paragraph. The largest 
shares in the heat production have the combined heat and power as well as incineration plants. 
Moreover, apart from these strategically basic technologies, there are also geothermal (19) 
and heat storage systems that offer an important contribution to the district heating system. 
However, this part of the technologies that participate in the district heating system will be 
analyzed in more details during following chapters.  To continue, the entire network is 
separated in smaller distribution areas where heat is delivered to customers. Through the 
transmission grid thermal energy stemming from these resources is transferred to heat 
exchangers that are installed in the above mentioned distribution areas. In this way the heat 
demands of an overwhelming majority of consumers that reaches the level of 98 percent (20), 
is covered by district heating. Thus, district heating in Copenhagen has established as an 
efficient and stable form of heat supply but also at the same time affordable for consumers 
and environmentally green. 
2.4.2 Integration of heat storage technology in district heating 
systems 
The increasing importance of renewable energy resources and the ongoing integration of 
intermittent technologies like wind and solar energy set a variety of challenges into the energy 
grid as under all circumstances the heat production has to meet the heat demand despite the 
fluctuations that may occur on both sides. These fluctuations offer incentives for the 
integration of heat storage inside the district heating system. 
Generally, variations in the heat demand side can be categorized in seasonal and daily. The 
seasonal variation is closely related to the changing of the outdoor temperature, thus 
throughout the year the needs for space heating are not similar. The daily variations are 
relevant to the different patterns that people have for using the domestic hot water during the 
day. In both cases, heat storage technology can be quite beneficial for the district heating 
==PAGE:29==
28 
 
system as the production can be more flexible and efficient. The most commonly used 
applications of heat storage integrated in district heating systems are for managing daily 
variations (21), as storage systems for seasonal heat load variations are not yet employed in 
large scale as described in previous sections. 
Water storage tanks are mostly employed for short term thermal energy storage thus 
managing changes in the daily heat loads. As it has been described previously the proper 
design and operation of water tanks can result in quite high energy storage efficiencies thus 
they are able to improve and enhance the operation of district heating. Moreover, a special 
occasion is this of the very short-term heat storage during the day. The supply temperature of 
network is increased shortly before anticipated heat load peaks (21). Thus, hourly heat storage 
is achieved by taking advantage of the installed network of the system.   
The advantages that heat storage can offer in the operation of a district heating system can be 
various (21).  
 
In the case of combined heat and power plants the coupled generation of power and 
heat can become more flexible. Usually, the electricity prices during the day are 
higher compared to the night. Thus, with the usage of heat storage the plant can focus 
on having higher revenues from electricity during the day, while the storage is being 
charged. Later during the night the stored energy can be delivered. 
 
In the case of mass boilers, the often load variations can lead to decreased conversion 
efficiencies. Heat storage in this occasion, can contribute in maintaining a more stable 
load, increasing in this way the efficiency. The heat storage can be charged in the 
time of night when the heat loads are quite low and discharged later during the day. 
 
Furthermore, heat storage systems can contribute in the reduction of peak heat 
demands. Additionally, this can be translated in the scaling down of installed peak 
capacity that is also expensive for the system. 
In all cases involving heat storage, the heat production can be shifted to other time periods, 
offering in this way the possibility for more flexible, efficient as well as profitable energy 
generation.  
2.4.3 Modeling of heat storage technology integration in energy 
systems 
The transition from conventional towards more renewable energy systems, that utilize 
intermittent resources like solar, wind as well as energy storage technologies is becoming of 
significant importance the last years. As this conversion has an important impact on issues 
that concern modern societies like the changes in the environment, the security of the energy 
supply and the societal economic growth, it is often essential to demonstrate solid as well as 
systematic analysis of how such a transition can be implemented inside modern energy 
systems. Furthermore, it is also a crucial element to display possible effects that may occur 
due to such changes as well as the interaction between the different technologies and other 
parts inside the energy system itself. Analysis of this kind requires computer tools that are 
capable to model and simulate energy systems and provide answers to such topics. 
To continue, there is a broad range of available computer tools that can be used for energy 
system modeling, analysis and optimization. The majority of them is based on linear 
programming (22), however they distinct in terms of the fields that they analyze like the 
==PAGE:30==
29 
 
technologies considered as well as the objectives that should be fulfilled based on predefined 
constraints. Balmorel is a tool which is emphasized on the electricity as well as the heat 
sector. It is a computer tool that is developed using the GAMS language. There is a variety of 
units that can be contained in the model involving electricity, district heating, combined heat 
and power as well as short-term thermal storages. Moreover, since the integration of 
renewable energy is a major concern, the model provides the possibility to include units for 
wind, solar as well as hydro power production. As far as the generation capacity is concerned 
the model can optimize the investment in electricity as well as combined and heat 
technologies, but at the same time taking into consideration certain constraints involving fuel 
prices, maximum investments even emission penalties. EnergyPLAN is a computer tool which 
is formulated using Delphi Pascal. It is mainly used for simulating complete energy systems 
and provides information about their design and further operation. The model can enclose all 
types of energy sector, which means electricity, heat as well as transportation. Therefore, it 
offers the possibility to enclose thermal units, units for energy conversion as well as storage 
and set constraints about several system costs. The inputs for the model can be several 
including electricity and heat demand, renewable resources, system costs as well as planning 
of energy import and export. The outputs from the model could be energy balances, energy 
production on annual basis, fuel utilization as well as several system costs. This model 
performs the optimization of the system’s operation and suggests configurations of energy 
resources. Another optimization model is the energyPRO which investigates the operation of 
individual thermal and combined heat and power units. It gives the possibility to perform 
analysis and optimization in technical as well as economic aspects of the models that are 
investigated. It can include electricity and district heating sectors but not the transport one. 
Lastly in offers the possibility to include renewable energy sources as well.  
The fact is that there is a wide range of computer tools available which either is open-sourced 
or that can be purchased as well as. However, since the possibilities offered are not the same 
from all these tools, the operator has to select the most proper one that fulfills his 
requirements and specific objectives. This is also the case for the integration of thermal 
energy storage in district heating systems. The objectives and the investigation aspects differ 
from one study to another which is also a contributing factor for the employment of many 
different computer tools. In the literature several studies can be found and the findings vary 
depending on the energy system that has been modeled, the possible aspects taken into 
consideration like the demand and supply sides, the energy sources available, constraints in 
prices etc.   
In a study performed, a model was developed in order to investigate the application of 
thermal storage in cogeneration systems (23). The model comprised of a combined heat and 
power plant, a boiler for peak loads and a hot water storage tank. The operation of the system 
was examined for a period of one month and for a given energy demand. From the results 
obtained it was observed that fuel consumption from the boiler used for peak demand was 
significantly reduced. Furthermore, the loss of heat from fan coolers that were used has been 
also decreased. It was also proposed that the optimization of the tank volume can introduce 
the model improved results. Lastly, the utilization of a storage tank can reduce the required 
capacity of the peak boiler and improve the payback time of the plant. 
In another study performed, the integration of thermal energy storage to a combined heat and 
power plant has been modeled and investigated in order to cover the heat demands of a 
university campus (24). The model was based on an hourly operation so as to match the heat 
==PAGE:31==
30 
 
demand with the production. The type of thermal storage that has been used was water 
storage tank that operated in a temperature range between the supply and return temperature 
of the network. The operation of the combined heat and power plant was assumed steady, 
which means that in the case the load was lower compared to the production, the surplus of 
the heat was stored in the storage system. When the maximum capacity of the storage has 
been reached, the excess heat was released to the environment. The investigation resulted in 
improving the plant’s operation by using the thermal storage. The waste heat as well as the 
energy used from the auxiliary boiler was reduced. Furthermore, the coupling of the heat 
storage with the plant led to a reduction in the payback time of the project. Lastly, it was 
pointed out the necessity for an optimal sizing of the storage system, in order to accomplish 
the best possible operation. 
The primary energy savings in a district heating system were investigated also in another 
study (25). In this case a model was developed so as to examine the integration of heat 
storage in the district heating of the Turin network. The system operated during all year long 
covering the heat demand of the region. During summer months the supply temperature was 
reduced in order to decrease the heat loss of the system. The storage system comprised of 
three hot water storage tanks of the same volume (1000 m3). The principle followed is that the 
storage system was charged during the night, when the heat demand was lower, and 
discharged later during the day. The outcome of the study showed that certain peak loads that 
could be observed during the morning hours were decreased by the employment of thermal 
storage. Peak boilers operated for fewer hours, which led to reduction of primary energy 
consumption. Furthermore, larger storage capacity could reduce even further the load during 
peak hours, making possible the increase of electricity generation in day time. Also it was 
pointed out that the simulated system was able to cover a larger percentage of the heat load 
with the utilization of larger thermal storage volume, resulting in an overall reduction in the 
fuel consumption (approximately 12 percent). 
In another study it was developed a combined heat and power based district heating system 
coupled with thermal energy storage system and renewable energy (26). The formulation was 
done with linear programming. The optimization model had a monthly horizon and the main 
goal was to minimize the overall cost for acquiring energy. The system comprised of three 
combined heat and power plants, two heat-only boilers, a solar thermal plant and a thermal 
energy storage system. The power prices, the profile of the heat demand as well as the solar 
radiation were some of the basic inputs of the model. From the results obtained is was 
indicated that the thermal energy storage was operating more when there was fluctuating 
production from the CHP plant, in order to balance the variations  on the demand and 
production sides. It was also indicated that the TES system was operating for longer periods 
during winter times, when the demand was higher. The optimal solution concerning the 
operation of the TES system was affected by the demand as well as the power prices. Also, in 
a future scenario investigated, for more fluctuating CHP load profiles as well as larger share 
of renewables inside the system, the operation of TES was even more extended. 
Another investigation had the objective to examine the influence of the position of thermal 
energy storage into a district heating system (27). The possibilities that were examined were 
the centralized and decentralized thermal energy storage systems and the potential flexibility 
that could provide to the system. The energy system comprised of combined heat and power 
plants, boiler units and the heat storage system. The optimization was based on the 
minimization of the system’s cost and making the maximum electricity profits. In detail, there 
==PAGE:32==
31 
 
were also taken into consideration the investment cost, maintenance costs as well as fuel costs 
and the model was running on an hour basis. From the comparison between the two cases, the 
centralized storage offered a slightly higher flexibility in the energy production of the system 
as well as advantages in the storage procedure. Moreover, generally with higher storage 
capacities the flexibility of the system increased as well as the revenues.  
The flexibility that can be provided to a district heating system with the integration of thermal 
energy storage systems has been also investigated in an additional study (28). Two forms of 
flexibility have been investigated; the first has been described as the amount of time that the 
plant operation can be postponed while the heat demand can be covered entirely by the energy 
stored and the second is the amount of time that the plant can operate while the surplus of 
heat is stored at the same time. The investigated model comprised of a combined heat and 
power plant and a sensible thermal storage system (water tank) for covering the heat demand 
of a small region but without considering any heat losses to the environment. Moreover, the 
position of the storage system was investigated meaning whether central or decentralized 
storage is more advantageous for the district heating performance. From the results obtained, 
the combined heat and power plant coupled with centralized storage performed better 
concerning both flexibility cases. Furthermore, higher flexibility was observed during the 
summer months as the heat load is lower and there is larger utilization of the storage system. 
It is also stated that a weaker link was demonstrated between the operation of the storage with 
the CHP plant. Lastly, it was pointed out that with increasing storage capacity the flexibility 
in the system can be also increased.  
The environmental impact of the thermal energy storage coupled with a district heating 
system has been also studied (29). The energy system that was modeled comprised of a 
combined heat and power plant and a thermal energy storage system. From the results 
acquired it was observed that significant carbon emissions were achieved by the integration of 
the storage.  Furthermore, it was mentioned that the payback time of the system can be further 
reduced due to the increased carbon savings and the additional electricity production that was 
accomplished. 
Furthermore, the beneficial utilization of the district heating network itself for sensible 
thermal storage has been investigated (30). In the present study the volume of the piping 
network was utilized as sensible heat storage. The system comprised of three boilers for 
delivering heat and the supply temperature was considered as an essential parameter for the 
modeling. Therefore, four hours prior to an expected peak in the heat load, the supply 
temperature was increased by certain Celsius degrees in order to start the charging phase of 
the system. The obtained results demonstrated a significant reduction of up to 15 percent in 
the heat load peaks during the day. Additionally, it was observed a reduction in the fuel 
consumption of the system as well as the carbon emissions. However, due to the increase in 
the supply temperature increased heat losses were detected but to a very small extent. 
Furthermore, an optimal time for the starting of the loading phase of the system was acquired.   
The potential advantages of the combined operation of heat storage together with a district 
heating system have drawn the attention for investigation and further development. From the 
abovementioned findings is has been proven that it can be quite beneficial for the overall 
system operation. The possible improvements or favorable influences in the system 
performance, the environmental impact, the primary energy consumption as well as the 
==PAGE:33==
32 
 
security for energy supplying during peak load hours can make the heat storage a promising 
technology for future district heating and generally the energy systems. 
 
 
==PAGE:34==
33 
 
Chapter 3: Energy system modeling 
3.1 
Introduction 
In order to investigate and analyze the operation of thermal energy storage inside modern 
energy systems, it is important to take into consideration the interactions with the other main 
technologies that are employed for covering the energy demand. For that reason it is required 
to examine the effect of thermal energy storage systems on the operation of the technologies 
that primarily compose the present as well as future district heating systems such as for 
example CHP plants and boilers for peak load operation. As these technologies are also 
representative of the district heating system of Copenhagen, their operation could be 
influenced from the integration of thermal energy storage therefore it would be interesting for 
further investigation.  
For such an analysis, a computer tool is required so as to simulate the cooperation of multiple 
energy sources and examine the interconnections between them. Thus, the influence of the 
storage technology on the system operation can be examined inside the energy system. 
Furthermore, the more in detail the computer tool represents the system’s real operation the 
better is the outcome of the investigation as it is closer to the systems real working conditions 
and properties.  
3.2 
Energy systems representation  
When the level of requirements is high so as to achieve a representation of the energy system 
as close to real operation as possible, then the technologies that are involved have to be also 
depicted inside the optimization model with high detail. As it was mentioned in the first 
chapter, there are several computer tools that have been developed for simulating modern 
energy systems, district heating systems as well as the integration of renewable energy 
sources. The majority of these computer tools that are utilized today and are in on-going 
development use linear optimization (22). 
However, since modern energy systems usually operate under various conditions and 
moreover numerous constraints, the interdependence of the units that compose these systems 
can be expressed up to a certain extent. The higher the number of the  technologies that are 
involved for power and heat generation including the renewable energy sources, the more 
complicated is the representation of the energy system with a computer tool.  
In the case of the Danish energy system, several utility technologies are involved like CHP 
plants, boilers, thermal storage units as well as energy production stemming from renewable 
sources. This system operates under certain constraints and properties for the different 
technologies that it consists of. The optimization model that is used in this study in order to 
investigate the influence of thermal energy storage in the district heating system of 
Copenhagen has been previously developed (31) in order to analyze the Danish energy system 
and further investigate the integration of heat pumps.   
The selection of the most appropriate optimization approach is critical, as the quality of the 
system’s representation is based on that selection. The optimization scheme that is selected 
can affect how the constraints and properties of the system are depicted, thus making the 
model more close to real operation. As the main technologies inside the system are the CHP 
and boilers, the optimization scheme that is approaching the most the real operation, will have 
==PAGE:35==
34 
 
also more robust and realistic outcomes from the performed investigation. In Figure 7, the 
representation of the system constraints based on different optimization schemes can be 
depicted.  
 
Figure 7: Operation constraints, b-value and boiler efficiency illustration for different optimization models 
(32). 
The utilization of linear dispatch models often leads to unsatisfying level of detail for the 
utility technologies that are employed and furthermore the interrelationship between the 
different units is not depicted in such a constrained way so as to resemble the present Danish 
energy system. 
As it can be observed, using Mixed Integer Programming (MIP) a more physical 
representation of the combined heat and power plant operation is achieved close to the actual 
operation. Thus the optimization model that is used can produce more realistic and accurate 
results compared to other tools that use linear and non-linear programming. 
3.3 
The optimization model 
The optimization model that is used in the present study has been developed in order to 
represent the Danish energy system with high detail and more particularly the energy system 
of the Greater Copenhagen. The model simulates power and heat production including also 
power generation from renewable energy sources such as wind turbines and has the purpose 
to derive an optimum economic and environmental solution. It has been developed in General 
Algebraic Modeling System (GAMS) with the utilization of the mixed integer linear 
optimization algorithm CPLEX. Furthermore, the processing of external available data is 
accomplished by Matlab. 
In order to investigate the influence of thermal energy storage integration in a market-based 
energy system like in the case of Copenhagen, it is important to depict the other main 
technologies that play a determining role in the system. Therefore, as the CHP plants and 
boilers are the main players in the market, Mixed Integer Programming (MIP) has been used 
in order to achieve the best embodiment of technologies. The operation as well as the 
schedule of CHP plants can be affected as usually they are few in number and large in size, 
therefore they can experience numerous alterations  such as working in part-load due to 
changes in system demand. On the contrary boilers for peak load operation (heat only boilers) 
are usually more abundant and they can be found in various capacity sizes thus they are less 
==PAGE:36==
35 
 
constrained. Consequently, the specific selection of optimization scheme (MIP), illustrates an 
energy system with high shares of CHP plants as well as boilers, in a more complete way and 
approaching the real operation and constraints. 
Apart from the main technologies that are included, the purpose of the developer has been to 
make the model as complete as possible. Therefore, the model also comprises of intermittent 
power generation from wind turbines, so as to illustrate the real energy system that includes 
apart from traditional technologies but also renewable energy sources. 
The model, which has been validated, represents in high detail the power and heat system of 
Copenhagen and can determine an optimum production cost by the minimization of the cost 
of power and heat from the consumer’s point of view. Thus, there is an-hourly optimization 
for the power and heat networks that have been embodied inside the model. 
For a more complete understanding of the optimization model, in the next section some of the 
most important features and characteristics will be presented.  
3.3.1 Optimization model structure and features 
The optimization model that is used in the present study performs an hourly-based 
optimization. Several data has been used as input to the model in order to represent the energy 
system with high detail.  
 To begin with, for that purpose real historical data have been used regarding the electricity as 
well as the heat consumption for each hour period of time that has been considered for the 
specific year (2011) and for the entire examined energy system.  Furthermore, the power 
generation from wind turbines together with decentral CHP plants on hourly basis has been 
also included in the model.  
In order for the model to be more complete the import and export of electricity has been taken 
into consideration taking also into account the network capacities between that interconnected 
regions. Additionally, the power prices on hourly basis have been used for the spot market 
that corresponds to the investigated bidding area, as well as the prices for the exchange of 
electricity with three other regions that are connected to the network (DK-West, Sweden, DE 
European Power exchange). Moreover, regarding the decentralized CHP units as well as the 
intermittent wind production, it was assumed that their production is independent of the 
power price for each hour and thus historical data could be used for their production profile. 
Inside the model all the central thermal power stations as well as the units that are connected 
to the network of the District Heating network of the Greater Copenhagen have been 
included. The DH system of Copenhagen consists of CHP units of various capacities and 
technologies, waste incineration plants for combined and heat power generation, boilers and 
electric heaters. In addition, certain thermal energy storage systems are also connected to the 
network. For every time period of the optimization, informative data regarding the load of the 
power plants as well as the heat that is accumulated at the end of this period, is transferred to 
the beginning of the next consecutive time period.  
 
 
==PAGE:37==
36 
 
On the assumption that the capital cost of a system can be regarded as sunk cost, the objective 
function of the optimization model that is utilized is the following: 
    ∑ ∑  ̇   
     
   
   
∑  ̇   
        ∑  ̇   
       
   
   
∑  ̇   
       
   
 ̇   
                  
In the equation above  ̇ is the rate of the cost production for each unit that is considered 
inside the model. The CHP units inside the model are indicated by the index I, the boilers by 
the index H and additional heat or power production with the index F. Energy markets that are 
neighbor to the system so that import or export of power can be made are also indicated by 
the index J. The objective function that is presented above is based on several economic as 
well as technical constraints.  
Furthermore, several locations have been considered inside the optimization model for the 
representation of the energy system. More in detail, there are areas considered for the 
production units that are employed, transmission points of the district heating network (where 
the different steams are met) as well as transmission and distribution networks. Moreover, 
capacity limitations regarding the aforementioned networks have been taken into 
consideration in order to achieve a more realistic representation of the interconnections 
between the networks.  
For the majority of the technologies that have been assessed, the cost of utility production for 
a particular unit depends on the technology of the unit, the efficiency that is characterizing 
each one, the operation of the unit and moreover the cost that is required for maintenance as 
well as the cost for the fuel. Additionally, apart from the cost that can directly occur from the 
fuel utilization, the possible fuel types that are utilized may be also affected by different 
taxation or even subsidy schemes.  
However, since in this study the main subject is not the further analysis of the utilized 
optimization model, if additional information is required for the model formation the reader 
can address to the developer’s publication of the specific model (31).  
The representation of the CHP plants operation has been made in detail as they are the main 
technology inside the system. Some of the most important features of the CHP representation 
are included below: 
 
Four types of power plant technologies can be met inside the model; back-pressure 
and extraction plants and then gas turbines/combined cycle or condensation.  
 
Several limitations have been taken into consideration concerning the operation of 
these plants. Firstly, maximum ramp rates have been used for the hour-based 
operation as well as minimum production limits under which the operation of the 
plants is interrupted (shut down).  
 
As the operation of the plants may go through variations in their load (part-load 
operation), the reduction in the electrical efficiency has been taken into account.  
 
The extraction technology is depicted in the model with the usage of two power loss-
factors that are related to the level of production. 
 
Possibility for steam bypass of the turbine for CHP plants of back-pressure 
technology. 
==PAGE:38==
37 
 
 
The availability of each plant at the market can be determined. For the validated 
model historical data has been acquired from urgent market messages. 
 
Costs for the startup or the shutdown of the plants have been also considered based on 
the capacity and the technology of the plant. 
 
Specific units do have the possibility to produce at higher level of capacity compared 
to what they are rated (overload operation), at the sake of reduction in their 
efficiency. 
 
Taxation schemes have been also included in the model. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:39==
38 
 
Chapter 4: Thermal energy storage in district 
heating systems 
4.1 
Introduction 
Hot water storage tanks or else heat accumulators, as they can be also found in literature, have 
been employed in the operation of district heating systems for several years also in the case of 
the DH of Copenhagen (33), as with their operation can offer several advantages to the 
system. The liberalization of the electricity market in Denmark has increased the necessity for 
a more flexible operation of the CHP plants so as to operate in a cost-effective way but at the 
same time covering both demands for heat as well as electricity. For that reason, there have 
been a lot of incentives and motivation for the development and implementation of thermal 
energy storage in the energy system. 
4.2 
Hot water storage tanks in the DH networks  
In general, hot water storage tanks inside the DH networks are installed between the heat 
source and the heat consumers. Usually, the storage tanks can be found very close to the 
thermal plants, however there are also other configurations (primary or secondary DH 
network).  In Figure 8, there is a simplified representation of how a hot water storage tank can 
be connected to the network. As it can be observed, there are connections with the supply as 
well as the return line of the hot water in the DH network.  
 
Figure 8: Configuration of thermal energy storage in the district heating network. 
Concerning the interaction of the hot water storage tank inside the DH system, as a means of 
thermal energy storage, it has been previously mentioned that certain stages can take place. 
Therefore, the hot water storage tank can be in a process of charging and discharging as well 
as in a stage where the thermal energy that is stored just remains in the tank (steady state). 
The hot water storage tanks that are utilized inside the DH system are operating with water 
layers in different temperatures or else stratification. At the upper part of the tank the 
temperature of the water is high and specifically it can be considered to be the same with the 
==PAGE:40==
39 
 
supply temperature of the DH network. At the bottom part, the temperature of the water inside 
the tank is the same with the return temperature of the network, which is always lower. 
Between these two layers, a separation layer with an intermediate temperature can be 
observed. This layer works as a barrier between the hot and cold layer and doesn’t permit the 
heat transfer through conduction between these two layers. The temperature difference 
between the supply and return temperatures of the DH are characteristic of the network size 
and the commissioning year (31). Therefore the temperature difference of the DH network 
can also define the temperature difference inside the water storage tank. In general principle, 
the method of stratification enhances the performance of the storage tank as the hot and cold 
parts of the storage tank are separated and the mixing of water volumes with different 
temperatures is avoided.   
During the charging process, water with high temperature coming from the supply line enters 
the top part of the tank leading the mixing layer to move downwards.   Simultaneously, the 
same volume of hot water that is inserted in the tank is also coming out from the bottom part 
of the tank where the water with lower temperature is kept. In this way the volume of the 
water inside the storage tank is kept constant. In the case of discharge, hot water is drawn 
from the top part of the tank and is driven to the supply line, while at the same time water 
from the return line is fed inside the tank moving also the mixing layer upwards. 
 
Figure 9: Stratified hot water storage tank and flow of water. 
In Figure 9 the connection of a stratified hot water storage tank to the network is depicted as 
well as the different water layers that are employed inside the tank. 
4.3 
Thermal storage in the optimization model 
In the optimization model that is investigated, capacity of thermal energy storage has been 
initially included so as to simulate the operation as well as the properties of the system as 
==PAGE:41==
40 
 
close to reality as possible.  The operation of the hot water storage tank systems is firmly 
related to the operation of system and more specifically the operation of the CHP plant.  
The model has been developed in such a way so that the heat that is produced should cover 
the heat demand in every hour that the model is simulating. Therefore the heat that is 
transferred from the transmission to the distribution network should be able to cover the 
hourly heat demand. The utilization of heat storage can contribute to this equilibrium, 
enhancing and potentially improving the operation of the system. As several fluctuations in 
the heating load can be found in the profile of the heat demand, sometimes it is not efficient 
and even not possible for the CHP plants to follow the same load pattern. Therefore, heat can 
be stored to the heat storage systems when the production is higher than the demand and 
likewise, this heat stored is later utilized by the system when it is required.  
The operation of the heat storage systems inside the optimization model is described from the 
following governing equations: 
         
       
        
                                  (1) 
The term      depicts the heat that is available at the storage system in the time t at a specific 
location   inside the network, while the term        describes the heat that is disposable 
during the following time step. As it can be observed there are three other terms; two of them 
describe the heat flow inside and out of the hot water storage tank and the other one illustrates 
the heat losses that occur at the storage system. The excess heat that is produced is stored in 
the storage tanks and it is considered to be an amount of energy that comes into the storage 
system thus having a plus sign. On the opposite side, when stored energy is utilized from the 
system, it is considered that this amount of energy is coming out of the storage system having 
a minus sign.  
Considering the heat losses from the heat storage systems, in the initial version of the 
optimization model, it was considered that heat loss occurs only in the case when there was a 
discharge of the hot water storage tank, meaning energy coming out of the system. Moreover, 
the heat loss considered was calculated by a constant percentage, related to the amount of 
energy that was being discharged each time from the storage system. In this study the heat 
loss considered, is based on the level of the energy that is stored inside the storage system and 
is on an hourly basis. Therefore, heat loss occurs every hour depending on the energy content 
of the storage system and not just on the case of having a discharge or not. In this way a more 
realistic and accurate way of taking into consideration the heat loss is considered inside the 
optimization model, thus having also more robust results considering the investigation. 
                 
             ,              (2) 
As it can be observed, the heat loss     
         that occurs in the storage system is related to the 
energy content of the system      that is available at the time t and a factor      that 
represents the efficiency of the hot water storage tank taking into consideration the heat losses 
that occur at the storage system on hourly basis. The calculation of this factor will be 
explained in detail in following section. The calculated heat loss that occurs is taken into 
consideration also in equation (1), resulting in the final energy content of the heat storage 
system available during the next time step. 
==PAGE:42==
41 
 
Furthermore, some additional equations depict the constraints of the heat storage systems 
inside the optimization model as well as their physical dimension and design. Therefore, the 
following equations are given: 
         
            ,                 
where the term     
         depicts the maximum installed capacity so that the heat that is stored 
inside the system does not exceed the upper limit set by the user. Furthermore, there are also 
two equations that set constraints for the charging and discharging rates of the heat storage 
systems, as it also happens in their operation inside the network, hence making their operation 
realistic. 
    
       
                             
    
        
                             
where the terms     
   and     
    depict the limitations considering the energy coming in and 
out of the storage systems during the processes of charging and discharging correspondingly. 
Also these parameters depend on the properties of the system and the possible heat transfer 
that can accomplished between the heat storage and the DH network during a specific time 
period. 
4.4 
Modeling of hot water storage tank for DH application 
As it was previously mentioned, the hot water storage tanks that are utilized in energy 
systems are usually stratified tanks, so this is also the case for DH network of Copenhagen 
(34). By the implementation of this method, the hot water that is stored inside the tank during 
the charging process retains the quality of its thermal energy as it is not mixed with the water 
of the bottom part with lower temperature. Therefore, the high temperature of the water that is 
stored at the top part of the tank is preserved, thus the operation of the water storage tank is 
improved and the energy stored can be maintained for long periods. In case that the hot water 
would be mixed with the water with the lower temperature that is located at the bottom of the 
tank, then its temperature would be significantly reduced and thus degrading the quality of the 
stored energy as the high temperature of the storage tank would be lower compared to the 
supply temperature of the DH network.  
4.4.1 Heat store capacity 
The heat store capacity of a heat storage   is prescribed as the difference in the heat content 
of the heat storage when the temperature is changing by 1 K. The determination of the heat 
store capacity of a selected material can be accomplished by the product of mass and the 
specific heat of the chosen material.  
In the present investigation the medium that is utilized inside the storage tanks is the water as 
well as the material of the storage tanks that is usually steel. With an assumption that the mass 
as well as the specific heat of the water and the tank material do not change significantly with 
the temperature change, then the heat store capacity of a hot water tank can be calculated by 
the following equation: 
                                   [  
 ]        
==PAGE:43==
42 
 
In the above equation             is the mass of the water that is utilized inside the storage 
tank and         (J/kg∙K) is the specific heat of the water. Respectively the mass             
and the specific heat of the tank material                  that are employed are used so as 
to define the total heat store capacity of the system. As it can be commented, the higher the 
mass of the material that is utilized, the higher also gets the heat store capacity of the system. 
Water is widely used in hot water storage systems as with its thermal properties such as the 
thermal conductivity, density and other general characteristics (high availability, low cost, 
environmentally friendly) offers several advantages compared to other materials. The 
favorable properties of the water together with a comparison to other mediums were made in 
the previous chapter. 
Having defined the heat store capacity of the heat storage, the heat content of the system can 
be calculated using the following equation: 
          ΔΤ) [J]     (7) 
As it can be observed the temperature interval ΔΤ between the operative temperatures has a 
significant effect on the heat content. The higher the temperature interval, the higher also gets 
the heat content of the heat store. Generally, in hot water storage tanks, water has the largest 
contribution on the heat store capacity as its mass is usually considerably larger compared to 
the tank material. 
4.4.2 Heat loss calculation 
Hot water storage tanks, as thermal energy storage means, suffer from heat losses that occur 
due to the temperature difference with the ambient environment. Normally, the heat loss that 
is caused from the storage tank is the result of a heat loss coefficient and the temperature 
difference between the storage temperature during the operation and the surroundings. 
Generally, the heat loss coefficient and together with that also the heat loss that occurs is the 
result of the transmission loss through the insulation material of the tank and also the heat loss 
caused from other possible penetrations through the insulation material. These penetrations 
could be pipe connections at the top or the bottom of the tank or other necessary equipment 
for the proper operation of the tank (sensors, tank securing, etc.). In the present section, there 
will be an introduction to the heat loss coefficients that can be used for calculating the heat 
loss in a hot water storage tank and thus having a better understanding of the thermal 
properties and the design of the storage tank. 
In most cases the hot water storage tanks that are used in cooperation with the DH networks, 
also in the case of Copenhagen, are big cylindrical tanks (33). Usually this is the case for 
manufacturing reasons as large companies utilize cylindrical shapes in the constructed tanks. 
Apart from these reasons also the aesthetic part of the construction plays in important role as 
these tanks are often situated close to city centers and residential areas, so their appearance 
should be the quite attractive. Therefore, the heat loss that occurs in such constructions can be 
categorized; there is heat loss that occurs from the top and the bottom part of the cylindrical 
tank as well as heat loss from the side of the tank. The determination of the heat loss 
coefficient for each one of these cases is possible so as to finally conclude in the total heat 
loss that takes place from the whole body of the storage tank. 
Starting with the side part of the storage tank, the heat loss coefficient per height unit can be 
calculated from the following equation  (35): 
==PAGE:44==
43 
 
      
 
 
            
  
 
 
       
 [  
   ]         
In the equation above, as it can be observed, there are several parameters that finally 
contribute in the determination of the heat loss that occurs from the side of the storage tank. 
The parameter λ is the thermal conductivity of the insulation that is used in the storage tank, 
   is the diameter of the cylindrical tank and    is the thickness of the insulation that is used 
in the side of the storage tank. Depending on the occasion of the construction, the thickness of 
the insulation can differ between the different parts of the tank basically for economic reasons 
as well as the level of importance of the heat losses that has been considered. The parameter 
  is the surface resistance that characterizes the insulation that is used. Usually the value of 
the parameter   corresponds to the normal value of surface resistance that is used for the 
interior surfaces of buildings. 
To continue, the heat loss coefficient for the top of the tank can be determined by the 
following equation (35): 
     
 
          
  
   
 [ 
 ]         
The heat transfer coefficient for the top of the tank depends on the    diameter of the tank as 
well as the thickness of the insulation that is used for both the side    and the top part    of 
the tank. Additionally, the thermal conductivity    of the insulation material together with the 
surface resistance   have contributing factor in the final calculation of the heat transfer 
coefficient. 
Respectively, the heat transfer coefficient for the bottom part of the tank can be determined 
by the following equation (35): 
        
 
          
  
   
 [ 
 ]          
The heat transfer coefficient for the bottom part of the tank can be calculated with the same 
way like the top of the tank, but taking into account the thickness of the insulation of the 
bottom. The contributing parameters are the same for both case as the geometry and design of 
the tank is symmetrical for the top and bottom part of the storage tank. 
The design of the storage tank, considering the geometry as well as the materials that are 
used, can significantly affect the heat loss coefficients thus the heat loss from the tank. In 
following section these parameters will be investigated so as to have a better understanding 
on their impact on the heat loss of the tank, hence the thermal performance of the tank. 
4.4.3 Thermal stratification inside the tank 
In order to investigate the performance of stratified hot water tanks inside the DH network 
and simulate their operation, it is necessary to have a mathematical model with which the 
temperature of the water inside the tank can be calculated. Therefore, the several parameters 
==PAGE:45==
44 
 
and designs can be investigated so as determine an optimal design for a hot water storage tank 
with the desirable properties and thermal performance integrated in the DH network. 
The model that is introduced in the present study divides the tank in a number of layers, so 
that each one can be characterized by its temperature. Therefore, the vertical stratification 
inside the tank can be simulated. An illustration of the storage tank that will be modeled is 
depicted in Figure 10, where the different temperatures of the water are presented with 
separate layers.  
 
Figure 10: Different layers of stratified hot water storage tank. 
The mathematical model utilizes heat balance equations so as to calculate the temperature of 
each layer inside the tank. The purpose of the model is to calculate the temperature of the 
water inside the tank, hence the potential heat loss that may occur in the storage system. 
Moreover, the heat balance equations that will be presented below are based on the heat loss 
due to the interaction with the environment as well as the thermal conduction between the 
water layers and the material of the tank. 
The equation system is composed from the heat balances for the different layers that may 
exist inside hot water storage tank. The solution of the equation system can provide a new 
temperature for the assumed layer after a time step that the user can define. The purpose of 
this model is to provide an outcome on an hourly-basis, so that it can be utilized and 
integrated in the optimization model and make the operation of the thermal energy storage 
systems more accurate and close to real operation.  
The heat balance equations that can be used for each one of the layers inside the tank are 
shown below for the different possible layers in which the tank can be divided. 
For the layer 1:    
  (   
  )                          
For the layer i (1<i<N): 
==PAGE:46==
45 
 
  (   
  )                                        
For the layer N: 
  (   
  )                             
 
In the above equations the terms that have been introduced are briefly described: 
   : is the heat store capacity of the layer i [J/K] 
   
   : is the temperature change in the storage per time unit for the layer i [K/s] 
            : is the thermal conduction from the layer i+1 to the layer i [W] 
     : is the heat loss from the layer i [W] 
 
The conduction between two layers that can result in heat transfer between the two can be 
calculated with the equation below (35): 
                  
 
                    
where the parameter L, corresponds to the transport coefficient between the assumed layers 
that are involved.  
                          
  : is the height of each layer inside the storage tank [m] 
  : is the temperature of the layer i [°C] 
  : is the cross section area of the wall of the tank [m2] 
  : is the thermal conductivity of the wall of the wall [W/mK] 
  : is the cross section area of the volume of the water inside the tank [m2] 
  : is the thermal conductivity of the water inside the tank [W/mK] 
 
As it can be observed from the equation (12) in a layer that is intermediate, so it has other 
layers above and below, heat transfer takes place by means of conduction with both of them. 
Having defined the thermal conduction, the heat loss to environment can be also defined 
below: 
                      (16) 
==PAGE:47==
46 
 
where      is the heat loss coefficient for the layer i that was described in the previous section. 
Depending on the position of the layer, at the bottom, the top or intermediate position of the 
tank, the heat loss coefficient has to be calculated correspondingly. In equation (16)     is the 
temperature of layer i while    is the ambient temperature. 
In the methodology that has been followed, the time has been further divided into smaller 
steps Δτ so the user can define the time period for the investigation depending on specific 
requirements. As a result, the new temperatures of the layers that are considered can be 
calculated at the end of the time period as function of the initial temperatures at the start of 
the time period. The temperatures of the different layers at the end of the considered time 
period can be found from the above equations: 
              
  
   
    
  (             )      (         )      (17) 
              
  
   
      
  (               )  
      
  (               )      (         )      (18) 
              
  
    
      
  
(               )      (         )      (19) 
 
With the abovementioned equations, the temperature in each layer can be calculated after a 
time period that can be defined. Therefore, the solution of this system of equations can 
provide the user with the new temperature of each layer accounting for the heat loss towards 
the environment as well as the thermal conduction between the layers. It is assumed that the 
system is in steady state operation, so there is no charging or discharging of the heat storage.  
The initial temperature of the water layers is known therefore, the energy content of the hot 
water storage tank can be calculated using the above equation: 
                                           
In the equation above    is the difference between the operative temperatures of the system. 
Therefore, calculating the new temperature of the layer after one hour, also the new energy 
content can be calculated. Thus, the difference between the energy contents after this period, 
equals the heat losses that occur in the specific layer. Following this process for all the layers 
inside the tank, then the heat loss of the entire storage system can be calculated after one hour 
of storage operation.  
4.4.4 Heat loss factor  
The energy content level of the storage tanks that are employed in the DH system can vary 
depending on the operation of the system. For that reason as a means of thermal storage, a hot 
water storage tank can have from fully charged to fully discharged energy content level. 
However, the effective volume of the tank, that can be delivered to the district heating supply 
line, is usually lower than the total volume so as to preserve the separation layer inside the 
tank and avoid the mixing of layers (36), (37).  
Therefore the simulation of hot water tanks with varying energy level has taken place. This 
can be made by varying the volume of hot water inside the tank. So, the lower the volume of 
the hot water inside the tank, the lower the energy content level.   
==PAGE:48==
47 
 
After calculating the efficiency of the hot water storage tank for varying energy content levels 
(from fully charged to fully discharged level) on an hourly basis, it was then possible to 
calculate an average efficiency for the specific storage tank that was investigated each time. 
The calculated average efficiency depicts the amount of energy that can be still found inside 
the storage tank subtracting the losses that occur for the different energy content levels. This 
efficiency     has been utilized in equation (2), from which the heat losses of the storage tank 
are calculated inside the optimization model. . 
Consequently, the heat loss from the tank is calculated based on the energy content level at 
each time period and then taken into account in equation (1) where the energy balance of the 
storage system is described. Thereafter, the energy balance determines the energy content of 
the storage tank for the next time step (hour) based on the energy coming in and out of the 
storage system as well as the heat loss that occurs for that period. 
4.4.5 Energy efficiency 
In order to compare the different hot water storage tanks, the storage efficiency of the tank 
can be defined as below: 
       
  
          
In equation (22) the numerator    describes the energy content of the tank after a period of 
time accounting for the heat loss that may have occurred. The denominator     describes the 
initial energy content of the tank at the start of the simulation period. The ideal hot water 
storage system would have storage efficiency          equal to 1, meaning that no heat loss 
occurs between a time period. Several parameters can result in different storage efficiencies 
of a hot water storage tank. Some of them will be investigated in a following section. 
4.4.6 Exergy efficiency 
The energy efficiency defined in the section above is based on the first law of 
thermodynamics which takes into account the magnitude of energy. The second law of 
thermodynamics takes into consideration apart from the quantity of the energy also the 
quality. The term quality describes the amount of energy that can be utilized as useful work. 
Usually this useful work is defined as exergy.  
The exergy loss that can take place inside a system, that can be also translated as loss of 
useful energy, is caused by the generation of entropy inside systems with irreversible 
processes. 
The calculation of the exergy inside a system, as well as a storage tank can be made with the 
following equation (38): 
                                        
For a system that employs incompressible medium, like the storage tank that utilizes water, 
the last term of equation (23) is canceled out. Therefore, the calculation of the exergy can be 
achieved by calculating the difference of the internal energy of the system as well as the 
entropy. 
==PAGE:49==
48 
 
Finally the exergy efficiency of the system can be defined as the total exergy that can be 
recovered from the storage tank divided by the total exergy initially stored in the tank. The 
equation below defines the exergy efficiency of the system: 
                           
                   
          
Usually, it is expected that the exergy efficiency is lower than the energy efficiency of a 
system due to the irreversibilities that occur and lead to entropy generation inside the system. 
4.5 
Design of hot water storage tank for integration in DH  
The design of the hot water storage tank can be quite complex as several parameters have to 
be taken into consideration. The most commonly used hot water tanks for large scale 
application that are also employed in the DH of Copenhagen are steel cylindrical tanks (33). 
Furthermore, due to the wide employment of the steel tanks, they have become a well-
established technology for energy systems for the last years. 
4.5.1 Geometry of the hot water storage tank 
The geometry of the tank has initially an important role as its choice can improve the 
operation of the tank and decrease the cost which is always an important matter when it 
comes to large scale applications and constructions. The majority of the companies that are 
employed in the thermal storage industry manufacture cylindrical storage tanks as their 
operation is well-proven and robust (33). In detail, the specific design of the cylindrical tank 
can significantly contribute in the improved stratification of the water tanks. The height to 
diameter ratio H/D is a parameter that can be determining for the operation and performance 
of the storage tank, as apart from the enhancement of the stratification also the heat loss can 
be altered based on the outer surface of the tank. Normally, the preferable height to diameter 
ratio H/D is above 1.5, as in this way the separation layer that is used between the hot and 
cold part of the tank and prevents the mixing of layers is kept at the minimum volume 
possible (35), (39). However from experience in real operation, it is shown that the value of 
the ratio can be even lower, for example in case that diffusers are employed at the top and the 
bottom part of the tank to control the flow of the water. 
4.5.2 Insulation of the hot water storage tank 
Insulation is an important element that has to be taken into consideration when it comes to 
constructing a hot water storage tank. As it was mentioned in previous section, the interaction 
of the hot water storage tank with the surroundings, which is usually the environment at 
ambient temperature, can result in heat loss from the storage tank. The heat loss can occur 
from the top and side part of tank as well as the bottom part. The greatest share of the heat 
loss comes from side of storage tank since it constitutes the biggest part of the total surface as 
well as the upper part of the tank where the water with the high temperature is situated. 
However, in general heat loss occur from the whole body of the tank, since even the cold part 
of the tank which has same temperature with the DH return temperature is considerably 
higher than the ambient temperature.  
The material as well as the thickness of the insulation plays a significant role in order to 
constrain the heat loss and enhance the performance of the storage tank. The material that is 
widely used in hot water storage tanks in DH applications is mineral wool as it has low 
==PAGE:50==
49 
 
thermal conductivity and is reasonable considering its market price. The thickness that can be 
used depends on the specific requirements of the application. Usually, it can reach the value 
of 300 mm for storage applications of up to 130 °C (33) (39). As it is expected the higher is 
the insulation, the lower is the heat loss to the environment, thus improved performance of the 
storage tank is achieved. 
4.5.3 Number of layers in the hot water storage tank 
The number of layers that has been selected for the modeling of the hot water storage tank is 
three. Therefore, two layers have the highest and lowest temperature inside the storage tank 
so they are directly related to the supply and return DH network lines. The third one, between 
the abovementioned layers, has the purpose to prevent the mixing of the layers. 
The first layer that is situated at the lowest part of the tank has also the lowest temperature 
inside the water storage tank. This “cold” temperature is the same to the return temperature of 
the DH as it is directly connected to the return line. At the upper part of the tank, the layer 
with the highest temperature is situated. Correspondingly, the “high” temperature of this layer 
is the same with the supply temperature of the DH network. The layer between these two is 
the separation layer or thermocline, which has an important part on the operation of the 
storage tank. The temperature of this layer can be in a range between the cold and the hot 
temperature of the storage tank. The mixing between the hot and cold part of the tank is 
avoided, thus the energy that is transferred inside the storage tank can be maintained in a high 
quality. In the case of mixing layers, the temperature of upper part would be significantly 
lower, resulting in lower quality energy content at the storage tank. 
As it can be pointed out, the presence of both the cold and the separation layer is important 
for the desirable operation of the water tank. Therefore, the hot water storage tank should not 
be completely discharged in order to maintain the presence of all layers. For that reason, 
usually storage tanks have an effective water volume, which corresponds to the volume of the 
hot water that can be discharged and it is different to the total volume of the tank. In the 
present model that has been investigated the effective volume of a fully charged storage tank 
has been designed to be 90 percent (37). The cold layer together with the separation layer 
cover the rest of the volume. Furthermore the volume of the separation layer has been kept 
constant as this is usually the case in real operation (16). 
During the operation of the storage tank inside the DH system, the volume of the water has 
been kept constant. Therefore, in the case of charging the same volume of hot water than 
enters the tank and is directed in the hot layer is also rejected from the cold layer from the 
bottom part of the tank in the return DH line.  Thus, under all circumstances the volume of the 
separation layer is maintained inside the storage tank. In the same way the tank operates 
under the discharging process, keeping the volume of the water inside the tank constant. 
Following this methodology the simulation of different energy content levels inside the 
storage tank has been accomplished, resembling the real operation inside the energy system. 
A fully charged storage tank contains the maximum possible hot water volume together with 
the cold layer and the separation layer. On the opposite hand, a fully discharged storage tank 
contains the cold layer as well the separation. 
==PAGE:51==
50 
 
4.5.4 Interaction with the outdoor environment 
The proper design of a hot water storage tank can assure that the mixing of the layers is 
avoided. The proper stratification using the separation layer is crucial factor towards this goal 
probably together with diffusers and other equipment. Therefore, the energy that is entered 
inside the tank remains at high quality since the hot water coming from the supply line of the 
DH network at the top of the tank is separated from the water with lower temperature.  
Hence, due the fact that the heat loss caused by the mixing of the layers is prevented, the main 
heat loss that occurs is to the surrounding environment, whose temperature is considerably 
lower than the storage temperatures inside the tank.  
The perimeter as well as the top part of the tank are in contact with the surrounding air which 
has an ambient temperature. The bottom part of the tank is in touch with the soil, which has a 
higher temperature. Despite the fact that insulation is installed in order to prevent and 
minimize the heat loss to the environment, this is a phenomena that can’t be completely 
avoided. For having higher accuracy in the results acquired, the average air temperature for 
the region of Copenhagen has been used from the Danish Design reference year weather data 
(40) as well as average soil temperature for the corresponding area considered. In Table 2 
below the temperatures for the two cases are shown. 
    
Table 2: Conditions of exterior environment 
Exterior environment 
Average Temperature T [°C] 
Ambient temperature 
8.6 
Soil 
9.1 
 
4.6 
Results from hot water storage tank modeling 
The design as well as the energy content of the storage tanks can be various depending on the 
application and the specific requirements that may have been set. The capacity of the tank can 
be determined by the volume of the water as well as the temperature difference utilized. Then, 
thermal energy stored can be transferred in the system on an hourly basis.  
The range of the supply and return temperatures of the DH depends on the position inside the 
network as well as the commissioning time. In this section results will be presented 
considering a supply temperature of approximately                and               
for a storage tank with installed capacity of 50 MWh. As it was previously described these 
temperatures also define the temperatures inside the storage tank as well as the energy 
content. Variations in some of the most important parameters have been made in order to 
comprehend the effect of each one on the performance of the storage system. 
==PAGE:52==
51 
 
4.6.1 Geometry of the hot water storage tank 
 
Figure 11: The surface to volume ratio for different height to diameter ratios for a storage tank of 50 MWh. 
As it can be observed from Figure 11 for increasing height to diameter ratio of the storage 
tank the ratio between the surface to volume also has an increasing trend line. As it has been 
mentioned before the H/D height to diameter ratio can contribute in the enhanced operation of 
the storage tank as with ratios close to 1.5 the volume of the separation layer can be reduced 
and the stratification inside the tank can be well-established (8). On the other hand, high 
values of H/D ratio can increase the surface of the tank which can lead to increased heat 
losses as a larger area of the tank is in contact with surrounding environment. In previous 
section it has been shown that the calculation of the heat loss coefficient, thus the subsequent 
heat loss, has a close dependence with the diameter of the tank as well its height. Therefore, 
the design of a hot water storage tank should target a low surface to volume ratio so as to 
decrease the potential heat loss that may occur. However, since stratification is important this 
parameter shouldn’t be defining only by itself, since apart from heat losses also the proper 
thermal operation of the storage tank is always desirable.  
The heat losses that were calculated based on the methodology described on an hourly basis 
of operation are depicted in Figure 12 for a fully charged tank. For the same energy content 
inside the storage tank (50 MWh) but for increasing height to diameter ratio the 
differentiation in the heat losses can be observed.  
 
1
1.5
2
2.5
0.44
0.46
0.48
0.5
0.52
0.54
Height/Diameter ratio  [-]
Surface/ Volume ratio  [-]
==PAGE:53==
52 
 
 
Figure 12:  Heat loss in relation to the height to diameter ratio for a fully charged storage tank of 50 MWh 
after 1 hour of operation. 
As it can be noticed from Figure 12, the heat loss from the storage tank increases for 
increasing height to diameter ratios. Going from a H/D ratio of 1 to a ratio of 2.5 the 
occurring heat loss is increased by 8 percent (%). This can be explained as with higher values 
of height to diameter ratio the surface to volume ratio also increases. This means that the 
surface of the storage tank is getting larger counter to the water volume that determines the 
storage capacity of the tank. Thus, the heat losses that are introduced to the system are larger. 
The value of the H/D ratio that has been selected for all the hot water storage tanks that will 
be utilized in the optimization model is 1.2 since the heat loss occurring is quite lower 
comparing to other values of H/D ratio. Furthermore, for this value the stratification is 
enhanced (35) and the volume of the separation layer that is necessary is kept at low levels. 
4.6.2 Insulation thickness 
Having defined the height to diameter ratio for the storage tank that is examined, an 
investigation in the impact of the insulation thickness on the heat loss that takes place in the 
storage tank has been conducted. The insulation material that has been used is mineral wool 
with a thermal conductivity of 0.065 W/K (41). The low conductivity of the material assures 
the lowest possible interaction with the external environment, thus reduced heat loss. In the 
two following cases, the insulation thickness at one part of the storage tank is changing at a 
time, while for the rest parts the insulation thickness remains constant. The results for the heat 
loss from a fully charged water storage tank (50 MWh) after one hour of operation are 
presented in the figures below.  
1
1.5
2
2.5
0.0128
0.013
0.0132
0.0134
0.0136
0.0138
Height/Diameter ratio[-]
Heat loss [MWh]
==PAGE:54==
53 
 
 
Figure 13: Heat loss in relation to insulation thickness on the top of the storage tank after 1 hour of 
operation. 
As it can be observed in Figure 13 with increasing insulation thickness on the top of the 
storage tank, the heat loss is reduced. The insulation at the other parts of the storage tank 
remains the same. The higher is the thickness of the top insulation the lower gets the heat loss 
coefficient at the top of the tank, thus lower heat losses to the environment. However, it can 
be mentioned that for insulation thickness of values higher than 0.3 m, the benefit in the 
system is constrained since the heat loss is only slightly reduced. 
 
Figure 14: Heat loss in relation to the insulation thickness at the side of the storage tank after 1 hour of 
operation. 
Correspondingly in Figure 14, the same happens with increasing side insulation, as the heat 
loss is reduced. However, since the surface on side part of the tank is significantly larger than 
the surface on the top of the tank, the effect in this case is higher. For insulation thickness of 
0.3 m, the occurring heat loss is significantly reduced (almost 3 times lower) compared to the 
insulation of 0.05 m. However, also in this case it can be observed that for thickness above 
0.3 m, the improvement in heat loss reduction is minor.  
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.012
0.014
0.016
0.018
0.02
0.022
Top insulation thickness[m]
Heat loss  [MWh]
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
0.035
0.04
0.045
0.05
Side insulation thickness [m]
Heat loss [MWh]
==PAGE:55==
54 
 
Consequently, it can be pointed out that the insulation thickness when designing a heat 
storage tank together with the proper selection of the material can decidedly reduce the 
occurring heat loss in the system. Moreover, it can be mentioned that for the hourly operation 
of the hot water storage tanks, the heat loss that corresponds to that period is quite low 
compared to the energy content inside the tank.  
In this case of parameter, the thickness of the insulation that has been selected in order to 
model the hot water storage tanks utilized in the optimization model is 300 mm for both the 
top and the side of the tank. The heat loss reduction by utilizing higher insulation thickness is 
improved in minor extent and additionally this value is commonly used in real hot water 
storage tank applications (39). Increasing the insulation thickness but having small 
improvements can reduce the cost-efficiency of the system, since the insulation is an 
important parameter when it comes installing a new storage tank (33). 
Apart from the insulation thickness, the thickness of the wall of the storage tank has been 
investigated. It has been found that above the thickness of 5cm the improvement in the 
efficiency of the storage system is minor. Therefore, this value of thickness has been used the 
modeling of the hot water storage tank. Furthermore, the steel material has an important share 
in the total cost of the storage tank, thus the lower the utilization the better for the cost of the 
system (33). 
4.6.3 Storage efficiency 
 
Having investigated the geometry of the storage tank as well as the insulation thickness at the 
different parts of the tank and having selected values for these parameters, the storage 
efficiency of the tank is afterwards examined. 
 
Figure 15: Energy storage efficiency in relation to the hours of operation for a 50 MWh storage tank. 
The storage efficiency which represents the energy contained in the storage tank compared to 
the energy at the start of the time period has a decreasing trend line in relation to the operation 
hours as presented in Figure 15. With increasing operation time, the heat loss towards the 
exterior environment is increasing therefore the energy content is reduced leading to lower 
efficiencies. For one (1) hour of operation the heat loss to environment is quite low and 
0
24
48
72
96
120
144
168
98
98.5
99
99.5
100
hours  [h]
Energy efficiency [%]
==PAGE:56==
55 
 
specifically 0.013 MWh for the storage tank of 50 MWh. This corresponds to approximately 
0.03 percent (%) heat loss over the total energy content of the storage tank.  
Moreover, in order to install a specific storage capacity, like in this case of 50 MWh, different 
storage temperatures can be possibly utilized depending on the position of the tank and the 
operation of the network. Lower temperatures will lead in the utilization of higher hot water 
volumes as well as influence the heat loss. However, the lowering the temperature below a 
certain point is something that has to be avoided in order to prevent the development of 
legionella inside the storage tank (42). 
 
Figure 16: Heat loss in relation to different storage temperatures of hot water after 1 hour of operation for 
the same storage capacity of 50MWh.  
As it can be observed in Figure 16, lowering the temperature of the hot water, for achieving 
the same storage capacity of 50 MWh, will result in larger water volumes but lower heat loss 
as the temperature difference with the ambient is decreasing. This will respectively result in 
higher storage efficiency as lower percentage of the stored energy inside the tank will be lost 
to the environment. It would be beneficial for the storage tank system to utilize as low 
temperature as possible in order to minimize the occurring heat loss. 
In Figure 17, the storage efficiency of tanks of different storage capacities is depicted after 24 
hours of operation. As it can be observed, the efficiency of the storage system is increasing 
for higher storage capacities. For larger capacities the surface to volume ratio is decreasing 
for the same H/D ratio, which means that the occurring heat loss is lower in percentage to the 
energy content of the tank. Thus the storage efficiency is improved for larger storage 
capacities. This is a point to be taken into consideration, as large storage capacities should be 
more beneficial compared to lower capacities for the employment inside energy systems. 
 
 
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
0.0105
0.011
0.0115
0.012
0.0125
0.013
Hot water temperature [°C]  
Heat loss [MWh]
==PAGE:57==
56 
 
 
Figure 17: Energy storage efficiency in relation to the capacity of the storage tank after 24 hours of 
operation. 
 
4.6.4 Exergy efficiency 
 
The exergy efficiency of the hot water storage tank with the same design characteristics is 
presented in Figure 18. As it can be observed the exergy efficiency is lower compared to the 
energy efficiency, as the entropy generation inside the system is taken into consideration. The 
irreversibilities of system, such as the heat loss to the environment as well as the conduction 
between the layers of the tank cause exergy loss to the system. Also in this case, the exergy 
losses are higher for increasing operation hours leading to the decrease of the exergy 
efficiency respectively. 
 
Figure 18: Energy and exergy efficiencies comparison in relation to the hours of operation of a 50 MWh 
storage tank. 
Reducing the temperature of the hot water inside the storage tank, but for the same storage 
capacity of 50MWh, can result in lower exergy losses since the irreversibilities inside the 
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
99.7
99.75
99.8
99.85
99.9
Thermal storage capacity [MWh]
Energy efficiency [%]
0
24
48
72
96
120
144
168
97.5
98
98.5
99
99.5
100
hours  [h]
Storage efficiency [%]
hexergy,%
hexergy,%
hstorage,%
hstorage,%
==PAGE:58==
57 
 
system will be also lower. Thus the entropy generation in the system can be lower, leading to 
lower exergy losses. In Figure 19  the effect of lowering the temperature of the hot water 
inside the storage tank on the exergy losses is depicted. 
 
Figure 19: Exergy loss in relation to hot water temperature inside the storage tank after 1 hour of operation 
for the same storage capacity of 50 MWh. 
4.7 
Discussion 
In the present chapter the integration of hot water storage tanks inside the DH network as well 
as their operation has been introduced. Furthermore, the energy balance equations that are 
governing the simulation of the storage tanks inside the optimization model have been also 
described. Important parameters concerning the operation of the storage tanks like the storage 
capacity of the tank, the occurring heat losses as well as the thermal stratification have been 
investigated. Moreover, design parameters that have been utilized for the modeling of the 
storage tanks have been analyzed and values have been selected for a final type of storage 
tank that will be used in the optimization model. Furthermore, the performance of the hot 
water storage tanks has been evaluated based on the energy as well as exergy efficiency. 
Apart from design parameters such as the geometry or insulation, it has been also found that 
lowering the storage temperature of the tank can result in reduced heat loss thus increased 
efficiency of the tank. Furthermore, hot water storage tanks of larger storage capacity perform 
more efficiently compared to tanks of lower capacity.  
 
 
 
 
 
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
0.0095
0.01
0.0105
0.011
0.0115
0.012
Hot water temperature [°C]
Exergy loss [MWh]
==PAGE:59==
58 
 
Chapter 5: Case studies 
5.1 
Introduction 
In order to investigate the operation of a combined heat and power plant inside an energy 
system and the interaction with a heat storage system that can be also part of such a system 
together with other technologies like for instance peak load boilers, two study cases will be 
examined in the present chapter. The integration of heat storage technology can potentially 
affect the operation of the CHP plant that is employed in the system, as it can be used for 
storing excess heat during the operation of the CHP. 
Usually in a real energy system, like the energy system of the Greater Copenhagen, a number 
of different technologies are integrated so as to contribute in the fulfillment of the power and 
heat demand of the consumer. Such technologies can be CHP plants, thermal power plants, 
peak load boilers etc. The production of these technologies is monitored and controlled so as 
that the heat and power demand can be covered in a cost-efficient and flexible way. 
For the initial purpose of investigating the integration of a heat storage system in the DH of 
Copenhagen, two study cases have been examined. In these cases, two types of combined heat 
and power plants have been considered in order to observe the interaction of each one with 
the heat storage system that is integrated in the system. The two types of plants that have been 
investigated are a back-pressure and an extraction plant which are representative of the 
combined heat and power plant technology. Furthermore these plants are employed in the DH 
system of Greater Copenhagen and therefore it would be interesting to observe the operation 
of these plants together with a heat storage system and the potential flexibility that can be 
provided in the system. The heat storage technology utilized by the model is assumed to be 
integrated in the form of hot water storage tanks. 
5.2 
Methodology 
In each one of the specific cases that are investigated, a new district heating network has been 
introduced in the existing energy system that has no interconnections with other networks. In 
the real system, there are usually interconnections between the DH networks so that heat 
demand can be covered by more than one production units. Therefore, the heat demand of the 
specific network is exclusively covered by the technologies introduced for the corresponding 
area while the power generated is fed into the grid to also satisfy the system’s power demand. 
Consequently, there is no supplementary heat production coming from other networks that 
may transfer heat from additional combined heat and power plants or boilers. This has been 
decided so that the possible interconnections between the technologies that are utilized can be 
conveniently observed and further discussed. 
Moreover, the technologies that are employed in the optimization model are defined by 
several parameters that can influence the operation of the system. From the combined heat 
and power plant side, important parameters that can affect its operation and can be inserted 
inside the optimization model are the electrical as well as the total efficiency of the plant, the 
ramp rate which can define the increase or decrease on the output, the start rate and of course 
the capacity of the plant. From the boiler side, its capacity and efficiency can define the heat 
output of its production during the operation. When it comes to the heat storage, the heat 
storage capacity as well as its efficiency can affect the performance of the storage unit, thus 
==PAGE:60==
59 
 
the operation of the system. However, the specific parameters of the technologies that are 
utilized are further introduced in each case in order to have a complete overview of the 
technologies that are employed. 
In each case that has been examined, the operation of the system with no heat storage 
integration is initially investigated. Following, there are three sections in which different input 
parameters of the system are studied. Firstly, different heat storage capacity will be integrated 
in the system in order to observe the interaction between the technologies and also the 
operation of the system. Altering the heat storage capacity of the system, the quantity of 
thermal energy that can be stored and later be used from the system is also changing. Thus, it 
is has been decided to integrate various heat storage capacities and observe the effect on 
system operation and the possible flexibility provided. Following, an analysis will be 
performed concerning variations in the price of fuel that is utilized from the generation 
technologies. The fuel cost is an important input parameter based on which the total cost for 
the operation of each technology is calculated inside the model and thus directly affects the 
objective function of the optimization model. Therefore, it has been decided to investigate the 
potential effect on the operation of the system as well as the interaction between the employed 
technologies. Lastly, in the third part of each case an investigation will be performed on the 
effect of changing the District heating forward temperature in the network and the impact on 
the system operation. The operational temperatures of the DH network can possibly influence 
the different technologies that are employed inside the system as well as the occurring heat 
loss, including also the heat storage. 
The operation temperatures inside a District heating network are kept at lowest level possible 
so as to decrease the occurring heat loss and enhance the efficiency of electricity generation 
of the combined heat and power technologies. The design temperature of the present DH 
network as well as the utility technologies that are employed is 100 °C, with some small 
variations depending on the season. In certain investigations (43), (44), reduction in this 
temperature is proposed introducing the fourth generation district heating 4GDH. 
However, reduction of DH temperature influences apart from the generation technologies also 
the volume flow of the fluid that is employed inside the DH network for constant provided 
heat. Therefore, for simulating different temperatures of DH inside the optimization model, 
changes will be applied in the efficiencies of the CHP plants as well as the heat transfer 
capacity of DH network. Furthermore, the changes in the volume as well as the efficiency of 
the hot water storage tank will be also considered. 
The operation of the system in each case will be examined based on the contribution of each 
technology in the covering the energy demand, the power production from the system as well 
as the total system cost. 
5.3 
Back-pressure combined heat and power plant 
For this study case, a new production area has been added to the existing energy system inside 
the optimization model, the network of which is not interconnected to any other network. 
Therefore, the heat demand of the area is exclusively covered by the units that are installed in 
this considered area. There can be no additional heat transfer from other networks. 
Furthermore, the power which is generated is provided into the grid. 
==PAGE:61==
60 
 
5.3.1 Heat demand profile 
The model makes an hourly-based optimization, thus data for the heat demand of the area 
hour per hour should be used in order to perform the analysis. The heat demand profile that 
has been selected is the profile of specific area of Copenhagen, so that the pattern of the heat 
profile or the trend lines that can be observed could be as realistic as possible. It has to be 
mentioned that the heat demand profile used corresponds to part of real data of 2011 that has 
been initially used for validating the optimization model. The heat demand profile that was 
applied for the present study case can be observed in fFigure 20. 
 
Figure 20: Heat demand profile on hourly basis for the year considered 
The start of the year is considered to be the midnight of the 1st (first) of January while the end 
is the midnight of the 31st (thirty-first) of December, thus covering the whole yearly demand. 
Observing the above figure, it can be mentioned that the heat demand is significantly higher 
during the winter months compared to summer months. The highest hourly value can be 
observed on the 27th of January (126.83 MWh), while on the other hand the lowest value can 
be on the 7th of June (5.22 MWh). In order to define the yearly heat load, the demand for both 
space heating and domestic hot water has been initially accounted for. The seasonal variations 
that can be observed in the figure are mainly due to the changes in the outdoor temperature 
during the year. Therefore, as days are colder in winter than in summer this results in 
concentration of space heating demand and the heating season to be broadened starting the 
early autumn and continuing until the late spring months. Moreover, the heat load variations 
are usually expensive for the system, since increased heat load capacity is required to cover 
the peaks (45).   
5.3.2 Production units 
For this first study case, the units that have been selected for covering the heat demand of the 
region are a combined heat and power plant of back-pressure technology, a peak load boiler 
and a hot water storage tank. These units can be also representative of the technologies that 
are used in modern systems for covering heat demands. 
==PAGE:62==
61 
 
Usually, the peak load boilers that are employed in energy systems serve two purposes; apart 
from providing supplementary heat production during peak load hours so that reduced 
capacity for main technology is required, they also offer security of supply into the system in 
case of emergency or in case the combined heat and power plant is not in operation. Thus the 
heat demand can be covered during all hours. However, in this case the capacities of the plant 
as well as the boiler are very close to those that are utilized in real network from which the 
heat demand has been used.  
Both the combined heat and power plant as well as the boiler run on natural gas as fuel, since 
it can be a fuel for base as well as peak technologies (15).Additionally to these technologies, 
the heat storage technology has been also introduced in the form of hot water storage tank.  
In Table 3, some of the most important parameters of the generation technologies have been 
included. 
Table 3: Generation technologies characteristics. 
Generation technologies 
 
CHP plant 
 
Electrical efficiency 
0.20 [-] 
Total efficiency 
0.89 [-] 
Ramp rate 
0.25 [-] 
Start rate 
0.5 [-] 
Minimum load 
0.45 [-] 
Fuel 
Natural gas 
 
 
Boiler 
 
Thermal efficiency 
0.90 
Fuel 
Natural gas 
 
5.3.3 Assumptions and system properties 
The heat production coming from the CHP plant should be able to cover to a big extent the 
heat demand of the year as it operates as base technology. The boiler should be able to offer 
heat production in peak load hours or when the CHP does not operate.  Accounting for the 
technologies efficiencies in the table above the capacity of the boiler of the CHP plant was 
decided at the level of 130 MW and the capacity of the peak load boiler at 75 MW 
respectively. 
In energy systems with high share of renewable energy sources, it is often required from 
technologies like CHP plants to quickly adjust their output, sometimes by ramping up or 
down as the demand and the load of the system fluctuates. Such a parameter is the ramping 
rate, which corresponds to the percentage of the plant’s capacity that the output can be 
adjusted. The value for this parameter has been chosen to be 0.25 in order to be close to 
relevant technologies that are already in use in the energy system of Copenhagen.   Another 
parameter, the start rate defines whether the plant will start its’ operation or not after it has 
been shut down, based on the load of the system. The higher is the number of startups in the 
plant also the higher is the cost for the operators since a procedure is required for starting the 
operation of the plant (46). For this case a value of 0.5 has been selected which is also 
representative of existing technology. Furthermore, the minimum load of the CHP plant has 
been set at the value of 0.45 of the maximum capacity of the plant. Likewise, this value is 
==PAGE:63==
62 
 
typical of the existing technology. Consequently, the values that have been selected to define 
the operation of the combined heat and power plant are very representative of the technology 
that is in use today, so as to make an investigation with realistic conditions and properties that 
can characterize the current utilized technology. 
The price of the natural gas, which is the fuel for both generation technologies has been set to 
5.85 €/GJ.  
Considering the hot water storage tank, in order to calculate the final heat loss factor that is 
utilized by the optimization model, the properties that have been concluded in previous 
chapter for the optimal tank design are used. Specifically, the geometry by means of the H/D 
height to diameter ratio, the insulation thickness and material have been kept constant for 
each hot water storage tank. However, the volume of the hot water inside the tank varies so 
that the final storage capacity of the tank can be also altered. Therefore, for each storage 
capacity that is integrated in the model, a corresponding heat loss factor is calculated and then 
entered in the model.  
5.3.4 Results 
In this section the results from the yearly optimization on hourly basis of the system that has 
been previously described are presented for the different investigations mentioned in the 
methodology. 
5.3.4.1 
System’s operation with no heat storage capacity 
Initially, no heat storage capacity was implemented in order to observe the system operation 
without the employment of this technology. Therefore the heat demand is covered from heat 
production coming exclusively from the CHP plant and the peak load boiler. 
 
Figure 21: Individual thermal energy production from the generation units on hourly basis. 
 
 
==PAGE:64==
63 
 
 
Figure 22: P-Q diagram of the backpressure CHP plant. 
The yearly operation of the system has been optimized on an hourly basis, taking into account 
the different inputs. As it can be observed from Figure 21 where the heat production is 
depicted individually for the two units, the thermal energy that is provided into the network 
comes from the CHP plant as well as the peak load boiler. During the winter months that the 
heat demand is high, the CHP is operating at high load producing big part of the required 
heat. However, there is also heat production from the boiler in order to cover the rest part of 
the heat demand. During the summer months that the heat load is low, the CHP is turned off 
so almost exclusively the heat production comes from the boiler. However, during some days 
with high heat load enough for the CHP to start, the heat production stems from both 
generation technologies. During the spring and autumn months, when the heat demand is also 
increased compared to summer months, the heat production is coming from the CHP to an 
important extent. 
In Figure 22, the diagram of the power and heat production P-Q of the plant is depicted. Due 
to the specific technology of the CHP plant, the production of heat and power is made with 
certain ratios so that finally the shaft power of the electrical generator and the process steam 
are firmly matched. As it can be also observed there is no power production after a certain 
heat load and below. This operation is characteristic of the backpressure technology turbines.   
5.3.4.2 
System’s operation with integration of heat storage 
capacity 
In the present section, different storage capacities have been integrated to the initial system. 
The efficiency for each storage capacity has been calculated and entered in the model. 
Consequently the influence of heat storage on the initial system can be investigated. The 
system operation will be investigated based on the contribution of each technology in the final 
heat production, the power generation as well as the final total cost of the system. 
In Figure 23, it can be observed that the integration of heat storage in the system, enables the 
CHP plant to produce more electricity during hours that the electricity price is high and the 
power generation is profitable for the system. Furthermore, the heat that is produced from the 
plant is provided into the network in order to directly cover the heat demand or driven to 
storage tank for later use. The size of the storage capacity for which the system achieves the 
highest increase of approximately 58 percent (%) in the power generation is 900 MWh. For 
sizes above this value, the heat storage offers no additional benefit to the system considering 
==PAGE:65==
64 
 
the electricity generation but still the integration is advantageous for the system compared to 
the case with no storage. 
 
Figure 23: Percentage change in the electricity generation from the combined heat and power plant for 
different storage capacities on yearly basis. 
The heat production from the CHP plant will respectively increase since power and heat 
generation are firmly attached. As it is depicted in Figure 24, heat production from the CHP 
plant increases when storage capacity is added to the system. For the storage capacity of 900 
MWh, the highest increase of almost 19 percent (%) in heat production is made. However, 
also in this case, additional capacity does not enhance further the heat production, since the 
power and heat are closely related. 
 
Figure 24: Percentage change in the thermal energy production from the combined heat and power plant 
for different storage capacities on yearly basis. 
The heat production from the peak load boiler in Figure 25 is decreasing for increasing 
storage capacities, as also the CHP is contributing more. Therefore, the utilization of the peak 
load technology is reduced. Also in this case, for the storage capacity of 900 MWh, the 
reduction of the parameter is the largest reaching the value of 36 percent (%). Further increase 
of the storage capacity is not further utilized from the system, since no additional flexibility is 
offered to the system. 
==PAGE:66==
65 
 
 
Figure 25: Percentage change in the thermal energy production from the peak load boiler for different 
storage capacities on yearly basis. 
 
Figure 26: Thermal energy stored in the hot water storage tank for different storage capacities on yearly 
basis. 
The excess heat that is produced during the operation of the CHP plant is driven to the storage 
unit. Also for this parameter, the highest amount of thermal energy stored of 28900 MWh is 
observed in Figure 26 for the same storage capacity of 900 MWh as previously for which the 
maximum power as well as heat production has been observed. 
Moreover, regarding the occurring heat loss from the storage tank, it has been found that 
thermal energy loss on yearly basis corresponds to approximately 0.1 percent (%) of the 
thermal energy stored for the specific storage capacity of 900 MWh.  
Important to mention, the integration of heat storage capacity in the system has enabled the 
CHP plant to operate for longer period of time during the year. Specifically, the operation 
hours of the plant have been increased by 31.5 percent (%) for the integration of 900 MWh in 
which the largest effect is observed. Additionally, the total fuel cost for the operation of the 
system has been increased by approximately 9 percent (%) for the specific storage (900 
MWh), but due to the increased power production a reduction of the total system cost has 
been accomplished by 6.8 percent (%). Considering the economy of the system, for storage 
capacities above 900MWh, no further improvement is introduced in system, since the cost is 
reduced compared to the case with no storage but in lower extent compared to the capacity of 
900 MWh. 
==PAGE:67==
66 
 
 
Figure 27: Thermal energy production from the generation units during a week in July when no storage 
capacity integrated in the system. 
In Figure 27: Thermal energy production from the generation units during a week in July 
when no storage capacity integrated in the system. the thermal energy production from the 
peak load boiler is depicted. The peak load boiler is exclusively utilized from the system so as 
to cover the heat demand. 
 
Figure 28: Thermal energy and power generation from the generation units during a week in July when 
storage capacity has been integrated. 
In Figure 28 it is depicted that the integrated heat storage capacity of 900 MWh enables the 
combined heat and power plant to generate electricity while storing the excess heat. Thus, the 
stored thermal energy is later discharged so as to cover the heat demand and reducing the 
operation of the peak load boiler. 
5.3.4.3 
Fuel price sensitivity analysis 
An important input parameter that can affect the operation cost of the employed technologies 
is the price of the utilized fuel, which in this case is the natural gas. In certain occasions, the 
supply of natural gas in Denmark as well as the price of the fuel can be affected by external 
parameters like political uncertainties or lowered fuel production compared to initial 
estimations (declining gas production in the North sea) (47). Furthermore, the utilization in 
larger extent of other fuels like biomass can also introduce further changes in the fuel prices. 
For that reasons, it could be interesting to examine the system operation under different 
==PAGE:68==
67 
 
changes of natural gas price and the cooperation of the different technologies that are 
employed. 
Therefore, in the present section the initial technologies that were presented previously (CHP 
and peak load boiler) together with the heat storage of 900 MWh capacity will be 
investigated. The parameters that will be examined are the contribution of each technology in 
covering the energy demand as well as the cooperation between them. 
 
Figure 29: Percentage change in electricity generation from the combined heat and power plant for 
different prices of natural gas on yearly basis. 
The electricity generation from the CHP plant can be observed in Figure 29. Lower fuel price 
makes more favorable the power generation for the system so the plant is operating more in 
order to produce more electricity with lower operational cost and finally provide it into the 
grid. For a reduction of 20 percent (%) in the fuel price, the electricity generation increases by 
almost 7.5 percent (%). The opposite happens for increasing fuel price, when it can be pointed 
out that the power production is not favorable. Therefore, the power generation from the CHP 
is reduced and other utility technologies can provide electricity which is less expensive for the 
system. 
 
Figure 30: Percentage change in the thermal energy production from the combined heat and power plant 
for different prices of natural gas on yearly basis. 
From Figure 30 above, it can be observed that the heat production from the CHP is following 
a similar trendline with the power production. For increasing fuel prices the heat provided 
==PAGE:69==
68 
 
into the network coming from the CHP plant is getting reduced. On the other hand, reducing 
fuel price leads to more profitable utilization of the CHP and this is depicted from the 
increased heat that is delivered to the network. For reduction in the fuel price of 20 percent 
(%) the thermal energy production from the CHP plant is increased 5.5 percent (%). 
 
Figure 31:  Percentage change in the thermal energy stored in the hot water storage tank for different prices 
of natural gas on yearly basis. 
In Figure 31, the thermal energy that is driven to the hot water storage tank is presented. It 
can be noted that the utilization of heat storage follows the same trendline with the general 
operation of the CHP. Therefore, for lower fuel prices when the CHP power production is 
increased, the employment of the storage is also increased storing in this case the excess heat 
that may be produced enhancing in this way the electricity generation. For the case of reduced 
fuel price by 20 percent (%), the thermal energy stored is increased by approximately 10 
percent (%). On the contrary, for increasing fuel prices the utilization of the hot water storage 
tank is decreasing.   
 
Figure 32: Percentage change in the thermal energy production from the peak load boiler for different 
prices of natural gas on yearly basis. 
The production of thermal energy from the peak load boiler is depicted in Figure 32. For 
increasing fuel prices, the reduced thermal energy production from the CHP is covered from 
the peak load boiler which is also characterized by a higher efficiency for heat generation. 
Respectively, for decreasing fuel prices the peak load boiler is utilized less from the system. 
==PAGE:70==
69 
 
For the case of reduced fuel price by 20 percent (%), the thermal energy production from the 
boiler is reduced by also 20 percent (%). 
The operating hours of the CHP plant are following a similar trendline to the energy 
production. Consequently, for increasing fuel prices when the operation of the CHP is more 
expensive for the system, the operating hours of the plant are reduced. For decreasing prices, 
when the production is more beneficial the plant is operating for longer period of time during 
the year, reaching a maximum increase of 1.3 percent (%). 
5.3.4.4 
District heating forward temperature analysis 
The operation temperatures inside the DH network can differ, depending on the 
commissioning time as well as the size of the network. The reduction of the temperatures 
generally in the DH network can influence the occurring heat loss inside the system as well as 
the efficiencies of the cogeneration technologies (43). In the present investigation the main 
effects of the temperature change are depicted in the electrical efficiency of the backpressure 
CHP plant and the DH capacity. The impact on the total efficiency of the plant in 
investigations (43) was found to be minor. Moreover the heat transfer capacity of the network 
is changed. Furthermore, the energy content of the hot water storage tank is affected, since for 
lowered temperatures increased volume is necessary in order to achieve the same storage 
capacity. Other impacts, like the heat loss in the network and possible pressure losses due to 
increased volume flow have not been taken into consideration. Also the forward temperature 
change regards only the network examined and not all the included networks inside the 
system. 
 
Figure 33: Percentage change in electrical efficiency of the backpressure combined heat and power plant 
and the capacity of the district heating network for different DH forward temperatures. 
As it can be observed in Figure 33 lowering the forward temperature below the design of 100 
°C, results in increasing electrical efficiency of the backpressure CHP plant and decreasing 
capacity of the DH network. It has been chosen not to investigate below the temperature of 60 
°C, since this is the optimal temperature that is suggested in the literature taking into account 
technical as well as economic constraints (43). 
The technologies that are employed in this section are the same with the previously utilized. 
In detail, the backpressure CHP plant, the peak load boiler and the hot water storage tank of 
900 MWh are employed for covering the energy demand. 
==PAGE:71==
70 
 
Also in this case the contribution of each technology will be presented as well as the heat loss 
from the thermal storage unit that is utilized inside the system. 
 
Figure 34: Percentage change in electricity generation from the combined heat and power plant for 
different forward temperatures of DH network on yearly basis. 
Starting with the electricity production, as it can be observed in the Figure 34 for decreasing 
forward temperature of the DH water employed in the network, the power generation is 
increasing. Due to the increased electrical efficiency of the plant, its operation is more 
beneficial for the system which results in increased production. For the lowest forward 
temperature a significant increase of the power production by almost 20 percent (%) takes 
place. Due to the characteristics of the backpressure plant, the power and heat production are 
closely matched. Thus, this improvement in the efficiency leads to prolonged operation of the 
plant. 
Consequently, the thermal energy production from the CHP is also increased as it is depicted 
in the Figure 35. Also here, for the lowest forward temperature the heat provided in the 
network is increased by approximately 1.2 percent (%) which is the highest increase. 
 
Figure 35: Percentage change in the thermal energy production from the combined heat and power plant 
for different forward temperatures of DH network on yearly basis. 
Due to the increased power generation from the CHP plant for decreasing temperatures the 
utilization of the hot water storage tank is also increased since the excess heat during the 
operation is stored in the tank. For the case with the lowest temperature and the largest 
==PAGE:72==
71 
 
increase in the electricity generation the utilization of the thermal storage increased by 3 
percent (%). Additionally, the operation of the peak load boiler is decreased resulting in lower 
contribution in the covering of the heat demand requirement. 
Specifically for the thermal storage unit, apart from the higher utilization from the system, for 
decreasing forward temperature of the DH network, higher water volumes are required in 
order to obtain the same energy content. Moreover, in this case for increasing volumes the 
ratio between surface to volume of the tank is decreased leading towards lower heat loss. 
Therefore, the combination of the lowered temperature difference between the storage tank 
and the environment and the higher volumes that are needed result in reduced heat loss during 
the operation of the tank. The results are presented in Figure 36: Change in percent in the 
occurring heat loss from the storage unit for different forward temperatures of DH network.. 
 
Figure 36: Change in percent in the occurring heat loss from the storage unit for different forward 
temperatures of DH network. 
The reduction of heat loss for the case of 60 °C is of approximately 32 percent (%) compared 
to the design temperature that is initially utilized for the operation of the network.  
The fuel utilization is increasing for lower forward temperatures of DH, as the operation of 
the CHP is longer in order for the system to benefit from the improved electrical efficiency. 
The increase of the fuel consumption reaches a maximum change of 4% for the case of 60 °C. 
However, due to the significant increase of the power generation, the system cost is 
decreasing for lowered temperatures and reaching the largest reduction of 3% for the 60 °C. 
5.4 
Extraction combined heat and power plant 
After investigating the integration of heat storage technology in a system consisting of a 
backpressure combined heat and power plant and a peak load boiler, it has been decided to 
investigate an additional case of cogeneration technology plant. Therefore in this case an 
extraction plant has been employed which is also representative of the existing technology 
that is utilized in modern DH systems. Likewise, for this case a new production area has been 
added in the existing energy system. The network of this area has no other interconnections 
with other existing networks. Consequently, the heat demand is covered exclusively from the 
technologies that are installed in the specific area. 
==PAGE:73==
72 
 
5.4.1 Heat demand profile 
The heat demand profile that is utilized for this case is exactly the same with the one that was 
introduced for the previous case so that there are no changes in the heat demand profile 
between the two cases.  
5.4.2 Production units 
For this study the production units that have been selected in order to cover the heat demand 
are an extraction combined heat and power plant and peak load boiler. Additionally, the hot 
water storage tank will be the heat storage technology integrated in the system. Also in this 
examined case the fuel that is utilized from the generation technologies is the natural gas. 
In Table 4, some of the most important parameters of the generation technologies have been 
included. Also, it should be mentioned that the efficiencies of the plant, meaning the electric 
as well as the energy utilization, were calculated for the operation of the plant in back-
pressure mode. 
Table 4: Generation technologies characteristics. 
Generation technologies 
 
CHP plant 
 
Electrical efficiency 
0.36 [-] 
Total efficiency 
0.92 [-] 
Ramp rate 
0.25 [-] 
Start rate 
0.5 [-] 
Minimum load 
0.45 [-] 
Fuel 
Natural gas 
 
 
Boiler 
 
Thermal efficiency 
0.90 
Fuel 
Natural gas 
 
5.4.3 Assumptions and system properties 
The heat production stemming from the CHP plant should cover the biggest share of the heat 
demand throughout the year while the peak load boiler can provide heat to the network on 
peak load hours or when the CHP is not operating. Therefore, taking into consideration the 
technology efficiencies of the previous table the capacity of the boiler of the CHP plant has 
been selected in order for the plant to be able to provide the same maximum heat production 
compared to the previous case. The capacity of the peak load boiler has been kept the same. 
In detail, the capacity of the boiler of the extraction CHP plant has been set at the level of 165 
MW and the capacity of peak load boiler 75 MW respectively. 
The values of the rest parameters that can affect the operation of the CHP like the ramping 
rate, the start rate of the plant as well as the minimum load have been kept the same with the 
previous case so that the main parameter that is changed in this case is the technology of the 
CHP plant. The fuel price that has been used is also the same. 
Regarding the integration of the heat storage inside the model, the same procedure has been 
followed. Design parameters of the hot water storage tank like the height to diameter ratio, the 
insulation material as well as the storage temperatures are kept the same for each hot water 
==PAGE:74==
73 
 
storage tank. Nevertheless, by changing the volume of the hot water inside the tank, the 
storage capacity of the unit can be calculated and also the heat storage efficiency that is 
utilized as input in the model.  
5.4.4 Results 
In this section the results that are obtained from the yearly optimization of the described 
system are presented following the same methodology as previously described. 
5.4.4.1 
System’s operation with no heat storage capacity 
The contribution of each technology in the heat production of the system as well the operation 
of the CHP plant are firstly presented without the integration of the heat storage technology. 
 
Figure 37: Individual thermal energy production from the generation units on hourly basis. 
 
Figure 38:  P-Q diagram of the extraction CHP plant. 
In Figure 37 the individual thermal energy production from the two generation units can be 
observed. It can be pointed out that the CHP plant operates during almost all year long 
producing heat as well as feeding electricity in the grid. However, the peak load boiler is also 
contributing with heat production during hours with high heat demand that the CHP cannot 
cover alone or when it is more beneficial for the system to produce more electricity. The 
prolonged operation of the extraction CHP plant throughout the year reduces considerably the 
operation of the peak load boiler compared to the case of the backpressure plant. The yearly 
==PAGE:75==
74 
 
thermal energy production from the peak load boiler in this case is 65 percent (%) reduced 
compared to the case with the backpressure CHP plant. 
Observing Figure 38 the P-Q power to heat production diagram of the extraction CHP plant is 
depicted. The ratios between the heat and the electricity can vary resulting in a more flexible 
operation of the plant. That means that the plant can satisfy the system requirements for heat 
and power operating in a broader range. Therefore, in summer months when the heat demand 
is considerably lower compared to winter months, the extraction plant is capable of providing 
heat into the network and at the same time feeding the generated electricity into the grid. This 
operation characterizes the extractions plants for being able to operate in a more extended 
territory compared to backpressure CHP plants. 
5.4.4.2 
System’s operation with integration of heat storage 
capacity 
In this part, several storage capacities have been integrated in the initial system. Also for this 
case the efficiencies of the thermal storage units have been calculated and entered in the 
model. Therefore, the possible effect of the integration of the heat storage technology can be 
investigated. Additionally, the operation of the system and the contribution of each 
technology can be observed for the different storage capacities. Also possible changes in the 
cost of the system can be examined.  
 
Figure 39:  Percentage change in thermal energy production from the combined heat and power plant for 
different storage capacities on yearly basis. 
==PAGE:76==
75 
 
 
Figure 40: Percentage change in thermal energy production from the peak load boiler for different storage 
capacities on yearly basis. 
As it can be observed in the figures above, the integration of different storage capacities into 
the system does not clearly change the cooperation of the CHP plant and the peak load boiler 
regarding the heat production. Regarding the contribution of the CHP plant in the heat 
demand of the network small changes can be noticed. Some alterations can be observed in the 
heat production from the boiler however the trendline that is followed is not straightforward 
having certain fluctuations especially for the lower storage capacities. The increase in the heat 
production from the boiler can be related to the reduction in the thermal energy production 
from the CHP for the storage capacities of 100 and 500 MWh respectively.  
However, observing the utilization of the heat storage from the system in Figure 41, it can be 
pointed out that excess heat from the CHP is stored inside the tank. In fact for increasing 
storage capacities the heat that is stored is increasing. For storage capacities higher than 700 
MWh, the further improvement in storage utilization is minor. 
 
Figure 41: Thermal energy stored in the hot water storage tank for different storage capacities on yearly 
basis. 
==PAGE:77==
76 
 
 
Figure 42: Percentage change in electricity generation from the combined heat and power plant for 
different storage capacities on yearly basis. 
In Figure 42, it can be pointed out that for increasing storage capacity the power generation 
from the CHP is reducing. For the storage capacity of 500MWh the largest reduction of 
approximately 3 percent (%) can be observed. However, for storage capacities larger than 700 
MWh the additional change in power production is minor although still reduced compared to 
the case with no storage integrated in the system. In this case, for the employment of storage 
capacity of 500 MWh, the heat loss from the storage found to approximately 0.12 percent (%) 
of the total thermal energy stored on yearly basis. 
Consequently, during the operation of the CHP plant excess heat is stored in the hot water 
storage tank while the plant provides electricity in the network. It has to be also mentioned 
that the amount of electricity that is provided into the grid from the extraction plant is 
considerably larger compared to the backpressure plant due to the increased electrical 
efficiency.  This thermal energy that can be later discharged and utilized from the system 
enables the CHP plant to generate less power when the price is low and thus not so profitable 
for the system. Thus, the CHP can operate in a more flexible way so as to improve the 
economy of the system. Hence, in this way the fuel that is utilized from the CHP is reduced 
by approximately 2.5 percent (%) and the operational hours as well by 5 percent (%) when 
integrating storage capacity of 500 MWh in the network. These changes have also resulted in 
a maximum reduction of the total system cost by 0.8% with the integration of the same 
storage capacity. 
5.4.4.3 
Fuel price sensitivity analysis 
Also in this case the fuel that is utilized from the generation technologies is the natural gas, 
therefore a sensitivity analysis has been performed varying the price of the fuel. For changing 
fuel price the contribution of each technology will be examined. 
==PAGE:78==
77 
 
 
Figure 43: Percentage change in electricity generation from the combined heat and power plant for 
different prices of natural gas on yearly basis. 
From Figure 43 it can be pointed out that for increasing fuel prices, the operational cost of the 
CHP increases therefore the power production is reduced. On the opposite hand, for 
decreasing prices the electricity production from the CHP plant is increased due to the 
reduced cost. Therefore, the CHP is utilized more from the system so as to provide electricity 
into the grid as it is also characterized by high electrical efficiency. For the case of reduced 
fuel price by 20 percent (%), the power generation is increased by almost 9 percent (%) 
respectively. 
 
Figure 44: Percentage change in thermal energy production from the combined heat and power plant for 
different prices of natural gas on yearly basis. 
The heat production that comes from the CHP follows a similar trend. Increasing fuel prices 
result in more expensive operation of the CHP, thus the heat production is reduced. On the 
contrary, reduced fuel prices lead to less expensive production which is advantageous for the 
system, thus the CHP is utilized more for covering the heat demand. 
==PAGE:79==
78 
 
 
Figure 45: Change in percent in the heat stored in the hot water storage tank for different prices of natural 
gas on yearly basis. 
The change in the utilization of the hot water storage tank is depicted in Figure 45. It can be 
pointed out that for increasing fuel prices a small reduction can be observed in the usage of 
the storage tank as a result of the reduced CHP operation. However, for the case of decreasing 
fuel prices the employment of the storage is significantly increased following the enhanced 
production of the CHP plant. For reduced fuel price by 20 percent (%), the heat that is stored 
in the tank is increased by 17 percent (%) on yearly basis. 
 
Figure 46: Percentage change in thermal energy production from the peak load boiler for different prices of 
natural gas. 
Finally, the production from the peak load boiler follows the opposite trend from the CHP 
heat production. So, for increasing fuel prices when the operation of the CHP is more 
expensive the system utilizes more the peak load boiler for contributing in covering the heat 
demand requirement. The opposite happens when the fuel prices decreases and the operation 
of the CHP is more beneficial compared to the boiler. For reduced fuel price by 20 percent 
(%) the heat production from the boiler is significantly reduced by approximately 30 percent 
(%). 
5.4.4.4 
District heating forward temperature analysis 
In the case of the extraction CHP plant, changing the temperature of the DH network from the 
design one (100 °C) to off design temperatures can significantly influence the electrical 
==PAGE:80==
79 
 
efficiency of the plant as well as the power loss factor by heat extraction β (43). The changes 
in DH capacity are similar to the previous case. In Figure 47 below the modifications in the 
CHP parameters are presented for the different DH forward temperatures. 
 
Figure 47: Percentage change in electric efficiency and the power heat loss factor of the extraction combined 
heat and power plant for different DH forward temperatures. 
In Figure 48 the power generation from the extraction CHP plant is depicted. It can be 
observed that for lower temperatures compared to the design one (100 °C), the power 
generation is increasing. This can be attributed to fact that the electrical efficiency of the plant 
is increasing for lower DH forward temperatures, therefore the electricity generation from the 
plant is more beneficial for the system. For the lowest forward temperature of 60 °C the 
power generation from the unit is increased by almost 7 percent (%). 
 
Figure 48: Percentage change in electricity generation from the combined heat and power plant for 
different forward temperatures of DH network on yearly basis. 
In Figure 49 the heat production from the extraction CHP plant is depicted. It can be 
mentioned that for lowering the DH forward temperature the heat that is provided from the 
CHP into the network is reduced. This can happen due to the flexible operation of the plant 
and the turn into more power production which is also profitable for the system. A reduction 
of 1.1 percent (%) can be observed for the lowest temperature in the system. In this case this 
==PAGE:81==
80 
 
leads to lower utilization of the storage tank and to a higher employment of the peak load 
boiler for covering the heat demand requirement.  
 
Figure 49: Percentage change in thermal energy production from the combined heat and power plant for 
different forward temperatures of DH network on yearly basis. 
Lastly also in this case, the occurring heat loss from the hot water storage tank is significantly 
reduced for lower temperatures. Although higher volumes of hot water are required when 
reducing the temperatures in order to achieve the same energy content in the tank, the heat 
loss to the ambient is lowered. For the lowest temperature introduced, the heat loss from the 
storage unit has been reduced by 36 percent (%) on yearly basis. 
 
Figure 50: Percentage change in the occurring heat loss from the storage unit for different forward 
temperatures of DH network on yearly basis. 
In this case examined, the primary energy use for lowering the DH forward temperature is 
increasing, reaching the maximum increase of 2.5 percent (%) for the lowest forward 
temperature of 60 °C. However, the increased power production enhanced from the 
improvement in the electrical efficiency of the plant resulted in reduced system cost by 2.3 
percent (%) for the lowest forward temperature. 
5.5 
Discussion 
The integration of heat storage technology inside a new DH network has been investigated in 
two different cases with the employment of different combined heat and power generation 
technologies as well as peak load boilers. For the case of the backpressure combined heat and 
==PAGE:82==
81 
 
power plant, the integration of heat storage enables the more flexible operation of the plant 
and increases its operational hours during the year. The decoupling of electricity and heat is 
enhanced and thus the plant can produce more electricity during hours with profitable 
electricity prices while the possible excess heat can be stored in the storage unit for later 
utilization. Moreover, the increased operation of the plant results in less thermal energy 
production from the peak load technology. Additionally, regarding the economy of the 
system, a reduction in the final total cost is achieved on yearly basis. 
For the case of the extraction combined heat and power plant the production between the 
power and heat is more adjustable and it is found that the integration of heat storage capacity 
does not clearly influence the synergy between the plant and peak load boiler. However, still 
the storage unit is utilized from the system and excess heat during the operation of the plant is 
stored for later use while electricity generation takes place. Moreover, this stored heat that is 
utilized from the system in later periods, gives the possibility to the CHP plant to generate 
less electricity during hours with not favorable electricity prices but at the same time covering 
the heat demand. Therefore, the electricity generation is decreased with the integration of 
storage capacity in the network, leading to more cost-effective operation of the plant. 
Furthermore, the fuel utilization is decreased from the CHP plant and a reduction in the total 
annual cost of the system is achieved.  
Considering the fuel price sensitivity analysis the results have been quite similar for the two 
cases. Increasing fuel prices make less favorable the operation of the CHP for the system thus 
leading to lower electricity as well as thermal energy production from both plants. Also, less 
thermal energy is driven to the storage units. Moreover, the peak load boilers are employed 
more from the systems in order to cover the heat demand when the contribution from the CHP 
plants is reduced. On the contrary, for lower fuel prices, when the operation of CHP is more 
beneficial for the system the utilization of the storage is increased contributing in the 
enhanced operation of the CHP plants and the lower employment of the peak load boilers.  
In addition, lowering the forward temperature of the DH network has been examined. 
Considering the backpressure CHP plant its operation hours have been increased, due to the 
increased electrical efficiency for lower forward temperatures compared to the design. 
Therefore, more electricity is generated and also larger amount of thermal energy is produced 
as the power and heat production are firmly connected resulting also in lower employment of 
the peak load technology. The utilization of the heat storage is increased as more excess heat 
is driven to the storage and for lower forward temperatures the heat loss from the storage to 
environment is also lower. The total cost of the system on annual basis is reduced for lower 
temperatures as the electricity generation is increasing. 
For the case of the extraction plant lowering the forward temperature also increases the 
electrical efficiency of the plant which is higher compare to the backpressure. In this case the 
power generation is increased since it is more favorable for the system however the thermal 
energy production is reduced. Also lower utilization of the storage unit was observed and 
moreover the increased production from the peak load boiler. Moreover, the heat loss from 
the storage tank is also reduced in this occasion due to the employment of lower temperatures. 
Lastly, the total annual cost of the system is reduced due to the profitable electricity 
generation. 
 
==PAGE:83==
82 
 
Chapter 6: Heat storage in District Heating of 
Copenhagen 
6.1 
Introduction 
The cooperation of District Heating systems together with combined heat and power 
production has been well established in Denmark reducing significantly the primary energy 
consumption (48). Especially in central Copenhagen the 98 percent (%) of the consumers’ 
heat demand is covered from the district heating network.  
Having investigated in the previous chapter the integration of heat storage technology inside 
individual networks consisting of a combined heat and power technology plant and a peak 
load boiler, in the present chapter the current energy system of the Greater Copenhagen will 
be investigated. Consequently, the potential effect of heat storage technology inside a real 
energy system can be investigated. 
6.2 
Methodology 
For the investigation of the heat storage potential in the DH of Copenhagen, the current 
energy system (2011) has been utilized. In the optimization model several utility technologies 
have been included that are also employed in the real energy system. Thus the model includes 
combined heat and power plants, thermal power stations as well as waste incineration plants 
that are employed for the actual operation of the energy system of the Greater Copenhagen. 
Moreover, additional peak load boilers as well as thermal storage units are included in the DH 
network of the system. 
The area that has been investigated is separated in several networks that are connected to 
production units. The heat demand profiles of the particular networks are known and have 
been applied inside the model. Therefore, the simulation of the entire heat demand of 
Copenhagen is accomplished. Furthermore, the electricity production from decentral  CHP 
plants as well as wind turbines has been acquired from historical data, thus the additional 
power demand is covered either from the generated power or the electricity that may be 
imported in the grid. Also electricity can be exported to other regions based on the exchange 
electricity prices that are used on hourly basis for the whole year. 
In Table 5 the thermal power plants that are employed in the current energy system are 
presented with some of the most important characteristics. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:84==
83 
 
 
Table 5: Thermal power plants and waste incineration plant characteristics 
Plant 
Type 
ηelec (%) 
ηtotal (%) 
fuel 
Boiler capacity   
(MW) 
AMV1 
Backp. 
0,20 
0,92 
Bio/straw 
350 
AMV3 
Extr. 
0,35 
0,89 
Coal 
595 
HCV4 
Backp. 
0,11 
0,82 
Nat. gas 
157 
HCV7 
Backp. 
0,26 
0,89 
Nat. gas 
285 
HCV8 
CC 
0,20 
0,89 
Nat. gas 
127 
SVM7 
CC 
0,23 
0,92 
Nat. gas 
275 
AMF1 
Backp. 
0,21 
0,83 
Waste 
132 
AVV1 
Extr. 
0,35 
0,89 
Coal 
595 
AVV2B1 
Extr. 
0,36 
0,92 
Bio 
805 
AVV2B2 
Extr. 
0,36 
0,92 
Straw 
100 
AVV2CC1 
CC 
0,34 
0,91 
Nat. gas 
135 
AVV2CC2 
CC 
0,51 
0,85 
Nat. gas 
135 
KARA5 
Backp. 
0,17 
0,80 
Waste 
65 
VF5 
Backp. 
0,13 
0,82 
Waste 
90 
VF6 
Backp. 
0,19 
0,82 
Waste 
105 
ASV2 
Extr. 
0,31 
0,88 
Coal 
368 
ASV5 
Extr. 
0,26 
0,88 
Coal 
1750 
KYB1 
Elec. Only 
0,33 
0,85 
Oil 
790 
KYB2 
Elec. Only 
0,33 
0,85 
Oil 
790 
 
As it can be observed the thermal power plants that are employed in the energy system consist 
of different technology types and moreover they utilize various fuels as input. Also the 
electrical efficiencies as well as the total efficiencies for each plant that is employed are 
presented. 
The thermal storage units that are installed in the DH network are three in the current system 
(49). One heat storage unit is installed together with the AMV CHP plant in Amagerværket 
and two more storage units in Avedøreværket operating together with the AVV CHP plants 
respectively. The storage capacity of the storage units is presented in the table below. 
Table 6: Heat storage units installed in the current DH network 
Heat storage 
unit 
Storage capacity    
(MWh) 
AMV-HS 
1340 
AVV-HS1 
1228 
AVV-HS2 
1228 
 
The total storage capacity of the heat storage units is 3796 MWh, being able to store excess 
heat during the operation of the CHP plants. Apart from the storage capacities of the units 
also the charging and discharging load rates have been accounted inside the model for the 
operation of the units. 
==PAGE:85==
84 
 
In the first part of the present chapter, an investigation will be performed regarding the 
installed storage capacity of the heat accumulators inside the system. Thus the operation of 
the system will be evaluated by integrating different storage capacities into the network and 
specifically in different networks from those that already employ heat storage units. 
Moreover, in order to observe the benefit from the utilization of the heat storage technology, 
the operation of the system will be examined without the heat storage units. The performance 
of the system will be examined by means of the contribution of each generation technology in 
covering the energy demand as well as the power production from the system. Furthermore, 
the import and export of electricity will be considered in addition to the total system cost.  
In the second part, an investigation will be performed taking into account the electricity 
prices. The optimization model takes into consideration apart from the electricity prices for 
the bidding area which also corresponds to the area of Greater Copenhagen, but also the 
exchange prices for import and export of electricity between Denmark and other regions. 
These regions are DK-West, Sweden and Germany. Taking into account predictions for future 
electricity prices for the above mentioned interconnections, the operation of the system as 
well as the possible contribution of the heat storage technology will be investigated. 
More specifically predictions have been made for electricity prices in the aforementioned 
networks showing increase of the prices during future years. In the table below the current 
average electricity prices that are utilized as input in the model as well as future electricity 
prices are presented (50).    
Table 7: Average annual electricity prices for current and future scenarios. 
Year 
DK-West 
    (DKK/MWh) 
Sweeden 
(DKK/MWh) 
Germany 
(DKK/MWh) 
2011 
357 
362 
380 
2020 
420 
373 
445 
2025 
441 
396 
471 
2030 
460 
416 
495 
 
Additionally, the capacities of the electricity networks have been considered so as to constrain 
the power exchange between the networks as it happens in the real operation of the energy 
system. 
6.3 
Results 
In the present section the results for the different investigations will be presented. The results 
depict the operation of each technology inside the energy system as well as their 
interconnections taking into account the integration of heat storage, towards the goal of 
energy demand covering.  
6.3.1 Heat storage inside the DH network of  Copenhagen 
In previous sections the integration of heat storage technology has been investigated in 
individual systems. The operation of a heat storage unit can be advantageous for the operation 
of the system considering several aspects. Therefore, in this case where the complete energy 
system of the Greater Copenhagen is investigated, it is of interest to examine the potential 
influence of different storage capacities installed in the DH network. The storage capacity that 
==PAGE:86==
85 
 
is currently installed in the DH is situated in two different networks of the system, in which 
the specific production units belong. For that reason, additional storage capacity will be 
integrated in the system in new networks that can possibly utilize new storage capacity. Some 
of the networks of the DH have as heat transfer medium steam, thus hot water storage tanks 
cannot be utilized. For that reason, networks that use hot water as medium have been selected 
as the new networks in which storage capacity is installed. However, apart from adding extra 
storage capacity it has been decided to also remove the existing in order to observe the 
changes in the operation of the system.  
 
Figure 51: Percentage change in the heat production from CHP plants for different storage capacities on 
yearly basis. 
In Figure 51  the change in the total heat production from the CHP units of the system is 
depicted for different storage capacities on yearly basis. The 0 change in x axis means that the 
installed storage capacity in the system is the initial one of 3796 MWh. The point of minus 
100 corresponds to the removal of all the storage capacity. On the other hand, the 100 change 
represents the doubling of storage capacity in new DH networks that can employ hot water 
storage tanks. 
As it can be observed for increasing the storage capacity in the network the heat production 
from CHP plants is increased by a range of approximately 0.1 percent (%). On the other hand, 
the total removal of the existing storage capacity can lead to a reduction of the heat 
production from the CHP units by 0.35 percent (%). Therefore, the impact on the system by 
removing the already installed storage capacity is quite considerable. 
==PAGE:87==
86 
 
 
Figure 52: Percentage change in the heat production from peak load boilers for different storage capacities 
on yearly basis. 
The percentage change in the heat production from peak load boilers is depicted in Figure 52. 
As it can be observed the changes are of greater scale since also the installed capacity of the 
heat only boilers inside the system is considerable limited compared to the CHP plants that 
constitute the base generation technology of the system. Specifically, the removal of the heat 
storage capacity can result in an increase of the heat generation from this peak load 
technology by 5 percent (%). This can be explained as reduced heat production from CHP 
plants has to be covered from other generation technologies like the boilers. On the opposite 
side, the increase of the storage capacity by 100 percent (%) can reduce the annual heat 
production from the peak load boilers by 1 percent (%).  
 
Figure 53: Percentage change in the stored heat in hot water storage tanks for different storage capacities 
on yearly basis. 
In Figure 53, the heat that is stored in the thermal storage units for different cases of storage 
capacities can be observed. For increasing by half the installed storage capacity in the DH 
network, the heat that is stored in the units on annual basis is increased by 85 percent (%). For 
doubling the storage capacity, the heat that is stored is approximately doubled. Therefore, the 
utilization of the additional heat storage capacity is increased. On the contrary, the removal of 
the half of the already installed storage capacity reduces the heat that is stored in the tanks 
only by 8 percent (%).  
==PAGE:88==
87 
 
 
Figure 54: Percentage change in power generation from CHP plants for different storage capacities on 
yearly basis. 
The power generation from combined heat and power plants for different storage capacities is 
presented in Figure 54. For increasing heat storage capacity in the network, the power 
generation from the combined heat and power plants is decreased by approximately 0.1 
percent (%) for the case of doubling the system storage capacity. This can be explained as due 
to high utilization of the storage units and the available stored heat the system can produce 
less electricity during hours that are not profitable. On the opposite side, with no heat storage 
capacity in the system, the increased production from CHP units leads also to increased power 
generation to a larger extent even in not favorable hours. In fact for completely removing the 
existing storage capacity the power generation is increased by 0.65 percent (%).   
 
Figure 55: Percentage change in system electricity import for different storage capacities on yearly basis. 
Continuing with electricity variables inside the system, the electricity import that is made 
from the system is depicted in Figure 55. It can be mentioned that the increased storage 
capacity that can enable the system to produce less electricity during less favorable hours with 
low electricity prices, also offers the opportunity to the system to import more electricity 
when it is profitable for the system. In this case for doubled storage capacity in the system the 
electricity import is increased by 0.12 percent (%).  However, on the opposite occasion when 
there is no storage capacity in the system, the system is led to increased power production 
from the CHP plants as previously shown, thus the electricity import is reduced. When the 
==PAGE:89==
88 
 
storage capacity is completely removed, the electricity import is decreased by approximately 
0.4 percent (%). 
 
Figure 56: Percentage change in system electricity export for different storage capacities on yearly basis  
Regarding the electricity export of the system in Figure 56, it can be mentioned that for the 
case of no storage capacity installed in the system, the increased power production from the 
CHP plants, potentially forces to export electricity to other power networks even if the 
exchange price of electricity in not so lucrative for the system. However, with increasing 
storage capacity a small increase in the electricity export can be observed which can be result 
of the more flexible operation of the CHP plants and the more beneficial power generation 
from the system. 
 
Figure 57: Percentage change in the fuel cost of the system for different storage capacities on yearly basis. 
The total cost of the fuel for the system operation can be observed in Figure 57. As it can be 
mentioned, with no storage capacity installed in the network the cost of the fuel increases by 
approximately 0.6 percent (%) compared to the current installed storage capacity. This can be 
attributed to the increased  and less flexible operation of the combined heat and power plants. 
Furthermore, the integration of additional capacity, can further lead to small reduction of the 
fuel cost. Specifically, for the case of doubling the storage capacity, there is a reduction of 
0.08 percent (%) in the fuel cost. 
Lastly in Figure 58, the total system cost is presented. This cost takes into consideration the 
operation cost of all the utility technologies that included as well as the electricity cost from 
==PAGE:90==
89 
 
import and export. As it can be observed the integration of heat storage is beneficial for the 
system also from economic point of view. By removing the existing storage units, the total 
system cost is increased by almost 0.25 percent (%). The integration of supplementary heat 
storage capacity can be beneficial for the system as previously mentioned, resulting in a 
reduction of the system cost by 0.1 percent (%). In order to offer an overview, this change 
corresponds to approximately 1 M€ on annual basis. 
 
Figure 58: Change in system total cost for different storage capacities on yearly basis. 
It has to be mentioned, that the biggest share of CHP capacity (80 percent %) that is 
employed in the energy system is of extraction technology, which means that the system can 
operate flexibly to an extent. As it was shown in the previous study case where an extraction 
plant was employed, the integration of the storage capacity didn’t clearly influence the 
synergy between the CHP and the peak load boiler, but it enhanced the system to operate in a 
more cost-effective way improving the economy of the system. So in this case, the additional 
storage capacity leads to some changes in the contribution of the technologies as well as the 
economy of the system.  
Additionally, an investigation was also made regarding the integration of larger storage 
capacities than shown in the present study. Specifically, an investigation was made adding 
two times the existing storage capacity of the system so that finally the capacity was tripled.  
However, the advantages for the system although were visible, were found to be less 
beneficial compared to the case of doubled storage capacity. Thus, it was decided not to 
include these results. 
6.3.2 System operation on weekly basis 
Apart from the total contribution of each employed technology in the system on an annual 
basis, the operation of each technology for a period of a week will be presented so as to 
demonstrate the influence of the additional storage in the network. In the figures presented, 
the existing storage capacity corresponds to the storage that is currently installed in the DH 
network of 3796 MWh while the additional storage corresponds to the case where the storage 
capacity is doubled. 
==PAGE:91==
90 
 
 
Figure 59: Thermal energy production from the CHP plants during a week of July for the existing and 
additional storage capacity in the network. 
 
Figure 60: Thermal energy production from the CHP plants during a week of November for the existing 
and additional storage capacity in the network. 
In the figures above the total heat production from the combined heat and power plants of the 
system is depicted during the weeks of July and November for the existing as well as 
additional storage capacity case. 
 As it can be observed, in Figure 59 during the week of July, the additional storage capacity 
integrated in the network enables the increased heat production from the CHP plants in 
certain time periods. In certain occasions the difference between the two cases is quite 
obvious by the formation of peaks in the production profile. 
Also, during the week of November it can be mentioned that in certain time periods the heat 
production from the CHP plants is increased for the case with the additional storage capacity. 
Specifically, the maximum levels at the production profile are increased. This can potentially 
lead to increased amount of heat that is stored in the storage units during the electricity 
generation. It can be also observed that during certain periods the heat production of the 
==PAGE:92==
91 
 
CHPs for the case of the additional capacity is lower, as more heat can be discharged from the 
storage units. 
 
Figure 61: Thermal energy accumulated in the thermal storage units during a week of July for the existing 
and additional storage capacity in the network. 
As it can be observed from the Figure 61, the total heat that is accumulated in the storage 
units of the system is increased in the case where the storage capacity in the network in also 
increased. The excess heat from the higher thermal energy production of the CHP plants is 
stored in the hot water storage tanks resulting in larger amount of stored heat. This stored heat 
can be either utilized from the system so as to reduce the heat production from the CHP plants 
during later operation or reduce the heat production from peak load boilers that are employed. 
 
Figure 62: Thermal energy accumulated in the thermal storage units during a week of November for the 
existing and additional storage capacity in the network. 
Likewise, during the week of November, the increased heat production from the CHP plants 
enhanced by the additional storage capacity in the network results in the accumulation of 
larger amount of thermal energy in the storage units.  
==PAGE:93==
92 
 
To continue, in Figure 63, the heat production from peak load boilers is presented for the 
week of July. In the case where additional storage capacity is integrated in the system the heat 
production has been reduced for a certain period of hours while heat is discharged from the 
thermal storage units. Thus, the additional storage capacity can enhance the reduction of heat 
production from peak load technology. Moreover, it should be mentioned that increased heat 
accumulation in the storage units apart from the reduction in the operation of the peak load 
technology, it can be utilized to reduce the CHP heat production in later periods. 
 
Figure 63: Thermal energy production from peak load boilers during a week of July for the existing and 
additional storage capacity in the network. 
In the weekly operation during November, the reduction in the heat production from the peak 
load boilers can be observed for the case of the additional capacity. The increased 
accumulated heat in the storage units is discharged, thus less utilization from the peak load 
technology is required from the system to cover the heat demand. 
 
Figure 64: Thermal energy production from peak load boilers during a week of November for the existing 
and additional storage capacity in the network. 
 
==PAGE:94==
93 
 
6.3.3 Storage capacity inside the DH network of Greater Copenhagen 
and electricity prices 
In the present section the cases of different storage capacities inside the DH network will be 
investigated in combination with changing electricity prices. One case will include the 
existing storage capacity that is employed in the current network and the second case will 
include also the additional capacity that was investigated in the previous section. Thus the 
final storage capacity installed will be the double compared to current. Furthermore, the 
electricity prices that are utilized for the power exchange in the system, meaning the import or 
export of electricity, are expected to change in the future as depicted in the Table 7: Average 
annual electricity prices for current and future scenarios. . Hence, the operation of the system 
can be potentially influenced as well as the influence of the heat storage in the system. 
In the previous section it was shown that additional storage capacity can offer certain benefits 
in the operation of the energy system as well as reduce the total cost. In this part, the two 
cases of the storage capacity will be investigated for the different electricity prices and will be 
compared to the corresponding ones for the electricity prices of 2011from the previous 
section.  
The operation of the system will be examined by means of the contribution of each 
technology, the electricity exchange of the system as well as the final cost of the system for 
the different capacities and compared to the operation those previously examined for the year 
of 2011. 
 
Figure 65: Change in percent in power generation from combined heat and power plants for the different 
storage capacity cases and scenarios of electricity prices. 
In Figure 65: Change in percent in power generation from combined heat and power plants 
for the different storage capacity cases and scenarios of electricity prices. the power 
generation from the combined heat and power plants is presented. For increasing electricity 
prices the power generation is also increasing so that the system can potentially benefit from 
the power exchange in higher electricity prices. Furthermore, in the case with the larger 
storage capacity installed in the network the change in the power generation compared to 
2011 is slightly higher compared to the case where the existing storage capacity is employed. 
For the electricity price scenario of 2030, the increase of electricity generation for the case of 
the additional capacity is of 19.1 percent (%), compared to the case of existing capacity where 
there is an increase of 18.8 percent (%). 
==PAGE:95==
94 
 
 
 
Figure 66: Percentage change in the thermal energy production from combined heat and power plants for 
the different storage capacity cases and scenarios of electricity prices. 
As it can be observed in Figure 66 for increasing exchange electricity prices in the system and 
increasing power generation, the heat production from the combined heat and power plants is 
also increasing. Small differences in the range of increase can be found between the cases of 
the existing storage capacity and the case where additional storage capacity has been added to 
the network. However, in the case where the storage capacity is increased the CHP production 
is slightly higher in all electricity price scenarios. For the electricity price scenario of 2030, 
the increase in the heat production from the CHP plants with the existing storage capacity 
reaches the level of 0.76 percent (%). The additional storage can slightly enhance this 
production so that the increase in this case reaches the level of 0.81 percent (%). Therefore 
the already increased heat production from the CHP plants with the additional storage in 
2011, is further increased with higher electricity prices. 
 
Figure 67: Percentage change in the thermal energy stored in the storage units for the different storage 
capacity cases and scenarios of electricity prices. 
In Figure 67 the heat stored in the storage units is presented for the two different storage 
capacity cases and future scenarios of electricity prices. As it can be depicted, the increased 
operation of the CHP plants also results in larger amount of heat driven in the storage tanks. 
For increasing electricity prices, the percentage change in the stored heat also increases. 
However, although the changes in the case of the existing storage capacity case are larger, in 
==PAGE:96==
95 
 
absolute numbers the heat that is stored in the case of additional storage is higher. In previous 
section, it was shown that in the case of the additional storage capacity, the heat driven to the 
storage tanks is almost the double one compared to the case with the initial storage. 
Therefore, although with smaller changes the heat stored with the additional storage is 
increased. For the electricity price scenario of 2030, the increase in the utilization of the 
existing capacity is of the level of 14 percent (%) compared to the case of the additional 
capacity where there is an increase of 10 percent (%).  
 
 
Figure 68: Percentage change in the thermal energy production from peak load boilers for the different 
storage capacity cases and scenarios of electricity prices. 
In Figure 68, the contribution of the peak load boilers in the system is depicted. The increased 
production from the combined heat and power plants results in significant reduction of the 
peak load technology. In detail, for higher electricity prices the increasing heat production 
from the CHP plants results in larger reduction in the heat provided from the peak load 
boilers. For the electricity price scenario of 2030, the integration of additional storage 
capacity resulted in the further reduction by 11.5 percent (%) compared to the level of 2011. 
In the case with the existing capacity, the reduction reaches the level of 11 .1 percent (%) 
compared to the level of 2011. So as in the previous section it was found that the additional 
storage capacity can result in lower utilization of the peak load boilers, now it is found that 
this reduction can be even further with higher electricity prices.  
==PAGE:97==
96 
 
 
 
Figure 69: Percentage change in electricity export for the different storage capacity cases and scenarios of 
electricity prices. 
In Figure 69 the system’s electricity export is depicted. It can be mentioned that for increasing 
electricity prices more electricity is exported approaching almost the double amount for the 
scenario of 2030 for the highest prices. Electricity export in higher prices can be beneficial for 
the system as the total system cost can be reduced. Also in this case, the increased storage 
capacity enhances slightly more the electricity export. In the case of the additional storage 
capacity the electricity export is increased by 98 percent (%) compared to the level of 2011 
while in the case of the existing storage is increased by approximately 96 percent (%). 
Therefore the electricity export is more enhanced with the additional storage capacity. 
Similarly, when the system exports electricity during hours with high prices leading to 
increased power production from the generation units, it can also import electricity when 
prices are low and more favorable for the total cost of the system.    
 
Figure 70: Percentage change in electricity import for the different storage capacity cases and scenarios of 
electricity prices. 
In Figure 70 the electricity import is also increasing for increasing electricity prices and 
between the two storage capacity cases it can be observed that the changes compared to the 
levels of 2011 lightly higher for the case of the additional storage capacity. For the electricity 
price scenario of 2030, the electricity import in case of additional storage capacity is 
==PAGE:98==
97 
 
increased by 38.8 percent (%), compared to the case with the existing capacity where the 
increase reaches 38.6 percent (%).  
Finally, the total cost of the system is presented in Figure 71. As it can be observed, the 
system takes advantage of the higher electricity prices and thus the operation is optimized so 
as to decrease the total cost. With the previously mentioned alterations like the increased heat 
and power production from the CHP plants in combination with the storage units, the 
reduction in the peak load technology as well as the enhanced electricity exchange the system 
makes an important decrease in the total cost. For the electricity price scenario of 2030, the 
total system cost is reduced by 3.05 percent (%) with the utilization of the additional storage 
capacity. In the case of the existing storage capacity and with the same scenario the system 
cost is reduced by 2.8 percent (%). Therefore, the already reduced system cost with the 
additional storage capacity that was shown in the previous section, is even further reduced 
now with the increased electricity prices. Thus, the additional storage capacity can result in 
larger reduction of the total system cost. 
 
Figure 71: Percentage change in the total system cost for the different storage capacity cases and scenarios 
of electricity prices. 
6.4 
Discussion 
In the present chapter, the current district heating system of the Greater Copenhagen was 
investigated considering the integration of storage capacity. In the first part of the 
investigation alterations were made in the storage capacity that is integrated in the system in 
order to examine the influence on the operation and performance of the system. The 
integration of additional storage inside the network has proven to be beneficial for system 
considering the contribution of the generation technologies. The larger storage capacity and 
specifically doubled compared to the one initially installed, resulted in increased thermal 
energy production from the combined heat and power plants of the system and reduction of 
the thermal energy production coming from the peak load boilers. The utilization of the 
thermal energy storage increased for larger storage capacity and this found to be also 
attributed to time shifting in the thermal production of the CHP plants. Moreover, the 
increased thermal energy that is stored in the system resulted in lower power generation from 
the system which could be beneficial during hours with not profitable electricity prices. 
Additionally, considering the economy of the system, the fuel cost as well as the total cost of 
the system was reduced for increased storage capacity in the network.  
==PAGE:99==
98 
 
The total removal of the storage was also investigated and found to be disadvantageous for 
the system introducing the opposite results in the system. The absence of thermal storage 
leads to lower thermal production from the CHP plants and higher production from the peak 
load technology of the system. Furthermore, the combined heat and power plants found to 
produce more electricity which could mean the generation of electricity even in times with 
low electricity price and thus less beneficial for the system. Also with no storage capacity 
installed in the network the total cost of the system found to be higher. Thus the removing of 
storage resulted in less cost effective operation of the system.  
In the next case, different exchange electricity price scenarios were investigated considering 
two cases of storage capacity installed in the network. The first case included the currently 
installed storage capacity and the second case included the double storage capacity that 
previously found to be more beneficial for the system. For increasing electricity prices the 
power generation from the CHP plants was also increasing and the changes found to be higher 
for the case with the larger storage capacity in the network. Moreover, the thermal energy 
production from the CHP plants was also increasing for rising electricity prices and found to 
be higher for the case with the larger storage capacity in the network. Furthermore, the larger 
utilization of the thermal storage during the operation of the CHP plants for the case of the 
additional storage capacity also contributed in the bigger reduction in the thermal energy 
production from the peak load technology. The electricity export which is beneficial for the 
system was significantly increased for higher prices and again in this parameter the effect was 
bigger for the case where more storage capacity was integrated in the network. Lastly, 
considering the economy of the system, the total system cost was decreasing for higher 
electricity prices achieving greater reductions with the enlarged storage capacity. Thus, in the 
case with the additional storage capacity, the system was more influenced as the operation of 
the CHP plants was further enhanced, the employment of the peak load technology was 
reduced and the economy of the system was more improved.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:100==
99 
 
Chapter 7: Discussion 
 
The scope of this project was to investigate the integration of heat storage technology in the 
form of hot water storage tanks in the modern district heating systems and particularly the 
district heating system of Greater Copenhagen. 
For this investigation, a computer tool was necessary and thus a previously developed 
optimization model was utilized in order to simulate the operation of the district heating 
system of Copenhagen and the interconnection between the several utility technologies which 
operate under various technical and economic constraints.  
Considering the integration of thermal energy storage in the first two study cases, the heat 
storage units proved to be beneficial for the system. For the case of the backpressure plant, 
the storage unit offers the possibility for more flexible operation of the plant. Thus, the plant 
can operate more hours, generating electricity during hours that are profitable for the system 
while storing the excess heat in the hot water storage tank. The decoupling of heat and power 
production is enhanced from the utilization of the storage resulting in better economy for the 
system and moreover reduced utilization of the peak load technology. On the other hand, the 
integration of the storage unit together with the extraction plant has different influence on the 
system. The operation of the plant is already more flexible compared to the backpressure 
plant, thus the integration of storage capacity in the system results in lower electricity 
generation probably during hours that are not profitable for the system. Hence, the storage 
unit results in the lower fuel consumption of the system and more cost effective operation. 
Thus, the impact from the integration of storage capacity is different for the two cases 
offering each time other benefits in the system, but in both cases the economy of the system 
examined was improved. 
In the case where the current district heating system of Copenhagen is investigated, it can be 
pointed out that the integration of heat storage capacity in the network can affect the operation 
of the system and the contribution of the technologies employed as well as the economy of 
the system. With no heat storage capacity employed, it can be seen that the heat production 
from the CHP plants is reduced while the employment of the peak load technology is 
increased. Furthermore, the lack of thermal energy stored that could be utilized in order to 
generate less power during less profitable hours, leads to increased power production even in 
not favorable hours. On the contrary, the integration of thermal storage increased the heat 
production from the CHP plants and the stored thermal energy can be utilized so as to 
produce less power when it is not beneficial for the system but at the same time covering the 
heat demand. Also the employment of the peak load technology in covering the heat demand 
is reduced. Thus the system with storage capacity can operate in a more flexible way leading 
to an improved economy. The larger storage capacity enhances even further these 
improvements and finally more reduced cost of the system is achieved.  
The biggest share of combined heat and power plants in the system are extraction plants and 
their operation is more flexible compare to the backpressure technology. Therefore, the 
impact on the synergy between the employed technologies might not be of large scale since, 
however the influence on the economy of total system can be observed. Moreover, the effect 
that the removal of the storage introduced in the operation as well as the economy of the 
==PAGE:101==
100 
 
system was of larger extent, which shows that heat storage is beneficial for the system. It 
should be also pointed out, that between the district heating networks there can be 
interconnections, which means that the heat demand of one network can be covered by more 
than one production units. Therefore, taking into account that the extraction technology is 
more represented in the energy system, the system can operate in a flexible way for covering 
the demand of heat and power. However, future energy scenarios regarding Copenhagen (43), 
target in the larger utilization of waste as fuel and the transforming big share of extraction 
plants to backpressure. In this case it would be interesting for future investigation to examine 
the influence of thermal storage in the system where increased share of combined heat and 
power technology would be backpressure technology compare to the current one. 
Additionally, a feasibility study regarding the thermal energy storage technology would be of 
interest for future investigation so as to examine the payback time of the additional capacity 
considering the improvement in the economy of the system. 
Regarding the investigation with the electricity price scenarios, it was found that the system 
operation cost can be reduced for increasing prices as the operation of the CHP is enhanced 
leading to higher thermal and electricity generation, utilizing more the thermal energy storage 
and reducing the peak load technology. The electricity exchange in the system was found to 
be significantly increased as the system could benefit more from increasing prices and reduce 
the cost. However, the electricity generation from wind turbines and the decentral CHP units 
was assumed to be the same, therefore an investigation could be made considering future 
electricity prices and future wind power production in order to examine the exchange of 
electricity that could take place.  
Moreover, it would be interesting to examine the storage potential in future DH network, as 
the heat demand is expected to increase due to the expansion of the network as well as the 
transformation of networks that utilize steam to water based networks.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:102==
101 
 
Chapter 8: Conclusion 
The aim of the present project was to study the operation and performance of thermal energy 
storage systems and particularly of hot water storage tanks and investigate the integration of 
this technology in modern district heating systems and specifically the one of Copenhagen. 
Furthermore, the influence on the generation technologies that are employed for covering the 
heat and power demand and the potential flexibility offered were studied. 
For that purpose an optimization model was employed for this investigation that could 
simulate the operation of the system on hourly basis and obtain an optimal solution regarding 
the operational cost of the system for a complete operating year. 
In the first part, the investigation of hot water storage tanks was made regarding the operation 
inside the district heating network as well as their performance. Important parameters that 
have to be taken into consideration when designing storage tanks were examined like the 
geometry, the insulation, the thermal stratification and the occurring heat loss. Afterwards, the 
modeling of stratified hot water storage tanks was made in order to examine the influence of 
these parameters on the performance of the tanks. Furthermore the evaluation of the 
performance was made using the energy and exergy efficiencies of the tanks. It was found 
that the geometry as well as the insulation utilized can improve the performance of the storage 
tank by reducing the occurring heat loss. Moreover it was found that the utilization of lower 
storage temperatures for achieving the same thermal energy content was beneficial as 
increased energy and exergy efficiencies could be achieved. Furthermore, the employment of 
storage tanks with larger storage capacities was found to be advantageous as increased energy 
efficiencies were reached. Lastly, optimal values for the design parameters have been 
selected, on which the hot water storage tanks that would be utilized in the model could be 
based on. The calculated efficiencies of the modeled storage tanks were used as input to the 
optimization model for simulating their operation in the district heating network. 
In the next part of the study, the integration of heat storage technology in district heating 
networks was investigated in two different cases. In each one of the cases, a new network was 
introduced inside the existing district heating system and representative utility technologies 
were chosen for covering the heat and power demand. In the first case, a backpressure 
combined heat and power plant was employed together with a peak load boiler. The 
integration of hot water storage tank had several impacts on the system operation. The power 
generation of the backpressure plant was increased by 58 percent (%) in the case of 900 MWh 
storage capacity compared to the case were no storage was installed. Moreover, the heat 
production from the CHP increased by 18% and the thermal energy production from the peak 
load boiler decreased by 36 percent (%) for the same storage capacity. The operation hours of 
the CHP plant were increased and the total system cost was reduced by 6.7 percent (%).  In 
the case of the extraction CHP plant the integration of storage capacity resulted in small 
changes in the thermal production of the CHP and some fluctuations in the heat production 
from the peak load boiler which didn’t not follow a straightforward trendline. However, the 
introducing of storage into the system resulted in reduction in the power generation, reaching 
a maximum reduction of 3 percent (%) for a storage capacity of 500 MWh. Also in this case 
the total system cost was reduced by 1 percent (%) for the specific storage capacity, thus 
improvement in the economy of the system was introduced. 
==PAGE:103==
102 
 
A fuel price sensitivity analysis was also performed for both cases with the thermal energy 
storage integrated in the network. From the results obtained it was shown that for decreasing 
fuel prices compared to the initial the operation of the CHP plants was more beneficial for the 
systems, resulting in increased thermal energy and power production and higher utilization of 
the thermal storage. On the contrary, increased fuel prices resulted in decreased contribution 
of the CHP plants in both cases and larger heat production from the peak load boilers. 
Lastly, the effect of lowering the district heating temperature on the operation of system was 
investigated. The increase in the electrical efficiency of both the CHP plants resulted in 
increased power generation. Furthermore, with the employment of lower temperatures in the 
network, the heat loss from the storage units was decreased.  
In the third part of this study, the district heating system of the Greater Copenhagen was 
investigated including all the utility technologies and thermal storage units of the year 
examined. Firstly, the integration of different storage capacities in the system was 
investigated. For an increase of the already installed storage capacity by 100 percent (%) the 
heat production from the CHP plants was increased by 0.08 percent (%) while the heat 
production from the peak load boilers was reduced by approximately 1 percent (%). 
Moreover, the fuel consumption from the system was reduced and the total cost of the system 
was also reduced by 0.1 percent (%). Thus, the integration of additional storage capacity 
proved to be beneficial for the system. The total removal of the storage capacity resulted in 
opposite results as the thermal production from the CHP plants was reduced by 0.35 percent 
(%) and the peak load boilers produced more heat by approximately 6 percent (%). 
Furthermore, the fuel utilization was increased and the total system cost was higher by 0.25 
percent (%).  
Following, an investigation was performed regarding the exchange electricity prices that the 
model utilized. Future scenarios predict higher electricity prices, thus the operation of the 
system with the current storage capacity as well as the additional capacity that previously 
found to be advantageous were examined. For increasing electricity prices the power 
generation from the CHP plants was also increasing as well as the thermal energy production. 
The utilization of thermal storage was also increased. On the contrary the contribution of the 
peak load boilers was decreasing. Moreover, the electricity export from the system was larger 
for higher prices. Lastly, the total system cost found to have the largest reduction of 3.05 
percent (%) for the highest electricity price scenario. In all the above mentioned parameters, 
the influence on the system was higher in the case where the additional storage capacity was 
employed and the system could operate more flexible with changes in the future prices. Thus 
also in this case more storage capacity found to offer larger benefit to the system. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:104==
103 
 
Bibliography 
 
1. (IEA), International Energy Agency. Renewable energy medium-term market report 
2015 - Market analysis and forecasts to 2020. 2015. 
2. Eurostat. Europe 2020 indicators - climate change and energy. [Online] 2 17, 2016. 
http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/Europe_2020_indicators_-
_climate_change_and_energy. 
3. L.F. Cabeza, I. Martorell, L. Miro, A.I. Fernandez, C. Barreneche. Introduction to 
thermal energy storage (TES) systems. Advances in thermal energy storage systems. s.l. : 
Elsevier, 2015. 
4. J. Xu, R.Z. Wang, Y. Li. A review of available technologies for seasonal thermal energy. 
Solar Energy. 2014. 
5. Cabeza, L.F. Thermal Energy Storage. Comprehensive Renewable Energy. s.l. : Elsevier, 
2012, Vol. Vol.3. 
6. H. Mehling, L.F. Cabeza. Heat and cold storage with PCM. s.l. : Springer, 2008. 
7. A. Arteconi, N.J. Hewitt, F.Polonara. State of the art of thermal storage for demand-side 
management. Applied Energy. 2011. 
8. Furbo, S. Using water for heat storage in thermal energy stoage (TES) systems - Methods 
and Applications. [book auth.] L.F. Cabeza. Advances in Thermal Energy Storage Systems. 
s.l. : Elsevier, 2015, Vol. 2. 
9. International Energy Agency (IEA), Energy Technology Systems Analysis 
Programme (ETSAP), International Renewable Energy Egency (IRENA). Thermal 
Energy Storage - Technology Brief. 2013. 
10. Z. Lavan, J. Thompson. Experimental study of thermally stratified hot water storage 
tanks. Solar Energy. 1977. 
11. Cabelli, A. Storage tanks - A numerical experiment. Solar Energy. 1977. 
12. Y.M. Han, R.Z. Wang, Y.J. Dai. Thermal stratification within the water tank. Renewable 
and Sustainable Energy reviews. 2009. 
13. J. Fan, S. Furbo. Thermal stratification in a hot water tank established by heat loss from 
the tank. Solar Energy. 2012. 
14. Z. Yang, H. Chen, L. Wang, Y. Sheng, Y. Wang. Comparative study of the influences 
of different water tank shapes on thermal energy storage capacity and thermal stratification. 
Renewable Energy. 2016. 
15. S. Frederiksen, S. Werner. District heating and cooling. 2014. 
16. www.dbdh.dk. Danish Board of District Heating. [Online] [Cited: 2 16, 2016.] 
www.dbdh.dk/district-heating-history. 
==PAGE:105==
104 
 
17. Danish Energy Agency. www.ens.dk. [Online] [Cited: 2 16, 2016.] 
http://www.ens.dk/en/supply/heat-supply-denmark. 
18. www.ramboll.com. [Online] [Cited: 2 16, 2016.] 
http://www.ramboll.com/projects/group/district-heating-system-in-the-copenhagen-region. 
19. www.geotermi.dk. [Online] [Cited: 2 16, 2016.] 
http://www.geotermi.dk/english/geothermal-plants/amager. 
20. www.hofor.dk. [Online] [Cited: 2 16, 2016.] http://www.hofor.dk/fjernvarme/her-leverer-
vi-fjernvarme. 
21. H. Gadd, S. Werner. Thermal energy storage systems for district heating and cooling. 
[book auth.] L.F. Cabeza. Advances in Thermal Energy Storage Systems. s.l. : Elsevier, 2015, 
Vol. 18. 
22. D. Connolly, H. Lund, B.V. Mathiesen, M. Leahy. A review of computer tools for 
analysing the integration of renewable energy into various energy systems. Applied Energy. 
2010, Vol. 87. 
23. W. Kostowski, J. Skorek. Thermodynamic and economic analysis of heat storage 
application in co-generation systems. International Journal of Energy Research. 2004. 
24. G. Pagliarini, S. Rainieri. Modeling of a thermal energy storage system coupled with 
combined heat and power generation for the heating requirements of a University Campus. 
Applied Thermal Engineering. 2010. 
25. V. Verda, F. Colella. Primary energy savings through thermal storage in district heating 
networks. Energy. 2011. 
26. H. Wang, W. Yin, E. Abdollahi, R. Lahdelma, W. Jiao. Modelling and optimization of 
CHP based district heating system with renewable energy production and energy storage. 
Applied Energy . 2015. 
27. A. Bachmaier, S. Narmsara, J.B. Eggers. S. Herkel. Spatial distribution of thermal 
energy storage systems in urban areas connected to district heating for grid balancing . Energy 
Procedia. 2015. 
28. T. Nuytten, B. Claessens, K. Paredis, J.V. Bael, D. Six. Flexibility of a combined heat 
and power system with thermal energy storage for district heating. Applied Energy. 2013. 
29. M. Martin, P. Thornley. The potential for thermal storage to reduce the overall carbon 
emissions from district heating systems. s.l. : Tyndall Centre for Climate Change Research, 
2013. 
30. Sensible heat storage in district heating networks: a novel control strategy using the 
network as storage. D. Basciotti, F. Judex, O. Pol, R.R. Schmidt. Berlin : s.n., 2011. 
International Renewable Energy Storage Conference and Exhibition (IRES). 
31. Schmidt, Ommen Torben. Heat Pumps in CHP Systems - High efficiency Energy System 
Utilising Combined Heat and Power and Heat Pumps. 2015. 
==PAGE:106==
105 
 
32. Torben Ommen, Wiebke Brix Markussen, Brian Elmegaard. Comparison of linear, 
mixed integer and non-linear programming methods in energy systems dispatch modelling. 
Energy. 2014. 
33. Energinet.dk, Energi Styrelsen. Technology data for energy plants. 2012. 
34. Wit, Jan de. Heat Storages for CHP Optimization. PowerGen Europe. 2007. 
35. Furbo, Simon. Heat Storage for Solar Heating Systems. s.l. : DTU BYG, 2005. 
36. X. Chen, Q. Xia, C. Kang. Increasing the flexibility of combined heat and power for 
wind power integration in China : Modeling and implications. Power Systems. 2015. 
37. Aikaterini Fragaki, Anders Andersen, David Toke. Exploration of economical sizing 
of gas engine and thermal store for combined heat and power plants in the UK . Energy. 2007. 
38. Exergy analysis of a water heat storage tank. F. Dammel, J. Winterling, J. 
Langeheinecke, P. Stephan. 2012. 
39. M. Petersen, J. Aagaard. Heat accumulators. 2004. 
40. P. Wang, M. Scharling, L. Nielsen, K. Wittchen, C. Kern-Hansen. 2001-2010 Danish 
Design Reference Year. s.l. : Danish MInistry of Climate, Energy and Building, 2013. 
41. Z.K. Morvay, D.D. Gvozdenac. Fundamentals for analysis and calculation of energy and 
environmental performance. s.l. : John Wiley & Sons. 
42. M.C. Rodriquez-Hidalgo, A. Lecuona, M. Legrand, R. Ventas. Domestic hot water 
consumption vs. solar thermal energy storage: The optimum size of the storage tank. Applied 
Energy. 2012. 
43. Torben Ommen, Wiebke Brix Markussen, Brian Elmegaard. Lowering district 
heating temperatures - Impact to system performance in current and future Danish energy 
scenarios. Energy. 2015. 
44. H. Lund, S. Werner, R. Wiltshire. 4th Generation District Heating (4GDH). Energy. 
2014. 
45. H. Gadd, S. Werner. Daily heat load variations in Swedish district heating systems. 
Applied Energy. 2013. 
46. N. Kumar, P. Besumer, S. Lefton, D. Agan. Power Plant Cycling Costs. s.l. : NREL, 
2012. 
47. [Online] [Cited: 4 15, 2016.] www.energinet.dk. 
48. Blarke, M. Towards an intermittency-friendly energy system: comparing electric boilers 
and heat pumps in didtributed cogeneration. Applied Energy. 2012. 
49. B. Bach, J. Werling, T. Ommen, M. Münster, J. Morales, B. Elmegaard. Integration 
of large-scale heat pumps in the district heating systems of Greater Copenhagen. Energy. 
2016. 
==PAGE:107==
106 
 
50. [Online] 5 15, 2016. www.energinet.dk. 
51. Forecasting heat load for smart district heating systems: A machine learning approach. 
S. Idowu, S. Saguna, C. Ahlund, O. Schelen. 2014. 
52. R. Yuan, J. Ye. Integrated combined heat and Power System dispatch considering 
electrical and thermal energy storage. Energies. 2016. 
53. Enegie, BEAMS groupe. Energy storage technologies for wind power integrations. s.l. : 
Universite Lire de Bruxelles. 
54. C.F. Tsang, J. Claeson. Energy storage in Aquifers--A survey of recent theoretical 
studies. s.l. : U.S. Department of Energy, 1980. 
55. Socaciu, Lavinia G. Seasonal sensible thermal energy storag solutions. 2011. 
56. SPL Beatty. [Online] [Cited: 3 15, 2016.] http://www.bbeatty.com. 
57. EPRI, Electric Power Research Institute. Cool storage technology guide. 2000. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:108==
107 
 
Appendix 
A.1 Sensible thermal energy storage systems 
 
In the present section some of the commonly used technologies of sensible thermal 
storage that utilize different storage mediums and follow certain processes during the 
charging and discharging are analyzed.  
A.1.1 Water based thermal energy storage systems 
Water has been a favorable medium for sensible heat storage basically due to its characteristic 
properties. The high specific heat of water compared to other storage mediums and thus the 
high capacity rate during charging or discharging of a water-based heat storage system, has 
made water an advantageous and widely used media. In such systems, water is used either as 
a heat carrier fluid or directly as a storage medium. A further categorization can be the 
classification of such systems in water tanks or pit storage systems and aquifer storage 
systems. In the first case an artificial structure is used in order to store the water, while in the 
second case it can be mentioned that natural water is used directly from a layer below the 
ground surface. 
Considering the water tank systems, the tanks used in these systems are usually made of 
stainless steel or sometimes reinforced concrete enhanced by thick insulation. In case the tank 
is buried underground it is also called water pit. The basic principle of the operation of the 
water tanks is the stratification of the water inside. Due to thermal buoyancy, the water with 
the higher temperature stays at the upper part of the tank while the cold water stays at the 
bottom part. A possible mixing inside the tank caused by the temperature difference can 
downgrade the heat source and thus have a negative impact on the efficiency of the system. 
Furthermore, certain parameters can have a significant effect on the stratification of the tank, 
thus the efficiency of the system such as the placing of the tank, the insulation material that 
are used and the thermal bridges. A more detailed analysis will follow in a next paragraph. 
Depending on the capacity of the system this kind of technology can be used for long-term as 
well as short-term heat storage applications. 
Aquifer thermal energy storage, also found in literature as ATES, has been first launched in 
the 1970s (54) . It can be also considered as an application of the general underground 
thermal energy storage, also known as UTES in the literature. In ATES, two thermal wells at 
minimum are drilled inside an available and suitable aquifer. The structure and formation of 
the aquifer is employed as the storage medium whereas the underground water is used as the 
heat carrier fluid. The properties of the ground, which works as a porous material, together 
with the high specific heat capacity of the water, makes in total the aquifer a technology able 
to store heat and afterwards be retrieved when it is required. Also here the different stages of 
the storage cycle can be distinguished: during the charging mode, cool water is extracted from 
the cold well and its temperature is lifted using excess heat during the summer months. 
Afterwards, it is inserted in the warm well, creating in this way storage of hot groundwater. In 
order to discharge the system and retrieve the stored heat, the flow of the water is reversed. 
Usually, this kind of heat storage system works in a seasonal mode. The seasonal operation of 
==PAGE:109==
108 
 
the system is also depicted in Σφάλμα! Το αρχείο προέλευσης της αναφοράς δεν βρέθηκε..  
Additionally, it can be mentioned that during the charging mode, cooling capacity can be 
provided. However, although it is considered to be a promising technology, geological 
conditions can be a critical factor for its application. The underground formation, the depth 
that is required, the porosity as well as the permeability are some major parameters that can 
limit the application of aquifer systems. 
 
 
 Seasonal storage operation of aquifer storage system (55). 
A.1.2 Rock-bed thermal energy storage systems 
In this kind of technology a rock bed is used as the storage medium. Rock beds usually 
consist of gravel, pebble or bricks. The heat transfer fluid that is employed is commonly air or 
water, so by its circulation through the rock bed heat can be exchanged. Rock is a material 
that is characterized by a lower specific heat capacity compared to water. Therefore, in order 
to store the same amount of thermal energy a higher volume is required. However, rock has 
also some advantages as it is a material with high availability and quite low cost. Moreover, 
the operational temperatures of thermal energy storage systems based on rock can be higher 
than 100 °C, therefore they offer a more expanded operational temperature range. This 
technology is often met running on seasonal mode, as the heat that can be gained in summer 
months is later used for covering heat demand in winter months. 
A.1.3 Ground and soil thermal energy storage systems 
This kind of thermal energy storage systems can be considered as an application of general 
underground thermal energy storage that can be found also in the literature as UTES, due to 
the location that they are installed which is below the ground surface. More specifically, in 
this case the ground itself is employed as the storage medium, so that the thermal energy can 
be stored during periods with excess production and be retrieved later when required. The 
excavation as well as the drilling of the ground is necessary in order to install tubes with 
vertical or horizontal orientation. Due to that fact this technology is called also as borehole 
thermal energy storage BTES in the literature. A sketch of a borehole thermal energy storage 
system is depicted in Σφάλμα! Το αρχείο προέλευσης της αναφοράς δεν βρέθηκε.. The 
tubes that have been installed basically work as heat exchangers and the soil which is free of 
charge is used as the storage medium. Furthermore, the water is usually employed as the 
system’s heat transfer fluid. In this point it could be mentioned that the specific heat capacity 
of the soil is significantly lower compared to water-based storage systems. Therefore, as the 
==PAGE:110==
109 
 
volumetric heat capacity of a borehole thermal storage system is lower, larger volumes are 
required to achieve the storage of the same amount of heat. For this reason, it could be 
pointed that in order to enhance the thermal heat transfer, special materials are used in the 
space between the pipes and the boreholes. These materials are characterized by high thermal 
conductivity so that the system can perform better. Moreover, several projects and research 
are in an ongoing process so that certain constraining parameters can be further improved. 
The complexity of the system considering the properties of the water movement, the long 
time that is required in order to reach a designed performance level as well as the high 
investment costs are some of the main issues that have to be solved in the future so that this 
technology can be implemented in a large scale. 
 
3-D drawing of a borehole thermal energy storage system (56). 
 
 
==PAGE:111==
110 
 
A.2 Principles of water storage tanks for sensible heat storage 
 
It should be mentioned that when addressing to hot water storage systems and even more 
specifically storage tanks, certain thermal characteristics of the system have a significant role. 
Therefore, the heat storage capacity of the system, the heat exchange capacity, the heat losses 
involved as well as the stratification are defining parameters for the overall operation and 
performance of the system. 
The heat storage capacity of a system in a determined temperature range from T1 to T2 is 
defined from the specific heat capacity of the storage medium and the temperature difference 
itself. The heat content of the hot water storage materials between a temperature interval can 
be calculated from the equation  below:  
        ∑(      )  
 
   
        ∑(         )
 
   
      
The value n describes the number of materials that can be heated in the storage system, Mi is 
the mass of the material i that is involved, Cpi is the specific heat capacity of the material i,    
is the density and    the volume respectively. Most commonly, the biggest part of the heat 
storage capacity of the system is the heat capacity of the water.  
Usually in the majority of the applications there are several constraints regarding the space 
available for the storage system. Therefore, it is favorable that the heat content of the system 
should be the highest possible, so that the space requirements could be also minimized. 
Additionally, the volume of the employed water in the storage system, the design of the 
storage tank as well as the thickness of the insulation layer can significantly affect the space 
requirements.  
As far the heat losses are concerned, they are defined as the output of the heat loss coefficient 
factor and the temperature difference between the storage temperature and the temperature of 
the outdoor environment, also called as ambient. The heat loss coefficient can be theoretically 
defined taking into consideration the insulation materials (thickness, thermal conductivity) 
and the geometry of the storage tank as well as its surface. It should be mentioned that the 
heat loss from the storage tank should be constrained in such a way that the total performance 
of the system is not considerably affected. The heat loss coefficient that can be calculated 
basically indicates the heat transmission that takes place throughout the insulation layer of the 
storage tank (8). 
Apart from the heat transmission losses that can occur in the water storage tanks, quite 
significant heat loss takes place also through the thermal bridges that exist in the insulation 
layer of the tank. Usually, inadequately performed insulation work in the storage tank, 
inappropriate selection of insulating materials or even the thickness of the insulation layer can 
be origins for the causing of thermal bridges at the storage tank. Additionally, any other 
possible equipment placed in connection to the hot water storage tank can also contribute with 
extra heat losses in the system. For this reason, the installation place of the thermal bridges 
can have an important role in the degree of the occurring heat losses, thus the overall 
performance of the storage system. In the case that a thermal bridge is located at the bottom 
of the tank, the temperature of the water close to the thermal bridge will be lowered relatively 
fast and in this way there will be formed a layer of cold and stable water above the thermal 
==PAGE:112==
111 
 
bridge. Thus, this layer of water will work as an insulation, constraining the heat losses that 
may occur due to the thermal bridge. In the opposite case, if the thermal bridge is placed at 
the top of the water storage tank, due to the density properties of water, always the warmer 
will flow upwards replacing the water which is less warm. Thus, because of the natural 
convection inside the water storage tank, the thermal bridge at the top will remain hot and as a 
result the heat losses will be quite large.  
Moreover, it should be stated that the piping that is involved in the water storage tank systems 
can be a thermal bridge that could possibly introduce large heat loss in the system. As 
mentioned before, the density of the water is closely correlated to the temperature. Therefore, 
in the case that the piping is installed at the top of the storage tank, internal fluid circulation 
due to lower density can take place in the pipe leading in this way in heat losses. Hence, it is 
important that the piping of the storage system is installed at the bottom in order to limit the 
heat losses. In some cases, if the piping is installed at the top part of the tank for practical 
reasons, heat traps are also used in order to further restrain the thermal losses. The piping 
follows such a route that the internal circulation of the water is further restrained.  
In order to summarize, certain design parameters have to be taken into consideration so as to 
limit the heat losses that may occur in the system and thus improve the operation and the 
performance of the system: 
 
The insulation of the water storage tank should be carefully designed and performed. 
Even more, the upper part of the tank should be insulated with special attention and 
no thermal bridges should be involved. 
 
The piping and whatever security equipment is installed at the storage tank should be 
at the bottom part, as it is highly possible to be a source of thermal bridge for the 
system. 
As the volume of the water storage system increases significantly, the thermal losses that are 
introduced to the system due to thermal bridges are not that important (8). This can be 
justified as for increasing volume of water storage tank systems, the percentage of the heat 
loss due to thermal bridges is getting lower. The ratio of the surface of the tank to the volume 
is decreasing as the total water storage tank volume is increasing so the heat loss percentage 
introduced is also decreased. Therefore, long-term heat storage can be possible if the storage 
volume is large. 
As far as the heat exchange capacity rate is concerned, the efficiency of the system to both 
ways should be maintained at reasonable levels. So, during the charging of the storage the 
heat exchange capacity rate should be that high in order for the energy system that heats the 
storage to have the lowest effect on its efficiency and even if possible to keep it constant. 
Respectively, when the water storage tank is discharging, the exchange capacity rate should 
be that high, so that sufficient thermal power could be delivered at a suitable temperature 
level when it is required.  The heat exchange capacity rate is decidedly influenced by certain 
parameters. The heat exchangers that are used in hot water storage systems, the volume flow 
rate of the fluids that are used for the heat transfer and the level of the temperature that the 
water storage tank operates are some of the most important. The heat exchange capacity rate 
increases as the temperature level of the storage water is increasing and likewise with higher 
flow rates.  
==PAGE:113==
112 
 
The performance for the majority of hot water storage systems that are utilizing tanks can be 
enhanced from the effect of the stratification. In both periods of charging or discharging the 
formation of an extended thermal stratification can improve the operation of the system and 
increase the efficiency. It is also desirable that, in periods that there is no charging or 
discharging involved, the stratification inside the tank is maintained the longer period the 
possible so as to reserve the energy stored and reduce the future thermal energy required for 
charging the system (8). 
As it can be observed there is a variety of parameters that have to be taken into consideration 
when designing a hot water storage tank system. The majority of the abovementioned 
parameters can critically affect the operation as well as the performance of the storage system. 
As a result the final arrangement and realization of the system should be planned accurately  
and taking into thorough consideration all the involved technical issues so to achieve the best 
possible result in the final performance. 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:114==
113 
 
A.3  Categorization of water storage tanks  
 
For the first category of indirect heated tanks, various heat exchanger configurations have 
been used. However the most commonly used are the immersed tubes inside the water tank, 
the external heat exchanger and the mantle heat exchanger. In Figure 72, the three 
configurations of the indirect heating can be observed as well as the flows of the fluids in the 
system. 
As it can be clearly observed, the indirect heated tanks employ the use of heat exchangers. 
For the case of the immersed tubes inside the tank, by using higher heat exchanger flow rates 
or areas, this can result in respectively higher heat transfer rates. However, this does not mean 
necessarily that will result in an optimal result. Moreover, it can be mentioned that lower 
initial water temperatures inside the tank lead to decreased thermal stratification (12). 
Additionally, other characteristics of the system can affect the performance and stratification. 
The way that the immersed tubes are placed inside the tanks as well as the type of the piping 
that is used for the heat transfer can importantly contribute towards a stable stratification 
along the height of the tank. It is preferable that the coil should be placed at the upper part of 
the storage tank so as to have heat extraction of large extent.  
 
Figure 72: Heat exchange between the water inside the storage tank and the fluid circulating inside the heat 
exchanger. 
In the case of the external heat exchanger, in order to supply the required heat to the storage 
tank, circulating pumps are employed. As it can be depicted, cold water is extracted from the 
bottom part of the tank and passes through the heat exchanger. Afterwards, it is leaded back 
to storage tank at an appropriate height. In certain systems, a bypass circuit is also used in 
order to better control the entrance of the hot water in the tank according to the temperature 
and thus improve the stratification. Generally, external heat exchangers are characterized by 
improved thermal transfer properties compared to internal ones.  
Regarding the third case of mantle heat exchanger configuration, a larger heat transfer area is 
provided to the system. Furthermore, this kind of heat exchanger is considered to be quite 
simple and cheap but at the same time supplying heat very effectively and enhancing the 
thermal stratification. The advantages of a storage tank system that employs a mantle heat 
exchanger are the simple design of the system as the hot water tank along with the heat 
exchanger are combined in one part. Furthermore, the heat exchange area that is offered is 
increased compared to the other configurations, which leads to the employment of less 
material. Lastly the system is characterized by higher efficiency compared to the rest ones. 
In the case of direct heat transfer, there is no employment of heat exchanger thus the hot 
water is leaded straight inside the tank. However, for this reason, the risk of the mixing of the 
==PAGE:115==
114 
 
hot water with the cold is increased due to the turbulence that is caused inside the tank. 
Therefore, in order to constrain this turbulence certain measures are usually taken.  The 
addition of baffle plates at the inlet of the storage tank  or the employment of some porous 
mesh in order to lower down the water flow have been quite effective for minimizing the 
mixing effect and thus enhancing the stratification in the tank. In the Figure 73 the two 
different storage tank designs are depicted. 
 
Figure 73: Direct heated water storage tanks: (a) using baffle plate and (b) porous structure respectively  
(12). 
 
 
 
==PAGE:116==
115 
 
A.4 Thermal energy storage for cold applications 
 
The last few years apart from storing and delivering heat that was the initial purpose of the 
thermal energy storage systems, they have been also used for delivering required cooling 
loads (7). Towards an attempt for achieving general energy savings, this kind of energy 
storage has been quite attractive and has been increasingly used in a quite wide range of 
applications. The basic idea that lies behind the cold thermal energy storage is that cooling 
capacity can be provided by extracting heat out of certain storage materials. Usually these 
kinds of materials can be chilled water, ice or even phase changing materials PCMs. Also in 
this case, the selection of the proper storage materials has to do with the application involved. 
Therefore, certain constraints have to be fulfilled such as the operational temperature range as 
well as the volume available for the system. Many of the technologies that were previously 
described can be used for cold thermal storage applications.  Water-based systems are widely 
used in commercial basis like stratified storage tanks with chilled water. Also, in this case the 
insulation materials are important for the performance of the system. Moreover, aquifer 
storage systems can deliver cooling loads, as the cold water that is drawn from underground 
extracts heat from the surroundings increasing its temperature and then is stored for later use 
(long-term thermal storage). Furthermore techniques using phase changing materials like 
eutectic salts are also used in cold thermal storage systems (57). In Figure 2, the 
abovementioned storage materials that can be used for cold storage applications can be 
observed. Generally, the temperatures that can be met are below or above 0 °C, depending on 
the application and the material involved. Usually, these kind of thermal energy storage 
systems are coupled with air-conditioning systems in order to enhance the performance of the 
refrigeration equipment (7). Additionally, the final cost of the required energy is reduced, 
something which is always a desirable outcome. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:117==
116 
 
A.5 EES code for stratified hot water storage tank 
// Stratified water storage tank model 
  
// Ambient conditions  
T_ambient=8.6 "Danish design reference year" 
T_soil=9.1 "Danish desigh reference year" 
P=1 
  
// Installed energy in DH system and volume calculation 
T_supply=99.5 "Temperature at the top of the tank" 
rho_supply=density(Water,T=T_supply,P=P) 
cp_supply=cp(Water,T=T_supply,P=P) 
  
T_separation=50 "Temperature at the separation layer" 
rho_separation=density(Water,T=T_separation,P=P) 
cp_separation=cp(Water,T=T_separation,P=P) 
  
T_return=50 "Temperature at the botton of the tank" 
rho_return=density(Water,T=T_return,P=P) 
cp_return=cp(Water,T=T_return,P=P) 
  
E_delivered_MWh=50 "Energy delivered in MWh" 
E_delivered_MJ=E_delivered_MWh*(3600) "Energy delivered in MJ" 
E_delivered_J=E_delivered_MJ*(10^6) "Energy delivered in J" 
  
E_delivered_J=(V_necessary*rho_supply*cp_supply*(T_supply-T_return))  
  
// Initial tank geometry, volume and Energy as fully charged including cold and thermocline 
layer 
V_hot_full=V_necessary 
V_separation_full=f_separation*V_necessary 
f_separation=0.1 
V_cold_full=0.1*V_necessary "90% net volume of water is utilised as in Fragaki et al." 
V_total_full=V_hot_full+V_separation_full+V_cold_full 
  
Tank_ratio=1.2 
h_net=d_net*Tank_ratio 
V_total_full=(pi/4)*(d_net^2)*(h_net) 
  
steel_thickness=0.05 "Thickness of stell at the tank wall" 
d=d_net+steel_thickness "Outer tank diameter" 
  
E_total_full=(V_hot_full*rho_supply*cp_supply*(T_supply-
T_ambient))+(V_separation_full*rho_separation*cp_separation*(T_separation-
T_ambient))+(V_cold_full*rho_return*cp_return*(T_return-T_ambient)) "Energy in the tank in 
full charge in J" 
E_total_full_MJ=E_total_full/(10^6) 
E_total_full_MWh=E_total_full_MJ/3600 
  
//Calculation of surface to volume ratio (for the hot water at a fully charged tank) 
surface_hot=(2*pi*(d/2)*h_hot)+(pi*((d/2)^2)) 
SV_ratio=surface_hot/V_hot 
  
//Energy storage calculation inside the tank at the start of simulation 
  
T_hot_old=T_supply 
rho_hot_old=density(Water,T=T_hot_old,P=P) 
cp_hot_old=cp(Water,T=T_hot_old,P=P) 
T_separation_old=72.5 
==PAGE:118==
117 
 
rho_separation_old=density(Water,T=T_separation_old,P=P) 
cp_separation_old=cp(Water,T=T_separation_old,P=P) 
T_cold_old=55 
rho_cold_old=density(Water,T=T_cold_old,P=P) 
cp_cold_old=cp(Water,T=T_cold_old,P=P) 
  
charging_level=1 "Coefficient of level of energy inside the tank" 
  
E_required_J=E_delivered_J 
E_required_J=V_required*rho_hot_old*cp_hot_old*(T_hot_old-T_ambient) 
  
  
V_hot=charging_level*V_required "Volume of hot water inside the tank" 
h_hot=(V_hot*4)/(pi*(d_net^2)) "Height of hot layer inside the tank" 
V_cold=V_total_full-V_hot-V_separation 
h_cold=(V_cold*4)/((pi*d_net^2)) 
V_separation=f_separation*V_necessary 
h_separation=(V_separation*4)/((pi*d_net^2)) 
  
E_hot_old=V_hot*rho_hot_old*cp_hot_old*(T_hot_old-T_ambient)  "Energy stored in the hot 
layer in J" 
E_hot_old_MJ=E_hot_old/(10^6) 
E_hot_old_MWh=E_hot_old_MJ/3600 
  
E_cold_old=V_cold*rho_cold_old*cp_cold_old*(T_cold_old-T_ambient)  "Energy stored in the 
cold layer in J" 
E_cold_old_MJ=E_cold_old/(10^6) 
E_cold_old_MWh=E_cold_old_MJ/3600 
  
E_separation_old=V_separation*rho_separation_old*cp_separation_old*(T_separation_old-
T_ambient)  "Energy stored in the separation layer in J" 
E_separation_old_MJ=E_separation_old/(10^6) 
E_separation_old_MWh=E_separation_old_MJ/3600 
  
E_old_total=E_hot_old 
E_old_total_MJ=E_old_total/(10^6) 
E_old_total_MWh=E_old_total_MJ/(3600) 
  
//Exergy storage calculation inside the tank at the start of simulation 
x_hot_old=E_hot_old-(T_ambient*V_hot*rho_hot_old*cp_hot_old*ln(T_hot_old/T_ambient)) 
x_hot_old_MJ=x_hot_old/(10^6) 
x_hot_old_MWh=x_hot_old_MJ/(3600) 
  
x_cold_old=E_cold_old-
(T_ambient*V_cold*rho_cold_old*cp_cold_old*ln(T_cold_old/T_ambient)) 
x_cold_old_MJ=x_cold_old/(10^6) 
x_cold_old_MWh=x_cold_old_MJ/(3600) 
  
x_separation_old=E_separation_old-
(T_ambient*V_separation*rho_separation_old*cp_separation_old*ln(T_separation_old/T_amb
ient)) 
x_separation_old_MJ=x_separation_old/(10^6) 
x_separation_old_MWh=x_separation_old_MJ/(3600) 
  
x_old_total=x_hot_old 
x_old_total_MJ=x_old_total/(10^6) 
x_old_total_MWh=x_old_total_MJ/(3600) 
  
//Calculation of storage capacities of the layers 
C_hot=(pi/4)*(d_net^2)*h_hot*rho_hot_old*cp_hot_old "Hot layer J/K" 
==PAGE:119==
118 
 
C_cold=(pi/4)*(d_net^2)*h_cold*rho_cold_old*cp_cold_old "Cold layer J/K" 
C_separation=(pi/4)*(d_net^2)*h_separation*rho_separation_old*cp_separation_old 
"Separation layer J/K" 
  
//Transport coefficients 
A_g=(pi/4)*(d^2-d_net^2) "Cross section area of the tank wall in m^2" 
lamda_g3=k_steel_hot "Thermal conductivity of the tank material W/mk" 
lamda_g2=k_steel_separation "Thermal conductivity of the tank material W/mk" 
k_steel_hot=conductivity(Stainless_AISI302, T=T_hot_old) "Value close to J.P. Holman" 
k_steel_separation=conductivity(Stainless_AISI302, T=T_separation_old) "Value close to J.P. 
Holman" 
A_n=(pi/4)*(d_net^2) "Cross section of the water volume in the tank in m^2" 
lamda_n3=k_water_hot "Thermal conductivity of the water in W/mk" 
lamda_n2=k_water_separation 
k_water_hot=conductivity(Water,T=T_hot_old,P=P) 
k_water_separation=conductivity(Water,T=T_separation_old,P=P) 
  
L_3_2=A_g*lamda_g3+A_n*lamda_n3 "Transport coefficient for the conduction from hot layer 
to separation layer" 
L_2_1=A_g*lamda_g2+A_n*lamda_n2 "Transport coefficient for the conduction from 
separation layer to cold layer" 
  
//Heat loss coefficients 
lamda_ins=0.065 "Thermal conductivity of mineral wool in W/K from heat transfer book J.P. 
Holman 0.50-0.130 and 
http://www.wiley.com/legacy/wileychi/morvayindustrial/supp/toolbox10.pdf" 
k_side=(pi)/((1/(2*lamda_ins))*ln((d+2*e_s)/d)+(R/(d+2*e_s))) "Heat loss coefficient for the 
side of the tank in W/mK, so has to be multiplied with the height" 
k_top=(pi/4)*((d+e_s)^2)/((e_t/lamda_ins)+R) "Heat loss coefficient or the top of the tank in 
W/K" 
k_bottom=(pi/4)*((d+e_s)^2)/((e_b/lamda_ins)+R) "Heat loss for the bottom of the tank in 
W/K" 
  
e_s=0.3 
e_b=0.05 
e_t=0.3 
R=0.13 
    
//Calculation of new temperatures   
T_hot_new=T_hot_old+delta_t/C_hot*(-(L_3_2/h_hot)*(T_hot_old-T_separation_old)-
(k_top+k_side*h_hot)*(T_hot_old-T_ambient)) 
T_cold_new=T_cold_old+delta_t/C_cold*(((L_2_1/h_cold)*(T_separation_old-T_cold_old))-
((k_bottom)*(T_cold_old-T_soil))-((k_side*h_cold)*(T_cold_old-T_ambient))) 
T_separation_new=T_separation_old+delta_t/C_separation*((L_3_2/h_separation)*(T_hot_ol
d-T_separation_old)-((L_2_1/h_separation)*(T_separation_old-T_cold_old))-
(k_side*h_separation)*(T_separation_old-T_ambient)) 
delta_t=3600*hours 
hours=1 
  
//Energy storage calculation inside the tank at the end of simulation 
E_hot_new=V_hot*rho_hot_new*cp_hot_new*(T_hot_new-T_ambient)  "Energy stored in the 
hot layer in J" 
E_hot_new_MJ=E_hot_new/(10^6) 
E_hot_new_MWh=E_hot_new_MJ/3600 
rho_hot_new=density(Water,T=T_hot_new,P=P) 
cp_hot_new=cp(Water,T=T_hot_new,P=P) 
  
E_cold_new=V_cold*rho_cold_new*cp_cold_new*(T_cold_new-T_ambient)  "Energy stored 
in the cold layer in J" 
E_cold_new_MJ=E_cold_new/(10^6) 
==PAGE:120==
119 
 
E_cold_new_MWh=E_cold_new_MJ/3600 
rho_cold_new=density(Water,T=T_cold_new,P=P) 
cp_cold_new=cp(Water,T=T_cold_new,P=P) 
  
E_separation_new=V_separation*rho_separation_new*cp_separation_new*(T_separation_ne
w-T_ambient)  "Energy stored in the separation layer in J" 
E_separation_new_MJ=E_separation_new/(10^6) 
E_separation_new_MWh=E_separation_new_MJ/3600 
rho_separation_new=density(Water,T=T_separation_new,P=P) 
cp_separation_new=cp(Water,T=T_separation_new,P=P) 
  
E_new_total=E_hot_new 
E_new_total_MJ=E_new_total/(10^6) 
E_new_total_MWh=E_new_total_MJ/(3600) 
  
//Exergy storage calculation inside the tank at the end of simulation 
x_hot_new=E_hot_new-
(T_ambient*V_hot*rho_hot_new*cp_hot_new*ln(T_hot_new/T_ambient)) 
x_hot_new_MJ=x_hot_new/(10^6) 
x_hot_new_MWh=x_hot_new_MJ/(3600) 
  
x_cold_new=E_cold_new-
(T_ambient*V_cold*rho_cold_new*cp_cold_new*ln(T_cold_new/T_ambient)) 
x_cold_new_MJ=x_cold_new/(10^6) 
x_cold_new_MWh=x_cold_new_MJ/(3600) 
  
x_separation_new=E_separation_new-
(T_ambient*V_separation*rho_separation_new*cp_separation_new*ln(T_separation_new/T_
ambient)) 
x_separation_new_MJ=x_separation_new/(10^6) 
x_separation_new_MWh=x_separation_new_MJ/(3600) 
  
x_new_total=x_hot_new 
x_new_total_MJ=x_new_total/(10^6) 
x_new_total_MWh=x_new_total_MJ/(3600) 
  
//Energy losses in the layers and in total 
deltaE_hot=E_hot_old-E_hot_new 
deltaE_hot_MJ=E_hot_old_MJ-E_hot_new_MJ 
deltaE_hot_MWh=E_hot_old_MWh-E_hot_new_MWh 
  
deltaE_cold=E_cold_old-E_cold_new 
deltaE_cold_MJ=E_cold_old_MJ-E_cold_new_MJ 
deltaE_cold_MWh=E_cold_old_MWh-E_cold_new_MWh 
  
deltaE_separation=E_separation_old-E_separation_new 
deltaE_separation_MJ=E_separation_old_MJ-E_separation_new_MJ 
deltaE_separation_MWh=E_separation_old_MWh-E_separation_new_MWh 
  
deltaE_total=deltaE_hot 
deltaE_total_MJ=deltaE_hot_MJ 
deltaE_total_MWh=deltaE_hot_MWh 
  
//Exergy losses in the layers and in total 
deltax_hot=x_hot_old-x_hot_new 
deltax_hot_MJ=x_hot_old_MJ-x_hot_new_MJ 
deltax_hot_MWh=x_hot_old_MWh-x_hot_new_MWh 
  
deltax_cold=x_cold_old-x_cold_new 
deltax_cold_MJ=x_cold_old_MJ-x_cold_new_MJ 
==PAGE:121==
120 
 
deltax_cold_MWh=x_cold_old_MWh-x_cold_new_MWh 
 
deltax_separation=x_separation_old-x_separation_new 
deltax_separation_MJ=x_separation_old_MJ-x_separation_new_MJ 
deltax_separation_MWh=x_separation_old_MWh-x_separation_new_MWh 
  
deltax_total=deltax_hot 
deltax_total_MJ=deltax_total/(10^6) 
deltax_total_MWh=deltax_total_MJ/(3600)  
  
//Calculation of storage efficiencies 
eta_storage=(E_new_total/E_old_total) 
eta_storage_%=eta_storage*100 
  
//Calculation of exergy efficiency 
eta_exergy=(x_new_total/x_old_total) 
eta_exergy_%=eta_exergy*100 
  
//Calculation of heat loss factor 
loss_factor_variable=deltaE_total/E_old_total 
loss_factor_full=deltaE_total/E_total_full 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
