==PAGE:1==
 
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Management Engineering
Master’s Thesis 
Design & Innovation 
Submitted by: 
Mette Louise Christensen s102973 and Yen Mai Thi Trinh s140514 
Supervised by: 
Philip Cash, Associate Professor 
Submitted: 
July 1st 2016 
DESIGNING THROUGH THE SENSES: 
THE EFFECT OF INFLUENCING ATTITUDE AND BEHAVIOUR 
BY MEANS OF THE HUMAN SENSES IN DESIGN
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
PREFACE 
ENGLISH TITLE 
Designing through the senses: The effect of inﬂuencing attitude and behaviour by means of 
the human senses in design 
DANISH TITLE 
Designe ved brug af sanserne: Effekten af at påvirke indstilling og adfærd via de 
menneskelige sanser i design 
  
PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
This thesis sets out to compare the effect of priming through one of the basic human senses 
to another, to ultimately identify an appropriate way in which priming through the senses 
can be used. In the context of design, it may be considered that sensory inputs for these 
senses can be translated into design features and applied to products to change attitude 
and behaviour. A scientiﬁc literature review will provide the theoretical foundation and 
empirical data will be gathered through two experimental studies. 
Project: Master’s Thesis in M.Sc. Design and Innovation 
Authors: Mette Louise Christensen and Yen Mai Thi Trinh 
Supervisor: Philip Cash, Associate Professor 
Submission date: July 1st 2016 
Department: Management Engineering 
Educational institution: Technical University of Denmark 
Mette Louise Christensen s102973 
July 1st 2016
Yen Mai Thi Trinh s140514 
July 1st 2016
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
ABSTRACT 
The purpose of this thesis was to determine which of the ﬁve basic human senses in 
comparison to another is more effective in inﬂuencing for change of attitude and behaviour. 
Relevant literature within the scope of the area was reviewed and showed that priming 
through the senses has demonstrated effect. No previous studies have stated which of the 
senses is more susceptible to inﬂuence however. Two studies were conducted in the context 
of this project, where sustainable behaviour was the behaviour addressed in the studies. 
Study 1 uncovered, for the sense of hearing, smell, and touch, the sensory inputs that 
people most commonly associate with the concept of sustainability. Study 2 then used these 
sensory inputs as priming stimuli to assess whether one sense was more susceptible to 
inﬂuence than another, when being primed through for a more sustainable attitude and 
behaviour. Phenomena of nature, such as bird song, wind, grass, ocean, and wood, was 
found to be the sensory inputs that people most often associate with sustainability, and 
several of these phenomena of nature recurred across the senses. People primed with 
stimuli for one sense did not display a more sustainable attitude than people primed with 
stimuli for the other senses. The same was applicable for sustainable behaviour. However, 
results showed clear and equal effects of priming trough all of the senses for a sustainable 
attitude. Based on previous studies showing effect of priming for other types of attitudes 
and behaviours through each of the senses, it can be sensibly inferred that none of the 
senses: sight, hearing, smell, and touch are more effective than another when priming for 
change of attitude and behaviour in general. This implies for designers to be more aware of 
all senses when designing for attitude and behaviour change in the context of more society 
considerate designs. 
!II
==PAGE:6==
NOMENCLATURE 
Attitude & behaviour 
Attitude is what we are (on the inside) and behaviour is what we do (on the outside) (Myers, 
2002). 
Conceptual priming 
Attitude and behaviour is elicited by the inﬂuence of a pertinent mental representation that 
has been activated by the prior experience of a stimulus belonging to a particular concept 
(Bargh and Chartrand, 2000). 
Multisensory design 
Designing for the inclusion of the ﬁve basic human senses in order to provide users with a 
clear understanding of the intended purpose, functions, and application of the product 
(Schifferstein and Desmet, 2008). 
Priming 
A subconscious response is elicited in an event as a consequence of being exposed to a 
stimulus in a different event (Schacter and Buckner, 1998). 
Prosocial behaviour 
See section 1.5 for the deﬁnition.  
Self-construal 
The way in which individuals deﬁne themselves, which inﬂuences how they think, feel, and 
interact with others (Cross et al., 2002). 
Side effect (also known as: indirect effect; rebound effect) 
An unintended and undesired behavioural and social effect that can occur from the use of a 
product (Tromp and Hekkert, 2014). 
Smell 
Perceived by the sense of smell; including a scent (pleasant smell) and an odour (unpleasant 
smell) (Dictionary, 2005-2015). 
Society-centred design 
A design approach that considers the social aspects of design in the design process of 
designing new products (Tromp and Hekkert, 2014). 
Subliminal and supraliminal priming 
In subliminal priming, the brain is unaware of the prime as well as the inﬂuence, while in 
supraliminal priming, the brain is aware of the prime but not the inﬂuence (Bargh and 
Chartrand, 2000). 
Sustainability (ecology) 
The capacity to maintain the environment and preserve natural resources to support long-
term ecological balance (Dictionary, 2016). 
Sustainable behaviour  
See section 1.5 for the deﬁnition. 
!III
==PAGE:7==
Type 1 and Type 2 (also known as System 1 and System 2) 
The human mind can be considered in terms of two levels: the unconscious that includes 
the things that are beyond a human’s awareness, and the conscious that includes the things 
that a person is aware of (Stanovich’s, 1999). 
User-centred design (also know as human-centred design) 
The design approach where the individual user’s needs, satisfaction and other aspects in 
favour of the user are placed at the centre of the design process (Redström, 2006). 
ABBREVIATIONS 
CBSM: Community-Based Social Marketing (McKenzie-Mohr, 1999) 
DRM: Design Research Methodology (Blessing and Chakrabarti, 2009) 
DwI: Design with Intent (Lockton et al., 2009) 
POs: Performative Objects (Niedderer, 2007) 
SID: Social Implication Design (Tromp and Hekkert, 2014) 
GENERAL INFORMATION 
Due to the restricted time frame for this project, it has only been possible to conduct 
empirical studies on three of the four assessed senses. The project has therefore, for the 
relative comparison between the four senses, used Olsen and Holm-Hansen’s (2013) study 
results to represent one of the four senses (sight). Olsen and Holm-Hansen’s (2013) study 
was conducted with respect to sustainable attitude and behaviour. So for a fair relative 
comparison, the present study was also conducted with respect to sustainable attitude and 
behaviour. The literature review as well as the general discussion of this thesis will however 
address prosocial attitude and behaviour in general. The inclusion of sustainable attitude 
and behaviour will already be seen in the posed research questions that have established 
the foundation for the hypothesis proposed for the empirical studies.  
In the literature review, three different priming techniques are mentioned as techniques that 
can be considered relevant for this project; associative, semantic, and conceptual priming. 
Conceptual priming is however the priming technique of interest, while the other two 
techniques are rationally disregarded. The terms ‘associate’ and ‘association’ are used 
throughout the thesis to describe a relation or connection between two items, and has 
nothing to do with associative priming unless it has been explicitly mentioned in that 
context. 
For the studies in this thesis, the responsible parties have been denoted ’experimenter(s)’, 
which refers to the two authors of this thesis. 
!IV
==PAGE:8==
APPRECIATIONS 
The authors would ﬁrst and foremost like to thank the supervisor of the project, Associate 
Professor Philip Cash from DTU Management Engineering, for weekly supervision and 
support throughout the project which have been highly appreciated. Without his guidance 
in different aspects and areas, this project would not have been achievable, and not least 
educational and enlightening. 
An appreciation should also be expressed to a range of people who have provided their 
help in the process of the project. Firstly, thanks to Associate Professor Balder Onarheim 
from DTU Management Engineering for putting the students of his course at disposal for 
the execution of Study 1. Then, thanks to all the students who participated in the two studies 
and thereby provided the necessary empirical data for the project.  
The authors would also like to thank Senior Engineer John Kristensen from Sauer Danfoss 
for his external coding of data from Study 1 for the intercoder reliability agreement, and 
Assistant Professor Laurens Boer from the IT University of Copenhagen for providing rooms 
at the University for parts of Study 2. 
!V
==PAGE:9==
LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
When the students have completed the thesis, they: 
1. Shall have attained a good understanding of – and be able to reﬂect on – relevant 
scientiﬁc and engineering knowledge within the subject area of the project. 
2. Shall be able to identify relevant scientiﬁc problems within the subject area and be able 
to formulate clear and relevant research questions and a hypothesis. 
3. Shall be able to identify and review the relevant scientiﬁc literature within the scope of 
the project. 
4. Shall be able to assess and select appropriate scientiﬁc methods, tools and 
competencies within the subject area of the project. 
5. Shall be able to apply the selected scientiﬁc methods, tools and competencies to the 
project. 
6. Shall be able to analyse, explain and discuss relevant professional and scientiﬁc 
problems. 
7. Shall be able to manage situations that are complex and unforeseen and that require 
adaptation and new solving approaches. 
8. Shall be able to independently initiate and carry out scientiﬁc studies relevant to the 
subject area of the project and assume professional responsibility. 
9. Shall be able to disseminate research-based knowledge as well as the ﬁnal design 
approach and outcome. 
10. Shall be able to set up a clear framework for the thesis and communicate their work 
clearly and in a comprehensible manner. 
11. Shall be able to provide proper documentation, including proper referencing 
throughout the project and provide a complete reference list. 
12. Shall adjust the staging of the project based on an assessment of the magnitude of the 
task, its complexity and desired result. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
!VI
==PAGE:10==
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
1 
1.1 Aim of thesis 
2 
1.2 Research question 
2 
1.3 Report structure 
2 
1.4 Design research method 
3 
1.5 Deﬁnition of prosocial behaviour 
3 
2. LITERATURE REVIEW 
5 
2.1 Design in society 
8 
2.1.1 Side effects 
8 
2.2 Design approaches 
9 
2.3 Conﬂict in concerns 
10 
2.3.1 Self-construal 
11 
2.4 Inﬂuence 
13 
2.4.1 Four types of inﬂuence 
14 
2.4.2 Dual-processing 
17 
2.4.3 Priming 
18 
2.5 Senses 
20 
2.5.1 Inﬂuence through senses 
20 
2.6 Senses in design 
24 
2.7 Findings 
25 
3. PRODUCT DESIGN REVIEW 
27 
3.1 Sustainability 
28 
3.1.1 One’s understanding of sustainability 
29 
3.1.2 Worldwide understanding of sustainability 
30 
3.2 Sustainability in products 
31 
3.2.1 Speciﬁc product examples 
32 
3.2.2 General product examples 
34 
3.3 Findings 
35 
4. METHODOLOGY 
37 
4.1 Hypothesis 
38 
4.1.1 Hypothesis statement 
38 
4.2 Study approach 
39 
4.2.1 Study 1 
39 
4.2.2 Study 2 
39 
5. STUDY 1 
41 
5.1  Method 
42 
5.1.1 Design of study 
42 
5.1.2 Procedure 
43 
5.1.3 Participants 
44 
5.2 Data and coding 
45 
5.2.1 First coding 
45 
5.2.2 Second coding 
47 
==PAGE:11==
5.2.3 Intercoder reliability 
49 
5.3 Results 
52 
5.3.1 Stimuli for sustainable attitude and behaviour 
54 
5.4 Discussion 
55 
5.4.1 Brainstorm of words 
56 
5.4.2 Categorising words 
56 
5.5 Conclusion of study 
56 
6. STUDY 2 
59 
6.1 Method  
61 
6.1.1 Design of study 
61 
6.1.2 Design of assessment method 
63 
6.1.3 Procedure 
65 
6.1.4 Participants 
68 
6.1.5 Coding 
68 
6.2 Results 
70 
6.2.1 Statistical method 
70 
6.2.2 P-values 
71 
6.2.3 Behavioural test 
72 
6.2.4 Correlation 
74 
6.3 Discussion 
74 
6.3.1 Priming effect 
74 
6.3.2 Assessment of behaviour 
75 
6.4 Conclusion of study 
76 
7. GENERAL DISCUSSION 
77 
7.1 Discussion of results 
78 
7.1.1 Correlation 
80 
7.1.2 Sample size 
80 
7.2 Discussion of method 
81 
7.2.1 Compatibility with previous study 
82 
7.2.2 Assessment method 
82 
7.3 Implications 
85 
7.3.1 Implications for design research 
85 
7.3.2 Implications for design practice 
85 
7.4 Limitations  
88 
8. CONCLUSION 
91 
8.1 Further work 
93 
8.1.1 Assessment of behaviour 
93 
8.1.2 Reinforcement of generalisation 
94 
8.1.3 Evaluation in everyday products 
94 
8.2 Final words 
94 
REFERENCES 
95
==PAGE:12==
==PAGE:13==
1. INTRODUCTION 
!1
1. 
INTRODUCTION
==PAGE:14==
1.1 Aim of thesis 
Designing for change of attitude and behaviour is an important area for today’s modern 
world, where an increasing consumption of products has led to various issues in society. 
These issues are due to side effects occurring from the use of these products, which are 
consequences of designers’ little awareness of their social responsibility in design. As 
people make sense of the world through their senses, much research has taken interest in 
inﬂuencing through the basic human senses for a change of attitude and behaviour. It 
however seems as if an unequal interest has taken place without any explanation for this 
imbalance. This project sets out to explore how attitude and behaviour might be inﬂuenced, 
through the basic human senses by means of design, to become more prosocial. More 
precisely, the project will by a relative comparison investigate which of the basic human 
senses is more susceptible to inﬂuential design. The ﬁndings should ultimately allow 
designers to focus on the sense that is more susceptible to inﬂuence, and enable them to 
bring out designs that are more considerate of society. 
1.2 Research question 
With interest in exploring priming effects through the different basic human senses, the 
following research question was presented for this project, 
How might the design of everyday things, with the appropriate way of inﬂuencing through 
the basic human senses by means of design, elicit sustainable attitude and behaviour? 
which led to the following subquestions: 
1. Which stimuli within each basic sense of hearing, smell, and touch is most commonly 
associated with sustainability? 
2. What relative pattern can be observed across the different stimuli that people associate 
with sustainability? 
3. What hierarchy, in terms of the sensory perception more likely to cause the display of 
sustainable attitude and behaviour, will a relative comparison between the senses show? 
4. How can the acquired knowledge (from RQ3) be used to identify which human sense is 
more susceptible to inﬂuential design? 
1.3 Report structure 
The thesis is composed of eight chapters. The introduction (ch. 1) presents the aim of the 
project and the posed research questions. The following chapter (ch. 2) is a thorough review 
of literature relevant to the studied subject area that provides the scientiﬁc foundation for 
the project. In relation to sustainability, a product design review (ch. 3) has been performed 
to establish a basis within the speciﬁc area. Based on the two reviews, the methods applied 
to answer the research questions are described and the hypothesis is proposed (ch. 4). 
From this, the conduction of the two interrelated studies are documented (ch. 5 and 6). 
!2
==PAGE:15==
Results from the studies are then discussed, followed by implications of the ﬁndings and the 
limitations present throughout the project (ch. 7). Finally, the last chapter (ch. 8) presents a 
conclusion of the project along with suggestions for further work. 
1.4 Design research method 
This project can be deﬁned as being a design research project as its ﬁndings and 
deliverables will contribute as implications within the area of designing for priming of 
attitude and behaviour change. Based on this interpretation, the project has followed the 
structure of the Design Research Methodology (DRM) developed by Blessing and 
Chakrabarti (2009). The DRM consists of four stages: Research Clariﬁcation (RC), Descriptive 
Study I (DS-I), Prescriptive Study (PS), and Descriptive Study II (DS-II). Within the DRM 
framework, seven types of design researches can be considered as different types of 
approaches, depending on the variations of the stages. For the present project, type 2 
(Figure 1.1) was identiﬁed as the type of design research suitable for answering the research 
questions and verify the hypothesis. 
 
Figure 1.1: Design research project: type 2 (Blessing and Chakrabarti, 2009) 
For the type 2 design research, the RC stage consists of a clariﬁcation of the research by 
reviewing literature and formulate a hypothesis. The Comprehensive DS-I stage is a further 
elaboration of the literature review and the conduct of an empirical study where the results 
are produced by the researchers of the project. The stage is followed by an Initial PS stage, 
where the understanding of the problem obtained through the previous stages will be used 
to suggest how ﬁndings can be applied in the context of improving design. This stage is 
Initial because the suggested ﬁndings are only the beginning of the PS stage and have 
been prepared to be used in the development of interventions. In this design research type 
there will therefore not be a DS-II stage, where the usefulness of the implications otherwise 
could have been evaluated. 
1.5 Deﬁnition of prosocial behaviour 
In this thesis prosocial behaviour and sustainable behaviour will be addressed and should 
be understood as deﬁned following. 
Prosocial behaviour 
“With prosocial behaviour it is believed that people have an enduring tendency to think 
about the welfare and rights of other people, to feel concern and empathy for them, and act 
in a way that beneﬁts them” (Penner and Finkelstein, 1998). As a subcategory to prosocial 
behaviour is sustainable behaviour.  
RESEARCH 
CLARIFICATION
DESCRIPTIVE 
STUDY I
PRESCRIPTIVE 
STUDY
DESCRIPTIVE 
STUDY II
Review-based
Comprehensive
Initial
!3
==PAGE:16==
Sustainable behaviour 
No exact deﬁnition is found for the term. The way in which the term is understood and used 
describes a range of behaviours that relate to the concept of (ecological) sustainability. So in 
the context of ecology, sustainable behaviour describes the behaviour that is targeted 
towards maintaining the environment and preserving natural resources. In this regard, 
sustainable behaviour therefore includes: 
Reduce 
make resource consumption less in 
amount, degree, or size (Dictionary, 
2005-2015)
Repurpose 
adapt things for use in a different 
purpose (Dictionary, 2005-2015)
Recycle 
convert waste into reusable material 
(Dictionary, 2005-2015)
· read e-books 
· launder in cold water 
· line dry laundry 
· use natural light 
· walk or bike 
· print on two sides 
· borrow 
· eat local food 
· take short showers
· make compost 
· collect and use rainwater 
· use glass jars as containers 
· donate 
· cook with leftover food 
· buy used
· use recycle material 
products 
· use a recycle bin 
· plant trees
!4
==PAGE:17==
2. LITERATURE 
REVIEW 
!5
2. 
LITERATURE 
REVIEW
==PAGE:18==
In the context of designing by means of and priming through the senses to inﬂuence 
people for a more prosocial attitude and behaviour, an immense interest have led to much 
research and study in the domain. The research and studies essentially include a wide 
variety of theories. This review will however focus on themes that are recognised as relevant 
for this thesis as well as support the proposal of a hypothesis as foundation for the studies 
conducted in the context of this thesis. The review initially identiﬁes the role of consumer 
products and how the design of these enables the use of them to affect society (2.1). The 
society-centred design approach is then described to bring to light the design approach 
that considers society (2.2). To emphasise the importance of considering both the individual 
and society in design, the conﬂict between individual concerns and collective concerns are 
addressed (2.3). The concept of inﬂuence is then introduced and explained with respect to 
the desired prosocial attitude and behaviour, where inﬂuence type, technique, and level will 
be elaborated (2.4). Studies that have been conducted in the past in the ﬁeld of priming 
through the basic human senses for the inﬂuence of attitude and behaviour will then be 
presented. (2.5). Finally, the review describes the multisensory design approach; a design 
approach that emphasises the importance of awareness towards the ﬁve senses in design 
(2.6). An overview of the literature review is shown in the the illustration (Figure 2.1). In-
depth elaboration of ‘processing’ and ‘perception’ (bottom of Figure 2.1) have been 
excluded from the scope, as they concern matters that this thesis is not addressing. 
!6
==PAGE:19==
!
 
Figure 2.1: Overview of literature review 
SENSING 
SEEING HEARING SMELLING TASTING FEELING
ARTEFACT 
OVERCONSUMPTION
CONSCIOUS 
DECISIVE 
UNCONSCIOUS
CONSCIOUS 
COERCIVE 
UNCONSCIOUS
CONSCIOUS 
PERSUASIVE 
UNCONSCIOUS
CONSCIOUS 
SEDUCTIVE 
UNCONSCIOUS
ONCE INFORMATION IS SENSED, 
IT WILL BE PROCESSED, 
WHEREAFTER PERCEPTION IS GENERATED 
TO SUPPORT ATTITUDE AND BEHAVIOUR
NEGLECTS COLLECTIVE CONCERNS
NEGLECTS INDIVIDUAL CONCERNS
INFLUENCE
INFLUENCE
PERCEPTION
PERCEPTION
CONFLICT
USER-CENTRED 
DESIGN
SOCIETY-CENTRED 
DESIGN
INDIVIDUAL 
CONCERNS
COLLECTIVE 
CONCERNS
PICTURES 
BRAND LOGOS 
WORDS 
SCENTS 
…
PRIMING
STIMULATING
SUBLIMINAL____SUPRALIMINAL
STIMULATED 
VISUAL AUDITORY OLFACTORY GUSTATORY TACTILE
PROCESSING
TO BRIDGE THE TWO TYPES OF CONCERNS, 
THE DESIGNER MUST FIRST ADDRESS 
INDIVIDUAL CONCERNS IN ORDER TO 
ELICIT THE DESIRED PROSOCIAL BEHAVIOUR
STEREOTYPES 
OBJECTS 
MUSIC 
ORIENTATION 
…
!7
==PAGE:20==
2.1 Design in society 
Designers have for a long time been taught to develop products in the concern of the 
individual user; products that are considered everyday things of use and consumption. By 
the approach of user-centred design, these products are designed often for the purpose of 
the user's pleasure and satisfaction (Norman, 2013). To serve the need for satisfaction and 
pleasure as well as comfort, the world that we live in has been designed to support people 
in their desire to exert less physical effort (Tromp, 2013). An example of a product design 
existing in today’s society that allows minimal exertion is the car. The car has been designed 
to extend the travel distance and ease the travel process for an individual (Side Effects of 
Social Media, 2014). As a mean for travelling, the car can however also be thought of as 
aiding obesity and decreasing health, as it “amputates” people’s legs and thereby disables 
people. It leads to reduction in their level of physical activity that can in extreme cases lead 
to obesity. Other product design examples with the purpose of making people’s lives more 
efﬁcient can be found in the private homes, such as electronic devices to shave body hairs, 
blow dry hair, and brush teeth. Dishwashers, washing machines, tumble dryers, and vacuum 
cleaners are other electronic devices used as assistive tools in the home. Similar examples 
of product designs can be found in public spaces, where elevators and escalators are 
ridden to effortlessly move from one ﬂoor to another (Tromp, 2013). 
All of these means have been designed and are continuously being developed with the 
intention of serving the user’s desires and needs for an easy and effective life. These 
products do however lead to overconsumption of electricity and no physical effort. In their 
attempt to serve as extensions of some human ability they simultaneously disables it 
(McLuhan, 1967), which thereby increases the consumption of products. Yet, it is 
understandable that designers have a preference for designing products in the favour of the 
user. The user-centred approach enables designers to create successfully desirable 
products that meet the desires and needs of the user. Unfortunately, this approach is to 
some extent narrow and focused. Use of such products can bring about consequences in 
terms of various issues in society, such as obesity, climate change, health, and economic 
issues. Such issues can be considered side effects, which are the effects that can occur from 
the use of products even without the designer’s desire or intention to design it into the use 
of the products (Tromp and Hekkert, 2014). The issues are thus considered side effects, 
because they have without desire or intention occurred from excessive product 
consumption, and are ultimately affecting society. 
2.1.1 Side effects 
With the designer’s narrow focus on the user’s desires and needs, many side effects have 
followed as consequences of the use of designs existing in society (sec. 2.1). Examples of 
the consequences that follow when side effects are not considered are as have already been 
mentioned the car and the escalator. Other examples are fast food drive-ins that contribute 
to obesity, and cigarettes that contribute to decreased health and increased healthcare 
costs (Tromp, 2013). Verbeek (2005) uses the microwave as an example of how design 
unintentionally and implicitly affects behaviour patterns and thereby society. He states that 
because the microwave oven has made it so easy to quickly heat up an individual meal, 
families nowadays join together for fewer dinners than they did before (Verbeek, 2005). 
!8
==PAGE:21==
Such designs of everyday things are often not designed with the intention of causing side 
effects, but the user-centred design process does not explicitly address social aspects of 
design (Tromp et al., 2011). Hence, designers may unintentionally not always consider 
possible behavioural and social side effects that may occur from the use of their designs. 
When with intention, designers add a script to the product as an “implicit manual” in which 
the designer’s intention of use of the product is embodied. Whether this script is to be 
followed by the user is however out of the designer’s control (Akrich, 1992). As design can 
easily and unknowingly advocate for behaviours that cause side effects, even if the designer 
has no intentions of causing such effects (Tromp, 2013), side effects are necessary to 
consider in the design of products for user consumption. When the designer neglects 
considerations towards possible side effects that may occur through user interaction with 
their design, they are to some extent responsible for the resulting side effects. Therefore, 
designers need to take the social implications of their designs seriously (Tromp, 2011). They 
need to stop hiding behind the desires and needs of the user, and take responsibility as 
shapers of society. This means that designers must shift from a user-centred approach to a 
society-centred approach, and thereby through design turn the focus of the design in favour 
of society. 
2.2 Design approaches 
A possible reason to why there has yet to be a shift in focus of design from user to society 
can be that user-centred design brings about successfully desirable products that are 
satisfying for both users and consumer product companies. Norman (2013) states that by 
putting human needs, capabilities, and behaviour ﬁrst, user-centred design can be 
considered to be the solution for good design. The user-centred design approach has thus 
been considered to be the optimal practice for design (Norman, 2013), and has been 
explored and elaborated much over time by different designers (e.g. Norman, 2013; Cross, 
2008; Buur and Binder; 2006). However, since this user-centred design approach only aims 
attention at the user’s interests to enable design of desirable products, it often fails to 
consider society.  
!9
==PAGE:22==
To compensate for the absence of considerations towards society in the user-centred 
design approach, researchers have started considering a different design approach known 
as society-centred design (Tromp et al., 2011); an approach that considers the social aspects 
of design. A method that has been developed for society-centred design, is the Social 
Implication Design (SID) method (Tromp and Hekkert, 2014). The method intends to support 
the designer’s exploration of the inﬂuence that an artefact has on people’s behaviour in 
order to gain the desired social impact. The output of the method, a product or service, will 
be the designer’s contribution to the social realm. An example of such an output is ‘Welding 
Works’; a welding course in which participants are taught how to design, construct, and 
weld a fence. The main function of the design is to activate young people through their 
attendance in the course and its sub-function to get residents of the area to explore new 
parts of their neighbourhood by walking the distance to experience the fence (Tromp and 
Hekkert, 2015). Also developed for society-centred design, Niedderer (2007) has 
introduced Performative Objects (POs) to serve as artefacts that will ultimately inﬂuence 
people’s behaviour in the context of society. Her assumption is that these objects can 
stimulate the user’s behaviour by means of their function, thus causing mindful reﬂection 
and interaction. In relation to society, the aim of the POs is to shift consumption towards a 
more mindful—that is, socially-reﬂective—approach (Niedderer, 2007). As an example 
Niedderer describes ‘Social Cups’, cups that have a rounded foot and is therefore not able 
to stand by itself but only if connected to at least two other cups. This offers the user three 
choices of interaction: connecting the cup to two other cups to make them stand, hold the 
cup in their hand, or lying the cup down. There is essentially no right or wrong action, but 
each of the three actions has social connotations, and thereby makes the user aware of their 
social context. 
Unfortunately, society-centred design approaches like the SID method and POs have, in 
contrast to user-centred design approaches, an extreme focus on society and neglects the 
user’s desires and needs. Observed practitioners testing the application of the SID method 
noted that the method indeed does support considering the social implications of the 
design, but provides little support in thinking about the use, functioning, and experience of 
the design. One practitioner expressed, “I feel my design is way out of balance, it is too far 
from reality” (Tromp and Hekkert, 2015). So it appears that it is difﬁcult to ﬁnd a balance 
between the two different design approaches; a balance that ensures that either of the two 
is not leaning too much in their own extreme direction. In the context of designing products 
that are desirable by the user as well as being beneﬁcial for society, an alignment between 
user’s and society’s interests must ﬁrst be formed. Only then can a balance between the 
user-centred design approach and the society-centred design approach be found. 
2.3 Conﬂict in concerns 
The imbalance between user-centred design and society-centred design grounds in the 
conﬂict between individual and collective concerns, which are often not in line (Tromp, 
2013). Even though human beings are social creatures and have always sought to be a part 
of a community, it should not be forgotten that each human being still is an individual 
(Yeatts Jr., 1997). In society it is not uncommon that the individual chooses to prioritise 
themselves and their individual concerns, and push away collective concerns. Even though 
!10
==PAGE:23==
what is best for the collective will ultimately also beneﬁt the individual on average, the 
individual does not always experience or recognise it as so (Tromp et al., 2011)—or it 
becomes overruled by other conﬂicting concerns. Rather, as individuals, many are set with 
the attitude that a social problem is someone else’s problem, or at least not one’s own 
problem (Tromp, 2013). As every mind starts with some selﬁshness (Nelson, 1999), it can be 
considered that society consists to some extent of selﬁsh individuals, who ﬁnd it difﬁcult to 
think about doing something for society or others if it will not beneﬁt themselves. Acting to 
the beneﬁt of society is the behaviour that is also denoted as ‘prosocial behaviour’ (Penner 
and Finkelstein, 1998). So, in order to elicit the desired the desired prosocial behaviour, the 
individual and collective concerns must be bridged. Due to the selﬁshness of a person, the 
designer must therefore ﬁrst address individual concerns (Tromp et al., 2011). An example 
of a product that illustrates this approach is the speed bump. From the perspective of 
society, it wants people to drive slowly to be responsible, but from the perspective of the 
user, it signiﬁes to slow down to avoid damaging the car (Latour, 1992). In this case, the 
individual concerns about damaging the car will in most cases make the driver slow down 
their car, through which they will actually display prosocial behaviour by not being a danger 
to others in trafﬁc. Therefore, in the context of designing for prosocial behaviour, products 
can be designed seemingly in the concern of the individual, but through the use of the 
products in the long run can be beneﬁcial for society—and thereby align individual and 
collective concerns. 
2.3.1 Self-construal 
When designing for prosocial behaviour, it must be considered that one thing is the way 
people act in reality, their behaviour, but an entirely different thing is the way people see 
themselves, and thus how they think they behave. “What people say, what people do, and 
what they say they do are entirely different things” (Margaret Mead, n.d.). Thompson and 
Barton (1994) have in their study investigated whether or not there is a relationship between 
people's attitude towards the environment and sustainable behaviour. Results from the 
study however showed low correlations between pro-environmental attitude and 
conservation behaviour. So even though people see themselves as having the right attitude 
towards a behaviour, it is not certain that this behaviour will be expelled. This might however 
heavily depend on the self-construal of each individual. Self-construal denotes the way in 
which individuals deﬁne themselves, which inﬂuences how they think, feel, and interact with 
others (Cross et al., 2002). It is the extent to which individuals construe their identity in 
relation to their social roles, groups, status, and relationships (Ashton-James et al., 2007). A 
distinction between two types of self-construals can be considered: independent and 
interdependent (Cross et al., 2011). The way in which people see themselves in relation to 
others, and thereby which of the two self-construal categories people ﬁnd themselves in, 
has an inﬂuence on people’s willingness in terms of doing something for the collective. The 
interdependent self-construal is known as a precursor to prosocial behaviour. So people 
with an interdependent self-construal are more likely to deﬁne themselves by their 
relationships with others; like ‘I am a daughter’ or ‘I am a mother’. In contrast, people with an 
independent self-construal identify themselves by their individual or unique skills and 
attributes; like ‘I am tall’, ‘I am intelligent’, or ‘I am friendly’ (Ashton-James et al., 2007). The 
pro-environmental attitude displayed by the participants in Thompson and Barton’s (1994) 
!11
==PAGE:24==
study could be grounded in reasons related to either of the two types of self-construals. 
Either concern of not wanting to breathe in polluted air and thus thinking of themselves as 
individuals, or concern about emission of CO2 in the concern of the ecosystem and animal 
life and thus thinking of themselves as part of society (Arnocky et al., 2007). According to 
Ashton-James et al. (2007), participants displaying a pro-environmental attitude due to the 
latter would more likely perform a prosocial behaviour. 
So it appears that even though people display a desired attitude, it is not certain that the 
corresponding behaviour will be elicited as it partially depends on the way in which they see 
themselves; that is, their self-construal. The interdependent self-construal deﬁnes the self as 
being a part of society, hence the distance from displaying a prosocial attitude to actually 
performing a prosocial action will be shorter. However, reality is that not all people have an 
interdependent self-construal and therefore not a natural foundation to elicit prosocial 
behaviour regardless of attitude. This conﬁrms the identiﬁed conﬂict between individual and 
collective concerns and the notion that in designing for prosocial behaviour it should be 
preferred to design for seemingly individual concerns that triggers the user to perform a 
behaviour that eventually will beneﬁt society. This approach may make it possible to design 
for inﬂuence on prosocial attitude and behaviour regardless of people’s self-construal. 
!12
==PAGE:25==
2.4 Inﬂuence 
In the context of designing for behaviour change that addresses both the individual and 
society, Niedderer et al. (2014) suggest a middleground approach. Niedderer et al. (2014) 
identify a distinction between three levels for theories on behaviour change: (1) individual: 
behaviours are based on one’s individual self, (2) contextual: behaviours are based on 
contextual elements, and (3) middleground: behaviours are based on a combination of 
individual and contextual. Frequently discussed amongst the middleground approaches to 
design for behaviour change in social contexts are Community-Based Social Marketing 
Design (Clune, 2010), Mindful Design (Niedderer, 2013), Design with Intent (Lockton et al., 
2009) and Socially Responsible Design (Tromp et al., 2011). 
Clune (2010) suggests to apply the principles of Community-Based Social Marketing 
(CBSM) (McKenzie-Mohr and Smith, 1999) that involves ﬁve steps to aid behaviour change: 
(1) select behaviours, (2) identify barriers and beneﬁts, (3) design and develop strategies, (4) 
conduct a pilot, and (5) implement broadscale (McKenzie-Mohr and Schultz, 2012). He 
points out that even though CBSM does not directly consider design, design is implicit in its 
process. This is also indicated in the notion that practical assistance is necessary for the 
change of behaviours, which CBSM supports. In line with this notion is the model of mindful 
design that has been introduced by Niedderer et al. (2013). This model works on a twofold 
process: ﬁrst, an artefact that creates awareness through a physical or symbolic disruption of 
its function, and second, mediation of the disruption as awareness is directed towards the 
issue to be mindful of. Mindful design is intended to make users aware of, reﬂective about, 
and responsible for their actions and their consequences; like in the case with the ‘Social 
Cups’ (sec. 2.2). The model distinguishes between attitude change and behaviour change, 
and emphasises that conscious attitude change is essential for lasting behaviour change. 
Similarly, the Design with Intent (DwI) method proposed by Lockton et al. (2009) also starts 
at a product, a service, an environment, or other type of system. The method is a tool that 
suggests relevant techniques to inspire solutions, and is intended to support the 
redesigning of a system to ultimately inﬂuence user behaviour. It takes a functional 
approach by motivating behaviour, enabling behaviour, and constraining behaviour. 
Niedderer (2013) has identiﬁed that these approaches to inﬂuencing behaviour 
accommodate different combinations of Tromp et al.’s (2011) types of inﬂuence. Tromp et 
al.’s (2011) framework for socially responsible design distinguishes between four types of 
inﬂuences: coercive, persuasive, seductive, and decisive. Each type is in their own way 
intended to inﬂuence behaviour by encouraging desirable and discouraging undesirable 
behaviour. The framework emphasises on the intended user experience, and therefore 
recognises that even if socially responsible design is to be achieved, the desired behaviour 
must consider both society and the individual. 
Common for the described approaches to design for behaviour change is that they all to 
some extent have appropriated psychological principles of behaviour change to inﬂuence 
attitude and behaviour (Niedderer et al., 2014). Since attitude and behaviour change starts 
at the individual, understanding the cognitive behaviour of the individual’s mind is relevant 
and can support in realising how design can be used to inﬂuence the individual. The 
described approaches also, in each their different way, address the environment in which 
!13
==PAGE:26==
the individual exists, the interaction between the individual and artefacts, and the interaction 
between the individual and their social contexts. So beyond the individual and their single 
mind, the approaches also consider the individual as existing in and interacting with their 
surroundings. As has been identiﬁed however, even with awareness of the surroundings, 
selﬁshness is at the base of any mind (Nelson, 1999), which means that people will not tend 
to act in the favour of others, but rather in favour of themselves. In the context of designing 
to inﬂuence for more prosocial attitude and behaviour, Tromp et al.’s (2011) approach can 
therefore be agreed upon. This approach suggests that the behaviour that is wanted to 
design for can be chosen based on collective concerns, whereafter it must be considered 
how these concerns relate to possible future users and their individual concerns. In this 
regard, the relationship between collective concerns and individual concerns can be 
considered in terms of two possibilities: either they are in line with each other, or they are in 
conﬂict with each other. Given, they should preferably be in line to enable the design of 
products that considers both the individual and society. As this is not always possible 
(sec. 2.3), there are different types of inﬂuence that can be applied to either of the two 
situations to ultimately affect the individual user’s and consequently society’s behaviour. 
2.4.1 Four types of inﬂuence 
In the context of socially responsible design, Tromp et al. (2011) have developed a 
framework (Figure 2.2) that classiﬁes product inﬂuence based on the intended user 
experience. Initially, the experience of inﬂuence can be classiﬁed on two different 
dimensions: force and salience, where ‘force' implies a design’s inﬂuence in terms of 
strength (weak to strong) and ‘salience’ implies a design’s inﬂuence in terms of its approach 
(implicit to explicit). Based on the two dimensions, four types of inﬂuence can be 
distinguished: coercive, persuasive, seductive, and decisive inﬂuence. In context this can be 
understood in terms of a product that can coerce, persuade, seduce, or decide for a person. 
Figure 2.2: Map of four types of inﬂuence based on dimensions of force and salience (Tromp, 2011) 
STRONG
IMPLICIT
DECISIVE
COERCIVE
EXPLICIT
SEDUCTIVE
PERSUASIVE
WEAK
!14
==PAGE:27==
Coercive design is explicit and strong in its inﬂuence. 
People who are subject to coercive inﬂuence will 
experience it as obvious and forceful. Theoretically, in some 
cases they do have a choice to react upon the inﬂuence 
differently than prompted to, but in most cases they are 
forced to react upon it in a certain intended way. The 
bicycle barriers (Figure 2.3) is an example of coercive 
design that coerces bicyclists to slow down. These are 
usually located at streets where the trafﬁc can be dangerous 
for bicyclists, so they force the bicyclist to slow down and 
watch out for potentially dangerous trafﬁc.
Persuasive design is explicit and weak in its inﬂuence. The 
persuasive inﬂuence is experienced as obvious also but 
without being forceful to the people experiencing it. While 
they are clearly aware of the inﬂuence, they also have the 
freedom of choice in terms of whether or not as well as how 
to react upon the inﬂuence. The Break Light USB (Figure 
2.4) is an example of persuasive design that persuades the 
user to take a break in between work. The USB is to be 
attached to a USB port in the user’s working space within 
the visual ﬁeld, so that it can remind the user to take a break 
every 30 minutes (Ginty and Nielsen, 2015). 
Seductive design is implicit and weak in its inﬂuence. 
People who experience seductive inﬂuence will not 
recognise that they are indeed experiencing it. Without 
being aware that they are being inﬂuenced, they may also 
even believe that their (re)actions are internally motivated. 
The tilted garbage can (Figure 2.5) is an example of 
seductive design that seduces bicyclists to throw their 
garbage into the can. Their location along bicycle lanes and 
their tilted angle allow the bicyclist to literally throw out 
their garbage while they are riding by on their bicycle.
Decisive design is implicit and strong in its inﬂuence. The 
people being inﬂuenced by decisive inﬂuence will 
experience it as forceful without considering it as 
intentionally so. Without any other options, they are 
inﬂuenced to react the only way possible. The pay-on exit 
parking ticket machine and gate arm (Figure 2.6) is an 
example of decisive design that decides for the car driver. 
These are usually located at the exit of a parking lot and 
force the car driver to pay for the parking in order to be 
able to exit the parking lot.
!
Figure 2.6: Parking ticket machine 
and gate arm
!
Figure 2.4 Break Light USB
!
Figure 2.5: Tilted garbage can
!
Figure 2.3: Bicycle barriers
!15
==PAGE:28==
These four types of inﬂuence can in each their way be used by designers to deliberately 
affect people’s behaviour through the design of the things that people interact with and 
experience (Tromp et al., 2011). It must of course be recognised that the actual outcome—in 
terms of whether or not and the extent to which people will be inﬂuenced by the intended 
inﬂuential design—can never be entirely predicted, as it should be understood that people 
are unpredictable in practice (Blackwell, 2006). Wendel (2013) does however say that only 
few products can actually force people to do something. Therefore, in the context of 
designing for attitude and behaviour change, the optimal type of inﬂuential design to apply 
is persuasive design, as it is suitable for situations where the user is already motivated to 
change. In this sense, applying persuasive design will result in products that are desirable by 
both the user and society. Persuasive design to inﬂuence prosocial attitude and behaviour 
will support the already motivated user in changing towards their desired attitude and 
behaviour that is ultimately in favour of society. 
2.4.1.1 Persuasive design 
For the user who is motivated to change their attitude and behaviour, persuasive inﬂuence 
and thereby persuasive design can be considered to support the change. Persuasive design 
that is often used for situations where people are already motivated to change their 
behaviour (Tromp, 2013) may be more morally and ethically appropriate for the inﬂuence of 
people, while at the same time bring about noteworthy results. This type of intervention is 
probably also the most commonly known type of inﬂuential design explored, designed, and 
developed for. Fogg (2003) has introduced ‘persuasive technology’, which regards the idea 
that technology can be used to change people’s attitude and behaviour. This idea of 
persuasive technology has also been explored by IJsselsteijn et al. (2006) and has similarly 
been explored and discussed by Redström (2006). In practice, the approach of persuasive 
design has also been appropriated to suit different domains of design, such as game design 
(Visch et al., 2013) or coaching service design (Smink, 2012). Examples of persuasive design 
are the 7 Minute Fitness by Perigee that reminds the user to do their daily 7-minute workout 
(Perigee, 2016), the Vittel Refresh Cap by ogilvy paris that prompts the user to drink water 
every hour (ogilvy paris, 2014), the Balans chair by Opsvik and Menghshoel for Stokke that 
induces an ergonomically beneﬁcial posture (Redström, 2006), or the hotel key with metal 
weights that makes the hotel guest want to return the key (Bijker and Law, 1992). These 
examples indicate that there is indeed an interest in the area of persuasive design. While 
coercive, seductive, and decisive design is not excluded as possibilities, they are however 
sometimes argued against. 
Coercive design is often avoided because of probable ethical and moral issues (Wendel, 
2013; Fogg, 2009). The design itself and/or the designer may clash with the user on ethical 
and moral aspects, or one user’s views may conﬂict with another user’s views. Seductive 
design that may be more easily accepted, due to its ability to provide enjoyable 
experiences, should not have too much difﬁculty in inﬂuencing people without their 
objection. Still, in some cases seductive design can be too weak to make an impact in terms 
of inﬂuence. Decisive design that can be strong enough to make an impact however, are 
more likely to lead to unpleasant experiences (Tromp, 2013). This might make it difﬁcult to 
!16
==PAGE:29==
be used for the inﬂuence of people. However, as decisive design does not provide 
alternative options, people will in some cases just get used to the design and adjust their 
behaviours to it—of course, possibly still with a negative attitude towards it. The 
complexities in implementing coercive, decisive, and seductive design in real-life contexts 
imply reasons to why designers show more interest towards persuasive design. Persuasive 
design can encourage people to do something they already intended to do, rather than 
provoking them to do something they never intended to do. This can thereby keep alive the 
user’s desire for a product as it supports them and their motivations by persuading them to 
do something they were already motivated to do. Considering the ethical and moral issues 
there can be in forcing people to do something, persuading them to do something they 
were already motivated to do seems more appropriate. In that context, persuasive design 
can be used to address and activate this already existing motivation to display the desired 
attitude and behaviour. 
2.4.2 Dual-processing 
To be able to inﬂuence a person’s attitude and behaviour by means of persuasive design, it 
is then relevant to consider the way in which inﬂuence may be received in their mind. Each 
individual belongs to society, whose other individuals they constantly directly or indirectly 
interact with. Therefore, the desired prosocial attitude and behaviour within each individual 
is most appropriate as a continuously displayed attitude and behaviour. For continuous 
display, it is therefore necessary for the information that represents this attitude and 
behaviour to be easily and quickly accessed in the mind. Hence, it is essential to know 
where this information is placed and how it can be accessed. Following Stanovich’s (1999) 
theory on levels of the mind, the mental life is divided into two elementary levels: (1) the 
unconscious, and (2) the conscious. Here, the conscious includes the things that a person is 
aware of, while the unconscious contains the things that are beyond a person’s (conscious) 
awareness; the latter may still inﬂuence the person’s behaviour without their awareness 
regardless. The two levels of the mind have throughout literature been given a variety of 
names to signify the ability of the respective level. Some examples on labels used to refer to 
the unconscious and the conscious respectively are: associative mode and rule-based mode 
(Smith and DeCoster, 2000), heuristic and systematic (Evans, 2006), and implicit memory 
and explicit memory (Roediger, 1990). These two levels of the mind are however most 
commonly known and referred to as: ‘System 1’ (automatic and intuitive) and ‘System 
2’ (controlled and deliberative) (Stanovich, 1999). Stanovich himself and Evans (2013) have 
however identiﬁed errors related to the use of this terminology, and discontinued and 
discouraged the use of these labels. They therefore decide to denote the two forms as 
types: ‘Type 1’ and ‘Type 2’ processes; corresponding to the previous System 1 and 2 
attributes respectively as known. For the attitude and behaviour that is supposed to be 
easily and quickly accessed, it is better stored in the unconscious mind as attitude and 
behaviour that does not require much cognitive effort of the individual. This is equivalent to 
the Type 1 process, which is typically correlated with being fast, high capacity, automatic, 
and independent of cognitive ability (Evans and Stanovich, 2013). 
!17
==PAGE:30==
2.4.3 Priming 
Due to its ability to occur independently of conscious recollection of previous experiences 
of a stimulus, priming can be thought of as implicit memory (Schacter, 1992). This means 
that it can be thought of as the memory that is stored in the unconscious mind (Type 1), 
which is fast and automatic (sec. 2.4.2). Priming describes the effect that is caused by 
experience of a stimulus—that is, “the facilitated identiﬁcation of perceptual objects from 
reduced cues as a consequence of a speciﬁc prior exposure to an object” (Tulving and 
Schacter, 1990). The technique of priming is an acknowledged and widely applied method 
(Pace-Sigge, 2013). Research on cognitive priming has identiﬁed that priming allows 
inﬂuencing people’s perception (Tulving and Schacter, 1990), while studies on cognitive 
priming has proven that priming enables inﬂuencing people’s attitude and behaviour (e.g. 
Abbate et al., 2013; Holland et al., 2005; Kay et al., 2004). Essentially, the primes used in 
such studies, such as words (e.g. Gardner et al., 1999), pictures (e.g. Cesario et al., 2006), 
music (e.g. Tropeano, 2006), and videos (e.g. Harris et al., 2009), are things that are also 
already used in the ﬁeld of design. So in that sense, these are easily translated into the 
design language. From a design perspective, this quite obviously implies the possibilities of 
priming as a technique to be used in design. Priming to inﬂuence people is usually done by 
exposing them to a stimulus as a feature in an object or the environment. It can therefore be 
considered, in the context of this thesis, that designers can use priming through the design 
of objects and environments to inﬂuence people for a more prosocial attitude and 
behaviour. 
2.4.3.1 Conceptual priming 
Priming essentially covers a variety of priming techniques (Schacter, 1992). However, only 
some of these techniques may be relevant to consider in the context of using design in 
priming for more prosocial attitude and behaviour. These are associative priming, semantic 
priming, or conceptual priming. These are suitable in the sense that they all involve priming 
with things that can be perceptually linked to other things. In terms of words, in associative 
priming, the prime word has a high probability of calling to mind a word that can be 
associated with the prime word (Ferrand and New, 2003), like ‘pen’ and ‘paper’. In semantic 
priming, the prime word has a high probability of calling to mind a word that is similar in 
meaning or share featural descriptions of the prime word (Ferrand and New, 2003), like ‘run’ 
and ‘motion’. In conceptual priming, the prime word has a high probability of calling to mind 
a word that is related to the prime word (Schacter, 1992), like ‘shower’ and ‘shampoo’. 
Amongst the three techniques, conceptual priming might be able to call to mind a wider 
range of pertinent representations. One word can have many conceptual connections, while 
the semantic or associative connection between one word and other words may not be as 
many. In this sense, ‘prosocial behaviour’ might have more conceptual connections than it 
does associative and semantic connections. Based on this rationale, conceptual priming can 
be considered the appropriate priming technique when priming for more prosocial attitude 
and behaviour. 
Bargh and Chartrand (2000) have described the method of conceptual priming, which is the 
idea that mental representations can be activated in one event and inﬂuence another event 
seemingly independent from the prior activation. There must be a conceptual relation 
!18
==PAGE:31==
between the stimulus that activates the mental representation, but this relation must not be 
realised by the person experiencing it. Abbate et al. (2013) have identiﬁed the ways in which 
conceptual priming in particular has been used in different domains; including prosocial 
behaviour. As Bargh and Chartrand (2000) have also observed, by the occurrence of 
pertinent objects and events, people’s affective reactions can be produced automatically, 
hence it can be considered that priming can be used to mediate people’s attitude and 
behaviour. As priming can occur independent of conscious recollection of previous 
experiences (Schacter, 1992), behavioural responses too can be automatically activated on 
the presence of relevant features in the environment (Bargh et al., 1996). If the individual 
then elicits a speciﬁc response to speciﬁc (types of) features, then these features may be 
regarded as behavioural representations. For example, the experience of a feature in the 
form of running shoes, mostly associated with running, may activate the behaviour of being 
physically active. Roediger (1990) says that priming from past experience enables the 
performance of tasks without requiring conscious remembering of recent experiences. The 
information received is stored in the brain as implicit memory (2.4.2), which can be activated 
without conscious recollection and awareness. Behavioural representations can therefore be 
stored as implicit memory until, as Abbate et al. (2013) say, they can be automatically 
activated to then guide actual behaviour. So, by simply perceiving relevant features and/or 
behavioural representations, a person can be guided to behave in a certain manner. Such 
relevant features can exist as features that a person directly interact with through objects or 
indirectly experience in the environment. 
2.4.3.2 Subliminal priming and supraliminal priming 
While people distinguish between direct interaction with objects and indirect interaction 
with the environment, Hassin et al., (2005) argue that the brain 99 out of 100 times does not 
distinguish between subliminal and supraliminal priming. The brain does not care whether 
something is primed with conscious mediation or without conscious mediation (Hassin et 
al., 2005). Even though they are not perceived differently, the two degrees of priming are 
different. In subliminal priming, the brain is unaware of the prime as well as the inﬂuence, 
while in supraliminal priming, the brain is aware of the prime but not the inﬂuence (Bargh 
and Chartrand, 2000). Essentially, both subliminal and supraliminal priming do activate 
mental representations for inﬂuence without a person’s awareness, and so they are believed 
to have the same effect overall (Dijksterhuis et al., 2005). Bargh et al. (1996) note that the 
signiﬁcant differences in effects are not found in whether it is subliminal or supraliminal 
priming, but whether or not the person being primed is consciously aware of the potential 
inﬂuence of the prime. This is important because a potential inﬂuence that a person is 
consciously aware of can elicit control strategies that often aim at counteracting the 
inﬂuence of the stimulus (Dijksterhuis et al., 2005). So whether subliminal or supraliminal, 
the individual being primed must not become aware of the potential inﬂuence. For the 
design of products to inﬂuence people for a more prosocial attitude and behaviour, 
supraliminal priming is suitable as it enables the priming to happen through direct user-
product interaction. In a situation where the user is exposed to subliminal priming, there is a 
possibility that they will be occupied with an activity, and the attention to the priming will be 
lower. Supraliminal priming therefore eliminates this possibility of disturbing factors 
disrupting the priming and thereby possibly also having an impact on the priming effect. 
!19
==PAGE:32==
In the context of this thesis, persuasive design is the type of inﬂuential design that is most 
suitable. It enables higher chances of success in inﬂuencing people for attitude and 
behaviour change, as it applies to situations where people are already motivated to change 
(Tromp, 2013). By means of persuasive design, priming can then be used to inﬂuence 
people for a desired attitude and behaviour (sec. 2.4.3). Priming is correlated with the 
unconscious mind where mental representations are easily accessed and quickly activated 
(sec. 2.4.2; 2.4.3). This is desirable for the representations that are pertinent to prosocial 
attitude and behaviour, as this attitude and behaviour is ideally displayed continuously. 
Conceptual supraliminal priming will allow the priming to happen directly through a 
concept that is pertinent to the desired attitude and behaviour (Schacter, 1992). So 
speciﬁcally for this thesis, prosocial attitude and behaviour is desired, hence the prime 
concept will be related to this attitude and behaviour. At this point, knowing that conceptual 
supraliminal priming can be used to inﬂuence attitude and behaviour, it is then relevant to 
know how this as priming stimulus can be received and perceived by a person whose 
attitude and behaviour is to be inﬂuenced. 
2.5 Senses 
Human perception can be roughly understood as the reception of stimulus through the 
sensory receptors, which sends the received information to the sensory nervous system to 
be processed (Keeley, 2002). As receptors, it can generally be agreed upon that for the 
human nature there is a commonly accepted collection of at least ﬁve distinct senses. This 
most commonly accepted representing philosophy about senses includes and distinguishes 
between the ﬁve senses: sight, hearing, smell, taste, and touch (Tavares, 2013; Roberts and 
Walker, 2010; Fenko, 2010; Schifferstein and Desmet, 2008; Negroponte, 2006; Keeley, 
2002; Dischinger, 2000). 
Regarding the human ability of sensing, it is important to understand the distinction 
between sensing as “to detect something” and sensing as “to have a sensation” (Gibson, 
1966). Here, when the senses are considered a perceptual system they must be thought of 
as senses “to detect something”. A fundamental relationship in this perceptual system can 
be deﬁned as a central concept of duality for perception; a perceiver and a perceived 
(Keeley, 2002). The physical entity in possession of sense as the perceiver, and the world as 
the perceived. As perceiving here is the ability to detect something by sensing through the 
senses, the sense entity and the world that is being sensed are the two basic elements that 
must interact for perception to happen. So in priming, when the conceptual priming 
stimulus is perceived, there will be a higher possibility for the pertinent mental 
representation to be activated. This activation of a pertinent mental representation indicates 
that inﬂuence has to some extent occurred (sec. 2.4.3.1). Hence, with interest in priming for 
the purpose of inﬂuencing people, the senses through which a priming stimulus is 
perceived must be considered. 
2.5.1 Inﬂuence through senses 
With senses being so directly related to the way in which the human makes sense of things, 
this area is indeed of high interest to not only experts but also to people in general. 
!20
==PAGE:33==
Research and studies that has been conducted within the area of priming to inﬂuence 
attitude or behaviour (Appendix 1), show that different researchers often have different 
approaches to each their research and study. Relevant for this thesis is however that the 
different studies have also explored inﬂuencing through the different senses by means of 
priming. The studies conducted for each of the ﬁve senses each addresses ways in which 
the respective sensory stimuli affect speciﬁc perception(s), attitude(s), and/or behaviour(s); 
i.e. visual stimuli for sense of sight, auditory stimuli for sense of hearing, olfactory stimuli for 
sense of smell, gustatory stimuli for sense of taste, and tactile stimuli for sense of touch. 
Researchers have however identiﬁed an imbalance in the studies conducted on priming 
through the senses, with sense of sight being the sense for which more studies in the area 
have been conducted. 
Sight 
Much of the research conducted to explore the sense of sight takes interest in the way in 
which consumer and buyer behaviour is inﬂuenced by different types of visual experiences. 
Ferraro et al. (2009) studied the way in which incidental consumer brand encounters (ICBE) 
affects the brand they choose. In their study, they exposed their participants to photos of 
people engaged in everyday situations, each photo with an identical brand located near the 
individual in focus, appearing as if the individual used the brand. Kim et al. (2005) studied 
how visual images inﬂuenced consumer preference and product choice. On the website of 
a product displayed for purchase, they ﬁrst showed no primes, then primes in the form of 
images of paper money and coins to be associated with ‘price’, and thereafter primes in the 
form of images of the camera (as displayed for purchase) held in a hand to be associated 
with ‘size’. One example of many similar studies on consumer and buyer attitude or 
behaviour (e.g. Nenkov and Scott, 2014; Westerman et al., 2013; Mandel and Johnson, 
2002) through the visuals of product packaging is one conducted by Westerman et al. 
(2013), where they investigated the way in which on-package graphics inﬂuence consumers’ 
attitudes and behaviours with respect to a product. The participants were presented with a 
digital representation of eight product designs for either ‘water’ or ‘vodka’, where each 
design had been manipulated to have varying graphic design from the others. Given, 
consumer and buyer behaviour is just one type of behaviour of many. Other behaviours that 
have been similarly researched include behaviours such as voting behaviour (e.g. Berger et 
al., 2008), walking behaviour (e.g. Nuzir et al., 2014), eating behaviour (Harris et al., 2009), as 
well as social behaviour (e.g. Abbate et al., 2014; Abbate et al., 2013). With respect to social 
behaviour, Kay et al. (2004) studied how exposure to visual representations common to a 
speciﬁc domain increased the cognitive accessibility of behaviours usually perceived as 
belonging to this domain. In their studies they used either or a combination of objects, 
pictorial object representations, and textural descriptions related to business situations in 
order to elicit a business-related behaviour—in this case self-interested behaviour in general 
and ‘competitiveness’ in particular. All of the studies that have been conducted to study 
priming through the sense of sight not only reveal that many ways of priming have been 
attempted, but also that they have been tested on many occasions and for many different 
purposes. This is however not the trend across the senses. 
!21
==PAGE:34==
Hearing 
Compared to research on priming through the sense of sight, the sense of hearing has been 
explored signiﬁcantly less. The research on this sense takes much interest in the way in 
which music—in different aspects such as genre, volume, tempo, etc.—inﬂuence human 
behaviour, here again, consumer and buyer behaviour especially (e.g. Andersson et al., 
2012; Morrison et al., 2010; Mattila and Wirtz, 2001). In one of his studies, Milliman (1982) 
investigated the in-store shopping behaviour when inﬂuenced by music with different 
tempi. Three different treatments were observed, the ﬁrst being no music, the second being 
slow tempo music, and the third being fast tempo music. In another of his studies, Milliman 
(1986) again investigated the effect of different music tempi, though in a restaurant setting. 
Here, he only applied two different treatments, one being slow tempo music, and the other 
being fast tempo music. Yorkston and Menon (2004) in their slightly different investigation 
on consumer and buyer behaviour, looked at the effect of brand names as sound symbolism 
and the way in which this inﬂuenced consumer judgements. Examples of studies conducted 
in the same area observed the effect of sounds on other behaviours such as general choice 
behaviour (e.g. Egermann et al., 2006), violent behaviour (e.g. Tropeano, 2006), as well as 
helping behaviour (e.g. Abbate et al., 2014). These studies indicate that even though some 
research has been conducted in the area, not many different priming stimuli have been 
tested, nor has as many attitudes or behaviours been addressed. 
Smell 
Similar to research on the sense of hearing, but with even less, little research has been 
conducted on priming through the sense of smell. The research on this sense shows that 
there has mostly been interest in the effect of smells on social behaviour. Liljenquist et al. 
(2015) investigated the way in which clean scents inﬂuenced the two types of social 
behaviour: reciprocity and charity, by simply exposing their participants to a clean-scented 
room. Holland et al. (2005) similarly studied the way in which clean scents inﬂuenced social 
behaviour—environmental behaviour in particular—by exposing their participants to a 
citrus-scented room to be associated with the concept of cleaning. In addition to these 
studies, other studies on the inﬂuence of smells on social behaviour has been performed 
(e.g. Li et al., 2007), as well as with consumer and buyer behaviour (e.g. Haberland, 2010). 
This seemingly little research on the sense of smell does not provide any logic to the notion 
that sense of smell is human’s most powerful sense of the ﬁve (Ogden-Barnes and Barclay, 
2012). Particularly, because the sense of smell is said to be highly developed and has the 
power to strongly inﬂuence people due to its direct connection to the emotional seat and 
memory centre of the brain. This notion questions the little interest in exploring the sense. 
Taste and touch 
Both the sense of taste and the sense of touch has not been as widely explored as the 
previously mentioned senses. The reasons for this lack of investigation within the two sense 
categories can be one or many. Similar to the reasons for the imbalance in research and 
study on the senses, these reasons are usually not—if ever at all—implied. While no studies 
has been found to inspect the sense of taste, few studies that has been found to inspect the 
sense of touch look at consumer and buyer behaviour (e.g. Guéguen, 2006; Krishna and 
Morrin, 2007) as an effect of touching something. In other domains and for other purposes it 
!22
==PAGE:35==
could be interesting and insightful to explore the sense of taste further. It does however not 
make much sense to explore the sense of taste with respect to design and the way in which 
it may be used in design. As this thesis takes interest in studying priming through the senses 
by means of design, studying the sense of taste would ultimately result in designers 
implementing gustatory stimulus in the design of products for priming. It must however be 
considered that not many people use their sense of taste to perceive the world around them 
and thereby not to interact with products. 
The researchers who have explored the different senses (Appendix 1) generally agree upon 
the idea that senses can be used as receptors for priming stimuli to prime for change in 
attitude and behaviour. As can also be observed across the literature, the sense of sight is 
the more explored sense out of the ﬁve. The sense of hearing and smell have signiﬁcantly 
less yet still moderate exploration, while the sense of touch barely has any. This imbalanced 
focus in the exploration of inﬂuencing through the ﬁve senses has also been identiﬁed by 
Schifferstein and others (Roberts and Walker, 2010; Schifferstein and Desmet, 2008). In the 
found literature, no direct statements or indicators to the reason for the sense of sight being 
the more explored has been detected. Common for all of the studies reviewed from 
literature is that they all are just studying priming through a single sense. It has thereby also 
not been possible to ﬁnd literature that studies priming on multiple senses for a comparison 
between them, to compare the effects of priming through one sense to another, and 
therefore no rational reason for the imbalance. 
2.5.1.1 Effect of priming through senses 
As can be observed, many of the reviewed studies on priming through the senses for 
attitude and behaviour change (Appendix 1) have taken much interest in priming people 
through just the sense of sight. As a contrast, seemingly little interest has been taken in 
priming people through the sense of touch however. Since the reason for this imbalance 
has not been explicitly stated in any of the previous studies, the imbalance implies the 
illusion that the sense of sight is more susceptible to inﬂuence. However, it has not been 
possible to ﬁnd literature where the effect of priming through one sense has been 
measured in comparison to another. Instead, the studies have a tendency to typically focus 
on just one sense at a time. Therefore, a conﬁrmation of sense of sight being the sense most 
susceptible to inﬂuence, or one of the other senses for that matter, have not been found. A 
gap in literature has hence been identiﬁed due to the missing clariﬁcation of whether or not 
there is a valid reason to “prefer” priming through one speciﬁc sense. 
Even though none of the found and reviewed studies have made a relative comparison 
between the priming effects of the senses, an assessment of the priming effect for each of 
the senses based on the literature can still be made. The assessment has been based on the 
observation of studies conducted on priming through the same sense as a whole, and 
thereby evaluated the statistical results from these studies as one unit. Only studies that has 
studied the actual effect is being compared to; which means that there must be a prime 
condition that has been compared to its equivalent control condition. To compare the 
statistical results of the priming effect from all of the studies, performing a meta-analysis, 
where data can be assimilated through a statistical approach, would be the optimal 
!23
==PAGE:36==
approach. However, as none of the studies have been based on the exact same parameters 
or measure the exact same variables, a meta-analysis is not comprehensible. So, based on a 
general assessment, it has been observed that most of the studies in the assessment of the 
priming effect for each of the senses have a signiﬁcance level of α=0.05. For the few studies 
that have other signiﬁcance levels, the other values have been noted in the table (Appendix 
1). From the table it can be observed that within each sense unit (sense of sight, hearing, 
smell, and touch), there are signiﬁcant effects between prime condition and control 
condition. This indication causes further reﬂection about a reason for the imbalance in 
exploring the senses for priming of attitude and behaviour.  
2.6 Senses in design 
Similar to the imbalance that has been identiﬁed in exploring priming through the senses, 
Schifferstein and others (Roberts and Walker, 2010; Schifferstein and Desmet, 2008) have 
recognised an imbalance in exploring designing for the ﬁve senses. Here also, sense of 
sight is much more explored compared to the remaining four senses of hearing, smell, taste, 
and touch. Schifferstein and Desmet (2008) suggest that this imbalance of visual dominance 
can be helped if designers train themselves to be more sensitive to the non-visual 
impressions that products can evoke. Multisensory design is the design approach that 
encourages considering all the senses when designing user experiences. The multisensory 
design approach is becoming very apparent in the ﬁeld of designing for human senses (e.g. 
Tavares, 2013; Schifferstein, 2011; Spence and Gallace, 2011; Schifferstein and Desmet, 
2008; Negroponte, 2006), and several studies acknowledges that the designer’s awareness 
of the human’s (at least) basic ﬁve senses can enhance their ability to design products that 
provide a better user experience. As Schifferstein and Desmet (2008) have also identiﬁed, a 
product is preferred if its different pieces of sensory information duplicate or compliment 
one another to ultimately provide a holistic experience. This enables the communication of 
a coherent message and thereby makes it easier for the user to understand the product as 
what it is, what it does, and how it can be operated (Schifferstein and Desmet, 2008). 
Additionally, beyond the ﬁve senses and their corresponding sensory information, different 
levels of experience can further stimulate a person’s sensitivity. Schifferstein and Desmet 
(2008) explain with the example of a sound that can be experienced as loud or soft 
(perceptual level), nice or nasty (aesthetic level), elegant, professional, ﬂimsy (meaning 
level), or surprising, satisfying, inspiring (emotional level), where even further levels of 
experience can be the interpretations and evaluations of the sensory information detected. 
Ultimately, all sensory information that is perceived by a person from the exposure to it can 
inﬂuence product perception, cognition, experience, and behaviour (Schifferstein and 
Desmet, 2008). This is of course ideal in the context of this thesis, as this opens up for more 
opportunities in the ﬁeld of design. Designers are enabled to through design inﬂuence 
people by implementing different features to be perceived by the user. Since multisensory 
design appears to serve as an approach that compensates for the imbalance in the senses 
!24
==PAGE:37==
that are designed for, it would be interesting to identify whether or not elements from this 
approach can be applied also in the context of design, but inﬂuential design for attitude and 
behaviour change. It however appears that even though this imbalance of visual dominance 
has been recognised and multisensory design has been introduced to compensate for it, 
there is also no scientiﬁc documentation that supports the notion that all senses must be 
designed for to achieve a successful product. 
2.7 Findings 
As the senses are directly related to the way in which people perceive things, both 
researchers and designers have shown interest in this area. Through their work they have 
identiﬁed an imbalance in the focus on the senses, with sense of sight being the most 
explored sense out of the ﬁve basic human senses. An explanation for this imbalance and 
the high interest in the sense of sight, was however not found anywhere in literature. To 
determine whether or not a difference in priming for each of the senses could be found, an 
assessment of the priming effect for each of the senses was conducted. This was performed 
for studies within the area of priming to inﬂuence attitude or behaviour (Appendix 1). The 
assessment showed signiﬁcant effects in priming through all of the senses (sense of sight, 
hearing, smell and touch). So, the reason for the imbalance was not found from this either, 
as all the senses showed effect in priming for attitude or behaviour change. In the domain of 
design, designers have tried to correct the imbalance by introducing multisensory design; 
designing user experience with the inclusion of all the senses. However, this solution has no 
scientiﬁc grounds to support the decision of designing for all of the senses, which means 
that no ﬁndings from multisensory design can be taken into consideration when priming 
through the senses for attitude and behaviour change.  
This project sets out to confront this imbalance by identifying the effect of priming through 
one sense in comparison to another with the purpose of determining appropriate ways in 
which priming through the senses can be used in the context of design for change of 
attitude and behaviour. A result that indicates that one sense is more susceptible to 
inﬂuence for attitude and behaviour change will imply that designers should just focus on 
the sense of sight, but instead switch focus to the sense identiﬁed as most susceptible to 
inﬂuence when priming for an attitude and behaviour change by means of design. 
Designing for attitude and behaviour change is important due to the various issues that 
society faces today; such as obesity and climate change. These issues are the result of a 
user-centred design approach, where designers have designed and developed products for 
the purpose of the user’s desires and needs. This has brought about side effects that are 
unfavourable for society. Switching to a society-centred design approach, where the social 
aspects of design are considered, have often shown to clash with the interests of the user. 
Therefore, in the context of designing for attitude and behaviour change, products must be 
designed seemingly in the concern of the individual, but the use of the products must in the 
long run be beneﬁcial for society. This enables an alignment between individual and 
collective concerns, which allows designers to develop more society-considerate designs 
without having to compromise with the considerations towards the user, and thus relieve the 
issues that society is facing. 
!25
==PAGE:38==
!26
==PAGE:39==
3. PRODUCT 
DESIGN REVIEW 
!27
3. 
PRODUCT 
DESIGN 
REVIEW
==PAGE:40==
In this chapter, existing product designs will be reviewed with respect to their claims of 
being sustainable or related to sustainability. This review is relevant as the empirical studies 
conducted for this project will explore priming through the senses for a more sustainable 
attitude and behaviour. Ultimately, the review will support in providing an insight into the 
concepts that people commonly consider to be sustainable and related to sustainability. It 
will reveal common characteristic patterns of the observed concepts in this regard. The 
review is initiated with a deﬁnition of the term ‘sustainability’ and the concepts that the 
individual and people in general associate with this deﬁnition (sec. 3.1). It also presents a 
variety of product designs that have been claimed to be sustainable or related to 
sustainability, and thereby the characteristics that these products use to express 
sustainability (sec. 3.2). Finally, ﬁndings will be presented (sec. 3.3). Due to lack of relevant 
literature on the area, this review is based on primary research on product designs that are 
claimed to be sustainable or related to sustainability. For simplicity, a product design or 
product that have been claimed to be sustainable or related to sustainability will be 
denoted ‘sustainable product design’ or ‘sustainable product’ respectively.  
3.1 Sustainability 
It is generally accepted by people that ‘sustainability’ can be considered as deﬁned in the 
dictionary: “the quality of not being harmful to the environment or depleting natural 
resources, and thereby supporting long-term ecological balance” (Dictionary, 2016). By this 
deﬁnition it can be understood that concepts and elements related to ‘environment’, 
‘nature’, and ‘ecology’ can be associated with ‘sustainability. Similar to this deﬁnition, Ben-Eli 
(2006) describes the (general) deﬁnition of sustainability as emphasising cross generational 
equity in relation to the carrying capacity of the environment. This deﬁnition emphasises 
Brundland Comission’s (1987) deﬁnition for the development that is noted as sustainable, 
which they deﬁne as meeting present needs without compromising the ability of future 
generations to meet their own needs. Also in this context, Willis (2010) deﬁnes the common 
use of the term ‘sustainability’ as the concept that frames the ways in which environmental 
problems threaten the conditions of healthy economic, ecological, and social system. On 
the foundation of these deﬁnitions, it can be accepted that a way in which ‘sustainability’ 
may be understood by people relates to the environment, nature, and ecology. 
!28
==PAGE:41==
3.1.1 One’s understanding of sustainability 
On a foundational level, phenomena that are immediately recognised as related to 
environment, nature, and ecology, are things like wind, ocean, wood, soil, and others as 
shown (Figure 3.1). Such phenomena are in fact and reality belonging to the environment, 
nature, and the domain of ecology. 
Figure 3.1: Examples of phenomena of nature 
The overall impression of the array of phenomena of nature represented in Figure 3.1 
reveals colours of mainly shades of green and brown, while the tangible characteristics are 
generally invariably intricate and detailed for each entity. Most phenomena of nature carry 
common visual and tactile characteristics similar to the ones identiﬁed here. As these 
phenomena are almost only found in nature, an individual will also typically associate these 
phenomena with nature. So, since it can be accepted that nature can be associated with the 
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!29
 river 
 fruit 
 mushroom 
 rock 
 soil 
 ﬁre 
 ﬂower 
 rain 
 ﬁr 
 forest 
 ocean 
 grass 
 bird 
 wind 
 wave 
 jute 
 bark 
 leaf 
 sand 
 skin 
 bamboo 
 clay 
 straw 
 fungus 
 wool 
==PAGE:42==
concept of sustainability, it can also be expected that the characteristics that an individual 
will observe in such phenomena, they will associate with the concept of sustainability also. 
3.1.2 Worldwide understanding of sustainability 
In the extension of the individual’s understanding of sustainability, it would be interesting to 
identify whether the individual's understanding is also a general understanding of most 
people. By contemporary means in the form of an online search of phenomena of ‘nature’—
which ‘nature’ can be considered the more common terminology representing environment, 
nature, and ecology—majority of the results suggested concepts such as wind, water, trees, 
plants, and others as shown (Figure 3.2). 
!
Figure 3.2: Google Images search of ‘nature’ 
The colours that are mainly observed across the images in the ﬁgure are shades of green 
and brown, where green is more dominant and brown is slightly more modest. This is of 
course to be expected as the images are all of plants that are by nature mostly green and 
brown. The plants that are shown in the images are mainly trees and grass, which parts of 
these (i.e. tree trunk and leaves, and blade of grass) are of different tangible natures, such as 
rough, raw, grainy, and fuzzy. This supports the individual’s understanding of the concept of 
sustainability, to which the identiﬁed phenomena and characteristics belong. So, since the 
individual understanding of sustainability is to some extent shared worldwide, it can be 
accepted that the phenomena of nature and their common characteristics can be generally 
associated with the concept of sustainability. Based on this recognition, representations for 
such phenomena may be expected in the design of sustainable products also. 
!30
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Sustainability in products 
Designs that express sustainability through different design elements and features are not 
entirely uncommon today. Although, while such designs may possibly remind people about 
sustainability, they may not necessarily induce sustainable thinking, evoke sustainable 
attitude, or elicit sustainable behaviour; or at least not to an impactful extent. Campbell 
(2009) notes that designers are now conscious about consumerism, which excess of this can 
contradict the concept of sustainability. Designers do however recognise the general 
overconsumption amongst people—actually due to their own work that intends to compel 
consumption (Campbell, 2009). This implies a reason for designers to design more 
sustainable products to help counterbalance the overconsumption. For the design of 
sustainable products, it may then be expected that characteristics of phenomena of nature 
are implemented in the products, as these characteristics can be associated with the 
concept of sustainability. 
A simple online search on “sustainable product design” (Figure 3.3), or “sustainable 
product” (Figure 3.4) showed a large variety of existing products that in one way or the 
other relate to the concept of sustainability. The search was performed to identify possible 
characteristic patterns that are used for the expression of sustainable products. 
!
Figure 3.3 Google Images search of ‘sustainable product design’ 
!31
==PAGE:44==
!
Figure 3.4 Google Images search of ‘sustainable product’ 
Figure 3.3 and Figure 3.4 show different product designs that are designed to be somehow 
associated with sustainability. A brief glance across the images catches visuals in brown and 
beige colours with small hints of green throughout. By a closer look, textures of wood, cork, 
cardboard, and paper can be identiﬁed, suggesting a frequent material of choice for 
sustainable product design. These types of materials are naturally brown and beige in 
colour, which also implies that if the products are indeed made of the materials observed, 
they have had little to no surface treatment and have been left in their more or less natural 
state. Considering the deﬁnition and general understanding of sustainability, it can be 
recognised that the materials and colours of the product design examples are strong 
indicators of what may be considered sustainable or related to sustainability. 
3.2.1 Speciﬁc product examples 
From an online search on sustainable products, it was observed that there is an immense 
amount of products that are somehow related to sustainability. Through the exploration of 
many different designs, it was attempted to select and discuss a diverse variety of these 
designs. The designs have been addressed as examples of sustainable products, and they 
have been observed to identify the way in which the concept of sustainability has been 
expressed in each of their designs.  
The presented array of products shown (Table 3.5) are products that can be found when 
performing an online search for sustainable product designs. These products are just a few 
examples of many products that designers, producers, or distributers have introduced as 
being sustainable or related to sustainability. 
!32
==PAGE:45==
Table 3.5: Examples of sustainable product designs 
The presented products belong to a large variety of product domains, which shows that 
sustainability in product design does not only apply to speciﬁc (types of) products. Rather, it 
may even be argued that there is a much intended attempt to apply this concept of 
sustainability to as many product domains as possible. Even if they are different types of 
products, this considerably large spectrum of products show some commonalities. One very 
apparent pattern is the colour that is mainly different shades of brown and beige, or green 
The Natural 4X Laundry 
Detergent bottle by Ecologic 
Brands has a moulded ﬁber 
shell of recycled cardboard and 
old newspaper, with a inner 
pouch made from single resin 
and non-laminated PE.
The iPad Travel Case tablet 
sleeve by Bambu is made of 
cork fabric, lined with 
unbleached cotton, accented 
with coconut shell buttons and 
a waxed-cotton tie.
The Bough City bicycle by 
Bough Bikes is mainly made of 
sustainable wood.
The REFOLD desk by Refold is 
made from cardboard and 
laminated together with 
environmentally friendly glue.
The Mapu Guaquén speaker by 
Documentary Design is made 
from organic clay, wood, cork, 
and wool, where most is raw 
and unprocessed.
The rice sack backpack by Keen 
Footwear is from repurposed 
rice sacks and excess factory 
materials.
The Verticality of Root 
Vegetables shelf is made of 
wood treated with beeswax, 
glass, and sand.
The Moss Clock by Noktuku has 
a wood frame and dial, and is 
ﬁlled out with a moss face.
The Grove Bamboo Case phone 
case by Grovemade is crafted 
from bamboo, sanded and 
rubbed with natural oils.
The Backpacker Cologne 
perfume by Juniper Ridge is 
held in a glass bottle with a 
wood cap, and is distilled from 
natural sources.
The Corky wireless mouse by 
Adele Peters is made from 
recycled cork and runs on 
piezoelectric elements.
The CLEAN RESERVE fragrance 
by CLEAN is held in a linen 
labelled glass bottle with a 
wood cap, and is made of pure 
and sustainable ingredients.
The Cub children's chair by 
Daniel Michalik is made from 
pure reclaimed waste cork 
material and has been bound 
with an ecologically-sound 
binding agent.
The NC White Party watch by 
SPGBK has an eco-friendly 
wood case and a mineral glass 
face.
The Veneerware disposable 
tableware by Bambu is made of 
organic bamboo that has not 
been bleached or dyed.
The Xuan lamp by INNOVO is 
made of ﬁnely sliced bamboo.
The Moss Carpet by Nguyen La 
Chanh is moss mat that includes 
different types of moss.
The Seed to Food concept 
tableware by HH Lin are created 
from inedible parts of organic 
vegetables and fruits.
The 3D printed soft seat 
by Lilian Van Daal mimics 
structures found in nature.
The Quercus desk lamp by Max 
Ashford is made of reclaimed 
wood, an upcycled wine bottle, 
and a low power LED bulb.
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!33
==PAGE:46==
that is also in few different shades. Another noticeable pattern is the texture that appears to 
be different manipulations of (probably different sorts of) wood, bark, and grass. 
Furthermore, with or without surface treatment, each product shows the natural texture of 
the material that it is made of. Yet an additional considerable pattern is that the presented 
products’ more traditional and common alternative is usually of other materials. For 
example, the product that is traditionally and commonly made of plastic or metal will have 
texture characteristics that are smooth, glossy, and sleek. Its sustainable alternative may be 
made of wood or cork, and have texture characteristics that are rough, coarse, and fuzzy. So, 
the characteristics found in the design of sustainable products appear to align with the 
previous ﬁndings on the phenomena of nature and their characteristics; they are all 
associated with the concept of sustainability. 
3.2.2 General product examples 
It appears that amongst individual products, it is possible to ﬁnd many product designs that 
are somehow related to the concept of sustainability. A broader observation of the product 
spectrum may however support in identifying characteristic patterns that can be observed 
amongst sustainable product designs. 
Product packaging (Figure 3.6) is an example of a common everyday thing that is often 
designed with one or more sustainable aspects. Since product packaging is often expected 
to be disposed at some point in time, it is only reasonable that these are designed 
environmentally conscious. Some product packaging is not only made environmentally 
conscious in the aspect of disposal, but it may even be made of material that was once 
disposed then recycled and reused as new packaging, which makes the source of material 
more sustainable also. In this spectrum many types of packaging are existent; like 
packaging made of paper, cardboard, hemp, fungus, leaves, cotton, etc. 
Figure 3.6: Sustainable product packaging 
Disposable tableware (Figure 3.7) is another example of a common everyday thing that is 
often designed with one or more sustainable aspects. As the name implies, disposable 
tableware is expected to be disposed at some point in time, hence these too are often 
designed environmentally conscious. Like product packaging, disposable tableware may 
also come from a more sustainable source of materials that have been recycled also. The 
range within disposable tableware are some; like paper cup, sugarcane plate, wooden bowl, 
bamboo cutlery, etc. 
!
!
!
!
!
!34
==PAGE:47==
Figure 3.7 Sustainable disposable tableware 
Interior items (Figure 3.8) is yet another example of a common everyday thing that is also 
often designed with many sustainable aspects. Such interior items include things as big as 
home furniture, such as sofas, tables, and carpets, to things as small as home accessories, 
like vases, picture frames, and candle trays. These can be made of different types of wood 
and rattan (oak, cherry, ash, etc.), grass (bamboo, seagrass, etc.), clay, etc. Besides being 
made of more sustainable resources, their production processes are often also more 
sustainable, as many of these interior items do not necessarily need high levels of treatment 
in terms of both making and ﬁnishing. 
Figure 3.8: Sustainable interior items 
It appears that the generally same design characteristics are seen across all sustainable 
product designs. The common characteristics are colours of brown and green, materials of 
wood and leaves, and textures that are raw and rough. These are also the characteristics that 
are commonly found in phenomena of nature, which belong to nature and is associated with 
the concept of sustainability. So as expected, for the design of sustainable products, 
designers tend to implement characteristics of phenomena of nature. 
3.3 Findings 
Based on the deﬁnition of the term ‘sustainability’ as deﬁned by the dictionary, and 
researchers’ deﬁnitions of the concept of sustainability, it has been identiﬁed that 
sustainability is often associated with environment, nature, and ecology. Grounded in this is 
also people’s understanding of sustainability that relates phenomena of nature to the 
concept. A review of sustainable product designs showed that designers share this 
understanding. According with the understanding of the concept of sustainability, the 
elements identiﬁed in products that are sustainable or related to sustainability indeed do 
carry representations of phenomena of nature. 
The product review revealed a range of materials and colours that recurred across the 
product designs. Through the review, it was recognised that the characteristics of the 
products were representations of nature, as they were indeed common with the 
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!35
==PAGE:48==
characteristics of the phenomena of nature. The materials observed for sustainable products 
were materials of natural and organic sources, like wood, bark, leaves, and grass. With 
minimal processing these product materials showed surface textures that are coarse, rough, 
raw, and fuzzy. The colours observed for sustainable products were also of natural character 
and thereby in different shades of brown, beige, and green. Since these characteristics of 
phenomena of nature are characteristics that people associate with the concept of 
sustainability, these can be considered to be used in conceptual priming—representing the 
concept of ‘sustainability’—to prime people for more sustainable attitude and behaviour. 
!36
==PAGE:49==
4. METHODOLOGY 
!37
4. 
METHODOLOGY
==PAGE:50==
This chapter describes the methodology that has been applied with the intention of 
answering the previously presented research question and subquestions (sec. 1.2). In order 
to answer these questions, a hypothesis (sec. 4.1) was ﬁrst deﬁned, after which two studies 
were conducted to assess the validity of this hypothesis. Descriptions of the study 
approaches as well as the way in which the studies imply answers to the subquestions are 
documented at the end of this chapter (sec. 4.2). 
4.1 Hypothesis 
As presented in the previous chapter (ch. 2), researchers have identiﬁed an imbalance in 
focus on the senses when priming through the senses for change of attitude and behaviour. 
Even with this recognition, no literature have tried to ﬁnd an explanation for the imbalance. 
Instead, it appears that most of the literature, as well as designers, take interest in the sense 
of sight. Hence, a hasty conclusion would be that the sense of sight is more susceptible to 
inﬂuence by priming. Although, much literature actually presents and claims the sense of 
smell as being human’s most powerful sense of the ﬁve (sec. 2.5.1), which then induces the 
reﬂection about an unexplored reason for the imbalance. This thesis therefore aims to 
investigate which basic human sense is most susceptible to inﬂuence, thus having more 
effect in a relative comparison, when being inﬂuenced. This leads to the hypothesis that is 
proposed for this study. A possible identiﬁcation of the sense(s) through which priming has 
more inﬂuence, will enable designers to consider which of the senses to prime through 
when designing for attitude and behaviour change. 
The exploration of the senses’ susceptibility to make people display sustainable attitude and 
behaviour, will in this project be examined by using supraliminal conceptual priming (sec. 
2.4.3.1, 2.4.3.2). With this method, the idea is that mental representations can be activated 
in one event (priming) and inﬂuence another event (behaviour). By using priming stimuli 
that are belonging to the concept of sustainability, these stimuli will activate the pertinent 
mental representations in people’s minds, which will make them display a sustainable 
attitude and behaviour. So in order to activate the mental representations of the concept of 
sustainability, people need to already associate the priming stimuli with the concept. Hence, 
the aim of the project is not to establish a sustainable awareness in people from status quo, 
but to promote the sustainable awareness already embedded in their unconscious mind. 
4.1.1 Hypothesis statement 
H1: By the inﬂuence of stimuli related to the concept of sustainability, one type of sensory 
perception will in comparison to the others more likely cause people to think and behave 
more sustainably. 
!38
==PAGE:51==
4.2 Study approach 
To either verify or falsify the hypothesis, an empirical approach consisting of two studies 
have been conducted to examine the potential effect on attitude and behaviour when 
priming through the basic human senses. Due to the limited time for this project, the extent 
of the studies conducted were limited also. Hence, the studies for the project is build on an 
earlier performed study by Olsen and Holm-Hansen (2013) in Nudging for a better world: A 
study of the effect of subconscious stimuli on sustainable behaviour. The study was 
performed with interest in the sense of sight, and therefore this project’s studies will expand 
the exploration by focusing on the sense of hearing, smell, and touch. Even though human’s 
basic senses include another ﬁfth sense: taste, it is not relevant to study this sense in the 
context of this project. The interest of this project lies in identifying implications for design 
of everyday things, of which the interaction with and experience of has impact on society. So 
it can be argued that it is the rarest of those things people will attempt to taste. Coherent 
with the study by Olsen and Holm-Hansen (2013) that addressed sustainable behaviour, 
these present studies also explore the senses with respect to the same behaviour. Empirical 
data from Olsen and Holm-Hansen’s (2013) study must be used to support a relative 
comparison between the priming effects for sense of sight, hearing, smell, and touch. For a 
fair comparison, the design and conduct of the studies in this project must as sensibly close 
as possible mirror the design and conduct of Olsen and Holm-Hansen’s (2013) study. 
4.2.1 Study 1 
Study 1 was conducted with the intention to answer the ﬁrst and second subquestion. The 
study was performed with a group of DTU students to clarify which stimuli within each basic 
sense of hearing, smell, and touch people would ﬁnd most commonly associated with 
sustainability. The students’ task was concealed in a case task, where they were asked to 
help a company to come up with ideas to be used as design features in the company 
products to reﬂect the company image and vision. The slogan of the company was ‘Be 
sustainable’. The students were presented to three types of design features: sound, scent, 
and texture, for which they had to ideate. Results from the task were coded into separate 
categories for each of the basic senses, and ﬁnally translated into stimuli commonly 
associated with sustainability—three types of stimuli for each of the three senses. The results 
were used to provide answers to the ﬁrst and second subquestion. 
4.2.2 Study 2 
The three stimuli commonly associated sustainability for each of the basic sense of hearing, 
smell, and touch found in Study 1, were used in Study 2 as priming stimuli for priming of the 
participants in order to answer the third and fourth subquestion. Three separate priming 
conditions—one for each sense—were assessed for the relative comparison between the 
senses. In each condition, participants were primed with the three respective priming 
stimuli. A distinction between supraliminal and subliminal stimuli was assumed, where for 
this experiment supraliminal stimuli was decided upon. This was to ensure the use of each 
stimulus to their full ability and strength without other inﬂuences, as would happen if the 
stimuli was only subliminal. The three stimuli used for each sense were captured and 
exposed in the form of sound from a digital sound player, smell in bottles, and textures in 
their original form. After being exposed to the stimuli, and thereby primed, the participant 
!39
==PAGE:52==
was asked to complete a sentence completion test. Results from all three experiments were 
coded to see whether or not signs of sustainable awareness in higher degree were to be 
detected at participants exposed for one sense rather than another. Besides testing 
participants’ sustainable attitude, the participants were also confronted with a behavioural 
test to test their sustainable behaviour. Participants were served a cup of water with a pre-
cut slit for the water to leak out onto the table. This would reveal whether the priming had an 
effect of change in behaviour, which would be measured in the amount of paper towels 
used to wipe up the spilled water. Analysis of the data from both tests suggested answers to 
the third and fourth subquestion. 
!40
==PAGE:53==
5. STUDY 1 
!41
5. 
STUDY 1
==PAGE:54==
The studies for this project have their focus on sustainable behaviour, with the interest of 
designing everyday things to support attitude and behaviour change to positively affect 
society. In order to prime people for a more sustainable attitude and behaviour, literature 
review has revealed that conceptual priming can be used (sec. 2.4.3.1). To be able to 
conceptually prime people, it is important to know the things that people understand as 
belonging to the same concept. A product design review revealed that the concept of 
sustainability is often associated with phenomena of nature (ch. 3). To elaborate on this 
review, Study 1 was conducted as an observational study with the intention of identifying 
phenomena that people commonly associate with the concept of sustainability. Ultimately, 
these should be translated into sensory stimuli that can activate the behavioural 
representations to make people display a more sustainable attitude and behaviour. 
This chapter will ﬁrst address the study method that has been applied for the conduct of 
Study 1. This includes the design of the study, the procedure that unfolded, and the 
participants who were involved (sec. 5.1). The collected data and coding process will then 
be described. Here, the coding guidelines and procedure for the data coding at different 
coding stages will be explained (sec. 5.2). Then the results of the coding will be presented, 
through which the evaluation and reﬁnement of the results as auditory, olfactory, and tactile 
stimuli will be explained (sec. 5.3). Finally, a discussion of the method applied (sec. 5.4) and 
a conclusion of the study will be given (sec. 5.5). 
5.1  Method 
5.1.1 Design of study 
As has been deﬁned previously (sec. 3.1), sustainability can be accepted as: “the quality of 
not being harmful to the environment or depleting natural resources, and thereby 
supporting long-term ecological balance”. This deﬁnition in its raw form is however not as 
easily directly translated into the language of design. Of course, the designer can design a 
product with the intentional expression of sustainability. Whether or not this actually comes 
across through its expression cannot be entirely decided by the designer however, as it also 
depends on the individual person who experiences the design. What people perceive as 
being related to sustainability is based on the way in which they understand the concept 
(sec. 3.1.1). This part of Study 1 is hence designed to provide some insight into the things 
that people think of when thinking about sustainability. In the study, participants are asked 
to generate words that represent speciﬁc sensory stimuli—sounds, smells, and textures—
that they personally associate with sustainability. 
As has been described in the methodology (ch. 4) this study builds on Olsen and Holm-
Hansen’s (2013) study for a relative comparison between priming effects through the 
senses. In their study, participants were asked to sketch logos that reﬂected a company with 
the slogan ‘Be sustainable’. The purpose of the study was to identify the physical form and 
shape characteristics people visually associate with sustainability. For an appropriate 
!42
==PAGE:55==
comparison, Study 1 was designed and conducted in the same manner. However, as 
sounds, smells, and textures are not as easily created as visuals, the participants in the 
present study were asked to generate words to represent sounds, smells, and textures 
instead. Participants were presented with the same task through the same cover story that 
asked them to generate words to represent sounds, smells, and textures that reﬂected a 
company with the slogan ‘Be Sustainable’. 
A ﬁve-page booklet (Appendix 2), was made as a tool for the purpose of collecting data for 
this study. On the front page of the booklet was a brief (Appendix 3) that was actually a 
cover story. The brief described a situation in which the individual participant had to 
imagine themselves. In the brief, that was provided for the participants to have at hand in 
case they missed or forgot some information, the participants were asked to complete a 
task. The task was to describe possible design features for products of a company whose 
slogan is ‘Be sustainable’. On the three following pages the participants were then to 
complete the required task of generating words. Through brainstorming they were to use 
words to describe design features that reﬂected the company’s image and vision according 
to three senses: hearing, smell, and touch (translated into design features as sound, smell, 
and texture). Each assessed sense was dedicated with one page to not restrict the 
participant in the amount of words they could generate. On the header of each page, ‘Be 
sustainable’ was written as a reminder for the participant to constantly consider the crux of 
the task On the backside of the booklet, the participants were asked to ﬁll in personal data, 
which included name, age, gender, nationality, ﬁeld of study, and year on study. 
5.1.2 Procedure 
Participants were all situated in a classroom in which they had already settled as the study 
was conducted directly after a class lecture. Each participant was made sure to be equipped 
with a writing tool and provided with the prepared booklet. The participants were then 
brieﬂy introduced to the study experimenters. No information was given about the real 
context and purpose of the study. They were told that the instructions to the study would be 
given through reading aloud of a script that had been prepared for the study. The script 
(Appendix 4) as well as the brief (Appendix 3) were read aloud.  
Following the instructions, the participants were told what the booklet consisted of and how 
it was to be used—page by page. They were told that on the front page was a task brief that 
would be read aloud, but was there to serve as a reminder for them in case they would 
forget any information related to the task. They were then told that they were required to 
perform a task according to the directions in the task brief, which was to be recorded by 
themselves on the three pages following. 
The task was given through a cover story with the booklet as a mask. The task for them was 
to imagine themselves as designers generating design ideas to reﬂect the image and vision 
of a company whose slogan is ‘Be Sustainable’. The ideas had to be given in the form of 
words and could be whatever word(s) that would cross their minds according to three types 
of design features: sound, smell, and texture. For each feature, the participants were given 3 
minutes with a notice at the mark of 30 seconds remaining. Before the start of the actual 
!43
==PAGE:56==
task, the participants were made aware of the fact that they should not think and dwell too 
much, but just produce as many ideas as possible as fast as possible. After the participants 
were conﬁrmed to understand the task completely, the task started (Figure 5.1). At the 
moment of “Sound” being said aloud, the ﬁrst countdown of 3 minutes was set off. Once 30 
seconds were left, the participants were notiﬁed “You have 30 seconds left” in which they 
could ﬁnish noting down ideas. Once the entire 3 minutes had passed they were told that 
“Time is up” and the session for the ideation on words for ‘sound’ had ended. The exact 
same procedure then subsequently happened for ‘smell’ and ‘texture.’ When all three 
features had been ideated for, the participants were asked to turn to the very last page of 
the booklet back side, on which they were to ﬁll in personal data. Finally, once all booklets 
were completed in being ﬁlled in, they were collected again. 
!
Figure 5.1: Participants performing task of Study 1 
Since the study was conducted with Danish-speaking participants of a Bachelor programme 
where all lecturing is in Danish, the entire study was conducted in Danish also. This was to 
not make language a barrier and thereby obstruct the participants’ abilities to fully 
comprehend and complete the task. 
5.1.3 Participants 
46 undergraduate students participated in the study (50 % female) in the age range 18-37 
years (average age = 22 years). All participants were of Danish nationality, except for one of 
Icelandic nationality. All were engineering students in the ﬁeld of study Design and 
Innovation at the Technical University of Denmark. The students were therefore to some 
degree familiar with brainstorming and ideating in relation to design. All participants were 
equipped with the same prepared material and all underwent the same planned procedure 
for the study. A complete overview of information of each of the participants can be seen in 
Appendix 5. 
!44
==PAGE:57==
5.2 Data and coding 
From the study, an average of 500 words for each design feature had been collected. These 
results were processed through different coding stages, each with different levels of detail. 
For the ﬁrst coding stage, no interpretation of the words were made, rather a complete 
objective grouping of the exact same words were performed. For the following second 
coding stage, judgement of the words were involved, and the grouping of the words were 
performed according to a number of established rules for consistency in judgement. The 
second coding stage was mainly intended to strengthen the word groups that had shown as 
frequently occurring in the ﬁrst coding stage, thereby reinforcing the indications of the raw 
data. With the purpose of validating the judgements that had been made, an intercoder 
reliability test involving an external coder was performed. For each sense, the words that 
occurred most frequently were the words that more participants recorded as eligible for 
representing a company whose slogan is ‘Be sustainable’. Hence, these words were 
interpreted as likely being stronger than others in terms of being priming stimuli for 
sustainable behaviour. 
5.2.1 First coding 
The intention with the ﬁrst coding stage was that this initial coding would already show a 
signiﬁcant grouping of words that had been frequently mentioned. These words could 
already imply the sounds, smells, and textures that are most commonly associated with 
sustainability. For this ﬁrst coding stage the raw data was coded according to one main rule: 
same rule. Essential for the ﬁrst stage was that no judgements were allowed to be made 
when grouping the words.  
!
 
Same rule: the words can be grouped if they are the exact same or they are very similar 
and sensibly indistinguishable. This means to group words that are the same, like “ﬂower” 
and “ﬂower”, or they are similar and are sensed as the same through the sense of which 
they are perceived, like the smell of “ﬂower” and the smell of “ﬂowers”.
!45
==PAGE:58==
The ﬁrst coding, which was only an identiﬁcation of the most frequently occurring words 
noted, showed a result of words that stood out. This was the case for all of the feature types: 
sound, smell, and texture. The words that separated themselves from the others were e.g. 
for sound: wind, for smell: grass, and for texture: wood. The frequency of words can be seen 
in Figure 5.2, 5.3, and 5.4. 
!
 
Figure 5.2: Frequency of words for the sense of hearing 
!
 
Figure 5.3: Frequency of words for the sense of smell 
5
0
10
15
20
Frequency
Ocean
25
Wind
Bird song
Rain
Silence
Nature
Waves
Animals
Waterfall
Water
Trees in the wind
Rustling leaves
Birds
Laughter
Music
Foot steps
Running water
Miscellaneous
5
0
10
15
20
Frequency
Ocean
25
Grass
Flowers
Nature
Fresh
Rain
Perfume
Sweat
Forest
Smoke
Tree
Soil
Fruits
Food
Saltwater
Fir
Garbage
Miscellaneous
Petrol
Animals
Slurry
Fertiliser
Rotten
Detergent
Tea
Nose
!46
==PAGE:59==
!
 
Figure 5.4: Frequency of words for the sense of touch 
A review of the distribution of words in the raw data (Appendix 6) and illustrated graphs 
(Figure 5.2, 5.3, and 5.4) revealed the most frequently occurring words, which these imply 
the concepts that people typically consider representing sustainability. In terms of sound, 
the initial top three words were ‘wind’, ‘bird song’, and ‘rain’; in terms of smell, the initial top 
three words were ‘grass’, ‘ﬂowers’, and ‘nature’; and in terms of texture, the initial top three 
words were ‘tree’, ‘rough’, and ‘soft’. As can be seen, the majority of the words displayed in 
the graphs are related to the theme of nature. It can also be seen that some of these words 
that are related to the theme of nature, like ‘ocean’, ‘rain’, ‘tree/wood’ and ‘grass’, recur 
across the three different senses. Words that have a frequency of 5 or above have been 
illustrated in the graphs, while words with a lower frequency have been allocated to the 
category ‘miscellaneous’. 
5.2.2 Second coding 
For a stronger indication of the most frequently occurring words (Figure 5.2, 5.3 and 5.4), a 
second stage of coding was performed (Appendix 7). The second coding stage required 
judgement for grouping of the words. Therefore, the data outcome derived from the ﬁrst 
coding stage was coded according to a number of rules: follow the tendencies rule, same 
category rule, same general perception rule, and wrong rule. As the very ﬁrst step in the 
second coding stage, words that were used as examples during the instruction of Study 1 
were eliminated; which these were ‘thunder’, ‘footsteps’, and ‘foot odour’. These words if 
written could be for the reason that they were primed for during the instructions, and not 
genuinely thought of as associated with ‘sustainability’.  
5
0
10
15
20
Frequency
Stone
25
Wood
Rough
Soft
Grass
Smooth
Bark
Hard
Nature
Skin
Leaf
Wool
Fur
Water
Sand
Coarse
Warm
Miscellaneous
Soil
Leather
Cold
Cotton
Silk
Paper
Grooved
Sharp
Recycled material
Firm
Fabric
Wet
!47
==PAGE:60==
!
The rules described were established as more or less deﬁnite rules and it was attempted to 
follow these as precisely as possible. However, when it comes to making judgements, it is 
important to make judgements to create sensibly relevant results. Moreover, as sensing and 
Follow the tendencies rule: the most frequently mentioned words found at the ﬁrst coding 
stage should be considered foundational for the categories formed at the following 
stages, and should inherently form categories on their own. As judgement was involved, 
the categorisation based on such should be understood as reinforcement of the 
tendencies observed in the raw data. 
Same category rule: the words can be grouped if the sensing of a general word’s concept 
and a speciﬁc word’s concept is barely distinguishable in deﬁnite detail. This means to 
group words belonging to the same general concept if they are sensibly indistinguishable, 
like the smell of “ﬂowers” (general) and the smell of “roses” (speciﬁc). In this case the 
general word is accepted as the category name and thereby the respective stimulus. 
Same general perception rule: the words can be grouped if they can be perceived 
(sensed) as the same or very closely associated concept. This means to group words that 
are sensibly indistinguishable even if they are not the same, similar, or directly linked, like 
the smell of “ﬂowers” and the smell of “meadow”. In this case the best describing word is 
accepted as the category name and thereby the respective stimulus. 
The ﬁnal rule is the Wrong rule: This rule is intended to eliminate the words that essentially 
do not qualify as sounds, smells, or textures respectively, or belong to any of the existing 
word categories. They are therefore not considered as potential implications for design as 
stimuli to elicit prosocial attitude and behaviour. These words are put into one category of 
miscellaneous words. The words that belong to this category mainly include four types of 
words: 
Too general: The word does not describe a speciﬁc sound/smell/texture, and the concept 
behind the word holds several different sounds/smells/textures that are easily sensibly 
distinguishable. Like, for sound, the sound of “nature” can be sound of “wind”, “bird song”, 
“waterfall”, etc. 
Too abstract: The word describes a sound/smell/texture, but is not a sound/smell/texture 
in itself. Like, for smell, the smell of “comfortable”, “pleasant”, “cozy”, etc. does not deﬁne an 
actual smell (scent/odour). 
Wrong: The word does not describe a sound/smell/texture or a concept that can be 
immediately associated with a sound/smell/texture. With this rule, for texture two 
additional rules count: The word describes a texture, but the texture is inconsistent in most 
cases. Like, the texture of “soap” can be “watery”, or “creamy”, or “solid”, etc. The word 
describes something that can be sensed through the sense of touch, but is not a texture. 
Like, mass, mass consistency, mass structure, temperature, etc. 
Miscellaneous: The word describes a sound/smell/texture or can be immediately 
associated with a sound/smell/texture, but does not belong in one of the named 
categories.
!48
==PAGE:61==
perceiving are normal human abilities, the judgements were also made from a general 
perspective of the common individual and not from the view of any speciﬁc expert. For the 
coding, a word describing texture was not only accepted if the word implies a surface 
structure that can be sensed by the hand that glides across, but also if the word is a material 
that in itself has a texture. 
5.2.3 Intercoder reliability 
Since judgements were involved at the second coding stage, a ﬁnal coding to obtain 
intercoder reliability was necessary. At this stage, an external coder was asked to code the 
raw data from the ﬁrst coding stage according to the rules given in the second coding 
stage. The coder was provided with digital documents of the necessary information and 
data, which consisted of the raw data (Appendix 6), the word category names with category 
descriptions created from the second coding stage (Appendix 8), and an instruction 
including the rules needed for the coding (Appendix 9). The coder was asked to simply 
allocate the words from the raw data to the word categories. For the outcome of the 
intercoder reliability test to be considered valid, a percentage comparison of each category 
between the internal coding and the external coding had to be a minimum of 80 %. The ﬁrst 
round of external coding showed few differences in coding (Appendix 10). So the 
intercoder reliability agreement did therefore not show an agreement of 80 % or above 
between the internal and external coding for all categories (Appendix 11). It was realised 
that since coding of the words involved judgement of these, a clear understanding of the 
three types of stimuli: sound, smell, and texture to which the words belong was necessary as 
a common basis. It was also found that the category names and their descriptions needed 
!49
==PAGE:62==
improvement. So, deﬁnitions for each of these three types of stimuli were given as is seen 
below. Then the category names and their descriptions were modiﬁed. The new instructions 
(Appendix 12) together with the new category names and descriptions (Appendix 13), were 
handed to the external coder after which the data was re-coded. As words in the 
miscellaneous category are not interesting in relation to being potential implications for 
design as stimuli, words allocated to the four subcategories of miscellaneous were not 
further processed after the ﬁrst round of external coding, and were therefore not included in 
the external re-coding. 
!
!
!
The alterations resulted in the necessary effect and the re-coding showed a percentage 
comparison of 80 % or above for each category between the internal and external coding 
(Table 5.5), and thus meaning a veriﬁcation of the group categories (Appendix 14).  
Sound: For a word in the raw data to quality as a ‘sound’, the word must in itself be able to 
elicit a sound. The word is thereby not a sound if the word describes a sound, e.g. 
fascinating, noisy, or clean. The word is also not a sound if the word can be associated with 
something that elicits a sound when it in itself does not elicit a sound, e.g. “CD”. “CD” in 
itself does not elicit any sound, but a “playing CD” does. An activity like “ﬁtness” does not 
elicit a sound, but “ﬁtness can be associated with many things that do elicit sounds, e.g. 
“music”, “shouting”, and “heavy breathing”.
Smell: For a word in the raw data to qualify as a ‘smell’, the word must in itself be able to 
elicit a smell. The word is thereby not a smell if the word describes a smell, e.g. “clean” or 
“dirty”. The word is also not a smell if the word can be associated with something that 
elicits a smell when it in itself does not elicit a smell, e.g. an activity. The word for an activity 
is not a smell in itself, but the activity can be associated with a smell that is elicited in 
relation to the activity. The same is considered for a describing word, e.g. “disgusting”. 
“Disgusting” is not a smell in itself, even though the word for some individuals can be 
associated with a disgusting smell. The word that represents an object is also not a smell if 
the smell of the object is not consistent (i.e. there is a common perception of the smell of 
the object), but just one individual associates the object with a speciﬁc smell, e.g. a 
“pillowcase”. A “pillowcase” can have many different smells in different stages and 
contexts, but one individual may have one speciﬁc smell that perceive as associated with 
“pillowcase”
Texture: For a word in the raw data to qualify as a ‘texture’, the word must in itself be 
sensed as a texture by touch of a hand that glides across. The word is thereby not a texture 
if e.g. it is a consistency that cannot be sensed by the hand that glides across. Besides 
surface structures, the word can be accepted as being a texture if it is a material that in 
itself has a texture. The word can however not be accepted as being a texture if the word 
represents an object that carries the texture, or carries several different textures. For 
example, “car” can carry a material that has a texture, but “car” is not a texture or a material 
in itself.
!50
==PAGE:63==
Table 5.5: Second intercoder agreement 
CATEGORY NAME 
· DESCRIPTION
INTERNAL 
CODING
EXTERNAL 
CODING
LEVEL OF 
SIMILARITY
A whistling wind · a whistling wind to greater or lesser extent
35
38
92.1 %
Bird life · bird life chirping and singing
25
26
96.2 %
The ocean · the waving and roaring ocean
23
23
100 %
Rain · rain falling to a greater or lesser extent
17
17
100 %
Leaves · leaves rustling in all contexts
14
14
100 %
Laughter · laughter and joyful days
13
11
84.6 %
A stream of water · strong heavily streaming water in motion
21
23
91.3 %
Water splash · smaller splash and drip of water
7
8
87.5 %
Shouting · people shouting or screaming
5
5
100 %
Grass · grass
25
28
89.3 %
Flowers · ﬂowers in all forms
30
31
95.8 %
Rain · new fallen rain
13
13
100 %
The ocean · the fresh and salty ocean
20
20
100 %
Scented · saturated, synthetic, perfumed scent
25
27
92.6 %
Sweat · biting fresh perspiration
12
10
83.3 %
Forest · any overall forest atmosphere
14
14
100 %
Tree · wood, under here speciﬁc trees and their components
18
16
88.9 %
Soil · soil
8
9
88.9 %
Garbage · overall garbage and compost
13
15
86.7 %
Pollution · commonly known pollution and engine fuels
30
26
86.7 %
Excrement · urine and feaces, and smells that can be associated with these
17
17
100 %
Wood · wood
23
22
95.7 %
Rough · a rough and grainy surface
39
35
89.7 %
Soft · running hand through the soft fur of an animal
39
42
93 %
Rock-hard · hard material of nature
37
44
84.1 %
Blade of grass · grass and straw
17
17
100 %
Bark · bark on tree
14
15
93.3 %
Water · thin liquid wetness
14
13
92.9 %
Smooth · silk-smooth and polished surface
24
23
95.8 %
Skin · skin on a human being
10
12
83.3 %
Soil · moist soil and mould
7
7
100 %
Leather · leather and skin of an animal
9
9
100 %
Leaf · a leaf
8
8
100 %
!51
SOUND
SMELL
TEXTURE
==PAGE:64==
5.3 Results 
As an outcome for Study 1, the initial results were collected in the form of primary data, 
which then passed through a number of coding stages to show concluding results. Through 
the ﬁrst stage of coding, the 46 participants generated an average of 500 words for each 
design feature: sound, smell, and texture. Grouping of words in the ﬁrst coding stage 
revealed a tendency in words that people ﬁnd representing in relation to sustainability. To 
strengthen the indication of the most frequently occurring words in the raw data, a second 
stage of coding was conducted. The raw data of words was formed into categories that 
represent different concepts that may be used as priming stimuli. In order to validate the 
second coding, intercoder reliability was necessary and was established between the 
authors and an external coder. The intercoder agreement ended with a percentage 
comparison of 80 % or above for each category. The results for all formed categories for 
each of the senses can be seen in Figure 5.6, 5.7, and 5.8. 
!
 
Figure 5.6 Final distribution of word categories for sense of hearing 
5
0
10
15
20
Frequency
A stream of water
35
A whistling wind
Bird life
The ocean
Rain
Leaves
Water splash
Shouting
Laughter
Miscellaneous
30
25
!52
==PAGE:65==
!
 
Figure 5.7 Final distribution of word categories for sense of smell 
!
 
Figure 5.8 Final distribution of word categories for sense of touch 
5
0
10
15
20
Frequency
Scented
35
Grass
Flowers
The ocean
Rain
Sweat
Tree
Soil
Forest
Miscellaneous
30
25
Garbage
Pollution
Excrement
5
0
10
15
20
Frequency
Rock-hard
35
Soft
Wood
Blade of grass
Skin
Leaf
Bark
Soil
Smooth
Miscellaneous
30
25
Leather
Rough
Water
40
!53
==PAGE:66==
As can be seen in Figure 5.6, 5.7, and 5.8, some words illustrated in Figure 5.2, 5.3, and 5.4 
(for raw data) are no longer represented. These words were removed as they were identiﬁed 
as wrong according to the ‘wrong rule’ and thus being e.g. ‘wrong’ or ‘too abstract’. The 
remaining words grouped into categories had however largely increased in frequency—
which is illustrated with a black line for each category on the ﬁgures. Again, it can be seen 
that the majority of the words that represent the categories in the three ﬁgures are related to 
the theme of nature. These words, such as ‘the ocean’, ‘grass’, ‘rain’ and ‘wood’, are 
represented across the three senses. In terms of sounds, the top categories were sound of ‘a 
whistling wind’, ‘birdlife’, and ‘the ocean’. For smells the top categories were the smell of 
‘ﬂowers’, ‘pollution’, ‘grass’, ‘scented’ and ‘the ocean’. In terms of textures, the top categories 
for texture were ‘rough’, ‘soft’, and ‘rock-hard’. The category ‘miscellaneous’ includes all the 
words that follow the ‘Wrong rule’, thus not belonging to any of the deﬁned categories and 
not to be recommended to be used as stimuli to elicit sustainable attitude and behaviour. 
5.3.1 Stimuli for sustainable attitude and behaviour 
With the results from the second coding, the ﬁnal step was to sum up and identify three 
deﬁnite stimuli for each sense to be used for priming of the participants in Study 2. For the 
sounds, the three highest ranking words (Figure 5.6) represented different sounds that 
could be straightforwardly translated into auditory stimuli; sound of ‘a whistling wind’, sound 
of ‘birdlife’, and sound of ‘the ocean’. These three words would therefore be used as the 
priming stimuli for the sense of hearing. 
For the smells, the three highest ranking words (Figure 5.7) included the smell ‘pollution’, 
which however two participants speciﬁcally had noted as being “against” sustainability. 
Moreover, the highest ranking words for each of the three senses belong to the theme of 
nature, meaning that words related to nature, people would generally more often associate 
with sustainability. For these reasons, ‘pollution’ was not accepted as an appropriate stimuli 
in the context of sustainability. Another word occurring in the top three words for smell was 
‘scented’ (artiﬁcially). For the same reason of not belonging to the theme of nature, this was 
reconsidered for accept. It was then realised that the following most occurring word was ‘the 
ocean’. This word was also one of the highest ranking words for the sense of hearing, and it 
is a word that belongs to the theme of nature. Thus, this reinforced the relevance of the 
word ‘the ocean’, and therefore ‘scented’ was not accepted as an appropriate stimulus with 
respect to sustainability. Hence, the top three olfactory stimuli that would be used as the 
priming stimuli for the sense of smell were the smell of ‘ﬂowers’, smell of ‘grass’, and smell of 
‘the ocean’. 
For the textures, the three highest ranking words (Figure 5.8) represented the textures 
‘rough’, ‘soft’, and ‘rock-hard’. These are not tangible on their own and cannot be directly 
translated into touchable stimuli without a supporting object. An assessment of their 
following most recurring words, suggested that these could be combined to support the 
translation into appropriate stimuli for the sense of touch. Merges were made of ‘rough’ and 
‘rock-hard’ (‘rock’ became ‘stone’), ‘soft’ and ‘blade of grass’ (‘blade of grass’ became 
‘grass’), and ‘wood’ and ‘bark’. The ﬁrst two combinations were formed by the actual top 
three words that were not initially appropriate as tactile stimuli together with one other 
!54
==PAGE:67==
highly ranked word from the top list to become so. The last third combination was formed as 
‘wood’ was never speciﬁed as with or without bark, and so by adding ‘bark’ that is often a 
natural part of wood, the stimulus could be strengthened and thereby become one of the 
highest ranking words. ‘Wood’ was also the most frequent word for texture in the raw data. 
So, the top three tactile stimuli that would be used as the priming stimuli for the sense of 
touch were the texture of ‘rough stone’, texture of ‘soft grass’, and texture of ‘wood with 
bark’. The different stimuli identiﬁed for each sense are illustrated as a top three diagram 
(Figure 5.9). 
Figure 5.9: Top three stimuli for sense of hearing, smell, and touch 
Despite the stages in where judgments were involved in the categorisation of the words, the 
top three stimuli identiﬁed for each sense (Figure 5.9) did not differ much from the most 
frequent words mentioned in the raw data. Figure 5.2 shows that for sound ‘wind’, ‘bird 
song’ and ‘the ocean’ are ranked 1st, 2nd, and 6th. respectively. Figure 5.3 shows that for 
smell ‘grass’, ‘ﬂowers’ and ‘the ocean’ are also ranked 1st, 2nd. and 6th., and Figure 5.4 
shows that for texture ‘wood’ and ‘bark’, ‘stone’ and ‘rough’, and ‘grass’ and ‘soft’ are ranked 
1st. and 7th., 6th. and 2nd., and 4th. and 3rd. This supports the initial top three stimuli that 
were identiﬁed through the study as they are all to be found in the top 7 of words in the raw 
data, where no judgment had yet been done. 
5.4 Discussion 
The format of the method of Study 1 can be considered relatively “open”, meaning that 
there were not many restrictions in terms of the responses required from the participants 
involved. This was of course to some extent intended to not direct and lead the participants 
into giving speciﬁc responses, as it was the goal to let them deliver their most genuine and 
raw answers. This “openness” inevitably lead to several factors related to the outcome. 
1
2
3
!
!55
SOUND
SMELL
TEXTURE
 wood with bark 
 rough stone 
 grass 
 grass 
 a whistling wind 
 ﬂowers 
 the ocean 
 bird life 
 the ocean 
==PAGE:68==
5.4.1 Brainstorm of words 
Participants were asked to write down any word(s) crossing their minds when generating 
design ideas for a company with the slogan ‘Be sustainable’. They were told nothing about 
generating ideas associated with sustainability. This resulted in many words that did not 
comply with the concept of sustainability. Some of the words could even be considered as 
more associated with the concept of non-sustainability. Two participants pointed out the 
distinction between words that they considered to be “for” and “against” sustainability in 
their responses, and many of the words noted as being “against” were also the ones seen in 
other participants’ responses. There is a possible reason behind the absence of direct 
distinction between words that participants considered “for” and “against” sustainability. It 
seemed as if participants would write down the word that they thought of as more directly 
associated with the word that was written down just prior, instead of thinking back to what 
the task in the brief asked to do. This appeared to be a general tendency observed in all 
participants’ responses. Most words that are indeed against the concept of sustainability 
however, can be rationally and factually determined as so. 
Similar to the words not complying with the concept of sustainability, many other words 
seemed to have no relation to the task; i.e. not being design features in the form of either a 
sound, smell, or texture. Words that in the second coding had been categorised as ‘wrong’ 
or ‘too abstract’ were especially the words that were more difﬁcult to accept as the type of 
words that were actually asked for; or at least representation of phenomena that can be 
immediately considered as such. For the external coding, a clear understanding of the three 
types of stimuli to which the words belong to appeared to be necessary. Including a 
deﬁnition for this understanding in the script of Study 1 might have prevented the 
generation of some of the ‘wrong’ words. However, the purpose of keeping the study as 
open as possible and not limit the participants would have been counteracted had these 
deﬁnitions been included.  
5.4.2 Categorising words 
The categorisation of words for the second coding included a larger amount of judgement. 
Based on just interpretations of each word, it had to be determined which word category 
they belonged to. Therefore, it cannot be comprehensively said whether right or wrong 
judgements exist. Even though an external coder coded the words for reliability, and the 
intercoder reliability agreement ultimately showed reliability in the coding, the external 
coding was still performed using guidelines and instructions from the authors. However, this 
amount of judgement might not have had much inﬂuence on the outcome. The words 
representing the highest ranked words were the same words that were already highest 
ranked in the raw data. So it can be considered that the words chosen as stimuli for the 
three study conditions in Study 2 have been selected without any interpretation—as if no 
second coding had been performed and as if the stimuli had been selected directly from 
the highest ranked words in the raw data. 
5.5 Conclusion of study 
In ﬁnding answers for the research subquestion 1 and 2 (sec. 1.2), this study has shown fairly 
clear implications. With an average of 500 words collected for each design feature in the 
!56
==PAGE:69==
study, it appears that the stimuli most commonly associated with sustainability in general 
can be related to phenomena of nature. This is consistent with what was realised through 
the product design review (ch. 3), which also implied an association between sustainability 
and phenomena of nature. So for each sense, the top three stimuli determined as priming 
stimuli for further study were identiﬁed as phenomena of nature. It furthermore appears that 
the relative pattern that can be observed across the stimuli shows that a stimulus occurring 
for one sense will likely occur for another sense, if sensible through that other sense also. 
Amongst the most frequently recurring stimuli, this has been identiﬁed with the sound of 
‘the ocean’ that recurs as the smell of ‘the ocean’, as well as the smell of ‘grass’ that recurs as 
the texture of ‘soft grass’. Study 1 has supported the notion that the stimuli that people 
mostly commonly associate with the concept of sustainability are stimuli related to nature. 
For Study 2 the identiﬁed top 3 stimuli for each sense (Figure 5.9) will be used as conceptual 
priming stimuli to inﬂuence participants to display a more sustainable attitude and 
behaviour.  
!57
==PAGE:70==
!58
==PAGE:71==
6. STUDY 2 
!59
6. 
STUDY 2
==PAGE:72==
Stimuli commonly associated with sustainability for each of the basic senses of hearing, 
smell and touch were identiﬁed in Study 1. The purpose of Study 2 was then to use these 
ﬁndings as stimuli for priming for sustainable attitude and behaviour. By including the result 
for the assessment of sense of sight from Olsen and Holm-Hansen’s (2013) study, results 
from Study 2 was used to answer the hypothesis. Hence, the aim of Study 2 was to 
investigate whether, and if so which, one of the four basic senses would show to be more 
susceptible to inﬂuence through priming. Study 2 should essentially provide implications for 
design by identifying the sense through which priming has more inﬂuence. These 
implications will ultimately be suggested to be considered by designers in their choice of 
senses to prime through when designing for attitude and behaviour change.  
This chapter will address the different aspects of Study 2. First, the chapter describes the 
method that was applied to conduct the study (sec. 6.1). This includes the way in which the 
study was designed in terms of the means of priming and the means of assessing the effect 
of the primes. It also describes the procedure of the study through which materials are 
mentioned and after which participants are described. It furthermore describes the 
approach to the coding of the collected data. Then the chapter documents the statistical 
results of the study (sec. 6.2). Here, the statistical method of analysing the data is described. 
Some aspects of the method used for the study will be discussed (sec. 6.3) and ﬁnally, a 
conclusion of the study is presented (sec. 6.4). 
!60
==PAGE:73==
6.1 Method  
6.1.1 Design of study 
For a relative comparison between the priming effects of the senses, including the 
assessment on sense of sight from Olsen and Holm-Hansen’s (2013) study, Study 2 needed 
to be designed and conducted in the same manner. Study 2 was also designed to involve 
participants with their unawareness of the primes. Participants had to describe each of the 
stimulus they were exposed to, after which they were unknowingly tested for the priming 
effect through a seemingly unrelated sentence completion test masked as a questionnaire. 
Similarly, they were unknowingly tested for the priming effect on behaviour through a 
behavioural test. 
6.1.1.1 Design of priming stimulus 
In Olsen and Holm-Hansen’s (2013) study, participants were primed through the sense of 
sight where the stimuli being used were three pictures of everyday products: a bowl, a 
clock, and a speakers. Each of the three products included shapes that people associated 
with sustainability: multiple arrows in closed loop, loops and knots, and intertwined 
elements. Things commonly associated with sustainability for each of the senses: hearing, 
smell, and touch had been identiﬁed in Study 1 (sec. 5.3.1). Representations of these were 
found to be used in the form of stimuli for priming in Study 2. For the sense of hearing the 
sounds identiﬁed were the sounds of wind, bird song, and the ocean; for the sense of smell 
the smells identiﬁed were the smells of grass, ﬂowers, and the ocean; and for the sense of 
touch the textures identiﬁed were the textures of wood with bark, rough stone, and soft 
grass.  
As it is important to distinguish between subliminal and supraliminal stimuli when 
considering priming with respect to design (sec. 2.4.3.2), deciding on either type of stimuli 
was crucial. On one hand the stimuli can be presented as subliminal features, like ambient 
experiences of background music or atmospheric fragrances. On the other hand the stimuli 
can be presented as supraliminal features, like in objects or events that are interacted with 
and experienced. To solely observe the desired effect and achieve most effect possible, it 
was considered that full attention without potential distractions and inﬂuences besides the 
priming stimuli was more appropriate. Supraliminal stimulus was also the type of stimulus 
used in Olsen and Holm-Hansen’s (2013) study. So, for a fair comparison between the 
assessments, the choice of using supraliminal stimuli was only ﬁtting; and the relevant 
stimuli were captured and exposed as primes. Representational stimuli of the sounds, 
smells, and textures were captured and exposed respectively as digital sounds played 
through headphones plugged into a digital sound player, smells let out through small 
containers, and textures in their extracted but otherwise original form. Through a research 
(Appendix 15) it was examined how smells best could be captured in a easy manner. The 
use of small bottles for containing the source of the smell was found to be a useful method. 
However, it turned out that not much smell could come out of the small opening of a bottle. 
Higher smell intensities could quite possibly be obtained by fragrance extraction of the raw 
material. However, as as these could be perceived as synthetic smells and not smells 
associated with nature, small containers with a bigger opening surface was used instead of 
small bottles. All stimuli used for the three experiments can be seen in Figure. 6.1. 
!61
==PAGE:74==
 
Figure 6.1: Sensory stimuli for priming through the sense of hearing, smell, and touch 
To reinforce the idea of focusing the participant’s attention to just the prime, the remaining 
basic senses of the participants that were not primed through in the respective session were 
disabled as best as possible. With priming through the sense of hearing, the sense of sight 
and touch were restrained. With priming through the sense of smell and the sense of touch, 
the sense of sight was restrained. However, their sense of hearing had to be left open for 
them to hear instructions; but potentially disturbing sounds were kept at a minimal. Since 
supraliminal stimuli were used for priming, respectively comprehensive ways of exposure 
[THE OCEAN]
[A WHISTILING WIND]
[BIRDLIFE]
!
FLOWERS
THE OCEAN
!
GRASS
!
WOOD WITH BARK 
SOFT GRASS
!
ROUGH STONE
!62
SOUND
SMELL
TEXTURE
==PAGE:75==
were found for each of the sensory stimuli. In the sound prime condition, participants were 
seated and blindfolded and had their hands relaxed on the table in front of them. The 
headphones through which the sounds were played were over-the-ear headphones to 
exclude as much irrelevant sound and noise as possible. In the smell prime condition, 
participants were seated and blindfolded. The smells were places one at the time in the 
containers on the table in front of them for them to pick up and smell. In the texture prime 
condition, participants were seated and blindfolded. The textures were placed one at the 
time on the table in front of them for them to just stroke across the surface with their hands. 
6.1.2 Design of assessment method 
To asses the priming effect in Study 2, the assessment method used in Olsen and Holm-
Hansen’s (2013) study was used, as this would enable a fair comparison between the results 
of the two studies. The assessment method was a sentence completion test where 
participants had to complete 15 unﬁnished sentences. Some of the 15 sentences were more 
related to sustainable behaviour than others, and sustainable-related sentences were 
expected to be the ones most likely to trigger a sustainable response. Sentences unrelated 
to sustainability were included in order to not arouse suspicion regarding the intentional 
theme of sustainability in the sentences. ‘I would like to limit my consumption of…..’ is an 
example of a sentence in the test that would possibly trigger a sustainable answer, whereas 
‘A personal advice for a good life is…..’ is an example of a sentence that would less likely do 
the same. A couple of more open sentences, like ‘I believe it is important to…..’ where 
answers could go in any direction, were also included. The sentence completion test was 
given in the masked form of a “questionnaire” so that the participants would stay unaware of 
being tested. The seemingly questionnaire (Appendix 16) consisted of the sentence 
completion test, personal data including name, age, gender, nationality, ﬁeld of study, and 
year on study, and a debrief similar to that of Chartrand and Bargh’s (1996) in the end. The 
debrief consisted of ﬁve questions and was to ensure that participants had not discovered a 
relation between the two tasks and thereby not ﬁgured out the actual purpose of the study. 
A participant’s response was accepted if they were just conscious about their experience of 
the primes as a mere stimuli, but was unaware of the stimuli as primes with the underlying 
intention of inﬂuencing their attitude and behaviour. 
6.1.2.1 Design of behavioural test 
As an extension for the sentence completion test, which only tested the attitude (self-
construal), the participants were subjected to a behavioural test. This was to test the effect of 
priming for a change in sustainable behaviour. The test could then be used to detect if a 
correlation between the participants’ self-construal (how I think I am) and their actual 
behaviour (how I act) could be found (sec. 2.3.1). In Olsen and Holm-Hansen’s (2013) 
behavioural test, the experimenter asked participants to throw out some paper with the 
excuse that there was no paper bin located in the room. Outside the room were two 
garbage bins; one ordinary and another with a recycle mark on the front. The participants 
then had two options for which they could dispose of the paper. Thus, the mean of 
measurement was binary; either a participant would throw out the paper in the recycle 
garbage bin, or they would not. For a more comprehensive judgement, a new behavioural 
test was suggested, where the results could be measured in terms of the extent to which the 
!63
==PAGE:76==
effect is shown. A noticeable amount of the experiments existent (Appendix 1) assess their 
results in measurable results, as such an assessment provides the understanding of the 
degree of the effects measured. Since the design of the present behavioural test was 
different from Olsen and Holm-Hansen’s (2013) behavioural test, results from these could 
not be compared.  
The behavioural test had to be concealed and the things happening in its context could not 
be suspected as a test or a part of the experiment. Therefore, it was crucial that the 
behavioural test could be carried out as natural as possible in the conditions of the study. In 
everyday life, many sustainable behaviours takes place in the home where water, electricity, 
heat, etc. can be saved, or in the public spaces as choice of transport, purchase of groceries, 
etc. Mirroring of such behaviours was not possible in a small room with few props. 
Inspiration for design of the test was found from an experiment by Twenge et al. (2007), 
where participants were primed with words. One group of participants were told that they 
would be alone later in life and three other groups were told that they enjoy a future in rich 
personal relationships. As each participant was alone with the experimenter to ﬁll out a 
questionnaire (the cover story), the experimenter knocked over a cup of 20 pencils onto the 
ﬂoor while reaching for the questionnaire. The behavioural test was here to observe the 
amount of pencils the participants were willing to help the experimenter pick up after the 
mishap. The idea of creating a small accident with respect to sustainability inspired the 
behavioural test. The test was thereby to spill water and observe the amount of paper towels 
the participant would use to wipe up the spilled water, and to see if the amount of paper 
towels used was affected by the type of sensory stimuli. 
Two scenarios for a water-mishap were considered. In one scenario, the experimenter can 
knock over a cup of water onto the table where the participant is ﬁlling out their 
questionnaire. In another scenario, the participant can be served water in a slitted cup that 
will leak water out onto the table where the participant is ﬁlling out their questionnaire. To 
ensure a seemingly natural occurrence of the accident for the behavioural test and minimise 
the chance of acting, it was decided to just give the participant a cup of water while ﬁlling 
out the questionnaire. The water was served in a disposable plastic cup with a pre-cut slit in 
it for the water to leak out and spread onto the table. The timing was to seamlessly conceal 
the test, while the participant was busy ﬁlling in information and answering questions. They 
would then not notice the immediate leaking of the water and the experimenter who did 
nothing to stop it. This is similar to the way in which magicians lead the audience's attention 
away from what is really going on. Additionally, the timing, which was after the sentence 
completion test itself, was also to avoid any potentially affecting disturbance during the 
moment of them completing the sentence completion test.  
In order to ﬁnd the right course of action, water amount, and leaking speed for the 
behavioural test, many different types of cups were tried and tested. These were tested in 
terms of material and design, and the hole was tested in terms of size, placement, and 
shape. It was important that the slit and the leak appeared realistic as if it was caused by 
accident. For the purpose of validating the test results, it was especially important that the 
participants were all tested in the exact same circumstances. So the cup material and the slit 
!64
==PAGE:77==
design had to allow identical replication to support equal amounts of water being leaked 
with each participant. This was to ensure that the amount of paper towels used would not 
depend on the amount of water leaked, but the then primed state of mind. Since in this 
case, reaction time was identiﬁed as a risk factor with respect to the amount of water 
leaking, the water had to be ensured to leak out quickly enough in each participant’s 
situation, for each to be confronted with the same amount of spilled water. 
A standard, white, 20 cl disposable plastic cup with a pre-constructed vertical slit (Figure 6.2) 
was identiﬁed as most appropriate for the test. The slit was to mimic an accidentally 
occurring crack, while allowing water to leak out in the desired manner. Several water leak 
tests indicated that the water would stop leaking once an approximately certain amount was 
left in the cup; which this was usually at the top end of the vertical slit. Thus, this ensured a 
very close to equal amount of water leaked out each time. For wiping up the water, a stack 
of 20 pieces of paper towels were placed on the table for each new participant. After each 
experiment, the stack was counted for the remaining amount of paper towels left. The 
amount of 20 pieces were decided upon as it did not seem as an unreasonably excessive 
amount, while at the same time be more than enough to wipe up the water that would leak 
out onto the table. So the amount of paper towels provided should not be a risk factor in 
terms of limiting the capacity to wipe up the water. 
 
!
Figure 6.2: Behavioural test cup with slit (red) and pouring limit (blue) 
6.1.3 Procedure 
The study lasted for a time period of three weeks and took place at three different 
universities to allow access to as many participants as possible. The three locations were 
Technical University of Denmark, IT University of Copenhagen and Copenhagen Business 
School. To ensure the same conditions for each session at each location, the same 
experimental setting was set up in the same type of a small, minimalistic, and square room. 
All studies were organised and conducted by the authors. 
!65
==PAGE:78==
Before the conduct of the actual study, a total aim of 90 participants, 30 participants for each 
assessed sense, was decided upon due to the time limit of the project. Results were 
considered representative with a sample size of 30, as most researchers suggest this as a 
minimum (Pett, 1997 and Sallkind, 2004 cited in Corder and Foreman, 2009). Students at the 
three locations were approached by asking if they had 10 minutes to participate in two 
individual experiments. A cover story was prepared so that the students would not ask for 
too much information about the experiments. They were told that one task was to observe 
people’s understanding of certain sounds, smells, and textures, and the other task was an 
opinion questionnaire of students. If the student agreed to participate in the experiments, 
they were led to the room; one participant at a time. When a participant entered the room 
they were asked to take a seat in a designated chair, and the experimenter would make sure 
that the participant would be sufﬁciently briefed about the experiment and the two 
seemingly separate tasks. 
Figure 6.3: Experiment room setting for priming with sound (left) and smell or texture (right) 
The experimenter then explained and introduced the materials and procedure for the ﬁrst 
task of the study (priming); the task where the experimenter assisted the participants by 
exposing them to the different stimuli. For all three experiment conditions the blindfold was 
placed on the table in front of the participants. For the sound prime condition the 
headphones were also placed in front of the participants on the table (Figure 6.3 (left)). For 
the smell and texture prime conditions however, the smell containers and texture objects 
were covered with a dishtowel in order to not inﬂuence the participants visually (Figure 6.3 
(right)). Once participants had conﬁrmed that they understood the task, they were asked to 
put on the blindfold.  
For all three experiment conditions, the participants were asked for three describing words 
(Appendix 17) for each presented stimulus before being exposed to the next one. 
Participants were told to just say each word as soon as it came to their minds, and that they 
would be exposed to the next stimulus when three words for the one that they were already 
exposed to had been said. This would allow participants to process each stimulus at their 
own pace. Even though the individual participant did not always come up with adjectives as 
words to describe each stimulus, the word was still noted and accepted, since these words 
were not important to the actual purpose of the experiment. The actual important factor was 
that the participant had been fully exposed to and stimulated by each of the three stimuli, 
and thus primed for the second task to be carried out.  
!
!
!66
==PAGE:79==
For the second task, the experimenter explained and introduced the sentence completion 
test as if was it a questionnaire. The experimenter clariﬁed that the test should be answered 
without them thinking too much about it and just answered with what ﬁrst came to their 
minds. When participants had conﬁrmed that they understood the task, they were handed 
the ostensibly unrelated questionnaire. All instructions (Appendix 18), and the questionnaire 
(Appendix 16) that consisted of the sentence completion test, the personal data, and the 
debrief, were provided in Danish for Danish-speaking participants and English for non-
Danish-speaking participants.  
6.1.3.1 Behavioural test 
When handing participants the sentences completion test, the experimenter would let the 
participant know that in a minute they would step outside of the room to let the participant 
ﬁll out the questionnaire in peace. The participant was asked to just come out and join the 
experimenter outside the room once they had ﬁnished ﬁlling out the questionnaire. So, the 
experimenter would only stay in the room until the sentence completion test had been 
completed and the participants would turn to the page of the personal data. This was to not 
interfere and potentially add unnecessary inﬂuence to the responses to the sentence 
completion test. The experimenter would then approach the table with a jug of water and a 
pre-cut cup, and pour water into the cup from the jug, while notifying that the participant 
was provided a drink in case they would want something to drink. To force a reaction from 
participants, the cup was placed in the near front of the participant, between the stack of 
paper towels and a stack of the experimenter’s (actually unimportant) papers. Each time, the 
water was poured up until the blue line on the cup as illustrated in Figure 6.2. Once the 
water had reached the mark, the experimenter would stop pouring, put down the jug, and 
leave the room. The design of the slit in the cup allowed immediate leaking of the water. 
With the experimenter leaving the room, the participant was then confronted with the water 
that they could either wipe up or ignore––rather than notifying the experimenter about it or 
asking the experimenter to wipe it up. 
The behavioural test was mainly to observe the extent to which a speciﬁc sense would be 
affected by sustainability-related primes, in comparison to another sense, and ultimately 
trigger sustainable behaviour. This was measured by the amount of paper towels used to 
wipe up the spilled water. For each new participant, a stack of 20 pieces of paper towels 
were placed on the table. Once the participant had left the room and their session was over, 
the stack was counted for the remaining amount of paper towels left to ﬁgure out the 
amount that the participant had used, which was recorded for each participant. For each 
new participant, used paper towels were removed from the garbage bin in order to not 
arouse suspicions by the excessive pile of wet paper towels in the bin. 
6.1.3.2 Pilot study 
Before conducting the actual study, a pilot study was conducted with a couple of test 
participants. Since the sentence completion test had already been tested and used in Olsen 
and Holm-Hansen’s (2013) study, the purpose of this pilot study was mainly to test the 
procedure of priming to ensure consistency in the way the experimenters would execute the 
experiment. The test was also to try out the behavioural test, since this was the part of the 
!67
==PAGE:80==
experiment that was entirely new. After just testing the experiment with two test participants 
the behavioural test showed need for modiﬁcation. Neither of the test participants noticed 
the water leaking and hence had no behavioural reaction. The two test participants were 
confronted after the experiment and asked for feedback on the test. They said that for a 
behavioural reaction, the placement of the cup and the paper towels could be changed 
slightly. They also suggested that the experimenter should leave the room during the 
sentence completion test and not come back in until the test had been completed. The test 
participants did however say that the behavioural test seemed completely natural and 
unsuspicious, so it could be considered a success in that aspect. After a modiﬁcation of the 
behavioural test, the study was again conducted with a couple of new test participants in 
order to ensure that the adjustments had positive effects, which they had. 
6.1.4 Participants 
90 students from three different universities participated in the study. The 90 students were 
divided across the three prime conditions so that each condition had 30 participants. The 
average age, gender distribution, nationalities, and ﬁelds of study varied slightly across the 
conditions (Table 6.4). 
Table 6.4: Demographic distribution of participants 
Participants that represented other nationalities than Danish were all mainly exchange 
students from Europe. With Danish students the study was conducted in Danish, while with 
students of other nationalities the study was conducted in English. A complete overview of 
information of each of the participants can be seen in Appendix 19 and a distribution of 
participants for each prime condition and their respective information can be seen in 
Appendix 20. 
6.1.5 Coding 
In the coding of the collected data, for which inferences are required, bias is preferably 
avoided as it can result in undesirable inﬂuence on the results. Research suggests that on 
average people believe more strongly than they should in their favoured hypothesis (Rabin 
and Schrag, 1997). Especially with coding of ambiguous data, it is difﬁcult to keep bias away 
from coding decisions. The straightforward way of at least reducing bias in coding is to keep 
coders selectively unaware of information that can trigger bias (Harris et al., 2009). So, as an 
attempt to avoid bias in the coding of the collected data, all data (participants’ responses to 
the sentence completion test) was anonymised with a code name that could eventually be 
SOUND
SMELL
TEXTURE
Sample size (n) 30
30
30
Age range 20-30 years
21-36 years
19-36 years
Average age 23 years
25 years
23 years
Gender 60 % female
53 % female
47 % female
Nationality 77 % Danes
50 % Danes
83 % Danes
!68
==PAGE:81==
traced back to its original identiﬁcation name. The data collected were initially given an 
original identiﬁcation name during the study, where one participant’s response would be 
given one identiﬁcation name. Each identiﬁcation name consists of a double ﬁgure number 
from (participant) 01 to (participant) 30 followed by a two-letter initials for the respective 
prime condition, which would be either ‘SO’ for sound, ‘SM’ for smell, or ‘TE’ for texture. In 
some cases where a participant was declined by the debrief, their response would be 
eliminated and another participant would be added to cover a total of 30 participants for 
the particular prime condition. Hence, the ‘smell’ and ‘texture’ conditions have a double 
ﬁgure of numbers higher than ‘30’ while there are actually just 30 responses for ‘sound’. 
Including all accepted participants from all three prime conditions studied, 90 representing 
code names––one for each response––were given at the range from #01 to #90 (Appendix 
19). On a list of code names from #01 to #90, the original identiﬁcation names (i.e. for 
sound: 01SO, 02SO, 03SO, 04SO, 05SO, etc.) were randomly allocated to the code names. 
Essentially the coding intended to identify the “answer” (response) that can be considered 
‘sustainable’ for each of the 15 “questions” (item) in the sentence completion test. An 
answer that would be considered sustainable would be an answer that would clearly imply 
attitudes regarding sustainability. Since the results from the study were to be compared to 
Olsen and Holm-Hansen’s (2013) study, their coding scheme was used as reference in terms 
of coding of the responses to the sentence completion test. From their coding scheme, the 
three categories: ‘sustainable answers’, ‘debatable sustainable answers’, and ‘non-
sustainable answers’ were used as a general foundation for coding the data. Answers in the 
present study that were identical (i.e. exactly alike) to the answers that they had coded 
‘sustainable’ were coded likewise. So for example, if they regarded ‘food’ (in completion of 
sentence 5. ‘I hate when people waste…’) as sustainable, any response to the same sentence 
with exactly ‘food’ would also be coded so in the present study. Answers in the present 
study that were equivalent (i.e. equal in meaning) to the answers that they had coded 
‘sustainable’ were also coded accordingly. For example, the answers including the word 
‘consumption’ they had regarded as sustainable, so any answer noting the desire to reduce 
or restrict ‘consumption’ or somehow expressing concerns about ‘overconsumption’ were 
coded so. Answers that seemed to relentlessly be debatable in terms of whether or not they 
could be regarded ‘sustainable’, were coded as not being sustainable; just like answers that 
were not regarded as sustainable.  
The answers that had not been assessed through the coding based on Olsen and Holm-
Hansen’s (2013) coding scheme were internally independently coded. The intercoder 
agreement had to be at 80 % or above for each question in order to be accepted. 
Comparison of the independently coded answers showed an agreement of 94 % or above 
for each question, which indicated divergence in the coding of just few of the answers. They 
were discussed and clariﬁed to reach a common agreement for the coding of these. All 
answers given by the 90 participants and the coding of these can be seen in Appendix 
XLS1, where the intercoder codings independent of Olsen and Holm-Hansen’s (2013) 
coding scheme have been marked with yellow. 
!69
==PAGE:82==
6.2 Results 
6.2.1 Statistical method 
In the assessment of the the collected data from the 90 participants, a statistical test method 
had to be determined. The dependent variable (i.e. sustainable answers per participant) was 
measured at an ordinal level; the number of sustainable answers per participant were from 
0 to 15. The independent variable (i.e. test condition) consisted of two categorical, 
independent groups; for each comparison, one condition (e.g. sound prime condition) is 
compared to another condition (e.g. smell prime condition). The observed (i.e. test 
participants) were independent of each other; one participant was tested only once in only 
one condition, and there was no relationship between the participants in each condition or 
between conditions. A graphic representation of the collected data (Figure 6.5) revealed the 
distribution of sustainable answers, showing that the data was not normally distributed. 
Considering all of these parameters, the Mann-Whitney U test (Nachar, 2008) with an 
ordinary signiﬁcance level α=0.05 was identiﬁed as a suitable statistical test method. The 
method was hence used to assess the collected data to determine any possible signiﬁcant 
differences between the assessed treatment conditions. 
!
 
Figure 6.5: Distribution of sustainable answers in Study 2 
The study was to test the hypothesis: inﬂuence through one particular sense would make 
participants provide more sustainable answers in comparison to participants inﬂuenced 
through another sense. This hypothesis is one-directional, and so the null hypothesis: there 
is no difference between inﬂuencing participants through the different senses. In a two-
tailed test, values in either direction are considered signiﬁcant; either sufﬁciently small or 
sufﬁciently large. For the hypothesis of this study however, it is only relevant to see if the 
results are sufﬁciently large, that is, if there is a “positive” effect: e.g. effect of sound prime > 
effect of smell prime. Therefore, only deviation in one direction of the null hypothesis is 
considered of interest and thus reasons the application of a one-tailed test. 
3
0
6
9
12
Number of participants
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Sustainable answers per sheet
Sound
Smell
Texture
!70
==PAGE:83==
6.2.2 P-values 
The dependent variable in Study 2 (number of sustainable answers given) would indicate if 
the inﬂuence through one particular sense would make participants give more sustainable 
answers in comparison to participants inﬂuenced through either of the other senses. 
However, the result of Study 2 showed no evidence against the null hypothesis. That is, no 
signiﬁcant difference in the number of sustainable answers was found between inﬂuencing 
participants by means of sound (M=1.70; SD=1.47; n=30), smell (M=1.53; SD=1.20; n=30), 
or texture (M=1.63; SD=1.52; n=30). All p-values observed for a relative comparison 
between the prime conditions using one-tailed Mann-Whitney U test can be seen in Table 
6.6. The table also presents the results from a relative comparison between sound, smell, 
texture, and visual prime (M=1.32; SD=1.08; n=60), the latter from Olsen and Holm-
Hansen’s (2013) study. Results showed no signiﬁcant difference in the number of sustainable 
answers between visual prime and the other three prime conditions.  
Table 6.6: Comparison between prime conditions using one-tailed Mann-Whitney U test 
with signiﬁcance level α=0.05 
Figure 6.7 supports the results shown in Table 6.6, as the ﬁgure shows that the difference 
between number of sustainable answers per participant in the sentence completion test is 
not remarkable across the prime conditions. However, Figure 6.7 shows that the difference 
between sound prime condition and visual prime condition is greater than between the 
other conditions; although none are signiﬁcant. 
!
 
Figure 6.7 Average sustainable answers per participant 
SOUND
SMELL
TEXTURE
VISUAL
SOUND
p=0.42074
p=0.39358
p=0.16109
SMELL
p=0.4721
p=0.21476
TEXTURE
p=0.2776
VISUAL
n=30
n=30
n=30
m=1.70
m=1.53
m=1.63
Sound
Smell
Texture
0.5
0.0
1.0
1.5
2.0
Sustainable answers per participant
n=60
m=1.32
Visual
!71
==PAGE:84==
The relative comparison did not show any signiﬁcant difference in the effect of the priming 
through the senses for a more sustainable attitude. However, this does not necessarily mean 
that there is no effect from the three prime conditions. In Olsen and Holm-Hansen’s (2013) 
study, a control condition had been obtained by having participants complete the sentence 
completion test after being exposed to visuals (pictures) of sustainability-neutral products. 
With result from the control condition, the effect of priming with sound, smell, and texture 
have been determined in the same manner as for the relative comparison. The null 
hypothesis here being that there is no difference in number of sustainable answers between 
the prime participants and the control participants. Results showed that participants in all 
three prime conditions, sound (M=1.70; SD=1.47; n=30), smell (M=1.53; SD=1.20; n=30), 
and texture (M=1.63; SD=1.52; n=30), gave more sustainable answers than did participants 
in the control condition (M=0.90; SD=0.99; n=60). All p-values determined for the 
comparison with control condition can be seen in Table 6.8. The table shows that out of the 
three prime conditions, sound prime and smell prime have strong evidence against the null 
hypothesis, and texture prime has some evidence against the null hypothesis. Overall, all 
three senses showed signiﬁcant results. Visual prime (M=1.32; SD=1.08; n=60) from Olsen 
and Holm-Hansen’s (2013) study has also been compared to the control condition, and the 
result showed some evidence against the null hypothesis, thus a signiﬁcant result also (Table 
6.8). All data used for calculation of means and p-values can be seen in Appendix XLS2.  
Table 6.8: Comparison with control condition using one-tailed Mann whitney U test 
with signiﬁcance level α=0.05 
6.2.3 Behavioural test 
In the behavioural test, where participants were served a leaking cup of water, the amount 
of paper towels used to wipe up the water served as the measure. Results of this 
behavioural test showed no tendencies towards a more sustainable behaviour for 
participants exposed for one sense rather than the other. 
In the behavioural test, some participants did not wipe up the water that had leaked out 
onto the table and hence used zero number of paper towels (Appendix XLS3). It is unknown 
whether this is due to their unwillingness to wipe up the water or because of an extremely 
sustainable attitude. Results from participants using zero number of paper towels have 
therefore been eliminated and only results for participants who wiped up the water have 
been considered and presented. 
The number of participants wiping up in each of the three assessed prime conditions can be 
seen in Figure 6.9. From the ﬁgure it can be seen how closely the average amount of paper 
towels per participant used for wiping up the water is across the three conditions. This 
indicates that there is no notable difference in priming effects between the three conditions. 
SOUND
SMELL
TEXTURE
VISUAL
CONTROL p=0.0048
p=0.00798
p=0.015
p=0.01539
!72
==PAGE:85==
!
 
Figure 6.9 Average number of used paper towels per participant 
To determine the signiﬁcant differences between the behavioural test conditions it would 
have been preferable to use the Mann-Whitney U test again as the statistical test method. 
However, due to a problem of small sample sizes of either 23 or below, the method showed 
not to be optimal. Instead, a one-tailed Student's t-test with a signiﬁcance level α=0.05 was 
performed. A prerequisite for using the Student’s t-test is that the data for each experiment 
can be assumed to be normally distributed. To ensure this, the data was veriﬁed and proven 
to fulﬁl the requirement. The result from the behavioural test showed no evidence against 
the null hypothesis (sec 6.2.1). That is, no signiﬁcant difference in the number of used paper 
towels was found between priming participants with sound (M=3.40; SD=2.48; n=19), smell 
(M=3.70; SD=2.24; n=23), or texture (M=3.20; SD=1.72; n=21). All p-values determined for 
a relative comparison between the three prime conditions using one-tailed Student’s t-test 
can be seen in Table 6.10. 
Table 6.10 Comparison between prime conditions using one-tailed Student’s t-test 
with signiﬁcance level α=0.05 
As the sample size is too small to allow drawing of a deﬁnite conclusion however, the results 
in Table 6.10 are just to provide an indication. Yet acknowledging the small sample size in 
the behavioural test, the results still give an indication that supports the results from the 
sentence completion test. This shows that for the relative comparison between the prime 
conditions, there is no signiﬁcant difference between inﬂuencing participants through one 
sense or the other for a more sustainable attitude and behaviour. All data used for 
calculation of means and p-values can be seen in Appendix XLS3. 
n=23
n=21
m=5.37
m=4.78
m=4.62
Sound
Smell
Texture
3.0
0.0
4.0
5.0
2.0
Used paper towels per participant
1.0
6.0
n=19
SOUND
SMELL
TEXTURE
SOUND
p=0.222649
p=0.134651
SMELL
p=0.399773
TEXTURE
!73
==PAGE:86==
6.2.4 Correlation 
A correlation check was performed to test for a relationship between the number of 
sustainable answers given by a participant in the sentence completion test, and the number 
of used paper towels in the behavioural test used by the same participant. Again, the 
calculation was only performed for participants who wiped up the water. 
For a perfect relationship between two variables, the correlation coefﬁcient is either 1.00 
(positive relationship, both variables will tend to move in the same direction) or -1.00 
(negative relationship, the variables tend will to move in the opposite directions). No 
relationship is to be found if the correlation coefﬁcient is 0.00. In this study, a strong 
relationship would be indicated by a high number of sustainable answers and a low number 
of used paper towels, thus the desired relationship is a negative (inverse) correlation. 
Table 6.11 Correlation coefﬁcient between participants’ attitude and behaviour in prime conditions 
From Table 6.11 it can be seen that all the correlation coefﬁcients show a very weak 
correlation (0.00 < |r| < 0.20). Hence, in all of the three prime conditions no correlation was 
detected between the number of sustainable answers given by a participant in the sentence 
completion test and the number of used paper towels in the behavioural test used by the 
same participant. It is also seen that the relationship for the sound prime condition is 
positive, which means that a high number of sustainable answers also have a high number 
of used paper towels. However, the correlation coefﬁcient for the sound prime condition is 
still very close to 0.00 and thus depict no correlation. 
6.3 Discussion 
Since Study 2 involved interaction with people, who are of many different types, their 
differences could possibly inﬂuence the results that should only depend on the priming 
condition. These possible inﬂuences are discussed in this section. Also to be discussed is 
the behavioural test that followed a newly designed test method. The test therefore had to 
be carefully designed and considered, as the design and conduct of this test could also 
possibly yield a different outcome. 
6.3.1 Priming effect 
Study 2 accepted the assumption that all participants were independent of each other, so it 
also accepted the assumption that all individuals had the same baseline attitude and 
behaviour. However, no two people are ever the exact same. But since the prime conditions 
SOUND 
(n=19)
SMELL 
(n=23)
TEXTURE 
(n=21)
Correlation coefﬁcient:
0.0834
-0,0913
-0,1441
!74
==PAGE:87==
should be the only varying factor in a relative comparison between the conditions, one 
individual with one baseline attitude and behaviour should be subject to each of the 
different priming conditions. Such a design will however affect the study results, as one 
participant subject to multiple priming conditions subsequently will be affected by multiple 
priming stimuli. This will be reﬂected in the measure of the study. Furthermore, if one 
participant is subject to multiple priming stimuli through several study conditions of the 
same design, they will eventually discover the true intention of the study that is to inﬂuence 
them through priming, which is undesired in priming. 
The timespan during which participants were primed were according to their time needed 
to complete the task. Some participants spent few minutes cogitating before responding, 
while other participants responded immediately. Since people generally take less than 1.5 
seconds to make an association (Hourihan and MacLeod, 2007) however, relatively little time 
is needed to associate a prime with a pertinent mental representation of an attitude or 
behaviour. So an effect of priming is possible even with short duration of exposure to the 
priming stimuli. However, the extent to which the effect lasts may still differ partially based 
on this duration, as the timespan in which they are primed can reﬂect their level of 
immersion with respect to the mode that the priming stimuli is attempting to put them in. 
6.3.2 Assessment of behaviour 
For the behavioural test, deﬁnite display of behaviour, natural performance in conduct, and 
feasible exact replication had to be ensured. An identical amount of spilled water with each 
participant was most crucial to not let the amount of water depict the amount of paper 
towels used to wipe up the water. Filling the cup with a deﬁnite amount of water and 
knocking over the cup to let all the water spill out at once would ensure this. However, if the 
experimenter knocked over the cup of water, it would not make sense to force the 
participants to mind it. Yet, if the experimenter acted on their (staged) mishap, it would 
interfere with the participant’s behaviour. Additionally, the water could also possibly spill 
onto the supposedly questionnaire, and risk the sentence completion test (“questionnaires”) 
being drenched and possibly unreadable. It was therefore found that the method of letting 
water leak out of a slit in the cup was more appropriate for the study. Eventually, many 
manipulations enabled a satisfactory degree of identicalness in type of disposable cup, slit 
size, shape, and placement, and amount of water to enable the same amount of water 
leaking out of the cup in the same speed each time. This design made the behavioural test 
replicable, appear naturally accidental, and to some degree force display of behaviour. 
Even though the behavioural test is to assess participants’ behaviour, the test results cannot 
be used to draw conﬁdent conclusions. Especially because Study 2 is assessing prime 
conditions (hypothetically more sustainable), and is not assessing respective control 
conditions (hypothetically less sustainable). It is therefore unknown the amount of paper 
towels a participant can use to be regarded as displaying sustainable behaviour. The 
number of paper towels that a participant uses to wipe up the spilled water in the study 
does not depict the degree to which they are sustainable, but only how much more they are 
sustainable when primed with one type of sensory stimuli compared to when primed with 
another type of sensory stimuli. 
!75
==PAGE:88==
6.4 Conclusion of study 
The results that have been obtained from Study 2 forms a foundation for answering 
subquestion 3 and 4. By performing a one-tailed Mann-Whitney U test with a signiﬁcance 
level α=0.05, the relative comparison between the prime conditions, for the sentence 
completion test, showed no statistical signiﬁcance. Hence, it was found that when 
inﬂuencing people to display a more sustainable attitude, all the assessed senses were 
equally in inﬂuencing. 
Results from the behavioural test supports the results determined for the sentence 
completion test. By performing a one-tailed Student’s t-test with a signiﬁcance level α=0.05, 
the relative comparison between the prime conditions, for the behavioural test, showed no 
statistical signiﬁcance. Though, as the sample size is too small in the behavioural test to 
allow drawing of a deﬁnite conclusion, the results from this test are just to give an indication. 
Overall, none of the assessed senses in both tests revealed to be more effective than 
another in the inﬂuence to display a more sustainable attitude or behaviour. Furthermore, 
no correlation between the number of sustainable answers given by a participant and the 
number of used paper towels by the same participant was detected for any of the three 
prime conditions. Although, a weak correlation could have been expected with a participant 
amount of 23 or below for each calculated correlation coefﬁcient. A correlation between the 
two tests would have only been found if the two variables (number of sustainable answers 
and number of used paper towels) for each participant had a strong correlation. The reason 
for no correlation will be thoroughly discussed in a later chapter (sec. 7.1.1). 
Even though a relative comparison between the prime conditions in both the sentence 
completion test and the behavioural test did not show any signiﬁcance, an effect of the 
prime was still detected. A comparison between number of sustainable answers given by 
primed participants (the three prime conditions + a visual prime condition) and participants 
in a control condition, showed statistical signiﬁcance for priming through either of the four 
senses. From these results it appears that there is a strong effect of the priming for a more 
sustainable attitude regardless of the type of sensory stimuli. 
The lack of statistical signiﬁcance in the relative comparison between the three prime 
conditions in both test, could possibly be due to the limited number of participants 
included in all three prime conditions in the present study. The previously conducted study 
with visual prime condition (Olsen and Holm-Hansen, 2013) included 60 participants. This 
was double the amount of participants for each of the present prime conditions. Therefore, 
including 60 participants for each of the three conditions would possibly also have an 
impact. Uncertainties due to sample size will be thoroughly discussed later (sec. 7.1.2). 
Although, with just 30 participants in each of the prime conditions in the present study, 
statistical signiﬁcances was still observed in a comparison to the control condition (Olsen 
and Holm-Hansen, 2013). 
!76
==PAGE:89==
7. GENERAL 
DISCUSSION 
!77
7. 
GENERAL 
DISCUSSION
==PAGE:90==
Through a conduction of two studies, the proposed hypothesis (sec. 4.1.1) has been 
investigated and results from these studies have provided answers for the research 
questions presented in the introduction (sec. 1.2). How these results supported in answering 
the posed questions is discussed in the chapter, along with how these answers relate to the 
reviewed literature (sec. 7.1). Relevant aspects in terms of the applied method and its use in 
the studies of this project are also discussed (sec. 7.2). Implications of the ﬁndings will be 
provided as contributions for both researchers and designers (sec. 7.3). These implications 
can be included in future work of designers for more socially considerate design. Finally, is a 
discussion and description of the limitations (sec. 7.4) that have been present through the 
project. 
7.1 Discussion of results 
Through the present study it was possible to determine the effect of priming through each 
of the assessed senses of hearing, smell, and touch for a more sustainable attitude, while 
the effect of priming for the same attitude through the sense of sight had been determined 
by Olsen and Holm-Hansen (2013). The results showed signiﬁcant effects of priming for 
sustainable attitude through each individually assessed sense, and it is hence possible to 
prime people with the concept of sustainability through any of the senses, in order to make 
them display a more sustainable attitude. This result is in line with previous studies 
(Appendix 1) that have shown that there are signiﬁcant effects when priming through any of 
the senses of sight, hearing, smell, and touch. Each of the studies have investigated the 
effect of priming through just one sense, but they generally show that there is an effect of 
priming through each of the senses. For each study also, just one attitude is being tested, 
and the type of attitude vary across studies. For example, for sense of sight: consumer 
choice attitude (Ferraro et al., 2009), buyer preference attitude (Kim et al., 2005), or 
competitive attitude (Kay et al., 2004); for sense of hearing: violent attitude (Tropeano, 
2006), in-store consumer attitude (Andersson et al., 2012), or choice attitude (Egermann et 
al., 2006); for sense of smell: charity attitude (Liljenquist et al., 2015), or cleaning attitude 
Holland et al., 2005); and for sense of touch: consumer attitude (Krishna and Morin, 2007).  
!78
==PAGE:91==
As has been identiﬁed, the present study showed signiﬁcant effects of priming people for a 
more sustainable attitude when being primed through either of the senses of sight, hearing, 
smell, and touch. Similarly, from previous studies, it has been identiﬁed that priming through 
either of these senses will inﬂuence attitude. In literature this effect from priming is not only 
seen when priming for one type of attitude, but several types. So, with previous studies 
supporting the present study, it can be stated that it is possible to prime through any of the 
senses of sight, hearing, smell, and touch, to change a variety of types of attitudes. The 
present study has not only tested the priming effect with respect to a baseline attitude 
however. A relative comparison in priming effects on attitude and behaviour between the 
sensory prime conditions has also been made. 
Results for the relative comparison between the sensory prime conditions for both the 
attitude and behaviour test showed no signiﬁcance; meaning, there was no difference in 
effect when priming for a more sustainable attitude and behaviour through either of the 
assessed senses. It appears that previous studies in the same area have not been conducted 
for the same purpose as the present study. That is, no studies that assess different senses 
and compare the effects of priming through these different senses for attitude and 
behaviour change have been found. This is what distinguishes this project from prior work 
that has been done within the area. Although, similar to the previous studies that have 
investigated attitude, previous studies have also shown signiﬁcant effects when priming 
through any of the senses of sight, hearing, smell, and touch for change in behaviour 
(Appendix 1). Each of these studies have investigated the effect of priming through just one 
sense, but they generally show that there is an effect of priming through each of the senses. 
Similar to studies testing attitude, for each study, just one behaviour is being tested, and the 
type of behaviour vary across studies. For example, for sense of sight: competitive 
behaviour (Kay et al., 2004), helping behaviour (Abbate et al., 2014), or voting behaviour 
(Berger et al., 2008); for sense of hearing: helping behaviour (Twenge et al., 2007), 
cooperative behaviour (Twenge et al., 2007), in-restaurant consumer behaviour (Milliman, 
1986); and for sense of smell: cleaning behaviour (Holland et al., 2005), or in-store 
consumer behaviour (Haberland, 2010); for sense of touch: buying behaviour (Guéguen, 
2006).  
The present study has shown that priming is possible through either of the senses of sight, 
hearing, smell, and touch for change of sustainable attitude. The study has also shown that 
the effect of priming through these senses is equal regardless of the sense with respect to 
sustainable attitude and behaviour. Literature has likewise shown that it is possible to prime 
through either of the senses of sight, hearing, smell, and touch for an effect in change of 
various types of attitudes and behaviours. Based on these results and the results from the 
present study, it can therefore be sensibly inferred that none of the assessed senses are 
more effective than another when priming for attitude and behaviour change in general. 
Essentially, they all show the same effect, so there is no actual reason for the imbalance of 
visual dominance that has been identiﬁed in exploring and studying the senses. In the 
context of design, this means that designers can actually freely choose between either of 
the senses to prime through, and expect attitude and behaviour change as a result of using 
their inﬂuential designs. 
!79
==PAGE:92==
7.1.1 Correlation 
Since the present study assessed both participants’ sustainable attitude and behaviour, the 
relationship between the two was examined to detect whether there was a correlation 
between the results from the two tests. This investigation however showed no correlation for 
the three present prime conditions, thus a high number of sustainable answers by a 
participant would not necessarily result in a low number of used paper towels. This result 
can be interpreted in two ways. On one hand, as a control condition was not conducted for 
the behavioural test, the amount of used paper towels that would depict a sustainable 
behaviour is unknown. So even though no correlation was detected for each of the prime 
conditions, the number of paper towels used by a participant would maybe still reﬂect a 
sustainable behaviour. On the other hand, the lack of correlation could also be seen as any 
sustainable awareness identiﬁed in the responses by a participant was not reﬂected in the 
behaviour. Previous work (Wright and Klÿn, 1998; Thompson and Barton, 1994) have shown 
that our attitude, and thus how we think we act, is not always aligned with the way we really 
behave. However, even though a sustainable attitude in the study is not reﬂected in the 
behaviour, it does not necessarily mean that no sustainable behaviour can be elicited. If a 
sustainable attitude is present, the outcome of the corresponding behaviour can be due to 
the way in which we see ourselves (self-construal). Past work (Arnocky et al., 2007) has 
presented that if we see the self as part of the collective, a sustainable attitude will more 
often be reﬂected in a behaviour beneﬁcial for the society. Whereas, if we see the self as 
only consisting of the individual, a sustainable attitude will probably not be reﬂected in the 
behaviour unless the behaviour is beneﬁcial for the individual themselves. This is supported 
by other literature (Nelson, 1999) saying that people are often selﬁsh and tend to only act in 
favour of themselves. Using a small number of paper towels in a situation as was presented 
in the present study will not momentarily beneﬁt the participant, but will beneﬁt the society 
and the environment in the long run. Therefore, if the latter interpretation is assumed, the 
missing correlation between attitude and behaviour in the study could be due to the fact 
that the behavioural test was designed to beneﬁt society and not immediately the 
participant. So, even though this study has shown that it is possible to design by the means 
of all the assessed senses to inﬂuence people for a more sustainable attitude, it is not 
enough without the corresponding behaviour being elicited. Designers must through their 
designs thus ﬁrst address the individual and their concerns to increase the probability of the 
product’s ability to not only elicit the desired attitude, but also the needed behaviour. The 
necessity for this approach has also been identiﬁed in previous work (Tromp et al., 2011).  
7.1.2 Sample size 
As all participants in the three assessed prime conditions in the present study had been 
primed, it could be expected that a relative comparison between the conditions, with a 
sample size of 30 for each, would show no signiﬁcance for both the test on attitude and the 
test on behaviour. The decision to use 30 participants for each assessed prime condition 
was decided upon due to the time limitations of the project. Due to this, a sample size of 30 
is suggested as a minimum for representative results as has also been argued in section 
6.1.3. It may then be considered that an increase in the number of participants in each 
assessed condition could affect the results. The number of participants in the visual prime 
condition (Olsen and Holm-Hansen, 2013) that has been used for a relative comparison 
!80
==PAGE:93==
between the prime conditions in the sentence completion test was 60; so twice as many 
participants as in each of the prime conditions for the study of this project. Table 7.1 shows 
the calculated required sample size for each prime condition in the sentence completion 
test for a desired power of 0.8 and a signiﬁcance level of α=0.05 for a relative comparison 
between the four conditions. 
Table 7.1 Sample size for speciﬁed power (default is .80), value for α (default is .05), one-tailed test 
As can be seen in Table 7.1, big sample sizes are required—especially for texture. However, 
none of the p-values for the relative comparison for the sentence completion test (sec. 6.2.2) 
are close to the signiﬁcant level of α=0.05. The inclusion of a large number of participants 
could therefore be expected to possibly show a deﬁnite signiﬁcant difference between the 
prime conditions. The smallest sample sizes are seen for the comparison between each of 
the assessed prime conditions and the visual prime condition (Table 7.1). This is probably 
due to the fact that the smallest p-values are also found for each comparison with the visual 
prime condition (sec. 6.2.2). This may be because of the visual prime condition including 60 
participants and therefore having a better data foundation in terms of sample size for 
showing signiﬁcance. If this indeed has an effect on the p-values, it would then be relevant 
to see if a doubling in the number of participants for the sound, smell, and texture prime 
conditions—that is, a sample size of 60 participants that is equal to the visual prime 
condition—could affect the results and thereby enhance the difference between the prime 
conditions in the relative comparison. Similarly, a relatively large sample size would also be 
expected for the behavioural test, in order for the test to possibly detect some signiﬁcance 
in a relative comparison between the assessed prime conditions. The present sample size 
for the behavioural test was not helped by the fact that not all of the 90 participants in the 
three conditions wiped up the spilled water and thus used zero number of paper towels. 
Since it was not sensible to make assumptions about the reason behind participants’ 
decisions to not wipe up the spilled water, data provided by these participants were 
declined (sec. 6.2.3). This resulted in a sample size of just 19 participants for the sound 
prime condition, 23 for the smell prime condition, and 21 for the texture prime condition. 
These are small sample sizes for drawing a deﬁnite conclusion. Although, results from this 
test can be used as an indication.  
7.2 Discussion of method 
The present study was designed and conducted in the same manner as Olsen and Holm-
Hansen’s (2013) study to allow a comparison with results from this study. Due to this, not 
many deliberations have been made in the choice of study method used for the execution 
SOUND
SMELL
TEXTURE
VISUAL
SOUND
n=757
n=5603
n=139
SMELL
n=2288
n=365
TEXTURE
n=218
VISUAL
!81
==PAGE:94==
of the present study; since a foundation was already established. However, it is still plausible 
that the decision of applying Olsen and Holm-Hansen’s (2013) method to the study of this 
project has had an inﬂuence on the outcome. Signiﬁcant factors that have played a role in 
the application of the study method as well as possibilities in applying other methods have 
therefore been discussed. 
7.2.1 Compatibility with previous study 
Since no control conditions were included for an assessment of the effect of each of the 
conditions assessed in Study 2, they were all individually compared to the control condition 
from Olsen and Holm-Hansen’s (2013) study. The control condition from their study was 
however exposed to equivalent neutral stimuli of the stimuli exposed to in their prime 
condition. So, while participants were exposed to shapes expressing sustainability in the 
prime condition, participants were exposed to shapes not expressing sustainability in the 
control condition. In this case, even if the participants are being exposed to something that 
is visually sustainably neutral, they are still being deliberately exposed to something that is 
visual. It may however be considered that control condition is essentially to show the 
baseline attitude. So ultimately the neutral prime—whether visual, auditory, olfactory, or 
tactile—should show no effects as the neutral prime is supposed to prime for nothing. In this 
regard, the visual control condition could be viewed as a baseline condition and hence be 
used in the comparison of the three assessed prime conditions to a control condition. 
Also in relation to the study method, the present study and Olsen and Holm-Hansen’s (2013) 
study obtained different types of stimuli representations. While visual ideas associated with 
sustainability were presented in the form of drawings in Olsen and Holm-Hansen’s (2013) 
study, auditory, olfactory, and tactile ideas associated with sustainability were presented in 
the form of words in the present study. Visual shapes can be illustrated through the more 
readily accessible medium of pen and paper, while the “illustration” of sounds, smells, and 
textures are not as straightforward. Therefore, the sounds, smells, and textures were 
recorded as written words. For better compatibility between the compared studies, the 
study on visual primes could be based on written word representations of visuals also. 
However, since shapes are very likely best represented as visuals illustrating the actual 
shapes, this method of representing shapes should be opted for. Similarly for the different 
prime conditions, it had been opted for the most context-appropriate study method; which 
for the three assessed conditions were representation of sounds, smells, and textures in the 
form of written words. 
7.2.2 Assessment method 
After an evaluation of three possible assessment methods, Olsen and Holm-Hansen (2013) 
chose the sentence completion test as their method of assessment, as the other two 
assessment methods would bring concerns that the sentence completion test could 
compensate for. The sentence completion test was however not entirely without matters, as 
the incomplete sentences were by some participants perceived as inconspicuously leading 
to speciﬁc responses; that is, responses related to the environment and ecology. Loftus 
(1975) suggests that leading questions can inﬂuence the answer to the question or the 
answer given to a different question at a later time. Furthermore, if the incomplete 
!82
==PAGE:95==
sentences are so obvious in their intention, they should also be more easily connected to 
the priming stimuli exposed to just moments before. This can reverse the priming effect 
(sec. 2.4.3.2). So as Krosnick and Presser (2010) also advises, leading or loaded questions 
should ideally be avoided to allow more candid answers––as an effect of the prime. 
To avoid including inconspicuously leading questions, participants can be asked to rate 
statements reﬂecting the expected attitude as effect of the prime. Previous studies have 
applied binary items and rating systems to assess participants’ attitude towards an array of 
items (e.g. Fitzsimons et al., 2008). Participants are presented with a number of items to be 
rated between two anchors; e.g. yes or no, agree or disagree, etc. Binary items are however 
not usually prefered as it does not provide as reliable and valid measurements as open 
items, nor does it add the same richness to results like open items do (Krosnick and Presser, 
2010). Ratings on a range scale may yield more comprehensive results. Participants are 
presented with a number of items, for which they are asked to rate each on a range between 
two anchors; e.g. level of agreement, level of importance, etc. (Vagias, 2006). Previous 
studies have applied rating-type assessment methods like the Likert items and Likert-type 
scale (e.g. Liljenquist et al., 2015; Kim et al., 2005; Mattila and Wirtz, 2001) or just general 
rating items and ordinal scales (e.g. Krishna and Morrin, 2007; Kay et al., 2004; Gardner et 
al., 1999). 
Sentences that are not especially carefully phrased can however still be inconspicuously 
leading. Previous studies have applied assessment methods using just words also. Besides 
the word stem completion task that Olsen and Holm-Hansen (2013) have already discussed, 
the lexical decision task is a method that has been used in previous studies to assess 
participants’ ability to detect words relevant to the prime (e.g. Egermann et al., 2006; 
Holland et al., 2005). Participants are presented with an array of letter strings, where one 
portion consists of nonwords and the other portion consists of words. Of the words, some 
are relevant to the prime exposed to prior (target words), while the remaining are irrelevant 
to the prime. Participants have to quickly identify the target words; the words relevant to the 
prime and target attitude or behaviour. As this requires monitoring of response time, it can 
be slightly more challenging to manage. 
The free response task is another assessment method that has also been used in previous 
studies (e.g. Holland et al., 2005: Kashima et al., 2002 ). The application of this method 
avoids the inclusion of leading sentences, nor is time monitoring necessary. Participants are 
presented with a question or a statement to which they are requested to give a free 
response. This can be a single response, such as their favorite food, their most recent 
purchase, etc.––or it can be a series of responses, such as a number of outﬁts they will wear 
the upcoming week, a number of movies they will watch this year, etc. This approach will 
however return ambiguous responses, will that will be heavily inﬂuenced by interpretations 
and judgements when coded, and thereby also yield uncertain results. 
Each assessment method has strengths and weaknesses that other methods can 
compensate for. Different aspects must be considered in the decision of an assessment 
method for social science studies. In the context of Study 2 it has been considered that 
!83
==PAGE:96==
using rating items and scales may be appropriate. Participants can be presented to an array 
of sustainable statements, which they must rate on a scale according to their attitude 
towards the statement. The rating scale can support the method in bringing about 
measurable results, while the responses given in terms of degrees of a speciﬁc attitude can 
allow less semantic judgement. So, the method will be more comprehensive as an 
assessment method overall. To avoid the issue of presenting items that are too leading, and 
thereby making the connection between the priming and the inﬂuence obvious, the 
wording of the sentences must however be phrased in a manner that affords sustainable 
thinking without obviously implying it. The three priming conditions that had been assessed 
in Study 2 were however to be compared to Olsen and Holm-Hansen’s (2013) assessed 
priming condition and control condition. Hence, the assessment method––that is, the 
sentence completion test––had to be the same to enable a fair comparison. 
!84
==PAGE:97==
7.3 Implications 
The study conducted in the context of this project distinguishes itself from prior work, as it 
has compared the priming effects through one sense to others. This differs the present 
study to previous studies that has been done within the area of priming through the senses 
for attitude and behaviour change. Findings should therefore be viewed as contributing 
with new knowledge to the area. These ﬁndings have led to implications for design research 
as well as design practice. 
 
 
 
 
 
7.3.1 Implications for design research 
In extension of the research that has been conducted in the context of this project, many 
other aspects in the area may be interesting to address. Priming through the senses to 
inﬂuence attitude and behaviour can still be explored further. It can be for the inﬂuence on 
sustainable attitude and behaviour speciﬁcally, but it can also be for the inﬂuence on 
attitudes and behaviours in general. 
From the present study it has been identiﬁed that the sense of sight, hearing, smell, and 
touch can equally be used to inﬂuence sustainable attitude and behaviour. Meaning, that 
the effect is the same when priming through each of the single senses. For further research, 
it is therefore suggested that the priming study that has been conducted for this project can 
be further extended to study multisensory conceptual priming. Instead of priming with a 
concept through just one single sense, the effect of priming with a concept through multiple 
senses simultaneously can be explored. This further study may show whether there are 
signiﬁcant effects in sustainable attitude and behaviour of priming through multiple senses. 
In this regard, it will imply to designers if the effect of priming for sustainable attitude and 
behaviour is more signiﬁcant for priming through just one single sense or multiple senses. 
With results from the present study and previously conducted studies, a sensible inference 
has declared that none of the senses: sight, hearing, smell, and touch are more effective 
than another when priming for all types of attitude and behaviour change. However, this 
study has focused speciﬁcally on sustainable attitude and behaviour, so whether the 
assessed senses are all equally effective in priming for any attitude and behaviour is 
therefore not deﬁnitive. Hence, it is suggested for further research that equivalent studies, 
consisting of a relative comparison between the senses, should be conducted for other 
attitudes and behaviours. Results from these studies may likewise show an equal priming 
effect between the senses when other attitudes and behaviours are addressed. This will 
further strengthen the indication that if there is a desire to design for attitude and behaviour 
change in general, it is not necessary to be choosey when determining the type of sensory 
prime, as priming through just either of the senses will affect attitude and behaviour. 
7.3.2 Implications for design practice 
Findings from the studies conducted for this project cannot only be addressed to design 
researchers, but also designers in companies for these ﬁndings to be used in design 
practice. Designs that are considerate of experiences through the senses cannot alone be 
considered by companies of consumer products that want to design sustainable products, 
!85
==PAGE:98==
but also by companies that want to design products with the ability to inﬂuence people’s 
attitude and behaviour in general. 
For companies as well as designers with an interest in inﬂuencing people to think and 
behave more sustainably, it can be suggested to consider providing experiences for any of 
the senses when designing products. Companies can inﬂuence people to think and behave 
more sustainably by designing products with design features that a user will experience as 
related to nature, and thereby sustainability. These experiences can be provided as visual, 
auditory, olfactory, and tactile experiences. The illustration (Figure 7.2) shows for each of the 
three senses of hearing, smell, and touch, the stimuli that people most commonly associate 
with sustainability. Given, the illustration presents the stimuli in their raw form. So for them to 
be appropriately implemented in products, they must be contextually considered. Evidently, 
designing sustainably useful and satisfying experiences is not limited to designing visual 
experiences as is more often observed. Rather, product experiences can through any of the 
senses inﬂuence users and change their way of thinking and behaving to become more 
considerate of the environment and nature. 
!
 
Figure 7.2: Stimuli that can be experienced as related to the concept of sustainability 
through the senses of hearing, smell, and touch 
 A WHISTLING WIND 
 BIRD LIFE 
 THE OCEAN 
 SOFT GRASS 
 ROUGH STONE 
 WOOD WITH BARK 
 THE OCEAN 
 FLOWERS 
 GRASS 
Sound of 
bird life 
chirping 
and singing
Sound of the 
waving and 
roaring ocean
Smell of the 
fresh and salty 
ocean
Smell of 
ﬂowers 
in all forms
Smell of grass
Feeling of 
grass and straw
Feeling of 
rough and 
grainy stone
Feeling of 
wood and bark
Sound 
of a whistling 
wind to greater 
or lesser 
extent
!86
==PAGE:99==
As the illustration suggests, each stimulus shown can provide one type of sensory 
experience. For the stimulus that recurs at multiple senses, it may be considered that they 
can all be designed into one product to provide a more holistic sensory experience and 
thus may increase the potential inﬂuence. An example of a product that has multiple sensory 
experiences in its design, is the Organika Cases by MMore Cases (Figure 7.3). These are 3D 
phone cases that have been designed with emphasis on providing immediate and strong 
visual, tactile, as well as olfactory experiences. Each of the mobile phone cases have been 
designed with intent of evoking certain emotions in the user. For example, the case made 
with hay is intended to evoke memories from childhood, the case made with coffee beans is 
intended to provide a sensation of energy, and the case made with rose petals is intended 
to remind of that special someone. Although these designs have not been explicitly created 
to trigger sustainable attitude or behaviour, they are made with materials that are found in 
nature, which the studies in this project have identiﬁed can trigger sustainable attitude and 
behaviour. Hence, designs similar to these may as well be used to prime for sustainable 
attitude and behaviour. Moreover, these mobile phone cases show exactly that product 
experiences do not only have to be visual, as is often experienced in products, but that 
product experiences may as well be tactile, or olfactory, or a combination of these.  
Figure 7.3: Organika Cases by MMore Cases made from real natural materials 
Since each of the senses of sight, hearing, smell, and touch can be designed for with respect 
to inﬂuencing attitude and behaviour, designers must grab this opportunity to explore their 
options in terms of designing experiences through products. It can therefore be suggested 
for designers to expand their awareness and sensitivity towards the sensory experiences of 
products, and thereby consider all sensory experiences equally when designing user 
experiences. Designers must be aware of the visual dominance in product design, and 
consider the possibility that visual experiences are not always optimal in any context. As 
designers, they must realise that other sensory experiences than visual can also result in 
successfully desirable and beneﬁcial products. In this context, they must however also 
understand that for any sensory experience they design into a product, there will be an 
interpretation of it by the user. Therefore, designers must also be aware of what sensory 
experiences they are designing into their products, and how this may inﬂuence the users’ 
way of thinking and behaving. As shapers of society, designers should be responsible for 
the implications of their designs, and thereby design products that are useful for the 
individual while being in favour of society. 
!
!
!
!87
==PAGE:100==
7.4 Limitations  
Limitations that have been present through the project will in this section be described and 
discussed. 
Firstly, the sample was of restricted size and representativeness, and of course thereby not 
representative for all people with the ability to display sustainable attitude and behaviour. 
Due to the time frame, the sample was predetermined to a sensibly minimum, and collected 
from accessible locations. The sample consisted of students from three different Danish 
universities located in the Capital Region of Denmark. This sample can be considered to 
only represent a selected group of the general population. All participants were higher 
education students in the age range of 19-36, with some participants of academic 
background relevant to sustainability and/or environment (Appendix 19). The tasks that they 
were required to perform did not discriminate among levels or types of intellect or 
intelligence, and thus did not require the participants to be of any speciﬁc background or in 
possession of any particular knowledge. Study responses from the participants who were of 
academic background relevant to sustainability also did not differ from study responses 
from participants from other academic backgrounds. However, it may be considered to, 
prior to conducting the study, check whether participants with backgrounds that can 
inﬂuence their responses are indeed inﬂuenced by their background. Besides potential 
errors related to representativeness due to occupation and academic background, there 
were also potential errors related to nationality. Even though the sample was collected from 
Danish universities in Denmark, the participants were of different cultural backgrounds. 
Participants who were not of Danish nationality represented other European countries, such 
as Italy, Spain, Norway, Hungary, and Austria, as well as international countries like America, 
China, Australia, and India. As Study 1 was conducted with only Danish participants, the 
words associated with sustainability and therefore also the stimuli used for priming were 
based on a Danish understanding of sustainability. However, it was not observed that 
international participants gave more or fewer sustainable answers than did Danish 
participants. Yet, it may be relevant to assess other cultural understandings of sustainability 
and the things that can be associated with it. 
Secondly, the setting and situation of the studies were restricted to available resources. The 
context of the cover story for the study had to be brought into a small room with little props. 
Due to a restricted availability in facilities and props, the context of the cover story and 
thereby also its setting and situation had to be restricted. However, potential suspicions had 
to be avoided, so it was only sensible to adapt the study context to naturally suit the 
resources available. Manipulations of setting and situation can in general be complex in 
priming studies however. On one hand, an empty space with just a stimulus will essentially 
make the subject display attitude and behaviour just based on the stimulus. On the other 
hand, an empty space with just a stimulus will possibly appear unreal and make the subject 
respond in a manner that does not reﬂect real life. Besides restricted manipulation on study 
setting and situation, resources also caused constraints in the design of the priming stimuli. 
The stimuli had to be made of resources that were available and acquirable. This implies 
further limitation in the possibly to replicate the same stimuli. However, considered from a 
!88
==PAGE:101==
common perspective of the general individual, it may not be possible to be able to 
distinguish between extremely similar sensory stimuli. 
Finally, the study assessed effects on one of many possible attitudes and behaviours. In 
reality, there are many different types of attitude and behaviour. Due to the time frame, the 
studies conducted in the context of this project have only been able to study attitude and 
behaviour change with respect to sustainability. However, previous studies documented in 
literature have studied priming of other possible attitudes and behaviours. Although, 
considering that there is an endless amount of attitudes and behaviours existing in this 
world, the possibility of addressing all of these in one study will be low. So for more 
exhaustive inferences, one study method can be used to assess priming effect on as many 
different types of attitudes and behaviours as possible. The documentation on the study 
method, as has been conducted for both studies in the context of this project, should 
enable replication of the study to suit different attitudes and behaviours. 
!89
==PAGE:102==
!90
==PAGE:103==
8. CONCLUSION 
!91
8. 
CONCLUSION
==PAGE:104==
The present project set out to investigate the susceptibility of one basic human sense in 
relation to another when being inﬂuenced for attitude and behaviour change. This was with 
the intention of identifying an appropriate way of using priming through the senses in 
design to enable designing of more socially considerate products. Society of today has a 
necessity for more attention towards such product designs as it is facing various issues, such 
as global warming, obesity, and overconsumption of resources. People perceive the world 
through their senses, so including sensory inputs for these senses in the form of  design 
features in the design of products to change attitude and behaviour, may possibly be 
beneﬁcial for society. 
Much research have been performed on the area of priming through the senses for attitude 
and behaviour change, but a great amount of this research has be done on the sense of 
sight. This can lead to the possible misconception that visual stimulation would result in 
more effect in inﬂuence. However, no studies have in fact identiﬁed and veriﬁed this. So to 
actually determine the appropriate way in which priming through the senses can be used in 
the context of design, a relative comparison of the senses respective priming effects on 
attitude and behaviour was performed. 
To limit the scope of the project, result of priming effect on the sense of sight from a 
previously conducted study which addressed sustainable behaviour was used. Sustainable 
behaviour was therefore also the behaviour addressed in the present study, where the 
priming effects for sense of hearing, smell, and touch were assessed. Through the project, 
the following research question was therefore decided to be answered: 
How might the design of everyday things with the appropriate way of inﬂuencing through 
the basic human senses by means of design elicit sustainable attitude and behaviour? 
To answer this question, two studies addressing sustainable attitude and behaviour were 
conducted. In the ﬁrst study it was identiﬁed that e.g. sound of a whistling wind and bird 
song, smell of ﬂowers and grass, and feeling of wood and grass were the concepts that 
people most commonly would associate with the concept of sustainability. Generally, 
concepts related to nature were also those associated with sustainability. Amongst all 
!92
==PAGE:105==
concepts, the most concepts most commonly associated with sustainability were used as 
priming stimuli for each of the senses to establish a sustainable attitude to hopefully lead to 
a sustainable behaviour. Results showed that none of the assessed senses were more 
effective when inﬂuenced. This meant that they showed equal effects when being primed 
through for sustainable attitude and behaviour; which thereby falsiﬁed the hypothesis of this 
project. However, an effect of priming was deﬁnitely present, as the use of a baseline 
showed signiﬁcant effects when priming through each of the senses for a sustainable 
attitude change. So, by implementing nature-related priming stimuli as design features to 
be sensed by any of the senses of sight, hearing, smell, and touch, the design of everyday 
products can enhance the awareness towards sustainability, and elicit sustainable attitude 
and possibly behaviour. Previous studies have likewise shown effect of priming through 
each of the senses within other types of attitudes and behaviours. Based on these results 
together with the results from the present study, a sensible inference can state that none of 
the basic human senses: sight, hearing, smell, and touch are more effective than another 
when priming for change of attitude and behaviour in general.  
From that ﬁnding it can be concluded that if designers want to take social responsibility for 
their designs, and design for attitude and behaviour change, sense of sight, hearing, smell, 
and touch can all be used for the purpose. This has shown that there is no reason for visual 
dominance in research or practice. Visual experiences in the form of design features in 
design are not necessarily always optimal in any context. The outcome is therefore seen as 
being successful, because designers now have the possibility of inﬂuencing for any type of 
attitude or behaviour through any of the senses. Designers are given more options in terms 
of turning people’s undesired attitudes and behaviours into desired ones––simply by 
designing. As long as the sensory inputs are thoroughly considered with respect to the 
addressed attitude and behaviour, there is essentially no barriers for not designing for each 
and every one of the basic human senses. 
8.1 Further work 
This project has, according to the Design Research Methodology (Blessing and Chakrabarti, 
2013), followed the structure of a type 2 design research project. It started with review of 
literature, followed by empirical studies in which results were produced, and closed with 
implications for design research and practice. These implications can indicate directions to 
go thereafter, and so, different approaches can be taken for further work. 
8.1.1 Assessment of behaviour 
The present study has only been able to test for the effect in inﬂuence for sustainable 
attitude, but has yet to do so for the corresponding behaviour for each of the assessed 
senses. Due to the time frame given, it was not sensible to include the conduction of control 
conditions in the scope of the project. While it was possible to ﬁnd a baseline condition for 
the assessment of attitude, it was not possible to ﬁnd one for the behavioural test. For a 
comprehensive assessment of the effects in inﬂuence through the senses on sustainable 
behaviour, control conditions for the behavioural test should be conducted. As for any 
study, the inclusion of appropriate control conditions will allow more accurate assessment of 
the effects. 
!93
==PAGE:106==
8.1.2 Reinforcement of generalisation 
Since this project has been closed as a Initial Prescriptive Study (Blessing and Chakrabarti, 
2013), it has yet only brought some understanding about the study area to light and 
suggested how this understanding can be used to improve design. Although, as the study is 
the only one comparing priming effects through one sense to others that is known of, it 
might be considered that more supporting research is necessary. The study has taken 
interest in studying and comparing the effects of inﬂuencing people by stimulating different 
senses. Evaluations of the results were based on the effects only in sustainable attitude and 
behaviour change however. This study can therefore be supported by conducting 
equivalent studies where other types of attitudes and behaviours are addressed. Sufﬁcient 
supporting studies will provide more comprehensive implications about inﬂuencing through 
the senses with respect to general attitude and behaviour. As no literature has been found 
for research on inﬂuence through the senses in relation to each other, there are many 
opportunities to expand and strengthen this research area. 
8.1.3 Evaluation in everyday products 
A different approach to conducting supporting studies is to study the effects of the 
suggested stimuli when they are implemented into products. In this project, the stimuli that 
have been identiﬁed to enable sustainable attitude and behaviour change have been tested 
exclusively in their original form and entity. As they are essentially to be used to inﬂuence 
people’s sustainable attitude and behaviour, it will be interesting to understand how they 
perform as parts of the things that people interact with and experience in their everyday 
lives. These stimuli can be translated into design features to be implemented into the 
design of products. However, the inﬂuencing stimuli as design features in products are only 
intended to support change of people’s attitude and behaviour, so they should not 
overshadow the product’s main use, functioning, or experience. Interesting here is therefore 
not only the extent to which people can be inﬂuenced by inﬂuencing products, but the 
extent to which inﬂuencing design features and the design itself can compromise. 
Ultimately, the product should serve its purpose as a user product, while its existence can be 
of beneﬁts to society. 
8.2 Final words 
This thesis has identiﬁed that with the appropriate stimulus, designers can freely choose 
among any of the senses of sight, hearing, smell, and touch, when designing to inﬂuence 
people for attitude and behaviour change. Designers are thereby given more opportunities 
for changing attitudes and behaviours in favour of society through design, as they are made 
aware of the options of providing a wider and richer range of product design experiences. 
!94
==PAGE:107==
REFERENCES 
!95
REFERENCES
==PAGE:108==
LITERATURE 
Abbate, C.S. et al., 2014. Priming Effects on Commitment to Help and on Real Helping 
Behavior. Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 36(4), pp.347–355. 
Abbate, C.S., Ruggieri, S. & Boca, S., 2013. Automatic Inﬂuences on Priming on Prosocial 
Behavior. Europe’s Journal of Psychology, 9(3), pp.479–492. 
Ahmadi, G., Bahrami, H.R. & Ahani, M., 2013. An Investigation of Visual Components of 
Packaging on Food Consumer Behavior. Business and Economic Research, 3(2), pp.1–11. 
Akrich, M., 1992. The De-Scription of Technical Objects. In W. E. Bijker & J. Law, eds. Shaping 
Technology/Building Society: Studies in Sociotechnical Change. London: The MIT Press, 
pp. 205–224. 
Andersson, P.K. et al., 2012. Let the music play or not: The inﬂuence of background music on 
consumer behavior. Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services, 19(6), pp.553–560. 
Ashton-James, C. et al., 2007. Mimicry and Me: the Impact of Mimicry on Self-Construal. 
Social Cognition, 25(4), pp.518–535. 
Bargh, J.A., Chen, M. & Burrows, L., 1996. Automaticity of Social Behavior: Direct Effects of 
Trait Construct and Stereotype Activation on Action. Journal of personality and social 
psychology, 71(2), pp.230–244. 
Ben-Eli, M.U., 2006. Sustainability: The Five Core Principles - A New Framework, New York. 
Berger, J., Meredith, M. & Wheeler, S.C., 2008. Contextual Priming: Where people vote 
affects how they vote. In I. Verma, ed. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of 
the United States of America. United States National Academy of Sciences, pp. 8846–
8849. 
Bijker, W.E. & Law, J., 2011. Shaping Technology/Building Society: Studies in Sociotechnical 
Change Illustrated. W. E. Bijker & J. Law, eds., London: MIT Press. 
Blackwell, A.F., 2006. The Reiﬁcation of Metaphor as a Design Tool. ACM Transactions on 
Computer-Human Interaction, 13(4), pp.490–530. 
Blessing, L.T.M. & Chakrabarti, A., 2013. DRM, a Design Research Methodology 1st ed. K. M. 
Merz Jr., ed., London: Springer-Verlag London. 
Buur, J. & Binder, T., 2006. User Centred Product Design, Denmark. 
Cesario, J., Plaks, J.E. & Higgins, E.T., 2006. Automatic Social Behavior as Motivated 
Preparation to Interact. Journal of personality and social psychology, 90(6), pp.893–910. 
Chartrand, T.L. & Bargh, J.A., 1996. Automatic Activation of Impression Formation and 
Memorization Goals: Nonconscious Goal Priming Reproduces Effects of Explicit Task 
Instructions. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 71(3), pp.464–478. 
Clune, S., 2016. Design for Behavioral Change. The Journal of Design Strategies, 4(1), pp.68–
75. 
Corder, G.W. & Foreman, D.I., 2009. Nonparametric Statistics for Non-Statisticians: A Step-by-
Step Approach 1st ed., WILEY. 
Cross, N., 2008. Engineering Design Methods 3rd ed., Chichester: WILEY. 
Cross, S.E., Hardin, E.E. & Gercek-Swing, B., 2011. The What, How, Why, and Where of Self-
Construal. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 15(2), pp.142–179. 
Cross, S.E., Morris, M.L. & Gore, J.S., 2002. Thinking about oneself and others: The 
relational-interdependent self-construal and social cognition. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 82(3), pp.399–418. 
!96
==PAGE:109==
Dijksterhuis, A. et al., 2005. The Unconscious Consumer: Effects of Environment on 
Consumer Behavior. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 15(3), pp.193–202. 
Dischinger, M., 2000. Designing for all senses: Accessible spaces for visually impaired 
citizens. Chalmers University of Technology. 
Egermann, H., Kopiez, R. & Reuter, C., 2006. Is there an effect of subliminal messages in 
music on choice behavior? Journal of Articles in Support of the Null Hypothesis, 4(2), pp.
29–46. 
Evans, J.S.B.T., 2006. The heuristic-analytic theory of reasoning: Extension and evaluation. 
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 13(3), pp.378–395. 
Evans, J. & Stanovich, K.E., 2013. Dual-process Theories of Higher Cognition: Advancing the 
Debate. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 8(3), pp.223–241. 
Fenko, A., 2010. Sensory Dominance in Product Experience. Moscow State University. 
Ferrand, L. & New, B., 2003. Semantic and Associative Priming in the Mental Lexicon. In P. 
Bonin, ed. The Mental Lexicon: “Some Words to Talk About Words.” New York: Nova 
Science Publishers, pp. 25–43. 
Ferraro, R., Bettman, J.R. & Chartrand, T.L., 2009. The Power of Strangers: The Effect of 
Incidental Consumer Brand Encounters on Brand Choice. Journal of Consumer Research, 
35(5), pp.729–741. 
Fiore, Q. & Angel, J. eds., 1967. The Medium is the Massage 3rd ed., Ginko Press. 
Fitzsimons, G.M., Chartrand, T.L. & Fitzsimons, G.J., 2008. Automatic Effects of Brand 
Exposure on Motivated Behavior : How Apple Makes You “ Think Different .” Journal of 
Consumer Research, 35(June), pp.21–35. 
Fogg, B.J., 2003. Persuasive Technology Illustrated., Morgan Kaufmann. 
Fogg, B.J., Cuellar, G. & Danielson, D., 2009. Motivating, Inﬂuencing, and Persuading Users. 
In A. Sears & J. A. Jacko, eds. Human-Computer Interaction Fundamentals. Boca Raton: 
CRC Press, pp. 133–147. 
Gardner, W.L., Gabriel, S. & Lee, A.Y., 1999. “I” value freedom, but “we” value relationships: 
Self-construal priming mirrors cultural differences in judgment. Psychological Science, 
10(4), pp.321–326. 
Gibson, J.J., 1966. Introduction - What are the senses? In The Senses Considered as 
Perceptual Systems. Bostom: Houghton Mifﬂin, pp. 1–31. 
Ginty, J. & Alban, T., 2015. Behavioral Design for Back Pain. Technical University of Denmark. 
Haberland, M.F., 2010. The Power of Scent: Empirical Field Studies of Olfactory Cues on 
Purchase Behavior. University of St. Gallen. 
Harris, C., Hedges, L. V. & Valentine, J.C., 2009. The Handbook of Research Synthesis and 
Meta-Analysis 2nd ed., New York: Russell Sage Foundation. 
Harris, J.L., Bargh, J.A. & Brownell, K.D., 2009. Priming Effects of Television Food Advertising 
on Eating Behavior. Health Psychology, 28(4), pp.404–413. 
Holland, R.W., Hendriks, M. & Aarts, H., 2005. Smells like clean spirit: Nonconscious effects of 
scent on cognition and behavior, The Netherlands. 
Hourihan, K.L. & MacLeod, C.M., 2007. Capturing conceptual implicit memory: The time it 
takes to produce an association. Memory & cognition, 35(6), pp.1187–1196. 
Ijsselsteijn, W. et al., 2006. Persuasive Technology. In T. Ploug, P. Hasle, & H. Oinas-Kukkonen, 
eds. Eindhoven: Springer. 
!97
==PAGE:110==
Kashima, Y., Foddy, M. & Platow, M., 2002. Self and Identity: Personal, Social, and Symbolic 
1st ed., Psychology Press. 
Kay, A.C. et al., 2004. Material priming: The inﬂuence of mundane physical objects on 
situational construal and competitive behavioral choice. Organizational Behavior and 
Human Decision Processes, 95(1), pp.83–96. 
Keeley, B.L., 2002. Making sense of the senses: Individuating modalities in humans and 
other animals. The Journal of Philosophy, 99(1), pp.5–28. 
Kim, E., You, S. & Lee, J., 2005. Priming Effects by Visual Image Information in On-Line 
Shopping Malls, Gwangju. 
Krishna, A. & Morrin, M., 2008. Does Touch Affect Taste? The Perceptual Transfer of Product 
Container Haptic Cues. Journal of Consumer Research, 34(6), pp.807–818. 
Krosnick, J. a. & Presser, S., 2010. Question and Questionnaire Design. In P. V. Marsden & J. 
D. Wright, eds. Handbook of Survey Research. Emerald Group Publishing Limited, p. 886. 
Latour, B., 1992. “Where Are the Missing Masses? The Sociology of a Few Mundane 
Artifacts.” In W. E. Bijker & J. Law, eds. Shaping Technology/Building Society: Studies in 
Sociotechnical Change. London: MIT Press, pp. 225–258. 
Li, W. et al., 2007. Subliminal Smells Can Guide Social Preferences, Chicago. 
Liljenquist, K., Zhong, C. & Galinsky, A.D., 2015. The Smell of Virtue : Clean Scents Promote 
Reciprocity and Charity, United States. 
Lockton, D., Harrison, D. & Stanton, N.A., 2010. The Design with Intent Method: A design 
tool for inﬂuencing user behaviour. Applied Ergonomics, 41(3), pp.382–392. 
Loftus, E.F., 1975. Leading Questions and the Eyewitness Report. Cognitive Psychology, 7(4), 
pp.560–572. 
Mandel, N. & Johnson, E.J., 2002. When Web Pages Inﬂuence Choice: Effects of Visual 
Primes on Experts and Novices. Journal of Consumer Research, 29(2), pp.235–245. 
Mead, M., n.d. 
Mattila, A.S. & Wirtz, J., 2001. Congruency of scent and music as a driver of in-store 
evaluations and behavior. Journal of Retailing, 77(2001), pp.273–289. 
McKenzie-Mohr, D., 1999. Fostering Sustainable Behavior: An Introduction to Community-
based Social Marketing 3rd ed., New Society Publishers. 
McKenzie-Mohr, D. & Schultz, P.W., 2012. Choosing Effective Behavior Change Tools. 
Behavior, Energy and Climate Change Conference, 20(1). 
Milliman, R.E., 1982. Using Background Music to Affect the Behavior of Supermarket 
Shoppers. The Journal of Marketing, 46(3), pp.86–91. 
Milliman, R.E., 1986. The Inﬂuence of Background Music on the Behavior of Restaurant 
Patrons. Journal of Consumer Research, 13(2), pp.286–289. 
Moggridge, B., 2006. Multisensory and Multimedia. In Designing Interactions. MIT Press, pp. 
513–586. 
Morrison, M. et al., 2011. In-store music and aroma inﬂuences on shopper behavior and 
satisfaction. Journal of Business Research, 64(6), pp.558–564. 
Nachar, N., 2008. The Mann-Whitney U: A Test for Assessing Whether Two Independent 
Samples Come from the Same Distribution. Tutorials in Quantitative Methods for 
Psychology, 4(1), pp.13–20. 
Nelson, T.D., 1999. Motivational Bases of Prosocial and Altruistic Behavior: A Critical 
Reappraisal. Journal of Research, 4(1), pp.23–31. 
!98
==PAGE:111==
Nenkov, G.Y. & Scott, M.L., 2014. “So Cute I Could Eat It Up”: Priming Effects of Cute 
Products on Indulgent Consumption. Journal of Consumer Research, 41(2), pp.326–341. 
Niedderer, K., 2007. Designing Mindful Interaction: The Category of Performative Object. 
Design Issues, 23(1), pp.3–17. 
Niedderer, K., 2013. Mindful Design as a Driver for Social Behaviour Change. In 5Th 
International Congress of International Association of Societies of Design Research: 
Consilience and Innovation in Design. Tokyo, pp. 4562–4572. 
Niedderer, K. et al., 2014. Creating sustainable innovation through design for behaviour 
change: full project report, Loughborough. 
Norman, D.A., 2002. The Design of Everyday Things Revised an., New York: Basic Books. 
Nuzir, F.A. et al., 2014. A Study of the Visual Inﬂuence of Pavement Patterns on Pedestrian 
Walking Behaviour in the KSRP, Kitakyushu, Japan. In Proceedings of the 10th 
International Symposium on Architectural Interchanges in Asia. Hangzhou, pp. 1017–1024. 
Pace-Sigge, M., 2013. Lexical Priming in Spoken English Usage 1st ed., London: Palgrave 
Macmillan UK. 
Penner, L.A. & Finkelstein, M.A., 1998. Dispositional and structural determinants of 
volunteerism. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74(2), pp.525–537. 
Poturak, M., 2015. Inﬂuence of Product Packaging on Purchase Decisions. European Journal 
of Social and Human Sciences, 3(3). 
Rabin, M. & Schrag, J., 1997. First Impressions Matter: A Model of Conﬁrmatory Bias, 
Berkeley. 
Redström, J., 2006. Persuasive Design: Fringes and Foundations. In W. A. IJsselsteijn et al., 
eds. Persuasive Technology. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 112–122. 
Roberts, J.C. & Walker, R., 2010. Using All Our Senses: the need for a Uniﬁed Theoretical 
Approach to Multi-sensory Information Visualization. IEEE VisWeek, pp.1–2. 
Roediger, H.L., 1990. Implicit memory: Retention Without Remembering. The American 
Psychologist, 45(9), pp.1043–1056. 
Schacter, D.L., 1992. Priming and Multiple Memory Systems: Perceptual Mechanisms of 
Implicit Memory. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 4(3), pp.244–256. 
Schifferstein, H.N.J., 2011. Multi Sensory Design. In Proceedings of the Second Conference 
on Creativity and Innovation in Design - DESIRE ’11. Eindhoven, pp. 361–362. 
Schifferstein, H.N.J. & Desmet, P.M.A., 2008. Tools Facilitating Multi-sensory Product Design. 
The Design Journal, 11(2), pp.137–158. 
Smink, S., 2012. Applying persuasive design in a diabetes mellitus application. p.11. 
Smith, E.R. & DeCoster, J., 2000. Dual-Process Models in Social and Cognitive Psychology: 
Conceptual Integration and Links to Underlying Memory Systems. Personality and Social 
Psychology Review, 4(2), pp.108–131. 
Spence, C. & Gallace, A., 2011. Multisensory Design: Reaching Out to Touch the Consumer. 
Psychology & Marketing, 28(3), pp.267–308. 
Stanovich, K.E., 1999. Who is Rational? Studies of Individual Differences in Reasoning 
Routledge, ed., New York: Taylor & Francis. 
Tavares, T.A., 2013. Multisensory Interaction Design: Designing User Interfaces for Human 
Senses. In International Conference WWW/Internet 2013. p. 4. 
Tromp, N., 2013. social design: How products and services can help us act in ways that 
beneﬁt society. Technical University of Delft. 
!99
==PAGE:112==
Tromp, N. & Hekkert, P., 2016. Assessing methods for effect-driven design: Evaluation of a 
social design method. Design Studies, 43(2016), pp.24–47. 
Tromp, N. & Hekkert, P., 2014. Social Implication Design (SID) - A design method to exploit 
the unique value of the artefact to counteract social problems. In Design Research 
Society. Umea: Umeå Institute of Design, p. 15. 
Tromp, N., Hekkert, P. & Verbeek, P.-P., 2011. Design for Socially Responsible Behavior: A 
Classiﬁcation of Inﬂuence Based on Intended User Experience. Design Issues, 27(3), pp.
3–19. 
Tropeano, E., 2006. Does Rap or Rock Music Provoke Violent Behavior? Journal of 
Undergraduate Psychological Research, 1, pp.31–34. 
Tulving, E. & Schacter, D.L., 1990. Priming and Human Memory Systems. Science, 247(1985), 
pp.301–306. 
Twenge, J.M. et al., 2007. Social Exclusion Decreases Prosocial Behavior. Journal of 
Personality and Psychology, 92(1), pp.56–66. 
Vagias, W.M., 2006. Likert-Type Scale Response Anchors. pp.3–4. 
Verbeek, P.-P., 2005. What Things Do: Philosophical Reﬂections on Technology, Agency, and 
Design Illustrated., Pennsylvania State University Press. 
Visch, V. et al., 2013. Persuasive Game Design: A model and its deﬁnitions. In CHI 2013: 
Workshop Designing Gamiﬁcation: Creating Gameful and Playful Experiences. Paris: 
ACM, pp. 1–5. 
Wendel, S., 2013. Designing for Behavior Change - Applying Psychology And Behavioural 
Economics 1st ed. M. Treseler, ed., Sebastopol: O’Reilly Media. 
Westerman, S.J. et al., 2013. The design of consumer packaging: Effects of manipulations of 
shape, orientation, and alignment of graphical forms on consumers’ assessments. Food 
Quality and Preference, 27(1), pp.8–17. 
Wright, M. & Klÿn, B., 1998. Environmental Attitude - Behaviour Correlations in 21 Countries. 
Journal of Empirical Generalisations in Marketing Science, 3, pp.42–60. 
Yorkston, E. & Menon, G., 2004. A Sound Idea: Phonetic Effects of Brand Names on 
Consumer Judgments. Journal of Consumer Research, 31(June), pp.43–51. 
Zekiri, J. & Hasani, V.V., 2015. The Role and Impact of the Packaging Effect on Consumer 
Buying Behaviour. Ecoforum, 4(1), pp.232–240. 
WEBSITES 
Klansek, N., 2016. Organika Cases. MMore Cases. Available at: https://www.kickstarter.com/
projects/mmore/organika-cases-a-scent-of-nature-wherever-you-go [Accessed June 14, 
2016]. 
ogilvy paris, Vittel Refresh Cap. Available at: http://www.ogilvy.com/The-Work/Articles/
May-2014-Ogilvy-Paris-Innovate-an-Irresistible-Way-for-Vittel.aspx [Accessed June 23, 
2016]. 
Perigee, 2014. The Medium is the Massage. Available at: https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/7-
minute-workout-free-daily/id650762525?mt=8 [Accessed June 23, 2016]. 
Unkown, 2014. Side Effects of Social Media. Available at: http://www.livablecities.org/blog/
side-effects-social-media [Accessed February 13, 2016]. 
!100
==PAGE:113==
Yeatts Jr., H.W., 1997. Simply Complicated: Understanding the Human Being. Available at: 
http://www.threeleggeddragon.com/writings/simply/simple.social.html [Accessed 
February 17, 2016]. 
IMAGES 
Figure 2.6, Parking ticket machine and gate arm. Engineered Parking Systems, Inc., p.16. 
Available at: http://www.epsinfo.com. 
Figure 3.2, 2016. Google Images search of “nature.” , p.30. Available at: https://
www.google.dk/search?
q=nature&biw=1155&bih=737&source=lnms&tbm=isch&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwimh_yj_M
3NAhXlF5oKHXRHDeYQ_AUIBigB [Accessed March 19, 2016]. 
Figure 3.3, 2016. Google Images search of “sustainable product design.” , p.30. Available at: 
https://www.google.dk/search?
q=nature&biw=1155&bih=737&source=lnms&tbm=isch&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwimh_yj_M
3NAhXlF5oKHXRHDeYQ_AUIBigB#tbm=isch&q=sustainable+product+design [Accessed 
March 19, 2016]. 
Figure 3.4, 2016. Google Images search of “sustainable product.” , p.30. Available at: 
https://www.google.dk/search?
q=nature&biw=1155&bih=737&source=lnms&tbm=isch&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwimh_yj_M
3NAhXlF5oKHXRHDeYQ_AUIBigB#tbm=isch&q=sustainable+product [Accessed March 
19, 2016]. 
Figure 3.5, Natural 4X Laundry Detergent. Ecologic Brand, p.33. Available at: http://
www.thedieline.com/blog/2011/12/14/ecologic-brands.html [Accessed May 30, 2016]. 
Figure 3.5, iPad Travel Case. Bambu, p.33. Available at: http://www.greenpioneer.co.uk/en/
bambu-cork/278-cork-fabric-ipad-travel-case.html [Accessed May 30, 2016]. 
Figure 3.5, Bough City. Bough Bikes, p.33. Available at: http://www.boughbikes.com/store/ 
[Accessed May 30, 2016]. 
Figure 3.5, REFOLD. Refold, p.33. Available at: http://www.thedieline.com/blog/2014/10/8/
refold-kickstarter-sustainable-desk-design [Accessed May 30, 2016]. 
Figure 3.5, Mapu Guaquén. Documentary Design, p.33. Available at: http://
www.documentarydesign.com/portfolio/mapuguaquen/ [Accessed May 30, 2016]. 
Figure 3.5, (Rice backpack). Keen Footwear, p.33. Available at: http://www.oursus.org/
product-26 [Accessed May 30, 2016]. 
Figure 3.5, CLEAN RESERVE. CLEAN, p.33. Available at: http://www.thedieline.com/blog/
2016/1/27/clean-reserve-fragrances [Accessed May 30, 2016]. 
Figure 3.5, Cub. Daniel Michalik, p.33. Available at: http://www.danielmichalik.com/
danielmichalikcom/furniture/rwq9igjlctj11vn1f8lk0b4v3x16c7 [Accessed May 30, 2016]. 
Figure 3.5, NC White Party. SPGBK, p.33. Available at: http://www.springbreakwatches.com/
products/spgbk-white-party-2-1 [Accessed May 30, 2016]. 
Figure 3.5, Verticality of Root Vegetables. , p.33. Available at: http://www.ze.tt/kuehlschrank-
voll-wie-ihr-lebensmittel-auch-anders-lagern-koennt/ [Accessed May 30, 2016]. 
Figure 3.5, Moss Clock. Noktuku, p.33. Available at: http://www.noktuku.com/moss-clock/ 
[Accessed May 30, 2016]. 
Figure 3.5, Grove Bamboo Case. Grovemade, p.33. Available at: http://
www.grovemade.com/product/bamboo-iphone-case/?
!101
==PAGE:114==
v=1&utm_expid=70706339-21.qs4_M13tT_Kn-rc57Mpylw.1&utm_referrer=https%3A
%2F%2Fwww.google.dk%2F [Accessed May 30, 2016]. 
Figure 3.5, Juniper Ridge cologne - thedieline. Juniper Ridge, p.33. Available at: http://
www.thedieline.com/blog/2014/9/29/juniper-ridge [Accessed May 30, 2016]. 
Figure 3.5, Corky. Adele Peters, p.33. Available at: http://www.gadgetsin.com/corky-
wireless-mouse-without-battery.htm [Accessed May 30, 2016]. 
Figure 3.5, Veneerware. Bambu, p.33. Available at: http://www.gracioushome.com/bambu-
veneerware-natural-square-plate-5059653.html?cgid=dining-complete-paper-goods 
[Accessed May 30, 2016]. 
Figure 3.5, XUAN. INNOVO, p.33. Available at: http://www.inhabitat.com/jovan-chis-lei-
unveils-swirling-bamboo-grass-lamp-in-milan/ [Accessed May 30, 2016]. 
Figure 3.5, Moss Carpet. Nguyen La Chanh, p.33. Available at: http://www.inhabitat.com/
moss-carpet-by-nguyen-la-chanh/ [Accessed May 30, 2016]. 
Figure 3.5, Seed to Food. HH Lin, p.33. Available at: http://www.behance.net/gallery/
30130227/Seed-to-Food-15 [Accessed May 30, 2016]. 
Figure 3.5, (3D printed soft seat). Lilian Van Daal, p.33. Available at: http://
www.inspirationist.net/biomimicry-3d-printed-soft-seat-by-lilian-van-daal/ [Accessed May 
30, 2016]. 
Figure 3.5, Quercus. Max Ashford, p.33. Available at: http://www.behance.net/gallery/
17918863/Quercus [Accessed May 30, 2016]. 
Figure 3.6, Banana leaf packaging. , p.34. Available at: http://www.cargocollective.com/
bruskowski/Sea-Food-Packaging [Accessed May 30, 2016]. 
Figure 3.6, Cardboard packaging. , p.34. Available at: http://www.bevnet.com/news/2013/
boxed-water-opens-new-bottling-and-distribution-center [Accessed May 30, 2016]. 
Figure 3.6, Fungus packaging. , p.34. Available at: http://www.mintpressnews.com/ikea-
looks-replacing-styrofoam-biodegradable-mushroom-packaging/216642/ [Accessed 
May 30, 2016]. 
Figure 3.6, Straw packaging. , p.34. Available at: http://www.thedieline.com/blog/
2012/6/18/eco-sustainable-premium-thai-pomelo-packaging.html [Accessed May 30, 
2016]. 
Figure 3.6, Carton packaging. , p.34. Available at: http://www.probablytina.wordpress.com/
2014/11/21/design-overlooked-the-egg-carton/ [Accessed May 30, 2016]. 
Figure 3.7, Paper dinnerware. , p.35. Available at: http://www.marielangaa.dk/papkop.htm 
[Accessed May 30, 2016]. 
Figure 3.7, Palm leaf dinnerware. , p.35. Available at: http://www.happytifﬁn.com/25-pack-
biodegradable-palmleaf-large-dinner-plate-round.html [Accessed May 30, 2016]. 
Figure 3.7, Wooden dinnerware. , p.35. Available at: http://www.etsy.com/dk-en/listing/
193311387/clearance-30-off-25-mini-wooden-spoons?ref=market [Accessed May 30, 
2016]. 
Figure 3.7, Bamboo dinnerware. , p.35. Available at: http://www.bambooskewers.com/
bamboo-disposables/ [Accessed May 30, 2016]. 
Figure 3.7, Wooden dinnerware. , p.35. Available at: http://www.etsy.com/dk-en/listing/
229266862/20-x-wooden-forks-wood-forks-weddings?
ga_order=most_relevant&ga_search_type=all&ga_view_type=gallery&ga_search_query=
disposable fork&ref=sr_gallery_16 [Accessed May 30, 2016]. 
!102
==PAGE:115==
Figure 3.8, Stool interior. , p.35. Available at: http://www.behance.net/gallery/30181168/
Zostera-Stool [Accessed May 30, 2016]. 
Figure 3.8, Lamp shade interior. , p.35. Available at: http://www.zarahome.com/dk/en/
lamps/conical-rafﬁa-lampshade-c1293878p6910184.html [Accessed May 30, 2016]. 
Figure 3.8, Lamp interior. , p.35. Available at: http://www.behance.net/gallery/10975113/
Carlota- [Accessed May 30, 2016]. 
Figure 3.8, Chair interior. , p.35. Available at: http://www.zarahome.com/dk/en/occasional-
furniture/rectangular-carved-stool-c1293877p6907405.html [Accessed May 30, 2016]. 
Figure 3.8, Side table interior. , p.35. Available at: http://www.behance.net/gallery/
24077655/Sumo-Side-Table [Accessed May 30, 2016].
!103
