==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Computational
Authorship Attribution
in Danish High Schools
Master Thesis
Spring 2016
by
Alexander Houmann Aalykke  s091890
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
In this thesis, we design a plagiarism detection system for use in Danish high
schools. Our goal is to detect outsource plagiarism, where a student gets another
person to write the assignment for them. This is dierent from the more common
copy-paste type of plagiarism, where students use existing material without
proper citation. While copy-paste plagiarism can be detected by comparing the
handed-in assignment to a collection of original documents, detecting outsource
plagiarism is more dicult, since the handed-in assignment is original work,
although it is not the student's own work.
Outsource plagiarism in Danish high schools is mostly present in the StudieRet-
ningsProjekt (SRP), which is a large written assignment, written towards the
end of the student's education. The SRP has a high weight in the student's nal
grade-point average, and so an increasing number of student's feel the need to
outsource the assignment to a more experienced writer, in order to get a good
grade.
We detect outsource plagiarism in the SRPs by comparing the writing style
used in the handed-in SRP to the student's usual writing style, extracted from
the student's earlier work.
A number of questions arise in this scenario: Is
the student's writing style constant over the span of his education, and can we
extract a reliable measure of the student's writing style from his earlier work at
all?
To model writing style, we use stylometrics  statistical information about the
text, such as the number of occurrences of the word the. These pieces of infor-
mation are also known as style markers. While critics argue that stylometrics
==PAGE:4==
ii
is based on an unproven hypothesis, we do achieve results that seem to support
the hypothesis.
We propose a method for refuting the student's authorship, based on an au-
thorship attribution method.
We then test the performance of a number of
stylometric style markers when representing writing style, and evaluate a num-
ber of settings for our proposed refuting method.
For testing, we have used a set of 500 students and their assignments. This set
has been provided by MaCom, who develop a study administration system in
use by most Danish high schools (called Lectio). With the optimal settings, we
were able to detect outsource plagiarism in 71.9% of the cases, while making
false accusations of outsource plagiarism in below 5% of the cases in the dataset.
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
I dette speciale designer vi et plagiatdetekteringssystem til brug i danske gym-
nasier. Vores mål er at detektere outsource-plagiering, hvor en elev får en anden
person til at skrive deres opgave for dem. Dette er anderledes end den mere
almindelige plagiattype, copy-paste plagiat, hvor elever kopierer tekst fra andre
kilder, uden at citere dem. Copy-paste plagiat kan detekteres ved at sammenlig-
ne den aeverede opgave mod en samling af originale dokumenter. Outsource-
plagiering kan ikke detekteres på samme måde, idet den aeverede opgave er et
originalt værk, bare ikke elevens eget.
Outsource plagiering i danske gymnasier forendes oftest i StudieRetingingsPro-
jektet (SRPen), som er en større skriftlig opgave eleverne får stillet i slutningen
af deres studie. Denne opgave vægter højt i forhold til elevens afgangsgennem-
snit, og et stigende antal elever får en mere erfaren forfatter til at skrive deres
opgave for at opnå en bedre karakter.
Vi afslører outsource plagiering i SRPer ved at sammenligne skrivestilen der
er brugt i SRPen med elevens normale skrivestil, som vi ekstraherer fra elevens
tidligere opgaver. Dette giver anledning til et par spørgsmål; Er elevens skrivestil
konstant igennem hele elevens uddannelse, og kan vi ekstrahere en pålidelig
repræsentation af elevens skrivestil ud fra hans tidligere opgaver?
Vi bruger stylometri for at modellere skrivestil. Stylometri er statistiske infor-
mationer om en tekst, som for eksempel antallet af gange ordet den optræder i
teksten. Disse kaldes også stilmarkører.Kritikere kritiserer brugen af stylometri,
idet det beror på en endnu ikke bevist hypotese. Vores resultater ser dog ud til
at understøtte denne hypotese.
==PAGE:6==
iv
For at afvise en elevs forfatterskab af en SRP, foreslår vi en metode, baseret på
en metode der normalt bruges til at tilskrive forfatterskab. Med denne metode
tester vi forskellige stilmarkørers præcision i forbindelse med forfatterskabsaf-
visning.
Til at teste metoden og stilmarkørene bruger vi et sæt bestående af 500 elever og
deres opgaver. Vi har fået stillet dette sæt til rådighed af rmaet MaCom, som
udvikler et studieadministrationssystem der bruges af de este danske gymnasier
(Lectio). Med det optimale indstillinger og stilmarkører, er vi i stand til detektere
outsource plagiat i 71.9% af tilfældene, samtidig med at vi afviser 5% af de
tilfælde hvor eleven rent faktisk selv har skrevet opgaven.
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fullment of the requirements
for acquiring an M.Sc.
in Engineering.
It has an assigned workload of 30
ECTS points, and has been written under the supervision of Nicola Dragoni, in
cooperation with the company MaCom.
Alexander Houmann Aalykke
Lyngby, July 1st 2016
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor, Nicola Dragoni, for agreeing to supervise
my thesis on such short notice, and for his help and advice during the completion
of the thesis.
I would also like to extend my gratitude to MaCom for allowing me access to
their data, as well as providing the necessary facilities for completing my thesis.
Finally, I would like to thank my parents for their support during my stressful
periods.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Authorship Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.1.1
Problem Types in Authorship Analysis . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.1.2
Authorship Analysis Terms and Concepts . . . . . . . . .
7
1.2
The Problem: Authorship Refuting in High Schools . . . . . . . .
11
1.3
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2
Authorship Analysis Methods
17
2.1
Feature Extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.1.1
Character Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.1.2
Lexical Features
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.1.3
Syntactic Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.1.4
Semantic Features
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.1.5
Technical Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.2
Authorship Attribution Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.2.1
Prole-Based Attribution Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.2.2
Instance-Based Attribution Methods . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.3
Authorship Verication Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.3.1
Intrinsic Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.3.2
Extrinsic Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.4
Authorship Refuting Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
3
Test Setup
29
3.1
Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2
Refuting Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.3
Dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.4
Preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.5
Error Sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4
Results
35
4.1
Feature Type Parameter Comparisons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.2
Feature Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.3
Feature Type Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.4
Feature Type Combination
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.5
Similarity Measure Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.6
Number of Candidate Authors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.7
AUC Scores . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.8
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5
Conclusion
55
5.1
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
A POS Tags
59
B AUC Scores
61
Bibliography
63
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Plagiarism is a big problem in education, made even easier today with the
information-sharing capabilities of the internet, and the anonymity opportu-
nities of digital written work: Instead of writing the assignments themselves,
students can copy material from the web and turn it in as their own work. Al-
ternatively, the students can have someone else write the assignments for them,
and turn it in digitally with their name on it. The teacher cannot be expected
to detect all types of plagiarism, and so in this thesis we aim to provide a tool
for detecting some forms of plagiarism.
A common type of plagiarism is copy-paste plagiarism, where a student copies
phrases or sometimes even whole assignments from others, without citing their
sources properly. The student can copy the text directly, or may try to disguise
the plagiarism by paraphrasing the original text. To combat this type of plagia-
rism, the teacher (or the plagiarism detection software the teacher might use)
can compare the student's assignment with a reference collection of documents,
to detect if parts of the assignment occurs elsewhere, and thus has been copied,
although the more the student has paraphrased the text, the harder this gets.
Common examples of such reference collections are all other students' work,
Wikipedia, or the entire Internet.
Another kind of plagiarism is when a student gets someone else to write their
assignment for them and passes o the work as their own. We will call this type
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction
of plagiarism outsource plagiarism, and the person writing the assignment the
contractor. This type of plagiarism is more common in larger assignments, and
the student often pays the contractor to write the assignment. Detecting this
kind of plagiarism is somewhat harder than detecting copy-paste plagiarism,
since the assignment is original work, and does not exist anywhere else, but the
student is not the real author1. To detect this kind of plagiarism, the teacher
can analyze the writing style used in the assignment, and compare it to the
student's writing style in other assignments. This task is known as authorship
analysis, and is traditionally done by a human expert.
When a case of copy-paste plagiarism is detected, it is fairly easy to prove
that the text is plagiarized, as we have the text occurring in another, older
document. For small passages of text, the student can argue that it is simply
a coincidence. However, if one passage of text in an assignment is copied from
elsewhere, it is usually not the only one. In the case of outsource plagiarism,
the proof is much harder. We do not have a reference document to support the
claim, and the argument that the writing style is much too dierent is based on
the authorship analysist's skills and condence. To counter the claim, students
can argue that their writing style has evolved during their education, as is the
goal of the education, and may argue that thy have had someone proofread the
assignment, which is allowed.
A recent TV documentary reported that outsource plagiarism is an increasing
issue in Danish high schools: In a poll, 15% of students admitted they knew
someone who had committed this type of plagiarism. Outsource-plagiarism cases
were most prevalent in the assignment called StudieRetningsProjekt (SRP),
which is a large (ten to twenty pages), written assignment the students are
given near the end of their study. The assignment has a high weight in the
students' nal grade point average, and is thus considered the most important
assignment in their education. The prices some students were willing to pay for
someone else to write their SRP were upwards of 20.000 DKK2.
Most Danish high schools use Lectio, an online study-administration system, for
handling the turn-in of assignments (among other study-administration relation
tasks). Based on an earlier thesis by Frølich and Hansen [10], Lectio already have
the functionality to detect copy-paste plagiarism, checking new assignments a
reference collection containing all students' assignment. Currently, Lectio does
not have the ability to detect outsource plagiarism, and teachers need to perform
authorship analysis themselves.
1In case the contractor also commits plagiarism and copies his work from an existing source,
the plagiarism case can be detected by a copy-paste detector, although this kind of combined
plagiarism is unlikely.
2https://www.dr.dk/tv/se/studentereksamen-til-salg/studentereksamen-til-salg
==PAGE:15==
3
The work done in this thesis is aimed towards helping teachers combat outsource
plagiarism by using computational authorship analysis methods to support or
automate their writing style analysis. The context of this thesis is detecting
outsource plagiarism in Danish high-school students' assignments. More specif-
ically, we will analyze students' SRPs, since the methods studied in this thesis
require a relatively large amount of text in order to determine writing style with
condence.
There are a number of challenges when analyzing writing style in the context of
high schools: As noted earlier, a student's writing style is expected to change
over the course of their education. In addition, the writing style used in the
student's various assignments may vary naturally. For example, the writing style
used when writing a poem is naturally dierent from that used when writing
a lab report. On a more practical level, the student might include citations in
his assignment, which a computer may have diculties handling, since they are
hard to detect, and will most likely aect the writing style when extracted. A
student may also have committed plagiarism in his previous assignment, which
of course also will aect the extracted writing style of that assignment.
In this thesis, we will evaluate the suitability of the style markers used in com-
putational authorship analysis for representing the writing style of students in
the face of the above-mentioned challenges. We will also investigate the various
methods for determining authorship, based on these markers. As most of the
existing work in authorship analysis is on attributing texts to authors, we will
also look into which of these attribution methods can be used for discrediting
or refuting authorship (i.e. determining that a student is not the real author of
his SRP).
The intent of the tool developed here is to provide teachers with plausible ev-
idence of outsource plagiarism. It is not intended for being an authoritative
judge on whether the student has committed plagiarism or not. Nevertheless,
if the program falsely accuses a student of outsource plagiarism, it can lead the
teacher to erroneously convict the student, which is a more serious case than
the program not detecting a case of outsource plagiarism. The program should
therefore strive to err on the safe side. That is, it should not accuse students of
outsource plagiarism unless it is very condent.
This thesis is done in cooperation with MaCom, the company behind Lectio,
who has provided access to their data for evaluating the performance of the
methods evaluated in this thesis. The intention of MaCom is that the work
done in this thesis will be integrated in a tool in Lectio and thus help Danish
high schools combat plagiarism.
The rest of this thesis is structured as follows: In the next section, we will
==PAGE:16==
4
Introduction
give an overview of the eld of authorship analysis; the problem types that
exist herein, and explain the various terms used. Following that, we will give
a more detailed denition of the problem we focus on in this thesis, and the
contribution of the thesis. We nish o the introduction with a study of related
work. In Authorship Analysis Methods we describe the style markers  also
called features  used for representing writing style, as well as the methods used
for determining authorship based on these features. We then describe the Test
Setup; the features and methods we will evaluate, the dataset we use, as well
as some of the error sources. Then we will discuss the results and evaluate the
usability of the features and methods for use in Lectio. Finally, we conclude the
thesis with an overall evaluation and pointers for future work.
1.1
Authorship Analysis
Traditionally, authorship analysis is done by a human expert trained in linguis-
tics. The expert is able to discern literary style used in documents to determine
if they were written by the same author. In the 20th century, computational
authorship analysis has become a new eld of study. Computational authorship
analysis  also called non-traditional authorship analysis  is not as strongly
rooted in linguistics as traditional authorship analysis, but rather uses statistics
and stylometrics to compare documents. In stylometrics, certain style markers
 or features  are extracted from the document to represent the writing style
used. Examples of these features include the average sentence length, the num-
ber of occurrences of function words like the, I, and of. Compare this to the
literary style a stylistics expert uses, where the expert may look more into the
semantics, like the use of metaphors, which is (still) too complex for computers
to process.
Computational authorship analysis is based on the Human Stylome Hypothesis.
The hypothesis is that each person has their own, unique writing style, called
a stylome  like genome, indicating that it is as unique as DNA. This stylome
can be detected using statistics and stylometry, and used to discern authors [48].
Exactly which features of a text denes this stylome is still not certain, but many
have been proposed with varying success in identifying authors [41, 20, 11, 12].
Among the more intuitive are measures such as sentence length, vocabulary size
and word frequencies [11].
With regards to its scientic value, the human stylome hypothesis is still just a
hypothesis, and critics argue that even though the eld is more than 50 years
old and with more than 1500 publications, the hypothesis has not yet been
thoroughly tested or proven [36]. A lot of work has been done based on this
==PAGE:17==
1.1 Authorship Analysis
5
hypothesis, and the results indicate that it is possible to discern authors based on
their stylome [11, 12, 1, 41, 20], although critics argue that the scientic method
used in many of these studies is questionable [35, 36]. The lack of scientic
fundament may pose a question of whether our system can be used at all for
plagiarism detection purposes.
In this study, we take the more engineering-
based approach, try to optimize the performance of our plagiarism detection
tool assuming that the hypothesis holds.
By far, the most commonly studied problem in authorship analysis is authorship
attribution, where the task is to determine the author of a document, often from
among a set of candidates. This problem often occurs in forensics, where for
example the author of a terrorist threat needs to be determined from a set of
suspects. In the next section, we describe this and other problems in authorship
analysis in more detail.
1.1.1
Problem Types in Authorship Analysis
The eld of authorship analysis is concerned with extracting as much informa-
tion about the author of a document as possible. This leads to a number of
problems, based on the amount of data available.
When given only a single document of unknown authorship, we can of course
not attribute it to any authors, since we have no candidate authors. We can
however, try to extract as much information about the author's demographics
 such as age, sex, and education level  from the document as possible. To do
this, we need some training data  examples of other authors' demographics and
their writing styles  from which we can make some generalizations about the
correlation between writing style and demographics. This is the authorship
proling problem [20, 33]. Determining the demographics of the author of a
document can be useful in the case of outsource plagiarism detection, for exam-
ple, when the contractor is a forty-year old woman with a university education
and the student is an eighteen-year old male. In this case, the demographics of
the actual author (the contractor) would not match the student's demographic.
However, as the demographic proling is based on writing style, we would also
expect the writing style dierences to be detectable by the methods for the at-
tribution problems below. We will therefore not investigate this problem any
further.
If we have one or more candidate authors in addition to the document of un-
known authorship, we can try to attribute the document to one of them. Usually
an author is represented by extracting his writing style from a set of documents
that he is assumed to have written. Attribution is done by comparing the writ-
==PAGE:18==
6
Introduction
ing style of each author to the writing style used in the document. Based on
how many candidate authors we have, and whether we can assume that one of
the candidates is the real author, we get the following three problems, which we
will group under the term authorship attribution for the rest of the project:
Authorship attribution with a closed set of candidate authors In this
problem, we are given a document, and a closed set of authors, one of
which we can assume is the real author. As one of the candidates is the
real author, we can say that the author whose writing style is most similar
to that used in the document is the real author [20].
Authorship attribution with an open set of candidate authors Similar
to the previous problem, but we can no longer assume that the real author
is among the authors given. We can no longer just take the most likely
author among the given authors to be the real author, since it might be the
case that none of them is the real author. One way to solve this problem is
to compare the authors and document using a number of dierent aspects
of writing style, and seeing if a single author's writing style is consistently
more similar to the one used in the document. If an author fullls this
criteria, then we can choose him as the real author. Otherwise, we can
say that none of the given authors is the real author [21].
Authorship verication Here, we are only given a single author and a docu-
ment of unknown authorship. The task is to determine whether the author
is the real author of the document or not. To solve this problem we can
dene a threshold, based on previous experiments, and require that the
author's writing style and the one used in the document are more similar
than the threshold [19].
The authorship attribution problem with a closed set of candidate authors can
be viewed as a special case of the attribution problem with an open set. Likewise,
both attribution problems can be viewed as a set of verication problems  one
for each author. If we only have one document for the author in the verication
problem, we arrive at what Koppel et al. termed The Fundamental Problem
of Authorship Attribution, in which the task is to determine if two documents
are written by the same author [23].
As we go from authorship attribution
with a closed set of candidate authors towards the fundamental problem, the
problems become harder: We have less text to work with, compared to the
number of candidate authors, and we rely more on the stylome hypothesis and
the uniqueness of each author's writing style.
In this thesis we will work with a problem we will call authorship refuting.
For this problem, we are given an author and a document he claims to be the
==PAGE:19==
1.1 Authorship Analysis
7
author of. Our task is to try to falsify the claim that the author wrote the
document. In contrast to the three attribution problems is; in refuting, the task
is to prove that the author in question is not the real author of the document
in question, whereas in attribution, the task is to prove that an author is the
real author. The verication problem also covers this task, however, not much
work has been done in verication that explicitly handles the refuting case, so
we feel that this problem can be viewed as separate. To solve this problem,
we can of course use the methods from verication, but we can also reuse some
of the methods used for attribution, although with inverse criteria (i.e.
the
author with the claim must not be signicantly more similar to the document
in question, than the other candidates).
Often, the methods used for solving the attribution problems either return an
author, which they estimate to be the real author, or a don't know answer
when they are unable to determine authorship. Because of this, it is not always
possible to directly convert a method for an attribution problem to a method
for a refuting problem. Nevertheless, as most methods proposed are for the
attribution problems, we will investigate the performance of those that can be
converted, when used for refuting.
Before we go into details about the features that are used to represent writing
style and the methods used for attributing and refuting, we will rst give an
overview of the terms and concepts used in authorship analysis.
1.1.2
Authorship Analysis Terms and Concepts
Here we give a short taxonomy of the terms and concepts used in authorship
analysis. We mostly focus on the attribution and refuting problems, but most
of the topics discussed here also apply to other areas of authorship analysis.
An author is a person who writes documents.
Each author has, according
to the human stylome hypothesis, his own unique writing style. This writing
style partly comes to show when the author writes a document, through style
markers, which are aspects of the text that vary between author, such as an
author's preference for short words, or his tendency to write long sentences, like
this one. However, not all of the author's writing style markers may come to
play in any single document. For example, the author's preference for the word
gigantic over the word huge is not going to be observable in a document in
which he uses neither. In small documents most of the author's writing style
markers will probably not be present, but as the document length grows, so
does the probability of the style markers' presence. Note however, that some
style markers are content-specic, such as an author's preference for the word
==PAGE:20==
8
Introduction
table over desk.
A document can be any written work, examples include novels, screenplays,
student assignments, emails, speeches, and text messages. Each of these docu-
ment types have dierent genres, that is, the writing style used in a screenplay
is dierent from the style used when writing a text message. In addition, the
length of the documents can also vary greatly between genres. The document's
topic can also inuence the writing style, or rather the words used in the doc-
ument: As an example, a Harry Potter novel is more likely to contain words
like wizard and wand, whereas a novel about James Bond is more likely to
contain the words spy and gun.
Given an author and a document, if the author claims to have written the
document, we say that the author has a claimed document, and conversely
the document has a claimed author. The task of the refuting system is then
to try to disprove the claim. When doing attribution, we may have multiple
candidate authors who could have written the document in question. We call
the document to attribute (or refute authorship of) the query document.
Since we do not know exactly what style markers that dene an author's writing
style, we approximate them by extracting features from the documents.
A
feature is a piece of information about a text, for example the average sentence
length, the number of times the word the occurs in a text, or the tense (past,
future, etc.) of the text. There are many dierent types of features that can
be extracted from a document, commonly grouped into the classes below (after
Stamatatos [41]):
Character features Here, the document is viewed as a sequence of individual
characters, that is, things like words and sentences are not considered.
Among the feature types in this group are character n-grams, which are
very popular and rather successful.
Lexical features In this group, the document is viewed as a stream of tokens
(words and symbols).
This gives rise to features such as word length
distribution, function word frequencies, and vocabulary richness.
Syntactic features The document is still viewed as a stream of tokens, but
the context of each token (the surrounding tokens) is also considered. This
allows features such as part-of-speech tags, lemmatization, stemming and
parse trees.
Semantic features Here, we start to look into the meaning of the words and
sentences. Features in this group include synonyms and high-level sentence
structures, like conjunctions, elaborations and clarications.
==PAGE:21==
1.1 Authorship Analysis
9
Application-Specic or technical features These features are artifacts from
the writing process that are not really part of the document itself, such
as metadata generated by the word processor used, page numbers and
headers and the visual layout of the document.
Extracting a set of features from a document generates a document prole,
which is used to represent the writing style of the document. This is usually a
vector of the values of the all the features we have chosen to extract. Taking
all documents that we assume a single author has written and generating their
document proles, we can combine them into the author's author prole,
which is an approximation to the authors' actual writing style.
The author
prole is only an approximation to the authors' writing style, since not all
aspects of the authors' writing style may have been present in the documents
from which we generated the prole. In addition to this, the set of features
extracted from the documents may not fully represent the actual style markers
of the authors' writing style.
When we have an author prole and a document prole, we can compare them
to determine if the author actually wrote the document. If we view the proles
as vectors in a hyper dimensional space we can compare them using distance
measures, such as the cosine similarity. Alternatively, we can train a machine
learning classier on the author prole and test it on the document prole, to
determine if the two proles are similar enough to be considered the same. In
any case, to do authorship refuting we need some training data containing exam-
ples of authors and their documents, where we know exactly what documents
each author has written. We can then use this data to determine a similar-
ity threshold for authorship (in the case of distance measures), or to train the
classier to distinguish between dierent writing styles (in the case of machine
learning). To nd a reliable threshold or classier, we need to be sure that the
training data represents the actual data we will work on. That is, if we use
established writers and their works as training data, and then use the resulting
thresholds and classiers to determine authorship for students' assignments, we
are probably not going to get a high accuracy.
When determining if an author wrote his claimed document, we make the dis-
tinction between four cases based on whether our decision about the claim cor-
responds to the actual truth. If a claim is indeed correct and we do not reject
the, we have a true acceptance (TA). Similarly, we have a true rejection
(TR) when we reject a claim that was in fact, not true. The error cases are then
divided into false acceptances (FA), when we do not reject the claim, but
the claim actually was false, and false rejections (FR) when the claim was
true, but we rejected it. To measure the quality of the classication algorithm,
we seek to minimize both the False Rejection Rate (FRR) and the False
==PAGE:22==
10
Introduction
Acceptance Rate (FAR).
Another pair of measures, often used in information retrieval, is precision and
recall, which only make sense when we look at the system's performance on a
collection of claimed documents. When doing attribution, precision is the ra-
tio between the number of attributed documents, and the number of correctly
attributed documents. Recall is the ratio between the number of correctly at-
tributed documents to the number of attributable documents, that is, documents
whose author is among the candidates. For authorship refuting, we can use pre-
cision and recall measures with regards to the accepted or rejected claims. More
precisely:
Precisionacceptance =
TA
TA + FA
Recallacceptance =
TA
TA + FR
Precisionrejection =
TR
TR + FR
Recallrejection =
TR
TR + FA
For authorship refuting, rejection precision is the ratio between the number
true rejections we make and the total number of claims we reject. Rejection
recall is the ratio between the number of true rejections we make, and the
number of claims in the collection that were actually false. Acceptance recall
and acceptance precision are similarly dened.
Note that the attribution methods may answer don't know, which will often
increase the precision at the cost of lowering the recall. In the case of open
candidate sets, the methods can also attribute query documents to the pseudo-
candidate none, which means that none of the candidates in the set wrote the
query document.
To sum up the general process of authorship attribution and refuting: First we
have to decide which features to use to generate the proles. Second we must
determine how to compare the document- and author proles. Third, we need
to train the method we use for attribution or refuting on some training data,
that is, nd a threshold or train a classier. Last, when all this is set up, we
can begin applying our method on new query documents and attribute them to
their author, or determine if an author's claim on the document is valid.
==PAGE:23==
1.2 The Problem: Authorship Refuting in High Schools
11
With the context of the problem, as well as common terms dened, we next
discuss the problem in more detail, and its challenges.
1.2
The Problem: Authorship Refuting in
High Schools
We can now dene the problem more concisely: Given a student with a number
of assignments, we can assume he wrote, and an SRP that the student claims to
have written, determine whether the claim is true or false, based on the writing
style used. This problem is a rather challenging one, because the authors are
students.
As other studies have found, authors' writing styles tend to drift over time,
decreasing the similarity of the writing styles used in documents written by the
same author but spaced far in time. The assignments we use in this study are
collected from students over their study period (2-4 years), which in itself may
already decrease the writing style similarity between documents. In addition
to this, most students are still young (16-19 years old) and may not have a
stable writing style yet. Most importantly, one of the goals of the high school
education is for the students to develop their writing style, and so there may
be large dierences in writing style between the rst and last assignment the
student writes.
The assignments that we use for establishing the student's writing style come
from various classes the student has taken. The various classes usually require
that the student write the assignment in a specic way, leading to variations in
genres. The assignments in each class are also rarely on the same topic. This
heterogeneity in genres and topics for all the student's assignments and the
SRP presents a big challenge in nding style markers that consistent enough
across genres and topics to be used to dene writing style. In addition, the
assignments are rather short, often only a few pages. The SRP, however, is a
bit longer, usually between 10 to 20 pages.
Another challenge is that students can also have plagiarized their earlier work,
thus breaking the assumption that the earlier work represents the student's own
writing style. In general, we believe that the amount of cases where this is a
problem is relatively small, compared to the number of students who have not
plagiarized. Along the same lines, we also face the problem that many students
include proper citations of other people and in particular, they often include
the teacher's problem denition in their assignments. Accurately determining
==PAGE:24==
12
Introduction
which parts of an assignment is plagiarized, cited or part of the teacher's problem
denition is out of the scope of this project.
In addition to the challenges in the input data, we also have some restrictions
on the output of the system, since the system is to be used to aid teachers
in detecting plagiarism.
Most importantly, the system must not make false
accusations.
That is, the FRR must be as close to zero as possible, at the
expense of the FAR. In addition, to further convince the teacher when a case of
plagiarism has been detected, it would be benecial if the output includes the
features that made the system determine that the SRP is plagiarized. To do
this, the features used should be somewhat intuitive. However, as writing style
dierence is often a function of many small variations, this requirement might
be impossible to satisfy.
Concerning the scientic contributions of this study, our work touches upon a
few areas that have not been studied extensively. First o, we are doing refuting
instead of the much more studied problem of attribution. To our knowledge,
refuting authorship has only been studied as part of authorship verication, and
has not retrieved full attention as its own problem. Second, most existing studies
assume that all documents are written in the same genre, on the same topic,
and over a relatively small timespan. In more recent studies, the assumption
that the documents are on the same topic has been removed, but the others still
remain. In this study, we work with student assignments written over the span
of an education, in dierent genres, and on dierent topics. We will evaluate
the performance of features and methods in the face of these challenges. Last,
we work on a corpus of Danish texts. To our knowledge, most of the features we
study have not been used for detecting writing style in Danish texts before. In
all, our study is novel as it explicitly focusses on using computational authorship
analysis for outsource plagiarism detection.
With the problem dened, we next discuss how others have approached related
authorship analysis problems.
1.3
Related Work
The eld of stylometry, the application of statistical methods to authorship
analysis has a long history, dating back to the 19th century. Most of the work
in this eld focus on authorship attribution.
The rst seminal work in this eld is often considered to be Mosteller and Wal-
lace's work The Federalist Papers [29]. In the study, they use the frequencies
==PAGE:25==
1.3 Related Work
13
of common words such as and and the together with Bayesian statistics to at-
tribute a collection of 146 texts of disputed authorship. Since then, many papers
have described various features for representing writing style and attribution
methods for accurately determining the real author. Features and attribution
methods studied up until the 90s have been summarized by Holmes [12]. Since
the 90s, other elds such as machine learning and natural language processing
have given rise to new features and attribution methods, such as character n-
grams (substrings of a text, n characters in length), Part-of-Speech (POS) tags,
and Support Vector Machines for attribution. Stamatatos, and Koppel et al.
has both made summaries of the more recent published features and attribution
methods [41, 20].
In the area of plagiarism detection most work have been on detecting copy-
paste-plagiarism, which focusses more on dividing the document into chunks
and nding one-to-one-, or paraphrased correspondences between parts of the
suspicious document and a reference collection [6, 32].
One problem in pla-
giarism detection of interest with regard to stylometry, is intrinsic plagiarism
detection. In this problem, only a single document is given, and the algorithm
must determine if any parts of the document have been copied from elsewhere.
This is often done by dividing the document into chunks and using stylometry
to determine if all chunks can be attributed to the same author [51, 52]. One
example of an intrinsic plagiarism detection method is the style change func-
tion proposed by Stamatatos [40]. In it, the document is divided into chunks
by moving a window across the text, thus creating overlapping chunks of text.
From these chunks the frequencies of character n-grams are extracted. Using
these frequencies, the algorithm detects plagiarism based only on the contents
of the document. From the perspective of authorship analysis, studies rarely
mention plagiarism detection as a use case. Van Halteren mentions the use of
authorship attribution techniques for determining the author of student essays
(in case the student forgot to put his name on the assignment), and detecting
plagiarism in universities [47]. Koppel et al. also tests the performance of their
verication method on a corpus of 950 students' essays, but other than that,
most studies in authorship attribution are targeted at proving authorship in the
context of forensics [11, 20, 41].
Most current authorship analysis studies do not take variations in topics and
genres into account. Nor do they handle the case that an author's writing style
may change over time. All these factors can decrease the writing style simi-
larity between the author's documents [25, 43]. Mikros and Argiri investigated
the inuence of topic on a number of features, and found that many feature
types are correlated not only with author, but also with topic [28]. Menon and
Choi also investigated topic inuence and found that function words are sta-
ble even across dierent topics and genres [27]. Kestemont et al. studied the
eects of topic and genre on a popular attribution method by Koppel et al.
==PAGE:26==
14
Introduction
called unmasking [19], and found that the unmasking method was ineective in
a cross-genre setting [15]. Stamatatos, and Sapkota et al. both found that char-
acter n-grams are still usable in cases when the documents may have dierent
genres and topics [42, 38]. Furthermore, Sapkota et al. found that some types
of character n-grams were more robust to variations in genre and topic than
others [37]. Van Dam and Hau found that doing authorship attribution where
all documents were on similar topics increased the precision, while comparing
documents from the same author written over longer periods of time were more
dicult to attribute to the same author than documents written in a short time
frame [46]. Can and Patton investigated the inuence of time in two author's
writing style and found that they were able to distinguish between the authors'
new and old works (over a time span of more than 20 years) with high suc-
cess [5]. Klaussner and Vogel were able to estimate the year of publication of
documents for two authors, given a reference corpus with documents and their
year of publication [17]. To combat the eects of time-separation on writing
style, Azarbonyad et al. proposed a time-aware language model for authorship
attribution which outperformed their baseline time-unaware method [3].
In addition to the challenges imposed by varying topics and genres, and writing
style change with time, the author may perform an attack on the attribution
techniques  that is, the author makes a deliberate attempt at fooling the at-
tribution techniques into making the wrong choices. Brennan and Greenstadt
dierentiate between obfuscation attacks, in which an author deliberately at-
tempts to hide his writing style, and imitation attacks, where one author at-
tempts to imitate the writing style of another [4]. They found that both attacks
completely undermine the attribution techniques: Obfuscation attacks reduced
the attribution success to no more than random guesses, and imitation attacks
were very successful at fooling the attribution techniques into attributing the
document to the imitated author. Especially the latter type of attack is of con-
cern in the refuting case. However, Afroz, Brennan, and Greenstadt were able
to distinguish between regular documents and deceptive documents with high
accuracy [2].
Most authorship attribution studies are done with a small, closed set of candi-
date authors, often between two and a hundred. Luyckx and Daelemans argue
that many attribution methods are severely aected by increasing the set of
candidate authors [25, 26]. Nevertheless, studies have also been conducted on
problems with thousands of candidate authors, upwards of 100.000 candidates,
with some success [22, 21, 30]. In addition to small candidate sets, many meth-
ods assume that the text available for each author is more than ten thousand
words, and that the query document contains at least a thousand words [26, 8].
Koppel et al. has proposed a method for authorship verication which is able
to determine authorship with around 85% accuracy using only 500 words for
the author and the query document [24]. Methods have also been proposed for
==PAGE:27==
1.3 Related Work
15
handling candidate sets where the amount of text available for each author is
imbalanced [39], and for handling cases when authors only have short documents
available [31].
The eld of non-traditional authorship attribution has been much criticized for
the lack of scientic underpinnings. Despite some studies on the stylometrics
features, such as Kestemont's investigation of function words and character n-
grams [14], most features and approaches are used without an understanding of
why they are useful [34, 36, 7]. In addition, some studies have been shown to
be cherry-picking the data for the best results [35, 9]. In recent years, an inter-
national competition, called PAN3, has been held on many dierent authorship
analysis problems. One of the goals of this competition is to standardize the
evaluation of dierent features and attribution methods, as well as to foster
new approaches [44]. In the rst competitions, the submissions were tested on
texts with the same topic and genre, but in 2015 this assumption was removed,
and new submissions (as well as submissions from previous competitions) were
tested on a cross-topic and cross-genre corpus [43].
Most of the reviewed papers can be divided into those that are in favor of
computational authorship attribution, and those that are against. In general,
the positive papers use small sample sizes, often very few authors and query
documents, and have unrealistic assumptions about the documents, such as
all documents having the same topic. On the other hand, the negative papers
mostly use features that are generally considered unreliable indicators of writing
style, and only rarely uses state-of-the-art features which have been shown to
have much greater attribution success. This cherry-picking for the sake of one's
argument seems to be rather pervasive in the eld of computational authorship
analysis [35].
3http://pan.webis.de/
==PAGE:28==
16
Introduction
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 2
Authorship Analysis
Methods
In this section, we give a more detailed overview of the methods and techniques
used in authorship attribution. We will divide this section into a description of
the features that can be extracted from texts, and three sections on the methods
used for attribution, verication and refuting, respectively.
2.1
Feature Extraction
The rst thing we need in order to do authorship analysis is determining how
we want to represent the documents. As claimed in the stylometry hypothesis,
we can extract statistical information from the document, which represents the
author's writing style. We call these pieces of statistical information feature
types or just features. Strictly speaking, a feature type is a group of related
features, such as the feature type letter occurrences, which covers the features
number of occurrences of the letter a, number of occurrences of the letter b
and so on. We will use the name feature for both kinds, as it will usually be
apparent from the name of the feature if it is a feature type or a feature.
For a feature to be considered useful, it must be common and frequent. For
==PAGE:30==
18
Authorship Analysis Methods
hat
t␣h
Tha
at␣
␣ha
That␣hat
Figure 2.1: Character 3-grams. Note that the tri-gram hat appears twice.
example, the feature describing the number of occurrences of the word
Supercalifragilisticexpialidocious is not useful, the value would be zero for most
documents, and for those documents that do contain the word it is likely to be
occurring only once, making it dicult to attribute to writing style instead of
coincidence. Conversely, the feature describing the sentence length distribution
is more usable: Every document contains sentences, and a distribution skewed
towards longer sentences than average is more likely to be an indicator of writing
style, since the sentence length is consistently longer. For most of the following
features, we extract their relative frequencies (relative to each other or to the
text length) rather than absolute occurrences, since a longer document would
naturally have a higher number of occurrences of most of these features.
There are a lot of feature types that can be extracted, and for some feature
types there are millions of features. In the following we will discuss most of
the feature types used today.
We can divide these feature types according
to their linguistic abstraction level, and computational requirements, into the
following groups: Character, Lexical, Syntactic, Semantic, and Technical. We
will describe each group, and the feature types next.
2.1.1
Character Features
For the features in this group, the document is viewed as a string of characters,
without any semantics tied to them. This allows us to extract statistics on the
character frequencies.
These include letter-, upper case-, lower case-, digit-,
punctuation-, and white-space frequencies.
The most useful character feature type is character n-grams (CNG): A CNG of
a text is a substring of length n of the text. Usually all n-grams of a text are
extracted. This is done by moving a window of length n over the string. As an
example, gure 2.1 shows the character 3-grams that can be extracted from the
text That hat. Extracting CNGs from a text results in a very large number
of n-grams and a lot of dierent ones, making them very useful. Many studies
have been done using CNGs as features with great success, but exactly what
==PAGE:31==
2.1 Feature Extraction
19
it is that makes the CNG frequencies so useful for representing writing style is
not known. It is hypothesized that they just capture a little bit of everything,
from inections, to function words and punctuation [14]. In addition to plain
n-grams, there are other kinds of n-grams with various restrictions on them.
Examples include prex n-grams; only n-grams that start at the beginning of a
word, sux n-grams; only n-grams which occur at the end of words, mid-word n-
grams; n-grams that are neither prex or sux n-grams, punctuation n-grams;
only n-grams that contain a punctuation mark, and space-free n-grams, which
are n-grams of length 1 to n, which do not contain any whitespace. Some of these
n-gram types capture intra-word information, such as inections, while others
capture inter-word information, such as word pairs and sentence structure.
Another particular type of character feature is compression models [41]. The
value of these features is not frequencies, as it is for the other features, but
rather the compression model created by a compression algorithm. To compare
two documents using compression features, the two documents are compressed
using the compression model based on the other document. If the two docu-
ments are similar in writing style, the resulting compressed documents should
be relatively small, since the compression models are usually based on repetition
and frequencies of certain patterns.
Due to their low level of linguistic abstraction, character features are computa-
tionally very easy to extract from a document, but conversely may not be as
strong indicators of writing style, since writing style is often acting on a much
higher level of abstraction. Nevertheless, CNGs do carry a lot of information
about writing style, possibly due to the sheer number of them.
2.1.2
Lexical Features
Next up on the ladder of linguistic abstraction are the linguistic features. Here,
the document is viewed as a sequence of tokens, such as words, numbers, and
punctuation, while whitespace is usually ignored. In this group we can extract
features such as word-length frequencies, or frequency distributions, as well as
sentence length frequency distributions.
The most interesting feature in this group is function word frequencies. Function
words, also called stop words, are small, very frequent words, which do not carry
any meaning by themselves. Examples include the, a, for, and and. In
addition to being extremely common  according to Zipf's law, these words
make up 80% of the normal word usage [50]  they are also useful since they
are topic independent, as opposed to content-bearing words, such as Europe.
They are also useful, since they are unstable [18]: They can easily be replaced
==PAGE:32==
20
Authorship Analysis Methods
by a synonym, or by using a dierent wording in the sentence, and so using a
particular function word more often is considered a good indicator of a writing
style.
This group also contains vocabulary and readability measures. Many measures
have been dened in this area, including the type/token measure (the number
of unique tokens divided by the total number of tokens), Yule's K-measure [49],
Honore's R-measure [13], and Flesch-Kincaid's readability index [16], among
many others. Most of these measures are not considered reliable indicators of
writing style on their own [45], but like the character features, they may add
value when used in addition to other measures.
To extract the features in this group, we need a reliable tokenizer. The tokenizer
should be able to tokenize the document the same way a human would, by sepa-
rating words, including some contractions (which are very common in Danish),
and punctuation marks. This makes the feature extraction a more dicult and
a bit computationally expensive, but not overly so.
2.1.3
Syntactic Features
Here we come to the sentence-level of linguistic abstraction. At this point we
can start parsing the sentences. The features in this group are rather compu-
tationally expensive, and are usually extracted using machine learning, due to
the many ambiguities, both lexical and syntactic, that can occur when parsing
a sentence. There are many examples of ambiguous sentences, some of which
are also dicult to parse even for humans. Some of the more entertaining are:
• Time ies like an arrow; fruit ies like a banana
Here, the dual meaning of the word ies causes lexical ambiguity
• Police help dog bite victim
Here, the sentence structure induces syntactic ambiguity; did the
police help the dog or the victim?
• The old man the boats
Here, the reader is tricked into parsing the sentence one way, until
the last word which renders the previous parsing incorrect.
There are many features that can be extracted by parsing the sentences into
syntactic parse trees, most of which lies out of the scope of this project, as they
==PAGE:33==
2.1 Feature Extraction
21
require a much deeper understanding of linguistics. One feature type that we
will focus on, however, is the Part-of-Speech (POS) tags associated with each
word. From these POS tags we can create features such as POS tag frequencies
and POS n-grams, much like we did with characters, although now on a much
higher abstraction level. Two other types of features that are mostly lexical, but
requires a bit of syntactic parsing (due to ambiguities) are lemmatization (i.e.
removing the inection of a word, such as reducing examining to examine),
and verb tense detection.
2.1.4
Semantic Features
In this group the features we can extract are on the highest linguistic abstraction
level, the features are more on the meaning of the text and words. This is as
close to traditional (human-expert) authorship analysis as we get. Examples of
features in this group are word synonyms, and meanings of sentences, such as
conjunctions, explanations, and conclusions. The features in this group require
a great deal of computational power, and are not yet fully matured. We will
therefore not include features from this group in our studies.
2.1.5
Technical Features
This last group of features contains the everything else-features, such as the
lename of a digital document, the presence of headers, page numbers, the
visual layout, and other aspects of the document that are not really part of
the content of the document. Some of these meta-features are easy to extract
(such as lenames), while others (such as visual layout) are much more complex.
We will however, not be using these features in this project, due to practical
limitations4.
Some of the above described features are individually not very indicative of
writing style, but may add information when used together with other features.
Combining all of the above features however, may lower the accuracy of the
attribution, since some features do not add any information. To nd the optimal
combination of features, we can do feature selection, where we nd the features
that together give the highest accuracy. A simple method of features selection
for our purposes is selecting the most common features in a reference corpus
and only extracting these. In the next section, we will describe how to group
4Lectio automatically extracts the plaintext from the students' uploaded PDFs and
DOCXs. For our study, the plaintext version is the only available representation of the docu-
ments.
==PAGE:34==
22
Authorship Analysis Methods
these features into document- and author proles, and how to compare these
proles.
2.2
Authorship Attribution Methods
In general, we can group attribution methods into two: Prole-based methods,
which use distance measures to compare proles, and instance-based methods,
which use machine learning to determine authorship. Both methods extract
features from the query document to create its prole, but they vary in how they
create the author proles. In prole-based methods, all the author's documents
are viewed as a single document which represents the author's writing style,
whereas in instance-based methods, each of the author's documents are viewed
as individual examples of the author's writing style.
2.2.1
Prole-Based Attribution Methods
To create the author prole, the prole-based methods rst create a single doc-
ument for each author by concatenating all the documents the author is known
to have written. From this document, the features are then extracted to create
the author prole. This way we can directly compare the set of features from
the author prole with the set of features from the query document's prole.
One way of comparing the two sets of features is by using statistics: We can
calculate the probability of the feature values of the query document, given
the feature values of each of the author proles.
We then select the author
with the overall highest probability or no author if all authors' probabilities are
low (in the case of an open set of candidate authors). The statistical attribu-
tion methods that have acceptable accuracies require a great deal of statistical
background, and will thus not be discussed here, since other, simpler, methods
achieve comparable or even better results.
If we view the feature sets as vectors in a hyper-dimensional space, we can use
geometric distance measures, such as the Euclidian distance, or cosine similarity.
Of these two, the cosine similarity is often preferred, due to the deteriorating
eect of high dimensionality on the Euclidian distance measure.
Given two
feature vectors, X and y of length n, representing the author prole and the
query document prole, the cosine similarity is dened as follows:
==PAGE:35==
2.2 Authorship Attribution Methods
23
similarity(X, Y ) = cos θ =
X • Y
|X| · |Y | =
Pn
i=1 Xi · Yi
pPn
i=1 Xi2 ·
pPn
i=1 Yi2
Where θ is the angle between the two vectors.
Another similarity measure
is the min-max measure dened below, which seems to outperform the cosine
measure [24]:
similarity(X, Y ) =
Pn
i=1 min (Xi · Yi)
Pn
i=1 max (Xi · Yi)
In addition to these similarity measures, Stamatatos has also dened three dier-
ent formulae for calculating the distance between two feature vectors containing
character n-gram features [39]. Given the query document feature vector, X,
and the author prole feature vector Y Let fX(g) and fY (g) be the frequencies
of the feature g in the query document prole and author prole, respectively,
we then have the rst of Stamatatos's distances:
distance(X, Y ) = d0(X, Y ) =
X
g∈X∪Y
2 (fX(g) −fY (g))
fX(g) + fY (g)
2
The drawback of this is that the number of features in the author proles can
vary between authors, in part due to dierent amount of text available per
author. Since the distance depends on the features in the author prole, an
author prole with more features is more likely to have a higher distance, since
it is more likely to include features that are not in the query document prole.
Due to this limitation, Stamatatos redened the distance measure to depend on
the query document features only:
distance(X, Y ) = d1(X, Y ) =
X
g∈X
2 (fX(g) −fY (g))
fX(g) + fY (g)
2
The last of the distance measures Stamatatos has dened includes a corpus
norm, N, which is the feature vector containing the features extracted from the
concatenation of all documents in the test corpus.
distance(X, Y ) = d2(X, Y ) =
X
g∈X
2 (fX(g) −fY (g))
fX(g) + fY (g)
2
·
2 (fX(g) −fN(g))
fX(g) + fN(g)
2
==PAGE:36==
24
Authorship Analysis Methods
This extra term is used as a weight to give more importance to features from
the query document that dier from the average frequency found in the corpus
norm.
Common for all three of Stamtatos's distance measures is that they
don't include all character n-gram frequencies, but only the most frequent (on
an individual document basis).
The number of features to be included is a
parameter suggested to be between 1000 and 5000 [39].
2.2.2
Instance-Based Attribution Methods
For instance-based attribution methods to work, we need a number of examples
representing the writing style of each author. In contrast to the prole-based
methods, we therefore keep each document separate when extracting features.
In case we only have a single (long) document of known authorship, we need to
split the document into chunks to generate multiple shorter documents that can
be used as training examples for the author prole. We can then train a classier
- such as a support vector machine - on each author prole in order to classify
the query document, or use a lazy learner such as k-nearest neighbour.
As most document proles consist of thousands of features, many machine learn-
ing methods have diculties handling the proles. Support Vector Machines
(SVMs) however, are able to handle this case, and are the most commonly used
machine learning method for authorship attribution.
When doing attribution with thousands of candidate authors, distance mea-
sures often perform better [20]. In addition, when only short documents are
available representing the author's known work, prole-based methods are more
accurate [39]. As prole-based methods combine all of the author's documents
before extracting features, some of the author's natural variation in writing
style between documents may be lost. This variation loss might be benecial in
a cross-genre attribution, since combining all documents before generating the
prole will also smooth out the genre variations. For these reasons, we will stick
to prole-based attribution methods.
For the attribution problem with an open set of candidate authors, Koppel et
al. [23] has proposed a meta-learning method, in which they repeatedly select
a subset of all the available features, and nd the author prole that is most
similar to the query document prole using only this subset. The method then
sums up the number of times each author was scored as the most similar, and
selects the author that scored best the most times as the author. The rationale
is that for some of the features, any one author prole may be more similar to
the query document prole, but overall the actual author is expected to be the
most similar. This method is able to determine if the actual author is in the
==PAGE:37==
2.3 Authorship Verication Methods
25
set at all: If, in the nal overall score, no author has scored signicantly higher
than any of the others, it is likely that none of the candidates is the actual
author [23].
2.3
Authorship Verication Methods
To verify authorship, we can either base the verication solely on the query
document and documents of known authorship, or transform the verication
problem into an attribution with an open set of candidates. The rst method
is also known as intrinsic, since we only use information given in the problem
(query document and documents of known authorship). In the second method,
known as extrinsic, we can pull in information from outside the problem. Below
we discuss the two.
2.3.1
Intrinsic Methods
For intrinsic methods, we still allow ourselves to train classiers on data that is
not part of the input problem, as this training data can be seen as background
knowledge.
Koppel et al. has proposed a method for intrinsic authorship verication called
unmasking [19].
In this method, a machine learning algorithm is trained to
distinguish between the query document and each of the documents of known
authorship. At rst, the algorithm is trained on all of the available features,
and may be rather accurate in discriminating between the query document and
each of the author's documents. By iteratively removing the most discriminative
features and retraining the algorithm, it is expected that the classier's accuracy
drops rather quickly if the query document is actually written by the author,
compared to when the query document is not written by the author.
The
rationale behind this is that only a few features are distinctive between the query
document prole and the prole of the actual author, while a larger number of
features discriminate between the query document prole and the proles of
authors that did not write the document. Unmasking requires that we have a
large amount of text available for the query document and author. Luyckx and
Daelemans have studied the accuracy of the method with shorter texts, and
found that the accuracy decreases with decreasing text size [26].
==PAGE:38==
26
Authorship Analysis Methods
2.3.2
Extrinsic Methods
To reduce the dicult problem of authorship verication to the less dicult
authorship attribution problem, Koppel et al. [24] has proposed the impostors
method. Given an author and a query document, the method rst generates a
set of impostor authors. This set can be generated by either using a xed set
of authors, nding some authors that appear similar to the original author, or
in the case the author is from a set of known similar authors  such as in the
case of students in the same class  we can use this set. The method then
progresses as an authorship attribution method with an open set of authors.
While there are other, more exotic, methods for authorship verication, the un-
masking and impostors methods, and their variations, are the most popular and
successful methods [44]. In particular, the extrinsic approaches usually achieve
the best performance [43].
On a nal note, the accuracy of the verication
methods can usually be improved if we allow the methods to return a don't
know answer when they are not condent enough to return a concrete answer.
2.4
Authorship Refuting Methods
We have not found any studies explicitly focusing on refuting authorship, al-
though authorship verication studies implicitly also solve this problem. Here,
we propose variations on the attribution and verication methods discussed
above for applying them to authorship refuting problems. Since the most suc-
cessful verication methods rely on transforming the verication problem into
an attribution problem, we will base our refuting method on attribution meth-
ods as well. In particular, our method is similar to the impostors method for
authorship verication.
Given an author and claimed document, we construct a set of candidate au-
thors and refute the claim if the claimed author is not among the best scoring
candidates in the attribution. The set of candidate authors must be similar to
the claimed author, otherwise the claimed author might be scored at the top or
bottom, simply because of his uniqueness in writing style. In the context of our
problem  plagiarism detection  we have an apparent set of candidate authors,
namely the other students.
Note that we cannot aim to put a claimed author in the bottom n of the can-
didates if the claim is false. A consequence of the stylome hypothesis is that
if the claimed author did not write the query document, the claimed author's
==PAGE:39==
2.4 Authorship Refuting Methods
27
writing style is no more similar than any of the other candidates. The claimed
author's scoring will therefore be randomly distributed, and might even be the
top scoring simply by chance, assuming none of the other candidates wrote the
document. Alternatively, we can repeat the scoring, each time with a dierent
subset of the available features, and only accept the claim if the claimed author
overall scores signicantly better than the other candidates.
To score the candidates, we need an attribution method that outputs a real
value for each of them. We can use any of the prole-based methods described
in section 2.2.1. We could also use instance-based methods with the condence
output of the machine-learning classier as the author's score.
The number of candidate authors may have an inuence on the accuracy of the
attribution: In a small set of candidates, the candidate- and query document
proles might be so distant that the claimed author is placed among the top
scoring candidates, even if the claim is false, due to the sparsity of the candi-
dates. In a larger set of candidates, there is a higher probability that some of the
other candidates are more similar in writing style to the query document, and
thus it is less likely that the claimed author is among the top scoring candidates
simply by chance if the claim is false.
With the refuting method in hand, we next describe how we have tested its
performance.
==PAGE:40==
28
Authorship Analysis Methods
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 3
Test Setup
In this section, we describe the features we have chosen to for representing
writing style, and the refuting method we will investigate. We list the parameter
settings for the features and refuting methods, and discuss the dataset we use
for testing.
3.1
Features
We have chosen to focus our tests on the following four types of features: Char-
acter n-grams, space-free character n-grams, function words, and POS tag n-
grams. We have chosen these based on their success in the literature [20, 41,
44, 43]. Although these features are considered eective for representing writing
style, they are not all very intuitively understandable. We have, however, cho-
sen to focus more on the features' ability to represent writing style than their
clarity when presented to the end user.
For both character n-grams and space-free character n-grams we test values of
n (the length) ranging from 3 to 10. Other studies have found 3 and 4-grams
to perform best, but were mainly done on English texts [41, 23].
==PAGE:42==
30
Test Setup
Our choice of function words is based on the 1000 most common words found
in the KorpusDK 2010 corpus of Danish texts5. We tried extracting this infor-
mation from the set of student assignments, but got a lot of erroneous output.
Finally, we will use POS tag n-grams with n varying from 3 to 6. We use the
Stanford NLP POS tagger6 to tag the texts. To train the tagger, we again use
the KorpusDK 2010 text corpus, which is annotated with Danish POS tags.
The tag set we use contains 39 categories. The main POS categories, like verbs,
are divided into subcategories, like innitive- and nite verbs, and in addition
to the POS categories our tag set also include punctuation, to further represent
sentence structure. The complete list of POS tags we use is shown in Appendix
A.
We also test the performance when combining various feature types  like CNGs
and POS tag n-grams  into a single feature set.
In addition to using all the available features of each feature type, we also inves-
tigate the eect of feature selection. Namely we evaluate the accuracy of each
feature type when varying the number of features between 100 and the max-
imum number of available features. An important point to note is that prior
to extracting the features from the test set, we have dened a feature universe.
This feature universe denes, for each feature type, a subset of all the available
features that we will work with: If a feature exists in a document, but not in
the universe, it is not included. The universes are also based on the KorpusDK
corpus, and include the up to 100.000 most common features found in that cor-
pus for each feature type (for function words the universe is of course only the
1000 function words). We have done this partly for performance reasons, and
partly because the KorpusDK corpus has much less noise  in terms of exotic
characters like math characters  in comparison to the Lectio dataset. In ad-
dition, this universe also reduces the eect of international language, number
tables, index, and bibliography, since these often contain unique features that
are not actual indicators of the author's writing style. While this might throw
away some information that could be useful for representing writing style, we
believe that the noise it removes far outweighs the removed information. An-
other benet is that we can now represent the extracted features as a vector in
this feature universe.
To evaluate the performance of each feature type, we will run each conguration
of feature types, parameters and feature selection through the refuting process,
described next.
5http://korpus.dsl.dk/
6http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/tagger.shtml
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Refuting Method
31
3.2
Refuting Method
To refute claims we will use our proposed refuting method, which is based on
attribution with impostors. The attribution relies on a similarity function in
order to score the authors. We will evaluate the accuracies of the following four
similarity (or distance) measures:
• Euclidian distance
• Cosine similarity
• MinMax similarity
• Stamatatos' D0 distance
• Stamatatos' D1 distance
The cosine and minmax measures output the similarity of two vectors, while the
Euclidian and Stamatatos' measures output the distances. We can easily convert
between distance and similarity measures by inverting the sign of the output
value. We have chosen not to evaluate Stamatatos' D2 measure, as extracting
a corpus norm from the entire Lectio dataset would be too time consuming.
For our tests, we create the set of candidates for each claim by randomly se-
lecting students from the same school, in addition to the claimed author. The
candidates might not be from the same class, or even the same year. We evalu-
ate the accuracy of the method when doing refuting with between 20 and 3.500
candidates. In most of our tests we use 500 candidates, and assume that each
student has written their own SRP, which gives us 500 true claims. To create
the false claims, we take the students and SRPs and randomly pair them up,
such that no student has their own SRP. This way we also get 500 false claims.
We then test on the dataset consisting of 1000 claims, with a 50/50 distribution
between true and false claims.
To determine whether a claim is true, we can dene a threshold, above which the
claimed author must score for the claim to be considered true. This threshold
is relative to the other candidates, so an example threshold could be that the
claimed author must be in the top 10% of all candidates. We can then dene the
accuracy of the features and similarity measures used by varying the threshold
and checking how many claims the method correctly identies.
==PAGE:44==
32
Test Setup
3.3
Dataset
For testing, we use the Lectio data made available to us by MaCom, which
contains around 40.000 Danish high-school students' assignments and SRPs.
We only use a subset of up to 3.500 students and their SRPs for evaluating the
dierent parameters due to performance and time constraints. Alternatively,
we could use the PAN datasets7. However, they do not contain Danish texts,
and the texts are not representative of the evolution in writing style we expect
to see over the course of a student's high school education. We have not been
able to nd any Danish dataset for our studies, other than the Lectio dataset.
The Lectio dataset has some drawbacks: The most being that we cannot estab-
lish a ground truth: We assume that the dataset contains only positive cases,
that is, we assume that all students in the set have written their own SRP.
This is of course not true, but we are unable to determine exactly which of the
students have committed plagiarism. We cannot determine the percentage of
students who have committed plagiarism either, but an educated guess from the
people at MaCom puts the number between 1% and 5%.
In addition to the unknown number of plagiarists, we also have some errors
introduced during the creation of the Lectio dataset. In particular, for some
assignments, multiple students may have cooperated on the assignment, but
only one of them has turned the assignment in. This assignment then includes
the writing style of multiple students, but is treated as though the student
that turned in the assignment wrote it. Another more serious error source is
that for the SRPs, students can upload multiple les. Some students choose to
upload both PDF and DOCX versions of the same le, while others are required
to upload their appendix as a separate le, and some are required to upload a
receipt from an external plagiarism system (Urkund). We have put a lot of eort
into a heuristic to determine which of these les are the actual SRP document
containing the student's report, but can conclude that there are still cases where
we accidentally select the wrong le, and may end up with a document that is
not the students actual SRP.
As the Lectio dataset is a real-world dataset, we are getting some noise in
the proles we compare. Specically, the students may have committed copy-
paste plagiarism or cited other work in any of their assignments. The dierence
between citation and copy-paste plagiarism in this case is indistinguishable, as
both leads to the inclusion of other authors' writing style in the document.
Finally, the texts in the dataset are the outputs of a text extraction algorithm,
7http://pan.webis.de/data.html
==PAGE:45==
3.4 Preprocessing
33
which also introduces noise in the dataset. This is especially true for assignments
in classes like math and physics, where the documents often contain tables of
results and various math symbols.
This noise is combatted by ltering the
extracted features using the feature universe described earlier. There are also
cases where the text extraction process has failed, and the output plaintext
document is just gibberish. These cases are not handled by the feature universe
ltering, as the output of this ltering then just results in a zero-vector.
Plagiarized SRPs and incorrectly extracted les both result in cases where we
assume that the claim is true, but based on the compared documents it should
actually be considered false. Because of this, we expect that the number of false
rejections in our test results will be higher than they actually are.
We would have liked to evaluate the features' and methods resistance against
imitation and obfuscation attacks, but this requires a dataset in which we know
more about the individual cases.
3.4
Preprocessing
To increase the accuracy of our refuting methods, we have applied some pre-
processing. One of these preprocessing steps is the feature universe ltering
described earlier.
Before we do this, we rst run the input data through a
heuristic that removes non-Danish sentences, as we found that some of the as-
signments contain large amounts of English texts, often as appendices.
The
heuristic counts the number of Danish and English function words in each sen-
tence, and if the number of English function words exceeds the number of Danish
function words by some threshold, we discard the sentence as English. We have
not tried to detect and remove Danish citations, as we believe that they do not
skew the features extracted signicantly.
3.5
Error Sources
Here, we describe the error sources  in addition to the errors from the dataset
 that may aect the accuracy of the tested congurations.
The feature universe we restrict ourselves to is based on the KorpusDK corpus,
which is partly based on transcriptions from the Danish parliament. Because
of this, the feature universe might not be the best for representing the features
==PAGE:46==
34
Test Setup
extracted from the Lectio dataset. We have also tried basing the feature universe
on the Lectio dataset, but this resulted in a noisy feature universe, partly due
to math and physics assignments.
The tokenizer we use is also from the Stanford NLP suite of language-processing
tools8, and is more suited to tokenize English, rather than Danish text. We were
unable to nd any cases where the tokenizer as unable to correctly tokenize the
assignments, though (apart from contracted words).
For POS tagging, we have trained our tagger on the KorpusDK corpus, which
contains POS tagged words. The corpus itself was tagged using another POS
tagger, namely the ePOS tagger9. While the ePOS tagger has introduced some
noise in the training dataset for our tagger, we have been able to remove some
of the sentences where the ePOS tagger made errors. In particular, we have
removed all sentences from the KorpusDK dataset where the ePOS tagger has
tagged a word as unknown or foreign, or has out put a nonsensical tag.
Most of the students' assignments include information about the student, such
as the schools name, the year, the student's name and the student's class. This
information is not ltered out, and may thus aect the accuracy of the feature
types tested. For example, if the claimed author is the only one among the
candidates from a specic year, the mere presence of the year in his assignments
and SRP can increase the claimed author's score. The claimed author's name is
also only present in the SRP and the author's prole, but we believe that this
case is handled by our feature universe, which is mostly name-free.
The way we have generated the negative claims may also aect the accuracy of
the tests. Namely, since the real author of the SRP is also among the candidates,
he will most likely score higher than the claimed author. In addition to this, the
SRP still contains the personal information pertaining to the real author and
no personal information about the claimed author.
One aspect that we do not investigate is the performance of our method based
on the amount of data available per student.
In general, we focus only on
authorship refuting for SRPs, in which case, we have all the student's earlier
work, which gives us a lot of (small) texts. For some students, however, there
may not be that many assignments available, possibly due to them writing their
assignments by hand.
In these cases, we have very little data available for
creating the author prole, which often leads to a false rejection.
8http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/tokenizer.shtml
9http://korpus.dsl.dk/clarin/corpus-doc/pos-design.pdf
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 4
Results
In this section, we present our results from testing our refuting method on a
subset of the Lectio dataset. We rst look at the eects of tuning the parameters
of the feature types (such as the length of the n-grams), and then compare the
best of the dierent feature types. We then look at the eect of feature selection,
and the accuracy of combining the dierent features. We nish o by comparing
the performance of the dierent similarity measures, and an overall comparison
of all the parameters.
To evaluate the performances of each feature and similarity measure, we look
at the recall of the methods with respect to acceptance and rejections. That is,
we look at the ratio between true acceptances and the number of true claims
(positive recall) and the ratio of true rejections to false claims (negative recall)
in the test set. We could also show the positive and negative precision, but
precision depends on the ratio between true acceptances and true rejections
(see section 1.1.2). The ratio between true acceptances and rejections depends
both on the accuracy of the method, but also on the ratio between true and
false claims in the test set. The ratio between the true and false claims in our
test set (50/50), is not representative of the real world. As we do not know the
actual ratio (although MaCom's guess is that 5% of the claims are negative),
the precision graphs we could show would not give any insight into the actual
performance of the methods.
We show the negative recall as a function of
positive recall in our graphs.
==PAGE:48==
36
Results
To evaluate the performance of each conguration, we compute the area under
the curve (AUC) for both the positive and negative recall curves, and then
combine the two in a weighted sum, using the weights 0.8 for positive recall, and
0.2 for negative recall. This gives more weight to positive recall, in accordance
with the requirement that we should strive to minimize the number of false
accusations (the FRR), at the expense of the FAR.
4.1
Feature Type Parameter Comparisons
We start out looking at the individual features. First, we investigate how the
dierent parameter settings for CNGs, SFCNGs and POS tag n-grams aect
the accuracy. For each of these feature types, we test with 500 candidates, and
the MinMax similarity measure to compare writing styles.
In general, we start out with a threshold of 1, requiring that the claimed author
must be the top scoring candidate, which may sometimes not be the case purely
by chance. This leads us to a rather low positive recall, and a high negative
recall, since most claims are considered false. As we increase the threshold, we
end in the opposite end, where the claim is only considered false if the claimed
author is the lowest scoring candidate.
Figure 4.2 shows the positive and negative recall when using space-free character
n-grams (SFCNGs) with varying lengths. For SFCNGs we see the same trend
with regards to the length of the n-grams as for CNGs: Longer n-grams perform
better for positive recall, while shorter n-grams detect false claims a bit more
often. SFCNGs of length 6 achieve the best AUC score. SFCNGs and CNGs are
related, so it is not surprising to see that the performances of these two feature
types are similar. The high accuracies of both CNGs and SFCNGs ts well with
what other studies have found: Despite their simplicity, CNGs are very accurate
indicators for writing style, although we still do not know exactly why.
Figure 4.1, shows the positive and negative recall for our refuting method when
using CNG features of varying length. It is worth noting that even when re-
quiring the claimed author to be the top scoring author (i.e. a threshold of 1),
the positive recall is above 18% for all n-gram lengths, and as high as 40% for
CNGs of length 8. Overall, the n-grams of length 8 achieve the highest AUC
score.
The positive and negative recall when using POS tag n-grams is shown in gure
4.3. The shorter POS tag n-grams perform much better than the longer ones for
positive recall. The best AUC score is achieved by POS tag n-grams of length
==PAGE:49==
4.1 Feature Type Parameter Comparisons
37
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Positive Recall
Negative Recall
n = 3
n = 4
n = 5
n = 6
n = 7
n = 8
n = 9
Figure 4.1: Positive and negative recall for dierent lengths of CNGs.
==PAGE:50==
38
Results
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Positive Recall
Negative Recall
n = 3
n = 4
n = 5
n = 6
n = 7
n = 8
n = 9
Figure 4.2: Positive and negative recall for dierent lengths of SFCNGs.
==PAGE:51==
4.1 Feature Type Parameter Comparisons
39
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Positive Recall
Negative Recall
n = 3
n = 4
n = 5
n = 6
Figure 4.3: Positive and negative recall for dierent lengths of POS tag n-
grams.
==PAGE:52==
40
Results
3. The relatively poor performance might be caused by the specicity of the
POS tags.
4.2
Feature Selection
To increase the accuracy of the refuting, we can try lowering the number of
features included, in the hopes that we may lter out some features that do not
contribute any information about writing style. In gures 4.4 through 4.7 we
show the recall when varying the number of features included for each of the
best performing parameter settings for each feature type.
The best performing CNGs, SFCNGs use all features available, but the second
and third places only use 3-4000 of the available features.
For POS tag n-
grams the more features included, the better the accuracy. The best performing
FunctionWords only use 700 of the available features.
We believe the reason for why the CNGs perform good when using both all,
and a small set of the available features might be because the feature universe is
based on the KorpusDK corpus, and not the Lectio dataset: Some features that
are not as common in KorpusDK might be common in the Lectio dataset, and
vice-versa. The features that are more common in the Lectio dataset may carry
valuable information for distinguishing writing style. But including them also
includes some features which adds no information about writing style, but are
included because they are more common in the KorpusDK set. The information
gained when adding the extra features is then not as signicant as what may be
achievable.
4.3
Feature Type Comparison
Figure 4.8 compares the positive and negative recall of the best performing n-
gram lengths of each type, along with the function words. Again, we are using
all features available for each feature type.
The CNGs outperforms all other feature types. The POS tag n-grams overall
perform rather poorly.
Despite the relatively low number of features of the
function word feature type, they actually perform competitively. This indicates
that the use of function words is a very good indicator of writing style. Looking
into the CNGs, we see that they also contain a lot of function words. Comparing
==PAGE:53==
4.3 Feature Type Comparison
41
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Positive Recall
Negative Recall
200
300
500
1000
5000
10000
20000
All
Figure 4.4: Accuracy of the best performing CNGs when varying the number
of features included
==PAGE:54==
42
Results
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Positive Recall
Negative Recall
200
300
500
1000
5000
10000
20000
All
Figure 4.5: Accuracy of the best performing SFCNGs when varying the num-
ber of features included
==PAGE:55==
4.3 Feature Type Comparison
43
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Positive Recall
Negative Recall
200
300
500
1000
5000
10000
20000
All
Figure 4.6: Accuracy of the best performing POS tag n-grams when varying
the number of features included
==PAGE:56==
44
Results
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Positive Recall
Negative Recall
50
100
200
400
700
All
Figure 4.7: Accuracy of the function words when varying the number of fea-
tures included
==PAGE:57==
4.3 Feature Type Comparison
45
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Positive Recall
Negative Recall
CNGs (n = 8)
SFCNG (n = 6)
POS tag tri-grams
Function Words
Figure 4.8: Accuracy of the best performing features of each feature type
==PAGE:58==
46
Results
CNGs and SFCNGs we see that CNGs perform a bit better. One reason for this
might be that the relatively long CNGs are able to capture multiple function
words in a single n-gram, in addition to n-grams of longer words.
4.4
Feature Type Combination
We have also tested the eect of various feature combinations. Figure 4.9 shows
the accuracy when combining the best performing features of each feature type.
The combinations tend to be dominated by the best performing feature, but do
not add any accuracy. We suspect this is because these features give the largest
absolute dierences between writing styles, while the other feature types may
have just as large relative dierences between writing style, but with a smaller
absolute dierence.
4.5
Similarity Measure Comparison
Figure 4.10 shows compares the various measures when used in combination
with the best performing feature; CNGs of length 8 with all features included.
By far, the best measure is the MinMax measure. A possible explanation of
why this measure is so accurate is that it is less sensitive to large dierences
in individual features. Two documents by the same author often have mostly
the same feature values, except for a few features, which can have very dierent
values [19].
4.6
Number of Candidate Authors
In gure 4.11, we show the performance of our refuting method using CNGs
of length 8 and the MinMax measure on dierent candidate set sizes.
The
graphs for 20,50,100,250, and 500 candidates are based on 10 runs, while the
graphs for 1000 and 3500 are based only on a single run, due to data and time
constraints.
As can be seen from the graph, smaller candidate sets tend to
perform better. This is in line with what other studies have found [26]. We
suspect that this is because the vector space containing the writing style feature
vectors is more sparse with fewer candidates, which leads to a larger margin
for variation between the writing style of the claimed author and the claimed
document.
==PAGE:59==
4.6 Number of Candidate Authors
47
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Positive Recall
Negative Recall
CNG and FW
CNG and POS
CNG and SFCNG
POS and FW
All available
CNG
SFCNG
POS
FW
Figure 4.9: Accuracy of the various combinations of the best performing fea-
tures, compared with the individual features
==PAGE:60==
48
Results
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Positive Recall
Negative Recall
Euclidian
Cosine
MinMax
Stamatatos d0
Stamatatos d1
Figure 4.10: Accuracy of CNGs with length 8 when using the various similar-
ity measures.
==PAGE:61==
4.6 Number of Candidate Authors
49
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Positive Recall
Negative Recall
20
50
100
250
500
1000
3500
Figure 4.11: Accuracy of the refuting method when varying the number of
candidates
==PAGE:62==
50
Results
4.7
AUC Scores
In table 4.1 we show the top 30 performing congurations. CNGs are clearly the
best performing feature type, with longer n-grams performing better. We do
not see a trend in how many features to include, but as mentioned earlier, this
might be due to how we construct our feature universe. The MinMax similarity
measure is by far the most accurate similarity measure with regards to positive
recall, at the expense of negative recall. For our purposes, this is an acceptable
tradeo. The complete table of all AUC scores can be found in appendix B.
4.8
Discussion
Figure 4.12 shows the negative and positive recall of the best performing con-
guration  character n-grams of length 8 using all available features and the
MinMax measure as similarity measure with 20 candidate authors  as functions
of the threshold. While the positive recall is remarkably good, the method per-
forms approximately random when looking at negative recall. This is, however,
an expected result. When a claim is true, the student's writing style match the
writing style used in the SRP, and thus the claimed student scores much better
than the other candidates. When a claim is false, the writing style used in the
SRP is as dissimilar to the claimed author as it is to every other candidate, and
the claimed author's score is uniformly distributed across all candidates'. The
same pattern is present in all of our tests.
Looking at the best performing conguration, we can achieve a positive recall
of 95,0% with a negative recall of 71.9%. We achieve this accuracy at a scoring
threshold of 6. That is, by requiring the claimed author to be scoring in the
top 30% of all candidates, we can say with a 5% chance of making a false
accusation, whether the claim is true or false, and detect almost three fourths
of the plagiarized SRPs.
If we look into the false rejections, especially the last ones to become true
acceptances, we see that some of them are due to errors in the Lectio dataset.
Namely, the text extraction process has failed for the student's assignments
and the plaintext les contain only gibberish. In our tests, 4 out of 5 of the
worst scoring candidates were due to observable errors in the dataset. If we
assume that MaCom's guess that 5% of the SRPs are plagiarized is correct, the
algorithm does not make any false accusations, but this is only speculation.
The success of the CNG features matches the ndings of other studies. What
==PAGE:63==
4.8 Discussion
51
Feature
Candi-
dates
Features
Included
Similarity
Measure
Positive Recall
AUC Score
Negative Recall
AUC Score
Weighted
Score
CNG 8
20
All
MinMax
0.9575
0.535
0.873
CNG 8
100
All
MinMax
0.9623
0.5009
0.87002
CNG 8
50
All
MinMax
0.958
0.5152
0.86944
CNG 8
500
3000
MinMax
0.945520706
0.420227457
0.840462056
CNG 8
500
All
MinMax
0.948369867
0.4017714
0.839050174
CNG 8
500
2000
MinMax
0.943500897
0.420933795
0.838987476
CNG 7
500
4000
MinMax
0.944044539
0.41750131
0.838735893
CNG 8
500
4000
MinMax
0.944441358
0.415675942
0.838688275
CNG 8
500
6000
MinMax
0.944381835
0.413914065
0.838288281
CNG 8
500
5000
MinMax
0.943953271
0.415096586
0.838181934
CNG 9
500
7000
MinMax
0.94406438
0.413132331
0.83787797
CNG 8
500
10000
MinMax
0.944473104
0.410890303
0.837756544
CNG 7
500
5000
MinMax
0.942877891
0.417009254
0.837704163
CNG 8
500
9000
MinMax
0.944250885
0.41043793
0.837488294
CNG 9
500
6000
MinMax
0.943453279
0.413322804
0.837427184
CNG 8
500
7000
MinMax
0.943524706
0.412398216
0.837299408
CNG 8
500
8000
MinMax
0.943782638
0.410894272
0.837204965
CNG 7
500
3000
MinMax
0.941282678
0.419842542
0.836994651
CNG 7
500
All
MinMax
0.946223076
0.399362709
0.836851002
CNG 9
500
All
MinMax
0.944683418
0.405180077
0.836782749
CNG 9
500
5000
MinMax
0.941846161
0.414624371
0.836401803
CNG 9
500
3000
MinMax
0.940893795
0.417664005
0.836247837
CNG 9
500
4000
MinMax
0.940965223
0.416366407
0.83604546
CNG 7
500
2000
MinMax
0.938957318
0.423655974
0.835897049
CNG 7
500
6000
MinMax
0.94119141
0.414612466
0.835875621
CNG 7
500
7000
MinMax
0.941239028
0.413160109
0.835623244
CNG 9
500
2000
MinMax
0.939485088
0.418044952
0.83519706
CNG 7
500
8000
MinMax
0.940600149
0.412207743
0.834921668
CNG 7
500
10000
MinMax
0.940421581
0.410100633
0.834357391
Table 4.1: AUC scores for the best performing congurations.
==PAGE:64==
52
Results
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Threshold
Recall
Positive Recall
Negative Recall
Figure 4.12: Positive and negative recall curves for best performing cong-
uration (CNGs of length 8 with all available features and the
MinMax similarity measure comparing 20 candidate authors).
==PAGE:65==
4.8 Discussion
53
is surprising, however, is that the most successful CNG length is 8, whereas
in most studies the CNGs are usually of length 3 or 4. We suspect that this
increased length might be because we test on the Danish language.
The positive and negative recall are equal at 88%, which is a rather good result
in general. This high accuracy seems to support the stylome hypothesis. Even
over the span of a high school education, and across dierent topics and gen-
res, the student's writing style is consistent enough that we can determine the
authorship.
==PAGE:66==
54
Results
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 5
Conclusion
In this thesis we explored the possibilities for using computational authorship
analysis techniques for detecting outsource plagiarism in Danish high schools.
We investigated the performance of existing methods and features for authorship
attribution, and proposed a new method for authorship refuting based on an
existing authorship attribution method. We evaluated the performance of our
method on a real-world test set based on the Lectio dataset made available to
us by MaCom.
With our proposed method, and the features and similarity measure that re-
sulted in the highest accuracy  character n-grams of length 8 and the MinMax
measure  we were able to detect over two thirds of the cases where a student
had committed plagiarism, while only making wrong accusations of plagiarism
in a small fraction of the cases. This result seems to indicate that the student's
writing style is consistent through their education, and across the many topics
and genres, at least when we average the individual dierences between assign-
ments out by combining the assignments before extracting the writing style.
The method developed in this thesis is scheduled to be included in Lectio as
a tool for outsource plagiarism detection next year, when the next batch of
SRPs are to be turned in.
While we did manage to perform refuting with
high accuracy on the test data, we did not manage to do so while being able to
provide teachers with meaningful reasons for why we ag an SRP as plagiarized.
==PAGE:68==
56
Conclusion
As such, the teachers who choose to use this tool will have to believe the output
with only their own intuition and the tool's performance record as supporting
evidence. By doing this, the responsibility for rejecting a student's SRP is shifted
towards MaCom as the company promoting this tool, and me as the engineer
that developed it. This brings the question of whether it is justiable to refuse a
student his graduation, based on the outcome of a plagiarism detection method
that is developed based on an unproven hypothesis. MaCom is willing to take
the responsibility, as the tool gives them a competitive advantage, and argue
that the nal decision to convict a student for plagiarism is always up to the
teacher and the school's principal. On the other hand, you would not build a
bridge with a structure based on an unproven hypothesis. We tend to side with
MaCom on bringing this too to the teachers, with the reservation that teachers
should be thoroughly informed that the output of this tool is not to be blindly
followed.
5.1
Future Work
While we have tried various combinations of feature types, it could be interest-
ing to do a more thorough study of feature type combinations to improve the
representation of writing style. It may also be interesting to investigate if one
feature type dominates because it has large absolute dierences between writing
styles, or if it is because the feature type includes the same information as the
others.
Comparing the performance of our refuting based on attribution-method to a re-
futing method based on verication is also worth looking into. Using verication
might give better negative recall.
In this thesis we have compared a single SRP with a number of candidate au-
thors. It might be interesting to compare a single author to a number of can-
didate SRPs and only accept the claim as true, if both the claimed author is
the most probable author of the claimed SRP, and the claimed SRP is the most
probable SRP of the author.
Another interesting study would be to get a better estimate of how common
outsource plagiarism is. One way to do this is by supposing that a single author
has acted as a contractor in a number of plagiarism cases. Comparing SRPs not
only with their claimed author, but also with other SRPs might result in clusters
of SRPs that are more similar to each other than to their claimed authors.
A teacher using the method developed here may choose to not trust the out-
==PAGE:69==
5.1 Future Work
57
put due to the lack of convincing evidence. Looking more into what features
that may convince teachers to trust the output of the refuting could also be
interesting.
We have not investigated the robustness of our method to imitation and obfus-
cation attacks, mainly due to the lack of examples of these attacks. Studying
the eects of these attacks, as well as their practicality, for example, if a con-
tractor is capable of an imitation attack, would increase the usability of the tool
for Lectio.
Machine learning methods are often used for authorship attribution. Investi-
gating their usability for authorship refuting in a high-school setting is also an
interesting study.
Finally, proving the human stylome hypothesis would be a very benecial study,
not only as an expansion of this study, gut for the entire eld of computational
authorship analysis.
==PAGE:70==
58
Conclusion
==PAGE:71==
Appendix A
POS Tags
Here we list the POS tags used by our POS tagger. It is based on the tag set of
the ePOS tagger10 and combined with punctuation tags.
10http://korpus.dsl.dk/clarin/corpus-doc/pos-design.pdf
==PAGE:72==
60
POS Tags
Category
Subcategory
Tag
Verb
Innitive
VI
Finite
VF
Imperative
VM
Gerund
VG
Participle
VP
Past Participles
VT
Adverbial Participle
VD
Adjective
Common
AC
Adverbial
AD
Numeral
Cardinal
LC
Ordinal
LO
Noun
Common
NC
Proper
NP
Pronoun
Reciprocal
PC
Demonstrative
PM
Indenite
PI
Possessive
PO
Personal
PP
Relative
PR
Adverb
-
D-
Interjection
-
I-
Preposition
-
T-
Conjunction
Coordinating
CC
Subordinating
CS
Unique
Inectional Marker
UI
som/der
US
Lexical element
Word Formation
EW
Inectional Ending
Attatched to a Noun
MN
Attatched to a Verb
MV
Attatched to a Adjective
MA
Symbol
-
XS
Punctuation
Period
BP
Comma
BC
Colon
BO
Semicolon
BS
Dash
BD
Quote
BQ
Parenthesis
BT
==PAGE:73==
Appendix B
AUC Scores
The complete table of AUC scores calculated for all test congurations run, is
included in the external le Appendix.pdf.
==PAGE:74==
62
AUC Scores
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
[1] Ahmed Abbasi and Hsinchun Chen. Writeprints: A stylometric approach
to identity-level identication and similarity detection in cyberspace. ACM
Transactions on Information Systems, 26(2):7:17:29, 2008.
[2] Sadia Afroz, Michael Brennan, and Rachel Greenstadt. Detecting hoaxes,
frauds, and deception in writing style online. In Proceedings of the 33rd
conference in IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, pages 461475,
2012.
[3] Hosein Azarbonyad, Mostafa Dehghani, Maarten Marx, and Jaap Kamps.
Time-aware authorship attribution for short text streams. In Proceedings
of the 38th International Conference on Research and Development in In-
formation Retrieval, pages 727730, 2015.
[4] Michael Brennan and Rachel Greenstadt.
Practical attacks against au-
thorship recognition techniques. In Proceedings of the 21st Conference on
Innovative Applications of Articial Intelligence, 2009.
[5] Fazli Can and Jon M. Patton. Change of writing style with time. Computers
and the Humanities, 38(1):6182, 2004.
[6] Paul Clough.
Plagiarism in natural and programming languages:
An
overview of current tools and technologies. Research Memoranda CS-00-05,
Department of ComputerScience, University of Sheeld, 2000.
[7] Walter Daelemans. Explanation in computational stylometry. In Proceed-
ings of the 14th International Conference on Computational Linguistics and
Intelligent Text Processing, pages 451462, 2013.
==PAGE:76==
64
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[8] Maciej Eder. Does size matter? authorship attribution, small samples, big
problem. In Proceedings of Digital Humanities 2010, pages 132135, 2010.
[9] Maciej Eder and Jan Rybicki. Do birds of a feather really ock together,
or how to choose training samples for authorship attribution. Literary and
Linguistic Computing, pages 229236, 2012.
[10] Morten Frølich and Kristoer Hansen. Ecient plagiarism detection. Mas-
ter's thesis, Technical University of Denmark, 2010.
[11] David I. Holmes. Authorship attribution. Computers and the Humanities,
28(2):87106, 1994.
[12] David I. Holmes. The evolution of stylometry in humanities scholarship.
Literary and Linguistic Computing, 13(3):111117, 1998.
[13] Antony Honoré. Some simple measures of richness of vocabulary. Associa-
tion for literary and linguistic computing bulletin, 7(2):172177, 1979.
[14] Mike Kestemont.
Function words in authorship attribution from black
magic to theory?
In Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Computational
Linguistics for Literature, pages 5966, 2014.
[15] Mike Kestemont, Kim Luyckx, Walter Daelemans, and Thomas Crombez.
Cross-genre authorship verication using unmasking.
English Studies,
93(3):340356, 2012.
[16] J. Peter Kincaid, Robert P. Fishburne Jr, Richard L. Rogers, and Brad S.
Chissom. Derivation of new readability formulas (automated readability in-
dex, fog count and esch reading ease formula) for navy enlisted personnel.
Technical report, CNTECHTRA Research Branch Report 8-75, 1975.
[17] Carmen Klaussner and Carl Vogel. Stylochronometry: Timeline prediction
in stylometric analysis. In Research and Development in Intelligent Systems
XXXII, pages 91106. Springer, 2015.
[18] Moshe Koppel, Navot Akiva, and Ido Dagan. Feature instability as a crite-
rion for selecting potential style markers. Journal of the American Society
for Information Science and Technology, 57(11):15191525, 2006.
[19] Moshe Koppel and Jonathan Schler. Authorship verication as a one-class
classication problem. In Proceedings of the 21st international conference
on Machine learning, pages 6268. ACM Press, 2004.
[20] Moshe Koppel, Jonathan Schler, and Shlomo Argamon.
Computational
methods in authorship attribution. Journal of the American Society for
information Science and Technology, 60(1):926, 2009.
==PAGE:77==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
65
[21] Moshe Koppel, Jonathan Schler, and Shlomo Argamon. Authorship at-
tribution in the wild.
Language Resources and Evaluation, 45(1):8394,
2011.
[22] Moshe Koppel, Jonathan Schler, Shlomo Argamon, and Eran Messeri. Au-
thorship attribution with thousands of candidate authors. In Proceedings
of the 29th annual international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and
development in information retrieval, pages 659660, 2006.
[23] Moshe Koppel, Jonathan Schler, Shlomo Argamon, and Yaron Winter.
The fundamental problem of authorship attribution.
English Studies,
93(3):284291, 2012.
[24] Moshe Koppel and Yaron Winter. Determining if two documents are writ-
ten by the same author. Journal of the Association for Information Science
and Technology, 65(1):178187, 2014.
[25] Kim Luyckx and Walter Daelemans. Authorship attribution and verica-
tion with many authors and limited data. In Proceedings of the 22nd Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguistics, pages 513520, 2008.
[26] Kim Luyckx and Walter Daelemans. The eect of author set size and data
size in authorship attribution. Literary and linguistic Computing, 26(1):35
55, 2011.
[27] Rohith K. Menon and Yejin Choi. Domain independent authorship attri-
bution without domain adaptation. In Proceedings of Recent Advances in
Natural Language Processing, pages 309315, 2011.
[28] George K. Mikros and Eleni K. Argiri. Investigating topic inuence in au-
thorship attribution. In Proceedings of the International Worksop on Pla-
giarism Analysis, Authorship Identication and Near-Duplicate Detection,
pages 2935, 2007.
[29] Frederick Mosteller and David Wallace. Inference and disputed authorship:
The Federalist. Addison Wesley, 1964.
[30] Arvind Narayanan, Hristo Paskov, Neil Zhenqiang Gong, John Bethen-
court, Emil Stefanov, Eui Chul Richard Shin, and Dawn Song. On the
feasibility of internet-scale author identication. In Proceedings of the 33rd
conference in IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, pages 300314,
2012.
[31] Nektaria Potha and Efstathios Stamatatos.
A prole-based method for
authorship verication. In Articial Intelligence Methods and Applications,
pages 313326, 2014.
==PAGE:78==
66
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[32] Martin Potthast, Matthias Hagen, Anna Beyer, Matthias Busse, Martin
Tippmann, Paolo Rosso, and Benno Stein. Overview of the 6th Interna-
tional Competition on Plagiarism Detection. In Working Notes Papers of
the CLEF 2014 Evaluation Labs, 2014.
[33] Francisco Rangel, Fabio Celli, Paolo Rosso, Martin Potthast, Benno Stein,
and Walter Daelemans.
Overview of the 3rd Author Proling Task at
PAN 2015. In CLEF 2015 Evaluation Labs and Workshop  Working Notes
Papers, 2015.
[34] Joseph Rudman.
Non-traditional authorship attribution studies:
Ignis
fatuus or rosetta stone? Bulletin, 24(3):163176, 2000.
[35] Joseph Rudman. Cherry picking in nontraditional authorship attribution
studies. Chance, 16(2):2632, 2003.
[36] Joseph Rudman.
The state of non-traditional authorship attribution
studies2012: Some problems and solutions. English Studies, 93(3):259
274, 2012.
[37] Upendra
Sapkota,
Steven
Bethard,
Manuel
Montes-y
Gómez,
and
T Solorio. Not all character n-grams are created equal: A study in au-
thorship attribution. In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
93102, 2015.
[38] Upendra Sapkota, Thamar Solorio, Manuel Montes-y Gómez, Steven
Bethard, and Paolo Rosso. Cross-topic authorship attribution: Will out-
of-topic data help? In Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on
Computational Linguistics, pages 12281237, 2014.
[39] Efstathios Stamatatos. Author identication using imbalanced and limited
training texts. In 18th International Workshop on Database and Expert
Systems Applications, pages 237241, 2007.
[40] Efstathios Stamatatos. Intrinsic plagiarism detection using character n-
gram proles. In SEPLN 2009 Workshop on Uncovering Plagiarism, Au-
thorship, and Social Software Misuse, pages 3846, 2009.
[41] Efstathios Stamatatos. A survey of modern authorship attribution meth-
ods. Journal of the American Society for information Science and Tech-
nology, 60(3):538556, 2009.
[42] Efstathios Stamatatos. On the robustness of authorship attribution based
on character n-gram features. Journal of Law and Policy, 21:421439, 2013.
==PAGE:79==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
67
[43] Efstathios Stamatatos, Walter Daelemans amd Ben Verhoeven, Patrick
Juola, Aurelio López-López, Martin Potthast, and Benno Stein. Overview
of the Author Identication Task at PAN 2015. In CLEF 2015 Evaluation
Labs and Workshop  Working Notes Papers, 2015.
[44] Efstathios Stamatatos, Walter Daelemans, Ben Verhoeven, Martin Pot-
thast, Benno Stein, Patrick Juola, Miguel A. Sanchez-Perez, and Alberto
Barrón-Cedeño. Overview of the Author Identication Task at PAN 2014.
In CLEF 2014 Evaluation Labs and Workshop  Working Notes Papers,
2014.
[45] Fiona J Tweedie and R Harald Baayen. How variable may a constant be?
measures of lexical richness in perspective. Computers and the Humanities,
32(5):323352, 1998.
[46] Michiel van Dam and Claudia Hau. Large-scale author verication: Tem-
poral and topical inuences. In Proceedings of the 37th international con-
ference on Research and development in information retrieval, pages 1039
1042, 2014.
[47] Hans van Halteren. Linguistic proling for author recognition and veri-
cation. In Proceedings of the 42nd Annual Meeting on Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 199206. Association for Computational
Linguistics, 2004.
[48] Hans Van Halteren, R. Harald Baayen, Fiona Tweedie, Marco Haverkort,
and Anneke Neijt. New machine learning methods demonstrate the exis-
tence of a human stylome. Journal of Quantitative Linguistics, 12(1):6577,
2005.
[49] G. Udny Yule. The statistical study of vocabulary. Cambridge University
Press, 1944.
[50] George Kingsley Zipf. Selected studies of the principle of relative frequency
in language. Harvard University Press, 1932.
[51] Sven Meyer zu Eissen and Benno Stein. Intrinsic plagiarism detection. In
European Conference on Information Retrieval, pages 565569, 2006.
[52] Sven Meyer zu Eissen, Benno Stein, and Marion Kulig. Plagiarism detection
without reference collections. In Advances in data analysis, pages 359366.
Springer, 2007.
