==PAGE:1==
Analysis of ship responses by
means of wavelet transforms
Jorinna Gunkel
Kongens Lyngby 2016
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
Until today, the FFT is the unchallenged method to analyse ship response
measurements but wavelet transforms have been designed to deal with non-
stationary signals and provide a signal representation as a function of time and
frequency simulatenously. Therefore, they have the potential to improve vessel
response analysis by extracting new information and the objective of this thesis
is to assess the capability of wavelet transforms to improve the estimation of sea
states and future ship responses.
This thesis evaluates the potential of wavelet transforms in three steps. At rst,
the theoretical background and conceptual design of wavelet transforms are
studied compared to the conventional FFT. Afterwards, it is assessed whether
the three relevant methods and their output t to the expectations of ship
response analysis. The last study attempts to determine the potential of wavelet
transforms to provide simple estimates of the sea state or future ship responses
based on full-scale ship response measurments and corresponding wave radar
data.
The results demonstrate that the concept of wavelet transforms is useful because
the energy of response measurements can be represented in its temporal develop-
ment. Only one out of three transforms is, however, found to provide sucient
accuracy in this context. The last study implies that wavelet transforms are
not suitable to signicantly simplify response prediction or sea state estimation.
Nonetheless, it is recommended to conduct further studies on a more complex
level to obtain a better impression of the potential of wavelet transforms.
Keywords: ship responses, predictions, sea state estimation, wavelet transforms
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the Section of Fluid Mechanics, Coastal and Marine
Engineering, Department of Mechanical Engineering at DTU in Kgs. Lyngby,
Denmark, in fullment of the requirements for acquiring an M.Sc. in Maritime
Engineering within the Nordic Master program. The work load is equivalent to
30 points in the European Credit Transfer System (ECTS) and the project was
carried out between January and June 2016 under the supervision of Associate
Professor Ulrik Dam Nielsen.
The thesis introduces wavelet transforms to the eld of maritime engineering and
provides insight into the calculation method and its potential for the application
in ship response ananlysis. Starting without any previous knowledge about the
topic of wavelet transforms, the author aimed to provide an illustrative report
for other maritime engineers who would like to gain insight into this particular
technique.
The thesis consists of 6 chapters including the introduction and conclusions. The
work has mainly been conducted by the author though the MATLAB script for
avering WaMoS sea state estimates has been provided by Associate Professor
Ulrik Dam Nielsen. As this project is based on an intensive literature survey,
the results of research of others is integrated into the text and the author has
done her best to provide accurate references to these sources.
==PAGE:6==
iv
Lyngby, 25-June-2016
Jorinna Gunkel
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
At this point, the author would like to thank a number of people who have been
helpful and supportive in the working and writing process.
• First of all, I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisor Associate
Professor Ulrik Dam Nielsen for his continuous support, his willingness to
help whenever problems turned up and his valuable input given in our
weekly meeting. Furthermore, I would like to say thanks for the quick
replies to my emails when guidance was needed spontaneously.
• Secondly, I would like to thank Professor Sverre Steen from the Depart-
ment of Marine Technology at NTNU in Trondheim who followed the
progress of this thesis on behalf of NTNU and was willing to provide in-
put and help at all time.
• Special thanks goes to my brother, Philipp Gunkel, who spent his valu-
able time proofreading this report and give important input to ensure the
comprehensibility of the documentation.
• Besides my brother, I would like thank my good friend Maria Berndt who
had a critical eye on the layout and language of this document.
• At last, I am sincerely grateful for the encouragement and support pro-
vided by my parents and for the motivation inspired by Lea Beglerovic, a
fellow Nordic Master student.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Nomenclature
FFT
Fast Fourier transform
WT
Wavelet transform
CWT
Continuous wavelet transform
DWT
Discrete wavelet transform
DWPT
Discrete wavelet packet transform
STFT
Short time Fourier transform
DFT
Discrete Fourier transform
f, ω
Wave frequency
t
Time
n
Discretised time
N
Number of samples
k
Discretised frequency
Es
Signal energy
ψ0(t)
Mother wavelet
Ψ(ω)
Fourier transform of wavelet function
ψa,b(t)
Daughter wavelet
a
Wavelet scaling factor
b
Wavelet shifting factor
fc
Wavelet center frequency
fa
Pseudo frequency
==PAGE:10==
viii
W ψ
x (a, b)
Wavelet coecients per scale and shift
¯W 2(a)
Wavelet energy per scale
GWS
Global wavelet spectrum
j
Discrete wavelet transform scale parameter; also level of DWT
ψa,b(t)
Discretised daughter wavelet
Dj
Detail of discrete wavelet transform per level j
Aj
Approximation of discrete wavelet transform per level j
J
Maximum number of decomposition levels (DWT)
dj
Detail coecients of discrete wavelet transform per level
aj
Approximation coecients of discrete wavelet transform per level
φa,b(t)
Discretised scaling function
Vs
Ship speed
µs, µw, µr
Ship, wave and relative heading
Hs
Signicant wave height
Tz, Tp
Zero-crossing period, peak period
ζ
Wave amplitude
S(f, θ)
Directional wave energy spectrum
θ
Wave direction
S(f), S(ω)
1-D wave energy spectrum as function of f or ω
σ2
Variance
σ
Standard deviation
mn
Spectral moment of order n
WaMoS
Wave Monitoring System
D
Ship draught
DB
Daubechies wavelet
Sym
Symlet
SR(ω)
Response Spectrum
RAO, φR(ω)
Response Amplitude Operator
==PAGE:11==
ix
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
==PAGE:13==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Nomenclature
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Thesis Background and Problem Formulation . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Methodology and Report Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Literature Survey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Wavelet Transforms - Theoretical Considerations
7
2.1
The Potential of Wavelets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.1
Brief Review of the FFT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.2
Resolution Problems of Fourier Transforms
. . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Introduction to Wavelet Transforms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.1
What is a Wavelet? - The Concept of Scales
. . . . . . .
12
2.2.2
The Continuous Wavelet Transform
. . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2.3
The Discrete Wavelet Transform . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.2.4
The Discrete Wavelet Packet Transform . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.3
Discussion of Intermediate Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3
Full-Scale Measurements and Related Notation
31
3.1
Background of the Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.2
Ship Operational Conditions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.3
Full-Scale Ship Response Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.4
Sea State Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
==PAGE:14==
xii
CONTENTS
3.4.1
Wave Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.4.2
Onboard Installation of the WaMoS System
. . . . . . .
36
3.4.3
Stationary Time Periods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4
Determination of the most appropriate wavelet transform method 39
4.1
Approach of the study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.1.1
Input data and settings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.1.2
Assessment Criteria
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.2
Results of the CWT Test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.3
Results of the DWT Test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.4
Results of the DWPT Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.5
Comparison and selection of a Wavelet Transform . . . . . . . . .
50
5
The potential of the CWT for ship motion analysis
53
5.1
Procedures to analyse the relevance of the CWT for decision sup-
port models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.1.1
Objectives, approach and limitations . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.1.2
Input data and further assumptions
. . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.2
Evaluation of the CWT's relevance for decision support systems .
56
5.2.1
Evaluation related to simple response predictions . . . . .
57
5.2.2
Evaluation related to simple sea state estimates . . . . . .
60
5.2.3
Summary and discussion of the ndings . . . . . . . . . .
62
6
Conclusions
65
6.1
Findings and discussions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
6.2
Recommendations for further research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
A Appendix - Chapter 2
69
A.1 Center Frequency of the Morlet Wavelet . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
A.2 Schematic representation of th wavelet translation in the CWT .
70
A.3 Schematic representation of wavelet scaling in the CWT . . . . .
71
A.4 Schematic representation of wavelet scaling in the CWT . . . . .
72
B Appendix - Chapter 3
73
B.1
Main particulars of the CMA CGM Rigoletto . . . . . . . . . . .
74
B.2
Center Frequency of the Morlet Wavelet . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
B.3
Stationary sea state time periods in WaMoS data . . . . . . . . .
76
C Appendix Chapter 4
79
C.1 Wavelet and scaling function of the DB8 . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
C.2 Wavelet and scaling function of the DB12 . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
C.3 Wavelet and scaling function of the DB20 . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
C.4 Wavelet and scaling function of the Sym12 . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
C.5 Wavelet and scaling function of the Sym20 . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
C.6 Wavelet and scaling function of the Coif5
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
==PAGE:15==
CONTENTS
xiii
C.7 CWT assessment: 20.Aug, stationary, heave . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
C.8 CWT assessment: 20.Aug, not stationary, heave . . . . . . . . . .
84
C.9 CWT assessment: 02.Oct, stationary, heave . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
C.10 CWT assessment: 02.Oct, not stationary, heave . . . . . . . . . .
86
C.11 CWT assessment: 20.Aug, stationary, pitch . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
C.12 CWT assessment: 20.Aug, not stationary, pitch . . . . . . . . . .
88
C.13 CWT assessment: 02.Oct, stationary, pitch
. . . . . . . . . . . .
89
C.14 CWT assessment: 02.Oct, not stationary, pitch . . . . . . . . . .
90
C.15 Reconstructed heave sequence using the Morlet wavelet
. . . . .
91
C.16 Reconstructed pitch sequence using the Morlet wavelet . . . . . .
92
C.17 Reconstructed heave sequence using the Sym12 wavelet
. . . . .
93
C.18 Reconstructed pitch sequence using the Sym12 wavelet . . . . . .
94
C.19 Reconstructed heave sequence using the DB20 wavelet . . . . . .
95
C.20 Reconstructed pitch sequence using the DB20 wavelet
. . . . . .
96
C.21 DWT assessment: 02.Oct, not stationary, heave . . . . . . . . . .
97
D Appendix - Chapter 5
99
D.1 Data collection for response prediction; 20.August, heave . . . . . 100
D.2 Data collection for response prediction; 20.August pitch . . . . . 103
D.3 Data collection for response prediction; 20.August, roll . . . . . . 106
D.4 Data collection for response prediction; 02.October, heave . . . . 109
D.5 Data collection for response prediction; 02.October, pitch
. . . . 112
D.6 Data collection for response prediction; 02.October, roll
. . . . . 115
E Appendix MATLAB
119
E.1
Code to read and prepare the vessel response measurements . . . 120
Bibliography
141
==PAGE:16==
xiv
CONTENTS
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 1
Introduction
This thesis studies dierent wavelet transform methods as a complement or
alternative for the fast Fourier transform and explores their potential to improve
spectral analysis models in dierent elds of application in a marine context.
The background of this project, its main objectives and the thesis' methodology
including a brief literature survey are presented in the following.
1.1
Thesis Background and Problem Formulation
Operating a ship requires careful monitoring of the related costs while ensuring
a high level of safety. Shipboard decision support systems may enable the ship's
crew to reduce costs and minimise risks while sailing. Within this eld, it is
of particular importance to estimate the surrounding sea state and to predict
future responses of the ship in terms of motions. As decision support systems
formulate their guidance based on mathematical models and measured data,
it has to be ensured that the estimation methods and measurements are as
accurate as possible.
Many approaches for decision support systems use time domain ship response
measurements and apply the fast Fourier transform to convert the data to the
==PAGE:18==
2
Introduction
frequency domain. The frequency domain is convenient when it comes to ob-
taining statistical parameters based on which guidance is provided to the crew.
However, it is known that the fast Fourier transform does not handle non-
stationary data, such as ship motions in heavy seas, properly. Moreover, the
FFT is a very exact representation in the frequency domain but it is not able to
depict the temporal development of the measured quantity. In signal process-
ing, dierent forms of wavelet transforms serve as an alternative to conventional
Fourier transforms as they address some of the drawbacks of the fast Fourier
transform and are able to highlight the temporal development of dierent fre-
quency components by a joint time-frequency representation.
Recently, the two studies [Iseki, 2015] and [Xu und Iseki, 2015] have explored
the application of the discrete wavelet transform with respect to main engine
power uctuations and non-stationary ship response analysis. They hypothesise
that the discrete wavelet transform might reveal information in measured data
which has been hidden so far.
As [Iseki, 2015] and [Xu und Iseki, 2015] drew interest towards wavelet trans-
form methods as complements or alternatives to the fast Fourier transform, the
question quickly arises whether wavelet transform may be used to improve the
prediction of future responses or the estimation of sea states. Scanning basic
material about wavelets furthermore shows that there are, in fact, three rele-
vant methods: the continuous wavelet transform, the discrete wavelet transform
and the discrete wavelet package transform. Until now, wavelet transforms have
hardly ever been used in maritime engineering and knowledge about the dier-
ent wavelet transform methods and their capabilities is scarce. Thus, there is a
gap of knowledge and based on this chain of thoughts, the following two main
questions of this thesis are formulated:
• Are wavelet transform methods useful for ship response analysis from a
general point of view and which method is the most suitable one?
• How could wavelet transforms be used to improve the analysis of ship
response measurements with respect to spectral analysis?
The rst question refers to the conceptual design of wavelet transforms. Wavelet
transforms would have to provide new pieces of information presented in a useful
manner in order to be applicable to the eld of response analysis. Thus, answer-
ing question one ensures that these transforms are theoretically and practically
able to produce new input from response measurements. The second question
connects the general ndings about wavelet transforms to ship response analysis,
in particular to ship response prediction and sea state estimation.
==PAGE:19==
1.2 Methodology and Report Outline
3
If the above questions are answered, it is possible to give a detailed comment
on the potential of wavelet transforms in a decision support context and, if the
result is positive, a new technique for the analysis of ship responsible is made
available.
1.2
Methodology and Report Outline
The following section presents the scope, limitations and methodology of this
thesis and outlines the structure of this report.
The purpose of this study is to extend the current knowledge about wavelet
transforms to eventually comment on their potential for spectal and response
analysis in a decision support context. By using a thorough literature review
and small, specic examples, the answers to the main thesis questions are found
step by step. Due to a limited time frame, the thesis focuses on qualitative
statements and observations, as all applications of wavelet transforms can only
be conducted in small scale.
Due to the fact that wavelet transforms have hardly ever been applied in mar-
itime engineering, a thorough literature survey is the key to answering the rst
of the two questions. Understanding what wavelet transforms are, how they
function and how they dier from the common fast Fourier transform regarding
spectral analysis, is essential to ensure their correct and ecient application.
Afterwards, the application of wavelet transforms to relevant data is supposed
to tell which wavelet transform is most useful for this thesis. A second study
is then performed that actually uses the selected wavelet transform to analyse
ship response data, in this case, with respect to ship response prediction and
sea state estimation. These three steps are supposed to allow for a performance
rating of the wavelet transforms' potential within the given elds of application.
It can be seen that the thesis is formulated in a quite open manner. The outcome
of the individual steps is unknown in the beginning and not nding a positive
answer to any of the questions is always an option.
This thesis works with full-scale ship responses measurements, wave radar sea
state estimates and operational conditions that have been collected on a ship
for a dierent project. All computations are performed in MATLAB version 8.5
released in 2015 which includes a wavelet toolbox and related documentation.
The main MATLAB code divided in six subles is given in Appendix E.
Resulting from the above approach, the thesis is structured as described in the
==PAGE:20==
4
Introduction
following.
Chapter 2 provides a brief and basic theoretical background on the currently
used fast Fourier transform in contrast to the three wavelet transforms men-
tioned previously. The chapter focuses on aspects related to spectral analysis
and highlights the advantages, disadvantages and dierences of the dierent
methods to ensure they are all theoretically applicable to the analysis of ship
motions.
Chapter 3 introduces the full-scale measurements and related notations used
throughout this thesis.
Chapter 4 focuses on the practical application of the three wavelet transform
methods to identify which wavelet transform method is most suitable for fur-
ther analysis. The transforms are evaluated based on the usefulness of their
output regarding spectral analysis and an evaluation of their implementation in
MATLAB.
Chapter 5 presents the application of wavelet transformation to ship response
data with the aim to decide whether wavelet transforms have the potential to
improve simple sea state estimation or response prediction.
Chapter 6 summarises the ndings regarding the main question of this thesis
and indicates further possibilities for research.
1.3
Literature Survey
The literature survey constitutes an essential element of this project, as there
is no previous knowledge regarding wavelets to rely on. In the course of the
project, a large number of publications are consulted but only the most relevant
ones are mentioned in this chapter. The literature can further more be divided
in two categories: literature which is directly referenced in the main part of
this thesis and literature which signicantly inuenced the development of this
thesis.
The latter includes [Iseki, 2015] and [Xu und Iseki, 2015]. [Iseki, 2015] is a basic
study applying the discrete wavelet transform methods to ship response data
concluding that they are useful tools to analyse non-stationary data. The second
study applies the discrete wavelet transform to main engine power uctuations
and tries to estimate the fuel consumption without direct measurements. These
studies initiated this very thesis, because they gave rise to assumption that
==PAGE:21==
1.3 Literature Survey
5
wavelet transform may be an important technique to understand and integrate
in response analysis methods.
The studies [Nielsen u. a., 2013] and [Nielsen und Iseki, 2015] present current
work on the topics of sea states estimates and vessel response predictions and
thereby help to develop new ideas on how wavelets could be applied in these
elds. Moreover, both studies utilise the same measurements as this thesis and
help to understand and use the data appropriately.
The theoretical background on wavelet transforms in relation to Fourier trans-
forms is mainly based on the following publications.
The lecture notes [Nielsen, 2010] from the "Ship operations" course at DTU
elaborate on navigational guidance and decision support system including the
underlying models.
Thereby, this document provides the practical frame in
which this project is situated. In addition, it is the main source regarding the
fast Fourier transform, as it explains its main features by using the example of
ship response analysis.
The theoretical background of wavelet transforms is a well-studied eld though
most of publications follow a quite mathematical approach. [Mallat, 2009] is
probably one of the most comprehensive textbooks available which focuses on
multi-resolution analysis and the discrete wavelet transform methods. Though
highly mathematical, it provides useful information on the mathematic deni-
tions and advantages of the multi-resolution approach which is closely linked to
discrete wavelet transforms. [Bergh u. a., 1999] also mainly deals with the dis-
crete wavelet transform but attempts to explain the mathematical background
with slightly less detail to enable a larger eld of interested readers to un-
derstand wavelet theory. The textbook [Alessio, 2016], in contrast, covers all
relevant wavelet transforms including a comparison to Fourier transforms and
focuses specically on spectral analysis. It furthermore provides illustrative ex-
planations, useful for an engineer with a particular interest in the application
of wavelet transforms.
The handbook [Misiti u. a., 2009] explains basic theoretical aspects using a
graphic approach with little mathematical detail but a lot of practical infor-
mation on how to link the theory to the actual utilisation of the MATLAB
commands available in the wavelet toolbox.
==PAGE:22==
6
Introduction
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 2
Wavelet Transforms -
Theoretical Considerations
Navigational guidance is usually provided through statistical measures obtained
from measurements converted to the frequency domain. The common trans-
formation method, the fast Fourier transform (FFT) , struggles to extract all
relevant information from non-stationary data which is why wavelet transforms
are considered as a valuable complement or alternative.
The mathematical background of wavelet transforms(WT) is excessively dealt
with in literature but this thesis focuses on the application in an engineering
context. It is therefore necessary to limit the mathematical denitions and fo-
cus on the functionalities, advantages and disadvantages of the relevant wavelet
transforms, the continuous wavelet transform(CWT), the discrete wavelet trans-
form(DWT) and the discrete wavelet packet transform (DWPT).
This chapter rst summarises the FFT and its problems with respect to time
resolution before wavelets and wavelet transforms are introduced.
==PAGE:24==
8
Wavelet Transforms - Theoretical Considerations
2.1
The Potential of Wavelets
The FFT is the currently common method to convert ship response measure-
ments to the frequency domain. The FFT is not ideal when it comes to analysing
non-stationary data. This chapter briey summarises the functionality of the
FFT to derive the source and extent of this problem. The short-time Fourier
transform (STFT) will be mentioned as an attempt to solve the problem before
wavelets may enter the stage.
2.1.1
Brief Review of the FFT
The general idea of all Fourier transformation methods, continuous or discrete,
is to decompose a time domain function or signal x(t) into sinusoidal compo-
nents which are ordered by their frequencies. These Fourier transforms can be
used to obtain an energy spectrum in the frequency domain showing how much
a sine wave of a specic frequency contributes to the original signal. Conse-
quently, the time and the frequency domain are two dierent representations of
the same signal and converting the signal from one domain to the other may
reveal dierent information and characteristics of the underlying physical pro-
cesses[Wavelets]. The frequency domain has furthermore proven to be ecient
for statistical analysis of signals.
In real life, signals are not described by a continuous function but by discrete
measurements which have nite energy.
Mathematically, they are thus part
of the space L2 of square-integrable functions. The energy of the discrete sig-
nal x(n) containing N elements is dened below. The discretised time is now
denoted n.
Es = ⟨x(n), x(n)⟩=
∞
X
n=−∞
|x(n)|2 < ∞
(2.1.1.1)
Signals for which (2.1.1.1) is valid are called energy signals.
If such a data sequence is nite, periodic and the samples are equally-spaced,
the Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT) may be used to analyse the signal and
obtain a discrete, periodic spectrum in the frequency domain. Using the so-
called frequency synthesis, it is possible to retrieve the original time history from
the spectrum. The analysis of a discrete sequence uses complex exponentials
which leads to complex Fourier Transforms X(k) with k denoting the discretised
frequencies. For a discrete sequence, the synthesis and analysis are dened as
==PAGE:25==
2.1 The Potential of Wavelets
9
[Alessio, 2016].
x[n] = 1
N
N−1
X
k=0
X[k]ei 2πk
N n
(2.1.1.2)
X[k] =
N−1
X
n=0
x[n]e−i 2πn
N k
(2.1.1.3)
n = 0, 1, 2, ..., N −1
k = 0, 1, 2, ..., N −1
The above equations (2.1.1.2) and (2.1.1.3) show that calculating the DFT re-
quires O(N 2) arithmetic operations which is impractical for most applications.
Therefore, the fast Fourier transformation was established which provides ef-
cient algorithms for the calculation of the DFT by reducing the number of
operations to O(N log N) [Bingham, 2015]. Consequently, the FFT is not an
independet transform but an optimised version of the DFT and both expressions
are often used interchargeably.
The coecients X[k] and thus the importance of a specic sine wave component
are comprehensively illustrated in the energy density spectrum which uses the
relation between energy and amplitude and relates each frequency component
to a spectral ordinate according to (2.1.1.4) [Nielsen, 2010].
S[k] =
1
N 2 |X[k]|2
(2.1.1.4)
The spectrum is commonly visualised by plotting the spectral ordinates over the
frequencies. The total area underneath this spectrum is then proportional to
the total energy contained in the wave system. This relation resembles (2.1.1.1)
and it implies that the total energy of the system can either be calculated from
the sum of the squared time-domain coecients or from the sum of the squared
Fourier transforms.
N−1
X
n=0
|x[n]|2 = 1
N
N−1
X
k=0
|X[k]|2
(2.1.1.5)
Equation 2.1.1.5 is known as Parseval's theorem.
To illustrate the use of the FFT and the information it extracts from data, a
rather simple example of superimposed sine waves is presented in the following.
This example is going to be adopted during the presentation of the wavelet
transforms to visualise how they treat this simple set of data.
The focus is
specically on how the signal is represented in the frequency domain in terms
of a spectrum, though other outputs might be discussed, if necessary.
==PAGE:26==
10
Wavelet Transforms - Theoretical Considerations
Example - Superimposed sine waves analysed by the FFT:
A signal is constructed of two sine waves with f1 = 20Hz and f2 = 60Hz
according to (2.1.1.3).
x(t) = sin(2πf1t) + 2 · sin(2πf2t)
(2.1.1.6)
The considered period is 1.5s with a sampling time of 0.001s.
The FFT is
performed in MATLAB using in-built functions and appropriate scaling. The
scaling factor is dened as the number of positive frequencies times the sampling
frequency [Nielsen, 2010]. In fact, this example is rather simple but appropriate
to show the full power of the FFT. The signal is built up of sine waves i.e. there
is a perfect match between the signal's constituents and the FFT's analysing
functions. Figure 2.1 presents a 0.2s long extract of the time history and the
energy spectrum of the signal following eq.(2.1.3).
(a) Extract of the time history
(b) Energy density spectrum
Figure 2.1: Heave response measurements in common time and frequency do-
main representations
The FFT exactly identies the two frequencies f1 and f2 and the average signal
energy related to them. By ensuring proper scaling in MATLAB, the energy of
the signal and the FFT spectrum is identical which is why the above spectrum
is a trustworthy representation of the signal in the frequency domain.
In fact, Figure 2.1 illustrates the great strength of the FFT, namely the perfect
frequency resolution. As the FFT uses sinusoids which are all dened by single
frequencies, it is able to detect exactly these frequency components perfectly in
a signal. In consequence, the FFT averages signal power over time and provide
a spectral estimate per frequency.
==PAGE:27==
2.1 The Potential of Wavelets
11
2.1.2
Resolution Problems of Fourier Transforms
Especially with regards to non-stationary signals, the perfect frequency resolu-
tion of the FFT constitutes a major disadvantage. This issue is further discussed
in the following including a description of why the problem cannot be solved
within the range of Fourier transforms.
To understand the time and frequency resolution provided by a FFT, it is neces-
sary to look at the analysing functions. Sinusoids are innite and if a particular
sinusoid is found to be part of the signal, it is naturally assumed that the signal
is aected by this component at all points of time. It is therefore not necessary
to specify the time at which a particular wave is present in the signal. In mea-
sured data, however, transcient oscillations at varying amplitudes might occur
which contribute to the signal energy only in a very short interval. It is then
not accurate to approximate them by innite sinusoids. In the cases of non-
stationary data sequences, it is important to also locate the wave and its energy
in time, not only in the frequency domain. Yet, the FFT does not provide any
time resolution and thus wrongly assumes that even transcient waves are present
forever and may be represented by an average power.
The lack of a time resolution of the FFT is dicult to solve, as, in fact, it is
technically not possible to provide perfect frequency and perfect time resolution
at the same time. This phenomenon is referred to as Heisenberg's uncertainty
principle which is usually associated with quantum mechanics.
In terms of
signal processing, Heisenberg's uncertainty principle implies that it is impossible
to accurately determine the frequency and the point of time at which a wave
occurs[FriendlyGuide]. Therefore, perfect frequency resolution, as provided by
the FFT must always result in a complete lack of time resolution. Every attempt
to improve the time resolution will always lead to a certain loss in frequency
resolution.
Real signals or measurements are usually assumed to be quasi-stationary in or-
der to apply the FFT. The less accurate the assumption of quasi-stationarity
is, the more relevant it becomes to represent the constituents of the signal
in both domains to account for the instationarity. In order to overcome the
non-existence of time resolution in Fourier transforms, the so-called Short-Time
Fourier Transform (STFT) was invented. It uses a window function to split a
signal into smaller quasi-stationary segments and analyses the segments individ-
ually [Alessio, 2016] by a FFT. The discrete STFT is mathematically described
in (2.1.2.1) where m represents the shifting factor of the window.
X[k] =
N−1
X
n=0
x[n]w[n −m]e−j( 2πn
N )k
(2.1.2.1)
==PAGE:28==
12
Wavelet Transforms - Theoretical Considerations
The window function w[n] is non-zero in only a short interval which is called the
window width. By multiplying the original signal x[n] by the window function,
only the signal components inside the window are non-zero and Fourier trans-
formed, resulting in a regular FFT spectrum. Afterwards, the window is shifted
along the timeline in order to transform the next set of elements. Thus, the
original signal is subdivided in smaller intervals corresponding to the window
width and information about the temporal development of the signal's spectral
features is provided through separate spectra for each interval.
Nevertheless, the window function only improves the time resolution but does
not solve the problem for non-stationary signals. As the window width is con-
stant, it is still dicult to identify high and low frequency components of the
signal equally well. If a small window is selected, high frequency oscillations
are captured adequately but it is not possible to cover suciently many low fre-
quency oscillations to determine their frequency properly. The other way round,
large windows are benecial when low frequency components are to be identi-
ed but with regards to high frequency wave components, the same problems
as known from the FFT are faced.
This constant window width problem may be encountered by using an adjustable
"window" which is translated along the time line and tted to the wave com-
ponents at a each time segment. Wavelets are in fact "adjustable windows"
[Alessio, 2016].
2.2
Introduction to Wavelet Transforms
Wavelets are indeed functions that provide the desired adaptive type of time-
frequency representation of measured data. Therefore, wavelet functions are rst
introduced separately, before the actual wavelet transforms, the CWT, DWT
and DWPT, are introduced.
2.2.1
What is a Wavelet? - The Concept of Scales
This chapter introduces wavelets which are the analysing functions of all wavelet
transforms and thus represent the counterpart to sinusoids in the FFT.
The name wavelet can be translated to "little wave" which implies that the wave
is not innite but represents a short, transcient oscillation of nite energy, i.e.
wavelets belong to the space L2 mathematically. Unlike sinusoids, the wavelet is
==PAGE:29==
2.2 Introduction to Wavelet Transforms
13
concentrated in time and covers a certain frequency band [Alessio, 2016] instead
of representing one particular frequency. This is important to bear in mind for
the interpretation of wavelet transform results. Wavelets, usually denoted ψ(t),
have to full the zero-mean condition given in (2.2.1.1) in order to be called a
wavelet [FriendlyGuide].
Z ∞
−∞
ψ(t)dt = 0
(2.2.1.1)
Z ∞
−∞
|ψ(t)|2dt = 1
(2.2.1.2)
The zero mean value indicates that the function oscillates around the time axis
and thus may be called a wave. In fact, the zero mean also implies that the
wavelet's Fourier transform Ψ(ω) vanishes at Ψ(0) which indicates that wavelets
have a bandpass spectrum [Alessio, 2016]. This property will be taken up again
in Chapter 2.2.3. Moreover, normalising wavelets according to 2.2.1.2 ensures
that the wavelet transform is only aected by the amplitudes of the signal and
not weighted by the wavelet itself.
Knowing that wavelets are short and transcient instead of innitely long waves
does not yet explain how they provide an adjustable window to decompose a
signal. In the FFT, the analysing sinusoids change their frequency to reveal the
corresponding components in the signal. Wavelets cannot change their frequency
in the same manner but they can be scaled i.e. stretched or compressed. Figure
2.2 sketches the eect by means of the popular Morlet wavelet. Compressing
the wavelet as shown in the top left plot means reducing its extent in time and
thus improving its time resolution. At the same time, the corresponding spec-
trum in the frequency domain covers slightly higher frequencies and increases in
bandwith compared to the unscaled wavelet. The latter statement indicates a
decrease in frequency resolution. Again, Heisenberg's uncertainty principle re-
veals itself and it should be noted that scale and frequency are in fact inversely
related. Thus, stretching the wavelet as shown in the lowest plot has exactly the
opposite eect on the wavelet than compression. The adjustable window is an
inherent property of the wavelets and is also called the multiresolution property.
To analyse a complete signal, the wavelet is shifted along the time domain just
like the window in the STFT. The unscaled wavelet is usually called mother
wavelet ψ0(t), while the scaled and shifted versions of it each represent a new
daughter wavelet ψa,b(t). In Figure 2.2 , the top and the bottom wavelet are
thus the daughters of the wavelet in the middle. The parameter a represents
the scale factor and b the translation factor. Thus, b denes at which position
on the time line the signal is analysed. In conclusion, a wavelet is rst scaled
by a and afterwards translated along the signal by b. To change the frequency
band that the wavelet analyses, it is scaled and shifted again. This procedure
==PAGE:30==
14
Wavelet Transforms - Theoretical Considerations
(a) The Morlet wavelet in the time domain
(b) Calculated Pressure due to Thickness
Figure 2.2: The corresponding representations of the Morlet wavelet in the
frequency domain
is visualised in 2.3.
The basic idea of wavelet transform thus is a comparison between the original
signal and the daughter wavelets. Mathematically, this process is described in
(2.2.1.3).
ψa,b(t) =
1
√aψ0
t −b
a

(2.2.1.3)
The factor
1
√a ensures that the normalisation given in 2.2.1.2 is fullled.
From the above, it can be seen that wavelets analyse a signal by changing
their scale. Consequently, wavelet transforms convert a signal from the time
to the scale domain rather than the frequency domain. However, representing
a signal as a function of frequency is more intuitive.
Even though it is not
possible to associate the wavelet with a particular frequency, it is often feasible
to determine a center frequency fc of the mother wavelet which captures the
dominant oscillation of ψ0(t). Figure A.1 in appendix A illustrates the centre
==PAGE:31==
2.2 Introduction to Wavelet Transforms
15
Figure 2.3: Comparison of a signal to a shifted and scaled wavelet [Alessio,
2016]
frequency of the Morlet wavelet by comparison to the sinusoid that ts best to
its major oscillation. For the daughter wavelets, the centre frequency is scaled
to fa, usally called pseudo-frequency, according to 2.2.1.4.
fa = fc
adt
(2.2.1.4)
It is thus possible to represent wavelets and the results of wavelet transforms in
terms of frequency instead of scale.
Wavelets thus dier considerably from sinusoids, especially due to the represen-
tation of a signal in the scale instead of the frequency domain. The following
chapters explain how wavelets are used in practise.
2.2.2
The Continuous Wavelet Transform
In the following, the functionality of the continuous wavelet transform is pre-
sented with a particular focus on its use in spectral analysis.
The generic CWT is dened for a continuous signal x(t) which is multiplied by
shifted and dilated complex conjugates of the mother wavelet ψ(t).
W ψ
x (a, b) =
Z ∞
−∞
x(t) 1
√aψ∗
0
t −b
a

dt
(2.2.2.1)
==PAGE:32==
16
Wavelet Transforms - Theoretical Considerations
However, real life signals x[n] are of nite length and are sampled at discrete
points of time n′ = [0, N −1]. It follows that b and a must be discretised in
order to enable numerical calculation [Alessio, 2016]. This is reected in 2.2.2.2:
W ψ
x (a, b) =
1
√a
N−1
X
n′=0
x[n′]ψ∗
0
n −n′
a

(2.2.2.2)
Now, n denotes the discretised translation factor and states at which temporal
positions the signal is analysed by the wavelet. Usually, a dense scheme is as-
sumed for the shifts implying that the signal is analysed at all points in n′. This
scheme causes a signicant amount of redundancy in the wavelet coecients.
Figure A.2 in appendix A shows that translating the wavelet in small steps
changes the analysed signal sequence only slightly for two subsequent wavelets.
The values of the scaling factor a may, in general, be discretised arbitrarily
but again a dense scheme is preferred. Consequently, the wavelet is stretched
and compressed in small steps as shown in A.3 in appendix A. The frequency
bands have similar bandwidths and cover similar intervals in the frequency do-
main.
Thus, the individual wavelets in A.2 reveal only little new frequency
information, as their frequencies bands overlap signicantly. The high degree of
redundancy caused by dense scaling and dense shifting makes the CWT a very
time-consuming business.
However, the dense discretisation schemes are required for the inverse CWT.
The theoretical, non-discreticed inverse CWT indeed allows for the perfect re-
construction of the original signal by using special analytic wavelets. But as
soon as scales and translations are discretised, information of the signal gets
lost and the reconstruction is no longer perfect implying that energy is lost at
the same time. Consequently, the inverse discretised CWT only approximates
the signal and requires as many coecients as possible to achieve acceptable ac-
curacy. Usually, the the loss of information is small but computing the inverse
CWT and comparing it to the original data set is a good way of checking the
quality of the selected translation and scale values.
At this stage, it seems odd to still label the CWT "continuous" because it
operates on a discrete signal using discrete sets of scale and translation fac-
tors. However, the possibility to arbitrarily select the number of translation
and especically scale values distinguishes the CWT from the discrete wavelet
transforms. This is going to be addressed in further detail in Chapter 2.2.3.
Until now, all plots used the Morlet wavelet as stated in Chapter 2.2.1. The
Morlet wavelet is by far the most common choice in the CWT, as it is analyti-
cally described and basically is a product of a Gaussian window and a complex
==PAGE:33==
2.2 Introduction to Wavelet Transforms
17
exponential, as shown in (2.2.2.3). It is therefore linked to Fourier transforms.
ψ(t) = eiωte
−t2
2
(2.2.2.3)
However, a strength of wavelet transforms in general is the possibility to select
a wavelet out of a large variety of functions and it is even possible to select
dierent wavelets for the decomposition and reconstruction of a signal due to
the large degree of redundancy in a CWT.
For this project, the most important feature of wavelet transforms is the ability
to provide a frequency-based representation of the signal energy. [Alessio, 2016]
provides a detailed description of how spectral analysis is conducted by means
of the CWT. By squaring the coecients W ψ
x (a, n) a wavelet energy spectrum
is obtained.
Eω(a, n) = |W ψ
x (a, n)|2
(2.2.2.4)
This spectrum species signal's energy content at a particular scale and position
in time. The most common method to visualise the wavelet energy spectrum is
the scalogram which represents the temporal development of the signal energy
per scale.
The scalogram is easy to interpret but not the most useful plot
to be used in this project. For comparison to FFT results, a global wavelet
spectrum(GWS) is more suitable.
Both the scalogram as well as the GWS
are described in further detail at the of this chapter by means of an example.
However, to create a GWS, the instantaneous wavelet energy spectrum values
are summed up for each scale and doing this for all scales leads to a spectrum
comparable to the FFT' frequency spectrum. The GWS for a discretised CWT
is calculated according to 2.2.2.5
¯W 2(a) = 1
N
N−1
X
n=0
X(k)|W ψ
x (a, n)|2
(2.2.2.5)
As scales are inversely related to (pseudo-)frequency, it is then possible to obtain
a spectrum in the frequency domain.
Example - Superimposed sine waves analysed by the CWT:
The CWT is performed on the same signal introduced in Chapter 2.1.1.
It
should be noted beforehand that wavelet transforms are not able to analyse
periodic signals perfectly, just as the sinusoids in the FFT struggle to represent
a short transcient oscillation. The example is supposed to illustrate this and
show how the CWT output is usually visualised.
This CWT uses the Morlet wavelet for decomposition and reconstruction and
the scales range from 0.002 to 100 with an interval of 0.004 between the scale
==PAGE:34==
18
Wavelet Transforms - Theoretical Considerations
values. The signal is analysed at all points of time in the signal vector, thus the
translation scheme is maximally dense.
First of all, the inverse CWT, as an idicator of the transform quality, shows
that the accuracy of the computation is promising. The reconstructed signal,
shown in red, in Figure 2.4 (a) varies so little from the original signal, given in
blue, that the deviation is only visible in a zoomed plot 2.4 (b). The average
dierence between the signal and its CWT reconstruction is 0.375% for this
simple example. In consequence, the selected scaling scheme is acceptable.
(a) Reconstructed singal
(b) Close-up of the amplitude peaks show-
ing the degree of deviation
Figure 2.4: Quality check of the of CWT using the reconstructed signal
As stated previously, the scalogram is the most common CWT plot but the GWS
is expected to be more useful in this project. The following results explain this
assumption.
Figure 2.5 shows the scalogram, which is automatically produced by MATLAB.
The scalogram is a plot in the scale-shift plane which indicates the importance
of each |W ψ
x (a, n)| by colours. If the plot is dark, the coecient is close to zero.
The lighter the plot is at a particular combination of scale and position, the
larger the value of |W ψ
x (a, n)|. The scalogram does not show the signal energy
but how active the component of a particular scale or frequency is [Alessio,
2016]. In this case, two bands of scales are active over the whole time period.
The CWT thus detects the two sine waves but it does not associate them with
specic frequencies but with bands. The scalogram also shows the periodicity
of the signal, as the active bands are regularly interrupted by darf "stripes".
To get information about the average energy in the signal, the GWS is certainly
more useful. The GWS in Figure 2.6 is clearly similar to Figure 2.1 (b), even
though it is signicantly smoother. The energy concentrates in two frequency
==PAGE:35==
2.2 Introduction to Wavelet Transforms
19
Figure 2.5: Scalogram of the analysed superimposed sine waves signal
Figure 2.6: GWS of the superimposed sine waves signal
bands which is in line with the scalogram. It is evident that the peak at ap-
prox. 60Hz is lower than it is expected from the FFT spectrum. As compressed
wavelets are linked to bad frequency resolution they tend to spread the infor-
mation over larger frequency bands which results in a greater smoothing in the
corresponding part of the spectrum. The CWT is thus not recommended when
energy peaks have to be identied [Alessio, 2016].
The main advantages and disadvantages of the CWT are summarised in Table
2.1. In general, the CWT provides all required functionalities for the analysis
of ship response data. However, the loss of energy and the computation time
need to be analysed in order to decide whether the CWT is of practical use.
==PAGE:36==
20
Wavelet Transforms - Theoretical Considerations
Table 2.1: Summary of the CWT's major advantages and disadvantages
CWT
Advantages
CWT
Disadvantages
- results are intuitive and
easy to interpret
- high computation time
- suitable for spectral analysis
(GWS)
- energy not completely preserved
- provides a smooth
time-frequency
representation of the signal
- energy of high frequency
components not recognised
properly
2.2.3
The Discrete Wavelet Transform
The considerable amount of redundant information in CWT coecients eventu-
ally led to the development of the DWT which is computationally signicantly
more ecient. As the DWT is a complex mathematical topic which further-
more makes use of dierent signal processing concepts, this chapter can only
give a brief overview. The focus therefore is on highlighting the computational
and conceptual dierences between the DWT and CWT to enable the reader to
understand the advantages and disadvantages of the method.
The DWT uses a signicantly dierent approach towards signal decomposition
than the CWT. The mathematician Stéphane Mallat recognised the bandpass
character of wavelets and combined it with common signal processing techniques
to eliminate the redundancy from the wavelet transform. His idea was to con-
sider the scaled wavelets as bandpass lters. By scaling wavelets so that their
frequency bands only overlap minimally, it is possible to extract all required in-
formation with the smallest possible eort. Figure A.4 visualises how wavelets
following this scheme separate the signal into frequency bands. By this, the
number of computations and wavelet coecients is signicantly reduced. To
obtain minimally overlapping frequency bands, the scale factor should be a
power of two, so a = 2j with scale parameter j ∈Z. Equation (2.2.3.1) reects
this adjustment.
ψj,k(t) =
1
√
2j ψ
t −k2j
2j

(2.2.3.1)
It is seen that the translation factor is now depending on the scales as well,
==PAGE:37==
2.2 Introduction to Wavelet Transforms
21
so b = k2j with k representing the integer shift parameter. Now, the scale and
translation parameters assume discrete values which is why this method is called
"discrete" [FriendlyGuide], even though the CWT also works with discretised
factors.
Stretching a wavelet by a factor of two means the corresponding frequency band
is halved and shifted down to lower frequencies by the same factor as sketched in
A.4. It should be noticed that fn denotes the Nyquist frequency. Thus, in order
to split the signal into frequency bands all the way down to zero, an innite
number of wavelets would be required. By introducing a scaling function which
acts like a low pass lter, this problem is solved. The wavelets decompose the
signal until suciently low freuquency bands have been produced. The scaling
function then captures the remaining information in the low frequency range
[FriendlyGuide]. The red box in A.4 indicates how the scaling function covers
the frequency band that is not reached by the wavelets.
The wavelet and scaling functions thus form a lter bank i.e. a set of lters
that breaks up the signal into dierent, disjoint frequency bands. The iterative
process of splitting up the signal using lter banks is called subband coding
[FriendlyGuide].
In consequence, the nature of the DWT wavelets must be
completely dierent from CWT wavlets.
The wavelet and scaling functions
have to represent lters that are able to extract all information relevant for
subsequent reconstruction which also means that the signal energy is preserved
in the process.
Usually, the wavelet functions are designed to be high pass
lter, as this simplies the process. Figure 2.7 demonstrates the actual DWT
ltering process with h[n] and g[n] representing the low and the high pass lter.
The signal of length N is at rst passed through both lters. The coecients
obtained from the high pass lter are saved as details D1 while the output
from the low pass lter is ltered again. Thus, a DWT decomposition is an
iterative process because ltering the signal only once would result in a too
coarse representation.
Figure 2.7 shows three lter iterations implying that
this DWT has three levels. At level three, the wavelet coecients are stored
as D3 while the remaining low frequency components of the signal are saved
as approximation coecients A3. Thus, no information is lost and the signal
contents is broken up in four frequency bands. Furthermore, the DWT makes
use of downsampling. If a signal of length N is just passed through two lters,
both outputs would be of length N again. The number of wavelet and scaling
coecients would then double with every iteration. Downsampling by two, i.e.
storing only every second coecient after ltering, ensures a minimum number of
coecients without loss of information required for a subsequent reconstruction
of the signal.
The mathematical description of the inverse DWT is shown in 2.2.3.3.
The
maximum number of level J denes how many scales are used, as j must increase
==PAGE:38==
22
Wavelet Transforms - Theoretical Considerations
Figure 2.7: Block diagram showing the generic DWT ltering process
from 1 to J. Consequently, aJ represents the coecients at the nal level of
decomposition, while dj stands for the details at each level. The original signal
is thus reconstructed by using the relationship between the approximations and
the scale function φJk(t) and the detail coecients and the wavelet function
ψjk(t). The details and the approximation are often summarised as the vectors
==PAGE:39==
2.2 Introduction to Wavelet Transforms
23
Dj and AJ.
x(t) =
X
k
aJ[k]φJk(t) +
J
X
j=1
dj[k]ψjk(t)
(2.2.3.2)
Dj =
J
X
j=1
dj[k]ψjk(t)
(2.2.3.3)
AJ =
X
k
aJ[k]φJk(t)
(2.2.3.4)
The scaling and wavelets functions are not dened explixitely and there are
numerous restrictions which ensure that they reconstruct the signal perfectly
while ensuring a critical sampling scheme.
At this point, the most important pieces of information on the DWT are known.
The DWT is quick because it selects wavelets in such a way that there is prac-
tically no overlap in the frequency information they take out of the signal. This
and the applied downsampling reduces the number of coecients used and in-
creases the eciency of the method. However, this eciency is linked to splitting
the frequency spectrum into bands with xed bandwidth because the bandwidth
of the spectrum at level j is always half the bandwidth of level j −1. It should
be checked whether this scheme is sucient for a project that requires a certain
accuracy in the frequency domain. Furthermore, DWT is hardly ever linked to
spectral analysis in literature and seems to be most relevant for signal de-noising
and compression.
Again, the example presented in Chapter 2.1.1 is used to illustrate the output
of a DWT decompostion i.e. the details which are the main result. It will then
be seen that the computation method of the DWT trades o a lot of frequency
resolution for computational eciency.
Example - Superimposed sine waves analysed by the DWT:
MATLAB provides good tools to conduct a DWT including a large number of
wavelets that could be used to analyse the signal, from which one may select
freely. In this case the symlet "Sym8" is selected. More information about this
and other wavelets is given in Chapter 4. For now, it is enough to know that
this wavelet is symmetric,comparatively regular in shape and in general, it is a
valid selection for this sort of investigation. Knowing the wavelet and the length
of the signal, MATLAB is able to determine the maximum number of levels up
to which the wavelet is able to extract interpretable information. In the given
case, this is six.
The major output from a DWT is not a spectral representation but a plot of wave
==PAGE:40==
24
Wavelet Transforms - Theoretical Considerations
components that the DWT expects the signal to be built up by. Figures 2.8 and
2.9 therefore show that the DWT assumes most of the signal to be made up out
of the waves D3 to D5 which have the largest amplitudes. The details are linked
to certain frequency bands. For the given signal of sampling rate 1000Hz, the
rst detail D1 covers high frequencies between 0.5fn and 1fn. Consequently,
the details D3 to D5 cover the frequency bands 62.5-125Hz,31.25-62.5Hz and
15.625-31.25Hz. It follows that the DWT expects the signal to be made up of
components with frequencies between 15.625 and 125 Hz. This is certainly the
correct range but it is also very coarse.
Knowing that the original signal is built
Figure 2.8: Details D1 to D3 from a 6-level DWT for the superimposed sine
wave example
up of just two sine waves, the shape of the identied wave components might
be surprising. However, it should be noted that it is not possible to exactly
reproduce an innite sinusoids by a nite wavelet just a sinusoids struggle to
identify transcient oscillations.
This shows the dierence between the FFT
and all wavelet transforms, as the CWT provides a huge number of similar
components. However, especially D3 and D4 show the periodicity of the signal.
The DWT therefore highlights that WT are not suitable for the analysis of
clearly stationary signals.
Apart from this, it is important to state that a frequency representation of
the DWT results is neither part of the automatic MATLAB output nor are
there instructions or descriptions to be found. Considering the coarse frequency
resolution of just seven frequency bands(six details and one approximation), one
may conclude that the DWT is not ideal for spectral analysis.
==PAGE:41==
2.2 Introduction to Wavelet Transforms
25
Figure 2.9: Details D4 to D6 from a 6-level DWT for the superimposed sine
wave example
The main advantages and disadvantages of the DWT are therefore summarised
in Table 2.2.
Table 2.2: Summary of the DWT's major advantages and disadvantages
DWT
Advantages
DWT
Disadvantages
- ecient computation method
- splits the signal in very few
and thus large frequency bands
- perfect signal reconstruction
including energy preservation
- no information about its use in
spectral analysis found
==PAGE:42==
26
Wavelet Transforms - Theoretical Considerations
2.2.4
The Discrete Wavelet Packet Transform
This chapter briey introduces the DWPT which was developed as a compromise
between the CWT and the DWT to provide more details than the DWT without
losing the eciency of Mallat's algorithm.
As described previously, the DWT seems to be decient in the time-frequency
analysis due to the coarse frequency intervals it creates. A richer analysis may
be created, if the bandwidths of the frequency bands were smaller. As a con-
sequence, the DWPT performs the iterative lter process not only on the low
pass lter approximations but also on the high pass lter output [Bergh u. a.,
1999]. This results in a decomposition tree structure shown in Figure 2.10. The
Figure 2.10: Generic 3-level Wavelet packet decomposition
comparison to Figure 2.7 highlights the fundamental dierence between the two
methods because the DWPT continues to break up the former details Dj until
the maximum level of decomposition is reached. Thereby, the frequency bands
become narrower. In the end, the DWPT will provide 2j sets of coecients but
as the downsampling process is still included, the nal number of coecients
is identical in the DWT and DWPT. Thus, the DWPT avoids redundancy but
provides a ner discretisation in the frequency domain. In Figure 2.7, the co-
ecients are no longer stored as pure details(D) or approximations(A) but the
naming scheme indicates the ltering order.
It is thus expected that the DWPT is superior to the DWT when it comes to a
==PAGE:43==
2.2 Introduction to Wavelet Transforms
27
frequency representation of the signal. This is further investigated by applying
the DWPT to the superimposed sine waves.
Example - Superimposed sine waves analysed by the DWPT:
The DWPT can be performed using the same wavelet and levels of decomposi-
tion as the DWT. MATLAB provides an in-built function for a wavelet packet
spectrum. The corresponding plot is shown in Figure 2.11 and it shows a high
degree of similarity to the CWT scalogram. Again, the spectrum is shown in a
top view of the frequency-time plane and the relative importance of a coecient
is indicated by colours. While cyan areas imply that there is no signal energy
related to the corresponding frequency and time, violet in dierent shades of
brightness presents where the DWT expects the signal energy to be located
temporally and in which frequency range. The highest coecients are found
Figure 2.11: Wavelet packet spectrum for the superimposed sine waves
right above the 50Hz mark but also the 20Hz component is identied by the
DWPT. From the above, it is evident that the DWPT is less coarse than the
DWT and is meant to be used for time-frequency representation of a signal.
==PAGE:44==
28
Wavelet Transforms - Theoretical Considerations
2.3
Discussion of Intermediate Results
The previous sections gave an overview of wavelets and described the three
transform methods individually. To eectually apply wavelets to ship response
data, the most suitable method should be determined. The theoretical aspects
regarding this decision are discussed in the following.
Both the FFT and wavelet transforms have individual strengths and weaknesses.
The FFT is able to decompose a signal into exact spectral components and re-
late an average portion of the signal energy to them. This averaging process
of the FFT is a disadvantage of the analysed data sequence is non-stationary
because mean energy per frequency might not suciently explain what is hap-
pening in reality. The WT are able to localise energy in time and are represent
signal energy as an evolutionary process. Due to this it might be possible to
discover developments inside the signal which are valuable for the analysis of
ship response data. If, for example, a WT reveals that the energy inside the
full-scale response or performance measurements increases or decreases by trend,
estimations on the future development of the analysed of these quantities might
be improved. As wavelet transforms trade o frequency resolutions to provide
this time resolution, it is suggested that they complement but not fully replace
a FFT analysis.
All wavelet transforms have been applied to a simple example and compared
to FFT results.
While the CWT and the DWPT naturally provide a time-
frequency representation of the wavelet coecients, the DWT is only used to
visualise approximations of the signal's constituents. The time-frequency plots
obtained from the CWT and the DWPT are furthermore not directly applicable
to spectral analysis and it should be aimed to create an easily usable represen-
tation for all WT. In general, none of the WT was able to identify the two sine
waves accurately but this is not to be expected from them. Apart from this, the
calculation of the example showed that there is a large variety of wavelets and
it has to be determined how the most suitable one is selected for an analysis.
Therefore, the following questions need to be answered before wavelet transforms
can actually be used for any kind of prediction or estimation:
• Is the CWT too slow when applied to full-scale measurements? Or if the
CWT can be used, is it an accurate representation of the signal considering
the loss of energy?
• Do the DWT or DWPT provide sucient accuracy or are they too coarse?
• How are WT successfully set up e.g. with respect to the selection of a
==PAGE:45==
2.3 Discussion of Intermediate Results
29
suitable wavelet?
• Is the MATLAB code easy to use or is a lot of knowledge about wavelet
theory required to apply it?
The above questions address the accuracy of the results as well as practical as-
pects regardings the MATLAB implementation. In case that wavelet transforms
are useful for the analysis of full-scale data and could be applied in a decision
support context, it is important that the implementation of wavelet transforms
is simple and that the computation is quick.
==PAGE:46==
30
Wavelet Transforms - Theoretical Considerations
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 3
Full-Scale Measurements
and Related Notation
To test the wavelet transforms eciently, relevant full-scale data is required. In
all further studies conducted within this project, ship response and wave radar
measurements taken from intensive studies on the vessel CMA CGM Rigoletto
are used. This chapter gives an overview of the data and presents the required
notation along the way.
3.1
Background of the Measurements
The input data used in this thesis originates from European research programs
for which the CMA CGM Rigoletto, a container vessel, was equipped with ex-
tensive instrumentation systems. First, strain sensors and accelerometers were
installed onboard the Rigoletto in 2006 for the Lashing@Sea project, a joined
industry project focusing on lashing physics.
In 2010, the EU FP7 project
TULCS (Tools for Ultra Large Container Ships) started for which additional
strain sensors and sea state assessment devices were integrated into the measur-
ing system. The full-scale data therefore comprises operational, ship response,
and wave data.
==PAGE:48==
32
Full-Scale Measurements and Related Notation
During the TULCS project, the Rigoletto with main dimensions as per B.1
sailed on a route between the North Sea and the Sea of China.
Out of the
large amount of collected data ve sets of 24h continuous measurements were
selected based on the criteria that the operational conditions (e.g. speed and
draught) were approximately constant, that all sensors were on-line and that the
sea conditions were dierent from each other. An overview of the operational
parameters on the ve days including visual observations of the surrounding sea
state is given in Table 3.1.
Table 3.1: Operational parameters on the ve selected days
Date
(in 2011)
Geograpical
Position
Ship Speed
[knots]
Draught
[m]
Sea state
(visual obs.)
12thAug.
Gulf of Aden
21.0 - 23.5
14.2
Moderate
20thAug.
Mediterranean Sea
24.0 - 25.0
14.2
Mild
16thSep.
Gulf of Aden
17.0 - 18.0
14.0
Mild/moderate
20thSep.
South of India
11.5 - 13.5
14.0
Mild
02ndOct.
O Hong Kong
9.5 - 14.0
15.0
Severe
In later chapters, the specic data sets will be referred to by mentioning the date.
The 20th August and the 2nd October are particularly focused on because the
surrounding sea states are noticeably dierent.
3.2
Ship Operational Conditions
For this thesis, the speed and heading conditions are of interest, as they might
give information about operational changes aecting the response measure-
ments.
The WaMoS system explained in 3.4.2 stores averaged values of the
mean ship speed Vs, the mean ship's heading µs and the mean wave heading
µw. Both ship and wave heading are dened with respect to cardinal directions.
However, it is common to relate heading to the angle between the wave head-
ing and the ship heading which is called relative mean wave heading µr. The
relative mean wave heading is classied for portside as:
• 150-180 deg, head seas; wave and ship heading are exactly oppsite
• 120-150 deg, bow seas
• 60-120 deg, beam seas
==PAGE:49==
3.3 Full-Scale Ship Response Data
33
• 30-60 deg, quartering seas
• 0-30 deg following seas
Because of the ship's symmetry around its center line, these denitions can be
mirrored to cover 180-360 degrees on starboard.
The assumption that the important operational conditions are suciently con-
stant has been made prior to this thesis and has not been validated any further.
3.3
Full-Scale Ship Response Data
In the following, the notion regarding ship motions is introduced before the
response measurements particularly used in this thesis are described.
The motions of a ship and thus its responses to wave excitation are dened by
three translations of and three rotations around the ship's centre of gravity. The
translational motions are called surge x1 (x-direction), sway x2(y-direction) and
heave x3(z-direction), whereas the rotations are named pitch x5 (around y-axis),
roll x4 (around x-axis) and yaw x6 (around z-axis). Figure 3.1 represents these
denitions schematically for the right-handed, ship-xed coordinate system. For
Figure 3.1: Ship motions and coordinate system
most ships, port-starboard symmetry can be readily assumed because of which
the motions in the symmetry plane - heave, surge and pitch - are symmetric
motions.
The ve data sets comprise the ship motions heave, pitch, sway and roll and
vertical bending moment information. This project only considers ship motions,
==PAGE:50==
34
Full-Scale Measurements and Related Notation
which were measured by accelerometers and saved in continuous time histories,
one for each day. The heave and sway responses are given in meters, the roll
and pitch motion in radians and all of them were recorded in intervals of ∆t =
0.2s. It should be noted that the heave measurements are not fully independent
of pitch and roll because the motions were recorded only on the starboard side.
As these response measurements have been used in several projects prior to this
thesis, they are expected to be reliable.
3.4
Sea State Measurements
As a part of the TULCS project, two sea state measurement systems - one
recording the instantaneous wave heights at the ship's bow and one wave radar
system - were installed on the Rigoletto. This project uses the wave radar data
obtained from a Wave Monitoring System (WaMoS). The following subchapters
introduce the sea state parameters used in this thesis and explain how they are
obtained from the WaMoS installation.
3.4.1
Wave Parameters
This section provides a brief overview of important quantities characterising a
sea state and how they are calculated by statistical analysis of ocean wave data
records.
Figure 3.2 shows an extract of measured ocean wave elevations and the infor-
mation derived from it. The record is clearly irregular with signicantly varying
wave heights H, wave amplitudes ζ and wave periods T. While there is dierent
ways to dene T, H is measured as the vertical distance between a wave peak
and the subsequent trough. The amplitude ζ is dened as the vertical distance
between the mean water level and a peak or trough. In this thesis, the charac-
teristics of such records are expressed by three average quantities obtained from
statistical analysis. The signicant wave height Hs represents the average value
of the highest third of all measured H. Tz constitutes the mean value of the
time measured between to successive up-crossings. In contrast to that, the peak
period Tp quanties the average time between two successive peaks. For all of
these quantities, a large number of measurements has to be considered.
The above quantities are usually derived from a spectral representation of the
wave elevation record. As further explained in the next subchapter, WaMoS pro-
==PAGE:51==
3.4 Sea State Measurements
35
Figure 3.2: Ocean waves time history and peak-trough analysis
vides the wave data in the form of a directional wave energy spectrum S(f, θ)
which represents the wave energy as a function of the wave frequency f and
the wave direction θ.
Integrating this spectrum with respect to θ results in
a frequency-dependent wave energy spectrum S(f) which indicates the impor-
tance of the sine components making up the record.
S(f) =
Z 360
0
S(f, θ)dθ
(3.4.1.1)
Figure 3.3 expresses the interpretation of such a spectrum. For a given range
of frequencies δf, the area under the curve is proportional to the energy de-
livered by the wave components of frequencies within δf. The area below the
complete curve is thus proportional to the total energy of the recorded wave
measurements. Most commonly, this 1-D spectrum is represented through the
Figure 3.3: Ocean waves time history and peak-trough analysis
angular frequency ω instead of the "true" frequency f. During the conversion,
the energy contained within a frequency band δf must be the same as the energy
==PAGE:52==
36
Full-Scale Measurements and Related Notation
inside the corresponding segment δω. The conversion is performed as stated in
(3.4.1.2) and (3.4.1.3).
ω = 2πf
(3.4.1.2)
S(ω) = S(f) δf
δω
(3.4.1.3)
Z ∞
0
S(f)df =
Z ∞
0
S(ω)dω = m0 = σ2
(3.4.1.4)
Equation (3.4.1.4) expresses the important relation between the wave spectrum
and the statistical measure of variance which is also called 0-th order spectral
moment m0. This relationship may be applied to all cases in which time domain
measurements are expressed in the frequency domain and must also hold when
response measurements are analysed. The general formula for spectral moments
is
mn =
Z ∞
0
ωnS(ω)dω
(3.4.1.5)
Using the spectral moments, the ocean wave characteristics can be calculated.
Hs = 4.0√m0
(3.4.1.6)
Tz = 2π
rm0
m2
(3.4.1.7)
Tp = 2π
rm2
m4
(3.4.1.8)
The formula for Hs is valid under the assumption that Tz and Tp are about equal
which has been shown by [Jensen, 2001] to give a reasonably good estimation.
3.4.2
Onboard Installation of the WaMoS System
The wave radar system WaMoS analyses radar images to provide an analysis
of the spatial and temporal development of the sea surface out of which a di-
rectional wave spectrum is created. From this, the above described sea state
characteristics are obtained. Therefore, a X-band radar system was installed on
the compass deck of the Rigoletto as shown in Figure B.2 in appendix B. The
nal position was chosen in order to avoid of the disturbance of other devices
such as communication antennas or the compass.
WaMoS operates at wind speeds of more than 3 m/s and is able to detect wave
lengths from 15m to 600m and wave periods from 4s to 200s. Rough weather
conditions, harsh sea states or darkness do not aect the functionality of the
WaMoS system.
==PAGE:53==
3.4 Sea State Measurements
37
X-band radars usually provide ne temporal and spatial resolution so that se-
quences of collected radar images containing the spatial sea state development
of the ocean surface can be converted to the frequency domain by Fourier trans-
form methods. From this, the directional wave energy spectrum given in the
WaMoS data les are derived. These WaMoS les have been created every ve
minutes based on 32 radar images, so there is more than 270 WaMoS les per
day. Furthermore, WaMoS provides Hs and TP for each of these les based on
the approach outlined in the 3.4.1. The data contained in the data les can fur-
thermore be used to calculate Hs,Tz and Tp manually and provide a 20-minutes
average of these sea state parameters. Usually, 20 minutes are more common
time intervals for the evaluation of e.g. response measurements by the FFT.
In general, wave radar measurements are believed to deliver suciently accurate
estimates.
However, the above explanation shows that the FFT is used to
generate spectral representations of the radar images and as it is discussed in
Chapter 2, the FFT has its drawbacks.
So, one should keep in mind, that
WaMoS sea state parameters are just approximations, even though they are
good and reliable.
3.4.3
Stationary Time Periods
As WaMoS covers 24h continuously, most of the data must represent non-
stationary processes due to variations in the sea state or slight changes in ship
speed or headings. However, it is natural to assume that there is time periods
within the data record for which neither the sea state parameters nor relevant
operational conditions change. These time periods may be considered stationary
and they are supposed to be used in the wavelet transform functionality check
explained in Chapter 4. This subchapter briey introduces how stationary time
periods have been identied within the 5 data sets.
Stationary time periods were identied within the WaMos data and are expected
to last 30 minutes to three hours [Nielsen, 2010]. This work has already been
performed master thesis "Transfer functions of a large containership" by Kasper
Fønss Bach submitted in March 2015 to DTU. The following passages therefore
summarise his approach towards identifying the stationary time periods which
are listed in B.3.
In the present case, stationarity requires that the wave parameters Hs and Tz
and the operational parameters D, Vs and µ do not change with time. These
quantities are determined for all WaMoS data les and compared to the condi-
tion in the previous and the subsequent time period [Bach, 2015]. Bach assumes
that the directional wave spectra in the WaMoS les contain information about
==PAGE:54==
38
Full-Scale Measurements and Related Notation
the previous 20 minutes of measurements. Thus, time period i is stationary if all
above parameters are identical to those in time period i−1 and i+1. Figure 3.4
illustrates this procedures with black circles representing the dierent WaMoS
les for one day of continuous measurements [Bach, 2015]. While D, Vs and
Figure 3.4: Time line of the WaMoS data les created every ve minutes
µ are directly stated as average values in each WaMoS le, Hs and Tz are cal-
culated from the spectra as outlined in 3.4.1. The comparison is performed by
means of the statistical measures of mean value, standard deviation σ and the
coecient of variation CoV which denotes the ratio of σ to the mean value and
thus constitutes a relative standard deviation. Those time periods for which
the lowest standard deviation or CoV is obtained are considered stationary.
This is done for all ve days. As seen in B.3, the largest numbers of stationary
time periods are identied for the 20th August and the 20th September which,
according to Table 3.1, are associated with calm sea states.
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 4
Determination of the most
appropriate wavelet
transform method
The literature survey and theoretical assessment of wavelet transforms did not
make it possible to decide which wavelet transform method is most suitable for
the analysis of full-scale response measurements. Therefore, a study is performed
that uses response data, dierent wavelets and all three WT methods to assess
the dierent methods. The focus of this study is on the time-frequency repre-
sentation of the signal energy. Global wavelet spectra as shown for the CWT
are good indicators of the transforms capabilities but they do not present hid-
den information. The strength of wavelet transforms is the property to localise
signal constituent in time and frequency to a certain degree. The previously
described ways to illustrate this, e.g. the scalogram, do not particularly work
with signal energy, so it is desirable to create a dierent way to represent the
data.
The following study decides on the WT with which this thesis is continued
by comparing the developed 3D representations as well as computation-related
aspects such as calculation time.
==PAGE:56==
40
Determination of the most appropriate wavelet transform method
4.1
Approach of the study
As the outcome of this chapter signicantly inuences the further work of this
project, the analysis has to be in depth and reliable. Therefore, a great variety
of parameters need to be dened and checked. This chapter explains the selected
data and settings and the criteria based on which the perforamce of the wavelet
transforms is evaluated.
4.1.1
Input data and settings
The reliability and accuracy of the CWT, DWT and DWPT can only be assessed
properly, if the study is based on relevant data i.e.
full-scale ship response
measurements as presented in Chapter 3. To keep the study within reasonable
limits, only two data sets out of ve are considered and split into intervals of
20 minutes. Out of these intervals, six are selected per day and only heave and
pitch motions are considered. A summary of the selected time periods taken
from the 20th August and the 02nd October is given in Tables 4.1 and 4.2.
Table 4.1: Selected responses data from 20th August
20. August
WaMoS Files
Time Periods in
Response Data
Stationary
11-15
3300 - 4500
yes
12-16
3600-4800
yes
72-76
21600-22800
yes
31-35
9300-10500
no
117-121
35400-36600
no
197-201
59100-60300
no
The tables indicate which time periods (in seconds) are accessed in the response
measurements. The interval is assumed to be stationary, if at least one of the
stationary time periods described in Chapter 3 lies within the considered 20
minutes. As the stationarity check was performed for 5-minutes of sea state
measurements and not for 20 minutes of response measurements, there is no
guarantee that the responses are actually stationary. However, the probably that
they are is increased compared to randomly selected time periods. As wavelet
transforms perform better on non-stationary signals, it would be interesting to
==PAGE:57==
4.1 Approach of the study
41
Table 4.2: Selected responses data from 2nd October
02. October
WaMoS Files
Time Periods in
Response Data
Stationary
16-20
4800 - 6000
yes
62-66
18600-19800
yes
63-67
18900-20100
yes
37-41
11100-12300
no
188-192
56400-57600
no
189-193
56400-57600
no
see whether the results are aected by an assumed degree of stationarity. The
two days, 20th August and 02nd October, have been selected because the sea
states were reported to be signicantly dierent, as seen in 3.1. This might
aect the CWT as well, as the probability that the sea state and ship motions
are non-stationary is larger on the 2nd October.
The calculations are completely performed in MATLAB (APPENDIX). It has
already been mentioned that it is possible to select dierent kinds of wavelets
but hints on how to select them are hardly ever found. The response analysis is
therefore conducted based on up to six mother wavelets per wavelet transform
to gain detailed insight into how the wavelet selection inuences the results.
The following mother wavelets are selected:
• CWT: Morlet, DB12, DB20, Sym12, Sym20
• DWT: DB8, DB12, DB20, Sym12, Sym20, Coif5
• DWPT: DB8, DB12, DB20, Sym12, Sym20, Coif5
The Morlet wavelet is already known. Because it is an analytic wavelet and
does not represent a lter bank, the discrete wavelet transform cannot use the
Morlet wavelet. The abbreviation DB stands for Daubechies wavelets and the
number indicates the number of vanishing moments. Vanishing moments are
an important concept for discrete wavelets. They indicate the degree of dif-
ferentiability of the wavelet and therefore its smoothness [Alessio, 2016]. The
Daubechies wavelets are named after Ingrid Daubechies, one of the main con-
tributors to discrete wavelet theory. The wavelets denoted "Sym" are called
symlets and are modied versions of the Daubechies wavelets as they are more
==PAGE:58==
42
Determination of the most appropriate wavelet transform method
symmetric than these [Misiti u. a., 2009]. Both, DB-wavelets and symlets may
be used to decompose a signal with the CWT but they are not permissible for
the reconstruction. Therefore, the inverse CWT always uses the Morlet wavelet.
In addition to this, Daubechies developed coiets which show a high degree of
symmetry [Misiti u. a., 2009] and do not support the CWT. The discrete wavelet
and scaling functions are illustrated in C.1 to C.6 in Appendix C. The functions
have normalised amplitude and are plotted over their support length in e.g.
time.
4.1.2
Assessment Criteria
The wavelet transforms are evaluated based on two types of decision criteria:
measures to determine the accuracy of the results and measures to determine
computational aspects.
One of the most important criteria is the availability of new pieces of information
in the results. The underlying question of this study is basically whether wavelet
transforms are able to reveal and present new information of measured data that
could be of use for response prediction or sea state estimates. Therefore, one
part of this study is to enable MATLAB to create a 3D representation of the
signal energy as a function of frequency and time.
All in all, the following the following aspects have to be assessed:
• Visual evaluation of 3D plot: accuracy, reliability
• Signal reconstruction and energy preservation issues
• Eect of the mother wavelet selection on results
Energy preservation is checked by comparing the signal variance to the area
under the spectrum i.e.
the GWS. This relationship is already known from
Eq. (eq:equalenergy). Equation 4.1.2.1 expresses the variance of a measured
sequence in terms of the heave motion x3 and its mean value ¯x3. This equation
can be equivalently used for all other types of motions.
σ2 = 1
N
N
X
n=1
(x3 −¯x3)2
(4.1.2.1)
Furthermore, the applicability of the MATLAB code is assessed. This includes
the following items:
==PAGE:59==
4.2 Results of the CWT Test
43
• Computation time
• Required manual work an knowledge
The latter point assess how practical the wavelet transforms and the related
MATLAB scripts are. If the a lot of manual ajustments are required or the
wavelet selection aects the results noticeably so that well-founded choices are
necessary, the transform might not be applicable in practise. In the case that
WT can be used for decision support, they need to be ready for integration in
onboard systems and should work in the background.
4.2
Results of the CWT Test
The theoretical considerations in Chapter 2 suggested that the CWT is able to
provide a ne evoulotionary spectrum of the signal but it also assumed high
computation time and imperfect energy preservation which create doubt that
this transform is practically applicable. Therefore the performance of the CWT
has to be evaluated in detail and a method to preserve the energy needs to be
determined.
Therefore, the signal reconstruction and energy preservation have to be assessed
before the time-frequency representation can be developed. Recalling that the
match between the signal and its CWT representation is assessed for all time
periods listed in 4.1 and 4.2, for heave and pitch measurements and for ve
dierent mother wavelets, it is important to keep track of the ndings. Hence,
data sheets are used to record the main ndings. One data sheet shows the
analysis for one day, either stationary or non-stationary time periods, one type
of motion and all applied wavelets. The sheets are provided in C.7 to C.14 and
Figure 4.1 exemplies the contents of these data sheets for one analysis using
the Morlet wavelet. In the following, it is explained how the information noted
in these tables is used to assess the quality of the CWT computations. The
columns three to wave relate to the energy preservation issue. Just like the
FFT spectrum, the GWS needs sclaing to represent the signal energy properly.
While the FFT is conveniently scaled by the sampling frequency Fs and the
number of positive frequencies in the spectrum nf, it is not as simple to nd
a scaling factor for the CWT. The scaling factor, 2.2/N, works reasonably well
but does not ensure energy preservation. Therefore, the CWT spectral estimates
are scaled a second time by the ratio between the signal and the CWT variance.
In consequence, the CWT spectral estimates match the signal energy. In fact,
[Alessio, 2016] states that it is necessary to calculate individual scaling factors
for the dierent wavelets to compensate for the energy loss between signal and
==PAGE:60==
44
Determination of the most appropriate wavelet transform method
Figure 4.1: Exemplary presentation of the tables used to analyse the CWT
performance
CWT representation related to them. Because the determination of these scal-
ing factors was not performed successfully in this project, the two-step scaling
process explained before is applied throughout this thesis.
The signal reconstruction is considered as a general measure of quality for the
CWT and may help to decide which mother wavelet is most suitable for this
transform method. Checking for the agreement between the original and recon-
structed signal actually requires to compare them by plots. To simplify this,
column six as shown in Figure 4.1 contains a value that quanties the maximum
deviation between signal and reconstruction. This measure itself should not be
used for decision making but it is a reliable indicator of the quality approxi-
mation. Extremely high values of e.g. more than 100 % indicate that at least
one peak in the original signal is not recognised and studying plots of such re-
constructions shows that there is a general mismatch between the original and
synthesis. The symlets are usually exceeding the 200% and as expected, their
reconstructions do not match the signal well (see C.17 and C.18). It is there-
fore concluded that the symlets are not recommended for this kind of data. In
contrast to this, the Morlet wavelet usually creates only small maximum devia-
tions and the Figuers C.15 and C.16 show that there is a quite good agreement
between signal and reconstruction. So, if the maximum deviation is lower than
30%, the synthesis is acceptable. The Daubechies wavelets show dierent ten-
dencies. While the DB12 is almost as good as the Morlet wavelet, the DB20
fails to capture the signal with the same accuracy. The reconstruction of the
DB12 is shown in C.19 and C.20 in Appendix C. All in all, the Morlet wavelet
provides the best results and is considered as a reliable choice.
As mentioned in Chapter 4.1.1, it was attempted to test the eect of stationarity
==PAGE:61==
4.2 Results of the CWT Test
45
in the data by selecting time periods which may be assumed to contain stationary
intervals. However, the current study does not provide clear information about
this. It is assumed that the CWT would be better at handling data that is not
stationary, so the quality of the reconstruction is expected to be better in these
cases. Tables C.7 to C.14 indicate that the measure given in column six in 4.1
is slightly worse for the time periods called stationary. However, the trend is
not very clear. A better tendency is seen when comparing the qualitiy ofthe
reconstruction between the two selected days. Especially for the heave motion,
it is remarkable that the reconstruction is better on the 02nd October which is
linked to a harsher sea state and signicant variation in the wave and motion
amplitudes.
The last part of the CWT results check refers to the time-frequency represen-
tation of the signal energy. It was decided to develop a 3-dimensional diagram
based on Eq.(2.2.2.5) describing the calculation of GWS. To obtain a GWS,
the coecients W ψ
x (a, n) are averaged above all points of time. In the same
manner, it is possible to take mean values of W ψ
x (a, n) for shorter intervals, e.g.
per minute or every ve minutes. In this way, short sequence wavelet spectra
are created and one can represent the signal as a sequence of spectra. This is
a rather interesting way of presenting the data because it allows for statistical
analyses at dierent points of time within the data set. In general, this approach
is similar to what the STFT produces. Figure 4.2 shows two examples for such
diagrams. .
(a) Local wavelet spectrum created every
10s
(b) Local wavelet spectrum created every
minute
Figure 4.2: Time-frequency representation of a heave motion sequence by
means of the CWT
Of course, the intervals over which the coecients are averaged should be chosen
reasonably, as too many spectra might be dicult to handle. Generating a high
number of short term spectra slows down the calculation to some extent. In
general, the computation time was not found to be a problem and performing
==PAGE:62==
46
Determination of the most appropriate wavelet transform method
the CWT for a 20-minutes data sequences is completed within very few sec-
onds. Generating a plot like 4.2(a) takes up to 20s. It is thus assumed that
analysing several motions at the same time including the computation of short
segment spectra may take up to a minute. Considering that the CWT is easy
to automate, the method seems rather suitable.
Each of the spectra in the spectra sequence represents a fragment of the signal
energy related to a certain time interval e.g. one minute or ten seconds as shown
in 4.2.
These spectra can be evaluated individually, just as shown for wave
spectra in Chapter 3.4.1. Therefore, this representation is considered useful for
future applications.
4.3
Results of the DWT Test
In Chapter 2 it is assumed that the DWT's decomposition scheme is not ne
enough to create useful time-frequency representations. This chapter thus dis-
cusses the obtained 3D plots and evaluates whether they are useful for further
studies.
One of the strengths of the DWT is the perfect reconstruction and energy preser-
vation that is provided through the ltering process. It is therefore not necessary
to track the DWT's performance in a Table comparable to C.7. However, one
data sheet is provided in Figure C.21 to ensure that the DWT calculations are
actually conducted correctly.
As there is no signicant deviation, the DWT
calculations are accepted.
The critical issue in this case is the representation of the signal in an evolutionary
spectrum or by a sequence of wavelet spectra as described in 4.2. Chapter 2
already points out that literature hardly ever deals with spectral analysis by the
DWT and the subsequently described test underlines why the DWT is indeed
not expected to be suitable for this sort of application.
As described in 2.2.3, the DWT is based on decomposition levels for which
detail coecients are stored. For the mother wavelets as per Chapter4.1.1, the
maximum number of levels J varies between six and eight depending on the
selected wavelet. Consequently, the 20-minutes measurements are ltered and
downsampled six to eight times and the coecients per level j are stored in Dj.
For signals with a sampling time of 0.2s, the Dj are then linked to the frequency
bands as shown in Table 4.3. The displayed values correspond to J = 8. If J
is smaller, e.g six, the last details are stored as D6 and the approximation, now
A6, covers the complete frequency band from zero to 0.0195, as this is where
==PAGE:63==
4.3 Results of the DWT Test
47
the breaking-up of the frequency domain ends.
Table 4.3: DWT frequency bands for a signal with a sampling time of 0.2s
Level j
Details/
Approximations
per j
Frequency
Bands
[Hz]
1
D1
1.25 - 2.5
2
D2
0.625 - 1.25
3
D3
0.3125 - 0.625
4
D4
0.1562 - 0.3125
5
D5
0.0781 - 0.1562
6
D6
0.0391 - 0.0781
7
D7
0.0195 - 0.0391
8
D8
0.0098-0.0195
8
A8
0.00 - 0.0098
Table 4.3 reveals that the frequency spectrum is broken up into rather coarse
bands. For example, D5 represents a large range of those frequencies that are
important for heave motion analysis. The meaning of this is further illustrated
by Figure 4.3 which shows the GWS obtained from a DWT in comparison to
the FFT's spectrum of heave motion measured on the 02. October. It is evident
that the DWT is not able to dierentiate between frequencies in a frequency
range where details are required. Instead the DWT averages the energy which
it detects in the individual frequency bands. The corresponding 3D plot further
illustrates this deciency. Figure 4.4 sketches the temporal development of the
signal by showing the energy coecients at decompostion levels four to seven.
The 3D representation is not only very discontinuous and coarse, it is also
dicult to work with. As the DWT uses downsampling, the number of stored
coecients changes from level to level. The energy content is therefore spread
over dierent time intervals depending on the level and it is challenging to "cut"
through the plot at a particular point of time and get a local spectrum. It is
therefore not easily possible to create short segment spectra as described in
Chapter 4.2. Because the complete DWT decomposition is not deemed to be
ne enough for further studies in this thesis, the lack of short segment spectra
is not of importance.
==PAGE:64==
48
Determination of the most appropriate wavelet transform method
Figure 4.3: Comparison of a heave motion FFT spectrum to the GWS from a
DWT
Figure 4.4: Time-Frequency representation of the DWT coecients for heave
motions
4.4
Results of the DWPT Test
Previously, the DWPT has been identied as a compromise between the DWT
and the CWT. It is therefore to be determined to what extent it adopts the
individual advantages and shortcomings of the two methods.
The DWPT uses the same computational method as the DWT which means
that perfect signal reconstruction is no problem for this method. As it applies
the iterative ltering to approximations and details, it is noticeably more de-
tailed than the DWT. Furthermore, the tree structure of the decomposition
==PAGE:65==
4.4 Results of the DWPT Test
49
method ensures that all frequency bands are represented by the same number
of coecients and that their bandwidth is constant. This simplies the work in
MATLAB signicantly.
In general, it is thus possible to generate a GWS and 3D representation con-
taining several spectra. An example for the latter is given in Figure 4.5. The
Figure 4.5: Time-frequency representation of a heave motion sequence by the
DWPT
similarity to the corresponding CWT plots is striking though the lack of de-
tail in the DWPT is observable. Even though the DWPT is much ner than
the DWT, it acutally provides average energy per frequency band. To get a
better insight in the shape of DWPT spectra, Figure 4.6 shows two GWS gen-
erated from the same data set but using two dierent wavelets, the DB20 and
the Sym12. These diagrams highlight the eect of the wavelet selection for the
DWPT which splits the frequency domain into 2j frequency bands. The symlet
may go down to level eight, resulting in 28 equi-distant frequency bands. In
contrast to this, the DB20 only works properly until level seven. The dierence
that this selection makes is seen in Figure 4.6. Figure 4.6 thus shows that the
frequency resolution of the DWPT depends on the selected wavelet. It should be
noted that according to Heisenberg's uncertainty principle the time resolution
must be worse for a Sym12-decomposition than for a DB20-analysis. Providing
more detail in the frequency domain is naturally linked to losing time resolution
and vice versa. This aects the number of dierent spectra seen in the kind of
plots shown in Figure 4.5. Selecting a wavelet for the DWPT therefore requires
a weighing up process that compares the need for good frequency resolution to
the desire to understand the temporal development. This can be challenging
==PAGE:66==
50
Determination of the most appropriate wavelet transform method
(a) DWPT with DB20
(b) DWPT with Sym12
Figure 4.6: Comparison of FFT and DWPT spectra for heave motion and
dierent wavelets
and is a potential drawback of the method, even though the representation as
a sequence of spectra is an indicator that the DWPT is potentially interesting.
4.5
Comparison and selection of a Wavelet Trans-
form
This section compares the ndings regarding the individual wavelet transforms
and consequently decides on which method is most suitable for further studies
which require a time-frequency representation of the signal energy.
First of all, the main ndings of this study summarised in Table 4.4.
The
CWT and the DWPT both represent the signal energy as a sequence of wavelet
spectra. Both therefore allow for statistical analysis of the the measurement's
energy at dierent points of time.
Because the DWPT is less detailed, the
CWT is preferred. Another advantage of the CWT is the possibility to perform
all calculations with the same wavelet, the Morlet wavelet.
In general, the
most critical aspect related to the CWT is the computation time. The herein
presented study does not reveal signicant problems. The CWT is slower than
the discrete methods but the amount of data utilised in the present project does
not create problems.
In general, the CWT using the Morlet wavelet is thus the preferred method for
further studies. However, it should be noted that the CWT should be seen as
a complement to the FFT rather than as an alternative. The wavelet spectra
==PAGE:67==
4.5 Comparison and selection of a Wavelet Transform
51
Table 4.4: Comparison of the performance of the CWT, DWT and DWPT
Assessment
Criterion
CWT
DWT
DWPT
Time-frequency
representation
(quality and type)
useful and
detailed;
sequence of
wavelet spectra
coarse in time and
frequency;
limited in
degree of
detail but ok;
sequence of
wavelet spectra
Signal
reconstruction
approximation
perfect
perfect
Energy
preservation
perfect after
particular
scaling method
perfect
perfect
Wavelet
selection
Morlet works
best
no clear
best selection;
denes level
of detail in
time & frequency
denes level
of detail in
time & frequency
Computation
time
acceptable
very good
very good
Manual work
(MATLAB)
none
if wavelet
is changed
none
created by the CWT are rather smooth an cannot identify energy peaks in the
frequency domain as accurately as the FFT. Therefore, it seems recommendable
to use both methods and benet from their individual advantages.
==PAGE:68==
52
Determination of the most appropriate wavelet transform method
==PAGE:69==
Chapter 5
The potential of the CWT
for ship motion analysis
The previous chapters have dealt with wavelet transforms on a very general level
and highlighted the impression that especially the CWT might complement anal-
yses which are currently solely based on the FFT. As the FFT always calculates a
time average of the signal energy per frequency, it is decient when the analysed
measurements display a non-stationary character. The CWT trades o some of
the accuracy in the frequency domain to also locate the signal energy in time
and therefore it presents instationarity in a more realistic manner. In Chapter
4, a means to represent the signal energy as sequence of spectra is established
that allows for the assessment of the CWT output by statistical measures. The
question arising at this point is therefore: What sort of information is actually
uncovered by the CWT and how can this be of practical use?
This chapter tries to provide an answer to this question by presenting a study
which assesses ways to integrate the information produced by the CWT in re-
sponse prediction and sea state estimation. In the following, the approach and
ideas of the study are described and the ndings are discussed and evaluated.
==PAGE:70==
54
The potential of the CWT for ship motion analysis
5.1
Procedures to analyse the relevance of the
CWT for decision support models
The following sections describe the objectives and the approach of the study
to illustrate its general framework. Furthermore, an overview is given of the
considered data.
5.1.1
Objectives, approach and limitations
As this thesis works in the context of decision support systems, it is important
to nd a link between their needs and requirements and the output of the CWT.
This section provides an overview about the context, approach, objective and
limitations of the study that is supposed to enlighten the applicability of the
CWT in the given eld.
At rst before the actual study approach is presented, a side note is given on why,
of all potential elds of application, sea state estimates and response predictions
are selected as a context for this examination. In general, it is imaginable to
apply the CWT whenever time domain measurements are statistically analysed
and the non-stationary character of the data is supposed to be accounted for. In
[Xu und Iseki, 2015], for example, the DWT is used to investigate possibilities to
estimate the main engine power without requiring direct measurements. How-
ever, this study considers the CWT with respect to ship response prediction and
sea state estimation and thus mainly in the context of safety. Sea state estimates
form the input to various aspects of decision support, also to more sophisticated
vessel response predictions (see [Nielsen und Iseki, 2015]). The ship's response
to the surrounding sea has a large eect on e.g. its structural integrity and
stability. Studying the CWT with a focus on the selected to elds of applica-
tion allows to deal with the CWT from two dierent viewpoints. Thereby, it
is expected that the insight into the output of the CWT is improved. In this
project, the available data base encourages the consideration of both aspects in
one study. As described in Chapter 3, the available measurements are rather
detailed and cover dierent conditions. Furthermore, the data has previously
been used dierent studies and may safely be deemed reliable.
Due to the tight time frame of this thesis, the study assessing the applicability
of the CWT has to be limited. It is therefore examined to what degree the CWT
could be used to provide simple estimates of sea states and future responses with
a particular focus on getting deeper insight into the information presented by
the CWT. In consequence, the purpose of the study is to give recommendations
==PAGE:71==
5.1 Procedures to analyse the relevance of the CWT for decision support
models
55
on how the CWT could be applied instead of developing a complete calculation
method. The study is therefore mainly of a qualitative nature.
The presented work is split in two parts: the CWT's potential for simple re-
sponse prediction methods and its potential for providing simple sea state esti-
mates. Both parts work on the same set of data, described further in Chapter
5.1.2. This data is prepared to give dierent kinds of input to the study, as can
be seen in Appendix D as Table D.1 to D.6. The contents of these data sheets
is going to be discussed in the following sections.
The rst part focusing on response prediction concentrates on using the sequence
of spectra provided by the CWT. It is investigated if it is possible to deduce
the future development of the response from this plot. The most important
parameter is the standard deviation of the measured response sequence and it is
tried to deduce the development of this measure for the next sequence. So, for
time period i + 1 an estimate is provided bast on the measurements recorded in
time period i.
To estimate the sea state present in time period i, the CWT spectra sequence is
used. To conclude on the surrounding sea state, as much of the data recorded
in Tables D.1 to D.6 as possible is tried to integrate in the estimation.
The result of the study is a comment on the potential of the CWT to enable
simple, empirical estimation of sea states and future responses.
5.1.2
Input data and further assumptions
As mentioned previously, the study requires dierent kinds of data. While re-
sponse prediction mainly works on the full-scale response measurements, devel-
oping sea state estimation methods require information of Hs and Tz to verify
the approach. In addition, knowledge of Vs and the relative heading µr com-
pletes the data basis.
Therefore, all kinds data presented in Chapter 3 are
integrated in this study.
Due to the tight time frame, the data analysed in this thesis has to be limited to
ensure a sucient analysis. The following list provides an overview of important
selections.
• 25 time periods of the 20th August and 30 of the 2nd October
• heave, roll and pitch motions
==PAGE:72==
56
The potential of the CWT for ship motion analysis
The time periods represent 500-600 minutes of measurements per motion and
day and are not extracted completely randomly from the full 24h measurements.
Usually, 3-5 consecutive time periods are selected to illustrate the general de-
velopment of the sea state and responses.
Even though the study has to be limited, three out of four available motion mea-
surements are selected. Restricting the number of included responses requires
careful consideration. Analysing heave motions is a rather common choice, as
they are related to safety issues for various types of marine operations. Further-
more, large damping forces make it possible to consider them as quasi-static
which is convenient for many kinds of analysis. However, this study does not
only consider responses but also tries to establish a link to the sea state. Be-
cause of the inuence of the heading on the heave motion, it is important to
also include roll and pitch. Together with the heading as recorded by WaMoS,
the data basis is expected to be as good as possible.
Regarding the WaMos data les, Chapter 3 points out that new estimates are
created every ve minutes. However, a MATLAB code provided by Associate
Professor Ulrik Dam Nielsen calculates the mean sea state parameters based on
four subsequent WaMos les. This code has been utilised in dierent studies
prior to this project and therefore provides reliable estimtates of the sea state
parameters, mainly Hs and Tz. Furthermore, µr and Vs are recorded within
each WaMoS le. The selected time periods in the ship motion measurements
thus have to match the data given by WaMoS.
As mentioned in the previous section, D.1 to D.6 in Appendix D give an overview
of the analysed data. Ship speed and relative heading are recorded for every
ve minutes to increase the level of detail when their inuence on the motions
is required.
5.2
Evaluation of the CWT's relevance for deci-
sion support systems
The following sections present the dierent steps undertaken to check the CWT's
capabilities in response and sea state estimation. The presentation includes the
reasoning behind each step and eventually explains whether the CWT is deemed
useful for further work.
==PAGE:73==
5.2 Evaluation of the CWT's relevance for decision support systems
57
5.2.1
Evaluation related to simple response predictions
This section presents an invesitgation which assess what kind of information the
CWT may provide for simple, emiricial motion response prediction methods.
The ndings are discussed in order to evaluate the applicability of the CWT.
A simplied approach for motion prediction is scaling the standard deviation of
the analysed time period i, σi , to obtain an estimate of the motion's standard
deviation in the subsequent 20-minutes interval denoted σi+1.
σi+1 = σi(1 ± factor)
(5.2.1.1)
This study attempts to nd a way to produce the scaling factor inlcuding its sign
based on the CWT sequece of spectra. Following from the previous chapters,
the CWT presents the energy of the motion as a function of time. So, it might
be able to deduce a general tendency from the temporal development of the
measured sequence.
At rst, the accuracy with which the CWT represents the signal's development
is evaluated to ensure that the representation is, at all, useful. Figure 5.1 illus-
trates a comparison between a 20-minutes roll motion sequence taken from the
02nd October and the corresponding CWT spectra sequence. The CWT is set
up to split the signal in twenty segments, so one spectrum shows the average en-
ergy of one minute of measurements. It is clearly visible that the CWT reects
the development of the signal. Around t = 300s and t = 600s, the roll motion
is particularly low but after 700s the it increases noticeably. The same develop-
ment is visible in the CWT representation 5.1 (b) which shows extremely small
spectra for approximately time segements 5 and 10 and large spectra from about
segment 13 on. In consequence, the CWT might be able to give important input
to the motion prediction, if the trend of the standard deviation is deducible from
the temporal evoluation of the signal energy. In particular, it should be tested
whether a general statement can be made on whether the standard deviation of
time interval i + 1 is increasing or decreasing compared to σi.
The data collection in Tables D.1 to D.6 in Appendix D provides an overview
of the standard deviation of each time segment and indicates the development
of σ beteen consecutive time periods. The rst attempt to derive whether the
CWT provides information about the future energy development is a simple
visual check. Creating a simple estimation method, requires little and easily
interpretable input to the generation of a scaling factor. Pre-checking the spectra
sequence of several time periods, gave rise to the hope that the CWT plots could
be divided into three categories based on which the development of the standard
deviation can be deduced.
==PAGE:74==
58
The potential of the CWT for ship motion analysis
(a) Time history of roll motion
(b) Time-frequency representation by the
CWT
Figure 5.1: Comparison of a CWT sequence of spectra to the original mea-
sured roll motion (2nd October, time period 26)
a) If the spectra in the last third of the time line are signicantly larger than
the previous spectra, the respective motion is often has a larger standard
deviation in the following time interval.
b) If the largest spectra are located in the rst third of the sequence, the mo-
tion's standard deviation is likely to be lower in the following 20 minutes.
c) If the spectrum is more balanced and the peaks are not as pronounced,
the standard deviation usually does not vary much between the respective
time period and the following interval.
These categorised are exemplied in Figures 5.2 to 5.3
Of course, this categorisation is very coarse but this step allows to assess how
easy or dicult it actually is to deduce the future motion development based on
the CWT. Consequently, the CWT is applied to all time periods and motions
mentioned in Chapter 5.1.2 and the tables in Appendix D show whether the
plotted spectra sequences indicate increasing (+), decreasing (-) or stable ( )
standard deviation in the subsequent time interval. As this is a post-voyage
analysis rather than a prediction, the match between the expected development
and the actual development is evaluated by comparing to the given σ in column
eight.
If the expectation derived from the spectra sequence is not true, the
corresponding eld is marked orange. By following this simple method, it is
possible to decide whether this direction should be headed for further.
As there is a lot of good matches, the next step is to remove as many mismatches
as possible by using more data contained in the CWT results. Therefore, the
==PAGE:75==
5.2 Evaluation of the CWT's relevance for decision support systems
59
(a) Sequence illustrating nding a)
(b) Sequence illustrating nding b)
Figure 5.2: CWT sequence of spectra for roll motion, 02nd October, time
period 26 and 27
Figure 5.3: CWT sequence of spectra for roll motion, 02nd October, time
period 28,refers to nding c)
second step of the investigation tries to eliminate some of the oragne mismatches
by recording the maximum, minimum and mean standard deviations found in
the respective time interval. These parameters are hoped to give further insight
into the signal development. In some of the orange cases, the mismatch occured
because extremely high motions occured in a small interval which changed the
overall impression of the spectrum. Analysing mean, maximum and minimum
spectra is exptected to give further clues. The following is assumed:
If the mean and minimum standard deviation of time interval i are about
equal to those of the previous ones in i−1 but the maximum is signicantly
higher, this might be considered as an "outlier", a sudden temporary mo-
tion and not a part of the general development.
If the mean and/or minimum standard deviation increase, this could be
==PAGE:76==
60
The potential of the CWT for ship motion analysis
an indicator of a general increase in the motion energy level.
If all values are not changing signicantly, this is an indicator that the
overall signal energy does not change much in the near future.
As can be seen from above, this approach requires knowledge of what happened
20 minutes previous to the analysed time interval i because it is dicult to judge
whether increases or decreases in the standard deviation are large or small if
there is nothin to compare to.
The results of this are given in columns 16 and 17 of the data sheets in Appendix.
In general, only few of the mismatches were cleared by this method. Mostly, the
mean, maximum and minimum standard deviations supported the impression
already provided by the plots of the spectra sequence.
All in all, it is dicult to judge whether it is possible to conclude the future
development of the ship motion energy's standard deviation. The general im-
pression is that the presented simple approach is not a bad indicator. However,
the categorisation of the spectra sequences in one of the categories was often
not as easy as the Figures 5.2 to 5.3 imply. Many plots were noticeably less
distinct so that it is expected that an implementation in Matlab would require
more if-statements as given in a,b and c. In general, the CWT is able to illus-
trate the previous development of the motion energy and to some extent this
contains implications of the future motion. However, further studies would be
required to ensure that the identied trends are usable and it is expected that
the method would not be as simple as outlined in the beginning of this section.
Furthermore, it should be noted that any such prediction method cannot be ex-
pected to estimate future responses perfectly. Sudden, unexpected motions may
always occur and especially such simple methods will not be able to account for
these. Therefore, an uncertainty measure accounting for abrupt changes in the
motion amplitude and the general possibility that the previous measurements
are misinterpreted has to be integrated.
5.2.2
Evaluation related to simple sea state estimates
Apart from predicting future ship motions, this study assesses whether the sea
state can be identied from the response measurements through the CWT rep-
resentation and thus, whether the CWT can be used to estimate a sea state
without direct measurements.
Usually, a linear relation ship between the amplitude of the encountered waves
==PAGE:77==
5.2 Evaluation of the CWT's relevance for decision support systems
61
and the ship's motion response is assumed. This allows for the establishment of
a Response Amplitude Operator (RAO) approximates the frequency response
of a particular ship to regular waves.
The response spectrum for a specic
motion can then be expressed by the wave spectrum as shown below where
φR(ω) denotes the RAO.
SR(ω) = Sζ(ω)|φR(ω)|2
(5.2.2.1)
The response amplitude operator φR(ω) is dened for a particular ship, loading
condition, heading and it furthermore depends on the ship speed. The RAO
illustrates the complexity of the relation between ship response and sea state
and it is evident why simple approaches are desirable.
However, the herein described study with all its limitations could not dene a
suitable method to estimate the sea state in a simple and quick manner by use
of the CWT.
In general, the study was limited to estimating the signicant wave height to
simplify the study even further.
In Tables D.1 to D.6, a ratio between the
signicant wave height and the standard deviation of the particular motion is
given. The basic idea was to approximate these ratios by means of the CWT
to eventually scale the standard deviation of a time period to nd Hs. Looking
closely at these ratios shows that their values vary noticeably even for subsequent
time periods i.e. Hs might increase continuously but the response does not. This
is not unexpected but it complicates the procedure, as the scaling factor has to
be calculated uniquely for each time period and a standardised or constant factor
is not an option. In contrast, the scaling factor must account for the particular
development of the response inside the measured interval.
Chapter 3 already describes that the response data is known to be linked to
constant loading conditions. The datasheets in D.1 to D.6 illustrate furthermore
that the speed changes only slightly within 20 minutes, just like the relative
heading. The basic conditions for the analysis are consequently good, as sudden
changes in the operational conditions do not aect the responses, at least in the
majority of the considered time intervals. Still, it was dicult to separate the
sea state eect on the response from the total response and to utilise the heading
and speed data eectively, as no direct eect from both could be identied in
the data.
The general approach to estimating the sea state again incorporated using the
sequence of spectra and the statistical parameters derived from them. As the
development of the sea state does not necessarily correlate with the calculated
standard deviation of the 20-minutes interval, the ndings described in Chapter
5.2.1 are of no particular use in this case. However, all attempts to manipulate
==PAGE:78==
62
The potential of the CWT for ship motion analysis
the standard deviation of the spectra remain unsuccessful and no particular
route for estimating the sea state based on the CWT is identied.
5.2.3
Summary and discussion of the ndings
To conclude the study, the main ndings are briey discussed and the overall
applicability of the CWT is evaluated.
In general, the CWT is able to generate a reliable representation of the signal
energy in its temporal development. Nevertheless, a few additional consideration
need to be stated. First of all, the study has been limited with respect to the
analysed data. Even though the described tendencies are recognisable in a great
number of time periods, the ndings should be veried through other data.
Secondly, the length of the considered time interval is exptected to be limited.
Predicting the motions for much more than 20 minutes, seems optimistic, if the
method is based on 20-minutes of measurements. However, it might be worth
to try and use more than 20 minutes of measurements and see whether using
more information about the previous development helps to predict the motions
over a longer time period.
The outcome of the attempt to identify the CWT's usefulness for simple response
prediction methods is not easy to dene but shows that there is some potential.
However, this potential is not quantied and further work would be required to
conrm it.
The application to sea states is less successful because it has not been possible
to suitably link the given data on operational conditions to the CWT spectra.
It is, in general, believed that CWT may play a role in sea state estimation
but the general models for assessing operational conditions and other external
eects would have to be more complex. The sea state is not easily identiable
in the response measurements, even when the time axis is included. The lack of
success is deemed to be related to the overall too simple approach of the study,
which was, however, required, as the main objective was the evaluation of the
CWT's capabilities. It can therefore be saved that a strikingly simplied sea
state estimation method cannot be developed solely based on the CWT.
All in all, the CWT is not able to provide a simple sea state estimation method
and its ability to simplify response prediction is not proved.
However, it is
questionable whether the presented studies are at all able to give a proof of the
real potential of wavelet transforms. Of course it is desirable to get simple and
reliable sea state estimates but the chosen approach was probably too simple.
In the same way, it is at least questionable whether the potential of the CWT
==PAGE:79==
5.2 Evaluation of the CWT's relevance for decision support systems
63
for response prediction can be assessed based on the simple approach described
before.
After all, the CWT is similar to the FFT in many ways and most
probably applications in which the FFT is mormally used are more suitable to
assess the potential of the CWT when it comes to providing new information.
==PAGE:80==
64
The potential of the CWT for ship motion analysis
==PAGE:81==
Chapter 6
Conclusions
This thesis was set out to explore wavelet transforms as a complement or alter-
native to the fast Fourier transform and to identify their potential for the eld
of ship response analysis.
In particular, the following two main questions had to be answered by a thorough
literature review and studies on the performance of the three wavelet transforms:
• Are wavelet transform methods useful for ship response analysis from a
general point of view and which method is the most suitable one?
• How could wavelet transforms be used to improve the analysis of ship
response measurements with respect to spectral analysis?
These questions are addressed in detail in chapters three to ve which deal
with the theoretical background, a study on the actual results given by the
three relevant wavelet transforms and a study on the application of one wavelet
transform to analyse full-scale ship response measurements.
The results and additional recommendations for future work are presented in
the following sections.
==PAGE:82==
66
Conclusions
6.1
Findings and discussions
This section synthesises the main ndings and implications of this thesis by
particularly addressing the two main research questions. Detailed summaries
of the ndings regarding the theoretical background, the comparison of the
three wavelet transforms and their potential for ship response analysis are found
at the end of the respective chapters. The studies identied advantages and
disadvantages of wavelet transforms, their dierences to the FFT and their
ability to produce accurate time-frequency representations of the signal energy
including their usefulness in a ship response analysis context.
The rst question addresses the conceptual design of wavelet transforms and
mainly concerns their ability to reveal new pieces of information from measured
data compared to the FFT. The presentation of the results in a useful manner is
an additional criterion for the assessment of the transforms. Wavelet transforms
are indeed found to uncover signal information that is not captured by the
conventional FFT. As opposed to Fourier transforms, wavelet transforms are
designed to handle non-stationary data by representing the signal and its energy
as a function of time and frequency simultaneously. The signal energy can thus
be analysed in its temporal development. As ship response measurements are
likely to be non-stationary to some extent, it is expected that knowledge of the
development of the response energy is useful for dierent applications.
However, it was found that wavelet transforms should not be seen as a replace-
ment of the FFT but as a complement. The great strength of the FFT is its
ability to link the signal energy to particular frequencies. All wavelet transforms
lack this accuracy in the frequency domain in return for the localisation of the
energy in time. The three considered wavelet transform methods are found to
dier noticeably in their accuracy in both domains. As the representation of the
signal energy should be as precise as possible, the continuous wavelet transform
is dened as the most suitable transform from a spectral analysis point of view.
The CWT is able to produce spectra similar to the FFT but for several points
of time within a given time interval. Therefore, the development of the signal
energy can be represented as a sequence of spectra which is deemed to be a
rather useful manner because it allows for statistical analysis.
It should be mentioned that the CWT is known to suer from computational
ineciency, even though this was not found to be a problem within this project.
It is, however, recommended to subject the CWT to larger amounts of data to
test its limits of applicability.
The second question is an attempt to further explore the output of the CWT and
to assess its potential to provide input to simple estimates of the surrounding sea
==PAGE:83==
6.2 Recommendations for further research
67
state and ship motions. The related studies are performed based on the same
sets of data. Considering two dierent elds of application allows for insight
into the CWT's results from dierent perspectives. Nevertheless, it is dicult
to use the CWT to develop simplied estimation methods for both, sea states
and response predictions. While all attempts to use the CWT output to get a
reliable method were unsuccessful, the CWT showed some potential for response
prediction. Illustrating the temporal development of motion energy, the CWT
is found to be able to give trends for the future development of the analysed
motion.
Still, the results need further verication and the study conducted
within this thesis may only be seen as a rst indicator of the CWT's potential.
In conclusion, it is not possible to give a clear answer to main question two. The
conducted studies do not imply that sea state estimation or response prediction
can be signicantly simplied by use of the CWT, at least this is not proved
for the response prediction. Still, it is believed by the author that the CWT
is an interesting topic of further studies. As the time frame of this thesis is
limited and the CWT applicability studies had to be simple enough to provide
at least a tendency, the studies themselves are most probably unsuitable to give a
clear statement. It is therefore recommended to see the CWT as a complement
to the FFT and analyse whether it provides new information if it is used in
applications which are currently solely based on the FFT. The CWT is, in
general, an interesting technique which at least theoretically has the potential to
improve current methods by treating non-stationarity with increased accuracy.
6.2
Recommendations for further research
The previous discussion of the results regarding the assessment of the CWT's
potential to improve sea state estimation and response prediction showed that
applying the method in a more sophisticated context might be more suitable
to identify the CWT's capabilities. Therefore, two possible topics for further
studies are described in the following.
The rst recommendation for further studies addresses the estimation of sea
states by means of the wave buoy analogy. In this method, the sea state is
estimated based on the transfer functions and the response spectrum of the
motions of a particular given ship.
A common method to provide response
spectra is converting motion measurements to the frequency domain by the FFT.
Therefore, a certain length of the time history is required. As the CWT uses
wavelets to decompose the signal, it is possible to produce sea state estimates
for noticeably smaller time intervals which could be of interest if the sea state
is harsh and the responses cannot be readily assumed to be quasi-stationary. In
==PAGE:84==
68
Conclusions
such cases, the CWT might be an advantage and the sea state might be identied
in greater detail. As the CWT is not as accurate in the frequency domain as
the FFT, it would be important to see whether this impairs the applicability of
the CWT in this context and would therefore provide a relevant implication on
the real potential of the CWT.
A second potential application is derived from [Nielsen und Iseki, 2015] which
deals with response prediction including uncertainty factors reecting a level of
condence. Again, the FFT is used to derive the response spectrum of mea-
sured motion and the CWT could provide updates on this spectrum at shorter
intervals. The presented uncertainty factors are based on the 0th order spectral
moment of the spectrum and therefore on the response spectrum. If the analysed
responses contain a certain degree of non-stationarity, it might be interesting to
analyse the measurement with the CWT and assess whether the prediction are
more accurate due to better recognition of the temporal motion development.
==PAGE:85==
Appendix A
Appendix - Chapter 2
A.1
Center Frequency of the Morlet Wavelet
==PAGE:86==
70
Appendix - Chapter 2
A.2
Schematic representation of th wavelet trans-
lation in the CWT
==PAGE:87==
A.3 Schematic representation of wavelet scaling in the CWT
71
A.3
Schematic representation of wavelet scaling
in the CWT
==PAGE:88==
72
Appendix - Chapter 2
A.4
Schematic representation of wavelet scaling
in the CWT
==PAGE:89==
Appendix B
Appendix - Chapter 3
==PAGE:90==
74
Appendix - Chapter 3
B.1
Main particulars of the CMA CGM Rigo-
letto
Name
CMA CGM Rigoletto
Owner
CMA CGM
Operator
CMA CGM
Flag
France
IMO Number
9299654
Delivery Date
29/9/2006
Builder
Hyundai Heavy Industries Ltd. Co, South Korea
Max. TEU Capacity
9415
TEU Capacity at 14t
6919
Summer Deadweight
113,890tons
Gross Tonnage
99,500tons
Length Overall
350.00m
Beam Overall
42.80m
Max. Draught
14.50m
Max. Speed
25.4kn
Main Engine Type
12K98MC6-TI
Main Engine Power
68,666kW
==PAGE:91==
B.2 Center Frequency of the Morlet Wavelet
75
B.2
Center Frequency of the Morlet Wavelet
==PAGE:92==
76
Appendix - Chapter 3
B.3
Stationary sea state time periods in WaMoS
data
WaMoS
File No.
#
Sign.
wave height
H_s
[m]
Zero crossing
period
T_z
[m]
Mean
ship speed
V_s
[kn]
Heading µ
[deg]
Draught D
[m]
12th August
246
2.1
6.6
22.6
105
14.2
265
1.4
6.6
23.0
101
14.2
20th August
13
1.1
6.5
24.8
143
14.2
14
1.2
6.5
24.8
143
14.2
15
1.2
6.5
24.8
143
14.2
16
1.1
6.5
24.8
143
14.2
26
1.1
6.5
24.7
142
14.2
41
1.1
6.5
24.3
143
14.2
42
1.1
6.5
24.2
143
14.2
54
1.1
6.5
24.2
141
14.2
55
1.1
6.5
24.2
141
14.2
65
1.2
6.5
24.2
151
14.2
66
1.2
6.5
24.2
152
14.2
69
1.1
6.5
24.2
153
14.2
70
1.2
6.5
24.3
153
14.2
74
1.2
6.5
24.3
152
14.2
75
1.2
6.5
24.3
152
14.2
110
1.2
6.5
24.3
149
14.2
16th September
159
2.8
6.7
17.7
94
14.0
214
1.7
6.8
17.7
103
14.0
216
1.7
6.8
17.7
105
14.0
251
2.8
6.9
17.6
105
14.0
255
2.9
6.9
17.8
104
14.0
265
3.3
6.9
17.9
99
14.0
==PAGE:93==
B.3 Stationary sea state time periods in WaMoS data
77
Table B.1: My caption
WaMoS
File No.
#
Sign.
wave height
H_s
[m]
Zero crossing
period
T_z
[m]
Mean
ship speed
V_s
[kn]
Heading µ
[deg]
Draught D
[m]
20th September
66
1.3
7.3
11.6
91
14.0
67
1.3
7.3
11.6
91
14.0
123
1.3
7.2
12.0
93
14.0
124
1.4
7.2
11.9
94
14.0
130
1.4
7.2
12.1
97
14.0
131
1.4
7.2
12.1
98
14.0
136
1.4
7.1
12.3
99
14.0
137
1.4
7.1
12.3
100
14.0
152
1.4
7.1
12.0
94
14.0
179
1.6
7.0
12.8
104
14.0
180
1.6
7.1
12.8
104
14.0
181
1.6
7.1
12.8
104
14.0
182
1.6
7.1
12.8
105
14.0
232
1.6
7.0
12.3
95
14.0
233
1.6
7.0
12.3
94
14.0
264
1.6
6.8
12.5
100
14.0
2nd October
5
1.6
6.5
15.9
164
15.0
20
2.2
6.5
16.7
161
15.0
66
4.6
8.2
14.4
142
15.0
67
4.6
8.3
14.2
142
15.0
68
4.7
8.2
14.0
142
15.0
101
6.6
8.7
12.6
138
15.0
==PAGE:94==
78
Appendix - Chapter 3
==PAGE:95==
Appendix C
Appendix Chapter 4
C.1
Wavelet and scaling function of the DB8
==PAGE:96==
80
Appendix Chapter 4
C.2
Wavelet and scaling function of the DB12
C.3
Wavelet and scaling function of the DB20
==PAGE:97==
C.4 Wavelet and scaling function of the Sym12
81
C.4
Wavelet and scaling function of the Sym12
C.5
Wavelet and scaling function of the Sym20
==PAGE:98==
82
Appendix Chapter 4
C.6
Wavelet and scaling function of the Coif5
==PAGE:99==
C.7 CWT assessment: 20.Aug, stationary, heave
83
C.7
CWT assessment: 20.Aug, stationary, heave
nf = number of positive frequency (FFT); Fs = sampling frequency
==PAGE:100==
84
Appendix Chapter 4
C.8
CWT assessment:
20.Aug, not stationary,
heave
nf = number of positive frequency (FFT); Fs = sampling frequency
==PAGE:101==
C.9 CWT assessment: 02.Oct, stationary, heave
85
C.9
CWT assessment: 02.Oct, stationary, heave
nf = number of positive frequency (FFT); Fs = sampling frequency
==PAGE:102==
86
Appendix Chapter 4
C.10
CWT assessment: 02.Oct, not stationary,
heave
nf = number of positive frequency (FFT); Fs = sampling frequency
==PAGE:103==
C.11 CWT assessment: 20.Aug, stationary, pitch
87
C.11
CWT assessment: 20.Aug, stationary, pitch
==PAGE:104==
88
Appendix Chapter 4
C.12
CWT assessment: 20.Aug, not stationary,
pitch
==PAGE:105==
C.13 CWT assessment: 02.Oct, stationary, pitch
89
C.13
CWT assessment: 02.Oct, stationary, pitch
==PAGE:106==
90
Appendix Chapter 4
C.14
CWT assessment: 02.Oct, not stationary,
pitch
==PAGE:107==
C.15 Reconstructed heave sequence using the Morlet wavelet
91
C.15
Reconstructed heave sequence using the Mor-
let wavelet
==PAGE:108==
92
Appendix Chapter 4
C.16
Reconstructed pitch sequence using the Mor-
let wavelet
==PAGE:109==
C.17 Reconstructed heave sequence using the Sym12 wavelet
93
C.17
Reconstructed heave sequence using the Sym12
wavelet
==PAGE:110==
94
Appendix Chapter 4
C.18
Reconstructed pitch sequence using the Sym12
wavelet
==PAGE:111==
C.19 Reconstructed heave sequence using the DB20 wavelet
95
C.19
Reconstructed heave sequence using the DB20
wavelet
==PAGE:112==
96
Appendix Chapter 4
C.20
Reconstructed pitch sequence using the DB20
wavelet
==PAGE:113==
C.21 DWT assessment: 02.Oct, not stationary, heave
97
C.21
DWT assessment: 02.Oct, not stationary,
heave
==PAGE:114==
98
Appendix Chapter 4
==PAGE:115==
Appendix D
Appendix - Chapter 5
==PAGE:116==
100
Appendix - Chapter 5
D.1
Data collection for response prediction; 20.Au-
gust, heave
==PAGE:117==
D.1 Data collection for response prediction; 20.August, heave
101
==PAGE:118==
102
Appendix - Chapter 5
==PAGE:119==
D.2 Data collection for response prediction; 20.August pitch
103
D.2
Data collection for response prediction; 20.Au-
gust pitch
==PAGE:120==
104
Appendix - Chapter 5
==PAGE:121==
D.2 Data collection for response prediction; 20.August pitch
105
==PAGE:122==
106
Appendix - Chapter 5
D.3
Data collection for response prediction; 20.Au-
gust, roll
==PAGE:123==
D.3 Data collection for response prediction; 20.August, roll
107
==PAGE:124==
108
Appendix - Chapter 5
==PAGE:125==
D.4 Data collection for response prediction; 02.October, heave
109
D.4
Data collection for response prediction; 02.Oc-
tober, heave
==PAGE:126==
110
Appendix - Chapter 5
==PAGE:127==
D.4 Data collection for response prediction; 02.October, heave
111
==PAGE:128==
112
Appendix - Chapter 5
D.5
Data collection for response prediction; 02.Oc-
tober, pitch
==PAGE:129==
D.5 Data collection for response prediction; 02.October, pitch
113
==PAGE:130==
114
Appendix - Chapter 5
==PAGE:131==
D.6 Data collection for response prediction; 02.October, roll
115
D.6
Data collection for response prediction; 02.Oc-
tober, roll
==PAGE:132==
116
Appendix - Chapter 5
==PAGE:133==
D.6 Data collection for response prediction; 02.October, roll
117
==PAGE:134==
118
Appendix - Chapter 5
==PAGE:135==
Appendix E
Appendix MATLAB
==PAGE:136==
120
Appendix MATLAB
E.1
Code to read and prepare the vessel response
measurements
==PAGE:137==
E.1 Code to read and prepare the vessel response measurements
121
==PAGE:138==
122
Appendix MATLAB
==PAGE:139==
E.1 Code to read and prepare the vessel response measurements
123
==PAGE:140==
124
Appendix MATLAB
==PAGE:141==
E.1 Code to read and prepare the vessel response measurements
125
==PAGE:142==
126
Appendix MATLAB
==PAGE:143==
E.1 Code to read and prepare the vessel response measurements
127
==PAGE:144==
128
Appendix MATLAB
==PAGE:145==
E.1 Code to read and prepare the vessel response measurements
129
==PAGE:146==
130
Appendix MATLAB
==PAGE:147==
E.1 Code to read and prepare the vessel response measurements
131
==PAGE:148==
132
Appendix MATLAB
==PAGE:149==
E.1 Code to read and prepare the vessel response measurements
133
==PAGE:150==
134
Appendix MATLAB
==PAGE:151==
E.1 Code to read and prepare the vessel response measurements
135
==PAGE:152==
136
Appendix MATLAB
==PAGE:153==
E.1 Code to read and prepare the vessel response measurements
137
==PAGE:154==
138
Appendix MATLAB
==PAGE:155==
E.1 Code to read and prepare the vessel response measurements
139
==PAGE:156==
140
Appendix MATLAB
==PAGE:157==
Bibliography
[FriendlyGuide ]
:
A Really Friendly Wavelet Guide.  URL http://www.
polyvalens.com/blog/wavelets/theory/#note3
[Alessio 2016]
Alessio, Silvia M.:
Digital Signal Processing and Spectral
Analysis for Scientists. 2016.  Forschungsbericht
[Bach 2015]
Bach, Kasper F.:
Transfer functions of a large containership.
2015.  Forschungsbericht
[Bergh u. a. 1999]
Bergh, Jöran ; Ekstedt, Fredrik ; Lindberg, Martin:
Wavelets. 1999.  Forschungsbericht
[Bingham 2015]
Bingham, Harry B.: Supplemental Lecture Note for: "Wave
Loads on Ships and Oshore Structures. 2015.  Forschungsbericht
[Iseki 2015]
Iseki, Toshio: Non-stationary Ship Motion Analysis Using Dis-
crete Wavelet Transform. In: Proceedings of the 12th International Conference
on the Stability of Ships and Ocean Vehicles, 2015, S. 673680
[Mallat 2009]
Mallat, Stéphane: A wavelet tour of signal processing. 2009.
 Forschungsbericht
[Misiti u. a. 2009]
Misiti, Michel ; Misiti, Yves ; Oppenheim, Georges ;
Poggi, Jean-Michel: Wavelet Toolbox 4 User's Guise. 2009.  Forschungs-
bericht
[Nielsen 2010]
Nielsen, Ulrik D.:
Ship Operations - Engineering Analysis
and Guidance. 2010.  Forschungsbericht
[Nielsen u. a. 2013]
Nielsen, Ulrik D. ; Andersen, Ingrid Marie V. ; Koning,
Jos:
Comparisons of Means for Estimating Sea States from an Advancing
==PAGE:158==
142
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Large Container Ship / Technical University of Denmark and MARIN. 2013.
 Forschungsbericht
[Nielsen und Iseki 2015]
Nielsen, Ulrik D. ; Iseki, Toshio:
Prediction of
First-Order Vessel Responses with Applications to Decision Support Systems
/ Technical University of Denmark and Tokyo University of Marine Science
and Technology. 2015.  Forschungsbericht
[Xu und Iseki 2015]
Xu, Peng ; Iseki, Toshio:
Multi-Resolution Analysis
of Main Engine Power Fluctuations in Waves / Tokyo University of Marine
Science and Technology. 2015.  Forschungsbericht
