==PAGE:1==
Inferring social networks from
geographic coincidences
Anders Lønberg Rahbek
s107029@student.dtu.dk
Søren Howe Gersager
s094557@student.dtu.dk
Kongens Lyngby 2016
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
As you often like similar things, as your friends, recommendations can be im-
proved if you know if two people share social ties.
This thesis attempts to
answer to what degree a future co-occurrence between two people (as a sub-
stitute for social ties) can be inferred, based on the users past spatiotemporal
traces. Data is obtained from Sony Lifelog, a tracking mobile phone application,
collected from Sony employees over three months and real-world users from a
single month. Through analysis of data we extract several datasets which we
train using machine learning models.
We use a Logistic Regression as baseline model trained with a single feature and
compare it with a Random Forest model trained using numerous features based
on spatiotemporal data, user age and gender data as well as app usage data.
We found that for inferrence of a future co-occurrence, there was not a large
signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the models for most of the datasets. Furthermore
we found that the models had a higher ROC AUC score as well as precision and
recall for the positive class, having a future co-occurrence, using the dataset for
real-world users than for sony employees.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
Da man ofte deler smag med ens venner kan anbefalinger om bl.a. produkter
forbedres hvis man kender brugeres sociale relationer. Denne afhandling kigger
på, i hvor høj grad man kan udlede et fremtidigt møde (som substitut for social
relation) mellem to personer udfra geograﬁske og tidsmæssige sammenfald. Data
kommer fra Sonys mobil app Lifelog, indsamlet fra henholdsvis Sony medarbej-
dere henover tre måneder og rigtige brugere fra en enkelt måned. Gennem data
analyse laver vi ﬂere datasæt som vi træner med machine learning modeller.
Vi benytter en Logistic Regression baseline model med én feature og sammen-
ligner med en Random Forest model trænet med ﬂere features ud fra spatiotem-
porale data, bruger-alder og køn samt mobil app forbrug.
Vi fandt at til udledning af et fremtidigt møde var der ikke en større forskel mel-
lem baseline og Random Forest modellen for de ﬂeste af datasættene, vi fandt
desuden at modellerne havde højere ROC AUC score samt Precision og Recall
for den positive klasse, at de mødes, med datasættet for rigtige brugere end for
Sony medarbejdere.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁllment of the requirements
for acquiring an M.Sc. in Digital Media Engineering.
The project has been completed in the period 25th of January to 25th of June
and is rated as 30 ECTS points. Associate professor Sune Lehmann Jørgensen
have been supervisor for the project.
The thesis addresses the analysis from and results of datasets for use in a clas-
siﬁcation problem predicting social ties.
The thesis is structured chronologically and is best read from front to back.
Literature references are given as an ID in index parenthesis [] and can be found
in the section Bibliography. Equations are numbered using X.Y.Z as notation,
where X.Y is the section and subsection and Z is the equation number.
Lyngby, 25-June-2016
Anders Lønberg Rahbek
s107029@student.dtu.dk
Søren Howe Gersager
s094557@student.dtu.dk
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Sune Lehmann for supervising us and the weekly thesis
group for providing consultation and inspiration.
We would also like to thank Sony Mobile in Lund for letting us use their facilities
and data to run our experiments.
Lastly we would like to thank Vedran Sekara for helping us throughout the
project and being kind enough to answer our questions.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgments
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature review
3
3
Dataset
5
3.1
Test data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.1.1
App usage data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.1.2
Demographics data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
Production data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4
Methods
27
4.1
Data preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.1.1
Preparation of Test data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.1.2
Preparation of Production data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2
Modeling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.2.1
Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.2.2
Spatial Features
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.2.3
Homophily Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2.4
Temporal features
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.3
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
5
Results
41
5.1
Class Imbalance Problem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.2
Performance metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.2.1
Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) . . . . . . . . .
43
5.2.2
Precision and Recall . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.2.3
Feature importance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.3
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6
Discussion
55
7
Conclusion
59
Bibliography
61
Code
65
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
The analysis of human behavior and networks is a signiﬁcant part in several ﬁelds
of social science like psychology, anthropology and sociology. Before the advent
of sensing devices, the analysis of behaviors and networks were limited due to the
biases inherent in the data collection methods of the studies and the limit in the
number of participants of the studies. Data collection methods like participant
observation can result in several biases, amongst others an unwanted inﬂuence
in the behavior of the participants by the presence of the researcher[Ros66].
Furthermore studies relying on self-reporting can be prone to recall errors by
the participants[SBJ+99][BKS80].
In recent years the popularity of sensor-driven mobile devices like phones, tablets
and wearables and the emergence of the big data revolution has facilitated the
creation and analysis of large-scale datasets generated from monitoring diﬀerent
aspects of our daily lives[LPA+09]. This method of data-collection can alleviate
the problems of the former methods by removing the inaccuracy of self-reporting,
the bias of unwanted inﬂuence and at the same time allows for massive scaling
of the number of participants. Furthermore the research on social networks has
witnessed a substantial increase from the popularity and growth of online social
networks such as Facebook, Twitter and LinkedIn[CC13]. The mobile phone
and its related technologies have made it easier to trace the movements of peo-
ple over time and have resulted in numerous advancements in computational
social science. It has been shown that individuals show signiﬁcant regularity in
their movement over time[GHB08] and that their movement can be predicted
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction
with great probability independent of distance[SQBB10].The research on hu-
man mobility is important because of its wide range of applications in diﬀerent
areas. Understanding human mobility can better our understanding of how dis-
eases such as malaria spread[WET+12], if people have social ties[CBC+10] and
predicting crime hotspots[BLS+14] amongst others.
In this thesis we will try to predict social ties, using a future co-occurrence as
proxy, thus we will try to answer the following question: Can we predict if people
meet in a period based on their spatiotemporal patterns in a previous period.
For this, we will use data collected from an activity tracker app called Sony
Lifelog[sona]. The prediction of a future co-occurrence is used, as the dataset
lacks ground truth. We acknowledge that a future co-occurrence between users
cannot be equated as having social ties, as the co-occurrence can merely be
coincidental. Even if the co-occurrence is not coincidental and they know each
other, it might be on a superﬁcial level.
Sony Lifelog tracks location data and app usage of the users and allows them
to gain insights based on these data. The data is collected for a 3-month period
from Sony employees from all over the world. The inference of social ties have
numerous applications for diﬀerent problems. It can aid friendship suggestions
for social network sites like Facebook and Twitter. If we can infer two people
have social ties they might share common interests which can improve target
advertising or recommendations[YM15].
We will try to predict social ties using several diﬀerent features from several
datasets, one exclusively from Sony employees and one from regular users. The
datasets are then used to train state of the art machine learning models of
which a comparison will be made on their performance. Each feature will be
examined to asses how relevant they are for prediction of social ties in our
dataset. Furthermore we will include features based on homophily[MSLC01]
from user gender and age, as well as app-usage.
The thesis is organized as follows. In chapter 2, we will describe the relevant
research conducted on the inference of social ties from human spatiotemporal
data. In chapter 3 we will analyze and describe the dataset and try to gain
insights we can use in our work. chapter 4 will describe the methods used on
the dataset and chapter 5 will describe the results we obtained. In chapter 6 we
will discuss the work we have done, the problems and shortcomings, as well as
the qualities. In chapter 7 we conclude on the work and oﬀer our suggestions
for what could be done in future work.
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Literature review
The problem of analyzing location traces and predicting social ties and friend-
ship have been investigated in a number of works. Below we will discuss the
relevant literature in the ﬁeld.
Crandall et al.[CBC+10] used spatiotemporal data embedded in images (geo-
tagging) by users of Flickr and partitioned the globe into grid-like cells and
time bins at diﬀerent resolutions.
They found that even a small number of
co-occurrences from geotags was a predictor of social ties.
Eagle et al.[EL13] collected call-logs, cell-tower information and bluetooth data
from mobile phones given to 94 participants and looked at diﬀerences in self-
reported and behavioural data, as well as relationship inference. They found
they were able to predict 96% and 95% of reciprocal friends and reciprocal
nonfriends respectively, based on a factor ’extra-role’ found from measurements
of locations, communication and of behaviour characterized of being outside the
work environment.
Cranshaw et al[CTH+10] looked at possible similarities between online social
networks and oﬄine co-location networks for the same users and tried to predict
social ties in the social network, based on the oﬄine co-locations using several
features focusing on user mobility and co-location. They found location entropy
to be valuable in prediction of social ties, as locations with high entropy makes
chance encounters more probable and furthermore found, that features from user
mobility and co-location outperformed predictions based on number co-location
==PAGE:16==
4
Literature review
observations alone.
Cho et al.[CL11] used data from location-based social networks Gowalla and
Brightkite, and data from cell phone towers from 2 million users and found
that, long-distance travels are more inﬂuenced by social ties than short-distance
travels, thus people are more likely to travel near a friend when traveling far.
Furthermore they found similarity in movement trajectories, is a strong indica-
tion of a tie in a social network.
Pham et al. in a number of works looked at inferring social ties from spatiotem-
poral co-occurrences[PHS11][SP15]. The authors proposed a geo-social model
(GEOSO) for capturing the relationship between co-occurrences and social ties.
Inherent in the model, is the two properties that a higher number of common
cells visited by two users, the socially closer they are (compatibility), and if two
users repeatedly visits the same place together, they are more likely socially
close (commitment).
Our work share similarities with these works but also diﬀerences.
The means of getting location are diﬀerent from the works we have discussed.
Some use direct measures of location updates like GPS[CTH+10] while others
use periodic measures like cell-tower information[EL13], geotagged images[CBC+10]
or check-ins from location-based social networks[CL11].
Our work consists of location updates from GPS-enabled mobile phones which
allows a greater resolution than cell-tower information and location-based social
networks and with a higher update frequency than geotagged images.
The means for getting ground truth data with friendship and social ties varies,
while some use mobile phone call and messaging logs, others use self-report
information[EL13], links from online social networks[CTH+10][CBC+10] or prox-
imity measures derived from Bluetooth[EL13] or Wi-Fi range data[ea16].
Our dataset does not consist of ground truth of social ties between users, there-
fore we will use a future co-occurrence as a proxy for a social tie.
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 3
Dataset
In the following chapter the datasets used will be examined. Basic statistics of
the datasets will be shown and deviations will be examined as well as methods
to deal with these deviations, especially how data cleaning was done.
The chapter will end with a summary.
Our data are derived from Sony’s Lifelog[sona] which is a mobile life tracking
app which logs your activities during the day, among those location update and
app usage.
The dataset describes the spatiotemporal location where a user has been present.
It describes where, when and for how long the user has been in the given location.
Each time the user changes spatial location, deﬁned by latitude and longitude,
a location update will be logged with the following attributes:
1. timestamp_seen
Milliseconds since the epoch showing when the location update is logged
on the server/cluster
2. id
Location id represented as a string
3. useruuid
Unique user id represented as a string
4. start_time
Time when the user enter a location. Represented as an ISO8601 time
==PAGE:18==
6
Dataset
stamp with time zone
5. end_time
Time when the user leaves a location. Represented as an ISO8601 time
stamp with time zone
6. name
Name of the city where the user is situated when the location update is
logged
7. area
Name of the local region where the user is situated when the location
update is logged. E.g. Skåne in Sweden
8. country
Name of the country where the user is situated when the location update
is logged
9. region
Name of the global region where the user is situated when the location
update is logged. E.g. Europe
10. latitude
Latitude for the location. Latitude has a precision of up to approximately
15 decimals, which corresponds to 0.1 nanometer or less. This precision
is not to be taken too seriously, as most mobile GPS modules has an
uncertainty of about 30 meters [ZB11].
11. longitude
Longitude for the location. Longitude has a precision of up to approxi-
mately 15 digits, which corresponds to 0.1 nanometer or less. The precau-
tions about precision are the same as for the latitude
12. altitude
Altitude represented in mm. Altitude is calculated from the gyroscope of
the phone together with information from the GPS
13. accuracy
Accuracy represented in mm.
Accuracy indicates that the user with a
conﬁdence of 68% is at the location inside a radius of the distance of
the accuracy [and]. The lower value, the better. This is deﬁned by the
operating system of the phone together with the GPS
14. devices
The device is represented as an array with name, type and id. Type is the
type of device (e.g. Phone), name is the name of the current device and
the id is the unique identiﬁer of the device
In our thesis the following attributes are of relevance to us:
==PAGE:19==
Test data
7
• useruuid
• start_time
• end_time
• country
• latitude
• longitude
• accuracy
These attributes has been chosen as they are important or interesting with
respect to the current thesis. useruuid is important to diﬀerentiate the users,
start_time and end_time are important as they show how long time the user
has been at the current location. country allows an easy ﬁltering of the users.
latitude and longitude are very important as they tell about the most central
issue i.e. the location where the user has been situated. accuracy can tell about
the conﬁdence to be associated with the current location update.
We will analyze the attributes of the test data and production data statistically.
3.1
Test data
The period for the test data stretches over 3 months: September - November
2015. In this period 2,665,893 location updates from 1,586 users were collected.
These users are all employees of Sony based around the world. This means that
they have some natural common meeting places which are Sony related, such
as Sony oﬃces in diﬀerent countries. This fact has an impact on the validity of
the data, and will be investigated later.
In Table 3.1 the statistic summary of accuracy can be seen. In the table we
can see that there are invalid values for the accuracy. The invalid values shows
up in the form of negative values. Of all location updates 20 show a negative
accuracy, which corresponds to less than 10 ppm.
Accuracy (mm)
Min
-2,147,483,500
Max
500,000
Mean
35,249
Std. dev.
3,672,390
Table 3.1: Statistic summary of dataset in test period
==PAGE:20==
8
Dataset
As accuracy aﬀects both latitude and longitude, which are the most important
attributes, the updates with negative accuracy are removed. Furthermore lo-
cation updates with an accuracy of more than 55.000 (55m) is removed. Our
binning will correspond to cells with a side length of maximum 111 meters. As
accuracy means the user with a conﬁdence of 68% is at the location plus inside a
radius of the distance of the accuracy, the maximum allowed accuracy is chosen
to be 55 meters, which is half the size of the maximum bin. This means that the
user with 68% conﬁdence is in the deﬁned bin on the condition that the user is
situated in the middle of the cell. This condition may not always be met. But
after all, it seems to be an adequate way to set the limit of the allowed accuracy.
See more in section 4.1.1.2, p. 28, about how binning is deﬁned and in chapter 6
about the challenges for binning and cell size.
After this reduction, the quantiles of the accuracy can be seen in Table 3.2.
Accuracy
Min
3,000
Q1
9,000
Median
20,000
Mean
22,565.72
Q3
35,541
Max
55,000
IQR
26,541
Std. dev. 14,669.72
Table 3.2: Quantiles of accuracy after cleaning
By looking at the values for the median and mean we see that most users have a
low value for the accuracy. If we assume a normal distribution for the accuracy
and use a 2 sigma value, 95% of the users have an accuracy between 7,896 and
37,235.44. This shows that there is a probability that a small number of users
must have high values for the accuracy, where the max is 50,000. The fact that
only a few users have high values is good because it also means that there are
many users with low (and good) accuracy. As the maximum for the accuracy
has been set at 50.000 we may with conﬁdence apply the users with a high value
of accuracy. If we later were to use a ﬁner binning it should be possible to do
this without removing too much data, because the accuracy values are as low
as they are.
The median value and the mean value are 23 m and 26.89 m respectively and
the 95% standard deviation is 7.9 m and 37.24 m.
When looking at which countries are represented in the dataset, we ﬁnd that
we have 74 unique countries. It turned out that there were a lot of location
updates where the country attribute had not been logged. In these occasions
==PAGE:21==
Test data
9
the county attribute was just represented by an empty string. This was the
case in so many updates that an empty string in the country attribute had
the second most common occurrence with about 500,000 location updates. As
it was important to be able to sort data on the basis of country, this was a
problem. The problem was solved by making a reverse geolocation. For almost
all of the 500,000 location updates with blank country deﬁnition the latitude
and longitude were logged, so it was possible by using an API[rev] to look up
the country on the basis of latitude and longitude, and insert the correct string
in the country attribute. By adjusting the dataset once, we avoided access to
the API every time scripts were run. This would have been very ineﬀective and
a waste of time. Furthermore the API had a limit for how many positions we
could look up every minute, which resulted that it took a week to get all data
resolved, running 24/7.
The use of reverse geolocation resulted in a reduction of the number of location
updates with blank country attributes from 500,000 to 130. The 130 where the
country couldn’t be found, was because of failure in the look-up. At the same
time new countries were represented in the dataset, so the number of countries
increased from 74 to 80 (incl. countries represented with an empty string).
After this we can investigate how the location updates are distributed across
the ﬁve countries with most updates. In ﬁgure 3.1 we can see that Sweden and
Japan are at the top of the list, whereas the country with an empty string is
outside the list (it moved down among the last 25%).
Figure 3.1: Distribution for number of location updates between the ﬁve coun-
tries with most updates
==PAGE:22==
10
Dataset
The fact that Sweden and Japan are the top of the list is not strange as Sony is
a Japanese company which took over Sony-Ericsson where Ericsson is a Swedish
company. Sony-Ericsson was once the mobile brand of Sony, so a large part of
Sony’s mobile development is still located in Sweden. This may explain why
Sweden has three times as many updates as Japan.
On the basis of ﬁgure 3.1, we will look at the data of Sweden and Japan going
forward and compare them. In Japan there are 316 unique users while in Sweden
there are 542. The two countries may have common users as users may travel
between several countries and thereby have location updates in several countries.
In the total number of location updates Japan has 261,4071 updates, whereas
Sweden has 938,840 updates for all three months.
Figure 3.2 compares the mean value of location updates in Japan and Sweden.
Figure 3.2: Distribution for mean of location updates for Japan and Sweden
We can see that Sweden has signiﬁcantly more updates than Japan during all
three months and in the two months September and October even twice as
much. We can also see a decreasing tendency in both countries. September
has the highest number of updates and thereafter the number decreases, where
November in Sweden has more that 300 updates less than in September. Even
as the tendency is more prominent for Sweden, it is also visible for Japan.
This will be investigated more closely later.
==PAGE:23==
Test data
11
As mentioned earlier we have identiﬁed commonly frequented Sony oﬃces in
Sweden and Japan. Three places in Sweden and one in Japan has been identiﬁed.
The reason for the importance of the oﬃces is that the co-occurrences within
are most likely work-related, and thus not necessarily a social tie.
It is therefore interesting to see how many updates for each country are made
inside the Sony oﬃces and how many are outside.
Figure 3.3: Shows how many of the updates that is outside/inside Sony
perimeters
Figure 3.3 show how updates are distributed with respect to whether they are
made on a gathering place or not. It can be seen for both countries that there
is a reasonably small proportion of updates inside gathering places. For Japan
and Sweden this value is 23.89% and 19.86% respectively. As we will only be
using location updates outside these perimeters, a lower percentage of location
updates within the perimeters is ideal. It is thus good for the purpose of this
thesis that a relatively large amount of updates are outside the gathering places.
For each of the two countries, the distribution of the updates between the users
is of interest. For this purpose the quantiles for each country are available in
Table 3.3.
When we look upon the quartile of the countries, we can see that the 25% quan-
==PAGE:24==
12
Dataset
Japan Sweden
Min
1
1
Q1
26
68
Median
233
840
Mean
851.49 1,735.38
Q3
994.5
2,642
Max
9,320
14,759
IQR
968.5
2,574
Table 3.3: Quantiles and mean over location updates for Japan and Sweden
tile (Q1) is very low in both countries. Q1 shows in other words that 25% of the
users in Japan and Sweden respectively has less than 26 and 68 updates during
these three months. It is not a good condition that so many users have so few
updates. The 75% quantile (Q3) is a good deal higher in Sweden than in Japan,
which shows that there are 75% of the users who has a maximum of 994.5 and
2,642 location updates in Japan and Sweden respectively. Again the data seems
better in Sweden where the users have more updates than in Japan.
Both countries have a small percentage of users with extraordinarily many up-
dates.
In Sweden there are 25% users who have between 2,642 and 14,759
updates and in Japan they have between 994.5 and 9,320 updates. As with Q1
this is a bad sign. Median and mean are very much larger in Sweden than in
Japan. This indicates that there are more users with many updates in Sweden
than in Japan.
The tendency described above can be shown more clearly by plotting the Cu-
mulative Distribution Function (CDF) for the two countries.
==PAGE:25==
Test data
13
Figure 3.4: Cumulative Distribution Function (CDF) over location updates
for Japan and Sweden over the three months of the period
The plot shows that in both Japan and Sweden, a large part of the users have
very few location updates during the whole period.
It can be seen that in
Japan the number of users with few updates increases faster than in Sweden.
As the updates are generated each time the user changes his location, it must
indicate that many of the users are very stationary or their mobile phones are not
sending data. It must be stated that stationary also encompasses the situation
where the user has forgotten his phone at home. In the data we can see the
diﬀerence between whether the phone has been switched oﬀor is stationary,
but not whether the phone is stationary or just forgotten. We can diﬀerentiate
between the situation with a phone not sending data and a stationary phone by
noting that in the ﬁrst case data are missing for a while whereas with a forgotten
phone there is a long time between start_time and end_time.
It is important to see if there is a pattern in the time-stamp of the updates, as
it may be possible on this background to identify better or worse sub-periods,
which may be taken into account. We have plotted heat maps to show distri-
bution of updates over 24 hours. These are produced by aggregating data from
a time slot in a 24 hour period. The aggregated data are based on whether the
user has had at least one update in the time slot of the day (represented by 0
or 1), regardless of which day it is.
==PAGE:26==
14
Dataset
Figure 3.5: Heat map for location updates over the 3 month period in Japan,
aggregated over a day with 60 minutes of bin size and log scale.
Users are sorted by total values.
Figure 3.5 shows how updates for each user (y-axis), are distributed over the
time of day, measured over all 3 months. The users are sorted according to their
total aggregated values, with the largest at the lowest part of the Y-axis.
We see there is a period between 02:00 AM and 06:00 AM where most users
do not have any updates, which might indicate that they either turn oﬀtheir
phone or for some other reason cease sending data. From 06:00 AM until 12:00
PM there are regular updates after which the number of updates decreases until
02:00 AM. If we compare this with Figure 3.7 we can see a reasonable good
correlation. Figure 3.7 shows the aggregated location updates over 24 hours in
both Japan and Sweden. Here we see the same development in Japan as the
heat map indicates, as described above.
It is quite surpricing that so many users cease sending data at night, but it has
no eﬀect on our work since we dont actively use the nights as features. Therefor
will we still use themm by keeping them in the dataset.
The above mentioned is also valid for Sweden (Figure 3.6), which show the same
as for Japan. Also here almost all users stop sending data between 02:00 AM
and 06:00 AM. No other time slots have a signiﬁcant deviation either in Japan
or in Sweden.
==PAGE:27==
Test data
15
When we initially plotted Figure 3.6, we discovered 16 users with an identical
number of location updates in every hour period, upon further investigation we
discovered the users all had duplicate location updates. We removed the users
from the dataset as they were likely test-users from Sweden.
Figure 3.6: Heat map for location updates over the 3 month period in Sweden,
aggregated over a day with 60 minutes of bin size. Users are sorted
by total number of location. Largest is at the bottom
==PAGE:28==
16
Dataset
Figure 3.7: Shows when the cumulative location updates occurring over a day.
The value of the updates are normalized
If we only look at Figure 3.7, we can see that in both countries the number of
updates have a peak at about 08:00 AM. In Sweden there is a further peak at
04:00 PM whereas in Japan there is no similar peak.
The peak at 08:00 AM may be caused by users moving from home to work and
in this process generates a lot of updates. Similarly the second peak (in Swe-
den) may be caused by users returning to their home again generating a certain
number of updates. It can be remarked that Japan does not have a similar
increase in location updates in the afternoon, but a slight increase at 7:00 PM
and higher values than Sweden from 21:00 PM until 01:00 AM.
We want to investigate how location updates are distributed over days. This
issue is interesting to investigate to see whether there are some days which
might be used with advantage instead of using all days. Furthermore it might
be possible to see a pattern for days of the week. We can imagine that the
weekend will hold less or more updates than working days because people go
out to socialize or perhaps the opposite, that they stay in.
==PAGE:29==
Test data
17
Figure 3.8: Heat map for mean location updates over the 3 month period in
Japan
Figure 3.8 shows how location updates per user in Japan (rounded to nearest
integer) is distributed for each day in each of the three months. We can for
example see that in Japan we have as a mean 16 updates per user on Friday in
week 2 of September.
Again we see that generally there are more updates in September than in the
other two months. The ﬁrst 3 weeks of September are especially pronounced.
October and November are similar except for a couple of days where November
has some higher values than some other days in October.
==PAGE:30==
18
Dataset
Figure 3.9: Heat map for mean location updates over the 3 month period in
Sweden
Figure 3.9 shows how location updates per user in Sweden (rounded to nearest
integer) is distributed for each day in each of the three months. As in Japan
we have in general more updates in September than in the other two months.
In Sweden this tendency is more pronounced than in Japan. As in Japan this
tendency has been observed in Figure 3.2, so it is not surprising.
It is peculiar that September for both countries are the most populated months.
In the two ﬁgures above, we plot the mean number of updates for each day.
Next we look at the location updates of each user.
==PAGE:31==
Test data
19
Figure 3.10: Heat map for mean location updates over the 3 month period in
Japan in log scale. x-axis is days and y-axis is users.
Figure 3.10 shows the number of updates for each user (y-axis), for each day in
each of the three months (x-axis) in Japan. Each row in each of the three heat
maps (one for each month) represents one user. So there are 316 number of
rows in each heat map. Each heat map is sorted so the user with most updates
in most days is in the lowest row. This means that the users are not necessarily
represented in the same row in all three heat maps. It can also be seen that
many users (approximately half) has no updates in some of the days for each of
the three months. This is reasonable from what is known from Figure 3.4 and
these users are as mentioned not necessarily the same over all the months.
The days and months are plotted this way as it gives a possibility to compare
the days for each month with each other.
It can be seen that there are relatively few users who have updates in all days
in a month. This is not optimal as we want to have as many location updates
in as many time slots as possible for all users. Furthermore we cannot be sure
that it is the same user that has updates in all days in the three months.
Again it seems that September has more users who have updates in relatively
more days than in the other months.
If we look at October, we can see pairs of days which form a pattern of light
vertical stripes in comparison with the other days. This indicates a lower amount
==PAGE:32==
20
Dataset
of updates. This is happening on the 3rd and 4th, 10th and 11th, 17th and 18th
and at last the 24th and 25th. These pairs pop up with an interval of a week,
where the 3rd is a Saturday and the 4th is a Sunday. This means that the other
pairs are also Saturdays and Sundays. This pattern is repeated in November
where it is really signiﬁcant on the 7th and 8th. The data for September are
not so distinct but the eﬀect is observable.
That weekends haver fewer updates than other days are interesting, but have no
negative contribution to our goal. Therefor will we still use weekends wellknown,
that it may not contribute as much.
Otherwise no days or periods stands out from the main data. The reason that the
31st September and November are empty is that these dates are invalid, while
the 31st of October exists. Therefore the dates for September and November
must be empty.
Figure 3.11: Heat map for mean location updates over the 3 month period in
Sweden in log scale. x-axis is days and y-axis is users
Figure 3.11 shows the same for Sweden. Again it can be seen that Saturdays
and Sundays deviates from the other days by having fewer updates. It seems
that September has fewer users without updates during the month than Japan,
where October and November are more similar in level to Japan.
==PAGE:33==
Test data
21
Sweden also has more users with updates every day than Japan.
By using Figure 3.10 and Figure 3.11 we can get a sense if there are some
irregularities of the updates for each day, for each user, e.g. that there are alot
of people each month with no updates. This can tell us, that it makes no sence
to use these users as they do no contributes to our goal.
One thing is to be able to see how the updates are distributed per day per user,
but it is not known whether all the updates for a day occurs in one hour or
whether they are distributed all over the day. We want to ﬁnd users with a
large number of location updates over each period. The more updates spread
out over the period, the greater probability we have of knowing if the users meet
or not in the period.
Figure 3.12: Plot over number of users which have location updates in certain
percentage unique time bins in each sub-period. A sub-period
is deﬁned in chapter 4, which is a period divided in three. For
three months a month is thus a sub-period
In chapter 4 we explain that the chosen period is divided into three sub-periods
to be able to train and analyze on these. Figure 3.12 shows how many users
who has location updates in a certain percentage of unique time bins in all
three sub-periods for a given period. For example we can see that there are
approximately 50 users who have updates in 40% of the possible time bins in
==PAGE:34==
22
Dataset
each of the three sub-periods in Sweden in September. From now on we will use
the term cross-occupancy when referring to the metric of users with a certain
percentage of time-bins occupied in all three sub-periods, we thus have 90 users
with 20% cross-occupancy. Here the 30 days of September are divided into the
following sub-periods: 1-10, 11-20, 21-30.
It can be seen that a large amount of users have updates in very few time bins
in each sub-period. The values are calculated with a resolution of 1%. Already
at 1% unique time bins the number for September in Sweden has changed from
542 to approximately 140. This means that 140 users have updates distributed
on 1% of the possible time bins in each sub-period. For the other months the
number is even lower. This is a very drastic decrease in the number of users.
As a sub-period in September has 10 days and our time bins have a size of one
hour, we have 10 · 24 = 240 possible time bins. 1% of this is equal to 240
100 = 2.4,
which means that the 140 users must have updates over 3 unique time bins in
each of the three sub-periods, as we shall round to the next higher integer. The
50 users with 40% cross-occupancy have updates over 96 unique time bins in
each period.
Using all months the sub-period is a month which is 30 - 31 days.
In general we can see that even if all the periods in both countries starts with
a huge dip, it ﬂattens out very quickly. September in Sweden is clearly better
than the other months in Sweden, whereas in Japan the situation is less clear.
Here it seems that the choice may be made between September and November.
40% cross-occupancy seems to be the best threshold. Here we still have some
users and not too low threshold.
3.1.1
App usage data
In this section we will describe the app usage portion of the data from the test
dataset. The data spanned the same months as the test data and was in the
same format.
The data contained the following attributes:
1. timestamp_seen
Milliseconds since the epoch showing when the app usage update is logged
on the server/cluster
2. id
Activity uuid represented as a string
3. useruuid
Unique user id represented as a string
==PAGE:35==
Test data
23
4. deleted_time
If the activity has been deleted, this is the timestamp when it occurred,
default is empty string
5. start_time
Time when the user enter an activity. Represented as an ISO8601 time
stamp with time zone
6. end_time
Time when the user leaves an activity. Represented as an ISO8601 time
stamp with time zone
7. package_name
The package name of the started activity
8. application_name
The human readable name of the started activity
9. category
Name of the the category of the application as determined by Sony Lifelog
10. genre
Name of the Google Play genre of the application
11. icon
An URL to the application icon image
12. devices
The device is represented as an array with name, type and id. Type is the
type of device (e.g. Phone), name is the name of the current device and
the id is the unique identiﬁer of the device
As can be seen from the attributes, the data contains information about which
apps the users are using and when they are using them (when the app is in the
foreground).
We use the data for implementing the App similarity measure as described in
chapter 4.
3.1.2
Demographics data
In this section we will describe the demographics portion of the data from the
test dataset.
The data consisted of a birthdates and genders for 1174 users.
The CSV ﬁle containing the data consisted of the following attributes:
==PAGE:36==
24
Dataset
1. useruuid
Unique user id represented as a string
2. gender
Gender of user represented as a string, "MALE" or "FEMALE"
3. birthdate
Birthdate of user represented as string in format yyyy-mm-dd
We decide to plot the distribution of the user ages, which can be seen in Figure
3.13. We can immediately see a huge outlier in number of users around 35 years
of age.
Figure 3.13: The distribution of user ages
Looking closer at the data we can see the most frequent birthdates are December
1st, 1980, (’1980-12-01’) for 346 users, January 1st, 1981, (’1981-01-01’) for 86
users, and May 16th, 1976, (’1976’05-16’) for 31 users.
We determine the two most frequent birthdates to be outliers as they occur
on the ﬁrst day of the month and are likely due to the users having accepted a
default birthdate in the app as theirs. Removing the outliers we have a birthdate
for the remaining 742 users.
We used the cleaned demographics data for implementing the homophily fea-
tures described in chapter 4.
When we ﬁrst obtained the demographics data, we identiﬁed 5 users in our
test datasets which were missing from the demographics data. We learned they
==PAGE:37==
Production data
25
were test-users, used for testing new features and thus we removed their location
updates, 10 in total, from our datasets.
3.2
Production data
In this section we will describe the production data with regular users from Sony
servers.
Initially we tried using a newer month than the months from our test data,
however we found the months did not have geocoding data (region, country,
area, place) and thus we could not ﬁlter by country. An option would be to
do reverse geocoding on the data. Another option would be a coarse ﬁltration
where we use the borders of Sweden in terms of latitude and longitude. Both of
these options would take time. Instead we found the newest month folders with
geocoding data intact was 09-15, 10-15, 11-15, the same months we had as test
data, and we decided to use September as we have for the test data.
We found the data folder for 09-15 had 929,697,167 location updates. After
our ﬁltration by Sweden, accuracy and just the period of September we found
a remaining number of location updates of 2,450,205 and number of users of
12,692.
We divided September into three periods, 1-10, 11-20, and 21-30 and extracted
two datasets, one using all users and another using only the users with a certain
cross-occupancy threshold. Using a cross-occupancy threshold of 40% we found
296 users in period 1, 457 users in period 2, and 12561 users in period 3.
As we can see there is a very large inﬂux of users in period 3, this could perhaps
be due to a new version of Sony Lifelog released in that exact period, this could
also mean the number of 12,692 users could in reality be much lower in the ﬁrst
two periods. Of the users in each period we found none with 40% in all three
periods, thus we picked a lower threshold of 10%.
3.3
Summary
In this section we will present the most important ﬁndings in the analysis above.
We have found that Sweden and Japan were the two countries with the largest
representation of number of location updates. On this basis we proceeded with
the two countries, furthermore we found data with invalid values for accuracy
which we removed. The data with an accuracy value of more than 50.000 were
removed as well because of the binning size. The data were preprocessed further
by updating nearly all of the 500.000 location updates with a missing country
==PAGE:38==
26
Dataset
attribute, which increased our number of represented countries. After prepro-
cessing, we concluded that Sweden and Japan most suitable in terms of number
of location updates.
We found a decreasing tendency in the number of updates between the months
where September had the most updates, where after the number decreased in
the two following months. Of all the updates 23.89% and 19.86% respectively
in Sweden and Japan occurred on Sony locations.
When we looked at the 542 and 316 users in Sweden and Japan respectively,
many had very few updates over all three months. It is assumed that many
turned their phone oﬀin the period 02:00 AM to 06:00 AM which leads to the
few updates. This was valid for both Sweden and Japan. Furthermore it can be
seen that the number of updates peaks at 08:00 AM and 04:00 PM in Sweden,
where the number in Japan only peaks at 08:00 AM. Japan has no corresponding
peak at 04:00 PM.
At last we found that in general there were not as many updates Saturdays and
Sundays as for the other days. We also found that when we looked upon how
many users who had updates over several time bins in each sub-period (called
cross-occupancy), the number of users decreased very rapidly as a function of
the number of time bins until a certain number. After this the decrease was
very slow. In Sweden for September there were approximately 140 users having
updates over 3 time bins in each sub-period, corresponding to 1% of the possible
time bins in each sub-period. If we looked at the number for 40% (96 time bins
in each sub-period) there were approximately 50 users.
On the basis of this it seems that the data for Sweden in September looks
most promising, and we will use them in our models. We will also use a cross-
occupancy at 40%
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 4
Methods
In this section we will outline which methods we have used for conducting the
work.
4.1
Data preparation
When we got the dataset it was stored in three folders, one for each month (9,
10, 11) and within each folder were multiple chunks of data in Apache Avro
format[apa] which we learned is a format similar to JSON and easily convert-
ible. The chunks were contained in folders bearing the number for each month,
however they were sorted by when the server had received the data packet con-
taining the location from the phone and not when the phone had registered the
location. The app is storing the collected data on the users phone for a maxi-
mum of one month, if the data is not uploaded within a month it is discarded.
This approach to data collection means the month folders can contain location
updates from the previous month as well.
4.1.1
Preparation of Test data
In this section we will demonstrate what we have done to prepare the test data.
==PAGE:40==
28
Methods
4.1.1.1
Data import to database
We converted the Apache Avro formatted ﬁles to JSON format and imported
them to a PostgreSQL database which allowed us to easily manipulate the data
using SQL. We created a single table with the schema shown in Table 4.1. We
decided to compute the time and spatial bins on insertion, thus we only had to
compute them once. We created indexes on the following features: start_time,
end_time, location, useruuid, spatial_bin, time_bins, country. Initially we cre-
ated a normalized database with several relations. We discovered however that a
deonormalized database might improve our performance, as we reduce the num-
ber of tables and and thus the number of joins required[SS01]. The interaction
with the data consists mostly of data extraction, after the initial insertion of the
data and after removing all relations our performance improved signiﬁcantly.
Field name
Field type
id
SERIAL PRIMARY KEY
useruuid
TEXT NOT NULL
start_time
TIMESTAMPTZ NOT NULL
end_time
TIMESTAMPTZ NOT NULL
location
GEOGRAPHY(POINT, 4326)
altitude
INTEGER NOT NULL
accuracy
INTEGER NOT NULL
region
TEXT
country
TEXT
area
TEXT
place
TEXT
time_bins
INTEGER[] NOT NULL
spatial_bin
BIGINT NOT NULL
Table 4.1: Denormalized database schema
4.1.1.2
Binning
In the following section the term grid cell or spatial bin will be used synony-
mously, the same holds for time interval and time bin. A spatiotemporal co-
occurrence between two users is deﬁned as an instance in which they co-occurred
in approximately the same time and approximately the same place. We have
partitioned or binned the globe into a discrete grid where the cells span .001°
of latitude and longitude on each side (approximately 111m at the equator),
and in a discrete time interval of 1-hour. Thus we say a co-occurrence happens
between users i and j if they share the same .001° spatial cell C within the same
discrete time interval. We chose 0.001 as bin size as the location updates from
==PAGE:41==
Data preparation
29
GPS allowed for a high resolution.
Each grid cell has a unique ID, this is obtained by considering the grid as a
matrix and ﬂattening it to a list by traversing from left to right and top to
bottom (row-ﬁrst ordering) and using the list index as an ID. This makes a
total possible spatial bin indexes of:
(190 · d) · (360 · d)
where d is the number of decimals. This makes in our case a total number of
spatial bins of 68.400.000.000 with our case of d = 3.
We calculated the time bins by counting every hour from the start of the day of
the earliest date appearing in the dataset, which has the ISO 8601 timestring:
"2015-08-09 22:25:33.766+02".
The last day has the ISO 8601 timestring:
"2015-12-01 00:59:15.738+01".
This makes 2 hours and 23 days of August,
30 days of September, 31 days of October, 30 days of November and a single
hour of December plus another hour between timezones. This leaves us with
2 + (23 + 30 + 31 + 30) · 24 + 1 + 1 = 2740
possible time bin IDs.
As each location update has a start_time and an end_time, each update will
result in one or more entries for each time bin dependent on the duration be-
tween start_time and end_time. We chose a time bin size of 1 hour as the
location updates between users were sparse.
For generating our dataset we
count co-occurrences between dyads only once per distinct spatial and time bin,
as duplicates would result in an artiﬁcially inﬂated number of co-occurrences
between dyads.
Figure 4.1: Illustration of spatiotemporal co-occurrences, users i and j have
2 co-occurrences in spatial bin 1 and 3, the users in spatial bin 6
have diﬀerent time bins.
==PAGE:42==
30
Methods
4.1.1.3
Visualization
We used Basemap[bas], for plotting static visualizations of all the locations at
once and Leaﬂet[lea] for producing interactive maps to visualize the data. We
created a map for visualizing the users location traces over time and we created
one that allowed us to see all the co-occurrences that happened between a pair
of users.
Figure 4.2: Location updates in Sweden, hex-binned in log scale with markers
to Sony-related properties where we can see increased activity
==PAGE:43==
Data preparation
31
Figure 4.3: Location updates in Japan, hex-binned in log scale with markers
to Sony, Tokyo which also shows increased activity
Figure 4.2 and Figure 4.3 shows all location updates from Sweden and Japan for
the three months plotted on a map. On Figure 4.2 we can see increased activity
around Sony-related properties in Lund[sonc], Kista[sonb], and at Ericsson AB
in Göteborg[eri]. Likewise on Figure 4.3 we can see increased activity at the Sony
headquarters[sond] in Tokyo. We exclude co-occurrences from these locations
for our dataset as they are work-related and being at the same workplace does
not constitute a valid co-occurrence.
==PAGE:44==
32
Methods
Figure 4.4: User pair with high number of co-occurrences clustered for whole
period at Sony perimeters, blue traces are location updates
Figure 4.4 shows an example of the co-occurrences visualized for a dyad in
Sweden having lots of co-occurrences within the Sony perimeter. This enabled
us to exclude co-occurrences from these locations from our dataset as we are
looking for co-occurrences outside of the users work.
==PAGE:45==
Data preparation
33
Figure 4.5: Distribution of co-occurrences inside and outside Sony perimeters
We decided to look at just how many co-occurrences happened inside the Sony
perimeter. Figure 4.5 shows the number of co-occurrences inside and outside
Sony perimeters, here we see a massive amount of co-occurrences happening
inside the Sony perimeters. This can pose a problem as we will only be looking
at co-occurrences between users that is outside Sony perimeters.
4.1.1.4
Data export to Numpy arrays
We found that query the database for calculating the features took too long. In-
stead, we created scripts for exportation to Numpy arrays and refactored some
of the code to run with Numpy. The users were encoded with K values where
K = number of users. The countries were encoded with K values where K =
number of countries.
Due to Numpys internal optimization, our code ran alot faster than with database.
Each row in the dataset represent a dyad of users and the features computed
for them as well as the binary label of whether they met in the next period or
not. We used it in the sklearn module.
4.1.2
Preparation of Production data
In this section we will demonstrate what we have done to prepare the production
data for analysis.
The methods for binning of production data are the same as for test data4.1.1.2.
==PAGE:46==
34
Methods
4.1.2.1
Code preparation - Apache Spark
The production data were stored on Sony’s Apache Spark[spa] cluster.
To manipulate the data, we converted some of our previously written code for
use in RDDs (Resilient Distributed Datasets) and Dataframes which are fault-
tolerant collections native to Spark that can be operated on in parallel. As the
size of our datasets were manageable we opted not to use the built-in machine
learning library of Spark MLlib and thus we saved the datasets in LibSVM
format which enabled us to import the datasets in sci-kit learn.
4.2
Modeling
In this subsection we will describe the model and features used for prediction.
As we do not have ground truth for friendship, we decided to use a meeting in
a next period as a proxy for friendship.
We will try to answer the following question: Can we predict if people meet in a
period based on their spatiotemporal patterns in a previous period. The models
and algorithms we use are implemented in scikit-learn[sci] a Python module for
machine learning.
4.2.1
Models
For our work we will use two models, Logistic Regression and Random Forest.
For each model we will ﬁrst ﬁt them on the complete period of 3 months and the
single month of September as found in chapter 3. Furthermore we will use all of
the users as well as a subset of users meeting our criteria for cross-occupancy as
found in chapter 3 of 40% and 10% for test and production data respectively.
For the datasets we will use an outer loop of 2-fold cross-validation and an inner
loop of randomized search. We chose 2-fold cross-validation as it enables us to
validate both our training and test sets and provide us with a better estimate
on how well our models will generalize. We choose randomized search over grid
search because of the eﬃciency in computation time. We will use ROC AUC as
the score function for the randomized search.
4.2.1.1
Logistic Regression
The Logistic Regression model will be used as the baseline model. It will be
ﬁt on only one feature, whether or not people have had two co-occurrences in
==PAGE:47==
Modeling
35
distinct spatial bins. We will compare the predictive strength of just that one
feature to several diﬀerent features ﬁtted to a Random Forest model.
4.2.1.2
Random Forest
The random forest is an ensemble learning classiﬁer which means it ﬁts several
models to obtain better predictive performance than just a single model would
achieve. In the case of the random forest it ﬁts several decision trees. Each
decision tree is ﬁtted with a random sample with replacement of the training
data, a technique called bagging. Furthermore it uses a random subset of fea-
tures. The predicted class will then be the mode of predictions of the decision
trees.
In the following sections we will describe the diﬀerent features which our models
are ﬁtted on.
4.2.2
Spatial Features
4.2.2.1
Speciﬁcity
The total number of co-occurrences between two users divided by the sum of
the two users location updates. Feature ID: 14
4.2.2.2
Number of co-occurrences
The total number of co-occurrences between users. Feature ID: 7.
4.2.2.3
Diversity of a co-occurrence
We use the diversity measure taken from the papers of Shahabi and Pham[SP15][PL14].
Diversity is a measure of how important the spatial locations of the co-occurrences
between a dyad is, given how many times they appear. The diversity measure
uses the Shannon entropy, which holds the amount of location information in
the co-occurrences of each dyad and yields a higher value with more locations
and a more equal distribution of updates for each location. Feature ID: 2. The
Shannon entropy is deﬁned by Equation 4.2.1
HS
ij = −
X
l
P l
ij log P l
ij = −
X
l,cij,l̸=0
cij,l
fij
log cij,l
fij
(4.2.1)
where fij, the frequency, is the total number of co-occurrences between user i
and user j, and cij,l, the local frequency, is the total number of co-occurrences
==PAGE:48==
36
Methods
between user i and j at location l. From this the diversity is deﬁned by taking
the exponential function of the entropy deﬁned in Equation 4.2.2:
Ds
ij = exp(HS
ij)
(4.2.2)
4.2.2.4
Two unique co-occurrences
If the user i and j has at least two unique co-occurrences in terms of spatial
bins. This feature is only used for the baseline model. Feature ID: 0.
4.2.2.5
Unique co-occurrences
The number of unique co-occurrences in terms of spatial bins between two users
i and j. Feature ID: 3.
4.2.2.6
Weighted frequency
We use the weighted frequency measure taken from the papers of Shahabi and
Pham[SP15][PL14].
Weighted frequency is a measure of how important the
co-occurrences at non-popular places are. It uses the Shannon entropy for a
location, where a more crowded place yields a higher entropy. Feature ID: 4.
The weighed frequency is deﬁned by Equation 4.2.3
Fij =
X
l
cij,l × exp(−Hl)
(4.2.3)
where Hl is the entropy for location l deﬁned in Equation 4.2.4
Hl =
X
u,Pu,l̸=0
Pu,l log Pu,l
(4.2.4)
where Pu,l is the probability that a location update from location l belongs to
user u.
4.2.2.7
Co-occurrences weighted with respect to each location
We use the weighted co-occurrences measure proposed in the master’s thesis
of Sapieżyński[Sap13]. The co-occurrences between users i and j are weighted
by how many other people are present in the same spatial bin and time bin.
Feature ID: 5.
==PAGE:49==
Modeling
37
4.2.2.8
Common travels
We use the common travels measure proposed in the master’s thesis of Sapieżyński[Sap13].
The number of common travels between two users. Common travels are deﬁned
when user i and user j co-occur in consecutive time-bins with each spatial bin
being diﬀerent than the previous one. Feature ID: 6.
4.2.2.9
Mutual co-occurrences
Number of mutual co-occurrences, the mutual co-occurrences for user i and j
will be the number of users, with whom they share co-occurrences. Feature
ID:8.
4.2.3
Homophily Features
Based on the work by McPherson et al.[MSLC01] on homophily in personal
networks, we have tried to create several features based on homophily between
users.
4.2.3.1
Within 6 years of age
McPherson et al.[MSLC01] found that age homophily is a strong dimension with
respect to close friendship. This feature explains if a dyad of users are within 6
years of age of each other. Because this feature is categorical, we apply one-hot-
encoding which converts it to three binary features, NO, YES, N/A. Feature
ID: 13,14,15
4.2.3.2
Same gender
This feature explains if a dyad of users share the same gender. Because this
feature is categorical, we apply one-hot-encoding which converts it to three
binary features, NO, YES, N/A.Feature ID: 16,17,18
4.2.3.3
App usage similarity
The Jaccard index is a measure used in comparing the similarity of sample sets.
We extract what apps two users have i and j used in the period and compute the
==PAGE:50==
38
Methods
similarity between them using the Jaccard index. Feature ID:9. The Jaccard
index is deﬁned in Equation 4.2.5
J(Ai, Aj) = |Ai ∩Aj|
|Ai ∪Aj|
(4.2.5)
where Ai is the set of apps used by user i and Aj is the set of apps used by user
j. If Ai and Aj are empty sets we deﬁne J(Ai, Aj) = 1
4.2.4
Temporal features
In this section we have features related to the time of the co-occurrences.
4.2.4.1
Timely arrival and leaving
We use the timely arrival and leaving measure proposed in the master’s thesis of
Sapieżyński[Sap13]. Sapieżyński argued that two persons arriving or leaving a
location synchronously could be more indicative of friendship than them arriving
or leaving non-synchronously.
If for every co-occurrence one of the persons
remains in the antecedent or subsequent time bin, the co-occurrence is non-
synchronously arrived or left at. Feature ID: 1.
4.2.4.2
Number of weekends
How many co-occurrences between two users happened in the weekend, deﬁned
as either a Friday after 18:00, a Saturday or a Sunday. Feature ID: 11.
4.2.4.3
Number of evenings
How many co-occurrences between two users happened after 18:00. Feature ID:
10.
4.3
Summary
In this section we will give an overview of which model we will ﬁt on which
data. As Logistic Regression works as our baseline and Random Forest will be
compared up against Logistic Regression, we will end up with pairs of Logistic
Regression and Random Forest. We will come back to this later.
First we will show which features the two models (Logistic Regression and Ran-
dom Forest) use on which dataset.
==PAGE:51==
Summary
39
Feature ID
Feature name
Test data
Production data
T-LR
T-RF
P-LR
P-RF
0
Two unique co-occurrences


1
Timely arrival and leaving

2
Diversity


3
Unique co-occurrences


4
Weighted frequency


5
Co-occurrences weighted


6
Common travels

7
Number of co-occurrences


8
Mutual co-occurrences


9
App usage similarity

10
Number of evenings


11
Number of weekends


12
Speciﬁcity


13,14,15
Within 6 years of age [NO, YES, N/A]

16,17,18
Same gender [NO, YES, N/A]

Table 4.2: Overview of the features used by each model in Test data and Pro-
duction data. T-LR = Test data Logistic Regression, T-RF = Test
data Random Forest, P-LR = Production data Logistic Regression,
P-RF = Production data Random Forest
Table 4.2 give an overview, where we have a Logistic Regression and Random
Forest for both Test data and Production data. Both Logistic Regressions (T-
LR & P-LR) will only use one feature, as earlier explained, as it will be used
as the baseline. The Random Forest models (T-RF & P-RF) will be using all
of the features for Test data and some of the features for Production data. See
chapter 6 on why we only used some of the features.
Table 4.3 shows which sub-period and data delimitations each of the models
from Table 4.2 (T-LR, T-RF, P-LR, P-RF) uses.
==PAGE:52==
40
Methods
Data
delimitation
Model
T-LR
T-RF
P-LR
P-RF
All three month


September
All users


September
Users with
40% cross-occupancy


September
Users with
10% cross-occupancy


Table 4.3: Overview of which models from Table 4.2 (T-LR, T-RF, P-LR, P-
RF) that uses which sub-period and other delimitations
As Table 4.3 shows, we end up with four model-pairs. Each represented as a
row in the table:
• All three month (September, October, November) for all users
Name ID: TP-1
• For September for all users
Name ID: PP-1
• For September for users with 40% cross-occupancy
Name ID: TP-2
• For September for users with 10% cross-occupancy
Name ID: PP-2
For each of the pairs (TP-1, PP-1, TP-2, PP-2), the Random Forest will be
compared with the baseline, the Logistic Regression.
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 5
Results
In this chapter we will show and discuss the results of the work we have reached
in this thesis.
We will start by looking at the train and test sets of the four dataset (see
Table 4.3 and below) and describe what we did about class imbalance. Then we
describe and interpret our results and we end the chapter with a brief summary
of our ﬁndings.
From chapter 4 we have found the following datasets and model pairs based on
the available data (see also Table 4.2 and Table 4.3):
1. Test data
(a) without user-ﬁltering
Model pair: TP-1
(b) with user-ﬁltering using cross-occupancy of 40%
Model pair: TP-2
2. Production data
(a) without user-ﬁltering
Model pair: PP-1
(b) with user-ﬁltering using cross-occupancy of 10%
Model pair: PP-1
==PAGE:54==
42
Results
For our test data without user-ﬁltering we found a training set with 1798 neg-
ative samples (did not meet) and 9203 positive samples (did meet). In our test
set we found a more moderate 5513 negative samples (did not meet) and 1674
positive samples (did meet).
Using test data with user-ﬁltering in just September we found a training set
with 118 that did not meet and 95 that did meet. The test set consisted of 151
that did not meet and 98 that did meet.
Using production data without user-ﬁltering we found 5585 that did not meet
and 10907 that did meet for our training set, for our test set we found 9148 that
did not meet and 10028 that did meet.
Using production data with user-ﬁltering we found 403 that did not meet and
4533 that did meet for our train set and 402 that did not meet and 4630 that
did meet for our test set.
The datasets composed from the test data have more negative samples than
positive samples.
In TP-1 the diﬀerence is more pronounced than in TP-2,
except for the training set. In the production data, we have the opposite. Here
we have more positive samples than negative.
This shows that for some of the datasets we have a class imbalance problem.
Due to this, the Logistic Regression classiﬁer we trained initially predicted the
largest prevalent class, in our training dataset. The next section explains this
problem and how we dealt with it.
5.1
Class Imbalance Problem
The Class Imbalance Problem is when the total number of samples for one
class greatly exceeds the number of samples for a diﬀerent class. A number of
techniques can be used to handle the class imbalance problem, two of the most
common techniques are called oversampling and undersampling[TSK+06]. In
oversampling you sample the minor sample with replacement until there is an
equal number of positive and negative samples. In undersampling you randomly
sample from the major class N times where N is the number of minor classes.
The drawbacks of undersampling is the loss of information in the dataset, as
samples from the major class is removed.
The advantage is, that all of the
minority class is maintained, where in oversampling we create duplicate copies
of the minority class, which can cause overﬁtting. We will train our models with
and without undersampling our datasets, to see how it aﬀects our performance
metrics.
==PAGE:55==
Performance metrics
43
5.2
Performance metrics
We utilize the precision and recall metrics for evaluating the performance of our
models as well as AUC of the ROC Curve.
5.2.1
Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC)
The Receiver Operating Characteristic or ROC in short, illustrates the perfor-
mance of a binary classiﬁer in terms of the true positive rate (TPR, also called
recall) plotted against the false positive rate (FPR) at diﬀerent discrimination
thresholds. As points on the ROC-curve represents diﬀerent thresholds with an
associated (TPR,FPR) pair, it allows us to see diﬀerent trade-oﬀs between TPR
and FPR. The ROC curve is useful for comparing the relative performance of
diﬀerent classiﬁers[TSK+06]. The area under the curve (AUC) represents the
probability, that a classiﬁer will rank a random positive sample higher than a
negative sample, assuming positive ranks higher. An AUC of 0.5 would mean
the model would just randomly guess the class of each sample. We will use the
ROC AUC as a metric for comparing our diﬀerent models.
In Figure 5.1 we have plotted the ROC curve and ROC AUC for the diﬀerent
model pairs. We have also plotted the curve of a randomly guessing classiﬁer for
comparison. Figure 5.2 shows the same models performance, where the datasets
most prevalent class have been undersampled. We used randomized search to
ﬁnd the optimal hyper-parameters in the Random Forest models, choosing from
gini or entropy as split criterion, and 1 −9 max features for each split. The
randomized search runs for 20 iterations, where each iteration performs a 3-fold
cross-validation to validate the parameters of the model, we used ROC AUC as
the scoring function. When the best parameters for the model are found, 2-fold
cross-validation is performed to validate the model.
Looking at Figure 5.1 we see the Random Forest model is higher than baseline
for every case. Looking at the case of using all users, the diﬀerence is miniscule,
but using the users with a cross-occupancy threshold makes it more pronounced.
Comparing test with production the outputs look similar.
==PAGE:56==
44
Results
Figure 5.1: Mean ROC AUC of Logistic Regression (LR) and Random Forest
(RF) in the four model-pairs (TP-1, TP-2, PP-1, PP-2) using ran-
domized search for hyper-parameter optimization (internal loop
with 3-fold cross-validation) and 2-fold cross-validation.
Looking at Figure 5.2 we see similar results as without undersampling.
==PAGE:57==
Performance metrics
45
Figure 5.2: Mean ROC AUC of Logistic Regression (LR) and Random Forest
(RF) in the four model-pairs (TP-1, TP-2, PP-1, PP-2) using ran-
domized search for hyper-parameter optimization (internal loop
with 3-fold cross-validation) and 2-fold cross-validation, and with
undersampling of the most prevalent class
Comparing Figure 5.1 and 5.2 it seems undersampling does not make a signiﬁ-
cant diﬀerence for performance between the models.
Overall we ﬁnd the Random forest provides a higher ROC AUC score than the
baseline model and thus that it does a better job of predicting classes, albeit
not by much.
In the next section we will look at the performance of the models in terms of
the precision and recall scores of the positive class.
5.2.2
Precision and Recall
We will use the metrics Precision and Recall to further evaluate the performance
of our models.
Precision and Recall are deﬁned using the following measures: True positive
(TP), the number of records predicted to be positive which really are positive.
False positive (FP), the number of records predicted to be positive but are
==PAGE:58==
46
Results
negative. Lastly, FN which is false negative, the number of records predicted
to be negative which actually are positive.
Precision or the positive predictive value (PPV) is a metric that measures the
number of a given class that are correctly identiﬁed in proportion to the number
of classes that are predicted to be that class.
Recall, or the true positive rate (TPR), is a metric that measures the number of
a given class that are correctly identiﬁed as that class. PPV and TPR is deﬁned
in Equation 5.2.1 and Equation 5.2.2 respectively.
PPV =
TP
TP + FP
(5.2.1)
TPR =
TP
TP + FN
(5.2.2)
As a summary we have the F1 score which is the harmonic mean of the preci-
sion and recall. Since the score tend to be closer to the lowest value (of preci-
sion and recall), a high F1 score ensures precision and recall to be reasonably
high[TSK+06]. The F1 score is deﬁned in Equation 5.2.3
F1 =
2 · TP
2 · TP + FP + FN
(5.2.3)
In Table 5.1 and 5.2 we can see the performance metrics of the diﬀerent classiﬁers
for the positive class (did meet), in the dataset without and with undersampling
respectively.
Model
PPV
TPR
F1-score
LR in TP-1
0.25
0.67
0.37
RF in TP-1
0.47
0.15
0.23
LR in TP-2
0.53
0.68
0.59
RF in TP-2
0.54
0.52
0.53
LR in PP-1
0.66
0.74
0.70
RF in PP-1
0.65
0.61
0.63
LR in PP-2
0.94
0.81
0.87
RF in PP-2
0.93
0.99
0.96
Table 5.1: Models performance metrics for the positive class (did meet) with-
out undersampling
==PAGE:59==
Performance metrics
47
Looking at Table 5.1 we ﬁnd the recall is higher for the baseline for all of the
datasets except for PP-2. The precision values for the diﬀerent models have
similar values for each dataset.
Looking at the F1 score which considers both precision and recall we see that
each model pair performs better than the last when considering the datasets
in sequence. This might be because the users of the production data are less
homogeneous than the users in the test data and biases or noise which might be
inherent in the test data might not be present in the production data. Further-
more ﬁltering users on cross-occupancy, ensured the users had data in all periods
and thus reduce the number of cases where they might have a co-occurrence,
but fails to show it due to lack of location updates.
The F1 score also shows that the baseline is better in all the pairs except for
PP-2. This is surprising but might be because some of our features are not
important to the classiﬁcation task and presents themselves as noise.
Model
PPV +
TPR +
f-score
LR in TP-1
0.25
0.67
0.37
RF in TP-1
0.28
0.53
0.37
LR in TP-2
0.53
0.68
0.59
RF in TP-2
0.53
0.62
0.57
LR in PP-1
0.66
0.74
0.70
RF in PP-1
0.66
0.56
0.61
LR in PP-2
0.94
0.81
0.87
RF in PP-2
0.95
0.89
0.92
Table 5.2: Models performance metrics for the positive class (did meet) with
undersampling
In Table 5.2 with undersampling we see similar values for precision and recall as
found without undersampling. Looking at the F1 score we see the highest score
coming from the RF model in PP-2, but values are higher from the baseline
models for the other datasets.
It seems undersampling does not aﬀect the scores notably with respect to the
positive class, perhaps except for the RF model in TP-1.
5.2.3
Feature importance
The Random Forest model allows for ﬁnding the relative importance of the dif-
ferent features. The depth of a feature in the trees can be used to determine
==PAGE:60==
48
Results
importance, as features at the top of the tree contributes to the prediction deci-
sion over a larger fraction of samples. The average is then computed from each
tree in the forest to obtain the ﬁnal feature importances.
Figure 5.3 shows the mean of the feature importances of the random forest of
PP2 and Figure 5.4 shows it for TP-2.
Figure 5.3: Feature importances of random forest for PP2
We can see for PP-2, the features which contribute most are features 8 (mutual
co-occurrences), 12 (speciﬁcity), 5 (co-occurrences weighted), 4 (weighted fre-
quency), 2 (diversity), 7 (number of co-occurrences), 3 (unique co-occurrences).
Feature 10 (number of evenings) contributes very little and 11 (number of week-
ends) seems to have no variance.
Figure 5.4: Feature importances of random forest for PP2
==PAGE:61==
Performance metrics
49
For TP-2 we ﬁnd features 8 (mutual co-occurrences), 12 (speciﬁcity), 4 (weighted
frequency) and 5 (co-occurrences weighted) are the most important. Feature 10
(number of evenings) again contributes very little.
Since we have not implemented the same amount of features for PP-2 and TP-2,
is it diﬃcult to compare them. Though we can see that the top 4 features are
the same for PP-2 and TP-2.
Next we try to look at the diﬀerences in features between the meet and non-
meets of the TP-2 and PP-2 dataset. We chose to look at both because TP-2
represents more features but PP-2 represents data for regular users.
Looking at Figure 5.5 to 5.9 for the TP-2 dataset, we can see features which
have very little variance like number of weekends, evenings and common travels.
For Co-occurrences weighted we can note a slightly higher mean for the class
did meet. For the homophily features, being within 6 years is higher for the did
meet group, we see no signiﬁcant diﬀerence relating to gender. Diversity and
weighted frequency have large outliers. Looking at the plots, weighted frequency
and especially diversity, is higher for did meet. A large diversity signiﬁes a user
pair with a very large number of locations between them, which seems to be
more common for people who meet in the next period. Speciﬁcity holds higher
values for the did meet class.
As number of co-occurrences, mutual co-occurrences and speciﬁcity have higher
medians for the class did meet, and two of the three also contributed most to the
importances for our features, we regard those as most important for predicting
did meet for TP-2.
==PAGE:62==
50
Results
Figure 5.5: Boxplots of and barplots of features of TP2
Figure 5.6: Boxplots of features of TP2
==PAGE:63==
Performance metrics
51
Figure 5.7: Boxplots and barplots of features of TP2
Figure 5.8: Boxplots of features of TP2
==PAGE:64==
52
Results
Figure 5.9: Boxplots of features of TP2
Figure 5.10: Boxplots of and barplots of features of PP-2
==PAGE:65==
Performance metrics
53
Figure 5.11: Boxplots of features of PP-2
Figure 5.12: Boxplots and barplots of features of PP-2
Looking at Figure 5.10 to Figure 5.12 which explains the features of PP-2,
we see lower medians for the features: number of co-occurrences, mutual co-
occurrences, and speciﬁcity. The implementation for the number of weekends
feature was faulty in the production dataset which explains the lack of variance
of the feature. We found two extreme outliers in speciﬁcity (12) for PP-2, which
had values greater than 1, which would suggest they had more co-occurrences
than the sum of their location updates, which should be impossible. We removed
these outliers from the data.
==PAGE:66==
54
Results
5.3
Summary
In this section we will present the most important results.
The ROC AUC of the random forest compared to the baseline was higher for
every dataset.
This suggests however, that it is simply better at predicting
the negative class, did not meet, as the precision and recall scores are similar
for the positive class, did meet. The performance of the models improve, when
ﬁltering the users on cross-occupancy, but undersampling provided no signiﬁcant
diﬀerence.
We found the production data made the models achieve a higher performance
in terms of precision and recall compared to the test data.
The most important features between datasets for the random forest models
were mutual co-occurrences, speciﬁcity, co-occurrences weighted and weighted
frequency.
The datasets TP-2 and PP-2 collectively had lower medians for number of co-
occurrences, speciﬁcity and mutual co-occurrences for did meet, which suggests
these are the strongest predictors for, if people meet in the next period.
We also found a larger number of people which met in the period, were within 6
years of age for the TP-2 dataset, which might suggest homophily of age plays
a part for people who did meet.
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 6
Discussion
In this section we will discuss the work we have done and the limitations of it.
We found that compared to the test dataset, our models worked better for
production data in terms of predicting the positive class according to our F1
scores for the models. We suspect this could be due to a low number of data-
points for the users of the test-data. The homogeneity of the users as Sony
employees could also be a factor as they are colleagues and mostly see each
other as such. This means they have regular noisy co-occurrences which could
be attributed to their work relations and not due to them being friends.
Furthermore a dataset with a subset of users which met our criteria of cross-
occupancy worked best for training our models. This results in a higher prob-
ability of detecting whether user dyads had a co-occurrence or not in a period
and also resulted in features generated on the basis of more data.
We found that the performance of our random forest was not very signiﬁcant
compared to the baseline model at least in terms of predicting the positive
class. It seems it does a better job of predicting the negative class based on the
higher scores of the ROC AUC and confusion matrices produced, which we did
not include in the report which takes into account true negative. The absence
of a performance diﬀerence between the models could be due to the label of
predicting whether they meet in the next period or not. The optimal features
for prediction of a meeting in the next period might not align with the optimal
features for predicting a social tie, thus two unique co-occurrences can be a
==PAGE:68==
56
Discussion
suﬃcient metric.
Initially we tried to infer social ties based on app usage for use as ground truth.
We did not have directed call-logs available so we could not reliably say if for
example two people were calling each other.
However the idea was that if
we could ﬁnd users with a similar time stamp and duration in an app, they
could perhaps be communicating with each other either through phone calls
or messaging apps. After ﬁnding user-pairs that met that criteria we try to
validate them looking at their co-occurrences, were they many or few, were
they oﬀSony properties or on, a lot of co-occurrences oﬀSony properties could
perhaps indicate a friendship. We identiﬁed the Android activity application
name and package name for when a user is in a phone call called "Phone" and
"package.com.android.incallui" respectively. Furthermore we identiﬁed a large
number of messaging apps. We tried ﬁnding user pairs having activity in the
phone app with a start time diﬀerence and end time diﬀerence of at most 10
seconds from each other. We looked at co-occurrences between user-pairs found
this way and found that they either had a low number of co-occurrences around
Sony properties or none at all.
Looking at more features related to app-usage could perhaps have been valuable,
furthermore the Jaccard index similarity in app usage between users does not
take into account disregarding the commonly used apps of the population of
users, it could beneﬁt from looking at if a user pair used apps uncommon for
the general population of users.
The techniques used for binning also have a number of limitations. We chose
a relatively high resolution for spatial bins at 0.001 decimal degrees thinking a
higher resolution provides more detail. A bin size of 1 hour on the hour was
chosen for the time bins based on the assumption that 1 hour is a commonly
occurring time period measurement for humans with respect to appointments
and due to the sparse test data. Diﬀerent choices of time bin and spatial bin
for binning could have been analyzed.
The method of time-binning used an hourly bin instead of the time diﬀerence
between the actual timestamps. This is limiting in the way that if two users
occur in the same spatial bin but at the end and start of diﬀerent hours, e.g.
11:59 and 12:01, it would not count as a co-occurrence.
Because of the ﬁgure of the earth being an oblate spheroid, the area of our spatial
cells based on latitude and longitude degrees will vary signiﬁcantly dependent
on the location on the surface. The area of the cells will decrease as we traverse
the globe from the equator to the poles. Equal-area partitioning could have
been used for preserving the area measure.
The division in periods for a single month results in each period lasting 9-11
days.
We chose working with a single month of users.
This period interval
might not be suﬃcient as it is not as natural a period measure for humans as
==PAGE:69==
57
for example a month or a week. Thus we do not capture the co-occurrences of
friends who meet with friends at monthly intervals and only capture part of the
weekly intervals.
We found a greater ratio of did meets for the test data. We suspect this can
be due to places Sony employees meet in a work setting to a lesser degree than
the already found places of exclusion. A larger radius of exclusion for the three
Sony business-related properties could also have been tried. Surprisingly the
same is true for production data, although to a much lesser degree, while we
ponder if this could be due to a ’contagion’ eﬀect on app usage between friends,
we do not know.
We did not include altitude as a factor in calculating co-occurrences, two users
with vastly diﬀerent altitude levels but same spatial and time bin would thus
co-occur independently of altitude. We disregarded altitude because we were
unsure of how binning should work for altitude levels and varying altitude lev-
els would often mean being inside buildings or below ground resulting in an
inaccurate GPS signal.
Our ﬁltering on accuracy at 55m makes the naive assumption that the user is in
the center of the spatial bin with each side measuring 110m and thus remains
inside even with their position being displaced 55m. A better solution could be
ﬁltering accuracy on the shortest distance to the actual cell perimeter for each
location.
Due to time constraints running the code which took considerable time and
having to travel to Sweden to run our code, we unfortunately did not get to
implement all our features and analyses for the production data in Apache
Spark.
==PAGE:70==
58
Discussion
==PAGE:71==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
We built several datasets with a number of features based primarily on users
spatiotemporal behavior, collected from mobile sensors. Using these datasets we
trained two classiﬁers and showed, it is possible to a certain extent to predict
whether users meet in a future period, as a proxy for social ties, based on their
patterns in a previous period. For our datasets we found no signiﬁcant diﬀerence
between the performance of a baseline logistic regression model with a single
feature of two unique co-occurrences, versus a random forest model trained on
several features with respect to predicting the positive feature, did meet, except
for the reﬁned dataset with regular users.
We found increasing performance in the models when using only a subset of
active users and also an increase in performance using a dataset of diverse regular
users, contrasted with a dataset of Sony employees only. Furthermore for the
dataset of real-world users using just a subset of active users, we found mutual
co-occurrences, speciﬁcity and co-occurrences weighted by number of people
present to be most important for prediction.
If the goal is to predict actual social ties, our features for prediction might have
made a more signiﬁcant diﬀerence, for our work however, they did not.
The inference of social ties or even just a co-occurrence, has implications for user
privacy as analysis from past data shared by the users, can reveal information
about future occurrences between them. This is information which users might
not give permission to share, if they were aware of what can be inferred.
==PAGE:72==
60
Conclusion
The beneﬁts of inferring social ties are numerous as stated in chapter 1, however
beneﬁts from successful inference of just a co-occurrence can, if combined with
possible information of where, provide users with quick directions or time-to-
arrival information.
Future work could be spent on looking at the links between the users in the
datasets, to assess who have had a co-occurrence with whom and how inter-
connected they are. We could also look at how well our features perform in
predicting actual social ties between users.
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
[and]
Android
developer
-
getaccuracy.
https://developer.
android.com/reference/android/location/Location.html#
getAccuracy(). Accessed 2016-05-30.
[apa]
Apache avro documentation.
http://avro.apache.org/docs/1.
8.0/. Accessed 2016-04-28.
[bas]
Matplotlib basemap. http://matplotlib.org/basemap/. Accessed
2016-05-23.
[BKS80]
H Russell Bernard, Peter D Killworth, and Lee Sailer. Informant
accuracy in social network data iv: A comparison of clique-level
structure in behavioral and cognitive network data. Social Networks,
2(3):191–218, 1980.
[BLS+14]
Andrey Bogomolov, Bruno Lepri, Jacopo Staiano, Nuria Oliver,
Fabio Pianesi, and Alex Pentland.
Once upon a crime: towards
crime prediction from demographics and mobile data. In Proceed-
ings of the 16th international conference on multimodal interaction,
pages 427–434. ACM, 2014.
[CBC+10] David J Crandall, Lars Backstrom, Dan Cosley, Siddharth Suri,
Daniel Huttenlocher, and Jon Kleinberg. Inferring social ties from
geographic coincidences. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 107(52):22436–22441, 2010.
[CC13]
Laks V.S. Lakshmanan Chen, Wei and Carlos Castillo. Information
and inﬂuence propagation in social networks. 2013.
[CL11]
Seth A. Myers Cho, Eunjoon and Jure Leskovec. Friendship and
mobility: User movement in location-based social networks. 2011.
==PAGE:74==
62
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[CTH+10] Justin Cranshaw, Eran Toch, Jason Hong, Aniket Kittur, and Nor-
man Sadeh. Bridging the gap between physical location and online
social networks. In Proceedings of the 12th ACM international con-
ference on Ubiquitous computing, pages 119–128. ACM, 2010.
[ea16]
Sapiezynski et al. Inferring physical interactions and social ties using
wiﬁsignals. 2016.
[EL13]
Y. Pentl Eagle, Nathan and David Lazer. Inferring social network
structure using mobile phone data. 2013.
[eri]
Ericsson
property
-
göteborg,
sweden.
https://www.
google.dk/maps/place/Ericsson+AB/@57.7058472,11.
9387722,17z/data=!3m1!4b1!4m5!3m4!1s0x0000000000000000:
0xda4af18f253ea97e!8m2!3d57.705844!4d11.9409585. Accessed
2016-05-23.
[GHB08]
Marta C Gonzalez, Cesar A Hidalgo, and Albert-Laszlo Barabasi.
Understanding individual human mobility patterns.
Nature,
453(7196):779–782, 2008.
[lea]
Leaﬂet - a javascript library for interactive maps.
http://
leafletjs.com/. Accessed 2016-05-10.
[LPA+09]
David Lazer, Alex Sandy Pentland, Lada Adamic, Sinan Aral, Al-
bert Laszlo Barabasi, Devon Brewer, Nicholas Christakis, Noshir
Contractor, James Fowler, Myron Gutmann, et al. Life in the net-
work: the coming age of computational social science. Science (New
York, NY), 323(5915):721, 2009.
[MSLC01] Miller McPherson, Lynn Smith-Lovin, and James M Cook. Birds of
a feather: Homophily in social networks. Annual review of sociology,
pages 415–444, 2001.
[PHS11]
Huy Pham, Ling Hu, and Cyrus Shahabi. Towards integrating real-
world spatiotemporal data with social networks. In Proceedings of
the 19th ACM SIGSPATIAL International Conference on Advances
in Geographic Information Systems, pages 453–457. ACM, 2011.
[PL14]
Cyrus Shahabi Pham, Huy and Yan Liu. Ebm- an entropy-based
model to infer social strength from spatiotemporal data. 2014.
[rev]
Openstreetmap reverse geocoding service.
http://nominatim.
openstreetmap.org/reverse. Accessed 2016-04-28.
[Ros66]
Robert Rosenthal. Experimenter eﬀects in behavioral research. 1966.
[Sap13]
P. Sapiezynski.
Measuring patterns of human behavior through
ﬁxed-location sensors, 2013. DTU supervisors: Jakob Eg Larsen,
jaeg@dtu.dk, and Sune Lehmann Jørgensen, DTU Compute.
==PAGE:75==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
63
[SBJ+99]
Arthur A Stone, Christine A Bachrach, Jared B Jobe, Howard S
Kurtzman, and Virginia S Cain. The science of self-report: Impli-
cations for research and practice. Psychology Press, 1999.
[sci]
Scikit-learn - machine learning in python. http://scikit-learn.
org/stable/. Accessed 2016-05-13.
[sona]
Sony lifelog app. https://lifelog.sony.com/. Accessed 2016-04-
29.
[sonb]
Sony property - kista, sweden.
https://www.google.com/maps/
place/Sony+Sverige/@59.4004444,17.9659455,14.71z.
Ac-
cessed 2016-05-16.
[sonc]
Sony
property
-
lund,
sweden.
https://www.google.com/
maps/place/Sony+Mobile+Communications/@55.7182367,13.
2242078,17z. Accessed 2016-05-16.
[sond]
Sony property - tokyo, japan.
https://www.google.com/maps/
place/Sony+Mobile/@35.6308495,139.7433187,18.5z. Accessed
2016-05-16.
[SP15]
Cyrus Shahabi and Huy Pham. Inferring real-world relationships
from spatiotemporal data. 2015.
[spa]
Apache spark documentation.
http://spark.apache.org/docs/
latest/index.html. accessed 2016-06-13.
[SQBB10]
Chaoming Song, Zehui Qu, Nicholas Blumm, and Albert-László
Barabási.
Limits of predictability in human mobility.
Science,
327(5968):1018–1021, 2010.
[SS01]
G Lawrence Sanders and Seungkyoon Shin. Denormalization eﬀects
on performance of rdbms. In System Sciences, 2001. Proceedings of
the 34th Annual Hawaii International Conference on, pages 9–pp.
IEEE, 2001.
[TSK+06]
Pang-Ning Tan, Michael Steinbach, Vipin Kumar, et al. Introduction
to data mining, volume 1. Pearson Addison Wesley Boston, 2006.
[WET+12] Amy Wesolowski, Nathan Eagle, Andrew J Tatem, David L Smith,
Abdisalan M Noor, Robert W Snow, and Caroline O Buckee.
Quantifying the impact of human mobility on malaria.
Science,
338(6104):267–270, 2012.
[YM15]
Yan Yu and Lingfei Mo. Investigating correlation between strength
of social relationship and interest similarity. In Computational Social
Networks, pages 172–181. Springer, 2015.
==PAGE:76==
64
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[ZB11]
Paul A. Zandbergen and Sean J. Barbeau. Positional accuracy of
assisted gps data from high-sensitivity gps-enabled mobile phones.
Journal of Navigation, 64:381–399, 7 2011.
==PAGE:77==
Code
converter.py
Script to convert Avro-ﬁles to JSON-ﬁles
1 /usr/bin/env python3.5
2 port os
3 port sys
4 port subprocess
5
6 ot_folder = sys.argv[1]
7 se_dir = os.path.dirname(os.path.realpath(__file__))
8 art_folder = os.path.join(base_dir,root_folder)
9
10 r (_,_,files) in os.walk(start_folder):
11 or filename in files:
12 print("converting {}".format(filename))
13 name_without_extension = filename.split(".")[0]
14 handle = open("{}.json".format(os.path.join(start_folder,name_without_extension))
15 subprocess.run(["java",
16
"-jar",
17
os.path.join(base_dir,"avro-tools-1.7.7.jar"),
18
"tojson",
19
"{}".format(os.path.join(start_folder,filename)
20 handle.close()
==PAGE:78==
66
Code
main.py
Main ﬁle for starting to generate datasets
1 /usr/bin/env python3
2 om DatabaseHelper import DatabaseHelper
3 om Predictor import Predictor
4 om DatasetHelper import DatasetHelper
5 om FileLoader import FileLoader
6 port numpy as np
7
8
9 ass Run():
10
"""docstring for ClassName"""
11
def __init__(self, country):
12
self.filter_places_dict = {"Sweden": [[(13.2262862, 55.718211), 1000],
13
[(17.9529121, 59.4050982), 1000],
14
[(11.9387722, 57.7058472), 1000]],
15
"Japan": [[(139.743862, 35.630338), 1000]]}
16
self.country = country
17
self.file_loader = FileLoader()
18
self.database_helper = DatabaseHelper()
19
self.predictor = Predictor(country=country)
20
self.dataset_helper = DatasetHelper()
21
22
def update_all_data(self):
23
24
first_period_datetime_min = "2015-09-01 00:00:00+02:00"
25
first_period_time_bin_min = self.database_helper.calculate_time_bins(first_peri
26
first_period_datetime_max = "2015-09-10 23:59:59+02:00"
27
first_period_time_bin_max = self.database_helper.calculate_time_bins(first_peri
28
second_period_datetime_min = "2015-09-11 00:00:00+02:00"
29
second_period_time_bin_min = self.database_helper.calculate_time_bins(second_pe
30
second_period_datetime_max = "2015-09-20 23:59:59+02:00"
31
second_period_time_bin_max = self.database_helper.calculate_time_bins(second_pe
32
third_period_datetime_min = "2015-09-21 00:00:00+02:00"
33
third_period_time_bin_min = self.database_helper.calculate_time_bins(third_peri
34
third_period_datetime_max = "2015-09-30 23:59:59+02:00"
35
third_period_time_bin_max = self.database_helper.calculate_time_bins(third_peri
36
37
selected_users = [’2f8fe4e1-a3f0-4deb-ba9b-8f0470141082’, ’6255db24-5443-40d3-b
38
print("processing users, countries and locations as numpy matrix (train and tes
39
users, countries, locations = self.database_helper.generate_numpy_matrix_from_d
==PAGE:79==
67
40
41
print("processing cooccurrences numpy array (train and test)")
42
coocs = self.dataset_helper.generate_cooccurrences_array(locations)
43
44
print("processing coocs for met in next (train)")
45
coocs_met_in_next_train = np.copy(coocs)
46
coocs_met_in_next_train = coocs_met_in_next_train[coocs_met_in_next_train[:
47
coocs_met_in_next_train = coocs_met_in_next_train[coocs_met_in_next_train[:
48
49
print("processing coocs for met in next (test)")
50
coocs_met_in_next_test = np.copy(coocs)
51
coocs_met_in_next_test = coocs_met_in_next_test[coocs_met_in_next_test[:, 3
52
coocs_met_in_next_test = coocs_met_in_next_test[coocs_met_in_next_test[:, 3
53
54
locations_train = locations[locations[:, 2] <= first_period_time_bin_max]
55
locations_train = locations[locations[:, 2] > first_period_time_bin_min]
56
coocs_train = coocs[coocs[:, 3] <= first_period_time_bin_max]
57
coocs_train = coocs[coocs[:, 3] > first_period_time_bin_min]
58
59
locations_test = locations[locations[:, 2] <= second_period_time_bin_max]
60
locations_test = locations[locations[:, 2] > second_period_time_bin_min]
61
coocs_test = coocs[coocs[:, 3] <= second_period_time_bin_max]
62
coocs_test = coocs[coocs[:, 3] > second_period_time_bin_min]
63
64
print("processing dataset for machine learning (train)")
65
X_train, y_train = self.predictor.generate_dataset(users, countries, locati
66
coocs_train, coocs_met_i
67
first_period_datetime_mi
68
first_period_datetime_ma
69
print("processing dataset for machine learning (test)")
70
X_test, y_test = self.predictor.generate_dataset(users, countries, location
71
coocs_met_in_next_test, se
72
second_period_datetime_max
73
74
# undersampling did meet
75
#train_stacked = np.hstack((X_train, y_train.reshape(-1, 1)))
76
#didnt_meets = train_stacked[train_stacked[:,-1] == 0]
77
#did_meets = train_stacked[train_stacked[:,-1] == 1]
78
#train_stacked = np.vstack((didnt_meets[np.random.choice(didnt_meets.shape[
79
#
did_meets[np.random.choice(did_meets.shape[0], 2
80
#y_train = train_stacked[:, -1]
81
#X_train = np.delete(train_stacked, -1, 1)
82
83
# oversampling didnt meet
==PAGE:80==
68
Code
84
#train_stacked = np.hstack((X_train, y_train.reshape(-1, 1)))
85
#didnt_meets = train_stacked[train_stacked[:,-1] == 0]
86
#did_meets = train_stacked[train_stacked[:,-1] == 1]
87
#train_stacked = np.vstack((didnt_meets[np.random.choice(didnt_meets.shape[0],
88
#
did_meets[np.random.choice(did_meets.shape[0], did_
89
#y_train = train_stacked[:, -1]
90
#X_train = np.delete(train_stacked, -1, 1)
91
print("saving dataset")
92
self.file_loader.save_x_and_y(X_train=X_train, y_train=y_train, X_test=X_test,
93
self.predictor.predict(X_train, y_train, X_test, y_test)
94
__name__ == ’__main__’:
95
r = Run(country="Sweden")
96
r.update_all_data()
==PAGE:81==
69
DatabaseHelper.py
Class for extracting and inserting data from/to database
1 /usr/bin/env python3
2 om FileLoader import FileLoader
3 om DatabaseHelper import DatabaseHelper
4 port numpy as np
5 port itertools
6 port collections
7 om tqdm import tqdm
8
9
10 ass DatasetHelper():
11
12
def __init__(self):
13
self.file_loader = FileLoader()
14
self.db_helper = DatabaseHelper()
15
16
def calculate_countries_in_common(self, user1, user2, loc_arr):
17
user1_countries = loc_arr[loc_arr[:, 0] == user1][:, 3]
18
user2_countries = loc_arr[loc_arr[:, 0] == user2][:, 3]
19
return np.intersect1d(user1_countries, user2_countries).size
20
21
def calculate_unique_cooccurrences(self, cooc_arr):
22
return np.unique(cooc_arr[:, 2]).shape[0]
23
24
def calculate_number_of_saturday_night_coocs(self, cooc_arr):
25
return sum([self.db_helper.is_saturday_night(self.db_helper.calculate_datet
26
27
def calculate_number_of_weekend_coocs(self, cooc_arr):
28
return sum([self.db_helper.is_weekend(self.db_helper.calculate_datetime(coo
29
30
def calculate_number_of_evening_coocs(self, cooc_arr):
31
return sum([self.db_helper.is_evening(self.db_helper.calculate_datetime(coo
32
33
def calculate_specificity(self, user1, user2, cooc_arr, loc_arr):
34
return cooc_arr.shape[0]/(loc_arr[loc_arr[:, 0] == user1].shape[0] + loc_ar
35
36
def calculate_number_of_common_travels(self, cooc_arr):
37
bins = cooc_arr[:, [2, 3]]
38
# sort rows by column timebin
39
time_sort = bins[bins[:, 1].argsort()]
==PAGE:82==
70
Code
40
# split array into consecutive travels
41
# [[s_bin,5],[s_bin,10],[s_bin,11],[s_bin,12],[s_bin,14]] ->
42
# [[s_bin,5], [(s_bin,10),(s_bin,11),(s_bin,12)], [(s_bin,14)]]
43
stepsize = 1
44
consecutive = np.split(time_sort, np.where(np.diff(time_sort[:, 1]) != stepsize
45
num_common_travels = 0
46
for arr in consecutive:
47
if arr.shape[0] > 1:
48
lst = list(arr[:, 0])
49
count = 0
50
for idx, sub in enumerate(lst, start=1):
51
if idx >= len(lst):
52
break
53
if lst[idx] != sub:
54
count += 1
55
if count == arr.shape[0]-1:
56
num_common_travels += 1
57
return num_common_travels
58
59
def calculate_arr_leav(self, cooc_arr, loc_arr):
60
"""
61
As proposed in the master’s thesis of Sapieżyński:
62
63
We propose that if two persons arrive at a location at the same time and/or
64
leave the location synchronously it yields a stronger signal than if two people
65
are in the same location, but their arrival and leaving are not synchronized. T
66
value is weighted by the number of people who arrived and/or left the building
67
in each particular time bin. Thus, timed arrival of many people in the beginnin
68
of the scheduled classes is not as strong a signal as synchronized arrival of a
69
persons an hour before the class begins.
70
71
Feature ID: arr_leav
72
"""
73
if cooc_arr.shape[0] == 0:
74
print("no cooccurrences in arr_leav")
75
return 0
76
arr_leav_values = []
77
for row in cooc_arr:
78
arr_leav_value = 0
79
80
user1_present_in_previous = loc_arr[(loc_arr[:, 0] == row[0]) & (
81
loc_arr[:, 2] == row[3]-1) & (loc_arr[:, 1] == row[2])].shape[0]
82
user2_present_in_previous = loc_arr[(loc_arr[:, 0] == row[1]) & (
83
loc_arr[:, 2] == row[3]-1) & (loc_arr[:, 1] == row[2])].shape[0]
==PAGE:83==
71
84
if not user1_present_in_previous and not user2_present_in_previous:
85
# synchronous arrival
86
# finds users in previous timebin with spatial bin
87
before_arrive_list = loc_arr[
88
(loc_arr[:, 2] == row[3]-1) & (loc_arr[:, 1] == row[2])][:, 0]
89
# finds users in current timebin with spatial bin
90
arrive_list = loc_arr[
91
(loc_arr[:, 2] == row[3]) & (loc_arr[:, 1] == row[2])][:, 0]
92
num_arrivals = np.setdiff1d(
93
arrive_list, before_arrive_list, assume_unique=True).shape[0]
94
if num_arrivals == 0:
95
arr_leav_value += 1
96
else:
97
arr_leav_value += (1/num_arrivals)
98
99
#user 0, spatial_bin 1, time_bin 2, country 3
100
user1_present_in_next = loc_arr[(loc_arr[:, 0] == row[0]) & (
101
loc_arr[:, 2] == row[3]+1) & (loc_arr[:, 1] == row[2])].shape[0]
102
user2_present_in_next = loc_arr[(loc_arr[:, 0] == row[1]) & (
103
loc_arr[:, 2] == row[3]+1) & (loc_arr[:, 1] == row[2])].shape[0]
104
if not user1_present_in_next and not user2_present_in_next:
105
# synchronous leaving
106
leave_list = loc_arr[
107
(loc_arr[:, 2] == row[3]) & (loc_arr[:, 1] == row[2])][:, 0]
108
# finds users in current timebin with spatial bin
109
after_leave_list = loc_arr[
110
(loc_arr[:, 2] == row[3]+1) & (loc_arr[:, 1] == row[2])][:, 0]
111
num_leavers = np.setdiff1d(
112
after_leave_list, leave_list, assume_unique=True).shape[0]
113
if num_leavers == 0:
114
arr_leav_value += 1
115
else:
116
arr_leav_value += (1/num_leavers)
117
arr_leav_values.append(arr_leav_value)
118
119
return sum(arr_leav_values)/cooc_arr.shape[0]
120
121
def calculate_coocs_w(self, cooc_arr, loc_arr):
122
"""
123
As proposed in the master’s thesis of Sapieżyński:
124
125
While other researchers use entropy to weight the social impact of meetings
126
data allows us to introduce a more precise measure. We use anonymous statis
127
to estimate the number of all people present in the building in each time b
==PAGE:84==
72
Code
128
assume the social importance of each co-occurrence to be inversely proportional
129
to the number of people – if only a few persons are there in a location, it is
130
probable that there is a social bond between them compared to the situation
131
when dozens of people are present.
132
133
Calculates all values of coocs_w for cooccurrences and returns the mean of them
134
135
Feature ID: coocs_w
136
"""
137
if cooc_arr.shape[0] == 0:
138
print("no cooccurrences for cooc_w")
139
return 0
140
coocs_w_values = []
141
for row in cooc_arr:
142
coocs_w_value = loc_arr[(loc_arr[:, 1] == row[2]) &
143
(loc_arr[:, 2] == row[3])].shape[0]
144
coocs_w_values.append(1/(coocs_w_value-1))
145
return sum(coocs_w_values)/cooc_arr.shape[0]
146
147
def calculate_diversity(self, cooc_arr):
148
"""
149
Diversity quantifies how many locations the cooccurrences between two people re
150
Can either use Shannon or Renyi Entropy, right now uses Shannon
151
From inferring realworld relationships from spatiotemporal data paper p. 23.
152
"""
153
frequency = cooc_arr.shape[0]
154
_, counts = np.unique(cooc_arr[:, 2], return_counts=True)
155
156
shannon_entropy = -np.sum((counts/frequency) *
157
(np.log2(counts/frequency)))
158
return np.exp(shannon_entropy)
159
160
def calculate_weighted_frequency(self, cooc_arr, loc_arr):
161
"""
162
Inferring realworld relationships from spatiotemporal data paper p. 19 and 23-2
163
Tells how important co-occurrences are at non-crowded places
164
"""
165
weighted_frequency = 0
166
spatial_bins, counts = np.unique(cooc_arr[:, 2], return_counts=True)
167
for spatial_bin, count in zip(spatial_bins, counts):
168
# get all locations with spatial bin
169
locs_with_spatial = loc_arr[loc_arr[:, 1] == spatial_bin]
170
location_entropy = 0
171
for user in np.unique(locs_with_spatial[:, 0]):
==PAGE:85==
73
172
# get all locations for user
173
v_lu = locs_with_spatial[locs_with_spatial[:, 0] == user]
174
# get all locations for spatial bin
175
v_l = locs_with_spatial
176
prob = v_lu.shape[0]/v_l.shape[0]
177
if prob != 0:
178
location_entropy += prob*np.log2(prob)
179
location_entropy = -location_entropy
180
weighted_frequency += count * np.exp(-location_entropy)
181
return weighted_frequency
182
183
def generate_cooccurrences_array(self, loc_arr):
184
"""
185
Returns an array of cooccurrences with columns:
186
["useruuid1", "useruuid2", "spatial_bin", "time_bin"]
187
It removes location spatial/time duplicates
188
and the smallest userid is always in column useruuid1
189
"""
190
coocs_dict = collections.defaultdict(list)
191
cooccurrences = []
192
for x in loc_arr:
193
coocs_dict[(x[1], x[2])].append(x[0])
194
for x, coocs_list in tqdm(coocs_dict.items()):
195
for pair in itertools.combinations(set(coocs_list), 2):
196
# make column1 always have the lowest userid
197
pair = sorted(pair)
198
cooccurrences.append([pair[0], pair[1], x[0], x[1]])
199
return np.array(cooccurrences)
==PAGE:86==
74
Code
FileLoader.py
Class for saving and loading the generated datasets as pickle and numpy ﬁles
1 /usr/bin/env python3
2 om tqdm import tqdm
3 port json
4 port os
5 port pickle
6 port numpy as np
7 om collections import defaultdict
8 om dateutil import parser
9 om datetime import datetime
10 port csv
11 om dateutil import parser
12
13 ass FileLoader():
14
15
def __init__(self):
16
self.DATA_PATH = os.path.join(os.path.dirname(__file__), "data")
17
18
def generate_data_from_json(self, filenames, callback_func, path=""):
19
for file_name in tqdm(filenames):
20
with open(os.path.join(self.DATA_PATH, file_name), ’r’) as json_file:
21
raw_data = json.load(json_file)
22
for row in tqdm(raw_data):
23
callback_func(row)
24
25
def generate_demographics_from_csv(self, path="data"):
26
file_name = "user_data.csv"
27
user_info_dict = defaultdict(dict)
28
29
with open(os.path.join(self.DATA_PATH, file_name)) as csv_file:
30
reader = csv.reader(csv_file)
31
for row in reader:
32
birthdate = parser.parse(row[2])
33
age = datetime.now()-birthdate
34
user_info_dict[row[0]] = {"gender": row[1],
35
"age": int(age.days/365),
36
"birthdate": row[2]}
37
return user_info_dict
38
39
def filter_demographic_outliers(self, user_info_dict):
==PAGE:87==
75
40
user_info_dict = defaultdict(dict, {k: v for k, v in
41
user_info_dict.items()
42
if v["birthdate"] !=
43
"1990-01-01" and
44
v["birthdate"] != "1981-01-01" and
45
v["birthdate"] != "1980-12-01" and
46
v["age"] > 16 and v["age"] < 100})
47
return user_info_dict
48
49
def generate_app_data_from_json(self,
50
callback_func,
51
filenames=["all_app_201509.json",
52
"all_app_201510.json",
53
"all_app_201511.json"]):
54
return self.generate_data_from_json(filenames, callback_func)
55
56
def generate_location_data_from_json(self, callback_func):
57
filenames = [
58
"all_201509.json", "all_201510.json", "all_201511.json"]
59
return self.generate_data_from_json(filenames, callback_func)
60
61
def save_met_in_next_train(self, met_in_next_train):
62
with open(os.path.join(self.DATA_PATH, "met_in_next_train.pickle"), "wb") a
63
pickle.dump(met_in_next_train, fp)
64
65
def save_met_in_next_test(self, met_in_next_test):
66
with open(os.path.join(self.DATA_PATH, "met_in_next_test.pickle"), "wb") as
67
pickle.dump(met_in_next_test, fp)
68
69
def load_met_in_next_train(self):
70
with open(os.path.join(self.DATA_PATH, "met_in_next_train.pickle"), "rb") a
71
met_in_next_train = pickle.load(fp)
72
return met_in_next_train
73
74
def load_met_in_next_test(self):
75
with open(os.path.join(self.DATA_PATH, "met_in_next_test.pickle"), "rb") as
76
met_in_next_test = pickle.load(fp)
77
return met_in_next_test
78
79
80
def load_cooccurrences_train(self):
81
with open(os.path.join(self.DATA_PATH, "cooccurrences_train.npy"),
82
"rb") as f:
83
coocs = np.load(f)
==PAGE:88==
76
Code
84
return coocs
85
86
def load_cooccurrences_test(self):
87
with open(os.path.join(self.DATA_PATH, "cooccurrences_test.npy"),
88
"rb") as f:
89
coocs = np.load(f)
90
return coocs
91
92
def save_cooccurrences_train(self, coocs):
93
with open(os.path.join(self.DATA_PATH, "cooccurrences_train.npy"), "wb") as f:
94
np.save(f, coocs)
95
96
def save_cooccurrences_test(self, coocs):
97
with open(os.path.join(self.DATA_PATH, "cooccurrences_test.npy"), "wb") as f:
98
np.save(f, coocs)
99
100
def save_x_and_y(self, **kwargs):
101
for key in kwargs:
102
with open(os.path.join(self.DATA_PATH, str(key)+".pickle"), "wb") as fp:
103
pickle.dump(kwargs[key], fp)
104
105
def load_x_and_y(self):
106
with open(os.path.join(self.DATA_PATH, "X_train.pickle"), "rb") as fp:
107
X_train = pickle.load(fp)
108
with open(os.path.join(self.DATA_PATH, "y_train.pickle"), "rb") as fp:
109
y_train = pickle.load(fp)
110
with open(os.path.join(self.DATA_PATH, "X_test.pickle"), "rb") as fp:
111
X_test = pickle.load(fp)
112
with open(os.path.join(self.DATA_PATH, "y_test.pickle"), "rb") as fp:
113
y_test = pickle.load(fp)
114
return X_train, y_train, X_test, y_test
115
116
def load_numpy_matrix_train(self):
117
with open(os.path.join(self.DATA_PATH, "pickled_users_train.pickle"),
118
"rb") as f:
119
users = pickle.load(f)
120
121
with open(os.path.join(self.DATA_PATH, "pickled_countries_train.pickle"),
122
"rb") as f:
123
countries = pickle.load(f)
124
125
with open(os.path.join(self.DATA_PATH, "pickled_locations_train.npy"),
126
"rb") as f:
127
numpy_arr = np.load(f)
==PAGE:89==
77
128
return users, countries, numpy_arr
129
130
def load_numpy_matrix_test(self):
131
with open(os.path.join(self.DATA_PATH, "pickled_users_test.pickle"),
132
"rb") as f:
133
users = pickle.load(f)
134
135
with open(os.path.join(self.DATA_PATH, "pickled_countries_test.pickle"),
136
"rb") as f:
137
countries = pickle.load(f)
138
139
with open(os.path.join(self.DATA_PATH, "pickled_locations_test.npy"),
140
"rb") as f:
141
numpy_arr = np.load(f)
142
return users, countries, numpy_arr
143
144
def save_numpy_matrix_test(self, useruuid_dict, country_dict, locations):
145
with open(os.path.join(self.DATA_PATH, "pickled_users_test.pickle"),
146
"wb") as f:
147
pickle.dump(useruuid_dict, f)
148
with open(os.path.join(self.DATA_PATH, "pickled_countries_test.pickle"),
149
"wb") as f:
150
pickle.dump(country_dict, f)
151
with open(os.path.join(self.DATA_PATH, "pickled_locations_test.npy"),
152
"wb") as f:
153
np.save(f, locations)
154
155
def save_numpy_matrix_train(self, useruuid_dict, country_dict, locations):
156
with open(os.path.join(self.DATA_PATH, "pickled_users_train.pickle"),
157
"wb") as f:
158
pickle.dump(useruuid_dict, f)
159
with open(os.path.join(self.DATA_PATH, "pickled_countries_train.pickle"),
160
"wb") as f:
161
pickle.dump(country_dict, f)
162
with open(os.path.join(self.DATA_PATH, "pickled_locations_train.npy"),
163
"wb") as f:
164
np.save(f, locations)
165
166
def load_missing_data(self):
167
with open(os.path.join("data", "missing_data.json"), ’r’) as json_file:
168
return json.load(json_file)
169
170
def load_by_filename(self, filename):
171
dot = filename.rfind(".")
==PAGE:90==
78
Code
172
if filename[dot+1:] == "json":
173
with open(os.path.join("data", filename), ’r’) as json_file:
174
return json.load(json_file)
175
elif filename[dot+1:] == "pickle":
176
with open(os.path.join("data", filename), "rb") as f:
177
return pickle.load(f)
178
else:
179
with open(os.path.join("data", filename), "r") as f:
180
return f.readlines()
181
182
__name__ == ’__main__’:
183
fl = FileLoader()
184
rows = []
185
callback = lambda r: rows.append(r)
186
fl.generate_data_from_json(["all_201509.json"], callback)
187
188
print(min(rows, key=lambda r:parser.parse(r["start_time"]))["start_time"], max(rows
189
190
rows = []
191
callback = lambda r: rows.append(r)
192
fl.generate_data_from_json(["all_201510.json"], callback)
193
print(min(rows, key=lambda r:parser.parse(r["start_time"]))["start_time"], max(rows
194
195
rows = []
196
callback = lambda r: rows.append(r)
197
fl.generate_data_from_json(["all_201511.json"], callback)
==PAGE:91==
79
Predictor.py
Class for generating datasets and making predictions
1 /usr/bin/env python3
2 om DatabaseHelper import DatabaseHelper
3 om FileLoader import FileLoader
4 om DatasetHelper import DatasetHelper
5 port numpy as np
6 port sklearn
7 port sklearn.metrics
8 om sklearn.metrics import roc_auc_score, roc_curve, auc, confusion_matrix, precis
9 om sklearn.preprocessing import StandardScaler
10 om sklearn.datasets import load_svmlight_file
11 port sklearn.ensemble
12 om tqdm import tqdm
13 port matplotlib.pyplot as plt
14 om sklearn.grid_search import GridSearchCV
15 om collections import defaultdict
16
17
18 ass Predictor():
19
20
def __init__(self,
21
country):
22
"""
23
Constructor
24
25
Args:
26
country: country used for generating dataset and prediction
27
"""
28
self.database_helper = DatabaseHelper()
29
self.dataset_helper = DatasetHelper()
30
self.file_loader = FileLoader()
31
self.country = country
32
33
def filter_by_country(self, loc_arr, countries):
34
country_arr = loc_arr[loc_arr[:, 3] == countries[self.country]]
35
return country_arr
36
37
def generate_dataset(self, users, countries, locations_arr, coocs,
38
met_next, min_timestring, max_timestring, selected_users=[
39
min_timebin = self.database_helper.calculate_time_bins(
==PAGE:92==
80
Code
40
min_timestring)[0]
41
max_timebin = self.database_helper.calculate_time_bins(
42
max_timestring)[0]
43
# get only locations from specific country
44
country_arr = self.filter_by_country(locations_arr, countries)
45
46
# filter location array
and cooc array so its between max and min
47
# timebin
48
country_arr = locations_arr
49
country_arr = country_arr[country_arr[:, 2] <= max_timebin]
50
country_arr = country_arr[country_arr[:, 2] > min_timebin]
51
coocs = coocs[coocs[:, 3] <= max_timebin]
52
coocs = coocs[coocs[:, 3] > min_timebin]
53
54
return self.calculate_features_for_dataset(users, countries,
55
country_arr, coocs,
56
met_next, min_timebin,
57
max_timebin, selected_users)
58
59
def extract_and_remove_duplicate_coocs(self, coocs):
60
"""
61
Extract column 0 and 1 and removes duplicates row-wise
62
63
Arguments:
64
coocs {numpy array} -- Numpy array with at least 2 columns
65
66
Returns:
67
numpy array -- Numpy array with column 0 and 1 of input array.
68
Duplicates are removed
69
"""
70
# Extract only column 0 & 1
71
A = np.dstack((coocs[:, 0], coocs[:, 1]))[0]
72
B = np.ascontiguousarray(A).view(np.dtype((np.void, A.dtype.itemsize *
73
A.shape[1])))
74
_, idx = np.unique(B, return_index=True)
# Remove duplicate rows
75
return A[idx]
76
77
def calculate_features_for_dataset(self, users, countries, loc_arr, coocs,
78
met_next, min_timebin, max_timebin, selected_use
79
datahelper = self.dataset_helper
80
coocs_users = self.extract_and_remove_duplicate_coocs(coocs)
81
if selected_users:
82
coocs_users = coocs_users[np.in1d(coocs_users[:, 0], [users[u] for u in sel
83
coocs_users = coocs_users[np.in1d(coocs_users[:, 1], [users[u] for u in sel
==PAGE:93==
81
84
X = np.zeros(shape=(len(coocs_users), 19), dtype="float")
85
y = np.zeros(shape=len(coocs_users), dtype="int")
86
demo_dict = self.file_loader.filter_demographic_outliers(self.file_loader.g
87
app_data_dict = defaultdict(set)
88
89
def app_data_callback(row):
90
# filter on min and max timebin
91
start_bin = self.database_helper.calculate_time_bins(row["start_time"])
92
end_bin = self.database_helper.calculate_time_bins(row["end_time"])[0]
93
if min_timebin <= start_bin and end_bin < max_timebin:
94
app_data_dict[row["useruuid"]].add(row["package_name"])
95
96
self.file_loader.generate_app_data_from_json(app_data_callback)
97
for index, pair in tqdm(enumerate(coocs_users), total=coocs_users.shape[0])
98
user1 = pair[0]
99
user2 = pair[1]
100
within_6_val = self.is_within_6_years(demo_dict, users[user1], users[us
101
same_sex_val = self.is_same_sex(demo_dict, users[user1], users[user2])
102
103
pair_coocs = coocs[
104
(coocs[:, 0] == user1) & (coocs[:, 1] == user2)]
105
X[index:, 0] = self.has_two_unique_coocs(user1, user2, coocs)
106
X[index:, 1] = datahelper.calculate_arr_leav(pair_coocs, loc_arr)
107
X[index, 2] = datahelper.calculate_diversity(pair_coocs)
108
X[index, 3] = datahelper.calculate_unique_cooccurrences(pair_coocs)
109
X[index, 4] = datahelper.calculate_weighted_frequency(
110
pair_coocs, loc_arr)
111
X[index:, 5] = datahelper.calculate_coocs_w(pair_coocs, loc_arr)
112
X[index:, 6] = datahelper.calculate_number_of_common_travels(
113
pair_coocs)
114
X[index:, 7] = pair_coocs.shape[0]
115
X[index:, 8] = self.compute_mutual_cooccurrences(coocs, user1, user2)
116
X[index:, 9] = self.compute_app_jaccard_index(app_data_dict, users[user
117
X[index:, 10] = datahelper.calculate_number_of_evening_coocs(pair_coocs
118
X[index:, 11] = datahelper.calculate_number_of_weekend_coocs(pair_coocs
119
X[index:, 12] = datahelper.calculate_specificity(user1, user2, pair_coo
120
X[index:, 13] = 1 if within_6_val == 0 else 0
121
X[index:, 14] = 1 if within_6_val == 1 else 0
122
X[index:, 15] = 1 if within_6_val == 2 else 0
123
X[index:, 16] = 1 if same_sex_val == 0 else 0
124
X[index:, 17] = 1 if same_sex_val == 1 else 0
125
X[index:, 18] = 1 if same_sex_val == 2 else 0
126
y[index] = self.has_met(user1, user2, met_next)
127
==PAGE:94==
82
Code
128
return X, y
129
130
def compute_mutual_cooccurrences(self, coocs, user1, user2):
131
user1_coocs = coocs[(coocs[:, 0] == user1) | (coocs[:, 1] == user1)]
132
user2_coocs = coocs[(coocs[:, 0] == user2) | (coocs[:, 1] == user2)]
133
user1_coocs = set(user1_coocs[:, 0]) | set(user1_coocs[:, 1])
134
user2_coocs = set(user2_coocs[:, 0]) | set(user2_coocs[:, 1])
135
return len(user1_coocs & user2_coocs)/len(user1_coocs | user2_coocs)
136
137
def compute_app_jaccard_index(self, app_data_dict, user1, user2):
138
union = len(app_data_dict[user1] | app_data_dict[user2])
139
intersect = len(app_data_dict[user1] & app_data_dict[user2])
140
if intersect == 0 and union == 0:
141
return 1
142
if union == 0:
143
return 0
144
return intersect/union
145
146
def is_within_6_years(self, demo_dict, user1, user2):
147
if user1 in demo_dict and user2 in demo_dict:
148
diff = abs(demo_dict[user1]["age"]-demo_dict[user2]["age"])
149
if diff <= 6:
150
return 1
151
else:
152
return 0
153
return 2
154
155
def is_same_sex(self, demo_dict, user1, user2):
156
if user1 in demo_dict and user2 in demo_dict:
157
if demo_dict[user1]["gender"] == demo_dict[user2]["gender"]:
158
return 1
159
else:
160
return 0
161
return 2
162
163
def has_met(self, user1, user2, met_next):
164
return np.any(np.all([met_next[:, 0] == user1, met_next[:, 1] == user2], axis=0
165
166
def has_two_unique_coocs(self, user1, user2, coocs):
167
tup = coocs.shape
168
if len(tup) == 1:
169
if tup[0] == 0:
170
return 0
171
else:
==PAGE:95==
83
172
if tup[0] == 1 and tup[1] == 0:
173
return 0
174
coocs = np.dstack((coocs[:, 0], coocs[:, 1],
175
coocs[:, 2]))[0]
176
b = np.ascontiguousarray(coocs).view(
177
np.dtype((np.void, coocs.dtype.itemsize * coocs.shape[1])))
178
_, idx = np.unique(b, return_index=True)
179
180
unique_met_next = coocs[idx]
181
unique_pair_rows = unique_met_next[np.all([unique_met_next[:, 0] ==
182
user1,
183
unique_met_next[:, 1] ==
184
user2], axis=0)]
185
return unique_pair_rows.shape[0] >= 2
186
187
def compute_feature_ranking(self, forest, X):
188
importances = forest.feature_importances_
189
std = np.std(
190
[tree.feature_importances_ for tree in forest.estimators_], axis=0)
191
indices = np.argsort(importances)[::-1]
192
193
plt.figure()
194
plt.title("Feature importances")
195
plt.bar(range(X.shape[1]), importances[indices],
196
color="r", yerr=std[indices], align="center")
197
plt.xticks(range(X.shape[1]), indices)
198
plt.xlabel("feature number")
199
plt.ylabel("feature importance")
200
plt.xlim([-1, X.shape[1]])
201
plt.show()
202
203
def compute_roc_curve(self, y_test, y_pred_proba):
204
false_positive_rate, true_positive_rate, _ = roc_curve(
205
y_test, y_pred_proba)
206
roc_auc = auc(false_positive_rate, true_positive_rate)
207
208
# Compute ROC curve and ROC area for each class
209
plt.title(’Receiver Operating Characteristic’)
210
plt.plot(false_positive_rate, true_positive_rate, ’b’,
211
label=’AUC = %0.2f’ % roc_auc)
212
plt.legend(loc=’lower right’)
213
plt.plot([0, 1], [0, 1], ’r--’)
214
plt.xlim([-0.1, 1.2])
215
plt.ylim([-0.1, 1.2])
==PAGE:96==
84
Code
216
plt.ylabel(’True Positive Rate’)
217
plt.xlabel(’False Positive Rate’)
218
plt.show()
219
220
def compute_precision_recall_curve(self, y_test, y_pred_proba):
221
precision = dict()
222
recall = dict()
223
average_precision = dict()
224
for i in range(2):
225
precision[i], recall[i], _ = precision_recall_curve(y_test[:, i],
226
y_pred_proba[:, i])
227
average_precision[i] = average_precision_score(y_test[:, i], y_pred_proba[:
228
# Plot Precision-Recall curve for each class
229
plt.clf()
230
plt.plot(recall["micro"], precision["micro"],
231
label=’micro-average Precision-recall curve (area = {0:0.2f})’
232
’’.format(average_precision["micro"]))
233
for i in range(2):
234
plt.plot(recall[i], precision[i],
235
label=’Precision-recall curve of class {0} (area = {1:0.2f})’
236
’’.format(i, average_precision[i]))
237
238
plt.xlim([0.0, 1.0])
239
plt.ylim([0.0, 1.05])
240
plt.xlabel(’Recall’)
241
plt.ylabel(’Precision’)
242
plt.title(’Extension of Precision-Recall curve to multi-class’)
243
plt.legend(loc="lower right")
244
plt.show()
245
246
def plot_confusion_matrix(self, cm, title="Confusion matrix", target_names=["did no
247
plt.figure()
248
plt.imshow(cm, interpolation=’nearest’, cmap=cmap)
249
plt.title(title)
250
plt.colorbar()
251
tick_marks = np.arange(len(target_names))
252
plt.xticks(tick_marks, target_names, rotation=45)
253
plt.yticks(tick_marks, target_names)
254
plt.tight_layout()
255
plt.ylabel(’True label’)
256
plt.xlabel(’Predicted label’)
257
plt.show()
258
259
def predict(self, X_train, y_train, X_test, y_test):
==PAGE:97==
85
260
# create new feature two_unique_coocs from unique_coocs
261
solo_feature_train = np.zeros(X_train[:, 1].shape)
262
np.putmask(solo_feature_train, X_train[:, 1] >= 2, 1)
263
solo_feature_test = np.zeros(X_test[:, 1].shape)
264
np.putmask(solo_feature_test, X_test[:, 1] >= 2, 1)
265
print(np.count_nonzero(solo_feature_test))
266
#scaler = StandardScaler().fit(np.vstack((X_train, X_test)))
267
#X_train = scaler.transform(X_train)
268
#X_test = scaler.transform(X_test)
269
print("Logistic Regression - with number of cooccurrences")
270
lg = sklearn.linear_model.LogisticRegression(random_state=0)
271
272
273
lg.fit(solo_feature_train.reshape(-1, 1), y_train)
274
y_pred = lg.predict(solo_feature_test.reshape(-1, 1))
275
print("matthews: {}".format(matthews_corrcoef(y_test, y_pred)))
276
print(average_precision_score(y_test, y_pred))
277
print(sklearn.metrics.classification_report(y_test, y_pred))
278
self.compute_roc_curve(y_test, lg.predict_proba(solo_feature_test.reshape(-
279
cm = confusion_matrix(y_test, y_pred, labels=[0, 1])
280
self.plot_confusion_matrix(cm, title="Confusion matrix (Logistic Regression
281
print(cm)
282
print("Random Forest - all features")
283
#np.delete(X_train, [0], axis=1)
284
#np.delete(X_test, [0], axis=1)
285
forest = sklearn.ensemble.RandomForestClassifier(n_estimators = 1000, rando
286
forest.fit(X_train, y_train)
287
y_pred = forest.predict(X_test)
288
print("matthews: {}".format(matthews_corrcoef(y_test, y_pred)))
289
print(average_precision_score(y_test, y_pred))
290
print(sklearn.metrics.classification_report(y_test, y_pred))
291
plt.style.use("ggplot")
292
self.compute_feature_ranking(forest, X_test)
293
plt.style.use("default")
294
# compute ROC curve
295
self.compute_roc_curve(y_test, forest.predict_proba(X_test)[:,1])
296
#self.compute_precision_recall_curve(y_test, forest.predict_proba(X_test))
297
cm = confusion_matrix(y_test, y_pred)
298
self.plot_confusion_matrix(cm, title="Confusion matrix (Random Forest)")
299
print(cm)
300
301
def find_users_in_cooccurrence(self, spatial_bin, time_bin):
302
"""
303
Find all users who’s been in a given cooccurrence
==PAGE:98==
86
Code
304
Arguments:
305
lat {float} -- latitude
306
lng {float} -- longitude
307
time_bin {integer} -- time bin index
308
Returns:
309
list -- list of user_uuids
310
"""
311
return self.database_helper.find_cooccurrences_within_area(spatial_bin,
312
time_bin)
313
314
def calculate_unique_cooccurrences(self, cooccurrences):
315
"""
316
Calculates how many unique spatial bins they have had cooccurrences in
317
"""
318
319
return len(set([cooc[1] for cooc in cooccurrences]))
320
321
322
__name__ == ’__main__’:
323
p = Predictor("Sweden")
324
f = FileLoader()
325
d = DatabaseHelper()
326
327
X_train, y_train = load_svmlight_file("data/vedran_thesis_students/X_train_filter_m
328
X_test, y_test = load_svmlight_file("data/vedran_thesis_students/X_test_filter_merg
329
X_train = X_train.toarray()
330
X_test = X_test.toarray()
331
#X_train, y_train, X_test, y_test = f.load_x_and_y()
332
print(type(X_train), type(y_train))
333
print("y_train contains {} that didnt meet, and {} that did meet".format(
334
list(y_train).count(0), list(y_train).count(1)))
335
print("y_test contains {} that didnt meet and {} that did meet".format(
336
list(y_test).count(0), list(y_test).count(1)))
337
p.predict(X_train, y_train, X_test, y_test)
==PAGE:99==
87
DatasetHelper.py
Auxiliary class to generate the datasets
1 /usr/bin/env python3
2 om FileLoader import FileLoader
3 om DatabaseHelper import DatabaseHelper
4 port numpy as np
5 port itertools
6 port collections
7 om tqdm import tqdm
8
9
10 ass DatasetHelper():
11
12
def __init__(self):
13
self.file_loader = FileLoader()
14
self.db_helper = DatabaseHelper()
15
16
def calculate_countries_in_common(self, user1, user2, loc_arr):
17
user1_countries = loc_arr[loc_arr[:, 0] == user1][:, 3]
18
user2_countries = loc_arr[loc_arr[:, 0] == user2][:, 3]
19
return np.intersect1d(user1_countries, user2_countries).size
20
21
def calculate_unique_cooccurrences(self, cooc_arr):
22
return np.unique(cooc_arr[:, 2]).shape[0]
23
24
def calculate_number_of_saturday_night_coocs(self, cooc_arr):
25
return sum([self.db_helper.is_saturday_night(self.db_helper.calculate_datet
26
27
def calculate_number_of_weekend_coocs(self, cooc_arr):
28
return sum([self.db_helper.is_weekend(self.db_helper.calculate_datetime(coo
29
30
def calculate_number_of_evening_coocs(self, cooc_arr):
31
return sum([self.db_helper.is_evening(self.db_helper.calculate_datetime(coo
32
33
def calculate_specificity(self, user1, user2, cooc_arr, loc_arr):
34
return cooc_arr.shape[0]/(loc_arr[loc_arr[:, 0] == user1].shape[0] + loc_ar
35
36
def calculate_number_of_common_travels(self, cooc_arr):
37
bins = cooc_arr[:, [2, 3]]
38
# sort rows by column timebin
39
time_sort = bins[bins[:, 1].argsort()]
==PAGE:100==
88
Code
40
# split array into consecutive travels
41
# [[s_bin,5],[s_bin,10],[s_bin,11],[s_bin,12],[s_bin,14]] ->
42
# [[s_bin,5], [(s_bin,10),(s_bin,11),(s_bin,12)], [(s_bin,14)]]
43
stepsize = 1
44
consecutive = np.split(time_sort, np.where(np.diff(time_sort[:, 1]) != stepsize
45
num_common_travels = 0
46
for arr in consecutive:
47
if arr.shape[0] > 1:
48
lst = list(arr[:, 0])
49
count = 0
50
for idx, sub in enumerate(lst, start=1):
51
if idx >= len(lst):
52
break
53
if lst[idx] != sub:
54
count += 1
55
if count == arr.shape[0]-1:
56
num_common_travels += 1
57
return num_common_travels
58
59
def calculate_arr_leav(self, cooc_arr, loc_arr):
60
"""
61
As proposed in the master’s thesis of Sapieżyński:
62
63
We propose that if two persons arrive at a location at the same time and/or
64
leave the location synchronously it yields a stronger signal than if two people
65
are in the same location, but their arrival and leaving are not synchronized. T
66
value is weighted by the number of people who arrived and/or left the building
67
in each particular time bin. Thus, timed arrival of many people in the beginnin
68
of the scheduled classes is not as strong a signal as synchronized arrival of a
69
persons an hour before the class begins.
70
71
Feature ID: arr_leav
72
"""
73
if cooc_arr.shape[0] == 0:
74
print("no cooccurrences in arr_leav")
75
return 0
76
arr_leav_values = []
77
for row in cooc_arr:
78
arr_leav_value = 0
79
80
user1_present_in_previous = loc_arr[(loc_arr[:, 0] == row[0]) & (
81
loc_arr[:, 2] == row[3]-1) & (loc_arr[:, 1] == row[2])].shape[0]
82
user2_present_in_previous = loc_arr[(loc_arr[:, 0] == row[1]) & (
83
loc_arr[:, 2] == row[3]-1) & (loc_arr[:, 1] == row[2])].shape[0]
==PAGE:101==
89
84
if not user1_present_in_previous and not user2_present_in_previous:
85
# synchronous arrival
86
# finds users in previous timebin with spatial bin
87
before_arrive_list = loc_arr[
88
(loc_arr[:, 2] == row[3]-1) & (loc_arr[:, 1] == row[2])][:, 0]
89
# finds users in current timebin with spatial bin
90
arrive_list = loc_arr[
91
(loc_arr[:, 2] == row[3]) & (loc_arr[:, 1] == row[2])][:, 0]
92
num_arrivals = np.setdiff1d(
93
arrive_list, before_arrive_list, assume_unique=True).shape[0]
94
if num_arrivals == 0:
95
arr_leav_value += 1
96
else:
97
arr_leav_value += (1/num_arrivals)
98
99
#user 0, spatial_bin 1, time_bin 2, country 3
100
user1_present_in_next = loc_arr[(loc_arr[:, 0] == row[0]) & (
101
loc_arr[:, 2] == row[3]+1) & (loc_arr[:, 1] == row[2])].shape[0]
102
user2_present_in_next = loc_arr[(loc_arr[:, 0] == row[1]) & (
103
loc_arr[:, 2] == row[3]+1) & (loc_arr[:, 1] == row[2])].shape[0]
104
if not user1_present_in_next and not user2_present_in_next:
105
# synchronous leaving
106
leave_list = loc_arr[
107
(loc_arr[:, 2] == row[3]) & (loc_arr[:, 1] == row[2])][:, 0]
108
# finds users in current timebin with spatial bin
109
after_leave_list = loc_arr[
110
(loc_arr[:, 2] == row[3]+1) & (loc_arr[:, 1] == row[2])][:, 0]
111
num_leavers = np.setdiff1d(
112
after_leave_list, leave_list, assume_unique=True).shape[0]
113
if num_leavers == 0:
114
arr_leav_value += 1
115
else:
116
arr_leav_value += (1/num_leavers)
117
arr_leav_values.append(arr_leav_value)
118
119
return sum(arr_leav_values)/cooc_arr.shape[0]
120
121
def calculate_coocs_w(self, cooc_arr, loc_arr):
122
"""
123
As proposed in the master’s thesis of Sapieżyński:
124
125
While other researchers use entropy to weight the social impact of meetings
126
data allows us to introduce a more precise measure. We use anonymous statis
127
to estimate the number of all people present in the building in each time b
==PAGE:102==
90
Code
128
assume the social importance of each co-occurrence to be inversely proportional
129
to the number of people – if only a few persons are there in a location, it is
130
probable that there is a social bond between them compared to the situation
131
when dozens of people are present.
132
133
Calculates all values of coocs_w for cooccurrences and returns the mean of them
134
135
Feature ID: coocs_w
136
"""
137
if cooc_arr.shape[0] == 0:
138
print("no cooccurrences for cooc_w")
139
return 0
140
coocs_w_values = []
141
for row in cooc_arr:
142
coocs_w_value = loc_arr[(loc_arr[:, 1] == row[2]) &
143
(loc_arr[:, 2] == row[3])].shape[0]
144
coocs_w_values.append(1/(coocs_w_value-1))
145
return sum(coocs_w_values)/cooc_arr.shape[0]
146
147
def calculate_diversity(self, cooc_arr):
148
"""
149
Diversity quantifies how many locations the cooccurrences between two people re
150
Can either use Shannon or Renyi Entropy, right now uses Shannon
151
From inferring realworld relationships from spatiotemporal data paper p. 23.
152
"""
153
frequency = cooc_arr.shape[0]
154
_, counts = np.unique(cooc_arr[:, 2], return_counts=True)
155
156
shannon_entropy = -np.sum((counts/frequency) *
157
(np.log2(counts/frequency)))
158
return np.exp(shannon_entropy)
159
160
def calculate_weighted_frequency(self, cooc_arr, loc_arr):
161
"""
162
Inferring realworld relationships from spatiotemporal data paper p. 19 and 23-2
163
Tells how important co-occurrences are at non-crowded places
164
"""
165
weighted_frequency = 0
166
spatial_bins, counts = np.unique(cooc_arr[:, 2], return_counts=True)
167
for spatial_bin, count in zip(spatial_bins, counts):
168
# get all locations with spatial bin
169
locs_with_spatial = loc_arr[loc_arr[:, 1] == spatial_bin]
170
location_entropy = 0
171
for user in np.unique(locs_with_spatial[:, 0]):
==PAGE:103==
91
172
# get all locations for user
173
v_lu = locs_with_spatial[locs_with_spatial[:, 0] == user]
174
# get all locations for spatial bin
175
v_l = locs_with_spatial
176
prob = v_lu.shape[0]/v_l.shape[0]
177
if prob != 0:
178
location_entropy += prob*np.log2(prob)
179
location_entropy = -location_entropy
180
weighted_frequency += count * np.exp(-location_entropy)
181
return weighted_frequency
182
183
def generate_cooccurrences_array(self, loc_arr):
184
"""
185
Returns an array of cooccurrences with columns:
186
["useruuid1", "useruuid2", "spatial_bin", "time_bin"]
187
It removes location spatial/time duplicates
188
and the smallest userid is always in column useruuid1
189
"""
190
coocs_dict = collections.defaultdict(list)
191
cooccurrences = []
192
for x in loc_arr:
193
coocs_dict[(x[1], x[2])].append(x[0])
194
for x, coocs_list in tqdm(coocs_dict.items()):
195
for pair in itertools.combinations(set(coocs_list), 2):
196
# make column1 always have the lowest userid
197
pair = sorted(pair)
198
cooccurrences.append([pair[0], pair[1], x[0], x[1]])
199
return np.array(cooccurrences)
==PAGE:104==
92
Code
Appache Spark code
Code for Apache Spark
1 port sys
2 port os
3 port os.path
4
5 ARK_HOME = """spark-1.6.0-bin-hadoop2.6/""" ## PATH TO SPARK
6
7 s.path.append(os.path.join(SPARK_HOME, "python", "lib", "py4j-0.9-src.zip"))
8 s.path.append(os.path.join(SPARK_HOME, "python", "lib", "pyspark.zip"))
9 .environ["SPARK_HOME"] = SPARK_HOME
10 .environ["PYSPARK_SUBMIT_ARGS"] = "--packages com.databricks:spark-avro_2.10:2.0.1 py
11 .environ["PYSPARK_PYTHON"]="/usr/bin/python3"
12
13
14 om pyspark import SparkConf, SparkContext, StorageLevel
15 om pyspark.sql import SQLContext
16 om pyspark.sql.functions import col, udf
17 om pyspark.sql.types import DecimalType, DoubleType, FloatType, ByteType, IntegerType
18
19 nf = (SparkConf()
20
.setMaster("local[*]")
21
.setAppName("My app"))
22
= SparkContext(conf = conf)
23 lContext = SQLContext(sc)
24
25
26
27 load data to dataframe
28 ta = (sqlContext.read.format("com.databricks.spark.avro")
29
.load("data/201509/*.avro")
30
)
31
32
33
34 import python3 style functions
35 om __future__ import print_function
36 om __future__ import division
37
38
39
==PAGE:105==
93
40 load data to dataframe
41 ta = (sqlContext.read.format("com.databricks.spark.avro")
42
.load("s3://sbdp-source-lifelog/environments/prod/revisions/1/location/yearmo
43
)
44
45
46 ### Look at data
47
48 I kan se strukturen på data her
49 ta.printSchema()
50
51 kig på data
52 ta.show(10)
53
54
55 ### Define bin calculation functions and periods
56
57
58 om pyspark import SparkConf, SparkContext, StorageLevel
59 om pyspark.sql import SQLContext
60 om pyspark.sql.functions import col, udf
61 om pyspark.sql.types import DecimalType, DoubleType, FloatType, ByteType, Integer
62 om dateutil import parser
63 port math
64
65 id_boundaries_tuple=(-180, 180, -90, 90)
66 atial_resolution_decimals = 3
67
68 ID_MIN_LNG = (grid_boundaries_tuple[0] + 180) * pow(10,spatial_resolution_decimal
69 ID_MAX_LNG = (grid_boundaries_tuple[1] + 180) * pow(10,spatial_resolution_decimal
70 ID_MIN_LAT = (grid_boundaries_tuple[2] + 90) * pow(10,spatial_resolution_decimals
71 ID_MAX_LAT = (grid_boundaries_tuple[3] + 90) * pow(10,spatial_resolution_decimals
72
73 f calculate_spatial_bin(lng, lat):
74
lat += 90.0
75
lng += 180.0
76
lat = math.trunc(lat*pow(10, spatial_resolution_decimals))
77
lng = math.trunc(lng*pow(10, spatial_resolution_decimals))
78
return (abs(GRID_MAX_LAT - GRID_MIN_LAT) *
79
(lat-GRID_MIN_LAT)) + (lng-GRID_MIN_LNG)
80
81 f calculate_time_bins(start_time, end_time=None):
82
start_time = parser.parse(start_time)
83
min_datetime = parser.parse(’2015-08-09 00:00:00+02’)
==PAGE:106==
94
Code
84
start_bin = int(math.floor(
85
((start_time-min_datetime).total_seconds()/60.0)/60))
86
87
if end_time:
88
end_time = parser.parse(end_time)
89
end_bin = int(math.ceil(((end_time-min_datetime).total_seconds()/60.0)/60))
90
else:
91
end_bin = start_bin
92
93
if start_bin == end_bin:
94
return [start_bin]
95
else:
96
return list(range(start_bin, end_bin))
97
98 string reps of periods
99 rst_period_min = "2015-09-01 00:00:00+02:00"
100 rst_period_max = "2015-09-10 23:59:59+02:00"
101 cond_period_min = "2015-09-11 00:00:00+02:00"
102 cond_period_max = "2015-09-20 23:59:59+02:00"
103 ird_period_min = "2015-09-21 00:00:00+02:00"
104 ird_period_max = "2015-09-30 23:59:59+02:00"
105
106 datetime objects of periods
107 rst_period_min_date = parser.parse(first_period_min)
108 rst_period_max_date = parser.parse(first_period_max)
109 cond_period_min_date = parser.parse(second_period_min)
110 cond_period_max_date = parser.parse(second_period_max)
111 ird_period_min_date = parser.parse(third_period_min)
112 ird_period_max_date = parser.parse(third_period_max)
113
114 timebins of periods
115 rst_period_min_bin = calculate_time_bins(first_period_min)[0]
116 rst_period_max_bin = calculate_time_bins(first_period_max)[0]
117 cond_period_min_bin = calculate_time_bins(second_period_min)[0]
118 cond_period_max_bin = calculate_time_bins(second_period_max)[0]
119 ird_period_min_bin = calculate_time_bins(third_period_min)[0]
120 ird_period_max_bin = calculate_time_bins(third_period_max)[0]
121
122
123 ### Create dataframes: filter by country, accuracy, min and max period
124 ### Convert to spatial_bin, time_bins
125 om pyspark.sql.functions import udf, explode
126 om pyspark.sql.types import DecimalType, DoubleType, FloatType, ByteType, IntegerType
127
==PAGE:107==
95
128 ilter by country (Sweden) and start_time and end_time
129 e_data = data.filter(data["country"] == ’Sweden’).filter(data["start_time"] >= fi
130 f_spatial_bin = udf(calculate_spatial_bin, IntegerType())
131 add new column spatial_bin
132 nned_swe_data = swe_data.withColumn("spatial_bin", udf_spatial_bin("longitude", "
133 add new column time_bins
134 f_time_bins = udf(calculate_time_bins, ArrayType(IntegerType()))
135 nned_swe_data = binned_swe_data.withColumn("time_bins", udf_time_bins("start_time
136 get distinct spatial bin, time bin, useruuid rows only
137 nned_swe_data_with_spatial = binned_swe_data.select(binned_swe_data["spatial_bin"
138 nned_swe_data = binned_swe_data_with_spatial.select(binned_swe_data_with_spatial[
139
140 reduce to (spatial_bin, time_bin) -> [users] (CONVERSION TO RDD)
141 ns_to_users = binned_swe_data_with_spatial.rdd.map(lambda r: ((r[0],r[1]),[r[2]])
142 ns_to_users_counts = bins_to_users.map(lambda r: (r[0], len(r[1])))
143 ns_to_users_counts_broadcast = sc.broadcast(bins_to_users_counts.collect())
144
145 ### Statistics
146
147 e_data.printSchema()
148 e_data.count()
149
150
151 ### Define criteria for users
152
153 mebin_percentage = 0.2
154 riod_1_max_timebins = first_period_max_bin - first_period_min_bin
155 riod_2_max_timebins = second_period_max_bin - second_period_min_bin
156 riod_3_max_timebins = third_period_max_bin - third_period_min_bin
157
158 int(period_1_max_timebins)
159 int(period_2_max_timebins)
160 int(period_3_max_timebins)
161
162
163 ### Find users for each period and find users which are common to every period (R
164
165 riod_1_users_counts = binned_swe_data.filter(binned_swe_data["time_bin"] < first_
166 riod_1_users = period_1_users_counts.filter(lambda r: r[1] / float(period_1_max_t
167 riod_2_users_counts = binned_swe_data.filter(binned_swe_data["time_bin"] < second
168 riod_2_users = period_2_users_counts.filter(lambda r: r[1] / float(period_2_max_t
169
170 riod_3_users_counts = binned_swe_data.filter(binned_swe_data["time_bin"] < third_
171 riod_3_users = period_3_users_counts.filter(lambda r: r[1] / float(period_3_max_t
==PAGE:108==
96
Code
172
173 ers_in_all = period_1_users.intersection(period_2_users).intersection(period_3_users)
174 ers_in_all = sc.broadcast([x["useruuid"] for x in users_in_all.collect()])
175
176
177 ### Find users for each period and find users which are common to every period (Dataf
178 riod_1_users_counts = binned_swe_data.filter(binned_swe_data["time_bin"] < first_peri
179 riod_1_users = period_1_users_counts.filter(period_1_users_counts["count"]/float(peri
180
181 riod_2_users_counts = binned_swe_data.filter(binned_swe_data["time_bin"] < second_per
182 riod_2_users = period_2_users_counts.filter(period_2_users_counts["count"]/float(peri
183
184 riod_3_users_counts = binned_swe_data.filter(binned_swe_data["time_bin"] < third_peri
185 riod_3_users = period_3_users_counts.filter(period_3_users_counts["count"]/float(peri
186
187 ers_in_all = period_1_users.intersect(period_2_users).intersect(period_3_users)
188 ers_in_all = sc.broadcast([x["useruuid"] for x in users_in_all.collect()])
189
190 riod_1_users_counts.orderBy("count", ascending=False).show(5)
191
192
193 ### Divide into periods
194
195
196 riod_1_bins_to_users = bins_to_users.filter(lambda row: row[0][1] >= first_period_min
197
and row[0][1] < first_period_max_bin)
198 riod_2_bins_to_users = bins_to_users.filter(lambda row: row[0][1] >= second_period_mi
199
and row[0][1] < second_period_max_bin)
200 riod_3_bins_to_users = bins_to_users.filter(lambda row: row[0][1] >= third_period_min
201
and row[0][1] < third_period_max_bin)
202
203
204 ### Generate co-occurences
205
206 generate cooccurrences in form of: (user1,user2) -> [(spatial,time)]
207 om itertools import combinations
208 f generate_cooccurrences(row):
209
return [(tuple(sorted(pair)),[row[0]]) for pair in combinations(row[1], 2) if pair[
210
211 ocs_1 = period_1_bins_to_users.flatMap(generate_cooccurrences).reduceByKey(lambda a,b
212 ocs_2 = period_2_bins_to_users.flatMap(generate_cooccurrences).reduceByKey(lambda a,b
213 ocs_3 = period_3_bins_to_users.flatMap(generate_cooccurrences).reduceByKey(lambda a,b
214
215
==PAGE:109==
97
216 ### Auxiliary functions
217
218 om dateutil.relativedelta import relativedelta
219 om pytz import timezone
220 port datetime
221
222 f calculate_datetime(time_bin):
223
min_datetime = parser.parse(’2015-08-09 00:00:00+02’)
224
datetime = min_datetime+relativedelta(seconds=60*60*int(time_bin))
225
return datetime
226
227
228 ### Generate is_weekend
229 f is_weekend(datetime, timezonestring="Europe/Stockholm"):
230
converted = datetime.astimezone(timezone(timezonestring))
231
return converted.date().isoweekday in [6, 7] or (converted.date().isoweekday ==
232
233 f calculate_number_of_weekend_coocs(cooc_arr):
234
return sum([is_weekend(calculate_datetime(cooc[1])) for cooc in cooc_arr])
235
236
237 ### Generate number of evenings
238 f is_evening(datetime, timezonestring="Europe/Stockholm"):
239
converted = datetime.astimezone(timezone(timezonestring))
240
return converted.hour > 18
241
242 f calculate_number_of_evening_coocs(cooc_arr):
243
return sum([is_evening(calculate_datetime(cooc[1])) for cooc in cooc_arr])
244
245
246 ### Coocs w
247
248 f calculate_coocs_w(cooc_arr):
249
if len(cooc_arr) == 0:
250
return 0
251
coocs_w_values = []
252
for row in cooc_arr:
253
for bins_users in bins_to_users_counts_broadcast.value:
254
if bins_users[0][0]==row[0] and bins_users[0][1]==row[1]:
255
coocs_w_value = bins_users[1]
256
break
257
258
coocs_w_values.append(1/float((coocs_w_value-1)))
259
return sum(coocs_w_values)/len(cooc_arr)
==PAGE:110==
98
Code
260
261
262 ### Generate location entropies
263 port numpy as np
264 generate location entropies (H_l) for use in weighted frequency in form key:spatial_b
265 f calculate_H(row):
266
H_val = 0
267
for user in set(row[1]):
268
P_ul = row[1].count(user)/float(len(row[1]))
269
H_val += P_ul*np.log2(P_ul)
270
return row[0],-H_val
271 COLLECTS
272 riod_1_h_vals = sc.broadcast(period_1_bins_to_users.map(lambda row: (row[0][0],row[1]
273 riod_2_h_vals = sc.broadcast(period_2_bins_to_users.map(lambda row: (row[0][0],row[1]
274
275
276 ### Generate features
277
278 om pyspark.mllib.regression import LabeledPoint
279 port pyspark
280 port numpy as np
281 om itertools import permutations
282
283 COLLECTS
284 1_users = sc.broadcast(coocs_2.map(lambda row: row[0]).collect())
285 2_users = sc.broadcast(coocs_3.map(lambda row: row[0]).collect())
286
287
isinstance(period_1_users_counts, pyspark.rdd.PipelinedRDD):
288
period_1_users_counts_bc = sc.broadcast(period_1_users_counts.collectAsMap())
289
period_2_users_counts_bc = sc.broadcast(period_2_users_counts.collectAsMap())
290 se:
291
period_1_users_counts_bc = sc.broadcast(period_1_users_counts.rdd.collectAsMap())
292
period_2_users_counts_bc = sc.broadcast(period_2_users_counts.rdd.collectAsMap())
293
294
295 generate dict of useruuid : coocs_users
296 unique by position, not value, thus user1 : user2 and user2: user1 can occur
297 f generate_cooccurrences_with_duplicates(row):
298
return [(pair[0],[pair[1]]) for pair in permutations(row[1],2) if pair[0] in users_
299
300 p_coocs_1 = period_1_bins_to_users.flatMap(generate_cooccurrences_with_duplicates).re
301 p_coocs_2 = period_2_bins_to_users.flatMap(generate_cooccurrences_with_duplicates).re
302 p_coocs_1 = sc.broadcast(dup_coocs_1.collectAsMap())
303 p_coocs_2 = sc.broadcast(dup_coocs_2.collectAsMap())
==PAGE:111==
99
304
305
306 f compute_mutual_cooccurrences(row, dup_coocs):
307
user1 = row[0][0]
308
user2 = row[0][1]
309
user1_coocs = set(dup_coocs[user1])
310
user2_coocs = set(dup_coocs[user2])
311
return len(user1_coocs & user2_coocs)/len(user1_coocs | user2_coocs)
312
313 f compute_specificity(row, counts):
314
user1_count = counts[row[0][0]]
315
user2_count = counts[row[0][1]]
316
return len(row[1])/(user1_count+user2_count)
317
318 f compute_weighted_frequency(row, h_vals):
319
spatial_bins = [r[0] for r in row[1]]
320
wf_value = 0
321
for sb in set(spatial_bins):
322
wf_value += spatial_bins.count(sb)*np.exp(-h_vals.value[sb])
323
return wf_value
324
325 row = [(user1, user2), [(spatial, timebin), (...), ...]]
326 f compute_features(y, row, h_vals, counts, dup_coocs):
327
# number of cooccurrences
328
num_coocs = len(row[1])
329
# number of unique (by spatial bin) cooccurrences
330
num_unique_coocs = len(set([r[0] for r in row[1]]))
331
spatial_bins = [r[0] for r in row[1]]
332
# weighted frequency
333
weighted_frequency = compute_weighted_frequency(row, h_vals)
334
# diversity
335
diversity = np.exp(-np.sum([spatial_bins.count(sb)/float(len(spatial_bins))*np.
336
# sum weekend
337
sum_weekends = calculate_number_of_weekend_coocs(row[1])
338
# sum evenings
339
sum_evenings = calculate_number_of_evening_coocs(row[1])
340
# coocs_w
341
coocs_w = calculate_coocs_w(row[1])
342
specificity = compute_specificity(row, counts)
343
mutual_cooccurrences = compute_mutual_cooccurrences(row, dup_coocs)
344
return LabeledPoint(y, [num_coocs, num_unique_coocs, diversity,
345
weighted_frequency, sum_weekends, sum_evenings, coocs_w
346
347 f compute_train_features(row):
==PAGE:112==
100
Code
348
y = 1 if row[0] in y_1_users.value else 0
349
return compute_features(y, row, period_1_h_vals, period_1_users_counts_bc.value, du
350 f compute_test_features(row):
351
y = 1 if row[0] in y_2_users.value else 0
352
return compute_features(y, row, period_2_h_vals, period_2_users_counts_bc.value, du
353
354 train = coocs_1.map(compute_train_features)
355
356 test = coocs_2.map(compute_test_features)
357
358 om pyspark.mllib.util import MLUtils
359 train = MLUtils.loadLibSVMFile(sc, "data/vedran_thesis_students/X_train_nonfilter", F
360 test = MLUtils.loadLibSVMFile(sc, "data/vedran_thesis_students/X_test_nonfilter", Fal
361 train = X_train.coalesce(1)
362 test = X_test.coalesce(1)
363 Utils.saveAsLibSVMFile(X_train, "X_train_nonfilter_merged")
364 Utils.saveAsLibSVMFile(X_test, "X_test_nonfilter_merged")
365
366
367 ### Show number of meets and dont meets
368 train_neg = X_train.filter(lambda row: row.label == 0).count()
369 train_pos = X_train.filter(lambda row: row.label == 1).count()
370 test_neg = X_test.filter(lambda row: row.label == 0).count()
371 test_pos = X_test.filter(lambda row: row.label == 1).count()
372 int("X_train has {} negative samples".format(X_train_neg))
373 int("X_train has {} positive samples".format(X_train_pos))
374 int("X_test has {} negative samples".format(X_test_neg))
375 int("X_test has {} positive samples".format(X_test_pos))
376
377
378 ### Save to disk
379 om pyspark.mllib.util import MLUtils
380
381 Utils.saveAsLibSVMFile(X_train, path+"X_train")
382 Utils.saveAsLibSVMFile(X_test, path+"X_test")
383
384
385 ### Undersampling
386
387
X_train_pos > X_train_neg:
388
ratio = X_train_neg/X_train_pos
389
X_train = X_train.filter(lambda row: row.label == 0).union(X_train.filter(lambda ro
390 se:
391
ratio = X_train_pos/X_train_neg
==PAGE:113==
101
392
X_train = X_train.filter(lambda row: row.label == 1).union(X_train.filter(lambd
393
394
X_test_pos > X_test_neg:
395
ratio = X_test_neg/X_test_pos
396
X_test = X_test.filter(lambda row: row.label == 0).union(X_test.filter(lambda r
397 se:
398
ratio = X_test_pos/X_test_neg
399
X_test = X_test.filter(lambda row: row.label == 0).union(X_test.filter(lambda r
400
401 train_neg = X_train.filter(lambda row: row.label == 0).count()
402 train_pos = X_train.filter(lambda row: row.label == 1).count()
403 test_neg = X_test.filter(lambda row: row.label == 0).count()
404 test_pos = X_test.filter(lambda row: row.label == 1).count()
405 int("X_train has {} negative samples".format(X_train_neg))
406 int("X_train has {} positive samples".format(X_train_pos))
407 int("X_test has {} negative samples".format(X_test_neg))
408 int("X_test has {} positive samples".format(X_test_pos))
409
410
411 ### Train model and get AUC
412
413 In[ ]:
414
415 om pyspark.mllib.tree import RandomForest, RandomForestModel
416 om pyspark.mllib.evaluation import BinaryClassificationMetrics, MulticlassMetrics
417 om pyspark.mllib.util import MLUtils
418
419 Train model and compute AUC
420 del = RandomForest.trainClassifier(X_test, numClasses=2, categoricalFeaturesInfo=
421
numTrees=1000, featureSubsetStrategy="auto",
422
impurity=’gini’, maxDepth=4, maxBins=32, seed=
423
424
425 edictions = model.predict(X_train.map(lambda x: x.features))
426
427 bels = X_train.map(lambda x: x.label)
428
429 edictionAndLabels = predictions.zip(labels)
430
431 trics = BinaryClassificationMetrics(predictionAndLabels)
432
433 int("Area under ROC = {}".format(metrics.areaUnderROC))
434 int("Area under Precision-Recall Curve = {}".format(metrics.areaUnderPR))
435 trics = MulticlassMetrics(predictionAndLabels)
==PAGE:114==
102
Code
436
437 r label in sorted(labels.distinct().collect()):
438
print("Class %s precision = %s" % (label, metrics.precision(label)))
439
print("Class %s recall = %s" % (label, metrics.recall(label)))
440
print("Class %s F1 Measure = %s" % (label, metrics.fMeasure(label, beta=1.0)))
==PAGE:115==
103
GeoData.py
Class for generating geo data for use in Leaﬂet
1 /usr/bin/env python3
2 port json
3 port dateutil
4 port dateutil.parser
5 port geojson
6 om geojson import Feature, FeatureCollection, MultiPoint, MultiLineString, Point
7 port DatabaseHelper
8 om collections import defaultdict
9 om itertools import combinations
10
11
12 ass GeoData(object):
13
14
"""docstring for Geo_data"""
15
16
def __init__(self, path_to_settings=""):
17
self.databasehelper = DatabaseHelper.DatabaseHelper(path_to_settings)
18
19
def check_validity(self, data):
20
validation = geojson.is_valid(data)
21
if validation[’valid’] == ’yes’:
22
return True
23
else:
24
print(
25
"geo_json object is not valid: {0}".format(validation[’message’]))
26
return False
27
28
def save_json_data_if_valid(self, data, filename="geodata.geojson"):
29
if self.check_validity(data):
30
with open(filename, ’w’) as outfile:
31
geojson.dump(geo_json, outfile)
32
print("file saved: {0}".format(filename))
33
else:
34
print("Something went wrong")
35
36
def generate_geojson(self, input_dict):
37
"""Generate the geojson dictonary for the geo data
38
39
Arguments:
==PAGE:116==
104
Code
40
input_dict {dict} -- ["raw" dict of the data]
41
42
Returns:
43
geojson dict -- geojson dictonary of the "raw" data
44
"""
45
features = []
46
print(len(input_dict.items()))
47
c = 0
48
for user, _ in input_dict.items():
49
if user.strip() == ’’ or user is None:
50
print("no user found")
51
lat_long = input_dict[user][’lat_long’]
52
if not self.validate_lat_long(lat_long):
53
print("User {0} has an error in lat_long".format(user))
54
index = 0
55
total_diff = input_dict[user][’total_diff’]
56
multipoints = []
57
opacities = []
58
for diff in input_dict[user][’time_diff’]:
59
multipoints.append(input_dict[user][’lat_long’][index])
60
if diff > 0.0:
61
opacities.append(diff/total_diff)
62
else:
63
opacities.append(1.0)
64
index += 1
65
geometry_lines = MultiLineString([input_dict[user][’lat_long’]])
66
geometry_circle = MultiPoint(multipoints)
67
feature_lines = Feature(geometry=geometry_lines,
68
properties={’name’: ’null’, ’circles’: {’opacities’
69
features.append(feature_lines)
70
c += 1
71
return FeatureCollection(features)
72
73
def validate_lat_long(self, lat_long_lst):
74
for lst in lat_long_lst:
75
for lat_long in lst:
76
try:
77
float(lat_long)
78
except ValueError:
79
return False
80
return True
81
82
def get_geo_data_by_country(self, country, start_datetime, end_datetime):
83
"""Gets useruuid, location, start_time, end_time from the database
==PAGE:117==
105
84
where country is equal to input parameter.
85
Makes a dict where useruuids is the top-key. Generate a hex-color for ea
86
87
88
Arguments:
89
country {string} -- The country which the data should come from
90
91
Returns:
92
dict -- Dictonary of the collected data
93
"""
94
wanted_data = defaultdict(dict)
95
user_colors = self.databasehelper.get_user_colors()
96
start_datetime = dateutil.parser.parse(start_datetime)
97
end_datetime = dateutil.parser.parse(end_datetime)
98
99
result = self.databasehelper.get_locations_by_country(
100
country, start_datetime, end_datetime)
101
for res in result:
102
user = res[0]
103
lat_long = json.loads(res[1])
# The location is fetched as GeoJSON
104
start_time = res[2]
105
end_time = res[3]
106
diff = end_time-start_time
107
if user in wanted_data:
108
wanted_data[user][’lat_long’].append(lat_long[’coordinates’])
109
wanted_data[user][’start_time’].append(res[2])
110
wanted_data[user][’time_diff’].append(diff.total_seconds())
111
wanted_data[user][’total_diff’] += diff.total_seconds()
112
else:
113
wanted_data[user][’lat_long’] = [lat_long[’coordinates’]]
114
wanted_data[user][’start_time’] = [res[2]]
115
wanted_data[user][’time_diff’] = [diff.total_seconds()]
116
wanted_data[user][’total_diff’] = diff.total_seconds()
117
wanted_data[user][’color’] = user_colors[user]
118
print("geodata fetched from database")
119
return wanted_data
120
121
def get_geo_data_from_occurrences(self, useruuid1, useruuid2, points_w_distance
122
user_colors = self.databasehelper.get_user_colors()
123
# receive locations for user we want co-occurrences on
124
locations = self.databasehelper.get_locations_for_user(useruuid1)
125
# retrieve locations that co-occur with useruuids locations
126
if useruuid2:
127
cooccurrences = self.databasehelper.find_cooccurrences(
==PAGE:118==
106
Code
128
useruuid1, points_w_distances, useruuid2=useruuid2)
129
else:
130
cooccurrences = self.databasehelper.find_cooccurrences(
131
useruuid1, points_w_distances)
132
133
features = []
134
# append main user
135
features.append(Feature(geometry=MultiLineString([[(loc[3], loc[4]) for loc in
136
"id1": useruuid1, "name": "null"}, style={’color’: "red"}))
137
# append cooccurrences
138
for cooccurrence in cooccurrences:
139
lat_long = json.loads(cooccurrence[5])
140
features.append(Feature(geometry=Point(lat_long["coordinates"]), properties
141
"id1": useruuid1, "name": "null"}, style={’color’: user_col
142
143
return FeatureCollection(features)
144
145
def get_geo_data_from_all_cooccurrences(self):
146
selected_users = [’91f38f33-bae3-4f7f-84e1-c80ff245ece0’, ’90522cae-ba2e-4677-a
147
locations = []
148
for user in selected_users:
149
user_locs = self.databasehelper.get_locations_for_user(user)
150
locations.extend([(u[3], u[4]) for u in user_locs])
151
features = [Feature(geometry=Point(loc)) for loc in locations]
152
return FeatureCollection(features)
153
154
def get_and_generate(self, country, start_date, end_date):
155
return self.generate_geojson(self.get_geo_data_by_country(country, start_date,
156
157
__name__ == ’__main__’:
158
tools_path = "../tools/"
159
g = GeoData(tools_path)
160
print(g.get_geo_data_from_occurrences(
161
"c98f46b9-43fd-4536-afa0-9b789300fe7a", 0.001, 60*24))
==PAGE:119==
107
record_analysis.py
Script for analyzing location updates: xy-plots, heatmaps, etc.
1 /usr/bin/env python3
2 port os
3 port sys
4 s.path.insert(1, os.path.join(sys.path[0], ’..’))
5 port DatabaseHelper
6 port DatasetHelper
7 port Predictor
8 port seaborn as sns
9 port numpy as np
10 port math
11 om dateutil.rrule import rrule, WEEKLY, DAILY
12 om dateutil import parser
13 om datetime import timedelta
14 om collections import defaultdict
15 om tqdm import tqdm
16 port matplotlib.pyplot as plt
17 port matplotlib.ticker as tck
18 port pandas as pd
19 port collections
20 port pprint
21 port itertools
22 om tqdm import tqdm
23 om matplotlib.colors import LogNorm
24
25
26 f get_data_for_heat_map_per_month(country="Japan", total_count={}, user=""):
27
"""
28
Generate numpy matrix represent heatmap with the following dimension: 3x7x6
29
Hardcoded datetimes
30
31
Arguments:
32
country {string} -- Which country to get data from
33
total_count {dict} -- Dict with total users in country (key = country,
34
user {string} -- find it for specific user
35
36
Returns:
37
numpy array -- Numpy array with number of location in that day, in that
38
"""
39
d = DatabaseHelper.DatabaseHelper()
==PAGE:120==
108
Code
40
timezones = {"Sweden": "+02:00",
41
"Japan": "+09:00"}
42
sept_min_datetime2 = "2015-08-30 00:00:00" + timezones[country] #Mandag
43
nov_max_datetime2 = "2015-12-13 23:59:59" + timezones[country]
44
number_of_month = 3
45
days_in_week = 7
46
number_of_weeks = 6
47
data = np.full((number_of_month, days_in_week, number_of_weeks),
48
-1, dtype=int)
49
sep_start = parser.parse(sept_min_datetime2)
50
nov_end = parser.parse(nov_max_datetime2)
51
weeks = list(rrule(freq=WEEKLY, dtstart=sep_start, until=nov_end))
52
month_range = [9, 10, 11]
53
month_index = 0
54
for week_index, week in enumerate(tqdm(weeks)): #Vi starter på en mandag!!!
55
current_month = week.month #mandag i ugen
56
if current_month in month_range:
57
month_index = month_range.index(current_month)
58
break_flag = False
59
days_in_week = list(rrule(freq=DAILY, dtstart=week, until=weeks[week_index+1]))
60
for day_index, day in enumerate(days_in_week):
61
if day.month not in month_range: #hvis dagens måned ikke er i listen
62
if day.month > max(month_range):
63
break_flag = True
64
break #Break all!!!!
65
else:
66
#print("{}/{} - {}".format(day.day, day.month, day.weekday()))
67
if day.month > current_month and day.month != 8:
68
current_month += 1
69
if current_month > max(month_range):
70
break_flag = True
71
break
72
else:
73
month_index = month_range.index(current_month)
74
start = day.strftime("%Y-%m-%d %H:%M:%S") + timezones[country]
75
end =
day.strftime("%Y-%m-%d")+" 23:59:59" + timezones[country]
76
user_query = ""
77
if user != "":
78
user_query = " AND useruuid = ’"+user+"’"
79
query = "select count(*) FROM location WHERE country=’" + country +
80
"’ AND ((start_time >= ’" + start + \
81
"’ AND start_time < ’" + end + "’)" + \
82
" OR (end_time >= ’" + start + \
83
"’ AND end_time < ’" + start + "’)" + \
==PAGE:121==
109
84
" OR (start_time < ’"+start + \
85
"’ AND end_time > ’"+end+"’))" + user_query+";"
86
result = d.run_specific_query(query)[0][0]
87
data[month_index][day.weekday()][week_of_month(day)-1] = result
88
89
else: #Hvis vi er i current_month
90
if day.month != 8:
91
start = day.strftime("%Y-%m-%d %H:%M:%S") + timezones[count
92
end =
day.strftime("%Y-%m-%d")+" 23:59:59" + timezones[cou
93
user_query = ""
94
if user != "":
95
user_query = " AND useruuid = ’"+user+"’"
96
query = "select count(*) FROM "+ \
97
"location WHERE country=’" + country + \
98
"’ AND ((start_time >= ’" + start + \
99
"’ AND start_time < ’" + end + "’)" + \
100
" OR (end_time >= ’" + start + \
101
"’ AND end_time < ’" + start + "’)" + \
102
" OR (start_time < ’"+start + \
103
"’ AND end_time > ’"+end+"’))" + user_query+";"
104
result = d.run_specific_query(query)[0][0]
105
data[month_index][day.weekday()][week_of_month(day)-1] = re
106
if break_flag:
107
break
108
109
print(data)
110
mask = data == -1
111
print(mask)
112
return data, mask
113
114
115 f get_all_users_in_country(country, users=[]):
116
"""
117
Generate dict with incremental values as key, and original useruuid as valu
118
119
Arguments:
120
country {string} -- Which country to get users from
121
users {list} -- List of users. If not empty list, the db call is omitte
122
123
Returns:
124
dict -- dict with incremental values as key, and original useruuid as v
125
"""
126
d = DatabaseHelper.DatabaseHelper()
127
if not users:
==PAGE:122==
110
Code
128
result = d.run_specific_query("SELECT DISTINCT(useruuid) FROM location WHERE co
129
users = [row[0] for row in result]
130
alt_useruid = {}
131
i = 0
132
for user in users:
133
if user not in alt_useruid:
134
alt_useruid[user] = i
135
alt_useruid[i] = user
136
i += 1
137
138
return alt_useruid
139
140
141 f get_data_for_heat_map_per_user(country, start_date, end_date, input_users=[], count
142
"""
143
Generate numpy matrix represent heatmap with the following dimension: usersxday
144
145
Arguments:
146
country {string} -- Which country to get data from
147
start_date {string} -- start datetime
148
end_time {string} -- end datetime
149
input_users {list} -- list of specific users
150
counts {boolean} -- Indicates if it should find number of locations (True)
151
152
Returns:
153
numpy array -- Numpy array
154
"""
155
d = DatabaseHelper.DatabaseHelper()
156
users = get_all_users_in_country(country, input_users)
157
sept_min_datetime2 = start_date + " 00:00:00+00:00" #Mandag
158
nov_max_datetime2 = end_date + " 23:59:59+00:00"
159
sep_start = parser.parse(sept_min_datetime2)
160
nov_end = parser.parse(nov_max_datetime2)
161
days = list(rrule(freq=DAILY, dtstart=sep_start, until=nov_end))
162
#print("get_data_for_heat_map_per_user")
163
#print(len(users)/2)
164
data = np.full((len(users)/2, len(days)),
165
0, dtype=int)
166
timezones = {"Sweden": "+02:00",
167
"Japan": "+09:00"}
168
if not input_users:
169
for day_index, day in enumerate(tqdm(days)): #Vi starter på en mandag!!!
170
start = day.strftime("%Y-%m-%d %H:%M:%S") + timezones[country]
171
end =
day.strftime("%Y-%m-%d")+" 23:59:59" + timezones[country]
==PAGE:123==
111
172
result = d.run_specific_query("SELECT useruuid, count(*) FROM " +
173
"location WHERE country=’" + country +
174
"’ AND ((start_time >= ’" + start +
175
"’ AND start_time < ’" + end + "’)" +
176
" OR (end_time >= ’" + start +
177
"’ AND end_time < ’" + start + "’)" +
178
" OR (start_time < ’"+start +
179
"’ AND end_time > ’"+end+"’))" +
180
"GROUP BY useruuid")
181
for row in result:
182
user = row[0]
183
if counts:
184
data[users[user]][day_index] = row[1]
185
else:
186
data[users[user]][day_index] = 1
187
else:
188
for day_index, day in enumerate(tqdm(days)): #Vi starter på en mandag!!!
189
for user in input_users:
190
start = day.strftime("%Y-%m-%d %H:%M:%S")+"+00:00"
191
end = day.strftime("%Y-%m-%d")+" 23:59:59+00:00"
192
result = d.run_specific_query("SELECT count(*) FROM " +
193
"location WHERE country=’" + country
194
"’ AND ((start_time >= ’" + start +
195
"’ AND start_time < ’" + end + "’)" +
196
" OR (end_time >= ’" + start +
197
"’ AND end_time < ’" + start + "’)" +
198
" OR (start_time < ’"+start +
199
"’ AND end_time > ’"+end+"’))" +
200
" AND useruuid=’"+user+"’")
201
for row in result:
202
if row[0] > 0:
203
if counts:
204
data[users[user]][day_index] = row[0]
205
else:
206
data[users[user]][day_index] = 1
207
208
return data, users
209
210
211 f get_data_for_heat_map_per_user_aggregated(country, start_date, end_date, bins=6
212
"""
213
Generate numpy matrix represent heatmap, with user and number of bins over
214
Bins is number of minutes each bin is. So dimension for arrays is usersx((2
215
==PAGE:124==
112
Code
216
Arguments:
217
country {string} -- Which country to get data from
218
start_date {string} -- start datetime
219
end_time {string} -- end datetime
220
input_users {list} -- list of specific users
221
counts {boolean} -- Indicates if it should find number of locations (True)
222
223
Returns:
224
numpy array -- Numpy array
225
"""
226
d = DatabaseHelper.DatabaseHelper()
227
users = get_all_users_in_country(country, input_users)
228
start_time = parser.parse(start_date + " 00:00:00+00:00")
229
end_time = parser.parse(end_date + " 23:59:59+00:00")
230
days = list(rrule(freq=DAILY, dtstart=start_time, until=end_time))
231
data = np.full((len(users)/2, (24*60)/bins),
232
0, dtype=int)
233
timezones = {"Sweden": "+02:00",
234
"Japan": "+09:00"}
235
if not input_users:
236
for day_index, day in enumerate(tqdm(days)):
237
times_in_that_day = generate_time_list(day, day+timedelta(days=1), bins, Tr
238
#print(times_in_that_day)
239
for bin_index, times in enumerate(times_in_that_day):
240
241
start = times[0].strftime("%Y-%m-%d %H:%M:%S")+timezones[country]
242
end = times[1].strftime("%Y-%m-%d %H:%M:%S")+timezones[country]
243
#print("start = {}, end = {}\nbin_index = {}\n-----------"
244
#
.format(start, end, bin_index))
245
result = d.run_specific_query("SELECT useruuid, count(*) FROM " +
246
"location WHERE country=’" + country +
247
"’ AND ((start_time >= ’" + start +
248
"’ AND start_time < ’" + end + "’)" +
249
" OR (end_time >= ’" + start +
250
"’ AND end_time < ’" + start + "’)" +
251
" OR (start_time < ’"+start +
252
"’ AND end_time > ’"+end+"’))" +
253
"GROUP BY useruuid")
254
for row in result:
255
user = row[0]
256
if counts:
257
data[users[user]][bin_index] += row[1]
258
else:
259
data[users[user]][bin_index] += 1
==PAGE:125==
113
260
else:
261
for day_index, day in enumerate(tqdm(days)): #Vi starter på en mandag!!!
262
times_in_that_day = generate_time_list(day, day+timedelta(days=1), bins
263
for bin_index, times in enumerate(times_in_that_day):
264
for user in input_users:
265
start = times[0].strftime("%Y-%m-%d %H:%M:%S")+"+00:00"
266
end = times[1].strftime("%Y-%m-%d %H:%M:%S")+"+00:00"
267
result = d.run_specific_query("SELECT count(*) FROM " +
268
"location WHERE country=’" + coun
269
"’ AND (start_time >= ’" + start
270
"’ AND start_time < ’" + end + "’
271
"’ OR (end_time >= ’" + start +
272
"’ AND end_time < ’" + start + "’
273
" OR (start_time < ’"+start +
274
"’ AND end_time > ’"+end+"’)" +
275
" AND useruuid=’"+user+"’")
276
for row in result:
277
if row[0] > 0:
278
if counts:
279
data[users[user]][bin_index] += row[0]
280
else:
281
data[users[user]][bin_index] += 1
282
283
return data, users
284
285
286 f generate_time_list(start_time, end_time, step_size, zips=False):
287
"""
288
Generate a list of datetimes with an rrule of specific number of minutes
289
290
Arguments:
291
start_time {datetime} -- Datetime for when the list starts
292
end_time
{datetime} -- Datetime for when the list ends
293
step_size
{int}
-- How many minutes between element in the list (minu
294
295
Return:
296
list of datetimes
297
"""
298
lst = []
299
if not zips:
300
lst.append(start_time)
301
temp_time = start_time
302
while temp_time < end_time:
303
temp_time = temp_time+timedelta(minutes=step_size)
==PAGE:126==
114
Code
304
lst.append(temp_time)
305
lst = lst[:-1]
306
else:
307
temp_time = start_time
308
before = temp_time
309
while temp_time < end_time:
310
temp_time = temp_time+timedelta(minutes=step_size)
311
lst.append((before, temp_time))
312
before = temp_time
313
return lst
314
315
316
317 f week_of_month(date):
318
"""
319
Calculate which week number of a month a date are in
320
That is between 1 and 6
321
322
Arguments:
323
date
{datetime} -- Datetime for which week number should be calculated for
324
325
Returns:
326
int
327
"""
328
flag = False
329
if date.weekday() == 6:
330
flag = True
331
lst = list(rrule(freq=DAILY, dtstart=date-timedelta(days=(date.day-1)), until=date)
332
d = defaultdict(int)
333
for date in lst:
334
d[date.weekday()]+=1
335
for i in range(7):
336
if i not in d:
337
d[i] = 0
338
if flag:
339
return d[6]
340
return d[6]+1
341
342
343 f calc_labels(data, bins):
344
max_value = max(data)
345
min_value = min(data)
346
step = math.ceil((max_value - min_value)/bins)
347
xlabels = list(np.arange(min_value, max_value, step))
==PAGE:127==
115
348
349
#print("min_value = {}, max_value = {}, len = {}".format(min_value, max_value,
350
return xlabels, step
351
352
353 f cdf_xy_plot():
354
"""
355
Plotting the CDF for countries from fetch_data
356
"""
357
_, df, _, countries = fetch_data()
358
no_users = {"Japan": 316, "Sweden": 542}
359
data = []
360
for i, country in enumerate(countries):
361
updates = list(df["Location updates"][df[’country’] == country])
362
c = dict(collections.OrderedDict(sorted(collections.Counter(updates).items(
363
x = []
364
y = []
365
for updates, users in sorted(c.items()):
366
x.append(updates)
367
y.append(users/no_users[country])
368
data.append((x, np.cumsum(y)))
369
370
title = "CDF for location updates"
371
xlabel = "Location updates"
372
ylabel = "Frequency"
373
legend_labels = countries
374
ax = plt.subplot(111, xlabel=xlabel, ylabel=ylabel, title=title)
375
plt.plot(data[0][0], data[0][1], label=legend_labels[0], linewidth=6.0)
376
plt.plot(data[1][0], data[1][1], label=legend_labels[1], color=’r’, linewidth=6
377
xlim_max = max([max(data[0][0]), max(data[1][0])])
378
plt.ylim(0, 1)
379
plt.xlim(0, xlim_max)
380
plt.title(title)
381
plt.legend(prop={’size’: 40})
382
sns.plt.tick_params(labelsize=20)
383
[item.set_fontsize(45) for item in [ax.yaxis.label, ax.xaxis.label]]
384
ax.title.set_fontsize(48)
385
[item.set_fontsize(33) for item in ax.get_xticklabels() + ax.get_yticklabels()]
386
plt.show()
387
388
389 f xy_plot(data, title, xlabel, ylabel):
390
ax = plt.subplot(111, xlabel=xlabel, ylabel=ylabel, title=title)
391
plt.plot(data[0], data[1])
==PAGE:128==
116
Code
392
xlim_max = max(data[0])
393
plt.ylim(0, max(data[1]))
394
plt.xlim(0, xlim_max)
395
plt.title(title)
396
#plt.legend(prop={’size’: 28})
397
[item.set_fontsize(35) for item in [ax.yaxis.label, ax.xaxis.label]]
398
ax.title.set_fontsize(40)
399
[item.set_fontsize(28) for item in ax.get_xticklabels() + ax.get_yticklabels()]
400
plt.show()
401
402
403 f records_dist_plot(data, bins, xlabels, ylabels, titles, labels):
404
#labels = calc_labels(data, bins)
405
#print(labels)
406
#fig, ax = sns.plt.subplots(2, 1)
407
sns.set(font_scale=2.5)
408
for index, sub_data in enumerate(data):
409
sns.plt.subplot(2, 1, index+1)
410
#print(labels[index])
411
xticks, bin_size = calc_labels(sub_data, bins)
412
print("title = {}\nbin_size = {}".format(titles[index], bin_size))
413
ax = sns.distplot(sub_data, norm_hist=True, kde=False, bins=bins, hist_kws={’cu
414
#ax.set_xticklabels(calc_labels(sub_data, bins), rotation=90)
415
sns.plt.xticks(xticks, rotation=90)
416
417
#for label in [item.get_text() for item in ax.get_xticklabels()]:
418
#
print("|{}|".format(label))
419
print(list(np.arange(0, 1.1, 0.1)))
420
sns.plt.yticks(list(np.arange(0, 1.1, 0.1)))
421
#sns.plt.ylim((0.1))
422
sns.plt.tick_params(labelsize=20)
423
ax.set_xlabel(xlabels[index])
424
ax.set_ylabel(ylabels[index])
425
ax.set_title(titles[index])
426
sns.plt.show()
427
428
429 f heat_map(data, mask, xticks, yticks, title="", xlabels=[], ylabels=[], anno=True, m
430
"""
431
Plotting a heatmap
432
433
Arguments:
434
data
{numpy array} -- Data to be plottet
435
mask
{numpy array} -- Shows which cells to "remove" in the heatmap
==PAGE:129==
117
436
xlabels {list} -- One or more labels for X-axis
437
ylabels {list} -- One or more labels for Y-axis
438
titles
{string} -- title of heatmap
439
anno
{boolean} -- Indicates whether the heatmap should show the values o
440
multiple {boolean} -- Indicates whether there are data for multiple heatmap
441
max_val {int}
--
max value of the indicator. If it’s 0 (default) max_v
442
"""
443
min_val = 0
444
sns.set(font_scale=3.5)
445
if multiple:
446
#sns.set(font_scale=2.5)
447
months = ["September", "October", "November"]
448
if max_val == 0:
449
max_val = np.amax(data)
450
fig, ax = sns.plt.subplots(3, 1)
451
cbar_ax = fig.add_axes([.91, .3, .03, .4])
452
for index, ax in enumerate(ax.flat):
453
if log:
454
d = np.array(data[index], dtype=np.float)
455
np.place(d, d == 0, [0.1])
456
min_val += 1
457
sns.heatmap(d, ax=ax, xticklabels=[" "]*len(xticks[index]) if index
458
annot=anno, fmt="d",
459
yticklabels=[" "]*d.shape[0] if yticks == [] else ytick
460
norm=LogNorm(vmin=min_val, vmax=max_val),
461
cbar=index == 0, cbar_ax=None if index else cbar_ax)
462
463
else:
464
sns.heatmap(data[index], ax=ax, xticklabels=[" "]*len(xticks[index]
465
annot=anno, fmt="d",
466
yticklabels=yticks[index], mask=mask[index], vmin=min_v
467
vmax=max_val, cbar=index == 0, cbar_ax=None if index el
468
if title != "" and index == 0:
469
ax.set_title(title)
470
ax.set_ylabel(months[index])
471
#plt.subplots_adjust(left=0.1, right=0.9, top=0.9, bottom=0.1)
472
else:
473
if max_val == 0:
474
max_val = np.amax(data)
475
#sns.set(font_scale=5.5)
476
if not yticks:
477
yticks = [[" "]*data.shape[1]]
478
if isinstance(mask, np.ndarray) and mask.shape[0] > 0:
479
if log:
==PAGE:130==
118
Code
480
data = np.array(data, dtype=np.float)
481
np.place(data, data == 0, [0.1])
482
min_val += 1
483
ax = sns.heatmap(data, xticklabels=xticks[0],
484
annot=anno, fmt="d",
485
yticklabels=yticks[0], mask=mask,
486
norm=LogNorm(vmin=min_val, vmax=max_val), cbar=cbar, c
487
488
else:
489
ax = sns.heatmap(data, xticklabels=xticks,
490
annot=anno, fmt="d",
491
yticklabels=yticks, mask=mask, vmin=min_val,
492
vmax=max_val, cbar=cbar, cbar_kws=cbar_kws)
493
else:
494
if log:
495
data = np.array(data, dtype=np.float)
496
np.place(data, data == 0, [0.1])
497
min_val += 1
498
print("max_val = {}, min_val = {}".format(max_val, min_val))
499
ax = sns.heatmap(data, xticklabels=xticks[0],
500
annot=anno, fmt="d",
501
yticklabels=yticks[0],
502
norm=LogNorm(vmin=min_val, vmax=max_val), cbar=cbar, c
503
else:
504
ax = sns.heatmap(data, xticklabels=xticks[0],
505
annot=anno, fmt="d",
506
yticklabels=yticks[0], vmin=min_val,
507
vmax=max_val, cbar=cbar, cbar_kws=cbar_kws)
508
[label.set_visible(False) for label in ax.yaxis.get_ticklabels()]
509
510
for label in ax.yaxis.get_ticklabels()[::4]:
511
label.set_visible(True)
512
ax.set_title(title)
513
#[item.set_fontsize(33) for item in ax.get_xticklabels() + ax.get_yticklabels()
514
if ylabels:
515
ax.set_ylabel(ylabels)
516
else:
517
ax.set_ylabel("Users")
518
if xlabels:
519
ax.set_xlabel(xlabels)
520
else:
521
ax.set_xlabel("Days")
522
plt.yticks(rotation=0)
523
sns.plt.show()
==PAGE:131==
119
524
525
526 f boxplot(data, xx, yy, title):
527
sns.set(font_scale=2.5)
528
ax = sns.boxplot(x=xx, y=yy, data=data)
529
ax.set_title(title)
530
sns.plt.show()
531
532
533 f data_summary_per_user():
534
"""
535
Calculates the quantiles for the data
536
"""
537
_, df, total_counts, _, = fetch_data()
538
q = df.groupby(’country’)[’Location updates’].quantile([0.0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1
539
means = df.groupby(’country’)[’Location updates’].mean()
540
print("///////// Japan ////////")
541
print(q[’Japan’])
542
print("////////")
543
print("///////// Sweden //////////")
544
print(q[’Sweden’])
545
print("////////")
546
print("Japan - mean: {}".format(means[’Japan’]))
547
print("Sweden - mean: {}".format(means[’Sweden’]))
548
549
550 f show_all_month_same_scale(countries, periods=[("2015-09-01", "2015-09-30"),
551
("2015-10-01", "2015-10-31"),
552
("2015-11-01", "2015-11-30")],
553
same_scale_over_countries=False,
554
values_loc_updates=True, specific_users=[],
555
sorter_non_location_user_fra=True,
556
sorter_efter_sum=True, find_users=False,
557
user_start_id=-1,
558
number_of_days_without_updates=5, anno=False, log=Fal
559
mask=False, mask_value=0, show_user_ticks=True, multi
560
base_title="Heatmap of location updates per users per
561
562
"""
563
Plotting heatmaps of location updates per users per day in each month (sep, okt
564
The month are hardcoded
565
566
Arguments:
567
countries
{list}
-- List of countries
==PAGE:132==
120
Code
568
values_loc_updates
{boolean} -- Whether to get number of updates (T
569
specific_users
{list}
-- Only shows for certain users
570
sorter_non_location_user_fra
{boolean} -- Whether to remove user who haven’t
571
sorter_efter_sum
{boolean} -- Whether to sort the list of users a
572
find_users
{boolean} -- Whether to find users (True) or not
573
user_start_id
{int}
-- User ID of the user to find users f
574
number_of_days_without_updates {int}
-- A threshold for finding users (if f
575
It is max number of days of with th
576
base_title
{string}
-- (Base) title for the heatmaps
577
578
"""
579
max_values = defaultdict(dict)
580
for country in countries:
581
for fro, to in periods:
582
data, users = get_data_for_heat_map_per_user(country, fro, to,
583
specific_users,
584
values_loc_updates)
585
max_value = np.amax(data)
586
if country in max_values:
587
if max_value > max_values[country]:
588
max_values[country] = max_value
589
else:
590
max_values[country] = max_value
591
total_max_value = max(max_values.values())
592
for country in countries:
593
if not multiple:
594
for fro, to in periods:
595
cbar = False
596
if (fro,to) == periods[-1]:
597
cbar = True
598
show_specific_country_and_period(country, fro, to,
599
values_loc_updates, base_title,
600
specific_users,
601
sorter_non_location_user_fra,
602
sorter_efter_sum, find_users,
603
user_start_id,
604
number_of_days_without_updates,
605
mask, mask_value,
606
max_values[country] if not
607
same_scale_over_countries else
608
total_max_value, anno, log,
609
show_user_ticks, show_cbar=cbar)
610
else:
611
fro = [p[0] for p in periods]
==PAGE:133==
121
612
to = [p[1] for p in periods]
613
show_specific_country_and_period(country, fro, to,
614
values_loc_updates, base_title,
615
specific_users,
616
sorter_non_location_user_fra,
617
sorter_efter_sum, find_users,
618
user_start_id,
619
number_of_days_without_updates,
620
mask, mask_value,
621
max_values[country] if not
622
same_scale_over_countries else
623
total_max_value, anno, log,
624
show_user_ticks, multiple=multiple)
625
626
627 f show_specific_country_and_period(country, fro, to, values_loc_updates,
628
base_title, specific_users=[],
629
sorter_non_location_user_fra=True,
630
sorter_efter_sum=True, find_users=False,
631
user_start_id=-1,
632
number_of_days_without_updates=5,
633
mask=False, mask_value=0,
634
max_val=0, anno=False, log=False,
635
show_user_ticks=True, show_cbar=True, multiple
636
"""
637
Plotting a single heatmap of location updates per users per day in a month
638
The month are hardcoded
639
640
Arguments:
641
country
{string}
-- Country
642
fro
{string}
-- From datetime string
643
to
{string}
-- To datetime string
644
values_loc_updates
{boolean} -- Whether to get number of update
645
base_title
{string}
-- (Base) title for the heatmap
646
specific_users
{list}
-- Only shows for certain users
647
sorter_non_location_user_fra
{boolean} -- Whether to remove user who have
648
sorter_efter_sum
{boolean} -- Whether to sort the list of use
649
find_users
{boolean} -- Whether to find users (True) or
650
user_start_id
{int}
-- User ID of the user to find use
651
number_of_days_without_updates {int}
-- A threshold for finding users (
652
It is max number of days of wit
653
max_val
{int}
-- Max values for the scale in hea
654
anno
{boolean} -- Whether to show values in the c
655
==PAGE:134==
122
Code
656
"""
657
if multiple:
658
data = []
659
users = []
660
for i, f in enumerate(fro):
661
dat, user = get_data_for_heat_map_per_user(country, f, to[i],
662
specific_users,
663
values_loc_updates)
664
data.append(dat)
665
users.append(user)
666
else:
667
data, users = get_data_for_heat_map_per_user(country, fro, to,
668
specific_users,
669
values_loc_updates)
670
ylabels = []
671
if sorter_non_location_user_fra:
672
if not multiple:
673
for i, x in enumerate(np.any(data != 0, axis=1)): #Sorter dem der har rene
674
if x:
675
ylabels.append(i)
676
data = data[np.any(data != 0, axis=1)]
677
else:
678
for j, d in enumerate(data):
679
temp_ylabels = []
680
for i, x in enumerate(np.any(d != 0, axis=1)): #Sorter dem der har rene
681
if x:
682
temp_ylabels.append(i)
683
data[j] = d[np.any(d != 0, axis=1)]
684
ylabels.append(temp_ylabels)
685
else:
686
if not multiple:
687
ylabels = list(range(data.shape[0]))
688
else:
689
ylabels = list(range(data[0].shape[0]))
690
if sorter_efter_sum:
691
if values_loc_updates:
692
if multiple:
693
for i, d in enumerate(data):
694
arr_bool = d == 0
695
s = np.sum(arr_bool, axis=1)
696
data[i] = np.take(d, np.argsort(s)[::-1], axis=0)
697
ylabels[i] = np.take(d, np.argsort(s)[::-1], axis=0)
698
else:
699
arr_bool = data == 0
==PAGE:135==
123
700
s = np.sum(arr_bool, axis=1)
701
data = np.take(data, np.argsort(s)[::-1], axis=0)
702
ylabels = np.take(data, np.argsort(s)[::-1], axis=0)
703
704
else:
705
if multiple:
706
for i, d in enumerate(data):
707
s = np.sum(arr_bool, axis=1)
708
data[i] = np.take(d, s.argsort(), axis=0)
709
ylabels[i] = np.take(d, s.argsort(), axis=0)
710
else:
711
s = np.sum(data, axis=1)
712
data = np.take(data, s.argsort(), axis=0)
713
ylabels = np.take(ylabels, s.argsort(), axis=0)
714
#Find users...
715
if find_users and not multiple:
716
if user_start_id == -1:
717
start = 0
718
else:
719
start = list(ylabels).index(user_start_id) #sverige: nov: 270, okt: 293
720
found_users = []
721
for i, row in enumerate(data[start:], start=start):
722
res = collections.Counter(row)
723
print(res)
724
if 0 in res:
725
if res[0] < number_of_days_without_updates: #sverige: nov: 6, okt:
726
found_users.append(users[ylabels[i]])
727
else:
728
if specific_users:
729
if users[ylabels[i]] in specific_users:
730
print("user er i users_input")
731
else:
732
print("nej, user er ikke i specific_users")
733
else:
734
found_users.append(users[ylabels[i]])
735
print("find_users\n--------------")
736
print("Antal found_users: {}\n{}".format(len(found_users),
737
found_users))
738
ylabels = [ylabels]
739
if not multiple:
740
idxs = find_duplicate_rows(data)
741
for group in idxs:
742
print("#### Ny gruppe der er ens! ####")
743
for user in set(group):
==PAGE:136==
124
Code
744
print(users[ylabels[0][user]])
745
print("#######################")
746
747
#Gør at dag nummer 31 kommer med:
748
max_cols = -1
749
if multiple:
750
for d in data:
751
if d.shape[1] > max_cols:
752
max_cols = d.shape[1]
753
for i, d in enumerate(data):
754
if d.shape[1] < max_cols:
755
missing_cols = max_cols-d.shape[1]
756
new_cols = np.full((d.shape[0], missing_cols), mask_value, dtype=int)
757
data[i] = np.hstack((d, new_cols))
758
if multiple:
759
xlabels = []
760
for d in data:
761
xlabels.append(list(range(1, d.shape[1]+1)))
762
else:
763
xlabels = [list(range(1, data.shape[1]+1))]
764
if not show_user_ticks:
765
ylabels = []
766
mask_list = []
767
if mask:
768
if multiple:
769
for d in data:
770
mask_list.append(d == mask_value)
771
else:
772
mask_list = data == mask_value
773
774
heat_map(data, mask_list, xlabels, ylabels, title=(base_title+country +
775
" from "+fro+" to "+to) if not multiple else (base_title+country+" for all
776
max_val=max_val, log=log, cbar=show_cbar)
777
778
779 f show_all_month_for_contries():
780
"""
781
Show a heatmap of the 3 months (sep, okt, nov) for each country
782
"""
783
data, df, total_count, countries = fetch_data()
784
785
#............... HEAT-MAP --------------------#
786
for country in countries:
787
user = ""
==PAGE:137==
125
788
data, mask = get_data_for_heat_map_per_month(country, total_count)
789
title = "Number of mean location updates in "+country
790
if user != "":
791
title += " for user " + str(user)
792
ylabels = [["M", "T", "W", "T", "F", "S", "S"],
793
["M", "T", "W", "T", "F", "S", "S"],
794
["M", "T", "W", "T", "F", "S", "S"]]
795
xlabels = [["Week 1", "Week 2", "Week 3", "Week 4", "Week 5", "Week 6"],
796
["Week 1", "Week 2", "Week 3", "Week 4", "Week 5", "Week 6"],
797
["Week 1", "Week 2", "Week 3", "Week 4", "Week 5", "Week 6"]]
798
heat_map(data, mask, xlabels, ylabels, title, True)
799
800
801 f find_duplicate_rows(data):
802
"""
803
find rows in a sorted numpy array of 0 and 1,
804
where columns are equal in 90% or more of the cases
805
806
Arguments:
807
data
{numpy}
-- Numpy array with 0 or 1’s
808
809
Return:
810
list of list with indices of the rows which are flagged as duplicates
811
"""
812
length = data.shape[0]
813
threshold = math.ceil(data.shape[1]*0.9)
814
zero_threshold = math.ceil(data.shape[1]*0.5)
815
lst = []
816
temp_lst = []
817
for i, d in enumerate(data, start=1):
818
if i < length:
819
row = collections.Counter(d)
820
if 0 not in row or row[0] <= zero_threshold:
821
res = np.bincount(d == data[i])
822
if res.shape[0] > 1: #Der er nogle der er true
823
if res[1] >= threshold:
824
temp_lst.extend([i-1, i])
825
else:
826
if temp_lst:
827
lst.append(temp_lst)
828
temp_lst = []
829
else:
830
if temp_lst:
831
lst.append(temp_lst)
==PAGE:138==
126
Code
832
temp_lst = []
833
else:
834
if temp_lst:
835
lst.append(temp_lst)
836
temp_lst = []
837
return lst
838
839
840 f compare_loc_updates_per_month():
841
"""
842
Plots a plot
of mean of location updates of Japan and Sweden
843
"""
844
d = DatabaseHelper.DatabaseHelper()
845
countries = ["Japan", "Sweden"]
846
no_users = {"Japan": 316, "Sweden": 542}
847
periods = [("2015-09-01", "2015-10-01"), ("2015-10-01", "2015-11-01"),
848
("2015-11-01", "2015-12-01")]
849
months = ["September", "October", "November"]
850
dd = {’Countries’: [], ’Month’: []}
851
for i, period in enumerate(periods):
852
for country in countries:
853
query = "SELECT count(*)/"+str(no_users[country])+" FROM location WHERE cou
854
" AND start_time >= ’"+period[0] + "’ " +\
855
"AND start_time < ’"+period[1] + "’"
856
result = d.run_specific_query(query)
857
#print(result[0])
858
for row in result:
859
[dd["Countries"].append(country) for x in range(row[0])]
860
[dd["Month"].append(months[i]) for x in range(row[0])]
861
862
df = pd.DataFrame(dd)
863
#print(df)
864
sns.set(font_scale=2.5)
865
ax = sns.countplot(x="Month", hue="Countries", data=df)
866
ax.set_ylabel("Number of location updates")
867
ax.set_title("Location updates per user in Japan and Sweden over three month period
868
ax.set_xlabel("")
869
sns.plt.legend(prop={’size’: 40})
870
sns.plt.tick_params(labelsize=20)
871
[item.set_fontsize(45) for item in [ax.yaxis.label, ax.xaxis.label]]
872
ax.title.set_fontsize(48)
873
[item.set_fontsize(33) for item in ax.get_xticklabels() + ax.get_yticklabels()]
874
sns.plt.show()
875
==PAGE:139==
127
876
877 f fetch_data(countries=["Japan", "Sweden"]):
878
"""
879
Arguments:
880
countries
{countries}
-- Which countries to fetch data for
881
882
Return:
883
data
{list}
-- List raw data
884
df
{dataframe}
-- Pandas dataframe of data
885
total_count
{dict}
-- dicts with country as keys and number of disti
886
countries
{list}
-- List of countries
887
"""
888
data = []
889
titles = []
890
labels = []
891
xlabels = []
892
d = DatabaseHelper.DatabaseHelper()
893
894
dd = {’Location updates’: [], ’country’: []}
895
total_count = {}
896
for i, country in enumerate(countries):
897
query = "SELECT useruuid, count(*) FROM location WHERE country=’"+country+"
898
"GROUP BY useruuid ORDER BY useruuid"
899
result = d.run_specific_query(query)
900
total_count[country] = len(result)
901
print("country = {}, sum = {}, len = {}".format(country, sum([row[1] for ro
902
for row in result:
903
data.append(row[1])
904
dd[’Location updates’].append(row[1])
905
dd[’country’].append(countries[i])
906
titles.append("Cumulative distribution of location updates for users in " +
907
labels.append(country)
908
xlabels.append("Number of location updates\n"+"("+chr(ord(’a’) + i)+")")
909
df = pd.DataFrame(dd)
910
return data, df, total_count, countries
911
912
913 f accuracy_summary():
914
d = DatabaseHelper.DatabaseHelper()
915
data = {’Accuracy’: []}
916
query = """SELECT accuracy FROM location"""
917
result = d.run_specific_query(query)
918
[data[’Accuracy’].append(r[0]) for r in result]
919
df = pd.DataFrame(data)
==PAGE:140==
128
Code
920
#print(df)
921
q = df.quantile([0.0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1.0])
922
mean = df.mean()
923
std = df.std()
924
print(q)
925
print("Mean = {}".format(mean))
926
print("Std = {}".format(std))
927
#print("Japan - mean: {}".format(means[’Japan’]))
928
#print("Sweden - mean: {}".format(means[’Sweden’]))
929
930
931 f location_updates_at_hq_or_not():
932
d = DatabaseHelper.DatabaseHelper()
933
filter_places_dict = {"Sweden": [[(13.2262862, 55.718211), 1000],
934
[(17.9529121, 59.4050982), 1000]],
935
"Japan": [[(139.743862, 35.630338), 1000]]}
936
data, df, total_count, countries = fetch_data()
937
938
test = {’Country’: [], ’hq’: []}
939
for country in countries:
940
print(country)
941
for row in df.loc[(df[’country’] == country), ’Location updates’]:
942
test[’Country’].extend([country]*row)
943
test[’hq’].extend([’At HQ’]*row)
944
test2 = pd.DataFrame(test)
945
for country in countries:
946
res = d.get_locations_for_numpy(filter_places_dict[country])
947
res = [row for row in res if row[3] == country]
948
if country == ’Sweden’:
949
print(len(res))
950
test2.loc[(test2[’Country’] == country) & (test2.index < (299157+len(res)))
951
else:
952
test2.loc[(test2[’Country’] == country) & (test2.index < len(res)), ’hq’] =
953
test3 = {’total’: [], ’Not at hq’: [], ’Country’: []}
954
for i, country in enumerate(countries):
955
test3[’Country’].append(country)
956
test3[’total’].append(test2.loc[(test2[’Country’] == country)].shape[0])
957
test3[’Not at hq’].append(test2.loc[(test2[’Country’] == country) &
958
(test2[’hq’] != ’At HQ’)].shape[0])
959
test4 = pd.DataFrame(test3)
960
print(test4)
961
sns.set(font_scale=2.5)
962
963
#
==PAGE:141==
129
964
ax = sns.barplot(x="Country", y=’total’, data=test4, color=’#e74c3c’)#, color="
965
bottom_plot = sns.barplot(x="Country", y="Not at hq", data=test4, color=’#3498d
966
967
bottombar = plt.Rectangle((0, 0), 1, 1, fc=’#3498db’,
edgecolor=’none’)
968
topbar = plt.Rectangle((0, 0), 1, 1, fc="#e74c3c", edgecolor=’none’)
969
970
l = plt.legend([bottombar, topbar], [’Outside perimeters’, ’Inside perimeters’]
971
l.draw_frame(False)
972
973
bottom_plot.set_ylabel("Number of location updates")
974
bottom_plot.set_title("Distribution of location updates (inside/outside Sony pe
975
#ax.set_xlabel("Days")
976
ax.set_xlabel("")
977
#plt.legend(prop={’size’: 40})
978
#ax.yaxis.set_major_formatter(tck.FormatStrFormatter(’%.2e’))
979
sns.plt.tick_params(labelsize=20)
980
[item.set_fontsize(45) for item in [ax.yaxis.label, ax.xaxis.label]]
981
ax.title.set_fontsize(48)
982
[item.set_fontsize(33) for item in ax.get_xticklabels() + ax.get_yticklabels()]
983
sns.plt.show()
984
985
986 f coocs_at_hq_or_not():
987
d = DatabaseHelper.DatabaseHelper()
988
ds = DatasetHelper.DatasetHelper()
989
filter_places_dict = {"Sweden": [[(13.2262862, 55.718211), 1000],
990
[(17.9529121, 59.4050982), 1000]],
991
"Japan": [[(139.743862, 35.630338), 1000]]}
992
993
countries = ["Japan", "Sweden"]
994
result = {’total’: [], ’Not at hq’: [], ’Country’: []}
995
_, countries_dict, locations = d.generate_numpy_matrix_from_database()
996
for country in countries:
997
result[’Country’].append(country)
998
coocs = ds.generate_cooccurrences_array(locations[locations[:, 3] ==
999
countries_dict[country]])
1000
result[’total’].append(coocs.shape[0])
1001
_, countries_dict2, locations2 = \
1002
d.generate_numpy_matrix_from_database(filter_places_dict[country])
1003
coocs2 = ds.generate_cooccurrences_array(locations2[locations2[:, 3] ==
1004
countries_dict2[country]])
1005
result[’Not at hq’].append(coocs2.shape[0])
1006
1007
test4 = pd.DataFrame(result)
==PAGE:142==
130
Code
1008
print(test4)
1009
sns.set(font_scale=2.5)
1010
1011
#
1012
ax = sns.barplot(x="Country", y=’total’, data=test4, color=’#e74c3c’)#, color="red"
1013
bottom_plot = sns.barplot(x="Country", y="Not at hq", data=test4, color=’#3498db’)
1014
1015
bottombar = plt.Rectangle((0, 0), 1, 1, fc=’#3498db’,
edgecolor=’none’)
1016
topbar = plt.Rectangle((0, 0), 1, 1, fc="#e74c3c", edgecolor=’none’)
1017
1018
l = plt.legend([bottombar, topbar], [’Outside perimeters’, ’Inside perimeters’], lo
1019
l.draw_frame(False)
1020
1021
bottom_plot.set_ylabel("Number of co-occurrences")
1022
bottom_plot.set_title("Distribution of co-occurrences (inside/outside Sony perimete
1023
#ax.set_xlabel("Days")
1024
#plt.legend(prop={’size’: 40})
1025
1026
sns.plt.ylim(0, 1300000)
1027
sns.plt.tick_params(labelsize=20)
1028
ax.yaxis.set_major_formatter(tck.FormatStrFormatter(’%.2e’))
1029
[item.set_fontsize(45) for item in [ax.yaxis.label, ax.xaxis.label]]
1030
ax.title.set_fontsize(48)
1031
[item.set_fontsize(33) for item in ax.get_xticklabels() + ax.get_yticklabels()]
1032
sns.plt.show()
1033
1034
1035 f time_plot():
1036
d = DatabaseHelper.DatabaseHelper()
1037
data = []
1038
_, _, total_count, countries = fetch_data()
1039
for country in countries:
1040
x = []
1041
y = []
1042
res = d.run_specific_query("select extract(hour FROM start_time), count(*) from
1043
for row in res:
1044
x.append(adjust_hour(row[0], country))
1045
y.append(row[1]/total_count[country])
1046
temp = zip(x, y)
1047
temp2 = list(zip(*sorted(temp)))
1048
data.append((list(temp2[0]), list(temp2[1])))
1049
title = "Aggregate location updates by time of day"
1050
xlabel = "Time of day in hours"
1051
ylabel = "Location updates frequency"
==PAGE:143==
131
1052
legend_labels = countries
1053
ax = plt.subplot(111, xlabel=xlabel, ylabel=ylabel, title=title)
1054
plt.plot(data[0][0], data[0][1], label=legend_labels[0], linewidth=6.0)
1055
plt.plot(data[1][0], data[1][1], label=legend_labels[1], color=’r’, linewidth=6
1056
#xlim_max = max([max(data[0][0]), max(data[1][0])])
1057
#plt.ylim(0, 1)
1058
plt.xticks(data[0][0])
1059
#ax.yaxis.set_major_formatter(tck.FormatStrFormatter(’%.1e’))
1060
plt.xlim(0, 24)
1061
plt.title(title)
1062
plt.legend(prop={’size’: 40})
1063
sns.plt.tick_params(labelsize=20)
1064
[item.set_fontsize(45) for item in [ax.yaxis.label, ax.xaxis.label]]
1065
ax.title.set_fontsize(48)
1066
[item.set_fontsize(33) for item in ax.get_xticklabels() + ax.get_yticklabels()]
1067
plt.show()
1068
1069
1070 f adjust_hour(hour, country):
1071
countries = {’Japan’: 7, ’Sweden’: 0}
1072
return (hour+countries[country]) % 24
1073
1074
1075 f aggregated_heatmap(sorter_efter_sum=False):
1076
countries = ["Japan", "Sweden"]
1077
start = ’2015-09-01’
1078
end = ’2015-11-30’
1079
bin_size = 60 #minutes
1080
for country in countries:
1081
data, users = get_data_for_heat_map_per_user_aggregated(country, start, end
1082
lst = generate_time_list(parser.parse(start+’ 00:00:00+00:00’),
1083
parser.parse(start+’ 00:00:00+00:00’) +
1084
timedelta(days=1), bin_size)
1085
xticks = [row.strftime("%H:%M") for row in lst]
1086
print(xticks)
1087
yticks = list(range(data.shape[0]))
1088
if sorter_efter_sum:
1089
s = np.sum(data, axis=1)
1090
data = np.take(data, s.argsort(), axis=0)
1091
heat_map(data, [], [xticks], [],
1092
title=country + " - ’" + start + "’ to ’" + end + "’",
1093
xlabels="Time of day", ylabels=[], anno=False, multiple=False, max
1094
1095
==PAGE:144==
132
Code
1096
__name__ == ’__main__’:
1097
aggregated_heatmap(True)
1098
1099
#show_all_month_for_contries()
1100
#location_updates_at_hq_or_not()
1101
#
1102
#accuracy_summary()
1103
countries = ["Japan", "Sweden"]
1104
# show_all_month_same_scale(countries, values_loc_updates=True,
1105
#
same_scale_over_countries=True,
1106
#
sorter_non_location_user_fra=False,
1107
#
sorter_efter_sum=True, log=True,
1108
#
mask=True, mask_value=0, show_user_ticks=False, multipl
1109
1110
1111
#---------------------------
1112
# print(LogNorm(vmin=1, vmax=74))
1113
# data = [[0.1,2.0,3.0], [4.0,5.0,6.0], [7.0,8.0,9.0]]
1114
# ax = sns.heatmap(data,
1115
#
annot=True, fmt="0:.0f",
1116
#
norm=LogNorm(vmin=1, vmax=9)
1117
#
)
1118
1119
# sns.plt.show()
1120
#------------------------------------
1121
#res = generate_time_list(parser.parse(’2015-08-30 00:00:00+00:00’),
1122
#
parser.parse(’2015-08-31 00:00:00+00:00’), 60, True)
1123
#print(len(res))
1124
#print(res)
1125
1126
#coocs_at_hq_or_not()
1127
#location_updates_at_hq_or_not()
1128
#cdf_xy_plot()
1129
#time_plot()
1130
#compare_loc_updates_per_month()
1131
#data, df, total_count, countries = fetch_data()
1132
1133
#show_all_month_for_contries()
1134
#cdf_xy_plot()
1135
#print("show_all_month_same_scale")
1136
#show_all_month_same_scale(countries, find_users=False,
1137
#
number_of_days_without_updates=5)
1138
#print("show_specific_country_and_period")
1139
country = "Japan"
==PAGE:145==
133
1140
fro = "2015-11-01"
1141
to = "2015-11-30"
1142
#show_specific_country_and_period(country, fro, to, False,
1143
#
base_title="Heatmap of location updates per u
1144
#
per day in ")
==PAGE:146==
134
Code
country_distribution.py
Script for analyzing country distribution
1 /usr/bin/env python3
2 port os
3 port sys
4 s.path.insert(1, os.path.join(sys.path[0], ’..’))
5 port FileLoader
6 om collections import Counter
7 port seaborn as sns
8 port DatabaseHelper
9 port pprint
10 om matplotlib import rcParams
11 om tqdm import tqdm
12 port matplotlib.pyplot as plt
13 port matplotlib.ticker as tck
14
15
16
17 f get_data(top_five=True):
18
country_dist = d.get_distributions_categories("country")
19
countries = []
20
data = []
21
filter_countries = ["Sweden", "Japan", "United States", "China", "United Kingdom"]
22
for row in tqdm(country_dist[’results’]):
23
if top_five:
24
if row[’Countries’] in filter_countries:
25
data.extend([row[’Countries’]]*row[’Count’])
26
countries.append(row[’Countries’])
27
else:
28
data.extend([row[’Countries’]]*row[’Count’])
29
countries.append(row[’Countries’])
30
return data, countries
31
32
33 f bar_plot(data, labels):
34
test = {’test2’: data}
35
sns.set(font_scale=4.5)
36
ax = sns.countplot(x="test2", data=test)
37
ax.set_xticklabels(labels)
38
ax.set_ylabel("Number of location updates")
39
ax.set(title="Top 5 countries with most location updates")
==PAGE:147==
135
40
sns.plt.show()
41
42
43 f func(x, pos):
44
return str(int(x/1000))+"K"
45
46
47
__name__ == ’__main__’:
48
d = DatabaseHelper.DatabaseHelper()
49
data, labels = get_data(top_five=True)
50
51
bar_plot(data, labels)
52
53
==PAGE:148==
136
Code
feature_histograms.py
Script for visualizing feature box- and bar-plots
1 /usr/bin/env python3
2 port os
3 port sys
4 s.path.insert(1, os.path.join(sys.path[0], ’..’))
5 om FileLoader import FileLoader
6 port seaborn as sns
7 port matplotlib.pyplot as plt
8 port numpy as np
9 om sklearn.datasets import load_svmlight_file
10
= FileLoader()
11 port pickle
12
13 f load_x_and_y(path):
14
with open(os.path.join(path, "X_train.pickle"), "rb") as fp:
15
X_train = pickle.load(fp)
16
with open(os.path.join(path, "y_train.pickle"), "rb") as fp:
17
y_train = pickle.load(fp)
18
with open(os.path.join(path, "X_test.pickle"), "rb") as fp:
19
X_test = pickle.load(fp)
20
with open(os.path.join(path, "y_test.pickle"), "rb") as fp:
21
y_test = pickle.load(fp)
22
return X_train, y_train, X_test, y_test
23
24
25 f remove_outliers(meets, nonmeets):
26
#find rows specificity > 1
27
bad_rows = np.where(meets[:, 8] > 1)[0]
28
meets = np.delete(meets, bad_rows, 0)
29
return meets, nonmeets
30
31
32 f hist(is_prod=True):
33
if is_prod:
34
X_train, y_train = load_svmlight_file("../data/vedran_thesis_students/X_train_f
35
X_test, y_test = load_svmlight_file("../data/vedran_thesis_students/X_test_filt
36
X_train = X_train.toarray()
37
X_test = X_test.toarray()
38
features = ["Number of co-occurrences (7)", "Unique co-occurrences (3)", "Diver
39
"Number of weekends (11)", "Number of evenings (10)", "Co-occurrenc
==PAGE:149==
137
40
else:
41
print("Test data"
)
42
X_train, y_train, X_test, y_test = load_x_and_y("../data/reduced_dataset/")
43
features = ["Two unique co-occurrences (0)", "Timely arrival and leaving (1
44
"Co-occurrences weighted (5)", "Common travels (6)", "Number of
45
"App usage similarity (9)", "Number of evenings (10)", "Number
46
"Not within 6 years of age (13)", "Within 6 years of age (14)",
47
"Not same gender (16)", "Same gender (17)", "Same gender - Unkn
48
49
meets = X_train[np.where(y_train == 1)]
50
nonmeets = X_train[np.where(y_train == 0)]
51
meets, nonmeets = remove_outliers(meets, nonmeets)
52
figure = 1
53
f = plt.figure(figure, figsize=(10, 10))
54
plot_index = 1
55
colors = [’#3498db’, ’#e74c3c’]
56
sns.set_palette(colors)
57
for index, feature in enumerate(features):
58
ax = f.add_subplot(2, 2, plot_index)
59
ax.set_title(feature)
60
all_events = np.hstack((meets[:, index], nonmeets[:, index]))
61
types = np.hstack((["did meet" for x in range(len(meets[:, index]))], ["did
62
if feature in ["Two unique co-occurrences (0)", "Not within 6 years of age
63
"Not same gender (16)", "Same gender (17)", "Same gender - U
64
sns.barplot(x=types, y=all_events, ci=False)
65
else:
66
sns.boxplot(x=types, y=all_events, ax=ax)
67
[item.set_fontsize(45) for item in [ax.yaxis.label, ax.xaxis.label]]
68
ax.title.set_fontsize(48)
69
[item.set_fontsize(33) for item in ax.get_xticklabels() + ax.get_yticklabel
70
plot_index += 1
71
if plot_index == 5:
72
plt.show()
73
figure += 1
74
f = plt.figure(figure, figsize=(10, 10))
75
plot_index = 1
76
[item.set_fontsize(45) for item in [ax.yaxis.label, ax.xaxis.label]]
77
ax.title.set_fontsize(48)
78
[item.set_fontsize(33) for item in ax.get_xticklabels() + ax.get_yticklabels()]
79
plt.show()
80
81
82
__name__ == ’__main__’:
83
hist()
==PAGE:150==
138
Code
==PAGE:151==
139
model_performance.py
Script for calculating and visualizing ROC AUC
1 /usr/bin/env python3
2 port sys
3 port os
4 s.path.insert(1, os.path.join(sys.path[0], ’..’))
5 om sklearn.datasets import load_svmlight_file
6 om sklearn.metrics import roc_auc_score, roc_curve, auc, confusion_matrix, precis
7 port sklearn
8 port sklearn.linear_model
9 port sklearn.ensemble
10 port matplotlib.pyplot as plt
11 port numpy as np
12 om scipy import interp
13 om sklearn.grid_search import GridSearchCV, RandomizedSearchCV
14 om sklearn.cross_validation import StratifiedKFold
15 port pickle
16 om scipy.stats import randint as sp_randint
17 port seaborn
18 t.style.use("seaborn-deep")
19
20
21 f load_file(path_file):
22
with open(path_file, "rb") as f:
23
return pickle.load(f)
24
25
26 f two_unique(X_train, X_test):
27
# create new feature two_unique_coocs from unique_coocs - production data only
28
solo_feature_train = np.zeros(X_train[:, 1].shape)
29
np.putmask(solo_feature_train, X_train[:, 1] >= 2, 1)
30
solo_feature_test = np.zeros(X_test[:, 1].shape)
31
np.putmask(solo_feature_test, X_test[:, 1] >= 2, 1)
32
return solo_feature_train, solo_feature_test
33
34
35 f gen_alldata():
36
all_data = []
37
#Test data
38
X_train = load_file("../data/full_dataset/X_train.pickle")
39
y_train = load_file("../data/full_dataset/y_train.pickle")
==PAGE:152==
140
Code
40
X_test = load_file("../data/full_dataset/X_test.pickle")
41
y_test = load_file("../data/full_dataset/y_test.pickle")
42
43
solo_feature_train = X_train[:, 0]
44
solo_feature_test = X_test[:, 0]
45
np.delete(X_train, 0, 1)
46
np.delete(X_test, 0, 1)
47
all_data.append([(X_train, y_train, solo_feature_train, X_test, y_test,
48
solo_feature_test, "TP-1"),
49
(X_test, y_test, solo_feature_test, X_train, y_train,
50
solo_feature_train, "TP-1")])
51
X_train = load_file("../data/reduced_dataset/X_train.pickle")
52
y_train = load_file("../data/reduced_dataset/y_train.pickle")
53
X_test = load_file("../data/reduced_dataset/X_test.pickle")
54
y_test = load_file("../data/reduced_dataset/y_test.pickle")
55
56
solo_feature_train = X_train[:, 0]
57
solo_feature_test = X_test[:, 0]
58
np.delete(X_train, 0, 1)
59
np.delete(X_test, 0, 1)
60
all_data.append([(X_train, y_train, solo_feature_train, X_test, y_test,
61
solo_feature_test, "TP-2"),
62
(X_test, y_test, solo_feature_test, X_train, y_train,
63
solo_feature_train, "TP-2")])
64
#Production data
65
X_train, y_train = load_svmlight_file("../data/vedran_thesis_students/X_train_nonfi
66
X_test, y_test = load_svmlight_file("../data/vedran_thesis_students/X_test_nonfilte
67
X_train = X_train.toarray()
68
X_test = X_test.toarray()
69
solo_feature_train, solo_feature_test = two_unique(X_train, X_test)
70
all_data.append([(X_train, y_train, solo_feature_train, X_test, y_test,
71
solo_feature_test, "PP-1"),
72
(X_test, y_test, solo_feature_test, X_train, y_train,
73
solo_feature_train, "PP-1")])
74
X_train, y_train = load_svmlight_file("../data/vedran_thesis_students/X_train_filte
75
X_test, y_test = load_svmlight_file("../data/vedran_thesis_students/X_test_filter_m
76
X_train = X_train.toarray()
77
X_test = X_test.toarray()
78
solo_feature_train, solo_feature_test = two_unique(X_train, X_test)
79
all_data.append([(X_train, y_train, solo_feature_train, X_test, y_test,
80
solo_feature_test, "PP-2"),
81
(X_test, y_test, solo_feature_test, X_train, y_train,
82
solo_feature_train, "PP-2")])
83
==PAGE:153==
141
84
return all_data
85
86
87 f filter_features(data_tuple, filter_list):
88
prod = {7: 0, 3: 1, 2: 2,
89
4: 3, 13: 4, 12: 5,
90
8: 6, 14: 7}
91
92
if data_tuple[6][:2] == "PP":
93
filter_list = [prod[i] for i in filter_list]
94
data_tuple[0] = data_tuple[0][:, filter_list]
95
data_tuple[1] = data_tuple[1][:, filter_list]
96
data_tuple[3] = data_tuple[3][:, filter_list]
97
data_tuple[4] = data_tuple[4][:, filter_list]
98
return data_tuple
99
100
101 f oversample(X_train, y_train):
102
train_stacked = np.hstack((X_train, y_train.reshape(-1, 1)))
103
didnt_meets = train_stacked[train_stacked[:,-1] == 0]
104
did_meets = train_stacked[train_stacked[:,-1] == 1]
105
train_stacked = np.vstack((didnt_meets[np.random.choice(didnt_meets.shape[0], d
106
did_meets[np.random.choice(did_meets.shape[0], did_m
107
y_train = train_stacked[:, -1]
108
X_train = np.delete(train_stacked, -1, 1)
109
return X_train, y_train
110
111
112 f undersample(X_train, y_train):
113
train_stacked = np.hstack((X_train, y_train.reshape(-1, 1)))
114
didnt_meets = train_stacked[train_stacked[:,-1] == 0]
115
did_meets = train_stacked[train_stacked[:,-1] == 1]
116
if didnt_meets.shape[0] > did_meets.shape[0]:
117
train_stacked = np.vstack((didnt_meets[np.random.choice(didnt_meets.shape[0
118
did_meets[np.random.choice(did_meets.shape[0],
119
did_meets.shape[0], replace=False)]))
120
elif did_meets.shape[0] > didnt_meets.shape[0]:
121
train_stacked = np.vstack((didnt_meets[np.random.choice(didnt_meets.shape[0
122
did_meets[np.random.choice(did_meets.shape[0],
123
didnt_meets.shape[0], replace=False)])
124
y_train = train_stacked[:, -1]
125
X_train = np.delete(train_stacked, -1, 1)
126
return X_train, y_train
127
==PAGE:154==
142
Code
128
129 f plot_performance(all_data, filter_feature_lst=[], undersampling=False,
130
target_importance="PP-2"):
131
param_grid = {"max_features": sp_randint(1, 10),
132
"criterion": ["gini", "entropy"]
133
}
134
if target_importance[0] == "T":
135
importances = np.array([0]*19)
136
else:
137
importances = np.array([0]*9)
138
for i, pair in enumerate(all_data, start=1):
139
ax = plt.subplot(2, 2, i)
140
print("plot number {}".format(i))
141
mean_tpr_lr = 0.0
142
mean_fpr_lr = np.linspace(0, 1, 100)
143
mean_tpr_rf = 0.0
144
mean_fpr_rf = np.linspace(0, 1, 100)
145
pair_name = ""
146
precision_score_lr = [0,0]
147
precision_score_rf = [0,0]
148
recall_score_lr = [0,0]
149
recall_score_rf = [0,0]
150
conf_matrix_lr = np.array([[0,0],[0,0]])
151
conf_matrix_rf = np.array([[0,0],[0,0]])
152
for j, data in enumerate(pair):
153
pair_name = data[6]
154
if filter_feature_lst:
155
data = filter_features(data, filter_feature_lst)
156
lr = sklearn.linear_model.LogisticRegression(random_state=0, class_weight="
157
lr.fit(data[2].reshape(-1, 1), data[1])
158
y_pred = lr.predict_proba(data[5].reshape(-1, 1))[:, 1]
159
precision_score_lr[0] += sklearn.metrics.precision_score(data[4], lr.predic
160
recall_score_lr[0] += sklearn.metrics.recall_score(data[4], lr.predict(data
161
precision_score_lr[1] += sklearn.metrics.precision_score(data[4], lr.predic
162
recall_score_lr[1] += sklearn.metrics.recall_score(data[4], lr.predict(data
163
conf_matrix_lr = np.add(conf_matrix_lr, confusion_matrix(data[4], lr.predic
164
# logistic regression ROC
165
false_positive_rate, true_positive_rate, _ = roc_curve(data[4], y_pred)
166
mean_tpr_lr += interp(mean_fpr_lr, false_positive_rate, true_positive_rate)
167
forest = sklearn.ensemble.RandomForestClassifier(n_estimators=100)
168
grid_search = RandomizedSearchCV(forest,
169
param_distributions=param_grid,
170
scoring="roc_auc", n_jobs=-1,
171
n_iter=20)
==PAGE:155==
143
172
if undersampling:
173
temp_data0, temp_data1 = undersample(data[0], data[1])
174
grid_search.fit(temp_data0, temp_data1)
175
else:
176
grid_search.fit(data[0], data[1])
177
print(grid_search.best_params_)
178
y_pred = grid_search.predict_proba(data[3])[:, 1]
179
precision_score_rf[0] += sklearn.metrics.precision_score(data[4], grid_
180
recall_score_rf[0] += sklearn.metrics.recall_score(data[4], grid_search
181
precision_score_rf[1] += sklearn.metrics.precision_score(data[4], grid_
182
recall_score_rf[1] += sklearn.metrics.recall_score(data[4], grid_search
183
conf_matrix_rf = np.add(conf_matrix_rf, confusion_matrix(data[4], grid_
184
185
# forest ROC
186
false_positive_rate, true_positive_rate, _ = roc_curve(
187
data[4], y_pred)
188
mean_tpr_rf += interp(mean_fpr_rf, false_positive_rate, true_positive_r
189
if pair_name == target_importance:
190
importances = np.add(grid_search.best_estimator_.feature_importance
191
f_score_lr = (2 * (precision_score_lr[1]/2 * recall_score_lr[1]/2) / (preci
192
f_score_rf = (2 * (precision_score_rf[1]/2 * recall_score_rf[1]/2) / (preci
193
mean_tpr_lr /= 2
194
mean_tpr_rf /= 2
195
196
mean_tpr_lr[-1] = 1.0
197
mean_tpr_rf[-1] = 1.0
198
199
mean_auc_lr = auc(mean_fpr_lr, mean_tpr_lr)
200
201
mean_auc_rf = auc(mean_fpr_rf, mean_tpr_rf)
202
print("For pair: {}\n---------".format(pair_name))
203
print("\t\tPrecision,\t\tRecall\t\t f-score \nLR:\t {}
\t{}
\t{}".format(
204
print("Confusion matrix LR : \n{}".format(conf_matrix_lr/2))
205
print("RF:\t {}
\t{}
\t{}".format(precision_score_rf[1]/2, recall_score_r
206
print("Confusion matrix RF : \n{}".format(conf_matrix_rf/2))
207
print("---------")
208
# Compute ROC curve and ROC area for each class
209
if undersampling:
210
plt.title(’ROC for ’ + pair_name + " with undersampling")
211
else:
212
plt.title(’ROC for ’ + pair_name)
213
plt.plot(mean_fpr_lr, mean_tpr_lr, ’r’,
214
label=’LR, Mean AUC = %0.2f’ % mean_auc_lr)
215
plt.plot(mean_fpr_rf, mean_tpr_rf, ’b’,
==PAGE:156==
144
Code
216
label=’RF, Mean AUC = %0.2f’ % mean_auc_rf)
217
218
plt.legend(loc=’lower right’, prop={’size’: 40})
219
plt.plot([0, 1], [0, 1], ’k--’)
220
plt.xlim([-0.1, 1.2])
221
plt.ylim([-0.1, 1.2])
222
plt.ylabel(’True Positive Rate’)
223
plt.xlabel(’False Positive Rate’)
224
#sns.plt.tick_params(labelsize=20)
225
[item.set_fontsize(45) for item in [ax.yaxis.label, ax.xaxis.label]]
226
ax.title.set_fontsize(48)
227
[item.set_fontsize(33) for item in ax.get_xticklabels() + ax.get_yticklabels()]
228
plt.show()
229
return importances/2, target_importance
230
231
232 f plot_feature_importance(feature_impor, feature_id, pair_name, undersampling):
233
feature_impor, feature_id = [list(t) for t in zip(*sorted(zip(feature_impor,
234
feature_id),
235
reverse=True))]
236
print(feature_impor)
237
ax = plt.subplot(1, 1, 1)
238
if undersampling:
239
plt.title("Feature importances of " + pair_name + " with undersampling")
240
else:
241
plt.title("Feature importances of " + pair_name)
242
plt.bar(range(len(feature_id)), feature_impor,
243
color="#e74c3c", align="center")
244
plt.xticks(range(len(feature_id)), feature_id)
245
plt.xlabel("Feature id")
246
plt.ylabel("Feature importance (%)")
247
#plt.xlim([-1, 9])
248
[item.set_fontsize(45) for item in [ax.yaxis.label, ax.xaxis.label]]
249
ax.title.set_fontsize(48)
250
[item.set_fontsize(33) for item in ax.get_xticklabels() + ax.get_yticklabels()]
251
plt.show()
252
253
__name__ == ’__main__’:
254
undersampling = False
255
target = "PP-2"
256
feature_impor, pair = plot_performance(gen_alldata(), undersampling=undersampling,
257
#print("feature_impor = {}".format(feature_impor))
258
if target[0] == "T":
259
feature_id = [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18]
==PAGE:157==
145
260
else:
261
feature_id = [7, 3, 2, 4, 11, 10, 5, 8, 12]
262
263
plot_feature_importance(feature_impor, feature_id, pair,
264
undersampling=undersampling)
==PAGE:158==
146
Code
ﬁnd_user_criteria_for_dataset.py
Script for visualizing cross-occupancy
1 /usr/bin/env python3
2 "
3 nds users with locations for all days of the three months
4 "
5 port sys
6 port os
7 port matplotlib.pyplot as plt
8 port matplotlib.patches as mpatches
9 om collections import defaultdict
10 port numpy as np
11
12 s.path.insert(1, os.path.join(sys.path[0], ’..’))
13 om DatabaseHelper import DatabaseHelper
14
15
= DatabaseHelper()
16 t.style.use("ggplot")
17
18
19 f generate_user_timebins_dict(country, periods):
20
first_period_time_bin_min = periods[0]
21
first_period_time_bin_max = periods[1]
22
second_period_time_bin_min = periods[2]
23
second_period_time_bin_max = periods[3]
24
third_period_time_bin_min = periods[4]
25
third_period_time_bin_max = periods[5]
26
27
locations = db.get_locations_by_country_only(country)
28
user_timebins_dict = defaultdict(lambda: defaultdict(set))
29
for l in locations:
30
timebins = l[4]
31
for timebin in timebins:
32
if timebin > first_period_time_bin_min and timebin < first_period_time_bin_
33
user_timebins_dict[l[0]]["first_period"].add(timebin)
34
elif timebin > second_period_time_bin_min and timebin < second_period_time_
35
user_timebins_dict[l[0]]["second_period"].add(timebin)
36
elif timebin > third_period_time_bin_min and timebin < third_period_time_bi
37
user_timebins_dict[l[0]]["third_period"].add(timebin)
38
return user_timebins_dict
39
==PAGE:159==
147
40
41 f user_timebins_to_percentages(user_timebins_dict, periods):
42
first_period_time_bin_min = periods[0]
43
first_period_time_bin_max = periods[1]
44
second_period_time_bin_min = periods[2]
45
second_period_time_bin_max = periods[3]
46
third_period_time_bin_min = periods[4]
47
third_period_time_bin_max = periods[5]
48
49
for user, periods_dict in user_timebins_dict.items():
50
periods_dict["first_period"] = len(periods_dict["first_period"])/(first_per
51
periods_dict["second_period"] = len(periods_dict["second_period"])/(second_
52
periods_dict["third_period"] = len(periods_dict["third_period"])/(third_per
53
return user_timebins_dict
54
55
56 f compute_plot_in_three_periods(country, periods):
57
user_timebins_dict = generate_user_timebins_dict(country, periods)
58
user_timebins_dict = user_timebins_to_percentages(user_timebins_dict, periods)
59
60
def plot(x): return len([(user, p) for user, p in user_timebins_dict.items() if
61
return [plot(x) for x in np.arange(0, 1, 0.01)]
62
63
64 f generate_plot():
65
first_period_datetime_min = "2015-09-01 00:00:00+02:00"
66
first_period_time_bin_min = db.calculate_time_bins(first_period_datetime_min)[0
67
first_period_datetime_max = "2015-09-10 23:59:59+02:00"
68
first_period_time_bin_max = db.calculate_time_bins(first_period_datetime_max)[0
69
second_period_datetime_min = "2015-10-11 00:00:00+02:00"
70
second_period_time_bin_min = db.calculate_time_bins(second_period_datetime_min)
71
second_period_datetime_max = "2015-10-20 23:59:59+02:00"
72
second_period_time_bin_max = db.calculate_time_bins(second_period_datetime_max)
73
third_period_datetime_min = "2015-11-21 00:00:00+02:00"
74
third_period_time_bin_min = db.calculate_time_bins(third_period_datetime_min)[0
75
third_period_datetime_max = "2015-11-30 23:59:59+02:00"
76
third_period_time_bin_max = db.calculate_time_bins(third_period_datetime_max)[0
77
78
periods = (first_period_time_bin_min, first_period_time_bin_max, second_period_
79
80
sweden, = plt.plot(np.arange(0, 1, 0.01), compute_plot_in_three_periods("Sweden
81
japan, = plt.plot(np.arange(0, 1, 0.01), compute_plot_in_three_periods("Japan",
82
83
first_period_datetime_min = "2015-09-01 00:00:00+02:00"
==PAGE:160==
148
Code
84
first_period_time_bin_min = db.calculate_time_bins(first_period_datetime_min)[0]
85
first_period_datetime_max = "2015-09-10 23:59:59+02:00"
86
first_period_time_bin_max = db.calculate_time_bins(first_period_datetime_max)[0]
87
second_period_datetime_min = "2015-09-11 00:00:00+02:00"
88
second_period_time_bin_min = db.calculate_time_bins(second_period_datetime_min)[0]
89
second_period_datetime_max = "2015-09-20 23:59:59+02:00"
90
second_period_time_bin_max = db.calculate_time_bins(second_period_datetime_max)[0]
91
third_period_datetime_min = "2015-09-21 00:00:00+02:00"
92
third_period_time_bin_min = db.calculate_time_bins(third_period_datetime_min)[0]
93
third_period_datetime_max = "2015-09-30 23:59:59+02:00"
94
third_period_time_bin_max = db.calculate_time_bins(third_period_datetime_max)[0]
95
96
periods = (first_period_time_bin_min, first_period_time_bin_max, second_period_time
97
98
sweden_sept, = plt.plot(np.arange(0, 1, 0.01), compute_plot_in_three_periods("Swede
99
japan_sept, = plt.plot(np.arange(0, 1, 0.01), compute_plot_in_three_periods("Japan"
100
101
first_period_datetime_min = "2015-10-01 00:00:00+02:00"
102
first_period_time_bin_min = db.calculate_time_bins(first_period_datetime_min)[0]
103
first_period_datetime_max = "2015-10-10 23:59:59+02:00"
104
first_period_time_bin_max = db.calculate_time_bins(first_period_datetime_max)[0]
105
second_period_datetime_min = "2015-10-11 00:00:00+02:00"
106
second_period_time_bin_min = db.calculate_time_bins(second_period_datetime_min)[0]
107
second_period_datetime_max = "2015-10-20 23:59:59+02:00"
108
second_period_time_bin_max = db.calculate_time_bins(second_period_datetime_max)[0]
109
third_period_datetime_min = "2015-10-21 00:00:00+02:00"
110
third_period_time_bin_min = db.calculate_time_bins(third_period_datetime_min)[0]
111
third_period_datetime_max = "2015-10-31 23:59:59+02:00"
112
third_period_time_bin_max = db.calculate_time_bins(third_period_datetime_max)[0]
113
114
periods = (first_period_time_bin_min, first_period_time_bin_max, second_period_time
115
116
sweden_oct, = plt.plot(np.arange(0, 1, 0.01), compute_plot_in_three_periods("Sweden
117
japan_oct, = plt.plot(np.arange(0, 1, 0.01), compute_plot_in_three_periods("Japan",
118
119
first_period_datetime_min = "2015-11-01 00:00:00+02:00"
120
first_period_time_bin_min = db.calculate_time_bins(first_period_datetime_min)[0]
121
first_period_datetime_max = "2015-11-10 23:59:59+02:00"
122
first_period_time_bin_max = db.calculate_time_bins(first_period_datetime_max)[0]
123
second_period_datetime_min = "2015-11-11 00:00:00+02:00"
124
second_period_time_bin_min = db.calculate_time_bins(second_period_datetime_min)[0]
125
second_period_datetime_max = "2015-11-20 23:59:59+02:00"
126
second_period_time_bin_max = db.calculate_time_bins(second_period_datetime_max)[0]
127
third_period_datetime_min = "2015-11-21 00:00:00+02:00"
==PAGE:161==
149
128
third_period_time_bin_min = db.calculate_time_bins(third_period_datetime_min)[0
129
third_period_datetime_max = "2015-11-30 23:59:59+02:00"
130
third_period_time_bin_max = db.calculate_time_bins(third_period_datetime_max)[0
131
132
periods = (first_period_time_bin_min, first_period_time_bin_max, second_period_
133
134
sweden_nov, = plt.plot(np.arange(0, 1, 0.01), compute_plot_in_three_periods("Sw
135
japan_nov, = plt.plot(np.arange(0, 1, 0.01), compute_plot_in_three_periods("Jap
136
137
138
plt.legend(handles=[sweden, japan, sweden_sept, japan_sept, sweden_oct, japan_o
139
plt.ylabel("Number of users")
140
plt.xlabel("Percentage of total timebins")
141
plt.title("Plot of users with unique timebins in all three periods")
142
plt.tick_params(labelsize=15)
143
[item.set_fontsize(30) for item in [plt.gca().yaxis.label, plt.gca().xaxis.labe
144
plt.gca().title.set_fontsize(48)
145
[item.set_fontsize(25) for item in plt.gca().get_xticklabels() + plt.gca().get_
146
plt.show()
147
148 er_locations_dict = {}
149
150
151 f get_users_with_unique_days(number):
152
"""
153
Find test and train users with at least ’number’ unique days in
154
both test or train months
155
"""
156
train_users = []
157
test_users = []
158
for u, location_dates in user_locations_dict.items():
159
sept_locations = [x for x in location_dates if x[1] == 9]
160
oct_locations = [x for x in location_dates if x[1] == 10]
161
nov_locations = [x for x in location_dates if x[1] == 11]
162
if len(set(sept_locations)) >= number and len(set(oct_locations)) >= number
163
train_users.append(u)
164
if len(set(oct_locations)) >= number and len(set(nov_locations)) >= number:
165
test_users.append(u)
166
return train_users, test_users
167
168
169 f generate_days_plot(min=0, max=25):
170
train_values = []
171
test_values = []
==PAGE:162==
150
Code
172
for x in range(min, max):
173
train_users, test_users = get_users_with_unique_days(x)
174
train_values.append(len(train_users))
175
test_values.append(len(test_users))
176
plt.title("Number of users with unique days with location updates (Sweden)")
177
plt.xlabel("number of unique days with updates in both months")
178
plt.ylabel("number of users")
179
plt.plot(range(min, max), train_values, label="train users (sept, oct)")
180
plt.plot(range(min, max), test_values, label="test users (oct, nov)")
181
plt.legend()
182
plt.show()
183
184
__name__ == ’__main__’:
185
generate_plot()
186
187
# first_period_datetime_min = "2015-09-01 00:00:00+00:00"
188
# first_period_time_bin_min = db.calculate_time_bins(first_period_datetime_min)[0]
189
# first_period_datetime_max = "2015-09-09 23:59:59+00:00"
190
# first_period_time_bin_max = db.calculate_time_bins(first_period_datetime_max)[0]
191
# second_period_datetime_min = "2015-09-10 00:00:00+00:00"
192
# second_period_time_bin_min = db.calculate_time_bins(second_period_datetime_min)[0
193
# second_period_datetime_max = "2015-09-19 23:59:59+00:00"
194
# second_period_time_bin_max = db.calculate_time_bins(second_period_datetime_max)[0
195
# third_period_datetime_min = "2015-09-20 00:00:00+00:00"
196
# third_period_time_bin_min = db.calculate_time_bins(third_period_datetime_min)[0]
197
# third_period_datetime_max = "2015-09-30 23:59:59+00:00"
198
# third_period_time_bin_max = db.calculate_time_bins(third_period_datetime_max)[0]
199
# user_timebins_dict = generate_user_timebins_dict("Sweden")
200
# user_timebins_dict = user_timebins_to_percentages(user_timebins_dict)
201
# prob = 0.4
202
# filtered = [(user, p) for user, p in user_timebins_dict.items() if p["first_perio
203
# print([x[0] for x in filtered])
204
# print(len(filtered))
==PAGE:163==
151
location_for_each_day.py
Script for ﬁnding users with locations for all days of the three months
1 /usr/bin/env python3
2 "
3 nds users with locations for all days of the three months
4 "
5 port sys
6 port os
7 s.path.insert(1, os.path.join(sys.path[0], ’..’))
8 om DatabaseHelper import DatabaseHelper
9
10
= DatabaseHelper()
11
12
13 cations = db.get_locations_by_country_only("Japan")
14
15 ers = set([l[0] for l in locations])
16 pt_dates = range(1, 31)
17 t_dates = range(1, 32)
18 v_dates = range(1, 31)
19
20 l_days_users = []
21 r u in users:
22
location_dates = [(l[1].date().day, l[1].date().month) for l in locations if l[
23
if set([(x,9) for x in sept_dates]) != set([x for x in location_dates if x[1] =
24
continue
25
if set([(x,10) for x in oct_dates]) != set([x for x in location_dates if x[1] =
26
continue
27
if set([(x,11) for x in nov_dates]) != set([x for x in location_dates if x[1] =
28
continue
29
all_days_users.append(u)
30
31 int(all_days_users)
32 int(len(all_days_users))
==PAGE:164==
152
Code
plot_all_locations.py
Script for plotting Sony locations
1 /usr/bin/env python3
2 port os
3 port sys
4 port json
5 s.path.insert(1, os.path.join(sys.path[0], ’..’))
6
7 om DatabaseHelper import DatabaseHelper
8 om mpl_toolkits.basemap import Basemap
9 port matplotlib.pyplot as plt
10 port numpy as np
11
12 undaries = {"Sweden":[7, 20, 55, 65], "Japan":[125, 150, 30, 45]}
13 idsizes = {"Sweden":250, "Japan":1000}
14 untry = "Japan"
15
16
= DatabaseHelper()
17 cations = db.get_locations_by_country_only(country)
18 cations = [(json.loads(l[3])["coordinates"][0], json.loads(l[3])["coordinates"][1]) f
19
20
21 cnrlon = boundaries[country][0]
22 crnrlon = boundaries[country][1]
23 crnrlat = boundaries[country][2]
24 crnrlat = boundaries[country][3]
25
26 t.figure(figsize=(20, 50))
27 = Basemap(projection="merc", llcrnrlon=llcnrlon, urcrnrlon=urcrnrlon,
28
llcrnrlat=llcrnrlat, urcrnrlat=urcrnrlat, resolution=’h’)
29 drawcoastlines(zorder=0)
30 drawcountries(zorder=0)
31 fillcontinents(color=’#555555’, zorder=0)
32 drawmapboundary(zorder=0)
33
y = m([l[0] for l in locations], [l[1] for l in locations])
34
35 hexbin(np.array(x), np.array(y), gridsize=gridsizes[country], bins="log", lw=0.2, alp
36
country == "Sweden":
37
mob_coords = (13.2236973, 55.7172633)
38
ericsson_coords = (11.9387722, 57.70585)
39
sony_coords = (17.9535443, 59.4066036)
40
x, y = m(mob_coords[0], mob_coords[1])
==PAGE:165==
153
41
x2, y2 = m(mob_coords[0]-0.7, mob_coords[1]-0.7)
42
plt.annotate("Sony Mobile", xy=(x, y), xytext=(x2, y2), xycoords=’data’, textco
43
x, y = m(ericsson_coords[0], ericsson_coords[1])
44
x2, y2 = m(ericsson_coords[0]-2.3, ericsson_coords[1]+0.5)
45
plt.annotate("Ericsson", xy=(x, y), xytext=(x2, y2), xycoords=’data’, textcoord
46
x, y = m(sony_coords[0], sony_coords[1])
47
x2, y2 = m(sony_coords[0]+0.3, sony_coords[1]-0.6)
48
plt.annotate("Sony", xy=(x, y), xytext=(x2, y2), xycoords=’data’, textcoords=’d
49 if country == "Japan":
50
sony_coords = (139.7609281, 35.6721699)
51
x, y = m(sony_coords[0], sony_coords[1])
52
x2, y2 = m(sony_coords[0]+1.5, sony_coords[1]-1.5)
53
plt.annotate("Sony", xy=(x, y), xytext=(x2, y2), xycoords=’data’, textcoords=’d
54
55 t.tight_layout()
56 t.show()
