==PAGE:1==
M.Sc.Eng. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Next Generation Fronthaul Networks
Enabled by Radio over Ethernet
Rami Al-obaidi (s113120)
Supervisor: Henrik Christiansen
Co-Supervisor: Michael Berger
Kongens Lyngby 2016
==PAGE:2==
DTU Fotonik
Department of Photonics Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 343
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 6352
info@fotonik.dtu.dk
www.fotonik.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Due to the fast paced growth of mobile network traﬃc globally, operators are com-
pelled to continuously increase network capacity to cope with demand. In order to
remain competitive this must be accomplished in a cost eﬀective manner without com-
promising network performance or reliability. Cloud Radio Access Network (C-RAN)
has been proposed as a future Radio Access Network (RAN) architecture with a scal-
able solution to the increase of traﬃc and promises to reduce Operating Expenditure
(OPEX) and Capital Expenditure (CAPEX). However, C-RAN deployments are hin-
dered by the costly and capacity intensive fronthaul network required to transports
radio data from and to the antenna sites.
This thesis investigates the feasibility of a Next Generation Fronthaul Interface
(NGFI) which seeks to replace the popularly used Common Public Radio Interface
(CPRI) and considerably reduce requirements and cost of the fronthaul. NGFI ac-
complishes this by repartitioning the functions performed by Remote Radio Heads
(RRHs) at the cell site and the Baseband Unit (BBU). This work is speciﬁcally fo-
cused on the mapping and packet transportation of the radio data for NGFI.
As a part of the feasibility analysis a demonstration platform is established on hard-
ware and analysed with LTE (Long Term Evolution) speciﬁc veriﬁcation tools. The
demonstration platform is conceptually an LTE RRH operating solely in the downlink
direction, but extended with BBU physical layer functionality.
The NGFI implementation for LTE was successfully validated with the demonstra-
tion platform for diﬀerent cell conﬁgurations. The chosen functional split of NGFI
shows a larger than 4 factor reduction in data rates in comparison to CPRI as well as
being cell load dependent. The reduced traﬃc rate enables the fronthaul to comprise
of point-to-point MWR links thereby reducing cost associated with deployment of
ﬁber. Furthermore, as the fronthaul load is dependent on cell loads any surplus net-
work capacity can be used to generate additional revenue streams such as a combined
access and aggregation network for wired public and private Internet subscribers.
NGFI can therefore be seen as an important facilitator for C-RAN which in turn
enables cost-eﬀective and high performance mobile networks.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared during the Spring of 2016 at Comcores ApS and in close
collaboration with the Department of Photonics Engineering at the Technical Univer-
sity of Denmark in partial fulﬁlment of the requirements for acquiring a M.Sc.Eng.
degree in Telecommunications.
I would like to give my sincere gratitude to my colleagues Anders Lund and Niklas
Mortensen for the great cooperation we have had during this project. Likewise my
deepest gratitude to my supervisors Henrik Christiansen and Michael Berger for pro-
viding me with valuable feedback as well as helping us obtain access to test equipment
for our testbed.
Finally, I would like to express my great appreciation to Comcores for enabling us
in developing this solution, our thesis work and by providing us with the necessary
equipment, know-how and encouragement. I thank you all.
Kongens Lyngby, June 25, 2016
Rami Al-obaidi (s113120)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Contents
v
List of Acronyms
vii
Introduction
1
1
Cellular Network Design and Evolution
5
1.1
Mobile Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2
LTE overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.3
C-RAN - Design and Purpose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.4
CPRI over Ethernet
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
1.5
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2
Beyond CPRI
21
2.1
NGFI - Design and Purpose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.2
LTE radio interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.3
NGFI and functional splits
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
2.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3
NGFI - Split 4
33
3.1
Split 4 considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.2
Split 4 impact on the fronthaul . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.3
Requirement speciﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4
RoE System Design
47
4.1
Adjacent component interaction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.2
1904.3 RoE standard . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.3
Component overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5
Implementation and Simulation
61
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
5.1
RoE TX . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.2
RoE RX . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
5.3
System simulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
5.4
Requirement fulﬁlment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
5.5
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
6
Hardware Validation
79
6.1
Test platform overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
6.2
R.1 hardware validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
6.3
R.9 hardware validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
6.4
R.11 hardware validation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
6.5
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
7
System evaluation and network integration
91
7.1
RoE component implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
7.2
RoE and NGFI deployment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
7.3
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
8
Conclusion
99
8.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
Bibliography
103
A Testbed measurement results
1
A.1 R.9 measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
A.2 R.11 measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
==PAGE:9==
List of Acronyms
ARQ
Automatic Repeat Request
AXI
Advanced Extensible Interface
BBU
Baseband Unit
BS
Base Station
C-RAN
Cloud Radio Access Network
CA
Carrier Aggregation
CAPEX
Capital Expenditure
CP
Cyclic Preﬁx
CPRI
Common Public Radio Interface
CRC
Cyclic Redundancy Check
DL
Downlink
E-UTRAN Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access Network
eNB
eNodeB
EPC
Evolved Packet Core
EPDCCH
Enhanced Physical Downlink Control Channel
EVM
Error Vector Magnitude
FCS
Frame Check Sequence
FF
Flip-Flop
FIFO
First In First Out
FPGA
Field-Programmable Gate Array
GPP
General Purpose Processor
GPS
Global Positioning System
==PAGE:10==
viii
List of Acronyms
HSPA
High Speed Packet Access
HSS
Home Subscriber Server
I/Q
In-phase and Quadrature
IFFT
Inverse Fast Fourier Transform
IoT
Internet of Things
JR
Joint Reception
JT
Joint Transmission
LTE
Long-Term Evolution
LUT
Lookup Table
MAC
Medium Access Control
MIMO
Multiple Input Multiple Output
MME
Mobility Management Entity
MTU
Maximum Transport Unit
MWR
Microwave Radio
NGFI
Next Generation Fronthaul Interface
NGFN
Next Generation Fronthaul Network
OAM
Operations Administration and Maintenance
OFDMA
Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiple Access
OPEX
Operating Expenditure
PBCH
Physical Broadcast Channel
PCFICH
Physical Control Format Indicator Channel
PDCCH
Physical Downlink Control Channel
PDN-GW
Public Data Network Gateway
PDSCH
Physical Downlink Shared Channel
PHICH
Physical Hybrid ARQ Indicator Channel
PMCH
Physical Multicast Channel
PRB
Physical Resource Block
==PAGE:11==
List of Acronyms
ix
PSS
Primary Synchronization Signal
PTP
Precision Time Protocol
QAM
Quadrature Amplitude Modulation
RAM
Random Access Memory
RAN
Radio Access Network
RB
Resource Block
RCC
Radio Cloud Center
RE
Resource Element
RE
Radio Equipment
ROM
Read Only Memory
REC
Radio Equipment Controller
RoE
Radio over Ethernet
RRH
Remote Radio Head
RRS
Remote Radio System
RTD
Round Trip Delay
S-GW
Serving Gateway
SPI
Serial Peripheral Interface
SSS
Secondary Synchronization Signal
ToD
Time of Day
TSN
Time Sensitive Networking
UE
User Equipment
UL
Uplink
UMTS
Universal Mobile Telecommunication System
==PAGE:12==
x
==PAGE:13==
Introduction
Mobile data traﬃc continues to grow at an ever accelerating pace due to the World-
wide adoption of smart devices with cellular and wireless (Wi-Fi) connections. This
combined with bandwidth demanding Over-the-Top applications such as video stream-
ing lead to large growth rates around the world. In fact global mobile traﬃc grew
an astounding 74 % in 2015 alone[13]. Of that the high and low growth rates were
identiﬁed as 117 % in the Middle East and Africa and 52 % in Europe, respectively.
The market growth must be addressed by mobile operators lest they risk dissat-
isﬁed customers that will migrate to other operators with a more accommodating
network capacity. However, increasing network capacity to cope with a projected
eightfold increase in mobile data traﬃc between 2015 and 2020[13] is no trivial nor
costless task. Subscriber fees are evidently not increasing at the same exponential
pace which leads to a continuous decrease in revenue per bit transferred. Thus op-
erators are faced with much required capital expenditure for network upgrades to
maintain competitiveness and a foothold in their respective markets.
New strategies and key technologies are therefore needed to curb CAPEX and OPEX
such that proﬁts can be maintained while also transitioning to a 4.5G and further on
a 5G mobile network.
For several years a new RAN architecture has been proclaimed to oﬀer methods of
reducing both CAPEX and OPEX while introducing a platform for signiﬁcant RAN
improvements such as cooperative radio procedures. This is made possible by cen-
tralizing the baseband processing resources into a pool, resulting in an aptly named
Cloud Radio Access Network. However, C-RAN has yet to see widespread deployment
which can be attributed to the lack of key technologies necessary to make C-RAN a
viable architecture, both in terms of technical feasibility and economics.
Centralizing baseband processing is possible by dividing the basestation in a mobile
network into its RF component (digital/analogue conversion, ﬁltering, ampliﬁcation,
etc.) and baseband processing component (Discrete Fourier Transformations, mod-
ulation, encoding/decoding, etc.). These components are referred to as a RRH and
BBU for RF and baseband processing, respectively. A large number of BBUs are
then centralized into what is referred to as a BBU pool which manages and interfaces
with a large number of RRHs. The interconnecting network between RRHs and BBU
pools is referred to as a Fronthaul network.
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction
The division between the RRH and BBU pool requires a suitable interface. Few
options exist, but the current market dominator is CPRI. CPRI enables the BBU and
RRH to exchange complex samples of the carrier signal in downlink (DL) and uplink
(UL). In the DL direction, from the network to the user, In-phase and Quadrature
(I/Q) samples are generated by the BBU and transported to the RRH by CPRI and
vice versa for the UL.
Unfortunately, the data rates at this level of post-processing are very high and require
low jitter and latency. A large scale C-RAN deployment of hundreds of RRHs will
therefore require an operator to own or be willing to deploy a signiﬁcant amount of
ﬁber in order to facilitate the demanding RRH-BBU pool interconnection. This may
more than oﬀset the potential reduction in CAPEX with a C-RAN deployment. As
a result of this market players are proposing a Next Generation Fronthaul Interface
(NGFI) or Next Generation Fronthaul Network (NGFN) which seeks to interconnect
RRHs and BBUs in a more eﬃcient and less resource intensive manner[17]. One of
the key aspects of NGFI is basing the fronthaul on packet transmission instead of e.g.
native CPRI over ﬁber which transmits peer-to-peer constant bitrate frames. In fact
there is ongoing work of standardizing CPRI over Ethernet with the 1904.3 Radio over
Ethernet (RoE) standard. However, while carrying CPRI over Ethernet opens up for
the possibility of using a packet fronthaul with reduced cost, signiﬁcant requirements
remain by CPRI to jitter, latency and bandwidth. One proposal of NGFI is there-
fore to establish a functional split of the BBU pool to move some carefully selected
amount of processing to the RRHs such that the transportation requirements on the
fronthaul can be relaxed. Nonetheless, there are several aspects and trade-oﬀs to be
considered when performing such a split. A functional split is commonly referred to
Layer 1 or Layer X oﬄoading as some of the lower layer processing is relocated to the
RRHs.
This thesis investigates the trade-oﬀs of varying degrees of oﬄoad with the main
objective of implementing a proof-of-concept oﬄoading implementation in the down-
link direction of an LTE RAN. This will be performed in collaboration with other
students whom each will be responsible for a vital aspect of the oﬄoading procedure.
This thesis will in particular focus on the design and implementation of a protocol to
enable transport of radio data for a partial layer 1 oﬄoad implementation.
The ﬁnal solution is deployed on an FPGA evaluation board and validated with LTE
speciﬁc test equipment.
The ﬁrst chapter delivers an overview of common RAN, basestation architectures
and a brief introduction to LTE as well C-RAN. The purpose is to familiarize the
reader with current status quo and the motivation behind NGFI. The second chapter
presents the concept of NGFI and how such a solution would look speciﬁcally in the
LTE domain. The proposed solution is examined in detail in the third chapter to
establish a requirement speciﬁcation for its design. The fourth chapter presents this
design along with the 1904.3 RoE standard for which the encapsulation procedure is
based upon. The implementation and system veriﬁcation results through simulations
==PAGE:15==
Introduction
3
are reviewed in chapter ﬁve along with an evaluation of the requirement speciﬁcation.
The solution is integrated on a hardware test platform and validated in chapter six.
Chapter seven discusses the achieved results at the hardware level while also taken
these into perspective for potential usage in a mobile network. The work is ﬁnally
concluded in chapter eight.
==PAGE:16==
4
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 1
Cellular Network Design
and Evolution
The following sections serve as a detailed introduction to several topics within cellular
networks with focus on LTE, C-RAN and the internal base station interface CPRI.
The purpose is to provide a solid motivation for why the establishment of a Next
Generation Fronthaul Interface is a necessary and natural evolution of existing mobile
networks and RAN architecture.
1.1
Mobile Networks
All publicly available mobile networks can be summarized to oﬀer one service: wire-
less data connectivity for its subscribers. These subscribers may be mobile or static
for the duration of a call or a temporary connection to the network, but regardless of
mobility the connection should be satisfactory. A voice call should for example not
be dropped simply because the user is moving about.
The quality of data connectivity is a function of two important aspects of any mobile
network; coverage and capacity. These are regulated with the deployment of cells
throughout a given area. Such a cell may oﬀer wireless data connectivity to hundreds
of subscribers.
The perfect mobile network would oﬀer both superior coverage and endless capacity,
however, these properties are counteracting. If a single cell covers a large area with
many users it will have less capacity available for each user compared to a cell with a
small coverage area. For this reason cells are deployed densely in urban areas where
there is a large population density. Oppositely rural areas have fewer cells, but each
cell maintains a larger coverage area.
The deployment of a cell usually occurs in triplets and across several radio air
interface technologies. A cell site or base station (BS) which includes at minimum
antennas, RF equipment, network equipment and potentially an antenna tower will
therefore contain several cells and may oﬀer both 2G, 3G and LTE/4G connectivity.
The most commonly seen deployment in Denmark is a three sector deployment such
as the one shown in the left-hand side of ﬁgure 1.1. The right-hand side depicts a top
view of the 3-sector site. Each directional antenna transmits a 120 degree wide beam.
A three-sector cell site will therefore provide three times the capacity of a similar
==PAGE:18==
6
1 Cellular Network Design and Evolution
one-sector site with an omnidirectional antenna at the cost of additional equipment.
Antenna
Sectors
RRHs
Ground view
Top view
Figure 1.1: Left: Ground view of 3-sector cell site with RRHs. Right: Illustrative
top view of such a deployment.
The antennas of a site are connected with coaxial cables to either a RRH as is
the case in ﬁgure 1.1 or directly to base station equipment as illustrated in ﬁgure 1.2.
Figure 1.2 shows how a traditional BS setup maintains a full protocol stack including
the physical layer (baseband + RF) within the BS equipment. This is usually located
in a secured box at the base of an antenna tower. Transmission lines with the ana-
logue carrier signals interconnect the BS equipment and antennas. In a distributed
BS the physical layer is relocated much closer to the antennas within a RRH. One
beneﬁt of using RRHs is the capability of reducing the length of coaxial cables which
incur a transmission power loss. This BS separation is explained in more detail in
section 1.3.2.
While the BS provides connectivity for subscribers, the BS itself must also be con-
nected in order to carry user data to its appropriate destination. A user’s request to
visit a website will for example be send to the BS then transported to the mobile core
network which is connected to the Internet through a gateway. The link between a
BS and the mobile core network is referred to as the backhaul.
With a general overview of mobile networks established the following section shows
how these BS, RRH and BBU nodes are incorporated in an actual radio access tech-
nology such as LTE.
==PAGE:19==
1.2 LTE overview
7
BBU
RRH
RRH
RRH
BS
BS
Fiber
Coaxial
RF
Baseband
MAC
RLC
Baseband
MAC
RLC
RF
Traditional base station
Distributed base station
RF
RF
PDCP
PDCP
Figure 1.2: A traditional base station compared to a RRH+BBU site deployment
1.2
LTE overview
LTE was introduced with 3GPP Release 8 as the latest major change to the radio air
interface as well as mobile core introducing a more ﬂat and packet centric cellular net-
work. This prompted mobile operators around the world to market LTE as a fourth
generation (4G) network despite not fulﬁlling the initial 4G requirements as speci-
ﬁed in IMT-Advanced by the ITU-R[27][26]. Nonetheless, LTE provides substantial
improvements to the radio air interface with new modulation techniques and larger
bandwidth allocations. One of the main diﬀerences in the air interface between LTE
and its forerunner UMTS/HSPA1 (3G/3.5G) is the usage of Orthogonal Frequency
Division Multiple Access (OFDMA)[32].
OFDMA allows the network to schedule
capacity dynamically in both time and frequency which the network can take advan-
tage of to allocate parts of the spectrum for which a user experiences the best radio
conditions. There are also numerous changes in the core network where a number of
nodes have been consolidated.
For this work the focus will be on LTE based mobile networks while 2G/3G, including
HSPA/HSPA+ are deemed out of scope.
1.2.1
UE capabilities
An LTE capable device is referred to as user equipment (UE) and may be catego-
rized according to its UL and DL capabilities. When the network is informed of a
UE’s category it will implicitly be aware of its radio capabilities and act accordingly.
Table 1.3 lists a subset of categories speciﬁed in the UL and DL direction including
theoretical peak data rates in Mbps for a 20 MHz carrier. MIMO refers to Multiple
1Universal Mobile Telecommunication System / High Speed Packet Access
==PAGE:20==
8
1 Cellular Network Design and Evolution
Input, Multiple Output where spatial multiplexing is utilized such that several trans-
missions can take place from multiple transmit to multiple receive antennas despite
utilizing the same frequency band[32]. While there are many other categories only
this subset of categories is shown since they are the most relevant to the test platform
of this work. Furthermore, the current smartphone ﬂagships from major vendors do
not support much more than UE category 6.
UE Category
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Maximum downlink datarate [Mbps]
1
10
50
100
150
300
300
Maximum uplink datarate [Mbps]
1
5
25
50
50
75
50
Number of MIMO streams in DL
1
1
2
2
2
4
2/4
64 QAM support in uplink
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
Table 1.3: LTE UE categories[5]
As shown there are signiﬁcant diﬀerences in data rate between categories. This
allows vendors to develop low performance devices for e.g. embedded system and
Internet of Things (IoT) with the lower categories. The most recent UE category
17 as of release 13 boasts of 25 Gbps DL theoretical peak data rate through the use
of 8x8 MIMO and carrier aggregation (CA) where several 20 MHz LTE carriers are
bundled together. However, such data rates, even theoretically, are unlikely to be seen
commercially within the next several years. That would require substantial network
overhaul and most importantly applications that necessitate such throughput.
1.2.2
Network Architecture
It is important to obtain a clear overview of responsibilities of individual nodes such
as the base station and the core network nodes to understand the RAN restructuring
which takes place in C-RAN and functional splitting with Layer 1 oﬄoading.
Figure 1.4 illustrates an edge-to-edge overview of an LTE network[6]. As shown the
general architecture is divided into UE, Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access
Network (E-UTRAN) and the Evolved Packet Core (EPC). The UE is simply a gen-
eral user device and client of the network and essentially the start and endpoint for
UL and DL traﬃc. The UE is connected over the radio interface to an eNodeB (eNB)
which is the base station. The base station performs several functions some of which
are: User data transfer, user paging, handover between base stations and connection
setup and release[6].
The eNBs are shown interconnected with the logical X2 interface. This interface
allows eNBs to interact and perform various cooperative procedures to improve the
radio performance.
Examples of such are fast and seamless handover procedures
as well as inter-cell interference coordination by coordinating which frequencies to
allocate for a given time frame. However, the interface itself is optional.
==PAGE:21==
1.2 LTE overview
9
eNode-B
S-GW
MME
PDN-GW
S1
E-UTRAN
Evolved Packet Core (EPC)
S1
eNode-B
X2
S1
HSS
UE
Internet
Figure 1.4: Network architecture of LTE
An eNB may also be referred to as a cell and it may generate one or more LTE carriers.
In a commercial deployment these eNBs are often seen deployed in groups of three as
shown in the previous ﬁgure 1.1. The equipment of an eNB basestation may consist
of:
• The ﬁgure 1.1 shown rectangular antennas
• Coaxial cable to the baseband processing equipment
• Signal processing equipment. May be all-in-one box for three sectors
• Battery backup and various transmission equipment to the remainder of E-
UTRAN/EPC
As previously mentioned the processing equipment can be divided into a RRH
and BBU. The RRH is co-located with antennas at the top of a cell tower while the
BBU is installed at ground-level or even several kilometres apart. The BBU and RRH
are connected with a suitable base station interface such as CPRI over ﬁber. One
beneﬁt of a RRH-BBU setup is reducing the distance over which the RF signal must
be transmitted with coaxial, thus reducing signal power loss and power ampliﬁcation
requirements.
==PAGE:22==
10
1 Cellular Network Design and Evolution
Returning to ﬁgure 1.4 the eNB is shown as connected to a mobility management
entity (MME) and serving gateway (S-GW) over the S1 interface. These nodes are
part of the LTE core and are divided into domains of user data transportation and
user management[32].
The MME is responsible for among others: user authentication, mobility manage-
ment, handover support (when no X2 interface is available), establishing a tunnel for
user data transport and interworking with previous generations of mobile networks[32].
As such the MME does not deal with user data, but simply the management of users
within the network. The Home Subscriber Server (HSS) maintains a database of sub-
scribers and the services they are eligible for. Information contained within the HSS
is also used for authentication, identiﬁcation, location tracking, roaming, etc.
On the other hand the S-GW and public data network gateway (PDN-GW) ensure the
transportation of user data to and from external networks. The S-GW manages user
data transportation tunnels between the eNBs and PDN-GW such that user mobility
between eNBs is transparent to the PDN-GW. Public IP addresses are assigned by
the PDN-GW and it is at this node that user IP packets encapsulation/decapsulation
takes place.
It is worth noting that the nodes within the EPC are strictly logical. This allows
for dividing the elements across diﬀerent servers with varying physical processing and
networking capabilities.
The S-GW would for example require network interfaces
with signiﬁcant throughput to handle packet forwarding for all its subscribers. On
the contrary this also allows for a compact single-unit EPC implementation such as
the OpenAirInterface open-source EPC[10].
As mobile network traﬃc increases rapidly throughout the years, all mobile op-
erators are required to increase capacity in their network to maintain a satisfactory
level of service for their subscribers. Increasing capacity can be accomplished in a
number of ways. One strategy is to reduce the coverage area of each eNB and deploy
additional cells. Another is to increase the capacity of each cell site by upgrading the
radio air interface to accommodate wider bandwidths or utilize multi-antenna tech-
niques. A third strategy is to deploy WiFi cells in certain hotspot areas to oﬄoad
traﬃc from cellular networks.
Regardless of strategy it is evident that increasing capacity is a costly aﬀair due to
deployment of additional equipment and accompanying operational expenses. Oper-
ators are therefore always on the lookout for methods to reduce CAPEX and OPEX
while not degrading network performance in order to maintain their competitiveness.
Proponents of C-RAN believe that restructuring the relationship between RRH and
BBU is an eﬃcient method to accomplish just that.
==PAGE:23==
1.3 C-RAN - Design and Purpose
11
1.3
C-RAN - Design and Purpose
C-RAN itself is not limited to one radio technology, but will for the sake of scope be
considered as LTE centric in this work.
The overall objective of C-RAN is to reduce operator CAPEX and OPEX as well
as improve network performance and capacity through consolidation of baseband
processing into a cloud (i.e. server farm)[24]. Some envision that 15 % CAPEX and
50 % OPEX savings are possible with C-RAN[12]. The question is then, how will
this consolidation take place and why are there potential savings and increases in
performance?
1.3.1
Tidal eﬀect
C-RAN takes advantage of the daily movement of users throughout cells and networks
as well as cell load patterns to achieve a multiplexing gain on the processing resources
used in each eNB. The concept is as follows:
Each eNB is designed to be able to operate at peak load, however peak load does
not occur frequently, nor does it occur simultaneously in all cells. Such a design is
necessary since an eNB cannot share its idle processing resources with other eNBs
which experience a high load. As a consequence, the overall processing power within
a mobile network is over-dimensioned yet a requirement since all cell sites must be
able to handle peak load lest the RAN becomes a bottleneck. Figure 1.5 depicts cells
which cover areas with cell loads that diﬀer from each other over the course of 24
hours. Cells located in residential areas experience high loads in the morning and in
the evening when the residents are home. However, cells located in areas with mostly
oﬃces or educational institutions experience the largest loads during work hours as
illustrated. This variation in cell load is referred to as the tidal eﬀect and can be
addressed by C-RAN in an intelligent manner since processing is shared among all
cells within a pool.
Thus the ability to consolidate processing resources allows for reducing idle processing
and enables a more eﬃcient usage of resources. This may reduce OPEX as well as
CAPEX since less energy is consumed and less equipment must be installed at each
physical basestation. Less equipment can signiﬁcantly reduce OPEX since a large
percentage of OPEX for a mobile operator is dedicated to rental of storage space
for basestation equipment and antenna tower. In fact cell site rental can make up
31 % of an operator’s yearly OPEX[24]. Additionally the network capacity oﬀered
in a C-RAN deployment may be greater than a traditional RAN. This is due to
cooperative radio procedures such as Joint Transmission (JT) in the DL and Joint
Reception (JR) in the UL. This allows the use of multiple cells to coordinate the
transmission/reception of data, in eﬀect improving the connectivity between a user
and the cellular network[1]. Since all cells are controlled within the BBU pool it is
an excellent platform for cooperative radio procedures. Thus C-RAN oﬀers several
advantages, but naturally these come at a cost as detailed in the following section.
==PAGE:24==
12
1 Cellular Network Design and Evolution
Residential area
eNB
Office area
eNB
eNB
Time (24h)
Time (24h)
Cell load
Cell load
Figure 1.5: Illustrating the tidal wave of cell load throughout a day
1.3.2
RRH and BBU separation: Fronthaul
In a complete C-RAN deployment the eNB has been separated into a RRH, respon-
sible for all RF functionality and a BBU which performs baseband processing and
upper layer procedures such as scheduling, retransmission, link establishment, etc.
The BBUs are then centralized and referred to as a BBU pool.
The BBU pool
can be established on diﬀerent platforms with varying degrees of consolidation and
virtualization[24]. Ideally the BBU pool is a data center where a BBU ”instance” is
a virtual machine or within one while being executed on top of general purpose pro-
cessors (GPP). Additional processing power can be added in the form of additional
blades or server racks while BBUs can be dynamically instantiated and relocated
according to load. This is the essence of C-RAN, however, the road is paved with
technical and ﬁnancial challenges. Establishing the network between the BBU pool
and RRHs is the source of most of these. This network is designated as the fronthaul
since the network from the BS to the core network is referred to as a backhaul.
An overview of the above described C-RAN architecture is shown in ﬁgure 1.6. Sev-
eral cell sites with diﬀering load characteristics have baseband processing occur at the
same BBU pool. I/Q data samples are carried with CPRI over point-to-point ﬁber
links. As indicated on the ﬁgure the collective BBU pool + RRHs is the RAN part of
the mobile network and is essentially the decentralization of several eNBs. The BBU
pool maintains a backhaul connection to the mobile core network nodes such as the
previously introduced S-GW and MME.
In C-RAN with a clear split of RF and baseband functionality the fronthaul must
carry I/Q complex samples between the RRH and BBU pool. These samples are
==PAGE:25==
1.3 C-RAN - Design and Purpose
13
BBU Pool # 1
RRH
RRH
RRH
Mobile Core
Time 
(24h)
Cell 
load
eNB / RAN
Time (24h)
BBU 
Load
Time 
(24h)
Cell 
load
Backhaul
BBU Pool # X
CPRI based 
Fronthaul
Figure 1.6: Overview of a C-RAN deployment with CPRI over ﬁber fronthaul
simply the output from each receive antenna after mixing and down conversion to a
lower sampling rate; or the samples are input to the transmit antenna from the BBU
pool. As such this data stream is constant bitrate since the antennas are sampled
continuously without awareness of upper layer data/frequency occupancy. A further
implication of this is that the fronthaul must always carry I/Q data streams despite
there not being any user data or cell load. To make matters worse the I/Q stream
data rate increases linearly with the number of antennas. A cell with 8 transmit and
8 receive antennas (8x8) will therefore require four times as many I/Q data streams
as a 2x2 cell.
Nevertheless, there are also substantial beneﬁts with having a functional split which
requires the transmission of I/Q data between the RRH and BBU pool. One is that
if the BBU pool is implemented solely in software, new functionality such as an ex-
tended or completely revamped radio air interface can be developed much faster in
software and requires no more than a software update of the BBU pool to deploy.
New hardware is not necessarily needed at the RRHs either unless there are changes
to RF functionality such as e.g. frequency ﬁltering due to changes in band deploy-
ment. There are therefore advantages and disadvantages to consider with the division
of an eNB.
==PAGE:26==
14
1 Cellular Network Design and Evolution
The disadvantage of fronthauling I/Q data naturally depends on the data rate
required. The question is then how large are the I/Q data streams that must be
transported between the BBU pool and RRH? The next section presents a few exam-
ples of such based on the popular CPRI interface and LTE cell bandwidth.
1.3.3
Fronthaul data rates
CPRI is a publicly available speciﬁcation for transportation of I/Q data between what
the interface speciﬁes as radio equipment (RE) and radio equipment controller (REC),
which are interchangeable with RRH and BBU, respectively[14].
CPRI speciﬁes a layer 1 and layer 2 protocol which implies that a native CPRI point-
to-point link can be established between an RE and REC. An electrical as well as
optical L1 transmission interface is speciﬁed for CPRI though optical is the most
practical due to superior range and reduced error rates. Furthermore, CPRI enables
transmission of three distinct ﬂows over a single CPRI link with the goal of covering
all data transfer needs that might arise between an RE and REC. These are[14]:
• User data: This may be I/Q data in a traditional RRH/BBU functional split,
however, it may be any other non-speciﬁed user data. Several I/Q ﬂows can be
transported over a single CPRI link. There is one I/Q ﬂow per antenna which
is aptly called an Antenna-carrier (AxC).
• Control & Management: General control and management in regards to the RE
itself, statistics gathering, conﬁguration, ﬁrmware update, etc. This channel
which is time multiplexed with user data allows for transportation of Ethernet
frames. This allows for an IP/TCP connection to be established for e.g. various
management purposes.
• Synchronization: Data ﬂow for synchronizing equipment at both sides of the
CPRI link. Necessary when e.g. GPS is not used at the RE side for synchro-
nization.
Depending on the number of antennas and thus the amount I/Q data that must
be transmitted the CPRI line bit rate can greatly vary. The basic frame structure of
CPRI at a line rate of 614.4 Mbps contains 15·8 bits of I/Q data and 8 bits of control
data. The frame is transmitted once every 260.42 ns (30.72MHz). This corresponds
to 460.8 Mbps of payload and 30.72 Mbps of control words. The control words are
responsible for carrying all data channels that do not contain I/Q data. The I/Q pay-
load and control words sum up to 491.52 Mbps, however, due to 8B/10B line coding
the data rate reaches 614.4 Mbps which is the CPRI line option 1. The remaining
line options are listed in table 1.7[14]. All data rates are given in Mbps. Line options
8-10 use 64B/66B line coding. The discrepancy between payload bit rate and line bit
rate is due to the additional control word data and line coding.
==PAGE:27==
1.3 C-RAN - Design and Purpose
15
#
CPRI
line
bit
rate [Mbps]
Word bit length
I/Q bit rate [Mbps]
1
614.4
8
460.8
2
1228.8
16
921.6
3
2457.6
32
1843.2
4
3072.0
40
2304.0
5
4915.2
64
3686.4
6
6144.0
80
4608.0
7
9830.4
128
7372.8
8
10137.6
160
9216.0
9
12165.12
192
11059.92
10
24330.24
384
22118.4
Table 1.7: CPRI line options and corresponding data rates[14]
Considering table 1.7 which line option is required for a regular 2x2 (2 TX, 2 RX
antennas) 20 MHz LTE carrier? Assuming a 15 bit sample resolution per I/Q stream
the following I/Q data rate is generated in each link direction:
30.72 · 106 sample
s
· 15
bit
sample · 2 · 2 = 1843.2Mbps
Which corresponds precisely to line option 3.
The multiplications by two are
derived from the number of antenna and I/Q streams.
Still an antenna tower is
commonly equipped with at least three sectors (i.e. three separate LTE cells) each
providing a 120 degree coverage beam from the tower. In a C-RAN deployment with
such a site conﬁguration the total CPRI line rate required from RRHs to the BBU
pool and vice versa will therefore be a minimum of 9830.4 Mbps or three CPRI links
each at 2457.6 Mbps. This is simply for a 20 MHz carrier, future deployments will
bundle even larger bandwidths together with more antennas as is evident by the LTE
UE categories in table 1.3 presented in section 1.2.
The listed theoretical peak DL data rate for a 2x2 enabled UE on a 20 MHz LTE
carrier is 150 Mbps. In comparison the CPRI line option required to carry this signal
to the antenna is 2457.6 Mbps. The overhead is therefore substantial (a factor of
16) and recall furthermore that the CPRI link is constant bitrate and does not vary
according to cell load.
Based on the above it is apparent that building a C-RAN fronthaul is a costly
aﬀair for the operator if hundreds of RRHs shall have dedicated ﬁber to set up CPRI
links to the BBU pool. Even more so if the operator does not own an existing ﬁber
network with available capacity. In that case it is arguably less costly to use tradi-
tional BSs with microwave radio backhaul rather than deploying C-RAN with the
accompanying cost of rolling out ﬁber to all antenna tower locations. At this given
==PAGE:28==
16
1 Cellular Network Design and Evolution
point it is very much a cost-beneﬁt analysis for the operator. Does the potential
reduction in CAPEX and OPEX with C-RAN outweigh the investment in a wide-
reaching ﬁber network and will CPRI or similar interfaces be able to support the
upcoming increases in bandwidth assignment and antenna numbers? The answer to
this question depends on dozens of factors including, but not limited to: country of
deployment, rules and regulation, operator business model and evolution of the radio
air interface.
Reducing cost associated with the fronthaul is therefore an important pillar for
establishing C-RAN as a commercially viable deployment option for operators. Sev-
eral options such as compression of CPRI and using microwave radio instead of ﬁber
to reduce cost have previously been considered[9]. Other options such as the ongoing
standardization work from IEEE 1904.3 is focused on enabling a packet based fron-
thaul where CPRI is transmitted over Ethernet. This would allow for reuse of the
fronthaul to carry other types of traﬃc and take advantage of inexpensive Ethernet
equipment. The mobile operator will then be able to oﬀer wired Internet access to
private or commercial subscribers through the existing packet fronthaul and obtain
an additional revenue stream. Unfortunately, transporting CPRI over Ethernet in-
troduces several complications with regards to synchronization, jitter and latency.
The following section focuses on these aspects and issues while arguing that a more
appropriate solution beyond CPRI is warranted.
1.4
CPRI over Ethernet
The proposition of transporting CPRI over a packet based network does seem quite
trivial. After all it is simply the matter of mapping CPRI data into the payload of an
Ethernet frame and subsequently transmitting it. However, since CPRI is a determin-
istic and constant bit rate transmission protocol it does not fair well when mapped
and transported over a packet based network. Packets can be buﬀered, dropped and
routed over diﬀerent pathways depending on the switching/routing table. The trust-
ful act of transporting CPRI over an Ethernet network which may or may not have
background traﬃc will result in an antenna receiving an I/Q stream that is sporadic
at best and non-existent at worst. The reasoning behind this lies in the strict re-
quirements CPRI maintains to jitter and latency and how the plain Ethernet MAC
handles packet transmission and reception. The result is unacceptable wireless data
connectivity.
A clean split between the BBU and RRH which requires transmission of I/Q
data necessitates a 100 μs one way transportation delay including delay variation
(jitter)[17]. The packet delay variation itself is stated by the latest draft standard
within fronthaul standardization to be 5 μs or 10 % of end-to-end latency[21]. How-
ever, this is still up for discussion.
Such low numbers are not beyond grasp if the connection between a BBU pool and
==PAGE:29==
1.4 CPRI over Ethernet
17
RRH is a single point-to-point link and dedicated to only CPRI traﬃc. In that case
there is no reason for signiﬁcant jitter to occur and latency is strictly deﬁned by the
transmission distance and component traversal time. However, one may then question
the purpose of establishing a packet based fronthaul when it still requires dedicated
links between RRH and BBU equipment.
Unfortunately, as soon as multi-hop and background traﬃc is introduced to a
packet fronthaul the delay and jitter become anything, but deterministic. They be-
come highly dependent on the egress and ingress buﬀer mechanics and overall network
load even if CPRI Ethernet frames have strict prioritization over other types of traﬃc.
The following example illustrates this: A CPRI carrying Ethernet frame is currently
pending transmission within an egress buﬀer because a background traﬃc type Ether-
net frame with a 1500 byte payload has just managed to occupy the line as depicted in
ﬁgure 1.8. The Ethernet frame consists of a header, payload and a Cyclic Redundancy
Check (CRC) ﬁeld used for error detection[28]. On a 1 Gbps Ethernet link one byte is
transmitted every 8 ns (125 MHz), a full Ethernet frame containing 8 bytes preamble,
14 bytes header, 1500 bytes payload, 4 bytes CRC and ﬁnally an inter-frame gap of
12 bytes sums up to 12,304 ns of transmission time or approximately 12 μs. This
delay may or may not occur across several network nodes and thus corresponds to
unacceptable jitter per the earlier stated requirements.
Therefore, even if CPRI loaded Ethernet frames are prioritized there is a substan-
tial risk of being delayed if a large background traﬃc type frame is currently being
transmitted. The Medium Access Control (MAC) responsible for the transmission
of frames will in that case have two options. Either continue transmitting the back-
ground frame and incur additional delay on the CPRI payload to the point where
the content is outdated and unnecessary or halt the background frame transmission
which essentially discards it. Either scenario is unacceptable due to disruption of
higher layer services.
For this reason there is ongoing work on multiple standards within the 802.1 Time
Sensitive Networking (TSN) task group for enabling the transmission of time sensitive
data while still maintaining satisfactory service to regular traﬃc. One such standard
is 802.1Qbu which addresses exactly the above issue of background traﬃc occupying
the transmission link. 802.1Qbu introduces frame preemption functionality between a
TX and RX MAC. When preemption occurs the transmission of a preemptable frame
is suspended to allow for one or more express frames (e.g. frames with CPRI) to be
transmitted before the preemptable frame is resumed[19]. This ensures that express
traﬃc is transmitted in due time while background traﬃc can be paused and resumed
as necessary. Additionally the 802.1CM standard which is currently at draft version
0.1 attempts to deﬁne proﬁles for features, options, conﬁgurations, protocols and so
on for the construction of networks capable of transporting fronthaul streams such as
CPRI over Ethernet[21].
Despite the potential for achieving satisfactory jitter and latency of CPRI over
==PAGE:30==
18
1 Cellular Network Design and Evolution
CPRI o. Ethernet
Background Ethernet
# X-1
High priority traffic
buffer
Background Ethernet
# X
Low priority traffic 
buffer
H
D
R
C
R
C
I 
F
G
Background Ethernet 
# X+1
Transmission line
Egress Buffer
Scheduler
Ethernet Switch Egress Port # N
Remaining background traffic frame 
incurs significant delay on CPRI over 
Ethernet frames
Figure 1.8: The delay of a CPRI over Ethernet frame by background traﬃc
Ethernet with TSN standards there is also the matter of enabling synchronization.
Synchronization is necessary to ensure that the RRH and BBU generate and consume
I/Q data at equal rates. In addition tight synchronization must be achieved between
neighbouring cells in order to perform cooperative radio procedures and minimize in-
terference. If the LTE carrier of one cells starts to drift in frequency it will adversely
aﬀect neighbouring cells and their users. Recall that with CPRI, synchronization
was natively possible due to the synchronization information embedded in the CPRI
protocol. With a packet based fronthaul this is no longer an option since the CPRI
synchronization accuracy is invalidated by being transported over a non-deterministic
packet network.
It is possible for network wide synchronization through the use of the satellite based
Global Positioning System (GPS), however, since the signal is wireless the mobile
network becomes dependent on having suﬃcient view of the sky as well as vulnerable
to interference due to jamming with or without malicious intent. As cells are envi-
sioned to be deployed at street level and even within buildings achieving line of sight
becomes diﬃcult.
Another option is to use a packet based synchronization method such as IEEE’s 1588
Precision Time Protocol (PTP)[25]. With PTP it is possible to synchronize frequency
as well as phase by continuously transmitting and receiving PTP packets. The RRH
and BBU can therefore maintain synchronization despite the utilization of a packet
based fronthaul.
==PAGE:31==
1.5 Summary
19
1.5
Summary
To summarize what has been presented so far:
• Mobile data traﬃc is increasing at an incredible pace prompting operators to
continuously increase capacity in their networks, however, they must do this in
the most cost eﬀective fashion to remain competitive.
• The use of C-RAN can lead to signiﬁcant savings, but is limited by the expensive
fronthaul network that must be established to carry I/Q samples between BBU
pool and RRH.
• Ongoing standardization eﬀorts focus on enabling a packet based fronthaul
where e.g. CPRI can be transported over Ethernet to reduce fronthaul asso-
ciated costs.
• Due to the constant bit rate nature of CPRI there are strict requirements to
jitter and latency for packet fronthaul. These may be fulﬁlled by implement-
ing TSN features from the 802.1 TSN working group. Synchronization can be
achieved via GPS or in-band with PTP.
Despite the implementation of standards for a successful packet based fronthaul
network it does not change nor address the ineﬃciency of CPRI - a constant bit rate
service - over a packet based fronthaul. One of the beneﬁts of packet networks is
the ability to reduce network transmission resources through the use of statistical
multiplexing. This will not be the case for a CPRI over Ethernet fronthaul network.
For this reason a number of large telecommunications companies are proposing a
new internal base station interface to replace CPRI with something that can better
take advantage of a packet based fronthaul. In fact the introductory white paper
of this interface identiﬁes CPRI as a ”key hindrance” towards large scale C-RAN
deployments[17].
The interface is being coined NGFI: Next Generation Fronthaul Interface. The white
paper for NGFI does not present NGFI in any technically detailed form or function,
but attempts to list requirements, design principles, applications and potential solu-
tions in order to promote discussion within the industry to accelerate the emergence
of such an interface. The following chapter presents the key points in the white paper
and its potential usage in LTE.
==PAGE:32==
20
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 2
Beyond CPRI
This chapter presents NGFI, an interface which aims to replace the usage of CPRI and
instead oﬀer the ability to relocate parts of the LTE radio stack from the BBU to the
RRH. While NGFI is not yet speciﬁed in any technical detail the introduction is given
based on the introductory white paper of NGFI[17]. Because the NGFI whitepaper
is highly focused on LTE an in-depth introduction is given to the radio air interface
of LTE. This introduction is fundamental in understanding the solution developed in
this work and should therefore be reviewed carefully. Armed with knowledge of the
LTE radio interface each of the NGFI splits are examined and one is selected as the
candidate for a proof of concept implementation.
2.1
NGFI - Design and Purpose
The objective of NGFI is to enable a ﬂexible and low-bandwidth fronthaul while
addressing the needs for future mobile networks, in particular 4.5G and 5G. The
increase in network capacity through additional ultra-dense small cell deployments can
lead to problems with interference and frequent cell handover. A centralized control
plane such as the one possible with C-RAN is essential for reducing interference and
perform coordinated radio functionality. Through two key aspects of NGFI ﬂexible
low-bandwidth fronthaul and cell coordination is made possible: Firstly by redeﬁning
the functionality division between the RRH and BBU as some functionality of the
BBU is shifted to the RRH and secondly by utilizing a multiple-to-multiple fronthaul
network.
The following items are desired to be the design principles for NGFI[17]
• Statistical multiplexing. The fronthaul traﬃc should be dynamic so that the
total fronthaul bandwidth required is reduced.
• High support for coordinated algorithms. NGFI should oﬀer support to capacity
increasing coordinated algorithms such as joint scheduling, joint reception and
joint transmission.
• Decouple interface traﬃc from number of antennas. As was evident with CPRI
the I/Q data increases linearly with number of antennas.
With NGFI the
antenna-related processing should take place at the RRH.
• Neutrality with respect to air interface technology. NGFI should be able to
support LTE just as well as future 5G technologies.
==PAGE:34==
22
2 Beyond CPRI
• BBU pool aﬃliation change. Enabling the movement of BBU processing from
one BBU pool to another to balance load.
Those are very ambitious goals, but the key point to take away is that complexity
will signiﬁcantly increase at the RRHs with NGFI. In fact the change in functionality
has prompted the authors of NGFI to rename the RRH to a Remote Radio System
(RRS) and the BBU pool as Radio Cloud Center (RCC). However, for the sake of
consistency the RRH and BBU terms are maintained in this work.
The increase in complexity at the RRH has been suggested previously by China Mo-
bile Research Institute. Although, it was termed ”partial centralization”[24] due to the
decentralizing procedure of relocating processing to RRHs which is opposite the goal
of C-RAN. Another term used is layer 1 oﬄoading due to the PHY being oﬄoaded
in the OSI model.
Nonetheless, by shifting part or all of the baseband processing to the RRH the data
rate required between the RRH and BBU pool diminishes. On the other hand the
RRHs become less agile and agnostic in regards to the air interface technology. De-
spite this NGFI promises to be much more scalable than a CPRI fronthaul solution.
With that in mind, the NGFI white paper does not present a clear split in functional-
ity between the RRH and BBU. Instead several diﬀerently located splits are suggested
and analyzed in terms of properties and aﬀects on the fronthaul as well as equipment.
These splits are based on the LTE protocol stack and will therefore be presented in a
later section after the LTE radio air interface introduction in section 2.2.
Naturally there are technical challenges that must be addressed in the develop-
ment of NGFI. Depending on the location of the functional split between the RRH
and BBU there will be need for packetizing wireless data in one way or another and
with this comes the requirement for synchronization procedures between the RRH
and BBU. Secondly, there will be varying requirements to latency and jitter of the
fronthaul network. The lower the split in terms of layers, the higher requirements
there will be to delay and jitter since the data becomes more real-time in nature.
Overall the transport network for NGFI should oﬀer high bandwidth, low delay, low
jitter, support very accurate time synchronization and be inexpensive! It is evident
that concepts from Radio over Ethernet (1904.3) and TSN are required by NGFI.
The exact fronthaul requirements vary according to the functional splits which are
introduced in section 2.3.
However, since these splits are placed within the LTE protocol stack it is important
to have an understanding of LTE and especially its radio air interface. While LTE in
general has already been presented in section 1.2 the following delivers a detailed re-
view of its radio air interface. It serves as a precursor for the possibility and reasoning
behind functional splits and oﬄoading between a BBU and RRH.
==PAGE:35==
2.2 LTE radio interface
23
2.2
LTE radio interface
The focal point of the LTE radio interface is its OFDMA modulation technique which
enables an extremely ﬂexible bandwidth assignment in both time and frequency. Data
is modulated on top of several hundreds of slow subcarriers which are orthogonal to
each other and thus do not interfere despite tight positioning. Each subcarrier utilizes
15 kHz of bandwidth. The value modulated on a subcarrier is changed every 66.7
microsecond (
1
15000s); this can be referred to as an OFDM symbol or a resource ele-
ment (RE)[4]. Thus every 66.7 microseconds a new symbol is placed on a subcarrier
for transmission. The symbols can be modulated with QPSK, 16QAM, 64QAM or
256QAM depending on radio conditions and the type of information to be transmit-
ted. Depending on the frequency bandwidth allocated to an LTE carrier the number
of subcarriers may vary according to the values listed in table 2.1. It can be noted
that the number of RBs do not correspond to the assigned bandwidth, this is due to
additional guard subcarriers at upper and lower ends of the channel bandwidth.
Bandwidth (MHz)
No. of subcarriers
No. of RBs
1.4
72
6
3
180
15
5
300
25
10
600
50
20
1200
100
Table 2.1: Possible LTE bandwidth conﬁguration[7]
Combining 12 subcarriers in the frequency domain over 0.5 ms (7 symbols) adds
up to a single resource block (RB). In other words 180 kHz of subcarriers allocated
over 7 a symbol timeframe is one RB. Two consecutive RBs in time are then deﬁned
as a subframe which is the smallest unit of bandwidth a single user can be allocated.
LTE is therefore capable of scheduling users on one or several subframes at a resolu-
tion of 1 ms. Figure 2.2 illustrates the concept of aggregating symbols in time and
frequency to generate a subframe. Further illustrated is the distinction between slot
and RB. A slot is a 0.5 ms duration of transmission time which sums up to 7 symbols
per subcarrier. A RB consists of 12 subcarriers (180 kHz) for a time period of 1 slot[2].
An LTE carrier is build up of a variable number of these resource blocks according
to the previous table 2.1. The resulting structure is referred to as the LTE resource
grid due to its array-like construction and the ability to assign numerous pairs of
resource blocks to UEs. An LTE resource grid for a 1.4 MHz LTE carrier is depicted
in ﬁgure 2.3. The subframe colouring indicates assignment of resource blocks to indi-
vidual users where white implies unassigned or free resources. As shown 10 subframes
equal one LTE frame. An LTE frame is used to identify the location of various chan-
==PAGE:36==
24
2 Beyond CPRI
Slot | 0.5 ms
180 kHz
12 subcarriers
Subframe | 1 ms
1 x RB
Figure 2.2: Aggregating several OFDM symbols to generate a subframe
nels such as synchronization and cell information within each subframe. A substantial
amount of synchronization information will for example always be located in the ﬁrst
subframe of an LTE frame.
1680 symbols = 20 RBs = 10 subframes = 1 frame = 10 ms
Frequency
Time
1 subframe = 2 RBs
1.4 MHz
6 RBs
Figure 2.3: LTE grid example for 1.4 MHz bandwidth of RBs
This implies that not all symbols within each RB are dedicated to user data. In
==PAGE:37==
2.2 LTE radio interface
25
fact depending on the location of the subframe, resource block and symbol it may or
may not be reserved for various control information. The type of data allocated on
an RB therefore depends on which physical channels are mapped to that particular
RB according to its location within a subframe and LTE frame.
The following physical channels are deﬁned in the DL[2]:
• Physical Downlink Shared Channel (PDSCH)
Contains UE speciﬁc control or user data. E.g. paging information and connec-
tion management.
• Physical Broadcast Channel (PBCH)
Cell speciﬁc information such as its conﬁguration.
• Physical Multicast Channel (PMCH)
Carries multicast scheduling information and data.
• Physical Control Format Indicator Channel (PCFICH)
Indicates the number of symbols allocated to the PDCCH.
• Physical Downlink Control Channel (PDCCH)
Carries UE scheduling information and data format in both DL and UL.
• Physical Hybrid ARQ Indicator Channel (PHICH)
Used to carry Hybrid Automatic Retransmission Request (HARQ) ACK/NACKS
in response to uplink transmissions.
• Enhanced Physical Downlink Control Channel (EPDCCH)
Additional control channel. Informs UE of user data allocation and accompany-
ing HARQ info as well as uplink grants.
In addition to physical channels, physical signals are also mapped to resource el-
ements. Physical signals are characterized and diﬀer from physical channels by not
carrying information originating from higher layers (i.e. limited to the PHY)[4]. Ex-
amples of these are reference signals for distinction of layers (spatial multiplexing)
and synchronization signals.
Several tools are available to aid in visualization and understanding of the LTE re-
source grid. An example output from one of these is shown in ﬁgure 2.4. It illustrates
a 1.4 MHz carrier along with all the symbols for the two ﬁrst subframes in an LTE
frame. Each square denotes a symbol or a resource element which is colourized to
indicate the mapped physical channel/signal. As observed the ﬁrst subframe has a
substantial amount of its symbols allocated to PSS and SSS which are primary syn-
chronization signal and secondary synchronization signal, respectively. Besides this
the ﬁrst pair of symbols within a subframe are dedicated to control signalling with
the PDCCH and they reoccur once every subframe. It is conveniently located to in-
form the UE of resource allocation in the subsequently following symbols within the
==PAGE:38==
26
2 Beyond CPRI
Figure 2.4: Colorized LTE grid example for 1.4 MHz bandwidth of RBs[15]
PDSCH.
One physical channel that is vital to the high throughput performance of LTE
and included within the ﬁrst column of symbols is the PHICH channel. Hybrid Auto-
matic Retransmission ReQuest (HARQ) has been brieﬂy mentioned before, but not
described in any detail. At its essence HARQ is responsible for retransmitting frames
that have not been acknowledged as received correctly by the receiver. One might see
this as similar to the transport protocol TCP, however, HARQ operates at the MAC
layer which allows for a much more rapid retransmission since the acknowledgements
are not end-to-end destined, but solely over the air interface.
For instance if the eNB receives a data block in the uplink from a UE at subframe
T1 it must acknowledge it four subframes later via the PHICH[32]. Naturally if the
data was not received correctly the UE must be notiﬁed with a NACK instead. That
implies that from transmission at T1 and four subframes later at T5 the UE will be
aware whether the data was received correctly or a retransmission is required. This
leaves only 3 ms for the eNB to process the incoming data and formulate its response.
These 3 ms and general HARQ procedures play an important role in the latency re-
quirements for C-RAN and functional split with NGFI as will be discussed in the
==PAGE:39==
2.3 NGFI and functional splits
27
following section.
2.3
NGFI and functional splits
The NGFI white paper performs an analysis of several potential splits between the
RRH and BBU pool[17]. These are introduced below together with reasoning for
choosing a speciﬁc split for a proof of concept implementation. As mentioned earlier,
the more functionality is relocated to the RRH, the less capacity is required on the
fronthaul network and the less stringent are the requirements. The drawback is that
RRH complexity increases and the cooperative radio function diminishes. There is
therefore certainly cause for a careful cost beneﬁt analysis for an operator in terms of
deploying a functional split RAN and whether to do this at all.
S1 Termination/PDCP
Dual Connection
RLC
High MAC
Low MAC
Bit level processing
Bit level processing
IDFT & De-modulation
Modulation
Channel Estimation & 
Equalization
Layer Mapping & 
Precoding
FFT & Resource de-
mapping
Resource mapping & 
IFFT
1'
1"
2
3
4
5
PHY
MAC
UL
DL
Figure 2.5: Functional split placement in regards to LTE functional blocks[17]
==PAGE:40==
28
2 Beyond CPRI
Figure 2.5 delivers an overview of potential split placements marked as red lines
numbered 1-5. Any functional blocks above a given split remains at the BBU while
the remaining functions are relocated to the RRH. The ﬂow of data is shown for both
DL and UL direction. The orange blocks indicate traﬃc independent functionality; a
split located below these will therefore remain constant bit rate regardless of cell load.
In fact split 5 is the current ”clean” split between a RRH and BBU for which CPRI can
be used as the interface. Green blocks indicate traﬃc dependent processing. A split
as early as 4 will therefore oﬀer variable bit rate data transport over the fronthaul.
How such a split can be translated to the LTE RAN architecture is illustrated in
ﬁgure 2.6.
Here the functional split 2 is marked between the RRH cell site and
the C-RAN BBU pool. The complete physical layer of LTE (baseband + RF) has
been relocated/oﬄoaded to the RRH. The RRH interfaces through NGFI to a packet
fronthaul and to the BBU pool.
The combination of RRH and BBU pool makes
up the eNB in the LTE network. Depending on the split, diﬀerent functionality is
relocated between the RRH and the BBU pool.
One can envision that the mobile operator may utilize the packet fronthaul as an
aggregation network for e.g. wired subscriber Internet access or rent out available
capacity in the network as an additional revenue stream.
S-GW
MME
PDN-GW
S1
E-UTRAN
Evolved Packet Core 
(EPC)
S1
HSS
UE
Internet
BBU Pool
Baseband
RF
Split 2
MAC
RLC
PDCP
Packet 
Fronthaul
RRH
RRH
Figure 2.6: Functional split placement visualized in an LTE network
In the DL direction split 4 takes place after mapping of data on to the diﬀer-
ent transmit antennas, indicated as layer mapping, but before each layer is resource
mapped. Resource mapping, as the name implies, maps the diﬀerent physical chan-
==PAGE:41==
2.3 NGFI and functional splits
29
nels and signals on to each resource grid such as the one illustrated in ﬁgure 2.4.
Each spatial layer has its own resource mapper and once mapping of data onto sub-
carriers/symbols has taken place the resulting subcarriers are input to an IFFT. The
size of the IFFT varies according to the number of subcarriers and size of the LTE
carrier. A 20 MHz LTE cell has 1200 subcarriers and an IFFT size of 2048[32]. The
output of resource mapping and resulting input to the IFFT must then be 2048 I/Q
samples every symbol transmission time. Placing the split at 4 will allow the BBU
to send data according to the number of symbols/subframes which are utilized. The
resource mapper will then ﬁll in blank or void data at unmapped resource elements.
For this reason resource mapping & IFFT are the boundary between dependent and
independent fronthaul traﬃc rate.
A rough estimate on traﬃc load in the DL direction can be made based on sample
width and cell conﬁguration. Assuming a 2x2 MIMO 20 MHz LTE cell with an I/Q
sample width of 10 bits the DL data rate at 100 % cell load is:
(1200·14) symbol
subframe·10
bit
sample · symbol·2 sample
antenna·2antenna·1000subframe
second
= 672Mbps
This is assuming all 1200 subcarriers/symbols are always in use and thus a fully
loaded cell. That will naturally not be the case if there is no user data to transmit
as the PDSCH makes up 85 % of the symbols in an LTE frame[15]. Nonetheless, the
reduction in data rate compared to CPRI line option 3 (2457.6 Mbps) is 3.6 times at
peak usage!
Unfortunately, split 4 does not fulﬁl one important design principle of NGFI, namely
decoupling interface traﬃc from number of antennas. Since split 4 is located after
layer mapping the number of subcarriers generated as input to each resource grid will
increase linearly with the number of antennas.
On the other hand, split 3 takes place before modulation and layer mapping al-
lowing for further decrease of downlink data rate and antenna decoupling. Bit-level
processing refers to the encoding/decoding procedures for all data streams from/to
the MAC layer. This entails error detection, error correction, rate matching, etc.[3].
In split 3 the fronthaul traﬃc will therefore consist of physical channels which are
ready to be modulated with an appropriate modulation scheme. The RRH will as
such require information about which modulation to apply to which channels and for
which users since physical channels bound for diﬀerent users do not require the same
robustness.
Split 2 represents a clear split between PHY and MAC functionality, i.e. a full L1
oﬄoad to the RRH while the MAC remains in the BBU. The MAC is also located in
the BBU pool for splits 5, 4 and 3 which enables highly eﬃcient coordinated schedul-
ing across several cells. Since the MAC by deﬁnition controls access to the medium it
will be possible to seamlessly handover users between cells as the user state is retained
==PAGE:42==
30
2 Beyond CPRI
within the BBU pool.
The interesting aspect about the bottom four splits (2-5) is that the transport
requirements to jitter and latency remain virtually identical. This is due to the time
sensitive HARQ procedure which is located in the MAC. Recall that the HARQ pro-
cedure must transmit an ACK/NACK for received data 3 ms after reception in the
uplink. Assuming 2 ms is spend processing in the RRH and BBU pool that leaves
1 ms round trip delay. In order to relax these requirements it is suggested that the
MAC is divided into single-cell low-delay functionality (lower MAC) and a multi-cell
real-time coordination functionality (upper MAC) as shown with split 1”. The upper
MAC will be concerned with scheduling users over several cells and performing various
coordinated features. With this intra layer 2 functional split the delay requirements
is increased to < 100 ms according to the NGFI white paper[17].
The highest split is marked at 1’, here RRHs will perform inter-cell coordination
through the NGFI where it is argued that such a split will have the BBU pool com-
patible with many diﬀerent radio access technologies.
The observed trend is that the distributed C-RAN and RRH architecture slowly
progress (or degrade) to the traditional base station setup with a higher split NGFI
interface. In other words the less distributed C-RAN is, the more the conﬁguration
resembles a traditional BS setup with decentralized processing. This leads to idle
processing, equipment over dimensioning and reduced cooperative radio procedures.
On the other hand the fronthaul requirements are signiﬁcantly reduced, albeit latency
and jitter remain restrictive up to and including split 2.
Split 1
Split 2
Split 3
Split 4
Split 5
RRH complexity
High
High
High
Low
Lowest
FH
interface
complexity
Low
High
Medium
Low
Low
Pooling gain
Small
Relativ. small
Relativ. small
Large
Large
Complexity
of
upgrading
and
maintenance
High
High
High
Low
Low
Delay requirement
< 100 ms
< 1 ms
< 1 ms
< 1 ms
< 1 ms
Table 2.7: NGFI split comparison from [17] white paper
Table 2.7 shows some qualitative comparison between diﬀerent functional splits
based on table 3-2 and 3-4 of [17]. Based on this table and the previous discussion,
which split is the most suitable, not necessarily for a real deployment, but a proof of
concept implementation for NGFI?
Since split 5 is the existing RRH/BBU split it is not considered. Out of the remaining
==PAGE:43==
2.4 Summary
31
splits, split 4 oﬀers the lowest implementation complexity while maintaining signiﬁ-
cant reduction in fronthaul traﬃc. At this split in the DL the RRH receives precoded
and premodulated symbols which have been distributed on the appropriate antennas.
HARQ remains at the BBU along with all major LTE procedures such as scheduling,
retransmission, handover and encoding. What remains of processing is mapping of
physical channels and signals, Fourier transformation, digital up conversion, mixing
and D/A conversion. In the uplink the same applies in the way that the RRH will
only transmit symbols to the BBU pool which are known to carry data based on the
scheduling of users.
One reason that split 4 is signiﬁcantly less complicated in terms of implementation
in comparison to for example split 3 is the information required to perform modula-
tion. Diﬀerent physical channels use diﬀerent modulation schemes depending on a
variety of factors. E.g. the PDSCH - used to carry user data - utilizes any number
of QPSK/QAM modulation schemes according to the quality of the radio channel
between the user and eNB. Therefore for split 3 the RRH must be informed of modu-
lation schemes for each user in a given subframe and act accordingly. Split 4 obviates
such a requirement and simpliﬁes several aspects of establishing a real-time NGFI-like
BBU-to-RRH implementation. The remaining splits 1-2 require complex interactions
between the protocol layers and an intimate knowledge of the upper layer implemen-
tation methods. This would require access and understanding of a fully functioning
BBU system and is therefore deemed infeasible.
Consequently split 4 is selected for a proof of concept implementation of NGFI and
packet based fronthaul.
2.4
Summary
In summary, NGFI is the latest move by major Telecom companies to establish a scal-
able and cost eﬃcient network interface within the access part of a mobile network
and move beyond limiting interfaces such as CPRI. The focus is on a packet based
fronthaul network, traﬃc dependent load, and coordination support.
The LTE radio air interface was introduced with focus on establishing an understand-
ing of how the various NGFI splits may be located in LTE. The analysis on diﬀerent
splits shows that the NGFI split 4 is a viable candidate for a proof of concept imple-
mentation on hardware. The remaining splits require considerable implementation
work and were deemed infeasible given the time constraints.
The following chapter delves into further detail with split 4 and establishes a require-
ment speciﬁcation for an implementation of the interface.
==PAGE:44==
32
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 3
NGFI - Split 4
This chapter analyses the concept of a split 4 NGFI in an LTE network in relation to
the previously discussed topics of LTE, CPRI and Ethernet. The purpose is to derive
a well reasoned set of requirements for the speciﬁcation and implementation of a split
4 type NGFI.
The ﬁrst section considers the implementation aspects and test platform possibilities.
The second section considers the impact split 4 may have on the fronthaul network
in terms of load and latency requirements. Finally the third section establishes a
requirement speciﬁcation based on an analysis of performance and functional require-
ments.
3.1
Split 4 considerations
With the previous discussion in mind this section considers the components necessary
for implementing and verifying split 4. The veriﬁcation includes establishment of a
test platform, which is also brieﬂy discussed. These and future considerations form
the basis of a requirement speciﬁcation for the protocol used to transport radio data
between the RRH and BBU pool. The components will be developed in VHDL, a
widely used hardware description language, and deployed on Field-Programmable
Gate Array (FPGA) development boards for demonstration.
3.1.1
Required components
Based on what has been reviewed for C-RAN and NGFI the enablers for split 4 can
be divided into the following four components:
A. Partial L1 oﬄoad with RB (de)mapping and remaining PHY functionality. This
is the component that will reside within the RRH and perform the functions of
the oﬄoaded L1 stack.
B. Transport protocol for DL/UL transport of modulated symbols and C&M. The
component which implements this protocol provides the interface between the
BBU and RRH at the selected functional split.
This interface is essentially
NGFI at split 4.
C. Underlying fronthaul network with strict latency and jitter characteristics to
ensure timely and robust transport of data between BBU and RRH.
==PAGE:46==
34
3 NGFI - Split 4
D. BBU with split 4 interface where part of the LTE L1 has been oﬄoaded.
Each of the ﬁrst three components are developed individually by three students
as their Master’s thesis project, but remain in tight collaboration for interface and
veriﬁcation purposes. Due to implementation complexity item D is deemed out of
scope for this work.
Item A is concerned with everything from mapping modulated symbols into a re-
source grid to transmission of the LTE carrier signal through transmit antennas. It
will through this work be referred to as L1 oﬄoad or simply the RRH LTE PHY.
Item B is concerned with the reception and transmission of packets containing mod-
ulated symbols between the BBU and RRH along with any necessary control and
management data. As presented in the following this component will be referred to
as Radio over Ethernet (RoE). Finally item C ensures that packets between the BBU
and RRH are transported with high priority and in a timely fashion through the im-
plementation of certain TSN features. Items A through C are the essential building
blocks for a RRH which implements split 4 type NGFI.
This work is focused on item B and the remaining listed items are therefore out of
scope. However, for the sake of maintaining overview and overall understanding both
A and C will be introduced superﬁcially during the design phase of item B.
BBU
RRH
Scrambling
Modulation 
mapper
Layer
mapper
Precoding
Resource element 
mapper
OFDM signal 
generation
Resource element 
mapper
OFDM signal 
generation
Scrambling
Modulation 
mapper
layers
antenna ports
codewords
Split 4 – Complex valued 
modulation symbols to be 
transported to RRH
Figure 3.1: Split 4 placement within the DL physical channel processing chain
The location of split 4 in the PHY layer processing chain is illustrated in ﬁgure
3.1. It is based on ﬁgure 6.3-1 of [4] which shows an overview of the LTE DL phys-
ical channel processing. As shown the right most blocks are relocated to the RRH
(implemented within item A) while the remainder is at the BBU. The wireless radio
data at the highlighted split is in the form of complex-valued modulation symbols.
In other words I/Q samples in the frequency domain and each represent an LTE
subcarrier. These must be transported to and from the RRH and therefore require a
form of packet encapsulation which is exactly what item B provides. Though, instead
of designing a properietary radio data transport protocol from square one it would
==PAGE:47==
3.1 Split 4 considerations
35
be more appropriate to utilize an existing one for the sake of future interoperability.
Fortunately, there is ongoing work with standardizing RoE which deﬁnes a native
RoE data packet to carry radio sample data[18]. However, as the RoE standard is
still in a volatile draft state the format will be extended as necessary according to the
needs of a split 4 type NGFI. The implementation of a transport protocol for split 4
will therefore be based on the RoE protocol from the IEEE 1904.3 task group.
A RoE component which implements said protocol must then be placed in the RRH
as well as the BBU. Both the RRH and BBU will require an RX and TX RoE compo-
nent for establishing DL and UL traﬃc ﬂows. Since the BBU implementation remains
out of scope the focus will be on design and implementation of RoE with regards to
UL and DL solely within the RRH. Nonetheless, an RoE component which packetizes
radio data in the uplink direction at the RRH will not diﬀer much from the RoE
component which packetizes radio data in the downlink direction at the BBU. The
most signiﬁcant diﬀerence is the source of radio data.
With that said, how will a fully integrated split 4 capable RRH be tested when
there is no BBU to supply the upper layer LTE protocol stack?
To address this
the test platform will be limited to the DL direction; no BBU is therefore required
to process the UL path. The RoE component will, however, still be designed and
implemented for both RX and TX since the DL path still requires encapsulation and
decapsulation of data from Ethernet frames. This decision is based on the expected
development and deployment time. The BBU connection in the DL to the RRH can
then be simulated through a number of means. The following reviews these in order
of increasing complexity.
3.1.2
Potential test platform
Since the proof of concept implementation is concerned solely with the DL ﬂow it
will not be possible for the RRH to receive nor pass on UL data to the BBU and
subsequently the EPC. This is not an issue since a deployed eNB with no connected
UEs experiences a similar unoccupied band in the UL.
As previously mentioned the split 4 type RRH will be developed in VHDL and de-
ployed on FPGA technology. This allows for direct interfacing with hardware equip-
ment and highly precise timing control. Four diﬀerent phases of the test platform are
envisioned:
Phase 1: All in one FPGA
The test platform encompasses the entire RRH implementation along
with a BBU DL simulator. This simulator transmits a statically loaded
LTE frame (10 ms) to the RRH implementation over a looped back
Ethernet link.
Phase 2: All in two FPGAs
Similar to Phase 1, however, the BBU simulator is relocated to a separate
==PAGE:48==
36
3 NGFI - Split 4
FPGA. Compared to Phase 1 this introduces a challenge in regards to
time and frequency synchronization between the FPGAs.
Phase 3: One FPGA + one PC (dummy BBU)
Here the BBU simulator is replaced with a Linux PC which generates
data identical to Phase 1/2. The challenge here is also in establishing
time and frequency synchronization between the RRH-FPGA and PC,
but also in the thread scheduling procedures. Since Linux OS is not a real
time system it will be diﬃcult to ensure precise transmission ordering.
Phase 4: One FPGA + OpenAirInterface eNB with split 4
The OpenAirInterface software based eNB could be modiﬁed to a split
4 type BBU which transmits radio data to the RRH-FPGA. This would
in eﬀect enable a live demonstration of an LTE mobile network with a
packet based fronthaul and partial oﬄoad of layer 1 procedures.
The above test platform phases may or may not be reached depending on develop-
ment progress. Nonetheless, they present a clear path for the development of a fully
functioning split 4 type RAN. The objective of this thesis is to perform hardware
veriﬁcation with phase 1 of the test platform as a minimum.
Putting aside the technical considerations it would be of interest to investigate the
impact a split 4 type NGFI would have on the fronthaul of an LTE based C-RAN
mobile network. Such an analysis may lay the foundation for the requirements to the
fronthaul network and the RoE transport protocol which facilitates the NGFI split.
The following section accomplishes this.
3.2
Split 4 impact on the fronthaul
Recall that an LTE site may contain several sectors and that each of these sectors is
an independent LTE cell. Furthermore neighbouring sectors within one site can be
referred to as intra-site cells while neighbouring sectors that belong to diﬀerent sites
are referred to as inter-site cells. The load an intra-site and inter-site cell experience
need not dependent on the neighbouring cells. It may indeed be the case that each
intra-site cell experiences diﬀerent peak loads and this allows the backhaul link to be
provisioned accordingly through statistical multiplexing. A backhaul link is shared
by the intra-site cells of a given site. One provision strategy utilizes the knowledge of
average load during busy hour and the estimated peak load to dimension the backhaul
link to an LTE site[30]:
backhaul = max(N · BusyTimeMean, Peak)
N denotes the number of intra-site cells. Busy time mean indicates the average
load on the backhaul link from an eNB during busy hour. Busy hour is the one hour
during the day where the cell experiences the highest average load. The peak value
indicates the peak load that a cell might experience during quiet times where the
==PAGE:49==
3.2 Split 4 impact on the fronthaul
37
full cell bandwidth is available to a user with good radio conditions. According to
simulation results provided by [30] a UE category 4 connected to a 2x2 MIMO 20
MHz LTE cell is able to achieve 118 Mbps peak cell throughput in the DL. This is
based on a 95%-ile of user throughput under very light network load. The busy time
mean is measured to 21 Mbps. Based on these values and the previous backhaul
provisioning strategy a 3-sector site will require a backhaul data rate of:
max(3 · 21Mbps, 118Mbps) = 118Mbps
This is excluding any overhead accompanied with the transport of user data from the
S-GW to the eNB. Increasing the number of sectors will eventually lead to the busy
time mean load of cells setting the lower limit on the backhaul capacity.
The large gap between busy time mean and peak can be attributed to several factors.
Firstly, the mean load is calculated over a signiﬁcant amount of time whereas the
peak value is instantaneous. Secondly, the busy hour implies dozens if not hundreds
of users connected to a cell and where the bit spectral eﬃciency or average radio
condition is not optimal. Thus while many users are incurring a load on the cell, the
available radio resources are not being utilized eﬃciently due to lower modulation
schemes. On the other hand a single user with good radio conditions being able to
utilize 64 QAM will achieve a signiﬁcantly higher throughput.
The above backhaul provisioning strategy is not at all relevant for the fronthaul
in a C-RAN deployment since the backhaul is located between the BBU pool and
the EPC whereas the fronthaul is between the BBU pool and RRHs. Load on the
backhaul of C-RAN is irrelevant for the fronthaul when it is established with point to
point CPRI links between the BBU and RRH. As mentioned CPRI is constant bit rate
and the data transmitted with CPRI is not reduced nor aﬀected by the load on the cell.
However, if a C-RAN deployment utilizes NGFI at split 4 and above, the fronthaul
is indeed aﬀected by the load on the cells. In that case it would be interesting to
estimate the network resources that a split 4 type NGFI utilizes depending on the cell
site conﬁguration and load. The above backhaul provisioning strategy can be used to
do exactly this.
3.2.1
Fronthaul data rates
The required data rate of split 4 for a 2x2 MIMO 20 MHz LTE cell with an I/Q
sample width of 10 bits during full cell load has previously been estimated as:
(1200·14) symbol
subframe·10
bit
sample · symbol·2 sample
antenna·2antenna·1000subframe
second
= 672Mbps
A more generic function for varying number of antennas, I/Q bit width which
==PAGE:50==
38
3 NGFI - Split 4
incorporates cell load can be derived as:
FH_load = (100 PRB · cell_load · (12 · 14)
symbol
PRB · subframe)
· iq_width
bit
sample · symbol · 2 sample
antenna · N antenna · 1000subframe
second
(3.1)
where FH_load is the data rate required to transport the raw modulated symbols
with no overhead, cell_load is the integer percentage usage of physical resource blocks
(PRBs), iq_width is the individual sampling width of I and Q and N is the number of
antennas. Note that this equation can be used to estimate fronthaul load in both the
DL and UL, but they must be calculated separately. The reason for this is that a cell
is not necessarily installed with the same number of transmit and receive antennas.
Based on the above function a number of graphs can be generated to illustrate the
fronthaul capacity requirements for a varying number of sectors and sector conﬁgu-
rations. Figure 3.2 displays the estimated fronthaul load at peak cell load. As shown
there is a linear correlation between load and the number of antennas/sectors. These
values do not take any protocol overhead into account and a conservative 10 % over-
head may be added. In that case a single 10 Gbps Ethernet will only satisfy sites
up to and including 8 antenna/3 sector or 4 antenna/6 sector. However, since these
estimates are based on peak load this is essentially the worst case scenario for the
fronthaul load.
1
10
100
1000
10000
100000
1
2
4
8
Fronthaul Load [Mbps]
No. of Antenna
20 MHz - 1 sector
20 MHz - 3 sector
20 MHz - 6 sector
Figure 3.2: Estimated peak fronthaul load from a cell site with split 4 type NGFI
as a function of antennas with varying sector conﬁguration
A more realistic approach can be based on the previously presented backhaul di-
mensioning strategy. The fronthaul capacity should then be dimensioned according to
==PAGE:51==
3.2 Split 4 impact on the fronthaul
39
the maximum of either the average fronthaul load from all sectors or peak load from
one cell. However, the previously used busy time mean value denotes the collective
user throughput for one cell - this cannot be used to derive the number of frequency
resources (PRBs) that are occupied and thereby the load on the fronthaul. For LTE
dimensioning purposes some litterature assume that the average busy hour load on a
cell is 50 %[22]. This will also be the assumption in this case and allows for directly
estimating the average fronthaul load. The equation 3.1 assumes full peak load when
100 PRBs are in use, calculating the average busy hour load is therefore simply the
matter of halving the number of used PRBs. The resulting fronthaul load values are
simply 50 % of the ones shown in ﬁgure 3.2, but for the sake of clarity they are shown
in ﬁgure 3.3 with an additional overhead of 10 % to fronthaul load values. As listed
a 10 Gbps fronthaul Ethernet link would be able to satisfy the heaviest conﬁguration
of 6 sectors and 8 antennas including a presumed 10 % overhead. This is identical
to a 3 sector, 8 antenna cell site with 40 MHz of bandwidth through the use of LTE
carrier aggregation.
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
9000
10000
1
2
4
8
Fronthaul Load [Mbps]
No. of Antenna
50 % Load - 1 sector
50 % Load - 3 sector
50 % Load - 6 sector
Figure 3.3: Estimated average busy hour fronthaul load from a cell site with split 4
type NGFI as a function of antennas with varying sector conﬁguration
By combining ﬁgure 3.2 and 3.3 through the use of the previously discussed provi-
sion strategy a minimum data rate requirement can be established for the split 4 type
NGFI and thus the interface throughput for the RoE implementation. The applied
provisions are shown in ﬁgure 3.4. The only signiﬁcant diﬀerence between 3.3 and 3.4
is the 1 sector LTE sites. With 1 sector the peak fronthaul load sets the minimum
provisioning target. The remaining sector conﬁgurations utilize the average busy hour
load to provision the site’s fronthaul link.
What can be gathered from these estimates is that a 10 Gbps fronthaul link is
==PAGE:52==
40
3 NGFI - Split 4
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
9000
10000
1
2
4
8
Fronthaul Load [Mbps]
No. of Antenna
Provision - 1 Sector
Provision - 3 Sector
Provision - 6 Sector
Figure 3.4: Estimated fronthaul link provisioning from a cell site as a function of
antennas and varying sector conﬁguration
suﬃcient between a site with up to 8 antennas and 6 sectors each at 20 MHz and the
BBU pool with the functional split 4. In fact multiple LTE sites could be aggregated
over a single 10 Gbps link if the sites are conﬁgured as e.g.
3-sector/4 antenna.
The RoE component which packetizes radio data at the RRH and BBU pool should
therefore be compatible with or support a 10 Gbps Ethernet interface. The high data
rate also assists in reducing the component traversal time thus minimizing latency in
the system.
The envisioned internal networking between the RRHs at a 3-sector cell site and
through the fronthaul to the BBU pool is illustrated in ﬁgure 3.5. As shown a RoE
component within each RRH/sector performs the conversion to and from Ethernet
frames. An Ethernet switch at the cell site multiplexes the links from the RRHs to the
fronthaul. The fronthaul link highlighted in red is the link for which the previously
presented fronthaul provisioning analysis applies to. The green data links between the
RRH and the switch are unlikely to peak above 3 Gbps even with 8 antennas at each
sector. The internal 10 Gbps cell site data rate might therefore be over-dimensioned,
however, future radio technologies may require even higher number of antennas and
larger bandwidths for which 10 Gbps is a necessity. For current applications such
internal switching capacity can be reduced to 5 Gbps or even 2.5 Gbps for each
RRH/sector.
How do these data rates compare to CPRI? Based on the available line options
(see table 1.7) and 10 bit I/Q sample width a comparison is shown between split 4 and
CPRI for a 3-sector 20 MHz LTE site in ﬁgure 3.6. No CPRI line option ﬁts precisely
with 8 antenna and 3 sector I/Q ﬂow, the entry was therefore extrapolated based on
previous values of 1, 2 and 4 antennas. As shown there is a signiﬁcant reduction in
load on the fronthaul when using NGFI at split 4. Do keep in mind that the split 4
==PAGE:53==
3.2 Split 4 impact on the fronthaul
41
RRH/Sector #1
RRH/Sector #2
RRH/Sector #3
10 Gbps
10 Gbps
10 Gbps
Fronthaul Packet 
Network
10 Gbps
Ethernet 
Switch
BBU Pool
3-Sector LTE cell site
RoE
RoE
RoE
Figure 3.5: Example of network structure between individual LTE sectors at a cell
site to the BBU pool
loads are based on 50 % average load during busy hour. The daily average load can
therefore be expected to much lower. CPRI on the other hand is constant bit rate.
Concerning the capacity of a packet based fronthaul it is therefore considerably more
advantageous to transport RoE frames with split 4 radio data in place of RoE frames
with CPRI.
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
1
2
4
8
Fronthaul Load [Mbps]
No. of Antenna
Split 4 - 50 % load
CPRI
Figure 3.6: Comparison of fronthaul load between split 4 @ 50 % load and CPRI
for a 3-sector LTE site as a function of antennas
Additionally the required bandwidth of split 4 can be further reduced by removing
physical signals that are static in nature and can be generated locally at the RRH
==PAGE:54==
42
3 NGFI - Split 4
instead of the BBU. Such examples are the physical synchronization signals (PSS
and SSS) and reference signals used to distinguish antenna layers. On a 20 MHz
LTE carrier with 2 antennas these physical signals constitute almost 10 % of the
symbols transmitted in an LTE frame[15]. If these physical signals are generated at
the RRH they will not be transported over the fronthaul resulting in direct savings in
bandwidth consumption. The previously shown graphs of fronthaul load do not take
such savings into account.
3.2.2
Fronthaul latency requirements
Besides the data rate, latency between the RRH and BBU pool must also be consid-
ered. A high speed network in itself reduces latency by enabling rapid transmission
and reception of packets. However, regardless of throughput a high number of in-
termediate nodes between the RRH and BBU pool will result in an unacceptable
latency. In LTE the upper latency limit is established by the HARQ procedure as
previously discussed in section 2.2. As such there is a maximum 3 ms round trip
delay requirement including processing time at the BBU pool. In this time frame the
following must take place:
• Through the radio air interface the RRH receives a full subframe at time T from
a UE for which it must return an ACK/NACK four subframes later.
• The subframe is partially processed by the L1 oﬄoaded PHY into modulated
symbols in the frequency domain. These are presented to the RoE component
where they are packetized and delivered to an Ethernet MAC.
• The Ethernet MAC transmits the packetized symbols.
• The RoE frames containing symbols are transported across the fronthaul net-
work to the BBU pool.
• At the BBU pool the Ethernet frames are received by an Ethernet MAC and
delivered to an RoE component responsible for that particular ﬂow of radio
data.
• The RoE component depacketizes the symbols and delivers them through an
interface to the remaining LTE PHY component.
• The LTE protocol stack processes the subframe and generates a DL subframe
with NACK/ACK.
• This new DL subframe now performs the opposite traversal of components until
it is transmitted by the RRH on the radio air interface at time T+3 ms.
The delay each component contributes to the data path will heavily depend on
the speciﬁc scenario and hardware implementation. However, a delay budget can be
established to certain sections of the transmission path and consequently a maximum
==PAGE:55==
3.2 Split 4 impact on the fronthaul
43
delay requirement for the RoE component.
The NGFI whitepaper states that current baseband software without any optimiza-
tion can process a single carrier in 0.9 ms[17]. Furthermore, a 0.5 ms unidirectional
transmission delay is assumed through the fronthaul network[17]. 1.1 ms remains to
be divided among the Ethernet MAC at the RRH and BBU, RoE components, L1
oﬄoad processing and the RF chain. Based on this distribution the ﬁgure 3.7 delay
budget is established. Note that the listed times are round trip delays (RTD).
PHY
Partial
RoE Tx
ETH 
MAC
ETH 
MAC
RoE Rx
PHY
Partial
MAC
1000 µs
800 µs
BBU Pool
Packet Fronthaul
900 µs
300 µs
RRH
RLC
PDCP
RoE Rx
RoE Tx
LTE stack
RoE/NGFI stack
Figure 3.7: Delay budget estimation for round trip time between RRH and BBU
pool
As depicted the remaining 1.1 ms of the budget has been unevenly allocated
between the RRH and the RoE/MAC stack at the BBU pool. This is based on the
assumption that the LTE physical layer which has been partially oﬄoaded to the
RRH requires additional time to perform e.g. FFT. The remaining RF processing
chain must also be taken into account. For this reason 800 μs has been allocated to
the complete RRH processing chain.
The remaining 300 μs are allocated to the RoE/NGFI stack at the BBU pool. By
evenly dividing this share between the RoE components and Ethernet MAC it can be
determined that each RoE component should add no more than 75 μs of delay to the
radio data in either direction. This is the requirement to the RoE components. Do
though bear in mind that these numbers are mostly assumptions and an attempt to
assign a delay budget to individual components as a part of establishing a requirement
speciﬁcation. The overall target is to ensure that there is suﬃcient time for the RRH
to deliver an ACK/NACK for received subframes through HARQ.
==PAGE:56==
44
3 NGFI - Split 4
3.3
Requirement speciﬁcation
Based on the previous considerations and requirements to data throughput and net-
work latency this section establishes the full requirement speciﬁcation for the RoE
component. As illustrated in ﬁgure 3.7 RoE resides in both the RRH and BBU pool.
It orchestrates the encapsulation and decapsulation of complex valued modulation
symbols.
Requirements will be based on reasoning with respect to desired functionality and
performance of the component. Furthermore each requirement will be assigned an
identiﬁer and used as a basis for veriﬁcation, whether that is on hardware or in
simulation.
3.3.1
Functional description
The RoE component will functionally act as an interface between the BBU and RRH
at split 4 as shown in the previous ﬁgure 3.1. Modulated symbols in the form of I/Q
samples are received and given through this interface . However, contrary to CPRI
the number of modulated symbols to be transmitted will vary according to the cell
load. The 1904.3 deﬁned native RoE packets will be used to transport these symbols.
The interface should also support any form of control traﬃc required to establish and
maintain the interface link between a RRH and BBU. The RoE standard conveniently
speciﬁes a packet format for control packets with vendor speciﬁc data[18].
Since Ethernet does not oﬀer a reliable transport service infrequent frame drops should
be anticipated. Retransmission should not be expected for user data (i.e. symbols)
as strict latency and jitter requirements will invalidate any retransmitted frames.
3.3.2
RoE Peak data rate
The section 3.2.1 analysis of fronthaul data requirements saw the need for a 10 Gbps
fronthaul link from a 6-sector 8 antenna cell site. The individual sector requirements
were much lower and unlikely to reach 3 Gbps even in a worst case scenario. Despite
this a requirement of 10 Gbps is set since future deployments where multiple 20 MHz
carriers are aggregated will necessitate such data rates. The RoE component shall
therefore support the transmission of Ethernet frames at 10 Gbps. The high data
rate will also serve to reduce transmission and component traversal latency.
3.3.3
I/Q sample width
The RoE component should support the transportation of modulated symbols with
varying I/Q sample widths according to a ﬁxed deployment conﬁguration. The exist-
ing RRH-BBU interface CPRI supports 8-20 bits sample width for I and Q in the UL
and 4-20 bits in the DL[14]. The RoE component should similarly support 8-20 bits
in both DL and UL.
==PAGE:57==
3.3 Requirement specification
45
3.3.4
Antenna ports
The RoE component should support 1, 2, 4 and 8 antenna ports allowing for a 8x8
MIMO LTE cell. This is based on the current maximum number of layers any UE
category speciﬁes[5].
3.3.5
Clock frequency
The RoE component should be able to support the full peak data rate of 10G Ethernet.
This is possible by processing 64 bits at a clock rate of 156.25 MHz identical to an
Ethernet 10 Gbps MAC. The design of the RoE component should therefore be able
to synthesize and run on the target FPGA at 156.25 MHz with no timing violations.
3.3.6
Component delay
Due to the realtime nature of the RoE payload the RoE component should strive
to minimize the delay it imposes on the modulated symbols. The analysis in sector
3.2.2 established a requirement of 75 μs unidirectional delay. An I/Q sample should
therefore take no longer than 75 μs to traverse the RoE RX or TX component from
end to end.
3.3.7
LTE bandwidth support
When the bandwidth of an LTE cell is reduced the number of modulated symbols that
the RoE component transports is similarly reduced as listed in the previous table 2.1.
The RoE component should therefore support all of the available LTE bandwidths
up to and including 20 MHz.
3.3.8
List of requirements
The above requirements are condensed and listed in table 3.8.
Req. ID
Requirement
Value
A
RoE data rate
10 Gbps
B
I/Q sample width
8-20 bits
C
Antenna ports
1, 2, 4, 8
D
Clock frequency
156.25 MHz
E
Component delay
<= 75 μs
F
Cell bandwidth
1.4, 3, 5, 10, 15, 20 MHz
Table 3.8: List of requirements for the RoE component
==PAGE:58==
46
3 NGFI - Split 4
3.4
Summary
In summary, a number of enabling components for a split 4 type NGFI implementation
were identiﬁed. A split 4 type NGFI requires the transportation of complex modulated
symbols. Ongoing standardization work for RoE aims to allow for any type of radio
data to be transported over a suitable fronthaul network and RoE is therefore chosen
as candidate for this task. This work is speciﬁcally focused on the implementation
and veriﬁcation of the RoE component.
However, the overall objective is to establish a proof of concept implementation of a
RRH with split 4 NGFI in the downlink on an FPGA which encompasses the entire
test platform.
Split 4 NGFI shows a considerable reduction in required fronthaul data rates due to
partially oﬄoading L1 processing which enables variable data rates. Especially in
comparison to CPRI a multi-factor reduction rate is expected.
Based on further analysis the table 3.8 requirement speciﬁcation has been established
for the RoE component.
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 4
RoE System Design
Based on an improved understanding of requirements for the RoE component which
shall enable packetization of split 4 type radio data this chapter reviews the design
concepts of RoE and the system it will reside within. This includes a block level
functional overview of the TX and RX RoE components as well as how these interact
with adjacent components such as the Ethernet and radio layer.
The ﬁrst section presents the adjacent components which the RoE will interface to.
The second section delves into detail in regards to the RoE draft standard and the
frame format. Finally the third section delivers an overview of the RoE component
design.
4.1
Adjacent component interaction
Figure 4.1 illustrates a high-level overview of the envisioned architecture within a
RRH with split 4 type NGFI enabled by RoE, TSN MAC and partial LTE L1 oﬄoad.
The top part shows UL processing from the RRH to the BBU pool. The bottom
part of the RRH shows DL processing to the user. Finally there is a control and
management block for Operations Administration and Maintenance (OAM).
4.1.1
TSN MAC
On the right-hand side the RRH is connected to the fronthaul through a 10 Gbps
capable TSN MAC. The TSN MAC is among others responsible for:
• Managing the transmission and reception of Ethernet frames with regards to
the Ethernet link protocol and error detection.
• Enabling prioritization of RoE frames over background traﬃc.
• Minimizing jitter and latency for RoE frames.
The ability to strictly prioritize RoE frames is vital to ensure suﬃciently low jitter.
Recall from section 1.4 that large frames of background traﬃc can adversely aﬀect
jitter and latency by occupying the transmission line. It is therefore useful for the
Ethernet MAC to be able to pause background traﬃc, push through RoE frames
and resume background traﬃc without losing either Ethernet frame. As previously
discussed this is possible with 802.1Qbu Frame Preemption which is available as a
==PAGE:60==
48
4 RoE System Design
TSN MAC
L1 Offload
10Gbps Interface
64 bit @ 156.25 MHz
RoE TX
Varying number of LTE 
modulated symbols 
RF
RRH with Split 4 NGFI
L1 Offload
10Gbps Interface
64 bit @ 156.25 MHz
RoE RX
Varying number of LTE 
modulated symbols 
10 GbE
I
DL Processing
UL Processing
Control & Management
I
Q
Q
Fronthaul Packet 
Network
Figure 4.1: High-level overview of the envisioned RRH with split 4 type NGFI. Or-
ange denotes RoE/NGFI speciﬁc functionality. Blue denotes LTE stack
functionality
3.0 draft version[19].
A TSN MAC which implements frame preemption must provide two types of client
interfaces to the upper layer; express MAC and preemption MAC. All traﬃc provided
to the express MAC is automatically classiﬁed as priority. The RoE component will
as such be interfacing on the express MAC. Contrarily traﬃc that is provided to the
preemption MAC is classiﬁed as background traﬃc and may be preempted in order
to provide transmission time for express traﬃc.
For the RRH only the express MAC interface is necessarily used, however, there may
be certain OAM functions that with beneﬁt can be connected to the preemption
MAC. For instance an embedded CPU with an IP/TCP stack can have its network
interface attached to the preemption MAC allowing remote control and management
of the RRH.
The TSN MAC further distinguishes itself from a regular Ethernet MAC by requiring
that its link partner is also preemption capable since regular MAC procedures do not
include the ability to pause Ethernet frame transmissions. The network node which is
the link partner of the RRH must therefore also implement 802.1Qbu. Yet this does
not preclude the deployment of network nodes without 802.1Qbu since a preemption
context is only link-to-link. Nonetheless, some minimum of TSN functionality is pre-
sumably required in the fronthaul to ensure satisfactory jitter and latency properties.
Based on the preemption mechanics in 802.1Qbu the worst case delay caused by the
MAC is speciﬁed to be 123 octet times[19]. That is the time it takes to transmit 123
==PAGE:61==
4.1 Adjacent component interaction
49
bytes of data. For a 10 Gbps Ethernet interface this corresponds to approximately
100 ns. By assuming that this is the most signiﬁcant source of delay variation for an
express frame then 6 network hops would experience less than 1 μs of jitter!
The TSN MAC also aims to reduce the delay impact on express frames (i.e. RoE
frames) by not implementing a store-and-forward mechanism. Store-and-forward en-
abled Ethernet MACs will receive the entirety of an Ethernet frame, ensure that no
errors are detected based on the frame check sequence (FCS) and then forward the
frame. Meanwhile the frame is stored locally in a buﬀer. In this case the resident
delay of the frame is proportional with the frame size. Other MACs are capable of
cut-through where the Ethernet frame is received and forwarded simultaneously, the
error detection is then performed at the end of the frame. For large Ethernet frames
this can reduce the MAC delay from over 1200 ns to less than 100 ns. The TSN MAC
shall include such cut-through functionality.
4.1.2
L1 Oﬄoad
The left hand-side of ﬁgure 4.1 shows the RoE component interfacing with L1 oﬄoad
of LTE in both UL and DL direction. In both cases the purpose of the interface is to
exchange complex modulated symbols in one direction. At the RF side of L1 oﬄoad
a constant stream of I/Q samples are received and transmitted from/to the RF chain.
The number of symbols that are transferred between RoE and L1 oﬄoad varies ac-
cording to the load on the cell. Recall from section 2.2 that a symbol corresponds to
a subcarrier whose value is changed at a rate of 15 kHz. And that 12 subcarriers in
the frequency domain (180 kHz) by 1 ms correspond to one subframe. The subframe
is the granularity at which an LTE cell can allocate resources to a UE.
This implies that the RoE component shall receive or transmit anywhere from 0-1200
symbols (in the case of a 20 MHz LTE cell) every 66.7 μs. However, due to cyclic
preﬁx (CP) between symbols the inter-symbol time is in fact 71.88 μs or 71.35 μs[4].
CP is transmitted between each symbol to prevent intersymbol interference[32]. The
variation in inter-symbol time is due to varying CP length depending on the symbol
position within a slot. The ﬁrst symbol in a slot has a cyclic preﬁx length of 160 basic
LTE time units while the remaining symbols have CP length of 144 basic LTE time
units. An LTE basic time unit is deﬁned as[4]:
Ts =
1
15000 · 2048s ≈32.55 ns
Since each symbol is represented by an I/Q pair and the speciﬁcation requires any-
where between 8-20 bit width for both I and Q this results in 16-40 bit total bit length
for a symbol.
To summarize, at an interval of ≈71µs a column of symbols are generated by the
BBU in the DL and by the RRH in the UL which are transported via RoE. The
number of symbols a speciﬁc column contains varies according to the load on the cell
==PAGE:62==
50
4 RoE System Design
and the cell bandwidth.
When there is no cell load there are in fact still occupied symbols in the DL
direction.
These are physical reference and synchronization signals as well as the
broadcast channel PBCH which are static in nature and always included in an LTE
frame. Maintaining these signals is important for allowing UEs to synchronize and
establish connection to the cell. By relocating the generation of such physical signals
to the RRH one can further reduce fronthaul load. For this speciﬁc implementation of
L1 oﬄoad all reference and synchronization signals are generated locally at the RRH.
However, due to time constraints the PBCH is still to be generated at the BBU.
4.2
1904.3 RoE standard
The previous section brieﬂy reviewed the L1 oﬄoad and TSN MAC key functionality
and how they interact with the RoE component. As mentioned L1 oﬄoad and TSN
MAC are individual projects outside the scope of this work. The focus in this work
is the RoE design, implementation and veriﬁcation.
As such the centre attention will return to the RoE standard which is introduced
below followed by a proposed design of the RoE component in accordance with the
previously listed requirement speciﬁcation.
The 1904.3 RoE standard is an ongoing development with new draft versions arriving
bi-monthly. Due to the rapidly changing standard the RoE implementation is frozen
to draft version 0.4 while newer draft releases are designated as part of future work.
The stated purpose of RoE is to transport any new fronthaul protocol as well as CPRI
over Ethernet by deﬁning header formats and packet encapsulation methods[18]. The
following types of mappers for encapsulating radio data are currently deﬁned:
• Simple tunnelling mapper
A mapper which encapsulates any given byte stream of data.
• Structure agnostic mapper
A mapper which generates a ﬂow of frames from a single CPRI link.
It is
agnostic to the CPRI content.
• Structure aware mapper
A mapper which is fully aware of the CPRI data it is encapsulating. Control,
user data and synchronization are separated and processed individually.
• Native RoE
A mapper to transport one or more ﬂows of sampled radio data.
Each of these mappers share the common RoE header shown in ﬁgure 4.2. The ver
ﬁeld indicates the version of RoE which is applicable to the frame. PktType indicates
the type of RoE packet and thus its payload. FlowID identiﬁes the individual radio
data ﬂow of which there may be up to 255 between two RoE nodes. Length ﬁeld
==PAGE:63==
4.2 1904.3 RoE standard
51
ver
pktType
flowID
length
orderingInfo
8
16
24
31
0
..payload bytes..
Figure 4.2: RoE common frame format[18]
is used to inform of the total number of bytes following the common RoE header,
however, its semantic may change according to the packet type. OrderingInfo is a
ﬁeld that can be used either as a sequence number or timestamp. In sequence number
mode a p and q counter of variable bit length can be deﬁned. In timestamp mode the
orderingInfo is 30+2 bit nanosecond timestamp ﬁeld. The least signiﬁcant two bits
indicate quarter fractions of one nanosecond. Such a timestamp allows the source of
the frame to specify a future point in time where the encapsulated data should be
made available to the next layer; a so called presentation time. This is important for
ensuring synchronization of radio transmissions across several antennas and even cell
sites. The orderingInfo is followed by the payload of the RoE frame whose structure
and payload data is deﬁned by the selected mapper.
Based on the RoE common frame the composition of a complete Ethernet frame
transporting RoE is shown in ﬁgure 4.3. The ﬁelds are colourized to distinguish Eth-
ernet frame ﬁelds from RoE and its payload. As shown the ﬁrst few ﬁelds contain the
destination and source MAC addresses followed by the EtherType. The EtherType is
used to indicate the payload of the Ethernet frame and thus the protocol it is trans-
porting, however, there is currently no EtherType allocated to 1904.3 RoE. The end
of the frame consists of a 4 byte FCS ﬁeld used to detect errors within the Ethernet
frame.
The RoE payload highlighted in red is deﬁned by the RoE packet type. Each map-
per is assigned a packet type due to the diﬀerent types of payload, however, there
are also packet types for control packets. Currently deﬁned RoE packet types are
listed in table 4.4. Which of these are suitable for a transporting split 4 type radio
data? The CPRI speciﬁc packet types are obviously not considered, even the simple
tunnelling is focused on transporting a single CPRI link.
The remaining candidates are the control and native RoE packet types. Control
packets can be used to perform remote OAM functions over the fronthaul network.
This could be link establishment or gathering runtime information (statistics, errors,
etc.). It is is assigned an additional one byte subtype ﬁeld to indicate the type of
==PAGE:64==
52
4 RoE System Design
ver
pktType
flowID
length
orderingInfo
0
8
16
24
31
MAC DA
MAC DA
MAC SA
MAC SA
EtherType
orderingInfo
..payload bytes..
FCS
..payload bytes..
Figure 4.3: A complete Ethernet frame with RoE. Light blue denotes Ethernet
frame speciﬁc ﬁelds, green denotes RoE speciﬁc ﬁelds and red for the
RoE payload
PktType
Function
Description
00 0000b
Control Packet
Control
packet
between
RoE nodes
00 0001b
Simple tunnelling CPRI
Data payload
00 0010b
Structure
agnostic
CPRI
RoE
common
frame
header
and
structure
agnostic CPRI payload
00 0011b
Structure aware CPRI
RoE
common
frame
header
and
structure
aware CPRI payload
00 0100b
Native RoE
Data payload with RoE
common frame header
00 0101b
Slow C&M CPRI
C&M
payload
with
6
octet RoE frame header
and structure aware CPRI
Slow C&M payload
00 0110b -
11 1111b
-
Reserveed
Table 4.4: RoE pktType values[18]
==PAGE:65==
4.3 Component overview
53
control packet. However, no control subtype beside CPRI speciﬁc control packets is
deﬁned in detail.
The native RoE packet type is not further speciﬁed than that its payload should
contain an arbitrary number of I/Q samples from one or several antennas. When
transporting split 4 type radio data the payload consists of complex frequency domain
I/Q samples for each used subcarrier. However, since split 4 type I/Q samples are not
contiguous such as the constant rate I/Q samples carried by CPRI certain extensions
to the native RoE payload format are necessary. These extensions are proprietary
in nature and can not be omitted since the current RoE standard does not present
any support for functional splits in the radio layer stack. The proprietary function is
presented in the following section along with the design of the RoE component.
4.3
Component overview
The RoE component which is responsible for producing and consuming RoE packets
is composed of a TX and an RX RoE module. RoE TX receives a column of symbols
every ≈71µs which are mapped, packetized and given to the Ethernet MAC for
transmission. On the receiver side an RoE RX module receives these RoE packets.
The payload is depacketized and demapped before given to the L1 oﬄoad component
in the form of I/Q samples. Based on this description the three functional blocks in
ﬁgure 4.5 can be deﬁned for the RoE component in both the TX and RX direction.
These are mapper, packetizer and aggregator as well as their counterparts.
Each
perform a vital function of the RoE feature set and are described below.
4.3.1
Mapper / Demapper
As depicted in ﬁgure 4.5 a mapper is instantiated for each antenna I/Q ﬂow. The
mapper acquires LTE symbols from a shared Random Access Memory (RAM) be-
tween the radio layer and the RoE implementation. A RAM has been selected as the
data interface between RoE and L1 for numerous reasons. Firstly the RoE and L1
oﬄoad is expected to run within diﬀerent clock domains requiring the data to cross
clock boundaries, for this a dual clock FIFO or RAM is highly suitable. Secondly
since the number of occupied subcarriers vary over time a FIFO would require an
index value to be attached to each enqueued element which leads to an increase in
memory usage. A RAM interface is arguably the better solution since an index is
natively included.
One symbol can be read from the RAM every clock cycle including a qualiﬁer
to indicate whether the symbol is in use or not. The depth of the RAM is a mini-
mum of 1200 symbols for 20 MHz LTE cell and the data width of each element is
IQ_WIDTH + 1. The I/Q width value is the total bit width of a symbol and an
additional bit is used as a qualiﬁer. In accordance to requirement B in table 3.8 the
I/Q sample width should be 8-20 which corresponds to a 16-40 bit width for each
==PAGE:66==
54
4 RoE System Design
Aggregator
Packetizer(0)
Packetizer(n-1)
Mapper(0)
Mapper(n-1)
10G Interface
64 bit @ 156.25 MHz
RAM interface
@ 156.25 MHz
I/Q
I/Q
Control and Management
Control packet can be given 
to C&M for node state 
synchronization, first frame, 
flow sync, etc.
N antenna
Packetizer applies header to 
the payload of the RoE frame. 
Buffers packet until 
Aggregator enables transmit
Ethernet
Deaggregator
Depacketizer(0)
Depacketizer(n-1)
Demapper(0)
Demapper(n-1)
10G Interface
64 bit @ 156.25 MHz
RAM interface
 @ 156.25 MHz
I/Q
I/Q
Control and Management
Control packet can be given 
to C&M for node state 
synchronization, first frame, 
flow sync, etc.
N antenna
Depacketizer extracts the 
payload of the RoE frame. I.e. 
RoE header is discarded.
Ethernet
Figure 4.5: Overview of internal RoE components in TX and RX
==PAGE:67==
4.3 Component overview
55
symbol. For a 20 MHz LTE cell the time required for the mapper to read an entire
column of symbols and construct its payload is 6.4
ns
symbol ·1200 symbols = 7.68µs. 6.4
ns is one clock period of the 156.25 MHz clock used by the Ethernet 10G interface
and consequently the core clock of the RoE component.
With the radio layer interface clariﬁed one may consider how each symbol should
be mapped into the payload of the native RoE packet? The act of simply inserting
each valid symbol one after another in the payload is not an option since vital in-
formation about the location of each symbol is missing. Recall that a symbol or a
subcarrier is a resource element in the LTE resource grid and that physical channels
and physical signals are mapped to these according to the position of each RE within
the grid. Furthermore, not all symbols are always in use, some may be mapped to a
null value. Therefore, if e.g. subcarriers 0-10 and 13-20 are occupied while subcarriers
11-12 are not this leaves a gap of symbols which should not be mapped into the RoE
payload. The payload should only include I/Q data for subcarriers 0-10 and 13-20,
however, if these are simply placed in a continuous manner within the payload the
receiver cannot correctly assert the index of each symbol. The result is a corrupt
LTE resource grid leading to a non-functioning cell. The RoE payload must therefore
include information of the index of each subcarrier sample. A simple, but ineﬃcient
solution is to preface each sample with an index value; the overhead is simply too
large. 11 bits would be required to indicate the index of each 16-40 bit wide sam-
ple. Another solution is to exploit the continuous nature of the LTE resource grid to
establish a set of I/Q pointers indicating a range of indexes in the resource grid for
which the following samples are applicable to. For the previous example the solution
would now look like:
[Range : 0 −10][IQ#0, IQ#1..IQ#9, IQ#10], [Range : 13 −20][IQ#13..IQ#20]
Each range indicator requires 22 bits and can potentially deﬁne the range for hun-
dreds of subcarrier samples within the RoE payload. For subcarriers which are dedi-
cated to user data (PDSCH) these are allocated in ranges of minimum 12 subcarriers
(one RB). The native RoE payload will therefore be extended with this proprietary
I/Q pointer structure which prefaces each range of valid subcarriers. An example
payload snippet is shown in ﬁgure 4.6.
Several additional changes can be seen in ﬁgure 4.6 compared to the previous
discussion. The subcarrier index range is deﬁned with ScStart and ScEnd which are
assigned 24 bits instead of 22. This is to ensure a byte-level alignment. Following the
range indication a number of symbols are inserted before the next range indication.
However, in order to reduce the complexity of the payload processing module within
the demapper the ScStart and ScEnd range indicators are always placed on the MSB
of a 64-bit chunk. In a 10G Ethernet interface 64-bits are transmitted every clock
cycle (156.25 MHz), thus the signiﬁcance of a 64-bit alignment. A ﬁxed position of
the range indicator will considerably simplify the state machine of the demapper. As
==PAGE:68==
56
4 RoE System Design
...PAD...
...PAD...
...I/Q Payload...
ScStart
ScEnd
...I/Q Payload...
ScStart
ScEnd
0
8
16
24
31
1
2
3
4
0
PacketEnd/ColumnEnd
Figure 4.6: I/Q payload for split 4 indicating the index range of valid subcarriers.
Green denotes overhead, red denotes usable payload. Horizontal mark-
ers bit resolution while vertical indicate 64-bit chunks
a result an arbitrary amount of padding must be inserted between I/Q payload and
range indicators. The worst case padding size is 63 bits in order to align the range
indicators on a 64-bit index. The second range of subcarriers in ﬁgure 4.6 show a
much lesser use of padding due to the position of the last subcarrier payload. For any
arbitrary range of subcarriers the worst case and best case overhead is therefore 87
bits and 24 bits, respectively, including range indication overhead.
The necessary alignment of range indicators is less than ideal, for future work a more
eﬃcient demapping processor should be implemented without use of padding. The
worst case scenario for such a mapping method is that every second subcarrier is
inactive which leads to a 1:1 relation between range indicator and I/Q payload. In
the case of a 20 bit total sample width the overhead that occurs when using range
indicators is over 100 %. However, such a scenario is unrealistic due to the contiguous
way channels are mapped to subcarriers in the LTE resource grid.
Nevertheless, it is important to maintain large and consecutive occupancy of subcar-
riers in the resource grid to reduce overhead. Unfortunately, while the PDSCH in the
LTE resource grid is quite contiguous this is not the case for reference signals which
are used to distinguish antenna layers. These are highlighted in red/dark grey in
ﬁgure 2.4 which is based on a 20 MHz LTE cell with 2 transmit antennas. As shown,
four out of 14 columns contain reference signals. In the frequency axis (vertical) ev-
ery third subcarrier has a reference signal mapped to it. The problem arises from
the fact that reference signals are generated locally at the RRH. The BBU and its
TX RoE module will therefore not transport subcarriers with reference signals. This
leaves a large number of gaps in-between the remaining subcarriers which in ﬁgure
4.7 are mapped to PDSCH, i.e. user data. Every gap caused by a reference signal
requires a range indicator in the I/Q payload. Consequently the overhead becomes
unacceptably large in columns where there are reference signals. This gives rise to
==PAGE:69==
4.3 Component overview
57
the following solution:
Figure 4.7: Two Antenna LTE grid illustration of RBs with reference signals marked
as dark grey and red[15]
All non-reference subcarriers are relocated and accumulated in one continuous
block within the LTE column before being mapped into the RoE payload and trans-
mitted. Once the payload is demapped by the receiver, the subcarriers are relocated
back to their respective positions within the resource grid. In this manner one ob-
viates the need for range indicators for each reference signal gap in the subcarrier
column. The procedure is illustrated in ﬁgure 4.8. The grey and red reference signals
are void and are not transported by RoE. By relocating these it is possible to reduce
the overhead of using range indicators.
Finally returning to ﬁgure 4.6 one may notice a PacketEnd and ColumnEnd ﬁeld at
the end of the RoE payload. These are mutually exclusive and indicate whether the
payload of the packet is ﬁnal for a column or if there are more packets inbound. The
demapper can then determine whether the column of symbols it has received so far
should be handed over to the radio layer or if further symbols can be expected.
This concludes the review of the mapper and demapper. The remaining modules
within the RoE component are the packetizer and aggregator which are less compli-
cated in design, but important nonetheless.
4.3.2
Packetizer / Depacketizer
As the name implies it is within the packetizer that the Ethernet and RoE frame
headers are generated and used to encapsulate the payload generated by the mapper.
Among the added ﬁelds is a ﬂow identiﬁer and a two-type sequence number. The ﬂow
ID enables the RoE component to distinguish which antenna a RoE packet belongs
to since there is a packetizer and mapper for each antenna. The two-type sequence
number inserted in the ordering info ﬁeld of RoE is used to detect packet losses as
well as perform on-time delivery of radio payload. P and Q counters are deﬁned for
==PAGE:70==
58
4 RoE System Design
RoE
Figure 4.8: Relocating non-reference subcarriers to allow for more contiguous blocks
of subcarriers to reduce range indicator overhead. Red/grey reference
signals are void and not transported. The white user data can be iden-
tiﬁed by a single range indicator
the sequence number in accordance with the RoE standard.
These counters oﬀer
full freedom in deﬁning range and increment values. For this particular split 4 type
implementation the P and Q counters are used in the following manner.
The Q counter is incremented for every column that is transmitted and wraps around
to 0 after counting 14 columns indicating a complete subframe transmission. The P
counter counts the number of packets transmitted within each column and wraps to
0 whenever a full column has been transmitted. These counters allow the packetizer
and depacketizer to distinguish between all packets transmitted within a subframe
and thereby buﬀer packets until they are required by the demapper. On the receive
end the depacketizer buﬀers received packets and waits for the demapper to request
the next expected column number. Once the expected column number matches the
ordering info of the next packet in the buﬀer the frame headers are removed and the
payload delivered to the demapper. Whenever a packet is received out of sequence
indicating possible packet loss or reordering of the packets due to changes in the
network route the packetizer raises an error.
In regards to the Ethernet headers the packetizer adds MAC addresses, Ethertype and
FCS. The current design maintains a single Ethernet address for one RoE component
since there is only one physical Ethernet interface.
4.3.3
Aggregator/Deaggregator
As illustrated by ﬁgure 4.5 there is a single Ethernet interface for the RoE component,
yet there are multiple packetizers and mappers each generating a RoE packet ﬂow.
The packets must therefore be aggregated in the TX and conversely deaggregated in
==PAGE:71==
4.4 Summary
59
the RX direction by the aggregator and deaggregator modules according to the ﬂow
ID of the packet.
In the TX direction the radio data is made available instantaneously for all antenna
layers to the RoE component. The generation of packets therefore occurs simultane-
ously across all packetizers and are made available to the aggregator at roughly the
same time according to cell load. The aggregator will then in a round-robin fashion
dequeue a packet from each packetizer until all buﬀers are empty. Beyond this no
additional functionality is required by the aggregator.
On the other hand the deaggregator performs several other functions. First of all it
ﬁlters inbound Ethernet frames for which the destination address does not match the
MAC address assigned to the RoE component and in extension the RRH. This is typ-
ical Ethernet behaviour, if the frame is not destined to the node then it is discarded.
Secondly Ethernet frames which do not carry the RoE Ethertype are discarded as
these are irrelevant to the RoE component. Finally the RoE packets are distributed
according to the ﬂow ID they carry to the matching packetizer. However, control
packets are redirected to a control and management process for enabling remote mon-
itoring, link establishment and similar features. For the current scope such control
packets are not considered and monitoring is instead performed through a CPU in-
terface locally on the system. This decision is further reinforced by the fact that the
current draft standard has yet to deﬁne the usage of control packets.
The above three main modules within the RoE component oﬀer a full feature set
for enabling the eﬃcient and variable data rate transfer of split 4 type radio data
for an LTE cell through a packet based fronthaul. The service the RoE component
oﬀers to the radio layer is in essence the transport of an arbitrarily loaded column of
LTE subcarriers every ≈71µs. During transportation the structure of the column is
maintained and reestablished at the receiving end. Since the interface to the radio
layer is a RAM interface on both ends of a RoE transport link, the RoE component
can be said to accurately copy the contents of the RAM at the transmitter end and
insert them within the RAM at the receiving end.
4.4
Summary
To summarize, the design of a RRH with split 4 type NGFI has been presented. It
consists of three main enabling components: L1 oﬄoad which oﬀers partial processing
of the LTE physical layer, TSN MAC which manages the transmission of Ethernet
frames and ensures prioritization of RoE frames over background traﬃc and ﬁnally
the RoE component which performs the mapping, packetization and reverse proce-
dures to enable the transportation of LTE subcarriers depending on cell load.
The RoE component is based on draft 0.4 version of the 1904.3 RoE standard, how-
ever, with additional proprietary extensions in order to support the mapping of a
variable number of subcarriers. Within the RoE component the mapper, packetizer
and aggregator as well as their counterparts have been deﬁned in detail along with a
==PAGE:72==
60
4 RoE System Design
proposed mapping procedure of I/Q data.
With the design of the RoE component concluded the following chapter delves into
certain speciﬁc details for the hardware implementation such as the component hier-
archy and interface descriptions. This is followed by simulation of the implementation
in order to extract performance metrics for assessment in regards to the requirement
speciﬁcation and validation of functionality.
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 5
Implementation and
Simulation
The RoE component implementation is examined in this chapter with the purpose of
establishing an overview of its module hierarchy and interfaces. The RoE component
has been implemented in VHDL, a hardware description language suitable for real-
ization of designs on FPGAs and integrated circuits (ICs).
Furthermore, simulations of the RoE component are carried out using ModelSim a
hardware description language simulation tool. The results of these simulations are
used to verify the design according to the established requirement speciﬁcation in
section 3.3.
The ﬁrst and second sections present the RoE TX and RoE RX implementation, re-
spectively. The third section presents a number of simulations of the implemented
design and uses these to verify the design according to the speciﬁcation. Based on
simulation results the fourth section reviews the RoE requirement speciﬁcation and
the degree to which it is fulﬁlled.
5.1
RoE TX
RoE TX is fully implemented within the following VHDL ﬁles:
• roe_map.vhd: The mapper
• roe_pack.vhd: The packetizer
• roe_aggregator.vhd: The aggregator
• roe_tx_top.vhd: A top-level ﬁle encapsulating the above three components as
well as instantiating them according to the number of antenna layers required.
Certain minor components such as RAMs and FIFOs have been excluded from the
list for the sake of maintaining a clear overview. The RoE top-level ﬁle ensures that
the internal modules are interfacing correctly to each other as well as to the outer
world, referring to externally from the RoE TX component.
The RoE TX component can be interfaced with through a number of signals, but
must also be instantiated with a speciﬁc set of generics. In VHDL generics are used
to modify the design of a component at compile-time, similar to the C preprocessor
==PAGE:74==
62
5 Implementation and Simulation
with macros. In the instance of RoE this could be to set the number of antenna layers,
the size of the LTE channel or even the size of internal buﬀers. For the RoE TX
implementation the table 5.1 generics have been deﬁned. By modifying these at time
of instantiation the RoE TX design can be customized to the application requirements.
Interestingly this implies that the number of antennas and cell bandwidth once chosen
cannot change at run-time and is ﬁxed as part of the hardware design. This may be
changed if necessary such that it is possible to switch between bandwidths, however,
the resulting design would take up additional logical elements. The default generic
assignment is applicable for a 20 MHz 2 antenna layer LTE cell.
Generic name
Type
Range
Default
Description
RESET_ACTIVE
Boolean
-
False
Low/high active reset con-
ﬁguration
IQ_WIDTH
Integer
16-40
20
I
and
Q
sample
total
width
K
Integer
7-11
11
Depth of RAM interface,
varies
according
to
the
bandwidth size of the cell
N_SUBCARRIER
Integer
72-1200
1200
Number of subcarriers
N_ANTENNA
Integer
1-8
2
Number of antenna layers
in the design
Table 5.1: Deﬁned generics for RoE TX component
Besides generics the RoE TX component lists a number of signals for interfacing
with. These signals can be categorized as: Main clock and reset, Ethernet MAC inter-
face and L1 oﬄoad interface. All signals are listed in table 5.2 along with descriptions.
Note the direction of data ﬂow within this component. The L1 oﬄoad component
oﬀers a RAM interface from which the RoE TX component extracts, maps and packe-
tizes radio data. Hereafter the packets are transmitted through the 10 Gbps Ethernet
interface.
As listed in the width column the Ethernet interface is static in size while the L1
oﬄoad interface is highly dependent on the number of antennas and I/Q width con-
ﬁguration. Each additional antenna requires a separate RAM interface.
Furthermore, the L1 interface crosses clock boundaries for which special care must
be taken.
For this reason a two-way handshake is established through the use of
l1_column_v and l1_column_ack, respectively referred to as valid and acknowledge.
Once the L1 oﬄoad component has updated the RAM with subcarriers for a given
column it asserts the valid signal. The RoE TX component will then map all active
subcarriers and once complete assert the acknowledgement signal. Once acknowledge-
ment is high the valid signal is deasserted by L1 oﬄoad followed by deasserting the
acknowledgement signal by RoE TX. Such a handshake ensures that only one com-
ponent accesses the RAM at any given time to maintain integrity of the I/Q data
==PAGE:75==
5.1 RoE TX
63
transaction.
Signal name
Dir.
Width
Description
core_clk
in
1
Component clock
core_reset
in
1
Hardware reset
tx_data_o
out
64
Ethernet interface data
tx_valid_o
out
8
Ethernet interface control
tx_error_o
out
1
Error signal for aborting packet
transmission
tx_eop_o
out
1
End of packet signal indicator
mac_ready_i
in
1
Ready signal from MAC to allow
for transmission
l1_ram_data
in
N_ANTENNA*
(IQ_WIDTH+1)
L1 oﬄoad RAM interface data
signal
l1_ram_rd_en
out
N_ANTENNA
L1 oﬄoad RAM read enable
l1_ram_addr
out
N_ANTENNA*K
L1 oﬄoad RAM address pointer
l1_column_v
in
N_ANTENNA
L1 oﬄoad column valid indicator,
is asserted when the RAM con-
tains valid data
l1_column_ack
out
N_ANTENNA
L1 oﬄoad column acknowledge-
ment signal, is asserted when
RoE TX has acquired RAM con-
tents
Table 5.2: Signal description for RoE TX component
In order to estimate the resource usage of the TX component it has been imple-
mented as a top-level design in Vivado 2015.4. Vivado is a design suite developed by
Xilinx which oﬀers simulation, synthesis, place & route and similar tools for realiza-
tion of hardware designs on FPGAs.
The table 5.3 lists estimated resource utilization from Vivado with two diﬀerent con-
ﬁgurations based on a XC7VX690T-2FFG1761C FPGA chip. One is single-layer 20
MHz while the other is a two-layer 10 MHz conﬁguration. These have been speciﬁcally
selected due to their later usage in hardware validation on a collective test platform.
The resources listed are look-up tables (LUTs) for realizing logical elements, ﬂip-ﬂops
(FF) for realizing registers and ﬁnally block RAM (BRAM) for memory used in inter-
nal buﬀers and FIFOs. Note that the listed memory excludes the RoE to L1 RAM
interface since this is expected to be instantiated outside the design.
==PAGE:76==
64
5 Implementation and Simulation
Resource
Utilization
1 Layer - 20 MHz
LUT
1350
FF
993
BRAM (36kb)
1
2 Layer - 10 MHz
LUT
2624
FF
993
BRAM (36kb)
2
Table 5.3: Estimated resource usage of RoE TX component
5.2
RoE RX
The RoE RX component is comprised of the counterpart modules to the transmitter
which are implemented in the following VHDL ﬁles:
• roe_demap.vhd: The demapper
• roe_depack.vhd: The depacketizer
• roe_deaggregator.vhd: The deaggregator
• roe_axi2ip.vhd: CPU/Microprocessor interface
• roe_rx_top.vhd: A top-level ﬁle encapsulating the above four components as
well as instantiating them according to the number of antenna layers required.
Note that an additional AXI-to-IP module is listed. AXI is the Advanced eX-
tensible Interface, a protocol used to interface with hardware cores[33]. In this case
the AXI4-Lite interface is used which is suitable for low-throughput memory mapped
communication. The roe_axi2ip.vhd module does not implement the AXI4-Lite in-
terface itself, instead a component external to the design is used to translate from
AXI4-Lite to a simple bus interface with read/write operations to arbitrary registers.
This simple bus interface is what the RoE RX component presents to upper layer
entities and is listed below in the signal description overview.
Roe RX utilizes the same generics as RoE TX and these are therefore not repeated.
Two additional generics are used to determine the address width and data width of
the bus interface, however, these are expected to be ﬁxed at 32 bit regardless of design
conﬁguration.
Table 5.4 lists the full interface of the RoE RX component. As one may note the in-
terface is quite similar to RoE TX, but simply with reserved data direction. The CPU
interface signals are listed at the end of the table - the inner workings of the interface
==PAGE:77==
5.3 System simulation
65
are out of scope. However, the registers which are accessible through this interface are
quite relevant for conﬁguration and gathering statistics of the implementation. These
can be used to conﬁgure the RoE component such as ﬂow ID assignment, Ethernet
MAC address pairs and gather run-time statistics. In a complete implementation
such conﬁguration is also envisioned to take place remotely with RoE control packets,
however, for the sake of implementation complexity the current design is limited to
local microprocessor access.
Not surprising the resource utilization of RoE RX listed in table 5.5 is signiﬁcantly
larger than its counterpart. The reason for this can be based on the larger data rate
of incoming data. In the TX direction of RoE one I/Q sample is mapped every clock
cycle, however, in the RX direction several I/Q samples must be extracted from a
64-bit chunk and mapped to the RAM interface within one clock cycle. The result is a
signiﬁcantly more complex state machine for receiving compared to transmitting and
thus an increase in logic element usage. The CPU interface is also included within
the RoE RX top ﬁle which accounts for an increase in FFs used as registers.
5.3
System simulation
During development each individual subcomponent was tested with a customized test
bench. Simulation of these subcomponents have been limited in complexity and do
not show much in terms of the overall data ﬂow; the main objective has been to
debug and verify functionality. For that reason this section focuses on a complete
system veriﬁcation of both RoE TX and RX. In order to do so a test bench has been
established to show a successful end-to-end data ﬂow. The simulation will allow for
a precise estimation of latency as well as data throughput in relation to simulation
stimuli.
5.3.1
Simulation test bench
The input stimuli is delivered by a BBU generator and LTE timer which have been
developed by another student as part of the collective hardware test platform vali-
dation eﬀorts. The BBU generator and LTE timer simulate the radio layer that a
RoE TX component is attached to. The remaining test bench entities are the test
subjects; RoE TX and RoE RX. Figure 5.6 delivers an overview of the established
test bench. As depicted two clock domains exist and the RAM interface is used as a
clock crossing circuit. Additionally a CPU interface is indicated on the RoE RX and
BBU generator. This is used to initiate and conﬁgure the BBU generator as well as
accessing the RoE RX registers.
LTE time is a module which distributes timing information to the BBU genera-
tor. The timing information speciﬁes where in the LTE frame the system currently is.
With this knowledge the BBU generator can extract the appropriate data from a read
only memory (ROM) containing subcarriers from numerous physical channels. The
contents of the LTE data ROM has been generated with help from the LTE System
==PAGE:78==
66
5 Implementation and Simulation
Signal name
Dir.
Width
Description
core_clk
in
1
Component clock
core_reset
in
1
Hardware reset
rx_data_i
in
64
Ethernet interface data
rx_valid_i
in
8
Ethernet interface control
rx_error_i
in
1
Error
signal
indicating
CR-
C/FCS error
rx_eop_i
in
1
End of packet signal indicator
l1_ram_data
out
N_ANTENNA*
(IQ_WIDTH+1)
L1 oﬄoad RAM interface data
signal
l1_ram_wr_en
out
N_ANTENNA
L1 oﬄoad RAM read enable
l1_ram_addr
out
N_ANTENNA*K
L1 oﬄoad RAM address pointer
l1_column_v
out
N_ANTENNA
L1 oﬄoad column valid indicator,
is asserted when the RAM con-
tains valid data
l1_column_ack
in
N_ANTENNA
Column acknowledgement signal
to L1, is asserted when L1 has
started acquiring RAM contents
l1_sym_start_lvl
in
N_ANTENNA
Level change signal from L1 in-
dicating upcoming deadline for
making symbols available
bus2ip_clk_i
in
1
CPU interface clock
bus2ip_rst_i
in
1
CPU interface reset
ip2bus_data_o
out
32
CPU interface speciﬁc
ip2bus_wrack_o
out
1
CPU interface speciﬁc
ip2bus_rdack_o
out
1
CPU interface speciﬁc
ip2bus_error_o
out
1
CPU interface speciﬁc
bus2ip_addr_i
in
32
CPU interface speciﬁc
bus2ip_data_i
in
32
CPU interface speciﬁc
bus2ip_rnw_i
in
1
CPU interface speciﬁc
bus2ip_be_i
in
8
CPU interface speciﬁc
bus2ip_cs_i
in
1
CPU interface speciﬁc
bus2ip_rdce_i
in
1
CPU interface speciﬁc
bus2ip_wrce_i
in
1
CPU interface speciﬁc
Table 5.4: Signal description for RoE RX component
==PAGE:79==
5.3 System simulation
67
Resource
Utilization
1 Layer - 20 MHz
LUT
2404
FF
1368
BRAM (36kb)
4.5
2 Layer - 10 MHz
LUT
4544
FF
2384
BRAM (36kb)
9
Table 5.5: Estimated resource usage of RoE RX component
RoE Tx
R
A
M
LTE Data 
ROM
BBU GEN
LTE Time
RoE Rx
RoE TX/RX Testbench
CPU AXI interface
l1_clk domain @ 245.76 MHz
roe_clk domain @ 156.25 MHz
Ethernet TX/RX
R
A
M
l1_column_v/l1_column_ack
Figure 5.6: Overview of test bench and stimuli for simulating RoE TX/RX
==PAGE:80==
68
5 Implementation and Simulation
Toolbox in MATLAB and customized scripts.
The LTE System Toolbox is commonly used to simulate a complete LTE cell signal[29].
However, in this case the desired output from the toolbox are the individual subcar-
riers excluding reference and synchronization signals and before complete physical
processing has taken place. This custom output is extracted from within the toolbox
for three diﬀerent standardized and predeﬁned scenarios listed in table 5.7. These
scenarios are part of the LTE 3GPP speciﬁcation and oﬃcially deﬁned as DL ref-
erence measurement channels[8]. In the test bench these are used as input stimuli
to the RoE system. As listed in the table, R.1 and R.9 use a single antenna port
while the 10 MHz reference channel R.11 uses two. Speciﬁc points of interest are the
subframe and RB allocation values as well as average throughput for a single LTE
frame which, if one recalls from ﬁgure 2.3, is 1 ms. For all reference channels the
ﬁfth subframe remains unallocated as speciﬁed by 3GPP 36.101 in order to facilitate
the transmission of System Information Blocks. This is irrelevant to the test, but
important to know for verifying the resulting output.
It was desired to acquire a highly loaded 20 MHz reference channel with two antennas
as well, however, such a conﬁguration was not available in the LTE toolbox and the
BBU generator is therefore limited to the listed reference channel scenarios.
Parameter
Unit
Value
Reference channel
R.1
R.9
R.11
Channel bandwidth
MHz
20
20
10
Antenna ports
-
1
1
2
Allocated resource blocks
-
1
100
50
Allocated subframes per LTE frame
-
9
9
9
Modulation
-
16QAM
64QAM
16QAM
Subframe payload 0-4, 6-9
Bits
256
61664
12960
Subframe payload 5
Bits
N/A
N/A
N/A
Max throughput over 1 frame
kbps
0.230
55,498
11,664
Symbols allocated to PDCCH
-
2
2
2
Table 5.7: Overview of diﬀerent reference channel scenarios for test bench stimuli
as speciﬁed in annex A of [8]
The BBU generator repeats a static LTE frame based on one of the three diﬀerent
reference channels, however, due to memory limitations on the hardware test platform
it is not possible to store a complete LTE frame for all scenarios. The BBU generator
is therefore designed to reuse the PDSCH acquired in subframe #1 in all subframes
except subframe #5 which is unallocated.
The same cannot be done with the PDCCH which is allocated the ﬁrst two symbols
in every subframe since the contents of the control channels continuously change. A
unique PDCCH is therefore stored for each subframe. Finally a ROM containing
subcarries for the PBCH is used to populate the broadcast channel in subframe 0.
==PAGE:81==
5.3 System simulation
69
Thus the BBU generator accesses a ROM for each PDCCH, PDSCH and PBCH to
construct the LTE frame.
In summary, the BBU generator delivers one of three static LTE frames based on
reference channels R.1, R.9 and R.11. The PDSCH in subframe #1 is repeated in all
subframes except subframe #5 for which the reference channels do not have allocated
data. The physical reference signals and synchronization signals are not included in
the LTE frame as these will be generated locally by the L1 oﬄoad component.
With the test bench setup clariﬁed the following subsections present simulation results
from each of the aforementioned scenarios.
5.3.2
Simulation R.1
The R.1 reference channel is an example of a lightly loaded LTE cell with one user
continuously allocated a single resource block for 9 subframes. By enabling the BBU
generator from start of simulation it is possible to see the data generation and the
LTE timer keep track symbol indexes, subframe and LTE frame count.
Figure 5.8 shows a 1 ms simulation of the testbench. The highlighted signals are
generated by the LTE timer while the RAM interface to the RoE TX component
is listed below. As shown the LTE symbol counter is incremented whenever a new
column of symbols is written to the RAM interface. Once 7 columns of symbols are
generated the counter is reset and the slot count is incremented to indicate that the
position is now within the second slot of an LTE subframe. Once the second slot has
passed the slot counter is reset and the subframe counter is incremented. The process
continues until 10 subframes have been transmitted for which the subframe counter
resets and the LTE frame count is incremented.
The RAM interface shows each column becoming valid and acknowledged once the
subcarriers have been extracted by the RoE mapper. This indicates that the BBU
generator is successfully delivering subcarrier samples to the RoE component.
Figure 5.8: 1 ms simulation of R.1 with focus on LTE timer and BBU generator
A high-level overview of the radio data ﬂow from end-to-end is shown in ﬁgure
==PAGE:82==
70
5 Implementation and Simulation
5.9 for the ﬁrst 4 symbols of an LTE frame. The ﬁgure shows that radio data is
successfully arriving at the receiver and written into the RAM interface for the L1
oﬄoad component to extract.
Two cursors have been added for the ﬁrst symbol transmission. The ﬁrst cursor marks
the time where the BBU generator makes the ﬁrst column of symbols available to RoE.
The second cursor marks the time where RoE RX has demapped all the symbols and
made them available to the radio layer. The time diﬀerence between the two is thus
the component traversal time for RoE TX and RX which is indicated as 16.1 μs. This
fulﬁls requirement E of the requirement speciﬁcation which states that the end-to-end
component delay including RX and TX shall be no higher than 150 μs. In fact the
ﬁrst symbol for which the traversal time is measured to 16.1 μs can be said to be
the worst case delay since the symbol column is fully occupied. The third symbol
in the subframe contains only user data which in the case of R.1 is a single RB/12
subcarriers. With few subcarriers to transport the end-to-end delay is reduced to 10
μs.
The low number of subcarriers that are transported in a column with mostly PDSCH
mapped data is clearly shown on the highlighted l1_ram_data signals for RoE TX
and RX in ﬁgure 5.9. The ﬁrst two columns show signiﬁcant changes of l1_ram_data
for a long period of time while the third and fourth column transfer show little data
transfer. This indicates that the RoE system is successful in transporting a varying
number of subcarriers.
How much data is then transported over time and how does this compare to the
previous estimates of fronthaul load? Such information can be acquired from the
gathered statistics. For each of the ﬁrst two columns three Ethernet frames are used
to transport the fully loaded subcarriers while a single Ethernet frame is suﬃcient to
transport the third column. Whenever a frame has been transmitted it is indicated
by the tx_eop_o signal.
For an LTE frame of 10 ms the RoE component transmitted 71,244 bytes over 180
Ethernet frames which corresponds to a 57 Mbps average data rate. Compared to
previous estimates a 1 % loaded cell should contribute 3.7 Mbps to the fronthaul load
including a 10 % overhead ﬁgure. The large discrepancy is not surprising as it can be
attributed to several well known factors. The ﬁrst is that the control channels which
comprise two out of 14 symbol columns in every subframe are indicated as fully loaded
by the BBU generator. This would not be the case for a real LTE signal, however, it
was a necessary technical design choice. A second factor is that the PBCH has not
been accounted for in the fronthaul load estimations. These two factors contribute
an approximate 14 % additional load corresponding to 24,280 subcarriers out of an
LTE frame’s 168,000. When including this information in the estimation model the
calculated data rate becomes considerably closer to the simulated scenario:
(1200 · 14) symbol
subframe · 10
bit
sample · symbol · 2 sample
antenna · 1antenna
·1000subframe
second
· 0.15 load = 50.4Mbps
(5.1)
==PAGE:83==
5.3 System simulation
71
Figure 5.9: Simulation of R.1 with an overview of end-to-end data ﬂow for the ﬁrst
4 symbol columns
Including a 10 % overhead the model predicts 55.4 Mbps.
The conclusion to draw is that the estimation model in itself is quite adequate to
predict the fronthaul load, however, it should also account for subcarriers allocated
to the control channels as well as the PBCH.
Overall the simulation of reference channel R.1 is deemed to be successful; the RoE
component is able to transport a varying load of subcarriers and reassemble these in
the receiver RAM. The following scenario R.9 is more interesting as it maintains the
same cell conﬁguration, but at full cell load.
5.3.3
R.9 simulation
The R.9 reference channel allocates all subframes except subframe #5 where just the
control channels are occupied. Such usage corresponds to approximately 88 % cell
load which the fronthaul load model estimates to 325 Mbps average load including a
10 % overhead.
The simulation itself shows that 384.717 bytes were transmitted over 369 Ethernet
frames over the course of an LTE frame which leads to an average data rate of 307.8
Mbps. The RoE implementation therefore demonstrates an overhead much smaller
than 10%. This is quite expected since transmitting a large contiguous block of sub-
==PAGE:84==
72
5 Implementation and Simulation
carriers requires a minimal amount of overhead. In fact the simulation shows that
1200 subcarriers, each at 20 bit is transported with three Ethernet frames for a total
of 3111 bytes transmitted. Out of 3111 bytes 96 were used as overhead for RoE and
Ethernet in general. The transport overhead is thus 3% for a fully loaded LTE cell.
Figure 5.10: Simulation of R.9 illustrating the transmission of three Ethernet frames
indicated by the EOP signal. The last frame contains very little pay-
load and therefore contributes a signiﬁcant overhead relative to its
payload
Particularly interesting the R.9 scenario presents an unfortunate payload distri-
bution among the Ethernet frames which is documented in ﬁgure 5.10. When 1200
subcarriers are allocated, three Ethernet frames are transmitted with the ﬁrst two
transporting 1509 bytes each while the third packet contains a mere 93 bytes for the
remaining few subcarriers. The overhead for transporting the tailing subcarriers is,
while minuscule, not ideal. One method to address this is to use Ethernet frames with
a larger maximum transport unit (MTU) thus reducing the overhead of transporting
a trailing RoE payload.
Figure 5.11: Top level overview of simulation R.9 for the duration of an LTE frame
A high-level overview for the R.9 simulation is given in ﬁgure 5.11. It shows the
data ﬂow of subcarriers from the BBU generator to the RoE TX ports and ﬁnally the
==PAGE:85==
5.3 System simulation
73
demapper within the RoE RX. As shown there is no disruption of the encapsulation
or decapsulation procedures. A signiﬁcant pause in data is shown at 5 ms which is
the well known unallocated subframe # 5. The same unallocated pattern is displayed
in both TX and RX directions.
A closer inspection conﬁrms that subcarriers for
the columns are being received and demapped correctly. No errors are detected nor
reported by any subcomponents.
5.3.4
R.11 simulation
The RoE implementation has thus far proved capable of transporting subcarriers for a
20 MHz 1 antenna LTE cell at both low and high cell loads. In R.11 the antenna count
is doubled and the bandwidth halved. The resulting fronthaul load should therefore
be quite similar to R.9 with minor diﬀerences due to overhead.
With R.11 it is
possible to verify the base capability of the RoE implementation to be conﬁgurable
for a diﬀerent number of antennas and lower bandwidths. Naturally the fact that no
issues come up for R.11 does not exclude the possibility for issues to appear at even
lower bandwidths or with higher antenna counts. Veriﬁcation should take place for
all conﬁgurations, but is in this work limited to the aforementioned reference channel
scenarios.
Figure 5.12: Select signals from aggregator and deaggregator in the R.11 simulation
Nevertheless, new functionality is displayed by the RoE component when conﬁg-
ured with multiple antennas. Namely the aggregation procedure where frames are
multiplexed from diﬀerent packetizers. This can be seen in ﬁgure 5.12 which displays
a selection of signals from the aggregator in RoE TX and deaggregator in RoE RX.
What is shown is that the tx_buf_empty signal goes to ”00” indicating that both
antenna layer packetizers have one or more Ethernet frames in the buﬀer. The ag-
gregator then selects antenna layer 0 which initiates a transmission of an Ethernet
==PAGE:86==
74
5 Implementation and Simulation
frame. The transmission is then seen on the highlighted signal tx_data_i which is
an array of 2x64 bits. First layer 0 transmits a packet and afterwards layer 1. This
is repeated once more with a smaller packet from each of the antenna layers.
Similarly on the receiver side the deaggregator demultiplexes the incoming packets to
the correct antenna layer based on the ﬂow ID in each RoE packet header.
An interesting implication of multiplexing that can be observed directly from ﬁg-
ure 5.12 is that the second antenna layer packet is delayed by the transmission of
the ﬁrst antenna layer. The delay is proportional to the frame size and in this case
constitutes an additional 1.2 μs end-to-end delay since subcarrier data is made avail-
able to all layers simultaneously. The eﬀect is not of much concern with two antenna
layers, however, may be so with 8 antennas. In such an event the worst case delay
experienced by one of the antenna layers would be 8.4 μs which combined with the
baseline RoE end-to-end delay is a 50 % increase. The worst case delay for transmit-
ting radio data for 8 layers is then 24.5 μs and this is positively still within bounds of
the established 150 μs requirement. However, the delay can be aggravated further by
increasing the total I/Q sample width to 40 bit. This in eﬀect doubles the payload
size and the transmission time on the Ethernet link leading to an absolute worst case
delay of 32.9 μs. Despite maximizing delay components the end result remains within
speciﬁcation requirements.
As one may have noticed from the tx_eop_o signal, despite having all subcarriers
occupied in R.11 just 2 packets are necessary to transmit an entire column for each
antenna layer. This indicates that the RoE implementation is correctly transmitting
600 subcarriers due to the 10 MHz cell bandwidth setup.
In terms of performance metrics the gathered statistics show that each antenna layer
over the course of 10 ms transmitted 188,213 bytes in 241 Ethernet frames averaging
a 150.6 Mbps average data rate. The combined average fronthaul load is thus 301.2
Mbps which is as expected quite similar to the 1 antenna 20 MHz load scenario. The
value is lower due to additional reference signal occupation of subcarriers when the
cell is conﬁgured with two antennas.
For the entire simulation the R.11 scenario did not trigger any error or faults within
the RoE design. All packets were received correctly and the payload is observed to
be correctly demapped/mapped between the RAM interfaces.
5.4
Requirement fulﬁlment
Based on the above simulation results a number of preliminary comments and conclu-
sions can be established to the requirement speciﬁcation list for the RoE component.
For the sake of convenience the requirement speciﬁcation list is replicated in table
5.13.
Each requirement is assigned one of three states:
• Passed: Indicates full compliance with the requirement.
==PAGE:87==
5.4 Requirement fulfilment
75
Req. ID
Requirement
Value
A
RoE data rate
10 Gbps
B
I/Q sample width
8-20 bits
C
Antenna ports
1, 2, 4, 8
D
Clock frequency
156.25 MHz
F
Component delay
<= 75 μs
G
Cell bandwidth
1.4, 3, 5, 10, 15, 20 MHz
Table 5.13: List of requirements for the RoE component
• Passed with comments: Indicates compliance based on all established simula-
tions, however, may not have been fully veriﬁed for all conﬁgurations on hard-
ware/simulation.
• Not passed: An issue exists that prevents fulﬁlling the requirement.
5.4.1
RoE data rate
The 10 Gbps requirement for the RoE data interface is very much given by the design
and is established as 10 Gbps with a 64 bit data port and 8 bit control. However, the
implementation should be realizable in hardware at the speciﬁed clock frequency of
156.25 MHz and is therefore dependent on requirement D. Route and place implemen-
tations in Vivado 2015.4 show that the RoE does in fact achieve timing closure with
no violations for a core clock of 156.25 MHz. Requirement A is therefore concluded
as passed.
5.4.2
I/Q sample width
The I/Q sample width requirement is given by the system design. Both RoE TX
and RX can be instantiated with the IQ_WIDTH generic set between 16-40 bit total
sample width. However, end-to-end system level simulation has only utilized 20 bit
sample width (10 bit for each I and Q) while individual testing has been done for
varying sample widths, especially for the largest and smallest conﬁguration. For that
reason requirement B is concluded as passed with comments.
5.4.3
Antenna ports
Similar to the I/Q sample requirement the antenna port is conﬁgurable at compile-
time. Both one and two antenna port designs have been thoroughly veriﬁed in both
simulations and hardware while four and eight antenna port have only been veriﬁed
in simulation. However, if any complications should arise this is expected to be from
within the deaggregator/aggregator modules. Requirement C is therefore concluded
as passed with comments.
==PAGE:88==
76
5 Implementation and Simulation
5.4.4
Clock frequency
As previously discussed place and route runs show that the RoE design can be real-
ized with a 156.25 MHz core clock without timing violations. These implementation
runs have been done for 8 antenna conﬁguration which is the largest possible design
instantiation. No timing violations were reported for RX/TX.
Requirement D is therefore concluded as passed.
5.4.5
Component delay
Results from the simulation show that the absolute worst case end-to-end delay will
occur with an 8 antenna conﬁguration and 40 bit total sample width since the RoE
component delay is dependent on payload size and antenna layers. The delays expe-
rienced by the diﬀerent antenna layers are not identical since packets are multiplexed
on a single link - one layer’s Ethernet frames will necessarily be more delayed than
others. A worst case delay of 32.9 μs has been estimated which is well within bounds
of the requirement. Requirement F is therefore seen as passed.
5.4.6
Cell bandwidth
Requirement G states that the RoE implementation should support every LTE band-
width allocation between 1.4 MHz and 20 MHz. This can be conﬁgured through the
N_SUBCARRIER and K generics. The simulation veriﬁes successful operation in
10/20 MHz conﬁguration, but the remaining bandwidths have not been veriﬁed on an
end-to-end basis. Nevertheless, the method in which this is implemented is incredibly
trivial and it is fully expected that the design can comply with the speciﬁed subcarrier
and bandwidth count. Requirement G is therefore passed with comments.
5.5
Summary
In summary, an overview has been given for the implemented RoE component in
speciﬁc its conﬁguration options and port descriptions.
The component has then
been veriﬁed through a simulation test bench which generates one of three 3GPP
LTE reference channels as input stimuli to the component. These reference channels
cover the case of single and two antenna deployments as well as 10 and 20 MHz cell
bandwidth. In all three cases the RoE component proved successful in transporting
the statically generated LTE frame from the TX module to the RX module.
Based on simulation results and implementation runs in the Vivado design suite
the table 5.14 lists the degree to which the RoE component fulﬁls the established
requirement speciﬁcation. Note that certain conﬁguration options, especially those
with a large degree of freedom have not been fully veriﬁed. This can be attributed
partially to lack of suﬃcient input stimuli from the MATLAB LTE Toolbox and tim-
ing constraints. Out of these only requirement B is deemed as a high-risk for potential
==PAGE:89==
5.5 Summary
77
Req. ID
Requirement
State
Comment
A
RoE data rate
Passed
B
I/Q sample width
Passed w. comment
Not
veriﬁed
at
system
level for all conﬁgurations
C
Antenna ports
Passed w. comment
Not
veriﬁed
at
system
level for 4-8 antenna
D
Clock frequency
Passed
F
Component delay
Passed
G
Cell bandwidth
Passed w. comment
Unveriﬁed for 1.4-5,
15
MHz
Table 5.14: Requirement speciﬁcation fulﬁlment for the RoE component
issues to arise.
The following chapter presents the integration of the RoE component into a test
platform to demonstrate the feasibility of a RRH with split 4 type NGFI enabled
by RoE, L1 oﬄoading and TSN MAC. The test cases are identical to the reference
channels utilized in the simulation test bench.
==PAGE:90==
78
==PAGE:91==
CHAPTER 6
Hardware Validation
The previous veriﬁcation gave credibility to the RoE component in a virtual environ-
ment. The design seems capable of performing the envisioned transport of split 4
radio data in accordance to the given input stimuli. This may be not be the case
once deployed in hardware where several clock domains are introduced and where
synchronization issues can prove disastrous to a design.
This chapter will therefore review the hardware validation of not only RoE, but a
proof-of-concept LTE RRH that incorporates a split 4 NGFI interface in place of e.g.
CPRI to the BBU.
The ﬁrst section presents the test platform which is the ﬁrst of section 3.1.2 suggested
phases of test platforms. The remaining three sections present test results for the R.1,
R.9 and R.11 test cases.
6.1
Test platform overview
As mentioned the test platform is established on a single FPGA in accordance to the
ﬁrst of the test platform phases. In this phase a single FPGA comprises both the
BBU simulation entity as well as the RRH implementation which is the device under
test. The BBU simulation entity does not implement any of the LTE protocol stacks,
but generates RoE frames to simulate as such. The RoE frames are transmitted over
a 10G Ethernet interface and looped back to where the NGFI enabled LTE RRH
resides. The beneﬁt of such a platform is that clocks can be shared between the two
entities thereby obviating the need for establishing synchronization between the BBU
and RRH.
Figure 6.1 delivers an overview over the established test platform including vari-
ous test equipment and auxiliary parts. Certain third party components have been
excluded in order to minimize needless overhead. The coloured areas illustrate the
diﬀerent clock domains and their interface points across the design on the FPGA.
The implementation target is an XC7VX690T FPGA chip which is integrated on the
Xilinx VC709 development board. A comprehensive hardware list is given in table
6.3.
The top sectioned part of ﬁgure 6.1 contains the entities used to simulate the BBU
entity of the test platform. It is conﬁgured in the same manner as the RoE TX and
BBU generator within the RoE simulation test bench. The BBU generator delivers a
column of LTE subcarriers at appropriate intervals to the RoE TX component which
==PAGE:92==
80
6 Hardware Validation
SFP+
SFP+
TSN MAC
RoE Tx
R
A
M
LTE Data 
ROM
BBU GEN
LTE Time
ETH GEN
ANAlYZER
TSN MAC
RoE Rx
L1 DL Offload
R
A
M
LTE Time
R&S FSW Signal and 
Spectrum Analyzer
TX1/TX2
SI5324
@156.25 MHz
L1 PLL
XC7VX690T
I2C
MicroBlaze
AXI GPIO
AXI SPI
AD9361 
Digital 
interface
CPU AXI interface
DAC
FMCOMMS3
FMC
Tx FIFO
l1_clk
eth_clk
tx_clk domain @ 61.44 MHz
spi_clk domain @ 50 MHz
l1_clk domain @ 245.76 MHz
cpu_clk domain @ 100 MHz
eth_clk domain @ 156.25 MHz
spi_clk
BBU
RRH
I/Q
tx_clk
Figure 6.1: Overview of the hardware validation test platform
encapsulates these in Ethernet frames. The Ethernet frames are passed on to the
TSN MAC on its express interface thus classifying the RoE traﬃc as prioritized. On
the preemption port of the TSN MAC an Ethernet frame generator and analyzer is
attached. In short this entity is referred to as the frame generator. The purpose of
the frame generator is to generate Ethernet frames of a conﬁgurable size in a pseudo-
random fashion to simulate the existence of background traﬃc on the Ethernet link.
The TSN MAC transmits Ethernet frames via a 10 Gbps Ethernet interface en-
abled by the Xilinx 10 Gigabit Ethernet PCS/PMA (10GBASE-R) IP Core[34]. The
10GBASE-R core serializes the received data stream for transmission over the optical
ﬁber link and is logically positioned within the physical layer of an Ethernet link.
On the receive end the 10 Gbps data stream is deserialized and delivered to another
instance of the TSN MAC. Depending on whether the traﬃc is express or preemption
==PAGE:93==
6.1 Test platform overview
81
it is presented to RoE RX or the frame generator, respectively. The frames destined
to the frame generator are used to gather statistics for delay variation, peak latency
and so forth.
RoE RX demaps the payload and delivers radio data to L1 oﬄoad. Here the radio
data is processed and synchronization as well as reference signals are inserted into
the LTE resource map. The output of L1 oﬄoad is a stream of I/Q samples in the
time domain, these are queued up and delivered in a timely fashion to a customized
AD9361 interface. The AD9361 is an integrated RF transceiver incorporated on an
AD-FMCOMMS3-EBZ evaluation board. In other words, the D/A converter respon-
sible for generating the analogue downlink LTE signal. The output of the DAC is
analyzed by a R&S® FSW13 Signal and Spectrum Analyzer[31].
From a mobile network perspective the above hardware validation platform corre-
sponds to the ﬁgure 6.2 illustrated arrangement of the RRH and BBU. The ﬁgure 6.1
shown FPGA chip is thus located within the RRH of ﬁgure 6.2.
XC7VX690T FPGA (VC709 evaluation board)
10G TSN 
MAC
RoE
L1 Offload
Fronthaul / NGFI
RRH
RF
L1 (Partially Offloaded)
MAC
RLC
PDCP
BBU
LTE Protocol 
Stack
Ethernet
RoE TX
10Gbps
Figure 6.2: Overview of the hardware validation test platform from the perspective
of the mobile network
A number of other components external to the ﬂow of radio data are also shown in
ﬁgure 6.1. MicroBlaze is a softcore microprocessor used to interface with a majority
of components on the FPGA through the AXI interface. Each component interfacing
with MicroBlaze is marked with a circle. Through this interface statistics can be
extracted for errors and general run-time performance. Furthermore, the Microblaze
executes a program during start up to conﬁgure the AD9361 RF chip for the speciﬁc
LTE test case scenario. The conﬁguration takes place through a Serial Peripheral
Interface (SPI) bus directly connected to the AD9631.
SI5324 is a Silicon Labs clock multiplier and jitter attenuator. In the test platform it
is used to deliver a clock to the Ethernet transceivers and in extension the Ethernet
clock domain.
==PAGE:94==
82
6 Hardware Validation
Part
Count
Producer
Comment
Virtex-7
FPGA
VC709
1
Xilinx
BBU/RRH
implementa-
tion
10G
SFP+
transceiver AFBR-
709SMZ
2
Avago
10GBASE-SR
compliant
transceiver
AD-FMCOMMS3-
EBZ
1
Analog Devices
DAC daughter board
R&S FSW13[31]
1
Rohde&Schwarz
Signal and Spectrum ana-
lyzer
Fiber OM3 50/125
Multimode
2
-
Multimode ﬁber cable to
loopback Ethernet link
SMA coaxial cable
1
-
Connector between DAC
and FSW
Table 6.3: Part list for hardware test platform
A sophisticated software suite on the R&S FSW makes it possible to analyze a
received signal according to a variety of protocols and in particular LTE. With FSW
one can carefully inspect a sampled LTE frame down to the subcarrier resolution. De-
tailed information can be displayed about Error Vector Magnitude (EVM), physical
channel allocation, power measurements, channel decoding, etc. This data will be
used to verify the integrity of the generated LTE signal and validate the end-to-end
system of a split 4 type LTE RRH proof of concept implementation.
Each of the three, table 5.7, listed reference channels are executed as test cases
on the described test platform. The result of each test case and their implication are
presented in each of the following sections.
6.2
R.1 hardware validation
In accordance with R.1 the system is conﬁgured with one transmit antenna and 20
MHz bandwidth. In this reference channel a single user is allocated one subframe for
9 subframes out of the full LTE frame. Figure 6.4 shows a power spectrum overview
of the generated signal. Interestingly enough it is possible to see the synchronization
and broadcast channels which are allocated in the center part of the spectrum as well
as the user data which is allocated in the left most part of the spectrum. The power
measured for user data is signiﬁcantly higher than synchronization and broadcast.
The reason for this is that the number of allocated subcarriers diﬀer. For user data
one resource block is allocated for 9 subframes while synchronization and broadcast
channel only occupy two subframes. As a result more power is spent transmitting
==PAGE:95==
6.2 R.1 hardware validation
83
user data than synchronization and broadcast.
Note that the LTE tool reports successful synchronization to the LTE cell generated
by the RRH.
Figure 6.4: R.1: Power spectrum window showing subcarrier occupancy across the
20 MHz spectrum
Now to take a closer look at the LTE frame allocation to conﬁrm that subcarriers
are correctly mapped and transported throughout the system. The power received
on each subcarrier can be mapped across an LTE frame to indicate the allocation of
active data. This is shown in ﬁgure 6.5. At the center of the carrier in subframe 0
and subframe 5 one can see the transmission of the two synchronization signals as
well as the PBCH in the ﬁrst subframe. Note that the horizontal axis is marked by
symbols of which there are 14 per subframe. Subframe 0 is thus allocated between
symbol 0-13 and subframe 5 between symbol 70 and 83.
In the lower most part of the graph a signiﬁcant amount of subcarriers are shown to
be allocated for the entirety of the LTE frame. These are the 12 subcarriers (one RB)
which have been allocated to the user in the PDSCH. However, the PDSCH should
not be occupied in subframe 5 which seems to be the case. This can be attributed to
==PAGE:96==
84
6 Hardware Validation
an interpretation fault during implementation of the BBU generator where it was not
observed that subframe 5 was unallocated. For that reason the BBU generator does
in fact still transmit user data in the ﬁfth subframe and hence why it can be detected
by the signal analyzer. The RRH implementation still functions as expected.
Figure 6.5: R.1: Transmit power overview per subcarrier for an LTE frame
The fact that power is detected in the correct locations does not imply that the
correct modulation is used, that the physical channels are mapped correctly or that
the decoded data adheres to the LTE protocol. By displaying EVM measurements for
the LTE frame it is possible to determine whether the physical channels and signals
are mapped to the correct locations within the LTE resource grid. The reason for this
is that diﬀerent channels use diﬀerent modulations and if a reference channel symbol
which uses QPSK modulation is suddenly mispositioned where a 16QAM PDSCH
symbol is expected then this would register as high EVM. Similarly if null data is
mapped to a location where data is expected such as a ﬁxed reference signal position
or user data then this would also show up as a high EVM reading.
Figure 6.6 displays EVM measurements for each subcarrier in the LTE frame (top),
EVM for each subframe (left) and EVM vs the carrier (right). As shown the EVM
==PAGE:97==
6.2 R.1 hardware validation
85
Figure 6.6: R.1: EVM overview per subcarrier for an LTE frame (top), EVM per
subframe (left) and EVM for the carrier (right)
readings are very low for the entire LTE frame and the average EVM for all channels
is less than 0.4 % . There is no substantial fallout or indication that any subcarrier
is modulated incorrectly, misplaced or lost in transmission. The implication is that
the RoE component is successfully mapping, transmitting and demapping all received
subcarrier I/Q data throughout the system. If a single packet or a number of packets
were lost this would be indicated as a high EVM reading due to null-mapped subcar-
riers on e.g. the lower most subcarriers where user data is expected. Furthermore,
when extracting statistics from registers in the system no errors were reported from
the RoE RX component, the TSN MAC and L1 oﬄoad.
Further validation can be performed to the data integrity and LTE protocol ad-
herence by having the FSW decode the LTE channels. This displays the contained
bit stream and their semantics which can be compared to expectations. Figure 6.7
displays the decoded results for the ﬁrst few subframes. As shown the correct cell
conﬁguration has been decoded from the PBCH which shows 20 MHz, 1 TX/RX and
that the frame number is 0. The LTE frame number will, however, always be zero
==PAGE:98==
86
6 Hardware Validation
Figure 6.7: R.1: Channel decoder output
since it is a static frame that is being repeated continuously by the BBU generator.
Furthermore, the PCFICH correctly identiﬁes two symbols allocated for the PDCCH.
The results presented so far indicate that the system is working well within expec-
tations and no issues have been detected. The following R.9 test case may change
this as additional stress is exerted on the system by transmitting fully occupied LTE
frames.
6.3
R.9 hardware validation
The R.9 cell conﬁguration is identical to R.1, however, a single user is allocated all
resources of the cell. A similar implementation fault results in the subframe 5 being
occupied while it should not according to the reference channel properties. This does
not have an negative impact on the test platform measurements besides there being
an additional subframe worth of user data.
An overview of power vs symbol for a full LTE frame is shown in ﬁgure 6.8. The
control allocated columns are now fully visible due to their low subcarrier occupancy.
Only a limited amount of control is necessary to indicate full bandwidth allocation
==PAGE:99==
6.3 R.9 hardware validation
87
to a single user. The PDSCH is shown as fully occupied in all subframes as expected.
In subframe 0 and 5 the synchronization channels are visible at the center of the
carrier along with their guard band subcarriers located at the top and bottom of the
synchronization channel.
Figure 6.8: R.9: Transmit power overview per subcarrier for an LTE frame
The FSW indicates the mean EVM measured for all channels as 0.53 % with the
64QAM modulated PDSCH at 0.57 %. The 3GPP established limit for 64QAM in
LTE is 8 %[7]. If such a value is not possible the user should presumably be allo-
cated a more robust modulation scheme such as 16QAM for which the limit is 12.5
%. Naturally this is a closed system with limited interference from power ampliﬁers
and wireless transmission and EVM should therefore expected to be minimal.
A constellation diagram shown in ﬁgure 6.9 of the received modulation symbols il-
lustrates the high quality of the signal. The yellow marked points are the 64QAM
modulated PDSCH symbols, orange are the QPSK modulated PBCH symbols as well
as reference signals.
It is deemed unnecessary to include further screenshots from the FSW to document
the R.9 test results as no issues were identiﬁed. However, if the results are of interest
the remaining ﬁgures for EVM measurements, power spectrum and result summary
==PAGE:100==
88
6 Hardware Validation
Figure 6.9: R.9: Constellation diagram of all received subcarriers for a single LTE
frame
of the channel can be found in appendix A.1.
Overall the R.9 test case is deemed successful. The system has proved capable of
transporting split 4 radio data for a fully occupied 20 MHz LTE cell with one antenna
layer at an estimated Ethernet throughput of approximately 310 Mbps.
6.4
R.11 hardware validation
The ﬁnal test case seeks to validate the system’s ability to generate and multiplex
a stream of RoE data for two antenna layers.
For RoE this speciﬁcally validates
multi-antenna layer conﬁguration and 10 MHz bandwidth.
Overall similar behaviour was observed with R.11 as in the previous test cases.
The cell conﬁguration was automatically detected as a 10 MHz cell with two transmit
antennas. EVM measurements and diagrams show that all subcarriers are mapped
correctly and data is located as expected with one exception. It was discovered that
the physical synchronization signals are not expected by the FSW signal analyzer to
be located in both antenna layers as was otherwise understood. This is observed in
==PAGE:101==
6.4 R.11 hardware validation
89
Figure 6.10: R.11: Physical channel and signal allocation (top), transmit power per
subcarrier (bottom) for antenna layer 1
ﬁgure 6.10 where the top part is an overview over the allocation of physical channels
and signals and the bottom view the now familiar power vs subcarrier for antenna
port 1. The synchronization allocation is blacked out indicating the subcarriers to be
null-valued, however, it is still being transmitted as shown in the power per subcarrier
graph.
Nonetheless, this is a minor design issue and is out of scope for the RoE implemen-
tation since generating and mapping synchronization signals occurs within the L1
oﬄoad component. The remaining measurement results from the FSW for R.11 can
be found in appendix A.2 along with short commentary.
In none of the above test cases has the usage of the frame generator to generate
background traﬃc on the Ethernet link been mentioned. The reason for this is that the
TSN MAC became corrupted when both express and preemption traﬃc was provided.
Such issues were not observed in the preliminary simulation eﬀorts as part of the
hardware test platform and due to time constraints it was not possible to identify
and correct the defect. As a consequence none of the test results include background
traﬃc on the Ethernet link.
==PAGE:102==
90
6 Hardware Validation
6.5
Summary
A test platform for a fully integrated LTE RRH with functional split 4 has been
established on a Xilinx VC709 evaluation board. The VC709 contains both a BBU
simulating entity to generate RoE frames with split 4 type radio data and the RRH
system. The RoE frames are looped back over a 10 Gbps Ethernet link to the RRH.
This is the ﬁrst of several suggested phases for testing such a functional split in LTE.
Three reference channels R.1, R.9 and R.11 were used as test cases to validate a 20
MHz single antenna layer and a 10 MHz two antenna layer cell conﬁguration. In all
cases the LTE signal analyzer tool indicated a high quality LTE signal with no de-
tection of mislocated subcarriers. An issue was discovered with regards to allocation
of synchronization signals on the antenna layers, but it is out of scope for the RoE
component.
Due to issues within the TSN MAC it has not been possible to execute the test cases
with background traﬃc on the Ethernet link. The validation of such is deemed to be
part of future work.
With the overall successful validation of the functionally split RRH and in ex-
tension the RoE component the following chapter will discuss the RoE component
implementation as well as future prospects of RoE in the role of functionally split
mobile networks and C-RAN.
==PAGE:103==
CHAPTER 7
System evaluation and
network integration
With basis in the veriﬁcation and hardware validation results this chapter presents
a detailed discussion and evaluation of the solution with focus on two aspects. One
is the RoE component design and implementation with the purpose of identifying
shortcomings and areas suitable for future work. The second is RoE as a part of a
larger general solution for enabling NGFI, a more eﬃcient C-RAN fronthaul and thus
a potentially more cost-eﬀective mobile network. The former and latter take place in
the ﬁrst and second sections, respectively.
7.1
RoE component implementation
The implemented RoE solution proved to function as desired for a subset of its possible
conﬁguration parameters.
The established test cases veriﬁed the RoE component
with regards to one and two antenna layers, 20 MHz and 10 MHz cell bandwidths
and a 20 bit total I/Q subcarrier width. The remaining conﬁgurations have only seen
limited veriﬁcation in the ModelSim simulation tool and a full end-to-end RoE system
veriﬁcation should be included as part of future work. Despite this several areas of
improvement can already be identiﬁed for the component. These are reviewed below.
7.1.1
Padding overhead
An important shortcoming of the current implementation is the usage of padding to
align the range indicators, ScStart and ScEnd, to a 64-bit chunk. This has simpliﬁed
the receive processing mechanism since the range indicator could be expected to be
located in a ﬁxed position instead of a dynamic one.
In general limited padding overhead was detected in the test cases. This is due to
the small number of gaps between active ranges of subcarriers in the testbed radio
data. In all cases the PDSCH allocation is one contiguous block of subcarriers. If
it had been possible to acquire a more active dataset of reference channels from the
MATLAB LTE Toolbox an accurate estimate could have been established to how this
padding solution contributes to overhead in the RoE protocol. A decision can then be
made on the trade-oﬀbetween reduced overhead versus increasing receive processing
complexity.
==PAGE:104==
92
7 System evaluation and network integration
A tertiary method to address padding overhead is to make the LTE resource scheduler
aware of the RoE protocol structure. The concatenation of allocated RBs is then
encouraged in order to minimize the overhead associated with range indicators.
7.1.2
Synchronization
Little thought has been given to the synchronization aspect of establishing a packet
based fronthaul to transport time-sensitive radio data. The current implementation
of RoE utilizes sequence numbers in the ordering info to identify when a speciﬁc
payload should be delivered to the radio layer. This is possible mainly because the
BBU generator and L1 oﬄoad components share the same clock domain in the test
platform. Though this would not be possible in a multi-RRH device scenario since
the RoE payloads would arrive at diﬀerent times and not be delivered to the radio
layer simultaneously. The result are neighbouring cells that are desynchronized and
incapable of performing cooperative procedures. For that reason it would be beneﬁcial
to utilize timestamps where a presentation time is included for each payload and to
ensure that the BBU pool and RRHs share a common understanding of the Time
of Day (ToD). With a presentation time the RoE components can coordinate the
delivery of radio data to nanosecond accuracy. Naturally this requires a mechanism
for clock synchronization across the RAN and may be facilitated by 1588/PTP, GPS
or similar frequency and phase synchronization methods.
The disadvantage of timestamps is the inability to register packet losses especially for
variable bit rate services such as split 4 radio data. The 1904.3 task group is therefore
looking to modify the timestamp ﬁeld to include a 2-bit sequence counter to enable
the detection of infrequent packet losses.
7.1.3
Packet loss impact
Limited testing has been done in regards to the loss of RoE packets. Mainly because
the end results can be theorized and are diﬃcult to guard against. If an Ethernet
frame containing split 4 type radio data is corrupted and lost it is diﬃcult to minimize
the eﬀect of this on the radio layer. Hundreds of potential subcarriers may be lost.
In the best case the lost subcarriers only aﬀect a limited amount of users through the
PDSCH channel. The HARQ mechanism would then ensure that a retransmission
takes place within a few ms. However, if the lost payload contains radio data for a
control column then a complete subframe may be lost since the users are unable to
determine the allocation of data.
In general there is limited options for mitigating the eﬀects of packet loss. Re-
questing a retransmission of radio data would be done in vain as the resulting delay
on the payload would be too large. For a well-engineered fronthaul network such
losses should nonetheless be a rare occurrence.
However, the usage of 802.1CB TSN standard may be applied to the fronthaul net-
work to establish a high level of reliability[20]. 802.1CB provides a mean to replicate
==PAGE:105==
7.2 RoE and NGFI deployment
93
Ethernet frames across redundant paths towards the destination node. If a frame
becomes corrupted it will be replaced by replicas from a redundant stream.
The
implication is naturally that fronthaul load increases as a factor of redundant paths.
Such reliability measures may be unwarranted considering the already robust nature
of radio air interfaces.
7.1.4
Control and management
In a RoE deployment scenario with functional split 4 or simply CPRI over RoE it
should be expected that RoE links can be established remotely between RoE end
nodes. The current RoE component features a local CPU interface from which statis-
tics can be gathered and conﬁguration can take place of e.g. MAC addresses. It
would be more advantageous to have such functionality accessible directly through
the usage of RoE control packets. With these, diﬀerent link parameters can be agreed
upon, this could be anything from encryption, number of antenna layers, I/Q width,
CPRI line option, etc. For the 1904.3 RoE task group link establishment procedures
are out of scope, however, a number of conﬁgurable parameters are being deﬁned
and they are expected to be accessible via control packets. This would also allow for
remote monitoring and fault detection of the RoE link.
While the current implementation does not feature remote control capabilities it can
be readily implemented through the aggregator and deaggregator modules where con-
trol packets can be injected into the traﬃc stream and intercepted as necessary.
From the above it is clear that much future work remains for the RoE imple-
mentation. Whether the design will move forward hinges on the competitiveness of
functional splits and in particular split 4 in comparison to existing interfaces such
as CPRI and CPRI over Ethernet. In order to quantify the competitiveness of the
solution the following section analyzes and discusses the general viability of NGFI
and split 4. This is done in comparison to the choice of not engaging with functional
splits from the perspective of a mobile operator. Instead the operator may simply
transition to a packet based fronthaul with CPRI over Ethernet whose encapsulation
is also deﬁned in 1904.3 RoE.
7.2
RoE and NGFI deployment
The main focus of the 1904.3 RoE task group has been to deﬁne encapsulation meth-
ods for radio data already transported by CPRI. This is clearly the case as most of
the deﬁned solutions and mapping methods are CPRI-centric. In fact the task group
is currently only considering constant bit rate mappers as there has yet to be a clear
deﬁnition for variable rate radio data. However, it is not the intention for RoE to be
constrained to CPRI, but be as generic as possible to solve the transportation needs
for any radio data. This is partly the reason why that the 1904.3 RoE task group
is looking to migrate the project to the newly established 1914 NGFI working group
==PAGE:106==
94
7 System evaluation and network integration
within IEEE[23]. Within 1914 a project has been deﬁned for ”Standard for Packet-
based Fronthaul Transport Networks”. The work for this project entails specifying an
architecture for the transport of mobile fronthaul traﬃc and secondly requirements
and deﬁnitions for fronthaul networks.
However, it also seeks to analyze what is
referred to as functional partitioning schemes, i.e. functional splits. It might there-
fore be the case that RoE is extended in future versions to include mapping methods
for standardized fronthaul partitioning schemes similar to the RoE mapping method
implemented in this work.
A clear trend can be observed. The constant bit rate and point-to-point link CPRI
protocol will be transported over a packet based fronthaul opening up for savings by
using established and common technology. This is an excellent transition point for
legacy equipment as the CPRI interface can be maintained with an intermediate RoE
gateway. Meanwhile eﬀort is being put into not only deﬁning, but standardizing func-
tional splits through NGFI to replace constant bit rate standards such as CPRI.
An operator might therefore entertain one of several strategies with regards to
transitioning their mobile network to a centralized C-RAN like deployment. The ﬁrst
obvious option is to reject the premise of C-RAN and the centralization of processing
resources. Such considerations have taken place in other works and remains out of
scope for this. Assuming that the operator seeks to deploy C-RAN the options that
remain are deployment of C-RAN with either traditional CPRI, CPRI over Ethernet
or a functional split RAN with NGFI such as the solution developed in this work.
For both, Ethernet solutions standards and products are being developed[11]. How-
ever, in terms of modiﬁcations to legacy equipment NGFI requires both the BBU and
RRH to incorporate the functional split. On the other hand, CPRI only requires the
BBUs to become centralized so long as existing RRHs provide a CPRI interface. As
a consequence a C-RAN deployment with a CPRI packet based fronthaul will have
a shorter time to market than an NGFI solution. Since the RRH and BBU interface
must be modiﬁed this also increases CAPEX for deployment of NGFI based C-RAN
compared to pure CPRI. One may argue that the increased expense can be oﬀset
by reduced load on the fronthaul with NGFI and the potential for utilizing available
network capacity for other services. Such an economic analysis is diﬃcult to establish.
In place of this a scenario in the following section is used to showcase the diﬀerence
in network capacity for CPRI over Ethernet and this work’s solution of split 4 NGFI
with RoE.
7.2.1
Scenario analysis
A deployment of 10 cell sites is used as the scenario base. Each cell site utilizes the
table 7.1 listed conﬁguration. Table 7.1 also lists the estimated fronthaul load from
the site based on a 50 % average busy hour load across all cells. In both cases 15
bit I/Q sample width is assumed due to its optimal size for the CPRI line options
payload.
==PAGE:107==
7.2 RoE and NGFI deployment
95
With four antennas the reference signals in an LTE cell constitute 14.3 % of transmit-
ted subcarriers[15]. These are not included in the estimation of NGFI fronthaul load
since the reference signals are generated at the RRH. The calculated NGFI RoE load
is based on the fronthaul load estimation model with 43 % occupation of subcarriers
and the addition of a 3 % overhead value associated with RoE and Ethernet. A 43 %
subcarrier occupation is based on half of the available PDSCH subcarriers including
all available control allocated subcarriers (PDCCH, PHICH, PCFICH).
Note that the CPRI RoE load value is not comparable to any of the CPRI line op-
tion bit rates. The reason being that 8B/10B line coding is removed when CPRI is
mapped to the RoE payload thus minimizing needless overhead.
Parameter
Value
Site conﬁguration
Bandwidth
20 MHz
Sectors/site
3
Antenna/sector
4
I/Q sample width
15 bits
Fronthaul properties
Busy hour avg. load
50 %
Ref. signal overhead
14.3 %
Subcarrier occupation
43 %
RoE NGFI load
2.7 Gbps
RoE CPRI load
12.4 Gbps
Table 7.1: Cell site characteristics for comparison of CPRI over Ethernet and split
4 NGFI
As highlighted there is a signiﬁcant and not surprising diﬀerence between the fron-
thaul load of RoE CPRI and RoE NGFI. For a large scale C-RAN deployment such
load distinctions severely aﬀect the fronthaul provisioning strategy and cost. The
aggregated capacity required for 10 of these cell sites exceeds 100 Gbps in the case of
CPRI, but is well under that for NGFI.
Assume that 10 cell sites are used as building blocks for a C-RAN deployment where
each cell site group is aggregated on a dedicated ﬁber link to a centrally located BBU
pool requiring 27 Gbps and 124 Gbps capacity for NGFI and CPRI, respectively. In
that case the aggregation ﬁber link which connects the BBU pool and the site group
can be dimensioned as 100 GbE for the NGFI scenario. For CPRI over Ethernet at
least two parallel streams of 100 GbE are required. The cost diﬀerence for ﬁber may
be assumed to be negligible as multiple ﬁbers are dug when deploying underground
ﬁber cables. The two 100 GbE streams can also be wavelength multiplexed over the
same ﬁber if required, however, at an increased equipment cost.
The diﬀerence in utilizing a single or two 100 Gbps aggregated streams to the
==PAGE:108==
96
7 System evaluation and network integration
BBU pool can hardly be assumed to make a signiﬁcant cost diﬀerence between NGFI
and CPRI over Ethernet. However, the fact that the NGFI fronthaul load, unlike
CPRI, is not dedicated, but statistically multiplexed frees a considerable amount of
network resources up for other services or additional cell site deployment capacity.
As the number of multiplexed sites increase, the 50 % average cell load dimensioning
criteria becomes conservative especially outside busy hours. The reason being that
busy hour is assumed to carry 15 % of daily traﬃc load[22].
For durations of low load 10 NGFI cell sites may therefore occupy as little as 1 Gbps
of fronthaul capacity while CPRI over Ethernet maintains 124 Gbps of network ca-
pacity at all times!
The low load that NGFI imposes on the fronthaul opens up for further cost savings
by reducing the need for dedicated ﬁber links between cell sites and the aggregation
point. A combined 2.7 Gbps fronthaul load can be expected for 50 % cell load across all
three sectors of a site. If this traﬃc can be transported over multi-gigabit microwave
radio (MWR) instead of ﬁber to an aggregation point, the number of ﬁber links are
substantially reduced. An example of such a MWR product is the Ericsson MINI-
LINK 6352 supporting 5 Gbps capacity over a 750 MHz channel[16].
By aggregating 10 cell sites with MWR the aggregate busy hour traﬃc is less
than 30 Gbps and a factor 10 reduction in ﬁber is achieved. The remaining traﬃc
capacity may be leased out to private or business customers and used as a part of a
metropolitan access and aggregation network for wired Internet access. This concept
is illustrated in ﬁgure 7.2.
For operators that do not own a substantial ﬁber network, reducing the need to
lease fronthaul network ﬁber can arguably put NGFI in favour. This is especially
the case since 100 Gbps oﬀers enough capacity to statistically multiplex more than
30 cell sites assuming that the provisioning strategy is based on a 50 % average load.
Nonetheless, in order for a MWR fronthaul to be feasible the MWR link should oﬀer a
low transmission delay to satisfy the 1 ms RTD requirement for the packet fronthaul.
NGFI therefore enables a substantially cheaper fronthaul and in extension C-RAN by
reducing ﬁber requirements. Whether this oﬀsets the CAPEX of exchanging legacy
RRHs with RRHs that implement a functional split can be argued. However, when
considering that future mobile networks require cooperative cell procedures and large
bandwidths in MIMO conﬁgurations it seems infeasible to deploy CPRI based C-
RAN without an extensive ﬁber network. Functional repartitioning of the LTE stack
between the RRH and BBU pool as has been demonstrated in this work may therefore
be an important tool in establishing future mobile networks with C-RAN.
7.3
Summary
While the RoE component is deemed successful in the proof of concept test platform
several untested conﬁgurations remain. The validation of these conﬁgurations are
reserved as part of future work. In addition a number of considerations have been
==PAGE:109==
7.3 Summary
97
Fiber
Site
MWR
BBU Pool
LTE EPC
Internet
Access
  Aggregation
Core
Private Customers
Institutions
Businesses
Figure 7.2: Deployment example of reducing ﬁber in the fronthaul by aggregating
numerous cell sites with MWR. Additional capacity can be leased out
as part of a wired access network to customers
made for additional features and improvements to the RoE component. This is es-
pecially in regards to padding overhead associated with indicating subcarrier ranges,
synchronization across a packet fronthaul and control and management features.
Based on the RoE solution in this work, fronthaul load values were estimated for a
cell site and compared to CPRI over Ethernet data rates. Due to the variable format
of radio data at functional split 4 substantially diﬀerent network capacity require-
ments were found when compared with packetized CPRI. The NGFI solution allows
for fronthaul traﬃc from dozens of sites to be aggregated through MWR links to an
aggregation point. From here the bidirectional traﬃc streams can be transported over
ﬁber to the BBU pool. The amount of ﬁber required is therefore signiﬁcantly reduced
leading to lower CAPEX associated with C-RAN fronthaul. Whether this oﬀsets the
deployment of NGFI enabled radio equipment depends on the operator’s ownership
of an existing ﬁber infrastructure and requires an in-depth cost beneﬁt analysis.
==PAGE:110==
98
7 System evaluation and network integration
==PAGE:111==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
Mobile data traﬃc is increasing at an incredible pace prompting operators to contin-
uously increase their network capacity, however, this must be done in the most cost
eﬀective manner in order to remain competitive.
The utilization of C-RAN is one method which promises to lower both CAPEX and
OPEX for the mobile network by centralizing baseband processing resources. Through
centralization savings are achieved by reducing costs associated with e.g. site rental
and idle processing while improving network performance through cooperative radio
procedures. However, C-RAN deployment is limited by the high cost fronthaul net-
work that must be established to carry constant bit rate I/Q samples between the
BBU pool and RRH. CPRI is an example of such a bandwidth demanding fronthaul
interface.
Ongoing standardization eﬀorts of the IEEE 1904.3 RoE task force are therefore
looking to enable a packet based fronthaul and transport CPRI over the ubiquitous
Ethernet thereby reducing fronthaul associated costs. Such a packet fronthaul estab-
lishes strict requirements to jitter and latency due to the constant bit rate nature of
CPRI. These may be fulﬁlled by deploying TSN features from the 802.1 TSN task
group.
Despite the potential beneﬁts of CPRI over Ethernet this work argues that the ineﬃ-
ciency of a constant bit rate service over a packet based fronthaul should be addressed.
This is mirrored in the industry where a strong movement away from CPRI and to-
wards a new interface is taking place. It is led by China Mobile Research Institute
and has been formalized through the establishment of an IEEE working group: 1914
Next Generation Fronthaul Interface Working Group. The objective is to design a
scalable and cost eﬃcient network interface and move beyond limiting interfaces such
as CPRI. The focus is on a packet based fronthaul network, traﬃc dependent fron-
thaul load and multipoint-to-multipoint coordination support. This is achievable by
repartitioning the functional split between the RRH and BBU and in eﬀect relocate
a select amount of the LTE protocol stack to the RRH.
To demonstrate the feasibility of NGFI this work has sought to implement a proof
of concept RRH solely in the DL direction with a functional split that oﬄoads IFFT
and partial resource mapping to the RRH. Three components were identiﬁed as es-
sential for such an implementation: TSN MAC, L1 Oﬄoad and RoE. The ﬁrst to
ensure prioritization of radio data over the Ethernet link, the second to perform the
==PAGE:112==
100
8 Conclusion
oﬄoaded LTE procedures and the third to map and demap the split 4 type radio data
between the Ethernet and radio layer interfaces. This work has speciﬁcally focused
on the RoE component.
The RoE component has been implemented as a TX and RX type which includes
the three subcomponents mapper, packetizer and aggregator or their opposing pair.
The implementation is based on a draft 0.4 version of 1904.3 RoE with additional
proprietary extensions due to the variable data rate payload produced by functional
split 4. The proposed mapping method can potentially be used as a contribution to
the standardization work for NGFI.
The implemented RoE component was veriﬁed in a back-to-back test bench where
one of three 3GPP deﬁned LTE reference channels were used as input stimuli. These
reference channels demonstrate the case of single and two antenna RRH deployments
as well as 10 and 20 MHz cell bandwidth. In all three cases the RoE component
proved successful in transporting the statically generated LTE frame from the TX
module to the RX module. However, certain conﬁguration options with a large de-
gree of freedom remain unveriﬁed at the system level due to lack of appropriate input
stimuli.
Simulation results show that at full cell load 308 Mbps of Ethernet traﬃc was gen-
erated in the case of a single antenna 20 MHz cell and 301 Mbps for two antenna
10 MHz cell. For the R.1 reference channel with one RB allocation the traﬃc was
measured as 57 Mbps. The higher than expected data rate for R.1 is due to an issue
with the BBU simulating entity; in the actual usecase the traﬃc can be expected to
be as low as 5-10 Mbps.
The RoE component was integrated together with the remaining split 4 RRH com-
ponents and deployed as a demonstration platform on the VC709 evaluation board
containing a Xilinx developed FPGA chip. The demonstration platform contained
both a BBU simulating entity to generate RoE frames with split 4 type radio data as
well as the RRH system. The RoE frames were looped back over a 10 Gbps Ethernet
link to the RRH.
Three reference channels R.1, R.9 and R.11 were used as test cases to validate a 20
MHz single antenna layer and a 10 MHz two antenna layer cell conﬁguration. In
all cases the LTE signal analyzer tool indicated a high quality LTE signal with no
detection of mislocated subcarriers.
Unfortunately, due to issues within the TSN
MAC it has not been possible to execute the test cases with background traﬃc on
the Ethernet link.
With basis in the implemented RoE solution, fronthaul load values were estimated
for a 4 antenna 20 MHz cell site with three sectors and compared to the equivalent
CPRI over Ethernet data rates. Due to the variable format of radio data at func-
tional split 4, substantially diﬀerent network capacity requirements were found when
compared with packetized CPRI. The NGFI solution allows fronthaul traﬃc from
dozens of sites to be aggregated through MWR links to an aggregation point. From
the aggregation point bidirectional traﬃc streams can be transported over ﬁber to
==PAGE:113==
8.1 Future work
101
the BBU pool. The amount of ﬁber required is therefore signiﬁcantly reduced leading
to lower CAPEX associated with C-RAN fronthaul. Whether this oﬀsets CAPEX as-
sociated with NGFI radio equipment depends on the operator’s ownership of existing
ﬁber infrastructure and requires an in-depth cost beneﬁt analysis.
In conclusion, the feasibility of the proposed NGFI interface has been demon-
strated through a proof of concept implementation for a split 4 functional reparti-
tioning. The implementation shows a larger than 4 factor reduction in data rates
compared to CPRI as well as being cell load dependent. The resulting traﬃc rates
are suﬃciently low to enable the majority of the C-RAN fronthaul to comprise of
point-to-point MWR links. This allows operators with limited ﬁber infrastructure to
deploy an inexpensive fronthaul solution while operators with large ﬁber holdings ben-
eﬁt from reduced traﬃc loads and less performance demanding network equipment.
NGFI may therefore be the catalyst for a worldwide adoption of C-RAN.
8.1
Future work
Several interesting tasks for the current development progress remain uncovered. The
presented proof of concept RRH implementation is based on one of several test phases.
The subsequent phases focus on separating the RRH and BBU so that synchronization
must also be taken into account. However, the most interesting test setup establishes
a live LTE cell contrary to the current BBU simulator which generates a static LTE
frame.
This would allow for a complete validation of the split 4 NGFI solution,
however, only in the DL direction. For the UL additional challenges must be addressed.
A speciﬁc example is acquiring the knowledge of subcarrier allocation which must be
decoded from the DL PDCCH stream and used in the subsequent LTE subframe.
This is needed to determine the occupation of subcarriers in the UL.
In addition to this a number of tasks have been identiﬁed as future work for the RoE
component, namely synchronization, control processing and link establishment.
==PAGE:114==
102
==PAGE:115==
Bibliography
[1]
3GPP. ’Technical Speciﬁcation Group Radio Access Network; Coordinated multi-
point operation for LTE physical layer aspects Release 11’.
TR 36.819, 3rd
Generation Partnership Project (3GPP), September 2013.
[2]
3GPP.
’Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access (E-UTRA) and Evolved
Universal Terrestrial Radio Access Network (E-UTRAN); Overall description;
Stage 2 Release 13’. TS 36.300, 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP),
December 2015.
[3]
3GPP.
’Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access (E-UTRA); Multiplexing
and channel coding Release 13’. TS 36.212, 3rd Generation Partnership Project
(3GPP), December 2015.
[4]
3GPP. ’Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access (E-UTRA); Physical channels
and modulation Release 13’.
TS 36.211, 3rd Generation Partnership Project
(3GPP), December 2015.
[5]
3GPP. ’Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access (E-UTRA); User Equipment
(UE) Radio Access Capabilities Release 13’. TS 36.306, 3rd Generation Partner-
ship Project (3GPP), December 2015.
[6]
3GPP. ’Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access Network (E-UTRAN); Archi-
tecture description Release 13’. TS 36.401, 3rd Generation Partnership Project
(3GPP), December 2015.
[7]
3GPP.
’Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access (E-UTRA); Base Station
(BS) radio transmission and reception Release 13’. TS 36.104, 3rd Generation
Partnership Project (3GPP), January 2016.
[8]
3GPP. ’Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access (E-UTRA); User Equipment
(UE) radio transmission and reception Release 13’. TS 36.101, 3rd Generation
Partnership Project (3GPP), March 2016.
[9]
Rami Al-obaidi, Aleksandra Checko, Henrik Holm, and Henrik Christiansen. ’op-
timizing cloud-ran deployments in real-life scenarios using microwave radio’. 2015
European Conference on Networks and Communications, pages 159–163, 2015.
[10] OpenAirInterface Software Alliance.
http://www.openairinterface.org/
?page_id=864. Accessed 09-02-2016.
==PAGE:116==
104
Bibliography
[11] Comcores ApS.
CPRI over Ethernet Mappers IP.
http://comcores.com/
CPRItoEthMapper.html. Accessed 13-06-2016.
[12] Aleksandra Checko, Henrik Lehrmann Christiansen, Ying Yan, Lara Scolari,
Georgios Kardaras, Michael Stübert Berger, and Lars Dittmann.
’cloud ran
for mobile networks - a technology overview’. Ieee Communications Surveys and
Tutorials,, 17(1):405–426, 2015.
[13] Cisco.
’Cisco Visual Networking Index: Global Mobile Data Traﬃc Forecast
Update, 2015-2020’. White Paper 7.0, Cisco, February 2016.
[14] CPRI. ’Common Public Radio Interface (CPRI); Interface Speciﬁcation’. TS
7.0, CPRI, October 2015.
[15] Sandesh Dhagle. LTE Resource Grid. http://dhagle.in/LTE#. Accessed 09-
02-2016.
[16] Ericsson.
’Wireless Fiber - 6352’.
https://www.ericsson.com/res/site_
US/docs/2016/connections/WF_6352_DataSheet.pdf, January 2016. Product
datasheet.
[17] China Mobile Research Institute et. al. ’White Paper of Next Generation Fron-
thaul Interface’. White Paper 1.0, October 2014.
[18] IEEE 1904.3 Task Force. ’Standard for Radio Over Ethernet Encapsulations and
Mappings’. DS 0.4, IEEE, February 2016.
[19] IEEE 802.1 Time-Sensitive Networking Task Group. ’IEEE P802.1Qbu/D3.0.
Draft Standard for Local and metropolitan area networks — Bridges and Bridged
Network - Amendment: Frame Preemption’. DS 3.0, IEEE, July 2015.
[20] IEEE 802.1 Time-Sensitive Networking Task Group. ’IEEE P802.1CB™/D2.3.
Draft Standard for Local and metropolitan area networks — Frame Replication
and Elimination for Reliability’. DS 2.3, IEEE, March 2016.
[21] IEEE 802.1 Time-Sensitive Networking Task Group.
’IEEE P802.1CM/D0.1.
Draft Standard for Local and metropolitan area networks — Time-Sensitive Net-
works for Fronthaul’. DS 0.1, IEEE, January 2016.
[22] Harri Holma, Antti. Toskala, and John Wiley & Sons. LTE for UMTS : Evolution
to LTE-advanced. John Wiley & Sons, 2011.
[23] IEEE Working Group Site & Liaison Index. ’Next Generation Fronthaul Interface
(1914) Working Group’. http://grouper.ieee.org/groups/1914/, June 2016.
[24] China Mobile Research Institute.
’C-RAN. The Road Towards Green RAN’.
White Paper 2.5, October 2011.
==PAGE:117==
Bibliography
105
[25] IEEE Instrumentation and Measurement Society. ’IEEE Standard for a Preci-
sion Clock Synchronization Protocol for Networked Measurement and Control
Systems’. TS 1588-2008, IEEE, July 2008.
[26] ITU-R. ’Requirements related to technical performance for IMT-Advanced ra-
dio interface(s)’. Report M.2134, Radiocommunication Sector of ITU (ITU-R),
November 2008.
[27] ITU-R.
’Detailed speciﬁcations of the terrestrial radio interfaces of Interna-
tional Mobile Telecommunications-Advanced (IMT-Advanced)’. Recommenda-
tion M.2012-2, Radiocommunication Sector of ITU (ITU-R), September 2015.
[28] James F. Kurose and Keith W. Ross. Computer networking : a top-down ap-
proach. Pearson, 2013.
[29] MathWorks. LTE System Toolbox. http://se.mathworks.com/products/lte-
system/. Accessed 19-06-2016.
[30] NGMN. ’Guidelines for LTE Backhaul Traﬃc Estimation’. White Paper 0.4.2,
NGMN Alliance, July 2011.
[31] Rohde&Schwarz.
R&S FSW Signal and Spectrum Analyzer.
https://www.
rohde-schwarz.com/product/fsw-productstartpage_63493-11793.html.
[32] Martin Sauter. From GSM to LTE: An introduction to mobile networks and
mobile broadband. John Wiley & Sons, 2011.
[33] Xilinx. ’AXI Reference Guide’. User Guide 3.0, Xilinx, June 2015.
[34] Xilinx. ’10 Gigabit Ethernet PCS/PMA (10GBASE-R) IP Core’. http://www.
xilinx.com/products/intellectual-property/10gbase-r.html, April 2016.
Ver. 6.0.
==PAGE:118==
106
==PAGE:119==
APPENDIX A
Testbed measurement
results
The following ﬁgures are screenshots from the R&S FSW Signal Analyzer to document
measurements from the R.9 and R.11 reference channel test cases.
A.1
R.9 measurements
The R.9 reference channel is a single antenna 20 MHz carrier. User data is transmitted
in all subframes as a fully loaded cell.
Figure A.1 shows EVM vs subcarrier for a full LTE frame (top), EVM vs subframe
(left) and EVM vs carrier (right). The ﬁgure indicates that no signiﬁcant large EVM
values are measured in the LTE signal.
Figure A.2 shows a 0.53 % average EVM value for both physical channels and
signals. The 64QAM PDSCH EVM measurement is well below the 9.0 3GPP limit.
A.2
R.11 measurements
The R.11 reference channel covers the case of a two antenna transmit diversity cell
with 10 MHz of bandwidth. The cell is fully loaded with 16QAM modulated PDSCH.
Figure A.3 shows the automatically detected allocation of user data for antenna port 0.
The bottom part of the ﬁgure illustrates the power measured for each subcarrier across
the LTE frame. Note that besides the obvious limited usage of control subcarriers in
the ﬁrst two columns of symbols of each subframe a small number of subcarriers are
left unoccupied in through the each subframe. These are reference signals which are
reserved for transmission on the second antenna port.
==PAGE:120==
2
A Testbed measurement results
Figure A.1: R.9: EVM measurement overview
==PAGE:121==
A.2 R.11 measurements
3
Figure A.2: R.9: Result summary displaying EVM measurements for the 64QAM
modulated PDSCH channel
==PAGE:122==
4
A Testbed measurement results
Figure A.3: R.11: Physical channel and signal allocation (top), transmit power
per subcarrier (bottom) for antenna layer 0. Here the synchronization
signals are correctly expected
==PAGE:123==
A.2 R.11 measurements
5
Figure A.4: R.11: EVM measurement overview for antenna layer 0
==PAGE:124==
6
A Testbed measurement results
Figure A.5: R.11: Constellation diagram for antenna layer 0. 16QAM user data is
marked brown and is the majority of modulated subcarriers
==PAGE:125==
==PAGE:126==
