==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Supervisors:
Thomas Kjær Rasmussen
Otto Anker Nielsen
A Maximum Likelihood Approach
to Estimation of Threshold Based Equi-
librium Models From Observed Routes
A Monte Carlo experiment.
Morten Emmanuel Schiøler
Kongens Lyngby 2016
==PAGE:2==
DTU Management Engineering
Division of Transport Modelling
Technical University of Denmark
Produktionstorvet
DTU – Bygning 424
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tlf. 45 25 48 00
www.transportmodeling.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
The RSUET(min, τ min) (Restricted Stochastic User Equilibrium with Threshold) is a
computationally attractive, behaviourally realistic, new route choice model. Increasing
availability of detailed route choice data in the form of GPS traces motivates a maximum
likelihood approach to estimation of the model parameters, and this work represents one
of the ﬁrst scientiﬁc endeavours to that end.
The report develops methods for Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) and sample
generation, and then attempts to validate the MLE method by showing that when
applied to this type of sample, the MLE approximately recreates the actual parameters
used to generate the sample.
An auxiliary model is formulated to express the likelihood adequately. In the generic
RSUET(min, τ min), a constant threshold τ universally deﬁnes the maximum detour pos-
sible. In the auxiliary model, however, individuals’ true thresholds are random variables
that follow a Fréchet distribution with parameters α and ζ. This is to accommodate
the fact that real data contain the occasional detour much longer than the τ that would
be used to represent the “average” situation (the RSUET). This means that there is
an inconsistency between the auxiliary model and the actual RSUET model; to create
a link between the two, τ in the RSUET is assumed to be the ρth percentile of the
cumulative Fréchet distribution.
The RSUET(min, τ min) is implemented on the Sioux Falls test network in Java
along with a data sample synthesizer, a likelihood evaluation method, and a Particle
Swarm Optimisation (PSO) module. A Monte Carlo experiment is then carried out
by ﬁrst sampling from the auxiliary model, and then attempting to recreate the true
parameters by MLE using the PSO.
Replication of the parameters is mostly successful, especially for the threshold pa-
rameter τ and the value of time βtime, both of which are estimated with average errors
below 2%. The parameters of the Fréchet distribution, α and ζ, are replicated with
good accuracy if the correct value of ρ is assumed in the PSO (average error below 10
%). Replication of the true βPS was generally slightly less successful, with average errors
around 15% when using the correct value of ρ in the estimation. If ρ = 0.75 is assumed
on the estimation side even though the true value is ρ = 0.90, then the estimates of
α and ζ become very inaccurate (with around 35% and 18% average underestimation,
respectively), but this faulty assumption does not aﬀect the estimate of τ nor βtime much.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract (dansk)
RSUET(min, τ min) er en beregningsmæssigt attraktiv, adfærdsmæssigt realistisk, ny
rutevalgsmodel. Stigende tilgængelighed af detaljeret rutevalgsdata i form af GPS-spor
motiverer en maximum likelihood-tilgang til estimering af modelparametrene, og dette
værk udgør en af de første videnskabelige indsatser dedikeret til netop dét formål.
Rapportens overordnede fremgangsmåde er at udvikle metoder til a) Maximum Like-
lihood Estimering (MLE) og b) datasyntese og derefter at validere MLE’en ved at vise,
at den, når den anvendes på et syntetisk datasæt, omtrentligt genskaber de faktiske
parametre, der blev brugt til at generere data.
En hjælpemodel formuleres for at udtrykke likelihood’en på en passende måde. I
den generiske RSUET(min, τ min) deﬁnerer en konstant tærskelparameter τ universelt
den størst mulige omvej. I hjælpemodellen, derimod, følger individers sande tærskel en
Fréchet-fordeling med parametrene α og ζ. Dette er for at tage højde for, at data i virke-
ligheden indeholder sporadiske lange omveje, der er meget længere end den tærskel τ,
der ville bruges til at beskrive den “gennemsnitlige situation” (RSUET-modellen). Dette
betyder, at der er en hvis inkonsekvens imellem hjælpemodellen og RSUET-modellen;
for at skabe en kobling imellem de to antages det, at τ er den ρ’ende percentil af den
kumulative Fréchet-fordeling.
RSUET(min, τ min)-modellen implementeres på Sioux Falls testnetværket i Java.
Derudover implementeres en procedure til at fremstille datasæt ud fra hjælpemodellen,
en metode til at evaluere likelihood, og et Particle Swarm Optimisation (PSO) modul.
Et Monte Carlo-eksperiment udføres herefter ved først at skabe et datasæt med nogle
antagne sande parametre, og dernæst forsøge at genskabe dem ved hjælp af MLE med
den implementerede PSO.
Parameterreplikation er overvejende en succes, især hvad angår tærskelparameteren
τ og værdien af tid (value of time) βPS, som begge estimeres med gennemsnitlige fejl på
under 2%. Parametrene i Fréchet-fordelingen, α og ζ, replikeres med god nøjagtighed
hvis den korrekte værdi af ρ antages i PSO’en (under 10% gennemsnitlig unøjagtighed).
Replikation af den sande værdi af βPS var generelt lidt mindre succesrig; dens gennem-
snitlig afvigelse var omkring 15 % ved brug af den korrekte (sande) værdi af ρ. Hvis
ρ = 0.75 antages under estimeringen på trods af, at den sande værdi er ρ = 0.90, så
bliver estimaterne af α og ζ meget unøjagtige (med systematisk underestimering på
omtrent 35 % og 18%, hhv.), men en sådan fejlagtigt antaget værdi af ρ påvirker ikke
nøjagtigheden af estimeringen af hverken τ eller βtime ret meget.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This Master thesis was prepared at the Department of Management (and prior to being
discontinued, the Department of Transport) at the Technical University of Denmark in
fulﬁlment of the requirements for acquiring a Master’s degree in Transportation and
Logistics, within the subject area of Transport Modelling.
Kongens Lyngby, June 25, 2016
Morten Emmanuel Schiøler, s113353
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors Otto Anker Nielsen and Thomas Kjær Rasmussen
as well as David Paul Watling for their guidance and support throughout the process of
writing this work. Most of the theory presented here was developed by them, and this
thesis would have been impossible without their theoretical ground work and guidance
throughout the project. I would also like to give a special thanks to Carlo Giacomo
Prato for oﬀering me the opportunity to take on this task as my Master thesis, and for
inspiring my interest in route choice models in the ﬁrst place.
Finally, I would like to thank my girlfriend Monica, my best friend Jens, and my
little brother Asger for taking their time to read the report and contribute with valuable
feedback and corrections.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Abstract (dansk)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
Contents
ix
1
Introduction
1
2
Mathematical Notation
3
3
Theory
5
3.1
Random Utility Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
RSUE(Φ)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.3
RSUET(Φ, Ω) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.4
Likelihood function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.5
Distribution of observed MUCR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.6
Maximum Likelihood Estimation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.7
Sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.8
Particle Swarm Optimisation method (PSO) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
Implementation in Java
19
4.1
Test network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
Data structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3
RSUET(min,τmin) algorithm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.4
Shortest Path Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.5
Universal choice set enumeration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.6
Generation of consideration sets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.7
Calculation of likelihood . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.8
RSUET Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5
Results
29
5.1
Observed distribution of the MUCR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2
Log-likelihood function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
5.3
MLE using PSO algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6
Discussion and Further Work
49
7
Conclusion
53
A
Appendix A: PSO algorithm
55
B
Appendix B: RSUET algorithm
59
Bibliography
61
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The RSUET or Restricted Stochastic User Equilibrium with Threshold is a relatively
new route choice and traﬃc assignment model developed in the still unpublished paper
[16]. The RSUET is a further development of the RSUE (Restricted Stochastic User
Equilibrium), which was ﬁrst presented in its theoretical form by [15] along with a
sister paper by [11] presenting empirical results. As these papers elaborate, the aim
of the RSUE is to bridge the gap between the Deterministic User Equilibrium (DUE,
[13]) and Stochastic User Equilibrium (SUE, [3]) models, which each represent their
own extremity of user behaviour: The DUE is unrealistically precise in user choice,
since the absolute least costly options are always chosen, no matter by how small a
margin they may be superior to other alternatives; conversely, the SUE suggests that
users consider every possible option at their disposal, including options that would be
deemed ridiculous by any real-life traveller, and with some ﬁnite probability, choose these
routes. In addition to being a problem of behavioural realism, this is also a practical
issue: The SUE’s theoretical requirement of enumeration of the universal choice set is
so computationally demanding that in large-scale applications, it can only be overcome
by sampling a master choice set, hoping to emulate the diversity of the universal choice
set while including all relevant options. As remarked in [15, pp. 167], the model loses its
theoretical soundness when this major issue is addressed only at the algorithmic level,
and it becomes almost a matter of opinion whether a master choice set represents the
universal one to a satisfactory extent or not.
The RSUE solves the problem of the sheer size of the SUE not on the algorithmic
level, but instead on the modelling level by specifying choice set equilibrium criteria
(Eqs. (3.7), (3.8)), which allow for choice sets that are small subsets of the universal
ones (typically less than 10 routes per Origin-Destination relation [10]) by distinguishing
between used and unused routes. The RUM (Random Utility Model) is then applied to
these equilibrated choice sets in a standard way. The RSUE leaves room for improvement,
however, since it has the SUE as a special case; for any parameters and any choice of
Φ, the universal choice set always satisﬁes the RSUE(Φ) choice set equilibrium criteria
[15, pp. 174] (i.e., any SUE is also an RSUE). This means that according to the RSUE,
users potentially consider extremely long routes like in the SUE, which in the RSUE(T)-
context goes against the modeller’s intention of creating an intermediate of the SUE and
DUE. Therefore, the model is developed into the RSUET(Φ, Ω) in [16]. The RSUET not
only ensures that all attractive routes are used (as in the RSUE), but also restricts the use
of unattractive routes by adding a threshold condition Ωwhich sets the upper limit on
the cost of routes that may be used, thus bounding the user’s rationality; this mirrors the
hypothesis that in real life, travellers only consider routes that are somewhat attractive,
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
mostly because the limited capacity of the brain makes considering every single route
impossible. Rather, people pick out a small handful of promising routes based on some
strategy (like the choice set equilibrium conditions) and then decide between them (like
the RUM applied to the choice set).
Being a novel model, however, the RSUET is still largely uncharted territory, and a
paper on the estimation of its parameters still has not been published until this report.
The problem is not trivial for a number of reasons, but the most important one is that
we know that real data cannot be explained perfectly by the simple RSUET-model.[14]
In particular, observations of the Maximum Used Cost Ratio (MUCR)1 may sometimes
be extremely high for some unusual reason like getting lost, whereas the threshold in
the RSUET describes some “average” situation in which a threshold lower than these
large MUCRs is strictly enforced. In some way then, the model has to be “stretched” so
that it can accommodate the data of the real world and its parameters can be estimated.
But a complication then occurs in the form of the seeming inconsistency between the
idealised “threshold”, which is a strictly enforced cut-oﬀdictating that no MUCR can be
above the threshold τ, and the data, which show that some MUCRs can be very large in
practice. The threshold thus comes to have diﬀerent meanings in a) the RSUET, where
any MUCR must be below the universal threshold, and b) in the assumption behind
the data, where the MUCR follows some distribution that is not bounded above. This
inconsistency, along with the non-uniqueness of RSUET solutions, poses a theoretical
challenge that brings with it many practical complications. In this report, a solution
will be proposed and tested using the following basic Monte Carlo experiment structure:
1. Develop theory that allows unique deﬁnition of a likelihood to any sample of ob-
servations given RSUET-parameters.
2. Propose and implement an algorithm which maximises this likelihood by ﬁnding
the most likely parameters to produce the observed outcome.
3. Synthesize data based on some true model and parameters.
4. Attempt to replicate the true parameters in the synthetic data from 3 by maxi-
mizing the likelihood function proposed in 1, using the algorithm implementation
from 2.
5. Evaluate the eﬀectiveness and eﬃcacy of the proposed maximum likelihood esti-
mation method for determining attractive parameters for the RSUET(min,τmin)
based on the degree of success of 4.
If the above is achieved, a method for maximum likelihood estimation of RSUET(min,τmin)
parameters has been successfully developed and executed.
1The MUCR describes the largest relative detour observed taken by the individual and is calculated
based on actual route cost (see Section 2).
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Mathematical Notation
In this section, the mathematical notation used in the paper is presented. The notation
is adopted from [15], [11] and [14].
A network is represented as a set of directed links (also called arcs or edges) a ∈
{1, 2, . . . A}, nodes (vertices) v ∈{1, 2, . . . V } and origin-destination pairs m ∈{1, 2,
. . . , M}. Let the m’th element in the M-dimensional vector d represent the strictly
positive demand dm for OD-movement m. Let the index set Rm be the universal route
choice set for OD-pair m. In this work, Rm is assumed, without loss of generality, to be
the set of all acyclic paths between OD-pair m; in applications where it is not feasible
to enumerate all acyclic paths, a “master choice set” can be employed to substitute
{Rm}M
m=1. For convenience, deﬁne Nm ≡|Rm| and N ≡∑M
m=1 Nm.
Denote the ﬂow on path r ∈Rm as xmr, and let x = (x11, x12, . . . , x1N1, x21, x22, . . . ,
x2N2, . . . , xM1, xM2, . . . , xMNm) be the N-dimensional ﬂow vector on Rm, so that xmr
refers to element number r + ∑m−1
k=1 Nm in x . The same notation applies to the vector
of path costs c, which has the same dimensionality as x. Denote the ﬂow on link a by
fa and let f = (f1, f2, . . . , fA) be the A-dimensional link ﬂow vector. The notation f(γ)
reminds the reader that the link ﬂows f depend on a set of parameters gamma through
the equilibrium model (the RSUET(min,τmin) in this work).
The convex set of demand-feasible, non-negative path ﬂow solutions, G, is then given
by:
G =
{
x ∈RN+
m :
Nm
∑
r=1
xmr = dm, m = 1, 2, . . . , M
}
(2.1)
where RN+
m
deﬁnes the N-dimensional, non-negative Euclidean space.
Next, deﬁne the binary indicator variable δamr to be 1 if link a is part of path r for
OD-pair m and 0 otherwise. Then the convex set of demand-feasible link ﬂows, F, is:
F =
{
f ∈RA+
m : fa =
M
∑
m=1
Nm
∑
r=1
δamr · xmr, a ∈{1, 2, . . . , A}, x ∈G
}
.
(2.2)
Let ∆be the A × N link-path incidence matrix; then the relation between F and G
may be conveniently expressed in matrix notation:
f = ∆x
(2.3)
As in [15], it is assumed that the (actual) travel cost on a path is simply the sum of the
link travel costs on the path:
cmr(x) =
A
∑
a=1
δamr · ta(∆x)
(r ∈Rm; m ∈{1, 2, . . . , M}; x ∈G)
(2.4)
==PAGE:16==
4
2 Mathematical Notation
Note, however, that path equilibrium costs refers not to the travel cost cmr, but
to what is also referred to as “systematic utility” (with opposite sign), speciﬁcally of
relevance for the Path Size Logit models, where path equilibrium costs depend on the
consideration set in question because of the path size term (see Section 3.1 for more
details on the RUM). Equilibrium cost is not additive in link cost when a PSL (Path
Size Logit) model is used. The PSL is described in Section 3.1.2.
Furthermore, assume that we have available observations of trips made by a popu-
lation of Nind individuals, and that for individual i, ki routes were observed. Call this
observation set a sample, and call the procedure of generating a sample synthetically
with Monte Carlo simulation sampling. Denote the j’th route observed by individual i
by qij. The OD-movement is implicit in this observation from the ﬁrst and last node in
the path; denote this OD by the function δ:
δ(qij) = OD-movement corresponding to observation qij
(2.5)
such that
qij ∈Rδ(qij)
∀j ∈{1, . . . , ki}
∀i ∈{1, . . . , Nind} .
(2.6)
Once an RSUET-equilibrium is achieved for given parameters, inferred costs of these
routes can be computed by using the corresponding link costs c. For each observation,
one can then calculate the cost ratio for the chosen route relative to the shortest one for
that same OD-relation; call these Used Cost Ratios (UCR). Then the Maximum Used
Cost Ratio (MUCR) for each individual can be calculated:
MUCRi = yi(τ, βPS, β) =
max
j=1,...,kj
{cδ(qij)qij(f(τ, βPS, β))
πδ(qij)(f(τ, βPS, β))
}
∀i = 1, 2, . . . , Nind
(2.7)
where πm is the cost of the shortest path for OD movement m:
πm(f(τ, βPS, β)) = min
r∈Rm {cmr(f(τ, βPS, β))}
∀m ∈{1, . . . , M}.
(2.8)
Finally, assume that each traveller i has a true threshold ti and a consideration set
Smi for each OD pair m such that the observed decision qij was made based on the choice
set Sδ(qij)i according to the auxiliary model.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 3
Theory
In Section 3.1, the MNL and PSL RUMs are brieﬂy presented, after which the RSUE
and RSUET models are motivated and introduced in Sections 3.2 and 3.3, respectively.
Following this, new theory is discussed and presented in sections 3.4-3.7.
David
Watling is credited for pioneering most of this theory, see [14].
In the ﬁnal section of the theory chapter, section 3.8, the Particle Swarm Optimi-
sation method, which is originally due to Eberhart and Kennedy[4], is summarised in
brevity.
3.1
Random Utility Models
A Random Utility Model (RUM) is a choice model using utilities with continuous ran-
domly distributed error terms. The models specify the choice probabilities Pmr(c(x)| ˜Rm)
in the case of the RSUET, and Pmr(c(x)|Smi) in case of the auxiliary model. Any RUM
can in principle be applied to the RSUET, but the Multinomial Logit (MNL) and Path
Size Logit (PSL) models are probably the most attractive ones due to their computa-
tional eﬃciency, and the closed-form probability expression which allows computation
of a gap measure to determine if an equilibrium has been reached.
3.1.1
Multinomial Logit
The MNL is a standard and simple model which the reader should be familiar with; it is
restated here mostly to display the applied notation. The choice probabilities are given
by
Pmr(c(x)| ˜Rm) =
exp(Vmr)
∑
ˆr∈˜Rm exp(Vmˆr)
(3.1)
where Vmr can be speciﬁed in numerous ways, but in this context is assumed to have
the form
Vmr = −θ · cmr
(3.2)
It should also be noted that the Independence of Irrelevant Alternatives property
holds for the MNL:
Pmi
Pmj
= exp(Vmi)
exp(Vmj) = exp(Vmi −Vmj)
∀(i, j) ∈ˆR2
m
(3.3)
==PAGE:18==
6
3 Theory
i.e. the relative probabilities of alternatives do not depend on the remaining choice set.
The property does not hold for the PSL.
3.1.2
Path Size Logit
In this implementation, a standard Path Size Logit model (originally due to [1]) is
applied. This implies that the choice probability of route r for OD relation m with the
choice set C is
pmr =
exp (Vmr)
∑
ˆr∈C exp (Vmˆr)
∀m, ∀r
(3.4)
where
Vmr = −θ (cmr(x) + βPS · ln(PSmr))
(3.5)
and
PSmr =
∑
a∈Γmr
ca
cmr
·
1
∑
k∈C δamk
.
(3.6)
When applying the RUM to a choice set, e.g. ˆRm, C in the above equations is substituted
with that choice set (in this example ˆRm). In this work, the impedance is the actual
cost, la = ca and Lmr = cmr, i.e. the actual link and path costs are used in Eq. (3.6),
not the lengths. This requires updating of the path size factors whenever c is updated.
Γmr is the set of links that make up route r ∈Rm.
It is worth noting in this context that a consequence of using a PSL as opposed
to an MNL RUM is that path equilibrium costs depend upon the relevant choice set.
While choice probabilities do depend on the choice set in the MNL, path equilibrium
costs do not. This complicates the process of calculating choice probabilities, since the
path size terms need to be calculated (Eq. (3.6)) for the speciﬁc choice set before the
choice probability can be computed (Eq. (3.4)). This also makes likelihood evaluation
much more demanding than it would otherwise be, since consideration sets tend to be
unique for each observation (see Section 3.4), and each observation therefore requires
re-computation of the path size factors.
3.2
Restricted Stochastic User Equilibrium
(RSUE(Φ, Ω))
Whilst DUE and SUE are time-proven models, they have some ﬂaws, theoretical as well
as practical. Speciﬁcally, while the DUE has always been an attractive option because
of its simplicity and, more importantly, computational tractability, it does not have
any sane behavioural interpretation; the DUE assigns all demand between an OD-pair
on paths with lowest cost, even if there are feasible paths that are inﬁnitesimally less
attractive.
==PAGE:19==
3.2 RSUE(Φ)
7
The problem with the DUE approach is that it assumes perfect rationality and
omniscience of both users and the modeller. The SUE addresses this issue by treating
the perceived costs of routes as random variables.
The resulting path ﬂow solution
stands in stark contrast to the DUE, as the typical SUE with unbounded error terms
will assign strictly possible ﬂow to all possible routes for each OD-movement, no matter
how unattractive the route may be [3]. This is obviously not behaviourally realistic, but
an even more severe issue is practical, and not theoretical, namely that implementing
an SUE which is consistent with theory involves enumerating all the simple paths that
ﬂow is to be assigned to, which is an exceedingly hard problem that is in no way feasible
to solve on large-scale networks because of the “exponential explosion” of the universal
choice set size that occurs with growing network size. This issue has historically been
more or less ignored, and usually a large master choice set has instead been generated
using sampling methods to mimic the universal choice set, in hopes that they aptly
represent the true choice set. [9]
The RSUE(Φ) was ﬁrst presented in [15] and aims to bridge the gap between the
DUE and the SUE, and in doing so overcome the main limitations of the two. The
computational ineﬃcacy of ﬁnding an equilibrium that assigns ﬂow to all routes in the
universal choice set is a serious problem which should be solved at the theoretical level,
as opposed to the algorithmic level [15, p. 167], i.e. the mathematical model should only
use a subset of the universal choice set to begin. The RSUE achieves this by permitting
that only a select few routes be considered (for each OD-movement).
RSUE distinguishes implicitly between used and unused routes; used routes for OD
m are in the choice set ˜Rm, and unused ones are not. There is always 0 ﬂow on unused
routes, and routes with 0 ﬂow are always unused (dm > 0
∀m). Flow on used routes
is distributed according to the marginal probability of the routes being chosen (that is,
conditional on only routes in ˜Rm being possible choices). This means that there is always
strictly positive ﬂows on used routes, like in the SUE. Used routes are distinguished from
unused routes through a function Φ of the travel cost on used routes. More formally, the
necessary and suﬃcient condition for a demand-feasible ﬂow distribution to be RSUE(Φ)
is for the following two statements to be true:
xmr > 0 ⇒r ∈˜Rm ∧xmr = dm · Pmr(c(x)| ˜Rm)
(3.7)
xmr = 0 ⇒r /∈˜Rm ∧cmr(x) ≥Φ
({
cms(x) : s ∈˜Rm
})
(3.8)
Eq. (3.7) states that if there is a strictly positive ﬂow on a route, then that route is
used, and the ﬂow proportion on the route is the marginal probability of choosing the
route among the used routes. Eq. (3.8) says that if there is no ﬂow on a route, then
that route is unused and has a cost which is not lower than the reference cost deﬁned by
Φ (e.g. the shortest used path in the case of the RSUE(min)). Note that any standard
RUM (Random Utility Model) with unbounded error term distributions may be applied
for the (marginal) choice probabilities, giving the model ﬂexibility. [15].
RSUE does not have a unique solution, but it is guaranteed to have at least one1,
1Under the same mild conditions that ensures that there exists an SUE solution.
==PAGE:20==
8
3 Theory
since any SUE solution is also a RSUE solution [15, p.174], but this particular solution is
of no interest to this study as the chief goal of the RSUE is to assign ﬂow only to a true
subset of the universal choice set (namely the restricted choice set ˆRm) (for each OD
m, naturally). It is thus up to the RSUE algorithm to narrow down the consideration
choice set.
RSUE ensures through Eq. (3.8) that all attractive routes are used, but it does
not ensure that no unattractive routes are used; indeed, the SUE is also an RSUE(Φ)
solution for any Φ, and in the SUE all paths in the master choice set are used, regardless
of their costs. This issue is addressed by the RSUET(Φ, Ω) , which is the main topic of
[11] and is summarised in Section 3.3.
We shall in this work assume that the RUM used in the RSUET is a Path Sized
Logit [1], with a path size coeﬃcient βPS (see Section 3.1), a set of of coeﬃcients in
the utility function β2, and ﬁnally a scale parameter θ (which is not identiﬁed and is
therefore ﬁxed at some value, usually 1, but in the results section, it is set to 0.1 to make
the remaining parameters have values around 1).
3.3
Restricted Stochastic User Equilibrium with
Threshold (RSUET(Φ, Ω))
RSUET(Φ, Ω) is a further development of RSUE(Φ) in which routes above some thresh-
old are disallowed to appear in the equilibrated choice set. The threshold is determined
by some function of the travel cost on used routes, e.g. Ω= τ min, which means that
routes of cost crm > τπm can not be part of ˜Rm. Unlike the RSUE, the RSUET(Φ, Ω) so-
lution space does not generally contain the SUE. Furthermore, GRSUET(Φ,Ω) ⊆GRSUE(Φ)
(for identical Φ), since the RSUET is a restricted version of the RSUE[14]. This is good
from a theoretical modelling perspective, since travellers do not consider every available
route except for in the very most simple cases, as well as for computational reasons.
However, if the threshold function Ωis too restrictive, it can occur that there does not
exist a demand-feasible ﬂow solution with an equilibrated choice set [14]. On the other
hand, there may exist an Ωsuch that the RSUET(Φ, Ω)
solution is unique, but to
the author’s best knowledge, a way of determining this Ωhas not yet been found, and
regardless, the theoretical grounds of a such construction are debatable.
The RSUET conditions are formalised in [14] as follows:
xmr > 0 ⇒r ∈˜Rm ∧xmr = dm · Pmr(c(x)| ˜Rm) ∧cmr(x) ≤Ω
(
{cms(x) : s ∈˜Rm}
)
(3.9)
xmr = 0 ⇒r /∈˜Rm ∧cmr(x) ≥Φ
({
cms(x) : s ∈˜Rm
})
(3.10)
The conditions diﬀer from the RSUE only by the added requirement that used routes
must have a cost no greater than the reference value deﬁned internally3 by Ω.
2In the Sioux Falls application, β is only a single parameter βtime, i.e. the value of time.
3i.e. deﬁned by a function of routes in the choice set ˜Rm.
==PAGE:21==
3.4 Likelihood function
9
RSUET(min,τmin) is currently the most promising known member of the RSUET
family and is the focus of this study. This is due to very fast computation times and
a realistic choice set formation. Another variant, RSUET(max,Ω), has the advantage
of having a unique solution, which is very attractive in the likelihood context, but it
is deemed in [11] to be overly challenging computationally. The RSUET conditions for
OD m in the speciﬁc RSUET model RSUET(min, τ min) are:
1. ˆRm contains the optimal route (due to Φ = min).
2. No route in ˆRm has a cost that exceeds τπm (due to Ω= τ min).
3.4
Likelihood function for RSUET(Φ, Ω)
First, it may be useful to take a step back and recall what a likelihood function signiﬁes:
A likelihood L(γ|q) is the probability of an observed outcome q given a true model with
parameters γ. The problem of maximising the likelihood is then to ﬁnd the parameters
that make the observed outcome most probable: Lmax = max
γ (L(γ|q)). Since the (nat-
ural) logarithm is monotonously increasing, the maximisation problem can instead be
performed on the logarithm of the likelihood, which is called the log-likelihood, i.e.
LL(γ|q) = ln(γ|q) .
(3.11)
Developing the RSUET(Φ, Ω) likelihood function is the linchpin of this thesis, since
MLE naturally fails if the likelihood function is incorrect.
The introduction of the
threshold function Ωcomplicates estimation since it must now also include the thresh-
old parameter τ (in the Ω= (min, τ min) case). Furthermore, the non-uniqueness of
RSUET solutions creates a theoretical issue in that even for a correct set of parameters,
the evaluation of the likelihood function may be incorrect because the wrong RSUET
solution has been used for computing the choice probabilities, which are conditional on
the choice set. In actuality, the likelihood should be not only a function of the param-
eters to be estimated, but also of the speciﬁc solution (choice set composition), since
this is not unique. In that way, the likelihood could be maximised over the possible
RSUET solutions for the given parameters. A such method would require enumeration
of all RSUET solutions, however, and would leave the only currently known RSUET
solution algorithm insuﬃcient, since it only ﬁnds some solution (see Section 4.3). The
only option to address the non-uniqueness seems then to be to ignore it altogether and
assume that whichever solution the algorithm ﬁnds is correct given the input parameters.
It would be wise to investigate how sensitive the likelihood function, and more impor-
tantly the location of maximum likelihood, is to choice of speciﬁc solution. Notably, if
the calculated probability is computed in a logical (but problematic) way as follows:
L(τ, βPS, β) ̸=
M
∏
m=1
Nm
∏
r=1
Pmr(c(x)| ˜Rm) ,
(3.12)
==PAGE:22==
10
3 Theory
then if even a single route is observed which does not appear in the choice sets ˜Rm found
by the RSUET solution algorithm, the likelihood evaluates to 0. This is not really what
we want, since we do not expect a real life version to be an exact RSUET situation,
but only approximately so, and it would be impossible to ﬁnd the “maximum likelihood
parameters” when all possible parameter sets evaluate to 0 likelihood. The restricted
choice sets may be insuﬃcient (not exhaustive in describing observed routes) because of
two reasons:
1. The particular restricted choice sets do not contain some routes which are observed,
even though these are below the threshold.
2. There are observations which are above the threshold in the model and hence
cannot be in the equilibrated choice sets .
Reason 1 is equally relevant for RSUE and RSUET, as both these models use restricted
choice sets that may not be exhaustive in emulating real behaviour. One may simply
include into the restricted choice sets observed routes which are not already in there,
or one may assume that choices are made from the master choice sets instead of the
restricted choice sets (for the restricted SUE with threshold: The subset of routes in
the master choice sets that are below the threshold). If we presume that real behaviour
allows any choice, and if we wish to be able to simulate such choices, the best approach
would be the latter.
Reason 2 only applies to the threshold-based model, and complicates matters further.
As mentioned, we are interested in performing maximum likelihood estimation using
real data to obtain the most realistic parameters for the RSUET(min,τmin). But in
real data, there will be a few individuals with extremely high MUCRs (e.g. because
of unintentionally taking a detour or getting lost), and hence the maximum MUCR
observed will not be suitable for use as a threshold parameter. But if we assume a
perfect RSUET(min,τmin), τ must at least be the maximum MUCR for the outcome
to have L > 0. To overcome this, instead of assuming a ﬁxed, constant threshold τ, we
could assume that τ is a random variable which follows some distribution shared among
all individuals4. To make this translate in to the normal RSUET, this model is then
linked with the normal RSUET by some percentile ρ of the distribution of τ, since the
RSUET corresponds to an average situation [14].
This narrows down which routes an individual considers to be below a (distributed)
threshold, but which of those routes do we assume are in the individuals’ consideration
sets?
One could consider the set of routes that a travellers considers to be stochastic
conditional on his true threshold ti, but there would be no way to calculate the likelihood
of such a choice using the RSUET model and its choice probabilities directly, since
probabilistic choice set formation is not integrated in the model: The RSUET algorithm
simply ﬁnds one solution in a deterministic way which depends on input parameters,
including those that are purely algorithmic, such as d and Kmax. A necessary requirement
4For heterogenous populations, user classes could be used with each their own distribution.
==PAGE:23==
3.4 Likelihood function
11
for a non-zero likelihood of a set of observations (a sample) q is that all observations
have a strictly positive choice probability, which also requires all observed routes to be
in the relevant choice sets when computing the likelihood. In the “average-situation” of
equilibrated RSUET choice sets, however, it may be that the restricted choice sets do
not contain all observed routes, i.e. ∃(i, j) : qij /∈ˆRδ(qij). This is why the likelihood
speciﬁcation (3.12) fails and why it is necessary to use larger choice sets than ˆRm for
likelihood computation. These are what we call consideration sets.
We represent the choice sets with the notation Smi(ti, c) for OD-pair m given a true
threshold relative to the optimal route for individual i of ti when the route costs in
the universal choice set are given by the vector c. Furthermore, from what has been
discussed above, it seems best to assume that the consideration set consists of all routes
that have a relative cost below the threshold:
Smi(ti; c) ≡{r ∈Rm|cmr
πm ≤t}
∀m, i .
(3.13)
The variable ti is the threshold which deﬁnes the cut-oﬀfor the consideration set and is
a ratio to the optimal (cheapest or shortest) route. If one assumes that ti is the same
for all individuals i (i.e. constant), then the best guess for this value given some data
that are an outcome of the hypothesised behaviour would be the maximum among all
observed MUCR yi. That value would then be an obvious choice for the value of τ. But
as stated several times before, a strictly enforced, universal threshold does not match
behaviour in real life, even though it is the assumption of the RSUET. If τ is estimated
this way, it would be so high that the RSUET would become very similar to the SUE.
We should instead assume that the true threshold follows a distribution which is not
bounded above, and that the true threshold of each individual is an outcome ti from
that distribution. This way, any route has a non-zero likelihood of being observed, since
the universal choice set is eﬀectively parametrised through the distribution of t (which
is not bounded above) and the conditional choice sets (consideration sets).
An interesting counterargument to this approach is that if all routes have a non-zero
choice probability/likelihood, then the choice model is eﬀectively just a non-standard
RUM applied to the universal choice set; but this is equivalent to saying that every choice
in the universal choice set has been parametrised, which is exactly what is desired.
When using a MNL, it is unimportant whether actual costs or equilibrium costs are
used to calculate the used cost ratios, since the result is the same:
V1
V2
= −θc1
−θc2
= c1
c2
(3.14)
When using a PSL model, however, it becomes important to determine whether to use
equilibrium costs or actual costs to calculate the UCR and hence the MUCR, since the
introduction of the PSL term introduces signiﬁcantly diﬀerent ratios from when using
actual (additive) costs. Using the equilibrium cost ratios may seem reasonable since
equilibrium cost is used in the utility function, and in that way is the “total cost”, but
the path size term is not meant as an additional cost per se, but as a corrective term that
takes into account similarity of routes.[1] Besides, using equilibrium costs complicates
==PAGE:24==
12
3 Theory
matters quite a lot, since they depend on the choice set that the route is in. In fact, the
path size term is undeﬁned for routes that are not in the consideration set if they use a
link which no other route uses (divide by zero in Eq. (3.6)). This is why actual costs
must be used in the criterion Ωin the RSUET(Φ, Ω) (and so they are). Φ must also
use actual costs for Dijkstra’s algorithm to remain valid and have a well-deﬁned shortest
route. But since absolute costs are used for the threshold-criterion Ωin the RSUET,
the relevant UCR to consider must also be measured in actual costs, otherwise the UCR
tells us nothing about if the observation violates Ωor not, which is the fundamental
hypothesis and motivation to use the data in the ﬁrst place to estimate parameters.
These are probably among the considerations that made [15] decide to use actual
costs to determine the shortest path in the Φ = min criterion for the RSUE(min), and
[14] did the same for the Ω= τ min criterion. To have consistency between the RSUET
and the auxiliary model, it seems clear that actual costs must be used to deﬁne the
MUCR, and not equilibrium costs. At the same time, this makes practical application
of the theory more eﬃcacious.
Piecing all of this together, and denoting the probability density function (PDF) of
the threshold ti by f, the likelihood becomes:
L(τ, βPS, β) =
M
∏
m=1
Nm
∏
r=1
f(ti)Pmr(c(x)|Smi(ti; c))
(3.15)
≈
M
∏
m=1
Nm
∏
r=1
f(yi(c))Pmr(c(x)|Smi(yi(c); c)) ,
(3.16)
Which makes the log-likelihood:
LL = ln(L(τ, βPS, β)) =
M
∑
m=1
ln (f(yi(c))) +
Nm
∑
r=1
ln (Pmr(c(x)|Smi(yi(c); c))) .
(3.17)
Notice that we assume that the MUCR yi is equal to the individual’s true threshold:
ti ≈yi
(3.18)
This is a strong assumption, which only holds when there are many observations for the
individual, and the network layout allows a choice which is close to ti but still below
it. More formally, the argument for the validity of the (3.18) is that we, under certain
circumstances, can expect that
ti →yi as ki →∞
(3.19)
if the yi is continuously distributed on the interval [1; ti].
In reality, however, yi is
discretely distributed on the interval. This discrete distribution depends on c and always
contains 1. This is an issue which is discussed in Section 3.5.
==PAGE:25==
3.5 Distribution of observed MUCR
13
3.5
Distribution of observed MUCR
Given a dataset as presented in Section 2, inferred MUCRs, which follow some empirical
distribution, are obtained. Obviously, this distribution is bounded below by 1, since
any used cost ratio, and thereby any MUCR, is greater than or equal to 1.
There
must always be a ﬁnite probability of observing MUCR = 1, since it is possible that
an individual takes the shortest path in all observations.
If many observations are
sampled per individual, this probability decreases.
For instance, if all observations
for the individual belong to a single OD-relation, then the decay will be discretely
exponential, since if the probability of choosing the shortest path given a consideration
set deﬁned by the individual’s true threshold is p, then the probability of successively
choosing the shortest path in N trials is pN. Sometimes, however, there is only one
feasible route for an OD-relation, and with a threshold, this can easily mean that p = 1,
making observations of MUCR = 1 likely in some parts of the network. Even without a
threshold, if e.g. p = 0.98 (which is e.g. seen for OD 1 →2 on the Sioux Falls network,
Figure 4.1 on page 20), then with 30 observations, pn = 0.9830 = 0.55, meaning that one
must expect some observations of MUCR = 1 if all individuals have observations only
from single, respective OD-relations.
To address this issue, two things can be done:
1. Require observations to be sampled among several diﬀerent OD-pairs
2. Expand the distribution by having a special case where y = 1 with probability
P(y = 1).
Option 1 can be employed in a combination with many observations per individual
(i.e. large ki) to make it suﬃciently unlikely that there are many observations of y = 1. It
is not the most theoretically sound option, however, since it provides no way of handling
any such observation. Furthermore, when collecting real data it may not be possible
to “sample between many OD-pairs” (as opposed to in data synthesis, where the data
can be constructed as the modeller pleases); it may well be that there simply are some
individuals who incidentally consistently chose optimal routes, making it diﬃcult to
deduce what their thresholds are.
The better option, then, seems to be to adopt the explicit case-approach 2, so that the
outcome of the MUCR is hypothesised to have a ﬁnite probability of being one, and then
conditional on the opposite outcome, follows a continuous distribution; in this report,
the chosen probability distribution is the Fréchet, for reasons that will be elaborated on
below. More formally,
∀i :
yi



= 1
w/ probability p(y = 1) ≥0
∼Frechet(1, α, ζ) otherwise
(3.20)
Note that even if the chosen continuous distribution function has support in y = 1, it
is against the statistical assumption of a continuous probability density function (PDF)
==PAGE:26==
14
3 Theory
that there is a non-zero probability mass in any point, so this would not entirely solve
the problem of what to do when y = 1.
Extreme value theory tells us, somewhat like the Central Limit Theorem, that the
maximum of a series of outcomes of a stochastic variable with an upwardly unbounded
distribution follows one of the extreme value distributions. [5, pp. 4]. The Extreme
Value Type 2 distribution is called Fréchet, and has the PDF
f(y; α, ζ, m) = α
ζ
(y −m
ζ
)−1−α
exp


−
(y −m
ζ
)−α

, x > m
(3.21)
where α ∈]0, ∞[ is the shape parameter, ζ ∈]0, ∞[ is the scale parameter, and m ∈R is
the location parameter, so that the domain of f is ]m, ∞[. Note that ζ is purely a scale
parameter, and m is purely a location parameter, i.e. the shape of the distribution is
entirely contained in α.
Since no routes have a cost lower than the lowest cost route, UCR ≥1; since
MUCR ≥UCR, this means that MUCR = y ≥1 as well. For this reason, the location
parameter m should be equal to 1, and this will be assumed for the remainder of the
text. The corresponding cumulative density function (CDF) is
F(y) = exp


−
(y −m
ζ
)−α


(3.22)
which means that the inverse CDF is
F ◦−1(ρ) = 1 + ζ (−ln ρ)
1
−α ,
0 < ρ ≤1.
(3.23)
(3.23) can be used to infer τ when the latter is assumed to be some percentile of the
distribution of the true threshold and the parameters α, ζ are known. The choice of ρ
is important, since it links the true behaviour of individuals’ thresholds to the “average
situation” of the RSUET.
To reiterate, this makes the likelihood function (3.16) expand to
L(α, ζ, βPS, β) =
M
∏
m=1
Nm
∏
r=1
α
ζ
(y −m
ζ
)−1−α
exp


−
(y −m
ζ
)−α

Pmr(c(x)|Smi(yi(c); c)) ,
(3.24)
where τ = F ◦−1(ρ) and c is the route cost vector corresponding to the RSUET(min, τ min)
solution with βPS and β in the RUM.
Under the assumptions that the UCR cij/πδ(qij) is continuously distributed on [1; ti],
yi →ti as ki →∞. Then asymptotically with ki, yi follows the same distribution as ti.
Since we must assume that the UCR is not bounded above to agree with real data, the
same must be true for ti. So we have:
1. As ki →∞, the PDF of yi approaches that of ti assuming that yi is continuously
distributed.
==PAGE:27==
3.6 Maximum Likelihood Estimation
15
2. Since ti is not bounded above, yi is not bounded above.
3. Since yi is the maximum of a number of stochastic variables which are not bounded
above (UCR), yi asymptotically follows an Extreme Value distribution.
The sum total of these statements must be that as ki tends to inﬁnity, both ti and yi
share the same extreme value distribution (under the assumption that yi is continuous).
The choice of the Type 2 distribution speciﬁcally is simply agreement of the domain:
Type 3 is bounded above but not below, and Type 1 is completely unbounded. Hence
we have “proven” that ti and, asymptotically, yi do in fact follow the same Fréchet
distribution under the very important condition that yi is continuously distributed. Un-
fortunately, yi is necessarily discretely distributed; but if we sample from many diﬀerent
OD pairs, and many observations for each individual, we can more or less emulate a con-
tinuous distribution and at the same time reach a good approximation of the asymptotic
distribution of yi, which is the same as the distribution of ti. This is the core strategy
of the likelihood approach in this work.
To familiarise the reader with the Fréchet distribution, the PDF is plotted in Figures
3.1(a) and 3.1(b) for varying values of the shape and scale parameters.
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
y
p
 
 
α = 0.2 (ζ = 0.5)
α = 0.4 (ζ = 0.5)
α = 0.6 (ζ = 0.5)
α = 0.8 (ζ = 0.5)
α = 0.6 (ζ = 0.5)
((a))
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
y
p
 
 
ζ = 0.2 (α = 2)
ζ = 0.4 (α = 2)
ζ = 0.6 (α = 2)
ζ = 2 (α = 0.5)
((b))
Figure 3.1: Probability density function of the Fréchet distribution, Equation (3.21), with
varying values of the shape parameter α (3.1(a)) and the scale parameter ζ (3.1(b)).
3.6
Maximum Likelihood Estimation
Although maximum likelihood estimation is nothing unusual or particularly problematic
in itself, parameter estimation of the RSUET using real route-level GPS data poses a
great challenge because the RSUET model is inherently aggregate, whereas the data
is completely disaggregate. The RSUET is excellent at describing network ﬂow on the
==PAGE:28==
16
3 Theory
average or aggregate level[10], but it is also a very “strict” model in the sense that it
has a ﬁxed, deterministic threshold which it requires all possible outcomes to respect.
In other words, if an individual is observed in the data to have taken an unusually
long detour costing e.g. two times that of the cheapest route, an RSUET model with
a threshold of 1.5 deems the outcome impossible. In other words, the model holds no
ﬂexibility when it comes to outliers of the MUCR. This means that if one uses the
normal RSUET choice probabilities to evaluate the likelihood of a real data sample,
it will require that the threshold is at least as great as (and probably exactly equal
to) the greatest MUCR observed over the entire sample. This is not what is wanted
from the modeller’s perspective, since the aim of the RSUET (as an aggregate model)
is to capture some typical, “average” situation. This basically means that we have two
options to proceed:
1. Ignore the outliers
2. Expand the model so that it can explain the outliers
If approach 1 is chosen (removing some observations with MUCR greater than some
percentile ρ of the data) and the pure RSUET probabilities are applied in the likelihood
function, still expecting some true, strictly enforced, ﬁxed threshold τ and discarding
observations beyond some percentile ρ of the MUCR empirical distribution function,
then any parameter set where τ < MUCRρ has likelihood 0. In other words, if there
exists an observation that has a MUCR above τ, the likelihood of the entire sample
becomes 0 and the log-likelihood becomes −∞.
Additionally, parameter sets where
τ > argmax{f(y; α, ζ)} would always be less likely than τ = MUCRρ, since adding
more options to the choice set will reduce the probability (and hence likelihood) of the
chosen alternative, and f is monotonously and strictly decreasing after its maximum.
Thus in this scenario, the optimal value of τ (estimation-wise) is always the maximum
MUCR, τ = MUCRρ. This means that the more or less arbitrary truncation of the
data by MUCR percentile ρ directly yields MLE of τ, thus making the latter equally
arbitrary. Furthermore, there is no reason then to include τ in an actual MLE, since the
optimal value is given in advance as the maximum MUCR observed.
It seems then that to adapt an MLE approach based on disaggregate data for the
RSUET, it is necessary to go with option 2, by expanding the model on a quite fun-
damental level: If some individuals have an unusually high value of τ, it would be
reasonable to expect that instead of being some ﬁxed value, it followed a distribution,
so that each individual would have their own realised threshold. Notice here that we are
not only discussing a distributed MUCR, but a distributed threshold as an integral part
of the model. This sort of augmented RSUET would not be very useful, however, in a
practical application, since it negates the inherent strengths of the RSUET by requiring
a large master choice set and also simulation of every choice, making computation times
possibly even higher than those of the SUE. Maybe, though, it would be valuable to use
such an augmented model in the estimation process, and then transform it back to a
classical, disaggregate RSUET to be applied in practice.
==PAGE:29==
3.7 Sampling
17
The best option then, and the one applied here, is to compromise by using an auxiliary
model to explain the data, and then link this to the RSUET, so that estimating the
auxiliary model parameters also achieves estimation of the RSUET parameters.
3.7
Sampling from an RSUET model
Since no real-life route choice data on the Sioux Falls network exists, data must be
synthesized; a set of synthetic data will most commonly be referred to as a sample in
this work. Apart from being a challenge, synthesising a sample is useful because it allows
us to test whether our parameter estimation technique successfully reproduces the true
parameters (unlike with real data, where an experimental method provides no proof of
correctness of the found result).
Note that an RSUET path solution x ∈G is probabilistic, and thus assignment
of ﬂow according to the probabilities xmr = dmPmr(c(x)| ˆRm) does not represent any
speciﬁc outcome of the model, but rather the expected ﬂow when the demand is exactly
{dm}M
m=1. A clear distinction must also be made between the forecast and a sample
taken from the forecasted population.
Ideally, a sample is a random subset of an outcome of the probabilistic model. The
number of sampled observations is not (necessarily) the forecasted demand when the
topic of interest is parameter estimation, since only a fraction (sample) of traveller
routes is observed in usual real life contexts; hence, a sample should represent a random
selection of individuals or trips. In this context, we wish to have a random selection of
individuals (imagine volunteers for a data collection program).
But given some individual, how does one decide which trips this individual makes? A
standard demand model does not attribute certain trips to certain individuals. The ﬁrst
concern is which OD-relation to assume. In real life, there is likely some pattern in ODs
among observations. It even seems likely that for some individuals, every observation
belongs to one of only two OD-relations, e.g. home→work and work→home. Would it be
a good approach to sample from only one OD-relation for each individual, then? I argue
not, since restricting the OD-relation strongly biases the distribution of the MUCR. This
is because, depending on the network architecture, some OD-relations contain only the
optimal route within the threshold, even when including all possible routes and not just
the ones in the restricted choice set (i.e. at equilibrium with some reasonable parameters,
∃m ∈{1, . . . M} :
(
∀r ∈Rm : cmr
πm = 1 ∨cmr
πm > τ
)
). Some initial testing showed clearly
that this signiﬁcantly aﬀects the distribution of the MUCRs, since these are found on
a per-individual basis. On the theoretical level, one-OD-per-individual also conﬂicts
with the assumption we want to make that all individuals have the same distribution
of the MUCR (this comes from the assumptions that a) All individuals’ true thresholds
follow the same Fréchet distribution and b) the observed MUCR of each individual
equals his true threshold). For this reason, each observation is made for its own random
==PAGE:30==
18
3 Theory
OD-relation. The random OD is chosen according to its share of demand on the network:
pm =
dm
∑
m dm
(3.25)
This intends to mimic the structure of the demand on the network and thus ensure
that the expected ﬂow distribution of the sample mirrors the one predicted by the
RSUET. Of course there are other (equally valid) ways of choosing an OD-relation
randomly, but since the aim of the sampling is merely to produce a realistic artiﬁcial set
of observations from the real network, it is assessed that this method is adequate. In a
real-life application, this problem does not exist because the data set is already readily
available, but it is of importance for the degree of success of parameter replication, which
is the scope of this work.
3.8
Particle Swarm Optimisation method
(PSO)
The Particle Swarm Optimisation algorithm was ﬁrst due to [4] as a model to simulate
the movement of bird ﬂocks, but it was found by the authors that the algorithm was
performing optimisation [8, pp. 9]. The algorithm, adopted from [7] can be found in
Appendix A. Being a heuristic, the PSO is somewhat of a black box approach, since
this means that there is no guarantee of the solution being optimal, and no indication
of the optimality gap. The advantage of the algorithm is that it requires no knowledge
of the gradient of the objective function (sometimes referred to as the “ﬁtness”, in this
case the Likelihood function 3.16), and that it is relatively straightforward to implement
and understand. Furthermore, it is possible to trust that the algorithm will produce
a good result with reasonable conﬁdence when the parameters are chosen well. The
appropriate selection of parameters is an important issue when facing an optimisation
problem; luckily, research has been done in this area by [7] using meta-heuristics on a
variety of problem instances, and these tests provide generic good parameters for various
benchmark problems, showed in Table 2 in Appendix A [7].
Parameters should be chosen according to the benchmark problem with the closest
resemblance to the problem at hand with regards to problem dimensionality (number of
parameters to be estimated) and the allowed number of ﬁtness evaluations. The latter
is a matter of computational tractability, and depends on the time one can practically
aﬀord to spend on the optimisation, the available computation power, and the complexity
of evaluating the ﬁtness.
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 4
Implementation in Java
The purpose of this chapter is to give the reader an overlook of how the RSUET(min, τ min)
and likelihood evaluation routines were implemented in Java, and especially to validate
the RSUET in Section 4.8.
The chapter is meant to make it possible for others to
recreate what was found in this report, not to serve as an instructional manual to the
implementation.
Readers who are chieﬂy interested in theoretical and practical results may therefore
wish to skip this chapter.
4.1
Test network
For the implementation of the proposed algorithm, the famous Sioux Falls network [6]
is chosen because of its manageable size and the fact that it has been studied well in
other works, making results easy to validate. The network data was downloaded from
the online resource [12]. Figure 4.1 shows the network with link travel times, both at
free ﬂow and for an RSUET(min, τ min) solution.
The Java implementation is not inherently restricted to use on this network only,
as an instance of a network is created by reading text ﬁles which may contain the
information for any network when the same format is used.
Realistically, some re-
coding may be necessary if another network is to be used instead, and if the deﬁnition
of the utility function is to be augmented; speed of computation and eﬀectiveness were
the main issues in the creation of the implementation, not scalability and extendibility.
Additionally, the universal choice set enumeration algorithm will probably have to be
substituted with a master choice set heuristic for use in a large-scale application. The
implementation here should thus be seen as a work-in-progress if it is to be adopted in
a diﬀerent context, but it is complete within the scope of the Sioux Falls network.
The standard parameters used in the utility function along with α, ζ and the corre-
sponding inferred τ are listed in Table 4.1.
Table 4.1: Default true values of parameters to be estimated. These are used throughout the
Results chapter 5. Note that τtrue is inferred from α, ζ and ρ through Eq. (3.23).
Parameter
αtrue
ζtrue
ρtrue
τtrue
βPS,true
βtime,true
Default value
2
0.2
0.9
1.6162
-3
1
==PAGE:32==
20
4 Implementation in Java
Figure 4.1: The Sioux Falls network.
[6] The numbers on the edges are [free ﬂow travel
time]/[total travel time of the RSUET solution when using standard parameters] (standard
parameters are found in Tables 4.1 on page 19 and 4.2 on page 21), except τ = 1.5 instead of
the inferred value (α and ζ play no part in the equilibrium solution).
==PAGE:33==
4.2 Data structure
21
4.2
Data structure
As mentioned, the data structure used in the implementation allows for use on any net-
work, as long as the corresponding data ﬁles for network and demand have the expected
format. The problem is represented as methods of a custom Network class. Sioux Falls
is represented by creating an instance of the Network class, and then calling the dynamic
method readNetwork(networkdata,filedata).
A network is represented by:
• A set of nodes.
• A set of edges.
• A set of OD-pairs.
• A set of Individuals (data).
Finally, there is a Parameter class, which is passed to e.g. the RSUET, and which
when created has all the default parameter values (but τ = 1.5). The network contains
numerous other methods, the ones relevant to the user being listed in the UML diagram
in Figure 4.2.
4.3
RSUET(min,τmin) algorithm
The algorithm to achieve an RSUET solution based on given parameters (θ, βPS, τ) is
adopted from [16] and is shown in Table 1 in Appendix B. The parameters that are
consistently used throughout this work are furthermore listed in Table 4.2; these are
also the standard values taken on by the Parameter class. The values are adopted from
[16].
In the Restricted master problem phase, MSWA (Method of Successive Weighted
Averages) is used as the averaging scheme, where the step size γn in iteration n is
γn =
nd
1d + 2d + . . . + nd .
(4.1)
The inner assignment component is the inner Path Size Logit, i.e. simply the RUM
applied to the current restricted choice sets so that Eqs. (3.7) and (3.8) hold before
network loading (i.e., updating the link costs to match the new link ﬂows). This method
was chosen over e.g. path swapping algorithm because of the promising results that it
showed with regards to convergence in [11].
Table 4.2: Parameters used in the RSUET algorithm.
Parameter
d
ϵ
Nmin
Kmin
Value
2
0.005
2
7
==PAGE:34==
22
4 Implementation in Java
Network 
 - nodes: List of Node 
 - edges: List of Edge 
 - ods: List of OD 
 - individuals: List of Individual 
 + readNetwork( filename: String ): void 
 + draw( ): void 
 + RSUET ( parameters: Parameters ): void 
 + sampleFrechet(numObs: int): void 
 + logLikelihood(parameters: Parameters): double 
 + maxLikelihood(parameters: Parameters): PSOstats 
 - generateUniversalChoiceSet( ): void 
 - dijsktra( origin: Node ): void 
Node 
 + ID: int 
 + x: double 
 + y: double 
 + neighbours: List of 
Node 
 + dist: List of double 
 + pred: List of Node 
Edge 
 + ID: int 
 + tail: Node 
 + head: Node 
 - capacity: double 
 + length: double 
 - freeFlowTime: double 
 - B: double 
 - power: double 
 + flow: double = 0 
 + genCost: double 
 + time: double 
 + transformedCost: 
double 
 + delta: List of double 
 + updateCost( 
parameters: Parameters 
): void 
OD 
 + ID: int 
 + O: Node 
 + D: Node 
 + demand: double 
 + paths: Path[] 
 + R: Path[] 
 + maximumSystematicUtility: 
double 
Path 
 + nodeSequence: int[] 
 + edges: Edge[] 
 + flow: double = 0 
 + time: double 
 + length: double 
 + genCost: double 
 + getSystematicUtility( 
parameters: Parameters ): 
double 
 + updateCost( parameters: 
Parameters ): void 
 + load( ): void 
Parameters 
 + theta: double = 0.1 
 + betaPS: double = -3 
 + d: int = 2 
 + epsilon: double =  0.005 
 + Nmin: int = 2 
 + Kmin: int = 7 
 + betaTime: double = 1 
 + betaLength: double = 0 
 + alpha: double  =  1.9 
 + zeta: double = 0.3 
 + tau: double=1.5 
 +  S: double=47 
 +  omega:: double= -0.1832  
 + phiP: double = 0.5287 
 + phiG: double = 3.1913 
 + numIt: int = 1000/S 
  - mu: double = 1 
 + setMu(value: double): void 
Individual 
 + ID: int  
 + observations: 
Path[] 
 + UCR: double[] 
 + MUCR: double 
PSOstats 
 + x: double[][][] 
 + c: double[][] 
 + p: double[][][] 
 +  bestParticleFitness: double[][] 
 + g: double[][] 
 + h: double[] 
 + v: double[][][] 
 + print(filename: String): void 
Figure 4.2: UML diagram showing basic data structure of the Java implementation. Only key
attributes and methods are displayed here.
The algorithm is implemented in the dynamic method RSUET(Parameters), which
returns the number of iterations performed (-1 if not converged) and alters all relevant
network properties to correspond to an RSUET equilibrium solution. The initial network
is always the uncongested network with free-ﬂow times so that the same solution is always
found.
4.4
Shortest Path Algorithm
A specially-tailored implementation of Dijkstra’s algorithm is used to calculate the short-
est path from any node to all other nodes. Since the shortest path can be deﬁned re-
cursively by assigning to each non-origin node a predecessor node, all that is needed is
a vector of predecessor nodes to enable trivial extraction of the shortest path from the
origin node to any other node (pred[]). For convenience and computational eﬃciency,
the distance of the shortest path to the node is also saved, since this is calculated in
==PAGE:35==
4.5 Universal choice set enumeration
23
the algorithm (dist[]). The algorithm is adopted from the original Dijkstra’s algo-
rithm, and thus does not utilise a min-priority queue; it has a worst-case complexity of
O(V 2) and is thus eﬃcient (it runs in polynomial time).[2] Depending on the network,
a min-priority queue implementation may be considerably faster, but since computa-
tional speed is not the focus of this work and the RSUET is relatively fast on the Sioux
Falls network (< 1s), the simple Dijktra’s algorithm suﬃces. The algorithm is shown in
pseudo-code in the function dijkstra below.
Function dijkstra(Network, Origin)
Q ←{};
for edge v in Network do
dist[v] ←∞;
pred[v] ←UNDEFINED;
Q ←Q ∪{v};
end
dist[Origin] ←0;
while Q ̸= ∅do
u ←argmin
v∈Q {dist[v]};
Q ←Q \ {u};
for neighbour v of u do
neighbourDistance ←dist[u] + distance(u, v);
if neighbourDistance < dist[v] then
dist[v] ←neighbourDistance;
pred[v] ←u;
end
end
end
return dist[], pred[]
4.5
Universal choice set enumeration
The scale of the Sioux Falls network is suﬃciently small that brute force enumeration of
all acyclic paths is feasible (runtimes < 10 s).1 This is implemented on the OD-level by
calling the recursive function recursiveCall as showed in Algorithm enumerateUniversal-
ChoiceSet. The recursive call takes in two arguments other than the network (i.e. Sioux
Falls) and the OD-pair at hand:
• u: Node currently being considered
1On larger networks where the universal choice set can not be generated, a suﬃciently large master
choice sets must instead be used.
==PAGE:36==
24
4 Implementation in Java
• currentPath: Provisional node sequence describing the path taken to the node u
through multiple recursive calls.
The concept behind the algorithm is that all acyclic paths from O to D are formed
from all acyclic paths from the neighbours of O to D, and the links to the neighbours.
The base case is when the neighbour is the destination, in which case the sequence of
nodes taken to the destination can be directly returned as a route. The acyclic property
is enforced by only performing a recursive call when the considered neighbour has not
already been visited by the current path.
Function enumerateUniversalChoiceSet(OD)
Rm = {} /* Initialise universal choice set Rm for OD m
*/
currentPath ←{origin(OD)};
u ←origin(OD);
recursiveCall(OD,u,currentPath);
Function recursiveCall(OD,u,currentPath)
for v ∈neighbours(u) do
if v = destination(OD) then
add currentPath ∪v to Rm;
else if v /∈currentPath then
newCurrentPath ←currentPath ∪v;
recursiveCall(OD,v,newCurrentPath);
end
end
return;
1632820 routes were enumerated on the Sioux Falls network.
4.6
Generation of consideration sets
It is worth noting that potentially as many consideration sets as there are observations
have to be generated each time the likelihood function is evaluated. This demonstrates
the importance of having a computationally fast method of generating the considerations
sets.
When using actual costs to deﬁne the cut-oﬀfor consideration sets Sm(y, c) like for
the MUCR and the RSUET model’s Ωcriterion, they are easy to generate from the
universal choice set if the latter is sorted. This is illustrated in Algorithm 1.
The
binary search used is a standard algorithm which is not displayed here. Sorting is done
using Java’s standard static method Double.sort(). When using actual costs, it is only
==PAGE:37==
4.7 Calculation of likelihood
25
Algorithm 1: Generation of consideration set for MNL RUM type models
Rm[] = universal choice set for od movement m as a list sorted by actual cost c
ascending;
Sm ←{};
cutofftIndex ←binarySearch(Rm, τ · πm) /* Find highest index with c <=
tau*c
*/
Sm[] ←R[1 : cutoffIndex] /* first index to cutoffIndex (inclusive)
*/
necessary to re-sort the universal choice sets when link costs are updated (as opposed to
if using e.g. equilibrium costs for a PSL model, where the costs are choice set dependant).
In addition, relative costs of all paths are well-deﬁned since they are invariant to choice
set (the optimal route for OD m is contained in Rm and ˜Rm for all m when Φ = min in
the RSUET(Φ, Ω)).
4.7
Calculation of likelihood
Calculation of the likelihood is ideally given by the function, Eq. (3.16), but there are
enough prerequisite steps and ambiguities that it seems well-advised to explicitly state
the procedure here, shown below in Function likelihood. All the displayed initial steps
must be performed every time the likelihood is evaluated, and Rm∀m must be deﬁned
beforehand.
Function likelihood(α, ζ, ρ, βPS, βPS)
/* Requires the universal choice set to be enumerated
*/
τ ←F ◦−1(ρ; α, ζ);
Compute RSUET(min, τ min) equilibrium;
Sort Rm by cmr ascending ∀m;
Compute for each route r its cost ratio Ymr;
Compute for each individual i their MUCR yi as max
j∈1,...,kiYδ(qij)qij;
L ←0;
foreach i ∈{1, 2, . . . Nind} do
foreach j ∈{1, 2, . . . , ki} do
L ←L + ln f(yi);
Generate consideration set Sδ(qij)i(yi) using Algorithm 1;
Calculate path size factors using the consideration set;
L ←L + ln(pδ(qij)qij) where pδ(qij)qij is the PSL choice probability with
Sδ(qij)i as choice set;
end
end
return L;
==PAGE:38==
26
4 Implementation in Java
4.8
RSUET Validation
The RSUET(min, τ min) implementation is tested to ensure that it mirrors the mathe-
matical algorithm and that it produces a valid RSUET solution.
The RSUET implementation has good convergence properties. The procedure has
a maximum number of iterations of 500 before it “gives up” reaching convergence. For
approximately τ > 1.25, no convergence issues were encountered, but below this the
algorithm sometimes destabilises with the applied parameters. This may be mended by
selecting a higher Kmin, but for the purpose of this study, this region of τ was of no major
interest, so no action was taken other than avoiding τ values that extreme. Figure 4.3
shows convergence properties for diﬀerent values of τ. It can occur (although rarely) that
computationally, the algorithm has converged, but in reality, some of the network ﬂows
and costs are NaN (not a number) when using low thresholds, since these low values can
create very large ﬂuctuations in the provisional ﬂow solution in the algorithm. Therefore,
solutions found with very high numbers of iterations (e.g. 300) should not always be
trusted to have converged.
On the macroscopic level, the resulting choice sets and ﬂows seem to agree with
the ﬁndings in [16].
The choice sets have the same composition as reported in [16].
For instance, when using βPS = 0, d = 0, θ = 0.1, Nmin = 2, Kmin = 7, and forcing 50
iterations, the average choice set size is 1.9659, whereas [16] reports 1.95. If the same
parameters are used except θ = 1, the average size becomes 2.183, whereas [16] reports
2.16. The slight diﬀerence is either because other parameters were used (it is a bit unclear
from the report), or small diﬀerences in the implementations. For instance, the Java
implementation has step 4 (the convergence evaluation phase) moved to after step 1 to
avoid performing an extra shortest path search. Other small details, intentional or not,
may produce slightly diﬀerent results from the original application. The dependency of
the RSUET solution upon algorithmic parameters is arguably one of the model’s greatest
weaknesses.
Table 4.3 shows some additional statistic for the choice set composition using default
parameters (which diﬀer from the ones used in [16]), except for τ, which is varied in
the interval [1.25,2.5] in 100 increments. This is done to illustrate how much choice set
composition diﬀers in that range and to see how much computation time and number of
iterations to convergence varies as τ is varied. It reveals that the computation time of
the RSUET is on average 43 milliseconds, that the average of the average choice size is
2.43 but can be as low as 1.73 for low thresholds, and that the network is quite congested
(which can also be seen from Figure 4.1), having an average link congestion of around
1.5.
Figure 4.3 shows how the two gap measures change throughout a typical run. The
sudden drop in Rel.gapused at iteration 7 = Kmin is caused by the threshold phase
becoming active. The algorithm quickly stabilises and converges.
All tests indicate that the implementation works as intended and produces result
that agree with previous work, thus successfully validating the product.
==PAGE:39==
4.8 RSUET Validation
27
Table 4.3: Statistic for the RSUET using standard parameters, but varying τ; the dataset
consists of 100 runs of the RSUET, using τ = 1.25, 1.2625, 1.2750, ..., 2.5, i.e. 100 diﬀerent
equidistant values of τ in the interval [1.25;2.5]. The average link congestion is calculated as
∑
a∈1,...A fa
fa
ca / ∑
a∈1,...A fa.
Variable
min
max
µ
σ
σ/µ
No. Iterations
30
63
38.11
6.537993
0.171556
Time to convergence [ms]
33
194
43.02
16.32063823
0.379373274
Minimum choice set size
1
1
1
0
0
Maximum choice set size
7
9
7.46
0.539734
0.07235
Average choice set size
1.729167
2.797348
2.430095
0.277781
0.114309
Total No. routes used
913
1477
1283.09
146.6682
0.114309
Average link congestion
1.464421
1.547965
1.514925
0.02439
0.0161
Figure 4.3: Convergence pattern for a typical RSUET(min,τmin) run. Standard parameters
were used (Tables 4.1, page 19 and 4.2, page 21).
==PAGE:40==
28
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 5
Results
5.1
Observed distribution of the MUCR
Needless to say, the distribution of the MUCR y depends on the way the sample at hand
was produced. If our theory holds, the MUCR is Fréchet distributed. In this section, we
examine diﬀerent approaches to the problem of producing a sample with this property.
4 diﬀerent types of samples are initially examined. These are named A, B, C and D
– only sample D is accepted and used for experimentation in the end because samples
A, B and C do not satisfy theoretical requirements. The notation A(Nind, k) means that
the sample at hand is of type A and contains N individuals, who each have exactly k
observations associated with them. Note that with this individual-ﬁrst type of sampling
where the OD for each observations is chosen at random according to demand share, the
resulting samples are stratiﬁed, i.e. observed ﬂow counts approach the expected values
more quickly than in a completely random sampling. It is assessed that this is of no
practical importance to the analysis, especially since there seems to be no alternative
approach (sampling random trips would mean that very few trips per individual would
be observed). All samples are created from an RSUET(min,τmin) solution, but the
probabilities that are used to generate the observed routes are diﬀerent from the RSUET
choice probabilities (except for Sample B, which uses the restricted choice sets ˆRm from
the RSUET(min,τmin)-assignment).
Outcomes of all samples were generated using 1000 (100 for sample D) individuals
Nind = 1000 and four diﬀerent numbers of observations per individual k: 1, 5, 15 and
30. Individuals within a sample share the value ki, i.e. all individuals have the same
number of observations ki = k∀i.
Before the actual samples are presented, observe Figure 5.1; it conﬁrms that the
expected number of observations where y = 1 is exponentially decreasing with the num-
ber of observations per individual, as hypothesised in Section 3.5. Values corresponding
to the points are also listed in Table 5.1. Interestingly, there is a strong similarity be-
tween Sample B and D, which seems promising for Sample D, since Sample B represents
the direct RSUET choice probability sampling method, and D is the advanced version
applied to all routes in the universal choice set with a relative cost within a Fréchet
distributed stochastic threshold (see Section 5.1.4), i.e. corresponds to the auxiliary
likelihood model. Contrarily, Sample C lends itself to the unrestricted Sample A, even
though the only diﬀerence between sample C and D is that C uses a threshold for all
individuals, namely the constant ρth percentile of f(y; α, ζ), whereas in Sample D the
threshold is drawn at random from the same distribution (for each individual).
==PAGE:42==
30
5 Results
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Observations per individual
Proportion of singular observations
 
 
A
B
C
D
Figure 5.1: Percentage of samples A-D which are y = 1 (circles).
The dotted line is the
hypothesised exponential trend, using as py=1 the proportion of y = 1 in the samples with 1
observation per individual.
Table 5.1: Proportion of observations where y=1 in sample A-D.
Observations per ind.
Sample A
Sample B
Sample C
Sample D
1
0.469
0.76
0.483
0.76
2
0.218
0.576
0.232
0.54
5
0.027
0.268
0.024
0.25
15
0
0.017
0
0.02
30
0
0
0
0
==PAGE:43==
5.1 Observed distribution of the MUCR
31
5.1.1
Sample A: Unrestricted consideration sets
Instances of Sample A are synthesised using Algorithm 2.
Algorithm 2: Sample A procedure
Calculate RSUET(min,τ min) solution;
Generate universal choice sets for all OD-relations (Function
enumerateUniversalChoiceSet on p. 24) and calculate route costs in Rm and
choice probabilities pmr according to PSL (Eq. 3.6);
forall the i ∈1, . . . Nind do
forall the j ∈1, . . . ki do
m ←sampleOD();
qij ←outcome of draw from choice probabilities in pmr, r ∈Rm;
end
end
The empirical distributions are plotted in Figure 5.2. We see that as the number
of observations per individual increases, the distribution becomes more similiar to a
Fréchet, and for k = 30 observations per individual, the ﬁt is remarkable – see Figure
5.3, which shows a Fréchet PDF ﬁt with the data in Figure 5.2(d). This agrees with the
extreme value theory presented in Section 3.5.
Note that sample A is unrestricted, yet our theory would predict that, given the
MUCRs observed, there is a threshold of τ = 7.994 ≈8 using the 90th percentile of
the empirical distribution. This does not necessarily contradict our assumption that the
ρth percentile of the MUCR corresponds to τ in the RSUET; one interpretation here is
that on Sioux Falls, an RSUET(min,τmin) is very similar to an SUE when τ ≥8 (using
ρ = 0.9 and the standard parameters in Table 4.2).
5.1.2
Sample B: RSUET restricted choice sets
This sample is generated the same way as Sample A, except observations are chosen not
from the universal choice set, but from the RSUET choice sets ˜Rm. The pseudo-code is
shown in Algorithm 3.
As is immediately evident from the ﬁgures, the distributions are erratic and not useful
at all in this context. This is because the choice sets are too small and too sensitive to the
speciﬁc OD chosen to be approximately continuous and identical for each observation.
Hence we have shown that this method of sampling is, indeed, inadequate to produce
samples of Fréchet distributed route choice.
==PAGE:44==
32
5 Results
1000 individuals, 1 obs per individual
y
Density
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
4
5
((a))
1000 individuals, 5 obs per individual
y
Density
2
4
6
8
10
12
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
((b))
1000 individuals, 15 obs per individual
y
Density
5
10
15
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
((c))
1000 individuals, 30 obs per individual
y
Density
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
((d))
Figure 5.2: MUCR histogram of Sample A (Algorithm 2).
==PAGE:45==
5.1 Observed distribution of the MUCR
33
y
40
20
pdf
0.36
0.32
0.28
0.24
0.2
0.16
0.12
0.08
0.04
0
Figure 5.3: Histogram of the MUCR of the outcome of the A(1000,30) sample in Figure 5.2(d).
The 90th percentile of the ﬁtted probability density function is approximately 8.
Algorithm 3: Sample B procedure
Calculate RSUET(min,τ min) solution;
forall the i ∈1, . . . Nind do
forall the j ∈1, . . . ki do
m ←sampleOD();
qij ←outcome of draw from choice probabilities in pmr, r ∈ˆRm;
end
end
5.1.3
Sample C: Consideration sets with constant
threshold
This sample is generated like Sample A, except the consideration sets (which constitute
the choice sets for generation of observations) are restricted above by a constant τ (using
cost ratio) which is the same for all individuals and which is equal to F ◦−1(ρ; α, ζ) for
the true α = 2, ζ = 0.2, τ = 1.6162. The procedure is displayed in 4.
This sample shows that the MUCR distribution skews toward the global threshold
as the number of observations per individual k is increased, which is not very useful,
either. It does, however, illustrate the same concept that makes yi →ti as ki →∞.
==PAGE:46==
34
5 Results
1000 individuals, 1 obs per individual
y
Density
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
0
10
20
30
40
((a))
1000 individuals, 5 obs per individual
y
Density
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
0
5
10
15
((b))
1000 individuals, 15 obs per individual
y
Density
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
0
1
2
3
4
((c))
10000 individuals, 50 obs per individual
y
Density
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
((d))
Figure 5.4: Empirical MUCR histogram of Sample B (Algorithm 3).
==PAGE:47==
5.1 Observed distribution of the MUCR
35
1000 individuals, 1 obs per individual
y
Density
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
0
2
4
6
8
10
((a))
1000 individuals, 5 obs per individual
y
Density
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
((b))
1000 individuals, 15 obs per individual
y
Density
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
2.4
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
((c))
1000 individuals, 30 obs per individual
y
Density
1.8
2.0
2.2
2.4
0
1
2
3
4
5
((d))
Figure 5.5: Empirical MUCR histogram of Sample C (Algorithm 4)
==PAGE:48==
36
5 Results
Algorithm 4: Sample C procedure
Calculate RSUET(min,τ min) solution;
forall the m ∈1, 2, . . . , M do
Sm ←consideration set generated using Algorithm 1 and the global threshold
τ;
end
forall the i ∈1, . . . , Nind do
forall the j ∈1, . . . ki do
m ←sampleOD();
Calculate PS terms according to and choice probabilities in Sm(t) according
to (3.4) and (3.6);
qij ←outcome of draw from choice probabilities in pmr, r ∈Sm(τ);
end
end
5.1.4
Sample D: Stochastic, individual-unique threshold
Algorithm 5: Sample D procedure
Calculate RSUET(min,τ min) solution;
forall the i ∈1, . . . Nind do
Draw random threshold ti from Frechet with parameters α, ζ;
forall the j ∈1, . . . ki do
m ←sampleOD();
Generate Smi(ti) using (1);
Calculate PS terms according to and choice probabilities in Sm(t) according
to (3.4) and (3.6);
qij ←outcome of draw from choice probabilities in pmr, r ∈Smi(ti);
end
end
The ﬁnal sample type is the same as 4, except each individual has their own threshold,
which is drawn from the Fréchet(y; 2, 0.2) distribution, (3.21). The τ which is used for
this RSUET is the 90th percentile of this same distribution. See Algorithm 5.
As is seen from Figure 5.6, the histogram of the MUCR y matches very well the
probability density function of the true threshold t when k ≥30, and quite well already
when t = 15, although there are some observations of y = 1 then. We have thus shown
that, on Sioux Falls, when sampling across diﬀerent OD relations, yi →ti as ki →∞,
as theorised in Section 3.5.
==PAGE:49==
5.1 Observed distribution of the MUCR
37
100 individuals, 1 obs per individual
y
Density
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
0
20
40
60
80
((a)) 76 observations of y = 1.
100 individuals, 5 obs per individual
y
Density
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
((b)) 25 observations of y = 1.
100 individuals, 15 obs per individual
y
Density
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
((c)) 2 observations of y = 1.
100 individuals, 30 obs per individual
y
Density
1
2
3
4
5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
((d)) 0 observations of y = 1.
Figure 5.6: MUCR histogram of Sample D (Algorithm 5). The PDF of the true threshold is
shown as a line.
==PAGE:50==
38
5 Results
5.2
Log-likelihood function
This section investigates how α and ζ (i.e. the parameters in the distribution of τ) aﬀect
the likelihood of a sample (of type D, which is the only valid sample type produced).
This way, clues about important properties such as continuity and convexity may be
revealed. To ensure ideal sample quality while maintaining a good computation time,
there are 100 individuals with each 50 observations, i.e. the samples used here and for
the PSO in Sections 5.3 and 5.3.2 are D(100,50). The remaining model parameters, i.e.
those used in the RUM model, are kept ﬁxed at the true values. The procedure is shown
in Algorithm 6.
Algorithm 6: Procedure to produce Figures 5.7 and 5.8
Choose true parameters, including αtrue, ζtrue;
Achieve RSUET(min, τ min) equilibrium, where τ = τtrue = F ◦−1(ρ)|αtrue,ζtrue;
Produce sample D with 100 individuals, 50 observations per individual according
to algorithm 5;
Deﬁne vectors {αi}i∈I, {αj}j∈J of values to calculate likelihoods from;
forall the i ∈I do
forall the j ∈J do
τ ←F ◦−1(ρ; αi, ζj);
run RSUET(min, τ min);
evaluate loglikelihood using αi, ζj (Algorithm likelihood);
end
end
This procedure isolates the impact on the likelihood function that the choice of (α, ζ)
has, both through the inferred τ which inﬂuences the ﬂow solution through the RSUET,
and through the probability densities f used in calculating the likelihood 3.16. The
result is shown in Figure 5.7, and again with a higher resolution in Figure 5.8.
According to Figure 5.7, the MLE Frèchet distribution parameters are, in fact, the
true ones conditional on the remaining parameters being true, but remember that the
graph is only deﬁned on a rough grid. The Figure also shows that the likelihood function
is not smooth. This is because the ﬂow solutions (and hence route choice probabilities)
produced by the RSUET algorithm moves in “jerks” as new alternatives are added to-
or removed from choice sets; the process by which the equilibrated choice sets change is,
so to speak, “discrete”. The factor in the likelihood that comes from the Fréchet PDF
is, naturally, continuous, but the remaining part is not (despite this, the plot in Figure
5.7 is shown as a continuous surface for legibility). There is clearly a “ridge” of good
solutions which it may be diﬃcult to discriminate the optimal solution from.
The smoothness of the area of large ζ and low α indicates that the choice sets
among solutions there are identical, their likelihoods thus being diﬀerentiated only by the
probability density function’s contribution. This is conﬁrmed by examining the relevant
inferred thresholds: Inferred τ values in the ﬂat area are very high, meaning that all the
==PAGE:51==
5.2 Log-likelihood function
39
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
−10000
−8000
−6000
−4000
−2000
α
ζ
LL
Figure 5.7: Low-resolution plot of likelihood function surface when varying α and ζ of the
Frèchet distribution, holding all else constant. The maximal value on the grid is marked by
a magenta circle, and coincides with the true parameters. Note that a diﬀerent maximum is
found when using a higher resolution in Figure 5.8.
ﬂow solutions there are eﬀectively identical RSUE(min). Notice also the relative ﬂatness
of the area, which indicates that the probability density function f’s contribution to the
likelihood may not always be signiﬁcant compared to the corresponding inﬂuence from
choice probabilities, which are aﬀected only by τ in Figure 5.7 (other relevant parameters
are held constant).
Even though the best most likely parameters with the resolution in Figure 5.7 were
the true ones, the “ridge” that forms the most likely values has many candidates of that
have comparable likelihood to the maximum. Thus it seems likely that an optimization
algorithm may miss the true parameters by a signiﬁcant margin. This may or may not
be very problematic, since one could reasonably imagine that one pair α0, ζ0 could be
substituted with another one α1, ζ1 which for practical use would be very similar, even
though their values may not be. By this is not meant that we should not expect a change
in one parameter to have a signiﬁcant eﬀect, but rather that this eﬀect may be mitigated
by also changing the other parameter so that the pair are still located on the likelihood
==PAGE:52==
40
5 Results
“ridge”. This should be closely related to how well the corresponding τ matches the true
one; the ridge should be deﬁned by the values that give F −1(ρ) ≈τ.
To investigate if this is the case, Figure 5.8 is created (page 41). It is seen clearly
from the contour lines that there is a connection between the inferred value of τ and the
likelihood. Here it is seen clearly that the “ridge” is indeed formed by similar values of
τ. More speciﬁcally, the highest likelihoods reside on the contour line which corresponds
to τtrue.
Interestingly, there is a thin slither of points that have comparably poor ﬁtness in
the immediate vicinity of the true value of τ, indicated by a green-ish line of points in
an otherwise red area. This means that the sample is particularly unlikely to have been
produced by a τ which is in narrow range just above the true value – it is diﬃcult to
say why exactly this is the case.
With the higher resolution of Figure 5.8 compared to Figure 5.7, it is revealed
that the true values αtrue, ζtrue do not form the global optimum, with LL(αtrue, ζtrue) =
LL(2, 0.2) = −2813.1 < LL(1.75, 0.17) = −2811.7, but the diﬀerence between the two
likelihoods is quite small, and they correspond to almost exactly the same threshold.
This comes back to the eﬀect mentioned above, where two pairs (α, ζ) can be far apart
but still be similar because they share an inferred τ; they diﬀer by the shape of the
MUCR distribution, but share the ρ’th percentile.
Realising the importance of the inferred τ to the likelihood, it seems relevant to
examine the eﬀect of assuming a ρ which is diﬀerent from the true ρ. This is explored
in Section 5.3.2
5.3
MLE using PSO algorithm
5.3.1
PSO with ρ = ρtrue
The PSO algorithm was applied to perform MLE on Sample D(100,50), see Section
5.1.4. Key statistics of true parameters, input PSO parameters and output results are
listed in Table 5.2. These were chosen based on Table 1 in Appendix A; the problem
is 4-dimensional since α, ζ, βtime, βPS are estimated (τ is never directly estimated, but
can be inferred from α, ζ through the assumed ρ and the inverse CDF, (3.23)). All
other parameters were set to the default values listed in Table 4.1. Notice that here we
assume βlength = 0, without loss of generality of the results. One can specify a minimum
value τmin of the threshold to trust; values below this are immediately discarded, and
the log-likelihood is set to LL = −∞(-Infinity). This was set to τmin = 1.1, based on
consideration in the validation section 4.8.
There were S = 203 particles and 49 iterations (including initialisation), making
the total number of ﬁtness evaluations (each of which require re-running the RSUET
assignment and updating the master choice set costs) 9947 ≈10000. The runtime using
this many ﬁtness evaluations for one run was 7990 seconds, or 2h12 min on a desktop
PC running Windows 10 with 8 GB RAM and an Intel i3 dual core @3.4 GHz. Since
==PAGE:53==
5.3 MLE using PSO algorithm
41
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
α
ζ
 
 
−3500
−3400
−3300
−3200
−3100
−3000
−2900
Figure 5.8: Likelihood of sample assuming diﬀerent varying (α, ζ) while holding other param-
eters constant at their true values, like Figure 5.7. The true values are (α, ζ) = (2, 0.2), but
best solution is at (1.75,0.7)) (marked with black circles). Both lie on the contour line corre-
sponding to the true τ = 1.6162. The three other lines correspond to τ = 1.29, 1.45, 1.78, 1.94,
respectively.
both the generation of the sample and the PSO algorithm are stochastic, the experiment
was repeated more than once – more speciﬁcally, 11 times. Mean values and standard
deviations are given instead of the result from a single run, which would not be reliable.
The “SD to true value” is the square root of the sample variance. σtrue is the “standard
deviation to true value” and is similar to the sample SD σ, but instead of using as oﬀset
not the sample mean, its uses the true parameter value:
σtrue =
√∑N
n=1(x −xtrue)2
N −1
,
(5.1)
and σtrue,norm is σtrue,norm/xtrue, where xtrue is the true value of the parameter. Thus σtrue
is the most general measure of the goodness of estimation, with σtrue = 0 being perfect.
==PAGE:54==
42
5 Results
Table 5.2: Statistics for the PSO run on Sample D(100,50). ρ = 0.9, θ = 0.1 (scale parameter)
was assumed both as true values and throughout the estimation procedure. σtrue is deﬁned in
Eq. 5.1.
Parameter
α
ζ
τ*
βPS
βtime
True value
2
0.2
1.6162
-3
1
Estimated value (µ)
1.82310
0.18415
1.63695
-2.5452
1.00639
Av. relative error
8.845 %
7.925 %
1.284 %
15.16 %
0.639 %
σ
0.21532
0.02693
0.03396
1.08579
0.04082
σtrue
0.27895
0.031504
0.038912
1.16325
0.04116
σtrue,norm
0.13948
0.15752
0.024076
0.38775
0.04116
Optimisation interval
[0.01;4]
[0.01;2]
-
[-30;0]
[0.01;5]
PSO parameter
Nit
S
ω
ϕp
ϕg
τmin
Value
49
203
0.5069
2.5524
1.0056
1
*Inferred.
As is seen from Table 5.2, the threshold τ is estimated with remarkable accu-
racy, at least as well as the value of time βtime overall when considering the consistency
of the accuracy of the estimate of τ. Replication of the true values of the remaining
parameters is not achieved with the same level of accuracy, which is probably mostly due
to a) the discrepancy between the distribution of the MUCR, which the data represent,
and the true threshold, which the true parameters represent, and/or b) the introduction
of too many parameters, causing a sort of empirical identiﬁcation issue; this would be
closely tied to the ﬂat “ridge” on the likelihood function which represents the true τ.
Note that α, ζ are both systematically underestimated and also quite random, but nev-
ertheless they were estimated with reasonable accuracy. Note how the estimation of τ is
more precise than that of α, ζ; it is surprising and interesting that α and ζ, the purpose
of which is to enable accurate estimation of τ, seems too be governed by τ more so than
vice versa; i.e. it is more signiﬁcant for the likelihood what the inferred value of τ is than
the speciﬁc α, ζ combination, hinting that the more important part of the likelihood is
the one associated with the choice probabilities through the RSUET(min,τmin) link ﬂow
solution, the second part in 3.16. The precision of the τ estimate is likely aided by the
fact that the Sioux falls network is very congested, making the solution sensitive to small
alterations in route choice. High congestion usually prevails in the cases in which route
choice is relevant, but if for some reason the scenario is not very congested, it may be
more diﬃcult to accurately determine τ using MLE.
Especially the path size term βPS has a high variance and an inaccurate mean. The
worst result out of the 11 runs was ˆβPS = −0.715 (vs βtrue = −3), showing that the PSO
method may fall short in producing reliable results. In thoery, the variability of the esti-
mator of βPS may be an indication that the path size term further complicates asserting
the correct parameters in the Fréchet distribution; the path size factor warps the choice
probabilities from the MNL slightly, which is in eﬀect also what the parametrisation of
the master choice set through the distribution of the threshold does. Both of them tend
==PAGE:55==
5.3 MLE using PSO algorithm
43
to warp in favour of shorter routes, for obvious reasons as goes for the distribution of the
threshold, and for the PSL because larger choice sets have more overlap, especially on
the long routes. However, results conclusively reject this to be the cause of the problem:
The experiment in this section was repeated on 10 samples with a pure MNL RUM,
using the optimisation interval [0,0] for βPS in the PSO. 10 results showed no improve-
ment whatsoever in the estimation of α, ζ on this account (in fact, the results were worse
with average estimators of α = 1.728247266 and ζ = 0.165440611 and at least as much
variability). The best explanation then remains that the discrepancy stems from the
neglected diﬀerence in the MUCR and the threshold.
Figure 5.10 on page 45 shows that the particle swarm settles quite quickly in an area
close to the ﬁnal best solution (the illustration uses a particular run, namely the one
with the best results). As the iteration count increases, the swarm becomes increasingly
compact. While this ﬁgure shows convergence in the sense of particle position (at least in
the (α, ζ)-plane), Figure 5.11 on page 46 shows convergence of the current best solution
g; the values are normalised by the true value of the parameter. It is interesting (and
perhaps worrying) that the algorithm seems to have converged at iteration 34, since the
best solution has not changed over the past 10 iterations, but then suddenly is thrown
oﬀagain. The net result of de- and re-stabilising is mostly a small adjustment in βT,
which becomes more accurate (compared to the true value), and a small adjustment in
βPS, which becomes less accurate.
5.3.2
PSO with ρ ̸= ρtrue
The MLE in Section 5.3 was to some extent a succes, in that at least τ and βtime
were correctly estimated, and with very little stochastic deviation. α and ζ were also
estimated with satisfactory accuracy, but in that estimation, the true ρ was given to
the optimisation procedure. In reality, we know very little about this parameter. It
may even be interpreted as nothing more than an artiﬁcial construct which is chosen
by the modeller to deﬁne the relationship between the RSUET and the auxiliary model.
But how does this work in the real world? What happens if the “true value” of ρ is
something else than we assume? This is tested by ﬁrst creating a sample like the one in
Section 5.3 with a true rho of ρtrue = 0.9 and then proceeding with the estimation like in
Algorithm 6 assuming that that ρ = 0.75 ̸= ρtrue. Given that ρ is not correct, accurate
estimation of α, ζ must come at the expense of accurate estimation of τ, and vice versa,
but hopefully the result will still be sensible.
As the results, displayed in Table 5.3 on page 46, clearly show, the estimation of τ
remains accurate even when ρ is wrongfully chosen, while α, ζ are consequentially erro-
neous! This means that the estimation of the aggregate model, the RSUET(min,τmin),
is relatively insensitive to the choice of ρ (since the aggregate model does not contain α
and ζ); the modeller is free to deﬁne it as he pleases without it impacting the accuracy
of the estimate of τ. He should, however, be careful to trust the estimated parameters
ˆα, ˆζ; the experiment performed here shows clearly that they take on very inaccurate
values even with a sample of close-to-ideal quality (100 individuals, 50 observations per
==PAGE:56==
44
5 Results
100 individuals, 50 obs per individual
y
Density
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
0
1
2
3
4
Figure 5.9: MUCR histogram of one outcome of sample D(100,50) with overlaid Fréchet PDFs
for the true parameters (black) and the average parameters estimated using the PSO in Section
5.3 (magenta). There are no occurrences of y = 1.
==PAGE:57==
5.3 MLE using PSO algorithm
45
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
α
ζ
Iteration 0/48
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
α
ζ
Iteration 1/48
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
α
ζ
Iteration 2/48
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
α
ζ
Iteration 10/48
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
α
ζ
Iteration 24/48
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
α
ζ
Iteration 48/48
Figure 5.10: Particle swarm positions in the (α, ζ) plane for various iteration numbers (not
equally spaced), realised in the ﬁrst PSO run in Section 5.3. The large cyan dot marks the
ultimate best swarm solution.
==PAGE:58==
46
5 Results
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Iteration number
Best−yet value, g, normalised
 
 
α
ζ
βPS
βtime
Figure 5.11: Convergence of the best-known particle position g = (α, ζ, βPS, βT ). Values are
normalised by their true values.
Table 5.3: Statistics for the PSO run on Sample D(100,50). θ = 0.1 was assumed both as true
value and throughout the estimation procedure, but in generating the sample, ρ = 0.90 was
used, while the estimation procedure assumes ρ = 0.75. PSO parameters were the same as in
the smaller sample (Table 5.2).
Parameter
α
ζ
τ
βPS
βtime
Estimated value (µ)
1.30361
0.236364
1.620342
-2.22751
0.996916
Average relative error
-34.82 %
18.18 %
2.59 %
-25.75 %
-3.08 %
σ
0.18766
0.034107
0.035256
0.838003
0.041422
σtrue
0.762099
0.051488
0.035535
1.172
0.041551
σtrue,norm
0.38105
0.257438
0.021987
0.39067
0.041551
Optimisation interval
[0.01;4]
[0.01;2]
-
[-30;0]
[0.01;5]
==PAGE:59==
5.3 MLE using PSO algorithm
47
individual, type D). The corresponding distribution clearly does not represent the dis-
tribution of the observed MUCR; this can be conﬁrmed by looking at Figure 5.12 on
page 48. This may be a theoretical concern for the validity of the auxiliary model we
built in this work (i.e. the likelihood function and corresponding sampling procedure),
and it indicates that ρ should, in fact, be among the parameters which are estimated,
instead of being set to some value by the modeller. The ﬁgure shows promise that it
may be able to jointly estimate ρ by “using the information” that the Fréchet distri-
bution should match the empirical distribution of the MUCR y well. In addition, the
average maximum likelihood using ρ = 0.9 is −2855.44 versus −2868.19 when using the
incorrect ρ = 0.75, i.e. the correct value of ρ is more likely than the incorrect one, which
is a necessary, but not suﬃcient, condition for successful joint estimation of ρ. This
should be possible to do by simply adding ρ as an extra dimension in the PSO, and is
an inviting next step to take with further work in this direction.
The estimator for βPS is still a serious issue. Since it seems that the Fréchet distribu-
tion does not help estimation of τ, it would be interesting to examine the possibility of
completely neglecting the ﬁrst factor in the likelihood function (3.16), making it always
evaluate to 1, and breaking the link ρ to the Fréchet distribution. This eliminates 3
parameters from the model (namely α, ζ and ρ) and leaves discrimination of the opti-
mal likelihood entirely up to the eﬀect of τ on the ﬂow solution (and hence the choice
probabilities). In the best case, τ could still be estimated accurately, and it would even
be easier to identify βPS. In the worst case, it would not work at all. This should be
examined in future work.
==PAGE:60==
48
5 Results
100 individuals, 50 obs per individual
y
Density
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
0
1
2
3
4
Figure 5.12: MUCR histogram of sample D (with random seed 1992) with overlaid Fréchet
distribution PDF for the true parameters (black) and the 9 parameter sets estimated using
the PSO in Section 5.3.2 using a faulty ρ = 0.75 ̸= ρtrue = 0.9, see Table 5.3. (magenta).
It is clear that the incorrect choice of ρ makes the estimate of α, ζ inaccurate, even though
the estimator for τ remains accurate. This is because the optimisation is overly restricted; ρ
should be included in the estimation.
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion and Further Work
The objective of the likelihood approach to parameter estimation for the RSUET is to
utilise the potential that route choice data (GPS traces) provide instead of aggregating by
e.g. accumulating route ﬂows on edges and minimising the edge count errors. However,
as discussed previously, it is not obvious in which way to best link the RSUET to real,
detailed data, because the RSUET is a model which represents the population with an
average: A deterministic threshold, which is universally shared throughout a user class,
is strictly enforced on each OD-relation, making the probability of observations above
this threshold equal to 0. Trouble arises when real-world data shows that the MUCR is
distributed with a tail above, i.e. the MUCR does not seem to have a strict cut-oﬀ, and
hence there is not one, true threshold. If we assume that an individual’s UCR is always
smaller than or equal to his relevant threshold, then the threshold must be larger than
the individual’s MUCR. If we additionally assume, as in the RSUET, that τ is the same
for all travellers, the minimum value of τ becomes the maximum MUCR (or UCR) in the
dataset. But this approach would lead to excessively large values of the threshold; not
everyone considers routes that are as long as the largest detour among any individual. If
this were the case, then the RSUET would not be much of an improvement in behavioural
realism – remember that the key motivation for introducing the threshold in the ﬁrst
place is to accommodate the hypothesis that travellers do not consider excessively large
detours. This must be assumed for any of the work in the RSUET to be valid.
But what then is the problem?
It could be in the assumption that a MUCR is
always larger than the relevant threshold. An argument to support this is that very
large observations of the MUCR are often unintentional: Getting lost certainly is not
a deliberate choice, and as such should not be contained in the choice model. Taking
excessive detours may be because of construction works or other unexpected hindrances,
but then it is not quite clear if such outcomes should be counted as choices. The issue
is that the basis of a RUM is that the travellers’ estimates of the levels of service of
the choices available to them are not perfect. There is both epistemic and stochastic
uncertainty contained in the error term ε in the utility U. The RSUET is diﬀerent
because it does not allow extreme outcomes: Travellers will never take detours above
τ. This is a good assumption on average, but it does not always hold. Furthermore,
it seems problematic that the threshold is not “soft”, i.e.
that there is some exact
number which is the dividing line between probable consideration and certain elimination
by bounds.
This is not to criticise the RSUET model, but only to point out that
it is an aggregate model in the sense that it is valid for the “average situation” and
cannot contain extreme outcomes. It seems then that it may be reasonable to remove
observations of unintentional detouring, but this requires that individuals in the survey
==PAGE:62==
50
6 Discussion and Further Work
report every time a detour was taken by mistake.
Whether MUCR < τ always holds or not, there is a quite fundamental issue: In
principle, we can never determine τ from the observed MUCRs without a priori knowl-
edge (or assumptions) about τ. To realise this, just think of the inequality y < τ. If
taken out of the context entirely, it is clear that no matter the value of MUCR, the
unknown τ cannot be identiﬁed. But we do know something a priori about τ: It is not
inﬁnite (lest the model collapses to the RSUE), and it should be well below the longest
detour on the network (again, lest the model eﬀectively collapses to the RSUE). This
means that if we observe suﬃciently many UCR, we should have some conﬁdence that
the MUCR is close to the relevant threshold. There is an issue, however: The route
choice problem is discrete. If it were continuous, i.e. f(yi > 0)∀yi : 1 < yi ≤τ where f
is the density function of y, then obviously lim
ki→∞E(yi) = ti. But this is not so because
observations of the MUCR can only correspond to cost ratios of routes in the choice set
given the current level of service in the network c. This is why it is necessary in order
to approximate yi = τ to sample across diﬀerent OD-relations, hoping that a choice will
arise with a cost ratio which is close to the threshold.
We saw in the Results chapter (5) that in spite of all these issues, it is possible to
estimate τ with great accuracy from this type of data.
Also very interestingly, and
quite puzzlingly, in doing so, it does not bear much signiﬁcance at all what the modeller
assumes the link between the likelihood framework and the RSUET ρ to be for correct
results of τ, only for α and ζ. Figure 5.12 reveals something interesting in addition to
this: There is an obvious discrepancy between the empirical distribution of the MUCR
and the estimated distribution when the value of ρ is wrong. This hints that it may be
possible to include ρ in the MLE as well, instead of merely assuming it to have some
value. Another key point discovered in Section 5.3.2 is that it seems that the second
factor in the likelihood expression (3.16), which has to do with choice probabilities, has
a more signiﬁcant role in determining τ than the ﬁrst factor, which has to do with
the distribution of the MUCR (if this were not the case, the estimated parameters α, ζ
would show better empirical ﬁt, at the cost of the accuracy of τ due to the wrong
assumption of ρ). This is a consequential result because it shows that it may be possible
to correctly estimate τ from a likelihood function that is exclusively made up of the
choice probabilities:
L(τ, βPS, β) =
M
∏
m=1
Nm
∏
r=1
Pmr(c(x)|Smi(yi(c); c)) ,
(6.1)
thus eliminating the need to introduce α, ζ, ρ altogether. This approach may or may not
be eﬀective, but is here merely presented as a suggestion for future endeavours in this
area.
The theory presented in this work has not yet been perfected, but deﬁnitely demon-
strates potential. One of the most vital issues to address is the diﬃculty of deducing the
threshold from the observed MUCRs when not enough observations per individual are
present to assume yi = ti and avoid yi = 1; this should ideally be done within a sound
theoretical framework based on probability theory so that it should not be necessary to
==PAGE:63==
6 Discussion and Further Work
51
rely on consistently high observation counts for all individuals. It may even be possible
to take into account the eﬀect of the discrete nature of the choice problem on the distri-
bution of the MUCR, so that it should not be necessary to sample across many diﬀerent
OD-relations. Bridging the gap between the MUCR and the threshold distributions
would be very valuable for the robustness and eﬀectiveness of MLE and the eﬃcacy of
collection of adequate data. Another question yet unanswered is how to best handle
occurrences of the MUCR y = 1; in this work, samples have been generated which have
no such outcomes, but in a scenario where they do occur, it is necessary to accurately
estimate the likelihood regardless. Unfortunately, since the MUCRs are inferred values
that depend on the ﬂow solution and the parameters, likelihoods with diﬀerent param-
eter sets are not directly comparable if observations of y = 1 are simply ignored (since
the sizes of the remainders of the samples then vary). A more sophisticated theoretical
framework which includes the possibility of an outcome y = 1 needs to be developed,
maybe by having it as a separate special case with its own probability. The issue here
comes from the fact that the choice problem is discrete, yet the outcome of the MUCR
is assumed to be continuous; this is also one of the reasons that y = 1 should ideally be
handled as a special case, even if a MUCR PDF with f(1) > 0 were used. There is no
obvious way to use a discrete distribution for f, however, since that requires knowledge
about the network and is parameter-dependant because the cost ratios in a choice set
depend on the path costs.
Before wrapping up, it should be re-stated that experimental evidence and theoretical
considerations both indicate that the value of ρ can possibly, and probably should be,
jointly estimated in the MLE. This option should be explored in future work, along with
a sensitivity analysis of the variation in likelihood among diﬀerent RSUET solutions
valid for the same parameters.
As a ﬁnal note, it should be pointed out that an even better option than the auxiliary
model approach taken in this work may be to augment the RSUET so that it can directly
explain all real data (e.g. by integrating the distribution of the threshold into the model),
thus leading to a more consistent likelihood framework.
==PAGE:64==
52
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
The RSUET(min,τmin) assumes that there exists some threshold τ that all individuals
have in common, and which is strictly enforced. In the real world, this may only be
true e.g. 90 % of the time because of heterogeneity among travellers, stochasticity, and
unintentional detours. This makes it challenging to formulate a universally applicable
likelihood description of the data that remains loyal to the RSUET model.
Theory was proposed which enables the modeller to bridge this gap between the
“average” or aggregate nature of the RSUET and the disaggregate structure of the route
choice data, assigning to a set of parameters a likelihood given observed routes q through
an auxiliary model which is linked to the RSUET by the deﬁnition τ = F ◦−1(ρ; α, ζ).
The Sioux Falls network was used to test the proposed method on a small, experimen-
tal scale. The manageable network size allowed using the universal choice set as master
choice set, consisting of approximately 1.6 million routes. The RSUET(min,τmin) was
implemented and successfully validated with close agreement to the results in [16].
Synthetic data were produced with Monte Carlo simulation using probabilities from
the auxiliary model, which mirror the likelihood function. It was found that the dif-
ference in true threshold and MUCR is negligible when an individual has 30 or more
observations from random OD-relations, and experiments showed that the probability
of observing MUCR=1 among n independent route choice observations of the same
individual is exponentially decaying with n.
It was shown that the likelihood function (3.16) is not smooth, and that solutions in
the (α, ζ)-plane where F ◦−1(ρ; α, ζ) ≈τtrue form a “ridge” of the most likely solutions
when all other parameters are held constant at their true values. (α, ζ)-pairs can be
located far apart from each other on this ridge but still have comparable likelihood
because they correspond to the true τ; this implies that, in the case of the Sioux Falls
application, the value of τ has a large impact on the likelihood compared to the values
of α, ζ on their own.
The Particle Swarm Optimisation Method was implemented and applied to maximise
the proposed likelihood function on the synthetic data. Convergence properties were
good. Reproduction of the true parameters was mostly successful: βtime was estimated
accurately, and very interestingly, so was τ, with almost no error (<2 % on average). The
link ρ between the auxiliary model and the RSUET was chosen by the modeller; when
the choice of ρ mirrored the true value (i.e. was equal to the one used to produce the
sample), average estimation errors of α and ζ were within 10 %, and random variations
were small. However, if the choice of ρ on the estimation side did not agree with the
“true” value, the parameters α and ζ were underestimated (by around 35% and 18% on
average, respectively) with large, random errors. Interestingly, though, the accuracy of
==PAGE:66==
54
7 Conclusion
the estimation of τ hardly suﬀered at all from this, i.e. the “random” variation of (α, ζ)
was conﬁned to the line that corresponds to the true value of τ. In other words, the
accuracy of the estimate of τ is insensitive to the choice of ρ in the estimation, even
though the opposite holds for α and ζ. MLE solutions with the wrongfully chosen ρ had
smaller likelihoods than the ones with the correct choice of ρ. These results indicate that
ρ should be jointly estimated with the remaining parameters instead of being chosen by
the modeller as was done in this work.
βPS was overall the parameter which was estimated least accurately: Using ρ = 0.9 =
ρtrue, the average error was 15.16 %, and using ρ = 0.75 ̸= ρtrue = 0.9, it was 25.75 %.
Although the accuracy of the estimate of βtime seems to be negatively aﬀected by the
incorrect choice of ρ, a preliminary test indicated that this is not because of identiﬁcation
problems due to the overlapping eﬀect of the path size factors and the parameterisation
of the universal choice set through the distribution of the threshold, since using an MNL
model and forcing βPS = 0 in the PSO did not improve the estimate of (α, ζ) (when
using the correct value of ρ).
The MLE method using PSO was found to be moderately computationally demand-
ing. It would most likely be necessary to substitute the universal choice set with a master
choice set to allow likelihood evaluation in a large-scale application. Calculating RSUET
solutions was among the least computationally demanding tasks in the procedure, while
re-computation of path size factors when evaluation the likelihood function was among
the most demanding.
On the whole, this work shows promising results for the eﬃcacy of consistent Max-
imum Likelihood Estimation of parameters in the RSUET(min, τ min) using detailed,
disaggregate route choice data, even though the RSUET model does not conform di-
rectly with data of this nature.
==PAGE:67==
APPENDIX A
Appendix A: PSO algorithm
This is an excerpt from [7], showing the PSO algorithm in Figure 1 and “good parame-
ters” for various benchmark problems in Table 1. The page pp. 9 is included mostly to
show the deﬁnition of the Bound function on Figure 2.
==PAGE:68==
• Initialize each particle ⃗x ∈Rn with a random position in the search-space:
⃗x ∼U(⃗blo,⃗bup)
where ⃗blo and ⃗bup are the lower and upper boundaries of the search-space.
• Set each particle’s best known position to its initial position:
⃗p ←⃗x
• Initialize each particle’s velocity ⃗v ∈Rn to random values:
⃗v ∼U(−⃗d, ⃗d)
where ⃗d = |⃗bup −⃗blo|
• Initialize the swarm’s best known position ⃗g to the ⃗x for which f(⃗x) is lowest.
• Until a termination criterion is met, repeat the following:
– For each particle ⃗x in the swarm do the following:
∗Pick two random numbers: rp, rg ∼U(0, 1)
∗Update the particle’s velocity ⃗v as follows:
⃗v ←ω⃗v + φprp(⃗p −⃗x) + φgrg(⃗g −⃗x)
where ω, φp, and φg are user-deﬁned behavioural parameters.
∗Bound the velocity, that is, for all dimensions i update vi:
vi ←Bound(vi, −di, di)
See ﬁgure 2 for the deﬁnition of Bound()
∗Move the particle to its new position by adding its velocity:
⃗x ←⃗x + ⃗v
∗Bound the position, that is, for all dimensions i update xi:
xi ←Bound(xi, bloi, bupi)
∗If (f(⃗x) < f(⃗p)) then update the particle’s best known position:
⃗p ←⃗x
∗If (f(⃗x) < f(⃗g)) then update the swarm’s best known position:
⃗g ←⃗x
• Now ⃗g holds the best found position in the search-space.
Figure 1: PSO pseudo-code.
==PAGE:69==
Problem
Fitness
PSO Parameters
Dimensions
Evaluations
S
ω
φp
φg
2
400
25
0.3925
2.5586
1.3358
29
-0.4349
-0.6504
2.2073
2
4,000
156
0.4091
2.1304
1.0575
237
-0.2887
0.4862
2.5067
5
1,000
63
-0.3593
-0.7238
2.0289
47
-0.1832
0.5287
3.1913
5
10,000
223
-0.3699
-0.1207
3.3657
203
0.5069
2.5524
1.0056
10
2,000
63
0.6571
1.6319
0.6239
204
-0.2134
-0.3344
2.3259
10
20,000
53
-0.3488
-0.2746
4.8976
20
40,000
69
-0.4438
-0.2699
3.3950
20
400,000
149
-0.3236
-0.1136
3.9789
60
-0.4736
-0.9700
3.7904
256
-0.3499
-0.0513
4.9087
30
600,000
95
-0.6031
-0.6485
2.6475
50
100,000
106
-0.2256
-0.1564
3.8876
100
200,000
161
-0.2089
-0.0787
3.7637
Table 1: PSO parameters for various problem conﬁgurations. The practitioner
should select the PSO parameters where the dimensionality and allowed number
of ﬁtness evaluations most closely match those of the optimization problem at
hand. For some problem conﬁgurations multiple parameters are listed as they
had almost the same optimization performance.
==PAGE:70==
Bound(x, l, u) =



l
, x < l
u
, x > u
x
, else
Figure 2: Bounding function used in the PSO algorithm.
Meta-Optimizer
Optimizer
Benchmark Problems
Figure 3: The concept of meta-optimization. Another optimization method is
used as an overlying meta-optimizer for ﬁnding good behavioural parameters of
PSO (or MOL), which in turn is used to optimize benchmark problems.
Ackley
f(⃗x)
=
e + 20 −20 · exp

−0.2 ·
q
1
n
Pn
i=1 x2
i

−exp
  1
n
Pn
i=1 cos(2πxi)

Griewank
f(⃗x) = 1 +
1
4000
Pn
i=1 x2
i −Qn
i=1 cos

xi
√
i

Penalized1
f(⃗x)
=
π
n

10 · sin2(πy1)
+ Pn−1
i=1 (yi −1)2 ·
 1 + 10 · sin2(πyi+1)

+ (yn −1)2
+ Pn
i=1 u(xi, 10, 100, 4)
yi
=
1 + (xi + 1)/4
u(xi, a, k, m)
=



k(−xi −a)m
, xi < −a
0
, −a ≤xi ≤a
k(xi −a)m
, xi > a
Penalized2
f(⃗x)
=
0.1

sin2(3πx1) + Pn−1
i=1 (xi −1)2 ·
 1 + sin2(3πxi+1)

+(xn −1)2 ·
 1 + sin2(2πxn)
 
+ Pn
i=1 u(xi, 5, 100, 4), with u(·) from above.
QuarticNoise
f(⃗x) = Pn
i=1(i · x4
i + ri), ri ∼U(0, 1)
Rastrigin
f(⃗x) = Pn
i=1
 x2
i + 10 −10 · cos(2πxi)

Rosenbrock
f(⃗x) = Pn−1
i=1
 100 · (xi+1 −x2
i )2 + (xi −1)2
Schwefel1-2
f(⃗x) = Pn
i=1
Pi
j=1 xj
2
Schwefel2-21
f(⃗x) = max {|xi| : i ∈{1, · · · , n}}
Schwefel2-22
f(⃗x) = Pn
i=1 |xi| + Qn
i=1 |xi|
Sphere
f(⃗x) = Pn
i=1 x2
i
Step
f(⃗x) = Pn
i=1 (⌊xi + 0.5⌋)2
Table 3: Benchmark problems.
==PAGE:71==
APPENDIX B
Appendix B: RSUET
algorithm
This algorithm is from the yet-unpublished paper by Watling et al., “A Threshold-Based
Model with Equilibrated Choice Sets: Integrating Bounded Rationality and Stochastic
User Equilibrium”, [16]. The footnote reference to the computation of the gap measures
is [11].
==PAGE:72==
Algorithm 
 
Step 0 
Initialisation. Iteration n=1. Perform deterministic all-or-nothing assignment for all m=1, 
2,..., M OD-pairs and obtain the flow vector for all utilised paths 
n
X . 
Perform network loading, compute link travel costs 

a
n
t
f
 on all network links a
A

, 
and compute generalised path travel costs 


mr
n
c
X
. Set n=2. 
Step 1 
 
Column generation phase. Let km,n-1 denote the current number of unique paths in the 
choice set of used paths for OD-pair m=1, 2,..., M in iteration n-1. 
For RSUET(min, Ω):  
For each origin, 
perform a shortest 
path search to all 
destinations based on 
actual link travel costs


1
a
n
t

f
. If for any OD-
pair m=1, 2,..., M a new 
unique path r is 
generated, add it to the 
choice set with flow 
,
1
mr n
x
=0. 
For RSUET(Φ, Ω): 
For each OD-pair m=1, 2,..., M, 
based on actual link travel costs


1
a
n
t

f
, check for a new route to 
add to the choice set 
,
m n
R
 by 
applying some path generation 
method which supports the 
fulfilment of the Φ criterion. If for 
any OD- pair m=1, 2,..., M a new 
unique path r is generated, add it 
to the choice set with flow 
,
1
mr n
x

=0; if several routes are possible, 
add only the shortest one. 
For RSUET(max, Ω):  
Perform km,n-1 - shortest 
path search for each OD-
pair m=1, 2,..., M based on 
actual link travel costs 


1
a
n
t

f
.  
If for any OD-pair m=1, 2,..., 
M a new unique path r is 
generated among the k 
generated paths, add it to 
the choice set with flow 
,
1
mr n
x
=0; if several new 
unique paths are possible, 
add only the shortest one. 
Step 2 
Restricted master problem phase. Given the choice sets 
,
m n
R
 for all m=1, 2,..., M, apply the 
selected inner assignment component and averaging scheme to find the new flow solution 
Xn. 
Step 3 
 Network loading phase. Perform the network loading to obtain fn from Xn. Compute the 
link travel costs 

a
n
t
f
, the generalised path travel costs 

n
C X
 and (if 
relevant/included) the path-size factors. 
Step 4 
Threshold condition phase. Given the choice sets 
,
m n
R
 for all m=1, 2,..., M, check whether 
the threshold condition 


mr
n
c
X
≤ ({cms(x) : s  
m
R }; m ) is violated for any 
,
m n
r
R

 for 
m= 1, 2,..., M. Remove relevant routes (maximum 1 route per OD-pair), redistribute the 
flow on routes removed among the remaining routes in the respective choice sets. If no 
routes have been removed for any of the M OD-pairs, continue. Else, perform the network 
loading, compute the link travel costs 
a
n
t
f
, the generalised path travel costs 

n
C X
 
and (if relevant/included) the path-size factors. 
Step 5 
Convergence evaluation phase. If the gap measure consisting of the sum of 
.
Stoch
n
Rel. Gap
 
and 
,
.
Unused Stoch
n
Rel.Gap
 is below a pre-specified threshold  and the number of paths 
removed by the threshold condition is below a pre-specified threshold ζ, Stop1. 
Else, set n=n+1 and return to Step 1. 
Table 1. Solution algorithm for RSUET. 
                                                          
1 See Rasmussen et al. (2015) for the computation of the two gap measures 
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
[1]
M.E. Ben-Akiva and M. Bierlaire. Discrete choice methods and their applications to
short term travel decisions. R.W. Hall (Ed.), Handbook of Transportation Science,
Kluwer, (2003), 1999.
[2]
T. H. Cormen, C. Stein, R. L. Rivest, and C. E. Leiserson. Introduction to Algo-
rithms. McGraw-Hill Higher Education, 2nd edition, 2001. Section 24.3: Dijkstra’s
algorithm.
[3]
C.F. Daganzo and Y. Sheﬃ. On stochastic models of traﬃc assignment. Trans-
portation Science, 11 (3), pages 351–372, 1977.
[4]
R. Eberhart and J. Kennedy. A new optimizer using particle swarm theory. MHS’95.
Proceedings of the Sixth International Symposium on Micro Machine and Human
Science, pages 39–43, 1995.
[5]
S. Kotz and S. Nadarajah. Extreme Value Distributions: Theory and Applications.
2000.
[6]
L. J. LeBlanc, E. K. Morlok, and W. P. Pierskalla. An eﬃcient approach to solving
the road network equilibrium traﬃc assignment problem. Transportation Research,
9(5):309 – 318, 1975.
[7]
M. E. H. Pedersen. Good parameters for particle swarm optimization. Technical
Report HL1001, Hvass Laboratories, HL1001:1–12, 2010.
[8]
M.E.H. Pedersen and A.J. Chipperﬁeld. Simplifying Particle Swarm Optimization.
Applied Soft Computing, 10(2):618–628, 2009.
[9]
C. G. Prato and S. Bekhor. Modeling route choice behavior: how relevant is the
composition of choice set? Transportation Research Record, 2003, 2007.
[10] T. K. Rasmussen, D. P. Watling, C. G. Prato, and O. A. Nielsen. The Restricted
Stochastic User Equilibrium with Threshold : Large-scale application and calibra-
tion. Under review.
[11] T. K. Rasmussen, D. P. Watling, C. G. Prato, and O. A. Nielsen. Stochastic user
equilibrium with equilibrated choice sets: Part II - Solving the restricted SUE for
the logit family. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 77:146–165, 2015.
==PAGE:74==
62
Bibliography
[12] B.
Stabler.
SiouxFalls.
https://github.com/bstabler/
TransportationNetworks/tree/master/SiouxFalls, 2012.
[Online; accessed
2nd of June 2016.].
[13] J. Wardrop. Some theoretical aspects of road traﬃc research. Some Theoretical
Aspects of Road Traﬃc Research, 1952.
[14] D. P. Watling, T. K. Rasmussen, O. A. Nielsen, C. G. Prato, and M. E. Schiøler. A
Maximum Likelihood Approach to Consistent Estimation of Threshold Equilibrium
Models from Observed Route Choices. 2016. Unpublished.
[15] D. P. Watling, T. K. Rasmussen, C. G. Prato, and O. A. Nielsen. Stochastic user
equilibrium with equilibrated choice sets: Part I - Model formulations under alterna-
tive distributions and restrictions. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological,
77:166–181, 2015.
[16] D. P. Watling, T. K. Rasmussen, C.G. Prato, and O. A. Nielsen. A Threshold-
Based Model with Equilibrated Choice Sets: Integrating Bounded Rationality and
Stochastic User Equilibrium. pages 1–29. Under review.
