==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
A Data Driven and Web Based Course
Planner
Supervisor: Jakob Andreas Bærentzen
Thomas
Kjøller
Hammerbak
(s093673)
Kongens Lyngby 2016
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
INTRODUCTION
1
2
THEORY
5
2.1
Finding Courses To Attend . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Python Programming Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Web Programming Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Present Study Planner . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
METHOD
13
3.1
User Needs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
Use Case Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3
Personas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.4
User Stories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
IMPLEMENTATION
21
4.1
Functionality
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
Programming Language
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.3
Data Scraper
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.4
Data Formatter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.5
Course Planner . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5
RESULTS
33
5.1
State of Prototype
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2
User tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.3
Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.4
Heuristic Evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6
DISCUSSION
41
7
CONCLUSION
45
8
FUTURE WORK
47
ABBREVIATIONS
51
BIBLIOGRAPHY
51
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This project investigates the possibility of creating a better method for students to find
courses during their master studies at the university. The project will be focusing on
creating a course plan for the the master degree called Digital Media Engineering which
is available at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU).
The basic format of a course plan is the sum of 4 semesters each containing 30 ECTS
points. At DTU some constraints for every master study that ensures that graduates
uphold a certain standard. One of these constraints is the flag model, which is a de-
mand for dividing courses into subgroups of each 30 ECTS points (general competences,
technological specialization, electives and a thesis). Python is utilized to create a data
scraping script mining the DTU course database. An implementation of a website is
created using HTML, CSS and JS together with some third party libraries.
A user
study will be performed through applying basic UX theory. The UX theory consists of
identifying user needs, performing a use case study, defining personas and writing user
stories.
The desired functionality of a course planner is searching for courses, adding them to
semesters, getting told what the schedule will be and how many ECTS points a user will
be attending. The data scraping script will find information of every course at DTU and
download each and every course page and format that into a .json file. This .json file will
be opened by the data formatting script that will format the data into a more readable
format as a dictionary, which is to be used by the web site that is implemented. The
website is using the BS framework and the JQ library. Functions for selecting study,
focus area, the ability to find and view courses are implemented and some functions
which will calculate schedule slots used and accumulated points are also implemented.
The state of the prototype is minimal working alpha version. A user test revealed some
problems such as wrongly placed content which was then fixed. A heuristic evaluation
of the tool was performed revealing that although the tool is unfinished it did meet most
of the UX requirements.
From the results it has been discussed which parts of the Course Planner that sur-
passes the currently used implementation of the Study Planner. The current implemen-
tation of the Course Planner assists students in making a complete plan and finding
courses for their studies through an extended search feature. It is accessible online by
computer or mobile devices. The Course Planner uses data derived directly from the
DTU course database. The flag model is a crucial part of being able to plan your courses
and an implementation of this was not finalized, but was started. It is concluded that
more work is required for the Course Planner to be enough for students to use.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This report is the conclusion to a 5 months master thesis, in Digital Media Engineering
at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The project was performed in affiliation
with DTU in Lyngby and was spanning from January 4th 2016 to June 4th 2016.
I would like to thank my supervisor for coming up with this project during my par-
ticipation of the course 02830 and for being able to supervise me during my thesis. I
would also like to thanks Jette Kolby Laub Kristiansen who has been the contact per-
son regarding the new implementation of the Study Planner at DTU. Furthermore I
would like to thank Stine Søndergaard and Simon Bøge Hemmingsen for being able to
set aside time for testing my prototype. I would also like to thank all the helpful people
at www.stackoverflow.com who occasionally helped me solving different problems with
my prototype and lastly but not least I would like to thank my family for the support.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION
Master students who study at the university will have to apply for new courses before
the beginning of a new semester, i.e.
every half year.
Applying for courses is easy,
however finding out which courses to participate can be quite tricky, and depending on
what you’re studying, this will be different for most people. The university expects that
you create a complete study plan before starting your degree as that ensures that your
study plan complies with the general rules resulting in you graduating at the end of your
degree. As a student at DTU you have quite a lot to say in which courses you want in
study plan. Of course the university offers some sort of guidance, which in this case is
a set of pre-made focus areas. These areas all have a certain focus in mind, e.g. the
master degree in Digital Media Engineering have 5 focus areas:
• Social media and apps
• UX User experience
• Data science
• Computer games
• Computer graphics
All of these should follow the general competences required for passing your master
degree.
However if you want to specialize yourself a little differently you’ll have to
understand the flag model and its requirements. The flag model divides the amount
of ECTS points you need, based upon what type of courses you participate. A master
degree consists of 4 different course types, and each of them must contain 30 passed
ECTS points, which is illustrated in Figure 1.1:
• Technological specialization courses (30 ECTS points)
• General competence courses (30 ECTS points)
• Elective courses (30 ECTS points)
• Master thesis (30 ECTS points)
DTU has made a study planner, that somewhat helps keeping track of your courses.
If you know the number or name of a course, you want to participate you can add it to
a course basket. When you know which semester you are able to participate the course
==PAGE:10==
2
1 INTRODUCTION
Figure 1.1: Illustration of the categories within the Flag Model and their distribution
in, you can add it to that semester. Once courses are added to a semester you can view
your schedule and see the total amount of ECTS points you will achieve, if you pass all
your courses. However the current implementation of the study planner does not tell the
student if they have conflicting schedules, conflicting exams or fulfill the flag model. This
does not add to the experience of making a study plan for students. Furthermore if the
study planner could suggest courses for students it might result in some very differently
specialized engineers once they finalize their study, which could improve the knowledge
within different fields. Getting lost in all of this information is not an unknown problem
amongst master students, and to think that there is a small set of other constraints to
obey, aside from the ones already mentioned. These extra constraints are different for
each study.
This report aims to study a better approach for finding courses. Throughout the
report different tools, approaches and methods for finding courses will be presented
and some of them tested. This will partially be done by developing a prototype that
challenges the present approach. This prototype will be known as the ”Course Planner”
and is meant to be a tool for students assisting in making a study plan. Rather than
taking away the responsibility from the students the Course Planner should assists the
students by displaying the important information about their course plan as they are
making it. This should ease up the process and the workload on the students, who at the
current moment is juggling all this information by having multiple browser tabs open
and scribbling down notes about the courses The Course Planner should present course
information in a human readable format, giving the users an overview of their courses
at a fast glance. Furthermore the prototype will try to improve the way that students
search for courses by accepting more parameters for a search query. The prototype will
be an online tool running on a website that should be possible to access through most
standard web browsers using computers as well as mobile devices. Furthermore it should
be possible, to create a bare minimum course plan which should be done by putting
courses into four different semesters, and thereby visualizing a semester plan for each of
the semesters. During the project a flag model implementation will be attempted for the
Course Planner and the importance of the flag model will furthermore be investigated.
The Course Planner should be utilizing course information derived directly from the
course database that DTU hosts. Finally this project will investigate whether a course
==PAGE:11==
1 INTRODUCTION
3
planning tool can reduce the time it takes for students to create a complete course plan
from scratch by providing the students with the above mentioned tools.
==PAGE:12==
4
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
THEORY
2.1
Finding Courses To Attend
Students attending university degrees need to obtain ECTS points to graduate in the
end. The way you obtain ECTS points is by finishing courses at the university, and the
amount of ECTS points is usually depending on the difficulty level of the course or the
expected weekly time spent on the course. Finding out which courses to attend can be
difficult as a student, due to the fact that there are a lot of constraints your selection of
courses must comply to. The currently used methods for finding courses to attend are:
• Checking institute pages for suggested focus areas.
• Exchanging experiences with fellow students.
• Browsing the course database.
No matter which method you use, you are compelled to visit your institute website
to find out what the constraints for your study are.
As an example, Digital Media
Engineering has 3 important constraints to follow, besides the regular constraints. 10 of
your ECTS points must come from within the general competences category of courses,
and these 10 points must come from a selection of 4 specific courses, while the remaining
20 points within that category must come from a different selection of 8 specific courses
[11]. It is a little different with the technological specialization courses. It is noteworthy
that these very specific constraints are different for each single master degree available.
Besides the above mentioned special constraints there are a total of four different
categories of courses you can take as master student. Before you can graduate you must
as a student make sure that your courses fill up all of these four categories, that each
can contain 30 ECTS points. The four categories are as follows:
• General Competences (30 ECTS).
• Technological Specialization (30 ECTS).
• Electives (30 ECTS).
• Thesis (30 ECTS).
It is noteworthy to notice that this structure is known as the flag model due to
the structure seen in Figure 1.1 as it was also introduced in Chapter 1. It is pretty
==PAGE:14==
6
2 THEORY
regular to make sure that your thesis take up 30 points, but some students chose to
write a thesis of 32,5 or 35 points. This can be done in such a fashion that the first
30 points go within the thesis category while the remaining 2,5 or 5 points go within
the electives category. There are only minimal constraints on what courses you can put
into the electives category. The courses found on the course database are of different
education level. This means that they can be focused towards bachelor, diploma or
master students. As a master student you are only allowed to participate in a total of
10 bachelor course points. There are however no other constraints within the electives
category, which means that if you study Digital Media Engineering, but have a special
interest in Biological Engineering, then you are completely free to participate in such a
course.
Some of the problems with the methods for finding courses are that not all students
take the same amount of time to complete their study or even their courses. This means
that some students who might have finished their bachelor degree during the autumn
semester, might need to start their master degree during the spring semesters and none of
the focus areas are compatible with this. Furthermore most courses are available during
either spring or autumn, there are however a few courses that are available during both.
The focus areas suggested by the institutes do not come in a secondary version which
allows for a spring semester start. This does make some trouble for master students as
some courses are recommended prerequisites to other courses. Most master students only
have a total of 3 semesters to participate courses and then the 4th semester is usually
spent writing their thesis. If a master student starts his degree during a spring semester,
he can then opt in to take an extra semester making his master degree span a total of 5
semesters instead of the regular 4 semesters. However it would be more suitable for the
university and the danish government for students to only spend 4 semesters on their
master degree to quickly finish their degree.
2.2
Python Programming Language
Python comes in two major versions, 2.7 and 3.5. One of the major differences between
the two versions is that the 2.7 version has a lot more available third party libraries,
while thew 3.5 version is more up-to-date with common programming standards. For
gathering data it was paramount that the python version supported BeautifulSoup and
its bs4 native extension. At the time of the implementation version 3.5 did not support
this extension. Furthermore version 3.5 did not support jupyter properly and there were
many bugs. Jupyter (formerly known as ipython) allows running smaller parts of the
code as needed viewing the results in real-time instead of running an entire script when
it is not needed. This is excellent for testing the code. Jupyter is, by the developers of
the tool, explained as:
”The Jupyter Notebook App is a server-client application that allows editing
and running notebook documents via a web browser.” [1]
==PAGE:15==
2.3 Web Programming Language
7
Urllib2 is a third party tool for Python that allows downloading whole website as
text by downloading the Hypertext Markup Language (HTML) coding of the homepage,
which is the unformatted content of a website. The output from urllib2 is a long string,
and therefore very unreadable for humans as there are a lot of HTML tags within the
text output. The BeautifulSoup library allows for removing HTML tags within text,
which results in the text output being human readable, but still remaining as a long
string.
Instead of having a long string with very little text accessibility, it is preferable to
put parts of the string into another type of object, that can contain the parts and make
each part easily accessible. The JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) object is suitable
for containing strings with a key identifier. Furthermore the JSON object can be stored
within a ”.json” filetype and be retrieved or edited manually.
Python is a helpful tool in web development. It does not only have a lot of third
party libraries, but it is also able to start a local Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP)
server hosted on ”localhost:8000”. This local HTTP server is able to ”simulate” the ”get”
and ”post” calls that a regular online server will get from users. A web server is started
using the python command seen in Listing 2.1, but the command is different between
the two versions of python, which is also seen in the listing.
1
python -m SimpleHTTPServer # version 2.7
2
python -m http.server # version 3.5
Listing 2.1: Starting a http server
2.3
Web Programming Language
HTML is a programming language that is used in websites to mark up the text com-
ponents on the website. This mark up presents the elements as the developer of the
website wants, by giving him access to a set of different mark up types. Some of these
types are seen in Listing 2.2.
1
<p id="paragraph">This is a paragraph</p>
2
<h1 id="header">This is a heading</h1>
3
<a id="link" href="www.alink.com">This is a link</a>
Listing 2.2: HTML markup examples
Together with HTML comes a styling language that is utilized by the HTML docu-
ment known as Cascading Style Sheet (CSS). CSS makes it possible for the developer
to style different elements on the website, such as changing the background color, the
text color, margin, padding, even the position of elements and more. Listing 2.3 shows
a few examples.
1
p {
2
background-color: #000; //black
3
color: #fff; //white
==PAGE:16==
8
2 THEORY
4
margin: 10px;
5
padding: 10px;
6
position: relative;
7
}
8
9
h1 {
10
font-size: 14;
11
}
Listing 2.3: CSS examples
A HTML file created by making a new file and defining its file extension as ”.html”
while CSS files are created by making a file with the extension ”.css”. HTML and CSS
are both pretty static languages that can create and style a website, however neither
allow for a lot of interaction with the user or performing dynamic changes to the website.
JavaScript (JS) makes it possible to write scripts, also known as functions for the HTML
files. By scripting a HTML document the developer will be able to change the text of
paragraphs, headers and so forth, but it also allows him to perform different actions
based on the users interaction with the web site. Listing 2.4 shows a small example
that will change the text within the paragraph defined in Listing 2.2 to ”Paragraph
changed.”JS files are generated by creating a new file and naming it’s extension to ”.js”.
All three of the web programming languages are available at any type of platform, be it
Windows, Mac or even a linux based platform like Ubuntu. This is due to the language
being interpreted by the browser and not the system. It is however important to notice
that both CSS and JS files do nothing by themselves. The HTML file must be made
aware of these files in its header. An example of an HTML header is seen in Listing 2.5.
Amongst web developers it is a common practice that both CSS and JS files are put
inside sub-folders of the working directory named respectively either ”css/” or ”js/”.
1
function myFunction() {
2
document.getElementById("paragraph").innerHTML = "Paragraph changed.";
3
}
Listing 2.4: JavaScript example
1
<head>
2
<title>I am a page title</title>
3
<meta charset="utf-8">
4
<meta name="viewport" content="width=device -width, initial -scale=1">
5
<script src="js/javascript.js"></script> <!-- javascript.js is found in
js/ sub folder -->
6
<link href="css/styling.css" rel="stylesheet"> <!-- styling.css is found
in css/ sub folder -->
7
</head>
Listing 2.5: Example HTML header
Although HTML, CSS and JS make up a very good ground to start developing a
website, HTML is by itself a little lackluster with the type of elements at its disposal.
==PAGE:17==
2.4 Present Study Planner
9
Bootstrap (BS) is a framework that adds a lot of different elements on top of the standard
HTML framework and it does also take into account the different screen sizes for devices
that uses websites. This means that by using BS you will be able to create an adaptive
website that works on all devices. Furthermore BS has a lot of styles that are put in use
when using its elements. For BS to work the dependency jQuery (JQ) has to be loaded
as well. JQ is:
”a fast, small, and feature-rich JavaScript library. It makes things like HTML
document traversal and manipulation, event handling, animation, and Ajax
much simpler with an easy-to-use API that works across a multitude of
browsers.” [4]
Alongside BS and JQ a few smaller JS libraries are used. These include:
• Chart.js [5]
• Boostrap 3 typeahead [6]
2.4
Present Study Planner
The present study planner is the one that DTU students currently use. It gives the user
a very simplistic overview of their current achievements as well as their plans. Users can
add courses to the course basket, by searching for courses using the course number or
name, and move them back and forth between semesters. When courses are moved the
accumulated ECTS points are updated and it will be possible to view the schedule for
the semesters. Figure 2.1 shows a screen shot of the study planner in action.
2.4.1
improvements
Before the start of the project, DTU developed a product specification for improvements
for the study planner together with the company Arcanic A/S, that develops IT solutions
to the educational sector. Together with Arcanic a new implementation of the study
planner has started, but it has not yet finished as of the writing of this report. One of the
important aspects of this new study planner is that it should allow students to sign up for
courses through it and for students to watch their current flag model fulfillment, which
is not possible using the currently active implementation. The current implementation
is only a planning tool that gives the student visual representation of how their study
could work out. The functional description of the improved study planner from Arcanic
A/S can be found in [17] and mockups can be found in [18].
==PAGE:18==
10
2 THEORY
Figure 2.1: Screenshot of the 2015 Course Planner implementation
2.5
Related Work
Making a study planner is not something entirely new. Previous studies has been per-
formed on the subject. The following sections will highlight the different implementa-
tions of the study planner, their focus as well as the findings from the studies.
2.5.1
The Study Planner
The first report [8] is a pilot study of the concept of a study planner. The aim is to focus
on the business model and scientific content of the project idea. The study highlights
it’s use of a questionnaire in which 70% of the participants (total of 26 replies) thought
the concept of a study planner was something that would add value to them.
The
==PAGE:19==
2.5 Related Work
11
questionnaire found that a lot of the students used more than 6 hours to plan their
studies, mostly to make sure that they met the constraints set up by DTU, based on the
Ministry of Education’s guidelines. The study explains that a web-page based prototype
was implemented, and that a mathematical model was implemented. The model would
take previous courses, focus area and other students preferences and evaluations into
account. The data for the study was gathered by ”crawling” the course data base, study
handbook and the study lines, however the course data that was scraped was only the
course description and evaluation. The prototype was developed using Python and it’s
web2py library and a mathematical solver known as gurobipy.
The choice of using
web2py was based on the fact that it was easy to use, but a limitation was that it was
slow and therefore it was not optimal to be used for the final version. A business model
was also included in the report. The study concluded that for the study planner to be a
project that could be continued, a ”big player” partner was needed, to make sure that
larger companies would not steal the Intellectual Property (IP).
2.5.2
StudyPlanner
The second report [9] is, just as the first, a pilot study of the concept of a study planner.
The study explains that something like a study planner is interesting to look into, due
to the amount of courses available and the flexibility of the studies at DTU and because
the making a study plan therefore can be difficult. This study explains the process of
making a study plan by the use of three steps. The first step is for the user to input
preferences such as schedule and academic fields of interests. The second step is to use a
mathematical model to decide on courses to be used within the suggested study plan for
the user. This is followed by the third step that will present the suggested study and will
allow the user to change the suggestion based on their personal preferences. As well as
the previously mentioned study [8], this study goes on to elaborate on a business model
and some of the strengths and weaknesses of the idea of a study planner as a stand alone
entity. A prototype was implemented using Python for data scraping, while Java was
used for the user interface and calculation of the mathematical model. During testing of
the prototype some of the feedback given was that the design was ”sad” and that some
of the functionalities did not make much sense to some users. It was concluded that
the study had met its goals as it was possible to suggest courses based on a few input
parameters from the users.
2.5.3
Course Suggestor
The third report [10] is a master thesis pre-study done in course ”02830 - Advanced
Project in Digital Media Engineering”, which was one of things the course was meant
to be used as [13]. During the study a conceptual design was implemented using high-
fidelity mock-ups, a questionnaire distributed to find most wanted features of a study
planner among a subset of features and a user study performed. The report shortly
presents an unfinished prototype that is a locally running website using the Tag-it third
==PAGE:20==
12
2 THEORY
party JS plugin. The study also presents the fact that no finished Minimum Viable
Product (MVP) prototype was implemented and therefore a such could not be tested.
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 3
METHOD
Performing a user study is a reasonable way of getting an understanding of the project
at hand. It allows for a better perspective of the actions required between the system
and the end user. A user study consists of different sub tasks such as:
• User Needs
• Use Case Study
• Personas
• User Stories
This report will highlight the 4 methods mentioned. A complete user study consists
of more steps, some of which are:
• Testing
• Evaluation
However both of the above mentioned methods are a little bit more special than
the previously mentioned ones, as they both require a prototype and testing. Testing
mostly require a set of users to test on, and the evaluation does not. User testing is a
subtask of testing and is something that is used with a group of users. But there are
a lot of different ways to perform users tests. One of the pros of performing user tests
is usually the fact that users might be able to highlight problems with the design that
the designer/developer has been unable to identify. However due to the fact that not all
users are masters of user experience design the typical way of identifying these problems
is by performing any of the following types of user tests:
• Informal testing
• Laboratory testing
• Field testing
The typical way of performing either of the above type of tests is by performing a
think aloud test where it is the task of the user to tell what they are thinking as well
as why, while performing different actions. However there are other ways of performing
the tests, such as guiding the user through the use of the tool.
==PAGE:22==
14
3 METHOD
The informal testing is where the users are sent the materials needed for testing.
From that they will use the tool and afterwards go through a short questionnaire of
their experience of using the tool.
The laboratory testing is, as the name suggests,
usually performed in a laboratory. This is however not necessarily a laboratory as such,
but more likely a place that is unfamiliar for the tester and decided by the developer.
The last kind of testing is a field test. Field tests are performed in the field and the
best kind of fields tests are performed in a familiar environment for the user, mostly a
standard setup as suggested by the use of the tool. If the tool is a TV remote control,
then a good field test would be performed in the users own couch in their living room.
The evaluation phase usually comes after any given type of test and it is during this
phase that the results from the test is evaluated. E.g. if for instance a couple of users did
not like the location of a button, the position of that specific button should be changed.
To assist with this there are also different kinds of evaluation such as Nielsen’s heuristics
[16].
These evaluation methods might seem pretty simple, but when designing a user
interface it can be quite easy to lose track of it all and by the help of user testing,
design flaws can be easily fixed. A user test and evaluation phase will be highlighted in
Chapter 5.
3.1
User Needs
Defining the user needs is the first step of a user study. The needs of the users can be
defined within a couple of groups that specify different things, such as:
• Functional needs
• Data needs
• Environmental needs
• User characteristics
• Usability goals
• User experience goals
Not all of the above parts of the user needs have been taken into consideration during
this project, as some of them are irrelevant for the tool in question. Some of the irrelevant
user needs are environmental needs and usability goals. The reason environmental needs
are irrelevant is due to the tool not being bound to any specific kind of use. The usability
goals are irrelevant because the application only will have a very few features and all of
these are required to achieve the desired results.
==PAGE:23==
3.1 User Needs
15
3.1.1
Functional needs
The first set of needs describes what the tool should be able to do. In the case of a
course planning tool it is easily defined as being able to plan courses. The process of
planning courses do however include a group of sub-goals.
To be able to plan your
courses efficiently, you need to be able to:
• Search for courses using:
– course number
– course name
– keyword search
– schedule placement
• Add courses to semesters.
• See the schedule of planned courses.
• See the schedule of exams.
• See that you fulfill the flag model.
• See that you fulfill study constraints.
• Save/print your course plan.
3.1.2
Data needs
As the Course Planner tool is supposed to be running on an on-line website it is important
that the user of the tool is connected to the Internet in some way. Furthermore it is
important that the course database is kept up to date, so all of the available courses at
DTU can be found using the Course Planner tool. During the pre-study [10] for this
project it was noticed that the size of the database changed quite a lot, which means
that it is regularly updated, and so the Course Planner tool should be able to keep up
with that change and have a continuously updated course database.
3.1.3
User characteristics
The user characteristics tell what kind of a user that is expected to be using the tool.
The general user is young up-coming students about to start their master degree. It
is not impossible for people at the age of 30-50 to complete a master study, but they
are definitively a minority of the user base. The fact that the general user is expected
to be from the younger generation, means that the user interface can utilize drag and
drop elements as it comes much more natural to the younger generations than the older
generations.
==PAGE:24==
16
3 METHOD
3.1.4
User experience goals
The user experience goals should define what kind of experience is expected from the tool.
The tool should be enjoyable to use as well as motivating, not to mention aesthetically
pleasing. These three points is something the currently used study planner lacks, as it
looks pretty dull and matte. The following are some of the user experience goals that
will be aimed at achieving:
Motivating
The application should be motivating. This will be achieved by applying gamifi-
cation elements to planning of your courses with pie charts filling the users flag
achievement up as courses are added to semesters as well as indicating the ”work
load” with colors based on the current amount of courses added. The colors to
be used for the work load will be similar to that of a traffic light (red, yellow and
green).
Enjoyable and Aesthetically pleasing
The application should be enjoyable to use and look aesthetically pleasing. This
will be achieved by creating animations that will please the user as well as using
some warm colors throughout the design instead of the very grey/red-ish design
that the currently used study planner is using.
3.2
Use Case Study
To identify the use cases for the Course Planner tool the actions required for completing
an entire study plan must be identified. The first step for the user is to specify their
desired study as well as the focus area within that study. Once these two parameters
are input, the tool will actually be able to suggest an entire course plan identical to
the focus areas specified at www.dtu.dk. After that the user should be asked if they
want to custom tailor their study or if they just want a standard study that fulfills
the requirements and constraints together with some electives chosen as well. If they
want to tailor their study only the constraints should be put into their course plan, and
suggestions should be able to be searched for, to fill out the empty spots. However if
they just want a standard course plan they should get that suggested. If they do however
decide to custom tailor their course plan after making this choice it should be possible
to easily remove the custom courses from the plan.
A use case diagram from early on in the project is seen Figure 3.1 and an updated
use case diagram is seen in Figure 3.2. It is noteworthy to mention that the difference
is quite noticeable. The early use case diagram takes on an approach where the user
can be one of two types, where the newer use case diagram displays that there only is
one type of user, but depending on what the user want they will be using the design
differently.
==PAGE:25==
3.2 Use Case Study
17
General 
Student
Change Course
See suggestions
See flag fulfilments
Changes possible
See schedule
Fill with suggestions
See exam dates
Normal
Student
Create focus study
Change
See similar course plans
Choose
Crooked
Student
Fill out constraints
Get suggestion on KW
<<extend>>
<<extend>>
Get suggestion on topic
Watch overview
Switch courses
Fill with courses
Figure 3.1: Early version of the use case diagram for the Course Planner tool.
Student
Select Study
Select Focus Area
Edit/View Course Plan
Fill out constraints
See flag 
fulfillment
Get course
suggestions
See schedules
See exam dates
See similar 
course plans
Choose course plan
Clear course plan
Search keyword
Search schedule
slot
Search similar
courses
See semester
courses
Remove course
See accumulated
points
Add course
to semester
Select course
flag type
Figure 3.2: Newest use case diagram identified for the Course Planner tool.
==PAGE:26==
18
3 METHOD
3.3
Personas
As with the use case study, creating personas can help the developer to gain an insight
into the users of the design. Creating personas are basically thinking up fictional char-
acters and giving them a purpose of using the design in question. Once these personas
have been created it is quite common to write a story about how the personas will utilize
the tool. These are known as user stories or scenarios and will be found in Section 3.4.
The basic highlight of the personas are found in Table 3.1.
-
Persona 1
Persona 2
Name:
David
Laura
Age:
23
25
Location:
Lyngby
Copenhagen
Occupation:
Student without job
Student & job as a student counselor
Table 3.1: Personas
3.3.1
Persona 1 - David
David is not yet done with his bachelor degree in software programming and has no
knowledge of interaction design. He wants to study Digital Media Engineering and has
applied for the master degree, but has no knowledge of what this degree offers in courses
nor what constraints it holds. David is Danish of origin and he’s the first in his family
to start an academic degree, so no one in his family will be able to help.
3.3.2
Persona 2 - Laura
Laura has been studying on her master degree for 1 year but knows not which courses
she should take for her 3rd and final regular semester. She did not create a complete
course plan before starting her master degree in Digital Media Engineering and therefore
she does not know whether she fulfills the constraints for her degree. Laura is Spanish of
origin and completed her bachelor degree in Spain, after which she came to Denmark to
complete her master degree. She has a student job as a student counselor, so she knows
about the constraints, but have not yet looked into making sure she followed them.
3.4
User Stories
The user stories will be based on the two personas from Section 3.3.
==PAGE:27==
3.4 User Stories
19
3.4.1
User Story 1 - David
David just received a letter from DTU in which it was written that he has been preap-
proved to start his master degree at Digital Media Engineering after the winter holiday.
He starts his computer and goes to the master degree page to look up what courses
he will be able to attend. At a first glance he is very confused. The page for Digital
Media Engineering mentions something called focus areas. He finds that focus areas are
subfields within the Digital Media Engineering degree. He clicks on ”Social Media and
Apps” and the short explanation, as well as the overview of courses, is something that
he thinks sounds very interesting. He goes to the course application page using the DTU
intranet and tries to input the courses. After spending 5 minutes looking for the courses,
that are depicted at the focus area page, he finds that the 1. semester courses only are
available during the autumn semester and he is about to start his master degree on a
spring semester. He checks the other focus areas to see if any of them has a suggested
study plan that allows start at a spring semester. He goes to the DTU Study Planner
and puts in some of the courses he thinks are interesting. He spends close to 6 hours
finding courses that he can fit into the Study Planner after which he decides to quit.
The next day he contacts one of his friends who also got accepted into Digital Media
Engineering. They spend some time and Davids friend tells him about the constraints.
David did not know that such were needed to be followed. Just before splitting parts
Davids friend tells him about The Course Planner. David goes home and looks up the
constraints and finds that he did not fulfill many of them. All hope seems lost to him
at which point he remembers about The Course Planner that his friend told him about.
David goes to the website and choses his desired study as well as his focus area and
The Course Planner puts together a full course plan for him. He reads about few of
the courses which he finds are not that interesting. He removes them from the plan
and the flag completion decreases telling him that he needs to find courses within his
technological field. Using the search field he finds 3 new courses to fill the gap that was
created after he removed some courses. David now has a full course plan that he can
print and keep so that before each semester he can view his printed course plan and
apply for the courses that the Course Planner found for him.
3.4.2
User Story 2 - Laura
The course registration period has just started and Laura knows not which courses she
should apply for. She has helped a lot of students fulfilling their constraints in different
studies through her student counselor job, but has yet to assist anyone studying Digital
Media Engineering. She is at work, but has just started her lunch break. She looks
up the categories of the flag model that her already completed courses can go into, but
as some or more of them can go into multiple categories she’s all of a sudden pretty
confused. She is joined by one of her colleagues during lunch, who mentions The Course
Planner and surprised about not knowing of this tool Laura picks up her tablet from
her bag and goes to the website. She inputs her study and has not really been using
a focus area so she just chooses one of the options that sounds like it could have had
==PAGE:28==
20
3 METHOD
some of the courses she participated. A full study plan is presented to her, but some
of the courses are the ones she participated. She deletes these courses from the plan
and puts in the ones she completed and is notified with the fact that she has already
fulfilled all constraints and that she has 30 ECTS points remaining within the electives
category of the flag model. As the Course Planner already suggested which courses
she could participate for her third semester she checks out the courses and finds them
interesting. She prints out the course plan and goes to sign up for the courses on the
course application page using the DTU intranet.
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 4
IMPLEMENTATION
These sections cover the implementation of the Course Planner. It will outline function-
ality of the tool, choice of programming language, how to gather data, type of the data
gathered and different frameworks and extensions used together with the programming
language to achieve the desired result.
4.1
Functionality
As the previous studies presented in Chapter 2 mostly focused on either design, business
model or the technical aspects of suggesting courses, this study will focus on functionality
of a course planner as a complete tool. The Course Planner will aim at being able to
display the completion of the flag model, calculate whether the final and complete course
plan fulfills the constraints and work as visually intuitive planning tool that should make
the process of making a course plan an easier task for students. It is important that the
tool does not take away the responsibility for the students and makes a complete course
plan for them, if that is not what they want. The following sections will highlight some
of the functionality proposed for the prototype.
4.1.1
Study
When using the Course Planner the user will be presented with a welcome screen that
will let the user chose their desired study and a desired focus area within that study.
At the first iteration only one study will be available as well as five focus area within
that study. Table 4.1 shows the available study and its associated focus areas. Since
the start of this study, new focus areas have been added to the study in focus, but these
have not been implemented in the prototype.
Study
Focus Areas
Digital Media Engineering
Social Media and Apps
UX User Experience
Data Science
Computer Graphics
Computer Games
Table 4.1: Overview of available study and associated focus areas
==PAGE:30==
22
4 IMPLEMENTATION
It is the intention that choosing your study and a focus area would generate an
entire and complete course plan inputting courses into the semesters as the focus area
is visualized on www.dtu.dk if the user, chose to do so. Courses can easily be removed
if the user chose to do so.
4.1.2
Flag Model & Constraints
The flag model is visualized using pie charts for each of the four course categories.
Selecting a category on the added course and adding it to a semester should update
the pie charts showing how many points within each category the user plan currently
occupies. Once a category is full (as it reaches 30 points) it should be removed from
the options and only secondary options should be available. The prototype should tell
the user if the constraints are met or not. If they are not met the user should not be
available to continue.
4.1.3
Schedule & Context Search
A schedule is visualized enclosed close to the search bar. This is to visualize the searching
for courses can be done by selecting a time schedule. Clicking a schedule slot should
search for courses within that time schedule. Furthermore a schedule for each semester
is displayed alongside the semesters. This is to visualize the user’s schedule. Courses
running in June or January should be displayed close to the schedule.
4.2
Programming Language
One of the first steps of the project was to decide on a development platform. It was
especially important to choose a platform that was easy to use and learn. The chosen
platform for gathering data was Python version 2.7, because the newer version did
not support the BeautifulSoup library, as mentioned in Chapter 2. Instead of using a
dedicated Integrated Development Environment (IDE) for the python coding jupyter [1]
was used.
4.3
Data Scraper
To be able to write a script to scrape the data from the DTU course base it was necessary
to find a way to loop through all the courses on the data base. A list of all the available
departments at DTU was statically made with their numbers. At the time of making
the script, 23 departments were available. With a list of all the department numbers
available and a static link where only the department number changed, it was possible
to create a for loop to get the full list of courses, for each department. However as it
was not possible to click on any of the courses through code, it was just the numbers
==PAGE:31==
4.4 Data Formatter
23
and names of the courses that were saved to a dictionary. With this dictionary, which
has the format seen in Listing 4.1, it was possible to use another function and a static
link in which only the course number would change, to acquire the entire raw course
page. From looking through the raw source code returned from the query all the course
information was listed inside a Division (DIV) tag with the class CourseViewer. This
DIV tag was extracted, because it contained the necessary text, the HTML tags were
removed and the rest of the raw page was scrapped.
1
dictionary["name"] = course_name #name returned from scraping department
2
dictionary["number"] = course_number #number returned from scraping
department
Listing 4.1: Dictionary format
Because there is no strict guide of how courses are structured on their pages it was
necessary to create an index list. This index list would look through the page and decide
which tags the page in question contained, as they did not all contain the same tags.
The index list would then be used to extract text between two tags in an ordered fashion.
Once the text was extracted it was put into a dictionary with the index tag string as
the key, and the clean text as the value, similar to the process seen in Listing 4.1. See
Figure 4.1a for a flow chart displaying the process.
4.4
Data Formatter
To be able to use the dictionary later on it was necessary to format the dictionary in
such a way that all the keys in the dictionary had the same structure. After scraping
the data, the keys in the dictionary were weird strings, e.g. ”Learning objectives:”. This
had to be changed, so the keys were changed to small letters and no special characters
so that the above mentioned example would be ”learningobjectives”. First the list was
loaded into the jupyter notebook, then the keys were changed, followed by removing
newline characters from values, then the list was put into a dictionary, as the value
object with the key: ”items”. Then the file was saved again resulting in having the
entire course database inside a .json file. See Figure 4.2 for an illustration of the format
of the dictionary.
Currently the implementation of the Course Planner is able to alternate between
using two different course databases. The first one is the complete course database of
all courses currently associated with DTU, i.e. diploma student courses and exchange
courses as well.
A lot of the courses in this database have quite irregular structure
which means it might be hard to make a working implementation using them. The sec-
ondary course database used in the prototype consists only of the courses that are within
the general competences and technological specialization of Digital Media Engineering
(DME). This is due to this database being manually modified to allow for selection of
flag model type and making sure the schedule time slot format is correctly formatted,
which is another problem with the complete course database.
==PAGE:32==
24
4 IMPLEMENTATION
List
Department number list
Function
Extract from list:
Name and Number
Link
Static course base 
department link
(missing dep nr)
List
Name: <name>
Number: <number>
Link
Static course link
(missing course nr)
Function
Input name and number 
to new dictionary
Function
Download course page 
using course number
Function
Clean course page data
Input it to course 
dictionary
Append dictionary to list
Function
Save to json file
Json file
A list containing 
dictionaries for all 
courses
(a) Data Scraper flow chart
List
Containing a dictionary 
for each course 
downloaded
Function
Load from json file
Function
Update dictionary keys to 
simple text
Function
Remove newlines from 
text ( \\n )
Function
Save to json file
Function
Put list in  items  
dictionary
Json file
Dictionary containing list 
containing dictionary of 
each course
(b) Data Formatter flow chart
Figure 4.1: Flow charts displaying how the course data is acquired and formatted
Dictionary: 
Key:  items , Value: [...] (List)
Dictionary: (Course)
Key: name, value: <course name>
Key: number, value: <course number>
 
Key: points, value: <ects points>
List 
Figure 4.2: Illustration of the json dictionary format
==PAGE:33==
4.5 Course Planner
25
4.5
Course Planner
The entire Course Planner as a tool is created by combining 3 different programming
languages, that in combination is known as web programming. The languages used are
HTML, JS and CSS. Each of the sub-programs will each be explained in detail in the
following sections.
4.5.1
HTML file (index.html)
The website was created by writing HTML code. The HTML code is pretty complex
and in the <head> of the HTML file all the references to external libraries and custom
made scripts and styling documents can be found. The following references can be found
in the header in the following order.
• Bootstrap styling (CSS)
• jQuery (core, widget, mouse, draggable, droppable and touchpunch) (JS)
• Bootstrap javascript (JS)
• Bootstrap-slider styling + javascript (CSS + JS)
• Bootstrap-toggle styling + javascript (CSS + JS)
• Chart.js javascript (JS)
• Bootstrap3-typeahead javascript (JS)
• Custom functions (JS)
• Custom styles (CSS)
After all the references and JS’s are loaded, the core HTML page is found inside a
container class. The container class a BS class that handles the width of all the content
that is put into it. There is a different container class known as container-fluid, which
makes sure that everything inside utilizes the entire width of the page. The container
class makes sure that on larger screen sizes there will be some margin and padding on
the sides. Within this container a navigation bar with the header Course Planner is
found. Following the header are 4 links to ”sub-pages”. These are used for navigating
between the sub-pages during the development to test features and will not be available
for the final users tests. Following the navigation bar is an overview bar in which the
chosen study, focus and the flag model completion state will be shown. The flag model
completion state is visualized by 4 pie charts, each showing one of the categories.
Following the overview bar is the actual page content. For each of these pages (first,
second, third and fourth) available from the navigation is a Bootstrap row class named
their respective page names. Using jQuery the page to show is visualized (using the
.show function) while the rest of them are hidden (using the .hide() function).
==PAGE:34==
26
4 IMPLEMENTATION
First page
The first page contains some text and two bootstrap dropdowns to chose study
and focus area. A set of screenshots showing both the old and new implementation
can be found in Figure 4.3. The difference between the two implementations is
that the new prototype illustrates the users choice on the dropdowns.
Second page
The second page contains some text and 4 sliders to input how many completed
points within each of the flag models 4 categories are completed. A set of screen-
shots can be found in Figure 4.4. There’s no difference between the old and the
new implementation.
Third page
The third page contains a table showing all the courses available in the course
database that is used possible to search for.
When this page is loaded, so is
the flag model pie charts, using the on the second page input values. A set of
screenshots can be found in Figure 4.5. There’s not difference between the old and
the implemention.
Fourth page
The fourth page contains some text, a search field, a schedule grid, a course basket,
4 semesters and their corresponding schedules. A set of screenshots can be found
in Figure 4.6.
This page has undergone a lot of changes between the old and
the new implementation. The structure of the semesters have been changed to
accommodate the use of devices with smaller screens as well as saving screen space.
Furthermore it is possible to see the planned schedule, and the information about
the course is more readable for users. The course now has a button that can help
moving the course to a semester, allowing the user to avoid the use of drag and
drop. The course has also been restyled a little making it a little bit smaller, but
without losing any functionality.
The entire course planning tool is running using the fourth page while the rest of the
pages were used to test features and check that the database was properly loaded.
The course planning tool is used by searching for courses using the search field. By
using the schedule grid next to search field, the search can be extended to search for
courses running in a certain time slot. By typing in the search field courses can be found
by entering for their course name, course number or ECTS points. Preliminary results
will be shown during typing. Below each schedule on the 4 semesters the accumulated
semester points can be seen.
4.5.2
JavaScript file (functions.js)
The functions.js file is the one handling all the customized functions that are required
by the Course Planner. The main HTML file (index.html) knows about this file and will
==PAGE:35==
4.5 Course Planner
27
(a) Old prototype
(b) New prototype
Figure 4.3: First page screenshots
(a) Old prototype
(b) New prototype
Figure 4.4: Second page screenshots
use all of its functions because this file was referred in the header of the index.html file.
Because the index.html file also has a referral to the jQuery library it is also possible
to use jQuery commands within the functions.js file. The functions.js file consists of
a whole lot of functions calculating and collecting information and presenting it in a
desired manner. There is an important function known as the document-ready function,
which is run as soon as the website has finished loading all of it’s external sources. Most
of the custom functions are defined outside of this function and run when the document
returns its ready state. However some functions are required to be run inside the ready
function, such as the ajax function that loads the .json file mentioned in the sections
above with all the courses.
There are three types of containers within the website that are to be able to contain
and show courses as elements. The first kind is a typeahead search field, the second is
an Unordered List (<ul>) known as the .basket and the last is an <ul> known as the
semesters. In all three cases the courses are shown as List Item (<li>)s. The typeahead
==PAGE:36==
28
4 IMPLEMENTATION
(a) Old prototype
(b) New prototype
Figure 4.5: Third page screenshots
(a) Old prototype
(b) New prototype
Figure 4.6: Fourth page screenshots
==PAGE:37==
4.5 Course Planner
29
is able to show a dropdown on matches to whatever is written in the search field. This
dropdown is an <ul> with <li>s matching the text in the search field. The basket and
the semesters are static <ul>s defined within the HTML file.
When an HTML page is loaded, it creates an HTML Document Object Model (DOM)
and the ajax function is the one responsible for creating an object of courses, known
as the courseDB, in the DOM which contains all the important information about the
courses. It is also the one that generates the table of courses on the third page. Other
noteworthy functions to mention are:
• typeahead assignment.
• createBox.
• droppable & draggable assignments.
• pointUpdater & scheduleUpdater.
• clickableScheduleGrid.
• buttonBinder.
• getCharts.
4.5.2.1
typeahead assignment
The typeahead is a search field that allows the user to search through the course object
created in the DOM. The typeahead needs a source of content that should be viewable
inside the dropdown that can be shown, which in this case is the courseDB created in
the DOM by the ajax function.
The typeahead is a third-party plug-in that has build in functions. These are the
matcher, displayText, highlighter and afterSelect functions. Each of these are
defining how the typeahead works. The matcher function is the one that checks if the
query entered in the text field matches that of any of its sources. As the typeahead
has a max size of 5 items it will only show the 5 best matches to the query.
The
displayText function handles conversion of the items input and shows the items as
strings in the dropdown. The highlighter function is the one that highlights the item
that is hovered above with the mouse. If one wanted to not show the entire result or
change it, this is the function to modify. Lastly the afterSelect function handles what
happens when an item on the dropdown is clicked. This is the functions that creates
a course element and puts it into the basket. Furthermore when the course element is
created it is also made draggable.
4.5.2.2
createBox
When a course element is selected on the typeahead dropdown the createBox function
is run. It is parsed the course element in the function call, which is uses to create a
==PAGE:38==
30
4 IMPLEMENTATION
dynamic DIV. Firstly, inside the function, the schedule placement is translated from the
codes used by DTU. There is two global values used for this, and they are known as
springTranslate and autumnTranslate. The variables can be seen in Listing 4.2.
1
var springTranslate = {
2
"F1A": "Mon 8-12",
3
"F2A": "Mon 13-17",
4
"F3A": "Tue 8-12",
5
"F4A": "Tue 13-17",
6
"F5A": "Wed 8-12",
7
"F5B": "Wed 13-17",
8
"F2B": "Thu 8-12",
9
"F1B": "Thu 13-17",
10
"F4B": "Fri 8-12",
11
"F3B": "Fri 13-17"
12
};
13
14
var autumnTranslate = {
15
"E1A": "Mon 8-12",
16
"E2A": "Mon 13-17",
17
"E3A": "Tue 8-12",
18
"E4A": "Tue 13-17",
19
"E5A": "Wed 8-12",
20
"E5B": "Wed 13-17",
21
"E2B": "Thu 8-12",
22
"E1B": "Thu 13-17",
23
"E4B": "Fri 8-12",
24
"E3B": "Fri 13-17"
25
}
Listing 4.2: Global variables used to translate DTU schedule placement codes
After translating the schedule codes the box is styled with a header, a close button,
a flag choice dropdown and various paragraphs containing information about the course
in question.
4.5.2.3
droppable & draggable assignments
As the Course Planner is using a drag and drop methodology from the jQuery library
some of the elements on the HTML page have to be assigned as droppables or draggables.
There are two types of droppables and the basic difference is that one is known as the
basket and the other is known as a semester. The droppable elements have, just as the
typeahead, built in functions that can change their behavior. These functions are drop,
out and over. The drop function is run when the item is dropped, the out function is
run when the element is lifted from the droppable and the over is run when the element
is hovering over the droppable. When a course is dropped into either the basket or the
semester the only important thing is that it snaps to the whichever <ul> it is dropped
on.
==PAGE:39==
4.5 Course Planner
31
The course element, which is the draggable, handles updating the accumulated points,
checks if the course is already added to a semester or the basket and updates the schedule
accordingly. The draggable element also has built in functions, known as start and
stop, which are run exactly as their names would suggest, when starting or stopping
the dragging action. At both of these cases the accumulated points and schedules are
updated using the two functions, pointUpdater & scheduleUpdater.
4.5.2.4
pointUpdater & scheduleUpdater
The pointUpdater function runs through all the semesters <ul>s using their class
(.semester) and updates their accumulated points according to the amount of courses
inside the semesters and the points they are containing. The scheduleUpdater does the
same thing, but instead of calculating a sum of points, it colors the schedule time slots.
If two courses are taking up the same schedule time slot the color should be changing
to let the user known that an there is a conflict between at least two courses.
4.5.2.5
clickableScheduleGrid
The clickable grid is created using a reply created February 4, 2012 on stackoverflow.
com [14]. It is however quite modified to accommodate for a header showing days and
the clickable fields have timeslots input instead of a random iterator running from 1 to
a desired number. The clickable schedule grid used next to the search field is clickable
while the ones next to the semesters are not as they are only to visualize the current
schedule for the given semesters, but they are implemented using the same procedure,
however without adding an eventListener to the fields.
4.5.2.6
buttonBinder
The buttonBinder function is the first function that runs after the document-ready state
is returned. As the Course Planner uses jQuery this function is the one that binds most
of the HTML, JavaScript or jQuery element with click functions and similar. It is also
within this functions that both of the droppable elements are defined and it is generally
a good practice amongst developers to have this kind of functions as it increases the
readability of the code.
4.5.2.7
getCharts
The getCharts function is the function that will calculate the value that will be input
to each of the charts. It utilizes the third party JavaScript called chart.js version 2.
During the early implementation it utilized version 1, but as the plug-in was updated
the code had to be modified to accommodate for the changes between the two versions.
The pie charts are made responsive, which means they will scale with the screen size of
==PAGE:40==
32
4 IMPLEMENTATION
the device on which they are drawn. As previously mentioned the pie charts are shown
when navigating to the third page.
4.5.3
CSS file (custom_styles.css)
As previously mentioned CSS coding will allow one to style elements, such as creating
borders, changing text and/or background color, moving content around with right,
left or center alignment. All of this is possible by using build in key-words such as
DIV, paragraph (<p>), canvas or by using the id of the elements similar to that of the
#coursesearch or even by creating or using a predefined class. Listing 4.3 shows the
three different ways by using CSS to style a page and it is a code snippet from the CSS
file created for the Course Planner.
1
canvas {
2
align-self: center;
3
align-content: center;
4
vertical-align: center;
5
align-items: center;
6
}
7
8
#coursesearch {
9
border: thin solid #999;
10
padding: 5px;
11
border-radius: 5px;
12
width: 100%;
13
outline-width: 0;
14
}
15
16
.basket {
17
list-style-type: none;
18
list-style-position: inside;
19
margin: 0;
20
padding: 0;
21
min-height: 150px;
22
border-radius: 5px;
23
border: thin solid #999;
24
}
Listing 4.3: Code snippet from custom_styles.css
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 5
RESULTS
5.1
State of Prototype
At the time of hand-in of this report the prototype is in a medium functional state, also
known as a late alpha or early beta version. It is possible to search for courses, add them
to the basket and the semesters and from that get an overview of the weekly schedule
and the accumulated points within the semester. Courses can be searched for using the
following parameters:
• Course Name.
• Course Number.
• Course Placement (eg. ”Wed 8-12”).
• ECTS Points.
• Flag Model Type (eg. ”general1”, ”general2”, ”technical”).
The differences in between ”general1” and ”general2” is that one of the constraints
for DME is that there are two types of general competences. The ”general1” courses
must cover at least 10 ECTS points, while the ”general2” courses must cover the re-
maining 20 ECTS points within the general competences. There is no constraints that
keep students from filling up their electives with either ”general1” or ”general2” courses.
The flag model implementation was not completely functional as the courses cannot be
marked as either general competences or technical specialization. This implementation
is however not far from completion.
5.2
User tests
The prototype was tested by three testers at an early stage, one would call it an alpha
test as the prototype was far from finished and its functionality at that stage was very
limited. The name and occupation of the three testers can be seen in Table 5.1. The
testers were unable to create a complete course plan, but could add courses to the first
semester and thus go through the process of finding a given course and moving it to the
semester. At the point of the testing it was only possible to find courses using course
==PAGE:42==
34
5 RESULTS
number and name. The database of courses was newly scraped at the time of testing
for both Simon and Stine, however it was not for Jette. The user tests were performed
using the same prototype interface that was used during the development, which means
it had two pages that was not really used for suggesting or making a course plan, but
rather testing out features within the website.
#
User
Occupation
1
Simon Bøge Hemmingsen
Student @ DME
2
Stine Søndergaard
Student @ DME
3
Jette Kolby Laub Kristiansen
Special Consultant @ AUS
Table 5.1: Test Participants for the early Prototype (alpha version)
5.2.1
Simon
Simon was the first test person. The website loaded and he chose both his study and
his focus area. He was however a little uncertain whether he picked the focus that his
current study plan was based on. Simon went on to page second where he tried the
sliders and continued to page third. The pie charts appeared and updated with the
numbers he had selected using the sliders. He thought this was a nice touch and he
could see this becoming a very useful feature i f it was implemented together with the
course planning. He went to the course searching page and started typing in a course
number to find a given course. A list of 4 courses was shown as he stopped typing. He
could not find the course that he was looking for. He tried to enter the name of the
course instead, but it did not show up. This was due to the course being removed from
DTU’s online course database and since the database was newly scraped the course did
not exist at that time. Simon found a random course and clicked on it and it was moved
to his basket. He was uncertain of what to do next so he just tried to hover the mouse
over the course and drag it to the semester. It worked. He mentioned that due to the
state of the mouse pointer which looked like a ”line marker” icon when hovering above
the course it was not very intuitive, considering one could drag the course. He said that
by creating a small dropdown to move the courses to semesters one could avoid this
problem. Now with the course added to his semester he looked towards the clickable
schedule grid and mentioned that he did not quite get the idea of that. At this point in
time the clickable schedule grid was placed next to the semester, which was below the
search field and he was unsure of what to do with it. He tried clicking on it to see if
anything happened as the mouse pointer was indicating a click gesture with the ”hand
marker” icon. Nothing happened except for a time slot changing color. He mentioned
that this looked like it would be used to either view the schedule for a certain semester
or to search for courses, so when a time slot was clicked courses within that time slot
would appear. As a last side note Simon mentioned that it would be nice if the Course
==PAGE:43==
5.2 User tests
35
Planner was able to fill in a complete course plan based on the focus choice, so that he
only would need to remove courses he did not like and replace them with others.
5.2.2
Stine
Stine arrived at a user test after Simon and she went through a slightly improved course
planner, which had the clickable schedule grid moved next to the search field and the
mouse cursor was changed when hovering over a course to a ”move” icon. Therefore Stine
did not conclude entirely the same problems as Simon did. Stine’s user test was however
a little different from Simon’s as the courses she had available where only the general
competences and technical specialization courses for DME. Stine loaded the website and
chose her study and a random focus group. After selecting these she mentioned that it
would be nice if the choice was reflected after clicking the button, on the button itself.
It was however possible to view the selected study and focus in the overview bar at
the top of the page, but she said that when clicking the button and it stayed the same,
she was unsure whether her input was accepted. After selecting study and focus Stine
continued to page second and tried the sliders after which she went on to page third.
As the pie charts appeared she became a little bit confused as they just appeared and
mentioned that an animation or something likewise would have been nice. They could
also just have been there the entire time, instead of hiding them as the website was
loaded. She mentioned that page third was nice to have as a reference, so that she
could see the general competences and technical specialization courses for her study in
particular. This was something she could see as a useful feature and to get a quick
overview of the mandatory courses on her study. She said it would be nice if there were
actual links to the courses at DTU’s course database on page third, so that she could
navigate quickly to a course description from within the Course Planner. She continued
to page fourth and searched for one of the courses she had seen in the table at page
third. The course was moved to her basket and she liked the look of how the course was
visualized and found the drag and drop back and forth between semesters and basket
was very intuitive.
5.2.3
Jette
Unlike Simon and Stine, Jette does not currently study a degree within DME and has
not had any experience within User Experience (UX) design. Instead of having her go
through the prototype which at this point had reached the state of a late alpha version,
she was guided through the prototype and it was explained what the thought behind
the different features was, and what was expected as the prototype developed further.
On the first page, Jette liked the simplicity of having to choose your study and focus
area and then being presented with a choice for either a full course plan based on your
focus or a minimal constraint completed course plan. On page fourth she liked the idea
of seeing the amount of completed ECTS points within the different fields of the flag
model as well as semesters as well as the idea of being able to choose which part of the
==PAGE:44==
36
5 RESULTS
flag model certain courses would go into, thereby customizing your course plan. Jette
really liked the possibility of dragging and dropping courses into the desired semesters
as that seemed more intuitive than clicking buttons to make elements move to semesters.
Furthermore she thought the expansion of the search field and being able to search for
basically every important feature within the courses was a great addition as she thought
the current implementation lacks something like that.
5.2.4
Summary
Overall all tree test subjects liked the implementation of the Course Planner. The most
praised feature was the possibility to view the completeness of the flag fulfillment. The
movement of courses between semesters and the basket made a lot of sense with both
of the methods, i.e. dragging and dropping or clicking the dropdown. Another thing
all the users liked was the fact that the search feature was improved so it was possible
to search for courses using more than just their name and number, which is what the
current implementation of the Study Planner supports. The conversion of the time slots
which the course database uses can make up quite some confusion for newly arrived
students. The Course Planner is able to convert most of those times to human readable
formats e.g. ”E2A” means ”Mon 13-17”. Simon did not notice this feature until he was
told about it, but Stine in particular liked this feature as she had a lot of trouble finding
out which course ran at what time.
5.3
Evaluation
The evaluation for the Course Planner has been formatively performed [15], which means
it has been performed during the design of the prototype and without a finished prod-
uct during the different stages of the implementation. The design had gone through
changes between each user test which made way for new or different results from the
evaluation. Had the evaluation been performed on a finished product it would have
been a summative evaluation. These are usually performed to evaluate the success of a
finished product. The formative evaluation made way for some changes during the de-
velopment, which were based on the responses during the user testing mentioned above.
The formative evaluation is made to keep making sure that the product meet the users
requirements and needs during the development phase.
The changes made involved
moving the clickable schedule, changing button text on clicks, creating links for courses,
dropdown to move course to semester instead of dragging and others, which all have
been mentioned previously.
During the user testing phase of the alpha with Simon and Stine they were both
asked how much time they spent to create a complete study plan for their master degree.
Simon used around 5-6 hours due to some problems between his bachelor and master
degree and the completion of the flag model. He found that before starting his thesis
some of his ECTS points did not qualify to go within either of the 4 groups, so therefore
==PAGE:45==
5.4 Heuristic Evaluation
37
he had to apply for merit for some courses to qualify for a complete course plan. Stine
spent around 10-15 hours planning her study, as she started looking for an interesting
course plan before starting the master degree. However during her study the focus area
she chose was changed so she continuously had go back and research the changes and
made sure they actually complied, which was not the case at all times.
5.4
Heuristic Evaluation
After the development of the prototype had come to a halt due to the writing of this
report, the DTU Study Planner and the prototype was put through a heuristic evaluation
based on Nielsen’s 10 usability heuristics [16].
5.4.1
The Study Planner (DTU version)
1. Visibility of system status
At the frontpage of the Study Planner the user is presented with 6 basic ac-
tions to perform. ”Create project/transfer of courses/internship”, ”Find courses”,
”Add course to coursebasket...”, ”Study handbook”, ”Save studyplan as PDF” and
”Delete all planned courses in studyplanner”. The two first options are not specifi-
cally clear to what they do, but the last one of the first three is pretty understand-
able. The other 3 options makes good sense as they describe exactly what they do,
but it might be weird for the user, as the study handbook not necessarily makes
much sense to be linked on a study planning website. Clicking the ”add course to
basket...” buttons shows a pop-up window in which the user can search for courses
using their name or number. After adding courses to the basket they can be moved
to semesters by hovering the mouse over a small rounded corner rectangle show-
ing a course number with a small arrow next to it. The three options are only
registered as options because they look like links due to being underlined.
2. Match between system and the real world
Some of the phrases, wording and design choices are not easily understood as an
outsider. This goes for the first two basic options and the field showing the course
number is not registered by the user as a button as it does not look like a button.
The fact that the course basket appears on the right side of the semesters seems
illogical due to the basket being the first thing you should notice and utilize.
3. User control and freedom
As the Study Planner only supports 6 standard actions at the starting state there
is not much room for error. The two of the options shows a pop-up with a cancel
button, which is good. The middle option however redirects the user to the course
database without a confirmation of doing so. A user must be logged in to use
the Study Planner so their progress is not lost when performing this transition.
==PAGE:46==
38
5 RESULTS
There is no support for undo/redo, however a confirmation is shown whenever the
student choses an undo-able action.
4. Consistency and standards
There are no actions that lead to the same thing, so no confusion about wording
should be found in the Study Planner.
5. Error prevention
When performing a given action with the Study Planner only 1 option does not
support a confirmation window, which is redirecting to the course base.
6. Recognition rather than recall
The Study Planner is bad at minimizing the memory load on the user as very
minimal information about the courses, schedule, flag model type and so forth are
visible at any given time. The user has to find this information on a secondary
external page. Furthermore no instructions of how to use the Study Planner is
available anywhere except during internal presentations at DTU at semester start.
7. Flexibility and efficiency of use
There is only one way of utilizing the Study Planner. There are no expert user
options that can speed up the actions performed using the tool. There is no support
for tailoring frequent performed actions.
8. Aesthetic and minimalist design
The design is minimalistic and no irrelevant information is displayed. The amount
of information displayed might be too minimalistic due to it being hidden on
external pages. A lot of the actions relevant for the user are hidden inside fields
that don’t actually look like buttons, which might again point to the design being
too minimalistic.
9. Help users recognize, diagnose, and recover from errors
No error messages was found using the Study Planner.
10. Help and documentation
There is no easily accessible guide of how to use the Study Planner from the
homepage. The Study Planner can be hard to use without a guide of how to use
it, and since such guide is not accessible anywhere, some students might not even
know of the Study Planner.
5.4.2
The Course Planner
1. Visibility of system status
The prototype was not finished in a state that would be suited for informal testing
as there are some tabs present that the user will not be using due to the testability
of functions.
However the tab that a user is on is highlighted to indicate the
current location of the interface. At page fourth the search bar for courses clearly
==PAGE:47==
5.4 Heuristic Evaluation
39
states that a user should input something in the search bar to continue with the
interactions.
2. Match between system and the real world
The dropdowns visualize a downwards arrow, known as a caret, to explain that
something can drop down if the button is clicked.
The buttons look like real
buttons due to the use of bootstrap and so does the tabs at the top of the page.
When creating a course plan the design could have been improved with icons
suggesting the features of different fields, such as a search glass for the search
bar and basket icon at the basket, but other than that the name basket indicates
a place to put items before checking them out. The schedules are looking like
real world schedules and they are called schedules. The order of choosing a study,
followed by focus area, again followed by making a course plan is the natural order
for making a course plan. This is due to the fact that you cannot choose a focus
before you chose a study because the focus is reliant on the study.
3. User control and freedom
The two tabs that are not used could be an easy mistake for the user to make,
however choosing another tab after either of these tabs was mistakenly chosen has
no consequences for the user and their onward use of the tool. It could however
slightly confuse them as they do not need either of these tabs.
4. Consistency and standards
The naming of the tabs could lead to some confusion due to the fact that they
are named similarly to how semesters could be named, first, second, third and
fourth. However for the rest of the design the platform conventions have been
followed due to the use of Bootstrap.
5. Error prevention
In the case of entering a study followed by focus again followed by a continue
button the buttons should have remained hidden until the preliminary action was
completed by the user, to avoid errors. And the same goes with the tabs. If a
user tried to select a course to add to the course basket that is already inside the
basket or in another semester, this choice will return an error message saying that
the course is already in the course plan.
6. Recognition rather than recall
The Course Planner supports most of the important information about courses
presented at all times, as this was one of the important design choices. This reduces
the memory load on the user so more capacity can be used on planning courses.
The Course Planner is aimed at being more intuitive than the Study Planner and
therefore a user guide would be superficial. The overview bar showing the selected
study and focus should reduce the users memory load, by showing them what they
chose at all times.
==PAGE:48==
40
5 RESULTS
7. Flexibility and efficiency of use
When putting courses into semesters the user has the choice of dragging or dropping
courses, which can be a slow process, but on each course is a button that moves
the course to a selected semester which could speed up the process for a frequent
action such as moving the course to a desired semester.
8. Aesthetic and minimalist design
The design is kept minimalistic only showing items relevant for the users at times
when it is needed. The only unimportant dialog contained within the design is
the choice of context which is currently searched for, which was not implemented
before the hand in.
9. Help users recognize, diagnose, and recover from errors
The only error message displayed within the program is expressed in plain text
so that the user knows why the error happened and should help the user from
preventing that error again.
10. Help and documentation
As previously mentioned the design does not come with a user guide. The focus of
the design was to have it being intuitive to avoid a user manual, however for some
users, such as foreign students who have never made a course plan, the design
could be quite confusing, and some sort of tutorial could be necessary.
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 6
DISCUSSION
The procedure for implementing the Course Planner was firstly choosing a desired frame-
work, followed by all the UX theory presented in Chapter 3, implementation in Chapter 4
and lastly followed by the results and evaluation in Chapter 5. The evaluation was per-
formed a few times during the process which catered to performing changes to the design
along the process. This did however result in not all users trying out all features as more
features were added along the way. After applying Nielsen’s 10 heuristics to the design it
was found that most of the heuristics were completed at the first iteration of the heuristic
evaluation. They did not all meet the criteria, but most of them did. Most of the ones
that did not were minor changes and could have been fixed if more time was available
for the implementation. However performing more iterations of the 10 heuristics could
have shown whether new pitfalls were introduced later on in the design phase. The DTU
Study Planner was also put through Nielsen’s 10 heuristics and almost equally as many
problems were found for the Study Planner as was found for the Course Planner. How-
ever the Course Planner mostly had error management problems and missing features,
which is something that should not require too much work, where the Study Planner
had pretty basic design flaws. One could discuss which pitfalls are worse, but the Study
Planner has been in use for more than 3 years at this time and no actual improvements
have been made during this time. Due to this it can be assumed that the Study Planner
has more pitfalls than the Course Planner, once it is fully developed.
For the web programming HTML, CSS and JavaScript was used, together with some
3rd party plug-ins to extend the functionality of the page and it’s features. In the early
stages of the project other development frameworks such as Django, Flask and web2py
were investigated, however all of them required some knowledge of HTML, CSS and
JavaScript as they utilized these languages together with some of their own libraries to
create an interface. In a previous study [8] they used web2py to develop a study planner.
In their report they mentioned the fact that web2py runs slow and would not be a suit-
able solution for a final product. In another previous study [9] they developed a study
planner using Java. The currently implemented Study Planner which DTU currently is
hosting has been developed using SharePoint. It is discussable which solution is the best,
however only needing to learn HTML, CSS and JavaScript reduces the work load and
could therefore be a well suited solution for a project of this scale. One could however
argue for the fact that larger projects, utilizing a larger time frame should use another
approach.
The prototype created has an advantage, as it is able to be run on an online website,
which a given user can utilize from the comfort of their own home. Furthermore the
==PAGE:50==
42
6 DISCUSSION
prototype is able to run and scale to a mobile device such as a tablet or smartphone,
which has not been possible in any of the previously investigated studies included in
this report. The technological development, in which we are living, the fact of being
able to plan your studies on a handheld device could be an advantage, which is also an
improvement in the usability of the solution. In a previous study [9] they utilized Java
to develop their study planner. Due to this they will not be able to run their solution
online as a website, and their solution would needed to be run on a dedicated computer.
This would require students to go to DTU or to download the solution, install it, and
then use it. DTU has a live website, which could be an indication that DTU would
suggest students to use an online solution.
An important part of this project was to be able to visualize the flag model for stu-
dents, as that is not currently something that is possible. However the implementation
proved to be more time consuming than it first seemed. Therefore this feature only got
partially implemented, which was done early in the development. Without the use of the
Course Planner, students who want to know how they currently fulfill their flag model
have to look around the course base for courses, finding which category they reside in,
and due to the fact that quite a lot of courses change names and numbers, this can
seem as a huge and overwhelming jungle for the students. Another solution could be
to call the student administration at DTU and have them tell you how your flag model
is fulfilled. This would create a huge impact on the phone line queue that students
would experience when having other important questions regarding their studies. None
of the previous studies had this included in their implementation, but DTU has recog-
nized that this is something important which is missing from their implementation, and
therefore they are currently working together with Arcanic A/S to have this in their
soon to come implementation. Having a broad overview of the courses in question is
wanted by the users. Using the current Study Planner to make a complete course plan
users will have to have a different website open for each course to be able to get all the
information about the courses they are adding to their course plan, as well as a website
running the Course Planner tool.
e.g.
adding 20 courses requires 21 open websites.
With the Course Planner all this important information about the course is available at
a glance such as the name, number, flag model type, schedule time slot and ECTS points.
Based on the user tests performed in Chapter 5 the response the prototype received
was a little overwhelming as the users found it a nice tool, and they could not understand
why DTU had not done a similar implementation of their Study Planner. The best part
of the implementation was the visualization of the flag model, which seemingly would
improve the course planning process as users could see how much they had completed
and therefore which courses to look for accordingly. As only a few user tests were per-
formed increasing the amount of user test could likely have shown something differently.
Increasing the amount of user tests could also have resulted in more and maybe more
important features to have been suggested, which could have pointed the project in a
completely different direction.
Based on the feedback from users it should be possible to decide if the course planning
==PAGE:51==
6 DISCUSSION
43
tool shortens the time it takes to complete a course plan, but these user tests were not
performed. The Course Planner reached a working MVP state shortly before hand in
and therefore there was no time to conduct a final user test to test if the Course Planner
could shorten the amount of time the users spent making their course plan, compared
to not having the tool as your disposal. Stine mentioned using 10-15 hours planning her
courses while Simon mentioned using around 6 hours, which might seem like quite a lot.
They both mentioned having problems with the flag model during the planning process.
Having direct access to the DTU course database might have proved to decrease or
completely remove the amount of time spent scraping the course database, as quite a lot
of time was spent figuring out how courses were formatted. Even though the implemen-
tation of the course database scraper was quite extensive it can be discussed whether it
could be optimized to only scrape courses that are relevant for master students. Cur-
rently the ”complete scraped course” database contain a lot of courses that are not
allowed to follow as a master student, and these courses could be prone to mess up the
Course Planner if they are added to the database used in the prototype. Furthermore
formatting the output of the course database scraper even more it might have been pos-
sible to not only sort out unused courses, but also making sure that each and every field
explicitly required by the Course Planner to be filled out with the correct information
and formatted equally for each and every single course. However this approach was
deemed less important as some usable data was already acquired, and getting on with
the Course Planner implementation and functionality was more important.
==PAGE:52==
44
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 7
CONCLUSION
It can be concluded that some different tools have been tested to find an optimal im-
plementation platform for the Course Planner.
By using these tools a prototype of
a course planning tool has been implemented.
It is hosted onlkine on the domain
www.thomashammerbak.dk/cp, which is accessible using a computer as well as a mo-
bile device. It can be concluded that the Course Planner not necessarily would be a tool
that is able to assist students in making a course plan as it was not fully implemented
and tested. However based on the user test, the users explained that it would be a
tool they themselves would like to use as it gave them a good overview of the courses.
From that it can be concluded that the Course Planner assists users in keeping track
of important information by displaying it when needed as well as translating some of
the information into a human readable format, which should ease up the process for the
students.
The users of the Course Planner are able to search for courses, add them to semesters
and view their schedules and therefore it can be concluded that a bare minimum course
planning tool is implemented.
It can be concluded that an improvement of the searching tool has been made as
the current Study Planner only accepts two types of input, while the Course Planner
accepts up to five different inputs. Using Nielsen’s 10 heuristics in the evaluation of the
planning tools, it can be concluded that it seems that the Course Planner is more user
friendly than the Study Planner, but that would require some more work to actually
compete directly with the implementation of the Study Planner, as some functionality
was missing as well as some error handling.
It can be concluded that a flag model implementation was well on the way in the
Course Planner, however not completely finished before the hand-in of the project. Ad-
ditionally it can be concluded that the flag model is an important part of creating a
course plan and that it should be visually available while making a course plan.
It can be concluded that the Course Planner uses course information derived directly
from DTU’s online course base. Additionally it can be concluded that due to the limita-
tion of the online course database and it’s formatting together with the scraping method
used, the stored course database that is used has some limitations. This limitation is
missing information on some courses and therefore the current prototype will be utilizing
the manually modified course database with the manually input information and a bare
==PAGE:54==
46
7 CONCLUSION
minimum of courses.
It can be concluded that by using the Course Planner the time estimated for making a
course plan will not necessarily be shortened compared to the current approach. However
it can be concluded that it is necessary to continue work on the prototype to show a
possible decrease in time spent.
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 8
FUTURE WORK
As the Course Planner was not completed with the functionality that was thought to
make it to the implementation some extra work would be required to meet the standards
of the Study Planner. This section will highlight some of the features to be implemented
in the Course Planner in an order of importance vs work load with the most important
and easy to implement features appearing first and then decreasing in importance and
increasing in work load. E.g. a feature that has medium importance and low work load
comes before a feature with high importance and high work load. However this is not
the final order that these features might be implemented in, but merely an estimate of
how they might be ordered.
Change accumulated pts. location in design
Accumulated points are currently located in the bottom left corner of the semester
where it sort of disappears below the semester. Using Nielsen’s 10 heuristics it was
identified that this location of the accumulated calculated points should be moved
and made more visible in the design.
Add thesis to DB
It is not possible to create a complete course database without adding a thesis
to your course plan. This would however just be a placeholder. Most theses are
granting the student 30 ECTS points, but a 32,5 ECTS and 35 ECTS point thesis
option should also be available.
Basket showing content accumulated ECTS points
Some users might prefer adding all their wanted courses to the basket before start-
ing to distribute them amongst the semesters. Currently adding all the courses to
the basket tells you nothing about the accumulation of courses.
Restyling the courseBox element to be compact and similar to page design
Currently the course box element takes up a lot of screen space. It does not follow
the rest of the design of the Course Planner. As the styling of this element was
less important for the functionality this task was postponed, but the element feels
out of place.
Link to course page
Making the course number in the courseBox to a clickable button that should
redirect the user to the course page of the clicked course.
==PAGE:56==
48
8 FUTURE WORK
Calculate semester type (spring or autumn)
Master students can start in either spring or autumn. Based on which courses
are put in which semester the Course Planner should be able to calculate which
semesters are which (F vs. E courses).
Add 3 week period to course plan(june or january)
There’s no time slot available for June or January courses. This should be added
and as courses are added to the semesters this slot should be highlighted.
Check overlapping courses (exams and time slots)
Currently the user can input multiple courses that are located within the same time
slot of a semester without getting a warning. This warning should be implemented.
Search by course time placement (clickable grid)
It should be possible to simply click the schedule grid to search for courses within
the clicked time slot.
Context search - identify and display context while searching
The program should let the user know which kind of context they are currently
searching for courses in. Identify the kind of input.
Update design (colors, animations and etc.)
The design of the Course Planner should be updated to be up to par with the
bootstrap framework used. The color scheme should be changed and animations
should be added to improve the flow of the tool.
Choose course flag type (color coded)
It should be possible to choose the kind of flag model type for each of the courses
within the plan so that the flag model visualization can be implemented. This
choice should be visualized and a standard choice should be chosen for every course
added to either the basket or the semesters.
Flag model check (update flag model to fit choices)
The flag model completion should be calculated every time a new course is added
and their flag type is changed.
Check DME constraints and warn user if not fulfilled
The basic constraints for DME should be calculated and if they are not fulfilled
the user should be warned.
Random button - check it doesn’t already reside in basket or semesters
A button for adding a random course to the basket should be added. This would
be used for the exhibitionist students.
Less important or very high workload features that should be mentioned
• Make a full course plan for the user based on their focus.
==PAGE:57==
8 FUTURE WORK
49
• Make semesters to jquery-ui accordions (close and open at desire)
• Input already completed courses - make a fresh course plan or pre-completed
• Save/load/print course plan.
• Update database (electives, course placements, flag model types formatted)
• Crop database to only include master courses
• Fill out semesters with courses button (similar courses)
==PAGE:58==
50
==PAGE:59==
ABBREVIATIONS
<li> List Item. 27, 29
<p> paragraph. 32
<ul> Unordered List. 27, 29–31
AUS Office of Study Programmes and Student Affairs. 34
BS Bootstrap. iii, 9, 25
CSS Cascading Style Sheet. iii, 7, 8, 25, 32, 41
DIV Division. 23, 30, 32
DME Digital Media Engineering. 23, 33–35, 48
DOM Document Object Model. 29
HTML Hypertext Markup Language. iii, 7–9, 23, 25, 26, 29–31, 41
HTTP Hypertext Transfer Protocol. 7
IDE Integrated Development Environment. 22
IP Intellectual Property. 11
JQ jQuery. iii, 9
JS JavaScript. iii, 8, 9, 12, 25
JSON JavaScript Object Notation. 7
MVP Minimum Viable Product. 12, 43
UX User Experience. iii, 35, 41
==PAGE:60==
52
==PAGE:61==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[1]
Jupyter, Antonino Ingargiola and contributors, 1. What is the Jupyter Notebook?,
http://jupyter-notebook-beginner-guide.readthedocs.io/en/latest/
what_is_jupyter.html, 2015.
[2]
Python, Python Software Foundation, Python, https://www.python.org/, 2016.
[3]
Bootstrap, Designed and built with all the love in the world by @mdo and @fat,
Bootstrap, http://getbootstrap.com/, 2010.
[4]
JQuery, The jQuery Foundation, JQuery, write less, do more., https://jquery.
com/, 2016.
[5]
Chart.js Contributors, Chart.js, simple yet flexible JavaScript charting for design-
ers & developers http://www.chartjs.org/.
[6]
Bootstrap-3-Typeahead, Contributors, The Typeahead plugin from Twitter’s
Bootstrap 2 ready to use with Bootstrap 3 and Bootstrap 4, https://github.com/
bassjobsen/Bootstrap-3-Typeahead.
[7]
DTU Study Planner, http://www.kurser.dtu.dk/_layouts/Studyplanner/
default.aspx?menulanguage=en-GB.
[8]
The Study Planner, 02490, Pilot Study of your Project Idea, Alina Gherman
(s131650), Helga Bjarnadóttir (s122255), Tinna Björk Sigmundsdóttir (s121120),
December, 2013.
[9]
StudyPlanner, 02490, Pilot study of your project idea, Morten Kirkegaard
(s103082), Franciska Jenrich (s082785), Martin Hou (s082741), Umberto Bosi
(s131111), Joe Nader (s107119), Damodar Tripathi (s130521), December, 2013.
[10] 02830, Advanced Project in Digital Media Engineering, Thomas Kjøller Hammerbak
(s093673), December, 2015.
[11] Programme
provision
courses,
http://www.dtu.dk/english/Education/
msc/Programmes/digital_media_engineering#study-programme__curriculum,
June 29, 2015.
[12] Study Programme - Digital Media Engineering, http://www.dtu.dk/
english/Education/msc/Programmes/digital_media_engineering#study-
programme, May 18, 2016
==PAGE:62==
54
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[13] Course database - 02830 (Advanced Project in Digital Media En-
gineering), General course objects, http://www.kurser.dtu.dk/02830.aspx?
menulanguage=en-GB, April 29, 2015.
[14] Creating
a
Clickable
Grid
in
a
Web
Browser,
Stackoverflow,
http://stackoverflow.com/questions/9140101/creating-a-clickable-
grid-in-a-web-browser, Phrogz, June 4, 2016.
[15] Jennifer Preece et. al, Interaction Design, Beyond Human Computer Interaction,
4th edition, Chichester, West Sussex (UK), John Wiley & Sons Ltd., 2015, p. 369.
[16] Jakob Nielsen, 10 Usability Heuristics for User Interface Design, https://www.
nngroup.com/articles/ten-usability-heuristics/, January 1, 1995.
[17] Arcanic A/S, Studieplanlæggeren som tilmeldingsværktøj, Anne Oddershede
Larsen, October 7, 2015.
[18] Arcanic A/S, Bilag - Mockups af det nye kursuskatalog, Lise Jørgensen, October
8, 2015.
