==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
A method to investigate ice 
formation in concrete air voids  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DTU Department of Civil Engineering 
Spring 2016 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Christine Rem s083060 
Department of Civil 
Engineering 2016 
Jeppe Søbye 
Andreasen 
      s103603 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
  
ii 
 
Abstract 
 
The basis for this project is three articles where the authors have found ice in the 
air voids of the concrete by the use of an electron scanning microscope. From 
the beginning of this project, there has been doubt if the scanning electron 
microscope provides trustworthy results. The building material investigated is 
concrete. In this project mortar is used, because of the smaller size of aggregates 
compared to concrete. The concrete is protected by entrained air voids against 
expansion that happens when water solidifies and becomes ice. The air voids 
functions as an expansion reservoir when the ice expands and the room in the 
pores is insufficient. Little research prior to this project has been made to find 
direct proof of the exact function of the air voids.  
Hence the purpose of this project is to find and examine methods which 
are applicable for investigating the ice formation in concrete air voids.  
Four methods are chosen: Scanning electron microscope, Optical 
microscope, x-ray computed tomography and magnetic response imaging. The 
advantages and disadvantages to the four methods are discussed. In the light of 
the advantages and disadvantages the magnetic response imaging is discarded 
because no scanner in Denmark has a sufficient resolution. The freezing time of 
the specimens used for the scanning electron microscope is investigated. Full 
investigations of the methods regarding optical microscopy and x-ray computed 
tomography are intended. 
The method for the optical microscopy has been developed. A custom 
build microscope with a freezing device attached was constructed and post 
processing procedures has been developed. For the x-ray computed tomography 
a small freezing device has been built to fit into the micro CT scanner. 
It has been concluded that the Scanning Electron Microscope is not an 
applicable method for investigating ice formation in concrete air voids. The 
quenching did not happen fast enough to solidify the unfrozen water without 
relocated the water during solidification. 
==PAGE:3==
 
 
  
iii 
 
The optical microscopy method has shown useable results. A 2D image is 
joined from a stack of images with different field of depth. On the 2D image 
there is found ice by visual inspection, which is the goal of this project. The 
quality of the 3D model is not satisfactory. There is noise on the images 
captured with the custom build microscope, which distorts the quality of the 
image. The quality of the 3D model with test images from a commercial 
microscope is an improvement compared to the 3D model from the custom build 
microscope. 
The resolution obtained by the micro CT scanner is concluded not to be 
sufficient for investigating ice formation in the air voids of the concrete. The 
method is non-destructive, which leads to the air void to be investigated without 
creating artefacts during the investigation. In the succeeding research, the 
experiment can be conducted with a nano CT scanner, which provides a better 
resolution than the micro CT scanner.   
 
 
  
==PAGE:4==
 
 
  
iv 
 
Preface 
This report is the result of a student’s master thesis at the department of 
civil engineering at the Technical University of Denmark. 
The report is written by: Jeppe Søbye Andreasen in the spring term 2016. 
The extent of the project is 30 ECTS points 
Different people have contributed by technical discussions regarding this project 
but special acknowledgement should go to: 
Marianne Tange Hasholdt – The main supervisor on this project. 
Kristian Mølhave – The co-supervisor on this project. 
Ebba Cederberg Schnell and Jacob Friis-Grigoncza – For assistance with 
laboratory work. 
Christian Peter Rasmussen and Klaus Myndal – For help with the CT-scan setup 
Carsten Gundlach – Operator of the micro CT-scanner. 
Vedrana Andersen Dahl – Assistance with the Matlab code for image analysis. 
 
 
 
 
___________________________________________ 
Jeppe Søbye Andreasen 
 
 
(Front page figure: Mortar specimen in optical microscope) 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
 
 
  
v 
 
Contents 
1 Introduction............................................................................................... 1 
2 Concrete and frost resistance .................................................................... 4 
2.1 Driving force at water solidification .................................................. 4 
2.2 Air entraining agent ........................................................................... 6 
2.3 Powers’ spacing factor ....................................................................... 7 
3 Investigation methods ............................................................................... 9 
3.1 Optical Microscopy ........................................................................... 9 
3.2 Scanning Electron Microscopy ........................................................ 12 
3.3 X-ray Computed Tomography ......................................................... 15 
3.4 Nuclear Magnetic Response ............................................................ 17 
4 Selection of methods............................................................................... 19 
5 Materials ................................................................................................. 21 
5.1 Development of mortar recipe ......................................................... 21 
5.2 Casting plan ..................................................................................... 22 
6 Scanning Electron Microscope ............................................................... 24 
6.1 Nitrogen freezing of mortar specimens ........................................... 24 
6.2 SEM image ...................................................................................... 28 
6.3 Future work ...................................................................................... 29 
7 Optical microscope ................................................................................. 30 
7.1 Development of method .................................................................. 30 
7.2 Method ............................................................................................. 39 
7.3 Results and Discussion .................................................................... 41 
8 X-ray computed Tomography................................................................. 48 
8.1 Development of method .................................................................. 48 
8.2 Method ............................................................................................. 53 
8.3 Results and Discussion .................................................................... 53 
9 Discussion ............................................................................................... 57 
10 Conclusion ............................................................................................ 59 
11 Bibliography ......................................................................................... 60 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
1  INTRODUCTION 
 
1 
 
1 Introduction 
Concrete is a widely used material in today’s building industry, especially 
when used in combination with reinforced steel. This is due to the high strength 
of the reinforced concrete combined with the low costs compared with other 
construction materials such as steel or timber. Another advantage of concrete as 
a construction material is the shapeability. It is possible to produce almost any 
shape all though there are some limitations due to practical reasons, and the cost 
of formwork also increases as the shapes gets more abstract. 
Concrete originates from the Latin word concrescere which means “grow 
together” [1] which is what happens with the three main constituents of 
concrete: cement, water and aggregates. They are “growing” together by several 
chemical reactions. Regarding the durability, concrete has a good resistance to 
water penetration [2], therefor concrete is often used at marine constructions, 
such as pylons and piers known e.g. from the great belt link between Funen and 
Sealand. Even though concrete has a good resistance to water, concrete is a 
porous material and water will diffuse into the pores of the concrete. This 
creates a potential problem in climates where the temperature fluctuates around 
the freezing point, due to the expansion of water during solidification. The result 
can be either/or internal expansion and surface scaling, which can lead to loss of 
strength in the concrete and additionally a decrease in durability because the 
cracking induces an increase of water penetrating the concrete. This can also 
create other durability problems, such as corrosion in the reinforcement bars, 
which again decreases the strength. From the above, it can be derived that a 
durability failure due to frost/thaw cycles is a spiral where the functionality of 
the concrete member decreases. 
To avoid the expansion of water during solidification, air voids can be 
retained in the concrete by a chemical admixture. Air voids function as 
expansion chambers for the ice. Research has been made with regards to these 
air voids, but only a few researchers have documented direct proof, that the air 
voids functions as a recipient of the ice expansion. The reason why it is difficult 
==PAGE:7==
1  INTRODUCTION 
 
2 
 
to find direct proof of ice formation is because the size of the ice crystals is so 
small, that it is hard to find appropriate methods. 
The basis for this project was an investigation with a scanning electron 
microscope. In [3] research on ice formation in air voids, and other topics not 
relevant for this study, is conducted with a low-temperature scanning electron 
microscope. The concrete specimen is frozen at −7°𝐶𝐶 and then quenched in 
liquid nitrogen to fixate the water in the gel pores. With the cryo-SEM it is 
found, that the ice formation is taking place as discrete crystals. The crystals 
coincide with small divots, which can be seen when the ice is sublimated from 
the pore wall. The authors suggested that these divots are either favourable sites 
for nucleation of ice from the surrounding cement paste, or openings from the 
capillary channels where water will solidify when entering the air void.  In [4] 
and [5] cryo-SEM has also been used as a method for documenting ice 
formation in the air void. In [4] the findings are similar to [3]. The ice crystals 
are discrete, and they are situated at pivots on the pore wall. The reason for the 
ice in the crystals to be non-continuous is because the specimen is not fully 
saturated. In [4] the contact angle between ice and air void wall is measured 
because the contact angle has an effect on the pressure in the capillary pore. In 
[5] there are found single crystals, which are partially filling the air voids. Other 
crystals are grown together with the hydration products from the cement paste.  
The purpose of this project is to continue and refine the investigation with 
the scanning electron microscope, but also to find and explore other methods 
suitable for investigation of entrained air voids in concrete. 
The structure of the report is given in Figure 1-1. In the introduction-, 
description- and selection of method sections, all the methods are gathered in the 
same section.  The materials and method-, result- and discussion-sections are 
subsections to each method. In the last two sections: discussion and conclusion 
the methods are again gathered under the same section. 
==PAGE:8==
1  INTRODUCTION 
 
3 
 
 
Figure 1-1: Structure of the report. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:9==
2  CONCRETE AND FROST RESISTANCE 
 
4 
 
2 Concrete and frost resistance 
Concrete consists of three main constituents: Cement, Water and 
aggregate. Aggregate is a common term for sand and stone, which is mentioned 
together because the only difference between the two is the grain size. Cement is 
a powder and when cement is mixed with water, the cement paste becomes the 
adhesive constituent that holds the sand and stone together. The ratio between 
the water and cement (w/c-ratio) plays an important role regarding several 
properties of the concrete e.g. strength and rheology [6]. Most interesting in this 
investigation is the porosity, as transport of water onto the concrete is dependent 
on the porosity. The capillary pores have a diameter size range from 0.01 μm - 1 
μm [6]. Most transport of water in the concrete takes place through the capillary 
pores, and it is in or at exit the capillary pores ice formation starts. 
2.1 Driving force at water solidification 
In Denmark concrete is exposed to cycles of frost and thawing throughout 
the winter half year. The frost/thaw cycles can lead to extensive cracking and 
spalling in the concrete due to tension stresses in the cement paste. These 
tension stresses have been explained by several physical phenomena in relation 
to the porosity. The phenomena have been described below. 
2.1.1 Hydraulic pressure 
When water solidifies, a dilation of approximately 9% will take place. In a 
fully saturated concrete, the solidification will press the unfrozen water away 
from the ice front. If the distance from the compressed water to a free edge, e.g. 
an air void or edge of the concrete member, is too long; the water cannot escape 
due to friction in the water-cement interface. As a result the water pressure, 
acting on the pore wall, becomes so high that the cement paste cannot resist and 
will cause the concrete to crack. [6] 
==PAGE:10==
2  CONCRETE AND FROST RESISTANCE 
 
5 
 
2.1.2 Microscopic ice lens growth 
When ice starts to form in the capillary pores, water from the even smaller 
gel pores is not frozen, due to a surface interaction with the pore wall and thus 
the freezing point of the water is lowered. From a thermodynamic point of view, 
the water in the gel pores is in a higher energy state, than the ice formed in the 
capillary pores. Due to the higher energy state, the water is attracted to the ice to 
achieve an equilibrium which creates a pressure in the fluid close to the ice 
crystal [6]. 
2.1.3 Osmotic pressure 
In the pore solution there are many solutes in the pore fluid, which leads to 
a lowering of the freezing point [6]. When the first ice crystals are formed the 
concentration of solutes are higher in the water close to the ice crystals. The 
high concentration leads to an osmotic pressure in the fluid, as water will try to 
reach equilibrium by increasing the amount of water in the area with high 
concentration of solutes [6]. 
In Figure 2-1 the principle for hydraulic pressure is shown and Figure 2-2 
the principle for osmotic pressure and microscopic ice lens growth is shown 
together because the flow direction of the fluid, which is indicated with the 
white arrows on both Figure 2-1 and Figure 2-2.  
 
Figure 2-1: Principle of hydraulic pressure 
 
Figure 2-2: Principle of osmotic pressure/ 
microscopic ice lens growth 
 
The result of the three phenomena is the same – tension stresses in the 
concrete, which can lead to cracking in the cement paste. However, the flow 
directions for respectively hydraulic pressure and osmotic pressure/ microscopic 
ice lens growth are opposite; it is therefore not likely, that they will appear in the 
same place at the same time. 
Hydraulic pressure was the first suggested theory of frost damage in 
concrete [7] from 1945. However the author revised this theory in [8]  from 
1975where the theory of microscopic ice lens growth was presented, which is 
==PAGE:11==
2  CONCRETE AND FROST RESISTANCE 
 
6 
 
now the most dominating theory. Osmotic pressure and microscopic ice lens 
growth is mentioned together because the output of the two mechanisms are the 
same - fluid will be attracted towards the vicinity of the ice crystal creating the 
pressure.  
2.2 Air entraining agent 
When hydraulic pressure was the leading theory, it was stated that the 
amount of air in the concrete must be at least, the same volume as the 9% 
dilation when water solidifies. This increase in air volume can be managed with 
an air entraining agent (AEA). 
During mixing of the concrete, air bubbles are formed in the paste. To 
keep the bubbles stable in the concrete during mixing and vibrating, AEA are 
added. The AEA consists of a hydrophilic polar ion and a non-polar 
hydrophobic chain. The polar group will be bound to the surface of the cement 
grain and the hydrophobic chain will repel water, making the bubbles stable and 
attached to the cement grain [6]. The principle is illustrated in Figure 2-3. 
  
Figure 2-3: Function of the air entraining agent. Inspiration from [6]. 
 
When the concrete is saturated the water stays in the capillary channels 
because it cannot go into the air bubbles, due to surface tension at the channel 
exit at the air bubbles. During freeze/thaw action, the air voids which have a 
diameter range of 50 μm – 1 mm [6] will have free space for the ice to expand 
too. A condition for using an AEA is that adding and mixing should be 
conducted in a way, where the AEA is represented in the entire concrete 
mixture. This is to ensure that a part of the concrete has not got longer distance 
from an ice nucleation to a free edge than desired [6].  
==PAGE:12==
2  CONCRETE AND FROST RESISTANCE 
 
7 
 
2.3 Powers’ spacing factor 
The (Powers’) spacing factor was proposed in 1949 by T. C. Powers as a 
measure of describing the ability of an air void system, to protect the concrete 
against freeze/thaw action [7]. It is the most used parameter for describing the 
ability of an air void system to protect against frost/thaw actions. The spacing 
factor is the distance from the point in the cement paste with the longest distance 
to a free edge in the air void. The spacing factor is derived from geometrical 
considerations depending on the air content [7]. If the air content is high 
(Equation 2-1), it is assumed that all the paste is distributed in an evenly thick 
layer around the voids, and the distance is thus equal to the thickness of the 
layer. If the air content is low (Equation 2-2), it is assumed that that all the air 
voids have the same size, and that the air voids are distributed in a cubic lattice 
with one air void at the center at each lattice section, see Figure 2-4. 
 
Figure 2-4: Position of an air void in a lattice section. 
 
The spacing factor for low air content is the distance from lattice knot to 
the edge of the air void, indicated by the blue line on Figure 2-4. 
𝐿𝐿ത= 𝑝𝑝
𝐴𝐴∙1
𝑆𝑆                                      𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓 𝑝𝑝
𝐴𝐴< 4.342 
 
Equation 2-1 
 
         𝐿𝐿ത= 3
𝑆𝑆൭1.4 ቀ𝑝𝑝
𝐴𝐴+ 1ቁ
1
3 −1൱      𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓 𝑝𝑝
𝐴𝐴≥4.342 
 
Equation 2-2 
 
Where: 
- 
𝐿𝐿ത is the spacing factor [mm] 
- 
𝑝𝑝 is the paste content [% b.v. concrete] 
- 
𝐴𝐴 is the air content [% b.v. concrete] 
- 
S is the specific surface of the air voids [mm-1] 
In [9] the spacing factor is challenged as the correct measure of the ability 
of an air void system to protect the concrete against freeze/thaw action. The 
==PAGE:13==
2  CONCRETE AND FROST RESISTANCE 
 
8 
 
spacing factor has been developed to fit the theory of hydraulic pressure, even 
though the theory of microscopic ice lens growth is the dominating theory. The 
spacing factor has not been revised as it, by experience, provides a good 
indication of the frost resistance of a given concrete.  
The spacing factor is a distance whereas the total surface area describes 
the chance of capillary pores being connected to an air void where the ice 
nucleation is more likely to happen than in the capillary pores [9]. The total 
surface area is as good or a better measure for the frost resistance of an air void 
system [9].  
 
 
==PAGE:14==
3  INVESTIGATION METHODS 
 
9 
 
 
3 Investigation methods 
In this project several methods have been considered as appropriate 
solutions to investigate the air voids in a concrete. The theoretical background 
for the considered methods is described in the following section. 
3.1 Optical Microscopy1 
Optical microscopy is the most commonly used type of microscopy. It is 
also called light microscopy referring to the illumination source. It is easy to 
use, relatively inexpensive and has several variations of use. A basic microscope 
consists of a stage, an objective, an eyepiece and a light source mostly with a 
condenser. 
The objective has the function of collecting the light applied on the 
specimen to make an image of the surface. The objective consists of one or more 
lenses working together. The eyepiece, also called the ocular, has the opposite 
function of the objective, to spread the light to make it possible for the eye to 
see. The stage has the function of fixating the specimen. The stage, depending 
on the configuration, can also be used to move the specimen into focus and 
moving it in the remaining two directions to locate the area of interest.  
1 This section is based upon [10]. 
                                                 
==PAGE:15==
3  INVESTIGATION METHODS 
 
10 
 
 
Figure 3-1: Principle of optical microscopy [10]. 
 
In Figure 3-1 a sketch of an optical microscope is shown. The objective 
and the eyepiece are often more complicated and consist of several lenses. 
Together with the eyepiece the objective will ensure the magnification of 
the specimen, which is visualised in Figure 3-1. The image on the retina called 
the real image is together with the brain interpreted to a perceived image. The 
relation between the distance from the virtual image to the objective and the 
distance from the specimen to the objective is the linear magnification factor. If 
the image caption is performed with a camera, the intermediate image, see 
Figure 3-1, is projected on to the camera. 
Resolution is defined as the ability to distinguish between two adjacent 
points. The resolution is an important parameter when investigating e.g. 
capillary channels. The light is diffracted when the light interacts with an object, 
whether it passes through or reflects on the sample (depending on the position of 
the light source). It is the light diffraction that makes an object visible. If the 
light is not diffracted, the object remains invisible in the microscope. The light 
source hits a point on the sample, which cause the light and thus the intensity of 
light to diffract in a pattern as shown in Figure 3-2. The central circle contains 
approximately 84 % of the light, and is called the Airy disc [10]. 
==PAGE:16==
3  INVESTIGATION METHODS 
 
11 
 
 
Figure 3-2: Diffraction pattern of light 
from a point. (a) Seen from the top, (b) 3D 
view. From [10]. 
 
 
Figure 3-3: Rayleigh criterion for spatial 
resolution. From [10]. 
 
In Figure 3-3 two points with varying distance is shown. In (a), there is an 
overlap of two patterns. In (b), the patterns are at the Rayleigh limit of 
separation [10], where the maximum of the first pattern has a greater distance, 
from the centre of the other pattern, than the second point’s first minimum. 
The diffraction pattern is dependent on the wavelength of the 
electromagnetic radiation applied, in this case light, but also properties of the 
microscope itself. The numerical aperture (NA) describes how wide an angle of 
the diffracted light the objective can collect. A small wavelength and a big NA 
results in a high resolution. In Table 3-1, wavelength of visible light is shown. 
 
 
==PAGE:17==
3  INVESTIGATION METHODS 
 
12 
 
3.2 Scanning Electron Microscopy2 
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) is a microscope used for surface 
imaging similar to the optical microscopy. Instead of light an electron beam is 
bombarding the surface. The reason why SEM can be advantageous is the wave 
length of electrons, which is shorter than the wave length of light see Table 3-1. 
A shorter wave length will reveal more details of the surface. With the help of 
an advanced TEM (Transmission Electron Microscope) it is even possible to see 
atoms [11]. TEM uses the same principles as SEM, only with the electron beam 
transmitting through the material  
The overall principle of a SEM is an electron beam going through a 
system of lenses condensing the beam. The beam is scanning the surface of a 
sample while detectors absorb the deflecting electrons. From the signals an 
image of the surface is created. 
 
Table 3-1: Wavelength of visible light, electrons and x-ray [12]. 
 
Visible light 
(green/blue) 
Electrons 
 
X-rays 
Wavelength λ 
500nm  
0.06nm-3nm 
0.03nm-10nm 
When hitting the material the electron beam will either deflect, absorb or 
be transmitted through the material se Figure 3-4. The absorption and 
transmission depend on the thickness of the sample. Besides imaging of the 
surface, SEM can also provide information about the composition of atoms near 
the surface.  
 
Figure 3-4: Generated signals from an electron beam [11]. 
 
 
2 The following chapter is based on [11]. 
                                                 
==PAGE:18==
3  INVESTIGATION METHODS 
 
13 
 
At the source of the electron beam, an electric current with high voltage is 
applied to a filament; which emits a beam of electrons. The beam of electron is 
then passed through a series of condensers. In a SEM scanner the condensers are 
coils creating an electromagnetic field which guides the beam.. See Figure 3-5. 
                         
 
      Figure 3-5: Overview of a SEM [11] 
 
The condenser lens system will condense the electron beam, and play a 
role in the size of the beam hitting the material. The size of the beam is relevant 
in relation to the resolution of the picture, where a more condensed beam will 
result in a better resolution in the picture.  
On Figure 3-4 the signals generated from the sample are shown. The 
primary electrons hitting the material surface is the electron beam. Secondary 
electrons are a result of the primary electrons deflected on the surface. These 
electrons provide information about the surface topography.  Back scattered 
electrons origins from a collision with an atom in the material, which deflects 
towards the surface and results in backscattered electrons. The backscattered 
electrons provide information about the constituents near the surface.  
X-rays/Auger electrons can be emitted during relaxation of an atom. An inner 
shell in the atom is exitated by an incident primary electron. The atom energy 
level becomes above the ground state; therefor it is emitting x-rays or auger 
electrons to return to the ground state. [12] 
An image of the surface can be created, from the signals after collision of the 
electron beam with the sample surface. 
There are some limitations in regards to which kind of material that can be 
investigated by SEM. If the material has a low conductive capability a negative 
==PAGE:19==
3  INVESTIGATION METHODS 
 
14 
 
charge originating from the electron bombardment, will build in the material and 
backscatter the remaining bombardment of the sample. This will create a mirror 
image of the chamber to where the sample is placed, called the “mirror effect” 
[11] see Figure 3-6. 
 
Figure 3-6: Mirror effect in a SEM-scanner [13]. 
 
In materials with higher conductivity, the charge in the material does not 
build up if the sample is connected to the ground. This is not applicable if the 
sample is non- or low-conducting as e.g. a mortar sample. The sample can be 
coated with a thin layer of high conducting material as gold, leading the 
electrons to the ground instead of an electron build-up in the material. However 
this can alter the surface and give a false impression of the topography of the 
specimen. 
Another limitation of SEM is that the chamber where the specimen is 
placed has to be in vacuum (or close to vacuum), because the electron beam 
must not hit particles on the way to the specimen or else the image will be 
distorted.  Because of the vacuum, the specimens in the SEM scanner cannot 
contain volatile substances, like oil or water. The volatile substances are missing 
their corresponding vapour in the vacuum surroundings, and they will try to 
evaporate to obtain equilibrium. As a result the evaporated particles will 
obstruct the electron bombardment. A solution to circumvent the problem with 
saturated specimens is to freeze the specimen with liquid nitrogen in order to 
solidify and fixate e.g. the water to the specimen. During scanning of the 
electron beam, the specimen is placed on a special stage keeping the specimen 
cooled during scanning 
==PAGE:20==
3  INVESTIGATION METHODS 
 
15 
 
3.3 X-ray Computed Tomography 
Computed tomography or CT scanning is a stack of two dimensional 
images which can be processed by a computer to a three dimensional model. In 
most cases when referring to CT scanning the two dimensional images are 
performed with x-ray, but the computed tomography can also be produced with 
other types of pictures [14]. In this project, the computed tomography is 
produced with x-ray images. X-ray imaging is mostly known in the medical 
industry, both used as a two dimensional image to check e.g. fractures in bones 
and the three dimensional CT-scan used for e.g. the brain.  
X-rays was discovered by Wilhelm Conrad Röntgen during an experiment 
regarding another type of radiation. While performing the experiment, he 
discovered that crystals in the vicinity of the experiment became fluorescent. He 
named this type of radiation x-rays because this type of radiation was unknown 
at that time. X-rays are also called Röntgen radiation [15]. 
X-rays are produced in a tube consisting of a cathode in electrical 
connection with an anode see Figure 3-7. When applying current to the 
cathode/anode system, electrons will be attracted towards the anode which is 
usually Tungsten or a Tungsten alloy [15]. 
 
Figure 3-7: Sketch of an x-ray tube. From [15]. 
 
When the electrons reach the anode most of the electrons collide with the 
anode material and produces heat. The other electrons are slowed down or 
retarded by the anode. The retardation produces a photon with x-rays. The 
number of x-rays produced is closely connected to the number of electrons 
bombarding the anode. The number of x-rays can be increased by increasing the 
current in the tube. The energy in the x-rays is connected to the velocity of the 
==PAGE:21==
3  INVESTIGATION METHODS 
 
16 
 
electrons hitting the anode material. A greater velocity of the electrons leads to 
higher energy in the x-rays produced [15]. The velocity of the electrons is 
dependent on the ability to create vacuum or nearly vacuum in the tube, also 
known from the SEM scanner in section 3.2.  Depending on which kind of 
material pending for investigation, it is possible to vary both the amount of x-
rays and the energy in the x-rays. If the sample demands for a large penetrating 
power, a high amount of high energy x-rays are needed. 
When the radiation hits the specimen it can either: 
- 
Absorb – A quantum of x-rays collides with an orbital electron and 
ejects the electron from the atom. The remaining energy (energy not 
used to expel the orbital electron) is added to the expelled electron as 
kinetic energy. The vacancies in the orbit are filled up by electrons in 
outer orbits or external electrons. In this process radiation is expelled and 
secondary and tertiary radiation can happen, when absorbed in another 
atom. Low energy x-rays leads to a large absorption [15].  
- 
Scattering – A quantum of x-rays in collision with either the electron or 
the whole atom. In classical scattering the quantum of radiation has not 
got enough energy to expel an electron and the radiation deflected with a 
new direction. In Compton scattering the energy of the x-ray is sufficient 
to expel an electron with great speed called a Compton electron. As a 
result of the collision a quantum of x-rays is emitted with the remaining 
energy [15].  
On the other side of the specimen away from the source, a detector is 
placed. From the detected x-rays an image can be created, and the images can be 
joined to form a 3D model   
The resolution of the x-ray depends on the wavelength like the optical 
microscope and the SEM. The wavelength of x-rays is shown in Table 3-1. It is 
seen that wavelength is in the same range as SEM but smaller than the optical 
microscope. The smaller wavelength will lead to a lower diffraction limit and 
thus a better resolution.  
The magnification of the specimen is dependent on the distance between 
the source of the x-rays and the specimen. This is shown in Figure 3-8. 
==PAGE:22==
3  INVESTIGATION METHODS 
 
17 
 
 
Figure 3-8: Sketch of magnification by x-ray cone. 
 
In Figure 3-8, the projected image of circle 1 has the width of w1 on the 
detector and equivalent for circle 2 and w2. From the widths of the projected 
circles it can be seen that the magnification is greater for circle 1 than circle 2. 
The magnification is the relationship between the width of the sample and the 
projected width at the detector. 
The advantage of using x-ray images is that it is possible to “see” inside 
the specimen because the x-rays penetrate the specimen. With the CT 
technology it is possible to produce a three dimensional model of the specimen 
or part of the specimen. 
The disadvantages to using the x-ray are that the experimentation is time 
consuming. Small specimens are also needed for the source of the CT-scanner to 
be close conferring Figure 3-8. The small specimens can be difficult to produce, 
and may not be representative for a bulk concrete.  
3.4 Nuclear Magnetic Response 
The basis NMR is a magnetic response measured [16]. The NMR 
technique is widely used in the medical industry as an imaging method where it 
is known as MR or MRI (Magnetic Response Imaging) 
The two nuclei particles: protons and neutrons possess a physical property 
called spin. Each neutron or proton has ½ spin, and by adding these spin 
together, the nuclei has a spin. When there is an even number of neutrons and 
protons the spin is an integer and when there is an odd number the spin is a half 
integer [17]. When the nuclei with half integer spin is placed in a magnetic field, 
the energy level for the spin of the nuclei, will be split into two directions with 
opposite energies. By the use of radio waves, the excess energy in the most 
preferred position, alpha, is pumped into the less preferred beta position. The 
fluctuation is called resonance and is measurable [17]. 
The advantageous of using NMR is that it is possible to distinguish 
between atoms and the structure of molecules can be found, and hereby obtain 
==PAGE:23==
3  INVESTIGATION METHODS 
 
18 
 
very detailed information about the specimen at hand. A disadvantage of using 
NMR is the resolution of MRI scanners available in Denmark which is approx. 
50 μm [18]. 
 
 
==PAGE:24==
4  SELECTION OF METHODS 
 
19 
 
4 Selection of methods 
In section 3 four different methods of investigation air voids in concrete 
was presented. The applicability for the four methods is discussed below. 
The SEM experiment was the basis of this project. In the three articles [3] 
, [4] and [5] found ice formation in the air voids with a SEM scanner. For the 
SEM scanner to produce reliable images, it is necessary to quench the sample in 
liquid nitrogen to fixate the water. The authors of the articles do not mention the 
time for the water in the sample to freeze. The freezing is important as the 
argument by quenching the sample, is that water is fixated in the same position 
as before quenching. However if the time for the water to freeze is too long, 
there is no certainty that the water will be in the same position before and after 
solidification. On the basis of this a simple experiment will be conducted to 
check this hypothesis. The experiment with investigating entrained air in 
concrete are also wished to be conducted, to see if it is possible to replicate the 
experiment from the literature. 
The optical microscopy is the most straight forward method. The 
diffraction limit of the microscope can hinder the ability to see details as ice 
formation. A microscope with a magnification close to the diffraction limit has a 
small depth of field; therefor it is necessary to do post processing to join several 
images with different depth of field into a joined image. Despite the diffraction 
limit and the post processing, this method is explored in this project especially 
because this method will be easy for other researchers to replicate and to 
conduct further research. Compared to the three other methods the accessibility 
is higher, as this is a very common used method.  
The CT-scanning has one great advantage, the sample does not need to be 
opened up and thus it is achievable to obtain an image of the ice morphology in 
its original surrounding. As shown the wavelength of x-rays are considerably 
smaller than the wavelength of light, why it is potentially possible to achieve a 
better resolution than the optical microscopy. The challenge with the method is 
==PAGE:25==
4  SELECTION OF METHODS 
 
20 
 
to construct a freezing stage, where the stage can fit into the CT-scanner without 
disturbing the scanning. But because of the ability to see inside the specimen, 
this method must be explored further. 
The NMR method is the least accessibly of the four methods. A MRI 
scanner is not present at DTU why it would be necessary to find one outside 
campus. The method has a low resolution which is not sufficient for to 
investigate air voids. 
 To summarize: Optical microscopy and the CT-scan are explored to see if 
they are methods, which can be used to directly investigate the entrained air 
voids in concrete. The method with cryo-SEM is also investigated to verify if 
the method provides a trustworthy image.   
 
 
==PAGE:26==
5  MATERIALS 
 
21 
 
5 Materials 
The experimentation in this project is conducted with mortar instead 
concrete. The difference between mortar and concrete is the size of the 
aggregates. In mortar only sand grain is used whereas concrete also consist of 
stone. The advantages of mortar compared to concrete are that a more 
homogeneous mass is obtained and thus a smaller dispersion of results is 
achieved. Because some of the specimens are small, it is not possible to cast 
with a greater grain size.  
5.1 Development of mortar recipe 
For the experimental work, mortar specimens has been fabricated and 
tested. The base point for designing the mortar has been the DS/EN 196-1:2005 
[19]. The w/c-ratio is at 0.5, and a ratio of 0.45 is wanted because a frost 
resistant concrete is not only reliant on a sufficient air void system, but also a 
small porosity, which obstructs the water from penetrating the concrete. To 
obtain a smaller porosity, the w/c-ratio also must be lowered. The w/c-ratio was 
decided to be 0.45 as this also is a mortar used in the industry. The cement and 
water content from the 0.5 mortar have been adjusted to fit the w/c ratio at 0.45. 
To obtain a satisfying rheology, it was necessary to reduce the sand content. In 
Table 5-1 the base recipe for mortar specimens is given with the sample: 1-0.45-
(A,B,C). 
The cement used was Rapid Aalborg Cement, due to practical reasons. A 
rapid cement has a fast time of hardening, which reduced the testing period. The 
sand used was 0-2 mm sand class E which means that the aggregate was suitable 
for extra aggressive exposure class. The air entraining agent used was mapeair 
25. The normal dosage is: 0.05 – 0.5l (AEA) per m3 concrete, see appendix 1. 
This interval was used as a guideline for concrete even though mortar recipe was 
used. A dosage of 0.275l (AEA) per m3 mortar was selected providing an air 
content of 9-12% measured by volume. Because a large part of the AEA is water 
(appendix 1) the water content for the mortar was adjusted.  
==PAGE:27==
5  MATERIALS 
 
22 
 
The mixing procedure was according to DS/EN 196-1:2005 [19]. However 
there have been some deviations, with regards to the time of vibration on the 
jolting table. The vibrating is to ensure that there is no or little entrapped air 
inside the mortar. In some of the experiments other types of moulds, than the 
mould for the mortar bars is given in [19], has been used and the jolting table is 
not applicable for these moulds. In the cases where the jolting table cannot be 
used vibrating is conducted by beating the filled moulds repeatedly against a 
hard surface. As a result, visual acceptance during vibration has been used 
instead of the time. Figure 5-1 and Figure 5-2 are showing pictures from the 
mixing and casting process. 
 
Figure 5-1: Mixing of mortar in a Hobart 
mixer. 
 
 
Figure 5-2: Mortar in the mortar bar mould 
before vibration. 
 
5.2 Casting plan 
The casting plan, for the series of experiments can be seen in Table 5-1 
where the purpose of the respective casts is shown. In addition to the casting 
plan there have been several trial castings to test the recipe regarding 
workability and air content, but also to find suitable casting moulds. These are 
not mentioned in Table 5-1.  
Table 5-1: Casting plan for mortar specimens. 
Type 
Name 
Date casted 
Water 
Cement 
Sand 
AEA 
Purpose 
[g] 
[g] 
[g] 
[g] 
  
Bars 
1-0.35-(A,B,C) 18-03-2016 
174.8 
500 
1200 
0.22 
Optical  
Nitrogen 
 
1-0.45-(A,B,C) 18-03-2016 
209.3 
465.5 
1200 
0.22 
Optical  
Nitrogen 
 
1-0.60-(A,B,C) 18-03-2016 
252.9 
421.9 
1200 
0.22 
Optical  
Nitrogen 
Cylinders 
2-0,45-(A,B,C) 14-05-2016 
209.3 
465.5 
1200 
0.22 
X-ray 
 
==PAGE:28==
5  MATERIALS 
 
23 
 
Normally when working with mortar or concrete tests 28 days is the 
desired curing time, e.g. the compression strength is mostly given as the 28 days 
strength. The focus of this project is primarily on the applicability of the 
methods why the curing time is not important, and thus not noted even though 
many properties of the concrete and mortar changes evolves during curing. 
==PAGE:29==
6  SCANNING ELECTRON MICROSCOPE 
 
24 
 
6 Scanning Electron Microscope 
As discussed in section 4 the SEM is described as an invalid investigation 
method, and therefore the time for freezing a wet mortar sample is investigated.  
6.1 Nitrogen freezing of mortar specimens 
To make a rough estimation of the time it takes for the mortar sample to 
freeze in liquid nitrogen an experiment is carried out.   
Mortar specimens are plunged in a bowl with liquid nitrogen. The nitrogen 
will start to boil, due to a low boiling point at -195.79°C [20]. The boiling stops 
when the temperature of the sample has reached the boiling temperature of 
nitrogen. The time is noted and it can then be discussed whether the freezing is 
fast or not. In this experiment is freezing direction is wished to be one 
dimensional. This can be ensured with designing the width and height much 
bigger than the thickness of the sample.   
6.1.1 Method 
Following materials and equipment has been used in the experiment: 
- 
Insulated bowl approx. ½ litre 
- 
Nitrogen 6 litre 
- 
Mortar specimens 
- 
Timer 
- 
Tongs 
- 
Safety gloves and visor 
- 
Diamond cutter 
The mortar specimens have been prepared conferring the recipe in section 
5. To show if the w/c-ratio has significance regarding the freezing time, three 
different w/c ratio (0.35 – 0.45 – 0.6) have been used. For this experiment the 
mortar has been casted in prisms from DS/EN 196-1 [19]. After 24 hours the 
==PAGE:30==
6  SCANNING ELECTRON MICROSCOPE 
 
25 
 
prisms were demoulded for further hardening and curing. Before testing the 
prisms were cut up into slices of (2, 3, 4, 5, 7.5, 10, 20) mm. To ensure a fully 
saturation of the sliced specimens (discs) are left in water. Before plunging the 
mortar discs into the nitrogen, they are dabbed on the surface with a napkin to 
ensure a surface dry sample. 
Nitrogen will evaporate at room temperature, due to the low boiling point. 
The procedure described below must therefore be performed, with some degree 
of speed. 
Procedure 
1. Cut the mortar bars into discs of varying thicknesses. 
2. Transfer the nitrogen from the insulated container to the bowl.  
3. Measure the dimension of the sample. 
4. Dry the sample on the surface.  
5. Measure and note the weight of the sample.  
6. Plunge the sample into the liquid nitrogen while simultaneously starting 
the timer. 
7. When the bubble formation is ceased, stop the timer.  
8. Retract the sample is retracted from the nitrogen with the tongs, and 
leave it on a towel to defrost 
 In Figure 6-1 to Figure 6-4 pictures from the experimental process are 
shown. 
 
Figure 6-1: Cutting of the mortar bars with 
diamond cutter. 
 
Figure 6-2: Weighing of the sample. 
 
Figure 6-3: Plunging of mortar discs into 
nitrogen. Bowl insulated with polystyrene. 
 
Figure 6-4: Mortar discs after plunging. 
 
==PAGE:31==
6  SCANNING ELECTRON MICROSCOPE 
 
26 
 
6.1.2 Results and discussion 
The time obtained in the experiment is plotted against the thickness. This 
can be seen in Figure 6-5. Raw data from the experiment can be seen in 
appendix 2. 
 
Figure 6-5: Results from the nitrogen experiment. Time against thickness. 
In Figure 6-5 the specimens with the three w/c-ratios are all shown. The 
sample with w/c-ratio 0.35 has been toned down to grey because there were 
some issues during mixing and casting. During mixing it was observed that the 
workability of the concrete was very low which lead to problems during casting. 
Because the workability was low it was difficult to vibrate the mortar in the 
mould. This can be underlined when examining the hardened mortar bars see 
Figure 6-6. 
 
 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
0
5
10
15
20
25
Time [s] 
Thickness [mm] 
0.6
0.45
0.35
==PAGE:32==
6  SCANNING ELECTRON MICROSCOPE 
 
27 
 
 
 
Figure 6-6: From the top to the bottom 1-0.35-A, B and C. The three mortar bars are casted in 
the same mould with w/c = 0.35. 
 
The three pictures in Figure 6-6 stems from respectively 1-0.35-A, B and 
C. They are casted from the same mix in the same mould. It is clear that the 
vibration and compaction is not of a satisfying degree. There is entrapped air in 
the sample, which can be seen both on the high dimension of the voids, but also 
on the smaller circularity in relation to entrained air voids. The entrapped air is 
unwanted, as the sample gets inhomogeneous, which results in an increase of air 
content in the sample and a decrease in strength. When investigating the cross 
section there are lumps of cement, Figure 6-7, which underlines the poor 
execution during mixing. A mortar such as this would not be used in the 
industry. Regarding this investigation the mortar bars, does not provide truthful 
results, and therefor is disregarded.  
 
Figure 6-7: Cross section of mortar disc with lumps of cement. 
 
 
==PAGE:33==
6  SCANNING ELECTRON MICROSCOPE 
 
28 
 
In Figure 6-5 the progress for the curves are as expected. The time 
increases as the thickness increases. It is harder to conclude a trend for the 
progress of time as a function of the thickness. The trend looks somewhat linear 
but also as a power function. When calculating the R2 or coefficient of 
determination, the power function is a better fit with a value of 0.997 as opposed 
to the linear of 0.983. 
Any definitive difference between the specimens with w/c-ratio 0.45 and 
0.6 cannot be found. The progresses of the curves are uneven, which suggests 
that there has been some uncertainty regarding determining the time where the 
liquid nitrogen stops boiling. This was also experienced during the experiment. 
Because of the uncertainty with the time, the specimens were randomly selected 
for testing, to ensure that any subjective evolvement of determining the time at 
which the boiling stopped is randomly distributed over the range of discs.  
The most interesting result in relation to the SEM scanning is the time for 
the specimens with a thickness of 2mm to freeze. The 2mm is equivalent to the 
thickness of the specimens used in the articles regarding SEM scanning [3], [4] 
and [5]. For the sample with w/c: 0.45, the time for the nitrogen to stop boiling 
is 14s. For the sample with w/c: 0.60, the time is 16s. The times for the two 
discs indicates that the freezing is not momentary. Momentary freezing is one of 
the conditions for the method to provide realistic results. However, the time 
recorded in this experiment is the time it takes for the sample to reach -195.79°C 
and not the time for the water to freeze. The time for the water to freeze is 
difficult to obtain, however it can be estimated from the experiment. The phase 
change for water demands much energy compared to the energy necessary to 
lower the temperature when the phase change has already happened. Concrete is 
solid, and it will only need to do a lowering of the temperature. Because of this 
it is estimated, that time for the water to freeze is positioned in the last half of 
the time measured. For the 0.45 sample the time for the water to freeze inside 
the sample is between 7 and 14 seconds. But even in this interval the freezing of 
the water cannot be characterized as momentary. 
6.2 SEM image  
It was wished to make a SEM scan, but due to lack of time, this 
investigation was deselected. It was prioritised to work with the optical 
microscopy, as it was assessed that it had the best possibilities of obtaining 
results. The purpose the SEM scanning was to show that the cryo-part of the 
SEM scanner can produce misleading results. In the articles the sample is frozen 
in -7°C before quenching. In this investigation, it was wanted to freeze the 
sample only by quenching it in nitrogen. According to the articles, the ice will 
not move during quenching. If there is ice seen on the SEM image, it can be 
==PAGE:34==
6  SCANNING ELECTRON MICROSCOPE 
 
29 
 
concluded that the quenching is not fast enough to keep the ice in the capillary 
channels. If ice could be seen, no conclusion can be made whether the ice is due 
to the slow freezing at -7°C or the rapid freezing by liquid nitrogen. 
6.3 Future work 
A future work is to go through with the SEM scanning. The scanning 
would be suitable for a final argument whether the method is not suitable for 
investigation of frost in concrete. 
 
==PAGE:35==
7  OPTICAL MICROSCOPE 
 
30 
 
7 Optical microscope 
The optical microscopy is the most straight-forward and easy to use 
method, because there is a wide range of ready-made models and the 
accessibility is high. However, there are requirements of modifications such as 
installation of a freezing device. The decision was made to custom build a 
microscope, because of the requirements. The objective of the method is to 
investigate a sample at 3 stages: prefrozen – frozen – postfrozen. It is also a 
possibility to take several series of images during the freezing period, for an 
indication of dependency of time for frost formation.  
7.1 Development of method 
7.1.1 Construction of the microscope 
The basis for the custom build microscope was the body tube (Figure 
7-1A) to which objectives with different power can be fitted in one end (Figure 
7-1B) and a camera at the other end (Figure 7-1C). The microscope is placed on 
a mechanical apparatus (Figure 7-1D) which is fitted to the setup, as it makes it 
possible to change the depth of field and hence create a stack of images.   
Figure 7-1: Setup for the optical microscope 
 
Figure 7-1A: Body tube for the optical 
microscope 
 
 
Figure 7-1B: Objective for the optical 
microscope 
 
==PAGE:36==
7  OPTICAL MICROSCOPE 
 
31 
 
 
Figure 7-1C: Camera with USB connection for 
the optical microscope 
 
 
Figure 7-1D: Focus adjuster for the optical 
microscope 
 
The objective is interchangeable and thus different ranges of 
magnification can be chosen. The objective in Figure 7-1B, has a 50x 
magnification, which is close to the diffraction limit. When having a high 
magnification at 50x, it can be hard to find an area of interest due to small depth 
of field, why it is useful to have objectives with smaller magnification which 
provides a better overview of the air bubbles at the mortar surface. As this is a 
custom build microscope, there is no exact knowledge of the scale in the 
microscope. To find the scale of a known object, in this case a microchip with 
nano channels, the channel is measured in a commercial optical microscope with 
a known scale (Figure 7-2) and compared to an image in the custom build 
microscope (Figure 7-3). 
 
Figure 7-2: Picture of the microchip in the 
microscope with known scale. 
 
 
Figure 7-3: Picture of the microchip in the 
microscope with unknown scale 
From the microscope with the known scale 1 pixel equals 132nm. The size 
(in pixels) of a given number of channels can be measured by the software 
ImageJ, presented below. The microchip is transferred to the custom build 
microscope. The size of the microchip is calculated in nanometer by the means 
of the known scale from the commercial microscope. The scale of the custom 
build microscope can be calculated, as the size in nano meters is known. The 
scale for the custom build microscope is 1 pixel equals 124nm. The scale is 
measured and calculated both with the microscope zoomed in and out as 
differences can occur at the two positions. The data and results are presented in 
appendix 3. 
==PAGE:37==
7  OPTICAL MICROSCOPE 
 
32 
 
 In Figure 7-4 there is a knob on the apparatus controlling the depth of 
field. This knob has been fitted with a LEGO cog wheel, which is done in order 
to connect an electric LEGO engine to the microscope to control the propulsion 
of the microscope, see Figure 7-5. 
 
Figure 7-4: Turning knop with scale. 
 
Figure 7-5: Connection between engine and 
turning knop. 
 
The electric LEGO engine is controlled with LEGO software where the 
propulsion for the microscope can be programmed. Two options for the 
capturing of the image stack have been considered. The first option is to keep 
the engine at a steady rate, while images are captured continuously with a given 
rate. In the second option, the microscope advances in a series of well-defined 
cycles of displacements and breaks, where the images are captured during the 
break. The second option is chosen, as it was suspected that there was some 
degree of shaking, when the microscope was moving at a constant velocity. The 
first option also called for a third program controlling the LEGO software and 
Ueye cockpit, used to capture the images. 
From a previous project conducted at DTU Civil Engineering a ready-
made freezing devise has been constructed. An important factor for deciding to 
custom build the microscope setup was that, a freezing device has to be fitted to 
the setup, which was too big to be fitted to a commercial microscope. This 
freezing device consists of a Peltier element, which creates a temperature 
difference between the two sides. On the freezer, a ventilator is placed on the 
backside of the device to remove hot air, see Figure 7-7.      
 
Figure 7-6: Front side of the freezing device. 
 
Figure 7-7: Backside of the freezing device. 
 
The freezing device has been fitted to the same U-profile aluminium 
beam, as the microscope has been fitted to by a cross beam member; see below 
==PAGE:38==
7  OPTICAL MICROSCOPE 
 
33 
 
the freezing device inn Figure 7-6. The cross beam member helps ensuring that 
the freezing device is perpendicular and fixed in relation to the body tube of the 
microscope.   
In some microscopes the light passes through the sample and in to the 
microscope. This is not an option in this project, as the thickness of the 
specimens is too big for any light to transmit through it. Instead a reflective light 
source is used. In Figure 7-1A and B the entry for the light source can be seen. 
The light beam is bended by means of a silver mirror down through the 
objective, which works as a condenser. The light reflects on the sample and back 
into the objective [10].  
 
Figure 7-8: Principle sketch of reflected microscopy. From 
[10]. 
 
 
Figure 7-9: Image of reflected 
optical fibres. 
 
There is a glass front on the sample, which reflects the light and causes an 
image of the optical fibres to be visible. See Figure 7-9. To avoid this, the light 
source is not lead through the objective, but directly on to the sample where it is 
reflected into the objective.  
7.1.2 Sample preparation  
The challenge with using optical microscopy is that the sample has to be 
opened up to investigate the air bubbles. If freezing is started without any 
precautionary measures applied, moist from the surrounding air will desublimate 
on the surface of the sample and ice crystals will form. This is shown with the 
phase diagram of water Figure 7-10. 
==PAGE:39==
7  OPTICAL MICROSCOPE 
 
34 
 
 
        Figure 7-10: Phase diagram for H2O. [21] 
 
At atmospheric pressure with temperatures below 0°C, vapour will 
desublimate to solid ice. A way to supress this problem is to remove the vapour 
from the air by blowing dry air, with humidity close to 0%, across the surface of 
the sample. The dry air could potentially also remove ice formation from the 
pores by sublimation. To keep the ice in the pores, a glass cover was applied on 
the surface. With this configuration the dry air blows over the glass and removes 
the vapour in the air in front of the glass cover and the contingent desublimated 
ice on the glass.  
The last step before freezing the sample is to saturate the sample to 
provide the best possibilities of capturing ice formation behind the glass cover. 
The glass cover slows down the time it takes for the surface behind the glass 
cover to be saturation. To ensure saturation a quick as possible, the specimens 
are positioned as shown in Figure 7-17.  Specimens are positioned with the glass 
cover fully immersed in the water and the water level is merely above the glass 
cover. This is done to ensure that the air present in the specimens before 
saturation can escape from the sample. 
7.1.3 Image processing 
Due to the small depth of field, post processing actions must be taken to 
obtain a satisfying 3D-model or a 2D image. Both the 3D-model and the 2D-
image are acceptable solutions. The 3D model provides the spatial information 
of the air void; however it can be difficult to find the same point in two different 
models, which is necessary when comparing a frozen and a non-frozen model. 
With a 2D image such a point could be easier to single out. Furthermore 2D 
images are more practicable when presented in reports, even though the spatial 
information is weaker than the 3D model. The spatial information for the 2D 
images can be provided by plotting a contour plot, and present it close to the 2D 
image. As a conclusion both the 3D model and 2D image are attempted as 
==PAGE:40==
7  OPTICAL MICROSCOPE 
 
35 
 
outputs for the post processing of the optical images. Commercial microscopes 
have been made where built-in software computes the 3D model automatically 
[22]. The commercial microscopes with automatic 3D computation are a new 
product on the market, and not available at DTU.  
To process the images the software ImageJ was attempted to be used. 
ImageJ is an open source, where it is possible to install plugins to the basic 
version of the program. This entails that there is a lot of plugins which can be 
used. This is positive, as there is a wide range of plugins which can be applied 
for problems at hand. On the negative side it can be difficult to find and choose 
the correct plugin for the problem at hand, furthermore the quality of the plugins 
are difficult verify. Reviews found on the internet or self-made tests are the 
possibilities of verification. The user guides for the plugins also varies in 
quality: In some cases it can be difficult to extract the function of the plugin in 
the user guide. For the 3D model, the plugin used in this project is the volume 
viewer. The plugin had many features but the feature most interesting in this 
project was the volume display mode, where the plugin used a stack of images 
to form a 3D model [23]. Before the images were loaded in the volume viewer, 
the images were filtered. Many options were available in ImageJ and it proved 
to be more difficult than expected to find a satisfying way of filtering the images 
in ImageJ and produce satisfying models.  
Assistance was found at DTU compute to combine the stack of images 
captured. DTU compute suggested using Matlab programming, and a script for 
processing the images was written, which can be seen in appendix 4. 
The steps in the processing are described below. To remove noise and to 
smooth the image, a Gaussian filter was applied in the script. The output was a 
weighted average of each pixel with its neighbouring pixels, where the weight 
was on the central pixel [24]. The next step in the Matlab script was the 
calculation of gradients. For all the pixels in the stack, the gradient in relation to 
the neighbouring pixels was calculated. For pixels with the same x,y-coordinates 
but varying z coordinate, the pixel with highest gradient down was found. The 
highest gradient was defined as the sharpest pixel. By knowing the z coordinates 
to the pixels with the highest gradients in all x,y-positions, a set of the sharpest 
pixels can be combined. The pixels were again filtered with their contingent new 
neighbouring pixels with a median filter [25]. This filter was less sensitive to 
extreme values than a mean filter, as it takes the median value and discards any 
extreme values. The last step was to plot the computed pixels with different 
types of visualisation. When a 3D model was plotted, the position of the pixel 
was given in the x,y-plane. Regarding the position in the z-direction each image 
was separated with a distance of one pixel. To find the real z-position a scale on 
the turning knop, was used, see Figure 7-4. A 360° turn was a 500μm change in 
==PAGE:41==
7  OPTICAL MICROSCOPE 
 
36 
 
the position of the microscope, from the displacement at a full turn of the knop, 
each displacement caused by the electric engine was be calculated. An example 
of this can be found in appendix 5. The displacement was not constant, as the 
engine is powered battery. The power and thus the displacement of the 
microscope at each cycle decreased as the time in operation increased. The 
variation in battery bower and displacement of the microscope caused a 
measurement before each series of image is captured, if a precise distance 
between the images is needed.  
In some images it was possible to identify ice by visual inspection on the 
void wall. However, it would be preferable to quantify the difference pixel by 
pixel between two images. To do this, the clear view of difference had to be 
found. The clear view of difference was the minimum value, at which it could 
be concluded that there was a difference between two images. Two stacks of 
images were captured. The second of stack of images are displaced in the x-, y- 
and z direction in relation to the first image but still with a shared area, see 
Figure 7-11. 
 
Figure 7-11: Sketch of two stacks of images. 
 
The black box in Figure 7-11 symbolises the first stack of images. The 
blue box symbolises the second stack of images displaced in three directions. 
The green dotted box is the shared area of the two stacks.   
The two stacks were aligned by using the plugin align3_TP in ImageJ. A 
shared fiducial marker was found in both stacks and a slice in each stack was 
chosen where the fiducial marker was in focus. The two slices were aligned 
manually in align3_TP, see Figure 7-12.   
==PAGE:42==
7  OPTICAL MICROSCOPE 
 
37 
 
 
Figure 7-12: Alignment of two slices in fused window on the left, by ImageJ with the plugin 
Align3_TP. The alignment is manually conducted in the Alignment parameters dialog box, on 
the right.  
 
The slices in Figure 7-12 are not aligned. The distance for the 
displacement of one of the slices was entered in the horizontal and vertical shift 
boxes. 
When the slices were aligned, the difference between the two comparable 
images was found by choosing the DIFFERENCE in the Blitter op box. The 
difference option provided the numerical difference between the two stacks in a 
given pixel. A new stack of images showed the numerical difference between 
the two stacks was the output from the align3_TP plugin. The numerical 
difference stack was then loaded into the matlab script described above. The 
matlab script found the largest gradient for each pixel in the z-direction, which 
was the biggest difference between the two stacks in each x,y-position down 
through the stack. A 2D image of the combined pixels with the biggest 
numerical difference was the output from the matlab script, see Figure 7-13. 
Small numerical differences were close to black value close to 0 while big 
differences were closer to white with the value 255. 
==PAGE:43==
7  OPTICAL MICROSCOPE 
 
38 
 
 
Figure 7-13: 2D image of the biggest numerical difference between two comparable stacks of 
images 
 
Figure 7-13 was loaded in ImageJ where it was possible to obtain the 
values for the numerical difference, and calculate the mean numerical 
difference. The mean numerical difference was the clear view of difference for 
this test setup.  The procedure described above was only one evaluation of the 
clear view of difference. To increase the statistical safety, several clear views of 
differences should be calculated.  
 The procedure with aligning and calculating the mean numerical 
difference was repeated on images captured during freezing and after freezing. 
If the clear view of difference, between a stack where the specimen was exposed 
to freezing and stack where the same specimen was exposed to room 
temperature, was higher than clear view of difference, it can be concluded that 
there is a difference between the stack where the specimen was exposed to 
freezing and stack where the same specimen was exposed to room temperature. 
The values could also provide information about the quality and comparability 
of the two stacks. Mean numerical difference close to the clear view of field has 
led to a high quality and comparability. To see all the pictures in the two stacks, 
see the electronic appendix.  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:44==
7  OPTICAL MICROSCOPE 
 
39 
 
7.2 Method 
Following equipment has been used in the experiment: 
- 
Diamond cutter  
- 
Glass cover 
- 
TEC7 mounting and sealing glue 
- 
Waterproof bowl  
- 
Microscope 
- 
Light source 
- 
Ueye camera equipment  
- 
Ueye cockpit software 
- 
Freezing device made from peltier elements cooling aluminium 
elements and ventilation. 
- 
Manikin, temperature controlling software 
- 
LEGO Mindstorms electric engine with controller 
- 
LEGO Mindstorms NXT 2.0 
The mortar specimens have been prepared conferring the recipe in section 
5. The mortar was casted in mortar bars with a cross section of 40mm x 40mm. 
After 24 hours the bars were demoulded. After curing and hardening the mortar 
bars were divided into discs of 12mm by using the diamond cutter. Next, the 
glass cover was applied to the mortar disc with the glue. After the glue had 
dried, the sample was saturated in the bowl partly filled with water. When the 
mortar disc was saturated it was positioned on the freezing device, and the light 
was turned on. The area of interest was located by the use of the camera and the 
Ueye cockpit. The field of depth was set at the edge of the air void and the 
automatic contrast and white balance was ticked off until this stack and the stack 
used to compare were captured. A stack of images was captured by controlling 
the electric engine with the LEGO Mindstorms NXT 2.0. The capturing 
continued until the field of depth was beyond the area of interest. Pictures of the 
described process can be seen in Figure 7-14 to Figure 7-18.  
==PAGE:45==
7  OPTICAL MICROSCOPE 
 
40 
 
 
Figure 7-14: Cutting of the mortar bars with a 
diamond cutter. 
 
Figure 7-15: Application of glue on mortar 
sample. 
 
 
Figure 7-16: Mortar disc in place with 
insulation. 
 
Figure 7-17: Specimens for optical microscopy 
during saturation. 
 
 
Figure 7-18: Fully prepared microscope. 
==PAGE:46==
7  OPTICAL MICROSCOPE 
 
41 
 
7.3 Results and Discussion 
7.3.1 2D images 
An issue occurred during the experimentation with the fixation of the 
sample. Between the three different stages: prefrozen, frozen and postfrozen 
there has been displacement of the sample. The displacement is seen by a shared 
fiducial marker which is displaced at the three stages. In some cases the fiducial 
marker has disappeared between the three stages. The displacements have 
resulted in difficulties in finding the same area of interest on the two images. 
The sample is suspected to have thermal movements during the freezing and 
thawing. If this is correct the sample should end up in the same place after 
before and after freezing, which was not the case. The displacement was found 
to be ice formation on the backside of the sample, between the sample and the 
freezing surface. The images shown below are images captured after 24 and 48 
hours of freezing, where little movement has happened. After the matlab script 
has been applied, the following plots are selected shown in Figure 7-19 and 
Figure 7-25. To see all the pictures in the two stacks, see electronic appendix.  
 
Figure 7-19: Sample frozen at 24 hours. Images 
can be seen larger in appendix 6. 
 
Figure 7-20: Sample frozen at 48 hours. Images 
can be seen larger in appendix 6. 
Figure 7-21: Contour plot of a sample frozen in 
24 hours. 
Figure 7-22: Contour plot of a sample frozen in 
48 hours. 
 
==PAGE:47==
7  OPTICAL MICROSCOPE 
 
42 
 
In Figure 7-19 the sample has been frozen for 24 hours and in Figure 7-20 
for 48 hours. Figure 7-21 and Figure 7-22 provides information of the contours 
area. It can be seen, that there is differences between the two images. The 
differences are marked on both the images. In the big circle on Figure 7-20 a 
white structure can be seen, which is not seen on Figure 7-19. This is probably 
ice forming as the structure is distinct. The longest diagonal of the structure is 
19.0 pixels equivalent to 2.36μm. In the small circle a small structure can be 
seen in both the images. The structure is 1.27μm on the longest diagonal after 24 
hours and grows to 1.78μm after 48 hours of freezing, and thus grows during the 
24 hours. The growth is also a sign of the ice formation. In the rectangular box n 
Figure 7-19 three structures can be seen. The three structures cannot be seen on 
Figure 7-20. This implies that there is noise on the image. It is pointed out that 
some structures are a result of ice formation while others are a result of noise.  
The mean numerical difference has been produced as described in section 
7.1.3, and can be seen in Figure 7-23. 
 
Figure 7-23: The mean numerical difference between two stacks, where the specimen is exposed 
to frost in 24 and 48 hours. 
 
Figure 7-23 is livelier than Figure 7-13, and with brighter colours. One 
thing they have in common is in the middle of the images where there is an area 
that  looks blacker than for the rest of the image. This indicates that the 
difference in this area is smaller than the rest of the images. This could be due to 
excessive lighting. The capturing of the images was conducted with constant 
contrast and white balance in Ueye cockpit, in order for the images in a stack to 
be joined properly. The contrast and white balance were set before the capturing 
process at a chosen field of depth. The optimal setting for contrast and white 
balance was not sure to be the same in other field of depths. The change in 
==PAGE:48==
7  OPTICAL MICROSCOPE 
 
43 
 
optimal settings when the field of depth was changed, could lead to excessive 
lighting, as the contrast and white balance does not follow the optimal settings. 
The values for Figure 7-13 and Figure 7-23 are shown in Table 7-1. 
Table 7-1: Calculated values from Figure 7-13 and Figure 7-23. 
Image 
Area 
Integrated 
values 
Mean 
Standard 
deviation 
min 
max 
Clear view of difference 
148519 
2784432 
18.748 
14.421 
0 
250 
|24h - 48h| 
148086 
6709740 
45.31 
29.548 
0 
250 
In Table 7-1 the row with |24h - 48h| is the value for numerical difference 
between the sample frozen in 24 hours and the sample frozen in 48 hours. It can 
be seen that the mean value for the |24h - 48h| is higher than the mean value of 
the clear view of difference. From the difference between the mean values, it 
can be conclude that the two images are different from each other. The mean 
numerical difference found for |24h - 48h| can be explained by colour 
differences which can be seen in Figure 7-19 and Figure 7-20. The contrast and 
white balance were constant when the two stacks were captured, but not in 
between the capturing of the two stacks. Both of the images in Table 7-1 has a 
high standard deviation in relation to their respective mean values this implies 
that there is a big dispersion of the values in the pixels.  
The ice formation found in the large circle in Figure 7-20 has a value of 70 
– 80, measured by ImageJ. If the values are assumed to be Gaussian distributed, 
the mean value + one standard deviation equal 84% of the measurements. The 
mean value + one standard deviation are 74.88, which is in the middle of the 
range of values measure at the structure. The mean value and the standard 
deviation indicate that there is an 84% probability that the structure seen, is a 
result of the difference between the images.  
7.3.2 3D images 
In Figure 7-24 and Figure 7-25, 3D models of specimens frozen at 24 and 
48 hours, are shown. 
 
Figure 7-24: 3D model of the sample frozen in 24 hours. 
  
==PAGE:49==
7  OPTICAL MICROSCOPE 
 
44 
 
 
Figure 7-25: 3D model of the sample frozen in 48 hours. 
 
There is still noise on the model, and it is difficult to do a comparison 
between the two models, which underlines that a difference found between the 
two compared images could be a result of noise, as discussed above. 
7.3.3 Blue channel images 
As mentioned in section 3.1, the wavelength has significant effect on the 
resolution of images. The visible light has a range of wavelengths, where blue 
colour is at the short end of the range. It is tried single out the blue channel to 
investigate the image with a short wavelength.  
 
Figure 7-26: Frozen sample only with the blue 
channel. 
 
 
Figure 7-27: Same frozen sample as Figure 
7-26, but with all channels. 
Figure 7-26 should in theory have shown a better resolution than Figure 
7-27 due to the smaller wavelength of the blue colour. However, in Figure 7-26 
artificial spots can be seen compared to Figure 7-27. The spots are primarily at 
the centre of the image.  There are also spots in other location e.g. at the 
coordinate: (1900, 1100). The artificial spots are because the sample is 
illuminated by the whole range of light. In Figure 7-26, only 1/3 of the 
wavelength range is included and thus information is lost in the image, even 
though a shorter wavelength should provide a better resolution. During post 
processing there is interpolated between the pixels and the artificial spots 
==PAGE:50==
7  OPTICAL MICROSCOPE 
 
45 
 
appear. The spots distort the image and due to the distortion, the effort to 
optimise the wavelength by this method is concluded not to be satisfying. 
7.3.4 Images from commercial microscope  
A preliminary investigation of mortar specimens were examined in a 
commercial microscope. The sample was a random selected mortar sample 
without any glass cover. Because of the absence of a glass cover, condensed 
light through the objective were used. The stack of images was entered in the 
matlab script, appendix 4, and three plots are presented in Figure 7-28, Figure 
7-29 and Figure 7-30. 
Figure 7-28: Preliminary setup - 2D map. 
 
Figure 7-29: Preliminary setup – counterplot. 
 
 
 
Figure 7-30: 3D model of the preliminary sample. 
 
Figure 7-30 does not show the same noise as in Figure 7-24 and Figure 
7-25. Both the top surface and void surface are smoother than the 3D models 
obtained from the custom-made microscope. The only difference between the 
==PAGE:51==
7  OPTICAL MICROSCOPE 
 
46 
 
setups regarding imaging of Figure 7-24 and Figure 7-30 are: the microscope, 
the method of lightning and the glass cover on the sample. The quality of the 
microscopes should be the same in the two setups. That leaves the method of 
lightning which is a result of the glass cover. It is desirable to find a solution 
where condensed light can be applied to a specimen with a glass cover. In 
Figure 7-30, the sides of the void are not in focus. The surface of the sample 
intersects the void in the top half of the void, which causes the widest parts of 
the void to be hidden behind the edge of the void for the light. The light is 
applied perpendicular to the void, and the light can therefore not reach the 
widest parts of the void. 
7.3.5 Future works 
Improvements for potential succeeding work is suggested below:  
- 
When saturating the sample water can stick to the inside of the glass 
cover if the sample is placed in the water for too long time. To avoid 
water on the inside of the glass cover, it is suggested to apply a nano-
coating on the cover to ensure that the surface is hydrophobic.  
- 
To save time, it is suggested to programme the electric engine and the 
trigger in Ueye Cockpit to run the process in a way where no manual 
input is necessary during capturing of the images. 
- 
In this project, the sample is secured by a rubber band. To obtain a 
more stable fixing, a mechanical aggregate should be made. The 
aggregate should fix the mortar disc against the freezer, and at the 
same time ensure displacements in the two directions parallel to the 
surface of the disc. By the displacement, the aggregate should ease the 
locating of an air void. 
- 
The application of blue light on the sample should in theory provide a 
better resolution. The blue light is at the lower part of the light spectre, 
and thus a better resolution should be achieved. By using the blue light 
instead of picking out the blue channel in the matlab script no 
information is lost in the post processing.  
- 
In the Matlab code, optimisation of the parameters for the filters 
applied should be conducted. The goal is to remove the noise and 
artefacts without disturbing the result, i.e. improving the smoothening 
of the surface in a 3D model. 
- 
A moist barrier on the backside of the disc should be applied. The 
moist barrier is to avoid ice formation, which causes movement of the 
disc during freezing and thawing. 
- 
Expand the investigation of clear view of difference in order to obtain 
higher degree of statistical safety. 
==PAGE:52==
7  OPTICAL MICROSCOPE 
 
47 
 
- 
It has been showed, that more ice is present after 48 hour than after 24 
hours. More ice may occur after 72 hours which is why the freezing 
time should be expanded in further experimental work 
- 
It is suggested to find a method of condensing the lighting when a 
glass cover is on the specimen 
==PAGE:53==
8  X-RAY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY 
 
48 
 
8 X-ray computed Tomography 
The CT-scan was chosen because the method is non-destructive and 
captures an image of the air void inside the sample without cutting or 
hammering through the sample. There are some obstacles before conducting the 
experiment with regards to the construction of a freezing device. The 
experimentation was conducted on campus with a micro-CT scanner.  
8.1 Development of method 
8.1.1 Freezing device 
The first consideration in developing the method was to produce a 
freezing device, which could fit into the micro-CT scanner. The source of the x-
ray needs to be close to the sample in order to ensure sufficient resolution, as 
explained in section 3.3. The freezing device used in section 3.1 is not 
applicable for this test setup, due to the physical size of the device. The principle 
of the device was still useable.  
A large specimen was unwanted for this investigation, as it would increase 
the time for the scan to run and lower the resolution because the distance from 
the source to the middle of the sample would get bigger, but the specimen has to 
be big enough to represent a bulk concrete. In cooperation with the micro-CT 
operator, the specimen was chosen to be a cylinder with a diameter of 7 mm and 
a height of 17 mm, see Figure 8-2. The sample was casted in a plastic mould and 
when hardened, transferred to an insulated holder, see Figure 8-2, Figure 8-1 
and Figure 8-3. 
==PAGE:54==
8  X-RAY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY 
 
49 
 
 
 
Figure 8-1: Moulds for the mortar cylinder. 
 
 
Figure 8-2: Example of specimen. The white 
paste on the specimen is thermal conductive 
grease. 
 
 
Figure 8-3: Specimen in the polystyrene 
holder. 
 
 
Figure 8-4: Peltier elements at each end of the 
holder. 
 
 
 
Figure 8-5: Cooling aluminium elements to 
remove heat from the peltier elements. 
 
 
Figure 8-6: Final setup of the freezing device. 
==PAGE:55==
8  X-RAY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY 
 
50 
 
 
The principle of the freezing device was copied from the method with the 
optical microscope. The cylinder was placed in a polystyrene holder, also 
cylindrical, which worked both as a holder and an insulator. In both ends peltier 
elements were placed with the cold side against the sample. The peltier elements 
had a diagonal distance smaller than the diameter of the polystyrene holder, se 
the data sheet appendix 7. The polystyrene holder was shaped in a way, where 
the peltier elements were lowered in the polystyrene and hence insulated. The 
insulation was to avoid ice growth on the peltier element, which hindered the 
element to lower the temperature below the freezing point of water. This can be 
seen on the grey line on Figure 8-7.  
On the warm side of each peltier element a cooling aluminium element 
was placed. The cooling element was used to gain more surface area, from 
where the heat was removed and transferred to the surrounding air. The 
construction of the holder can be seen on Figure 8-3 to Figure 8-6. Thermal 
conductive grease was used to increase the heat transfer between the different 
elements. To check if the setup supplies sufficient effect to keep the ice in the 
sample solid a test setup was made, see Figure 8-6. The goal for the freezing 
device was to get below -10°C, as the micro-CT scanner can get hotter than 
room temperature, approx. 27°C. The freezer has to be well below 0°C to resist 
the increase in surrounding temperature.  
Figure 8-7: Temperature against time measured on the cold side of the peltier element. 
 
The results from the test setup are presented in Figure 8-7, in the legend 
box by: the current – number of peltier elements – possible ventilation. In the 
first few seconds the temperature of the four different setups has the same 
progress to then split up. The first two experiments where conducted, without 
-20
0
20
40
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
Temperature [⁰C] 
Time [min] 
2.2 Ampere - 2 peltier
2.7 Ampere - 4 peltier
2.7 Ampere - 2 peltier -
ventilation
3.3 Ampere - 4 peltier -
ventilation
2.7 Ampere - 4 peltier-
ventilation- no insulation
==PAGE:56==
8  X-RAY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY 
 
51 
 
ventilation at the aluminium element, and with respectively two and four peltier 
elements evenly distributed in at each end. When using two elements the 
temperature at the cold side of the peltier element is stable at approx. 21°C after 
20 min. When using 4 peltier elements and no ventilation the temperature gets 
stable, at an even higher temperature approx. 40°C. This is due to the inability of 
the aluminium element to dispose of the heat. The aluminium element cannot 
dispose of its energy, because the temperature of the surrounding air is the same 
temperature as the aluminium element. As a result of the high temperature in the 
aluminium element and the surrounding air, ventilation is necessary. The 
ventilation provides fresh supplies of room temperature air and the constant flow 
of air can uphold the cooling of the aluminium element. This can be seen in 
Figure 8-7. With 2 peltier elements and ventilation, the peltier elements are cold 
enough to freeze down the sample for the first 90 minutes, after that the 
temperature starts to rise. With 4 peltier elements the rise in temperature does 
not happen. It is concluded from the series of test described above, that a test 
setup with cylindrical mortar specimen, cylindrical polystyrene holder/insulator 
and four peltier elements with ventilation is chosen. The full data for the 
experiment can be seen in appendix 8. 
8.1.2 Sample preparation  
In the setup described above, air voids were difficult to locate during a 
CT-scan. To ensure that it was possible to locate an air void, it was desired to 
create an artificial void near the centre of the sample, which is larger than 
standard air voids. The first attempts were to cast a sample and inject a fluid to 
make an artificial void, see Figure 8-8. Both air and water were investigated as 
fluids. Both air and water are constituents in the mortar, and thus no artefact 
effects will take place. However, either air or water was not heavy enough to 
remove the mortar. When the injection was conducted, water was pressed 
towards the top of the specimen, running along the needle. 
==PAGE:57==
8  X-RAY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY 
 
52 
 
 
Figure 8-8: Injection of water in mortar. 
 
 
The next experiment was to take a frozen water bubble and place it in the 
sample. The water bubble was frozen by using liquid nitrogen also used in 
section 6.1. The water void was released from the needle and plunged in the 
liquid nitrogen. When the water void was completely frozen it settled at the 
bottom at the bowl. Next, the ice void was transferred to a freezer at approx. -
7°C. By raising the temperature of the ice void from liquid nitrogen at -195°C to 
-7°C in the freezer, the argumentation was that the ice bubble at -7°C will 
remain ice during casting and vibration, to then liquefy which leaves an air 
bubble in the mortar without causing early frost damage in the mortar. Early 
frost damage is ice crystals formed before the mortar has hardened, which leaves 
imprints that can change the properties of the mortar [6]. In order to make sure 
that the water has disappeared from the artificial air void, the sample has to be 
dried and re-saturated.   
 
 
==PAGE:58==
8  X-RAY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY 
 
53 
 
8.2 Method 
The experiment has not been fully conducted due to a lower prioritising. 
The method has been prepared and below is the necessary equipment for the 
experiment listed: 
- 
4 peltier elements 15mm x 15mm, Imax=3.9A 
- 
2 aluminium elements 28mm x 28mm 
- 
Thermal conductive grease 
- 
Polystyrene holder, shaped to fit the peltier elements 
- 
Power supply inclusive wiring 
- 
Ventilator  
- 
Micro-CT scanner 
The mortar specimens have been prepared conferring the recipe in section 
5, and casted in cylinders with a diameter of 7mm and a height of 17mm. The 
fresh mortar was poured half way into the moulds and vibrated. Next, the ice 
void was placed in the centre of the mould. The mortar was poured until the 
edge of the mould, and vibrated again. After curing and hardening, the sample 
was placed in a freezer until testing. The micro-CT was prepared by positioning 
the ventilator, and wiring the power supply to the peltier elements. The sample 
was transferred from the freezer to the polystyrene holder and the holder with 
the sample was fitted in the micro-CT quickly. The peltier elements were 
attached and operating. The ventilator was started and the scan can begin. 
8.3 Results and Discussion 
The test as described in section 8.2 was not fully conducted. However a test 
scan has been conducted without the freezing device, which is shown and 
discussed in this section. 
The test run served primarily to see how an image of a mortar specimen 
looked like in a micro-CT scan and if the resolution was sufficient to see ice 
development. The test was conducted with a mortar specimen, who had not been 
frozen before or during the scanning and hence no ice was expected.  
Images from the scan is presented below in Figure 8-9a to Figure 8-9c. The 
images show two slices from the tomography and a 3d image of the sample. On 
the three images, the grey areas are sand grains. The cement matrix is between 
the sand grains. The white spots are unreacted cement. The white colour occurs 
because cement consists of calcium (and other atoms) and calcium has a higher 
atomic number than the other constituents in concrete which leads to a higher 
absorption of the x-rays, as mentioned in section 3.3. Figure 8-9c has the size of 
672 x 451 pixels, and a resolution of 5.4μm per pixel. The resolution is 
measured by help of the scale on Figure 8-9c. 
==PAGE:59==
8  X-RAY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY 
 
54 
 
 
Figure 8-9a: Horizontal slices of mortar 
sample in CT-scan. 
 
Figure 8-9b: 3D image of mortar sample in 
CT-scan. 
 
 
Figure 8-9c: Vertical slice of mortar sample in 
CT-scan. 
 
Figure 8-9d: Position of the entrained air voids 
in the Figure 8-9c. 
 
 
When looking at the three slices in Figure 8-9, there are black areas which 
are air. The three biggest holes in Figure 8-9c are not air entrained voids but 
entrapped air. Areas of a similar or bigger size in Figure 8-9a are also 
characterized as entrapped air. The entrapped air is not relevant in this project, 
as it is entrapped air that has not escaped the mortar during vibration. The 
entrapped air voids are also different from the entrained air voids because they 
are less circular. 
In the images obtained from the operator of the micro-CT, a scale is fitted. 
The size distribution of the air voids can be found by using ImageJ in 
combination with the scale. The circularity and size is used as boundary 
conditions, and ImageJ identifies the voids from the conditions given, see Figure 
8-9d. The diameters of the voids, and thus the size distribution can be 
determined and is shown in Figure 8-10. For the full data set, see appendix 9. 
==PAGE:60==
8  X-RAY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY 
 
55 
 
 
Figure 8-10: Size distribution of air voids 
From the size distribution, it can be concluded that the number of voids 
decreases, as the size of the voids increases. It can also be seen, that a large part 
of the air voids (56%) are in the range between 10mm and 20mm and no voids 
are present in the ranges below. This is because the smaller air voids are difficult 
to detect due to the resolution of the image. It can also be difficult to distinguish 
between the voids close to 10mm. In appendix 9, 11 out of the 22 air voids with 
in the diameter range between 10mm and 20mm, has the diameter of 13.71mm. 
It is unlikely that 50% of the measurements have the exact same diameter. The 
11 air voids with the same diameter supports the problems with detecting and 
distinguishing the air voids close to 10mm or below.   
From the pore size distribution it can be deduced, that the resolution of the 
image is not sufficient for this investigation of air voids. Even if the bigger voids 
are investigated, the resolution is not sufficient to see the ice formation on the 
air void wall. As a precaution to the pore size, the analysis is made on a 2 
dimensional image representing a 3 dimensional system. It is improbable that 
the 2 dimensional image intersects the air voids at the widest point of the air 
void. A result of this is measured diameters of the air void which are lower than 
the real diameters of the air voids. 
It was possible to obtain a better resolution for the second experiment with a 
frozen sample. The operator of the micro CT estimated that it was possible to 
halve the size of one pixel and obtain a better the resolution by expanding the 
time for the scan to run. This will provide a resolution at approx. 2.7μm per 
pixels. But this resolution is probably not sufficient to identify the ice formation, 
depending on the size of the ice formed.  
The next step in exploring x-rays is to try nano-CT scanning. As the name 
implies the resolution is at nano level as oppose to the micro-CT at micro level. 
At the Carniege Mellon University a nano-CT scanner can perform 16 nm per 
pixels for a 16 µm field of view or 65 nm pixels for a 65 µm field of view [26]. 
0
5
10
15
20
25
Number of voids [-] 
Diameter of air void [μm] 
==PAGE:61==
8  X-RAY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY 
 
56 
 
At this level the ice formation could be possible. However manufacturing a 
sample with a size suitable for a nano-CT can be a challenge. The size of the 
sample is recommended to be within the field of view [26]. In samples with a 
high atomic number, the material makes the x-rays attenuate, and a sample even 
smaller than with a smaller field of view may be required [26]. 
 
 
==PAGE:62==
9  DISCUSSION 
 
57 
 
9 Discussion 
Three methods have been investigated in this project. The methods have 
been discussed in their respective sections 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3. In this section the 
methods are summarised and discussed.  
The SEM has not been found suitable for this type of investigation. It is 
estimated that the quenching of the specimens is too slow for the ice formation 
to happen instantaneous. The quick freezing of the specimens are a precondition 
for the method to provide true results. This is also the reason for the SEM image 
was deprioritised and at the end deselected. 
The optical microscopy is the method which has reached the furthest. 
From the method, a stack of images is joined into a single image. Ice is seen on 
the image by visual inspection, and a method for calculating the difference 
between two stacks of images is determined. There are still issues needing to be 
resolved, listed at section 7.3.3. The 3D model is the most important on the list. 
The model provides excellent spatial information of the void, but the images 
captured by the custom build microscope have noise disturbing the 3D model. 
Images captured by a commercial microscope provide a better 3D model. The 
commercial microscope does not show the same noise as the custom build 
microscope. The results from the commercial microscope combined with the 
detection of ice with the custom build microscope provide belief, that it is 
achievable to produce 3D models of higher quality.   
A test scanning was conducted by the micro CT-scanner. The resolution of 
the produced images is not sufficient to detect ice formation. The low resolution 
results in that a full experiment is deprioritised and not conducted. The next step 
is to try a nano CT-scanner where the resolution is higher than the micro CT 
scanner. With the nano CT scanner the specimens needs to be even smaller than 
the one used for the microscope. The size of the sample can create problem 
regarding representativity of a bulk of concrete. A freezing device for the 
==PAGE:63==
9  DISCUSSION 
 
58 
 
sample is made ready and tested to conduct a full experiment in the nano CT-
scanner. 
Of the three methods investigated, the SEM has been discarded. The 
results are not trusted as valid results. The two other methods show suitability 
for methods investigating ice formation of air voids in concrete, although issues 
are mentioned at both the methods. The optical microscope has the largest issues 
regarding the quality of the image captured. The CT-scan has not been 
conducted due to insufficient resolution, why it would be interesting to see if it 
is possible to see ice formation by the help of a nano CT-scanner. 
It would be advantageous to have two methods that can show ice 
formation in concrete air voids. With two methods the results can be verified by 
each other and thus the reliability of the results can be improved.  
 
==PAGE:64==
10  CONCLUSION 
 
59 
 
10 Conclusion 
 
The purpose of this project is to locate and investigate methods that are 
applicable for investigation of ice formation in the concrete air voids. 
It is concluded that SEM is not an applicable method for investigating ice 
formation in concrete air voids. The specimens are frozen at -7°C and to fixate 
the remaining unfrozen water in the sample, the method acquires the specimens 
to be quenched in liquid nitrogen. The quenching is not fast enough to solidify 
the unfrozen water without the water relocates during solidification. 
The optical microscopy has shown promising results. A 2D image is 
joined from a stack of images with different field of depth. By visual inspection 
on the 2D image ice has been located. A method has been developed to find the 
clear view of difference from where, it can be determined if there is a difference 
between two comparable stacks of images. The quality of the 3D model is not 
satisfactory. There is noise on the images captured with the custom build 
microscope, which distorts the quality of the image. The quality of the 3D model 
with test images from a commercial microscope is improved compared to the 
3D model from the custom build microscope 
The resolution obtained by the micro CT scanner is concluded not to be 
sufficient for investigating ice formation in the air voids of the concrete. The 
complete experiment is not conducted because of the low resolution. The 
method was non-destructive, which leads to an investigation of the air voids 
without creating artefacts during preparation and investigation. In the 
succeeding research, the specimen can be investigated with a nano CT scanner, 
which provides a better resolution than the micro CT scanner.  
 
==PAGE:65==
    11 BIBLIOGRAPHY 
 
    60 
 
11 Bibliography 
 
1]  
“Glosby.com,” [Online]. Available: 
https://en.glosbe.com/it/en/concrescere. [Accessed 13 05 2016]. 
2]  
P. K. Mehta and P. J. M. Monteiro, Concrete - Microstructure, Properties, 
and Materials, McGraw-Hill education, 2014.  
3]  
D. J. Corr, M. C. G. Juenger, P. J. M. Monteiro and J. Bastacky, 
“Investigating entrained air voids and Portland cement hydration with low-
temperature scanning electron microscopy,” Cement & Concrete composition, 
vol. 26, pp. 1007-1012, 2004.  
4]  
D. J. Corr, P. J. M. Monteiro and J. Bastacky, “Micrscopic characterization 
of ice morphology in entrained air voids,” ACI materials journal, vol. 99, no. 2, 
pp. 190-195, 2002.  
5]  
P. J. M. Monteiro, A. I. Rashed, J. Bastacky and T. L. Hayes, “Ice in 
cement paste as analysed in the low-temperature scanning electron microscope.,” 
Cement and Concrete reseach, vol. 19, pp. 306-314, 1989.  
6]  
P. K. Mehta and P. J. M. Monteiro, Concrete - Microstructure, properties, 
and materials, 5 ed., McGraw-Hill Education, 2014.  
7]  
T. C. Powers, “The air requirement of frost-resistant concrete,” Research 
laboratories of the portland cement association bulletin 33, vol. 29, 1949.  
8]  
T. C. Powers, “Freezing effects in concrete,” Durability of Concrete, vol. 
47, pp. 1-11, 1975.  
M. T. Hasholt, “Air void structure and frost resistance: a challenge to 
Power’s spacing factor,” Materials and Structure, vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 911-923, 
==PAGE:66==
    11 BIBLIOGRAPHY 
 
    61 
 
9]  2014.  
10] 
D. B. Murphy and M. W. Davidson, Fundamentals of light microscopy and 
electronic imaging, Wiley-Blackwell, 2013.  
11] 
D. J. Stokes, Principles and practice of variable pressure/environmental 
scanning electron microscope (VP-ESEM), John Wiley & Sons Ltd., 2008.  
12] 
The University of Liverpool, “Electron -atom interaction,” [Online]. 
Available: http://www.matter.org.uk/tem/electron_atom_interaction/x-
ray_and_auger.htm. [Accessed 02 05 2016]. 
13] 
Greg Pilgrim, “Institute of optics,” 2011. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.optics.rochester.edu/workgroups/cml/opt307/spr11/greg/. [Accessed 
24 03 2016]. 
14] 
W. A. Kalender, Computed Tomography - Fundamentals, System 
technology, Image quality, Application, Publicis Publishing, 2011.  
15] 
G. Van der Plaats, Medical X-ray techniques in diagnostic radiology, 
Martinu Nijhoff publishers, 1980.  
16] 
J. K. M. Sanders and B. K. Hunter, Modern NMR spectroscopy, Oxford 
University Press, 1993.  
17] 
J. M. Vinther and N. C. Nielsen, Notes on NMR spectroscopy: an 
introduction to the principles of NMR spectroscopy, Aarhus, 2012.  
18] 
K. Mølhave, Conversation regarding NMR, 2016.  
19] 
Danish Standard Association, “DS/EN 196-1: Method of testing cement - 
Part 1: determination of strength.,” 2005. 
20] 
Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility - Office of Science 
Education, “The periodic table of elements,” [Online]. Available: 
http://education.jlab.org/itselemental/ele007.html. [Accessed 04 04 2016]. 
21] 
David Mogk - Montana State University, “research education - equilibria - 
phaserule,” 29 05 2012. [Online]. Available: 
http://serc.carleton.edu/research_education/equilibria/phaserule.html. [Accessed 
10 05 2016]. 
Electron Microscope Sciences, “Digital 3D microscope,” Electron 
==PAGE:67==
    11 BIBLIOGRAPHY 
 
    62 
 
22] Microscope Sciences, 2016. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.emsdiasum.com/microscopy/products/magnifier/digital-
microscope.aspx. [Accessed 29 05 2016]. 
23] 
K. U. Barthel, “Imagj.net,” 03 12 2012. [Online]. Available: 
http://imagej.net/plugins/volume-viewer.html. [Accessed 12 05 2016]. 
24] 
Mathworks, “Matlab documentation and help of gaussian filter,” 
Mathworks, [Online]. Available: 
http://se.mathworks.com/help/images/ref/fspecial.html?s_tid=gn_loc_drop. 
[Accessed 29 05 2016]. 
25] 
Mathworks, “Matlab documentation and help medfilt2,” Mathworks, 
[Online]. Available: 
http://www.mathworks.com/matlabcentral/fileexchange/30853-field-mapping-
toolbox/content/medfilt3.m. [Accessed 29 05 2016]. 
26] 
X-ray computed tomography facility, “Nano-CT instrument,” [Online]. 
Available: http://www.cmu.edu/me/xctf/facility/index.html. [Accessed 20 05 
2016]. 
27] 
NASA's Science Mission Directorate, “NASA,” [Online]. Available: 
http://missionscience.nasa.gov/ems/09_visiblelight.html. [Accessed 25 05 2016]. 
28] 
F. Krumeich, “ETH Zürich,” [Online]. Available: 
http://www.microscopy.ethz.ch/properties.htm. [Accessed 25 05 2016]. 
29] 
A. Last, “X-ray optics - x-ray microscopy,” [Online]. Available: 
http://www.x-ray-
optics.de/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=118&Itemid=131&l
ang=en. [Accessed 31 05 2016]. 
 
 
 
