==PAGE:1==
1
Analysis of [Ru(bpy)3]2+ data from XFEL experiments
Master’s thesis by
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
June 4th 2016
Academic advisors:
Kristoﬀer Haldrup
Klaus Braagaard Møller
Martin Meedom Nielsen
Master’s thesis submitted to
the department of Physics
and the department of Chemistry
at the Technical University of Denmark
Liquid jet
Detector
==PAGE:2==
Analysis of [Ru(bpy)3]2+ data from XFEL
experiments
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Academic advisors:
Kristoﬀer Haldrup
Klaus Braagaard Møller
Martin Meedom Nielsen
Saturday 4th June, 2016
Master’s thesis submitted to
the department of Physics
and the department of Chemistry
at the Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
Preface
This thesis describes the results of 5 months work, and submitted to the depart-
ment of Chemistry and the department of Physics, Technical University of Denmark
(DTU), in order to obtain the Master’s degree in Advanced and Applied Chemistry.
The work was carried out from January-June 2016 under the joint supervision of
Kristoﬀer Haldrup (DTU Physics), Klaus B. Møller (DTU Chemistry) and Martin
M. Nielsen (DTU Physics). In this regard, I express my sincere gratitude to Kristof-
fer, Klaus and Martin for the opportunity to write my thesis as a joint work between
the Physics and Chemistry department at DTU.
The work is based on experimental work performed at the Linac Coherent Light
Source (LCLS) at SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory in February 2014. I did
not participate in these experiments, but during the work of this thesis, in April
2016, I participated in a similar experiment at the SPring-8 Angstrom Compact free
electron Laser (SACLA) in Japan, which deepened my knowledge relating to the
experimental part extensively.
The prerequisites to read this thesis include basic knowledge within the ﬁelds of
chemistry and physics taught at the university level. However, some basics of x-ray
science are described in the thesis.
The starting point of the work carried out, is the measured data after various
reductions, corrections and other preparations as described brieﬂy in the thesis. The
calculations involving the analysis of the data and the corresponding illustrations
were carried out using MATLAB® Release 2015a, The MathWorks, Inc., Natick,
Massachusetts, United States.
Finally, I would like to thank my academic advisors, and Kristoﬀer Haldrup in
particular, who spent many hours explaining and discussing the theories and chal-
lenges related to this work. Furthermore, I want to express my gratitude to the rest
of the Molecular Movies Group of Elisa Biasin, Mads Laursen, Frederik Beyer Kjær
Hansen, Peter Vester and Tobias C.B. Harlang for being great colleagues and letting
me feel very welcome in the group.
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
page i of 86
==PAGE:4==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
Resum´e
Denne afhandling, analyserer tidsopløst røntgenspredningsdata af en fotoeksitering
af [Ru(bpy)3]2+(bpy = 2,2′-bipyridin) i vandig opløsning fra et eksperiment med
røntgen-fri-elektron-laseren (XFEL) ved SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory i
Californien. Den eksperimentelle data giver en mulighed for at følge eksiteringen i
løbet af de første picosekunder af processen med en tidsopløselighed p˚a ∼100 fs.
Afhandlingen beskriver i detaljer, hvordan de bagvedliggende metoder er anvendt
i analysen. Metoderne er anvendt til at undersøge de strukturelle forandringer for det
opløste molekyle samt de omkringliggende solventmolekylers reaktion, i forbindelse
med fotoeksiteringen. Metoderne bygger p˚a en ’ﬁtte’ procedure ved brug af tre
forskellige modeller for strukturen, som i rapporten er kaldt den simple DFT, den
relativistiske DFT og den manuelt opførte (constructed) model. Den simple DFT
og den relativistiske DFT model, er baseret p˚a kvantemekaniske simuleringer af de
strukturelle ændringer for [Ru(bpy)3]2+, og forudsiger stort set ingen ændring i Ru-N
bindingslængderne (0,001 ˚A), men primært ændringer for de interne bindingslængder
i bpy-liganderne. Den opførte model, er ”manuelt” opført, med det resultat, at Ru-N
bindingslængderne bliver 0,03 ˚A kortere. Modellerne tager derudover højde for van-
dets reaktion, der bliver varmere og f˚ar større massefylde, hvilket indg˚ar i modellen
ved brug af eksperimentelt m˚alte temperatur- og massefylde-forskelle af rent vand.
Resultaterne viser en tydelig reaktion fra prøven efter fotoeksiteringen, og de in-
dikerer en forøgelse af elektrondensitet i prøven, svarende til en sammentrækning af
kemiske bindinger i prøven. Derudover, viser resultaterne en temperaturforøgelse p˚a
∼0,1 K, inden for de første 3,4 ps efter eksiteringen. Ud over dette viser resultaterne
en forøgelse i massefylde, ∼0,03-0,07 kg/m3 afhængigt af modellen, hvilket indikerer,
at nogle af de tættestliggende vandmolekyler ”presses” ud blandt de omkringliggende
vandmolekyler p˚a ps tidsskala. Den resulterende forøgelse i massefylde diskuteres dog
i afhandlingen, hvorvidt den er troværdig, idet modellen ikke tager højde for sam-
menhængen mellem ruthenium complexet og de tættestliggende vandmolekyler. De
tre forskellige modeller til beskrivelsen af de strukturelle forandringer i molekylet,
giver meget sammenlignelige ﬁts (χ2 =3,85; 3,68; 3,40), og en entydig afgørelse af den
mest sandsynlige model er ikke opn˚aet. Modellerne mangler bidraget fra molekyle-
solvent vekselvirkningen, hvilket ifølge analysen ikke kan negligeres.
page ii of 86
==PAGE:5==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
Abstract
This thesis analyzes time-resolved x-ray scattering data on the photoexcitation of
aqueous [Ru(bpy)3]2+(bpy = 2,2′-bipyridene) obtained from the X-ray Free Electron
Laser (XFEL) at SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory in California. The experi-
mental data provides the opportunity to follow the photoexcitation within the ﬁrst
picoseconds with a time resolution of ∼100 fs.
The thesis contains a detailed description of the methods that are used in the
analysis. These methods are used to investigate the structural changes of the solute
molecule and the solvent response upon photoexcitation. The method of choice is
a ﬁtting procedure using three diﬀerent models for the solute structural changes,
in the report referred to as the simple DFT, the relativistic DFT and the manu-
ally constructed model. The simple DFT, and the relativistic DFT model are based
on quantum mechanical simulations of the structural changes of [Ru(bpy)3]2+, and
suggest basically no change in the Ru-N bond lengths (0.001 ˚A), but primarily sug-
gests changes of the bond lengths within the bpy-ligands. The constructed model
is a ”manually” constructed model, in which the resulting structural changes are a
0.03 ˚A shortening of the Ru-N bond lengths. The changes in the water solvent is
modeled as an increase in temperature and density using a temperature and density
diﬀerence signal obtained from experiments of neat water.
The results show a direct response of the sample following the photoexcitation,
and indicate an increase of electron density corresponding to a contraction of bond
lengths within the sample. Furthermore, the results show an increase in tempera-
ture of ∼0.1 K within the ﬁrst 3.4 ps of the excitation. Besides this, the results show
an increase of the solvent density, ∼0.03-0.07 kg/m3, depending on the model, in-
dicating that some of the closest lying water molecules are ”pushed” into the bulk
solvent at ps time scales. However, the validity of the resulting increase in density
is discussed in the thesis, since the model does not include the correlation between
the solute and nearest solvation molecules. The three diﬀerent models used for the
solute structural changes provide very similar results for the ﬁts (χ2 =3.85, 3.68,
3.40), and a determination of the most probable model is not feasible. The models
lack the contribution of the solute-solvent cross interaction, which, based on the
analysis, cannot be neglected.
page iii of 86
==PAGE:6==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
Contents
Introduction
1
Background
2
The interaction of electromagnetic radiation and matter
. . . . . . . . . .
2
Investigating molecules with x-rays . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
X-ray scattering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
Background of [Ru(bpy)3]2+ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
Experiment
14
Experimental set up
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
Experiment execution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
Scattering data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
Methods
22
Scaling of the data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
The ﬁtting approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
Components of the models describing the scattering signals . . . . . . . . .
25
Description of the solute structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
The simple DFT structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
The relativistic DFT structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
The constructed structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
Comparison with literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
SVD analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
Basic principles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
Full data decomposition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
Reduced data decomposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
Background decomposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
SVD as a tool for background subtraction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
Clean data decomposition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
Noise estimation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
The polynomial method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
The wavelet method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
Analysis, results and discussion
54
Building up the model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
Changing the solute structure description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
Analysis of the temporal evolution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
Shortcoming of the models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
Summary of analysis and results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
Theoretical calculations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
Conclusions
76
Future work
77
Contents
page iv of 86
==PAGE:7==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
Introduction
Since the discovery of X-rays in 1895 [1], they have been used extensively to study
the structure and dynamics of matter. Recently, [Reference] a new source of informa-
tion on X-ray science has become available, namely the (hard) X-ray Free Electron
Laser (XFEL). Experiments at such a facility provide an opportunity to follow chem-
ical dynamics with a time resolution down to femtosecond (10−15 s) resolution. This
yields unprecedented detail and insight into chemical reactions as they unfold.
In this work, x-ray scattering data obtained from one of these sources, the
Linac Coherent Light Source (LCLS), provides new information related to the struc-
tural changes associated with the photoexcitation of a ruthenium based metal com-
plex. The particular molecule is 2,2′-tris-bipyridine ruthenium(II), referred to as
[Ru(bpy)3]2+throughout this thesis. This complex serves as a model system for a
potential photosensitizer in e.g. solar cells.
The ﬁrst section of this thesis, describes aspects of the background theory asso-
ciated with the interaction between electromagnetic radiation and matter, in partic-
ular the scattering of x-rays from a given material. In addition to this, relevant work
from previous studies of [Ru(bpy)3]2+is presented. Following this, the experiment
behind the data is described along with the preliminary data reduction performed,
before the analysis can take place. The third section describes, the methods used in
the data analysis to perform a scaling, to calculate a best ﬁt, to make a background
subtraction and to estimate the noise. The ﬁnal section, analyze and discuss the
results of this work.
Introduction
page 1 of 86
==PAGE:8==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
Background
We begin with an introduction to the subject of using electromagnetic radiation
to study materials. In particular, aspects of the theory related to the interaction
between x-rays and matter are described. Furthermore, the section describes the
knowledge obtained from previous studies of the molecule under investigation, re-
lated to this analysis.
The interaction of electromagnetic radiation and matter
Electromagnetic radiation consists of photons traveling at the speed of light c through
space. Due to the wave-particle duality we can also describe electromagnetic radi-
ation as oscillations of electric and magnetic ﬁelds propagating through space. The
energy E of the photon is proportional to its frequency ν and inversely proportional
to its wavelength λ. Speciﬁcally,
E = hν = h c
λ
(1)
where h = 6.626·10−34 J·s is Plank’s constant. Whenever charged particles are accel-
erated, they produce electromagnetic waves, and similarly, electromagnetic radiation
interact with charged particles. The electromagnetic spectrum categorizes the elec-
tromagnetic wave according to its wavelength and energy. Below, Figure 1 shows
the diﬀerent categories of electromagnetic radiation according to their wavelength
and energy range.
The wavelength of electromagnetic waves spans from the very long radio waves
of several 100 meters, to very short gamma waves comparable to the width of atomic
nuclei. X-rays have a wavelength comparable to the size atoms and chemical bonds,
making x-rays ideal to study structural changes of molecules. Energetically, the long
radio waves are low in energy. The energy of electromagnetic waves increases as
the wavelength becomes shorter. X-rays are considered highly energetic and capable
of ionizing molecules or breaking chemical bonds at certain energy levels. Similarly,
visible and ultraviolet radiation is equivalent to the electronic energy levels in atoms,
and is therefore capable of exciting electrons in atoms and molecules. Infrared waves
have an energy comparable to the vibrational levels of molecules, and might be used
to excite a speciﬁc vibrational state of a molecule. Finally, the longer microwaves
are energetically similar to the rotational levels of molecules making them useful
for rotational excitations. Because energy levels are quantized in molecules, the
energy of the electromagnetic radiation must equal the energy of that level in order
to excite a given molecule. In this way, the choice of energy and wavelength of
Background
page 2 of 86
==PAGE:9==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
Figure 1: The electromagnetic spectrum showing the diﬀerent types of radiation according
to wavelength and respective energy range. Furthermore, examples on the size scale of
the wavelength are shown, along with molecular processes of the respective energy.
the electromagnetic radiation depends on the desired material and process under
investigation in a given experiment. In this work, we used visible light to create an
excited electronic state of the ruthenium complex, and investigated the structural
changes using x-rays. When considering the size of molecules and energy of x-ray
radiation, the expression in equation (1) is more convenient in the form:
E [keV] = 12.3984
λ [˚A]
In this way, it is easy to see, that an x-ray photon with a wavelength of 1 ˚A has an
energy of 12.3984 keV [2]. Since, we are using x-rays to study [Ru(bpy)3]2+, we will
now look deeper into the interaction between x-rays and matter.
Investigating molecules with x-rays
In this section, we describe the various interactions between x-rays and matter. Here,
the diﬀerent types of interaction are described brieﬂy, and the associated x-ray tech-
niques.
X-rays can interact with matter in several ways. Below, Figure 2 shows the possi-
ble interactions between x-rays and a given solid or liquid material. The interactions
might happen simultaneously, but the dominant process is primarily, determined by
the energy of the incoming photon. The electromagnetic spectrum above shows, that
x-ray radiation is a relatively high energetic radiation, and therefore x-ray radiation
Investigating molecules with x-rays
page 3 of 86
==PAGE:10==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
penetrates into the material and may interact with all electrons within the material,
and not just the surface layer.
Figure 2: A schematic showing the possible interactions between an incoming x-ray pho-
ton and matter. When interacting, the photon is either scattered (elastically or inelasti-
cally) or absorbed by the material. Upon absorption of a photon either an electron or a
lower energy photon will reemit from the material. If no interaction occurs, the photon
is transmitted. Figure from [2]
When an incoming x-ray photon reaches a given material or substance, the pho-
ton is either absorbed, scattered or transmitted. Many photons are in fact trans-
mitted, i.e. not interacting with the sample, because of the empty space between
the electrons and nuclei. However, if the photon is absorbed, then this will result
in emission of either an electron or a lower energy x-ray photon. Emission of an
electron is referred to as Auger emission, and emission of a lower energy photon is
called ﬂuorescence. Since the energy levels of the numerous diﬀerent electrons are
quantized, the energy of an incoming photon must have a speciﬁc energy in order to
be absorbed by the molecule. On the other hand, independently of the energy, the
photon might be scattered, either elastically or inelastically. An elastically scattered
photon is deﬁned as Thomson scattering, and an inelastically scattered photon is
referred to as Compton scattering. Scattering of photons occurs at continuous ener-
gies, but more in some directions than others depending on the sample. Besides this,
the Thomson scattering dominates at lower energies of the incoming x-ray photon
and the Compton scattering gradually increases with increasing energy.
Investigating molecules with x-rays
page 4 of 86
==PAGE:11==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
Numerous diﬀerent x-ray techniques are used to study atoms and molecules, and
they are primarily categorized according to the type of interaction with x-rays. The
X-ray Absorption Spectroscopy (XAS) techniques use the amount of absorbed x-ray
photons to study a given sample, whereas the X-ray Emission Spectroscopy tech-
niques make use of the reemitted photons to gain information about a given sample.
Similarly, the scattering techniques, such as Wide Angle X-ray Scattering (WAXS)
and Small Angle X-ray Scattering (SAXS), detect the bent x-ray photons at various
angles to the incoming x-ray beam. For this study, the WAXS technique has been
used, which is also called X-ray Diﬀuse Scattering (XDS).
X-ray scattering
Since WAXS is the basis of the experimental results considered in this thesis, we will
now describe the scattering processes in greater detail. Recall, that the scattering of
an x-ray photon might happen either elastically (Thomson) or inelastic (Compton).
From an XDS experiment the observed signal will contain contributions from both
Thomson and Compton scattering. To begin with, we describe the coherent Thom-
son scattering, and later we move on to the incoherent Compton scattering.
In the classical picture, the elastic scattering might be visualized as an interac-
tion between the electric ﬁeld of the incoming x-ray photon and the electron, that
as a result starts oscillating. When the electron is accelerated, electromagnetic radi-
ation is formed, which propagates as a spherical wave from the electron oscillating
with the same energy and frequency as the incoming x-ray. The scattering is there-
fore, considered as elastic. Below, Figure 3 shows the classical description with the
incoming x-ray illustrated as a plane wave propagating along z and the radiated
spherical waves originating from the oscillating electron.
Figure 3: A schematic of the classical description of the elastic scattering of an x-ray by an
electron. The x-ray is illustrated as a plane wave propagating along z, which accelerates
an electron, illustrated in green. As a result, spherical waves of x-ray radiation are formed.
For clarity, the spheres are shown for the positive values of y only. Figure from [3]
X-ray scattering
page 5 of 86
==PAGE:12==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
For clarity, only the lower part of the sphere is drawn. In [3] they evaluate the
radiated ﬁeld at an observation point X, but we will leave that out for now, and
deduct that the ability of an electron to coherently scatter an x-ray photon is related
to its charge e, mass m, speed c and the permittivity constant ε0 = 8.854 · 10−12 F
m.
The ability of an electron to scatter x-rays is deﬁned as the Thomson scattering
length r0, which in the classical picture might be considered as a measure of the
radius of an electron observed by the incoming x-ray.
r0 =
 
e2
4πε0mc2
!
= 2.28 · 10−5 ˚A
From the scattering from a single electron, the system is expanded into a larger
system of electrons, when considering atoms. Each of the electrons are described
by a wave function as described by quantum mechanics and to ﬁnd the coherent
scattering from an atom, the Fourier transform of the electron density multiplied
by the Thomson scattering length r0 is considered. However, instead of solving the
Schr¨odinger equation, the electron density of a given atom, is estimated as a distri-
bution of charge ρ(⃗r) around the nucleus. The ability of an atom to scatter x-rays,
or the scattering amplitude, is then described by the atomic form factor fatom, which
is the Fourier transform of the electron density multiplied by r0.
fatom(⃗Q) = −r0
Z
ρ(⃗r) · ei⃗Q⃗rd⃗r
where ⃗Q is the scattering vector deﬁned as the diﬀerence between the incoming wave
vector ⃗k and scattered wave vector ⃗k′ of the x-rays with the length given by
⃗Q
 =
⃗k −⃗k′ = 4π
λ sin θ
(2)
where λ is the x-ray wavelength and θ is the scattering angle, as shown below.
Figure 4: Illustration of the Q vector. The incoming x-ray with wavelength λ, illustrated
as plane waves, are scattered by a 2-electron system separated by r. The incoming x-ray
is described by the wave vector k and the scattered wave by k′. The Q vector is deﬁned
as the diﬀerence between the two. Figure from [3]
X-ray scattering
page 6 of 86
==PAGE:13==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
When expanding the system into a molecule, the scattering is described by a
system of atoms each described from their respective atomic form factors. When
considering the expanded system in the classical picture, several charge densities
interact with the incoming x-rays, forming spherical waves of radiation, that will
interact constructively and destructively. From the atomic form factor fatom the
measured intensity I(Q) is calculated using the Debye equation, under the assump-
tion that the molecules on average are orientated in all directions:
I(Q)orient,av =
N
X
i,j=1
fifj
sin(Qri,j)
Qri,j
(3)
where fj denotes the complex conjugation of fi.
Recall, that the form factor of an atom fi is the Fourier transform of its real
valued electron density ρ(⃗r). By properties of the Fourier transform this implies
that the form factor fi of an atom satisﬁes fi(⃗Q) = fi(−⃗Q), that is, the form factor
is symmetric around the nuclei with a complex conjugation. Under the assumption
that the electron density ρ satisﬁes ρ(⃗r) = ρ(−⃗r) for all ⃗r, that is, the electron
density is radially symmetric around the nuclei, the atomic form factors fi are also
real valued. The above equation (3) may then be written as
I(Q)orient,av =
N
X
i,j=1
fifj
sin(Qri,j)
Qri,j
(4)
= f 2
1 + f 2
2 + . . . + f 2
N
+ 2f1f2
sin(Qr1,2)
Qr1,2
+ 2f1f3
sin(Qr1,3)
Qr1,3
+ 2f1f4
sin(Qr1,3)
Qr1,3
+ . . . + 2f1fN
sin(Qr1,N)
Qr1,N
+ 2f2f3
sin(Qr2,3)
Qr2,3
+ 2f2f4
sin(Qr2,4)
Qr2,4
+ . . . + 2f2fN
sin(Qr2,N)
Qr2,N
+ . . .
+ 2fN−1fN
sin(QrN−1,N)
QrN−1,N
In order to reduce calculation time, the formula is implemented in MATLAB® as:
I(Q)orient,av =
N
X
n=1

f 2
n + 2
N
X
k=n+1
fnfk
sin(Qrn,k)
Qrn,k

(5)
by Martin Meedom Nielsen in 2005 and later modiﬁed by Kristoﬀer Haldrup and
Elisa Biasin. Each of the atomic form factors fn are approximated analytically, using
the expression
f(Q) = C +
4
X
i=1
Aie−
1
16π2 BiQ2
(6)
where the coeﬃcients Ai, Bi and C are the so called Cromer-Mann coeﬃcients [4].
X-ray scattering
page 7 of 86
==PAGE:14==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
Now, we move on to the description of the incoherent Compton scattering. Some
of the incoming energy from the x-ray photon may be transferred to the electron with
the result of a scattered photon of less energy than initially. This inelastic scattering,
or Compton scattering results in a scattered photon with a larger wavelength than
the incoming photon, where the change in wavelength is deﬁned as
λscattered −λincoming = ∆λ = λC (1 −cos θ)
(7)
with θ as the scattering angle, and the Compton scattering length λC = 2.43·10−2 ˚A.
This way, the diﬀerence in wavelength increases with increasing incoming photon
energy and with increasing scattering angle. However, in most experiments, the ef-
fect is very small.
The inelastic scattering depends only on the number of electrons and electronic
conﬁguration within an atom, and not the interatomic distances. Therefore, Comp-
ton scattering carries no structural information. The inelastic contribution for the
elements of atomic numbers 2-36 has been approximated analytically by Hajdu et
al. [5] to the expression:
Iinelastic(Q) =

Z −Ielastic
Z

·

1 −M

e−Ks −e−Ls 
(8)
where K, L and M are ﬁtting parameters, uniquely determined for each atomic
element. The elastic intensity Ielastic is approximated from the atomic form factors
using the expression in 6. Similarly, for the atomic numbers 20-95, work by P´alink´as
et al.[6] found the analytical parameterization:
Iinelastic(Q) = Z
"
1 −
a
(1 + bs)c
#
(9)
where a, b and c are individual atomic parameters. In both equation 8 and 9, Z is
the atomic number, and s = Q
4π.
In this work, since the inelastic scattering is independent of molecular geometry,
the expressions are only included in the calculations of the scaling process described
later in this thesis.
All in all, the elastic scattering, or Thomson scattering, is the most dominant
scattering process, and therefore dominates the observed scattering signals. Since
the Thomson scattering depends on the geometry of the molecule, it is very useful
to investigate the structural changes of molecules. However, the Compton scattering
also needs to be taken into account, when analyzing the measured scattering signals.
X-ray scattering
page 8 of 86
==PAGE:15==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
Background of [Ru(bpy)3]2+
The molecule under investigation in this thesis, is the complex tris-2,2’-bipyridine-
ruthenium(II), referred to as [Ru(bpy)3]2+ throughout this thesis. In the following
section, the motivation to study this molecule is described, along with a brief de-
scription of the structure, the relevant electronic transition and related previous
studies of this molecule.
[Ru(bpy)3]2+is one of several potential candidates as a photosensitizer in a va-
riety of ﬁelds, such as photovoltaics [7], dye-sensitized solar cells [8][9], electro-
chemiluminescence cells [10],[11] and light emitting diodes [12]. Also, ruthenium
complexes show redox activity in both the ground and excited states which makes
them usable as redox agents for photoinduced electron transfer reactions [13],[14].
The ground state structure of [Ru(bpy)3]2+consists of the ruthenium atom placed
at the center surrounded by three bipyridine ligands bonded via the nitrogen atoms.
Based on X-ray diﬀraction measurements [15], [16] of [Ru(bpy)3](PF6)2, the ground
state geometry consists of a 2.056 ˚A Ru-N bond length uniformly for all 6 central
bonds. Furthermore, the crystal structure shows the N-Ru-N angle within the same
ligand to be 78.8◦, which gives rise to a distortion of the otherwise octahedral sym-
metry. This distortion originates from the steric constraint from the bridging C-C
bond between the pyridine rings. The symmetry includes three 2-fold rotational
axes going through the bridging carbon bonds and one 3-fold rotational axis going
straight through the metal center. In order to visualize the symmetry, think of the
shape of a 3-pronged propeller [17]. The overall symmetry of the molecule there-
fore, becomes the D3, and Figure 5 below, shows this geometry of the ground state
structure.
Figure 5: Ground state geometry of [Ru(bpy)3]2+based on crystallography experiments.
To the left, a schematic of the geometry is shown with the three C2 rotation axes.
Together with a C3 axis right through the center of the ruthenium atom, the overall
symmetry becomes D3. To the right, the geometry is shown as a ball-and-stick model
with colorcode: cyan, Ru; blue, N; black, C; white, H.
Background of [Ru(bpy)3]2+
page 9 of 86
==PAGE:16==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
The bonds between the ruthenium atom and the nitrogen atoms are formed
from the overlap between the 4d orbitals on the metal and the σ and π orbitals
from the ligands as in an ML6 complex, with M representing a transition metal,
and L representing a ligand. However, because of the D3 symmetry, the octahedral
splitting of the d-orbitals (eg and t2g) are further split into a total of three levels
with e, a1 and e representations. Below, Figure 6 shows the molecular orbital (MO)
diagrams of a typical octahedral complex and of [Ru(bpy)3]2+with the D3 symmetry.
Excitation from the Highest Occupied Molecular Orbital (HOMO), to the Lowest
Unoccupied Molecular Orbital (LUMO) corresponds to the transition of an electron
from a ruthenium d-orbital at the a1 level to a bipyridine ligand π-orbital at the a2
level, giving rise to the Metal-to-Ligand-Charge-Transfer (MLCT).
4d
4d
π
π
π∗
Figure 6: To the left, an MO diagram of a typical octahedral complex with bonding
between the d-orbitals on the metal and the π-orbitals on the ligand. To the right, an
MO diagram of [Ru(bpy)3]2+with D3 symmetry. Adapted ﬁgure from [18]
The photoinduced change in electronic conﬁguration should show consequences
for the structure of the molecule. Upon the excitation, a depopulation of the metal
orbital and population of a ligand orbital should lead to a modiﬁcation of the Ru-
N bond length. However, depending on a localization [19],[20],[21] or delocalization
[22],[23],[24] of the electron on the ligand, the modiﬁcation of the bond length should
be diﬀerent for the ligand accepting the electron and the remaining ligands, or the
modiﬁcation is uniform for each of the Ru-N bonds. In any case, the result of an
extra electron on the ligand, should also lead to changes in the C-C and C-N bond
lengths.
Background of [Ru(bpy)3]2+
page 10 of 86
==PAGE:17==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
One of the reasons that [Ru(bpy)3]2+is such a strong candidate as a photo-
sensitizer is, that it absorbs light in the ultraviolet (UV) and visible range of the
electromagnetic spectrum. This property makes the red ruthenium complex par-
ticularly useful in the development of e.g. solar cells. Below, Figure 7 shows the
absorption spectrum of aqueous [Ru(bpy)3]2+in the UV to near-infrared (IR) range.
Also the associated electronic transitions are indicated in the ﬁgure. In this work,
we are examining the MLCT transition and speciﬁcally this band is zoomed in, in
the ﬁgure. In the experiment the sample was excited at 530 nm, which is indicated
by the small green area in the right part of the ﬁgure. Furthermore, the emission
band associated with the MLCT transition is indicated, which also lies in the visible
range of the electromagnetic spectrum, giving rise to visible luminescence properties
of the complex. To the left, the absorption is given by the extinction coeﬃcient and
to the right the absorption is measured in optical density (OD).
In the UV range of the spectrum, the electronic transitions are dominated by Lig-
and Centered (LC) (200-300 nm) excitations within the bipyridine ligands. Besides
these, also Ligand-to-Metal-Charge-Transfer (LMCT) transitions dominate the UV
range (220-260 nm). Higher in the UV range, also Metal-Centered (MC) transitions
occur within the ruthenium-like orbitals. In the violet-blue-green end of the visible
spectrum, the complex absorbs light giving rise to the interesting MLCT transition
with a maximum around 450 nm. Upon photoexcitation in this range, a metal cen-
tered electron from the ligand-ﬁeld split 4d level transfers into the π∗-orbital of the
ligand, resulting in a singlet Metal-to-Ligand Charge Transfer (1MLCT). [17]
1MLCT
Wavelength [nm]
S0
1MLCT
Wavelength [nm]
Zoom MLCT
MC
LC
LMCT
MLCT
Emission
530 nm
3MLCT
Figure 7: UV-IR absorption spectrum of aqueous [Ru(bpy)3]2+with associated electronic
transitions indicated. To the right, the absorption of the MLCT band is zoomed in, and
the wavelength we excited at is shown in green. Adapted ﬁgure from [25].
Background of [Ru(bpy)3]2+
page 11 of 86
==PAGE:18==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
The photochemical cycle of the (1MLCT) excitation of [Ru(bpy)3]2+is shown be-
low in Figure 8. Femtosecond time-resolved absorption spectroscopy ﬁnds, that upon
photoexcitation from the ground state an electron transfers into one of several vi-
brational states within the singlet 1MLCT state within less than 25 fs. [22],[23] Upon
vibrational relaxation, the electron either undergoes non-radiative deactivation or
Inter-System Crossing (ISC) into the triplet 3MLCT state.
Ground
state
1MLCT
3MLCT
3MC
∼15 fs
<25 fs
600 ns
Figure 8: The photochemical cycle upon excitation of [Ru(bpy)3]2+into the singlet
1MLCT state. The singlet state undergoes ultrafast inter-system crossing into the triplet
3MLCT state with near unity quantum yield. The triplet state is complete within 300 fs
of excitation and has a lifetime of about 600 ns. From the triplet state the molecule re-
laxes by either emission (5%), or quenches into a 3MC state or vibrationally deactivates
into the ground state. Adapted ﬁgure from [26]
The inter-system crossing into the 3MLCT state occurs with near unity quan-
tum yield. [22],[23] Furthermore, the transformation into the triplet 3MLCT state
is complete within ∼300 fs of excitation [22],[23]. Work by Cannizzo et al.[27] sug-
gests an inter-system crossing time of ∼15 fs ± 10 fs from the 1MLCT based on a
ﬂuorescence-upconversion study from 2006. In contrast, the triplet 3MLCT state
has a lifetime of approximately 600 ns [28], corresponding to a factor of more than
a million. This excited state is therefore, extremely long-lived , and is the reason
why, this molecule makes a strong candidate as a photosensitizer. Upon population
of the triplet 3MLCT state, the relaxation processes occur in various ways. One
way, is a radiative decay into the ground state by emission of the excess energy as a
photon. Otherwise, the relaxation might undergo a non-radiative deactivation to the
ground state, principally as heat. Finally, a third option is to undergo non-radiative
quenching into low vibrational levels of the triplet metal centered (3MC) state. The
deactivation into the ground state and quenching into the 3MC state is very eﬃcient,
Background of [Ru(bpy)3]2+
page 12 of 86
==PAGE:19==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
and as a result, 95 % of the energy undergoes one of these pathways, and only 5 %
is reemitted as a photon [17].
Within the framework of the time-resolved experiment described in this work,
only the excited state molecular structure related to the triplet 3MLCT state of the
described excited states is observable. The transition from the singlet 1MLCT state
is below 100 fs, which is our approximate time resolution. Furthermore, the relax-
ation time of the triplet 3MLCT state is extremely long, and exceeds the measured
time delays.
The particular interest in the MLCT transition arises from the ”tunability” of
the photophysical properties by changing the ligands, and the fact that it absorbs
in a wide range of the visible part of the electromagnetic spectrum. Furthermore,
a long lifetime of 600 ns, along with a near unity quantum yield of formation, al-
lows for an eﬃcient possibility of harvesting of the electron to a suitable acceptor.
[Ru(bpy)3]2+therefore, serves as a model system of potential chromophores used for
e.g. solar cells.
Background of [Ru(bpy)3]2+
page 13 of 86
==PAGE:20==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
Experiment
The experimental part leading to the data will be described in the following sec-
tions. Since, I did not participate in the experiment, this part is only described
brieﬂy. However, the people involved, allowed me access to the information regard-
ing the experiment.
The experimental work was performed at a hard X-ray Free Electron Laser
(XFEL), that currently only exists two diﬀerent places; namely the Linac Coherent
Light Source (LCLS) [29],[30] in California at SLAC National Accelerator Labora-
tory in the US, and the SPring-8 Angstrom Compact free electron LAser (SACLA)
[31],[32] at the SPring-8 accelerator and synchrotron complex in Japan. The data
analysis of this thesis is based on an experiment from the LCLS facility in California
in February 2014. The experiment was a collaborative beamtime involving members
of the Departments of Physics and Chemistry from Technical University of Denmark
(DTU), as well as participants from Maxlab, Lund University, the PULSE Institute
at Stanford University and SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, along with per-
sons from the future FXE beamline at the European XFEL in Hamburg and from
the Wigner Research Centre for Physics, Hungarian Academy of Sciences.
Experimental set up
The experiments were carried out at the X-ray Pump Probe (XPP) beamline at
the LCLS facility at SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory. This beamline uses an
optical laser in combination with x-rays from the XFEL to achieve femtosecond time
resolved experiments. The optical laser was generated by the 800 nm fundamental
wavelength of a Ti:sapphire laser, into a green 532 nm pump source. The x-ray probe
source was set to an energy of 8.2 keV with a corresponding wavelength of 1.5 ˚A.
The time delay between the optical laser pulse and the x-ray pulse was monitored
using the so called Timing Tool [33], installed at the beamline. The x-ray source
from LCLS delivers a ﬂux of 1012 photons per pulse of ∼30 fs, where in comparison
the ID09 beamline at European Synchrotron Radiation Facility (ESRF) delivers a
ﬂux of 5·108 photons per pulse of ∼100 ps [34]. The sample was running through a
liquid jet in an open sample chamber. The liquid jet was a 100 µm sheet of sample,
which was rotated vertically to an angle of 45◦relative to the incoming beams.
The optical laser and x-ray beam reached the sample horizontally at time delays
between approximately -1-3.5 ps. Behind the sample chamber, the Cornell-SLAC
Pixel Array Detector (CSPAD) [35] measured the scattered x-rays. The detector
consists of 32 individual tiles each with 388x185 pixels of 110x110 µm2, and besides
this, the detector has a tiny whole in the middle for the x-rays that did not scatter
and were transmitted by the sample. The experimental setup is shown in Figure 9.
Experiment
page 14 of 86
==PAGE:21==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
Liquid
jet
Detector
Figure 9: Schematic representation of the experimental setup from a laser pump, x-ray
probe scattering experiment of aqueous [Ru(bpy)3]2+. The sample is running in a liquid
jet and the scattered x-rays are measured on the CSPAD detector from LCLS. The
illustration of the sample represents the solvated [Ru(bpy)3]2+and the diﬀerent solvation
shells. Adapted ﬁgure from [36], [37]
Experiment execution
In this section, the general features of the so called pump-probe experiment will be
described along with the speciﬁc experimental details of aqueous [Ru(bpy)3]2+.
In a pump-probe experiment, the sample is optically pumped into an excited
state, in this case by an optical laser, and then probed by another source, in this
case the x-ray free electron laser. Both sources are pulsed lasers, that are exciting and
”observing” the sample at 120 Hz. For every set of pump and probe pulse an image
is read out on the detector, providing information of the electronic density within
the sample. By delaying the x-ray pulse relatively to the optic laser pulse, an image
is produced at a given time after the excitation of the molecule in the sample. The
time evolution is obtained by changing the time delay between the optic laser pulse
and the x-ray pulse gradually. Ignoring the pulse width, the time between two pulses
is approximately 0.0083 s between each pulse, which is a very long time considering
the photoexcitation of molecules. Each image on the detector can then be regarded
as in independent experiment, that was repeated a great number of times in order
Experiment execution
page 15 of 86
==PAGE:22==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
to obtain better statistics of the results. However, various eﬀects have shown to
aﬀect the experiment, and therefore, the experiments also run over several so called
scans and changing sample under way. Under the execution of the experiment, the
pumping and probing is set to a certain time delay and repeated hundreds of times,
reading out an image for every set of pulses. After that, the time delay between
the sources is changed, and the pumping and probing is again repeated hundreds of
times. Information on the sample just before excitation is obtained by letting the
x-ray probe pulse arrive before the pumping laser pulse. The time delay between
the sources is then measured in negative values, and a time delay of 0 refers to the
pump and probe pulses arriving at the same time.
The data I received, is the result of two so called scans, that are combined in
order to obtain better statistics. Each of the scans, consists of 2400 images for each of
the measured 21 time delays giving a total of 54000 images. Given a repetition rate
of 120 Hz, these images were collected in ∼7 min. Further information on speciﬁc
experimental parameters for the experimental set up for [Ru(bpy)3]2+is shown in
Table 1.
Table 1: Experimental parameters from the experimental part of
time-resolved x-ray scattering measurements on [Ru(bpy)3]2+
Sample
Concentration
25 mM
Solute
[Ru(bpy)3]Cl2
Solvent
H2O
X-ray
Pulse energy
8.2 keV (1.3 fJ)
Wavelength
1.5 ˚A
Pulse length
∼30 fs
Spot size (height x width)
50x50 µm2
Optical laser
Pulse energy
40 µJ
Wavelength
532 nm
Pulse length
∼70 fs
Spot size (diameter)
150 µm
Data collection
Detector distance
∼7 cm
Range of scattering angle (2θ)
3.3◦-58.2◦
Range of time delays
-1.1-3.4 ps
Jet
Sheet thickness
100 µm
Angle (vertically rotated)
45◦
Experiment execution
page 16 of 86
==PAGE:23==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
Scattering data
Before the actual data analysis can start, the output from the detector needs to go
through several steps. Each of the steps is only described brieﬂy in the following
section, and for a deeper elaboration, please refer to [38]. An overview of the steps
is also shown schematically in Figure 10.
Figure 10: Schematic of the data process from detector output to analysis. The ﬁgure
shows the diﬀerent steps of the data reduction along with a graphical example, and
relative dimension and size of the data belonging to the speciﬁc step. Figure from [38]
Scattering data
page 17 of 86
==PAGE:24==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
Raw Images. First, the data read by the detector needs to be translated from
the LCLS/SACLA format into an HDF5 ﬁle designed to handle large data sets.
These .h5 ﬁles save each obtained image along with relevant experimental parame-
ters.
Dark. Each of the detector images needs background subtraction from a so called
dark image Idark. This is a detector image without any x-ray or laser on and can
therefore, be obtained before the actual data acquisition starts. The dark image
therefore, corresponds to a “blank” image and is useful to ﬁnd small variations in
the diﬀerent pixels.
Mask and Correct. For each experimental setup the images need a subtraction of
a so called mask Imask and other corrections C. The mask of the detector is made
to remove unreliable pixels, for example because they are shadowed by the beam
stop behind the sample or because they are simply bad. Other corrections of each
image include a polarization correction Cpol, a geometry correction Cgeom and an
absorption correction Cabs.
The polarization correction is necessary because of the way the x-ray radiation
is produced. Under the formation of the x-rays through an Undulator, the electrons
are wiggled in the horizontal plane, producing highly polarized x-rays. As a result,
the scattering intensity depends on polarization of the beam, which is highest at 0
degrees from the incoming beam in the horizontal plane, and lowest at 90 degrees
to the incoming beam.
The geometry correction is correcting for the space-angle coverage of each pixel.
The solid-angle coverage of the individual pixel is low at high scattering angles.
Finally, the absorption correction, accounts for the fact that some of the pho-
tons have been absorbed by the sample and the actual intensity hitting the sample
necessarily is larger than the measured intensity. In total we have so far
Icorrected = (Iraw −Idark) · Cpol · Cgeom · Cabs
Azimuthal integration. Usually scattering images are integrated along the az-
imuthal angle of the detector η in order to obtain a 1D scattering graph of the
measured intensity Smeas as a function of scattering angle 2θ or scattering vector
Q. However, due to the fact that the polarization of the optical laser results in a
preferential excitation of molecules with transition dipole moment parallel to the
polarization of the laser, the scattering intensity is not azimuthally isotropic. There-
fore, when analyzing data at such short time scales the excited state molecules will
have a preferred rotational orientation, and the assumption that the distribution of
molecular orientations is averaged is not valid at short time delays (fs). At longer
time scales (few ps) the excited molecular orientations are again averaged, and thus
Scattering data
page 18 of 86
==PAGE:25==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
the anisotropy decreases with the time delays. The 2D scattering images are there-
fore separated into an isotropic part S0 and an anisotropic part S2 as described by
U. Lorenz et al. [39]. The method is limited to symmetric tops, in which two mo-
ments of inertia are the same. This includes molecules with a three-fold or a higher
order rotational axis. Furthermore, the method is based on the assumption, that
only single-photon absorption occurs, such that the scattering signal stays within
the linear regime. In the following, we only analyze the isotropic part S0.
Scaling. Even though the multiple images represent the same experimental setup,
the measured intensity might still show small variations. The measured scattered
intensity varies from image to image for a number of reasons. One reason, is a result
from the nature of the formation of the x-ray radiation from oscillating electron
bunches in the free electron laser. The distribution of the electrons in the micro-
bunches varies from pulse to pulse and as a result the x-ray beam intensity varies
substantially from shot to shot. Another reason, is due to the experimental set up
with a thin liquid jet causing ﬂuctuations in the sample and a varying scattering
pattern. Because the intensity is eﬀected by the given experimental set up, the 1D
full scattering curves are scaled relatively to each other through an average of all
the signals.
Outliers and ﬁltering. Due to the ﬂuctuations in the x-ray beam, the data is
examined for outliers. These need to be discarded, since the diﬀerence signals are
of the order of a few %. The scattering curve is rejected if it deviates substantially
from the other curves determined by a predeﬁned factor.
Oﬀsubtraction. The next step is to construct the diﬀerence signals. This is done
by subtracting an average of the 2 nearest laser-oﬀimages to a laser-on image. The
nearest oﬀ-images are chosen in order to minimize possible drift eﬀects and preserve
as similar set up as possible.
∆Smeas = Slaser on −1
2

Slaser off(before) −Slaser off(after)

TimeTool Rebinning. At this point, the data consist of a large number of diﬀer-
ence curves belonging to diﬀerent repetitions and time delays. Because of a 500 fs
uncertainty of the timing jitter on the experimental set up, the actual delay be-
tween the optic laser pulse and the x-ray pulse varies from shot to shot. However,
the actual delay can be determined using the timing-tool with an uncertainty of
∼15 fs. With new information of the actual time delays, the diﬀerence curves need
a rebinning to the appropriate time delays. Following the timing tool corrections,
the time resolution is around 50-150 fs, limited by the the pulse width of both the
x-ray laser and optical laser and also the jet thickness. The refractive index of water
results in a smearing of the time resolution because the optical laser and x-ray laser
Scattering data
page 19 of 86
==PAGE:26==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
travel at diﬀerent velocities trough the jet. Roughly, the time smearing due to the
jet thickness is 1 fs pr. µm. Given a pulse width of the x-ray of ∼30 fs, and a pulse
width of the optical laser of ∼70 fs, the limiting factor is the jet thickness of 100 µm
resulting in a time resolution of ∼100 fs for the speciﬁc experiment of [Ru(bpy)3]2+.
Average. Since the experiment is repeated several times for each time delay, a large
number of diﬀerence scattering signals ∆Smeas are produced for the same time delay
∆t. For the diﬀerence signals from the same time delay an average curve is calculated
in order to reduce the noise of the collected data, assuming that they are dominated
by counting noise.
The above described subtractions and corrections were all performed, on the ex-
perimental data before I received it. The diﬀerence scattering signals ∆Smeas(Q, ∆t)
are a combination of 2 diﬀerent scans and mapped in a 2D matrix covering the
measured Q-range and the time delays ∆t. From the timing-tool corrections the
diﬀerence scattering signals ∆S(Q) were rebinned into ∼31 fs time bins so that each
bin contained approximately the same amount of signals averaged to one diﬀerence
scattering signal, for the speciﬁc time delay. Below, in Figure 11 ∆Smeas(Q, ∆t) are
shown for all the time delays in 2D and selected 1D signals. From these signals, the
data analysis related to this thesis is commenced, and I did not participate in the
process before this step. The scattering data was reduced from the raw scattering
images within the HDF5 ﬁles into MATLAB® matrices of the diﬀerence signals by
Elisa Biasin, who kindly provided the reduced data as a starting point for the anal-
ysis. Figure 10 also shows a step called 1D SVD Filtering, which in this thesis is
included in the part of the data analysis and will be described in detail in a later
section of the thesis.
Scattering data
page 20 of 86
==PAGE:27==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
Figure 11: Experimental data showing the diﬀerence scattering signals ∆Smeas(Q, ∆t) obtained
from the time resolved WAXS experiment. All plots show the same data in various ways. In the
top, the diﬀerence signals are shown as a 2D image. In the lower left corner, selected diﬀerence
signals ∆Smeas(Q) are shown with an oﬀset for clariﬁcation, and in the lower right corner, all
diﬀerence signals ∆Smeas(Q) are shown on top of each other in 1D.
Scattering data
page 21 of 86
==PAGE:28==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
Methods
Various methods are used to interpret the obtained experimental data. In this work,
the main way to interpret the data is by calculating a weighted least squares ﬁt
between the experimentally obtained data ∆Sdata and various hypotheses of the
expected changes in the sample, described by a given model ∆Smodel. Furthermore,
the experimental data needs a background subtraction and the noise needs to be
taken into account. In the following sections, the diﬀerent tools used to analyze the
data is described.
Scaling of the data
Before any ﬁtting approach will provide usable results, the measured scattering sig-
nals Smeas(Q) have to be brought to a comparable scale to the calculated scattering
signals Scalc(Q) to be used in the various models. In this section, we describe how
the theoretical scattering signals are calculated, and used to scale the measured
scattering signals.
The scaling is based on the theoretical scattering from one, so called, liquid unit
cell (LUC) [40], which corresponds to the stoichiometry of the solute molecules and
the solvent molecules. Another way to describe it is, that one LUC corresponds to
the smallest scalable volume of a given solution. The stoichiometry is calculated
from the concentration of the sample and the ”concentration” of water molecules in
a pure water sample, from its density ρ and molecular weight M.
cwater = ρ
M = 999.97 g
L
18.02
g
mol
= 55.50 mol
L
With a concentration of the investigated sample of 25 mM, the number of water
molecules per solute molecule is estimated as:
Nwater = cwater
csolute
= 2222 water molecules
LUC
Based on these calculations the ratio of solute and solvent molecules is 1:2222, or
described another way, each LUC consists of 1 [Ru(bpy)3]2+molecule and 2222 water
molecules. The scaling of the experimental data is then estimated from the calcu-
lated scattering of 1 LUC. As shown in Figure 13 on page 25, the diﬀerence between
the measured scattering signals Smeas(Q) from the laser-on Slaser on(Q) and laser-oﬀ
Slaser off(Q) image is very small. Therefore, the scaling is found using an average
of the total scattering signals from the experiment, instead of using the diﬀerence
signals ∆S.
When calculating the total signal, we need to consider both the coherent Thom-
Methods
page 22 of 86
==PAGE:29==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
son scattering and the incoherent Compton scattering, as described in the section X-
ray scattering. The Thomson scattering is calculated using the previously described
Debye equation implemented in MATLAB® as equation (5). However, for the wa-
ter solvent, the coherent scattering is not calculated, and instead an experimental
measurement from Hura et al., of pure water is used [41]. The Compton scattering
is calculated using the analytical expression from Hajdu et al., as shown in equation
(8) for all atoms except the ruthenium atom, where instead the expression from
P´alink´as et al is used, shown in equation (9).
Figure 12: Scaling of the experimental data to 1 liquid unit cell (LUC) containing 1 solute molecule
and 2222 water molecules. On the left side, each of the contributions (coherent and incoherent) to
the calculated total scattering signal Scalc(Q) are shown. On the right side, the calculated signal is
shown with the scaled measured scattering signal Smeas(Q) within in the scaling range. The signal
is scaled for Q>1 ˚A−1 where the solute signal is less dominant.
Figure 12 shows the scattering signals used in the scaling procedure. To the
left, the contributions, from the coherent Scoh and incoherent scattering Sincoh, to
the total calculated signal Scalc are shown. The contributions are calculated sepa-
rately for the solute and solvent, and summarized into a total signal. To the right,
the measured signal Smeas(Q) and calculated signal Scalc are shown together after
the scaling, along with the scaling factor in the box. From the ﬁgure to the left,
it is evident, that the solute signal dominates the low Q-range and the water sig-
nal dominates the signal above 1 ˚A−1. Also, the coherent, Thomson scattering is
the dominating contributor. The incoherent, Compton scattering, increases with in-
creasing Q. In the calculation of the Thomson scattering of the solute molecule, the
ground state structure was used, but since the diﬀerence between the excited state
signal and ground state signal is on the order of 10−3 both signals are usable. In
order to minimize the solute contributions, the signal is scaled in the Q-range above
1 ˚A−1.
Scaling of the data
page 23 of 86
==PAGE:30==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
The ﬁtting approach
As described in the Scattering data section, the diﬀerence scattering signals are the
starting point for the actual data analysis. The evaluation of the diﬀerence signals
is via a ﬁtting approach.
For each of the time delays ∆t, weighted least squares ﬁts of one of several
models ∆Smodel to the XDS diﬀerence signals ∆Sdata are calculated, using the built-
in function lscov in MATLAB®. For a data set containing N points, the weighted
least squares ﬁt minimizes the error estimate r including a weight wQ for each point
as follows: (With suppression the dependence of Q for clarity).
r =
N
X
Q=1
wQ

∆Sdata −∆Smodel
2
In this work, the weights are included as the inverse variances
1
σ2, which are esti-
mated using either the polynomial method or the wavelet method as described in
the following section Noise estimation. When comparing the various calculated ﬁts,
we also consider the number of diﬀerent parameters m included in the model, and
calculate the χ2-value:
χ2 =
1
N−m−1
N
X
Q=1
 ∆Sdata(Q) −∆Smodel(Q)
σ(Q)
!2
(10)
The measured diﬀerence scattering signals ∆Sdata(Q) consist of an integrated scat-
tering image with the optical laser oﬀSlaser off subtracted to an image with the laser
on Slaser on. (With suppression the dependence of Q for clarity).
∆Sdata = Slaser on −Slaser off
However, as described in the section Scattering data, each detected image varies
in the measured intensity, and in order to minimize the eﬀect caused by the ex-
perimental setup, the laser-on and laser-oﬀimages are collected in an alternating
fashion. This ensures the experimental conditions to be as similar as possible. Then,
the average of the two nearest laser-oﬀimages are subtracted to each laser-on image:
∆Sdata = Slaser on −1
2

Slaser off(before) −Slaser off(after)

Below, Figure 13 shows an example of the measured total scattering signals Smeas(Q),
along with the diﬀerence signal which is scaled and oﬀset for clarity. As evident in
the ﬁgure, the changes in signal is on the order of 10−3 and the noise level therefore
becomes apparent.
The ﬁtting approach
page 24 of 86
==PAGE:31==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
The ﬁgure shows an example of the scattering signals Slaser on, Slaser off and ∆S, from
a time-resolved WAXS experiment of the metal complex PtPOP ([Pt2(H2P2O5)4]4−)
described in [40].
t
Figure 13: Example of a pair of laser-on and laser-oﬀscattering signals collected at a
time resolved x-ray scattering experiment on PtPOP ([Pt2(H2P2O5)4]4−). The laser-oﬀ
curve is oﬀset for clarity, since the diﬀerence is very small. Furthermore, the diﬀerence
scattering signal is shown and has been scaled and oﬀset for clarity as well. The diﬀerence
scattering signals provide the basis for the data analysis. Figure from[40]
From equation (10), we also have the various models ∆Smodel, which we describe
in the following sections. Each set of measured scattering signal ∆Sdata(Q) from a
given time delay ∆t is considered an individual experiment, and therefore, weighted
least squares ﬁt are calculated from each of the measured time delays ∆t =-1.1-3.5 ps
giving a total of 141 calculated ﬁts for entire data set ∆Sdata(Q, ∆t).
Components of the models describing the scattering signals
In the following sections, we describe the diﬀerent components of the models ∆Smodel
used to describe the measured diﬀerence scattering signals ∆Sdata via weighted least
squares ﬁts.
The change in the scattering signal arises from changes in the electron distribu-
tion. The most obvious change in electron density originates from the excitation of
the solute molecule resulting in structural changes. Since the laser-on image Slaser on
represents the excited state (ES) and the laser-oﬀimage Slaser off represents the
ground state (GS) structure, the solute part of the observed signal is proportional
to the fraction of excited molecules. With α describing the excitation fraction and
(1 −α) the corresponding fraction of molecules still in the ground state, the total
scattering signals consist of contributions from the scattering of the molecule in the
Components of the models describing the scattering signals
page 25 of 86
==PAGE:32==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
ground state SGS, and excited state SES.
Slaser off = SGS
Slaser on = αSES + (1 −α)SGS
The diﬀerence scattering signal ∆Ssolute arising from structural changes in the solute
is then described as
∆Ssolute = Slaser on −Slaser off
= (αSES + (1 −α)SGS) −SGS
= α(SES −SGS)
= α∆Sstructure
The scattering signals SES, SGS arising from the ground state and excited state
structure, are calculated using the Debye formula from equation (5), described in the
section X-ray scattering. The structural changes in the solute molecule are estimated
in three diﬀerent ways. A description of proposed changes in structure is given
in the proceeding section, and will in the following be referred to as the simple
DFT, the relativistic DFT and the constructed structure. Below, Figure 14 shows
the resulting calculated diﬀerence scattering signals ∆Sstructure calculated as the
diﬀerence between the scattering signal of the excited state structure SES and the
ground state structure SGS.
Figure 14: Calculated diﬀerence scattering signals ∆Sstructure based on three diﬀerent
models referred to as the simple DFT, the relativistic DFT and the constructed structure.
Components of the models describing the scattering signals
page 26 of 86
==PAGE:33==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
From the calculated diﬀerence scattering signals ∆Sstructure, it is evident that the
constructed structure shows the most dominant diﬀerence signal, in the low Q-range,
which is because the constructed structure results in the to the largest structural
change of the solute therefore shows a stronger diﬀerence signal. In contrary, the
relativistic DFT model results in practically no change in geometry from the ground
state to excited state, and the diﬀerence signal is therefore weaker than the other
calculated diﬀerence signals.
When analyzing the diﬀerence signals, only the Thomson scattering is included
in the calculation. This is done, since the Compton scattering contribution does
not include structural information, but only depends on the nature and number of
atoms within the sample. Therefore, the Compton contribution will be the same for
the excited state and ground state, and unnecessary when analyzing the diﬀerence
signals.
Another contributor to the change in scattering signal, is due to structural
changes in the bulk solvent. The changes in the bulk solvent arise from changes in the
hydrodynamic parameters, temperature T, density ρ and pressure P as a response
to the photoexcitation of the solute molecule as described in [42], [43]. However,
only two of the three hydrodynamic parameters (T, ρ, P) are necessary, to describe
a hydrodynamic system. Therefore, the diﬀerence scattering signal ∆Ssolvent associ-
ated with the changes in the hydrodynamic variables can be described as a linear
combination of the diﬀerence signals resulting from changes in two of the three pa-
rameters, as described in [42]. The changes arise due to an energy transfer from the
light-absorbing solute molecule, to the solvent upon relaxation from the photoex-
cited state. This energy transfer occurs within the ﬁrst picoseconds [43] of excitation,
and therefore needs to be taken into account and included in the models ∆Smodel.
In this work, the temperature and density changes in scattering are included in the
solvent description of the models.
∆Ssolvent = ∆T ∂S
∂T

ρ
+ ∆ρ∂S
∂ρ

T
= ∆T · ∆Stemp + ∆ρ · ∆Sdensity
where ∂S
∂T

ρ is the diﬀerence scattering signal arising from changes in temperature at
constant density, and similarly, ∂S
∂ρ

T is the diﬀerence scattering signal arising from
changes in density at constant temperature, in the following referred to as ∆Stemp
and ∆Sdensity. The parameters ∆T and ∆ρ corresponds to the changes in tempera-
ture measured in K, and the changes in density measured in kg
m3, respectively.
The diﬀerence scattering signals related to the temperature change and density
Components of the models describing the scattering signals
page 27 of 86
==PAGE:34==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
change of the solvent are either estimated from Molecular Dynamics (MD) simula-
tions, or obtained experimentally. In this work, they are estimated from the method
described by Kjær et. al [43]. Below, Figure 15 shows the changes in the scattering
signals as a result of heating or density increase of water. The changes in temper-
ature are measured in electron units per water molecule per degree ◦C or K, and
similarly, the changes in density are measured per kg/m3.
Figure 15: Diﬀerence scattering signals arising from changes in the temperature ∆Stemp
and density ∆Sdensity of water. The temperature diﬀerence signal is measured in electron
units per water molecule per Kelvin
e.u
water K and similarly, the density diﬀerence signal
is in units of
e.u
water kg
m3
The methodology of using the experimentally obtained temperature and density
diﬀerence signals to describe the solvent response, is based on the use of this treat-
ment at time resolved experiments at synchrotron sources with a time resolution
of 100 ps. This time is suﬃcient for establishment of thermodynamic equilibrium.
However, at the ultrafast time scales of the time-resolved experiments performed
at an XFEL, the probed sample volume have not reached thermodynamic equilib-
rium yet. Consequently, the interpretation of the solvent contribution becomes more
complicated. The interpretation is discussed in [43] and [44]. In this work they are
interpreted as the eventual increase in temperature and density upon establishment
of thermodynamic equilibrium in the probed volume. The method, using the solvent
and density diﬀerence signals in the analysis of time-resolved WAXS data from an
XFEL has been successfully used in work by Canton et al. studying a Ru-Co metal
complex [45], Haldrup et al. [44] studying [Fe(bpy)3]+2, and Biasin et al. in [46].
Components of the models describing the scattering signals
page 28 of 86
==PAGE:35==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
To sum up, the models used to describe the diﬀerence scattering signals con-
sists of contributions from the structural changes of the solute ∆Ssolute, which in
the current work is described using either the simple DFT, the relativistic DFT or
the constructed structure. They are all described further in the proceeding section.
The diﬀerence scattering signal describing the solute structural changes ∆Sstructure
is calculated from the scattering of the excited state structure SES and ground
state structure SGS. Furthermore, the changes in the scattering signal arise from
structural changes in the bulk solvent ∆Ssolvent which are described by a change
in scattering signal due to temperature and density increase. The solvent diﬀerence
scattering signal arise from changes in temperature ∆Stemp and from changes in den-
sity ∆Sdensity are obtained experimentally and described as the changes in signals
due to temperature increase at constant density ∂S
∂T

ρ, and due to density increase
at constant temperature ∂S
∂ρ

T. In total, the model is described as follows:
∆Smodel = ∆Ssolute + ∆Ssolvent
= α(SES −SGS) + ∆T ∂S
∂T

ρ
+ ∆ρ∂S
∂ρ

T
= α · ∆Sstructure + ∆T · ∆Stemp + ∆ρ · ∆Sdensity
In the following section, we will elaborate on the description of the solute structures.
Description of the solute structures
In the following sections, 3 diﬀerent characterizations of the changes in the solute
structure upon excitation, will be presented. Each of these characterizations are used
to calculate the diﬀerence scattering signal ∆Sstructure, described in the previous sec-
tion. The ﬁrst description, referred to as The simple DFT structure and the second,
referred to as The relativistic DFT structure are both based on Density Functional
Theory (DFT) calculations of the ruthenium complex, with diﬀerent levels of func-
tionals and basis sets. A short description of the DFT approach is given below.
Finally, the third description, referred to as The constructed structure, is based on
”manually constructed” ground state and excited state structures.
Description of the solute structures
page 29 of 86
==PAGE:36==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
Density Functional Theory (DFT) [47],[48] is a popular computational method
to model atoms and molecules using quantum mechanical simulations. The popular-
ity is due to the lower computational cost than comparable Hartree-Fock (HF) based
methods, along with the implementation of correlation energy. In DFT geometry op-
timizations of molecules are calculated from the electronic density ρ(E) resulting in
the lowest energy E of the system. The electron density is used to describe the
electronic conﬁguration using one of many basis sets. The energy is described using
diﬀerent types of the, so called, functionals. The earliest developments of the func-
tionals are based on the so called Local Density Approximation (LDA) methods, in
which the electron density is considered a uniform electron gas that changes slowly.
Later developments include the so called Generalized Gradient Corrected (GGC)
methods, in which also the gradient of the electron density is included for higher
accuracy. Finally, the hybrid methods mix the exchange energies calculated from
HF theory in combination with the DFT based functionals. A further description of
DFT is available in [49].
The simple DFT structure
The ﬁrst characterization, ’The simple DFT’ structure is a description where the
structural changes of the solute is based on DFT calculations using the ORCA
program [50]. The calculations were performed using the hybrid type functional,
PBE0, that Adamo and Barone modiﬁed in 1999 [51] from the original Perdew,
Ernzerhof, and Burke (PBE) functional developed in 1996 [52]. The PBE0 functional
mixes the PBE exchange energy and the Hartree-Fock (HF) exchange energy in a
ratio of 3:1 and furthermore, uses the PBE correlation energy. For the Ru atom, the
Ahlrichs type triple zeta split valence including polarization basis set, def2-TZVP
[53],[54] was used, including an eﬀective core potential that replaced the 28 core
electrons. For the remaining atoms, the Ahlrichs double zeta, DZ [55], type basis
set was used. Solvation was included using the Conductor-like Screening Model
(COSMO) [56] to describe the solvated state in water. The calculations included an
energy optimization of the ground state structure of [Ru(bpy)3]2+in the singlet state,
and an energy optimization of the excited state structure simulated by changing the
spin multiplicity to 3. The overall charge of the molecule remained at +2.
The DFT simulations were performed by Kasper Skov Kjær, who kindly provided
the results. Figure 16 below, shows the structural changes near the central Ru atom
from ground state to excited state.
From the ground state to the excited state structure, two of the Ru-N bonds are
elongated, two of the bonds are contracted and two of the bonds show no change
in bond lengths. Other structural changes are primarily on one of the ligands where
Description of the solute structures
page 30 of 86
==PAGE:37==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
Ground state
Excited state
e
d
f
Figure 16: Illustration of the structural changes using the PBE0 functional and the
DZ/def2-TZVP basis sets. The changes are characterized as the simple DFT structure.
the C-C bonds between the bipyridine contracts by 0.05 ˚A, and the corresponding
C-N bonds are expanding. Overall, the molecule is both contracting and elongating
resulting in an ”opening” excited state structure. The speciﬁc changes regarding the
ground state and excited state bond lengths are summarized below in Table2. A
positive value corresponds to an elongation of the bond whereas a negative value
corresponds to a contraction. The labels of the bonds are according to Figure 17
and the labels of the ligands are according to Figure 16.
Table 2: Change in selected bond lengths from the ground state to
the excited state solute structure based on the simple DFT model.
Values are given in ˚A. Labels are according to Figure 17 and 16.
Ligand
Ru-N
C2-N1
C6-N1
C2-C2′
d
0.003
-0.001
-0.002
0.000
d
0.021
-0.002
-0.003
-
e
-0.021
0.034
0.010
-0.050
e
-0.021
0.034
0.010
-
f
0.003
-0.001
-0.002
0.000
f
0.021
-0.002
-0.003
-
Average
0.001
0.010
0.002
-0.01
Figure 17: Labeling of the atoms of each of the bipyridine ligands
Description of the solute structures
page 31 of 86
==PAGE:38==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
The relativistic DFT structure
In the second characterization, referred to as, ’The relativistic DFT’ structure, the
change in geometry is based on DFT calculations using the ORCA program sim-
ilarly to the simple DFT structure described above. However, in this model, the
calculations used another functional and basis set and furthermore, included rel-
ativistic eﬀects for the Ru atom. The functional used, was the gradient corrected
type (GGA) BP86, consisting of the Becke 88 exchange functional [57] and the
Perdew 86 correlation functional [58]. Furthermore, the Ahlrichs type triple zeta
split valence including polarization, TZVP [59], basis set was used for all atoms in
the molecule. Besides this, the calculations included a relativistic correction using
the zeroth order regular approximation (ZORA) [60],[61]. The calculations also in-
cluded solvation of [Ru(bpy)3]2+via the Conductor-like Screening Model (COSMO).
Similar to the calculations in the simple DFT model, the calculations consisted of
an energy optimization of the ground state geometry in the singlet state, and an
energy optimization of the excited state geometry approximated by changing the
spin multiplicity to 3.
The DFT calculations were performed by M´aty´as Imre P´apai who kindly pro-
vided the results. Below, Figure 18 shows diﬀerences between the ground state and
excited state structures based on these DFT simulations.
Ground state
Excited state
e
d
f
Figure 18: Illustration of the structural changes from the ground state to the excited
state structure based on DFT calculations using BP86/TZVP-ZORA.
These DFT simulations only show very small changes in the Ru-N bond lengths
(0.001 ˚A elongation) from the ground state to the excited state. The primary change,
is within the ligands, where the C-C bridging bonds contract (-0.02 ˚A), and the C-N
bonds elongate slightly (0.01 ˚A). In contrast to the simple DFT optimization, the
bond lengths are almost uniformly changed, i.e the C-N bonds elongates equally.
Description of the solute structures
page 32 of 86
==PAGE:39==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
The overall change in structure from ground state to excited state is very small
compared to the other structures. However, it is a possible solution that the solute
structure does not change signiﬁcantly, and the signal we observe arises due to the
solvent response of the change in electronic density. A summary of the change in
the bond lengths based on the relativistic DFT structure is given below in Table 3.
The labeling is according to Figure 18 and Figure 17.
Table 3: Change in selected bond lengths from the ground state to the
excited state solute structure based on the relativistic DFT model of
the structure. Distances are given in ˚A and the labels are according
to Figure 18 and 17.
Ligand
Ru-N
C2-N
C6-N
C2-C2′
d
0.001
0.011
0.001
-0.020
d
0.001
0.011
0.001
-
e
0.002
0.010
0.001
-0.018
e
0.002
0.010
0.001
-
f
0.001
0.011
0.001
-0.020
f
0.001
0.011
0.001
-
Average
0.001
0.011
0.001
-0.019
The constructed structure
The third characterization, ’The constructed’ structure, is based on the work of
Gawelda et al. from 2006 [62], in which x-ray absorption spectroscopy of aqueous
[Ru(bpy)3]2+in the ground state and excited state, 50 ps after short pulse laser exci-
tation, was performed. The results of their analysis suggest a Ru-N bond contraction
in the excited state of ∼0.03 ˚A compared to the ground state structure. Based on
these results, a ground state and excited state structure was ”manually constructed”
with all Ru-N bonds being 0.03 ˚A shorter in the excited state structure. Below, in
Figure 19 the structural changes between the two states are illustrated. It is impor-
tant to note that this model is a simpliﬁcation of the structural changes, since it
is an unphysical assumption, that all the chemical bonds of the ligands remained
completely restrained. The changes in bond lengths are summarized below in Table
4. The labeling is according to Figure 19 and Figure 17.
Description of the solute structures
page 33 of 86
==PAGE:40==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
0.03˚A
uniform
contrac-
tion
Ground state
Excited state
e
d
f
Figure 19: The ground state and excited state structures of the manually constructed
structure based on XAS results from 2006. Each of the Ru-N bonds are manually set to
be 0.03˚A shorter in the excited state structure.
Table 4: Change in selected bond lengths from the ground state to
the excited state solute structure based on the manually constructed
model. Distances are given in ˚A and the labels are according to Figure
19 and 17.
Ligand
Ru-N
C2-N
C6-N
C2-C2′
d
-0.030
0.000
0.000
0.000
d
-0.030
0.000
0.000
-
e
-0.030
0.000
0.000
0.000
e
-0.030
0.000
0.000
-
f
-0.030
0.000
0.000
0.000
f
-0.030
0.000
0.000
-
Average
-0.030
0.000
0.000
0.000
Comparison with literature
Since, the above described structures show various results, they are compared to
literature. In this section, the results of other research groups are presented, along
with their method of investigation. Below, Table 5 summarizes the changes in bond
lengths of selected bonds. Missing values, were not presented in the respective articles
or supplementary information. The bond changes are based on results with a uniform
change (excited state also D3) in the bond lengths for all three ligands and the central
metal, using QM simulations at 0 K. The changes are found upon subtracting the
excited state bond lengths from the ground state bond lengths presented in the
articles. Some of the additional work of the groups are also presented in the following.
Description of the solute structures
page 34 of 86
==PAGE:41==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
Table 5: Change in bond lengths from the ground state to the excited
state solute structure based on various DFT methods with a uniform
change in bond lengths of the three ligands. Distances are given in
˚A, and calculated as the diﬀerence between the bond length in the
excited and ground state.
Bond
Moret et al.
Alary et al.
Sun et al.
Diam. et al.
Ru-N
-0.001
-0.015
-0.003
-0.013
C2-N
0.011
0.020
0.012
-
C6-N
0.002
-
0.002
0.007
C2-C2′
-0.021
-0.020
-
-0.019
Moret et al. examined the structure of aqueous [Ru(bpy)3]2+in the ground
state [63] and in the excited state [24] at 0 K using DFT based methods and fur-
thermore, the excited state structure at 300 K using hybrid DFT/MD simulations.
They ﬁnd, that on average, the Ru-N bond length is slightly longer (0.01˚A) in the
geometry at 300 K than at 0 K, and attributes this as a solvation eﬀect, or to the
anharmonicity of the corresponding vibrational modes. Furthermore, they describe
the excited electron as being localized on one or two of the bipyridine ligands in
the optimizations at 300 K, but a delocalized electron in the optimizations at 0 K.
In the delocalized geometry, the excited state results in basically no change in the
Ru-N bond distance (0.001 contraction), but an average of 0.01 elongation of the
C2-N bonds and a 0.02 ˚A contraction of the C2-C2′ bridging ligand bonds. On the
other hand, the localized geometry at 300 K results in elongation of the Ru-N bonds
belonging to the ligand receiving the electron, and similarly a longer C2-N bond,
and shorter C2-C2′ bonds to the ligand with an extra electron. They also report,
that the electron seems to oscillate between the ligand 1 and 3 with a period of
approximately 1-2 ps and never appears on ligand 2.
Furthermore, they observe a peculiar solvation structure consisting of chain-like
hydrogen bonded water molecules in between the ligands in the inner-most solvation
shell. This tendency is observed both in the ground state and excited state structure
based on the DFT based calculations. Below, Figure 20 shows these water ”chains”
around the optimized geometry of the excited state structure.
Work by Alary et al. from 2007 suggests that two possible quasi-degenerate
triplet 3MLCT excited states exist; one with D3 symmetry and one with C2 sym-
metry. In the former, the electron is delocalized over the three ligands, whereas, in
the other state, the electron is localized on one ligand. The result of the delocalized
electron geometry, is a 0.01 ˚A contraction of the Ru-N bond and the C-C bridge
between the bipyridine ligands contract by 0.02 ˚A. On the other hand, the localized
Description of the solute structures
page 35 of 86
==PAGE:42==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
Figure
20:
Graphical
representation
of
the
excited
state
structure
of
aqueous
[Ru(bpy)3]2+in the ﬁrst solvation shell based on DFT calculations of Moret et al. [24].
The atoms are represented as Van der Waals spheres with color code: green, Ru; blue,
N; black, C, white, H; red, O.
geometry predicts an elongation of the Ru-N bond lengths of the ligand receiving the
electron. The evidence of both structures as being 3MLCT states is determined by
the changes in the spin densities of the metallic center and the ligands. The results
are based on DFT simulations using the B3LYP functional and two diﬀerent basis
sets. One, in which the Ru atom is described by a Steven’s type [64] relativistic
eﬀective core potential (RECP) and the associated double-zeta-split valence basis
set. For the remaining atoms the Ahlrichs’ type DZVP [55] basis set was used. In
the other basis set combination, the Stuttgard [65] relativistic ECP type along with
a split valence plus polarization basis set was used for the Ru atom and furthermore,
a TZVP basis set for the C and N atoms and a DZVP basis set for the H atoms.
Similarly, work by Sun et al. optimizes a D3 symmetric excited state, when
using Gaussian type basis sets and a C2 symmetric excited state, when using a
hybrid Gaussian and plane wave (GPW) method. In the electron delocalized result,
the excited state geometry results in a uniform 0.003 ˚A contraction of the Ru-N
bonds, and a 0.01 elongation of the C2-N bond. In the elecron localized result, one
of the ligands shows diﬀerent bond lengths than the other two ligands. The ligand
receiving the electron elongates the Ru-N bonds by 0.02 ˚A, whereas the other two
ligands contract the Ru-N bonds by 0.01 ˚A.
The GPW method uses the BLYP-D3 functional, with the cores of the atoms
described using Goedecker-Teter-Hutter pseudo potentials [66] and the valence states
described using the DZVP-MOLOPT-SR-GTH [67] basis set.
Description of the solute structures
page 36 of 86
==PAGE:43==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
Overall, the various results indicate, that the use of QM simulations in combi-
nation with Gaussian type basis sets, predict a delocalized electron in the excited
state, and a uniform change of the equivalent bonds, that is very small, but primarily
aﬀects the C2-N and C2-C2′ bonds on the ligands. On the other hand, when using
plane wave type basis sets or hybrid QM/MM or MD simulations, the excited state
results in a localized electron, and various bond lengths depending on, the ligand
that receives the electron.
Experimental work, on the other hand shows a more drastic change of the
Ru-N bond length. As previously described, work by Gawelda et al.[62] suggests a
Ru-N bond contraction of ∼0.03 ˚A based on EXAFS studies. Similar results are ob-
tained from the work of Sato et al.[68] in 2012, where EXAFS analysis shows a Ru-N
bond contraction of 0.04±0.01 ˚A. The uncertainty of the result is estimated from the
square of the residuals between the experimental data and ﬁt, when changing the
Ru-N bond distance in steps of 0.0025 ˚A.
All in all, the various methods agrees on an overall contraction of the molecule
in the excited state geometry, but the extend of the contraction varies from method
of choice. Simulations shows only a small change in the Ru-N bond lengths on the
order of 0.001 ˚A and a larger change in the bonds of the ligands. Especially a ∼0.02 ˚A
contraction of the bridging C-C bond between the ligands. Depending on the simu-
lation method of choice, the geometry changes diﬀer. If the excited state structure
delocalizes the electron on the ligands, the equivalent bonds change approximately
uniformly. On the other hand, if the excited state shows a localized electron, the
Ru-N bonds of the electron receiving ligand are elongated, and the remaining Ru-N
bonds are contracting.
With the deﬁnition of the solute structures settled and compared to literature,
we have described each of the components in the models to describe the measured
scattering signals. We now move on to the method of SVD, used to examine the
”behavior” of the experimental data, and to perform a background subtraction of
the diﬀerence scattering signals.
Description of the solute structures
page 37 of 86
==PAGE:44==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
SVD analysis
A singular value decomposition (SVD) of the measured diﬀerence scattering signals
∆Smeas(Q, ∆t) is used for two things in this work. The ﬁrst, is to better understand
the ”behavior” of the scattering signals, and secondly, it is used as tool for back-
ground subtraction. By using an SVD to understand the behavior of the scattering
signals, we analyze the signals separately in Q and time ∆t, and ﬁnd the most sig-
niﬁcant contributions to the signals. In this section, the basic principles of a singular
value decomposition is described, along with a description of how this tool is used
as a method of background subtraction.
Basic principles
A singular value decomposition or SVD, of a given data set divides the data matrix
into three matrices that multiplied results in the original data matrix. Any M × N
matrix A can be written as the product of an M × M matrix U, an M × N matrix
S and the transpose of an N × N matrix V.
A = USVT
The U matrix then contains vectors with information of the column space of A,
corresponding to the eigenvectors of AAT. Similarly, the columns of matrix V con-
tain information of the row space of A, corresponding to the eigenvectors of ATA.
Finally, the S matrix is a diagonal matrix and contains all the so called singular
values along the diagonal. These values correspond to the relative weights of each of
the columns in the U and V matrices. As an example, the ﬁrst value in the diagonal,
S1,1, corresponds to the weight of the ﬁrst column of U and the ﬁrst column of V,
relative to the whole data set. The weights, or singular values, are the square root of
the eigenvalues of both AAT and ATA and therefore also of the vectors (columns)
in U and V. The decomposition is illustrated below, in Figure 21.
Such a singular value decomposition is very useful to obtain information of a
given data set in each of the dimensions. With our data, the columns of the U
matrix represents characteristic signal shapes, and the rows of the transposed V
matrix shows the evolution in time of each of these signals. The diagonal elements
of the S matrix describe the magnitude of the values in the columns of matrix U
and V. The output is sorted, so that the ﬁrst columns of U and V and the ﬁrst
values of S are the most dominant components of the total data matrix A. A further
description of the SVD method is available in [69].
SVD analysis
page 38 of 86
==PAGE:45==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
Figure 21: A singular value decomposition of the matrix A, into the product of matrix
U, S and V transposed. With this decomposition, matrix U contains the column infor-
mation of A, matrix V contains the row information of A, and matrix S is a diagonal
matrix containing the so called singular values belonging to each column of U and V,
respectively.
Full data decomposition
Now, we perform an SVD on the data matrix containing all the measured diﬀerence
scattering signals ∆Smeas(Q, ∆t). The data matrix is shown below in Figure 22.
Figure 22: Measured diﬀerence scattering signals ∆Smeas(Q, ∆t). This data matrix was
used in a singular value decomposition SVD.
With an SVD of the scattering signals ∆Smeas(Q, ∆t), we obtain a U matrix
describing the column information, i.e. Q, of the diﬀerence scattering signals, and a
V matrix describing row information, i.e. ∆t. The relative weights, or signiﬁcance
of each column of matrix U and V is described by the S matrix. Below, Figure 23
shows the ﬁrst 8 columns of the U and V matrices multiplied by their respective
weights given by the S matrix, from the SVD of the matrix containing the measured
diﬀerence scattering signals.
On the left side of the ﬁgure, we see the characteristic signal shapes within the
data set, which is dominated by sharp features in the ends. This shows, the high
SVD analysis
page 39 of 86
==PAGE:46==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
Figure 23: The ﬁrst 8 columns of the U and V matrices with oﬀsets for clariﬁcation. The
decomposition is performed on the entire data set ∆Smeas(Q, ∆t), showing large noise
contributions in the low Q and high Q area.
degree of noise in the limits of the detector range. Therefore, the ﬁrst step is to select
a reliable Q-range of the data. This range was chosen from 0.3-3.5 ˚A−1, in which the
noise is drastically reduced. Preferably, the cut-oﬀvalue in the low Q-area should be
higher based on noise, but since the low Q-range provides the greatest information
on the solute structure, the cut-oﬀvalue of 0.3 ˚A−1 was chosen. Similarly, the right
side of the ﬁgure shows the time evolution of the ﬁrst 8 columns, which overall look
very ﬂuctuating. The reduced data set is shown below in Figure 24. The next step is
then to perform an SVD of the scattering signals in the range outlined by the black
box.
Figure 24: Scattering diﬀerence signals ∆Smeas(Q, ∆t). The black box outlines the chosen
range of the scattering signals to continue the analysis of, due to a high noise level outside
of the box. An new SVD was therefore performed on the data outlined by the box.
SVD analysis
page 40 of 86
==PAGE:47==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
Reduced data decomposition
After selection of the Q-range with less noise, an SVD of the reduced range of the
entire data set is performed.
When decomposing the outlined data matrix containing the measured diﬀerence
scattering signals, we obtain information of the overall tendency of the signals. Below
Figure 25 shows the ﬁrst 8 columns of the U and V matrices multiplied by the
relative weights given by the S matrix, from the SVD of the data matrix in a
smaller Q-range (0.3-3.5 ˚A−1).
Figure 25: The ﬁrst 8 columns of the U and V matrices with oﬀsets for clariﬁcation. The
decomposition is performed on the data set in a reduced Q-range outlined by the black
box shown in 24, showing the predominant shape and time evolution of the diﬀerence
scattering signals ∆Smeas(Q, ∆t). Primarily, the ﬁrst columns of both matrices represent
sample contributions based on the time evolution around time zero ∆t.
First of all, we notice that the ﬁrst columns of the U matrix contain signiﬁcantly
less noise. Secondly, we observe the ﬁrst curve U1 that shows maxima at Q< 0.7
and between approximately between 2-3 ˚A−1 area, and two minima around 1.0 and
1.5 ˚A−1. The appearance of this signal very much resembles the diﬀerence scattering
signal in 1D, after time zero. Since it is the ﬁrst column of the U matrix, it means that
this signal is the most ”signiﬁcant” contribution to the total data matrix. Prefer-
ably, the most signiﬁcant contribution describes the changes in the sample upon
photoexcitation. To inspect this further, we consider the corresponding columns of
the V matrix. The curves from the V matrix show the time evolution of each of the
curves from the U matrix. Similarly, the V1 curve shows an increase in magnitude,
around time zero ∆t = 0. This indicates, that U1 represents changing signal related
to the sample, since the it did not show up until after time zero. To examine the
signiﬁcance of the curves, we now consider the singular values Si,i from the S matrix.
The signiﬁcance of each curve is given by the singular values in the S matrix,
SVD analysis
page 41 of 86
==PAGE:48==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
which are shown below in Figure 26. In the left panel, only the 8 ﬁrst values are
shown belonging to each of the above shown U and V matrices. The right panel
shows all of the singular values for the given data set.
The singular values Si,i are gradually decreasing and converging towards zero,
with the ﬁrst value S1,1 relatively, large compared to the rest of the values. This
shows that the ﬁrst columns U1 and V1 are the most dominating contributions to
the given data matrix, with a relatively large ”jump” between S1,1 and the remaining
values. Unfortunately, the cut-oﬀbetween valuable data and ”just noise” is not a
speciﬁc number, and the magnitudes are only comparable to each other. With this in
mind, we can conclude that U2 and U3 are almost equally dominant within the data
set. Considering their shape, from the U matrix, they show signals diﬀerent from
zero especially around 1.5-3.0 and ˚A−1. However, considering their time evolution
from V1 and V2, they seem to ﬂuctuate continuously throughout the time delays,
indicating that these signals do not represent changes in the sample. This is not
preferable, since they represent the 2nd and 3rd most signiﬁcant contributions. The
next step is therefore to make a background subtraction of the measured scattering
signals and examine the consequences of the components of the diﬀerence signal
matrix.
Figure 26: The singular values from an SVD of the data set in a reduced Q-range. To
the left, the ﬁrst 8 singular values are shown, belonging to each of the curves shown
above for the U and V matrices. To the right, all of the singular values are shown, which
indicates the ﬁrst 4-5 singular values dominates the signals compared to the remaining
singular values. Overall, the data shows a relatively fast convergence towards zero, with
a relatively high ratio between the ﬁrst and second component.
SVD analysis
page 42 of 86
==PAGE:49==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
Background decomposition
As described by K. Haldrup in [70], a method to obtain information on the back-
ground noise in the measured diﬀerence scattering signals, is to perform an SVD of
the measured signals before time zero, ∆t < 0. In the measurements before time
zero, the x-ray pulse observe the sample before excitation by the optical laser pulse,
and therefore no change in the sample structure is expected. However, as evident
in the ﬁgure below, we observe several non-zero diﬀerence scattering signals before
time zero. Therefore, the next step is to perform an SVD of the scattering signals
before time zero, as shown below in Figure 27, outlined by the black box.
Figure 27: XDS diﬀerence signals ∆Smeas(Q, ∆t), showing non-zero diﬀerence signals
before time zero. The black box outlines the signals with ∆t < -0.2 ps, which is used in
an SVD of the ”background”.
The result of the singular value decomposition is shown in Figure 28 and 29.
Again, the ﬁrst 8 columns of the U and V matrices are shown multiplied by the
relative magnitudes determined by the S matrix.
Figure 28: The ﬁrst 8 columns of the U and V matrices with oﬀsets for clariﬁcation. The
decomposition is performed on the data set before time zero, outlined by the black box
shown in 27. The predominant shape and time evolution of the ”background” is shown.
SVD analysis
page 43 of 86
==PAGE:50==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
First of all, the magnitude of the signals is approximately a factor of 4 less, and
therefore not as dominant as the signals observed after time zero. However, we do
observe a signiﬁcant contribution from non-zero signal before time zero as observed
in the ﬁrst columns of the U matrix. Since these signals are observed before the
sample was excited by the optical laser pulse, the observed signals should not reﬂect
structural changes in the sample. Instead, it is likely that the observed background
signals are related to the experimental setup such as the detector response or air-
composition in the sample chamber.
From the singular values Si,i, shown below in Figure 29, we observe that par-
ticularly the ﬁrst two components S1, S2 dominate in the background diﬀerence
scattering signals. To the left, the ﬁrst 8 singular values Si,i, i =1-8 belonging to
each of the U and V matrices are shown, and to the right, all the singular values
are shown with the same y-axis as in Figure 26. Since, we believe that the signals
reﬂect noise in the diﬀerence scattering signals, we will use them in the following
section remove noise from the entire measured diﬀerence scattering data matrix.
Figure 29: The singular values from an SVD of the data set in a reduced time range
before time zero. To the left, the ﬁrst 8 singular values are shown, belonging to each of
the curves shown above for the U and V matrices. To the right, all of the singular values
are shown, which indicates the ﬁrst 1-2 singular values dominates the signals compared
to the remaining singular values. For an easier comparison, the values to right are shown
with the same axis as in the singular values belonging to the SVD of the reduced Q-range
data.
SVD as a tool for background subtraction
Since, we observe non-zero diﬀerence scattering signals before time zero, we believe
that the signals reﬂect background noise in the measured data. As described by
K. Haldrup in [70], a singular value decomposition of the measured signals before
excitation of the sample, can be used as a tool for background subtraction of the
entire range of measured scattering signals. The method uses the most dominant
SVD analysis
page 44 of 86
==PAGE:51==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
signals from an SVD of the background as a measure of noise, and use these in
a background subtraction. However, because the background signals are similar in
shape as the actual signal after time zero, it is not reliable to simply subtract the
background components from the entire data. Instead, the method in [70] uses ex-
isting knowledge of the sample, to limit the erroneous subtraction of actual signal.
By including the ﬁrst M columns of the U matrix, in combination with the ﬁt-
ting parameters describing the expected changes in the sample ∆Smodel, these extra
ﬁtting parameters from the data before time zero, are included in the model as a
description of the background ∆Sbackground. Then, by subtraction of the SVD part
of the ﬁt from the entire data set, the background is subtracted from the entire data
set.
In the ﬁtting approach we calculate weighted least squares ﬁts of one of several
models ∆Smodel to the measured XDS diﬀerence signals ∆Smeas, with the weight
described by the inverse variance
1
σ2. In the process of background subtraction, we
furthermore include a description of the background ∆Sbackground, and minimizes the
error estimate r
r =
N
X
j=1
1
σ2

∆Smeas −(∆Smodel + ∆Sbackground)
2
As described in the previous sections, the measured diﬀerence signals ∆Smeas(Q, ∆t)
consist of integrated scattering images with the laser on Slaser on with subtraction of
an average of the two nearest laser oﬀimages Slaser on.
∆Smeas = Slaser on −1
2

Slaser off(before) −Slaser off(after)

The various models ∆Smodel(Q, ∆t) consist of contributions from changes in the
solute structure ∆Sstructure, and changes in the solvent temperature ∆Stemp and
solvent density ∆Sdensity.
∆Smodel = α · ∆Sstructure + ∆T · ∆Stemp + ∆ρ · ∆Sdensity
Finally, the background ∆Sbackground is described by the ﬁrst M columns of the U
matrix multiplied with the the respective singular values from the S matrix from
the SVD of the measured signals before time zero ∆t < 0.
∆Sbackground =
M
X
i=1
ωi · UiSi
SVD analysis
page 45 of 86
==PAGE:52==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
For each of the time delays ∆t, we calculate a weighted least squares ﬁt including
the background components ∆Sbackground from the SVD of the measured signals
before time zero. The calculated ﬁts also depend on the choice of solute structure
used ∆Sstructure, but the SVD background components are basically zero in the low
Q range, and will therefore not aﬀect the ﬁt much in that range. Below, Figure 30
shows the mean of the absolute magnitude of the scaler values (α, ∆T, ∆ρ and ωi)
from the calculated ﬁts at each time delay, when including the ﬁrst 6 components
of the U and S matrix from the SVD of the data before time zero.
Figure 30: Average of the absolute magnitude of each of the scaler values (α, ∆t, ∆ρ and
ωi) all represented as a as a function of time delay ∆t. The ﬁt parameters include the
solute diﬀerence signal ∆Sstructure from the constructed structure, the solvent diﬀerence
signals of temperature and density changes ∆Stemp, ∆Sdensity and ﬁnally the ﬁrst 6
components of the U and S matrix from an SVD of the data before ∆T = 0. The structure
α, temperature ∆T and density ∆ρ components show signiﬁcant evolution around time
zero and describe the main contributors of the ﬁts. Also the ﬁrst two components ω1, ω2
describing the background contribute to the ﬁt, but they show large ﬂuctuations with no
apparent time dependency, which indicates their contribution as noise/artefacts to the
ﬁts. The third-sixth background components show the primary contribution before time
zero, but overall very low contribution to the ﬁt.
The key interest is to examine whether the included extra ﬁtting components
∆Sbackground may mimic the sample contributions in some way, instead of represent-
ing experimental noise. It is evident from the ﬁgure above, that the main contribu-
tors to the ﬁt, are the ”physical” parameters (α, ∆T, ∆ρ), and the ﬁrst two of the
background components (ω1, ω2). The inclusion of extra background components,
do not change this. The structure, temperature and density parameters show a clear
evolution around ∆t = 0 indicating, that these describe the sample evolution. In
contrast, the ﬁrst two of the SVD background components show no indication of
SVD analysis
page 46 of 86
==PAGE:53==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
time evolution and ﬂuctuates for the diﬀerent time delays. This indicates that the
background components do not represent a possible missing sample contribution
within the model and rather represent ”noise”.
When comparing the various ﬁts using an increasing number of background com-
ponents ∆Sbackground, we calculate the χ2-values, in the same manner as described
in the section The ﬁtting approach.
χ2 =
1
m−N−1
X
Q
(∆Smeas −(∆Smodel + ∆Sbackground))2
σ2
(11)
where m describes the number of ﬁtting components, which is 3 from the ∆Smodel
contribution and addition the M background components ∆Sbackground. Below, Ta-
ble 6 summarizes the average and median values of the calculated χ2-values, when
introducing an increasing number of background components in the ﬁts.
Table 6: Median and mean of the χ2-values of the least squares
ﬁt when increasing the number M of background components
∆Sbackground(Q, ∆t). The ﬁts are calculated by minimizing the er-
ror between the measured diﬀerence scattering signals ∆Smeas(Q, ∆t)
and the ﬁt components from the sample contribution ∆Smodel(Q, ∆t)
and the background contribution ∆Sbackground(Q, ∆t) as described in
the main text. The χ2-values are calculated using eq. (11) for each
time delay ∆t.
M
χ2-median
χ2-mean
0
2.88
3.11
1
2.43
2.47
2
2.26
2.12
4
2.24
2.07
6
2.23
2.02
8
2.12
1.93
When comparing the median and mean of the calculated χ2-values, it is evi-
dent, that the values do not change signiﬁcantly when including several background
components. The mean values varies a bit more, indicating some outlier values are
present. These values also indicate, that the extra ﬁtting components do not mimic
sample contributions of the ﬁts and only contributes to the ﬁts in a low extend.
After establishing, that the background components do not mimic missing sample
contributions, the next step is to subtract them from the raw data. Figure 31 shows,
the diﬀerence scattering signals upon subtraction of the background components
when including a varying number of SVD components ωi · UiSi.
SVD analysis
page 47 of 86
==PAGE:54==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
Figure 31: Measured diﬀerence scattering signals upon background subtraction. the six
images show the data matrix after including an increasing number of background com-
ponents ωi · UiSi in combination with the sample contribution ∆Smodel in the calculated
ﬁts and then subtracting the background contribution to the ”raw” measured signals.
Evidently, the scattering signals before time zero appear less noisy, and the signal
after time zero becomes more prominent, as the number of the background compo-
nents increases. However, the removal of the ﬁrst two background components results
in the most ”drastic change” of the data, as expected from Figure 29, which shows
that the ﬁrst two singular values dominate. No distinct diﬀerence is observed be-
tween the removal of the ﬁrst 2 or the ﬁrst 8 background components in the clean
data. This also shows, that the background components (i > 2) do not contribute
signiﬁcantly to the ﬁt, since they do not change the characteristics of the signal
upon subtraction.
The optimal way to reliably remove the background artefacts/noise would be to
ﬁnd the source giving rise to the signal, however, this it not always feasible. Instead,
the method proposed by K. Haldrup has proven a useful method to perform a
background subtraction of a given set of diﬀerence scattering signals. By applying
this method of including a given number of the SVD components from the signals
before time zero ∆t < 0 in the calculation of the weighted least squares ﬁt, we can
identify and remove signiﬁcant background contributions of the measured signals.
Using the ﬁrst two background components belonging to the SVD components seems
to do a suﬃcient job of subtracting background eﬀects.
SVD analysis
page 48 of 86
==PAGE:55==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
Clean data decomposition
In order to analyze the eﬀect of the background subtraction, an SVD of the ”cleaned”
diﬀerence scattering signals is performed. In the background subtraction, the ﬁrst
2 components ∆Sbackground = ω1 · U1S1 + ω2 · U2S2 was included in the ﬁt, and
then subtracted from the measured data. The results of the SVD upon background
subtraction are shown below in Figure 32 and 33.
Figure 32: The ﬁrst 8 columns of the U and V matrices with oﬀsets for clariﬁcation from
an SVD of the above described ”cleaned data”. The background subtraction included
the ﬁrst 2 background components from an SVD of the data before ∆t = 0. After the
cleaning procedure, the 1st and 2nd components from the new SVD represent sample
contribution based on the time evolution around ∆t = 0.
Again, the ﬁrst column U1 of the U matrix shows the most dominant signal with
very similar characteristics as before cleaning the data. However, the second column
U2 of the U matrix appears diﬀerent in the cleaned data. This indicates, that the
second largest contributor U2 to the original data matrix was noise related. Here,
the ﬁrst component U1, still shows a signiﬁcant change after time zero, based on
the ﬁrst column in the V matrix. Now, also the second curve V2 shows a slight time
evolution around ∆t = 0, and perhaps also the third column V3. This, indicates that
the most dominant contributions to the scattering data represent sample variations
Based on the singular values Si,i in the S matrix, the ﬁrst columns of the U and
V matrices becomes increasingly dominant compared to the remaining values, and
the remaining singular values converge faster towards zero. Below, Figure 33 shows
the singular values Si,i for the ﬁrst 8 columns of the U and V matrices and the
singular values of all the decompositions described in above sections.
SVD analysis
page 49 of 86
==PAGE:56==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
Figure 33: The singular values from an SVD of the data set in upon the above described
”cleaning” procedure . To the left, the ﬁrst 8 singular values Si,i, i =1-8 are shown, be-
longing to each of the curves shown above for the U and V matrices. To the right, the
ﬁrst 25 the singular values are shown for all the above described decompositions together.
Upon cleaning of the data set, the distance between the ﬁrst and the second singular value
is increased, indicating that the ”noise” components are reduced and sample contribu-
tions are increased. Overall, the data shows a relatively fast convergence towards zero,
indicating a more uniform data set.
To the left, the ﬁgure shows the 8 ﬁrst singular values Si,i upon an SVD of the
background cleaned data, where S1,1 clearly dominate the remaining values. To the
right, the ﬁrst 25 singular values are shown for each of the decompositions, where the
inﬂuence of ”manipulating” the data is shown. The dominating values S1,1 and S2,2
of the data before time zero, are clearly of less magnitude than the singular values
of the remaining decompositions. Furthermore, the inﬂuence of using the data of a
reduced Q-range compared to the full data matrix, increases the ”distance” between
S1,1 and S2,2, indicating that the noise contributed signiﬁcantly to the data matrix
before reducing the Q-range. Similarly, the result of ”cleaning” the data using the
background components ωi · UiSi from the background decomposition, increases the
ratio between S1,1 and S2,2. This indicates, that the data has become more uniform
in ”appearance”, and the components considered as noise contributed to a relatively
high extend of the data. For these reasons, the continuous analysis used the cleaned
experimental data.
SVD analysis
page 50 of 86
==PAGE:57==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
Noise estimation
As just described above, the experimental setup introduces noise in the data set.
Furthermore, the actual uncertainty of a measured data point, introduces noise in
the data set. In this work two diﬀerent methods are used to estimate this type of
noise. Either by use of the polynomial method or by use of the wavelet method,
both will be described brieﬂy in the following sections. Regardless of the method
used, the goal is to obtain an estimate of the noise level in the data set.
The noise level is estimated by generating a ”denoised” curve Cnoise, and deter-
mine the residual R, between the data points in a given interval of the measured
scattering signals ∆Sinterval and Cnoise, for each point i in the smaller intervals of
the data.
Ri = ∆Si,interval −Ci,noise
From the residual, for the given interval, the standard deviation is calculated as the
root mean square.
σ =
v
u
u
t
1
N−1
N
X
i=1
|Ri −Rmean|2
where N is the number of points and Rmean is the mean of the residuals in the given
interval.
Rmean = 1
N
N
X
i=1
Ri
In this way, each of the points i from the data set ∆Sdata is provided with a given
noise estimate σi. The standard deviation is used as a weight of each data point,
when calculating the least squares ﬁt between the measured diﬀerence signals ∆Sdata
and one of the described models ∆Smodel in the section Components of the models
describing the scattering signals. In the following sections the polynomial method
and the wavelet method are described shortly. For an elaboration of the methods,
and an analysis of the inﬂuence of the methods on the estimated noise level, please
see Appendix A.
The polynomial method
The idea behind the polynomial method is to estimate the noise level by approx-
imating the values of the data ∆Sinterval(Q) in intervals of lengths N as above.
Speciﬁcally, we approximate the data by polynomials C(x)
C(x) = a1xn + a2xn−1 + . . . + anx + an+1
A polynomial ﬁt is calculated from each point Q in the data ∆S(Q) and the nearest
lying data points determined by the interval length N. The method varies by choice
Noise estimation
page 51 of 86
==PAGE:58==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
of order n of the polynomial and the size of the intervals the data is split into N.
The idea was ﬁrst introduced by Dent et al. in 1991 [71], who used this method in
an application of noise estimation in XAS data.
The method is used as follows. (i) Choose a given data point Qi and an interval
length N e.g. 20 points. (ii) Fit a low order polynomial to the speciﬁc interval
of points. (iii) Determine the standard deviation of the selected data point to the
calculated polynomial. The procedure is repeated for each point Qi in the data set.
The method has also been used with success by Haldrup et al. in 2009 [40] in the
analysis of time-resolved x-ray scattering data. In the work related to this thesis,
the polynomial ﬁts are calculated using the built-in functions polyfit and polyval
from MATLAB®.
The wavelet method
Noise estimation and denoising has been a well-known problem for many years.
Mathematicians have provided several tools to deal with noise, and one of them is
the use of wavelets.
MATLAB® has a build-in function called wden for this purpose. The theory
behind the function is based on a model that describes the noisy signal Snoise(n) in
components of the underlying signal f(n) and some noise e(n).
Snoise(n) = f(n) + e(n)
The goal of any denoising method is to suppress the noise part e and recover f.
The wavelet method [72],[73] is based on a decomposition of the noisy signal
Snoise into two vectors, the so called detail coeﬃcients Di and the approximation
coeﬃcients Ai. The assumption of the wavelet denoising method is that the detail
coeﬃcients contain information about the noise e. The approximation coeﬃcients
contain only information about the signal f. The decomposition coeﬃcients depend
on the choice of the so called wavelet based on the oscillatory behavior of the data
with fast oscillations indicating noise. For more on the wavelet method, see the Ap-
pendix A.
The wavelet method works as follows. (i) Decomposition. The choice of wavelet
and level determines the coeﬃcients of the decomposition. (ii) Thresholding of the
detail coeﬃcients. The detail coeﬃcients Di are modiﬁed, determined by a threshold
varying for each level. (iii) Reconstruction. The signal is reconstructed from the ﬁnal
approximation coeﬃcient and the modiﬁed detail coeﬃcients.
Noise estimation
page 52 of 86
==PAGE:59==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
In conclusion, the polynomial and wavelet based methods both provide an es-
timate of the noise in the measured diﬀerence signals. In the polynomial method,
the noise estimate varies depending on the choice of polynomial order n, and the
size of the intervals used to calculate the best ﬁt polynomials. From a qualitative
inspection of an example of a scattering signal ∆S(Q, 2 ps), showing the largest
ﬂuctuating behavior of close lying data points and knowledge from the SVD de-
composition of the total signal, we are expecting a result showing high noise at Q
below 0.5, and around 2 and 3 ˚A−1. For a resulting σ2 value with high noise in these
regions, the combination of a polynomial order of 2, and an interval length of one
tenth of the data set (42 points in each ﬁt) provided the expected results. Similarly,
for the wavelet method, the noise estimate varies primarily based on the level pa-
rameter. Also, the choice of wavelet used in the denoising process has an inﬂuence,
but the speciﬁc consequence needs further analysis. With the choice of the wavelet
Daubechies 40 [72], a denoising level of 5 provided the most reliable result based on
the σ2 values and the appearance of the denoised signal, showing a smooth signal
without high frequency oscillations, and low deviation from the original data. Both
methods show, that the estimation of noise varies according to the choices made for
each method, and one should choose carefully. The resulting σ values obtained from
one of the methods is included as a weight for each point in the ﬁtting procedure
describe by eq. (10).
Noise estimation
page 53 of 86
==PAGE:60==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
Analysis, results and discussion
A comparison of the performance of the above described three diﬀerent solute struc-
tures will be presented in the following sections. The calculated χ2-ﬁts are analyzed
through a quantitative comparison with the experimental data, and through the
scaler values α, ∆T and ∆ρ describing the excitation fraction of the solute, change
in temperature and change in density of the solvent, respectively. Besides this, the
resulting diﬀerence between the calculated ﬁts and data are analyzed in order to
examine potential missing parts of the model. The ﬁts are also compared through
the χ2-values, as deﬁned in equation (10) in section The ﬁtting approach.
To begin with, we consider again the measured data, shown below in Figure
34. To the left, the measured X-ray Diﬀuse Scattering (XDS) diﬀerence scattering
signals ∆S(Q, ∆t) are shown in 2D for all the time delays ranging from -1.1−3.4 ps.
To the right selected signals are shown with an oﬀset for clarity. The signals are
background subtracted as described in the section SVD as a tool for background
subtraction.
Figure 34: The measured XDS diﬀerence signals, ∆S(Q, ∆t), upon background subtraction, repre-
sented in 2D to the left, and in 1D at selected time delays to the right.
Upon the background subtraction the diﬀerence scattering signals are approxi-
mately zero, before the excitation i.e. before ∆t = 0. After time zero, we observe
a positive diﬀerence signal in the low Q-range, and again ∼2.3 ˚A-1. Between these
peaks, and above 2.7 ˚A-1, the diﬀerence signals are negative. The ﬁrst positive peak
at low Q-values appears immediately upon excitation, whereas the second positive
peak seems to dominate as the time delay increases. We believe, the positive signal
at low Q-values originates from structural changes on the solute molecule. In sec-
tion Background of [Ru(bpy)3]2+, we learned that the excitation takes less than 25 fs
and that the lifetime of the excited 3MLCT state is around 600 ns, which greatly
Analysis, results and discussion
page 54 of 86
==PAGE:61==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
exceeds our measured time range. Therefore, we believe the positive signal at low Q
to originate from structural changes on the solute, since the signal arise immediately
after time zero and also appears constant in the measured time range. A positive
signal is the result of electronic density increasing, which indicates a contraction of
the solute molecular bonds. The positive signal above 2 ˚A-1 indicates a signal arising
from a solvent response of a temperature increase because of the later grow in. From
literature, the response time of the solvent is approximately 1 ps upon excitation [74].
Building up the model
For each of the time delays ∆t, weighted least squares ﬁts of one of several models
∆Smodel to the XDS diﬀerence signals ∆Sdata are calculated as described in the
section The ﬁtting approach. For a data set containing N points, the weighted least
squares ﬁt minimizes the error estimate r including a weight wi for each point. These
weights are described by the inverse variance
1
σ2, as described in the section Noise
estimation.
r =
N
X
i=1
1
σ2

∆Sdata −∆Smodel
2
In the following, we evaluate various models ∆Smodel. We are expecting a change
in the signal to arise from the structural changes in the solute, and therefore, the
ﬁrst model only consists of the solute structure term.
∆Smodel A = α · ∆Sstructure
The calculated ﬁts using model A, are shown below in the ﬁrst row of Figure 35,
with the constructed structure used, described in section Description of the solute
structures. The ﬁgure shows the background subtracted diﬀerence signals ∆Sdata to
the left, the calculated ﬁts ∆Smodel in the middle, and the diﬀerence between the
two to the right. A weighted least squares ﬁt is calculated for each of ∆t, and the
ﬁgure below illustrates the result of the ﬁts from all time delays, shown in 2D.
Clearly, including only the solute changes does not suﬃciently explain the charac-
teristics of the measured data. As described in the section Background of [Ru(bpy)3]2+,
vibrational cooling of the excited state begins on a fs time scale, and this energy
will be transferred to the solvent, resulting in a temperature increase of the solvent.
Based on this, we are also expecting a gradual increase in temperature within the
time scales of the experiment. The second model therefore, includes both the change
in the solute ∆Sstructure and change in the solvent signal due to increasing temper-
ature ∆Stemp.
∆Smodel B = α · ∆Sstructure + ∆T · ∆Stemp
Building up the model
page 55 of 86
==PAGE:62==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
The resulting ﬁts are shown in the second row of Figure 35, along with the back-
ground subtracted measured signals and the diﬀerence between the experimental
data and calculated ﬁts.
Increasing temperature, results in increasing density of the water solvent, con-
sidering an thermally equilibrated system. However, even though we are far from
a system in equilibrium, the density of water molecules might still change when
considering the nearest solvation shell. The nearest lying solvent molecules might
be ”squeezed” into the bulk solvent as a result of the structural changes of the so-
lute, considering the very closed packed water molecules in between the ligands,
in a chain-like manner as described by Moret et al. [24], and Figure 20 shown in
section Comparison with literature. Therefore, the third model furthermore includes
the signal arising from solvent change in density ∆Sdensity resulting in the model:
∆Smodel C = α · ∆Sstructure + ∆T · ∆Stemp + ∆ρ · ∆Sdensity
In the last row of Figure 35, the calculated ﬁts using this model is shown, along with
the measured diﬀerence signals to the left, and the residuals to the right.
∆Smodel A
∆Smodel B
∆Smodel C
χ2
median = 10.59
χ2
median = 8.80
χ2
median = 3.61
∆SData(Q, ∆t)
∆SData(Q, ∆t)
∆SData(Q, ∆t)
Figure 35: The measured XDS background subtracted diﬀerence signals ∆Sdata(Q, ∆t)
to the left, the calculated ﬁts ∆Smodel in the middle column, and the diﬀerence between
them in the right column. The top ﬁt only includes the solute structure ∆Sstructure,
whereas the middle includes both the structure ∆Sstructure and the solvent temperature
∆Stemp, and the bottom ﬁt includes both solute structure ∆Sstructure and the solvent
temperature ∆Stemp and density ∆Sdensity as described in the main text
Building up the model
page 56 of 86
==PAGE:63==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
χ2 = 7.39
χ2 = 5.24
χ2 = 3.43
Figure 36: The calculated weighted least squares ﬁt at a time delay ∆t = 2 ps in the top panel
shown with the XDS diﬀerence signals ∆S(Q, 2 ps) and the contributions from each of the ﬁt
components in the bottom. The ﬁrst column uses model A, the second column model B, and the
third column model C described in the main text.
An example of the calculated weighted ﬁts are shown in Figure 36 at a time
delay of ∆t = 2 ps. The plots to the left, show the measured diﬀerence signals, along
with model A, including only the structural component. The plots in the middle
column, show model B with the measured data, and the speciﬁc contributions from
the solute term, and the temperature term. In the third column, model C is shown
with the scattering data, and each of the contributions from the solute structural
change, the solvent temperature change and density change, in the bottom.
Evidently, the calculated diﬀerence signal related to changes in the solute struc-
ture ∆Sstructure only contributes to the ﬁt in the lower part of the Q-range. Similarly,
the temperature solvent diﬀerence signal ∆Stemp contributes to the ﬁt in the region
around 2 ˚A−1 with a gradually increasing negative and positive peak. The density
diﬀerence signal ∆Sdensity contribute particularly in the negative peaks around 1 ˚A−1.
The above ﬁgures, only show the case including the constructed structure as a
description of the solute structural changes. The improvements of the ﬁts are also
observed when using other either the simple DFT structural change or the rela-
tivistic DFT structural change. Below, in Table 7 the χ2 values are shown for the
Building up the model
page 57 of 86
==PAGE:64==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
diﬀerent combinations of ﬁtting parameters. The value is calculated as the median
of all the χ2 values after time zero. Before time zero, all of the ﬁtting combinations
show signiﬁcantly lower χ2 values.
Table 7: Median of χ2 values for all ﬁts after time zero.
Fitting parameters
χ2
comment
∆Smodel A (simple DFT)
9.75
Varying between 5-13.
∆Smodel A (relativistic DFT)
8.36
Varying between 4-11.
∆Smodel A (constructed)
10.59
Varying between 5-14.
∆Smodel B (simple DFT)
6.99
Varying between 4-12.
∆Smodel B (relativistic DFT)
5.38
Varying between 3-9.
∆Smodel B (constructed)
8.80
Varying between 4-12.
∆Smodel C (simple DFT)
4.22
Varying between 3-6.
∆Smodel C (relativistic DFT)
3.99
Varying between 3-6.
∆Smodel C (constructed)
3.61
Varying between 2-6.
Both the solvent change in temperature and solvent change in density are also
included in the model to describe the photoinduced structural changes for the struc-
turally similar system [Fe(bpy)3]2+ [74]. As described in their work (Haldrup et al.),
the iron metal complex is photoexcited from a ground state of low-spin conﬁguration
to singlet 1MLCT state followed by a prompt (<30 fs) inter-system crossing to the
triplet 3MLCT state with a 100 fs lifetime in contrast to the [Ru(bpy)3]2+complex,
and relaxation into a high-spin metal centered (MC) state. The results show an
elongation of the Fe-N bond of 0.2 ˚A within <250 fs. Similarly, for the ruthenium
complex, including the solvent change in temperature ∆Stemp is necessary, due to
the vibrational cooling in the 1MLCT state, in which the energy is transferred to the
solvent in less than 300 fs [22]. Including the solvent density change ∆Sdensity for the
iron complex is described as due to the expulsion of ∼2 water molecules from the
inner solvation shell into the bulk solvent as a response to the structural changes of
the solute complex, which results in a fast (∼1 ps time constant) density increase,
observed within the measured time range of 2.5 ps. For [Ru(bpy)3]2+a similar result
might be the case, and will be analyzed further. Similarly, work by Szymczak et al.
[37] conclude that the excited 3MLCT state is able to accommodate one extra water
molecule in the ﬁrst solvation shell, corresponding to ∼10% more. Furthermore, they
describe that by 880 fs the water molecules of the ﬁrst solvation shells have reorga-
nized. The work is based on molecular dynamics (MD) simulations using CHARMM
[75] and VALBOND-TRANS [76] force ﬁelds of solvated [Ru(bpy)3]2+in the ground
state and 3MLCT state, in a pre-equilibrated cubic box of 37.25 ˚A containing 1694
Building up the model
page 58 of 86
==PAGE:65==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
water molecules described by the TIP3P [77] potential. The charge distribution on
the solute molecule was described by Mulliken partial charges from optimized DFT
calculations. Based on these results, we would also expect to observe a contribution
to the diﬀerence signals from a change in density on the time scales within this
experiment (<3.4 ps). For now, all three contributions are therefore included in the
model, and we move on to analyze the eﬀect of using three diﬀerent models of the
description of the solute structural changes.
Changing the solute structure description
The changes in the signals due to structural changes of the solute molecule, is de-
scribed using either the simple DFT structure, the relativistic DFT structure, or
the constructed structure. Each model was described in the section Description of
the solute structures.
Regardless of the structure, the overall model being compared is:
∆Smodel = α · ∆Sstructure + ∆T · ∆Stemp + ∆ρ · ∆Sdensity
∆Smodel =











∆Ssimple DFT
∆Srel DFT
∆Sconstructed
with the ∆Sstructure term described by one of the above described solute struc-
tures. In the following, the model using the simple DFT structure is referred to as
∆Ssimple DFT, the model using the relativistic structure as ∆Srel DFT, and the model
using the constructed structure as, ∆Sconstructed. Below, Figure 37 shows the calcu-
lated ﬁts ∆Smodel for each time delay illustrated in 2D, along with the measured
XDS diﬀerence signals Sdata(Q, ∆t) after background subtraction and the diﬀerence
between the data and ﬁts.
In the ﬁgure, the ﬁrst column presents the background subtracted experimental
data for comparison, the second column shows the calculated ﬁts for each of the
models using diﬀerent solute structures, and the third column shows the residuals.
Qualitatively, all of the models capture the same features as the experimentally
obtained data well. That is, positive signals in the low Q-area and again after 2 ˚A-1,
and negative signals between 1-2 ˚A-1 and above 2.5 ˚A-1. Similarly, along the time
delays, the ﬁts show approximately no signal before time zero, and immediate signal
after time zero, with the second positive signal increasing with time delays. The
models primarily, diﬀer in the low Q-range, which is expected since the solute dif-
ference signal primarily describes the low Q-range and the other ﬁtting parameters
are the same for the three models. However, similar for all three models, the positive
Changing the solute structure description
page 59 of 86
==PAGE:66==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
χ2
median = 3.85
χ2
median = 3.68
χ2
median = 3.40
Figure 37: The measured XDS background subtracted diﬀerence signals ∆Sdata(Q, ∆t)
to the left, the calculated ﬁts ∆Smodel(Q, ∆t) in the second column, and the diﬀerence
between them in the right column. The top ﬁt is based on the model using the simple DFT
structure, the middle uses the relativistic DFT structure and, and the bottom ﬁt uses
the constructed structure as a description of the solute scattering contribution. All three
ﬁts include furthermore the solvent temperature ∆Stemp(Q, ∆t) and density diﬀerence
signals ∆Sdensity(Q, ∆t).
peak at low Q is lower than the experimental data, indicating either that all the
three models are wrong, or that something else is missing in the model. We will
look more into that later in the analysis. However, the experimental data in the low
Q-range are less trustworthy since they are more noisy as previously shown in the
subsection Full data decomposition within the section SVD analysis. The median
and mean χ2-value of all the ﬁts from each time delay is shown in Table 8
Table 8: Median and mean of χ2 values for all ﬁts from each time
delay. All ﬁts include contributions from the solute structure, tem-
perature and density diﬀerence signals.
Model
χ2-median
χ2-mean
∆Ssimple DFT
3.85
3.96
∆Srel DFT
3.68
3.82
∆Sconstructed
3.40
3.80
Changing the solute structure description
page 60 of 86
==PAGE:67==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
Below, Figure 38 shows one of the calculated ﬁts for all three models in 1D at
the time delays of 1.5 ps with the experimental data. Furthermore, the calculated
ﬁts are shown in 2D with the black line indicating the chosen ﬁt shown below. In
the ﬁnal row of the ﬁgure, the individual ﬁtting contributions are shown. Notice,
that the plots belonging to the same model, now are shown vertically instead of
horizontally, for an easier comparison of the diﬀerent parts of the ﬁgure.
χ2
med = 3.85
χ2
med = 3.68
χ2
med = 3.40
χ2 = 4.21
χ2 = 4.09
χ2 = 4.57
Figure 38: Results of the weighted least squares ﬁts of the three diﬀerent models
∆Ssimple DF T , ∆Srel DF T and ∆Sconstructed. The top images show the calculated ﬁts
of each time delay ∆t illustrated in 2D, and the plots in the second row show the experi-
mental XDS diﬀerence signals, ∆S(Q, 1.5 ps) and the model at a time delay of 1.5 ps, also
marked in the top images as the black line. The green curve shows the diﬀerence between
the two, with an oﬀset for clarity. The bottom part of the ﬁgure shows the contributions
of the 3 diﬀerent components to the ﬁt at a time delay of 1.5 ps
Again, it is evident that the models show diﬃculties in ﬁtting of the data in
the low Q-range. However, the models also predict diﬀerent contributions from the
solvent, where especially the density diﬀerence signal shows a larger contribution
Changing the solute structure description
page 61 of 86
==PAGE:68==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
when using the constructed structure to describe the solute signal. The larger den-
sity contribution is in agreement with the fact that the constructed structure model
predicts a greater change in the solute structure from ground state to excited state,
and thus a solvent response might be larger.
Analysis of the temporal evolution
The next step is to consider the scaler values α, ∆T and ∆ρ associated with each
of the ﬁtting parameters ∆Sstructure, ∆Stemp and ∆Sdensity. The temporal evolution
of each scaler value is shown below in Figure 39 for all three models. Each of the
columns represents a diﬀerent model in order for an easier comparison horizontally.
±0.002
±0.020
±0.003
±0.004
±0.008
±0.004
±0.003
±0.002
±0.003
Figure 39: Temporal evolution of the scaler values (α, ∆T, ∆ρ) associated with each
of the ﬁtting parameters (∆Sstructure, ∆Stemp, ∆Sdensity). The top three plots show
the scaler values of the solute diﬀerence signal for each of the structures (simple DFT,
relativistic DFT and constructed). The three plots in the second row show the scaler
values belonging to the temperature diﬀerence signal ∆Stemp in units of K. The bottom
three plots show the scaler values associated with the density diﬀerence signal ∆Sdensity
in units of kg/m3. The error bar is calculated as the standard deviation obtained from
each data point, and the value presented is an average of all standard deviations.
Analysis of the temporal evolution
page 62 of 86
==PAGE:69==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
In the ﬁrst row, the ﬁgure shows the scaler values α belonging to the solute
diﬀerence signal ∆Sstructure for each time delay. Notice, the y-axis is diﬀerent for
the scaler values associated with the solute diﬀerence signal. Due to the previous
scaling of the data, this scaler value corresponds to the excitation fraction of the so-
lute molecule. The simple DFT model then obtains an excitation fraction of around
10%, the relativistic model obtains an excitation fraction of around 35%, and the
constructed model obtains around 5% estimated from a qualitative inspection of
the values after time zero. Since the calculated scattering signals are based on the
expected structural changes of the solute, we do not expect a contribution from the
solute before time zero ∆t = 0. All of the three models show this characteristic, with
approximately zero structural change contribution before time zero and a prompt
increase around time zero. After time zero, the values are approximately constant,
in agreement with the long lifetime of the excited 3MLCT state.
From literature, similar experiments using time-resolved wide angle x-ray scat-
tering methods on an XFEL, have shown an excitation fraction of 43±0.03% of the
structurally similar compound [Fe(bpy)3]+2] [74],[44]. Similarly, for the bimetallic
RuCo complex ([Ru(bpy)2(tpphz)Co(bpy)2]+5, tpphz = tetrapyrido) Canton et al.
[45] obtain an excitation fraction of 67±4%. Based on these values, the excitation
fraction of ∼35% obtained from the relativistic DFT model, ∆Srel DFT shows the
greatest resemblance. However, the experimental setup also aﬀects the results e.g.
the power of the laser might have been diﬀerent.
The second row of the ﬁgure shows the scaler vales ∆T associated with the
temperature diﬀerence signal ∆Stemp. Upon scaling of the data, the scaler values
associated with the temperature diﬀerence signal corresponds to a temperature in-
crease measured in K. The temperature should not change before the vibrational
cooling of the excited molecule, and therefore, we expect approximately zero tem-
perature change before time zero ∆t = 0 and a gradual increase as long as the solute
molecule is vibrationally relaxing. The vibrational cooling from the 1MLCT is very
fast, it takes ∼40-200 fs [78], but the vibrational cooling of the 3MLCT state takes
∼10 ps [78], which exceeds our measured time range. Therefore, we do not expect the
change in temperature to have reached maximum. All three models are in agreement
with the described expectations showing approximately zero change before time zero
and a given time after the excitation, here around 1 ps the temperature change starts
increasing. Within the measured time range, the three diﬀerent models all predict a
temperature change of approximately 0.10 K after the 3.4 ps upon excitation.
Referring to the same literature as above [74],[44], they ﬁnd a temperature in-
crease of 2.75±0.08 K within the ﬁrst 2.4 ps of the photoexcitation of [Fe(bpy)3]+2]
but as described above, the lifetime of the triplet state is much shorter (∼100 fs [79])
Analysis of the temporal evolution
page 63 of 86
==PAGE:70==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
than for the ruthenium complex (∼600 ns). Therefore, the results are in agreement
with a lower temperature increase for [Ru(bpy)3]2+on these time scales. Similarly,
for the RuCo complex canton et al. [45] observe a rise in temperature of 1.0±0.1 K
within the ﬁrst 50 ps of excitation. They observe the initial increase already in the
very early time delays ∼1 ps in agreement with the results of [Ru(bpy)3]2+observed
here.
For the scaler values ∆T, it is furthermore debatable whether the values are too
much on the negative side, around time zero ∆t = 0 indicating a temperature de-
crease, or whether it is uncertainty. Since the temperature change cannot ﬂuctuate
between positive and negative values, a least squares ﬁt forcing only positive scaler
values was calculated. The result was then, that all scaler values before time zero
were basically zero, and the temperature started increasing after approximately 1 ps,
which is basically the same result assuming the ﬂuctuations describe uncertainty.
The choice was therefore, to stay with current method of choice, and disregard pos-
sible negative values. The uncertainty of each point was also given by the standard
deviation of each point to the ﬁt, and the average value is indicated in the ﬁgure for
both the α, ∆T and ∆ρ values from the diﬀerent models.
Finally, in the third row, the scaler values ∆ρ belonging to the solvent density
diﬀerence signal ∆Sdensity are shown. The change in density should be considered as
a change in density in the bulk solvent as a result of structural change and energy de-
position from the solute molecule. All of the three models, present an abrupt increase
in density around time zero ∆t = 0, which indicates an immediate change in the
solvent, following photoexcitation. The changes in solvent on an ultrafast timescale
was also observed for the photoexcitation of the [Fe(bpy)3]+2] [74],[44], metal com-
plex, where ∼2 water molecules are ”pushed” into the bulk solvent, as a result of the
overall expansion of the metal complex, and therefore the density change is observed
at such low time scales (0.3 kg/m3, 90 ps). However, in the current results, the den-
sity increase seems to change prompt around time zero, ∆t = 0 and approximately
constant after time zero, indicating that the change in the bulk solvent density oc-
curs immediately following excitation. The reason for this needs further analysis.
The simple DFT model shows a density increase around 0.06 kg/m3, whereas the
use of the relativistic DFT model shows ∼0.05 kg/m3 and the constructed model
shows ∼0.08 kg/m3. The noise, however, makes the exact prediction diﬃcult. Espe-
cially, when using the relativistic DFT model, the ﬂuctuations of the data points
are almost greater than the predicted change.
Analysis of the temporal evolution
page 64 of 86
==PAGE:71==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
Now, we look more into the expected shapes of the time evolution of the above
described scaler values α, ∆T, ∆ρ. The scattering signals, we observe, do not show
an immediate change due the excited electron of the solute molecule. However,
the structural response of the molecule, resulting in atomic movement give rise to
a changing scattering signal ∆Sstructure. Therefore, the scaler values α associated
with the changes in the solute structure ∆Sstructure, do not show the characteristics
of a step function. Instead, due to the delay in the nuclei movement, we expect an
exponential grow-in. However, a Gaussian broadening of the exponential is expected
to be observed, due to the given time resolution of the experiment. The width of
the rise centered at time zero ∆t = 0 can then be considered as a measure of
the time resolution of our experiment assuming an immediate structural response
upon excitation. Similarly, the solvent rearrangement, here observed as an increase
in temperature ∆T and density ∆ρ of the bulk solvent, is expected to show an
exponential grow-in. The exponential increase of the scaler values α, ∆T, ∆ρ is
modeled via
f(∆t) =





0
∆t < 0
h(1 −e−∆t/τ),
∆t ≥0.
(12)
Here τ is the so-called, lifetime of the decay described by e−∆t/τ and h is the limit
of f(∆t) as ∆t →∞.
The Gaussian is of its usual standard form, i.e.,
g(∆t) =
1
σ
√
2πe−(∆t−µ)2/(2σ2),
(13)
where σ and µ are the standard deviation and mean of the Gaussian, respectively.
As mentioned above, the measured signal is expected to be given by the Gaussian
g convolved with the exponential increase of α, ∆T, ∆ρ described by f, that is, we
will ﬁt the data with

g ∗f

(∆t) =
Z ∞
−∞g(s)f(∆t −s) ds
= 1
2h

1 −e(2µτ+σ2)/(2τ 2)e−∆t/τ
+ erf

µτ−τ∆t+σ2
στ
√
2

e(2µτ+σ2)/(2τ 2)e−∆t/τ −erf

µ−∆t
σ
√
2

(14)
where erf is the error function, the anti-derivative of the Gaussian, i.e., erf(x) =
2
√π
R x
0 e−t2 dt.
Analysis of the temporal evolution
page 65 of 86
==PAGE:72==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
To summarize, we now ﬁt the function g ∗f given as in (14) to the scaler values.
Note that there are four degrees of freedom, h, µ, σ, τ, which in our ﬁt describe the
height, midpoint, uncertainty (i.e., time resolution) and rate of exponential increase
of the signal. Below, Figure 40 shows the result of the ﬁts to each of the scaler values,
when using the constructed structure.
Figure 40: Fits of the kinetic model described as an exponential grow-in given by eq. (12) convolved
with a Gaussian as eq. (13) to describe the temporal evolution of the scaler values (α, ∆T, ∆ρ)
associated with each of the ﬁtting parameters (∆Sstructure, ∆Stemp, ∆Sdensity)
The parameters h, σ, τ, µ found using each of the models ∆Ssimple DFT, ∆Srel DFT,
∆Sconstructed are summarized in Table 9, 10, and 11.
Using the kinetic model to describe the excitation fraction α results in 11±0.4%
excitation with the ∆Ssimple DFT model, 34±2% with the ∆Srel DFT model and
5±0.3% with the constructed ∆Sconstructed model. From the σ parameter, we obtain
an estimate of the actual time resolution of the experiment assuming an immediate
response upon photoexcitation. However, the uncertainty of the ﬁtting parameter is
very high. The uncertainties are estimated with a 95% conﬁdence level within the
model. With this in mind, the time resolution is on the order of 100 fs. As described
in the section Scattering data, the time resolution is limited by the pulse width of the
lasers (∼70 fs and 30 fs), and the velocity mismatch between the sources through the
liquid jet. With a path length through the jet of ∼141 µm, and a time smearing of
approximately 1 fs pr. µm, we obtain a time resolution of ∼141 fs, which is roughly in
agreement with the σ values. The midpoint of the Gaussian µ, provides information
on, when the exponential growth begins, which is expected to be at ∆t = 0 for the
excitation fraction, since the excitation is ultrafast (<25 fs [22]). Since all models
show negative values, also considering the uncertainty, it appears that the actual
time zero lies roughly 100 fs below the current time zero. However, that is also our
approximate time resolution, showing that the current time zero is ”correct” within
the time resolution.
Analysis of the temporal evolution
page 66 of 86
==PAGE:73==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
Table 9: Parameters obtained by ﬁtting eq. (14) to the scaler values
α from each of the models ∆Ssimple DF T , ∆Srel DF T , ∆Sconstructed
Parameter
∆Ssimple DFT
∆Srel DFT
∆Sconstructed
α
0.11 ±0.004
0.34 ±0.02
0.05 ± 0.003
σ [fs]
88 ± 152
77 ±224
106 ± 238
τ [fs]
419 ±122
585 ± 161
758 ± 209
µ [fs]
-88 ±78
-146 ±91
-145 ± 103
Table 10: Parameters obtained by ﬁtting eq. (14) to the scaler values
∆T from each of the models ∆Ssimple DF T , ∆Srel DF T , ∆Sconstructed
Parameter
∆Ssimple DFT
∆Srel DFT
∆Sconstructed
∆T
0.10 ±0.04
0.13 ±0.06
0.10 ± 0.04
σ [ps]
0.16 ± 0.46
0.24 ± 0.43
0.007 ± 1.9
τ [ps]
1.64 ±1.4
2.01 ± 1.8
1.78 ± 1.2
µ [ps]
0.74 ±0.23
0.50 ± 0.27
0.90 ± 0.15
Table 11: Parameters obtained by ﬁtting eq. (14) to the scaler values
∆ρ from each of the models ∆Ssimple DF T , ∆Srel DF T , ∆Sconstructed
Parameter
∆Ssimple DFT
∆Srel DFT
∆Sconstructed
∆ρ
0.05 ±0.002
0.03 ±0.003
0.07 ± 0.002
σ [ps]
0.06 ± 0.008
0.05 ± 0.04
0.08 ± 0.02
τ [ps]
0.01 ±0.01
0.01 ± 0.02
0.01 ± 0.002
µ [ps]
-0.01 ±0.04
-0.03 ± 0.06
0.01 ± 0.03
Using the kinetic model to describe the temperature increase, ∆T , results in
a temperature increase between 0.06 K and 0.19 K where the three diﬀerent models
∆Ssimple DFT, ∆Srel DFT, ∆Sconstructed show similar results. From the τ parameter, we
can estimate the lifetime of the vibrational relaxation upon excitation, for the triplet
state. Assuming the exponential is the dominating function, at high time delays, we
can estimate, the time to reach 95% of the height (∆T) of the exponential increase
using eq 12.
0.95 = 1 −e−∆t/τ
By solving the above equation with respect to ∆t we estimate the time when 95% of
the ﬁnal height is reached. Estimating the begin of the exponential growth as 1 ps, we
can estimate the relaxation time of the triplet state. According to the ∆Ssimple DFT
model, the relaxation time is 8±4 ps considering the uncertainty of τ. According
to the ∆Srel DFT model, the relaxation time is 9±5 ps, and ﬁnally according to the
∆Sconstructed model, the relaxation time is 8±3 ps. From literature, the time of vi-
brational relaxation in the triplet excited state is ∼10 ps. [80],[78].
Analysis of the temporal evolution
page 67 of 86
==PAGE:74==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
Using the kinetic model to describe the density increase, ∆ρ, results in a
0.05 ±0.002 kg/m3 increase with the ∆Ssimple DFT model, 0.03±0.003 kg/m3 with
the ∆Srel DFT model and 0.07±0.002 kg/m3 with the constructed ∆Sconstructed model.
However, the exponential growth begins within 100 fs (at the latest) of excitation,
which is earlier than the corresponding σ-values related to the excitation fraction
α. Clearly, the solvent cannot have rearranged before the solute structural change
are begun. It also appears from a qualitative inspection of the ﬁt shown to the right
of Figure 40, that the exponential contribution is very small, and the dominating
function is the error function. This indicates, that the solvent density parameter
∆Sdensity ”catches” something missing from the model.
To sum up, the temporal evolution is expected to follow an exponential growth,
with a broadening described by a Gaussian, due to the time resolution of the exper-
iment. By ﬁtting an exponential increase, eq. (12), convolved with a Gaussian, eq.
(13), to each of the ﬁtting parameters α, ∆T and ∆ρ, we obtain information on the
most probable value of each with an uncertainty estimated within a 95% conﬁdence
level. We ﬁnd excitation fractions, α, of 11±0.4% with the ∆Ssimple DFT model,
34±2% with the ∆Srel DFT model and 5±0.3% with the constructed ∆Sconstructed
model. Furthermore, the τ parameter of the exponential growth is usable to ﬁnd
the time resolution of our experiment and the ”growth time” of our system. We ﬁnd
a time resolution of 0.088±0.152 ps, 0.077±0.224 ps and 0.106±0.238 ps for each of
the models, and ”growth time” τ of 0.4±0.1 ps, 0.6±0.2 ps and 0.8±0.2 ps. Also, the
time frame of the energy deposition from the solute to the solvent, is estimated from
the τ parameter of the temperature increase. We estimated the relaxation time of
the triplet state, when 95% of the height of the exponential growth was reached to
be 8±4 ps using the simple DFT model, 9±5 ps using the relativistic DFT model
and 8±3 ps with the constructed model. The kinetic ﬁts of the density change, ∆ρ,
showed an exponential increase faster than the solute structural changes, indicating
that the density parameter ∆Sdensity ”catches” something missing from the overall
model. The results of all the ﬁtting parameters h, σ, τ, µ to each of the scaler values
α, ∆T, ∆ρ found using each of the models ∆Ssimple DFT, ∆Srel DFT, ∆Sconstructed are
summarized in Table 9, 10, and 11.
Analysis of the temporal evolution
page 68 of 86
==PAGE:75==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
Shortcoming of the models
As just described, the fact that the change in density ∆ρ is positive immediately
after time zero, ∆t = 0, suggest that the model is missing something. To investigate
the missing part of the model, the residuals from the ﬁts are analyzed. Below, Figure
41 shows an average of the residuals between 1 and 2 ps for each of the models. In
order to see the relative magnitude of the residuals compared to the measured signal,
see Figure 38 in the second row.
Figure 41: Average of the residuals (data-ﬁt) from each of the models ∆Ssimple DF T ,
∆Srel DF T , ∆Sconstructed in the time delay range, ∆t =1-2 ps
All of the residuals show a positive (∼20-30 e.u.) signal in the lower Q-range on
the same order of magnitude as the measured scattering signal (∼20-40 e.u), which
shows that all three models show diﬃculties in describing the diﬀerence signals in
this area. The rest of the Q-range show ﬂuctuations/oscillations around zero with an
amplitude of ∼5-10 e.u. So far, all of the models included both the solute structure
contribution ∆Sstructure, the solvent temperature diﬀerence signal ∆Stemp and the
solvent density diﬀerence signal ∆Sdensity. However, since the density change seems
to describe features it should not, we also consider the residuals without including
the solvent density change term. These are shown below, in Figure 42.
Figure 42: Average of the residuals (data-ﬁt) from each of the model using only the solute structure
∆Sstructure (simple DFT, relativistic DFT and constructed) and the temperature diﬀerence signal
∆Stemp in the time delay range, ∆t =1-2 ps
Shortcoming of the models
page 69 of 86
==PAGE:76==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
So far, the models have only considered the solvent change in scattering as origi-
nating from changes in temperature and density. However, when the solute structure
changes, the nearest solvent molecules are also aﬀected resulting in a diﬀerent com-
position in the nearest lying solvation shells. This correlation between the solute and
the closest solvent molecules is often referred to as the solute-solvent cross term, or
the cage term. In total, the changing scattering signal consists of contributions from
the solute, the solvent and the cross-term
∆S = ∆Ssolute + ∆Ssolvent + ∆Ssolute−solvent
However, this cross-term ∆Ssolute−solvent, is diﬃcult to quantify, and impossible to
measure at a separate experiment. Because of this, the solute-solvent cross term is
often neglected if the contribution is small or included as a Molecular Dynamics
(MD) simulation. Considering the three diﬀerent models, ∆Ssimple DFT, ∆Srel DFT,
∆Sconstructed, the changes in solute structure are very small. The ∆Ssimple DFT, ∆Srel DFT
models basically present no change in the Ru-N bond distances and the ∆Sconstructed
structure presents a Ru-N bond change of 0.03 ˚A. In comparison, the photoexcita-
tion of [Fe(bpy)3]2+ [74] results in a Fe-N bond elongation of 0.2 ˚A. Therefore, the
solute-solvent cross term was left out of the models as a ﬁrst approximation in this
work. However, an attempt to include the cross-term in this work, was done in an
MD simulation. Based on the Quantum Mechanical (QM) optimized structures, the
optimized solute structure was solvated in a cubic box of 50 ˚A edge length of water
molecules described by the TIP-4P-Ew potential [81]. All solute bonds lengths were
constrained and the MD trajectories were calculated using the OPLS2005 force ﬁeld
parameters [82] and a Nose-Hoover thermostat at 300 K. The charge distribution on
the solute molecule was based on either the Mulliken [83] and L¨owdin [84] partial
charges from the QM calculations. Radial distribution functions were calculated from
the trajectories and used to calculate the theoretical x-ray scattering as described
in [85]. The MD simulations were calculated by Elisa Biasin who kindly provided
the results. Below, Figure 43 shows the calculated diﬀerence scattering signals from
only from the structural changes of the water molecules.
Shortcoming of the models
page 70 of 86
==PAGE:77==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
Figure 43: Cross-term diﬀerence scattering signals estimated from MD simulations using
either Mulliken or L¨owdin charges from the optimized DFT structures.
Unfortunately, the calculated cross-terms are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent, depending
on the choice of charge distribution on the ruthenium complex. From a qualitative
inspection of the residuals, the use of the L¨owdin charge density provides the most
similar result. However, it is important to note that the residuals might not represent
a reliable picture of the cross-term if the current ﬁtting components incorrectly com-
pensates the measured diﬀerence signals in the calculated ﬁts which ideally should
be ﬁtted by a correct cage term. Based on these results, the decision was made, not
to include any of these in the ﬁnal model. Further calculations and considerations
are needed, in order to determine a reliable cross-term.
Shortcoming of the models
page 71 of 86
==PAGE:78==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
Summary of analysis and results
To sum up the analysis and results of this section, the experimental data was an-
alyzed using several ﬁtting approaches. First, the inﬂuence of each ﬁtting parame-
ter was demonstrated showing the signiﬁcance of both the solute diﬀerence signal
∆Sstructure, along with the solvent temperature and solvent density diﬀerence sig-
nals ∆Stemp, ∆Sdensity. Furthermore, each of the models ∆Ssimple DFT, ∆Srel DFT,
∆Sconstructed using diﬀerent solute diﬀerence signals, have been compared based on
the ﬁts shown in 2D and 1D along with the speciﬁc ﬁtting parameters ∆Sstructure,
∆Stemp, ∆Sdensity and associated scaler values α, ∆T, ∆ρ. These were also analyzed
further by ﬁtting kinetic models, in order to examine the temporal evolution of the
excitation fraction α, the change in temperature ∆T, and the change in density
∆ρ. The time evolution was modeled using an exponential growth convolved with
a Gaussian, due to an expected broadening of the observed signal arising from the
limited time resolution. Finally, the residuals of the diﬀerent models was shown,
along with a short description of the missing solute-solvent cross term in the mod-
els. An attempt to determine the solute-solvent cross term was calculated using MD
simulations, but the results were inconclusive, and needs further analysis, before
including them in the models.
From the analysis, the use of the simple DFT model, ∆Ssimple DFT, provides a χ2
value of 3.85 as a median of the ﬁts from all time delays, and provides an excitation
fraction of 11±0.004%, a temperature increase of 0.10±0.04 K and a density increase
of 0.05±0.002 kg/m3 from the ﬁrst 3.5 ps of the photoexcitation.
Similarly, the use of the relativistic DFT model,∆Srel DFT, presents a median χ2
value of 3.68, and furthermore, results in an excitation fraction of 34±0.02% and
similarly a temperature increase of 0.13±0.06 K and only a slight increase in the
density of 0.03±0.003 kg/m3 after 3.5 ps of photoexcitation.
Finally, when using the constructed structure model, ∆Sconstructed, a median of
the χ2 values of 3.40 is obtained, providing the lowest value of the three models.
Furthermore, the constructed model gives an excitation fraction of 5±0.003%, and
a temperature increase of 0.10±0.04 K and a density increase of 0.07±0.002 kg/m3.
Overall, the model ∆Sconstructed, which includes a combination of the solute struc-
ture based on the constructed structure, the temperature diﬀerence signal and the
density diﬀerence signal shows the lowest χ2 values, but the values are similar for all
three models. Since, an inclusion of the missing the solute-solvent cross term, will
aﬀect the results, the analysis cannot conclude the ∆Sconstructed model as the best
model.
Summary of analysis and results
page 72 of 86
==PAGE:79==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
Theoretical calculations
Since, the molecule under investigation has a long lifetime (∼600 ns) in the triplet
3MLCT state, the experimental data should show the same excited state through-
out the time delays after time zero. Even though, the photochemical cycle is via a
singlet 1MLCT state, the lifetime of this state is ultrafast (<25 fs) and below our
time resolution (∼100 fs). The heating ∆T, we do observe however, we assume arises
from the vibrational relaxation of the molecule in the 1MLCT state and the 3MLCT
state with a transfer of the excess energy to the solvent.
Since all three models predict approximately the same temperature increase of
the solvent (∆T ≈0.10 K), this information can be used to estimate the necessary
excitation fraction α, assuming the energy originates from the photoexcitation of
the solute molecule.
In order to ﬁnd the excess energy available from the relaxation process, informa-
tion on the emission wavelength from to the 3MLCT state is used. The diﬀerence
between the absorbed and emitted energy equals the diﬀerence in energy of the two
excited states, and under the assumption that the exceess energy is transferred to
the solvent, we can estimate the theoretical excitation fraction of the solute. The
absorbed energy is known from the wavelength of the pump pulse, the optical laser.
The emitted energy is calculated from the emission wavelength of the 3MLCT state,
found in literature [27]. Based on the assumption that a solute molecule only absorbs
one photon, the diﬀerence in energy corresponds to the energy released per solute
molecule and is calculated using eq. (1) from the section Background as follows:
• Laser wavelength λlaser = 532 nm
• Emission wavelength λemis = 620 nm
• Planck’s constant h = 6.63 · 10−34 J · s
• Speed of light in air c = 3.00 · 108 m
s
Elaser =
hc
λlaser
= 3.7 · 10−19
J
solute = 2.3
eV
solute
Eemis =
hc
λemis
= 3.2 · 10−19
J
solute = 2.0
eV
solute
∆E = 0.50 · 10−19
J
solute = 0.30
eV
solute
From our model, we see an increase in the solvent temperature of ∆T = 0.10 K and
the energy required to heat the water molecules, observed by the x-ray beam is:
• cp,V = 4.18
J
cm3K
Qwater = cp,V · ∆T · Vx−ray = 1.5 · 10−7 J
Theoretical calculations
page 73 of 86
==PAGE:80==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
Where the volume of the liquid sample, observed by the the x-ray beam Vx−ray is
calculated from the width of the approximately square beam, liquid jet thickness
and the angle between the jet and the x-ray laser:
• X-ray spot width dx−ray = 50 µm
• Jet thickness b = 100 µm
• Jet angle θ = 45◦
Path length, ℓ=
b
sin(θ) = 141.4 µm
Vx−ray = d2
x−ray · ℓ= 0.35 · 10−6 cm3
To ﬁnd the amount of energy deposited in the solvent per solute molecule, we need
the number of solute molecules in the sample observed by the x-ray beam:
• Concentration c = 25 mM
• Avogadro’s number NA = 6.02 · 1023 molecules
mole
Nsolute = c · NA · Vx−ray = 5.3 · 1012 molecules
The energy per solute molecule, QN, then becomes:
QN =
Qwater
Nsolute,x−ray
= 2.8 · 10−20
J
solute = 0.17
eV
solute
From the scaling of our scattering signals, the energy per solute molecule corresponds
to the observed energy change QN = ∆Eobserved. The excitation fraction, estimated
from the energetics consideration, is then calculated as the ratio between the ob-
served energy change from the heating of the water molecules and the diﬀerence in
energy of the absorbed and emitted photons:
α = ∆Eobserved
∆E
= 57%
Based on this result, the relativistic DFT model ∆Srel DFT is the most probable
model predicting an excitation fraction of 34±0.02% . However, the calculated re-
sult is still almost twice the value.
Theoretical calculations
page 74 of 86
==PAGE:81==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
In comparison, the optical laser contributes photons with a factor of 20 relative
to the number of solute molecules:
• Laser energy P = 40 µJ
Nphot =
P
Elaser
= 1.07 · 1014 photons
Nphot
Nsolute
= 20
Since, in theory each solute molecule could absorb 20 photons, it is likely that some
of the solute molecules absorbed more than one photon and was excited to an even
higher electronic state. As we saw, in the Background of [Ru(bpy)3]2+ section, the
ruthenium complex highly absorbs light around 530nm
2
= 265 nm. Based on these
calculations, it is not possible to estimate the possible multiphoton absorption, but
the assumption that a solute molecule only absorbs one photon might be incorrect.
Furthermore, from literature [78] we know, that the relaxation time of the triplet
state is ∼10 ps, and since our measurements only includes the ﬁrst 3.5 ps upon pho-
toexcitation, the resulting temperature increase is likely higher than we observe.
Similarly, from the analysis of the temporal evolution of the temperature change,
the values are highly uncertain, and that the 95% of the height (h) of the growing
exponential is not reached before ∼8-9 ps, depending on the model. This means, that
the observed temperature increase is very uncertain, and likely even larger than the
observed 0.10 K. As a consequence, the estimated excitation fraction from these cal-
culations, will be even larger, and the distinction between the three diﬀerent models
∆Ssimple DFT, ∆Srel DFT, ∆Sconstructed, becomes impossible using these calculations.
Theoretical calculations
page 75 of 86
==PAGE:82==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
Conclusions
This work analyzed time-resolved x-ray scattering measurements on the photoexci-
tation of aqueous [Ru(bpy)3]2+obtained from an X-ray Free Electron Laser (XFEL).
Leading up to the actual analysis, a reliable range of the experimental data was cho-
sen, scaled and background subtracted, which are described in detail in the thesis.
We have seen, that choosing a reduced data range, and a background subtraction of
the data, leads to a less noisy data set that better describes the changes in the sam-
ple. Furthermore, the scaling of the data allows us to predict physical parameters
such as excitation fraction, temperature change and density change of the sample.
Besides this, various methods of estimating the noise showed that the results are
sensitive to the choice of method but the speciﬁc eﬀects requires further analysis.
The interpretation of the measured data focused on describing the structural
changes of the ruthenium complex and changes in solvent temperature and density
within the ﬁrst 3.4 ps of the photoexcitation. The method of choice to reveal these
structural changes, was a ﬁtting procedure including contributions from changes
in the solute structure, and changes in the bulk solvent. The changes in the so-
lute was described by either the simple DFT, the relativistic DFT or the manually
constructed. The ﬁrst two structures are based on quantum mechanical simulations
of [Ru(bpy)3]2+in the ground and excited state, and suggests basically no change
(∼0.001 ˚A) in the Ru-N bond lengths, but primarily changes of the bond lengths
within the bpy-ligands. The constructed structure suggests a 0.03 ˚A shortening of
the Ru-N bond lengths from ground state to excited state, which was ”manually”
constructed. The changes of solvent composition were described using temperature
and density diﬀerence signals obtained from independent experiments.
The results show contributions from both the changes in the solute structure,
and from an increase in temperature and density of the solvent. Unfortunately, the
model is missing the contribution from the solute-solvent cross term (cage), which
results in a diﬃcult determination of the best model of the three tested. All of the
three models, predict a temperature increase of ∼0.1 K of the water solvent, within
the ﬁrst 3.4 ps upon photoexcitation of the solute. Furthermore, all three models
predict an increase of the density (0.03-0.07 kg/m3), indicating that a portion of
the nearest water molecules are ”forced” into the bulk solvent due to the structural
changes of the solute. However, the predicted density increase occurs immediately
upon photoexcitation, indicating that the current ﬁt components incorrectly com-
pensates for a missing part of the model. The three diﬀerent models used to predict
the solute structural changes showed very similar quality of the ﬁts (χ2 =3.85, 3.68,
3.40), and a determination of the most probable model was not feasible without the
solute-solvent interaction term.
Conclusions
page 76 of 86
==PAGE:83==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
Future work
In future work, the missing solute-solvent cross-term needs a more thorough inves-
tigation, and should be included in the model in order to predict the structural
changes within the sample with higher certainty. The simulated structural changes
show diﬀerent results, and other methods need to be investigated. After obtaining
the cross-term, the model contains contributions from both the solute, the solvent
and the solute-solvent interaction. A possible strategy to test the model, would be
to change the solute contribution, in a more systematic manner, in order to ﬁnd the
optimum of structure according to the best ﬁt.
A way to improve on the methods used, could be to construct a set of hypothet-
ical test data, and check whether the method actually provides the same answer as
the expected result/hypothesis. An example of where this might be useful, is the
singular value decomposition (SVD) of the data into several components. A test
data set might provide insight into the parts of the decomposition that we believe
to observe. Also, the use of wavelets to estimate noise/uncertainty of each data
point needs further investigation. The inﬂuence of the choice of wavelet and eﬀect
of unevenly distributed noise in the denoising process would be useful to investi-
gate using a test data set. A collaboration with colleagues from the mathematics
society would be beneﬁcial in this matter.
Another interesting analysis would be
calculate the ﬁts in 2 dimensions. Since, the data shows a time evolution then each
measured scattering curve should be correlated in the time dimension as well. As
such, it would be interesting to analyze the data through 2D ﬁts of time dependent
diﬀerence curves. This, might shed new light on the evolution of the data in the
time dimension.
Finally, looking into the anisotropic signals might be interesting. Perhaps they
would reveal a preferred geometry in the excited state.
Future work
page 77 of 86
==PAGE:84==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
References
[1] Discovery of X Rays. British Medical Journal, 2(4426), 1945.
[2] Philip Willmott. 2: The Interaction of X-rays with Matter. In An Introduction
to Synchrotron Radiation: Techniques and Applications, pages 15–37. 2011.
[3] Jens Als-Nielsen and Des McMorrow. Chapter 1 - X-rays and their interaction
with matter. In Elements of Modern X-ray Physics, pages 1–28. 2011.
[4] D. T. Cromer and J. B. Mann. X-ray scattering factors computed from numeri-
cal Hartree–Fock wave functions. Acta Crystallographica Section A, 24(2):321–
324, 1968.
[5] F. Hajdu. Revised Parameters of the Analytic Fits for Coherent and Incoherent
Scattered X-ray Intensities of the First 36 atoms. Acta Crystallographica Section
A, 28(3):250–252, 1972.
[6] G P´alink´as. Analytic Approximations for the Incoherent X-ray Intensities of
the Atoms from Ca to Am.
Acta Crystallographica Section A, 29(1):10–12,
1973.
[7] Josep Font, Pedro de March, F´elix Busqu´e, Eva Casas, Miriam Benitez, Laura
Teruel, and Hermenegildo Garc´ıa. Periodic mesoporous silica having covalently
attached tris(bipyridine)ruthenium complex: synthesis, photovoltaic and elec-
trochemiluminescent properties. J. Mater. Chem., 17(22):2336–2343, 2007.
[8] Md.K. Nazeeruddin, C. Klein, P. Liska, and M. Gr¨atzel. Synthesis of novel
ruthenium sensitizers and their application in dye-sensitized solar cells. Coor-
dination Chemistry Reviews, 249(13-14):1460–1467, jul 2005.
[9] Tae In Ryu. Synthesis and Photovoltaic Properties of Novel Ruthenium(II)
Sensitizers for Dye-sensitized Solar Cell Applications. Bulletin of the Korean
Chemical Society, 30(10):2329–2337, oct 2009.
[10] G M Greenway, A Greenwood, P Watts, and C Wiles. Solid-supported chemi-
luminescence and electrogenerated chemiluminescence based on a tris(2,2’-
bipyridyl)ruthenium(II) derivative.
Chemical communications (Cambridge,
England), (1):85–7, jan 2006.
[11] Jing Li and Erkang Wang. Applications of tris(2,2’-bipyridyl)ruthenium(II) in
electrochemiluminescence. Chemical record (New York, N.Y.), 12(1):177–87,
feb 2012.
REFERENCES
page 78 of 86
==PAGE:85==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
[12] Frank G. Gao and Allen J. Bard. Solid-State Organic Light-Emitting Diodes
Based on Tris(2,2‘-bipyridine)ruthenium(II) Complexes. Journal of the Amer-
ican Chemical Society, 122(30):7426–7427, aug 2000.
[13] Makoto
Ogawa,
Bijitha
Balan,
Gopalakrishnan
Ajayakumar,
Shigeyuki
Masaoka, Heinz-Bernhard Kraatz, Masayasu Muramatsu, Syoji Ito, Yutaka Na-
gasawa, Hiroshi Miyasaka, and Ken Sakai. Photoinduced electron transfer in
tris(2,2’-bipyridine)ruthenium(II)-viologen dyads with peptide backbones lead-
ing to long-lived charge separation and hydrogen evolution. Dalton transactions
(Cambridge, England : 2003), 39(18):4421–34, may 2010.
[14] Hiroshi Takashima, Misa Fukuda, Fumie Nakagaki, Tomoko Ogata, and Keiichi
Tsukahara. Photoinduced Electron-Transfer Reactions of Carbonic Anhydrase
Inhibitor Containing Tris(2,2’-bipyridine)ruthenium(II) Analogue. The Journal
of Physical Chemistry B, 117(9):2625–2635, mar 2013.
[15] D. Paul Rillema and Daniel S. Jones. Structure of tris(2,2’-bipyridyl)ruthenium(
II ) hexaﬂuorophosphate, [Ru(bipy)3 ][PF6] 2 ; X-ray crystallographic determi-
nation. J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., (19):849–851, 1979.
[16] D. Paul Rillema. Comparison of the Crystal-Structures of Tris Heterocyclic
Ligand Complexes of Ruthenium(II). Inorganic Chemistry, 31(13):2935 – 2938,
1992.
[17] Wojciech Gawelda. Time-Resolved X-Ray Absorption Spectroscopy of Transi-
tion Metal Complexes. 3673, 2006.
[18] F Alary, J Heully, L Bijeire, P Vicendo, Paul Sabatier, and Route De. Is the
3MLCT the Only Photoreactive State of Polypyridyl Complexes? Inorganic
Chemistry, 46(8):1507–1517, 2007.
[19] Konstantinos D Demadis, Chris M Hartshorn, and Thomas J Meyer.
The
Localized-to-Delocalized Transition in Mixed-Valence Chemistry. 2(Cl), 2001.
[20] Staﬀan Wallin, Jan Davidsson, Judit Modin, and Leif Hammarstro.
Fem-
tosecond Transient Absorption Anisotropy Study on [Ru(bpy)3]2+ and
[Ru(bpy)(py)4]2+. Ultrafast Interligand Randomization of the MLCT State.
J. Phys. Chem. A, 109:4697–4704, 2005.
[21] Charles W. Stark, Wolfgang J. Schreier, Janice Lucon, Ethan Edwards, Trevor
Douglas, and Bern Kohler. Interligand Electron Transfer in Heteroleptic Ruthe-
nium(II) Complexes Occurs on Multiple Time Scales. The Journal of Physical
Chemistry A, (Ii):150511123542002, 2015.
REFERENCES
page 79 of 86
==PAGE:86==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
[22] N. H. Damrauer, G. Cerullo, A. Yeh, T. R. Boussie, C. V. Shank, and J.K. Mc-
Cuscker. Femtosecond Dynamics of Excited-State Evolution in [Ru(bpy)3]2+.
Science, 275(5296):54–57, jan 1997.
[23] A. T. Yeh, C.V. Shank, and J. K. McCusker. Ultrafast Electron Localization
Dynamics Following Photo-Induced Charge Transfer. Science, 289(5481):935–
938, aug 2000.
[24] Marc Etienne Moret, Ivano Tavernelli, Majed Chergui, and Ursula Roth-
lisberger.
Electron localization dynamics in the triplet excited state of
[Ru(bpy)3]2+ in aqueous solution.
Chemistry - A European Journal,
16(20):5889–5894, 2010.
[25] Krishnan Rangan, Shamindri M. Arachchige, Jared R. Brown, and Karen J.
Brewer. Solar energy conversion using photochemical molecular devices: pho-
tocatalytic hydrogen production from water using mixed-metal supramolecular
complexes. Energy & Environmental Science, 2(4):410, 2009.
[26] Michael Seery. The Photochemistry Portal: Ruthenium polypyridyl photochem-
istry, 2009.
[27] Andrea Cannizzo, Frank van Mourik, Wojciech Gawelda, Goran Zgrablic, Chris-
tian Bressler, and Majed Chergui. Broadband Femtosecond Fluorescence Spec-
troscopy of [Ru(bpy)3]2+. Angewandte Chemie, 118(19):3246–3248, may 2006.
[28] Carol Creutz, Mei Chou, Thomas L. Netzel, Mitchio Okumura, and Norman
Sutin. Lifetimes, spectra, and quenching of the excited states of polypyridine
complexes of iron(II), ruthenium(II), and osmium(II). Journal of the American
Chemical Society, 102(4):1309–1319, feb 1980.
[29] P. Emma, R. Akre, J. Arthur, R. Bionta, C. Bostedt, J. Bozek, a. Brach-
mann, P. Bucksbaum, R. Coﬀee, F.-J. Decker, Y. Ding, D. Dowell, S. Edstrom,
a. Fisher, J. Frisch, S. Gilevich, J. Hastings, G. Hays, Ph. Hering, Z. Huang,
R. Iverson, H. Loos, M. Messerschmidt, a. Miahnahri, S. Moeller, H.-D. Nuhn,
G. Pile, D. Ratner, J. Rzepiela, D. Schultz, T. Smith, P. Stefan, H. Tompkins,
J. Turner, J. Welch, W. White, J. Wu, G. Yocky, and J. Galayda. First lasing
and operation of an˚angstrom-wavelength free-electron laser. Nature Photonics,
4(9):641–647, 2010.
[30] Christoph Bostedt. Linac Coherent Light Source: The ﬁrst ﬁve years. Reviews
of Modern Physics, 88(1), 2016.
REFERENCES
page 80 of 86
==PAGE:87==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
[31] David Pile. X-rays: First light from SACLA. Nature Photonics, 5(8):456–457,
jul 2011.
[32] Makina Yabashi, Hitoshi Tanaka, and Tetsuya Ishikawa.
Overview of the
SACLA facility. Journal of Synchrotron Radiation, 22(3):477–484, 2015.
[33] M. Harmand, R. Coﬀee, M. R. Bionta, M. Chollet, D. French, D. Zhu, D. M.
Fritz, H. T. Lemke, N. Medvedev, B. Ziaja, S. Toleikis, and M. Cammarata.
Achieving few-femtosecond time-sorting at hard X-ray free-electron lasers. Na-
ture Photonics, 7(3):215–218, feb 2013.
[34] Kasper Skov Kjaer. Filming Femtosecond Molecular Movies with X-ray Pulses.
PhD thesis, University of Copenhagen, 2013.
[35] Philip Hart, S´ebastien Boutet, Gabriella Carini, Mikhail Dubrovin, Brian Duda,
David Fritz, Gunther Haller, Ryan Herbst, Sven Herrmann, Chris Kenney, Na-
dine Kurita, Henrik Lemke, Marc Messerschmidt, Martin Nordby, Jack Pines,
Don Schafer, Matt Swift, Matt Weaver, Garth Williams, Diling Zhu, Niels Van
Bakel, and John Morse. The CSPAD megapixel x-ray camera at LCLS. Pro-
ceedings of SPIE, 8504:85040C–85040C–11, 2012.
[36] Tim B.Van Driel, Kasper S. Kjær, Robert Hartsock, Asmus O. Dohn, Tobias
Harlang, Matthieu Chollet, Morten Christensen, Gawelda Wojciech, Niels E.
Henriksen, Jong Goo Kim, Kristoﬀer Haldrup, Kyung Hwan Kim, Hyotcherl
Ihee, Jeongho Kim, Henrik Lemke, Zheng Sun, Villy Sundstrom, Wenkai Zhang,
Diling Zhu, Klaus B. Møller, Martin M. Nielsen, and Kelly J. Gaﬀney. Atom-
istic characterization of the active-site solvation dynamics of a photocatalyst
(submitted). Nature Chemistry.
[37] Jaroslaw J Szymczak, Franziska D Hofmann, and Markus Meuwly. Structure
and dynamics of solvent shells around photoexcited metal complexes. Physical
chemistry chemical physics : PCCP, 15(17):6268–77, may 2013.
[38] Tim Brandt van Driel. Time Resolved X-ray scattering of molecules in solution:
Approching the Molecular Movie.
Phd dissertation, Technical University of
Denmark (DTU), 2014.
[39] U Lorenz, K B Møller, and N E Henriksen.
On the interpretation of
time-resolved anisotropic diﬀraction patterns.
New Journal of Physics,
12(11):113022, nov 2010.
REFERENCES
page 81 of 86
==PAGE:88==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
[40] Kristoﬀer Haldrup, Morten Christensen, and Martin Meedom Nielsen. Analysis
of time-resolved X-ray scattering data from solution-state systems. Acta Crys-
tallographica Section A: Foundations of Crystallography, 66(2):261–269, 2010.
[41] Greg Hura, Jon M. Sorenson, Robert M. Glaeser, and Teresa Head-Gordon. A
high-quality x-ray scattering experiment on liquid water at ambient conditions.
The Journal of Chemical Physics, 113(20):9140, 2000.
[42] M. Cammarata. Impulsive solvent heating probed by picosecond x-ray diﬀrac-
tion. Journal of Chemical Physics, 124(12), 2006.
[43] Kasper Skov Kjær, Tim B van Driel, Jan Kehres, Kristoﬀer Haldrup, Dmitry
Khakhulin, Klaus Bechgaard, Marco Cammarata, Michael Wulﬀ, Thomas Just
Sørensen, and Martin M Nielsen. Introducing a standard method for experi-
mental determination of the solvent response in laser pump, X-ray probe time-
resolved wide-angle X-ray scattering experiments on systems in solution. Phys-
ical chemistry chemical physics : PCCP, 15(i):15003–16, 2013.
[44] Kristoﬀer Haldrup, Wojciech Gawelda, Rafael Abela, Roberto Alonso-Mori,
Uwe Bergmann, Am´elie Bordage, Marco Cammarata, Sophie E. Canton, As-
mus O. Dohn, Tim Brandt van Driel, David M. Fritz, Andreas Galler, Pieter
Glatzel, Tobias Harlang, Kasper S. Kjær, Henrik T. Lemke, Klaus B. Møller,
Zolt´an N´emeth, M´aty´as P´apai, Norbert Sas, Jens Uhlig, Diling Zhu, Gy¨orgy
Vank´o, Villy Sundstr¨om, Martin M. Nielsen, and Christian Bressler. Observ-
ing Solvation Dynamics with Simultaneous Femtosecond X-ray Emission Spec-
troscopy and X-ray Scattering. The Journal of Physical Chemistry B, page
acs.jpcb.5b12471, 2016.
[45] Sophie E Canton, Kasper S Kjær, Gy¨orgy Vank´o, Tim B van Driel, Shin-ichi
Adachi, Am´elie Bordage, Christian Bressler, Pavel Chabera, Morten Chris-
tensen, Asmus O Dohn, Andreas Galler, Wojciech Gawelda, David Gosztola,
Kristoﬀer Haldrup, Tobias Harlang, Yizhu Liu, Klaus B Møller, Zolt´an N´emeth,
Shunsuke Nozawa, M´aty´as P´apai, Tokushi Sato, Takahiro Sato, Karina Suarez-
Alcantara, Tadashi Togashi, Kensuke Tono, Jens Uhlig, Dimali a Vithanage,
Kenneth W¨arnmark, Makina Yabashi, Jianxin Zhang, Villy Sundstr¨om, and
Martin M Nielsen. Visualizing the non-equilibrium dynamics of photoinduced
intramolecular electron transfer with femtosecond X-ray pulses. Nature com-
munications, 6:6359, 2015.
[46] Elisa Biasin, Tim Brandt Van Driel, Kasper S Kjær, Asmus O Dohn, To-
bias Harlang, Pavel Chabera, Yizhu Liu, Jens Uhlig, Robert Hartsock, Winnie
REFERENCES
page 82 of 86
==PAGE:89==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
Liang, Roberto Alonso-mori, Matthieu Chollet, James M Glownia, Silke Nel-
son, Dimosthenis Sokaras, A Tadesse, Alexander Britz, Andreas Galler, Woj-
ciech Gawelda, Christian Bressler, J Gaﬀney, Henrik T Lemke, Klaus B Møller,
Martin M Nielsen, and Villy Sundstr. Femtosecond X-ray scattering study of
ultrafast photoinduced structural dynamics in solvated [Co(terpy) 2]2+ (Ac-
cepted). J. Phys. Rev. Lett., 2016.
[47] Pierre; Hohenberg and Walter Kohn. Inhomogeneous electron gas. Physical
Review, 136(3B), 1964.
[48] Walter Kohn and L. J. Sham. Self-Consistent Equations Including Exchange
and Correlation Eﬀects. Physical Review, 140(4A), 1965.
[49] Frank Jensen. Introduction to Computational Chemistry, volume 1. John Wiley
& Sons Ltd., second edition, 2007.
[50] Frank Neese. The ORCA program system. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews:
Computational Molecular Science, 2(1):73–78, jan 2012.
[51] Carlo Adamo and Vincenzo Barone. Toward reliable density functional methods
without adjustable parameters: The PBE0 model. The Journal of Chemical
Physics, 110(13):6158, 1999.
[52] John P. Perdew, Matthias Ernzerhof, and Kieron Burke. Rationale for mix-
ing exact exchange with density functional approximations. The Journal of
Chemical Physics, 105(22):9982, 1996.
[53] Florian Weigend and Reinhart Ahlrichs. Balanced basis sets of split valence,
triple zeta valence and quadruple zeta valence quality for H to Rn: Design
and assessment of accuracy.
Physical chemistry chemical physics : PCCP,
7(18):3297–305, sep 2005.
[54] Florian Weigend. Accurate Coulomb-ﬁtting basis sets for H to Rn. Physical
chemistry chemical physics : PCCP, 8(9):1057–65, mar 2006.
[55] Ansgar Sch¨afer, Hans Horn, and Reinhart Ahlrichs. Fully optimized contracted
Gaussian basis sets for atoms Li to Kr.
The Journal of Chemical Physics,
97(4):2571, 1992.
[56] A KLAMT. COSMO - A New Approach to Dielectric Screening in Solvents
with Explicit Expressions for the Screening Energy and its Gradient. Journal
of the Chemical Society-perkin Transactions 2, (5):799 – 805, 1993.
REFERENCES
page 83 of 86
==PAGE:90==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
[57] A. D. Becke. Density-functional exchange-energy approximation with correct
asymptotic behavior. Physical Review a (General Physics), 38(6):3098 – 3100,
1988.
[58] J. P. Perdew.
Density-functional approximation for the correlation energy
of the inhomogeneous electron gas. Physical Review B (Condensed Matter),
33(12):8822 – 8824, 1986.
[59] Ansgar Sch¨afer, Christian Huber, and Reinhart Ahlrichs. Fully optimized con-
tracted Gaussian basis sets of triple zeta valence quality for atoms Li to Kr.
The Journal of Chemical Physics, 100(8):5829, 1994.
[60] E. van Lenthe, E. J. Baerends, and J. G. Snijders. Relativistic regular two-
component Hamiltonians. The Journal of Chemical Physics, 99(6):4597, 1993.
[61] S. Faas, J.G. Snijders, J.H. van Lenthe, E. van Lenthe, and E.J. Baerends. The
ZORA formalism applied to the Dirac-Fock equation. Chemical Physics Letters,
246(6):632–640, dec 1995.
[62] Wojciech Gawelda, Melanie Johnson, Frank M F de Groot, Rafael Abela,
Christian Bressler, and Majed Chergui.
Electronic and molecular structure
of photoexcited [Ru(II)(bpy)3]2+ probed by picosecond X-ray absorption spec-
troscopy. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 128(15):5001–5009, 2006.
[63] Marc-Etienne Moret, Ivano Tavernelli, and Ursula Rothlisberger. Combined
QM/MM and Classical Molecular Dynamics Study of [Ru(bpy) 3 ] 2+ in Water.
J. Phys. Chem B, 113(22):7737–7744, 2009.
[64] Walter J. Stevens and Morris Krauss. Relativistic compact eﬀective potentials
and eﬃcient, shared-exponent basis sets for the third-, fourth-, and ﬁfth-row
atoms. Can. J. Chem, 70:612–630, 1992.
[65] M DOLG, Hermann Stoll, and Heinzwerner Preuss. Relativistic and Correlation
Eﬀects for Element 105 (Hahnium, Ha) - A Comparative Study of M and MO
(M = Nb, Ta, Ha) Using Energy-Adjusted ab Initio Pseudopotentials. Journal
of Physical Chemistry, 97(22):5852 – 5859, 1993.
[66] S. Goedecker, M. Teter, and J. Hutter. Separable dual-space Gaussian pseu-
dopotentials. Physical Review B, 54(3):1703–1710, jul 1996.
[67] Joost VandeVondele. Gaussian basis sets for accurate calculations on molecular
systems in gas and condensed phases. Journal of Chemical Physics, 127(11):1
– 9, 2007.
REFERENCES
page 84 of 86
==PAGE:91==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
[68] Tokushi Sato, Shunsuke Nozawa, Ayana Tomita, Manabu Hoshino, Shin-ya
Koshihara, Hiroshi Fujii, and Shin-ichi Adachi. Coordination and Electronic
Structure of Ruthenium(II)- tris -2,2’-bipyridine in the Triplet Metal-to-Ligand
Charge-Transfer Excited State Observed by Picosecond Time-Resolved Ru K
-Edge XAFS. The Journal of Physical Chemistry C, 116(27):14232–14236, jul
2012.
[69] Richard W. Hendler and Richard I. Shrager. Deconvolutions based on singular
value decomposition and the pseudoinverse: a guide for beginners. Journal of
Biochemical and Biophysical Methods, 28(1):1–33, 1994.
[70] Kristoﬀer Haldrup.
Singular value decomposition as a tool for background
corrections in time-resolved XFEL scattering data. Philosophical transactions of
the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological sciences, 369(1647):20130336,
2014.
[71] A. J. Dent, P. C. Stephenson, and G. N. Greaves. The extraction of signal to
noise values in x-ray absorption spectroscopy. Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments,
63(1):856, 1992.
[72] I. Daubechies. Ten Lectures on Wavelets. SIAM, 1992.
[73] Stephane G. Mallat. A theory for multiresolution signal decomposition: The
wavelet representation. Fundamental Papers in Wavelet Theory, pages 494 –
513, 2009.
[74] Kristoﬀer Haldrup, G. Vank´o, W. Gawelda, A. Galler, G. Doumy, A. M. March,
E. P. Kanter, A. Bordage, A. Dohn, T. B. van Driel, H. T. Lemke, S. E. Can-
ton, J. Uhlig, V. Sundstr¨om, L. Young, S. H. Southworth, M. M. Nielsen, and
C. Bressler. Guest - Host Interactions Investigated by Time-Resolved X-ray
Spectroscopies and Scattering at MHz Rates: Solvation Dynamics and Photoin-
duced Spin Transition in Aqueous Fe(bipy)2+ 3. J. Phys. Chem. A, 116:9878–
9887, 2012.
[75] Bernard R. Brooks, Robert E. Bruccoleri, Barry D. Olafson, David J. States,
S. Swaminathan, and Martin Karplus. CHARMM: A program for macromolecu-
lar energy, minimization, and dynamics calculations. Journal of Computational
Chemistry, 4(2):187–217, 1983.
[76] Ivan Tubert-Brohman, Maurus Schmid, and Markus Meuwly. Molecular Me-
chanics Force Field for Octahedral Organometallic Compounds with Inclusion
of the Trans Inﬂuence. Journal of chemical theory and computation, 5(3):530–9,
mar 2009.
REFERENCES
page 85 of 86
==PAGE:92==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
[77] William L. Jorgensen, Jayaraman Chandrasekhar, Jeﬀry D. Madura, Roger W.
Impey, and Michael L. Klein. Comparison of simple potential functions for
simulating liquid water. The Journal of Chemical Physics, 79(2):926, 1983.
[78] William Henry, Colin G. Coates, Clare Brady, Kate L. Ronayne, Pavel Ma-
tousek, Michael Towrie, Stanley W. Botchway, Anthony W. Parker, Johannes G.
Vos, Wesley R. Browne, and John J. McGarvey. The early picosecond photo-
physics of ru(II) polypyridyl complexes: A tale of two timescales. Journal of
Physical Chemistry A, 112(20):4537–4544, 2008.
[79] Wojciech Gawelda, Andrea Cannizzo, Van-thai Pham, Frank Van Mourik,
Christian Bressler, and Majed Chergui. Ultrafast Nonadiabatic Dynamics of
[Fe. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 129(6):8199–8206, 2007.
[80] Staﬀan Wallin, Jan Davidsson, Judit Modin, and Leif Hammarstr¨om.
Femtosecond transient absorption anisotropy study on [Ru(bpy)3]2+ and
[Ru(bpy)(py)4]2+. Ultrafast interligand randomization of the MLCT state. The
journal of physical chemistry. A, 109(21):4697–704, jun 2005.
[81] Hans W Horn, William C Swope, Jed W Pitera, Jeﬀry D Madura, Thomas J
Dick, Greg L Hura, and Teresa Head-Gordon. Development of an improved
four-site water model for biomolecular simulations: TIP4P-Ew. The Journal of
chemical physics, 120(20):9665–78, may 2004.
[82] William L. Jorgensen, David S. Maxwell, and Julian Tirado-Rives. Development
and Testing of the OPLS All-Atom Force Field on Conformational Energetics
and Properties of Organic Liquids. Journal of the American Chemical Society,
118(45):11225–11236, jan 1996.
[83] R. S. Mulliken.
Electronic Population Analysis on LCAO[Single Bond]MO
Molecular Wave Functions. I. The Journal of Chemical Physics, 23(10):1833,
1955.
[84] Per Lowdin. Nonorthogonality problem. Adv. Quant. Chem., 5:185, 1970.
[85] Asmus O Dohn, Elisa Biasin, Kristoﬀer Haldrup, Martin M Nielsen, Niels E
Henriksen, and Klaus B Møller. On the calculation of x-ray scattering signals
from pairwise radial distribution functions.
Journal of Physics B: Atomic,
Molecular and Optical Physics, 48(24):244010, dec 2015.
REFERENCES
page 86 of 86
==PAGE:93==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
Appendix A
In the following appendix, the inﬂuences on using either the polynomial method or
the wavelet method is discussed. In the analysis, each of the methods are used to
estimate the noise level, σ2 of the diﬀerence scattering signal at a time delay of
approximately 2 ps, shown below.
Figure 44: Diﬀerence scattering signal ∆S(Q) at a time delay of approximately 2 ps.
The polynomial method
Recall, that the polynomial method is based on the idea of ﬁtting low order polyno-
mials, to smaller intervals of the experimental data. The method therefore, depends
on the choice of polynomial order, and the number of data points within the inter-
vals, the data is divided into.
To begin with, we will look deeper into the consequences of the choice of poly-
nomial order, and interval length for the calculated standard deviation σ. Below,
Figure 45 shows the noise estimated when changing the polynomial order.
The choice of polynomial order does not change the noise level estimated in
the low Q-range signiﬁcantly, which is predicted to be around σ2 = 25-27 for all
choices. However, the noise level in the area around 2 ˚A−1 varies according to choice
of polynomial order, where especially the choice of a 1st order polynomial estimates
a noise level of the same magnitude as in the low Q-range. Based on a qualitative
inspection of 44 we would expect a high estimation of noise around 2.3 ˚A and around
3.0 ˚A, and we know from the SVD analysis, that the noise is high in the low Q-range
(Q < 0.5 ˚A−1). All of the tested polynomials (1-4) show the these characteristics.
However, the amplitude diﬀers. Similarly, the models diﬀer in the prediction of
noise around 1.3 ˚A. Here, the ﬁrst order polynomial ﬁt shows a σ2 >10, whereas the
remaining polynomials are able the ﬁt the points better and show σ2 <10.
Appendix
page i of viii
==PAGE:94==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
Polynomial order 1
Polynomial order 2
Polynomial order 3
Polynomial order 4
Figure 45: Noise estimated from the polynomial method. The noise is estimated as a
standard deviation of the data and the calculated polynomials from varying intervals of
the data. The standard deviation is calculated upon changing the polynomial order.
The other contributor to the estimated noise level is the choice of interval length
used for each polynomial. Below, Figure 46 shows the estimated noise level, when
changing the bin size, i.e. the interval length, of the data to use in the calculation
of each polynomial. Since the data in the example consists of 421 data points, each
polynomial uses 140 data points to calculate a best ﬁt, when dividing the data into
3 bins. This results in polynomials that will skip a large number of data points.
Since a new polynomial is calculated from each point and the nearest lying 139
data points, the best ﬁts will not change much from point to point. The estimated
noise will therefore be slowly varying compared to the ﬁts using a larger number
of bins/shorter interval length. When increasing the number of bins, the amount of
data points used in each ﬁt decreases, and it becomes ”easier” to ﬁt a polynomial.
Therefore, using a larger number of bins, results in a noise estimation that is highly
oscillating and depending on the speciﬁc data point.
Appendix
page ii of viii
==PAGE:95==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
3 bins, 140 points
30 bins, 14 points
10 bins, 42 points
5 bins, 84 points
Figure 46: Noise estimated from the polynomial method. The noise is estimated as a
standard deviation of the data and the calculated polynomials from varying intervals of
the data. The standard deviation is calculated upon changing the number of bins the
data is split into, and thereby the number of points included in each calculation of the
best ﬁt polynomials. When increasing the bin size the number of data points used for
each ﬁt decreases.
All in all, the polynomial method estimates the noise of a given data set by di-
viding the data into smaller intervals and calculating a best ﬁt polynomial for each
of the data point in the given interval. The noise level is determined by the standard
deviation between the data points and the calculated ﬁts. The order of the poly-
nomial should not be too low (1st), since too many data points will be considered
noise, and it should not be too high, since too many of the data points will match
the calculated ﬁt. The eﬀect is however, very small when comparing 1st, 2nd, 3rd and
4th order polynomials. Similarly, the interval lengths, should not be too large (3-5
bins) resulting in almost the same calculated polynomial for all data points, or too
small (30 bins) resulting in all data points being included in the ﬁts. The choice of
combination of polynomial order and interval length does not have a simple answer
and one should choose these with care.
Appendix
page iii of viii
==PAGE:96==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
The wavelet method
To begin with, we elaborate on the general description of the wavelet method. Re-
call, that the wavelet method is based on a decomposition of a given noisy signal
Snoise into the detail coeﬃcients Di and the approximation coeﬃcients Ai. The de-
composition depends on the choice of wavelet and the choice of level. The wavelet
should be similar to the features of the noisy signal, that one wishes to preserve,
e.g. sharp edges or a smooth curve. The original signal is perfectly reconstructible
from the wavelet and the decomposition coeﬃcients.
The procedure of decomposing the remaining signal is repeated with the approx-
imation coeﬃcients Ai being further decomposed into detail- Di and new approxi-
mation coeﬃcients Ai. The number of decompositions is determined by the the level
parameter. Thus the level parameter yields a measure for the amount of noise that
should be removed from a given signal.
It is important to note that the decomposition in detail- and approximation-
coeﬃcients depends on the choice of wavelet used in this process. Here the Daubechies
40 wavelet is used [72]. However, there are many other possibilities, and the role of
the choice needs further investigation in future work.
Following the decomposition, the detail coeﬃcients Di are modiﬁed according
to a given threshold, from each of the levels in the decomposition. In the end, the
denoised signal is constructed from the approximation coeﬃcients Ai and the modi-
ﬁed detail coeﬃcients. Below, Figure 47 illustrates the wavelet decomposition of the
noisy signal ∆S(Q) for the time delay of 2 ps. With a level of 3, the signal is decom-
posed three times into the approximation coeﬃcients Ai and detail coeﬃcients Di,
and ﬁnally reconstructed from the approximation coeﬃcients Ai and the modiﬁed
detail coeﬃcients Di.
As evident from the ﬁgure, the approximation coeﬃcients represents the underly-
ing denoised signal, and the detail coeﬃcients estimates the noise i the signal. Upon
modiﬁcation of the detail coeﬃcients, the resulted denoised signal is reconstructed.
It is also evident, that the underlying signal becomes more ”smooth”, from each
level of decomposition.
Appendix
page iv of viii
==PAGE:97==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
Signal
A1
A2
A3
D1
D2
D3
Thresholding
Reconstruction
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Decomposition
Figure 47: Schematic of the wavelet denoising method. Upon a wavelet decomposition
the noisy signal is decomposed into the approximation coeﬃcients Ai and the detail
coeﬃcients Di. Depending on the choice of level, the procedure is repeated, here shown
for the choice of level 3. The detail coeﬃcients are modiﬁed by a given threshold and
the denoised signal is created from a reconstruction of the ﬁnal approximation coeﬃcient
and the three modiﬁed detail coeﬃcients.
Below, Figure 48 shows the result of a wavelet denoising at various levels between
1-7. Evidently, the wavelet denoised signal of ”level 1” only modiﬁes one set of detail
coeﬃcients, showing the highest oscillatory behavior. Therefore, the denoised signal
still shows a relatively noisy signal. In the other end of the scale, a denoising at
”level 7” continues to denoise at starts to remove too much out of the data. Upon
increasing the level, the denoised curve will eventually converge towards zero. Based
on a qualitative inspection of the denoised curves, the level 5 denoised curve show
the optimal choice of level, in which the signal is smooth, low in frequency, and
still low deviation from the data. In contrast, the denoised signal of level 3 is still
oscillating at high frequencies, and the signal of level 7 deviates to much from the
original data.
Appendix
page v of viii
==PAGE:98==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
Level 1
Level 3
Level 5
Level 7
Figure 48: Reconstructed signals based on a denoising using the wavelets. The black
circles shows the measured XDS diﬀerence signal at a time delay of approximately 2 ps.
The blue curve shows the denoised signal using wavelets at varying levels. Level 1 only
denoises the signal to a low extend, and increasing levels denoise to a higher extend.
Appendix
page vi of viii
==PAGE:99==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
In order to ﬁnd the estimated noise level, a standard deviation σ is calculated
between the measured data and the denoised signal. The resulting areas of noise
is shown below in Figure 49. Evidently, the wavelet denoising of level 1, hardly
changes the signal and therefore results in a noise level below ∼10 throughout the
data points. In contrast, the use of level 7 results in a noise level above 40 for several
points, but at the same time also σ2 values below 10, resulting in a noise level that
varies a lot. The use of level 3-5 denoising, results in a high degree of noise (σ2 >20)
at low Q, which we also know from the SVD of the complete signal, that the low
Q-range is very noisy. Otherwise, they show a higher noise level (σ2 ∼20) around
2.3 ˚A−1 and 3.0 ˚A−1. The level of 5 furthermore ﬁnds the area around 1.3 ˚A−1 more
noisy and particularly around 2.2 ˚A−1.
Level 1
Level 3
Level 5
Level 7
Figure 49: Noise estimated from the wavelet method upon changing the level of denoising
with level 1 resulting in a less denoised signal and therefore a low σ2 value. In contrast
a denoising using level 7 results in a highly denoised signal, that starts to deviate from
the original data and therefore shows a high variation in the σ2 values.
Appendix
page vii of viii
==PAGE:100==
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof
Analysis of Ru(bpy)3 -XFEL data
4. Jun 2016
In conclusion, both the polynomial method and the wavelet based methods are
useful methods in describing the noise of a given signal. In the polynomial method,
the choices of polynomial order and interval size inﬂuences the resulting noise level,
with the interval size showing the largest change. The choice of a second order
polynomial in combination with an interval length of 10 bins/42 data points in each
ﬁt provides maximum σ2 values at Q-values below 0.5, around 2.3 and 3.0 ˚A−1. The
wavelet method depends on the level parameter and the choice of wavelet. When
using the Daubechies 40 [72], wavelet a denoising level of 5 results in the most smooth
signal, with low ﬂuctuations, and show low deviation from the original data. Also,
the σ2 values show the same characteristics as above. However, the choice of the
wavelet method at level 5 seems to best ”catch” the particularly high noise around
2.2 ˚A from a qualitative inspection of noisy signal ∆S(Q). The wavelet method using
a level 5 denoising, was chosen as the method to ﬁnd σ2 in the following analysis.
Appendix
page viii of viii
