==PAGE:1==
Security Certiﬁcation Model for
Internet of Things (IoT) devices
Monica Ahuja
Kongens Lyngby 2016
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
The IoT world is exhilarating because of tremendous wealth and well being that
it can generate for mankind, but there are varieties of security challenges in
IoT that need to be addressed before the IoT idea is widely accepted.
Due
to complexities and security challenges revolving around IoT, understanding
the risks associated with the proliferation of IoT devices and knowing how to
evaluate them is very critical. Security certiﬁcation criteria that provide rigorous
testing, good security practices and a ﬂexible infrastructure methodology for
myriad of diﬀerent IoT devices is the need of the hour.
The aim of the thesis is to evaluate established security certiﬁcation standards
for IoT systems and understand their ﬁtment for IoT devices. Common crite-
ria (CC) security certiﬁcation, currently the most popular internationally rec-
ognized product assurance evaluation and certiﬁcation scheme for hardware,
ﬁrmware, and software, is evaluated in detail because of its generality that
enables it to deal with a wide range of security functionalities and security
products, and it’s evolution in ﬁelds related to IoT systems.
The thesis conducts in-depth literature review to gain knowledge and under-
standing of the concepts of IoT and its security challenges, security certiﬁcation
process and various established security criteria. Common Criteria beneﬁts and
limitations are evaluated in detail and need for new model is proposed. Fur-
thermore, analysis for classiﬁcation of IoT devices as ﬁrst step towards creating
new security certiﬁcation model is initiated.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁllment of the requirements
for acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering. The project has been completed in the
period between January 25th 2016 and June 25th 2016. Additionally, it accounts
for 30 ECTS points towards the completion of my M.Sc. in Engineering.
The thesis deals with a survey of security certiﬁcation model for the Internet of
Things devices.
Lyngby, 25-June-2016
Monica Ahuja
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my thesis supervisor, Professor Nicola Dragoni at the
Technical University of Denmark for valuable discussions and comments, as
well as constructive feedback and suggestions throughout this thesis. Without
his guidance and assistance, this thesis would not have come to fruition.
I am also grateful to Professor Colin Boyd at the Norwegian University of Science
and Technology for being my supervisor.
A special note of thanks goes to Neal Hindocha, Security Consultant at Fort-
Consult, always willing to take time out of his busy schedule to help assist with
the understanding of threats and classiﬁcations associated with IoT devices.
I would also like to thank my family and friends that provided me encouragement
and support throughout this period.
Last but not least, I am thankful to the people involved in the NordSecMob
program, for providing me the opportunity to pursue my education in Europe.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Organization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3.1
Literature Survey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3.2
Informal Discussions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Background of Internet of Things
5
2.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
History
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Visions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3.1
Things Oriented Vision
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3.2
Network Oriented Vision
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3.3
Semantic Oriented Vision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4.1
Inventory and product management
. . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4.2
Medical and Healthcare systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4.3
Environmental monitoring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4.4
Transportation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4.5
Energy management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.5
Trends . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.6
Enabling Technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.6.1
Identiﬁcation and sensing technology . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
2.6.2
Protocols
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.6.3
Middleware . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.7
Open Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3
IoT Security Challenges
23
3.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
Security Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4
Foundation of Security Certiﬁcation
27
4.1
Security Certiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
Security Certiﬁcation Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.3
Usage of Certiﬁcation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.4
Standardization and Certiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.5
General Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.6
Certifying IoT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5
Security Certiﬁcation Criteria
35
5.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2
Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria (TCSEC) . . . . .
37
5.2.1
About and History . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.2.2
Key Concepts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.2.3
Issues/Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.3
CTCPEC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.3.1
About and History . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.3.2
Key Concepts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.4
ITSEC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.4.1
About and History . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.4.2
Key Concepts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.4.3
Beneﬁts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.4.4
Issues/Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.5
Common Criteria (CC)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.5.1
About and History . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.5.2
Membership . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.5.3
Key Concepts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.5.4
Beneﬁts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6
Analysis
63
6.1
Beneﬁts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6.1.1
Evolution of criteria and next generation PP
. . . . . . .
64
6.2
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
6.3
Need of new security certiﬁcation model of IoT devices:
. . . . .
67
==PAGE:11==
CONTENTS
ix
7
Classiﬁcation Mechanism for IoT devices towards creating a
Security Certiﬁcation Model
69
7.1
Classiﬁcation of IoT devices First Step
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
7.2
Classiﬁcation Mechanism
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
8
Conclusion
73
8.1
Future Work: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
A Glossary of Terms
75
Bibliography
79
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Overview
The “Internet of things” (IoT) has become the most intriguing subject of present
day conversations. It is a concept in which the virtual world of information tech-
nology is joined seamlessly with the real world of things and has the potential
to transform how we live. The IoT is a giant network of connected intelligent
“things”. This term things refer to objects that can collect and transmit data
over a network without requiring human-to-human or human-to-computer in-
teraction and are uniquely identiﬁable [1]. This includes everything from cell
phones, coﬀee makers, washing machines, headphones, heart monitor implant,
refrigerators, farm animals with biochip transponder, automobiles, lamps, wear-
able devices and almost everything one can think of. The analyst ﬁrm Gartner
states that by 2020 there will be over 26 billion connected devices [2].
IoT systems and devices are being used for various applications ranging from
households to large industries on a very large scale. The IoT world is exhilarating
because of tremendous wealth and well being that it can generate for mankind,
but there are varieties of security challenges in IoT that need to be addressed
before the IoT idea is widely accepted. The IoT presents an expanded attack
surface and multiple points of vulnerability.
Study after study has revealed
vulnerabilities in existing IoT devices and their implications, indicating that
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction
the impact of breach of security in an IoT driven world will be unprecedented.
Due to complexities and security challenges revolving around IoT and the in-
creasing use of variety of IoT devices in various ﬁelds, understanding the risks
associated with the proliferation of IoT devices and knowing how to evaluate
them is very critical. Security certiﬁcation and evaluation criteria that provides
rigorous testing, good security practices and a ﬂexible infrastructure methodol-
ogy is required. A robust certiﬁcation and evaluation criteria for IoT devices is
the need of the hour.
Currently, we do not have speciﬁc security certiﬁcation standard for myriad of
diﬀerent IoT devices. The aim of the thesis is to evaluate established security
certiﬁcation standards for IoT systems and understand their ﬁtment for IoT
devices.
Common criteria (CC) security certiﬁcation is evaluated in detail because of its
generality that enables it to deal with a wide range of security functionalities and
security products, and it’s evolution in ﬁelds related to IoT systems. Moreover,
it is currently the most popular internationally recognized product assurance
evaluation and certiﬁcation scheme for hardware, ﬁrmware, and software [3].
The thesis conducts in-depth literature review to gain knowledge and under-
standing the concepts of IoT and its security challenges, security certiﬁcation
process and various established security criteria schemes. Common Criteria ben-
eﬁts and limitations are evaluated in detail and need for new model is proposed.
Furthermore, ﬁrst step of classiﬁcation of IoT devices approach towards creating
new security certiﬁcation model is initiated.
1.2
Organization
The rest of the thesis is organized as follows. Chapter 2 will provide a gen-
eral background about IoT and describes the basic idea that stands behind this
concept. In this chapter, various deﬁnitions, visions, applications, trends and
key empowering technologies of IoT paradigm are reviewed. Chapter 3 provides
systematic summary of key security challenges that are identiﬁed while read-
ing and analyzing the existing research of IoT security. Chapter 4 sheds some
light on the fundamental concepts behind security certiﬁcation and describes the
process of security certiﬁcation. It also motivates the need for certifying IoT
devices. Chapters 5 provides description on various established security certiﬁ-
cation criteria, specially focusing on Common criteria (CC) security certiﬁcation
and chapter 6 evaluates the beneﬁts and limitations of Common Criteria with
==PAGE:15==
1.3 Methodology
3
regard to IoT security requirements in particular and proposes the need of new
security certiﬁcation criteria for IoT devices. An analysis of ﬁrst step of clas-
siﬁcation mechanism of IoT devices towards creating new security certiﬁcation
model is initiated in chapter 7, followed by the conclusion in Chapter 8.
1.3
Methodology
This section describes the methodology that was followed in regard to the re-
search performed during the development of this thesis.
1.3.1
Literature Survey
The main methodology used to achieve the goal of thesis is comprehensive lit-
erature review to gain knowledge and understanding the concepts of IoT and
its security challenges, security certiﬁcation process, various established security
criteria, Common Criteria beneﬁts and limitations in detail, and the ongoing
research in the ﬁeld of IoT security.
An online search was performed using the following search engines for articles
and publications in regard to above concepts:
• DTU electronic library
• IEEE explore
• ACM digital library
• Google scholar
• Google
• Secure Direct
• Wiley Online library
Diﬀerent key terms that have relevance with the above concepts are searched
out from these sources. Main reason behind intense literature survey is to gain
comprehensive understanding for analysing the usage of CC, the most popular
existing certiﬁcation criteria, with respect to IoT scenario.
==PAGE:16==
4
Introduction
1.3.2
Informal Discussions
Many informal discussions were adopted as parallel step with literature survey.
For this purpose, security consultants from FortConsult company in Denmark,
professors, some PhD scholars, and some research students were approached.
These informal discussions enabled better understanding the in depth knowledge
of the topic.
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2
Background of Internet of
Things
Given that there are a lot of complexities around the “Internet of things”, this
chapter provides a general background about it and describes the basic idea that
stands behind this concept. In this chapter, various deﬁnitions, visions, appli-
cations, trends and key empowering technologies of IoT paradigm are reviewed.
Additionally, the open security issues of IoT are identiﬁed.
2.1
Introduction
The “Internet of things” (IoT) has become the most intriguing subject of present
day conversations. Production of various devices with built-in sensors and WiFi
capabilities, decrease in the cost of technology and connection, increase in the
availability of Internet, enlargement in the usage of smart phones and various
similar trends are creating a storm for the IoT. The analyst ﬁrm Gartner states
that by 2020 there will be over 26 billion connected devices [2].
The IoT is a giant network of connected intelligent “things”. This term things
refer to objects that can collect and transmit data over a network without re-
quiring human-to-human or human-to-computer interaction and are uniquely
==PAGE:18==
6
Background of Internet of Things
identiﬁable [1]. This includes everything from cell phones, coﬀee makers, wash-
ing machines, headphones, heart monitor implant, refrigerators, farm animals
with biochip transponder, automobiles, lamps, wearable devices, people and al-
most everything one can think of. Thus, Internet of Things can be considered
as new era of ubiquity where humans may become the minority as producers of
data traﬃc and changes brought about by the Internet will be carried by those
prompted by the networking of everyday things [4].
The Internet of Things is not identical with ubiquitous and pervasive computing,
the Internet Protocol (IP), communication technology, embedded devices, its
applications, the Internet of People or the Intranet and Extranet of Thing,
rather it incorporates aspects and technologies of all of these approaches [5].
Depending on various technologies for the implementation, the deﬁnition of the
IoT varies. However, the fundamental notion of IoT implies that objects in an
IoT can be identiﬁed uniquely in the virtual representations. Within an IoT,
all things are able to exchange data and if needed, process data according to
predeﬁned schemes [6]. Thus, the Internet of Things is a concept in which the
virtual world of information technology is joined seamlessly with the real world
of things and has the potential to transform how we live.
2.2
History
Although the concept of a network of smart devices wasn’t named until 1999, it
has been in development for decades. The ﬁrst Internet-connected appliance was
a Coke machine at Carnegie Melon University in the 1982. This appliance was
able to report its inventory and status [7]. The appliance could be connected
over the Internet and it could be determined whether or not there would be a
cold drink awaiting them. Mark Weiser’s inﬂuential 1991 paper on ubiquitous
computing, "The Computer of the 21st Century" shaped the current vision of
IoT [7, 8].
It was in 1999, when Kevin Ashton, co founder and executive director of the
Auto-ID Lab Center at MIT, ﬁrst stated the term Internet of Things in a pre-
sentation he made to Procter & Gamble. In his opinion, Radio-frequency iden-
tiﬁcation (RFID) was a requirement for the Internet of Things at that point. He
believed computers could manage an inventory of all the things that could be
identiﬁed. His elementary concept was that if computers could know everything
about things in real world, using data they gathered without any interventions
from humans, then everything could be tracked, controlled and managed in
better way [9].
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Visions
7
In recent years, the term “Internet of Things” has spread rapidly. The Internet of
Things vision has evolved due to a convergence of multiple technologies, ranging
from wireless communication to the Internet and from embedded systems to
micro-electromechanical systems (MEMS), including wireless sensor networks,
control systems and automation [7, 9]. Bluetooth, Wiﬁ, ZigBee, Cellular, RFID,
and many other wireless technologies are all important to drive the growth of
IoT. Hub devices such as smart phones, tablets, and laptops are crucial in
enabling the IoT ecosystem and will continue to be an essential building block
and future growth is expected to be driven by node or sensor type devices.
2.3
Visions
As identiﬁed by authors of [10], Internet of Things is one paradigm that has
many visions. The name “Internet of Things” syntactically is composed of two
terms. The ﬁrst term focuses on a network oriented vision of IoT whereas the
other term focuses on things oriented vision that spotlights generic objects.
In fact, “Internet of Things” semantically means “a world-wide network of in-
terconnected objects uniquely addressable, based on standard communication
protocols”. The large number of objects, their unique depiction and accumula-
tion of huge information exchanged between them gives rise to a third “Semantic
oriented” perspective of IoT. The IoT paradigm shall be the result of the con-
vergence of these three main visions.
2.3.1
Things Oriented Vision
The initial Things oriented vision statement revolves around RFID tags. The
main idea is based on the wide use of RFID to improve object traceability and
other information like the awareness of its status, current location, etc. Due to
the RFID maturity, low cost, and strong provision from the professional com-
munity, RFID still is one of the leading technology driving the vision. However,
a wide collection of device, network, and service technologies will eventually
build up the IoT. Near Field Communications (NFC) and Wireless Sensor and
Actuator Networks (WSAN) along with RFID are acknowledged as components
to connect the real world things with the virtual world.
IoT vision identify that the term IoT involves a much wider vision than the idea
of a mere objects identiﬁcation. Many relevant institutions emphasize that IoT
should primarily focus on "Things" and the growth in its intelligence. This is
why a term that emerged aside IoT is “Smart objects”. These are a sort of sensors
==PAGE:20==
8
Background of Internet of Things
not only equipped with usual wireless communication, memory, and elaboration
capabilities, but also with new potentials. Autonomous and proactive behavior,
context awareness, collaborative communications and elaboration are just some
required capabilities [10]. Authors in [11] deﬁnes smart objects as entities that
have a physical embodiment and a set of associated physical features like size,
shape, etc., a minimal set of communication functionality, a unique identiﬁer,
some basic computing capabilities and some means to sense physical occurrences.
The above deﬁnitions created a path for International Telecommunication Union
(ITU) vision as identiﬁed in [10, 12], according to which, "from anytime, any-
place connectivity for anyone, we will now have connectivity for anything”. A
new dimension has been added to the world of information and communication
technologies.This highlighted the importance of including existing and evolving
Internet and network developments in IoT vision. Figure 2.1 from [12] depicts
this new dimension of connectivity for anything.
Figure 2.1: A new dimension
2.3.2
Network Oriented Vision
The IoT vision of the IPSO (IP for Smart Objects) Alliance as identiﬁed in [10]
states that the IP stack is a light protocol that already connects a huge amount
of communicating devices and runs on tiny and battery operated embedded
devices. This guarantees that IP has all the qualities to make IoT a reality. The
idea is to move from Internet of Devices to Internet of Things.The complexity
of IP stack can be reduced to achieve a protocol designed to route “IP over
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Visions
9
anything”.
Various communities identiﬁes that the IoT will be deployed by
means of a sort of simpliﬁcation of the current IP to adapt it to any object and
make those objects addressable and reachable from any location.
2.3.3
Semantic Oriented Vision
The idea behind Semantic Oriented Vision is that the number of items involved
in the IoT is going to be extremely high and so will be the amount of in-
formation generated by these items. Requirements of scalable communication
infrastructure, appropriate modelling solutions for description of things, appro-
priate designs for handling the issues related to storage, search, representation,
interconnection and organization of huge information are going to make IoT
more challenging. Some other challenges include authentic identiﬁcation of a
smart object, autonomic management and self-organization of networks of smart
objects, diagnostics and maintenance, context awareness and goal-oriented be-
havior, and intrusion of the privacy [13].
The three visions internet-oriented (middleware), things oriented (sensors) and
semantic-oriented (knowledge) also identiﬁes IoT elements, as stated in [14],
which enables seamless ubicomputing:
• “Hardware—made up of sensors, actuators and embedded communication
hardware
• Middleware—on demand storage and computing tools for data analytics
and
• Presentation—novel easy to understand visualization and interpretation
tools which can be widely accessed on diﬀerent platforms and which can
be designed for diﬀerent applications.”
To summarize, the signiﬁcance of IoT can be truly realized only in an application
domain where the three visions intersect. The Things oriented vision joined with
Network oriented vision makes it possible to expand internet into new dimension
of smart objects where a computational component attached to a physical thing
processes the sensor data and supports a communication link to the Internet,
thereby bridging the gap between the physical world and the information world.
For example, a smart refrigerator can keep track of the availability of the items
and autonomously places an order to the next grocery shop if the supply of a
food item is below a given limit.
==PAGE:22==
10
Background of Internet of Things
However, the Semantic oriented vision states that the uniqueness of the IoT
is not in the functional capability of a smart object as already today many
embedded systems are connected to the Internet. It lies in the expected huge
size of billions or even trillions of smart objects that bring about diﬀerent issues
and characteristics related to size.
According to the IoT vision, a smart planet will develop, where lot of every-
day things around us have an identity in cyberspace, obtain intelligence, and
amalgam data from varied sources [13].
2.4
Applications
There will be very large number of devices connected to the Internet in the
coming years. The IoT ﬁnds applications in nearly every ﬁeld due to its ability to
network embedded devices with limited CPU, memory and power resources. IoT
systems could also be responsible for sensing information as well as performing
actions [7].
According to authors of [10], the applications can be grouped into following
domains: Transportation and logistics domain; Healthcare domain; Smart en-
vironment (home, oﬃce, plant) domain; Personal and social domain. Authors
of [14] categorize the applications into four application domains: Personal and
Home; Enterprize; Utilities; and Mobile. Personal and Home IoT is at the scale
of an individual or home, Enterprize IoT is at the scale of a community, Utility
IoT at a national or regional scale and Mobile IoT is usually spread across other
domains mainly due to the nature of connectivity and scale. There is a huge
crossover in applications and the use of data between domains. In terms of ap-
plication ﬁelds and market sectors where IoT solutions can provide competitive
advantages over current solutions, Authors of [11] identiﬁed six domains that
can play a leading role in the adoption of IoT technologies: Environmental moni-
toring; Smart cities; Smart business/inventory and product management; Smart
homes/smart building management; Health-care and security and surveillance.
Authors of [15] describe that based on the application domain, IoT products can
be classiﬁed broadly into ﬁve diﬀerent categories: smart wearable, smart home,
smart city, smart environment, and smart enterprise, making the IoT products
and solutions in each of these markets have diﬀerent characteristics.
Categorized in whichever way, all of the above indicate that IoT is of high sig-
niﬁcance to society, economy and life in general.
IoT will contribute to the
economy in many areas like supply chain management, manufacturing, envi-
ronmental monitoring, retailing, smart shelf operations, healthcare, food and
==PAGE:23==
2.4 Applications
11
restaurant industry, logistic industry, travel and tourism industry, library ser-
vices, etc and will address social issues such as healthcare monitoring, daily
living monitoring, and traﬃc congestion controlling, etc. [6].
In order to better illustrate the profound eﬀects of IoT deployments, below are
some of the case studies of applications in some sectors of IoT, where according
to present understanding, the wide deployment of Iot will have major impact.
2.4.1
Inventory and product management
The IoT can be brought within the realm of industrial applications. RFID tech-
nologies are already used in many sectors of inventory management, throughout
the supply and delivery chain. Production process control, situation manage-
ment, and real-time optimization of manufacturing production and supply chain
networks, dynamic response to product demands are within the purview of the
IoT [7, 13]. Industry safety and security can be optimized by automation of
operator tools and service information systems. But it also extends itself to
plant optimization and asset management via predictive maintenance, statisti-
cal evaluation, and measurements to maximize reliability [7].
Case Study - Smart Industrial Plants:
Massive deployment of RFID tags associated to production parts will lead to
big scale automation in industrial plants.
When production parts reach the
processing point, the tags associated with them will be read by RFID reader.
The reader then generates an event along with the required data like RFID tag
number to notify the robot to pick up the corresponding production part. The
robot then executes further process by using data from the enterprise system
for the associated RFID tag. Quality control can be achieved by stopping the
production process once a speciﬁc threshold is reached. This can be notiﬁed by a
wireless sensor mounted on the machine that monitors the vibration. Once such
an emergency event is propagated, devices that consume it react accordingly.
The robot receives the emergency shutdown event and immediately stops its
operation. The plant manager also immediately sees the status of the Enterprise
Resource Planning (ERP) orders, the production progress, the device status and
the possible side eﬀects of a production line delay due to device malfunctions [1].
This will help in reducing maintenance and diagnostic cost because an anomaly
can be detected before it leads to a failure.
==PAGE:24==
12
Background of Internet of Things
2.4.2
Medical and Healthcare systems
IoT provides a boosting solution in the ﬁeld of Health care. IoT devices can
be used to enable remote health monitoring, drug compliance and emergency
notiﬁcation systems.
Case Study - eHealth System:
Basic idea behind this is to improve the quality of medical treatment and re-
ducing the cost of treatment. Patients will carry medical sensors to monitor
parameters such as body temperature, blood pressure, breathing activity, heart
rate. Other specialized sensors including both wearables (Body area networks
that are part of clothing) and ﬁxed (proximity) can be equipped in living spaces
to monitor the health parameters and transmit alarm messages to remote med-
ical centers upon detection of conditions that may lead to health deterioration.
The medical centers will be able to provide rapid response actions when needed,
thus realizing preventive care. For example, an heart pacemaker can transmit
important data via a Bluetooth link to a mobile phone that is carried in the
shirt pocket. The mobile phone can analyze the data and call a doctor in case
an emergency develops [13].
The use of wearable sensors, together with suitable applications running on
personal computing devices enables people to track their daily activities (steps
walked, calories burned, exercises performed, etc.), providing suggestions for
enhancing their lifestyle and encouraging healthy living [3]. Moreover, smart
labels on drugs can help a patient to take the right medication at the right time
and enforce drug compliance [13].
2.4.3
Environmental monitoring
Environmental monitoring applications of the IoT typically use the ability of
sensing to assist in environmental protection by monitoring air or water quality,
atmospheric or soil conditions and the movements of wildlife and their habitats
[7]. Civil protection can be achieved by tunnel area, earthquake or tsunami
early-warning systems can be used by emergency services to provide more eﬀec-
tive aid. The massive deployment of miniaturized devices may enable access to
critical areas, whereby the presence of human operators might not represent a
feasible option (e.g., volcanic areas, oceanic abysses, remote areas), from where
sensed information can be communicated to a decision point in order to detect
anomalous conditions [11].
==PAGE:25==
2.4 Applications
13
Case Study – Fire Detection System:
The sensing ability of IoT devices supports the environmental safety is repre-
sented by ﬁre detection. When a suite of sensors detects the possible presence of
ﬁre (by means, e.g., of temperature sensors), an alarm is sent directly to the ﬁre
department in a short time (exploiting the advanced communication features of
IoT platform), along with other parameters that are useful in decision making
and support, such as the description of the area subject to the ﬁre, the possible
presence of people, of inﬂammable materials, etc. Clearly, rapid response has
the consequence of saving human lives, mitigating the damage to the property
or vegetation and in general reducing the level of disaster.whereby the ability to
access environmental data in real-time over large-scale areas enable the uptake
of eﬃcient coordination strategies among rescue teams [11].
2.4.4
Transportation
Dynamic communication between the vehicles, the infrastructure and the users
or drivers of a transport system enables smart traﬃc control, parking, electronic
toll collection systems, logistic, vehicle control, and safety and road assistance
[7].Sensors could detect the pollution level of air, retrieving smog information
such as the level of carbon dioxide, etc. that could be further used in other
applications like environmental monitoring and health systems [11].
Case Study - Advanced Traﬃc Control Systems:
IoT can be used to monitor vehicles traﬃc on roads and highways by sensing
various information like number of cars, average speed, etc. and deploy services
that oﬀer traﬃc routing advice to avoid congestion. Vehicles will thus be smart
objects. In addition, smart parking devices system, based on RFID and other
sensor technologies, may allow to monitor available parking spaces and provide
drivers with automated parking advice, thus improving mobility in urban area.
Safety and road assistance services can be assured through the means of inter
and intra vehicle communications.
2.4.5
Energy management
Optimization of energy consumption as a whole can be achieved by IoT. Smart
grid and smart metering is potential IoT application. The energy and power-
related information can be gathered and acted upon in an automated fashion to
maintain load balance in the grid at the city scale. The increased fuel eﬃciency
==PAGE:26==
14
Background of Internet of Things
of automotive engines, better coordination of energy supply and energy demand
by the installation of smart meters, the improved energy-eﬃciency of household
appliances, and the reduced loss in energy conversion are just a few examples
of the impact of this technology on energysavings [13].
Case study - Home based energy management system:
All form of energy consuming devices like bulbs, televisions, switches, etc. will
be able to communicate with the utility supply company and thereby eﬃcient
power generation and energy usage can be achieved.
Every electricity point
within a house can be continuously monitored and this information can be used
to modify the way electricity is consumed. The devices would also oﬀer the
opportunity for users to remotely control their devices or centrally manage them
via cloud based interface. Remotely powering oﬀthe electrical equipments when
not needed can lead to energy saving. Advanced functions like adapting room
heating to weather, room lighting to the time of the day, etc. can be automated.
2.5
Trends
Authors in [12] identiﬁes that the ladder of development trend of IoT includes
three major steps: embedded intelligence, connectivity and interaction.
Firstly, we have embedded intelligence that can carry out tasks automatically.
The example can be a food product that has embedded RFID tag used to get the
information about that food item. The next step is connecting every intelligent
device to a network.
Things can be connected wirelessly.
The third step is
making interaction within connected smart devices possible. Even though things
are connected, it does not imply that things can communicate by themselves.
So new smart things should be created which can process information, self-
conﬁgure, self-maintain, self-repair, make independent decisions, and eventually
even play an active role in their own disposal. Things can interact and exchange
information by themselves.
So the form of communication will change from
human-human to human-thing to thing-thing.
Figure 2.2 from [7] shows a rough development trend of the Internet of Things.
==PAGE:27==
2.6 Enabling Technologies
15
Figure 2.2: Trends of IoT
2.6
Enabling Technologies
There are many technologies that enable IoT. Main enabling factor of this
promising paradigm is the integration of several technologies and communica-
tions solutions. Identiﬁcation and sensing technologies, middleware, enhanced
communication protocols are the most relevant.
2.6.1
Identiﬁcation and sensing technology
2.6.1.1
Radio-frequency identiﬁcation - RFID
Radio-frequency identiﬁcation (RFID) is a technology that incorporates the use
of electromagnetic or electrostatic coupling in the radio frequency (RF) signals
to uniquely identify the presence of an object. An RFID system consists of
three components: an antenna and transceiver (often combined into one RFID
reader) and a transponder (the tag). The antenna uses radio frequency waves to
transmit a signal that activates the transponder. Each RFID tag has its unique
identiﬁcation number. When activated, the tag transmits its tag UID back to
the antenna.
Low-frequency (30 KHz to 500 KHz) RFID systems have short transmission
ranges (generally less than six feet). High-frequency (850 MHz to 950 MHz and
2.4 GHz to 2.5 GHz) RFID systems oﬀer longer transmission ranges (generally
==PAGE:28==
16
Background of Internet of Things
more than 90 feet). In general, the higher the frequency, the more expensive the
system [16]. There are Passive RFIDs which harvest the power from incoming
signals from RFID readers. Active RFIDs have their own battery power and
can instantiate the communication [17].
The advantage of RFID is that it does not require direct contact or line-of-sight
scanning and that is of very low cost and small in size. However, it has limited
battery power.
2.6.1.2
Wireless Sensor Network - WSN
A wireless sensor network (WSN) consists of multiple spatially distributed intel-
ligent detection stations called sensor nodes, each of which is small, lightweight
and portable. The sensor network have the capabilities of monitoring,analyzing
and recording conditions at diverse locations. Every sensor node is equipped
with a transducer, microcomputer, transceiver and power source. The trans-
ducer generates electrical signals based on sensed physical eﬀects and phe-
nomena.
The microcomputer processes and stores the sensor output.
The
transceiver receives commands from a central computer and transmits data to
that computer. The power for each sensor node is derived from a battery [18].
WSN can be proved better as compared to RFID while tracking the moving
object, as it traces location along with its surrounding atmosphere parameters
like humidity, temperature, wind direction and speed, illumination intensity, vi-
bration intensity, sound intensity, power-line voltage, chemical concentrations
etc.
Most of the sensor network can be implemented through various standard IEEE
802.15.4 wireless technologies: Wireless Personal Area Network (WPAN), Wire-
less Local Area Network (WLAN), Wireless Metropolitan Area Network(WMAN),
Wireless Wide Area Network (WWAN), and Satellite Network [7, 17]. The ad-
vantage of WSN is that it has high radio coverage range so no special device
like RFID reader, is required.
2.6.1.3
RFID Wireless Sensor Network – RSN
RFID Wireless Sensor Network (RSN) is an amalgamation of RFID and Wireless
Sensor Network. It has capabilities to carry out tracking and detect the status of
tagged object. The architecture of RSN comprises of RFID tag and sensor nodes,
working on same layer but they are not directly connected to each other. Rather,
there is RFID reader and Sensor Gateway on the higher layer which collects the
==PAGE:29==
2.6 Enabling Technologies
17
data from lower layer and forwards the data to the agent network.The agent
network can be any wireless IEEE 802.11 or IEEE 802.15 network or any wired
network [17].
The advantage of this architecture is that it does not require any specialized
hardware instead it will work on the existing infrastructure [17].
2.6.1.4
Bluetooth low energy - BLE
Bluetooth low energy is one of the latest technologies. Nowadays, most of smart-
phones have BLE hardware incorporated in them. Like its predecessor, Blue-
tooth LE uses frequency hopping wireless technology in the 2.4 GHz unlicensed
radio band to interconnect nearby devices. Bluetooth LE maxes out at just 1
Mbps while consuming only 0.01 to 0.5 watts[19]. Tags based on BLE can signal
their presence at a power budget that enables them to operate for up to one
year on a lithium coin cell battery [7].
2.6.1.5
Two Dimensional (2D) barcode
Two dimensional (2D) barcode is a graphical image that stores information both
horizontally as one-dimensional bar codes do and vertically. As a result of that
construction, 2D codes can store up to 7,089 characters, signiﬁcantly greater
storage than is possible with the 20-character capacity of a uni dimensional
barcode. This technology uses an optical means for representing data that can
be read by a special bar code reader (smart phones are usually equipped with
barcode readers) machine to obtain the data. It covers from several inches to
few feet distance but reader and the bar code should be in line of site [17]. The
advantage of 2D barcode is that they enable fast data access and are inexpensive
as compared to RFID. However, at the same time the wear and tear required is
more than RFID [17].
2.6.1.6
Near Field Communication - NFC
Near Field Communication (NFC) is a short-range wireless connectivity stan-
dard (Ecma-340, ISO/IEC 18092) covering the wireless range of up to few inches.
It uses magnetic ﬁeld induction to enable communication between devices when
they’re touched together, or brought within a few centimeters of each other [20].
It is similar to RFID technology. The data transfer rate of NFC is slower than
Bluetooth which is up to 424 Kbps [17]. In IoT, it can be used to update the
==PAGE:30==
18
Background of Internet of Things
ﬁrmware or retrieve diagnostic data just by keeping the mobile device very near
to new appliances [17].
2.6.2
Protocols
IoT needs diﬀerent protocols for diverse operations. Like it requires a protocol
for collecting the data from sensors, communication protocol to send the data to
server infrastructure, protocols for device to people communication and protocol
for device to device communication.
2.6.2.1
Message Queue Telemetry Transport – MQTT
Message Queue Telemetry Transport – MQTT is a lightweight messaging pro-
tocol that provides resource-constrained network clients with a simple way to
distribute telemetry information. The protocol, uses a publish/subscribe com-
munication pattern. MQTT allows devices to send (publish) information about
a given topic to a server that functions as an MQTT message broker. It is based
on hub-and-spoke architecture with broker connected to multiple clients. The
broker then pushes the information out to those clients that have previously
subscribed to the client’s topic [21].
MQTT is a good for wireless networks that experience varying levels of latency
due to occasional bandwidth constraints or unreliable connections.
2.6.2.2
Constrained Application Protocol – CoAP
It is a protocol especially use for the networks having very small, low powered
and constrained nodes. It uses request/response messaging technique. It is an
application layer protocol implemented using REST architecture and can be
easily mapped to HTTP. It provides the functionality of group communication
and push notiﬁcation. However, it does not support broadcasting [17].
2.6.2.3
Extensible Messaging and Presence Protocol - XMPP
Extensible Messaging and Presence Protocol – XMPP is a message oriented mid-
dleware protocol based on Extensible Markup Language (XML) and intended
for instant messaging. It functions between or among servers, and facilitates
==PAGE:31==
2.6 Enabling Technologies
19
near-real-time operation. It is slow but has good scalability, addressing and
security capabilities [17].
2.6.2.4
Advanced Message Queuing Protocol - AMQP
It is a message oriented middleware protocol having the capabilities of queuing,
routing, security and reliability. It implements publish/subscribe pattern and
point to point routing [17].
2.6.2.5
Zigbee
ZigBee is a mesh network speciﬁcation for low-power wireless local area networks
(WLANs) that cover a large area. Zigbee is deﬁned in four layers.Physical and
MAC layers are based on IEEE 802.15.4 standards. Network and Application
layer is Zigbee Speciﬁc [17]. Currently, there are three ZigBee speciﬁcations:
ZigBee, ZigBee IP(optimal for full mesh networks) and ZigBee RF4CE(optimal
for partial mesh networks) [22].
2.6.2.6
Internet Protocol version 6 - IPv6
Internet Protocol version 6 (IPv6) allows auto-conﬁguration of network, bet-
ter security, support for mobility and eﬃcient addressing scheme. IPv6 oﬀers
a highly scalable address scheme to overcome the limited size of its predeces-
sor, IPv4. It provides 2128 unique addresses, which represents addresses quite
suﬃcient to address the needs of any present and future communicating device.
2.6.2.7
IPv6 over Low power Wireless Personal Area Networks -
6LoWPAN
A 6LoWPAN focuses on low power personal area network having low-cost, low-
bit rate wireless devices with limited power and conforms IEEE802.15.4 standard
[17].
==PAGE:32==
20
Background of Internet of Things
2.6.3
Middleware
Middleware is a software layer that serves to glue together separate, complex and
already existing underlying technologies of IoT and its application level. It aims
to provides abstraction and interoperability and scalability among heterogeneous
devices.
2.6.3.1
Message Oriented Middleware(MOM)
Message oriented middleware is a technology that uses message queuing system
for delivery of messages in order to support asynchronous, store and forward
communication.The sender and receiver are loosely coupled. It generally uses
Extensible Markup Language (XML) based format for messaging and provides
priority based in-order delivery of messages [17].
2.6.3.2
Semantic Web and Web Service based middleware
The semantic web and web service technology provides interoperability within
various sensor networks. This technology helps in analyzing the information
generated by sensors so that the information can be used to perform intelligent
tasks. The various approaches for Semantic Web Technology include Service
Oriented Architecture based middleware, Task Computing based middleware
and Triple Space Based middleware [17].
2.6.3.3
Communication based middleware
RFID based middleware
The architecture of RFID based middleware consist of RFID tags deployed on
objects, RFID reader reads the raw data from tags and process it and further
transmitted to LAN. XML based Physical Markup Language (PML) is used to
represent the data.
Sensor Network based middleware
The data collected by spatially deployed sensors in WSN is further organized in
a sink node and forwarded to computational device for processing. Finally the
processed is data stored in cloud for future need.
==PAGE:33==
2.7 Open Issues
21
2.6.3.4
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition – SCADA
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) is a technology for process
control, the gathering of data in real time from distributed nodes in order to
control equipment and conditions. It is used in inherently complex distributed
systems.
SCADA systems include hardware and software components.
The hardware
gathers and feeds data into a computer that has SCADA software installed.
The computer then processes this data and presents it in a timely manner [23].
It is also preferred where wireless and wired network are to be blended in IoT
[17].
2.7
Open Issues
The IoT world may be exhilarating, but there are varieties of challenges in IoT
that need to be addressed before the IoT idea is widely accepted. Some of the
main challenges[10, 17] involved are:
• Integrating all diﬀerent technologies on same platform
• Making full interoperability of interconnected devices possible
• Supporting scalability
• Providing eﬃcient storing and retrieving techniques for massive data
• Providing middleware standardization
• Oﬀering high degree smart devices consistently by enabling their adapta-
tion and autonomous behavior
• Managing the complexities of Quality of Service support
• Assuring security and privacy
We will be discussing in detail the issues in IoT that are related to security in
chapter 3. Among IoT developers the awareness of security concerns is top of
mind as depicted in ﬁgure 2.3 from a recent IEEE survey [24]. IoT specialized
developers put security above interoperability, connectivity and performance.
==PAGE:34==
22
Background of Internet of Things
Figure 2.3: Top Concerns for developing IoT solutions
Due to the dynamics, uncertainties and complexity of IoT, securing millions of
intelligent things is a very challenging task. As the IoT devices are low powered,
heavyweight security algorithms for the data security are not feasible. Also, the
sensing devices are not under surveillance so they can be easily interceded by
intruders and eavesdropping can be possible. Apart from this the authentica-
tion, veriﬁcation, data integrity and various network attacks are major security
concerns [17].
The identiﬁed security issues motivate need for security certiﬁcation criteria of
IoT devices. Due to the increasing use of variety of IoT devices in various ﬁelds,
these devices need to have assured secure operation. Currently, we do not have
speciﬁc security certiﬁcation standard for myriad of diﬀerent IoT devices.
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 3
IoT Security Challenges
This chapter gives an overview of IoT components and their interoperability.
It then provides systematic summary of security challenges that are identiﬁed
while reading and analyzing the existing research of IoT security.
3.1
Background
To understand IoT security issues, it is essential to understand the interoper-
ability among various IoT components (smart devices, gateway, cloud platform,
etc.). The IoT ecosystem has following major components [25, 26]:
• IoT edge devices
• Gateway
• IoT services or Cloud
• Controller or Mobile
The edge component consist of actual physical devices. Generally, these de-
vices are resource constrained.
A gateway device is used to aggregate and
==PAGE:36==
24
IoT Security Challenges
bridge communications from edge devices. The edge or gateway, communicates
with cloud component providing IoT services. Finally, many IoT ecosystems
consist of mobile application components that allow users to interact with the
ecosystem via smart phones or tablets.
The properties and functions of these components are described as follows:
IoT edge device: The IoT edge device is the actual physical device that makes
up the IoT ecosystem. It consists of sensors, actuators, communication and net-
working capabilities, operating systems, system software, and lightweight ser-
vices. Its main responsibility is to collect contextual information using sensors
and to perform actions using actuators. In many deployments the edge compo-
nent is heterogeneous as it is made up of any number of types of devices with
diﬀerent resources, hardware, operating systems, networking or communications
interfaces.
Gateway: Gateway component is also termed as a multiprotocol device/sensor
bridge. It aggregates and bridge communications from edge devices and acts as
a hub between the local IoT network and IoT cloud services. It also serves as a
connector between heterogeneous local IoT networks. For example, a gateway
device enables ZigBee IoT devices to talk with Z-Wave IoT devices. Basically,
it serves as an aggregation point. Gateways have greater resource availability
than edge devices and run full operating system stacks and are responsible for
controlling bottlenecks.
IoT services or Cloud: Generally, IoT services are hosted on cloud so that
users can access IoT objects anytime, anywhere. The responsibilities of these
services include IoT process automation, device management, decision making,
data aggregation, analytics and reporting etc. The cloud component could be
deployed in a private company data center or a public cloud computing envi-
ronment.
Controller or mobile: IoT devices are controlled using the controllers i.e. mo-
bile applications component via smartphones or tablets. These controllers vary
in capabilities ranging from limited data reporting from speciﬁc edge devices to
providing a full view analytics and cloud management capabilities.
3.2
Security Challenges
The conventional approach for security will not be applicable to IoT ecosystem
because of it’s diﬀerent characteristics. The IoT is where the Internet meets
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Security Challenges
25
the physical world. This has some serious implications on security as the attack
threat moves from controlling information to controlling actuation. Also, the
wide scale of IoT requires that every design and security aspect must be con-
sidered to provide security countermeasures with that volume. Strong security
controls are required across all interfaces in an ecosystem. Moreover, IoT devices
are inherently resource constrained. The business case for many IoT services
demand that the cost of the IoT devices be kept low. This often results in the
device containing low computational capability, small memory and constrained
operating systems.
Major security challenges and considerations in designing and building IoT de-
vices or system are listed below [25, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31]:
1. Energy constraint: Generally, IoT devices are battery driven and require
low power consumption to achieve long battery life. The need of long bat-
tery life could be several years for a remote inaccessible device without a
permanent power supply or for a device that has a permanent, but limited,
power supply. These devices can usually only undertake computationally
simple cryptographic algorithms due to the high power consumption re-
quirements associated with more advanced cryptographic algorithms.
2. Computational constraint: IoT devices have limited computing capabili-
ties. Low computational capability of devices may not support complex
and evolving security algorithms.
3. Memory constraint: IoT devices have limited amount of memory and
therefore security algorithms should be memory eﬃcient. New memory
eﬃcient security algorithms are required as traditional security algorithms
are not designed with memory eﬃciency requirement.
4. Long-Lived: Many IoT devices must be long lived. For example, smart
meters could last beyond 40 years. This requires the cryptographic design
opted during the device designing, to be robust for the lifetime of the
device. Crypto algorithms have a limited lifetime before they are broken
and devices may outlive algorithm lifetime.
5. Physically accessible: Many IoT devices are physically accessible to the
attacker. All cryptographic secrets, programs, interfaces on these devices
are therefore potentially subject to attack and must be secured. Tamper
resistant packaging is required to defend these tamper threats on devices
by attackers.
6. Scalability: The number of IoT devices is growing everyday and a huge
number of devices are getting connected with the global information net-
work. Therefore, IoT has to provide capabilities to ensure the security for
this tremendous number of devices.
==PAGE:38==
26
IoT Security Challenges
7. Diversity: Diversity of the IoT devices within the IoT systems ranges in
characteristics widely. Moreover, there are diﬀerent types of communi-
cation and technologies involved. Therefore, it is hard to ﬁnd a single
security scheme that accommodate even the simplest of devices.
8. Dynamic security patch: Setting up a dynamic security patch on the IoT
devices and extenuating the vulnerabilities is not a simple job. Due to
constraints of lightweight operating system or protocol stack, remote re-
programming could be diﬃcult.
9. Mobility: IoT device might join or leave a network at anytime from any-
where as mobility is one of the prominent attributes of IoT devices. Mobil-
ity resilience and changing topological capabilities must be incorporated
by security algorithms for IoT devices.
There are complex and competing security requirements to be deployed
with the above challenges. Integrity, Authentication, Authorization, Non-
repudiation, Anonymity, Conﬁdentiality, Availability, Resiliency are the
few essential security requirements that are expected to be met by the
IoT.
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 4
Foundation of Security
Certiﬁcation
This chapter sheds some light on the fundamental concepts behind security
certiﬁcation and describes the process of security certiﬁcation. After description
of the process, the background of standardization in general, is outlined. Finally,
the need for certifying IoT devices is motivated.
4.1
Security Certiﬁcation
The security of a system or product is the degree to which it prevents and
counteracts malicious attacks that endanger the functionality or information of
the entire system. Security is engineering the system or product in a way that
it continues to function correctly even under malicious attack.
Security is now a major concern of decision makers to ensure that the products
they buy, possess security features needed to thwart security threats. More and
more complex technology is available in the information society to ease user’s
life. With the fast pace technological evolution of devices in terms of networking,
speed and computing power, in the last few years, users need help to decide what
technology to trust. Users need answers to questions like does the oﬀered system
==PAGE:40==
28
Foundation of Security Certiﬁcation
or product meet the security essentials? Does it fulﬁl legal requirements? Or is
the given organization trustworthy? Vendors‘ marketing information does not
always help and therefore some kind of independent evaluation and certiﬁcation
is needed that checks the products and systems and provides report on their
security properties [32].
Security certiﬁcation and criteria explicate all the needed information about
security properties and indicate the level of assurance that has been provided
for the system or product. [33] Intuitively, the security certiﬁcation process of
a product should reveal all the problems and faults of the product’s security
features, which could lead to vulnerability to attacks. Certiﬁcates can be seen
as the trusted information that is shared with customers regarding products and
devices available on the market. Certiﬁcates contain all information necessary
for independent assessment of the properties claimed for a product or device.
Security certiﬁcation criteria is increasingly aiming at civilian and commercial
security interests [34]. Certiﬁcates provide information about a product’s prop-
erties to the potential customer and to the general public, facilitating a com-
parison among competing IT products and devices. From the purchaser’s point
of view, the certiﬁcate provides a useful independent appraisal of a product’s
properties. From the product supplier’s point of view, getting a prestigious cer-
tiﬁcate can be a powerful marketing tool, while failing to do so can be an early
warning of something being wrong with the product [35].
4.2
Security Certiﬁcation Process
For security certiﬁcation, the terms evaluation, certiﬁcation and accreditation
have a well-deﬁned meaning and relation. They are best described by the ter-
minology of the harmonized European IT Security Evaluation Criteria (ITSEC)
[34]:
1. Evaluation is “the assessment of an IT system or product against deﬁned
evaluation criteria”.Assessment can be by means of tests.
2. Certiﬁcation is “the issue of a formal statement conﬁrming the results of
an evaluation, and that the evaluation criteria used were applied correctly”.
3. Accreditation has two deﬁnitions depending on the circumstances: “the
procedure for accepting an IT system for use within a particular environ-
ment”, or “the procedure for recognizing both the technical competence
and impartiality of a test laboratory to carry out its associated task”.
==PAGE:41==
4.2 Security Certiﬁcation Process
29
The security certiﬁcation process has evolved over the time. Figure 4.1 from
[32] shows the conceptual model of security certiﬁcation process.The main au-
thorities [34] involved in the certiﬁcation process are:
• Sponsor: manufacturer or developer of the product; it can also be any
other vendor
• Certiﬁcation body (CB): an entity trusted by users to create and assign
certiﬁcates
• IT Security Evaluation Facility (ITSEF): a laboratory that conducts
security testing
Figure 4.1: Certiﬁcation Process
The certiﬁcation process [34] begins with the request of a sponsor. The general
steps are speciﬁed below:
1. The sponsor either applies directly to a CB or contracts ITSEF and re-
quests for the evaluation and certiﬁcation of the product.
2. The ITSEF advises the sponsor about the Target of Evaluation (TOE) that
could be product or system, the security requirements and the planned
evaluation result as most of the criteria schemes leave these up to the
sponsors’ prudence. A mapping is clearly speciﬁed between a set of secu-
rity properties (in terms of security requirements) and the corresponding
security features that are included in the product.
3. The evaluation can take several months or years and is monitored by
the CB. ITSEF evaluates that the product under certiﬁcation actually
possesses the required security features and such features perform exactly
their intended functionalities.
==PAGE:42==
30
Foundation of Security Certiﬁcation
4. The ITSEF reports to the CB and to the sponsor. The evaluation report
is a pre-requisite for issuing a certiﬁcate on the part of the certiﬁcation
authority. If the evaluation report is positive and if there are no other facts
known to the CB that contradict the report, the CB issues the certiﬁcate.
5. The certiﬁcate is published with a certiﬁcation report if the sponsor agrees.
A certiﬁcate should contain all information necessary for an independent assess-
ment of all properties claimed for a product.The exact content of a certiﬁcate
depend on the product or system being evaluated and the speciﬁc property it
claims to hold. However, a certiﬁcate has to characterize all entities involved in
the certiﬁcation process [35]:
• Certiﬁcation body making the assertion
• Product/System being certiﬁed
• Properties being asserted
4.3
Usage of Certiﬁcation
All diﬀerent stakeholders involved in evaluation and certiﬁcation process have
diﬀerent interests regarding certiﬁcates [34].
• Manufacturers and vendors use certiﬁcation mainly for the evaluation
of products. Sales promotion is lucrative usage of certiﬁcation as its ex-
istence inﬂuence decisions of customers. The certiﬁcation can be used to
document the company position in the market and maintain the image.
• Users and procurers are the vital motivators of the certiﬁcation pro-
cess. Users use certiﬁcation for evaluation of diﬀerent products or vendors.
Certiﬁcates provide trust on the product/system for the users.
• Evaluation facilities see certiﬁcation as a competitive market.
• For the private certiﬁcation bodies and their employees, certiﬁcation is
means of business and income, for the government certiﬁcation bodies it
is their legal task.
==PAGE:43==
4.4 Standardization and Certiﬁcation
31
4.4
Standardization and Certiﬁcation
Standards are generally the result of an agreement between technology sup-
pliers, customers and regulatory authorities at a national or international level.
Probably the most important goals of standardization are setting a minimum ac-
ceptable level of quality for a given scope of a standard (both on a technical and
organizational level) and enabling technical interoperability of products from
diﬀerent vendors [36]. The emergence of standards has been crucial to ensure
interoperability among diﬀerent brands of products or services. Standardized
criteria is essential as it provides ease in comparing evaluation results. More-
over, it not only helps to structure evaluation results and security requirements
but also avoids the need of re-evaluation in each country.
Certiﬁcation bodies run in between the needs of the users and the needs of
industry. In that sense, certiﬁcation bodies provides certiﬁcates that can be seen
as trusted information given to potential customers about products available on
the market [35].
Many a times, the term certiﬁcation is intertwined with the term standardiza-
tion. Certiﬁcates are closely related to standards inasmuch they give information
about a product’s properties to the potential customer and to the general public,
facilitating a comparison among competing software products or services. Certi-
ﬁed properties correspond to a set of requirements, which can coincide to those
deﬁning an open standard. For example, the Common Criteria is a certiﬁcation
scheme where the security level of a software product is assessed according to a
set of requirements deﬁned in the international standard ISO/IEC 15408 [35].
4.5
General Structure
Generally, security aspects of all evaluation criteria are divided into two: Func-
tionality and Assurance [34, 32].
1. Functionality covers what the TOE does, or can do, for security. It covers
aspects for conﬁdentiality, integrity, availability, and accountability.
2. Assurance covers what was done to assure that the TOE does what it shall
do or does not do what it shouldn’t do. It covers the measures to produce
the TOE in a secure way, and it covers the thoroughness of the evaluation.
Assurance has two aspects:
==PAGE:44==
32
Foundation of Security Certiﬁcation
• Eﬀectiveness: The evaluation of the eﬀectiveness inspects whether
the functions and mechanisms of the TOE that implement security
are actually suﬃcient for the devised objective. Moreover, the po-
tency of the security mechanisms (e.g. cryptography) against potency
of direct attacks is checked.
• Correctness: The evaluation of the correctness examines whether the
security functions and mechanisms of the TOE were implemented
correctly.
4.6
Certifying IoT
The transformative potential of IoT rests perilously on major and critical factor
of security. Study after study has revealed vulnerabilities in IoT devices and
their implications. Survey results conducted by analyst ﬁrms identify security
and privacy concerns among the chief barriers to IoT adoption by enterprises
[37]. The lack of inherent security in IoT devices was highlighted in a ZDNet
report, which noted IoT devices vulnerability to security attacks as they were
not originally manufactured with security in mind [38]. A 2014 study [39] on
commercialized IoT deployments was conducted to represent existing state of
the IoT device deployments in the world. It found that 80% of such devices
violate privacy, 80% failed to require strong passwords, 70% failed to provide
encrypted communications, and 60% had security vulnerabilities in their user
interfaces.
Recent news and reports of security vulnerabilities in over 1 billion devices that
cover the IoT indicate the importance of protecting those devices and sensors
while protecting the information they collect. Consider for instance, the breach
in US-based retailer Target’s payment systems in late 2013. This was the largest
data hack in US retail history and resulted in the theft of 40 million credit card
numbers [40]. What is extraordinary about this attack is that hackers gained
access to target’s network through internet-enabled heating, ventilation and air-
conditioning systems installed in its retail stores [41].
The IoT creates new security risks that device manufacturers and application
developers have not anticipated. According to a study conducted by Quocirca
[42] , data protection in terms of customer privacy trumps all other IoT secu-
rity concerns, but other common issues include the expanding attack surface
aﬀorded by IoT devices, ﬁguring out how to institute regulatory controls and
data ownership.
The IoT presents an expanded attack surface and multiple points of vulnerabil-
==PAGE:45==
4.6 Certifying IoT
33
ity. Attacks on IoT devices are easy to conduct and compromising one device
in the IoT network enables fraudulent acts towards another connected devices,
impersonating the real one. The IoT devices enable the storage, analysis, mon-
itoring, and sharing of vast quantities of data with other networked devices and
users. Users’ data is threatened because of their limited control and choice over
the collection, retention, and distribution of their data.
Above incidents and traits show a signiﬁcant threat to the success of the emerg-
ing IoT ecosystem.Thus, understanding the risks associated with the prolifera-
tion of devices that make up the Internet of Things, and knowing how to evaluate
them is very critical. Security certiﬁcation and evaluation can provide peace of
mind not only for the end users but also for organizations that brand and re-
sell IoT devices to their customers; organizations that implement IoT devices
in their businesses; and device makers interested in demonstrating the security
eﬃcacy of their products to customers. It can help reduce supply chain risk,
improve their market standing, preserve their company brand, avoid the high
cost of remediation and protect their sensitive information.
Certiﬁcation and evaluation criteria could aid in procuring security requirements
for any IoT device type and performing evaluation mapping to those criteria
requirements.
Indeed, internationally recognized certiﬁcation and evaluation
criteria that follow detailed testing processes and procedures is needed, so that
organizations can count on it for the security of the IoT devices they sell or
implement.
==PAGE:46==
34
Foundation of Security Certiﬁcation
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 5
Security Certiﬁcation
Criteria
This chapter provides description on various established security certiﬁcation
criteria. Common criteria (CC) security certiﬁcation is focused and presented
in detail because of its generality that enables it to deal with a wide range of
security functionalities and security products, and it’s evolution in ﬁelds related
to IoT systems.
5.1
Introduction
The increasing need and public demand for improving the security of IT prod-
ucts and systems have led to huge interdisciplinary research and investigations
to develop methods for creating security certiﬁcates that should be delivered to
users together with IT products and systems [35]. In parallel to these research
eﬀorts, international governmental agencies and standard evaluation bodies have
been busy devising regulations and guidelines on the development and deploy-
ment of certiﬁed IT products and systems. This section describes who writes
which criteria and where do these criteria come from.
Table 5.1 represents the list of evaluation criteria and their corresponding editors
==PAGE:48==
36
Security Certiﬁcation Criteria
[34, 32].
The Figure 5.1 from [32] depicts where do the criteria come from.
In 1983, the ﬁrst criteria, the “Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria”
(TCSEC) was published.
Figure 5.1: Origins of criteria
Insuﬃciencies of the TCSEC, which prescribed a very strict military view of IT
security, made Europe and Canada develop own evaluation criteria. European
was a result of union of German Criteria ZSISC, French Criteria, and the UK
criteria. In Canada, CTCPEC was being developed at the same time. The IT-
SEC began the approach to create a framework that will assist in describing the
security characteristics that are to be evaluated. The ITSEC also served as a
starting point for international standardization of the ECITS in a joint commit-
tee of ISO and IEC. This aimed at uniform criteria and mutual acknowledgement
of evaluation results. Also the CTCPEC inﬂuenced the ECITS. Parallel to the
ISO/IEC standardization, North American and European government agencies
developed the Common Criteria [35].
Further sections brieﬂy review some established security certiﬁcation standards
like TCSEC, CTCPEC and ITSEC adopted in the US, in Canada and in Europe
respectively. These early mechanisms provides basis for much of the vocabulary
that is still shared by product purchasers, vendors and security auditors and
demonstrate ways in which CC has learnt from other schemes.
==PAGE:49==
5.2 Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria (TCSEC)
37
5.2
Trusted Computer System Evaluation Crite-
ria (TCSEC)
5.2.1
About and History
Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria (TCSEC) was the ﬁrst major
computer security evaluation methodology. It was initially issued in 1983 by
the National Computer Security Center (NCSC), a part of the Department of
Defense (DoD), National Security Agency (NSA) and was set forth as standard
in December, 1985. It is frequently referred as “Orange Book” and is the cen-
terpiece of the DoD Rainbow Series publications. It was formulated as a way
of standardizing security requirements for both the government and the indus-
try. Although it was originally written with military systems and applications
in mind, its security classiﬁcations have been broadly used within the entire
computer industry [35]. The TCSEC was used to evaluate, classify and select
computer systems being considered for the processing, storage and retrieval of
sensitive or classiﬁed information.
The TCSEC criteria was developed with following basic objectives in mind [43]:
• To provide users with a systematic way to measure the level of trust that
can be placed in computer systems for the secure, classiﬁed and other
sensitive information
• To provide sound security guidance for manufacturers as to what to build
into their new, widely-available trusted commercial products that satisfy
security requirements for sensitive applications
• To provide a basis for specifying security requirements in acquisition spec-
iﬁcations
Provisions that need to be present for considering a system to be “secure” are
mapped to speciﬁc security requirements, which must be provided by purchasers.
To help software users in deﬁning their own security requirements, TCSEC in-
troduced fundamental requirement types, which are derived from the objectives
stated above[44, 35]:
• Security policy: The policy must be explicit and well deﬁned and en-
forced by the mechanisms within the system.
• Identiﬁcation: Individual subjects must be uniquely identiﬁed.
==PAGE:50==
38
Security Certiﬁcation Criteria
• Labels Access: Control labels must be associated properly with objects.
• Accountability: Audit data must be captured and protected to enforce
accountability.
• Documentation: Documentation must be provided, including test, de-
sign, and speciﬁcation documents, user guides, and manuals.
• Life cycle assurance: Software, hardware, and ﬁrmware must be able
to be tested individually to ensure that each enforces the security policy
in an eﬀective manner throughout their lifetimes.
• Continuous protection: The security mechanisms and the system as
a whole must perform predictably and acceptably in diﬀerent situations
continuously.
5.2.2
Key Concepts
For TCSEC, the meaning of security functionality was very simple. Security
was the conﬁdentiality of the system owner’s documents. That’s why TCSEC
merely contain a list of security mechanisms [45].
To apply common evaluation procedures to various systems, TCSEC groups the
products into common categories according to their capability of securing data
and procedure they manage. TCSEC security categories are D, C, B, A where
D is minimal Protection and A is highest veriﬁed Protection.
• A — Veriﬁed Protection.
• B — Mandatory Protection.
• C — Discretionary Protection.
• D — Minimal Protection.
Each category characterizes a noteworthy diﬀerence in the trust on the evaluated
system.
To be classiﬁed in a given category, a system must provide all the
security features corresponding to that category.
Additionally, categories C,
B and A are broken into a series of hierarchical sub categories called classes:
C1, C2, B1, B2, B3 and A1. Each category and class expands or modiﬁes, as
indicated, the requirements of the immediately prior division or class [46].
Table 5.2 from [35] depicts the summary of TCSEC category and classes
==PAGE:51==
5.2 Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria (TCSEC)
39
Figure 5.2: TCSEC Category and Classes
Below is the detailed description of classes as described in [35] and [43].
D - Minimal Protection
This category includes any system that does not comply with any other category,
or has failed to receive a higher classiﬁcation. D-level certiﬁcation is very rare
[35]. It is held in reserve for those systems that have been evaluated but not be
up to meet the requirements for a higher division [46].
C - Discretionary Protection
Discretionary protection applies to Trusted Computer Bases (TCBs) with op-
tional object (ﬁle, directory, devices, etc.) protection.
• C1 - Discretionary Security Protection
This category includes systems that have provisions for Discretionary Ac-
cess Control by providing separation of users and data, as for example
Access Control Lists (ACLs). It provides minimal assurance and requires
identiﬁcation and authentication features. C1 certiﬁcation is quite rare
and has been used for earlier versions of Unix.
Nothing got evaluated
under this after 1986.
==PAGE:52==
40
Security Certiﬁcation Criteria
• C2 - Controlled Access Protection
This category is an extension to C1 with the addition of object protec-
tion on a single user basis, e.g., through an ACL or a Trustee database.
C2 auditing is capable of tracking each individual’s access or attempt to
each object and makes users individually accountable for their actions. It
provides more stringent security testing. It is one of the most common
certiﬁcations. Microsoft’s Windows NT 4.0 OS received C2-certiﬁcation
in November 1999.Oracle 7, DG AOS/VS II, IBM OS/400, are some of
the other Operating Systems using C2 certiﬁcation [35, 45].
B - Mandatory Protection
It speciﬁes that the TCB protection systems should have mandatory access
policies, not discretionary. Main condition is the protection of the integrity of
sensitivity labels and their support to enforce a set of mandatory access control
rules.
• B1 - Labelled Security Protection
B1 systems require all the features required for class C2 and the addi-
tional requirements like mandatory access control must be there for spe-
ciﬁc objects. Each controlled object must be labeled for a security level
& that labeling is used to control access. Security testing requirements
are more stringent. Informal security model for both hierarchical levels
and non-hierarchical categories is developed and is shown consistent with
its axioms. CA - ACF2 MVS is a B1-compliant product from Computer
Associates. Digital SEVMS is the B1 security-enhanced version of Open-
VMS (itself a C2 product). UTS/MLS by UTS is B1 certiﬁed. Some of
the other operating systems and environments using B1 certiﬁcation in-
clude: HP-UX BLS, Cray Research Trusted Unicos 8.0, Harris CS/SX,
SGI Trusted IRIX, DEC ULTRIX, Trusted Oracle 7 [35, 45].
• B2 - Structured Protection
B2 systems require all the features required for class B1 and the additional
requirements like mandatory access control for all objects, expanded la-
beling, trusted path for login. It requires use of principle of least privilege
and support for covert channel analysis and conﬁguration management.
It provides formal model of security policy proven consistent with its ax-
ioms. Some of the systems using B2 certiﬁcation are: Honeywell Multics,
Cryptek VSLAN, Trusted XENIX 4.0.
• B3 - Security Domains
B3 systems require all the features required for class B2 and the additional
requirements like tamper-proof security functions, increased trusted path
==PAGE:53==
5.2 Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria (TCSEC)
41
requirements, signiﬁcant assurance requirements. It requires administra-
tor’s guide and design documentation as well. The only B3-certiﬁed OS
is Getronics/Wang Federal XTS300 by Getronics Government Solutions
(formerly Wang Federal) [35, 45]
A - Veriﬁed Protection
It is the highest security category.
Category A is characterized by the use
of formal security veriﬁcation methods to assure that the mandatory and dis-
cretionary access control models correctly protect classiﬁed or other sensitive
information stored or processed by the system. TCB must meet the security
requirements in all aspects of design, development and implementation.
• A1 - Veriﬁed Protection
A1 systems require all the features required for class B3 and formal meth-
ods and proof of integrity of TCB. The following are the A1-certiﬁed sys-
tems: Boeing MLS LAN, Gemini Trusted Network Processor, Honeywell
SCOMP.
5.2.3
Issues/Limitations
1. The fundamental problem of TCSEC evaluation methodology is lack of
ﬂexibility in expressing security requirements and in mapping them to
security features.
2. Originally, military and governmental organizations were the intended
users of TCSEC. They have very speciﬁc security requirements, mostly
related to conﬁdentiality of classiﬁed data. Requirements considered im-
portant for business applications like availability and integrity were con-
sidered insuﬃciently [35].
3. The certiﬁcation process consumed a long time which lead to certiﬁed
products lagging behind technology development.
4. As business products were developed, the criteria needed to be interpreted
to apply to those products. It failed to adapt to the security requirements
of a wider general market.
5. Timeliness of the process and its inherent focus on operating systems are
another failures of TCSEC evaluation methodology.
==PAGE:54==
42
Security Certiﬁcation Criteria
5.3
CTCPEC
5.3.1
About and History
Canadian Trusted Computer Product Evaluation Criteria (CTCPEC) is a com-
puter security standard published in 1993 by the the Canadian System Security
Centre (CSSC) at the Communications Security Establishment of the Govern-
ment of Canada to provide an Canadian evaluation criterion on IT products. It
can be seen as a further development beyond the scope of the TCSEC and the
ITSEC and its approach to structure security functionality inﬂuenced interna-
tional standardization [47].
The CTCPEC addressed the commercial market demands by supporting a richer
classiﬁcation of security requirements and more expressive mapping of these re-
quirements to security features. The attempt was to widen the targeted products
to include monolithic systems, multi-processor systems, databases, subsystems,
distributed systems, network systems, and others [48].
5.3.2
Key Concepts
This was done by splitting the criteria into two distinct groups: functionality
and trust. There are four criteria deﬁned as Conﬁdentiality Criteria, Integrity
Criteria, Availability Criteria, and Accountability Criteria. For trust, the crite-
ria is deﬁned as Assurance Criteria [48]. The CTCPEC introduced the concept
of a proﬁle as a logical grouping based upon constraints. The Canadian ap-
proach to proﬁles allows for inﬁnite development of proﬁles to meet customer
requirements that do not break any of the criteria constraints. The approval
of proﬁles in Canada is by the Communications Security Establishment (CSE)
[47].
Additionally, the “Functional Proﬁles” of the CTCPEC deﬁne “Functionality”
similar to the way the “Functionality Classes” of the ITSEC do. [47]. It presents
another 2-layer-structure with four “Functional Criteria” as an abstract struc-
ture. Each of the four “Functional Criteria” is divided into altogether 18 “Secu-
rity Services”.
There has been criticism that this structure promotes mechanisms like self test-
ing on the same level as security functionalities e.g. identiﬁcation and authen-
tication. Additionally like the TCSEC and the ITSEC, the CTCPEC does not
include multilaterally secure functionality. Despite this, the CTCPEC’s fourfold
==PAGE:55==
5.4 ITSEC
43
structure of functional criteria at least gives proper room for the integration of
this functionality. Dependencies between functionality and assurance aspects
of security are also considered in the CTCPEC and documented by constraint
relations between functionality and assurance aspects. However the CTCPEC
authors did not let dependencies have a strong inﬂuence on the overall structure
of the criteria document [47].
Below image 5.3 from [47] shows Functional Criteria and their respective ser-
vices.
Figure 5.3: CTCPEC Functional Citeria
5.4
ITSEC
5.4.1
About and History
TCSEC gave rise to a European counterpart, the Information Technology Se-
curity Evaluation Criteria (ITSEC). With the progress of IT and the U.S. eval-
uation policy with regards to non-U.S. companies, several European countries
like France, Germany, UK and the Netherlands started working together to de-
velop their own criteria and evaluation schemes [35]. The Commission of the
European Communities (CEC) designed the ITSEC evaluation and certiﬁcation
scheme to satisfy the security needs of the European industry [47]. ITSEC V1.1
was published in January 1991 and version V1.2 was issued in June 1991 after
==PAGE:56==
44
Security Certiﬁcation Criteria
review.
Learning from the TCSEC history and experience, attempts were made by IT-
SEC authors to overcome the limitations of the Orange Book and hence newer
goals that qualiﬁed the European industry requirements were deﬁned [35]. They
recognised that this work needed to be approached in a concerted way, and that
common, harmonised IT security criteria should be put forward. There were
three reasons for harmonisation:
1. Much experience had been accumulated in the various countries, and there
would be much to gain by jointly building on that experience;
2. Industry did not want diﬀerent security criteria in the diﬀerent countries;
3. The basic concepts and approaches were the same, across countries and
even across commercial, government and defence applications [49].
The major goals of the ITSEC as described in [35] are:
• Generality: ITSEC certiﬁcation criteria are not limited to any category
of software products.
• Interoperability: ITSEC ensures compatibility with the national cata-
logs of security evaluation criteria used by each European country, and
deﬁnition of mappings from these national catalogs to ITSEC.
• Neutrality: ITSEC is supported by third parties, taking a neutral role
between software.
• Scalability: ITSEC contains guidelines for testing security features, aimed
at achieving full automatization of the certiﬁcation process.
5.4.2
Key Concepts
The ITSEC is a guideline for evaluation and certiﬁcation of the security of
IT products and systems. In the ITSEC context, security means conﬁdential-
ity, integrity, and availability [50]. ITSEC certiﬁcates have two components:
functionality level and assurance level. Certiﬁcates are given for a certain func-
tionality together with a certain assurance level between E0 ("no conﬁdence")
and E6 ("highest conﬁdence") [47]. Security assurance requirements [44] are:
• E00: Guidance documents and manuals
==PAGE:57==
5.4 ITSEC
45
• E01: Conﬁguration management
• E02: Vulnerability assessment
• E03: Delivery and operation
• E04: Life-cycle support
• E05: Assurance maintenance
• E06: Development
• Testing
ITSEC presented a broader range of security functionality and put forth a 2-
layer-structure that describes the security functionality. First and more abstract
level is the introduction of three properties dealing with risks to information and
resources:
• Conﬁdentiality: The prevention of the unauthorised disclosure of infor-
mation;
• Integrity: The prevention of the unauthorised modiﬁcation of informa-
tion;
• Availability: The prevention of the unauthorised withholding of infor-
mation or resources.
Second level presents 8 “Generic Headings” describing security functionality [51]:
• Identiﬁcation and Authentication
• Access Control
• Accountability
• Audit
• Object Reuse
• Accuracy
• Reliability of Service
• Data Exchange
==PAGE:58==
46
Security Certiﬁcation Criteria
Security enforcing functions may be either speciﬁed individually or by referenc-
ing one of predeﬁned "functionality classes" which are examples for combina-
tions of certiﬁable functionality. If security enforcing functions are individually
speciﬁed it is recommended to present them under the generic headings, stated
above [47, 50].
ITSEC had 10 classes F1 to F10 to evaluate the functional requirements. Secu-
rity functional requirement classes are [44]:
• F00: Identiﬁcation and authentication
• F01: Audit
• F02: Resource utilization
• F03: Trusted paths/channels
• F04: User data protection
• F05: Security management
• F06: Product access
• F07: Communications
• F08: Privacy
• F09: Protection of the product’s security functions
• F10: Cryptographic support
5.4.3
Beneﬁts
ITSEC contributed towards security in several ways. The beneﬁts [51] include:
1. It surpasses traditional conﬁdential focus.
2. It allows low-assurance or high assurance product.
3. It allows evaluation of diﬀerent kinds of security-enforcing products.
4. It allows vendors to decide what products the market requires subject to
market forces for time, schedule and price.
==PAGE:59==
5.5 Common Criteria (CC)
47
5.4.4
Issues/Limitations
Though ITSEC introduces various extension areas to certiﬁcation techniques, it
has limitations [50, 51]:
1. The ITSEC mainly takes into account closed systems where the interests
of a system’s management dominate over interests of single users.
2. Non-repudiation, which can be seen as a fourth basic security property at
the side of conﬁdentiality, integrity, and availability, is not really covered.
This makes ITSEC unsuitable for Open Systems.
3. The ITSEC deﬁnes a framework to formulate security evaluation criteria,
as the sponsors can deﬁne the functionality of their TOEs by themselves.
This is less obligatory than criteria would be.
5.5
Common Criteria (CC)
5.5.1
About and History
Common Criteria (CC) is an international set of guidelines and speciﬁcations
developed for evaluating information security products.
Common Criteria is
more formally called "Common Criteria for Information Technology Security
Evaluation." It is currently in version 3.1 [52].
Representatives from US, Canada and European Union, the latter with the ex-
ception of Italy started a joint eﬀort in 1993 under the label Common Criteria
for IT Security and became an ISO standard (ISO/IEC 15408) in 1998. Its
ﬁnal version was released in 1999. CC originated out of three standards: IT-
SEC, CTCPEC and TCSEC. CC was produced by unifying these pre-existing
standards, mainly to encourage companies selling computer products for the
government market would only need to have them evaluated against one set of
standards. Eventually, CC certiﬁcation standard intend to fulﬁll the needs of
an international standard for security certiﬁcation.
CC facilitate consistent evaluations of security products and systems. It pro-
vides assurance that the process of speciﬁcation, implementation and evaluation
of a security product has been conducted in a meticulous and standard and re-
peatable approach at a level that is appropriate with the target environment for
use. CC provides an uniﬁed process and a ﬂexible framework to specify, design,
==PAGE:60==
48
Security Certiﬁcation Criteria
and evaluate the security properties of IT products [35]. The basic philosophy of
CC lies in improving the state of security by encouraging various parties to write
Protection Proﬁles(PP) outlining their security needs and desires, in return it
will push vendors to meet the resulting Protection Proﬁles. Each new criteria
before CC allowed more ﬂexibility to describe the security properties of a TOE,
but on the other hand, made the comparison of evaluation results more com-
plicated. In order to resolve this problem and to give users the opportunity to
formulate their own requirements, the CC introduced the concept of Protection
Proﬁles (PPs). A PP describes the functionality and assurance requirements for
a certain application or technique. Ideally, several products will be evaluated
against a PP and, as a result, can be compared [34].
As described in [53], Common Criteria objective is to make sure that evaluations
of IT products and protection proﬁles are carried out to high and constant
standards and are seen to add signiﬁcantly to conﬁdence in the security of
those products and proﬁles. It targets to improve the availability of evaluated,
security-enhanced IT products and protection proﬁles.
It also motivates to
eliminate the burden of duplicating evaluations of IT products and protection
proﬁles.
5.5.2
Membership
There is a Common Criteria MRA (Mutual Recognition Arrangement), whereby
each party recognizes evaluations against the Common Criteria standard done
by other parties. Originally signed in 1998 by Canada, France, Germany, the
United Kingdom and the United States, Australia and New Zealand joined 1999,
followed by Finland, Greece, Israel, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway and Spain in
2000 [52]. The Arrangement has since been renamed Common Criteria Recog-
nition Arrangement (CCRA) and membership continues to expand. Figure 5.4
referenced from [32] depicts the international acceptance of CC 2015.
5.5.3
Key Concepts
The CC deﬁnes a set of components and speciﬁes the way they interact with
each other.
==PAGE:61==
5.5 Common Criteria (CC)
49
Figure 5.4: Membership of Common Citeria
5.5.3.1
TOE
The TOE is an IT product or system along with its associated administrator and
user guidance documentation that is to be evaluated. A TOE can be software,
ﬁrmware, hardware or a combination of the three [3]; also, it can be a subsystem
or component rather than an entire software system.
In this case only the
subsystem or component deﬁned as the TOE will be certiﬁed and not the entire
system [35].
5.5.3.2
Protection Proﬁle (PP)
Protection Proﬁle (PP) is deﬁned as implementation-independent statement of
security requirements for a category of TOEs that meet speciﬁc customer needs
to address a speciﬁed security environment [54].
PP is designed to answer the question: “What do I need in a security solution?”
[54]. The introduction of the PP is an important innovation of the CC, inasmuch
it allows groups or consortia of software purchasers to deﬁne and share their
own sets of security requirements. PPs do not mandate how these requirements
must be implemented rather, they contain high-level descriptions of user’s’ needs
==PAGE:62==
50
Security Certiﬁcation Criteria
[35]. It helps to rationalise security requirements. It also can be done to set a
minimum standard for protection.
A PP can be written by any of several parties. It can be written by a user
community as a means of stating a need that is not adequately met by the
current oﬀerings on the market. An accrediting body such as a government,
industry group, or insurance ﬁrm can also author a PP [54]. Also, PPs are
not written in a formal or controlled language; indeed, when comparing the PP
structure to the publicly available instances of PPs by [53] , it is noticeable that
their structure changes slightly [3].
Figure 5.5 from [32] depicts the general content of a PP.
Figure 5.5: Structure of Protection Proﬁle
PP Introduction
The PP introduction section provides general information
about the PP. PP identiﬁcation is a descriptive information to identify, search,
==PAGE:63==
5.5 Common Criteria (CC)
51
catalogue, register, and cross-reference a PP.
Example of PP Identiﬁcation:
Protection Proﬁle for an Unobservable Message Delivery Application.
The PP overview describes the scope of the PP and provides the necessary
information for customers to decide if a particular PP is appropriate for their
needs. It also includes conventions and document organization, and terms and
keywords. Furthermore, the EAL for which the PP claims conformance is also
mentioned [35].
Example of PP Overview [32]:
A Mix is an anonymous remailer application with the goal of hiding the link
between the origin and destination of the message transiting through it... Key-
words: Mix, anonymous electronic mail.
TOE Description
The TOE description describes the software product from
the customer point of view, which includes the purpose of the TOE, the security
functionalities needed and the intended operational environment.
TOE Security Environment
The security problem deﬁnition section de-
scribes the expected operational environment of the TOE.
More speciﬁcally, it deﬁnes the known security threats, the security assumptions
and the organizational security policies.The threats subsection describes what
we want to protect the TOE from.
Organizational Security Policies are the
set of roles, rules and procedures adopted by the organizations using the TOE
to protect its assets. During the certiﬁcation process, some assumptions will
inevitably have to be made, simply because it is almost impossible to adopt the
same set of requirements for all customers [35].
Table 5.2 shows example of PP Assumptions [32]
Table 5.3 shows example of PP Threats [32]
Table 5.4 shows example Organisational Security Policies [32]
==PAGE:64==
52
Security Certiﬁcation Criteria
Security Objectives
Based on the security problems deﬁned in the previ-
ous sections of the PP, the security objectives section provides a set of concise
statements as responses to those issues. Every problem deﬁnition must be ad-
equately addressed by one or more security objectives. These objectives act a
base for deﬁning testing activities. The PP also includes a mapping between
the security objectives and security problems to help the evaluator to recognize
the relations between the diﬀerent security objectives and their corresponding
security problems [35].
Table 5.5 shows example of Security Objectives [32]. Figure 5.6 from [32] shows
mapping of Security Objectives to Threats and Organizational Policies.
Figure 5.6: Example: Objectives To Threats Policies Mapping
Security requirements
The Security Requirements section represents the
core part of the PP document, that is, the one dealing with the desired security
properties. To be able to assess or evaluate the security level of a TOE, a PP
needs to deﬁne a set of requirements that would allow the evaluator to know
which software features should be tested.
Security requirements need to be
described clearly to avoid any ambiguous interpretation [35].
The CC certiﬁcation deﬁnes two types of security requirements: Security Func-
==PAGE:65==
5.5 Common Criteria (CC)
53
tional Requirements (SFRs) and Security Assurance Requirements (SARs) .
Security Functional Requirements (SFRs)
SFRs deﬁne the requirements
that the security features of the product under evaluation should satisfy. In
other words, SFRs specify how the TOE should work to preserve its expected
behavior [35]. Table 5.6 show of example Security Functional Requirements:
SFRs are grouped into into four hierarchies Classes, Families, Components and
Elements with each one providing more ﬁne-grained security requirements as
described in [53]. Classes are the most general grouping of security requirements
and all members of a class share a common focus.
These functional classes
are as follows: Audit, Identiﬁcation and Authentication, Resource Utilizations,
Cryptographic support, Security management, TOE Access, Communications,
Privacy, Trusted Path/Channels, User Data Protection, Protection of the TOE
Security Functions. Each of these classes contains a number of families. The
requirements within each family share security objectives, but diﬀer in emphasis
or rigor [54].
Security Assurance Requirements (SARs)
The SARs describe some prac-
tical ways to check the eﬀectiveness of the security features of the product under
evaluation [35]. The SARs catalogue includes predeﬁned requirements focusing
on diﬀerent phases of the product life cycle such as development, conﬁgura-
tion management, testing, etc. SARs specify the actions deemed necessary to
provide enough conﬁdence that the software product will satisfy the security
requirements, that is, how to investigate the eﬃciency of the security functions
for the required level of security [35].
SARs are grouped into into classes as described in [53].
These are as fol-
lows:Conﬁguration management, Guidance documents, Vulnerability assessment,
Delivery and operation, Life cycle support, Assurance maintenance, Develop-
ment, and Test. Two additional classes contain the assurance requirements for
PPs and STs [54].
Rationale
The PP Rationale is the section where the mapping between se-
curity problems and security objectives, and the mapping between SFRs and
security objectives are formalized. This is a section where more details could
be added to help understand how the TOE shall meet the stated security ob-
jectives. Details could be added to help the evaluator to fully understand how
the CC components should be applied [35].
==PAGE:66==
54
Security Certiﬁcation Criteria
Figure 5.7 from [32] shows example of Mapping of Security Requirements to
Objectives.
Figure 5.7: Example of Requirements to Objectives Mapping
5.5.3.3
Security Target (ST)
Security Target (ST) is deﬁned as basis for agreement among all parities (devel-
opers, evaluators and where appropriate users) as to what security the product
or system oﬀers, against which an evaluation is performed. It contains the TOE
security threat, objectives, requirements, and summary speciﬁcation of security
functions and assurance measures. (ST) is a security speciﬁcation for a partic-
ular IT product or system. Unlike PPs, STs are implementation dependent and
therefore it speciﬁes the implementation details about each SFR [35]. Security
Targets is actually designed to answers the question: “What do you provide in
a security solution?” [54].
The ST authors are product vendors, developers and integrators. The ST par-
allels the structure of the PP, though it has additional elements that include
product-speciﬁc detailed information. Unlike PPs, STs are implementation de-
==PAGE:67==
5.5 Common Criteria (CC)
55
pendent, which means that it speciﬁes the implementation details about each
SFR. A ST can be derived from a given PP by instantiation or can augment the
requirements derived from the PP. Indeed the product developer can create its
own ST without claiming conformance to any PP if there is no PP that matches
the security properties of a speciﬁc product [35]. Figure 5.8 from [35] depicts
the general content of ST.
Figure 5.8: General Structure of Security Target
A major feature of ST requirements speciﬁcation is the description of threats and
security objectives of the TOE. Threats recognize circumstances that could com-
promise the system assets, while security objectives contain all the statements
that intents to answer identiﬁed threats and satisfy recognized organization se-
curity policies. Based on threats and security objectives, the ST describes the
security requirements that the TOE security features need to oﬀer to accomplish
==PAGE:68==
56
Security Certiﬁcation Criteria
the security objectives [35].
5.5.3.4
Process
To establish an association between the components of the CC and the CC
certiﬁcation process, Figure 5.9 from [35] depicts where the CC components
mentioned in the above section are used during the CC process.
Figure 5.9: Common Criteria Process
Along with ST, the certiﬁed PP will be included in the certiﬁcation documents
if developer decides whether ST will claim conformance to PP. Additionally,
a set of other documents including design documentation, customer guidance,
conﬁguration management and testing must be made available to the evaluation
body. The role of CC evaluation body is to inspect and analyze all evidence
provided by developers.
5.5.3.5
Evaluation Assurance Levels (EALs)
The evaluation process also tries to establish the level of conﬁdence that may be
placed in the product’s security features through quality assurance processes.
There are seven Evaluation Assurance Levels (EALs). The higher-level of eval-
uation implies that product went through more tests than products at levels
below. The levels as described in [55, 54]are as follows:
==PAGE:69==
5.5 Common Criteria (CC)
57
EAL1: Functionally Tested
Applies when you require conﬁdence in a product’s correct operation, but do not
view threats to security as serious. An evaluation at this level should provide
evidence that the target of evaluation functions in a manner consistent with its
documentation and that it provides useful protection against identiﬁed threats.
The requirements are: Conﬁguration Management, Delivery and Operation,
Development, Guidance documents and Tests.
EAL2: Structurally Tested
Applies when developers or users require low to moderate independently assured
security but the complete development record is not readily available. This situ-
ation may arise when there is limited developer access or when there is an eﬀort
to secure legacy systems. To add to the previous requirements are developer
testing, vulnerability analysis, and more extensive independent testing.
EAL3: Methodically Tested and Checked
Applies when developers or users require a moderate level of independently as-
sured security and require a thorough investigation of the target of evaluation
and its development, without substantial reengineering.The additional require-
ment is the Life Cycle support. EAL4: Methodically Designed, Tested, and
Reviewed. Applies when developers or users require moderate to high indepen-
dently assured security in conventional commodity products and are prepared
to incur additional security-speciﬁc engineering costs.There are additional re-
quirements on design, implementation, vulnerability analysis, development and
conﬁguration management.
EAL5: Semi-Formally Designed and Tested
Applies when developers or users require high independently assured security in
a planned development and require a rigorous development approach that does
not incur unreasonable costs from specialist security engineering techniques. It
has additional requirements on speciﬁcation, design, and their correspondence.
EAL6: Semi-Formally Veriﬁed Design and Tested
Applies when developing security targets of evaluation for application in high-
risk situations where the value of the protected assets justiﬁes the additional
costs. The additional requirements are on analysis, design, development, con-
ﬁguration management, and vulnerability/covert channel analysis.
EAL7: Formally Veriﬁed Design and Tested
==PAGE:70==
58
Security Certiﬁcation Criteria
Applies to the development of security targets of evaluation for application in
extremely high-risk situations and when the higher costs are justiﬁed.
The
assurance is gained through application of formal methods. Testing and formal
analysis are additional requirements for this evaluation.
5.5.4
Beneﬁts
Common Criteria supports in improving the availability and security of IT prod-
ucts and contributes to the consumer conﬁdence, improves the eﬃciency and the
cost-eﬀectiveness of the product. It helps in making informed security decisions
in several ways:
1. Consumers can determine the level of security required in their product
based on comparison against their requirements and the Common Criteria.
2. Consumers can easily determine if certain product is within their security
requirements.
3. Consumers can rely on the Common Criteria since it is created by inde-
pendent testing lab and not performed by the vendor.
Moreover, Common Criteria can work with consumers worldwide.
Common
Criteria helps vendors build a better secure IT product. The CC certiﬁcate
is an advantage on the competitive market as an evaluated product will be
easily sold than a non evaluated one.
It allows the manufacturers to prove
their competence, to make a marketing argument and therefore to widen their
markets [56].
Authors of [55] mentions that large beneﬁts to any organization can be obtained
by using the system acquisition elements along with the Common Criteria fea-
tures, and the Table 5.7 indicates such relationship:
==PAGE:71==
5.5 Common Criteria (CC)
59
Publication/
Project Dates
Editors
Criteria Name
1983/85
USA,
Department
of
Defense(DoD)
Trusted Computer System
Evaluation
Criteria
(TC-
SEC) “Orange Book”
1989
Federal
Republic
of
Germany(D), German
Information
Security
Agency(ZSI)
IT-Security
Crite-
ria(ZSISC)
1990/91
Commission
of
the
European
Communi-
ties(CEC)
Information
Technology
Security Evaluation Crite-
ria(ITSEC)
1990/93
Canada(CDN),
Communications
Security
Establish-
ment/Canadian
Sys-
tem
Security
Center
(CSE/CSSC)
Canadian
Trusted
Com-
puter Product Evaluation
Criteria(CTCPEC)
1990/??
International
Organi-
zation
for
Standard-
ization/International
Electrotechnical Com-
mission ISO/IEC
Evaluation Criteria for IT
Security(ECITS)
1992/93
USA,
National
Insti-
tute of Standards and
Technologies(NIST)
and National Security
Agency(NSA)
Federal Criteria for Infor-
mation
Technology
Secu-
rity(FCITS)
1993/??
Common
Cri-
teria
Project,
Canada/European
Union/USA and other
agencies
Common Criteria (CC) for
IT Security Evaluation
Table 5.1: Security Criteria and their Editors
==PAGE:72==
60
Security Certiﬁcation Criteria
A.PhysSec
Users take care of securing their physical
access to the message traﬃc handled by
the TOE.
A.MinimalConnectivity
No attacker is able to block all access
points of the user to the mix network.
A.MinimalTrust
Not all nodes (mixes) of the network are
subverted.
A.UnreliableNetwork
The connecting network might not be re-
liable on correctly delivering messages be-
tween parts of the TOE. Speciﬁcally, mes-
sages may be lost, altered or truncated
accidentally. The TOE is however not re-
quired to provide reliable service.
A.UserCooperation
Users cooperate actively at the enforce-
ment of the security policy of the TOE.
Table 5.2: Example of PP Assumptions
T.UntrustworthyMix
Some mix(es) in the network may be com-
promised and hold, process and/or dis-
close information useful to trace, and/or
reveal the content of, communications.
TE.MixConspiracy
Some mixes in the network may be com-
promised and share information useful
to trace, and/or reveal the content of,
communications. This threat represents
an extension to the T.UntrustworthyMix
threat, in that it introduces the concept
of information sharing between parts of
the TOE.
Table 5.3: Example of PP Threats
==PAGE:73==
5.5 Common Criteria (CC)
61
O.Anonymity
The TOE shall provide for an anonymous
message delivery service; that is, the re-
cipient of a message shall not be able to
know the origin of the message, unless the
author expressly inserts this information
in the message body.
O.Untraceability
The TOE shall provide for an untraceable
message delivery service; this means that,
taken any message transiting through the
system at any time, it shall not be possi-
ble to obtain enough information to link
its origin and destination users.
Table 5.4: Example of Organisational Security Policies
SO.DivideSecurityInformation
The TOE shall be constructed as to pro-
vide the user the ability, and enforce the
correct use of such ability, of determin-
ing the allocation of unlinkability-relevant
data among diﬀerent parts of the TOE.
SO.DivideSecurity
The TOE shall provide to the user the
ability, and enforce the correct use of such
ability, of freely choosing a combination
of mix nodes among which to allocate the
processing activities achieving unlinkabil-
ity.
SO.EnforceTrustDistribution
The TOE shall be constructed to enforce
the user’s choice of information and pro-
cessing distribution
SO.MinimizeSecurityInformation
The TOE shall be constructed as to mini-
mize the use, distribution and availability
time frame of information impacting un-
linkability.
SOE.AntagonisticManagement
The TOE shall be independently and an-
tagonistically managed. The main prob-
lem with this security objective to be ful-
ﬁlled by the environment is that it is
nearly impossible to enforce it without
some form of post-deployment assurance
evaluation control and maintenance.
Table 5.5: Example of Security Objectives
==PAGE:74==
62
Security Certiﬁcation Criteria
FCS_CKM.1
Cryptographic key generation
FDP_ACC.2
Complete access control
FDP_ACF.1
Security attribute based access control
FDP_IRC.2
Full information retention control
FDP_RIP.2
Full residual information protection
FIA_ATD.1
User attribute deﬁnition
FIA_UID.1
Timing of identiﬁcation
FMT_MSA.1
Management of security attributes
FMT_MSA.2
Secure security attributes
FMT_MSA.3
Static attribute initialisation
FMT_SMR.1
Security roles
FPR_ANO.2
Anonymity without soliciting information
FPR_TRD.2
Allocation of information assets
FPR_TRD.3
Allocation of processing activities
Table 5.6: Security Functional Requirements
Common Crite-
ria features
System Acquisi-
tion Elements
Shows the common similar-
ity between the CC and the
Acquisition Paradigms
Protection Proﬁle
(PP)
Request for Pro-
posals
Provides
details
of
the
cus-
tomer’s requirements
Security
Target
(ST)
Proposals
Provides a good idea what will
be provided by the suppliers
that will satisfy the above needs
for the customer
Target of Evalua-
tion (TOE)
Delivered System
Represents
the
physical
sup-
plier’s manifestation about what
will be delivered to the customer
Evaluated System
Accepted System
Shows the consistency of the
above three preceding represen-
tations and that all are consis-
tent
Table 5.7: Relationship between system acquisition elements and the Common
Criteria features
==PAGE:75==
Chapter 6
Analysis
This chapter evaluates the internationally recognized “Common Criteria” se-
curity evaluation criteria.
Beneﬁts and limitations of Common Criteria are
discussed in particular with regard to IoT security requirements. Finally, this
chapter proposes the need of new security certiﬁcation criteria for IoT devices.
6.1
Beneﬁts
Common Criteria is currently the most popular internationally recognized prod-
uct assurance evaluation and certiﬁcation scheme for hardware, ﬁrmware, and
software [3]. It is a proven framework for the statement of security require-
ments and evaluation methodology. There are various important beneﬁts [3] to
CC that makes it a potential candidate for security certiﬁcation criteria of IoT
devices.
1. CC has international reorganization and there is existent network of secu-
rity accredited labs across most developed countries.
2. The ability to do a single evaluation that has market acceptance in many
countries enables global markets and fair competition for vendors while
reducing their burden and costs.
==PAGE:76==
64
Analysis
3. CC has been in use for more than a decade and thus is understood by
stakeholders in the vendor community who have worked with the certiﬁ-
cation labs and schemes over time. This familiarity and long life provides
a level of certainty and consistency in the CC.
4. CC is scalable to many diﬀerent types of products and fulﬁlls many dif-
ferent requirements for security assurance.
5. CC provides ﬂexible and structured review process for developing more
secure products.
6.1.1
Evolution of criteria and next generation PP
An important aspect of CC that is worthwhile to be considered is its ability to
evolve, at the same time preserving the international recognition of certiﬁcates.
One aspect of evolution is updating of the criteria in terms of new versions and
releases, which include editorial changes, clariﬁcations, changes to requirements
(SFRs and SARs) and even major changes in arrangement and viewpoint of
parts of the criteria.
The additional chief aspect for evolving CC is the creation of new generation
of PPs that implement an identiﬁably diﬀerent manner with the aim of making
evaluation much more speciﬁc to diﬀerent product types and their associated
technologies.
This dimension of CC evolution has progressively taken place
more in recent years through the eﬀorts of technical communities. These tech-
nical communities are created to address the needs of evaluation of many areas
(e.g. network devices, protected USB memory sticks and mobile devices) and
to produce a new generation of PPs for each of these TOE types. These new
generation PPs addresses the problems and concerns of its technology and ap-
plication domain. The idea is to set down PPs that includes interpretations
that match CC assurance requirements to the detail of the new technologies,
development and production environments, and attack types that apply to new
products. These PPs are then used to establish a base of common international
experience [57].
Some of the IoT devices could be likely a part of a number of technical commu-
nities (for example, the existing communities for payment terminals and mobile
devices), and the formation and growth of appropriate technical communities
along with creation of new generation PPs seem likely to be the an initial choice
for dealing with the security problems of these devices and their application
domain.
==PAGE:77==
6.2 Limitations
65
6.2
Limitations
While there are many beneﬁts like wide use and economic success to Common
Criteria along with its evolution in ﬁelds related to IoT, there are numerous
limitations and issues that questions its eﬀectiveness for being the evaluation
criteria for IoT devices.
1. Expensive: CC evaluation life cycle is expensive [54, 56, 58, 3]. Moreover,
due to the complexity of the procedure, vendors have to spend a large
eﬀort on preparation for the evaluation, which further adds to the cost.
Evaluation is a costly process (often measured in hundreds of thousands of
US dollars) [58]. Small business manufacturers or vendors of IoT devices
(costing 30 dollars or so) may not ﬁnd the investment of high cost of
evaluation feasible.
2. Long: CC evaluation life cycle is lengthy [54, 56, 58, 3]. High assurance
level (as EAL4) certiﬁcation can take one to two years. Since most IoT
devices characterize short time to market period, CC will not complement
the life cycle of these devices in many cases. The eﬀort and time necessary
to prepare evaluation evidence and other evaluation-related documenta-
tion is so cumbersome that by the time the process is completed a new
version of device in evaluation will be already delivered or it will become
outdated. Thus, lengthy evaluation life cycle can often result in signiﬁ-
cantly increased time and deter vendors from certifying.
3. Lack of ﬂexibility for diﬀerent product life cycles and build mod-
els: Though CC is scalable to many diﬀerent types of products and fulﬁlls
many diﬀerent requirements for security assurance, there will be myriads
of new devices having highly diﬀerent characteristics that may require
changing the criteria itself to produce comparable and eﬀective evalua-
tions. CC currently do not provide ﬂexibility for products with diﬀerent
life cycle and build models (e.g. hardware models)[54]. Also, CC assur-
ance requirements tend to be inspired by the traditional waterfall software
development methodology [52]. In contrast, software involved in IoT will
be mostly produced using modern agile paradigms.
4. Point in Time certiﬁcation: CC certiﬁes a particular version of the
product. Any updates to the product invalidate the certiﬁcation.This is
not a pleasing situation, given that IoT devices will evolve and will be
updated at a uptight speed.They will be patchable either in software or
ﬁrmware [58]. For example, complex products like cars can have in-line
component swaps and manufacturing patches [59].
==PAGE:78==
66
Analysis
5. Complex terminology: The public documents that are at present pro-
duced are too high level and too overloaded by CC jargons. More speciﬁc
and more understandable terminology to those responsible for security
in the organization of manufacturers of all IoT devices is required. Also,
comparison of products for buyers is not easy and straightforward because
of complex CC terminology. Further CC requires background knowledge
about broad susceptibility investigation for security loopholes that is not
a achievable for small or medium size organizations [60].
6. Mutual recognition: CC is evolving towards protection proﬁles that
deﬁne the evaluation methodology for the technology type. The objective
is a more robust evaluation. However, there is some concern that this
may have a negative impact on mutual recognition [61]. Already, there
are several concerns regarding the consistency of the assessments by the
evaluating laboratories located in diﬀerent countries, since the Common
Criteria Recognition Arrangement (CCRA) does not prescribe any moni-
toring and auditing capability.
7. Lack of speciﬁc evaluation activities: There is currently general set
of evaluation activities, deﬁned by Common Criteria Evaluation Method-
ology (CEM) document for all technologies. There will be need of set of
evaluation activities speciﬁc to IoT devices due to the complexities and
dynamics of their characteristics.
8. Focus on documentation: Evaluation focuses primarily on assessing the
evaluation documentation, not on the actual security, technical correctness
or merits of the product itself.
For example, full source code analysis
is required for U.S. evaluations only at EAL7 [52]. Present and future
demands attention on actual security merits of IoT devices.
9. Limit in Perimeter: Manufactures who initiates the certiﬁcate request
chooses the assurance level and chooses the limits in terms of perimeter
and potential of attack to its product in a document called Security Target
(ST) [3]. This is not viable for IoT scenario where the impact of security
breach could be tremendously hazardous. Indeed, regulators may intro-
duce minimum security protocols for IoT devices since breaches of security
can lead to more direct and physical eﬀects on a consumer’s safety.
Importantly, CC does not guarantee security functionality.
It evaluates the
development process of the system but can’t the system [62, 63]. Also, evaluated
products does not necessarily mean improved security as CC ensures already
deﬁned security requirements with product deployment [64] and future threats
and attacks are not taken into considerations.
Additionally other weakness
related to problems of interpretations, integrating new attacks, conformity of
==PAGE:79==
6.3 Need of new security certiﬁcation model of IoT devices:
67
penetration tests as described in [56] makes CC a questionable choice for security
certiﬁcation of IoT devices.
6.3
Need of new security certiﬁcation model of
IoT devices:
IoT devices need new security certiﬁcation criteria with their own threat model,
functional requirements, and evaluation activities.
The impact of breach of
security in an IoT driven world will be unprecedented. Hence, a new way of
thinking is required to provide and verify a robust security solution that is
unhindered by any past limitations.
The choice of new security certiﬁcation model of IoT devices is triggered by the
need
• To reduce cyber security risks by assessing vulnerabilities and weaknesses,
minimizing exploitation, reviewing security controls and increasing secu-
rity awareness for all kinds of IoT devices and to drive the adoption of
“security by design”.
• To provide internationally recognized security assurance to all stakeholders
(device manufacturers, service providers, regulators).
• To ensure security assurance by aggressive audits throughout the life cycle
of the devices (including the operation phase where updates to the devices
could be introduced).
• To ensure that innovative devices vendors could diﬀerentiate themselves
with better security features and at the same time are not prevented from
participating by unnecessarily expensive or time consuming evaluations.
• To consistently apply and produce comparable results by using the evalu-
ation methodology tailored speciﬁcally to IoT devices.
• To ensure there is a means of evaluating IoT security by closing the cer-
tiﬁcation gap with a pragmatic approach compatible with short device
life-cycle.
• To facilitate easy understanding of what types of security problems are
being addressed by describing security requirements in simple prose.
==PAGE:80==
68
Analysis
==PAGE:81==
Chapter 7
Classiﬁcation Mechanism
for IoT devices towards
creating a Security
Certiﬁcation Model
This chapter provides analysis on the classiﬁcation mechanism for IoT devices
which is the ﬁrst step towards creating a security certiﬁcation model.
7.1
Classiﬁcation of IoT devices First Step
The new security certiﬁcation model must try to ensure end to end security by
providing right sized secure foundations that scale for diﬀerent IoT devices, use
cases and market needs. IoT is a market where heterogeneous devices are being
used for various applications ranging from households to global scale. Complex
systems encompassing diﬀerent IoT devices need to meet security requirements
for the whole system where diverse devices require diﬀerent level of protection.
Designing a general security certiﬁcation model for such interconnected systems
is a demanding task. There is a lot of ongoing work towards creating a secu-
==PAGE:82==
70
Classiﬁcation Mechanism for IoT devices towards creating a Security
Certiﬁcation Model
rity certiﬁcation model for IoT devices with various diﬀerent approaches. The
emerging guidelines and models include OWASP Internet of Things Top 10 [65],
Industrial Internet Consortium Reference Architecture, and the Online Trust
Alliance’s IoT Trust Framework [66].
The initial step towards developing a general security certiﬁcation model could
be to build a classiﬁcation mechanism which can identify the security capa-
bilities or parameters of the diﬀerent devices comprising an IoT system. The
classiﬁcation mechanism would classify various devices that comprise the system
with respect to their computing, communication and other important capabil-
ities that impact the security design. Assigning a particular class would help
in identifying diﬀerent security capabilities. At the same time, it will help the
model designers to evolve a security mechanism for the entire IoT system. This
will help to act as a foundation for building a generic security certiﬁcation model
wherein a range of security protocols available for diﬀerent classes of devices can
be integrated to achieve the required security level for the entire system [67].
Along with device speciﬁcations and networking, application objective is also
essential to consider while dealing with IoT security issues and countermeasures.
7.2
Classiﬁcation Mechanism
Classiﬁcation Mechanism fundamentally involves following methodology as iden-
tiﬁed by authors of [67]:
1. Device properties have impact on the security solution. Identifying various
properties of the IoT devices and systems and also building a classiﬁcation
tree based on the identiﬁed properties is the way to begin. These properties
will serves as initial inputs to generate data to be used in classiﬁcation
algorithms.
2. After the identiﬁcation of the various properties, another important aspect
of the classiﬁcation is to identify the properties that are relevant from
security point of view. For instance, these properties could be:
• Connectivity having values as Wired or Wireless
• Power having values as Constrained or Non Constrained)
• System Control having values as Open loop or closed loop
• Functionality having values as Critical or Non Critical
• Real-Time having values as Yes or No
==PAGE:83==
7.2 Classiﬁcation Mechanism
71
3. Creating a database with all the devices to be classiﬁed and their respective
identiﬁed properties is the next step.
4. Finally, classiﬁcation algorithms should be applied.
There are several
classiﬁcation algorithms which can be used for classifying diﬀerent devices.
For example Naive Bayes algorithm.
Automation tools like Weka[68] tool can be used to carry out the process of
classiﬁcation. Identiﬁed properties must be used as input to these tools to get
a complete analysis graph and also the confusion matrix, which can be further
used to make out the diﬀerent classes. E.g. Class A for Critical, Class B for
Medium and Class C for Non critical [67].
==PAGE:84==
72
Classiﬁcation Mechanism for IoT devices towards creating a Security
Certiﬁcation Model
==PAGE:85==
Chapter 8
Conclusion
The thesis provides a systematic background about "Internet of things" and
describes the basic idea that stands behind this concept. Visions, applications,
trends and key empowering technologies of IoT paradigm are surveyed and the
security challenges of IoT are identiﬁed. It also conducts in-depth literature
review to evaluate established security certiﬁcation standards for IoT systems
and understand their ﬁtment for IoT devices.
Evaluating currently most popular Common criteria security certiﬁcation stan-
dard for IoT devices has not been oﬀered by current literature. The analysis
of usage of Common criteria (CC) security certiﬁcation for IoT devices was a
major contribution of this thesis. The analysis proposes and tries to justify the
need of a new security certiﬁcation model on the basis of the study undertaken.
The thesis also provides analysis for ﬁrst step towards new security certiﬁcation
model - classiﬁcation mechanism for IoT devices.
8.1
Future Work:
As there was a time constraint, the scope of survey was limited. Additional
study could be carried out to extend the literature survey performed in order to
==PAGE:86==
74
Conclusion
present a more comprehensive view of the security certiﬁcation criteria for IoT
to researchers.
Moreover, Classiﬁcation mechanism for IoT devices could be conducted thor-
oughly. It will enable the model designers to evolve a security mechanism for the
entire IoT system. This will help to act as a foundation for building a generic
security certiﬁcation model wherein a range of security protocols available for
diﬀerent classes of devices can be integrated to achieve the required security
level for the entire system.
==PAGE:87==
Appendix A
Glossary of Terms
2D - Two Dimensional
6LoWPAN - IPv6 over Low power Wireless Personal Area Networks
AMQP - Advanced Message Queuing Protocol
BLE - Bluetooth Low Energy
CB - Certiﬁcation Body
CC - Common Criteria
CCRA - Common Criteria Recognition Arrangement
CDN - Canada
CEC - Commission of the European Communities
CoAP - Constrained Application Protocol
CSE - Communications Security Establishment
==PAGE:88==
76
Glossary of Terms
CSSC - Canadian System Security Center
CTCPEC - Canadian Trusted Computer Product Evaluation Criteria
DoD - Department of Defense
EAL - Evaluation Assurance Level
ECITS - Evaluation Criteria for IT Security
ECMA - European Computer Manufacturers Association
ERP - Enterprise Resource Planning
FCITS - Federal Criteria for Information Technology Security
HTTP - Hypertext Transfer Protocol
IEEE - Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
IoT - Internet of things
IP - Internet Protocol
IPSO - IP for Smart Objects
IPv4 - Internet Protocol version 4
IPv6 - Internet Protocol version 6
ISO/IEC - International Organization for Standardization / International Elec-
trotechnical Commission
IT - Information Technology
ITSEC - Information Technology Security Evaluation Criteria
ITSEF - Information Technology Security Evaluation Facility
MEMS - Micro-Electro Mechanical Systems
MOM - Message Oriented Middleware
MQTT - Message Queue Telemetry Transport
==PAGE:89==
77
MRA - Mutual Recognition Arrangement
NCSC - National Computer Security Center
NFC - Near Field Communications
NIST - National Institute of Standards and Technologies
NSA - National Security Agency
PML - Physical Markup Language
PP - Protection Proﬁles
REST - Representational State Transfer
RF - Radio Frequency
RFID - Radio-frequency identiﬁcation
RSN - RFID Wireless Sensor Network
SAR - Security Assurance Requirement
SCADA - Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition
SFR - Security Functional Requirement
ST - Security Target
TCBs - Trusted Computer Bases
TCSEC - Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria
TOE - Target of Evaluation
WLAN - Wireless Local Area Network
WMAN - Wireless Metropolitan Area Network
WPAN - Wireless Personal Area Network
WSAN - Wireless Sensor and Actuator Networks
==PAGE:90==
78
Glossary of Terms
WSN - Wireless Sensor Network
WWAN - Wireless Wide Area Network
XML - Extensible Markup Language
XMPP - Extensible Messaging and Presence Protocol
ZSI - German Information Security Agency
ZSISC - ZSI IT Security Criteria
==PAGE:91==
Bibliography
[1] Jacob
Morgan.
A
simple
explanation
of
’the
internet
of
things’.
http://www.forbes.com/sites/jacobmorgan/2014/05/13/
simple-explanation-internet-things-that-anyone-can-understand/
#1938f3656828, 2014.
[2] Gartner. Gartner survey says 6.4 billion connected. http://www.gartner.
com/newsroom/id/3165317, 2016.
[3] Common Criteria Embrace,Reform and Extend. Cisco and Intel, 1 edition,
2011.
[4] Maarten Botterman.
Internet of things: an early reality of the future
internet. In Workshop Report, European Commission Information Society
and Media, 2009.
[5] Dieter Uckelmann, Mark Harrison, and Florian Michahelles. An architec-
tural approach towards the future internet of things. Springer, 2011.
[6] Shancang Li, Li Da Xu, and Shanshan Zhao. The internet of things: a
survey. Information Systems Frontiers, 17(2):243–259, 2015.
[7] Wikipedia. Internet of things — wikipedia, the free encyclopedia, 2016.
[Online; accessed 14-May-2016].
[8] Friedemann Mattern and Christian Floerkemeier.
From the internet of
computers to the internet of things. In From active data management to
event-based systems and more, pages 242–259. Springer, 2010.
==PAGE:92==
80
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[9] Jacob
Morgan.
What
is
internet
of
things
(iot)?
-
deﬁnition
from whatis.com.
http://internetofthingsagenda.techtarget.com/
definition/Internet-of-Things-IoT, 2016.
[10] Luigi Atzori, Antonio Iera, and Giacomo Morabito. The internet of things:
A survey. Computer networks, 54(15):2787–2805, 2010.
[11] Daniele Miorandi, Sabrina Sicari, Francesco De Pellegrini, and Imrich
Chlamtac. Internet of things: Vision, applications and research challenges.
Ad Hoc Networks, 10(7):1497–1516, 2012.
[12] Lu Tan and Neng Wang.
Future internet: The internet of things.
In
Advanced Computer Theory and Engineering (ICACTE), 2010 3rd Inter-
national Conference on, volume 5, pages V5–376. IEEE, 2010.
[13] Hermann Kopetz. Internet of things. In Real-time systems, pages 307–323.
Springer, 2011.
[14] Jayavardhana Gubbi, Rajkumar Buyya, Slaven Marusic, and Marimuthu
Palaniswami. Internet of things (iot): A vision, architectural elements, and
future directions. Future Generation Computer Systems, 29(7):1645–1660,
2013.
[15] C. Perera, C. H. Liu, and S. Jayawardena. The emerging internet of things
marketplace from an industrial perspective: A survey. IEEE Transactions
on Emerging Topics in Computing, 3(4):585–598, Dec 2015.
[16] Margaret Rouse. What is rﬁd (radio frequency identiﬁcation)? - deﬁnition
from whatis.com.
http://internetofthingsagenda.techtarget.com/
definition/RFID-radio-frequency-identification?src=itke+stub,
2016.
[17] Hetal B Pandya and Tushar A Champaneria. Internet of things: Survey and
case studies. In Electrical, Electronics, Signals, Communication and Op-
timization (EESCO), 2015 International Conference on, pages 1–6. IEEE,
2015.
[18] Margaret Rouse. What is wireless sensor network (wsn)? - deﬁnition from
whatis.com.
http://searchdatacenter.techtarget.com/definition/
sensor-network?src=itke+stub, 2016.
[19] Margaret Rouse.
what is bluetooth low energy (bluetooth le)?
- deﬁ-
nition from whatis.com. http://internetofthingsagenda.techtarget.
com/definition/Bluetooth-Low-Energy-Bluetooth-LE, 2016.
[20] Margaret Rouse.
What is near ﬁeld communication (nfc)?
- deﬁni-
tion from whatis.com.
http://searchmobilecomputing.techtarget.
com/definition/Near-Field-Communication, 2016.
==PAGE:93==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
81
[21] Margaret Rouse.
What is mqtt (mq telemetry transport)?
- deﬁnition
from whatis.com.
http://internetofthingsagenda.techtarget.com/
definition/MQTT-MQ-Telemetry-Transport, 2016.
[22] Margaret Rouse. What is zigbee? - deﬁnition from whatis.com. http://
internetofthingsagenda.techtarget.com/definition/ZigBee, 2016.
[23] Margaret Rouse.
What is scada (supervisory control and data acquisi-
tion)?
- deﬁnition from whatis.com.
http://whatis.techtarget.com/
definition/SCADA-supervisory-control-and-data-acquisition,
2016.
[24] IEEE IoT Eclipse IoT Working Group and AGILE IoT. Iot developer survey
2016. Eclipse Foundation, 1 edition, 2016.
[25] Md Mahmud Hossain, Maziar Fotouhi, and Ragib Hasan.
Towards an
analysis of security issues, challenges, and open problems in the internet
of things. In 2015 IEEE World Congress on Services, pages 21–28. IEEE,
2015.
[26] Owasp. Iot framework assessment. https://www.owasp.org/index.php/
IoT_Framework_Assessment, urldate=2016-6-23, 2016.
[27] Cisco.
Securing
the
internet
of
things:
a
proposed
frame-
work.
http://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/about/security-center/
secure-iot-proposed-framework.html, 2016.
[28] Maede Zolanvari. Iot security: A survey. 2015.
[29] Sachin Babar, Parikshit Mahalle, Antonietta Stango, Neeli Prasad, and
Ramjee Prasad.
Proposed security model and threat taxonomy for the
internet of things (iot). In International Conference on Network Security
and Applications, pages 420–429. Springer, 2010.
[30] Glenn A Fink, Dimitri V Zarzhitsky, Thomas E Carroll, and Ethan D Far-
quhar. Security and privacy grand challenges for the internet of things. In
Collaboration Technologies and Systems (CTS), 2015 International Con-
ference on, pages 27–34. IEEE, 2015.
[31] Yong Ho Hwang. Iot security & privacy: threats and challenges. In Pro-
ceedings of the 1st ACM Workshop on IoT Privacy, Trust, and Security,
pages 1–1. ACM, 2015.
[32] Kai Rannenberg. Evaluation criteria. 2011.
[33] V. Lotz, F. Di Cerbo, M. Bezzi, S. P. Kaluvuri, A. Sabetta, and S. Trabelsi.
Security certiﬁcation for service-based business ecosystems. The Computer
Journal, 58(4):709–723, 2013.
==PAGE:94==
82
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[34] Kai Rannenberg. It security certiﬁcation and criteria. Information Security
for Global Information Infrastructures, Kluwer Academic Publishers, pages
1–10, 2000.
[35] Ernesto Damiani, Claudio Agostino Ardagna, and Nabil El Ioini. Open
source systems security certiﬁcation. Springer Science & Business Media,
2008.
[36] Ragnar Schierholz and Kevin McGrath. Security certiﬁcation – a critical
review. 2010.
[37] ICSA Labs.
Iot devices and sensors.
https://www.icsalabs.com/
technology-program/iot-testing, journal=ICSA Labs, 2015.
[38] Eileen
Yu.
Certiﬁcation,
regulation
needed
to
se-
cure
iot
devices.
http://www.zdnet.com/article/
certification-regulations-needed-to-secure-iot-devices/.
[39] Hewlett Packard Enterprise Development LP. Internet of things Research
Study. HP, 1 edition, 2014.
[40] Lauren Coleman-Lochner Matt Townsend and Lindsey Rupp. Target’s data
breach: The largest retail hack in u.s. history. http://www.bloomberg.
com/infographics/2014-05-14/target-data-breach.html, 2014.
[41] Jaikumar
Vijayan.
Target
attack
shows
danger
of
remotely
accessible
hvac
systems.
http://www.
computerworld.com/article/2487452/cybercrime-hacking/
target-attack-shows-danger-of-remotely-accessible-hvac-systems.
html, Jul 2014.
[42] Bob Tarzey and Louella Fernandes.
The many guises of the iot, quo-
circa.com. http://quocirca.com/content/many-guises-iot, 2015.
[43] US DOD.
Departement of defense,“trusted computer security evalua-
tion criteria (tcsec)”. 5200.28-std, 1985.
Adresse Internet:
www. fas.
org/irp/nsa/rainbow/std001. htm.
[44] Security architecture and design/security product evaluation methods and
criteria.
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/security_architecture_
and_design/security_product_evaluation_methods_and_criteria.
[45] Orange book links. http://www.dynamoo.com/orange/links.htm.
[46] Steven B. Lipner. The birth and death of the orange book. IEEE Annals
Hist. Comput., 37(2):19–31, 2015.
==PAGE:95==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
83
[47] Kai Rannenberg. Recent development in information technology security
evaluation-the need for evaluation criteria for multilateral security. In Secu-
rity and control of information technology in society, pages 113–128, 1993.
[48] Joint Task. Foundations for the harmonization of information technology
security standards. 1993.
[49] Department of Trade and Industry. Information technology security evalu-
ation criteria (itsec), 1991.
[50] Michael Gehrke, Andreas Pﬁtzmann, and Kai Rannenberg. Information
technology security evaluation criteria (itsec)-a contribution to vulnerabil-
ity? In IFIP Congress (2), pages 579–587, 1992.
[51] Pﬂeeger Charles and Shari Lawrence Pﬂeeger Pﬂeeger. Security in com-
puting. 2002.
[52] Common criteria. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/common_criteria,
journal=Wikipedia.
[53] Common criteria. https://www.commoncriteriaportal.org/.
[54] Ariﬀuddin Aizuddin. The common criteria iso/iec 15408–the insight, some
thoughts, questions and issues, 2001.
[55] The
common
criteria.
https://buildsecurityin.us-cert.
gov/articles/best-practices/requirements-engineering/
the-common-criteria.
[56] Pierre Dusart, Damien Sauveron, and Kim Tai-Hoon. Some limits of com-
mon criteria certiﬁcation. context, 2(4), 2008.
[57] Tony Boswell. Security evaluation and common criteria. In Secure Smart
Embedded Devices, Platforms and Applications, pages 407–427. Springer,
2014.
[58] Samuel Paul Kaluvuri, Michele Bezzi, and Yves Roudier. A quantitative
analysis of common criteria certiﬁcation practice. In Trust, Privacy, and
Security in Digital Business, pages 132–143. Springer, 2014.
[59] Rob
Enderle.
New
iot
security
certiﬁcation
aims
to
make
the
world
safer.
http://www.cio.com/article/3073263/security/
new-iot-security-certification-aims-to-make-the-world-safer.
html, 2016.
[60] Manpreet Singh and Manjeet S. Patterh. Access control policy model for
implementing network based authorization framework. International Sym-
posium on Computer Science and its Applications, 2008.
==PAGE:96==
84
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[61] Common
criteria.
https://blogs.ca.com/2011/03/11/
common-criteria-reforms-sink-or-swim-how-should-industry-handle-the-revolution-b
Nov 2011.
[62] Haider Abbas, Louise Yngström, and Ahmed Hemani. Security evaluation
of it products: Bridging the gap between common criteria (cc) and real
option thinking. WCECS San Francisco, USA, 2008.
[63] Kirsten
Thompson
and
Brandon
Mattalo.
The
inter-
net
of
things:
guidance,
regulation
and
the
canadian
ap-
proach.
http://www.canadiancybersecuritylaw.com/2015/11/
the-internet-of-things-guidance-regulation-and-the-canadian-approach/,
2015.
[64] Rana Aamir Raza Ashfaq and Mohammad Qasim Khan. Analyzing com-
mon criteria shortcomings to improve its eﬃcacy. 2009.
[65] Owasp internet of things project. https://www.owasp.org/index.php/
owasp_internet_of_things_project.
[66] iot
trust
framework
discussion
draft
online
trust
alliance.
https://otalliance.org/system/files/files/resource/documents/
iot_trust_frameworkv1.pdf.
[67] VJ Jincy and Sudharsan Sundararajan. Classiﬁcation mechanism for iot
devices towards creating a security framework. In Intelligent Distributed
Computing, pages 265–277. Springer, 2015.
[68] Weka 3: Data mining software in java. http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/
ml/weka/.
