==PAGE:1==
==PAGE:2==
English Titel: Integrated Design Process for Urban Stormwater Management
Danish Titel: Integreret designproces for håndtering af overadevand i byrum
MSc Thesis by Lærke Philipsen (s093375)
Supervisor: Lotte Bjerregaard Jensen
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kongens Lyngby
Tel. 45 25 17 00
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
c
==PAGE:4==
d
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Challenges are observed with oods at Buddinge Station, an important trac
hub, blocked with rain- and wastewater during extreme rain showers. With more
intense and frequent rain showers, and more impermeable surface in cities, the
challenge must be solved. Generally, two options exist of solving the challenge -
expanding the sewer system or implementing stormwater management solutions
on the surface. Surface solutions are often chosen, because of lower costs, less
intervention, and restoration of the original water cycle. Because surface solu-
tions are space consuming, they should preferably serve multiple purposes. Due
to the extent of stormwater management projects, it is benecial to develop a
process including experts from dierent elds and structure the process.
This work developed an integrated design process for urban stormwater manage-
ment. The design process was then applied in a case study in the surrounding
catchment area sloping towards Buddinge Station. The design process was de-
veloped with inspiration from existing integrated design processes, combined
with framework research in relation to stormwater management and implemen-
tation of surface solutions in the urban context.
The frame of the design process is a project group coordinated by a project man-
ager. It was found that the composition of the project group is essential, and
it should consist of interdisciplinary group members, who will be able to con-
tribute with dierent knowledge and approaches. The design process contains
three steps: Research, Implementation and Evaluation. These three phases are
specied into ten steps of specic stormwater management related work.
The application of the process exemplies how the generic design process can be
applied in specic project. The research phase included development of an idea
==PAGE:6==
ii
catalog for understanding of the background, and used existing and developed
maps as a foundation for decision-making.
The idea catalog indicated that
projects with multifunctional purposes, including large detention volumes, are
desirable.
The implementation phase included identication of 22 potential
solution spots and a total detention volume of 39305 m3. The solutions were
separated into ve categories, which made it possible to analyze the solutions
before a smaller number of solutions were selected for more detailed design. The
detailed design was done for a parking concept, where it was achieved to develop
a dierentiated solution handling rain showers of varying intensities. Lastly, an
evaluation of the performance of the combined implementations was outlined.
The generic design process was applicable in many dierent stormwater projects.
Especially for projects in dense Danish context, the process will serve as a
relevant working tool.
==PAGE:7==
Preface
The thesis deals with the development of an integrated design process for urban
stormwater management and the application of the process in the project site
around Buddinge Station.
The thesis is written using the IMRaD report structure. The background, chal-
lenge and problem statement is introduced in chapter 1, Introduction.
The
methodology of the project, explaining the collaboration and process of this
specic project, is explained in chapter 2. The largest chapter of the thesis is
chapter 3, where the three main results are presented; section 3.1, Background,
section 3.2, Generic Description of the Design Process, and section 3.3, Appli-
cation of Design Process. In chapter 4, Discussion, the results are discussed,
and lastly chapter 5 concludes on the results and draws perspective of possible
future work in stormwater management.
I would like to thank, rst of all, my supervisor Associate Professor Lotte Bjer-
regaard Jensen, who has not only supervised me with regular meetings, but also
introduced me to the work in research at DTU through the promising STED net-
work (Sustainable Transformation and Environmental Design) in the NORDIC
BUILT programme. The network between several nordic universities and nordic
architectural company, took me on an inspiring trip to Trondheim, where the
newest research was presented in the eld.
Through the STED network the coorporation with Vandkunsten and I was es-
tablished. I would like to thank Thomas Nybo Rasmussen, partner at Vand-
kunsten, for supervision from a practical and architectural perspective. Further-
more, it has been a great pleasure to occasionally work in beautiful surroundings
at the oce. I would like to thank the team from DTU Enviroment, Professor
==PAGE:8==
iv
Karsten Arnbjerg-Nielsen, Postdoc Roland Löwe and Master's student Hampus
Åkerblom for cooperation and an insight into the environmental eld in the
project.
SCALGO has been a useful and interesting tool to work with, and I would
like to thank Morten Revsbæk and Thomas Mølhave for the license and quick
supervision through the work.
Lastly, I would like to warmly thank my friends, family and especially my part-
ner, Henrik Brun Hansen, for being by my side and supporting me through
exciting as well as challenging times.
Lyngby, 25-June-2016
Lærke Philipsen
==PAGE:9==
v
==PAGE:10==
vi
Contents
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Method
5
2.1
Cooperation Between Stakeholders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Results
9
3.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.1.1
Terminology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.1.1.1
LAR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.1.1.2
WSUD
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1.1.3
SUDS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.1.2
Design Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.1.3
Stakeholders
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1.4
The Danish Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.1.4.1
Responsibility
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.1.4.2
Standards, Codes, Norms and Guidelines . . . .
19
3.1.5
Mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2
Generic Description of the Design Process . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2.1
1st Phase - Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2.1.1
Understand the Challenge . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2.1.2
Understand the Project Site
. . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2.1.3
Form the Goal of the Project . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2.1.4
Dene the Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
==PAGE:12==
viii
CONTENTS
3.2.1.5
1st Phase Tools
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2.2
2nd Phase - Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2.2.1
Find Potential Solution Spots
. . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2.2.2
Reect on Each Solution
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.2.2.3
Design Solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.2.2.4
Estimate Consequences . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.2.2.5
2nd Phase Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.2.3
3rd Phase - Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.2.3.1
Perform Evaluation of the Design
. . . . . . . .
33
3.2.3.2
Decide Whether the Design Performs Satisfactory 33
3.2.3.3
3rd Phase Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.3
Application of the Design Process in Buddinge
. . . . . . . . . .
36
3.3.1
1st Phase - Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.3.1.1
Understand the Challenge . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.3.1.2
Understand the Area: Buddinge Station . . . . .
39
3.3.1.3
Form the Goal of the Project . . . . . . . . . . .
58
3.3.1.4
Dene the Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
3.3.2
2nd Phase - Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
3.3.2.1
Find Potential Solution Spots
. . . . . . . . . .
60
3.3.2.2
Reect on Each Solution
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
3.3.2.3
Design Solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
3.3.2.4
Estimate Consequences . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
3.3.3
3rd Phase - Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
3.3.3.1
Perform Evaluation of the Design
. . . . . . . .
76
3.3.3.2
Decide Whether the Design Performs Satisfactory 80
4
Discussion
81
5
Conclusion
85
A Idea Catalog
91
B SCALGO Guide
93
C Existing Maps
101
D Produced Maps
103
E Planning Tools
105
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
When taking a top down look on cities three dierent surfaces appear: The
buildings, the roads and the spaces in between covered with squares, parks,
courtyards and sometimes brownelds. The ratio between these three vary from
city to city and country to country. In gure 1.1 an aerial photograph of the
inner Copenhagen is presented. The style in the central Copenhagen is housing
blocks with small courtyards with roads and squares surrounding them. Occa-
sionally large impressive monuments appear, as Christiansborg is represented
in this photograph. The space is valuable in the dense city, but in 1962 it was
nevertheless decided to close of some of the central streets for cars and establish
pedestrianized zones (Gehl, 2010). Furthermore, the squares was transformed
from parking lots to spaces for city life. This gave the city center a renewed life,
and the squares and small alleys of Copenhagen now creates the foundation of
a very popular and vibrant city center. The transformation of valuable space,
however always comes with a sacrice - in this case that the mobility for vehicles
decreases.
In the same way the space is valuable when transforming cities for climate adap-
tation. It appears that climate change intensies the recurrence of the severe
rain event. At the same time more surface in the city gets covered with imper-
meable surfaces. This results in more recent oods of our cities, which is not
only inconvenient and unhealthy, but especially very expensive. The challenge
can be solved in two ways: Expanding the sewer system or implementing water
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction
Figure 1.1: An aerial photograph of the center of Copenhagen. The city con-
sist of surfaces covered with buildings, roads and space in between.
(Source: http://kbhkort.kk.dk/)
management solutions on the surface. In many cases it is desired to solve the
challenge by the second option, and handle the rainwater before it goes into the
sewer system. This is for many reasons. The dominating reason might be, that
expansion of the sewer systems are expensive and comprehensive compared to
surface solutions. When implementing surface solutions by Gladsaxe Stadium,
the economies of the two scenarios of expanding the sewers versus implementing
detention solutions on the surface, was studied. The results showed that the rst
scenario costed 102m DKK, while the project on the surface ran up in 80.6m
DKK (VandPlus, 2015), which was even including beautication and urban de-
velopment. Furthermore, recreating the natural water cycle, the contribution
to the groundwater is increased, and more water is cleaned naturally instead of
transporting it the the wastewater treatment plant.
The disadvantage of most water management solutions on the surface, is that
they usually are very space consuming. A way of utilizing the large areas neces-
sary for stormwater features, is to design solutions with multiple purposes. This
is yet another argument of choosing the surface solutions over the expansion of
the sewers - They create a possibility of creating new and better spaces, which
can contribute to the city with new activities and recreational features in the
urban context. An example of this, is illustrated in gure 1.2. Enghaveplads is a
large climate adaptation project, and the winning design proposal from Tredje
Natur ensured a detention volume of 24000 m3 of rainwater.
This is not in
itself the only reason that the project won. The key was the multifunctionality
that was achieved in the entire park through various aspects from the tradi-
tional ower gardens the park is known for to the new sports eld, which is the
element illustrated in gure 1.2 - all oodable.
The size of the climate adaptation projects are naturally large, which is propor-
==PAGE:15==
3
Figure 1.2: Mood renderings from the winning design proposal of Eng-
haveparken done by Tredje Natur. The renderings shows a dry
and wet situation of the main basin in the project, which can
in total detain 24000 m3 rain water, but is also usable in the
majority of the time, when it is dry.
The main basin, illus-
trated here, serves as a ball eld with spectator seats. (Source:
http://tredjenatur.dk/)
tional with the economy and intervention in the existing conditions. Therefore
it is important to act in the most sensible way, when transforming the large
areas of the city that is needed for proper ood protection. This is done by
using clever processes and frameworks. It is known, that many stakeholders
are involved in these project (see section 3.1.3), which complicates the process.
The many stakeholders can act as an advantage, if they are integrated in the
design process, and all opinions are presented. The need of implementing inter-
disciplinary project work into a simple design process with dened steps, is met
with this thesis, where such a design process is made particular for stormwater
management projects.
==PAGE:16==
4
Introduction
1.1
Problem Statement
With more frequent stormwater events and an increasingly impermeable urban
context, transformation projects are needed in cities. In a dense city, the po-
tential of transforming area is furthermore limited. It is therefore desirable to
plan stormwater management projects structured, while keeping consideration
to varied expert elds and aspects through the projects.
The main objective of this work is to develop an integrated design process
for urban stormwater management projects, as a tool for developers to create
interdisciplinary designs with added value for the citizens. The design process
should be suciently generic so that it can be applied to a wide range of projects.
The process is developed concerning stormwater projects in the dense Danish
urban context, but could preferably be applied in European context as well.
The process is applied in a case study in Buddinge, Denmark, where oods are
frequently experienced. The case area is well suited for a case study since it
consists of areas of mixed use, experience signicant challenges with ood, and
is dense, thus solutions need eort to implement. The application of the process
should exemplify how the generic process can be performed in a specic project.
It is not the purpose of this work to deal with all necessary competences in
detail. The application will be an illustration of one possible direction of the
use of the design process.
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2
Method
This thesis has been produced parallel to a Master's Thesis of the institute
DTU Environment, where the two Master's students proted by discussions
and collaboration with each other.
The process of this Master's Thesis has
included research, analysis and development of models, processes and designs
and a more detailed diagram is illustrated in gure 2.1.
2.1
Cooperation Between Stakeholders
The process of collaboration between dierent stakeholders have been an im-
portant learning. The collaboration occurred between dierent university de-
partments (DTU Civil Engineering and DTU Environment), with professionals
(Vandkunsten architectural oce and Krüger consultancy oce), and dialogue
with Gladsaxe Municipality.
The teamwork between DTU Civil Engineering and DTU Environment has been
performed as a teamwork between a Master's student from each institute produc-
ing two individual master theses where this work have produced a design process
for stormwater management in the urban context. Hampus Åkerblom (HÅ), the
Master's student form DTU Environment, has produced a framework for inte-
grating surface solution into simulation tools. Concurrent, common meetings
==PAGE:18==
6
Method
has been organized between the two academic groups which have ensured that
the two projects were developed in concordance.
The collaboration with Thomas Nybo Rasmussen from Vandkunsten architec-
tural oce has given the project an extra dimension and included the point of
view from an architect. This, together with the inputs from university stake-
holders and Gladsaxe Municipality, has opened eyes for the dierent approaches
and interests the stakeholders have.
2.2
Process
Figure 2.1 shows a time line from February to June 2016, where the thesis was
performed. The collaboration with HÅ has made it possible to distribute dier-
ent work between the two parts. In the illustration blue points are performed
by this work, the green points by HÅ, and the yellow points in collaboration.
The process of this thesis is in line with the developed design process, where
it is applied in a case study. The project started with the identication of the
problem and formation of project descriptions. Then a literature review was
done, where the Idea Catalog was the most important results of the rst phase
of the project. Analogous the MIKE Flood simulation model was studied and
developed by HÅ. After the literature review, the case study area was examined
through the research of existing spatial material and strategies and the making
of own maps using SCALGO and QGIS. The research made the foundation of
going into the implementation phase. Here potential solution spots were found
in collaboration by using the gained knowledge and discussing around a large
map on the table. After studying the potential of the area, solutions were chosen
and designed. Finally a solution evaluation was completed.
Throughout the process it has been protable to use planning tools. Some of the
most important planning tools have been weekly plans, where the appointments
and work of each day was plotted into a weekly plan, detailed meeting minutes,
making sure nothing was lost from meetings, and presentations for the meetings
to show the status of the project. Throughout the project Google Drive has
served as the drive for most les. This has made it very easy to share documents
with HÅ and supervisors. For the presentation of the project in Trondheim, a
poster was produced, which communicated the process, the implementations
and SCALGO as a immediate response tool. The weekly plans and poster can
bee seen in appendix E. Meeting minutes and presentations are reachable at
https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B26twtcIeH7-cHh2al9JNFlZSms.
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Process
7
Figure 2.1: The working process of the Master's Thesis, where this and Ham-
pus Åkerblom's theses beneted from a parallel collaboration.
==PAGE:20==
8
Method
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 3
Results
In the following chapter the integrated design process for urban stormwater
management is presented. This is done by rstly presenting the background
research for the development in section 3.1. Then the generic design process is
explained through the three phases with ten steps in section 3.2. Lastly, the
design process is applied on the case study in section 3.3.
3.1
Background
The background research formed the foundation of the design process develop-
ment and consisted of acquaintance of the terminology in stormeater manage-
ment, research in existing design processes and framework, a short stakeholder
analysis, a study of the Danish approach through responsibility and guidelines,
and lasty a quick introduction to the practice of producing maps.
3.1.1
Terminology
There is an extensive amount of terminology in the eld of stormwater manage-
ment. Firstly, the concept has dierent terms. Among these are stormwater
==PAGE:22==
10
Results
management" and urban drainage management common. The denition of
stormwater management is to manage surface runo. Surface runo, or solely
runo, is the precipitation that is not inltrated into the ground (SSWM, 2016).
Because of urban development, the amount of impervious surface decreases, thus
the need for stormwater management is introduced.
Dierent approaches and terms describing similar concepts, have to large extend
been developed in dierent parts of the world. This is emphasized by Fletcher
et al. (2014), where the dierent principles in the eld are explained; including
Low Impact Development (LID), Water Sensitive Urban Design (WSUD), Inte-
grated Urban Water Management (IUWM), Sustainable Urban Drainage Sys-
tems (SUDS), Best Management Practices (BMPs), Stormwater Control Mea-
sures (SCMs), Alternative Techniques (ATs), Source Control and Green Infras-
tructure (GI). Lastly approaches of non-English-speaking countries are outlined
- including the Danish LAR approach. The approaches dierentiates dierently,
but a way to see the dierence of the approaches is to introduce two scales, and
place the approaches in a coordinate system. In gure 3.1 such a coordinate
system is illustrated. The x-axis shows the specicity of the approach. Some
approaches suggest specic solutions and techniques whereas others rather de-
scribe general visions and broad principles. On the y-axis the focus is considered,
with solely stormwater management close to zero and the whole urban water
cycle out the axis. The gure is a constructed classication, and Fletcher et al.
(2014) mention that it can dier to dierent people and furthermore develop
over time.
In this thesis, the Danish LAR is used with contributions and inspiration from
WSUD and SUDS.
3.1.1.1
LAR
LAR, a short for lokal afvanding af regnvand (local diversion of stormwater),
is the Danish approach to stormwater management and was introduced in the
early nineties.
It focus on handling the rainwater as close to the source as
possible (Teknologisk Institut, 2016). This means implementing solutions with
the purpose of reducing or delay the rain water before it goes to the existing
sewer system, an example of centralized handling of rain water. LAR is based on
four main principles: 1) Inltration, 2) Delay, 3) Detention and 4) Evaporation.
LAR also includes water treatment close to the source. This being both literal
treatment devices, but also through green elements, such as rain gardens, or
sand and gravel lters.
==PAGE:23==
3.1 Background
11
Figure 3.1: A constructed classication of the eleven most popular stormwa-
ter management approaches due to specicity and primary focus.
(Fletcher et al., 2014)
3.1.1.2
WSUD
Water Sensitive Urban Design derives from Australia in the early nineties, but
has been spread internationally.
The objectives of the approach have been
redened several times. In 2002 Lloyd et al. (2002) describe WSUD as a "philo-
sophical approach to urban planning and design that aims to minimize the
hydrological impacts of urban development on the surrounding environment.,
with the ve objectives:
1. "Protection and enhancement of natural water systems in urban develop-
ments,
2. integration of stormwater treatment into the landscape by incorporating
multiple use corridors that maximize the visual and recreational amenity
of developments,
3. protection of water quality draining from urban development,
==PAGE:24==
12
Results
4. reduction of runo and peak ows from urban developments by employing
local detention measures and minimizing impervious areas, and
5. adding value while minimizing drainage infrastructure development costs.
Especially the fourth objective is directly in line with the Danish LAR, but the
added value and multiple use is also relevant features to solve the implemen-
tation of the space consuming elements in an elegant and usable manner.
3.1.1.3
SUDS
Sustainable Urban Drainage Systems is the traditional British approach to
stormwater management, formed through the eighties and nineties by the British
association CIRIA, the Construction Industry Research and Information Associ-
ation. SUDS are explained from four principles in the SUDS Manual (Kellagher
et al., 2015):
1. Water Quantity: Control the quantity of runo to 1) support the manage-
ment of ood risk, and 2) maintain and protect the natural water cycle.
2. Water Quality: Manage the quality of the runo to prevent pollution.
3. Amenity: Create and sustain better places for people.
4. Biodiversity: Create and sustain better places for nature.
The SUDS Manual also acts as a tool for both policy and decision makers and
planner, managers and designers. In this way the SUDS Manual contain both
visions and principles for the approach, the SUDS design process and specic
solution components.
3.1.2
Design Process
The Integrated Design Process (IDP) is development of building design with
a holistic approach, taking into account as many parameters of the design as
early as possible.
Parameters can be ventilation and heating systems, solar
orientation, architecture, materials, room geometries, and much more. The main
quality of IDP is the ability to approach as many issues as early as possible.
This is only possible when as many stakeholders as possible are collected early
in the phase. The process can be described in the following steps (Svendsen
et al., 2008)(Hestnes, 2008):
==PAGE:25==
3.1 Background
13
1. Pre-design phase: Before the actual design process all stakeholders are
collected to form design goals and process expectations. The result is a
common understanding of goals and future development of the project,
thus a decrease in conicts.
2. Space of solutions: The design team identies the solutions matching the
goals from rst phase. The space of solutions is achieved by sketching and
through discussions. Each solution is discussed and by combining the best
of them, design proposals to individual building features are formed.
3. Combination of design proposals: Based on the design proposals developed
in the second phase, combinations of the best design proposals are made,
forming complete building designs.
4. Selection of nal design: The dierent nal building designs are discussed
due to the initial goals, and a nal design is chosen.
To ensure a successful process, it is benecial to elect a design facilitator, who is
skilled in team management and communication. The design facilitator should
preferably also have technical and creative understanding. He or she will manage
the design team and facilitate discussions enhancing all perspectives. For the
constitution of the design team and to achieve a successful design process, it is
important that all participants of the design team:
• Keeps a positive attitude
• Is prepared for nontraditional takes of the design
• Stays in the design team throughout the whole process
This integrated design process is designed for building design processes. How-
ever, with the increasing awareness of complex urban design, including param-
eters such as stormwater management, livability, new technology, more green
elements etc., an integrated design process in urban design would result in bet-
ter and more coherent urban design.
For development of an integrated design process in urban stormwater manage-
ment a conceptual framework for the integrated planning and design of SUDS
has been developed by Fryd et al. (2012). It is based on a framework by Mitchell,
B. (1979) with the three axes of space, time and human decision-making which
creates a three dimensional coordinate system. The surfaces creates three planes
between the axes, biophysical processes (combination of time and space), spa-
tial strategies (combination of human decision-making and space) and adaptive
strategies (combination of time and human decision-making). This is showed
==PAGE:26==
14
Results
Theme
Biophysical
Spatial
Adaptive
Processes
Strategies
Strategies
Dimension
Time and
Human
Human
expanding
space
decision-making
decision-making
thematic
and space
and time
plane
Typical
Engineering,
Architecture,
Management,
schools/
Technical
Planning
Social
faculties
Science
Science
Typical
Biologists,
Architects,
Economists,
disciplinary
Ecologists,
Landscape
Management
actors
Engineers,
Architects, Urban
Experts,
etc.
Planners, etc.
Sociologists, etc.
Table 3.1: The planes of the framework and typical schools and actors.
(a) The original framework
(b) Modied framework
Table 3.2: The original and modied framework for integrated planning and
design of SUDS. The original model for integrated planning was
developed in 1979 by Mitchell, B. and the modied framework was
developed by Fryd et al. (2012).
==PAGE:27==
3.1 Background
15
in gure 3.2a. As illustrated in table 3.1 usually engineers would be connected
to the biophysical process, architects and planners to the spatial strategies and
management experts to the adaptive strategies. Stormwater management is as-
sociated with uncertainty across disciplines - both for engineers in relation with
climate change, inltration parameters and contamination, for architects and
planners in relation to sustainability and socio-cultural performance of design
options and for management experts in identication of goals, the role of ac-
tors in the process and economic predictions. It is thereby concluded that it is
essential, for a SUDS project to succeed, to be aware of the multi-dimensional
framework, thus include stakeholders from all expert elds.
On gure 3.2b a modied framework of the original model in 3.2a has been
developed. The human decision-making has been rephrased to human values,
the three dimensions of time, space and now human values has been laid down in
a triangle, and a process axis has been added upwards to the three dimensional
model. It now forms a tetrahedron, where the process happens upwards in a
reective loop through fact-nding, sketching and evaluation.
To interconnect the articles above about the Integrated Design Process in archi-
tecture and the Conceptual Framework for the Integrated Planning and Design
of SUDS, a step wise structure should be developed with interdisciplinary and
cross-temporal awareness. In this way a concrete design process for specically
stormwater management can be developed. Such a design process is developed
in this project and presented in section 3.2.
3.1.3
Stakeholders
Usually in building projects, the builder is the one owning the land and having
responsibility of the future building. Other stakeholders are naturally integrated
in the process, however, it is the builder who has the last word.
When handling stormwater, stakeholders are mixed across interests, since water
runs wherever the level is lower.
Therefore, stormwater strategies are often
found across municipality borders on the horizontal level and through the earth
on a vertical level.
Furthermore, there is time, money and conicts to save
when integrating several interests in the urban design process as explained in
the Integrated Design Process (usually applied on building projects) in section
3.2.
Under the exhibition Regnen Kommer ("The Rain is Coming") (The Dan-
ish Centre of Architecture, 2015) a short stakeholder analysis was made.
It
==PAGE:28==
16
Results
stated that the stakeholders that are usually involved in stormwater manage-
ment projects were:
Municipalities: The municipality owns the majority of the ground in the ur-
ban context. Therefore they have the primary responsibility to change the city
to a climate proof kind. They are doing the primary planning work and dele-
gate tasks to other stakeholders. Furthermore they do a lot of communication
between the stakeholders, and usually owns the utility companies.
Utility Companies: Has the responsibility of under-earth installations, such as
the sewer system. The sewer system has had the secondary purpose to handle
rainwater, but it is only dimensioned to handle wastewater (source?). Therefore
the utility companies have some responsibility due to stormwater management.
It is often seen that the municipalities in the catchment area and the utility
company cooperates to solve the stormwater challenges. Furthermore, the utility
companies are responsible of cleaning water and send it back to the citizen.
Private Developers: Own smaller pieces of land, and therefore have some, but
small potential in stormwater management. Large private property owners are
controlled by public regulations, low cost to administration, operation, mainte-
nance and value for money, while small property owners are controlled by public
regulations, shorter nancial perspectives and making a livable home.
Contractors: The executor of the plans and designs in the right frame of time,
money and quality.
Advisers: Includes engineers, architects, landscape architects, biologists, and
other professionals included in the process. They do preliminary investigations
and execute the planned demands from the builder through calculations, specic
shaping and design, projections and choice of solutions.
Producers: Develop standard products and solutions meeting the demand of
the market. They contribute to the industry, making the country leading in
sustainable technologies.
Insurance Companies: Repair damages and pay compensation when oods hap-
pen.
They are an important nancial player, since increased premiums can
heighten the incentives to climate adapt.
Citizens: The citizens are the users of the urban spaces and have the democratic
attribute to choose the political direction of a municipality, region or state.
In table 3.3 goals and challenges of the dierent stakeholders are listed.
==PAGE:29==
3.1 Background
17
Table 3.3: Dierent stakeholders have dierent interests and concerns in the
stormwater management design process. From the exhibition Reg-
nen Kommer (The Danish Centre of Architecture, 2015), these are
listed.
==PAGE:30==
18
Results
Other stakeholders than these eight exist. This is for example interest groups,
which count The Danish Nature Agency and the Danish Engineer Association,
researchers/universities and foundations, which for example count Realdania.
Common for these three elds are the goal of developing new knowledge and
descriptions of best practice.
3.1.4
The Danish Approach
3.1.4.1
Responsibility
In 2012 the Danish government and The National Association of Municipal-
ities (Kommunernes Landsforening) agreed on a national climate adaptation
initiative (Naturstyrelsen, 2012). The initiative included demands for the mu-
nicipalities to produce individual climate adaptation plans containing mapping
of the ooding risk and prioritized plans on handling these situations. The plans
was to be completed within a time frame of two years.
To provide a fair base for the work to begin, ve general focus areas was outlined:
1) Securing best possible framework in for example adjustments of rules and
laws, 2) a foundation for knowledge sharing and scientic development, through
eg. the web page http://www.klimatilpasning.dk/, 3) strengthen coopera-
tion between relevant stakeholders, 4) green transition where development of
new technologies lead to economic growth and 5) doing climate adaptation on
an international basis in line with the Floods Directive developed between EU
countries 1.
Summed up, this means that the government delegates the main part of the
work to the municipalities, but takes responsibility in the supervision of the
project and creates a basis, so that action is possible for the municipalities. It
makes good sense to delegate the detailed work to the municipalities, since they
have the overview of the area, and will know where implementations of solutions
is optimal.
As a part of the Floods Directive ten risk areas was to be identied, where a
larger national eort should be put. In Denmark the most eorts are to be
put in risks due to sea level rise and coastal protection. In this risk eld are
three of the projects Køge Bay, Odense Fjord and Aabenraa Fjord. All three
are about at land with fjords or bays close to the sea, where the movements
of the sea (for example when storms press the water up the coast) can result
in oods. Other risk areas are chosen on the basis of streams overowing their
1https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Floods_Directive
==PAGE:31==
3.1 Background
19
banks, where Holstebro and Storeåen is a challenge. Actually none of the risk
management plans are linked with intense rain events. However, this does not
mean that there is no risk in oods due to intense rain, but that intense rain
can hit the country wherever, and that action should be done in all cities with
a high amount of impermeable surface.
The Municipality of Gladsaxe has produced an online climate adaptation plan,
where Buddings Station, which is the case area for this project, is emphasized.
This is described in section 3.3.1.2.
3.1.4.2
Standards, Codes, Norms and Guidelines
In low scale planning, a wide range of standards and norms have been made. On
the bigger scale, not so much standardized material has been produced. This
is probably due to an old building tradition and the awareness of the condition
of buildings and building components.
Some well-reputed Danish sources of
standards, codes and norms are mentioned below:
Data Sheets from Technological Institute (Teknologisk Institut, 2016). Tech-
nological Institute has produced data sheets and guides of implementing LAR.
These guides range in scale from private housing to public areas as parks and
roads. They give a quick overview of each solution type containing a short de-
scription, design issues, pros, cons, function (due to handling of rainwater), area
type, its properties in removing pollutants and maintenance issues.
Data Sheets from the Municipality of Copenhagen (Københavns Kommune,
2011). These sheets feature the same overall solutions as the sheets from Techno-
logical Institute, however much more thorough. They include 1) an overview, 2)
detailed description of function, demands, eect, suggested contextual elements
and limitations, 3) elements of the solution, 4) dimensioning, 5) operation and
maintenance and 6) economy.
Climate Adaptation Plan, Gladsaxe Municipality (Gladsaxe Municipality, 2014a).
Gladsaxe Municipality has, like all the other municipalities in Denmark, pro-
duced a climate adaptation plan. As the case area of this thesis is in Gladsaxe
Municipality this climate adaption plan is emphasized here. The plan features
municipal goals, prioritizing, idea catalog and initiatives. The municipality and
their approach in climate adaptation is analyzed further in section 3.3.
Klimatilpasning.dk (The Danish Nature Agency, 2016a). In context with the
national climate adaptation initiative of the Danish government (Naturstyrelsen,
2012) the web page klimatilpasning.dk was launched. It is the portal of every-
==PAGE:32==
20
Results
thing worth knowing in relation to climate adaptation in Denmark. It features
portals for three stakeholders: citizen, municipality and industry. Furthermore
dierent subjects can be searched: News, examples, tools, technologies, publi-
cations, sectors and a knowledge database. Through these many subjects, a lot
of information is collected and forwarded to relevant stakeholders.
Byg-Erfa (BYG-ERFA, 2016). Experience papers from the building industry.
They have made a section of 18 papers related to stormwater and intense rain.
Most of them are only relevant in relation with the individual building, and we
are therefore at a very low scale and always considering the building. Some
examples in the section of 18 papers are how to handle water damage, install
green roofs, drain the water correctly around the house and establish fascines.
Danish Standard (Dansk Standard, 1994)(Dansk Standard, 1983).
The two
codes DS 432 (Code of Practice for Sanitary Drainage  Wastewater Installa-
tions) and DS 440 (Code for Smaller Drainage Works with Inltration) considers
action in and close to buildings. It mainly focusses on wastewater installations,
but also installations draining roof water in ex. fascines.
Vand og Aøb Ståbi (Micheelsen & Pejtersen, 2012). Describes short and precise
how to design fascines, dry basins and backow blockers.
Other standards, codes and norms:
• Numerous other guidelines from the municipalities
• The Danish Nature Agency on Climate Issues (The Danish Nature Agency,
2016b)
• Web page LAR i Danmark by The Technological Institute (Teknologisk
Institut, 2016)
• SBi-anvisning 255 - Aøbsinstallationer - systemer og dimensionering (Brandt,
2015)
• Rørcenter-anvisning 009 - Nedsivning af regnvand i faskiner (Teknologisk
Institut, 2005)
3.1.5
Mapping
One very communicative way of analyzing and understanding dierent param-
eters of an area is by illustrating spatial data on a map. People are used to
seeing maps regularly, which means that using maps for spatial data is received
==PAGE:33==
3.1 Background
21
intuitively. In that way a lot of information can be combined in the same map.
If looking detailed into a typical map from Google Maps, as shown in gure
3.2, it actually contains a vast amount of data. Firstly, it contains data about
what is physically on the ground surface - Areas like water, buildings, squares
and parks, linear objects as roads, creeks and ferry routes and points as bus
stops, stations and attractions. Going one level into detail, these elements have
dierent form, size and color, where for example the large roads are thicker and
yellow, whereas the footpaths are thinner, dashed and grey. Even the direction
of the road can appear here. Going into more data even more detail is put into
the elements. This is street names, store names, region names etc.
Figure 3.2: A simple map from Google maps. Regardless of the simplicity, the
map show very various parameters such as roads, buildings and
parks as well as stores, bus stops and ferry routes.
If more data is to be illustrated on a map, some of these elements should be
toned down to make the viewer focus on what is the essential message in the
map. Some key rules are important to follow making good maps:
• The essential message should be the clearest
• The background map should give the viewer quick overview of the area
• A map should always contain a north arrow, a scale bar and a legend
describing the content of the map
• Colors should be chosen carefully; 1) If elements of the map show dierent
values a red-to-green or red-to-blue scale is often used for valued element
- red is perceived as bad, warm or large numbers and green as good or
==PAGE:34==
22
Results
small numbers and blue as cold or small numbers. This can be risky if
the output should be received neutral. 2) If the scale crosses zero, from
a negative value to a positive value, values around zero are often picked
in a neutral color - grey, white or yellow. 3) If the color does not show a
value, it can show the element type. The color for water is blue, parks are
green, etc. 4) Lastly the map could show non-valued information which
can have random colors. However, on diagrams presenting a product, one
should choose a nice looking and perhaps repeated color palette.
• When categorizing valued elements the grouping, range, spread and dec-
imal degree of the number should make good sense. This very much de-
pends on the data, but round numbers with few decimals are preferred.
Being aware of these guidelines, well-communicating maps can be produced for
technical maps which are hard for third parties. It is later witnessed that results
performed in MIKE Flood and ArcGIS does not neccesarily communicate results
very well, thus a creative member of the group could transform these results into
maps understandable outside of the project group. These kinds of maps also
work well in presentation material, which indeed is relevant in the case of this
project.
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Generic Description of the Design Process
23
3.2
Generic Description of the Design Process
With inspiration from Svendsen et al. (2008), Hestnes (2008) and Fryd et al.
(2012) a new design process is developed containing three phases: 1st Phase -
Research, 2nd Phase - Implementation and 3rd Phase - Evaluation. The overall
process is illustrated in gure 3.3. The arrows illustrate that a natural iterative
process happens, which is inevitable in an integrated process including a large
amount of information and many stakeholders. This is supported by the theory
illustrated in gure 3.2b on page 14, where the spiral-formed process happens
up the z-axis circulating by all areas of interest at the same time as the room
for solutions shrinks in to a nal design. In the three phases in the illustration
below, the three phases are separate, but in reality, on large and small levels, it
is often a blurred process, where small iterations happens frequently, either in
the groups or in the individual mindset.
Figure 3.3: The three step design process in Stormwater Management
A project group containing members with dierent professions should be estab-
lished. It is both important to form a group which is not too large, making the
work inexible, and form one which is not too small, making sure all elds of in-
terest are covered. A project manager or design facilitator should be appointed
to control and coordinate the project.
Figure 3.4 shows a more detailed design process, for specically stormwater
projects. The phases have ten steps of tasks and decision-makings. First phase
includes research based tasks. Firstly the stormwater challenge has to be under-
stood, following the understanding of the project site. When these two elements
are examined, a goal for the project can be formed. Knowing the challenge, the
site and where the project is headed, the framework of the project is dened.
This is especially where it should be stated how intense rain showers the solu-
tions should be designed for, what the intentions are towards improving the life
for the citizens, etc. It is comparable to the building programme in the building
industry. For a process as exible and uent as possible, it should be possible
for the project group to redene the goal and framework. Likewise these should
not be too unclear so the project is prolonged due to new visions and goals
introduced frequently. Here, the project manager is important for the process,
which is also mentioned as one of the key objectives by Svendsen et al. (2008).
==PAGE:36==
24
Results
Each phase is elaborated in sections 3.2.1 to 3.2.3.
Figure 3.4: Detailed design process with process steps in each phase
3.2.1
1st Phase - Research
The structure of the rst phase is shown in gure 3.5. It shows the steps of
the process to the left, the working methods in the middle, and the tools to the
right. As the lines show, the methods, and tools are often used throughout all
steps of the phase, and some of both methods and tools are repeated in section
3.2.2 and 3.2.3, where second and third phase are explained.
3.2.1.1
Understand the Challenge
The rst work is to understand the challenge to solve. In stormwater manage-
ment it would often be a ood event that revealed a problem, but critical areas
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Generic Description of the Design Process
25
Figure 3.5: 1st phase of the design process with steps 1 to 4.
The phase
includes research of the project and the formation of a goal and
framework.
can also be unveiled with the help from simulations. By using simulation tools
to point out critical areas, the expenses of ood events can be saved.
The step of understanding the challenge is in gure 3.5 connected to the meth-
ods "Literature Review", "Development of Technical Models and Tools" and
"Mapping". These three methods will help the project group get a detailed
overview of the project and its extend. Through this step literature review is
central. If all project participants are not up-to-date with the technologies and
local political decisions, they should obtain it here. In this specic study, a gen-
eral "Idea Catalog" was worked out to support the knowledge about the extent
of possible solutions.
The participants of the project group could benet from splitting up in this
step, and do detailed research in their own eld connected to the challenge.
==PAGE:38==
26
Results
3.2.1.2
Understand the Project Site
Stormwater management projects vary especially due to dierent sites and their
qualities. Therefore it is essential to do research of the project site. This can
partly be done through maps and political strategies found on the internet, but
interviews and site visit are also useful research methods. Furthermore, online
maps are not always sucient and development of own models and tools can
be important. This count MIKE Flood models, which takes into consideration
both the sewer system and surface ows. The information from these technical
models can be dicult to understand and graphical communication on maps
can therefore be essential to get the knowledge from the engineer to the project
group. An example of simplied mapping can be seen on gure 3.14.
3.2.1.3
Form the Goal of the Project
When the challenge and area have been studied, the goal of the project should
be formed. This should include the extent of the implementations and visions
of the urban development for the city. The goal should be described concise and
only include the most important, dening design parameters and visions.
3.2.1.4
Dene the Framework
When having a goal for the project, the framework or programme can be dened.
It should state all concrete features of the project. Keeping the work of Fryd
et al. (2012) in mind, the framework can feature elements in each of the three
planes, biophysical processes, spatial strategies and adaptive strategies. Or in
other words technical parameters, urban development parameters and process
parameters. Some suggestions of parameters to consider are stated in gure
3.6. They are placed in a sustainability triangle according to which elds the
parameters belong to. Many of the parameters have parts of more elds in them.
In these kinds of projects the water handling volume and ability is the primary
design parameter, since it is the basis of the project. In particular, it should
be determined which return period is dimensioned for. The design level of the
sewer system is 10 years (Gladsaxe Municipality, 2015c), and the capacity of the
sewer system is therefore exceeded once every tenth year (actually it seems that
climate change has negative eect on the number of occurrences, thus oods will
happen more than once every tenth year (Fryd et al., 2012)). It can therefore
be benecial to dimension for return periods of 50-100 years. It could also be
agreed that the project group should dimension dierentiated solutions, where
==PAGE:39==
3.2 Generic Description of the Design Process
27
Figure 3.6: Some suggestions of important key points in the framework of a
sustainable development of project with stormwater management
in focus. Many more key points could be added.
the least valuable areas ood often, while the most valuable areas ood rarely.
In relation to the rain modeling, model parameters should be set in this step.
These parameters are the reference rain scenario, duration of rain shower, return
period, climate factor, model for perviousness and data source.
Other than these parameters, concrete facts should also be stated in this step.
Which area is the concerned area, what is the economic frame, who are the
actors, etc.
3.2.1.5
1st Phase Tools
Tools used in the rst phase are listed in gure 3.5.
The idea catalog was
developed with information from the numerous web pages and material on the
internet. The sources are listed in the back of the catalog. Furthermore the
communicative layout was performed in Adobe InDesign and self-made gures
==PAGE:40==
28
Results
in Adobe Illustrator. Alternative platforms for visual communication could be
the Microsoft Oce package with for instance PowerPoint.
The development of technical models and tools were done with dierent tools.
Simple calculation of basins, swales, rain gardens and pervious pavement can
be done with the excel sheet from Spildevandskomiteen (2015) or simple hand
calculation. On the larger scale analysis was made of natural movements of
water on the surface in SCALGO and ood simulation in MIKE Flood, while
spatial communication was done in the open source GIS program QGIS2.
SCALGO Live Flood Risk is an online tool developed by a team of algorithm
experts. They are supported by Real Dania to "create a powerful online ood
risk tool targeted at local governments and water utilities"3. SCALGO uses
the free terrain model of Denmark to create levels in the model. By using the
terrain levels, the tool calculates a Bluespot map, ow paths and catchment
areas from the paths. To do this, the user has to specify which rain intensities
to calculate for. The intensities can for example be the precipitation depths
for chosen return periods, based on statistical data for weather stations as close
to the site area as possible. Data on precipitation depth can e.g. be found
on klimatilpasning.dk. It is explained in section 3.3.1.2 under Existing Maps.
The precipitation numbers are put in the analysis congurations where also the
desired analyzes to be run are checked. For the case of Buddinge Station, the
sea level rise were for example not relevant, thus only rain related analyzes were
chosen. The analysis is run, and the results are shown on the map. They are
for Buddinge Station discussed in section 3.3.1.2.
MIKE Flood is used for analysis of the existing situation if extreme rain events
should happen. HÅ has used an existing MIKE Flood model for the catchment
area and modeled how oods would happen. What makes MIKE Flood simu-
lations extra useful, is the fact that it is possible to include the capacity of the
sewer system, the ow on the surface and, according to which model is used,
the inltration into the ground. The output of the MIKE Flood model is one
of the most detailed ood analyzes used in the stormwater management eld,
which is also emphasized in the model tool, "the climate meter" in gure 3.7.
The climate meter, explained in Paludan et al. (2011), ranges modeling methods
from simple to complex, which also follows the economy of the analyzes and the
detailing degree in the political decision process. In the meter the MIKE Flood
model gures at the 6th category only one step from the most complex category,
while BlueSpot map is the simplest model in the rst category.
Other than these two GIS based tools, an ordinary GIS program is also used for
2GIS: Geographical Information System
3http://scalgo.com/pr/2015-10-klimaspring.html
==PAGE:41==
3.2 Generic Description of the Design Process
29
Figure 3.7: The model tool "the climate meter" illustrating the possible mod-
els to perform when doing ood simulation. The model range from
low to high in complexity. In the urban context, the water ow is
dominated by the sewer system, thus a MIKE Flood simulation,
the sixth complexity category, should be done. The gure is from
(Paludan et al., 2011) and in Danish.
mapping. In this case the open source software QGIS is used. QGIS is used to
draw maps, and in this phase it is used to show which sub-areas the catchment
area is separated into. Later QGIS is used to show quantities on maps.
3.2.2
2nd Phase - Implementation
The four steps of the second phase are illustrated in gure 3.8. The phase works
with idea implementation in the specic catchment area through 5) ndings of
potential solution spots, 6) reection on possibilities at the individual spot, 7)
design of specic solutions and lastly 8) an estimation of the consequences, both
positive and negative, emerging when the solutions are implemented. Through
these steps many dierent methods and tools are used, which are described in
the following. The steps can merge into each other, which a part of the iterative
process.
3.2.2.1
Find Potential Solution Spots
The rst step of second phase is to nd potential solution spots in the catchment
area. Here, the project group can use a large, printed map of the site, point
==PAGE:42==
30
Results
Figure 3.8: 2nd phase of the design process with steps 5 to 8. In the phase
the stakeholders work with implementation and development of
solutions spread out in the area.
out all potential spots, and mark them up with post-its. Each member of the
project group should bring their analyzes from rst phase, and bring it up when
relevant. Especially mapped analyzes, which for example count SCALGO and
MIKE models, are relevant to use here.
Under the process, discussions are
naturally brought up about what the individual spots can be used for. These
discussions are valuable for later, since they bring up all kinds of thoughts and
ideas, usable for the entire group. The project manager has the responsibility
for keeping this process short and focused, because the discussions can go to far
into detail in specic elds.
3.2.2.2
Reect on Each Solution
In the sixth step each solution spot is analyzed through. What are the possibil-
ities at this exact spot, what facilities are missing in this area, is it possible to
implement stormwater management in these facilities? Here, the diverse group
of professionals contribute with their knowledge; the engineer could be looking
in volumes and technical qualities, while the architect might see possibilities for
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Generic Description of the Design Process
31
added value in these technical installations.
3.2.2.3
Design Solutions
When the ideas for each solution are formed, a more or less detailed design
should be performed. First it is important to design the solutions so it is possible
to estimate water handling volumes and overall economy. In this phase it is
relevant to use drawing tools, and calculate technical elements of the design
such as inltration degree, pump choices, etc.
3.2.2.4
Estimate Consequences
Both the positive and negative consequences of the new implementations are
identied and discussed.
Could the negative consequences be avoided?
Are
the positive consequences as imagined or do the solutions perform better than
expected? If the consequences does not live up to the expectations, iterations
reforming the project are done before the more thorough evaluation in the third
phase.
3.2.2.5
2nd Phase Tools
In the second phase various tools are also used.
These tools are shown in
the right column in gure 3.8. From the fth step is now introduced printed
maps as a tool. This seems trivial, but when the team consists of people from
dierent elds, idea development through discussions and visual communication
has potential of producing very good results.
Sketching and drawing are tools used a lot in this phase. Especially idea devel-
opment in step 6 and 7 is linked with sketching, where it is an important tool
for visual communication. Sketching can be done both with the use of digital
tools such as SketchUp. When detailing the design, digital tools are helpful.
SketchUp was used in this project, since it works well for designs with low level
of detail. When going into more details, other programs could be used.
Some tools from rst phase are continuously being used. Where the reference
model were calculated before in both MIKE Flood and SCALGO, new imple-
mentations can be done in this phase. Here the two tools are combined. A
feature in SCALGO is correction of terrain. This is not easy to do in ordi-
nary GIS programs, but SCALGO has made it very simple and user friendly.
==PAGE:44==
32
Results
The corrections are made roughly, and is therefore simplied geometries. This
is however sucient for ood calculations, since they already happens with a
rough level of detail due to the size of the overall water balance. When the
corrections are done in SCALGO it is possible to run the BlueSpot and ow
accumulation analysis, but it is also possible to export the new terrain model
and import it into for example MIKE Flood, where more detailed analysis can
be done.
3.2.3
3rd Phase - Evaluation
The third phase is the evaluation phase. Here it is assessed whether the individ-
ual implementation and the context of implementations performs satisfactorily.
This is done by step 9, where evaluation criteria is found and performed, and
step 10, where the conclusion is made of either accepting the case or reworking
it.
Figure 3.9: 3rd phase of the design process with steps 9 and 10, where the
implemented solutions and overall project is evaluated.
Lastly
it is determined whether the result is good enough or changes,
additions or removals of solutions should be done.
==PAGE:45==
3.2 Generic Description of the Design Process
33
3.2.3.1
Perform Evaluation of the Design
Performing the evaluation, comparable evaluation criteria are rstly set up with
basis in the goals and framework from rst phase. They should include a specic
level of water management, an economic frame, and some desires of added value
to the solution areas. When the criteria are identied, they are performed. It is
a good idea to develop the criteria as indicators that are easy for politicians and
other non-technical audience to understand. For instance the project could be
supported with six evaluation criteria, which could be 1) water handling ability,
2) economy, 3) sustainability, 4) increased quality of life, 5) user involvement
and 6) increased biodiversity and biomass in the city. Along with the indicators
an acceptance level should be found. The indicators can be illustrated with a
spiderweb diagram showing the numbers from a minimum level to a maximum
level. Such a spiderweb is developed in this work, and is shown in gure 3.35.
It is a possibility to link the project to DGNB4 certication for urban develop-
ment along with the project specic evaluation. Green Building Council Den-
mark has developed an evaluation matrix in the "Miniguide for DGNB in Urban
Districts" with 45 evaluation criteria in ve theme groups and thirteen criteria
groups (Green Building Council Denmark, 2016). The guide presents how to
evaluate on the individual criteria and lastly a weightings for each of them. The
evaluation criteria can be seen in gure 3.10, and can also contribute with an
understanding if which sustainability indicators the focus is on.
DGNB certication should only act as a contributing evaluation form, since it
evaluates on general goals of sustainability, thus the goals for the project itself
is not necessarily met. The Green Building Council Denmark can be seen as one
stakeholder and the evaluation is formed with the interest of the organization.
However, the board of directors consist of both engineers, researchers, architects
and private and public contractors, which forties the voice of the organization,
since dierent stakeholders have agreed on the content.
3.2.3.2
Decide Whether the Design Performs Satisfactory
In the last step of the design process, it is determined whether all goals are met.
If they are, the project is ready to be constructed. Otherwise something has
to be changed. This step appear both in the small decision-makings and as a
closing process, where the evaluation is done in detail.
4Deutsche Gesellschaft für Nachhaltiges Bauen - a non-prot organization performing sus-
tainability certication standards on buildings and urban districts.
==PAGE:46==
34
Results
Figure 3.10: The evaluation criteria matrix from the DGNB certication of
urban areas (Green Building Council Denmark, 2016). 45 eval-
uation criteria has been formed under the theme groups "En-
vironmental Quality", "Economic Quality", "Socio-Cultural and
Functional Quality", "Technical Quality", and "Process Qual-
ity". The illustration is in Danish.
==PAGE:47==
3.2 Generic Description of the Design Process
35
3.2.3.3
3rd Phase Tools
The most important tools in this phase are interdisciplinary discussions to
achieve evaluation indicators and calculations of them. Therefore no specic
new programs are used for the phase. All analysis tools should possibly be used
by performing a nal simulation, calculation or model. Also, the graphical pre-
sentation is essential here, since the results of the evaluation most likely is being
presented to decision-makers. The spiderweb diagram can be performed in a
spreadsheet or by hand.
==PAGE:48==
36
Results
3.3
Application of the Design Process in Bud-
dinge
In the following the design process is applied on a case study in the catchment
area sloping down to the depression by Buddinge Station. By the station, Bud-
dingevej crosses under the railroad, and the road is ooded under even rather
small rain showers (The cloudburst on september 4th, 20155 had a rain depth of
17.8 mm, and ooded the station as it can be seen in gure 3.13). Buddingevej
is a busy road, thus blocking of it creates issues. This issue must be solved,
and since a light rail is being constructed in the area in the near future, it is
the right time to act. This is consistent with the plans of the municipality, who
runs projects parallel with this work.
Figure 3.11: An overview of the project site. In the top middle the station
is found, where Buddingevej reaches from north towards south,
ending in the roundabout. To the west of Buddingevej the indus-
trial area of Buddinge is located, and to the right the city hall
park, church, city hall and library is situated.
In the following the case is elaborated through the steps of the design process,
which is explained in section 3.2.
This underlines the extent of the design
process, and its capability to include all phases of the integrated design process
in urban stormwater management. Most eort was put into technical research,
due to the group composition of two engineers, but also architectural and process
values has been included. The architectural values are rstly expressed in the
idea catalog, and later through the idea development and design, whilst the
5www.klimatilpasning.dk/vaerktoejer/ekstremnedboer.aspx
==PAGE:49==
3.3 Application of the Design Process in Buddinge
37
process is shown throughout all of the thesis, where it is a main result itself.
3.3.1
1st Phase - Research
As illustrated on gure 3.5 on page 25, in rst phase research and identication of
goal and framework is performed. In this case the research is done by developing
an idea catalog and produce relevant maps in respect to stormwater. The goal
and framework is formed in the light of this research.
3.3.1.1
Understand the Challenge
In the understanding of the challenge, research was done, and to understand the
extent of possible implementation options, an idea catalog was produced.
Idea Catalog
The idea catalog includes a quick introduction to the challenge, explains known
implementation options and lastly concludes with some examples from real life.
The idea catalog is enclosed in appendix A, and is the main product of the
rst phase. The scale of the solutions in the catalog span from solutions imple-
mentable in private gardens to solutions only implementable in larger contexts.
To separate and consider the individual solutions, they are rated in nine dier-
ent categories - ve by applying labels and four by scoring with numbers. The
categories of the ve labels are Concept, Scale, Surface Type, Extra Qual-
ities, and Rain Intensity, while the four numeric scores are in the categories
Need of Cleaning, Operation Demand, Economy and Life Expectancy".
They are all explained in the catalog.
The solutions count the following, and can be studied in the idea catalog:
• Green Roofs
• Pervious Pavement
• Rain Barrels
• Cisterns
• Fascines
• Rain Gardens
==PAGE:50==
38
Results
Figure 3.12: The idea catalog, which can be found in appendix A.
• Rainwater Rills
• Swales
• Terrain Correction
• Detention Ponds
• Strategic Use of Roads
• Increasing Biomass
As a conclusion of the idea catalog, it is stated that only a combination of mul-
tiple solutions will solve stormwater. Furthermore, the challenge with extreme
rain is only solved satisfactorily when the surface area is not solely used for
stormwater management - thus multifunctional implementations are desirable.
As an incentive of this argument, ve successful examples are presented.
• Tåsinge Square, Copenhagen Ø, DK
• Gladsaxe Stadium, Gladsaxe, DK
• Rabalderparken, Roskilde, DK
• Augustenborg, Malmö, SV
• Benthemplein Watersquare, Rotterdam, NL
==PAGE:51==
3.3 Application of the Design Process in Buddinge
39
Most of these examples exemplies that a coherent landscape with both wa-
ter transporting elements and especially large detention basins with multiple
purposes is the best way handle the intense stormwater problematics and simul-
taneously create new attractive urban spaces. It was found in economic inves-
tigations that, for Gladsaxe Stadium, an expansion of the sewer system would
cost 102 m DKK while the implemented new landscape not only costed 29 m
DKK less, but also gave extra value to the citizens in new activities (VandPlus,
2015).
3.3.1.2
Understand the Area: Buddinge Station
Figure 3.13: Pictures from the stormwater event the 4th of September 2015.
a) The Station from the south where people and vehicles are
observed continuing their travel through the ood. b) Bus pas-
sengers waiting at the bench. c) A view towards the domicile of
MOE, where people also cross the water volumes. d) A picture
from the inside of the station, where train passengers are stuck
on the stairs. a) and b) taken by Helena Larsen, c) by Signe
Staubo Sørensen and d) by Jens Elming.
Challenges are observed with water collecting on the road by Buddinge Sta-
==PAGE:52==
40
Results
tion when intense rain showers happen. The latest large ood observed was in
September 2015, where water was pushed up the manholes. In this situation a
particular severe situation occurs, since the rainwater is mixed with wastewa-
ter, posing a health risk. Since Buddinge Station is a trac hub, both for cars,
public transportation, cyclists and pedestrians, people tend to go through the
water to get to their destination. This is for example seen on the pictures from
the event at gure 3.13.
Municipal Strategy
Gladsaxe Municipality has made a prioritization plan (Gladsaxe Municipality,
2014b), where they argue for which problems in the municipality is most severe.
Here, Buddinge is marked as the second most important area of 13 to act in. The
prioritization is found by using seven criteria, 1) cost eciency, 2) improvement
of nature quality, 3) common or separate sewer system, 4) trac key point,
5) green areas, 6) plan for physical change of area and 7) planned projects by
Nordvand (the utility company in the area).
Buddinge scores high, since it
is a trac key point and that future plans are made for the light rail going
through Gladsaxe, which means that the area are to be transformed regardless.
In the climate adaptation plan, the municipality concludes that the problematic
areas of Buddinge are Buddinge station, Buddinge industrial area, Buddinge
square and houses along Klausdalsbrovej (between Buddinge Industrial Area
and Station Area) (Gladsaxe Municipality, 2014a). Furthermore, the climate
adaptation plan underlines that: 1) trac issues occur by the roundabout, 2)
the area consists of many green areas suitable for inltration, 3) the City Hall
Park, the horseshoe building, the roundabout and areas by the Vadgård School
is expected to be used for detention basins and 4) that a strategy could be to
implement rain gardens along roads to hold back the water until space is created
in the sewers.
As Buddinge and Bagsværd are the two highest prioritized areas of Gladsaxe,
detailed stormwater management plans are currently being produced. The main
ideas are visualized on the masterplan in gure 3.14, where the idea is to create
multifunctional detention basins to which stormwater and green roads lead to.
A project committee has been formed with the purpose of integrating dierent
parameters in the climate adaptation design process.
Five key elements are
identied: 1) Creating and maintaining a green city center, 2) securing smart
trac links, 3) improving the city life, 4) taking advantage of the new light
rail, and 5) handle rain water from intense rain events (Gladsaxe Municipality,
2015a). The largest detention basin will be placed in the city hall park. In a
100 years rain event it should be dimensioned to hold approximately 12,000 m3
collected in most of the catchment area.
Existing Spatial Material
==PAGE:53==
3.3 Application of the Design Process in Buddinge
41
Figure 3.14: The masterplan produced for Buddinge Catchment area. It fea-
tures 4 principles: Green roads where water is delayed in green
implementations, stormwater roads transporting water to larger
basins, detention areas where water can be temporary stored and
solutions on common and private cadastres where a larger eort
is put into private stakeholders implementing solutions. This ef-
fort is made north of the railroad. Basins are placed in the city
hall park, in the courtyard of the horseshoe, in the industrial
area, and the existing basin by the railroad is used. (Gladsaxe
Municipality, 2014a)
==PAGE:54==
42
Results
Plenty of material have already been produced, and among this material is spa-
tial analysis through maps with layers communicating spatial data. In 2013 The
Danish Agency for Data Supply and Streamlining opened access for basic data,
including for example mapping data and the digital terrain model of Denmark6.
Maps explained in the following can be found in appendix C.
Along with the release of data municipalities launched web maps with these
information as well as location of key points in the city, indication of areas
belonging to specic municipal or district plans and any spatial data the mu-
nicipality wants to share with citizens and business partners. Gladsaxe Munic-
ipality, where the catchment area to Buddinge Station is positioned, has also
developed a web map on http://webkort.gladsaxe.dk.
The map features
technical data in relation to climate adaptation planning, which is presented
below. The Gladsaxe web maps appear in the appendix under 1a to 1f and are
explained below, numbered with the map reference.
Sewerage Principles (1a).
This map shows the overall sewerage principle, if
there is a risk of polluted soil, where inltration of rainwater happens on own
cadastres, where the main sewer pipes are placed and where wastewater and
rainwater basins are placed. In Buddinge catchment area the sewer system is
common for wastewater and rainwater, meaning that the amount of water go-
ing to treatment plant is signicant larger than for areas with separate systems.
The methods of cleaning wastewater and rainwater are dierent, thus the mixed
waste- and rainwater is both hard to clean and of large volumes. If implement-
ing surface solutions for rainwater, less water is cleaned at the treatment plant,
and money and eort is saved. The map shows some polluted areas in rela-
tion with the industrial areas. This could mean that inltration is not optimal
here, but should be investigated in specic projects. Finally the maps shows
the Vadgårds basin north of the station and pumps placed by the basin, in a
triangular midpoint between some private gardens and where Stengårds Allé
crosses under the railroad.
Inltration Ability (1b). This map shows how well water inltrates into the
earth. This information can be used for which kinds of solutions to implement
in specic areas. Where the soil has high conductivity, solutions based on in-
ltration, as e.g.
fascines, pervious pavement and large terrain depressions,
are relevant. The categories on the map are vaguely dened ranging from well
suited over medium suited and poor suited to ill suited. This cannot be directly
translated to specic hydraulic conductivity numbers, but it could be assumed
that poor suited soil would be clayey soil, medium suited soil would be earthy
clay or silt, and well suited soil would be sand or gravel. There is however no
6https://www.hillerod.dk/kommunen/kommunen-i-udvikling/
digitale-kort-og-webkort/
==PAGE:55==
3.3 Application of the Design Process in Buddinge
43
proof for that, and an inltration test (Furesø Municipality, 2011) at the specic
site should always be performed before implementing any stormwater solutions
with inltration. None of the areas in the catchment area are ill suited for in-
ltration, but large areas are poor or medium suited for inltration. The city
hall park has medium suited soil and large areas, thus inltration basin would
be suitable.
Drainage coecients (1c). This map shows the demands to drainage on own
cadastre.
The drainage coecient is the number for how much rainwater is
allowed to lead in the sewers, where 1 is all and 0 is none. Generally for Gladsaxe
Municipality the coecient is 1
6 at private housing and varies through
1
10, 1
4, 1
3,
1
2, 2
3 and 3
4 in the rest. The uncertainty of these numbers are assumed high.
On the map it is clear that residential housing covers large areas, and it is
not possible to control all activities here. It was observed that the cadastre
of the domicile of MOE had a drainage coecient of 1
4, which is not possible
when looking at an aerial map. After asking the municipality it was found that
they constructed a tank for detention of water corresponding to the demands.
This show that the demands are complied with in large new constructions, but
possibly not always for small one-family houses.
Public Functions (1d). This map features dierent public functions provided for
the citizens along with selected areas of special focus. Among the functions are
both playgrounds and outdoor ballgame elds, which could be target for climate
adaptation projects. The areas of special focus are areas the municipality has
extra focus on, and thereby possibly areas where they would like to improve the
city life.
District Plans (1e) and Municipality Plan (1f). District plans create the frame
around the detailed planning of a municipality. Demands to specic parts of
the city are described here. The map shows the identication of the district
plans. The Municipality plans are comparable with district plans, but work on
a higher and more strategic level.
In relation with the climate adaptation plan made by Gladsaxe Municipality,
they furthermore produced climate adaptation mapping. The mapping included
a ood map (2a), based on MIKE Flood calculations, a value map (2b), showing
an area's value and thereby the extent of damage a ood could cause, and a
combined map (2c) showing the economic risk in the areas. The largest economic
risks occurs by the station and in the industrial area. This is a clear result of
where companies are placed with buildings of high value, and where the oods
happens.
The web page www.klimatilpasning.dk features some useful maps under the
toolbox. Two of the tools er emphasized here, and the maps are numbered 3a
==PAGE:56==
44
Results
and 3b. The rst tool is Extreme Rainfall, where rain data for the last year
is available.
It features data on date, duration, intensity (both average and
maximum in time steps), return period, rain depth and classication. The data
will rst of all give an overview of how dierent the rain showers are. They
vary dierently on all parameters, thus it is hard to categorize the showers
with a single number. The map also features statistical data for return periods
at a specic weather station.
In the case of Buddinge, the weather station
30230 is closest and has the following precipitation depths for return periods:
10 years: 50.4 mm, 20 year: 56.6 mm, 50 years: 64.8 and 100 years: 71.1 mm.
These numbers are used in SCALGO modelling.
The eleventh tab features
a Municipality Map where it is shown which municipalities have nalized a
climate adaptation plan and which municipalities are included in the Flood
Directive, described in 3.1.4.1. Via the map the specic plans are available.
Both of these tools does not benet much by being mapped, and are rather
portals for retrieving the specic data and information.
A last map platform to mention is the stormwater prole on MiljøGIS de-
veloped by The Nature Agency at Ministry of the Environment and Food of
Denmark (The Danish Nature Agency, 2014). The map features stormwater
related data from all of Denmark - some related to sea level rising and some to
oods caused by heavy rain. Three of the maps are explained below, but the
map also features layers with animations on sea and stream level rising, ow
paths showing the largest natural streams on the landscape surface, value maps,
equal to map 2b, and coast oods.
The rst map is the groundwater map, where the present water table of the
groundwater is mapped together with three predictions for the future water
tables. As observed in map 4a the water table in Buddinge lies on dierent
levels between 0 m below the ground level in the swamp in the north-eastern
corner, to more than 10 m below the ground level in the south-eastern part of
the catchment area. It corresponds to the highest and lowest terrains in the area
which are shown in appendix D on map 1a and 1b. The prediction, featured in
map 4b, is of very small change and does not show a lowering of more than 1
m.
Under the rainfall tab, maps for the degree of impermeability are presented.
The impermeability is assumed on behalf of the land use of the map.
For
example road and parking surfaces have an impermeability degree of 70 %, a
building of 100 % whereas parks and green areas vary from 0 % to 50 %. The
degree of impermeability is relevant to estimate the runo from the surface. The
impermeability map of Buddinge is featured in map 4c, and when comparing
with the map of the countryside by Ganløse in map 4d it is obvious that much
more runo will occur in the dense city.
==PAGE:57==
3.3 Application of the Design Process in Buddinge
45
Another layer under the rainfall tab shows the depressions in the terrain, where
water ll up if no sewer system existed. This is also known as BlueSpot maps or
lavningskort in Danish, and for Buddinge it is found in map 4e. In an urban
context the BlueSpot maps will not necessarily show where the oods happen,
since the sewer system is the dominant mechanism here. However, it will tell
where the water collects, when the capacity of the sewer system is exceeded. In
the project area, the BlueSpot map shows collections of water primarily by the
station, as it is also experienced in real life. When the sewer exceed its capacity,
oods naturally happens in the lower lying spots.
The existing material is not always enough to help decision makers make deci-
sions, thus it can be helpful to produce maps specically for the project. The
maps will not only support decision-making but also communicate results. Bel-
low, some maps produced in the projects are explained.
Produced Spatial Material
The maps produced are found in appendix D and described below. The numbers
mentioned, correspond to the name in the appendix.
Terrain level maps (1a-1b) - with and without buildings. By showing the levels
of terrain, it can quickly be interpreted how the water naturally move, since it
will always ow to a lower place. On the maps, it can be seen, that the station
and surrounding areas are lower lying than the southern parts of the catchment
area. The maps were made in SCALGO.
Maps with BlueSpots and ow paths (2a-2f) (or ow accumulation) produced
in SCALGO. The ow paths show where the water streams adds up. This is
done by a simple algorithm, that calculates that each pixel in the map adds
up towards the level which is lower. In this way the water accumulates into
larger and larger streams. For this specic map, 1 ha of pixel accumulations are
the smallest streams shown, and thereby the map shows how the water would
naturally move on the surface of the terrain. It is important to mention, that
the terrain model could be termed a "glass-surface-model", since no inltration
into the ground or obstruction by smaller elements happen. In this way, the
model shows an overestimation of the ow in 100 % natural circumstances. The
six maps show ow paths and BlueSpots for six dierent rain intensities: 0, 25,
50, 57, 65, and 71. The last four corresponding to statistical return periods
for 10, 20, 50 and 100 years in the weather station closest to Buddinge Station
featured on map 3a in appendix C.
Combined maps (3a-3f, and an example in gure 3.15) with ow paths, and
catchment areas. The catchment areas are computed by the area which does
not ow to another BlueSpot. This means that for the lower rain depths (thus
==PAGE:58==
46
Results
return period), the catchment areas are smaller, while for more voluminous
rain, the catchment area is very large, and the all water overows the local
depressions and collect in the main depression, which in this case is the station.
The maps should be used carefully, since they do not illustrate the reality, due to
not including the mechanism of the sewer system. However, they can show the
natural movements, and if an area can be disconnected from the larger natural
system, it would also benet in the larger perspective. Since the model does
not take inltration and smaller obstacles into consideration it overestimate the
volumes, which means that smaller solutions than the ones modeled in SCALGO
could possibly have smaller volumes and still contribute to the plan. It should
also be noted, that long transportation of water could be challenging if not
closing o the manholes of the sewers.
Sewer system (4a). The sewer system is important for the occurrence of oods,
since the sewer system is the dominant water handling eect. On the map of
the sewer system, the catchment area is therefore divided into zones, or sewer
catchments, to show which areas belong to which sewer strings. The colors of
the maps show the averaged imperviousness. On the map the size of the pipes
are visualized by the thickness of the line. It can be seen, that the pipes are
connected with the waste water basin and then Vangederenden, one of the main
sewer strings in the larger system. This is also where the oods appear, and the
system here, with the basin and Vangederenden in combination, is overloaded.
MIKE model (4b).
On this map, the inputs to the MIKE Flood model are
shown. The area is divided into several small catchments, which are linked with
the sewer system and manholes. The model is explained in the parallel running
thesis by Åkerblom (2016).
MIKE Flood simulation results (gure 3.16 and larger in the appendix as map
4c). This map shows the simulated oods with a rain shower of 2 hours with
return period of 50 years. The parameters for the model are specied in the
framework in section 3.3.1.4. It is a result considered realistic on the basis of
long time development and justications. The map shows largest, unwanted
oods at the station (depths up to 43 cm), at the industrial area in Buddinge
(spread out with depths up to 20 cm), at and next to the road north of the
industrial area, Klausdalsbrovej (depths up to 54 cm), next to the city hall and
in several gardens spread out in the entire area. The volumes of oods in the
sewer catchments are calculated and illustrated on map 4d. They support the
real oods of Buddinge Station with a ood of 1150 m2. In map 4e the same
map is produced, but with solutions implementations. It is discussed in section
3.3.3.1.
Sketching Maps (5a). Some simple maps with the most remarkable objects in
the area were made to sketch on. Roads and buildings were included, which
==PAGE:59==
3.3 Application of the Design Process in Buddinge
47
Figure 3.15: The combined map with ow paths and catchments, in this case
with precipitation of 50 mm, corresponding to a rain shower with
return period of 10 years according to the "Extreme Rainfall"
map in Appendix C, map 3a.
==PAGE:60==
48
Results
Figure 3.16: The results from MIKE Flood for a return period of 50 years
and a duration of 2 hours. The oods appear by the station,
in the industrial area, at Klausdalsbrovej between the station
and industrial area, next to the city hall, and scattered in some
private gardens.
==PAGE:61==
3.3 Application of the Design Process in Buddinge
49
made it possible to quickly orient oneself on the map and sketch what was
wanted. This map was produced in QGIS with the TOP10DK data and formed
the basis of the solution map presented in section 3.3.2.1.
Overview of the area and sub-areas (6a-6m). These maps, which are presented
in the following section, were produced in QGIS featuring an aerial photo, drawn
polygons in functional color-codes showing the sub-areas, and labels with names.
Potential Solution Spots (7a). This map features the found potential solutions
spots, and is explained in section 3.3.2.1.
Description of Sub-Areas
Buddinge is part of Gladsaxe Municipality located in the north of the Greater
Copenhagen. The use of the area is mixed. It contains larger areas of private
houses, but also industry, public property and shopping areas. A railroad crosses
the area and forms a clear boundary between north and south. The railroad is
elevated, but not enough for roads to cross under, and all the crossing points
are therefore lowered, which creates a challenge under intense rain showers.
The area is separated into twelve sub-areas, which are explained below. The
separation is based on function and barriers which in this case are roads and
the railroad. The overview map of the sub-areas are showed at gure 3.17.
The four public areas, two industrial areas and six housing areas include:
1. The Station Area
2. The City Hall
3. Buddinge Center
4. Budding Public School
5. Buddinge Industrial Area
6. Søborg Industrial Area N
7. Housing Area NW
8. Housing Area NE
9. Housing Area E
10. Housing Area S
11. Housing Area SW
==PAGE:62==
50
Results
Figure 3.17: The twelve compartmentalized sub-areas of Buddinge catchment
area. They include four public areas, including the station area,
shops, the city hall, Buddinge Public school and other public
facilities, two industrial area, with private production and oces
for private companies, and six housing areas including primarily
housing, but also few public facilities.
==PAGE:63==
3.3 Application of the Design Process in Buddinge
51
12. Housing Area W
Station Area
Figure 3.18: The station area including both station, technical facilities, pri-
vate companies, institutions and housing.
The great mix of use in Buddinge is reected in the station area of 9.7 ha,
where both public property, housing as well as technical facilities and private
companies are found.
North of the railroad a large wastewater basin is found.
According to the
wastewater plan of Gladsaxe (Gladsaxe Municipality, 2015b), it was constructed
in 1932, renewed in 1975 and can contain 8100 m3 of water before it overows
to Vangederenden, which is the main wastewater pipe from the area. In re-
ality the basin might be able to contain up to 20000 m3 of water, but this is
uncertain. The basin handles rainwater and wastewater, and can therefore not
be utilized for recreational purposes. It should not be removed, since it serves
as an important storage before the water can t in the Vangederenden. On the
northern side if the railway a kindergarten, apartment buildings and a playing
eld are also found.
In the east of the area the road, Buddingevej, crosses under the railroad. Here
the entrance to the two-level station is found. Both pedestrian and vehicle trac
==PAGE:64==
52
Results
is hectic here, and it is obviously a trac-related issue when this key spot is
blocked by water. Since the ows of people and vehicle are strong in this area, a
large amount of space is used for roads, bus stops, bicycle parking and sidewalks.
The train station continues in a bus station on the southern side of it, where
the bus station ll up an area of 2300 m2. To the west of the bus station, a
4400 m2 parking lot is found.
South of the bus station are the newly constructed domicile of Moe A/S in-
cluding a supermarket in the ground oor. This construction ll up 4000 m2
of impermeable surface. Since there is a drainage coecient of 1
4 (see map 1c
in appendix C) they have established a detention tank holding the water back
and slowly discharging to the sewer system. In the middle of the sub-area a
residential area with both houses and apartment buildings is found. The last
element of the area is the private school, Kvikmarkens Privatskole, in the very
west of the area. It covers an area of 6000 m2, where approximately 1
3 is covered
by buildings and 2
3 is schoolyard.
City Hall
Figure 3.19: The area around the city hall includes a lot of green area, parking
lots and the characteristic buildings of Gladsaxe City Hall and
Buddinge Church.
This sub-area of 8.8 ha include park, parking lots, Buddinge Church, Gladsaxe
City Hall, Gladsaxe Library and a few residential buildings. Thereby it features
==PAGE:65==
3.3 Application of the Design Process in Buddinge
53
some of the area's most characteristic buildings - the church and the city hall.
The red brick city hall building was built through three stages. In 1937 the
south facing L-building was build, in 1953 the west wing was added and nally
in 1982 the north wing was added, together with a new city council hall 7. The
city hall is in preservation category 2 meaning it is highly worthy of preservation.
The church was built in 1967, in the same red brick style as the city hall, on
the spot of the old village pond 8. It has the highest class of preservation and
is therefore highly protected from action on the building.
Another characteristic feature in this sub-area is the large amount of non-build
surface. The city hall park covers roughly 2.5 ha, which is a bit more than 1
3 of
the area, while parking lots cover roughly 1 ha, 1
8 of the area. These areas have
great potential for terrain correction in development of detention volumes.
Buddinge Center
Figure 3.20: The shopping center of Buddinge, primarily featuring parking
lots, stores and apartments.
This area of 5.5 ha mainly contains apartment buildings with shops in the ground
oor. In connection with the shopping area, a large parking lot is placed in
7http://www.gladsaxe.dk/gladsaxebyarkiv/undervisning/glimt_af_buddinge_bys_
historie/gladsaxe_raadhus
8http://buddingekirke.dk/page/221/kirkens-historie
==PAGE:66==
54
Results
the western part, where green space is also established in connection with the
apartment buildings.
Buddinge Public School
Figure 3.21: In the eastern part of the catchment area, a public area is found,
including a large school and other public facilities.
In the eastern part of the catchment area numerous public facilities, and also
apartment buildings, are placed in a sub-area of 11.3 ha.
They count reha-
bilitation, prevention and tness centers plus public housing in the west and
Buddinge Public School and its many facilities in the east. Buddinge Public
School was built in 1980 and is by the way marked as an eco-school meaning
they consider environmental issues in the daily operation of a public school. In
connection with the school large unbuild areas are found. This primarily count
the 0.9 ha sports eld and 0.3 ha parking lot.
Buddinge Industrial Area and Søborg Industrial Area N
The two industrial areas are placed just south to the station and in the south
of the entire area.
Buddinge Industrial Area on 7.2 ha includes PET, The
Danish Security and Intelligence Service, production facilities (including the
large production hall of PMC Group) and oce buildings. The area primarily
features buildings, parking lots and a few green areas in connection with PET.
The western edge of the area is dened by a 2 m high sound barrier towards the
==PAGE:67==
3.3 Application of the Design Process in Buddinge
55
(a) Buddinge Industrial Area
(b) Søborg Industrial Area N
Figure 3.22: The two industrial sites of the catchment area featuring primarily
production and oce buildings.
==PAGE:68==
56
Results
private houses next to the area. Maps from the municipality, furthermore, show
that the ground might be polluted, which, in case of implementing stormwater
solutions, would have to be investigated.
The northern part of Søborg Industrial Area is included in Buddinge catchment
area. Søborg Industrial Area is a 165 ha large area with a high concentration of
production companies and oce buildings. This part of the area is roughly 30 ha
and includes a fast food restaurant closest to the roundabout, then apartment
buildings, then some dierent sized companies and lastly in the very south end
Tinghøj Water Reservoir. The water reservoir is placed on a high level, and
it thereby provides a stable source of drinking water with a satisfactory water
pressure 9.
Housing Areas of Buddinge
A large amount of the area in Buddinge is used for one-family houses. The
houses are typically one or two stories, some of them with basements. To the
houses a garden, terrace and parking spot are most often included. Although
the majority of these six sub-areas are houses, some other elements are also
placed between these.
In Housing Area NW the most particular other feature is the public school,
Vadgård Skole. It features two large sports elds. In Housing Area NE a stripe
of companies are placed in the middle. Attached to them, three large parking
lots are placed. To the east of this area, a power plant takes up a large area.
South of the railway, in Housing Area E, the local police department is situated.
In Housing Area S, the only addition to housing in the very eastern end is Søborg
Torv, featuring a small park, a few shops and services.
The largest connected area in Buddinge is the two housing areas SW and W.
SW features Gladsaxe High School, while W features a small shopping square
and the remarkable horseshoe housing cooperative.
In the cross of ve of the sub-areas the roundabout, the trac center point, is
found.
9http://www.dn.dk/Default.aspx?ID=2532
==PAGE:69==
3.3 Application of the Design Process in Buddinge
57
(a) Housing Area NW
(b) Housing Area NE
(c) Housing Area E
(d) Housing Area S
(e) Housing Area SW
(f) Housing Area W
Figure 3.23: The six housing areas consisting of primarily one-family houses
with other functions scattered around in the areas.
==PAGE:70==
58
Results
3.3.1.3
Form the Goal of the Project
After researching on challenges and possibilities, a project goal can be estab-
lished. It includes both technical details and visions.
The main goal of climate adaptation of the catchment area to Buddinge Station,
is to secure for rain events with a return period of 50 years or less. The most
critical ood area is the station, since it obstruct the trac on Buddingevej.
Because expansion of the sewer system is very costly, the challenge should pri-
marily be solved by surface solutions, handling the rainwater on the surface. In
this way the rainwater is either inltrated, held or transported on the surface.
These solutions demand space, but in urban renewal that the project causes,
multifunctionality and added value should be integrated in the solutions, thus
make the transformed space valuable.
3.3.1.4
Dene the Framework
The framework of the project is separated into the three categories mentioned
earlier: Technical, urban development and process parameters.
Technical parameters: The result of the project should rst of all secure Bud-
dingevej by the station for rain events with return period of 50 years. This is
due to the recommendations in EN 752:2008 (Dansk Standard, 2008), stating
that underpasses and underground railways should not be ooded more than
once every 50 years. However, if it is possible to partly secure for 100 years rain,
it would be preferable. This can be done by overow to an area, which is ideally
not ooded, but is the least costly to sacrice. As well as acceptance for return
period can be dened, the acceptance level can also be dened with maximum
depth of water on roads. This is the design criteria mentioned in the terms
of reference for a political group formed in Gladsaxe Municipality, where they
have dened an acceptance level of 10 cm water on the roads once every 100
year, which is assumed to be the maximum level where inltration of water into
the buildings is kept at a minimum (Vorgod Pedersen et al., 2015) . This is the
same acceptance level as Copenhagen Muncipality dimension for (Københavns
Kommune, 2012). The two demands are coupled in one acceptance level for this
project: The climate adaptation project should secure Buddinge Station for rain
events with return period of 50 years, and for 100 years, the depth of rain on the
road should not exceed 10 cm. To check the project through the development,
a MIKE Flood model is made by HÅ. For the modeling the settings of table
3.4 are set to create a valid basis for hydrological decision-making. The model
==PAGE:71==
3.3 Application of the Design Process in Buddinge
59
is described in the work by HÅ, and is developed in collaboration with Krüger
A/S (Åkerblom, 2016).
Precipitation model
Chicago Design Storm (CDS)
Rain duration
2 hours
Primary return period
50 years
Climate factor
1.0
Terrain model
DEM (edited for bridges and other obstacles)
Terrain model resolution
2.8 m x 2.8 m
Hydrological model
Model B (based on Horton's Equation)
Table 3.4: MIKE Flood model settings from the Master's thesis of Åkerblom
(2016).
In the existing plan by the municipality (Vorgod Pedersen et al., 2015), water
volumes are achieved by enlargement of the waste water basin north of the
station and establishment of a vast basin in the city hall park. However, it is
also stated that more spots divided in the area could be used, and it is mentioned
that it is a goal to hold back rain where it falls. In the light of that, this work
focus on implementations as locally as possible, maintaining a size which will
only result in relatively few actions.
Urban development parameters: It is stated by the political group of the actual
project, that the climate adaptation should be done through solutions creating
added value and supporting city life. The city should be elevated with green,
recreational areas with green-blue solutions of high quality, making rainwater
visible on the surface.
Along with the implementation of the actual project
a logical connection of the activities and facilities in the city should be paid
attention to. The area possibly look very dierent after climate adaptation and
the establishment of the light rail, thus it is a opportunity to create successful
ow patterns in the city. Lastly, attention should be given accessibility, with
not to steep slopes, which is a recurring issue when designing large volumes into
the urban context.
Process parameters: The process of the project should be performed as explained
in 3.2 with a project group working through three phases with a total of ten
steps. The economic responsibility is in the actual project divided with the util-
ity company handling the water related implementations, and the municipality
handling the added value and overall transformation of urban spaces.
It is a goal of the project to include relevant stakeholders in the process as much
as possible. The challenge is comprehensive, thus it is important to utilize as
much area as possible for implementation of stormwater solutions. This includes
the large residential areas, where a lot of unbuild space is found. Therefore, it
==PAGE:72==
60
Results
should be made benecial to home owners to participate in the common climate
adaptation strategy. In larger projects in public space, both neighbours and
citizens should be involved in the process. In this way the project would meet
the demands of the locals and give them a say in the development of their city.
As last goal of the project, Gladsaxe Municipality want to manifest themselves
as front runners in the eld of successful climate adaptation through green and
innovative development.
3.3.2
2nd Phase - Implementation
The second phase of the process consist of implementation of surface solutions.
3.3.2.1
Find Potential Solution Spots
The rst step of implementing solutions is to nd potential solution sites by
gathering the project group around a large map, pointing and attaching post-
its at all potential spots.
Figure 3.24: The working table through the location spotting, making use of
several maps and taking notes. The step can be a bit unstruc-
tured, but when discussing all kinds of ideas, creative, new and
innovative solutions might be developed.
==PAGE:73==
3.3 Application of the Design Process in Buddinge
61
In this case, the group consisted of the two engineering students and would
have beneted from members with more diverse background. An A2 map with
an aerial photograph, simulated oods and ow paths were printed and post-its
were put on all potential solution spots. Along the work both additional physical
and digital maps were used and notes were taken through the discussions. The
group found areas that were not researched, thus the step was repeated more
than once.
3.3.2.2
Reect on Each Solution
After a couple of repetitions of the previous step, the map in gure 3.25 was
achieved. It includes solutions of ve dierent categories: 1) Activity Zone, 2)
Recreational Zone, 3) Climate Parking, 4) Climate Gardens and 5) Stormwater
Roads. These ve categories, together with the combined one in the city hall
park, embrace the options researched in this work.
22 solution spots were identied, and are shown on gure 3.25. Volumes were
found with the help from SCALGO and estimations of what was possible.
SCALGO proved usable for concluding which areas could be caught in basins
implemented with the editing tool. A brief guide for using SCALGO is provided
in appendix B. Especially the playground showed to be suitable for collecting the
surface water from the local residential area. This solution furthermore showed
good results using MIKE Flood (Åkerblom, 2016), which was presumed to be
due to the vicinity to the station. The 22 implementations are listed in table 3.5,
and result in a total detention volume of 39305 m3. This is the full potential,
and screenings should be done to decide which solutions are most cost-eective,
manage the water best and creates the basis of the best life for citizens. Below,
the categories and their associated specic solution proposals are explained.
Activity Zone
Activity zones are areas transformed into places encouraging activity. The ac-
tivities can dier limitless, but successful examples can be seen in the Idea
Catalog in appendix A, where both Gladsaxe Stadium, Rabalderparken and
Benthemplein Watersquare act as good examples integrating sports eld, play-
grounds, hangout areas, skateboard tracks, etc in stormwater management plans.
The features are integrated in the detention basins. The activity zones can stand
alone or act as one activity among several, which makes it less notable in the
landscape. An example of an activity zone that could stand alone is the paddle
tennis eld by Gladsaxe Stadium. It is one of the most voluminous solution
types since it has vertical walls. For this particular solution, they chose a pad-
dle tennis eld with space for an audience, but another option is to make a
==PAGE:74==
62
Results
Figure 3.25: The map with the most promising spots to locate solutions.
The map features solutions in ve dierent categories: Activity
Zones, Recreational Zones, Climate Parking, Climate Gardens
and Stormwater Roads. A larger map can be seen in appendix
D, map 7a.
==PAGE:75==
3.3 Application of the Design Process in Buddinge
63
ID
Type*
Name
Volume [m3]
1
A
Kvikmarkens Skole (multi-eld)
700
2
A
Climate Playground
525
3
A
Vadgård Skole (sports eld)
2925
4
Re
Buddinge Industrial Area
2000
5
Re
The Horseshoe
1240
6
Re
The Roundabout
750
7
C
The City Hall Park
11100
8
P
Parking North
3100
9
P
Parking West (Small Shopping Square)
450
10
P
Bus Station
1175
11
P
Bicycle Parking by Buddinge Station
400
12
P
City Hall Parking West
810
13
P
City Hall Parking East
2250
14
P
Buddinge Center Parking
1400
15
P
Buddinge Public School Parking
1550
16
G
Climate Gardens North
2254
17
G
Climate Gardens East
1160
18
G
Climate Gardens South
1274
19
G
Climate Gardens West
3333
20
Ro
Kong Hans Allé
94
21
Ro
Snogegårdsvej
35
22
Ro
Klausdalsbrovej
780
Total Volume
39305
Table 3.5: The total volume of the 22 implementations. Not all of them should
be accomplished, and the total estimated detention volume is much
too large to handle the water volumes in large oods.* A: Activ-
ity Zone, Re: Recreational Zone, C: Combined Zone, P: Climate
Parking, G: Climate Gardens, and Ro: Stormwater Roads.
==PAGE:76==
64
Results
multi-eld, which is larger and supports other ball games as street basket, mini
football or street hockey. For a basketball eld (which is a rather small eld) of
28 m times 15 m, and with a depression into the ground of 1 m, the volume of
such a basin would be 420 m3
Figure 3.26: Inspiration for Activity Zones.
To the left is mood pictures
from the prestige project Benthemplein Watersquare in Rot-
terdam.
The square features facilities for action as well as
relaxation.
The three picures in the top and the diagram
in the middle is from Gladsaxe Stadium.
They have imple-
mented basins with very dierent added value.
Here is fea-
tured the hangout area "Girls Room", the paddle tennis eld
and the water playground.
Lastly in the bottom right cor-
ner, is the skateboard eld in Rabalderparken, Roskilde.
All
projects are explained in the Idea Catalog in appendix A.
(Sources: (VandPlus, 2015); http://landarchs.com/; https:
//realdania.dk/; http://www.fastcoexist.com/
In this case study, three possible activity zones are marked with purple on the
map in gure 3.25. The rst one could be implemented in collaboration with
the school Kvikmarkens Skole. They are situated in the depressed risk area,
and a solution here would handle some of the water which otherwise would go
into the overloaded wastewater basin. In the school yard a ball eld of 20 m
times 35 m is found. If this area was depressed 1 m it would create a basin of
700 m3. Alternatively the entire school yard could be transformed into a new
school yard with a climate adapting brand, but this would be costly, and the
depression of the ball eld would itself be sucient. The second activity zone is
the transformation of a small grass eld close to the station. This area includes
the police station and a residential area. As seen on the existing map 1d with
==PAGE:77==
3.3 Application of the Design Process in Buddinge
65
local activities in appendix C, no playgrounds are placed particularly near this
area.
Therefore a playground could be a boost of the area for families.
As
also performed by Gladsaxe Stadium, a water playground could be a possibility.
The playground could include dierent basins, pumps and other water features,
but should also be usable and fun in dry periods. Therefore an underground
water tank could be part of the installation. The area is 30 m times 35 m, and
with an assumed average depth of 0.5 m, the volume of the climate playground
would be 525 m3. The third activity area is the sports eld by the public school
Vadgårds Skole. For the sports life in the city, the elds should be maintained
as close to the condition they are in at the moment, but it is not a signicant
sacrice if they are ooded up to 48 hours after the rain event. The areas of
the two elds are large (12150 m2 and 5850 m2), thus a small level dierence
create large volumes. However, especially the northern eld is elevated, and the
level of eld should logically be lower than the surroundings for the water to
ow there. Since no signicant oods appear in the north-western part of the
catchment area, no large changes in this area would be cost-eective, but would
reduce the burden on the wastewater basin. Because of the insignicant need
for action in this area, a depression of 0.5 m of the southern eld is suggested.
That would create a volume of 2925 m3.
Recreational Zone
Recreational Zones are alike Activity Zones, but the activating elements are ex-
changed with scenic and calming features with dierent planting combinations,
water streams, etc.. The Recreational Zones are well suited in parks, where
people go to relax, or as complimentary elements in working environments.
The last mentioned eect in the precious, is the desired function in Buddinge
industrial area. The site is dominated by oces and a few production facilities.
Thus, many people come to work in the area. The area, however is characterized
by functional elements with concrete and asphalt surfaces. Managing rainwater
by introducing green belts and small green spaces will have the double impact by
handling rainwater and improving the area for the employees with recreational
quality. It is important to keep the functional layout and a screening of possibil-
ities in the area therefore resulted in a total of 4000 m2, where solutions could
be implemented in an averaged depth of 0.5 m. This result in a total volume
of 2000 m3. One of the most remarkable buildings in the area is the horseshoe,
a cooperative housing association. The horseshoe creates a boundary around a
green area of 6200 m2. This area could be depressed with an average of 0.2 m
with the implementation of dierent surface elements and possibly fascines. It
would create a volume of 1240 m3. The roundabout in the center of the area is
at the moment covered with grass. It is 1500 m2, and only serves as the center
of the trac nerve in the area. It is not accessible and could serve as a detention
basin. Fences towards the road should be established to prevent car accident.
==PAGE:78==
66
Results
Figure 3.27: Examples of good practice integrating recreational features in
stormwater management projects.
The two top left pictures
and the bottom left diagram are from the project, "Tåsinge
Square", where they successfully collect rainwater from the sur-
rounding area in rain beds.
The top left picture is from the
latest cloudburst June 17th, 2016, where the largest rain gar-
den worked as intended. To the right are some details on rain-
water rills in Augusteborg in Malmö.
Both projects are ex-
plained in the Idea Catalog in appendix A. (Sources:
GHB
Landskabsarkitekter a/s on https://www.facebook.com; http:
//klimakvarter.dk/projekt/tasinge-plads/; (Clemensen &
Gade, 2013)
The ow path maps in 2a-3f in appendix D show that much of the rain ows
to the roads, thus the rain water from the south would pass the roundabout. If
the roundabout is depressed 1 m, a volume of 1500 m3 is created. For the city
hall park, the possibilities of creating an interesting park with both recreational
and activating values are numerous. Therefore a combined implementation is
proposed here. The area is 11.1 ha large, thus a small depth makes a large
dierence. By creating dierent features with an average depth of only 0.1 m,
the volume would be 11100 m3, which is approximately the volume the mu-
nicipality has plans on detaining (12000 m3, see section 3.3.1.2). However, this
basin would be located very centrally, thus the water from the entire project site
would be dicult to transport to the basin. Therefore less voluminous solutions,
possibly handling water from the southern area, could be a better solution.
Climate Parking
==PAGE:79==
3.3 Application of the Design Process in Buddinge
67
The concept of Climate Parking is to exploit the large spaces in the city used
for parking, for stormwater management. The parking lots are areas in the city
where the ow of people is continuous, but longer stays are not seen. The site
is therefore not necessary to visit under extreme rain, and the space could be
used for detention of rainwater. Some demands should be followed in respect to
accessibility and it should be a goal to keep the same amount of parking spaces.
This is possible through the model developed for dierentiated ood intensity,
explained in the next section 3.3.2.3. In short, the model includes three depths,
deepest in the rain beds between parking spaces, handling most rain showers,
second deepest on the maneuver area and lowest the specic parking spaces.
For the following potential solution spots, the average depth of the dierentiated
designs is set to be 0.25 m, based on the design of the parking lot in the following
section, and 0.5 m for an evenly sunken parking lot.
Figure 3.28: Dierent kinds of rain gardens that could be implemented in
parking areas.
The pictures all come from the "San Mateo
County Sustainable Green Streets and Parking Lots Design
Guidebook" by Perry & Dusenbury (2009), where many handy
suggestions for rainwater handling in road and parking contexts
are presented.
As it was seen in gure 3.25 and table 3.5 eight parking lots are pointed out
to be possible Climate Parking. Initially the parking lots 9, 10, 12, and 14 are
appointed for dierentiated stormwater management, meaning they will have
an average depth of 0.25 m. Parking lots 8, 13, and 15 will have even ground
and can have an average depth of 0.5 m. Lastly, parking 11 is in a category for
itself as bicycle parking, but an averaged depth of 0.5 m is assumed. In table
3.6 the areas, depths and volumes of the parking lots are listed.
==PAGE:80==
68
Results
ID
Name
Area [m2]
Depth [m]
Volume [m3]
8
Parking North
6200
0.5
3100
9
Parking West
1800
0.25
450
10
Bus Station
4700
0.25
1175
11
Bicycle Parking
800
0.5
400
12
City Hall Parking West
3240
0.25
810
13
City Hall Parking East
4500
0.5
2250
14
Buddinge Center Parking
5600
0.25
1400
15
Buddinge Public School
3100
0.5
1550
Table 3.6: Measures for Climate Parking implementation. The area is mea-
sured at http://webkort.gladsaxe.dk/, and depth assumed from
the design of the dierentiated parking lot by the city hall in section
3.3.2.3.
Climate Gardens
A large area of the project site is settled with one-family houses, which corre-
sponding to many districts in Denmark. Therefore, there is large potential in
forming a concept for stormwater management in these kinds of areas. It is seen
on the aerial photograph, that many of the houses in this area are positioned
by the road, with gardens behind the houses. A few exceptions are made, when
plots are partitioned and houses built in the backyards. The large unbuilt areas
could possibly be used for common stormwater implementation by strategically
depressing the areas where backyards meet. In gure 3.29 a potential triangular
area in the catchment is shown, which could be depressed and act as a deten-
tion basin - either wet, with a small pond, or dry, with grass and water streams
leading to it.
The challenge is of course that the potential area is owned by many house owners,
and that they must all agree on the implementations. Therefore, these processes
should always include the owners, to meet their wishes and educate them in the
benet of common stormwater solutions. One of the benets are that if the
houses are exposed for oods, it is much more cost-eective to keep the water
in the backyards. The challenge is that often, few houses in terrain depressions
are exposed to oods, while the owners with houses on the elevated terrain does
not have any incentive of acting due to ood of their houses. Another benet is,
however, that the implementation could give added value. Perhaps a pond in the
backyard could be attractive for some, as long as it does not take up too much
of the plot. Another possibility is for the municipality to pay for a depression of
the grass elds in the backyards. In this way the building owners have neither
spent money, nor lost plot area. Lastly, economic incentives could make more
house owners interested giving them direct savings. All these thoughts should be
==PAGE:81==
3.3 Application of the Design Process in Buddinge
69
Figure 3.29: Inspirational pictures for implementation of Climate Gardens.
To the left is an aerial photograph of a triangular plot on the
project site, where a potential Climate Garden could be imple-
mented in the middle, only taking up little space of each back-
yard. Next to the aerial photograph in the top is an example
of a voluminous swale. Obviously it takes up space and creates
a barrier, but could be a solution as a depression in the back-
yard. Next, is a water rill, created with natural elements, which
could lead water from the cadastre to the common detention area.
Lastly in the bottom of the collage, is a large detention pond. It is
probably too large for as dense areas as Buddinge, but a smaller
variant could give an added recreational value. (Sources: https:
//www.google.dk/; http://www.fairfaxcounty.gov/; http:
//www.gladsaxe.dk/; http://www.programmed.com.au/)
discussed in the project group and a concept could be formed. The uncertainty
of the concept is signicant, since dierent owners' associations would take the
project in dierent directions. Common for all these kinds of projects should be
that the municipality should oer advise and possibly economic subsidy.
The volume for Climate Gardens were calculated by summing the areas of the
light green polygons in each of the four areas in gure 3.25. The map shows
the maximal potential, and because the implementation needs a large eort and
would fail in many of the cases, it is assumed that only 10 % of the potential
is possible to implement. The average depth of the implementations is set to
be 0.5 m. These calculations result in a potential volume of 2254 m3 in the
northern area, 1160 m3 in the eastern area, 1274 m3 in the southern area and
nally 3333 m3 in the western area. The numbers rely on many assumptions,
==PAGE:82==
70
Results
and the numbers are therefore approximate.
Stormwater Roads
Stormwater Roads are roads with stormwater facilities along the road. It can
both be elongated beds along the entire or large parts of the road or single
beds. Elongated beds work well for transporting water, but require wide roads,
while single beds can act as rain gardens and road chicane at the same time.
The largest volumes are created with swales along the roads. However, this is
not always possible as it requires space. The swales also have the benet that
they can transport water to larger detention basins. If wanting to utilize the
full volume of swales at a steep slope, they should be separated into smaller
volumes with overow to the next volume. These are called cascades, and can
be seen in both gure 3.28 and 3.30.
Figure 3.30: Dierent examples of implementation of solutions along the road.
To the left a combination of a swale and a raingarden is seen, and
in the top middle, the concept of swales are sketched. In the top
right is an example of a water stair with separated levels, which
is particular smart in areas with steep terrain.
Lastly, in the
bottom is a sketch of the project at Kong Hans Allé in the north of
the project site. (Sources: http://www.svrdesign.com/; http:
//www.susdrain.org/; http://www.nbwla.com/; http://www.
gladsaxe.dk/)
The potential volume of the implementations in this project, is calculated with
measurement on the webmap (http://webkort.gladsaxe.dk/).
Since both
beds and swales are elongated, the features cannot be very deep. An average
depth of 0.25 m is assumed.
==PAGE:83==
3.3 Application of the Design Process in Buddinge
71
At Kong Hans Allé by solution number 20, an actual project is underway with
road beds. The straight road is passing a school, and the municipality wanted
to moderate the trac. The utility company seized the opportunity to integrate
stormwater features in existing plans. In gure 3.30, a sketch from the project is
seen. It shows the western end of the road, and the implementation is assumed
repeated two times and mirrored on the eastern side of the school. This result
in 8 road beds and 16 corner beds. The road beds are measured to be approxi-
mately 35 m2 and the corner beds to be 6 m2. With an average depth of 0.25 m,
the total volume of the implementation is 94 m3. At the continuation of Kong
Hans Allé, Snogegårdsvej, solution number 21, oods have been experienced on
the road, and in a depression in backyards to some row houses (see map 4c in
appendix D). The ood in the backyards are assumed on purpose, while the
ood on the road possibly could be avoided by continuing the road beds from
Kong Hans Allé. Four road beds of 35 m2 are placed, creating a volume of 35
m3. Between the industrial area and station a lot of oods are identied in the
ood map in appendix D. To not ood valuable areas, the Klausdalsbrovej is
assigned an overow road. With an area of 3900 m2 a depth of 20 cm creates a
volume of 780 m3.
3.3.2.3
Design Solutions
After analyzing and reecting on the possible solutions to implement, some
solutions are selected for design. Six implementations were chosen, and for this
project the parking lot west for the city hall was designed.
Based on the original distribution of parking spaces the parking lot is redesigned
for stormwater management.
It is an important objective to keep the same
number of parking spaces as in the original layout. The concept is to create
dierentiated stormwater management where rain from the most frequent events
go to the least used areas, whereas the very rare events will ll the whole parking
lot. The intention is therefore to lead rain of up to 20 years return period in
the rain gardens between the parking spaces, ood the maneuver area with rain
of up to 50 years return period and ood the whole parking lot when larger
showers appear. In this way the beds will be watered whenever it rains and cars
will only be damaged very rarely. The layout of the parking lot is featured in
gure 3.31.
The beds should be constructed with vertical walls allowing as big a volume of
water as possible. With slopes on the lot the water is led to the western end of
the beds. Through holes in the frame of the bed, the water runs into the bigger
rain gardens at the entrances in the eastern part of the lot. Before the long
beds an oil separator is placed and through the long beds the water is further
==PAGE:84==
72
Results
Figure 3.31: Concept of the rainwater ow at the parking lot by the City Hall.
By choosing slopes of the maneuver area, the water is guided
through the water beds and to rain gardens.
==PAGE:85==
3.3 Application of the Design Process in Buddinge
73
cleaned when it meets the surfaces of gravel and vegetation. From the beds, the
water inltrates with an overow to the sewers. The technique of the parking
lot is therefore to delay and inltrate the water to the ground.
The design parameters of the parking lot are the following:
• Rain gardens dimensioned to 20 years rain.
• Maneuver area dimensioned to 50 years rain.
• Entire parking lot dimensioned to 100 years rain.
• Cars are in rare instances allowed ooded up to 0.3 m.
• Steepest slopes should be 1:10 = 5.7 degrees according to accessibility
demands on level equalization. On the parking spaces the maximum slope
should be 1:40 = 1.4 degrees (SBi, 2013).
• Not more than 0.2 m of water should cover the beds in the frequent rain
events, since it should stream elsewhere within two days avoid mosquito
maggots (Københavns Kommune, 2011).
This solution allow for as little change in function and existing layout as possible.
In gure 3.32 an aerial photograph with local terrain levels is used as the basis
of the design. By elevating the ground under the yellow lines, the water is kept
at the parking lot, and by digging out under the blue lines, between the parking
lots, rain beds can be established.
The concept of the dierentiated parking lot can be implemented in varied
layouts. It is possible to place crossing paths on the long beds allowing better
mobility for the users or even to place paths on the beds avoiding pedestrians on
the maneuver area. If this would be the case, the sacrice would in all probability
be that the water would not be as visible and vegetation being limited. Another
redesign could be keeping the maneuver area and parking space in the same level.
This would result in a larger risk of ooding cars, but also a larger volume and
less dierence in level (due to accessibility). This is the model proposed for the
parking lots with a depth of 0.5 in the previous section.
For the design of the Activity Zones and Recreational Zones as well as the Cli-
mate Gardens and Stormwater Roads, the design methods are slightly dierent.
For the three rst, the users should be involved in the designing of the solutions
to ensure a valuable implementation used by the citizens.
==PAGE:86==
74
Results
Figure 3.32: Map of the parking lot west of the city hall with line indication
of depressed and elevated areas.
==PAGE:87==
3.3 Application of the Design Process in Buddinge
75
3.3.2.4
Estimate Consequences
After the design of the selected solutions has been performed by single or few
group members, they should be discussed in plenum through direct positive
and negative consequences of the designs. The solutions are examined with the
perspective of the entire project group and obvious disadvantages or advantages,
that some of the group members sees instantly, but the one performing the design
was not aware of, are pointed out and possibly changed through an iteration of
second phase.
Due to time constraints and group size, this step was not performed for this
specic project.
==PAGE:88==
76
Results
3.3.3
3rd Phase - Evaluation
In the third phase a more thorough evaluation is performed than for the last
step in second phase. Not more than the stormwater measure was investigated
in this project. The evaluation steps are, together with the potential solution
ndings and idea development, where the knowledge and dynamics from the in-
terdisciplinary group shines, since the broadest perspective is presented through
more stakeholders.
3.3.3.1
Perform Evaluation of the Design
The goal and framework from the rst phase are transformed into an evaluation
criteria. For this project the goals, transformed into criteria, were the following
nine:
1. Water Handling: Securing Buddinge Station from oods with a depth of
more than 10 cm in a 100 years rain event - The evaluation is done through
implementation of solutions in the MIKE Flood model.
2. Local Handling: Implementing several solutions, spread out in the catch-
ment area, to handle water locally - An evaluation criteria could be made
stating how spread out the solutions are.
3. Added Value: The solutions should create added value and support city
life - The evaluation criteria could be developed through questionnaire.
4. Green Value: The city should be elevated with green, recreational areas -
An evaluation criteria could combine the added plant species and added
biomass in a criteria.
5. Blue Value: Green-blue solutions of high quality making rainwater visible
on the surface - The evaluation could be made on how many water elements
are visible in the urban context.
6. Connecting Value: Logical connection of the activities and facilities in the
city - This evaluation could assess whether the implementation count in
better pedestrian network of the city.
7. Economy: The economy is split between utility company and municipality
- Evaluation on, if the project meets the budget.
8. Project Group: The process of the project should be conducted as ex-
plained in this work - Evaluation on how diverse the group was composed,
==PAGE:89==
3.3 Application of the Design Process in Buddinge
77
how well the work followed the process, and if new steps were added or
omitted in the process.
9. Branding: Gladsaxe Municipality want to manifest themselves as front
runners in the eld of successful climate adaptation - How exemplary does
the implementations work, and what is the branding eciency?
For the water handing ability, six chosen solutions were modeled in MIKE Flood.
The process of the modeling is described in the thesis by Åkerblom (2016). The
six chosen solutions are listed in table 3.7, where also the modeled volumes are
presented.
ID
Name
Volume [m3]
2
Climate Playground
870
4
Buddinge Industrial Area
570
6
The Roundabout
350
10
Bus Station
100
12
City Hall Parking West
810
14
Buddinge Center Parking
1100
Table 3.7: The selected solutions and the modeled volume for the MIKE model
(Åkerblom, 2016).
In the two gures 3.33 and 3.34 the two scenarios of no implementations and the
six implementations are illustrated. The numbers on top of the sewer catchment
areas are the volumes of oods when modeling with the parameters mentioned
in table 3.4. It is concluded, that the six implementations decrease the ooded
volume by the station with 93 % from 1150 to only 86 m3. Other signicant
reductions are in the area of the playground (catchment ID: 4) from 308 to 77
m3, the city hall area (catchment ID: 6) from 710 to 216 m3, the southern wing
(catchment ID: 2) from 496 to 272 m3 and the industrial area (catchment ID:
8) from 803 to 168 m3. All together the decrease of ood in the catchment area
is 2915 m3. It is concluded that the largest savings of water are done in the
catchments where the implementations are done, thus implementations close to
the problem area is ecient.
The evaluation of the Water Handling criteria could be the ood volume reduc-
tion at Buddinge Station, converted directly to a 0-10 ranking. In this case the
volume was decreased with 93 %, thus the criteria value would be 9.
==PAGE:90==
78
Results
Figure 3.33: Modeled ood volumes in sewer catchments in the existing con-
text. The most interesting volume is the volume in the station
area (ID: 0), which is 1150 m3.
==PAGE:91==
3.3 Application of the Design Process in Buddinge
79
Figure 3.34: Modeled ood volumes with the six implementations, explained
in section 3.3.3.1. The volume by the station (ID: 0) is reduced
from 1150 m3 to 86 m3, which is a signicant reduction.
==PAGE:92==
80
Results
3.3.3.2
Decide Whether the Design Performs Satisfactory
The nine evaluation criteria could be communicated on a scale from 0 to 10 in a
spider web diagram as the one in gure 3.35. In this specic gure, an acceptance
level is marked with red and the actual measure in blue. For the criteria where
the blue gure keeps inside of the red line, the performance is not good enough.
The 9 criteria here are quickly assumed, and a much better foundation should
be composed for each criteria in a real project. Only the Water Handling, Local
Handling, and Added Value criteria have some substance here.
Figure 3.35: A spider web diagram for the 9 criteria of the implementation
evaluation. The red line shows an acceptance level. As long as
the blue gure has points inside of the red line, the design should
be changed.
==PAGE:93==
Chapter 4
Discussion
The research presented in the preceeding has suggested and applied a new
integrated design process for development of urban stormwater management
projects. The design process consists of three phases: Research, Implementa-
tion and Evaluation. These three phases then consist of ten steps which can
be seen in gure 3.4 on page 24. After explaining the design process, it was
applied on a case study, taking place in the catchment area sloping towards the
low point of Buddinge Station. Floods are experienced here, and MIKE Flood
simulations developed in a Master's Thesis by Åkerblom (2016), show volumes
of 1150 m3 in a rain shower with a return period of 50 years and a duration of
2 hours.
The application of rst phase showed that background research was compre-
hensive, since much work has been done in the eld. The research span from
theoretical articles to practical websites directed towards the citizens and span
on a geographical level from each municipality of Denmark, through nationwide
programs and to a global level. The research was collected in an Idea Catalog
(appendix A). The application of the second phase was comprehensive as well.
The identication of potential solution spots was rewarding to do in a group,
even if the group only consisted of two members. Ideas were naturally devel-
oped through the process. Time was too constraint to perform detailed designs
of many solutions, but the parking lot west of the city hall was designed, and
showed the concept of this solution category. The application of the third phase
==PAGE:94==
82
Discussion
was done supercially, thus it contains large uncertainty.
The framework of
applying indicator criteria has been seen before, and is therefore considered an
ecient, and especially very communicative method. Clear communication is
important since stormwater management projects are costly and involve many
stakeholders, thus the products of the project are communicated to many dier-
ent collaborators. The design process is considered in relation to how successful
the application was performed.
The rst phase, concerning research, was performed successfully. While the en-
vironmental engineer analyzed the ood model, this thesis produced the idea
catalog which both introduced to existing solutions and examples, but would also
work well as a reference work for all participants through the rest of the project.
The idea catalog proved through examples, that creating coherent landscapes
with both water transporting elements and especially large detention volumes
with multiple purpose, was a successful way of performing stormwater manage-
ment projects. The understanding of the project site was done by researching
on existing mapping material and strategic plans, and furthermore producing
own mapping material. The produced maps in the rst phase of the project was
not all satisfying communicative. It was the aim to translate more technical
maps into maps usable in communication with non-technical third parties. To
achieve a satisfactory process, more eort should be put into this task. It was,
however, acceptable to not focus on communicating maps for this project, since
time from other work would have been taken. A site visit was not done, and
this, together with a visit at the municipality should have been done to get the
full insight in the area. The formation of the goal and framework was partly
decided from ocial papers (Vorgod Pedersen et al., 2015) and partly decided
in the rst period of the project. A common written project goal was never
done, which would have made the process more clear.
Second phase started with the point out of potential solutions spots. This was
a successful procedure, and was repeated more times, since the action lead to
unanswered questions.
Because of the repetitions this procedure turned out
to be more time consuming than expected, but it was experienced rewarding
due to the extra detail the iterations lead to, and was not a drawback. The
procedures furthermore acted as a gathering, and thereby doubts and questions
could be answered or discussed. The procedure of nding potential solution
spots was considered successful and rewarding for the project. Step 6 was al-
ready introduced subconsciously through step 5, when undergoing the solution
spots. When the group split up, detailed reections were individually done on
the map of several potential solution spots. In this thesis ve solution categories
was developed to characterize the work and explain the types individually. A
nal map with potential solutions were produced and volumes were estimated
roughly. These volumes are based on areas measured on the map and an as-
sumed depth. The ground is not completely at, thus the basin edge diers
==PAGE:95==
83
in level - especially in connection to large areas.
Therefore the volumes are
estimated on behalf of a volume below the lowest point in the edge, which
means they are possibly overestimated.
The total estimated volume is very
large in relation to the 3387 m3 assumed neccesary to remove in the catchment
by Åkerblom (2016), which makes it possible for the project group to chose the
most cost-benecial, voluminous and multifunctional solutions providing a bet-
ter life for the citizens. For the solution categories the estimated volumes has
dierent uncertainty. The basins in Activity Zone, Recreational Zone and espe-
cially Climate Parking rely on more idea development than Stormwater Roads,
and especially Climate Gardens. The latter of the two is the one associated
with the highest uncertainty, since the high number of plot owners makes the
possibility and choice of implementation uncertain.
The process of estimating volumes happened too late, and time was not there
to interconnect the results of the two theses, and the results of the two Master's
theses therefore took two dierent directions at this point. If less time had been
spent of the rst steps, time would have allowed for more coherent results, but
less eort would then have been put into the introductory tasks. The detailed
design was conducted for the western parking lot. The design proved that the
concept of Climate Parking was implementable, and supervision was given from
the architectural company Vandkunsten, to validate the realization potential of
the project. The concept was considered successful, and exible and dynamic
to implement in many contexts.
Third phase were conducted very supercially.
The goals were transformed
into nine evaluation criteria, which should be discussed and calculations of the
numbers should be developed. In this task interdisciplinarity is very important
to embrace all interests.
A suggestion could be to develop a framework for
each profession, and then collect and form the nal evaluation criteria. The
nine formed criteria were supercially assigned numbers for the implementation
and what the acceptance level was. The evaluation showed that a few more
solutions should be implemented to handle all water at Buddinge Station, and
further that more attention should be put on "Connecting Value" and "Project
Group". This is due to the project group being too small, not being diverse
enough in professions and that no improvements of connection of the city was
taken into account.
This thesis managed to cover all parts of the process in the case study. The
rst part of the project was conducted with sense of detail, and both Idea
Catalog and ndings of potential solutions spots was thoroughly developed.
The reection on each solution and design of them were processes, that would
have been interesting to be able to go more in depth with. The last part of the
application is associated with a large amount of uncertainty, since time was too
limited to go into detail. Even though the design process is assumed successful,
==PAGE:96==
84
Discussion
this work does not cover enough work to validate the process. It is inevitable,
that the process should be applied in an interdisciplinary context to prove its
value. Some steps was left out due to time and group composition, and these
steps are not necessarily important. Furthermore, it was found that some steps
are much alike, and could be merged into one. This is step 3 and 4 and step 8,
9 and 10. Step 8 was found slightly confusing, and should probably be left out.
The collaboration between the two Master's students was both successful and
challenging. The successful part was collaboration in the creative part of the
project, where the ndings of potential solution spots was a rewarding process
where ideas triggered new ideas. This would work even better in a more inter-
disciplinary group, which is part of the suggested design process. The challenges
was generally related to the unclear and discrepant goals for the two projects,
but also towards timing and inexibility. HÅ was in the clear place of the en-
vironmental engineer in an imagined project group, while this thesis embraced
the role of more of the group members, which did not correspond with the
time frame. This, however, means that a very good result could be achieved
if the design process was implemented in a project group of perhaps 5-6 group
members, in a common project with clear goals stated in step 3 and 4 of the
project. It could therefor be interesting to observe a project with the right group
composition and a clear framework. The architectural engineer generally works
in between professional elds, thus the architectural engineer would be a good
suggestion as the project facilitator.
As mentioned the project failed in some points due to 1) the size and homo-
geneity of the project group and 2) time sparsity. The developed design pro-
cess, however, seems successful as far as researched and discussed in this thesis.
The general, integrated design process with iterations through the three steps,
research, implementation and evaluations, is not new, and is already proven
well-functioning in i.a. Svendsen et al. (2008) and Hestnes (2008). The supple-
ment in this thesis is the stormwater direction, which should be applied in real
projects to conrm the eciency of the process.
The validity of SCALGO, and in which contexts it could be used, should be
examined further. Since the sewer system was the dominating mechanism, in
relation to stormwater, the tool did not have much use in Buddinge. If closing
o the manholes and the entire area should handle rainwater on own cadastre,
the natural ow paths would dominate, and solutions could be implemented to
catch surface water from a specic area. In this case SCALGO would be usable,
as it would be in designing for areas without sewers or smaller areas, where the
manholes are disconnected.
==PAGE:97==
Chapter 5
Conclusion
This work has developed a new integrated design process for urban stormwater
management. The process is applied in a case study in the catchment area to
Buddinge station, where oods are experienced frequently. The process included
the three phases: Research, implementation and evaluation, inspired by litera-
ture. The three phases are iterated through ten steps, developed specically for
stormwater management.
The background research served as a preliminary study clarifying approaches
in stormwater management, design of processes and Danish practice. The key
conclusion from the background research was that successful mayor stormwater
projects must include stakeholders from at least the three expert elds: 1) Engi-
neering and technical science, 2) architecture and planning and 3) management
and social science.
Through the generic description of the process, each of the ten steps was de-
scribed and tools were introduced. SCALGO was considered an interesting tool
for local surface analysis and terrain corrections for export to more complex
tools as MIKE Flood. The analysis, however, was found limited in larger and
dense urban contexts, since the dominating sewer systems are not included in
SCALGO simulations.
The case study applied the process in the area around Buddinge Station. The
==PAGE:98==
86
Conclusion
rst phase developed an idea catalog, researched existing mapping material and
strategies and developed own relevant maps. Through this process it was found
that much material exist, highlighting the importance of background research,
which when omitted results in double eorts. The idea catalog presented solu-
tion types and good examples of multifunctional stormwater squares and parks,
indicating that projects with combined designs including large detention vol-
umes with multiple functions are desirable. In the development of the maps,
HÅ produced a ood map, nding that a volume of 1150 m3 of water occurs at
the station in ood events with 50 years return period. The second phase began
with identications of potential solution spots. This process proved valuable,
since ideas triggered new ideas, and signicant solution development was done.
A total detention volume of 39305 m3 was found in 22 potential solution spots.
The 22 spots were divided into ve categories, which made it possible to ana-
lyze the solutions before a smaller number of solutions were selected for more
detailed design. A detailed design was performed for the parking concept. It
was found that it was possible to design dierentiated, so that the concept could
handle rain showers of varying intensities. A similarly detailed design process
could be performed in the future for the other four categories. The third phase
was not completed satisfactorily due to lack of diverse group competences and
limited group size. However, a framework of developing evaluation criteria was
outlined, and a deeper study into this is needed.
Because of the generic nature of the process, the use of it will take projects in
various directions. This is both a weakness and a strength. The weakness is that
the process can be more time consuming and cause doubt and aws, contrary
to use a more specic process suggestion. The strength is that the process is
applicable in diverse project types across urban contexts. In this way, it will be
possible to develop stormwater projects through a known structural procedure,
embracing all steps and tasks of the process, and ensuring various approaches
through the diverse group composition. Therefore, the generic integrated design
process was considered a good suggestion for stormwater management projects,
where the application served as an example of practical application of the pro-
cess.
==PAGE:99==
Bibliography
Åkerblom, Hampus. 2016. Planning and modelling use of urban landscapes and
infrastructure for real-time mitigation of urban ooding.
Master's Thesis,
Technical University of Denmark.
Brandt, Erik. 2015. SBi-anvisning 255; Aøbsinstallationer - systemer og di-
mensionering.
BYG-ERFA. 2016. Cloudbursts and Monster Rain.
Clemensen, S., & Gade, T. 2013.
Regnvand i byen - 9 Europæiske LAR-
Projekter. Tech. rept. Ministeriet for By, Bolig og Landdistrikter.
Dansk Standard. 1983. Dansk Ingeniørforenings norm for mindre aøbsanlæg
med nedsivning : Dansk Standard DS 440. Teknisk Forlag.
Dansk Standard. 1994. Norm for aøbsinstallationer : Dansk Standard DS 432.
Teknisk Forlag.
Dansk Standard. 2008. DS/EN 752:2008 - Aøbssystemer uden for bygninger.
1 edn.
Fletcher, T.D., Shuster, W., Hunt, W.F., Ashley, R., Butler, D., Arthur, S.,
Trowsdale, S., Barraud, S., Semadeni-Davies, A., Bertrand-Krajewski, J.L.,
Mikkelsen, P.S., Rivard, G., Uhl, M., Dagenais, D., & Viklander, M. 2014.
SUDS, LID, BMPs, WSUD and more  The evolution and application of
terminology surrounding urban drainage. Urban Water Journal, 12(7), 525
542.
Fryd, O., Dam, T., & Jensen, M.B. 2012. A planning framework for sustainable
urban drainage systems. Water Policy, 14(5), 865.
==PAGE:100==
88
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Furesø Municipality. 2011. Vejledning - Sådan laver du en faskine.
Gehl, J. 2010. Byer for mennesker. 1 edn. Bogværket.
Gladsaxe Municipality. 2014a. Climate Adaptation Plan. Tech. rept.
Gladsaxe Municipality. 2014b. Notat vedrørende prioritering af områder i Kli-
matilpasningsplan 2014. Tech. rept.
Gladsaxe Municipality. 2015a.
Meeting Minute from Start-up Meeting
26.11.2015 -  17, stk. 4 udvalg for byliv i klimatilpasningen af Buddinge-
området.
Gladsaxe Municipality. 2015b. Statusdel for Spildevandsplan 2015.
Gladsaxe Municipality. 2015c. Wastewater Plan. Tech. rept.
Green Building Council Denmark. 2016. Miniguide til DGNB for byområder.
52.
Hestnes, A.G. 2008.
Integrated Design Processes - A Must for Low Energy
Buildings. Chap. 6, pages 128131 of: Jensen, L.B. (ed), B150 Civil Engi-
neering Futures. Trondheim, Norway: DTU and Realdania.
Kellagher, R., Martin, P., Jeeries, C., Bray, R., Shaer, P., Wallingford, H.R.,
& Woods-Ballard, B. 2015. The SUDS manual.
Københavns Kommune. 2011.
Metodekatalog til lokal aedning af regnvand
(LAR).
Københavns Kommune. 2012. Københavns Kommunes Skybrudsplan 2012. Tech.
rept. København.
Lloyd, S., Wong, T.H.F., & Chestereld, C.J. 2002.
Water Sensitive Urban
Design - A Stormwater Management Perspective.
Tech. rept. Cooperative
Research Centre for Catchment Hydrology, Melbourne, Australia.
Micheelsen, C., & Pejtersen, B.H. 2012. Vand og aøb ståbi R⃝. Nyt Teknisk
Forlag.
Naturstyrelsen. 2012. Sådan håndterer vi skybrud og regnvand: Handlingsplan
for klimasikring af Danmark. 30.
Paludan, B., Høegh Nielsen, N., Nybo Jensen, L., Brink-Kjær, A., Linde, J.J.,
& Mark, O. 2011. En kogebog for analyser af klimaændringers eekter på
oversvømmelser i byer. Skanderborg: DANVA.
Perry, K.R., & Dusenbury, R. 2009. San Mateo County Sustainable Green Streets
and Parking Lots Design Guidebook. First edit edn.
==PAGE:101==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
89
SBi. 2013. BR 10 Tjekliste for parkeringspladser for personer med handicap.
Spildevandskomiteen. 2015. LAR-dimensioneringsregneark 2015.
SSWM. 2016. Sustainable Sanitation and Water Management Toolbox.
Svendsen, S., Petersen, S., & Hviid, C.A. 2008. Integrated Design of Sustainable
Buildings - Methods and Software. Chap. 6, pages 124127 of: Jensen, L.B.
(ed), B150 Civil Engineering Futures. Kongens Lyngby, Denmark: DTU and
Realdania.
Teknologisk Institut. 2005. Rørcenter-anvisning 009 - Nedsivning af regnvand i
faskiner. Tech. rept.
Teknologisk Institut. 2016. Lokal aedning af regnvand - LAR.
The Danish Centre of Architecture. 2015.
Regnen Kommer. Exhibition.
(01/16/2015-04/06/2015).
The Danish Nature Agency. 2014. Miljø-GIS - Prol: Klimatilpasningsplaner.
The Danish Nature Agency. 2016a. Klimatilpasning.dk.
The Danish Nature Agency. 2016b.
The Danish Nature Agency on Climate
Issues.
VandPlus. 2015. Vand på sidelinjen // Gladsaxe Stadium.
Vorgod Pedersen, B., Stefansen, K., & Wolf, M. 2015. Kommissorium for  17,
stk. 4 udvalg for byliv i klimatilpasningen af Buddinge området.
==PAGE:102==
90
BIBLIOGRAPHY
==PAGE:103==
Appendix A
Idea Catalog
Appendix A is the Idea Catalog, which is appended as an individual booklet.
==PAGE:104==
92
Idea Catalog
==PAGE:105==
Appendix B
SCALGO Guide
This is a quick guide to get started with using SCALGO Live. It includes guides
for creating the workspace, maneuvering around in the program and edit terrain.
SCALGO is, with a license, reachable at the webpage: http://scalgo.com/.
Create Workspace
1. Press the pencil icon.
2. Chose square or polygon.
3. Optionally show an aerial map under Aerial to get a better feeling of the
actual boundary.
4. Draw the boundary of the desired area. Naturally a catchment area would
make good sense. Remember to include an edge area, since the calculations
are limited to calculate the chosen area.
5. Open the Elevation tab and choose the desired Digital Elevation Model.
For this model Denmark/2015/Rain is chosen. It consists both terrain,
buildings, and a DHyM rain correction, which means that bridges and
other hollow elements are corrected, so that the water ows freely on the
==PAGE:106==
94
SCALGO Guide
surface. Lastly, press the pencil icon to create the workspace. It takes a
few minutes dependent on the size of the model.
6. Now the workspace is created and the Workspace Tools appear.
Also,
notice that the bridges are removed where roads cross.
Figure B.1: Creating the workspace on top of an aerial map.
Figure B.2: Using the right terrain model as the foundation of the model.
==PAGE:107==
95
Workspace Tools
1. In the Workspace Tools box dierent information appear.
A name is
automatically generated, but can be changed by pressing the pencil. The
same for the description underneath. Below is information about creating,
recomputing and editing times.
Figure B.3: The "Workspace Tools" window with options of editing name,
terrain and analysis conguring.
2. Press Congure . . .  to set which analyses SCALGO should conduct. In
this example, sea level rise is not of interest, and not a signicant threat.
Remove the check mark there. We want to model both Flash ood map
and Watershed delineation. For the rainfall amounts the map on http://
www.klimatilpasning.dk/vaerktoejer/ekstremnedboer/ekstremnedboer.
aspx is used. Switch the layer: ekstremnedbør - DMI on and nd the
closest red dot to the project area. For this case the statistics for point
30230 is used.
The data is statistical precipitation data for the exact
weather station. There is feature four kinds of rain events in return pe-
riod: 10 years (50 mm), 20 years (57 mm), 50 years (65 mm) and 100 years
(71 mm). These four numbers are written in Rainfall amounts together
with (25 mm), which is just a lower value between 0 and the depths for the
return periods. Be aware the decimal separator is ., to put mm behind
and to separate the four numbers with ,.
==PAGE:108==
96
SCALGO Guide
3. Go back to the Workspace Tools by pressing the backwards arrow.
4. To see the present situation, without any corrections of the terrain hit
Run analysis . . . . The analysis will take variable time according to area
size and number of Rain amounts. This analysis took 7-8 minutes.
5. It is now possible to see a ash ood map (known as BlueSpot map), Flow
Accumulation (known as ow paths), and watersheds by turning the layers
on. The analysis is done in four rain amounts, and it is thus possible to
see the oods at these four dierent levels.
6. Download the ash ood maps, ow accumulations and watersheds as a
reference to future changes. Especially the ow accumulations takes quite
a long time.
Figure B.4: Downloading the data for the analysis.
Edit Terrain
1. The terrain editor is the smart feature in SCALGO. It allows for really
easy corrections in the terrain and can for example quickly make a basin
of a specic volume or a swale next to a road.
==PAGE:109==
97
Figure B.5: The "Edit terrain" window. It features ve possibilities of editing
the terrain.
Figure B.6: A drawn polygon where the terrain is lowered in relation to the
existing terrain.
2. Press Edit terrain ...
3. The Edit terrain panel appears. It consist of the following keys: Cursor
(selection tool), Interpolate path (makes paths in lines, and does a at
slope from one point to another), Raise path (same as interpolate path,
but raises the path with a desired height), Lower path (same as raise path,
==PAGE:110==
98
SCALGO Guide
but lowers instead of raise), Raise path and atten (makes a at path or
area x meters above highest point) and Lower path and atten (same as
Rais path and atten, but lowers the level to x meters bellow the lowest
point). Note that the rst three are possible in lines, whereas the latter
two also makes areas possible. For all paths it is possible to set the width.
It is recommended to keep the width larger than around 3 m, since the
modelling is not more precise.
4. Draw a basin with the Lower path and atten tool. In this case a parking
lot is lowered 50 cm.
5. It can be hard to see how low the basin is related to the context and the
Point tool can then be used. It shows in this case that the level of the
basin is at 35.16 m. at the road next to the parking lot the level is at
35.97 m, and the volume is acceptable.
Figure B.7: The point tool tells which level a point is in. This can be usable
to see if the edit of terrain is realistic.
6. Head back to the editing panel.
7. Use the Cursor symbol and press the new terrain edit.
Path Info
appears in the right bottom corner. Here it is possible to see the surface
area, estimate the volume (in this case 1664.13 m2), order the path towards
the other paths, see and edit the prole of the basin, export the geometry
==PAGE:111==
99
Figure B.8: If the editing is wanted changed, it is possible in the dialog box
in the bottom right corner.
and delete it. At the moment we are satised with the basin, and the red
corner cross is pressed.
8. It was seen that the ow accumulation happened on the road. To direct it
into the parking lot, a interpolated path is done from the road to the lot.
Select the tool and start it in the basin and end it at the road, catching
both ow paths on the road.
9. Run the analysis with the added basin.
Interpretation of Results
It is important to point out that this tool only does surface ows, and in an area
as Buddinge, the sewer system is denitely the dominating system. The tool is
however useful when 1) wanting to create quick terrain corrections to import to
another program as MIKE FLOOD or 2) to estimate a rough size and extent of
solutions in a catchment area.
==PAGE:112==
100
SCALGO Guide
Figure B.9: Paths can be helpful guiding the water in a desired direction.
==PAGE:113==
Appendix C
Existing Maps
Appendix C consist of existing maps found during research of the area, in section
3.3.1.2. They are appended in an A3 collection.
• 1a Sewerage Principle
• 1b Inltration Ability
• 1c Drainage Coecient
• 1d Public Functions
• 1e District Plans
• 1f Municipality Plans
• 2a Flood Map
• 2b Value Map
• 2c Economic Risk
• 3a Extreme Rainfall
• 3b Municipality Map
==PAGE:114==
102
Existing Maps
• 4a Present Groundwater Level
• 4b Future Groundwater Level
• 4c Impermeability, Buddinge
• 4d Impermeability, Ganløse
• 4e BlueSpot Map
==PAGE:115==
Appendix D
Produced Maps
Appendix D consist of maps made in this project, explained in section 3.3.1.2.
The maps are produced by myself and HÅ. The maps produced by HÅ are
marked with an (HÅ).
• 1a Terrain Levels With Buildings
• 1b Terrain Levels Without Buildings
• 2a Flow Paths and Bluespot, 0 mm percepitation
• 2b Flow Paths and Bluespot, 25 mm percepitation
• 2c Flow Paths and Bluespot, 50 mm percepitation
• 2d Flow Paths and Bluespot, 57 mm percepitation
• 2e Flow Paths and Bluespot, 65 mm percepitation
• 2f Flow Paths and Bluespot, 71 mm percepitation
• 3a Flow Paths and Catchments, 0 mm percepitation
• 3b Flow Paths and Catchments, 25 mm percepitation
• 3c Flow Paths and Catchments, 50 mm percepitation
==PAGE:116==
104
Produced Maps
• 3d Flow Paths and Catchments, 57 mm percepitation
• 3e Flow Paths and Catchments, 65 mm percepitation
• 3f Flow Paths and Catchments, 71 mm percepitation
• 4a Sewer System (HÅ)
• 4b MIKE Model (HÅ)
• 4c MIKE Flood Simulation Results (HÅ)
• 4d Water Volumes in Sewer Catchments (HÅ)
• 4e Water Volumes in Sewer Catchments After 6 Implementations (HÅ)
• 5a Sketching Maps
• 6a Overview of the Project Site
• 6b Sub-area 1, Station area
• 6c Sub-area 2, City Hall
• 6d Sub-area 3, Buddinge Center
• 6e Sub-area 4, Buddinge Public School
• 6f Sub-area 5, Buddinge Industrial Area
• 6g Sub-area 6, Søborg Industrial Area
• 6h Sub-area 7, Housing Area NW
• 6i Sub-area 8, Housing Area NE
• 6j Sub-area 9, Housing Area E
• 6k Sub-area 10, Housing Area S
• 6l Sub-area 11, Housing Area SW
• 6m Sub-area 12, Housing Area W
• 7a Potential Solution Spots
==PAGE:117==
Appendix E
Planning Tools
Appendix D consist of weekly plans and the poster from the presentation in
Trondhjem.
==PAGE:118==
106
Planning Tools
==PAGE:119==
107
==PAGE:120==
108
Planning Tools
==PAGE:121==
109
==PAGE:122==
110
Planning Tools
==PAGE:123==
