==PAGE:1==
Analysis and Visualization of Attacks on
Organizations
Min Gu
Department of Compute
Technical University of Denmark
This dissertation is submitted for the degree of
M.Sc in Engineering
DTU
June 2016
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
First, I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my supervisor Christian W. Probst,
who has always been so supportive and inspiring to me. Each time I was stuck with some
obstacles, he could always come up with a great guidance and lead me to the right solutions.
In addition, he is so encouraging when I am tired and emotionally confused. I couldn’t finish
my thesis without his supervision.
I also want to thank Johan Montelius as my supervisor from KTH, he is so kind to accept
my request and be my supervisor, he often gives me some reminders about the time schedule
and illustrates the format of thesis I should follow. Though we are not able to have physical
meeting due to the distance, I appreciate it so much for his kindness.
Last but not least, I want to thank my family and my friends, and all my NordsecMob
fellows, they are always there to support me and bring me lots of pleasure when I am bored
and annoyed.
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Graphical system models enable the modelling of organisations on layers that are relevant
for attacks – the physical, virtual, and social layer. Recently, these models have been used
for automatically identifying possible attacks on the modelled organisation. The generated
attacks consider all three layers, making the contribution of building infrastructure, computer
infrastructure, and humans (insiders and outsiders) explicit. However, this contribution is
only visible in the attack trees as part of the performed steps; it cannot be mapped back to
the model directly since the actions usually involve several elements (attacker and targeted
actor or asset). Especially for large attack trees, visualising these relations between several
model components quickly results in a large quantity of interrelations, which are hard to
grasp. In this work we present several approaches for visualising attributes of attacks such as
likelihood of success, impact, and required time or skill level. The resulting visualisations
provide a link between graphical attack models and graphical system models.
==PAGE:6==
vi
Abstrakt
Grafiska systemmodeller möjliggör modellering av organisationer, i de skikt som är relevanta
för attacker - de fysiska, virtuella och sociala skikten. Nyligen har dessa modeller börjat an-
vändas för att automatiskt identifiera eventuella attacker mot den modellerade organisationen.
Genererade attacker tar hänsyn till alla tre skikt, vilket tydliggör påverkan av byggnaders
infrastruktur, datainfrastruktur, och människor (inom och utom organisationen). Emellertid
är detta bidrag endast synligt i attackträden som en del av de genomförda stegen; det kan inte
direkt återföras till modellen eftersom de åtgärder som vanligtvis involverar flera element
(angripare och angripna aktörer eller tillgångar). Särskilt för stora attackträd kommer en
visualisering av dessa förbindelser mellan flera modellkomponenter snabbt resultera i en stor
mängd inbördes förhållanden, som är svåra att överskåda. I detta arbete presenterar vi flera
metoder för att visualisera attackattribut som sannolikheten för framgång, påverkan och den
tid eller kompetensnivå som krävs för att utföra attacken. De resulterande visualiseringarna
utgör en länk mellan grafiska attackmodeller och grafiska systemmodeller.
==PAGE:7==
Table of contents
List of figures
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Socio-technical system threats . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
System component analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Structure of the paper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Background
5
2.1
Insider attack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.1
System Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.2
Attack model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.3
Running example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Attack tree . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Analysis of component contribution to attacks
15
3.1
Evaluating attack models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Contribution of Components of Organisations to Attacks . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2.1
Measuring Impact
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2.2
Importance of visualization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
Visualizing attacks
21
4.1
Tools and frameworks involved . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.1.1
Interface xml.dom.minidom . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.1.2
Networkx . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2.1
Implementation for counting occurrence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2.2
Implementation of Weight Measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2.3
Implementation for Path Computation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
==PAGE:8==
viii
Table of contents
4.2.4
Implementation of the visualization of attack tree . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.3
Verification of the result . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.3.1
File occurrence.csv . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.3.2
File weight_measurement.csv
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.3.3
File path.csv
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.3.4
Attack tree visualization assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.4
Pareto-Efficient Solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.4.1
Pareto-Efficient Solutions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5
Visualizing system models
47
5.1
Mapping from attack tree to model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.2
Tools and technologies involved
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.2.1
Model parser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.2.2
Cytoscape . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.3
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.3.1
Implementation of mapping attack tree to system model
. . . . . .
51
5.3.2
Implementation of visualizing system model
. . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6
conclusion and future work
59
6.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6.1.1
Shortcomings of this work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
6.2
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
References
63
Appendix A occurrence.csv
65
Appendix B
weight_measurement.csv
71
Appendix C path.csv
75
==PAGE:9==
List of figures
2.1
model example
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2
attacktree
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
attacktree
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4
attacktree
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.1
occurrenceCount
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2
weightMeasurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.3
pathCount . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.4
ATVisualization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.5
attack tree visualization example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.6
Pareto-efficient
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.1
model2json . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.2
modelElementJson
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.3
mappingAT2Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.4
modelVisualizationJson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.5
modelView
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Socio-technical system threats
Organizations are becoming quite complicated due to the mixture of technical systems and
their social aspects, which leads to the emergence of a new concept named socio-technical
system. Comparing with traditional technical systems, such systems are more possible to
be attacked since attacks could be launched from different entries, either from the technical
or social part weakness, or both at one time. Before, the technical security issue has been
investigated a lot and quite a few corresponding methods are presented. These risk assessment
methods describe processes that can be used to identify attacks, and to explain the attack’s
potential impact on the organization. However, the focus of these techniques is often rather
technical and ignores the internal structure and functioning of the organization. As to the
social layer, the analysis regarding this part is still far from satisfactory due to the complexity
of human factors.
To improve the scope of risk assessment and the level of scrutiny, security researchers
have suggested socio-technical security models, which include the physical, virtual, and
social layer of organisations. Socio-technical security models acknowledge the need of
considering all these levels in assessing the risk faced by an organisation since an increasing
number of attacks today do involve attack steps on all three levels. The recent attack on a
German steel mill, for example, started with a spear phishing campaign, installing malware
that gave the attackers access to the office network, and from there to the industrial control
system. Eventually, the attack is said to have caused physical damage to the mill’s production
system.
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
1.2
System component analysis
In order to have a good presentation of the attacks found in an organization, attack trees[19,
10] are often used. Since attack trees are relatively loose defined, thus they can be adapted to
the requirements in many different settings. Attack trees provide structure to the represented
attacks by relating a node representing the goal of an attack with different alternative or
required sub-goals, which an attacker may or must perform. This structure makes attack trees
also an appropriate target for automated identification of attacks [22, 6, 5].
The TREsPASS project [21] applies attack trees as an intermediate representation of
attacks. Attacks are generated from a socio-technical system model [7, 8] and are the basis
of computing the risk faced by an organisation if one or more of the identified attacks are
realised. Properties of interest of these attacks include required resources, such as time or
money, likelihood of success, or impact of the attack. The analyses also identify the Pareto
frontier of incomparable properties, for example, the likelihood of success of an attack, and
the required budget.
When communicating the result of risk assessment, two components are of interest:
the actual attacks and the contribution of components of the organisation under scrutiny to
these attacks. While properties of attack trees or other attack models can be visualised in
enlightening ways [20], the same does not hold for the connection between components of
the organisation and the attack.
The generated attacks make the contribution of building infrastructure, computer infras-
tructure, and humans (insiders and outsiders) to the attack explicit. However, this contribution
is only visible in the attack trees as part of the performed steps, for example, as leaf labels.
Mapping this back to the system model is in principle not complicated. However, the actions
usually involve several elements (attacker and targeted actor or asset) that may be located
far apart in the model. Especially for large attack trees, visualising these relations quickly
results in a large quantity of interrelations, which are hard to grasp.
In this work we present several approaches for visualising attributes of attacks such as
likelihood of success, impact, and required time or skill level. The resulting visualisations
provide a link between graphical attack models and graphical system models. After a dis-
cussion of visualising properties of attack trees, we present our approach of using metrics
to identify the importance or contribution of parts of the attack tree, and mapping it to the
system model. Our approach currently only considers contribution of model elements – it
not, for example, include information on how assets and actors are used in an attack.
Our approach is independent of the attack model or socio-technical system model used.
The only requirement is that all model elements have unique identifiers that establish the link
between their occurrences in the attack tree and the model, respectively. While we present
==PAGE:13==
1.3 Structure of the paper
3
them in the setting of the TREsPASS model, which is similar to ExASyM [13] and Portunes
[4], the general approach can be applied to any graphical system model and any attack model.
For example, the metrics used for visualising model components can also be output as a text
file for sorting and further analysis.
1.3
Structure of the paper
The rest of this article is structured as follows.
Chapter 2 would give an background overview of graphical models for systems and at-
tacks.
In chapter3, some techniques for analyzing the component contribution to attack would
be introduced.
Following that, Chapter 4 illustrates the relevant implementations of these analysis techniques
mentioned in chapter 3. At the end of this chapter, a visualization of an attack tree based on
its attributes would also be presented.
Based on the analysis result from chapter 4, we show a mechanism to map all compo-
nents inside an attack to its model and implement the visualization for a model.
Finally, Chapter 6 concludes the paper and discusses future work.
==PAGE:14==
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Background
2.1
Insider attack
Human is a quite important component for an organization, most of the value generation
processes for a company require the involvement of employees more or less. Meanwhile, it
also increases the attack risk of a company to some extend. Assuming the vulnerabilities of
an organization could be classified from insiders and outsiders[15], where outsiders mean
those hackers who are capable of taking advantages of the weakness in a technical system
and intrude into the company to make damages, while insiders could be employees in the
company or people who managed to get the access to an internal system and then abuse
their access by violating the privacy of an organization and creating loss to it. Most of the
time, organizations would have a big chance to protect attacks from outsiders if their systems
are in a good security architecture. However, insider attacks, which are quite common
nowadays, could be unexpectedly troublesome to detect or prevent since insiders might have
the privileges when applying actions[2], in some cases, this kind of attacks could lead to a
worse consequence to the corporations if not being taken seriously.
Of course, organizations could take some measures to prevent these insider attacks by
regulating insider actions or make all insiders under surveillance[18]. However, both of the
above methods seem not so feasible. Over regulating might lead to the rebellious emotion
from employees which possibly would result in a bad working efficiency and corporation
culture. On the other aspect, strict surveillance is still quite controversial in lots of places
around the world, so it is not difficult to imagine the difficulty of implementing it .
A viable solution might be analyzing all the human factors before a real attack, then orga-
nizations could narrow down the actions which should have occurred for the attack. In this
case, we might overcome the shortcomings of traditional risk assessment methods regarding
not considering too much about the internal structure or human factors of an organization. [6].
==PAGE:16==
6
Background
If more accurate result is required, the insider attack should be distinguished according
to the level of insiderness of attackers. The insiderness level could be affected by some
parameters such as trust, knowledge and access[15].
Here, considering that it is extremely complex to collect data and analyze human be-
haviors, so we would talk about one of the worst attackers that an organization could meet,
namely, the absolute insiderness attacker, which means attackers know everything about the
model and they also have the access to all locations in the organization, therefore they could
launch the strongest attack to the model. Actually, this absolute insiderness is not rare in
reality, for example, both the CEO and a cleaning lady of a company, have the access to large
parts of the organization, thus both of them could have the possibility to run an attack to the
company for a financial purpose or other unknown reasons. In reality, this issue is solved by
background checking, however, in our system model, we would specify some access control
policies to avoid this problem.
2.2
Model
Before discussing the contribution of components of organizations to attacks, we need to
summarize the system and attack models we consider in our work. As stated above, our
approach is not limited to specific models for systems and attacks. We only require system
models to provide unique identifiers for model elements, and attack models to use these
identifiers in describing attack steps.
2.2.1
System Model
A model could have a good representation of both the physical and digital infrastructures
in an organization. In fact, one organization could be presented by different system models
from different perspectives. In this paper, we would only consider the organization as a
socio-technical system, which includes the components stated below.
To provide a better view, we could think of the system models’ components majored in
the following layers [6]:
• Physical Layer defines the physical infrastructures of an organization, which could be
buildings, rooms, doors, etc., and the interconnection among these physical infrastruc-
tures. This layer also includes the physical items.
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Model
7
• Virtual layer represents the elements from the network domain (e.g., computers,
servers) together with their router connections. Relevant assets or data also are part of
this layer.
• Access control layer refers the access control regulations of the physical and virtual
layers. The model part policies which we would mention later belongs to this layer.
• Social layer implies the actors and the roles they are playing in the organization, all of
them are restricted by the access right, each of them also owns some data or asset.
With the above being stated, we would like to make it clear that any time we refer to an
example organization system model in a later phase, it is an instance of the above system
model.
Once the physical and digital infrastructures are clear, we need to define all the elements
that make up these infrastructures. In fact,these fundamental elements are our focus in this
work.
Here we use nodes to represents different elements in the system, different elements could be
actors, localities and all kinds of assets like computers, data existed in the model.
All the elements could be concluded as follow:
• Locations are where all actors and assets are placed. Locations are physically con-
nected, which means actors or assets in the model could be moved from the links
between locations. A location could be any part of a building.
• Actors are able to move form one location to another through the connections and
access to the internal resources under some access constrains.
• Data are those resources distributed in different locations, it might be files or documents
in the computer, or the cipher code to enter the room, etc.
• Actions are the behaviors granted to actors which would result in the location changing
of an actor, or some data modification.
• Policies means the access regulation to the locations or data, and some reasonable
expectation of the behaviors from an employee. Policies imply the allowed actions and
their specifically required credentials, allowed actions means the relevant actions is
permitted to be performed if enough credentials have been provided by actors.
==PAGE:18==
8
Background
In our abstraction of the model, nodes represent the organizational components that enable
and contribute to attacks. All elements in the model provide a unique identifier that can be
used to refer to the element and to obtain, for example, information on its concrete type,
model, or other relevant properties. This information is used in the attack generation, but it
can also provide input to the visualization of the system models, for example, whether two
elements should be conducted by an edge (e.g., two locations ) or one with in the other (e.g.,
two items ).
While models such as ExASyM [13] and Portunes [4] also define actions that can be
performed by actors and process, these are not required for our approach. We only expect to
be able to extract actors and arguments of actions from leaf nodes in attack trees.
2.2.2
Attack model
Similarly, attack models represent possible attacks on the modelled organization. For the
approach in this paper, we only require that attack goal can be divided into sub-goals that
can be combined either conjunctively, which means all the requirements described in its
sub-goals have to be satisfied in order to achieve the goal, or disjunctively, which represents
only one sub-goal need to be completed. This is very similar to attack tree, which we would
talk about the attack tree in section 2.3, and just as for these it would be interesting to allow
more complex combinations at a later point.
As mentioned before we require the attack model to support extraction of actors and
assets from the actions in an attack tree[19, 10]. In our current work, actions are contained in
the attack tree leafs, the leaf labels contain words from a regular language that provides, for
example, information about type of action, performing actor, which asset is obtained, and
where the asset is obtained from. The arguments to the action or exactly the identifiers that
connect the attack tree with the system model. We do not need to impose other assumptions
that are often found, e.g., about the ordering of sub goals from left to right; this is due to the
flow insensitive nature of our visualization.
2.2.3
Running example
We use the same running example in this paper as in [6], which is based on a case study
in the TREsPASS project[21] centered around an actor Alice, who receives some kind of
service, e.g., care-taking, provided by an actor Charlie. Charlie’s employer has a company
policy that forbids him to accept money from Alice or to steal money. Figure 2.1 shows a
graphical representation of the example scenario, consisting of Alice’s home, a bank with an
ATM, and a bank computer.
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Model
9
A basic introduction of the model:
• Alice, an old person who needs care-taking service from a company, and Charlie is
an employee of the company, and he is responsible for providing catering service to
Alice;
• Alice’s home include a door which requires cipher code to enter; an workstation
contains hard drive, where the password of the workstation is located. Alice could
manipulate the workstation to do money transferring via the bank computer.
• Alice holds a payment card, which contains the owner’s name and relevant pin code,
of course, Alice knows the Pin and also the password to initiate transfers from her
workstation via the bank computer
• Charlie also owns a payment card, similarly, the card contains a pin code which is only
known to Charlie.
• A bank, a bank computer and an ATM machine, which provide the payment service.
The money at the ATM requires a card with a pin code, as well as that very pin code
modeled as input in order to obtain money.
Figure 2.1 is the running example in paper [6]. The locations, represented by small rectangles,
are connected through directed edges. Actors are represented as rectangles with a location,
e.g., Alice is at home and Charlie is in the city. Both actor nodes and location nodes can
contain a pin code and Alice also has the pin code for her card. Actor nodes can represent
processes running on the corresponding locations as well. The processes at the workstation
and the bank computer represent the required functionality for transferring money; they
initiate transfers from Alice’s home and check credentials for transfers.
Note that all elements have either a unique name or a unique value, which serve as their
identifiers. If an element occurs more than once, for example, the password or the Alice’s
pin, these occurrences represent copies of the same artefact.
==PAGE:20==
10
Background
Fig. 2.1 Running model example. The white rectangles represent locations or items, the gray
rectangles represent processes and actors; actors contain the items or data owned by the actor.
The round nodes represent data. Solid lines represent the physical connections between
locations, and the dotted lines represent the present location of the actors and processes. The
dashed rectangles in the upper right part of some nodes represent the policies assigned to
these nodes.
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Attack tree
11
2.3
Attack tree
Attack trees[19, 10] have been widely used in both industrial and academic fields, they are
quite informative, easy to interpret. Based on the analysis on attack tree, it is quite straight
forward to figure out all the potential attacks that could be applied on the system.
Attack trees depict the attacks in a hierarchical way, with the root represents the goal for
the attack, and the leaf nodes imply the actions needed to be taken in order to achieve the
goal. There also exist some intermediate sub nodes, which are a division of the final goal.
Replacing rule
In fact, all non-leaf nodes could be classified into two kinds. One is conjunctive nodes,
which means the parent node has the same effect with all its child nodes conjunction and
thus they are mutually equivalent. The other one is disjunctive nodes, which represents
that any child node could replace its parent node and the same consequence would be
reproduced.[6]
In Figure 2.2 we can see a simply attack tree replacing result. The goal for this at-
tack tree is to steal a computer located in a room, for this goal, it could be dissolved into
enter a room and grab the computer, this two is conjunctive. For entering the room, it could
be replaced by either break into the room, or social engineering with the people who has the
access to the room with a key.
Fig. 2.2 How to steal a computer in a room
==PAGE:22==
12
Background
Here we would have a brief explanation about how to generate attack trees out of the
attack scenarios. Since the implementation for this attack tree generator is out of our concern,
so we would only introduce the usage of the tool on how to get its output.
Fig. 2.3 Overview for the tool to generate attack tree
Figure 2.3 shows the simple process how we use attack tree generator to get an attack tree
file. The input would be a XML file represents the whole scenario. Inside the scenario file, it
contains some information regarding the profit, which implies how much attackers would
benefit if a successful attack, together with some data regarding all the credentials owned by
the attacker. Of course, the scenario would also need to know the model information when
parsing, and the model information would be introduced in next section. The main function
of the tool could be concluded as parsing and applying some analysis to the scenario file and
then generate the attack tree file, which is an XML file shows all the possible attacks inside
the model. one example of the attack tree is as follow.
Figure 2.4 is an example of the whole attack tree. With the root being its goal, all the sub
nodes are combined by their parent nodes in a conjunctive or disjunctive way, the leaf nodes
are the basic actions need to be fulfilled to run the attack. We didn’t present a complicated
attack tree for a good visualization purpose because one entire attack tree would take up too
much space and make the whole plot quite messy. Another thing need to be noticed, this
attack tree is only for the presentation purpose, our following analysis examples for attack
tree are based on a more complex one.
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Attack tree
13
Fig. 2.4 An example for an general attack tree
==PAGE:24==
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 3
Analysis of component contribution to
attacks
Although attack trees give a good view about the required steps to fulfill the attack in a
good way, and it is also quite feasible to figure out all the possible paths by following the
grammar of the attack tree. However, for a large attack tree, visualizing these relations
between several model components is almost impossible since the interrelation would be
increased exponentially. Besides, the generated attacks consider all three layers and analyse
their contribution accordingly, but the contribution is only visible in the attack tree as part
of performed steps, it can not be mapped back to the targeted actors or assets. Thus we
have to provide a good mechanism to visualize attributes of the attack tree, and the resulting
visualization provide a link between graphical attack model and graphical system models.
The analytic risk assessment based on socio-technical security models operates on attack
trees and judgments about quantitative properties of the actions performed and the actors
performing them, after briefly discussing how to evaluate attack models, we present a simple
approach for visualizing several, potentially incomparable properties of such models.
3.1
Evaluating attack models
The attack models generated from system models from the basis of analytic risk assessment.
Properties of interest[11] of these attacks include required resources, such as time or money,
likelihood of success, or impact of the attack based on annotations of the leaf nodes in attack
trees. Analyses [1] also identify the Pareto frontier of incomparable properties, for example,
the likelihood of success of an attack, and the required budget.
==PAGE:26==
16
Analysis of component contribution to attacks
The mapping of actions to metrics can again be achieved by mapping the action and
its arguments to a specific value. These metrics can represent any quantitative knowledge
about components, for example, likelihood, time, price, impact, or probability distributions.
The latter could describe behavior of actors or timing distributions. For the visualization
described in this article the mapping of leaf nodes to metrics and the analyses performed are
irrelevant; we assume an attack tree and a mapping from its nodes to an analysis result.
3.2
Contribution of Components of Organisations to At-
tacks
Now we put the different elements described above together to figure out the relation between
attack trees and system models. Remember that we require all elements in the model to
have unique identifiers; we use this identifier to associate model components and attack tree
actions.
As for attack trees we need a measure for how much a model element contributes to a
given attack. We apply techniques similar to our earlier work on insiderness [14].
3.2.1
Measuring Impact
Computing the actual impact of a model component on an attack is as difficult as computing
the impact of an attack; the results can be used for ordering attacks or influence, but they
should not be taken as absolute answers. With this in mind we have applied several techniques
for measuring the impact of components on attacks.
As mentioned before we require the attack model to support extraction of actor and assets
from the actions in an attack tree, and actions are contained in the attack-tree leafs. Leaf
labels provide information about type of action, performing actor, which asset is obtained,
and where the asset is obtained from. All this information is provided through the identifiers
that connect the attack tree with the system model.
Counting Occurrences:
The simplest concept of measuring impact is that of counting occurrences of identifiers. It
computes for a given entity in how many places it contributes to the whole attack tree or a
path. The occurrence-based impact ignores impact, likelihood, or other analysis results. It is
either measured as absolute number or as percentage of occurrences of identifiers in the path
or tree being analysed. It is computed per identifier id for a set of nodes in a subtree of the
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Contribution of Components of Organisations to Attacks
17
attack tree that represents an attack, assuming that id ∈S returns 1 if true, and 0 otherwise,
and that node n has successors c ∈succ(n):
I (id,n) :=















[x,x]
x = (id ∈actor(n))+(id ∈assets(n)), if n is a leaf node
[l,u]
l = min(I (id,c)),u = max(I (id,c)), if n is a disjunc-
tive node
[l,u]
l = Σc{l′|[l′,_] = I (id,c)},u = Σc{u′|[_,u′] =
I (id,c)}, if n is a conjunctive node
(3.1)
As a first crude measure, this impact provides a defender with a quick overview of which
components of the organisation actually occur in the attack tree.
The occurrence-based impact provides for every identifier a lower and an upper bound of
occurrences; for conjunctive nodes these will be the same, for disjunctive nodes the lower
bound is the minimum of the lower bounds, and the upper bound is the maximum of the
upper bounds of the child nodes. The combination of lower and upper bounds provides a
measure for how reliable the numbers are. It also allows to identify, whether certain elements
occur in all attacks: if I (id,r) = [x,_] for some identifier id, the root of the attack tree, and
x > 0, then the element with id contains in every attack in the tree.
Weighted Sum:
The impact factor based on occurrences in the generated attacks is a rather crude approxi-
mation, since every occurrence of an identifiers is assigned the same impact independent
on the actual contribution to the attack. Given that the analyses of attack trees described
in 3.1 provide us with quantitative information about attacks, we can improve over the
occurrence-based ranking by weighting occurrences of identifiers with the impact of the
attack they occur in. The factors we can choose from are limited by available analyses only,
but include, for example, the likelihood of success, required time, difficulty, and cost.
In contrast to the occurrence-based impact we now include one of the analysis results, by
weighting the count for an identifier with the weight of the path, and potentially normalising
it. As before It is either measured as absolute number or as percentage of occurrences of
identifiers in a subtree of the tree being analysed. It is computed per identifier id for a node
on a path in the attack tree, assuming that id ∈S returns 1 if true, and 0 otherwise, that node
n has successors c ∈succ(n), and that val returns the result of the attack tree analysis for a
==PAGE:28==
18
Analysis of component contribution to attacks
node n in the (sub-)tree p:
I (id,n,p) :=





























vl
vl = val(n, p)⋆(id ∈actor(n)+id ∈assets(n)), if n is
a leaf node
vd
vd = val(n, p) ⋆min(I (id,c, p)), if n is a disjunctive
node
vca
vca = val(n, p)⋆ΣcI (id,c, p), if n is a conjunctive node
and we measure difficulty, time, or cost
vcm
vcm = val(n, p)⋆min(I (id,c, p)), if n is a conjunctive
node and we measure likelihood of success
(3.2)
3.2.2
Importance of visualization
The above analysis techniques could give us some basic information on how each component
contribute to the attacks in an organization. However, the outcome of the analysis would
be represented by a huge load of data, which is not so organization-friendly. Therefore, we
propose a better idea to provide a straightforward visualization mechanism.
Visualising attack tree:
The existing attack tree demonstration tool, which we have used to present the attack tree in
2.3, is good enough to give an idea about the structure of the attack tree. However, it doesn’t
have an emphasis on the parts with high impact, thus it is quite possible to get lost when
facing a large sized attack tree. Concerning how to apply analysis to attack trees and utilize
the analysis result to implement a better visualization of an attack tree, we would present
relevant solutions in Chapter 4. With enough information telling readers that different nodes
in the attack tree are unequally important. In that case, more focus could be put on the nodes
with higher importance.
Visualising Paths:
Depending on the kind of attack trees, they contain information about moves of the attacker
in the organisation or not. If the move information is contained in the attack tree, then the
methods above extend to visualising in the system model, which locations of the modelled
organisation are most important for the attack. This information is especially interesting for
deciding about the need for (better) surveillance.
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Contribution of Components of Organisations to Attacks
19
Visualising system model:
Understanding the attacks in an attack tree is quite important, but the interrelation of different
paths in the attack tree could also be quite confusing. It is not so helpful for an organization
knowing path of an attack tree with high attack risk, it is more realistic for organization to
apply protection solutions on the components. Thus we need to provide a visual system
model to the organization to avoid attacks better. Actually, the above two visualizations
provide a link between graphical attack model and graphical system models. In Chapter
5, we would elaborate how to map the attack analysis on attack tree to the relevant system
model, and the solution to present the system model with different visual styles to show their
importance.
Visualising different components:
There exist many different analyses on attack trees, and it may be interesting to investigate
and visualise several values combined on a system model. For many interesting counting
approaches the ones discussed here, one can combine different values into a vector, and
apply for each value the targeted counting operation. Since the values generally may not
be comparable directly, one then can either apply Pareto-based techniques, visualise the
different values simultaneously, or apply a summation function that combines the individual
values.
==PAGE:30==
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 4
Visualizing attacks
As mentioned before, the interrelation of large sized attack tree could result in considerable
confusion. So varieties of visual styles have been decided to differentiate various nodes and
paths according to their importance. The importance of each node and the path would rely
on the impact analysis described in the previous chapter.
In this chapter, we first would introduce some tools and frameworks that are used to implement
attack tree analysis and visualize attack trees. Following that, we would talk about the
implementation of analysis techniques and how we use the analysis result to build attack tree
visualization. The result of each analysis step would also be presented together with some
discussion based on the result.
4.1
Tools and frameworks involved
First, Python[16] is the main programming language involved for running script to parse
the whole attack tree. The reason to choose this implementation language is that the syntax
of Python is quite clear and tidy when programming, it also provides quite a few libraries
and frameworks that could be helpful in this project. Since python is a quite well-known
technology, we would not illustrate more details about it. Here, we would mainly focus on two
python technologies because these two are most frequently used. One is xml.dom.minidom,
the other one is Networkx.
==PAGE:32==
22
Visualizing attacks
4.1.1
Interface xml.dom.minidom
Attack trees is a very important portion in our project, most of the analysis needs to be
done using the attributes of attack tree. But in our project, attack trees are originally pre-
sented in the format of an XML file, thus we need to get a xml file parser to get all the
attributes and their corresponding values stored in the attack tree. In python, the interface
xml.dom.minidom would do the job as a parser of the XML object.
Xml.dom.minidom [17] is a simplified implementation for the DOM(Document Object
Model) interface, and it provides a quite user friendly API to deal with the XML file object.
There are two methods in this Interface that could be useful to get a XML document object
represent the content of the document.
The first method is
xml.dom.minidom.parse (filename_or_file[, parser[ , bufsize ] ])
which would return a Document object from the input, the input might be a file name
or a file-like object, the second parameter must be a SAX2 parser if given. This is a function
that could be used to change the document handler of the parser and activate the support
namespace as well.
The other method is named
xml.dom.minidom.parseString (string[, parser])
It has almost same mechanism with xml.dom.minidom.parse, the only difference is that the
former would only take a file name or file-like object as first parameter to parse, but the latter
could only parse a string the is made from XML codes.
The main outcome for parse() and parseString() is to make an XML parser bind with
a "DOM builder" that can take some parser events from any kind of SAX parser and then
transfer it into a DOM tree.
Once the document object is given, it is quite easy to have the access of the content of the
different parts in the XML document with the help of its properties and methods. Of course,
these properties have to be predefined in the DOM specification. The major property of the
document object in our case is documentElement property[17]. Following that, it is easy to
tell if a node is a leaf node or not based on its children count, if 0, then it is a leaf node. For a
==PAGE:33==
4.1 Tools and frameworks involved
23
non-leaf node, with the parser, we could get the sub-tree information of the node and then
apply further analyzing.
4.1.2
Networkx
Before choosing a tool for plotting the visualization of an attack tree, a few visual styles have
been decided for differentiating impact factors of the nodes and paths which would be talked
in section 4.2.2, there we could know that we are targeted at getting a tool that could offer a
good mechanism to display an tree structured network with different colors, customized edge
widths and various transparency. After evaluating quite a few python packages, we finalized
Networkx as our best choice.
NetworkX[12] is a python package which could be used for creating complex network.
It provides the basic functionality for drawing nodes and edges, and it also integrates some
packages to display nodes or edges with different colors, transparency and edge width.
The framework provides some classes like graph()(a graph class whose direction is out of
concern) and digraph()(a graph class whose direction has to be explicit). Besides, it is also
possible to put multiple graphs at the same plot by calling class multigraph()(a graph class
that could contain a few objects instantiated from classes of graph() and digraph()).
Here, we would introduce two important methods which are necessary for us to use in
the implementation.
Draw networkx nodes
draw_networkx_nodes(G, pos, nodelist=None, node_size=300, node_color=’r’,
node_shape=’o’, alpha=1.0, cmap=None, vmin=None, vmax=None, ax=None,
linewidths=None, label=None, kwds)
This is the method for drawing nodes in a graph, here, we would explain the meaning of each
parameter and the requirements of the argument.
• G means a graph instance of class graph(),or digraph(), or multigraph();
• pos tells all the position of all nodes
• node_size defines the size of the nodes
if it is a scalar, which means all the nodes would be in the same size;
if it is an array whose item count is equal to the number of nodes, each node would
have identical size mapped from the array to the node by ID.
==PAGE:34==
24
Visualizing attacks
• Node_color have the same requirements with node_size but implies the color of the
nodes.
• Node_shape would take a string to determine the node shape, in our case, we make
the shape in default ’o’,
• alpha represents the transparency of the nodes, for the attack tree, all nodes would be
assigned to half transparent, but for the edges which we would elaborate later, alpha is
quite a critical parameter.
• label is a parameter to show the tag for each node and it has to be an array with the
size equals to node count.
• linewidths implies the border width of a node, in our project, we take advantage of this
parameter to show different nodes, since the nodes have the disjunctive and conjunctive
properties, so we can use the border to identify them.
The rest of the parameters are out of our concern, so we would not elaborate them.
Draw networkx edges
draw_networkx_edges(G, pos, edgelist=None, width=1.0, edge_color=’k’, style=’solid’,
alpha=1.0, edge_cmap=None, edge_vmin=None, edge_vmax=None, ax=None, arrows=True,
label=None, kwds)
This method [12] shares lots of common properties with draw_networkx_nodes except all
the styles are for edges when calling method draw_networkx_edges, but here, we have to
pay attention to the following parameters
1. The alpha parameter in draw_networkx_nodes would always be 0.5 because the
transparency of the node is not in our scope, but the edge transparency means the
likelihood of the path in our visualization of attack tree. Thus we have to take each
edge alpha seriously.
2. Edge_width tells how width the edge would be, this is another fundamental parameter
we need to focus when assigning values
Similarly, some of the parameters could be ignored since we don’t need to use them.
From the above information, it is obvious to know that there are quite a few methods
and functions in networkx requires either a fixed value or an array to provide specific infor-
mation for the nodes or edges. Actually ,Networkx is quite efficient since it depends on this
==PAGE:35==
4.2 Implementation
25
kind of "dictionary of dictionary" data structure, and it is quite scalable and portable as well.
One more thought, it would be the best if we could visualize the attack tree in the sim-
ilar shape with what we have got from the attack tree generator. However, if we use the
networkx build-in function to get all the nodes’ positions, they would be quite randomly
distributed, but the advantages of networkx is that, the graph is compatible if using the
graphviz_layout to keep all the nodes in the positions of a tree, so when plotting the nodes,
all of them would still appear in the shape of a tree.
Matplotlib is a python plotting library for generating attack tree visualization plots and
produce high quality figures in hardcopy formats.
Both graphviz and matplotlib have a good integration with networkx, so it is quite con-
venient to use this tool to implement all the features required in our project, that is another
key reason why we choose this framework for our work.
4.2
Implementation
As mentioned in 3.2, in order to figure out the relation between attack trees and system
models, we need a measurement for how much a model element contributes to a given attack.
But one thing as premise, we require all elements in the model to have unique identifiers; we
use this identifier to associate model components and attack tree actions.
In this section, we would illustrate how we implement the techniques for analyzing the
attack tree. Beside the two techniques we have mentioned about impact measurement in
section 3.2, which are counting occurrence and weight sum. We would also describe a
method for computing the attack tree paths. With the result of above analysis, we would then
present a mechanism in detail on how the analysis result is used for plotting the attack tree.
At last, some test samples would be used to verify the correctness of our analysis and the
result, we would also have a discussion regarding the strength and weakness of our analysis
techniques.
4.2.1
Implementation for counting occurrence
The first technique we would use to measure the impact is to figure out the occurrence for
each element in the attack model, the occurrence count could give us a basic idea about how
==PAGE:36==
26
Visualizing attacks
many times each element has contributed to the whole attack model. In general, this way
of measurement would ignore any other impact factors of the element like the likelihood,
difficulty, or the cost.
In the beginning, the fundamental resource we could use is the attack tree xml file which we
generated from 2.3, thus we need to use an attack tree parser to go through each node in the
attack tree and keep a record of the appearing times for each element, the element here must
be one of the items in the element list of the system model, and all model elements need have
identical tags.
Algorithm to reach all the leaf nodes in attack tree
Due to the specialties of attack tree, we could know that only the element occurrence in leaf
nodes would matter since all non-leaf nodes are just a conjunctive or disjunctive combination
of its child nodes. Therefore, the occurrence count would start from the leaf nodes. Here, we
would talk about how to reach all the leaf nodes in the attack tree with the help of the parser.
When applying the tree parser xml.dom.minidom.parse to the attack tree xml file, we
can get the root node and its children. Logically, we can take its each child node as a sub-root
and continue the parsing process. To keep a record of the occurrence count for all leaf nodes
in the attack tree, we would use a post-order traverse algorithm to visit all leaf nodes. In
detail, starting from the root node, the traverse would continue in depth until it arrives at a
leaf node, then it would go back to the leaf node’s parent node so that other child branches of
the parent node could be traversed. Similarly, the traverse would go back further if all the
nodes in the parent node’s sub-tree have been visited, when it gets back to the root node, we
could know that the traverse should be terminated. Once the whole traverse is done, we can
be sure that all the leaf nodes have been visited. The tree parser interface also provides a
mechanism to get the children count of each node in the attack tree, thus each time when
we get to a node, we need to apply the tree parser to get all the sub-tree of the node. If the
children count is zero, we are acknowledged that this is a leaf node.
We use recursion to realize the computation. Starting from the root, we go down to its
children, continuously, once the recursion reach the leaf node, the occurrence count for the
leaf node would be recorded, when the traverse goes back, the occurrence count for non-leaf
node would be computed layer by layer. When it goes back to the root node, we can have the
knowledge about occurrence which has made the contribution to the attack tree.
==PAGE:37==
4.2 Implementation
27
Leaf node grammar
Every time when we arrive at a leaf node, we need to analyze the properties of the leaf node
by separating every word in the leaf label. Actually, the leaf label follows a few patterns
which are public and fixed. All the leaf grammar can defined as follows:
1. FULFILL actor1 action actor2 means the goal would be achieved if and only if the
actor1 fulfill the requirement described, since we don’t take actions like "fulfill" into
our consideration for the occurrence, so we would only keep a record of the count
number of actor1 and actor2.
2. FORCE/MOVE actor location locality is quite straight, we need to keep a track on
the occurrence of both the actor and locality in the leaf labels.
3. IN actor AssetKind AssetName AssetID TargetKind TargetName TargetID, the in-
terpretation for this in-action is that the actor needs to input an asset from someone
or somewhere else so that it can meet the requirements. In this case, we only need
to focus on the occurrence for the actor, AssetID and the TargetID appeared in the
statement.
4. MAKE actor1 actor2 + {one-of-the-patterns-above}, here, this make-action means
the attacker would determine an victim and try to make him perform a certain action,
here we only take the actor1 and the statement following actor2 into account, since the
victim actor2 would be sure appearing in the new statement.
Algorithm to get the occurrence count of non-leaf nodes
Once finishing the occurrence count of all leaf nodes, the occurrence count of elements on
each non-leaf node could be computed by merging its child nodes based on its correlation,
either disjunction or conjunction. If conjunction, the occurrence on all child nodes would be
summed up, otherwise, a range from the minimum to maximum occurrence value for one
specific element would be extracted from its child nodes.
The occurrence count for leaf nodes and non-leaf nodes would be carried out parallel
with the traversing process. When the traverse finished visiting all the sub-tree nodes of a
sub-root, which must be a non-leaf node, the occurrence count of this sub-root would be
computed with the above algorithm.
A sample result of occurrence is presented by an map, for example, ’Charlie’: {’min’:
1, ’max’: 4}, which denotes Charlie should appear at least once in this attack and at most
==PAGE:38==
28
Visualizing attacks
four times. Figure 4.1 shows all the functions in the module regarding the implementation of
the element occurrence count in the attack tree.
Fig. 4.1 Main functions in the occurrence count module
Actually, in this module,not only the element occurrence count for each node has been
recorded, some information regarding the child nodes and parent node for a node is also
documented together with the node type, either conjunctive or disjunctive. These information
is quite helpful with implementation in a later phase we would talk about in the following
sections.
4.2.2
Implementation of Weight Measurement
The basic concept of weight measurement has been illustrated in section 3.2, we would
follow the thought described there and start the implementation.
A few factors are used to determine the weight of one single element, the element could be
any actor or asset in the attack model, and then the weight of elements can help derive the
weight of nodes.
The factors mentioned above are the likelihood, time consumption, difficulty and cost
of carrying out an operation on one element, these factors also imply the attributes of this
element. Each factor would be divided into 4 levels and the value is based on the ease of
access and availability of the element.
One major difference for occurrence and weight measurement is that, we only need to
focus on the elements which appear in the model and ignore the actions in the leaf label
when computing the occurrence, but for the weight measurement, all actions should also
be analyzed, which is quite reasonable. For example, some actions in the label like "force",
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Implementation
29
"move", it definitely requires some cost and it might also increase the difficulty or decrease
the likelihood, further more, some action like "trust" might be quite time consuming, so it is
definitely necessary to think about all the effects these actions could make. Actually, we think
the effects these actions could make on the attack is quite comparable with other elements.
Note: With the above explanation, we need to emphasis that, when we mention elements in
occurrence count module, we are referring to all the elements which make up the components
in the attack model. The rest part of our paper, when we are talking about elements, it means
component elements as well as all the actions that could be applied to these component
elements.
In order to assign the impact values to all elements, there are 4 maps which are corre-
sponding to the 4 factors mentioned above. Each map concerning each factor is divided into
4 levels.
1. Time consuming map, four levels MT,HR,DY and MN, which represents minute, hour,
day and month level of time.
2. Difficulty map, four levels are V,H,M and L, which implies Very high, high, medium
and low, respectively.
3. Likelihood map is defined similarly with Difficulty map.
4. Cost map, is leveled with digit 1 to 4, which tells the cost is from low to high.
For each element, all four factors are totally independent. For example, the actor Charlie,
who is an actor in the attack tree, if an attacker wants to run any operation on him, the
attacker needs to spend some time in the hour level, cost in 3, and the operation’s difficulty
is in low level, while likelihood in very high level. Actually, all factors are only relied on
the characteristics of the element which has been predefined in the system, they have no
connection with each other.
One thing that is quite important to know, whenever we are talking about two levels concern-
ing the same impact factor, the gap between one level and its upper level is considerable huge,
so the effect of the lower level could be ignored when meeting higher leveled value. For
example, one element possess the time consuming level as MN(month), but another action
holds the HR(hour) as the time level, the hour could be totally ignored when facing month
level, thus, the result of combining these two is the MN(month). The same rule applies to the
other 3 factors.
==PAGE:40==
30
Visualizing attacks
Algorithm to get the weight sum for nodes in the attack tree
The computation of weight sum share lots of similarities with the occurrence count, and both
of them are carried out synchronously.
when we measure the weight of each node, we first need to keep a record on the weight
of each leaf node, following the grammar for leaf labels described in section 4.2.1, we can
then compute the weight of the node for all four factors.
As described in the beginning of this section, When analyzing each leaf label, all the
words, including the actions and component elements, in the label would contribute to the
weight measurement for the node. Our initial goal is to finalize the four factors referred
above for each node.
1. As to leaf nodes, we would analyze all the elements in the leaf labels. For each word
that appears in the label, we would consult the four impact factor value map defined
above to check its weight. For difficulty,cost and time, we would extract the highest
level among the elements and assign the value to the node, as to likelihood, the lowest
value among the elements would be taken.
2. When computing the weight sum for a non-leaf nodes, if it is conjunctive, likelihood
would be the lowest among its child nodes, while the cost, difficulty and time would
be the highest level from its child nodes. As to disjunctive node, the cost,difficulty and
time would be the lowest while the likelihood would be the highest among its child
nodes. The root node can also be taken as one of the non-leaf cases.
As what we have stated before, the process of measuring weight is parallel with the counting
occurrence, the recursion thought also works in this part of implementation. One example
would be, “FORCE Charlie door” {’likelihood’: ’L’, ’cost’: 4, ’time’: ’HR’, ’difficulty’: ’V’}
, implies that the happening of forcing Charlie to door has low likelihood, and the cost is 4,
the time consumption is hour level, and this action is very difficult.
Figure 4.2 shows all the functions involved in the implementation for the weight mea-
surement. Actually, this module is a quite important part for the whole project, the path
computation, attack tree visualization and even system model visualization are based on the
weight sum information we get from this module.
==PAGE:41==
4.2 Implementation
31
Fig. 4.2 main functions in the weight measurement module
4.2.3
Implementation for Path Computation
The above two impact measurement techniques are two simple analysis that we could conduct
on the attack tree, and they indeed could provide enough information if we only need to
understand the individual nodes in the attack tree. But it is not so meaningful if we only know
the information regarding nodes instead of the whole attack tree since attacks are always a
combination of a few different nodes. Thus we need extend the previous techniques to the
paths where these nodes occur.
There exists quite a few different paths in the attack tree, but all of them share one same
character, after applying all the actions described in the leaf nodes for one path. The attack
goal, which is the root of the attack tree, would be achieved. Thus it is quite fundamental to
figure out all the possible paths existing in the attack tree and the attributes of each path, for
example, the cost for each path, the likelihood and the difficulty. After comparing all the path
attributes, then we could determine which paths are the weakest in the system and prepare
some related countermeasures.
From the characters of attack trees, it is easy to know that the number of available paths
==PAGE:42==
32
Visualizing attacks
existing in the attack tree depends on the ratio between disjunctive and conjunctive nodes as
well as their locations in the attack tree.
Algorithm for path computation
Based on the replacement rules of conjunctive and disjunctive nodes which has been illus-
trated in 2.3, the computation would start from the the root node, we also need to define a
sequence in the beginning. Originally, the sequence would only have one node, root.
• When arriving at a conjunctive node, the parent sequence could be replaced by adding
all child nodes to the sequence and eliminate the parent node.
• But for disjunctive node, the parent sequence would be divided to a few new sequences
containing the sequence parent nodes’ child nodes by applying the replacement rule,
of course, the parent node would also be eliminated after the replacement.
The process keeps going on until only leaf nodes exist in the newly generated sequences.
Once the whole process terminates, all the possible paths have been figured out.
The above replacing step could only get all the leaf nodes of each path, however,we need
to figure out all the non-leaf nodes in the path as well since the attack tree visualization is
based on the whole path. In fact, it is not so difficult to implement that because we could use
the parent information stored in the occurrence count to get all the distinct non-leaf node til
the root node. At the same time, all the edges from the parent node to its child node in the
path would also be recorded for the usage in the next step.
Get the weight sum for each path
Knowing the number of possible paths and the nodes for each path is not enough in our
analysis for the attack model, it is also quite fundamental to carry out the weight measurement
for each path. Thus during the whole path generating process, the weight measurement of
one individual path would also be carried out. The mechanism for acquiring the weight factor
values of paths are quite similar with these conjunctive non-leaf nodes referred in 4.2.2 . The
weight of one path relies on all the leaf nodes in this path, all leaf nodes would be collected
and apply the same method for computing the weight of a conjunctive node to get the weight
for this path.
Figure 4.3 gives an overview for all the functions have been implemented for the path
computation module.
==PAGE:43==
4.2 Implementation
33
After getting all different properties of each path, we could do some comparison among all
Fig. 4.3 Main functions in the path count module
paths, then we could figure out which path is the easiest and most likely to be exploited by
attackers to run the attack.
Although all the above analysis and generated data could provide quite an amount of informa-
tion and have an good assessment on the risk in the attack model, it is still not straightforward
enough and the visualization is still far from satisfaction especially when the attack tree
becomes large, therefore we need to figure out a way to implement good visualization of the
attacks.
4.2.4
Implementation of the visualization of attack tree
The main technology for visualizing the attack tree is named networkx which has been
described in section 4.1.2. For the attack tree visualization module, it doesn’t produce new
information, but we just need to implement a method to use the analysis result properly and
reflect all the paths with high or low impact values on the attack tree.
Three visual styles would be utilized to reflect three impact heaviness of each path. First,
the line width of edges implies the resource of a specific path, here, the resource tells how
demanding this attack path is. We assumed attackers always choose the path with lowest
cost, lowest time consumption and lowest difficulty to apply attacking. Thus the resource is
inversely proportional to these three parameters. Secondly, the transparency reflects the like-
lihood of one path in an attack which is straightforwardly defined in the weight measurement.
The more transparent one path is, the lower likelihood it shall be. The last and foremost one
is color, which means the overall impact of each path for the whole attack. The impact value
==PAGE:44==
34
Visualizing attacks
is determined by the value of resource, likelihood as well as the profit of the attack, color
scale is from green to red, which means the impact is increasing from low to high. More
detailed information regarding the meaning of different visual styles would be given at the
end of this section.
There are a few optimization that have been applied in order to give a better appearance
when plotting the attack tree, for example, the transparency represents the likelihood of an
attack, but due to our calculation method, it might have the possibility that the value for
the likelihood for one path is not in the range of 0 to 1 which is explicitly restricted in the
networkx library, so we have to ensure that the final data provided to show transparency is in
that range, but of course, it should also have a good reflection of the likelihood of a path, so
what we do is get the biggest value among all the path, and then all other likelihood value
was divided by the biggest value of likelihood, in that case, the requirement is met.
For the edge width, considering the edge width larger than 5 would result in a messy
visualization of attack tree, so we implemented a method to make the edge width settle from
1 to 5. The implementation of this method is quite similar with transparency, but we would
get the lowest resource value, and assign lowest resource holder with edge width to be 1,
other paths could get the edge width according to the ratio of its resource value to the lowest
resource. If the ratio is higher than 5, the path would be assigned with edge width in 5.
Since many paths might share the same edge, so one edge might be assigned with different
color value, but it is clear that we have to make the more critical attack obvious, so we need
to prioritize different paths. The solution is to sort all the paths with the color factor value in
a descending order, so that the color with higher impact could be more visible than lower ones.
Figure 4.4 shows all the functions in the tree visualization module. There are 4 main
functions that are involved in this module, all the description and relevant usage have been
demonstrated in the figure, actually, this module share some similar functions with the attack
tree path computation.
While not at the core of our work, we briefly discuss the mapping from attack tree analysis
results to visualisations, since these map directly to the visualisation of the contribution
of components of organisations to the risk faced by the organisation. With all the plotting
information we could get and apply them with the attack tree visualization module, we could
get the following plot.
==PAGE:45==
4.2 Implementation
35
Fig. 4.4 Main functions in the attack tree visualization module
Figure 4.5 is an example for the attack tree we have plotted. We have applied three vi-
sual styles to illustrate the influence of paths in the attack tree on the overall result for the
tree:
• The line width of edges implies the resource usage of a specific path, that is, how
resource demanding an attack path is. We assumed attackers always choose the path
with lowest cost, lowest time consumption, and lowest difficulty to apply attacking.
Thus the line width is inversely proportional to these three parameters – the lower the
resource usage of a path, the more likely the attacker to take it (modulo other factors
that come next).
• The transparency reflects the likelihood of success of a path in an attack. This attribute
is directly defined in the weight measurement: the more transparent a path is, the lower
its likelihood of success.
• The last and foremost property is color, which represents the overall impact of a path,
normalised to percentage of the highest impact for the whole attack. The impact value
is determined by the required resources, likelihood of success as well as the profit of
the attack. In general the color scale chosen is between two colours, where one color
represents 0%, the other 100%, and other values are combination of the two. In our
example the color scale goes from green to red, which means the impact is increasing
from low to high.
Clearly, more advanced visualisations provide even deeper insights into the scenarions
represented by an attack tree. In the TREsPASS project we have explored many such
methods [20].
==PAGE:46==
36
Visualizing attacks
Fig. 4.5 Nodes with border represent conjunctive nodes, nodes without border disjunctive
nodes. the two red paths represent the two attacks with the biggest likelihood of success. The
left hand path, however, has a higher chance of success, which is represented by a higher
saturation of the colors
==PAGE:47==
4.3 Verification of the result
37
4.3
Verification of the result
The result from the above implementation would provide 4 outputs, including 3 cvs files,
which are occurrence.csv,weight_measurement.csv and path.csv, and a graph describe the
visual result for the attack tree. All the three csv files could be accessed in the appendix file.
4.3.1
File occurrence.csv
This file is generated from the occurrence count module, it would display the information
regarding the appearing times of each element in the attack tree. The file includes fields of
information as follows:
ID , Node_Occurrence_Count , Children , Node_Type , Label , Parent
For each field, they represent
1. ID is the only unique tag that could be used to refer to a node, it is quite important
since both the impact measurement techniques need to apply the analysis to all nodes,
and later in the path computation and attack tree visualization module, they also need
to use the node information. The id would be assigned to each node when traversing
the whole attack tree. Starting from 0, it has an auto-increment property and the owner
of id in largest number is the root node. We can also have a knowledge about how
many nodes exist in the attack tree by observing the root id number. Another critical
feature for this field is that, there exist a few nodes with the same label, but they are
under different branches or paths in the attack tree, we have to differentiate them by
assigning different ids to them.
2. Node_Occurrence_Count means the occurrence count of each element in each node.
If the node is a leaf node, the value in this field implies the element appearing times in
the leaf node label. If a non-leaf node, it would be the element occurrence count in all
leaf nodes of the sub tree with current node as the root. The element occurrence count
would be an array with the lower/upper boundary means the minimum/maximum times
this element should appear to fulfill the attack requirements. Here, we can take the
root node Node_Occurrence_Count as an example, most of the nodes hold the lower
boundary of 0, it makes sense since from the root node, the attack could have lots of
alternatives to run the attack, some elements are necessary in one path, but it is not in
another path. Of course, the deviation from the lower boundary to the upper boundary
relies on the amount of times of conjunctive and disjunctive child nodes it has gone
through.
==PAGE:48==
38
Visualizing attacks
3. Children includes a set of IDs of all children of one node. An empty set is assigned to
this field if a leaf node. The reason to keep this property is for the path computation in
a later phase and also for the inspection purpose.
4. Node_Type tells if a node is a conjunctive node or a disjunctive one. If it is a conjunc-
tive node, this field would be and, otherwise, it would be or, this property determines
the replacing rule described in 2.3, and it helps decide to plot the show the border of
the node when plotting the attack tree visualization graph.
5. Label shows the label content of the node. Actually, both the impact measurement
techniques, the occurrence count and the weight measurement, need to use this label
content, we separate each word in the leaf node label to get the element occurrence
and record the weight sum. Since most of the operations are relied on the id to access
each node, but we need this field to map the id to the label content. For verification
purpose, it would not be enough if only the id is provided, we also need to know the
label content to figure out the right node because some of the nodes hold the same
label, but we have different IDs to identify them. Since the traverse is in a post-order
breadth, so the same label with lower id number would be located in relatively left
place of the attack tree plot.
6. Parent implies the parent node of current node, the value for this field would be only a
integer ID. The parent value for the root node would be -1 to show the specialty. The
parent value is used in the path computation phase to get the entire path from the root
to all the leaf nodes. Besides, it can also be used to differentiate the nodes with the
same label when checking.
Here, we would give two examples to verify the correctness of the result. First, we would
take a leaf node, for example,the node with ID=0 has the label being FULFILL Fred trusts
Margrethe, the appearance of Fred denotes to 1 and Margrethe would also contributes to 1.
ID , Node_Occurrence_Count , Children , Node_Type , Label , Parent
0 ,"{ ’ Fred ’ : { ’ max ’ : 1 ,
’min ’ : 1 } ,
’ Margrethe ’ : { ’ max ’ : 1 ,
’min ’ : 1 } } " ,
s e t ( ) , or ,
FULFILL Fred
t r u s t s
Margrethe
,2
The result is quite easy to understand, and we would not elaborate it more.
The second example, we would take a look at a non-leaf node get item x004 and extract
data x009 with ID of 40, it has two child nodes, and it is a conjunctive node.
ID , Node_Occurrence_Count , Children , Node_Type , Label , Parent
==PAGE:49==
4.3 Verification of the result
39
38 ,"{ ’ door ’ : { ’ max ’ : 2 ,
’min ’ : 1 } ,
’ Fred ’ : { ’ max ’ : 3 ,
’min ’ : 3 } ,
’ x004 ’ : { ’ max ’ : 1 ,
’min ’ : 1 } ,
’ Margrethe ’ :
{ ’max ’ : 2 ,
’min ’ : 1 } } " ,
"{36 ,
37}" , add , t e s t ,40
39 ,"{ ’ Fred ’ : { ’ max ’ : 1 ,
’min ’ : 1 } ,
’ x009 ’ : { ’ max ’ : 1 ,
’min ’ : 1 } ,
’ x004 ’ : { ’ max ’ : 1 ,
’min ’ : 1 } } " , s e t ( ) , or ,
IN Fred x009 x004 ,40
From the above two items’ description, we know that the door and Margrethe only appear
in node 38 while X009 only in node 39 , so these occurrence information should be kept
for node 40. For other elements, we should apply the replacing rules, so Fred would have
a maximum occurrence value of 4 and minimum also 4. X004 holds both maximum and
minimum in value 2. So the following result can be verified then,
ID , Node_Occurrence_Count , Children , Node_Type , Label , Parent
40 ,"{ ’ door ’ :
{ ’max ’ : 2 ,
’min ’ : 1 } ,
’ Fred ’ : { ’ max ’ : 4 ,
’min ’ : 4 } ,
’ x004 ’ : { ’ max ’ : 2 ,
’min ’ : 2 } ,
’ x009 ’ : { ’ max ’ : 1 ,
’min ’ : 1 } ,
’ Margrethe ’ : { ’ max ’ : 2 ,
’min ’ : 1 } } " , " { 3 8 ,
39}" , add ,
get
item
x004 and
e x t r a c t
data
x009 ,41
Conclusion for occurrence count
If all the elements are of the same importance, the impact measurement based on occurrence
count can reflect the impact of each element to the attack model greatly. But this kind of
ideal circumstance is quite unrealistic, it is more reasonable to apply impact measurement
analysis considering various impact factors of each element. To some extend, we can rely on
the analysis result of the occurrence count to have a good idea about if an element has made
some contribution to the attack model.
==PAGE:50==
40
Visualizing attacks
4.3.2
File weight_measurement.csv
This file is generated after running the weight measurement module, it gives the information
about the weight impact factors of all nodes in the attack tree. The fields of information are
as follow:
ID , Node_Weigth_Measure , Children , Node_Type , Label
we can see that most of the fields in weight_measurement.csv share the similarity with
occurrence.csv, the only difference is that our focus would be on the weight sum of all nodes
instead of occurrence count.
Here, Node_Weigth_Measure gives us some information regarding the weight sum of
all elements(including actions) for a node. If it is a leaf node, only the weight sum of those
elements who appear in current node would be presented. Otherwise, the element weight
sum would include the information regarding all elements that contribute to current node’s
sub-tree.
Similarly, we would give some examples to verify the accuracy of the result. First, we
would take a leaf node, for example,the node with ID=0 has the label of Force Fred door.
From the 4 maps we have predefined in the system, we could summarize that the highest
cost should be from actor Fred or action Force, which is 2, the highest time consumption,
difficulty and likelihood should be HR , Medium and Low level respectively due to the
complication of action Force. Then we can get its weight measurement is
ID , Node_Weigth_Measure , Children , Node_Type , Label
1 ,"{ ’ d i f f i c u l t y ’ : ’M’ ,
’ cost ’ : 2 ,
’ l i k e l i h o o d ’ : ’ L’ ,
’ time ’ : ’HR’ } " ,
s e t ( ) , or , FORCE Fred
door
Then we would take another non-leaf node as an example. In order to know a non-leaf node’s
weight sum, we need first know its child nodes’ information. Like the node with ID of 14,
which is a disjunctive node, and it contains two child nodes as follows.
ID , Node_Weigth_Measure , Children , Node_Type , Label
11 ,"{ ’ d i f f i c u l t y ’ : ’M’ , ’ cost ’ : 2 , ’ l i k e l i h o o d ’ : ’H’ , ’ time ’ : ’HR’ } " ,
"{9 ,
10}" , and , t e s t
13 ,"{ ’ d i f f i c u l t y ’ : ’V’ , ’ cost ’ :
4 , ’ l i k e l i h o o d ’ : ’H’ , ’ time ’ : ’MN’ } " ,
{12} , and , t e s t
==PAGE:51==
4.3 Verification of the result
41
From the above information, we could get that node 14 would have Medium difficulty, cost
of 2, likelihood of high and the time consumption of HR level by using the method for
computing the weight sum for disjunctive nodes. The result is
ID , Node_Weigth_Measure , Children , Node_Type , Label
14 ,"{ ’ d i f f i c u l t y ’ : ’M’ , ’ cost ’ :
2 , ’ l i k e l i h o o d ’ : ’H’ , ’ time ’ : ’HR’ } " ,
"{11 ,
13}" , or , make Margrethe
get
x004
The above two examples are just two testing cases to see the correctness of the imple-
mentation.
Now let’s move to the root node, root is the node with highest ID number, which is
usually located at the end of the file. The weight sum of the root could give us a good view
of the whole attack tree.
ID , Node_Weigth_Measure , Children , Node_Type , Label
75 ,"{ ’ d i f f i c u l t y ’ : ’M’ , ’ cost ’ : 2 , ’ l i k e l i h o o d ’ : ’H’ , ’ time ’ : ’HR’ } " ,
"{24 ,
74}" , or , A tt a c ke r
Fredget
items
x004 x009
Here, we can get that the root node has a Medium difficulty level, cost in 2 , high likelihood
and the time consumption of HR level. But the result presented here for each impact factor
is the best situation it could reach, actually, all of them might not be able to be achieved at
the same time. For example, the lowest difficulty the attack could reach is Medium, but if
a attacker want to launch an attack with the difficulty of Medium level, the cost might be
higher than 2, or the likelihood would not be high. Since we are extracting the worst attack
situation for each factor, we need to analyze the strongest attack situation. But of course,
there are some chances that all the requirements have been fulfilled and that would be the
strongest attack it could happen to the organization.
Conclusion for weight sum
The concept of weight measurement improves over the occurrence-based ranking by weight-
ing occurrences of identifiers with the impact of the attack they occur in. But the current
analysis in this module is on a node basis, since the whole analysis is from the scope of the
whole attack tree, so we should not isolate the nodes, instead we should consider the weight
==PAGE:52==
42
Visualizing attacks
sum of a node by putting the node to the path it appears. Thus, it is more meaningful to talk
about the weight sum on a path basis and analyze the overall impact of the path.
4.3.3
File path.csv
This file is created by running the path computation module, it gives all the information
regarding the path and the weight measurement of each path. The fields exist in this file are
ID , Path_Leafs , Path_Nodes , Path_Edges , Path_Weight_Measurement
Each of the fields represent the meaning as follow:
1. ID means the id of each path, starting from 0, the id with the largest number gives
the information about the amount of all possible paths for the attack tree. Since we
sort all the path according to the overall impact factor of each path, so all the path ids
presented in the file would not be displayed in a fixed order.
2. Path_Leafs tells the information regarding all the leaf nodes existing in the path, and
it is used to compute the weight measurement of each path since the path weight
measurement is only determined by leaf nodes. This field is the original information
we could get when we finish the replacing rules.
3. Path_Nodes presents all the nodes, including all the leaf and none-leaf nodes, in the
path. Based on the list we get from Path_Leafs, then repeat the process of adding all
the parent nodes of current nodes into the list. Finally, we get a list of nodes the path
would go through from the root node to the leaf nodes.
4. Path_Edges shows all the edges exist in the path. The information in this field
is generated in the same time when Path_Nodes is computed. Actually, the edge
information here is the fundamental part when plotting the visualization figure of
attack tree.
5. Path_Weight_Measurement implies the weight measurement of each path in the attack
tree. However, the weight measurement of the path holds some difference with the
weight measurement of nodes described in 4.3.2. Except all the 4 factors mentioned
before, the information regarding the resource and colorFactor are also presented since
all the 4 basic factors excluding likelihood are not the direct data we use for deciding
the visual styles of the attack tree. But both the value of resource and colorFactor are
relied on the value of the 4 basic factors of the path.
==PAGE:53==
4.3 Verification of the result
43
From the Appendix file, we can get that there exist 36 paths in the attack tree. The path with
the highest colorfactor, which is the first one appearing in the path item in the file, happens
to be the one with the ID of 0, then we would take this one as an example.
ID , Path_Leafs , Path_Nodes , Path_Edges , Path_Weight_Measurement
0 , [ 4 5 ] , " [ 4 5 ,
46 ,
54 ,
73 ,
74 ,
7 5 ] " , " [ [ 4 6 ,
45] ,
[54 ,
46] ,
[73 ,
54] ,
[74 ,
73] ,
[75 ,
7 4 ] ] " ,
"{ ’ cost ’ :
2 ,
’ resource ’ :
0.5 ,
’ d i f f i c u l t y ’ :
’L’ ,
’ c o l o r F a c t o r ’ :
1500.0 ,
’ time ’ :
’MT’ ,
’ l i k e l i h o o d ’ :
’H’}"
it matches with the calculation of resource = 1/(1*2*1) = 0.5, since the profit is 1000 and
likelihood is high, which could be interpret into 3, so we can get colorFactor = 0.5*1000*3 =
1500.
As a comparison, we would also evaluate the path with lowest colorFactor, which is the last
one appearing in the path item in the file,
ID , Path_Leafs , Path_Nodes , Path_Edges , Path_Weight_Measurement
1 5 , [ 3 0 ] , " [ 3 0 ,
31 ,
41 ,
74 ,
7 5 ] " , " [ [ 3 1 ,
30] ,
[41 ,
31] ,
[74 ,
41] ,
[75 ,
7 4 ] ] " ,
"{ ’ cost ’ :
4 ,
’ resource ’ :
0.015625 ,
’ d i f f i c u l t y ’ :
’V’ ,
’ c o l o r F a c t o r ’ :
15.625 ,
’ time ’ :
’MN’ ,
’ l i k e l i h o o d ’ :
’L’}"
The resource for this path equals to 1/(4*4*4) = 0.015625, and the color factor denotes to
0.015625*1*1000 = 15.625
Conclusion for attack path
The computation of attack path presents all the possible paths that could be followed in an
attack tree, and it also shows all the impact measurement of each path so we could compare
the weight sum of each path and put surveillance to elements that appear in the path with
high impact values. Later for the attack tree visualization, the visual styles for different paths
rely heavily on the analysis result in this module.
==PAGE:54==
44
Visualizing attacks
4.3.4
Attack tree visualization assessment
If all the previous steps progress well, we have enough reason to trust the accuracy of the
attack tree visualization. Figure 4.5 only displays a very typical example of the attack tree
visualization.
But we need to make one thing clear.As mentioned in section 4.2.3, the color and line
width is not absolute, instead both of them are determined on a relative basis.
Since the formula to get the resource for one attack path is
r e s o u r c e = 1 / ( c o s t * d i f f i c u l t y * time )
thus we can conclude that if the resource value is high, it means the price demanded in this
path is relatively low. First, we would have a method to get the lowest resource value holder,
so the line width of a path is assigned with the ratio of the current resource value to the lowest
resource value. In this case, the minimum line width of the path would be 1. Besides, if an
attack path holds high line width, the attack along this path would be relatively easy.
The similar relativity mechanism has been implemented to the color displaying result as
well, but in an opposite thinking. Here, the path with highest color factor means the path is
the highest impact holder, so it would be assigned with the red color, then other path would
be assigned to relatively greener color depending on the level of ratio between the current
color factor to the largest color factor.
Conclusion for attack tree visualization
From the above analysis, we could know that both line with and color of the path are not
absolute, it could only provide the information concerning, the relatively easiest and relatively
strongest attacks could be applied to the organization. However, there are some situations
for the attack tree, for example, even the highest impact value is already very low, but we
still display this route in red since this path is currently the strongest attack could follow in
the organization. The organization should use our attack tree visualization and integrate it
with the analysis we have done in previous steps as well to evaluate the risk of attack in the
system.
==PAGE:55==
4.4 Pareto-Efficient Solutions
45
4.4
Pareto-Efficient Solutions
4.4.1
Pareto-Efficient Solutions
In case of multiple parameters most analytical methods optimise one parameter at a time
minimise cost or maximise probability of an attack. Such methods may lead to sub-optimal
solutions when optimising conflicting parameters minimising cost while maximising prob-
ability; in this scenario it may not be possible to identify the attack that will result in the
biggest gain for the attacker.
Here, we would introduce a concept named Pareto-Efficiency to give a solution to the attack
regarding multiple parameters. This concept was first introduced by an Italian economist
who used it in his research to find the best economic efficiency and income distribution. But
nowadays, it is also applied in academic fields like engineering and life science, it represents
a method to allocate resource for a purpose that one individual is better off without the cost of
making another individual worse off. Since in our case, we need to take different parameters
into consideration, like the difficulty, likelihood, cost and time, Pareto-Efficiency is a good
solution to balance all different parameters and find out the attack with highest benefits.
Pareto-efficient solutions [1] result in combinations of these conflicting parameters, and
can be used to approximate the results for comparable values. Figure 4.6 shows an example of
a Pareto-efficient solutions for an attack tree that results in probability of a successful attacks
ranging from 0 to 0.97 and the corresponding cost ranging from 0 to 695. Assuming that the
attacker has a fixed budget or a rational attacker who will not launch an attack if the cost is
higher than the expected gain, we can identify the optimal Pareto-efficient solution from this
set. We are currently experimenting with approaches for visualising this directly on the attack
tree to indicate how close a path in the attack tree is to the most Pareto-efficient solution.
The approach of scaling between two colours, which we applied for unary predicates as
discussed above, does not carry over to binary predicates, where we have worse attacks (for
the attacker) with higher probability. We are currently considering three colours green – red –
blue, or stretching of lines, where the colours have the same meaning as discussed above, but
the path lengths are scaled depending on how close they are to the Pareto-efficient solution.
The scaling would make identification of the most Pareto-efficient attack (and the ordering
on attacks) straightforward, since the longer paths are more efficient.
Visualising Pareto-efficient Solutions:
As mentioned above, visualising Pareto-efficient solutions requires special approaches due
to the fact that the best solution may be in the middle of the spectrum of possible attacks.
==PAGE:56==
46
Visualizing attacks
Fig. 4.6 Pareto efficient solutions for the attack tree
Therefore, it may be important to visualise not only the best solution, but also identifying
solutions that are worse or better, but are not chosen due to the efficiency criterion. The three-
colour option discussed above is also applicable in the model setting; other approaches such
as the scaling of edges do not carry over since different attacks with differing quantitative
valuations must be visualised on the same model.
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 5
Visualizing system models
The previous chapter presented some approaches to analyze the attack tree, and a relevant
visualization method has been provided to give a better view of the possible attacks in a attack
tree. However, we still could not get any information on how each element in the system
model contribute to the attack. Especially when the size of an attack tree is very large, there
would be a huge amount of attack paths inside the attack tree. Even with outstanding visual
styles, it would still result in confusion. Thus we need to come up with a clear mechanism
on how to map the attack tree to the system model components, and provide an acceptable
visual styles to the system model as well.
In this chapter we would integrate all different analysis described in the previous chapters
to visualise the relation between attack trees and system models. Remember that we require
all elements in the model to have unique identifiers; we use this identifier to associate model
components and attack tree actions.
5.1
Mapping from attack tree to model
Considering that if a huge attack tree is given, the visualization of attack tree would not be so
satisfactory since lots of interrelations between different paths are quite confusing. But the
amount of components of each model is always limited and easy to apply some surveillance,
thus we think it is also quite necessary to provide a good mechanism to have a satisfying
visualization of the system model. However, all the previous analysis and information we
got is based on attack trees, so we need to find a good solution to map all the data regarding
attack tree and apply it to system model.
Actually, mapping the attack tree to system model is not so complicated, we know that
the attack analysis is based on the attack model, and all the elements involved in the attack
trees should also be part of the components in the system model. But they are also quite
==PAGE:58==
48
Visualizing system models
different, for example, the smallest unit we need consider for the attack tree analysis would
be nodes, each node might contain multiple elements and different actions. However, for the
model, we would conduct the analysis on each element, the model has a good representation
of all elements like locations, actors and assets, so we need to find out the critical elements
in the model and mark them out according to their impact just like what we did for the attack
tree.
Another difference we need to pay some attention to is that, for the attack model, we
could use attack tree to show all possible attacks. The edges inside the attack tree mean the
goal in the parent node could be partially or totally replaced by the sub nodes. However, the
edges for the system model only means the connection between two locations. Therefore, we
first need to come up with a mechanism to map all the impact analysis from attack tree to
system model, and we can directly use the analysis result for elements in attack tree. But for
locations, we need to analyze the leaf labels to find out all actions with location transferring.
As mentioned above, analysis for attack tree and model share some basic parts, so we
can take advantage of the analysis result we have done for attack tree and apply it to the
model visualization. For example. in the attack tree analysis, we output some data regarding
the impact of each potential path in the attack tree. We can use this information to analyze the
elements in this path and show the analysis result in the model. Since all the result regarding
that part has already been stored, so we can just import them to the model visualization
module.
As to the difference between attack tree and model analysis, we should focus more on
individual element rather than performed steps or actions, and the connections between
different locations.
The rest part of this chapter is structured as follows: First, we would have an introduc-
tion of all the tools and technologies used for mapping attack tree to system model and
visualizing system models. After that, we would talk about the implementation of the map-
ping mechanism together with how to present the visualization of the system model according
to the result we got from above steps.
==PAGE:59==
5.2 Tools and technologies involved
49
5.2
Tools and technologies involved
For the technologies involved in model visualization, of course, Python is always the script
language which has been inherited from the previous codes. Here, we would talk about two
main tools used in this module, the first one is a model parser that outputs a json file about all
the details of the model such as the elements in the model and their co-relations. The other
one is Cytoscape, which is a tool for plotting different elements in the model.
5.2.1
Model parser
If we want to present a good view for the model of an organization, we first need to know
the structure of the model. Based on the previous work[6], a tool named model2json.jar is
provided to offer the structural information of a system model. Here. we would not elaborate
the implementation of the tool, instead, we would just have a brief introduction on how it
works for our project .
Figure 5.1 presents an overview of the model parser tool. First, the model parser would take
a model XML file as input, inside the model.xml file, it would have all basic information
regarding the identifiers of actors, locations, assets, and the connections between the locations.
Further more, some data about the role each actor is playing in the model together with some
system policies which implies the access regulations inside the organization are also listed in
the model xml file.
Fig. 5.1 A overview of the model to json generation tool
==PAGE:60==
50
Visualizing system models
Once the model xml file is input to the model parser, the parser would have an analysis
of all elements, which could be locations, actors, assets etc., and how each policies could
affect each element.
The output would be a json result, which is quite fundamental since it contains the
information such as all basic elements exist in the model, where the actor or some assets are
located, who is the owner of each asset, or some asset belongs to another item inside the
model, how each element is connected with each other. The json output would be used in a
later phase and is quite critical to the whole project.
5.2.2
Cytoscape
At first, the author was considering using the same python visualization framework networkx
to display model features. But after some testing, he found out that networkx doesn’t provide
a good interface to display nodes inside another node, since this is a quite necessary feature
for the system model visualization, for example, there are cases like one actor is the owner of
one asset, or one asset is part of another asset. What is worse, some of the assets also have
multiple hierarchies of child assets, which means some of its child items contains grand-child
items, which is almost impossible to use networkx to have a good displaying result for model
visualization, at least the author was not able to come up with a solution to cope with the
issues according to his knowledge.
After some investigation on the internet, a tool named Cystoscape is chosen for the model
visualization. According to the web demo, it is even possible to use this library to add some
model features and make different components draggable. So if anyone is not satisfied with
the outcome component positions, it can be resized and drag to the right position.
Cystoscape[3] is an open source software platform originally dedicated for visualization of
bioinformatics such as molecular interaction networks and integrating with gene expression
profiles and some other relevant state data. Later, based on the existing project, Cytoscape
is extended to a Javascript friendly tool, it contain a js library named Cytoscape.js, which
is the library we used for our project, Cytoscape.js could be used to carry out analysis and
visualizing graphs in Javascript environment, like web browsers.
The main part to call the Cytoscape,js is to specify all the parameters for the nodes and
edges and all desired styles of them. The basic elements for the Cytoscape graph is nodes
and edges, all the node and edge information has to be provided as two independent arrays.
Besides, for each node, the parent property should also be provided if any, and some other
class names to specify the style also needs to be assigned in the initialization phase. For
edges, first, each edge should be bind with an unique id so that all edges are identical. Each
==PAGE:61==
5.3 Implementation
51
edge also has the properties like source and target, source is the starting node for the edge
while the target is the end node, similar with nodes, it is also possible to assign some classes
to edges so that it could specify some special styles to the edges.
5.3
Implementation
In this section, we would talk about how we implement the analysis on an element basis in the
system model and use the analysis outcome to visualize the system model of an organization.
5.3.1
Implementation of mapping attack tree to system model
First, we would have a look at the fundamental part, how to map the attack tree to system
model.
As described in the first section of this chapter, we need to focus on the impact of each
element and how they are contributing to the attacks in the attack model when mapping the
attack trees to models. But there are more than one path that could make the attack possible,
for each path, it consists of quite a few actors, locations and assets, some elements might
appear in so many paths which makes it so difficult to make a decision to choose the right one
to map it to the model elements. In order to find out the right path, we prioritize all possible
attack paths according to its overall impact value considering the impact indeed reflects both
resource and likelihood, which is based on the information we got from attack tree analysis.
Here, we need to use some extra data to get all the impact measurement information
regarding each element.We indeed know that a few elements contribute to a specific attack
path in the attack tree, but if we extract all the elements out of the path, the work load would
be tremendously high, thus we need to get the element list of a model and then get the
element impact measurement according to the list.
Before we move forward to visual the system model, we would explain two important json
files, model_element.json and model_visualiztion.json. These two json files are the main in-
formation we use for implementing the visualization of system model. File model_element.json
is for getting information regarding all the nodes and edges, and model_visualiztion.json
provides all information for the visual styles of the nodes and edges.
==PAGE:62==
52
Visualizing system models
File model_element.json
First, we shall have a look at model_element.json file, this is the output for using model
parser tool model2json.jar with model.xml file as input, which has been introduced before.
Basically, this file contains a json object which tells all the nodes and edges information.
Figure 5.2 is a simplified example for the file.
1. MODELactors represents all the actor elements in the model.
2. MODELassets tells all the assets belong to the model.
3. MODELnodes gives the information about the locations in this model.
4. Other information:
if the key is an actor from the MODELactors list, it implies actor key is located in
value; For example, in Figure 5.2, Charlie is located in A1;
if the key is an location from the MODELnodes list, it means there is a connection
between the location key to location value. For example, in Figure 5.2, home is
connected to city;
otherwise, if the key is an asset, value means the owner of the asset or the asset is a
part of value For example, in Figure 5.2, x008 is part of x004.
The information in this file has been used in two different places, one is for assigning each
element with the same style with the path where it appears. The other one is for plotting the
system model layout since this model_element.json file concludes the structure of the whole
system model.
File model_visualiztion.json
Once we get the model_element.json file, we could use the information provided to traverse
each element and then get impact values for nodes and edges, which would be used to
determine the styles for nodes and edges. All the style information would be stored in
model_visualiztion.json.
To get the styles for each nodes and edges, we would have to go back to use the result
of path computation which has been explained in section 4.2.3. There, we can get all the
information, such as the likelihood, cost, time and difficulty of each path.
As mentioned at the beginning of this section, we prioritized all the paths according to
==PAGE:63==
5.3 Implementation
53
Fig. 5.2 An example of model element json
its its overall impact value before the traverse of elements happens. The more prioritized of
an attack path, the chance to assign the elements with same style is higher.
The main purpose for the traverse the element list could be concluded as getting the styles
for nodes and edges.
Styles for nodes
In the system model, nodes represent the elements of the system model. So when the
traverse is ongoing, if one element exists in a path of currently highest priority, we would
assign the element in the same style with the path. Therefore, when the traverse process
terminates, all the elements which contribute to the attack model would have been assigned
to the same style with the highest priority holder among those paths where this element
appears. Of course, there must exist some elements which are part of the system model, but
they don’t have any impact to the attack model. So they appear in the system_element.json,
but no visual styles have been assigned to them.
==PAGE:64==
54
Visualizing system models
Styles for edges
Getting the style for the nodes(elements) is quite convenient and straightforward to un-
derstand, but for the edges in the system model, we already know that edges in the system
model represent the connections between two locations in the system.
According to the previous knowledge, we know that there is no direct information we
can use from the attack tree analysis since they don’t provide any data related to the connec-
tion of two locations for applying the attack. So we have to come up with a solution to get all
the location transferring in the attack tree.
To solve the above issue, we need to reanalyze the leaf node label once more. Two pat-
terns of the labels come to our interest. One is FORCE/MOVE actor location locality, it is
quite obvious to know that this action would definitely result in the location transferring. The
other one is IN actor AssetKind AssetName AssetID TargetKind TargetName TargetID, if
the asset is not in the same location with the actor, it could also result in location transferring.
Thus during the analysis, if a leaf node in these two patterns appears in the path, we need
to analyze the edge styles. Similar with the node styles, we would assign the edge with the
same styles with the attack path where the edge appears.
Figure 5.3 displays the implementation function of computing the styles for system nodes
and edges. After running the above function, all the edges and elements contributes in the
Fig. 5.3 Function for mapping attack tree to model
attack would be assigned with some styles. All the relevant styles could be found in file
model_visualization.json.
Figure 5.4 gives an simplified example of generated model_visualization.json. There we can
see the model_visualization.json file contains all the visual information regarding the nodes
and the edges, all the nodes information would be stored in the value which could be mapped
==PAGE:65==
5.3 Implementation
55
with the key nodes, all the edges information cloud be mapped with the key of edges. For
each node and edge value, there would be a serialize of data, each data contains the resource,
which would be shown in the form of line width, but it is only meaningful to edges between
locations; likelihood would be a value to determine the transparency, which is meaningful
for both nodes and edges, the last one is colorFactor, which tells the color of each node and
the edge, here, colorfacor would vary from 1 to 4 according to the impact level.
• 1 means green, the color code is #00ff00, any item or edge is assigned in this color
means a lowest overall impact.
• 2 represents dark green, the color code is #55aa00, any item or edge is assigned in this
color means a second lowest overall impact.
• 3 implies dark red, the color code is #aa5500, any item or edge is assigned in this color
means a second highest overall impact.
• 4 refers to red, the color code is #ff0000, any item or edge is assigned in this color
means a highest overall impact.
Fig. 5.4 An simplified example of model_visualization.json
==PAGE:66==
56
Visualizing system models
5.3.2
Implementation of visualizing system model
Once we get both of the model_element.json and model_visualiztion.json, we need to apply
the result and create the nodes and edges object that Cytoscape interface could accept. For
example, for the nodes, we need to create items like
{data : {id : nodeID, parent : parentNodeID }, classes : className1+” ”+className2 };
As to edges, we need to specify the edge item as follows:
{data : {id : edgeID, source : startNodeID, target : endNodeID }, classes : className1+
” ”+className2 };
Since all the styles of the nodes and edges is specified on a class basis, which is quite
common for the html files. So we need to define all the classes needed and assign the
relevant class names to the nodes and edges depending on their specification. For the class
requirements, we need to satisfy the format of data into
{ selector: ’.className’, css: { Styles } }
After we make up all these required data, we could apply it with the js library and run
the result, the result is presented in the format of html, so we can view the result in a browser.
Here, a example regarding the system visualization could be seen in Figure 5.5,it shows the
visualisation based on the weighted impact. For example, Alice and her card have another
impact than Charlie; for occurrence-based visualisations we would have expected a similar
result since they do not occur in all attacks. The reason is another, though: the different
impact is due to the fact that Charlie might decide to steal the ATM, which has lesser cost
and higher chance of success than social engineering Alice.
From the plot, it is clear to see that not all elements in the model would be involved
in the attack, and some edges would also not appear in the attack, so they would be in gray in
the model visualization.
==PAGE:67==
5.3 Implementation
57
Fig. 5.5 Visualisation of the weighted impact of an attack tree on the physical infrastructure
part of the example model from. Charlie is identified as the major culprit due his identifier
occurring in every single attack step. Alice is less involved, since Charlie in some attacks
might steal money from the ATM directly (or the ATM altogether). It is also clear from the
visualisation that the user tag on Alice’s card is not used in the attack, and neither is the bank
computer C.
==PAGE:68==
==PAGE:69==
Chapter 6
conclusion and future work
6.1
Conclusion
Modern organisations are complex socio-technical systems. Understanding the interactions
between the organisation’s infrastructure, IT system, and human actors is difficult; under-
standing possible attacks on the organisation even more so. While attack trees are a natural
approach to communicate risks and possible attacks, it is often hard to estimate, which parts
of an organisation contribute to these attacks.
In this article we apply some analysis methods to evaluate the attack tree and provided a
mechanism to offer a visual effect of the attack tree on an attack path basis. In addition, we
have also presented a systematic approach for mapping the results of attack generation back
to system models. The visualisation can be based on arbitrary counting of occurrences of
model elements in the generated attacks. We have presented two such approaches based on
simple occurrence and weighted occurrence. More complex ones could also take the role of
actors into account, such as attacker, victim, or social engineered.
The techniques presented here are widely applicable. Our approach is agnostic to the
underlying system and attack models. The only requirement is the ability to associate actions
and the involved artefacts in the attack model with elements in the system model, and to
obtain quantitative judgments about the attacks. While the techniques discussed in this work
especially target IT security attacks, the techniques are applicable to any kind of attacks and
risks.
==PAGE:70==
60
conclusion and future work
6.1.1
Shortcomings of this work
However, there are also some limitations in the project. Here, we just present some of them
that the author thinks it should be improved in the future.
• For the occurrence count, we can get some general information about all elements
which contribute to the attack tree, but we can see from the result that most of the
element occurrence count have a lower boundary of 0, which means they are replace-
able in the attack tree, thus we could not get too much valuable information by just
evaluating the result of simple occurrence count of the attack tree. Actually, it is more
meaningful to do analysis based on each path, then we can have a good idea on how
important each element is to the attack path.
• Similarly, the impact evaluation based on each node have the same limitation as the
occurrence count. Besides, the way how we defined the impact level for each element
may not be the best solution, and the idea to treat all actions and elements equally is
still questionable, but for this project, this is the easiest way we can come out for our
implementation.
• For most the implementation in this project, we indeed have some structured program
to run the script, and we manually used some examples to check the validity of the
outcome. However,we don’t provide a good test mechanism to prove the accuracy of
the result, we should have provided a better way to testify the output, like some unit
tests.
• The tools we have chosen for the visualization of the attack tree is still not so visual-
friendly when the attack tree is over-sized, some of the paths would have overlap due
to the limited size of the computer screen, but it would be better if a big screen is
projected. For the system visualization, the solution how to primarily present the nodes
is not so satisfactory, the user need to drag the nodes accordingly so the best view
could be presented.
• One more thing, all the outcome of the result depends heavily on the tools from
previous work and their result, but we could not figure out a good way to check how
these external tools are totally compatible and trustworthy with our analysis.
==PAGE:71==
6.2 Future work
61
6.2
Future work
We are currently working on further refinement of the visualisations for Pareto-efficient
solutions, and on more advanced counting functions. As mentioned above, it would be
interesting to take the role of an actor into account. By that time, we need a new grammar
system for the leaf node, the labels of the attack tree leafs would be more complicated, and
the implementation should also be upgraded to cater the new changes.
If possible, we should also customize the visualization by provide more choices to the
organizations. For example, if the cost is not important when applying the attack, we should
provide a cost-free visualization of attack tree and system model so only other impact factors
are considered in the analysis.
Furthermore,we are also investigating how to extend our approach to attack-defence
trees [9], which combine actions by attackers with mitigating actions by defenders.
==PAGE:72==
==PAGE:73==
References
[1] Aslanyan, Z. and Nielson, F. (2015). Pareto efficient solutions of attack-defence trees. In
Focardi, R. and Myers, A. C., editors, Principles of Security and Trust, volume 9036 of
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 95–114. Springer.
[2] Cole, E. and Ring, S. (2006). Insider Threat: Protecting the Enterprise from Sabotage,
Spying, and Theft. Elsevier.
[3] Cytoscape Consortium (2016). cytoscape. http://cytoscape.github.io/. Online; Last
visited May 2016.
[4] Dimkov, T., Pieters, W., and Hartel, P. H. (2010). Portunes: Representing attack scenarios
spanning through the physical, digital and social domain. In Armando, A. and Lowe, G.,
editors, Automated Reasoning for Security Protocol Analysis and Issues in the Theory of
Security, volume 6186 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 112–129. Springer.
[5] Ivanova, M. G., Probst, C. W., Hansen, R. R., and Kammüller, F. (2015a). Attack tree
generation by policy invalidation. In Akram, R. N. and Jajodia, S., editors, Information
Security Theory and Practice, volume 9311 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
249–259. Springer.
[6] Ivanova, M. G., Probst, C. W., Hansen, R. R., and Kammüller, F. (2015b). Transforming
graphical system models to graphical attack models. In Mauw, S., Kordy, B., and Jajodia,
S., editors, Graphical Models for Security, volume 9390 of Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, pages 82–96. Springer.
[7] Kammüller, F. and Probst, C. W. (2013). Invalidating policies using structural information.
In 2nd International IEEE Workshop on Research on Insider Threats (WRIT’13). IEEE.
Co-located with IEEE CS Security and Privacy 2013.
[8] Kammüller, F. and Probst, C. W. (2014). Combining generated data models with formal
invalidation for insider threat analysis. In 3rd International IEEE Workshop on Research
on Insider Threats (WRIT’14). IEEE. Co-located with IEEE CS Security and Privacy
2014.
[9] Kordy, B., Mauw, S., Radomirovi´c, S., and Schweitzer, P. (2012). Attack–Defense Trees.
Journal of Logic and Computation.
[10] Kordy, B., Piètre-Cambacédès, L., and Schweitzer, P. (2014). Dag-based attack and
defense modeling: Don’t miss the forest for the attack trees. Computer Science Review,
13-14:1 – 38.
==PAGE:74==
64
References
[11] Lenin, A., Willemson, J., and Sari, D. P. (2014). Attacker profiling in quantitative
security assessment based on attack trees. In Bernsmed, K. and Fischer-Hübner, S., editors,
Nordic Conference on Secure IT Systems, volume 8788 of Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, pages 199–212.
[12] NetworkX developer team (2016). networkx. https://networkx.github.io/. Online; Last
visited May 2016.
[13] Probst, C. W. and Hansen, R. R. (2008). An extensible analysable system model.
Information Security Technical Report, 13(4):235–246.
[14] Probst, C. W. and Hansen, R. R. (2013). Reachability-based Impact as a Measure for
Insiderness. In 5th International Workshop on Managing Insider Security Threats (MIST
2013).
[15] Probst, C. W., Hansen, R. R., and Nielson, F. (2007). Where can an insider attack? In
Proceedings of the 4th international conference on Formal aspects in security and trust,
FAST’06, pages 127–142. Springer.
[16] Python Software Foundation (2016a). Python. https://www.python.org/. Online; Last
visited May 2016.
[17] Python Software Foundation (2016b). xml.dom.minidom. https://docs.python.org/2/
library/xml.dom.minidom.html. Online; Last visited May 2016.
[18] Raskin, V., Taylor, J. M., and Hempelmann, C. F. (2010). Ontological semantic
technology for detecting insider threat and social engineering. In Proceedings of the 2010
workshop on New security paradigms, NSPW ’10, pages 115–128, New York, NY, USA.
ACM.
[19] Schneier, B. (1999). Attack Trees: Modeling Security Threats. Dr. Dobb’s Journal of
Software Tools, 24(12):21–29.
[20] The TREsPASSConsortium. Attack trees: Visualisations for complex multi-step attacks.
Available at https://www.trespass-project.eu/node/160. Last visited April 2016.
[21] The TREsPASSConsortium. Project web page. Available at http://www.trespass-project.
eu. Last visited April 2016.
[22] Vigo, R., Nielson, F., and Nielson, H. R. (2014). Automated generation of attack trees.
In Proceedings of the 27th Computer Security Foundations Symposium (CSF), pages
337–350. IEEE.
==PAGE:75==
Appendix A
occurrence.csv
ID,Node_Occurrence_Count,Children,Node_Type,Label,Parent
0,"{’Fred’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}, ’Margrethe’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}}",set(),or, FUL-
FILL Fred trusts Margrethe ,2
1,"{’door’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}, ’Fred’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}}",set(),or, FORCE Fred
door,2
2,"{’door’: {’min’: 0, ’max’: 1}, ’Fred’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}, ’Margrethe’: {’min’:
0, ’max’: 1}}","{0, 1}",or,test,4
3,"{’door’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}, ’Fred’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}}",set(),or, MOVE Fred
door,4
4,"{’door’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 2}, ’Fred’: {’min’: 2, ’max’: 2}, ’Margrethe’: {’min’:
0, ’max’: 1}}","{2, 3}",and,test,6
5,"{’Fred’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}, ’Margrethe’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}, ’x004’: {’min’:
1, ’max’: 1}}",set(),or, IN Fred x004 Margrethe,6
6,"{’door’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 2}, ’Fred’: {’min’: 3, ’max’: 3}, ’Margrethe’: {’min’:
1, ’max’: 2}, ’x004’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}}","{4, 5}",and,test,24
7,"{’Fred’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}, ’Margrethe’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}}",set(),or, FUL-
FILL Fred trusts Margrethe ,9
==PAGE:76==
66
occurrence.csv
8,"{’door’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}, ’Fred’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}}",set(),or, FORCE Fred door,9
9,"{’door’: {’min’: 0, ’max’: 1}, ’Fred’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}, ’Margrethe’: {’min’:
0, ’max’: 1}}","{8, 7}",or,test,11
10,"{’door’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}, ’Fred’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}}",set(),or, MOVE Fred
door,11
11,"{’door’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 2}, ’Fred’: {’min’: 2, ’max’: 2}, ’Margrethe’: {’min’:
0, ’max’: 1}}","{9, 10}",and,test,14
12,"{’Fred’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}, ’Margrethe’: {’min’: 2, ’max’: 2}, ’x004’: {’min’:
1, ’max’: 1}}",set(),or,MAKE Fred Margrethe IN Margrethe x004 Margrethe,13
13,"{’Fred’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}, ’Margrethe’: {’min’: 2, ’max’: 2}, ’x004’: {’min’:
1, ’max’: 1}}",{12},and,test,14
14,"{’door’: {’min’: 0, ’max’: 2}, ’Fred’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 2}, ’Margrethe’: {’min’:
0, ’max’: 2}, ’x004’: {’min’: 0, ’max’: 1}}","{11, 13}",or,make Margrethe get x004,23
15,"{’Charlie’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}, ’Fred’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}, ’Margrethe’: {’min’: 1,
’max’: 1}}",set(),or,MAKE Fred Charlie FULFILL Charlie trusts Margrethe ,17
16,"{’Charlie’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}, ’door’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}, ’Fred’: {’min’: 1,
’max’: 1}}",set(),or,MAKE Fred Charlie FORCE Charlie door,17
17,"{’Fred’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}, ’Charlie’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}, ’Margrethe’: {’min’: 0,
’max’: 1}, ’door’: {’min’: 0, ’max’: 1}}","{16, 15}",or,test,19
18,"{’Charlie’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}, ’door’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}, ’Fred’: {’min’: 1,
’max’: 1}}",set(),or,MAKE Fred Charlie MOVE Charlie door,19
19,"{’Charlie’: {’min’: 2, ’max’: 2}, ’Fred’: {’min’: 2, ’max’: 2}, ’Margrethe’: {’min’: 0,
’max’: 1}, ’door’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 2}}","{17, 18}",and,test,21
==PAGE:77==
67
20,"{’Charlie’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}, ’Fred’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}, ’Margrethe’: {’min’:
1, ’max’: 1}, ’x004’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}}",set(),or,MAKE Fred Charlie IN Charlie x004
Margrethe,21
21,"{’Fred’: {’min’: 3, ’max’: 3}, ’x004’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}, ’Charlie’: {’min’: 3, ’max’:
3}, ’Margrethe’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 2}, ’door’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 2}}","{19, 20}",and,test,22
22,"{’Fred’: {’min’: 3, ’max’: 3}, ’x004’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}, ’Charlie’: {’min’: 3,
’max’: 3}, ’Margrethe’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 2}, ’door’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 2}}",{21},or,make
Charlie get x004,23
23,"{’Charlie’: {’min’: 0, ’max’: 3}, ’door’: {’min’: 0, ’max’: 2}, ’Fred’: {’min’: 1, ’max’:
3}, ’Margrethe’: {’min’: 0, ’max’: 2}, ’x004’: {’min’: 0, ’max’: 1}}","{14, 22}",or,make
somebody get it,24
24,"{’Charlie’: {’min’: 0, ’max’: 3}, ’door’: {’min’: 0, ’max’: 2}, ’Fred’: {’min’: 1,
’max’: 3}, ’Margrethe’: {’min’: 0, ’max’: 2}, ’x004’: {’min’: 0, ’max’: 1}}","{6, 23}",or,to
get or not to get,43
25,"{’Fred’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}, ’Margrethe’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}}",set(),or, FUL-
FILL Fred trusts Margrethe ,27
26,"{’door’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}, ’Fred’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}}",set(),or, FORCE Fred
door,27
27,"{’door’: {’min’: 0, ’max’: 1}, ’Fred’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}, ’Margrethe’: {’min’:
0, ’max’: 1}}","{25, 26}",or,test,29
28,"{’door’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}, ’Fred’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}}",set(),or, MOVE Fred
door,29
29,"{’door’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 2}, ’Fred’: {’min’: 2, ’max’: 2}, ’Margrethe’: {’min’:
0, ’max’: 1}}","{27, 28}",and,test,31
30,"{’x009’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}, ’Fred’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}, ’Margrethe’: {’min’:
1, ’max’: 1}}",set(),or, IN Fred x009 Margrethe,31
==PAGE:78==
68
occurrence.csv
31,"{’door’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 2}, ’x009’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}, ’Fred’: {’min’: 3, ’max’:
3}, ’Margrethe’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 2}}","{29, 30}",and,get data x009 at actor Margrethe,41
32,"{’Fred’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}, ’Margrethe’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}}",set(),or, FUL-
FILL Fred trusts Margrethe ,34
33,"{’door’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}, ’Fred’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}}",set(),or, FORCE Fred
door,34
34,"{’door’: {’min’: 0, ’max’: 1}, ’Fred’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}, ’Margrethe’: {’min’:
0, ’max’: 1}}","{32, 33}",or,test,36
35,"{’door’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}, ’Fred’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}}",set(),or, MOVE Fred
door,36
36,"{’door’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 2}, ’Fred’: {’min’: 2, ’max’: 2}, ’Margrethe’: {’min’:
0, ’max’: 1}}","{34, 35}",and,test,38
37,"{’Fred’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}, ’Margrethe’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}, ’x004’: {’min’:
1, ’max’: 1}}",set(),or, IN Fred x004 Margrethe,38
38,"{’door’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 2}, ’Fred’: {’min’: 3, ’max’: 3}, ’Margrethe’: {’min’:
1, ’max’: 2}, ’x004’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}}","{36, 37}",and,test,40
39,"{’x009’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}, ’Fred’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}, ’x004’: {’min’: 1,
’max’: 1}}",set(),or, IN Fred x009 x004,40
40,"{’door’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 2}, ’x009’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}, ’Fred’: {’min’: 4, ’max’:
4}, ’Margrethe’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 2}, ’x004’: {’min’: 2, ’max’: 2}}","{38, 39}",and,get
item x004 and extract data x009,41
41,"{’door’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 2}, ’x009’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}, ’Fred’: {’min’: 3, ’max’:
4}, ’Margrethe’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 2}, ’x004’: {’min’: 0, ’max’: 2}}","{40, 31}",or,get
x009,42
==PAGE:79==
69
42,"{’door’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 2}, ’x009’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 1}, ’Fred’: {’min’: 3,
’max’: 4}, ’Margrethe’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 2}, ’x004’: {’min’: 0, ’max’: 2}}",{41},or,to get
or not to get,43
43,"{’Fred’: {’min’: 1, ’max’: 4}, ’x009’: {’min’: 0, ’max’: 1}, ’Margrethe’: {’min’:
0, ’max’: 2}, ’door’: {’min’: 0, ’max’: 2}, ’Charlie’: {’min’: 0, ’max’: 3}, ’x004’: {’min’:
0, ’max’: 2}}","{24, 42}",or,Attacker Fredget items x004 x009,-1
==PAGE:80==
==PAGE:81==
Appendix B
weight_measurement.csv
ID,Node_Weigth_Measure,Children,Node_Type,Label
0,"{’cost’: 4, ’difficulty’: ’V’, ’likelihood’: ’H’, ’time’: ’MN’}",set(),or, FULFILL Fred
trusts Margrethe
1,"{’cost’: 2, ’difficulty’: ’M’, ’likelihood’: ’L’, ’time’: ’HR’}",set(),or, FORCE Fred
door
2,"{’cost’: 2, ’difficulty’: ’M’, ’likelihood’: ’H’, ’time’: ’HR’}","{0, 1}",or,test
3,"{’cost’: 2, ’difficulty’: ’L’, ’likelihood’: ’H’, ’time’: ’MT’}",set(),or, MOVE Fred door
4,"{’cost’: 2, ’difficulty’: ’M’, ’likelihood’: ’H’, ’time’: ’HR’}","{2, 3}",and,test
5,"{’cost’: 4, ’difficulty’: ’V’, ’likelihood’: ’H’, ’time’: ’MN’}",set(),or, IN Fred x004
Margrethe
6,"{’cost’: 4, ’difficulty’: ’V’, ’likelihood’: ’H’, ’time’: ’MN’}","{4, 5}",and,test
7,"{’cost’: 4, ’difficulty’: ’V’, ’likelihood’: ’H’, ’time’: ’MN’}",set(),or, FULFILL Fred
trusts Margrethe
8,"{’cost’: 2, ’difficulty’: ’M’, ’likelihood’: ’L’, ’time’: ’HR’}",set(),or, FORCE Fred
door
==PAGE:82==
72
weight_measurement.csv
9,"{’cost’: 2, ’difficulty’: ’M’, ’likelihood’: ’H’, ’time’: ’HR’}","{8, 7}",or,test
10,"{’cost’: 2, ’difficulty’: ’L’, ’likelihood’: ’H’, ’time’: ’MT’}",set(),or, MOVE Fred
door
11,"{’cost’: 2, ’difficulty’: ’M’, ’likelihood’: ’H’, ’time’: ’HR’}","{9, 10}",and,test
12,"{’cost’: 4, ’difficulty’: ’V’, ’likelihood’: ’H’, ’time’: ’MN’}",set(),or,MAKE Fred
Margrethe IN Margrethe x004 Margrethe
13,"{’cost’: 4, ’difficulty’: ’V’, ’likelihood’: ’H’, ’time’: ’MN’}",{12},and,test
14,"{’cost’: 2, ’difficulty’: ’M’, ’likelihood’: ’H’, ’time’: ’HR’}","{11, 13}",or,make Mar-
grethe get x004
15,"{’cost’: 4, ’difficulty’: ’V’, ’likelihood’: ’H’, ’time’: ’MN’}",set(),or,MAKE Fred
Charlie FULFILL Charlie trusts Margrethe
16,"{’cost’: 2, ’difficulty’: ’M’, ’likelihood’: ’L’, ’time’: ’HR’}",set(),or,MAKE Fred
Charlie FORCE Charlie door
17,"{’cost’: 2, ’difficulty’: ’M’, ’likelihood’: ’H’, ’time’: ’HR’}","{16, 15}",or,test
18,"{’cost’: 2, ’difficulty’: ’L’, ’likelihood’: ’H’, ’time’: ’HR’}",set(),or,MAKE Fred Charlie
MOVE Charlie door
19,"{’cost’: 2, ’difficulty’: ’M’, ’likelihood’: ’H’, ’time’: ’HR’}","{17, 18}",and,test
20,"{’cost’: 4, ’difficulty’: ’V’, ’likelihood’: ’H’, ’time’: ’MN’}",set(),or,MAKE Fred
Charlie IN Charlie x004 Margrethe
21,"{’cost’: 4, ’difficulty’: ’V’, ’likelihood’: ’H’, ’time’: ’MN’}","{19, 20}",and,test
22,"{’cost’: 4, ’difficulty’: ’V’, ’likelihood’: ’H’, ’time’: ’MN’}",{21},or,make Charlie get
x004
==PAGE:83==
73
23,"{’cost’: 2, ’difficulty’: ’M’, ’likelihood’: ’H’, ’time’: ’HR’}","{14, 22}",or,make
somebody get it
24,"{’cost’: 2, ’difficulty’: ’M’, ’likelihood’: ’H’, ’time’: ’HR’}","{6, 23}",or,to get or
not to get
25,"{’cost’: 4, ’difficulty’: ’V’, ’likelihood’: ’H’, ’time’: ’MN’}",set(),or, FULFILL Fred
trusts Margrethe
26,"{’cost’: 2, ’difficulty’: ’M’, ’likelihood’: ’L’, ’time’: ’HR’}",set(),or, FORCE Fred
door
27,"{’cost’: 2, ’difficulty’: ’M’, ’likelihood’: ’H’, ’time’: ’HR’}","{25, 26}",or,test
28,"{’cost’: 2, ’difficulty’: ’L’, ’likelihood’: ’H’, ’time’: ’MT’}",set(),or, MOVE Fred
door
29,"{’cost’: 2, ’difficulty’: ’M’, ’likelihood’: ’H’, ’time’: ’HR’}","{27, 28}",and,test
30,"{’cost’: 4, ’difficulty’: ’V’, ’likelihood’: ’L’, ’time’: ’MN’}",set(),or, IN Fred x009
Margrethe
31,"{’cost’: 4, ’difficulty’: ’V’, ’likelihood’: ’L’, ’time’: ’MN’}","{29, 30}",and,get data
x009 at actor Margrethe
32,"{’cost’: 4, ’difficulty’: ’V’, ’likelihood’: ’H’, ’time’: ’MN’}",set(),or, FULFILL Fred
trusts Margrethe
33,"{’cost’: 2, ’difficulty’: ’M’, ’likelihood’: ’L’, ’time’: ’HR’}",set(),or, FORCE Fred
door
34,"{’cost’: 2, ’difficulty’: ’M’, ’likelihood’: ’H’, ’time’: ’HR’}","{32, 33}",or,test
35,"{’cost’: 2, ’difficulty’: ’L’, ’likelihood’: ’H’, ’time’: ’MT’}",set(),or, MOVE Fred
door
==PAGE:84==
74
weight_measurement.csv
36,"{’cost’: 2, ’difficulty’: ’M’, ’likelihood’: ’H’, ’time’: ’HR’}","{34, 35}",and,test
37,"{’cost’: 4, ’difficulty’: ’V’, ’likelihood’: ’H’, ’time’: ’MN’}",set(),or, IN Fred x004
Margrethe
38,"{’cost’: 4, ’difficulty’: ’V’, ’likelihood’: ’H’, ’time’: ’MN’}","{36, 37}",and,test
39,"{’cost’: 2, ’difficulty’: ’M’, ’likelihood’: ’L’, ’time’: ’HR’}",set(),or, IN Fred x009 x004
40,"{’cost’: 4, ’difficulty’: ’V’, ’likelihood’: ’L’, ’time’: ’MN’}","{38, 39}",and,get item
x004 and extract data x009
41,"{’cost’: 4, ’difficulty’: ’V’, ’likelihood’: ’L’, ’time’: ’MN’}","{40, 31}",or,get x009
42,"{’cost’: 4, ’difficulty’: ’V’, ’likelihood’: ’L’, ’time’: ’MN’}",{41},or,to get or not
to get
43,"{’cost’: 2, ’difficulty’: ’M’, ’likelihood’: ’H’, ’time’: ’HR’}","{24, 42}",or,Attacker
Fredget items x004 x009
==PAGE:85==
Appendix C
path.csv
ID,Path_Leafs,Path_Nodes,Path_Edges,Path_Weight_Measurement
1,{28},"{28, 29, 31, 41, 42, 43}","{{29, 28}, {31, 29}, {41, 31}, {42, 41}, {43, 42}}","{’dif-
ficulty’: ’L’, ’likelihood’: ’H’, ’cost’: 2, ’colorFactor’: 1500.0, ’resource’: 0.5, ’time’:
’MT’}"
6,{35},"{35, 36, 38, 40, 41, 42, 43}","{{36, 35}, {38, 36}, {40, 38}, {41, 40}, {42, 41}, {43,
42}}","{’difficulty’: ’L’, ’likelihood’: ’H’, ’cost’: 2, ’colorFactor’: 1500.0, ’resource’: 0.5,
’time’: ’MT’}"
14,{10},"{10, 11, 14, 23, 24, 43}","{{11, 10}, {14, 11}, {23, 14}, {24, 23}, {43, 24}}","{’dif-
ficulty’: ’L’, ’likelihood’: ’H’, ’cost’: 2, ’colorFactor’: 1500.0, ’resource’: 0.5, ’time’:
’MT’}"
18,{3},"{3, 4, 6, 24, 43}","{{4, 3}, {6, 4}, {24, 6}, {43, 24}}","{’difficulty’: ’L’, ’likelihood’:
’H’, ’cost’: 2, ’colorFactor’: 1500.0, ’resource’: 0.5, ’time’: ’MT’}"
10,{18},"{18, 19, 21, 22, 23, 24, 43}","{{19, 18}, {21, 19}, {22, 21}, {23, 22}, {24,
23}, {43, 24}}","{’difficulty’: ’L’, ’likelihood’: ’H’, ’cost’: 2, ’colorFactor’: 750.0, ’re-
source’: 0.25, ’time’: ’HR’}"
2,{26},"{26, 27, 29, 31, 41, 42, 43}","{{27, 26}, {29, 27}, {31, 29}, {41, 31}, {42, 41}, {43,
42}}","{’difficulty’: ’M’, ’likelihood’: ’L’, ’cost’: 2, ’colorFactor’: 125.0, ’resource’: 0.125,
’time’: ’HR’}"
==PAGE:86==
76
path.csv
4,{39},"{39, 40, 41, 42, 43}","{{40, 39}, {41, 40}, {42, 41}, {43, 42}}","{’difficulty’:
’M’, ’likelihood’: ’L’, ’cost’: 2, ’colorFactor’: 125.0, ’resource’: 0.125, ’time’: ’HR’}"
7,{33},"{33, 34, 36, 38, 40, 41, 42, 43}","{{34, 33}, {36, 34}, {38, 36}, {40, 38}, {41, 40},
{42, 41}, {43, 42}}","{’difficulty’: ’M’, ’likelihood’: ’L’, ’cost’: 2, ’colorFactor’: 125.0,
’resource’: 0.125, ’time’: ’HR’}"
12,{16},"{16, 17, 19, 21, 22, 23, 24, 43}","{{17, 16}, {19, 17}, {21, 19}, {22, 21}, {23, 22},
{24, 23}, {43, 24}}","{’difficulty’: ’M’, ’likelihood’: ’L’, ’cost’: 2, ’colorFactor’: 125.0,
’resource’: 0.125, ’time’: ’HR’}"
16,{8},"{8, 9, 11, 14, 23, 24, 43}","{{9, 8}, {11, 9}, {14, 11}, {23, 14}, {24, 23}, {43,
24}}","{’difficulty’: ’M’, ’likelihood’: ’L’, ’cost’: 2, ’colorFactor’: 125.0, ’resource’: 0.125,
’time’: ’HR’}"
19,{1},"{1, 2, 4, 6, 24, 43}","{{2, 1}, {4, 2}, {6, 4}, {24, 6}, {43, 24}}","{’difficulty’: ’M’,
’likelihood’: ’L’, ’cost’: 2, ’colorFactor’: 125.0, ’resource’: 0.125, ’time’: ’HR’}"
3,{25},"{25, 27, 29, 31, 41, 42, 43}","{{27, 25}, {29, 27}, {31, 29}, {41, 31}, {42, 41},
{43, 42}}","{’difficulty’: ’V’, ’likelihood’: ’H’, ’cost’: 4, ’colorFactor’: 46.875, ’resource’:
0.015625, ’time’: ’MN’}"
5,{37},"{37, 38, 40, 41, 42, 43}","{{38, 37}, {40, 38}, {41, 40}, {42, 41}, {43, 42}}","{’dif-
ficulty’: ’V’, ’likelihood’: ’H’, ’cost’: 4, ’colorFactor’: 46.875, ’resource’: 0.015625, ’time’:
’MN’}"
8,{32},"{32, 34, 36, 38, 40, 41, 42, 43}","{{34, 32}, {36, 34}, {38, 36}, {40, 38}, {41, 40},
{42, 41}, {43, 42}}","{’difficulty’: ’V’, ’likelihood’: ’H’, ’cost’: 4, ’colorFactor’: 46.875,
’resource’: 0.015625, ’time’: ’MN’}"
9,{20},"{20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 43}","{{21, 20}, {22, 21}, {23, 22}, {24, 23}, {43, 24}}","{’dif-
ficulty’: ’V’, ’likelihood’: ’H’, ’cost’: 4, ’colorFactor’: 46.875, ’resource’: 0.015625, ’time’:
’MN’}"
11,{15},"{15, 17, 19, 21, 22, 23, 24, 43}","{{17, 15}, {19, 17}, {21, 19}, {22, 21}, {23, 22},
{24, 23}, {43, 24}}","{’difficulty’: ’V’, ’likelihood’: ’H’, ’cost’: 4, ’colorFactor’: 46.875,
==PAGE:87==
77
’resource’: 0.015625, ’time’: ’MN’}"
13,{12},"{12, 13, 14, 23, 24, 43}","{{13, 12}, {14, 13}, {23, 14}, {24, 23}, {43, 24}}","{’dif-
ficulty’: ’V’, ’likelihood’: ’H’, ’cost’: 4, ’colorFactor’: 46.875, ’resource’: 0.015625, ’time’:
’MN’}"
15,{7},"{7, 9, 11, 14, 23, 24, 43}","{{9, 7}, {11, 9}, {14, 11}, {23, 14}, {24, 23}, {43,
24}}","{’difficulty’: ’V’, ’likelihood’: ’H’, ’cost’: 4, ’colorFactor’: 46.875, ’resource’:
0.015625, ’time’: ’MN’}"
17,{5},"{5, 6, 24, 43}","{{6, 5}, {24, 6}, {43, 24}}","{’difficulty’: ’V’, ’likelihood’: ’H’,
’cost’: 4, ’colorFactor’: 46.875, ’resource’: 0.015625, ’time’: ’MN’}"
20,{0},"{0, 2, 4, 6, 24, 43}","{{2, 0}, {4, 2}, {6, 4}, {24, 6}, {43, 24}}","{’difficulty’: ’V’,
’likelihood’: ’H’, ’cost’: 4, ’colorFactor’: 46.875, ’resource’: 0.015625, ’time’: ’MN’}"
0,{30},"{30, 31, 41, 42, 43}","{{31, 30}, {41, 31}, {42, 41}, {43, 42}}","{’difficulty’:
’V’, ’likelihood’: ’L’, ’cost’: 4, ’colorFactor’: 15.625, ’resource’: 0.015625, ’time’: ’MN’}"
==PAGE:88==
