==PAGE:1==
Malware Detection on Android
platform
Rohit Goyal
Kongens Lyngby 2016
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
Android is the most common mobile platform with a market share of 82% ac-
cording to a report by IDC in 2015. In the last few years, the number of malware
apps reported in the Android market places have gone up considerably. The
large consumer base and loosely controlled nature of the operating system make
it more vulnerable to the attacks. With more and more critical services being
oﬀered through the mobile platform, user security and privacy has become very
important. In this project, we propose a solution named SafeDroid to detect
malware apps on Android platform using static analysis and machine learning
techniques. Our solution has three main components: an Android app, a clas-
siﬁcation and reporting server and a feature extraction server. The mobile app
sends the Dalvik Executable (DEX) ﬁle of the app that is to be scanned, to the
server. The server classiﬁes the app into either of the categories: benign or mal-
ware. It also provides a list of suspicious feature categories in case of a malware
app. The feature set for the machine learning based classiﬁer is generated by
static analysis of the DEX ﬁle. Our feature set constitutes the API calls that are
used in malicious apps more frequently than in benign apps. We identify a list
of 743 critical APIs with our algorithm that represents the malicious activity in
the data set. We also compare the accuracy and false positive rates for three
diﬀerent classiﬁers: Random Forest, Linear Support Vector machines, K-nearest
Neighbor and ﬁnd out that the Random Forest (RF) classiﬁer performs the best
with an accuracy of 99.51%. We extend this further to explore if the feature
selection methods could be used to improve the overall performance. In doing
so, the accuracy of the RF classiﬁer decreases by about 2.5% while the size of
feature set decreases by over 50%.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
Android er den mest almindelige mobile platform med en markedsandel på 82
% ifølge en rapport fra IDC i 2015. I de sidste par år, er antallet af malware
apps rapporteret i Android Market steder steget betydeligt. Den store bruger-
base og naturligt løse kontrol af operativsystemet gør det mere sårbart over
for angreb. Med ﬂere og ﬂere kritiske tjenester der tilbydes gennem den mobile
platform, er brugersikkerhed og privat livets fred blevet meget vigtigt. I dette
projekt foreslår vi en løsning ved navn SafeDroid at opdage malware apps på
Android-platformen ved hjælp af statiske analyse og machine learning teknikker.
Vores løsning har tre hovedkomponenter: en Android app, en klassiﬁcering og
rapportering server og en feature extraction server. Den mobile app sender Dal-
vik eksekverbare (DEX) ﬁlen fra app’en, der skal scannes, til serveren. Serveren
klassiﬁcerer app til enten af kategorierne: godartede eller malware. Det giver
også en liste over mistænkelige feature kategorier i tilfælde af en malware app.
Funktionen til machine learning baseret klassiﬁceringen er genereret af statisk
analyse af DEX-ﬁlen. Vores feature sæt udgør de API-kald, der bruges i ondsin-
dede apps oftere end i godartede apps. Vi identiﬁcerer en liste over 743 kritiske
API’er med vores algoritme, der repræsenterer ondsindet aktivitet i datasættet.
Vi sammenligner også nøjagtigheden og falske positive for tre forskellige klassiﬁ-
kationer: Random Forest, Linear Support Vector Machine, K-Nearest Neighbor
og ﬁnde ud af, at Random Forest (RF) klassiﬁceringen udføres med bedst nøjag-
tighed med en nøjagtighed på 99,51 %. Vi udvider dette yderligere at udforske,
om funktionens udvælgelsesmetoder kan bruges til at forbedre den samlede yde-
evne. Dette medfører at formindsker nøjagtigheden af RF klassiﬁkator med ca.
2,5 %, mens størrelsen af feature set falder med over 50 %.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to extend my sincere thanks to my project supervisor from DTU,
Prof. Angelo Spognardi for his expert guidance and direction throughout the
completion of this work. He took out time from his busy schedule to oﬀer valu-
able insights into the work whenever asked for. His knowledge and experience
in this domain helped me to ﬁgure out the path very well and more conﬁdently.
I would also like to thank my supervisor from KTH, Prof. Mads Dam for his
consistent support and guidance. His valuable feedback on the project helped
me to rectify the problems on time.
I would like to acknowledge the contributions of the fellow researchers who pro-
vided access to their research and other resources. I also feel gratitude towards
Prof. Nicola Dragoni, Prof. Flemming Stassen and Prof. Christian Probst for
their cooperation throughout the project. They have been very supportive in
discussing the suitable projects and the expectations. I would also thank my
colleague David Soendoro for his feedback and discussions on the topic.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Acknowledgements
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Aim
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.2
Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Contributions
9
3
Theory and concepts
11
3.1
Machine learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1.1
Supervised learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1.2
Unsupervised learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.1.3
Reinforcement learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
Classiﬁcation algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2.1
Random Forest Classiﬁer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2.2
K-Nearest Neighbor
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2.3
Linear Support Vector Machine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3
Feature selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.4
Cross validation in ML . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.5
Common ML pitfalls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.6
Evaluation metric . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.7
Android APK reverse engineering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.8
Advanced concepts in Java
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
4
Literature Review
25
4.1
Detection based on static features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Detection based on dynamic analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.3
Detection based on hybrid analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5
Limitations of the related work
31
6
Solution description
33
7
Methodology for generating model
37
7.1
Data set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
7.2
Software and tools used
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
7.3
Steps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
7.3.1
Feature extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7.3.2
Model training and evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7.3.3
Feature selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7.3.4
Model retraining and evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
8
Evaluation
45
8.1
Feasibility of deployment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
8.2
Model accuracy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
8.3
Performance analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
9
Discussion
51
9.1
Insights into the API feature set
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
9.2
Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
9.3
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
10 Conclusion and future work
57
A API feature set
59
B App prototype screenshots
69
Bibliography
73
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
The fast pace of life has pushed us to get things done on our way to oﬃces,
homes, restaurants, shopping stores etc. More gets done in the same amount of
time and we have more time at our disposal than ever for recreation, work, ﬁtness
and relaxation. This all has been made possible by the use of mobile devices.
Their mobility has helped us to organize ourselves better and more eﬃciently.
These mobile devices, in the form of smart phones, tablets, mini computers
etc have revolutionized the way we do business, shopping, jogging, cooking,
learning etc, basically the way we conduct ourselves. If we trace back the origin
of this revolution, we ﬁnd out that it is the advancement and penetration of
Internet services that has contributed to the phenomenal success of the mobile
devices. Being able to seamlessly connect to the world on the go is the game
changer for the mobile industry. The faster and cheaper internet services allow
more innovation in the services that are oﬀered on the mobile devices. In the
parts of the world previously disconnected with the rest, the availability of
internet service and smart phones have brought the people closer, to share and
communicate their stories with the rest of the world. According to techcrunch,
there were 2.6 Billion mobile devices worldwide in 2015 which is expected to rise
to 6.1B by 2020 [tec]. The business in this industry is only going to scale in leaps
and bounds in the years to come. There are applications available for all variety
of tasks like entertainment, ﬁtness, healthcare, utility, news, magazines, books,
movie, music, security, productivity, education, business, ﬁnance etc. There are
millions of apps available in diﬀerent app stores. Some of these app stores are
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
more strict than the others in ﬁltering the apps based on the security assessment.
The users, mostly unaware of the security implications tend to ignore this fact
and download apps from any source available. Since some of these services like
banking applications, personal email clients, healthcare applications are quite
critical, the security and privacy issues concerning the usage of these applications
have taken a center stage. The malicious apps have been known to steal users’
data, leak personal information, run malicious code on device and degrade device
performance. Such apps sneak through the app stores due to missing thorough
security analysis or are distributed directly from the servers. The malware apps
on mobile devices could range from the viruses, trojan horses, worms, adware,
spyware etc. The smart phones typically have capabilities like browsing internet,
sending and receiving SMSs and MMSs, email and chatting clients, camera,
GPS etc, which could be misused by the malware apps.
This makes them
very powerful attack vectors and the extent of possible damage could be huge.
They could render the user’s phone partially or fully unusable and disrupt the
cellular services. Apart from causing damage to the user, the malware could
also inﬂict damage to the cellular service provider as well. It could propagate to
other devices via user contacts. Social media networks and "always-connected"
applications have dramatically contributed to the spread of malware. All the
stakeholders are getting more interested in the security related discussions of
this architecture. It is reasonable to say that the future of these services depend
on the trust they establish with the users.
In January 2016, Google’s oﬃcial market place Play Store banished 13 apps
as they were making unauthorized downloads and tried to gain root privileges
[gpnb]. In a similar news article, a research team found out 343 malicious apps
uploaded to the play store in a span of 8 months [gpna]. The Apple’s oﬃcial
store known as App Store is also known to have been hosting malicious apps.
Researchers found out that some of the well known apps were infected by a
malware called XcodeGhost [xco]. This malware was able to sneak in through
the app store without developer’s knowledge because the creators of this mal-
ware packed it in the development tools used by app developers. The malware
was known to steal data and trick people into disclosing personal information.
In 2012, a new category of self-updating malware was discovered on Play store
[cne]. This malware known as Android.Dropdialer went undiscovered for a few
weeks before being identiﬁed as malware. This trojan sent text messages to
premium-rate phone numbers. The trojan was hidden in two popular game ti-
tles which had several thousand downloads. Later on, it was found out that the
trojan had remote payload capabilities which allowed it to escape from the Play
Store security checks. The trojan was divided into smaller chunks and once the
app was installed, new pieces of code were remotely downloaded and installed.
This functionality could not be detected by Google’s automated security service.
==PAGE:13==
3
Figure 1.1:
Mobile OS market share [idc]
Android is currently the most popular platform for mobile and hand-held de-
vices. According to IDC, android held 82.8% of the market share in the smart
phone market, followed by Apple which held 13.9% market share in 2015 [idc].
In our current work, we will be focusing only on the android platform because
of this large market share.
Android is an open source software stack led by Google for mobile devices. It
includes an operating system, middleware and some key applications. Android
is built on a Linux kernel modiﬁed with additional modules for power manage-
ment and support for smartphone speciﬁc features like GPS, camera etc. An
application virtual machine which runs as a normal application on the host OS
is called the managed or virtualized runtime. The virtualized runtime environ-
ment for android is known as Dalvik, which now is replaced by Android Runtime
(ART) in newer android versions [art]. The distribution of apps is administered
by Google through an online market place called Play Store. Users are however
free to download and install applications from any sources. This makes android
one of the most vulnerable mobile platforms. In 2014, F-Secure published a mo-
bile threat report announcing that there were 275 new malware families detected
on android platform in that year alone, as compared to 1 new malware family
in both iOS and Symbian, which are the other two popular mobile operating
systems [fse]. Applications in android run in their respective isolated contain-
ers also known as sandbox environment. Applications communicate with other
sandboxes through a permission system. Every application upon installation
presents a set of necessary permissions to the user as shown in the ﬁgure 1.3.
==PAGE:14==
4
Introduction
Figure 1.2:
Android OS architecture
These permissions range from all the critical services that cost user money like
sending SMS, making calls to accessing user contacts, SMS, media etc. A list
of all possible permissions is available [per]. With Android 6.0, the user can
actively and selectively change the permissions of an app after installation. It
has been noticed that the users do not pay much attention and thought to this
step of the workﬂow and tend to ignore it. Consequently, some of the malicious
applications sneak into the user devices and run malicious code, leak private
information, subscribe premium services etc.
In the past decade, researchers have invested eﬀorts in deﬁning models and
systems to detect malicious applications leaking critical data or carrying out
unintended functions. Prior to 2012, most of these systems focus on signature
based detection methods. A signature is typically a byte pattern that could be
obtained from a ﬁle, function etc. This conventional anti-virus research focuses
on accumulating signatures of known malware in a database and then comparing
the signatures from the unknown software for possible malware pattern. This
pattern matching scheme was very popular in the last decade and helped to
prevent the spread of malware. But it has its own challenges and limitations.
To name a few, the detection method only works if there is already a signature
==PAGE:15==
5
Figure 1.3:
Permissions screen in Android
of that malware in the database. The newly discovered malware or zero day
vulnerabilities will not be detected by the system. So, the anti-virus application
needs to be updated continuously to include new signatures. This also means
that the end users will have to wait for some time before they receive the signa-
tures of newly detected virus. This could cause a great damage to the real time
systems. These are the systems which provide services to the users with very
small delay. Another big problem with this detection mechanism is the long
processing time. The software needs to be scanned and compared with a long
list of possible malware signatures. Due to these problems, there was a need to
rethink the approach to detect malicious behavior of an application.
With the development of artiﬁcial intelligence paradigm, the next phase of re-
search focused on using machine learning techniques. These techniques work on
the principle that given a large number of samples to a machine, it would be able
==PAGE:16==
6
Introduction
to learn meaningful patterns and then use this learning to label new unknown
samples in the future. The model is trained periodically with the new types of
malware detected. The performance in terms of accuracy and computational
time have been under investigation for some time. This approach is currently
used in many ﬁelds quite successfully. In the last 5 years, there has been a lot
of research work in this domain which will be discussed in a later Chapter.
A large community of researchers has studied methods for detecting Android
malware by means of static, dynamic and hybrid analysis. These analysis tech-
niques provide the feature sets from the apps that could be used for generating
machine learning models. The static analysis is relatively fast and provides a
good accuracy for the real world deployment while the dynamic analysis provides
an in-depth knowledge of the behavior of the malware.
1.1
Aim
The primary aim of this project is to outline a system for malware detection
on Android platform that helps the users to detect if a particular app is safe
to use or not. The solution needs to be feasible, fast and accurate for the real
world deployment. We plan to look into both the static and dynamic analysis
approaches for designing the system. The secondary aim of the project is to
compare diﬀerent machine learning classiﬁers for the detection. We will look
deeper into the static features that could be extracted from an APK ﬁle and be
used to train the model eﬀectively. The system will be evaluated for accuracy of
the prediction and performance in terms of computation time for classiﬁcation
and reporting.
1.2
Outline
The thesis report is organized as follows.
Section 2:
This section presents the major contributions of this research
work. We provide a brief overview of the solution and the research supporting it.
Section 3:
This section discusses the theory and concepts related to machine
learning and Android platform which would be helpful in understanding the
related literature and current work.
Section 4 and 5:
These sections summarize the related literature reviewed
for this project and the limitations they suﬀer from. We provide details about
the approach, data sets and the motivation for each research work.
==PAGE:17==
1.2 Outline
7
Section 6, 7, 8:
These sections present our solution, the methodology used
to generate the machine learning model and the results of the experiments. We
elaborate the ﬁndings by means of graphs and tables.
Section 9:
This section discusses the insights into the feature set used for
generating model and the limitations of this work in general. A brief overview
of the challenges faced in this project is provided. We provide the motivation
behind dynamic analysis and the possible way forward.
Section 10:
This section concludes the report with a discussion on the scope
of future work in this area.
==PAGE:18==
8
Introduction
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2
Contributions
Our solution SafeDroid is a client app for Android platform that inspects the
device for installed apps and provides a classiﬁcation for it into benign or ma-
licious category. In case of a malicious app, the app displays the list of feature
categories that contribute the most for such prediction. The back end system
has been designed as an API service providing classiﬁcation and reporting. Our
architecture is novel in the way that the classiﬁcation is done on the remote
server using only the DEX ﬁle retrieved from the APK ﬁle.
The client app
saves bandwidth by only sending the DEX ﬁle of an app to the remote server.
The classiﬁcation model is light weight, suitable for deployment and oﬀers high
accuracy in prediction. Furthermore, we generate a relatively low dimensional
feature vector for training the machine learning classiﬁer, compared to the other
similar solutions. The details of the approach will be discussed in the later sec-
tions. In summary, our contributions are as follows:
• We introduce a malware detection system comprising of an Android app,
a back end classiﬁcation server and feature extraction server, to categorize
malicious and benign apps along with a list of suspicious feature categories
if any, using static analysis techniques.
• We discuss and motivate the approach to extract the API calls as our
feature set for machine learning. We identify a list of 743 API features
that describe the malicious behavior, which is comparatively a very small
==PAGE:20==
10
Contributions
feature set. This feature set is used for training machine learning classiﬁer
over a data set sourced from a prior research work.
• We compare three machine learning classiﬁers on our data set in terms of
accuracy and false positive rates. Random Forest classiﬁer performs the
best with an accuracy of 99.51% and a false positive rate of 0.017.
• We open source our solution so that the product could be extended fur-
ther. The server component comprises of the back end API for providing
classiﬁcation and reporting for an unknown app.
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 3
Theory and concepts
3.1
Machine learning
Machine Learning (ML) is an interdisciplinary ﬁeld of research which borrows
and builds upon ideas from computer science, statistics, probability theory, biol-
ogy, congnitive science, behaviorial science, optimization theory etc. The idea is
to teach the machines how to learn and make decisions without being explicitly
programmed. By using various algorithms, we train the model with a training
data set and then test the accuracy and performance of the model by mak-
ing predictions on the test data set. There are widespread applications of this
technique in various ﬁelds like search engines, spam detection, recommendation
engines, risk assessment etc. Machine learning tasks can be broadly classiﬁed
into three categories depending on the nature of input data given to the learning
model.
3.1.1
Supervised learning
The model is provided a set of inputs and their outputs. A subset of the available
data is chosen as training data and the rest of it as test data. The goal is to
learn the relationships from the training data and generate a rule for mapping
==PAGE:22==
12
Theory and concepts
future input to an output. This type of learning is called supervised learning
because the input to the training system includes their correct outputs as well.
The input object is typically a feature vector representation of the sample and
the output object is a target class. The model learns by generalizing the inferred
function in the training phase to ﬁt unseen inputs. A typical workﬂow to solve
such type of learning problem is described below.
1. Deﬁne the problem to be solved and determine the kind of training data
required for that.
2. Find a suitable data set or generate one if possible that could be used for
training and testing. Make sure the data set is labeled with the correct
target class labels.
The labeling could be done manually or using any
existing tools or measurements.
3. Next important step is to deﬁne the feature representation of the model.
The input object is transformed into a feature vector which is representa-
tive of the object. This vector contains all important features for the object
but should not have a very high dimensionality. A very large number of
features could make model too speciﬁc and thus not accurate enough.
4. Choose a suitable machine learning algorithm for example Decision Trees,
Support Vector Machines etc. Split the data set into training and test
sets.
5. Run the algorithm on test data to generate a model. Use the model to
test the remaining data. Use cross validation or resubstitution error for
model assessment.
6. Evaluate the accuracy of the model on the test data.
There are several common problems in supervised learning methods. We discuss
some of them below.
1. The trade oﬀbetween the bias and variance is an important parameter in
supervised learning. The error due to bias is taken as a diﬀerence between
the predicted value and the actual value of an input over few diﬀerent sets
of training data. The error due to variance is taken as the variability of
the prediction for a given data point [?]. A model which has low bias must
be ﬂexible to ﬁt all the data well but not as ﬂexible to ﬁt diﬀerent training
data set diﬀerently. That would produce high variance.
2. The dimensionality of the training data is signiﬁcant for learning prob-
lems. If the input object is represented by a feature vector having high
==PAGE:23==
3.1 Machine learning
13
dimensionality, the learning function would get confused with the "extra"
dimensions and would generate a model with high variance. There are
various approaches to solve this problem by manually removing irrelevant
features or using one of the feature selection algorithms.
3. The learning problems where the desired output has a lot of noise should
not try to ﬁt the training data exactly to the learning function. This noise
could be due to human errors, measurement limitations etc. In such a
case, the parameter for the function could be adjusted to high bias, low
variance.
3.1.2
Unsupervised learning
The algorithm draws inferences from the data set comprising of only a set of
inputs without any supervised target outputs or rewards from the environment.
It could be hard to imagine how the learning function learns without getting
any feedback from the environment. The goal of unsupervised learning is to
obtain the representations of input data that helps the model to make decisions
in the future. In simpler terms, the machine ﬁnds patterns in the training data
and try to group the similar data points in one category. In the future, when
it sees unknown data, it assigns it to one of the categories. The most common
application of this type of learning is found in cluster analysis and dimensionality
reduction. In a typical clustering problem, the similar data points or data points
within certain threshold distance are clustered together. Some of the common
clustering algorithms are Hidden Markov Models(HMM), K-Means Clustering,
self organizing maps etc. In a way, these learning methods explain the important
features of the data by grouping them in representative categories.
Figure 3.1:
Supervised vs Unsupervised learning
==PAGE:24==
14
Theory and concepts
3.1.3
Reinforcement learning
Learning by interacting with our environments in order to achieve a goal is
a very common learning method in the real world. The same is employed in
reinforcement machine learning. The system learns on its own in attempts to
perform a certain goal. The feedback from the previous steps will be used to
learn. There will be plenty of data available to study cause and eﬀect, conse-
quences of actions, impact of various actions on goal achievement, failure cases
etc. Acquiring knowledge like this is very logical to us due to our own nature of
learning like this. The goal of the system is to maximize the numerical reward
signal by learning what actions produce what results. The mapping of the cause
and eﬀect is used as a feedback to the loop. The model is not given a set of
actions to perform but discover all the possible actions which take it closer to
its goal. In problems where the reward is a set of optimized states, reinforced
learning is especially useful since it can determine how actions contribute to not
only the immediate reward but all the subsequent rewards.
Reinforcement learning is deﬁned not by the algorithm but by the problem to
be solved. The environment is set up as Markov Decision Processes (MDPs).
In simpler terms, the learning agent interacts with the environment by means
of sensing surroundings, taking actions and evaluating against the goal state.
It is diﬀerent from supervised learning where the external supervisor provides
the knowledge about some possible actions and their results. In an interactive
problem, that kind of learning does not help since it is impossible to capture
all the possible interactions between the actor and the environment. A typical
example of a reinforced learning problem would be self-driving cars. Since the
cars can’t be provided with a set of all interactions in advance, the supervised
learning is not useful. By specifying the goals like avoiding crashing with other
vehicles, following rules, stoping at pedestrian crossing, the actor can learn the
actions that help him in achieving these goals. One of the major challenges in
this approach is a trade-oﬀbetween exploration and exploitation. In reinforce-
ment learning problem, the agent must prefer the actions that took it closer to
the reward state in the past. This means it needs to exploit its previous knowl-
edge to move forward while it also needs to explore new actions. Every action
has to be selected a number of times in order to accurately estimate its reward.
The process of exploitation and exploration has to be performed progressively
in spite of failure states. This could be very expensive for the system and thus
a trade-oﬀcould be performed in practical situations.
There is another common classiﬁcation of machine learning tasks depending on
the nature of output.
1. Classiﬁcation: This method is employed for solving tasks that require
==PAGE:25==
3.1 Machine learning
15
output to belong to one of the predeﬁned categories. Such a problem is
a classiﬁcation problem and is solved by supervised learning where the
model learns how to categorize the new unknown input into a category.
The current task of detecting malicious applications falls into this category
of learning.
Figure 3.2:
Classiﬁcation
2. Clustering: This method is employed when the the categories of output are
not known beforehand. This is an unsupervised learning problem where
the model will be given a set of inputs to be clustered into groups.
Figure 3.3:
Clustering
3. Regression: This is a method of supervised learning where the output
variables form a continuous rather than a discrete distribution. Regression
analysis is used to understand which independent variables are related to
the dependent variables and the nature of these relationships.
==PAGE:26==
16
Theory and concepts
Figure 3.4:
Linear regression
3.2
Classiﬁcation algorithms
3.2.1
Random Forest Classiﬁer
This algorithm is based on the random Decision Trees (DTs). A DT algorithm
is a supervised learning method based on simple decision rules inferred from
the features. This is essentially an if-then-else rule set which determines the
ﬂow. Deeper the tree, more complex and ﬁtter is the model. A random DT
is obtained by introducing randomness in the classiﬁer construction phase. RF
classiﬁer is an ensemble learning method i.e.
it constructs multiple decision
trees in training phase and then outputs the class that is the mode (in case
of classiﬁcation and mean in case of regression) of all the predictions. When
a new input arrives, it puts down the feature vector across all the trees and
then take statistical measure of the votes for each target class. There are two
important factors that determine the forest error rate: correlation between any
two trees and the strength of each individual tree determined by its own error
rate. Increasing the correlation increases the forest error rate. Lower the tree
error rate, stronger is the tree [Cut13]. The diagram below represents the idea
of the algorithm.
This method runs eﬃciently on large data sets. It can also provide the esti-
mates of the score of the variables in the feature vector per their importance in
determining the output class. this method has higher prediction accuracy when
compared to other algorithms. This could be explained by the default feature
selection phase in the method. The random forests usually do not overﬁt. The
tree is pruned after certain depth speciﬁed as a parameter.
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Classiﬁcation algorithms
17
Figure 3.5:
Random Forest Classiﬁer
3.2.2
K-Nearest Neighbor
This is a non-parametric method of classiﬁcation and regression. K is a user
deﬁned constant. The unknown instance is classiﬁed into the class where most of
its k neighbors belong to or to the average of the neighbors in case of regression.
It is possible to assign weights to the neighbors so that their contribution to
the average is diﬀerent. The neighbors which are close to the unknown sample
contributes more towards the average than the distant neighbors. Typically, the
weight of 1/d could be assigned to each neighbor where d is its distance from the
point. Diﬀerent kinds of distance metric can be used depending upon the target
class values. Euclidean distance could be used for continuous variables, overlap
metric could be used for discrete variables. A good choice of the parameter k
is very important for the prediction accuracy. A large value reduces the eﬀect
of the noise on the classiﬁcation but also make the two target classes less apart
from each other. There are various heuristic algorithms that can be used to
adjust value of k. The image 3.6 explains the concept. For k = 1,2 and 5, the
class of red dot is determined to be plus, unknown and minus. The red dot is
plotted in the space and for k = 1, the nearest neighbor to the dot has the class
plus. So, we assign the class plus to the dot. Similarly, for k = 2 and 5 , we
count the classes of the neighbors and decide the class for the dot.
The naive implementation of KNN would compute distances between every two
points in the sample data and thus is computationally very expensive for large
data sets but over the years, many nearest neighbor search algorithms have been
proposed to reduce the distance computations. A very high dimensionality of
data may prove to be a hindrance to a good accuracy prediction because the
Euclidean distance between points in high dimensional space will happen to be
==PAGE:28==
18
Theory and concepts
Figure 3.6:
K-nearest neighbor classiﬁer
close to each other. Hence, the neighboring points will form a circle around
the query point, leading to indecisive behavior. For such cases, a fast approx-
imate KNN could be used which uses other techniques like locality sensitive
hashing,random projections etc to map multiple dimensions to same plane.
3.2.3
Linear Support Vector Machine
This is a non-probabilistic binary linear classiﬁer used to classify inputs into one
of the two categories. The input objects are represented in the space as points
in training phase with the diﬀerent categories having a clear boundary. The new
samples are assigned to either of the category depending on where this object is
placed in the space. In a linear SVM, a linear classiﬁer divides the data into two
categories by a pair of parallel hyperplanes with maximum distance between
them. This region between the planes is called the "margin". In general, the
SVM constructs a hyperplane or a set of hyperplanes in an n-dimensional space
which can be used for solving classiﬁcation, clustering or regression problems.
It is also possible to use the same technique in case of unsupervised learning when
the class labels are not available for the target output. In that case, the problem
is transformed as a clustering problem and hence the method is called Support
Vector Clustering.
In addition to performing linear classiﬁcation, non-linear
classiﬁcation is possible in SVM by means of kernel trick. A kernel function is
speciﬁed which maps the inputs to higher dimensions. There are a number of
kernel functions available in common implementations such as linear, sigmoid,
polynomial and radial basis function.
==PAGE:29==
3.3 Feature selection
19
Figure 3.7:
Support Vector Machine classiﬁer
3.3
Feature selection
Also known as attribute selection, it is a technique in machine learning and
statistics to select a subset of relevant features for model construction.
For
some data having large number of parameters or features, it is possible that
some of the features are strongly correlated to each other or are redundant
and do not inﬂuence the output class [Hal99]. Such features can be eliminated
without much loss of information.
We use Correlation Attribute Evaluation
(CAE) method in this project. This method is based on determining Pearson’s
product-moment correlation coeﬃcient (PPMCC) for each attribute and then
ranking them on that basis.
Pearson’s coeﬃcient is a measure of the linear
correlation between two variables (attribute and the class in our case). In simpler
terms, it determines linear dependence of two variables on each other. The value
varies between +1 and -1 inclusive. A coeﬃcient of +1 indicates total positive
correlation, -1 indicates total negative correlation and 0 indicates no correlation.
Positive correlation means that if one variable increases, the other variable also
increases. While the negative correlation means that if one variable increases,
the other decreases. In case of no correlation, the two variables do not aﬀect
each other.
==PAGE:30==
20
Theory and concepts
3.4
Cross validation in ML
It is a model validation technique in machine learning context where the gener-
ated statistical model is assessed for its suitability to be used for independent
data sets. In a typical classiﬁcation problem, the model is trained over a deﬁned
training data set and then is tested for accuracy over the test data set. The
goal of cross validation (CV) is to derive a model for a generalized data set by
means of splitting the whole data into chunks over which the model is trained
and tested. This additional step helps to limit the problems related to over-
ﬁtting of test data. Thus, the CV includes partitioning the data into several
partitions for the purpose of training and testing and then averaging the results
of all the rounds. Also, it can be argued that this technique presents a more
realistic view of the error rate since it is derived over diﬀerent rounds and thus
the performance assessment of the actual predictor would be fairer. In a simple
scenario, the algorithm runs like this:
• k-fold CV would partition the data set into k equally sized sets and would
run the next steps on each of the k sets known as k folds.
• The model would be trained for k-1 of the sets in the training phase in
each fold.
• The model generated in the last step would be tested over the kth data
set from the previous step.
• Each time a fold is run, a diﬀerent data set is used for validation. The
performance is measured by averaging the target values computed in each
fold.
3.5
Common ML pitfalls
There are some common pitfalls which most of the machine learning projects
face. Sometimes, the data is not representative of the problem to be solved
while other times, the problem is stated incorrectly or the choice of algorithm is
not the best suited one. This leads to inaccurate predictive models and hence
the projects do not deliver the expected results. We look more closely to some
of the pitfalls relevant for the current work.
1. Overﬁtting: It is a problem in ML when the model represents a random
error or noise rather than the actual data. It occurs because of highly
==PAGE:31==
3.6 Evaluation metric
21
complex model derived from data with too many parameters. In simpler
words, we can say that such a model tries to “memorize" the training
data rather than“learning" the generalizations in the data. It will have a
poor predictive performance. There are ways to avoid overﬁtting by using
cross-validation, model comparison, regularization etc.
2. Data sampling and splitting: The train and test data samples should be
independent. The number of positive and negative samples in the training
data should be decided on the basis of the problem to be solved.
For
example, for our current project, we know that there are far less malicious
apps as compared to the benign apps.
3. Data quality: It is important that the data is consistent. The duplicate
or corrupt data should be identiﬁed and handled properly so that it does
not create a bias in the training phase.
3.6
Evaluation metric
Model evaluation is an integral part of the machine learning problems. It is
a metric to judge the performance of a model in the future. The model will
always work best for the data it has been trained on but its performance in
predicting unseen data is of key value. There are several metrics to discuss the
performance of a model. A confusion matrix shows the number of correct and
incorrect predictions made by the classiﬁcation model compared to the actual
outcomes in the data [mat]. The matrix is NxN, where N is the number of
target values (classes). The following table displays a 2x2 confusion matrix for
two classes (Positive and Negative).
Figure 3.8:
Confusion matrix
Some of the standard terms deﬁned in this context are :
==PAGE:32==
22
Theory and concepts
1. Accuracy: It is a measure of the proportion of total number of predictions
that are correct.
2. Precision: Also known as positive predictive value, it is a measure of the
proportion of predicted positive cases that are correctly identiﬁed.
3. Recall: Also known as sensitivity, it is a measure of the proportion of
actual positive cases that are correctly identiﬁed.
3.7
Android APK reverse engineering
Android application package (APK) is a ﬁle format used by Android platform
for distribution of apps. This package is an archived bundle containing following
type of ﬁles:
1. Resource bundle: This folder comprises of resource ﬁles like image re-
sources, layout resources, String resources, icons etc. that the application
uses.
2. Manifest ﬁle: The manifest ﬁle presents the information about the applica-
tion to the android operating system. This information must be available
before the application is actually run. The manifest ﬁle names the java
package for the application, describes the various components of the app
like content providers, broadcast receivers, activities and services etc.
3. Dex ﬁle: The android class ﬁles are compiled into Dalvik Executable For-
mat (DEX), not the java bytecode format due to Dalvik Virtual Machine
(DVM) used by android.
These ﬁles can be obtained by unarchiving the apk ﬁle using any unzip program.
The class ﬁles which are compiled to Dalvik bytecode in classes.dex ﬁle, can be
disassembled into an intermediate java code known as Smali code. Smali code
is human readable and gives a good understanding of the ﬂow of the program.
The diagram 3.9 conveys the idea.
3.8
Advanced concepts in Java
Some of the important concepts related to Java programming language and
Android are discussed in this section.
==PAGE:33==
3.8 Advanced concepts in Java
23
Figure 3.9:
Reverse engineering Android APK ﬁle
1. Reﬂection API : This is a powerful technique that enables the Java
programs to modify and examine their behavior at the runtime. Reﬂection
provides a mechanism to call methods of a class in cases when the instance
of that class can not be cast to the desired type at compiletime.
An
application can create instances of user deﬁned classes by using their fully
qualiﬁed names. There are some caveats of this approach like performance
overhead.
2. Dynamic class loading : An important feature of Java virtual ma-
chine is dynamic class loading. It provides the ability to install software
components at runtime [LB98]. Android provides a class named "Dex-
ClassLoader" to load classes from JAR or APK ﬁle. An app can execute
the code not installed as part of the app. There are several advantages of
this programming paradigm like delaying the loading of a class as long as
possible to reduce memory usage, loading the class from remote location
etc.
3. Java Native Interface : Also referred as JNI, this is a programming
framework which allows the Java applications running in the Java virtual
machine to call and be called by other programs running on the underlying
platform [Lia99]. These programs can be libraries written in C, C++. It
enables the programmers to leverage the platform speciﬁc features and
deliver performance. The native code can be implemented in the .c, .cpp
ﬁles and could be accessed in the Java program.
==PAGE:34==
24
Theory and concepts
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 4
Literature Review
In this section, we will be discussing some of the most relevant literature in the
ﬁeld of static and dynamic analysis for malware detection.
4.1
Detection based on static features
In a publication by A. Shabtai et al. [SFE10],the authors worked on classifying
apps on Android OS based on their category of utility (for example, entertain-
ment, gaming, news etc.)using the static features extracted from the application
package (.apk ﬁle). The idea behind the research was to compare the diﬀerent
feature selection and machine learning algorithms to solve this problem and
extend it to the domain of classifying malware and benign apps. The authors
justiﬁed that the unavailability of the data set for the malware detection prob-
lem leads them to conduct the classiﬁcation experiment on the two category
of apps from the Google playstore : games and tools. The experiment gave
the highest accuracy using Chi-Square feature selection algorithm with Boosted
Bayesian Networks (BNNs) training algorithm.
This early work in the year
2010 gave an idea about the utility of this approach to solve security problems.
RiskRanker developed by M. Grace et al. [GZZ+12] focuses on detecting zero
day android malware by signature recognition techniques. The system is imple-
mented with two levels of complexity; ﬁrst and second order risk analysis. The
==PAGE:36==
26
Literature Review
ﬁrst order analysis detects the patterns of malicious code in the non-obfuscated
apps. These patterns exploit the vulnerabilities in the OS kernel or privileged
daemons. Since the exploitation at this level could be very dangerous, it is re-
garded as medium to high risk vulnerability. The second order analysis deals
with encrypted payloads or dynamically loaded payloads.
For this analysis,
RiskRanker gather information like background DLC, encryption APIs, access
to resources, native code execution APIs etc. For example, the analysis detects
the presence of frameworks like android.content.res.AssetManager in code paths
that also use other critical frameworks like encryption or execution. This makes
that piece of code suspicious due to the possibility of hidden or encrypted code
present in resource folder. The authors collected around 105,000 apps from the
diﬀerent app stores over a period of two months in 2011. The prototype was
able to identify 718 malicious apps in 29 malware families. This included 322
zero-day malwares. The approach has several limitations like the reliance on
known signatures for the ﬁrst order analysis, assumption that the attackers use
android libraries for encryption, decryption tasks instead of implementing their
own.
In another relevant publication by L. Batyuk et al. [BHC+11], the authors fo-
cus on detection of malicious apps on android platform that leak users private
information. In the ﬁrst part of the paper, they propose a service that stati-
cally analyses the applications by identifying third party libraries used in the
application and using rich pattern matching for security warnings etc. In the
second part, they provide mitigation measures by refactoring binary application
packages based on user preferences. Users are able to create their personal pro-
ﬁle which contains their security and privacy preferences. The system barred
the installation of the app if user speciﬁed preferences do not have a mitiga-
tion strategy. The mitigation is performed by decompiling application binary
code to Smali and then making necessary changes in the Smali source code of
the app. The app is then repackaged for installation. The authors present an
experimental prototype of the system but argue that the deployment is only
possible by the use of a third party hosting server and then uploading of apk
to the analysis server for assessment and mitigation. This approach is not very
practical. H. Kang et al. [KJMK15] presented a novel approach to complement
the existing static analysis techniques by considering the developer certiﬁcate
serial numbers of the applications. The authors found that a large set of mali-
cious applications are signed by a very small set of certiﬁcates. This lead them
to the conclusion that the malware detection could be made more eﬀective if
the app certiﬁcate serial number is compared with a predeﬁned blacklist of ma-
licious certiﬁcate serial numbers. Apart from that, they also used the suspicious
API calls, system calls and permission set to detect the malicious behavior. A
data set comprising of about 51,000 benign and 4500 malicious applications was
used for the experiments. A noticeable detection rate of 98% has been reported
by the authors. The authors proposed to look into dynamic analysis techniques
==PAGE:37==
4.1 Detection based on static features
27
to complement the detection for future work. J. Saxe et al. [SB15] discussed
about the malware detection based on deep neural networks using two dimen-
sional binary program features.The network was directly trained on binary ﬁles
without any ﬁltering or unpacking. The authors considered four complementary
features for the binaries i.e entropy histograms, PE import, PE metadata and
aggregate features. They were able to achieve a 95% detection rate at 0.1% false
positive rate.
In 2015, L. Apvrille and A. Apvrille [AA15] presented a research work on iden-
tifying unknown android malware using a combination of diﬀerent classiﬁcation
algorithms like SVM, Hidden Markov Models, Logistic Regression, Bayesian
Networks etc. The classiﬁcation module automatically and eﬃciently combined
various algorithms to produce the best results. The authors tracked 289 features
from the static analysis of the apk ﬁle which included ﬁle properties, Dalvik code
properties, resource properties and third party kit properties. The authors em-
phasize on feature relevance study by considering the features that seem to be
related with malicious activity e.g. mobile spyware interested in personal assets,
subscriber identities etc. The highlight of the paper was the classiﬁcation engine
named Alligator, which is a free and open-source tool for classiﬁcation of data.
The engine works by assigning weights to the classiﬁcation algorithms during
the training phase. The authors concluded that the learning time with Alligator
was faster compared to SVM but the classiﬁcation time was slower because of
the lack of classiﬁcation model for Alligator in the classiﬁcation phase. One of
the well known publication in this context was from the authors Y. Aafer et
al. [ADY13] in which they presented a tool called DroidAPIMiner. The au-
thors follow an approach to deﬁne a feature vector from the critical API calls,
their package level information and their parameters. They include the API
calls which have signiﬁcantly higher support in malicious applications than in
benign, excluding the API calls exclusively made by the third party advertising
packages. The choice of not considering ad related libraries is motivated by
the argument that the ad libraries do use suspicious APIs to track users and
deliver the functionality and thus the apps should be analyzed irrespective of
these libraries. Also, the API calls that were frequently used by both types of
apps were analyzed further to recover their parameters values. This knowledge
is then used to generate the feature vector. The classiﬁcation was compared
for four diﬀerent algorithms : ID5 Decision Tree (DT), C4.5 DT, K-Nearest
Neighbor (KNN), Support Vector Machine (SVM). A data set comprising of
about 16,000 benign and 4,000 malicious applications is sourced from McAfee
and Android Malware Genome project. The analysis shows that KNN and ID3
DT models provide a better accuracy as compared to the other models. The
authors are able to achieve 99% accuracy and a a false positive rate of 2.2%
using KNN classiﬁer. A few limitations of the approach have been discussed
which include the inability to detect API calls made by using reﬂection APIs.
The authors argue that since such an API is used more in malicious applications
==PAGE:38==
28
Literature Review
than in benign, they are a part of feature vector already. Similarly, the bytecode
encryption is used by some of the developers which prevents static analysis on
that code.
D. Arp et al.[ASH+14] published a paper presenting a tool called DREBIN that
provides a light weight method for detecting malicious applications on Android
platform. The tool extracts features by performing a broad static analysis on
apk. The authors implemented the dissembler for dex libaries to extract the fea-
ture set from the application and generated a feature set comprising of 545,000
features. The properties like suspicious API calls, requested permissions, hard-
ware components, intents, used permissions etc.
are taken into account for
generating such a rich feature set. They use linear SVM as learning and clas-
siﬁcation algorithm. The training of SVM is done on the remote machine and
the learned model is communicated to the client application for detecting ma-
licious apps. A data set comprising of around 120,000 applications has been
used for training and detection. The authors record a detection rate of 94% and
false positive rate of 1% for this analysis. Also, they quote that the method
requires 10 seconds for an analysis on the device on an average. The novelty of
the approach lies in providing a meaningful description to the user after detec-
tion. The patterns in feature space are mapped to speciﬁc malicious behavior
that helped to generate insights. The authors discussed the limitations of the
approach e.g. lack of dynamic analysis.
4.2
Detection based on dynamic analysis
Y. Zhou et al. [ZWZJ12] implemented a solution called DroidRanger that uses
permission based ﬁltering and heuristic detection methods to identify the mali-
cious apps in the oﬃcial and non oﬃcial android market places. About 204,000
applications were collected from ﬁve diﬀerent stores. The approach consisted of
ﬁltering the apps based on the permissions declared in the manifest ﬁle. Only
the suspicious permissions were used for ﬁltering such as related to SMS send-
ing or receiving. After that, the ﬁltered apps were matched with the malware
footprints generated from behavioral analysis. It is important to note that the
behavior footprints were generated manually by analyzing malware features.
The heuristics based detection focuses on identifying apps that exhibit suspi-
cious behavior by dynamically loading code. The dynamic execution monitor
is used to inspect the APIs triggered by the code. The system detected 211
malicious apps in the chosen dataset, 32 of them in the oﬃcial market place. In
a publication by W. Enck et al. [EGH+14], an information ﬂow tracking system
called TaintDroid is proposed for real time monitoring of user privacy on smart
phones. The design of the system is implemented as an extension to the Android
==PAGE:39==
4.3 Detection based on hybrid analysis
29
operating system that tracks the ﬂow of private information through the third
party apps. The traﬃc generated from all the installed apps is monitored and
scanned for the possible data leakage. The goal is to detect if the user sensitive
data leaves the system via any of these apps. The system makes use of the lan-
guage based security and privacy principles like labeling the program variables,
ﬁles etc for the purpose of identifying leakage of sensitive data. The information
regarding the data transmitted, the application and the destination are logged
for further analysis. TaintDroid is tested on only 30 apps but provides good
results with no false positives.
4.3
Detection based on hybrid analysis
T. Blasing et al. [BBS+10] published a paper experimenting with an android
application sandbox for detecting malicious applications. The experiment took
into consideration both static and dynamic analysis of the applications. The
static analysis was based on using pattern matching techniques for known mal-
ware behavior. The authors clustered the extracted patterns like usage of Java
Native Interface, usage of reﬂection API, usage of System.getRuntime().exec(..)
etc and the applications were assigned to clusters corresponding to their activity.
The dynamic analysis module which was more complex aimed at intercepting
system calls to understand the functionality and behavior of applications. A
Loadable Kernel Module (LKM) was installed in the kernel space to log the
system calls while the application underwent random operations from the user
interface. The authors tested the system with 150 applications downloaded from
the app store and a self written android malware.
The more recent publications focus on using machine learning and clustering
algorithms for detection, realizing that the signature based algorithm do not
scale up well in the present world. A paper was published in late 2015 by A.
Damodaran et al. [DDTV+15] which compares the static, dynamic and hybrid
approaches to malware detection. In this research, the authors used Hidden
Markov Models (HMMs) on static and dynamic feature sets and presented their
evaluations for various combinations of both approaches. The API call traces
and opcode sequences were used to generate the feature sets from the data sets.
The experiments were conducted on small data set comprising of windows exe-
cutable ﬁles. They also provide insights into the advantages and disadvantages of
both approaches. One of the major ﬁndings was that the fully dynamic analysis
produced the best results. The authors discussed that the fully dynamic analy-
sis could be impractical for real world deployment because of the computation
costs and overhead. Thus, they plan to optimize the hybrid analysis approach
further to product acceptable results. Y. Zhauniarovich et al. [ZAG+15] found
==PAGE:40==
30
Literature Review
out that the recent android malware is able to evade the best of static analysis
tools because of the presence of popular dynamic code update techniques and
reﬂection. The authors proposed to use dynamic analysis techniques along with
the existing static analysis to reveal the hidden or updated behavior of the ap-
plications. The system called STADYNA was implemented which consisted of
a server module and a client module. The server module generated the Method
Call Graph (MCG) for an application using the static analysis techniques. The
MCG does not contain information about the dynamically loaded code (DLC)
or the names of methods called through reﬂection but it marks the APIs used
in these methods as methods of interest (moi). After this static analysis phase,
the application is installed in an emulator or the device for dynamic analysis
if MOIs are detected. The client provides more information about the method
calls, stack trace, parameters etc for DLC and reﬂection. This information is
sent back to the server to complement the MCG generated in previous step.
The approach captures the advantages of both analysis. The evaluation data
set was quite small for the experiment. Also, the authors stated that the dy-
namic analysis steps could not be automated and were conducted by manual
trigger. Martin Lindorfer et al. [LNP15] introduced a system called MARVIN
to provide a comprehensible and practical malware analysis system to empower
the existing technologies struggling with problems like obfuscation and dynamic
code loading. The authors followed a hybrid approach consisting of static and
dynamic analysis leveraging the machine learning to provide malice scores to
the unknown android apps. The data set consisting of 135,000 Android apps
was used, out of which 15,000 samples were malware. MARVIN reported an
accuracy score of 98.24% with less than 0.04% false positives. The contribution
of the research was to provide a solution for the end user downloading apps from
diﬀerent app stores to assess the risk score associated with the app in an under-
standable way. The feature set for the static analysis included the information
from the developer certiﬁcate used for signing the app, app package structure,
used permissions, security critical APIs. The features like reﬂection API, cryp-
tographic API, dynamic code loading etc were also included in the static feature
set. A dynamic analysis tool called ANDRUBIS is used to monitor at the Java
level and system level through virtual machine in the emulator. The features
like ﬁle operations, dynamically loaded code, phone events, network operations
etc are extracted from the analysis logs. The authors argued that a more precise
diﬀerentiation is desirable in this case as compared to a binary classiﬁcation and
thus, a risk score based prediction could be a better choice. For example, an
adware is not necessarily malicious even if it exhibits some of the properties of a
malware like tracking user or accessing app data etc. The score is assigned from
probability estimations. The feature set with around 500,000 features was used
for the training of the classiﬁer. Two machine learning classiﬁers were used: a
linear classiﬁer and a Support Vector Machine. MARVIN had some limitations
like possibility of evasion for VM based dynamic analysis, mechanism of sharing
app from the user device to the system.
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 5
Limitations of the related
work
The current approaches have the following limitations :
1. The static analysis approach which is based on the permission based risk
assessment does not perform very well due to several reasons. Most of
the android apps are over privileged due to the ignorance of development
teams [FCH+11], while also some Android OS images unsafely expose
critical permissions to apps [GZWJ12].
2. The dynamic code loading, native code execution and use of reﬂection
(discussed in Chapter 3) is not taken into account in the most of related
work. In [ADY13, ASH+14], the API calls related to this functionality
are taken into consideration without the method parameters or the loaded
code. In these cases, the static analysis checks done at the bytecode level
would not provide concrete information about the behavior of the app.
3. The static analysis techniques do not perform well with the encrypted
bytecode. The bytecode encryption is another tool for the developers to
hinder the reverse engineering of the application code.
The encrypted
code is decrypted at the run time. Since the encrypted code could not be
analyzed statically, it evades the security check. In [ADY13], the authors
==PAGE:42==
32
Limitations of the related work
argue that the decryption API which would be a part of the feature vector,
indicates the suspicious activity to some extent.
4. Some of the relevant works do not have suﬃcient data to train and test
the model [EGH+14, DDTV+15].
5. Many of the works [ADY13] only discuss the static analysis approaches
and the accuracy of the model but not the deployment of the system in a
real world setting. This is particularly important because the deployment
and integration is a major task in mobile solutions.
The apps can be
installed from a variety of market places and third party servers. It is
therefore, important to look at the architecture for deployment.
6. The static analysis approach which uses machine learning algorithms to
classify, has a high dimensionality sometimes, as in [ASH+14, LNP15].
The high dimensional feature set generates a more complex model and
thus the model could suﬀer from over-ﬁtting. The feature extraction phase
would be computationally expensive as well.
7. Some of the approaches for static analysis use a feature set comprising
of diﬀerent types of features extracted from an app, like requested per-
missions, used permissions, hardware components, intents, API calls etc
[ASH+14, AA15, LNP15]. Since some of these features under diﬀerent
categories could have a strong correlation, these methods miss the cor-
relation analysis or feature selection step. For example, a malicious app
sending premium SMS would call API sendTextMessage(), request per-
mission SEND_SMS and use it. These three features in the feature set
are correlated and should be considered only once for training the model.
Therefore, the limitations of the reviewed literature range from insuﬃcient data
set, lack of dynamic analysis, deployment issues, highly complex model for train-
ing etc.
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 6
Solution description
SafeDroid is explained in detail in this section. We provide a proof of concept of
the solution in the current scope of our project. As pointed out in the Chapter
5, the deployment of such malware detection systems is a cumbersome task.
This is because of the following reasons:
1. The oﬃcial Android marketplace called Google Playstore does not provide
a mechanism to download an application directly on the server for the
purpose of analysis. The application can only be installed on an android
device.
2. It is possible to retrieve the application binary from the Android OS after
installation but sending the APK archive on the network would consume
network bandwidth and have communication latency.
3. In some of the architectures, the analysis module is proposed to be hosted
in a client application. In a production system, the model is supposed
to be retrained after some interval of time. The client app needs to be
updated every time there is a change in the model.
In order to solve some of these problems, we have designed a distributed system
comprising of an Android app, a Classiﬁcation and Reporting Server (CRS),
and a Feature Extraction Server (FES).
==PAGE:44==
34
Solution description
Figure 6.1:
Component diagram
Figure 6.2:
Communication between components
As shown in the ﬁgure 6.1, the ﬁrst component is a malware detection app
which is developed for the Android platform.
The app retrieves the list of
installed applications on the device. The user can choose the application he
wants to scan.
In the Android OS, the APK archive of every installed app
is available to all the apps without the device being rooted. The "Runtime"
class in Java can be used to run commands native to the environment. This
helps our detector app to locate the APK of the chosen application and access
its DEX class ﬁle which is relevant for the purpose of our analysis. The app
sends the dex ﬁle, app name and the MD5 hash of the APK to the CRS. The
server analyses the app ﬁle and classiﬁes it as malicious or benign and sends the
result back to the client app. In case of malware, the response also includes the
description of why the app has been classiﬁed as malware. The CRS module
==PAGE:45==
35
is written in Java and acts as an API end point for classiﬁcation and reporting
function. The classes.dex ﬁle which is a Dalvik Executable ﬁle is sent to the
Feature Extraction Server (FES) which analyses the ﬁle and returns a binary
feature vector. This feature vector is then tested for the class label. This module
contains a serialized machine learning classiﬁer the details of which are explained
in chapter 7. We use Random Forest classiﬁer implemented in Weka to train and
test our data. Once the classiﬁer is generated and cross validated, we serialize the
model and save it. Serialization is a process where the object state is translated
into a format suitable for storing it in the memory and then reconstructing
(deserialization) it into the same object in a computer system. When a new
feature set is available, the model is retrained and serialized. Retraining helps to
keep the model updated with the current state of malware and can be scheduled
at a regular interval depending on the volume of unseen apps. This model is
used to test the unknown instance for the malicious or benign class label. If the
classiﬁcation results in the malicious label, we determine the API features which
contribute to this classiﬁcation. The model contains a list of ranked features
generated by Attribute evaluation method as discussed in the Chapter 7.
For the purpose of reporting, the features are categorized under several labels
depending upon the security and privacy concern associated with them. It is
to be noted that labeling the features into categories is a manual task. The
label is decided depending upon the API functionality.
Since this is a time
consuming process to label each API feature and is not the focus area for the
current work, we have deﬁned only six feature categories i.e. suspicious network
activity, suspicious ads related activity, retrieves personal or device information,
suspicious utility method calls and miscellaneous method calls. This is to make
the report more understandable for the user. The top 20 API features which
determine the classiﬁcation are retrieved and the most common categories to
which these features belong are sent to the user for the purpose of reporting.
Following are the major third party frameworks used in the implementation of
this module.
1. Spark web framework: Spark is an open source micro framework written
in Java for creating web applications. It is a simple and lightweight frame-
work that aims for rapid development of Java applications. Spark is built
over Java 8’s lambda expressions philosophy which makes applications a
lot less verbose. It has been used to create a REST API.
2. Weka: The weka tool [HFH+09] provides Java libraries to integrate the
machine learning algorithms in a Java application. The libraries provide
methods for converting CSV ﬁle into ARFF format which is the ﬁle format
Weka uses for training and testing. There are several classiﬁers available
which can be conﬁgured for various options relevant for them. The clas-
siﬁer can then be serialized for use in the future. The classiﬁer can be
==PAGE:46==
36
Solution description
retrained with new samples.
3. Apache HTTP client:
The HTTP client and related java libraries by
Apache are used to make URL requests to the feature extraction module.
The extraction module provides a REST API which is accessed through
HTTP client. The response is wrapped in the JSON format.
The FES module is written in Python as an API end point for feature extraction.
The CRS sends the classes.dex ﬁle to this module. The ﬁle is statically analyzed
using the modiﬁed version of the open source tool called Androwarn as explained
in Chapter 7. A binary feature vector is retrieved depicting the APIs present
in the DEX ﬁle.
This feature vector is returned to the classiﬁcation server.
Following are the major third party frameworks used in the implementation of
this module.
1. Flask web framework: Flask is an open source micro framework for de-
veloping web applications in python. The framework is called micro not
because it lacks some functionality but because it keeps the core extensible,
so that the developers can make decisions about the other components like
database etc. The framework is used to create a REST API responding
to the Java back end client.
2. Androwarn: It is an open source static analysis framework based on an-
other open source project called Androguard. It provides APIs for search-
ing packages, method names, method signatures, opcodes etc in the DEX
ﬁle. The framework has been modiﬁed to return a binary feature vector
from a DEX ﬁle.
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 7
Methodology for generating
model
7.1
Data set
We source our data set from one of the prior research work in this ﬁeld [KJMK15].
As described by the authors, the malware samples are collected from the com-
mon malware repository websites such as VirusShare, contagio Mobile and Mal-
ware.lu. The samples were collected during the period January to August 2013.
The benign applications were downloaded from the oﬃcial Google Play Store
during the same period. It is important to note that these downloaded appli-
cations are assumed to be benign. We have a total of 25000 applications, out
of which 4554 (18%) are malware and 18909 (82%) are benign. In general, the
number of malware applications is far less than the benign applications. This
justiﬁes our data set proportion.
7.2
Software and tools used
1. Androwarn: Androwarn [and] is an open source tool written in python
for reverse engineering Android APK ﬁles and statically analyzing the
==PAGE:48==
38
Methodology for generating model
Dalvik bytecode. It provides support for decompiling the APK ﬁle, dissem-
bling the Dalvik bytecode, accessing app resources and XML ﬁles etc. The
tool detects the malicious behavior categories in an APK ﬁle by searching
the pre-deﬁned method calls in the dissembled bytecode.
Our require-
ments for the current project are diﬀerent from those of the tool. Thus,
we modiﬁed it per our needs (source code submitted separately).
2. Weka: Weka is an open source tool developed for using diﬀerent ma-
chine learning algorithms for data mining tasks [HFH+09]. It provides
the functionality for pre-processing, clustering, classiﬁcation, regression
and visualization. It provides an interface through software package with
GUI as well as Java APIs. The tool is implemented in Java. For the scope
of the current project, we will use the tool for classiﬁcation of data and
the Java APIs for implementing our prototype solution. There are several
classiﬁers we will use to compare the performance. The details will be
discussed in the following sections.
3. High Performance Computing Cluster(HPCC): After realizing that
the amount of data we need to process to generate feature vector or ex-
tract feature set etc is very large (of the order of 100 GBs), we decided
to explore the HPC infrastructure provided by the university. In the ex-
periment phase, we needed to run the same scripts a number of times to
improve the feature vector or modify the features. It was worth to inves-
tigate the facility and learn how to use it eﬀectively to run the jobs in an
eﬃcient manner. HPPC is an open source parallel computing platform
meant for big data applications and analytics maintained and developed
by NexisLexis [hpc]. The cluster engine is reliable, highly scalable and
fault tolerant. It has been in use in production systems for a long time
delivering high performance. The oﬃcial pages claim that the HPCC is a
superior alternative over exiting big data platforms like Hadoop because
of the easier development, easier administration and long time use in pro-
duction environments. By using the multiple cores for processing our big
data sets, we hope to improve the script run time many folds. We provide
a list of the important commands used to avail this facility.
7.3
Steps
The methodology for generating the model is outlined in the following and
illustrated in the diagram.
==PAGE:49==
7.3 Steps
39
Table 7.1: Common HPCC commands
Command
Description
qsub [-A account] script
submits PBS job
qdel job_identiﬁer
deletes PBS job
qstat -f job_identiﬁer
shows status PBS job
showstart job_identiﬁer
shows approximate starting time of PBS job
checkjob job_identiﬁer
shows current status of PBS job
showq
shows current status of whole queue
PBS -l walltime=00:30:00
specify the maximum time the job should run
PBS -l feature=X5550
specify the CPU type
PBS -l nodes=1:ppn=1
specify the nodes and processors per node
required for the job
Figure 7.1:
Model generation phase
7.3.1
Feature extraction
The ﬁrst step in the model generation phase is the feature extraction. A machine
learning model for the purpose of training, requires data in the form of feature
vectors and their correct labels. we decide to provide a binary feature vector
to the model where the occurrence of 0 or 1 determines whether a speciﬁc
feature is present or not in the application ﬁle. The performance and accuracy
of a machine learning classiﬁer depends on the quality of the feature set. Our
system requires a feature set that is representative of the malicious activity of
the application and does not have a very high dimensionality in order to not
fall victim to the problem of over-ﬁtting and complex model. There are a few
possibilities to extract static features from application binary ﬁles as suggested
by various related works in the Chapter 4.
1. Requested Permissions:
Every application presents user a list of
required permissions to access security critical services at the installation
time. This is an important security mechanism since the user needs to
grant access to these services before they could be used. For example,
READ_SMS, SEND_SMS, READ_CONTACTS, WRITE_CONTACTS
etc. It has been found that the malicious apps tend to ask for certain set of
==PAGE:50==
40
Methodology for generating model
permissions more frequently than the benign apps CITE. An application
requesting access to location information, network communication and
personal information is more likely to be sending user location to remote
server and thus misusing it.
2. Hardware components:
Similar to the permissions, the applications
need to list the hardware features for its functioning. A combination of
certain features could indicate malicious behavior. For example, an appli-
cation accessing camera and network connection could send your photos
to the remote server without your consent.
3. API calls:
API stands for Application Programming Interface. It is an
interface provided by the Android OS to the applications built on top of
it, to access the functionality and services oﬀered by it. The application
makes calls to speciﬁc APIs to access services, for example, getDeviceId(),
getSubscriberId(), sendTextMessage(). Some of these APIs are more criti-
cal than the others because of the security and privacy implications of the
services they access. The calls to the critical APIs are administered by
speciﬁc permissions but applications could call API without the required
permission. This could indicate a malicious behavior suggesting that the
application might have tried to use root exploits to call that API. Also,
a set of critical API calls could deﬁne a malicious behavior. For exam-
ple, an application calling sendTextMessage() API could send SMS to the
premium numbers without user consent.
4. App components:
There are four types of app components declared by
the applications namely broadcast receivers, content providers, activities
and services. These components are the interfaces by which the system
can interact with the app. Certain malware families could use the same
component names for malicious activities. So, this information may help
to detect such apps.
The above described feature families or their combinations play a signiﬁcant role
in determining the behavior of the applications and distinguish the malicious
applications from the benign ones [ADY13, ASH+14, DDTV+15, LNP15]. For
our research, we will use the API calls to deﬁne our feature set for the learning
model.
Motivation behind API feature set:
We decide to derive our feature set for
static analysis from the API calls. The API calls capture the behavior of an app
very well. The API calls like getDeviceId(), getSubscriberId(), sendTextMes-
sage() allow access to the sensitive data or resources of the smartphone. The
malicious applications try to extract this kind of information without the user
consent and misuse it. As discussed in [ADY13, ASH+14], the usage of this
==PAGE:51==
7.3 Steps
41
set of API calls make an application suspicious and thus could be helpful in
determining if it should be ﬂagged as malicious or benign. The other associated
features like requested permissions and hardware components, have a strong
correlation to these APIs and thus are excluded for our experiment described
in the next section. The API calls can be easily extracted statically from the
Dex class ﬁle without much computation overhead. This is important because
a great part of usability of every client solution lies in the fact that it should be
fast.
We took several steps to obtain the desired set of features. Our approach is
inspired from one of the previous works [ADY13].
Firstly, to ﬁgure out the
relevant APIs that could determine if an application behaves in a malicious
way or not, we planned to identify the most commonly used API calls from the
malware applications. This was done by searching for the calls in all the packages
of an application dissembled code ﬁle. We found out that this approach gives a
very large number of calls since an application accesses a lot of native and third
party packages and thus a large number of API calls in each of the packages.
Also, not all the common APIs in malware apps are necessarily malicious in
nature. The computation to collect the API list for each application and then
calculating the frequencies of each call was very huge. Thus, the approach was
modiﬁed to make the computation less expensive and feature set more relevant.
We decided to look for the API calls for only speciﬁc packages that are used
in the malicious apps more frequently. Now, the problem was to ﬁnd the criti-
cal packages whose API calls determine the behavior of apps more accurately.
This could have been done manually by listing the critical packages. But the
manual analysis is time consuming, imperfect and does not scale. So,we decided
to use some part of the data set to determine the packages that are used by
malicious applications more often than the benign applications. We created a
set of packages imported by 60% of the malicious and benign apps in the data
set along with the percent count of the times they were used in each category.
Then we calculated the diﬀerence in the count of usage of packages in malicious
apps with the benign apps. The packages which have a percent count diﬀerence
of more than a speciﬁed value (35% for our case) were considered as describing
the malicious behavior. We searched for the API calls for each app for each
of the packages from the previous step. The set of these API calls constitute
our feature vector for the experiment. Finally, we calculate the binary feature
vector for each application in our data set and append a bit representing the
class label of the application in its feature vector.
==PAGE:52==
42
Methodology for generating model
7.3.2
Model training and evaluation
Once the features are extracted, we are ready to train the machine learning
classiﬁer and evaluate its performance on the unseen data. There are various
machine learning techniques like clustering, classiﬁcation, regression etc which
are used to train a model and test the unknown data sets. For our case, clas-
siﬁcation which is a form of supervised learning technique is the best since our
data set is labeled and has two target classes: malicious or benign. We explored
scikit-learn [sci] which is a machine learning library written in Python and Weka
[HFH+09] which is a data mining software written in Java. Since the prototype
of our ﬁnal solution is implemented in Java and we need to use the generated
model for classiﬁcation in the prototype, we decided to use Weka for this step.
The feature vector from the last step is fed loaded into the Weka interface and
the models for three diﬀerent classiﬁers are trained and evaluated. We compare
the performance of Random forest, Liner support vector machines and K-nearest
neighbor classiﬁers. The results are averaged over 10 folds of cross validation.
7.3.3
Feature selection
Feature selection or "dimensionality reduction" is a step to improve the accuracy
of the estimator or the performance on high dimensional data set. A subset of
the original features has several beneﬁts:
• Over-ﬁtting: The dimensionality of the data is reduced, meaning there is
less noise and hence less opportunities to make decisions based on that.
As we learnt that the primary reason for over-ﬁtting is the large num-
ber of parameters, this step would indeed make model less complex and
consequently more general.
• Accuracy: Though we can not argue that the resulting model will be more
accurate since the less relevant features are not necessarily redundant, it
gives us an opportunity to achieve a trade oﬀbetween the model accuracy
and complexity. The duplicate features or features which do not aﬀect
classiﬁcation would be removed.
• Training time: Lesser parameters lead to faster training and classiﬁcation
time.
In the second experiment, we use Correlation Attribute Evaluation (CAE) method
for feature selection as described in Chapter 4. This method ranks all the fea-
tures according to their Pearson’s coeﬃcient. We choose to use the 300 top
==PAGE:53==
7.3 Steps
43
ranked features from our initial 743 features to evaluate the performance of
classiﬁers.
7.3.4
Model retraining and evaluation
The model is trained again with the new feature set with the select features.
We take the 300 top ranked features from the list and train the classiﬁers. The
results are compared with the previous experiment.
==PAGE:54==
44
Methodology for generating model
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 8
Evaluation
As discussed in the previous chapters, SafeDroid has several characteristic fea-
tures like feasibility of deployment, accuracy in prediction and performance. In
this section, we will evaluate these characteristics over the available parameters.
8.1
Feasibility of deployment
The proof of concept is provided for SafeDroid. The Android app is based on
the fact that the app can run shell commands on the device using the instance
of "Runtime" class and access the relevant ﬁle resource to be sent to the remote
server.
The feasibility was tested on the Android OS version 5.1.1 and the
concept app is built with SDK version 23.
8.2
Model accuracy
The ﬁgure 8.1 shows the top 20 application packages used by the malware apps.
The package names are plotted against their percentage count in the malware
==PAGE:56==
46
Evaluation
data set.
As we can notice that the generic packages like ‘Ljava/lang/Ob-
ject’,‘Ljava/lang/String’, ‘Landroid/app/Activity’ etc are used quite a lot. This
is understandable since these packages are used for usual app ﬂow tasks. Since
the usage of such packages do not determine any malicious behavior, we would
like to skip the API calls belonging to these packages. We can also notice the
other packages like ’Landroid/telephony/ TelephonyManager’,’Landroid/content/
BroadcastReceiver’, ’Landroid/net/Uri’ which have high usage frequency. These
packages do determine malicious behavior.
Figure 8.1:
Packages with the highest count in benign dataset
Similarly in the ﬁgure 8.2, the top 20 packages used by the benign app set are
shown. A quick look into the list reveals that the most common packages are
’Ljava/lang/Object’, ’Landroid/app/Activity’, ’Ljava/lang/StringBuilder’. We
reasoned in the last paragraph that these packages do not determine much of a
malicious behavior of an app. This has been proved correct by the observations
in this case.
We take the diﬀerence of the percentage usage count between the packages in
malicious set and benign set. The ﬁgure 8.3 shows the top 20 packages which are
used in malicious apps more than in benign apps. The chart is plotted between
the package name and the percentage diﬀerence of usage in malicious and benign
set. Apart from the packages related to core functions like TelephonyManager,
NotiﬁcationManager, there are some advertisement related packages which are
used in malicious apps more. There are a total of 107 such packages which are
==PAGE:57==
8.2 Model accuracy
47
Figure 8.2:
Packages with the highest count in benign dataset
used in the next phase of experiments.
We retrieve the APIs for the listed packages from the malicious set and these
APIs deﬁne our feature set. The feature set has 743 APIs listed in the appendix
A. The binary feature vector is generated for all the apps. After the model is
trained with the training data, it is evaluated for various metrics. The results
are presented in the table 8.1.
Table 8.1: Results of Classiﬁcation using diﬀerent classiﬁers
Classiﬁcation Algorithm
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
FP rate
Random Forest(trees=10)
99.511%
0.995
0.995
0.017
K-Nearest Neighbor(k=20)
98.74%
0.987
0.987
0.036
SVM(kernel=linear)
97.272%
0.973
0.973
0.117
The Random Forest classiﬁer with 10 trees gives the highest accuracy of 99.511%
and the false positive rate of 0.017 while the KNN also performs quite good with
98.74% accuracy. False positive rate is also minimum for random forest. One
reason why random forest usually performs better than the other algorithms is
that it does feature selection on its own and build trees with the good features
[Cut13]. Later on, these trees will be favored over the trees built with noisy
features.
==PAGE:58==
48
Evaluation
Figure 8.3:
Package count diﬀerence between malware and benign dataset
In the next step, we took 300 top ranked features (ranked by Attribute Evalua-
tion method) to measure the impact of feature selection on the performance of
classiﬁers. The results of the experiment are presented in the table 8.2.
Table 8.2: Results of Classiﬁcation using diﬀerent classiﬁers
Classiﬁcation Algorithm
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
FP rate
Random Forest(trees=10)
96.95%
0.969
0.970
0.110
K-Nearest Neighbor(k=20)
96.46%
0.965
0.965
0.128
SVM(kernel=linear)
96.04%
0.961
0.960
0.157
The Random Forest classiﬁer used in combination with CAE feature selection
gives the highest accuracy of 96.95% and false positive rate of 0.110. Comparing
the results from table 8.1, the accuracy of the classiﬁer dropped by 2.56% while
the number of features decrease by over 50%.
==PAGE:59==
8.3 Performance analysis
49
Figure 8.4: Accuracy of diﬀerent classiﬁers with and without feature selection
Figure 8.5: False positive rate of diﬀerent classiﬁers with and without feature
selection
8.3
Performance analysis
We logged the time taken by the API to respond to a client request to evaluate
the performance of the system. On a machine with 8 GB RAM, 128 SSD hard
disk, running Spark web framework on Java 8 on Mac OS X Yosemite, the API
responds in 3605 ms. This is an acceptable response time. Please note that the
response time depends on a lot of factors like the size of the DEX ﬁle, network
==PAGE:60==
50
Evaluation
bandwidth etc.
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 9
Discussion
Our model not only provides a high accuracy and low false positive rate but
also ranks the features depending upon their contribution in determining the
class label.
The solution as a whole provides a feasible deployment scheme.
The model for classiﬁcation does not depend on the presence of benign features.
Since the features are extracted based only on the suspicious calls, the attacker
could not trick the system by adding benign functionality to the apps.
9.1
Insights into the API feature set
A list of the top ranked features, their Pearson coeﬃcient generated by Cor-
relation Attribute Evaluation method and their description is presented in the
table 9.1.
Feature
Pearson’s coeﬃcient
Description
printStackTrace
0.760418
Writes
a
printable
representation
of
this
Throwable’s
stack
trace to the System.err
stream
==PAGE:62==
52
Discussion
Feature
Pearson’s coeﬃcient
Description
show
0.742947
Displays a frame win-
dow
notify
0.70537
Post a notiﬁcation to be
shown in the status bar
getActivity
0.687037
Return the Activity this
fragment
is
currently
associated with
getDeviceId
0.678918
Returns the unique de-
vice ID, for example,
the IMEI for GSM and
the MEID or ESN for
CDMA phones
getLine1Number
0.656914
Returns
the
phone
number string for line
1,
for
example,
the
MSISDN
for
a
GSM
phone
setLatestEventInfo
0.656545
Sets
the
Notiﬁca-
tion.ContentView ﬁeld
to
be
a
view
with
the
standard
"Latest
Event" layout
execute
0.651477
Executes the task with
the
speciﬁed
parame-
ters
getNetworkOperator
0.629171
Returns
the
numeric
name (Mobile Country
Code+Mobile Network
Code) of current regis-
tered operator
getStatusLine
0.628923
Obtains the status line
of HTTP response
init
0.623672
Specialized program for
initializing elements of
the Android system
toString
0.620651
To get string represen-
tation of the object
setClickable
0.6125
Deﬁnes
whether
this
view
reacts
to
click
events
==PAGE:63==
9.1 Insights into the API feature set
53
Feature
Pearson’s coeﬃcient
Description
ordinal
0.607405
Returns the position of
the enum constant in
the declaration
getNetworkCountryIso
0.606275
Returns the ISO coun-
try code equivalent of
the current registered
operator’s MCC
Table 9.1: Top ranked API calls with their Pearson’s coeﬃcient
We analyze the feature set generated by the algorithm to ﬁnd the app behavior
which could be called as representing malicious activity. An insight into such a
feature set enables us to understand how the malicious software functions and
accesses resources. The following is a summary of the broad categories of these
features.
1. Telephony and SMS services: The APIs related to these features like
getLine1Number, getNetworkOperator, getSubscriberId are used to gather
user information and share it to the remote systems without the user con-
sent. This is a serious privacy leak. The collected information is used
by the third parties to create user proﬁles and track them, end adver-
tisements, spam messages etc. The other APIs like sendTextMessage is
exploited by the malware to send messages to the premium rate numbers
that incurs charges to the users.
2. Dynamic code loader services: The DEX loader class provides APIs
like loadClass, getMethod to load dynamic code. This code can not be
statically analyzed. The malicious apps exploit this functionality to evade
static analysis checks and download and execute code after installation.
3. Network resources: The network classes like NetworkInfo have APIs to
retrieve the system network interfaces and connection types. The classes
for opening TCP sockets or requesting HTTP connections provide APIs
like setRequestMethod, getStatusLine, getOutputStream etc to manipu-
late the responses from the network connections. It has been found that
the malicious apps open more connections to the remote machines or for-
bidden URLs.
4. System services: The malicious apps call the APIs related to global
information like getApplicationInfo, getMemoryInfo etc. more frequently
than the benign apps. They collect more information about the system
==PAGE:64==
54
Discussion
and platform. The startScan API is used to scan the nearby devices for
bluetooth or wiﬁconnections.
This has privacy concerns for the user.
Another API from Service class startForeground is used to keep a service
running in the foreground without the OS killing it.
9.2
Challenges
There are few challenges that we faced while accomplishing the goals of the
project. We tried to make the best possible use of available time and resources.
The biggest challenge was the processing of a large number of APK ﬁles. As we
discussed earlier, we analyzed about 25000 application ﬁles. The computational
overhead for the static analysis of these ﬁles was very high. The single processor
would take a long time to retrieve the desired features. SO, we employed the
high performance computing facility to use multiple cores for this computation.
Another major challenge was to design a distributed architecture that could
leverage the computational resources in the cloud as well as provide a low com-
munication latency. This was solved by exploring the possibility to run ADB
commands on the device and accessing the DEX class ﬁle for the installed apps.
This helped us to send only the required data to the server. The classiﬁcation
model was hosted in the server since this requires static analysis of the DEX
ﬁle.
9.3
Limitations
Like other relevant works in this section, our solution also has some limitations
and areas of improvement. A very important point for discussion is the inherent
limitation of the static analysis approach and the motivation to complement it
with the dynamic analysis. As pointed out by [GZZ+12, PFB+14] the number
of applications using the advanced programming features like reﬂection API, dy-
namic code loading and Java Native Interface are increasing. These frameworks
provide the apps the ability to do more and oﬀer more functionality. With that
into consideration, we also realize that the malicious apps can exploit these fea-
tures to do harm to the users. By the very nature of these features, they can not
be detected completely using the static analysis techniques. In static analysis,
we indeed inspect the API calls related to this functionality but not the exact
code which is loaded dynamically or the native C, C++ code. This results in
incomplete understanding of the tendencies of the app. So, the dynamic analysis
could complement the existing approach to gain more insight into the working
of an app.
==PAGE:65==
9.3 Limitations
55
Before we dig deeper into it, we understand that the dynamic analysis techniques
have their own challenges. The analysis is time consuming and complex making
it less user friendly. The app needs to be installed on a device or an emulator
and certain actions need to be performed to get a good coverage of the use
cases. This would incur delay in the real time detection systems. That is also
one of the major reasons why the static analysis is more commonly used in the
deployment. A typical user would bypass the process if the detection takes a
long time. Secondly, the analysis on virtual machine based systems or emulators
is prone to evasion because the malware can detect that the app is not running in
the real device. The concern of testing the app on real devices in an automated
fashion is yet another reason for lack of popularity of this technique. Having
said that, we explore the dynamic analysis a little deeper to understand how it
could be used in the current setting to deliver better results.
In chapter 4, we discuss about the features extracted from the dynamic analysis
in the form of ﬁle operations, network operations, phone events, dynamically
loaded code etc. in a publication by M. Lindorfer [LNP15]. We looked into
a tool called DroidBox which provides a mobile sandbox environment [dro].
The tool uses its own system image and modiﬁed kernel to log applications
activities. Since the tool is not under active development, it only launches the
app automatically and does not simulate any user actions. The data collected
by the tool does not give a very detailed knowledge of the app actions but
only give an overview.
For example, the data collected for a ﬁle operation
contains the timestamp, read/write operation and path. Similarly, for a network
connection, it logs information like the timestamp, destination host IP and port.
We captured such logs for few applications in an intention to convert them into
a set of meaningful features that could be appended to the feature set obtained
from static analysis. But the data collected in the logs is too speciﬁc to the
apps and could not be translated to a generic feature. As suggested in [LNP15],
the speciﬁc details like ﬁle path for read/write operation, name of the class
that is dynamically loaded, destination IP address for socket connections can
be omitted from the feature deﬁnition. Further research into this domain would
be conducted in the future work.
It is a well known fact that the performance of any machine learning classiﬁer
largely depends on the quality of the data set used for training the model. The
data set sourced from diﬀerent market places, containing the latest samples of
apps, with the right proportion of malicious and benign apps would generate a
more accurate model. The data set used in this research was collected in the
time period from January to August 2013. With the state of malware changing
very quickly, this data set is not representative of the modern malware. The
collection of an up-to-date data set with the suﬃcient number of apps requires
more time and thus could be considered for the future work.
==PAGE:66==
56
Discussion
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 10
Conclusion and future work
With the widespread usage of smart phones and the ease of spreading malware,
the Android platform has become a prime target for the attackers. More and
more cases of cyber scams and robbery are reported every day. This can be
attributed partially to the user ignorance and partially to the less controlled
nature of the operating system. This provides a challenge and an opportunity
to the security experts to develop products and services to combat the mal-
ware. Various solutions have been proposed in this regard like DroidApiMiner
[ADY13], StaDyna [ZAG+15], Marvin [LNP15], Drebin [ASH+14] etc. These
solutions provide interesting insights into the nature of malware and the pos-
sible detection schemes but also suﬀer from some weaknesses. In this project,
we present a malware detection solution for Android which not only overcomes
some of the weaknesses like signature based detection, reliance on permissions
based model, complex machine learning model but also provides a feasible solu-
tion for deployment. Our system comprising of an Android client interacts with
the server by sending the DEX ﬁle for an app which is used for extracting static
features. These features are then used by the machine learning classiﬁer to de-
tect if the app is malicious or not. Our results demonstrate that a small feature
set generated by our approach can give a high accuracy and low false positive
rate. The back end classiﬁcation server provides a list of API features that con-
tribute the most to the classiﬁcation in case of a malware app. This helps the
user to understand the reason why an app is classiﬁed as malicious. The API
based back end delivers high performance that is important for usability.
==PAGE:68==
58
Conclusion and future work
The solution has several limitations as discussed in the earlier sections and thus
has a possibility of further extension into a dynamic analysis module. As a part
of the future work, we would explore how the dynamic analysis could be done
eﬃciently and reliably. There are several possible ways to dig deeper into the
dynamically loaded and encrypted code. This could mean to put more hooks in
the OS to record the activity of calls related to these operations. The method
parameters could be inspected for suspicious patterns of code etc. We would also
evaluate the model on a more recent data set. Further, the reporting function
would be improved to provide a more detailed insight to the user about the app
behavior.
We believe that the strong interest of the community in this ﬁeld and the con-
stant need of ensuring security to the end users would continue to provide better
solutions that meet the demands of changing landscape. Our solution is a small
contribution towards ensuring that the smart phone users can install apps from
any source free from the concern of getting infected by malware.
==PAGE:69==
Appendix A
API feature set
access \$902
getResId
addResponseInterceptor
s e t F i l l A f t e r
onSendThdImpTrack
getUserAgent
setOnAdListener
getDeviceSoftwareVersion
fadeIn3DFlipNewAd
access$8
access$9
getBackgroundTransparent
setCanceledOnTouchOutside
access$2
access$3
access$0
access$1
access$6
access$7
send
access$5
i n i t
getMessage
access$000
setLogMode
onSendClkTrack
saveAdViewShowTime
setOnDismissListener
getNetworkOperatorName
setURI
removeViewAt
cancelAll
access$1100
setMeasuredDimension
getPID
onUnbind
bbbbb
getConnectionManager
getButtonText
compareSignalLevel
getSimCountryIso
p
i s P o r t r a i t
prepareTransition
getPostalCode
getFirstHeader
==PAGE:70==
60
API feature set
getShrinkFSAdController
setDuration
getDefaultLoadingGifPath
getLogMode
onFailedToReceiveAd
setIsTestMode
setShrinkFSAdspaceId
access$1200
getWindow
saveConfiguration
getBSSID
getWifiState
updateUserLocation
getAllHeaders
onLowMemory
getMacAddress
setHttpRequestRetryHandler
hide
setForeground
access$700
setWebViewClient
setBackgroundDrawable
getApplicationPackageName
getConnectionInfo
s e t D e f a u l t I n t e r v a l
getAnimations
setTestMode
changeDipToPx
access$11
set Cl ic ka b le
administerRefreshTimer
setGender
postDelayed
equals
getVideoWidth
addJavascriptInterface
setRepeatMode
address
getMetaValues
getTestAction
stopTimer
isPressed
k
getDebugMode
getBuildID
publishProgress
setMessage
getTestAdType
failedToReceive
startForeground
i n v a l i d a t e
getaWeight
onUnshown
applyTransformation
disableNetwork
receiveAd
getAdViewWidth
getWidth
s e t P r i o r i t y
access$4
getHandler
setOnClickListener
onSendFullScreenThdClkTrack
setWillNotDraw
getCurrentApn
getCurrentDensity
setAnimations
getUserWidth
getPort
getrCloseImg
type
getPublisherId
setEnabled
setBuilder
getMeasuredHeight
requestFocus
onKeyDown
getEntity
startConversionTrackerWithGoalId
setSecondaryProgress
getLicenseKey
fadeInNewAd
f
getLastHeader
getScreenWidth
onSendBtnClkTrack
values
setCancelable
==PAGE:71==
61
fetch
getAppName
getIntent
createHttpProcessor
getAnimList
isTestMode
sendSms
aaaa
getLinkSpeed
abort
animTranslateAd
getAdHeight
setKeepAliveStrategy
setrLoadingImg
getBirthdayOfString
s e t R e f e r s h i n t e r v a l
setAppName
setMax
setAdHeight
setrCloseImg
getScanResults
setWebChromeClient
addCategory
getCoord
setTelephoneNumber
isNetworkRoaming
getAuid
s e t S c r o l l B a r S t y l e
getLine1Number
setRequestInterval
setReuseStrategy
adViewLoadAdvObject
getPaddingLeft
setCookieStore
setAdListener
setPressed
getProtocolVersion
getDataState
a
makeCall
setFocusableInTouchMode
getSSID
stopFullScreenAd
q
setFullScreenAdView
showAd
setFullScreenTimerTextColor
displayNextAd
stopFlipping
openDebug
containsHeader
setLayoutParams
getPhoneType
setIndeterminate
exitValue
setupAdserverUrl
getDeviceDensity
X
removeView
getShrinkFSAdspaceId
getHostName
getVideoAdController
setRepeatCount
getAddress
getAdListener
setUserGender
getPaddingTop
setLatestEventInfo
setGoneWithoutAd
access$300
halt
onGetFullScreenImgMaterial
getUserId
startAnimation
getPaddingRight
getAdEngine
addAd
s e t A d V i s i b i l i t y
animateTransition
onSendThdClkTrack
setAid
setEntity
execute
getParams
getScreenCurrentHeight
playVideo
getModel
l
==PAGE:72==
62
API feature set
sendMessage
addRequestInterceptor
access$14
setDetachedFromWindowListener
setKeywords
setDebugMode
hasStarted
getDefaultCloseImgPath
startScan
getReceiver
setAdWidth
i s I n t e r s t i t i a l
getLatitude
setAdSpaceIdAsFullScreen
constructView
requestFSAd
getContextFromActivity
getSimOperatorName
getListener
i s C l i c k a b l e
setDownloading
access$900
getStatus
isShowing
setAdWindowBackgroundOpacity
setBirthday
onDestroy
openAllAdView
setAdspaceId
countCategories
canRequestAd
getSpotAdListener
getCachedName
waitFor
ismLogShow
getService
performClick
setAdTextColor
W
applyRotation
aaaaa
getError
g
openPermissionJudge
getTestMode
onReceive
w
getAdPosition
setAppId
postInvalidate
addAction
isUnresolved
removeNetwork
createAdMeta
getDhcpInfo
getLongitude
getrLoadingImg
notify
setLocation
setOnAdListenerEx
setAdSpaceId
getSimSerialNumber
onReceiveAd
access$602
saveAvg2DB
requestAdvById
s e t L i s t e n e r
setTestAdType
d i s p l a y I n t e r n a l
printDiagnostics
onAdSkip
setButton
setLongClickable
$$
getWindowToken
getSubscriberId
getLocalizedMessage
stopBannerAd
initAdEngine
getWritableDatabase
getAdViewHeight
b
bringToFront
getParent
getCategory
startAlphaAnimation
getAdWindowBackgroundOpacity
setupAdserverUrlFromConfig
==PAGE:73==
63
setDescendantFocusability
i
r
getNetworkOperator
access \$500
access \$502
fadeOut3DFlipOldAd
l i s t e n
onDisplayAd
loadUrl
setInAnimation
getAdError
getBroadcast
setDensity
isDownloading
setOnCancelListener
printStackTrace
getVoiceMailNumber
setPublisherId
getWebView
setupMaParams
shouldUseEmbeddedBrowser
getAdWidth
getId
setVideoFinishEvent
setRequesting
destroy
setRefreshIntervalForTimer
getTop
getSysVersion
getVideoAdspaceId
getLocationOnScreen
onStart
access \$800
access \$802
getRequestLine
getProgress
getRequestInterval
addDataPath
onStartCommand
writeFcParams
openAdView
getCookieStore
setWifiEnabled
setHeader
getSiteId
getAdspaceId
getIntentSender
setFillEnabled
getURI
show
getRight
stopSelfResult
getOrientation
setRedirectHandler
setMetaValues
getMax
getStatusCode
setProgressStyle
sendEmptyMessageDelayed
getSimState
s e t V i s i b i l i t y
addDataType
isGoneIfFail
getRssi
ismVideoPlayer
getAdViewController
refreshAd
s e t P r o g r e s s B a r V i s i b i l i t y
disableUpdateApp
stop
setPhoneUA
swapAd
aaa
getContext
getPhoneUA
getFullScreenTimerTextColor
stopVideoAd
setCoordTimestamp
h
getDataSetting
getValue
onSendFullScreenImpTrack
setAnimationCacheEnabled
setOnKeyListener
x
setResult
showFullScreenAd
==PAGE:74==
64
API feature set
setAppSec
reconnect
getLac
getNetworkType
writeTo
setAnimationType
setRequestedOrientation
setAdWindowBackgroundColor
addNetwork
<i n i t >
getBackgroundColor
setProgress
getCredentialsProvider
getCoordinates
setAnimationListener
getNetworkCountryIso
setClkTrackStatus
setShrinkFSAdView
getLeft
getName
autoAdaptFontSize
addHeader
toString
setAdUnit
hasWindowFocus
stopShrinkFSAd
setPadding
getPrimaryTextColor
getAppsec
access \$200
requestFocusFromTouch
initByConf
onPreExecute
onTouchEvent
getDuration
getbgColor
setCancelMessage
getConfiguredNetworks
getScreenHeight
isHideLogo
isInEditMode
getaHeight
openBrowser
onSendFullScreenThdImpTrack
getFirstAd
getStatusLine
setFullScreenAdspaceId
requestLocationUpdate
destoryAd
OnAdLoad
s
getCallState
startFullScreenAd
getDisplayMetricsPit
setBackgroundResource
setGravity
cc
getTextColor
cancel
onCreate
createUnresolved
getDataItem
setAllowUseOfLocation
setSchedule
c a l c u l a t e S i g n a l L e v e l
setButton2
checkActivity
setFocusable
bbb
setVideoAdspaceId
getFullScreenTimerBgColor
incrementProgressBy
getPrimTxtColorSetByClient
s e t T i t l e
receiveAdData
getTextFontSize
setBannerSize
setKeyword
c
getCloseImg
getMeasuredWidth
onPostExecute
setError
readAdserverInfo
onCancelled
onDisplayFullScreenAd
getAdData
setCredentialsProvider
==PAGE:75==
65
setGoneIfFail
getAdWindowBackgroundColor
n
setBaseMap
addView
setDefaultImage
getSystemService
setTestAction
getAd
initAd
isTesting
startBannerAd
setContentTargeting
getReadableDatabase
getAppId
isWifiEnabled
onRefreshAd
setApplicationId
removeAllViews
failedToReceiveAdData
countActions
setGetAdInterval
getKeywords
access$100
getChildCount
getInputStream
fadeOutOldAd
setFrequently
ordinal
f i n i s h
onSendImpTrack
isTestAllowed
access$1000
getUserHeight
ConnectFaild
loadAdAttributes
initView
setRecvAdStatus
setDebug
getDensity
Y
getFullScreenAdController
setTextColor
setPostalCode
setHeight
startShowAd
startShrinkFSAd
getAdUnit
onGetImgMaterial
pathsIterator
getActivity
applyFadeIn
setId
isDataMode
access \$400
g e t V i s i b i l i t y
ccc
getNeighboringCellInfo
setShowrich
setR efreshI nterval
hasFocus
getAction
$
closeAdView
getHeaders
s e t F i l l B e f o r e
getBackground
setStatusCode
onSendFullScreenClkTrack
aQ
setUserBirthdayStr
getInstance
setUserAge
requestAd
f il t e rA p p s
cleanup
onRecivedAd
destroyDrawingCache
setIcon
match
s e t C o n t r o l l e r
onClickBackground
loadAd
f i n a l i z e
setUserPostcode
createWifiLock
getContentTargeting
getMID
==PAGE:76==
66
API feature set
checkInternal
getReasonPhrase
d
startVideoAd
requestRefreshAd
\_callForAd
t
setAggChannelId
addBannerAdView
resetAdserverInfo
getResources
onSendBtnThdClkTrack
setContent \_ihtml5
setContentView
dispatchTouchEvent
getBirthday
hasAd
sendDetector
setContent
getSpots
addDataAuthority
getCellLocation
getIpAddress
getCause
ak
setDonotClearWebViewCache
startNow
requestAdForAggregationPlatform
setShowFullScreenTimer
run
ba
bb
bc
onRebind
isInTestMode
getAdTypes
post
setResolution
setContentType
s e t I n t e r p o l a t o r
i s V e r t i c a l
s e t S t a r t O f f s e t
headerIterator
getGender
o
enableNetwork
getPaddingBottom
setDisabled
onProgressUpdate
onClickFullScreenAd
touchUpInside
fadeInScaleNewAd
getStackTrace
setParameters
setLicenseKey
getAdH
getOutputStream
getSimOperator
getApplicationVersion
access \$10
dispatchKeyEvent
access \$12
access \$13
makePostbody
access \$15
access \$16
access \$17
getAdW
setParams
setWidth
setCloseImg
getVideoHeight
setResId
getApplicationContext
getCID
setmDefaultBrowse
s t a r t
getDeviceId
setTransitionType
setDrawingCacheEnabled
getLayoutParams
getLoadingImg
getAdType
getBottom
getErrorStream
setBackgroundColor
setLoadingImg
getPlatform
==PAGE:77==
67
getChildAt
f i l l I n S t a c k T r a c e
getFullScreenAdspaceId
fadeOutScaleOldAd
Z
clearMemory
j
bbbb
setDefaultHttpParams
getCid
getSupplicantState
ifRequestFreshAd
setHorizontalScrollBarEnabled
setOutAnimation
z
checkPermissions
display
getBackColorSetByClient
aa
v
setVerticalScrollBarEnabled
ag
requestWindowFeature
ai
ah
isShowFullScreenTimer
aj
requestFreshAd
performAdManagerAddClickResp
setSplashAdListener
onFailedToReceiveRefreshedAd
setbgColor
check
a u t h o r i t i e s I t e r a t o r
readFcParams
setFullScreenFinishEvent
getContentResolver
getHeight
stopUpdateTimer
setDefaultUrl
g e t A c t i v i t i e s
aP
aS
aR
aT
aY
getCoordTimestamp
aZ
addDataScheme
draw
dismiss
showNext
ismDefaultBrowse
getSizeNo
callForAd
m
getSettings
setADVisibility
setPrimaryTextColor
setNeedDetect
setContent \_html5
executeOnExecutor
hasIccCard
e
getRadioVersion
manageRequestIntervalTimer
setAdViewListener
setStartTime
u
getAppSec
setFont
checkPermission
getResolution
==PAGE:78==
68
API feature set
==PAGE:79==
Appendix B
App prototype screenshots
Figure B.1:
Screen 1
==PAGE:80==
70
App prototype screenshots
Figure B.2:
Screen 2
Figure B.3:
Screen 3
==PAGE:81==
71
Figure B.4:
Screen 4
Figure B.5:
Screen 5
==PAGE:82==
72
App prototype screenshots
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
[AA15]
Ludovic Apvrille and Axelle Apvrille. Identifying unknown android
malware with feature extractions and classiﬁcation techniques. In
Trustcom/BigDataSE/ISPA, 2015 IEEE, volume 1, pages 182–189.
IEEE, 2015.
[ADY13]
Yousra Aafer, Wenliang Du, and Heng Yin. Droidapiminer: Min-
ing api-level features for robust malware detection in android. In
Security and Privacy in Communication Networks, pages 86–103.
Springer, 2013.
[and]
Androwarn. https://github.com/maaaaz/androwarn. Accessed :
2016-02-04.
[art]
Art and dalvik. https://source.android.com/devices/tech/dalvik/.
Accessed : 2016-06-05.
[ASH+14]
Daniel Arp, Michael Spreitzenbarth, Malte Hubner, Hugo Gascon,
and Konrad Rieck. Drebin: Eﬀective and explainable detection of
android malware in your pocket. In NDSS, 2014.
[BBS+10]
Thomas
Bläsing,
Leonid
Batyuk,
Aubrey-Derrick
Schmidt,
Seyit Ahmet Camtepe, and Sahin Albayrak.
An android appli-
cation sandbox system for suspicious software detection. In Mali-
cious and unwanted software (MALWARE), 2010 5th international
conference on, pages 55–62. IEEE, 2010.
[BHC+11]
Leonid Batyuk, Markus Herpich, Seyit Ahmet Camtepe, Karsten
Raddatz, Aubrey-Derrick Schmidt, and Sahin Albayrak.
Using
==PAGE:84==
74
BIBLIOGRAPHY
static analysis for automatic assessment and mitigation of un-
wanted and malicious activities within android applications.
In
Malicious and Unwanted Software (MALWARE), 2011 6th Inter-
national Conference on, pages 66–72. IEEE, 2011.
[cne]
Malware
went
undiscovered
for
weeks
on
google
play.
http://www.cnet.com/news/malware-went-undiscovered-for-
weeks-on-google-play/. Accessed : 2016-04-13.
[Cut13]
Adele Cutler. Trees and random forests. 2013.
[DDTV+15] Anusha Damodaran, Fabio Di Troia, Corrado Aaron Visaggio,
Thomas H Austin, and Mark Stamp.
A comparison of static,
dynamic, and hybrid analysis for malware detection. Journal of
Computer Virology and Hacking Techniques, pages 1–12, 2015.
[dro]
Droidbox open source project. https://github.com/pjlantz/droidbox.
Accessed : 2016-06-17.
[EGH+14]
William Enck, Peter Gilbert, Seungyeop Han, Vasant Tendulkar,
Byung-Gon Chun, Landon P Cox, Jaeyeon Jung, Patrick Mc-
Daniel, and Anmol N Sheth.
Taintdroid:
an information-ﬂow
tracking system for realtime privacy monitoring on smartphones.
ACM Transactions on Computer Systems (TOCS), 32(2):5, 2014.
[FCH+11]
Adrienne Porter Felt, Erika Chin, Steve Hanna, Dawn Song, and
David Wagner. Android permissions demystiﬁed. In Proceedings
of the 18th ACM conference on Computer and communications
security, pages 627–638. ACM, 2011.
[fse]
Mobile
threat
report
q1
2014.
https://www.f-
secure.com/documents/996508/1030743/Mobile_Threat_Report_Q1_2014.pdf.
Accessed : 2016-04-13.
[gpna]
Google
screening
missed
hundreds
of
ma-
licious
android
apps,
researchers
say.
http://www.theregister.co.uk/2016/02/29/worlds_worst_android_play_store_attack_
Accessed : 2016-03-28.
[gpnb]
Malicious apps in google play made unauthorized downloads,
sought root. http://arstechnica.com/security/2016/01/malicious-
apps-in-google-play-made-unauthorized-downloads-sought-root/.
Accessed : 2016-03-25.
[GZWJ12]
Michael C Grace, Yajin Zhou, Zhi Wang, and Xuxian Jiang. Sys-
tematic detection of capability leaks in stock android smartphones.
In NDSS, 2012.
==PAGE:85==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
75
[GZZ+12]
Michael Grace, Yajin Zhou, Qiang Zhang, Shihong Zou, and Xux-
ian Jiang.
Riskranker: scalable and accurate zero-day android
malware detection. In Proceedings of the 10th international confer-
ence on Mobile systems, applications, and services, pages 281–294.
ACM, 2012.
[Hal99]
Mark A Hall. Correlation-based feature selection for machine learn-
ing. PhD thesis, The University of Waikato, 1999.
[HFH+09]
Mark Hall, Eibe Frank, Geoﬀrey Holmes, Bernhard Pfahringer, Pe-
ter Reutemann, and Ian H Witten. The weka data mining software:
an update. ACM SIGKDD explorations newsletter, 11(1):10–18,
2009.
[hpc]
High
performance
computing
cluster.
https://hpccsystems.com/why-hpcc-systems. Accessed : 2016-03-
14.
[idc]
Smartphone
os
market
share,
2015
q2.
http://www.idc.com/prodserv/smartphone-os-market-share.jsp.
Accessed : 2016-02-28.
[KJMK15]
Hyunjae Kang, Jae-wook Jang, Aziz Mohaisen, and Huy Kang
Kim. Detecting and classifying android malware using static anal-
ysis along with creator information. International Journal of Dis-
tributed Sensor Networks, 2015:7, 2015.
[LB98]
Sheng Liang and Gilad Bracha. Dynamic class loading in the java
virtual machine. Acm sigplan notices, 33(10):36–44, 1998.
[Lia99]
Sheng Liang. The Java Native Interface: Programmer’s Guide and
Speciﬁcation. Addison-Wesley Professional, 1999.
[LNP15]
Martina Lindorfer, Matthias Neugschwandtner, and Christian
Platzer.
Marvin: Eﬃcient and comprehensive mobile app clas-
siﬁcation through static and dynamic analysis. In Computer Soft-
ware and Applications Conference (COMPSAC), 2015 IEEE 39th
Annual, volume 2, pages 422–433. IEEE, 2015.
[mat]
Confusion
matrix.
http://www2.cs.uregina.ca/
db-
d/cs831/notes/confusion_matrix/confusion_matrix.html.
Ac-
cessed : 2016-04-12.
[per]
Manifest.permission. https://developer.android.com/reference/android/Manifest.per
Accessed : 2016-06-05.
==PAGE:86==
76
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[PFB+14]
Sebastian Poeplau, Yanick Fratantonio, Antonio Bianchi, Christo-
pher Kruegel, and Giovanni Vigna. Execute this! analyzing unsafe
and malicious dynamic code loading in android applications. In
NDSS, volume 14, pages 23–26, 2014.
[SB15]
Joshua Saxe and Konstantin Berlin. Deep neural network based
malware detection using two dimensional binary program features.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1508.03096, 2015.
[sci]
scikit-learn. http://scikit-learn.org/stable/. Accessed : 2016-03-10.
[SFE10]
Asaf Shabtai, Yuval Fledel, and Yuval Elovici. Automated static
code analysis for classifying android applications using machine
learning. In Computational Intelligence and Security (CIS), 2010
International Conference on, pages 329–333. IEEE, 2010.
[tec]
6.1b smartphone users globally by 2020, overtaking basic ﬁxed
phone subscriptions.
http://techcrunch.com/2015/06/02/6-1b-
smartphone-users-globally-by-2020-overtaking-basic-ﬁxed-phone-
subscriptions/. Accessed : 2016-02-27.
[xco]
Updated:
Xcodeghost
ios
malware:
The
list
of
aﬀected
apps
and
what
you
should
do.
https://blog.lookout.com/blog/2015/09/21/xcodeghost-apps/.
Accessed : 2016-04-10.
[ZAG+15]
Yury Zhauniarovich, Maqsood Ahmad, Olga Gadyatskaya, Bruno
Crispo, and Fabio Massacci. Stadyna: addressing the problem of
dynamic code updates in the security analysis of android appli-
cations. In Proceedings of the 5th ACM Conference on Data and
Application Security and Privacy, pages 37–48. ACM, 2015.
[ZWZJ12]
Yajin Zhou, Zhi Wang, Wu Zhou, and Xuxian Jiang. Hey, you, get
oﬀof my market: Detecting malicious apps in oﬃcial and alterna-
tive android markets. In NDSS, 2012.
