==PAGE:1==
Inuence of oshore windfarms
on the morphology of large scale
bedforms
Søren Løgstrup Sørensen
Kongens Lyngby 2016
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Mechanical Engineering - Section of Fluid Mechanics, Coastal and
Maritime Engineering
Nils Koppels Allé, building 404,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +4545 25 19 60
www.mek.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
This Thesis investigates the development of bedforms, and which inuence o-
shore windfarms has on the formation of bedforms. This is relevant due to the
Danish Government ambition to become CO2 neutral in 2050, where a great
part of the green energy comes from wind energy. As well as Denmark is one
of the lead nations of the eld, green energy is also considered as an export
product.
The thesis is based on numerical models of the seabed, which are developed by
the MIKE 21 program, developed by Danish Hydraulic Institute (DHI). MIKE
21 performs shallow water equations and sediment transport equations. The
applied model has a domain of 800m x 31500m, and is based on earlier stability
analysis, with a quadratic mesh and a water depth of 10m. The developing of
bedforms are investigated by cases with pure current and cases with combined
current and waves. Dierent speeds of current are investigated in cases with
pure current, based on the Froude Number. For combined current and waves,
are dierent types of waves that leads to a change of the bedforms investigated.
Where the waves are based on the Beaufort scale and the Current are based on
the Froude Number.
The wind turbines are placed in the domain by dierent setups, where the
impacts at the development of bedforms are investigated with pure current and
combined waves and current. The wind turbines are simulated by increasing
the drag coecient for the specic elds in the model where the turbines are
placed.
The results are presented by gures of the sea bed morphology. The gures
are based on a sloped bed by Chezy's resistance coecient, where the sea bed
==PAGE:4==
ii
is disrupted and bedforms have developed as double periodic and move down
though the domain. The sizes of the ,formed, bedforms are reaching heights
ranging from the surface of the sea and up to 20m water depths. A phenomenon
which normally occurs in rivers and not in ocean environments. The formation
and size of the bedforms changes dramatically when waves occur, this happens
due to the calculations for the sediment transport are dierent for the cases with
pure current.
The sea bed develops at double periodic, when the secondary ow begins to have
a great inuence on the sediments transport, it has a damping eect on the size
of the bedforms. The bedforms are not inuenced by wind farms, except from
the resistance that leads to a small change of the sea bed development. Before
lager bedforms are developed, scour and stored sediments around the turbines
occurs, depending where they are placed, this does not have any eect for the
bedforms equilibrium state.
By changing the Froude number, the development of the sea bed is changed.
For high Froude numbers(0.2) the sea bed becomes greatly aected to follow
the same development as for low Froude numbers(0.1), for lower Froude Num-
bers(0.05) the development of the sea bed is reduced. When waves are included,
the dierence between low and high Froude values decreases, because of the
importance for the sediment transport. The choice of method has a great in-
uence on the development of the sea bed. The sea bed are mostly aected by
simulations with combined waves and current. As the size of waves and frequent
increases the bedforms are developed faster and are increasing in size.
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
Denne afhandling omhandler dannelse af sandbanker på havnbunden og hvilken
indydelse hav vindmølleparker har på dannelse af sandbanker. Dette er relevant
i forhold til Danmarks ambition om at være CO2 neutral i 2050, heraf med en
stor andel af den grønne energi skal komme fra vind energi. Samt grøn vind
energi som eksportvare, da Danmark er førende inden for dette felt.
Afhandlingen er baseret på numeriske modelleringer af havbunden, der er ud-
arbejdet i programmet MIKE 21, udviklet af Dansk Hydraulisk Institut (DHI).
MIKE 21 udregner lavvands ligninger samt sedimenttransport ligninger. Mo-
dellen der er opstillet har et domæne på 800m x 31500m, baseret på tidligere
stabilitets analyser med et kvadratisk mesh og en hav dybde på 10m. Udviklin-
gen af sandbanker undersøges ved cases med ren strøm og cases med kombineret
strøm og bølger. Ved tilfælde med ren strøm undersøges forskellige strømnings-
hastigheder ud fra Froude tallet. For kombineret strøm og bølger, undersøges
hvilke bølgetyper der medfører en forandring af sandbankerne, hvor bølgerne
er baseret på Beaufort skalaen. Strømmen er som tidligere baseret på Froudes
tallet. Vindmøllerne placeres i domænet i forskellige setups, hvor indydelsen
på dannelsen af sandbankerne undersøges for begge cases med ren strøm, og
kombineret strøm og bølger. Vindmølle parken simuleres i modellen ved at øge
drag koecienten i de felter hvor vindmøllerne er placeret.
Resultaterne er præsenteret ved morfologiske gurer af havbunden. De mor-
fologiske gurer er bygget på en vinklet sandbund ud fra Chezy's modstands
koecient, hvor havbunden forstyrres og der vil forekomme sandbanker, der
har udviklet sig som dobbelt periodiske og bevæger sig ned gennem domænet.
Størrelsen af de dannede sandbanker opnår højder rangerende fra havoverade
==PAGE:6==
iv
til 20m dybde, et fænomen som ikke ses normal for havmiljø'er men i oder.
Størrelse og udvikling af sandbanker på havbunden forandres drastisk når bølger
forekommer, dette skyldes at beregninger for sedimenttransport er forskellige fra
tilfælde med ren strøm.
Havbunden udvikler sig dobbelt periodisk, hvor det sekundære ow begynder at
have stor betydning for sedimenttransporten, dette giver en dæmpende eekt i
forhold til størrelsen af dannelsen af sandbanker på havbunden. Sandbankerne
bliver ikke påvirket af vindmøllerne, bortset en fra større modstand der medfører
en lille forandring i havbundens udvikling. Før større sandbanker er udviklet,
dannes eroderede områder og lagring af sedimenter rundt om vindmøllerne, alt
efter hvordan de er placeret, dette har dog ingen større eekt på havbunden
ligevægts tilstand. Ved ændring af Froude tallet, ændres udviklingen af havbun-
den. Ved høje Froudes tal bliver havbunden kraftigt påvirket til at følge samme
udvikling som ved lavere Froude tal. Ved lave Froude tal(0.05) formindsker ud-
viklingen af havbunden. Når bølger er tilstede bliver forskellen mellem Froude
tallene mindre, da bølger også har betydning for sedimentstransporten. Valget
af metode har stor betydning for udvikling af havbunden. Havbunden bliver
langt mere påvirket når der simuleres med kombineret strøm og bølger. I takt
med bølgerne og frekvensen bliver større udvikles sandbankerne hurtigere og
bliver større.
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU - Department of Mechanical Engineering,
section of Fluid Mechanics, Coastal and Maritime Engineering for acquiring
and M.Sc. in Engineering. The thesis contains work done from January to June
2016 and accredited by 32.5 ECTS points. The supervisor of the project has
been Associate Professor David R. Fuhrman. The thesis has been made by the
authors: The theory, however, is based on research of others, and I have done
the best to prove reference to the sources.
I would like to thank my supervisor David R. Fuhrman for great inspiration,
ideas and comments. A special thanks to Ph.D.-student Jonatan Margalit who
has been a great help with discussions the theoretical and technical part of this
thesis. I would also like to thank Asger Bendix Hansen Ph.D.-student for help
regarding MIKE 21.
Lyngby, 19-June-2016
Søren Løgstrup Sørensen
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
1
introduction
1
1.1
The topic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Large scale bedforms and oshore windfarms
. . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Comparing with engineering science
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.5
Method used in Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Earlier work
7
2.1
A.M. Hansen- The Inuence of Oshore Windmill Foundations
on the Stability of Large Scale Bedforms . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Østergaard Madsen, 2002- Numerical modelling of the dynamics
of large-scale bedforms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
K.W Olsen - Alternate bars in and meandering alluvial rivers . .
8
3
Description of Bedforms
9
3.1
Dune mechanics in steady current . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2
Bedforms growth rate
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Governing Equations in MIKE 21
13
4.1
Shallow water equations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
5
Sediment transport for current
17
5.1
Flow resistant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.1.1
Bed load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.1.2
Suspended load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.2
Found number
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.3
Helical ow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.3.1
Morphological development speedup factor
. . . . . . . .
24
6
Current and Waves
25
6.1
Beaufort scale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6.2
Near bed orbital
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
6.3
Bottom boundary layer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6.4
Bed friction in case of combined current and waves . . . . . . . .
29
6.5
Sediment transport Tables Q3D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6.6
Spectral wave model SW . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
7
Dimensional analysis
33
7.1
Dimensional analysis step by step and Buckingham's π-theorem .
33
7.1.1
Growth rate for large scale bedforms for steady current
.
34
7.1.2
Growth rate for large scale bedforms for current and waves 36
8
Validation of the Hydrodynamic- and sand transport module
37
9
Morphological modelling of a steady current
41
9.1
General comments on structure results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
9.2
Steady current result without structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
9.2.1
Helical ow eect on steady current
. . . . . . . . . . . .
49
9.2.2
Froude number . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
9.3
Conclusion for steady current . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
10 Bedforms inuenced by structure
53
10.1 Setup of Wind turbines
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
10.2 Result when wind turbines are included
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
10.2.1 Distance between piers (λ/D) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
10.2.2 Staggered vs non-Staggered . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
10.2.3 Froude Number for staggered vs non staggered . . . . . .
60
10.3 Conclusion for Structure on steady current
. . . . . . . . . . . .
61
11 Morphological modelling of combined current and waves
63
11.1 Dierence between combined wave and current, pure current setup 64
11.2 Dierence of Stoke 1st and 5th order theory . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
11.3 Coupled model vs Decoupled
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
11.4 Conclusion for combined wave and current . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
12 Conclusion
79
==PAGE:11==
CONTENTS
ix
Bibliography
81
Appendix A - Setup for MIKE 21
85
Appendix B - Growth rate
89
Appendix C - Boundary conditions for the model
91
Appendix D - Sediment table
93
Appendix E - Coupled model SW
95
Appendix F - Calculation for waves
97
Appendix G- Wave corresponds to B=10
101
Appendix H - data for piers
103
Appendix I - Fr=0.05 for B=4
105
Appendix J - plot for B4 and B6
109
Appendix K - Froude number calculation
111
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
==PAGE:13==
List of Symbols
u the depth averaged velocity i the x direction
v the depth averaged velocity i the y direction
∆time step size
∆S the sediment sink or source rate
∆x grid spacing in the x-direction
δy grid spacing in the y-direction
η surface evaluation
κ von karman's constant(0.4)
λ distance between wind turbine
ν the kinematic viscosity
νT eddy viscosity
νt the eddy viscosity
Ωgrowth rate
ω cyclic frequency of the sand wave
Φ0 unit prole function for the sediment concentration
ρs the density of the sediment
ρw the density of the water
==PAGE:14==
xii
CONTENTS
τ ′ the bed shear - skin friction
τ ′′ the bed shear - drag components
τb bed shear stress
τbx the bed shear stress in the x directions
τby the bed shear stress in the y directions
θ shields parameter
θ′ Shields parameter - skin quantities
θ′′ Shields parameter - drag components
θc critical Sheilds parameter
B Beaufort
C Chezy number
c concentration
cb reference concentration near bed
cf drag coecient
CFL Courant- Friedrichs-Lewy constant
D the water depth
d50 Sediment size
dt time step
Fr Froude number
g gravitational acceleration
H wave height
h the bed level
h0 the reference height
hamp amplitude of the bedform (from min to max)
hmax maximum height (from 0 to max)
hrms Root mean square of bed level change
I energy slope
==PAGE:15==
CONTENTS
xiii
is Intensity of the helical ow
kN the Nikuradse roughness parameter
ks roughness height
kx wave number for bedform in x-direction
ky wave number for bedform in y-direction
L wave length
Lx wave length for bedform in x-direction
Ly wave length for bedform in y-direction
p probability of a moving sediment
pa the atmospheric pressure
qB bedload transport
qS suspended transport
qT total bedtransport
Rs the radius of curvature
s specic density (2.65)
Sxx radiation stress in the components xx
Sxy radiation stress in the components xy
Syy radiation stress in the components yy
Tp peak period wave
U Mean ow velocity in x-direction
u velocity in x-direction
Uf the friction velocity
Us Ursell number
vθ velocity in the direction perpendicular to the radius
vr velocity in the direction radius
wS fall velocity
Z Rouse suspension parameter
==PAGE:16==
xiv
CONTENTS
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 1
introduction
1.1
The topic
The inuence of oshore windfarms on the morphology of large scale bedforms
have been investigated. The bedforms at sea are developing as a result of in-
teraction between bed and the water owing above it. When windfarms are
installed the ow pattern change along with the water motion above it. The
development of the large-scale bedfroms are simulated using the program MIKE
21, from DHI.
1.2
Large scale bedforms and oshore windfarms
The bedforms at sea occurs in a large variety of shape and dimensions. The
shape and dimensions of the bedforms at a given location depends on the ow
and wave conditions. The ow conditions are taken for locations where the ow
are constant over long periods, e.g a tidal current, so the bedforms can reach
an equilibrium state. When windfarms are installed on the bed, the inuence
of the windfarms is investigated and observed in relations to the change of the
bedforms. If the area where the bedforms occurs are greater than the individual
==PAGE:18==
2
introduction
bedform, then the bed is covered with samples of bedforms. In cases where this
occur, the bed level may be periodic, where a dene wave length and height will
be observed. The natural change in the ow or in the surrounding bed level
can causes that bedforms never will reach an equilibrium form. When waves
are included, the current that create the bedforms may wash out, or change
the bedforms dramatically. The inuence of windfarms may also change the
bedforms shape and dimensions. This thesis will not include the local scour
around each wind turbines, only the large scale bedforms.
The bedforms are generated as the bed is getting unstable under certain condi-
tions by disruption, i.e a favourable combination of current velocity and wind
generated surface waves[Østergaard Madsen, 2002]. In the model, the best way
to disrupt the bed without eecting the equilibrium bedforms is tested. In this
thesis is the term larger scale bedforms used for sand waves at sea or alternate
bars which are seen in rivers. The bedforms which will be observed have a wave
length of 1000 m or more. The height of the bedforms can be comparable to the
water depth. The parameters for this thesis are based upon already established
windfarms and for future planned windfarms.
1.3
Comparing with engineering science
There is a large request for renewable energy in the future. In 2012, the Danish
parlement (Folketinget) passed an agreement to be CO2 free in 2050, and in
2020 50 % of the energy consumption is supposed to come from wind power
[ene, ]. At the moment there are 1271 MW (516 windmills) oshore wind tur-
bines installed and when Horns Rev 3 and Krieger's Flak are commissioned in
2020, another 1,000 MW are added. In addition, 350 MW coastal wind farms
and 50 MW test wind turbines are to be connected by 2020. This means that
there will be more oshore windfarms at the Danish coast, and a need for more
knowledge about the impact of windfarms on the morphology. Large scale bed-
forms are present at sea. The large scale bedforms are migrating, which has an
important inuence for exploitation of the sea bed. The water depth is impor-
tant for the design of a windmill foundation, where the size of the migrating
bedforms are important. The windfarms in Denmark are placed in water depth
of approximately 10-20 m, this could be aected by the sand waves migrating.
==PAGE:19==
1.4 Objective
3
1.4
Objective
What inuence does oshore windfarms have on the morphology of the large
scale bedforms ?
MIKE 21 a depth averaged numerical program developed by DHI (Danish Hy-
draulic Institute), is used to model large scale bedforms for case with pure
current and combined waves and current.
It is not the aim of the thesis to
explain the comprehensive numerical model in detail, but to use and learn from
it, for modelling the stability of large scale bedforms, where windfarms are in-
troduced as well. The objective is to investigate, the mechanisms governing the
growth and migration of large scale bedforms for a plain bed and within an
oshore windfarm. The large scales bedforms will be tested for pure current
with dierent velocity and waves in dierence scale to create a realistic model
as possible. The eect of the helical ow will also be investigated.
Limitations
Since it is not possible to investigate all scenarios the thesis is limited to the
following scenarios: -3 dierent froude numbers, -3 dierent distances between,
the windfarms for dierent type of waves and durations.
The scenarios are
assumed to provide a complete picture of inuence of oshore wind farms on
the morphology. The simulation are made for a water depth of 10 meters. The
bed resistance for pure current are constant. The pure current symbolize a tidal
current. It is not possible to reverse the current, because the slope won't be
changed. The program is not a CFD program, so it will not be possible to see/
calculate local scour around the wind turbines, from vortex. MIKE 21 calculates
velocity by integrating over the depth-average and gives a mean velocity, which
makes it impossible to create vortex. The domain is the same for all simulations,
though the domain is made for a pure current case.
1.5
Method used in Thesis
The method "theory and modelling", gives a theoretical view of the reality and
create an articial situation, which is a simplied version of the reality.
The reality is made as a numerical modelling of a ow eld and the sediment
transport, the commercial software MIKE 21-fm from DHI is used. The software
==PAGE:20==
4
introduction
is veried for a simple ow, if the numerical model is able to produce results
that matches the founding theory. The morphological delevopment of larger
scale bedforms is invetigated using results from stability analysis , kyD and
kxD [M.S.Hansen, ]. The morphological model with windfarms will be used to
evaluate the bedforms, for pure current and combined wave and current.
Thesis design
Chapter 1: Introduction
Chapter 2: Early work regarding large scale bedforms.
Chapter 3: Description of Bedforms.
An overview of larger scale bedforms.
The mechanics governing the growth rate for migrating bedforms.
Assumed
bedforms shapes are used to nd growth rate.
Chapter 4: Governing equation in MIKE 21 for the hydrodynamic model. Ex-
plaining how MIKE 21 works with a ow. Here the shallow equation is described.
Chapter 5: Sediment transport for pure current.
A general overview of the
sediment transport and description of the most important equation for MIKE
21.
Chapter 6: Combined wave and current. A description of the wave parameter
calculated from Beaufort scale. A short description of the dierent wave theory
by MIKE 21.
Chapter 7: Dimensional analyses. Introduction of Dimensional analyses based
on the Buckingham's π−theorem. The dimensional analysis which constitutes
the basis of how the analysis is made.
Chapter 8: Validation of the hydrodynamic- and sand transport module. The
model is validated relative to the equation in the theory chapters (5) and con-
siderations of boundary conditions.
Chapter 9: Morphological modelling of a steady current. An overview of the
results of the dierent types, how the result are obtained from MIKE 21. Sub-
sequently, the following is investigated
• The best disruption of the bed to create large scale bedforms.
==PAGE:21==
1.5 Method used in Thesis
5
• The eect of dierent parameters in the MIKE 21 model, such as Helical
ow and Froude number.
The purpose of the chapter is to make a comparable basis when oshore wind-
farms, are introduced.
Chapter 10: Structure inuence on bedforms. The modelling of the windturbine
is described, investigating the inuence of windfarms on the morphological:
• Distance between the windmills
• Location of the wind turbines
• Varies froude number, Fr=0.05, Fr=0.1 and Fr=0.2
Chapter 11: Morphological modelling of combined current and waves.
The
combined current and wave model is compared with the pure current model.
Following scenarios are investigated:
• The inuence on the large scale bedforms, by dierent cases of waves.
• The inuence on the large scale bedforms, by including wind turbines
Chapter 12: Concluding remarks regarding the modelling of bedforms in general,
with pure current and combined waves and current. The inuence of windfarms
on the morphology of bedforms.
==PAGE:22==
6
introduction
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 2
Earlier work
The Literature study for this thesis includes earlier work on the topic, morpho-
logical modelling of larger scale bedforms. This chapter also describes the work
on linear stability analysis for the most unstable bedforms.
2.1
A.M. Hansen- The Inuence of Oshore Wind-
mill Foundations on the Stability of Large
Scale Bedforms
The present thesis is based on the work of [M.S.Hansen, ]. He made a stabil-
ity analysis of a steady current, to nd the most unstable bedforms and some
tests with a channel in steady current. He found that for the largest unstable
growth rate the transverse wavenumber kyD = 0, 04 for a streamwise wavenum-
ber of kxD = 0, 018. The wave numbers are used in this thesis as well. In
[M.S.Hansen, ], a grid space equal to 51 point per wave length gave accept-
able result with a error of 6%. Some of the topics are the same in this thesis
as in [M.S.Hansen, ], as it deals with the same subject, especially the theory.
[M.S.Hansen, ] has also been used to produce more or less the same result for
pure current, to validate the model.
==PAGE:24==
8
Earlier work
2.2
Østergaard Madsen, 2002- Numerical mod-
elling of the dynamics of large-scale bedforms
[Østergaard Madsen, 2002] has made a Ph.D study on large scale bedforms.
Where by a stability analysis found nearly the same result as [M.S.Hansen, ],
kyD = 0, 04 and kxD = 0, 021. He also investigated the helical ow, where he
found that the simulation runs better when it is included. [Østergaard Madsen, 2002]
made a stability analysis on combined wave and current, where he found that
the dimensions of the most unstable bedforms were predicted to be larger than
in the steady current.
2.3
K.W Olsen - Alternate bars in and meander-
ing alluvial rivers
[Olesen, 1983] present a linear perturbation analysis of a horizontal two-dimensional
model for the ow and bed topography, in which the eect of helical ow is em-
ployed. [Olesen, 1983] found that the helical ow had an important role for
determination of the bar wave length. [Olesen, 1983] made a stability analysis,
where he found that the depth to width ratio is essential. The analysis sug-
gests a wave length of the alternate bars of 3-4 times the width, which he also
observed in the laboratory.
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 3
Description of Bedforms
In this chapter, the dynamic of the bedforms is described. The dynamic can be
specied as the mechanisms of the bedforms, shape and the migrations. The
mechanisms of the development of bedforms are on large scale found in the
marine environment, the scale of bedforms wave length is in the order of 1000
m or more. The bedforms height is expected to be in the rate of 1-6 m. In order
to investigate the development of bedforms, a model of a rectangular domain is
made, where it is aected by steady current and waves. The bed is assumed to
be a double period bed, where the bedforms have a triangle shape, see gure
3.1 and migrate down stream. L is the wave length and Hmax is the hight of
the dune, from undisturbed bed to maximum height of the bedform.
Figure 3.1: Sketch of a 1D bedform
Fundamental processes of the sand waves dynamic will be explained. The bed
==PAGE:26==
10
Description of Bedforms
level is referred as h(x, y, z).
x and y are horizontal coordinates (ow in x
direction) and z as vertical coordinate. A denition sketch of the double period
bed is presented in gure 3.2. The rst gure is in 2D with the fully drawn line
indicates the crest of the bedforms and the dashed line represents the trough
and the second gure is a 3D plot of the bed.
x
y
z
y
x
Figure 3.2: Denitions sketch of doublet period bedforms.
1) 2D of the double period bed.
2) 3D of the double period bed
The height of the bedform, where the bed level is h , is described as:
h = h0 + h1(x, y) = h0 + h′ sin(kxx + kyy) sin(kxx −kyy)
(3.1)
Where h0 is the reference height (undisturbed bedlevel),h1 is the perturbation
of the bed level here is h′ the amplitude,kx is wave number in the longitudinal
direction and ky the wave number in the transverse direction. The wave number
corresponds to the wave lengths Lx = 2π
kx and Ly = 2π
ky
Section 3.1 show the mechanics of dunes in a steady current, where it is assumed
that a dune( gure3.1) is moving with a constant speed a and without any change
in shape.
3.1
Dune mechanics in steady current
Assume a dune is moving with a constant speed a and without any change in
shape[Fredsøe and Deigaard, 1992]. By looking at a small time increment dt see
gure 3.3, where the moving of the dune is explained.
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Bedforms growth rate
11
Figure 3.3: 1) Migration of the dune front [Fredsøe and Deigaard, 1992].
2) Sediment ux though a control box.
In gure 3.3 the net outow ∂qT
∂
must be equal to the change of the bed elevation
when the correction for the porosity n is taken into an account. The sediment
continuity equation is given by:
∂qT x
∂x
= −(1 −n) ∂
∂t
,
∂h
∂t =
1
1 −n
∂qT x
∂x
(3.2)
qT x is the net sediment transport in the x-direction. The calculation of the
continuity equation have to be solved numerically. The continuity equation can
also be expressed in the case of two dimensional which MIKE 21 use to update
the bed level see equation 3.3.
∂h
∂t =
1
1 −n
∂qT x
∂x
∂qT y
∂y

(3.3)
Where the total sediment transport rate qT can be divided into bed load trans-
ports qB and suspended load transportqS. The dierence between bedload-,
suspended load transport and a generally description is explained in chapter 5.
3.2
Bedforms growth rate
For a double periodic bed the growth and migration of a bedform can be written
as:
h(x, y, t) = eΩt cos(ωt −kxx) cos(kyy)
(3.4)
Where Ωis the growth rate, ω cyclic frequency of the sand wave migration,kx, ky
are the wave number in the x and y direction. The growth rate is assumed to
==PAGE:28==
12
Description of Bedforms
follow an exponentially function until it reach a steady state period. In this
thesis, the growth rate is measured for a domain and for a single bedform. The
bedform can reach a steady period without the domain reaching a steady period.
The steady period is dened as: The parameters is the amplitude which dene
the behaviour of the process are not changed over time. For a single bedform,
it reaches a point where shape, height and length are not change over time.
When the total domain is the same over time, the development is zero, the new
bedforms are equal to the bedforms which disappears at the end boundary.
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 4
Governing Equations in
MIKE 21
This chapter will present the important equations and background for the hy-
drodynamic Module in MIKE 21(HD). The description is based on DHI scientic
documentation of MIKE zero, [DHI, 2016b].
The hydrodynamic model is in general a numerical modelling system for the
simulation of water levels and ows. It calculates an unsteady two-dimensional
ow in one layer. The program is based on a numerical solution of the two-
dimensional Reynolds averaged Navier-Stokes equations with the assumptions
of Boussinesq and of the hydrostatic pressure.
4.1
Shallow water equations
The hydrodynamic Module (HD) solves the integration of the horizontal mo-
mentum equation and the continuity equation. To optimize CPU time, some
assumptions are made in equation (4.1). The Coriolis force is not included, be-
cause it only has inuence over great distance. Either is the shear stress from
the wind, since current is the head factor, and the wave is included separately
in the model, not from wind.
==PAGE:30==
14
Governing Equations in MIKE 21
continuty
∂D
∂t + ∂u
∂x + ∂qv
∂y = 0
x −momentum
∂uD
∂t
+ ∂u2D
∂x
+ ∂uvD
∂y
=
−gD ∂η
∂x −D
ρ
∂pa
∂x −gD2
2ρ
∂p
∂x −τbx
ρ −1
ρ
∂Sxx
∂x
+ ∂Sxy
∂y

+ ∂
∂x(hTxx) + ∂
∂y (hTxy)
y −momentum
∂vD
∂t
+ ∂v2D
∂y
+ ∂uvD
∂x
=
−gD∂η
∂y −h
ρ
∂pa
∂y −gD2
2ρ
∂p
∂y −τby
ρ −1
ρ
∂Syx
∂x
+ ∂Syy
∂y

+ ∂
∂x(hTxy) + ∂
∂y (hTyy)
(4.1)
Where η is the surface elevation, Sxx, Syy, Sxy, Syx are the radiation stress com-
ponents, τbx and τby are the bed shear stress in the x- and y directions. pa the
atmospheric pressure and u and v are the depth averaged velocity are dened
as:
hv =
Z η
−D
vdz
,
hu =
Z η
−D
udz
(4.2)
The lateral stresses Txx, Tyy, Txy, include viscous- and turbulent friction and
dierential advection[DHI, 2016b]. Advection, is a uid transports conserved
quantity. The uid's motion is described a vector eld, and the sediment trans-
ported is described by a scalar eld.
Txx = 2νT
∂u
∂x
,
Tyy = 2νT
∂v
∂y
,
Txy = νT
∂u
∂y + ∂v
∂x

(4.3)
Where νT is horizontal eddy viscosity.
Courant number
This condition is referred to as the Courant- Friedrichs-Lewy or CFL. The CFL
number is used to nd the time step, or the size of the element. The computa-
tional grid travels at a speed corresponding to the celerity. The Courant number
==PAGE:31==
4.1 Shallow water equations
15
expresses how many grid points the information moves in one time step. In gen-
eral when using an explicit solver (solving from time step) the CFL number
should be less than one. Courant number is dened as:
CFL = u∆t
∆x < 1
(4.4)
MIKE 21 is set to have a critical CFL on 0.8, so the value of CFL will never be
higher then 0.8, which means that the size of time step is not a problem.
Sediment continuity equation
When the bed is changing the most important parameter is the rate of the bed
level change ∂z
∂t for the element. The rate of bed level change is obtained from
the sediment continuity equation which can be describe as:
−(1 −n)∂z
∂t = ∂Sx
∂x + ∂Sy
∂y −∆S
(4.5)
n bed porosity, Sx bed load in the x direction, Sy bed load in the y direction,
∆S is the sediment sink or source rate. For equilibrium description ∆S = 0, if
non sediment is supplied. For combined wave and current is the model always
an equilibrium description.
For a non equilibrium description the sediment
sink/source(∆S) is equal to:
∆S = Φ0η0ws(c −ce)
(4.6)
Where Φ0 unit prole function for the sediment concentration, η0 normalised
no slip level above the bed, ws the settling velocity, c Depth-averaged sediment
concentration and ce the equilibrium concentration.
If the concentration in
the water column is higher than the equilibrium deposits will occur.
If the
concentration in the column is lower that the equilibrium scour will occur.
By solving the advection-dispersion equation all the terms can be found, and
thereby only the contribution from the bed load needs to be added for nd the
bed level rate.[DHI, 2016c]
==PAGE:32==
16
Governing Equations in MIKE 21
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 5
Sediment transport for
current
The moving of sediment can be spilt into 2 dierent types of sediments transport
[Fredsøe and Deigaard, 1992].
• Bed load
• Suspended load
There is a small transport in the wash load, which normally are not represented
in the bed [Fredsøe and Deigaard, 1992]. The moving of bedforms will be the
bed load and the suspended load. The bed load is mainly controlled by the
bed shear stress, which reacts instantaneously, where the suspended load have
a phase-lag compared to the ow, because it takes some time to create a con-
centration prole. The concentration prole will vary over the the water depth.
The velocity is divided in a primary ow and a secondary ow, the primary ow
in the x-direction which have a logarithmic prole and a secondary ow which
comes from Helical eect. The secondary ow has a prole in the transverse di-
rection and will mainly be related to the ow curvature and the bed resistance,
as described in section 5.3.
==PAGE:34==
18
Sediment transport for current
5.1
Flow resistant
For a uniform steady ow on a uniform sloping xed bed, the bed shear is given
by:
τb = ρU 2
f = ρgDI
(5.1)
Where ρ the density of the water, g the gravitational acceleration, D the water
depth, I the energy gradient (slope) and Uf the friction velocity, the relationship
between Uf and U is given by:
U
Uf
= 6.1 + 2.5 log
 D
kN

(5.2)
where kN is the Nikuradse roughness kN = αd50.
In MIKE 21 the friction
velocity is given by
Uf =
q
cf|ub|2
(5.3)
where cf is the drag coecient determined from Chezy number cf = g/C2 and
−→
ub = (ub, vb) is the ow velocity above the bottom. In MIKE 21 the bottom
shear stress −→
τb = (τbx, τby) is determined by a quadratic friction law
−→
τb
ρ = cf|−→
ub|−→
ub
(5.4)
The bottom friction velocity is described from bed resistance. For this thesis
the Chezy number is used. The Chezy number is not dependent on the depth,
thereby a constant bed resistance in time and place.
It is also possible to use Manning number as resistance formula, but Manning
number depends on the water depth and will make the resistances dierent due
to change of the water depth.
In the presence of bed forms, the bed shear stress τb can be divided into skin
friction τ ′ and form drag components τ ′′
τb = τ ′ + τ ′′
(5.5)
==PAGE:35==
5.1 Flow resistant
19
Shields parameter which is one of the most important parameters can be found
from the bed shear stress. Shields parameter is a non-dimensional number used
to calculate the initiation of motion of sediment in a uid ow.
θ =
τb
ρ(s −1)gd50
=
U 2
f
(s −1)gd50
(5.6)
where s is the specic density of the sediment (s = 2.65), and d50 the charac-
teristics sediment size with the fraction on 50%. Using equation (5.6), equation
(5.5) becomes
θ = θ′ + θ′′
(5.7)
where the non-dimensional skin quantitiesθ′ dened as:
θ′ =
(u′
f)2
(s −1)gd50
(5.8)
The skin velocity related to θ′ is calculated from equation (5.9)
u′
f =
U
6 + 2.5 ln

D
2.5d50

(5.9)
The skin shear stress is used to calculate the bed shear stress and the bed load
transport.
5.1.1
Bed load
The bed load will respond immediately to the change of the hydraulic conditions,
compared with the suspended load there is a phase lag. In MIKE 21 the bed
load transport is calculated from one of the selected formulas. However, the bed
load is eected by two other parameters:
• The deviation of the direction of the bed shear stress from the primary
ow direction due to the helical ow.
• The eect of a sloping bed.
The rst issue is modelled separately under Helical ow and described in section
5.3.
In MIKE 21 the issue of the eect of a sloping bed is solved based on Lane
(1953), Luque(1976), Koch(1980), Ikeda (1980) and Olsen(1978), for more de-
tails see.[DHI, 2016c].
==PAGE:36==
20
Sediment transport for current
This thesis uses the [Engelund and Fredsøe, 1976] formula for calculation of the
bed load. The dimensionless parameter to descripe the sediment transport is
based on [Einstein, 1950], the dimensionless bed shear stress θ and the dimen-
sionless bed- and suspended load Φb and Φs
Φb =
qb
p
(s −1gd3
50)
Φs =
qs
p
(s −1gd3
50)
(5.10)
Engelund and Fredsøe's formula is used to calculate the dimensionless bed load
as (5.11) where the non dimensional skin shear stress θ′ is dened in equation
(5.8).
qb = 5p(
√
θ′ −0.7
p
θc)
q
(s −1)gd3
50
θb = 5p(
√
θ′ −0.7
p
θc
(5.11)
Where θc is the critical Sheilds parameter set to θc = 0.05 and the p is the
probability of a moving sediment grain (5.12).
p =
 
1 +

π
6 νd
θ′ −θc
4!−1/4
θ′ > θc
(5.12)
where νd is the dynamic friction coecient set to νd = 0.51 = tan 27o. The
probability of a moving sediment grain is between zero and one.
5.1.2
Suspended load
The suspended load is calculated from Engelund-fredsøe formula(steps)[DHI, 2016c].
The suspended load qs is calculated as
qs =
Z D
2d50
u(z)c(η)cb
(5.13)
where u is the the velocity at deep z the x-direction and, c the concentration
which can be found from equation (5.14).
c(z) = cb
D −z
z
·
2d50
D −2d50
Z
(5.14)
where Z is Rouse suspension parameter (5.16) and cb is the reference concentra-
tion near the bed, calculated from empirical relation from [Zyserman and Fredsoe, 1994]
(5.15)
cb =
0.331(θ −θc)1.75
1 + 0.331
0.46 (θ −θc)1.75
(5.15)
==PAGE:37==
5.2 Found number
21
The Rouse parameter is a measure of the relative size of the settling velocity
and near bed vertical turbulent uctuations, given as:
Z = ws
κuf
(5.16)
where κ is von karman's constant κ = 0.4 and ws the fall velocity and calculated
from [Rubey, 1933] equation (5.17).
ws =
p
g(s −1)g ·
 2
3 +
36µ2
g(s −1)d3
1/2
−

36µ2
g(s −1)d3
1/2!
(5.17)
where s the relative sediment density and µ the kinematic viscosity which can
be found from (5.18)[DHI, 2016c].
µ = (1.78 −0.0570812T + 0.00106177T 2 −8.27141 · 10−6T 3) · 10−6
(5.18)
T temperature in Celsius, taking as default value 10C(µ = 1.3 · 106).
5.1.2.1
Sediment properties
The sediment properties for this thesis are: porosity, grain diameter and the
relative density.
The porosity is set to default value 0.4 and a standard value [Fredsøe and Deigaard, 1992].
The grain diameter is constant over the domain and d50 = 0.2 mm which is the
corresponding to 50 percent of the material being ner. The specic gravity is
set to the standart value of 2.65 [Fredsøe and Deigaard, 1992].
5.2
Found number
In this thesis, the eect of the Fround number is investigated. Froud number Fr
is a dimensionless number dened as the ratio of the ow inertia to the external
eld and is dene in equation (5.19)
Fr =
u
√gD
(5.19)
The size of Fr dene if the river or channel is subcritical, critical or supercritical.
• subcritical Fr<1 the bed elevation will be the opposite as the surface
==PAGE:38==
22
Sediment transport for current
• supercritical Fr>1 the surface will follow the bed
• critical Fr=1 the ow is unstable
For this thesis the Froud number is in the subcritical eld closed to zero(between
0.05 and 0.2) and the free surface will be nearly plane. It will have a large
inuence on sediment transport, which is described in section 9.
5.3
Helical ow
In MIKE 21 it is possible to include Helical ow. The Helical ow module can
be selected in the sand transport under model Denition.
The helical ow is a secondary ow in the a river, or where the water is curving.
Where the primary ow is the main ow in the x direction U. The eect of the
helical ow is not having a large inuence on the general ow patterns in rivers
with large width/depth ratios [Fredsøe and Deigaard, 1992]. But it can have a
signicant eect on the sediment transport special for merging river and there
by an important for bedforms and the migration of bedforms.
Figure 5.1: Helical ow description [DHI, 2016c] and [R.Fuhrman, 2015]
The Helical ow occurs when the the ow is curving, as in river bends see
gure 5.1.
It occurs from the imbalance between the pressure gradient and
the centripetal acceleration exerted on the water moving in the curved path,
and starts a transverse ow an outward motion of the water near the surface
and inward near bed. The magnitude of the helical ow is op to 5-10% of the
==PAGE:39==
5.3 Helical ow
23
main ow [DHI, 2016c]. The governing equation of motion in the longitudinal
direction can be written as
∂vr
∂t + vθ
∂vr
∂s + vr
∂vr
∂r + w∂vr
∂z −v2
θ
r = −g ∂h
∂r + 1
ρ
∂τr
∂z
(5.20)
Where h is the surface elevation and vr the velocity in the radius direction and
vθ velocity in the direction perpendicular to the radius see gure 5.12. The left
side represents the total uid acceleration and includes centrifugal force.
The leading order of equation (5.20) becomes
∂vr
∂t −v2
θ
r = −g ∂h
∂r + 1
ρ
∂τr
∂z
(5.21)
by assuming steady ow, and dening eddy viscosity as
τr = ρϵ∂vr
∂z
(5.22)
(5.21) becomes
−v2
θ
r = ∂(gh)
∂r
+ ϵ∂2vr
∂z2
(5.23)
In(5.23) the near bed velocities are small and the net pressure caused by super
elevation must be balanced by radial shear stress and can be written as
g ∂h
∂r = 1
ρ
∂τr
∂z
(5.24)
The super elevation that creates a negative bed shear stress is linked to the
velocity gradient and causes a near bed ow towards the bend center. Because
of the radial velocity component, the near bed velocity vector becomes dierent
from the longitudinal direction. The dierers between top and bottom directions
is the angle β relative to the longitudinal ow direction. [Engelund, 1974].
tan δs = −β h
Rs
(5.25)
where δs the angle between the bed shear stress and depth averaged shear stress,
h the location of the water depth and the Rs is the radius of curvature. β a
constant in the order of 7-11 [R.Fuhrman, 2015] and According to Olesen(1987)is
β 4-12 [DHI, 2016c]. β is dened as
β = α 2
κ2

1 −
√g
κC

(5.26)
where
==PAGE:40==
24
Sediment transport for current
• κ is the Karman constant, 0.4
• g is the gravity, 9.81 m/s2
• C is the Chezy number
• α is a calibration constant (model input) in range 0.4-1.2
In MIKE 21 the volume of eect from helical ow is described as intensity of
the helical ow, dened as:
is = V · h
Rs
(5.27)
The intensity of the helical ow is will change over time and place. The intensity
of the helical ow is the magnitude of the transverse velocity component.
From equation (5.27) it is shown that when the radius of the curvature of the
streamlines decrease, the intensity of the helical ow will increase.
5.3.1
Morphological development speedup factor
The morphological development is included by updating the bathymetry for
every time step with the net sedimentation. This ensures a stable evolution of
the bed that will not destabilise the hydrodynamic simulation. It is only the
bed there is aected and not the suspended sediment .
Zn+1 = Zn + ∆zn · Speedup
(5.28)
Where
• Zn Bathymetry level at present timestep
• Zn+1 iBathymetry level at next timestep
• ∆z Net sedimentation at present timestep
• n Timestep
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 6
Current and Waves
To make the model more realistic, waves are included. The waves are included
using MIKE 21-fm under force. Waves are described with a wave height and
wave length or a wave number. In this thesis the waves are simplied to follow
the Beaufort scale, so instead of having 2 parameters to change wave height and
wave length there only is one. The Beaufort scale is a division of wind strengths
into thirteen steps. [Army, 2008] describing the expected wave of corresponding
the Beaufort number.
There have been some early works on stability analysis for combined waves and
current [Østergaard Madsen, 2002]. In his thesis he made a stability analysis
where the helical ow was included as well. He found that the most unsteady
wave number is lager for combined wave and current comparing to pure current.
[Østergaard Madsen, 2002] studies was carried out with currents (0.4, 0.7 and
1.0 m/s) and wave height(3, 1.5 and 4.5 m) and a constant period of 8 seconds.
6.1
Beaufort scale
The selection of wave parameters are based on by the Beaufort scale and cal-
culated in accordance to [Army, 2008], for Beaufort B = 10, B = 6 and B = 4
description by [DMI, a]:
==PAGE:42==
26
Current and Waves
• B = 10 Storm
• B = 6 Strong wind
• B = 4 Moderate wind
The design wind speeds are determined from the Beaufort scale by
v = 0.836B3/2
(6.1)
This gives design a wind speed of 26.44 m/s at 10m above sea level. The required
wind duration can then be calculated from
tx,u = 77.23
x0.67
u0.34
10 g0.33
(6.2)
If the wind duration, is equal to or greater than (6.2) a fetch-limit situation
exists and therefore the following set of equations apply (6.1). The coecient
of drag and the friction velocity is given as,
Cd = 0.001(1.1 + 0.035u10)
u∗=
p
Cdu10
(6.3)
The non dimensional fetch bx have to be determined before the non dimensional
wave height can be estimated
bx = gx
u2∗
(6.4)
the non dimensional wave height and design can now be determined
γ1 = 0.0413
,
m1 = 0.5
bHm0 = γ1bxm1
,
Hm0 = bHm0
u2
∗
g
(6.5)
the peak period is determined as
γ2 = 0.751
,
m2 = 0.33
bTp = γ2bxm2
,
Tp = bTp
u∗
g
(6.6)
The design values for Beaufort equal to B = 10, B = 6 and B = 4 are shown
in table 6.1. where Us is Ursell number which in MIKE 21 determines whether
if it is deep water or shallow water. Deep water corresponds to Us < 25, and
shallow water to Us > 25 [DHI, 2016c]. This means that Beaufort 10 is shallow
water and for Beaufort 6 and 4 is deep water.
==PAGE:43==
6.1 Beaufort scale
27
Table 6.1: design parameter for dierences Beaufort value
Beaufort
10
6
4
Tp [s]
11
8.13
6.4
Hm0 [m]
8.5
3.5
1.8
kD
0.61
0.87
1.16
Us
92
18.17
5
H/L
0.06
0.04
0.033
[Le Méhauté, 1976] investigated when Stokes theory could be used and which
order. From gure 6.1 it show that for B = 4 and B = 6 it are in the rang of
2nd order theory and Cnoidal theory should be used for B = 10.
B = 6
H/(gT 2) = 0.005
D/(gT 2) = 0.015
B = 4
H/(gT 2) = 0.005
D/(gT 2) = 0.025
(6.7)
Figure 6.1: Applicability ranges of various waves [Le Méhauté, 1976] where d:
mean water depth; H: wave height; T: wave period
[Svendsen et al., 1976] have also investigated when to use stokes 2nd order or
higher, based on KD and Ur, see gure 6.2. It is also shown that for Beaufort
B = 4 and B = 6 it is a god approximation to use stokes 2nd order or higher.
==PAGE:44==
28
Current and Waves
Figure 6.2: Maximum Ursell number for appication of Stokes 2nd order theory
based on kD and Ur [Svendsen et al., 1976].where h: mean water
depth; k: wave number; Umax: maximum Ursell parameter
An approximation of the bottom wave orbital velocity Um is calculated from
the parametric expression, see all the calculation in appendix F.
Um = πHrms
Tm−1
1
sinh(km−1h)
B = 4
Um = 0.4m/s,
B = 6
Um = 1.3m/s,
B = 10
Um = 4m/s
(6.8)
6.2
Near bed orbital
In MIKE 21 there are 5 available wave theories, which contains the classical
wave theories and semi-empirical theories. There is not a linear wave theory
today that covers all the hydrodynamic conditions, and therefore it is possible
to choose a theory/empirical formula. In the classic theories there are:
• Stokes theory 1st, 3rd,5th [Fenton, 1990]: Deep water/non breaking waves
• Cnoidal theory 1st, 3rd,5th [Fenton, 1990]: shallow water/non breaking
waves
• Vocoidal theory [Swart and Loubser, 1979] all water depths/non breaking
waves.
This thesis use the Stokes theory and Cnoidal theory. The Stokes theory is used
for deep water and Cnoidal theory for shallow water. Both of the theories are
==PAGE:45==
6.3 Bottom boundary layer
29
for non breaking waves. To ensure non breaking waves equation (6.9) have to
comply.
H
L

max
= 0.14
(6.9)
In table 6.1 can H/L values be seen for Beaufort B = 4, B = 6 and B = 10
they are all under 0.14 and are thus non breaking waves.
6.3
Bottom boundary layer
The bottom boundary in combined wave-current over time is described by
[Fredsøe, 1984] rst-order dierential equation(6.10).
∂z
∂t = z(1 + z −expz)
expz(z −1) + 1
1
U0
dU0
dt + 30κ
k
p
κ2U 2
0 + z2Uf0 + 2κzUf0U0 cos γ
expz(z −1) + 1
(6.10)
Where z related to boundary layer thickness, U0 the near bed wave orbital veloc-
ity, Uf0 the friction velocity due to the current inside the wave boundary layer,
γ the angle between wave and current and k the bed roughness, depending on
if it is plan or ripple. For more details, see scientifc doumentation [DHI, 2016c].
6.4
Bed friction in case of combined current and
waves
MIKE 21 are divided into dierent models. The most important are the hydrodynamic-
and the sand transport model, the two models have a separately bed resistance.
In the case of pure current it is possible to have the same bed resistant (Chezy
number). In the case of combined current and wave is the bed resistant for the
sand transport model, calculated :
cf =
1

1
κ

ln

30h
ks

−1
2
(6.11)
==PAGE:46==
30
Current and Waves
where the roughness height ks is derived from the hydrodynamic simulation
and h is the local water Depth. This means that cf drag coecient will vary in
the domain and time, due to the dierence in h and thereby it can be dicult
to compare with the pure current case.
6.5
Sediment transport Tables Q3D
In the case of combined current and waves, the sediment transport rate is derived
by linear interpolation in a sediment transport table. The table is made in the
MIKE 21 toolbox under 'Generation of Q3D sediment table'. The program is
making a quasi three-dimensional sediment model.
The sediments transport
table there is generated by MIKE 21 toolbox contains the sediment transport
under combined current and waves, under variation of the hydrodynamic and
non cohesive sediment parameter. In the sediment transport table it is the total
sediment transport rate qT in the longshore direction (current direction) and
in the transverse direction. The output lls, the longshore ll and the cross
shore ll, consist of a head and a body. The head shows the parameters which
are used in the given table, see gure 6.3a. The body is the actual transport
table values, see gure 6.3a. The dierent headers which are used can be seen
in appendix D.
Figure 6.3: An example of a header in this case for stokes 5th order without
ripples and streaming
==PAGE:47==
6.5 Sediment transport Tables Q3D
31
In gure 6.3 the data for the case of stokes 5th order are shown. The general
parameter that controls the calculation of the sediment transport rate in the
body. Then it is shown the parameters that takes the inuence of ripples, bed
slope, streaming and helical eects on the sediment transport into account.
The selected theory can also be seen and the order. In the "table" the rst
value(oset), spacing(Increment) and the number of point(N) for each axis of
the body are shown. The table includes current speed (V), wave height/water
depth(Hrms/D), wave height (Hrms), wave period (TP), grain seize grading (d),
angle between current and waves(gamma), centrifugal accelertion (V2/R).
Figure 6.4: An example of a body for the header as in gure 6.3
In gure 6.4 it shows the body from the case of stokes 5th order, this is only
a part of the body, which covers approximate 4,00,000 lines. In the body the
resulting transport capacity can be found for the dierent value of current speed,
water depth and so on.
==PAGE:48==
32
Current and Waves
6.6
Spectral wave model SW
The spectral wave model is used in Combined wave and current case in Chapter
11 where it is called coupled model. MIKE 21 SW model simulates the growth,
decay and transformation of wind-generated waves and swell waves in oshore
and coastal. [DHI, 2016d] The model includes 2 dierent formulations
• Directional decoupled parametric formulation
• Fully spectral formulation
The directional decoupled parametric formulation is used in thesis. Directional
decoupled parametric formulation is based on parametrization of the wave action
conservation equation. It is made by introducing the zeroth and the rst moment
of the wave action spectrum as dependent variable. The directional decoupled
parametric formulation is faster than fully spectral formulation. For the time
formulation Quasi-stationary is use. So the wave will eect the hole domain
as one, because the time is removed as an independent variable and a steady
state solution is found for each steps. The dierence between the SW model
and the model where waves are included in the sediment transport, is that the
wave radiation stress is found in the SW, and shoaling is included. The wave is
included in the boundary specication, where the wave parameter version 1 is
used.
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 7
Dimensional analysis
The ideas behind Dimensional analysis are to reduce complex physical problems
to a more simple form, by looking at the dimension obtaining a quantitative
answer [Sonin, 2001]. In this thesis, the dimensional analysis is used to get an
understanding of the dierent parameters, and nd a more simple way to explain
the governing equations of the ow and sediment transport. The dimensional
analysis is a simple tool with concept of similarity in physical terms.
7.1
Dimensional analysis step by step and Buck-
ingham's π-theorem
The premise of dimensional analysis is that the form of all physical signicant
equations that is the relation between the actual physical quantities that re-
mains valid independently. The dimensional analysis is divided into 4 steps.
Step 1: The independent variables
To identify a complete set of independent quantities Q1, Q2..Qn to determine
the physical quantity Q0 that is a dependent variable in a well dened physical
process.
==PAGE:50==
34
Dimensional analysis
Q0 = f(Q1, Q2..Qn)
(7.1)
The Q1..Qn are the parameters so each member can be adjusted arbitrarily
without aecting the value of any other members.
Step 2: Dimensional considerations
List all the quantities, the dependent variable Q0 and the independent variable
Q1..Qn in a unit system.
Step 3: Dimensionless variables
The dimensionless forms of n−k are found by dividing each one with the product
of the powers Q0, Q1..Qk with the same dimension Γi.
Step 4: End game and Buckingham's π-theorem
Then the equation (7.2) can be written as:
Γ0 = f(Γ1, Γ2..Γn−k)
(7.2)
This is the nal result of the dimension analysis and contain [Sonin, 2001].
7.1.1
Growth rate for large scale bedforms for steady cur-
rent
The Dimensional analysis is used to get an understanding on the growth equa-
tions for shallow water, to nd the relationship between the main variable and
growth rate of the bedforms. The growth equations are described in chapter
3. The bed level change can be shown as in equation (7.3) where x and y are
constant and there for not included.
Ω= σh
σt
(7.3)
The growth rate Ωis descried in chapter 3, Ωhas the fundamental dimen-
sions:length, mass and time.
Step 1 : The independent variables
σh
σt = f(U, D, C, g, ρw, ρs, d50, kx, ky, νt, ν, λ)
(7.4)
==PAGE:51==
7.1 Dimensional analysis step by step and Buckingham's π-theorem
35
where U is the mean ow velocity in x-direction, D the water depth, C the
Chezy number, g the gravitational acceleration, kx and ky the wave length in
the x(stream direction) and y (transverse) direction, λ the distance between the
windmills, νt the eddy viscosity, ν is kinematic viscosity, ρw the density of the
water and ρsis the density of the sediment. The density are arbitrary constants
and are not aecting the values of any other members so they will not be in-
cluded in next step.
Step 2: Dimensional considerations
All the quantity are listed with the dependent variables unit,
Table 7.1: Unit for variables
Name
variable
Unit
Velocity
U
m/s
water depth
D
m
Chezy number
C
√m/s
Gravitational acceleration
g
m/s2
Sediment size
d50
m
Waver number in the x-direction
kx
1/m
Waver number in the y-direction
ky
1/m
Eddy viscosity
νt
m2/s
Kinematic viscosity
ν
m2/s
Distance between wind turbine
λ
m
Step 3: Dimensionless variables
All the variables are made dimensionless, starting with the independent variables
with the dimension of length that are made non-dimensional with the water
depth D and become equation (7.5).
σh
σt = f(U, λ, C, g, ρw, ρs, d50
D , kxD, kyD, νt, ν)
(7.5)
Then all the variable with m/s using both water depth D and gravitate g con-
taining the fundamental dimension time see equation (7.6)
σh
σt = f(U, λ
D, C
√g , g, ρw, ρs, d50
D , kxD, kyD, νt
UD,
ν
UD)
(7.6)
The dependent variable σh
σt can be made non dimensional with the term 1/√gD
it can the be rewritten as (7.7).
==PAGE:52==
36
Dimensional analysis
ω = σh
σt = f(
U
√gD, λ
D, C
√g , d50
D , kxD, kyD, νt
UD,
ν
UD)
(7.7)
Step 4: end game
From equation (7.7) it shows that it can be rewritten with some known pa-
rameters, the Froude number,Fr =
u
√gD,the non-dimensional Chezy number,
C∗=
C
√g and the Reynolds number Re =
ν
UD where all can be modied in
MIKE 21. The important parameter for the growth rate can be written as:
Ω= f(Fr, C∗, d50
D , kxD, kyD, λ
D, νt
UD, Re)
(7.8)
From a Linear Stability Analysis made by [M.S.Hansen, ] the most unstable
wave numbers kyD = 0.04, kxD = 0.018 are found, and used for this thesis.
Reynolds number Re and grain size d50
D are not changed. The parameters there
are investigated in the case of steady current:
λ
D and Froude number Fr. This
will be done in chapter 9 and 10.
7.1.2
Growth rate for large scale bedforms for current and
waves
For the case of combined current and waves there will be some more parameters,
the wave height H, the wave lengthL or wave period T and the angle of the
wave relation to the current γ. Both the wave height and wave length have
the dimension [m] by dividing with water deep D, it gets dimensionless. The
dimensionless amplitude can then be written as (7.9)
Ω= f(Fr, C∗, d50
D , kxD, kyD, λ
D, νt
UD, Re, H
D , L
D, γ)
(7.9)
In chapter 11, the focus will be based on the wave parameter (H/D, T/D, γ, Fr)
and the inuence on windmills λ/D since the other parameter have be investi-
gated in chapter 10 and 9. To simplify the wave parameter, the Beaufort scale
is used to calculate the wave parameter H and T,so instead of having 2 unde-
ned parameters there is only 1. The angle between the wave and the current
is generally from the same direction.
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 8
Validation of the
Hydrodynamic- and sand
transport module
As described previously Mike 21 is divided into dierent modules.
For this
Thesis the Hydrodynamic module and the sand transport Module are used for
the simulation.
To make sure that the two modules are working, they are
validated for an uniform open channel ow. For a perfect ow the change in the
rate of the bed level will be small and constant after some time. This is because
the net sediment transport is zero for a constant uniform ow, the inlet is equal
to the to the outlet. In the beginning the rate of changing bed level, is not the
same as the rest of the domain, the reason is that the concentration prole take
some time to develop, thus the suspended load have a phase lag relative to the
bed load. The ow is veried for a uniform slop with a energy gradient I, that
matches with the bed resistance C = 52.
I =
u2
C2 · D
(8.1)
where u is the velocity, D the water depth and C the bed resistance constant
Chezy number. In this case is u = 1 m/s, D = 10 m and C = 52 m
1
2 /s which
gives a slope at I = 3.7 · 10−5.
==PAGE:54==
38
Validation of the Hydrodynamic- and sand transport module
Domain setup
The domain used for the validation is shown in gure 8.1 and data in ta-
ble 8.1. The mesh is rectangular to save some time compared to triangular.
[M.S.Hansen, ] found that with 51 grid point per wave length, there is an error
of 6%, so the same is selected for this validation, because of the available CPU
power. With a renement of 51 grid points the numerical model takes around
30 hours.
Table 8.1: Mesh and bathymetry for slope
Mesh type
quadrangular
Width
1728m
Length
30,000 m
kxD
0.04[m−1]
kyD
0.018[m−1]
Number of elements
21000
Number of Nodes
21636
Slope
3.698 ·10−5 m/m
end bathymetry value
-10 m
start bathymetry value
-8.9 m
Figure 8.1: Domain and boundary code for simulation og the Hydrodynamic-
and the sand transport Module
In table 8.1 the dimension of the domain is shown. The domain is made so it
ts with the most unstable wave length for the sand waves. In the x-direction
(stream-direction) is the length 9 times the wave length, so it is possible to see
the bedforms becoming stable. The st wave length can not be used, because
of the phase lag in the suspended load. The y-direction (transverse-direction)
is the width half the wavelength to save CPU time, since the other half will be
the same. The bathymetry is calculated from the energy gradient I with an end
depth of 10 m.
==PAGE:55==
39
Table 8.2: data for Validation model for Hydrodynamic Module
Domain
see gure8.1
Simulation time
7 days
Time step interval
120 sec
solution technique time
higher order
Bed Resistance
Chezy number 52
initial conditions
1 m/s
Boundary conditions
land
land(zero normal velocity)
inlet
discharge 17280 m 3/s ∼1 m/s
outlet
specied level η = 0
Setup for the MIKE 21 model
The setup for the Hydrodynamic module can be seen in table 8.1 and setup for
Sand transport module at table 3.
In table 3 the parameter are shown, the simulation time is selected so that
it is stable most of the time, this means for later simulation the time will in-
crease. The selected time step is based on the Courant number. The time step
integration is set, so that the maximum Courant number was 0.8.
Table 8.3: data for Validation model for Sand Transport Module
Model Denition
pure wave
bed load formula
Engelund and Fredsøe
suspended load formula
Engelund and Fredsøe
starting time after
120 steps
solution technique time
low order, fast algorithm
Bed Resistance
Chezy number 52
Morphological speedup factor
100
Helical Flow
on
sediment properties
porosity
0.4
Grain diameter
0.2 mm
Relative density
2.65 mm
The boundary conditions for the sides-walls need to have no inuence on the
ow in the y direction: The boundary is symmetric, the boundary conditions
will be ∂u
y
= 0 and v = 0 where the velocity is divided into u and v parallel
and normal to the boundary, for more details see appendix C. The boundary
conditions for inlet are specied as discharge 17280 m 3/s ∼equal to 1 m/s,
==PAGE:56==
40
Validation of the Hydrodynamic- and sand transport module
which gives a better result than a specied velocity. The boundary conditions
for outlet are set to specied level η = 0. Because the ow, slop and bed resistant
are calculated so the water level should be 10 m (the bathymetry is set to 10 m
at the outlet) see equation(8.1).
In table 8.3 is the data for Sand Transport Module. The data is selected for
a pure current case and calculated based on Engelund and Fredsøe formulas,
which was described in chapter 5, the formulas( Engelund and Fredsøe) are well
documented, especially for the North Sea.
The morphological is starting to
update after 120 steps, since the water depth is stable after around 100 steps.
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
0.9
0.95
1
1.05
1.1
m/s
U-velocity
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
9
9.5
10
10.5
11
m
total water depth
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
m
surface elevation
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
m
×105
0
5
10
[meter/day]
×10-4
Rate of bed level change
Figure 8.2: domain results after 7 hours: 1) U-velocity
2)Total water depth
3) Surface elevation
4) rate of bed level change
Figure 8.2 the velocity is constant 1m/s which conrms validation of the bound-
ary conditions for inlet and outlet. The total water depth is steady at 10 m and
the surface elevation is matching with the slope. Thereby is the bathymetry
and the bed resistant validated. The rate of bed level change is constant after
1000 m, witch means that the net transport is zero, and the inlet is equal to the
to the outlet.
This concludes the validation of the Hydrodynamic and sand transport Module.
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 9
Morphological modelling of
a steady current
The success criteria for the morphological simulation is to nd the develop-
ment of bedforms relative to time and dimension and nd the equilibrium state.
Before evaluation of the development the bedforms dimension, the setup for
modelling of a steady current needs to be investigated:
• The best way to simulate a double sinus bed.
• The eect on the helical ow
• Changing the Froude number (0.05, 0.1 and 0.2)
Additionally this chapter is used as comparable basis when windfarms are intro-
duced in chapter 10. In [M.S.Hansen, ] Thesis the most unstable wave number
for x and y direction were found, kxD = 0.04[m−1] and kyD = 0.018[m−1]. As
this thesis has the same conditions, these values are also the most unstable wave
numbers. The wave number/length is used to dene the domain. The setup can
be seen in appendix A.
==PAGE:58==
42
Morphological modelling of a steady current
Disturbance of bedlevel
The thesis investigate the development of a doublet period bed. The doublet
period bed must be initiated and the disturbance should not aect the bedforms
at a steady period. Dierent methods to initiate the disturbance:
• Random increasing over the entire bed( 1.6%)
• Periodic bed with a sinusoidal signal
• Small increasing area in the beginning of the channel (hump)
The periodic bed with a sinusoidal signal bed is not used because it could intro-
duce a risk of manipulation with the wave length on the bed [Østergaard Madsen, 2002].
Nor was the random bed selected because it takes to long for bedforms to occur.
The dierent Mesh can be seen on gure 9.1.
Figure 9.1: Dierent methods for disturbance of the bed
In this thesis a hump is used in the beginning of the channel. The hump is
a small area where the bed level is increased. The hump is used because it
starts the doublet period bed, and after some time the hump is washed out.
The idea of making a hump to start the doublet period bedforms is taken from
[FUJITA and MURAMOTO, 1985].
==PAGE:59==
9.1 General comments on structure results
43
9.1
General comments on structure results
In order to follow the bedforms development, the results are presented in three
ways.
• Morphological area plot of the bed level change.
• The root mean square and amplitude plot of the change of the bed level.
• Line plot of the side wall (Boundary side) change of the bed level.
The morphological area plot
The morphological area plot is directly from MIKE 21. The morphological area
plot shows the change in the bed level at a given time step. It is from the area
plot, the root mean and amplitude values are calculated. The results of the
morphological area plot are shown for every 500 days, the time at the present
time step is calculated from (9.1) which is derived from equation (5.28). Where
dt is the time step size, and F is the speed up factor for morphological update,
t is the time step.
time[days] =
t · dt · F
60 · 60 · 24
(9.1)
The Root mean square and bedform heights
The root mean square(hrms) and the bedform height(hamp) plot is calculated
from the change of the bed level from MIKE 21 area plot.
The root mean
square value is found by using MATLAB standard function rms which is based
on equation (9.2). The root mean square is taken by a half wavelength from the
hump to the end of the channel (see gure 9.2), to avoid the the inuence of
the hump in the beginning. The value hrms is proved to be a convenient way to
follow the development of the bed in the total domain and to check the eventual
convergence of the individual runs.
hrms =
v
u
u
t 1
N
n
X
n=1
|hn|2
,
hamp = hmax −hmin
(9.2)
For equation (9.2) N is all Z values at a given time.
==PAGE:60==
44
Morphological modelling of a steady current
Figure 9.2: Figure show the area used to calculate hrms, hamp
The root mean square is not taking local maximum and minimum values into
account, therefore are the bedforms height monitored. The bedform height is
referred to as hamp to a given time step, where the hamp is dened as the
dierence between the height and lowest value at a given time step. Note that
for simulations where there are more than one bedform develop, hamp may at
times exceed the height of individual bedforms.
Line plot
The line plot is used to monitor the bedform shape at a given time step. The line
is close to the side wall (Boundary side) see gure 9.3(red line). It is assumed
to be close to the side wall where the most extensive development will happen.
Figure 9.3: Red line indicate values used for line plot
9.2
Steady current result without structures
The morphological area plot for the steady current can be seen in gure 9.4 and
9.5. Generally it shows that it follows the doublet period bed, with the wave
length(Ly = 1507.8 and Lx = 3500) as expected.
==PAGE:61==
9.2 Steady current result without structures
45
Figure 9.4: The morphological area plot for 14 days up to 1500 days. Each
plot with 500 days between
Figure 9.5: The morphological change from 2000 days to 5000 days. Each plot
with 500 days between
Figure 9.5 shows a doublet periodic bedlevel change, where the hump (Distur-
bance of bedlevel) is eective. The hump seem to be washed away after 500
days, from there the periodic bed is moving downstream as the time increases.
After 4000 days the bedforms have reached the end of the domain. It stops
after approximate 5000 days when the bedforms reaches the surface. At this
stage there is a dierence between the absolute value of the lowest point and
the highest point (lowest: -20m highest: 8m ). This could be caused by the
bedforms getting more shallow than the program can handle. In gure 9.6 the
bed level is shown. The simulation stops after approximate 5000 days, when
the bedforms reaches the surface. A phenomenon which normally is not seen in
the sea, but can be observed in rivers as meandering, where one side reaching
surface and the other side is deep.
==PAGE:62==
46
Morphological modelling of a steady current
The domain is symmetrically at the side boundary, it would be one or more
islands will form within the channel/domain.
Figure 9.6: Bed level after 5000 days where the bedforms reach surface.
The velocity eld after approximate 5000 days is shown in gure 9.7.
The
velocity is changing as the bedforms grow, the mean velocity is increasing in the
eroded area, decreases in the deposition area, contraction of streamlines.
Figure 9.7: Velocity stream after 5000 days
The development of the bed as function of time is shown in gure 9.8. The
graph follows an exponential function, special before the bedforms stables as
expected (section 3). The growth rate of the maximum amplitude is plotted
as Ω= 0.0007[m/day], the tting can be seen in appendix B. Figure 9.8 also
indicate that the domain ain't stable yet, hrms has begun to level o, which
means, it is close to stable.
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
[day]
0
1
max/D
0
0.5
1
rms/D
hmax/D
hrms/D
Figure 9.8: Root mean square and maximum bedforms height normalize with
the depth for a steady current 1m/s
==PAGE:63==
9.2 Steady current result without structures
47
Figure 9.10 shows the line plot of the bed development in the y-direction, after
dierent time steps. The line plot start after 1500 days. Over time the rst bed-
forms changew from a periodic form to a non periodic form, and the dierence
between lowest and highest point increases. The dierence between the lowest
and highest point, is caused by contraction of streamlines, the velocity is higher
in the area where there is eroded. The bedforms depth increases, the crest is
nearly steady after 2000 days.
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
[day]
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
hmax/D
1 bedfrom
2 bedfrom
1 bedfrom
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
[day]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
wave height/D
Wave height
Figure 9.9: 1)Wave length for the 2 rst bedforms
2)Wave height for pure current 1m/s
The wave length is measured at the line plot for the rst and secondary sand-
wave length. The wave length can be seen in gure 9.9b. Figure 9.9a is the
maximum wave height as a function of time. The max wave length Lmax/D for
pure current is 800 m, the wave length is not stable. This is caused by the shape
of the bedforms changing, with the growing of sand wave height and length, the
bedforms becomes more and more asymmetric see gure 9.4 and Figure 9.10.
==PAGE:64==
48
Morphological modelling of a steady current
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-1
0
1
[m]
After 500 days
with Helical
without Helical
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-2
0
2
[m]
After 1000 days
with Helical
without Helical
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-5
0
5
[m]
After 1500 days
with Helical
without Helical
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-5
0
5
[m]
After 2000 days
with Helical
without Helical
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-10
0
10
[m]
After 2500 days
with Helical
without Helical
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-20
0
20
[m]
After 3000 days
with Helical
without Helical
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-20
0
20
[m]
After 3500 days
with Helical
without Helical
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-20
0
20
[m]
After 4000 days
with Helical
without Helical
Figure 9.10: One-dimensional bed level plot for top lateral boundary. Flow
from left to right, where the eect on helical ow can be seen.
==PAGE:65==
9.2 Steady current result without structures
49
9.2.1
Helical ow eect on steady current
As described in chapter 5.3, the helical ow will have an inuence on the sedi-
ment transport. [Østergaard Madsen, 2002] discovered that the Helical ow had
a decisive inuence on the stability of the model and the wave length.
Figure 9.11: Dierences between with and without helical ow.
1) without helical ow
2) with helical ow
Figure 9.11 shows the dierence, when helical ow is included. The bed is owing
a "more" doublet period, and change the wave height and length compared with
out helical ow gure 9.11 2).
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
[day]
0
2
4
h/D
amp (max-min)
max
min
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
4500
[day]
0
2
4
h/D
amp (max-min)
max
min
Figure 9.12: Dierences between 1) without Helical ow
2) with Helical
ow
==PAGE:66==
50
Morphological modelling of a steady current
In gure 9.12 the result of the area plot is shown as function of time. The eect
of the helical ow can be seen in the min curve in gure 9.12, where the min
curve follows the max curve longer when helical is included.
The dierence
between the crest value and bottom value have changed when comparing the
results with and without helical ow. The dierence starts at approximate 2000
days where the max begin to stabilize, for the case of no helical ow the max
stabilises after 2500 days. This is caused by the helical ow only have an eect
when it is curves. When the bars occur, the Radius of the curvature streamlines
decreases, and the eect of the helical ow will increase.
is = V · h
Rs
(9.3)
The helical ow have an eect at the total sediments transport, but most impor-
tant is the change in the direction which can be seen at the dierence between
|min| and |max| whic shown by on gure 9.12. [Olesen, 1983] also found that
the helical ow had a damping eect on the scour process.
9.2.2
Froude number
By changing the slope and velocity, only the change of the Froude number, eect
the bedforms. In table 9.1 the dierent parameters are shown for the 3 cases.
One of the important parameters are shields where θ and θ′ are calculated as
described in chapter 5. Appendix K gives the calculations before any devel-
opment of the bedforms of θ and θ′ and bedloads- and suspendedload rate for
Fr=0.05, Fr=0.1 and Fr=0.2 for D = 10. The result are given by table 9.1 and
where the mean values from MIKE 21 of the bed loads and suspended loads are
shown as well.
Table 9.1
Results from MIKE 21
Result from appendix K
Fround
θ
θ′
qb
qs
qs/qb
qb
qs
qs/qb
[−]
[−]
[−]
[m2/s]
[m2/s]
[−]
[m2/s]
[m2/s]
[−]
Fr=0.05
0.28
0.08
1.4 ·10−6
1.2·10−8
0.008
8.7 ·10−7
1.5 ·10−7
0.17
Fr=0.1
1.12
0.3
2 ·10−5
5.7 ·10−5
2.85
2 ·10−5
6·10−4
30
Fr=0.2
4.48
1.3
5.6 ·10−5
0.04
625
5.6 ·10−5
0.1
1900
The ratio between qs/qb in table 9.1 is approximate 0.01 for Fr=0.05, which
indicates that it is the bed load transport which is the dominant for the total
sediments transport. The case of Fr=0.1 is the ratio between qs/qb in the order
of 1 and the total sediment transport is a combination of suspended load and
bedload. For Fr=0.2, it is the suspended load that is the dominating factor.
==PAGE:67==
9.3 Conclusion for steady current
51
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
hrms/D
[day]
[day]
[day·104]
fr=0.1
fr=0.2
fr=0.05
(a) Root mean squra. factor between the x-axis: be-
tween froude number 0.1 and 0.2 is 1/110 and
between 0.1 and 0.05 is 400.
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
hamp/D
[day]
[day]
[day·104]
fr=0.1
fr=0.2
fr=0.05
(b) Amplitude (from min to max). Factor between
the x-axis: between froude number 0.1 and 0.2
is 1/110 and between 0.1 and 0.05 is 400.
Figure 9.13: The dierence between froud number (0.05, 0.1 and 0.2 ) where
blue is Froud number 0.1, red is 0.2 and purple is 0.05, x-axis is
in days.
The values in the table ts, with the dierent speed on the bed level change in
gure 9.13. The dierence between the Froude number for the table and for the
gure can be seen below. The calculation can be see in appendix K where the
area plot also is shown .
Fr = 0.05
between
Fr = 0.2
table:600
gure:400 −500
Fr = 0.1
between
Fr = 0.2
table:170
gure:110 −130
General it is close to the same value, which means that the simulation match
the theory.
9.3
Conclusion for steady current
It can be concluded that the hump is working as a method to disturb the bed.
However, a steady state period is not achieved for the domain, as the rst
bedform is reaching a steady period, when reaching the surface. It is unrealistic
to see bedforms reaching the surface in the sea, but as meandering in channel it
is possible. The rst bedforms are increasing in dimension and moving slowly
down stream, and creates new bedforms in front of the rst ones. The bedforms
development follows an exponential function, mostly in the beginning before it
==PAGE:68==
52
Morphological modelling of a steady current
approach a steady state period. The eect of the helical ow is working after
the rst bedforms are made, which consist with the theory of helical ow. The
eect of the helical ow, moves the sediment, which shown by the dierent
lower values, and the domain have a more doublet period bed.
The helical
ow has a damping eect on the beforms. By changing the Froude number,
the bedforms development changes rapidly.
From the equation the dierent
development can be explained. The shape of the bedforms is nearly the same
for Froude number Fr=0.05, Fr=0.1 and Fr=0.2 and the result follows the same
exponential functions.
==PAGE:69==
Chapter 10
Bedforms inuenced by
structure
In this chapter, several cases has been studied to see if wind turbines (piers)
have a inuence on the morphology. This is done by using MIKE 21, with same
domain and setup as in chapter 9, where alternate bars in straight channels are
studied. The cases there have been made to investigate the inuence of wind
turbines are:
• Number of piers, the distance between the piers (λ/D)
• Location of the structures, if staggered or non staggered
• Change of Fround number - dierent current
10.1
Setup of Wind turbines
In general the set-up is the same as the case without structures in chapter 9.
All the designs parameters can be found in appendix A.
This thesis includes structures under the HYD-module where piers are used to
simulate wind turbines. The piers are set to have a height of 20 m to make sure
==PAGE:70==
54
Bedforms inuenced by structure
they are higher than the water level at any time. The piers are circular with
a diameter set to 8 m and streamline factor γ on 1.02. In MIKE 21, the piers
have an eect on the ow calculated by adding an extra drag force in the area
where the piers are placed. The drag force is determined from (10.1)
F = 1
2ργCDAeV 2
(10.1)
Where ρ the density of the water, γ the streamline factor, CD the drag coecient
and Ae the eective area of the piers exposed to current. F is the force there
acts against the current. From F can the shear stress from the piers τp can be
found as
τp =
nF
∆x∆y
(10.2)
Where n is the number of piers allocated to one grid point and ∆x, ∆y are
the grid spacing. The resulting bed shear stress is then the sum of τp and the
bottom shear stress τ0
10.2
Result when wind turbines are included
The chapter is divided into several sections rst, to see the inuenced dierent
distances between piers.
Then is the location investigate, non staggered or
staggered where the pier is rotated 45 degrees. The combinations of changing
the Froude number and the locations of piers are looked into.
10.2.1
Distance between piers (λ/D)
This section investigates the distance between the piers, with 3 dierent cases:
λ/D = 80 m, λ/D = 40 m and λ = ∞(with out piers). Where λ is the distance
between the piers, the location of the piers are shown in gure 10.1.
Figure 10.1: Sketch of eld with piers, interval λ = 200m, 400m, 800m
==PAGE:71==
10.2 Result when wind turbines are included
55
The selected distance between the piers is based on data from Horns rev II and
Kriegers Flak. The wind turbines at Horns rev II are 2.3 MW, a diameter 4m,
and are placed with a distance on 500m in between [HOR, ].
Kriegers Flak is set to start before 2022 and will be the largest oshore wind
farm in Denmark. The type of wind turbines are not selected yet. The options
for monopiles are between 3MW to 10 MWm the diameter for the dierent
monopiles can be seen in table 10.1.
Based on the data from table 10.1 is
λ = 400 chosen as the lower value when diameter is 8 m. λ = 200 have been
tested and it went unstable after 1000 days.
Table 10.1: Dimensions of monopile for Kriegers Flak [Torsten Berg, 2015]
MONOPILE
3.0 MW
3.6 MW
4.0 MW
8.0 MW
10.0 MW
Outer Diameter
4.5-6 m
4.5-6 m
5-7m
6-8 m
7-10 m
Distance between turbines λ
450m
-
-
-
10000m
Results for non staggered wind turbines
The result are presented as described in chapter 9. With an area point of the
bedlevel change for each 1000 days see gure 10.2 and 10.3. The root mean
square(hrms) and amplitude(hamp) plot, gure 10.4. The Line plot of the top
boundary change per 500 days in gure 10.6.
Figure 10.2: Change in bedlevel area plot for λ/D = ∞, λ/D = 80, λ/D = 40
after 500 days.
Figure 10.2 shows that the piers have a inuence in the early stage. For λ = 800
there is some scour from both sides from each piers, for λ = 400 the scour is in
a line. As the bedforms develop the local scour seems not to have much impact
see gure 10.3. The dierence between the 3 λ are not signicant.
==PAGE:72==
56
Bedforms inuenced by structure
Figure 10.3: Change in bedlevel area plot for λ/D = ∞, λ/D = 80, λ/D =
40 after:
1) 1500 days.
2)2500 days
3)3500
days
4)4500 days.
==PAGE:73==
10.2 Result when wind turbines are included
57
Figure 10.4 display the values of 3 dierent λ and gives approximate the same
value for hamp and hrms.
There is only a small dierence between λ∞and
λ80/D. λ40/D is higher the 2 others, until 2500 days, then it decreases to below
λ∞and λ80/D. This could be due to the eect of local scour, especially in the
beginning before the bedforms are developed.
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
[day]
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
hrms/D
RMS with Helical on
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
[day]
0
1
2
3
4
hamp/D
AMP with Helical on
Figure 10.4: Bed level change divided by D for dierent λ.
a)root mean square .
b) amplitude (from min to max)
In gure 10.6 is shown the line plot. It is not necessarily the maximum develop-
ment which is shown but it gives a good idea of how the periodically bedforms
develops over time, and to how the shape develop. The same pattern is seen in
gure 10.6 as gure 10.4, where λ = ∞and λ/D = 80 are quite similar.
Figure 10.5 show the maximum wave height for λ/D = ∞, λ/D = 80 and
λ/D = 40 over time. The wave height is stable for λ/D = ∞and λ/D = 80 with
values 0.51 and 0.49. The wave length is not stable for λ = ∞and λ/D = 80,
where the wave length is increasing, the end value is 6700m.
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
[day]
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
wave height/D
λ/D=∞
λ/D=80
λ/D=40
Figure 10.5: Maximum wave height for λ/D = ∞, λ/D = 80 and λ/D = 40
over time
There is no dierence if piers are included or not. λ/D = 40 have a slightly
dierent construction, no signicance for the selection of the distance between
the piers in the planning face. Fot the case of λ/D = 20, it got unstable after
1000 days and therefore not considered usable.
==PAGE:74==
58
Bedforms inuenced by structure
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-1
0
1
[m]
after 500 days
λ/D=∞
λ/D=80
λ/D=40
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-2
0
2
[m]
After 1000 days
λ/D=∞
λ/D=80
λ/D=40
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-2
0
2
[m]
After 1500 days
λ/D=∞
λ/D=80
λ/D=40
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-5
0
5
[m]
After 2000 days
λ/D=∞
λ/D=80
λ/D=40
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-10
0
10
[m]
After 2500 days
λ/D=∞
λ/D=80
λ/D=40
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-10
0
10
[m]
After 3000 days
λ/D=∞
λ/D=80
λ/D=40
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-20
0
20
[m]
After 3500 days
λ/D=∞
λ/D=80
λ/D=40
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-20
0
20
[m]
After 4000 days
λ/D=∞
λ/D=80
λ/D=40
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-20
0
20
[m]
After 4500 days
λ/D=∞
λ/D=80
λ/D=40
Figure 10.6: The change in bed level at the top boundary per 500 days. For
the 3 dierent λ values
==PAGE:75==
10.2 Result when wind turbines are included
59
10.2.2
Staggered vs non-Staggered
Until now systematic (non-Staggered) placing of wind farms have been studied,
where in reality they might not be placed non-Staggered.
By changing the
location to staggered there is a possibility to change the ow pattern. This is
done by rotating the pattern 45 degrees, for λ = 400 (gure 10.7).
Figure 10.7: Sketch of location
Results for staggered wind turbines
Figure 10.8 shows the area plot for non staggered λ/D = 40 and staggered
λ/D = 40 after 4750 days, the non staggered wind farms reach the surface after
approximate 4750 days and staggered after approximate 5000 days.
Figure 10.8: Area plot of bedlevel change for 1 m/s:
1) non staggered
2) staggered
Figure 10.8 shows a faster development of bedforms for non staggered(gure
10.8 1)), which explains the dierent end time. Figure 10.9 1) shows that in
early stages are there no dierence, until 3000 days then the non staggered is
increasing, seen by gure 10.8. In gure 10.9 2) the maximum value is greater
for staggered after 3000 days. In general it can be concluded that the placement
of the piers, has a small inuence on the bed development, the bedforms is larger
for staggered.
==PAGE:76==
60
Bedforms inuenced by structure
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
[day]
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
hrms/D
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
[day]
0
1
2
3
hamp/D
Figure 10.9: 1)root means square
2) amplitude (from min to max)
10.2.3
Froude Number for staggered vs non staggered
In section 9.2.2 was found that the development of the bedforms was eected
by changing the Froude number. Generally the dierent Froude number follow
the same exponential function. The dierence between Fr=0.05 and Fr=0.1 is a
factor of 400 and between Fr=0.1 and Fr=0.2 a factor of 110 was found in section
9.2.2. The same term are expected since it is determined from the formulas in
section 9.2.2. Figure 10.10 show the time steps before it change to unstable for
Figure 10.10: Bedlevel change for non staggered piers current 1m/s for
dierence froude number:
1)Fr=0.05
2)Fr=0.1
3)
Fr=0.2
Fr=0.05, Fr=0.1 and Fr=0.2.In gure 10.10 3) the piers have a large inuence
on the simulations, most of the development happens at the beginning of the
domain. Deposition around the piers and the scour between the piers. There
are no types of period bedforms or bedforms at all. It is the sediment form
==PAGE:77==
10.3 Conclusion for Structure on steady current
61
hump there is depositioned around the piers, so the result can not be used. The
hump is used to start up the beforms and shouldn't have have an eect later
on.
In gure 10.10 1) Fr=0.05 shows a few bedforms in the middle between 498000
m and 503000 m, compared with Fr=0.1 where the bedforms stretches from
493000 m to 514000 m. The bedforms move down stream, but create slowly
new bedforms, compared to the migration speed of the rst bedform.
Figure 10.11: Bedlevel change for staggered piers current 1m/s for dierence
froude number:
1)Fr=0.05
2)Fr=0.1
3) Fr=0.2
Figure 10.11 shows the area plot of the bed level change for dierent Froude
numbers, Fr=0.05, Fr=0.1, Fr=0.2. Where piers are placed staggered, see gure
10.7.
In gure 10.7 1) is quite the same pattern as for non staggered, the
bedforms seem just a bit more developed. It can be concluded that there is a
small dierence when the piers are located staggered, but most important, the
case for Froude number Fr = 0.2 does not provide plausible results.
10.3
Conclusion for Structure on steady current
For pure current, there are a small inuence in the early state when piers are
present, before the larger scale bedforms reach the piers. There are local scour
on both sides from each piers when wind turbines are placed with a distance of
800 m. When wind turbines are placed with distance of 400 m the scour is in
==PAGE:78==
62
Bedforms inuenced by structure
a line through the domain. As the bedforms develop the local scour, seems not
to have an impact on the larger scale bedforms.
In the case of dierent Froude numbers, for low Froude number (0.05) is the
shape of the bedforms the same as for Froude number 0.1 and the RMS plot,
shows nearly the same. Higher Froude number (0.2) does not provide plausible
results when piers are present, there are not created bedforms.
In the case of staggered vs non staggered, there is a small dierence: the non
staggered simulation gets unstable earlier and develop faster then the bedforms
for non staggered. In general there is no signicant dierence in the bedforms,
when windfarms are placed in the domain with pure current.
==PAGE:79==
Chapter 11
Morphological modelling of
combined current and
waves
As described in Chapter 6, waves have an inuence on velocity and the mor-
phological. The eect is depending on the wave height H and the wave length
L and frequent. To simplify the wave parameters(H, L) they are , based on
the Beaufort scale (see section 6.1). This means when changing the Beaufort
number both the wave length and wave height change. Modelling combined
wave and current setup is used. The combined wave and current is an other
model than pure current, the model is based on a transport table Q3D which
is described in section 6.5. The model is nding the transport rate value for
each cell in the Q3D table. There is a dierent table for each wave theory. The
dierent tables parameters can be seen in appendix D. When including waves
in the simulation the interval and the duration are important parameters. For
Beaufort number B = 4 and B = 6, storms will happen 182 times per year
meaning the waves are only active half of the time. The rest of the time there
will be no waves. The following 10 scenarios which are simulated are displayed
in Table 11.1, which investigate the following:
• Dierence between combined wave and current, pure current setup.
• Dierence between coupled and decoupled model.
==PAGE:80==
64
Morphological modelling of combined current and waves
• Dierence wave theory, Stoke 1st and 5th order.
• Dierent interval conditions of waves for corresponding Beaufort B=4.
• Dierent size of waves Beaufort B=4, B=6.
• Structures λ/D = 50
Table 11.1: data for runs with current and waves
runs
current
Beaufort
storms
H
Tp
theory
Us
kD
[m/s]
per. year
[m]
[s]
1
1
0
-
0
0
stokes 5th order
-
-
2
1
4
4
1.7
6.4
stokes 5th order
5
1.17
3
1
4
182
1.7
6.4
stokes 5th order
5
1.17
4
1
4
365
1.7
6.4
stokes 5th order
5
1.17
5
1
4
182
1.7
6.4
stokes 1st order
5
1.17
6
1
6
182
3.5
8.13
stokes 5th order
18
0.87
7
1
10
4
8.5
11
cnodail 5th order
92
0.6
8
1
4
182
1.7
6.4
stokes 5th order+SW
5
1.17
9
1
4
182
1.7
6.4
stokes 5th order + piers
5
1.17
10
0.5
4
182
1.7
6.4
stokes 5th order
5
1.17
11.1
Dierence between combined wave and cur-
rent, pure current setup
In MIKE 21 there is a dierent setup for pure current and combined wave and
current. The basic for pure current is described in chapter 9 and for combined
wave and current in chapter 5. The dierence is shown by running the 2 model
with the same conditions: 1m/s and non waves(H = 0, T = 0). Figure 11.1
show the area plot for bedlevel change after 3333 days for pure current setup
and combined wave and current.
Figure 11.1: Area plot of bed level change: 1 m/s and zero waves (H =
0, T = 0) after 3333 days, setup: 1) pure current.
2) com-
bined wave/current
==PAGE:81==
11.1 Dierence between combined wave and current, pure current setup 65
Figure 11.2: Area plot of bedlevel change for 1 m/s and zero waves per 500
days, with start after 14 days
In gure 11.1 it shows, that there is a dierence between the combined wave/current
and pure current setup. For the combined setup the bedforms are more non sys-
tematic, and bedforms are spread all over the domain, developing faster. The
area plot per 500 days for combined wave/current setup, with zero waves can be
seen in gure 11.2. The gure shows in the beginning, a little change in the bed
level before the bedforms are developed, small dunes/bedforms from the waves.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
4500
[day]
0
0.2
0.4
rms/D
comined wave and current B=0
current
Figure 11.3: Root mean squra value for combined wave and current for B=0
and pure current
==PAGE:82==
66
Morphological modelling of combined current and waves
The dierence between the setup are also shown in gure 11.3 over time by the
RMS plot. More specic in the growth rate of the amplitude ωpurecurrent =
0.0007 [m/day] and ωcombined = 0.0013 [m/day] see appendix B. This can be
explained by the dierence in the bed resistance, where the drag coecient cf
for pure current is constant in time and place. For combined current and waves
the drag coecient cf is depending on the local water depth and the roughness
height ks there is derived from the hydrodynamic simulation. This means that
the drag coecient is changing in the domain.
Additionally, there is a possibility that the drag coecient generally will have a
larger value for the combined setup. The combined setup is made to calculate a
combined wave and current situation and not for pure current. In the Q3D table
(see section 6.5) where the transport rate is calculated, there are no value for
zero waves, it will estimate a minimum transport rate in the case of zero waves,
which is observed in gure 11.2 at the early start, where small dunes are shown.
Again it is 2 dierent models: the combined model is nding the transport rate
in each cell from the sediments table, and is not taking into account the cell
before. Where the pure current model nds the transport between each cell,
taken into account the concentration prole.
Figure 11.5 display the line plot for the pure current setup and combined wave
and current with zero waves, per 250 days.
There is a signicant dierence
between the 2 curves, both for the shapes of the bedforms and rate of develop-
ment. The pure current is close to a sinus wave, nearly the same value at top
and bottom, where the combined setup is more a peak wave. The sand wave is
only developed at the top where to the bottom is close to zero.
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
[day]
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
wave lenght/D
bedfrom 1
bedfrom 2
bedfrom 3
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
[day]
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
wave height/D
bedfrom 1
bedfrom 2
bedfrom 3
Figure 11.4: Wave lenght and wave height from line plot, for the dierent
bedform. combined wave and current set up for B=0.
==PAGE:83==
11.1 Dierence between combined wave and current, pure current setup 67
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-2
0
2
[m]
Pure current
B=0
(a) 500 days.
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-2
0
2
[m]
Pure current
B=0
(b) 750 days.
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-2
0
2
[m]
Pure current
B=0
(c) 1000 days.
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-2
0
2
[m]
Pure current
B=0
(d) 1250 days.
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-5
0
5
[m]
Pure current
B=0
(e) 1500 days.
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-5
0
5
[m]
Pure current
B=0
(f) 1750 days.
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-5
0
5
[m]
Pure current
B=0
(g) After 2000 days.
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-5
0
5
[m]
Pure current
B=0
(h) 2250 days.
Figure 11.5: Line plot for top lateral boundary. Flow from left to right, setup:
pure current and combined, with current 1m/s and H = 0, T = 0
Figure 11.4 shows wave length and height divided by the wave depth, from the
line plot. The wave length from bedform 1 is not stable, this could be due to
the inuence of the hump. A new sandwave occurs between the rst and second
top, because of the large distance between sandwaves. Bedform 2 and bedform
3 are reaching a stable state at 3500m. The waves heights are not stable for any
of the bedforms it is just increasing. This is the opposite of the case for pure
current, here the wave height was reaching a stable state, and the wavelength
increasing without getting stable.
==PAGE:84==
68
Morphological modelling of combined current and waves
11.2
Dierence of Stoke 1st and 5th order theory
As described in chapter 6 there are no theories describing all types of waves. In
chapter 6 it was concluded that the wave parameters corresponding to B = 4
and B = 6 are stokes 2th order or higher (see gure 6.1). The dierence between
Stoke 1st and 5th order theory is investigated.
Figure 11.6: Area plot of bedlevel change for 1 m/s and wave parameter cor-
responds to B=4 half of the time.
1) stoke 1st order.
2) stoke 5th order
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
[day]
0
0.5
1
rms/D
stoke1
stoke5
Figure 11.7: Root mean square value for combind wave and current for B=4
half time, stoke 1st and 5th order
In gure 11.6 1) and 2) is seem nearly the same. Which also ia supported by
the RMS gure 11.7, which shows no dierence in the early state. After 4000
days there is a small dierence where stoke 5th order is greater than stoke 1st
order. This corresponds to stokes 5th order would give a positive net transport,
compared with stoke 1st order where the linear sinus wave, has a small net
transport.
==PAGE:85==
11.2 Dierence of Stoke 1st and 5th order theory
69
Dierent intervals of storms
Dierent intervals will have an eect on the velocity, and therefore an inuence
on the sediment transport. The interval goes for zero wave, wave half of the
time and wave all of the time(constant). The 3 dierent cases are simulated for
wave parameter corresponding to B = 4.
Figure 11.8: Area plot of bedlevel change for 1 m/s for combined wave/current
for dierent interval after 3333 days. Waves parameters corre-
sponds B=4: 1) pure current.
2) wave half time
3) constant
waves
From gure 11.8, the greatest dierence for the 3 cases, are when the waves are
constant in gure 11.8 3). When waves are constant, bedforms will stretch over
the whole domain, more systematic, and show larger bedforms. The hrms value
is shown in gure 11.9 where the constant waves are higher than the 2 others.
For B=0 and wave half the time is the morphology quite similar.
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
[day]
0
0.5
1
rms/D
B=0
B4 half time
B4 all the time
Figure 11.9: Root mean square value for combined wave and current for B=4
for zero wave, half of the time and constant.
Figure 11.10 gives the top side bed development per 250 days, which shows that
bedforms are higher and develop faster in the case of constant waves. The shape
is the same, a form shaped as a peak, and nearly no values lower then 0.
==PAGE:86==
70
Morphological modelling of combined current and waves
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-2
0
2
[m]
B4 half time
B4 constan
(a) 500 day.
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-2
0
2
[m]
B4 half time
B4 constan
(b) 750 day.
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-2
0
2
[m]
B4 half time
B4 constan
(c) 1000 day.
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-5
0
5
[m]
B4 half time
B4 constan
(d) 1250 day.
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-5
0
5
[m]
B4 half time
B4 constan
(e) 1500 day.
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-5
0
5
[m]
B4 half time
B4 constan
(f) 1750 day.
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-5
0
5
[m]
B4 half time
B4 constan
(g) 2000 day.
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-5
0
5
[m]
B4 half time
B4 constan
(h) 2250 day.
Figure 11.10: One-dimensional bed level plot for top lateral boundary. Flow
from left to right, dierent setups.
==PAGE:87==
11.2 Dierence of Stoke 1st and 5th order theory
71
Waves corresponding to Beaufort B=4 and B=6
In the case of wave with wave parameters for B = 6 and B = 4 stokes 5th order
is used due to deep water. For B = 6 and B = 4 the frequent is 182 times per
year(half of the time), B = 4 and B = 6 are taken as an everyday phenomenon.
It would not be unrealistic at the west cost of Denmark with a storm (10,8-13,8
m/s) half of the time. At Skagen there is around 170 days per year with hard
storm. [DMI, b]
Figure 11.11: Area plot of bedlevel change for 1 m/s for combined wave and
current half of the time after 4200days: 1) B=4
2) B=6
Figure 11.11, shows an area plot of B = 4 and B = 6 with waves half the time.
B=4 (Figure 11.11 1)) shows little dierence when compared to pure current,
bedforms are shown in the entire domain. B = 6 the bedforms are beginning to
be washed away at the end of the simulation. To see the area plot per 500 days
see appendix J, which shows that the bedforms are moving down stream, faster
than B = 4.
==PAGE:88==
72
Morphological modelling of combined current and waves
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-2
0
2
[m]
B4
B6
(a) 500 days.
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-2
0
2
[m]
B4
B6
(b) 750 days.
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-2
0
2
[m]
B4
B6
(c) 1000 day.
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-5
0
5
[m]
B4
B6
(d) 1250 days.
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-5
0
5
[m]
B4
B6
(e) 1500 days.
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-5
0
5
[m]
B4
B6
(f) 1750 days.
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-5
0
5
[m]
B4
B6
(g) 2000 days.
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-5
0
5
[m]
B4
B6
(h) 2250 days.
Figure 11.12: one-dimensional bed level plot for top lateral boundary. Flow
from left to right, dierent setup
Figure 11.13 show hrms/D, where B = 6 do not follow the same exponential
function as it has be seen for B=4 and pure current. It is nearly steady after
2000 days, because the hump is washed out and not forcing the ow to create
new bedforms. This is also shown in gure 11.13, which shows the line plot for
B = 4 and B = 6. When the waves increases, the bedforms increase in dimension
and the development happens much faster. After 2000 days the bedforms are
beginning to wash out of the domain, this is also why the RMS plot is beginning
to stabilizing.
Appendix G is a storm event for B = 10 with a frequency of 4 times per year
with a duration of 1 day. The simulation stops before it reaches, a steady state
period.
==PAGE:89==
11.3 Coupled model vs Decoupled
73
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
[day]
0
0.5
1
rms/D
stoke5 B6
stoke5 B4
Figure 11.13: root mean square value for combined wave and current for B=4
and B=6, half of the time
11.3
Coupled model vs Decoupled
The term of coupled model, is used where the HYD- and ST module are cou-
pled with a spectrum wave (SW) module. So the velocity in the HYD module
is depending on the SW- module, and wave force in the ST module is then
depending on the SW module. This means that velocity is dierent between
the decoupled and coupled model. In the decoupled model, only the HYD- and
ST module are included. The ST module is still depending on the HYD model
and gives feedback to the HYD module, the hydrodynamic ow eld is updated
continuously according to the changes in the bed. In the case of waves, the
velocity will not change, and the transport rate is calculated from a Q3D table,
which is dependent on the current and waves. The SW module is coupled at
the ST module at the wave force, where the radian stress and the depth, are
taken into account. Unfortunately there was an error in the coupled module
"illegal storage access " after 4000 days, where the model shut down. Both
of the models has an identical setup with waves on half of the time and wave
parameter equal to Beaufort scale B = 4.
Figure 11.14: Area plot of bedlevel change for 1 m/s for combined wave and
current B=4 half of the time after 4200days:
1) coupled model
2) decoupled model
Figure 11.14 shows the area plot for the coupled model and decoupled model
==PAGE:90==
74
Morphological modelling of combined current and waves
after 4200 days. Figure 11.14 1) the coupled model shows, the bedforms are less
periodic, and more random.
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
[day]
0
0.5
1
rms/D
 decoupled model
 coupled model SW
Figure 11.15: Root mean square value for combined wave and current for B=4
halv of the time, for coupled model and decoupled mode
Figure 11.15 shows the RMS plot, where the coupled (SW) model in the start
have a lower development, which was not expected since the velocity will be
inuenced by the waves, and thereby increasing the velocity. When the veloc-
ity increases, the transport rate increases, and the bedforms are expected to
increase.
==PAGE:91==
11.3 Coupled model vs Decoupled
75
Figure 11.16: Area plot for bed level for coupled (SW) model for B=4 half
time. First plot after 200 days then 500 days between each the
plots
In the area plot 11.16 it can be seen that the coupled (SW) model eect the bed
more in the early state where the waves create single period bedforms. When
the hump begins to move down stream it change the bed, to a doublet period
bed, where wave length is longer, after some time the bedforms are random. In
appendix E, is the Line plot of the top boundary, for the SW model shown. In
the line plot it can be observed, how the bed change from the small bedforms,
as an eect from waves into the larger scale bedforms.
Froude number 0.05
In the case of pure current, the dierence in development between Fr=0.1 and
Fr=0.05 was factor of 400. When waves are included the velocity will increase,
and there for the factor will be lower.
==PAGE:92==
76
Morphological modelling of combined current and waves
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
×104
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
hrms/D
[day]
[day]
fr=0.1
fr=0.05
Figure 11.17: Root mean square value for combind wave and current for B=4
half the time, for Fr=0.1 and Fr=0.05
Figure 11.17 shows that there is still a dierence between Fr=0.1 and Fr=0.05,
only a factor of 10, where it previously was 400 for pure current. By including
waves, the transport increases. The line area and line plot for Fr=0.05 can be
seen in appendix I.
With structures λ/D = 40
For pure current, there has not been a large dierence when piers are included.
When waves are included is it not expected to have a large eect on the bed-
forms.
Figure 11.18: Area plot of bedlevel change for 1 m/s for combined wave and
current B=4 half of the time after 4200days: 1) λ/D = ∞
2) λ/D = 40
Figure 11.18 shows the area plot of, the bed level change for with and without
==PAGE:93==
11.4 Conclusion for combined wave and current
77
piers. There are deposition and scour around the piers, especially in the begin-
ning of the domain. The bedforms are still following the doublet period bed.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
4500
[day]
0
0.5
rms/D
λ/D=∞
λ/D=40
Figure 11.19: Root mean square value for combind wave and current for B=4
half of the time, for λ/D = ∞and λ/D = 40
Figure 11.19 shows the RMS plot for with and without piers. There no dier-
ence between with and without piers except the model gets unstable earlier with
piers.
11.4
Conclusion for combined wave and current
There is a dierence between the setup for combined wave/current and pure
current. The combined wave/current is developing faster and the shape of the
sandwave is higher, less depth and the wave length is smaller. It is two dierent
models, and it was not expected to give the same result, although it was the
same force they were exposed to. The waves and the interval of the wave have
an impact on the bed, when the waves increases the bed develop faster and the
bedforms gets larger. When the waves are to big the bedforms gets washed out.
The dierence between the couple model (SW) and the decouple model has also
a large inuence on the bed, here the bed is eected more by the couple model.
In the early state the waves create single period bedforms, later the bedforms
changing to a double period bed. Changing of Froude number has less eect
when the waves are included. The waves will increase the sediment transport,
the bed development is following the a exponentially function as expected.
When piers are included, there is no signicant dierence when waves are added.
==PAGE:94==
78
Morphological modelling of combined current and waves
==PAGE:95==
Chapter 12
Conclusion
It can be concluded that the wind turbines has no signicant inuence on the
larger scale bedforms. This includes both cases of pure current and combined
waves and current. There has been observed some scour around the piers in
the early stages, after the bedforms are developed there is a minor dierence
when including wind turbines. The use of MIKE 21 as a numerical program
has been successful for modelling bedforms in dierent situations. The use of a
hump (small increasing area in the beginning of the domain) has been successful
as a tool to disrupt bed. The bed developed into a doublet period bed, where
the bedforms have a triangular shape, for pure current.
The domain is not
reaching an equilibrium state, when the wave height of the bedforms reaches an
equilibrium state.
The domain is not getting stable even though the bedforms reach the end of the
domain. The rst bedforms are increasing in dimension and moving slowly down
stream, and creates new bedforms in front of the rst ones. The model ends
when the bedforms reach the surface, it is unrealistic to see bedforms reaching
the surface in the sea, but possible as meandering in rives. The domain follows
a channel development, more than a sea bed.
When increasing the Froude number, the model does not provide with a plausible
result when wind turbines are added. When decreasing the Froude number,
the model gives a slower development of the bedforms which is expected when
==PAGE:96==
80
Conclusion
the velocity decreases. The bedforms are moving downstream and creates new
beforms with the same shape as for Froude number 0.1.
When waves are included, the model for pure current can not be used. The
model for combined wave and current, is built on a sediment table Q3D, where
the transport rate is found for each time step in the table. This has a large eect
for the bed development, as it develop faster and the shape of the bedforms
changes. The size of waves and the interval has an inuence on the bed, when
the waves increases, the bed develop faster, here especially the height of the
bedforms gets increases. When the durations of waves are to long the bedforms
gets washed out.
The dierence between couple model (SW) and decouple
model has also a extensive inuence on the bed, as the bed is eected more
when it is a couple model. In the early state the waves create single period
bedforms, later on the bedforms changes to a double period bed. Changing of
the Froude number has less eect when including the waves. The dierence
between Fr=0.05 and Fr=0.1 for pure current is a factor of 400, for combined
case the dierence is a factor of 10.
The eect of the helical ow change the shape of the bedforms, to a more
periodic or sinus wave form, the dierence between the lowest and highest point
decreases. The function of the helical ow works well and ts with the theory.
==PAGE:97==
Bibliography
[DMI, a] Danmarks
meteorologiske
institut.
http://www.dmi.dk/laer-
om/temaer/vejr/vejrgudernes-hvirvlende-dans/beaufort-skalaen/. Accessed:
2016-04-22.
[DMI, b] Danmarks meteorologiske institut. http://www.dmi.dk/klima/klimaet-
frem-til-i-dag/danmark/vind/. Accessed: 2016-05-22.
[DMI, c] Danmarks meteorologiske institut. http://www.dmi.dk/fileadmin/
user_upload/Stormlisten/storme-2.pdf. Accessed: 2016-04-26.
[ene, ] energistyrelsen.
http://www.ens.dk/politik/
dansk-klima-energipolitik. Accessed: 2016-06-11.
[HOR, ] Horns
rev
2
dong
energy.
https://assets.dongenergy.com/
DONGEnergyDocuments/Hrev2/HREV2_Leaflet_DA.PDF. Accessed: 2016-04-
26.
[Army, 2008] Army, U. (2008). Coastal engineering manual. chapter ii-2, mete-
orology and wave climate, engineer manual 1110-2-1100. US Army Corps of
Engineers, Washington, DC.
[DHI, 2016a] DHI (2016a). Mike 21 ow model hydrodynamic module. User
Guid, 9(1):1136.
[DHI, 2016b] DHI (2016b). Mike 21 mike 3 ow model fm hydrodynamic and
transport module. scientic documentation, 9(1):381.
[DHI, 2016c] DHI (2016c). Mike 21 mike 3 ow model fm sand transport mod-
ule. scientic documentation, 9(1):356.
==PAGE:98==
82
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[DHI, 2016d] DHI (2016d). Mike 21, spectral wave module. scientic documen-
tation, 9(1):356.
[Einstein, 1950] Einstein, H. A. (1950).
The bed-load function for sediment
transportation in open channel ows. Number 1026. US Department of Agri-
culture.
[Engelund, 1974] Engelund, F. (1974). Flow and bed topography in channel
bends. Journal of the Hydraulics Division, 100(11):16311648.
[Engelund and Fredsøe, 1976] Engelund, F. and Fredsøe, J. (1976). A sediment
transport model for straight alluvial channels. Hydrology Research, 7(5):293
306.
[Fenton, 1990] Fenton, J. (1990). Nonlinear wave theories. the Sea, 9(1):325.
[Fredsøe and Deigaard, 1992] Fredsøe, J. and Deigaard, R. (1992). Mechanics
of coastal sediment transport. World Scientic.
[Fredsøe, 1984] Fredsøe, J. (1984). Turbulent boundary layer in wave-current
motion. Journal of Hydraulic Engineering, 110(8):11031120.
[Fredsøe and Deigaard, 1992] Fredsøe, J. and Deigaard, R. (1992). Mechanics
of coastal sediment transport, volume 3. World scientic.
[FUJITA and MURAMOTO, 1985] FUJITA, Y. and MURAMOTO, Y. (1985).
Studies on the process of development of alternate bars.
[Le Méhauté, 1976] Le Méhauté, B. (1976). An introduction to hydrodynamics
and water waves. Springer.
[M.S.Hansen, ] M.S.Hansen, A. The inuence of oshore windmill foundations
on the stability of large scale bedforms. Master's thesis, DTU.
[Olesen, 1983] Olesen, K. W. (1983). Alternate bars in and meandering of allu-
vial rivers. Technical report, Delft University of Technology.
[R.Fuhrman, 2015] R.Fuhrman, D. (2015). Bed load and suspended load sedi-
ment transport.
[Rubey, 1933] Rubey, W. W. (1933). Settling velocity of gravel, sand, and silt
particles. American Journal of Science, American Journal of Science, Amer
J Sci, Am J Sci, American Journal of Science Devoted To the Geological
Sciences and To Related, Am. J. Sci, s5-25(148):325338.
[Sonin, 2001] Sonin, A. A. (2001). The physical basis of dimensional analysis.
Department of Mechanical Engineering, MIT, Cambridge, MA.
==PAGE:99==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
83
[Østergaard Madsen, 2002] Østergaard Madsen, E. (2002). Numerical modelling
of the dynamics of large-scale bedforms. Department of Mechanical Engineer-
ing., Technical University Denmark.
[Svendsen et al., 1976] Svendsen, I. A., Svendsen, I. A., and Jonsson, I. G.
(1976). Hydrodynamics of coastal regions. Den Private ingeniørfond, Techni-
cal University of Denmark.
[Swart and Loubser, 1979] Swart, D. H. and Loubser, C. C. (1979). Vocoidal
theory for all non-breaking waves.
Proceedings of the Coastal Engineering
Conference, 1:467486.
[Torsten Berg, 2015] Torsten Berg, Karin Fürhaupter, H. W. T. M. (2015).
Kriegers ak oshore wind farm, benthic ora, fauna and habitats eia - tech-
nical report june 2015.
NIRAS for ENERGINET DK Tonne Kjærsvej 65
7000 Fredericia.
[Zyserman and Fredsoe, 1994] Zyserman, J. A. and Fredsoe, J. (1994). Data
analysis of bed concentration of suspended sediment. Journal of Hydraulic
Engineering, 120(9):10211042.
==PAGE:100==
84
BIBLIOGRAPHY
==PAGE:101==
Appendix A - Setup for
MIKE 21
The setup is divided into 4 parts: the mesh and bathymetry, Hydrodynamic
model, Sand Transport Module and Spectral Wave Module.
Table 1: Mesh and bathymetry for sloop
Mesh type
quadrangular
Wide
1728m
Length
30,000 m
Number of elements
21000
Number of Nodes
21636
Sloop
3.698 ·105 m/m
deepest
-10 m
lowest
-8.9 m
==PAGE:102==
86
Appendix A - Setup for MIKE 21
Table 2: data for Hydrodynamic
Domain
see gure8.1
Simulation time
7 days
Time step interval
120 sec
Module selection
HYD and ST
Hydrodynamic Module
solution technique time
higher order
Depth
No depth correction
Density
Barotropic
Eddy Viscosity
smagorinsky formulation
Bed Resistance
Chezy number 52
Coriolis Forcing
No Coriolis
Wind force
not include
Ice coverage
No ice
Tidal Potential
not include
Precipitation
No precipitation
Evaporation
No evaporation
Inltration
No inltration
Wave Radiation
No Wave Radiation
Sources
No Source
Structures
zero
initial conditions
1 m/s
Decoupling
not include
Boundary conditions
land
land(zero normal velocity)
inlet-weak formula
discharge 17280 m 3/s ∼1 m/s
outlet
specied level η = 0
==PAGE:103==
87
Table 3: data for Sand Transport Module
Model Denition
pure wave
bed load formula
Engelund and Fredsøe
suspended load formula
Engelund and Fredsøe
time parameter
120s
solution technique time
low order, fast algorithm
Bed Resistance
Chezy number 52
Forcing
not include for pure current
Fraction
scaled eddy viscosity formula
sources
No Source
Initial conditions
Equilibrium conditions
boundary conditions
Equilibrium conditions
Morphological
speedup factor
100
include feedback on HYD
start time
120 step
Slop failure
NO slop failure
Boundary conditions
zero sediment ux gradient
Helical Flow on
start time
0
on
Initial conditions
Equilibrium conditions
boundary conditions
Equilibrium conditions
sediment properties
porosity
0.4
Grain diameter
0.2 mm
Relative density
2.65 mm
CPU time
==PAGE:104==
88
Appendix A - Setup for MIKE 21
Table 4: data for Spectral Wave Module
spectral formulation
Directionally decoupled
Time formulation
Quasi stationary
time parameter
0
spectral discretization
270
solution technique time
low order, fast algorithm
Method
Newton raphson iteration
water level
no water level variation
current
no current variation
Wind forcing
no wind
Ice
no Ice
Diraction
no diraction
wave breaking
constant 0.8
Bottom friction
no bottom friction
structures
no structures
Initial conditions
zero spectra
Boundary conditions
type
version 1
format
varying in time and constant along line
==PAGE:105==
Appendix B - Growth rate
The tting is made by MATLAB's function fit where the rst data is not
include and the last where it is going close to get stabilise.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
[day]
0
2
4
rms/D
messure data
exp
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
4500
[day]
0
2
4
rms/D
messure data
exp
Figure 1: tting amplitude for dierent setup force1m/s for zero waves :1)com-
bined wave/current 2) pure current setup
==PAGE:106==
90
Appendix B - Growth rate
==PAGE:107==
Appendix C - Boundary
conditions for the model
The program is divided into dierent models, each models have some boundary
conditions. The boundary conditions can be open or closed. If a bound is closed
is there not adding anything. In the HYD model can there chosen between:
• land (normal velocity)
• land (zero velocity)
for the normal velocity is the slip boundary is assumed to hold the normal
velocity component is zero. in the case of zero velocity is the slip boundary
conditions to hold for both the normal velocity and the tangential velocity to
be zero. In this thesis is the boundary code set to 1 in the mesh and there
by default set to full slip boundary. If a bound is open is there a number of
conditions to applied the most importance is
• Flux
• Velocity
• Flather
• specic level
A ghost cell technique is applied where the primitive variable in the ghost cell
are specied.
==PAGE:108==
92
Appendix C - Boundary conditions for the model
Boundaries conditions for sides(wall)
The bounder for the wall need to slips and full the (3). The boundary con-
ditions is spilt up in MIKE21, hydrodynamic boundaries and sand transport
boundaries.
ση
σy = 0
σh
σy = 0
(1)
v = 0
σu
σy = 0
(2)
gsy = 0
σgsx
σy
= 0
(3)
boundaries conditions HYD
closed boundaries (land boundaries), normal uxes are forced to zero for all
variables. for momentum equations, this leads to full- slip along land boundaries.
in general is the boundary symmetric boundary conditions where the velocity
is divide in to u and v parallel and normal to the boundary, will be ∂u
y = 0 and
v = 0.
boundaries conditions sand transport
There are two boundaries conditions to specication, the bed boundaries con-
ditions and the morphology boundary condition.
The boundaries conditions for η and water depth h is set in the hydrodynamic
model,land (zero normal velocity). The boundaries conditions for velocity(v and
u) is set in the sand transport module. At last the boundaries for the sediment
(gsx, gsy) is set in the sand transport under morphology
==PAGE:109==
Appendix D - Sediment
table
In this thesis is use 3 dierence sediment tables, for stokes 1st order, 5th order
and Cnoidal 5th order. Stokes 5th order is used when wave parameter corre-
sponds to deep water and for Cnoidal 5th order for shallow water. There is only
shown the head of table, the body is the result based on the parameter in the
head.
Figure 2: Head for stokes 1st order theory
==PAGE:110==
94
Appendix D - Sediment table
Figure 3: Head for stokes 5th order theory
Figure 4: Head for Cnoidal 5th order theory
==PAGE:111==
Appendix E - Coupled
model SW
==PAGE:112==
96
Appendix E - Coupled model SW
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-2
0
2
[m]
B4 SW half time
B4 SW half time
(a) 500 days.
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-2
0
2
[m]
B4 SW half time
B4 SW half time
(b) 750 days.
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-2
0
2
[m]
B4 SW half time
B4 SW half time
(c) 1000 day.
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-5
0
5
[m]
B4 SW half time
B4 SW half time
(d) 1250 days.
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-5
0
5
[m]
B4 SW half time
B4 SW half time
(e) 1500 days.
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-5
0
5
[m]
B4 SW half time
B4 SW half time
(f) 1750 days.
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-5
0
5
[m]
B4 SW half time
B4 SW half time
(g) 2000 days.
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-5
0
5
[m]
B4 SW half time
B4 SW half time
(h) 2250 days.
Figure 5: one-dimensional bed level plot for top lateral boundary. Flow from
left to right, dierent setup: coupled model and decoupled model.
The line plot is for B=4 half time with 500 days between each the
plots
==PAGE:113==
Appendix F - Calculation
for waves
In this appendix show the calculation for the wave parameter based on Beaufort
scale and the orbital velocity. The calculated exampled is made on Beaufort
equal to 10. The calculated can be see in the next page.
==PAGE:114==
(1.7)
(1.7)
(1.5)
(1.5)
(1.2)
(1.2)
(1.3)
(1.3)
(1.4)
(1.4)
(1.6)
(1.6)
(1.1)
(1.1)
ues
wave heigth and period, Tp Hm0 from Army, U-(2008)
26.43664124
Fetch limited situation check.
15.50079126
15.5001<16 hours. Therefore we have a fetch limited situation. From Figure 
Coefficient of drag and friction velocity
0.002025282443
1.189731818
Non-dimensional fetch
Non-dimensional waveheight
59.55196638
Design waveheight
8.592612994
Non-dimensional peak period
==PAGE:115==
(2.6)
(2.6)
(2.1)
(2.1)
(2.4)
(2.4)
(1.8)
(1.8)
(2.5)
(2.5)
(2.2)
(2.2)
(2.3)
(2.3)
(1.9)
(1.9)
91.31546456
Peak period
11.07450700
Orbital velocity 
the root mean square wave height wave
6.075894918
is the -1th spectral wave period approximated
10.06773364
deep water wave lenght 
158.2532263
wave lenght
138.6675740
wave number based on Tm-1
0.04531113602
bottom orbital velocity
4.044483144
==PAGE:116==
100
Appendix F - Calculation for waves
==PAGE:117==
Appendix G- Wave
corresponds to B=10
In the case of wave with wave parameters for B = 10 are there used Cnoidal
theory due to shallow water, and for B = 6 and B = 4 stokes 5th order is used
due to deep water. For B = 10 is the frequent 4 times per year duration 1 day.
B = 10 is assumed to be a storm with a frequents on 4 times per year and a
duration of a day [DMI, c]. The simulation stop after the bedforms reach the
surface after 11 storms and stops at the twelfth storm.
Figure 6: area plot for bed level change for wave condition correspondent to
Beaufort B=10, rst plot after 14 days, then is there 250 days be-
tweem each plot
==PAGE:118==
102
Appendix G- Wave corresponds to B=10
==PAGE:119==
Appendix H - data for piers
Figure of the piers on the domain, for λ = 800, λ = 400 and staggeredλ = 400.
Figure 7: domain with piers, 1)λ = 800
2) λ = 400
3) staggered λ = 400
Data for the piers is selected under structures-piers. Here is the location choice,
type of map projection and position coordinate.
Then is the pier data se-
lected: streamlines factor and number of section, the type of geometry and the
height/width. Since there are many wind turbines, are the data for wind tur-
bines made through text le. The data for each wind turbine is made in matlab
to save time.
==PAGE:120==
104
Appendix H - data for piers
==PAGE:121==
Appendix I - Fr=0.05 for
B=4
Line and area plot for wave condition equal Beaufort scale B=4. The wave is
active half of the time. The current is based on Froude number 0.5, which for
this parameter is equal to 1m/s. The area plot of the bed level change is shown
on the next page, where the rst plot is after 500 days and then is there 2500
days between each plot last plot after 27500 days, where the model is stop. The
line plot is shown after the area plot, with 2500 days between the plots.
==PAGE:122==
106
Appendix I - Fr=0.05 for B=4
Figure 8: Area plot of bed level change for Froude number 0.05 and B=4 half
time, per 2500 days. rst plot after 200 days and last 27500 days
==PAGE:123==
107
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-1
0
1
2
[m]
B4 Fr=0.05
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-0.5
0
0.5
1
[m]
B4 Fr=0.05
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
[m]
B4 Fr=0.05
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-1
0
1
2
[m]
B4 Fr=0.05
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-2
0
2
4
[m]
B4 Fr=0.05
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-2
0
2
4
[m]
B4 Fr=0.05
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-2
0
2
4
[m]
B4 Fr=0.05
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-2
0
2
4
[m]
B4 Fr=0.05
4.9
4.95
5
5.05
5.1
5.15
[m]
×105
-2
0
2
4
[m]
B4 Fr=0.05
Figure 9: One-dimensional bed level plot for top lateral boundary. Flow from
left to right, for Froude number 0.05 and B=4 half time, per 2500
days. rst plot after 2500 days and last 22500 days
==PAGE:124==
108
Appendix I - Fr=0.05 for B=4
==PAGE:125==
Appendix J - plot for B4
and B6
Figure 10: Area plot of bedlevel change for 1 m/s and zero wave per 500 day
start after 14 days. B4 half time
==PAGE:126==
110
Appendix J - plot for B4 and B6
Figure 11: Area plot of bedlevel change for 1 m/s and zero wave per 500 day
start after 14 days B4 constant waves
Figure 12: Area plot of bedlevel change for 1 m/s and zero wave per 500 day
start after 14 days B6 all half time
==PAGE:127==
Appendix K - Froude
number calculation
Figure 13: Area plot for pure current Fr=0.05, Fr=0.1 and Fr=0.2. a)Fr=0.1
after 27600 days
b) Fr=0.1 after 5000days
c) Fr=0.2 after
16.5days
==PAGE:128==
Calculation for difference Froude number Fr=0.05 Fr=0.1 Fr=0.05	
suspende load
Froude number:
 = 
Velocity
Grain size
constant for contrations profile
Fiiction velocity
 = 0.0162
Tempatur in celcus
 = 0.00000131
Fall velocity
 = 0.0216
 = 0.0300
Rouse parameter 
 = 1.80
sheilds parameter for fround number 0.05, 0.1 and 0.2 
concentration near bed
==PAGE:129==
(3.1)
(3.1)
(3.2)
(3.2)
 = 0.0240
normalised vertical concentration profile
Suspeneded load transport rate 
 = 
Suspeneded load transport rate  for fround number 0.05, 0.1 and 0.2 
bedload
Probability of a movning sediment
 = 0.118
bedload transport rate
 = 
bedload transport rate for fround number 0.05, 0.1 and 0.2 
ration between froude number 
614.
169.
