==PAGE:1==
Calculating evapotranspiration:
towards an operational Global
Ecosystem Restoration Index (GERI)
MSc Thesis - Technical University of Denmark
Samuel Bloch
Abstract
The current decline in biodiversity prompted researchers to ﬁnd indicators that would help them monitor
and counter this trend. The Global Ecosystem Restoration Index (GERI) is such an indicator; it is dedicated
to ﬁght land degradation and restore 15% of degraded land by the end of the decade, a biodiversity target
set in Aichi in 2010 by the members of the Convention on Biological Diversity. In this context, this
study focuses on the computation of evapotranspiration to develop an indicator, the Evapotranspiration
Ratio (ER), which would allow researchers to detect degradation hotspots in a given area, through the
analysis of temporal trends. Based on the Penman-Monteith equation, the model was adapted from a
previous study and improved; meteorological data from the global reanalysis ERA-Interim were included,
and a workﬂow was designed so that future users would have few manual manipulations to do before
obtaining their results. Validation was performed using ﬁeld data from Coussoul, in the south of France;
it returned mixed results, with meteorological data behaving very well while other variables showed
rather bad correlation with physical measurements. In the end, simulations in the period 2003-2015 were
performed and correlation between time and ER was calculated, with signiﬁcant points (p<0.05, r2>0.8)
labelled as potentially degraded.
I.
Introduction
Biodiversity is a contracted version of “bi-
ological diversity”, deﬁned by the Conven-
tion on Biological Diversity as “the variability
among living organisms from all sources [. . . ];
this includes diversity within species, between
species, and of ecosystems.” Therefore, it in-
cludes concepts such as genetic variety within
a species, or habitat variety within a landscape
(Encyclopedia of Earth, EoE (2016)).
Today,
biodiversity is declining at an alarming rate.
According to the World Wildlife Fund (WWF,
2016), the loss of species we see today is 1000 to
10000 times higher than the natural extinction
rate, meaning that between 0.1 and 0.01% of all
species on Earth become extinct each year. This
mass extinction event is often referred as the
6th mass extinction, but unlike the previous
one, it is caused by one and only one species,
the human .
In 1993, the United Nations Convention on Bi-
ological Diversity entered into force after being
signed by 168 states. It has three targets (CBD,
2016):
1. The conservation of biological diversity
2. The sustainable use of the components of
biological diversity
3. The fair and equitable sharing of the ben-
eﬁts arising out of the utilization of ge-
netic resources
In 2010, at the Aichi conference (Japan), a
“revised and updated Strategic Plan for Bio-
diversity” (CBD, 2016) was adopted for the
2011-2020 period, labelled as the UN Decade
for Biodiversity.
This plan set the 20 Aichi
biodiversity targets , spread among 5 strategic
goals that are to be reached by the end of the
decade.
For instance, Target 15 states: “By
2020, ecosystem resilience and the contribution
1
==PAGE:2==
of biodiversity to carbon stocks has been en-
hanced, through conservation and restoration,
including restoration of at least 15 per cent of
degraded ecosystems, thereby contributing to
climate change mitigation and adaptation and
to combating desertiﬁcation”. GEO Biodiver-
sity Observation Network (GEO-BON, 2016)
is an international organization that works
towards accomplishing these targets.
GEO BON is a consortium part of GEO, The
Group on Earth Observations, and a partner of
the CBD. GEO BON aims at collecting, study-
ing and delivering biodiversity observations to
a set of customers including decisions makers,
NGOs and scientists. In relation to the Aichi
biodiversity targets, the organizations has de-
ﬁned Essential Biodiversity Variables (EBV),
“window[s] into the biodiversity observation
systems” to be used by its customers . GEO
BON’s aim is to produce indicators "character-
ized by the rigorous use of open access large
global datasets, state of the art remote-sensing
based information, model-based integration
of multiple data sources and types, including
in situ (ground based) observations, and on-
line infrastructure enabling inexpensive and
dynamic updates, with full transparency" (Fer-
nandez et al., 2015), which assess progress
towards the Aichi targets. One of these indica-
tors is the Global Ecosystem Restoration Index
(GERI, Fernandez et al. (2015)), aimed at Target
15 (restoration of 15% of degraded ecosystems).
The GERI is made of three components related
with ecosystem health and degradation sta-
tus: changes in land productivity, changes in
surface energy balance and changes in land
cover. ”This composite index is produced for
near the entire terrestrial surface of the planet
at a spatial resolution of 1 km2. This allows
for the GERI index to be aggregated to small
regions, states, countries, continents and the
planet. This index uses well vetted products
derived from MODIS sensor, in orbit since
2001. These products are continuously being
outputted and the expected data availability
and planned mission continuity is an assurance
of the temporal sustainability of the proposed
index.” The GERI addresses the two following
essential biodiversity variables: net primary
productivity and ecosystem extent and frag-
mentation.
Researchers can now count on remote-sensing
to monitor biodiversity. In the past, informa-
tion regarding biodiversity was gathered in the
ﬁeld by making species census, for instance
nest census.
This kind of information was
local and non-systematic or comparable across
different sites or periods of time.
In order
to account for biodiversity losses, there is an
urgent need to have systematic and compara-
ble indicators of biodiversity across the globe
and consistent over time; that is what the GEO
BON program intends to do. In this sense, tech-
nological improvements made satellite data
research relevant for this purpose; and linking
biodiversity to remote sensing has become an
important research topic in the past decade
(Turner et al., 2003).
Two general models of biodiversity monitoring
using remote sensing exist: direct and indirect
models. The direct methods track “individual
organisms, species assemblages or ecological
communities”, whereas the indirect ones rely
on proxies, such as type of habitat (e.g. wood-
land, drylands) to estimate species range or
species richness (Turner et al., 2003). The in-
direct methods are based on the assumption
that there is a relationship between the proxy
and the species richness, e.g. an old, pristine
rainforest is expected to shelter more diverse
forms of life than a soybean plantation at the
same location.
Due to the complexity of biodiversity, com-
bining different environmental parameters,
quantitative and qualitative, is necessary to
obtain better assessments of biodiversity. Thus,
regarding the indirect method, Turner et al.
(2003) identiﬁed three key indirect variables:
“primary productivity, climate and habitat
structure (including topography)”. Duro et al.
(2007) chose four indicators that can be derived
from remote-sensing data: productivity, distur-
bance, topography and land cover. Land cover
is a class-based indicator, unlike others that
2
==PAGE:3==
are based on continuous mapping. That means
that when using land-cover maps based on
remote-sensed data and in-situ data, the Earth
surface is divided into classes or blocks, each
representing a certain category of land-cover
(generally vegetation). Pettorelli et al. (2016)
pointed out that such classiﬁcation needs agree-
ment among researchers, an agreement that is
apparently difﬁcult to reach .
Two other issues related to mapping in eco-
logical research are pointed out by Fassnacht
et al. (2006): scale (the combination of extent,
grain and minimum mapping unit of a study)
and accuracy assessment (e.g. how error is
distributed on a map, and how it affects further
analysis).
This thesis is a contribution to the surface en-
ergy balance indicator of the GERI, to address
degradation and restoration of ecosystems. To
use land degradation as a proxy for biodiver-
sity, it is assumed that the more degraded the
ecosystem, the lower the biodiversity (Fernán-
dez, 2013).
Then, the problem of using indirect indicators
to monitor biodiversity in our case starts with
the problem of developing a land degradation
indicator.
Land degradation needs to be deﬁned.
In
1996, the United Nations Conventions to Com-
bat Desertiﬁcation (UNCCD) deﬁned it as a
“reduction or loss in the biological and eco-
nomic productivity and complexity of terres-
trial ecosystems, as well as in the ecological,
biochemical and hydrological processes that
operate in them” (UNCCD, 1996).
In general, most of the remote sensing in-
dicators of land degradation try to detect
changes in the relationship between plant Net
Primary Production (NPP) and rainfall. The
Rainfall Use Efﬁciency index (RUE) uses the
ratio of NPP to precipitation to explain land
degradation; it’s intended to separate climatic
effects (e.g. changes in annual rainfall) from
human induced land degradation (e.g. land
cover changes). Prince et al. (1998) noted that
this index had been locally applied in several
areas, however, indices like the RUE or others
relying heavily on the Normalized Difference
Vegetation Index (NDVI) "‘tend only to in-
dicate susceptibility to desertiﬁcation rather
than actual degradation"’. Moreover, Huete
and Jackson (1987) noted that a ”non-linear
scattering of photons” from a bright arid soil
could mask reﬂectance signals from vegetation
(especially senesced grass), hence the ques-
tioning of vegetation-based indicators in arid
environments.
García et al. (2008) showed that a new type of
land degradation indicator related to surface
water deﬁcit, for instance the NEFS (Non-
Evaporative Fraction Standardized) could suc-
cessfully lead to the detection of not only
extremely disturbed or undisturbed areas in
southern Spain but also areas that had suffered
more subtle disturbances (e.g. topsoil losses).
This study suggests that such indicators, de-
rived from satellite datasets, from ASTER and
MODIS sensors for instance, can give an insight
into land degradation and then be connected
to biodiversity losses beyond more classic re-
mote sensing indicators of degradation based
on analysis of vegetation greenness García
et al. (2008). ”Functional ecosystems should
optimize the fraction of dissipated energy in
the land surface in the form of [evapotranspi-
ration]. Therefore the partition of the available
energy reaching the land surface into latent
heat [evapotranspiration] and sensitive heat
provides key information on the restoration
process” (Fernandez et al., 2015).
To estimate an energy-based indicator such
as the NEFS from remote sensing information,
it is necessary to calculate evapotranspiration
and net radiation ﬂuxes. Evapotranspiration is
the rate of water loss from an ecosystem to the
atmosphere, including soil and water bodies
(evaporation) and plants, through stomata in
their leaves (transpiration). The calculation of
the indicators related with the evaporative frac-
tion (or its reciprocal non-evaporative fraction)
requires the estimate of evapotranspiration.
This topic has been the subject of many studies
3
==PAGE:4==
(Kalma et al., 2008) using several models and
remote sensing data. They are all based on the
surface energy balance equation:
Rn −G −H −LE = 0
(1)
where Rn is the net radiation, G the ground
heat, H the sensible heat and LE the latent
heat, i.e. the expression of evapotranspiration
in terms of energy.
We consider broadly two types of methods to
estimate LE relying on remote sensing datasets.
A ﬁrst group of models contains those which
calculate LE as a residual of the energy balance
equation (Kalma et al., 2008). They are based
on the difference between surface temperature
and air temperature, which drives H, and re-
quire to calculate the aerodynamic resistance
to H, turbulent heat transfer. It is therefore
H that is solved ﬁrst, LE being the residual.
Two-source residual models, treating land sur-
face as a composite of soil and canopy, have
a “strong physical basis” and provide better
results in drylands than one-source models
(Anderson et al., 2007), but they are difﬁcult
to apply regionally because the estimation of
aerodynamic resistance requires precise knowl-
edge about parameters related with vegetation
roughness or atmospheric stability.
A second type of models directly solves for LE.
The Penman-Monteith combination equation is
the basic equation of the second group of mod-
els that use remote-sensing. It combines the
surface energy balance and the mass-transfer
ﬂux equations for latent and sensible heat
ﬂuxes. Here, when applying this method glob-
ally or regionally, the challenge is to evaluate
the variations of surface conductance to water
vapor (García et al., 2013) without using ﬁeld
calibration. Several methods have been pro-
posed, with constant parameters throughout
the year (Leuning et al., 2008) or with variable
parameters depending on rainfall (Zhang et al.,
2008).
Priestley and Taylor suggested in 1972 a sim-
pliﬁcation of the Penman-Monteith equation
that got rid of the surface and aerodynamic
resistances to replace them by an empirical
multiplier, α.
That way, the model doesn’t
require explicit estimates of water vapor deﬁcit
or stomatal conductance, although it may be
less accurate than a Penman-Monteith model
and is hard to apply for non-potential condi-
tions. Fisher et al. (2008) proposed a model
(PT-JPL) based on the Priestley-Taylor equation
to calculate monthly the actual evapotranspira-
tion using empirical multipliers derived from
remote sensing and meteorological datasets
(biophysical constraints) to the potential evap-
otranspiration to obtain actual evapotranspira-
tion.
Because they are based on remotely-sensed
data, all these models face the problem of data
consistency, especially regarding time scaling
(e.g. MODIS data may be available daily, or
every 8 days, or every 16 days) and space
scaling (e.g. data may be available with pixels
representing 1 km, or 10 km).
The PT-JPL model has shown great results at
monthly time scales in many kinds of environ-
ments, “ranging from boreal to temperate and
tropical ecosystems” (García et al., 2013), but
not for drylands receiving less than 400mm of
rain every year (Fisher et al., 2008)(Fisher et al.,
2009). Given that such habitats are particularly
sensitive to water availability changes and
land degradation, García et al. (2013) adapted
the PT-JPL model to make it work on a daily
time scale, with a new way to calculate soil
moisture based on the thermal inertia concept
(Verstraeten et al., 2006). Based on data from
two sites in Sahel and Spain, they showed that
this rather simple model gave equivalent re-
sults whether using data from remote sensing
or ﬁeld data in Sahel. The results from the
site in Spain were less accurate, but were still
better than those from other models (a residual
two source energy balance model from Kustas
and Norman (1999) and Penman-Monteith-
Leuning) run in the area (Morillas et al., 2013b)
(Morillas et al., 2013a). Expanding the PT-JPL
model, tested at the point level in two ﬂux
sites in García et al. (2013), to apply it to a
regional level and using only freely available
EO (Earth Observation) data is a necessary
step to develop a global degradation index,
4
==PAGE:5==
involving technical and conceptual challenges.
II.
Objectives
The general aim of this thesis was to contribute
to the further development of the GERI indi-
cator at regional level as a proof of concept.
In particular, the study focused on the GERI
component that tracks changes in surface en-
ergy balance and evapotranspiration using a
remote sensing –based model. Three particular
objectives have been addressed: script improve-
ment, validation and detection of degradation
hotspots. The starting point of this thesis was
the Matlab script used by García et al. (2013)
and a preliminary regional version from Moy-
ano et al. (2015) for their studies. From a very
speciﬁc script, customized for one user, one
computer and one region, we tried to offer a
generic framework in which the user doesn’t
need many manual operations to produce re-
sults. In addition to that, meteorological data
from global reanalysis were introduced to the
model, which then needed to be validated. The
ﬁnal objective was to analyze temporal trends
to detect degradation hotspots in the study
area.
Figure 1: General location of the area of interest (orange
square)
III.
Data and study area
I.
Study site: Coussoul and the south-
east of France
The area of interest is located in the south-
east of France. This choice was motivated by
two reasons: initially, we wanted a country
for which biodiversity data was available. A
few of them were available, but as the focus
of García et al. (2013) was drylands, we chose
an arid zone. Figure 1 shows the general lo-
cation of this area. It was selected as a pilot
site to test the functioning and accuracy of the
spatial model. In subsequent stages, after this
project, the model can be applied in a larger
region. The pilot area, or study area, covers dif-
ferent land use types, including wetlands with
high biodiversity (Camargue) and ﬂux sites for
validation.
II.
Validation data
For validation purposes, Sébastien Garrigues
(INRA-EMMAH, Avignon, France) provided
ﬁeld data from Coussoul, a dry grassland site
in the Crau-Camargue area (43.56 N; 4.86 E,
(Mira et al., 2016)). Measurements started on
this site in 2010, with a CNR1 net radiome-
ter (Kipp Zonen, Delft, The Netherlands) that
measures “incoming and outgoing irradiances
in the solar domain (global radiation, or short-
wave radiation) and the thermal infrared do-
main (atmospheric radiation, or longwave ra-
diation)” (eddy covariance system). Albedo
was then calculated as the ratio of outgoing
shortwave radiation over incoming shortwave
radiation, and “surface temperature was com-
puted from the outgoing thermal irradiance
(LWo) based on the Stefan–Boltzmann law”.
Instruments were placed between 1.5 and 2
meters above the ground, and ”measurements
were made every second and averaged every
30 min”.
III.
MODIS data
MODIS (Moderate resolution imaging spectro-
radiometer) is an instrument aboard two NASA
5
==PAGE:6==
satellites, Terra and Aqua, which acquires data
in 36 spectral bands or group of wavelengths.
Orbiting the earth, these two satellites allow
NASA to provide various datasets (MODIS
products) that can be used freely by scientists.
Table 1 shows the variables we use to calculate
evapotranspiration, classiﬁed by the MODIS
products they are extracted from. While these
data are all available with the same spatial res-
olution (1 km), the time steps between two
values were not always the same. Therefore,
when data were missing, measurements from
the last available date were used.
MODIS data are available in tiles, each one
covering a certain part of the planet. Our area
of interest was entirely located on tile h18v4,
therefore data were downloaded for this tile
only.
Figure 2: Tile h18v4. The contour is shown in yellow
Data from the Terra satellite are available
from 1999, but measurements from Aqua start
in the middle of 2002. Thus, our analysis covers
the period 2003-2015.
IV.
ERA-Interim data
ERA-Interim is a daily global atmospheric
reanalysis offering data from 1979 to now, up-
dated every month with a delay of two months.
Among the many meteorological parameters
available in the dataset, we were interested in
two of them: air temperature at 2 meters, and
surface solar radiation downwards.
Some parameters are called ‘analysis param-
eters’. Available four times a day, at 0, 6, 12
and 18 UTC, they mostly rely on observation.
From these parameters, ‘forecast parameters’
are calculated. Unlike the previous ones, they
mostly rely on the ERA model, not on observa-
tion. Still, they are based on an initialization
epoch (or analysis time, 0 or 12 UTC), and are
available 3, 6, 9 or 12 hours after this epoch
(not at the initialization time).
Given these constraints, we downloaded the
required data with the following settings, so
that they would be as close as possible to the
time when the satellite passed overhead (which
is around 11 in the study area):
- 2 meter temperature is an analysis parameter,
so we downloaded it at time 12, step 0.
- Surface solar radiation downwards is a fore-
cast parameter, so we downloaded it at time 0,
step 12.
The spatial resolution of the ERA dataset is
approximately 80 km, whereas the MODIS
resolution is 1 km.
Figure 3 provides an overview of the area
of interest, including the ERA data points, the
partitioning related to them and the validation
site of Coussoul.
IV.
Methods
I.
The PT-JPL model
The model we run is based on the study from
García et al. (2013) and modiﬁed for a prelimi-
nary spatial version by Moyano et al. (2015). It
is a daily implementation of the PT-JPL model,
which is based on the algorithm described by
Fisher et al. (2008). In this paper, the word
”evapotranspiration” refers to latent heat, the
energy ﬂux equivalent of the physical process
called evapotranspiration. ”Real” evapotran-
spiration is expressed in grams or millimeters,
but latent heat is expressed in W m−2. There-
6
==PAGE:7==
Table 1: MODIS products used in this study. NDVI means Normalized Difference Vegetation Index, fPAR means
Fraction of Photosynthetically Active Radiation, LAI means Leaf Area Index.
MODIS product
Time step
Variable
MOD13A2
16 days
1 km NDVI
MOD15A2
8 days
1 km fPAR
8 days
1 km LAI
MCD43B3
8 days
1 km Black/White sky albedo
MOD/MYD 11A1
1 day
1 km Band 31/32 Emissivity
1 km Daytime land surface temperature
1 km Nighttime land surface temperature
1 km Day observation time
MOD/MYD 11A2
8 days
1 km Band 31/32 Emissivity
1 km Daytime land surface temperature
1 km Nighttime land surface temperature
fore, what we call evapotranspiration is ex-
pressed in W m−2 in this paper.
Figure 3: Details of the area of interest. The 4 stars rep-
resent the locations of the ERA data points.
The lines deﬁne 4 regions, one for each ERA
data points. Pixels in each region share meteo-
rological data from the ERA data point located
inside this region. The diamond shape locates
the validation site, Coussoul. The city and
town names of Marseille, Montpellier and Avi-
gnon are also displayed.
Actual evapotranspiration (LE) is calculated
as a fraction of potential evapotranspiration
(LEp), which is derived from net radiation (Rn)
received by the habitat. Rn is made of two com-
ponents, longwave and shortwave radiations,
which in turn are made of two components,
incoming and outgoing longwave/shortwave
radiations, as described in Figure 4.
Figure 4: Net radiation
Longwave radiation (in W m−2) is com-
puted as explained in Equation 2 and Equa-
tion 3 (Stefan-Boltzmann law), where T is the
land surface temperature (K) and Emissivity
the average emissivity of bands 31 and 32 (no
unit). 5.67 × 10−8 is the value of the Stefan-
Boltzmann constant, in W m−2 K−4.
LWi = 5.67 × 10−8 ∗T4 ∗0.261e−7.77 × 10−4T2
(2)
LWo = −5.67 × 10−8 ∗Emissivity ∗T4
(3)
7
==PAGE:8==
Incoming shortwave radiation (SWi) is pro-
vided by the ERA-Interim dataset. Outgoing
shortwave radiation (in W m−2) is a fraction of
SWi, as shown in Equation 4. Albedo, or re-
ﬂection coefﬁcient (no unit), is the broadband
reﬂectivity of the land.
SWo = Albedo ∗SWi
(4)
The PT-JPL model is a two source model
separating soil and vegetation ﬂuxes. There-
fore, actual and potential evapotranspiration,
like net radiation, are partitioned into canopy
evapotranspiration, occurring in the vegetation,
and soil evapotranspiration, occurring on the
ground (all in W m−2). Table 2 deﬁnes several
notations for these variables, which are then
deﬁned in the subsequent equations.
Table 2: Soil and canopy radiations - notations.
ET
means evapotranspiration. LE is called ”ac-
tual evapotranspiration”, or simply ”evapotran-
spiration”. All this variables are expressed in
W m−2.
Notation
Variable
Rn
Net radiation
Rnc
Canopy net radiation
Rns
Soil net radiation
LE
(Actual) Evapotranspiration
LEc
Canopy evapotranspiration
LEs
Soil evapotranspiration
LEp
Potential evapotranspiration
LEpc
Canopy potential ET
LEps
Soil potential ET
A layer model (additive ﬂuxes) is assumed
as follows:
Rn = Rnc + Rns
(5)
LE = LEc + LEs
(6)
LEp = LEpc + LEps
(7)
In the following equations, LAI is the Leaf
Area Index, s is the slope of the vapour pres-
sure curve (Pa), ψ is the psychometric constant
(Pa), G is the ground heat (W m−2).
In order to calculate how much of the net radi-
ation reaches the soil surface, a Beer Lambert
law of light extinction is used with an extinc-
tion coefﬁcient of radiation k=0.6 (Equation 8).
Rns = Rn ∗e−0.6∗LAI
(8)
Potential evapotranspiration is calculated
using the Priestley-Taylor (Priestley, 1972) ap-
proach:
LEpc = 1.26 ∗
s
s + ψ ∗Rnc
(9)
LEps = 1.26 ∗
s
s + ψ ∗(Rns −G)
(10)
To calculate actual evapotranspiration, we
still need the multipliers to apply to poten-
tial evapotranspiration. These biophysical con-
straints, or stress multipliers, are similar to
stomatal and soil conductance in the approach
of Jarvis (1976) , and are deﬁned in Table 3.
The green canopy fraction (fg) is the ratio
between intercepted and absorbed photosyn-
thetically active radiation.
The plant tem-
perature constraint (fT) ”accounts for reduc-
tions in photosynthetic efﬁciency when plants
grow at temperatures departing from their
optimum temperature range” (Potter et al.,
1993). The plant moisture constraint (fM) re-
ﬂects changes in light absorptance with respect
to the maximum fAPARmax. The soil moisture
constraint (fSM−ATI) is based on the thermal
inertia concept, using land surface tempera-
ture and albedo. ”Thermal inertia is a physical
property of soil at the land surface measur-
ing the thermal response of a material to the
changes in its temperature” (Nearing et al.,
2012).
The model is then complete with Equa-
tion 11 and Equation 12:
LEc = fg ∗fT ∗fM ∗LEpc
(11)
LEs = fSM−ATI ∗LEps
(12)
In the end, we deﬁne the Evapotranspira-
tion Ratio (ER) as in Equation 13. This is a
8
==PAGE:9==
Table 3: Biophysical constraints. NDVI means Normalized Difference Vegetation Index, PAR means Photosynthetically
Active Radiation, ATI means observed Apparent Thermal Inertia index (◦C−1) (García et al., 2013)
Name
Deﬁnition
Fraction of intercepted PAR
fIPAR = NDVI −0.05
Fraction of absorbed PAR
fAPAR (MODIS data)
Green canopy fraction
fg = fAPAR
fIPAR
Plant temperature constraint
fT = 1.1814 ∗
1
1+e0.3∗(−35−T) ∗
1
1+e0.2∗(15−T)
Plant moisture constraint
fM =
fAPAR
fAPARmax
Soil moisture constraint
fSM−ATI =
ATI−ATImin
ATImax−ATImin
Fractional vegetation cover
fc = fIPAR
dryness index that will be used in this study
as an indicator for land degradation.
ER =
Evapotranspiration
Potential evapotranspiration
(13)
II.
Script improvement
Script improvement was performed with a fo-
cus on ﬁve different axes in order to improve
the user’s workﬂow, by minimizing the num-
ber of manual operations and making the code
more user-friendly.
The ﬁve axes are the following:
1. Incorporation of meteorological data
from a reanalysis dataset
2. Improvement of ﬁle reading in the script
3. Improvement of the deﬁnition of the spa-
tial extent of the study area
4. Deﬁnition of a ﬁle structure
5. Creation of a tutorial for future users
The incorporation of meteorological data
from a reanalysis dataset was necessary be-
cause, initially, the model used one single set
of meteorological data (temperature at 2 me-
ters and downwards surface solar radiation, or
incoming shortwave radiation) for the whole
area of interest. This was possible since the
area considered in previous studies was small
enough. With the introduction of data from the
ERA-Interim dataset, a higher accuracy was ex-
pected at the regional scale we targeted. After
the extraction of ERA data, each pixel in the
study area is assigned a set of meteorological
data. At the moment, this process is not fully
automatized: based on the study area and the
data points available in the ERA dataset, the
user has to assign meteorological data to every
pixel in the area.
The improvement of ﬁle reading was an im-
portant step for future users to be able to use
the code with ease. The program reads many
ﬁles during its execution, and therefore needs
to be given the path leading to these ﬁles. Orig-
inally, this was done with absolute paths; we
introduced relative paths.
Another interesting point is the deﬁnition of
the spatial extent of the study. We are only
studying a small part of the tile we download
(tile h18v4 covers a large part of France but also
the north-east of Spain, the south of Germany,
Switzerland and the north of Italy), that’s why
we need to feed the script with the coordinates
of our study area. Originally, these coordinates
were repeated in the script every time they
were used. Thus, when the user wanted to
study a new area, he or she had to modify ev-
ery occurence of these coordinates, and make
sure that none was forgotten. This was a te-
dious and boring task, which could easily lead
to mistakes. Instead of that, a generic notation
for the spatial extent, with variable instead of
numbers, was introduced.
This improvement process led to the deﬁnition
of a ﬁle structure for the model, which can be
downloaded by anyone wanting to run simula-
9
==PAGE:10==
tions with it.
In the end a tutorial for future users was writ-
ten, so that it’s easy for them to run the model.
The idea was to describe the ﬁle structure we
created, and then detail the workﬂow that was
deﬁned so that anyone could run simulations,
even with a limited knowledge of the code it-
self. This tutorial appears in the Appendix of
this report.
III.
Drought indicator validation
Validation of the model was performed us-
ing the results from year 2011, as advised
by Sébastien Garrigues because it should be
more reliable than other years. Data from the
model were extracted from the results, for the
place of measurements (Coussoul site, 43.6 ◦N
4.86 ◦E). To check the agreement between in
situ datasets and EO (Earth Observations) or
modeled datasets, we calculated three indi-
cators: the Pearson product-moment correla-
tion coefﬁcient R, the root-mean-square error
(RMSE) and the mean absolute error (MAE) for
each of the following variables: net radiation
(Rn), incoming (LWi) and outgoing (LWo) long-
wave radiation, incoming (SWi) and outgoing
(SWo) shortwave radiation, evapotranspiration,
albedo, air temperature and Evapotranspira-
tion Ratio (ER).
The Pearson product-moment correlation coef-
ﬁcient (Pearson’s r) measures the linear corre-
lation between two variables, giving a result
between -1 and 1. A value of 1 indicates total
correlation, a value of -1 indicates total nega-
tive correlation, while a value of 0 indicates no
correlation.
r =
n ∑xy −(∑x ∑y)
p
[n ∑x2 −(∑x)2][n ∑y2 −(∑y)2]
(14)
Equation 14 deﬁnes Pearson’s r, with x and y
being realizations of two variables X and Y, and
n the number of samples. In our case, X and Y
represent the same physical variable, X being
the output of the model (or input, for some
variables like albedo and air temperature) and
Y the ﬁeld measurement of the same variable.
n is the number of days on which comparison
can be made, i.e. the number of days where
both X and Y data are available (both datasets
generally show gaps in data).
The root-mean-square error (RMSE) of a vari-
able measures the difference between a predic-
tion and the values actually observed. Equa-
tion 15 deﬁnes it, with x the predicted value of
the variable, y the observed value, and n the
number of data points available for compari-
son.
RMSE =
s
∑(x −y)2
n
(15)
The mean absolute error (MAE) also measures
how close a predictor is to the variable it esti-
mates. It is deﬁned as the statistical mean of
the absolute difference between predictor and
observation, as shown in Equation 16.
MAE = 1
n ∑|x −y|
(16)
While the Pearson’s r explains how much the
evolution of one variable explains the evolution
of another variable, the RMSE and the MAE
give an insight into the absolute error between
those variables. Bias, as deﬁned in Equation 17,
can tell whether a certain error is random or
systematic.
Bias = 1
n ∑(x −y)
(17)
A bias of 0 indicates that the results of the
model are unbiased. If the error is consistent
(or systematic), the bias should be quite close
to the MAE.
To evaluate the ﬁeld ﬂux data, we calculated
the closure error CE%, as deﬁned (in percent)
in Equation 18. Rn means net radiation, G
means ground heat, H means sensible heat
and LE means evapotranspiration.
CE% = Rn −G
H + LE ∗100
(18)
Ideally, the closure error should be 100%, mean-
ing that the surface energy balance equation
(Equation 1) is true.
10
==PAGE:11==
IV.
Detection of degradation hotspots
Once the performances of the model were eval-
uated, it was used for the detection of sites
that might have been degraded or restored in
the study area. This was achieved by calculat-
ing the correlation coefﬁcient (Pearson’s r or
r-value, see above) between time and Evapo-
transpiration Ratio (ER). This value tells about
how much one variable (time) explains the vari-
ations of the other (ER): once we ﬁnd a place
with a high correlation between the two, the
next task is to look for the causes of this phe-
nomenon, but this is out of the scope of the
present study. In addition to the r-value, the
p-value was also calculated for every pixel of
the study area. It explains how signiﬁcant the
associated r-value is. With this information, we
were able to consider only the places with high
correlation between time and ER and with high
signiﬁcance.
MODIS data were available starting from 2003,
so the analysis covered the period 2003-2015. A
simulation was run for every odd year, result-
ing in the simulation of 7 years. The last year
provided aberrant results, so it was discarded.
For each pixel in the area, ER was averaged on
a yearly basis, giving one value for each year.
We then computed r and p-values based on this
time-series. The square of the r-value, r2, was
scrutinized: the highest values highlighted the
suspected degradation hotspots. Of these high
r2, we only kept those with a corresponding
p-value inferior to 0.05, as suggested by the
Matlab help.
V.
Results and discussion
I.
Script improvement
The steps taken to improve the script made the
user’s work considerably smoother.
The incorporation of reanalaysis data for
some meteorological input variables proved
successful: the correlation between them and
ﬁeld values was satisfying, as was the error (see
the next section). However, the ERA-Interim
dataset has a lower resolution than the rest of
our input data, so we need to decide how these
data are used. More speciﬁcally, we need to
divide the study area into regions in which ev-
ery pixel is assigned the same meteorological
data. In our study, we used 4 ERA data points,
and divided our study area into 4 regions in
the shape of a rectangle. In each region, pix-
els were assigned meteorological data from the
closest ERA data point, the one situated in the
region. This process is not fully automatized
yet: the user has to deﬁne these regions by it-
self. In the future, we hope that this partition
can be done automatically, based on the deﬁni-
tion of the study area.
Figure 5 shows how ﬁle reading in the script
was improved.
Figure 5: File reading improvement in the script - from
absolute to relative paths
An absolute path (BEFORE) includes ev-
ery folder from the hard drive letter to the
ﬁle, whereas a relative path (AFTER) only in-
cludes the path from the working directory (in
which the script is working, in this case ’Spa-
tial script’) to the ﬁle. That makes a signiﬁcant
difference because every computer is not struc-
tured the same way. For instance, hard drives
can be assigned different letters (typically C, D,
E...). To make the code usable by every poten-
tial user, we needed to get rid of this, lest the
user has to modify the code to make it ﬁt the
ﬁle structure of his or her own computer.
The next step was the deﬁnition of the extent
of the study area, with the use of variables
instead of numbers throughout the script (see
Figure 6) Now, when it starts, the main script
calls a secondary script called ’parameters.m’,
in which the spatial extent of the study area is
deﬁned. Thus, the user needs to specify this
extent of the study area in one and only one
place, the ’parameters.m’ script.
In the future, this script could also be used
to deﬁne other variables that are repeated in
the main script, if needed.
11
==PAGE:12==
Figure 6: Spatial extent - from numbers to variables
Figure 7: File structure of the model
In this project, we deﬁned a ﬁle structure
for the model; potential users can download
it freely and adapt it to their needs.
This
framework, described in more details in the
Appendix and shown in Figure 7, contains the
scripts and text ﬁles needed for running a sim-
ulation but also the folders that contain input
and output data. With this, the user knows
where to save the data he or she downloads,
and knows where the results of the simulation
can be found.
In a previous version of the model, text ﬁles
(corresponding to input data ﬁles) were gen-
erated manually by the user, based on these
input ﬁles’ names. The ﬁle structure we offer al-
ready contains most of the necessary text ﬁles;
this results in a real gain of time for the user,
but also affects his or her mood by removing
boring and repetitive tasks.
Finally, a tutorial aimed at future users was
written; it can be found in the Appendix. This
tutorial explains the ﬁle structure and precisely
describes the user’s workﬂow. It also provides
a list of input and output variables. We hope
that it helps users understand how the scripts
work together and what they need to do to run
a simulation.
II.
Drought indicator validation
To validate the results of our model and the
remote sensing variables we use, we compared
them to a ﬁeld dataset. We assessed the va-
lidity of this dataset by calculating the closure
error (Equation 18). Figure 8 shows that this
error, which should ideally be around 100%, is
particularly high. Even though we use it for
validation, results for evapotranspiration and
evapotranspiration ratio should be considered
with caution due to this uncertainty.
Figure 8: Year 2011 - Closure error CE% (in percent)
against time (in days)
When data from the model or from MODIS
are unavailable, they appear as NaN (not a
number). However, unavailable ﬁeld data ap-
pear as -9999, while several data points are
also aberrant in the sense that they are differ-
ent from -9999, but still odd (−4000 W m−2 for
sensible heat for instance). The ﬁrst attempt at
validation took into account every single ﬁeld
data point.
We could see that data from the ERA-Interim
12
==PAGE:13==
dataset, air temperature and downwards sur-
face solar radiation (SWi), were extremely well
correlated to ﬁeld data. Calculated longwave
radiation was also relatively well correlated to
the observations, but showed a consistent gap,
or offset, between observation and prediction.
We suspected that there was a systematic bias
involved. Indeed, bias is 53.5 W m−2, i.e. 91%
of the MAE. On the other hand, we noticed
that outgoing short wave radiations gave badly
correlated results.
Figure 9: Year 2011 - Albedo values from MODIS (cir-
cles) and the validation ﬁeld dataset (crosses),
against time (in days) - Area: Coussoul
Given that SWo = albedo ∗SWi, we in-
vestigated albedo values (which we calculate
as Albedo = 0.8 ∗Black Sky Albedo + 0.2 ∗
White Sky Albedo). We noticed that these val-
ues were really far away from the ﬁeld data
(Figure 9), in addition to missing data. High
values (above 0.4) correspond to cloudy days,
hence the high absolute values for outgoing
shortwave radiation at the same time (not
shown). Given that albedo is not calculated but
downloaded from the MODIS database (prod-
uct MCD43B3), we couldn’t really conclude on
the validity of our results.
To improve this aspect of the simulation,
we decided to use a ﬁxed value for the albedo,
and apply it to the whole region. The chosen
value was the mean of the albedo ﬁeld data,
0.13. We expected this to improve our results,
especially SWo. Doing so, we could see that, al-
though the correlation between predicted and
measured outgoing shortwave radiation was
greatly improved, evapotranspiration and ER
were not really improved (results not shown).
We suspected that these results may be caused
by aberrant data from the ﬁeld measurements
Based on these observations, we ﬁltered
the aberrant ﬁeld data: half-hourly values for
evapotranspiration (LE), net radiation (Rn) and
ground heat (H) were to be situated between
-50 and 1500 W m−2 to be taken into account
and aggregated into daily values. Further ﬁl-
tering steps dealt with the number of available
measurements each day (one day wouldn’t be
taken into account if less than 80% of the half-
hourly points were available that day) and the
closure error (CE = Rn −H −LE −G, which
should be inferior to LE), but these approaches
didn’t leave enough points for the comparison
to be signiﬁcant. Table 4, Figure 10 and Fig-
ure 11 show the result of the ﬁrst ﬁltering de-
scribed above. Evapotranspiration correlation
and error are improved, as is ER. We should
still keep in mind, though, that ﬁeld data are
unreliable.
Subsequently, the simulations for the other
years were run with a ﬁxed value for the
albedo, the same (0.13) for the whole area. It
is also interesting to note some limits of our
model: ﬁrst, a ﬁxed value for elevation was
used for the whole study area. To improve
the accuracy of this model, the introduction
of real elevation data, used in the calculation
of potential evapotranspiration, could be con-
sidered. Moreover, NASA is developping a
new MODIS product, MOD21, which provides
the same data as MOD11 (emissivity, temper-
ature, timepass). However, it corrects a bias
known in MOD11A ”over arid and semi-arid
regions” (NASA, 2016). It is not available yet,
but using this product instead of MOD11 could
improve the results of the model, especially in
dry areas. Finally, the calculation of soil net
radiation (Rnc) used a ﬁxed extinction coefﬁ-
cient (K = 0.6), but it should be adapted to
vegetation type.
13
==PAGE:14==
Figure 10: Year 2011 - Graphs of 4 validation variables: LWi, LWo, SWi and SWo (in W m−2), ploted against time (in
days). On each graph, model output (or input) is drawn with circles, and ﬁeld data are shown with crosses
14
==PAGE:15==
Figure 11: Year 2011 - Graphs of 4 other validation variables: Rn (W m−2), air temperature (◦C), evapotranspiration
(W m−2) and ER, ploted against time (in days). On each graph, model output (or input) is drawn with
circles, and ﬁeld data are shown with crosses
15
==PAGE:16==
Table 4: Validation results - Rn means Net radiation, LWi means Incoming longwave radiation, LWo means Outgoing
longwave radiation, SWI means Incoming shortwave radiation, SWo means Outgoing shortwave radiation,
ER means Evapotranspiration Ratio - Pearson’s r, Root-Mean-Square Error (RMSE) and Mean Absolute Error
(MAE) are calculated between model output or input in Coussoul and ﬁeld validation data from Coussoul -
The last column indicates the number of data points available for comparison
Variable
Pearson’s r
RMSE
MAE
Validation points (n)
Rn
0.933
48.9 W m−2
41.7 W m−2
248
LWi
0.385
90.5 W m−2
58.8 W m−2
251
LWo
0.432
90.4 W m−2
50.4 W m−2
251
SWi
0.944
40.4 W m−2
30.1 W m−2
364
SWo
0.591
25.8 W m−2
13.4 W m−2
365
Evapotranspiration
0.512
27.3 W m−2
22.4 W m−2
137
ER
0.406
0.420
0.375
137
Air temperature
0.968
3.45 ◦C
3.05 ◦C
365
III.
Detection of degradation hotspots
After validation, we evaluate temporal trends.
First, we look at spatial patterns in some input
or output variables
To get a visual idea of the spatial patterns in
Evapotranspiration Ratio (ER), we compare it
to a land cover map of our study area. Fig-
ure 12 shows a comparison between land cover
types from MODIS product MCD12C1 (right)
and mean annual ER from our simulations
(2011, left). In the south of the area, we can
recognize the Mediterranean coast (water bod-
ies are masked and appear in dark blue, as do
missing data points) and the lakes in the Rhône
delta, in Camargue (south-west). In addition,
it seems like places with high ER (yellow pix-
els) correspond to the areas of mixed forest
(blue-green).
Then, we compare years 2007 and 2009, be-
cause the latter seems wetter than the former:
evapotranspiration and ER are globally higher
in 2009 than in 2007. This seems to apply to
every kind of vegetation.
In order to have an idea of the spatial vari-
ability of input variables and stress factors, we
visualized maps of such parameters. For in-
stance, Figure 13 shows mean Normalized Dif-
ference Vegetation Index (NDVI) during years
2007 (left) and 2009 (right). Figure 14 shows
mean fSM−ATI during years 2007 (left) and
2009 (right).
Figure 15 shows mean evapo-
transpiration during years 2007 (left) and 2009
(right). Figure 16 shows mean Evapotranspi-
ration Ratio (ER) during years 2007 (left) and
2009 (right).
Figure 17 is a graph of the daily average
evapotranspiration over the study area, in 2007
(left) and 2009 (right). We can see that there
was a plateau at 80 W m−2 between days 125
and 225 in 2007, while 2009 shows more of
a peak shape. Moreover, plant evapotranspi-
ration (canopy evapotranspiration) dominates
soil evapotranspiration as the main component
of total evapotranspiration (LE). Since LE fol-
lows the seasonal radiation course, the ecosys-
tem is not limited by water so much.
After studying some spatial patterns, we
tried to ﬁnd temporal trends in the study area.
For this, we used our indicator, the Evapotran-
spiration Ratio (ER), and calculated the corre-
lation between time and the annual mean of
ER, for every pixel of the study area. Figure 18
shows the correlation coefﬁcient r: values are
between 1 and -1, these two extremes showing
the highest correlations. Missing data appear
in green (0).
16
==PAGE:17==
Figure 12: Land cover from MODIS product MCD12C1 (2011) on the right, mean annual ER (2011) from the model
on the left - Study area
Figure 13: Mean NDVI (Normalized Difference Vegetation Index) in years 2007 (left) and 2009 (center), land cover
from MODIS product MCD12C1 (right) - Study area - Deep blue pixels in the two maps on the left indicate
water bodies or missing data
17
==PAGE:18==
Figure 14: Mean fSM−ATI (soil moisture constraint) in years 2007 (left) and 2009 (center), land cover from MODIS
product MCD12C1 (right) - Study area - Deep blue pixels in the two maps on the left indicate water bodies
or missing data
Figure 15: Mean evapotranspiration in years 2007 (left) and 2009 (center), land cover from MODIS product MCD12C1
(right) - Study area - Deep blue pixels in the two maps on the left indicate water bodies or missing data
Figure 16: Mean ER (Evapotranspiration Ratio) in years 2007 (left) and 2009 (center), land cover from MODIS
product MCD12C1 (right) - Study area - Deep blue pixels in the two maps on the left indicate water bodies
or missing data
18
==PAGE:19==
Figure 17: Year 2007 (left) and 2009 (right) - Daily mean evapotranspiration (W m−2) against time (days) - Average
over the whole study area
Figure 18: r2 unﬁltered - Study area
Figure 19 shows the map of signiﬁcant pix-
els: 1, in yellow, indicate that the pixel sees a
signiﬁcant trend in dryness change, that could
be indicating degradation or restoration.
Finally, Figure 20 shows the r value for sig-
niﬁcant pixels: when the p-value was below
0.05, the r-value was set to NaN (not a number,
i.e. missing data point). In this ﬁgure, yellow
and orange pixels indicate high correlation be-
tween time and ER, while blue pixels indicate
high negative correlation between these two
variables. For instance, pixel (49,83), 43.9 ◦N,
5.23 ◦E, has a r-value of 0.94, and a p-value of
0.0013.
Figure 19: Signiﬁcant pixels (p-value<0.05) appear in
yellow, non-signiﬁcant pixels appear in blue -
Study area
Figure 21 shows the increasing trend in ER
in this place: the linear regression follows a
slope of 0.015 /year. According to land cover
data from MODIS, it is an area of cropland.
Figure 22 shows the daily values of ER in
pixel (49,83), if available, for every year we con-
sidered. Even years, which we didn’t study,
were omitted in the time axis.
The global
trend is not as obvious as in Figure 21 (annual
means).
19
==PAGE:20==
Figure 20: r2 ﬁltered - pixels with low signiﬁcance (p-
value>0.05) were masked - Study area
Figure 21: Average ER trend in pixel (49,83), against
time (in years). ER values (circles) and linear
regression (dashed line)
Still, we see that the maximum value is
not the same each year: the maximums were
lower in 2005, 2009 and 2011 than in 2003, 2007
and 2013. Finally, this detection of a potential
degradation point doesn’t give any information
about the causes of this degradation: a closer
study of the area, probably on the ﬁeld, would
be necessary to understand the dynamics at
work there. A trend towards higher humidity
could simply be related to increased precipita-
tion.
Originally, as it is reﬂected in the introduc-
tion, we wanted to focus on the link between
land degradation and biodiversity. We lacked
time to do so, but that would be an interesting
topic to investigate, provided biodiversity data
can be retrieved.
VI.
Conclusion
This study presents a way to detect land degra-
dation hotspots through a spatial analysis of
time trends in Evapotranspiration Ratio (ER),
the ratio of evapotranspiration over potential
evapotranspiration. It is based on a daily imple-
mentation of the PT-JPL model, and considers
correlation between time and ER as an indica-
tor of degradation: signiﬁcant (p<0.05) pixels
with r2 over 0.8 were classiﬁed as possibly de-
graded.
The study area chosen for this pilot study was
located in the south of France.
Data came
mainly from NASA’s MODIS, but this study
introduced ERA-Interim data to the model:
air temperature and downwards surface so-
lar radiation from this source proved to be well
correlated with ﬁeld data from the validation
site in Coussoul. However, validation showed
that albedo data from MODIS were affected by
clouds and missing data points, which forced
us to use a value ﬁxed in time and space in
order to obtain satisfying outgoing solar radia-
tion values. It should be noted that ﬂux data
from Coussoul proved particularly unreliable,
with an average closure error of 183%.
In addition to these ﬁndings, this study put
a huge emphasis on script improvement: this
included some corrections directly in the code,
but also the deﬁnition of a workﬂow for the
user. Based on a framework that can be freely
downloaded, it minimizes the number of man-
ual operations to be made by the user, so that
he or she can focus on the science and not on
the technical aspects of running a simulation.
Acknowledgements
The author wishes to thank Monica Garcia,
Sheng Wang, Matti Kummu and Sébastien Gar-
rigues for their guidance, help, support and
valuable advice.
20
==PAGE:21==
Figure 22: Daily values of ER in pixel (49,83). Even years do not appear in the time axis.
References
Martha C Anderson, John M Norman, John R
Mecikalski, Jason A Otkin, and William P
Kustas.
A climatological study of evapo-
transpiration and moisture stress across the
continental united states based on thermal
remote sensing: 1. model formulation. Jour-
nal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 112
(D10), 2007.
CBD. Strategic plan for biodiversity 2011-2020,
including aichi biodiversity targets, jun 2016.
https://www.cbd.int/sp/.
Dennis C Duro, Nicholas C Coops, Michael A
Wulder, and Tian Han. Development of a
large area biodiversity monitoring system
driven by remote sensing. Progress in Physi-
cal Geography, 31(3):235–260, 2007.
EoE.
Biodiversity?,
apr
2016.
https://eoearthlive.wordpress.com/view/
article/150560/, temporarily not accessible.
Karin S Fassnacht, Warren B Cohen, and
Thomas A Spies. Key issues in making and
using satellite-based maps in ecology: A
primer. Forest Ecology and Management, 222
(1):167–181, 2006.
Miguel Fernandez, Monica Garcia, and Nestor
Fernandez. Global ecosystem restoration in-
dex. The GEO Biodiversity Observation Net-
work (GEO BON): Enhancing Biodiversity Ob-
servations and Products for User Needs. Twelfth
Plenary Session, pages 14–15, 2015.
Nestor Fernández.
Earth observation for
species diversity assessment and monitoring.
Earth observation of ecosystem services, pages
151–177, 2013.
Joshua B Fisher, Kevin P Tu, and Dennis D
Baldocchi.
Global estimates of the land–
atmosphere water ﬂux based on monthly
avhrr and islscp-ii data, validated at 16
ﬂuxnet sites. Remote Sensing of Environment,
112(3):901–919, 2008.
Joshua B Fisher, Yadvinder Malhi, Damien
Bonal, Humberto R Da Rocha, Alessan-
dro C De Araujo, Minoru Gamo, Michael L
Goulden, Takashi Hirano, Alfredo R Huete,
21
==PAGE:22==
Hiroaki Kondo, et al. The land–atmosphere
water ﬂux in the tropics. Global Change Biol-
ogy, 15(11):2694–2714, 2009.
Mónica García, Cecilio Oyonarte, Luis Villa-
garcía, Sergio Contreras, Francisco Domingo,
and Juan Puigdefábregas. Monitoring land
degradation risk using aster data: The non-
evaporative fraction as an indicator of ecosys-
tem function. Remote Sensing of Environment,
112(9):3720–3736, 2008.
Monica García, Inge Sandholt, Pietro Ceccato,
Marc Ridler, Eric Mougin, Laurent Kergoat,
Laura Morillas, Franck Timouk, Rasmus Fen-
sholt, and Francisco Domingo. Actual evap-
otranspiration in drylands derived from in-
situ and satellite data: Assessing biophysical
constraints. Remote Sensing of Environment,
131:103–118, 2013.
GEO-BON.
Essential biodiversity variables,
jun 2016.
http://geobon.org/essential-
biodiversity-variables/ebv-classes-2/.
AR Huete and RD Jackson. Suitability of spec-
tral indices for evaluating vegetation charac-
teristics on arid rangelands. Remote sensing
of environment, 23(2):213IN1–232IN8, 1987.
PG Jarvis. The interpretation of the variations
in leaf water potential and stomatal conduc-
tance found in canopies in the ﬁeld. Philo-
sophical Transactions of the Royal Society of Lon-
don B: Biological Sciences, 273(927):593–610,
1976.
Jetse D Kalma, Tim R McVicar, and Matthew F
McCabe. Estimating land surface evapora-
tion: A review of methods using remotely
sensed surface temperature data. Surveys in
Geophysics, 29(4-5):421–469, 2008.
William P Kustas and John M Norman. Evalu-
ation of soil and vegetation heat ﬂux predic-
tions using a simple two-source model with
radiometric temperatures for partial canopy
cover. Agricultural and Forest Meteorology, 94
(1):13–29, 1999.
Ray Leuning, YQ Zhang, Amelie Rajaud, Helen
Cleugh, and Kevin Tu. A simple surface con-
ductance model to estimate regional evapo-
ration using modis leaf area index and the
penman-monteith equation. Water Resources
Research, 44(10), 2008.
Maria Mira, Albert Olioso, Belen Gallego-
Elvira, Dominique Courault, Sébastien Gar-
rigues, Olivier Marloie, Olivier Hagolle,
Pierre Guillevic, and Gilles Boulet. Uncer-
tainty assessment of surface net radiation
derived from landsat images. Remote Sensing
of Environment, 175:251–270, 2016.
L Morillas, M García, H Nieto, L Villagarcia,
Inge Sandholt, MP Gonzalez-Dugo, PJ Zarco-
Tejada, and F Domingo. Using radiometric
surface temperature for surface energy ﬂux
estimation in mediterranean drylands from
a two-source perspective. Remote Sensing of
Environment, 136:234–246, 2013a.
Laura Morillas, Ray Leuning, Luis Villagar-
cía, Mónica García, Penélope Serrano-Ortiz,
and Francisco Domingo. Improving evap-
otranspiration estimates in mediterranean
drylands: The role of soil evaporation. Water
Resources Research, 49(10):6572–6586, 2013b.
Maria Carmen Moyano, Monica Garcia, Lu-
cia Tornos, Laura Recuero, Alicia Palacios-
Orueta, and Luis Juana. Assessing regional
crop water demand using a satellite-based
combination equation with a land surface
temperature component. In EGU General As-
sembly Conference Abstracts, volume 17, page
15503, 2015.
NASA.
Modis
land
surface
tempera-
ture and emissivity (mod21),
jun 2016.
http://modis.gsfc.nasa.gov/data
/dataprod/mod21.php.
Grey S Nearing, M Susan Moran, Russell L
Scott, and Guillermo Ponce-Campos. Cou-
pling diffusion and maximum entropy mod-
els to estimate thermal inertia. Remote sensing
of environment, 119:222–231, 2012.
22
==PAGE:23==
Nathalie Pettorelli, Martin Wegmann, An-
drew Skidmore, Sander Mücher, Terence P
Dawson, Miguel Fernandez, Richard Lucas,
Michael E Schaepman, Tiejun Wang, Brian
O’Connor, et al.
Framing the concept of
satellite remote sensing essential biodiversity
variables: challenges and future directions.
Remote Sensing in Ecology and Conservation,
2016.
Christopher S Potter, James T Randerson,
Christopher B Field, Pamela A Matson, Pe-
ter M Vitousek, Harold A Mooney, and
Steven A Klooster. Terrestrial ecosystem pro-
duction: a process model based on global
satellite and surface data. Global Biogeochemi-
cal Cycles, 7(4):811–841, 1993.
CHB Priestley. On the assessment of surface
heat ﬂux and evaporation using large scale
parameters. In Mon. Weather Rev. Citeseer,
1972.
Stephen D Prince, De Colstoun, E Brown, and
LL Kravitz. Evidence from rain-use efﬁcien-
cies does not indicate extensive sahelian de-
sertiﬁcation. Global Change Biology, 4(4):359–
374, 1998.
Woody Turner, Sacha Spector, Ned Gardiner,
Matthew Fladeland, Eleanor Sterling, and
Marc Steininger. Remote sensing for biodi-
versity science and conservation. Trends in
ecology & evolution, 18(6):306–314, 2003.
UNCCD. United Nations Convention to Combat
Desertiﬁcation in Those Countries Experiencing
Serious Drought and/or Desertiﬁcation, Particu-
larly in Africa. United Nations, 1996.
Willem W Verstraeten, Frank Veroustraete,
Corné J van der Sande, Ief Grootaers, and Jan
Feyen. Soil moisture retrieval using thermal
inertia, determined with visible and ther-
mal spaceborne data, validated for european
forests. Remote Sensing of Environment, 101
(3):299–314, 2006.
WWF.
How
many
species
are
we
losing?,
jun
2016.
http://wwf.panda.org/about_our_earth/
biodiversity/biodiversity/.
YQ Zhang, FHS Chiew, L Zhang, R Leuning,
and HA Cleugh. Estimating catchment evap-
oration and runoff using modis leaf area
index and the penman-monteith equation.
Water Resources Research, 44(10), 2008.
23
==PAGE:24==
Appendix: PT-JPL script – a tutorial 
 
This appendix is aimed at the user who wants to run the PT-JPL daily evapotranspiration model. It 
explains the file structure we provide, and the workflow to be followed. 
 
1. The lists of files 
The main script takes daily binary files as input (one for each day of the year), and produces daily binary 
files as output. Most of the original data come as .hdf files, with variable time frequency. .hdf files need 
to be converted to binary, which are the input to the main script. 
The main script, likes the conversion (hdf to binary) scripts, works with several lists of file. These lists 
contain the names of .hdf files or binary files, in chronological order. 
For each variable, there is a list of the .hdf files that were downloaded. Then, there is a list of the binary 
files that result from the conversion from hdf to binary. Finally, in the case of data that are not produced 
daily, there is a second list of binary files: since the model runs daily, we need a list with 365 files. This 
last list contains the same files as the previous one, except these ones are duplicated according to the 
time step.  
Let’s take the Modis product MOD13A2 as an example. From the .hdf files is produced a list of their 
names: VI_T_HDF.txt. The structure already contains a list of binary files: NDVI_T.txt. The 
hdf_to_binary_NDVI_T_tr.m script writes these binary files, but because MOD13A2 data come every 16 
days, there are only 23 of these files, not 365. NDVI_Tin.txt is a list of file names that artificially creates 
365 input binary files: from NDVI_T.txt, each line is duplicated 15 times (that is, the 16 first lines are 
identical). The main script uses the same binary file for the 16 first days, then the second file for the 16 
next days, etc. 
This procedure is identical for all datasets that are not produced daily. 
 
2. File structure 
The directory “Spatial script –structure” contains all the scripts, in addition to the folders that hold input 
and output data. 
‘Root’ directory: 
- 
spatial_script.m : the main script 
- 
parameters.m : spatial extent of the project; called by spatial_script.m 
- 
check_results.m : visualization of some output variables; can be customized to your own needs. 
‘Root/Data’ directory: 
- 
Modis folders (MCD43B3, MOD11A1 etc): contain a Matlab file (hdf_to_binary_xxx.m) that 
converts Modis files (HDF format) to binary files. The text files are lists of filenames used as 
output by the hdf_to_binary_xxx.m script and/or as input by spatial_script.m. Data downloaded 
from EarthData (see later) have to be placed in these folders. 
- 
MOD11A1: contains eos2dump.exe, a program that needs to be used to produce latitude data 
from a .hdf file (only once for a given MODIS tile). 
- 
MOD15A2: contains faparmax.m, a script that needs to be run before spatial_script.m. 
- 
Meteo folder: data from the ERA-Interim dataset (temperature at 2 meters and downwards 
surface solar radiation) have to be placed in this directory. ERA2.m processes these data. 
NOAA_trise_tsunset.xlsx contains data relative to time of sunrise and sunset. 
==PAGE:25==
- 
Input_files_generator.m creates lists of files names; these files have already been generated, but 
this script can be useful in the case of a leap year (said files then lack one line). 
‘Root/Results’ directory: 
- 
Each directory contains lists of output filenames. Output from spatial_script.m will appear in 
these folders.  
 
 
File structure
==PAGE:26==
3. Workflow (these steps are detailed below): 
1) Create the folder structure (copy-paste “Spatial script – structure”)  
2) Download MODIS data, and put the HDF files in the adequate folder (inside the “Data” folder) 
3) Dump latitude (eos2dump, needs to be done only once for a given MODIS tile) 
4) Create the files lists (command prompt ‘dir’) 
5) Run hdf2binary.m (Matlab) 
6) Download ERA data. 
7) Run ERA2.m (Matlab) 
8) Run spatial_script.m (Matlab) 
 
2) Data download (HDF files) 
https://search.earthdata.nasa.gov/ 
This website doesn’t work with Chrome anymore. Firefox recommended, with the plugin 
“DownloadThemAll” (DtA). 
Search by product name (MOD11A2…), set the time frame (from January 1st to December 31st). 
Regarding the spatial limits, several methods are available. If one is looking for a single tile, the 
easiest way is to point at the map. 
Select the collection on the left panel, then click “Retrieve collection data”. Select data access via 
“Download”, then “View download links”. 
Right-click in the page, then launch the DtA plugin. Ctrl+A to select all links, right-click “Tick all 
selected”, then start the download. 
Attention: when setting the time frame, some files may be missing. The lists of filenames (those with 
daily entries) need to be updated accordingly: missing days are assigned data from the last available 
date. Sometimes, EarthData shows more files than necessary (usually from the year before). Don’t 
select these files with DtA, in order to download only the necessary files. 
 
3) HDF-EOS2 DUMP 
This operation extracts latitude data from a .hdf file. 
‘Data/MOD11A1’ contains the program eos2dump.exe (Source, with examples). In Windows’ 
command prompt, run the following (adapt the .hdf file name to one of those present in your 
folder): 
 
$eos2dump -c1 MOD11A1.A2007113.h11v09.005.2007136163924.hdf > lat_MOD11A1 
A binary file lat_MOD11A1 is created, it can be used in any simulation taking place on the current 
MODIS tile. Therefore, this operation needs to be completed only once, provided you keep working 
on the same area. 
 
4) and 5) Data conversion (HDF to binary) 
First a list of .hdf file names must be created. For this, use the Windows command prompt, with the 
following command: dir *.hdf/b > xxx_HDF.txt (see the section “file names” below to name the list of 
.hdf files). 
This creates a text file containing the list of all HDF files present in the folder you’re working in. 
The lists of binary files are already in the structure, so the hdf2binary.m script can be run now. It calls 
all the conversion scripts, and faparmax.m. 
 
==PAGE:27==
6) and 7) ERA-Interim data 
Temperature and incoming short wave radiation data do not come from a Modis product but from a 
meteorological reanalysis dataset called ERA-Interim. Download from the following page: 
http://apps.ecmwf.int/datasets/data/interim-full-daily/levtype=sfc/ 
Two files need to be downloaded and stored in the folder ‘Root/Data/meteo’, with the following 
parameters: 
Time=12, step=0, 2 metre temperature (2nd column, 1st line). Call this file ERA_t2m.nc 
Time=0, step=12, Surface solar radiation downwards (2nd column, 35th line). Call this file ERA_rad.nc 
Then run ERA2.m 
 
 
ARCHIVE, no longer necessary (except in case of leap years: the defaults files contain only 365 
lines) 
Creating the input/output files list 
This is done with the output_file_generator.m script (or input_file_generator.m) located in ‘Root/Results’. 
 
The names need to be adapted to reflect on what the output is. In this case, we calculate WDI. The script 
creates a text file with 365 different lines, from “WDI1” to “WDI365”. These are the names of the 365 output 
files. For input files, the number of lines depends on the data: 23 lines if they are produced every 16 days, 46 
lines if they are produced every 8 days. 
 
Duplicate file names 
The result of this step is a text file containing 365 (or 366) binary file names. 
This is done with a Linux Terminal. 
Run the following: awk ‘{for(i=0;i<8;i++)print}’ xxx.txt > xxxin.txt 
The figure here (8) depends on the dataset frequency: 8 for data available every 8 days, 16 for data available 
every 16 days. 
The resulting daily file will be the input for the spatial script. 
Attention: the result of the command will be a file longer than 365 lines (because 365 is not divisible by 8). 
Check the file, and delete the unnecessary lines (3 of them, 2 in case of a leap year). 
Tutorial for installing a Linux virtual machine on a Windows computer ] 
 
4. Input data from MODIS 
MODIS product  
Time step  
Variable  
Scripts  
MOD13A2  
16 days  
1 km NDVI  
a  
MOD15A2  
8 days  
1 km fPAR  
b  
  
  
1 km LAI  
c  
MCD43B3  
8 days  
1 km Black/White sky albedo  
d  
MOD/MYD 11A1  
1 day  
1 km Band 31/32 Emissivity  
e, l  
  
  
1 km Daytime land surface temperature  
f, m  
==PAGE:28==
  
  
1 km Nighttime land surface temperature  
h, o  
  
  
1 km Day observation time  
g, n  
MOD/MYD 11A2  
8 days  
1 km Band 31/32 Emissivity  
i, p  
  
  
1 km Daytime land surface temperature  
j, q  
  
  
1 km Nighttime land surface temperature  
k, r  
 
5. File names 
The first level of indentation is the list of .hdf files. The second one consists of the output of hdf_to_binary.m 
scripts. The third level consists of duplicated files, for datasets that are not produced daily. 
 
MOD13A2 (16 days): 
VI_T_HDF.txt 
a 
NDVI_T.txt 
 
 
NDVI_Tin.txt 
 
MOD15A2 (8 days): 
LAIfAPAR_HDF.txt 
b 
fAPAR.txt 
 
 
fAPARin.txt 
-- 
c 
LAI.tx 
 
 
LAIin.txt 
 
MCD43B3 (8 days): 
Albedo_HDF.txt 
d 
Albedo_BSA.txt 
 
 
BSAin.txt 
 
Albedo_WSA.txt 
 
 
WSAin.txt 
 
MOD11A1 (daily): 
MOD11A1_HDF.txt 
e 
Emis31_dT.txt 
 
Emis32_dT.txt 
-- 
f 
Tday_T.txt 
-- 
g 
Tday_timepass_T.txt 
-- 
h 
Tnight_T.txt 
 
MOD11A2 (8 days): 
MOD11A2_HDF.txt 
i 
Emis31_T.txt 
 
 
Emis31_Tin.txt 
 
Emis32_T.txt 
 
 
Emis32_Tin.txt 
-- 
j 
Tday_T.txt 
 
 
Tday_Tin.txt 
-- 
k 
Tnight_T.txt 
 
 
Tnight_Tin.txt 
 
MYD11A1 (daily): 
MYD11A1_HDF.txt 
l 
Emis31_dA.txt 
 
Emis32_dA.txt 
-- 
m 
Tday_A.txt 
-- 
n 
Tday_timepass_A.txt 
-- 
o 
Tnight_A.txt 
 
MYD11A2 (8 days): 
MYD11A2_HDF.txt 
p 
Emis31_A.txt 
 
 
Emis31_Ain.txt 
 
Emis32_A.txt 
 
 
Emis32_Ain.txt 
-- 
q 
Tday_A.txt 
 
 
Tday_Ain.txt 
-- 
r 
Tnight_A.txt 
 
 
Tnight_Ain.txt
 
==PAGE:29==
 
6. Variables and variable types 
Input variables 
 
Output variables 
Variable code 
name 
type 
 
Variable code 
name 
type 
A1 
NDVI 
Int16 
 
B30 
NDVI 
Double 
A2 
fAPAR 
Uint8 
 
B31 
fAPAR 
Double 
A3 
Emis31 daily A 
Uint8 
 
B32 
fc 
double 
A4 
Emis32 daily A 
Uint8 
 
B33 
fg 
Double 
A5 
Emis31 daily T 
Uint8 
 
B34 
fM 
double 
A6 
Emis32 daily T 
Uint8 
 
B35 
fT 
Double 
A7 
Tday A 
Uint16 
 
B36 
Tday A 
Double 
A8 
Tday T 
Uint16 
 
B37 
Long wave in 
Double 
A9 
Timepass A 
Uint8 
 
B38 
Long wave out 
Double 
A10 
Timepass T 
Uint8 
 
(B39) 
Net short wave daily 
Double 
A11 
BSA 
Uint16 
 
B40 
Net short wave instant 
Double 
A12 
WSA 
Uint16 
 
B41 
Net radiation instant 
Double 
(ERA) 
Tair 
Double 
 
B42 
Net radiation daily 
Double 
(ERA) 
Short wave in inst 
Double 
 
B421 
Short wave out 
double 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A13 
LAI 
Uint8 
 
B44 
Net soil radiation 
Double 
A14 
Net radiation daily 
Double 
 
B45 
Net canopy radiation 
Double 
A15 
Fc 
Double 
 
B46 
Etpc 
Double 
A16 
Fg 
Double 
 
B47 
Etps 
Double 
A17 
fT 
Double 
 
B48 
Etp 
Double 
A18 
fM 
Double 
 
B49 
Available energy 
Double 
 
 
 
 
B50 
Canopy latent heat 
double 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A19 
BSA 
Uint16 
 
B51 
ATI 
Double 
A20 
WSA 
Uint16 
 
 
 
 
A21 
Tday T 
Uint16 
 
 
 
 
A22 
Tday A 
Uint16 
 
 
 
 
A23 
Tnight T 
Uint16 
 
 
 
 
A24 
Tnight A 
Uint16 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A25 
ATI 
Double 
 
B52 
fSM ATI 
Double 
A26 
Etps 
Double 
 
B53 
Soil latent heat 
Double 
A27 
Canopy latent heat 
Double 
 
B54 
Latent heat 
Double 
A28 
Available energy 
Double 
 
B55 
Evaporative fraction 
Double 
A29 
Etp 
Double 
 
B56 
Water deficit index 
Double 
T = Terra satellite (MOD) 
A = Aqua satellite (MYD) 
(ERA) = data from the ERA-interim dataset 
Output variables used as input later in the script 
 
 
