==PAGE:1==
Peter Jensen - s090786
Robot Task Control Using Vision
Master’s Thesis, June 2016
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
PETER JENSEN - S090786
Robot Task Control Using Vision
Master’s Thesis, June 2016
Supervisors:
Nils Axel Andersen, Associate Professor at the Electrical Engineering Department of DTU
Ole Ravn, Associate Professor, Head of Automation and control Group, Electrical
Engineering Department of DTU
DTU - Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby - 2016
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Robot Task Control Using Vision
This report was prepared by:
Peter Jensen - s090786
Advisors:
Nils Axel Andersen, Associate Professor at the Electrical Engineering Department of DTU
Ole Ravn, Associate Professor, Head of Automation and control Group, Electrical Engineering Department
of DTU
DTU Electrical Engineering
Automation and Control
Technical University of Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 326
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: +45 4525 3576
Project period:
January 2016- June 2016
ECTS:
35
Education:
MSc
Field:
Electrical Engineering
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
A robot arm that can work side-by-side with a human, in a human optimized environment, can easily be
integrated into every kind of work. In the event of a disaster, the arm could be part of the rescue team, and
lower the risk of human lives and/or human errors.
The aim of this project is to develop a system to control a robot arm using computer vision and force sensor
data. The robot arm should be able to ﬁnd spanners, locate a valve, and use the spanners to turn the valve.
A system was successfully made to track and ﬁnd the position and rotation of a valve. Likewise, a system
was created to ﬁnd and use a spanner. Finally, different methods of controlling a robot arm in the process of
searching for objects of interest, and performing tasks such as picking up a spanner, turning a valve with the
spanner, and putting the spanner back were created as well.
i
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at Automation and Control, department of Electrical Engineering at the Technical
University of Denmark. This thesis was conducted in connection with the completion of the M.Sc. in
Electrical Engineering during the period of January 4th 2016 to June 20th of 2016. It represents 35 ECTS
points and has been supervised by the associate professors Niels Axel Andersen and Ole Ravn.
Besides being part of the completion of the M.Sc. in Electrical Engineering, the purpose of the project was
to develop a system to help solve challenge 2 in the MBZIRC competition, for future participation. The
report is directed toward people further developing the solution for challenge 2, but could also be of interest
for people with a general interest in autonomous robotics.
Peter Jensen - s090786
iii
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
Table of Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
List of Figures
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
MBZIRC
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
The project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Outline of report
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Experiment Design
3
3
Robot Arm
5
4
Computer Vision
7
4.1
The camera . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4.2
Auto-exposure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4.3
Preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.4
Camera calibration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.5
Morphology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.6
Finding the valve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.7
Finding the spanners
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5
Gripper Fitting
21
6
Robot Movements
23
6.1
Position representation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
6.2
No feedback movements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
6.3
Feedback movements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
7
Conclusion
27
8
Future Work
29
8.1
Valve detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
8.2
Spanner detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
v
==PAGE:12==
vi
TABLE OF CONTENTS
8.3
Valve turning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
Bibliography
31
Appendices
1
A The Algorithm
I
B
Calibration
III
C Setup perimeter of workspace
V
D Change Angle Normalization
VII
E
How to use the code
IX
==PAGE:13==
List of Figures
1.1
The dimensions of the board used in MBZIRC challenge 2 (MBZIRC (2016)). . . . . . . . . .
2
2.1
The board that was constructed to demo the software. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
An overview of the equipment used. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
4.1
An example of a dark image with an exposure value of 592. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.2
An example of a perfect image with an exposure value of 839.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.3
An example of a bright image with an exposure value of 1095. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.4
An example of binary morphology opening. Left is original, middle is the morphology ﬁlter
shape, and right is the result. White pixels are ones and black are zeros (Carstensen (2012)).
.
10
4.5
An example of binary morphology closing. Left is original, middle is the morphology ﬁlter
shape, and right is the result. White pixels are ones, black are zeros, and red are the new zeros
(Carstensen (2012)). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4.6
Ilustration of grayscale morpholgy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4.7
Shows the result after a big mean ﬁlter was applied. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.8
Shows the result of subtracting background from original image, and the result of threshold.
.
12
4.9
Shows the process of ﬁrst applying morphology close, and then morphology open. . . . . . . .
12
4.10 The ﬁnal result of the computer vision for valve area detection. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.11 Example of the valve being dark. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.12 Thresholded image of the valve seen a bit from the side. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.13 Image captured directly in front of the valve. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.14 Visual representation of equation 4.1. The value u is the number of pixels from center, f is the
focal length, d is the distance from camera to the object in real world, and r is the horizontal
distance from camera center to the real world object.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.15 Image captured close to the valve in order to better ﬁnd the angle of the valve. . . . . . . . . .
15
4.16 Threshholded image of the valve. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.17 Result of the algorithm to ﬁnd the angle of the valve. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.18 Real image of six spanners captured by the camera. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.19 The two ﬁrst prepossessing steps in order to identify the spanners horizontal position. . . . . .
17
4.20 The next two prepossessing steps in order to identify the spanners horizontal position. . . . . .
17
4.21 The last two prepossessing steps in order to identify the spanners horizontal position. . . . . .
18
4.22 The prepossessing to identify the length of the spanner. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
vii
==PAGE:14==
viii
List of Figures
4.23 The result of the algorithm to ﬁnd the spanners, blue dots, are the expected lengths of the
spanners from 10 mm to 19 mm. Red dots is the chosen ones, and white is the measured length.
19
5.1
Fittings used for the gripper.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
6.1
The plot for a successful detection of the wall. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
6.2
An example of the forces needed to turn the valve. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6.3
Left: the position plot for a 360 degrees turn. Right: Torque forces for a 360 degrees turn. . . .
25
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The development of robots capable of working side by side with humans, or alone in human optimized
areas, is a fascinating subject. In order to more easily integrate robots into such environments, it would
be beneﬁcial for them to know how to use standard human tools, like spanners or screwdrivers. For
example, a human optimized workplace may provide easy access to standard human tools. In such a
workplace, situations could occur that would make it dangerous for humans to enter. Luckily robots can be
used, and if the robots know how to use human tools, they would not have to bring special equipment or
know beforehand what to use. The robot could simply drive in, choose the correct tool, and solve the problem.
Robot arms are very agile, and can be used to solve many tasks. So far, robot arms have mostly been used
in the industry, under highly controlled environments where unknown factors do not usually play a part.
But when deployed in areas where there is less control of the environment, human intervention is usually
required. If robot arms are able to work in less controlled areas without human assistance, it would be
possible to make even more sophisticated autonomous robots.
1.1
MBZIRC
This project is heavily inspired by the Mohamed Bin Zayed International Robotics Challenge (MBZIRC)
Challenge 2. In this challenge an autonomous mobile ground vehicle has the task of ﬁnding a container on
an area approximately the size of a football ﬁeld. The challenge features a container on which a board with a
valve is mounted. There are also 6 spanners of different sizes hung on the board. The challenge is that the
robot should be able to pick up the correct spanner and turn the valve 360 degrees (MBZIRC (2016)).
Requirements
Drawn from the challenge description (MBZIRC (2016)), an image showing the layout of the board and how
the valve and spanners are placed can be found in Figure 1.1. As shown in this image, there is 605 mm from
the valve to the spanner that is furthest away. The ﬁrst requirement is that the robot arm should be able to
reach the last spanner and be able to turn the valve. The second requirement is that in order to turn the valve,
the application of 5 Nm of rotational force is needed. The spanners are of ISO 7738 standard. The largest
spanner of ISO 7738 standard that was available for this project had a weight of 165 grams.
To summarize, the requirements are:
• 605 mm working area. (302.5 mm if the robot is placed in the middle)
• 5 Nm torque in order to turn the valve.
1
==PAGE:16==
2
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
• Lift a spanner with a weight 165 grams.
Figure 1.1: The dimensions of the board used in MBZIRC challenge 2 (MBZIRC (2016)).
1.2
The project
The aim of this project was to solve most of the tasks in the MBZIRC challenge 2, namely the part from
where the robot has found the board. To summarize the tasks were:
• Find the valve.
• Find a matching spanner.
• Pickup the spanner.
• Turn the valve with the spanner.
• Put the spanner back in place.
1.3
Outline of report
Chapter 2: Information about the test setup and the equipment.
Chapter 3: Information about the robot arm and how it was used.
Chapter 4: Information about the computer vision. What methods were used and how were they used. An
explanation of the algorithms to ﬁnd the valve and spanners.
Chapter 5: Information about a special extension to more easily pick up a spanner.
Chapter 6: A description of how the robot moves around, and information about open and closed loop
control.
Chapter 7: Conclusion.
Chapter 8: Future work.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Experiment Design
For this project, a test setup was built. This chapter is about the setup, and the equipment used.
As mentioned in the introduction, this project was heavily inspired by the Mohamed Bin Zayed International
Robotics Challenge Challenge 2. The project starts after the robot has found the board. It is assumed that the
orientation relative to the robot arm base frame is known (for example, via a laser scanner on the robot), and
the approximately position of the valve.
It was straightforward to build a setup similar to that of the challenge, and was done in order to more
easily compare the result with the challenge. In Figure 1.1 the dimensions of the board are shown, and the
completed board can be seen in Figure 2.1. It is not easy to build a board to a precision of less than one
millimeter; however, this randomness makes sure that the program is more robust.
Figure 2.1: The board that was constructed to demo the software.
In this project a Universal Robots model UR5-robot (Universal Robots A/S, Denmark) was used. On the end
effector was mounted a Mini40 Network Force/Torque sensor (AIT Industrial Automation Inc., USA), a
2-ﬁnger adaptive robot gripper (Robitiq, Canada) with a custom ﬁtting to grap the spanners, and a Guppy
3
==PAGE:18==
4
CHAPTER 2. EXPERIMENT DESIGN
GF036C IRF camera (Allied Vision Technologies GmbH, Germany) with a 4mm Pentax manual focus lens
(RICOH IMAGING COMPANY LTD, Japan). This can be seen in Figure 2.2. Everything was controlled
using a Linux machine through an local area Ethernet connection.
(a) The robot setup used.
(b) The force sensor, gripper, gripper ﬁtting and camera used.
Figure 2.2: An overview of the equipment used.
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 3
Robot Arm
This chapter contains a short description about the robot arm, and how it is controlled.
The UR5-robot arm has 6 degrees of freedom. When the arm is fully stretched it has a reach of 0.85 m, and
can lift a maximum of 5 kg. The robot arm can turn each joint at a rotational speed of 180 degrees/sec, and
can move up to 1 m/s around in the tool space. The arm movement has a precision of 0.1 mm (Universal
Robots (2016)). These speciﬁcations were more than enough to meet the requirements for this project.
When working with a robot arm, it is essential to have knowledge of the kinematics of the robot arm in order
to position it. Forward and Inverse kinematics are the processes of calculating the position of the robot end
effector when you know the angle of each joint (forward), and the process of ﬁnding what angles are needed
in order to position the end effector in a speciﬁc position and orientation (inverse).
Even though the UR5-robot has built-in forward and inverse kinematics, it was necessary to provide local
support for them in C++ code, in order to better control the ﬁnal pose of the robot arm. The forward
kinematics were simply made by following the Denavit-Hartenberg method (Spong et al. (2006)). However,
another was available (Hawkins (2013)), which worked perfectly after minor changes in the data structure,
and therefore, not much effort was put into making one, and the solution was chosen.
Inverse kinematics is a bit more tricky; however, using mathematical isolation it is possible to ﬁnd an
algorithm to calculate it. Hawkins also provided the inverse algorithm, and this was used, with minor
changes in the data structure as well.
The inverse kinematics that Hawkins (2013) had created used an analytical method, which returned all 8
possible solutions for the given end effector position. When these solutions were given, it was simply a
matter of choosing the one that you wanted, and sending it to the robot. This was done by choosing the one
that needed the least amount of movements from where the robot arm was already positioned.
As a supplement to the functions Hawkins (2013) had made, a simple extension of the forward kinematics
was created. This extension, instead of returning the position of only the end effector, returned the position
of all joints. When these six joint positions were known, one could set up an perimeter within which the
walls and other obstacles were placed. If any of the solutions had a joint inside one of the obstacles, this
solutions could simply be ignored. This perimeter was changed to ﬁt the setup for the project, however, it
should of course be edited to ﬁt the setup it is supposed to work in. For information about how to change
5
==PAGE:20==
6
CHAPTER 3. ROBOT ARM
this perimeter see Appendix C.
Furthermore, the UR5-robot was designed in such a way that the second-last joint could very easily block its
own path when turning. In order to prevent this, a speciﬁc orientation was needed for this joint. Solutions
that did not have this orientation ware removed as well.
Lastly, in order to communicate with the robot, a driver made by Andersen (2015) was used. This driver made
it easy to connect to the robot and send commands, since it took care of the queuing and other problematics
related to controlling the UR5 robot arm.
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 4
Computer Vision
This chapter discusses information about the camera used, its speciﬁcations, and how it was used. You will
ﬁnd detailed information about the computer vision techniques used, and how detection of the valve and the
spanners worked, as well as information about how good the results were.
4.1
The camera
The Guppy GF036C camera used in the project is an industrial grade, low cost camera. It has a resolution of
640 x 480 pixels at 60 fps. With the available lens, the focal length was found to be around 680 pixels. With
this focal length, it was calculated that a resolution of around 2-3 pixels per mm at 0.3 m distance could
be achieved. These speciﬁcations were considered to be good enough, and were chosen because they were
capable of meeting the speciﬁcations, without costing a lot of money.
4.2
Auto-exposure
When dealing with a system that should be able work in any kind of weather and lighting, it is obvious
to try and get images to look as identical as possible in every kind of situation. The camera that was
used with the version of OpenCV installed (2.7.8) supported manual adjustment of the exposure. When
adjusting the exposure value, one could control how much light would be captured by the camera. A
simple way of making the light level approximately the same would be to control this exposure value. In
order to do that, a simple function was made to return the center of gravity (COG) of the histogram of a
given grayscale image. If an image had a lot of light, the COG would be at the high end (Figure 4.3), and
one would need to turn down the exposure in order to capture less light. Likewise when a low level of
light was captured the COG would be at the low end (Figure 4.1), and therefore a higher exposure was needed.
In order to control this, a separate thread was constructed whose only job was to capture an image and decide
whether to turn the exposure up or down, and to send images to the main thread when needed. A simple
PI controller, with a Kp of 0 and a Ki of 0.5, was created to control this. Furthermore, when asking for
an image, the thread would not return until the given image was close enough to the desired COG, or in
saturation, being at highest or lowest possible exposure.
This method was found to be very efﬁcient, both in very strong light and very low light. In some cases, it did
have some problems though. For example, in sudden bright conditions where there would be a big step from
current COG to desired COG, the regulator could be unstable. Likewise, if the CPU was to slow to handle
the incoming data, there could be a delay from the time the new exposure value was set, to the moment it
7
==PAGE:22==
8
CHAPTER 4. COMPUTER VISION
was actually applied. This also lead to an unstable regulator. Both of these problems can be corrected with a
lower Ki and/or lower frames per second from the camera.
(a) The histogram. It has been normalized to 0 to 255
(b) The captured image
Figure 4.1: An example of a dark image with an exposure value of 592.
(a) The histogram. It has been normalized to 0 to 255
(b) The captured image
Figure 4.2: An example of a perfect image with an exposure value of 839.
(a) The histogram. It has been normalized to 0 to 255
(b) The captured image
Figure 4.3: An example of a bright image with an exposure value of 1095.
==PAGE:23==
4.3. PREPROCESSING
9
4.3
Preprocessing
Since grayscale is less vulnerable to the colour of the light source, the images were converted to grayscale.
Furthermore, the image is normalized in order to increase the probability that the images are identical.
A process where the system would normalize before calculating the COG had been tried, but because
normalisation is such an efﬁcient step, the actual image that was captured could be very dark. The best
solution was found to be using auto-exposure and then normalization.
4.4
Camera calibration
Most cameras experience some kind of image distortion, and if you are going to do measurements on the
resulting images, it is essential to have a good calibration of both the camera matrix, and the camera position.
In this section you can ﬁnd a brief explanation of how that calibration was achieved. This was not an essential
part of the project, however, it is worth mentioning because good calibration is required in order to get the
best results.
Radial distortion
First of all, good calibration of the camera is essential. Different tools, like the Camera Calibration Toolbox
for Matlab, or OpenCV camera calibration, can be used, however, manual steps are usually involved. An
automated process was desired, and since the camera was already mounted on a robot arm, it was easy to
make it move around and take the required images.
Camera position
Once the camera matrix was found, it was time to ﬁgure out the exact position of the camera, on the robot arm.
With known points in space one can easily calculate the missing translation and rotation in order to make it ﬁt.
More about how to use the created calibration tools can be found in Appendix B.
4.5
Morphology
Morphology was used a great deal throughout the computer vision part of this project, and so a short
description of what it is follows.
Binary morphology
Binary morphology is a method to ﬁlter a binary image. Opening and closing are a part of the morphology
functions. These can be simpliﬁed as the process of ﬁling holes (opening) or removing structures that are too
small (closing). As an example in Figure 4.4 one could deﬁne opening as the process of removing black
pixels that do not ﬁt inside the structure B. Likewise, closing can be explained as the process of removing
white pixels that do not ﬁt inside the shape as seen in Figure 4.5.
Grayscale morphology
Grayscale morphology is similar to binary morphology. Opening and closing are also a part of grayscale
morphology, and likewise, are a matter of ﬁlling holes, or removing tops. However, the opening in binary
morphology was used to make black pixels white, whereas opening in grayscale will lower high intensity
==PAGE:24==
10
CHAPTER 4. COMPUTER VISION
Figure 4.4: An example of binary morphology opening. Left is original, middle is the morphology ﬁlter
shape, and right is the result. White pixels are ones and black are zeros (Carstensen (2012)).
Figure 4.5: An example of binary morphology closing. Left is original, middle is the morphology ﬁlter
shape, and right is the result. White pixels are ones, black are zeros, and red are the new zeros (Carstensen
(2012)).
pixels, and vice versa the closing will raise low intensity to a higher level. More precisely, the opening will
cut off the tops in an image, and closing will ﬁll the holes in an image. An example can be seen in Figure
4.6, it is only a representation of a 1 dimensional image for better illustration, but the principal can of course
also work in 2 dimensional images (Carstensen (2012)).
(a) Grayscale morphology opening. Red is the original graph.
Green, blue and black is after morphology opening, with
different size of ﬁlter
(b) Grayscale morphology closing. Red is the original graph.
Green, blue and black is after morphology closing, with
different size of ﬁlter
Figure 4.6: Ilustration of grayscale morpholgy.
==PAGE:25==
4.6. FINDING THE VALVE
11
4.6
Finding the valve
Valve Area
The valve was placed inside a circular area of 8 cm in diameter, that was slightly darker than the board
everything was mounted on, in order to make it easier to ﬁnd. It was initially thought that an easy way to
ﬁnd this area would have been to use the OpenCV function HoughCircles1, which basically looks for circles
that ﬁts some speciﬁcations in an image, however, this was not found to be very consistent, and therefore a
simpler and more robust method was constructed.
First, it was necessary to resize the image, in order to speed up further processing.
Secondly, the valve area was enclosed by a sharp edge on the background. In order to ﬁnd this sharp edge, a
big mean ﬁlter of approximately 50% of the wanted valve area was applied. This gave an image without
sharp edges, which is called the background. Example shown in Figure 4.7(b).
(a) The original image
(b) After the ﬁlter was applied, also called background
Figure 4.7: Shows the result after a big mean ﬁlter was applied.
Thirdly, as seen in Figure 4.8(a), when the background was subtracted from the original image, a new image
called the foreground was created. In the foreground image, a sharp edge would be easy to detect, and a
simple normalization and threshold would reveal any sharp edges in the image. See Figure 4.8(b).
The thresholded image is rarely perfect. The circle itself is not solid, and in the top left corner, the gripper
can be seen. Also in some cases, there might be noise shown as small dots randomly scattered in the image.
In order to remove these, binary morphology open, followed by morphology close, was used. A circular
ﬁlter was used that was 80% of the expected size of the circle. In this way, anything that was smaller than
the ﬁlter would be removed, and anything bigger would be ﬁlled to be completely black. Furthermore the
circular shape would be sharpened and for example, shadows will be cut of. As seen in Figure 4.9 (a) and
(b).
The only thing left was to resize the image back to original size and ﬁnd the circle. The result can be seen in
Figure 4.10.
1OpenCV HoughCircles (2014)
==PAGE:26==
12
CHAPTER 4. COMPUTER VISION
(a) Original image minus smoothed image, also called fore-
ground
(b) Simple threshold of 70% on the smoothed image
Figure 4.8: Shows the result of subtracting background from original image, and the result of threshold.
(a) Morphology close applied to the thresholded image
(b) Morphology open applied to the closed image (ﬁgure a)
Figure 4.9: Shows the process of ﬁrst applying morphology close, and then morphology open.
Figure 4.10: The ﬁnal result of the computer vision for valve area detection.
The algorithm to ﬁnd the valve area worked quite well under the given circumstances. It did however require
that the area of interest was darker that the rest of the wall. To change this, one would only have to invert the
order in which the morphology open and morphology close functions were executed.
==PAGE:27==
4.6. FINDING THE VALVE
13
Valve stem
Later, it was discovered that the valve stem was not placed exactly in the middle of the area, and therefore an
algorithm to ﬁnd the stem was needed. The valve stem was found to be the darkest part of the image, and
since the algorithm to ﬁnd the valve area was created to conﬁrm that it indeed did ﬁnd the valve, it was okay
to simply track the dark area after verifying the valve area. The process of ﬁnding the stem was easy once
the image was normalized, and the threshold to ﬁnd this was simply a constant that did not change much
each time. In Figure 4.11(b) one can see that a little area on the dark side is present, this is the valve that can
be seen here.
(a) Image of the valve, it is clear to see the valve is black
(b) Histogram of image (a), the arrow point at the valve in the
histogram
Figure 4.11: Example of the valve being dark.
With an estimation of how long the valve stem would be, and the knowledge from the kinematics of where
the camera was, it was easy to calculate where the stem would actually be. However, the positional estimate
could potentially be a bit off because of an imperfect focal length, but most notably because the stem itself
was also dark like the tip, meaning that the stem would be part of the estimation, (see Figure 4.12). In order
to improve the position estimate, multiple measurements was made, each moving close and closer to the
center. The ﬁnal estimation would be reached when the camera was directly in front of the valve stem as
seen in Figure 4.13. In this position, the focal length precision did not matter.
Figure 4.12: Thresholded image of the valve seen a bit from the side.
The reason why the focal length did not matter can be explained by the Distance Equation given in 4.1 and
==PAGE:28==
14
CHAPTER 4. COMPUTER VISION
(a) Image captured where the valve stem is not visible, and
the camera center is directly in front of the valve.
(b) The thresholded image of ﬁgure (a)
Figure 4.13: Image captured directly in front of the valve.
Figure 4.14. When the point of interest is converging to the center, and r is moving towards zero, one can
easily see that u also moves to zero. This means that the whole equation will converge to zero as well, and
therefore the focal length, and the distance estimation would not matter.
r
d = u
f
(4.1)
Figure 4.14: Visual representation of equation 4.1. The value u is the number of pixels from center, f is the
focal length, d is the distance from camera to the object in real world, and r is the horizontal distance from
camera center to the real world object.
The algorithm was able to ﬁnd the tip of the valve stem position to a precision within at least ± 2 mm.
However it was found that if the ﬁtting was dark, it was hard to ﬁnd the darkest spot, because the ﬁtting
would equally dark, or even more dark than the valve. To ﬁx this, one could remove the part of the image
where the ﬁtting would be. However a ﬁtting that was not black was made instead.
The rotation of the valve stem
It was found that in the position where the stem is directly in front of the camera, the actual stem was not
visible, and only the tip of the valve stem could be seen. This was perfect, since now we would be able to
actually do more precise measurements.
==PAGE:29==
4.6. FINDING THE VALVE
15
In order to take more precise measurements with higher precision, an image was taken where the camera
was only about 4 cm from the tip of the valve stem, as seen in Figure 4.15. In this position the focus of the
camera was not correct, and therefore the image was very blurry. This meant that it was only possible to
estimate rotation and not the actual size of the valve stem.
Figure 4.15: Image captured close to the valve in order to better ﬁnd the angle of the valve.
A simple threshold was used here as well and as seen in Figure 4.16 it actually gave a decent shape to
calculate on. From here it was simply a matter of ﬁnding the edges. Finding edges in an binary image is
very simple with the OpenCV function Canny2 which returns an image with only edges. At this point the
OpenCV function HoughLines3 could be used to ﬁnd the lines in the edge image as seen in Figure 4.17, and
then after all the angles had been normalized to be between ± 30 degrees, it was simple to calculate the
average angle and to estimate the rotation of the valve stem.
Figure 4.16: Threshholded image of the valve.
The angle estimation was proven to be within ± 1 degree every time. This was considered to be robust. It
was however, still possible to get the wrong measurements if the threshold was wrong. Furthermore, the
algorithm expected to ﬁnd a hexagon. If it at some point should ﬁnd something other than a hexagon, the
angle normalization should not normalize to ± 30 degrees, but rather something that ﬁts better. Etc. if it
2OpenCV Canny (2014)
3OpenCV HoughLines (2014)
==PAGE:30==
16
CHAPTER 4. COMPUTER VISION
Figure 4.17: Result of the algorithm to ﬁnd the angle of the valve.
should ﬁnd a square it should be ± 45 degrees.
4.7
Finding the spanners
Now that the valve had been located, it was time to ﬁnd the spanners. As described in the experimental
design chapter, the spanners had a well deﬁned position relative to the valve. Therefore one could be tempted
to assume that once the valve position was known, the spanner’s position would also be known. But this was
not always the case, because of errors from calibration, computer vision and manufacturing could be present.
However, one could ﬁnd an approximate position and thereby move to a position that would, with high a
degree of certainty, have all spanners visible in the camera frame. It would then be a simple matter of calling
the ﬁnd spanners function in order to ﬁnd them. However, in this step, only one image was captured, because
with the custom gripper ﬁtting, the spanner would fall in place if the robot was a little off, as explained in
chapter Gripper Fitting.
A frame was produced that held all the spanners, as seen in Figure 4.18, and a process of ﬁnding them was
created.
Figure 4.18: Real image of six spanners captured by the camera.
The ﬁrst step was to apply a relatively small mean ﬁlter to smooth it out. Then the minimum value and
==PAGE:31==
4.7. FINDING THE SPANNERS
17
maximum value of each column was found. In each column it can be assumed that there is some background,
and in the columns with the spanner there will be pixels which are very different from the background, no
matter if the spanner is brighter or darker than the background.
The difference between the maximum and the minimum vector was then calculated, and the result was a
graph like the one shown in Figure 4.19(b). This image could sometimes be a little noisy, but some of this
noise was valleys from shifting max-min from glances from the light in the spanners. A small morphology
close ﬁlter was applied in order to remove these valleys and also to smooth things out a bit. It was then
discovered that the tops were not necessarily aligned with the center of the spanner, but rather just somewhere
with a high max-min value. However, the width of the hill was about the same width as the spanner, so in
order to shift the top into the middle of the spanner, a big mean ﬁlter was applied. Two extra steps were
taken to make the tops more visually appealing during testing, as seen in Figure 4.21(a) and 4.21(b). These
two steps were not necessary, since the tops are actually the same, they are just moved down to zero. In order
to actually ﬁnd the tops, one would just have to ﬁnd places with a positive gradient followed by a negative
gradient, the ﬁrst 6 tops were then selected. In Figure 4.19(a) to 4.21(b) the six processing steps can be seen.
(a) Relative big mean ﬁlter applied to the normalized
grayscale image of the spanners.
(b) The max-min of each column in a smoothed, grayscalea
and normalized spanner image.
Figure 4.19: The two ﬁrst prepossessing steps in order to identify the spanners horizontal position.
(a) Morphology close used to remove unwanted valleys.
(b) A big mean ﬁlter applied.
Figure 4.20: The next two prepossessing steps in order to identify the spanners horizontal position.
==PAGE:32==
18
CHAPTER 4. COMPUTER VISION
(a) Grayscale morphology open applied in order to remove
the tops.
(b) Graph e subtracted from graph d, in order to only have the
tops shown, this is also called morphology tophat.
Figure 4.21: The last two prepossessing steps in order to identify the spanners horizontal position.
The competition uses the ISO 7738 standard for spanners. The spanners available for this project had a
length of
0.14 m + 0.010 m · (spannerSize-10), where spannerSize is the bolt size the spanner is capable of turn-
ing. This means that for every millimeter in bolt size, the spanner itself grew 10 mm. This equation
do of course have to be updated to one applicable for the set of spanners in the competition. With this
knowledge, it was decided to identify each spanner by it’s length, instead of the size of the bolt it could handle.
Once the horizontal location of each spanner was found, the lengths were needed. Each spanner image was
then extracted into 6 separate images.
It was again only assumed that the spanner would appear different from the background. As seen in Figure
4.22(b) there was a clear area deﬁning where the spanner was. Just as with the columns, there might be areas
where there is a small valley, these were also removed with a small morphology close ﬁlter. There was still a
lot of noise, but this was easily removed by using the grayscale morphology opening function, where a big
ﬁlter that ﬁts within the size of a 10 mm spanner can be chosen. Finally it was a simple task of thresholding
the normalized graph at 50%, and everything that was high would indicate a spanner.
Finally, once the length of the spanners had been found in the images, the algorithm compared the lengths to
the expected pre-calculated lengths of the spanners at the given distance to the board, and then choose the
one that was closest. The result can be seen in Figure 4.23.
It was shown that the algorithm, in general, worked very well, but of course it did have some limitations.
A big limitation of this algorithm was that if estimation of the distance to the wall was wrong by more than
1 cm, the spanners would be estimated to be the wrong size. A solution for this could be to measure the
distance to the spanners from two known positions on the image, for example, the distance between the
ﬁrst and last spanner, or the average between each. However, the algorithm was not guaranteed to ﬁnd the
center of all spanners, and therefore an incorrect distance could be calculated. The robot could also have
some troubles related to the problem of not ﬁnding the center. While the task of picking up the spanner went
mostly well, it was the process of putting the spanner back that could go wrong, if it where to calculate the
center a bit incorrectly, it might not hit the nail on which the spanner was hanging before. A proven solution
for this was not developed, but a simple one is suggested in the chapter Future Work.
==PAGE:33==
4.7. FINDING THE SPANNERS
19
(a) An example of an extracted spanner image.
(b) The max-min of each row in the spanner image.
(c) Grayscale morphology open applied to the max-min graph,
and then normalized.
(d) Grayscale morphology open applied to the max.min graph,
and then normalized.
Figure 4.22: The prepossessing to identify the length of the spanner.
Figure 4.23: The result of the algorithm to ﬁnd the spanners, blue dots, are the expected lengths of the
spanners from 10 mm to 19 mm. Red dots is the chosen ones, and white is the measured length.
==PAGE:34==
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 5
Gripper Fitting
In order to easily grab the spanners, a special ﬁtting was created for the gripper, see Figure 5.1. This chapter
discusses the special gripper ﬁtting in more detail.
The ﬁtting was constructed in such a way that even if the position was off, the ﬁttings would force the
spanner into place. This was achieved by the use of two special design features.
The ﬁrst design feature is the groove that is carved in one end. This groove is where the spanners are
supposed to ﬁt. It makes sure that the spanner is perpendicular to the gripper ﬁngers; note also, that the
groove was coated with rubber to increase friction. The second special design feature are the two extrusions
and two holes right next to the groove. These are here to guide the spanner into the groove.
The gripper was a very good enhancement to the build. It helped a lot with holding the spanner in place. The
only problem was the fact that there was no friction on the groove. This was solved with the use of rubber
bands, but it was not an ideal solution. Another less important problem was that while this was very good for
spanners, it was hard to ﬁt anything else, and therefore it was only suitable for this task. If one where to
solve another task, this ﬁtting would most likely be replaced to something more suited to that task. Thanks
to the low cost of 3D printers now-a-days, it wold be no problem to create a different one.
(a) Gripper ﬁtting from top
(b) Two gripper ﬁttings placed like in the real setup
Figure 5.1: Fittings used for the gripper.
21
==PAGE:36==
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 6
Robot Movements
All the computer vision for ﬁnding the different points of interest was created, and it was time to solve the
movements. In this chapter information about how the robot is controlled in the different part of the tasks is
explained.
6.1
Position representation
To move the robot around, one needs to deﬁne the desired position and orientation of the end effector of
the robot. Such position and orientation can be deﬁned by using a homogeneous 4x4 matrix as shown in
Equation 6.1, where R is a 3x3 rotation matrix, and T is a 3 dimensional vector with x,y and z translations.
With this kind of notation, it is easy to apply inverse kinematics on the matrix to ﬁnd the angles for the robot
arm.
(6.1)
This kind of matrix can also represent a change from one position to another. For example, the matrix in
Equation 6.2 represents a position on x, y, z = 1, 0, 0 with no rotation. However, it can also be relative to
another frame. Let H be the current position the robot arm is in, and T be the matrix 6.2; then H ∗T would
be a new position 1 meter away from H in the x direction in tool space.
T =


1
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1


(6.2)
This way of moving from one position to another is very powerful and efﬁcient. For example, when the
valve is found, if the board is exactly like the drawing, we would know where each spanner would be simply
be having six predeﬁned matrices that represent where the spanner would be, relative to the valve.
23
==PAGE:38==
24
CHAPTER 6. ROBOT MOVEMENTS
6.2
No feedback movements
A lot of work was put into calibration, and it was therefore interesting to try and see if everything could run
without any feedback.
An initial staring point was deﬁned. The robot then started to search for the valve from this position. When
the valve was found it moved on to the spanners, and found the positions and sizes for them. The position
for the valve and the 6 spanners was saved, and the robot would then blindly move to the location of the
correct spanner, pick it up, move to the valve, and turn 360 degrees. This was proven to worked relatively
well, meaning that under correct conditions it would solve it every time. However, it required very good
calibration, and a very well deﬁned distance of less than ± 1 cm to the wall, otherwise it would easily fail in
the tasks. Therefore it was not as fault tolerant as a solution with some kind of feedback to correct for errors
doing the task completion.
6.3
Feedback movements
Force feedback based pickup spanner
Even though the program worked well without feedback, there where situations where it could go wrong,
therefore feedback was needed. One situation where it could go wrong, was when the robot had to pick up
the spanner. If the distance measurement to the wall was wrong the robot would not get the spanner, even
though the gripper helped a lot. The force sensor was chosen, and was found to be very efﬁcient for this task.
One could simply place the robot in front of the spanner, and move forward until the wall was hit. This was
shown as a spike. Because of the gripper ﬁtting, the robot would have pushed the spanner in place doing the
movement, and it was simply a matter of closing the gripper so that the spanner would be picked up. The
position was then saved in order to know where to put it back after the valve was turned.
When the process of ﬁnding the wall was started, the initial forces were saved as a reference, and when
the magnitude of the forces grew bigger than the desired force, the algorithm would trigger and return the
position. A successful detection is shown in Figure 6.1. The limit in this case was 1 N, but tests have shown
that even lower values could be used.
Figure 6.1: The plot for a successful detection of the wall.
This method of picking up the spanner was proved to be very use full. After this was implemented, there
where little to no errors.
==PAGE:39==
6.3. FEEDBACK MOVEMENTS
25
Force feedback based turn valve
Another situation where things could go wrong was in the process of turning the valve. If the robot arm did
not hit the valve correctly, there was a high chance it would not turn it correctly as well. That is why another
method of turning was necessary. In ﬁgure 6.2, an example can be seen of the forces needed to turn the valve.
The green and red arrow show the forces required for turning, and the blue is to make sure the spanner is
kept attached to the valve. In the solution chosen, a constant rotation (green) speed was applied, and a speed
perpendicular to the spanner (red) was then regulated with respect to the torque applied to the force sensor.
This process did however require that the spanner was on the valve, and therefore a step where the robot
would place the spanner on the valve before turning was created. This was simply done by placing the arm
above, and moving slowly down until the force sensor could feel the valve.
Figure 6.2: An example of the forces needed to turn the valve.
As seen in Figure 6.3, a working solution was not successfully achieved within the time frame of the project.
However, as a proof of concept it showed that it is indeed achievable.
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.3: Left: the position plot for a 360 degrees turn. Right: Torque forces for a 360 degrees turn.
==PAGE:40==
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
This thesis has shown a solution to ﬁnd valve and spanners, and to control a robot arm in the task of turning
a valve using spanners. The problems were split into smaller problems which were solved independently.
Simple computer vision was used via the free library OpenCV in order to help solve the tasks.
An auto-exposure algorithm was successfully created in order to control the light level on the camera.
With this, images could be obtained to make robust detection of the valve and spanners possible. At ﬁrst
an algorithm was created to ﬁnd the base of the valve within an image to ensure that a valve was present.
Then a second more sensitive algorithm was used to locate the stem of the valve. The valve was detected and
position estimated to a precision of ± 2 mm; likewise the rotation of the valve could be found to be within ±
1 degrees of precision.
The system was capable of ﬁnding the spanners, which would be successfully picked up with the correct
preconditions. Alternative methods of adjusting for incorrect preconditions were suggested.
A specially designed ﬁtting for the gripper was designed and 3D printed, and was shown to drastically
improve the performance of the system.
Open loop and closed loop control of the robot was achieved, both to complete the tasks of picking up
the spanner, turning the valve and putting the spanner back in its place. The open loop and closed loop
control activities were completed with either a successful result, or a result that can easily be used in further
development.
27
==PAGE:42==
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 8
Future Work
A lot of time was put into ﬁnding different solutions, however there was not enough time to try them all.
Here are some explanations of the alternative solutions and improvements that could possibly be used to
improve the system.
8.1
Valve detection
One of the requirements was to measure the size of the valve. This was never achieved. The main reason was
because of the equipment available. As the camera was not able to change focus automatically or through a
interface, it was not possible to get a clear picture of the valve to measure its size. It is therefore suggested to
use a camera with such capabilities, or to have two cameras, one with a shorter focus, and one with a longer
focus. In both cases, if the camera with shorter focus was aligned with the gripper, one could use visual
feedback when picking up spanners, or turning the valve, as well.
Another way of measuring this size could be to use the gripper ﬁnger positions, however, it was seen that
this was not precise enough on the available gripper. If a gripper could be found that had a precision of less
that 0.5 mm it could be an option.
One important modiﬁcation is needed because at present, the algorithm to ﬁnd the angle of the valve assumes
that the valve is a hexagonal. The competition might use a different shape, such as a square, and the
normalization of the angles should be changed to be within ± 45 degrees instead. How to change this can be
seen in appendix D
8.2
Spanner detection
First of all, the length of the spanners could not be correctly estimated if the distance to the wall was wrong.
It was discovered that a laser scanner was not necessarily precise enough to ﬁnd the distance to a wall, and
an alternative method was necessary to measure this distance. For example, using the distance between the
spanners at both ends; however, this would required that the algorithm to ﬁnd the spanners was reliably
precise, which was not always the case.
Although the detection of the spanners worked, there was no guarantee that it could ﬁnd the exact position of
them. Especially the spanners at both ends could be off. Two ways to improve this can be suggested. The
ﬁrst would be to take another image of the spanner before picking it up, which would be taken where the
camera was in front of the chosen spanner, and then measured a new middle. However, it is feared that even
in this position, it could go wrong. Another simpler method could be, when closing the gripper to pick it
up, one could measure the forces. If high horizontal force was detected it would most likely be because the
29
==PAGE:44==
30
CHAPTER 8. FUTURE WORK
robot was pulling the spanner at an angle, and the nail the spanner was hanging on was resisting this force,
and therefore preventing the robot from taking the spanner.
8.3
Valve turning
The turning of the valve did not go entirely as expected. Therefore, a better solution should be suggested. It
would be obvious to try and improve the algorithm to turn using the force sensor, however, one could also
consider using a camera. Since the valve and the spanners have some straight line features to detect, it would
be easy to create an algorithm to track and control the turning. It is however quite hard to measure how much
force is applied to the spanner through a camera. Therefore a combination of a camera to attach the spanner
on the valve, and a force sensor to do the actual turning is recommended.
==PAGE:45==
Bibliography
Andersen, T. T.: 2015, Optimizing the universal robots ros driver., Technical report, Technical University of
Denmark, Department of Electrical Engineering.
URL:
http://orbit.dtu.dk/en/publications/optimizing-the-universal-robots-ros-driver(20dde139-7e87-
4552-8658-dbf2cdaab24b).html
Carstensen, J. M.: 2012, Course note in image analysis, 02502, on morphological ﬁltering, DTU informatics.
Hawkins, K.: 2013, ur_kinematics, https://github.com/gt-ros-pkg/cpl/tree/master/
universal_robot_cpl/ur_kinematics. [Online; accessed 1-February-2016].
MBZIRC: 2016, Mohamed Bin Zayed International Robotics Challenge, http://www.mbzirc.com/.
OpenCV Canny:
2014, Canny, http://docs.opencv.org/2.4/modules/imgproc/doc/
feature_detection.html?highlight=canny#canny. [Online; accessed 1-February-2016].
OpenCV
HoughCircles:
2014,
Houghcircles,
http://docs.opencv.org/2.4/
modules/imgproc/doc/feature_detection.html?highlight=houghcircles#
houghcircles. [Online; accessed 1-February-2016].
OpenCV HoughLines: 2014, Houghlines, http://docs.opencv.org/2.4/modules/imgproc/
doc/feature_detection.html?highlight=houghlines#houghlines.
[Online; ac-
cessed 1-February-2016].
Spong, M. W., Hutchinson, S. and Vidyasagar, M.: 2006, Robot modeling and control, John Wiley & Sons.
Universal Robots: 2016, Ur5 technical speciﬁcations, http://www.universal-robots.com/
media/50588/ur5_en.pdf. [Online; accessed 1-February-2016].
31
==PAGE:46==
==PAGE:47==
Appendices
1
==PAGE:48==
==PAGE:49==
APPENDIX A
The Algorithm
Start
move to
initial
valve guess
Look for
valve area
Valve area
found?
Valve in
center of
the image?
Update
valve guess
Move to
new guess
Return false
Move to
spanners
ﬁnd spanner
length
Choose
the correct
spanner
yes
no
no
yes
I
==PAGE:50==
II
APPENDIX A. THE ALGORITHM
Are we
using the
force
sensor?
No
feedback
used
Pick up
spanner
Move
to valve
Turn valve
Return
spanner
Using force
sensor
Move near
spanner
Move towards
spanner until
force feedback
Save
position
Pick up
spanner
Move
near valve
Place spanner
on valve
using force
Turn valve
using force
Return
spanner
no
yes
==PAGE:51==
APPENDIX B
Calibration
All the calibration values should be written in a ﬁle called conﬁg.txt.
First lets calibrate the camera
1. Start the program automated_calibration
This program will look for a checkers board parallel to the robot X,Y axis. After some time it will end and
will eventually give you these:
• Camera Rx
• Camera Ry
• Camera K1
• Camera Focal Length
• Distance from camera to checkers board
The easiest way to get the camera Z distance, is to measure the distance from the checkers board to the robot
end effector, and then subtract the Distance from camera to checkers board.
Save these 5 values in the conﬁg.txt ﬁle.
It might seem that the program is stuck, but be patient it is just really slow. As long as the values in the
console keeps changing it is running. It might however, if the radial distortion is to big, run into a loop, and
you can force it to continue by pressing the Enter button in the window. It will then try and estimate K1 in
the camera matrix, and go back. Eventually it will ﬁnd the correct parameters and exit.
2. Start the program calibCameraRz
This is for ﬁnding the camera Rz value. However, this step is somewhat manual.
When it is running, 2 windows will appear. One named Live and one called Camera; Only the window called
Camera is interesting.
III
==PAGE:52==
IV
APPENDIX B. CALIBRATION
When the window Camera is in focus, you can use the arrow keys to move the camera up or down and
rotate left or right.
The whole idea is then to ﬁnd a horizontal line and align it with the camera so that is becomes horizontal as
well. When you are happy with the result, press enter and it will print out a new camera Rz for you to save.
Save the Rz in the conﬁg.txt ﬁle.
The last step to calibrate the camera is ﬁnd Tx and Ty:
This is done by the program calibCameraPosition. This works by ﬁnding the valve, just as in the project, but
this time from 2 angles and then calculate the error in order to get the actual camera position on the robot,
this step is also automatic, however, for this to work, the values:
distanceToWall , WallZangle , expectedValveHeight , expectedX
has to be supplied. The ﬁrst 2 needs to be quite precise. For that a program called ﬁndWall can ﬁnd the
distanceToWall for you.
3. Start the program ﬁndWall
The program start by closing the gripper. Then the program will move to a ﬁxed position 20 cm above the
expected valve from the calibration ﬁle, and ﬁnally slowly move forward until the wall is hit.
Save the value in the conﬁg.txt ﬁle. Keep in mind that this value is to the end effector, and the distance
needed is to the gripper tip, so remember to add the length of the gripper.
4. start the program calibCameraPosition
Save the values that the program prints.
Calibrate the angle of the force sensor
A small calibration program was created to calibrate the force sensor as well.
5. start the program calibForceRotation
This program will align the gripper in vertical position, and then slowly move downwards until the robot hits
the table. then the spike that is being created by the table, will be used to calibrate the force sensor rotation
relative to the gripper.
==PAGE:53==
APPENDIX C
Setup perimeter of workspace
In the ﬁle ur_kin.cpp there is a function called checkPerimeter. This function deﬁnes the perimeter. change
this to ﬁt your needs.
The function look like this, but can of course be edited to ﬁt any needs.
bool checkPerimeter(std::vector<std::vector<double>>* positions){
double minX = -2.0;
double maxX =
0.6;
double minY = -2.0;
double maxY =
0.25;
double minZ =
0.25;
double maxZ =
2.0;
bool valid = true;
for (int n = 1 ; n < 5 ; n++){
if ( positions->at(0).at(n) < minX ||
positions->at(0).at(n) > maxX ||
positions->at(1).at(n) < minY ||
positions->at(1).at(n) > maxY ||
positions->at(2).at(n) < minZ ||
positions->at(2).at(n) > maxZ )
{
valid = false;
}
}
return valid;
}
V
==PAGE:54==
==PAGE:55==
APPENDIX D
Change Angle Normalization
In the ﬁle FindObject.cpp in the function normalizeAngle the normalization can be found. Change this
function to ﬁt you needs.
double normalizeAngle(double theta){ // theta is radians
while (theta < -30*CV_PI/180) {
theta += 60*CV_PI/180;
}
while (theta >= 30*CV_PI/180) {
theta -= 60*CV_PI/180;
}
return theta
}
VII
==PAGE:56==
==PAGE:57==
APPENDIX E
How to use the code
The code is a simple class to import into your project. An example of how to import can be seen in the
main.cpp ﬁle or in the following piece of code.
#include "Challenge2.h"
int main(int argc, char** argv ){
// define variables
double distanceToWall = 0,572; // E.g. read this from a laser scanner.
double wallZangle = PI/2; // Positive is clockwise
double wallTiltAngle
= 0; // this is usually 0.
double expectedValveHeight = 0.395;
double expectedX = 0.15; // In tool space and Positive is left
// Create a challenge 2 solver.
Challenge2 * solver = new Challenge2();
// Run the solver program
if (solver->solve( distanceToWall ,
wallZangle ,
wallTiltAngle ,
expectedValveHeight ,
expectedX )){
printf("--- Solved ---\n");
}else{
printf("--- Something went wrong ---\n");
}
// Delete the solver and close all the threads it has started.
delete solver;
return 0;
}
IX
