==PAGE:1==
June 25th, 2016
Technical University of Denmark
Master Thesis at DTU Transport
Sustainable Transport
Assessment and Stakeholder
Analysis:
Applying stochastic simulation to comparative
judgements
Thesis supervisors:
Michael Bruhn Barfod & Yannick Cornet
Rasmus Frandsen, s140416
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Preface
The following thesis entitled ”Sustainable Transport Assessment and Stake-
holder Analysis: Applying stochastic simulation to comparative judgements”
concludes my master study at the Department of Transport (DTU Transport)
at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The work with the data and
the writing of the report has been done in the period from February to june
2016, both months included.
The process has been very educational for me. Getting to work with clever
and dedicated people have increased my own dedication to the project and our
discussions and talks have greatly beneﬁted the ﬁnal product. Furthermore
the focused work with this one topic for an extended duration of time has
been a great experience and I have enjoyed the privilege of getting to sink
my teeth into a project like this.
I would like to thank the people who have been there for me during this
process. First of all I would like to thank my supervisors Michael Bruhn Barfod
and Yannick Cornet for great guidance and support throughout the project.
The data provided by Yannick Cornet was paramount for the existence of
this project. I would also like to thank Kim Bang Salling for introducing me
to the project and getting me oﬀto a good start.
Finally I would like to thank my family for the support during the process.
The interest shown by my parents and the understanding of my somewhat
lacking social life the last couple of months have been a great help for me to
be able to ﬁnish the thesis. The support and understanding I have received
from my girlfriend and my brother have also been invaluable.
Frederiksberg C, June 2016
Rasmus Frandsen
i
==PAGE:4==
Summary
The topic of this thesis entitled ”Sustainable Transport Assessment and Stake-
holder Analysis: Applying stochastic simulation to comparative judgements”
is surrogate weights and how they can be improved in order to improve
sustainable transport assessments. The pure cost-beneﬁt analysis (CBA)
approach currently used in Denmark expresses the outcome in monetary
terms, namely the net present value, the beneﬁt-cost rate and the internal
rate of return. Implementing the multi-criteria decision analysis (MCDA)
can help taking into account other impacts that are not as easily quantiﬁable.
The MCDA does however, to a high degree, depend on subjective preferences
stated by the decision-makers. To make the MCDA process more accessible
the use of surrogate weights is introduced. Using surrogate weights enables
the decision-makers and stakeholders to simply rank the criteria, on which
the assessments of the projects/alternatives are based on, and then assign
the chosen surrogate weights. This can be very helpful in situations where
the participants of the assessments are not considered experts or in some way
lack the knowledge to weight the criteria between each other themselves.
The focus of this thesis is to try to improve the current surrogate weights
by use of stochastic simulation on comparative judgements gathered through
structured interviews done by Yannick Cornet in 2015-2016. A lot of time
has been spend on gathering and working with the data behind the results.
During this part of the process a lot of work has been done with setting up
useful calculations and easy to access results. This work helped a lot when
it came to the process of gathering the data for the simulations of the new
surrogate weights and the calculations of results using these new weights.
For the MCDA the simple multi-attribute rating technique exploiting
ranks (SMARTER) method is used. This method uses the ranking of criteria
and assigning of surrogate weights instead of swing weights. Swing weights
require a high level of knowledge which cannot necessarily be assumed for
the respondents of the structured interviews. To assess the alternatives based
on the criteria the multiplicative analytic hierarchy process, also known as
ii
==PAGE:5==
REMBRANDT, is used.
The new surrogate weights are found by use of Monte Carlo simulation,
which is applied on ranked groups of criteria scores. Each respondent have
had their criteria weights ranked and normalized. They are then put into
one or more groups depending on how many criteria they weighted in the
structured interview. The groups are named Top 2, Top 3, Top 4, Top 5, Top
6 and Top 7, and in each groups the respondents top 2-7 criteria are put in
and normalized. Each of the ranks of criteria scores in each of the groups are
ﬁtted to the closest ﬁtting probability distribution using the chi-square test
and simulated by Monte Carlo simulation. This results in the new surrogate
weights. At the end of the report these weights and results found using them
are tested and discussed.
iii
==PAGE:6==
Summary in Danish
Emnet for dette speciale er surrogatvægte, og hvordan de kan forbedres for
p˚a den m˚ade at kunne forbedre bæredygtige transportvurderinger. Den rene
cost-beneﬁt analysis (CBA) tilgang, som bliver brugt i Danmark beskriver
resultatet i monetære termer; net present value, beneﬁt-cost rate og inter-
nal rate of return. Ved at implementere en multi-criteria decision analysis
(MCDA) kan nogle af de eﬀekter, som ikke er nemme at sætte en monetær
værdi p˚a, ogs˚a indg˚a i en samlet vurdering. Metoden bygger dog i høj grad
p˚a subjektive præferencer fra beslutningstagerne. Brugen af surrogatvægte til
at vægte de forskellige kriterier, p˚a hvilke et eller ﬂere projekter kan vurderes,
er med til at gøre MCDA metoden lettere tilgængelig. Her skal responden-
terne blot rangere kriterierne indbyrdes, og s˚a kan surrogatvægtene blive
tildelt. Denne tilgang kan være meget brugbar i situationer, hvor deltagerne
i vurderingen af projekterne ikke har den nødvendige viden og/eller erfaring
til at vurdere kriterierne mellem hinanden.
Fokuspunktet for dette speciale er at forsøge at forbedre de nuværende
surrogatvægte ved hjælp af stokastisk simulering p˚a de komparative vur-
deringer samlet gennem strukturerede interviews udført at Yannick Cornet i
2015-2016. En stor del af arbejdet bag dette speciale er blevet brugt p˚a at
samle og behandle den data, der ligger bag beregningerne og resultaterne.
Denne del af opgaven har i et stort omfang best˚aet i at sætte data brugbart
op med beregninger, der gjorde resultaterne let tilgængelige. Dette arbejde
har hjulpet meget da det blev tid til at samle data til simuleringerne samt
beregningerne af resultater med de nye surrogatvægte.
For MCDAen er metoden simple multi-attribute rating technique exploit-
ing ranks (SMARTER) brugt. Denne metode bruger rangering af kriterier og
tildeling af surrogatvægte i stedet for de s˚akaldte svingvægte. Svingvægte
kræver et højt niveau af viden, hvilket respondenterne af de strukturerede
interviews ikke nødvendigvis kan antages at have. Ved vurdering af alter-
nativerne p˚a basis af kriterierne bruges multiplicative analystic hierarchy
process, ogs˚a kendt som REMBRANDT.
iv
==PAGE:7==
De nye surrogatvægte er fundet ved hjælp af Monte Carlo simulering,
som er udført p˚a rangerede grupper af kriteriescorer. Hver respondent har
f˚aet rangeret og normaliseret sine kriteriescorer. Respondenterne er dernæst,
afhængig af hvor mange kriterier de har valgt under interviewet, blevet sat i
en eller ﬂere grupper. Grupperne hedder Top 2, Top 3, Top 4, Top 5, Top
6 og Top 7, og i hver gruppe ﬁndes respondenternes top 2-7 rangerede og
normaliserede kriterier. Kriteriescorerne for hver rang over alle respondenterne
i hver gruppe ﬁttes efter den bedst passende sandsynlighedsfordeling ved
hjælp af chi-square testen og simuleres ved brug af Monte Carlo simulering.
Dette resulterer i de nye surrogatvægte. Til sidst i rapporten bliver disse nye
vægte, og resultater fundet p˚a baggrund af dem, testet og diskuteret.
v
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Preface
i
Summary
ii
Summary in Danish
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Sustainable transport assessments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem addressed
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Theory
6
2.1
Cost-beneﬁt analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.1
Strength and weaknesses of the CBA . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2
Risk analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Chi-square test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4
Multi-criteria decision analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.4.1
Pairwise comparisons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.4.2
SMARTER
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3
Case and Data generation
28
3.1
Case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2
Cost-beneﬁt analysis on HS2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.3
Data generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4
Results and Discussion
37
4.1
Results of simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2
Results using new weights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.3
Discussion of the weights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5
Conclusion
48
Bibliography
53
vi
==PAGE:9==
Appendix A Cost-beneﬁt analysis of HS2
55
Appendix B Important questions from the questionnaire
57
Appendix C Results of simulation
61
C.1 Normalized results using actual weights . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
C.2 Results using actual weights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
vii
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Sustainable transport assessments
Sustainable assessment of transport projects has, since the emerging of the
concept of sustainability as an international priority in the 1980s and 1990s,
had a growing interest regarding infrastructure sustainability. [6] In the
Brundtland report from 1987 a one-line deﬁnition of sustainability, which has
been quoted a lot since then, was written:
”Sustainable development is development that meets the needs of the present
without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own
needs” [5]
When working with sustainability, there are three dimensions to be con-
sidered, namely:
• Economy
• Society
• Environment
These three dimensions are also referred to as the three pillars of sustainability.
The idea is, that by addressing all three dimensions, this will support a
process towards sustainability. In Figure 1.1 the intersected model of the
three dimensions can be seen. The grey space where all three dimensions
overlap is considered sustainable.
One of the problems, is that the three dimensions do not provide much
guidance on how to prioritize between conﬂicting and interacting impacts,
which can often emerge. Without a way to prioritize between the three
dimensions, what often becomes the case, is that the eﬀects which can be
1
==PAGE:11==
Figure 1.1: The intersected model of the three dimension of sustainability
monetized and/or quantiﬁed, are prioritized (mostly the economical impacts)
while more complex and long term eﬀects are being neglected (societal and
environmental impacts). [18]
Figure 1.2: The nested model of the three dimension of sustainability
The nested model (seen in Figure 1.2), as opposed to the intersected
model, depicts the economical circle nested in the societal circle and those
two circles nested in the environmental circle. This way of looking at the
three circles symbolises the idea that in the long term, harmonious economic
development can only be guaranteed if, ﬁrst, the environmental and societal
2
==PAGE:12==
priorities of public projects are respected. The economical aspect would have
to respect the constraints of the societal and environmental aspects. [14]
However, There are also some problems with the nested model, which can be
seen in the list below. [18]
1. Diﬀerent types of environmental capital are not explicitly considered,
eg. critical, irreversible, non-renewable or renewable.
2. Not all environmental impacts are long term or relevant to keeping
natural systems intact. Not all social or economical impacts are short
term.
3. Limits may still be crossed. There is no explicit ’veto’ in the model.
Gains between dimensions may still be traded.
4. Issues of governance and change process are considered external.
The method proposed in ”Applying sustainability theory to transport in-
frastructure assessment using a multiplicative AHP decision support model”
by Marie Ridley Pryn, Yannick Cornet and Kim Bang Salling [18] (The
SUSTAIN-DSS Model) introduces multi-criteria decision analysis to allow the
systematic inclusion of impacts that are not easily quantiﬁable. In Figure
1.3, the model can be seen. The multiplicative AHP is performed through
pairwise comparison of the alternatives based on the planning criteria. The
ﬁnal results are found using surrogate weights with the environmental dimen-
sion ranked highest, then the societal dimension and ﬁnally the economical
dimension ranked lowest. The focus of this thesis is to attempt to improve
the currently used surrogate weights to give results which better portray the
present preferences of stakeholders and decision-makers.
In recent years the transport area in Denmark has been subject to massive
investments and there is great focus on sustainability, green technology and
modal shift towards active and public transportation as means to reduce
the level of CO2 emissions. Planning for sustainability has become a global
trend and is becoming an integrated focus when assessing new initiatives.
[18] In Denmark, the way a transport project is being appraised is by pure
cost-beneﬁt analysis. It will be explained further in Chapter 2.1, but brieﬂy
described a lot of strategical impacts are not considered using the pure cost-
beneﬁt analysis approach. In order to take the bigger picture into account
an improvement of the approach is needed. This could be by implementing
a multi-criteria decision analysis and use preference analysis and surrogate
weights to determine appropriate criteria and their weights. The alternatives
3
==PAGE:13==
Figure 1.3: Overview of the SUSTAIN-DSS model using nested model priori-
tisation
are then evaluated on the basis of the chosen criteria and their weights. Doing
this could include some of the impacts, which are not included in the cost-
beneﬁt analysis and in the end result in a more informed decision regarding
the sustainability of the transport projects.
1.2
Problem addressed
In Denmark the transport project appraisal is quite conservative. The way
projects are appraised today is somewhat one-sided, using a pure cost-beneﬁt
analysis approach. This approach does not take into account strategical
impacts which can include Wider Economic Impacts (WEI) such as ag-
glomeration. Without these impacts taken into account the appraisal will
not be complete. Without a complete understanding of the impacts of the
implementation of a transport project the decision-makers might end up
supporting the construction of one project when another alternative might
in fact have been better. This might still be the case but the risk of that
happening should be decreased with a more thorough approach. This project
will attempt to improve the ability to appraise transport projects by including
strategical impacts and advanced preference analysis. A stochastic analysis
of a collection of stakeholder responses on which criteria are most important
when appraising transport projects will be used. These responses will be used
in an attempt to make a template with surrogate weights which can be used
on other projects as well to help evaluate the value or attractiveness of said
4
==PAGE:14==
projects in order to make the decision-making process more informed.
This thesis deals with sustainable transport assessments and analysis of
stakeholder preferences. An actual stakeholder analysis is not performed but
the data used is found on the basis of a stakeholder analysis performed by
Yannick Cornet in 2015 and 2016. The goal of this thesis is to apply stochastic
simulation to comparative judgements and look at strategical impacts in an
attempt to make a more complete appraisal of transport projects. It is very
important to consider these aspects, because they can help make a project
that is infeasible, attractive, from a strategic point of view. To make a decision
without considering these strategical impacts would be making a decision
without having considered all aspects/impacts and therefore it can have a
higher risk of turning out to be a bad decision.
The purpose of this thesis is to attempt to determine how experts weight
ranked criteria and attempt to produce predeﬁned surrogate weights, that
can be used in place of extensive preference analysis when assessing transport
projects. Surrogate weights are widely used, for example as seen in Figure 1.3,
but in this thesis it is attempted to update and improve the existing ones by
producing weights based on stochastic simulation of comparative judgements
performed by experts.
5
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Theory
This chapter presents the theory behind the methodologies used in this thesis.
First the ideas behind a cost-beneﬁt analysis is explained, next risk analysis
is introduced and here the theory behind the chi-square test is also described.
Finally the multi-criteria decision analysis, SMARTER and diﬀerent surrogate
weights are introduced and explained.
2.1
Cost-beneﬁt analysis
Cost-Beneﬁt Analysis (CBA) is a method often used to evaluate the ’goodness’
of public investments. It is a comprehensive method, that attempts to place
monetary values on both costs and beneﬁts of a transport project and using
these monetized costs and beneﬁts to determine whether or not the project is
feasible. [20]
The United Kingdom use Web-based Transport Analysis Guidance, also
known as WebTAG. This is the Department for Transports transport appraisal
guidance and toolkit. It consists of software tools and guidance on trans-
port modelling and appraisal methods. Together with the Green Book[13],
WebTAG presents a guide on how to successfully conduct an appraisal of a
public investment. As such making it a lot easier for this kind of process to
be performed and a lot easier to compare diﬀerent investments, since they
are appraised based on the same guidance. [9]
When decision-makers are considering a public investment they want to
maximize the welfare of the society. The welfare of the society is based on the
individuals utilities. Because of this, the values of costs and beneﬁts should
be derived on the basis of individual preferences. The value of beneﬁts should
be the amount of money an individual is willing to pay to obtain the beneﬁts
while the value of costs should be the amount of money an individual is willing
6
==PAGE:16==
to accept as compensation. These two values are called Willingness-To-Pay
(WTP) and Willingness-To-Accept (WTA). Both of the values are diﬃcult
to estimate because answering the question of how much a person would
want to pay to get a beneﬁt is diﬃcult. The stated preference method can
be used to estimate the values. States preference methods use respondents
statements about their preferences in a set of transport options to estimate
utility functions. [15]
The WTP and WTA measures can be illustrated through a demand curve,
which expresses society’s demand for a good as a function of its cost, which is
society’s WTP. Looking at Figure 2.1 where N0 is the demand at cost c0 and
N1 is the demand at cost c1. The area A is the reduction in costs (the beneﬁts)
for the existing travellers when the cost of the good is reduced from c0 to c1
(for example due to reduced travel time). Looking at the N0 + 1th traveller
who, before the reduction in travel time did not travel due to their WTP
being slightly lower than c0. The beneﬁt the N0 + 1th traveller experience is
the vertical distance between c1 and the demand curve. This logic can also be
applied to the N0 + 2, N0 + 3 . . . N1 making area B in Figure 2.1 the beneﬁts
of the new travellers due to the cost reduction.
Figure 2.1: Results of reduction of costs
When the changes in the costs are not too big, the demand curve can be
assumed to be linear between c0 and c1. With this assumption the calculations
for the consumer surplus can be seen in Equation (2.1), which is referred to a
Rule-of-a-Half (RoH). [4]
7
==PAGE:17==
RoH = (c0 −c1) · N0 + 1
2 · (c0 −c1) · (N1 −N0) = 1
2 · (c0 −c1) · (N0 + N1)
(2.1)
Investment criteria
Investment criteria are the main components of the CBA process. In Figure
2.2 an illustration of how the beneﬁts and costs evolves over time can be
seen. The development of costs (Ct) and beneﬁts (Bt) over time are used to
determine the three investment or evaluation criteria, namely Net Present
Value (NPV), Internal Rate of Return (IRR) and Beneﬁt-Cost Rate (BCR).
Figure 2.2: Development of costs (red) and beneﬁts (blue) over time
The following sections will explain the three investment or evaluation
criteria starting with the NPV.
Net present value
When analysing a project, the stream of beneﬁts and costs are aggregated
into a single number, namely the NPV. The NPV indicates the actual size
of proﬁtability and in order for a project to be feasible the following has to
hold true: NPV ≥0. How the NPV is derived can be seen in Equation (2.2)
where T is the calculation period in years, Bt is the beneﬁts in year t, Ct
8
==PAGE:18==
is the costs in year t and r is the discount rate. The discount rate is used
to compare beneﬁts and costs for a project over time making the value of
present and future impacts comparable.
NPV =
T
X
t=0
Bt −Ct
(1 + r)t
(2.2)
Looking at (1+r)t it can be seen that it reduces the amount that is added
to the NPV, the higher the values of r and t are. The actual value of the
discount rate is an expression of the emphasis on beneﬁts in the near future
compared to beneﬁts in a more distant future. In the so-called HEATCO
project the rate is set to 3% for EU assessment projects. [21]
It is necessary to determine a base year for price levels. Once a base year
is decided upon it is important to make sure that all prices are given in that
year. When discounting the prices back inﬂation is not taken into account,
however both average annual growth in trips and in gross domestic product
is taken into account.
The NPV is the most important investment criteria used for public invest-
ment decision, however the IRR and the BCR will also be introduced and
explained in the following two sections. [4]
Internal rate of return
The internal rate of return is determining the rate, i, at which the balance
between beneﬁts and costs will be perfect, namely resulting in a NPV of zero.
In Equation (2.3) the calculations for the IRR can be seen, where T is the
calculation period in years, Bt is the beneﬁts in year t, Ct is the costs in year
t and i is the IRR.
T
X
t=0
Bt −Ct
(1 + i)t = 0
(2.3)
Since the IRR is representing the value that the discount rate must be in
order for the NPV of a project to be zero, a higher IRR is preferred. In order
for a project to be feasible based on the IRR, the discount rate must be lower
than the IRR, basically meaning that the NPV will be above zero. [4]
Beneﬁt-cost rate
The Beneﬁt-Cost Rate (BCR) is an index that divides discounted beneﬁts
per discounted costs. The formula for this index can be seen in Equation
9
==PAGE:19==
(2.4) where T, Bt, Ct and r are all as explained in the previous sections.
BCR =
PT
t=0
Bt
(1+r)t
PT
t=0
Ct
(1+r)t
(2.4)
The BCR must be greater than one, but because the BCR calculates the
discounted beneﬁt per discounted cost, it does not determine the project with
the largest net beneﬁts as is the case with the NPV. As such the BCR is a
useful index to check whether or not a project is feasible, but to decide which
project is most attractive is diﬃcult based solely on the BCR. [4]
Using the NPV as decision criterion suggests that all projects with positive
NPV should be carried out. If there is only a limited ﬁnancial resource and not
all positive projects can be carried out the relative value must be considered
in order to rank the considered projects.
IRR is an eﬀective method to decide whether or not a project is worth
undertaking, however it is diﬃcult to utilize in ranking projects. It is not
unusual that the rankings made by the IRR are inconsistent with the rankings
made by the NPV and the BCR.
For independent projects, the BCR can be used to rank in order of most
cost-beneﬁcial. With a limited budget, projects can be chosen from highest
to lowest BCR until the budget is spent. In cases where the projects are
interdependent, meaning that the BCR of one project depends on whether or
not other projects are also selected a combination of NPV and BCR can be
helpful. [21]
2.1.1
Strength and weaknesses of the CBA
There are some clear strengths of the CBA. A CBA converts all impacts and
eﬀects into an absolute monetary value, which gives the method transparency
since all the complicated impacts are summed into one simple value.
It is a powerful decision support tool because it is a great method for
comparing diﬀerent projects based on their value, beneﬁts and costs.
In order to do a CBA a lot of information collection is required and during
this collection phase greater insight into the possible pros and cons can be
gained.
On the other hand there are also weaknesses of the CBA. When estimating
prices for non-marketed impacts such as travel time savings, emissions etc.
there can be some problems and in practice compromises are often made on
10
==PAGE:20==
the valuation of these kinds of eﬀects. This results in the unit prices having
a subjective nature. By giving this subjective nature to the unit prices it
implies a false transparency for the method.
Some impacts or eﬀects are diﬃcult if not impossible to put a unit price
on. Many environmental impacts fall under this category.
Because of the long evaluation time of a CBA, the fact that the present
generation might not live to experience the impacts of a project means that
they are valuing the impacts on behalf of future generations who might not
value the impacts the same way.
Because a big part of the CBA is based on forecasts, it is associated with a
degree of uncertainty. Furthermore some of the parameters are, as previously
stated diﬃcult to estimate due to them being highly subjective. Because of
these uncertainties it is very relevant to perform a sensitivity analysis when
performing a CBA. This can be done by for example reducing the value of
travel time savings and see how it eﬀects the investment criteria. [4]
2.2
Risk analysis
The main objective of a risk analysis is to establish a rational basis for objective
decision making. It is performed in order to help the decision-makers make
an informed decision and to help them avoid deciding on an investment with
a high risk associated. It is important because without this kind of analysis
a choice of a risky investment can end up being very costly. In this thesis,
Monte Carlo simulation is used in order to determine the surrogate weights
on the basis of the input from structured interviews.
Uncertainties are a big part of working with transport appraisals. For ex-
ample the unit pricing in the CBA is very uncertain. The source of uncertainty
is a combination of lack of knowledge and randomness in the system. Looking
at for example travel time savings, which is by far the largest contributor
of direct beneﬁts from any transport project. These beneﬁts are based on a
set monetary value of time for diﬀerent groups and an assumption that the
amount of trips made will increase by a certain percentage each year. These
two parameters are very uncertain and should always be analysed in order to
take into account the sensitivity to changes. [21]
The risk related to a project can be deﬁned as a function of the hazards,
probability of occurrence and all the related consequences for humans, envi-
ronment and economical values. In order to be able to relate the consequences
to diﬀerent aspects a scale to which the consequences are related is selected,
this being a monetary scale. Equation (2.5) shows how the total expected
11
==PAGE:21==
risk can be formulated.
Risk =
X
All consequences
pi(H, Ci)U(Ci)
(2.5)
Where pi(H, Ci) is the probability of experiencing consequence Ci, H is
the considered hazard and U represents the utility function that relates the
consequences to the same monetary scale. The expected risk is expressed
as expected monetary unit/year. Looking at Equation (2.5) it shows an
important aspect of risk analysis, namely that a risk analysis should identify all
potential hazards and their related consequences, then calculate the probability
of experiencing both the potential hazard and the related consequence. [12]
The formulation might seem simple, but it is in fact quite complicated due to
the problems listed below.
1. The identiﬁcation of all possible hazards. Doing this requires a thorough
understanding of the project, gained by historical experience, knowledge
and intuition.
2. The identiﬁcation of all undesired consequences of the considered haz-
ards, and calculating the probability of the occurrence of the conse-
quences.
3. Deﬁning the utility function that relates the types of consequences to
the same monetary scale. For example assigning monetary values to
human life, injuries, pollution and other environmental damages.
A complete risk analysis is considered to consist of ﬁve steps, namely: [21]
1. Identiﬁcation of the risk that is to be analysed
2. A qualitative description of the problem and the risk - why it might
occur, what you can do to reduce the risk, probability of the occurrence,
etc.
3. A quantitative analysis of the risk and the associated risk management
options there are available to determine or ﬁnd an optimal strategy for
controlling and hereby solving the risk problem
4. Implementing the approved risk management strategy
5. Communicating the decision and its basis to various decision-makers
12
==PAGE:22==
In step 3 a Quantitative Risk Analysis (QRA) is performed. By per-
forming a QRA it is possible to diﬀerentiate the features of risk information
in terms of outcome criteria by probability distributions. To use the QRA
for transport projects, a set of uncertain impacts are deﬁned and the most
descriptive probability distribution functions are determined. Each impact
will be assigned a probability distribution where after the impacts are weighed
together by the probability of occurrence. [21]
The method used in this thesis is a Monte Carlo simulation. A Monte Carlo
simulation is considered stochastic in the context of modelling uncertainty in
transport projects. Stochastic simulation is a method where random numbers
from a particular probability distribution are collected. Each collection of a
random number from the probability distribution is referred to as an iteration
and with ’enough’ iterations the sampled values become distributed in a
manner which approximates the given input distribution. The sampling
process of Monte Carlo simulation can be illustrated in ﬁve steps. [21] The
following steps are based on QRA on a CBA.
1. Probability distributions for signiﬁcant parameters such as travel time
saving, construction cost, maintenance cost etc.
2. Selection at random sets of factors
3. Determine beneﬁt-cost rate for each run
4. Repeat the process to give a clear picture of the feasibility risk
5. Probability distribution as concerns the beneﬁt-cost rate
A very important part of the QRA and Monte Carlo simulation is to deﬁne
suitable distributions to describe the uncertain parameters. [21] In order
to make sure that the distributions are suitable a chi-square test can be
performed. The chi-square test is explained in Chapter 2.3. Some of the most
common distributions are described in the following sections of this chapter.
The uniform distribution
The uniform distribution is a very simple distribution. The probability of
occurrence is the same for all values within the given interval, as can be seen
in Figure 2.3. An example of a uniform distribution can be throwing a fair
dice. There is an equal probability for all possible outcomes. [21]
13
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.3: Uniform distribution within the interval [-1:1] from @RISK
The triangular distribution
The triangular distribution is based on knowledge of the minimum and
maximum values and an inspired guess of the most likely value. It is a very
useful distribution for modelling processes where the relationship between
variables is known, but data is scarce. An enhanced version of the triangular
distribution, namely the trigen distribution, oﬀers the analyst the possibility
to choose a conﬁdence interval, where the upper and lower boundaries can
be exceeded by a predeﬁned percentage. Figure 2.4 illustrates the trigen
distribution with a lower bound of -1, a most likely value of 0, an upper
bound of 3 and open ended boundaries of 5%. [21]
14
==PAGE:24==
Figure 2.4: Trigen distribution with [-1;0;3] and open ended boundaries of
5% from @RISK
The Beta-PERT distribution
The Beta-PERT distribution is useful when modelling expert data. When the
Beta-PERT distribution is used in Monte Carlo simulation it can be used to
identify risks in projects especially based on the resemblance of the triangular
distribution. In Figure 2.5, a comparison between the Beta-PERT and the
triangular distribution can be seen.
Figure 2.5: Beta-PERT distribution compared to a triangular distribution
From Figure 2.5 it can be seen that as with the triangular distribution
the Beta-PERT distribution puts emphasis on the most likely value over the
15
==PAGE:25==
minimum and the maximum estimates. But unlike the triangular distribution
the Beta-PERT distribution creates a smooth curve which puts more emphasis
on the most likely value at the cost of the values around the edges. [21]
The normal distribution
The normal distribution is a family of distributions of the same form, but
varying in their location and scale parameters (mean and standard deviation
respectively). The standard normal distribution can be seen in Figure 2.6 and
has a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one. The normal distribution
is symmetric around the mean and the mean is also both the mode and the
median value. The normal distribution is continuous meaning it is open ended.
This can be a problem when it comes to Monte Carlo simulation because
large negative or positive numbers can be selected. [21]
Figure 2.6: The standard normal distribution from @RISK
2.3
Chi-square test
The chi-square test was initially developed by Karl Pearson in 1900 who
applied it to goodness of ﬁt. Later the Pearson family of chi-square tests has
grown to three test, namely:
16
==PAGE:26==
• Goodness of ﬁt: Used when a sample is compared on a variable of
interest against a population with known parameters.
• Independence: Determine whether two categorical variables in a single
sample are independent from or associated with each other.
• Homogeneity: Used to determine whether two or more independent
samples diﬀer in their distributions on a single variable of interest.
There are often a lot of misinterpretations about chi-square tests because
when most researchers declare they are using chi-square test, they are typically
referring to chi-square test of independence. The lack of speciﬁcation can
result in other researchers interpreting the results as one test, when it is in
fact another that has been conducted. This thesis is using the chi-square
goodness of ﬁt test.
The test score is calculated using the formula shown in Equation (2.6)
where n is the number of elements in the test, Oi is the observed value of
object i and Ei is the expected value of object i.
χ2 =
n
X
i=1
(Oi −Ei)2
Ei
(2.6)
It can be seen that the closer the observed values are to the the expected
values the closer the chi-square goodness of ﬁt test score will be to zero, mean-
ing that a smaller score equals a better ﬁt for the sample on the probability
distribution in question. When the chi-square test score is equal to zero the
null hypotheses has been proved. The null- and corresponding alternative
hypotheses are as follows:
• Null hypotheses: The data follow a speciﬁed probability distribution.
• Alternative hypotheses: The data does not follow the speciﬁed
probability distribution.
The smaller the chi-square test score, the better the data is ﬁtted on the
probability distribution. [10]
2.4
Multi-criteria decision analysis
The Multi-Criteria Decision Analysis (MCDA) is a useful tool to help
decision-makers make an informed decision. Decision-making is the pro-
cess of choosing between alternatives based on several criteria. It can be
17
==PAGE:27==
quite overwhelming to have to consider diﬀerent alternatives based on several
criteria, and this is where the MCDA can be very helpful.
The MCDA is a method that takes opinions on diﬀerent alternatives based
on criteria and combine them into a ﬁnal weighted score of the alternatives.
One of the diﬃcult aspects of the MCDA is to decide which criteria are impor-
tant and which are not, since this is in large parts a very subjective decision.
Decision conference is a method to determine the necessary criteria. In this
method a structured debate between diﬀerent groups of people representing
diﬀerent aspects of the project is set up. The debate will enrich the basis on
which the decision has to be made.
When the set of criteria is built, the scoring of the diﬀerent alterna-
tives can be done by use of diﬀerent MCDA methods depending on the
level of knowledge about the alternatives and criteria. For example Simple
Multi-Attribute Rating Technique (SMART) and swing weights or Simple
Multi-Attribute Rating Technique Exploiting Ranks (SMARTER) and the
multiplicative Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) also known as Rating
Estimation in Magnitudes or deci-Bells to Rate Alternatives which are
Non-DeterminaTed (REMBRANDT). All four methods are explained in the
following sections of this chapter.
In Table 2.1 the diﬀerent user modes and the corresponding methods can
be seen. Table 2.1 is from ”A new composite decision support framework for
strategic and sustainable transport appraisals” by Michael Bruhn Barfod and
Kim Bang Salling. Basic users should use the simplest methods to avoid
misunderstandings regarding the criteria and the alternatives. SMARTER is
used for assigning weights to the criteria since that method only required the
users to rank the criteria in order of importance. For assigning scores to the
alternatives the basic users should use REMBRANDT since this method only
requires the users to do simple pairwise comparison based on the criteria.
Experts users on the other hand are considered capable of performing more
demanding methods. Because of this, the swing weight method can be applied.
The method is explained in Chapter 2.4.2. The swing weights make it possible
to determine the criteria weights with relative high accuracy. For scoring
the alternatives the SMART method should be used if the attributes are
measurable, otherwise REMBRANDT should be used. [3] In this thesis the
methods for the basic user mode are applied because the group of respondents
to the structured interview is consisting of a wide variety of people.
Since MCDA is based on subjective input it will always be a problem that
the results of the method can mirror the individual users preferences. Hence,
it is important to note that the result of a speciﬁc assessment only reﬂects
the preference of the user who performed it, not the overall preference of the
alternatives.
18
==PAGE:28==
Basic user mode
Expert user mode
Criteria weights
SMARTER
Swing weights
Alternative scores
REMBRANDT
SMART/REMBRANDT
Table 2.1: MCDA methods depending on user mode
The MCDA can be put into ﬁve steps which are as follows: [3]
• Step 1: Introduction of the concepts and methods being used at the
decision conference. This makes the decision-makers more comfortable
with the characteristics of the decision support system.
• Step 2: Identify relevant impacts/criteria. It can be a good idea to
have workshops in the planning phase to discuss issues regarding the
project. That way a lot of impacts/criteria will be found and then it is
the job of the decision conference to structure the criteria into a set of
relevant criteria.
• Step 3: Assess the alternatives based on each of the chosen criteria by
use of methods based on the knowledge about the alternatives and the
criteria. See Table 2.1 for when to use the diﬀerent methods.
• Step 4: Rank/weight the criteria depending on which methods are
used. This part can be very diﬃcult because of the diﬀerent perspectives
of the participants in the decision conference. Instead of attempting
to make the participants agree, examine the diﬀerent weight sets or
rankings of the criteria given by the participants.
• Step 5: Validation of the results. If participants are not conﬁdent
about the results it is possible to go back and revise earlier steps of
the process. It is important to document the information about the
assessments and the discussions made at the decision conference for
future review and justiﬁcation.
2.4.1
Pairwise comparisons
Once a set of criteria has been decided upon, the alternatives have to be
assessed by pairwise comparison based on each of the chosen criteria. This
can be done by use of the AHP. The AHP was developed in 1977 by Saaty
and is essentially the formalisation of an intuitive understanding of a complex
problem using a hierarchical structure.
19
==PAGE:29==
Figure 2.7: Example of an attribute hierarchy
The AHP enables the decision-makers to structure an MCDA visually in
form of a so called attribute hierarchy. An attribute hierarchy has at least
three levels, namely the focuc or the overall goal of the project at the top,
multiple criteria that deﬁne alternatives in the middle and ﬁnally the diﬀerent
alternatives to solve the problem at the bottom level. An example using the
HS2 project, a few of the criteria and its alternatives can be seen in Figure 2.7.
To assist in the pairwise comparison a nine-point intensity scale of importance
between two elements is created. The explanation of the values 1, 3, 5, 7, 9
and their reciprocal values can be found in Table 2.2. The remaining value,
namely 2, 4, 6, 8 and their reciprocal values are compromises between their
surrounding values.
The amount of judgements required for a full pairwise comparison of n
alternatives can be seen in Equation (2.7).
Judgements = n · (n −1)
2
(2.7)
Firstly the four criteria (found in Figure 2.7) are compared pairwise in
order to decide upon their relative weightings. In this small example six
pairwise comparisons are required (4·(4−1)
2
= 6). Next the three alternative
are compared pairwise based on each of the four criteria and the comparisons
are put into a pairwise comparison matrix. Such a matrix can be seen in
Table 2.4. [2] The procedure of how to retrieve the weights of each alternative
based on the comparison matrix is explained later in this chapter.
The AHP is however criticised for three main reasons, namely: [22]
1. The fundamental scale to quantify human judgements
20
==PAGE:30==
2. Estimation of scores by the Perron-Frobenius eigenvector
3. Calculation of ﬁnal scores using arithmetic mean aggregation
To overcome these issues, REMBRANDT, which is a multiplicative version
of AHP, was developed in 1992 by Lootsma. To overcome problem 1 and 2,
Lootsma presents a geometric scale which makes the relative judgement more
naturally concave. The geometric scale is derived by use of the transformation
2δ(jk), where δ(jk) is the comparison made by the decision-maker for object
j compared to object k. In Table 2.2 the AHP and REMBRANDT scales
are shown and explained for an example where alternative X is compared to
alternative Y .
In the AHP, arithmetic mean is used to calculate ﬁnal scores. However
using arithmetic mean can result in rank reversal meaning that if three
alternative projects are compared and A1 > A2 > A3 is the ranking of the
ﬁnal scores, introducing a fourth alternative can change the initial ranking of
the ﬁrst three alternatives (for example A2 > A1 > A3 > A4). To overcome
this ’problem’ (problem 3), Lootsma suggests that after the transformation of
the comparisons, the ﬁnal results are derived using the geometric mean. [17]
Description
AHP scale
REMBRANDT scale (δ(jk))
Very strong preference for X over Y
9
8
Strong preference for X over Y
7
6
Deﬁnite preference for X over Y
5
4
Weak preference for X over Y
3
2
Indiﬀerence
1
0
Weak preference for Y over X
1/3
−2
Deﬁnite preference for Y over X
1/5
−4
Strong preference for Y over X
1/7
−6
Very strong preference for Y over X
1/9
−8
Table 2.2: Description of AHP and corresponding REMBRANDT scale
Once all alternatives have been pairwise compared to each other, an assessment
matrix can be set up. Such a matrix can be seen in Table 2.3 for an example
with alternatives X, Y and Z. The diagonal always contains zeroes since an
X
Y
Z
X
0
6
2
Y
−6
0
−4
Z
−2
4
0
Table 2.3
21
==PAGE:31==
alternative is not in any way preferred to itself. It can be seen that there
is a strong preference for X over Y , a weak preference for X over Z and a
deﬁnite preference for Z over Y . In order to make sure, that the assessment
is consistent the Consistency Ratio (CR) is calculated. The calculations are
based on the AHP scales which is why the assessments are translated into
AHP equivalents. Table 2.4 shows the translated assessment matrix.
X
Y
Z
X
1
7
3
Y
1/7
1
1/5
Z
1/3
5
1
Table 2.4: AHP Translated assessment matrix
The next step is to calculate the priority vector (w), which is the normal-
ized principal eigenvector of the matrix. For these calculations an approxima-
tion is used. The approximation works well for small instances (n ≤3) and
it is easy to calculate. First each column of the matrix is normalized, which
can be seen in Table 2.5.
X
Y
Z
X
0.6774
0.5385
0.7143
Y
0.0968
0.0769
0.0476
Z
0.2258
0.3846
0.2381
Table 2.5: Translated assessment matrix with normalized columns
Then the normalized principal eigenvector is found by averaging over the
rows which result in the vector seen in Equation (2.8).
w = 1
3


0.6774 + 0.5385 + 0.7143
0.0968 + 0.0769 + 0.0476
0.2258 + 0.3846 + 0.2381

=


0.6434
0.0738
0.2828


(2.8)
The priority vector (w) shows that X is preferred 8.72 (= 0.6434
0.0738) times to
Y and 2.27 (= 0.6434
0.2828) times to Z. This is how the results using the AHP are
derived. Normally more than one criteria would be considered, which would
lead to the ﬁnal result being the sum of the weighted scores of the alternatives
X, Y and Z based on each criteria. From w the principal eigenvalue (λmax) is
calculated. This value is calculated by summing the products between each
element in w and the sum of the columns in the original assessment matrix
(Table 2.3). This can be seen in Equation (2.9).
22
==PAGE:32==
λmax = 31
21 · 0.6434 + 13 · 0.0738 + 21
5 · 0.2828 = 3.0967
(2.9)
The Consistency Index (CI) is a measure of consistency which is computed
by Equation (2.10), where n is the number of alternatives in the assessment.
CI = λmax −n
n −1
= 3.0967 −3
3 −1
= 0.0484
(2.10)
The ﬁnal step is to calculate the Consistency Ratio (CR) which is found
by comparing the found CI to an appropriate one (Random Consistency
Index (RI)), which is computed by calculating the average CI from a sample
size of 500 matrices of the same size. In Table 2.6 RI values for diﬀerent sizes
of matrices can be seen.
n
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
RI
0
0
0.58
0.9
1.12
1.24
1.32
1.41
1.45
1.49
Table 2.6: Random Consistency Index for diﬀerent sizes of matrices
Equation (2.11) shows the CR by using the appropriate RI. If the CR is
below 10% (referred to as the consistency threshold) the assessment is said
to be consistent. In this case it can be seen that the CR is found to 8.34%
which means that the assessment is consistent. [22]
CR = CI
RI = 0.0484
0.58
= 0.0834 = 8.34% < 10%
(2.11)
In order to make sure that a few individuals do not get too much inﬂuence
on the assessments, a quantity threshold is introduced. The quantity threshold
makes sure that if the alternatives are assessed on a criteria fewer times
than the given quantity threshold, this criteria is not included in the ﬁnal
calculations of the results. For later calculations the quantity threshold will
be set to four. This is done because the collected data is ﬁnite, so using a too
high quantity threshold will exclude too many criteria especially from the
group of environmentally oriented criteria (The criteria groups can be seen
in Table 3.4 in Chapter 3.3). If the quantity threshold is set to six only one
criteria from the environmental group will be included in the calculations for
the ﬁnal results, namely Carbon footprint.
23
==PAGE:33==
2.4.2
SMARTER
SMARTER is an alternative method to SMART, which is a method used to
support decision-makers. SMARTER is the same abbreviation as SMART
but with Exploiting Ranks at the end. The SMART method is based on
a linear additive model, meaning that an overall value of an alternative is
calculated by summing the performance score of each criterion multiplied
with the weight of that criterion. The SMART method includes the following
ﬁve steps: [1]
1. Deﬁne the alternatives and relevant criteria
2. Evaluate each alternative separately on each criterion
3. Assign relative weights to the criteria
4. Aggregate the weights of the criteria and the single-criterion evaluations
of alternatives to obtain an overall evaluation of alternatives
5. Perform sensitivity analysis and make recommendations
Step 3 in SMART is often performed by the use of swing weights. Swing
weights are the comparison of how important a swing from worst to best case
scenario on two diﬀerent criteria is. For example a swing from the worst to
the best case scenario on criteria A can be estimated to be 75% as important
as a swing from worst to best case scenario on criteria B, meaning that a
swing on criteria B is more important than a swing on criteria A for the
decision-maker. A problem with the swing weights is that they can be very
diﬃcult for the decision-makers to assess. In SMARTER the decision-makers
are only asked to rank the criteria from most to least important. SMARTER
then uses surrogate weights to decide how important each criterion is by
assigning approximate weights to the ranked set of criteria. The surrogate
weights can for example be the Rank Order Centroid (ROC) weights. [11]
The formula for calculating the ROC weights can be seen in Equation (2.12).
wi(ROC) =
Pn
j=i 1/j
n
(2.12)
Where wi(ROC) is the weight of the ith ranked criterion and n is the total
number of criteria. The calculations for n = 7 and i = 3 can be seen in
Equation (2.13).
w3 = (1/3 + 1/4 + 1/5 + 1/6 + 1/7)
7
= 0.1561
(2.13)
24
==PAGE:34==
Meaning that the third ranked criterion in a set of seven criteria will have
the ROC weight of 0.1561 (= 15.61%). The ROC weights for ranked criteria
for groups with up to ten criteria can be seen in Table 2.7. [19]
Rank/Criteria
Top 2
Top 3
Top 4
Top 5
Top
Top 7
Top 8
Top 9
Top 10
1
75.00%
61.11%
52.08%
45.67%
40.83%
37.04%
33.97%
31.43%
29.29%
2
25.00%
27, 78%
27.08%
25.67%
24.17%
22.76%
21.47%
20.32%
19.29%
3
11.11%
14.58%
15.67%
15.83%
15.61%
15.22%
14.77%
14.29%
4
6.25%
9.00%
10.28%
10.85%
11.06%
11.06%
10.96%
5
4.00%
6.11%
7.28%
7.93%
8.28%
8.46%
6
2.78%
4.42%
5.43%
6.06%
6.46%
7
2.04%
3.34%
4.21%
4.79%
8
1.56%
2.62%
3.36%
9
1.23%
2.11%
10
1.00%
Table 2.7: Rank Order Centroid weights
It can be seen that as the number of criteria increases the weights of the
least important criteria becomes so low that they have close to no eﬀect on
the result. Next, the Rank Sum and the Rank Order Distribution weights
will be introduced and discussed and it is clear that these weights suﬀer from
the same weakness as the ROC weights when the number of criteria increases.
Another approach to surrogate weights is called Rank Sum (RS) weights. In
this approach the weights are the individual ranks normalized by dividing by
the sum of the ranks.
The calculations for RS weights are shown in Equation (2.14).
wi(RS) = 2(n + 1 −Ri)
n/(n + 1)
, i = 1, . . . , n
(2.14)
Where wi(RS) is the weight of the ith criterion, n is the number of criteria
and Ri is the ith rank. The calculations for n = 7 and i = Ri = 3 can be
seen in Equation (2.15).
w3 = 2(7 + 1 −3)
7/(7 + 1)
= 0.1786
(2.15)
The third ranked criterion in a set of seven criteria will have the weight
of 0.1786 (= 17.89%) using the RS weights. In Table 2.8 the RS weights for
groups with up to 10 criteria can be seen. [19] As with the ROC weights it
can be seen that as the number of criteria increases the weights of the lowest
ranked criteria decreases towards a value where they have close to no eﬀect
25
==PAGE:35==
on the outcome of the calculations.
Rank/Criteria
Top 2
Top 3
Top 4
Top 5
Top 6
Top 7
Top 8
Top 9
Top 10
1
66.67%
50.00%
40.00%
33.33%
28.57%
25.00%
22.22%
20.00%
18.18%
2
33.33%
33.33%
30.00%
26.67%
23.81%
21.43%
19.44%
17.78%
16.36%
3
16.67%
20.00%
20.00%
19.05%
17.86%
16.67%
15.56%
14.55%
4
10.00%
13.33%
14.29%
14.29%
13.89%
13.33%
12.73%
5
6.67%
9.52%
10.71%
11.11%
11.11%
10.91%
6
4.76%
7.14%
8.33%
8.89%
9.09%
7
3.57%
5.56%
6.67%
7.27%
8
2.78%
4.44%
5.45%
9
2.22%
3.64%
10
1.82%
Table 2.8: Rank Sum weights
Another approach found to be a closer approximation is called Rank Order
Distribution (ROD) weights. In Table 2.9 the ROD weights for ranked criteria
in groups up to 10 can be seen. When using a direct rating method the most
important criterion is often given a ’raw’ weight of 100 and the importance
of the other criteria are assigned relative to this benchmark. Assuming that
all criteria have a weight means that the ranges of possible weights will be
0 < w∗
i ≤w∗
i−1 where w∗
i is the ’raw’ weight of criterion i and i ̸= 1. The
uncertainty about the ’true’ weights can be represented by assuming uniform
distribution for them. Empirical evidence that suggest that weights or errors
in the estimation of weights follow a uniform distribution is not known, but
in the absence of other information this assumption is made. [19] A small
problem involving two criteria is considered. It is assumed that w∗
1 = 100 and
because of the uniform assumption it is assumed that w∗
2 = U(0, 100). The
normalized weights are as follows w1 =
100
100+w∗
2 and w2 =
w∗
2
100+w∗
2 so that
E(w1) =
Z 100
0
100
100 + w∗
2
dw∗
2 =
given the assumption of uniformity for w∗
2
= [loge(100 + w∗
2)]100
0
= 0.693
Similarly it can be shown that E(w2) = 0.307. [19] This is a simple exam-
ple of two criteria, when considering more criteria the calculations become
increasingly more tedious, especially compared to the calculations for the
previously introduced surrogate weights.
In Figure 2.8 it can be seen that the RS and the ROD weights are very
similar and since ROD weights are quite diﬃcult to calculate when the number
26
==PAGE:36==
Figure 2.8: Comparison of the three types of surrogate weights with 10 criteria
of criteria increases the RS weights can be used instead for instances with a
high number of criteria. In this thesis however, the number of criteria will
not exceed 10 so the ROD weights will do ﬁne.
Rank/Criteria
Top 2
Top 3
Top 4
Top 5
Top 6
Top 7
Top 8
Top 9
Top 10
1
69.32%
52.32%
41.80%
34.71%
29.66%
25.90%
22.92%
20.58%
18.67%
2
30.68%
32.40%
29.86%
26.86%
24.10%
21.74%
19.77%
18.08%
16.67%
3
15.28%
19.12%
19.55%
18.84%
17.81%
16.72%
15.65%
14.66%
4
9.22%
12.69%
13.87%
14.06%
13.75%
13.32%
12.71%
5
6.19%
9.08%
10.38%
10.84%
10.95%
10.81%
6
4.45%
6.79%
8.05%
8.67%
8.93%
7
3.34%
5.31%
6.44%
7.09%
8
2.63%
4.25%
5.27%
9
2.11%
3.49%
10
1.73%
Table 2.9: Rank Order Distribution weights
From Table 2.9 it can be seen that, as with the ROC and RS weights,
when the number of criteria increases the weights of the lower ranked criteria
becomes insigniﬁcant and would, in practice, probably be removed from the
analysis. [11]
The article ”Weight Approximation in Multi-attribute Decision Models” by
Ron Roberts and Paul Goodwin is published in 2002. The focus of this thesis
is based on the fact that between 2002 and when the data for this thesis
was collected (2015-2016) the way people assign weights might have changed.
Because of this it is important to keep the surrogate weights up to date in
order to take into account the current preferences of the stakeholders and
decision-makers.
27
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 3
Case and Data generation
This chapter contains information about the case and the data generation
and processing. The ﬁrst part will introduce and brieﬂy explain the case
from England while the second part of this chapter will go through a CBA
performed on HS2. Finally the last part will explain how the data was
gathered and how it was processed.
3.1
Case
In February 2011, the discussion about constructing a high speed rail in
Britain began. The proposition included a new line called High Speed 2
(HS2) which would be built between London and the West Midlands and then
be extended in a further phase of work to Manchester, the East Midlands
and Yorkshire (the so called Y-network). The purpose of the new line is to
provide additional capacity on the West Coast Main Line, the Midland Main
Line and the East Coast Main Line by transferring long distance travellers
from existing routes to the new line. Furthermore the new high speed line will
provide signiﬁcant reductions in journey times and improvements in national
and international connectivity. [16] While HS2 has a strong business case,
which can be seen in Chapter 3.2, alternatives was developed to test whether
or not HS2 is indeed the best way to solve the problem. The alternatives
are an upgrade to the West Coast Main Line (WCML) and an alternative
high speed route following the M1 motorway towards Birmingham. The three
alternatives are illustrated in Figure 3.1 and are further explained in the
following three sections of this chapter.
28
==PAGE:38==
Figure 3.1: The three alternatives depicted on a map of the area
High Speed 2
HS2 will be a new high speed line constructed from Euston to north of
Birmingham (221 km), where it will rejoin the existing WCML. This can be
seen in Figure 3.1. Phase 1 is planned to begin construction in 2017 and be
ready to open in 2026.
HS2 is designed with a top speed of 250mph (approximately 400 km/h).
However due to impacts such as but not limited to noise, the plans are to
have service running at up to 225mph (approximately 360 km/h), which is
becoming the standard capability for new high speed trains. The speed will
result in a travel time from London to Birmingham of 49 minutes.
Big parts of the HS2 will be hidden by going through tunnels or cuttings
to reduce visual impacts and noise. However the route does pass through
Chilterns Area of Natural Beauty, which can also be seen in Figure 3.1.
New stations will be built to accommodate 400 meter long trains, which
will each be capable of carrying up to 1,100 passengers which is typical for
high speed trains.
HS2 is a publicly funded project with a total budget in phase 1 of £21.4
billion. [8]
West Coast Main Line
The current train service between London and Birmingham is provided by
the WCML and can be seen in Figure 3.1. This section of the WCML is very
29
==PAGE:39==
busy and this alternative is based on upgrading the existing rail line. The
proposed upgrade is aimed at making WCML more suitable for long distance
travel.
Some of the proposed upgrades include:
• Running longer, 12-car trains for long distance service.
• Reconﬁgure one ﬁrst class carriage to standard class.
• Running additional peak long distance service.
• Running four fast line services to out suburban destinations.
Infrastructure enhancements to support the increase in service level has
been proposed as well.
[16] The upgrades are expected to increase the
maximum train speed to 140mph (approximately 225 km/h), from 125mph
today (approximately 200 km/h). This alternative is obviously a lot cheaper
compared to the other two at an expected cost of £2.5 billion. [8]
M1
This alternative high speed rail route will follow the existing motorway M1. It
will follow the proposed HS2 route from Euston to Old Oak Common, where
it will head due north following M1 and M45/A45 towards Birmingham. This
can be see in Figure 3.1. The route following the M1 corridor is the only
viable route between London and Birmingham that does not cross Chilterns
Area of Natural Beauty. Due to this, the impacts on nationally protected
ecological sites, ancient woodlands and Biodiversity Action Plan habitats will
be lower for this alternative.
Due to the curves of the M1 motorway the trains would be required to
drive at a lower speed, namely 186mph (approximately 300 km/h), which
results in a travel time from London to Birmingham of 55 minutes. This
route is also going through several large populated areas, which means that
big parts of the route will have to go under ground in tunnels, which results
in increased project costs and complexity.
The cost of construction would be about £22 billion, which puts it about
£2 billion more than the proposed HS2 route. [7]
The reason for choosing to work with exactly this case is because of a unique
possibility to work with data collected by Yannick Cornet in 2015 and 2016
by structured interviews of a group of people. To collect this data takes a
lot of time, but because a big part of the data was already collected before
30
==PAGE:40==
the beginning of this project the majority of the time could be spent working
with the collected data rather than actually collecting it.
3.2
Cost-beneﬁt analysis on HS2
A CBA has been performed on HS2 based on the numbers given for the
alternative found in ”The Strategic case of HS2”. [8] In Table 3.1 the input
of the analysis can be seen. In Appendix A images taken from the UNITE
decision support system can be seen. The evaluations period is 60 years, the
prices are given in 2011 prices and the discount ratio is set to 3%. The prices
given in ”The Strategic case of HS2” are given in 2086 prices, therefore the
numbers have been discounted back to 2011, which are the numbers shown in
Table 3.1 (The numbers from the paper can also be found in Appendix A).
Construction cost
Beneﬁts
WEI
Revenues
Construction cost:
e -21.400.000.000
Time savings:
e 315.261.838
Agglomeration:
e 43.972.648
Revenues:
e 240.546.605
Crowding beneﬁts:
e 74.715.233
Imperfect competition:
e 30.833.701
Improved realiability:
e 47.380.392
Increased labour force participation:
e 4.282.459
Car user beneﬁts:
e 10.933.937
Other impacts:
e 7.289.291
Loss to government of indirect tax:
e 22.867.873
Table 3.1: Input for the CBA performed on HS2
After running the CBA for HS2 with the given input the results seen in
Table 3.2 are found (the results sheet from UNITE decision support system
is in Appendix A). It can be seen that the BCR is indeed found to be greater
than one, the IRR is greater than the discount rate (3%) and the NPV is
positive. Considering the three investment criteria it can be said that the
project is feasible. Whether or not that means the project should be chosen
for construction is another question. The CBA is a quite simple method which
cannot take into account strategic impacts. For example, the CBA thinks of
all travel time as time wasted (zero value), however this project is about a
high speed train rail, meaning that passengers can actually work while they
are transported which gives the travel time value. This is an example of how
the CBA is insuﬃcient as a standalone basis for a decision of whether to
proceed with the project or not.
31
==PAGE:41==
Beneﬁt-cost ratio (BCR)
1.72
Internal rate of return (IRR)
5.14%
Net present value (NPV)
mio e 21.510,5
Table 3.2: Investment criteria from the CBA
3.3
Data generation
The data used in this thesis is collected by Yannick Cornet, who has performed
38 structured interviews during 2015 and 2016. Of the 38 interviews ﬁve were
unusable, leaving 33 as data for this thesis. In the interviews, the respondents
are, among other things, asked to choose a set of criteria they think are most
important when it comes to appraising transport projects, weight the chosen
criteria and ﬁnally assess the three alternatives (HS2, WCML and M1) on the
chosen criteria. Due to loops, the printed version of the questionnaire is very
long (approximately 300 pages), which is why only examples of the important
questions are included in this report. A full version of the questionnaire can
be provided on request.
The Questionnaire asks three question, which are important for this thesis.
They will now be explained. Pictures of the three questions can be found in
Appendix B.
The question asking the respondents to choose important criteria can
be seen in Figure B.1. The respondents are asked to select a minimum of
six criteria to assess the projects on. This was however not always the case.
Earlier in the process the number of criteria to be chosen was lower than six.
This is one reason why making simulations on groups of ranked criteria for
more than the top 7 ranked criteria is not possible with the current data.
After having chosen the important criteria, the respondents are asked to
give the criteria weights on a scale from 0 −10 (more than one criterion can
get a score of 10). Each of the criteria are given a weight and the weights are
normalized for each respondent for further calculations. The question asking
the respondent to assign weights to the chosen criteria, and an example of
how the weights can be given, can be seen in Figure B.2.
The ﬁnal question in the questionnaire which is important for this thesis,
asks the respondent to assess the three alternatives pairwise against each
other based on the criteria he/she has chosen. This is done by ﬁrst assessing
HS2 against WCML, then HS2 against M1 and ﬁnally WCML against M1.
For each assessment the respondent is asked to give a score based on the
REMBRANDT scale explained in Chapter 2.4.1. The question as it is asked
in the questionnaire, and an example of how it can be answered, can be seen
32
==PAGE:42==
in Figure B.3.
Table 3.3 shows a list and description of the ten most chosen criteria. These
criteria can be assumed to be the most important ones since they were chosen
the most amount of times by the respondents.
Rank
Criteria
Description
1
Capacity
Rail capacity for passengers
2
WEI
Regional economic development & regeneration
3
Carbon
Carbon footprint
4
Cost
Project costs
5
Accessibility
Accessibility
6
Freight
Rail capacity for freight
7
Integration
Transport integration and connectivity
8
Time
Journey time
9
Land Use
Land use and urban development
10
Reliability
Journey reliability & system resilience
Table 3.3: Top 10 most chosen criteria and descriptions of these criteria
In Table 3.4 a full list of the possible criteria to choose from is shown.
However due to inconsistency in some of the assessments of the alternatives
and the fact that some criteria were chosen by very few respondents, these
criteria are removed from the calculations for the ﬁnal results.
Direct project impacts
(internal costs & beneﬁts)
Indirect societal impacts
(externalities - people)
Environmental impacts
(externalities - planet)
Journey cost & aﬀordability
Accessibility
Agriculture, forestry & soils
Journey experience
Accidents & safety
Air quality
Journey reliability &
system resilience
Community disruptions &
severance; blight
Biodiversity & nature
Journey time
Equity & distributional eﬀects
Carbon footpring
Project costs
Land use & urban development
Material footprint
Project delivery risks
Landscape, townscape &
cultural heritage
Noise & vibration
Rail capacity for freight
Prestige & image
Solid waste & disposal
Rail capacity for passengers
Rail industry growth &
innovation
Water & land contamination
Traﬃc & transport disruptions
Regional economic development &
regeneration
Water resources & ﬂood risk
Transport integrations &
connectivity
Table 3.4: All criteria sorted in groups
Table 3.5 shows which criteria have been chosen and assessed consistently
33
==PAGE:43==
enough times to be included in the calculations. The reason for not including
criteria which have only been chosen a few times is to make sure that no
one respondent will get too much inﬂuence on the weight of a criterion
and the assessment of the alternatives based on that criterion. The quantity
threshold (the number of times a criterion must have been chosen and assessed
consistently in order to be included in the calculations) is set to four. As
shown in Table 3.5, four out of nine criteria in the environmental impacts
group are removed from the calculations with the quantity threshold set to
four, leaving ﬁve criteria for the calculations. If the quantity threshold was
increased to ﬁve or six the number of criteria left in this group would be
reduced to three or one respectively.
Direct project impacts
(internal costs & beneﬁts)
Indirect societal impacts
(externalities - people)
Environmental impacts
(externalities - planet)
Journey cost & aﬀordability
Accessibility
Agriculture, forestry & soils
Journey experience
Accidents & safety
Air quality
Journey reliability &
system resilience
Community disruptions &
severance; blight
Biodiversity & nature
Journey Time
Equity & distributional eﬀects
Carbon footprint
Project costs
Land use & urban development
Material footprint
Project delivery risks
Landscape, townscape &
cultural heritage
Noise & vibration
Rail capacity for freight
Prestige & image
Solid waste & disposal
Rail capacity for passengers
Rail industry growth & innovation
Water & land contamination
Trafﬁc & transport disruptions
Regional economic development &
regeneration
Water resources & ﬂood risk
Transport integration &
connectivity
Table 3.5: All criteria, with removals due to quantity threshold shown
In Tables 3.9, 3.10 and 3.11 the scores of each alternative based on each
of the criteria can be seen. The scores are found by using the geometric
mean of all the assessments on each criteria. These scores are used when
calculating ﬁnal results later in the thesis. In order to get these scores from
the assessments the calculations of the following example are performed on
the actual assessments from the respondents of the structured interviews.
First take a set of pairwise comparisons of the three alternatives which can
be seen in Table 3.6.
HS2
WCML
M1
HS2
0
6
2
WCML
-6
0
-4
M1
-2
4
0
Table 3.6: Initial pairwise comparison of the alternative
34
==PAGE:44==
These comparisons are transformed using the transformation 2δ(jk), where
δ(jk) is the element in the comparison matrix, the comparison made by the
respondents for alternative j compared to alternative k. In Table 3.7 the
transformation of the comparison matrix can be seen.
HS2
WCML
M1
HS2
1
64
4
WCML
0.015625
1
0.0625
M1
0.25
16
1
Table 3.7: Comparison matrix after the transformation
The ﬁnal step is to take the geometric mean of the three rows in order to
get to the scores of the three alternatives. [2] The scores can be seen in Table
3.8
Score
HS2
6.3496
WCML
0.0992
M1
1.5874
Table 3.8: The scores of the three alternatives based on the comparison matrix
These calculations are used for all the assessments to end up with the
scores which can be seen in Tables 3.9, 3.10 and 3.11. These results are the
total scores for each criterion without any weights. The preferred alternative
for each criterion can be seen in green in the three tables.
Direct project impacts
Aﬀordability
Reliability
Time
Costs
Risks
Freight
Capacity
Integration
HS2
0.25
3.82
7.80
0.37
0.31
3.84
3.63
0.72
WCML
8.00
0.08
0.05
6.73
4.00
0.10
0.16
3.62
M1
0.50
3.17
2.39
0.40
0.79
2.52
1.75
0.38
Table 3.9: Overall assessment of alternatives based on criteria in the direct
project impacts group
In Table 3.9 the preferences of the alternatives based on the criteria in the
direct project impacts group can be seen. As it would be expected, criteria
such as aﬀordability, costs, risks and integration favour the upgrade of WCML
since that is a really cheap alternative compared to the other two. The
remaining criteria favours HS2.
35
==PAGE:45==
Indirect societal impacts
Accessibility
Community
Equity
Land use
Landscape
WEI
HS2
0.61
0.30
0.40
0.40
0.19
3.13
WCML
2.43
3.51
4.67
2.65
3.26
0.20
M1
0.68
0.94
0.54
0.95
1.59
1.59
Table 3.10: Overall assessment of alternatives based on criteria in the indirect
societal impacts group
Table 3.10 shows the preference based on the criteria in the indirect
societal impacts. Based on this group of criteria the WCML is quite heavily
favoured all around except for the wider economic impacts criterion which
favours HS2. This is to be expected since the HS2 will lead to a lot of positive
impacts such as, but not limited to agglomeration.
Environmental impacts
Soils
Biodiversity
Carbon
Waste
Water
HS2
0.07
0.06
0.46
0.18
0.52
WCML
20.16
5.79
3.22
14.25
1.59
M1
0.71
3.03
0.67
0.40
1.20
Table 3.11: Overall assessment of alternatives based on criteria in the envi-
ronmental impacts group
Finally Table 3.11 shows the preferences based on the criteria in the
environmental impacts group. In this group, even more so than the indirect
societal impacts group, the WCML upgrade is favoured. This makes perfect
sense since an upgrade of an already existing rail line will cause a lot less
work and therefore reduce the negative impacts on the ﬁve criteria left in this
group.
36
==PAGE:46==
Chapter 4
Results and Discussion
In this chapter, the results from the simulations will be discussed. Furthermore
some of the results using the weights derived from the simulation will be
compared to the results found solely from the structured interviews and the
results using ROD weights. Finally the SUSTAIN-DSS model will be used to
calculate results portraying the idea of the nested model (Chapter 1.1 Figure
1.2).
4.1
Results of simulation
From the structured interviews done by Yannick Cornet the respondents
have all chosen sets of criteria which they believe are important aspects to
appraise transport projects. Those criteria are then weighted on a scale from
1−10. The weights are not relative (meaning for example that more than one
criterion can get a score of 10), however afterwards the criteria weights are
normalized. The criteria weights and alternative assessments were extracted
from the responses and put into an Excel workbook where the assessments of
the alternatives were transformed using 2δ(jk) and the alternative scores were
found by use of the geometric mean, as explained in Chapter 3.3. In Figure 4.1
an example from Excel of the transformation of the alternative assessments to
alternative scores can be seen. HS2:WCML means HS2 compared to WCML,
in this case making WCML the strongly preferred alternative of the two.
The percentage in the green cell above the alternative assessments is the
consistency ratio to make sure that the assessments are consistent. This
feature was also helpful when it came to the exclusion of the assessments,
that did not meet the consistency threshold.
37
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.1: Example of transformation from assessments to scores
The initial simulations used the top 10 most chosen criteria and their
respective weights. These criteria are found and described in Table 3.3. The
10 criteria were put into nine groups, namely top 2, top 3, . . . and top 10. In
each group the appointed weights for each criterion were ﬁtted to appropriate
probability distributions. Then Monte Carlo simulation was performed (one
simulation per criterion per group of 1.000 iteations) to ﬁnd the weights
of each criterion in each group. In Appendix C the exact results of the
simulations can be found, but Table 4.1 shows a more compact version of the
results, using the results found with the chi-square test scores. As explained
in Chapter 2.3 about the chi-square test, the distribution with the chi-square
test score closest to zero is the best ﬁtted distribution for the dataset. When
looking at the results in Table 4.1 it can be seen that the weights in each of
the groups are close to 1
n, where n is the number of criteria in the group. It
is clear to see that a simulation of weights independent of rank (which is the
case here) yields very watered down results. The average of the mean values
of all the criteria on all nine simulation (top 2, top 3, . . . and top 10) is 7.6909
with a standard deviation on 0.9306 which implies that all criteria weights in
all the simulations are very close to the average (The actual simulated weights
can be found in Appendix C.2). That all the criteria are turning out to have
closely the same weights in each of the nine groups is, in hindsight, not very
surprising. Since the 10 criteria chosen for this simulation are all the top
chosen criteria it is to be expected that these criteria are all scored somewhat
high and close to each other, resulting in the distribution of weights seen in
Table 4.1.
38
==PAGE:48==
Rank/Criteria
Top 2
Top 3
Top 4
Top 5
Top 6
Top 7
Top 8
Top 9
Top 10
1 (Capacity)
48.98%
34.06%
24.55%
19.12%
16.83%
14.37%
12.70%
11.34%
10.28%
2 (WEI)
51.02%
35.62%
25.61%
19.96%
17.53%
15.02%
13.28%
11.86%
10.75%
3 (Carbon)
30.33%
21.93%
17.09%
15.01%
12.90%
11.40%
10.17%
9.23%
4 (Costs)
27.91%
21.71%
19.13%
16.34%
14.43%
12.89%
11.70%
5 (Accessibility)
22.11%
19.42%
16.61%
14.67%
13.09%
11.86%
6 (Freight)
12.09%
10.36%
9.17%
8.20%
7.44%
7 (Integration)
14.41%
12.71%
11.35%
10.30%
8 (Time)
11.64%
10.39%
9.46%
9 (Land Use)
10.70%
9.72%
10 (Reliability)
9.26%
Table 4.1: Results from ﬁrst simulation using distributions with best chi-
square test score
To improve the results of the initial simulation another approach was used.
Instead of using the most chosen criteria, each respondent’s scores were
arranged from highest to lowest. This resulted in six groups, namely Top 2,
Top 3, Top 4, Top 5, Top 6 and Top 7. In these groups the respondents’ top
scoring criteria were normalized, ﬁtted and simulated once again. Table 4.2
shows an example of how the data was handled in order to derive the required
criteria sets for the new approach of the simulation. Each row in the table
represents the highest and second highest ranked criterion for a respondent.
Each column of normalized scores are ﬁtted and used for the simulation.
Rank 1
Rank 2
Score
Normalized score
Score
Normalized score
10.0
0.5348
8.7
0.4652
9.4
0.5193
8.7
0.4807
9.8
0.5568
7.8
0.4432
10.0
0.5556
8.0
0.4444
9.8
0.5026
9.7
0.4974
8.8
0.5301
7.8
0.4699
9.8
0.5026
9.7
0.4974
Table 4.2: Example of data generation for the second simulation
Even though these results are from the normalized scores it is still possible
to compare the average mean and the corresponding standard deviation
with the ﬁrst simulation.
In this case the average mean is 0.2225 with
a standard deviation of 0.1061. Comparing that to the average mean and
standard deviation of the ﬁrst simulation (average mean of 7.6909 and standard
deviation 0.9306), it is clear to see that the results here are more spread out
which is a good sign. Once again the distributions with the lowest chi-square
39
==PAGE:49==
value for each criteria in each group is used for the simulation and once again
one simulation for each rank in each group is made with 1.000 iterations.
Figure 4.2: Results of the ﬁrst ﬁve ranked groups
In Figures 4.2 and 4.3 the full results of the simulations using @RISK
can be seen. Top 1(2) refers to the top ranked criteria in the Top 2 group,
Top 2(2) refers to the second ranked criteria in the Top 2 group and so
on. The workbook with the input for the simulations can be handed out on
request. It is clear to see that the weights in the diﬀerent groups are no longer
approximately 1
n, but now represent a more distinctive ranking of the criteria
in each group.
40
==PAGE:50==
Figure 4.3: Results of the last two ranked groups.
A compact version of the results of the second simulation in Figures 4.2
and 4.3 are found in Table 4.3. It can be seen that these result somewhat
resemble the tendencies of the ROD weights. Looking at the ROD weights
in Table 2.9 it shows that with seven criteria the lowest ranked criterion
only gets a weight of 3.34% meaning that this criterion is insigniﬁcant since
even a very high score on this criteria will make close to no diﬀerence for the
assessment of the alternative in question. Comparing the results of this thesis
to the ROD weights it can be seen that the seventh ranked criterion gets the
weight of 8.52% which makes it more than twice as important compared to
the seventh criterion using the ROD weights. The simulated weights have a
tendency of being closer grouped which seems more fair compared to some of
the big jumps between ranks when using other known surrogate weights.
41
==PAGE:51==
Rank/Criteria
Top 2
Top 3
Top 4
Top 5
Top 6
Top 7
1
53.51%
38.12%
30.25%
25.43%
22.27%
20.09%
2
46.49%
33.17%
26.43%
22.23%
19.54%
18.10%
3
28.70%
22.94%
19.60%
17.50%
15.94%
4
20.39%
17.48%
15.94%
14.35%
5
15.27%
14.16%
12.39%
6
10.58%
10.61%
7
8.52%
Table 4.3: Results from second simulation with ranked and normalized criteria
Even though the size of the data is quite small (based on 33 structured
interviews) some clear tendencies can be seen. The fact that more emphasis is
put on the lower ranked criteria and less on the ones ranked higher (compared
to ROD weights) ensures that even though a criterion is ranked low, it still is
able to impact the results.
4.2
Results using new weights
Using the newly found weights and the average assessments of the seven most
important criteria, based upon the amount of times the criteria have been
chosen, a general ﬁnal result of the MCDA is calculated. The equation used
to calculate the ﬁnal score of each scenario can be seen in Equation (4.1).
FinalScorei =
n
Y
j=1
Assessment
CriterionWeightj
ij
(4.1)
Where FinalScorei is the ﬁnal score for alternative i, n is the number of
criteria, Assessmentij is the assessment of alternative i based on criterion
j and CriterionWeightj is the weights of criterion j. [2] In Table 4.4 the
seven most important criteria and their respective weights can be seen. The
description of each of the alternatives can be found in Table 3.3.
42
==PAGE:52==
Rank
Criteria
Weight
1
Capacity
0.2009
2
WEI
0.1810
3
Carbon
0.1594
4
Cost
0.1435
5
Accessibility
0.1239
6
Freight
0.1061
7
Integration
0.0852
Table 4.4: Seven most important criteria and their respective weights
In Table 4.5 the results using the simulated weights compared to the weights
gotten from the respondents and the ROD weights can be seen. In order
to get a useful result, the 10% consistency threshold is relaxed a bit and
increased to 40%, this is due to the fact that 10% would cut oﬀtoo many
assessments. When considering only three alternatives, inconsistency quickly
increases and even an assessment with a consistency rating of about 40%
can be understood. It is worth noting that using all three sets of weights
yield the same ranking of the three alternatives, however using the simulated
weights give a somewhat clearer preference towards HS2 compared to the
results using the respondents own weights. In this case the ROD weights are
actually giving a more clear ranking of the three alternatives. This is because
some of the lower ranked criteria, namely Cost, Accessibility and Integration
all have WCML as the preferred alternative. By using the new simulated
weights, more emphasis is put on the lower ranked criteria which results in
WCML scoring higher compared to the scores found using ROD weights.
New weights
Respondents’ weights
ROD weights
Alternative
Score
Normalized
Score
Normalized
Score
Normalized
HS2
1.2897
42.17%
1.1369
39.73%
1.3980
44.75%
WCML
0.8009
26.18%
0.9128
30.29%
0, 6912
22.13%
M1
0.9681
31.65%
0.9636
31.98%
1.0349
33.13%
Table 4.5: Results using diﬀerent weights
Three diﬀerent proﬁles are set up, namely an economical, a societal and
an environmental proﬁle, in an attempt to represent the three pillars of
sustainability. Each proﬁle has had a set of seven criteria chosen which
combined illustrates the diﬀerences in the three proﬁles points of focus. In
Table 4.6 the three sets of criteria for the three proﬁles can be seen.
The economical proﬁle focuses on the criteria which consider the costs and
economical beneﬁts of a project, this is clearly shown by the high ranking of
43
==PAGE:53==
Rank
Economical
Societal
Environmental
1
Costs
Accessibility
Carbon
2
Accessibility
Land use
Biodiversity
3
WEI
Landscape
Water
4
Capacity
WEI
WEI
5
Freight
Integration
Landscape
6
Integration
Carbon
Accessibility
7
Carbon
Costs
Costs
Table 4.6: Three proﬁles and their respective criteria
Costs, Accessibility and WEI, furthermore Capacity, Freight and Integration
can all have a big eﬀect on the economical outcome of the project which is
why they are also among the seven criteria. Lastly Carbon has been chosen
for the economical proﬁle, this is done because carbon footprint is not just
important for the environment, but can also be a big cost for a project.
The societal proﬁle focuses on how the project will impact the people
in their day to day activity and how it eﬀects the network as a whole.
Accessibility, Land use and Landscape are all ranked high because they all
represent how the project will eﬀect the current network and ﬂow. The ﬁnal
four criteria are chosen because they are generally important criteria in order
to assess a transport project.
Finally the environmental proﬁle is obviously highly focused on criteria
which eﬀect the environment, as such it can be expected that the criteria
Carbon, Biodiversity and Water will all rank high. The lowest ranked crite-
rion is Costs because even though the environmental proﬁle focuses on the
environment it is still important to consider the costs of a project.
The results using the simulated, respondents’ and the ROD weights have
been calculated. In Tables 4.7, 4.8 and 4.9 the results can be seen of the
economical, societal and environmental proﬁle respectively. The consistency
threshold is kept at 40% for these calculations while the quantity threshold is
kept at four. The quantity threshold is set at four because it is necessary to
have several assessments in order to not put too much weight on one persons
opinion. The reason the threshold is set to exactly four is that this amount
makes sure that no one person gets too much inﬂuence and at the same time
enough criteria (especially for the environmental proﬁle) are available for the
calculations of the results.
Once again it is clear that the ranking of the three alternatives does not
change depending on whether the simulated, the respondents’ or the ROD
weights are used, but as with the general results, the simulated and the
44
==PAGE:54==
ROD weights result in a more clear preference of the best ranked alternative.
Furthermore it is worth noting that the only proﬁle that gets the same
preferred alternative, namely HS2, as the general results is the economical
proﬁle. This is due to the fact that many of the criteria in the economical
proﬁle are also included in the general results and in both cases the most
important criteria heavily favours HS2. The similarities between the two
results are as such to be expected.
Economical
New weights
Respondents’ weights
ROD weights
Alternative
Score
Normalized
Score
Normalized
Score
Normalized
HS2
1.1563
38.31%
1.0931
36.35%
1.1198
37.11%
WCML
0.9787
32.42%
0.9852
32.76%
1.0333
34.24%
M1
0.8837
29.27%
0.9286
30.88%
0.8643
28.64%
Table 4.7: Results for economical proﬁle
Societal
New weights
Respondents’ weights
ROD weights
Alternative
Score
Normalized
Score
Normalized
Score
Normalized
HS2
0.5645
15.99%
0.8001
25.62%
0.5590
16.13%
WCML
2.1373
60.54%
1.4757
47.26%
2.0220
58.34%
M1
0.8289
23.48%
0.8470
27.12%
0.8846
25.53%
Table 4.8: Results for societal proﬁle
Environmental
New weights
Respondents’ weights
ROD weights
Alternative
Score
Normalized
Score
Normalized
Score
Normalized
HS2
0.3856
10.21%
0.7547
24.37%
0.3626
9.50%
WCML
2.2251
58.93%
1.3875
44.80%
2.2003
57.66%
M1
1.1654
30.86%
0.9550
30.83%
1.2533
32.84%
Table 4.9: Results for environmental proﬁle
Looking at the SUSTAIN-DSS model introduced in Chapter 1.1 each of
these three proﬁles can be assigned a weight in order to end up with a ﬁnal
result. In the SUSTAIN-DSS model the three proﬁles are ranked according
to the nested model of the sustainability dimensions, namely environmental,
societal and ﬁnally economical in ranked order. Table 4.10 shows the results
of the calculations. Taking the scores for each alternative from each of the
three proﬁles and assigning them their respective weights (38.12%, 33.17%
and 28.70% for the new weights and 52.32%, 32.40% and 15.28% for the
45
==PAGE:55==
Final results
Alternative
New weights
ROD weights
Score
Normalized
Score
Normalized
HS2
0.5998
18.20%
0.4657
14.32%
WCML
1.7344
52.63%
1.9074
55.11%
M1
0.9614
29.17%
1.0578
30.56%
Table 4.10: Final results using the SUSTAIN-DSS model
ROD weights), results in WCML as the big winner. This is not surprising
considering both the societal and environmental proﬁles both heavily favours
that alternative. However one of the weaknesses of the nested model was
that it does not take into account that not all environmental criteria are
irreversible and therefore should not be weighted as high as the irreversible
criteria. Furthermore only Biodiversity, Water and Carbon footprint were
chosen enough times by the respondents to be included in the calculations
and both Water and Biodiversity were only chosen ﬁve times, which suggests
that there could be a substantial amount of subjectivity in those two criteria.
4.3
Discussion of the weights
In Table 4.11 the new simulated weights can be seen with the ROD weights.
There are some clear tendencies when looking at the diﬀerence between the
two sets of surrogate weights. In each of the six groups it can be seen that
the highest ranked criteria are weighted lower with the new weights while
the lowest ranked criteria are weighted higher compared to the ROD weights.
This diﬀerence makes the new weights more compensating when it comes to
the lower ranked criteria.
Rank/Criteria
Top 2
Top 3
Top 4
Top 5
Top 6
Top 7
New
ROD
New
ROD
New
ROD
New
ROD
New
ROD
New
ROD
1
53.51%
69.32%
38.12%
52.32%
30.25%
41.80%
25.43%
34.71%
22.27%
29.66%
20.09%
25.90%
2
46.49%
30.68%
33.17%
32.40%
26.43%
29.86%
22.23%
26.86%
19.54%
24.10%
18.10%
21.74%
3
28.70%
15.28%
22.94%
19.12%
19.60%
19.55%
17.50%
18.84%
15.94%
17.81%
4
20.39%
9.22%
17.48%
12.69%
15.94%
13.87%
14.35%
14.06%
5
15.27%
6.19%
14.16%
9.08%
12.39%
10.38%
6
10.58%
4.43%
10.61%
6.79%
7
8.52%
3.34%
Table 4.11: The new weights compared to the ROD weights
The ROD weights are, as explained in Chapter 2.4.2, based on statistical
calculations, while the new weights are purely based on user input. This
diﬀerence makes the new weights potentially more accurate, but there is also
46
==PAGE:56==
a risk of subjectivity involved since the data pool is quite small (33 usable
interviews). In order to reduce the risk of subjectivity in the weights, more
data is required. With more interviews the risk that just a few people will
have a great inﬂuence on a single criterion greatly decreases.
Surrogate weights are excellent for decision support because they help
simplify a process that would otherwise be quite diﬃcult due to stakeholders’
and decision-makers’ lack of knowledge. The new weights can be used for
decision support exactly like previous surrogate weights are. The beneﬁt
of using the new weights is that they are based on new data (2015-2016)
meaning that these weights take into account the latest trends when it comes
to weighting ranked criteria.
47
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 5
Conclusion
This thesis has worked with the case of High Speed 2 (HS2) in England in
an attempt to determine how experts weight ranked criteria and to produce
predeﬁned surrogate weights. In order to have a case of reference, a cost-
beneﬁt analysis was performed on the HS2 phase 1. HS2 is a new high speed
line which will be constructed from Euston to north of Birmingham where it
will reconnect with the existing west coast main line. The investments criteria
of the analysis can be seen in Table 5.1. This analysis is including the so
called wider economic impacts which includes impacts such as agglomeration.
It can be seen that the HS2 project is indeed feasible from the cost-beneﬁt
perspective.
Beneﬁt-cost ratio (BCR)
1.72
Internal rate of return (IRR)
5.14%
Net present value (NPV)
mio e 21.510,5
Table 5.1: Results from the CBA
Even though the project looks stable two alternatives are presented and
analysed in order to make sure the right project is chosen. The ﬁrst alternatives
is an upgrade of the already existing west coast main line to among other
things run longer cars, reconﬁgure ﬁrst class carriage to standard class and
additional peak long distance service.
The other alternative is another new high speed rail route which will
follow the existing motorway M1. This alternative route is the only viable
route between London and Birmingham that does not cross Chilterns Area
of Natural Beauty, however due to the curves of the M1 the trains would be
required to run at a slower speed increasing the travel time compared to HS2.
48
==PAGE:58==
In order to assess the three alternatives Yannick Cornet has performed 38 (33
usable) structured interviews where respondents are asked, among other things,
to chose sets of criteria which are important to evaluate transport projects,
weight the criteria and assess the three alternative in pairwise comparison
based on each of the chosen criteria. Pictures of the three questions can be
found in Appendix B. By use of the REMBRANDT method the weighted
criteria and the assessments of the alternatives can be used to determine the
preferred alternative for each of the respondents and for all of them combined.
In Table 5.3 the ﬁnal result of the preferred alternative using the respondents
weights and assessments can be seen.
In an attempt to create new surrogate weights the top 10 most chosen
criteria and their respective weights were used to make nine groups, namely
Top 2, Top 3, . . . and Top 10. The weights of the criteria in each group were
ﬁtted to the probability distributions with the smallest chi-square value and
each of them were simulated by Monte Carlo simulation. The result from the
simulation where, however very watered down. The simulation turned out to
give each criterion in each of the groups a weight resembling 1
n, where n is
the amount of criteria in the group. This result is unusable because it fails in
creating any sort of ranking of the criteria in the groups.
To be able to create usable weights another approach was taken. Instead of
using the top 10 most chosen criteria and using their actual scores a new
set of groups were created. This time the groups did not consist of speciﬁc
criteria for all the respondents, but of the criterion each of them had scored
highest, second highest and so on, as shown in Table 4.2 in Chapter 4.1.
Using this approach, the number of groups was reduced to six because too
few respondents had chosen more than seven criteria. The six new groups
consists of a ranked order of criteria with their weights normalized. Using
the new groups and the normalized weights in each group another simulation
was run, again using the probability distributions with the lowest chi-square
value for each of the ranks in each of the groups. This resulted in more
interesting weights. Instead of the watered down weights seen in the results
of the ﬁrst set of simulations, these ranked weights actually showed a ranked
list of weights for the criteria in the six groups. In Table 5.2 the weights from
the second simulation can be seen.
When looking at already existing surrogate weights, such as the ROD weights,
one of the problems is that when the amount of criteria increases the weight
of the lowest ranked criterion becomes very small to the point where they
are almost insigniﬁcant. Comparing the new weights with the ROD weights
it can be seen that the lowest ranked criterion in the Top 7 group for the
new weights has a weight of 8.52% which makes it more than twice as impor-
49
==PAGE:59==
Rank/Criteria
Top 2
Top 3
Top 4
Top 5
Top 6
Top 7
1
53.51%
38.12%
30.25%
25.43%
22.27%
20.09%
2
46.49%
33.17%
26.43%
22.23%
19.54%
18.10%
3
28.70%
22.94%
19.60%
17.50%
15.94%
4
20.39%
17.48%
15.94%
14.35%
5
15.27%
14.16%
12.39%
6
10.58%
10.61%
7
8.52%
Table 5.2: Results from second simulation with ranked and normalized criteria
tant as the lowest ranked criterion in the Top 7 group using ROD weights,
which only has the weight of 3.34%. The new weights seem more fair in
their distribution of weights amongst the criteria in each of the groups. It is
important to remember that the new weights are based on a limited data pool
(33 structured interviews) and weights might change with a bigger data pool.
However, despite the limited data pool some tendencies are clearly visible,
namely that the high ranked criteria are weighted lower and the low ranked
criteria are weighted higher, compared to ROD weights.
By choosing the seven most important (chosen the most times) criteria ﬁnal
results on the preference of the alternatives were calculated. In Table 5.3 the
preferences of the three alternatives using the new weights, the respondents
own weights and ﬁnally the ROD weights can be seen. It is worth noting
that both the new weights and the ROD weights give a clearer picture of
the preference of the alternatives without changing the ﬁnal outcome. In
fact in this case the ROD weights give the clearest picture of the alternative
preference. This is because the new weights put more emphasis on the low
ranked criteria and less on the high ranked, compared to ROD weights. In
this case the high ranked criteria favours HS2 while the low ranked criteria
mostly favours WCML making the results using the new weights less clear
on the preference of HS2. The preferred alternatives are written in green in
Table 5.3.
New weights
Respondents’ weights
ROD weights
Alternative
Score
Normalized
Score
Normalized
Score
Normalized
HS2
1.2897
42.17%
1.1369
39.73%
1.3980
44.75%
WCML
0.8009
26.18%
0.9128
30.29%
0, 6912
22.13%
M1
0.9681
31.65%
0.9636
31.98%
1.0349
33.13%
Table 5.3: Results using diﬀerent weights
50
==PAGE:60==
In an attempt to represent three diﬀerent proﬁles, three sets of criteria where
chosen, one with focus on the economical aspects, one with focus on the
societal aspects and ﬁnally one with focus on the environmental aspects. For
each of the three proﬁles the alternative preferences were calculated using the
new weights, the respondents own weights and the ROD weights. In Tables
5.4, 5.5 and 5.6 the alternative preferences for the three proﬁles can be seen.
Here it is worth noting that the new weights, for all three proﬁles give the
clearest picture of the preference of the alternatives. Again the preferred
alternative for each proﬁle is written in green.
Economical
New weights
Respondents’ weights
ROD weights
Alternative
Score
Normalized
Score
Normalized
Score
Normalized
HS2
1.1563
38.31%
1.0931
36.35%
1.1198
37.11%
WCML
0.9787
32.42%
0.9852
32.76%
1.0333
34.24%
M1
0.8837
29.27%
0.9286
30.88%
0.8643
28.64%
Table 5.4: Results for economical proﬁle
Societal
New weights
Respondents’ weights
ROD weights
Alternative
Score
Normalized
Score
Normalized
Score
Normalized
HS2
0.5645
15.99%
0.8001
25.62%
0.5590
16.13%
WCML
2.1373
60.54%
1.4757
47.26%
2.0220
58.34%
M1
0.8289
23.48%
0.8470
27.12%
0.8846
25.53%
Table 5.5: Results for societal proﬁle
Environmental
New weights
Respondents’ weights
ROD weights
Alternative
Score
Normalized
Score
Normalized
Score
Normalized
HS2
0.3856
10.21%
0.7547
24.37%
0.3626
9.50%
WCML
2.2251
58.93%
1.3875
44.80%
2.2003
57.66%
M1
1.1654
30.86%
0.9550
30.83%
1.2533
32.84%
Table 5.6: Results for environmental proﬁle
In all of the three proﬁles it is clear that the ranking of the preference
of the alternatives does not change no matter which weights are used, but
the clearest preferences are found using the new weights closely followed by
the ROD weights. It is also worth noting that the only proﬁle getting the
same preferred alternative as the general calculations using the seven most
important criteria is the economical proﬁle. This is, however to be expected
51
==PAGE:61==
since many of the criteria included in the economical proﬁle are also included
in the seven most important criteria.
Applying the SUSTAIN-DSS model proposed by Pryn, Cornet and Bang in
”Applying sustainability theory to transport infrastructure assessment using a
multiplicative AHP decision support model” to the three proﬁles, the results
seen in Table 5.7 were found.
Final results
Alternative
New weights
ROD weights
Score
Normalized
Score
Normalized
HS2
0.5998
18.20%
0.4657
14.32%
WCML
1.7344
52.63%
1.9074
55.11%
M1
0.9614
29.17%
1.0578
30.56%
Table 5.7: Final results using the SUSTAIN-DSS model
These results heavily favours WCML which is not surprising considering
both the environmental and the societal proﬁle favours this alternative. Con-
sidering that the following weaknesses of the current state of the model and
the new weights, a decision should not be made solely on the basis of this,
but with other supporting material.
• The SUSTAIN-DSS model does not take into consideration that not
all environmental criteria are irreversible and therefore should not be
weighted as high as the criteria that are
• The fact that for the environmental criteria in the environmental proﬁle
only ﬁve respondents have chosen Water and Biodiversity, leading to
potential subjectivity in the results
All in all the new weights do seem to provide the decision-makers with
a clearer picture of the preference of the alternatives, however in order for
these weights to be usable in cases with more than seven criteria and to
reduce the risk of subjectivity in the weights, more data is required. The
new weights help simplify the method by only requiring simple ranking of
the chosen alternatives and not an actual weight distribution given by the
stakeholders and/or decision-makers. By including these types of analysis
with weights portraying the current trends among people when it comes to
preference analysis, the decision-makers will theoretically be able to make
more sustainable decisions regarding future investments.
52
==PAGE:62==
Bibliography
[1] Michael Bruhn Barfod. Optimising Transport Decision Making using
Customised Decision Models and Decision Conferences. PhD thesis, 2012.
[2] Michael Bruhn Barfod and Steen Leleur. Multi-criteria decision analysis
for use in transport decision making. 2014.
[3] Michael Bruhn Barfod and Kim Bang Salling. A new composite decision
support framework for strategic and sustainable transport appraisals.
Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice, 72:1–15, 2015.
[4] S. Barfod, M., Leleur. Socio-economic analysis in the transport sector.
DTU Transport Compendium Series part 1, (January):1–60, 2013.
[5] Gro H. Brundtland. Our Common Future: Report of the World Commis-
sion on Environment and Development. Medicine, Conﬂict and Survival,
4(1):300, 1987.
[6] P.C. Bueno, J.M. Vassallo, and K. Cheung. Sustainability Assessment
of Transport Infrastructure Projects: A Review of Existing Tools and
Methods. Transport Reviews, 35(5):622–649, 2015.
[7] Department for Transport. Review of HS2 London to West Midlands
Route Selection and Speed - A report to Government by HS2 Ltd.
(January), 2012.
[8] Department for Transport. The Strategic Case for HS2. (October):153,
2013.
[9] Department for Transport. Transport Analysis Guidance An Overview
of Transport Appraisal. Lustre, 2014.
[10] T. M. Franke, T. Ho, and C. A. Christie. The Chi-Square Test: Often
Used and More Often Misinterpreted. American Journal of Evaluation,
33(3):448–458, 2011.
53
==PAGE:63==
[11] P Goodwin and G Wright. Decision Analysis for Management Judgement.
John Wiley & Sons, 2009.
[12] Thomas Friis Hansen. Risk Analysis of Marine Structures. 1998.
[13] HM Treasury. The Green Book : Appraisal and Evaluation in Central
Government. Evaluation, (October 2002):118, 2003.
[14] Robert Joumard and Jean-Pierre Nicolas. Transport project assessment
methodology within the framework of sustainable development. Ecological
Indicators, 10(2):136–142, 2010.
[15] Eric P Kroes and Robert J Sheldon. Stated preference methods, an
introduction, 1988.
[16] Network Rail. Review of Strategic Alternatives to High Speed Two.
(November), 2011.
[17] David L. Olson, Gene Fliedner, and Karen Currie. Comparison of the
REMBRANDT system with analytic hierarchy process. European Journal
of Operational Research, 82(3):522–539, 1995.
[18] Marie Ridley Pryn, Yannick Cornet, and Kim Bang Salling. Applying
sustainability theory to transport infrastructure assessment using a
multiplicative ahp decision support model. Transport, 30(3):330–341,
2015.
[19] R. Roberts and P. Goodwin. Weight approximations in multiattribute de-
cision models. Journal of Multi-Criteria Decision Analysis, 303(June):291–
303, 2002.
[20] R Robinson.
Cost-beneﬁt analysis.
BMJ (Clinical research ed.),
307(6909):924–926, 1993.
[21] Kim Bang Salling. Assessment of Transport Projects - Risk Analysis
and Decision Support. page 242, 2008.
[22] Karmi Teknomo. Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) Tutorial. 2014.
54
==PAGE:64==
Appendix A
Cost-beneﬁt analysis of HS2
Figure A.1: Input for the CBA performed on HS2
55
==PAGE:65==
Figure A.2: Input for the CBA performed on HS2
Figure A.3: Input from the paper ”The Strategic Case of HS2”
56
==PAGE:66==
Appendix B
Important questions from the
questionnaire
57
==PAGE:67==
Figure B.1: Question 3: Criteria selection
58
==PAGE:68==
Figure B.2: Question 4: Criteria weights
59
==PAGE:69==
Figure B.3: Question 5: Assessment of project options
60
==PAGE:70==
Appendix C
Results of simulation
C.1
Normalized results using actual weights
These are the normalized results of the simulations using the top 10 most
chosen criteria and their actual weights given by the respondents.
61
==PAGE:71==
62
==PAGE:72==
C.2
Results using actual weights
These are the actual weights found by the simulation using the top 10 most
chosen criteria and the weights given by the respondents, but in this case
they are normalized.
63
==PAGE:73==
64
==PAGE:74==
65
==PAGE:75==
66
