==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
Benedikt Minge 
Daniel Seybold  
Optimal operation of a pump-storage 
plant in the German 15-min intraday 
power market 
 
Master’s Thesis, June 2016   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
 
Authors: 
Benedikt Minge 
Daniel Seybold 
Supervisors: 
Peter Bauer-Gottwein 
Claus Davidsen 
Dominik Godde 
 
 
Optimal operation of a pump-
storage plant in the German 
15-min intraday power market  
Master’s Thesis, June 2016  
 
 
 
Department of Environmental Engineering 
Technical University of Denmark 
Bygningstorvet 
Bygning 115 
2800 Kgs. Lyngby  
 
www.env.dtu.dk 
Tel: (+45) 45 25 16 00 
Fax: (+45) 45 93 28 50 
E-mail: info@env.dtu.dk 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
 
2 
PREFACE 
The work presented in this Master’s Thesis was conducted at the Department of 
Environmental Engineering of the Technical University of Denmark (DTU), from 
January 25th to 2016 June 25th 2016. Associate Professor was Dr. Peter Bauer-Gottwein. 
Dr. Dominik Godde from the Chair of Hydraulic and Water Resource Engineering at the 
Technical University of Munich (TUM) and Claus Davidsen from the Department of 
Environmental Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark acted as co-
supervisors.  
 
The realization of the thesis was a result of a team effort of both authors. Benedikt 
Minge had his focus on the market analysis and the optimization of design. He 
introduced into the topic on basis of a detailed literature research. Daniel Seybold’s 
personal contribution focused on the optimization of operation and the implementation 
of the dynamic programming models. He drew the conclusions as final statements. 
 
A special thanks goes to our supervisors at DTU Peter Bauer-Gottwein and Claus 
Davidsen who were always a great source of inspiration and provided us with assistance 
whenever needed. We also would like to thank Dominik Godde for the contact and the 
fruitful collaboration with the executing company. 
 
==PAGE:5==
 
3 
ABSTRACT 
The recently increasing feed-in of renewables energies like wind and photovoltaic leads 
to higher fluctuations on the German electricity market. To be able to balance these 
deviations the 15-minute intraday trading market has been introduced. The investigated 
hydro power plant is supposed to act as a buffer that consumes power in times of 
surpluses and produces power whenever there are shortcomings that need to be covered. 
This thesis aims to provide functioning models that act as decision support for the 
optimization of design and the optimization of operation of the investigated pump-
storage hydro power plant. The optimal configuration of the design parameters installed 
power, reservoir size and machinery type is evaluated using a discrete dynamic 
programming approach that simulates the plant’s revenues for the year 2015 assuming 
perfect foresight. The net present value and the internal rate of return method are 
applied to reveal the best set of design parameters as they focus on suitable ratios of 
benefit and investment costs. Depending on the discount rate and the investigated time 
horizon the most beneficial design parameters are a reservoir size of 700,000m3 with an 
installed power of 250MW. Examinations of four different machinery sets reveal that 
additional benefits due to reduced transition times between the operational modes of the 
plant do not cover the additional acquisition costs. By increasing the discount rate or 
lowering the investigated time horizon the optimum installed power decreases to 
125MW. A supplementary spillway that releases water from the upper reservoir without 
power production is proven to be a good investment under consideration of the 
recommended setup of the design parameters. Further the discrete dynamic optimization 
algorithm is implemented into the frame of a model predictive control environment to 
get insight on the real time operation of the plant. This part focuses on real time 
scheduling meaning to find the optimal sequence of pumping and releasing considering 
the influence of predicted price development on the optimal operation. It is observed 
that the right trade-off between steady pump-release schedules and coverage of price 
extremes is key to maximize benefits. The model is employed to evaluate investments in 
the installed machinery and the forecast horizons of market analyses. Findings of this 
study reveal that the impact of the plants capacity outweighs the advantage of longer 
analysis horizons. Limitations of the applied methods can be found within the accuracy 
of both models to simulate the reality and the uncertain data basis of investment costs. 
Establishing reliable acquisition costs seems desirable to strengthen the validity of the 
obtained optimal design parameters. Overall it can be concluded that the models provide 
reasonable decision support for both the design and the operation of the proposed pump-
storage plant.  
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
 5 
TABLE OF CONTENT 
Preface ............................................................................................................................. 2 
Abstract ........................................................................................................................... 3 
Table of content ............................................................................................................... 5 
Symbols and Abreviations ............................................................................................. 6 
1 Introduction ............................................................................................................... 9 
2 Methodology ............................................................................................................ 21 
2.1 System characteristics ........................................................................................ 21 
2.2 Optimization of design ...................................................................................... 25 
2.3 Optimization of operation .................................................................................. 30 
2.4 Investment evaluation tools ............................................................................... 35 
3 Results ...................................................................................................................... 39 
3.1 Optimization of design ...................................................................................... 39 
3.2 Optimization of operation .................................................................................. 55 
4 Discussion ................................................................................................................ 69 
4.1 Modelling approach and possible extensions .................................................... 69 
4.2 Assumptions, uncertainties and limitations ....................................................... 71 
4.3 Significance of results ........................................................................................ 84 
5 Conclusion ............................................................................................................... 93 
References ...................................................................................................................... 97 
List of Figures ............................................................................................................. 104 
List of Tables ............................................................................................................... 109 
A Computed Benefits .................................................................................................. 111 
B Storage discretization ............................................................................................. 119 
 
 
==PAGE:8==
 
6 
SYMBOLS AND ABREVIATIONS 
Symbol 
Declaration 
Dimension 
𝐸𝑛𝑒𝑞! 
Energy equivalent pump 
𝑊𝑠𝑚! 
𝐸𝑛𝑒𝑞! 
Energy equivalent turbine 
𝑊𝑠𝑚! 
𝐻!"# 
Geodetic head 
𝑚 
𝐻! 
Head loss 
𝑚 
𝐻!"# 
Net head 
𝑚 
𝑃!" 
Electric power 
𝑊 
𝑃!" 
Fluid power 
𝑊 
𝑃!"# 
Maximum pump capacity 
𝑚! 
𝑄!"# 
Maximum turbine capacity 
𝑚! 
𝑆!"# 
Storage level at end of time 
step 
𝑚! 
𝑆!"! 
Initial storage level 
𝑚! 
𝑆!"# 
Maximum storage level 
𝑚! 
∆𝑆 
Change in storage level 
𝑚! 
b 
Benefits 
€ 
b’ 
Immediate benefits 
€ 
𝑐 
Velocity 
𝑚𝑠 
𝑑 
Discount Rate 
% 
𝑑 
Pipe diameter 
𝑚 
𝑒𝑡𝑎!" 
Cycle Efficiency 
− 
𝑒𝑡𝑎!"# 
Motor efficiency 
− 
𝑒𝑡𝑎!"# 
Generator efficiency 
− 
𝑒𝑡𝑎! 
Pump Efficiency 
− 
𝑒𝑡𝑎! 
Turbine efficiency 
− 
𝑓ℎ 
Forecast horizon 
ℎ 
𝑔 
Gravitational acceleration 
𝑚𝑠! 
ℎ 
Head 
𝑚 
𝐼𝑃 
Installed power 
𝑊 
𝑁𝐵! 
Net benefit at time t 
€ 
𝑝 
Pressure 
𝑃𝑎 
𝑝ℎ 
Planning horizon 
ℎ 
𝑃𝑃 
Power price 
€ 
𝑄 
Turbine discharge 
𝑚! 𝑠 
==PAGE:9==
Symbols and Abreviations 
7 
𝑟 
Internal rate of return 
% 
𝑅𝑒 
Reynolds number 
− 
𝑟ℎ𝑜 
Density of water 
𝑘𝑔𝑚! 
𝑆 
Storage level 
𝑚! 
𝑡 
Time 
𝑠 
𝑇 
Time horizon 
𝑠 
𝑡𝑒𝑟 
Time to empty upper 
reservoir 
ℎ 
𝜈 
Kinematic viscosity 
𝑚! 𝑠 
 
 
 
Abbreviation 
Declaration 
𝑎𝑓 
Fluctuation of amplitude 
𝐵 
State space size 
DDP 
Discrete dynamic programming 
EEG 
German renewable energy act 
EEX 
European exchange market 
FLC 
Fuzzy logic control 
𝑓𝑝 
Flow path 
HPC 
High performance computer 
𝐼 
Idling mode 
I-P 
Mode transition idling to pumping 
I-Q 
Mode transition idling to releasing 
IPCC 
International panel on climate change 
IRR 
Internal rate of return 
𝐿𝐵 
Lower boundary 
𝑚 
Mode type 
MINLP 
Mixed-integer nonlinear programming 
𝑚𝑝 
Moenetary penalties 
MPC 
Model predictive control 
𝑁𝑎𝑁 
Not a number 
NPV 
Net present value 
NREAP 
National renewable energy action plan 
𝑃 
Pumping mode 
P-Q 
Mode transition pumping to releasing 
PSP 
Pump-storage plant 
PV 
Photovoltaic 
𝑄 
Release mode 
Q-P 
Mode transition releasing to pumping 
==PAGE:10==
Symbols and Abreviations 
8 
𝑅𝑓 
Feasible range of storage level change 
𝑅𝑓’ 
Reduced feasible range of storage level change 
𝑠 
State in state space 
𝑆 
Storage vector 
𝑆!"#$%" 
Storage end condition 
𝑠𝑑 
Storage discretization 
𝑡𝑙𝑝 
Time loss punishment 
 
 
==PAGE:11==
 9 
1 INTRODUCTION 
The aim of this thesis is to provide a decision support tool for planning and operating a 
pump-storage plant (PSP). Reliable modelling supports the planning and operation of 
new power facilities and enables operators to work successfully on modern power 
markets. Different configurations for a planned pump-storage plant are evaluated. The 
plant is supposed to operate on the continuous intraday 15-minute trading market. To 
give the reader an overview the following chapter examines the current situation and the 
developments on the power market. Understanding the changes and their triggers 
reveals the importance of modern modelling approaches and can be seen as the 
fundamental motivation for this thesis. In many parts of the world fossil fuels are still 
the main sources of energy. Their negative impacts on the environment while being 
converted to useful energy forms calls for substituting energy sources. Renewable 
energy sources such as wind, PV (photovoltaic) and hydropower are most appropriate 
candidates to establish a cost-competitive, reliable, environmental friendly and 
sustainable energy supply. (Kusakana, 2015) (Goedecke et al., 2007) (Kusakana & 
Vermaak, 2013) 
As a consequence the energy sector in Europe and especially in Germany is recently in 
a change. The European Union’s 20/20/20 policy aims at a 20% reduction of emissions, 
whilst the share of energy produced out of renewable sources should increase to 20% 
until 2020 (Epexspot, 2016). Each member state had to set out a Nation Renewable 
Energy Action Plan (NREAP) by June 2010. These plans define the energy mix 
scenario, the trajectory to be followed and policy strategies to overcome barriers and 
ensure development of renewable energies (González & Lacal-Arántegui, 2016) (Knaut 
et al., 2015) (Epexspot, 2016). In Germany the NREAP is executed with the renewable 
energy act (EEG). Originally established in 2000, but constantly renewed and extended 
it is responsible for a remarkable increase of renewable energy production. Part 1 
Section 1 of the EEG describes the purpose of the act as the following: 
 
“(1) The purpose of this Act is to enable the energy supply to develop in a sustainable 
manner in particular in the interest of mitigating climate change and protecting the 
environment, to reduce the costs to the economy not least by including long-term 
external effects, to conserve fossil energy resources and to promote the further 
development of technologies to generate electricity from renewable energy sources.  
(2) In order to attain the purpose of subsection 1, this Act aims to increase the share of 
electricity generated from renewable energy sources to at least 80 percent of gross 
==PAGE:12==
Introduction 
 
10 
electricity consumption by 2050 in a steady and cost-efficient manner. To this end, the 
share is to amount to:  
1. 40 to 45 percent by 2025 and  
2. 55 to 60 percent by 2035.  
(3) The aim pursuant to subsection 2 sentence 2 number 1 also serves to increase the 
share of renewable energy sources in terms of total gross final energy consumption to 
at least 18 percent by 2020.“ (Federal Ministry of Justice and Consumer Protection, 
2014) 
 
New policy strategies such as the EEG were introduced to reduce pollution caused by 
fossil fuels and to trigger the change to a sustainable energy supply. The German 
government names four reasons aiming at an energy turnaround towards renewable 
energy: 
• Renewable energy is good for the environment 
• Renewable energies create jobs and money 
• Renewable energies ensure energy supply 
• Renewable energies let the people participate on the power market  
(The Press and Information Office of the Federal Government, 2016) 
 
The positive effect of a low emissive power production can be considered as obvious. 
Germany’s leading role in renewable energy techniques also supports the export 
industry. In 2014 the renewable energy industry accounted for 8,6 billion Euro export 
revenue (Agentur für Erneuerbare Energien, 2016). 
However, the role of the nuclear catastrophe in Fukushima is not to be underestimated. 
Directly after the nuclear meltdown Germany made an about-turn in its nuclear energy 
policy. In advance of the Japanese disaster nuclear energy was seen as an important 
substitute for fossil fuels like oil and coal (Landeszentrale für politische Bildung Baden-
Württemberg, 2016). This example illustrates that not only hard facts but also public 
opinions influence policy decisions. All together these factors drive the on going 
developments in the energy sector. 
In Figure 1 the developments of renewable energy shares of primary energy 
consumption is displayed. It can be seen that the share has been constantly growing 
since 1990. Accounting for 1.3% in 1990 to 12.5% in 2015. The bars shown in Figure 2 
indicate that the growth of the renewable energy share of the gross electricity 
consumption is even more significant. Rising from 3.4% in 1990 to 32.6% in 2015. 
However, to meet the goals of the EEG the numbers still have to rise in upcoming years. 
The trend from power production out of fossil fuels to renewable sources resulted in the 
construction and implementation of various new wind farms and photovoltaic modules. 
Studies show that wind and PV energy production did grow most significantly (Federal 
Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy, 2016) (Weber, 2009) (Onea & Rusu, 2016). 
==PAGE:13==
Introduction 
11 
 
Figure 1 Development of renewable energy share of primary energy consumption in 
Germany (Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy, 2016) 
 
 
Figure 2 Development of renewable energy share of gross electricity consumption in 
Germany (Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy, 2016) 
 
Figures 3 and 4 depict the development on the renewable-based electricity generation in 
Germany and the shares for the different energy carriers in 2015. A total amount of 
195.9TWh has been reached in 2015. Growing wind power production dominates the 
picture in Germany with a share of 44.9%. Shares of biomass and PV have been 
growing in the past but are stagnating in the last couple of years. With approximately 
20TWh and a share of 9.9% the amount of electricity generated by hydropower has 
been almost constant over the last 25 years.  
 
==PAGE:14==
Introduction 
 
12 
 
Figure 3 Development of renewables-based electricity generation in Germany (Federal 
Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy, 2016) 
 
 
Figure 4 Renewables based electricity generation in Germany 2015 (Federal Ministry 
for Economic Affairs and Energy, 2016) 
 
Figure 5 supports this statement but also shows that the full potential of the installed 
capacity is not used completely. The deviation between installed capacity and actual 
power production can be found by looking at the power plant types. Hydropower 
includes storage and pump-storage plants, which are typically operated under 
predefined conditions, such as extreme power prices or for balancing purposes. 
==PAGE:15==
Introduction 
13 
 
Figure 5 Development of electricity generation and installed capacity of hydropower 
plants in Germany (Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy, 2016) 
 
The main goal of this study is determining the optimal way of operating such a plant. 
The growth of renewable power generation is supported by technological 
improvements. A good example is the capacity or load factor of a wind turbine. The 
capacity factor is defined as the actual production relative to the possible production by 
the turbine (Abed & El-Mallah, 1997) (Boccard, 2009). It has increased from 25% to 
over 50% within the last 10 years. Comparing the total power consumption to the 
theoretical potential of renewable energy capacities reveals that Germany’s need for 
electricity can be satisfied completely by renewable power generation.  
Table 1 shows the technical potentials of different renewable energy carriers (Wesselak 
et al., 2013). The technical potential of renewable energies is represented as the 
achievable energy generation of a particular technology given system performance, 
topographic limitations, environmental, and land-use constraints (National renewable 
energy laboratory, 2016). The numbers are estimated for 2011 but can be seen as 
representative for 2015. The energy consumption has slightly decreased to 600TWh/a 
over the last couple of years and therefore the calculations are even conservative 
(Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy, 2016). 
 
==PAGE:16==
Introduction 
 
14 
Table 1 Energy yield and share of power consumption 2011 for renewable energy 
sources 
 
 
It can be seen that in 2011 129% of the power consumption could have been handled by 
renewable energy. The technical potentials of wind, PV, biomass, geothermal and 
hydropower sum up to a total of about 780TWh/a. For 2015 the technical potential 
exceeded the consumption by 30%. 
All previous figures illustrate that the renewable energy sector especially in power 
production is significantly growing and that the basis for a sustainable and 
environmental friendly electricity supply can be built upon these renewable sources. It 
can also be seen that the technically feasible potential exceeds the necessary growth 
rates by far. Thus it can be assumed that there is no problem with the absolute amount 
of electricity that can be generated out of renewables. However a simple substitution of 
conventional fossil fuels by renewable energy sources does not seem applicable without 
adequate measures (Weber, 2009). Vulnerability and uncertainty caused by renewables 
like wind and PV bring up the question of how to deal with their inherent fluctuations. 
The fluctuating nature of some renewables has an adverse effect on power production 
directly, by hampering a regular and uninterrupted supply (Rehman et al., 2014). A 
highly weather dependent production curve proposes that the typical base-load-peak-
load structure of load curves is no longer valid and the seasonality patters in the price 
have disappeared (Goedecke et al., 2007) (Caro et al., 2012). Nevertheless due to 
limited storage capacities the supply and demand of power is still to be balanced. A 
wind power dominated energy market, as presented in northern Europe, requires highly 
sensitive balancing services and smart trading methods to cope with the upcoming 
surpluses and shortages. Even though power demand is relatively stable and predictable, 
the production is more uncertain than ever and therefore needs new ways of 
management (Epexspot, 2016). The above-mentioned reasons suggest that the most 
challenging part on the way to a sustainable and clean energy supply is the exploitation 
of the existing potentials. Old structures have to be broken up and replaced by smart and 
innovative management approaches. Without adequate measures the exploitation of 
inherent potentials of renewable energies will hardly be successful. To tackle this new 
==PAGE:17==
Introduction 
15 
situation, the power market in itself had and still has to be adjusted. This is challenging 
for both the system operator and the electricity operator. New market designs were 
introduced in order to deal with the upcoming condition of a power marked dominated 
by renewable energy production. One regulation mechanism is the coupling of the day-
ahead markets of several countries. A deficit in country specific surpluses can be 
balanced by the coupled markets. (Vila et al., 2012) 
Therefore, the markets are less vulnerable to disruption of supply. Coupled markets help 
to stabilize the power prices and lower peaks both in negative and positive prices (Vila 
et al., 2012) (Sämisch, 2016) (Epexspot, 2016). In addition to that, the energy trading 
platforms developed, in order to cope with the increased amount of renewables. The 
EEX (European Energy Exchange) in Leipzig is the largest marketplace for power in 
Germany. Power can be freely traded either on the forward market or on EEX’s spot 
market, called EPEX SPOT, situated in Paris. EPEX SPOT is used as a trading post for 
short-term deliverable power. In opposite the forward market concludes long term 
trading contracts with a lead-time up to six years. With a trading volume of 1570TWh in 
2014 the forward market still takes the largest share of the traded power. In comparison 
to that, only 566TWh have been handled on European spot markets in 2015. However, 
these numbers are growing. A minimum volume of 0.1MW per bid is required. EPEX 
SPOT trades blocks with the length of either 15 minutes or one hour. Spot trading can 
be split up into its two sub disciplines: day-ahead trading and intraday trading. As the 
name already implies day-ahead trading is used to trade power one day before the 
physical delivery. In contrast, intraday trading can be concluded 24 hours until 30 
minutes ahead of delivery. The biggest difference between both is the price formation. 
Day-ahead trading uses the principle of the market-clearing price. At the intersection of 
demanded and offered quantity the market clearing prices are calculated. Effectively the 
last one who gets paid sets the price for all. (Hildmann et al., 2014) (Amjady et al., 
2010)  
Price formation on the intraday market works with the principle of the pay-as-bid 
procedure. In continues trading exactly the price for every transaction will be charged. 
As a result no unit prices for the respective products are formed. Meaning there will be 
different prices for the same product depending on its transaction time (Amjady et al., 
2010) (Vila et al., 2012). As mentioned before the investigated power plant is supposed 
to work on the intraday market. The importance of intraday trading is recently 
increasing (Epexspot, 2016). Intraday trading is primarily used to overcome shortages 
and surpluses and to meet forecasting obligations in order to reduce potential balancing 
energy costs (Sämisch, 2016). Regarding highly flexible power plants and short-term 
trading intraday trading can also be used to customize and therefore maximize the 
benefits (Sämisch, 2016). Intraday trading is an optimal tool to handle fluctuations 
brought by renewable energy in-feed (Vila & Fernandes, 2013). 59TWh have been 
traded on the intraday market in 2015 (Sämisch, 2016). Compared to the total traded 
volume its share is relatively small but with an increasing tendency (Sämisch, 2016). It 
==PAGE:18==
Introduction 
 
16 
is a smart solution to avoid the use of expensive balancing energy. Overall intraday 
trading is a powerful tool to optimize trading strategies. In the scientific world intraday 
trading is seen as a key feature to overcome difficulties caused by the energy 
turnaround. A functioning intraday trade market with a high liquidity is seen as a 
keystone to improve efficiency of market design (Weber, 2009). Growing numbers of 
participants and trades increase the traded volume on the intraday market. The 
subsequently improved liquidity helps to implement renewable energy in the power 
market (Sämisch, 2016) (Weber, 2009) (EU Comission, 2007). However a greater 
weight on Spot trading requires advanced risk management skills, a profound market 
analysis and sufficient risk capital, since prices in short term trades are more volatile 
(Sewckow & Günther, 2013). 
To operate on the intraday trading market, a power plant needs to meet certain 
requirements such as short start up times and high flexibility. Pump-storage plants 
(PSP) with their characteristic features are very likely to beneficially operate on the 
intraday market. Although the attention has recently shifted towards wind power and 
PV, hydropower is nevertheless a very useful technique. Many operators of hydropower 
plants have recognized their potential to provide flexibility and ancillary services to the 
market (Key et al., 2013). 
Hydropower is an approved method with a long history. Francis and Pelton turbines 
have been developed already in the 19th century. Followed by the construction of the 
Kaplan turbine only a few decades later. These turbines are still predominantly used 
today (International hydropower association, 2014). As a well-known technique the 
long-term effects from hydropower on the environment are precisely predictable. 
Compared to the unknown behaviour of PV modules, disposal hazards are not a concern 
for hydropower plants (Dubey et al., 2013) (Wiegand, 2014). Figure 3 illustrates that 
hydropower is the only renewable energy source that is covered by long-term empirical 
statistics. It can be seen that the amount of hydropower produced in Germany is 
relatively stable since 1990, whilst wind energy and solar PV developed over the last 
decade (Wesselak et al., 2013). Furthermore, PSPs take the largest share of the power 
storage capacity in Germany. Power storage can decrease effects of variable output 
power from renewable energy sources and assure a reliable dispatch responding to the 
fluctuating load requirements (Castillo & Gayme, 2014) (Kusakana, 2015). In 2013 
German PSPs had a storing capacity of around 40GWh (Agentur für Erneuerbare 
Energien, 2015). Due to a lack of suitable sites this number is currently stagnating 
(Wesselak et al., 2013). Compared to other storing options such as batteries or power-
to-gas devices, pump-storage plants are still the only technically feasible and 
economically profitable way of large scale power storing (Agentur für Erneuerbare 
Energien, 2015). Compared to a total power consumption of 600TWh in 2015 the 
storage capacity is nevertheless vanishingly low (Hartmann et al., 2012). 
==PAGE:19==
Introduction 
17 
 
40
600
𝐺𝑊ℎ
𝑇𝑊ℎ∗
1
1000
𝑇𝑊ℎ
𝐺𝑊ℎ= 0.00006 = 0.006% 
 
(1) 
A simple calculation illustrates that about 0.007% of the yearly power consumption can 
currently be stored in PSPs. In the past PSPs were predominantly used to store cheap 
electricity, mostly produced during night-time when the demand is low (off peak 
energy) and released it back into the net when prices were high due to high demand 
(peak energy) (International hydropower association, 2014). The consequential 
difference between peak and off-peak prices reflected the profit margin of the PSP 
(International hydropower association, 2014). However, its typical operation scheme is 
not profitable anymore and therefore no longer applied. With the changes on the power 
market towards a highly fluctuating and unsecure in feed, PSPs are predominantly used 
to provide controlling mechanisms (International hydropower association, 2014). 
Storing surpluses out of renewable energy production are seen as one of the keystones 
of a successful power market design (Wesselak et al., 2013). Nevertheless, due to the 
lack of storage capacity it cannot be seen as the final answer to the challenging situation 
on the power market. Several studies imply that the theoretical storage capacity in 
Germany exceeds the current capacity by far (Agentur für Erneuerbare Energien, 2015). 
Yet it can be argued that most of this potential will never be exhausted due to 
economical inadequateness (Hubik, 2015). Storage capacity enables operators and 
power suppliers to an increased flexibility, alternative scheduling possibilities and raises 
their efficiency (Wesselak et al., 2013) (European Comission, 2012). 
Reviewing the described situation on the power market with its multifaceted 
requirements, good modelling can be helpful to beneficially operate a PSP. The natural 
strengths of PSPs match the challenges posed by the operation on the intraday market 
very well. The growing market complexity, the power productions depending on 
unknown weather conditions and the additional trials posed by the energy turnaround 
have made the operation of a power plant to a highly challenging task. The operation of 
a PSP depends mainly on the market’s power price and is therefore indirectly influenced 
by the weather, i.e. if there is a lot of wind, a surplus of wind energy will lower the 
power price and vice versa. An optimal operation of a PSP needs to model these effects 
and predict benefits and scheduling options as good as possible. Detailed modelling and 
accurate forecasting are seen as essentials for both planning and operating a modern 
power facility (Clements et al., 2016) (Mashud Rana, 2014). 
To set this thesis into a context of scientific investigations in this field a literature 
research is applied. The dimensioning of a PSP contains several aspects. First (Brown et 
al., 2008) consider the available operational water and the maximum discharge in both 
directions, in order to produce or consume energy. Both are dependent on the general 
setup of the plant’s machinery and the surrounding constructional units such as 
housings and waterways (Spitaler & Flodl, 1975). (Anagnostopoulos & Papantonis, 
==PAGE:20==
Introduction 
 
18 
2008) present a numerical methodology for sizing various plant components. More over 
in (Anagnostopoulos & Papantonis, 2007) they use an empirical cost-estimation 
algorithm to estimate a suitable machinery set. A linear primal-dual interior point 
method is used by (Castronuovoa & Peças Lopes, 2004) for optimal operation and 
storage sizing. (Pousinho et al., 2012) develop a linear programming approach for short 
term hydro energy scheduling. Furthermore the framework of the grid environment the 
plant is integrated in needs to be considered. (Brown et al., 2008) distinguish between 
the case of a storage facility that influences the price and one that does not. This is 
dependent on the realtion between the size of the plant and the grid it is implemented in. 
In general only prices of isolated island systems are influenced by PSPs of the size of 
the investigated plant. In order to find the optimal setup of a PSP (Correia et al., 2014) 
employ a stochastic approach that directly considers the influence of wind energy on the 
price. The effect of renewable energies on the grid can be modelled statisically (Duquea 
et al., 2011). This thesis deals with a PSP implemented in the electricity grid of 
Germany and unable to influence the price. (Conejo et al., 2002) discribe the behaviour 
of a price-taker on the market. Considering the price being determined by demand and 
generation while big parts of the generation are influenced by wind and solar energy the 
price indirectly contains the influence of renewable sources. Therefore, in this thesis the 
price is used as a deterministic time series in order to optimize the PSP’s dimensions. 
(Shapiro, 1968) and (Brown, 1965) describe how deterministic dynamic programming 
(DDP) can be applied to find the maximum benefit of a finite space model with 
deterministic input.  
Even though many researchers like (Duquea et al., 2011) provide ways to consider price 
fluctuations due to the penetration of wind energy into the operation of hydro power 
plants, the predictability of wind is still rather low. Most stochastically based models are 
employed on day-ahead scheduling (Zadeh et al., 2012). (Xiong et al., 2015) discribe a 
way to react on short-term influences of renewables on the grid by using model 
predictive control (MPC) as a real-time control tool. (Xiong et al., 2015) presents 
several alterantives to MPC. Examples are fuzzy logic control (FLC) implemented by 
(Kassem & Zaid, 2014) and mixed-integer nonlinear programming (MINLP) introduced 
by (Marzband et al., 2013). MPC however can be adjusted to the needs of the operator. 
(Qi et al., 2011) and (Teleke et al., 2010) use MPC models with different numbers of 
levels to optimize them to their needs. Another approach for short term scheduling is 
presented by (Wu et al., 2008) as they use particle swarm optimization and chance-
constrained programming. (Fletena & Kristoffersen, 2008) propose a multi-stage mixed-
integer linear dynamic programming approach for short-term hydro power production 
planning. 
This thesis aims at providing a functioning model that helps to increase the benefit of a 
small PSP in southern Bavaria (Germany). In the spring of 2016 the plant is in 
feasibility analysis and different design options are evaluated. The plant is supposed to 
be situated at a former gravel mine. The mining process left a hole that can be used as 
==PAGE:21==
Introduction 
19 
the lower basin. The construction of the upper basin can be executed approximately 
without additional expenses. The digging costs and the revenue that can be generated 
with the sold material are nearly even. As mentioned it is planned to operate the plant 
on the intraday power market. All simulations and calculations are executed considering 
this assumption. The core objective of this thesis is to establish a decision support tool 
for both the planning and the operating phase of the power facility. Therefore the thesis 
is split up into two main parts. The first part of this thesis tests different constructional 
setups. Throughout the thesis the term setup refers to a certain combination of design 
parameters. The maximum possible benefits for the year 2015 are calculated using a 
fully discrete optimization algorithm and perfect foresight throughout the year assuming 
all trades are executed at the average price. The design parameters machinery size and 
reservoir volume are optimized a using a DDP approach. Furthermore it is tested if an 
additional spillway, that can release water without power production is beneficial. The 
losses due to switching and start-up times of different machinery sets are assessed. 
Dynamic investment tools are applied to reveal the most profitable solution in terms of 
long scale planning during the feasibility analysis. Overall, the first part aims to provide 
an overview of the different construction options and supports decision-making in the 
planning period. The second part of the thesis focuses on the future real time operation 
of the PSP. The discrete optimization algorithm used to optimize the design is combined 
with MPC. The model optimizes operation schedules in order to maximize the plants 
possible benefit. The main objective is to find the optimal sequence of releasing and 
pumping. The focus of the second part is laid on a support of the operating phase. Also 
the influences of different forecasting horizons are evaluated. Together with the findings 
of the first part it is examined whether additional investments in machinery or forecast 
raise the revenue most. The results of the second part also allow conclusions about the 
meaningfulness of the obtained findings in the first part. The overall goal of this thesis 
is to provide a model that helps maximizing the financial worth of the related PSP. 
 
==PAGE:22==
==PAGE:23==
 21 
2 METHODOLOGY 
As the cause of the problem addressed in this thesis is now introduced, this chapter 
provides description of the methods employed during the project. A general overview of 
the system’s characteristics and deviations of the applied modelling algorithms are 
covered. 
2.1 System characteristics 
Aiming to establish a decision support tool this paper quantifies different setups of the 
PSP. Table 2 illustrates 12 possible construction variations that were introduced in 
former investigations by the operating company. To increase the scientific value of this 
thesis and to get a better understanding of the influence of different parameters three 
additional setups are introduced. In the first part of this thesis these variations are 
compared and evaluated in order to find the best setup.  
 
Table 2 Constructional setups introduced in this thesis and by the executing company 
and 
 
 
Three different reservoir sizes are under consideration. The maximum size of the upper 
reservoir is 700,000m3. The time to empty the volume of the upper basin into to the 
lower basin determines size and power of the hydraulic machinery. Geographical 
boundaries limit the storage volume. The time to empty the upper basin is a common 
parameter to describe the relative size of the machinery to the size of the reservoir. The 
upper value of two hours is set as the limit in the operator’s feasibility analysis. As an 
addition to these options the possible benefit of another magnitude of machinery size 
that leads to a decreased time to empty the upper reservoir of one hour is tested. 
For every constructional option a deterministic optimization model computes the 
potential benefits for 2015 in order to determine the most profitable setup for the PSP. 
==PAGE:24==
Methodology 
 
22 
In a second step MPC is offered as a decision support tool for the optimal operation of 
the PSP. Both models are set up in the Matlab environment and described in the 
following. A conceptual model of the related management problem is illustrated in 
Figure 6. 
 
 
Figure 6 Conceptual model of the pump-storage plant 
 
Figure 6 shows a simplified scheme of the power plant that marks the basis for 
optimization approaches in this thesis. The investigated PSP consists of an upper 
reservoir connected to a lower reservoir. The plant is equipped with machinery sets, 
which can either consume power in order to pump water from the lower basin into the 
upper basin or produce power while releasing water back down. As the machine 
representing the generator for the turbine and the motor for the pump is one machine the 
arrows in Figure 6 indicate that water can either be pumped or released at the same 
time. 
The dashed line leading from the upper basin to the lower basin represents an additional 
spillway. Deviations arising from the feed-in of other renewable energy sources like 
wind power or PV may result in longer times with consecutive extremes of the power 
price. Modern PSPs are operated to balance these deviations and to stabilize the grid 
frequency. To achieve the maximum benefit power needs to be consumed in times of 
negative power prices. Because of limited predictability it can occur that the upper basin 
is completely full but water should be pumped in order to consume power. This can be 
Upper 
reservoir 
Lower 
reservoir 
Release 
Pump 
 
 
==PAGE:25==
Methodology 
23 
realized by an additional spillway, which results in a benefit-storage relation as shown 
in Figure 7. Thereby benefits are generated through pumping even while the storage 
level reached its maximum. Results of further investigations into the behaviour of the 
PSP and the power price in this period are presented in chapter 3.2.4. The pipe 
displayed in Figure 6 allows pumping water at any time without changing the storage 
level of the upper basin 𝑆. The additional benefits achieved by the new pipe are 
compared to setups with no spillway to evaluate the economical feasibility. 
 
 
Figure 7 Simulated storage level and immediate benefits starting at March 29th 3:00am 
under the assumption of perfect foresight 
 
Table 2 defines the constructional boundaries of the project. The constructional options 
are specified by the maximum storage volume 𝑆!"# [𝑚!] of the upper reservoir and the 
time it takes to empty the reservoir 𝑡𝑒𝑟 [𝑠] with a discharge of the maximum turbine 
capacity per time step 𝑄𝑚𝑎𝑥 [𝑚!]. It is assumed that the total of the operational volume 
can completely be emptied into the lower basin at any time. Therefore, the water level 
of the lower basin is not constraining the system. The setups are simulated separately 
using different input parameters respectively. The following calculations illustrate the 
mathematical and hydraulic background of the different setups. The calculations are 
built upon the common equation for fluid power shown in equation (2). 
𝑃!" = 𝑟ℎ𝑜∗𝑔∗𝑄∗ℎ [𝑊] 
(2) 
𝐸𝑛𝑒𝑞! = 𝑒𝑡𝑎! ∗𝑟ℎ𝑜∗𝑔∗ℎ(𝑆!"#) 𝑊𝑠
𝑚!  
(3) 
𝐼𝑃= 𝐸𝑛𝑒𝑞! ∗𝑄!"# ∗1
𝑡 𝑀𝑊 
(4) 
𝑄!"# = 𝑆!"# ∗𝑡
𝑡𝑒𝑟
 𝑚!  
(5) 
==PAGE:26==
Methodology 
 
24 
The density of water 𝑟ℎ𝑜 [𝑘𝑔𝑚!], the gravitational acceleration 𝑔 [𝑚𝑠!], the 
hydraulic head ℎ [𝑚] and the discharge 𝑄 [𝑚! 𝑠] determine the fluid power 𝑃!" [𝑊]. 
The hydraulic head is represented by an average value ℎ for each investigated upper 
reservoir size. Dividing 𝑃!" by 𝑄 makes the power dependent on the discharge, resulting 
in the energy equivalent for the turbine 𝐸𝑛𝑒𝑞! [𝑊𝑠𝑚!]  containing the overall 
efficiency of the PSP during turbine mode 𝑒𝑡𝑎! [−]. This can be seen in equation (3), 
where the head ℎ is assumed to be constant for each value of 𝑆!"# and independent of 
the storage level in the upper basin. (Kaltschmitt et al., 2013) 
The installed power 𝐼𝑃 [𝑊] is calculated according to equation (4) using the previous 
results. Due to a planned operation of the plant on the 15-minute intraday market 15-
minute power blocks are calculated. The length of every time step 𝑡 is therefore set to 
15 minutes throughout the thesis. Equation (5) determines the maximum amount of 
water 𝑄!"# that can be released in one time step 𝑡 depending on the 𝑆!"# and 𝑡𝑒𝑟. 
Inserting equation (3) and (5) into equation (4) with appropriate unit conversion gives 
the result for 𝐼𝑃 in 𝑀𝑊. The maximum capacity per 𝑡 of the pump 𝑃!"# [𝑚!] is defined 
by equation (6): 
𝑃!"# = 𝐼𝑃∗𝑡
𝐸𝑛𝑒𝑞!
 𝑚!   
(6) 
𝐸𝑛𝑒𝑞! = 𝑒𝑡𝑎! ∗𝑟ℎ𝑜∗𝑔∗ℎ(𝑆!"#) 𝑊𝑠
𝑚!   
(7) 
𝑒𝑡𝑎! =
1
𝑒𝑡𝑎!"
𝑒𝑡𝑎!
 −  
(8) 
𝐼𝑃 and the energy equivalent of the pump 𝐸𝑛𝑒𝑞! determinate 𝑃!"#. The calculation of 
𝐸𝑛𝑒𝑞! in equation (7) is almost similar to the calculation of 𝐸𝑛𝑒𝑞!. The PSP’s 
efficiency during pump mode 𝑒𝑡𝑎! [−] is derived by an assumed storage efficiency 
cycle 𝑒𝑡𝑎!" [−]. In reality the efficiency of hydraulic machinery is dependent on a 
variety of factors such as its operating point. As a simplification the efficiency of the 
PSP is set to be constant in the calculations of this thesis. The equations (3) to (8) 
determine a set of input parameters for each different setup. 
Using these input parameters the objective is to find the maximum possible benefit for 
each time step stated by equation (9): 
 
max 
(∆𝑆∗𝐸𝑛𝑒𝑞!/! ∗𝑃𝑃)
!
!!!
 𝐸𝑢𝑟𝑜  
(9) 
 
==PAGE:27==
Methodology 
25 
Where 𝑃𝑃 [𝐸𝑢𝑟𝑜/𝑀𝑊ℎ] is the power price, ∆𝑆 [𝑚!] is the change of stored volume 
depending on each time step. With 𝑆 [𝑚!] representing the current storage level of the 
upper basin the investigated system is bound to the constraints (10), (11) and (12): 
 
𝑆!"# = 𝑆!"! −∆𝑆 [𝑚!]  
(10) 
𝑆!"# ≤𝑆!"# 𝑚!  
(11) 
−𝑃!"# ≤∆𝑆≤𝑄!"# 𝑚!  
(12) 
𝑆!"# represents the storage volume in the upper basin after each time step, 𝑆!"! is the 
initial storage volume. It is reasonable that 𝑆!"# must respect the finite storing capacity 
𝑆!"#. Also the amount of water released or pumped cannot exceed the limits of 𝑄!"# 
and 𝑃!"# respectively. The equality constraint (10) establishes the water balance of the 
system. It is assumed that losses due to evaporation and leakage can be neglected and 
therefore the total volume of water in the system must be constant at any time step. The 
management problem consists of finding the optimal sequence of releasing and 
pumping in order to maximize the benefit. 
2.2 Optimization of design 
Aiming to find the maximum benefit for a known price time series of each setup the 
constraints of a limited storage and discharge need to be respected. The management 
problem and the optimization approach of the system can be set up as a finite space 
discrete dynamic programming model. Due to the known price series the model can be 
seen as a deterministic version of the finite state space Markovian decision model. In 
general such a model finds application in problems where a maximum or minimum path 
between two nodes within a limited corridor needs to be computed. This represents a 
perfect foresight approach 𝑝𝑓 of the investigated horizon. The standard method is 
backwards iteration from the end of the problem to its beginning while dividing the 
original problem into smaller, solvable sub-problems. (Brown, 1965) (Shapiro, 1968) 
(Loucks et al., 2005) 
2.2.1 Discrete dynamic programming 
In case of the related PSP the goal is to obtain a flow path 𝑓𝑝 for a given time series that 
shows the optimal way of operation. The power price 𝑃𝑃 is the determining variable. 
The length of the available price time series defines the horizon of the system. Every 
15-minute time step 𝑡 within the price series is labeled with an integer from 1 to the end 
of the observed forecast horizon. For every 𝑡 the system can be in a specific state within 
the state space B. The space is limited by the discretization level of the storage vector 𝑆 
==PAGE:28==
Methodology 
 
26 
of the upper basin with its maximum 𝑆!"# and three different mode types 𝑚∈𝑀 
representing pumping 𝑃, releasing 𝑄 and idling 𝐼. In words, during every 15-minute 
time step the PSP can operate in a specific mode while there is a specific amount of 
water in the upper basin leading to the state space size 𝐵(𝑆, 𝑀). (Blackwell, 1962) 
A suitable level of the storage discretization 𝑠𝑑 depends on 𝑡𝑒𝑟. The longer it takes to 
empty the upper reservoir for a certain volume, the smaller is the discharge in every 
time step. The discharge represents the change in storage volume ∆𝑆. The higher 𝑠𝑑 is 
the smaller is the computable ∆𝑆 and the better the fit to different multiples of the actual 
𝑄!"# and 𝑃!"#. Therefore for every 𝑡𝑒𝑟 an optimal 𝑠𝑑 in terms of computation time of 
the model and computable benefit needs to be determined. (Bertsekas, 1975) 
 
 
Figure 8 Computable benefits and corresponding computation time per time step in 
dependency of the storage discretization level (Example for 𝑆𝑚𝑎𝑥= 7 1𝑒5 𝑚! and 
𝑡𝑒𝑟= 3ℎ) 
 
Figure 8 shows the computable benefit and computation time plotted over an increasing 
level of storage discretization for a specific 𝑡𝑒𝑟. A recurring pattern highlighted by the 
blue lines can be observed. The fluctuation and the pattern of the benefit can be 
explained by the fit of 𝑠𝑑 to multiples of 𝑄!"# and 𝑃!"# with respect to 𝑆!"#. The red 
line marks a suitable 𝑠𝑑. In order to enable a comparable choice of 𝑠𝑑 for every 𝑡𝑒𝑟, 𝑠𝑑 
is set to a point orientated on the recurring pattern. There are sections of lower 
amplitude in between every section with higher amplitudes of the fluctuation. The 
fluctuation of the benefit is a source of error. Therefore 𝑠𝑑 is set to a point where the 
amplitude is low, the benefit is at a local maximum and the computation time is still 
feasible. (Foufoula-Georgiou & Kitanidis, 1987) 
By backwards iteration through the forecast horizon and evaluating the benefits 𝑏 for 
every state 𝑠∈𝐵 in 𝑡 the theoretical maximum benefit for the PSP can be computed. 
For every 𝑠(𝑡) there is a set of immediate benefits 𝑏′(𝑠, 𝑡) dependent on every feasible 
𝑠(𝑡+ 1) . Because the immediate benefits 𝑏′(𝑡)  depend on 𝑠(𝑡)  and 𝑠(𝑡+ 1)  the 
decision 𝑓𝑝(𝑡) defining the flow path of the water during the operation of the PSP also 
contains 𝑚(𝑡+ 1). Limitations for the feasibility are the maximum capacity of the 
==PAGE:29==
Methodology 
27 
pumping mode 𝑃!"# and the turbine mode 𝑄!"# derived by the size of the machinery. 
The dynamic of the system is controlled by the change in the storage volume in the 
upper basin represented by ∆𝑆. Therefore, for any 𝑠∈𝐵(𝑡) there is only a certain 
number of feasible 𝑠∈𝐵(𝑡+ 1) restrained in 𝑆. This ensures the water balance 
between the two reservoirs for every time step. Values beyond the feasible range 𝑅! ∈𝑆 
result computational in not a number 𝑁𝑎𝑁. Further 𝑅! is dependent on 𝑚. Because of 
time losses due to switching between different modes 𝑚 in 𝑡 and 𝑡+ 1, the reduction 
for 𝑅! varies and results in differently decreased ranges 𝑅!′. In relation to equation (9) 
this leads to immediate benefits 𝑏’(𝑡) ∈𝐵 for every 𝑠(𝑡+ 1). The benefit 𝑏(𝑠, 𝑡) for 
any state 𝑠 in 𝑡 is computed by adding the future benefit 𝑏(𝑡+ 1) ∈𝐵(𝑡+ 1) to the 
immediate benefit 𝑏’(𝑡) and find the maximum out of all feasible transitions to a state 𝑠 
in 𝑡+ 1. (Blackwell, 1962) (Foufoula-Georgiou & Kitanidis, 1988) 
Figure 9 shows a set of different immediate benefits 𝑏’ within a limited state space 𝐵 for 
one time step 𝑡. 𝐵(𝑡+ 1) contains the future benefits 𝑏(𝑡+ 1). 
 
 
Figure 9 Simplified illustration of the state space 𝐵 and several changes over a time step 
 
The cells of 𝐵(𝑡) get filled with the maximum achievable benefit 𝑏 for every 𝑠∈𝐵(𝑡) 
computed as: 
 
𝑏𝑠, 𝑡= max (𝑏! 𝑠𝑡, 𝑠𝑡+ 1
+ 𝑏(𝑠(𝑡+ 1)) 
(13) 
 
The single immediate benefits 𝑏’ can be divided into groups of 𝑚(𝑡). The feasibility 
gets checked referring to ∆𝑆 that defines the change in the storage volume of the upper 
basin within 𝑡. 
 
==PAGE:30==
Methodology 
 
28 
∆𝑆= 𝑆𝑡+ 1 −𝑆(𝑡) 
(14) 
 
The following illustrates possible changes in state space between time step 𝑡 and 𝑡+ 1 
in literature also mentioned as the action space (Shapiro, 1968). 
• Turbine mode 𝑄 in 𝑡: 
For 𝑚𝑡= 2 the maximum feasible range 𝑅! is 𝑄!"#. 
1) 𝑚𝑡≠𝑚(𝑡+ 1); ∆𝑆∉𝑅!′ à 
𝑏! = 𝑁𝑎𝑁 
2) 𝑚𝑡= 𝑚(𝑡+ 1); ∆𝑆∈𝑅! à 
𝑏! = ∆𝑆∗𝐸𝑛𝑒𝑞! ∗𝑃𝑃(𝑡) 
3) 𝑚𝑡≠𝑚(𝑡+ 1); ∆𝑆∈𝑅!′ à 
𝑏! = ∆𝑆∗𝐸𝑛𝑒𝑞! ∗𝑃𝑃(𝑡) 
• Idling 𝐼 in 𝑡: 
Idling defines a neutral state of neither pumping nor turbine mode. Therefore, 
𝑅! = 0. 
4) ∆𝑆∈𝑅! 
à 
𝑏! = 0 
• Pumping mode 𝑃 in 𝑡: 
For 𝑚𝑡= 1 the maximum feasible range 𝑅! is 𝑃!"#. 
5) 𝑚𝑡≠𝑚(𝑡+ 1); ∆𝑆∉𝑅!′ à 
𝑏! = 𝑁𝑎𝑁 
6) 𝑚𝑡≠𝑚(𝑡+ 1); ∆𝑆∈𝑅!′ à 
𝑏! = ∆𝑆∗𝐸𝑛𝑒𝑞! ∗𝑃𝑃(𝑡) 
7) 𝑚𝑡= 𝑚(𝑡+ 1); ∆𝑆∈𝑅! à 
𝑏! = ∆𝑆∗𝐸𝑛𝑒𝑞! ∗𝑃𝑃(𝑡) 
8) 𝑚𝑡= 𝑚(𝑡+ 1); ∆𝑆∉𝑅! à 
𝑏! = 𝑁𝑎𝑁 
 
The additional spillway is implemented in the model through an extension of the state 
space. New modes for the states of spilling and pumping water at the same time 𝑃!"#$$ 
and only spilling water 𝑆𝑝𝑖𝑙𝑙 are introduced. This leads to a new 𝑀 with the length 5 
and consequently a bigger 𝐵. The immediate benefit 𝑏′ for every 𝑠 where 𝑚= 𝑆𝑝𝑖𝑙𝑙 is 
zero. The new state 𝑚= 𝑃!"#$$ is applied when power is consumed but ∆𝑆 does not 
represent the volume of pumped water. However, it is reduced through the influence of 
the spillway. Therefore 𝑏′ is computed independent of ∆𝑆 but with a constant value of 
the maximum capacity of the pump within the limits of 𝑅! and 𝑅!′ for punished time 
losses due to mode switches. 
2.2.2 Time loss punishment 
To improve accuracy and degree of reliability a systematic punishment of mode 
switching is included into the model. Figure 10 shows the time losses due to mode 
switches for different possible machinery sets only limited by waterways and 
mechanical limits. The dark blue bars represent switches from pumping to releasing (P-
Q), the light blue bars indicate a switch from releasing to pumping (Q-P) while the 
green and the yellow bars stand for switches from idling to pumping (I-P) or releasing 
(I-Q) respectively. 
 
==PAGE:31==
Methodology 
29 
 
Figure 10 Qualitative illustration of mode change times of the four considered 
machinery sets 
 
In this thesis two technologies are considered as suitable for the investigated PSP. The 
sets C and D represent two-machine setups with a reversible pump-turbine and a 
variable speed motor-generator. The difference lies within the electric machinery and 
results in the spread of the switching times. The sets E and F represent ternary sets 
consisting of three machines. In addition to the motor-generator a separated turbine and 
pump are introduced. This allows the operator to keep both machines running in 
opposite direction which leads to even shorter switching times and a reversed pattern 
within the sets. For the ternary sets start-ups are more time consuming than direct 
switches. By coupling the motor-generator to one machine the desired mode is selected. 
A Francis Turbine and a Pelton Turbine define the sets E and F respectively. (Voith 
GmbH, 2016) 
Reducing the feasible change in storage volume 𝑅! for each time step in dependence of 
the mode switch includes the punishment of the transition times. This is called the time 
loss punishment 𝑡𝑙𝑝 in the rest of the thesis. The shares of the different time losses in 
one 15-minute time step lead to the values of 𝑡𝑙𝑝 and finally 𝑅!′. 
 
𝑅!′ = 𝑅! ∗𝑡𝑙𝑝 
(15) 
 
Table 3 illustrates for all mode sequences whether the benefit according to equation 9 as 
transferred to equation 14 is calculated for all states within the maximum feasible 𝑅! for 
no punishment necessary or the reduced 𝑅!′. 
==PAGE:32==
Methodology 
 
30 
 
Table 3 Characterization of mode sequences 
 
 
The mode in 𝑡 is listed in the rows, while the columns show the mode in 𝑡+ 1. A 
sequence including idling of the machines does not get punished due to the fact that 
𝑅! = 0 for 𝑚𝑡= 3. Figure 11 exemplifies a series of consecutive modes and the 
distribution of the time losses. The punishment system is based on the idea that the 
transition leading to the time loss happens in 𝑡. Consequently the feasible ∆𝑆(𝑡) leads to 
𝑅!′ in case of a punishment or 𝑅! in case of no punishment. 
 
 
Figure 11 Example of four consecutive modes and the distribution of time losses in the 
DDP-model 
 
In this example the machinery is pumping in 𝑡 and releasing in 𝑡+ 1. In order to enable 
releasing from the beginning of 𝑡+ 1 the transition is started in 𝑡. Every transition 
related to idling leads to no punishment of the operation because the transition is 
considered to happen within the time of idling as it can be seen in 𝑡+ 2. 
2.3 Optimization of operation 
The perfect foresight model based on DDP recommends an optimal setup of the planned 
PSP in terms of the upper reservoir size, the installed power and the type of machinery. 
The second part of this thesis deals with the optimal operation. MPC is introduced as a 
suitable method for real-time control of the storage level in dependence of the power 
price. The basic control problem of the operation of the PSP is turned into an 
optimization problem (Xiong et al., 2015). Furthermore, additional insights in the 
optimal design due to the more practical approach of modelling the PSP’s control are 
==PAGE:33==
Methodology 
31 
provided. The perfect foresight model dismisses some aspects of the real operation. 
Many decisions simulated by the DDP-model of the first part of the present thesis are 
based on knowledge that is not provided in real time optimization of the operation. 
Therefore the approach introduced in this chapter is applied on some of the setups of the 
first part to evaluate the reliability of the obtained results. 
2.3.1 Model predictive control 
MPC works as a rolling optimization process and can be applied in real-time to the 
infinite horizon problem of the PSP’s operation. Therefore in the beginning of every 
time step revealing a new power price the optimal operation for a given finite planning 
horizon is computed (Morari, 1999). The initial state for the planning horizon 𝑝ℎ is 
given by the plant’s current state. The length of 𝑝ℎ is defined by the reliability of the 
price forecast. The longer the forecast of the power price can be considered as steady 
the longer the planning horizon can be determined. It is investigated to which degree the 
quality of the model in terms of achievable benefit increases with a longer planning 
horizon. 
The overall infinite horizon operation optimization is built upon a series of consecutive 
finite horizon optimizations of 𝑝ℎ. 𝑝ℎ is a finite horizon for a deterministic price time 
series with a given initial and end state that are described later in this chapter. In the 
optimization of design the operation of the PSP is described in a finite state space 
model. This model and the approach of discrete dynamic programming are applied on 
the optimization of 𝑝ℎ. The result of the DDP optimization of 𝑝ℎ controls the decision 
made in the immediate time step 𝑡 in dependence of the forecasted input price time 
series. Therefore 𝑝ℎ and accordingly the inner optimization can be called the input 
horizon while the infinite outer horizon can be called the output horizon that finally 
controls the operation of the PSP (Bemporad & Morari, 1999). Parameters regarding the 
output horizon carry the affix real. Figure 12 shows the input horizons and their 
optimized storage level behaviour in four consecutive time steps of the output horizon. 
 
 
==PAGE:34==
Methodology 
 
32 
 
Figure 12 Illustration of the input horizons with 𝑝ℎ= 5ℎ of four consecutive time steps 
t to t+3 (Influence of Sendcon and meaning of red markers addressed in following 
chapters) 
 
2.3.2 End condition for storage level of input horizon 
Except for long negative price time series the maximum benefit in 𝑝ℎ will be computed 
by discharging the upper basin and ending up with an empty reservoir, in case 𝑝ℎ is 
long enough. Without an additional constraint the DDP-model applied on the input 
horizon will always find the maximum achievable benefit striving to empty the upper 
basin. This is not expedient with respect to the outer optimization of the output horizon. 
Therefore, a condition controlling the storage level at the end of 𝑝ℎ is introduced. The 
end condition of the storage ensures that the optimization considers a minimum storage 
level that needs to be reached at the end of every inner horizon as illustrated in Figure 
12. 
Due to high discharges 𝑄!"# and 𝑃!"# compared to the volume of the upper basin the 
influence of current storage levels into the future are relatively low. This does not 
justify leaving the end condition of the storage level out of consideration but allows the 
implementation of a recurring vector 𝑆!"#$%". This vector contains the storage volume 
at the end of every time step in the average day in 2015 continuously. Regarding the end 
condition every day is treated the same. 
Comparability of the results of both models, perfect foresight DDP of the first part of 
the thesis and MPC of the second part, is crucial. To provide that, the output horizon of 
the MPC-model is limited to a defined time series called the forecast horizon 𝑓ℎ. In 
addition to that a fixed overall start and end storage level is applied. In general this can 
be realized likewise for both models because of the mutual core process of the DDP-
model. The storage level is represented by 𝑆 defining the rows of the state space. Every 
index of the state space but the one characterizing the starting or aimed storage level is 
==PAGE:35==
Methodology 
33 
excluded from the feasible computations. In this way every condition contained in the 
discretization of 𝑆 can be set. This works without limitations for the backwards iteration 
of the perfect foresight DDP-model because no unforeseen conditions can occur. The 
outer horizon of the MPC-model is moving forward in time. For every real time step the 
operation gets optimized for the length of 𝑝ℎ. For every initial storage level there is 
only a certain range of feasible end conditions depending on the maximum discharge of 
the machinery and 𝑝ℎ. The end condition of the inner horizon is defined for every 
investigated setup and therefore no unfeasible fluctuations are included. The end 
condition for the outer horizon is implemented as an addition to 𝑆!"#$%". The length of 
𝑝ℎ is adjusted so that the planning horizon never exceeds the forecast horizon. From the 
time step 𝑡 where 𝑓ℎ−𝑡< 𝑝ℎ, 𝑝ℎ is set to 𝑓ℎ−𝑡+ 1. This is realized by equation 16 
where 𝑝ℎ! is the initial planning horizon. 
 
𝑝ℎ= min (𝑝ℎ!, 𝑓ℎ−𝑡+ 1) 
(16) 
 
By setting the value of 𝑆!"#$%", which represents the last time step of 𝑓ℎ to the overall 
aimed storage level unfeasible fluctuations are no longer impossible. To still ensure the 
applicableness not only the last value in 𝑆!"#$%" needs to be changed but every 
preceding storage condition must be adjusted to the maximum discharge of the 
machinery so that the overall end condition can be reached from every initial storage 
level. Figure 13 shows the integrated new 𝑆!"#$%". An executable transition for the 
machinery is guaranteed this way. 
 
 
Figure 13 𝑆!"#$%" for the period of one day (96 time steps) 
 
2.3.3 Time loss punishment 
The time loss punishment system implemented in the DDP model punishes feasible 
discharges in the current time step 𝑡 in dependence of the consecutive time step 𝑡+ 1. 
==PAGE:36==
Methodology 
 
34 
Hence the real benefit and the end storage level of 𝑡 for the output horizon are affected 
by the optimized time step 𝑡+ 1 of the input horizon. Since the MPC model is used as a 
control tool for the optimal operation in real-time, 𝑚(𝑡+ 1) which is responsible for the 
real 𝑡𝑙𝑝 in 𝑡 is unsure. Because of the finite input horizon, with every real time step and 
a new incoming price the optimal operation path can change. This is the source of two 
different errors. Either the optimization of the input horizon leads to an unnecessary 
punishment (first error) or a necessary punishment is omitted (second error). An 
erroneously reduced 𝑅!′ is taken into account as a loss compared to the perfect foresight 
that cannot be avoided within the scope of the thesis. The second error leads to an 
unfeasibility of the optimized operation in the output horizon and therefore must not be 
tolerated. By testing in 𝑡 whether the discharge in 𝑡−1 got reduced or not and 
consequently if a punishment was applied or not the discharge and the real immediate 
benefit in 𝑡 can be corrected accordingly. If 𝑅!′ was applied on 𝑡−1 the occurrence of 
the second error is impossible and 𝑏’ and the end storage of the input horizon can be set 
as the real values of the output horizon. For the case of no punishment in 𝑡−1 it needs 
to be investigated if the in 𝑡−1 predicted optimal mode for 𝑡 still applies or if shifting 
of 𝑝ℎ to the next time step changed the decision in such a way that a transition that was 
not taken into account in 𝑡−1 needs to be subtracted. For an unforeseen mode switch 
𝑡𝑙𝑝 gets employed on 𝑏’ and ∆𝑆 as shown in equation 17 and 18. In contrast to the usual 
punishment system of the DDP-model the transition is considered in 𝑡 in dependence of 
𝑡−1. This leads to differences in the expected and the real initial storage level for the 
next time step as the red markers in Figure 12 illustrate. 
  
𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑙 𝑖𝑚𝑚𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑎𝑡𝑒 𝑏𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑓𝑖𝑡(𝑡) = 𝑏! 𝑡 ; 2𝑛𝑑 𝑒𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟 𝑑𝑜𝑒𝑠 𝑛𝑜𝑡 𝑜𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑟
𝑏! 𝑡∗𝑡𝑙𝑝 ;  2𝑛𝑑 𝑒𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟 𝑜𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑠 
(17) 
 
𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑙 ∆𝑆(𝑡) = ∆𝑆𝑡 ; 2𝑛𝑑 𝑒𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟 𝑑𝑜𝑒𝑠 𝑛𝑜𝑡 𝑜𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑟
∆𝑆𝑡∗𝑡𝑙𝑝 ;  2𝑛𝑑 𝑒𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟 𝑜𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑠 
(18) 
 
2.3.4 Simple decision rule 
The perfect foresight DDP-model delivers the maximum achievable benefit for any 
given price time series. To be able to classify the MPC-model’s outcome in a full scale 
a lower boundary needs to be set. A fully deterministic simulation based on a simple 
decision rule is applied to compute such benefits. Within the limitations of the system 
regarding the water availability only the average power price of the year 2015 is crucial 
for the operation of the PSP. In periods of prices over average water is released through 
the turbine in case of availability. In time steps where the price is under average water 
gets pumped. Since the purpose of this model is to define a frame within that the results 
of the MPC and the DDP-model can be compared it is reasonable to neglect mode 
==PAGE:37==
Methodology 
35 
switch times of the machinery. One lower boundary (LB) for every set defined by 𝑆!"# 
and 𝑡𝑒𝑟 is computed. 
2.4 Investment evaluation tools 
The obtained results from the modelled simulations in the first part of this thesis are 
further investigated using dynamic investment evaluation tools. The simulations obtain 
the benefits corresponding to the different setups. A good investment however consists 
not solely of the possible revenue but also of arising costs. Assessing which setup is the 
best investment it is important to trade off benefit and investment costs. Thereby 
discounting future profits and costs is essential to account for growth, uncertainty and 
risks of the market. The principle of discounting routs in opportunity costs, meaning the 
costs invested into a project are set off to what they would have earned in an alternative 
use (Gollier, 2002). In terms of limited time a single constant discount rate is applied to 
account for a dynamic future economy. In consultation with the executing company a 
discount rate of 7.5% is seen as a realistic approach while a more conservative approach 
of a discount rate of 10% is also applied. Discounting can be implemented into a variety 
of tools that provide decision support for investments. However the most widely used 
method is the net present value (NPV) method also often referred to as the net present 
worth criterion (Remer & Armando P., 1995) (Pasqual et al., 2013). The NPV or 
discounted cash flow method is a widely excepted method to evaluate investments by 
moving all cash flows into present. (Stone, 1988) defines the NPV as the sum of net 
present values of annual incomes in the period of projected exploitation. In the related 
case the annual incomes are the achievable benefits per year. The NPV method assumes 
that all cash flows received are reinvested at the same fixed rate that was used to 
calculate the equivalent worth, where the referred rate is the interest rate appropriate for 
a certain project (Remer & Armando P., 1995). The NPV can be derived using equation 
(19) as described by (Götze, 2008). 
 
𝑁𝑃𝑉=
𝑁𝐵!
(1 + 𝑑)!
!
!
 
(19) 
 
𝑇 is the investigated time horizon, 𝑡 is the indicator to the referred year and 𝑑 is the 
interest rate. The net benefits 𝑁𝐵! received over 𝑇 are subsequently discounted and 
summed up. The investment costs occur where the equipment is used for the first time. 
In the related case the acquisition costs for machinery occur in the first year of the 
investigated period. An investment is considered as beneficial if the NPV is bigger than 
zero. The NPV method supports decision makers in choosing between different 
opportunities as a higher NPV corresponds to a better investment. 
Additionally, the internal rates of return (IRR) are calculated for all investment options. 
The IRR is based on similar thoughts as the NPV method. The internal rate of return is 
==PAGE:38==
Methodology 
 
36 
the rate that leads to a NPV of zero if applied as discount rate 𝑑. As shown in equation 
(20), setting the NPV in equation (19) to zero and calculating the related rate 𝑟 gives the 
IRR. 
 
𝐼𝑅𝑅: 0 = 𝑁𝑃𝑉=
𝑁𝐵!
(1 + 𝑟)!
!
!
 
(20) 
 
An investment is advantageous if the IRR is higher than the previously defined discount 
rate (Götze, 2008). The reinvestment permission introduced for the NPV is also 
necessary in the calculation of the IRR. To illustrate the dynamic behaviour of the 
plant’s revenues dynamic amortization time calculations are obtained. The 
determination of the dynamic payback period can be executed by calculating gradually 
for each period of its operational life - starting with the first period - the cumulated 
present value of net payments. This cumulative present value equals to the net present 
value as a function of operating time. As long as this value is negative, the amortization 
or break-even point of an investment is not reached (Götze, 2008) 
 
𝑁𝐵! ∗𝑑!!
!
!
 
(21) 
 
The cash flows, the investigated time horizon and the discount rate are the parameters 
determining the outcome of the introduced tools. Acquisition costs for the hydraulic 
equipment are derived from estimations of the executing company in combination with 
literature values. Basic machinery sets with a fixed number of revolutions are assumed 
to have specific costs per KW that vary with the size of the machinery. The specific 
costs per KW for big machinery are lower than the costs per KW for small machinery. 
Table 4 shows the applied specific costs for different machinery sizes. 
 
Table 4 Applied specific acquisition costs for hydraulic machinery in dependence of 
installed power 
 
 
==PAGE:39==
Methodology 
37 
The specific costs are divided into five classes related to the installed power of the 
machinery. Multiplying the specific costs with the installed power calculated in 
equation (4) results in the acquisition costs of machinery sets. For machinery set C the 
costs of the basic set are multiplied with the factor 1.1. For the slightly faster switching 
set D this factor increases to 1.25. The ternary sets E and F consist of a separate pump 
and turbine, which drives their price up. The costs are assumed to be 1.6 and 1.8 times 
the basic machinery set. To estimate the worth of an additional idle spillway similar 
investigations are carried out. The additional idle spillway introduced earlier, extends 
the power facility in order to increase the maximum possible benefit. However, its 
construction costs are completely unknown. A conservative guess of 500,000€ for the 
construction of the spillway is chosen in order to gain insight on the worth of this 
investment. It can be assumed that the necessary investment in reality might be even 
lower. The NPV and the IRR method can determine if this investment is beneficial for a 
certain setup. Amortization times are calculated to obtain a time frame needed to cover 
the expense. A calculation approach that trades off the added value of the idle spillway 
against its extra investment cost is chosen. 
The applications of the before mentioned methods are as widespread as the reasons to 
apply them. In the related case the emphasis lies on identifying the best solution in 
terms of long-term planning of design parameters. The implemented Matlab functions 
“pvvar”, ”irr” and “cumsum” are used to execute the calculations. 
 
==PAGE:40==
==PAGE:41==
 39 
3 RESULTS 
The outputs of both modelling approaches are similar. The DDP model used in the first 
part as well as the MPC model in the second part provide the storage level in the upper 
basin, the change in storage level between two consecutive time steps, the mode 
transition between two consecutive modes and the generated benefit per time step. All 
evaluated results in the following sections are based on these outputs. The pump and 
release schedules are illustrated according to storage level changes. All investment 
calculations are based on the simulated benefits and investigations in the direction of 
switching behaviour are executed using the obtained mode transitions. In the following 
part the expression setup x/y/z refers to a certain constructional setup with x = 𝑆!"# 
[1𝑒5 𝑚!], y = 𝑡𝑒𝑟 ℎ and z = 𝑚𝑎𝑐ℎ𝑖𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑦 𝑠𝑒𝑡. 
3.1 Optimization of design 
The optimization of design provides decision support in the feasibility analysis of the 
power plant. The investigation aims at determining the most profitable set of design 
parameters consisting of reservoir size, installed power and machinery type. Therefore, 
all possible setups are assessed to obtain their achievable benefit. Every result in this 
part refers to simulations for the year 2015 assuming perfect foresight. All benefits are 
simulated using the described DDP-model. Finding the optimal sequence of pumping 
and releasing through the investigated period maximizes the benefits. In Figure 14 the 
optimal path 𝑓𝑝 of pumping and releasing for a certain setup is shown together with the 
respective power prices. 
 
==PAGE:42==
Results 
 
40 
 
Figure 14 Flow path 𝑓𝑝 and correlated power price 𝑃𝑃 simulated by the DDP-model 
under the assumption of perfect foresight (48-hour period starting March 4th 2015 00:00, 
setup 7/6/C, benefit: 14,298 Euro, cut out of simulated time series of 2015) 
 
The blue bars represent the amount of water pumped or released while the red curve 
indicates the power price. Negative values for the bars indicate pumping and positive 
releasing. The decision in every time step is crucial for the possible benefit. Hereafter 
the benefits for all investigated setups are shown and listed. 
3.1.1 Computed benefits – perfect foresight 
All benefits are normalized by the highest achieved benefit. The power prices for the 
year are taken from EPEX SPOT’s website. Perfect foresight is assumed throughout the 
simulated period. The upcoming figures show the benefit achieved in 2015 for all 
combinations of reservoir sizes and installed power of machinery. The right axes show 
the different reservoirs 𝑆!"# with the sizes 300,000m3, 500,000m3 and 700,000m3. The 
left axes display the time needed to empty the reservoir 𝑡𝑒𝑟. The installed power of the 
machinery increases with decreasing 𝑡𝑒𝑟. The benefits are displayed on the vertical 
axes. Figures 15 to 18 show the results for the machinery sets C to F respectively.  
 
==PAGE:43==
Results 
41 
Figure 15 Normalized benefits for setups 
3-7/1-6/C 
 
Figure 16 Normalized benefits for setups 
3-7/1-6/D 
 
Figure 17 Normalized benefits for setups 
3-7/1-6/E 
Figure 18 Normalized benefits for setups 
3-7/1-6/F 
 
There are two main trends in all four figures. The benefit increases with decreasing 𝑡𝑒𝑟 
and increasing 𝑆!"#. For small 𝑡𝑒𝑟 the benefit can be increased by about 50% when 
increasing 𝑆!"#  from 300,000m3 to 700,000m3. For higher 𝑡𝑒𝑟 the gain drops to 
approximately 30%. With decreasing 𝑡𝑒𝑟 an increase of 30% up to over 70% can be 
achieved depending on the reservoir size. Especially a decrease in 𝑡𝑒𝑟 from two hours 
to one hour seems beneficial for all 𝑆!"#. In Figure 18 the benefit reaches the overall 
maximum on the vertical axis meaning that the setup 7/1/F is most beneficial. Table 5 
specifies the results and substantiates the statements above. All resulting benefits are 
normalized to the highest achieved benefit in setup 7/1/F. 
==PAGE:44==
Results 
 
42 
Table 5 Normalized benefits for setups 3-7/1-6/C-F 
 
 
It is determined that the benefit for all machinery sets increase with rising 𝑆!"# and 
decreasing 𝑡𝑒𝑟. The deviations between the different machinery sets arise from the 
established 𝑡𝑙𝑝. Set C has the highest transition times while set F switches the fastest 
between modes. Therefore as expected the highest possible benefit can be found bottom 
right in Table 5 where machinery set F is displayed. A table with the absolute values 
can be found in Table A-1 of Appendix A. 
3.1.2 Mode switching behaviour – perfect foresight 
Each mode transition is afflicted with a specific time loss. The influence of the 
punishment system grows with increased machinery and reservoir size. While for setups 
3/6 the deviation between fastest and slowest set is only 0.3% it grows to 7% for setup 
7/1. This reveals that the 𝑡𝑙𝑝 has higher influence on machinery with higher installed 
power. The following chapter illustrates the switching behaviour of the different 
machinery sets. Switching times affect the optimal path through all time steps. 
Punishing a switch from one mode to another might change the decision on the next 
mode. All investigations on switching behaviour are executed using occurrences of 
switches of a sample day. The absolute numbers are divided by 365 days per year to 
estimate this sample day. The cases of repeating consecutive modes are displayed in 
Figure 19 to show the affinity towards switching of machinery sets within the same 
setup. Overall a slight tendency towards more mode switches for machinery sets with 
lower transition times is investigated. The occurrences of repeating consecutives modes, 
meaning that there is no mode switching between time step 𝑡 and 𝑡+ 1, for all 
machinery sets and a certain constructional setup illustrate the influence of 𝑡𝑙𝑝. 
Nevertheless the numbers do not differ significantly. Not only the total number of 
switches is influenced by the different transition times but also the distribution within 
the different transition types is affected. Figure 20 illustrates the occurrences of the 
different transition types for the same setup as in Figure 19 and all machinery sets. 
==PAGE:45==
Results 
43 
 
Figure 19 Occurrences of no switching 
between consecutive time steps for setup 
7/1/C-F 
Figure 20 Occurrences of transition types 
for setup 7/1/C-F 
 
Reviewing Figure 10 in the methodology the relations of switching times of each set 
show that for the pump-turbine sets C and D the transitions P-Q and Q-P are the most 
time intensive switches while for the ternary sets E and F I-P and I-Q are more time 
intensive. This explains why the sets E and F tend to execute more direct switches from 
pumping to releasing and vice versa while sets C and D avoid direct switches by 
bypassing them through a time step of idling mode. Machinery set C has the lowest 
amount of direct switches from pump to turbine mode while machinery set F executes 
this switch about two more times each day. The switching behaviour of the different 
machinery sets corresponds with the observations on the benefits for each set, where set 
F achieved the highest benefit, as its losses due to 𝑡𝑙𝑝 are lowest. Again, the differences 
range only within one or two switches per day. Besides the differences within the 
machinery sets it appears interesting how the switching behaviour is influenced by 𝑡𝑒𝑟 
and 𝑆!"#. 
 
==PAGE:46==
Results 
 
44 
 
Figure 21 Occurrences of no switching between consecutive time steps for setup 7/1-
6/C-F 
 
In Figure 21 the numbers of same consecutive modes for all 𝑡𝑒𝑟 and a 𝑆!"# of 
700,000m3 are displayed. It can be seen that the model switches more often for smaller 
𝑡𝑒𝑟 and therefore bigger installed power of machinery. The statement is valid for all 
machinery sets. Because the investigated reservoir is relatively small it is filled up or 
emptied fast. Even faster with decreasing 𝑡𝑒𝑟. Growing numbers of switches are 
necessary to respect the boundaries of the system. 
 
Figure 22 Occurrences of transition types 
for setup 7/1-6/F 
Figure 23 Occurrences of transition types 
for setup 3-7/1/F 
 
In Figure 22 the occurring switches between the different modes for all investigated 𝑡𝑒𝑟 
within a 𝑆!"# of 700,000m3 and machinery set F are shown. Overall the total amount of 
switches increases with decreasing 𝑡𝑒𝑟 as already presented in Figure 21. The amount of 
direct switches P-Q and Q-P decrease with increasing 𝑡𝑒𝑟. The ratio of 𝑄!"# and 𝑃!"# 
towards 𝑆!"# can explain this behavior. If the ratio is high the reservoir can be emptied 
or filled up quickly whenever desired and storing water for later times is less important. 
For small 𝑡𝑒𝑟 switching directly from pumping to releasing and vice versa results in the 
==PAGE:47==
Results 
45 
largest benefit. Investigations assuming constant 𝑡𝑒𝑟, one set of machinery and varying 
𝑆!"# show that the switching behaviour is not sensitive towards the size of the 
reservoir. This is illustrated in Figure 23 where the total amounts of switches as well as 
the occurrences of each transition do almost not change with the reservoir size. The 
chosen structure of the model where reservoir size, head and installed power increase 
proportionally supports this observation. To give an overview Table 6 illustrates the 
numbers of transitions per day for all setups. This table can be used to investigate 
further on phenomena like abrasion or lifetime of machinery. Overall the numbers of 
switches per day do not vary much for different reservoir sizes and sets. The most 
significant trend is the increase in mode switches for decreasing 𝑡𝑒𝑟. 
Table 6 Numbers of average daily mode switches for setups 3-7/1-6/C-F 
 
 
==PAGE:48==
Results 
 
46 
3.1.3 Investment evaluation 
The highest benefit is achieved by the setup 7/1/F. However, the benefit alone does not 
provide meaningful insight into the economic value of the different setups. The internal 
rate of return is calculated to value the revenue of each investment. In Figures 24 to 26 
the internal rates of return for all setups for time horizons of 20, 30 and 40 years 
respectively are presented. 
 
 
Figure 24 Internal rate of return - IRR for a time horizon of 20 years 
 
 
Figure 25 Internal rate of return - IRR for a time horizon of 30 years 
 
==PAGE:49==
Results 
47 
 
Figure 26 Internal rate of return - IRR for a time horizon of 40 years 
 
The IRR for all setups for the sets C and D are relatively high. The IRR does increases 
when applying a longer time horizon. Many setups excel rates of 10% and more. With 
regard to the discount rate of 7.5% proposed by the executing company many of the 
setups can be seen as beneficial investments. Most of the setups with set E and F are no 
beneficial investments for an investigated period of 20 years. In Figure 26 for a time 
horizon of 40 years the IRRs of machinery set E and F grow but are mostly still below 
the desired discount rate. For a longer period an investment in those machinery sets is 
beneficial for more setups. The IRR for a time horizon of 60 years can be found in 
Figure A-1 of Appendix A. In all figures it can be seen that for the conservative 
approach of very high discount rates above 15% the setup 7/2/C is the only 
economically reasonable investment. High discount rates lead to a perforation of 
investments with early pay off. However, as explained in the methodology the IRR does 
not provide reasonable decision support for comparing investments but only qualifies an 
investment as good or bad in terms of a related discount rate. To evaluate the most 
profitable setup the NPV for the same horizons is calculated. The calculations are based 
on a discount rate of 7.5%. 
 
 
Figure 27 Net present value - NPV for a discount rate of 7.5% and a time horizon of 20 
years 
 
==PAGE:50==
Results 
 
48 
 
Figure 28 Net present value - NPV for a discount rate of 7.5% and a time horizon of 30 
years 
 
 
Figure 29 Net present value - NPV for a discount rate of 7.5% and a time horizon of 40 
years 
 
Comparing Figures 27, 28 and 29 reveals that the decision on optimal design parameters 
depends on the investigated time horizon. While a reservoir size of 700,000𝑚! and 
machinery set C are the best choices for all investigated time horizons, the most 
beneficial configuration for 𝑡𝑒𝑟 changes. Figure 28 shows that for a horizon of 30 years 
the NPV of setup 7/1/C and 7/2/C are almost equal. Both obtain revenues of 
approximately 30 million Euro. Below 30 years setup 7/2/C with its lower investment 
costs is favoured but considering more than 30 years setup 7/1/C is most beneficial. 
Overall a decrease in NPV with decreasing reservoir size and increasing 𝑡𝑒𝑟 is 
observed. The setups using the ternary sets E and F are not profitable. Applying a more 
conservative and higher discount rate of 10% changes this fact. In Figure 30 to 32 for all 
related time horizons the lower investment costs for 7/2 compared to 7/1 triggers the 
decisions. Most of the possible investments are not profitable when applying a discount 
rate of 10%. The NPV’s for both applied discount rates and a time horizon of 60 years 
are shown in Figures A-2 and A-3 of Appendix A. 
==PAGE:51==
Results 
49 
 
Figure 30 Net present value - NPV for a discount rate of 10% and a time horizon of 20 
years 
 
 
Figure 31 Net present value - NPV for a discount rate of 10% and a time horizon of 30 
years 
 
 
Figure 32 Net present value - NPV for a discount rate of 10% and a time horizon of 40 
years 
 
Overall it can be concluded that depending on the discount rate and the investigated 
time horizon either setup 7/1 or 7/2 are the best decisions in terms of their net present 
value. In all cases it becomes obvious that the most cost effective solution is machinery 
==PAGE:52==
Results 
 
50 
set C. Its lower investment costs in comparison to other sets are crucial. The higher 
losses due to increased switching times are not decisive. The increased flexibility and 
faster transitions of a ternary set do not balance out the enormously higher acquisition 
costs. To obtain amortization times for the most desirable setups, its discounted costs 
and benefits are displayed as cumulated sums. 
 
Figure 33 Cumulated sums for setup 7/1/C 
using a discount rate of 7.5% 
Figure 34 Cumulated sums for setup 7/2/C 
using a discount rate of 7.5% 
 
Figure 33 and 34 show the revenue curves for 7/1 and 7/2 and all machinery sets for 30 
years time horizon and a discount rate of 7.5%. The circles highlight the breakthrough 
points with the x-axis. These points illustrate the break-even points where the 
investment for the machinery set is amortized. It can be seen that only the sets C and D 
amortize in the related time horizon. These observations confirm the previous results of 
the NPVs. Also machinery set C is paying off the earliest in each of the investigated 
cases. This was expected from the previously obtained investigations. The more 
expensive machinery sets for 7/1 amortize later than the ones for 7/2. The setup 7/2/C 
reaches break-even of investment and revenue after approximately 10 years while setup 
7/1/C breaks even after around 15 years. In Figures 35 and 36 the discount rate is 
increased to 10% hence the break-even points are reached later. Especially for the 
expensive machinery sets related to setup 7/1 this effect has vast influence. The 
amortization time is shifted approximately 5 years back.  
 
==PAGE:53==
Results 
51 
Figure 35 Cumulated sums for setup 7/1/C 
using a discount rate of 10% 
Figure 36 Cumulated sums for setup 7/2/C 
using a discount rate of 10% 
 
3.1.4 Additional spillway – perfect foresight 
In an attempt to raise the financial value of the project the possibility of installing an 
additional spillway is examined. The benefits for all setups presented above are 
simulated with the additional opportunity to release water around the turbine. Except 
small deviations the results represent the same trends as without the additional spillway. 
The finding of increasing benefit with decreasing 𝑡𝑒𝑟 and increasing 𝑆!"# are still 
valid. Figure 37 shows the resulting benefits for set F as an example. The absolute 
benefits for all setups are displayed in Table A-2 of Appendix A. To estimate the 
financial gain each benefit is compared to the one of its equivalent setup without the 
additional spillway.  
 
 
Figure 37 Normalized benefits for setups 3-7/1-6/F with the additional spillway 
 
==PAGE:54==
Results 
 
52 
Table 7 Gains in benefits for the additional spillway for setups 3-7/1-6/C-F 
 
 
The numbers in Table 7 show that the influence of the additional spillway varies for 
different setups and machinery sets. The benefits increase more for higher installed 
power with gains up to 2.3%. For a ratio of reservoir size to machinery size of 𝑡𝑒𝑟= 6ℎ 
the effect of the spillway is disappearing. As explained in chapter 2.1 containing the 
methodology the additional spillway allows releasing water around the turbine. This is 
beneficial in times of many consecutive negative prices. In these cases water is released 
through the additional spillway to create space in the upper reservoir in order to keep 
pumping. The gain in benefit also differs within the machinery sets. Table 8 shows the 
occurrences of the newly established mode where water is pumped and released through 
the additional spillway at the same time.  
 
Table 8 Occurrences of utilizations of the additional spillway for setups 3-7/1-6/C-F 
 
 
==PAGE:55==
Results 
53 
More unitizations of the spillway lead to more gain in benefit. However, it is not to be 
forgotten that not only the number of occurrences but also the corresponding power 
price matters. A few occurrences of extremely negative prices might provide more 
benefit than more occurrences with less negative prices. To reveal the profit of the 
investment dynamic finance tools are applied. All investigations are only concluded for 
machinery set C as it has already been proved the best investment. Because of lacking 
information about arising construction costs for such a spillway a conservative approach 
with costs of 500,000 Euro is chosen. Figure 38 shows the plant’s NPV with the 
additional spillway compared to the NPV of the related setup referred to as benchmark. 
The yellow bars indicate the values for the operation with the additional spillway in 
comparison to the blue bars without the additional spill. In cases of yellow bars 
exceeding the blue bars the investment can be considered as beneficial.  
 
 
Figure 38 Net present value - NPV for the additional spillway for a discount rate of 
7.5% and a time horizon of 30 years 
 
In Figure 38 for a time horizon of 30 years and a discount rate of 7.5% the investment is 
beneficial for the setups 7/1, 7/2, 5/1 and 3/1. Especially for setup 7/1 the NPV with the 
additional spillway exceeds the one without it by far. Simulations for different time 
horizons and discount rates show the same relations for each setup with and without 
spillway. Figure 39 shows the IRR for the investment of the additional spillway. 
 
==PAGE:56==
Results 
 
54 
 
Figure 39 Internal rate of return - IRR for the additional spillway for a time horizon of 
30 years 
 
Comparing Figure 38 and 39 reveals that the IRR is always negative when the NPV of 
the related benchmark exceeds the revenue with the additional spillway. Only in the 
cases of small 𝑡𝑒𝑟 the IRR provides positive values. It can be concluded that an 
additional spillway is beneficial when choosing the right setup. These setups correspond 
with the most beneficial setups revealed earlier. To illustrate the dynamic revenue 
behaviour with and without the additional spillway the cumulated benefits for setup 
7/1/C and 7/2/C are shown in Figure 40 and 41.  
 
Figure 40 Cumulated sums for setup 7/1/C 
with and without the additional spillway 
using a discount rate of 7.5% 
Figure 41 Cumulated sums for setup 7/2/C 
with and without the additional spillway 
using a discount rate of 7.5% 
 
The cross indicates the break-even point where the investment amortizes. This point is 
reached after 2 to 3 years for setup 7/1/C. For setup 7/2/C break-even is reached after 
around 17 years. When increasing the construction costs this point would be shifted to a 
later time. Nevertheless, the assumed construction costs are a conservative guess and it 
is more likely that break-even can be reached earlier. The mode switching behaviour 
==PAGE:57==
Results 
55 
with the additional spillway is quite similar to the one without. All observed patterns 
and trends are still valid. However there is a rather small trend towards less switching 
for all setups and sets. This is visible in Figure 42. The deviations are rather small with 
around 0.3 transitions per day at maximum. With increasing 𝑡𝑒𝑟 the deviations are 
disappearing. Due to the possibility of pumping and releasing water around the turbine 
at the same time longer consecutive negative prices ranges can be fully used. It is not 
necessary to switch to turbine mode in between in order to gain space in the upper 
basin. The model behaviour related to the spillway is investigated in detail in the second 
part. 
 
 
Figure 42 Occurrences of no switching between consecutive time steps for setup 7/1-
6/C-F with and without additional spillway 
 
To provide an overview the main findings obtained by the DDP-model for 2015 under 
the assumption of perfect foresight are listed. The highest achieved benefit is obtained 
by the setup 7/1/F. Generally the benefits rise with increasing 𝑆!"# and decreasing 𝑡𝑒𝑟. 
Evaluating the IRR and the NPV the best investments are setups 7/1/C and 7/2/C 
depending on the applied discount rate and the related time horizon. 7/2/C has lower 
investment costs therefore pays off earlier and is favoured in case of high discount rates. 
For long-term planning in the scope of 30 to 60 years and a discount rate of 7.5% 7/1/C 
represents the optimal design parameters. An investment into bigger machinery size is 
more beneficial than into faster switching hydraulic equipment. The option of an 
additional spillway can be considered as a beneficial investment for the mentioned 
setups. 
3.2 Optimization of operation 
In the second part of this thesis a MPC-model is used to deal with the operation of the 
PSP. For this model a planning horizon with a steady power price is assumed. The 
length of the horizon for which the assumption of known power prices is reasonable is 
not constant. Many factors such as weather predictability or short-term deviations of 
demand and supply have an influence. Both factors are based on information 
==PAGE:58==
Results 
 
56 
availability that can be invested in. In part one of the thesis different setups of 𝑡𝑒𝑟 and 
𝑆!"# are compared under the assumption of perfect foresight over the entire simulated 
period. In a second step the impact of the length of the planning horizon is investigated. 
The results of the optimization of design dismiss some of the setups. One finding is that 
there is no advantage of smaller reservoir sizes. Even though also smaller machinery is 
therefore needed the cost savings do not balance the loss in achievable benefits. This is 
why only setups with 𝑆!"# = 700,000𝑚! are examined. 
Due to higher computation times of the MPC-model and the available resources of this 
thesis it is not possible to compute time series of a whole year as it was done to find the 
optimal design of the plant. A restriction to four weeks is chosen to be a reasonable 
trade-off between computation time and significant results. Considering seasonality one 
month is not representative for the rest of the year and cannot simply be scaled up to 
provide annual data. Therefore the application of dynamic investment evaluation tools is 
abandoned but only immediate benefits of the same time series computed by the MPC-
model and the DDP-model are compared to each other. 
3.2.1 Pump-release schedules 
As well as the DDP-model the MPC-model delivers an output that contains the optimal 
flow path for each considered setup and for each time step and power price. The 
resulting immediately achieved benefit as well as the current storage level depends on 
the decisions leading to the optimal flow path. The model is applied on five different 
planning horizons to assess their impact. Figures 43 to 45 show flow paths containing 
time steps of two days assuming planning horizons of 𝑝ℎ= 1ℎ and 5ℎ and perfect 
foresight for the same setup. 
 
 
Figure 43 Flow path 𝑓𝑝 and correlated power price 𝑃𝑃 simulated by the MPC-model 
with 𝑝ℎ= 1ℎ (48-hour period starting March 4th 2015 00:00, setup 7/6/C, benefit: 9,850 
Euro, cut out of simulated four-weeks time series of March 2015) 
 
==PAGE:59==
Results 
57 
 
Figure 44 Flow path 𝑓𝑝 and correlated power price 𝑃𝑃 simulated by the MPC-model 
with 𝑝ℎ= 5ℎ (48-hour period starting March 4th 2015 00:00, setup 7/6/C, benefit: 
11,701 Euro, cut out of simulated four-weeks time series of March 2015) 
 
 
Figure 45 Flow path 𝑓𝑝 and correlated power price 𝑃𝑃 simulated by the DDP-model 
under the assumption of perfect foresight (48-hour period starting March 4th 2015 00:00, 
setup 7/6/C, benefit: 14,298 Euro, cut out of simulated time series of March 2015) 
 
Mode switches lead to time losses, therefore small numbers of mode changes are one 
characteristic of an optimal flow path. That is what can be seen in Figure 45, too. The 
perfect foresight flow path has a rather consistent pattern while the flow path for 
𝑝ℎ= 1ℎ is highly fluctuating. Fluctuations signify mode switches and therefore time 
losses. The flow path for 𝑝ℎ= 5ℎ shows the trend for increasing planning horizons to 
get closer to the perfect foresight pattern. The MPC-model does not reach the exact 
same pattern at any time. The advantage of the perfect foresight is still obvious by 
comparing the price time series that is plotted into each flow path. Thereby the DDP-
model still fits better to every single price fluctuation in terms of covering the peaks 
than the MPC-model, even with a rather long planning horizon. The planning horizon of 
five hours represents the expected average forecast security of the power price. Figures 
46 and 47 show how the flow paths get slightly closer to the perfect foresight optimum 
==PAGE:60==
Results 
 
58 
when the 𝑝ℎ is increased to 7 and 9 hours respectively. The improvement is smaller for 
the long 𝑝ℎ-values than it is from Figure 43 to 45. 
 
 
Figure 46 Flow path 𝑓𝑝 and correlated power price 𝑃𝑃 simulated by the MPC-model 
with 𝑝ℎ= 7ℎ (48-hour period starting March 4th 2015 00:00, setup 7/6/C, benefit: 
12,250 Euro, cut out of simulated four-weeks time series of March 2015) 
 
 
Figure 47 Flow path 𝑓𝑝 and correlated power price 𝑃𝑃 simulated by the MPC-model 
with 𝑝ℎ= 9ℎ (48-hour period starting March 4th 2015 00:00, setup 7/6/C, benefit: 
12,868 Euro, cut out of simulated four-weeks time series of March 2015) 
 
The relation of steady flow paths and higher benefits is only valid within one setup. 
Over the five optimized flow paths in the figures 43 to 47 a rather conservative pattern 
of pumping during the night where prices are typically low and releasing during the 
daily price peaks can be observed. The big 𝑡𝑒𝑟-value of six hours makes the plant’s 
optimal pump-release schedule being adjusted to long-term daily fluctuations of the 
price rather than to short-term variations typical for the 15-minute intraday market. 
Because the storage volume lasts for several consecutive turbine modes no water needs 
to be pumped in between. A smaller ratio of maximum storage capacity and machinery 
discharge resulting in small 𝑡𝑒𝑟-values enables the plant to convert more energy per 
time but also increases the importance of an intelligent operation schedule. The ability 
==PAGE:61==
Results 
59 
of covering longer extends of price extremes is reduced and the focus lies on the local 
maxima and minima. Figure 48 shows the flow path for an expected average planning 
horizon of five hours for setup 7/1/C. 
 
 
Figure 48 Flow path 𝑓𝑝 and correlated power price 𝑃𝑃 simulated by the MPC-model 
with 𝑝ℎ= 5ℎ (48-hour period starting March 4th 2015 00:00, setup 7/1/C, benefit: 
51,290 Euro, cut out of simulated four-weeks time series of March 2015) 
 
A much higher alternation of pumping and turbine mode and more time steps of idling 
can be observed. But at the same time the smaller impact on concerns in the future due 
to the ability of refilling the storage within only a few time steps enables the plant to 
react on short-term fluctuations of the power price to a higher degree. Because the 
converted amount of energy is much higher in every time step the benefits achieved are 
less sensitive to a steady pattern of the flow path. 
3.2.2 Computed benefits – limited foresight 
To show the connection of the pattern of the flow path to the quality of the model that is 
controlling the operation of the PSP the achieved benefits for every setup and the 
different planning horizons are examined. In Figure 49 every benefit computed in the 
four-weeks time series by the MPC-model is compared to the maximum achievable 
benefit computed by the DDP-model. To be able to evaluate the advantage of using 
dynamic programming a lower boundary 𝐿𝐵 is included into the Figure. It represents 
the benefit that can be achieved by controlling the operation of the PSP with a simple 
decision rule. In time steps where the price is above the yearly average the PSP will 
release water when it’s available. Only the results of one machinery size represented by 
setup 7/6 are displayed.  
==PAGE:62==
Results 
 
60 
 
Figure 49 Computed benefits of the MPC-model for five different planning horizons 
compared to the perfect foresight benefit of the DDP-model and a lower boundary 
computed by a simple decision rule for Setup 7/6 (Due to computational limitations 
simulations of the sets 7/3+6/D with 𝑝ℎ= 7ℎ and 𝑝ℎ= 9ℎ could not be finished. To 
still provide a qualitative overview of the setups interpolated values are included.) 
 
There are two trends that can be seen in Figure 49. First the increasing benefit with 
increasing planning horizons. All four machinery sets are illustrated and confirm the 
trend. The differences between the single benefits are getting smaller with growing 
planning horizons and grow asymptotically against the perfect foresight value. Second 
the in part one already described trend of growing benefits in dependence of the 
decreasing mode transition times of the sets C, D, E and F respectively is still valid. As 
Figure 49 shows the benefits of the smallest machinery with 𝑡𝑒𝑟= 6ℎ the characteristic 
of the second trend is rather small. To show that the behavior of this trend is still the 
same as in the DDP-model and therefore the characteristic grows with increasing 𝑡𝑒𝑟-
values Figure 50 refers to Figure 49 content-wise but depicts the benefits for setup 7/1. 
 
==PAGE:63==
Results 
61 
 
Figure 50 Computed benefits of the MPC-model for five different planning horizons 
compared to the perfect foresight benefit of the DDP-model and a lower boundary 
computed by a simple decision rule for Setup 7/1 
 
As Figure 49 shows, the gained benefit from machinery set C to F is higher than in the 
setups 7/6. This states that the influence of the time losses is higher for bigger 
machinery sizes. What also can be observed is that the influence of 𝑝ℎ is smaller for the 
setups with higher capacity in Figure 50 than for the setups 7/6. This introduces another 
relation within the MPC results that states that machines with small discharges are more 
affected by short planning horizons and therefore forecast uncertainties as it has already 
been shown by comparing the flow patterns of Figure 44 and 48. 
In order to demonstrate the behaviour of the achieved benefits over different 𝑡𝑒𝑟’s 
Figure 51 displays the benefits for the different sets 7/1-6/C for 𝑝ℎ= 5. The shape is 
similar to the one of the corresponding axis in Figure 15. While the benefits are growing 
with decreasing 𝑡𝑒𝑟 the growth gets bigger for the smallest values of 𝑡𝑒𝑟= 1ℎ and 2ℎ. 
All behaviours described are similar for all setups as it can be seen in Figure A-4 of 
Appendix A. Tables A-3 to A-9 show the corresponding absolute values. 
 
==PAGE:64==
Results 
 
62 
 
Figure 51 Computed benefits of the MPC-model with 𝑝ℎ= 5 for setups 7/1-6/C 
 
3.2.3 Mode switching behaviour – limited foresight 
In a further step the connection of number of mode switches and benefits as described 
by the flow paths in the Figures 43 to 47 is illustrated. Figure 52 supports the findings 
from the patterns of Figures 43 to 47 that small numbers of mode switches are a 
characteristic of optimal flow paths and therefore lead to higher benefits. This 
assumption is only valid within each setup. Figure 52 shows the numbers of mode 
switches within the simulated four-weeks period of the example setup 7/4/C. Every 
examined 𝑝ℎ is compared to the perfect foresight results. 
 
==PAGE:65==
Results 
63 
 
Figure 52 Numbers of mode switches within the simulated four-weeks period of the 
MPC-model for five planning horizons and the DDP-model assuming perfect foresight 
for setup 7/4/C 
 
It can be seen that the number of time consuming mode switches such as P-Q and Q-P 
decrease with increasing 𝑝ℎ. The shape of the decrease to the minimum value of the 
perfect foresight can be compared to the asymptotic approximation of the benefits in 
Figure 49. This supports the relation between mode switches and benefit and proves the 
advantage of longer planning horizons that are associated to forecasting quality. 
Another correlation including the number of mode switches is the size of the machinery 
represented by 𝑡𝑒𝑟. The results of the optimization of design show that for a decreasing 
𝑡𝑒𝑟 the PSP is forced to switch more often due to the limited operational volume. By 
comparing Figure 52 to Figure 53 that shows the number of mode switches for setup 
7/1/C it can be seen that this trend is still valid for the limited foresight of the MPC-
model. 
 
==PAGE:66==
Results 
 
64 
 
Figure 53 Numbers of mode switches within the simulated four-weeks period of the 
MPC-model for five planning horizons and the DDP-model assuming perfect foresight 
for setup 7/1/C 
 
In order to compare absolute values of different setups the sum of all mode switches is 
divided by the 28 days of the four-weeks time series. The thereby gained results are 
presented in Table 9. Both trends that are previously described can be detected. 
 
Table 9 Number of average daily mode switches of the MPC-model for five planning 
horizons and the DDP-model assuming perfect foresight for the setups 7/1-6/C 
 
 
Due to the rather short time series of only four weeks the trends are not consistent for 
every single cell. But it can be assumed that for longer horizons continuity will become 
prevalent. Also affected by the short time series are the higher values of the daily 
switches of the perfect foresight DDP-model. The data of part one can be seen in Table 
6. This can be argued by the fact that four weeks are not representative for the whole 
year. It can be assumed that the numbers simulated by the MPC-model are estimated too 
==PAGE:67==
Results 
65 
high in comparison to a computation over the whole year 2015, as it was done in the 
first part of the thesis. 
3.2.4 Additional spillway – limited foresight 
In addition to the above described investigations, the impact of the additional spillway is 
assessed. The results of part one show that the spillway only has a big overvalue for 
small 𝑡𝑒𝑟. The second part of this thesis only deals with the biggest reservoir size of 
700,000m3. Therefore the investigations regarding the extension of the PSP are limited 
to the setups 7/1 and 7/2. Since only immediate benefits can be compared in this part of 
the thesis investigations are restricted to the benefit surplus of the additional spillway. 
Benefits of one setup with and without the added pipe are compared to each other in 
order to reveal the achieved gain.  
 
Figure 54 Computed benefit surplus of the additional spillway for five planning 
horizons and the perfect foresight assumption for the setups 7/1-2/C 
 
Figure 54 shows the results for the setups 7/1-2/C with planning horizons of 1, 3, 5, 7 
and 9 hours as wells as the perfect foresight benchmark. Tables A-10 to A-15 of 
Appendix A show all computed benefits including the additional spillway. 
The trend of increasing benefit surpluses for decreasing 𝑡𝑒𝑟-values as described in part 
one can be confirmed. For every 𝑝ℎ and the 𝑝𝑓 the growth is higher for the bigger 
machinery of 𝑡𝑒𝑟= 1ℎ. Outstanding is the result of both setups for 𝑝ℎ= 1ℎ. The 
benefit surplus of the smallest planning horizon exceeds any of the other bars in Figure 
54, while the trend from 𝑡𝑒𝑟= 1ℎ to 𝑡𝑒𝑟= 2ℎ is still valid. Further investigations are 
necessary to prove the assumption of a trend depending on the length of the planning 
horizon. But a correlation between the influence of the ratio of 𝑡𝑒𝑟 and 𝑝ℎ on the 
benefit surplus of the spillway is to be expected. The effect is the same as observed in 
the Figures 49 and 50 showing that the impact of the planning horizon is bigger for 
increasing 𝑡𝑒𝑟-values. This second trend of bigger impacts of the additional spillway for 
==PAGE:68==
Results 
 
66 
shorter planning horizons can also be described by studying the flow paths combined 
with the immediate benefit in the Figures 55 and 56. 
 
 
Figure 55 Flow path 𝑓𝑝 and correlated 
immediate Benefits 𝐼𝐵 simulated by the 
MPC-model with 𝑝ℎ= 7ℎ with no 
additional spillway (Period starting 
March 29th 2015 3:00am, setup 7/1/C, 
benefit: 27,147 Euro, cut out of simulated 
four-weeks time series of March 2015) 
 
Figure 56 Flow path 𝑓𝑝 and correlated 
immediate Benefits 𝐼𝐵 simulated by the 
MPC-model with 𝑝ℎ= 7ℎ incl. the 
additional spillway (Period starting 
March 29th 2015 3:00am, setup 7/1/C, 
benefit: 35,957 Euro, cut out of simulated 
four-weeks time series of March 2015) 
 
In Figure 55 and 56 the flow paths outline the operational difference between the PSP 
with and without the spillway. The storage level to benefit relation of the perfect 
foresight counterpart is illustrated in Figure 7. The time series starts at March 29th 
3:00am and is taken from the four-weeks period. The price is negative in most of these 
time steps as presented in Figure 57. 
 
 
Figure 57 Power price for the period starting March 29th 2015 3:00am 
 
A loss in benefit around time step 20 can be observed. The highest benefits can be 
achieved by pumping or turbine mode with full capacity at times of extreme prices. Due 
==PAGE:69==
Results 
67 
to a full upper reservoir this cannot be realized without the spillway in this time period. 
Figures 58 and 59 show that the influence increases for short planning horizons. 
 
 
Figure 58 Flow path 𝑓𝑝 and correlated 
immediate Benefits 𝐼𝐵 simulated by the 
MPC-model with 𝑝ℎ= 1ℎ with no 
additional spillway (Period starting 
March 29th 2015 3:00am, setup 7/1/C, 
benefit: 19,324 Euro, cut out of simulated 
four-weeks time series of March 2015) 
 
Figure 59 Flow path 𝑓𝑝 and correlated 
immediate Benefits 𝐼𝐵 simulated by the 
MPC-model with 𝑝ℎ= 1ℎ incl. the 
additional spillway (Period starting 
March 29th 2015 3:00am, setup 7/1/C, 
benefit: 36,073 Euro, cut out of simulated 
four-weeks time series of March 2015) 
 
While the effect of the PSP being unable to capture the full extend of the price extreme 
is the same its impact is much higher. Comparing the achieved benefits confirms the 
trend derived in Figure 54. For the long planning horizon of 7 hours the surplus of 
benefit is around 30% compared to a surplus of 85% for 𝑝ℎ= 1ℎ. The difference can be 
explained by the influence of growing planning horizons on the quality of the operation 
control described earlier in this chapter. A long 𝑝ℎ enables the model to predict time 
series of price extremes like the one in the observed period of Figures 44 to 48 and 
adjust the flow path of the prior time steps consequently. This reduces the losses. The 
shorter the planning horizon is, the smaller is the PSP’s ability to predict extremes and 
to adjust the flow path accordingly. The additional spillway allows the operator to 
balance the lack of forecasting in periods of consecutive negative prices. 
 
==PAGE:70==
==PAGE:71==
 69 
4 DISCUSSION 
In a first step the modelling approach is discussed and further improvement options and 
possible extensions are examined. In a second step the uncertainties and limitations of 
the applied methods are addressed. Finally the obtained simulation results are critically 
discussed. 
4.1 Modelling approach and possible extensions 
Basis and core of all simulations is a discrete dynamic programming algorithm. The 
discretization of the state space of this model leads to losses in the accuracy that needs 
to be considered (Kitanidis & Foufoula-Georgiou, 1987). Their impact is discussed in 
the following of this chapter. Nevertheless the model is expedient for the investigations 
of this thesis and was optimized for the design questions of the first part. Furthermore it 
was adapted and implemented for the MPC-approach to confirm the first insights won 
by the perfect foresight application and to optimize the operation control of the 
investigated PSP. One main aspect regarding the gathering of results was the utilization 
of all available resources in the best way. Restrictions on computable time series are 
often related to high computation times. The model’s speed is sufficient for real time 
optimization of the operation. By increasing the model’s performance reduced 
computation times could allow further studies on longer time periods with the MPC-
model. This could reveal more information about long-term investments. The high 
amount of tested setups could only be realized by the accessibility of DTU’s high 
performance computer (HPC), which enables the computation of many simulations 
simultaneously. The chosen algorithm’s limitations in accuracy can only be stretched 
until a certain level. To reach better representation of reality and to possibly attain 
higher advantages in the operation other algorithms might provide more sophisticated 
approaches. To dismiss the error caused by the discretization of the DDP-model linear 
programming approaches could be taken into consideration. (Parastegari et al., 2015) 
and (Correia et al., 2014) for example use piece-wise linearization methods to achieve 
that. Alternatively (Cheng et al., 2008) proposes a genetic algorithm that could also 
increase the performance. Overall besides the operation of the PSP the DDP-model is 
built to compare options rather than quantify specific values. However, due to different 
aspects, which are discussed later in this section, quantification might be seen as 
magnitudes rather than as final values. 
Besides alternative modelling algorithms extensions to the current code could deliver 
further insight in issues regarding the operation of the plant. Hydraulic machinery is 
==PAGE:72==
Discussion 
 
70 
highly vulnerable to abrasion due to physical phenomena like cavitation and suspended 
particles in the process water, but a monetary evaluation is not provided in the literature. 
The unstable output of wind and solar energy to the electrical grid leads to an additional 
source of attrition. Modern PSP’s are used to ensure the grid’s balance. Highly frequent 
mode switches and high numbers of starts and stops are very demanding for the material 
and can lead to increased maintenance costs. The technical lifetime is therefore 
connected to the number of switches within the operation time. (Huang et al., 2014) 
(Kokko & Ahtiainen, 2014) 
An approach in this direction can be to count the numbers of switches per day or year 
and discuss these numbers with a manufacturer of hydraulic machinery. Comparing 
occurrences of switches with empirical values from similar plants might be helpful as 
well. As starting point for investigations in this direction the number of switches for the 
most profitable setups in 2015 as well as the ones for a sample day are displayed in 
Table 10 for the most beneficial setups. The numbers for the other setups are introduced 
in Table 6 of chapter 3.1.2. Remember that these numbers are derived using a perfect 
foresight approach and real time operation could lead to a slightly increased number of 
transitions. From the results of the MPC-model one additional switch per day seems to 
be a reasonable estimation. 
 
Table 10 Mode switches per average day and year for the setups 7/1/C and 7/2/C 
 
 
Another possibility to account for abrasion could be to introduce a monetary 
punishment system, where a price tag for each switch from one mode to another is 
introduced. However many site-specific factors like water properties and hydraulic 
configurations are influencing the abrasion of machinery and the variations between 
different setups are significant. Monetary values for a punishment system need to be 
evaluated in field tests separately for each set of machinery. Prior executed model tests 
deliver ratios between the different stresses caused by mode switches. The occurring 
pressure changes lead to the relation between the different monetary penalties 𝑚𝑝 given 
in Table 11. 
 
==PAGE:73==
Discussion 
71 
Table 11 Relation between the impacts of mode transitions derived from (Ruchonnet & 
Braun, 2015) 
 
 
Due to a lack of reliable values for the monetary punishment an approach could be to 
execute a sensitivity analysis with varying monetary values to evaluate the influence on 
the operation schedule. The extent of this thesis does not include detailed investigations 
in this topic. 
 
4.2 Assumptions, uncertainties and limitations 
To model complex real processes a certain degree of simplification is necessary. Every 
assumption introduces uncertainty to the model. In this chapter the influence of these 
characteristics of modelling is discussed and possible ways to increase the performance 
are mentioned. 
4.2.1 Storage discretization 
The level of storage discretization defines the size of the state space in one dimension. 
In discrete programming the discretization and therefore the size of the state space 
determines the accuracy of the model. The finer the discretization grid is, the higher is 
the accuracy (Bertsekas, 1975). But at the same time the computational effort rises with 
increasing 𝑠𝑑. This can be seen in Figure 8 where the computed benefit and the 
computation time are plotted against an increasing 𝑠𝑑. In chapter 2.2.1 of the 
methodology of this thesis the reasons for a specific level are explained. In order to 
discuss the feasibility of the decisions the amplitude of the fluctuation 𝑎𝑓 in the area of 
the chosen 𝑠𝑑 and therefore the uncertainty of the results is compared to the differences 
within the computed benefits. For five 𝑡𝑒𝑟-values five 𝑠𝑑-values are set. Table 10 
shows the corresponding 𝑎𝑓-values. 
 
==PAGE:74==
Discussion 
 
72 
Table 12 Amplitude of fluctuations regarding the model outcome 𝑎𝑓 and level of 
storage discretization 𝑠𝑑 dependent on 𝑡𝑒𝑟 
 
 
𝑎𝑓 represents the highest fluctuation of the benefit around the chosen 𝑠𝑑. Typically the 
jump from the previous 𝑠𝑑 to the chosen one is higher than every other in the area 
around the local maximum to where 𝑠𝑑 is set. The extent of the area reaches to the 
neighbouring local maxima. In Figure 8 it can be seen that the scale of the maximum 
amplitude is most widely constant. 
In order to prove the assumption of feasible 𝑠𝑑-values every 𝑎𝑓 must be smaller than 
the difference between the single benefits of all setups. Figure 60 and 61 show the 
computed benefits of the different setups for one set of machinery. The included error 
bars outline the range of uncertainty resulting from the corresponding 𝑎𝑓-values. 
 
Figure 60 Benefits of different setups 
dependent on 𝑆!"# and error bars 
illustrating 𝑎𝑓 
Figure 61 Benefits of different setups 
dependent on 𝑡𝑒𝑟 and error bars 
illustrating 𝑎𝑓 
 
Uncertain deviations of the results are an inevitable weakness of fully discrete 
programming. By increasing the level of storage discretization the effect of this 
weakness can be minimized. Due to the big differences between the single benefits none 
of the uncertainties caused by the weakness of DDP effects the results of the different 
setups regarding 𝑆!"# and 𝑡𝑒𝑟 in a way that the assumptions drawn become invalid. 
==PAGE:75==
Discussion 
73 
The third dimension of the setups is represented by the four different machinery sets C, 
D, E and F. In this dimension the difference between the results is smallest. Figure 62 
shows the benefits of the setups 3-7/6/C and F. For the small 𝑡𝑒𝑟= 6ℎ the difference 
between the results is minimal. Therefore these are the setups with the highest risk of an 
insufficient 𝑠𝑑. 
 
 
Figure 62 Benefits of the setups 3-7/6/C and F, most dependent on a high 𝑠𝑑, with 
overlapping error bars illustrating 𝑎𝑓 
 
As presented in Figure 62 the error bars overlap, which indicates the potential of 𝑎𝑓 to 
influence the results. Regarding Figure 8 of Chapter 2.2.1, 𝑎𝑓 shrinks only slowly with 
increasing 𝑠𝑑. Within a practicable computation time the fluctuation of the benefit does 
not become totally smooth and 𝑎𝑓 does not reach a value that could prevent the problem 
displayed in Figure 62. 
Since the uncertainty cannot be avoided its impact needs to be considered. At first, the 
consequence from the insight of this uncertainty is that the results of the different 
machinery sets C, D, E and F for all setups are not necessarily reliable. However, as 
Figure 63 shows, the error bars do not overlap for the setups with 𝑡𝑒𝑟= 1ℎ. 
 
==PAGE:76==
Discussion 
 
74 
 
Figure 63 Benefits of the setups 3-7/1/C and F, least dependent on a high 𝑠𝑑, with error 
bars illustrating 𝑎𝑓 
 
From Figures B-1 and B-2 of Appendix B the overall trend of decreasing uncertainties 
with decreasing 𝑡𝑒𝑟 and increasing 𝑆!"# can be derived. As it is stated the weakness of 
DDP does not lead to unavoidable problems in all setups 3-7/1-6. Even in the troubled 
setups the problem does not necessarily lead to an error. But it limits the reliability 
without further investigations. The trends within the results of the thesis over all setups 
are consistent. Since some of them are proven to be reliable it is found that the potential 
error did not falsify the results of the concerned setups. On basis of this finding the 
reliability of the outcomes of the simulations is assured and further conclusions are 
made. 
4.2.2 Time loss punishment 
The introduced punishment system is built upon transition times established by a 
manufacturer of hydraulic machinery. The necessary time to execute a mode transition 
is subtracted from the available operation time. The relation of the transition times 
shown in Figure 10 distinguish between different switches and machinery sets. A 
differentiation in terms of the installed power of machinery is not considered. However, 
by the expertise of Dr-Ing. Wilfried Knapp from the chair of hydraulics and water 
resource engineering of the Technical University of Munich this approach is critical. 
The transition times which can be realized with different configurations of the 
electromechanical equipment may be independent of the unit size, but high-powered 
units are usually embedded in hydraulic systems of larger overall dimensions. 
Depending on the overall plant configuration, i.e. the length of the waterways, the flow 
velocities occurring in these, the type and location of surge chambers the transition 
times required to keep pressure surges within limits can be substantially longer. Thus, 
quantifying transition times without taking the layout and overall size of the complete 
hydraulic system into consideration could be misleading. A trend towards longer 
transition times for bigger plants is to be expected. Overall quantifying transition times 
==PAGE:77==
Discussion 
75 
without measurements and detailed investigations is critical. Due to a lack of insight on 
more accurate transition times the assumption of transition times that do not depend on 
the installed power of machinery is satisfying. 
As described in the methodology additional mechanisms influence the time loss 
punishment of the MPC-model compared to the DDP-model. DDP provides the core of 
the MPC-model employed in this thesis. Two possible errors result from the fact that the 
DDP-model accounts the time loss of mode switches to the end of every time step. This 
is based on the idea that the transition is introduced before the new time step starts. For 
a perfect foresight assumption this does not lead to any problems. But considering real 
time operation of the PSP, the price uncertainty beyond the planning horizon can change 
the optimal decision. Figure 64 shows a fictive series of time steps of the output horizon 
and the operation modes for every 15-minutes block. Also included to every time step is 
the additional time loss that it is punished for, depicted by the hatching. This can be 
compared to the original punishment shown in Figure 11 in the methodology. 
 
 
Figure 64 Example of four consecutive modes and the distribution of additional time 
losses in the MPC-model 
 
It is assumed that 𝑡 is the current time step of the output horizon and every further time 
step 𝑡+ 1 to 𝑡+ 3 is unknown at this point. The additional punishment of the MPC-
model only accounts for time steps of the output horizon. Therefore it only affects time 
steps regarding prior operation. At the end of 𝑡 during the transition to 𝑡+ 1 the DDP-
model of the input horizon of the MPC-model computes pumping to be the most viable 
operation also under consideration of the future time steps within the planning horizon. 
Due to start-up times of the machinery not the full 15 minutes can be used to consume 
power. This is simulated by the additional punishment. In the same time step the 
computed optimal consecutive operation is pumping. This is why no further punishment 
is taken into account for the first time step of the input horizon, which is depicted by 
𝑡+ 1 in Figure 64. After another 15 minutes 𝑡+ 2 is the current time step and the next 
power price is influencing the decisions of the input horizon. This leads to being turbine 
mode the new optimal operation and describes the second possible error mentioned in 
the methodology. No punishment simulating the transition at the end of 𝑡+ 1 from 
==PAGE:78==
Discussion 
 
76 
pumping to turbine mode was taken into account. Hence the time loss must be 
subtracted at the beginning of 𝑡+ 2. The computed optimal consecutive operation of the 
input horizon is assumed to be pumping mode again. Therefore 𝑡+ 2 already got 
punished regarding the transition to 𝑡+ 3 by the original time loss punishment of the 
DDP-model. For the real time operation of the PSP this means that the turbine is shut 
down early enough to be able to start the new expected optimal mode of pumping. In 
the model the next incoming power price for 𝑡+ 3 being the current time step again can 
influence the decision. In Figure 64 𝑄 being the new optimal operation illustrates this. It 
becomes obvious that shutting down the machinery was unnecessary at this point. This 
describes the first possible error of the methodology. Other than the second error this 
one cannot be rectified. Additional punishment only applies for unexpected mode 
changes and cold starts from idling. In general not to switch between modes is favoured 
by the model and the number of mode switches are kept to a minimum. Therefore the 
additional inaccuracy is kept to a minimum, too. As it was shown by the results of the 
second part of the thesis in general shorter planning horizons lead to higher numbers of 
switches. Potentially the inaccuracy increases with growing numbers of mode switches. 
The influences of the error as well as short planning horizons reduce the computed 
benefit. Therefore both support the observed trends in the same way. But as there is an 
additional inaccuracy it must be kept in mind and considered by the evaluation of the 
results. 
Both errors must be considered bearing in mind that the MPC-model is a decision 
support tool but not an autonomous control system of the PSP and further that contracts 
for power packages are not made in the first second of the concerning time step. The 
first error, that punishes a time step even though it later becomes obvious that that was 
not necessary, can be avoided by keeping the machinery running if during the current 
time step a change in the optimal decision is suspected. In reality new power prices do 
not appear suddenly but the uncertainty of the price gets smaller over time. For the 
second error there is no additional loss that needs to be avoided. But the power prices of 
both concerned time steps could influence the decision when to make the transition 
from one mode to the other. More extreme prices lead to higher benefits. Therefore 
transitions should happen in time series of low achievable benefits. 
 
4.2.3 Hydraulic head 
In all simulations the head is assumed to be constant for each reservoir size and 
independent of the actual storage level in the upper basin. The head is fixed to values 
that correspond to a half full reservoir. This assumption introduces a systematic error to 
the model. In reality the head is depended on a various components and circumstances. 
In general the gross or geodetic head 𝐻!"# [𝑚] is the elevation difference between head 
and tail water, while the net head 𝐻!"# [𝑚] equals the difference of the energy head 
between inlet and outlet of the turbine or the pump respectively.  
==PAGE:79==
Discussion 
77 
 
 
Figure 65 Scheme of related plant in turbine mode showing the geodetic and net head 
 
Figure 65 shows a simplified scheme of the related plant in turbine mode, where the 
upper basin is at the elevation ℎ! [𝑚] and the lower basin at ℎ!! [𝑚]. The solid line 
displays the geodetic head while the dashed line illustrates the net head. Hydraulic head 
losses account for the difference between geodetic and net head. These losses arise at 
inlet and outlet structures but are mainly attributed to friction within pipes, tunnels, 
valves and channels. The hydraulic head between the two elevation points is derived 
with Bernoulli’s equation. (Kaltschmitt et al., 2013) 
 
ℎ! +
𝑝!
𝑟ℎ𝑜∗𝑔+ 𝑐!
!
2 ∗𝑔= ℎ!! +
𝑝!!
𝑟ℎ𝑜∗𝑔+ 𝑐!
!!
2 ∗𝑔+ 𝜁𝑐!
!!
2 ∗𝑔= 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡. [𝑚] 
(22) 
 
Where 𝜁 [−] is the loss coefficient, ℎ [𝑚] is the elevation above a reference level, 
𝑝 [𝑃𝑎] is the cross-sectional averaged static pressure and 𝑐 [𝑚/𝑠] is the cross-sectional 
averaged flow velocity. The lost energy head is the portion of head that is converted to 
ambient heat due to friction (Kaltschmitt et al., 2013). The occurring losses are 
subsequently subtracted in turbine and added in pumping operations. This results in a 
smaller usable head for turbine mode and limits the maximum of electricity that can be 
produced, while overcoming the higher head increases the mechanical power 
consumption in pumping mode. This can be seen in equation (23). 
 
𝐻!"# = 𝐻!"# ±
𝐻!  [𝑚] 
(23) 
 
==PAGE:80==
Discussion 
 
78 
Friction losses in pipes are depended on the velocity 𝑐, the pipe diameter 𝑑 [𝑚] and the 
kinematic viscosity 𝜈 [𝑚! 𝑠]. Those parameters determine the Reynolds number 
𝑅𝑒 [−] of a flow.  
 
𝑅𝑒=
𝑐
𝑑∗𝜈 [−] 
(24) 
 
The head loss in a pipe can be determined by using the Prandtl-Colebrook equation or 
the Moody diagram (Kaltschmitt et al., 2013). In the related case head losses are 
included into the efficiency of the turbine or pumping mode respectively and are 
constant throughout the investigation. In this way the dependency of head losses on the 
velocity is completely neglected. Simulations show that the average storage levels are 
close to the assumed half full reservoirs. Table 13 illustrates that the deviations range 
between 5.52 % and 3.50 %. In terms of computational effort and a feasible 
simplification of the investigated system the deviations seem acceptable and the 
assumption is therefore applicable. 
 
Table 13 Assumed and real mean storage levels for all setups 
 
 
4.2.4 Plant efficiency 
The efficiencies for turbine and pump mode introduced in the methodology are derived 
using empirical values (Chen et al., 2008). In reality those values are split up into 
different components and derived separately. Generally the efficiencies of turbine and 
==PAGE:81==
Discussion 
79 
pumping operations depend on the fluid potential in equation (2) and conversion 
parameters for the turbine and generator or the pump and motor respectively. 
(Kaltschmitt et al., 2013) 
 
𝑃!" = 𝑃!" ∗𝑒𝑡𝑎! ∗𝑒𝑡𝑎!"# [𝑊] 
(25) 
 
𝑃!" = 𝑃!" ∗
1
𝑒𝑡𝑎!
∗
1
𝑒𝑡𝑎!"#
 [𝑊] 
(26) 
 
Efficiency drops in turbines 𝑒𝑡𝑎! [−]  and pumps 𝑒𝑡𝑎! [−]  are categorized into 
mechanical losses, volumetric losses and losses due viscosity of fluid. Viscosity losses 
can occur as hydraulic losses in spiral cases, guide vanes, stay vanes, runner and draft 
tube. Friction losses arise between runner and casing. Mechanical losses occur due to 
friction in bearings or seals, while volumetric losses are caused by leakage. The losses 
and the theoretical fluid potential determine the usable power at the shaft. The available 
power for turbine mode is reduced by the losses whereas the necessary power 
consumption for pumping is increased. The efficiencies of generator 𝑒𝑡𝑎!"# [−] and 
motor 𝑒𝑡𝑎!"# [−] are approximately constant. The cycle efficiency is determined by the 
efficiency of the turbine mode and the efficiency of the pumping mode. Final values of 
efficiencies can only be examined in field tests. For the planning phase of the related 
case different efficiencies are adapted from investigations on comparable plants. 
Additionally, the dynamic behaviour of the efficiency is completely neglected as 
efficiencies are assumed to be constant and independent of head and discharge. Figure 
66 shows a typical performance chart for a turbine. (Kaltschmitt et al., 2013) 
 
==PAGE:82==
Discussion 
 
80 
 
Figure 66 Typical performance chart for a turbine showing efficiency dependency on 
discharge and head (Knapp, 2014/2015) 
 
The efficiency and the discharge are displayed as functions of the guide vane openings 
and the head. It becomes obvious that the efficiency for a turbine is highly dependent on 
its operating point. Slight deviations from the optimal operation point can result in 
distinct drops in efficiency. Figure 66 illustrates that the assumption of constant 
efficiency values for turbine and pump mode is not valid and thereby a systematic error 
is introduced that limits the reliability on the modelled results. However this error might 
not be too significant because the machinery is working at its operating point most of 
the time. The assumption of the plant pumping or releasing at 𝑄!"#  or 𝑃!"# 
respectively justifies the model. The desired volume of trades for single time steps 
includes the amount of energy produced in full capacity. The negligible influence of 
varying heads of the system is shown in Table 13. Therefore the assumption of constant 
efficiencies provides satisfying results. Cavitation limits for the Francis turbines in the 
sets C, D and E are not investigated in detail. The minimum water level in the lower 
basin is assumed to cover the pump-turbine to avoid cavitation. This is indicated by the 
location of the turbine in Figure 65. For turbine set F the situation is different because 
Pelton turbines need to be installed above the tail water level. In this case the 
operational head decreases. This fact is not represented in the model. Furthermore the 
efficiency is assumed to be equal for all investigated types of hydraulic machinery. As a 
fact the efficiencies of set E and F are slightly higher because separate machines as 
pump and turbine are used. The lower efficiency of reversible pump-turbines is a well-
known fact in hydropower (Williams, 1996). The model in the related case does not 
==PAGE:83==
Discussion 
81 
distinguish between the machinery types and their efficiencies. A possibility to improve 
the performance of the power plant is to increase its efficiency. However, the applied 
values are commonly observed in similar plants and it is assumed to be challenging to 
improve them. The discussion of the above-mentioned issues leads to the 
acknowledgment that the qualitative results obtained by the model can be used to 
compare different setups. A model that accounts for the dynamic behaviour of 
efficiency and head is beyond the frame of this thesis, but further investigations in this 
direction might be helpful to improve the accuracy and reliability of the model. 
(Kaltschmitt et al., 2013) 
4.2.5 Power price 
The power prices used for the simulation are the determining variable of the model and 
therefore drive the decisions of the optimal sequence of pumping and releasing. Due to 
its limited storage capacity and the relatively low output the investigated plant does not 
have an influence on the market price but is completely dependent on factors like 
weather and demand. The plant can therefore be considered as a price taker (Conejo et 
al., 2002). The formation of the power price on the market is the biggest source of 
uncertainty to the model. As mentioned in the introduction price formation in intraday 
trading differs greatly from the usual unit prices known in day-ahead trading (Epexspot, 
2016). The so-called “Pay-as-bid” procedure establishes different prices for the same 
products depending on the time of the trade (Sämisch, 2016). On the website of EPEX 
SPOT prices are publicly available (Epexspot, 2016). There is a distinction between 
last, lowest, highest and weighted average price for every quarter hour. While the last 
traded price is typically rather close to the weighted average, the lowest and highest 
prices differ clearly. All simulations and calculations in this thesis are executed using 
the weighted average price. Figure 67 shows the price history for an exemplary week 
from March 2nd to March 8th in 2015. The red line illustrates the lowest, the green line 
the weighted average and the blue line shows the highest prices for this specific time 
horizon.  
 
==PAGE:84==
Discussion 
 
82 
 
Figure 67 Lowest, weighted average and highest power price from March 2nd to March 
9th 2015 
 
All graphs show the expected trend with two peaks each day during the week, but the 
deviations of the lowest and highest price to the average are not constant. It can be 
observed that divergences increase at extreme prices. It can be seen that the differences 
between low, average and high prices are the greatest at these prices. There are 
deviations up to almost 100 Euro. With forecasting superior to the competitors there is 
the possibility to sell power at prices higher than the average and buy at prices below 
average. Values and limitations of better forecasting are discussed in the following of 
this thesis. A drawback of the established model is that it can only find the optimal 
sequence of pumping and releasing in a chronological order. However, in reality it is 
possible to fixe future trades before determining actions of the following time steps. 
This is not represented in the model. The established algorithm does take future price 
developments into account but decisions are made only for the current operation. The 
applied calculations in terms of investment planning assume consistent power price 
behaviour in the future. The benefits calculated for 2015 are extrapolated using a 
constant discount rate to account for future economic developments. In reality the 
European market is a more complex construct that is influenced by a variety of factors. 
Europe’s policy makers have the most influence. For example the German nuclear 
phase-out had a major impact on the expansion of renewable power production in 
Germany (Radtke, 2013). There are many scientific investigations on policy scenarios 
and their interference on the power price. The most widely used scenarios are the ones 
established by the international panel on climate change (IPCC). A basic distinction 
between scenario families is made and further spilt up into altogether 40 scenarios. The 
different scenarios account for the main drivers of climate change such as demographic 
development, socio-economic development and technological change (International 
Panel on Climate Change, 2000). The scenarios vary from a baseline scenario with no 
significant developments in the above-mentioned drivers to scenarios with very high 
penetration of renewable energies and low emissions. (Densing et al., 2014) conducted a 
study on the influence of different scenarios on the electricity price in Switzerland. The 
==PAGE:85==
Discussion 
83 
results reveal that the influence is very significant and relevant to for long term 
planning. This short section aims at showing that the development on the power market 
in general is uncertain and may lead in different directions. 
The selection of an appropriate discount rate is essential even so difficult for long term 
planning. Most authors argue that a positive discount rate is appropriate due to a growth 
of the gross national product especially in highly developed countries. The larger the 
growth the larger is the related discount rate. (Gollier, 2002) However risk aversion 
supports lower discount rates. Another important aspect of discounting is that its 
influence increases with a longer time horizon. The further in the future a benefit is 
received the higher is the influence of the discount rate. Therefore high discount rates 
favour projects that accrue early (Gollier, 2002). To compensate the exponential effect 
of discounting many authors such as (Harvey, 1994) discuss the need for non-constant 
discounting and propose rates that decrease as a function of time especially for long-
term projects. Nevertheless it seems to be difficult to meet precise finance and risk 
characteristics of a project with a single discount rate (Gollier, 2002). However, single 
constant discount rates are applied in this thesis and appear to be sufficient to account 
for a dynamic future economy. In academic circles a discount rate for developed 
countries between 5% and 8% is widely accepted (Gollier, 2002), what corresponds 
well with the chosen rate. Discounting can be implemented into a variety of tools that 
act as decision support for investments. Profitable capital investment leads to growth of 
an economy. As an investor it is important to have a tool to predict the profitability of a 
proposed investment (Remer & Armando P., 1995). 
Most researchers argue that many methods such as net final value, internal rate of 
return, benefit–cost ratio, profitability index, equivalent annuity, discounted payback 
period and average payback period, if properly applied, provide reasonable and 
satisfying results. In this thesis the NPV, IRR and amortization time method are used. 
Common strengths of all applied methods can be found within their easy computation 
and variety of applicability. The NPV determines whether an investment is good or not 
in terms of the present value of future incomes. If the NPV is above zero an investment 
is considered as good. The same conclusion can be made when using the IRR, but the 
IRR cannot be used to compare mutually exclusive investments. While the significance 
of the IRR is strictly limited to determining whether an investment is good or not and 
not to compare it with other investments, the NPV method is capable of comparing 
investments. As argued above it is not easy to find an appropriate discount rate. In 
situations where no usable information about an applicable discount rate exists the IRR 
seems superior. One weakness of both methods is due to the assumed reinvestment 
principle. Many authors argue that this assumption does not represent the reality. 
Strengths and weaknesses of the dynamic amortization time evaluation can be adopted 
from the ones of the NPV method. (Götze, 2008) (Fabozzi & Peterson Drake, 2009) 
The major weakness of all three methods is their strong degree of dependence on the 
input data. Especially the calculations of the investment and acquisition costs are 
==PAGE:86==
Discussion 
 
84 
afflicted with a lot of uncertainty. Clearly further insight on costs for machinery or 
construction could improve the meaningfulness of the results. Overall it can be 
concluded that the applied methods all obtain reasonable insight on the dynamic 
behaviour of investments. However, by increasing knowledge on price developments 
and investment costs more reliable results would be enabled. 
4.3 Significance of results 
Under consideration of the aforementioned uncertainties this chapter discusses the 
significance of the results and the insights for the project main questions. 
4.3.1 Optimization of design 
In the first part the described deterministic model simulates the benefits for the year 
2015. It is investigated that with increasing 𝑆!"# and decreasing 𝑡𝑒𝑟 the benefits grow. 
Therefore it seems desirable to extend those parameters as far as possible. However, the 
size of the upper basin is limited by geographical conditions. A basin with more than 
700,000 𝑚! is not feasible. The time it takes to empty the reservoir 𝑡𝑒𝑟 was originally 
investigated to a value of two hours. In this thesis also a 𝑡𝑒𝑟 of one hour is simulated, 
which results in the highest benefits. The executing company and the planning engineer 
expressed reasonable doubts about the technical feasibility of such a configuration. 
However, investigations on the feasibility of installed power to reservoir size 
relationships are not part of this thesis. Nevertheless it appears to be crucial to study 
these relationships to examine whether 𝑡𝑒𝑟= 1 or 2 is applicable. The benefit does not 
give insight about the most profitable setup for the power plant and therefore cannot be 
used to examine the optimal set of design parameters. It is important to reveal the 
connection between higher benefit and higher investment costs. Therefore the financial 
mathematical evaluation of the results is a necessary tool to support decision-making in 
the phase of the feasibility analysis. The highest benefits and the best investment option 
are not the same. The slightly higher benefits for the machinery sets E and F do not 
balance their much higher investment cost. It can be concluded that the loss due to the 
influence of the mode switching times is rather small compared to the difference in 
acquisition costs. An investment in more installed power of machinery is therefore more 
beneficial than into faster switching machinery. In all investment calculations the costs 
of the construction of the upper basin are assumed to be zero regardless the size of the 
reservoir. Nevertheless, bigger reservoir size leads to higher installed power and 
therefore more expensive machinery. Even though acquisition costs for suitable 
hydraulic machinery for a 𝑆!"# of 700,000𝑚! are high it still represents the best 
tradeoff of investment and revenue. Also running costs for operation, power trading and 
maintenance are completely neglected because the lack of data basis. However, these 
costs can be assumed as relatively equal for all setups and do not interfere with the 
comparability of different setups. The NPVs and IRRs decrease proportionally by 
including these costs. The results of the NPVs show that the optimal set of design 
==PAGE:87==
Discussion 
85 
parameters changes with the discount rate and the investigated time horizon. For 
example if the discount rate for a time horizon of 30 years is slightly changed the 
decision towards 𝑡𝑒𝑟 would be affected. A discount rate below would favor 𝑡𝑒𝑟= 1ℎ 
while a rate shifts the optimal decision towards 𝑡𝑒𝑟= 2ℎ. Also the results for NPV and 
IRR are strongly depended on the assumed machinery costs. The calculation of the 
machinery sets’ costs is conducted based on roughly estimated values for different 
machinery sizes. The different costs for the sets C, D, E and F are assumed by 
multiplying a basic set with determined factors. These factors are chosen to account for 
the higher costs of faster switching equipment and in cases of the ternary sets for the 
extra machinery. The ratios of these factors are estimated based on information 
provided by the executing company. When changing these relations the results of the 
NPV and the IRR would be affected significantly. For smaller ratios the decision for the 
optimal design parameter is shifted towards the more expensive sets. Furthermore alloys 
or special equipment are not taken into account. The approach of stepwise costs per KW 
may be a reasonable approximation but does not reveal the real price structure. Further 
investigations in this direction would improve the reliability of the calculated NPV and 
IRR. In reality the manufacturer of hydraulic machinery provides the acquisition costs. 
In the frame of this thesis it is not possible to access this information. 
The obtained information about the switching behaviour meets the expectations. 
Machinery sets with higher transition times tend to switch less and avoid the time 
intensive switches from releasing to pumping and vice versa. The switching behaviour 
is investigated for two reasons. First, the influence of 𝑡𝑙𝑝 on the different machinery 
sets is evaluated. As stated the influence of 𝑡𝑙𝑝 is rather low in comparison to offer 
determining facts like the acquisition costs. Second, the numbers of switches per day are 
examined to provide insight for possible investigations in the direction of abrasion and 
technical lifetime of machinery. Most significantly a decrease of 𝑡𝑒𝑟 leads to more 
switching per day. The different switching behaviours for different machinery sets are 
proven to not being decisive for long-term effects. Also the chosen reservoir size does 
not change switching behaviour significantly. The absolute numbers of switches per 
day, except for 𝑡𝑒𝑟, vary within one to two switches per day. The ratio of the maximal 
storage change in a time step and 𝑆!"# defined by 𝑡𝑒𝑟 is determining for the number of 
switches. A growing number of switches per day means that the technical lifetime of 
machinery is reduced and maintenance costs increase. Also the transition types are 
evaluated. Together with the relations shown in Table 12 the occurrences of the 
different transition types could be used to establish a monetary punishment system as 
proposed earlier. It can be expected that more switches per day lead to a reduced 
lifetime of the blades and other machinery parts. This would lead to additional costs. 
Better alloys could reduce the effect of higher abrasion but again would increase costs. 
These facts could change the optimal decision towards a setup with a lower amount of 
switches per day. The degree of this phenomena and its influence on the economics is 
not considered in this thesis but could be a starting point for further investigations. 
==PAGE:88==
Discussion 
 
86 
Overall it can be concluded that decreasing 𝑡𝑒𝑟 has been proven to raise the plant’s 
revenue but is also likely to cause higher and unknown costs in terms of abrasion. For 
borderline cases such as the decision between setup 7/1/C and 7/2/C for a discount rate 
of 7.5% and a related time horizon of 30 years the number of switches per day could be 
a decisive parameter in terms of abrasion costs. However, the degree to which this 
influences the decision of the optimal design parameters is unknown. Investigations on 
the profitability of an additional spillway reveal that it is in deed a good investment 
under a few configurations of design parameters. The benefits obtained are significantly 
higher compared to the equivalent setups without it. The construction of the extra 
release option is assumed to cost 500,000€ which is very likely enough if not estimated 
too high. Overall for the right setup it can be considered as a good investment. Anyhow, 
when it comes to the realization of the project it has to be investigated if geographical 
circumstances allow such a supplement. 
All results of the first part of the thesis are obtained under the assumption of perfect 
foresight. This is to be considered when interpreting them. The perfect foresight of the 
rest of the year enables the system to schedule the operation in a way that the flow path 
fits the price time series in the most profitable way. Also the findings about the 
switching behaviour of the model are highly influenced by this assumption. The second 
part of this thesis provides detailed information about the influence of forecasting 
towards the achievable benefit. It can be concluded that the obtained results represent 
trends more than quantifications. The approach of assuming perfect foresight leads to 
satisfying results for the evaluation of the design parameters. However, when it comes 
to real time operation this approach is infeasible. Nevertheless, the model delivers 
reasonable decision support for the design of the planned power facility. The 
deterministic power price time series as the only external input parameter determinates 
the design parameters. Due to the relatively high fluctuations on the intraday power 
market a plant design that enables capturing positive price peaks as well as negative 
prices effectively is necessary. The ability to release or pump as much water as possible 
in one time step is decisive for a beneficial operation. In other words 𝑄!"# and 𝑃!"# 
should be increased as far as possible to be able to respond quickly and effectively to 
price fluctuations. Retrospectively this influences the optimal decision for 𝑡𝑒𝑟 and 
𝑆!"#. Nevertheless choosing the right design parameters for a power plant is always an 
economic decision. The setup, which balances price fluctuations the best, might not be 
the most profitable investment for a company. As every commercial company’s goal is 
to maximize their profit financial aspects will always drive decisions about optimal 
plant design. 
 
4.3.2 Optimization of operation 
The second part examined the influence of forecasting onto the model. Because of the 
high computation time of the MPC-model that reaches up to 50 seconds per 15-minute 
==PAGE:89==
Discussion 
87 
time step only a four-week period from March 2nd 2015 to March 29th 2015 is 
simulated. Seasonal patterns do not allow simply extrapolating the results to longer time 
horizons. Without at least one year of simulated results is does not make sense to 
investigate into the direction of investments. Figure 68 shows the power price for the 
investigated period compared to the average price of a four-week period in 2015. 
 
 
Figure 68 Power price March 2nd - March 29th 2015 compared to power price of average 
four-week period 
 
The red line illustrates the prices of March 2015 while the blue line shows the average 
price. To prove that the results of the MPC-model for the four-week time series are not 
applicable for the whole year the benefits obtained in this period are extrapolated and 
the results are compared to the originally observed benefits of simulating the whole 
year. The results are displayed in Figure 69. 
 
 
Figure 69 Benefits for 2015 compared to benefits of March 2015 scaled to a year 
 
The scaled benefits obtained in the four-week period of March exceed the 
corresponding yearly outcomes. Reasons for the deviations can be seasonal weather 
patterns that influence the power price. For example March is a month with an above 
average wind power production (He et al., 2012). A rather high wind power production 
==PAGE:90==
Discussion 
 
88 
influences the power prices especially on the intraday market what results in 
fluctuations the PSP’s purpose is to balance. These facts justify the decision of only 
dealing with immediate benefits in the second part of the thesis. The focus lies on the 
obtained benefits and relationships between setup, power price and forecasting. 
Before discussing the benefits the reason for the influence of 𝑝ℎ is exposed. The 
necessity of an end condition for the storage level of the input horizon is illustrated in 
Figure 70 and 71. The development of the real storage level with and without the 
application of an end condition is compared. 
 
Figure 70 Storage level pattern simulated 
by the MPC-model without an end 
condition for the input horizon (48-hour 
period starting March 2nd 2015 00:00, 
setup 7/1/C, 𝑝ℎ= 1ℎ, benefit: 57,187 
Euro) 
Figure 71 Storage level pattern simulated 
by the MPC-model incl. end condition for 
the input horizon (48-hour period starting 
March 2nd 2015 00:00, setup 7/1/C, 
𝑝ℎ= 1ℎ, benefit: 65,593 Euro) 
 
Without implementing an end condition the fact that the optimization process strives for 
the biggest benefits would lead to minimum rest storage levels at the end of every input 
horizon. This is not expedient for the output horizon, which can be seen in the 
developments of the real storages shown in Figures 70 and 71 and by comparing the 
achieved benefits. In the MPC-model the same setup simulated with two planning 
horizons is affected differently by this additional constraint. The planning horizon 
represents the period within that the DDP-model optimizes the flow path from an initial 
storage level of the upper basin to the level prescribed by the end condition. Shorter 𝑝ℎ-
values limit the optimizer’s possibilities of actions between these two given points. 
Figures 72 and 73 illustrate the different influence of the end condition on storage level 
patterns for different 𝑝ℎ-values. 
==PAGE:91==
Discussion 
89 
Figure 72 Influence of the end condition 
on simulations of the MPC-model with 
𝑝ℎ= 1ℎ (24-hour period starting March 
2nd 2015 00:00, setup 7/1/C, benefit: 
33,035 Euro) 
Figure 73 Influence of the end condition 
on simulations of the MPC-model with 
𝑝ℎ= 5ℎ (24-hour period starting March 
2nd 2015 00:00, setup 7/1/C, benefit: 
39,076 Euro) 
 
It can be observed that the storage level of the simulation with 𝑝ℎ= 1ℎ evolves rather 
close to 𝑆!"#$%" compared to the corresponding simulation with 𝑝ℎ= 5ℎ where the 
fluctuation of 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑙 𝑆 around 𝑆!"#$%" is higher. The daily average optimal storage level 
computed by the perfect foresight model determines the end condition. This does not 
relate to the real daily price time series. Therefore the increased flexibility of the longer 
planning horizons enables the model to higher degrees of adjustment and consequently 
higher benefits. 
In Figures 49 and 50 the computed benefits of the MPC-model are compared to the 
upper benchmark of the perfect foresight and the lower boundary 𝐿𝐵 of the simple 
decision rule simulations. This shows that the advantage of the operation control with 
dynamic programming is higher for small 𝑡𝑒𝑟-values. The time to empty the upper 
reservoir represents the ratio of the water that can be pumped or released within one 
time step, 𝑃!"# and 𝑄!"# respectively, to the volume of the upper basin 𝑆!"#. For 
every time step the decision whether to pump, to release or to save water is to be made. 
Since the available water in the upper reservoir defines how much energy can be 
produced in the next time steps decisions regarding changes of this storage level - 
𝑑𝑒𝑙𝑡𝑎 𝑆 - have higher impact for smaller 𝑡𝑒𝑟-values where 𝑑𝑒𝑙𝑡𝑎 𝑆 is potentially bigger. 
While the 𝐿𝐵 benefits are computed by a simple decision rule the MPC-model takes 
more variables into account and optimizes the operation in a more sophisticated way. 
This explains the increased advantage of the model for decreasing 𝑡𝑒𝑟 and therefore 
increasing machinery capacity. 
Several trends regarding the behaviour of the benefits within the different setups are 
illustrated in chapter 3.2.2 containing the optimization of operation. Some of these 
==PAGE:92==
Discussion 
 
90 
trends are already described in chapter 3.1.1 covering the optimization of design. In 
contrast to the DDP-model of the first part of this thesis the employed MPC-model is 
applicable to the real time control of the operation of the PSP. Therefore the findings of 
this part are used to confirm the conclusions drawn from the perfect foresight approach. 
Furthermore the influence of the uncertainty of the power price is simulated by 𝑝ℎ. The 
application of five different planning horizons and the relations to the perfect foresight 
model allow describing coherences between the impact of machinery and forecasting on 
the achievable benefit. Figures 49 and 50 show the development of the benefit with 
growing 𝑡𝑒𝑟 and 𝑝ℎ-values. Figure A-4 of Appendix A shows all computed benefits of 
the MPC-model. It is noticeable that the influence of increasing machinery size 
outweighs the one of longer planning horizons. This can be explained by the way the 
ratio of storable volume to the maximum discharge affects the ability of the plant to 
react on different fluctuations of the power price. While big 𝑡𝑒𝑟-values favour the 
utilization of daily variations due to the demand side of the grid, small 𝑡𝑒𝑟-values 
support the main purpose of a modern PSP to balance short-term fluctuations. 
Comparing Figures 44 and 48 illustrate this. The fact that in every time step much 
higher volumes of energy can be converted and the reservoir can be filled up quickly, 
lowers the influence of immediate decisions on the future. Big 𝑡𝑒𝑟-values describe that 
it is more time consuming to empty and fill up the reservoir what increases the ability of 
the plant to cover long-term fluctuations without changing mode in between. The aimed 
15-minute intraday market’s main purpose is to cover brief temporary deviations of 
demand and supply. Therefore it is more important to convert big amounts of energy in 
one time step than to obtain constant production in consecutive time steps in order to 
maximize the benefit. This favours small 𝑡𝑒𝑟-values. The third aspect after 𝑆!"# and 
𝑡𝑒𝑟 covered by the investigations is the type of machinery represented by the four sets 
C, D, E and F. Main characteristic of the sets are their mode switching times where the 
main difference lies between the sets C and D compared to sets E and F. While C and D 
are combined pump-turbine sets, E and F are ternary sets consisting out of separated 
pumps and turbines. This enables the PSP to accomplish much faster mode switches but 
also implies highly increased costs. In the optimization of design dynamic investment 
tools are engaged to show that the additional price of the expensive machines cannot be 
covered by their additionally achieved benefit over a reasonable timespan. The small 
variances between the benefits computed in the optimization of operation do not lead to 
the assumption that the MPC-model results in a different outcome. Therefore the focus 
lies on the profitability of investments in either the machinery size, thus 𝑡𝑒𝑟, or the 
forecasting purview. In reality the planning horizon represents the ability of the operator 
to predict the price uncertainty. The degree of uncertainty and therefore the length of the 
horizon are not constant but fluctuate in dependence of several outside influences. The 
market analyst of the executing company states that the price can be presumed as steady 
within a projected range of five to seven hours. The trend regarding 𝑝ℎ illustrated in 
chapter 3.2.2 has its biggest characteristic for very short planning horizons represented 
==PAGE:93==
Discussion 
91 
by 𝑝ℎ= 1ℎ. The gain in benefit by decreasing the time to empty the reservoir and 
consequently increasing the capacity of the PSP is already outstanding. The 
considerations about the realistic length of 𝑝ℎ are lowering its influence even more. The 
highly fluctuating prices on the investigated market allow the generation of high 
benefits by adjusting to short-term developments. This leads to the understanding that 
the PSP’s capacity is more important than the extension of the forecast. This does not 
include the precision of the forecast that leads to the closing of transactions on the 
power market. All considerations in this thesis are based on the average price on the 
market for every time step. Advantages of better price prediction that lead to contracts 
above the average price are not included. Leaving the in reality negligible results for 
𝑝ℎ= 1ℎ out of attention the MPC-model confirms the findings on the surplus in benefit 
of the additional spillway obtained in the design optimization. Regarding the 
assumptions for the costs and the constructional terms of the pipe the extension of the 
PSP still appears a economically reasonable investment. The immediate benefits are 
coupled to the power price of the market. Operating on the 15-minute intraday market 
the PSP achieves its highest benefits in times of high price fluctuations. These 
fluctuations mostly result from high deviations of the demand to supply ratio expected 
by the grid operator. These deviations lead to price extremes expressed either as peaks 
or lows. The additional spillway can cover time series of consecutive negative prices by 
the continuous consumption of electricity. In order to cover price peaks brought about 
by missing feed-ins into the grid electricity needs to be generated. The size and 
consequently the energy content of the upper reservoir 𝑆!"# limit the amount of 
producible power. The ratio of the capacity of the machinery to the stored volume 
represented by 𝑡𝑒𝑟 states during how many consecutive time steps energy can be 
generated. However, the amount of energy and thus the benefit is limited by 𝑆!"#. The 
optimal operation of the PSP computed by the MPC-model strives for full load releases 
during every local maximum of price peaks. Nevertheless the coverage of the full 
extend of the peak depends on the available amount of water. In the current setup the 
investigated plant is not capable of balancing shortcomings on a large scale but rather is 
built to react on small deviations, as it is the purpose of the aimed 15-minute intraday 
market. Therefore a small 𝑡𝑒𝑟 is desired to increase the achievable benefits. 
 
==PAGE:94==
==PAGE:95==
 93 
5 CONCLUSION 
The optimal operation of a pump-storage power plant is dependent on the optimal 
dimensioning of its design parameters during the planning period. In this thesis dynamic 
programming is employed to examine both, the operation and the design. The first part 
containing the optimization of design distinguishes between three main parameters. For 
the reservoir size 𝑆!"# a clear trend towards higher revenue for more volume can be 
concluded. This is based on the assumption of negligible construction costs of the upper 
reservoir due to the disposal value of the sight’s gravel. To increase the achievable 
benefits with bigger reservoir sizes the installed power of machinery needs to be scaled 
up accordingly. However, the increase of the costs for hydraulic equipment is rather 
small compared to the enormously higher revenue that can be realized. This leads to the 
optimal decision for the reservoir size 𝑆!"# = 700,000𝑚!  limited by the given 
geographical conditions. The addressed relation between the plants capacity and the 
storable volume described by the parameter 𝑡𝑒𝑟 is the decisive factor controlling the 
share of the total storable energy that can be converted within one time step. Working 
on the 15-minute intraday market a modern PSP acts as buffer of discrepancies between 
supply and demand on the electricity market. Therefore its economic operation that is 
determined by the closing of trades for every 15-minute package depends on both the 
price predictability and the plant’s ability to cover the market’s demands at any time. 
Pump-storage plants are one of the grid operator’s several control mechanisms. Price 
extremes caused by grid imbalances are not of long duration and the potential benefits 
need to be exploited in the maximum magnitude. This favours small ratios of the 
storable volume and the maximum discharge that enables the plant to deliver bigger 
shares of the storable energy in every traded package. This results in the investigations 
outcome of either 𝑡𝑒𝑟= 1ℎ or 𝑡𝑒𝑟= 2ℎ being the best choice. Due to differing 
acquisition costs the applied discount rate and the investigated time horizon do have a 
significant influence on the decision for 𝑡𝑒𝑟 as well. For discount rates higher than 7.5% 
𝑡𝑒𝑟= 2ℎ is favorable. Also investigated time horizons lower than 30 years support this 
decision. When applying a discount rate of 7.5% or lower and prospecting for more than 
30 years the optimal decision changes to 𝑡𝑒𝑟= 1ℎ. For a conservative investment that 
pays off early after ten to twelve years depending on the discount rate the smaller 
machinery is recommended. Not taking technical feasibility analyses of the 
configuration including the biggest installed power into account reveals this setup as 
most beneficial as a long-term investment. Amortization of this setup is expected after 
15 to 20 years. The additional parameter of time losses due to mode switch times 
==PAGE:96==
Conclusion 
 
94 
introduced by four examined machinery sets does not have an influence on this 
decision. The lack of accessible price proposals leads to an uncertainty within the final 
decision for one set. But the small differences allow the reasonable conclusion that the 
benefit surplus does not cover the higher costs of the machines with reduced transition 
times. Therefore the reversible pump-turbine represented by set C is recommended for 
the concerned pump-storage plant. The economic worth of installing an additional 
spillway has been proven for both possible configurations of design parameters even 
though amortization is reached much later for the more conservative approach of 
smaller plant capacity. 
This configured setup of design parameters enables the pump-storage plant to operate in 
a way that the highest benefits can be achieved. Developments of the electricity market 
require adaptions of a pump-storage plant’s operation in a more and more sophisticated 
way in order to realize these benefits. Investigations on price time series of the 
concerned market reveal that general tendencies of low prices during the night and price 
peaks in expected periods during the morning and the afternoon are still valid. However 
high fluctuations around this daily pattern are the main characteristic of the 15-minute 
intraday market. Optimized flow paths of the desired setup reflect a day-night pattern 
only to a small degree. The advantage of the applied MPC-model over less complex 
operation control systems like a simple decision rule leads to an adaption of the pump-
release schedule to the short-term fluctuations of the power price. The application of 
different planning horizons has shown that the combination of limited storage volume 
and high installed power of the plant raises the impact of every single decision but 
simultaneously lowers the influence on future considerations. This enables the operator 
to react on temporary fluctuations of the price without having shorts in storage for the 
future because the reservoir can get filled up quickly. High discharges also increase the 
impact of time losses due to mode transitions. The MPC-model supports the optimal 
operation and reduces the number of time consuming mode switches to a minimum. An 
optimized trade-off between steady pump-release schedules and coverage of price 
extremes is key to maximal benefits. The plant’s revenue is not just dependent on 
immediate benefits and investment costs but also on upcoming maintenance costs. A 
high number of mode switches leads to abrasion of the machinery. Higher plant 
capacities result in increased occurrences of daily mode transitions in the optimized 
schedules. This additional cost factor must be considered in the evaluation of both 
recommended setups. 
The results of this thesis deliver decision support for the dimensioning of a pump-
storage hydropower plant on the German 15-minute intraday market. High price 
fluctuations favour small ratios between the plant’s installed power and the maximum 
storage capacity. The recently established market demands well-adapted patterns of 
pump-release schedules to maximize the benefit. Dynamic programming in the frame of 
model predictive control supplies intelligent operation control. Closer interaction with 
the executing company and operator of the power plant will lead to further insight about 
==PAGE:97==
Conclusion 
95 
the implementation of the model. Introducing real-time market analysis to the model’s 
optimization process will increase the efficiency of the operation control. 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:98==
==PAGE:99==
 97 
REFERENCES 
Abed, K.A. & El-Mallah, A.A., 1997. Capacity factor of wind turbines. Energy, 22.5, 
pp.487-91. 
Agentur für Erneuerbare Energien, 2015. Forschung Energiewende - Stromspeicher in 
Deutschland. Metaanalyse. Agentur für Erneuerbare Energien. 
Agentur für Erneuerbare Energien, 2016. Unendlich viel Energie. [Online] Available at: 
https://www.unendlich-viel-energie.de/erneuerbare-energie/wasser/wasserkraft 
[Accessed 25 April 2016]. 
Amjady, N., Rabiee, A. & Shayanfar, H.A., 2010. Pay-as-bid based reactive power 
market. Energy Conversion and Management, 51(2), pp.376-81. 
Anagnostopoulos, J.S. & Papantonis, D.E., 2007. Pumping station design for a pumped-
storage wind-hydro power plant. Energy Conversion and Management, 48(11), 
pp.3009-17. 
Anagnostopoulos, J.S. & Papantonis, D.E., 2008. Simulation and size optimization of a 
pumped–storage power plant for the recovery of wind-farms rejected energy. 
Renewable energy, 33(7), pp.1685-94. 
Bemporad, A. & Morari, M., 1999. Robust model predictive control: A survey. 
Robustness in identification and control, pp.207-26. 
Bertsekas, D.P., 1975. Convergenceof Discretization Procedures in Dynamic 
Programming. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 20(3), pp.415-19. 
Blackwell, D., 1962. Discrete Dynamic Programming. The Annals of Mathematical 
Statistics, pp.719-26. 
Boccard, N., 2009. Capacity factor of wind power realized values vs. estimates. Energy 
Policy, 37(7), pp.2679-88. 
Brown, B.W., 1965. On the Iterative Method of Dynamic Programming on a Finite 
Space Discrete Time Markov Process. The annals of mathematical statistics , pp.1279-
85. 
Brown, P.D., Lopes, J.A.P. & Matos, M.A., 2008. Optimization of Pumped Storage 
Capacity in an Isolated Power System With Large Renewable Penetration. IEEE 
TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS, 23(2), pp.523-31. 
Caro, G., Hildmann, M. & Daly, D., 2012. A Quantitative Analysis of Weather Effects 
on Traded Volume in the Swiss Energy Spot Market. In 9th International Conference 
on the European Market., 2012. IEEE. 
Castillo, A. & Gayme, D.F., 2014. Grid-scale energy storage applications in renewable 
energy integration: A survey. Energy Conversion and Management, 87, pp.885-94. 
==PAGE:100==
References 
 
98 
Castronuovoa, E.D. & Peças Lopes, J.A., 2004. Optimal operation and hydro storage 
sizing of a wind–hydro power plant. Electrical Power and Energy Systems, 26(10), 
pp.771-78. 
Chen, H. et al., 2008. Progress in electrical energy storage system: A critical review. 
Progress in natural science, 19(3), pp.291-312. 
Cheng, C.-T., Wang, W.-C., Xu, D.-M. & Chau, K.W., 2008. Optimizing Hydropower 
Reservoir Operation Using Hybrid Genetic Algorithm and Chaos. Water Resources 
Management, 22(7), pp.895-909. 
Clements, A.E., Hurn, A.S. & Li, Z., 2016. Forecasting day-ahead electricity load using 
a multiple equation time series approach. European Journal of Operational Research, 
251(2), pp.522-30. 
Conejo, A.J., Nogales, F.J. & Arroyo, J.M., 2002. Price-Taker Bidding Strategy Under 
Price Uncertainty. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS, 17(4), pp.1081-88. 
Correia, P.F., Ferreira de Jesus, J.M. & Lemos, J.M., 2014. Sizing of a pumped storage 
power plant in S. Miguel, Azores, using stochastic optimization. Electric Power Systems 
Research, 112, pp.20-26. 
Densing, M., Hirschberg, S. & Turton, H., 2014. Review of Swiss Electricity Scenarios 
2050. Review. Villingen: Paul Scherrer Institut Paul Scherrer Institut. 
Dubey, S., Jadhav, N.Y. & Betka, Z., 2013. Socio-Economic and Environmental 
Impacts of Silicon Based Photovoltaic (PV) Technologies. Energy Procedia, 33, 
pp.322-34. 
Duquea, Á.J., Castronuovoa, E., Sánchez, I. & Usaolaa, J., 2011. Optimal operation of a 
pumped-storage hydro plant that compensates the imbalances of a wind power 
producer. 
Epexspot, 
2016. 
Epexspot. 
[Online] 
Available 
at: 
http://www.epexspot.com/en/renewables [Accessed 20 April 2016]. 
EU Comission, 2007. Dg competition report on energy sector inquiry. SEC. 
European Comission, 2012. The future role and challenges of Energy Storage. 
European Comission. 
Fabozzi, F.J. & Peterson Drake, P., 2009. Mathematics of finance. John Wiley & Sons. 
Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy, 2016. Developement of renewable 
engery sources in Germany 2015. Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy. 
Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy, 2016. Federal Ministry for 
Economic Affairs and Energy. [Online] Available at: http://www.erneuerbare-
energien.de/EE/Redaktion/DE/Dossier/eeg.html [Accessed 28 April 2016]. 
Federal Ministry of Justice and Consumer Protection, 2014. Gesetz für den Ausbau 
erneuerbarer 
Energien. 
[Online] 
Available 
at: 
http://www.gesetze-im-
internet.de/eeg_2014/BJNR106610014.html#BJNR106610014BJNG000100000 
[Accessed 20 April 2016]. 
Fletena, S.-E. & Kristoffersen, T.K., 2008. Short-term hydropower production planning 
by stochastic programming. Computers & Operations Research, 35(8), pp.2656-71. 
==PAGE:101==
References 
99 
Foufoula-Georgiou, E. & Kitanidis, P.K., 1987. Error Analysis of Conventional 
Discrete and Gradient Dynamic Programming. Water Resources Research, 23(5), 
pp.845-58. 
Foufoula-Georgiou, E. & Kitanidis, P.K., 1988. Gradient Dynamic Programming for 
Stochastic Optimal Control of Multidimensional Water Resources Systems. Water 
Resources Research, 24(8), pp.1345-59. 
Götze, U., 2008. Investitionsrechnung. Heidelberg: Springer. 
Goedecke, M., Therdthianwong, S. & Gheewala, S.H., 2007. Life cycle cost analysis of 
alternative vehicles and fuels in Thailand. Energy Policy, 35(6), pp.3236-46. 
Gollier, C., 2002. Discounting an uncertain future. Journal of public economics, 85(2), 
pp.149-66. 
González, J.S. & Lacal-Arántegui, R., 2016. A review of regulatory framework for wind 
energy in European Union countries: Current state and expected developments. 
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 56, pp.588-602. 
Hartmann, N. et al., 2012. Stromspeicherpotenziale für Deutschland. Stuttgart: Zentrum 
für Energieforschung Zfes Zentrum für Energieforschung Zfes. 
Harvey, C.M., 1994. The reasonableness of non-constant discounting. Journal of Public 
Economics, 53(1), pp.31-51. 
He, Y., Hildmann, M. & Andersson, G., 2012. Modeling the Wind Power In-feed in 
Germany by Data Decomposition and Time Series Analysis. In IEEE Power and 
Energy Society General Meeting., 2012. IEEE. 
Hildmann, M., Ulbig, A. & Andersson, G., 2014. Revisiting the Merit-Order Effect of 
Renewable Energy Sources. arXiv preprint. 
Huang, X.. et al., 2014. Fatigue analyses of the prototype Francis runners based on site 
measurements and simulations. Earth and Environmental Science, 22(1). 
Hubik, F., 2015. Der Stromspeicher-Irrglaube. Handelsblatt, 18 Augustus. 
International hydropower association, 2014. Hydropower. [Online] Available at: 
http://www.hydropower.org/a-brief-history-of-hydropower [Accessed 22 April 2016]. 
International Panel on Climate Change, 2000. IPCC special report: Emission scenarios. 
Summary for policiy makers. IPCC. 
Kaltschmitt, M., Streicher, W. & Wiese, A., 2013. Erneuerbare Energien - 
Systemtechnik, Wirtschaftlichkeit, Umweltaspekte. Springer. 
Kassem, A.M. & Zaid, S.A., 2014. Load parameter waveforms improvement of a stand- 
alone wind-based energy storage system and Takagi– Sugeno fuzzy logic algorithm. 
IET Renewable Power Generation, 8(7), pp.775-85. 
Key, T. et al., 2013. Quantifying the Value of Hydropower in the Electric Grid: Final 
Report. Technical Report. Electric Power Research Institue. 
Kitanidis, P.K. & Foufoula-Georgiou, E., 1987. Error Analysis of Conventional 
Discrete and Gradient Dynamic Programming. Water resources research, pp.845-58. 
Knapp, W., 2014/2015. Hydro Power and Energy Storage. Presentation. Munich: 
Technical Universitiy of Munich. 
==PAGE:102==
References 
 
100 
Knaut, A. et al., 2015. The reference forecast of the German energy transition—An 
outlook on electricity markets. Energy Policy, 92, pp.477-91. 
Kokko, V. & Ahtiainen, J., 2014. Ageing Due to Start-stop cycles and Frequent 
Regulation in Lifetime Estimation of Hydro Turbines and Generators. Grenoble: Aptril. 
Kusakana, K., 2015. Optimization of the daily operation of a hydrokinetic–diesel hybrid 
system with pumped hydro storage. Energy Conversion and Management, 106, pp.901-
10. 
Kusakana, K. & Vermaak, H.J., 2013. Hybrid renewable power systems for mobile 
telephony base stations in developing countries. Renewable Energy, 51, pp.419-25. 
Landeszentrale für politische Bildung Baden-Württemberg, 2016. Landeszentrale für 
politische Bildung Baden-Württemberg. [Online] Available at: http://www.lpb-
bw.de/energiewende.html [Accessed 27 April 2016]. 
Loucks, D.P. et al., 2005. Water Resources Systems Planning and Management : An 
Introduction to Methods, Models and Applications. UNESCO Publishing. 
Marzband, M., Sumper, A.D.-G.J.L. & Gumara-Ferret, R., 2013. Experimental 
validation of a real time energy management system for microgrids in islanded mode 
using a local day-ahead electricity market and MINLP. Energy Conversion and 
Management, 76, pp.314-22. 
Mashud Rana, I.K., 2014. Forecasting electricity load with advanced wavelet neural 
networks. Neurocomputing, 182, pp.118-32. 
Morari, M., 1999. Model predictive control: past, present and future. Computers and 
Chemical Engineering , pp.667–682. 
National renewable energy laboratory, 2016. NREL. [Online] Available at: 
http://www.nrel.gov/gis/re_potential.html [Accessed 27 April 2016]. 
Onea, F. & Rusu, E., 2016. Efficiency assessments for some state of the art wind 
turbines in the coastal environments of the Black and the Caspian seas. Energy 
exploration & exploitation. 
Parastegari, M.., Hooshmand, R.A., Khodabakhshian, A. & Zare, A.H., 2015. Joint 
operation of wind farm, photovoltaic, pump-storage and energy storage devices in 
energy and reserve markets. International Journal of Electrical Power & Energy 
Systems, pp.275-84. 
Pasqual, J., Padilla, E. & Jadotte, E., 2013. Technical note: Equivalence of different 
profitability criteria with the net present value. International Journal of Production 
Economics, 142(1), pp.205-10. 
Pousinho, H.M.I., Mendes, V.M.F. & Catalão, J.P.S., 2012. Linear programming 
applied for the optimization of hydro and wind energy resources. Linear programming. 
Qi, W., Liu, J. & Christofides, P.D., 2011. A Two-Time-Scale Framework to 
Supervisory Predictive Control of an Integrated Wind/Solar Energy Generation and 
Water Desalination System. In 2011 American Control Conference. San Francisco, 
2011. 
==PAGE:103==
References 
101 
Radtke, J., 2013. Die deutsche "Energiewende" nach Fukushima: Der wissenschaftliche 
Diskurs zwischen Atomausstieg und Wachstumsdebatte. Marburg: Metropolis-Verlag. 
Rehman, S., Al-Hadhrami, L.M. & Alam, M.M., 2014. Pumped hydro energy storage 
system: A technological review. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 44, 
pp.586-98. 
Remer, D.S. & Armando P., N., 1995. A compendium and comparison of 25 project 
evaluation techniques Part 1: Net present value and rate of return methods. Internation 
journal of production economics, 42(1), pp.79-96. 
Ruchonnet, N. & Braun, O., 2015. Reduced scale model test of pump-turbine transition. 
In Meeting on Cavitation and Dynamic Problems in Hydraulic Machinery and Systems. 
Ljubljana, 2015. 
Sewckow, S. & Günther, S., 2013. Beschaffung stärker auf Spot ausrichten. Wiso. 
Sämisch, H., 2016. Next Kraftwerke. [Online] Available at: https://www.next-
kraftwerke.de/wissen/strommarkt [Accessed 21 April 2016]. 
Shapiro, J.F., 1968. Shortest Route Methods for Finite State Space Deterministic 
Dynamic Programming Problems. SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics, 16(6), 
pp.1232-50. 
Spitaler, G. & Flodl, P., 1975. Pumped storage power plants, pump-turbines the 
tendency toward larger dimensions, outputs and heads. Water for human needs. 
Stone, R., 1988. Management of Engineering Projects. London: Macmillan education. 
Teleke, S., Baran, M.E. & Bhattacharya, S., 2010. Optimal Control of Battery Energy 
Storage for Wind Farm Dispatching. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENERGY 
CONVERSION, 25(3), pp.787-94. 
The Press and Information Office of the Federal Government, 2016. Bundesregierung. 
[Online] 
Available 
at: 
https://www.bundesregierung.de/Content/DE/StatischeSeiten/Breg/Energiekonzept 
[Accessed 20 April 2016]. 
Vila, J.P.C.-A. & Fernandes, C., 2013. The Spanish intraday market design: A 
successful solution to balance renewable generation? Renewable Energy, 74, pp.422-32. 
Vila, J.́.P.C.-A.́., Hakvoort, R.A. & Ramos, A.́.s., 2012. Short-term strategies for Dutch 
wind power producers to reduce imbalance costs. Energy Policy, 52, pp.573-82. 
Voith GmbH, 2016. Pumped storage machines: Reversible pump turbines, Ternary sets 
and Motor-generators. Brochure. Heidelberg: Voith Hydro Holding GmbH & Co. KG. 
Weber, C., 2009. Adequate intraday market design to enable the integration of wind 
energy into the European power systems. Energy Policy, 38(7), pp.3155-63. 
Wesselak, V., Schabbach, T., Link, T. & Fischer, J., 2013. Regenerative Energietechnik. 
Heidelberg: Springer. 
Wiegand, P., 2014. Hydro Project Ronovation Marries History, Technology and 
Environmont. Hydroworld. 
Williams, D.A.A., 1996. Pumps as turbines for low cost micro hydro power. Renewable 
Energy, 9(1). 
==PAGE:104==
References 
 
102 
Wu, J., Zhu, J., Chen, G. & Zhang, H., 2008. A Hybrid Method for Optimal Scheduling 
of Short-Term Electric Power Generation of Cascaded Hydroelectric Plants Based on 
Particle 
Swarm 
Optimization 
and 
Chance-Constrained 
Programming. 
IEEE 
TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS, 23(4), pp.1570-79. 
Xiong, M., Gao, F., Liu, K.C. & Dong, J., 2015. Optimal Real-Time Scheduling for 
Hybrid Energy Storage Systems and Wind Farms Based on Model Predictive Control. 
Energies, 8(8), pp.8020-51. 
Zadeh, A.K., Abdel-Akher, M. & Wang, M., 2012. Optimized Day-ahead Hydrothermal 
Wind Energy Systems Scheduling Using Parallel PSO. Renewable Energy Research 
and Applications (ICRERA), pp.1-6. 
 
==PAGE:105==
==PAGE:106==
 
104 
LIST OF FIGURES 
Figure 1 Development of renewable energy share of primary energy 
consumption in Germany (Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and 
Energy, 2016) ......................................................................................................... 11 
Figure 2 Development of renewable energy share of gross electricity 
consumption in Germany (Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and 
Energy, 2016) ......................................................................................................... 11 
Figure 3 Development of renewables-based electricity generation in Germany 
(Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy, 2016) .................................. 12 
Figure 4 Renewables based electricity generation in Germany 2015 (Federal 
Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy, 2016) ................................................ 12 
Figure 5 Development of electricity generation and installed capacity of 
hydropower plants in Germany (Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs 
and Energy, 2016) .................................................................................................. 13 
Figure 6 Conceptual model of the pump-storage plant ................................................... 22 
Figure 7 Simulated storage level and immediate benefits starting at March 29th 
3:00am under the assumption of perfect foresight ................................................. 23 
Figure 8 Computable benefits and corresponding computation time per time 
step in dependency of the storage discretization level (Example for 
𝑆𝑚𝑎𝑥= 7 1𝑒5 𝑚3 and 𝑡𝑒𝑟= 3ℎ) ........................................................................ 26 
Figure 9 Simplified illustration of the state space 𝐵 and several changes over a 
time step ................................................................................................................. 27 
Figure 10 Qualitative illustration of mode change times of the four considered 
machinery sets ........................................................................................................ 29 
Figure 11 Example of four consecutive modes and the distribution of time 
losses in the DDP-model ........................................................................................ 30 
Figure 12 Illustration of the input horizons with 𝑝ℎ= 5ℎ of four consecutive 
time steps t to t+3 (Influence of Sendcon and meaning of red markers 
addressed in following chapters) ........................................................................... 32 
Figure 13 𝑆𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑐𝑜𝑛 for the period of one day (96 time steps) ........................................ 33 
Figure 14 Flow path 𝑓𝑝 and correlated power price 𝑃𝑃 simulated by the DDP-
model under the assumption of perfect foresight (48-hour period starting 
==PAGE:107==
List of Figures 
105 
March 4th 2015 00:00, setup 7/6/C, benefit: 14,298 Euro, cut out of 
simulated time series of 2015) .............................................................................. 40 
Figure 15 Normalized benefits for setups 3-7/1-6/C ...................................................... 41 
Figure 16 Normalized benefits for setups 3-7/1-6/D ...................................................... 41 
Figure 17 Normalized benefits for setups 3-7/1-6/E ...................................................... 41 
Figure 18 Normalized benefits for setups 3-7/1-6/F ....................................................... 41 
Figure 19 Occurrences of no switching between consecutive time steps for 
setup 7/1/C-F ......................................................................................................... 43 
Figure 20 Occurrences of transition types for setup 7/1/C-F ......................................... 43 
Figure 21 Occurrences of no switching between consecutive time steps for 
setup 7/1-6/C-F ...................................................................................................... 44 
Figure 22 Occurrences of transition types for setup 7/1-6/F .......................................... 44 
Figure 23 Occurrences of transition types for setup 3-7/1/F .......................................... 44 
Figure 24 Internal rate of return - IRR for a time horizon of 20 years ........................... 46 
Figure 25 Internal rate of return - IRR for a time horizon of 30 years ........................... 46 
Figure 26 Internal rate of return - IRR for a time horizon of 40 years ........................... 47 
Figure 27 Net present value - NPV for a discount rate of 7.5% and a time 
horizon of 20 years ................................................................................................ 47 
Figure 28 Net present value - NPV for a discount rate of 7.5% and a time 
horizon of 30 years ................................................................................................ 48 
Figure 29 Net present value - NPV for a discount rate of 7.5% and a time 
horizon of 40 years ................................................................................................ 48 
Figure 30 Net present value - NPV for a discount rate of 10% and a time 
horizon of 20 years ................................................................................................ 49 
Figure 31 Net present value - NPV for a discount rate of 10% and a time 
horizon of 30 years ................................................................................................ 49 
Figure 32 Net present value - NPV for a discount rate of 10% and a time 
horizon of 40 years ................................................................................................ 49 
Figure 33 Cumulated sums for setup 7/1/C using a discount rate of 7.5% .................... 50 
Figure 34 Cumulated sums for setup 7/2/C using a discount rate of 7.5% .................... 50 
Figure 35 Cumulated sums for setup 7/1/C using a discount rate of 10% ..................... 51 
Figure 36 Cumulated sums for setup 7/2/C using a discount rate of 10% ..................... 51 
Figure 37 Normalized benefits for setups 3-7/1-6/F with the additional spillway ......... 51 
Figure 38 Net present value - NPV for the additional spillway for a discount 
rate of 7.5% and a time horizon of 30 years .......................................................... 53 
==PAGE:108==
List of Figures 
 
106 
Figure 39 Internal rate of return - IRR for the additional spillway for a time 
horizon of 30 years ................................................................................................ 54 
Figure 40 Cumulated sums for setup 7/1/C with and without the additional 
spillway using a discount rate of 7.5% .................................................................. 54 
Figure 41 Cumulated sums for setup 7/2/C with and without the additional 
spillway using a discount rate of 7.5% .................................................................. 54 
Figure 42 Occurrences of no switching between consecutive time steps for 
setup 7/1-6/C-F with and without additional spillway ........................................... 55 
Figure 43 Flow path 𝑓𝑝 and correlated power price 𝑃𝑃 simulated by the MPC-
model with 𝑝ℎ= 1ℎ (48-hour period starting March 4th 2015 00:00, 
setup 7/6/C, benefit: 9,850 Euro, cut out of simulated four-weeks time 
series of March 2015) ............................................................................................ 56 
Figure 44 Flow path 𝑓𝑝 and correlated power price 𝑃𝑃 simulated by the MPC-
model with 𝑝ℎ= 5ℎ (48-hour period starting March 4th 2015 00:00, 
setup 7/6/C, benefit: 11,701 Euro, cut out of simulated four-weeks time 
series of March 2015) ............................................................................................ 57 
Figure 45 Flow path 𝑓𝑝 and correlated power price 𝑃𝑃 simulated by the DDP-
model under the assumption of perfect foresight (48-hour period starting 
March 4th 2015 00:00, setup 7/6/C, benefit: 14,298 Euro, cut out of 
simulated time series of March 2015) .................................................................... 57 
Figure 46 Flow path 𝑓𝑝 and correlated power price 𝑃𝑃 simulated by the MPC-
model with 𝑝ℎ= 7ℎ (48-hour period starting March 4th 2015 00:00, 
setup 7/6/C, benefit: 12,250 Euro, cut out of simulated four-weeks time 
series of March 2015) ............................................................................................ 58 
Figure 47 Flow path 𝑓𝑝 and correlated power price 𝑃𝑃 simulated by the MPC-
model with 𝑝ℎ= 9ℎ (48-hour period starting March 4th 2015 00:00, 
setup 7/6/C, benefit: 12,868 Euro, cut out of simulated four-weeks time 
series of March 2015) ............................................................................................ 58 
Figure 48 Flow path 𝑓𝑝 and correlated power price 𝑃𝑃 simulated by the MPC-
model with 𝑝ℎ= 5ℎ (48-hour period starting March 4th 2015 00:00, 
setup 7/1/C, benefit: 51,290 Euro, cut out of simulated four-weeks time 
series of March 2015) ............................................................................................ 59 
Figure 49 Computed benefits of the MPC-model for five different planning 
horizons compared to the perfect foresight benefit of the DDP-model and 
a lower boundary computed by a simple decision rule for Setup 7/6 (Due 
to computational limitations simulations of the sets 7/3+6/D with 
𝑝ℎ= 7ℎ and 𝑝ℎ= 9ℎ could not be finished. To still provide a 
qualitative overview of the setups interpolated values are included.) ................... 60 
==PAGE:109==
List of Figures 
107 
Figure 50 Computed benefits of the MPC-model for five different planning 
horizons compared to the perfect foresight benefit of the DDP-model and 
a lower boundary computed by a simple decision rule for Setup 7/1 ................... 61 
Figure 51 Computed benefits of the MPC-model with 𝑝ℎ= 5 for setups 7/1-
6/C ......................................................................................................................... 62 
Figure 52 Numbers of mode switches within the simulated four-weeks period 
of the MPC-model for five planning horizons and the DDP-model 
assuming perfect foresight for setup 7/4/C ........................................................... 63 
Figure 53 Numbers of mode switches within the simulated four-weeks period 
of the MPC-model for five planning horizons and the DDP-model 
assuming perfect foresight for setup 7/1/C ........................................................... 64 
Figure 54 Computed benefit surplus of the additional spillway for five planning 
horizons and the perfect foresight assumption for the setups 7/1-2/C .................. 65 
Figure 55 Flow path 𝑓𝑝 and correlated immediate Benefits 𝐼𝐵 simulated by the 
MPC-model with 𝑝ℎ= 7ℎ with no additional spillway (Period starting 
March 29th 2015 3:00am, setup 7/1/C, benefit: 27,147 Euro, cut out of 
simulated four-weeks time series of March 2015) ................................................ 66 
Figure 56 Flow path 𝑓𝑝 and correlated immediate Benefits 𝐼𝐵 simulated by the 
MPC-model with 𝑝ℎ= 7ℎ incl. the additional spillway (Period starting 
March 29th 2015 3:00am, setup 7/1/C, benefit: 35,957 Euro, cut out of 
simulated four-weeks time series of March 2015) ................................................ 66 
Figure 57 Power price for the period starting March 29th 2015 3:00am ........................ 66 
Figure 58 Flow path 𝑓𝑝 and correlated immediate Benefits 𝐼𝐵 simulated by the 
MPC-model with 𝑝ℎ= 1ℎ with no additional spillway (Period starting 
March 29th 2015 3:00am, setup 7/1/C, benefit: 19,324 Euro, cut out of 
simulated four-weeks time series of March 2015) ................................................ 67 
Figure 59 Flow path 𝑓𝑝 and correlated immediate Benefits 𝐼𝐵 simulated by the 
MPC-model with 𝑝ℎ= 1ℎ incl. the additional spillway (Period starting 
March 29th 2015 3:00am, setup 7/1/C, benefit: 36,073 Euro, cut out of 
simulated four-weeks time series of March 2015) ................................................ 67 
Figure 60 Benefits of different setups dependent on 𝑆𝑚𝑎𝑥 and error bars 
illustrating 𝑎𝑓 ........................................................................................................ 72 
Figure 61 Benefits of different setups dependent on 𝑡𝑒𝑟 and error bars 
illustrating 𝑎𝑓 ........................................................................................................ 72 
Figure 62 Benefits of the setups 3-7/6/C and F, most dependent on a high 𝑠𝑑, 
with overlapping error bars illustrating 𝑎𝑓 ........................................................... 73 
Figure 63 Benefits of the setups 3-7/1/C and F, least dependent on a high 𝑠𝑑, 
with error bars illustrating 𝑎𝑓 ............................................................................... 74 
==PAGE:110==
List of Figures 
 
108 
Figure 64 Example of four consecutive modes and the distribution of additional 
time losses in the MPC-model ............................................................................... 75 
Figure 65 Scheme of related plant in turbine mode showing the geodetic and 
net head .................................................................................................................. 77 
Figure 66 Typical performance chart for a turbine showing efficiency 
dependency on discharge and head (Knapp, 2014/2015) ...................................... 80 
Figure 67 Lowest, weighted average and highest power price from March 2nd 
to March 9th 2015 ................................................................................................... 82 
Figure 68 Power price March 2nd - March 29th 2015 compared to power price 
of average four-week period .................................................................................. 87 
Figure 69 Benefits for 2015 compared to benefits of March 2015 scaled to a 
year ......................................................................................................................... 87 
Figure 70 Storage level pattern simulated by the MPC-model without an end 
condition for the input horizon (48-hour period starting March 2nd 2015 
00:00, setup 7/1/C, 𝑝ℎ= 1ℎ, benefit: 57,187 Euro) ............................................. 88 
Figure 71 Storage level pattern simulated by the MPC-model incl. end 
condition for the input horizon (48-hour period starting March 2nd 2015 
00:00, setup 7/1/C, 𝑝ℎ= 1ℎ, benefit: 65,593 Euro) ............................................. 88 
Figure 72 Influence of the end condition on simulations of the MPC-model 
with 𝑝ℎ= 1ℎ (24-hour period starting March 2nd 2015 00:00, setup 
7/1/C, benefit: 33,035 Euro) .................................................................................. 89 
Figure 73 Influence of the end condition on simulations of the MPC-model 
with 𝑝ℎ= 5ℎ (24-hour period starting March 2nd 2015 00:00, setup 
7/1/C, benefit: 39,076 Euro) .................................................................................. 89 
 
==PAGE:111==
 109 
LIST OF TABLES 
Table 1 Energy yield and share of power consumption 2011 for renewable 
energy sources ....................................................................................................... 14 
Table 2 Constructional setups introduced in this thesis and by the executing 
company and ......................................................................................................... 21 
Table 3 Characterization of mode sequences ................................................................. 30 
Table 4 Applied specific acquisition costs for hydraulic machinery in 
dependence of installed power .............................................................................. 36 
Table 5 Normalized benefits for setups 3-7/1-6/C-F ...................................................... 42 
Table 6 Numbers of average daily mode switches for setups 3-7/1-6/C-F .................... 45 
Table 7 Gains in benefits for the additional spillway for setups 3-7/1-6/C-F ................ 52 
Table 8 Occurrences of utilizations of the additional spillway for setups 3-7/1-
6/C-F ...................................................................................................................... 52 
Table 9 Number of average daily mode switches of the MPC-model for five 
planning horizons and the DDP-model assuming perfect foresight for the 
setups 7/1-6/C ........................................................................................................ 64 
Table 10 Mode switches per average day and year for the setups 7/1/C and 
7/2/C ...................................................................................................................... 70 
Table 11 Relation between the impacts of mode transitions derived from 
(Ruchonnet & Braun, 2015) .................................................................................. 71 
Table 12 Amplitude of fluctuations regarding the model outcome 𝑎𝑓 and level 
of storage discretization 𝑠𝑑 dependent on 𝑡𝑒𝑟 ...................................................... 72 
Table 13 Assumed and real mean storage levels for all setups ...................................... 78 
 
 
==PAGE:112==
==PAGE:113==
 
 111 
A Computed Benefits 
 
Table A-1 Perfect foresight benefits 2015 for setups 3-7/1-6/C-F 
 
 
 
Figure A-1 Internal rate of return - IRR for a time horizon of 60 years 
 
==PAGE:114==
Computed Benefits 
112 
 
Figure A-2 Net present value - NPV for a discount rate of 7.5% and a time horizon of 
60 years 
 
 
Figure A-3 Net present value - NPV for a discount rate of 10% and a time horizon of 60 
years 
 
Table A-2 Perfect foresight benefits 2015 for setups 3-7/1-6/C-F incl. the additional 
spillway 
 
 
==PAGE:115==
Computed Benefits 
113 
Table A-3 Computed lower boundary benefits of four-weeks period 
 
 
Table A-4 Computed benefits of the MPC-model for the four-weeks period with 
𝑝ℎ= 1ℎ 
 
 
Table A-5 Computed benefits of the MPC-model for the four-weeks period with 
𝑝ℎ= 3ℎ 
 
 
Table A-6 Computed benefits of the MPC-model for the four-weeks period with 
𝑝ℎ= 5ℎ 
 
 
==PAGE:116==
Computed Benefits 
114 
Table A-7 Computed benefits of the MPC-model for the four-weeks period with 
𝑝ℎ= 7ℎ (Due to computational limitations simulations of the sets 7/3+6/D with 
𝑝ℎ= 7ℎ could not be finished. To still provide a qualitative overview of the setups 
interpolated values are included.) 
 
 
Table A-8 Computed benefits of the MPC-model for the four-weeks period with 
𝑝ℎ= 9ℎ (Due to computational limitations simulations of the sets 7/3+6/D with 
𝑝ℎ= 9ℎ could not be finished. To still provide a qualitative overview of the setups 
interpolated values are included.) 
 
 
Table A-9 Perfect foresight benefits for the four-weeks period 
 
 
==PAGE:117==
Computed Benefits 
115 
 
Figure A-4 Computed benefits of the MPC-model for the four-weeks period for setups 
7/1-6/C-F for perfect foresight, 𝑝ℎ= 1 −9ℎ and the lower boundary 
==PAGE:118==
Computed Benefits 
116 
 
Table A-10 Computed benefits of the MPC-model incl. the additional spillway for the 
four-weeks period with 𝑝ℎ= 1ℎ 
 
 
Table A-11 Computed benefits of the MPC-model incl. the additional spillway for the 
four-weeks period with 𝑝ℎ= 3ℎ 
 
 
Table A-12 Computed benefits of the MPC-model incl. the additional spillway for the 
four-weeks period with 𝑝ℎ= 5ℎ 
 
 
Table A-13 Computed benefits of the MPC-model incl. the additional spillway for the 
four-weeks period with 𝑝ℎ= 7ℎ 
 
 
Table A-14 Computed benefits of the MPC-model incl. the additional spillway for the 
four-weeks period with 𝑝ℎ= 9ℎ 
 
 
==PAGE:119==
Computed Benefits 
117 
Table A-15 Perfect foresight benefits for the four-weeks period incl. the additional 
spillway 
 
 
==PAGE:120==
==PAGE:121==
 
 119 
B  Storage discretization 
 
 
Figure B-1 Benefits of the setups 3-7/1-6 over 𝑆!"# with error bars showing 𝑎𝑓 
comparing machinery sets C and F 
 
 
Figure B-2 Benefits of the setups 3-7/1-6 over 𝑡𝑒𝑟 with error bars showing 𝑎𝑓 
comparing machinery set C and F 
 
 
==PAGE:122==
Storage discretization 
120 
 
