==PAGE:1==
Master thesis
Adrian Mito Eberhard	
	
s142488
Olga Rubio Santamaría	
	
s117954
Yutaka Yoshinaka	
	
	
Supervisor
Department of Management Engineering
Design for the after-sales 
market of Simatek
22nd of June, 2016
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
==PAGE:4==
Table of 
contents
Table of contents.......................................................................................................... 4
Abstract	
6
Acknowledgments	
7
Introduction.................................................................................................................. 8
1.1 Overview	
11
1.2 The scope of this thesis	
12
1.3 Learning objectives	
13
The case company Simatek......................................................................................... 14
2.1 Introducing the case company - Simatek A/S	
15
2.2 Standardised ‘off-the-shelf’ filters, Dust Collection Aspiration (DCA)	
17
2.3 Current after-sales operations of Simatek A/S and the point of departure	
19
Literature Review.......................................................................................................... 22
3.1 Design processes and the landscape of design	
24
3.1.1 The Fuzzy Front End	
24
3.1.2 The fuzzy-front end in service: Importance of customer interaction	
26
3.1.3 Designing things: A different view	
28
3.1.4 The process of design, co-design and 	
30
co-creation	
30
3.1.5 Service design/designing for service and 	
36
co-creation	
36
3.1.6 Boundary objects and constraints in design and design processes	
38
3.1.7 What to consider when (co-)designing services or finding out what to design (for)	
40
3.2 After-sales and servitization	
40
3.2.1 After-sales	
40
3.2.2 Service & Servitization	
45
Theory and Methodology............................................................................................. 48
4.1 Case study & qualitative 	
50
research theory	
50
4.2 The design process model of this thesis 	
51
4.3 The case study with Simatek A/S	
53
3.4 Methods and analytical tools	
55
4.4.1 Theoretical work - reading ‘methods’	
55
4.4.2 Field work methods	
55
4.4.3 Visualisation of findings and analysis, writing process	
58
==PAGE:5==
4.5 The theoretical lens for analysis: Domestication of technology	
59
4.5.1 Introduction to domestication of technology	
59
4.5.2 Units of analysis and levels of engagement	
60
4.5.3 The ‘process’ and the ‘dimensions’ of domestication of technology	
62
4.5.4 Really an “alien” technology?	
66
4.5.5 Domestication from a practitioner’s perspective & its relation to after-sales	
67
4.5.6 Tools for analysis	
69
Chapter X - Overall issues	
70
Findings and Analysis................................................................................................... 72
5.1Tacit knowledge among Simatek technicians & ‘experience’	
76
5.2 Before the sale, documentation and knowledge sharing	
78
5.3 Communication with end-users & the current situation on the website	
81
5.3.1 Communicating with end-users	
81
5.3.2 Simatek’s website	
82
5.4 Contractors - domesticating Simatek	
84
5.4.1 The influence of contractors & why Simatek works with them	
84
5.4.2 Contractor practices	
85
5.5 Resources, commoditization of Simatek and ‘the barrier’	
86
5.5.1 The barrier	
86
5.5.2 Commoditization of Simatek’s filters	
88
5.5.3 ‘User friendly design’ 	
88
5.6 A practitioner at work	
88
5.6.1 Acquisition of the Simatek filter & contractor relations	
90
5.6.2 Running the filter	
90
5.6.3 Bag changes and servicing work	
92
5.6.4 Denied domestication & what the practitioner needs	
92
Discussion................................................................................................................... 94
6.1 Discussing Simatek’s situation	
96
6.1.1 ‘Overarching’ problems around Simatek’s after-sales	
96
6.1.2 Opportunities for Simatek	
97
6.2 Discussion of our design process - how to design for after-sales	
102
6.2.1 Spiraling and iterating through after-sales at Simatek	
102
6.2.2 Designing for after-sales (services) - issues to consider as a designer 	
104
6.3 Suggestions for Simatek and the toolbox	
108
6.3.1 Suggestions to the case company Simatek	
108
6.3.2 The ‘toolbox’	
109
6.4 Limitations, delimitations and room for further work	
110
6.4.1 Limitations of this thesis	
110
6.4.2 Delimitations of this thesis	
110
6.4.3 Further work	
111
Conclusion................................................................................................................... 112
References................................................................................................................... 114
==PAGE:6==
6
Abstract
This thesis concerns the design for after-
sales services in the market for industrial 
dust filters. To provide support to customers 
after a purchase has been made - after-sales 
services - have become a huge profit source 
in addition to mere product sales. In markets 
for industrial goods, companies are facing 
difficulties to differentiate their products from 
those of competitors. After-sales services 
may be a way to differentiate to avoid this 
commoditization trap. However, introducing 
them in small and medium-sized companies in 
these markets can be particularly challenging. 
The case company for this thesis - Simatek 
A/S - is a producer of dust filters for industrial 
purposes in Western Sjælland. The company 
aims to enhance their after-sales, which they 
are currently not satisfied with. Customer 
demand for their services is low. Efforts to 
differentiate by technological excellence and 
product quality oftentimes seems like a tilting 
at windmills, and Simatek are struggling to 
communicate the value of their products and 
services have to end-users. Hence, this thesis 
explores opportunities for the case company 
to implement higher quality after-sales. By 
taking an open and iterative approach in 
the fuzzy front end of enhancing Simatek’s 
after-sales, internal processes are illuminated 
and 
end-user 
processes 
are 
explored. 
Furthermore, the thesis explores effects of 
practices in their landscape of customers. The 
findings suggest that it might be beneficial to 
move closer to the end-user and away from 
middlemen like contractors. The focus on the 
work of filter operators can be a way to increase 
after-sales quality. Some of these operators 
want to be able to master the technology in 
order to harmonise it with their daily working 
routine and production processes. Various 
practitioners’ level of involvement with the 
products might however differ. Hence, there is 
potential for customised after-sales services. 
We found that, for both Simatek and their end-
users, ‘after’-sales does not necessarily begin 
at the moment of the purchase. Knowledge 
influencing after-sales services might already 
be translated into the technology the services 
are to be designed around. Know-how-
generative end-user interaction can also 
occur in development phases, and should 
be maintained after a purchase. The internal 
structuration and documentation of know-
how and pre-sale processes can be of value 
for Simatek and their employees. Apart from 
providing suggestions to the case company, 
the purpose of this thesis is to provide 
designers for after-sales in markets of industrial 
goods with a selection of meaningful issues 
to consider. When designing for after-sales 
in such markets, the product and the services 
to be designed around should be regarded 
as boundary objects. Different parties are 
involved with both on different levels, and 
these actors influence each other during their 
processes of domestication of the technology 
and the practices around. Underprioritising 
the work of operators can result in inefficient 
processes at end-user companies. Hence, it is 
important to communicate this value both to 
the management and operators. The design 
for after-sales benefits from a co-design effort 
in for example workshops.
==PAGE:7==
7
Acknowledgments
In the evolution of this thesis a number of 
people have contributed to making it possible. 
First, we would like to send a big thank you 
to our lovely supervisor Yutaka Yoshinaka for 
his guidance through the matter. We would 
also like to thank the company Simatek A/S 
and especially our company contact, Rasmus 
Hyge Nielsen, who gave us the opportunity 
for a collaboration through which we explored 
design within a new and highly interesting 
topic. He did not hesitate to share his 
experiences and insights with us. Furthermore, 
we want to thank the Simatek employees, who 
hugely contributed to this thesis and who we 
had a fun and constructive workshop with. 
This thesis would not have been possible 
without the contribution of a charming filter 
operator at one of Simatek’s customers. We 
also want to thank DTU professors Philip 
Cash and Melanie Kreye who gave us a hand 
with useful information regarding workshop 
design and the topic of servitization. A very 
special thank you and big hugs go to Ida 
Sofie Åsle, Iskandar Tange and Alvin Šipraga 
for their support and contributions. Last but 
not least, we want to thank our families and 
friends with their support both in Denmark, 
Germany and Spain. You have always cared 
for us during our work, especially at difficult 
times. Thank you! Gracias a Javier y Alba! And 
on the very last, but definitely not at all least 
note: Thank you Party Hamsters! 
==PAGE:8==
8
Introduction
Chapter 1
==PAGE:9==
9
In today’s globalised world, producers of 
industrial components become increasingly 
prone to commoditization. To compete with 
attributes such as original product quality is 
getting harder and harder. There are several 
strategies to tackle this challenge. One of 
them is to implement after-sales services as 
an add-on the original product. This can be a 
way for the company to diversify their income 
sources, by delving into services beyond just 
hardware. 
After-sales as a concept is widely described 
as the customer services around a product 
after the purchase. Generally, after-sales can 
include advice on how to use a product, 
maintenance or warranties. Some claim 
that after-sales services “can double profit 
margin compared to the profitability of the 
goods sold” (Viardot, 2007:1). Moreover, 
such services are seen as key in increasing 
customer loyalty as well as productivity in the 
in the long run (Saccani, 2006). Especially in 
the market for industrial goods, companies 
are struggling with differentiating their 
products from those of competitors (Bendig 
et al., 2006). Their customers are increasingly 
generalising the goods under one criterion: 
price. Succeeding in the after-sales market is 
seen as a remedy, and servitization, a shift in 
focus from manufacturing products to selling 
services as a way to get there. However, this 
is perceived to be especially difficult for 
manufacturers of industrial goods (Bendig et 
al., 2006).
In this thesis, we are exploring how to design 
for after-sales in the market of industrial dust 
filters. We selected the case of Simatek A/S, 
a medium-sized Danish company which 
produces dust filters and filter systems to 
be used in different industries, for example 
animal feed or cement production. This 
company aims to improve after-sales services 
around a the portfolio of their (more or less) 
standardised filters as they have identified 
‘after-sales’ as a market with opportunities 
to grow. Their current after-sales around 
==PAGE:10==
10
these ‘off-the-shelf’ filters are currently not 
as successful as the company hopes for. 
Therefore, they would like to explore starting 
points as opportunities for improvement in 
after-sales.
Given the nature of our case study, we looked 
at design from a fuzzy front end point of 
view. In fuzzy front end projects the design 
situation is characterised by uncertainty, and 
the focus lies on exploring opportunities 
for design. In our work, we are taking an 
open and iterative design approach, leaving 
room for reframings. For analysis, we include 
sociotechnical viewpoints and especially 
theory on domestication of technology. Co-
design and designing for services are central 
concepts. The aim of this thesis evolved 
alongside our work with Simatek’s after-sales 
operations. What needs to be emphasized 
is that our work was not research question 
driven, but rather design situation driven. 
Rather than following pre-defined questions 
or methods, we allowed for the situation to be 
transformed and tried to work out the most 
pressing issues in that way.
One outcome of this thesis is a set of design 
based solutions for Simatek to get started on 
tackling their problematic situations around 
after-sales. The work of filter operators at 
customers as well as Simatek’s own technicians 
play important roles here. According to Orr 
(2006), the work of practitioners is of great 
concern in companies’ service operations, 
and tacit knowledge about practice and 
product has the potential to boost after-sales 
operations. Therefore, we have included both 
employees of Simatek and a filter-responsible 
at an end-user company in our design process. 
Beyond that, a second outcome is a more 
generalized approach for similar problematic 
situations. This results in a toolbox for the 
designer of after-sales services of industrial 
good for medium-sized companies. The 
toolbox 
encourages 
the 
designer 
to 
challenge the common conception of where 
the after-sales process starts. It moreover 
highlights what we found to be the most 
important issues to consider when designing 
for after-sales in a market like Simatek’s. 
Hence, the toolbox addresses issues that 
were uncovered through our exploration 
of problematic situations at Simatek. These 
were included based on the literature-backed 
assumption that similar problems might 
occur in other companies operating in such 
markets. Furthermore, issues that concern the 
design process are addressed. Upon critical 
reflection of our design process, the toolbox 
was extended with issues regarding the role 
of the designer in the design for after-sales 
for markets of industrial goods.
==PAGE:11==
11
1.1 Overview
After this introduction in chapter [2], we 
present the case company Simatek A/S and 
give a exemplary explanation of how their 
‘standardised’ filters work. This is followed by 
an introduction to how they sell and distribute 
their products. Then, we give an overview 
of their current after-sales services that are 
offered to their customers and what they see 
as the overall issues. 
Chapter [3] presents a review of relevant 
literature for the design case at hand. It 
first introduces literature about design and 
approaches, to be followed by reviewing 
literature about after-sales and servitization. 
The chapter presents design literature in 
a way that represents how we obtained an 
understanding about what design approaches 
could benefit our own process of design. The 
order can be regarded chronologically as to 
how the literature contributed to our model. 
After-sales and servitization literature served 
us in understanding the subjects, and how 
theorists outline the field we were moving in. 
In chapter [4] we describe our design 
approach and process as to how we tackled 
the situation around after-sales at Simatek. 
We describe and explain the iterative nature 
of our design process and how the process 
developed, being influenced by findings 
throughout our work. Then, we give an 
overview of the methods we used to conduct 
our field work at Simatek as well as one of 
their end-users. Finally, we try to explain the 
theory of domestication of technology. Here, 
we first speak generally about the theory we 
use to underline that it is a concept that can 
be applied to all kinds of technology. Then we 
try to make clear how we used the approach 
and how it is relevant for after-sales and finally 
our case.
What will follow is a very short section X, 
which introduces the the overall issues that 
unfolded throughout our work and that we 
thought needed to be analysed by means 
of our findings. Then, chapter [5] both 
presents and analyses the findings from our 
field work. Given the nature of our design 
process, we used the analysis of our findings 
as a means to further develop the issues that 
arose in iterations before. We also allowed 
for new issues to unfold. As mentioned, we 
mainly used the theory of domestication of 
technology for analysis. 
Chapter [6] represents the discussion of our 
work. In this chapter, we present both our 
suggestions to Simatek as well as the toolbox 
for how to design for after-sales. Through 
discussion with the literature introduced in 
chapter [2], we explicitly address issues that 
arose during our work and will be adopted 
into the toolbox. We hence chose to use the 
discussion chapter as a synthesis of our final 
outcomes. The chapter first discusses the 
problematic situations we found and analysed 
at Simatek and one of their end-users. This 
finalises the suggestions we make to the case 
company. Based on this discussion, we also 
point out issues for the designer to consider, 
directly concerning the notion of after-sales. 
Subsequently, we address our design process 
and the methods we used. Here, we point out 
issues that arose as a result of the discussion of 
our approaches with the design literature we 
reviewed. After presenting our outcomes (see 
above), we finish the chapter with discussing 
limitations of this work, its delimitations as 
well as ideas for further work. In chapter [7] 
we conclude this thesis in a general sense.
==PAGE:12==
12
Figure 1: Thesis overview illustration
1.2 The scope of this thesis
In the course of our work, the process 
developed towards a socio-technological 
and design approach focus. Figure 2 shows a 
depiction of what is of concern and what is of 
less concern in this thesis. Although ‘business’ 
is not in the scope to a great extend, we do 
make some strategic suggestions to the case 
company. In general, the thesis undertakes 
a holistic approach of internal and external 
practices around Simatek’s products and 
services.
==PAGE:13==
13
Figure 2: The scope of the thesis
1.3 Learning objectives
 To search and examine relevant literature 
to support the project. 
To gain knowledge on the case company, 
internally, and gain knowledge on their 
operations and customers.
To work with the notions of servitization 
and after-sales.
To combine field work and appropriate 
design methods to facilitate problem 
solving.
To be able to construct a suitable design 
process appropriate to the case.
To steer through an iterative and open 
process with an unclear outcome.
To be able to explore key issues of the case, 
and to extract and classify them.
To be able to conduct co-design sessions 
and use for example workshops as design 
tools.
To evaluate the design methods chosen 
with the literature in order to interpret final 
outcomes.
To analyse and discuss findings from field 
work by contrasting them with theoretical 
tools.
To suggest valuable recommendations to 
the case company based on the literature 
and considerations from the project.
To obtain an understanding of how to 
operate as a design engineer in after-sales 
environments.
The learning objectives shall help to assess 
the criteria that the thesis is based and 
focussed on. These criteria define what we as 
students want to learn from the thesis and its 
procceses:
==PAGE:14==
14
The case 
company 
Simatek
Chapter 2
==PAGE:15==
15
2.1 Introducing the case company - 
Simatek A/S
Simatek, founded in 1981, is situated in 
western Sjælland, Denmark. The company 
has their headquarters in Sorø as well as a 
production site in Jerslev. They produce dust 
filters for industrial purposes. The filters are 
used in different industries where cleaning 
of contaminated air is required (by law) or 
where the filtered material is valuable to the 
customer. Business has expanded from early 
dust removal systems for a limited number of 
industries to the production of complex filter 
plants. Currently, Simatek employs 65 people 
including 30 engineers and other technical 
experts. Therefore, Simatek is capable of 
supplying high-quality filter systems for 
almost any dust removal and flue gas cleaning 
application in order for their end-users to 
meet environmental requirements. According 
to their website (Simatek, n.d.), the company 
produces four different types of systems, 
depending on the aspirated material. Pulse-
jet filters, flue gas cleaning systems, sanitary 
cleaning and industrial filter systems. 
Simatek offers ‘standardised’ off-the-shelf 
filters and customized solutions. Their range 
of customers is large, and to satisfy their 
different desires is a complicated task. Thus, 
in certain countries - France, Russia, Ukraine 
and Belarus - Simatek works together with 
==PAGE:16==
16
Figure 3: Customers of Simatek: contractors, end-users and agents
so called agents, who act as vendors to sell 
both filters and spare parts. However, Simatek 
can also sell directly to end-users in these 
countries. In general, Simatek can sell directly 
to end-users in all markets. In Denmark and 
Sweden, Simatek sells to both end-users and 
contractors. In Germany, the Benelux and 
Great Britain, Simatek are almost only selling 
to contractors. Contractors are companies 
which build or equip plants for the end-
users of the filters, sell spare parts and often 
service the filters as well. Figure 3 shows 
a basic scheme of the distribution system. 
Contractors or agents can have access to 
end-users that Simatek has no access to.
==PAGE:17==
17
The standardised off-the-shelf filters are 
called Dust Collection Aspiration (DCA) within 
Simatek (see figure 4) (Simatek, n.d.). The 
pulse-jet filters are DCA systems. They remove 
particles from the air in the environment 
of industrial production. Below, we briefly 
describe the general technical functionality of 
such a pulse-jet filter (see figure 5) (Simatek, 
n.d.).
2.2 Standardised ‘off-the-shelf’ filters, 
Dust Collection Aspiration (DCA)
Figure 4: Different types of pulse-jet filters
Pulse jet filters can be placed at production 
lines which generate dust. This is for example 
the case in mills, animal feed production 
plants and the like. The following description 
is a general example, and does not relate to 
one specific pulse jet filter: Contaminated 
air is captured by a hood placed above the 
production line. Via a ducting system, the air 
is then aspirated and conveyed to a chamber 
where the filter bags are placed on wire 
cages. Thereafter, the air passes through the 
filter bags. While big particles might fall down 
to the collector after hitting the bags, smaller 
particles stick to them. In order to remove 
the small particles the pulse-jet mechanism is 
activated in repetitive intervals. The filter bags 
are cleaned by a controlled high pressure air 
pulse in each bag through a blowpipe placed 
on top. These short duration air pulses travel 
through the bags, generating air waves. The 
wire cage prevents the bags to touch each 
other during both normal operation and the 
==PAGE:18==
18
Figure 5: Pulse-jet technology illustration (Babcock&Wilcos, 2007)
Different types of material have different dust 
properties in terms of for example stickiness. 
Therefore, the pulse pressure needs to be 
adjusted accordingly, in order to ensure that 
the pulse travels through the entire bag, and 
thus efficient dust removal. Simatek filters 
can also filter dusts that are highly explosive 
or dangerous otherwise. The dust is driven 
away from the filter through a hopper where 
the dust is collected and put on a transport 
system. According to industry and end-user, 
the collected dust is either reused or disposed 
of.
 In order to change filter bags (see figure 6) 
(Simatek, n.d.), the system has to be stopped. 
The wire cage with the dirty bag is pulled out 
of the baghouse by disengaging it from the 
structure. In some cases the wire cages are 
pulled out from the top of the baghouse, and 
in others from the side. Sometimes it requires 
a technician to declamp them from the inside 
of a filter. For these filters, Simatek can provide 
pulse cleaning. The jet-pulses take around 0.5 
seconds to travel until the bottom. Due to this 
rapid performance, the pressured air pulses 
do not interfere with the normal flow of the 
contaminated air.
==PAGE:19==
19
Figure 6: Filter bags
Figure 7: Platform
After describing shortly how Simatek sells 
and distributes their (off-the-shelf) filters, as 
well as a general functionality, we will now 
briefly explain how the company currently 
offers their after-sales services. This section 
contains information that we found through 
our field work with Simatek. Therefore, it 
might contain information that later becomes 
relevant in our analysis. However, we present 
it here in order for the reader to obtain an 
understanding about the case and to get 
insight into the current situation of Simatek’s 
after-sales services. 
Simatek’s after-sales department consists of 
eight people: an after-sales manager, a spare 
parts manager, a sales supporter, three key 
account managers (KAMs) and two service 
engineers. In our talks with Simatek, the key 
account managers were also referred to a 
technicians. Both KAMs and service engineers 
were said to be deployed on service missions 
if needed. At the moment, the after-sales 
operations are  divided into 3 sub-operations: 
Spare Parts, Service and Retrofitting. The 
latter is addressed only in passing in this 
thesis, as the main concerns developed into 
other directions during our field work. Spare 
part operations and service will be briefly 
explained in the following. 
2.3 Current after-sales operations 
of Simatek A/S and the point of 
departure
a platform that can be deployed inside 
[see figure 7]. The bag replacement itself is 
performed outside of the filter. Afterwards, 
the wire case with the clean bag is coupled 
again to the baghouse structure.
==PAGE:20==
20
Spare parts
Simatek is offering spare parts “for filters 
delivered within the past 10 years. Spare 
parts for older filters [are] delivered to order” 
(Simatek, 2016). For each filter-order, every 
component is now registered as part of the 
filter in Simatek’s system. This means that for 
every shipped filter, Simatek are able to put 
together an order-number-specific spare 
part packages. It was stated that Simatek 
recommends that a ‘spare part package’, 
containing the most important spare parts, 
should be kept in stock. In order to ‘advertise’ 
such packages to their customers (end-users), 
Simatek is emailing ‘spare part quotes’ to 
their end-users in the first weeks after a filter 
sale. Then, the customer has the choice to 
take or leave the offer, and most end-user 
companies do not choose to accept. A quote 
is valid for one year and contains, apart from 
the spare parts, one or two control visits. 
Our collaborators at Simatek speculated 
that customers prefer saving money and buy 
spare parts only if they need them instead of 
using their budget on something they might 
need. In a first meeting, the employees we 
talked to felt that Simatek is failing to convince 
customers to buy Simatek’s original parts. 
In the past, Simatek included a list of parts 
with every filter delivery. Nowadays, this list 
is not sent to customers anymore, as Simatek 
would need to update it for every design 
change in the filter or of the parts themselves. 
Agents and contractors are also able to sell 
spare parts. Moreover, contractors oftentimes 
use non-Simatek parts when selling to their 
customers, Simatek’s end-users. Figure 8 
shows a very basic scheme of the spare parts 
distribution system.
Figure 8: Spare parts distribution
==PAGE:21==
21
Service
Service operations are globally taken care 
of the aforementioned service engineers 
and key account managers. Simatek is 
offering “regular service visits, replacement 
of filter bags, inspection, troubleshooting, 
supervision, and commissioning (Simatek, 
n.d.). Currently, a filter sale does not 
automatically include contracts where such 
services are specified to the customer. Rather, 
they are mentioned on Simatek’s website, and 
the customer (end-user company) can choose 
to buy the services from Simatek, if desired.
Simatek’s services furthermore include a free 
of charge 24-hour emergency hotline for 
troubleshooting and support via telephone in 
order to guide the customer through fixing a 
filter in case of a problem with the filters or 
a breakdown. Sometimes, service engineers 
can guide end-users in troubleshooting 
and figure out the problem via telephone. If 
not, services engineers are sent to visit their 
customers to all over the world. We were told 
that such cases are very costly for all parties 
involved. Moreover, these service missions 
are almost never planned, as most customers 
only shut down their facilities at the event 
of a filter breakdown - when it is ‘too late’ - 
and do often not maintain their Simatek filter 
regularly, according to our collaborators.  
Point of departure of the case and our thesis
We were told that Simatek wishes to enhance 
their current after-sales situation. They are not 
satisfied with how after-sales are taken care of 
at the moment. More structured operations 
were an expressed desire. Furthermore, a 
wish is to increase the amount of customers 
being bound to their after-sales program, for 
example through service contracts or spare 
part agreements. Explicitly, our collaborators 
saw the purpose of the project in finding 
starting points for Simatek to improve their 
after-sales. Together with the initial project 
description (see appendix [1]) the above 
described situation marked the point of 
departure for our thesis and design process. 
While exploring what is possible for the 
company Simatek, the purpose of our work 
developed into providing designers with a 
toolbox for designing for after-sales.    Due to 
the fuzzy and iterative nature of our process, 
issues - both case specific and academically 
- that needed to be treated developed 
throughout our work.  These issues will be 
presented in chapters [X &  6] to emphasize 
that they were partly subject to analysis, 
but also emerged through analysing and 
discussing our findings.
==PAGE:22==
22
Chapter 3
Literature 
Review
==PAGE:23==
23
The first part of this chapter will introduce 
literature about the so called ‘fuzzy front 
end’, a very early phase in design processes 
in general, and about the fuzzy front end 
in 
service 
development 
in 
particular. 
Furthermore, design literature with a focus on 
co-design and co-creation will be reviewed. 
Then, the concept of service design - 
designing for service - and the importance 
of boundary objects will be elaborated on. 
The purpose of the first part of this chapter 
is to inform the reader of the considerations 
undertaken by the authors in order to design 
and follow a design process for this thesis that 
is of benefit to both learning and outcome. It 
will thus illustrate the open - and open-ended 
- nature of design processes, and emphasise 
that there is no magic bullet when it comes 
to designing something. Design processes 
and design philosophies are ever-changing 
theoretical constructs, which may be applied 
as general guidelines, but which should 
always be reviewed critically according to 
contextual factors. A design process does not 
have to follow a standardized or pre-defined 
way. Through constant adaptation, prompted 
by findings through literature and field work, 
every design process will become unique. 
The following section hence presents and 
discusses a selection of articles that have been 
considered on the way to creating a suitable 
design process for the topic of this thesis.
The second part of this chapter gives an 
overview over after sales operations, and 
how theorists suggest these should be 
conducted. Furthermore, the concept of 
servitization is introduced as a way to help 
traditional companies which have their focus 
on production and sales in entering services 
markets. For the purpose of this thesis, we 
have not positioned ourselves critically 
towards after-sales and servitization literature 
in this chapter, but only aim to inform about 
their current perception amongst theorists. A 
reflection is provided in the discussion part of 
this thesis.
==PAGE:24==
24
Elisabeth Sanders and Pieter Stappers (2008) 
describe the “front end” of design, as the 
“different activities [that are conducted to] 
inform and inspire the exploration of open-
ended questions” (Sanders & Stappers, 
2008:2). This front end is oftentimes called 
“fuzzy”, as many authors give it attributes 
such as chaotic, ambiguous, unstructured 
and unpredictable (Sanders & Stappers, 
2008; Koen et al., 2001). This front end of 
a development or design process is also 
referred to as the “front end of innovation” 
(FEI) (Koen et al., 2001). 
Sanders and Stappers (2008) characterise 
the fuzzy front end (FFE) as the phase of a 
design process, in which its outcome is still 
unclear. It might be a service, a product, 
or any other kind of “deliverable”. Koen 
et al. (2001) propose a framework which 
is supposed to provide clarity to the fuzzy 
front end phase. They define the front end 
as the “activities that take place prior to the 
[...] well structured [...] process”, and divide 
the front end into five elements. The first is 
referred to as “opportunity identification”, 
followed by “opportunity analysis”. The 
term “opportunity identification”, which is 
also used by Rhea (2003), suggests that an 
opportunity (for innovation) might be of any 
kind, such as a new service, a new business 
process or the like, or even a completely new 
business direction (Koen et al., 2001). Rhea 
(2003) furthermore highlights that identified 
problems or customer needs could also be 
seen as opportunities.
3.1 Design processes and the 
landscape of design
3.1.1 The Fuzzy Front End
Figure 9 and 10: Fuzzy front end process proposals by Koen et al. (2001) and after Rhea (2003)
==PAGE:25==
25
According 
to 
Sanders 
and 
Stappers 
(2008), it is important to obtain a thorough 
understanding of the users and their contexts 
in order to properly explore and be able to 
select what opportunities to pursue. Koen et 
al. (2001) suggest that techniques of informal 
opportunity identification such as discussions, 
ad hoc sessions or employees’ individual 
insights can be incorporated into the process. 
The considerations and activities in the fuzzy 
front end aim to get an idea of what is to be 
- and what is not to be - designed (Sanders 
& Stappers, 2008). Adding to the notion of 
“opportunity identification”, they argue that its 
purpose could be to determine what issue or 
problem to address, whom to design for, or 
simply to explore what problematic situations 
exist in the given context. Rhea (2003:145) 
describes the front end as the phase where 
one discovers “what to make, [...] whom to 
make it for” and obtains and understanding 
of “why to make it”. 
Within the design process, especially during 
the front end phase, the design researcher 
plays an important role. According to Rhea 
(2003), this role entails identifying customers 
and their needs or desires, as well as finding 
and understanding what problems to solve 
and what questions to ask.” Describing the 
fuzzy front end process as first divergent, 
and then convergent, Rhea (2003) points out 
the importance of divergent thinking both 
“deep and broad”, focusing on significant 
problematic situations of customers or users. 
He suggests observing customers and users 
in order to search and find these situations 
and opportunities. 
Whereas Rhea (2003) and Koen et al. (2001) 
refer to the fuzzy front end (FFE) or front end 
of innovation (FEI) in a more organisational 
context and in development processes, 
Sanders and Stappers (2008) refer more 
generally to design processes. Both Koen 
et al. (2001), Rhea (2003) and Sanders and 
Stappers (2008) describe the front end 
process as the process before the actual 
product development process. They all 
point out the importance of exploratory and 
open research activities in many different 
directions, taking into account manifold 
considerations. The different authors suggest 
different visualisations of the process. Rhea 
(2003) and Koen et al. (2001) are proposing 
models that should bring “clarity” into the 
Figure 11: Design process illustration from Sanders and Stappers (2008)
==PAGE:26==
26
3.1.2 The fuzzy-front end in service: Importance of 
customer interaction
In his article, Alam (2005) is working with 
ways to bring clarity into the - according 
to him - important fuzzy front end of new 
service development (NSD). New Service 
Development refers to developing a service 
from idea to launch. For our work, we make 
the assumption that Alam’s research can 
also be considered for, in general, service 
development and service design. Alam 
(2005), similar to other authors (see section 
[3.1.1]) describes the fuzzy front end phase 
as where ad hoc decisions are common and 
processes are imprecise.
Alam (2005) moreover emphasises the 
importance of customer interaction during the 
fuzzy front end phase of service development. 
He defines “customer interaction” as the 
Alam interaction between representatives of 
service producers, or service providers, and 
representatives of their customers during the 
service development phase (Alam, 2005). 
He refers to Shostack’s work (1984), who 
emphasises the importance of customer 
involvement 
as 
well. 
Shostack 
(1984) 
furthermore points out that developing 
successful 
services 
requires 
- 
besides 
including customers - collaboration between 
employees 
handling 
customer 
contacts 
(“the front office”) and operations (“the back 
office”) in the company which aims to offer the 
service to be designed. The fuzzy front end 
phase in service development is, according to 
Alam (2005) and Zahay, Griffin and Fredricks 
(2004), the most information intensive. For 
this reason, customers should be included in 
the development process in this phase, Alam 
(2005) argues. This might however also have 
a negative effect, which will be discussed later 
in this section.
Alam (2005) points out that researchers, 
including himself (Alam & Perry, 2002; 
Scheuing & Johnson, 1989), have suggested 
a formal stage-gate process for service 
development. They see the fuzzy front end 
as a part of that process, and divide it into 
the following stages: idea generation, idea 
screening and concept development. These 
three stages are described as the most critical, 
as they “determine the outcome” of the whole 
project - the ‘new service’. In contrast, Koen et. 
al. (2001) and Rhea (2003), see the fuzzy front 
end as the phase before a well structured 
development process. Alam (2005) sees it as 
a part of it. While Koen et. al. (2001) and Rhea 
(2003) are in this context referring to product 
development processes, Alam (2005) is 
concerned with service development. These 
theorists do however not suggest the option 
of fuzzy front end projects being considered 
separately, 
with 
an 
outcome 
can 
be 
standalone and is not fed into a subsequent 
development process. 
open and sometimes confusing proceedings, 
introducing possible steps to follow (see figure 
9 and 10) . Sanders and Stappers (2008), on 
the other hand, leave the process unclear and 
emphasize the uncertainty and exploratory 
nature of the process in their model, also 
hinting to overlapping activities and multiple 
iterations (see figure  11). They do, however, 
see the fuzzy front end phase as a prior stage 
to a well structured development process.
==PAGE:27==
27
Alam (2005) sees the interaction between 
customers and service providers as inevitable 
while while the customer is using the service. 
Hence, since customers and providers are 
interacting all the time during this service 
delivery, he argues that interaction in the 
development phase of services is crucial 
in order to provide customers with tailored 
services. Hence, considering the uncertainty 
of fuzzy front end phases, we understand 
that Alam (2005) sees customers’ needs and 
expectations from services as something 
that should be investigated. Gruner and 
Homburg (2000) suggest that interaction 
with customers in early development stages 
has a great influence on the performance 
of products. Alam (2005) makes the same 
assumption about services. According to 
Alam (2005) not just any customer should 
be involved in development processes. He 
argues that the selection of which customers 
to interact with influences the success of the 
service or product, thus the selection should 
be made carefully. Reflecting on Shostack’s 
(1984) argument as to the importance of 
cooperation between the front- and back-
end of a company, one could argue that the 
selection of customers is not the only important 
decision to make. Based on his findings, 
Alam (2005) emphasizes the importance of 
selecting the right people to participate from 
the providing side. The providing side is the 
company which wants to offer the service. 
Designers - be they part of the providing 
company itself or from an external design 
firm -  should consider whom to include into 
the development process on their side, too. 
More specifically, it is argued that in many 
cases, “front line personnel are in [the best] 
position to proactively collect, analyze and act 
on customer information” (Alam, 2005:474). 
This is because in the case of most services, 
production and consumption are inseparable 
(Alam, 2005). 
Many of the service managers interviewed by 
Alam (2005) stated the importance of asking 
customers about their expectations in terms of 
outcomes and benefits of new services, rather 
than to focus on “ultimate solutions”.  This was 
suggested mainly because customers are not 
skilled in reporting their own needs (Alam, 
2005). Rather than asking “what the service 
should look like and what it should offer”, it 
is better to ask what problems it should solve 
or what outcomes it should have in order to 
benefit the customer. Alam’s (2005) research 
shows that most companies choose their 
customers according to their perceived level 
of trustworthiness, as confidentiality issues are 
paramount. Close customer relationships are 
preferred, as they are considered to contribute 
to a well designed service. Managers who do 
not interact with their customers and who 
generally know little about them, display 
more trust concerns (Alam, 2005). 
So far in this section, ‘customers’ have not been 
specified as to whom they might be.  A close 
relationship to a ‘customer company’ does 
not necessarily guarantee a good outcome of 
a service design process. Focusing on which 
employees of customers to involve rather 
than, or in equal amounts to, what customers 
to involve, may lead to a more successful 
outcome. We base this assumption on Orr’s 
(1996) work, where practitioners (technicians) 
of the printer company Xerox developed their 
own service routine in opposition to the one 
suggested by their company (see Orr, 2006). 
This will be elaborated on in more detail later 
(see sections [3.2.1]  & [4.5.5]). Although 
Xerox in this case is the service providing 
company, similar phenomena can occur 
on the service receiving end. This implies 
that front line personnel of both the service 
providing and the service receiving company 
has the potential to contribute to good service 
design by bringing their experience from 
==PAGE:28==
28
practice to the table. This is supported by 
Shostack’s (1984) claim that the ‘front-office’ 
of the service provider and service receiver 
should be included in service development 
processes.
According 
to 
Alam 
(2005), 
customer 
inclusion can also be problematic in some 
cases. His findings suggest that a service 
designer should not listen too closely to 
single customers when designing services. 
Doing so might lead to “over-customisation 
of services” and therefore leave out needs of 
other customers (Alam, 2005). As mentioned 
before, Alam (2005) describes the fuzzy front 
end in service development as extremely 
information intensive. He argues that this 
intensity is likely to increase with customer 
interaction. Many ideas might be expressed 
in sessions where customers are involved, 
distant needs and nice-to-have features, which 
may not be important for the current design 
process. This might lead to over-information 
and aims being set too broadly. Therefore, 
Alam (2005) argues that the goals of customer 
interaction should be to find out and solve 
rather specific problems at hand in the 
“simplest way possible”. This can, however, be 
difficult. Simply involving a customer does not 
necessarily mean that problematic situations 
or needs can be identified. Furthermore, “find 
out and solve” points to a positivistic approach. 
However, researching and extracting data 
might not be sufficient to get to the bottom 
of a problematic situation, as one would have 
to assume that problematic situations exist in 
the areas of investigation. Also, customers are 
considered to be “poor reporters of their own 
needs” (Alam, 2005:474). An approach, where 
problematic situations are explored together 
with customers, and where an area - or market 
- for services is co-created, rather than ‘found’ 
could be more helpful when developing 
services. It could create an empowering 
mindset amongst the involved parties. The 
pressure of ‘having to find something’ could 
be released. This points amongst others to the 
notion of re-framing, which will be discussed 
in the next section. In what we discussed so 
far, users and customers furthermore have 
not been described as ‘actors’, neither in 
what is being designed nor in the design 
process itself. This notion will be adopted 
in the following, and is shortly explained as 
an underlying thought in the beginning of 
section [3.1.4].
Looking back at the previous sections about 
the so called fuzzy front end, it becomes clear 
that many authors agree on this phase being 
characterized by uncertainty. Uncertainty as 
to what constitutes problematic situations, 
what should be designed, and even whom 
to design for (Koen et. al., 2001; Rhea, 2003; 
Alam, 2005; Sanders & Stappers, 2008). They 
point out the importance of a divergent phase 
of exploration that should be open in all sorts 
of directions. The outcome of this process is 
unclear - it could become a product, a service 
or something else. 
Koen et. al. (2001) and Rhea (2003) propose 
models 
in 
which 
opportunities 
should 
be identified, analysed and prioritized. 
According to them, ideas and concepts 
should be generated and funneled into well 
structured processes. Rhea (2003) suggests 
a divergent-convergent nature of the fuzzy-
front end phase. These authors seem to share 
the understanding that designers should 
generate and shape ideas that emerge 
through wide exploration and investigation 
of problematic situations and opportunities. 
Responding to these problematic situations, 
3.1.3 Designing things: A different view
==PAGE:29==
29
ideas and concepts are then generated in 
order to find solutions. 
The explorative fuzzy front end phase 
discussed before, can open up a wide range 
of opportunities for designing.  “Design 
proceeds by the expression of ideas, needs 
and opportunities” (Binder et. al., 2011:79). 
However, 
opportunities 
uncovered 
by 
research are not limited to simply responding 
to problematic situations. Rather, explorative 
research allows designers to become so 
closely acquainted with them that they are 
able to see them from different vantage 
points. Hence, they may redefine and reframe 
- or transform -  objects of design (Binder et. 
al., 2011). Objects of design can for example 
represent the problematic situation itself. As 
we interpreted Binder et al.’s (2011) ‘object’, 
both object (what is being designed) and 
objective (why or for what is being designed) 
of design can be subject to transformation (see 
below).  When Alam (2005) sees customers 
as poor reporters of their own needs, the 
designer has the power to  reformulate the 
case at hand and make the customer look at it 
from other, previously unfamiliar perspectives. 
The customer might then uncover needs that 
he or she was not aware of before. 
Binder et. al. (2011:79), describe design 
as “an act of metamorphing”. They say that 
“design takes place through the designer’s 
engaging in the transformations of the 
objects of design” and that “to create the 
metamorphoses of the objects of design and 
to reflect on the effects of the changes is the 
core of design work” (Binder et. al., 2011:79). 
This reframing of problems - or problematic 
situations - can make actors understand the 
situation better (Binder et. al., 2011), or in a 
different way. This is due to the phenomenon 
that reframing provides a somewhat “new 
situation”, which can be used to break out 
of thinking patterns. These may have been 
overpowering throughout the design process 
so far and might have  limited the actors in the 
design process, such as designers or included 
customers. 
Binder et. al. (2011) describe metamorphing 
in a way that interaction with materials - for 
example looking at design material, such as 
findings, in new, uncommon, ways -  shapes 
the situation newly. This newly shaped - or 
viewed - situation then talks back to the 
designer and he or she has to re-appreciate 
the situation and accept the changes. This 
re-appreciation of the situation viewed from 
another standpoint embodies opportunities 
for designing solutions that might not have 
been thinkable before.
In this way, Binder et. al. (2011) describe 
a  spiraling process, much opposed to for 
example Rhea’s (2003) diverging-converging 
model (see section [3.1.1]). The problematic 
situation - or other object(ive)  of design  - 
undergoes reframing and re-appreciating, 
until the designer “achieves a satisfactory 
coherence between artifact [or what else 
is being designed] and idea” (Binder et. al., 
2011:85). The situation that is being designed 
in is reframed, is re-appreciated and shapes 
the idea of the design. The design object 
talks back to the designer and influences the 
design process. This can even generate new 
ideas which then again can be considered. 
What sounds like a circling process can be 
seen as more of a spiral where the final design 
is achieved through harmonisation of design 
object and design situation.
Thus, this is not just an “idea generation” for 
seemingly pre-defined opportunities that 
have to be “identified”, or a funneling of 
ideas into a divergent-convergent process as 
other authors (Koen et. al. 2001, Rhea, 2003) 
propose, but a co-shaping of design context, 
==PAGE:30==
30
design object   and design objective, where 
reframing of (problematic) situations can 
help achieving a design - which might be an 
artifact, service or something else - suitable 
for a situation which has been shaped 
together with the design, the designer and 
the involved actors. An opportunity can be 
shaped itself, even by seeing it from different 
vantage points. 
Hence, when being in the fuzzy front end 
phase, or a ‘fuzzy front end project’ like this 
thesis, an open and wide exploration of as 
many opportunities as possible, problems 
ideas and the like might not always be called 
for, especially when dealing with a more or 
less given, or taken for granted context that 
involved actors might take for granted and 
not questionable. Doing so might result in 
“limited” ideas, because the opportunity might 
not just lie out there, waiting to be identified. 
Maybe the opportunity has to be shaped or 
reframed. When being in the fuzzy front end 
phase, one should also consider making 
oneself - and customers - see the situation from 
different, unexpected and non-conventional 
perspectives. Rather than following processes 
as described by for example Rhea (2003), one 
can also consider undertaking the spiraling 
approach that Binder et. al. (2011) describe. It 
is then important to consider each translation 
- each transformation of the situation - and 
the new understanding developing from it. 
According to Binder et. a. (2011:103), the 
designer should also take care to achieve at 
least “temporary closure” of the new ideas, 
in order not to get stuck in the process of 
transformation. Idea and design need to be 
brought together as a result of the process. 
This philosophy might become especially 
important when involving actors such as 
customers or other future users of what is 
being designed, as many of them might be 
stuck in patterns of thinking that have for 
example become by getting used to certain 
(company) processes, policies or similar. 
The next section describes how design 
is increasingly done together with users, 
benefiting the outcome. Especially fuzzy front 
end projects are increasingly characterised by 
design processes done together with users 
(Sanders & Stappers, 2008).
As 
aforementioned, 
Rhea 
(2003) 
hints 
towards the consideration and observation 
of customers in the fuzzy front end process. 
Alam (2005) points out the importance 
of involving customers when developing 
services, and Sanders and Stappers (2008) 
furthermore point out that the fuzzy front end 
phase has been “growing, as designers move 
closer to the future users of what they design”. 
We mention “actors” and customers when 
critically reflecting on the models for fuzzy 
front end projects and discussing the work of 
Binder et. al. (2011) in the previous section. 
Actors can be both actors in the design 
process, but also in the design situation. 
Furthermore, in a sociotechnical sense, actors 
can be both human and non-human (Latour, 
1999).
3.1.4 The process of design, co-design and 
co-creation
==PAGE:31==
31
With “moving closer to the future users”, 
Sanders and Stappers (2008) refer to a 
changing landscape of design. Especially 
in the early phase of the design process 
(FFE/FEI), it is becoming more and more 
common to include the users “and other 
actors” (Mattelmäki & Sleeswijk Visser, 2011), 
in the design research and design activities. 
According to Sanders & Stappers (2008), two 
ways of empowering the user in the design 
process exist, the first being “user centered 
design”, in which professional designers and 
researchers observe and interview “mostly 
passive users” - or “subjects” - and incorporate 
the findings into the idea generation. The 
second way is “participatory design”, where 
the user is seen as a “partner” in informing, 
ideation and conceptualisation. Both are 
“starting to influence each other” and have 
been around for some 50 years. Sanders and 
Stappers (2008) describe a shift in the design 
landscape towards “co-creation” and “co-
design”. 
They define “co-creation” as collaborative 
creativity of any kind, and use the term “co-
design”...
Including the user, especially in the fuzzy 
front end phase of a design development 
process, has proven to have positive effects 
on the outcome of that process. Participation 
with the user in later phases, such as idea 
generation and decision has also become 
more influential (Sanders & Stappers, 2008).
Taking Sanders & Stappers work (2008) as a 
benchmark, co-designing gives the people 
involved in the design process roles, that differ 
from those of the “classical” user centered 
approach. The “user”, or let us call him or her 
the profiteur of the design process, (Sanders 
and Stappers (2008) call it “the person who 
The term ‘actors’ is used by the authors 
of this thesis, in order to promote a 
sociotechnical character of design. When 
including users in a design process, they 
can be influenced - acted upon - by other 
human beings involved in the network 
where the design is taking place, but also 
by non-human actors. A product that is 
being designed around a product, for 
example, will also influence activities in 
the design process. A product can also 
act upon other actors, such as users, when 
being used, through its design, functions, 
implied working routine or similar. This 
makes a product, or technical object an 
actor as well (e.g. Latour, 1999). This way 
of thinking is underlying in Actor-Network 
Theory (ANT). When Binder et. al. (2011) 
mention “translations” in their work, it 
reminds of the notions of de-scription of 
technical objects and translations, coined 
by Akrich (1992), and have been affiliated 
into ANT. The philosophy of sociotechnical 
design and ANT is an underlying thought 
in this thesis, but is not discussed in detail. 
“...in a broader sense to refer to the 
creativity of designers and people not 
trained in design working together in the 
design development process” (Sanders & 
Stappers, 2008:2).
==PAGE:32==
32
is served by the design process”) becomes 
more of a “co-designer”, who is an “expert of 
his/her experience” and can bring into play 
insider knowledge and individual experience. 
The “researcher” supports these experts by 
providing additional information, ideation 
tools, such as boundary objects - which will 
be discussed later in this chapter - or the 
like. The designer collaborates on the tools 
and observes the process together with the 
researcher. As aforementioned, Sanders and 
Stappers (2008) point out that the researcher 
and the designer can actually be the same 
person. The roles in the design processes are 
shown in figure 12.
In order for a co-design process to be 
successful, Sanders and Stappers (2008) point 
out, that in a co-design process the “user” - 
or profiteur - can not always be regarded as 
a “designer”. This depends on their level of 
“expertise, passion and creativity” as well 
as their interest in the matter that is to be 
designed for. They suggest that everyone is 
creative, but not all at the same level. While 
some might be inspired by for example open 
discussions and come up with ideas freely, 
others might be more inspired by supporting 
tools. Therefore, Sanders and Stappers (2008) 
propose “four levels of creativity”, which are 
shown in table 1 and shortly addressed below.
Figure 12: Co-designing as opposed to the classical user centered approach and the distribution of 
roles, from Sanders and Stappers (2008).
==PAGE:33==
33
The designer’s expertise is needed to 
conclude and put together the different 
pieces from the design process, obtain 
missing information and make important 
decisions according to the design expertise. 
The designer is increasingly important as the 
design processes and problems become more 
and more complex. This could be important 
to consider in for example workshops as co-
creative tools to boost participants’ creativity, 
especially in fuzzy front end phases. There, 
things are open and diffuse. The designer 
could then enable the participants to grasp 
and accommodate an openness that is 
productive and not too open, but not too 
narrow at the same time. This might require 
a generative aim to channel the co-designers’ 
creativity. This can be linked to section [3.1.6], 
when we introduce literature about creative 
constraints and the “sweet spot” (Onarheim & 
Biskjær, 2014).
Sanders and Stappers (2008) describe that 
the borders between research and design 
are fading and that co-design “will be a close 
collaboration between all stakeholders in the 
design development process”, especially in 
the front end phase. Apart from Sanders & 
Stappers work (2008) there are other takes 
on co-design and co-creation that should be 
considered and possibly combined to get 
a balanced mindset and powerful mental 
toolbox when considering co-design as part 
of a design process. Mattelmäki and Sleeswijk 
Visser (2011) give an important and very 
detailed literature review about co-creation 
and co-design. While emphasising that 
Sanders’ work (Sanders, 1992 - 2005; Sanders 
& Stappers, 2008) is of significant importance, 
they give an overview over how the terms 
“co-creation” and “co-design” are used in 
literature. Foverskov and Dam (2010), argue 
that co-design sessions should be designed 
in way to evoke co-creation. Mattelmäki and 
Table 1: Four levels of creativity of the users and examples, from Sanders & Stappers (2008)
The role of the researcher is it then, to 
provide appropriate tools for the users to 
express themselves according to their level of 
creativity. According to Sanders and Stappers 
(2008), the researcher is to lead people at the 
“doing” level, guide people at the “adapting” 
level, “provide scaffolds  - such as for example 
creativity enhancing tools and methods - that 
support and serve people’s need for creative 
expression at the “making” level”, and provide 
a “clean slate” for “creating” people.
==PAGE:34==
34
Sleeswijk Visser (2011) interpret that “co-
design sessions [...] are about collaborative 
exploration [...] and learning”, which points 
towards knowledge generation for everyone 
involved in the process. Brandt and Agger 
Eriksen (2010) say that co-designing is about 
including “important stakeholders” in several 
consecutive meetings that are organised 
by a “core design team”. Mattelmäki and 
Sleeswijk Visser (2011) refer to them and 
point out the  great importance of an “open-
ended, 
collaborative, 
exploratory 
and 
creative working mode”. Open-endedness 
seems especially important in the earlier 
described fuzzy front end phase. Inclusion 
and active participation of “users”, rather than 
“stakeholders” in the design process comes 
into play in other works (van der Lugt et al., 
2009).
Some authors and practitioners (van der 
Lugt et al., 2009; Keinonen, 2009; Rizzo, 
2010) describe co-design as the methods, 
tools and practices that are used to trigger 
creative thinking amongst participants of 
“co-creation 
events”. 
Here, 
participants 
can be users, stakeholders or other actors. 
According to Keinonen (2009), co-design 
is about empowering these participants 
which are also “affected by the design” that 
is created. Mattelmäki and Sleeswijk Visser 
(2011) conclude that Keinonen (2009) gives 
competence a great influence in co-design. 
“[...] Future ‘users’ are invited to utilise their 
competence, experiences and creativity for 
design” (Mattelmäki & Sleeswijk Visser, 2011). 
Mattelmäki and Sleeswijk Visser (2011) also 
point out that co-design and co-creation 
plays a role in business literature, too. They 
name Prahalad and Ramaswamy (2000), who 
describe co-designing as “creating value 
[together] with customers”. They furthermore 
mention Winsor (2006), who says that “co-
creation is about engaging with the internal 
team as well as with the customers and theirs”. 
Winsor (2006) puts an emphasis on discussing 
together in order to share and inspire ideas 
and knowledge with each other. For this 
purpose, it is crucial to “provide inspiring 
spaces” (Mattelmäki & Sleeswijk Visser, 
2011), which can be put into relation with the 
aforementioned four levels of creativity of 
Sanders and Stappers (2008).
Co-creation seems to be both, collective 
creativity in co-design sessions and a 
method in these sessions, where participants 
create outcomes together. Users and other 
stakeholders - one could say all actors involved 
- play an important role in co-creation and 
co-designing processes. Their ‘voice needs 
to be heard’. Furthermore, it is important to 
provide supportive and creativity-enhancing 
tools and methods to the participants of a co-
design process, such as for example design 
games (Mattelmäki & Sleeswijk Visser, 2011). 
This is in line with what Sanders and Stappers 
(2008) pointed out, as well. 
As the problems to solve in design are 
increasing in complexity and scope, increasing 
scope and complexity in thinking is crucial. 
Especially services and related problems 
are conceived as complex (Nieminen & 
Mattelmäki, 2011; Kimbell, 2011). Through 
co-creation and co-design, designers and 
design researchers can bring people’s (users, 
stakeholders, 
other 
actors) 
experience 
to the arena. A better understanding is 
created and gives access to deeper levels 
of the problems that could perhaps not 
have been discovered by the designers 
themselves, without observing and especially 
empowering and involving users and other 
actors in the design process, especially in the 
fuzzy front end phase. Considering Binder et. 
al. (2011) and their suggestions (see earlier 
in section [3.1.3]), involving users could also 
be very helpful when reframing a problematic 
==PAGE:35==
35
situation, as they might have insights into the 
situation, the designer might not have. In this 
case, the designer needs to take care that 
users do not get stuck in given patterns of 
thinking. 
From Mattelmäki’s and Sleeswijk Visser’s 
(2011) findings, the following Table 2 shall 
visualise what is co-design, and what is co-
creation (in co-design):
Table 2: Co-design and co-creation (Mattelmäki & Sleeswijk Visser, 2011)
==PAGE:36==
36
3.1.5 Service design/designing for service and 
co-creation
Decades 
of 
mass 
production 
have 
contributed to a world, where nearly every 
market is populated by a great number 
of competitors, who offer very similar 
products. This is often even the case in 
high-tech branches. The value of “the 
mere product” is becoming smaller, and 
it is rather what the product does, how it 
is perceived and how it is delivered, its 
performance and its flawless functionality 
which becomes of value to the user. One 
could call that a holistic experience, or a 
system that works around (and includes 
within itself) a product, which is of value 
to the users and which is desired by them. 
Not only companies, but everyone has 
begun to realise that. Therefore, “service 
design” is a recently growing field in the 
landscape of design, amongst design 
researchers and practitioners.
As shortly mentioned in the previous 
section, services are complex. Nieminen 
and Mattelmäki (2011), for instance, call 
services “systems of systems”. Lucy Kimbell 
(2011) 
describes 
services 
as 
dynamic 
constructs which involve “diverse actors”. 
As aforementioned, we consider the view 
that actors can be non-human as well (see 
section 3.1.4). Services should be seen as 
relationships that are beneficial for “both 
sides”, the offering end and the receiving end. 
Through a service, value should be created 
for both. Hence, in co-design [2.1.4], we see 
emerging opportunities in including ‘both 
sides’ into the process.
Kimbell (2011) promotes the expression 
“designing for services”, which shall emphasize 
that when designing a service, the outcome 
will not be a finished result, but rather “a 
platform for action with which diverse actors 
will engage over time”. Approaching design 
activities with the mindset of designing for a 
purpose is also what Sanders and Stappers 
(2008) promote. Kimbell (2011) proposes 
a mindset in which the distinction between 
services and products is not necessarily 
important. A product, or a delivery, or what 
it represents can in itself be regarded as 
a service, and a service can be seen as a 
product, or outcome, of a design process. 
Kimbell (2011) sees designing for service as an 
exploratory activity, through which designers 
should learn to understand interests and 
experiences of diverse stakeholders. Mager 
(2009) says that designing services should 
start out by understanding the system and 
the play of its subsystems. Mattelmäki and 
Sleeswijk Visser (2011), refer to Mager (2009), 
and state that “clients [of a design agency 
or the like] and [their] customers [should] 
participate in the process of exploration and 
creation” of what is needed in a service and 
what needs to be made to fulfill these needs. 
They furthermore refer to Vargo and Lusch 
(2008:257) who say that co-creation in service 
is “assisting customers [or clients] in their 
own value creation”, which in the opinion of 
the authors of this thesis can also be seen as 
making the client realise what kind of value 
they are providing to their customers or 
users. Alam (2005), as previously discussed, 
emphasises the importance of customer 
involvement in service development, during 
its fuzzy front end phase. Considering the 
previous section on co-design, what is to 
follow in this section suggests itself.
==PAGE:37==
37
Numerous authors agree that designing 
for services should be seen as an act of co-
designing, and co-creating value. According 
to Cottam and Leadbeater (2004), the 
designers task in this process consists of being 
a “coordinator, developer and provider of co-
creation tools” (Mattelmäki & Sleeswijk Visser, 
2011), which is what Sanders and Stappers 
(2008) suggest in their distribution of roles in 
the co-designing process (see section [3.1.4]). 
Mattelmäki and Sleeswijk Visser (2011:6) 
point out that…
In order to co-design and be co-creative, the 
participants of the process need appropriate 
tools to do so. As mentioned before, Sanders 
and Stappers (2008) point out the importance 
of this. Kimbell (2011) says that especially 
when designing for services, tools for 
“making the intangible tangible” are needed. 
She points to workshops as a way to engage 
and include all sorts of actors in the design 
process. Non-human actors can be included 
using representative objects, sketches or the 
like. Boundary objects (Star & Griesemer, 
1989) are suggested to help in open ended 
design processes, as which designing for 
services is described as. They can make all 
sorts of actors visible within a service (Kimbell, 
2011). Considering the notion of reframing 
(see section [2.1.3]), they might make for a tool 
to see situations from different vantage points. 
Boundary objects can be the objects (figures, 
sketches) that are used in a workshop, other 
people, technical artifacts and many more. 
They will be discussed later in this chapter.
Concluding, also looking back at Alam’s 
(2005) paper, where customer interaction is 
crucial in the process of developing services, 
especially in the fuzzy front end phase, service 
development - designing for services - should 
thus be seen as co-design and co-creation 
activities. Especially when being in the fuzzy 
front end phase of designing (for) services, 
when opportunities can be discovered. Binder 
et al. (2011) suggests that opportunities 
are to be expressed in design. Thinking of 
services as systems (Nieminen & Mattelmäki, 
2011; Kimbell, 2011), opportunities in service 
design can for example be finding out what is 
of value in such a system around, for example 
a product. Considering the openness of fuzzy 
front end phases and Binder et al. (2011), 
explorative and iterative activities can be 
suitable to do so.
When Alam (2005) mentions that the fuzzy 
front end phase is the most information 
intensive (in service development), one has 
to consider one important point: Arguably, 
from experience of the authors of this thesis, 
inclusion of users by co-design and field work 
would yield an amount of information that is 
difficult to deal with. The obtained information 
would for example not only include findings 
about ‘fact’,  but also tacit knowledge 
from customers, representatives of service 
providers and their customers, which might 
be extremely useful, but might also be too 
much in some cases. There can be such thing 
as ‘too much information’. However, it might 
not be clear to the designer which information 
useful, and which is not. In order to control, 
and to some extend direct, this potential 
”flood” of information, other important parts 
of designing and design processes should 
be considered: Boundary objects (Star & 
Griesemer, 1989) and constraints (Onarheim 
& Biskjær, 2014) in co-design processes.
“...methods that were developed for co-
designing with potential users or other 
stakeholders are now utilised in service 
design to create potential service solutions 
with clients, the solutions of which are 
then to be co-created with customers and 
producers”.
==PAGE:38==
38
3.1.6 Boundary objects and constraints in design and 
design processes
In their original work, Star and Griesemer 
(1989:393) define boundary objects the 
following way:  
Star 
(2010:603) 
revisits 
the 
notion 
of 
boundary objects. She defines an “object” 
as “something people act toward and with”. 
The object does not have to be material. It 
can be something non-material, such as for 
example a theory (Star, 2010). A “boundary”, 
in the term “boundary object” is considered 
by Star (2010:602), to be a “shared space”. 
A boundary object can hence be seen as 
something that “forms boundaries between 
groups 
through 
flexibility 
and 
shared 
structure” (Star, 2010:603); something that 
different groups can relate to in (perhaps) 
different ways, and work with in order to come 
to a (common) understanding of a more 
overall topic. The groups would possibly 
interpret the boundary object in individual 
ways, but use it as something that brings them 
together on a common task. Each group, or 
even individual can see something else in 
the object. This is the aspect of “interpretive 
flexibility” (Star, 2010:602). Wenger (1998) 
suggests that boundary objects can bring 
together different groups and are allowing 
them to work together on a common task. 
Considering the previously discussed work 
of Binder et. al. (2011) and the definition by 
Star and Griesemer (1989), a boundary object 
can thus be seen as something that is capable 
of inspiring a transformation or translation in 
design, inspiring a new way of seeing things.
Furthermore, according to Bergman et. al. 
(2007:546), boundary objects have four 
main properties: “capability to promote 
shared representation, capability to transform 
design knowledge, capability to mobilize for 
action, and capability to legitimize design 
knowledge.” Thus, considering the concept 
of boundary objects from a ‘designing point 
of view’, incorporating them into design 
processes of co-design, boundary objects 
can for example be objects in workshops, 
that inspire participants to work together, 
“mobilize them for action” (Bergman et. 
al., 2007) or inspire translations. These can 
include material objects such as for example 
printed icons that participants from different 
departments of a company or different social 
groups can both relate to, but interpret 
differently, and can thus be used to get 
these different groups to work together in a 
common task (Wenger, 1998). According to 
Bergman et. al. (2007:546), boundary objects 
in design “help align, integrate, and transform 
[...] knowledge across social worlds as well as 
mobilize, coordinate, and align stakeholder 
power.”
Boundary objects can also be “design 
products” (Bergman et. al., 2007). A good 
example of this could be a conclusion that 
participants of a co-design session have 
reached together, and can then be used as 
a “design task” in a following exercise, hence 
“Boundary objects are objects which are 
both plastic enough to adapt to local 
needs and constraints of the several parties 
employing them, yet robust enough to 
maintain a common identity across sites. 
They are weakly structured in common 
use, and become strongly structured in 
individual-site use. They may be abstract 
or concrete. They have different meanings 
in different social worlds but their 
structure is common enough to more than 
one world to make them recognizable, a 
means of translation. The creation and 
management of boundary objects is key 
in developing and maintaining coherence 
across intersecting social worlds.”
==PAGE:39==
39
mobilises them (again) for action (Bergman 
et. al., 2007). Boundary objects seem to be 
widely viewed as objects that bring together 
actors - be they social groups, participants 
of workshops or different departments of 
a company -  can be interpreted by them 
flexibly and help align knowledge and create 
common understanding. This in itself can be 
seen as a common task already. Therefore, 
we think that creative constraints in co-design 
processes can sometimes be regarded as 
boundary objects. 
According to Onarheim and Biskjær (2014), 
constraints contribute to creativity, if they 
‘hit’ a so called “sweet spot”. This sweet 
spot is reached when constraints are not 
too delimiting and at the same time do not 
leave too much freedom to participants of for 
example a workshop. Onarheim and Biskjær 
(2014:3) argue, that for each situation and 
participant, an “individual ‘sweet spot’ [exists] 
to address the particular situations where the 
level of constrainedness seems just ‘right’ 
with regard to creative performance”. Too 
concrete constraints, that leave no possibility 
of interpretation, or in other words have 
no interpretive flexibility (Star, 2010), might 
limit creativity for generating something 
and should hence not be understood as 
a boundary object. So might “constraints 
without background, explanation and/or 
a clear owner”, because “[understanding] 
the constraint was difficult without investing 
time in examining [it]” (Onarheim & Biskjær, 
2014:8). Onarheim and Biskjær (2014:3) 
name three types of constraints that can 
be beneficial for such sessions: “1) intrinsic 
(immediately given by or inherent in the 
context), 2) imposed (by external agents 
such as stakeholders who have an interest in 
influencing the process and outcome), and 
3) self-imposed constraints (instigated by the 
creative agent herself).”
Constraints can hence be used in order to 
inspire participants of co-design sessions, 
and to delimit the amount of information (see 
section [3.1.5]) that facilitators (for example 
designers) have to deal with, by creating an 
arena for a common task to work and focus 
on for all participants, while at the same time 
providing interpretive flexibility (Star, 2010) in 
order to not limit the participants’ creativity 
too much. In this way, an open and explorative 
design process as described in the previous 
sections can be maintained while not getting 
stuck in the process of transformation (Binder 
et. al., 2011 & see above), as boundary objects 
provide with a common task. Boundary 
objects might in this regard even be used 
as representatives of, or inspirations for, the 
transformations described by Binder et. al. 
(2011) (see above), in order to make them 
visible and imaginable to the participants of 
the co-design session or even the designer, 
by visualising findings and design process 
results for him or herself.
==PAGE:40==
40
3.1.7 What to consider when (co-)designing services 
or finding out what to design (for)
Taking stock, co-design can be a powerful way 
to design meaningfully for situations. These 
(problematic) situations can be discovered 
and explored together with users, and 
solutions can be created in collaborations as 
well. Especially when designing (for) services, 
co-design, considering actors in the system at 
play, is a powerful way of designing. Having a 
mindset shaped by his or her education, the 
designer should then maintain a “supervising” 
role, taking care that the process does not drift 
into meaningless interaction with users, such 
as for example drawn upon in Alam (2005). 
Furthermore, the designer should open up 
and try to escape predefined ways of thinking, 
taking into consideration the work of Binder 
et. al. (2011), and see design as a process 
of constant transformation. Reframings of 
problematic situations, presented to actors or 
achieved together with them can be powerful. 
The designer, however, has to take care to not 
get stuck in a constant circle of reiterations 
(Binder et. al., 2011), and should guide and 
support the participants of co-design sessions 
in a way that they can be creative, productive 
and innovative on their level of “expertise” 
(Sanders & Stappers, 2008). The designer 
should attempt not to force own views and 
ideas onto the participants, and needs to take 
care not to do so subconsciously. Boundary 
objects can be used to bring actors in a co-
design process together, providing a common 
basis for working together. They can be used 
for both assisting participants in the design 
process and inspiring them to see situations 
from new vantage points.
Traditionally, from a seller’s perspective, it 
seemed that the relationship between buyer 
and seller ended right after a sale has taken 
place. To the seller, a sale seems like the end 
of a long process (for example of order and 
quote, production and sale), while to the 
buyer it is just the beginning of a process 
of getting used to the purchased product, 
incorporating it into daily routines and similar 
challenges (Levitt, 1983). Nowadays, the 
progress of new technologies, the search 
to meet the demands of an increasingly 
competitive market and high expectations 
from customers turn companies towards 
considering providing services around their 
products to their customers, once they have 
made an acquisition. Hence, after-sale services 
are used as a tool to understand customers 
and learn from each other and create loyalty 
and trust in order bind customers. In case 
trust is build up, customers might also 
introduce the supplier to other customers 
(Walter 
& 
Ritter, 
2001:366). 
After-sales 
operations have become part of strategic 
business plans as a source of differentiation 
and turnover generation (Legnani, Ierace & 
Cavalieri, 2007). The importance of after-sales 
operations becomes evident, as the profit of 
services after a purchase can be up to five 
times higher than the profit from a product 
3.2 After-sales and servitization
3.2.1 After-sales
==PAGE:41==
41
itself (Bundschuh & Dezvane, 2003). Even, 
services to increase after-sales are offered 
on the market. The consultancy Arthur D. 
Little (2009), for instance, claims that firms 
adopting after-sales service may benefit from 
an EBIT increase of 8-15% relative to their 
non-adopting counterparts. Thus, after-sales 
operations are by many seen as a new business 
opportunity, be it by offering services around 
their product, or offering services to ramp up 
after-sales for other companies.
The times when a sole, physical product was 
considered to constitute the ‘whole package’ 
are long gone. Already in 1983, Levitt analysed 
that the market has grown into ‘product-
service’ mode, where the buyer must figure 
out what customers want rather than trying to 
sell what the seller wants (Levitt, 1983:88). He 
refers to... 
Thus, it becomes clear that effort is required 
in order to develop well-functioning after-
sales services. Having enough time and 
money to invest in the development and 
adoption of such an after-sales model is 
crucial. A lack of these resources, or in the 
willingness to invest sufficiently, can make 
such an undertaking impossible. Especially 
for small and medium sized companies that 
have previously focused on the production 
and sale of industrial goods  , well-functioning 
after-sales services are not easy to establish 
(Bendig et. al., 2006). An example is the case 
company of this thesis, Simatek.  Bendig et. 
al. (2006) claim that for these companies, the 
traditional production-sales model represents 
constant losses in effectiveness (Bendig et. al., 
2006:1). Obtaining profit growth only through 
the sales of products is becoming harder 
and harder. Despite the profit potential that 
lies in the area of after-sales services, only 
25% of small and medium-sized businesses’ 
turnover originates from services. This is 
caused by “insufficient strategic involvement 
of this topic” (Bendig et. al., 2006:1). Most of 
these businesses compete in the production 
phase and as they increasingly use the same 
standards, it is challenging to differentiate. 
Products become commoditized,      and the 
businesses end up competing on price only. 
Their manufactured goods are increasingly 
lacking meaningful differentiation to their 
customers and become generalised under the 
perceived value they deliver. Heitman (2010) 
refers to this as the “race to the bottom” in 
which price then becomes the predominant 
criterion as the products seemingly deliver 
the same value to the customer. Heitman 
(2010), sees increasing service quality as a 
strategy to combat this phenomenon. After-
sales service may thus be an effective way 
to for companies to distinguish themselves 
from their competitors, by creating value 
throughout a product’s life (Cohen et. al., 
2006) . This applies to both their customers 
and the firm itself (Levitt, 1983).
While 
the 
after-sales 
service 
delivery 
commends immediately after the point of 
purchase in some cases, in others, the starting 
point is less clear. This uncertainty could be 
caused by changes in agreements prior to 
the delivery date, installation problems, or 
the lack of investigation   between the parties 
involved (Walter et. al., 2001:366). The quality 
of the customer relationship is decisive for 
“[...] buyers of automated machinery [who] 
expect installation services, application 
aids, [spare] parts, postpurchase repair and 
maintenance, retrofitted enhancements, 
and vendor R&D to keep the products 
effective and up to date for as long as 
possible and to help the company stay 
competitive” (Levitt, 1983:88).
==PAGE:42==
42
the selling company’s understanding of their 
customers’ needs. Absence of communication 
usually entails a low quality partnership (Levitt, 
1983). The earlier close ties are established 
between the selling company and its 
customers, the more secure will the long-term 
survival of the relationship be. This involves 
the identification and maintenance of joint 
value functions., i.e. what is of value for both 
(Walter et. al., 2001). Hence, the company’s 
communication initiative and capacity from 
the very beginning of the sales relationship 
constitutes the main instrument to increase 
the quality of the after-sales service, as well as 
the customers’ ease of using their purchase. 
  
Cohen et. al. (2006) suggest a strategy for 
companies that aim to establish efficient after-
sales operations: As a first step, companies 
should decide which of their products should 
be supported by after-sales services. Cohen 
et. al. (2006:133) exemplify the case of Kodak, 
who only support their digital cameras 
through after-sales services. 
They (Cohen et. al., 2006) continue by naming 
important things that a company which wants 
to improve their after-sales should commit 
to. 
Companies 
should 
make 
promises 
to 
customers 
about 
prices, 
production 
and deliveries, for example by applying 
guarantees and insurance policies. These 
promises are based on the communication 
the company and customers have together in 
order to assess customer needs and company 
capacities. 
An 
effective 
communication 
between customer and supplier should be 
created early in the relationship. Failure to 
do so might lead to a lack of understanding 
between them, will affect future dialogues 
and might cause the customer to change 
to another supplier (Vandermerwe & Rada, 
1988). According to Cohen et. al., (2006:131), 
companies should regard the promises they 
make to their customers as products which 
“they design, price, produce, and deliver to 
customers in order to generate revenues”. 
In other words, companies should not offer 
after-sales services for free, as their costs 
might become too big to handle otherwise 
(Cohen et. al.,2006).
Communication can furthermore be used as a 
tool to explore business model opportunities. 
Cohen et. al. (2006), suggest to think about 
multiple after-sales business models in order 
to appeal to different types of customers. 
They write:
Additionally, a company aiming to offer 
good after-sales services needs to realise 
that “different customers have different 
service needs even though they may own 
[(have bought)] the same product” (Cohen 
et. al.,2006:132). A malfunction of the same 
product might affect different customer-
companies with different severity. Hence, 
the service supplier needs to offer “different 
kinds of services to [different kinds of] 
customers”(Cohen 
et. 
al., 
2006:132). 
Furthermore, after-sales service should be 
variable over time. For example, breakdowns 
of production lines at peak times affects a 
customer-company more severe than at times 
“Companies can support service products 
by deploying one or more business 
models at the same time. When customers 
want low levels of service, companies 
can use an ad hoc business model, 
which allows customers to pay per use. 
When a product’s functioning is critical, 
companies can use a performance-
based model, whereby customers pay for 
services according to the way products 
perform” (Cohen et. al.,2006:134).
==PAGE:43==
43
where production is scaled down (Cohen et. 
al., 2006).  Thus, a portfolio of services product 
should be defined according to different 
customers’ needs. Considering the findings 
of Alam (2005), this should however not result 
in too customized services for few customers. 
Cohen et. al., (2006:138) point out that “[i]
n addition, [after-sales offering companies] 
need to design service products [such as for 
example maintenance of machines] based on 
customer-focused metrics such as machine 
up-time - not on internally focused metrics 
such as the part-fill rate [...]”. 
Furthemore, Cohen et. al., (2006:132) suggest 
that companies should:
This supply chain will, according to Cohen et. 
al., (2006), have to handle more salable items 
(products, services etc.) than a manufacturing 
supply chain companies might already 
have established. Instead of only having 
to handle materials and finished products, 
the new system has to convey people and 
infrastructure, as well as a flow of (spare) 
parts both to the customer and reverse 
for failed parts. Cohen et. al., (2006) point 
out an eminent threat to companies which 
aim to establish after-sales services: The 
manufacturing supply chain that is already 
established and the new after-sales supply 
chain have “surface similarities” (Cohen et. 
al., 2006:132). That might make the latter 
inefficient, as management might see the 
similarities and disregard the differences and 
necessary adaptations (Cohen et. al., 2006). 
Efficient after-sales supply chains can enable 
companies to quickly respond to unexpected 
breakdowns that are not easy to forecast. As 
aforementioned, Levitt (1983) identifies spare 
parts supply as an important part of a good 
after-sales service. Because field failures are 
not scheduled, demand of spare parts is fairly 
random. There are however tools to develop 
a spare parts forecast. Creating a demand 
process analysis, for example, can lead to 
reducing the number of parts that must be 
stored (Cohen & Lee, 1990) and cut down the 
uncertainty. 
Lastly, Cohen et. al., (2006) suggest to monitor 
after-sales operations and assess performance 
according to changing customer needs. They 
suggest: 
Arthur D. Little (2009) is a management 
consultancy providing the implementation of 
after-sales services to other companies, for 
example automotive companies. They also 
suggest that a selection of key performance 
indicators (KPIs) might help companies in 
assessing the current situation and identifying 
potential for improvement.  This helps the 
“[...] visualize a distinctive after-sales 
services supply chain that delivers service 
products to customers through a network 
of resources: materials (parts), people 
(engineers, call center staff, depot and 
warehouse 
staff, 
and 
transportation 
staff), and infrastructure (for materials 
movement 
and 
storage, 
repair, 
transportation, information systems, and 
communications)”. 
“Two kinds of metrics prove useful in these 
cases. Customer-focused metrics - such as 
the waiting time for technical assistance, 
the waiting time for diagnosis, and the 
waiting time for the delivery of parts - can 
help determine how efficiently a company 
creates value for its customers. Internally 
focused metrics - such as fill rates and 
parts obsolescence costs - can quantify 
the way companies use their service 
assets” (Cohen et. al.,2006:138).
==PAGE:44==
44
company focus their attention to the right areas 
(Arthur D. Little, 2009). In terms of customer 
service, the KPIs could for instance include 
customer service email and phone call count, 
average of resolution time, concern count, 
brand attributes and customer satisfaction 
(Hayes, M. (n.d.)  Additionally, some customer 
metrics, such as Customer Retention Rates 
(CRR) and Net Promoter Score (NPS), can 
be used as indicators to unveil whether 
customers would recommend the company’s 
services or not. These are good parameters to 
measure what a company needs to change or 
revise (Aicardi, S., 2015)
Warranties and service contracts are methods 
to align interests and expectations from 
both customers and companies. These 
legal 
agreements 
between 
the 
parties 
are the reliability which can ensure to the 
customer that a product delivers adequate 
performance for a certain period of time 
(Rahman & Chattopadhyay, 2015). After-
sales services would then need to ensure 
the compliance with these contracts. For 
customers, they represent a protection in case 
of highly costly failures and breakdowns, as 
they are guaranteed the service of them. For 
the companies that deliver the services these 
contracts signify a possible estimation of 
future costs, a base to develop their services, 
as they get the possibility to ‘practice’ their 
services and hence improve (Reinartz & Ulaga, 
2008). Furthermore, the service providers get 
the chance to promote themselves, when 
effectively competing in the market.
However, to establish a product-service 
system that is ‘good’ in the eyes of the 
management and according to theory is 
not necessarily a guarantee of success. 
User actions are unpredictable and differ 
from one customer to another (Orr, 2006). 
Whereas some customers know the product 
well, others might need help to understand 
the product. Moreover, managers in either 
customer or provider companies may not 
always possess a good understanding of the 
actual work and processes taking place in 
their organization. Xerox, a printer company, 
offered their customers fully operational 
printers in a way that they would place the 
printers in offices of their customers, rather 
than selling them, and service them by their 
own technician force. Instead of selling 
products, they offered the customer what the 
printer does and guaranteed that the printer 
‘worked’. Orr (1996,2006) found out that these 
service technicians had developed their very 
own working routine rather than following 
the working rules that were provided by their 
company Xerox. They did this in order to 
achieve better efficiency in their work, as the 
rules given by Xerox would have lead to work 
not being done correctly, which could have 
lead to serious issues for them as they might 
not have been able to deliver their promises. 
The technicians thus helped the services of 
Xerox ‘survive’ without the knowledge of their 
managers. Orr’s work will be related to again 
in section [4.5.5].
==PAGE:45==
45
After-sales services are part of a ‘‘movement’’ 
that Vandermerwe and Rada (1988) call the 
“servitization of business” (Vandermerwe 
& Rada, 1988). In order to offer after-sales 
services, one should know about servitization. 
Numerous companies are not selling just 
products - or goods - anymore, but rather 
bundles. Goods, services, support, self-service 
and knowledge make up these bundles, which 
are “customer-focused” and their main focus 
should be on services (Vandermerwe & Rada, 
1988). They are answering the phenomenon 
of commoditization (see section [3.2.1]).
According to Vandermerwe and Rada (1988), 
there are three pillars to a servitization 
strategy. Firstly, it can be profitable if it is 
applied properly among the company by 
the creation of specific services around 
(one ore more of) their products, such as 
maintenance, reparations or the like. For this 
matter, and secondly, both Vandermerwe 
and Rada (1988) and Reinartz and Ulaga 
(2008) highlight the importance of forming 
special teams within the company for these 
servitization projects, such as for example 
a department just focused on after-sales. 
Thirdly, Vandermerwe and Rada (1988) see 
a trend towards selling know-how. They 
furthermore argue that companies which aim 
to servitize should move from concentrating 
on distributors towards dealing directly with 
end-users, in order to pay attention to their 
problems. Contractors can be competitors in 
the service market. Therefore, “moving down 
the distribution chain” (Vandermerwe & Rada, 
1988:318) should be considered in order to 
connect to end-users and create demand by 
paying them attention.
Reinartz and Ulaga (2008) propose a 
framework for servitization in four steps. 
As the first step, they propose a process 
through which companies that aim to servitize 
should come to the realisation that they are 
already offering services. In this process both 
managers and customers should be made 
aware of value that is already ‘given away’ 
by the company through ‘hidden services’. 
Hidden services could be for example free 
commissioning of industrial products or the 
like. Reinartz and Ulaga (2008) suggest that by 
contemplating practices within the company, 
the “best practices in the organisation” 
(Reinartz & Ulaga, 2008:93) - what the 
company can do best - can be identified. 
Ideally, ‘hidden services’ and ‘best practices’ 
would coincide. Furthermore, it should be 
thought about which of the hidden services 
could be made payable (Reinartz & Ulaga, 
2008). According to Reinartz and Ulaga 
(2008), switching those services from “free 
to fee” will clarify the value of the services for 
both company and customers and customer 
awareness about what value they are receiving 
(already) from the company could increase. 
Critically reflecting this statement, making a 
service that has been at no charge liable to 
pay could also frighten customers and raise 
an incentive to switch to a competitor. Thus, 
choosing the right services to be moved from 
“free to fee” (Reinartz & Ulaga, 2008:93) is 
probably important.
As parts of the second step in their servitization 
framework, Reinartz and Ulaga (2008:93) 
suggest three things: Firstly, investigating 
which (hidden) services are “profit drains” 
and which are “moneymakers”, secondly, 
finding out how to establish “cost-efficient 
service processes”, and thirdly, exploring how 
to “tailor services to customers’ needs”. For 
the latter, Alam’s (2005) caution to not over-
customise should be respected. Based on 
3.2.2 Service & Servitization
==PAGE:46==
46
that, the company could then elaborate the 
aforementioned cost-efficient service plan by 
adjusting services to customers’ requirements. 
When the plan is in action, revenues coming 
from the services can represent a great 
opportunity to invest in the - for example 
after-sales -  services itself. Improving delivery 
process or establishing rapid response 
teams when a product breaks down could 
for instance be areas of investment. The new 
strategy should be flexible enough to to fit any 
customer’s needs and standardized enough 
to have control on the mechanisms (Reinartz & 
Ulaga, 2008). In the light of this discussion of 
balancing services, we think that for example 
assessing and tailoring needs could be an 
objective of co-design (see sections [2.1.2], 
[2.1.4] & [2.1.5]). 
According to Reinartz and Ulaga (2008), 
companies which aim to servitize - and more 
specifically their sales forces -  should be 
ready to promote their services alongside 
their products. Equally important is sharing 
know-how about how to use the sold product 
and the service system around it correctly. 
The act of sharing should happen both with 
the customers as well as within the company. 
This knowledge should furthermore be 
documented 
in 
an 
effective 
way. The 
documentation may then be used as a tool 
of communication both internally and in 
customer relations. The aim of this knowledge 
sharing is communicating the value that is 
created for both parties through the (new) 
service offerings to both parties  (Reinartz 
& Ulaga, 2008). Again, we as designers see 
a great opportunity of exploring what is of 
value for both sides in co-designing (or co-
exploring) efforts. The service providing 
company should use the documentation 
to build on and establish a database 
communicating how to create value both to 
the customer and the company itself.  It is from 
these companies which apply their know-
how in a competitive plan where additional 
value creation is more likely to happen 
(Vandermerwe & Rada, 1988:323). According 
to Vandermerwe and Rada (1988), the goal 
of this kind of knowledge sharing is to create 
dependency through cooperation rather than 
trying to control customers (Vandermerwe & 
Rada, 1988).
Since customers become more critical and 
more difficult to please (Vandermerwe & 
Rada, 
1988:318), 
service 
customizations 
through the knowledge sharing described 
above, and the knowledge sharing itself will 
help the company to focus on customers’ 
processes and to understand better their 
customers’ needs and expectations. Also 
Reinartz and Ulaga (2008), as the last step 
of their framework, suggest - for companies 
which aim to servitize - to “focus on  customers’ 
processes”. This should be done in order to 
find out whether the “offerings [are] aligned 
with [...] customers’ goals and processes”, 
whether they “can [...] address their problems 
holistically” and to find out “what further 
expertise [the service offering company] 
need” to improve their services. (Reinartz & 
Ulaga, 2008:93). Reinartz and Ulaga (2008) 
mention an example of SKF, a Swedish bearing 
manufacturer.  “The company studied how 
bearings might break down in its customers’ 
equipment and then acquired the know-how 
to help manage such breakdowns” (Reinartz 
& Ulaga, 2008). Through incorporating this 
knowledge into their service portfolio, SKF 
managed to reach a world leading position 
in their industry (Reinartz & Ulaga, 2008). 
Especially this kind of knowledge should 
be documented and worked into service 
(after-sales) processes. Reinartz’ and Ulaga’s 
(2008) example about SKF successfully 
doing so, shows that succeeding in doing so 
can give enormous competitive advantage. 
==PAGE:47==
47
But although benefits from services can be 
higher than from products, it requires a shift 
in thinking on managers, production team 
and sales people as well as considerable 
investments and an enormous strategic 
implication for the company to successfully 
servitize (Reinartz & Ulaga, 2008).
Lastly, customer desires can differ from one to 
another. One customer might want to choose 
only specific services while others might want a 
whole service  package. Thus, agreements that 
define how much service a company should 
offer and what the customer should expect 
from these services should be set up in order 
to avoid misunderstandings. These limits, 
agreed upon by both parties, will influence 
customer-company relationship in terms of 
loyalty. To know early what customers want 
or not want can be of competitive advantage. 
Hence, offering services early in customer’s 
decision processes can “minimize the risk 
of customers being wooed by competitors” 
(Vandermerwe & Rada, 1988:319). Therefore, 
companies may offer different levels of 
complexity 
according 
to 
their 
service 
agreements. According to Kreye et al. (2015), 
after-sales services require less complexity 
than performance-based services. Levels 
of complexity can help to build up strong 
working relationships with customers and 
better interpersonal and interorganizational 
relationships (Kreye et al., 2015:1) to, for 
instance, increase information exchange, 
address occurring problems and to realize 
innovation in service offerings. This might 
require a great effort from the management 
department to investigate the service capacity 
and customers’ perception of the service, as 
well as to review the capacities of their own 
company that allow them to increase the level 
of service complexity (Kreye et al., 2015:12).
==PAGE:48==
48
Chapter 4
Theory and 
Methodology
==PAGE:49==
49
This chapter describes the design process that 
has been developed throughout the project 
and thesis. It has been influenced by findings 
as well as theoretical work, and methods 
used in the process have been chosen to 
address issues unfolded in the process 
and have been adjusted throughout. The 
theoretical work - i.e. the choice of literature 
and reading - and conclusions drawn from 
it is interwoven with the process, co-shaping 
the model. Furthermore, this chapter explains 
what methods were used in the process, 
how and why, as well as how findings were 
analysed, using the theory of domestication 
of technology.
We as the authors of this thesis have taken a 
constructivist (Stake, 1994; Silverman, 2001) 
approach to both the thesis and the case 
study.   The design model and the case have 
been crafted on its course, being inspired by 
the literature and findings. For the project 
with Simatek, the aim was not to investigate 
literature, the company and its customers and 
extract data. We were rather attempting to 
co-create an understanding of after-sales and 
how Simatek’s operations are influencing their 
partners (their customers, their practitioners), 
together with Simatek. 
==PAGE:50==
50
4.1 Case study & qualitative 
research theory
According to Kemmis (1980), the concept 
of ‘case’ can generate discussion. The very 
case can be changed depending on the 
different methods used for the study. Each 
case is understood and influenced by its 
authors’ 
backgrounds 
and 
expectations 
and thus becomes specific and unique. The 
same case could be worked on by different 
authors and then take different directions. It 
might be developed by different methods of 
studies and under different ways of working, 
depending on the researchers. Then, the 
‘same case’ could even lead to different 
conclusions.
A major question to be answered facing a 
case is what can be learned from this specific 
case study through and about  the process, 
and the case itself (Stake, 1994:87). The 
conductors learn about the case at hand while 
at the same time, they learn how to work with 
the methods used to study the case (Stake, 
1994:89). For example, if a workshop is used 
as a method, learning (or gaining experience) 
how  to conduct a workshop becomes an 
objective. Facilitating and critically reflecting 
upon its outcome could then contribute to 
this process of learning.
According to issues that unfold in the case, its 
conductors can organize and prioritize them 
by asking the following questions: Which 
issues bring out initial concerns? Which 
issues help reveal merit or shortcomings? 
And which issues facilitate the planning of 
the investigation? Issues have been chosen 
depending on what can be learned within the 
opportunities of the case (Stake, 1994:92). 
Also , authors should allow findings to surprise 
them and incorporate them into the ongoing 
work. Outputs generated by, and fed back into 
the case study - for example obtained from 
research such as interviews and literature - can 
be corroborated or denied  by participants 
of the study (Steinert, 2010), for example in 
co-design events such as workshops with 
employees of a case company.
In writing, it should be attempted to find 
the best way to represent the case in a 
comprehensible manner (Van Maanen, 1988). 
The goal is to protect and validate the transfer 
of knowledge to the reader in the best 
manner. By transforming complex meaning 
into a finite report, the authors should try to 
enable their readers to understand the case 
and make their own conclusions. For that 
reason, all findings should be contrasted 
with theoretical readings (and to each other) 
to be able to make a comparative with other 
similar cases in order to illuminate data and 
to demonstrate their relevance  (Silverman, 
2001:71).
==PAGE:51==
51
4.2 The design process model of this 
thesis 
The model for the design process has been 
inspired by the work that has been discussed 
in the literature review and the approaches 
described in chapter [3]. The different theories, 
suggestions and mindsets have contributed 
to form the model depicted in figure 13. The 
model shall depict a different way of thinking 
than 
a 
‘classical’ 
diverging-converging 
approach. 
The 
model 
is 
divergently-
convergently spiraling, through iterations, 
while being transformed by findings. In our 
process we took into consideration a way of 
thinking inspired by Binder et. al. (2011) (see 
section [3.1.3]), as well as the other design 
literature discussed.
The starting point of the iterative process (see 
figure 13) was given by the project proposal 
and an introductory meeting at the case 
company Simatek. Taking a similar approach 
as discussed in section [3.1.1] about fuzzy 
front end projects, the project’s design 
process has then been undertaking divergent 
exploration 
phases. 
These 
‘exploration 
phases’ included exploratory reading and 
fieldwork, using qualitative and co-creative 
methods such as discussions and a workshop 
(see section [4.4]). Reviewing literature was 
done parallel to field work and findings from 
both have been incorporated into design 
process and research. Hence, the process has 
continuously been adjusted in accordance 
 Figure 13: Our design process
==PAGE:52==
52
with what these findings have suggested. 
For example, the inclusion of customers and 
other users is regarded to be  especially 
fruitful when designing for services, such as 
after-sales operations (see sections [3.1.2 
& 3.1.5]). These considerations lead to 
conducting field work at an end-user’s factory 
and, in the next iteration of the process, an 
exploratory workshop at Simatek. Both were 
included in order to cooperate and co-create 
with the ‘profiteurs’ (see section [3.1.4]) of the 
eventual outcome of the design process, as 
which both were considered . 
The research during the ‘exploration phases’ 
yielded findings such as specific problematic 
situations, which were then fed into ‘analysis 
phases’. During these , findings were 
compared to each other (e.g. contradictory 
statements of actors), compared to findings 
from theoretical work and reviewed, for 
example in informal talks (see section [4.4]). 
The ‘analysis phases’ yielded ideas and 
(preliminary) conclusions, for example how 
to incorporate and make use of findings from 
research at the  end-user into the workshop at 
Simatek, or conclusions based on theory as to 
what could be improved for the topic at hand. 
Ideas were furthermore used to reframe 
problematic situations in order to see them 
from different vantage points  (see section 
[3.1.3]). Ideas, conclusions and reframings 
have then been fed into the next iteration of 
the process.
This resulted in a model for the design process 
(see figure 1), which is spiraling towards a 
‘final’ outcome that is designed regarding 
different points of view, applying principles 
of co-design (designing for services) and 
transformation. 
The 
process 
itself, 
and 
the incorporated case study with Simatek, 
influenced the choice of the very theory that is 
being analysed with . Hence, no pre-defined 
design approach was undertaken, but the 
process has been ever-developing and the 
model was created as a result of this thesis. 
Throughout this process, the methods used 
have been critically evaluated in terms of their 
applicability towards a fruitful outcome. We 
wanted to be inspired by methods and not 
limited. Therefore, they were reviewed in order 
for us to learn, develop an understanding 
about, and be able to critically observe our 
design approach and put it into relation with 
the reviewed literature (see section [6.2]).
==PAGE:53==
53
As aforementioned, each case is unique 
to its involved actors, and especially its 
conductors. In the instance of this thesis, the 
case is affected by our Design and Innovation 
education at DTU, and the expectations of 
Simatek, DTU as well as ourselves. We used 
the case at Simatek not only to understand 
and analyse Simatek’s operations, current 
situation and what they aim to achieve, but 
also to learn about the methodology used 
during the process, as how to analyse and 
understand literature, develop fruitful (semi-
structured/open) interviews and facilitate 
workshops suitable for these situations.
 
The Simatek case study was offered by 
the company as a project proposal on 
the ‘redesign’ of the after-sales services, 
regarding their standardised pulse jet filters 
(DCA). It was the starter’s gun for the project to 
explore opportunities for Simatek to enhance 
their unsatisfactory after-sales operations. An 
introductory meeting at their production site 
in Jerslev, Sjælland, defined the starting point 
as to what Simatek was hoping to gain from the 
project. A first problem description, regarding 
the ‘current situation’ from Simatek’s point 
of view was formulated (see appendix [3]). 
However, problematic situations unfolded 
not only concerning situations around the 
DCA systems in an ‘immediate’ sense but 
for example also more general company 
proceedings. Therefore, the design situation 
and what we thought needed to be analysed 
quickly became subject to discussion and 
reframing. 
The case was a great opportunity for us as 
researchers to learn about after-sales and 
how it is theorised by researchers in general 
as compared to how Simatek defines it, and 
to finally be in the position to critically discuss 
both views. Therefore, as an initial approach, 
we needed to obtain an understanding of 
‘after-sales’ in the specific case of Simatek. 
Also for this, the first meeting was essential as 
a starting point.  A tour around the facilities 
was addressed  by the contact person at 
Simatek who is responsible for technical 
support of DCA system. It was helpful to 
see on site what kind of different products 
Simatek is providing to their customers and 
how the filter systems are manufactured. 
The tour helped us to understand how the 
pulse jet system functions (see section [2.2]) 
and how filter bags are exchanged. The next 
part of the meeting was an informal talk (see 
section [4.4.2]) & appendix [2]) with both 
our contact person and the sales support 
engineer from the after-sales department. For 
the talk, no interview guide was prepared. 
Considering approaches discussed in the 
literature review (see section [3.1]), we felt 
that an open conversation would be most 
beneficial. A prepared interview might turn 
out to be too leading in such an early phase 
of the project, while a natural conversation 
might reveal problems that our conversation 
partners thought were most important or 
severe. Rather than only considering the DCA 
filters, the conversation led to the discussion 
of general operations such as sales processes. 
It was discussed whom is to be considered a 
customer and how. From the results of this 
first meeting, it was possible to seek out the 
nature of the case (why Simatek wanted to 
improve their after-sales) and obtained first 
impressions about its historical background 
(how Simatek had arrived to the current 
situation). As described in the design model 
(section [4.2]) these findings were used for 
further research . 
The first meeting mostly revealed the 
perception of the two conversation partners, 
and had to be put in relation to our research 
and shaped towards our particular case study 
(Stake, 1994) of after-sales in a design and 
sociotechnical context. The course of the 
4.3 The case study with Simatek A/S
==PAGE:54==
54
project and also the thesis (domestication 
of 
technology, 
after-sales 
theory 
and 
servitization) 
was 
not 
predefined, 
but 
developed during our process. The objective 
of the first meeting was to explore problematic 
situations. To unravel the causes behind the 
problems was the job of us as researchers. 
Hence, the problematic situations as viewed 
by the conversation partners had to put into 
relation of the bigger picture .
Based on the initial issues we found, the next 
steps to follow in the case study were assessed 
and designed. Service design literature was 
taken into consideration. As reviewed in 
section [3.1.5], designing for services should 
be a co-effort between designers, service 
providers and service receivers. Therefore, 
we planned an exploratory workshop with 
Simatek. We, felt that we could get the most 
valuable insights from a co-creative effort. 
Furthermore, our aim for participants on 
Simatek’s side was to take away valuable 
learnings about the situation as well, as 
co-creation is not only a tool for design 
but can generate value for all participants. 
The participants were trusted to be able to 
contribute with knowledge and experiences 
from their jobs. We as facilitators contributed 
creative tools and additional information from 
findings.
The case study has always followed a ‘semi-
structure’. We allowed data to surprise us 
(Silverman, 2013) and adjusted our methods 
and tools to conduct the further research. In 
the planning phase of the aforementioned 
workshop, we conducted fieldwork at an end-
user’s (of Simatek filters)  factory in Denmark, 
which included a factory tour and talks (see 
section [4.4.2.2]). Findings from this end-user 
research were adopted into the workshop 
and presented to the Simatek employees as 
a topic of discussion. Furthermore, two DTU 
professors were consulted and contributed 
to the workshop design by providing leads 
for co-creation techniques and methods (see 
section [4.4.2.3]) as well as servitization.
The choice of meeting both customers 
(end-user) and Simatek was made to assure 
variety of opinions and knowledge from 
different perspectives. However, this does not 
guarantee representativeness of end-users. 
The case study only included one end-user 
of Simatek’s filters. Agreements to meet with 
another end-user were made, but did not 
take place due to the lack of time on their 
side. Furthermore, meetings with contractors 
in Germany could not be arranged due to 
economical reasons. However, it often is 
better to learn a lot from a small case than 
learn little from a big case (Stake, 1994). 
Moreover, face-to-face conversations might 
yield more qualitative data than for example 
questionnaires send by email or interviews 
conducted via telephone. Therefore, we 
eventually decided to lie our focus mainly on 
Simatek and the one end-user.
Our findings were analysed with domestication 
of technology and the work about tacit 
knowledge by Orr (1996, 2006) and Yanow 
(2006), as well as Bijker’s (1995) notion of 
‘working’ (see section [4.5.5]).  From the initial 
project proposal (see appendix [1]), the project 
undertook transformations into  exploring 
company proceedings at the case company, 
as well as the work of practitioners. In our field 
work we included the provider of the products 
and (future) services and the end-user.  ‘How 
are different actors and practices influencing 
each other’ developed into an underlying 
issue. We discussed our work using after-
sales and servitization theory, regarding how 
Simatek’s operations compare to theorists’ 
work that describes state of the art after-sales 
services and servitization strategies. We as 
designers used the case study and our thesis 
to learn how design engineers can contribute 
==PAGE:55==
55
to such an operation and wanted to develop 
and partly try out  a design process inspired 
by the reviewed philosophies. The purpose 
of this was to develop an understanding of 
how to design for after-sales (in our case), and 
to be able to discuss literature (see chapter 
[6]) in order to frame after-sales for the case 
at Simatek.
The choice of literature was firstly inspired by 
the situation Simatek saw themselves in, and by 
assumptions what kind of design philosophy 
was suitable to tackle this situation. Along 
the road of the design process (see section 
[4.2]), literature was explored concerning 
both the topic of the case and in general 
design philosophies and methods that were 
taught throughout our education at DTU. 
The exploratory reading of design literature 
armed us with a design mindset - a mental 
scaffolding - and inspired and co-shaped the 
design process to be suitable for the situation 
in question. Reading was done, parallel to 
field work, with the goal to obtain knowledge 
about what methods can be suitable to 
support the design. Furthermore, the theory 
to be used for analysis - domestication of 
technology - was explored. Additionally , 
we researched literature about state of the 
art after-sales operations and servitization in 
order to gain understanding about the topic 
and what Simatek was hoping to achieve.
Throughout, part of our work developed 
towards 
exploring 
tacit 
knowledge 
of 
employees, and practitioners (technicians) 
both in the case company and their 
customers. Therefore, a considerable amount 
of the research has been done in informal 
conversations that have been fuelled by inputs 
of us as researchers. This part of the research 
was inspired by an important remark in the 
lectures of the course “Staging Co-Creation” 
at DTU (Cash & Onarheim, 2015): Often, the 
most fruitful conversations and the “best” 
thoughts happen during breaks of for example 
co-design sessions, when participants have 
had time to re-think discussions and exercises 
(and their outcomes). As for Simatek, these 
conversations were led during the initial 
meeting (see section [4.3]), as well as in 
the breaks and after the workshop. Under 
the impression of the co-creative sessions 
and discussions involving employees from 
different 
departments, 
the 
conversation 
partners expressed interesting thoughts about 
the situation and reviewed taken for granted 
company processes. These conversations 
have then been protocolled as “mind notes” 
after  (see appendix [17]).
4.4 Methods and analytical tools
4.4.1 Theoretical work - reading ‘methods’
4.4.2 Field work methods
4.4.2.1 Informal talks, open and semi-
structured interviews
==PAGE:56==
56
The workshop we did with Simatek was 
structured by exercises. However, we allowed 
for open discussions to take place to a great 
extent. The purpose of this was to explore 
knowledge from different employees with 
different backgrounds within Simatek as a 
company. Due to spontaneous changes in 
the lineup, four employees participated in 
the workshop: The new after-sales manager, 
a technical support engineer, a production 
engineer 
and 
an 
area 
sales 
manager 
(see figure 14) . Three main points were 
addressed during the workshop. Firstly, to 
look at Simateks operations around their 
filters in more detail. Externally when selling 
and delivering filters and delivering their 
services that are in place at the moment, and 
internally when receiving orders, interacting 
with customers and designing the filters to be 
delivered. Secondly, to explore what Simatek 
‘wants’ (future expectations and goals as to 
their after-sales operations) as expressed by 
the employees from different departments, 
and thirdly what Simatek needs to do, to 
possibly achieve these goals.
Based on findings from the initial meeting at 
Simatek and theoretical work, observational 
studies (a factory tour to see technicians 
at work) at an end-user of Simatek filters 
were planned. The field observations were 
supposed 
to 
follow 
the 
sociotechnical 
principle of following the actor (Bijker, 1995), 
in order to not only rely on verbal accounts 
of actors - in this case the practitioner - but 
to only  observe them in their daily routines 
interacting (operating, servicing, maintaining) 
the filters. The background of this plan was 
work by Orr (1996; 2006) and Yanow (2006) 
(see section [4.5.5]) in order to find out 
whether technicians are following the material 
and suggestions delivered by Simatek, or 
if they have established their own way of 
action. Unfortunately, almost all practitioners 
concerned with the filters were not present, 
and no interaction with the filter occurred. 
Based 
on 
readings 
of 
after-sales 
and 
servitization theory and findings from the 
initial meeting at Simatek, guidelines for a 
semi-structured interview were prepared 
(see appendix [4]). The interview guide 
aimed 
at 
exploring 
key 
performance 
indicators (KPIs) of the end-user regarding 
an after-sales collaboration with Simatek. It 
was furthermore aimed at exploring their 
customer journey (van Boeijen, Daalhuizen, 
Zijlstra & van der Schoor, 2013:53) (i.e. how 
did they acquire the filter, etc.) and finding 
out about their communication with Simatek. 
The filter-responsible technician was the 
contact person at the end-user. However, the 
practices at his company were more complex 
than expected and it is not him who ran or 
serviced the filter alone (see section [5.6]). 
As the planned observational studies could 
not be conducted, the interview was begun 
according to the guide. However, because we 
could not conduct the observational studies, 
we as researchers decided to also explore 
the technician’s experience and knowledge 
about the practices in the talk. This was hence 
incorporated into the interview and a more 
open conversation emerged. This allowed the 
practitioner to express himself more openly, 
regarding the situation and practices around 
the Simatek filter in his factory.
4.4.2.2 Observations and talks at an 
end-user’s factory
4.4.2.3 Workshop with Simatek
==PAGE:57==
57
The workshop was planned for a duration of 
approximately four hours, and for originally 
six participants. The original list included 
the sales director and an executive officer, 
in order to explore points of view from the 
management department. Due to their busy 
schedules, they could unfortunately not 
participate. As organisers, we were aware 
about possible fluctuations in the number 
of participants. Therefore, we attempted to 
design the exercises in a way that the number 
of participants would not strongly influence 
the workshop flow.
As part of the design process, the workshop 
was influenced by findings from the previous 
meetings and field work, as well as readings. 
The following schedule shows the exercises 
of the workshop. The ‘trigger’ can be seen as 
what inspired the respective exercise as for its 
‘purpose’ and ‘expectations’. As findings were 
used in the presentations and exercises, these 
will not be depicted here, but can be found in 
the next chapter (see section [5.6]). In order 
to be flexible as to how discussions develop 
during an exercise, we as facilitators decided 
to not limit the exercises timewise beforehand. 
All exercises were hence outcome driven. We 
had expectations as to what the exercises 
would yield, however these were attempted 
to not be used in a way that would bias the 
participants too much. We did not ask them 
to work towards a specific outcome, but 
rather tried to inspire them. In this way, we 
hoped that they would contribute their own 
expectations, experiences and knowledge to 
the outcome of the exercises. Table 3 shows 
a list of exercises we did together with the 
participants as icons and arrows we used 
as visualisations and constraints. A detailed 
description of the exercises, as well as the 
reason of why we did them can be found 
in appendix [9]. Furthermore, appendix [8] 
shows the original facilitator’s manual that 
was prepared prior to the workshop. While 
the initial reason for the exercises remained 
the same, some exercises were altered and 
improvised in the course of the workshop. 
We show both ‘manuals’ in the appendix 
to emphasise the transition from our initial 
Figure 14: Workshop session picture
==PAGE:58==
58
In order to structure the findings for the 
designers to use for further thinking and in 
for example the workshop exercises, findings 
were visualised using different tools of visual 
communication such as demonstrative icons, 
and arrows to symbolise processes (see 
appendices [10], [11] & [13]). These were 
selected by us. It is important to mention that 
the writing process itself played a big role 
in ordering our findings and made way to 
an analysis that would present problematic 
situations and their causes in a structured way.
Table 3: Workshop exercises table
4.4.3 Visualisation of findings and analysis, writing 
process
plan to what was actually done, according to 
the workshop situation. Note that the  initial 
manual was seen as a flexible guideline. 
Material we used in the workshop and the 
‘raw’ outcomes of the exercises can be found 
in appendices [10]-[14].
==PAGE:59==
59
In this section, we explain the theory of 
domestication of technology which is used to 
analyse what we found through field work. The 
approach can be regarded as a theoretical 
lens through which we looked at our work. 
In our case the technology will be Simatek’s 
filters, and the practitioner its operator. 
We see domestication of technology as a 
powerful tool, which can be used understand 
how Simatek’s filters and actors around it 
influence each other regarding after-sales 
services around the product. Please note, that 
the theory was not chosen prior to our field 
work. Therefore, it was adapted and critically 
assessed in iterations of our design process. 
As a result, we relate the theory to the work 
of practitioners (Orr, 1996; 2006) and tacit 
knowledge (Yanow, 2006) and explain how we 
see its relevance for after-sales and services in 
this section. In the last part, we explain how 
the theory was used for analysis.
4.5 The theoretical lens for analysis: 
Domestication of technology
The theory of domestication of technology 
emerged from the work of Silverstone 
et. al (1992) who studied how household 
technologies (especially information and 
communication technologies) are adopted 
into daily practices. They refer to a quote 
by Carrier (1990:3): “No general model 
of how people use objects can ignore 
household practices and relations.” Then 
they contemplate (Silverstone et. al 1992:15): 
“No general model of household practices 
and relations can ignore how people use 
objects.” Combining these quotes leads 
to the conclusion that practices influence 
objects and how they are used. Conversely, 
objects and their use influence practices, 
and therefore also the practitioner, or user. 
Furthermore, they transform each other. 
Yoshinaka (2012:7) writes: 
Yoshinaka (2012) describes domestication 
of technology as a process that happens in 
four overlapping yet distinguishable phases: 
appropriation, objectification, incorporation 
and conversion (see section [4.5.3]). When the 
process is ‘accomplished’, users will not only 
have integrated a new technology into their 
daily practice, but: They will have converted 
it and given it a meaning which represents an 
individual value for them. A simple example of 
how users end up using a product differently 
than what was intended by the designer is 
provided by a lighter. Originally designed for 
ignition purposes, it may also serve as a bottle 
opener. Thus, the lighter has not only been 
transformed into being both a lighter and a 
bottle opener. It has also altered the practice 
of the user, who now might not need a generic 
bottle opener anymore, but would always use 
the lighter. It is however important to note that 
the process of domestication should never be 
regarded as complete (Yoshinaka, 2012). After 
‘accomplishing’ the transformation described 
in the example above, more transformation 
can follow, making domestication a motor of 
continuous change. This process is unique 
to every ‘user’ and has three dimensions to 
it. Domestication of technology happens in 
cognitive, practical and symbolic dimensions, 
making it “a heterogeneous undertaking” 
(Yoshinaka, 2012:9). 
4.5.1 Introduction to domestication of technology
“The domestication of technology focuses 
on the co-shaping of artifact and user 
setting in their mutual transformation”.
==PAGE:60==
60
Each ‘user’ has their unique process of 
domestication. 
However, 
one 
‘user’s’ 
domestication of technology can influence 
that of another ‘user’. They are interrelated. 
This realisation becomes especially important 
when looking at workplaces rather than 
households, as noted by Sørensen et. al. 
(2000). First, it has to be explored, who the user 
is, or what a user is. The concept suggests that 
use can either be direct or indirect. ‘Use’ of 
an object, or a technology, means that a ‘user’ 
is related to it, in one way or another. A ‘user’ 
might be an individual who is directly ‘using’ 
or interacting with the technology. A  ‘user’ 
can also be a collective, such as for example 
a group, a company or even a community  - 
‘using’ or making use of a technology. Such a 
collective might regard the ‘use’ - in this case 
both usage and purpose -  of a technology 
differently than the actual practitioner who 
is directly interacting with it. The collective 
might transform its meaning. Nevertheless, 
the practitioner is part of the collective. Both 
are ‘users’ of the technology, but stand in 
different relations to it and have different 
levels of engagement. These collectives, 
depending on their ‘kind’ of engagement, 
serve as units of analysis in an analytical 
framework. However, to differentiate them, 
and by differentiating making them relevant 
for analysis, can be challenging. Especially 
as the contexts of use might not only differ 
between units of analysis, but even for a single 
user (Yoshinaka, 2012). Therefore, questions 
regarding the who, the how and the why of 
the usage of a technology for each unit need 
to be posed.   An illustrative example is given 
by a company in which management decides 
to buy a novel technology in order to gain 
competitive advantage and domesticate it 
by making use of its promised improvement 
of efficiency. The practitioner, for instance a 
technician working for the company, then has 
to domesticate this new technology in his or 
her daily work routine. At the workplace, the 
practitioner is not necessarily the acquirer 
of a technology (Sørensen et. al., 2000). This 
can be the origin of problematic situations in 
the company . In this example, exploring the 
process of domestication for both these units 
of analysis is important in order to handle 
these situations.  
The units of analysis, and the aforementioned 
questions to be posed will be described 
more exhaustively in the following section. 
In the subsequent section, domestication of 
technology as a process and its phases, also 
regarding the different dimensions, will be 
elaborated on in detail.
As aforementioned, Sørensen et. al. (2000) 
say that both the domestication at home as 
well as at the workplace have similarities, 
but are not the same. They point out that 
“the social dynamics of the workplace are 
different from those of the home” (Sørensen 
et. al., 2000). They hint that at companies, not 
necessarily the end-user directly is purchasing 
technology. For example in an organisation, 
the management could buy a new technology 
and advise their technicians to operate it. This 
acquisition usually follows certain overarching 
strategic goals of the company. In order to 
achieve these goals, management is able to 
influence the process of implementation by 
informing or training their staff (Sørensen et. 
al., 2000). This means that the actual users of 
the technology at the company might have 
to implement and get used to technology 
that is not acquired on their own incentive 
4.5.2 Units of analysis and levels of engagement
==PAGE:61==
61
in their daily practice, which will in turn be 
transformed by the technology as well. The 
user and contexts of use of a (newly acquired) 
technology or artifact therefore becomes 
less defined and both become “open for 
exploration” (Yoshinaka, 2012:2). In the 
previous example by Sørensen et. al. (2000), 
both management and practitioners are 
‘using’ the newly acquired technology. They 
are both ‘users’. However, they are using it for 
different reasons, with different incentives and 
in different settings, that are unique to them, 
but still interrelated.
Picking up on this idea, Yoshinaka (2012), 
explains that the process of domestication 
of technology can manifest itself in different 
ways, embedded in the contexts of the diverse 
user settings. These user settings can differ 
from user to user and might even be different 
for a single user in “different use situations” 
(Yoshinaka, 2012:4). As was introduced earlier, 
users can either be individuals or collectives. 
Their ‘contexts of user settings’ may very well 
be interrelated, as for example management 
and practitioners naturally influence each other 
in an organisation. As hinted to in the above 
example, these different but simultaneously 
interrelated contexts of use imply that users 
and their way of using a technology influence 
each other and therefore influence the 
process of domestication of technology for 
the other involved users respectively. This 
is especially the case in - or rather because 
of - the ‘appropriation’ phase. This will be 
elaborated on in the following section. 
Domestication happens on different “levels of 
engagement” which can originate from “social 
aspects of interactions (e.g. the collective 
being a group, organization, region or nation, 
etc.)” (Yoshinaka, 2012:4). Therefore, ‘user’, 
‘use’ and ‘use context’ are not “delimited to 
direct use of technology” (Yoshinaka, 2012:4). 
Use can also be regarded as indirect use, or 
as Yoshinaka (2012:4) puts it, “some relation 
to the technology”. Hence, reconsidering that 
both the notions of user and use become 
“open for exploration” (Yoshinaka 2012:2), 
instead of talking about a ‘user’ from the 
beginning, one should consider starting off 
with the notion of ‘actors’.
The above considerations open up for the 
aforementioned questions to be posed:  Who 
is the actor? How is the actor a user? To what 
extend? In what setting? How engaged is he 
or she in the (newly acquired) technology 
on a social level and why? How is the user’s’ 
relation to the technology?  What is at stake 
for the actor using the technology in the 
setting at question? What is his or her goal or 
incentive for using the technology? What are 
the contexts of use for the different units of 
analysis? How are they interrelated? 
Explicitly, the different levels (of engagement) 
of actors provide the aforementioned different 
units of analysis. “Domestication is not limited 
to individuals but also addresses collectives” 
(Yoshinaka, 2012:4). This unfolds more 
concerns to the matter: On which level is the 
domestication happening, individually or in a 
collective, organisational or even communal? 
And how do they influence each other and 
affect the domestication at the different units? 
On these units of analysis, Yoshinaka (2012:5) 
writes: 
“[...] The unit of analysis, while providing 
a convenient analytical frame through 
which to address domestication, presents 
in its multiplicity, a challenge. The difficulty 
concerns how the respective units can be 
differentiated and thus rendered relevant, 
and particularly, how they may thus 
interrelate.” 
==PAGE:62==
62
In order to answer these questions, the process 
of domestication of technology itself has to 
be observed (at the different levels/units of 
analysis). When seeing and understanding 
how someone is domesticating a technology 
or artifact, one can analyse why this is 
happening in that way, regarding the units 
of analysis . How are they interrelating? Then, 
domestication of technology becomes a 
powerful tool for analysis. In the following, the 
notion of an ‘artifact’ will be used alongside 
the notion of technology, to emphasise that 
both technology and artifacts can be subject 
to domestication, but that they are not 
necessarily the same.
What is to be explored using the introduced 
units, is the process of domestication, or 
how a technology has been domesticated 
uniquely by an actor or ‘user’ and how this 
related to other actors in a possible collective. 
This enables the researcher to find situations 
that are problematic and analyse them, 
regarding their origin. Picking up on the short 
explanation of domestication of technology in 
the introductory section [4.5.1], domestication 
of technology as a process, running through 
its different overlapping phases in different 
dimensions will be elaborated on in the 
following. Yoshinaka (2012:9) states: 
Hence, the actor dealing with the new 
technology or artifact is altered by it, and 
the artifact is altered by the actor using it. 
Furthermore, the entire context in which the 
it is used is redefined by the artifact, and the 
other way around: the artifact is redefined 
by the use context as well. Artifact and user 
co-shape each other and the context of use. 
Considering the different units of analysis, 
this becomes especially interesting. Here, 
the already used ‘management-practitioner 
example’ can be consulted again: If one actor 
brings the new technology into practice for 
another user, for example when management 
(on an organisational level) purchases a new 
technology, practitioners (on an individual 
level) are given this technology to deal with. 
Hence, this technology, influences their 
individual way of working and their working 
practice, which changes their individual 
situation. 
As introduced, the process of domestication 
is of heterogeneous nature. Each unique 
process of domestication - unique as to 
the units of analysis - takes place in three 
dimensions: cognitive, practical and symbolic. 
Furthemore, the process subdivides the 
integration of an artifact “into concrete 
practice” -  into daily life, practice or working 
routine - in four phases, namely appropriation, 
objectification, incorporation and conversion 
(Yoshinaka, 
2012). 
These 
phases 
are 
“overlapping, yet discernable” (Yoshinaka, 
2012:9). In the following, they are explained 
4.5.3 The ‘process’ and the ‘dimensions’ of 
domestication of technology
“The domestication of [a new] artifact [(or 
technology)] into a concrete setting of 
practice implies that the artifact settles into 
a (new) working order, where it, in part, 
(re)defines, but is itself also (re)defined 
by, the particular context in question.”
==PAGE:63==
63
briefly. As promised, the importance of the 
appropriation as to the units of analysis phase 
will be explained below. But even though 
appropriation plays an especially important 
role in this regard, the other phases are also 
of concern.
Appropriation:
Appropriation is the phase in which a new 
technology or a new artifact is being acquired 
into familiar context of practice, mostly with 
an intended purpose. 
This ‘purpose’ is derived from what is 
known of the technology or artifact prior to 
acquiring it and can be seen as “expectations” 
or “intentions”. This implies, that a new 
technology that is being acquired is not 
always completely ‘alien’ to its future users. 
This consideration will be briefly elaborated 
on later in section [4.5.4]. 
Yoshinaka 
(2012) 
points 
out 
that 
the 
process actors undergo in this phase 
significantly influences the following phases. 
“Appropriation 
[...] 
configures 
practice” 
(Yoshinaka, 2012:9). Appropriation is the 
collectivity of heterogeneous process, in 
which a technology (or artifact) is acquired 
physically, and made accessible to its users 
practically, symbolically and cognitively. In 
other words, users have to start identifying 
themselves with the artifact, learn how to use 
it (initially) and recognize the “new thing” that 
now is available to use. In the appropriation 
phase, according to Yoshinaka (2012), the 
artifact is not just procured. Right after, users 
start defining it for themselves by determining 
what it means to them. The three dimensions 
start to manifest themselves. Here, it is 
important to realise that not necessarily the 
“end-user” acquires the artifact or technology. 
Russell and Williams (2002:69-70) explain: 
Again, 
the 
‘management-practitioner 
example’ can be made use of: Practitioners 
(e. g. technicians) in a company might be 
given a new technology, which has been 
purchased 
by 
management. 
This 
new 
technology then needs to be appropriated 
by both management and the practitioners, 
even though the practitioners did not have a 
choice acquiring it. Even management might 
have been limited in choice: The acquisition 
might have been influenced by a company’s 
existing contract with a supplier or other 
aspects (see quote above). This might result 
in dissatisfaction for practitioners, or even 
across units of analysis (e.g. practitioners 
and company), as they might have preferred 
another technology instead. In this case, they 
might perceive the technology with a negative 
mindset, which can influence the upcoming 
phases of domestication. Positive examples 
might also be possible.
“Acquisition is much more complex than 
the conventional picture of replacement 
by a self-evidently better technology. 
Users, or those purchasing technology for 
organisations, are guided and constrained 
by complex mixes of acknowledged 
objectives, priorities, criteria and perhaps 
regulatory constraints, as well as values, 
pressures, 
images 
and 
associations. 
[...] However, the requirements, criteria, 
assessments, 
and 
weightings 
given 
to each, are variable and contestable. 
Choice is both informed and constrained 
by knowledge, experience, availability 
and relations with suppliers. [...] In 
organisational settings, of course, groups 
using a technology are involved to varying 
extents in its selection, but frequently not 
at all.”
==PAGE:64==
64
Additionally, 
the 
appropriation 
phase 
might differ between management and 
practitioners. While for the management, the 
new technology might have the symbolical 
meaning 
of 
“new 
opportunities 
and 
competitive advantage”, it might have the 
symbolical meaning of “not having a say in the 
company” to the practitioners -  considering 
the symbolical aspect. Differences might also 
occur practically (e.g. management needs to 
know about the finances influenced by the 
new technology, practitioners need to know 
about technical details), and cognitively. 
Yoshinaka (2012) describes this phenomenon 
in the following way:
	
The appropriation phase hence plays an 
important role in the following process of 
building up the perceived value of a new 
technology or artifact to the involved actors. 
This underlines that the process of “getting” 
the artifact will influence using it. 
Objectification:
This perceived value that has started to be built 
up in the appropriation phase is manifested, 
and the technology or artifact is objectified  - 
or made use of - in the objectification phase. 
The users begin using it the way they got to 
“know” it during appropriation. The use of 
the new artifact or technology is “cultivated” 
(Yoshinaka, 2012). Its users are getting used to 
having the new technology or artifact around 
and grow a custom to it. They do this in the 
aforementioned context of their practice 
(context of use), which is now however 
becoming of a new nature, because of the 
presence of the artifact: Known practice is 
altered by integrating the new technology or 
artifact into it. Challenges of the objectification 
phase concern practical and knowledge 
related issues: Users are in the process of 
getting to know how to use the artifact “best”. 
Best in this case means best for them, most 
convenient or clever. They start building an 
understanding of it and obtain knowledge 
about it (cognitively), and then incorporate 
these into their practice (practically). Thus, 
“objectification is determined through the 
artifact in relation to how it is used” (Yoshinaka, 
2012). Yoshinaka (2012) suggests that if users 
prioritise using the new artifact, even though 
it might still be cumbersome getting used 
to it, it will become part of their daily routine 
faster.
Incorporation:
Objectification is followed by the phase of 
incorporation. Note that the phases, and 
that goes for all the phases of domestication 
are not clearly divided chronologically, but 
“grow into each other”. Neither are they 
clearly divided by their characteristics. So 
can characteristics of the incorporation phase 
take their beginning in the objectification 
phase, for instance.
Incorporation is the phase “which addresses 
how the artifact (or technology), in effect, 
comes to play its role in the practice-setting” 
(Yoshinaka, 2012:13). Patterns of use are 
ensued or ensue as actors use the artifact or 
“How users or other actors engage with 
the artifact (or some dimension of it) is 
not generalisable for users across the 
board. Any concrete user may or may 
not have partaken actively in each of 
such [appropriation] processes (leading 
up to engaging with the artifact). But 
a user’s initial engagement with the 
technology is partly dependent on past 
events and actions, which have rendered 
the technology accessible to the user.” 
(Yoshinaka, 2012:12)
==PAGE:65==
65
technology according to how it is designed, 
and adapt to it. They have now learned how 
to use the artifact “correctly”, according to its 
intended use. However, as mentioned, these 
patterns of use are not the “known practice” 
anymore that the artifact has once been 
integrated to. The patterns of use are rather 
a construct of having learned how to use the 
artifact and how to include it into the practice 
that existed until the artifact was acquired/
appropriated. From that point on, the practice 
has changed and now become the “new 
practice”, in which the artifact or technology is 
(still being) incorporated. 
Interpreting Yoshinaka (2012), incorporation 
is the phase where the artifact shapes the 
practice around it and is starting to be 
shaped by the context it is used in. Artifact 
and practice configure each other. Still in this 
phase, the artifact is shaping more than it is 
shaped. The technology’s or artifact’s design 
still influences the user to a great extend, and 
the “mode of practice” [(using it)] becomes 
“taken for granted and seemingly naturalised” 
(Yoshinaka, 2012:14). And: “[b]oth the artifact 
and the practice setting have settled into 
a particular means of practice” (Yoshinaka, 
2012:14). In the incorporation phase, an 
understanding develops as to how the artifact 
or technology is relevant for the context it is 
used in and vice versa. The practice with the 
artifact or technology becomes natural for the 
user through this understanding. “Natural”, 
in this case however, concerns all kinds of 
practices, be they well incorporated or ‘not 
ideal’.
Conversion:
In incorporation, the artifact is incorporated 
into practice and begins to shape its users 
and their practice by its design (implied 
patterns of use, getting used to it). In 
conversion, the artifact is transformed. Users 
begin using it in different ways, maybe totally 
different from originally implied patterns of 
use, maybe counter intuitive; it is translated 
(Akrich, 1992) into something with a personal 
meaning to the actors who use it. This means 
that, once conversion has been “reached”, 
actors and their practice shape the artifact 
or technology and alter it according to their 
needs and ideas. What might have been 
intended by designers creating the artifact or 
technology and what was intended acquiring 
it, is possibly still playing a role. However, the 
practice and the artifact both are not limited 
to that anymore. The users have developed a 
deep understanding, which goes beyond just 
having knowledge. They have domesticated 
the artifact cognitively. They have made 
the technology or artifact “their own” and 
are therefore redefining. The artifact or 
technology is, besides the “traditional” 
and most probably still important way of 
using it, used in new contexts, practically. 
Interpreting Yoshinaka (2012), conversion 
can be seen as the phase of domestication 
where the result (the technology and the new 
context of use) becomes greater than just 
the sum of its summands (users, technology 
and “old context”). Value has been added 
through the new practice involving the new 
technology, in the just mentioned cognitive 
and practical way, but also symbolically: The 
technology now carries a personal meaning 
to the user, he or she has made it their own. 
This value did not exist before the artifact was 
introduced, and might be greater than what 
was “expected” or “intended” by acquiring it 
in the appropriation phase. 
Value in this case can take many forms, 
and should be regarded considering the 
three dimensions to domestication. A good 
example of such value is knowledge. When 
a practitioner, through using the technology, 
obtains a deep understanding and masters 
==PAGE:66==
66
the technology (Yanow, 2006), he or she has 
gained knowledge which might be extremely 
valuable to for example the company the 
technician might work at. Yanow (2006), 
discussing the work by Orr (1996), points 
out the difficulty to express such knowledge. 
Therefore, it often remains tacit. This plays an 
important role for this thesis.
According to Yoshinaka (2012), much of the 
theory of domestication of technology is 
based in the assumption that the technology 
- or artifact - to be integrated into practice 
is foreign or alien  - completely new - to its 
users to be.  However, he then points out 
the necessity to question the technology 
being 
foreign 
by 
definition 
(Yoshinaka 
2012). Newness of artifacts or technology 
- how alien they are, and how they are alien 
- should rather be explored than assumed. 
Yoshinaka (2012) calls this the “equivocality 
of being foreign”. He argues that although 
the technology is foreign, the setting in which 
it is used is familiar to the actor that is using 
the technology. As the new artifact is then 
used in the familiar setting, the boundaries 
between novelty and familiarity - the technical 
(new) and the social (familiar) - are blurry and 
it needs to be assessed empirically what is 
foreign or new and what is familiar or known. 
Foreignness cannot be taken for granted 
(Yoshinaka, 2012). These boundaries are 
being redefined by domestication in any way. 
Furthermore, some properties or “facts” might 
be familiar or known to the future users of this 
“alien” technology. This knowledge might 
come from research about the technology, 
talks with actors that have already used the 
technology and so forth, prior to acquiring it. 
It might even cause expectations, that users 
then have of the new technology. 
For example, if a coffee shop buys a novel 
technology for foaming milk, the practice of 
foaming milk itself is already known to them, 
they have just been using another technology 
to do it. Furthermore, they have the possibility 
to read up on the new technology prior 
to purchasing it. Hence, they have certain 
expectations to the technology which they 
want to be fulfilled. If these expectations are 
not fulfilled, for one reason or another, this 
might influence the meaning that a technology 
gets through the process of domestication. 
Also, the fact that they might be used to their 
old practice might impose a problematic 
situation in itself, as old patterns of use 
might hinder the objectification of the new 
technology. As mentioned before, prioritising 
the use of a new technology can contribute to 
a faster domestication (Yoshinaka, 2012).
Again, this adds to the questions to be posed 
in the analytic toolbox: How is the technology 
foreign to the user? Has the user informed 
him- or herself before? How did the ‘old’ 
working routine look like? What expectations 
does the user have to the new technology? 
Have these expectations influenced how the 
technology is perceived and how it has been 
domesticated?
4.5.4 Really an “alien” technology?
==PAGE:67==
67
In this section we describe how we see the 
relevance of domestication of technology to 
after-sales services. Part of what we write is 
our interpretation of the theory. Please note 
that these interpretations were inspired by 
our findings and the analysis. However, we 
feel that it is necessary to address them here, 
as it will contribute to the understanding of 
what and how we analysed. 
As described, the domestication of a 
technology or artifact results in a transformed 
practice, that has been co-shaped by both 
the user and the technology. They have co-
configured each other. Through the process 
and its four phases, the user has thus gained 
his or her very own ‘expertise’ in using the 
artifact for their own means, in their own way. 
And it is this ‘expertise’ and the means that 
should be analysed. How and why have they 
become? The becoming of this expertise has 
to be explored. Here, the units of analysis, 
and their respective domestication processes 
with their four phases need to be considered. 
This points to a problematic aspect of the 
domestication of technology across its units of 
analysis, especially problematic situations that 
might occur by their respective domestication 
processes influencing each other.  
For the following, still theoretical example, 
the units of analysis will be pointed out by the 
abbreviation ‘UA’. As mentioned, users can be 
individuals, but also groups and organisations. 
The domestication of a technology might be 
of a different nature for the management of an 
organisation, and the practitioners operating 
it. Yoshinaka (2012:15) writes: 
In this example, the appropriation phase 
of 
the 
technology 
of 
the 
practitioner 
(‘UA1’) is strongly influenced by that of the 
management. Even the management’s (‘UA2’) 
appropriation (or decision to acquire and then 
appropriate) can be influenced by strategies 
of the organisation as a whole (‘UA3’), such 
as contracts with suppliers or the like. This 
is drawn upon in the quote by Russell and 
Williams (2002:69-70), that has been used in 
section [4.5.3]. Additionally, as pointed out 
before, the rest of the domestication process 
to follow is influenced by this appropriation. 
“Appropriation 
[...] 
configures 
practice” 
(Yoshinaka, 2012:9), and thus also influences 
the formation of this practice through 
domestication. Hence, how one unit of analysis 
domesticates a technology influences how 
another unit of analysis domesticates it. This 
points to a potentially problematic situation, 
which should be payed attention to as part of 
the analysis. 
The management of an organisation might 
buy a technology for production with 
a certain intention, for example to gain 
competitive advantage. This decision might 
have been influenced by the current practice 
of the organisation, for example by working 
together with a certain supplier. Now this 
4.5.5 Domestication from a practitioner’s perspective 
& its relation to after-sales
“[W]hile the ‘management’, on behalf of 
the organisation [...] may have more of a 
hand in the acquisition of the technology 
than the concrete users would, the latter’s 
appropriation of the technology is, in 
part, mediated by the strategies and 
actions of the former - i.e. the respective 
appropriations are interrelated across 
practice settings (with the settings as 
respective units of analysis), but not the 
same.” 
==PAGE:68==
68
supplier might offer sort of the technology 
that is intended to buy, but one that is not 
ideally integrable into the production line 
(practices, context of use). This means, that 
the practitioners working in production 
would need to incorporate (and domesticate) 
a technology that is not ideally working 
for the production. This could for example 
mean that the technology does not provide 
a needed function. Applying the concept of 
domestication, the awry technology would 
then transform the practice of the workers, and 
the workers would ‘transform’ the technology 
by domesticating it, by integrating it into 
their context of use. This could mean that 
the practitioners would find ways to “make 
the technology work” for their purposes 
by finding workarounds for for example 
missing functions, therefore “ignoring” how 
the technology is supposed to be worked 
with and developing new ‘working routines’. 
They might have to completely ignore the 
intended way, because management did 
not consider their practitioners context of 
use in the first place (Orr, 2006). These new 
working routines might however influence 
their outcome negatively. The practitioners 
might have made the technology ‘work’ for 
their purposes, to be able to do their job. In 
our production example this might have a 
negative influence in production by slowing 
it down.  The technicians might have gained 
‘expertise’ in using the technology, but it 
needs to be explored and explained how this 
expertise emerged (through domestication 
and its aspects ). Then, it can for example be 
analysed why processes in a company are 
‘not good’. Bijker’s suggests (Bijker, 1995:14): 
	
Considering 
this 
and 
the 
theory 
of 
domestication 
of 
technology, 
‘working’ 
should maybe figure as a result of the 
domestication of a technology. Whether this 
result is ‘successful’ theoretically might be 
assessed using for example state-of-the art 
literature. How and why it is a ‘success’, may 
be analysed using domestication. The very 
notion of ‘success’ should however always 
be questioned when doing so. By ignoring 
‘how it is supposed to work/be done’ and 
finding workarounds through their process 
of domestication, practitioners develop own 
practices (Orr, 1996) and, if not documented, 
tacit knowledge. This might also have 
positive effects. Through his work, Julian Orr 
discovered and wrote (Orr, 1996; Orr, 2006): 
The 
operations 
of 
Xerox 
were 
briefly 
mentioned in section [3.2.1]: Rather than 
selling printing machines, they offered 
the guarantee that their customers could 
print comfortably at all times, by putting 
printing machines in their customers’ offices 
and sending their service technician crew 
to guarantee that the customers could 
always print. The above quote shows that, 
according to Orr’s (1996) findings, Xerox’s 
“[...]’Working’ should be the explanandum 
[what is to be explained], not the 
explanans [the explanation]. The ‘working’ 
“Xerox [...] did not look to see how much 
work the technicians did to socialize 
their monsters [printing machines] or to 
train their customers. Indeed, they rarely 
looked to see if [service] tools provided to 
the technicians [by Xerox] actually worked 
[...]” (Orr, 2006:1808).
of a machine [(or a technology)] is not an 
intrinsic property of the artifact, explaining 
its success; rather, it should figure as a 
result of the machine’s [(or technology’s)] 
success.”
==PAGE:69==
69
technicians developed their own way to do 
their job well, ‘ignoring’ instructions by the 
company, because those did not fully cover 
the job. This was not only beneficial to their 
customers, but also to Xerox themselves (Orr, 
2006), as it added to customers’ satisfaction. 
Xerox’ technicians have thus ‘domesticated 
Xerox’ operations’. Although the mandated 
practices to conduct these operations did 
not work as intended, the service technicians 
have found ‘positive workarounds’, and 
made the operations their own. This gives 
way to the thought that not only artifacts 
can be domesticated, but also processes 
and practices  , and puts domestication of 
technology in an after-sales perspective.   
After-sales services are seen as operations by a 
company that complement a product through 
a number of services (see section [3.2.1]). 
Taking the aforementioned assumption that 
processes can also be domesticated, after-
sales operations can be looked at through 
‘domestication glasses’. It can be explored, 
investigated and analysed how the product(s) 
around which after-sales services are (to be) 
build are domesticated, especially by the 
practitioners operating them, but also how 
the very services and the practices within are 
domesticated by the different actors. This 
includes finding out how after-sales is defined 
by the provider and the receiver and possibly 
reframing it.
This 
section 
describes 
how 
we 
use 
domestication for analysis. As mentioned, 
the idea that it can be used not only for 
technology, but for example also for practices, 
was developed through reading the theory 
and iterations of the design process. This 
idea, and the possible negative effect of 
it (see section [4.5.5]), was applied during 
our analysis.  Another facet is added if one 
considers that each actor in an actor-network 
around a technology, artifact or process can 
domesticate another actor.   In addition to 
this, Bijker’s (1995) notions of explanans 
and explanandum were carefully considered 
throughout the analysis phase. This allowed 
for the analysis of why and how a technology 
or practice is ‘working’, and whether it is a 
‘success’ (see section [4.5.5]). The theory 
was furthermore combined with the work on 
communities of practitioners and practices 
by Orr (1996, 2006) and Yanow (2006). Then, 
domestication of technology through its units 
of analysis (UAs), phases and dimensions 
provides a strong analytical toolbox. We may 
explore how Simatek’s filters - the technology 
- are working in their (transformed) contexts 
of use, through analysing how the users - the 
different units of analysis - might have gained 
‘expertise’, deep understanding and (tacit) 
knowledge by using it.
Domestication of technology was used as a 
mindset which we used as a methodological 
tool.  In analysis, there is hence no strict 
method. Apart from the underlying ideas, 
domestication provided us with analytical 
elements to consider. The analytic element 
table (see table 4) addresses four aspects of 
the theory of domestication of technology: 
units of analysis (UAs), phases, dimensions 
and the notion of ‘alien’. Due to the nature 
of the theory, these columns have not been 
regarded separate, but are interrelated. A 
table which lists a selection of questions 
underlying these elements and that have 
been considered during analysis can be 
found in appendix [18]. 
4.5.6 Tools for analysis
==PAGE:70==
70
Table 4: Analytic elements of domestication of technology
We saw our thesis as a fuzzy front end project. 
As mentioned, the outcome of its process was 
not predetermined, but rather developed 
throughout our theoretical research, analysis 
and discussion of our findings. Provided 
with the incentive to (re)design something 
concerning 
after-sales 
around 
Simatek’s 
DCA filter systems, we had to develop an 
understanding of the notion as well as the 
case company. Throughout our process, the 
following overall issues arose:
Then, with these issues in mind, and during 
our analysis, ‘sub-issues’ arose and were 
developed. They concern both the case 
company as well as our overall aim - how 
to design for after-sales, what is there to 
consider. In the analysis chapter, these issues 
will be implicitly addressed. When we say 
‘implicitly addressed’, we are aware of the fact 
that the reader might analyse what we found 
differently. We addressed what appeared 
most relevant to us, according to the 
literature, theory and most significantly our 
collaborators. Note that during the workshop, 
findings have been clarified and to some extent 
analysed together with the participants, so as 
to identify what might cause the problematic 
situations that we found. As part of a co-
design process, analysis was hence not solely 
done by us as designers, but happened as a 
part of discussions in the workshop as well. 
We believe that this enabled us to gain and 
thus depict a more holistic and ‘true’ view of 
the issues at hand. In our discussion chapter, 
we will address the issues that emerged from 
our case more explicitly and take stock of 
what we have found. 
Chapter X - Overall issues
What influences after-sales? And what 
needs to be considered when working 
with this notion? Do we need to challenge 
the notion of after-sales?
==PAGE:71==
71
==PAGE:72==
72
Chapter 5 
Findings and 
Analysis
==PAGE:73==
73
When applying domestication of technology, 
units of are marked with ‘(UA)’. As for the (actor) 
network surrounding the company Simatek, 
its products and after-sales operations, the 
units of analysis can be ordered as follows:
Table 4: Analytic elements of domestication of technology
==PAGE:74==
74
As for the case, the project proposal by 
Simatek concerned the design of after-sales 
services around their ‘standardised’ off-the-
shelf filters. Therefore, we firstly chose to 
explore the overall situation faced by the 
company:
1. How does Simatek currently 
distribute 
their 
products 
and 
services? How do they conduct 
their after-sales operations? What 
are their expectations? How do they 
describe their problems related to 
this?
This first three parts of this issue are to 
some extent answered in the introduction 
of the case company. We made the choice 
of addressing them in the beginning of this 
text in order to provide the reader with an 
understanding of the company and their 
operations. This is required to understand the 
case matter that will be analysed as well as the 
process undertaken to do so. The last part will 
be addressed just below.
Early on during the case study at Simatek, we 
realised that the company (UA) is struggling 
to promote and sell their after-sales services 
to the end-users of their off-the-shelf filters. 
In the first meeting, our conversation partners 
expressed that the end-users to a large 
extent do not care about the ‘original quality’ 
or ‘technological excellence’ that Simatek 
provides, but simply about price. Therefore, 
many of them do not consider original spare 
parts an option. Furthermore, it was assumed 
that the vast majority of end-user companies 
blackbox Simatek’s filters and do not care 
about their maintenance or service until 
they eventually break down. According to 
the Simatek employees we talked to, this is 
caused by the filters mostly being regarded 
as a means to fulfill air regulation laws by their 
customer companies’ (UA, management). 
Moreover, they often require a shutdown for 
servicing work and checks (see chapter [2]). 
As most of their customers produce around 
the clock and see shutdowns as interference 
with their processes, the Simatek employees 
we talked to assumed this to be widely 
avoided. Our conversation partners stated 
that there is hardly any communication 
between their end-users of off-the-shelf 
filters and Simatek except for in emergency 
situations. In these cases, Simatek’s service 
department is contacted via their 24-hour 
hotline (see section [2.3]), and the majority of 
callers can provide only sparse information 
about the cause of the problem. Service 
engineers then try to assist in troubleshooting, 
finding and fixing the problem. At times, this 
is successful via telephone, but in some cases 
they need to visit the end-users. These visits 
need to be carried out quickly and were said 
to be very costly for both sides. We learned 
that the technicians of Simatek are working 
at very high capacity to deal with these 
types of service inquiries, which according 
to our conversation partners are numerous. 
Furthermore, we were told that Simatek as a 
company and their employees in general are 
extremely busy with a great number of orders 
that need to be manufactured. 
The situation described above provided 
the starting point for the analysis in our first 
process iteration. We got the impression 
that the high workload in producing filters is 
causing a low prioritisation of relationships 
with customers exceeding the point of sale. 
We learned that in most cases, communication 
is cut after the sale from Simatek’s side. The 
after-sales project was proposed to us as a 
project that should identify possible starting 
points for Simatek to enhance their after-sales 
business. Despite this intention, we were told 
that management does currently not want to 
increase resources on the matter.
==PAGE:75==
75
The first conversation and an iteration in 
our process lead us to the formulation of 
more particular questions regarding the 
case. After-sales and servitization literature 
describe similar situations like Simatek’s, 
and guided us to the discovery of apparent 
problematic situations that we thought 
needed to be treated in Simatek’s case. These 
questions are concerning both Simatek and 
their employees, as well as practitioners on 
the end-user side, as our design process 
concerned both ends of the service. Through 
the research at the end-user we aimed to 
explore what an operator of a product that 
after-sales are being designed around sees 
as his needs and whether they differ with his 
apparent needs to us as designers.
Simatek’s operations will later on be discussed 
in terms of state-of-the art literature of after-
sales and servitization. This will contribute to 
our suggestions for the case company.
Along with the ones regarding our case, more 
specific issues regarding our overall topic - 
the design for after-sales - unfolded. Some 
of these are partly addressed and partly 
developed throughout our analysis. Others 
unfolded during the discussion. Therefore, the 
discussion chapter will serve as the ground 
where we explicitly name the issues we found 
to be important to consider when designing 
for after-sales. They represent, summarised in 
a toolbox for the designer for after-sales and 
with their specifications, the outcome of this 
thesis.
Issues regarding the case company Simatek:
1.	 How does Simatek define after-sales? Where do they see the starting point of 
‘after-sales’?
2.	 How does Simatek develop/produce the products they want to (re)design their 
services around?
3.	 Most services are based on a relationship between a provider and a receiver. How 
do  the relationships between Simatek and their customers (contractors and end-
users) manifest themselves?
4.	 Services are ‘offered’ by the company (UA) but provided by their employees. How 
do Simatek’s employees do their work on a daily basis?
Issues regarding an end-user (operator/practitioner):
1.	 The services Simatek aims to ‘(re)design’ concern their filters. How do Simatek’s 
end-users (the practitioners) use their filters and how do they interact with them? In 
terms of operation and maintenance and service? Are they working together with 
Simatek?
2.	 How does the product work for them?
3.	 What are the primary needs of the filter users?
==PAGE:76==
76
During both our first meeting with Simatek 
and the workshop, Simatek’s technicians were 
frequently described by the participants of the 
workshop as extremely knowledgeable. Their 
knowledge was explained to originate from 
both installation support and commissioning 
deployments as well as service deployments 
in order to repair broken filters or to do 
maintenance. Hence, this knowledge seems 
to be influential in the after-sales services.
Unfortunately, we could not speak to 
Simatek’s practitioners directly, due to lack of 
time on their side. However, in the workshop 
the present after-sales manager recounted an 
experience he had when accompanying one 
of their technicians to a service field trip in 
Sweden: The customer had problems running 
the filter efficiently. It was not filtering enough 
dust out of the air to fully fulfill the customer’s 
‘need’. In order to investigate the problem , 
Simatek’s technician and the practitioner on 
the customer’s side exchanged information 
(see figure 15). After the practitioner had 
explained his problems  and how he had tried 
to run the filter more efficiently and fix the 
problem, Simatek’s technicians adjusted the 
filter and changed parameters in the program. 
Moreover, he suggested adjustments to 
the customer’s production processes to 
work best in combination with said filter. 
The problem was remedied . The after-sales 
manager stated that he was in fact surprised 
that Simatek’s technician is in possession of 
such knowledge. Other participants stated 
that this knowledge comes not only from 
service missions, but also commissioning and 
installation supervision. According to them, 
Simatek’s service engineers know what filter 
is best, or what parts a filter should include in 
order to suit customer’s production processes 
and how to adjust both in order to obtain the 
best result . Furthermore, they were trusted to 
know what is likely to break in filters regarding 
certain processes and what spare parts 
specific end-users need.
5.1Tacit knowledge among Simatek 
technicians & ‘experience’
Figure 15: Knowledge exchange between Simatek practitioner and end user practitioner; not 
documented on Simatek side
==PAGE:77==
77
Yanow (2006) talks about knowledge that 
originates from mastering the use of a 
technology. Similar to the technicians of 
Xerox that Orr (1996) investigated in his work, 
the technicians of Simatek seem to have 
developed practices that are not necessarily 
prescribed by their company, by for example 
adjusting customer processes. They seem 
to have mastered Simatek’s technology 
both in terms of suiting it to their customers’ 
requirements and adjusting processes in 
order to suit Simatek’s filters. They developed 
the knowledge through the exchange of 
information 
about 
problems, 
processes, 
solution attempts with practitioners of end-
users  in combination with their technical know-
how about the filters. Yanow (2006) states that 
such deep knowledge (understanding) is 
difficult to express to others and challenging 
to document. It often remains tacit. According 
to the workshop participants, Simatek’s 
technicians do not document their knowledge 
due to the effort this would require and the 
lack of time. Furthermore, we were told that 
Simatek’s management (UA) currently does not 
enforce such documentation. The knowledge 
hence does remain tacit in Simatek’s case. In a 
reflecting talk after the workshop, our contact 
person from technical support realised that 
this can be dangerous for the company. He 
called their skilled technicians ‘key figures’ 
who carry a lot of the ‘experience’, which 
Simatek is also using to advertise their current 
after-sales services on their website (Simatek, 
n.d). Loss of these employees would result in 
a loss of such ‘experience’.
Figure 16: Post-it from workshop session
In exercise five of the workshop (see 
appendices [9] & [11]), ‘know-how’ was rated 
‘5’ to be something that Simatek is doing 
extremely well in (see figure 16). As a follow 
up on this note, we asked the participants 
where this ‘know-how’ comes from. They used 
‘35 years of experience’ as an explanation. 
In general, we got the impression that 
‘experience’ is what the participants see as 
one of the foundations of Simatek’s business. 
Recapitulating Bijker’s (1995) notions of 
explanandum (what is to be explained) and 
explanans (the explanation) when it comes 
to the ‘working’ of a machine, ‘experience’ 
and ‘know-how’ can be compared with such 
‘working’. The participants of the workshop 
seemed to take this ‘experience’ for granted. 
In the course of the workshop however, they 
drew conclusions that their service experience 
comes from the work of their technicians. 
An interesting finding was that the tacit 
know-how of the technicians is also used in 
processes that occur prior to a filter sale. This 
will be described in the next section.
==PAGE:78==
78
5.2 Before the sale, documentation 
and knowledge sharing
After literature exploration and based on 
findings from our first meeting at Simatek, 
we decided that, in a new iteration of our 
design process the very notion of ‘after-sales’ 
could be subject to exploration, analysis and 
discussion. Inspired by literature (e.g. Reinartz 
& Ulaga, 2008) and findings about Simatek’s 
technicians (see section [5.1]), we made the 
assumption that services offered around 
a product after a sale might be influenced 
by processes prior to the sale   . Therefore, 
we decided to explore such processes. In 
workshop-exercise nine , we mapped out 
different journeys of Simatek with their 
different kinds of customers (end-users, 
contractors, (see appendix [13]). Several 
participants stated that for customised filters, 
most customers already have service and 
spare part contracts, as Simatek is usually the 
sole provider of the customized parts and 
assembly, and can hence bind them to their 
after-sales program. Only in some cases, the 
end-users take care of all service themselves, 
according to our contact person from technical 
support. Therefore, we felt that looking into 
processes around customised filters could 
be beneficial for assessing difficulties in after-
sales for off-the-shelf filters holistically.
Figure 17 shows part of an exemplary 
‘customer journey’ for customized filters 
that we mapped out in a joint effort with the 
participants. The red oval highlights a process 
that the group called ‘pre-order guidance’. 
It is represented by the magnifying glass 
icon to symbolise an investigative process. 
According to the participants, a large number 
of employees across different departments 
is involved. We realized that what they 
described as pre-order guidance, seems to 
be not only investigative, but also generative 
of (tacit) know-how. 
In collaboration with the customer (end-user), 
Simatek’s employees discuss in order to 
figure out how a filter should be designed, 
what parts to include and how it can be 
produced in order to match the customer’s 
requirements. This process was described as 
follows: The sales department is contacted by 
a (potential) customer and obtains information 
(requirements) about which type of industry 
the filter will be used in, the location of the filter 
(e.g. outside or inside), production processes 
and so on. In order to assess the design of 
the filter, the service department is included. 
Figure 17: Customer journey for a customized filter
==PAGE:79==
79
As aforementioned in the previous section, 
Simatek’s service engineers can contribute 
knowledge about how a filter can be adjusted 
to their customers’ processes (and vice versa). 
In collaboration with technical support and the 
production department, it is examined how to 
develop and produce the filter design. As a 
result of this process, a quote is sent to the 
customer which can be accepted or declined. 
If the offer is accepted, Simatek sends 
engineers and technicians to consult with the 
practitioners who would operate the filter on 
customer side, in order to further customise 
the filter and make adjustments to the original 
filter offer. According to the workshoppers, 
this can also cause price adjustments.   This 
loop is highlighted in figure 20 with the blue 
oval. 
As Simatek initially introduced the project to 
evolve around their off-the-shelf filters, we 
decided to address the customer journey 
related to these as well. In the first meeting, our 
conversation partners informed us that when 
end-users equip a new plant themselves, 
most of them realise that they ‘need’ a filter 
only in the very end of this operation. The 
trigger for this ‘need’ is mostly a requirement 
by law. From their experience, our dialogue 
partners told us that the project managers 
on end-user side would not always be able 
to link their knowledge about the production 
processes (type of produce, location etc.) to 
the choice of a Simatek filter, and therefore 
require technical support. Furthermore, DCA 
systems are standardised, but not completely, 
because the processes they are used in are not 
standardised. Details for example regarding 
the filter legs or the control unit still need to 
be adjusted. Together with the participants 
of the workshop, we realised that in order 
for technical support to decide if a customer 
is sufficed with an off-the-shelf filter (DCA 
system) sometimes requires a process similar 
to the above described pre-order guidance. 
This is also sometimes the case for the choice 
of a filter for customers. This process goes 
back and forth across departments. 
As becomes evident, these processes generate 
knowledge about how to relate and design 
filters according to customers’ processes. 
Furthermore, this knowledge is actually 
created in collaboration with customers. 
However, the participants of the workshop 
described them to be very unstructured and 
insufficiently documented. As we were told, 
there is no focus from management side 
(UA) on these processes. According to our 
contact person, the knowledge is ‘translated 
into the artifacts’ and ‘lives on in the heads of 
the employees and as technical specifications 
(technology) in the filters’, resulting in 
technological innovation. Why the filter was 
designed to these specifications and how 
this process was conducted seems to remain 
tacit knowledge. He lamented, that all the 
effort used in technical support and pre-order 
guidance is not made use of adequately. 
Firstly, because they are not structured, 
and secondly because the majority of 
relationships with end-users who buy off-the-
shelf filters end after the sale. For the latter, 
instead of continuing collaboration with the 
end-user, communication from Simatek’s side 
is cut, apart from the spare parts quote.   The 
==PAGE:80==
80
Figure 18: Where Simatek employees saw the starting point of ‘after-sales’
The employees participating in the workshop 
actually expressed a wish that such processes 
should 
be 
more 
structured. 
Currently, 
the employees involved are conducting 
these processes on this unstructured basis, 
generating and sharing tacit knowledge. 
The process seems to be employee-initiated. 
Here, the employees seem to be a ‘community 
of practitioners’ (Orr, 2006).  Because they 
currently are not structured, these processes 
are perceived as time consuming and non-
beneficial, due to insufficient documentation. 
In exercise five (see appendices [9] & [11]), 
they were rated as practices that Simatek is 
performing well in, but at the same time as 
money drains (see figure 19), since they are 
beginning of ‘after-sales’ at the moment was 
marked by the participants by a line on the 
whiteboard. At Simatek, after-sales is currently 
said to start at the moment of when the filter is 
delivered to the customer (see figure 18).
==PAGE:81==
81
Figure 19: Pre-order guidance post-it from the workshop
According to the people we talked to at 
Simatek, the communication with their end-
users is cut after the sale in the vast majority 
of cases, although they might have been in 
contact during the design and production 
phase of the filter (see section [5.2]). The 
only ‘communication’ initiated by Simatek 
manifests itself in a spare parts quote sent 
by email. The quote concerns a ‘spare parts 
package’ with important parts that Simatek 
recommends to have in stock for their end 
users. However, this quote mostly idles and 
is not made use of. All other communication 
is initiated by the end-users and happens 
almost exclusively via the 24-hour hotline 
when a filter has broken down and the users 
are not able to fix the issue themselves. Hence, 
after the sale of an off-the-shelf filter, which is 
where the participants saw the starting point 
of after-sales in this case, there is often no 
information exchange concerning other than 
emergency cases. During our collaboration, 
we as researchers got the impression that 
Simatek and most of their employees make 
the end-users responsible for the scarce 
communication. 
Furthermore, 
Simatek’s 
business model regarding contractors (see 
later in section [5.4) has resulted in great 
difficulty for Simatek to know where a lot of 
their end-users are actually situated.
5.3 Communication with end-users & 
the current situation on the website
5.3.1 Communicating with end-users
of no charge. Considering Yanow (2006), the 
very documentation of tacit knowledge is 
in itself a difficult and thus time consuming 
process. According to their employees, 
Simatek is instead busy with manufacturing a 
great number of filters.
==PAGE:82==
82
Simatek has a website that can be regarded 
as a means of communication before actually 
talking to their customers. From our field 
work with an end-user, we learned that the 
filter responsible (UA) or management (UA) 
on their side could not be considered experts 
in filter technology. When clicking on the tab 
for ‘pulse jet filters’ (see figures 20 and 21), 
several filters are listed by their technical 
description used by Simatek as a company 
(UA). Clicking on one of the filter-links leads 
to a page describing technical details such as:
5.3.2 Simatek’s website
“The large suction intake involves a very 
low admission speed, thus minimizing 
turbulence and dust circulation” (Simatek, 
2016).
Figure 20 and 21: Screenshots from Simatek website (1)
But what does a low admission speed mean? 
What materials or processes the filter is 
suitable for is not immediately described on 
this page. This information can be found in a 
way that is not obvious to the website visitor: 
After clicking on the tab “pulse jet filters”, 
above the appearing listing of the different 
filters is another link to “pulse jet filters”. Using 
this link, the visitor gets to a page where all 
pulse jet filters are listed, along with materials 
and industries they are suitable for (see figure 
22). However, the listings in most cases have 
mostly the same entries. From the overviews, 
it does not become clear which filters 
==PAGE:83==
83
Figure 22: Screenshot from Simatek website (2)
are suitable for which kind of production 
processes. From the detailed description of 
the different filters, this information has to 
be searched in a text that is mostly focused 
on how the filter works technically, and 
characteristics such as “simple and functional 
design” (Simatek, 2016). To choose a filter 
directly from the website would require more 
precise information about how they can be 
combined with production processes. Again, 
this knowledge remains tacit, considering the 
website design. Thus, the website situation is 
not beneficial to the end-users’ appropriation 
phase. It seems like one needs to know about 
air filtering technology and how it can be 
related to processes, to understand what filter 
is suitable for what process, before visiting 
the website.
==PAGE:84==
84
5.4 Contractors - domesticating 
Simatek
In this section, we shed light on Simatek’s 
proceedings with contractors and analyse why 
Simatek prefers working with them. Moreover, 
we use domestication of technology to 
analyse how the contractors are making use 
of Simatek’s proceedings for themselves.
Contractors are companies which build and 
equip complete production plants for other 
companies. They select machinery - including 
dust filters - for their customers according 
to their industry, production processes and 
so on. The area sales manager attending 
the 
workshop 
described 
contractors 
guaranteeing to their customers that the 
plant is always ‘working’. Their customers 
are Simatek’s end-users. This ‘working’ can 
however be challenged, as we will see in 
section [5.6], where we present the case of 
an end-user. By Simatek, most contractors are 
regarded to be very important customers, as 
they supply a lot of end-users - up to 15 each - 
and hence buy Simatek’s off-the-shelf filters in 
large numbers. In the workshop, participants 
were of the opinion that it was of advantage 
for Simatek to work with contractors. Our 
co-creators expressed a seemingly common 
view at Simatek: Dealing with contractors and 
being able to sell a large number of filters 
is better than directly having to deal with a 
great number of end-users, learning about 
their processes and having to deal with their 
service inquiries. Putting this into perspective 
with their wish to ‘increase after-sales around 
the off-the-shelf filters’ reveals a contradiction.
According to the workshop participants, 
dealing with contractors is an ‘insurance’ 
for Simatek as a company to get distance to 
end-users and give away responsibility. The 
area sales manager stated, that contractors 
know about their customers’ processes and 
are therefore able to respond quickly to 
their service inquiries. In both our meeting, 
email correspondence and in the workshop, 
the participants presumed that end-user 
companies (UA) which buy off-the-shelf 
filters blackbox these. As maintaining a filter 
- even a bag change - requires a shutdown, 
it was assumed that this is widely avoided, 
and maintenance is not invested in by 
these end-users. The workshop participants 
based these assumptions on the enunciated 
lack of communication. According to the 
workshop group, such end-users only contact 
Simatek via their 24-hour hotline in case of a 
breakdown. The only information they would 
then be able to provide is that they ‘have 
a problem’. Our collaborators stated that 
Simatek’s service engineers and KAMs would 
then need to perform a lengthy and costly - 
for Simatek and the end-user - operation in 
order to troubleshoot and in the ‘worst case’ 
visit the end-user to fix the problem. 
These 
findings 
provide 
evidence 
that 
Simatek’s strategy is focussed on sales.  Here, 
the theory of domestication of technology 
can be used for analysis. Inspired from our 
theoretical research and findings, we as design 
engineers developed the understanding, that 
if one thinks of things that have the power to 
change current practices and be changed 
5.4.1 The influence of contractors & why Simatek 
works with them
==PAGE:85==
85
by the practitioners, such as the discussed 
“artifacts or technologies”, another aspect is 
not to be neglected: Not only technology or 
artifacts can be domesticated. If one sees an 
actor network as a network of “equal rights” 
- say the technology or artifact is seen as 
an actor as well as for example one of the 
stakeholders - one can argue that any of 
the actors could be domesticated in a way 
by any of the other actors. Similarly, actors 
could also be shaped by - and shape - a 
“foreign practice”. For example when using 
otherwise well known artifacts in a new way, 
or cooperating with a business partner while 
adapting to their business processes.
Adopting this view, we can regard Simatek as 
a company (UA) as well as their management 
(UA) as units of analysis. They have objectified 
contractors as ‘someone to sell to’ in order to 
create a huge turnover. Contractors, currently 
seen as mere customers by management, 
hence symbolise profit and make way to even 
more sales. Simatek is selling the filters to 
them as only a product. Simatek’s employees 
(UA) seem to have incorporated this focus 
on sales in their practices. In section [5.1] we 
described unstructured pre-order guidance 
processes. In order to develop innovative 
filter technology, they have to be conducted, 
as stated by the participants in our workshop. 
However, it seems like because of the sales 
focus, Simatek’s management is not prioritizing 
these processes, and the employees perform 
them in an unstructured way. Therefore, these 
processes are considered to be cumbersome 
and time consuming, and having to deal with 
such processes is seen as tedious among 
Simatek employees. 
Because it seemed that the business with 
contractors plays an influential role within 
Simatek, we decided to investigate further 
and explored interesting contractor practices 
through discussions in the workshop. The 
present area sales manager contributed 
especially to this part of our analysis. When 
equipping a plant for an end-user, many 
contractors cover the logo of Simatek 
on filters, or replace it by their own. For 
especially important contractors Simatek 
would even do so for them when producing 
the filter. Servicing the filters is also part of the 
contractors’ business of providing ‘working 
plants’. 
For servicing that requires spare parts, some 
contractors use unoriginal parts. Others 
produce their own parts, and exchange 
the ones from Simatek by their own. A third 
case was expressed in the workshop, where 
contractors buy original spare parts from 
Simatek and get up to 20% discount. They 
would then proceed to cover Simatek signs 
and serial numbers on these parts. The end-
users would therefore often not know, that the 
parts in their filters are actually from Simatek, 
and could perceive their quality as merit of 
the contractor. It was stated by the workshop 
group, that most of the parts in the filters, 
such as for example vents and valves are 
exchangeable for any other look-alike part. 
According to the participants, contractors 
often do not wan t Simatek to contact their 
customers (Simatek’s end users). In case an 
end-user who is working via a contractor does 
5.4.2 Contractor practices
==PAGE:86==
86
actually contact Simatek directly for a service 
inquiry, Simatek has to ask for permission 
to deal with the case. If such permission is 
granted, Simatek does service work in the 
name of the contractor. These cases in which 
Simatek needs to be consulted and needs 
to state their own name almost exclusively 
concern severe problems with the filter 
control unit. It was discovered that this is the 
only part that always displays Simatek’s label. 
Running the filter was described as one of 
Simatek’s greatest skills. Recapitulating, this is 
supported by our findings analysed in section 
[5.1].
Analysing 
this, 
using 
domestication 
as 
described before in this section, we can 
see that contractors as companies (UA) are 
incorporating Simatek’s strategic focus on 
sales into their own practices. By their focus 
on customers’ processes and servicing 
Simatek’s filters, they position themselves to 
gather great amounts of the aforedescribed 
know-how that on the other hand is slipping 
through Simatek’s fingers. And contractors 
are not only domesticating Simatek’s strategy. 
By painting over numbers, removing signs 
and conducting the above described spare 
part practices, they are converting Simatek’s 
technology (the filters) into their own. 
They are making use of Simatek’s strategy 
and technology and it seems like they are 
actively transforming Simatek’s practices and 
technology by their own practices.
After analysing how contractors make use of 
Simatek and their practices, we would like to 
now shed light on how Simatek’s employees 
perceive the company strategy and how it 
influences their view of the filters, service as 
well as their end-users.
5.5 Resources, commoditization of 
Simatek and ‘the barrier’
5.5.1 The barrier
As aforementioned, we were told in our first 
meeting that the management of Simatek 
(UA) would like to enhance their after-sales 
business around their off-the-shelf filters. 
We learned from our collaborators that they 
would however not significantly increase 
resources on the matter. In workshop-exercise 
seven, we took the overall goal as a starting 
point and asked the participants the following 
question: ‘What can Simatek as a company 
==PAGE:87==
87
Figure 23: Barrier illustration.
do, to achieve this goal?’ However, the 
participants did not seem to be able to answer 
it. Therefore, we reframed the question into 
the following: ‘What is preventing Simatek 
as a company from achieving this goal?’ In 
order to visualise, we introduced a figure on 
the whiteboard, depicting a barrier between 
a current state and a future desired state (see 
figure 23). 
This picture changed the understanding of 
the situation for some of the participants. 
By including processes before the sale 
and contractor relations in the workshop 
(see sections [5.2] & [5.4]), we as designers 
generally attempted to shift the focus from 
strictly talking about the standardised filters, 
towards a bigger picture in which different 
actors and practices influence each other. 
In the light of the contractor discussions, in 
which Simatek’s sales focus already implicitly 
became evident to the participants, our main 
contact person now explicitly stated that what 
is preventing Simatek’s after-sales operations 
from being successful is the company’s focus 
on technology and product sales. 
In the beginning of our collaboration with 
Simatek, our conversation partners often 
stated that Simatek was delivering the best 
filter technology. They furthermore expressed, 
that how involved an end-user is with this 
technology, depends on how valuable the 
filtered material is for them. If it is precious, or 
its weight will contribute to the selling price 
of the end product, the customer would care 
more about the filter and learn how to ‘use 
it properly’ than in cases where the filtered 
material is considered waste. If the material is 
to be disposed of, end-users would just push 
the button and let it run in order to fulfill the 
law.
==PAGE:88==
88
5.5.2 Commoditization of Simatek’s filters
5.5.3 ‘User friendly design’ 
5.6 A practitioner at work
Throughout 
our 
meetings 
it 
became 
evident that most of Simatek’s customers (as 
companies) see price as the main criterion 
to buy. This was accredited by our findings 
from our end-user visit (see section [5.6]), 
where the practitioner we talked to named 
his company’s main ‘needs’ to be ‘working 
filters’ and ‘the best price’. Our collaborators 
stated that their original spare parts, such as 
filter bags are not widely used by their end-
users due to being expensive. These factors 
point towards a commoditization (see section 
[3.2]) of Simatek’s products. Companies (end-
users) seem to generalise the filters under the 
value they deliver for them. In the course of 
our collaboration, the employees developed 
different views as to what the value of their 
filters actually is to customers. ‘Clean air’, 
‘fulfilling the law’ and simply a ‘working filter’ 
were named.
In exercise five, our contact person from 
technical 
support 
named 
‘user-friendly 
design’ as a good practice of Simatek. The 
participants specified, and stated that the 
off-the-shelf filters are designed in a way that 
the end-user just ‘needs to push the button’ 
for the filter to ‘work correctly’ in case it is 
‘installed correctly’. However, what that means 
was not specified in more detail. ‘Working and 
installed correctly’ were used as an explanans 
(Bijker, 1995) where these two things should 
actually be explained. What does ‘working 
correctly’ and ‘installed correctly’ mean? 
And what does working mean for an actual 
practitioner, operating such a filter? Do end-
users really need ‘clean air’ from Simatek?
In order to find out about these potential 
problems, we conducted field research 
(see section [4.4.2.2]) with a practitioner - 
someone who is dealing with the operation of 
a Simatek filter in his daily work routine. In the 
light of ‘after-sales services’, this might reveal 
what such a practitioner, directly influenced 
by the product which the services are 
supposed to concern, is needing from them. 
The end-user company is situated in Sjælland 
and is a large producer of different kinds of 
animal feed. The factory visit was addressed 
by the practitioner - the technician, who is 
internally responsible for the filter systems. 
As mentioned, the information was obtained 
through an open interview during and after 
a factory tour, as observational studies and 
a semi-structured interview (see appendix 
[4]) were not conducted as planned. In the 
following, we analyse how the practitioner is 
struggling with the filter and his practices and 
how his struggle is influenced. In the following, 
this practitioner will also be referred to as ‘our’ 
practitioner.
The end-user company (UA) is working 
together 
with 
three 
different 
external 
companies in order to run, maintain and 
service the filter. Firstly a contractor, who was 
titled ‘filter-specialist’ by our practitioner. 
==PAGE:89==
89
They acquired and installed the filter and take 
care of regular system checks. Secondly, an 
‘engineering firm’ which, together with our 
practitioner takes care of repair work requiring 
blacksmith work and bag changes. And finally, 
an electrician firm which is hired in order to 
figure out how to run the filters (see figure 24). 
The practitioner stated that when working on 
the filter together with the engineering firm 
or the electrician, neither of them are using 
documentation or equipment from Simatek. 
Himself and the practitioners of the firms 
have developed their own practices regarding 
the operation, service and maintenance, and 
repair of the filter. In case there is a problem 
with the Simatek filter, our practitioner first tries 
to troubleshoot and solve it himself together 
with his internal colleagues. If they cannot find 
the problem or figure out a ‘suitable’ solution, 
they either consult the engineering company 
or the contractor depending on the issue 
(see sections [5.6.3] & [5.6.4]). According 
to our practitioner, Simatek is called by the 
contractor company only as a last option. The 
internal technicians themselves have never 
contacted Simatek directly nor have they seen 
a manual of the filter. When we directly asked 
the practitioner about the needs he (UA) and 
his company (UA) have regarding the filters, 
he expressed two things: a ‘well working filter’ 
that ‘does its job’ and the best offer regarding 
the machinery and services.These practices, 
and how they occur, will be described and 
analysed in more detail below.
Figure 24: Parties involved in practices around the filter at the visited end-user
==PAGE:90==
90
5.6.2 Running the filter
In the factory, several filter systems from 
three different manufacturers are at work. 
One of the filters is from Simatek and was 
acquired and installed by the contractor 
as they were assigned by the end-user 
company. According to the practitioner, the 
company has been working together with this 
contractor for many years, because they are 
able to service all machinery in the factory, 
such as feeders, silos and the filters. According 
to the technician, this contractor furthermore 
offers the economically most advantageous 
solution. Specifically, he stated that his 
company is stuck with them because they are 
the only ones who can service the feeders. 
As for the filters this contractor is providing 
support with regular system checks, to see if 
they are running without technical problems 
per se. They check pressure readings and 
the like. They also procure spare parts from 
Simatek in case of a filter breakdown and 
do fixes in severe cases. Domestication of 
technology (see section [4.5]) provides the 
tools to analyse this: The acquisition of the 
filter by management (UA) was influenced by 
the company’s agreement with the contractor 
which is based on the expectation that this 
contractor is able to provide them with 
‘working’ machinery. Because this contractor 
provides the company with the cheapest 
bundle, management (UA) has incorporated 
working with them into their company’s current 
strategy. The filter that was acquired by this 
contractor is only objectified by management. 
Although they were in fact not involved in its 
appropriation into actual practice (its working 
at the production line), they have objectified it 
as a machine that ensures the filtering of dust 
from their production lines. According to our 
practitioner, they do not see the problems he 
has operating the filter. As we will learn in the 
following section, his working practices have 
been greatly influenced and transformed by 
the appropriation through management and 
contractor.
The Simatek filter in the end-user’s factory is 
installed at a production line through which 
different types of animal feed are processed. 
For example grain based feed and fish meal 
based feed. Hence, the dust particles that 
need to be filtered out of the air have different 
masses. As the contractor is providing a 
‘working’ plant, they decided to equip the 
filter with a new motor that is able to run at 
different speeds. The motor was produced by 
Simatek. 
However, the motor of the filter was generally 
described as too strong by our contact person. 
Although the speed is ‘acceptable’ for the 
different types of feed, he stated that besides 
the dust that is supposed to be filtered out, 
the filter is also sucking actual produce, for 
example pieces of grain. The Simatek filter 
is supposed to filter dust that is put back 
into the feed later on, when it has been 
processed further. Hence, pieces of grain that 
are sucked by the filter are not processed 
enough and could reduce the quality of the 
product. The filtered material currently has 
to be sifted in order to be put back. In order 
to avoid this, the operators, in this case our 
practitioner together with technicians from 
the engineering firm (see figure 25), have 
undertaken several attempts. They have for 
example tried to lay pieces of iron into the 
inlet of the filter, close to the conveyor belt 
5.6.1 Acquisition of the Simatek filter & contractor 
relations
==PAGE:91==
91
carrying the feed, in order to put more load on 
the motor. Another attempt was to partly block 
the motor’s air inlet to reduce its capacity. It 
appears that the contractor has misjudged the 
motor in assuming that it would be suitable 
for the end-user’s processes. Here, we can 
doubt that the contractor is actually a ‘filter 
specialist’ and can provide a ’working plant’.
As introduced, the original incentive to 
equip the filter with the new motor was to 
let it run at different speeds. However, it is 
currently running at only one speed, which 
is acceptable for the different types of feed, 
but not ideal. In our talk, the operator stated 
that he is not satisfied with this situation, but 
accepts it because it ‘works’, as in ‘it is at least 
running’. At the time of the visit for already 
three months, an electrician company has 
been trying to figure out how to run the 
Simatek filter at the required different speeds, 
together our practitioner and his colleagues. 
Before, another electrician firm handled the 
control units. After the equipment with the 
motor, they were hired to run it. According 
to our practitioner, this firm actually has the 
knowledge of running the motor at different 
speeds. However, due to dispute, they were 
replaced by the new firm. The old electrician is 
not willing to provide the end-user or the new 
electrician firm with this knowledge, which 
was not documented on the end-users side. 
This loss of (tacit) know-how now deteriorates 
their processes. According to our contact 
person, contacting Simatek is not an option, 
as this would disagree with company policy 
of working together only with the different 
partners in such cases. When we presented 
these issues in our workshop at Simatek, the 
participants were convinced that their own 
technicians could provide help in this case 
(see also section [5.1]).
Figure 25: The end-user is working together with an electrician firm to adjust the filter to their needs 
(Icon references see Appendix [20])
==PAGE:92==
92
5.6.3 Bag changes and servicing work
Filter bag changes and fixes that require 
blacksmith work are done by two blacksmiths/
technicians from an external engineering 
company together with our practitioner. 
When doing bag changes, the engineering 
company does not use the original Simatek 
bags. Neither do they use the provided 
service equipment by Simatek, a platform that 
is supposed to be deployed inside of the filter, 
in order to stand on when changing the bags 
(for bag change procedure, see section [2.2]). 
According to our practitioner, the blacksmiths 
say that this platform it is too heavy to carry 
up to the filter door through which the filter 
can be accessed, and is thus unmanageable. 
Instead they use a wooden ladder to enter 
the filter and stand on the horizontally placed 
ladder inside the filter. In the workshop, the 
after-sales manager stated that there is a 
‘security reason’ for the platform being so 
heavy. It seems like Simatek did not consider 
practitioners work practices when designing 
the platform, but only the filter design and 
theoretical security.
As becomes evident, our practitioner’s 
practices 
are 
very 
much 
influenced 
- 
transformed - by other actor’s practices in 
his working environment. He incorporates 
the proceedings of his company, to work 
together with three different firms, and what 
they acquired for him to domesticate (e.g. the 
motor). We can see that these proceedings are 
not ideal for him, but seem to be incorporated 
into this company’s strategy by management. 
For our practitioner however, this results in 
makeshift solutions (iron pieces) to problems 
that could be solved otherwise. During 
our conversation, we asked him what he 
personally ‘needs’ from Simatek, regarding 
the filter and also regarding services. First, 
he said that he needs it to ‘work’. However, in 
the course of our conversation, we realised 
that what he really wanted, was to be able 
to master (Yanow, 2006) the filter in order to 
adapt it into his daily working routines (e.g. 
run the motor in different speeds). We got the 
impression that he was unhappy and stressed 
about the way this was performed at the 
moment as it negatively affects processes he 
is responsible for. Currently, together with his 
co-practitioners from the external partners, 
they are trying to convert for example the filter’s 
motor to adapt its speed. But instead of being 
able to make use of the technology itself, they 
currently need to adapt their own practices in 
an unsatisfactory way. Domestication, when 
being able to make use of a technology 
and add a personal positive value can result 
in the feeling of mastery (Yanow, 2006). For 
our practitioner, this value at the moment is 
negative. He is unsatisfied. For him the filter 
symbolises cumbersome practices that are 
ill-functional, as he is currently not able to 
make use of the technology in a practical and 
cognitive dimension.
We were told that he as a practitioner did not 
have a say in acquiring the filter, although he 
knows what it should be able to do. He - as 
a unit of analysis - is directly involved with 
the filter in terms of practice. Management 
(UA) is involved with it on another level that 
concerns company strategy and economical 
5.6.4 Denied domestication & what the practitioner 
needs
==PAGE:93==
93
reasons. Then, due to the current situation 
with three external companies and the lack 
of documentation as well as know-how, our 
practitioner does not have the chance to 
obtain the ‘expertise’ to make the filter his 
own. Rather, he developed ‘expertise’ in how 
to adapt to an ill-suitable technology. With his 
colleagues and the externals, he attempted 
to find workarounds to problems, and ways of 
operation and maintenance, in order to make 
the filter work ‘as good as possible’.
==PAGE:94==
94
Discussion
Chapter 6
==PAGE:95==
95
This chapter will serve as a discussion of our 
findings and analysis with the literature, as 
well as a development chapter. Firstly, we will 
discuss the situation that we found regarding 
Simatek’s after-sales situation and compare 
them to state-of-the-art literature about 
servitization and after-sales. Through this 
comparison we can discuss what is and what 
is not aligned with what theorists describe 
as ‘good’ after-sales operations and ways to 
get there (servitization). Both our findings 
and the literature will be critically discussed. 
Moreover, the literature as well as our analysis 
may also provide suggestions as to potential 
changes. 
Secondly, we name issues that implicitly 
unfolded in the course of our process and 
analysis, both regarding Simatek’s situation, 
as well as in regards to our overall aim. In 
this chapter, we discuss them more explicitly. 
Furthermore, we discuss how these issues 
have played a role in our design process and 
how they contribute to the final outcome of 
this thesis, which will be presented in the end 
of this chapter. The outcome is a toolbox for 
designing for after-sales for a company like 
Simatek, a manufacturer of industrial goods. 
We try to equip the toolbox with issues that 
should be considered when designing for 
after-sales (for such a company). Ideally, 
when using the toolbox, the design engineer 
will be able to avoid asking the wrong 
questions. The toolbox shall provide the 
designer with the right questions to ask, 
issues to address and reveal the background 
thoughts of why to do so. Moreover, the 
design literature is discussed and compared 
to our own undertakings in order to obtain an 
understanding of how they can be combined, 
or opposed, when designing (for) services. 
This will also contribute to the final outcome.
The discussion chapter will furthermore 
discuss this thesis in terms of its limitations 
and shortcomings. Furthermore, it will discuss 
its delimitations which we shortly addressed 
in section [1.3].
==PAGE:96==
96
6.1 Discussing Simatek’s situation
With their 65 employees (Simatek, n.d.) 
Simatek can be classified as a medium-
sized company according to the European 
Commission (2015). Through our research 
and analysis, it became clear that Simatek has 
their focus on production and sales, as well as 
development of their technology. For medium 
sized companies that do have their focus on 
production and sales of industrial goods - like 
Simatek - Bendig et. al. (2006) describe the 
establishment of well-functioning after-sales 
services as especially difficult. They state that 
this is due to “insufficient strategic involvement 
in this topic” (Bendig et. al., 2006). Despite 
their wish to improve, Simatek’s management 
is currently not willing to significantly increase 
resources for the after-sales department, 
according to our findings. However, this 
lack of willingness to invest might make the 
undertaking extremely difficult (Bendig et. al., 
2006). Our analysis suggests that Simatek is 
facing the phenomenon of commoditization 
regarding their filters and spare parts. The 
conversion of their filters by the contractors 
they work with, as well as the evidence 
that most of their end-users are not using 
original spare parts, point towards the 
increasing difficulty for Simatek to promote 
meaningful differentiation from competitors. 
The customers care mostly about price. For 
Simatek, the “race to the bottom” (Heitman, 
2010) is happening. As mentioned in section 
[3.2.1], Heitman (2010) suggests increasing 
service quality as a strategy to tackle this 
situation. What that means for Simatek we 
hope to make clear further down the line. 
Our analysis of Simatek’s relationship with 
contractors suggests that a shift in overall 
strategy might be required in the long run, in 
order to successfully operate in the after-sales 
market. Vandermerwe and Rada (1988) name 
cutting the cord to distributors and other 
middlemen as a step towards becoming a 
service business. Paying attention to end-
users is what they see as necessary to sell 
services and product bundles. Although 
the contractors are currently regarded as 
extremely important customers in terms of 
sales, the are stealing the market that Simatek 
aims to operate in. They are converting 
Simatek’s filters into their own, and for their 
parts are trying to cut the cord between 
Simatek and the end-users. The employees 
we talked to seemed to be aware of that, 
and our findings suggest that Simatek is 
even enabling some of the contractors to 
do so. While contractors are learning about 
customer’s processes, doing so is often 
perceived to be too cumbersome and time 
consuming for Simatek. Our analysis suggests 
that this is because they are focused on sales 
and therefore have an enormous workload to 
carry, only by handling filter orders. Therefore, 
Simatek risks losing in the service (after-sales) 
market by letting themselves and their sales 
focussed proceedings being incorporated in 
their contractors working. From our viewpoint 
as designers, the employees we talked to 
began to realise problematic situations such as 
commoditization and the contractor relations. 
The analysis of our end-user visit suggests that 
working with contractors also causes struggle 
for the operators of Simatek’s filters. However, 
because Simatek’s employees incorporated 
the company’s sales focus in their work 
life (see section [5.4.1]), dissociating from 
contractors seems like a paradox to them. 
Therefore, time is spent on satisfying product 
6.1.1 ‘Overarching’ problems around Simatek’s after-
sales
==PAGE:97==
97
orders. However, theorists suggest that the 
revenue from after-sales services can be 
much higher than from mere sales (e.g Cohen 
et. al., 2006). Reinartz and Ulaga (2008) see 
importance in a shift of (strategic) thinking 
throughout 
the 
company 
and 
suggest 
considerable investments. Hence, when also 
regarding time as a resource, Simatek should 
consider to invest. The contractor and sales 
focus issues raise an issue that the designer 
for after-sales should consider: What could 
be impeding after-sales? This also points to 
the issue of influence, which will be discussed 
later on.
Very generally, the after-sales offerings by 
Simatek are aligned with what Levitt describes 
as what “buyers of automated machinery 
expect” (Levitt, 1983:88): Simatek’s after-
sales are divided into spare parts, service 
- which can include installation supervision, 
commissioning, repair and maintenance - as 
well as retrofitting. Cohen et. al. (2006) see 
the choice of the products around which a 
company wants to establish an after-sales 
program as an important factor. Simatek has 
done so, by offering services around their 
customized filters and their DCA filters that 
they sell directly to end-users. For the latter, 
these services are not used to Simatek’s 
satisfaction. For us as designers, the choice of 
the product gave an idea of what to design 
(for after-sales) around. However, our design 
process revealed that this issue can be 
discussed further (see section [6.2.2.3]). Our 
findings show that for Simatek, communication 
that exceeds the point of the sale is currently 
nearly absent. According to theorists, this 
is an indicator for low quality partnerships 
with customers (Levitt, 1983). The quality of 
these is however crucial for companies to 
understand what their end-users need. What 
Simatek’s end-users need, this is where we 
see a starting point for enhanced after-sales 
services for the company. Therefore, we will 
discuss the opportunities we see for Simatek 
to improve their after-sales in the following.
6.1.2 Opportunities for Simatek
6.1.2.1 What ‘our’ practitioner needs
As we analysed, the employees  - also 
supported by our workshop - are starting to 
realise that end-users are generalising their 
filters according to what they ‘need’ from them. 
However, they have only named ‘needs’ which 
they assumed their end-users would have. 
Furthermore, needs such as ‘fulfilling the law’ 
seem to be expressed on the management 
levels of end-user companies. Our analysis 
shows that a ‘working filter’, as was expressed 
by both the workshop participants and (at 
first) our practitioner on end-user side, does 
not do justice to what is actually ‘needed’ 
from the filter by its operators. Our findings 
and analysis suggest that what the operator 
of the Simatek filter we talked to primarily 
==PAGE:98==
98
needs, is the mastery of the filter and its 
functions. Furthermore, he and his colleagues 
seem to be in need of appropriate material 
for servicing work. Hence, he wants to be able 
to make use of the filter for his daily working 
routine in a way that is beneficial for him. 
As we analysed, our practitioner is currently 
denied such mastery. Instead of being able 
to domesticate the filter for himself, he has to 
ill-configure his own practices. In our opinion, 
this might also become problematic for his 
company. Processes can turn out to be less 
effective as they could be (e.g. filtered material 
has to be sifted), and practitioners might 
become frustrated with their working routine. 
Therefore, the company might lose (or not 
gain) what they hoped for when acquiring the 
filter, or in a more general sense, machinery to 
support their processes. Orr (2006) warns that 
ignoring the work of practitioners has caused 
many corporate problems. Therefore we 
argue that their struggle is disadvantageous 
for their employer. We believe that this 
is where Simatek is able to differentiate 
themselves from their competitors, which in 
our end-user case are their own contractors 
(see also Vandermerwe & Rada, 1988) who 
are not providing mastery.
6.1.2.2 Knowledge that influences after-
sales services & sharing with end-users
Considering our findings about the currently 
tacit know-how of Simatek’s technicians and 
other employees, they might be able to 
help our practitioner in order to master the 
filter, and make use of it for himself and his 
work. Our findings suggest that Simatek’s 
technicians do have vast knowledge about 
customer’s processes. Cohen et. al. (2006:135) 
writes that suppliers (in our case Simatek) 
“must know exactly how their products create 
value for customers”. As aforementioned, for 
our practitioner, we see this value lying in the 
mastery of the filter. In order to master it, he 
needs to know how to adapt the technology 
to his processes and how to adapt his 
processes to the technology. Simatek could 
then provide him with the means to do so. 
What is needed in the concrete case could 
be assessed individually. This will briefly be 
addressed later in this section, as well as at 
the end of this chapter (see section [6.4.1]). 
Reinartz and Ulaga (2008) suggest - by the 
example of SKF (see section [3.2.1]) - that 
focusing on customers’ processes should be 
part of a servitizing strategy. What we see 
implied in their description is that the focus 
should lie on learning how products act upon 
customers’ processes (and practitioners’ 
practices) to be able to adjust the services 
to the effect of this action. We learned that 
this kind of know-how exists at Simatek, 
and comes in great parts from the work of 
Simatek’s technicians, through the exchange 
of information with practitioners of filter users 
(see section [5.1]). 
Reinartz and Ulaga (2008) name ‘knowledge 
sharing’ about the ‘correct use’ of product 
and service system with customers as one of 
the pillars of becoming a service company. 
How this correct use manifests itself is not 
described, probably because it differs from 
case to case. In our (end-user) case, ‘correct 
use’ of the product would be to adjust the 
control unit to run the filter’s motor in different 
speeds that match the type of produce. In other 
cases, the ‘correct use’ might be something 
else. Cohen et. al. (2006) write that the needs 
of different customers (end-users) differ, and 
that a service portfolio of different services 
should be offered according to these different 
needs. Reinartz and Ulaga (2008) suggest 
a service strategy that is flexible enough 
to fit different customers and standardised 
==PAGE:99==
99
enough to be manageable. Also, Alam (2005) 
warns of too customised services for few 
customers. Simatek is offering standardised 
filters that can, according to our collaborators, 
be adjusted to different processes via the 
control unit. Thus, one opportunity lies in 
providing end-user’s practitioners with the 
skills to master their filters in terms of being 
able to match settings of both filter (control 
unit) and processes. Moreover, the suitability 
of service equipment should be revised. 
How to master the filters in the concrete 
individual case may be assessed by Simatek’s 
technicians together with the practitioners 
of their end-users as part of the after-sales 
services. Hence, such coordinated process 
assistance for practitioners can be a starting 
point for Simatek to create a difference in the 
after-sales market. In regards to the after-sales 
designer, this discussion raises an issue to 
consider: Who to include in (the design for) 
after-sales?  Possibilities are staff training, for 
example in forms of workshops.
In regards to different needs of different 
customers (Vandermerwe & Rada, 1988) and 
the customisation (see above), we need to 
discuss questions of how for the mentioned 
process support. How does ‘mastery’ manifest 
itself for the individual practitioner? What 
function do operators need to know most 
about? How could the filter and the process 
be adjusted in the concrete case? How can 
this information be clustered and organised 
into meaningful documentation? And finally: 
How can this knowledge be integrated into 
Simatek’s after-sales services? While some 
practitioners might need precise knowledge 
of how to master the filter themselves for 
their practices as they need to adjust them 
often, others might need adjustments less 
frequently, as the statements by Simatek 
employees suggest. Here, Simatek could 
provide service customisation (Alam, 2005; 
Cohen et al., 2006; Reinartz & Ulaga, 2008). 
While providing the means for mastery for 
some practitioners through documentation 
or assistance, other filters could be managed 
by Simatek directly, according to end-user 
processes. In our work, we did not address 
these questions, as we talked to only one 
practitioner at one end-user company. This 
limitation will be discussed later in sections 
[6.4.1 & 6.4.3].
In addition, the mentioned knowledge sharing 
with end-user companies and depicting value 
of after-sales services should be performed 
on different levels. For our practitioner, his 
personal mastery seems to be denied by the 
lack of knowledge provided by Simatek and 
the current proceedings in his professional 
environment (see section [5.6]). Hence, we 
believe that it is important to visualise the 
value that the filter and after-sales services 
have to the practitioner, as well as to the 
management of a company.
6.1.2.3 The beginning of after-sales for the 
provider & internal knowledge sharing
After discussing the value for the service 
receivers, which in our opinion directly 
concerns - and derives from - the value for 
the direct users of Simatek’s filter (mastery, 
see above), we need to discuss what can 
be of value for Simatek as the provider of 
the after-sales services. As a first point, the 
aforementioned knowledge of technicians 
is currently of tacit nature (see section [5.1]). 
Therefore, Simatek risks losing such know-
how if one of these ‘key figures’ (see section 
[5.1]) leaves the company. Thus, we see the 
==PAGE:100==
100
internal documentation of this knowledge as 
important for Simatek, in order to enhance 
their 
after-sales 
services. 
According 
to 
Vandermerwe and Rada (1988), companies 
who succeed to capture and transmit this kind 
of know-how are more likely to succeed in the 
service market.
Value creation for both sides - provider and 
receiver - of services is crucial for successful 
(after-sales) services according to theorists 
(Levitt, 1983; Walter et. al., 2001). Here, 
we need to raise and discuss an important 
question that seems to be of great relevance 
for the designer for after-sales (see section 
[6.2]): Where does after-sales begin (for 
the service provider)? Theorists suggest an 
uncertainty of the beginning of after-sales 
services for different cases. For Simatek, our 
findings suggest that after-sales do not actually 
start ‘after the sale’, as Simatek’s employees 
‘defined’. We found that knowledge that is 
created by the combination of their own 
technicians’ mastery of the filters (see section 
[5.1]), by collaboration with the end-user, and 
by cooperation of different departments, is 
translated into Simatek’s filter technology 
(see section [5.2]). This knowledge hence 
influences their technology and, as a result, 
can enhance their services. In literature, 
although 
theorists 
suggest 
knowledge 
sharing internally (and with the customer) 
(Reinartz & Ulaga, 2008), it is hard to derive 
when or how such knowledge sharing 
shall occur, as it differs from case to case. 
Appropriate documentation as means of the 
knowledge sharing is furthermore crucial 
according to literature. At Simatek, know-how 
about customer’s processes is in fact already 
translated into the design of the industrial 
product. A focus on customer processes does 
thus not only affect services after a purchase 
in an immediate sense, as Reinartz and Ulaga 
(2008) suggest by their example of SKF (see 
section [3.2.1]). Its translation into the product 
around which after-sales services are offered, 
and the realisation of this, could ease the 
operations for the service provider. At Simatek, 
knowledge sharing and documentation is 
unstructured, and the know-how remains tacit. 
Among their employees, ‘experience’ is used 
as explanation for the origin of know-how, 
who were sometimes surprised by the know-
how of other employees in the workshop. But 
Simatek needs to realise where this experience 
comes from (see sections [5.1] & [5.2] & Bijker, 
1995). It comes from the knowledge that is 
obtained through working with customers 
and within the community of their different 
employees (across departments). Thus, for our 
case company, we see value of (the enhanced) 
after-sales services in the structuration and 
documentation of processes and the involved 
know-how (and where it comes from) that 
result in the design of the filters for their end-
users. This could occur in cross-departmental 
platforms (such as workshops) and requires 
willingness to invest time. Companies like 
Simatek - manufacturers of industrial products 
(filters) who want to enter or enhance 
their after-sales market -  could use such 
documentation to build on and establish a 
database communicating how to create value 
both to the customer and the company itself. 
Hence, know-how also plays a role in the issue 
of what influences after-sales?
==PAGE:101==
101
6.1.2.4 How to share knowledge & 
communication to customers
In literature, frequent communication to 
customers (Levitt ,1983) is described as an 
indication of well functioning after-sales 
services, and the initiative by the service 
provider is described to be beneficial. It 
does however not become clear what type 
of communication is meant. Furthermore, 
theorists suggest that communication should 
start early in the relationship with the customer 
and that ties should be bound, but we need 
to discuss what ‘early’ means. For our case 
at Simatek, direct communication with their 
customers after a sale is sparse. However, we 
found that technicians are communicating 
with 
practitioners 
(see 
section 
[5.1]). 
Moreover, before the sale, communication 
happens in the development phases (see 
section [5.2]). We can see that Simatek is in 
fact starting communication early, but then 
cuts ties after the sale. This is unfortunate 
for both sides, as a purchase marks the 
beginning of a relationship with the seller for 
the customer (Levitt, 1983). Simatek should 
instead try to benefit from the prior-to-the-
sale communication and maintain the bond. 
As part of their after-sales services, this direct 
communication should be of knowledge 
sharing nature about how to use the filters for 
the according production processes and how 
to master the interaction with and application 
of the filters. Finding out about the best form 
of communication could be subject to further 
work (see section [6.4.3]). However, there are 
some opportunities for  quick change. 
According to Reinartz and Ulaga (2008), 
promoting services around products at the 
moment of sale helps in becoming a service 
company. They suggest that a company’s 
sales force should actively advertise Simatek’s 
after-sales offers (contracts, and what they 
offer) to the customer. Opposed to this theory, 
we found that at Simatek, their services are 
not promoted at the sale. Hence, this option 
provides room for quick improvement. 
However, in the digital era, communication 
starts before direct communication. Websites 
are the first portal to communicate value, 
also of products and accompanying after-
sales services to the customers. Based on 
our findings we argue that filter users cannot 
necessarily connect what we found to be 
of value for them with what is visualised on 
the website (see section [5.3.2]). Therefore, 
Simatek should make clearer which filter can 
be used for which type of process. Not just by 
listing different industries, but by being more 
specific as to how the (standardised) filter can 
be adjusted for different types of use and 
practices. This would also take workload off 
some of the departments, as customers could 
call with more specific inquiries. Furthermore, 
Simatek should make clear that the company 
can offer the means for practitioners to 
master the technology for their practices, and 
assist them in this. As we discussed before 
in this section, the value of this should be 
made clear in a way that is understood also 
on management level. For the designer, this 
adds another facet to the above expressed 
issue: Where does after-sales begin - for 
the service receiver? Levitt (1983) says the 
relationship begins after the purchase. Our 
findings suggest that it can start before, 
which for Simatek and their end-users can be 
beneficial.
As a result of the above discussion, we feel 
confident to propose steps to undertake, and 
starting points for Simatek in order to enhance 
and redesign their after-sales services. When 
considering the need of domestication of 
==PAGE:102==
102
the (future) operators of their filters, Simatek 
can make a difference. The suggestions will 
be visualised in a ‘suggestion box’ later in 
this chapter (see section [6.3]). We chose to 
present it at the end, as it can then be put into 
relation with the limitations of this thesis and 
our case, as well as the toolbox for designing 
for after-sales for the designer.
6.2 Discussion of our design process - 
how to design for after-sales
6.2.1 Spiraling and iterating through after-sales at 
Simatek
Before discussing our design process and 
methods, it should be stated that the success 
of a design process is always partly based on 
the perception of the designer. However, this 
perception should be justified and discussed. 
Therefore, this will be a part of this section. 
Based on the overall issues addressed 
throughout the analysis, the discussion of 
our findings from the case at Simatek already 
pointed out more specific issues that are 
important to consider when (re)designing for 
after-sales. Our work only concerned Simatek, 
a producer of industrial dust filters. We 
make literature-based connections to similar 
industrial goods. Issues from the Simatek 
case will - considering our findings, analysis 
and discussion - be adopted into the toolbox 
for how to design for after-sales. However, our 
case is not necessarily representative. 
In this section, we will discuss and point out 
issues that have unfolded in terms of our 
design process and methods with the design 
literature introduced in chapter [3]. First, we 
will discuss how we as designers experienced 
our approach in order to illustrate (our) 
challenges 
with 
open 
and 
explorative, 
iterative processes.
Both our case study as well as our thesis were 
(tightly connected) projects in their fuzzy front 
end phase, as we explained in chapter [4]. 
When we started our work, and long through 
the process, its outcome was developing 
rather than clear. In fact, the outcome became 
finalized through the process of discussing 
and reflecting on our findings and analysis, 
because we felt the need to discuss our 
findings and analysis with literature to be 
able to make a judgement. Only post analysis 
and discussion we felt confident to present 
suggestions to the case company and our 
toolbox. The project proposal by Simatek 
gave a direction: To (re)design in the field 
of after-sales. Because we were not familiar 
with the topic prior to the proposal, we had 
to explore the matter and how it could be 
treated in the situation at hand. However, we 
did not take a classical divergent-convergent 
(Rhea, 2003) approach. During our working 
process, we realised that we had to allow our 
design situation to be transformed (Binder et 
al., 2011). 
We were for example not able to directly 
observe practices of our practitioner at the 
==PAGE:103==
103
end-user company and could not visit other 
end-users due to their busy schedules. Rather 
than observing concrete, unswayed examples 
of practices as we planned to (see section 
[4.4.2.2]), we had to allow the design situation 
to partly rely on the conversation with our 
practitioner. We trust his descriptions, but 
had, and still have to, reflect on the effects of 
these changes (Binder et al., 2011). We are 
aware that his interpretations of our questions 
and our interpretations of his answers have 
influenced our process. Considering Kemmis’ 
(1980) discussion about the notion of ‘case’ 
it should be pointed out that this might have 
influenced the outcome of our work. However, 
we can see positive consequences of this 
issue. By not solely observing actors and 
their acting on each other (the filter and the 
practitioner(s)), but talking to a practitioner 
and allowing his interpretations to influence 
our work, we made the practitioner himself an 
actor in our design process. In general, what 
the design situation was for us was iterated 
upon and reframed several times throughout 
our process. We believe that this enabled us 
to holistically explore problematic situations, 
which greatly influence the unsatisfactory 
after-sales situation around Simatek’s off-the 
shelf filters. Hence, considering Binder et al.’s 
(2011) work on design (see section [3.1.3]), 
describing it as a co-shaping of design 
context and design object  , we think that 
our process resulted in an outcome for the 
case that can help Simatek to enhance their 
situation around their after-sales. Undertaking 
a spiraling, iterative process was challenging. 
Different viewpoints and knowledge from 
different actors we collaborated with were 
interesting to see and did contribute to 
the outcome. However, reflecting on our 
struggles, Binder et al.’s (2011, section [3.1.3]) 
warning to not get stuck in the process 
of transformation and achieve temporary 
conclusion on new findings and ideas needs 
to be taken seriously. 
Although we did not follow the processes 
we illuminate in chapter [3], the fuzzy front 
end literature helped us in steering through 
our own process. For example, Rhea’s (2003) 
suggestion that identified problems can 
be seen as opportunities for developing 
something around empowered us in our work. 
Knowledge remaining tacit is a problem. In 
our case however, this knowledge represents 
a 
great 
opportunity 
for 
improvement 
regarding Simatek’s after-sales. Moreover, 
informal discussions (Koen et al., 2001) 
were generative of knowledge to both us as 
researchers and our collaborators. Hence, we 
argue that when operating in the fuzzy front 
end of after-sales services, iterative processes 
are beneficial as they allow for transformations 
of difficult situations. The result (our result) 
could then be subject to development  and 
tests in structured processes like theorists 
describe. In our case, we saw the outcome to 
be most beneficial in the form of suggestions 
and their justifications. The suggestions box 
for Simatek should however be tested in 
further work (see section [6.4]). 
Hence, considering Binder et. al.’s (2011) 
notion of transformation, after-sales as a 
concept and how it is defined by the ‘provider’ 
(e.g. Simatek) might be subject to reframing 
when observed from different vantage 
points, especially that of practitioners that 
operate the product that after-sales are to 
be designed around, and the practitioners 
(service technicians, other employees) on 
the manufacturers (Simatek) side. With this in 
mind, the designer for after-sales may in the 
process challenge the notion of ‘after’-sales. 
==PAGE:104==
104
6.2.2 Designing for after-sales (services) - issues to 
consider as a designer 
6.2.2.1 Actors in after-sales
Simatek’s current service situation is very 
complex. 
Nieminen 
and 
Mattelmäkis 
(2011) description of systems of systems is 
appropriate to the situation we explored. 
When Kimbell (2011) describes diverse actors 
operating in dynamic environments, we think 
that our sociotechnical viewpoint of seeing 
also Simatek’s filters and the practices around 
them as actors contributed to discovering 
problematic situations and opportunities 
for our case company. On this note, we 
believe that our choice of domestication 
of technology as a tool for analysis was 
very helpful. We allowed for the thought 
that not only technologies or artefacts are 
subject to domestication, but also practices 
and other actors. From this we obtained an 
understanding of the situation that helped 
bringing us into the position to make 
suggestions to the case company. Therefore, 
we suggest that the designer for after-sales 
should be aware that practices in the after-
sales service system at hand are actors and 
influence other actors in the network. This 
adds to the issue of what influences after-
sales, and can effectively be analysed using 
the domestication of technology approach, 
supplemented with considering practices 
and processes as actors. This issue should 
be considered for both the provider and the 
receiver of the services.
6.2.2.2 Co-designing for after-sales and 
roles in the workshop
The fuzzy front end literature drawn upon 
in chapter [3] mentions the inclusion of 
customer and user in the design process 
(e.g. Alam, 2005). However, they are mostly 
mentioned separately and are not necessarily 
considered actors in the action of design. We 
saw for example our practitioner as an actor 
in our process although he did not actively 
partake in a generative process. At Simatek, 
our workshop included the employees in 
order to create an understanding of the 
situation not only for us as designers, but also 
for them as actors in the after-sales services, 
by including and involving different vantage 
points. Theorists regard co-designing  as 
crucial when designing for services (see 
section [3.1.5]). Mattelmäki and Sleeswijk 
Visser (2011) see the inclusion of users and 
other actors as an important point. However, 
experience suggests that the designer for 
after-sales needs to consider whom to co-
design (for after-sales) with. It has already 
been pointed out that it is important to 
consider whom to include in the (design for) 
after-sales (see section [6.1.2.2]). This issue 
should be supplemented with specifics when 
considering co-design. Apart from including 
our practitioner, other actors were at play 
during our design process. In our workshop, 
we 
included 
employees 
from 
different 
departments of Simatek. This enabled us to 
see the notion of after-sales from different 
==PAGE:105==
105
viewpoints and contributed to the outcome of 
our work. The participants inspired each other 
with their knowledge, and brought us into the 
position of being able to view the notion of 
after-sales differentiated. We are aware that 
the discussion below is at times specific, but 
as the workshop made for a great part of our 
research and also generative process, we 
argue that it is necessary to discuss in detail.
 
During the workshop, we experienced that the 
participants from the different departments 
where at times surprised by the knowledge 
that other employees contributed to the 
workshop. This led to fruitful discussions that 
yielded a lot of information, later contributing 
to our suggestions to Simatek. It was interesting 
to see that the most senior employee - the 
area sales manager - was most engaged in 
discussions. He is directly in contact with 
customers, and was able to provide a large 
amount of information about for example 
contractors. Although some juniors were 
mostly listening, others, like our contact 
person and the new after-sales manager, 
were also engaged in the discussions. While 
our contact person, who had the pleasure to 
receive the same education as the authors of 
this thesis, was oftentimes thinking in terms 
of concrete ideas for improvements of the 
after-sales situation, the after-sales manager 
pointed out the importance of economical 
aspects.  
Sanders and Stappers (2008) suggest that 
the fuzzy front end phase has been “growing, 
as designers move closer to the future 
users of what they design”. Considering this 
statement, we did experience a growing 
fuzziness at times in our process. Through 
the enourmous amount of information that 
especially the discussions in the workshop 
yielded, the situation sometimes seemed to 
become more unclear than clear. Too much 
information can hence be confusing for 
the designer and facilitator of workshops. 
We mentioned in section [4.4.2.3] that we 
left much room in our workshop for open 
discussions. However, considering Onarheim 
and Biskjær’s (2014) notion of ‘the sweet 
spot’, we were experiencing some difficulties 
in ordering the great amounts of information 
we got. Hence, the designer, when using 
workshops as a method in designing for 
after-sales, should be considerate of using 
delimiting constraints for the participants.
During the workshop, we experienced to 
some extend what Sanders and Stappers 
(2008) describe as levels of creativity (see 
section [3.1.4]). While some were often 
having ideas that emerged from open 
discussions, others were more engaged 
during the customer journey exercise where 
we provided scaffolding by arrows and icons 
(see appendix [10]). Sanders and Stappers 
(2008) hint that co-design is effective if the 
participants are able to express the expertise 
in their field. Reflecting on our workshop, we 
think that we gave most of our co-designers 
- and as it was an exploratory workshop: co-
explorers - the opportunity to do so. However, 
although we discovered that the production 
department was involved in for example pre-
order guidance, the production engineer 
was less involved throughout the workshop. 
Designing the workshop, we were not aware 
that a production engineer would be present 
(the final board of participants was assembled 
right before the beginning of the workshop). 
Nevertheless, we suggest that the designer for 
after-sales should be aware of the participants 
and what they work with, and provide tools 
that might match their expertise. Here, 
workshop facilitators should be considerate 
of spontaneous changes in participant 
lineups, especially when workshopping in 
organisational environments.
==PAGE:106==
106
We would like to discuss one of the workshop 
exercises in more detail, as this exercise 
paved the way for a decisive reframing of the 
notion of after-sales in our case (see section 
[6.1.2]). Reinartz and Ulaga (2008), as part 
of their servitization framework, suggest that 
a company should realise that they might 
already be offering services. In exercise 
five (see appendices [9] & [11]), which was 
inspired by this framework, we discovered 
that Simatek is indeed performing practices 
that might in a sense be classified as services, 
or, as we analysed, influence their after-sales 
services. Apart from their current after-sales 
services, that they are aiming to enhance, 
we found that the described processes of 
pre-order guidance are generating crucial 
know-how. Inspired by the work of Reinartz 
and Ulaga (2008), this exercise hence made 
the participants of the workshop conscious of 
the value created by these current practices, 
which they in fact rated high in importance yet 
classified as profit drains. We believe that this 
know-how has the potential to contribute to 
their after-sales (see section 6.1.2.3]). When 
speaking of reframings of design situations 
(Binder et al., 2011) (again), we found that 
this can also be helpful spontaneously. Our 
reframing of the question in exercise seven 
enabled a participant of the workshop to 
explicitly realize Simatek’s strong focus on 
sales and that they currently are not making a 
‘value-based’ selling point. 
Generally, the workshop was a success, as 
it yielded a great amount of useful material. 
Creating comfort and impose laughter in the 
beginning (Cash & Onarheim, 2015) made 
for a nice and constructive atmosphere. On 
the negative side, we could see that after 
the lunch break, the participants were tired 
and less keen to participate in discussions. 
Four hours of workshop has also made us as 
facilitators less concentrated towards the end. 
Hence, the duration of a workshop should be 
considered. Furthermore, the exercise that 
was supposed to yield information about 
Simatek’s strategic goals did not work as 
expected. We assume that this was due to the 
absence of employees from the management 
level, who could spontaneously not partake. 
The feedback exercise was unfortunately not 
generative of undiscussed vantage points 
to the extent we hoped for. It seemed like 
the feedback cards were not inspirational to 
the participants. However, we believe that a 
feedback discussion would have tired the 
participants. 
Designing or rather exploring the situation 
with employees from different departments 
and getting insight into a practitioner’s 
working life have enabled us to consider many 
perspectives. This is aligned with Shostack’s 
(1984) suggestions to include employees 
with customer contact (for example ‘our’ area 
sales manager) and from the ‘back office’ into 
the process of designing services. While he 
does not mention co-design, we think that 
the inclusion of these people as co-creators/
co-explorers was beneficial to our outcome. 
As aforementioned, Alam (2005) suggests the 
inclusion of ‘front line personnel’. In our case, 
that was the filter practitioner on the end-user 
side. He told us that what he needed was a 
‘working filter’. However, as we analysed, we 
found his need to be the mastery of the filter. 
Alam (2005) considers ‘customers’ as poor 
reporters of their own needs. As we shortly 
discussed in section [3.1.5], the designer (us), 
with the background of his or her education 
can interpret what is said and bring it into new 
perspectives, in our case that of domestication. 
Sanders and Stappers (2008) see the designer 
in an important role in co-design processes: 
Guiding and enabling the co-designers. 
Reflecting on our co-design activities, we 
also see this as a relevant point. When they 
==PAGE:107==
107
(Sanders & Stappers, 2008) suggest that in 
fuzzy front end phases, the researcher can act 
as a designer, this is considerable as well, as 
much of the findings from our research played 
a role in iterations of the design process and 
in our co-design/co-exploring efforts. Adding 
to the issue of whom to co-design with, and 
as a result of this sub-section, the designer for 
after-sales should hence contemplate on the 
issue: What is the role of the designer, when 
designing for after-sales?
6.2.2.3 The filter and the after-sales services 
as boundary objects
During the workshop, we realised that the 
employees where involved with the filters 
and (current) after-sales services to different 
degrees and different levels. Domestication 
as an analytic tool furthermore made clear 
that also at Simatek’s end-users, different 
actors (UAs) are involved on different levels. 
Hence, we feel the need to raise another 
issue, that has already partly been unfolded 
in section [6.1.1]: What to (co-)design for 
after-sales around? We experienced that 
what is being design designed around (the 
filters) but also what is being designed for 
(after-sales services) should be regarded as 
things that are open for different levels of 
involvement for the involved actors, both 
in the after-sales services, but also in the 
process of co-design. We learned that it can 
be of advantage to regard both the filters as 
well as the after-sales services as boundary 
objects (Star & Griesemer, 1989). In the light 
of the issues we raised in sections [6.1.2.3] & 
[6.1.2.4] (where does after-sales begin?), we 
can take this thought further and see benefit 
in blurring the borders between the filters 
and the after-sales services around: Where 
does the filter (product) end and the service 
begin? In our case, knowledge from service 
should be embedded in the filter design, and 
then made use of for the (enhanced) service 
offers.
==PAGE:108==
108
6.3 Suggestions for Simatek and the 
toolbox
6.3.1 Suggestions to the case company Simatek
As the outcome of our work, we would like to 
present two things: Firstly our ‘suggestion box’ 
to the case company Simatek, and secondly, a 
toolbox that helps the designer avoiding the 
wrong questions and gives an overview of 
what should - according to our findings - be 
considered when designing for after-sales for 
a company like Simatek:
Hence table 6 (see Appendix [21]).shows the 
suggestions we make for our case company. 
Based on our findings and analysis, the table 
finally results from the discussion in this 
chapter and should be seen as an overview of 
the most important issues. In order to obtain 
a more complete understanding, the analysis 
(chapter [5]) and complementary discussion 
(chapter [6]) should be consulted. 
Table 6:Suggestion box for Simatek 
==PAGE:109==
109
6.3.2 The toolbox
Now, we would like to introduce the toolbox 
for designing for after-sales (table [7]) (see 
Appendix [22]). As mentioned, the toolbox 
provides with issues that in our opinion should 
be considered when designing for after-sales 
around industrial pulse jet filters. We believe 
that some issues can also be translated into 
other markets of industrial goods. The box 
is a result of our field work, findings, analysis 
and most importantly the discussion. Note 
that some of the issues have similar sub-
points. The issues can be influenced by each 
other. The toolbox should not be regarded as 
a strict framework, but more as a tool of what 
to be considerate about, when designing 
for after-sales (in this market). Please note 
furthermore, that the toolbox is an overview of 
the discussion of our work, as it is supposed to 
leave room for different situations. Therefore, 
we include the issues and also some specifics 
that guide in using the toolbox. The issues are 
not listed in a specific order as other projects 
might have different starting point than ours. 
The toolbox might be added to when in use.
Table 7: The toolbox: How to design for after-sales in markets of industrial goods and especially 
industrial dust filters
==PAGE:110==
110
6.4 Limitations, delimitations and room 
for further work
6.4.1 Limitations of this thesis
This work concerns the design for after-sales 
for industrial dust filters in our case at the 
company Simatek A/S and is not necessarily 
representative. The work at one of their 
end-users does furthermore only reflect the 
situation at that particular company. Therefore, 
both our suggestions to the company as well 
as the toolbox for designing for after-sales 
should be subject to further work. As for the 
suggestions, the case we explored can for 
example be compared to other manufacturers 
of industrial dust filters.
The toolbox as well as the suggestion box 
should furthermore be tested on the field, 
for example in further work at Simatek. 
Workshops with technicians of Simatek and 
external practitioners could be a suitable tool 
in order to explore how mastery manifests 
itself for different filter operators at different 
end-user companies (see section [6.1.2.2]) 
and what kind of process assistance is needed 
in the individual cases. Our work does not 
treat these aspects concretely as we spoke to 
only one practitioner. 
The end-user company we visited works 
together with contractors who influence 
the work with the filter. During our work, we 
sought to include practitioners who work for 
end-user companies that buy directly from 
Simatek, as we believe that this would have 
given valuable insight and differentiated the 
outcome. Unfortunately, despite our effort, 
we were not able to do so. 
Due to their busy schedules, we were 
furthermore not able to talk to Simatek’s 
technicians directly. However, due to the 
frequency and the concrete example of the 
field trip to Sweden, we trust in the description 
of the participants of the workshop
6.4.2 Delimitations of this thesis
Quite early in our work, we decided to explore 
the situation that we found in a broad sense. 
We believe that this enabled us to view and 
analyse the situation holistically. Contractor 
proceedings and other issues might have 
been overlooked when focussing on the off-
the-shelf filters in a concrete sense. Therefore, 
the scope of our work does not cover the filter 
technology in detail, neither does it concern 
concrete redesigns around the filters and 
equipment. In the workshop, we were advised 
to look at economical aspects. However, we 
feel that doing so would have limited us in our 
doings. While business strategy is part of our 
work in a broad sense, concrete suggestions 
are not included. However, we believe that 
our outcome can provide with a base for 
economical success in the long run.
==PAGE:111==
111
6.4.3 Further work
We mentioned some further work that could 
be done to further validate the outcomes of 
the thesis throughout the discussion and in 
section [6.4.1]. Now we would like to share 
some more specific thoughts that we think are 
interesting to work further with.
From our own experience of working in R&D 
departments of big and medium technological 
companies, we are aware that knowledge 
sharing as we suggest it to Simatek can be 
extremely difficult, both to document but 
also to make use of it. A challenge is hence 
to find out, how to incorporate this value on 
an organisational level. This can provide room 
for further research.
Kreye (2015) mentions different levels of 
service complexity. Vandermerwe and Rada 
(1988) hint into the same direction (see section 
[3.2.2]). Our analysis with domestication of 
technology made us aware of the possibility 
that even practitioners might be involved 
with Simatek’s filters on different levels. Some 
might want to master the use (like in our case), 
but some might need to be less involved with 
the interaction. This is also in respect to their 
daily workload. Simatek currently sees ‘user 
friendly design’ as one of their strengths: 
‘Push the button and it works correctly, 
if it is installed correctly’, was a phrase in 
the 
workshop. 
Furthermore, 
installation 
supervision and commissioning is already 
an offer they provide. Hence, Simatek should 
continue offering these services, but add the 
offer to practitioners to master the product. 
However, ‘user friendly design’ should not be 
an excuse to blame customers of incorrect 
use. Here, a principle of design for interaction 
could come into play: Provide expert 
knowledge to some, and basic knowledge to 
others. What that means in the concrete case 
of Simatek or other providers of industrial 
products could be a field of further research.
We mentioned research about the best form 
of communication as a subject to further 
work. How can the guide to master a Simatek 
filter be communicated to the practitioner 
in way that he or she can make use of it 
for his or her individual situation? Here, a 
meaningful operation and service manual 
might be of help. However, the design of such 
communication means was not treated in this 
thesis, and therefore leaves room for further 
work.
==PAGE:112==
112
Conclusion
Chapter 7
==PAGE:113==
113
After-sales around an industrial product, 
such as Simatek’s filters, and the servitization 
of a manufacturing company of industrial 
goods cannot simply be forced into current 
practices. This is true both for the company 
planning to offer these services as well 
as for their end-users. Introducing these 
novel practices requires gaining a thorough 
understanding of the product throughout 
its lifetime. This includes knowledge about 
processes surrounding its use, the prevailing 
perceptions of all involved parties, and how 
these influence each other. 
When designing for after-sales, companies 
like Simatek and the designers of after-sales 
services have to understand how the current 
practices of filter operators on the end-user 
side and their own service staff look like, how 
their employees gained their experience, and 
how they can make use of that. Furthermore, 
practices with and of contractors, and how 
these practices have been adopted into the 
environment of the different actors should be 
looked into.
Especially when redesigning already existing 
after-sales operations, getting insights and 
ideas from different actors and co-exploring 
the situation help drawing a holistic picture 
and can result in not just identifying, but 
also creating possible starting points for a 
strategy of enhancing after-sales. Then a 
constructivist approach helps being open in 
explorations and analysis. Not being limited 
to certain methods for gathering data can 
be of great advantage. We believe that 
applying a sociotechnical approach involving 
practitioners on both sides provides the 
designer for after-sales with the possibility to 
not only find symptoms of undesired service 
offers, but exploring deeper lying problems 
of current situations. Knowledge sharing 
between practitioners on both ends of after-
sales services, about how to master the 
technology that after-sales concern, can be 
one of the pillars of these. Providing the direct 
operators with meaningful documentation, 
regarding the technology embedded in 
their daily practices is a key for providing 
qualitative 
after-sales 
services 
around 
industrial machinery. Create after-sales value 
in the form of operation empowerment (when 
selling industrial dust filters).
Internal knowledge sharing seems to be of 
great importance to structure the processes 
that translate the perceived value of actual 
end-users (match the technology to their 
processes) into the artifact. Finally, the 
design for after-sales should be a co-effort 
of (professional) designers, employees from 
different departments of the service provider 
and practitioners (and management) of the 
service receiver. For each of them, the value of 
the services might manifest itself differently. If 
this is respected, after-sales services and their 
value can be communicated on the different 
levels of involvement, and might be more 
successful than before.
==PAGE:114==
114
References
==PAGE:115==
115
==PAGE:116==
116
Aicardi, S. (2015). How to Choose the Right 
KPIs for Your E-Commerce Store. Retrieved 
May 5, 2016 from this link https://www.
searchenginejournal.com/choose-right-kpis-
e-commerce-store/136284/
Akrich, M. (1992). The de-scription of technical 
objects. Chapter in W.E. Bijker& J. Law (eds.): 
Shaping 
Technology/ 
Building 
Sociaty 
(pp.205-224). Cambrigde, MA: The MIT Press
Alam, I. (2005). Removing the fuzziness from the 
fuzzy front-end of service innovations through 
customer interactions, 35, 468–480. http://
doi.org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2005.04.004
Alam, I., & Perry, C. (2002). A customer-
oriented new service development
process. Journal of Services Marketing, 16(6), 
515– 534.
Arias, E. G., & Fischer, G. (2000). Boundary 
Objects: Their Role in Articulating the 
Task at Hand and Making Information 
Relevant to It Center for LifeLong Learning 
& Design and Institute of Cognitive Science 
Department of Computer Science , and 
College of Architecture and Planning Univers. 
Architecture, 1–8.
Arthur D. Little (2009).Driving After Sales 
excellence. Retrieved February 20, 2016 from 
the link http://www.adlittle.com/automotive-
viewpoints.html?&view=392
Badcock&Wilcox (2007). Pulse jet fabric filters. 
Retrieved May 25, 2016 from this link http://
www.babcock.com/library/documents/
e1013199.pdf 
Bergman, M., Lyytinen, K., & Mark, G. (2007). 
Boundary objects in design: An ecological 
view of design artifacts. Journal of the 
Association for Information Systems, J. Assoc. 
Inf. Syst, J Assn Inf, J Assoc Inf Syst, Journal of 
Ais, Journal of the Ais, 8(11), 546–568.
Binder, T., De Michelis, G., Ehn, P., Jacucci, G., 
Linde, P., & Wagner, I. (2011). Designing as 
Metamorphing. Chapter 5 in Design Things 
(s.79-103). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bendig, T., Irion, T., & Oettgen, N. (2006). The 
strategic importance of after-sales services 
for the insurance of growth in customer-
value-oriented management: An observation 
of small and medium-sized industrial goods 
manufacturers. Retrieved from http://www.
amfiteatrueconomic.ase.ro/arhiva/pdf/no20/
revista_fulltext.pdf
Bijker, Wiebe E. (1995): Of bicycles, Bakelites 
and Bulbs: Toward a Theory of Sociotechnical 
Change. Chapter 1: Introduction (only pp.13-
6). Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press. ISBN 
0-262-02376-8
Brandt, E. & Agger Eriksen, M. (2010) Co-
design events. In Halse, J., Brandt, E., Clark, 
B., Binder, T. (eds) Rehearsing the future. The 
Danish Design School Press. Denmark.
Bundschuh, R.G. and Dezvane, T.M. (2003) 
‘How to make after sale services pay off’, The 
McKinsey Quarterly, No. 4.
Business dictionary (n.d.). Commoditization. 
Retrieved May 5, 2016 from this link http://
www.businessdictionary.com/definition/
commoditization.html
Callon, M. (1989). Some elements of a 
sociology of translation - Domestication of the 
scallops and the fishermen of the St-Brieuc 
bay. Sociological Review Monograph, Sociol 
R Mo, Sociol Rev Monogr, 196–233.
==PAGE:117==
117
Carrier, J. (1990). Reconciling commodities 
and personal relations in industrial society. 
Theory and Society 19:1–16. 
Cash, P. & Onarheim, B. (2015). Lectures from 
Staging co-creation course.
Cohen, M. A. & Lee, H.L. (1990). Out of touch 
with customer needs? Spare parts and after 
sales service, Sloan Management Review, Vol. 
31, num. 2, p. 55-66.
Cohen, M. A., Agrawal, N. & Agrawal, V. (2006). 
Winning in the aftermarket. Harvard Business 
Review, Harv. Bus. Rev, Harv Bus Re, Harvard 
Bus Rev, Harv Bus Rev, 84(5), 129-+.
Cottam, H.& Leadbeater, C. (2004) RED Paper 
01: HEALTH: Cocreating Services. Design 
Council. 
UK.www.designcouncil.info/RED/
health/REDPaper01.pdf
European Commission (2015). What is an SME?. 
Retrieved June 2, 2016 from this link https://
web.archive.org/web/20150208090338/
http://ec.europa.eu/enterprise/policies/sme/
facts-figures-analysis/sme-definition/index_
en.htm
Foverskov, M., & Dam, K. (2010) The Evocative 
Sketch, in Rehearsing the Future, p. 44-49 
edited by Halse, J, Brandt, E., Clark, B. and 
Binder, T. The Danish Design School Press.
Gruner, K. E. and Homburg, C. (2000). Does 
customer interaction enhance new product 
success? Journal of Business Research, 49(1), 
1–14. IEEE (1990).
Hayes, M. (n.d.). 32 Key Performance Indicators 
(KPIs) for Ecommerce. Retrieved  May 15, 
2016 from this link https://www.shopify.
com/blog/7365564-32-key-performance-
indicators-kpis-for-ecommerce
Holmlid, S., Mattelmäki, T., Visser, F. S., & 
Vaajakallio, K. (2015). Co-creative practices 
in service innovation. Handbook of Service 
Innovation, Handb. of Service Innovation, 
545–574. 
doi:10.1007/978-1-4471-6590-
3_25
Heitman (2010). Putting the Brakes on the 
Race to the Bottom. Retreived May 15, 2016 
from 
this 
link 
http://www.fastcompany.
com/1639689/putting-brakes-race-bottom
Keinonen, T. (2009). Design Method –
Instrument, Competence of Agenda? Multiple 
ways to Design Research, Swiss Design 
Research Network Symposium ‘09. 12–13.
Kemmis, S. (1980). The Imagination of the Case 
and the Invention of the Study. In H. Simons 
(Ed.),Towards a Science of the Singular: Essays 
about Case Study in Educational Research 
and Evaluation (pp. 96-142). Norwich: Centre 
for Applied Research in Education, University 
of East Anglia.
Kimbell, L. (2011). Designing for Service as 
One Way of Designing Services. International 
Journal of Design, Int. J. Des, Int J Des, 5(2), 
41–52.
Koen, P., Ajamian, G., Burkart, R., Clamen, A., 
Davidson, J., D’Amore, R., … Wagner, K. (2001). 
Providing clarity and a common language to 
the “fuzzy front end”. Research Technology 
Management, Res Technol Manage, Res Tech 
M, Res.-Technol. Manage, 44(2), 46–55.
Kreye, M. E., Roehrich, J. K., & Lewis, M. A. 
(2015). Servitising manufacturers: the impact 
of service complexity and contractual and 
relational capabilities. Production Planning & 
Control, 7287(April), 1–14. http://doi.org/10.1
080/09537287.2015.1033489
==PAGE:118==
118
Latour, B. (1999). Pandora´s hope. Excerpt 
from Chapter 6: A Collective of Humans and 
Nonhumans (pp. 174-215). Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press
Legnani, E., Ierace, S., & Cavalieri, S. (2007). 
Towards 
a 
reference 
model 
for 
after-
sales service processes. IFIP International 
Federation for Information Processing, 246, 
289–296. http://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-
74157-4_34
Levitt, T. (1983). After the sale is over. Harvard 
Business Review, Harv. Bus. Rev, Harv Bus Re, 
Harvard Bus Rev, Harv Bus Rev, 61(5), 87–93.
Mager, B. (2009) Service design as an 
emerging field. In: Miettinen, S. & Koivisto. 
M. (eds) Designing Services with innovative 
methods. Publication series of the University 
of Art and Design Helsinki. Keuruu Finland. 
28-43
Mattelmäki, T., & Sleeswijk Visser, F. (2011). 
Lost in CoX, Interpretations of Co-Design 
and Co-creation. In N. F. M. Roozenburg, L. 
L. Chen, & P. J. Stappers (Eds.), Diversity and 
unity: Proceedings of IASDR2011, the 4th 
World Conference on Design Research.
Nieminen, 
J. 
& 
Mattelmäki, 
T. 
(2011). 
Navigating in the world of services – Visualizing 
a system of systems. Nordic Design Research 
Conference 2011.
Onarheim, B., & Biskjaer, M. M. (2014). 
Balancing Constraints and the Sweet Spot 
as Coming Topics for Creativity Research. 
Creativity 
in 
Design: 
Understanding, 
Capturing, Supporting, (1), 1–18.
Orr, J. E. (1996). Talking about machines : An 
ethnography of a modern job (pp. 172 s). 
Cornell University Press.
Orr, J. E. (2006). Ten years of Talking about 
Machines. Organization Studies, Organ Stud, 
Organization Studies (Walter De Gruyter 
Gmbh and Co. Kg.), Organ. Stud, 27(12), 1805–
1820. doi:10.1177/0170840606071933
Pezzotta, G., Cavalieri, S., & Gaiardelli, P. (2007). 
A framework for an integrated management 
of After Sales Service. Strategic Management 
Journal.
Prahalad, C.K., Ramaswamy, V. (2000). Co-
opting 
customer 
competence 
Harvard 
Business Review 78(1), 79-87.
ProTeacher Collection (2002). Compliment 
circle description. Retrieved April 15, 2016 from 
the link http://www.proteacher.org/a/29492_
compliment+circle+quick+description.html 
Rahman, Anisur, & Chattopadhyay, Gopinath. 
(2015). Long term warranty and after sales 
service : concept, policies and cost models 
(pp. 1 online resource (xvi, 113 pages).
Reinartz, W., & Ulaga, W. (2008). How to sell 
services more profitably [service business]. 
Harvard Business Review, 86(5), 90–96.
Rhea, D. (2003) ‘Bringing clarity to the “Fuzzy 
Front End”, in: Laurel, B. (ed.) Design Research: 
Methods and Perspectives. London, England: 
The MIT Press, pp. 145-154.
Rizzo, F. (2010) Co-design versus User Centred 
Design: Framing the differences. In Guerrini, 
L. (Ed) Notes on Design Doctoral Research. 
Franco Angeli Editore.
Russell, S., & Williams, R. (2002). Social Shaping 
of Technology: Frameworks, Findings and 
Implications for Policy. Shaping Technology, 
Guiding Policy: Concepts, Spaces and Tools, 
37–131.
==PAGE:119==
119
Saccani, N. (2006). The role and performance 
measurement of after-sales in the durable 
consumer goods industries: an empirical 
study. Journal of Productivity and Performance 
Management , 55(3), 259-283.
Sanders, E. B.-N., & Stappers, P. J. (2008). 
Co-creation and the new landscapes of 
design. CoDesign, 4(1), 5–18. http://doi.
org/10.1080/15710880701875068
Scheuing, E. E., & Johnson, E. M. (1989). 
A 
proposed 
model 
for 
new 
service 
development. Journal of Services Marketing, 
3(2), 25–35.
Shostack, L. G. (1984). Designing services that 
deliver. Harvard Business Review, 62, 133–
139.
Silverman, D. (2001). Interpreting Qualitative 
Data: Methods for Analysing Talk, Text, and 
Interaction (2 edition) Sage, London 
Silverman, D. (2013) A Very Short, Fairly 
Interesting and Reasonably Cheap Book 
about Qualitative Research. London: Sage.
Silverstone, R., Hirsch, E. and Morley, D. 
(1992) ‘Information and Communication 
Technologies and the Moral Economy of the 
Household’, in Silverstone, R. and Hirsch, E. 
(eds.) Consuming Technologies, Routledge, 
London, pp.15-31.
Simatek (n.d.). Simatek. Retrieved February 2, 
2016 from this link http://www.simatek.dk/
Simatek (n.d.). History. Retrieved February 
2, 
2016 
from 
this 
link 
http://201042.
buildyourownpublisher.com/00010/00013/ 
Stake, R. (1994): Case studies. Chapter 4 in 
Denzin, N. K., & Lincoln, Y. S. (ed.). The SAGE 
Handbook of qualitative research ( pp.86-109 
). Los Angeles: Sage Publications. 86-109
Star, S. L., & Griesemer, J. R. (1989). Institutional 
Ecology, ‘Translations’ and Boundary Objects: 
Amateurs and Professionals in Berkeley’s 
Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, 1907-39. 
Social Studies of Science, 19(3), 387–420. 
doi:10.2307/285080
Star, S. L. (2010). This is Not a Boundary Object: 
Reflections on the Origin of a Concept. 
Science Technology and Human Values, 
Science, Technology, and Human Values, Sci. 
Technol. Hum. Values, Sci Technol, Sci Technol 
Hum Val, Science Technology and Human 
Values, Sci Technol Human Values, 35(5), 601–
617. doi:10.1177/0162243910377624
Steinert, Y. (2010). How to design and conduct 
effective workshops. In K. M. Skeff, G. A. Stratos, 
(Eds.), Methods for Teaching Medicine (pp. 89 
– 115). Philadelphia: ACP Press
Stickdorn, ed., Marc, & Schneider, ed., Jakob. 
(2010). This is service design thinking : Basics. 
Tools. Cases (pp. 373 s). BIS Publishers.
Sørensen, K. H., Aune, M., & Hatling, M. (2000). 
Against linearity on the cultural appropiation 
of 
science 
and 
technology. 
Between 
understanding and trust: The public, science 
and technology, 165.
Van Boeijen, A.G.C., Daalhuizen, J.J., Zijlstra, 
J.J.M. and Van der Schoor, R.S.A. (eds.) 
(2013) Delft Design Guide. Amsterdam: BIS 
Publishers. 
Van der Lugt, R., Bakkeren, M., & De Lille, C. S. 
H. (2009). Co-design in een pressure cooker. 
Bunnik, The Netherlands: Drukkerij Libertas.
==PAGE:120==
120
Van Maanen, J. (1988). Tales of the field: on 
writing ethnography. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.
Van Oorschot, R.(2013). How tangible arrows 
create innovative relations. Presented on 
and published in Proceeding of the 3rd 
Participatory Innovation Conference, Lahti, 
Finland, June.
Vandermerwe, S. & Rada, J. (1988). Servitization 
of Business: Adding Value by Adding 
Services. European Management Journal, 
6(4), 314–324. http://doi.org/10.1016/0263-
2373(88)90033-3
Vargo, S. L. & Lusch, R. F. (2008) From goods 
to service(s): Divergences and convergences 
of logics. Industrial marketing management 
37. 254-259.
Viardot, E. (2007). Exploiting the Full Potential 
of After-Sales Market. Retrieved May 20, 2006 
from this link http://pragmaticmarketing.
com//resources/exploiting-the-full-potential-
of-after-sales-market?p=1
Walter, A., Ritter, T., & Gemünden, H. G. (2001). 
Value Creation in Buyer-Seller Relationships: 
Theoretical Considerations and Empirical 
Results 
from 
a 
Supplier’s 
Perspective. 
Industrial Marketing Management, 30(4), 
365–377. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/S0019-
8501(01)00156-0
Wenger, Etienne (1998). Communities of 
Practice: Learning, Meaning, and Identity. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
ISBN 978-0-521-66363-2.
Winsor, J. (2005). Spark: Be More Innovative 
Through Co-Creation. CIO Insight, (60), 17.
Yanow, D. (2006). Talking about Practices : 
On Julian Orr’ s Talking About Machines. 
Organization Studies, 27(12), 1743–1756. 
http://doi.org/10.1177/01708406
Yoshinaka, Y. (2012). Lecture notes on 
domestication of technology. DTU course 
42640 sociotechnical design, 1–18.
Zahay, D., Griffin, A., & Fredricks, E. (2004). 
Sources, uses, and forms of data in the new 
product development process. Industrial 
Marketing Management, 33(7), 657– 666.
==PAGE:121==
121
==PAGE:122==
122
==PAGE:123==
Adrian Mito Eberhard
Olga Rubio Santamaría
==PAGE:124==
