==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
ModellingDynamicCommunitiesinCom-
plex Networks
Community detection in temporal multiplex networks
Daniel Heestermans Svendsen
s103121
Supervisors:
Sune Lehmann
Jakob Eg Larsen
Kongens Lyngby 2016
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
The SensibleDTU dataset holds, for approximately 1000 participants, detailed information on so-
cial media and face-to-face interaction, highly resolved in time. These very different channels of
data, derived from the Facebook API and mobile-phone Bluetooth scans respectively, are used to
build temporal multiplex networks. The goal of this thesis is to investigate the similarities and dif-
ferences between the two modes of data through the lens of dynamic community detection.
First, a general overview of complex networks theory is provided, then the focus is narrowed to a
review of the rapidly expanding subfield of community detection. Further zooming in, clustering
in temporal multiplex networks is treated, specifically the information theoretical framework of the
map equation used to analyse the networks.
Different schemes for coupling strength between multiplex layers are investigated, and their effects
on community detection studied. The results are interpreted through both quantitative measures
and visualisations, focusing on the temporal development of: 1) Detected communities, 2) Com-
munity affiliation of participants and 3) The network as seen from the perspective of a single user.
Effective community detection in the Facebook network is found to be difficult, due to the many
different time-scales over which people communicate. The individual networks display a low aver-
age clustering coefficient, leading to unintuitive partitions.
For the face-to-face network, an optimal interlayer coupling is found, allowing for the distinguish-
ing of different types of meetings revolving, for example, around university courses, lunch and
evening activities.
In order to study recurring meetings, a network of temporal communities linked by similarity-
weighted edges is constructed. Performing graph clustering on such a network yields a partition
into sets of communities with high self-similarity. It is shown how plotting timelines of when the
recurring communities are active can give interesting insight into the social contexts which they
represent.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science at the
Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring an M.Sc. degree
in Mathematical Modelling and Computation.
TheprojectwascarriedoutfromJanuary25thtoJune25thof2016undertheacademicsupervision
of associate professor Sune Lehmann and postdoc Enys Mones from DTU compute.
The workload of this thesis corresponds to 30 ECTS points.
Kongens Lyngby, June 25, 2016
Daniel Heestermans Svendsen
s103121
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
First of all, I would like to thank my supervisor Sune Lehmann for his energetic support, and for
giving me the key-card to the offices of his research group, which has been an enjoyable and very
conducive environment to grow as a researcher in. Big thanks to Enys Mones, Piotr Sapieżyński,
Mieszko Manijak, Radu Gatej, Bjarke Mønsted, Bjarke Felbo and Andreas Bjerre-Nielsen for creat-
ing a warm atmosphere at the KU offices.
A special thanks to my dear friend Linards Kalnins, for a million weird conversations, bringing me,
on average, closer to an understanding of my field of research and/or other topics in life. I owe great
thanks to Ulf Aslak as well for being my D3 guru, and to my father for patiently proof reading my
thesis in the days before submitting it.
Lastly, I am very grateful for my friends, who have kept me in good spirits this year, especially Anna
Mortensen, Simon Lange, Lise Grevsen, Ida Aamot, Ulf Aslak, Eskil Ferslev, Andreas Brøgger,
Michael Petersen, and my family.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Complex networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Community detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.3
Time development section
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2
The map equation
19
2.1
Shannon’s source coding theorem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.2
The map equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3
The SensibleDTU data - an initial exploration of temporal development
27
3.1
SensibleDTU and similar studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2
Building a temporal multiplex network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4
Temporal community detection and visualisation
39
4.1
Proximity network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2
Facebook network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.3
Recurring communities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5
Concluding remarks
59
5.1
Thesis outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.2
Discussion and future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
A
TA-view visualisations of dynamic communities in the proximity network
63
B
Ego-network visualisations
67
B.1
Student A in the proximity network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
B.2
Student A in the Facebook network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
Bibliography
73
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER1
Introduction
We humans live our lives, entangled in a host of complex networks. Each take part in sociological
networks of diverse personal relations forming the social units of society. We are embedded in the
information networks of the World Wide Web and telecommunication, and we move around by
means of the transportation networks of roads, trains or airplanes. Our lives are powered by the
network of the electric grid. In short, today we are networked in a multitude of ways hitherto
unforeseen.
The last few decades have seen the advent of revolutionary new opportunities for gathering the data
necessarytopreciselymapthelargescalenetworksinwhichweareinterwoven. Theseopportunities
have come about through the digital traces we leave every day: Social interaction in the computer
age involves calling each other on mobile phones, ”checking in” online together in public locations
andmaintainingoldfriendshipsthroughsocialmedia. Theuseofonlinesearchenginesisengrained
in our everyday routines, and we use them to sift through everything from music to educational or
politicalcontent. Weswipetransitcardsforpublictransportation, creditscardsforpayingandmost
people who own a smartphone have some software that logs their GPS-coordinates. We generate
data all through the day which may be used to gain insight into individual and group behaviour.
Figure 1.1: Proximity network, using one hour of aggregated bluetooth-sensor data. The network
exhibits community structure and has a fat-tailed degree distribution. The node positions are com-
puted by a force-directed algorithm [1]
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
The development of advanced systems for storing and analysing massive amounts of data is the
foundation of modern complex network studies. In its earliest form, the analysis of networks fo-
cused on small graphs and the properties of individual nodes. It was possible to make observations
about such properties using only the human eye, simply by plotting a network. For example, in the
relatively small network of about 400 nodes shown in Fig. 1.1, it is possible to observe groups of
nodes that have a higher concentration of links between them than they do with the remaining net-
work. It is also possible to observe a large variation in the number of links that different nodes are
attached to, some having only one neighbour, some being coupled to tens of other nodes. With the
emergence of massive network datasets, spanning millions of nodes, the focus has, however, shifted
from individual nodes and connections, to the statistical properties of the components that make
up the network. Network-gazing for such vast amounts of data is futile, but asking questions like
“what is the distribution of property X over the network?” can offer real insight into the nature of
how a complex network is organised.
This thesis analyses complex networks derived from the SensibleDTU experiment. The data
is large-scale, not in the sense that it spans millions of nodes, but by way of extending 2 years into
the temporal dimension. With high resolution, the everyday interactions of approximately 1000
freshman students have been recorded through several channels to get a real-time picture of how
socialnetworksevolveintime. Thesechannelsincludeproximity data(bluetoothsensors)andsocial
media interaction data (Facebook history).
We as people tend to organize in groups, certainly in the form of physical meetings, as can be seen
from Fig. 1.1, but in other types of social networks as well. Algorithms that map such community
structure in networks have found widespread application, and the study of these is a major subfield
of complex network science. In a static network, of which Fig. 1.1 is an example, mathematically
determining a community is no trivial task. This will be further explored in the literature review on
graph clustering, Sec. 1.2. The problem is further complicated, however, when taking into account
the temporal development of interactions in a network, and approaching this in a meaningful way
is a topic of much debate.
Performing such a meaningful clustering of social networks developing in time is the topic of this
thesis. Data from the Bluetooth and Facebook channels of SensibleDTU are used to construct
temporal multiplex networks in order to investigate the similarities and differences in how the two
types of social networks develop in time. Intuitively we know that there exist groups of people
in social networks, which for different periods of time interact more intensely among themselves
than with the rest of the network. In this thesis, we visualize and quantify how such groups emerge
and dissolve at various points in time. The mathematical framework of community detection in
multiplex networks is the tool which will be used to this end. Applying the multiplex Infomap
algorithm, temporal communities are identified and subsequently inspected using different types
of visualizations, casting light on the detected community structure from different angles.
==PAGE:13==
1.1 Complex networks
3
1.1
Complex networks
Inordertounderstandthelanguageofcomplexnetworks,uponwhichcommunitydetectionbuilds,
abriefhistoryofnetworksispresented, alongwithsomemathematicaldefinitionsofnetworkprop-
erties. At the end of the section, the concept of multiplex networks, used in this thesis to model
temporal development, is introduced.
The study of networks builds upon one of the most fundamental pillars of discrete mathemat-
ics: graph theory. The mathematical treatment and solution to the Königsberg bridge problem,
famously given by Euler in 1736, is widely considered the dawn of formalised graph theory. A net-
work (or graph in graph theory) consists of a set of points called vertices (sn. vertex) and connections
between such points called edges. The terminology of networks has been subject to input from the
various fields using this model, most notably the social sciences, computer science and physics. A
short overview of terms that will be used interchangeably throughout the thesis is therefore given
in Table 1.1.
name (graph theory)
equivalent names
vertex
node (computer science), actor (sociology)
edge
link (computer science), tie (sociology)
Table 1.1: Network terminology
More information may be added to an edge by assigning to it a weight. This could be, in a text
messaging network, the number of texts sent back and forth between two people, and would be
more telling than just an unmarked connection. Adding more interesting information, an edge
may be directed showing which way the interaction takes place.
In order to understand some of the ideas presented in this chapter we need to define the adjacency
and degree matrices. The degree of a node is the number edges incident on it 1 and the degree matrix
isa diagonal matrixwhere Dii isequaltothedegree ofnode i. Theelementsoftheadjacencymatrix
Aij are equal to 1 if there is an edge between node i and node j and 0 otherwise.
1.1.1
Real-world networks
A great many systems of the world lend themselves to network-representation. Real-world net-
works are complex in the sense that they exhibit many properties that simple graph structures, such
as lattices, do not. Some of the most widely studied classes of complex networks together with ex-
amples of these are presented here.
Social networks are made up of a set of people and a set of interrelations among them. The collec-
tionofdataandrepresentationinnetworkformhasalong-standinghistoryinthesocialsciences[2]
. Examples include school-yard friendship networks, social relations in workplaces, intermarriages
between families as well as sexual contact networks [3].
1In directed networks, one might distinguish between the degree pertaining to in- and outgoing edges.
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
Technological networks are constructed to transport physical goods or pieces of information. Ex-
amples are the water and electricity networks and the Internet; ie. the packets of light travelling in
optical fiber cables and the computers at which they terminate or are redirected (not to be confused
with the WWW).
Information networks or ’knowledge networks’, are best exemplified by the citation network of
scientific papers, in which a directed edge exist from one paper to another if it cites it. The WWW
is also an example, where a directed link represents a hyperlink from one webpage to another.
Biological networks are a fascinating branch of networks that map relations of the organic. An ex-
ample is the protein interaction network, where edges between proteins denote physical interaction
[4] of different sorts. The metabolic pathways network, in which nodes are metabolic substrates
andproducts, isalsowidelystudied. Here, adirectededgerepresentsareactionactingonasubstrate
producing a particular product.
1.1.2
Properties of networks
In recent years, a shift in ways to study networks has been brought on by the increasing availability
of computational power, and access to much larger sets of data. Suddenly, questions about what
node possesses the most of a specific property, become a question of what fraction of nodes posses
the given property.
The focus of this thesis is on social networks, and this will be the angle from which a few of the
quantitative measures of network theory will now be introduced.
Random graphs: A yardstick
While somewhat peripheral to the topic of the thesis, the random graph is central to the devel-
opment of network theory and widely applied as a yardstick against which to compare measured
network properties. The model, presented in a renowned 1959 paper by Erdös and Réyni [5] gen-
erates a graph Γ(n, p) accordingly: Each of the n(n −1)/2 possible edges between the n vertices
of the graph are realized with probability p2.
It is clear that the number of neighbours of a given vertex is determined in a binomial process
Bin(n, p), thus for large numbers of vertices the distribution of degrees tends to a Poisson dis-
tribution (with rate λ = np). A realization of a random graph is shown in Fig. 1.2.
Numerous ways have been developed to construct a random graph, each depending on its in-
tended application. Some keep constant one property, observed in an empirical network, so that
the significance of other properties may be measured. Some represent a set of rules for growing
a network, in order to model the dynamics of how a real network forms [6]. Others again are
constructed with the purpose of maximizing the likelihood of its parameters given an observed net-
work, in order to infer underlying ’real-world’-parameters [7]. Random graphs find many uses in
network theory to be sure.
2This version of Erdös and Réynis random graph, which originally was defined by a fixed number of vertices and edges,
was in fact proposed by Edgar Nelson Gilbert 1959
==PAGE:15==
1.1 Complex networks
5
Figure 1.2: A random graph with n = 30 vertices and link-probability of p = 0.15
The small world effect
In the 1960’s, a series of experiments were conducted by Stanley Milgram [8] , studying the path
length distribution between people. Without mapping out the network itself, a method was de-
vised to asses the distance between two nodes in a large-scale social network.
Themethodworksasfollows: Apersonreceivesaletterwithbasicinformationonatarget-individual,
in the hands of which the letter is to end up. If she knows the target-individual by first name, she
sends it directly; if not, she sends it to a person she knows on first name basis who she believes has
a better chance of knowing him. In an experiment distributing 296 such letters to people across
different states in USA, Milgram found that the average number of people the letters had to go
through was 6. This later became the phrase ”six degrees of seperation”, which was never actually
used by Milgram himself.
The measure describing the average distance between nodes is the mean geodesic path
ℓ=
1
1
2n(n −1)
∑
i≥j
dij
(1.1)
where dij, the geodesic path length, is the shortest path in the graph between node i and j. A ”small
world network” is defined as one where ℓscales with log n where n is the number of vertices in the
network.
The small world effect is observed in many real-world networks [3] and has obvious implications
for the dynamics on a network. For example, the stronger the small-world property, the faster in-
formation, or maybe even a disease, is likely to spread.
Clustering
The property of clustering is observed in many networks. It describes in the increased probability
of nodes A and B sharing an edge when node C already shares one with both A and B. In social
networks, it expresses the notion that my friend’s friend is likely to be my friend - a rather intuitive
==PAGE:16==
6
1 Introduction
concept. One can define a local clustering coeﬃcient of node i as the number of triangles (fully
connected triplets) of which i is a member, divided by the number of triplets centered on i. The
latter is the number of potential triangles that may occur. Say node i has ki neighbours which have
Ei connections between them, we write
Ci =
2Ei
ki(ki −1)
(1.2)
and averaging over all nodes we get the clustering coefficient of the network. In a fully connected
network the clustering coefficient is C = 1. Clustering is the result of many different phenomena,
such as web-pages concerning the same topic in the WWW-network, or proteins working closely
in a so-called ”active group” of a protein interaction network.
Degree distribution and correlation
The distribution over degrees in networks has been widely studied with some interesting results.
The degree distribution of real networks are very commonly found to follow a power law, e.g.
pk ∼kα for some α. Some examples of networks exhibiting this are the World Wide Web, the
Internet, protein interaction networks and telephone call networks [3]. Other frequently observed
distributions include the exponential and power laws with exponential cutoffs.
Characteristic of the degree distributions of empirical complex networks are the fat tails, which
power laws and exponential distributions exhibit. The nodes occupying the tail corresponds to
very connected centers, sometimes called hubs.
An interesting network measure is the extent to which nodes of high degree connect with other
nodes of high degree. Define P(k′|k) as the probability that a randomly chosen link connects to
a node of degree k′ given that it is connected to one of degree k. With this, a degree correlation
function can be computed, describing the average degree of the first neighbours connected to a
given node of degree k:
⟨kneighbor⟩(k) =
∑
k′
k′P(k′|k)
(1.3)
When this is an increasing or decreasing function of k, it is known respectively as assortative and
disassortative mixing. It has been shown that social networks are often assortatively mixed, while
the opposite is true for technological networks [9].
1.1.3
Multiplex networks
It is often the case that the components of a complex system are not restricted to interacting in one
particular way. The example relevant to this thesis is how people interact both through the social
media as well as face-to-face. Taking a broader perspective on life, we see the different species inter-
acting on both mutualistic, host-parasite and predator-prey levels [10]. Such systems abound, and it
is becoming increasingly popular to model them as a network of multiple layers, where nodes recur
in each, and a specific layer pertains to a particular interaction type.
Since links can be used to represent all sorts of interactions, there are certainly types that simply
==PAGE:17==
1.2 Community detection
7
make no sense to aggregate into a single link. It is argued, that there are many systems incorporat-
ing different interaction types which yield more information when treated separately [11].
One recent, significant approach in network science, is that of applying the multiplex network rep-
resentation to time-stamped interaction data, gathered at regular intervals. Collecting the data in
adjacent time bins, each resulting in a network layer, can yield new insight into community struc-
ture and dynamics of the network [12, 13]. It is this model that will be applied in order to detect
temporal communities.
Quantifying multiplex networks
In order to describe properties of multiplex networks, different generalizations of existing measures
have been developed. These include ways of calculating geodesic distance and clustering coefficient,
as well as models for generating, and simulating dynamics on, multiplex networks [14].
Different types of correlations across multiple layers have been studied by Nicosia and Latora [15].
They have shown how correlations in degree between layers vary among different networks, stress-
ing that the role of a node in one layer is poor evidence for its role in another. Using a citation-,
and an actor collaboration-network, they find a positive correlation between the number of layers
in which a node is active, and its mean degree. They underline that the field is still rather young,
since most generative models still model each node as being active in all layers.
The evaluation of the above-mentioned descriptors tends to scale exponentially with the num-
ber of layers, while the information contained in some layers may be very limited, to the point of
redundancy [16]. In order to address this, one approach by Manlio De Domenico et al. [17] has
been to generalize the Von Neumann Entropy (VNE) to multiplex networks, by considering the
Laplacian of each layer as density matrix3. The graph VNE can be interpreted as a measure of the
structural complexity of a graph [18]. Defining a distance measure between Laplacian matrices of
individual layers, De Domenico et al. merge similar layers and construct a dendrogram. They cut
it where the VNE per layer of the resulting multiplex network is the smallest. The idea is that one
might obtain a network of fewer layers but of similar structural complexity.
There is a large difference in the nature of the many systems which multiplex networks may
represent, and it is a relatively young area of research. This is reflected in the lack of a solid and
widely accepted mathematical framework for treating them. In Sec. 1.3 we will narrow our focus to
the subset that is temporal multiplex networks, and the methods developed to analyse them.
1.2
Community detection
A common property of real-world networks, is the existence of groups of nodes within which there
is a high concentration of edges, compared with the number edges between the groups. This prop-
erty is know as community structure [19]. In this section, based on the detailed review paper of
Fortunato [20], an overview of the different approaches developed for community detection is pre-
sented.
3In quantum mechanics (QM) the density matrix describes a mixed state of a QM-system and the VNE was developed
to describe the degree of mixing. The VNE of a pure state, with identity density matrix, is zero.
==PAGE:18==
8
1 Introduction
The studies of communities in social networks constitute some of the earliest applications of
graph clustering algorithms. In 1950, George Homans showed that it was possible to reveal social
groups by row (coloumn) permutation of adjacency matrices in social networks [21]. The objective
is to reach approximate block-diagonal form, since this corresponds to meeting the criteria of the
community structure definition given above.
As many different systems can be represented as networks, community detection algorithms have
found a wide variety of applications. When applied for grouping similar consumers, it can be used
to improve recommendations systems. Identifying groups of similar nodes can help create more
efficient data structures for storing graph data. In sociological theory, an actor with connection to
multiple, otherwise rather disconnected communities, corresponds to a person with high potential
social capital. This comes in the form of information brokerage, ie. the opportunity to gain, from
having access to knowledge from one neighbour which is useful to another [22]. Figure 1.3 shows,
by colouring each community differently, the result of running a community detection algorithm
on the network of Fig. 1.1.
Figure 1.3: A partition of the proximity network shown in Fig 1.1. A greedy modularity-maximizing
algorithm [23] has been applied to the graph, and the detected communities have been assigned
individual colours.
1.2.1
Desirable properties of clustering algorithms
There is no universally agreed upon, mathematical definition of a community in a graph. The
central characteristic is, as described above, a high ratio between intra- and inter-community edge
concentrations. This requirement indeed forms the basis of various quality functions that are opti-
mized in order to identify communities.
The amount of work published in the field of community detection has grown tremendously over
the last decade. The host of methods developed boast incorporation of various properties besides
resulting in some partition of a graph. Below is a description of the central ones and why they are
==PAGE:19==
1.2 Community detection
9
considered desirable.
Community overlap
The importance of allowing for nodes to be a part of several communities is clear. In the context
of social networks, we have only to think of the various social contexts in which we participate to
realize that a hard partition, allocating to us a single group, is an over-simplification [24]. Another
good example is words in association networks, where the ”bright”, for instance, is a part of word-
groups to do with astronomy, colour and intelligence.
Hierarchical community structure
Hierarchical organization can be found in many places, e.g. in the ordering of cells into tissue, and
tissue into organs. In networks, there are often more relevant scales of clustering, and algorithms
capable of finding clusters within clusters can yield insight into this hierarchical structure.
A common way to proceed, known as agglomerative clustering, begins by first determining a mea-
sure of distance/dissimilarity between nodes and modules. Then, through iteratively merging the
most similar nodes/modules and recording their distance, a dendrogram can be constructed as
shown in Fig. 1.4. Depending on where the dendrogram is cut, partitions of different scales come
about, thus, hierarchical graph clustering is closely related to the previously explained resolution
parameter algorithms.
The other mode of hierarchical clustering is divisive clustering, in which all nodes begin in one clus-
ter, which is iteratively divided according to some criterion until all nodes are their own module.
Non-interfering resolution limit
When the size of the smallest modules that can be distinguished by a community detection algo-
rithm depends on the size of the network being analysed, the algorithm is said to have a resolution
limit. This happens because, as the network grows, merging previously distinguishable communi-
ties becomes favourable for the algorithm, i.e. maximises its objective function.
All two-level (as opposed to hierarchical defined below) community detection algorithms suffer
from resolution limits [25] to different extents. In order to address this problem, a class of algo-
rithms have been developed, incorporating an external resolution parameter which directly affects
the scale at which individual modules are identified. Scanning over different values of this param-
eter allows for exploration of the network at different resolutions. Typically, however, not at all
obvious at which parameter-setting the most useful structural information may be extracted.
Multiplex generalization
Graph clustering on single-layer networks is already a controversial field, and the problem of gen-
eralization to include multiple layers has only added to the controversy. The idea here is that a
community might span different layers of a multiplex network. This is certainly the case with tem-
poral social networks, treated in this thesis, where the interpretation of a temporal module is simply
a continued existence of a specific social group.
==PAGE:20==
10
1 Introduction
distance
Figure 1.4: Example of a dendrogram with a cut-off (dashed line) that may be generated after de-
termining a suitable distance measure.
1.2.2
Approaches to community detection
Community detection is an interesting problem with many applications, and thus the amount of
literature within the field has soared over the last decade. The complex network community has
produced a myriad of algorithms for graph clustering, which are not trivial to divide into main
categories 4. Nevertheless, one such informative and inclusive division, is that into community
detectionalgorithmsbasedrespectivelyonnull-models, ﬂow-models andblock-models. Whatfollows
is not an exhaustive review of each main approach, rather an introduction to the central ideas and
methods, along with representative examples. For a comprehensive overview, see Ref. [20].
Null-model based
Probably the most renowned concept making use of null-models to assess partitions, is that of mod-
ularity. It was developed by Newman and Girvan for selecting the optimal5 partition in their be-
tweenness algorithm [19]. For a given edge, the edge betweenness is the number of shortest paths
that traverse it. The main algorithm of Newman and Girvan proceeded by iteratively removing
the edge of the highest betweenness, and then recalculating the edge betweenness. The network
thereby falls apart into connected components of ever decreasing size, which are interpreted as com-
munities. This is an example of a divisive hierarchical clustering, which needs of a way to asses what
level of network decomposition is optimal (where to cut the dendrogram).
The basic idea of Newman and Girvan was to construct a quality function comparing the frac-
tion of edges inside a community with the fraction expected according to random null model [27] .
Given an adjacency matrix A, the objective function to maximize is
Q =
1
2m
∑
ij
(Aij −Pij)δ(i, j)
(1.4)
4It has, for a while, been the ambition of this author to produce a computationally efficient algorithm for accurately
partitioning existing clustering algorithms into main clusters.
5There are many cases where maximizing modularity is not the best approach to community detection. For a thorough
analysis, see Ref. [26].
==PAGE:21==
1.2 Community detection
11
where m is the total number of edges in the network, and Pij is the expected number of edges
between nodes i and j. The delta-function δ takes on value 1 when vertex i and j belong to the
same community and 0 otherwise. The null-model could be any random graph, for example the
Erdös-Réyni graph, but its degree distribution poorly models the fat tails often observed in real-
world networks. Instead, standard modularity imposes the constraint that the degree sequence
is held the same as the original network. One might imagine cutting all edges, leaving node i of
degree ki with ki edge-stubs. The probability that node i and j connect can be expressed as the
probability ofpicking astub fromeachwhen randomly sampling twostubs ki
2m × kj
2m = kikj
4m2 . The
expected number of edges between node i and j under the more restrictive null-model is therefore
Pij = 2m kikj
4m2 = kikj
2m , yielding the most commonly used definition of modularity:
Q =
1
2m
∑
ij
(Aij −kikj
2m )δ(i, j).
(1.5)
Amoreinclusiveversion,knownasgeneralized modularity,foruseonweightedanddirectedgraphs,
has been developed and used with much success [28].
The betweenness algorithm suffered from being rather computationally heavy, which led to
the question of how to obtain high values of Q in less resource-demanding ways. Newman then
changed strategy, from using modularity to evaluate partitions resulting from another algorithm,
to optimizing for modularity itself. He developed a fast, greedy algorithm [23] - the first of the now
long line of algorithms which attempt to optimize for Q.
Modularity suffers from the above-mentioned resolution limit. For large-scale networks, with
high values of m, the expected number of edges between node i and j becomes very low for any
set of two nodes. This favours large communities since there is low expectation as to whether two
nodes in a community have to be connected (low penalty). One might say that the problem of the
null-model lies in the assumption that all nodes ’see each other’.
Anearlyattempttoapproachthisproblemisthemultiscale modularitybyPons[29], whichreplaces
thesum-terminEq. (1.5)byαAij−(1−α)kikj/2m, whereαistheresolutionparameter. Itiseasy
toseethatwhenα = 1theoptimumpartitionisonebigcommunityyieldingamodularityequalto
the element-wise sum of the adjacency matrix. Conversely, α ≪1 corresponds to a comparatively
high expectation on intra-community edge density, favouring small, highly connected (e.g. dyads)
communities.
Flow-model based
Central to the flow-based approach is how, with a graph, we may associate a probability flow, gov-
erned by the topology of the graph. Each vertex in the vertex set vi ∈V is considered a state, and
the transition probability of moving from state i to j is given by
Pij = wij
wout
i
,
(1.6)
where wij is the weight of edge ⃗ij (0 if the edge does not exist) and wout
i
is the total weight of edges
going out from i.
==PAGE:22==
12
1 Introduction
From the adjacency matrix of a weighted undirected network Aij = wij, where we may write
wout
i
= win
i
= wi, a transition matrix can be constructed as given by Eq. (1.6): P = D−1A
where D = diag(wi), i = 1, 2, ..., |V|. The transition matrix defines a Markov Chain [30], or
a 1st order random walk on the vertices. An example of a 71-step walk on a network is shown in
Fig. 1.5. For the case of undirected networks, it can be shown that the stationary distribution πi, i.e.
the fraction of time an infinite random walker spends at node i, is given by πi = wi/(2 ∑
i wi).
It is the central idea of flow-based methods to use the dynamics taking place on the network to
investigate it’s structure. As we shall see below, one can define not only 1st but also higher-order
random walks on a network, leading to more advanced clustering techniques.
Figure 1.5: Example random walk on a network, with transition probabilities proportional to edge
weights. Illustration from [31].
Random walks as a distance measure
One approach is to use random walks as defined above to introduce a distance measure between
vertices. One such algorithm called Walktrap, which has found wide-spread use due to good perfor-
mance and comparably fast computation speed, was developed by Latapy and Pons in 2005 [32].
They define a distance between vertex-vertex, vertex-cluster, and cluster-cluster pairs. The distance
is computed from the probabilities of moving from one vertex to another, through a random walk
of a fixed length t. Choosing t is no straight-forward matter. It has to be large enough to make use
of the information about local topology, not only assigning low distance (high similarity) to first
and second neighbours. However if it is too large, the probability to move from i to j in t steps
approaches the stationary distribution πj, thus discarding the local information about the random
walker dynamics.
The distance measure is used to perform hierarchical agglomerative clustering, where the optimal
cut-off in the dendrogram is selected by maximizing modularity. As mentioned, modularity is both
used dynamically in algorithms to arrive at a partition, and in assessing the outcome-partition of
an algorithm using a different approach. This is an example of the latter.
A flow-based quality function
==PAGE:23==
1.2 Community detection
13
Walktrap uses random walks to perform hierarchical clustering, but utilizes modularity to assess
partitions. There are however also quality-functions that are themselves flowbased such as Markov
stability [33]. This approach introduces the clustered autocovariance matrix Rt of a Markov process
taking place on the graph. Given a partition, the diagonal elements (Rt)jj give the probability of
a random walk of length t starting and ending in cluster j, minus the probability that two inde-
pendent random walkers, evaluated in the stationary state, may both be found in j [33]. In other
words, it is a comparison between the probability of staying in a cluster and that of being in it due
to the topology of the network.
With this, the stability over the Markov time scale t is defined as
r(t) = min
0≤s≤t
c
∑
j
(Rs)jj = min
0≤s≤t trace(Rs)
where c is the number of communities. The minimum is taken, so that high stability is not assigned
to partitions which result in a high probability of leaving a cluster and returning later. This mono-
tonically decreasing function, describes the ability of communities to contain flow at a timescale t,
and works as a tunable quality function to assess partitions.
It is clear to see, that the size of the optimal community increases with t: It takes a bigger commu-
nity to contain a random walker for a longer amount of time. In other words, t is the resolution
parameter of this approach. Interesting, it can be shown that one recovers modularity from stabil-
ity for Markov time t = 1.
As with all quality-functions, one might use stability to assess communities found by other algo-
rithms, for different Markov times t. Alternatively, an approach to community detection would
be maximizing stability for a constant t, although this suffers from similar resolution limits as mod-
ularity. As is often done with multiresolution methods, one can sweep carefully over different
time-scales, in order to find partitions that are robust over a range of t.
Higher order Markov dynamics on networks
Some processes are better modelled as higher order random walks, i.e. where flow moves might be
dependent on where it comes from. An example of this is how, in an email network, a mail from
user A to B has a higher probability of occurring after a mail from B to A. It has been shown, for
a set of well-studied networks, that taking flow-memory into account avoids an oversimplification
of the underlying dynamics that take place on the network [34]. It is worth noting, however, that
the networks representations studied in [34] describe a flow of elements of a tangible nature be-
tween the nodes: people between airports, taxis between locations, email between correspondents
and patients between hospital wards. While path dependency is rather intuitive in these cases, the
undirected links which occur from proximity data do not lend themselves as readily to the idea.
Often a second order random walk is enough to improve results over memoryless models. In
this model, each state no longer corresponds to a node, but a visit to node α given a visit to node β.
In other words, each state is now an edge, and subsequent community detection leads to a partition
of edges. This naturally leads to overlapping clusters which often models the truth better [24] than
hard partitions. As an example, the concept of Markov stability has been extended to incorporate
second order memory [35], which was used to perform in-depth analysis of the US airport traffic
==PAGE:24==
14
1 Introduction
network, and multiplex community detection.
One of the most successful flow-based algorithms called Infomap will be used in this thesis to
detect temporal communities. A detailed description of its workings and performance is given in
Sec. 2.
Block-model based
The model of a random graph is widely used to construct generative network models incorporating
community structure. These go by the name stochastic block models (SBM) and are popular within
the social sciences [7] and widely used in the graph clustering literature [20]. The general idea is to
use the maximum likelihood framework to fit the parameters of the model to make inference about
community structure (for a good introduction to maximum likehood theory see Ref. [36]). The
parameters of a generic SBM are
1. The number of vertices n
2. A partition M into m communities
3. An m × m matrix P of inter-community edge probabilities
The network is then generated by connecting any two vertices α ∈Ci and β ∈Cj with proba-
bility Pij. A special case of this is the planted partition model in which diagonal and off-diagonal
elements of P are equal to a constant p and q. This implies that all groups have similar intra- and
inter-community edge density. This makes for a simpler, yet useful model, which is less computa-
tionally heavy, and has a likelihood function with fewer local maxima.
Bickel and Chen have shown how maximizing proﬁle likelihood with respect to only the partition
M performs well on real and simulated data compared to modularity maximization [37].
With regard to the desirable properties of graph clustering algorithms, there also exist extensions of
stochastic block models to include community overlap [38] as well as an SBM framework to model
multiplex networks [16].
Community detection is alarge andrapidly developingdiscipline, receivingcontributions from
statistics, social science and physics communities. There are many approaches, a representative part
of which have been presented here. One might use modularity to assess the outcome of maximizing
Markov stability, or use Markov stability as a quality function for a partition created by modularity
maximization. At the end of the day, one method searches for densely connected substructures
and the other attempts to retain flow, and the optimal method depends on the application. While
comparative studies exist, there is not yet any clear consensus about what method is superior under
which circumstances. The definitive guide to graph clustering does not exist, and most likely never
will, due to the constant flux of novel applications.
==PAGE:25==
1.3 Time development section
15
1.3
Time development section
It is the nature of many real-world networks, that edges are not continuously active. Phone, SMS,
Facebook and proximity networks are examples, where interactions are instantaneous or active for
short amounts of time. Many such systems have been modelled as static networks, sometimes
through aggregating interaction counts into edge-weights, yielding interesting and useful results.
Although some information about interaction frequency may be retained in edge-weights, the
static model often discards useful of information about the dynamics taking place on the network.
For a detailed treatment of the matter, see the review paper on temporal networks by Holme and
Saramäki [13].
One example of how an aggregated network may oversimplify matters is the reachability issue.
As edges are not always active, neither are paths between vertices, and in this sense some vertices
might not even be connected at all. This has implications when, for example, modelling the spread
of disease in a network, illustrated in fig 1.6.
Figure 1.6: Illustration of the reachability issue. Edge labels indicate at which times they are active,
and the red color represents a disease spreading, starting at node A. We see how the disease never
reaches node D, contrary to what would have been the case in an the corresponding aggregated
network. Illustration from [13].
Many measures have been developed in order to analyse temporal networks, some overlapping
with those developed for general multiplex networks. Some are purely related to the temporal
dimension, such as time-respecting paths (the reachability issue) and time-persisting subgraphs.
There are various representations of dynamically changing networks, out of which the multiplex
network is the one applied in this thesis.
The multiplex representation is the one used in development of community detection algorithms
for temporal networks. Graph clustering over several layers in time presents the interesting oppor-
tunity to study at what time scales communities exist and how often or in what forms they reoccur.
Such algorithms exists both based on modularity optimization [12], stochastic block models, [16]
and Markov stability [35]. Various methods for generating random temporal graphs (apart from
==PAGE:26==
16
1 Introduction
the SBM) have also been developed, allowing for null-model comparison with various observed
quantities.
Figure 1.7:
Illustration of the estrangement. On
the left: A network at time-step t−1 and the par-
tition which maximizes modularity. One the right:
Two possible partitions after the disappearance of
one edge. The top partition actually maximizes mod-
ularity, but it estranges 8 edges, which go from being
intra-community edges of the top module to inter-
community edges. This yields an estrangement of
E = 8/51 = 0.1568. It seems more intuitive that
if the green partition of time-step t−1 indeed repre-
sents a social community, it would not split up due to
the removal of a single connection. Illustration from
[39].
One interesting method for graph clus-
tering focusing on temporal multiplex so-
cial networks was developed by Kawadia
and Sreenivasan [39].
They define the
concept of estrangement between to sub-
sequent network layers in time. Estrange-
mentisequaltothefractionofedgeswhich
from layer t-1 to layer t stop sharing com-
munity. This notion is illustrated in Fig.
1.7, showing, on the left, a network at
time t-1 and its optimum partition accord-
ing to modularity.
On the right, two
possible partitions of the graph at time t
are shown, after the disappearance of one
intra-community edge. While splitting the
community in two maximizes modularity,
it increases estrangement.
In stead of simply maximizing modular-
ity in each layer and matching communi-
ties across layers, Kawadia and Sreenivasan
pose a constrained optimization problem
maximize
M
Q(M)
subject to
E(M) ≤δ
(1.7)
where Q is modularity and δ is a positive
constant between 0 and 1. The intuition
behind estrangement confinement is the
observation that the abrupt splitting of a
community that may result from maximiz-
ing a quality function in individual layers,
is a poor model of actual social interaction.
The amount of allowed estrangement δ
controls the smoothness of the temporal evolution of communities. This method was used on
proximity data based on bluetooth signals, similar to the data used in this thesis, but from fewer
users and aggregated over very large time scales (weeks). The method was proven able to distin-
guish student from staff as temporal communities at the MIT Media Lab6.
6The MIT reality mining study, from which the data originates will be introduced in Sec. 3.1.
==PAGE:27==
1.3 Time development section
17
Kawadia and Sreenivasan argue that temporal community detection algorithms which only
uses information of one network layer at a time suffers from many weaknesses, e.g. large fluctu-
ation in optimal partitions between layers. As we shall see in the following chapters, it is possible
with the map equation framework to utilize information from any desired configuration of adja-
cent networks.
==PAGE:28==
18
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER2
The map equation
This section deals with the map equation, an information theoretical approach to graph cluster-
ing. The map equation, in short, provides the theoretical lower bound to the expected description
length of a infinite random walk on a network. In the following, it should become apparent to the
reader, how compression of description length and detection of community structure are, in fact,
closely interlinked. To this end, some concepts from information theory are treated, namely those
of entropy and Shannon’s source coding theorem. This is followed by a derivation of the map equa-
tion and an explanation of the algorithm which minimizes it. The derivation of the map equation
follows rather closely the first paper on the topic by M. Rosvall and C. T. Bergstrom [40].
2.1
Shannon’s source coding theorem
Claude E. Shannon, in his famous 1948 paper A Mathematical Theory of Communication [41],
posed the question:
”How is an information source to be described mathematically, and how much infor-
mation in bits per second is produced in a given source?”
In order to answer this question, we consider the abstraction of a discrete, noiseless source of in-
formation. Such a source can be thought of as generating a message, symbol by symbol, e.g. the
alphanumeric, whitespace and punctuation characters of this thesis.
In order to describe a discrete information source mathematically, Shannon shows how it may be
thought of a as Markov process of arbitrary order.
Crucial to the question of how much information a source produces is the statistical structure
of the generated symbols or states. This allows for information compression, an example of which
is the how letter ”E” has the shortest code in English telegraphy (the dot). In order to quantify
how much the statistical structure of a source may be utilized for compression, Shannon’s idea was
to define a measure of uncertainty. Given a set of n possible events occurring with probability
p1, p2, ... , pn, he argued that such a measure, call it H, should satisfy the following properties:
1. H should be continuous in pi.
2. If all probabilities are equal, pi =
1
n, H should be a monotonic increasing function of n.
This comes from the reasoning that when all events are equally likely, having more events to
chose from increases uncertainty.
==PAGE:30==
20
2 The map equation
3. If the process by which an event is chosen is broken down into two successive choices, the
original H should be the weighted sum of the individual values of H. What is meant by this
isdescribedinFig. 2.1(A),whereontheleftwechoosebetweenthreeeventswithpossibilities
p1 = 1
2, p2 = 1
3 and p3 = 1
6. On the right we first chose between the top event and the
bottom two, each with probability 1
2. If the latter occurs, we chose again with probabilities
2
3, 1
3. We require then that
H( 1
2, 1
3, 1
6) = H( 1
2, 1
2) + 1
2H( 2
3, 1
3)
(2.1)
where the coefficient on the last term is because the second choice only occurs half the time.
It can be proved that the only H satisfying these three requirements is of the form:
H = −
n
∑
i=1
pi log pi
(2.2)
where the choice of logarithm-base determines the unit of measure. The unit of information re-
sulting from the base 2 is called a bit (binary digit). A system of two stable states, such as a relay or
a magnetic spin in a hard disk, may store 1 bit. If one has N such devices, 2N states can be repre-
sented or log2 2N = N bits may be stored.
(A)
(B)
Figure 2.1: Illustration of the decomposition of choice (A) and the values that H take on for the
simple case of two event with probability p and q = 1 −p (B). Images from Ref. [41]
The quantity H was given the name entropy, adopted from statistical mechanics where it had
already been used as an uncertainty measure. Entropy satisfies a range of interesting properties,
justifying it’s role as an uncertainty function, where two of the most central ones are:
1. It holds that H = 0 if and only if all pi equal 0 except one, i.e. one event is found with
complete certainty each time an event is chosen. In other words, there is no uncertainty.
==PAGE:31==
2.2 The map equation
21
2. For a given n, entropy is maximized at H = log n when all probabilities are equal, that is,
the most uncertain situation.
These properties are visualized for the simple example where two states are chosen with probabil-
ities p and q = 1 −p, yielding an entropy of H = −(p log p + q log q) in Fig. 2.1 (B). Having
defined entropy and its properties, Shannon proved his renowned source coding theorem, which
states:
Let a source, generating symbols, have entropy H and be transmitting through a channel of capacity
C (bits per second). It is then possible to encode the signal in such a way as to transmit at an average
rate (symbols per second) up to, but no greater than C
H .
Calling the transmitting rate T, we have
H ≤C
T ,
in units:
[
bits per second
symbols per second
]
=
[
bits
symbol
]
.
(2.3)
This important result, which shall be used when deriving the map equation, states that the entropy
H is the lower limit of the average number of bits needed to encode a symbol, originating from a
source of said entropy.
Note that in the context of information theory, ’information’ is not intended to mean pieces of
knowledge which illuminate or increase certainty about a specific system. Instead, the information
in a system, is linked to the amount of bits needed to describe it.
2.2
The map equation
Let us now return to the duality between encoding an infinite random walk in an efficient way, and
detecting community structure. In doing so, we first consider how to describe a random walk on
network.
2.2.1
Communicating a random walk
Consider a random walker, transitioning between connected nodes in a network with probability
proportional to the edge weights as illustrated in Fig. 2.2 (A) (edge thickness is used to portray edge
weight). One way of communicating this random walk in binary code, is by assigning to each node
a unique codeword. The sequence of nodes traversed by the walker may then be transmitted as a
continuous string of codewords and still be unambiguously decoded by the receiver [31].
Aminimum redundancymethodforassigningcodewordswasdevelopedin1952byDavidA.Huff-
man[42]. Itsavesspacebyeffectivelyassigningtheshortestcodewordstothestates(nodes)withthe
highest visit frequency and vice versa. An example of the approach using unique node-codewords
to describe the random walk is given in Fig. 2.2 (B).
==PAGE:32==
22
2 The map equation
(C)
(B)
(A)
1111100
01011
1100
10000
0110
11011
0011
10111
1001
0100
111111
11010
10110
10101
11110
00011
0010
0000
1111101
10100
01010
1110
10001
0111
00010
1111100 1100 0110 11011 10000 11011 0110 0011 10111 1001 0011
1001 0100 0111 10001 1110 0111 10001 0111 1110 0000 1110 10001
0111 1110 0111 1110 1111101 1110 0000 10100 0000 1110 10001 0111
0100 10110 11010 10111 1001 0100 1001 10111 1001 0100 1001 0100
0011 0100 0011 0110 11011 0110 0011 0100 1001 10111 0011 0100
0111 10001 1110 10001 0111 0100 10110 111111 10110 10101 11110
00011
0000
001
11
100
01
101
110
011
00
111
1010
100
010
00
10
011
11
011
0010
010
1101
10
000
111
1100
111 0000 11 01 101 100 101 01 0001 0 110 011 00 110 00 111 1011 10
111 000 10 111 000 111 10 011 10 000 111 10 111 10 0010 10 011 010
011 10 000 111 0001 0 111 010 100 011 00 111 00 011 00 111 00 111
110 111 110 1011 111 01 101 01 0001 0 110 111 00 011 110 111 1011
10 111 000 10 000 111 0001 0 111 010 1010 010 1011 110 00 10 011
110
000
10
0001
0
1011
111
0001
Figure 2.2: A random walker on a network (A), and different schemes for describing it (B+C). It
can be seen that the coding scheme of naming each node individually (B) does a worse job of com-
pressing the bit-string describing the random walker than the scheme which allows for modular
structure (C). Illustration from [40]. The bit-strings to the left and right of the coloured arrows are
the enter and exit codes respectively.
The coding-scheme described so fardoes nothing to highlight structure in a network. However,
further compression of description length is allowed for by incorporating higher structure into the
coding scheme. If a network exhibits community structure, there will be groups of nodes where
the walker will spend a longer time before exiting. One can take advantage of this by making a par-
tition into groups, giving each group an exit- and an enter-codeword. This allows for the reusing of
node-codewordswithin a group, the price of whichis the needto communicategroup-entering and
exiting to maintain unambiguous decoding. The trade-off is then this: Increasing the amount of
clusters will allow for shorter node-codewords, while codewords that pertain to clusters (enter/exit)
will become longer and needed more often.
The optimum partition of the example network is shown in Fig. 2.2 (C) along with the new sets of
codewords for nodes and module-entering/exiting. It allows for the codewords needed to describe
the random walk to become 32% shorter, on average. The details of how to compute this is the
subject of Sec. 2.2.2.
It is seen that the definition of a group (community) in this framework is much in line with the
explanation given in Sec. 1.2: A high ratio of internal to external edges in a groups of nodes will trap
the walker, leading to a higher persistence-time of internal flow. Rosvall and Bergstrom compare,
in their papers [40, 31], the map equation framework with generalized modularity. They highlight
that there are cases where a partition might result in a large number of edges inside communities as
compared to between them, yet where these communities sustain no flow. The two methods will
thus, dependent on the network topology, produce quite different results for the optimal partition.
Computational speed and resolution limits aside, in the end it is a matter of how one wishes to
==PAGE:33==
2.2 The map equation
23
define a community.
The theoretical lower bound of the average codeword-length used to describe the random walk
is given by the Shannon entropy. It yields non-integer values of bits which one might argue is
of little practical use for communication purposes, however, the purpose here, is to assess which
partition most effectively compresses the information of the infinite random walk.
The expression used to evaluate compression-efficiency and the subsequent optimization will be
treated in the sections that follow.
2.2.2
Derivation of the map equation
Since we are making use of a two-level code to describe a random walk, the entropy is a weighted
sum of two contributions: The average number of bits necessary to describe movement between
modules and within modules respectively. Given a partition M, of n nodes into m modules, the
average number of bits per step needed to describe the random walker is
L(M) = q↷H(Q) +
m
∑
i=1
pi
⟳H(Pi)
(2.4)
Each term will now be explained. Terms coloured red and blue will pertain to between- and within-
module movements respectively.
The entropy of between-module movement H(Q), is weighted by the per step probability that the
random walker steps from one module to another q↷. This probability depends on the partition-
ing and is given by
q↷=
m
∑
i=1
qi↷
(2.5)
where qi↷is the per step probability of exiting module i. Normalizing these exit-probabilities by
q↷,yieldsaprobabilitymassfunction(PMF)overmstates,eachcorrespondingtoexitingamodule.
By invoking Shannon’s source coding theorem [41] on this PMF, the entropy of between-module
movement is obtained
H(Q) = −
m
∑
i=1
qi↷
∑m
j=1 qj↷
log
(
qi↷
∑m
j=1 qj↷
)
.
(2.6)
Now let us turn to H(Pi), the entropy of movement within the module i, and its weight pi
⟳.
This weight is the total per step probability of the random walker either stepping on a node inside
module i, or exiting it:
pi
⟳= qi↷+
∑
α∈i
pα
(2.7)
where pα is the visit frequency of node α. By counting ”module-exiting” as a within-module state,
and coding it as such, the length of the exit-codewords are suitably adjusted according to the fre-
quency of their use. The actual computation of pα and qi↷is explained in Sec. 2.2.3. As before,
==PAGE:34==
24
2 The map equation
a PMF can be constructed, this time through normalizing within-module state probabilities (node
visit and module-exit probabilities) by pi
⟳. With this, the entropy of within-module movement
becomes
H(Pi) = −
qi↷
qi↷+ ∑
β∈i pβ
log
(
qi↷
qi↷+ ∑
β∈i pβ
)
(2.8a)
−
∑
α∈i
pα
qi↷+ ∑
β∈i pβ
log
(
pα
qi↷+ ∑
β∈i pβ
)
.
(2.8b)
As we see, this lower limit for the average codeword-length for nodes (and the exit-code) in module
i, is split into the contribution of the exit-codeword in Eq. (2.8a), and that of the node-codewords
in Eq. (2.8b).
With the individual terms of the map equation in place, let us turn to its computation and mini-
mization.
2.2.3
The Infomap algorithm
Firstly, note from Eq. (2.5) - (2.8), that the map equation depends only on two quantities, namely
node visit frequencies pα and exit probabilities qi↷. Before steps can be taken towards finding a
partition that decreases the description length, these must be computed.
Node visit frequencies
In order to obtain the ergodic node visit frequencies (node visit frequencies of an infinite random
walk) one needs the between node transition probabilities.
It may occur to the reader that some nodes might posses no links, or similarly in a directed graph,
that a node is a sink. In either case, there is no probability flow from these nodes and the random
walker would be stuck, so to say, if it should find itself there. To circumvent this problem, a small
probability τ of teleporting to any node in the network is introduced, and thus, every element of
P will be non-zero. The random walker is now a random surfer (like that of the google PageRank
algorithm [43] ).
To summarize: At each step, the random surfer either teleports with probability τ, or follows an
outgoinglinkwithprobability1−τ. Whenfollowinganoutgoinglink, itdoessowithprobabilities
proportional to the link weights wαβ
pαβ =
wαβ
∑
β wαβ
.
(2.9)
If the node on which the random surfer finds itself has no outgoing links, it teleports with proba-
bility 1.
The node visit frequencies are found by power method 1. The probability flow between the nodes
can be formulated as a state transition matrix P, containing the transition probabilities. An initial
distribution vector v = n−11 (where 1 is the unit vector) is chosen, and by multiplication with
P until convergence, a steady state is reached.
1For a synopsis of different methods for obtaining the steady state distribution of a Markov chain, see [44]
==PAGE:35==
2.2 The map equation
25
Exit probabilities
The exit probability qi↷of module i is comprised of the probability of being in i and teleporting
away, and being in i and exiting by means of a link. This sums to
qi↷= τ n −ni
n −1
∑
α∈i
pα + (1 −τ)
∑
α∈i
∑
β /∈i
pαpαβ
(2.10)
where ni is the number of nodes in module i. With this we are able to evaluate the map equa-
tion. The Infomap algorithm, which seeks to find the optimal partition that minimizes description
length, first performs a deterministic greedy search and then refines its solution through simulated
annealing.
Greedy search
First, each node is assigned its own module. Then, the merging of the two modules which results in
thelargestdecreaseindescriptionlengthiscarriedout. Thisisrepeateduntilmergingonlyresultsin
a longer description length. This approach was inspired by Clauset et al. [45], who used increasing
modularity instead as merging criterion.
Simulated annealing
Simulated annealing is an non-greedy optimization technique, that is, it accepts merging of mod-
uleswhichdonotcompressdescriptionlength. Itisdevelopedtoavoidgettingstuckinlocaloptima.
In short, the criterion for a accepting a merge is not only dependent on the Shannon entropy but
also on a time-dependent contribution. This term goes to zero as number of iterations increases
and at some point, only greedy merges are made once again. This approach has proven capable of
refiningthemodularity-basedgreedysearch[46]anditsimilarlyimprovestheresultoftheInfomap
algorithm up to several percent [40].
2.2.4
Multiplex Infomap
A key strength of the map equation framework is the easy generalization to community detection
in multiplex networks [47].The novelty is that the random walker now needs to be able to move
between layers. There are two ways to allow for this. One is enabling a ”relaxed step” to happen
with some probability κ, during which the walker is free to move along edges attached to its current
nodeinanylayer. Theother,whichisemployedinthisthesis,isbyengineeringinterlayer edges. The
advantage of the former is that it is a handy and easy-to-implement way of including information
from different layers. The advantage of the latter is of course that explicitly designing the coupling
between layers, allows for a more intricate description of how interlayer dynamics play out.
Figure 2.3 shows a two-layer temporal network and a random walk taking place on it. Let us,
as an example, insert interlayer links between each node and itself in the subsequent time-slices of
weightwinter. Then,ateachstep,therandomwalkerswitcheslayerwithprobabilitywinter/ ∑
β wαβ
where α is the current node of the random walker. Effectively, this is just another uniplex network,
and the mechanics are as described above. That means that modules can be identified across layers,
==PAGE:36==
26
2 The map equation
t2
t1
ε
θ
α
β
γ
δ
ζ
η
ε
θ
α
β
γ
δ
ζ
η
Figure 2.3: A random walk (green) on a multiplex network with interlayer weights (red) between
each node and itself at the adjacent layer.
and thus include the same node at two, or more, different times. The interpretation of this is a con-
tinuation of module in time. How interlayer-edge engineering affects community detection, will
be studied in detail in Sec. 4.
2.2.5
Performance and implementation
Oneofthefirstcomprehensive,systematicpaperstocompareperformanceofcommunitydetection
algorithms was written by A. Lancichinetti and S. Fortunato [48]. Pointing out that algorithm-
testing in the literature was commonly on small and unrealistic networks, they performed a struc-
tured comparison of a wide array of graph clustering algorithms. Using benchmark networks, pre-
viously developed by the authors together with F. Radicchi (LFR-networks [49]), partitions were
assessed measuring robustness, resolution limits and ability to identify synthetic clusters. In the
study, Infomap was deemed the most efficient graph clustering method; a result echoed in other,
more recent comparative analyses [50].
As mentioned, all two-level community detection algorithms suffer from a resolution limit.
Loosely speaking, when a network is very large, e.g. if we attempted to identify social communi-
ties over the entire two years of data, the module-codebook has to hold a lot of codewords. At
some point these unique community-codewords would become so long that the partition of op-
timal compression would involve merging communities that ought to be separate. In a recent pa-
per, T. Kawamoto and M. Rosvall derive an analytical estimate of the resolution limit of the map
equation [25]. They find that the resolution limit of the map equation is set by total number of
inter-community edges, as opposed to the resolution limit of modularity is set by the total number
of edges in a graph. They go on to show how this makes the map equation outperform modu-
larity. For these reasons, along with Infomaps fast computation speed and ability to generalize to
multiplex community detection, the map equation framework was deemed the optimal choice for
purposes of this thesis.
A C++ implementation of the Infomap algorithm is available at mapequation.org taking as
input for multiplex community detection the Pajek multilayer .net format. The code for running
the infomap algorithm and analyzing results may be found at github.com/dhsvendsen/thesiscode.
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER3
The SensibleDTU data - an initial
exploration of temporal development
This chapter is an exploration of the network data at hand. First, it describes how the data was col-
lected and compares with studies similar to the SensibleDTU experiment. The remaining chapter
deals with the problem of determining an optimal timescale over which to aggregate data into a
single layer of a multiplex network.
3.1
SensibleDTU and similar studies
The SensibleDTU study was launched to address the problem of single-modality of social data.
Common to many computational social science studies, is that data is usually gathered through a
singlechannel[51]. TheSensibleDTUdatasetdoesnotsufferfromthisweakness, containinghighly
time-resolveddataonface-to-faceinteraction, Facebookactivity, callandtext-messagerecords, GPS-
location, and Wi-Fi logs. Furthermore the dataset features questionnaires developed by scholars
of economy, sociology and psychology. Approximately 1000 smartphones were handed out to
freshman students at DTU, gathering data over 2.5 years; the largest and most dense longitudinal
study of its type to date.
Studies of the same ilk include, for example, the Reality Mining study [52], where mobile phone
data from 115 individuals at MIT was collected with high temporal resolution. The Locaccino
study[53]usedalocationcheck-inapplicationlinkedtoeachindividual’sFacebookprofile, allowing
analysis of how locational data may predict Facebook friendship. In total, 489 participants were
subscribed to the application for periods ranging from a week to several months. As a part of the
SocioPatternscollaboration1 onestudyequipped 243 primary schoolstudentsand10 teacherswith
radio frequency identification (RFID) badges [54], measuring proximity over the course of 2 days.
The study was aimed at understanding how infectious diseases spread in a school and used a high
measurement resolution of 20 seconds. Another study under the SocioPatterns project distributed
RFID badges at a large conference [55].
1Similar datasets gathered by the SocioPatterns collaboration may be found at http:// www. sociopatterns. org
==PAGE:38==
28
3 The SensibleDTU data - an initial exploration of temporal development
3.2
Building a temporal multiplex network
Whenbuildingatemporalmultiplexnetworkoneneedstounderstandhowthedataevolvesintime
in order to decide how big a time-window of data each layer should comprise. In this section the
temporal development of the data is analysed by plotting individual network layers and computing
network measure for different network-timescales.
The smartphones of the experiment scanned for Bluetooth signals (∼10 m radius) every 5
minutes from the moment of being turned on, which is thus the highest resolution of the data at
hand. The asynchronous measurements were binned into set time-windows within which data-
points were given the same time-stamps.
The majority of participants authorized collection of Facebook data comprising data on individ-
uals: birthday, education, friend lists, groups, hometown, interests, likes, location, political views,
religion, statuses, and work, as well as interaction data: friend requests and approvals, commenting
on stories of others, tagging and liking in images and posts, and posting on the walls of others. The
data of the latter category, provided with timestamps by Facebook’s own API, was used to build
the networks. All types of interactions were treated as equally important when determining edge-
weights.
The timestamped data was acquired from the API of the SensibleDTU server as .csv files, as
Figure 3.1: A high-level illustration of the workflow for preprocessing the data.
illustrated in Fig. 3.1. After cleaning the data for duplicates and non-experiment users, the ques-
tion of how to construct a multiplex temporal network presents itself. The first challenge of this
process is to decide the length of the time-windows ∆, within which data is aggregated in a sin-
gle network-layer. In order to retain as much information as possible, the number of interactions
counted between two users α and β in such a time-window is recorded as the weight of edge αβ.
For networks built from proximity data, this means that the maximum edge-weight occurring in a
layer is equal to ∆[min]/5 min. In the Facebook-network there is no such upper limit on edge
weights. The python code used to bin the raw data and construct networks may be found at
github.com/dhsvendsen/thesiscode.
The overarching objective is to identify communities and their development in time, using the map
equation framework. With regards to this, there are two possible pitfalls: Choosing the temporal
resolution too high, or too low. In choosing a very high resolution, one risks exaggerated sparseness
of each individual network. In this case, the random walker has no community structure to explore,
and has to reconstruct communities from series of dyads in time. Furthermore, the large number
of resulting individual layers increases computational complexity. The risk of aggregating interac-
==PAGE:39==
3.2 Building a temporal multiplex network
29
tions over too much time, lies in not being a able to distinguish individual temporal communities
(provided they exist). Although temporal information is retained in the edge-weights, community
structure can become obscured as this example from the proximity network will show: Consider an
occurrence of a meeting between participants {α, β, γ, δ}, followed by a similar meeting between
{γ, δ, ϵ, ζ}. Let us suppose that both meetings last Tmeet and the timescale of one network-layer
is relatively large, say ∆≫2Tmeet. Then the resulting graph will hold a connected component
with {α, β, γ, δ, ϵ, ζ} (in which the edge αβ has double the weight of other edges), which is likely
to be considered one big community.
Networks snapshots of the proximity data
A first, useful approach to deciding a meaningful timescale, is to plot the networks resulting from
different values of ∆. Such plots are shown for the proximity data in Fig. 3.2, where the used time
windows are chosen to start both at 00:00 and 11:00 am.
3 Feb. ′14
Midnight
∆= 5 min.
∆= 15 min.
∆= 30 min.
∆= 1 hour
3 Feb. ′14
11 a.m.
Figure 3.2: Networks snapshots, made from aggregating data over timescales ∆=5 min, 15 min, 30
min and 1 hour. These time windows of Bluetooth data from the 3rd of February 2014, are chosen
to start at midnight (top) and at 11 am (bottom) to illustrate the difference in the network at its
quietest and at its busiest.
For this Monday, the first of the DTU spring semester 2014, we note that expanding the time-
window does little to change the network, due to the lack of activity. The dyads, a lot of which
persistallthroughthenight, arepotentiallycouplessharingaroom, orindividualssleepinginneigh-
bouring dorm-rooms. In the daytime, the proximity network comes alive, exhibiting densely con-
nected subgraphs at the smallest timescale. As more data is aggregated, the network comes together
up to the point that a giant component emerges for ∆= 1 hour. It is seen that 4-5 different
densely connected groups are joined by edges extending from relatively few nodes. As the 1-hour
time-window borders on noon, an explanation could be study-related interactions breaking up in
favour of lunch-related ones, causing a mixing of groups.
==PAGE:40==
30
3 The SensibleDTU data - an initial exploration of temporal development
Networks snapshots of the Facebook data
Networks snapshots derived from the Facebook data are shown in Fig. 3.3. The same values of ∆
and starting points of 00:00 and 11:00 a.m. are chosen for the sake of comparison. We notice as
before a difference in activity between day and night, but it is also clear that the Facebook network
develops at a much slower rate than the proximity network.
It is clear that the data on Facebook interactions yields trivial networks for timescales ∆< 1 hour.
Activity on the network is often driven by a range of reactions to a post by some actor, and it is hard
to predict in which hours activity will spike. The phenomenon of sudden increases in network
activity is also known as bursty behaviour and we will also see examples of this below where the
development of different network measures in time is computed. Furthermore, interaction which
is actually going on between, say, seven actors in the comment fields of a post, and ought to appear
as a connected component, will appear as a star2 structure (see Fig. 3.3 bottom).
3 Feb. ′14
Midnight
∆= 5 min.
∆= 15 min.
∆= 30 min.
∆= 1 hour
3 Feb. ′14
11 a.m.
Figure 3.3: Networks snapshots, built from aggregating Facebook data over timescales ∆=5 min,
15 min, 30 min and 1 hour. As above, the data is from the 3rd of February 2014, and the time-
windows start at midnight (top) and at 11 am (bottom).
In Fig. 3.4, the Facebook network is plotted for time-windows of 4 hours and 1 day, and we
start to see more interesting structure. Most notably, we see that the basic motifs that the network
consists of are dyads and stars.
At this point, having achieved an initial understanding of the data, it is important to address
the fundamental differences in the two types of networks treated in this thesis:
1. Interaction at the smallest time scale: We might say that face-to-face interaction is continuous
in nature, as opposed to that occurring on Facebook, which could be considered discrete.
The physical act of being in someone else’s proximity is one that takes place over time. On
the other hand, we might imagine the largest interaction subgraphs of the daytime Facebook
2In graph theory, the mentioned graph, which consists of one node connected by single edges to d other nodes, is
known as a d-star or a K1,k bipartite graph
==PAGE:41==
3.2 Building a temporal multiplex network
31
∆= 4 hours
∆= 1 day
Figure 3.4: Networks snapshots, built from aggregating Facebook data from the 3rd of February
over timescales ∆= 4 hours (starting at 11 am) and ∆= 1 day.
networks as coming about through an upload of a picture, tagging initially 6 friends. This
emergence of connections is much more immediate in nature.
2. Temporal development of the network: When people are intentionally close (as a opposed
to random passing) they are often close enough for Bluetooth sensors to recognize all the
present participants. This means that the potential triangles between the nodes of such a
meetup are much likely closed. As data is aggregated over longer time-windows, the network
becomes more dense as people break up their meetings and begin to participate in other
meetups.
In the Facebook network, the manifestation of triangles is much more rare. This is due to the
fact that interaction proceeds more or less as follows: A story, picture or link is uploaded, and
in time, other people log on to Facebook and view these packets of information which they
then chose to either comment on, ”like”, or share on their own profile-wall. The resulting
subgraphs are the star structures of Fig. 3.3.
3. Interpretation of temporal communities: Forproximitynetworks, theinterpretationofacom-
munity in time is rather clear. It is intuitive to think of it as an intentional meeting (hangout)
between people, persisting for some amount of time. Detection of these is made easy, both
for the eye and for algorithms, by the fact that they often occur as completely connected sub-
graphs.
From the interactions taking place on the Facebook network, one might infer communities
that exchange information more than others. Whether to label these as ”friend-groups”,
professional collaborators, or diametrically opposed politics debaters is, however, uncertain.
The realcomplication lies is the verywide variationin timescales overwhichinteractions take
place. Communities of heated debate might span only a few periods of some set ∆, while
communities of people who frequently share information about, say, Tour de France, might
last for longer periods of time.
==PAGE:42==
32
3 The SensibleDTU data - an initial exploration of temporal development
Proximity network measures
While visually studying the networks is informative, quantitative measures provide a more com-
pact source of information about their development in time. The Monday of February 3rd is now
inspected from the perspective of network measures recorded at different timescales.
4
8
12
16
20
0
50
100
150
200
250
No. of nodes
Layer timescale
= 5 min
= 15 min
= 30 min
= 1 hour
(A)
4
8
12
16
20
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Mean degree
(B)
4
8
12
16
20
Hour of day
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Mean clustering coeff.
0
(C)
Figure 3.5: Network measures developing in time, de-
rived from the proximity data of Monday the 3rd of
February. For different timescales of multiplex-layers
∆the plots show: (A) Number of nodes, (B) Mean
degree, and (C) Mean clustering coefficient.
Consider first the number of nodes
in a network-layer, built over some time-
window ∆. As nodes are only considered
when they have a link (a Bluetooth sensor
recognizing a signal), the number of nodes
in a layer can be seen as a measure of ac-
tivity. First and foremost, it is interesting
to notice, in Fig. 3.5 (A), the discrepancy
in number of nodes in 5 min and 1 hour-
layers. In the night-hours between Sun-
day and Monday, the difference in activ-
ity across timescales is much smaller than
it is in the Monday evening hours. This is
because the interaction is stable and long-
term in the night (see the dyads of Fig. 3.2).
Ontheotherhand,meetingsintheevening
aremorefrequentandshorterlived, sothat
’casting a bigger time net’ captures more in-
teractions. This conclusion will be corrob-
orated through visualisations in Sec. 4.1.
The largest discrepancy in activity between
5 min and 1 hour-timescales is at lunch
for two reasons. The first reason is the
turnover that happens as people leave their
classes and go for lunch.
While really
at the smallest timescale people interact
in smaller groups during the lunch break
(12:00-13:00), the fact that students start
moving around all over campus causes
morediversebluetoothsignalstobepicked
up over the timescale of 1 hour. The sec-
ond reason is that while students that have
had morning classes are likely to stay on
campus, there is an influx of students com-
ing for afternoon classes, increasing the
overall activity in the dataset.
The mean degree in the network-layers of
different timescales, shown in Fig. 3.5 (B),
exhibits no increase after lunch, implying.
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Building a temporal multiplex network
33
It is clear that lectures (officially 8:00-12:00 and 13:00-17:00) are the main driving force of in-
creased ’student density’. We see only inside lecture hours is there really a large discrepancy in mean
degreebetweenlayertimescales. Thiscanbeexplainedbythefactthatpeoplearestationaryonshort
timescales (e.g. solving problems with group-members), but as time progresses go to the bathroom,
go for coffee or consult other groups for advice on a maths problem. In the evenings, the mean de-
gree shows the presence of small meetings, with little variation across timescales. This is due to the
separation of meetings, meaning that the probability of additional Bluetooth sensors passing each
other does not increase with the timescale.
Recall that the clustering coefficient of a particular node is the fraction between number of trian-
gles and possible triangles involving that node. We see in Fig. 3.5 (C), that the clustering is fairly
constant over time-scales and as indicated before, clustering is driven by lecture attendance. From
the mean clustering coefficient it is also possible to observe the social interaction taking place after
lecture hours.
By plotting the network measures considered thus far over the course of a week (averaged over
the weeks of February) there are additional lessons to be learned about the structure of the prox-
imity data. In Fig. 3.6, from the number of nodes, it appears that activity on Friday afternoons is
lower than the average afternoon. It is however stable, at a higher rate than the ’night-baseline’ for
a period stretching into Friday evening and Saturday morning. Looking at the mean degree and
clustering coefficient in that time period, it is apparent that people are gathering, presumably in a
non-academic setting, at high density. From considering the network measures in the weekend, it is
clear that the lecture-structure is the main driver of node activity in the data. Even so, the weekends
see a relatively high level of clustering.
0.0
0.5
1.0
0
5
10
0
100
200
300
Monday
Tueday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
mean clustering coeff.
mean degree
no. of nodes
Figure 3.6: Development, over the course of a week, of no. of nodes (bottom) mean degree (mid)
and mean clustering coefficient (top) for proximity network layers of ∆= 1 hour. The values
computed are averaged over 3 weeks of February, i.e. each point in the plot is an average of 3 data
points.
==PAGE:44==
34
3 The SensibleDTU data - an initial exploration of temporal development
Facebook network measures
Weturnnowtothenetworkmeasures, computedfortheFacebookdataofMonday3rdofFebruary
2014, using different time windows ∆. Figure 3.7 shows the activity in the network as reflected in
the number of nodes. Note that the weight of a single edge, as mentioned earlier, has no upper
bound and thus the number of nodes is less indicative of activity than in the proximity network.
It is apparent that there is no clear, predictable structure, apart from a decrease in activity in the
night hours. What appears to be a more stable level of node activity in the evening hours, does not
generalize to all days, as can be seen below in figure 3.8.
4
8
12
16
20
Hour of day
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
No. of nodes
Time slice length
= 5 min
= 15 min
= 30 min
= 1 hour
(A)
4
8
12
16
20
Hour of day
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Mean degree
(B)
Figure 3.7: Network measures developing in time, derived from the Facebook data of Monday the
3rd of February. For different timescales of multiplex-layers ∆the plots show: (A) Number of
nodes, (B) Mean degree.
InFig. 3.7(B)weseethatthemeandegreeislowerinthenight, indicatingthatFacebookactivity
is more dyadic at night. This is opposed to the more ’expansive’ interaction taking place in the day,
where for example stars begin to emerge. Assuming that the Facebook network for ∆= 1 hour
is composed predominantly by d-stars, and d-paths (as shown in Fig. 3.3 bottom right), we might
make some basic assumptions about what the mean degree will be. The mean degree of a d-path
Pd and a d-star Sd are respectively
⟨k⟩(Pd) = 2(d −2) + 2
d
= 2(1 −1
d)
and
⟨k⟩(Sd) = d + d
d + 1 =
2
1 + 1
d
(3.1)
Computing these for different values of d as shown in Tab. 3.1, it seems reasonable that the mean
degree for ∆= 1 hour stabilizes around 1.5 in the day as it does in Fig. 3.7 (B). The mean degree is
set to 0 if a network-layer is empty. From this it appears that ∆= 5 min is the longest period that
goes by without any activity in the network.
Observing Fig. 3.4 it clear that the adjacency matrix of the networks resulting from binning the
Facebook data in time windows ∆< 1 day are very sparse. Plotting the clustering coefficient over
the course of a day has therefore shown not to be meaningful, and is omitted. Plotting the mean
degree and number of nodes over the course of a week, it is interesting to see how activity patterns
diverge from those of the proximity network.
==PAGE:45==
3.2 Building a temporal multiplex network
35
d
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
⟨k⟩(Pd)
1
1.33
1.5
1.6
1.66
1.71
1.75
1.77
1.8
⟨k⟩(Sd)
1.33
1.5
1.6
1.66
1.71
1.75
1.77
1.8
1.82
Table 3.1: Mean degree for d-paths and d-stars for different values of d. Note that P3=S2 and that
P2 is a dyad.
The activity in the Facebook networks does not seem to be driven by lecture structure (this is pre-
sumablyagoodthing), astheweekendseesthesameaveragedegreeandnumberofnodesfor∆= 1
hour networks. The amount of time that the network is active is considerably larger than for the
proximity network, with only short ’down periods’ in the morning hours. In general, it can be
said that the network is less active in the first half of a given day (a.m. hours) than in the last (p.m.
hours), but predicting the individual spikes in activity is no trivial matter.
0
25
50
0
1
2
3
Monday
Tueday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
mean degree
no. of nodes
Figure 3.8: Development, over the course of a week, of no. of nodes (bottom) mean degree (top)
for Facebook network layer of ∆= 1 hour. The values computed are averaged over 3 weeks of
February, i.e. each point in the plot is an average of 3 data points.
Concluding on single-layer timescales
Apart from using a priori knowledge about how communities interact based on experience, an
important question to ask is “what resolution is desirable when visualising these communities?”.
For the case of the proximity network, the question of how people flow in and out of communities
is an interesting one, which is best investigated by using the highest possible resolution. We have
seen that the networks of the smallest timescales in fact exhibit considerable community structure
and so, the timescale used for single layers of the proximity multiplex network from now on will be
∆= 5 min.
The Proximity data analysis of this and the following chapter was in the early stages of this thesis
performed using all data points irrespective of received signal strength indicator (RSSI). Proximity
data ranging up to 10 m, however, is often not telling of actual face-to-face interaction. It was
shown by Sekara and Lehmann that weak links (low RSSI), compared to strong ones have a lower
probability of being observed again and are less indicative of online friendship [56]. For this reason
==PAGE:46==
36
3 The SensibleDTU data - an initial exploration of temporal development
data-points with an RSSI corresponding to distances > 1.5 m were filtered out. All plots and
analysis is performed using filtered data unless explicitly stated.
In the case of the Facebook data, the networks resulting from ∆< 1 hour were shown to be
trivial and even for ∆= 4 hours there was not much network to explore. Real structure begins
to emerge however, for ∆= 1 day. While face-to-face interactions are synchronous in nature, ie.
the people interacting are doing so at the same time, the Facebook interactions are asynchronous.
Furthermore they take place on a wide variety of timescales. For these reasons, interactions are
aggregated into network layers each spanning ∆= 1 day.
While links of the proximity data are undirected in nature, the links in the Facebook data, could be
represented as directed. This is not done due to the structure of the network. Since so many nodes
have degree 1, directing the edges would in many cases turn nodes into sinks, trapping flow and
making community detection using Infomap infeasible.
Degree and weight distributions - Facebook data
The topology of the 5 minute network layers of the proximity data varies greatly according to the
time of day and since the highest possible time resolution is used, all edge weights are equal to 1.
For the 1 day Facebook networks however, each layer more or less corresponds to a cycle in the data
as can be seen from Fig. 3.8, and edge weights vary. It is therefore meaningful to compute degrees
and edge weights of all 1 day networks in February and plot their distributions.
100
101
102
k
100
101
102
103
104
frequency
(A)
10 2
10 1
100
w
100
101
102
103
104
(B)
Figure3.9: Frequencyplotsoverallone-day-networksoftheFebruary2014data. Figures(A)and(B)
show degrees and link weights distributions respectively. Note that the weights are linearly mapped
to the interval [0; 1].
The edges of the Facebook network are weighted by the number of interactions, and normal-
ized so that the maximum edge weight is wmax = 1. It is interesting to see that both the degree
and weight distributions are, to a rough approximation, linear in a log-log plot. The reason for the
heavy tail of the degree distribution we have already seen, namely the nodes in the center of d-stars.
In large-scale networks the nodes in the tail are considered hubs, because they make it possible to
traverse the network in relatively few steps, but in this case they do not serve that role. Rather,
they make up the vertebrae of a central spine that spans the giant component of the network. The
==PAGE:47==
3.2 Building a temporal multiplex network
37
heavy tail of weight distribution most likely comes from the irregularity in how communication
takes place on Facebook. An ’image-tag’ might spawn a 100-message long debate, or might lead to
no reaction at all. The overall average degree of ⟨k⟩= 2.547 and average weight of ⟨w⟩= 0.02245
will be used in the following chapter when engineering the interlayer edge weights.
==PAGE:48==
38
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER4
Temporal community detection and
visualisation
In this chapter, temporal community detection is carried out, first on the proximity data, then on
the Facebook data. For both types of multiplex networks, an interlayer weighting scheme is con-
structed incorporating a parameter determining interlayer coupling strength. The effect of tuning
this coupling parameter is investigated through various quantitative measurements of the resulting
partition. Finally the found communities are explored through different types of visualizations,
shedding light on the results from different sides.
4.1
Proximity network
Having decided on the appropriate timescale of a single layer in the temporal network, in this case
∆= 5 min, we now turn to the question of how to build the coupling between layers. The weight-
ing scheme of the interlayer links determines the random walker’s propensity to move between lay-
ers thus detecting a continuity in community-appearance. Consider two network-layers li and lj
where subscripts denote their order in the sequence of subsequent layers, i.e. if |i−j| = 1 they are
adjacent. We then need an interlayer-weight function which reflects the timescale on which a com-
munity can be considered itself. What is meant by this is best illustrated with an example: Three
actors are having beers together, forming a triangle in layer li, when suddenly one of them goes to
the bathroom and another to the bar, dissolving the triangle. At a point in time, corresponding
to the layer li+2, they reconvene and continue their social get-together. For Infomap to detect a
single continuous meeting, there needs to be a sufficiently strong coupling of the nodes in layer li
with themselves in layer li+2. On the other hand, if they met the following day it would sensible
to consider this gathering a different one. In summary, we need a function g(li, lj) decaying with
time-difference (layer-distance), leading to the choice of
g(li, lj) =
{
c × 2−|i−j|
if |i −j| = 1, 2, ..., 10
0
if |i −j| > 10
(4.1)
asaninterlayerweightfunction. Otherbasesofexponentiationthan2wouldserve, whichischosen
due to an initial intuition that each layer of separation ought to translate into a halving of interlayer
link strength. The prefactor c is a parameter which, as mentioned, will be tuned in order to analyse
the structure resulting from different levels of interlayer coupling strength. The cut-off at |i−j| >
10 is to reduce computational complexity.
==PAGE:50==
40
4 Temporal community detection and visualisation
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
cluster lifetime
c = 0. 08
c = 0. 5
c = 2. 5
avg.
k
k
k
0
1
2
3
4
5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
 cluster size
avg.
0
1
2
3
4
5
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
clusters found (total)
k
c (units of      )
Figure 4.1: Measures used to interpret the partitions
resulting from different values of parameter c of the
interlayer weight function. The multiplex network
comprises 5 minute layers of the proximity data from
Monday the 3’rd of February. Red markers denote
the parameter choices which will be used for further
visualization below.
The issue with graph clustering algo-
rithms that allow for tuning of parameters,
is that the network seldom offers a natural
way to determine the optimal parameter-
value. We will thus scan over a range of c,
and rely on a priori knowledge about the
community structure to find such an opti-
mal value.
The sum of the weight on the interlayer
edges impinging on a given node is equal
to 2 ∑10
n=1 c
( 1
2
)n = 1.996c ≈2c, when
there are 10 layers both before and after it
in time. Since the chosen timescale of a sin-
gle network-layer equals the highest resolu-
tion, all intra-layer edges are of weight 1.
Therefore, the average probability for the
random walker to stay in its current layer
at a given step is about pstay =
⟨k⟩
2c , where
⟨k⟩is the mean intra-layer degree. This
serves as an indication of which order of
magnitude of c to investigate, and is also
used as unit when plotting.
In order to interpret the partitions result-
ing from different values of c, the average
community lifetime (layers over which a
grouppersists),theaveragesizeofsaidcom-
munities, and how many individual ones
were found.
This is shown in Fig.
4.1
for Monday the 3rd of February. We see
that when c approaches 0, the average clus-
ter life-time is low and the number of clus-
ters found is high. This is simply because
the interlayer coupling is almost gone, and
thus Infomap detects individual commu-
nities in each layer and sees no continua-
tion. Indeed for c = 0, the lifetime of
all groups equals 1. This corresponds to
running Infomap on each layer individu-
ally, except for the fact that the codebook
for modules has to hold names for all the
single-layer clusters.
On the other hand, when the interlayer
links are very strong, the flow runs mostly between the layers, as opposed to within them. It is
==PAGE:51==
4.1 Proximity network
41
seen that the average cluster size approaches 1, meaning that each student makes up his/her own
community. The number of clusters found approaches the number students active in the network
that particular day, and the mean lifetime approaches the average number of layers in which stu-
dents were active.
Neither of the limiting cases explored are a sensible choice for c, and the answer must lie some-
where in between. The next step in trying to understand the best way to cluster the network is to
visualise the detected communities.
Having run Infomap and found a partition of the multiplex network, i.e. the communities present
in a given layer and its constituent members, the first step is to assign to each temporal commu-
nity an individual colour. While the RGB values might be unique, the eye may have a hard time
distinguishing the colours used when there are many different communities, but this is helped by
placement-context as will become apparent. With this, the output can be turned into various kinds
of visualisations. The three ways to visualise the results implemented in this thesis will now be
explained.
Temporal Communities (TC) view: This approach plots communities on a canvas where their po-
sition on the vertical axis marks their placement in time, and their width (along the horizontal axis)
denotes the size of the community. The placement along the horizontal axis holds no information
and communities are simply placed where they fit. In this way, it is possible to visualise how each
community emerges, fluctuates in size, and disperses.
In a given layer, in this visualization, a community is a block of width proportional to its number of
members, call it a c-block. The location of each such block is determined according to the following
algorithm:
for layer in multiplex do
for community in layer do
if community present in any previous layer then
center c-block below the center of previous c-blocka
else
place c-block randomly in a free position on the canvas
end
end
end
aThis is the case if the community occurs in the layer immediately above. If the community ’disbands’ for a layer or
more and reunites, this location might be unavailable. In this case the block is also placed in a random new location.
Whether the output is feasible to visualise depends on the number of communities found, but
for one day in the proximity network, for example, it is quite informative. This visualisation was
made in D3 using the template of student who worked on visualizing temporal communities in
proximity data. All images shown using the TC-view in this thesis may be found in an interactive
browser version at dhsvendsen.github.io.
Temporal Actors (TA) view: Another way to visualise results is by putting emphasis on the ability
==PAGE:52==
42
4 Temporal community detection and visualisation
to follow each participant of the study individually. In this visualisation, time is on the vertical axis
again, but each column corresponds to an actor. Colours denote cluster affiliation at a given time-
step, while layer inactivity is shown as white.
The visualisation is built up as follows: First the Na most active actors are chosen to be displayed
as participation-columns. Na serves to make the visualization fit in a reasonable amount of space,
but also to hide actors to appear in only a few time bins. Columns are ordered by first labelling each
actor with the ID of the community in which it participates the most. The left-most columns are
then occupied by the actors labelled with the most popular community (havingthe highest number
of labelled actors) and so on in descending order towards the right of the canvas. This visualization
was made with python’s own matplotlib library.
Ego-network: In order to understand what a partition into communities looks like from the per-
spective of a single node, one might draw the network that a particular actor sees in a given time
step. This visualisation is constructed according to the following steps: All nodes that the central
actor has shared an edge or a community with across all layers are plotted as a background with
high transparency. Their positions are computed with a force-directed placement algorithm [1],
using the edge weights of the ego-network aggregated over all layers. For each network-layer, nodes
sharing an edge with the central actor are highlighted in dark grey, and nodes sharing community
with it are given the predetermined colour (community-colour overwrites grey). This view offers
insight into the network structure of individual communities. This visualization was made using
the python igraph library.
We consider first the effects of using different interlayer coupling strengths to build the mul-
tiplex networks, from the perspective of the TC-view. Figure 4.2 shows subsets of the temporal
communities discovered using the interlayer weight parameters c = 0.08 ⟨k⟩, 0.5 ⟨k⟩and 2.5 ⟨k⟩,
highlighted in Fig. 4.1. The data, once again from Monday, February 3rd 2014, is seen here from
threeverydifferentperspectives. Fortheverystronginterlayercoupling, peopleareconsideredtheir
own communities and put in singlet groups as long as they are active in the network. The results of
a weak interlayer coupling parameter is that ’continuity’ is poorly detected. It is possible to detect
small temporal communities, for example two people chatting alone in a room. If they are passed
by another group however, generating edges in a single layer, an entirely new module is most likely
detected as these edges have a relatively strong weight in this configuration. This configuration
is characterized by the spontaneous emergence and dissolving of rather large communities, which
does not appear likely.
There is no objective way to determine an optimal value of the parameter c; in fact it could be
argued that there are time periods where community detection algorithms should be more sen-
sitive to continuity in social interaction (stronger interlayer weights) than in other periods. The
detected communities resulting from choosing c = 0.5 ⟨k⟩are deemed the most natural out of
the many configurations inspected during the course of this thesis-work. We now explore the ob-
servations that may be made using this configuration, many of which are easily confirmed by any
DTU-student, lending validity to the results.
The TC-view of communities discovered using c = 0.5 ⟨k⟩, are shown in Fig. 4.3. It shows
that the biggest communities appear within lecture hours, which is true. We can also see subsets
of lecture-time communities going for lunch together, and people meeting at lunch to proceed to
==PAGE:53==
4.1 Proximity network
43
whatispresumablylectures, aswell. Manylargelecture-timecommunitiesemergeordissolveabout
halfway through lecture periods both mornings and afternoons. This agrees well with the typical
DTU structure of splitting classes into approximately 2 hours of lecturing and 2 hours of problem
solving. In the morning hours there are dyads and triads which are either couples or neighbours in
dorms, living sufficiently close. In the evening, meetings with high variance in lifetime appear.
c=0.08
c=0.5
c=2.5
k
k
k
Figure 4.2: TC-view of communities detected in the proximity data, using different strengths of
interlayer coupling. The data of Monday the 3rd of February 2014 is used to make multiplex net-
works with interlayer weight parameters c = 0.08 ⟨k⟩, 0.5 ⟨k⟩, 2.5 ⟨k⟩. Each community is rep-
resented as polygons with their own colour. The number of communities is too high for unique
colouring but an attempt is made. The visualisation spans Monday midnight to Tuesday midnight,
and grey lines denote, from top to bottom, the hours 8:00, 12:00, 13:00 and 17:00. The temporal
communities shown are only subsets of the detected communities, and since the positioning and
colouring algorithms are not deterministic, the comparison should be restricted to the average sizes
and lifetimes (vertical polygon length).
==PAGE:54==
44
4 Temporal community detection and visualisation
Figure 4.3: TC-view of temporal communities found in the Bluetooth data of Monday the 3rd
of February 2014. The multiplex network is constructed using an interlayer weight parameter of
c = 0.5 ⟨k⟩. Each community is represented as polygons with their own colour. The number of
communities is too high for unique colouring.
Inspecting temporal communities with the TA-view offers another perspective on our results.
As the effects of choosing c too small or too large have been sufficiently treated using the TC-view,
the reader is referred to Appendix A for comparative TA-plots. We focus here on the results for
c = 0.5 ⟨k⟩as shown in Fig. 4.4. What is novel here is the possibility to see how actors switch
groups during the day. It is, for example, possible to observe members of the main (left-most,
turquoise) lecture cluster reconvene, one pair in the afternoon, another pair in the evening. The
second main clump of temporal actor columns (second from the left, dark blue in morning lecture
rows) is seen to more or less dissolve at lunch, only to reconvene after lunch a another community.
This community then slowly thins out and disintegrates into sub-communities. It is possible to ob-
serve people participating sporadically in a few different communities before joining a large cluster
in the second lecture period.
People that sleep in close proximity to each other will be mainly described by their ’night’ commu-
nities and thus placed next to each other. These dyads and triplets are often seen to reconvene in
==PAGE:55==
4.1 Proximity network
45
the evening after lecture hours, typical of both people living in the same dormitory and couples. To
the far right in the TA-view are the actors who have little contact with other people of the experi-
ment (on this day), and no long-term affiliation with any cluster. Whether these people are alone
or interacting with friends outside the experiment is unknown.
It is quite clear that the ordering of the columns plays a large role in determining what interpreta-
tions follow from the visualization. Even so, we have seen that there is general information which
may be inferred from this way of assessing a graph partition.
Figure 4.4: TA-view of communities detected in the Bluetooth data of February 3rd 2014 using
interlayer weight parameter of c = 0.5 ⟨k⟩. The 350 most active actors are plotted, each corre-
sponding to a column, changing colour according to community membership in the relevant time-
bin (row). The number of communities is too high for unique colouring. The visualisation spans
Mondaymidnight to Tuesdaymidnight, and againthegreylinesshowthehours8:00, 12:00, 13:00
and 17:00.
Let us now inspect some of the detected temporal communities from the perspective of a single
person. This person isgivenanickname: student A,as weshalllookat herFacebookego-networkas
well and her 128-bit hash value is too long to repeat. The Ego-view of Student A for the multiplex
==PAGE:56==
46
4 Temporal community detection and visualisation
network of February 3rd 2014 constructed using c = 0.5 ⟨k⟩is plotted in Fig. 4.5. There are some
brief interactions in the morning and around lunch, but the majority of community interaction
takes place in the afternoon-lecture time window. It is reasonable to believe that Student A is doing
group exercises from 12.55 to 16.55 with 4 (or more) group members. It is possible to observe
fluctuations in which group members Student A is the closest to, and time periods of 10, 15 and
20 minutes where she is removed from the community.
As for the Ego-view resulting from a coupling strength of c = 0.08 ⟨k⟩is actually identical to
that of Fig. 4.5. The main reason for this is most likely, as we see, that the only other people from
the experiment which Student A interacts with are from her afternoon class. This allows flow to
be efficiently trapped within this community throughout the afternoon network layers. In the
Ego-view using c = 2.5 ⟨k⟩, Student A is simply seen as a single node in her own community all
throughout the day (see Appendix B).
5.45
11.55
12.00
12.50
12.55
13.10
13.25
13.30
13.35
13.50
14.00
14.10
14.15
14.20
14.25
14.30
14.40
14.45
14.50
15.00
15.20
15.25
15.30
15.35
15.40
15.45
15.50
15.55
16.00
16.05
16.10
16.15
16.20
16.25
16.30
16.35
16.40
16.45
16.50
16.55
Figure 4.5: Ego-view of Student A, showing her interactions over the course of Monday, February
3rd 2014. The multiplex network is constructed using c = 0.5 ⟨k⟩. Each individual ego-network
is labelled with the timestamp of the network-layer.
==PAGE:57==
4.2 Facebook network
47
4.2
Facebook network
0
2
4
6
8
10
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
avg. cluster lifetime
s = 0. 05
s = 0. 75
s = 4. 95
kw
kw
kw
0
2
4
6
8
10
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
avg. cluster size
0
2
4
6
8
10
s
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
clusters found (total)
kw
(units of      )
Figure 4.6: Measures used to interpret the partitions
resulting from different values of parameter c of the
interlayer weight function. The multiplex network
comprises 5 minute layers of the proximity data from
Monday the 3’rd of February. Red markers denote
the parameter choices which will be used for further
visualization below.
In the previous chapter, the single-layer
timescale of ∆=1 day was decided upon.
In order to come up with an interlayer
weighting scheme which takes into ac-
count the structure of the multiplex net-
work, we again take a look at a typical se-
quence of interactions in the FB-data: A
person releases a piece of information for
everyone to see. People are then free to re-
spond as they wish, but there is no strict
time limit on doing so, in the way that an
SMS imposes a time limit on the respon-
dent to reply. An interlayer weight func-
tion g, which highlights the significance
of continuous day-to-day interactions, but
also gives importance to interactions oc-
curring over longer timescales, is therefore
made:
g(li, lj) =
{
s
if |i −j| = 1
s/3
if |i −j| > 1 (4.2)
where s plays the same role as c did in the
interlayer weight function for the proxim-
ity network. In the Facebook network lay-
ers of ∆= 1 day, the average degree is
⟨k⟩= 2.547. The edges are weighted
by the number of interactions, and nor-
malized so that the maximum edge weight
wmax = 1. The average weight in a net-
work layer is ⟨w⟩= 0.02245. The aver-
age weighted degree is therefore ⟨kw⟩=
⟨k⟩⟨w⟩≈0.057 which will be the units
of the parameter s.
Running the multiplex Infomap algo-
rithm on the Facebook network built with
a range of different values s, the number
ofcommunitiesdetected, andtheir average
lifetime and size, is plotted in Fig. 4.6. As
seen in the proximity network, when inter-
layer links are too strong, the detected com-
munities consist of single actors, and the average cluster lifetime approaches the average number of
==PAGE:58==
48
4 Temporal community detection and visualisation
layers (days) that an actor is active in the network.
The only metric which does not follow the trends observed for the proximity network is the average
cluster size. While for the proximity network, the average cluster size had a global optimum around
a low value of c, it falls almost monotonously with increasing s for the Facebook network. In other
words, the largest communities are found when flow is constrained to the individual network lay-
ers. One explanation is the stars. Stars are rather efficient at trapping flow since the random walker,
when standing in the middle sees considerably more edges that are in the star, than edges exiting it.
As s increases, flow begins to run into the adjacent network-layer, and the nodes that make up a
star might find structures that are more flow-retaining using the new interlayer connections. This
trend is seen In Fig. 4.7.
s = 0.05 ⟨kw⟩
s = 0.75 ⟨kw⟩
s = 4.95 ⟨kw⟩
Figure 4.7:
Results of graph clustering for different interlayer weight strengths. The plotted
network-layer of the Facebook multiplex corresponds to the 5th of February 2014. Nodes are
coloured according to community membership. The figure shows how the tendency to find large
intra-layer communities falls with inter-layer link strength.
The results of community detection are visualised in TC-view in Fig. 4.8, the rows of which
correspond to 1-day networks and span the month of February 2014. As mentioned, a temporal
community in the Facebook network is not easy to interpret since types of interactions and their
timescales vary tremendously. Even so, the visualisation gives a good overview of the kind of clus-
ters that are found in the Facebook data. We can observe the described trend that communities
become smaller with increasing values of s.
==PAGE:59==
4.2 Facebook network
49
s=0.05
s=0.75
s=4.95
kw
kw
kw
Figure 4.8: TC-view of communities found in the Facebook multiplex networks constructed using
s = 0.05 ⟨kw⟩, 0.75 ⟨kw⟩, 4.95 ⟨kw⟩. Each network-layer spans ∆=1 day, and the visualization
covers the month of February 2014. Only subsets of the communities detected for each value of s
is shown, but with the Facebook network this is sufficient to get at understanding of the results.
==PAGE:60==
50
4 Temporal community detection and visualisation
For the Facebook network, the TA-view, shown in Fig. 4.9, is a very informative way to visu-
alise temporal community detection. Once again we see the weakest interlayer coupling leading to
a change of community for actors every day, and the strongest coupling leading to single-node com-
munities persistent in time. Interestingly, for s = 0.75 ⟨kw⟩we actually see sizeable communities
persisting throughout the month of February. On further inspection of such a community, e.g. the
largest (leftmost, yellow), one finds that there is a large day-to-day fluctuation with regard which
participants the community is made up of. As activity patterns are highly individual on Facebook,
and communication through it does not demand a high temporal continuity, this does not seem
so surprising after all.
One could argue that the clusters which persist all throughout February could maybe have been
found by applying conventional graph clustering to the aggregated network. The point, however,
is that with this we are enabling the study of the fluctuation of communities in time.
s = 0.05 ⟨kw⟩
s = 0.75 ⟨kw⟩
s = 4.95 ⟨kw⟩
Figure 4.9: TA-view of communities detected in the Facebook data of February 2014, for different
interlayer weight parameters. The 250 most active actors are plotted, each corresponding to a col-
umn, changing colour according to community membership. Each row corresponds to a ∆=1 day
network. Again, the amount of communities is too high for unique colouring.
.
==PAGE:61==
4.2 Facebook network
51
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
Figure 4.10: Ego-view of Student A, showing her interactions on Facebook throughout the month
of February. The multiplex network is constructed using s = 0.05 ⟨kw⟩. Each individual ego-
network is labelled with day in February the interactions are gathered from. For this weak inter-
layer, Infomap detects the different day-to-day interaction patterns of Student A’s, as individual
communities.
==PAGE:62==
52
4 Temporal community detection and visualisation
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
Figure 4.11: Ego-view of Student A, where s = 0.75 ⟨kw⟩is used to build the multiplex. This
configurations detects Student A being part of a main cluster, switching occasionally to a secondary
cluster.
==PAGE:63==
4.3 Recurring communities
53
4.3
Recurring communities
Having detected meaningful temporal communities in the proximity network, we now explore
what might be learned from performing dynamic community detection over more than a single
day and studying the temporal patterns in which they emerge.
Once graph clustering in a temporal multiplex network is performed, we are left with commu-
nities which appear, span some number of network-layers, and then dissolve. At this point, it is in-
teresting to ask: “Do dissolved communities re-emerge at a later point in time, and are they similar
in composition?”. In order to address this question, the period of data analysed with the tempo-
ral Infomap algorithm, is expanded from a single day to the entire month of February 2014. Using
theinterlayerweightingparameterthatpreviouslyyieldedthemostmeaningfulresultsc = 0.5 ⟨k⟩,
the average lifetime and size of detected communities are found to be 5.31 and 3.01 respectively.
This is in good agreement with the values found using c = 0.5 ⟨k⟩on the Monday data (see Fig.
4.1), indicating that the algorithm is not affected by a resolution limit.
Now, consider a network where each node corresponds to a temporal community. Define
’membership’ of a given actor as the act of having been a part of a community in one network-layer
or more. Edges are then constructed between two communities Ci and Cj with weights equal to
the Jaccard Similarity between their respective lists of members: Wij = Ci ∩Cj/Ci ∪Cj. Hence-
forth, networks of this kind will be denoted community-networks and the modules resulting from
performing graph clustering on them as Recurring Communities (RCs). It is exactly the RCs that
are interesting to study, as they are composed of temporal communities of high similarity. Since
it is trivial to match up dyads in time, the focus here is narrowed to communities of more than 2
people; except for in Fig. 4.13, which is a comparative plot.
When building the community-network, a similarity-threshold Wmin is set, above which the weight
of an edge needs to be in order to be included. This is incorporated in order to filter unimportant
information out for better results, but also for ease of plotting and computation speed.
The community-network is built for different similarity thresholds and analysed using the single-
Wmin = 0.25
Wmin = 0.5
Wmin = 0.75
Figure 4.12: The community-network, without dyad-communities, for different values of thresh-
old similarity. Node size is proportional to the size of the temporal community it represents.
Colours indicate the RC’s found by the single-layer Infomap algorithm.
==PAGE:64==
54
4 Temporal community detection and visualisation
layer Infomap algorithm. We see in Fig. 4.12 how the network becomes less dense as the threshold
value is increased. To get an idea of the amount of discovered temporal communities that are dis-
carded, see Tab. 4.1.
Wmin
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1
Edges
31794
9456
3116
1341
1276
Nodes
3361
2488
1204
596
536
Table 4.1: Numbers of Nodes (temporal communi-
ties)andEdges(similaritylinks)decreaseasthecut-off
increases.
In attempting to study recurring commu-
nities, setting Wmin presents a trade-off
between clustering together communities
that are too dissimilar to be recurrences
of each other, and throwing away useful
data. In order to evaluate the RCs found
for different values of Wmin, we consider
the weighted adjacency matrix associated
with the nodes of each RC. Recalling that
weights between the nodes correspond to similarities (nodes which originally communities in the
temporalmultiplex), wemaycallsuchamatrixS asimilaritymatrix. Ameasureofhowsimilarcom-
munities within an RC of size NRC are, can then be constructed from the Frobenius norm divided
by NRC.
||S||F N =
1
NRC
v
u
u
t
NRC
∑
i,j
|Si,j|2
(4.3)
Figure 4.13 shows the average ||·||F N over all detected RCs, and the average RC-size is computed for
different values of Wmin. It is trivial that the average similarity matrix norm goes to 1 as Wmin goes
towards 1. We see that intra-RC similarity jumps as Wmin increases from 0.30 to 0.35 and from
0.65 to 0.70 when dyads are considered. Since these intervals contain the fractions 1/3 and 2/3,
the jumps are likely due to similarity-edges between community constellations such as {α, β} ↔
{α, β, γ} and {α, β} ↔{α, β, γ, ϵ, δ, ζ}. We see that the average RC size, and variation in size,
dropsquicklywithWmin andstabilizesaround5and9whenaccountingfor,anddisregardingdyads
respectively.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Wmin
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
avg. ||S||FN
w/ dyads
w/o dyads
(A)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Wmin
10
30
50
70
90
110
avg. C size
R
(B)
Figure 4.13: Measures computed to assess the effect of Wmin on detected RCs: (A) Average Frobe-
nius norm of the similarity matrix of RCs divided by their size and (B) Average size of detected RCs.
Shaded areas mark 1 standard deviation.
==PAGE:65==
4.3 Recurring communities
55
We see that the average || · ||F N jumps for Wmin = 0.75; more precisely from 0.88 to 0.96.
Since we want ensure that RCs indeed represent recurring meetings of the same people, all RC used
for further analysis are found using a cut-off of Wmin = 0.75.
Understanding the social contexts of recurring communities
Having identified recurring communities (RCs), we try to explore what might be learned about the
recurring meetings that it represents. In order to understand whether all the students making up an
RC are equally engaged in the meetings, a participation proﬁle may be constructed. For a group that
reconvenes T times over the course of February 2014, a participation-profile is a bar plot showing
for each member of the RC, how many of the T individual temporal communities he/she took part
in. It is also illustrative to plot the number of actual network layers each member was present in
while being a part of any temporal community belonging to the RC. These two types of participa-
tions profiles are shown in Fig. 4.14 (A) and (B) respectively for one particular RC. It is interesting
to see that the RC has three members participating in more than 10 hours, or 120 network layers
of ∆=5 min., while the rest participate in less than 5 hours.
Similar gaps in participation profiles were found by Sekara and Lehmann [57] who investigated re-
curring meetings in the SensibleDTU proximity data by simply matching connected components
in time. They sampled a large number N participation profiles from a multivariate uniform dis-
tribution and computed the gap of each for use as a null model. Defining significance of a gap
in a participation profile as it being larger than the mean of N simulated gaps plus one standard
deviation, they found significant gaps in the majority of the participation profiles they investigated.
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
com. participation
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
layer participation
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
random participation
(A)
(B)
(C)
Figure 4.14: Participation profiles of one RC found using a cut-off of Wmin = 0.75: (A) Showing
number of temporal communities each member has participated in, (B) Showing number of 5 min.
network layers each member was a part of the RC, (C) Showing one random participation profile
sampled from a multivariate uniform distribution.
In order to understand the patterns in which temporal communities appear we can make a
timeline showing when, and in what numbers the members of an RC are together. Plotting the
number of people active in the detected communities at a given time-layer we get the RC-activity
as shown in Fig. 4.15. We see that that the RC meets almost only in the afternoons and disband
before the end of a normal lecture day. Nevertheless, the RC is driven by no clear schedule, and it
is difficult to infer the nature of this relationship.
==PAGE:66==
56
4 Temporal community detection and visualisation
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
0
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28
Day of February
0
1
2
3
4
5
(B)
(A)
Figure 4.15: Activity timeline of the RC corresponding to the blue participation profile above:
(A) For the entire month of February 2014, (B) For the last week of February. The ticklabels in
(A) denote the days of February; specifically the red ticklabels mark the weekends. Small ticks on
the x-axis mark midday and vertical lines mark midnight. The thick vertical lines mark the nights
between Sunday and Monday. We see that the RC tends to appear with 2-3 participants occasional
expanding to 5, which is also indicated by the participation profile.
Observing the participation profiles of Fig. 4.16, it is clear already from the size of the RC that
it most likely is lecture-driven. Here it is apparent that the layer participation profile does the job
of filtering out the insignificant members of the RC. We are left with about twenty students that
see each other on a regular basis over the month of February.
10
20
30
40
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
community participation
10
20
30
40
0
100
200
300
400
500
layer participation
(A)
(B)
Figure 4.16: Participation profiles of one RC found using a cut-off of Wmin = 0.75, corresponding
to a group of people meeting for classes. Sub-figure (A) and (B) show the two kinds of participation
profiles discussed.
==PAGE:67==
4.3 Recurring communities
57
The activity timeline of Fig. 4.17 confirms the suspicion that the (green) RC is lecture driven.
WecanseeaclearscheduleofpeoplemeetingeveryweekonMondayandWednesdayinthemorning
lecture hours, and on Thursday in the afternoon class period. As there are no lectures with this
structure, this is most likely a group of people from the same study-line sharing both a 5 and a 10
ECTSpointclass. Wecan furthermoreseefromthe timeline thatasubsetoftheRCsometimesgoes
for lunch together, and on the first Friday of February they meet before the start of their normal
lecture hours, possibly to prepare for class.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28
Day of February
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Participants in community
Figure 4.17: Activity timeline of the RC corresponding to the green participation profile above. We
see a clear lecture driven structure.
The participation profile of the final RC which will be highlighted is plotted in Fig. 4.18. This
is a small group of 3, meeting repeatedly throughout the month of February. The social context in
which these meeting occur becomes clear when inspecting the activity timeline of Fig. 4.19.
2
4
6
8
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
community participation
2
4
6
8
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
layer participation
(A)
(B)
Figure 4.18: Participation profiles of one RC found using a cut-off of Wmin = 0.75, possible
corresponding to a group of people living in the same dormitory. Sub-figure (A) and (B) show the
two kinds of participation profiles treated.
We see that the three students meet sporadically around the month of February, but that pro-
longed meetings occur on Friday evenings and on one Tuesday evening. Whether the information
that one of the large dormitories close to DTU hosts a notorious party each Tuesday is relevant shall
remain unknown. Nevertheless, spending time together on Friday evenings is a strong indicator of
friendship, thus it seems safe to assume that these people are indeed friends.
==PAGE:68==
58
4 Temporal community detection and visualisation
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28
Day of February
1
2
3
4
Participants in community
Figure 4.19: Activity timeline of the RC corresponding to the green participation profile above. We
see a clear lecture driven structure.
ApartfromdetectingRCscenteredaroundlecturesandfriendlyget-together’s,itisalsopossible
to observe recurring communities driven by nightly and evening meetings. These types of groups
most likely share a kitchen in a dormitory. Furthermore, there are many RCs that are hard to label,
such as that illustrated in Figures 4.14 and 4.15.
This section has presented a brief exploration into how the results achieved from dynamic com-
munity detection in the multiplex proximity network may be used to investigate recurring commu-
nities. Representing data in the simplest and most elegant way is often the key to deep insight. We
have gone from flow-based method for multiplex graph clustering to decomposing the detected
communities into their constituent members and visualizing how they meet in time.
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER5
Concluding remarks
The purpose of this thesis was a comparative investigation into the temporal development of two
different social networks by means of dynamic community detection. Recalling our journey, we
have gone from raw sensor/API data to multiplex networks, and from there on to detecting tem-
poral communities with the map equation framework. In order to understand our results, the
temporal communities were visualised in different ways, easily interpretable by the eye. As a last
explorative analysis, the different social contexts of communities recurring multiple times through-
out the month of February 2014 were highlighted. These concluding remarks start with a short
summary of the contents and findings of this thesis.
5.1
Thesis outline
An overview of the extensive literature on community detection and complex networks in general
was provided, setting the background for the work of the thesis. The main approaches to commu-
nity detection treated were those based on null-models, block-models and flow-models.
Shannon’ssourcecodingtheoremwasexplained, providingtheintuitionofhowwecanmakeuseof
the statistical nature of any discrete process we wish to communicate to compress it. This facilitated
a deeper understanding of the map equation which was derived for single layer networks, describ-
ing the duality between compressing the description length of a random walk on a network, and
detecting communities. We then saw how the map equation can be easily extended to community
detection in multiplex networks.
We investigated the structure of the temporal multiplex networks resulting from the raw data
of Bluetooth sensors and the Facebook API using network snapshots and quantitative measures.
These were investigated for different timescales of data-aggregation. In doing so, we learned some
of the fundamental differences between the interactions occurring in the two channels of data.
First of all, if we at one instant in time observe a proximity link, it will invariable correspond to a
pair of people sufficiently close for their Bluetooth sensors to recognize each other. If we inspect a
link in the Facebook network, we find a single person uploading some text string, URL or image
to Facebook, intended for another person to see. The other person might see this digital message
at some point and respond to it, but the time it takes him to do so is indeterminable. In other
words, the links of the proximity network are synchronous while those of the Facebook network are
asynchronous.
We further saw that the amount of interactions pr. time unit were much higher in the proximity
==PAGE:70==
60
5 Concluding remarks
network. At the smallest time scale of ∆= 5 min. it was actually possible to pick out individual
connected components which could be interpreted as communities. The Facebook network only
showed any interesting structure for timescales ∆> 4 hours. Aggregating data over an entire day
we saw that the fundamental motif of the resulting Facebook network was the d-star, due to the
nature of how people interact on social media. We concluded on single-layer timescales of ∆= 5
min. and ∆= 1 day for constructing the multiplex networks of proximity and Facebook data
respectively.
For the proximity network an exponentially decaying interlayer weighting function was used
for coupling multiplex network layers, reflecting that the more separated interactions are in time,
the less likely they are to bespeak an actual community. The output of the multiplex Infomap algo-
rithm was interpreted by developing various modes of visualisation focusing, respectively, on the
temporal development of: 1) Communities, 2) Actor community-affiliation, 3) The ego-network
of individual actors. The effect of tuning the interlayer coupling strength was investigated, reveal-
ing an optimal value yielding meaningful results. At this configuration, dynamic community de-
tection allowed us to observe groups of people coming together around university lectures, lunch
and social evening activities.
The Facebook multiplex network was built using a step function for interlayer coupling, connect-
ing each 1-day network layer strongly to its neighbouring layers and to all other layers with a lower,
constant strength. Community detection in the Facebook network was made considerably harder
due to the different timescales on which people communicate which will be discussed in the final
section. The weakest interlayer coupling strength, practically corresponding to performing com-
munity detection on each network-layer individually, was found able to identify d-stars, but no
temporal evolution of communities. On the other hand, a stronger interlayer coupling saw the
emergence of sizeable communities persisting throughout the month of February. While these
might have been found by analysing the aggregated network, this framework enables us to visualize
how the participation of individual members fluctuates throughout the month.
Finally, in order to study recurring communities, each detected temporal community was made
a node in a community-network. The edges of this network were determined by the Jaccard Similar-
ity between communities so that running Infomap on it uncovered clusters of communities with
high participant-overlap. Plotting the participation profiles and activity timelines we observed a set
of different social contexts in which students meet. This served as an introduction to the analyses
possible once recurring communities have been identified through dynamic graph clustering.
5.2
Discussion and future work
The are two main reasons for the difficulties related to the interpretation of temporal communities
found in the Facebook network. The first is the wide range of timescales over which interaction
takes place. For example, a group of close friends might discuss their plans for the summer in a
single Facebook comment-field, writing in a sporadic bursty fashion over the course of many weeks.
Such a community is infeasible to detect. The second reason is the problem of overlap. Since it is
only possible to be one place at a time, the temporal multiplex is a fitting solution to the problem
of community overlap in proximity network. On Facebook, however, it is perfectly possible to be
==PAGE:71==
5.2 Discussion and future work
61
interacting in two or more social context simultaneously.
Seeingascommunitydetectioninmultiplexnetworksalreadyleadstooverlappingcommunities, to
the best of this authors knowledge, there has yet to emerge any literature about overlapping multi-
plex community detection. The multiplex Infomap algorithm does, however, allow for hierarchical
partitioning. This can lead to some sort of community overlap, but only in the form of communi-
ties that are subsets of larger ones. Since this is a very restrictive constraint, it is doubtful that much
could be gained from such an approach.
The most natural continuation of the work done in this thesis is by extending the analysis to
include longer periods of data. If we were to perform dynamic community detection over the en-
tire two years of data from the SensibleDTU experiment, a range of new paths of research would
open up. Identifying recurring communities on a longer timescale, we might ask “what does a be-
ginning friendship look like?”. If a group of people that had not interacted previously start meeting
often, one could measure how they start meeting with increasing frequency and under which cir-
cumstances they first met, e.g. in class. Conversely, we might study how a social tie dies. When
people no longer are bound by class or simply have grown apart, one could investigate what the
interaction pattern in the final part of the relationship looks like.
Another very interesting direction to take is inspired by the growing sub-field of computational
social science trying to predict questionnaire-derived personality traits based on mobile-phone data.
Reference [58] is an example of this, using measures of regularity, diversity, spatial behaviour, and
basic phone use. It would be interesting to introduce measures based on how people interact with
recurring communities of which they are a part. One could imagine measures such as regularity in
social meetings or social interaction in exam periods as being predictive of e.g. extroversion.
==PAGE:72==
62
==PAGE:73==
APPENDIXA
TA-view visualisations of dynamic
communities in the proximity network
This appendix holds comparative TA-plots for multiplex proximity network, built with three dif-
ferent strengths of interlayer coupling. The 350 most active actors are plotted, each corresponding
to a column, changing colour according to community membership in the relevant time-bin (row).
The number of communities is too high for unique colouring. The visualisation spans Monday
midnight to Tuesday midnight, and again the grey lines show the hours 8:00, 12:00, 13:00 and
17:00.
Weseethetrendsdescribedinthemainpartofthethesisastheinterlayercouplingstrengthincreases.
It is interesting to note that the lecture/lunch structure is visible for all coupling strengths.
==PAGE:74==
64
A TA-view visualisations of dynamic communities in the proximity network
Figure A.1: TA-view of communities detected in the Bluetooth data of February 3rd 2014 using
interlayer weight parameter of c = 0.08 ⟨k⟩.
==PAGE:75==
A TA-view visualisations of dynamic communities in the proximity network
65
Figure A.2: TA-view of communities detected in the Bluetooth data of February 3rd 2014 using
interlayer weight parameter of c = 0.5 ⟨k⟩.
==PAGE:76==
66
A TA-view visualisations of dynamic communities in the proximity network
Figure A.3: TA-view of communities detected in the Bluetooth data of February 3rd 2014 using
interlayer weight parameter of c = 2.5 ⟨k⟩.
==PAGE:77==
APPENDIXB
Ego-network visualisations
ThisappendixholdscomparativeEgo-networkplots, allpertainingtooneparticularstudent(called
student A in the thesis). The Ego-networks for both types of multiplex networks are shown, built
with three different strengths of interlayer coupling.
B.1
Student A in the proximity network
This section presents the Ego-network of Student A from the perspective of the proximity data,
showing her interactions over the course of Monday, February 3rd 2014. Each individual ego-
network is labelled with the timestamp of the network-layer.
5.45
11.55
12.00
12.50
12.55
13.10
13.25
13.30
13.35
13.50
14.00
14.10
14.15
14.20
14.25
14.30
14.40
14.45
14.50
15.00
15.20
15.25
15.30
15.35
15.40
15.45
15.50
15.55
16.00
16.05
16.10
16.15
16.20
16.25
16.30
16.35
16.40
16.45
16.50
16.55
Figure B.1: Ego-network of student A in the proximity multiplex constructed using c = 0.08 ⟨k⟩
==PAGE:78==
68
B Ego-network visualisations
5.45
11.55
12.00
12.50
12.55
13.10
13.25
13.30
13.35
13.50
14.00
14.10
14.15
14.20
14.25
14.30
14.40
14.45
14.50
15.00
15.20
15.25
15.30
15.35
15.40
15.45
15.50
15.55
16.00
16.05
16.10
16.15
16.20
16.25
16.30
16.35
16.40
16.45
16.50
16.55
Figure B.2: Ego-network of student A in the proximity multiplex constructed using c = 0.5 ⟨k⟩
5.45
11.55
12.00
12.50
12.55
13.10
13.25
13.30
13.35
13.50
14.00
14.10
14.15
14.20
14.25
14.30
14.40
14.45
14.50
15.00
15.20
15.25
15.30
15.35
15.40
15.45
15.50
15.55
16.00
16.05
16.10
16.15
16.20
16.25
16.30
16.35
16.40
16.45
16.50
16.55
Figure B.3: Ego-network of student A in the proximity multiplex constructed using c = 2.5 ⟨k⟩
==PAGE:79==
B.2 Student A in the Facebook network
69
B.2
Student A in the Facebook network
We now turn to the Ego-network of Student A from the perspective of the Facebook data, showing
her social media interactions over the course of February 2014. Each individual ego-network is
labelled with the date that the network-layer corresponds to.
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
Figure B.4: Ego-network of student A in the Facebook multiplex constructed using c = 0.05 ⟨kw⟩
==PAGE:80==
70
B Ego-network visualisations
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
Figure B.5: Ego-network of student A in the Facebook multiplex constructed using c = 0.75 ⟨kw⟩
==PAGE:81==
B.2 Student A in the Facebook network
71
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
Figure B.6: Ego-network of student A in the Facebook multiplex constructed using c = 4.95 ⟨kw⟩
==PAGE:82==
72
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
[1]
ThomasMJFruchtermanandEdwardMReingold.“Graphdrawingbyforce-directedplace-
ment”. In: Software: Practice and experience 21.11 (1991), pages 1129–1164.
[2]
John Scott. “Social network analysis”. In: Sociology 22.1 (1988), pages 109–127.
[3]
Mark EJ Newman. “The structure and function of complex networks”. In: SIAM review
45.2 (2003), pages 167–256.
[4]
Jingchun Chen and Bo Yuan. “Detecting functional modules in the yeast protein–protein
interaction network”. In: Bioinformatics 22.18 (2006), pages 2283–2290.
[5]
P Erdös and A Réyni. “On random graphs I”. In: Publ. Math. Debrecen 6 (1959), pages 290–
297.
[6]
Albert-László Barabási and Réka Albert. “Emergence of scaling in random networks”. In:
science 286.5439 (1999), pages 509–512.
[7]
Carolyn J Anderson, Stanley Wasserman, and Katherine Faust. “Building stochastic block-
models”. In: Social networks 14.1 (1992), pages 137–161.
[8]
Stanley Milgram. “The small world problem”. In: Psychology today 2.1 (1967), pages 60–67.
[9]
MarkEJNewman.“Assortativemixinginnetworks”.In:Physical review letters 89.20(2002),
page 208701.
[10]
Michael JO Pocock, Darren M Evans, and Jane Memmott. “The robustness and restoration
of a network of ecological networks”. In: Science 335.6071 (2012), pages 973–977.
[11]
Mikko Kivelä et al. “Multilayer networks”. In: Journal of Complex Networks 2.3 (2014),
pages 203–271.
[12]
Peter J Mucha et al. “Community structure in time-dependent, multiscale, and multiplex
networks”. In: science 328.5980 (2010), pages 876–878.
[13]
PetterHolmeandJariSaramäki.“Temporalnetworks”.In:Physics reports 519.3(2012),pages97–
125.
[14]
Manlio De Domenico et al. “Mathematical formulation of multilayer networks”. In: Physi-
cal Review X 3.4 (2013), page 041022.
[15]
Vincenzo Nicosia and Vito Latora. “Measuring and modeling correlations in multiplex net-
works”. In: Physical Review E 92.3 (2015), page 032805.
[16]
TiagoPPeixoto.“Inferringthemesoscalestructureoflayered,edge-valued,andtime-varying
networks”. In: Physical Review E 92.4 (2015), page 042807.
==PAGE:84==
74
Bibliography
[17]
Manlio De Domenico et al. “Structural reducibility of multilayer networks”. In: Nature
communications 6 (2015).
[18]
Lin Han et al. “Graph characterizations from von Neumann entropy”. In: Pattern Recogni-
tion Letters 33.15 (2012), pages 1958–1967.
[19]
Michelle Girvan and Mark EJ Newman. “Community structure in social and biological net-
works”. In: Proceedings of the national academy of sciences 99.12 (2002), pages 7821–7826.
[20]
SantoFortunato.“Communitydetectioningraphs”.In:Physics reports 486.3(2010),pages75–
174.
[21]
George C Homans. “The Human Group New York”. In: Harpers (1950).
[22]
RonaldSBurt.“Structuralhole”.In:Harvard Business School Press, Cambridge, MA (1992).
[23]
Mark EJ Newman. “Fast algorithm for detecting community structure in networks”. In:
Physical review E 69.6 (2004), page 066133.
[24]
Yong-Yeol Ahn, James P Bagrow, and Sune Lehmann. “Link communities reveal multiscale
complexity in networks”. In: Nature 466.7307 (2010), pages 761–764.
[25]
Tatsuro Kawamoto and Martin Rosvall. “Estimating the resolution limit of the map equa-
tion in community detection”. In: Physical Review E 91.1 (2015), page 012809.
[26]
Benjamin H Good, Yves-Alexandrede Montjoye,and Aaron Clauset. “Performanceof mod-
ularity maximization in practical contexts”. In: Physical Review E 81.4 (2010), page 046106.
[27]
Mark EJ Newman and Michelle Girvan. “Finding and evaluating community structure in
networks”. In: Physical review E 69.2 (2004), page 026113.
[28]
Alex Arenas et al. “Size reduction of complex networks preserving modularity”. In: New
Journal of Physics 9.6 (2007), page 176.
[29]
Pascal Pons. “Post-processing hierarchical community structures: Quality improvements
and multi-scale view”. In: arXiv preprint cs/0608050 (2006).
[30]
James R Norris. Markov chains. 2008. Cambridge university press, 1998.
[31]
Martin Rosvall, Daniel Axelsson, and Carl T Bergstrom. “The map equation”. In: The Eu-
ropean Physical Journal Special Topics 178.1 (2009), pages 13–23.
[32]
Pascal Pons and Matthieu Latapy. “Computing communities in large networks using ran-
dom walks”. In: Computer and Information Sciences-ISCIS 2005. Springer, 2005, pages 284–
293.
[33]
J-C Delvenne, Sophia N Yaliraki, and Mauricio Barahona. “Stability of graph communi-
ties across time scales”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107.29 (2010),
pages 12755–12760.
[34]
Martin Rosvall et al. “Memory in network flows and its effects on spreading dynamics and
community detection”. In: Nature communications 5 (2014).
[35]
VsevolodSalnikov,MichaelT.Schaub,andRenaudLambiotte.“Usinghigher-orderMarkov
modelstorevealflow-basedcommunitiesinnetworks”.In:Scientiﬁc Reports 6(2016),page23194.
[36]
Christopher M Bishop. “Pattern Recognition”. In: Machine Learning (2006).
==PAGE:85==
Bibliography
75
[37]
Peter J Bickel and Aiyou Chen. “A nonparametric view of network models and Newman–
Girvan and other modularities”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 106.50
(2009), pages 21068–21073.
[38]
PremKGopalanandDavidMBlei.“Efficientdiscoveryofoverlappingcommunitiesinmas-
sivenetworks”.In:Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences110.36(2013),pages14534–
14539.
[39]
Vikas Kawadia and Sameet Sreenivasan. “Sequential detection of temporal communities by
estrangement confinement”. In: Scientiﬁc reports 2 (2012).
[40]
Martin Rosvall and Carl T Bergstrom. “Maps of random walks on complex networks reveal
community structure”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 105.4 (2008),
pages 1118–1123.
[41]
Claude Elwood Shannon. “A mathematical theory of communication”. In: The Bell system
Technical Journal 27.3 (1948), pages 379–423.
[42]
David A. Huffman. “A Method for the Construction of Minimum-Redundancy Codes”.
In: Proceedings of the Institution of Radio Engineers. Volume 40. 1952, pages 1098–1101.
[43]
Sergey Brin and Lawrence Page. “Reprint of: The anatomy of a large-scale hypertextual web
search engine”. In: Computer networks 56.18 (2012), pages 3825–3833.
[44]
DIMITAR Radev, VLADIMIR Denchev, and ELENA Rashkova. “Steady-state solutions
of Markov chains”. In: Proceedings of the 7th Balkan Conference on Operational Research.
2005.
[45]
Aaron Clauset, Mark EJ Newman, and Cristopher Moore. “Finding community structure
in very large networks”. In: Physical review E 70.6 (2004), page 066111.
[46]
Roger Guimera and Luis A Nunes Amaral. “Functional cartography of complex metabolic
networks”. In: Nature 433.7028 (2005), pages 895–900.
[47]
ManlioDeDomenicoetal.“Identifyingmodularflowsonmultilayernetworksrevealshighly
overlappingorganizationininterconnectedsystems”.In:Physical Review X 5.1(2015),page011027.
[48]
Andrea Lancichinetti and Santo Fortunato. “Community detection algorithms: a compar-
ative analysis”. In: Physical review E 80.5 (2009), page 056117.
[49]
Andrea Lancichinetti, Santo Fortunato, and Filippo Radicchi. “Benchmark graphs for test-
ing community detection algorithms”. In: Physical review E 78.4 (2008), page 046110.
[50]
Rodrigo Aldecoa and Ignacio Marı́ n. “Exploring the limits of community detection strate-
gies in complex networks”. In: Scientiﬁc reports 3 (2013).
[51]
Arkadiusz Stopczynski et al. “Measuring large-scale social networks with high resolution”.
In: PloS one 9.4 (2014), e95978.
[52]
Nathan Eagle and Alex Pentland. “Reality mining: sensing complex social systems”. In: Per-
sonal and ubiquitous computing 10.4 (2006), pages 255–268.
[53]
Justin Cranshaw et al. “Bridging the gap between physical location and online social net-
works”. In: Proceedings of the 12th ACM international conference on Ubiquitous computing.
ACM. 2010, pages 119–128.
==PAGE:86==
76
Bibliography
[54]
Juliette Stehlé et al. “High-resolution measurements of face-to-face contact patterns in a
primary school”. In: PloS one 6.8 (2011), e23176.
[55]
Ciro Cattuto et al. “Dynamics of person-to-person interactions from distributed RFID sen-
sor networks”. In: PloS one 5.7 (2010), e11596.
[56]
Vedran Sekara and Sune Lehmann. “The strength of friendship ties in proximity sensor
data”. In: PloS one 9.7 (2014), e100915.
[57]
Vedran Sekara, Arkadiusz Stopczynski, and Sune Lehmann. “The fundamental structures
of dynamic social networks”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.04704 (2015).
[58]
Yves-Alexandre de Montjoye et al. “Predicting personality using novel mobile phone-based
metrics”. In: International Conference on Social Computing, Behavioral-Cultural Modeling,
and Prediction. Springer. 2013, pages 48–55.
