==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
June 20 2015, DTU Compute
Random Access in Grammar Compressed Strings
Rasmus David Helmer Pihl
Study no. s132435
Supervisors:
Philip Bille
Patrick Hagge Cording
Inge Li Gørtz
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
In this master thesis we will survey state of the art algorithms for
random access in strings that are compressed using a grammar. We
will show how to gain random access in a grammar compressed string
of size N in O(logN) time. The preprocessing takes O(nαk(n)) time and
space. The grammar is of size O(n) where we assume n < N. Showing
this bound is our main contribution. The other results of this thesis are
based on the article [10]. We will show how to decompress a substring
of a grammar compressed string in O(logN + m) where m is the size of
the substring to be decompressed. Further more we will show how to
do approximate string matching in a grammar compressed string us-
ing O(n(m+t(m)+logN)+occ) time. Here m is the length of the pattern
we match, t(m) is the time for our black box string matching, and occ is
the number of occurences we ﬁnd. This requires O(nαk(n) + m + s(m)),
where s(m) is the space used by the black box algorithm. Finally we
will explain how to gain random access in a tree whose balanced paran-
thesis sequence has been compressed using a grammar. That is to nav-
igate the tree while the balanced parantheses sequence is compressed.
These navigations takes O(logN) time, where N is the size of the bal-
anced parantheses.
==PAGE:3==
Master Thesis
CONTENTS
Contents
Contents
3
1
Introduction
4
2
Compression
5
2.0.1
Run Length Encoding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.0.2
Huﬀman Codes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.0.3
Ziv Lempel Compression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Grammars
8
3.1
Straight Line Program . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4
Random Access in Strings
11
4.1
Heavy Path Decomposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.2
Algorithm for Heavy Path search . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.3
Heavy Path Forrest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.4
Interval-Biased Search Trees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.5
Weighted Level Ancestor Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.6
Branching decomposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.7
Inverse Ackermann bound . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5
Substring Decompression
27
6
Approximate String Matching
28
7
Random Access in Trees
29
7.1
Tree . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
8
Conclusion
35
Bibliography
36
3
==PAGE:4==
Master Thesis
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
1
Introduction
The topic for this thesis is how to gain information from compressed strings
without doing any decompression. We will explain a way to structure gram-
mar. Using this structure, we will show how to eﬃcient gain random access
in the string it produces. Random access in a string S, is the problem of
ﬁnding the p’th character in the string S. If we have S in memory we can do
random access in constant time. However it is not always the case that the
memory can contain a string. In these cases it makes sense to compress S,
while maintaining the possibility of doing random access queries in S. An
example of a string that takes up a lot of space is a genome sequence. In
analyzing genome sequences, random access is an important tool [1].
In chapter 2 we will explain the concept of data compression. We do
this to give the reader some intuition on how data compression works. In
the next chapter 3 we will explain what a formal grammar is and how we
can use this to compress strings.
In chapter 6 we will show how to perform random access in strings that
are compressed by a Straight Line Program. First we will explain how to
gain random access by doing naive search for the character. After this we
will investigate ways to improve this search. We end up with a data struc-
ture that uses only O(αk(n)n) space for a ﬁxed k. Here n denotes the size
of the Straight Line Program used to compress the string with, and αk(n)
denotes the inverse of the k’th row of the inverse Ackermann function.
In chapter 5 we will show how to do substring decompression, by apply-
ing more structure to the grammar. In chapter 6 we will show how struc-
ture a Straight Line Program in order do approximate string matching on
the original string. In the chapter 7.1 we will show how to query trees rep-
resented by a grammar compressed balanced parantheses sequence.
The data structures that we will survey in this master thesis are from
the article [10]. The main contribution of this master thesis is the analysis
of the section of [10] that resolves around the problem of random access in
grammar compressed string on the pointer machine. The article suggests an
O(nlog∗n) bound on a data structure supporting random access in O(logN)
time. We will show how to obtain random access in O(logk nlogN) time,
where logi(n) is the logarithm applied i times to n and not multiplied. The
bound of O(nαk(n)) space is mentioned in the article, but never shown. We
describe a way to achive this. The strategy of this data structure is based on
the ideas of the article [8].
4
==PAGE:5==
Master Thesis
CHAPTER 2. COMPRESSION
2
Compression
The goal of data compression is to represent data using as little memory as
possible. There are two diﬀerent kinds of data compression lossy and lossles.
In lossy data compression information about the original data is lost when
compressed. Decompressing a lossy compressed ﬁle will then give an ap-
proximation of the original ﬁle. This is used widely in diﬀerent multimedia
ﬁles such as JPEG, mp3 etc. Lossy compression has the advantage to lossles
compression that it is possible to obtain better compression rates.
In lossles compression no data is lost compressing a ﬁle. We will go
through some diﬀerent methods for compressing data lossles. The diﬀerent
schemes we consider are quite simple, but are in fact still widely used in
diﬀerent forms.
Compressing data is all about recognizing patterns and then represent-
ing the pattern only once.
In order to write about compression in a formalized way, we begin by
intoducing the concept of compress and decompress as functions.
Deﬁnition 1. When compressing a ﬁle f we denote it compress(f ) and when
decompressing the compressed ﬁle f ′ we denote it decompress(f ′).
We can consider compress as a one-to-one function where decompress is
the inverse function. If compress is not one-to-one, we cannot decompress
the ﬁles. In order to fully understand the limitation of data compressing,
we consider the following proposition.
Proposition 1. No algorithm can compress all programs of size n to a size
smaller than n.
Proof. Assume for contradiction that all programs of size n can be com-
pressed by one algorithm. Consider all programs of size n. There are 2n
such programs. The number of programs smaller than n is:
n−1
X
i=1
2i = 2n −2
This is easily proved using induction. Hence from the pidgeon hole prin-
ciple we get that at least two programs are compressed to the exact same
sequence of less than n bits. Thus we cannot decompress these two pro-
grams since we do not know which one to decompress. Thus we obtain a
contradiction.
5
==PAGE:6==
Master Thesis
CHAPTER 2. COMPRESSION
If an algorithm could compress all ﬁles of size n, we could do this repeat-
edly and we would end up with a one bit representation for all programs,
which is of course absurd. However this is acutally patented cite??. Since no
algorithm can compress every ﬁle there exists a lot of diﬀerent compression
schemes taking advantage of diﬀerent patterns of diﬀerent types of ﬁles.
2.0.1
Run Length Encoding
Run length encoding is a simple compression scheme. It is used for data
where long sequences of repetitive sequences appear. For instance consider
the string
aaaaaaaaaaaaabbbaaaaaaaaaa
This can be represented by 13a3b10b meaning 13 a’s followed by 3 b’s fol-
lowed by 10 a’s. The new representation consists of 8 characters whereas
the original consists of 26.
RLE can be used successfully in bitmaps where the same color appears
often. For instance a picture of this page will have only two color values
and most of the pixels would be white. Thus we could represent a picture
of a page a lot smaller using RLE.
2.0.2
Huﬀman Codes
In compression we may consider the encoding of the characters. If we have a
large ﬁle consisting of only 4 diﬀerent characters we may not use the ASCII
representation for each character. The ASCII representation for a charac-
ter consists of 8 bits, whereas for an alphabet of 4 we need only 2 bits
(00,01,10,11). In order to interpret the values of a ﬁle consisting of a lot
of bits we introduce the notion of preﬁx codes. Preﬁx codes is an encoding
of the alphabet in use where for each code for a character is not a preﬁx of
an other character. When this holds we can read the ﬁle unambigously from
left to right.
A Huﬀman code[3] is an optimal preﬁx code that can be found by con-
structing a Huﬀman tree. Hufmann trees are constructed by ﬁrst counting
the number of times each character occurs in the ﬁle. Each character and
the number of occurences make up for a leaf node of our tree. Bottom-up
we make a binary tree by taking the two nodes with smallest weights and
making a new parent node with the sum of the two children as weight. Fi-
nally for each internal node we label the edge to one child 1 and to the other
child 0. For all leaf to root-paths the concatenation of the edge labels make
up the Huﬀman code for the leaf.
Example 1. Let us consider the string ababababababaac. We start by counting
the number of occurences of each character in the string. There are 8 a’s 6 b’s
and one c. This gives us the following Huﬀman-tree.
6
==PAGE:7==
Master Thesis
CHAPTER 2. COMPRESSION
15
a:8
7
b:6
c:1
0
1
0
1
We have that the Huﬀman code for a is 0 and the code for b and c are 10 and
11 respectively. The string is then 0100100100100100100011 which is 22 bits.
2.0.3
Ziv Lempel Compression
The most successful familiy of compression schemes are the one of Ziv-
Lempel. In this section we will describe the ﬁrst of their algorithms also
known as the LZ77[14]. In the algorithm we read the ﬁle F from left to
right. We output tuples of 3. When we are at character i in reading the ﬁle
we ﬁnd the longest preﬁx in F[i;m] that occurs as a suﬃx in F[0;i −1]. The
output is then the position of this suﬃx in the previous part of the string,
the length of this suﬃx and the next characterj. After this we jump to the
character right of j and repeat.
Example 2. We consider the string ababababababaac. The LZ77 factorization
is
(0,0,a),(0,0,b),(2,11,a),(0,0,c)
In the tuple the ﬁrst value is the index of the suﬃx found. The second value is
the length of the suﬃx and the third is the next character. The tuple (2,11,a) we
have the length is much longer than the suﬃx. In this case the suﬃx is recycled
until 11 characters has been reached. Hence the LZ77 also takes advantage of
the same patterns as run time encoding.
7
==PAGE:8==
Master Thesis
CHAPTER 3. GRAMMARS
3
Grammars
We all know grammars from school at some point, namely grammars for
natural languages. They are the rules for putting words together into proper
sentences. Using such grammars we can produce all the sentences of a lan-
guage. In general, a grammar is any set of rules that can produce a language,
and we can easily represent these rules in a computer. In order to do so we
need to formally deﬁne grammars.
Deﬁnition 2. A formal grammar G = (N,Σ,S,R) consists of a set of nontermi-
nal symbols N, a starting symbol S ∈N, terminal symbols Σ (sometimes referred
to as the alphabet), and some production rules R. The set of production rules is
a binary relation where the let side must contain a nonterminal.
Further more we have that N and Σ are disjoint. The set of all strings that
can be derived from the grammar G we call the language of G and denotes it
L(G).
Example 3. Consider a grammar G = (N,Σ,S,R) where N = {A,B}, Σ = {a,b},
R = {S →A,A →BA,B →ab,A →ε}, and ε denotes the empty string.
Let us give an example of a string in L(G). We start by using a rule containing
the start symbol on the left side. In this case the only where this is the case is
S →A.
Now we are left with the nonterminal A. Let us use the production rule
A →AB on A. Now we have a string of nonterminals AB. Since we must end up
with a string of merely terminals, we must use more production rules to get rid
of the nonterminals.
The A of AB we use the production rule A →ε. For B we use the rule B →ab.
Hence we are left with the string ε·ab = ab where (·) denotes concatenation of the
two strings. We can visualize the production of a string as a tree (see Figure 3.1)
where the parent node represents the left side of a production rule and child nodes
denotes the right sides of production rules. The concatenation of all the leaves
from left to right is the string that we have produced.
S
A
A
ε
B
ab
Figure 3.1: Parse tree producing the string ab using production rules from
G.
8
==PAGE:9==
Master Thesis
CHAPTER 3. GRAMMARS
The langauge L(G) is the set consisting of the empty string and the strings
ε,ab,abab,ababab,...
We can write this as L(G) = {(ab)n|n ≥0} where (ab)i denotes the string consist-
ing of i strings ab all concatenated into one string. As we can see a language does
not need to be ﬁnite.
Deﬁnition 3. A grammar G is context free if for each product rule the left side
consists of a single non-terminal symbol.
Example 3 is indeed context-free.
3.1
Straight Line Program
We will consider a particular of grammar for compressing strings. These
grammars we call Straight Line Programs. A property for Straight Line
Programs is that the language that they produces consists of a single string.
Deﬁnition 4. A straight line grammar G is a grammar where |L(G)| = 1. A
grammar G is in Chomsky Normal Form if all the production rules are of the
form A →BC,A →a, or A →ε, where A,B,C are nonterminals, a is terminal,
and ε denotes the empty string.
A Straight Line Program(SLP) S is a straight line grammar in Chomsky nor-
mal form.
When we use a grammar G to be the compressed representation of a
string S it is important that G is a straight line grammar. When this holds
we can decompress G producing the language L(G) = {S}.
We consider the size of a grammar G as the number of production rules
used to deﬁne the the grammar. The size of a straight line grammar G can
be smaller than the size of the string S ∈L(G). However, ﬁnding the smallest
such grammar is an NP -complete problem [5].
We will consider compression using a straight line programs(SLP’s). We
do this because we can transform well known compression schemes into
SLP’s using only little additional space[12, 5]. An SLP is the same as a
straight line grammar in Chomsky Normal Form.
Example 4. Consider the SLP S = (N,Σ,S,R) where we have
N
=
{X1,X2,X3}
Σ
=
{a}
S
=
X1
R
=
{X1 →X2X2,X2 →X3X3,X3 →a}
We have that the size of S is 3 as there are 3 production rules. Producing the
language L(G) is pretty straight forward:
X1
→
X2X2
X2X2
→
X3X3X3X3
X3X3X3X3
→
aaaa
9
==PAGE:10==
Master Thesis
CHAPTER 3. GRAMMARS
As we will see in the next chapter, we have that Straight Line Programs
are very structured. This structure we will use for searching and querying
strings that are compressed using SLPs
10
==PAGE:11==
Master Thesis
CHAPTER 4. RANDOM ACCESS IN STRINGS
4
Random Access in Strings
In this chapter we will show how to access the p’th letter of a string S of
size N. The string S is compressed using a Straight Line Program S of size
O(n). We will show how access the p’th character of S, in O(logN) time by
preprocessing S in O(nαk(n)) time and space. We will start by suggesting a
simple algorithm for searching a Straight Line Program(SLP). This we will
require only O(n) preprocessing, but the running time will be O(h) where h
is the height of the SLP. Next we give an alternative algorithm for searching
an SLP.
This is based on a heavy path decomposition of SLPs. For searching a
heavy path decomposed SLP, we make use of a data structure that supports
predecessor queries on each path. Doing this naively on each heavy path
requires O(n2) space. In order to obtain better space, we decompose the
heavy paths into a forest. As we do this we reduce the problem of ﬁnding
predecessors on a heavy path to the problem of ﬁnding weighted ancestor
queries. This is the problem where we have a tree T where each edge have a
weight. For a node v ∈T we would like to ﬁnd the lowest ancestor of v that
is at least d.
Finally we show how to preprocess a heavy path forrest eﬃciently in
order to solve weighted ancestor queries fast enough to obtain the running
time of O(logN) for random access in S.
In order to get a notion of compression using SLP’s consider the follow-
ing example.
Example 5. Let us consider the straight line program S that consists of the fol-
lowing production rules.
X7
→
X6X5
X6
→
X5X5
X5
→
X4X3
X4
→
X1X2
X3
→
c
X2
→
b
X1
→
a
This grammar produces the string abcabcabc which gives us N = 9, and n = 7
since there are 7 production rules in S. Hence we consider the string abcabcabc
compressed by S.
We have that S is a grammar, and for this grammar we can make a parse
tree. The root of this tree is the starting rule of S and the leaves form the string
11
==PAGE:12==
Master Thesis
CHAPTER 4. RANDOM ACCESS IN STRINGS
X7
X6
X5
X4
X1
a
X2
b
X3
c
X5
X4
X1
a
X2
b
X3
c
X5
X4
X1
a
X2
b
X3
c
X7
X6
X5
X4
X3
X2
X1
a
b
c
Figure 4.1: Left: The parse tree T of S. Right: The DAG representation T of
the parse tree T of S
from left to right make up the uncompressed string. The size of the parse tree is
always greater than the size of the original string. The compression that we can
achieve using SLP’s is based on the fact that we can represent the parse tree T
smaller than the actual tree using repetative occurences of subtrees in T . This we
can represent using a directed acyclic graph(DAG) see 4.1.
In order to search an SLP S for the p’th character, we need to introduce
the concept of size(v) for the nonterminals of S.
Deﬁnition 5. For a nonterminal v ∈S we have that size(v) is the number of
characters in the string induced by the Straight Line Program starting in v.
Note that size(v) is the same as the number of leaves in the subtree T (v)
of the DAG-representation of S. From this point we will consider Straight
Line Programs as their DAG representation. This is because all the struc-
ture from SLPs that we use for our data structures, are found also in the
corresponding rooted DAGs. This will ease the notation as we make use
of well-known expressions such as nodes and leaves instead of nontermi-
nals and terminals. The problem of random access in S is now the problem
of ﬁnding the p’th leaf from left to right in the DAG T . We will let S(v)
deonote the substring of S that is induced by subgraph T (v).
Assume that we store all the sizes of the nodes in T . Then the naive
procedure starting at the root goes as follows:
1. If p is less than the size of the left child continue the search in the left
child for p.
2. If p is greater than the size of the left child u, continue the search in
the right child v for p −u.
The preprocessing is quite simple.
Proposition 2. For a rooted DAG T , we can calculate the sizes of all the nodes
in O(n) time where n is the number of nodes in T .
12
==PAGE:13==
Master Thesis
CHAPTER 4. RANDOM ACCESS IN STRINGS
Proof. Assume we have the DAG T . Initialize each node to have size 0 ex-
cept the leaves that have size 1. This takes O(n) time. Next we increment
the sizes of each parent of v with the size(v) bottom-up. This we can do
because of the relation
size(v) =
X
v′∈child(v)
size(v′)
Hence we can calculate the sizes of all the nodes in a DAG using linear time
and space.
It is easy to see that the worst case for this kind of search is O(h) where h
is the height of T . The problem about this, is that the height of an SLP may
be the same as the size the SLP. Hence the worst case running time for this
procedure is O(N).
Example 6. Consider the SLP deﬁned in 5. Let us say we search for the fourth
character of S. We would then start out by ﬁnding sizes of the substrings induced
by each node of the parse tree. This gives us the following sizes.
Node v
size(v)
X7
9
X6
6
X5
3
X4
2
X3
1
X2
1
X1
1
The search then starts at the root X7 where we can see that the substring of the
left child X6 is of size 6 and the substring of the right child is of size 3. We then
continue our search in the left child because 4 is smaller than 6. In X6 we see
that 4 is greater than the size of the left child substring. Hence we continue in
the right child X5 of X6 and search for to 4 −|S(X5)| = 1 (here we use |S(X5)|
because it is the left child of X6). In the same way we continue our search going
left to X4 and ﬁnally left again to end up in X1 and returning the chararacter
”a”.
Our goal is now to show how we can search an SLP smarter. We will
make use of a decomposition of a rooted DAG T . Using this we will speed
up the query by doing a fast search in each part of the decomposition.
4.1
Heavy Path Decomposition
In this section we will use the sizes deﬁned in the previous section to de-
compose the DAG T . The decomposition that we make is a so called heavy
path decomposition. It is deﬁned in the following way.
Deﬁnition 6. For all nodes u in a rooted DAG T we mark the edge to a child v
as heavy if it is the child of u greatest of size. If two children are of the same size,
13
==PAGE:14==
Master Thesis
CHAPTER 4. RANDOM ACCESS IN STRINGS
only one of the edges is marked as heavy. If an edge is not heavy we mark it as
light.
We consider only the nodes that are connected purely by heavy edges as beeing
on the same heavy path.
For each node in a heavy path decomposed tree we deﬁne heavy(v) to be the
heavy child of v.
A path v1,v2,...,vk starting in v1 ending in leaf vk is called a heavy path
suﬃx iﬀheavy(vj) = vj+1 for j = 1,2,...,k −1.
This deﬁnition of heavy path decomposition diﬀers from the one used
normally. Heavy path decompostions are usually deﬁned by the sizes of the
subtrees and not just by the number of leaves. Also heavy path decomposi-
tions are normally deﬁned on rooted trees and not on rooted DAGs.
The construction of is pretty simple once the sizes are found.
Proposition 3. A heavy path decompostion of a rooted DAG T can be done in
O(n) where n is the number of nodes in T .
Proof. Suppose we are given a rooted DAG T of n nodes. From Proposition
2 we have that we can ﬁnd the sizes of all nodes in O(n) time. Mark all the
edges as light. For each node do a linear search for the heaviest child and
mark the edge to this as heavy. This gives us a total of O(n) time to do a
heavy path decomposition.
Example 7. The SLP of Example 5 is heavy path decomposed in the following
way.
X7
X6
X5
X4
X3
X2
X1
a
b
c
Figure 4.2: DAG representation of the derivation tree. The red edges are
heavy and the black. edges are light
The heavy path suﬃxes of the DAG in Figure 4.2 are X7,X6,X5,X4,X1,a
and X2,b and X3,c.
4.2
Algorithm for Heavy Path search
In this section we will describe an algorithm for searching a a heavy path
decomposed DAG. The idea is to choose the correct light child when in a
heavy path P . If we can do this eﬃciently, the total running time will im-
prove. For searching for the right light child on a heavy path, we introduce
the concept of light edge-sequences.
14
==PAGE:15==
Master Thesis
CHAPTER 4. RANDOM ACCESS IN STRINGS
Deﬁnition 7. For a heavy path suﬃx a left size sequence l0,l1,...,lk we have lj is
the accumulated sizes of the left light children from level 0 to j of the heavy path
suﬃx v1,...,vk added 1. We deﬁne l0 to be 1. Similar for the right size sequence
r0,r1,...,rk we have rj is the accumulated size of the light right children at level
j of the heavy path suﬃx added 1.
Example 8. Let us consider the DAG of Figure 4.2. The left light sequence
for the heavy path suﬃx X7,X6,X5,X4,X1 is 1 for all the nodes in the suﬃx
because there are no left light edges on this path. The right light sequence is
r0 = 1,r1 = 4,r2 = 7,r3 = 8,r4 = 9.
In order to search a heavy decomposed DAG, we keep track of the fol-
lowing. For each heavy path suﬃx P = v1,...,vk with root v1 we store the
size of v1, the index of the character in vk in the substring S(v1), the char-
acter in vk, and a predecessor data structure for the left light size-sequence
and the right size-sequence respectively.
In the procedure that we are about to describe, we are at node v1 and we
wish to ﬁnd the path with root v′ where the p’th character is in the substring
S(v′). We assume that v1 is the root of the heavy path suﬃx P = v1,v2,...,vk
and the leaf character of P has index j in the substring S(v1).
• If p = j, return the character in vk.
• If p is smaller than j we do a predecessor search for p in the left light
size-sequence ﬁnding lm and setting p = p −lm + 1 and continuing our
search in the left light child of vm+1.
• If p is greater than j we do a predecessor search for size(v1) −p in the
right size-sequence ﬁnding rm and setting p top −j −(rk −rm+2). We
continue our search for p in the right child of vm+1.
Proposition 4. When using the procedure just described, we ﬁnd the correct
light child of the heavy path suﬃx.
Proof. If p = j the procedure is obviously correct. In the case that p < j the
correct character must be in a subtree induced by a left light child of P .
Assume vm has a left light child v′
m and vt is the next node on the heavy
path suﬃx with a left light child v′
t such that t > m. Then lm is the size of
the substring of S(v1)(added one) left of the substring S(v′
t). A predecessor
query on the li values will then return the index of the parent node of the
node whose left light child v′ induces the substring that contains the p’th
character. Substracting the l-value from p gives us p’s index in S(v′) minus
one. Thus we shall add one.
Assume p > j. Then we know that the p’th character is to the right of the
heavy path. Suppose we have that vm has right light child v′
m and the next
node on the heavy path with a right light child v′
t is vt. Then the value rm is
the size of the suﬃx in S(vm)(added one) to the right of the substring S(v′
t).
Hence a predecessor query for size(v1) −p) will give us the node that is the
parent of the node with right light child v′ where p is in the suﬃx of S(v′).
The value p −z where z is the index of vk gives us the position of the p’th
15
==PAGE:16==
Master Thesis
CHAPTER 4. RANDOM ACCESS IN STRINGS
character in the substring to the right of vk. The value (rk −rm+2) is the same
as the size of the substring starting right of vk and ending left of S(v′
m+1).
Hence the new position is correct.
The running time of our new search strategy relies on the time for doing
predecessor queries, and on how many heavy paths we meet on our way
down to the leaf.
Proposition 5. In a heavy-path decomposed rooted DAG with N leaves, there
are at most O(logN) heavy paths from root to leaves.
Proof. Consider a heavy-path decomposed rooted DAG T . Walking from
the root to a leaf, we only surpass a new heavy path when a light edge
is accessed. Hence we need to show that at most O(logN) ligh edges are
surpassed on the way to a leaf.
Assume u is a node on our path from root to leaf with a light child v. In
order for v to be light there must exist another child v′ of u that is heavy.
We have that size(v′) ≥size(v). Hence size(u)/2 ≥> size(v). That means that
the number of leaves left when entering a light edge is at least halfed. As
every heavy path contains exactly one leaf of T , we surpass at most O(logN)
heavy paths.
The total size of all heavy path suﬃxes is quite large. In the next section
we will describe a way to represent each suﬃx in a much more eﬃcient way.
Proposition 6. The heavy path suﬃxes of derivation trees of size n takes up to
O(n2) space.
Proof. Consider a heavy path decomposed DAG T . In the worst case is when
each node of T except the root, is both a light and a heavy child in the heavy
path decomposition. In this way every internal node of T is both a root of a
heavy path and also an internal node of heavy paths. This is only possible
when each node has two edges to the same child. Hence we get one heavy
path of size n, one path heavy path of size n −1 etc. This yields a total
n + (n −1) + ··· + 1 = n(n + 1)/2 = O(n2) space.
4.3
Heavy Path Forrest
We would like to be able to do predecessor queries on all the heavy path
suﬃxes of a heavy path decomposed rooted DAG T . The problem is that
sizes of all the heavye path suﬃxes is O(n2). In this section we will now
show how to represent these heavy path suﬃxes in another way.
Deﬁnition 8. A heavy path forrest H of a heavy path decomposition of T con-
sists of the nodes of S where u is a parent of v if heavy(v) = u in the heavy path
decomposition of T .
All the trees in a heavy path forrest H is rooted at a character of the
string S. As each node of S is represented only once in H we get that H is
of size O(n).
16
==PAGE:17==
Master Thesis
CHAPTER 4. RANDOM ACCESS IN STRINGS
We can transform the predecessor problem to be a weighted level ancestor
problem of H by deﬁning left and right weights for each edge in H.
Deﬁnition 9. In a heavy path forrest H of SLP S we deﬁne the weights of an
edge from u that is a parent of v the following way. If u was a right child of v
in T then the right weight is 0 and the left weight is size(v′) where v′ is the left
child of v.
If u was a left child of v in S the right weight is 0 and the left weight is
size(v′) where v′ is the left child of v.
Example 9. We consider the heavy path decomposition of Example 8. This gives
us the heavy path forest of Figure4.3.
a
X1
X4
X5
X6
X7
b
X2
c
X3
Figure 4.3: The HP forest over the DAG of Figure4.2
Now ﬁnding the predecessor of i among the left size sequences of node v
of a heavy path, is the same as ﬁnding the nearest ancestor in H of v that is
at least i. It is obvious that the transformation of a heavy path decomposed
rooted DAG can be transformed into a heavy path forest using only O(n)
time.
4.4
Interval-Biased Search Trees
In this section we will deﬁne a data structure on a universe U,|U| = N where
the elements e1 ≤e2 ≤··· ≤ek. In this data structure we can do the query
predecessor(y) that will return ei such that ei ≤y < ei+1. It is obvious that a
qeury will never return ei if ei = ei+1. Doing a linear scan of the elements,
we can remove ei if ei = ei+1 in O(k) time. From here on we assume that
ei < ei+1.
Deﬁnition 10. In an interval-biased search tree (IBST) over the elements
minU < e1 < e2 < ··· < ek < maxU
consists of the intervals
[e0,e1],[e1,e2],...,[ek,ek+1]
17
==PAGE:18==
Master Thesis
CHAPTER 4. RANDOM ACCESS IN STRINGS
where e0 = minU,ek+1 = maxU.
IBSTs are deﬁned recursively: The root [ei,ei+1] is the interval that contains
(ek+1 −e0)/2. The left child of [ei,ei+1] is the root of the intervals
[e0,e1],[e1,e2],...,[ei−1,ei]
and the right child is the root of the intervals
[ei+1,ei+2],[ei+2,ei+3],...,[ek,ek+1]
The deﬁnition is altered a little from [10]. We make use of our assumtion
that e1 < e2 < ··· < ek whereas in the article they assume e1 < e2 < ··· < ek. We
will explain why this is of importance in Example10.
Proposition 7. An IBST for elements e1,...,ek uses O(k) space.
Proof. Consider an IBST. Each element ei for i = 1,...,k is the smallest ele-
ment of one interval. That gives us that we have k + 2 intervals. Hence the
total size is O(k).
We construct the tree recursively. For elements ej,ej+1,...,ek we start by
doing a doubling search from each side for the interval of elements where
the root is located. Once this is done we do a binary search for the root on
the interval found in the doubling search.
Proposition 8. The time for constructing an IBST with n elements is O(n)
Proof. Consider the case where the root of an array e0,e1,...,ek is the interval
[ei,ei+1]. W.l.o.g. assume that the interval we are looking for in our doubling
search is closer to e0 than to k. Suppose the interval of elements we ﬁnd
using our doubling search is from el to e2l. We then have that l = 2t and
2l = 2t+1. It took log(2l) steps to ﬁnd the interval. Since log(2l) = 1 + logl
and i > l we have that this took O(logi) time. Doing a binary search on an
interval of 2l −l = l elements takes O(logl) time which is also O(logi). This
gives us the following recurrence for construction time.
T (n) = log(min{i,n −i}) + T (i) + T (n −i)
This is the same as
T (n) = logd + T (d) + T (n −d)
Where d ≤n/2.
In order to prove the bound we will use strong induction to prove that
T (n) < 2n −logn −2 for n > 1. Let us consider the base case T (2). This is the
same as log1 + 2T (1) = 0 < 2 · 2 −log2 −2 = 1. Thus the base case holds.
Assume that for 1 < i ≤k it holds that T (i) < 2i −logi −2. Then we get
T (k + 1)
<
2d −logd −2 + 2(k + 1 −d) −log(k + 1 −d) −2 + logd
=
2(k + 1) −log(k + 1 −d) −4
Since we have d ≤k+1
2 we get that 2(k+1)−log(k+1−d)−4 cannot be greater
than 2(k + 1) −(log(k+1
2 ) −4 = 2(k + 1) −(log(k + 1) −log2) −4 = 2(k + 1) −
log(k + 1) −3. Thus the induction hyptothesis holds and we can conclude
that T (n) < 2n −logn −2 which is O(n).1
18
==PAGE:19==
Master Thesis
CHAPTER 4. RANDOM ACCESS IN STRINGS
The query time for IBSTs are found in the following way.
Proposition 9. For an IBST on n elements of a universe U,|U| = N it takes
O(log N
x ) time to ﬁnd the predessocor of y where x = ei+1−ei and ei is the answer
to the query.
Proof. Let us consider an IBST on the elements ei,i = 1,...,n. The answer to
a query predessocor(y) is ei i.e. ei ≤y < ei+1. We let x = ei+1 −ei.
At level j of the search tree there is N/2j possible intervals left. It must
be the case that N/2j ≥x ≥N/2j+1 for some j. Suppose we have a node of the
search tree u at level j. This gives us that u is at level at most logN −logx.
At level j + 1 there are at most N/2j+1 nodes (intevals). But since x ≥
N/2j+1 an interval of size x can be at a level at most j + 1. j + 1 ≤1 + logN −
logx.
Hence a predecessor query takes at most O(log N
x ) time.
As we mentioned earlier in this chapter, our deﬁnition of IBSTs is a little
diﬀerent than in [10].
Example 10. Consider the the problem of ﬁnding the predecessor to 3 in the
instance of the problem where we have 1 ≤2 ≤2 ≤2 ≤2 ≤2 ≤4. We only
consider the problem where the elements are all strictly greater than the previous
element. If we did not take this into account the tree of Figure4.4 would be a valid
IBST. However a predecessor query would take 5 steps to ﬁnd, and log(4/(4 −
2)) = 1. Hence we would not be guarenteed the running time.
[2, 2]
[1, 2]
[2, 2]
[2, 2]
[2, 2]
[2, 4]
Figure 4.4: False IBST
When using an IBST for our weighted ancestor problem we need to be
able to make the query time smaller if we end up in the middle of a heavy
path. Then we do not want to search the entire IBST for this heavy path.
Proposition 10. If we know that i > ej we can in constant time shrink the run-
ning time from O(logN/x) to O(log(N −ej)/x) time in constant time.
Proof. We preprocess the IBST by storing the lowest common ancestor of
each node and [ek,ek+1]. This can be done in linear time and the lca-query
takes constant time. The subtree induced by lca([ej,ej+1],[ek,ek+1] has size
N −ej which gives us the desired bound.
19
==PAGE:20==
Master Thesis
CHAPTER 4. RANDOM ACCESS IN STRINGS
Suppose we are doing a search as in section 4.2, and we are located at
node v of the heavy path P . Then we wish to make a predecessor query on a
light sequence. Using an IBST for this we use O(log|S(v)|/|S(v′)|) time as the
diﬀerence between two values in the light sequence is the size of the string
induced by the light child v′. Here v′ is the light child we ﬁnd using the
biased search. The next search will then take O(log|S(v′)|/|S(v′′)|). Doing
this all the way down to the leaf will then take O(log|S(r)|) where r is the
root of the rooted DAG. We make use of the fact that logx/y = logx −logy.
The running time we need for each biased search in the heavy path forrest
is O(log|S(v)|/w(u,u′)).
4.5
Weighted Level Ancestor Problem
In this section we will make use of the IBST’s to solve the weighted level
ancestor problem for a heavy path forest H. We start out by making a new
heavy path decomposition. This time we do it for all the trees of H. From
here on we will focus on making weighted level ancestor queries on the left
weights, as the problem of weighted level ancestor on the right weights is
the same. Recall that when we are at a node v in H we wish to ﬁnd the
lowest ancestor u of v such that the total weight between these are at least
p. From here on we will consider a heavy path decomposed forrest H′ and
try to solve the weighted levell ancestor problem in O(log|S(v)|/w(u,u′))
time where w(u,u′) is the weight between u and the child u′ that is also an
ancestor of u. We make a heavy path decompostion as in section 4.1 only
this time we do it on rooted trees. The running time for this heavy path
decomposition is also linear.
In order to solve the weighted ancestor problem, we introduce the con-
cept of top and bottom in a heavy path.
Deﬁnition 11. For a node u in a path P of a heavy path decomposed tree in a
HP-forest, we denote t(u) to be the weighted distance to the root of the path. We
let b(u) denote the weighted distance to the leaf of the heavy path.
Calculating every top and bottom value for all nodes in the HP-forest
takes linear time. Finding the top values are calculated top-down, and ﬁnd-
ing the bottom values are done bottom-up.
For each heavy path in our new heavy path decomposition we construct
an IBST on the bottom values. Suppose we are at a node u of a path P and
the answer to the weighted distance query is on the same path.
Proposition 11. An IBST query at node v in a heavy path P of a HP-forest takes
O(log|S(v)|/w(u,u′)) if u is also in P .
Proof. Before we do our query we know that v is at least b(v). Hence from
Proposition 10 we can reduce the universe of the IBST to be t(v). The query
then takes O(logt(v)/w(u,u′)). Since t(v) < |S(v)| we have that the query
takes O(log|S(v)|/size(v′)) as required.
Now we just need to consider the case where u and v are on diﬀerent
heavy paths in H′. To do so we introduce a light representation L of H′.
20
==PAGE:21==
Master Thesis
CHAPTER 4. RANDOM ACCESS IN STRINGS
Deﬁnition 12. For a heavy path decomposition H′ of a heavy path forest H we
make a tree L where each node is a heavy path of H′ and each edge is a light edge
of H′. The edges of L are given the same weights as H′ and t(w) added, where
w is the parent node of the light edge in H′. For every root-to-leaf path in L we
construct an IBST on the weights of L.
Now we start oﬀour search by looking for the lowest ancestor of weight
at least i−t(u) in L. The reason that we look for the WLA of p−t(u) is that we
look for the lowest hanging path that p is in. Once we are on the right path
we can ﬁnd the lowest ancestor of weight at least p in the usual fashion.
Proposition 12. A light representation L takes up O(nlogn) space and time.
Proof. Let us consider a light representation of a heavy path forest of size
O(n). Since we did a heavy path decomposition of H there are O(logn)
nodes from each root-to-leaf path. This gives us a total time and space for L
of O(nlogn).
Example 11. Let us cosider the heavy path decomposed tree depicted in the fol-
lowing ﬁgure.
a
v4
v′
2
v′
1
3
v3
v2
v1
3
v′′
1
9
0
5
2
Figure 4.5: The red edges are the heavy edges of H′ and the black are the
light. The edges are labelled with the left weights.
This gives us t(v3) = w(v4,v3) = 5 and b(v3) = w(v2,v3) + w(v2,v1) = 3 + 0.
From the heavy path decomposition we get the following tree.
V1
V2
V3
14
2
Figure 4.6: Light represenation of the heavy path decomposed tree
Here V1 corresponds to the heavy path v1,v2,v3,v4,a and V2 corresponds
to v′
1,v′
2 and V3 is the node corresponding to v′′
1 . We ﬁnd the weights to be
w(V1,V2) = w(v3,v′′
1 ) + t(v3) = 9 + 5 = 14 and w(V1,V2) = w(v4,v′
2) + t(v4) = 2.
To sumarize we now have a data structure of size O(nlogn) that answer
the random access question in O(logN) time for a straight line program of
size n that represents the string S of size N.
21
==PAGE:22==
Master Thesis
CHAPTER 4. RANDOM ACCESS IN STRINGS
4.6
Branching decomposition
In this section we will show how to construct a data structure, using the
results of the previous section, to solve the weighted ancestor problem in
O(logN) time by doing only O(nlogk+2(n)) preprocessing where k ≥0 is
ﬁxed. Here logi(n) is the logarithm applied i times and not multiplied i
times.
For the data structure we need to indtroduce a Branched Decomposi-
tion(BD). Like heavy path decomposition, this is also a path decomposition
of a tree.
Deﬁnition 13. For a tree T with m leaves and weights on each edge, we deﬁne
a BD on T as a path decomposition on T where v is in path P if v is the only
child of the parent to v. For each path we deﬁne t(v) and b(v) as in section 4.5.
The weight of the edges between paths are deﬁned by the weight of the original
weight and t(u) where u is the parent node in the parent path.
It is worth noting that a BD takes O(m) time, just as a heavy path de-
composition.
Example 12. A branching decomposition is done as depicted below.
v1
v4
v5
v6
1
2
v3
v2
5
4
3
V1
V4
V3
V2
5
4
6
Figure 4.7: The ﬁgure on the left is a tree before the branching is done, and
the ﬁgure on the left is the branched decomposition of the tree
V1 corresponds to v1, we have V4 corresponds to v4,v5,v6 and V2,V3 to v2
and v3 respectively.
Let us describe the procedure for constructing the data structure for a
ﬁxed k. We consider a single tree in the heavy path forest:
1. Make a heavy path decomposition H′ of the tree.
2. Decompose the new tree into bottom trees and a toptree. A node v
induces a bottom tree if the number of descendant leaves are smaller
than or equal to logn and the parent node has more than logn descen-
dant leaves. The connected component that is not a bottom tree is a
top tree.
3. For every root-to-leaf path in the top tree construct an IBST data struc-
ture.
22
==PAGE:23==
Master Thesis
CHAPTER 4. RANDOM ACCESS IN STRINGS
4. For every node in the bottom trees store the distance to the toptree.
5. Make a branching decomposition on each bottom tree.
6. For each of the branched bottom trees, do step 1-6 k times.
7. Make a light structure on each of the last branched bottom trees.
8. Construct an IBST over the distances to the top trees for each node in
the original problem.
We query our data structure by ﬁrst, using the IBST for the distances of
the node in order to ﬁnd the top tree with the resulting node. Once the top
tree is found we make use of the IBSTs all the way down to the correct node.
Note that once in a toptree where each node is a node of a branched decom-
position, we must do IBST-queries until we have found the correct path of
the ﬁrst light structure. Since there are at most k branched decompositions
we do at most O(k) IBST-queries. Since k is ﬁxed and each IBST-query takes
O(log|S(v)|/weight(u,u′)) we get that the total running time using this data
structure on the heavy path decomposed forest is O(logN).
We will make use of the following propostion to show the running time
of contructing the data structure.
Proposition 13. The size of a branched bottom tree B is O(logn).
Proof. Consider a bottom tree B with logn leaves. Once we do the branching
of this we know that each internal node has at least two children. Since
there are O(logn) leaves there must be at least two leaves as a children of
nodes at depth above the leaves etc. This gives us a total of O(logn) internal
nodes.
We will split up showing the preprocessing by start showing the running
time step 1-7 and then show the time for step 8-9.
Proposition 14. The time and space used for step 1-7 is O(nlogk+2(n)).
Proof. We will show this using induction on k. Our base case (k=0) is to
show that step 1-7 takes O(nloglogn) time and space:
Step 1-2 takes O(n) time. Step 3 takes O(n) time as the height of each
path in the top tree is O(logn) there are n/ logn such paths. We are now
left with n/ logn branched bottom trees of size O(logn). Making a light
structure on one of these takes O(logn · loglogn) time. Hence we get a total
of O(n)+O(n/ logn·lognloglogn) = O(nloglogn). Thus the base case holds.
Assume that for a ﬁxed i we have that the procedure takes O(nlogi+2(n))
time and space. We are now left to show that for i + 1, the procedure takes
O(nlogi+3(n)) time and space. We have that step 1-5 takes linear time. We
are left with n/ logn branched bottom trees of size O(logn). Repeating this
k +1 times is the same as using the the O(nlogi+2(n)) data structure on each
of the branched bottom trees. Each of these takes O(lognlogi+3(n)) time and
space. This gives us a total of O(nlogi+3(n)) which concludes our proof.
23
==PAGE:24==
Master Thesis
CHAPTER 4. RANDOM ACCESS IN STRINGS
Proposition 15. Step 8 takes O(nlogk+2(n)) time and space.
Proof. We have O(n) nodes in the original heavy path forest. Since there are
at most O(logk+2(n)) top trees from top to bottom, the total amount of space
and time used for the n IBSTs is O(nlogk+2(n)).
In order to use this data structure to obtain O(nlog∗(n)) preprocess-
ing, we would have to set k to this. This will then imply that we need
O(log∗(n)logN) queries in the case that the answer to the query is in the
lowest branced bottom tree.
4.7
Inverse Ackermann bound
In this section we will show how to structure the heavy path forrests in
order to obtain an even better bound than O(nlog∗n). We will show that
we need at most 2(k −1) of O(log|S(v)|/w(u,u′)) queries to ﬁnd the right
ancestor and that this requires only O(nαk(n)) preprocessing. αk(n) is the
k’th row of the inverse Ackermann function. Let us start by deﬁning this.
However in the next section we will show that this is obtainable, using a
slightly diﬀerent data structure.
Deﬁnition 14. We have that
α1(n) =
n
2

For k ≥2 we have that
αk(1) = 0,αk(n) = 1 + αk(αk−1)
For k ≥2 the deﬁnition is the same αk(n) = α∗
k−1(n). Hence we have that
α2(n) = log(n),α3(n) = log∗(n),α4(n) = log∗∗(n) etc.
We deﬁne the data structure for a tree T of size n where k ≥2.
1. We binarize T such that for all new edges we add a weight of 0.
2. If k = 2 we construct a Light representation of the tree.
3. Else we split the binarized tree into O(αk−1(n)) connected components
of size O(αk−1(n)).
4. For all nodes v in T we ﬁnd the weighted distance d(v) to the root of
the connected component.
5. For all nodes v with at least one child not in the same connected com-
ponent C(v) we make an IBST on the path from v to the root of C.
6. For all the roots of the connected components we store the weighted
distance to the root of the connected component above.
7. Construct a data structure for answering weighted ancestor queries in
at most 2(k −1 −1) steps on the tree consisting O(n/αk−1(n)) roots.
24
==PAGE:25==
Master Thesis
CHAPTER 4. RANDOM ACCESS IN STRINGS
8. Apply step 3-7 on each of O(n/αk−1(n)) components until the sizes of
the components are smaller than 2(k −1).
9. If a component is of size smaller than 2(k −1) do a heavy path decom-
position on them and make an IBST on each heavy path.
10. For each node v construct an IBST on the distances d(v).
The decomposition is done in a similar fashion as in [2]. We can always
make such a decomposition due to [4].
Proposition 16. The data structure just described takes 2(k −1) IBST-queries
each taking the time of O(log|S(v)|/w(u,u′)), k ≥2, to do a weighted level an-
cestor queries on a tree T .
Proof. We will proof this using induction on k.
Base case(k=2): We have already proved this in a previous section.
We are now left to show that if we can answer weighted level ancestor
queries in 2(i −1)O(log|S(v)|/w(u,u′)) queries, then we can answer WLA-
queries in 2(i + 1 −1)O(log|S(v)|/w(u,u′)) IBST-queries.
Assume that u and v are in diﬀerent connected components at depth j
in the data structure. Then we start by doing an IBST-query on the dis-
tances of v to ﬁnd the j’th level. This takes O(|S(v)|/w(u′′,u′′′)) time. Since
w(u′′,u′′′) ≥w(u,u′) we have that this query indeed is O(log|S(v)|/w(u,u′)).
From the induction hypothesis we know that ﬁnding the component that
contains u takes 2(k −1) of O(logt(u)/w(v,v′)) IBST queries. Finally the last
query takes O(logt(x)/w(v,v′)) time, where x is the bottom node of the con-
nected component of u. This gives us a O(log|S(v)|/w(u,u′)) as |S(v)| ≥t(x).
We have now used a total of 2(k −1) + 2 = 2k IBST-queries to answer an
WLA-query.
Assume that u and v are in the same connected component C of size less
than or equal to 2k. Then we make a heavy path decomposition of C and
store all the distances in the nodes v to the root of each heavy path. Then we
can search for the heavy path of v checking at most log2k = 1 + logk heavy
paths and ﬁnally doing one IBST-query on the heavy path that contains v.
This concludes the inductive step. Hence we have that using this data
structure we can answer WLA-qeuries using at most 2(k−1) O(|S(v)|/w(u,u′))
IBST-queries.
Now we just need to show the time and space for the preprocessing. We
start by showing that part of the data structure requires O(αk(n)n) prepro-
cessing for a ﬁxed k.
Proposition 17. Step 2-9 takes O(αk(n)n) time and space.
Proof. We will deﬁne a recurrence for step 2-9. Let us consider the base case
k = 2. Here we have our recurrence S2(n) = O(nlogn) = O(α2(2−1)(n)).
Assume k > 2. We have that splitting the tree takes O(n) time. The dis-
tances can also be found in O(n) time. Since there are at most O(n/αk−1(n))
nodes that has a child which is a root of another component and each com-
ponent are of size O(αk−1(n)), we get that step 5 takes O(n/αk−1(n) · αk−1(n))
25
==PAGE:26==
Master Thesis
CHAPTER 4. RANDOM ACCESS IN STRINGS
preprocessing. Finally we construct an O(n/αk−1(n)·αk−1(n/αk−1)) data struc-
ture for the component roots. This is also O(n). Step 6 takes linear time as
well. Step 7 we get n/αk−1(n) new WLA-problems each of size O(αk−1(n)).
The recurrene stops at step 9, and the total size of all these trees is O(n).
We get the following recurrence.
Sk(n) =

O(n)
n ≤2(k −1)
O(n) +
n
αk−1(n) · Sk(αk−1(n))
n > 2(k −1)
The solution to this is S(n) = O(αk(n) · n). Hence we have that step 2-9 takes
O(αk(n) · n) time and space.
We just need to prove a decent running time for step 10.
Proposition 18. Step 10 takes O(nαk(n)) time and space.
Proof. Assume we have made the data structure for a ﬁxed k ≥2. The re-
cursive depth is then α∗
k−1(n) = αk(n). Hence every node is in at most αk(n)
connected components. Thus each path of distances is at most αk(n) long.
Constructing IBST’s on every path of distances takes at most O(n · αk(n))
which is what we wanted to show.
We can now conlude that we can do random access in strings represented
as SLPs in O(logN) time, using only O(nαk(n)) preprocessing.
26
==PAGE:27==
Master Thesis
CHAPTER 5. SUBSTRING DECOMPRESSION
5
Substring Decompression
In this section we will extend the random access data structure to support
substring decompression in O(m + logN) time where m is the size of the
substring. We do this by for each node v in the SLP S we store a pointer
that points to the next descendant on the heavy path that has a light child.
We also store pointers that do the same but for the right light children.
Let us say we wish to decompress the substring S[i,j]. We do this by ﬁrst
ﬁnding S[i] and S[j] in the same manner as described earlier. We do these
two searches in parallel. When we reach the lowest common ancestor of S[i]
and S[j] we keep track of the right light children of the path to S[i] putting
the top light right child vt into the list as the right most element. The next
right light child we encounter we put left of vt and continue in this way all
the way to S[i]. Similar we store the left light children of our path from the
lowest common ancestor to S[j] in a linked list. Then we concatenate the
two linked lists s.t. the subtrees that the elements induce are in order from
left to right. Finally we decode the subtrees to get desired substring.
The running time and space for the two linked lists is O(m) as there can
be no more subtrees between the path to S[i] and the path to S[j]. Since
the total size of these subtrees we get that decoding these takes a total of
O(m + logN) which is what we wanted to show.
27
==PAGE:28==
Master Thesis
CHAPTER 6. APPROXIMATE STRING MATCHING
6
Approximate String Matching
In this section we will explain how to use a known approximate string
matching algorithm as a black box to ﬁnd approximate patterns in a string
compressed by an SLP. More formally we wish to show the following.
Proposition 19. For a string compressed using an SLP of size O(n) we can do
approximate string matching of a pattern P of size m and an error threshold of
k′ using O(nαk(n)+m+s(m)) space and O(n(m+t(m)+logN)+occ) time. t(m)
denotes the time used in our black box approximate string matching algorithm
and s(m) the space used by this.
Proof. Let us start by prooving the bound for the time complexity. We do
the string matching bottom up. Let us consider a node v in S. If v is a leaf
we decode the character and run the black box on it. If v is an internal node
we have S(v) = S(vl) · S(vr) where vl is the left child of v and vr is the right
child and (·) denotes concatenation. The pattern recognized in S(vl) and in
S(vr) both occur in S(v). However in order to check for matches that is a
part of both S(vl) and S(vr) we decompress the string S′ that consists of the
last min{|S(vl)|,m + k′} and the ﬁrst min{|S(vr)|,m + k′} characters. After the
decompression we use our black box on S′. Finally we merge the lists of
matched patterns.
Hence for every node in S we decompress a substring of size O(m + k)
which takes O(logN + m) time and do a pattern matching in O(t(m)). The
merging of the patterns found takes up O(occ) time. Thus the total time is
O(n(m + t(m) + logN) + occ) time which is the desired bound.
Since we can support compression of substrings in O(nαk(n)) space and
we keep decompressing a string of size O(m) we get the total amount of
space to O(nαk(n) + m + s(m)).
28
==PAGE:29==
Master Thesis
CHAPTER 7. RANDOM ACCESS IN TREES
7
Random Access in Trees
7.1
Tree
In this section we will survey methods for navigating a tree whose balanced
paranthesis sequence is compressed by an SLP. We assume that the tree that
we have compressed is in pre-order. A balanced paranthesis sequence for
a tree T with n nodes is a way to represent T using only 2n bits. Each bit
represents a paranthesis. If a bit has value 1, we have that it is an opening
paranthesis and if a bit is 0, we have that it is a closing paranthesis. For
each encapsulated pair of paranteses ’(,)’ we have that the parantheses of the
subtree induced by the corresponding node is within these two paranteses.
The right sibling of a node u is represented by the opening paranthesis that
is just right of the closening paranthesis of u. If this paranthesis is not an
opening paranthesis, then u has no siblings to the right. The mother of a
node u is represented by the closest pair of parantheses than encapsules the
parantheses of u.
Example 13. Consider the tree deﬁned by the BP-sequence 11100100. We name
the nodes of the tree in pre-order as a,b,c,d. This gives us the following tree.
Figure 7.1: The tree represented by 11100100
There exists diﬀerent kinds of tree compression [11, 6], and one of the
those is DAG compression[7, 9]. This takes advantage of subtree repetitions.
Each subtree is represented once, but can then have more parents. This is
actually the same kind of compression as we see the SLPs doing for parse
trees.
Proposition 20. We can construct an SLP over the BP of a DAG-compressed
tree G with e edges and O(e) nodes using O(e) space.
Proof. Consider a DAG-compressed tree G. For each node in G that have k
children we make k + 1 non-terminal nodes x0,...,xk. We set the child of x0
to be ’(’ and the child of xk to be ’)’. We deﬁne xi+1 to be the right child for
xi for i = 1,...,k −1 and xi corresponds to the i’th node of G.
29
==PAGE:30==
Master Thesis
CHAPTER 7. RANDOM ACCESS IN TREES
• parent(x) returns the parent node of x
• f irstchild(x) returns the ﬁrst child of x
• lastchild(x) returns the last child of x
• nextsibling(x) returns the next sibling of x
• prevsibling(x) returns the previous sibling of x
• depth(x) returns the depth of x
• levelanc(x,i) returns the ancestor of x at level i
• desc(x) returns the size of the sibtree induced by x
• height(x) returns the height of subthe tree induced by x
• lef tleaf (x) returns the leftmost leaf of the subtree induced by x
• rightleaf (x) returns the rightmost leaf of the subtree induced by x
• levellef t(i) returns the ﬁrst node visited in preorder whose depth is i
Figure 7.2: List of queries to use on succinct trees
From this we may consider the problem of querying a DAG compressed
tree as a problem of querying a balanced paranthesis sequence represented
by an SLP.
We will show how to perform the navigations of Figure7.2 on SLP com-
ressed BPs. In order to do this we introduce some queries that wiill help
us.
• rank(S,i) returns the number of 1’s in the range S[1],...,S[i].
• select(S,i) returns the index of the i’th node.
• excess(S,i) returns the diﬀerence between the number of 1’s and 0’s in
S.
Proposition 21. We can answer the queries rank,select,excess in O(logN) time
and O(nαk) space.
Proof. We start by introducing the concept of weight and sum. For a binary
string S we deﬁne weight(S) to be the number of 1’s in S. We deﬁne sum(S)
to be the diﬀerence of 0’s and 1’s in S. For each node in the SLP S we can
calculate the sum and weight bottom-up as we did with the sizes earlier.
A naive approach for the queries rank and excess is to do a random access
query for the i’th character in S. For rank we then do a walk from root to
the leaf of i counting the weights on the left children of this path. For excess
we do the same but accumulate the sums of the left children instead.
30
==PAGE:31==
Master Thesis
CHAPTER 7. RANDOM ACCESS IN TREES
If we instead of storing the sizes and sums at each node we store the
accumulated sizes and sums of the right light children and the left light
children, we can rank and excess while we search for the i’th character. The
accumulated sums and weights are calculated top-down thus the time for
this is O(n). Hence the total running tume for rank and excess is O(logN)
and the space used is O(αkn).
The select query is done in a fashion similar to the one of random access
in S. In this case however our heavy path decomposition we will be using
the weights instead of sizes. Storing also the sizes and weights in each node,
we can ﬁnd the position of the i’th node in O(logN) time and O(αkn) space.
In order to introduce more queries on compressed trees, we start by
deﬁning some new notation to use on heavy path suﬃxes v0,...,vk.
• Sl(vi) is the concatenation of all the strings induced by the left light
children of the path vi,vi+1,...,vk.
• Sr(vi) is the concatenation of all the strings induced by the right light
children of the path vi,vi+1,...,vk.
• suml(v) is the same as sum(Sl(v)).
• sumr(v) is the same as sum(Sr(v)).
• M(s) is the maximum excess in the string s.
• m(s) is the minimum excess in the string s.
• Mr(v) is the same as M(s(u)) + sumr(w) where u is the left light child
of v and w is the heavy right child of v. If u is not a left child we set
the value to −∞.
The range [m(s),M(s)] we denote the excess range of a string s. Going left
to right in a string the excess grows at most 1 at the time. Hence both m(s)
and M(s) will be achived by some preﬁx of s and there will also be a point
where the excess is each value between m(s) and M(s).
We wish to be able to query our tree even more. Consider the query
f wdSearch(i,δ) that returns the smallest j > i s.t. excess(i) + δ = excess(j).
In the same way we can deﬁne the query bwdSearch(i,δ) that returns the
smallest j < i s.t. excess(i)−δ = excess(j). The idea for f wdsearch is the start
by ﬁnding the i’th paranthesis, and then walk backwards searching for the
lowest ancestor where the maximal excess is greater than or equal to δ.
Proposition 22. We can do the query f wdSearch(i,δ) in O(logN) time and
O(nαk(n)) space.
Proof. We will show the running time for f wdSearch. The proof for bwdSearch
is analogous to this.
For this we preprocess our heavy path decomposed s.t. we store suml,
sumr, mr, and Mr for each node in our SLP. This takes O(n) time to do. For
each heavy path we store a range maximum query data structure for the Mr
31
==PAGE:32==
Master Thesis
CHAPTER 7. RANDOM ACCESS IN TREES
and a minimum query data structure for the mr values in each heavy path.
This can be done in linear time where the queries takes O(1) time using [8].
We start by ﬁnding the i’th opening paranthesis as described before. On our
way down we store the light edges that we encountered along our search.
We then walk back on the O(logN) light edges. For a light edge (v,w) we
check if v is the lowest common ancestor of i and j using the sum values.
If this is not the case we check if the lowest common ancestor is on the
heavy path between w and the next light edge of our search. We do this
by ﬁrst checking if the excess value is in the interval [m∗,M∗] where m∗is
the minimal excess value on the heavy path and M∗is the maximal excess
value. If the excess value is in the range of [m∗,M∗] we do a binary search
using the range minimum and range maximum queries. Since a heavy path
is at most O(n) long and n < N as we consider a compressed string, we get
that the binary search takes O(logN) time. If the wanted excess value was
not in [m∗,M∗] we would consider the next light edge.
As we found the lowest common ancestor x of i and j, we go to the right
child y of x and start a biased search for j on the heavy path of y using the
values of Sl(y) and Sr(y). This also takes O(logN) time. Hence we end up
using O(logN) time for f wdSearch using O(nαk(n)) space.
Another useful query is the query RMQ(i,j) that returns the maximal
excess(k) where i ≤k ≤j. In the same way we deﬁne rmi(i,j) as the minimal
excess(k) for i ≤k ≤j. These two queries very useful when navigating the
BP. The idea for ﬁnding RMQ is that we as in the proof for f wdsearch ﬁnd
the LCA of i and j. Then we ﬁnd the maximal excess for the string bottom
up the LCA from i. After this we continue down to j ﬁnding the maximal
excess.
Proposition 23. The queries RMQ(i,j) and rmq(i,j) can be done in O(logN)
time using only O(αk(n)n) time.
Proof. As in the proof for f wdsearch we store the same in each node includ-
ing a range max/min data structure of the sizer(v) for each heavy path. Here
sizer(v) deonotes the size of the string Sr(v). We then start out by ﬁnding
excess(i). Then we are left with ﬁnding the maximal excess of the string be-
tween i and j. Next we ﬁnd the lowest common ancestor of i and j. We do
this in a similar fashion as in Proposition 22. The diﬀerence here is that we
consider the sizes of the right subtrees on our way up to the LCA and not
the excess values. On our way up to the LCA we keep track of the maximal
excess value. Consider the path between w and v. If the light edge (v,v′) is a
left edge then the maximal excess of the substring to the right of the path is
Mr(w). If (v,v′) was a right child, the maximal excess of the substring to the
right of the path is Mr(w)−Mr(v′). We set the totalMaxEx to excess+maxExR
or keep it as it is. The excess so far is updated accordingly. Once the LCA is
reached we make use of the same tactic down to j.
For each node in our SLP we store Mr(v),Ml(v),sumr(v),suml(v) and a
range maximum query data structure over these for each heavy path. We
32
==PAGE:33==
Master Thesis
CHAPTER 7. RANDOM ACCESS IN TREES
start by searching for i and j in parallel searching for the lowest com-
mon ancestor. When we are at i we ﬁnd the excess(i) and store this as the
currentExcess and maxExcess. Then we walk up to the LCA. At each path
do a range max query for Mr(v). If the currentExcess+Mr(v) is greater than
maxExcess we set this to be the new maxExcess.
We use sumr(v) to update the currentExcess upon leaving a path. Sup-
pose we enter a path at node v and we leave at node w. Then the total excess
to the right of the path between v and w is sumr(w) −sumr(v).
Once we reach the LCA, we continue down to j in the same way only this
time we use suml and Ml(v) instead. It takes O(logN) to ﬁnd the LCA and
also for walking up and down. Finding the maximal excess on the run takes
constant time per heavy path. Hence the total running time is O(logN).
The queries fwdsearch, bwdsearch and excess allows us to do query the
compressed tree. We will show how to do the following queries in O(logN)
time.
Proposition 24. For a tree with a BP compressed using an SLP, we can support
lowest common ancestor queries in O(logN) time where the size of the BP is
O(N).
Proof. Suppose that we wish to ﬁnd the LCA of node A with starting paran-
thesis at index i and node B with starting paranthesis at index j. If B is a
descendant of A the query f wdsearch(i,0) would return a number greater
than j as the closing paranthesis of A would have to occur on the right of
the opening and closing parantheses of B. We have that f wdsearch takes
O(logN) time. Hence if A is an ancestor of B we have the required query
time.
Assume that the LCA of A and B is the node C with start paranthesis
index k in the corresponding BP. The corresponding BP then is of the form
···(C···(A···)A ···(B···)B ···)C ···
First we wish to ﬁnd the excess of the string between )A and (B. This we
ﬁnd to be excess((B) −excess()A). We will call this value k′. Now we need
to ﬁnd the opening paranthesis at k. The excess of the string between (B
and (C in the BP is 2 + k′. Hence we can ﬁnd (C using a backwards search
bwdsearch(i,2+k′). Since both excess and bwdsearch takes O(logN) time we
get the desired bound.
Proposition 25. The queries of Figure7.2 can all be done using the queries
f wdsearch, bwdsearch, RMQ, rmq, rank, select, and excess.
Proof. We consider each query individually.
• parent(x): We do a bwdsearch for the ﬁrst opening paranthesis that is
not enclosed left of x.
• f irstchild(x): We ﬁnd the opening paranthesis that is at index one
higher than x.
33
==PAGE:34==
Master Thesis
CHAPTER 7. RANDOM ACCESS IN TREES
• lastchild(x): We do a f wdsearch for the closening paranthesis )x of
x.
The last child has closing paranthesis left of )x.
We then do a
bwdsearch for the opening paranthesis of this.
• nextsibling(x): We start by doing a search for the closing paranthesis
of x. If the paranthesis just right of this is an opening paranthesis this
is the next sibling.
• prevsibling(x): We do a bwdsearch for the opening paranthesis that is
enclosed just left of x.
• depth(x): We ﬁnd the excess at node x.
• height(x): We do a forward search for the closing paranthesis. Then
we do an RMQ of the indexes of these two paratheses. This is the
height of x.
• lef tleaf (x): We ﬁnd the ﬁrst closing paranthesis right of x using select.
Then search back for the opening paranthesis. We use the a select for
closing parantheses not for opening as in the deﬁnition of select.
• rightleaf (x): We ﬁnd the the enclosing of x and do a backwards search
for the ﬁrst open paranthesis using two select queries.
• levellef t(i): We do a forward search for this.
The parent of a node x with index i can be found using bwdsearch(i,2).
This will return the position of the rightmost opening paranthesis that has
index smaller than i and the closing paranthesis has index greater than i.
For ﬁnding the ﬁrst child of node x with index i we start by ﬁnding the
index j of the closing paranthesis for x. This we do using f wdsearch(x,0). If
j −i is greater than 1 we know that x must have a child. The ﬁrst child have
index i + 1. Again we have f wdsearch takes O(logN) time.
Since we use use a constant amount of O(logN)-queries for doing each
of these navigations on an SLP-compressed tree, we get that these also takes
O(logN) time.
34
==PAGE:35==
Master Thesis
CHAPTER 8. CONCLUSION
8
Conclusion
In this master thesis we have discussed methods for random access in gram-
mar compressed strings. We have in detail analyzed the data structures of
[10]. We have shown a method for preprocessing SLPs using only O(nαk(n))
time and space. It is mentioned in the article that this result is possible,
but never shown. We have on our studied the results of [8], and used these
ideas to come up with the data structure. In the article [10] there is a result
where they obtain random access on the RAM using only linear space. If
one were ever to try these data structures in our galaxy, the data structure
on the RAM-machine would propably be superior to our.
We have discussed and shown results on how to decompress a gram-
mar compressed string. We have shown how to perform approximate string
matching on string that are compressed using an SLP.
We have shown how to navigate a tree whose balanced parantheses se-
quence is compressed using an SLP. This compression method, takes advan-
tage of patterns cannot be found using the well known DAG-compression.
However this data structure requires a lot of constants for us to navigate it.
It could be interesting to compare this method with the ones of [13].
35
==PAGE:36==
Master Thesis
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bibliography
[1]
Sebastian Deorowicz and Szymon Grabowski. Robust relative com-
pression of genomes with random access. Bioinformatics 27(21):2979-
2986, 2011.
[2]
G.N. Frederickson. Data structures for on-line updating of minimum
spanning trees, with applications.
SIAM J. Comput., 14 : 781-798,
1985.
[3]
D.A. Huﬀman.
A method for the construction of minimum-
redundancy codes. Proceedings of the I.R.E. pp 1098–1102, 1952.
[4]
R.J. Lipton and R.E. Tarjan. A separator theorem for planar graphs.
SIAM J. Appl. Math.,3: 177-189, 1979.
[5]
D. Liu R. Panigrahy M. Prabhakaran A. Sahai M. Charikar, E. Lehman
and A. Shelat. The smallest grammar problem. IEEE Transactions on
Information Theory, 51(7):2554–2576, 2005.
[6]
Sebastian Maneth Markus Lohrey and Roy Mennicke. Xml tree struc-
ture compression using repair. Information Systems, 38,8, 1050-1167,
2013.
[7]
Sebastian
Maneth
and
Eric
Noeth
Mireille
Bousquet-Mélou,
Markus Lohrey.
Xml compression via dags.
Proceeding ICDT:
69-80, 2013.
[8]
N.Alon and B.Schieber. tech. report, TR-71/87, Institute of Computer
Science, Tel Aviv University, 1987.
[9]
R. Sethi P. J. Downey and R. E. Tarjan.
Variations on the common
subexpression problem. J. ACM, 27:758–771, 1980.
[10] R.Raman K.Sadakane S.R.Satti O.Weimann P.Bille, G.M.Landau. Ran-
dom access to grammar-compressed strings and trees. SODA, 373-839,
2011.
[11] Gad M. Landau Oren Weimann Philip Bille, Inge Li Gørtz. Tree com-
pression with top trees. In ICALP.
[12] W. Rytter.
Application of lempel-ziv factorization to the approxi-
mation of grammar-based compression. Theoretical Computer Science,
302(1-3):211–222, 2003.
36
==PAGE:37==
Master Thesis
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[13] K. Sadakane and G. Navarro. Fully-functional succinct trees. Proc.
ACM-SIAM SODA: 134–149, 2010.
[14] J. Ziv and A. Lempel. A universal algorithm for sequential data com-
pression.
IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 23(3):337–343,
1977.
37
==PAGE:38==
Project Describtion
2015, DTU Compute
Title: Random Access in Grammar Compressed Strings
Type:
Master Thesis
Student’s name: Rasmus David Helmer Pihl
Student no:
s132435
Advisors:
Philip Bille
Inge Li Gørtz
Patrick Hagge Cording
Evaluation:
7 point scale
ECTS:
32,5
Period:
5.1.2015-20.6.2015
Project Describtion: The topic of this project is algorithms and data structures for
grammar compressed strings. The goal is survey selected state-of-the art algorithms
for grammar compressed strings and based on the experiences design and develop new
solutions.
Teaching Goals:
• Document key relevant aspects of the algorithm and data structures in a concise
manner.
• Analyze and evaluate the eﬀeciency of the work from a theoretical perspective.
• Survey existing algorithms for grammar compressed strings.
==PAGE:39==
Project Describtion
2015, DTU Compute
Title: Random Access in Grammar Compressed Strings
Type:
Master Thesis
Student’s name: Rasmus David Helmer Pihl
Student no:
s132435
Advisors:
Philip Bille
Inge Li Gørtz
Patrick Hagge Cording
Evaluation:
7 point scale
ECTS:
32,5
Period:
5.1.2015-20.6.2015
Project Describtion: The topic of this project is algorithms and data structures for
grammar compressed strings. The goal is survey selected state-of-the art algorithms
for grammar compressed strings and based on the experiences design and develop new
solutions.
Teaching Goals:
• Document key relevant aspects of the algorithm and data structures in a concise
manner.
• Analyze and evaluate the eﬀeciency of the work from a theoretical perspective.
• Survey existing algorithms for grammar compressed strings.
Evaluation: I have through this master thesis analyzed state of the art algorithm. I
have in detail explained how they work, and proved the bounds of these. I have shown
a bound that was never shown, but only mentioned. In this proces I have been able to
read and comprehend theoretical results at a high level.
