==PAGE:1==
ASSIMILATION OF CRYOSAT-2 WATER HEIGHTS
TO A MUSKINGUM-CUNGE ROUTING SCHEME
Jonas Wied Pedersen, s103369
Master Thesis
July 4TH 2016
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Assimilation of CryoSat-2 water heights to a Muskingum-Cunge routing scheme
This report was prepared by:
Jonas Wied Pedersen, s103369
Supervisors:
Peter Bauer-Gottwein, Associate Professor at DTU Environment
Raphael Schneider, PhD student at DTU Environment
Liguang Jiang, PhD student at DTU Environment
DTU Environment
Department of Environmental Engineering
Miljoevej, Building 113
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
http://www.env.dtu.dk/
Phone: (+45) 4525 1600
Fax: (+45) 4593 2850
E-mail: info@env.dtu.dk
Project period:
January 4th, 2016 - July 4th, 2016
ECTS:
35
Education:
MSc
Field:
Environmental Engineering
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Remotely sensed data are widely used within the ﬁeld of hydrological modeling and have been an
increasingly important source of information as the number of in-situ gauging stations has declined
recently. Altimeters carried by satellites observe water surface elevations whenever they pass over a
water body, which provide data that can be used for analysis, calibration or assimilation by hydrol-
ogists. In this study, water level observations from the CryoSat-2 mission is assimilated to a river
discharge model of the Brahmaputra river in the Assam Valley, India. CryoSat-2 is a unique satel-
lite altimetry mission due to its drifting orbit and its advanced altimeter instruments. The drifting
orbit produces spatially distributed observations as opposed to previous missions that have been on
repeating orbits, which means that few studies have attempted to use the data for inland water level
estimation. The use of CryoSat-2 altimetry in a river discharge model is yet to be published in the
open literature, and this study therefore attempts to show how the spatially distributed observations
can be integrated through an assimilation framework based on the Extended Kalman Filter. This is
done by setting up a state space representation of a Muskingum-Cunge routing scheme that routes
reach water storage rather than discharge. The routing scheme is calibrated with a newly developed
approach that allows for the calibration of channel geometry solely based on remotely sensed water
heights. The results of the calibration turned out to be biased due to an uneven temporal distribution
of the CryoSat-2 altimetry. It was not possible to correct this problem within the limits of this thesis,
and subsequent assimilation attempts were signiﬁcantly aﬀected by this. The initial representation of
both model and observation errors lead to a large loss of coverage in the initial assimilation run’s 95%
conﬁdence interval compared to base model without assimilation. The eﬀect of lowering the temporal
auto-correlation in the model error, and making the observation error a function of the number of
observations in a single satellite crossing improved the performance of the assimilation scheme. This
seems promising for future use of the scheme in properly calibrated models.
i
==PAGE:6==
Preface
This master thesis has prepared at the Technical University of Denmark’s Department of Environ-
mental Engineering during the spring semester of 2016. It accounts for 35 ECTS and is the ﬁnal step
towards graduation.
Acknowledgments
I would like to thank my three supervisors for helping me out through entire process of developing the
ﬁnal work: Peter for always providing excellent and fast assistance when I have been stuck at various
places; Raphael for helping me understand the world of radar altimetry, providing tons of data and
help with the calibration as well as being extremely patient with my many questions; Liguang for
good discussions about the state space representation of Muskingum-type routing schemes.
It would be remiss of me not to mention my oﬃce mates and fellow thesis writers here. Without
them these last six months would not have been as fun as they turned out to be.
ii
==PAGE:7==
Table of Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Case Study
7
2.1
The Brahmaputra River and the Assam Valley
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
In-situ Gauging Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Catchment Runoﬀand Tributary Discharge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Satellite Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Theory and Methods
11
3.1
Muskingum-Cunge River Routing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
State Space Representation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Data Assimilation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.4
Error Modeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.5
Satellite Altimetry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.6
Calibration Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.7
Evaluation Criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4
Results and Discussion
33
4.1
Cross-Section Calibration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.2
Error Model Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.3
Base Run . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.4
Assimilation of CryoSat-2 Altimetry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.5
Evaluation of Simulated and Observed Water Levels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.6
Re-evaluation of Model Uncertainty
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.7
Re-evaluation of Observational Uncertainty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.8
Second Attempt at Assimilation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.9
Eﬀect of Correction to the Measurement Operator
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.10 Ideas for Future Work on the use of CryoSat-2 Altimetry for Routing Models . . . . .
50
5
Conclusion
53
Bibliography
55
iii
==PAGE:8==
Chapter 1
Introduction
The future management of water resources will be aﬀected by several drivers of change, e.g. population
growth and movement, climate change as well as economic development (Stakhiv and Stewart, 2010).
Good hydrological models will be a key aspect in assisting water managers with facing these challenges
during decision making processes.
Hydrological models rely on data for calibration, evaluation and operational use, which for river
models in particular means observations of streamﬂow. Considering the importance of quality time
series of streamﬂow observations, it is somewhat paradoxical that the amount of in-situ gauging sta-
tions have declined over the past decades (V¨or¨osmarty et al., 2001). As the number of local in-situ
gauging stations have declined and as improvements in computing power have made more and more
distributed modeling possible with a corresponding need of data in ever-larger amounts, the interest
in remote sensing technologies has grown.
Besides the fact that remote sensing has helped mitigate the loss of in-situ information, it also allows
for the retrieval of observations in areas that were previously inaccessible via ground. Furthermore,
remotely sensed data from satellite missions often cover large areas and thus provide distributed
observations, which are useful in distributed hydrological models (Stisen and Sandholt, 2010).
Various kinds of remotely sensed data relevant to the ﬁeld of hydrology has become available over
the past few decades. Gravimetry is used to evaluate long-term changes in subsurface water storage
(Yeh et al., 2006; Thomas et al., 2014), sensing of passive microwaves is used to infer soil moisture
content (Wagner et al., 2007; Albergel et al., 2012), while microwave and thermal imagers as well as
satellite-borne radars are used to provide estimates of precipitation (Stisen and Sandholt, 2010; Liu
et al., 2012) and evapotranspiration (Vinukollu et al., 2011).
Remotely sensed data products have already been used in hydrological models for calibration,
forcing, and updating purposes. Milzow et al. (2011) and Bauer-Gottwein et al. (2015) calibrated
ﬂow forecasting models for the poorly gauged Kavango river basin, Immerzeel and Droogers (2008)
calibrated a SWAT model for estimation of actual evapotranspiration in a subcatchment to the Krishna
river basin, while Campo et al. (2006) calibrated a distributed MOBIDIC model for ﬂow forecasting
with SAR imagery in the Arno river.
Stisen et al. (2008) used remotely sensed precipitation, evapotranspiration, and Leaf Area Index
to force a MIKE SHE model for the Senegal river basin, and showed that their ﬂow simulation were
of comparable quality to a model forced with conventional meteorological data.
Remotely sensed river width estimates have successfully been assimilated to operational discharge
forecasting for the Brahmaputra and Ganges rivers (Hirpa et al., 2013), while the assimilation of
multi-mission soil moisture estimates in a river discharge forecasting model has been illustrated for
the upper Danube river (Wanders et al., 2014).
1
==PAGE:9==
1.
Introduction
This thesis considers the use of satellite-based radar altimetry for estimates of surface water heights,
which was ﬁrst used within the environmental sciences for sea level estimation in the 1970’s (Ben-
veniste, 2011). It took about two decades more before the technology had improved enough to allow
for the retrieval of water heights from inland water bodies. This became feasible with the launch of the
ERS-1 and TOPEX/Poseidon missions in 1991 and 1992, respectively (Cr´etaux and Birkett, 2006).
Since the early 1990’s, the accuracy of radar altimetry has greatly improved, and today the hydrolog-
ical modeling community is using it for a variety of aspects. Currently, there are six satellite missions
in operation with radar altimeters: Jason-2, Jason-3, CryoSat-2, HaiYang-2, SARAL/AltiKa, and
Sentinel-3. The Jason satellites are on the same 10-day repeat orbit as the original TOPEX/Poseidon
mission, while SARAL/AltiKa is on the same orbit as the ERS and Envisat missions with 35 day
repeat cycles.
Today, several databases with radar altimetry provide freely available water level estimates for large
lakes and rivers. DAHITI delivers water level time series based on TOPEX/Poseidon, Jason-1, Jason-
2, ERS-2, Envisat, and SARAL/AltiKa (Schwatke et al., 2015b). Hydroweb uses TOPEX/Poseidon
altimetry for large rivers, as well as GFO, Jason-1, ERS-1 and -2, and Envisat data for lake level
estimates (Cr´etaux et al., 2011). Recently, a database called AltWater with CryoSat-2 observations
has been developed at DTU Space (http://altwater.dtu.space/).
Surface water heights from satellite altimetry have been used for many diﬀerent aspects. A few
examples are Zakharova et al. (2014) who used Envisat altimetry to monitor seasonal variations
in Siberian wetlands, while Lee et al. (2009) examined wetland dynamics with TOPEX/Poseidon
observations. Another example is the study of climate change eﬀects on lake water levels and storage
in e.g. the Tibetan Plateau (Krop´aˇcek et al., 2012; Song et al., 2013), despite the fact that the available
time series probably are too short for deﬁnite conclusions on the eﬀect of changes in precipitation and
thawing of permafrost (Cr´etaux et al., 2016).
The accuracy and precision of altimetry from satellites vary greatly between diﬀerent missions. If
in-situ data is available for evaluation of remotely sensed water levels, the scientiﬁc community tends
to quantify accuracy in terms of Root-Mean-Square-Error (RMSE) or linear correlation between the
observed time series. Precision of water level estimates from single crossings are most often given in
terms of Root-Mean-Square-Error (RMSE) around the mean water height estimate. In the following
overview of the quality of satellite-based altimetry, accuracy and precision are given as these RMSE
estimates unless otherwise stated.
The size of the water body for which surface heights are desired has a large inﬂuence on the
accuracy and precision that various satellite products can deliver. Generally, the larger the water
body, the less topographic noise from surrounding land surfaces will interfere with the estimation
process. Water levels for large lakes thus tend to be more accurate and contain less uncertainty than
for rivers. Jarihani et al. (2013) produced a large review of altimetry data for lake levels from several
missions. They showed that laser based altimetry from ICESat provided water height estimates of
Lake Argyle and Lake Eildon with no bias and a very small precision of just 4 cm, while radar
altimetry mission such as Envisat, Jason-1 and -2, and TOPEX/Poseidon had biases between 4-77
cm and precisions between 28-150 cm. For rivers, SARAL/AltiKa observations have been used to
retrieve water levels with a precision of approximately 50 cm in the Brahmaputra river (Dubey et al.,
2015a,b), 16-160 cm in the S˜ao Francisco river depending on the speciﬁc river crossing (Maillard et al.,
2015), and 8-32 cm for various river crossings in the Amazon basin (Schwatke et al., 2015a). Envisat
and ERS-2 altimetry over tributaries to the Amazon river have produced water level time series with
a precision of 20-30 cm and 70 cm as well as accuracies compared to in-situ gauges of 25-50 cm and
40-200 cm, respectively (da Silva et al., 2010).
Several studies have also used remotely sensed river water levels to infer discharge. One way to
do this is by setting up rating curves based on in-situ gauged discharge and altimetry water heights
for speciﬁc crossings, also known as ”virtual stations”, along a river. Papa et al. (2010) used this
2
==PAGE:10==
approach with TOPEX/Poseidon, ERS-2 and Envisat data over the Brahmaputra and Ganges river
system. Another method for discharge estimation is to set up rating curves from radar altimetry
and simulated rather than observed discharge (Getirana and Peters-Lidard, 2013; Finsen et al., 2014).
Some studies have set up other kinds of simple empirical relationships between river discharge and
remotely sensed stage and/or surface width, e.g. Birkinshaw et al. (2014) for the Ob and Mekong
rivers with ERS-2 and Envisat data as well as Sichangi et al. (2016) for eight of the largest rivers in
the world with Envisat and Jason-2 altimetry.
The hydrological modeling community has adopted radar altimetry for the calibration of models
and for direct use via assimilation schemes. For examples of altimetry in model calibration see e.g.
Getirana (2010) and Getirana et al. (2013) both of whom used Envisat altimetry over parts of the
Amazon river, or Milzow et al. (2011) who use Envisat altimetry along with other remote sensing prod-
ucts to calibrate a hydrological model for the Kavango river. In terms of river discharge forecasting,
Envisat altimetry has been assimilated to simple routing schemes for the Brahmaputra (Michailovsky
et al., 2013) and the Zambezi rivers (Michailovsky and Bauer-Gottwein, 2014). An ambitious attempt
at an online forecasting scheme for the major rivers in Bangladesh were set up by Hossain et al. (2014).
Here, Jason-2 altimetry were used to update water level forecasts from a hydrodynamic HEC-RAS
model.
This thesis considers the use of CryoSat-2 water level estimates in a hydrodynamic model.
The
other altimetry missions described above are all on orbits with a repeat cycle of 10-35 days, which
means that they return to the same place on a lake or a river with a decent frequency. CryoSat-2 is
on a drifting orbit with a very long repeat cycle of 369 days (Wingham et al., 2006), which makes it
unique among all previous and current satellite-based altimetry missions. The reason for the special
orbital pattern is that CryoSat-2’s main scientiﬁc purpose is to monitor the thickness of sea ice as well
as surface variations of ice sheets on land in the polar regions, while the main purpose of the other
altimetry missions are to study ocean surface heights around the planet. An orbit with a short repeat
cycle enables the construction of water height time series at speciﬁc locations, which is convenient
for studying temporal changes of water resources. If related ﬁeld data (e.g. river cross-sections) are
required for a speciﬁc modeling or management purpose, a repeating orbit limits surveying to the
locations where the satellite intersects the area of interest. A drifting orbit does not allow for these
beneﬁts as the orbit will have shifted when the satellite returns to the same region.
The challenges related to CryoSat-2’s special orbit as well as the fact that it only has been in
operation since April 2010 means that few studies have used its observations for inland water height
estimation. In fact, just nine papers in the open literature are available at the time of writing.
Song et al. (2015a) and Song et al. (2015b) used CryoSat-2 observations to extend a previous
ICESat based analysis of Tibetan lake levels. Both studies used ESA’s own estimation of surface
heights (known as Level 2 data), and removed polluted water heights based on a box-plot outlier
removal. They found good correlation with in-situ lake level measurements. Tourian et al. (2015)
used CryoSat-2 altimetry in a multi-mission evaluation of water storage at Lake Urmia, Iran. They
noted issues with water height estimates near the shore of the lake, but do not specify how the water
levels were estimated.
In addition to its orbit, CryoSat-2 has another special feature compared to other altimetry missions:
SIRAL (SAR Interferometric Radar Altimeter). SIRAL is the short-hand for CryoSat-2’s altimeter
instrument, which it operates in diﬀerent modes depending on the geographical location. The speciﬁc
details of the diﬀerent operation modes will be discussed later in this thesis, but for now the reader
should know that in some modes CryoSat-2 is able to sample surface heights from smaller areas
than many other satellite missions. This means that it is less likely that surrounding land surface
topography will interfere with the water level estimation. Nielsen et al. (2015) took advantage of this
and showed that water level estimates could be derived with a precision of less than 10 cm even for
3
==PAGE:11==
1.
Introduction
small lakes, which is a huge improvement over previous radar altimetry missions.
In one of CryoSat-2’s operational modes it is in many cases possible to separate echos from water
and land surfaces, rather than them being mixed together in the signal that the satellite picks up. Good
signal-processing techniques thus have the potential to dramatically lower the precision of water level
estimates. Kleinherenbrink et al. (2014) and Villadsen et al. (2016) have both developed techniques
that take advantage of this feature for lake level estimation. Kleinherenbrink et al. (2014) retracked
water level estimates for the Lake Nasser reservoir with a precision of approximately 28 cm, while
Kleinherenbrink et al. (2015) used the same method to analyze changes in lake levels on the Tibetan
Plateau and the Tian Shan area. Villadsen et al. (2016) were able to produce water level time series
with an RMSE compared to in-situ gauging of just 5-13 cm for Lake V¨anern and Lake Okeechobee
with precisions of 9-14 cm.
Only two previous studies that have been published in scientiﬁc journals have attempted to use
CryoSat-2 altimetry for the derivation of river water level time series. Villadsen et al. (2015) looked
at the Brahmaputra river but did not have any in-situ data to evaluate against.
They thus only
compared the quality of their time series against Envisat altimetry, which meant that they had to
move the spatially distributed CryoSat-2 observations to a few speciﬁc Envisat crossings through a
simple linear transformation. Despite this crude method of evaluation, they found that their CryoSat-
2 time series showed similar behavior in terms of annual amplitude and timing of season water level
changes. Villadsen et al. (2016) compared a new water level retrieval method to that of Villadsen
et al. (2015) for the Amazon river. They were able to derive river water levels with a precision just
3-4 cm for the various methods if they only considered observations without any topographical noise.
This precision was, however, increased to around 30 cm if they considered all observations that they
in the ﬁrst place had ﬁltered out as having hit a water surface. Compared to in-situ gauging they
obtained an RMSE of 33-39 cm depending on the method.
The most recent study to use CryoSat-2 observations over inland waters is Schneider et al. (2016),
who developed a method that combines the spatially distributed CryoSat-2 altimetry with Envisat
virtual station data for calibration of hydrodynamic river models in places where no in-situ channel
information is available. They illustrated this calibration technique for the Brahmaputra river with
Villadsen et al.’s (2015) CryoSat-2 water levels.
To this day, no studies in the open literature have attempted to assimilate CryoSat-2 observations
in a river routing model.
The purpose of this thesis is therefore to develop such a scheme based
on a simple Muskingum-Cunge routing model for the Brahmaputra river. The model is based on
Michailovsky et al.’s (2013) reach storage routing method, but further developed from their constant
parameter Muskingum model to a variable parameter Muskingum-Cunge model. This will be the ﬁrst
time a storage-based state space model has been set up for a Muskingum-Cunge routing model. The
inclusion of an AR1 error model requires state-augmentation as will be explained later, which is also
developed in this study. Michailovsky et al. (2013) did not account for the eﬀect of the Muskingum
wedge storage on simulated water levels at the speciﬁc location of a water level observation during
their assimilation of water levels with an Extended Kalman Filter. This study shows how a correction
factor can be applied in the measurement operator to account for this and further evaluates the impact
of including this. The uncertainty related to the altimetry will have a large inﬂuence on the behavior
of the assimilation framework, and the thesis will therefore consider a few approaches to evaluate this.
The case study area and the available data will ﬁrst be introduced in Chapter 2. Chapter 3 will
outline how a Muskingum-Cunge reach storage routing model is set up in a state space formulation.
Hereafter, the use of an Extended Kalman Filter for assimilation of water levels, and the speciﬁc
approach to error modeling through state-augmentation will be explained. Chapter 3 ends with a
description of how the CryoSat-2 altimetry is processed before use, and how model performance will
4
==PAGE:12==
be evaluated. The results of this study will be presented and discussed in Chapter 4, while the thesis
is rounded oﬀwith a conclusion in Chapter 5.
5
==PAGE:13==
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 2
Case Study
2.1
The Brahmaputra River and the Assam Valley
The Brahmaputra river is the ﬁfth largest river in the world in terms of discharge, and the 11th in terms
basin area (Thorne et al., 1993). The river runs from the northern side of the Himalayan mountains
in Tibet into the Assam Valley in India, before it ﬁnally meets the Ganges river in Bangladesh and
discharges into the Bay of Bengal as illustrated in Figure 2.1. The Brahmaputra drains a total area of
580,000 m2 from which it also carries around 16 million tons of sediment per year, which makes it the
second most sediment-loaded river in the world (Goswami, 1985). This study considers the section of
the Brahmaputra that is inside the Assam Valley. Here, the river is very braided with frequent, large
sand bars inside the main channel. No major engineering works exist along the Brahmaputra in the
Assam Valley, and parts of the plain is ﬂooded occasionally during the monsoon season (Thorne et al.,
1993). The river is known to be highly morphologically active and the main channel can migrate from
one year to another.
Figure 2.1: Overview of the Brahmaputra river basin.
7
==PAGE:15==
2.
Case Study
2.2
In-situ Gauging Data
In-situ gauging data of the Brahmaputra river is available at one location at Bahadurabad in Northern
Bangladesh. Here, water level is measured and a discharge time series has been computed from a local
rating curve. The data is available for two separate periods. The ﬁrst one is from Jan. 2002 to Dec.
2007, while the second one is from Apr. 2010 to May 2015. It is worth noting that all of the low ﬂow
season data in the second period have large gaps as seen in Figure 2.2.
In general, it is seen that the high ﬂow season occurs during the summer months, which corresponds
to the monsoon period in the Northeastern India and Bangladesh. The maximum annual ﬂow at
Bahadurabad ranges from 4 to 8 ×104 m3s−1. The low ﬂow season is during the winter months, and
minimum annual ﬂow ranges between 0.3 to 0.6 ×104 m3s−1.
Figure 2.2: Time series of available in-situ discharge data at the Bahadurabad gauging station in
Bangladesh.
2.3
Catchment Runoﬀand Tributary Discharge
The routing model in this thesis is forced by data from from Schneider et al. (2016), who built a MIKE
11 model based on an even larger hydrologic-hydrodynamic model for the entire Ganges-Brahmaputra
river system. In general, two types of forcing is applied to the routing scheme in this study: (1) Runoﬀ
from catchments that discharge directly into the modeled section of the Brahmaputra river, and (2)
discharge from major tributaries that join the Brahmaputra within the modeled section of the river.
The part of the Brahmaputra river that is upstream of the modeled section of the river is treated as
a tributary in this study.
Time series of catchment runoﬀis calculated based on NAM rainfall-runoﬀmodels (Nielsen and
Hansen, 1973) that are forced by remotely sensed precipitation from the Tropical Rainfall Measuring
Mission (TRMM), while the necessary temperature and evapotranspiration data is from the ERA-
Interim reanalysis products.
Time series of tributary discharge is from Schneider et al.’s (2016)
MIKE 11 model, which is forced with the same NAM setup. For a detailed description of the speciﬁc
calibration of the NAM models as well as the MIKE 11 model setup, the reader is referred to Schneider
et al. (2016). One aspect of the calibration procedure should, however, be highlighted here. In-situ
runoﬀdata is only available for one of the NAM subcatchments in the entire Brahmaputra basin,
which means that the NAM parameters of all other catchments are based on the properties of this
one subcatchment as well as a few subcatchments in Ganges river basin.
8
==PAGE:16==
2.4.
Satellite Data
Figure 2.3 shows where the seven major tributaries as well as the upstream part of the Brahmaputra
meet the section of the river that is considered in this study. The ﬁgure also highlights the seven
NAM subcatchments that discharge directly into the this study’s routing scheme. Tributary discharge
is added to the model at the exact location where they join the main Brahmaputra stem, while
catchment runoﬀforcing is evenly distributed between the model’s reaches inside the catchment. Here
the runoﬀis added in at the inlet of each reach.
Tributary and catchment runoﬀdata is available for the period of January 2002 to November 2014,
and therefore spans the entire ﬁrst period of in-situ gauging data at Bahadurabad. Only the ﬁrst four
years of the second period are covered.
Figure 2.3: Overview of the parts of the Brahmaputra river that is modeled in this study. The main
part of the river is distinguished from what is considered tributaries, and the subcatchments that
produce runoﬀdirectly to the modeled section of the river are highlighted.
2.4
Satellite Data
This section only provides an overview of the availability of satellite altimetry in the Assam Valley
from the Envisat and CryoSat-2 missions. The speciﬁc processing of the satellite observations for later
use in this study will be discussed later Section 3.5.
2.4.1
Envisat Altimetry
During its lifetime Envisat was on a repeat-orbit with a cycle of 35 days, i.e. it returned to the same
track with 35 day intervals. This means that Envisat crosses the Brahmaputra river at the same
speciﬁc locations again and again, producing a time series of altimetry observations at each point.
These locations are often called virtual gauging stations (VS), and Figure 2.4 shows where along the
9
==PAGE:17==
2.
Case Study
modeled section of the river that Envisat virtual station data is available. The time series of water
level at these stations are available for the period of Oct. 2002 to Sep. 2010, which overlaps with the
ﬁrst period that in-situ discharge measurements are available.
2.4.2
CryoSat-2 Altimetry
As will be further discussed later in Section 3.5, CryoSat-2 is on a drifting orbit with a very long
repeat period of 369 days. This means that within one of the full cycles of 369 days, CryoSat-2 will
cross the Brahmaputra at diﬀerent locations every time it returns. Observations are therefore spaced
along the entire river. Figure 2.4 shows where along the modeled section of the river that CryoSat-2
observations are used in this study. Altimetry data is available for the period of Jun. 2010 to Oct.
2014, which overlaps with the second period of in-situ discharge measurements at Bahadurabad.
Figure 2.4: Locations of Envisat virtual stations (left) and individual CryoSat-2 observations (right)
along the modeled section of the Brahmaputra river.
10
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 3
Theory and Methods
This chapter provides a description of the methods and outlines the thesis’ approach to assimilation
of altimetry to a river routing scheme. It is structured in a way that resembles the workﬂow of the
assimilation algorithm, while explaining the necessary background for each sub-part along the way.
First, the Muskingum-Cunge routing scheme is presented in Section 3.1, whereafter the state space
setup is laid out in Section 3.2. Section 3.3 introduces the data assimilation procedure, while Section
3.4 explains how model error is represented. The basics of satellite altimetry is explained in Section 3.5,
which also introduces how the CryoSat-2 data is processed before use. Finally, Section 3.6 describes
the model calibration procedure before Section 3.7 outlines how model performance will be assessed.
11
==PAGE:19==
3.
Theory and Methods
3.1
Muskingum-Cunge River Routing
Hydrologic river routing is a term used for models that treat individual sections of a river, called
reaches, as lumped entities of storage (Margulis, 2015). In this thesis, the routing method used to
propagate water through the Brahmaputra river is the Muskingum-Cunge method, which will be
described in this section along with a few speciﬁc features of its implementation here.
3.1.1
Muskingum
Muskingum-Cunge river routing builds on the Muskingum method that conceptualizes reach storage
in two compartments (McCarthy, 1938). The ﬁrst is the storage in a prism, which is constant along the
reach, while the second is a wedge component that allows for a variable storage-discharge relationship.
It does so by deﬁning the wedge in terms the diﬀerence between the reach inﬂow, I [L3T −1], and
outﬂow, O [L3T −1]:
S = KO + KX(I −O)
(3.1)
where S [L3] is the reach storage, K [T] is a proportionality coeﬃcient, and X [−] is a weighting
factor that determines the size of the wedge with a range of 0 ≤X ≤0.5. Here, KO deﬁnes the prism
storage, while KX(I −O) is the wedge storage. When a ﬂood is advancing into the reach, the inﬂow
will be larger than the outﬂow and a positive wedge storage is added to prism. When a ﬂood wave is
receding from the reach, the outﬂow will be larger than the inﬂow, producing a negative wedge storage
(Chow et al., 1988). This relationship is illustrated in Figure 3.1.
The mass balance for an individual reach is given as
dS
dt = I −O
(3.2)
and by substituting Equation 3.1 into this and solving the diﬀerential equation with an explicit time-
centered ﬁnite diﬀerence approach, one can obtain the discharge routing equation for the Muskingum
method:
Ot+∆t = C1It+∆t + C2It + C3Ot
(3.3)
where the C-coeﬃcients are dimensionless and deﬁned as
C1 =
∆t −2KX
2K(1 −X) + ∆t
C2 =
∆t + 2KX
2K(1 −X) + ∆t
C3 = 2K(1 −X) −∆t
2K(1 −X) + ∆t
(3.4)
These coeﬃcients sum to unity and the routing equation thus becomes analogous to a weighted sum
of the inﬂow from the current and the previous time step as well as the outﬂow from the previous
time step.
3.1.2
Muskingum-Cunge
The K and X parameters in the Muskingum method are constant for each reach, yet it seems rea-
sonable that they would vary over time depending on the current ﬂow conditions in the river. Cunge
(1969) developed a scheme in which K and X are variable, and connected it to kinematic wave rout-
ing. This extension is known as the Muskingum-Cunge routing method. Cunge (1969) expressed a
kinematic wave model as,
∂Q
∂t + c∂Q
∂x = 0
(3.5)
12
==PAGE:20==
3.1.
Muskingum-Cunge River Routing
Figure 3.1: The Muskingum method’s prism and wedge storage for a reach with a triangular cross-
section. The black lines indicate the prism while the red lines illustrate the water level along the reach
when the wedge storage is taken into account. The left side of the ﬁgure shows the eﬀect of a positive
wedge storage when inﬂow exceeds outﬂow, while the right of the ﬁgure shows the eﬀect of a negative
wedge storage when outﬂow exceeds inﬂow.
where Q [L3T −1] is discharge, c [LT −1] is the wave celerity, and x [L] is the distance along the reach.
He then showed that solving this partial diﬀerential equation with an explicit time-centered ﬁnite
diﬀerence scheme, and using X as a space-weighting factor yields the exact same expression as in
Equation 3.3, if K and X are deﬁned as
K = ∆x
c
(3.6)
X = 1
2

1 −
Q
BS0c∆x

(3.7)
where B [L] is the width of the water surface in the reach, ∆x [L] is the reach length, and S0 [−] is
the bed slope. When X is deﬁned in this way the numerical dispersion from the solution to the partial
diﬀerential equation equals the physical dispersion (Todini, 2007).
The Muskingum-Cunge parameters should be estimated based on the ﬂow conditions of the time
step that the model is propagated into. However, these are unknown and several iterative parameter
estimation schemes have been proposed in the literature to cope with this (e.g. Todini (2007)). In this
study, a simpliﬁcation is made as the parameters are estimated from the previous time step’s storage
and discharge estimates.
Manning’s equation is an empirical formulation for the friction slope and can under the assumption
of uniform ﬂow (friction slope equals bed slope) be used to estimate channel ﬂow, which is very common
within surface water hydrology (Beven, 2011).
Under the assumption of uniform ﬂow, Manning’s
equation is given as:
Q = 1
nAR2/3S1/2
0
(3.8)
where n [TL−1/3] is Manning’s roughness, A [L2] is the cross-sectional area, and R [L] is the hydraulic
radius.
Wave celerity is deﬁned as dQ
dA and by using the fact that the hydraulic radius is given as the
cross-sectional area over the wetted perimeter, celerity can be estimated by diﬀerentiation Manning’s
equation with respect to the area:
ct−1 = dQt−1
dAt−1
= 5
3
S1/2
0
n
A2/3
t−1
Per2/3
t−1
(3.9)
13
==PAGE:21==
3.
Theory and Methods
where Per [L] is the wetted perimeter of a cross-section. At−1 is in this study estimated as the average
cross-sectional area in the reach:
At−1 = St−1
∆x
(3.10)
where S [L3] here is the reach storage. The wetted perimeter and the reach surface width can then
be estimated for a triangular cross-section as
Pert−1 = 2
p
At−1 cot(α)
cos(α)
(3.11)
Bt−1 = 2
p
At−1 cot(α)
(3.12)
with α [rad] being the river bank slope.
Once K and X have been computed, the C-coeﬃcients are computed as for the constant parameter
Muskingum method (Equation 3.4).
The following criteria must hold to avoid getting negative C-coeﬃcients, which potentially can
create numerical instabilities:
2KX < ∆t < 2K(1 −X)
(3.13)
With a non-varying spatial discretization of the river into reaches, it can be diﬃcult to ﬁnd a single
∆t that make the criteria hold for all reaches in the river at the same time. In this study, a ∆t is
chosen at each time step so that as few reaches as possible fail to meet the criteria.
3.2
State Space Representation
The only paper in the open literature to have developed a state-space representation of Muskingum-
Cunge routing is Georgakakos et al. (1990). They showed how a downstream reach becomes dependent
on all upstream reaches’ Muskingum-Cunge coeﬃcients, and used this routing scheme to assimilate
ﬂow measurements into a discharge forecasting model. Michailovsky et al. (2013) set up a state-space
representation of a Muskingum scheme with states based on reach storages instead of reach outﬂow
as in Georgakakos et al. (1990). The constant Muskingum parameters where calibrated based on a
budyko-type rainfall-runoﬀmodel as well as channel ﬂow velocity. They furthermore showed that
the constant parameters simplify the state-space implementation as several terms in the model setup
cancel out.
The routing scheme in this study builds on both of these studies. It diﬀers from that in Georgakakos
et al. (1990) as it propagates reach storages opposed to reach outﬂow, which makes the derivation of
the state-space representation more elaborate. It diﬀers from that of Michailovsky et al. (2013) as
the Muskingum parameters and coeﬃcients are variable in time. The constant parameters allowed
Michailovsky et al. (2013) to estimate the storage in any given reach along the river with a concise
expression. However, when the parameters are variable the derivation of the storage-based state-space
becomes much more complicated. This section outlines how a state-space Muskingum-Cunge storage
routing scheme can be formulated.
In the following, matrices are denoted in bold font F, vectors are in bold and italicized font S,
while individual vector and matrix elements are italicized Si,j.
State-space representations are formulations where the model states are set up in a vector, and seen
as a function of previous state values, model parameters and forcing data Liu and Gupta (2007). For
a simple system this can be written as
St+1 = F · St + G · M t+1
(3.14)
14
==PAGE:22==
3.2.
State Space Representation
Figure 3.2: Illustration of how the runoﬀfrom catchment N −1 is drained into the reach N −1’s
inlet.
where F and G are matrix operators applied to the state values, St, and the forcing, M t+1, respec-
tively. This general equation is known as the state transition equation.
Muskingum-type schemes rely on both the previous and the current time step’s forcing data, which
means that an additional forcing operator has to be included in the state transition equation:
St+1 = F · St + G1 · M t + G2 · M t+1
(3.15)
The normal discharge based Muskingum equation (Equation 3.3) needs to be formulated in terms
of reach storage, which is done via the storage-discharge relationship deﬁned in Equation 3.1. This
yields the following storage-based routing equation for any given reach:
St+1 = (θt+1C1 + ϕt+1) It+1 + θt+1

C2 −C3
ϕt
θt

It + θt+1
θt
C3St
(3.16)
where ϕ = K · X and θ = K · (1 −X) has been introduced for the sake of brevity. It is also worth
noting, that all C’s are deﬁned for time step t + 1.
The inﬂow to a reach is dependent on the outﬂow from its upstream neighbor, and is in this study
deﬁned as
IN,t+1 = ON−1,t+1 + MN,t+1
(3.17)
where subscript N denotes the reach number, ON−1 the upstream reach outﬂow and MN the catchment
runoﬀ. Here, MN is the runoﬀfrom the upstream reach’s catchment, which is added to the reach
outﬂow to produce the inﬂow the downstream reach. Figure 3.2 clariﬁes this choice of notation.
Most Muskingum-type routing schemes are calculated sequentially from upstream to downstream
at each time step, and ON−1,t+1 in Equation 3.17 is thus known before IN,t+1 is used in Equation
3.16. However, all state values at time t + 1 is calculated at the same time in state-space models, and
ON−1,t+1 thus has to be substituted with Equation 3.3 where the I’s and O’s has to be deﬁned in
terms of Equations 3.16 and 3.17. As more reaches are added to the system, the expression for the
downstream reach quickly becomes complicated.
The full, general expression for the Nth reach storage at time step t + 1 deﬁned in terms of its
own and all upstream reaches’ storages from the previous time step, as well as the catchment runoﬀ
to itself and all upstream reaches in the past and present time step is:
15
==PAGE:23==
3.
Theory and Methods
SN,t+1 =
 θN,t+1C1,N + ϕN,t+1

·
N
X
j=1

Mj,t+1 ·
N−1
Y
k=j
C1,k

+
 θN,t+1C1,N + ϕN,t+1

·
N−1
X
j=1


Mj,t


N−j
X
k=1


N−1
Y
b=N+1−k
C1,b




N−1−k
Y
b=j
−ϕb,t
θb,t



C2,N−k + C3,N−k
−ϕN−k,t
θN−k,t




+
θN,t+1

C2,N + C3,N
−ϕN,t
θN,t

·
N
X
j=1

Mj,t
N−1
Y
k=j
−ϕk,t
θk,t

+
θN,t+1
θN,t
C3,N · SN,t+
θN,t+1

C2,N + C3,N
−ϕN,t
θN,t

·
N−1
X
j=1

1
θj,t
Sj,t
N−1
Y
k=j+1
−ϕk,t
θk,t

+
 θN,t+1C1,N + ϕN,t+1

·
N−2
X
j=1

1
θj,t
Sj,t


N−j−1
X
k=1


N−1
Y
b=N+1−k
C1,b




N−1−k
Y
b=j+1
−ϕb,t
θb,t



C2,N−k + C3,N−k
−ϕN−k,t
θN−k,t



+
 θN,t+1C1,N + ϕN,t+1

·
N−1
X
j=1

1
θj,t
C3,jSj,t
N−1
Y
k=j+1
C1,k


(3.18)
The matrices F, G1 and G2 in the state transition equation (Equation 3.15) can all be computed
from Equation 3.18. This is done by summing the parts that are multiplied with St, Mt and Mt+1,
respectively, in the appropriate matrix elements.
3.3
Data Assimilation
A popular way to assimilate data into environmental models is through the Kalman ﬁlter, or one of
its variations. In this study, the extended Kalman ﬁlter (EKF) is used. For the following explanation
of how the EKF works and the way that it has been implemented here, a few notation elements have
to be deﬁned. Superscript f and a refers to forecast and analysis, respectively. Forecast is used to
describe a state that has been propagated forward in time, while analysis describes a forecasted state
that has been updated with an observation. Superscript T means that the object is transposed, while
subscripts t refers to time, m to model, and o to observation.
3.3.1
The Extended Kalman Filter
The standard Kalman ﬁlter can be applied to any linear, state space formulated model (Beven, 2009).
For the generic state-space transition in Equation 3.14 this becomes
sf
t+1 = F · st + G · mt + Γ · ωt
(3.19)
where sf
t+1 is the forecasted state vector. Γ·ωt has been added here compared to Equation 3.14, with
ωt being a Gaussian white noise process describing the model error, while Γ is the error operator.
For a Muskingum-Cunge routing schemes which depend on last time step’s forcing as well as this
one’s, the state transition equation will be:
sf
t+1 = Ft+1 · st + G1t+1 · mt + G2t+1 · mt+1 + Γt+1 · ωt
(3.20)
Note that the F, G and Γ operators have a time-related subscript now as they vary in time depending
on the Muskingum parameters.
16
==PAGE:24==
3.3.
Data Assimilation
Assimilating data with a Kalman ﬁlter requires an estimate of model uncertainty, which is deﬁned
in the state covariance matrix, P. This state covariance matrix is propagated forward in time by the
state operator F:
Pf
t+1 = Ft+1 · Pt · FT
t+1 + Γt+1 · Qt+1 · ΓT
t+1
(3.21)
where Q is the covariance matrix for the errors described by ωt.
The Kalman ﬁlter is used to update a model by incorporating information from an incoming
observation with a given uncertainty
Zo = zo + r
(3.22)
where zo is the observed quantity, r is a Gaussian white noise term that reﬂects the uncertainty related
to the observation, and Zo is the used estimate of the observation.
The observation is compared to the model’s estimate of the same quantity that was measured.
This is done by projected the model states into the measurement space:
Zm = H · sf
t+1
(3.23)
where H is the measurement operator that is used to translate the model space into the measurement
space at the location of the observation.
The information from the observed quantity is weighted against the information from the model by
the Kalman gain. The Kalman gain is essentially a factor that is computed as the model uncertainty
divided by the total uncertainty in the system (the sum of model and observational uncertainty).
KG = Pf
t+1 · HT ·

H · Pf
t+1 · HT + R
−1
(3.24)
where R is the covariance matrix of the uncertainty described by r.
The model states can then be updated by multiplying the Kalman gain with the diﬀerence between
the model estimate and the measurement, which is also known as the innovation.
sa
t+1 = sf
t+1 + KG · (Zo −Zm)
(3.25)
The uncertainty on the states has changed as the information from the observation has been
incorporated, and the state covariance matrix thus have to be updated as well:
Pa
t+1 = (I −KG · H) · Pf
t+1
(3.26)
From this expression, it is seen that information from the measurement lowers the uncertainty relative
to the value of the Kalman gain.
3.3.2
Measurement Operator
The Extended Kalman Filter (EKF) is a linearization of the normal Kalman Filter that can be
used when the model operator and/or the measurement operator are non-linear. In this case, the
relationship between water level and reach storage is non-linear, which means that the measurement
operator will have to be linearized.
The cross-sections in this study have a generic triangular shape as will be further discussed in
section 3.6. For triangular cross-sections, the water depth as a function of the cross-sectional area is
given as
h =
p
tan(α) · A
(3.27)
where h [L] is the water level, α [rad] is the bank slope, and A [L2] is the area.
17
==PAGE:25==
3.
Theory and Methods
To get water level as a function of reach storage, Michailovsky et al. (2013) obtained an average
cross-sectional area in the reach by simply dividing the storage, S [L3], with the length of the reach,
∆x [L], yielding
h =
r
tan(α) · S
∆x
(3.28)
As stated this expression will give an average water level in the reach, and not the water level
at the speciﬁc location where an observation has happened. In Muskingum-type routing scheme, the
water level will vary along the reach due to the wedge storage, which size is dependent on the current
ﬂow conditions. Observations from satellites, especially those on drifting orbits, will occur at diﬀerent
locations along the river, and the eﬀect of the wedge storage might thus be signiﬁcant. However, this
has not been taken into account before in assimilation studies in the open literature. To include the
eﬀect of the wedge storage, an improved measurement operator has been developed in this thesis based
on a correction factor that is applied to the h-S relationship.
The water level at a speciﬁc point in the reach can be split into two elements: the water level of
the prism and the water level of the wedge. The prism water level is constant throughout the reach,
while the wedge water level varies along the reach. For the following derivation, a ratio of the wedge
storage to the total reach storage needs to be speciﬁed as:
rw = Swedge
Stotal
=
KX(I −O)
KO + KX(I −O)
(3.29)
Here, the reach inﬂow, I [L3T −1], and the outﬂow, O [L3T −1], can be estimated in a similar fashion
to how the reach storage is propagated in time in Equation 3.18.
The prism storage is then simply given as (1 −rw)stotal, and the water level in the prism can be
found by inserting this in Equation 3.28:
hprism =
r
tan(α)(1 −rw)
∆x
Stotal
(3.30)
While the prism has a triangular cross-section in this study, the wedge on top of it will have a
trapezoidal shape (as illustrated in Figure 3.3). The area of the wedge’s trapezoid can be expressed
as
Awedge = bhwedge +
h2
wedge
tan(α)
(3.31)
where hwedge [L] is the wedge water depth at the speciﬁed location. b [L] is the width of the wedge
bottom, which is also the width of the prism’s water surface, and can be found as
b = 2 ·
s
(1 −rw)Stotal
tan(α)∆x
(3.32)
Another aspect of the wedge is that its water level will be 0 at the reach outlet, while it will linearly
increase (positively when reach inﬂow > outﬂow, and negatively when the opposite is true) towards
the reach inlet. By taking this into account, the wedge’s cross-sectional area at any speciﬁc location
along the reach can be expressed as
Awedge = rwStotal
∆x
2L
∆x
(3.33)
where L [L] is a parameter that describes the distance from the speciﬁc location to the reach outlet.
This way
2L
∆x is a dimensionless factor that ranges from 0 to 2, while rwstotal
∆x
describes the average
wedge water depth.
18
==PAGE:26==
3.3.
Data Assimilation
A general expression for the water depth in the wedge at any location along the reach can thus be
found by combining Equations 3.31, 3.32 and 3.33:
hwedge =
r
tan(α)
∆x
Stotal
 s
1 + rw

2 L
∆x −1

−
√
1 −rw
!
(3.34)
Now the total water depth at any point in the reach as a function of reach storage can be found
by adding hprism and hwedge, which simpliﬁes to
htotal = hprism + hwedge =
s
tan(α)

1 + rw
 2 L
∆x −1

∆x
Stotal
(3.35)
This expression is the measurement operator that the Kalman ﬁlter needs to generate synthetic
measurements. Equation 3.35 is, however, non-linear and has to be linearized by diﬀerentiating it
with respect to forecasted model state:
H = dh
ds

s=sf =
1
s
∆x
tan(α)

1 + rw
 2 L
∆x −1
 · Stotal
(3.36)
This linearized measurement operator can then be used directly in normal Kalman ﬁlter equations.
Figure 3.3: The Muskingum-style prism and wedge storage for a triangular channel with deﬁnitions
of parameters used in the derivation of the measurement operator. In this case, the wedge is positive
while it can be negative when the reach inﬂow is lower than the outﬂow.
19
==PAGE:27==
3.
Theory and Methods
3.4
Error Modeling
Environmental models are simpliﬁed representations of complex real systems and will thus inevitable
contain errors. These errors can come from many places such as the model structure itself and the
external forcing among many other things.
In the Kalman ﬁlter’s state transition equation, model error is accounted for through a Gaussian
white noise term.
The size of this term and its related covariance matrix will deﬁne the model
uncertainty at any given point in time and will be of great importance during the assimilation process.
The use of Gaussian white noise processes here implies that model error is completely random, which
rarely is the case for environmental models (Beven, 2009).
In this study, it is assumed that the dominating source of model uncertainty is the forcing data as it
is based on remotely sensed TRMM rainfall estimates, which are known to contain large uncertainties
(e.g. Fekete et al. (2004)). A multiplicative error term is therefore implemented on the forcing, making
the error relative to the amount of forcing applied to the model at each time step. The model errors are
expected to be correlated in both time and space, and these two aspects will be dealt with separately.
Auto-correlation in the errors is accounted for through an AR1 process:
ωt+1 = a · ωt + εt
(3.37)
where ω is the model error, a is the AR1 parameter, while ε is a Gaussian white noise term. The
a-parameter ought to reﬂect the auto-correlation in the forcing error but since no in-situ runoﬀdata
are available for the case study, it will have to be computed indirectly. By assuming that the auto-
correlation in the forcing data will be similar to that of the routed discharge, an estimate of it is given
by the auto-correlation of the model residuals at the downstream ﬂow gauging station:
wt = Qinsitu,t −Qmodel,t
Qinsitu,t
(3.38)
where wt [−] are the normalized residuals, while Qinsitu [L3T −1] and Qmodel [L3T −1] are the measured
and simulated ﬂow at the most downstream location of the considered river section, respectively. In
this study, the a and ε parameters are hereafter derived with Matlab’s in-built estimate-function,
which is based on Maximum Likelihood estimation.
Including an AR1 error model in variations of the Kalman ﬁlter has to be done by augmenting
the state vector with the error terms (Jazwinski, 1970). Examples of state augmentation applications
within environmental modeling can be found in Baek et al. (2006) and Zupanski and Zupanski (2006),
both of which used it to represent model bias in ensemble Kalman ﬁltering schemes. Michailovsky
et al. (2013) also used state-augmentation in their assimilation of water levels to simulated reach
storages, where their error estimates were applied directly to the reaches were each forcing element is
used. In this study, errors in the forcing data will propagate through the routing scheme in the same
way that the forcing is propagated, i.e. through the G-operators in Equation 3.15. This is taken care
of by augmenting the state operator, F, with the forcing operators. The new, augmented state vector
and operators are deﬁned as
S′
t =


St
ωt
ωt+1

, F′
t+1 =


Ft+1
G1t+1MD
t
G2t+1MD
t+1
0
0
I
0
0
α · I

,
G1′
t+1 =


G1t+1
0
0

, G2′
t+1 =


G2t+1
0
0

, Γ′
t+1 =


0
0
Γt+1


(3.39)
In this expression, MD is a matrix where the RR forcing in the considered time step is in the
diagonal with all other values being zero. By putting the forcing in the diagonal the error becomes
20
==PAGE:28==
3.4.
Error Modeling
relative to the size of the forcing, when F′ is multiplied with the augmented state vector. Note also
that 0 are matrices full of zeros, while I are identity matrices.
The new state transition equation for the EKF with the error model thus become:
Sf
t+1 = F′
t+1 · St + G1′
t+1 · mt + G2′
t+1 · mt+1 + Γ′
t+1 · εt+1
(3.40)
Spatial correlation in the forcing error is taken care of in the Kalman ﬁlter’s error covariance
matrix, Q. The errors are assumed to be spatially correlated in the same way that the forcing is
spatially correlated, and thus included as:
Q′ =


0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
C · σ(ε)2


(3.41)
where C is the spatial correlation of the forcing and σ(ε)2 is the variance of the AR1 model’s ε.
21
==PAGE:29==
3.
Theory and Methods
3.5
Satellite Altimetry
This section will provide a brief, general overview of how altimetry is estimated from space with radar
technology, as well as the speciﬁc features that make CryoSat-2 a unique satellite-mission for inland
water level estimation. Hereafter, the processing of CryoSat-2 observations for use in this study will
be outlined.
3.5.1
The Basics of Satellite-based Radar Altimetry
During this general introduction to radar altimetry from satellites, key expressions that are relevant
for the discussion of this study are italicized.
Radar altimetry works by emitting a microwave pulse from a satellite towards the ground below
it, and this pulse is then reﬂected oﬀthe surface of the Earth. The type of surface and the incidence
angle will determine how much of the pulse that is scattered back in the direction of the satellite,
where it is measured upon return.
The satellite only measures return signals within a certain time-window, which is split into bins of
equal size. Each of these bins will have a measure of the power of the returned echo, as illustrated in
Figure 3.4. This record of the echo’s power against the elapsed time since the pulse-emission is known
as a waveform (Calmant et al., 2008).
When the satellite emits a pulse it does not just hit a single point on the Earth’s surface. As the
pulse travels down, the area which it illuminates will increase as illustrated by the increasing cone
of light that a ﬂashlight makes when it is pulled away from a ﬂat surface. The area of the ground
which is illuminated by the satellite is known as its beam-limited footprint, and delineates the part of
the Earth surface that the satellite will receive echos from. By taking the pulse duration (the short
amount of time at which microwaves are emitted from the satellite) into account, it is possible to
estimate the ground area that is illuminated between the time the leading edge of the pulse hits the
ground to the time the trailing edge of the pulse arrives - this is known as the pulse-limited footprint
(Scagliola, 2013). The point on the Earth’s surface directly below the satellite is known as nadir.
Though the satellite receives echos from the entire pulse-limited footprint, the reﬂection from nadir
will be the most powerful as well as the ﬁrst signal to arrive back at the satellite - on ﬂat and smooth
surfaces. This is due to the fact that parts of the light that hit oﬀ-nadir, with a certain angle, will be
reﬂected away from the satellite, and it will have to travel a longer distance from and to the satellite
than reﬂection from nadir. On surfaces that are rough and/or have a highly variable topography, the
return signal will be more complicated as further discussed below.
Altimetry can be estimated by measuring the elapsed amount of time between the emission of
the pulse and its return. In a vacuum the pulse would travel at the speed of light and by correcting
for speciﬁc atmospheric conditions (e.g. dry gas components and moisture content) and gravitational
eﬀects that aﬀect the pulse’s velocity, an estimate of the distance traveled from the satellite to the
ground and back to the satellite again can be found (Calmant et al., 2008). This distance is known
as the range and by subtracting this from the known height of the satellite orbit over Earth’s surface,
the altimetry of the point below the satellite can be estimated.
The satellite already has a predicted estimate of the next pulse’s travel time to and from nadir,
and this prediction is used as the center of the time-window where the return signal is measured.
This process is known as tracking of which there generally are two modes: open-loop and closed-
loop. Open-loop tracking is done with prior information from a digital elevation model on-board the
satellite, while closed-loop tracking is based on the travel times of the most recent echos that the
satellite has picked up (Rosmorduc et al., 2011). In areas where the surface topography varies a lot,
closed-loop predictions is often not accurate (Cr´etaux and Birkett, 2006; Gommenginger et al., 2011).
This happens when the reﬂected signal returns to the satellite outside (or partially outside) of the
22
==PAGE:30==
3.5.
Satellite Altimetry
Figure 3.4: Example of a return waveform with estimates of reﬂective power for each measurement
bin. This ﬁgure also illustrates how multiple peaks in a waveform can be created by reﬂections from
diﬀerent types of surfaces within the satellite’s footprint. This speciﬁc waveform is from a CryoSat-2
SARIn observation (Kleinherenbrink et al., 2014).
time-window, and limits the ability to retrieve water heights when the target lake or river is close to
steep cliﬀs, as seen in mountainous areas.
When altimetry has to be estimated from the power of a speciﬁc bin or a few consecutive bins
in the measured waveform, it is done by correcting for the diﬀerence between the predicted travel
time and travel time of that speciﬁc bin. This bin correction is known as re-tracking and has a large
inﬂuence on the ﬁnal altimetry estimate. Many retracking algorithms exist in the literature, and the
choice of algorithm should depend on the intended use of the altimetry estimate. For a review of
available retrackers and further details on the process, the reader is referred to Gommenginger et al.
(2011).
3.5.2
CryoSat-2
The satellite CryoSat-2 was launched in April 2010 with a main objective of monitoring thickness of
sea ice at the poles, ice sheets on Greenland and Antarctica, and glaciers around the world (ESA and
Mullard Space Science Laboratory, 2012). Among other things CryoSat-2 measures altimetry, which
over water bodies can provide estimates of water level in them. There are a couple of notable features
that make CryoSat-2 interesting from a water height estimation perspective: its drifting orbit and its
SIRAL instrument.
CryoSat-2 is on a drifting orbit as opposed to previous altimetry missions, which have been on
repeating orbits. Speciﬁcally CryoSat-2 has a repeat cycle, i.e. time for it to return to the same
speciﬁc orbital track, of 369 days. It does, however, have 30-day subcycles, which means that after 30
days, CryoSat-2 will have returned to a track that is slightly shifted from the previous one (Wingham
et al., 2006). Figure 3.5 illustrates how the drifting orbit leads to a high coverage of the polar regions,
intended to assist with CryoSat-2’s main ice monitoring purpose. Villadsen et al. (2015) explain that
these shifts complicate the construction of water level time series over rivers since the satellite does
not return to the same point, as opposed to previous altimetry missions like ERS-1/2 and Envisat. It
can, however, be beneﬁcial for large lakes as CryoSat-2’s orbit can lead to more frequent overpasses
compared to satellites on return orbits (Nielsen et al., 2015). In this study, the drifting orbit is of
interest as the Brahmaputra River runs in an East-West direction in the Assam Valley, which means
that CryoSat-2 will drift down along the river. According to Kleinherenbrink et al. (2015), CryoSat-
2 drifts around 6.6km in each subcycle at 25 degrees latitude, which is where the Assam Valley is
23
==PAGE:31==
3.
Theory and Methods
Figure 3.5: Illustration of CryoSat-2’s coverage over a three day period (Wingham et al., 2006).
located.
CryoSat-2’s drifting orbit will thus provide frequent overpasses, albeit at many diﬀerent
locations along the river.
CryoSat-2 is the ﬁrst satellite to use a Synthetic Aperture Interferometric Radar Altimeter (SIRAL),
which it uses in three operating modes: Low Resolution Mode (LRM), Synthetic Aperture Radar
(SAR), and Synthetic Aperture Radar Interferometry (SARIn). The LRM works as explained in the
previous section where the circular pulse-limited footprint is the ground area that reﬂects echos back
to the satellite. In SAR mode CryoSat-2 emits microwave pulses in bursts of 64 pulses with a high
frequency, rather than one pulse at a time. Normally the time between pulse emissions is long enough
that consecutive echoes will be uncorrelated, but the pulses within one of CryoSat-2’s bursts are so
frequent that the echoes will be correlated. By looking at all the pulses in one burst together, it is
possible to use the correlation between pulses and separate the echoes into individual strips rather
than normal circular footprints. These strips have a much smaller footprint area in the along-track
direction of the satellite. LRM observations have a circular footprint with a radius of approximately
1.5km, which is reduced to a near-rectangular footprint for SAR observations with dimensions of
roughly 300m (along-track) by 1.5km (across-track) according to Nielsen et al. (2015). The two types
of footprint are illustrated in Figure 3.6. CryoSat-2’s SAR/SARIn footprint is thus quite small relative
to previous satellite missions that have had resolutions of 15-20 km (Kleinherenbrink et al., 2014). In
SARIn mode CryoSat-2 uses two separate antennas, which will receive the returned echoes at slightly
diﬀerent times if it does not come from directly below the satellite. The time diﬀerence between the
detection of an echo at the two antennas can then be used to determine the angle of arrival, and
thus the location of the reﬂecting in the rectangular SAR footprint (ESA and Mullard Space Science
Laboratory, 2012).
CryoSat-2 operates in SAR and SARIn mode over sea ice, inland ice sheets, glaciers etc. - all areas
of interest to cryologists. The speciﬁc regions that are covered by each mode changes over time as
the ESA receives feedback from the scientiﬁc community. The Assam Valley has during CryoSat-2’s
lifetime been within a SARIn mode area due to its proximity to the Himalayan glaciers. This is very
useful, as a small footprint reduces the risk of reﬂections from the surrounding land surfaces, which
can induce noise in the retracking of the waveforms or even lead to outright erroneous water height
estimates. Oﬀ-ranging is a term used to describe when the retracked altimetry estimate has an error
because the signal did not come directly from nadir. When the retracked signal is oﬀ-nadir in the
along-track direction it is called hooking (Villadsen et al., 2016), while it in the across-track direction
is called snagging (Armitage and Davidson, 2014). According to Villadsen et al. (2016), the SAR
observations from CryoSat-2 are not signiﬁcantly aﬀected by hooking due to its small along-track
24
==PAGE:32==
3.5.
Satellite Altimetry
Figure 3.6: The left hand side of the ﬁgure shows how the pulse-limited footprint is deﬁned as the
ground area illuminated between the time of the pulse’s leading and trailing edge reaches the ground.
The right hand side illustrates how the circular pulse-limited footprint can be reduced to rectangular
strips during CryoSat-2’s SAR mode (edited from Scagliola (2013)).
footprint, but snagging will impact the observations. In SARIn mode where the speciﬁc location of
peaks in the waveform can be calculated, the snagging eﬀects can be incorporated into the retracking
method.
CryoSat-2 has an additional beneﬁt of fast decay rates in the return waveforms, which means that
echoes from varying topography will show up as separate peaks in the waveform rather than as a
noisy mixture of signals (Kleinherenbrink et al., 2014). This is also visible in Figure 3.4’s example
waveform. A few studies have developed retracking approaches that take advantage of this for lake
level estimation (Kleinherenbrink et al., 2014, 2015; Villadsen et al., 2016).
3.5.3
Processing of CryoSat-2 observations
The CryoSat-2 observations that are used in this study have been retracked with the method developed
by Villadsen et al. (2015).
This method is based on primary peak retracking, which as its name
suggests is based on locating the largest peak in each return waveform and retracking that only.
Water generally produces brighter reﬂections than the surrounding ground surfaces, which makes this
a reasonable heuristic. The retracking method will, however, be vulnerable to waveform pollution
from the surrounding topography in cases where this heuristic for whatever reason does not hold.
This vulnerability makes it essential to have a good water mask.
In this context, the word mask simply refers to a spatial outline of the water surface, and observa-
tions that fall within the mask is viewed as having hit the water surface. However, the width of rivers
25
==PAGE:33==
3.
Theory and Methods
with very seasonal ﬂow conditions can change signiﬁcantly over the course of the year, and some rivers
are very morphologically active, i.e. turbulent ﬂow conditions and bank erosion can cause the channel
to move over time. These two aspects make it diﬃcult to set up a single binary water mask that
will represent the location of the water surface over time. This study builds on the work of Schneider
et al. (2016), where water masks for the Brahmaputra river were created. The Brahmaputra is a very
morphologically dynamic river, and Schneider et al. (2016) therefore set up a new mask for each year.
The masks are binary ”water/not water” representations of the Brahmaputra river’s outline, and were
created based on an assessment of the Normalized Diﬀerence Vegetation Index (NDVI) in optical im-
ages from the Landsat-missions. The NDVI is an index of the degree of vegetation in an area, which
ranges from -1 to 1. Land surfaces will normally produce NDVI values between 0 and 1 while water
will show up in these analyses as negative values. Singling out negative values can therefore be used to
separate water from land surfaces in the images. The annual masks were set up for the low ﬂow season
when river width is at its lowest, ensuring that the masks are conservative delineations of the water
surface. By doing this the likelihood of ”false positives”, i.e. accepting observations that actually did
not hit a water surface, is reduced.
It is common within the ﬁeld of altimetry for inland water bodies to calculate one single water level
for each satellite track, and then determine the uncertainty on that estimate based on the variations
among individual observations in the track. However, most of these applications are for lakes and
reservoirs wherein the spatial variations in water level usually are small.
If the satellite track is
perpendicular to the river few observations will fall on the water mask. On the other hand, many
observations from a single track can be ﬁltered out as having hit a water surface if the the satellite’s
track crosses the river in a near-parallel way. For the latter case, water observations may be spaced
over long stretches of the river where topography and bathymetry may vary signiﬁcantly. Instead
of evaluating all observations from one track together, they are in this study grouped into clusters
depending on their proximity to each other. Before the clustering itself happens, all observations
are projected onto the river line of Schneider et al. (2016)’s Mike 11 1-D river model. Hereafter,
the observations of a track are grouped with a k-means clustering algorithm, where the k number
of clusters is deﬁned as the distance between the most upstream and most downstream observations
divided by a threshold of 3 km. A cluster’s location on the river line and its altimetry estimate is
deﬁned by the mean location and altimetry, respectively, of its member observations.
Villadsen et al.’s (2015) altimetry estimates do not have any explicit uncertainty attached to them,
which is problematic as the observational uncertainties are a very important part of the Kalman
ﬁltering process. The uncertainties related to the observation clusters will thus have to be determined
in this study. Here, two types of uncertainties will be distinguished: pre-retracking, and retracking +
masking. As explained earlier, several geophysical and atmospheric corrections have to be applied to
the raw data before the waveforms can be retracked. These corrections as well as orbit determination
and the operation of the satellite’s instrument all contain errors. According to Wingham et al. (2006)
and Armitage and Davidson (2014), the orbit determination error for CryoSat-2 is around 6 cm,
while the instrument error for SARIn measurements is around 14 cm. Kleinherenbrink et al. (2014)
estimated the total error budget due to orbit estimation, geophysical and instrumental corrections
for CryoSat-2 to be around 8 cm. The literature thus suggests that pre-retracking uncertainty is in
the range of 8-20 cm. The speciﬁc retracking method as well as the selection of observations through
the water masks will also induce some amount of error in the clusters’ altimetry estimates. Villadsen
et al. (2015) do not attempt to calculate uncertainty related to their retracking algorithm itself, which
makes it diﬃcult to come up with a ﬁnal estimate of this. Though the water masks are conservative it
is not impossible that the selection of observations will contain false positives, which will induce errors
in the ﬁnal cluster water heights. The speciﬁc choice of uncertainty for each cluster will be further
explored in the discussion later in this thesis, but will in general be deﬁned as
ϵtotal = ϵinstrument + ϵprocessing
(3.42)
26
==PAGE:34==
3.6.
Calibration Procedure
where ϵinstrument will be the 8-20 cm deﬁned form the literature, while ϵprocessing will be a function
of the spread in the cluster members’ water levels. The standard deviation of the cluster members’
water levels are used as an initial estimate of ϵprocessing. For clusters that only consist of one or two
observations, and a standard deviation thus cannot be computed, a fairly large error term of 1.5 m
will be used. ϵtotal will be used as the standard deviation in the zero-mean Gaussian distribution that
describe the uncertainty on the observation in the Extended Kalman Filter (r in Equation 3.22).
3.6
Calibration Procedure
As the main aim of this study is to assimilate spatially distributed CryoSat-2 altimetry to a routing
scheme, it will be necessary to have a good simulated representation of water levels along the entire
modeled section of the river. There are, however, no available survey data in terms of bathymetry in
the Brahmaputra, nor are there any in-situ measurements of water level or discharge along the river
other than at the downstream Bahadurabad location. This poses a serious issue for any modeling
attempt, which will thus have to be based on assumptions and indirect inferences related to all of
these aspects.
Schneider et al. (2016) recently developed a framework for cross-section calibration based on re-
motely sensed data. The main idea behind their approach is to set up generically shaped cross-sections
with few parameters, which can then be inferred from satellite-based water height estimates. This
procedure will also be used in this study, which furthermore beneﬁts from the fact that Schneider
et al. (2016) examined the same section of the Brahmaputra.
Generic triangular river cross-sections contain just two parameters, which will have to be estimated:
river bed datum and bank slopes. The river bed datum is given as the height above a reference level,
while the bank slope is deﬁned by the opening angle of the triangle. Schneider et al. (2016) used two
types of altimetry products for estimating these two parameters, namely data from Envisat virtual
stations and spatially distributed CryoSat-2 observations.
Envisat virtual stations contain time series of the water levels for a speciﬁc location and thus
provide a view of water level variations over the course of the year. This information can be used to
calibrate river bank slopes as the opening angle of the triangles will have a direct eﬀect on the degree
of variability in simulated water levels. CryoSat-2 observations will on the other hand be spaced along
the entire river, providing water level estimates that are much less frequent for any given location.
However, if multiple years of CryoSat-2 altimetry is evaluated, it will be possible to derive a dense
spatial representation of water levels spread across the time of the year. These collected observations
will present an image of the water level of one location relative to another, which can be used to
calibrate datums along the river.
For the calibration procedure, triangular cross-sections are spaced along the river with 50 kilometers
between them. The placement of these cross-sections are shown in Figure 3.7. It is seen that cross-
sections are spaced closer together in the uppermost part of the Assam Valley, in fact there is just
12.5 km between them here. This is based on Schneider et al.’s (2016) experiences with calibrating
a hydrodynamic model for the same area. They found that a denser representation of cross-sections
were necessary in the upper valley, as the variation in river bed slope is more variable here than further
downstream.
Between the cross-sections that are ﬁtted, there are additional reaches in the system. The datums
and bank slopes of the cross-sections of these additional reaches are linearly interpolated between
the calibrated cross-sections. The number of these additional reaches in each section of the river has
been determined through a manual trial and error process based on having the stability criteria of the
routing scheme, Equation 3.13, hold for as many reaches as possible.
The calibration procedure consists of three steps: (1) calibrate datums, (2) calibrate bank slopes,
and (3) calibrate Manning’s roughness (see Figure 3.8 for a schematic overview of the entire process).
27
==PAGE:35==
3.
Theory and Methods
Figure 3.7: Nine Envisat VS are available within the modeled section of the river, while CryoSat-2
observations are available between the two blue X’s. The simple triangular cross-section that are ﬁtted
during the calibration procedure are shown with dots along the river.
The results of each of these three steps will aﬀect the other steps, and the procedure will thus be
iterative.
In the ﬁrst step, bed datums are ﬁtted so that the RMSE (Root Mean Square Error) between
the CryoSat-2 altimetry and the mean simulated water levels along the river are minimized. This is
done for the period of 2010-2014 where CryoSat-2 observations are available. The only constraint on
the parameter space during the optimization is that the datums decrease monotonically throughout
the river. A cross-section’s datum can thus not be larger than any upstream cross-section’s datum.
Cross-sections that are within the spatial range of available CryoSat-2 observations will have their
datums calibrated, while those outside of the range will be taken from Schneider et al.’s (2016) larger
hydrodynamic model.
In the second step, bank slopes are ﬁtted so that the RMSE between observed and simulated
average annual water level amplitudes at the Envisat VS locations are minimized. This is done for
the period of 2003 to 2009 where there are full-year records of Envisat altimetry. Simulated water
levels amplitudes at an Envisat VS location will be directly dependent on the bank slopes of the
nearest upstream and downstream cross-sections. On Figure 3.7 it can, however, be seen that not all
cross-sections are directly next to an Envisat VS. Several of the model’s cross-sections are upstream
of the ﬁrst available Envisat VS, while three are downstream of the last VS. As the bank slopes of
these cross-sections cannot be directly calibrated they are during the optimization kept equal to the
each other. This means that cross-sections upstream of the ﬁrst VS will have the same bank slope, as
will the ones downstream of the last VS.
In the third step, Manning’s roughness will be ﬁtted so that the RMSE between simulated and
in-situ measured discharge at Bahadurabad is minimized. This is done for the ﬁrst period of in-situ
measurements, i.e. 2002 to 2007. Manning’s roughness is in this study assumed to be the same for
all reaches, which means that just one parameter is calibrated. Schneider et al. (2016) found that
Manning’s roughness had a minor eﬀect on simulated water levels, while it was very important for the
timing of discharge. They therefore justiﬁed a manual calibration of Manning’s roughness prior to the
cross-section calibration. In this study, this step is brought in as a part of the iterative process.
28
==PAGE:36==
3.6.
Calibration Procedure
Figure 3.8: Overview of the three steps in the calibration of the routing scheme.
The optimization is performed with a simple genetic algorithm (GA). As an initial condition for
the genetic algorithm, Schneider et al.’s (2016) cross-sections and Manning’s roughness were used.
Genetic algorithms are generally inspired by evolutionary biology, where natural selection ensures
that the ﬁttest members of a population get to produce oﬀspring for the next generation. In this
process, mutations ensures that there is variability in the gene pool that natural selection acts upon.
An optimization algorithm based on these principles will ideally examine the entire parameter space
through mutations, while zoning in on the best performing parameter sets through the selection
procedure. The speciﬁc features of the GA used in this study will brieﬂy be outlined here.
The population of parameter sets have a size of 200 for the cross-section calibrations, while it is
lowered to 50 for the Manning’s roughness calibration as only one parameter is evaluated. The best
performing 5% of the population are considered elite and are guaranteed to survive as is to the next
generation. 80% of the population in the new generation will be created from a recombination of genes
that cross-over from the existing population. The rest of the population experiences genetic mutation.
After the objective function has been calculated for all members of the population, the members are
ranked in terms of performance. The higher the rank of a member, the larger the probability will be
that the GA will choose genes from it for the next generation.
The parameter space is constrained for all parameters by an upper and a lower boundary. Schneider
et al. (2016) used simple datum estimates from the SRTM digital elevation model as their ﬁrst guesses
with generous boundaries on the calibration of plus/minus 100 meters. Initial calibration attempts in
this study showed that bed datums never diﬀer more 5-6 meters at most from Schneider et al.’s (2016)
estimates. For the ﬁnal calibration, the bed datums were therefore constrained to be within 15 meters
of their estimates to shorten the computational time needed. Schneider et al.’s (2016) bank slopes
vary between 0.01-2 degrees throughout the Assam Valley. The parameter space for the bank slopes
are in this study conﬁned to be within 0.06 degrees of these values. The United States Geological
Survey’s guide for selecting Manning’s roughness for natural channels suggests that roughness vary
between 0.01-0.07 depending on the speciﬁc conditions in the river Arcement and Schneider (1989).
The parameter space will therefore be conﬁned to this interval.
29
==PAGE:37==
3.
Theory and Methods
3.7
Evaluation Criteria
The model estimates of discharge are in this study probabilistic, and two types of evaluation criteria
are used to evaluate the model performance. The ﬁrst type only evaluates the center estimate of the
conﬁdence intervals, while the second type takes the intervals into account as well.
3.7.1
Center Estimates
The performance criteria used to evaluate the center estimates of the models are the Water Balance
Error (WBE), Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE), and the Nash-Sutcliﬀe Eﬃciency (NSE). In the
following, Q refers to discharge, N refers to the number of observations, while subscript o and m refer
to observation and model, respectively.
MAE is deﬁned as
WBE =
PN
i=1 Qo,i
PN
i=1 Qm,i
(3.43)
RMSE is deﬁned as
RMSE =
v
u
u
t 1
N
N
X
i=1
(Qo,i −Qm,i)2
(3.44)
NSE is a term that ranges from −∞to 1, where a score of 1 is a perfect ﬁt, and a score of 0 means
that the model is no better than the mean of the observations at representing them. It is deﬁned as
NSE = 1 −
PN
i=1 (Qo,i −Qm,i)2
PN
i=1
 Qo,i −Qo
2
(3.45)
where Qo refers the mean of the observations.
3.7.2
Uncertainty Intervals
In this study, all considered uncertainty intervals have a conﬁdence of 95%. The performance of the
95% conﬁdence intervals are assessed in terms of coverage, sharpness, Interval Skill Score, and Contin-
uous Ranked Probability Score (CRPS). Coverage simply refers to the percentage of observations that
fall within the bounds of the interval, while sharpness is calculated as the mean width of the interval.
Gneiting and Raftery (2007) deﬁnes the ISS as
ISSα =
N
X
i=1
issα(li, ui, Qo,i)
(3.46)
(u −l)
if
l < Qo < u
issα
=
(u −l) + 2/α(l −x)
if
Qo < l
(u −l) + 2/α(x −u)
if
Qo > u
(3.47)
where u is the upper bound and l is the lower bound of the α-level conﬁdence interval. For 95%
conﬁdence intervals, α is 0.05. The ISS thus includes a penalty for observations that fall outside of
the interval, with this penalty being dependent on the distance to the nearest interval boundary and
the degree of conﬁdence in the interval.
The continuous ranked probability score (CRPS) is a criteria used for probabilistic forecasts, which
allows for an evaluation of the entire probability distribution of a forecast rather than simply evaluating
the uncertainty interval of a chosen conﬁdence level. The CRPS can be seen as a generalization of
30
==PAGE:38==
3.7.
Evaluation Criteria
the deterministic performance score mean absolute error (Hersbach, 2000), and is interpretable as the
area between a forecast’s cumulative distribution function and a unit step function located at the
observation value. This skill score thus rewards both accuracy and precision. The crps is visualized
in Figure 3.9 for a single probabilistic forecast and a deterministic observation. Gneiting et al. (2005)
has shown that the CRPS for a single normally distributed forecast is given by
crps(Qo, Qm, σ) = σ
Qo −Qm
σ
(2Φ −1) + 2φ −
1
√π

(3.48)
where φ is the probability and Φ is the cumulative probability of the observation being an outcome
of the probabilistic forecast.
The mean of a time series of computed crps’s will then be directly comparable to a deterministic
forecasting model’s MAE:
CRPS = 1
n
n
X
i=1
crps (Qo,i, Qm,i, sigmai)
(3.49)
Figure 3.9: The pdf (left) and cdf (right) of a probabilistic forecast are shown as a full line, while
an observation is indicated as a dotted line. The crps is given as the highlighted area between the
cumulative pdf and the observation.
31
==PAGE:39==
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 4
Results and Discussion
This section presents and discusses the results of the work produced for this thesis. First the cross-
section calibration is evaluated in Section 4.1, whereafter the AR1 model parameters are ﬁtted to
the discharge residuals at Bahadurabad in Section 4.2. A base model run without assimilation of
altimetry is shown in Section 4.3, and the ﬁrst attempt at assimilation is described in Section 4.4.
The simulated water levels of this assimilation run is compared to the observations in Section 4.5, while
the representation of model and observation error are re-evaluated in Section 4.6 and 4.7, respectively.
New error representations are applied in a second assimilation attempt in Section 4.8. Finally, the
eﬀect of the correction to the measurement operator in the EKF is evaluated in Section 4.9, before
ideas on future improvements of this routing scheme as well as general improvements in the use of
radar altimetry in river models are presented in Section 4.10.
33
==PAGE:41==
4.
Results and Discussion
4.1
Cross-Section Calibration
In this section the results of the cross-section calibration are shown relative to the initial parameter
values, which come from Schneider et al.’s (2016) MIKE11 1-D routing model. Doing it this way
provides an image of how diﬀerent river routing schemes aﬀect the resulting channel geometry after
it has been through the exact same calibration procedure.
4.1.1
Datums
After having iterated through the calibration process twice, the resulting datums and average simulated
water levels along the Assam Valley are shown in Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Results of the datum calibration relative to the datums in Schneider et al.’s (2016)
hydrodynamic model.
From Figure 4.1, it is clear that CryoSat-2 altimetry from the upper-most part of the modeled
section of the river is very erratic. Everything before chainage 2.05 × 106 is actually upstream of the
Assam Valley itself, inside a gorge that the Brahmaputra passes through before it enters the valley.
The observations in this part are clearly polluted by the surrounding topography, which questions the
calibration of this section and also limits the usability of observations from this part in an assimilation
scheme.
It is also worth noting that the average simulated water levels after the calibration do not follow
the CryoSat-2 altimetry well between chainage 2.05×106 and 2.15×106. To explain this it is necessary
to distinguish between the cross-sections that are calibrated in the iterative procedure, and the reach
discretization of the routing model. The placement of the cross-sections that are calibrated in the
iterative procedure were adopted from Schneider et al. (2016), while the spatial discretization of
the routing model’s reaches is based on an initial manual evaluation of being able to comply with
the Muskingum-Cunge stability criteria throughout the model with a single time step. The cross-
section parameters of the model’s reaches are then interpolated linearly between cross-sections that
are calibrated. When the model discretization is larger than the distance between the calibrated cross-
sections, some details of the calibration will be lost. This is the case upstream of chainage 2.15 × 106
a shown in Figure 4.2. Figure 4.1 also shows that the average simulated water levels fail to track
the CryoSat-2 altimetry well here. This issue could be resolved by making the spatial discretization
of the model ﬁner in this section of the river, which might also lead to it being necessary to change
the model discretization in other places in order to comply with the routing scheme stability criteria.
Ideally this would be resolved, but due to the computational time needed for the entire calibration
34
==PAGE:42==
4.1.
Cross-Section Calibration
procedure it was not possible to revisit this problem within the deadline of this thesis. The simulated
water levels in this part of the river will therefore not correspond well to the CryoSat-2 altimetry, and
observations upstream of chainage 2.15 × 106 will not be assimilated to the model in the subsequent
result sections.
Figure 4.2: Comparison of the placement of the calibrated cross-sections and the reach discretization
in the model.
Figure 4.1 also shows that the simulated water levels downstream of chainage 2.8 × 106 increase
compared to the initial water levels. The reason for this will be evident in the next section about the
calibration of bank slopes. It is also noteworthy that almost all datums are adjusted downward by the
calibration. Some datums are lowered as much as 7 m compared to Schneider et al.’s (2016) datums.
The reason for this will also be apparent in the next section.
Table 4.1 shows the RMSE between average simulated water levels and CryoSat-2 altimetry (the
objective function for the datum calibration) before and after the calibration. Here, it is seen that
the calibration has improved the RMSE with 27%. This improvement is, however, reduced to 4%
when only the part of the river between chainage 2.15 × 106 and 2.8 × 106. The initial cross-sections
already produced average simulated water levels that tracked the observations well, and it is thus not
surprising that the calibration only improved this slightly.
Table 4.1: Objective function values before and after the calibration.
Values in the parenthesis
denotes RMSE between average simulated water levels and CryoSat-2 altimetry within chainage 2.15×
106 and 2.8 × 106.
Model
RMSE [m]
Initial Values
4.41 (2.35)
After Calibration
3.22 (2.26)
35
==PAGE:43==
4.
Results and Discussion
4.1.2
Bank Slopes
After the second iteration of the calibration procedure, the ﬁnal bank slope estimates for the model
were found. The new bank slopes are shown in Figure 4.3 relative to the initial values for the calibra-
tion.
Figure 4.3: Calibrated bank slopes relative to the initial values.
In Figure 4.3, it is seen that all bank slopes except for the most upstream part of the calibrated
section of the river have been increased. These increased bank slopes lead to larger water depths in the
river, which explains why almost all of the datums along the river were lowered during the calibration
as the average simulated water levels would be aﬀected by this. In Figure 4.1 for the datum calibration,
it was seen that the average simulated water levels increased at the most downstream part of the river
relative to the initial values. This can be explained as a result of the bank slope calibration. The
downstream cross-sections’ bank slopes are increased quite signiﬁcantly, while the lack of CryoSat-
2 observations in this section made it impossible to adjust the datums in the iterative calibration
procedure.
Figure 4.4 shows the average annual water level amplitudes for each of the 12 Envisat VS used for
the bank slope calibration. Here, it is seen that the initial bank slopes lead to a large underestimation
of water level amplitudes. This explains why the bank slopes were increased in most of the river, as
larger bank slopes lead to larger water level variations over the course of the year.
Figure 4.4: Average annual water level amplitudes at the 12 Envisat VS locations. The observed
amplitudes are shown next to the simulated amplitudes for the initial and the calibrated model.
Table 4.2 shows the RMSE between observed and simulated annual water level amplitudes. The
calibration improved the RMSE with almost 70%, mainly due to the large improvements in the
36
==PAGE:44==
4.1.
Cross-Section Calibration
downstream half of the river.
Table 4.2: Objective function values before and after the calibration of bank slopes.
Model
RMSE [m]
Initial Values
2.76
After Calibration
0.85
4.1.3
Manning’s Roughness
Manning’s roughness was calibrated such that the RMSE between observed and simulated discharge
at Bahadurabad for the period of 2002 to 2007 was minimized. The calibration yielded a Manning’s
roughness of 0.0313, and thus a small change from the initial 0.03.
The diﬀerence in simulated
discharge from this change in Manning’s roughness is shown in Figure 4.5 for one of the years in the
calibration period.
Figure 4.5: Observed and simulated discharge before and after the calibration of Manning’s roughness
for on of the years in calibration.
Table 4.3 shows the objective function value before and after the calibration. Here, it seen that
the calibration improved the RMSE with almost 8%.
Table 4.3: Objective function values before and after the calibration of Manning’s roughness.
Model
RMSE [m3/s]
Initial Values
4,258
After Calibration
3,923
37
==PAGE:45==
4.
Results and Discussion
4.2
Error Model Parameters
The AR1 error model’s parameters are estimated on for the ﬁrst period of available in-situ gauging
data of 2002 to 2007. This is done by running a model with the calibrated cross-sections and Manning’s
roughness for this period. Figure 4.6 shows the modeled discharge against the in-situ gauging data,
as well as the associated normalized residuals.
Figure 4.6: Observed and simulated discharge for the calibrated model (upper). Normalized residuals
for the same period (lower).
Fitting an AR1 error model to the normalized residuals yields the following parameters:
a = 0.997 ;
σ(ε) = 0.0181
(4.1)
It is clear from this a-parameter that there is a high level of temporal correlation in the residuals.
38
==PAGE:46==
4.3.
Base Run
4.3
Base Run
Subsequent assimilation attempts in this thesis will be compared to a base model run that is produce
by using the calibrated cross-sections and the AR1 model parameters shown in Equation 4.1 in the
routing scheme.
Figure 4.7: Simulated discharge with 95% conﬁdence intervals for the base run.
Table 4.4 shows the model performance of the base run. RMSE for the period 2002 to 2007 was
after the second iteration of the calibration scheme 3,923 m3/s. This good model performance is seen
to decline to 7,548 m3/s for the second period of 2010 to 2014 with the base run. While this compar-
ison cannot be considered a strict split-sample validation as the bed datums were calibrated against
CryoSat-2 altimetry for the same period as the evaluation, it does illustrate how model performance
has changed. A NSE of 0.76 shows that the base run generally ﬁts the discharge observations at
Bahadurabad well, despite a 13.5% water balance error. The 95% conﬁdence intervals cover 91% of
the observations.
Table 4.4: Evaluation of initial assimilation attempt.
Criteria
Base Run
NSE [-]
0.76
RMSE [m3/s]
7,548
WBE [%]
+13.5
Coverage
91.4
Sharpness [m3/s]
22,889
ISS [m3/s]
1.14×108
CRPS [m3/s]
4,659
39
==PAGE:47==
4.
Results and Discussion
4.4
Assimilation of CryoSat-2 Altimetry
For the assimilation of CryoSat-2 water heights to the routing scheme, the uncertainty of the cluster
estimates will at ﬁrst be calculated as:
ϵtotal = ϵinstrument + ϵprocessing = 0.2m + σcluster
(4.2)
where the 0.2 m acts as a base level of uncertainty that is added to all clusters based on Wingham et al.
(2006) and Armitage and Davidson (2014) description of the errors related CryoSat-2’s instrument
and the geophysical corrections that are applied during the altimetry estimation. σcluster describes the
standard deviation of a cluster’s observation members.
The result of assimilating these observations to the routing scheme is shown in Figure 4.8. Here
it is seen that the model now exhibits large ﬂuctuations in discharge. The conﬁdence interval is very
small and does not track the observed discharge well. From Table 4.5 it is seen that this ﬁrst attempt
at assimilation has worsened all performance criteria except for interval sharpness.
The collapse of the interval suggests that there are issues with the representation of errors related to
the model, observations or both. The drastic sudden changes in discharge suggests that the diﬀerence
between simulated and observed water levels is large, at least in some cases. In the following sections,
each of these issues will be further explored through an examination of simulated versus observed
water levels in the river, a re-evaluation of the model error representation, and a re-evaluation of the
uncertainty related to the CryoSat-2 water heights.
Figure 4.8: Simulated discharge and its corresponding 95% conﬁdence interval for the ﬁrst assimila-
tion attempt.
Table 4.5: Evaluation of initial assimilation attempt.
Criteria
Base Run
First Assimilation Run
NSE [-]
0.76
0.04
RMSE [m3/s]
7,548
15,073
WBE [%]
+13.5
+30.7
Coverage
91.4
23.6
Sharpness [m3/s]
22,889
10,640
ISS [m3/s]
1.14×108
1.25×109
CRPS [m3/s]
4,659
10,922
40
==PAGE:48==
4.5.
Evaluation of Simulated and Observed Water Levels
4.5
Evaluation of Simulated and Observed Water Levels
The large sudden changes in the simulated discharge from the ﬁrst assimilation run could for instance
be the result of including altimetry that have been polluted by surrounding topography. Including
large outliers might disrupt the assimilation scheme. The cluster water heights are therefore plotted
against simulated water levels from the base run (i.e. without any assimilation) in Figure 4.9. From
this plot, it is clear that there is a bias in the simulated water levels. In the ﬁrst half of the modeled
section of the river, the CryoSat-2 clusters are almost all larger than the simulated water level at the
same time and location. The mean diﬀerence of all observations and simulated water levels shows a
bias of +0.77 m. It is also interesting that the diﬀerence in water levels often exceeds ﬁve meters,
which is signiﬁcant and can lead to the kind of abrupt updates during assimilation that were in the
ﬁrst assimilation attempt.
The reason for the bias in water levels might be due to the calibration methodology itself. As
explained earlier, the datum calibration relies on ﬁtting average simulated water levels to observed
altimetry. For this to be a good approach, each part of the river needs altimetry observations spread
across the various seasons of ﬂow. If radar altimetry is available for only the high or low ﬂow season,
ﬁtting average simulated water levels can lead to a bias in the calibrated datums. Figure 4.10 provides
an overview of the number of available CryoSat-2 observations as well as their timing over the year in
terms of high or low ﬂow season along the river. Here, the high ﬂow season is deﬁned as being from
May to October, while low ﬂow occurs during November to April. In this ﬁgure, a horizontal row
illustrates a single section of the river for which an uneven temporal distribution of altimetry data
is undesired. It turns out that there in general are more observations available during the low ﬂow
season for most parts of the river, which could be problematic for the datum calibration step.
This issue becomes more evident when the CryoSat-2 water heights are compared to simulated
water levels. Figure 4.11 shows the same data as Figure 4.9, but with the ratio between the number
of observations in the low and high ﬂow seasons as well. Here, there seems to be a visible relationship
between the low/high ﬂow ratio and the bias in the simulated water levels.
This bias in simulated water levels will undoubtedly aﬀect the performance of the assimilation
attempts in the rest of this thesis, but adjusting for it would require re-evaluating Schneider et al.’s
(2016) calibration procedure, which is both out of the scope for this thesis and not plausible to do
within its deadline. Despite this issue, the ideas related to deﬁning model and observational error in a
scheme that assimilates CryoSat-2 altimetry to a routing model will still be explored in the remaining
Figure 4.9: Diﬀerence between observed water heights and simulated water levels from the ﬁrst
assimilation run.
41
==PAGE:49==
4.
Results and Discussion
Figure 4.10: Overview of when and where CryoSat-2 observations are available for the calibration
and subsequent assimilation attempts. Here low ﬂow season is deﬁned as Nov-Apr while high ﬂow
season is May-Oct.
Figure 4.11: Diﬀerence between observed water heights and simulated water levels from the ﬁrst
assimilation run. This is compared to the ratio between the number of observations in the low ﬂow
and high ﬂow seasons.
parts of this study.
A quick view on the problem related to the risk of biases in the sort of calibration that has been
used this study will be given here. As Schneider et al.’s (2016) calibration procedure separates the
calibration of datums and bank slopes into two separate steps, it could perhaps be possible to ﬁx this
issue by applying a small correction to the datum calibration part. Information about the water level
variations (amplitudes) are provided by the Envisat VS data that is used to calibrate the bank slopes.
This information could perhaps be used to estimate the mean of the true water levels in the river
based on the timing of each CryoSat-2 observation. Another approach could be to move away from
ﬁtting mean simulated water levels, and instead just minimize the diﬀerence between each observation
and the model’s corresponding water level at the same location and time.
42
==PAGE:50==
4.6.
Re-evaluation of Model Uncertainty
4.6
Re-evaluation of Model Uncertainty
Besides the bias in the calibration, it was also seen from the ﬁrst assimilation attempt that the
conﬁdence interval was very small, which led to a large loss of coverage. This could be caused by an
overestimation of the auto-correlation in the model error. In this study, the model error is applied
to the runoﬀforcing, but no in-situ runoﬀdata is available for any of the subcatchments along the
Brahmaputra. The properties of the discharge residuals at the downstream Bahadurabad gauge were
therefore applied to the forcing data. Michailovsky et al. (2013) used the same assumption about the
tranferability of downstream residual properties to the runoﬀforcing, and was in fact the inspiration
for doing it the same way here. Interestingly, they also witnessed a large loss of coverage by using this
type of model error representation in their assimilation scheme, which suggests that there are issues
with this approach. Michailovsky et al. (2013) corrected for this problem by assuming that integration
of the forcing from all subcatchments as well as the smoothing from the routing itself increase the auto-
correlation in the errors. Upon comparison between the auto-correlation of the simulated discharge
at the downstream location and the catchment runoﬀ, they found that runoﬀauto-correlation was
in fact lower. This justiﬁed a correction in the AR1 model parameters that led to better coverage.
Such a comparison of auto-correlation between simulated discharge at Bahadurabad and the forcing
input for the model reaches is shown in Figure 4.12. Each line in the ﬁgure corresponds to the ratio
between auto-correlation in the discharge and auto-correlation in one of the model reach’s runoﬀinput.
It is clear that the temporal correlation in the downstream discharge is more persistent than in the
catchment runoﬀ, which could justify lowering the AR1 coeﬃcient.
Figure 4.12:
The autocorrelation of each forcing element in the model is shown relative to the
autocorrelation of the simulated discharge at Bahadurabad up to lag 20. Each line corresponds to one
forcing input.
Michailovsky et al. (2013) lowered the AR1 coeﬃcient by the average discharge-runoﬀauto-
correlation ratio, and then adjusted the error variance coeﬃcient manually until a similar coverage of
the 95% conﬁdence interval were achieved. In this study, several AR1 model parameter sets will be
examined to see how the model error representation aﬀects the assimilation. Table 4.6 shows AR1 and
error variance coeﬃcients that produce the same level of coverage of 91% of the observations that the
base run achieved.
43
==PAGE:51==
4.
Results and Discussion
Table 4.6: AR1 parameters that produce the same level of coverage as the original parameter values.
a
σε
0.95
0.10
0.90
0.15
0.85
0.21
0.80
0.26
0.75
0.32
0.70
0.39
4.7
Re-evaluation of Observational Uncertainty
During the ﬁrst assimilation run, the uncertainty on the observations were simply deﬁned as the sum
of the uncertainty related to CryoSat-2’s instruments and the geophysical corrections, ϵintrument, as
well as the standard deviation of the cluster members’ water heights, ϵprocessing. This approach does
not take into account whether a cluster consist of few or many observations, and it is thus possible that
the uncertainty is underestimated for clusters that consist of few observations. Figure 4.13 shows the
number of clusters as a function of the number of individual altimetry observations that they consist
of. From this ﬁgure it is seen that most clusters actually only consist of less than ﬁve to six individual
altimetry observations. When the samples are this small it can be diﬃcult to compute meaningful
standard deviations. Figure 4.14 complements Figure 4.13 by showing the assigned uncertainty to
each cluster as a function of the number of observations that it contains. First of all, it should be
noted that all clusters with one or two individual observations are given the same uncertainty as
standard deviations cannot be computed. Hereafter it is interesting that many clusters are assigned
uncertainties as low as 0.2 m, which is equal to the base level of uncertainty from the CryoSat-2
instruments and the geophysical corrections. In these cases, the standard deviation of the cluster
members are near-zero. It is quite possible that assigning such a low uncertainty to a cluster with
few observations will lead to an underestimation of its true uncertainty, which could cause an over-
correction of the modeled discharge during assimilation process. Low uncertainties on the clusters
will also lead to a shrinking of the 95% conﬁdence interval and is perhaps partly to blame for the
loss of coverage in the ﬁrst assimilation attempt. Villadsen et al. (2016) used the same primary peak
retracker over the Amazon river, which enables a comparison with the uncertainty in their water level
estimates. They found that it was possible to retrack water levels for single tracks with an average
standard deviation for the observation members of 0.3 m. This average standard deviation should,
however, be seen in the light of the average number of observations per track, which in their study was
16. None of the clusters used in this study have more than 14 observations, which questions whether
the assigned uncertainty should be as low as Figure 4.14 shows. Add to this that the Brahmaputra
is very braided with sand bars in the main channel that potentially pollute the water levels. The
conservative water masks used to ﬁlter out non-water observations ought to lower the likelihood of
polluted water heights but it also comes with the cost of small samples. There is deﬁnitely room for
more research into the trade-oﬀs between conservative masking that lead to small samples, and more
generous masking that require subsequent outlier removal. In Section 4.10, a discussion of the future
of masking satellite observation over inland water is given that explores the issues mentioned here
further.
44
==PAGE:52==
4.7.
Re-evaluation of Observational Uncertainty
Figure 4.13: Overview of the amount of individual observations that each cluster consists of.
Figure 4.14: Comparison of the uncertainty assigned to each cluster and the number of individual
observations in the cluster.
Accounting for the number of observations in a cluster during the computation of its assigned
uncertainty, could be done through the inclusion of a penalty term. An example of such a modiﬁcation
is:
ϵprocessing = σWL +
1
Nobs
· P
(4.3)
where σWL is the standard deviation of the cluster members’ water levels, Nobs is the number of
observations in a cluster, and P is a penalty term with a unit of length.
Figure 4.15 illustrates how a P value of 3 meters modiﬁes the cluster uncertainties. The eﬀect
of the size of the penalty term on the assimilation of water heights to the routing scheme will be
illustrated later.
45
==PAGE:53==
4.
Results and Discussion
Figure 4.15: Uncertainty assigned to each cluster compared to the number of observations in it with
and without the penalty term.
Despite the fact that conservative masks are used in this study, it is still possible that surrounding
topography can pollute cluster water heights. Villadsen et al. (2016) actually compared their newly
developed persistent peak retracker with the primary peak retracker of Villadsen et al. (2015) for lake
level estimation. They found that there are cases where the primary peak method picks the wrong
peak if a highly reﬂective nearby surface inﬂuence the measurements. This highlights a potential
problem with using a primary peak retracker over a braided river where surrounding topography, both
in terms of the river banks and sand bars inside the channel, often will be in close proximity to the
location of the observations. In order to protect the model against erroneous water levels it can be
necessary to apply some sort of outlier removal in the altimetry data. An example of this is Nielsen
et al. (2015) who used a heavy-tailed distribution to avoid outliers from polluting their mean water
level estimates over lakes. Due to the narrow surface of rivers and the consequent small number of
observations for each satellite track, it will often not be feasible to ﬁt a statistical distribution to the
data. A simple way to apply outlier removal for rivers might be to use a threshold approach. Such a
method could set a limit on the distance that an observation is allowed to deviate from the simulated
water level in the model.
4.8
Second Attempt at Assimilation
After having reconsidered the representation of model and observation error, new assimilation runs are
made. Figure 4.16 summarizes model performance for various evaluation criteria. Here, combinations
of AR1 model parameter values and size of the penalty term for the cluster uncertainty are compared.
A small AR1 coeﬃcient will lead to more uncertainty in the model as the conﬁdence interval will grow
faster after an observation has made it shrink. A large penalty term will lead to large uncertainty in the
observations and thus reduce the eﬀects of the update during the data assimilation. In general, Figure
4.16 shows that model performance both in terms of the center estimate and intervals performance
measures improve as auto-correlation in the model error is lowered and the penalty term is increased.
This is due to the calibration bias, which leads to a disruption of model performance as altimetry is
assimilated.
46
==PAGE:54==
4.8.
Second Attempt at Assimilation
Figure 4.16:
Model performance for assimilation runs with various combinations of model and
observational uncertainty. The base run’s model performance is highlighted as a black line on the
color bars of each criteria.
The calibration bias is less pronounced in the lower half of the river and an extra series of models are
therefore run where altimetry is only assimilated downstream of river chainage 2.5×106. Furthermore,
a threshold on the diﬀerence between observed and simulated discharge of 2 meters is applied avoid
extreme updates during the data assimilation.
If an observation is more than 2 meters from the
simulated water level, its water height value is for this run changed to 2 meters from the simulated
value. Its uncertainty is also increased by 1.5 meters in this case. In a properly functioning assimilation
scheme such a limiting threshold could act as a simple outlier adjustment that still retains some
information as it might inform the model about the direction that an update ought to be towards.
The results of this assimilation run is shown in Figure 4.17. For most parameter combinations the
model performance is increased as the upstream observations are not assimilated.
Several of the
parameter sets actually have better NSE and RMSE than the base run, hinting at slightly improved
central estimates. The ISS and CRPS are, however, not better than the base run’s values. There does
not seem to be any clear pattern in terms of optimal uncertainty parameter values, which suggests
that the improvements in NSE and RMSE are within the eﬀects of random variations of noise from
the model error. It is, however, diﬃcult to make conclusions about what a properly calibrated scheme
could achieve.
One thing that can be taken away from these results is the fact that model performance, both
in terms of center estimate and interval scores improve signiﬁcantly as soon as the AR1 coeﬃcient
is lowered even sightly. Michailovsky et al. (2013) made a large correction to their AR1 parameter
(going from 0.96 to 0.70) in order to improve their assimilation scheme. Here it is seen that smaller
corrections perform comparatively to larger corrections in terms of NSE, RMSE and CRPS.
The representation of both model and observation uncertainty are fairly simple in this study. An
analysis of the sort shown in Figure 4.16 and 4.17 could therefore reveal parameter combinations that
yield better assimilation performance than others without having to go through a rigorous optimization
process. This could help inform hydrological modelers that are interesting in implementing a properly
calibrated version of the scheme presented here.
47
==PAGE:55==
4.
Results and Discussion
Figure 4.17:
Model performance for assimilation runs with various combinations of model and
observational uncertainty. Here CryoSat-2 observations are only assimilated downstream of chainage
2.5×106 where the calibration bias is less pronounced, and a threshold of 2 m is used to account for
outliers. The base run’s model performance is highlighted as a black line on the color bars of each
criteria.
The simulated discharge and related conﬁdence intervals are shown in Figure 4.18 for an assimila-
tion run with an AR1 coeﬃcient of 0.75 and a penalty term of 1.5 meters. This illustrates what one of
the assimilation runs from Figure 4.17 actually looks like in terms of discharge at Bahadurabad. Table
4.7 summarizes the performance criteria of this particular run. The conﬁdence intervals are slightly
sharper than the base run’s, and the central estimate performance criteria are slightly better than the
base run’s. Coverage, ISS, and CRPS have, however, not improved, highlighting that the assimilation
did not improve interval performance.
Figure 4.18: Assimilation run with an AR1 coeﬃcient of 0.75 and a penaly term of 1.5 m
48
==PAGE:56==
4.9.
Eﬀect of Correction to the Measurement Operator
Table 4.7: Evaluation of assimilation.
Criteria
Base Run
Assimilation Run
NSE [-]
0.76
0.79
RMSE [m3/s]
7,548
7,019
WBE [%]
+13.5
+8.5
Coverage
91.4
83.7
Sharpness [m3/s]
22,889
19,956
ISS [m3/s]
1.14×108
1.56×109
CRPS [m3/s]
4,659
4,906
4.9
Eﬀect of Correction to the Measurement Operator
As explained earlier, the assimilation scheme in this study applies a correction to the measurement
operator compared to Michailovsky et al.’s (2013) Muskingum-based routing scheme. This is done
in order to account for the eﬀect of the wedge storage on the simulated water levels at the precise
location in the reach that an observation has occured.
Michailovsky et al.’s (2013) measurement
operator simply used the average water height in a reach, which under certain conditions might not
be appropriate. The diﬀerence in simulated water levels between using Michailovsky et al.’s (2013)
measurement operator and the one in this study is shown in Figure 4.19. The ﬁgure is the results of a
single assimilation run and shows that the diﬀerence between simulated water levels is rather small -
on the order of a few centimeters. On many occasions, the diﬀerence is minuscule, which shows up as
near-zero values in the ﬁgure. The reason for this is that three conditions have to be true at the same
time for the correction to have a large impact on the ﬁnal simulated water level: (1) the observation is
far from the center of the reach, (2) the X-parameter in the Muskingum-Cunge routing is large, and
(3) there is a large diﬀerence between reach inﬂow and outﬂow. Through manual inspection during
several assimilation runs, it has been seen that the correction typically does not exceed 10 cm. It is
diﬃcult to say how large the corrections will be in a diﬀerent case study with another ﬂow regime,
reach discretization etc.
Figure 4.19: Diﬀerence between simulated water levels with and without the correction factor in the
measurement operator at the point and time of each CryoSat-2 observation cluster.
49
==PAGE:57==
4.
Results and Discussion
4.10
Ideas for Future Work on the use of CryoSat-2 Altimetry for
Routing Models
This section will outline a few ideas for improvements in the way that CryoSat-2 altimetry can be used
in hydrological models. Issues related to the calibration methodology have already been addressed
and will thus not be discussed here. The section is split into two parts: one about the way CryoSat-2
observations are processed, and another about how the Muskingum-Cunge routing scheme presented
in this thesis potentially could be improved.
4.10.1
Radar Altimetry for River Models: Masking, Processing and Uncertainty
Estimation
When satellite altimetry is used to estimate water levels of a given water body, the ﬁrst step is most
often to go through a selection procedure where the observations that are believed to have been
reﬂected from a water surface are distinguished from land surface observations. As explained earlier
this is done by outlining the water surface resulting in what is known as a mask. All previous CryoSat-
2 papers related to inland water bodies, with the exception of Schneider et al. (2016), have used a
single, stationary mask for the entire period of study. Song et al. (2015a,b) set up a mask based on
a single Landsat 5 optical image, Kleinherenbrink et al. (2014, 2015) and Villadsen et al. (2016) used
a mask from the Global Lakes and Wetland Database, as did Nielsen et al. (2015) who also used
masks from the Danish Geodata Agency. Tourian et al. (2015) and Villadsen et al. (2015) applied a
MODIS mask. Using a single mask is often suﬃcient for reducing the eﬀect of pollution in lake level
estimation as long as the mask is conservative. For river level estimation using a single mask can lead
to outright erroneous water levels if the river channel is morphologically active. In fact, Villadsen
et al. (2015) mention that better masking is necessary for further improving the use of their primary
peak retracker over rivers. This can be done in terms of better resolution in both space and time.
Schneider et al. (2016) made an eﬀort to improve the temporal resolution of river masks by creating
a new mask during the low ﬂow season of each year - the same masks that are used in this study.
Though this is a step in the right direction, many actual water surface observations will be sorted out
as false negatives by this selection procedure - especially during the high ﬂow season. This problem
is much more signiﬁcant for rivers and small lakes than for the large lakes that are typically studied
within by the research community as their surface area is much smaller, which makes each additional
observation more valuable. With the launch of the Sentinel-1A and Sentinel-1B missions in 2014 and
2016, respectively, the temporal resolution of water masks can be greatly improved. The Sentinel-1
missions deliver SAR imagery in high spatial resolution, which has the ability to penetrate cloud cover
making year-round updates of water masks possible.
Another aspect of masking that, to the author’s knowledge, is yet to be explored in the open
literature is probabilistic evaluations of water surface extent. The water masks used in all previous
CryoSat-2 studies for inland water applications, including the masks used in this thesis, are binary
”water/not water”-evaluations of the surface. When the complex reality viewed by satellite imagery,
be it optical or microwave imagery, is reduced to a simple binary mask, a lot of information will in-
evitably be lost. An example of this is the masks used in this study, which are based on an evaluation
of the NDVI in optical Landsat imagery. NDVI is calculated from the diﬀerence in surface reﬂectance
in the visible and near-infrared spectrum of light. As water surfaces generally produce negative NDVI
values while land surfaces produce positive values, such an evaluation can be used to separate the two
and thus create a water mask by applying a threshold of zero. As satellite imagery contain large un-
certainties, applying a hard threshold of zero could lead to errors in the water masks. A probabilistic
evaluation of the likelihood that a pixel in the image is a water surface based on its NDVI value could
provide a more complete view of our knowledge about the surface layout. Probabilistic assessments
50
==PAGE:58==
4.10.
Ideas for Future Work on the use of CryoSat-2 Altimetry for Routing Models
also lend themselves nicely to Sentinel-1 imagery, which is updated every time one of the Sentinel-1
satellites return to the area of interest. Such an evaluation would enable Bayesian algorithms to con-
tinuously update the probability of a pixel being a water surface as new images are received over time.
One potential alley of future research related to satellite altimetry for water heights in river mod-
els is through inclusion of relevant metadata items from the retracking algorithms. The backscatter
coeﬃcient and the absolute power of the primary peak are related entities that both describe the
degree of reﬂectance from a surface. These could be used as an additional level of information for
evaluating the likelihood of an observation being over water. Schwatke et al. (2015b) used backscat-
tering coeﬃcients for outlier rejection but only applied it for the removal of ice surfaces on lakes. They
do, however, mention that this property in principle could be used for land-water discrimination as
well. In their DAHATI database, it is possible for users to do outlier rejection with upper and lower
thresholds on the backscatter coeﬃcient. Such an approach allows for rejection of extreme outliers,
but only allow for a limited evaluation of the likelihood that an observation came from a water sur-
face. Dubey et al. (2015a) developed an approach where optical and microwave images were used
for an initial assessment of the location of the main channel of the Brahmaputra river. They then
successfully used the backscattering coeﬃcient of Jason-2 waveforms to relocate their virtual stations
to the area with the brightest reﬂections. This allowed them to account for the morphological activity
of the Brahmaputra river before their ﬁnal estimation of water heights, and yielded better water level
estimates compared to in-situ gauging than both the DAHITI and Hydroweb products.
Retracking algorithms that discriminate between individual peaks in waveforms have only recently
become possible, which means that few studies have looked into this. Kleinherenbrink et al. (2014)
and Villadsen et al. (2016) have developed algorithms that look at multiple adjacent waveforms and
try to identify peaks that appear in several waveforms. This direction seems promising but both of the
algorithms still rely on binary masks for selection of waveforms prior to the retracking process itself.
Desai et al. (2015) provided an interesting look at the information in metadata items that retracking
algorithms could provide to hydrologists. They were able to accurately identify land-water transitions
in single satellite tracks by comparing characteristics, such as maximum power and number of peaks,
of adjacent waveforms. Interestingly, this study was made on the Brahmaputra river with altimetry
from Jason-2 and SARAL/AltiKa, both of which have larger footprints than CryoSat-2. It therefore
seems possible that including this type of information could improve not just water height estimates,
but also the representation of their related uncertainties.
4.10.2
Muskingum-Cunge River Routing
The K and X parameters that are estimated at each time step for the Muskingum-Cunge routing have
in this study been based on the previous time step’s discharge and storage values. The ideal way to
calculate these parameters are, however, to use the current time step’s values. As these are unknown
other studies, e.g. Todini (2007), have developed schemes that guess at the current time step’s values
and then go through an iterative process until the estimated discharge converges to a single value. A
similar approach could be developed for the routing scheme presented in this thesis.
Ponce and Chaganti (1994) showed that Muskingum-Cunge routing can lead to a mass balance
error. They did, however, show that this error was less than 10% for diﬀerent inﬂow hydrographs and
a variety of 3- and 4-point iterative parameter estimation schemes. From this they concluded that the
error was not a signiﬁcant drawback for real-world applications considering the size of other errors
related to river routing. Todini (2007) later showed that the mass balance error can be avoided by
directly estimating KX and K(1 −X), rather than the traditional K and X parameters. It could be
interesting to see how this aﬀects simulated water levels and thus impacts the assimilation of water
height observations.
51
==PAGE:59==
==PAGE:60==
Chapter 5
Conclusion
For the assimilation of CryoSat-2 altimetry to a river discharge model, a Muskingum-Cunge routing
scheme was set up. The scheme was based a previous study’s reach storage routing approach that
simpliﬁes the relationship between the observations and model states. This was the ﬁrst time a reach
storage-based Muskingum-Cunge routing model has been set up as a state space representation.
An AR1 model that describes the temporal correlation of model error was successfully implemented
via state augmentation. This was implemented as errors relative to the runoﬀforcing that in this
thesis are routed through the model reaches in the same way that the forcing itself is routed.
Compared to a previous study that also assimilated satellite-based water height observations to a
reach storage routing model, a correction to the measurement operator has been developed. This
correction allows for estimation of simulated water levels at the exact location where an observations
has occurred, rather than simply using the mean simulated water level in the reach. The eﬀect of
using this correction turned out to be rather small with diﬀerences between the two measurement
operators less than 10 cm. It is, however, diﬃcult to generalize how the correction factor would eﬀect
simulated water levels in other case studies.
The model calibration was performed with a recently developed approach that allows for calibra-
tion of river channel geometry purely based on remotely sensed water heights. Upon ﬁrst sight the
calibration seemed good, but further investigation of the simulated water levels proved that they in
fact were biased along most of the river. This gravely aﬀected the performance of subsequent assimi-
lation attempts, but it was not possible to correct for this within the limits of this project. The issue
with the calibration was that the CryoSat-2 data that was used for calibrating cross-section datums
was not evenly distributed between high and low ﬂow seasons. There were in fact more observation
available during the low ﬂow season. Fitting mean simulated water levels to these observations would
lead to a bias on the low side, which was also observed in the model. The ﬁndings in this thesis
highlight a vulnerability in the calibration methodology that needs to be addressed for future use.
Initial assimilation attempts did not perform well, both due to the calibration issues but also due
to the simple representation of model and observation errors. The model error representation was
addressed by lowering the AR1 coeﬃcient and thus reducing the temporal correlation in the errors.
This was able to mitigate some of the loss of coverage in the 95% conﬁdence interval that was observed
during the initial assimilation attempt. Observation errors were initially accounted for through the
instrumental error budget of the CryoSat-2 satellite, as well as the spread in water heights inside each
cluster of observations. Upon further analysis of the cluster members, it was seen that this approach
probably underestimates uncertainty in the CryoSat-2 data. As a remedy to this, a simple penalty
53
==PAGE:61==
5.
Conclusion
term was introduced that takes into account how many observations that a cluster consists of. Final
assimilation runs showed that the calibration bias obstructed the evaluation of the inﬂuence of the
new model and observation error representations on model performance. Only assimilating CryoSat-2
altimetry to the downstream half of the river, which was less aﬀected by the bias, showed decent model
performance. This seems promising for future applications of a model that is properly calibrated.
54
==PAGE:62==
Bibliography
Albergel, C., de Rosnay, P., Gruhier, C., Mu˜noz-Sabater, J., Hasenauer, S., Isaksen, L., Kerr, Y., and
Wagner, W. (2012). Evaluation of remotely sensed and modelled soil moisture products using global
ground-based in situ observations. Remote Sensing of Environment, 118:215–226.
Arcement, G. J. and Schneider, V. R. (1989). Guide for selecting manning’s roughness coeﬃcients for
natural channels and ﬂood plains. Technical report, United States Geological Survey.
Armitage, T. W. K. and Davidson, M. W. J. (2014). Using the interferometric capabilities of the esa
cryosat-2 mission to improve the accuracy of sea ice freeboard retrievals. IEEE Transactions on
geoscience and remote sensing, 52:529–536.
Baek, S.-J., Hunt, B. R., Kalnay, E., Ott, E., and Szunyogh, I. (2006). Local ensemble kalman ﬁltering
in the presence of model bias. Tellus, 58A(3-4):469–488.
Bauer-Gottwein, P., Jensen, I. H., Guzinski, R., Bredtoft, G. K. T., Hansen, S., and Michailovsky,
C. I. (2015). Operational river discharge forecasting in poorly gauged basins: the kavango river
basin case study. Hydrology and Earth Systems Sciences, 19:1469–1485.
Benveniste, J. (2011). Radar altimetry: past, present and future, pages 1–18. Springer.
Beven, K. (2009). Environmental Modelling: An Uncertain Future? Routledge.
Beven, K. (2011). Rainfall-runoﬀmodelling - the primer. Wiley-Blackwell, 2nd edition.
Birkinshaw, S. J., Moore, P., Kilsby, C. G., O’Donnell, G. M., Hardy, A. J., and Berry, P. A. M.
(2014).
Daily discharge estimation at ungauged river sites using remote sensing.
Hydrological
Processes, 28(3):1043–1054.
Calmant, S., Seyler, F., and Cretaux, J. F. (2008). Monitoring continental surface waters by satellite
altimetry. Surveys in Geophysics, 29:247–269.
Campo, L., Caparrini, F., and Castelli, F. (2006). Use of multi-platform, multi-temporal remote-
sensingdata for calibration of a distributed hydrological model: an application in the arno basin,
italy. Hydrological Processes, 20:2693–2712.
Chow, V. T., Maidment, D. R., and Mays, L. W. (1988). Applied Hydrology. McGraw-Hill, Inc.
Cr´etaux, J.-F., Abarca-del Ri´o, R., Berg´e-Nguyen, M., Arsen, A., Drolon, V., Clos, G., and
Maisongrande, P. (2016). Lake volume monitoring from space. Surveys in Geophysics, 37:269–
305.
Cr´etaux, J.-F. and Birkett, C. (2006). Lake studies from satellite radar altimetry. C. R. Geoscience,
338:1098–1112.
55
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
Cr´etaux, J.-F., Jelinski, W., Calmant, S., Kouraev, A., Vuglinksi, V., Berg´e-Nguyen, M., Gennero,
M.-C., Nino, F., Abarca del Rio, R., Cazenave, A., and Maisongrande, P. (2011). Sols: A lake
database to monitor in the near real time water level and storage variations from remote sensing
data. Advances in Space Research, 47(9):1497–1507.
Cunge, J. A. (1969). On the subject of a ﬂood routing method (muskingum method). Journal of
hydraulic research, 7:205–230.
da Silva, J. S., Calmant, S., Seyler, F., Filho, O. C. R., Cochonneau, G., and Mansur, W. J. (2010).
Water levels in the amazon basin derived from the ers 2 and envisat radar altimetry missions.
Remote Sensing of Environment, 114(10):2160–2181.
Desai, S., Chander, S., Ganguly, D., Chauhan, O., Lele, P. D., and James, M. E. (2015). Waveform
classiﬁcation and water-land transition over the brahmaputra river using saral/altika and jason-2
altimeter. Journal of the Indian Society of Remote Sensing, 43(3):475–485.
Dubey, A. K., Gupta, P., Dutta, S., and Singh, R. P. (2015a). An improved methodology to estimate
river stage and discharge using jason-2 satellite data. Journal of Hydrology, 529:1776–1787.
Dubey, A. K., Gupta, P., Dutta, S., and Singh, R. P. (2015b). Water level retrieval using saral/altika
observations in the braided brahmaputra river, eastern india. Marine Geodesy, 38(sup1):549–567.
ESA and Mullard Space Science Laboratory (2012).
Cryosat product handbook.
Technical re-
port, ESA. http://emits.sso.esa.int/emits-doc/ESRIN/7158/CryoSat-PHB-17apr2012.pdf [Jun. 03,
2016].
Fekete, B. M., V¨or¨osmarty, C. J., Roads, J. O., and Willmott, C. J. (2004). Uncertainties in precipi-
tation and their impacts on runoﬀestimates. Journal of Climate, 17(2):294–304.
Finsen, F., Milzow, C., Smith, R., Berry, P., and Bauer-Gottwein, P. (2014). Using radar altimetry
to update a large-scale hydrological model of the brahmaputra river basin. Hydrology Research,
45(1):148–164.
Georgakakos, A. P., Georgakakos, K. P., and Evangelos, A. B. (1990).
A state-space model for
hydrologic river routing. Water Resources Research, 26(5):827–838.
Getirana, A. C. V. Boone, A., Yamazaki, D., and Mognard, N. (2013). Automatic parameterization
of a ﬂow routing scheme driven by radar altimetry data: Evaluation in the amazon basin. Water
Resources Research, 49(1):614–629.
Getirana, A. C. V. (2010). Integrating spatial altimetry data into the automatic calibration of hydro-
logical models. Journal of Hydrology, 387(3):244–255.
Getirana, A. C. V. and Peters-Lidard, C. (2013). Estimating water discharge from large radar altimetry
datasets. Hydrology and Earth Systems Sciences, 17(3):923–933.
Gneiting, T. and Raftery, A. E. (2007). Strictly proper scoring rules, prediction, and estimation.
Journal of the American Statistical Association, 102(477):359–378.
Gneiting, T., Raftery, A. E., Westveld, A. H., and Goldman, T. (2005).
Calibrated probabilistic
forecasting using ensemble model output statistics and minimum crps estimation. Monthly Weather
Review, 133:1098–1118.
56
==PAGE:64==
Bibliography
Gommenginger, C., Thibaut, P., Fenoglio-Marc, L., Quartly, G., Deng, X., Gomez-Enri, J., Challenor,
P., and Gao, Y. (2011). Retracking Altimeter Waveforms Near the Coasts A review of retracking
methods and some applications to coastal waveforms, pages 61–100. Springer.
Goswami, D. C. (1985).
Brahmaputra river, assam, india: Physiography, basin denudation, and
channel aggradation. Water Resources Research, 21(7):959–978.
Hersbach, H. (2000). Decomposition of the continuous ranked probability score for ensemble prediction
systems. Weather and Forecasting, 15(5):559–570.
Hirpa, F. A., Hopson, T. M., De Groeve, T., Brakenridge, G. R., Gebremichael, M., and Restrepo,
P. J. (2013). Upstream satellite remote sensing for river discharge forecasting: Application to major
rivers in south asia. Remote Sensing of Environment, 131:140–151.
Hossain, F., Maswood, M., Siddique-E-Akbor, A. H., Yigzaw, W., Mazumder, L. T., Ahmed, T.,
Hossain, M., Shah-Newaz, S. M., Limaye, A., Lee, H., Pradhan, S., Shrestha, B., Bajracharya, B.,
Biancamaria, S., Shum, C. K., and Turk, F. J. (2014). A promising radar altimetry satellite system
for operational ﬂood forecasting in ﬂood-prone bangladesh. IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing
Magazine, 2(3):27–36.
Immerzeel, W. W. and Droogers, P. (2008). Calibration of a distributed hydrological model based on
satellite evapotranspiration. Journal of Hydrology, 349(3-4):411–424.
Jarihani, A. A., Callow, J. N., Johansen, K., and Gouweleeuw, B. (2013). Evaluation of multiple
satellite altimetry data for studying inland water bodies and river ﬂoods. Journal of Hydrology,
505:78–90.
Jazwinski, A. (1970). Stochastic Processes and Filtering Theory. Academic Press.
Kleinherenbrink, M., Ditmar, P. G., and Lindebergh, R. C. (2014). Retracking cryosat data in the
sarin mode and robust lake level extraction. Remote Sensing of Environment, 152:38–50.
Kleinherenbrink, M., Lindebergh, R. C., and Ditmar, P. G. (2015). Monitoring of lake level changes
on the tibetan plateau and tian shan by retracking cryosat sarin waveforms. Journal of Hydrology,
521:119–131.
Krop´aˇcek, J., Braun, A., Kang, S., Feng, C., Ye, Q., and Hochschild, V. (2012). Analysis of lake
level changes in nam co in central tibet utilizing synergistic satellite altimetry and optical imagery.
International Journal of Applied Earth Observation and Geoinformation, 17:3–11.
Lee, H., Shum, C. K., Yi, Y., Ibaraki, M., Kim, J.-W., Braun, A., Kuo, C.-Y., and Lu, Z.
(2009). Louisiana wetland water level monitoring using retracked topex/poseidon altimetry. Marine
Geodesy, 32(3):284–302.
Liu, Y. and Gupta, H. V. (2007). Uncertainty in hydrologic modeling: Toward an integrated data
assimilation framework. Water Resources Research, 43(7):1–18.
Liu, Z., Ostrenga, D., Teng, W., and Kempler, S. (2012). Tropical rainfall measuring mission (trmm)
precipitation data and services for research and applications. Bulletin of the American Meteorological
Society, 93(9):1317–1325.
Maillard, P., Bercher, N., and Calmant, S. (2015). New processing approaches on the retrieval of
water levels in envisat and saral radar altimetry over rivers: A case study of the s˜A£o francisco
river, brazil. Remote Sensing of Environment, 156:226–241.
57
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
Margulis,
S. A. (2015).
Introduction to hydrology.
Open-access e-textbook available at
http://aqua.seas.ucla.edu/margulis˙intro˙to˙hydro˙textbook.html [Jun 20, 2016].
McCarthy, G. T. (1938). The unit hydrograph and ﬂood routing. Unpublished manuscript presented
at a conference of the North Atlantic Division, Corps of Engineers, War Department.
Michailovsky, C. I. and Bauer-Gottwein, P. (2014). Operational reservoir inﬂow forecasting with radar
altimetry: the zambezi case study. Hydrology and Earth Systems Sciences, 18:997–1007.
Michailovsky, C. I., Milzow, C., and Bauer-Gottwein, P. (2013). Assimilation of radar altimetry to a
routing model of the brahmaputra river. Water Resources Research, 49:4807–4816.
Milzow, C., Krogh, P. E., and Bauer-Gottwein, P. (2011). Combining satellite radar altimetry, sar
surface soil moisture and grace total storage changes for hydrological model calibration in a large
poorly gauged catchment. Hydrology and Earth Systems Sciences, 15:1729–1743.
Nielsen, K., Stenseng, L., Andersen, O. B., Villadsen, H., and Knudsen, P. (2015). Validation of
cryosat-2 sar mode based lake levels. Remote Sensing of Environment, 171:162–170.
Nielsen, S. A. and Hansen, E. (1973). Numerical simulation of the rainfall-runoﬀprocess on a daily
basis. Hydrology Research, 4(3):171–190.
Papa, F., Durand, F., Rossow, W. B., Rahman, A., and Bala, S. K. (2010). Satellite altimeter-derived
monthly discharge of the ganga-brahmaputra river and its seasonal to interannual variations from
1993 to 2008. Journal of Geophysical Research, 115(C12013).
Ponce, V. M. and Chaganti, P. V. (1994). Variable-parameter muskingum-cunge method revisited.
Journal of Hydrology, 162(3):433–439.
Rosmorduc, V., Beneviste, J., Bronner, E., Dinardo, S., Lauret, O., Maheu, C., Milagro, M.,
and Picot, N. a. (2011).
Radar altimetry tutorial.
Beneviste, J. and Picot, N., Ed. Online.
http://www.altimetry.info.
Scagliola
(2013).
Cryosat
footprints.
Technical
report,
Aresys.
ESA
Docu-
ment
Ref.
XCRY-GSEG-EOPG-TN-13-0013,
http://wiki.services.eoportal.org/tiki-
index.php?page=CryoSat+Technical+Notes&structure=CryoSat [Jun. 03, 2016].
Schneider, R., Godiksen, P. N., , Villadsen, H., Madsen, H., and Bauer-Gottwein, P. (2016). Appli-
cation of cryosat-2 altimetry data for river analysis and modelling. Hydrology and Earth Systems
Sciences Discussions, 243:1–23. in review.
Schwatke, C., Dettmering, D., B¨orgens, E., and Bosch, W. (2015a). Potential of saral/altika for inland
water applications. Marine Geodesy, 38(sup1):626–643.
Schwatke, C., Dettmering, D., Bosch, W., and Seitz, F. (2015b). Dahiti - an innovative approach
for estimating water level time series over inland waters using multi-mission satellite altimetry.
Hydrology and Earth Systems Sciences, 19:4345–4364.
Sichangi, A. W., Wang, L., Yang, K., Chen, D., Wang, Z., Li, X., Zhou, J., Liu, W., and Kuria,
D. (2016). Estimating continental river basin discharges using multiple remote sensing data sets.
Remote Sensing of Environment, 179:36–53.
Song, C., Huang, B., and Ke, L. (2013). Modeling and analysis of lake water storage changes on the
tibetan plateau using multi-mission satellite data. Remote Sensing of Environment, 135:25–35.
58
==PAGE:66==
Bibliography
Song, C., Ye, Q., and Cheng, X. (2015a).
Shifts in water-level variation of namco in the central
tibetan plateau from icesat and cryosat-2 altimetry and station observations.
Science Bulletin,
60(14):1287–1297.
Song, C., Ye, Q., Sheng, Y., and Gong, T. (2015b). Combined icesat and cryosat-2 altimetry for
accessing water level dynamics of tibetan lakes over 2003-2014. Water, 7:4685–4700.
Stakhiv, E. and Stewart, B. (2010). Needs for climate information in support of decision-making in
the water sector. Procedia Environmental Sciences, 1:102–119.
Stisen, S., Jensen, K. H., Sandholt, I., and Grimes, D. I. F. (2008). A remote sensing driven distributed
hydrological model of the senegal river basin. Journal of Hydrology, 354(1-4):131–148.
Stisen, S. and Sandholt, I. (2010).
Evaluation of remote-sensing-based rainfall products through
predictive capability in hydrological runoﬀmodelling. Hydrological Processes, 24:879–891.
Thomas, A. C., Reager, J. T., Famiglietti, J. S., and Rodell, M. (2014). A grace-based water storage
deﬁcit approach for hydrological drought characterization. Geophysical Research Letters, 41:1537–
1545.
Thorne, C. R., Russel, A. P., and Alam, M. K. (1993). Planform patter and channel evolution of the
brahmaputra river, bangladesh. Geological Society London, Special Publication, 75(1):257–276.
Todini, E. (2007). A mass conservative and water storage consistent variable parameter muskingum-
cunge approach. Hydrology and Earth Systems Sciences, 11:1645–1659.
Tourian, M. J., Elmi, O., Chen, Q., Devaraju, B., Roohi, S., and Sneeuw, N. (2015). A spaceborne mul-
tisensor approach to monitor the desiccation of lake urmia in iran. Remote Sensing of Environment,
156:349–360.
Villadsen, H., Andersen, O. B., Stenseng, L., Nielsen, K., and Knudsen, P. (2015). Cryosat-2 altimetry
for river level monitoring - evaluation in the ganges-brahmaputra river basin. Remote Sensing of
Environment, 168:80–89.
Villadsen, H., Deng, X., Andersen, O. B., Stenseng, L., Nielsen, K., and Knudsen, P. (2016). Improved
inland water levels from sar altimetry using novel empirical and physical retrackers. Journal of
Hydrology, 537:234–247.
Vinukollu, R. K., Wood, E. F., Ferguson, C. R., and Fisher, J. B. (2011).
Global estimates of
evapotranspiration for climate studies using multi-sensor remote sensing data: Evaluation of three
process-based approaches. Remote Sensing of Environment, 115:801–823.
V¨or¨osmarty, C. J., Askew, A., Grabs, W., Barry, R. G., Birkett, C., D¨oll, P., and Landwehr, J. (2001).
Needs for climate information in support of decision-making in the water sector. Eos, Transactions
American Geophysical Union, 82(5):54–58.
Wagner, W., Bl¨oschl, G., Pampaloni, P., Calvet, J.-C., Bizzarro, B., Wigneron, J.-P., and Kerr, Y.
(2007). Operational readiness of microwave remote sensing of soil moisture for hydrologic applica-
tions. Nordic Hydrology, 38:1–20.
Wanders, N., Karssenberg, D., de Roo, A., de Jong, S. M., and Bierkens, M. F. P. (2014).
The
suitability of remotely sensed soil moisture for improving operational ﬂood forecasting. Hydrology
and Earth Systems Sciences, 18(6):2343–2357.
59
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
Wingham, D., Francis, C., Baker, S., Bouzinac, C., Brockley, D., Cullen, R., de Chateau-Thierry, P.,
Laxon, S., Mallow, U., Mavrocordatos, C., Phalippou, L., Ratier, G., Rey, L., Rostan, F., Viau, P.,
and Wallis, D. (2006). Cryosat: A mission to determine the ﬂuctuations in earth’s land and marine
ice ﬁelds. Advances in Space Research, 37:841–871.
Yeh, P. J.-F., Swenson, S. C., Famiglietti, J. S., and Rodell, M. (2006). Remote sensing of ground-
water storage changes in illinois using the gravity recovery and climate experiment (grace). Water
Resources Research, 42. W12203.
Zakharova, E. A., Kouraev, A. V., R´emy, F., Zemtsov, V. A., and Kirpotin, S. N. (2014). Seasonal
variability of the western siberia wetlands from satellite radar altimetry.
Journal of Hydrology,
512:366–378.
Zupanski, D. and Zupanski, M. (2006). Model error estimation emplouying an ensemble data assimi-
lation appreach. Monthly Weather Review, 134(5):1337–1354.
60
