==PAGE:1==
Personality archetypes reveal evolutionarily
important behavioral strategies
Ulf Aslak
July 4, 2016
==PAGE:2==
i
Preface
This thesis was submitted as a ￿nal requirement for obtaining the degree of Master
of Digital Media Engineering (cand. polyt.) at the Technical University of Denmark
(DTU). It was carried out from january to july of 2016 as a collaboration between the
Uri Alon Lab, at the Weizmann Institute of Science (WIS) in Israel, and the Social Fab-
ric project at University of Copenhagen and DTU Compute. Throughout the project
I lived in Israel and appeared in the lab where I, aside from conducting my own re-
search, participated in group meetings, project sparing, and various other research
activities. The project was mainly supervised by Uri Alon (Professor, WIS, Dept. of
Molecular Cell Biology) and Sune Lehmann (Associate Professor, DTU, DTU Com-
pute). Hila Sheftel and Pablo Szekely (PhD students, WIS, Dept. of Molecular Cell
Biology) also took part in supervising and mentoring.
I want to thank Uri for actively engaging in my work with childlike curiosity and
genuine interest, and for never failing to identify the paths to the most interesting
research objectives. I thank Sune for always believing in me and my motivations, for
facilitating the whole arrangement and for his in￿nite resource of spirit. I thank Hila
and Pablo for invaluable scienti￿c guidance and mentoring, Avi Mayo for technical
discussions of various sorts, all the members of the Theatre Lab for inspiration and
enlightenment, and everyone in the Uri Alon Lab for accepting me as a member of
their nurturing research environment. I also thank my dear friend Daniel Svendsen
for endless videocall discussions about the hardship of research and the meaning of
life.
For economical support I want to thank Oticon Fonden, Reinholdt W. Jorck og
Hustrus Fond, Ingeniørforeningen i Danmarks og Berg-Nielsens Studie- og Støtte-
fond, KnuHøjgaards Fond, Dansk Tennisfond, Otto Mønsteds Fond and Dansk-Israelsk
Studiefond.
Finally, I thank Vivi Lai for her tremendous courage and faith, and for letting me
travel so far away for so long and still be right there, in the hammock by the window,
upon my return.
==PAGE:3==
ii
Abstract
Evolutionary psychology suggests that di￿erent strategies for performing evolution-
arily important tasks shaped our personality di￿erences. But what these strategies
are remain guesswork. Here, we apply Pareto Task Inference to infer the strategies
and their behavioral correlates. We ￿nd the same six personality archetypes to con-
sistently emerge from archetypal analysis applied to a diverse selection of datasets
describing personality of millions in broad western culture. Enrichment of demo-
graphic attributes, personality facets, values and behavior near the archetypes reveal
behavioral strategies, some of which are mentioned in the literature. We test how
well distance from personality archetypes can be predicted for individuals using be-
havioral data, and compare the resulting accuracy to that of prediction models for Big
Five traits and Big Five questionnaire inventory principal components. We ￿nd that
distance from personality archetypes can be predicted more accurately than the other
personality targets. Based on the ￿ndings and supported by literature in evolution-
ary psychology we argue that personality archetypes can be viewed as fundamental
behavioral strategies.
==PAGE:4==
Table of Contents
Preface
i
Abstract
ii
List of Abbreviations
v
List of Symbols
vi
Glossary
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Background Theory
4
2.1
Evolutionary Psychology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.1
What is personality and how does it relate to behavior?
. . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
How is personality measured?
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.3
How does evolutionary psychology treat personality?
. . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Pareto Task Inference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.1
Finding traits that are optimized for objectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.2
Inferring objectives from enrichment near archetypes
. . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2.3
Inferrence of archetypes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
Datasets
21
3.1
Sensible DTU
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
myPersonality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
Midlife Development in the U.S
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.4
SAPA-project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4
Analysis and Results
25
4.1
Six consensus archetypes emerge across seven datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Enrichment and correlation reveal distinct strategies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2.1
Analysis and data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2.2
Summary and strategy suggestions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.3
Archetypes separate data better than traits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5
Discussion
39
6
Conclusions
41
6.1
Future Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
iii
==PAGE:5==
iv
Table of Contents
7
Methods
43
7.1
SensibleDTU data pre-processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7.1.1
Feature Engineering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
7.1.2
Variable Transformation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
7.1.3
Outlier Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
7.1.4
Extracting personality data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
7.2
Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
7.2.1
Computing consensus archetypes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
7.2.2
Computing enrichments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
7.2.3
Computing correlations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
7.2.4
Classi￿cation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
References
52
Appendices
A Full List of Extracted Indicators
58
B
A Note on Feature Engineering
61
C Questionnaire Enrichment Table
63
D Basic Human Values Enrichment Table
65
E
Behavior Correlation Table
66
F
Theory of Basic Human Values
67
G Distributions of Big Five datasets
68
H Code for enrichment of feautres near archetypes
69
I
Online
71
==PAGE:6==
List of Abbreviations
Abbreviation
&
Acronyms
Interpretation
DTU
The Technical University of Denmark
no.
number of
SD
standard deviation
NDA
non-disclosure agreement
AA
archetypal analysis
KDE
Kernel Density Estimation
BF
Big Five
BFM
Big Five model
FFM
Five Factor model
EP
evolutionary psychology
sig.
signi￿cance
PC
principle component
QI
questionnaire item
F2F
face-to-face
v
==PAGE:7==
List of Symbols
Symbol
Description
d
Number of spacial components
n
sample size
A
Archetype tensor
Subscript
Description
a
Archetype tensor archetype-index (0th axis)
t
Archetype tensor trait-index (1st axis)
D
Archetype tensor dataset-index (2nnd axis)
vi
==PAGE:8==
Glossary
Indicator
High-level unit of behavior measured in the data. Practically inter-
changable with what is commonly referred to as a feature in statistics and machine
learning, but is called indicator, because behavior is dynamic and can thus only be
quanti￿ed as an indication, not a feature which linguistically is something more static.
Conversation
Set of interactions (text, call, F2F) grouped by max. time
distance criteria. For text this forms intuitive text conversations, and similarly for
call it corresponds to missed calls returned a short time after but could potentially
be an inde￿nite series of back and forth calls. For F2F a conversation corresponds to
the physical co-presence over a period of time. Conversations are strictly between two
individuals.
vii
==PAGE:9==
==PAGE:10==
1
Introduction
From one perspective humans are all the same. We think with our brains and act
with our bodies, feel sadness and share laughter. Yet we are also di￿erent from each
other. No two people are exactly the same, and even for identical twins the ￿rstborn
will always be the ￿rstborn and will never know what it’s like to be the secondborn.
Somewhere between our common humanity and individual di￿erences lies personal-
ity. We are all variations of the same basic template, and personality captures those
di￿erences: how our shared human nature can manifest itself in di￿erent behaviors,
feelings and ways of thinking.
Personality can be measured. Throughout the 20th century, many have con-
cerned themselves with understanding and quantifying personality. Rooted in the
assumption that personality attributes that are truly important should manifest them-
selves in language [1], various systems for measuring personality using questionnaire
methods have been developed. Models like the Big Five, the 16PF and the Eysenck
model score personality along dimensions such as extraversion and neurotiscm and
are well established and widely applied. The Big Five model especially provides an
e￿ective and intuitive framework and is generally recognized as the gold standard
instrument of measurement [2]. It measures personality along ￿ve nearly orthogonal
dimensions called traits which are openness to experience, conscientiousness, extraver-
sion, agreeableness and neuroticism. It is argued to represent the most evolutionarily
plausible way of representing human personality, due to the property that its traits
are nearly independent [3,4].
Personality can be viewed as behavioral strategy. Past studies in evolutionary
biology did not recognize personality as important to an organism’s ability to propa-
gate its genes, i.e. its ￿tness, because other factors like physical attributes were con-
sidered far more important. Recent ￿ndings from twin-studies have, however, shown
that personality is 30−50% inherited suggesting that there are ￿tness bene￿ts to dif-
ferent genetically inheritable aspects of personality [5,6]. This ￿nding, joined with the
observation that personality di￿ers between people, has roused signi￿cant interest
in the emerging ￿eld of evolutionary psychology (EP). EP established the following
notion: if a human has to perform a certain set of tasks to propagate its genes - such
as self-protection, status a￿rmation and mate acquisition - and these tasks can be
performed, from an evolutionary perspective, equally well in a multitude of ways, the
personality held by an individual is its adopted strategy for performing these tasks [2].
Hereinafter ’personality’ and ’strategy’ will be used interchangeably.
Frequency dependence causes individual personality di￿erences. Evolu-
tionary psychologists argue that variation in personality between individuals arise
because there is no single optimal strategy for performing life’s many tasks [2]. In fact
there are many, which causes people’s personalities to vary greatly. This argument
1
==PAGE:11==
2
Introduction
is best presented using an example. A fundamental strategy to cope with life’s tasks
could be to rely on trust and benevolence to establish a network to rely on, conform
with society’s rules and opt for stability over risk. Another fundamental strategy
might then be to take advantage of people’s weaknesses, lie to get ahead and trust
no one. If everyone adopted the ￿rst strategy it would be too easy to succeed us-
ing the second, and if everyone adopted the second there would be no one for the
second to take advantage of. The ￿tness associated with each strategy is therefore
frequency dependent, which drives constant ￿uctuations in ￿tness as the frequency of
each changes. Furthermore, because these ￿uctuations occur asynchronously across
local environments, variation will be perpetuated globally.
Individual personality is a trade-o￿between fundamental strategies. To
fully adopt one fundamental strategy is rarely a robust solution due to the ￿tness
￿uctuations that result from frequency dependence. An individual will therefore tend
to adopt a strategy that is a mix of many fundamental strategies. This can be thought
of as a multi-objective optimization problem: individuals must ensure maximal ￿tness
but personal strategies must obey inherent trade-o￿s between performance of funda-
mental strategies. It con￿nes solutions to a surface in performance space called the
Pareto front. The Pareto front de￿nes the boundary where increasing performance in
one strategy comes at the expense of performance in others. Evolution tends to not
allow individuals to stay o￿the Pareto front because their ￿tness advantage would
be inferior to those on it, and as such personalities of people should be con￿ned to
the Pareto front where they remain Pareto optimal trade-o￿s between fundamental
strategies.
Fundamental personality strategies can be inferred from archetypes. Re-
cent theoretical advances due to Uri Alon et. al. enable the inference of evolutionary
biological objectives subject to performance trade-o￿s [7,8]. The Pareto Task Infer-
ence (ParTI) principle developed by Alon et. al. establishes that for a representatively
large population of individuals, the distribution of points in trait-space will fall on a
simplex (a polytope of ddimensions + 1 vertices that evaluates to a triangle in 2D, a
tetrahedron in 3D, a 4-simplex in 4D, etc.) either in the original trait-space or in a
lower-dimensional subspace spanned by the ￿rst principle components. The vertices
of this simplex are archetypes and each represents a combination of traits that are
suited for a speci￿c objective. Depending on the system that is analyzed the objec-
tives that are inferred can be single tasks such as nut cracking or branch grasping in
the case of Darwinian ￿nches, or something more complex like personality strategies
which are optimized to solve multiple tasks in di￿erent ways in the case of humans.
The ParTI principle has proven successful in explaining functions of cancer cells [8],
morphology of ammonite shells [9], mass and longevity design of mammals [10], and
more [7,11].
==PAGE:12==
3
Introduction
This study sets out to infer fundamental personality strategies. In the estab-
lished context there is a gap in our knowledge about fundamental personality strate-
gies. Given the ready availability of instruments to measure personality, a whole ￿eld
of theory which treats personality as behavioral strategy, and a proven theoretical
principle for inferring evolutionary objectives from traits there is strong motivation
to pursue an understanding of fundamental personality strategies.
The research project documented here is novel and ongoing, and as such this
thesis presents the trajectory of ￿rst exploration with strong emphasis on outlook.
The research idea is due to Hila Sheftel, Uri Alon and Ulf Aslak. In brief, the reader
will be presented with the following narrative: Six personality archetypes are found
across a multitude of independent Big Five datasets using the ParTI principle. By
studying how di￿erent personal attributes and questionnaire items have higher/lower
means or are in over/under-representation for individuals near each archetype (i.e.
are enriched/depleted) and how certain types of behavior correlate with distance from
archetypes, an understanding of possible strategies for each archetype emerges. For
this purpose the book Evolutionary Psychology (2014) by Workman et. al. [2] is used as
a literary reference framework for establishing sound arguments for which scienti￿-
cally investigated evolutionary strategies that the archetypes may correspond to. To
infer the viability of the archetypes a supervised machine learning approach is taken
to infer the predictive power between behavior and distance from the archetypes, as
compared to Big Five traits as well as principle components of questionnaire items.
The result of this analysis gives a preliminary picture of what the landscape of funda-
mental personality strategies looks like. Since the discoveries are of sensitive nature,
due discussion is made to clarify doubts about their implications. Furthermore, results
relating to race and gender are omitted for moral reasons.
The relevant theory is presented in Section 2 which primarily treats personality
psychology, EP and ParTI. Section 3 describes the datasets used for analysis. Section 4,
which is the main section, presents the conducted research. It reads like an investiga-
tive research story separated into shorter subsections that each has a single premise.
Section 5 discusses the results, their uncertainties and limitations, implications and
impact. Section 6 sums up the outcomes of the study in a list of conclusions, and
gives an outlook on future directions for the project. The methods are presented last
in Section 7 as supporting information and serves as reference to consult for clari￿ca-
tion on aspects of the analysis, and provides necessary information to allow for future
reproducibility.
==PAGE:13==
2
Background Theory
This chapter introduces the most relevant theory used in the current study. It ￿rst ex-
amines the concept of personality in evolutionary psychology, giving an account of the
related ￿eld personality psychology from which it uses many ideas. It then introduces
the reader to the Pareto Task Inference principle which is the fundamental research
paradigm on which this study is based. Although a large number of computational
tools from machine learning, and concepts from statistics are used in the analysis,
this chapter does not treat them because, although important to understand for the
purpose of usage, they are not a central part of the research problem. For reference
on topics in machine learning used in this thesis the reader is referred to [12].
2.1
Evolutionary Psychology
This section is as much about personality psychology (PP) as it is about evolutionary
psychology (EP), but that is only because EP is as much about any sub￿eld of psychol-
ogy as any sub￿eld is about itself. EP boldly sets out to treat all parts of psychology
from the fundamental assumption that all psychological processes result from Dar-
winian natural selection - a mechanism which over time pressures "un￿t" traits out
of existence. It views the brain as an evolved organ designed by natural selection to
guide the individual in making decisions that increase the chance of survival and re-
production. EP was conceived in 1992 following the publication of The Adapted Mind
by Leda Cosmides et. al., and is still considered an emerging ￿eld. Cosmides et. al.
de￿nes the discipline as "simply psychology that is informed by the additional knowl-
edge that evolutionary biology has to o￿er..." [13]. Despite having earned a substantial
amount of controversy and criticism (which even has a dedicated Wikipedia article to
it [14]), EP has proven useful in explaining many concepts in e.g. language, cognition,
intelligence, learning, adaptation, perception and personality [2,15].
Since the author of this thesis has not been given the appropriate schooling, in
the ￿eld of psychology, to lecture any reader beyond the mere introductory aspects of
EP, each part of this section is presented as a query rather than a block of knowledge.
The ￿rst sections treat topics in PP mainly dealing with personality and behavior,
how personality can be measured and what inherent limitations remain in the exist-
ing methods. Following this, personality is presented as treated by EP and the view
of personality as a behavioral strategy is given due motivation. The material relat-
ing to PP relies mostly on Icek Ajzen’s textbook Attitudes, Personality and Behavior
(2005) [16], while the material on EP uses Lance Workman and Will Reader’s textbook
Evolutionary Psychology (2013) [2].
4
==PAGE:14==
5
2.1
Evolutionary Psychology
Nature of
response
Source of information about responses
Observation
Person
Acquaintances
Overt
Motor acts,
nonverbal cues,
verbal response
Self-reports of
motor acts,
nonverbal cues
Peer-reports of
motor acts,
nonverbal cues
Covert
Physiological
responses,
personal device
monitoring
Self-reports of
thoughts,
feelings, needs,
desires
Peer-reports of
thoughts,
feelings, needs,
desires
Table 2.1: Responses used to infer personality. As the columns indicate, behavioral responses may
be recorded by observing the individual from the outside, by personal questioning or by interview-
ing acquaintances of the individual. For each of these approaches, researcher can either aim at
measuring overt or covert behavioral responses. This table is an excerpt from [Ajzen 2005]. The
bolded text indicate information which has been added by this author.
2.1.1
What is personality and how does it relate to behavior?
In both psychology and everyday reasoning, human behavior is often explained by
referencing underlying personality traits. When people cancel appointments they
are called unreliable, when they make others laugh they are said to be charming,
and when they are caught lying they are considered dishonest. As such, personality
should be understood as that which you are while behavior is that which you do. More
elaborate de￿nitions characterize personality as “the set of emotional qualities, ways
of behaving, etc., that makes a person di￿erent from other people”, and behavior as
“the way a person or animal acts or behaves” or “the manner of conducting oneself”1.
Given these de￿nitions it stands to reason that personality and behavior should be
highly coupled constructs. Undoubtedly, the personality of an individual will a￿ect
its behavior, and in turn, its behavior will reveal information about its personality.
This particular notion is of central concern to Icek Ajzen’s Attitude, Personality and
Behavior (2005, 2nd Ed.) [16]. The remainder of this discussion follows that discourse.
Ajzen argues that personality consists of latent, hypothetical characteristics which
are not directly accessible, and can only be inferred from records of observable re-
sponses. Table 2.1, which is an excerpt from Ajzen’s book, establishes that response
measurements can come from three sources: an observer, the subject itself, or some-
one who is acquainted with the subject. Responses can either be overt - meaning
directly observable acts/cues/expressions - or covert - meaning not directly observed
but inferred from interaction with the subject or from electronic measurements. It
is important to note that responses need not be behavioral, but can also be answers
1"personality", "behavior". Merriam Webster.com. Merriam-Webster, 2011. Sat. 7 May 2016.
==PAGE:15==
6
2.1
Evolutionary Psychology
to direct or indirect questions about the subject’s personality, which is, for example,
the case when inferring personality from questionnaires. In this study, measurements
of behavior (for the sake of measuring behavior) are obtained through personal de-
vice monitoring (observation/covert) while measurements of personality are obtained
through a questionnaire inventory (person/covert).
Trait theory is a ￿eld of inquiry that seeks to model personality as a set of traits
(or characteristics) that each has in￿uence on a range of behaviors. This, along with
the earlier stated notion that personality and behavior are coupled, implies a degree
of correlation between traits and behavioral manifestations, and so it is obvious to
seek to construct predictive models between personality and behavior. In fact, a large
parts of trait theory and an extensive amount of research, both historically and con-
temporary, addresses the modeling problem [17–21]. Common for all, is that in no case
has it been possible to produce statistically signi￿cant correlations between behav-
ioral indicators and personalty traits that exceeded 0.3 in absolute correlation. This
limit has been observed so frequently that is has come to be known as the "personality
coe￿cient" (coined by Walter Mischel (1969) [22]). Regardless of its broad acceptance,
however, it is important to note that the personality coe￿cient is an empirical value.
Ajzen attributes the low correlation to e￿ects governed by behavioral inconsis-
tency, that is, even though someone might consider themself highly altruistic, they
may not always act accordingly due to natural ￿uctuations in mood, circumstance,
attitude, etc. Furthermore the notion of behavioral multi-determinism - that traits
express themselves through multiple behaviors, and reversely that behavior results
from multiple trait expressions - is argued to be a contributing factor to low predic-
tive validity between personality and behavior [16].
It is important to note that two variables with low correlation can still be statis-
tically signi￿cant, and that often times this is the only thing which matters. In the
case of this study, the purpose of correlating personality with behavior is not to build
predictive models, but rather to study whether there is a signi￿cant relationship at
all.
2.1.2
How is personality measured?
Human e￿orts to derive a taxonomy for character traits predate our calender. Early
e￿orts include the four Cardinal Virtues - prudence, temperance, courage and justice -
due to Plato and Aristotle [23], as well as the four humors - blood, yellow bile, black bile
and phlegm - said to have originated in Ancient Egyptian medicine but formalized by
Hippocrates [24]. The foundation of the ￿eld now known as trait theory is, however,
not considered rooted in this way thinking. Rather it started in 1884 when Sir Francis
Galton established the lexical hypothesis which states that any trait that is truly impor-
tant to humans will become encoded into their language [1]. Galton reported ￿nding
==PAGE:16==
7
2.1
Evolutionary Psychology
talkative
frank
adventurous
sociable
silent
secretive
cautious
reclusive
good-natured
gentle
cooperative
not jealous
irritable
headstrong
negativistic
jealous
tidy
responsible
scrupulous
perservering
careless
undependable
unscrupulous
quitting
calm
composed
poised
not hypochondriacal
anxious
excitable
nervous
hypochondriacal
artistically sensitive
imaginative
intellectual
refined
insensitive
simple
nonreflective
crude
Openness to experience
Conscientiousness
Extraversion
Aggreeableness
Neuroticism
Low
High
Low
High
Low
High
Low
High
Low
High
Figure 2.1: Visualization of the BFM. Traits are shown in the order ’OCEAN’, each constituting a
continuous domain between low trait value, associated with adjectives that oppose the name of the
trait, and high trait value, associated with adjectives that support the trait name. The model ex-
plains an individual’s personality as a vector with one score per trait. Scored are typically obtained
through a questionnaire inventory.
exactly 1000 personality descriptive adjectives in the English language. A similar ef-
fort was later made by Gordon Allport and Henry Odbert (1936) using the Webster’s
Unabridged Dictionary (2nd Ed.), which resulted in a 17,953 long list of unique words
to describe personality and behavior [25]. The ￿rst e￿ort to understand the underly-
ing structure of this vocabulary was taken by Raymond B. Cattell (1943) who applied
factor analysis to the covariance structure of words when used to describe individuals
in large test groups, and found 16 primary and eight secondary traits [26]. This result
was re￿ned by Donald. M. Fiske (1949) who, in an e￿ort to replicate Cattell’s result,
arrived at a ￿ve factor solution [27]. Supported by later research, this is still the prevail-
ing result. It was coined the Big Five model2 (BFM) by Lewis Goldberg (1981) [28], but
credit for its invention is typically given to Fiske [29]. The model is shown in Figure 2.1.
It o￿ers ￿ve high-level personality traits: openness to experience (O), conscientiousness
(C), extraversion (E), aggreeableness (A) and neuroticism (N) [30], which are typically
recalled using acronyms OCEAN or CANOE. Traits in the BFM is typically measures
using a questionnaire inventory such as the Big Five Inventory or the IPIP100 Inven-
tory which relies on honest self-report by the subject [31]. Rather than reducing the
rich tapestry of the human psychology to mere ￿ve traits, the model seeks to provide
2Also commonly referred to as the Five Factor model (FFM).
==PAGE:17==
8
2.1
Evolutionary Psychology
a compelling framework for organizing the enormous variety of psychological di￿er-
ences characterizing humans. It assumes a hierarchical view of psychological traits,
where the Big Five traits (BFT) are independent roots that each branch into many
facets and subfacets.
Criticism
The BFM is widely accepted among a substantial number of researchers,
by some even considered a universally valid structure that transcends culture and
language [32,33]. Unsurprisingly this particular viewpoint is not unchallenged. Recent
￿ndings have shown the BFM to only explain variance in a subset of traits (C, E, N)
for indigenous societies [34], which resonates with the ￿nding that humility emerges
as a trait when studying populations in Asia (as captured by the HEXACO model, see
below). Furthermore the lexical hypothesis has been argued to have the two following
problems: (1) since language itself is not developed by experts, the inherent ambiguity
of words causes any model based on language sampling to, at best, re￿ect only a lay
perceptions of the traits [35,36], and (2) words can’t accurately capture the spectrum of
personality because some very important traits are tacit [37].
Limitations
It has been shown that the BFM only captures up to 56% of a per-
sons personality spectrum [38]. This is very important knowledge to have when using
the BFM in any study that attempts to make general statements about personality. In
the current undertaking, it too must be respected that certain ￿ne-grained aspect of
personality won’t be captured and therefore shouldn’t be speculated about. Unlike
the Eysenck model (presented below) the BFM doesn’t for example capture person-
ality variance due to psychotism. It thus stands to reason that any strategies inferred
from a dataset of BFTs cannot possibly be purely psychopathy, although it is in fact a
proven evolutionarily stable strategy (ESS, see Section 2.1.3) [2].
Alternative models
While the BFM is the most commonly used system for
measuring personality traits, it is not the only one. The HEXACO model of person-
ality structure is another widely accepted model which has deeper roots in European
and Asian languages. Using factor analysis it ￿nds six traits, where ￿ve are similar
to those in the BFM, and one is related to honesty and humility [39]. Another impor-
tant model is Cattell’s 16PF questionnaire which measures personality on 16 out of his
original 24 personality dimensions [40]. Finally, the Eysenck personality questionnaire
reduces personality into mere three traits: psychoticism, extraversion and neuroticism.
In this model psychoticism captures the aggressive and more extreme nuances of neu-
roticism. Rather than capturing a wide spectrum of personality the Eysenck model
aims only at capturing personality variance associated with temperament.
==PAGE:18==
9
2.1
Evolutionary Psychology
2.1.3
How does evolutionary psychology treat personality?
Evolutionary psychologists are interested in personality because there are clues that
suggest it might play an important role in natural selection. The ￿rst such clue is that
much research shows personality to exhibit stability over time and contexts [4,41,42].
The second is that studies have shown individual personality traits to be 30 −50%
inherited [5,6]. This strongly suggests that there are ￿tness bene￿ts to di￿erent genet-
ically inheritable aspects of personality. EP suggests that due the heredity of person-
ality it may be seen, from an evolutionary point of view, as a type of behavioral
strategy, i.e. a motivational system which predisposes people to seek out particu-
lar situations and respond in particular ways [2]. This argumentation, however, gives
rises to a paradox: in trying to explain the heredity of personality traits by assum-
ing that the traits increase ￿tness, the question of why personality is only 30 −50%
genetic must be addressed. EP has several theories to explain this, of which the two
central ones are: (1) the brain develops as it does due to chance because the genome
only contains ~20,300 genes of information which cannot possibly code exactly for a
brain that has ~100 billion complexly interacting neurons and (2) the individual is born
with an adapted capacity for environmental calibration because inherent uncertainty
of the world renders a ￿xed strategy on birth suboptimal [2].
EP’s primary instrument for measuring personality is the BFM because, as argued
by Buss, it represents the most evolutionarily plausible way of carving up human
personality [3,4]. The main reason for this is because the traits are orthogonal and
they capture a wide array of individual di￿erences. To compare, in one end of the
scale Cattell’s 16PF model elaborately cover many aspects of personality at the cost
of using a very non-orthogonal system of traits, whereas in reverse the Eysenck model
is too narrow and disregards evolutionarily important traits like agreeableness, con-
scientiousness and openness to experience.
Trade-o￿s cause trait variations
Trade-o￿s between physical and psycholog-
ical traits are inherent to almost all biological systems. It can be understood intuitively
as the problem of having to choose between things that are good for something but
can’t be had simultaneously. Like being big or small: each has advantages, but obvi-
ously an organism must somehow choose to be either like one or a trade-o￿. An in-
vestigated example from Darwinian evolutionary theory explains the practical value
of this problem. Ground ￿nches on the Galapagos are typically sectioned into three
types: (1) long beak/medium body, (2) large thick beak/large body and (3) small thick
beak/small body. Shoval et. al. shows that each of these trait con￿gurations are in
fact archetypes of traits exhibited by all ground ￿nches, and that each archetype is
optimized to perform a speci￿c task (see Figure 2.2.b) [7]. Archetype-(1) is optimized
for picking insects and extracting nectar, archetype-(2) is optimized for cracking large
==PAGE:19==
10
2.1
Evolutionary Psychology
hard seeds and archetype-(3) is optimized for crushing small soft seeds. Shoval et. al.
observes that most ground ￿nches are, however, not exactly like any archetype, rather
each seems to trade o￿archetypal traits such as to be able to perform all tasks to some
ability. This is thought to be a strategy for coping with changing ecological pressures,
such that when a niche becomes unavailable (e.g. small soft seeds disappear) the or-
ganism has other ways of leveraging its ￿tness.
a)
Performace in objective A
Performace in objevtive B
Fitness disadvan-
tage but feasible
Fitness advantage 
but not feasible
b)
Figure 2.2: a) Illustration of distribution of points in a two-objective performance space where the
black points are Pareto optimal and the blue curve signify the Pareto front where no objective can be
optimized further without decreasing performance in the other. b) Illustration of how members of
a species is distributed in trait-space to respect trade-o￿s between archetypal traits (source: Shoval
et. al. [7]).
It is reasonable to ask what the best trade-o￿con￿guration of traits is, but the im-
mediate answer is that there are in￿nite. To explain what this means, the concept of
Pareto optimality must be introduced. Pareto optimality is a concept that stems from
Economics and characterizes the set of solutions to a multi-objective optimization
problem where no objective can be further optimized without having to compromise
performance of another. For two objectives this means that solutions that are Pareto
optimal are distributed along a curve in performance space, as illustrated in Figure
2.2.a. For an individual organism, traits will be adopted in such a way the the organ-
ism remain Pareto optimal, i.e. good enough at all evolutionarily important tasks to
remain ￿t. Those that are not on the Pareto front will have a ￿tness disadvantage
and be selected against in the long run, thus not passing on the genes that caused the
disadvantage. The propensity to seek niches of least competition, i.e. Niche ￿lling,
drives populations to distribute traits somewhat evenly across the Pareto front.
The con￿guration of traits that a ground ￿nch inherits from its parents can, in an
evolutionary view, be considered a strategy for coping with the environment. This
view is conceptually similar to the way evolutionary psychologists treat personality.
For this reason, an individuals con￿guration of personality traits is also considered
to be under in￿uence of trade-o￿s. For example a person cannot (disregarding per-
sonality disorders) be both extroverted and introverted at the same time, and if life in
==PAGE:20==
11
2.1
Evolutionary Psychology
Opponent
Hawk
Dove
You
Hawk
(V −C)/2
V
Dove
0
V/2
Table 2.2: Reward table for the hawk-dove
game. It models an exchange between ’you’
and an opponent where each chooses e.g. to
be like a dove (cooperate) or hawk (cheat).
Each combination of moves has a di￿erent
reward for each player.
general can be viewed as a complex collection of tasks then a persons level of intro-
/extraversion poses an evolutionary trade-o￿problem just as much as beak shape
does to seed-cracking.
Frequency dependence drives emergence of multiple strategies
EP treats
the predominance of di￿erent personalities/behavioral strategies using the concept
of frequency dependence from evolutionary theory. It argues that the reason why all
humans have not simply adapted the single best strategy is that, while at times there
may be one strategy which is the best, this quickly changes when too many individu-
als adopt it. This can be compared to how driving to work early is a good strategy for
avoiding tra￿c as long as not too many people do it. Another example is that of psy-
chopathy. Workman et. al. argues that psychopathy is in fact (purely evolutionarily
speaking) a very e￿ective behavioral strategy to maximize personal ￿tness 3, provided
there are not too many psychopaths around [2]. In most populations only 1-3% of in-
dividuals will adopt this strategy to a sub-clinical level whereas clinical psychopathy
is as low as 0.2% [43]. The psychopath strategy revolves around gaining peoples trust
and then using them for own goals, and imaginably this strategy wouldn’t work well
if there were so many psychopaths that otherwise trusting people were used to get-
ting cheated by psychopaths and therefore in general learned only to trust kin or
long-term friends.
Game theory can explain some behavioral strategies
The suggestion that
personality is a behavioral strategy must be understood in terms of what evolutionary
psychologists already identify with the term ’strategy’. It has its roots in the ￿eld of
game theory, which examines how people behave depending on the strategies of oth-
ers. Here the term is simply synonymous with algorithm. A central goal of applying
game theory is to ￿nd a strategy for an individual which, given what everybody else
is doing, cannot make the individual better o￿. Such as strategy is said to represent a
state of Nash Equilibrium. A commonly treated paradigm is the so-called hawk-dove
game which is illustrated in Table 2.2. It models an interaction between two play-
ers, you and an opponent, who have to share a resource V . Each player can choose
3Also: exclusive ￿tness - only increasing ￿tness of self as opposed to inclusive ￿tness which measures
￿tness of all kin.
==PAGE:21==
12
2.1
Evolutionary Psychology
to cooperate or defect, i.e. act as a dove or as a hawk. If both cooperates V is shared
equally, but if one chooses to cooperate while the other doesn’t the gullible player gets
nothing while the defector gets all. In case both players choose the hawk-strategy the
resources are shared equally but at the cost of battle, C. This game has been studied
extensively, and for repeated games - between rational players - the winning strategy
is a so-called tit-for-tat strategy [2], where one simply copies the opponents’ last move.
This strategy constitutes a Nash equilibrium because, provided the opponent doesn’t
change strategy, there is nothing to gain from changing strategy [44]. Other strategies
such as a generous-tit-for-tat which chooses cooperation with some probability even
if the opponent has defected, or win-stay lose-shift which (even simpler) just repeats
past moves if they were successful and tries something new if not, have been shown
to work slightly better when the opponent acts irrationally [45]. Other less sophisti-
cated strategies which are not in equilibrium are uncompromising cooperation as well
as constant defecting.
A generalization of the Nash equilibrium to describe evolutionary stability which
is used in biology, behavioral ecology and EP is the concept of the evolutionarily stable
strategy (ESS). An ESS is a behavioral strategy that, if it exists abundantly enough in a
population, it cannot be replaced by an invading strategy [46]. It links to the concept of
frequency dependence examined above, when multiple ESSs exist alongside, because
they depend on each other in complex ways (recall the example with psychopathy),
and can therefore be said to be inter-frequency dependent (this terminology is not
used in literature but resonates with notions raised by Workman et. al. [2] and Buss
[42]).
EP considers a number of behavioral strategies to be ESS. Firstly the psychopathy
strategy is thought to be ESS. Another is reciprocal altruism which has been exten-
sively studies in tribe cultures [2], where individuals tend to give presents to non-kin
with the expectation that presents will be returned to them at another time of greater
need. Reciprocal altruism is formally treated as either: (1) direct where reciprocity is
expected from the same person/group and of equal value as was donated (compared
to the tit-for-tat strategy) or (2) indirect which relies on good reputation, established
through gossip of altruistic acts, to eventually provide the giver with resources from
like-minded (cooperation strategy) [45]. Another important strategy which is thought
to be ESS is the freeloader, which utilizes the cooperators trusting nature to cheat as
frequently as possible within the limit of remaining an ESS. Evolutionary psycholo-
gists speculate the freeloader to have signi￿cant importance to community formation
through exemplifying morally wrong behavior [2].
==PAGE:22==
13
2.2
Pareto Task Inference
2.2
Pareto Task Inference
Pareto Task Inference (ParTI) is a research paradigm developed at the Uri Alon lab
to solve a number of problems related to evolution of morphology in various species.
ParTI has been applied to understand systems in biology involving cancer cells [8],
morphology of ammonite shells [9], mass and longevity design of mammals [10], and
more [7,11]. It is founded in principles relating to evolutionary trade-o￿s and Pareto
optimality as explained in Section 2.1.1, and combines these to provide a novel ap-
proach for inference of biological functions.
The goal of ParTI is to infer the evolutionary objectives of an organism. Objec-
tives can be anything from tasks like cracking nuts and picking insects which a ￿nch
must perform well to remain evolutionarily ￿t, or even behavioral strategies that a
human can employ to perform all of life’s evolutionarily important tasks in a way
that maximizes ￿tness in a given niche. The value proposition of ParTI is that it
provides evidence of what these objectives are only by considering the traits
of the organism in question. ParTI works in two parts:
2.2.1 Find archetypes, i.e combinations of traits that are optimized for speci￿c
objectives (Pareto).
2.2.2 Infer objectives by studying the combinations of traits for each archetype
(Task Inference).
The central paradigm of ParTI exists in the ￿rst part, while the second part em-
ploys statistical methods to produce scienti￿c results. In the following, each of these
are examined.
2.2.1
Finding traits that are optimized for objectives
This part of ParTI is based on two core abstractions:
1. Inherent trade-o￿s between traits that are evolutionarily important to increase
performance in di￿erent objectives, drive variation in a population to distribute
along a Pareto front.
2. The Pareto front in trait-space is the hypervolume of a simplex. Each vertex of
this simplex represents combinations of traits that are optimal for performing
its respective objective.
From (2) it is noted that vertices of a simplex may also be treated as archetypes.
Abstraction-(1) is explained in Section 2.1.3. Abstraction-(2) requires further explana-
tion. When organisms have a single performance objective natural selection leads to
traits that maximize performance of that objective. Any deviation from the optimal
trait con￿guration causes performance, and thus ￿tness, to drop and in turn individ-
uals who fall too far from the optimum will be selected against. This is illustrated in
==PAGE:23==
14
2.2
Pareto Task Inference
a)
Trait 2
Trait 1
Performance
One objective
b)
Performance
Trait 2
Trait 1
Three objectives
Figure 2.3:
a) Performance function of a single objective/task in trait-space (source: [47]. b)
Performance function of three objectives/tasks in trait-space. Archetypes are the local maxima
(source: [10]).
Figure 2.3.a. When multiple objectives exist, no set of traits can optimize performance
in all tasks and as such organisms must trade o￿traits relating to optimal performance
of each objective. In Figure 2.3.b a performance function of three objectives is illus-
trated. It shows that in order to maximize performance, leaving the triangle spanned
by the three peaks is disadvantageous. In fact, it corresponds to moving away from a
position of Pareto optimality since performance in each objective is decreased with-
out any gain. Therefore, the triangle shaped by the peaks, or archetypes, constitutes
the region where traits are Pareto optimal, i.e. the Pareto front. Figure 2.4 shows how
the number of objectives shapes the Pareto front. If there are two tasks, organisms
must have traits that are distributed somewhat along a line between the archetypes
in order to remain Pareto optimal, and if there are four tasks the Pareto front will
be the volume spanned by the corresponding four archetypes shaping a tetrahedron.
This is important because it shows if objectives are evolutionary tasks or behavioral
strategies, these can be inferred just by considering the vertices of the triangle, i.e. the
archetypes that emerges from the distribution of points in trait-space.
The ParTI principle generalizes to any number of dimensions
Since a tri-
angle is just a special case of a d-simplex composed of d + 1 vertices, the ParTI prin-
ciple can be used to infer objectives in any number of dimensions. However, ParTI
provides no "idiot-proof" solution to any dataset. For very high-dimensional data like
gene expressions which may span a thousand dimensions, one shouldn’t expect to
￿nd a thousand and one objectives. There is a purely mathematical reason for this.
The convex set for any distribution of points grows exponentially with the number
of dimensions as O(log (n)M−1) [48]. Points on the convex hull are more likely to be
==PAGE:24==
15
2.2
Pareto Task Inference
Trait 2
Trait 1
Trait 3
Trait 2
Trait 1
Trait 3
Trait 2
Trait 1
Trait 3
A
B
D
2 objectives
3 objectives
4 objectives
A
B
C
A
B
C
line (1-simplex)
triangle (2-simplex)
tetrahedron (3-simplex)
Figure 2.4: Pareto front regions (blue) for up to three objectives in trait-space. In the 2 objectives-
case the Pareto front spans the edge connecting objectives A and B. For 3 objectives and 4 objec-
tives Pareto fronts are the area and volume, respectively, of the simplex spanned by the set of
objectives.
a)
b)
Figure 2.5: a) The size of the convex hull for N points scale exponentially with the number of
dimensions M as O(log n)M−1. This ￿gure illustrates the convex set sizes for ￿xed values of N. It
shows that above ￿ve dimensions, many points are required in order to obtain a low ratio between
the size of the convex set and the number of points. b) The Pareto front is a simplex anchored in
d + 1 points on the convex hull, and as such points on the hull that are not archetypes are not
Pareto optimal.
==PAGE:25==
16
2.2
Pareto Task Inference
outside of the Pareto front, and as such the possibility of ￿nding valid simplex geome-
tries (where valid means that most points are on the Pareto front) in high-dimensional
spaces is severely diminished. Figure 2.5 illustrates that for over ￿ve dimensions, a
very large number of datapoints are required to maintain a low ratio between the
number of points in the convex set to the number of points in total.
Is this problematic? Somewhat yes, but recall from Section 2.1.3 the concept of
ESS. In most biological systems multiple ESSs can only exist alongside if they are
frequency dependent and inter-frequency dependent, and arguably there must be an
upper limit to the number of complexly interacting strategies which can be ESS and
exist alongside. That said, the above analysis cannot inform us about where this limit
lies as biology has little regard for computational shortcomings.
Projections enable inference in high-dimensional data
There is a solution
to the problem pointed out above and illustrated in Figure 2.5. In high-dimensional
systems such as cancer cells which are typically measured in terms of their gene ex-
pressions, objectives can be found using dimensionality reduction methods. In ParTI
literature the prevailing such method is principle component analysis (PCA) [8]. PCA
allows the analyst to project points in a high-dimensional space onto a subspace
spanned an orthogonal basis of vectors which explain the most variance in the data.
These vectors are called principle components (PC) and are computed as the eigenvec-
tors of the covariance matrix. Informally, PCA can be thought of as casting a shadow
of an object in such as way that the object can best be recognized. If the object was
a sword, the ￿rst PC would follow the length of the sword and the second (being or-
thogonal to the ￿rst) would follow the guard and as such the best way to show that
is was a sword just from looking at the shadow would be to project it onto these two
components.
For objects that exist in high-dimensional spaces such as a point-cloud of gene
expressions this method of "casting the shadow of highest explained variance" works
methodically in exactly the same way as the sword example. Here, however, the an-
alyst has more freedom to choose the dimensionality of the space projected to (the
shadow). When ParTI treats high-dimensional data it looks for shadows that are
shaped like simplexes (see Figure 2.4). For a low-dimensional projection where the
points appear to fall inside a simplex, the vertices can be taken as the combinations of
traits that allow for optimal performance of objectives, and each can in turn be iden-
ti￿ed by further analysis into how organisms with that combination of traits behave.
2.2.2
Inferring objectives from enrichment near archetypes
In the current context the word inference simply means to uncover evidence of cer-
tain features or behaviors of an archetype to the point where it is valid to make an
==PAGE:26==
17
2.2
Pareto Task Inference
interpretation of what the main objective of the archetype is. As such, ParTI is really
a method for providing evidence rather than giving an ultimate answer.
Since archetypes in trait-space are optimal con￿gurations of traits for performing
speci￿c objectives that are evolutionarily important, the problem of inferring what
those objectives are can be solved in many ways. For very simple systems one could
unobtrusively observe how organisms employ their traits and take special notice of
behavioral di￿erences between those that resemble archetypes [7]. But for systems
that can’t be directly observed, other methods must be used. A relevant example is
personalities of people and which behavioral strategies for performing evolutionarily
important tasks they lead to. In this example traits are personality factors such as the
Big Five (see Section 2.1.2) and the objective is the behavioral strategy that the per-
sonality is optimized to perform. Given the archetypes it would be to time-consuming
and obtrusive to monitor people, who were similar to each archetype, in their natu-
ral habitat. Using qualitative interviewing might work better but would also be time
consuming and possibly introduce qualitative research biases.
A better approach is to study the statistical properties of individuals who are simi-
lar to each archetype. Using extra data such as demographic variables, response items
from surveys and behavioral data, layers of information can be added such as to reveal
what people similar to each archetype typically do for a living, whether they tend to
be married or what age range they occupy. This approach is general. If the system
were cancer cells and traits were gene expressions, extra data such as tissue type, cell
cycle period and protein production level would provide evidence to aid inference of
objectives for di￿erent cells [8].
There are di￿erent methods for doing this. The simplest method is to correlate
the feature value with distance from the archetype and then use the slope and cor-
relation coe￿cient as measures of relatedness. Another approach which provides a
better visual image is to analyze the enrichment of features near the archetypes. As
illustrated in Figure 2.6 this method works by binning points according to their dis-
tance from the archetype and then taking the average of the feature in each bin to
create a curve which shows whether the feature tends to be enriched or depleted near
the archetype. If the feature is categorical the method estimates the frequency of each
category in every bin, such as to create separate histograms for the feature-categories.
This method is applied widely in ParTI literature [7–11].
2.2.3
Inferrence of archetypes
So far archetype has been used synonymously with simplex vertex, and surely simplex
vertices can be considered archetypes - but archetypes are not necessarily simplex
vertices. Figure 2.7 gives two examples of archetypes in clusters of simulated points,
and shows that archetypes are in fact just the intuitive "corner-points" of any point
==PAGE:27==
18
2.2
Pareto Task Inference
Distance from archetype
Bin freq./avg.
Archetype
Figure 2.6: Enrichment of variables near archetypes are estimated across a number bins charac-
terized by distance to the archetype. If the studied feature is continuous the
cloud. The method for inferring these corner-points is called archetypal analysis (AA).
It was introduced by Adele Cutler and Leo Breiman in 1994 and developed as an un-
supervised learning method for clustering data that is not well-separated [49]. The
central idea it to derive a set of archetypes from which all points can be approximated
as linear combinations. Below is given a brief introduction to the method.
The AA factorization problem
AA solves the following matrix factorization
problem. Consider a data matrix X = [x1, x2, ..., xn] 2 Rm⇥n. The task of AA is
to estimate the two factor matrices S 2 Rk⇥n and C 2 Rn⇥k such as to satisfy the
following equation with minimal approximation:
X ⇡AS = XCS
(2.1)
The number of archetypes is controlled by k and can be chosen by the analyst,
while the archetypes themselves are column vectors in A 2 Rm⇥k. C and S are
column stochastic matrices subject to |cj|1 = |si|1 = 1. Columns in C give the
coe￿cients of each archetype as a linear combination of the data points, and reversely
S give the coe￿cients of each data point as an approximate linear combination of
the archetypes. This leads to the property that archetypes may be derived from data
points as A = XC and data points approximated from archetypes as X ⇡AS.
This introduces symmetry into the matrix factorization problem consistent with the
following statement: archetypes are convex combinations of the data points and data
points are approximated by convex combinations of archetypes. C and S are derived
by minimizing the residual sum of squares (RSS):
RSS = kX −XCSk2
F
(2.2)
subject to |cj|1 = 1 8 j 2 {0, ..., k} and |si|1 = 1 8 i 2 {0, ..., n}, where k · kF
is the Frobenius norm. Furthermore, AA imposes the constraint that all coe￿cients
of C and S are greater or equal to zero. Note that RSS goes to zero in the limit
==PAGE:28==
19
2.2
Pareto Task Inference
Figure 2.7: Two generic examples of archetypes in multidimensional data. Hollow circles represent
the archetypes which are typically located in corner-like regions of the data.
AS ! X where the data points can be reconstructed exactly as convex combinations
of the archetypes. It can be shown that Equation (2.2) is non-convex, and that the
optimization problem has no closed form solution [49], yielding numerical methods
necessary for solving the problem.
Numerical methods for estimation of archetypes
Cutler et. al. solved the
AA problem using an alternating optimization approach. Starting from a random ini-
tialization of S the method alternates between ￿nding the best C for an S and ￿nding
the best S for a C, for as necessary until the reduction in RSS is su￿ciently small.
Each iteration requires solving several convex least squares problems and conver-
gence is slow for many points in high dimensions because the number of points on
the convex hull increases exponentially (see Figure 2.5.a. Recent work due to Mørup
and Hansen introduces an e￿ective initialization procedure and a projected gradient
approach to solving the AA matrix factorization problem, which however reduces the
computation time by limiting the number of points on the convex hull that can con-
stitute solutions to the optimization problem [48]. It furthermore allows the analyst
to compute archetypes with slack such that they may fall outside of the convex hull,
diminishing the problem illustrated in Figure 2.5.b.
Available implementations
A number of implementations of AA are available
across di￿erent software languages. Morup et. al. gives an implementation of their
proposed projected gradient version of AA [48] which has furthermore been translated
into a Python package, by this author, available on the Python Package Index (PyPI).
The Python package PyMF also gives an implementation of the, however, slightly
slower alternating optimization version of AA [50]. Finally, there is an implementation
in R that also uses the traditional approach [51].
==PAGE:29==
20
2.2
Pareto Task Inference
Alternative methods
As far as the ParTI principle is concerned the only re-
quirements of archetypes is that they constitute the geometrical corners of the dataset.
As such other methods for computing archetypes are just as valid as AA. Four al-
ternative methods estimate archetypes using minimal volume simplex and spectral
unmixing methods using di￿erent approaches [52,52–54]. It is, however, not within the
scope of this thesis to further discuss any of these methods.
==PAGE:30==
3
Datasets
Four di￿erent datasources are used in this study. Each one contains multiple datasets
and are used for slightly di￿erent purposes. Table 3.1 gives an overview of which
datatypes each source provides. They all have in common that they provide Big Five
data for a large number of survey responders which is useful for the analysis presented
in Section 4.1. Appendix G gives a comparative overview of all Big Five datasets.
Big Five
Facets
Values
Attributes
Behavior
N (appr.)
SensibleDTU
3
-
-
-
3
1E3
myPers.-project
3
-
3
-
2.5E6
SAPA-project
333
3
3
3 −78E3
MIDUS
333
-
-
-
3 −7E3
Table 3.1: Overview of the types of data contained in each used dataset. ’3’ symbolizes that the
source contains a given type, and if there are multiple it means that the source contains multiple
sets of the type. ’-’ symbolizes that the type is contained in the datasource but is not used in the
analysis.
3.1
Sensible DTU
Sensible DTU was an experiment conducted as part of the ongoing interdisciplinary
research project Social Fabric at Copenhagen University (UCPH) and DTU Compute
of The Technical University of Denmark (DTU), which ran from September 2013 to
January 2015 (2.5 years). In the experiment, 863 undergraduate students at DTU gave
informed consent to participate. Participants were predominantly male (78.8%), of
average age 21.7 (SD 2.8) years, distributed across all study lines, and were primarily
1st year students (59.2%) and 2nd year students (30.2%). Remaining students were
either 3rd year students or students for which a year was not reported. Participants
were provided a NEXUS smartphone for personal use, which was reprogrammed to
continuously collect social behavioral data through multiple channels [55,56]. Tab. 3.2
gives an overview of which social behavioral data were collected.
The experiment saw its largest volume of activity in the spring of 2014, where 526
students were actively using the provided smartphone as their primary device (active
on more than 75% of days through the period, see Fig. 3.1).
As described in Sec. 2.1.1, behavioral inconsistency sets a limit for the level of
mutual information, or correlation, there may be found between a personality trait
obtained through a questionnaire, and a speci￿c type of behavior. To mitigate such
in￿uence, data originating only from school weeks in the spring semester of 2014 is
selected for analysis, based on the assumption that this provides the highest degree of
self-similarity in the data. Similar subsets, e.g. from exam periods or holiday weeks,
could also have been chosen, but would contain less data since these are narrower
spans of time.
21
==PAGE:31==
22
3.1
Sensible DTU
Relative social activity throughout the experiment
no. active
310
526 475
390
262
172
11
Figure 3.1: An overview of the amount of activity tracked in the respective months of the ex-
periment. The months marked in bold represent those with which the data used in this study
is associated. The far right bar plot show the number of students in each semester and summer
holiday, which are active on more than 75% of days through the period.
Before receiving the phone, participants were required to ￿ll out a baseline ques-
tionnaire. It included the Big Five (BF) questionnaire which was used in this study
to obtain BF pro￿les for each subject (see Sec. 2.1.2). The BF questionnaire was ￿lled
out for each participant no later than december 20th of 2013 [55]. The notion raised in
Section 2.1.1 that behavior and personality are not constants provides a compelling
argument that they should be measured as close in time as possible, which gives an-
other reason for choosing to use only behavioral data from the spring semester of
2014.
Researchers in the Social Fabric project also has access to administrative data such
birth year, courses, drop-out and most notably grades, none of which, however, were
Datatype
Sample period
Used in this study
GPS-location
15 minutes
Yes
WiFi-scans
10 minutes
No
Bluetooth-scans
5 minutes
Yes
Phone calls
-
Yes
Text messages
-
Yes
Facebook data
-
No
Screen on/o￿events
-
Yes
Table 3.2: Overview of the datatypes which were collected through the administered smartphones,
and which are used in this study. Niether channel provides written or spoken content. The Facebook
channel includes friends, groups, interests, likes, political orientation, religion and more.
==PAGE:32==
23
3.2
myPersonality
used in this study.
Privacy and data access
Given the sensitive information contained, or easily
extracted, from this data despite all reference to personal identity having been re-
moved, strict access rules to the data are imposed. Researchers are obliged to sign a
non-disclosure aggreement (NDA) and raw data is not to be contained on private of
public machines outside of the EU. Data is accessed in JSON format through the Data
Viewer API at sensible.dtu.dk/apps/data_viewer with a valid research
token, or through a virtual IPython Notebook environment hosted at raw.sensible.dtu.dk,
where data is served as Numpy MaskedArray type for e￿ciency which easily converts
to Pandas DataFrame type, Numpy 2D array or similar matrix-like types (see Sec. 7.1
for technical reference). Researchers working outside of the EU are restricted to work
with the data remotely through the virtual IPython Notebook environment, which is,
conveniently, also the faster alternative.
3.2
myPersonality
The myPersonality research project maintained a Facebook application through which
users could answer various personality questionnaires and donate personal data from
their pro￿les [57]. It reached great popularity because it allowed users to compare re-
sults with friends and even ￿ll out personality questionnaires for others. From 2007
to 2012 the research project managed to collect questionnaire responses from nearly
7.5 million Facebook users. 900.000 users retook the questionnaire providing longitu-
dinal data, 300.000 provided friend ratings enabling self-report accuracy assessment
and 40% gave full access to private pro￿le information.
In the current study, access to approximately 2.5 million BF pro￿les and 9000 ’Ba-
sic Human Values’ (BHV) questionnaire responses were provided. BHVs stem from
the Theory of Basic Human Values due to Shalom Schwartz [58,59], which juxtapose
the 10 fundamental values: benevolence, tradition, conformity, security, power, achieve-
ment, hedonism, stimulation, self-direction, universalism. An overview of value/facet-
relationships of their position relative to each other is given in Appendix F.
3.3
Midlife Development in the U.S
Midlife Development in the U.S (MIDUS) was a longitudinal telephone/email survey
study conducted in three waves in 1995, 2004/06 and 2013 [60]. Its goal was to create a
dataset which could be analyzed to understand how various life variables a￿ect each
other. It successfully collected repeated questionnaire responses for 3294 randomly
selected Americans, which, among many other metrics, included personality pro￿les
measured with the BFM. For the BF items in the survey participants rated how well
di￿erent words described them on a four tick scale. In this study, BF datasets from
==PAGE:33==
24
3.4
SAPA-project
each of the waves are used. MIDUS 1 has 6261 valid datapoints, MIDUS 2 has 3971
and MIDUS 3 has 2715. Importantly the MIDUS 2 and MIDUS 3 datapoints are mea-
surements of participants who are also measured on in the previous years. For the
intended purpose this is not thought to have any damaging in￿uence on the results,
but is still important to keep in mind. Considering Appendix G is can furthermore
be seen that the C, E, and A traits do not distribute normally, but seem highly shifted
towards higher values. This may be due to bias in the collection method which relied
on an interviewer to collect the responses over telephone, or possible an artifact of
the inventory used.
3.4
SAPA-project
SAPA stands for ’Synthetic Aperture Personality Assessment’ which is a survey col-
lection method that feeds the respondent with semi-random questions from a large
pool of questionnaire items from a variety of inventories, until the respondent stops
answering. This creates a sparse dataset of response values, but for a large number of
participants, covariance matrices between questionnaire items across people with dif-
ferent attributes (e.g. country/gender) can be computed to infer di￿erences between
groups. The SAPA-Project is an e￿ort by computational psychologist David Condon,
which works as a web application allowing Internet users to take a personality test
and get insights about themselves [61]. In turn it is also a tools for researchers to gather
personality data. Participants disclose various personal demographic information and
respond to questions from three BF inventories: IPIP100, IPIP-NEO and SPI. The ￿rst
two are internationally recognized pools of questionnaire items [62], while the last
one is a product if Condon’s thesis [61]. Each one derives the BFTs using slightly dif-
ferent approached but largely produce the same factors. Using only responders who
answered at least four items for each trait, the IPIP100 inventory has 77,685 valid data-
points, the SPI inventory has 2928 valid datapoints and the IPIP-NEO has 37,554 valid
datapoints. 100% of valid responders to the SPI inventory are also valid responders to
the IPIP-NEO inventory and 47% of valid responders to the IPIP-NEO inventory are
also valid responders to the IPIP100 inventory.
An excerpt of the SAPA data is freely avaiable through the Harvard Dataverse at
https://goo.gl/vrX83G.
==PAGE:34==
4
Analysis and Results
The research objective is to ￿nd fundamental personality archetypes and understand
which behavioral strategies they correspond to in terms of the their personality facets,
demographic attributes, values and correlated behaviors. As stated in the introduction
this thesis documents the ￿rst e￿orts in an ongoing research project, and as such the
above goal is bold and will not be exhaustively satis￿ed. The results do however o￿er
clues towards which evolutionary behavioral strategies can be inferred from data.
The analysis takes the following trajectory: Six archetypes are found to emerge
consistently across multiple datasets. For each, values, personality facets, personal at-
tributes and behavior is inferred. The features of each archetype di￿er in fundamental
ways and provide clues towards strategies for performing life’s many tasks. These are
speculated to be: (1) self-concern (power/achievement driven, emotionally stable, un-
sympathetic), (2) social achievement (achievement driven, highly social, emotionally
unstable), (3) reciprocal altruism (conformist, benevolent, social, emotionally stable),
(4) xenophobia-loyalism (narrow-minded, loyal, orderly), (5) freeriding (unconformed,
undutiful, unorganized, unworried, emotionally stable) and (6) withdrawal (antiso-
cial, depressed, worried, emotionally unstable). Note that for the sake of clarity these
strategy labels are used throughout the analysis before they are given fair justi￿cation.
The analysis is separated into parts that each has a single premise. Each moti-
vates the next and together they discover the strategies. The ￿rst part presents the
analysis leading to the discovery of consensus archetypes, a relaxed interpretation of
an archetype. The second part investigates the types of personal attributes that are
enriched near each consensus archetype, and which stable behavioral indicators cor-
relate with distance from the archetypes. The third part investigates the predictive
power of the consensus archetypes compared to raw BFTs and PCs of BF question-
naire items (QI). Technical details about the analysis are explained in Section 7.2.
4.1
Six consensus archetypes emerge across seven datasets
The search for six strategies has two motivations. The ￿rst is that, as was shown in
Section 2.2.1 Figure 2.5, for more than ￿ve dimensions most points are in the convex
set of points and therefore not inside of the Pareto front, unless the number of points
becomes very large. As such, this justi￿es six as an upper bound. The lower bound
is slightly harder to justify, but an argument can be found in the fact that there are
￿ve personality factors. In Section 2.1.2 the Big Five model was presented and it was
explained that the covariance of personality descriptive adjectives applied to subjects
within a large enough population across a multitude of studies leads to ￿ve signi￿cant
factors of personality. The ParTI principle states that objectives (here: strategies) are
the d + 1 vertices of the simplex on which points fall in the d-dimensional subspace
of greatest variance, and since personality varies strongly along ￿ve factors, there
25
==PAGE:35==
26
4.1
Six consensus archetypes emerge across seven datasets
Difference from median
Figure 4.1: Archetypes emerging from each dataset. Color map scales with archetype trait dis-
tances from archetype trait median across all datasets. Annotated values are rows of archetypes
and BFTs as columns ordered by O, C, E, A and N.
should not be less than six fundamental personality strategies.
Archetypes are computed for multiple datasets to ensure generality. Under
the assumption that no questionnaire inventory and sample population can provide
enough generality to ￿nd the fundamental personality archetypes, the ParTI prin-
ciple is applied to seven di￿erent datasets (see Section 3). The Sensible DTU BF
dataset is left out because the population is deemed to speci￿ed to produce general
enough archetypes. For each dataset archetypes are computed as median values over
5000 bootstrapping iterations with sample size 200. The emerging sets of archetypes
(median values) are presented in Figure 4.1. Section 7.2.1 explains in detail how the
archetypes are computed.
Archetype deviations across datsets reveal consensus archetypes. Figure 4.1
shows that roughly the same archetypes emerge from the di￿erent datasets. How-
ever, certain archetype traits are far from the median. Since these are large datasets
from mixed populations it is not believed that any one produces archetypes that are
severely di￿erent due to noise. Rather the di￿erences are believed more likely to arise
due to characteristics relating to the population and the questionnaire inventory. To
investigate the severity of the di￿erences a 6 ⇥5 array of SDs across the datasets
(stacked in depth and calculated along 2nd axis, see Section 7.2.1) is computed, and
shown in Figure 4.2.a. Due to the observation that some archetype traits appear to
have much higher SD than others a consensus threshold of maximum SD, λ, is set for
a signi￿cance level ↵= 0.05. To ￿nd the threshold, an SD value array is computed
multiple times for shu￿ed archetype traits (columns shu￿ed independently). All re-
sulting SDs are then arranged in a list and sorted to ascending order, and the largest
value of the lower 5th percentile is chosen as the threshold. This method results in
==PAGE:36==
27
4.1
Six consensus archetypes emerge across seven datasets
a)              SDs across datasets
Bin frequency
܆ = 0.22
b)
Figure 4.2: a) SD values for archetype traits across datasets. It is observed that some vary greatly
while others are very stable. b) A consensus threshold λ emerges at 0.22, which gives rise to p-
values less than 0.05 for all archetype traits below the consensus threshold. The purple histogram
shows the normalized distribution of SDs for shu￿ed archetype traits. The blue histogram shows
the normalized distribution of SDs of the actual archetypes, where the rug shows distribution of
individual SDs.
λ = 0.22. The distribution of SDs and shu￿ed archetype SDs are visualized in Figure
4.2.b. Clearly there is a group of archetype traits with low SD and one with high SD.
λ gives rise to a mask that decides which archetype traits are in consensus and which
are not. Applying the mask to the median archetypes across all datasets reveals the
consensus archetypes (CA) presented in Figure 4.3.a. For consistency the CAs are here
named according to their later speculated strategies.
The strategies reveal themselves somewhat from the CA traits. The self-concern
CA is particularly unagreeable, which typically correlates with distrust for others and
self-centered motives. The withdrawal CA is highly introverted and neurotic which
could indicate a constantly-aware-of-danger strategy. In fact, it seems, each archetype
is quite distinct from the others. It is de￿nitely worth taking a short break from read-
ing to get acquainted with the CAs and their individual di￿erences and similarities
(see Figure 4.3.a).
A remark on the mathematical implications of CAs should be made. While there
are no strict mathematical de￿nitions of what an archetype is, the discourse so far has
implied that it is a point. However, once a consensus mask is applied, certain of the
trait values for some of the archetypes are said to be "not in consensus". What this re-
ally means is that when e.g. computing the distance to a CA the weighted euclidean
distance must be used, adding zero weight to non-consensus traits while all other
weights sum to 1. As such, if, for an archetype, a single trait is in non-consensus the
archetype is e￿ectively a line. If two traits are in non-consensus it is a plane, if three
a volume, if four a hyperplane in ￿ve dimensions, etc. In the following analysis the
fact that they are CAs and not just normal archetypes only has importance in terms
of computing the distance to them, which is done using the weighted euclidean ap-
==PAGE:37==
28
4.2
Enrichment and correlation reveal distinct strategies
a)                 Consensus archetypes
0.54
0.31
-0.22
-0.75
-0.42
0.84
0.12
1.10
0.55
1.00
0.83
1.11
0.97
1.12
-1.10
-0.45
0.35
-0.39
0.55
0.00
0.65
-0.87
0.53
0.30
-0.52
0.68
-0.13
-1.05
0.52
1.01
O
C
E
A
N
self-concern
social achievement
reciprocal altruism
xenophobia-loyalism
freeriding
withdrawal
b)
self-concern
social achievement
reciprocal altruism xenophobia-loyalism
freeriding
withdrawal
Figure 4.3: a) Main result of Section 4.1. Consensus archetypes emerge as median archetypes
where trait values are colored with respect to the consensus threshold: green signi￿es consensus
and gray signi￿es above threshold non-consensus, i.e. unde￿ned dimensions. b) Distributions of
weighted euclidean distances from points in the Facebook dataset to consensus archetypes. Axes
are scaled equally.
proach as described. Therefore CAs will be referred to as archetypes unless discussion
requires them to be explicitly stated as archetypes in consensus between datasets.
4.2
Enrichment and correlation reveal distinct strategies
From Figure 4.3.a it is observed that some archetypes share very similar trait values.
Comparing e.g. the social achievement and withdrawal archetypes they only di￿er
on the E trait. Does this mean that the two may correspond to the same behavioral
strategy? No. In the following the di￿erences between archetypes are investigated by
studying how facets, values, demographic attributes and behaviors are enriched/de-
pleted4 for- or correlate with distance from the archetypes. Enrichment analysis is
used because it provides an intuitive way of interpreting whether a variable is in-
￿uenced by distance from an archetype, and correlation analysis is used for behavior
where there are not enough datapoints to provide statistically signi￿cant results using
enrichment analysis (see Section 2.2.2). It is important to stress, however, that either
of these approaches inform only about statistical trends and not absolute di￿erences.
For example, as was stated in Section 2.1.1 there is a limit to how well personality and
behavior can correlate, empirically ￿xed around 0.3. And while the same rule may not
necessarily apply for demographic attributes, values and particularly not facets (for
reasons explained later), it still raises the important notion that no relationship be-
tween anything and personality is absolute, because after all (as was raised as critism
in Section 2.1.1) the best available method can only explain 56% of personality vari-
ance. The results presented in the following are therefore only indicative and their
4Herinafter just enriched to simplify the language.
==PAGE:38==
29
4.2
Enrichment and correlation reveal distinct strategies
implications are strictly useful for supporting claims that strategies exist and sug-
gesting what those might then be. Since the analysis yields many results, this section
presents them in summary form. The full collection of results is presented in Appen-
dices C-E.
4.2.1
Analysis and data
Enrichment methods for continuous and categorical variables, as described in Section
2.2.2, and Pearson product-moment correlation are applied. Table 4.1 gives a qualita-
tive summary of all enrichments as they are presented in Appendices C-E. Figure 4.4
visualizes the strongest enrichments of QIs and BHVs, as well as enrichment of pro-
fessional disciplines for each archetype, to give the reader an intuition of the method.
Because both enrichment and correlation methods uses distance from archetype as the
independent variable, negative slopes signify enrichment and positive slope signi￿es
depletion. Error bars have been omitted because they vanish due to the large sample
sized, however SDs are typical in the order of a quarter of the second axis range which
is not insigni￿cant to the later interpretation of the enrichments. All presented en-
richments and correlations in Table 4.1 and Figure 4.4 are signi￿cant after Bonferroni
and Benjamin-Hochberg corrections, respectively, for a signi￿cance level of 0.05.
Two datasets provide facets, values and attributes and one provides behavior. The
SAPA-project dataset is analyzed for facets and demographic attributes. It comprises
personality test responses from a large number of Internet users, as well as demo-
graphic information such as age, gender, country, education and marital status. This
provides a unique opportunity to study how personality - or in this paradigm, dis-
tance to an archetype - links to demographic attributes. Furthermore the property
that the SAPA collection method asks respondents questions from multiple invento-
ries is taken advantage of. When analyzing enrichment of QIs care has been taken to
avoid "circular enrichment" since distance is measured in units of BFTs and BFTs are
composed of QIs. By analyzing enrichment of QIs from the SPI inventory for individ-
uals close to each archetype, where distance is measured using BFT values computed
from the IPIP100 inventory, circularity is mitigated.
The myPersonality Facebook dataset is analyzed for values. The SensibleDTU
dataset is analyzed for behaviors. Raw data is recombined into 38 behavioral indi-
cators for 412 study participants, using an - for the purpose of this study - extended
version of the behavioral feature extraction Python software bandicoot. The indica-
tors can be viewed in Appendix A, and the implementation pipeline is presented in
Section 7.1.1.
==PAGE:39==
30
4.2
Enrichment and correlation reveal distinct strategies
Facets
Values
Demographic attributes
Mobile behavior
Highlights
Highlights
Discipline
Rel.ship
Job status
Exerc.
Smok.
Age
Highlights
self-concern
Emotionally stable,
unsympathetic,
self-concerned,
exploitative, arrogant,
hard to o￿end
Power, not benevolence,
not conformity, not
tradition, achievement,
stimulation, hedonism
Computer sci.,
language and lit., arts,
natural sci. eng. and
tech. - not
communication, edu.,
med. and health, social
services
No
Unemployed
Yes
-
Younger (0.5
years/bin),
not retired
-
social
achievement
Talkative, social,
lively, moody,
worrying, emotional,
insecure/need
reassurance, easily
hurt
Stimulation, hedonism,
power, achievement,
universalism, security,
not conformity
Insurance sales,
operations
manager/specialist,
CEO - not food
preparation worker,
cashier, computer
programmer
Yes
Employed
Yes
Yes
Not retired
Freq. calls/texts, brief
stops, goes new places,
long calls, sends more
texts than receives,
response-rate depends
on receiver, socializes
at night
reciprocal
altruism
Happy, hard-working,
dutiful,
well-tempered,
trusting, talkative,
social, lively,
unworried
Conformity, benevolence,
stimulation, achievement,
tradition, security,
universalism
Business, education,
community and social
services - not arts,
lang. and lit.
Yes
Employed,
not student
Yes
No
Older (-1.01
years/bin)
Socializes o￿-campus,
freq. calls/texts, goes
out at night, unperiodic
social pattern, brief
stops, gets ￿nal word
xenophobia-
loyalism
Uncreative,
simple-minded,
ignorant,
unintellectual, slow
Not self-direction,
conformity, not
stimulation, tradition, not
universalism, security,
not hedonism
Healthcare, o￿ce
support, military - not
computer sci. and arts
Yes
Student,
unemployed
-
No
Younger (0.3
years/bin)
Periodic social pattern,
returns calls/texts,
immediate text
responses, has long
ongoing chats, shows
up for class
freeriding
Undutiful, not
hard-working,
disorderly,
rule-breaker, don’t
plan ahead,
unworried, calm,
emotionally stable
Not security, not
achievement, not
tradition, not power, not
benevolence, stimulation,
hedonism
Arts, cultural and
regional studies, lang.
and lit. studies,
communication, social
sci. - not business and
med./health
No
Student,
unemployed
No
Yes
Younger (0.6
years/bin),
not retired
Short calls, unperiodic
social pattern, very
nocturnal, interacts
with strangers,
none/slow text/call
responses, doesn’t
conclude chats
withdrawal
Not talkative, shy,
antisocial, reclusive,
depressed, worried,
moody, irritated,
panicking, emotional,
lost
Not stimulation, not
achievement, not
conformity, not power,
not security, not
benevolence, not
hedonism, not tradition
Arts, lang. and lit.,
computer sci., natural
sci. - not business,
health-care and
communication
No
Unemployed
No
No
Retired
Doesn’t meet people at
campus, not nocturnal,
periodic social pattern,
rarely calls/texts/looks
at phone, few contacts,
stays home
Table 4.1: Summary table of the strongest signi￿cant enrichments for facets, Basic Human Values, demographic attributes and mobile behaviors for each archetype.
Considering the rows one by one there are clear di￿erences between the archetypes. Facets, values and behaviors are sorted by descending enrichment/correlation strength.
The following words are shortened: sci[ence], tech[nology], eng[ineering], lit[erature], lang[uage], edu[cation] and med[icine]. ’-’ symbolizes no signi￿cant enrichments.
Facets are single-word descriptions of longer questionnaire items (see Appendix C). Demographic attributes strongly in￿uenced by age, such as education level and marital
status, are omitted due to the strong age di￿erences between archetypes.
==PAGE:40==
31
4.2
Enrichment and correlation reveal distinct strategies
self-concern
social
achievement
reciprocal 
altruism
xenophobia-
loyalism
freeriding
withdrawal
(            )
,
,
.
,
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
,
,
.
.
.,
.
.
,
a)
Questionnaire items
Basic Human Values
Professional discipline
b)
c)
i)
ii)
iii)
iv)
v)
vi)
Figure 4.4: Enrichments for each archetype. a-b) are single strongest enrichments of question-
naire items (blue) and Basic Human Values (red). c) are enrichments of professional disciplines.
First axes are bin-distances from archetype and second axes for a-b) are average item response val-
ues rescaled from [1 ; 5] to [-1 ; 1] and normalized frequency for c). ’slo’ is the slope of a ￿rst order
approximation of the curve, so negative slope is enrichment and positive slope is depletion.
==PAGE:41==
32
4.2
Enrichment and correlation reveal distinct strategies
4.2.2
Summary and strategy suggestions
The analysis yields a large number of enrichments and correlations for each archetype,
of which an excerpt is visualized in Figure 4.4, a shortened overview is shown in Ta-
ble 4.1, and elaborate presentation is given in Appendices C-E. Here, each archetype
is presented in prose highlighting their individual characteristics. Each is examined
and proposed a behavioral strategy with reference to existing literature when possible
(primarily Evolutionary Psychology (2014) by Workman et. al. [2]).
Self-concern
The self-concern archetype is unemotional and mostly interested
in power and achievement. Occupied in ￿elds which commonly don’t involve work-
ing directly with people, whereas the depleted professional disciplines are the reverse.
Lacks sympathy, tends to exploit others for own ends and looks down on others. Has
a high degree of control through emotional stability and is hard to o￿end. Highest
valued BHVs other than power and achievement are stimulation and hedonism and
least valued BHVs are benevolence, conformity and tradition. Tends to be slightly
younger (~5 years younger than furthest bin), particularly not retired individuals, not
committed in relationships and has a tendency to exercise often. Comprises many un-
employed individuals. There were found no signi￿cant correlations between distance
from this archetype and behaviors measured through smartphones.
Discussion
These are traits that are often prevalent in individuals with antiso-
cial personality disorders (APD) and are typically lumped together using the term
psychopathy by evolutionary psychologists [2]. People su￿ering from psychopathy,
i.e. psychopaths, can use their manipulative tendencies to exploit others, gaining re-
sources including sex, which is supported by studies that show ADP traits to correlate
positively with an accelerated mating strategy [63,64]. Psychopathic traits are further-
more shown to lead to success in high-level business positions [65], which the current
results, however, don’t support. Enriched disciplines are rather those of solitary na-
ture, and as such it is just as reasonable to speculate this archetype to have a form of
passive aggressive withdrawal strategy, that don’t necessarily attract only attract psy-
chopaths and individuals with other personality disorders. Furthermore, considering
Figure 4.3.b distances to this archetype are typically small, which in other words mean
that many people somewhat resemble this archetype, which is inconsistent with the
converging agreement between psychologists that only up to 3% of any larger popula-
tion should su￿er from sub-clinical psychopathy [43]. As such it might be an artifact of
a possible tendency in many humans to be competitive and, depending on context, feel
emotions of contempt and superiority towards others, all of which may only surface
when ￿lling out a survey. The safest label for this strategy is therefore self-concern.
==PAGE:42==
33
4.2
Enrichment and correlation reveal distinct strategies
Social-achievement
The social achievement archetype is highly social, talkative
and lively, yet su￿ers from mood swings, insecurity and gets hurt easily. Values are
mostly stimulation, hedonism, power and achievement. Has high level of employment
and works high-pace jobs that directly involve people, such as sales, management and
CEO positions. Does not hold unskilled positions (food prep. worker, cashier) which
resonates with the valuing of achievement and power. Curiously both smokes and
exercises, which is somewhat contradictory but can be explained by the high held
value of stimulation and hedonism. It may also indicate an ability to hold contra-
dictory beliefs simultaneously, which is undoubtedly a useful feature for individu-
als whose behavioral strategy is to use social engagement to advance in hierarchies.
Maintains social relations through mobile phone by calling and texting a lot, social-
izes and moves around frequently both day and night and explores new places (visits
places only once). Typically makes long calls, sends more texts than receives and
response-rate to texts or missed calls tends to depend on who the receiver is.
Discussion
The BFTs and enrichments for this archetype resonate with with known
literature. Recall that this archetype is characterized by high levels of O, E and N. N
is found to correlate positively with competitiveness and academic success for those
who are resilient enough to cope with it [66,67], which agrees with the ￿nding that
this archetype works in fast-pace/high-status jobs such as CEO and operations man-
ager. Provided that the goals of this archetype are mainly achievement and power
(curiously similar to the self-concern archetype), is seems clear that this strategy fo-
cuses on using social interaction as a tool for acquiring resources and power. To the
knowledge of this author there is no strategy treated in EP literature which strongly
resembles this one. It can be argued that this strategy may attract individuals with
multiple complex pro￿les, since it is a fairly universal drive to be highly social - and if
one is also sensitive interacting with people may be a matter of earning popularity and
using vulnerability to get ahead. This is discussed by Nettle [15]. On a highly specula-
tive note, given the occupation pro￿les, it might even attract psychopaths. However,
for now it is simply named after its main facet social and value achievement.
Reciprocal altruism
Happy, lively and social, well-tempered, not worried, trust-
ing, hard-working and dutiful describe the most diverse set of enriched facets for the
reciprocal altruism archetype. It highly values conformity, benevolence, stimulation
and achievement, and is strongly enriched for relationship commitment and employ-
ment. This archetype is more mature in age (closest bin is ~10 years older than furthest
bin), and tends to work in disciplines that have direct interaction with people. Smok-
ing is depleted and exercise is enriched, indicating self-discipline. Has many friends
outside of the university, frequently uses phone for communication, goes out at night,
doesn’t meet people in predictable weekly pattern, goes to many di￿erent places and
==PAGE:43==
34
4.2
Enrichment and correlation reveal distinct strategies
tends to send the last text in chat conversations.
Discussion
EP build on the notion reciprocal altruism ￿rst introduced by Trivers [68].
The idea, which is also mentioned brie￿y in Section 2.1.3, is that altruism may have
developed as a mechanism for optimizing group ￿tness, or simply as a personal strat-
egy for storing value by giving it away and expecting a return of similar value at a
later time of greater need. Much about this archetype resemble this, and as such it is
deemed to represent reciprocal altruism.
Xenophobia-loyalism
The xenophobia-loyalism archetype is uncreative, simple-
minded and slow, values conformity, tradition and security and neither self-direction,
stimulation nor hedonism. Works in health-care, o￿ce administration support and
military, and particularly not computer science and arts. Slight tendency to be younger
(~3 years younger than furthest bin), non-smoker, committed in relationship and also
often students. Meets people in predictable weekly pattern, immediately responds to
missed calls/texts, has long ongoing chats and shows up for class.
Discussion
Workman makes the remark that "Social psychologists have long known
that the roots of xenophobia, or hatred of strangers, may be traced back to identifying
strongly with one’s own group and negatively stereotyping those of other groups.". Go-
ing further back Darwin once noted: "The tribes inhabiting adjacent districts are almost
always at war with each other [and yet] a savage will risk his own life to save that of
a member of the same community." [69]. Several enriched features of this archetypes
resonate with characteristics commonly associated with xenophobia and loyalism. So
the question of why this seemingly negative-sounding characterization should be an
ESS for performing life’s many tasks in such a way to increase ￿tness is fairly di￿cult
to answer. Possibly this is remanence of a time where we lived in small tribes and
had to react strongly to outsiders to survive, as noted by Darwin. However, others
suggest that the ability to perceive sharp distinctions between "us and them" group
members is crucial to the formation of lasting coalitions and is therefore an adaptive
strategy [70].
Freeriding
The freeriding archetype is undutiful, disorderly, not hard-working,
breaks rules, unworried, emotionally stable and does not plan ahead. Only values
stimulation and hedonism, and particularly doesn’t value security, achievement, tra-
dition, power nor benevolence. Professional disciplines that are enriched near the
archetype include performance and visual arts, cultural studies, language and liter-
ature studies as well as communications and social science, while there is depletion
for business and medicine/health related disciplines. This archetype is younger (~6
years younger than furthest bin and not retired), not committed in relationship, tends
==PAGE:44==
35
4.2
Enrichment and correlation reveal distinct strategies
to smoke and not exercise, and is enriched for student and unemployed. Makes short
calls, doesn’t meet people in predictable weekly pattern, is very nocturnal, interacts
with strangers and bad at responding to missed calls/texts.
Discussion
Workman remarks: "The evolution of cooperation among non-kin is
greatly compromised by the existence of freeriders. Freeriders reap the bene￿ts of cooper-
ation without paying the costs and thus place themselves at a competitive advantage by
exploiting cooperators. Many (e.g. Tooby et al., 2006) [71] have argued that, given the in-
herent disadvantages of cooperating with freeriders, cooperation could not have evolved
unless mechanisms for detecting and dealing with freeriders also evolved." While the
behavior of the freerider - other than its immediate strategy - are not examined in
literature, this archetype could be a candidate, to help probe further into the under-
standing of this strategy which relies on others to do the heavy lifting.
Withdrawal
The withdrawal archetype is antisocial and reclusive, worried, de-
pressed, su￿ers from mood swings and gets very emotional. Values none of the BHVs,
and particularly not stimulation, achievement, conformity and power. Disciplines in-
clude arts, language and literature, computer science and natural sciences, and par-
ticularly not human interaction dependent disciplines in business, health-care and
communication. No signi￿cant enrichment of age, but enriched for unemployment
and retirement which indicates that this strategy might attract older people. Neither
smokes nor exercises, which resonates with the low valuing of stimulation and hedo-
nism, and is not committed in relationship. Doesn’t meet people at campus, not noc-
turnal, meets people in predictable weekly pattern, rarely calls/texts/looks at phone,
has few contacts, stays at home.
Discussion
This archetype may also simply be called depression. Models in lit-
erature view depression as adapted response to adverse conditions, which may help
the individual accept defeat [72]. Others attribute it more complexity, arguing that
it is an involuntary strategy to signal yielding towards the surroundings such as to
terminate unnecessary con￿ict (which would otherwise likely have been lost by the
depressed) [73]. If the latter is true, the label withdrawal is appropriate.
==PAGE:45==
36
4.3
Archetypes separate data better than traits
B
a
s
e
l
i
n
e
 
3
3
.
7
%
B
a
s
e
l
i
n
e
 
3
3
.
7
%
B
a
s
e
l
i
n
e
 
3
3
.
7
%
B
a
s
e
l
i
n
e
 
3
3
.
7
%
B
a
s
e
l
i
n
e
 
3
3
.
7
%
B
a
s
e
l
i
n
e
 
3
7
.
6
%
-1
0
1
-1
0
1
-1
0
1
-1
0
1
-1
0
1
-1
0
1
Accuracy
40.5%
Accuracy
38.5%
Accuracy
36.7%
Accuracy
39.2%
Accuracy
39.6%
Accuracy
46.4%
self-concern
social
achievement
reciprocal
altruism
xenophobia-
loyalism
freeriding
withdrawal
Figure 4.5: Three-class classi￿cation accuracy of archetypes predicted from behavioral indica-
tors. Samples are split into three semi-balanced classes based on their target values (low, medium,
high). Sample distributions are shown as KDE plots below each score diagram, and vertical lines
show decision boundaries. Reported accuracies are averages over 100 shu￿ed strati￿ed cross vali-
dation folds of parameter optimized random forest models (random search and grid search), with
standard errors in the range of .2 to .5 percent. Baselines are calculated as the of size of the largest
class divided by number of samples. The bar diagrams show how each component/archetype is
interpreted in terms of BFTs, where height is the normalized archetype position in BF space and
non-consensus dimensions are shown in grey.
B
a
s
e
l
i
n
e
 
3
6
.
6
%
B
a
s
e
l
i
n
e
 
3
6
.
4
%
B
a
s
e
l
i
n
e
 
3
7
.
6
%
B
a
s
e
l
i
n
e
 
3
8
.
9
%
B
a
s
e
l
i
n
e
 
3
6
.
7
%
Openness
Conscientiousness
Extraversion
Agreeableness
Neuroticism
Accuracy
35.4%
Accuracy
40.6%
Accuracy
46.3%
Accuracy
38.9%
Accuracy
37.1%
Figure 4.6: Three-class classi￿cation accuracy of BFTs predicted from behavioral indicators. Only
C and E can be predicted Same procedure as described in Figure ??.
4.3
Archetypes separate data better than traits
Until this point, six strategies have been suggested by interpreting results from en-
richment of facets, values and attributes, and correlations with di￿erent indicators
of behavior. To investigate how well the archetypes that perform these strategies
seperate data, the predictive power of archetypes as a target variable in a supervised
learning paradigm is investigated. The prediction accuracy is compared to that of
plain BFTs as well as PCs of QIs, of which there are also six. Data from the Sensi-
bleDTU experiment is used. As was shown in Section ??, di￿erent strategies tended
to be adopted by people in di￿erent age groups, and since the population in the Sen-
sibleDTU dataset is strictly composed of students, conclusions must be drawn with
a degree of respect for this bias. Details of the analysis are are discussed in Section
7.2.4.
Optimized prediction models are trained on 38 indicators to predict low, medium
==PAGE:46==
37
4.3
Archetypes separate data better than traits
BF QIs have 6 significant factors
1000 shuffling
iterations
Figure 4.7: Percentage explained variance of PCs for original and domain shu￿ed BF question-
naire data. The green curve results from 1000 shu￿ing iterations where p = 0 for the six PCs with
greatest eigenvalues.
B
a
s
e
l
i
n
e
 
3
3
.
7
%
B
a
s
e
l
i
n
e
 
3
3
.
7
%
B
a
s
e
l
i
n
e
 
3
3
.
7
%
B
a
s
e
l
i
n
e
 
3
3
.
7
%
B
a
s
e
l
i
n
e
 
3
3
.
7
%
PC1
PC2
PC3
PC4
PC5
Accuracy
35.7%
-1
0
1
-1
0
1
-1
0
1
-1
0
1
-1
0
1
Accuracy
37.9%
Accuracy
38.1%
Accuracy
41.5%
Accuracy
39.2%
B
a
s
e
l
i
n
e
 
3
3
.
7
%
PC6
-1
0
1
Accuracy
34.3%
Figure 4.8: Three-class classi￿cation accuracy of PC components of Big Five Inventory QIs [74].
Same procedure as described in Figure ??. The bar diagrams show how each component/archetype
is interpreted in terms of BFTs. Bar length correspond to inner products between PC and BF trait.
==PAGE:47==
38
4.3
Archetypes separate data better than traits
or high distance to each of the archetypes. Figure 4.5 visualized the accuracies, and
explains high-level aspect of the applied procedure. It is compared to prediction ac-
curacies for Big Five traits (Figure 4.6) and PCs of Big Five Inventory QIs (Figure 4.8)
using the same approach. There are discovered to be six PCs in QI-space as shown in
Figure 4.7. The remainder of this section presents the results.
Distances to archetypes predicted with highest accuracies. Average predic-
tion accuracies AB (AB) reported in Figure 4.5, 4.6 and 4.8 are 5.8%, 2.4 and 4.1%, re-
spectively. As such PCs can be predicted better than BFTs and distance from archetypes
can be predicted better than PCs. Prediction accuracy compares to, but is not better
than what has already been reported for prediction of BFTs in previous studies [20,21].
This may be upsetting in terms of the predictive promise of the behavioral indicators
computed using the extended version of the bandicoot software (see Section 7.1.1),
but on the other hand it also shows that archetypes do split the data better.
Archetypes are predicted better than their parts. In the current approach
only C and E can be predicted well. Considering the self-concern archetype, prediction
accuracy is 6.8% AB, yet out of these two BTFs this archetype only varies on C which
has prediction accuracy 4.2% AB. It is unclear what accounts for this di￿erence, and
further analysis is requires to understand it.
==PAGE:48==
5
Discussion
Out of the six archetypes which have been suggested based on the conducted analysis,
all except the social achievement archetype appears to ￿t a strategy known from the
literature. There are, however, a number of aspects which are important to the validity
of the results which needs to be discussed. Some are scienti￿c in nature and some
regard the ethical implications.
The Big Five model is "too crude" to capture ￿ne-grained strategies. The
Big Five factors result from factor analysis based in as many as 17.000 personality
descriptive adjectives (English language), each of which was encoded into language
arguably to ￿ll some hole in comprehension. The model then lumps together all these
words, into ￿ve factors that admittedly comprise a whole range of facets, but at the
same time disregards much of the variance inherent to the language. For this reason,
very ￿ne-grained personality di￿erences cannot be explained. For example, there is
no trait in the Big Five model that successfully captures a persons psychopathic ten-
dencies to form close relationships with people for the sake of personal gain. Trying
to describe this behavior using the Big Five model is like trying to grab a coin with a
boxing glove. As such, the strategies which are suggested in this work, are never less
crude than the model they were inferred from.
The strategies are broad. This relates to the above statement. Comparing to
strategies treated in e.g. game theory, the ones suggested in this study are fairly broad
spectered. This is to say, a strategy such as the social achievement could comprise
any number of otherwise vastly di￿erent individuals. There might even me a few
psychopaths in there. As such it shows personality strategies to be very unspeci￿c
constructs. Just because one knows the personality of another person their behavior
might still be a mystery.
Archetypes are not real people. There is an important notion to be made about
the nature of these archetypal personalities. When presenting this work to people
who are not familiar with it, and in particular when showing people the archetypes
they have a strong tendency to quickly identify with one. Why people do this remains
an open question but a speculation is that people may ￿nd it easier to understand
things such as this by projecting their own self-image and feelings onto it. However,
while people tend to do this, no one can really be described by just one archetype. In
fact, by a geometrical argument (and as can be seen from Figure 4.3.b), no one is very
close to an archetype - we are all described by all archetypes at the same time. That is
to say, since the archetypes were derived from the point distribution of personalities
in Big Five space using the PCHA algorithm run with some allowed slack, points are
generally closer to the middle of the simplex than they are to the archetypes.
People are not necessarily stuck with a strategy. This study makes no claims
about human nature beyond the strategies which can be inferred from the data. That
39
==PAGE:49==
40
Discussion
is to say, whether a person can change strategy over a short period of time, or instantly
depending on context, this study does not know. However, it does say that no person
can fully assume more than one strategy at a time. Picturing the Pareto front in 3D
trait-space, this makes sense - a point can only be in one location at a time. Yet,
the result that the reciprocal altruism archetype tends to be far older than e.g. the
freeriding suggests that people do change strategies over a lifetime.
The type of people who take surveys on the internet may not be general
to humans in general. This very artifact may be what causes the distribution of
traits to be so di￿erent between datasets that were collected online and per phone,
as shown in Appendix G. However, it is unknown exactly how severe this biases the
data, or if it biases it at all.
Archetypes seperates data better than traits do, but is this really so sur-
prising? This short discussion would have been replaced by a simulation if time had
permitted it. However, since that is not the case a few remarks on the result that
archetypes are better prediction targets than BFTs and QI-PCs are due. First: Maybe
it’s not so strange? Archetypes are geometrical extremes and the data is not well-
seperated so possible the best way to distinguish points is my learning which their
nearest archetype is.
Con￿rmation bias may have in￿uenced the analysis. We are all humans. And as
humans analyzing humans we are constantly at risk if making analysis choices that
are under bias of this fact. So while care has been taken to withdraw excitement over
preliminary results and "read too much into things", it cannot be rejected that some
scienti￿cally unhealthy humanity has seeped into the interpretations of the results.
==PAGE:50==
41
Conclusions
6
Conclusions
• Six archetypes emerge from multiple datasets, and each are enriched for facets,
values, demographic attributes and behavior that suggest behavioral strategies
known from evolutionary psychology literature. This indicates: (1) the Big Five
model is in fact an evolutionarily plausible way of carving up personality as
argued by Buss [3,4], and (2) there are trade-o￿s between personality archetypes
which likely correspond to behavioral strategies.
• There are signi￿cant age di￿erences between behavioral strategies, indicating
that humans adopt di￿erent strategies over the course of a lifetime.
• An individuals’ distance to the inferred archetypes can be predicted with greater
accuracy than its BF trait values.
• PCs of personality questionnaire items provide a better prediction target indi-
cating that strategies may belong in a PC-basis space rather than a BF-basis
space.
6.1
Future Research
• Assuming that there are six personality archetypes which correspond to be-
havioral strategies, because personality is observed to reduce to ￿ve factors
is justi￿ed in argument and is therefore scienti￿cally ￿aky. Furthermore the
fact that the BFM only explains 56% of variation in personality [38], motivates
deeper investigation into the nature of personality archetypes. One possible ap-
proach could be to analyze the covariance structure of a large number of facets
in the SAPA dataset to identify number of signi￿cant factors and then look for
archetypes in that space - however large it may be.
• Quantify how extreme individuals in each dataset are. What is the distribution
of how many archetypes each individual is close to, where close is de￿ned by
some distance, such as a quarter of the average distance between archetypes.
The analysis could be expanded to quantify the percentage of individuals with
e.g. a certain job-type or education background are close to a particular archetype.
• In Section 7.2.4 it was shown there are six signi￿cant PCs in QI-space that QI-
PCs are better prediction targets than BFTs. Personality archetypes are points
in BF-space, but in light of this result could it be that they might rather belong
in PC-space? This could be analyzed by collapsing multiple datasets and using
PCA to ￿nd the common vectors of most explaine variance, and then computing
consensus archetypes similar to how it is explained in Section 7.2.1 but in 5D
PC-space (not 6 - recall Figure 2.5).
==PAGE:51==
42
6.1
Future Research
• Investigate whether the discovered archetypes are predicted with higher accu-
racy than equally extreme well-seperated random points on the convex hull.
==PAGE:52==
7
Methods
For most data-driven projects, the typical pipeline includes extraction of data from
some source and cleaning and reformatting of that data; there is typically feature
engineering involved, which is the process of designing higher-level features based
on a raw or semi-raw extract of data. After that comes outlier detection and typically
also some variable transformation in order to balance the scales and distributions of
signals in the data. All of these steps are called preprocessing, but will often require
more work than any other task in the pipeline, simply because the preprocessing
constitutes a bottelneck to the quality of the scienti￿c analysis, where errors made in
the preprocessing result in poor or, even worse, misleading results. Because of this,
preprocessing must be carried out with the desired analysis in mind, and analysis
must be conducted with awareness of the problems that might result from errors in
preprocessing.
While this project mainly relies on personality data, for which the extraction
pipeline is simple, a signi￿cant amount e￿ort has been invested in development of
a reusable pipeline to extract behavioral indicators from the SensibleDTU experiment
dataset (see. 3.1). This pipeline constitutes an alternative value proposition of this re-
search project because it can readily be applied by other researchers within Sensible
DTU to extract high-level indicators for various purposes.
In the following, it is explained how the pipeline is implemented and behavior-
and personality data from the SensibleDTU experiment is extracted. Then follows a
brief section that explains the preprocessing of personality data from the remaining
three datasources: myPersonality, SAPA and MIDUS. Finally technical details about
the analysis are presented.
7.1
SensibleDTU data pre-processing
This pipeline transforms raw data from the Sensible DTU experiment into ordered,
clean, datamatrices of behavioral indicators, personality traits and personality archetype
distances for each participant, labeled X, Y and D respectively. It is constructed us-
ing principles from software engineering such as reusability and version control. The
pipeline is implemented as a set of smaller modules that each execute a task. All mod-
ules rely on the virtual IPython Notebook environment made available to researchers
associated with the Social Fabric project (see Sec. 3.1). The pipeline is designed to
allow the researcher to extract data for speci￿c date ranges and with hour-of-day-
and day-of-week- restrictions. It relies on a modi￿ed verision of the Python module
bandicoot for computing behavioral indicators.
Consider Fig. 7.1 as a reference for the following introduction to the pipeline. The
researcher ￿rst enters the create_user_records IPython notebook to create
data records for each user in a desired time range using the load_sensible_data
43
==PAGE:53==
44
7.1
SensibleDTU data pre-processing
load_sensible_data.py
create_user_records.ipynb
create_datasets.ipynb
load_big_five_data.py
outlier_detection.py
load_concensus_arcs.py
compute_thetas.py
location_reference.py
timezone_reference.py
bandicoot
Cache
Records
{ X (N x M),  Y (N x 5),  D (N x 6) }
build_dataset
analysis
data
compute_thetas.py
load_consensus_arcs.py
dst_converter.py
location_reference.py
outlier_detection.py
timezone_reference.py
archetypes.csv
M_non_cons.csv
M.csv
X.csv
Y.csv
workers
load_sensible_data.py
load_big_five_data.py
location_is_campus.py
location_is_dorm.py
location_is_friday_bar.py
Figure 7.1: Preprocessing pipeline implemented on the virtual IPython notebook environment (see
Sec. 3.1). The researcher ￿rst creates records for all users in a format that is accepted by the modi￿ed
version of bandicoot, then uses bandicoot and pipeline submodules to compute three datamatrices:
behavioral indicators X, Big Five personality traits Y and weighted euclidian distances from
precomputed consensus archetypes D.
.
module. When data is loaded for a new time range, load_sensible_data caches
the raw data to save time and API load in case of future uses, then looks for timezone
and location references for each user which, if not found, are automatically created.
The module then returns semi-raw datasets for each datatype (text, call, F2F,
stop, screen) where timestamps are corrected according to timezone and DST,
and where a location label (’home’, ’campus’, ’dorm’, ’friday_bar’ or ’other’) is added
to stop-records using a point-inside-polygon algorithm [75]. Each semi-raw dataset is
split into seperate datasets for each user, and stored. Using the create_datasets
IPython Notebook which relies on the bandicoot library to compute behavioral indi-
cators for each user constructing a datamatrix X which has a row for each user and a
column for each indicator. For each user the corresponding Big Five personality traits
are computed using the load_big_five_data module. Furthermore distances
from precomputed archetypes are computed using the compute_thetas module.
The analysis pipeline is made available on Github at:
https://github.com/ulfaslak/MScProject-build-dataset
7.1.1
Feature Engineering
Feature engineering is carried out with focus on producing statistically independent
behaviroal indicators, such as to capture as much of the behavioral spectrum with as
little redundancy as possible. Views on importance of this is discussed in Appendix
B. For extracting behavioral indicators (herinafter just indicators) the Python package
bandicoot is used, and extended to handle multiple data-types. bandicoot is a call-
detail-record (CDR) analysis package that o￿ers phone companies and researchers to
extract a comprehensive array of measurements of behavior based on text and call
==PAGE:54==
45
7.1
SensibleDTU data pre-processing
records [20]. It works by loading records for individual users as comma separated
values (CSV) which it expects to contain certain attributes such as timestamp,
interaction, correspondent-id, into Record objects and creating User
objects which contain their Records as parameters as well as other parameters in-
ferred from the loaded records such home if the data contains location labels. The
analyst then speci￿es whether to compute indicators for each day, week or month or
the entire period comprising the data, whether to treat day and night or weekdays and
weekends separately and ￿nally which indicators to compute. Some of these rely on
records being grouped into conversations which are de￿ned as dyad exchanges that
are not delayed by more than some time constant (typically 30 minutes or 1 hour).
Two extensions to bandicoot were made:
1. Generalization of the the Record object to be any kind of data which only
requires to have timestamp as an attribute.
2. Modifying existing indicators to accept new data-types and adding new indica-
tors that combine data from multiple channels.
An example of (2) is that using multiple data channels allows for creation of indi-
cators that show how much use their phone when they are social (channels: F2F and
screen), how much they tend to go in groups rather than be in dyads (time overlap
between F2F conversations) and whether they tend to socialize with friends from the
university outside of the university (F2F and stop-locations). A full list of the indicators
which are used is shown in Appendix A, where it is marked which are added for this
study and which already exist in the standard bandicoot version. The project code for
the standard and extended versions of bandicoot is available, respectively, at:
github.com/yvesalexandre/bandicoot
github.com/ulfaslak/bandicoot
In this study, features were computed across the entire period since it was expected
that the ￿ltering criteria explained in Figure 3.1 would provide su￿cient behavioral
consistency in the data.
7.1.2
Variable Transformation
Two steps of variable transformation is employed:
1. Domain scaling
2. Form transformation
For (1): The indicators that the extended version of bandicoot returns are scaled
in di￿erent domains. Most of then either return ratios or count variables, which can
==PAGE:55==
46
7.1
SensibleDTU data pre-processing
be problematic to analysis methods that are not scaling invariant. To correct for this,
the data are structured as a matrix with rows for users and columns for indicators,
and the columns are subtracted by their means and divided by their standard devia-
tions such as to enforce zero mean and unit standard deviation for all columns. The
same approach is taken for the Big Five data (but not the distances from consensus
archetypes, as this would produce negative distance which confuses the analysis).
For (2): Some indicators are not normally distributed which can cause problems in
analysis because a density shift to one end of the domain can make trends in the data
arise although there is none. In most cases, generally, and for all cases in this study,
variables that are not normally distributed can be transformed using a scaling func-
tion like the logarithmic, square root, square, inverse, etc.. Out of the 38 behavioral
indicators used in this study 12 were log-transformed.
7.1.3
Outlier Detection
As Figure 3.1 shows, the activity of participants in the SensibleDTU study wasn’t
constant over the entire period, and although care was taken only to use data from
the period of most activity (containing 526 participants), all participants cannot be
expected to provide useful data that informs the analysis. Therefore two levels of
￿ltering was set up. The ￿rst level of ￿ltering removes outliers using indicator activity
thresholds based in careful assumptions about how people use smartphones. The aim
is to ￿lter out participants who were not actually using the phone. The assumptions
are: (1) not everyone likes calling and texting, but everyone carries their phone with
them on most days, (2) average over time people are within 1.5 meters distance of
at least three people every day and (3) changes location at least twice daily. These
conditions remove 84 participants from the analysis. The second level of ￿ltering uses
kernel density estimation (KDE) for removing outliers [76]. It employs a very simple
scheme that computes kernel density (KD) (using the Python module sklearn) for
each datapoint and removes those that fall below an empirically chosen threshold.
This removes 30 participants from the analysis. After both levels of ￿ltering 412 valid
datapoints remain.
7.1.4
Extracting personality data
The Big Five personality questionnaire used in the SensibleDTU study is a version of
the Big Five Inventory [77], translated from english into danish. It contains 44 individ-
ual items and each Big Five trait is computed as the average of 7-10 items. To extract
the traits, reference [74] was used.
==PAGE:56==
47
7.2
Analysis
7.2
Analysis
In the following, details about how analysis is conducted, which cannot be understood
from Section 4, is explained. It gives an account of the details which enables others to
reproduce, however for very exact details and code (of which this section consciously
includes very little), the reader is referred to the Github repository at [78].
7.2.1
Computing consensus archetypes
Section 4.1 explains that six consensus archetypes are found to emerge across seven
datasetets. In the following the methods used to arrive at this result is explained.
Employing archetypal analysis on a for a large number of points prove problem-
atic when the domain is constrained (in this case from [-1 ; 1]), because noise in the
data causes all domains of the space to ￿ll up. For BF datapoints which exist in ￿ve
dimensions, the full dataset therefore constitute a 5D cube (a hypercube), which leads
the archetypes to snap the the vertices of this box. Therefore a di￿erent approach is
taken. Considering Figure 2.5 the convex hull in ￿ve dimensions of just two points
only contains about 20% of the datapoints in a point cloud. Furthermore, 200 points
are found to constitute a small enough subset that points rarely go to the geometri-
cal extremes of the domain. Howver, it is observed that using such a small number
of points often leads to archetypes that are very di￿erent between iterations, and as
such the following approach for ￿nding the archetypes is taken (all references to row
sorting use the algorithm shown in Python code in Listing 1):
1. Compute archetype 5000 times for subsets of 200 points for each of the seven
datasets, using Python implementation of PCHA [79]. This yields a tensor X
which has dimensions (N = 6) ⇥(M = 5) ⇥(K = 5000), where N are
archetypes, M are BFTs and K are iteration slices, indexed i, j, k, respectively
(see Figure 7.2).
2. For each dataset:
(a) For each pair of iteration slices (of which there are (K −1)2/2) sort rows
to minimize average distance between points, and record the distance be-
tween the pairs. Remove the 50% of all iteration slices starting with the
ones of highest average distance to other slices.
(b) In two-iteration steps, sort rows of Xk+1 with respect to rows of Xk such
as to minimize average distance between archetypes. Replace pair with
average along 2nd axis. Repeat until there is only one slice left. This
constitutes the archetypes of the dataset.
3. Sort resulting rows for each dataset using one as a reference. This yields the
archetypes shown in Figure 4.1. Stack them in depth to form a matrix of shape
==PAGE:57==
48
7.2
Analysis
...
Entry-wise statistics
(stacked data matrices)
A
0
2
1
Figure 7.2: Example of how 2D matrices are stacked to shape a 3D tensor. The coordinate system
explains the use of axis labels in the text, and the ’Entry-wise statistics’ matrix illustrates how e.g.
SD, mean or median values result from computing such along the 2nd axis.
6 ⇥5 ⇥7 and compute the SD and median matrices along the 2nd axis, ⌃and
A respectively.
4. Repeat step (3) 1000 times where columns in each slice are shu￿ed, and record
the distribution of SDs along the 2nd axis. Take the maximum value in the ￿rst
ventile (i.e. the 5%-value imposing a 0.05 signi￿cance level) as a threshold, λ,
for maximally allowed SD between archetype traits (consensus threshold, see
Figure 4.2).
5. Enforce λ on ⌃and apply the resulting mask to A to reveal the consensus
archetypes.
Listing 7.1: "Python code for sorting rows of matrix A to match those of B"
1 import numpy as np
2 def reorder_to(A, B):
3
"""Return order of rows in A the best match rows in B."""
4
distance_matrix = np.ones((6, 6))*np.inf
5
for i, a in enumerate(A):
6
for ii, b in enumerate(B):
7
ba = (b-a)
8
distance_matrix[i, ii] = np.sqrt(np.dot(ba, ba))
9
reorder = [[] for _ in range(6)]
10
for _ in range(6):
11
ind = np.argmin(distance_matrix)
12
i, ii = ind/6, ind%6
13
reorder[ii] = i
14
distance_matrix[i, :] = np.inf
15
distance_matrix[:, ii] = np.inf
16
return reorder
==PAGE:58==
49
7.2
Analysis
7.2.2
Computing enrichments
For the early research conducted in this project, enrichment was analyzed using the
ParTI software package developed by the Uri Alon group [8]. However as Figure 2.6
illustrates the concept of enrichment is simple, and as such an implementation was
made in Python which is shown in Appendix H. It takes a matrix of precomputed
distances between samples and archetypes D and a matrix of feature-values corre-
sponding to the same samples, and returns a json object the contains enrichments
for each feature near each archetype (example given in Appendix H). Standard errors
are computed for each associated bin as SD/
p
N where N is the number of samples.
Since the number of samples is large the standard goes to 0 and is therefore not shown
on the enrichment plots in Figure 4.4.
Statistical signi￿cance of enrichments is computed for the null hypothesis that:
any random permutation of bins will result in greater R2 and slope values for a ￿rst
order polynomial ￿tted to the bin values. The signi￿cance level is set to ↵= 0.05 and
a Bonferroni multiple hypothesis correction is used [80]. For enrichment of attributes
and facets, of which there are collectively 780 which all stem from the SAPA dataset,
enrichments are therefore only accepted if they have a p−value smaller than ↵/780,
since there are 780 hypotheses being tested. For BHVs of which there are 10 the
threshold is ↵/10.
7.2.3
Computing correlations
For computing linear relationships between behavioral indicator values and distance
from archetypes, the Pearson product-moment correlation method is used [81]. It esti-
mates the ratio between the covariance of two variables normalized by the product of
their individual variances, and as such does not provide an estimate for the slope of
the covariance, only its strength and sign. This is, however, considered valid because
the analysis goal is only to ￿nd evidence of the existence of relationships and not to
model them.
Statistical signi￿cance is tested using a permutation test for the null hypothesis
that: randomly rede￿ned coordinate pairs from the original coordinates yields greater
correlation coe￿cients than the original data. A signi￿cance level, ↵= 0.05, is used
and a Benjamin-Hochberg (BH) multiple comparisons correction is used. The BH
correction is less strict than the Bonferroni correction mentioned in Section 7.2.2 but
is widely accepted, especially by those that consider the Bonferroni correction too
harsh. It sorts the p−values of N tests such that each is denoted pi and states that in
order for a test i to be signi￿cant it must obey:
pi = ↵
N i
(7.1)
==PAGE:59==
50
7.2
Analysis
Any test i which is signi￿cant, renders all preceding tests signi￿cant also.
7.2.4
Classi￿cation
It is outside of the scope of this thesis to give an exhaustive account of classi￿cation
in machine learning and as such no dedicated section to explain this is included in
the theory chapter, but for good measure a brief introduction to the subject is given
below. Supervised learning constitutes a very rigid analytical paradigm: given a set of
observations X = [x1, x2, ..., xn]> 2 Rn⇥m which has a corresponding set of labels
y = [y1, y2, ..., yn]> 2 Rn⇥1 supervised learning aims to learn the labels that typi-
cally result from di￿erent types of observations. If the labels for example were "cat"
or "dog", and features were "paw size", "body weight", "has whiskers", "barks", a super-
vised machine learning algorithm would be trained to learn the decision boundary that
separates the classes and be able to predict whether new unseen data corresponded to
a cat or a dog. Modeling is, however, not always the primary concern when applying
supervised machine learning. As is the case with the current analysis, it is often de-
sired to get an estimate of the accuracy with which a target variable can be predicted
from a given type of data. To do this, the orignal dataset X is split into a training fold
Xtrain and a test fold Xtest. The model is then trained on Xtrain and the reported
accuracy is the percentage of labels it guess correctly when it is tested on Xtest. This
sectioning of training and test data can be done in a variety of ways to get the most in-
formation out of the available data. In the current analysis a cross validation approach
is used for doing this. There exist many di￿erent models for classi￿cation one of the
simplest being decision trees that learns to separate data by sequential decision rules
which best separates it into di￿erent classes. An extension of this model is the ran-
dom forest which trains many trees that in turn "vote" for which class a given sample
should belongs to.
Section 7.2.4 investigates whether consensus archetypes provide better predic-
tion targets than Big Five traits and QI PCs using a supervised machine learning ap-
proach. For each target accuracy is reported for a three-class optimized random forest
classi￿er which is validated using a random sampling cross-validation approach (ex-
plained below). The optimization scheme optimizes the parameters n_estimators
and max_features which are generally considered the most important parame-
ters to tune for random forest models [82]. n_estimators decides the number of
trees which the forest model trains and uses for voting, and max_features is the
maximal number of randomly selected features which are considered at each split.
The scheme works in two steps: (1) estimate validation scores 100 times for ran-
dom parameter settings and record the parameter combination (popt
1 , popt
2 ) which
lead to the highest score, then (2) do a 10 ⇥10 grid-search in the quadratic range
of [popt
1
−popt
1
2 ; popt
1
+ popt
1
2 ] and [popt
2
−popt
2
2 ; popt
2
+ popt
2
2 ] to ￿nd the optimal parame-
==PAGE:60==
51
7.2
Analysis
ters. Grid search matrices are shown in Appendix I.b.
Cross-validation is performed over 100 folds. In each fold the model is trained
on a subset of 80% randomly selected samples from the dataset and tested on the
remaining 20%. The reported accuracy is the average of this. SD of acuracies across
folds are around 2% so for 100 fold the standard error evaluates to around 0.2%.
==PAGE:61==
References
[1] Francis Galton. The measurement of character. 1949.
[2] Lance Workman and Will Reader. Evolutionary psychology. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 2014.
[3] David M Buss. Evolutionary personality psychology. Annual review of psychol-
ogy, 42(1):459–491, 1991.
[4] Randy J Larsen and David M Buss. Personality psychology. Jastrebarsko: Naklada
Slap, 2008.
[5] Denise L Newman, Auke Tellegen, and Thomas J Bouchard Jr. Individual dif-
ferences in adult ego development: sources of in￿uence in twins reared apart.
Journal of personality and social psychology, 74(4):985, 1998.
[6] Timothy C. Bates. Behavioral genetics (5th edition) robert plomin, john c. defries,
gerald e. mcclearn, peter mcgu￿n. (2008). worth publishers, new york, 505 pp.,
us$115.95, isbn 10 1 4292 0577 6. Twin Research and Human Genetics, 11:245–246,
4 2008.
[7] Oren Shoval, Hila Sheftel, Guy Shinar, Yuval Hart, Omer Ramote, Avi Mayo,
Erez Dekel, Kathryn Kavanagh, and Uri Alon. Evolutionary trade-o￿s, pareto
optimality, and the geometry of phenotype space. Science, 336(6085):1157–1160,
2012.
[8] Yuval Hart, Hila Sheftel, Jean Hausser, Pablo Szekely, Noa Bossel Ben-Moshe,
Yael Korem, Avichai Tendler, Avraham E Mayo, and Uri Alon. Inferring bio-
logical tasks using pareto analysis of high-dimensional data. nature methods,
12(3):233–235, 2015.
[9] Avichai Tendler, Avraham Mayo, and Uri Alon. Evolutionary tradeo￿s, pareto
optimality and the morphology of ammonite shells. BMC systems biology, 9(1):1,
2015.
[10] Pablo Szekely, Yael Korem, Uri Moran, Avi Mayo, and Uri Alon.
The mass-
longevity triangle: Pareto optimality and the geometry of life-history trait space.
PLoS Comput Biol, 11(10):e1004524, 2015.
[11] Yael Korem, Pablo Szekely, Yuval Hart, Hila Sheftel, Jean Hausser, Avi Mayo,
Michael E Rothenberg, Tomer Kalisky, and Uri Alon. Geometry of the gene
expression space of individual cells. PLoS Comput Biol, 11(7):e1004224, 2015.
[12] Christopher M Bishop. Pattern recognition. Machine Learning, 128, 2006.
52
==PAGE:62==
53
References
[13] Jerome H Barkow, Leda Cosmides, and John Tooby. The adapted mind: Evolu-
tionary psychology and the generation of culture. Oxford University Press, 1995.
[14] Criticism of evolutionary psychology. https://goo.gl/hWu6I5. Accessed:
2016-01-07.
[15] Daniel Nettle. The evolution of personality variation in humans and other ani-
mals. American Psychologist, 61(6):622, 2006.
[16] Icek Ajzen. Attitudes, personality, and behavior. McGraw-Hill Education (UK),
2005.
[17] Richard D Mann. A review of the relationships between personality and perfor-
mance in small groups. Psychological Bulletin, 56(4):241, 1959.
[18] Albert Richard Behnke and Jack H Wilmore. Evaluation and regulation of body
build and composition. Prentice Hall, 1974.
[19] Sampo V Paunonen. Big ￿ve factors of personality and replicated predictions of
behavior. Journal of personality and social psychology, 84(2):411, 2003.
[20] Yves-Alexandre de Montjoye, Jordi Quoidbach, Florent Robic, and Alex Sandy
Pentland.
Predicting personality using novel mobile phone-based metrics.
In Social computing, behavioral-cultural modeling and prediction, pages 48–55.
Springer, 2013.
[21] Bjarke Mønsted, Anders Mollgaard, and Joachim Mathiesen. Phone-based metric
as a predictor for basic personality traits. arXiv preprint arXiv:1604.04696, 2016.
[22] Walter Mischel. Continuity and change in personality. American Psychologist,
24(11):1012, 1969.
[23] Sarah Broadie. Ethics with Aristotle. Oxford University Press, 1991.
[24] Geo￿rey Ernest Richard Lloyd, John Chadwick, and William Neville Mann. Hip-
pocratic writings. Penguin (Non-Classics), 1978.
[25] Gordon W Allport and Henry S Odbert. Trait-names: A psycho-lexical study.
Psychological monographs, 47(1):i, 1936.
[26] Raymond B Cattell. The description of personality: Principles and ￿ndings in a
factor analysis. The American Journal of Psychology, 58(1):69–90, 1945.
[27] John M Digman.
Personality structure: Emergence of the ￿ve-factor model.
Annual review of psychology, 41(1):417–440, 1990.
==PAGE:63==
54
References
[28] Lewis R Goldberg. Language and individual di￿erences: The search for univer-
sals in personality lexicons. Review of personality and social psychology, 2(1):141–
165, 1981.
[29] A Festschrift Honoring Donald W Fiske. Personality research, methods, and
theory.
[30] Ernest C. Tupes and Raymond E. Christal. Recurrent personality factors based
on trait ratings. Journal of Personality, 60(2):225 – 251, 1992.
[31] International personality item pool. http://ipip.ori.org/. Accessed:
2016-01-07.
[32] Thomas J Bouchard Jr and John C Loehlin. Genes, evolution, and personality.
Behavior genetics, 31(3):243–273, 2001.
[33] Robert R McCrae and Paul T Costa Jr. Personality trait structure as a human
universal. American psychologist, 52(5):509, 1997.
[34] Michael Gurven, Christopher von Rueden, Maxim Massenko￿, Hillard Kaplan,
and Marino Lero Vie. How universal is the big ￿ve? testing the ￿ve-factor model
of personality variation among forager–farmers in the bolivian amazon. Journal
of personality and social psychology, 104(2):354, 2013.
[35] Daniel Cervone and Dylan T. Lott. Language and the languages of personality.
European Review, Eur. Rev, Eur Rev, 15(4):419–437, 2007.
[36] Drew Westen. A model and a method for uncovering the nomothetic from the
idiographic: An alternative to the ￿ve-factor model?
Journal of Research in
Personality, 30(3):400–413, 1996.
[37] M ARGYLE. Silent messages - mehrabian,a. Contemporary Psychology, Comtemp.
Psychol, Cont Psycho, Contemp Psychol, Contemporary Psychology Apa Review of
Books, 18(5):239–240, 1973.
[38] Gregory J Boyle, Lazar Stankov, and Raymond B Cattell. Measurement and sta-
tistical models in the study of personality and intelligence. In International hand-
book of personality and intelligence, pages 417–446. Springer, 1995.
[39] Michael C Ashton, Kibeom Lee, Marco Perugini, Piotr Szarota, Reinout E
De Vries, Lisa Di Blas, Kathleen Boies, and Boele De Raad. A six-factor struc-
ture of personality-descriptive adjectives: solutions from psycholexical studies
in seven languages. Journal of personality and social psychology, 86(2):356, 2004.
[40] Heather EP Cattell and Alan D Mead. The sixteen personality factor question-
naire (16pf). The SAGE handbook of personality theory and assessment, 2:135–178,
2008.
==PAGE:64==
55
References
[41] Colin Cooper. Individual di￿erences and personality. Routledge, 2015.
[42] David M Buss. How can evolutionary psychology successfully explain person-
ality and individual di￿erences? Perspectives on Psychological Science, 4(4):359–
366, 2009.
[43] Ann M Kring, Gerald C Davison, John M Neale, and Sheri Johnson. Abnormal
psychology. Wiley, 2005.
[44] John F Nash et al. Equilibrium points in n-person games. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci.
USA, 36(1):48–49, 1950.
[45] Martin A Nowak.
Five rules for the evolution of cooperation.
science,
314(5805):1560–1563, 2006.
[46] J Maynard Smith. The theory of games and the evolution of animal con￿icts.
Journal of theoretical biology, 47(1):209–221, 1974.
[47] Hila Sheftel, Oren Shoval, Avi Mayo, and Uri Alon. The geometry of the pareto
front in biological phenotype space. Ecology and evolution, 3(6):1471–1483, 2013.
[48] Morten Mørup and Lars Kai Hansen. Archetypal analysis for machine learning
and data mining. Neurocomputing, 80:54–63, 2012.
[49] Adele Cutler and Leo Breiman. Archetypal analysis. Technometrics, Technomet-
rics, Technomet, 36(4):338–347, 1994.
[50] Python implementation of the aa algorithm. https://pypi.python.org/
pypi/PyMF. Accessed: 2016-02-07.
[51] Manuel Eugster and Friedrich Leisch. From spider-man to hero-archetypal anal-
ysis in r. 2009.
[52] José M Bioucas-Dias. A variable splitting augmented lagrangian approach to
linear spectral unmixing. In 2009 First Workshop on Hyperspectral Image and
Signal Processing: Evolution in Remote Sensing, pages 1–4. IEEE, 2009.
[53] Jun Li and José M Bioucas-Dias.
Minimum volume simplex analysis: A fast
algorithm to unmix hyperspectral data. In IGARSS 2008-2008 IEEE International
Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium, volume 3, pages III–250. IEEE, 2008.
[54] Tsung-Han Chan, Chong-Yung Chi, Yu-Min Huang, and Wing-Kin Ma. A convex
analysis-based minimum-volume enclosing simplex algorithm for hyperspectral
unmixing. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 57(11):4418–4432, 2009.
[55] Social Fabric. Data documentation of the social fabric survey.
==PAGE:65==
56
References
[56] Arkadiusz Stopczynski, Vedran Sekara, Piotr Sapiezynski, Andrea Cuttone,
Mette My Madsen, Jakob Eg Larsen, and Sune Lehmann. Measuring large-scale
social networks with high resolution. Plos One, Plos One, 9(4):e95978, 2014.
[57] Michal Kosinski, Sandra C Matz, Samuel D Gosling, Vesselin Popov, and David
Stillwell. Facebook as a research tool for the social sciences: Opportunities, chal-
lenges, ethical considerations, and practical guidelines. American Psychologist,
70(6):543, 2015.
[58] Shalom H Schwartz. Universals in the content and structure of values: Theoreti-
cal advances and empirical tests in 20 countries. Advances in experimental social
psychology, 25:1–65, 1992.
[59] Shalom H Schwartz. An overview of the schwartz theory of basic values. Online
readings in Psychology and Culture, 2(1):11, 2012.
[60] Orville Gilbert Brim, Carol D Ry￿, and Ronald C Kessler. The MIDUS National
Survey: An Overview. University of Chicago Press, 2004.
[61] David Condon. An Organizational Framework for the Psychological Individual
Di￿erences: Integrating the A￿ective, Cognitive, and Conative Domains. PhD the-
sis, NORTHWESTERN UNIVERSITY, 2014.
[62] M Brent Donnellan, Frederick L Oswald, Brendan M Baird, and Richard E Lu-
cas. The mini-ipip scales: tiny-yet-e￿ective measures of the big ￿ve factors of
personality. Psychological assessment, 18(2):192, 2006.
[63] Peter K Jonason, Norman P Li, Gregory D Webster, and David P Schmitt. The
dark triad: Facilitating a short-term mating strategy in men. European Journal
of Personality, 23(1):5–18, 2009.
[64] Peter K Jonason, Katherine A Valentine, Norman P Li, and Carmelita L Harbe-
son. Mate-selection and the dark triad: Facilitating a short-term mating strat-
egy and creating a volatile environment. Personality and Individual Di￿erences,
51(6):759–763, 2011.
[65] Robert D Hare. Psychopathy: A clinical and forensic overview. Psychiatric Clinics
of North America, 29(3):709–724, 2006.
[66] Scott R Ross, Jane Stewart, Molly Mugge, and Brandy Fultz. The imposter phe-
nomenon, achievement dispositions, and the ￿ve factor model. Personality and
Individual Di￿erences, 31(8):1347–1355, 2001.
[67] James McKenzie, Mahdad Taghavi-Khonsary, and Gary Tindell. Neuroticism
and academic achievement: the furneaux factor as a measure of academic rigour.
Personality and Individual Di￿erences, 29(1):3–11, 2000.
==PAGE:66==
57
References
[68] Robert L Trivers. The evolution of reciprocal altruism. Quarterly review of biol-
ogy, pages 35–57, 1971.
[69] Charles Darwin. The descent of man, and selection in relation to sex, volume 1.
Murray, 1888.
[70] Dennis L Krebs and Kathy Denton. Social illusions and self-deception: The evo-
lution of biases in person perception. Evolutionary social psychology, pages 21–
48, 1997.
[71] John Tooby, Leda Cosmides, and Michael E Price. Cognitive adaptations for n-
person exchange: the evolutionary roots of organizational behavior. Managerial
and Decision Economics, 27(2-3):103–129, 2006.
[72] Lewis Wolpert. Depression in an evolutionary context. Philosophy, Ethics, and
Humanities in Medicine, 3(1):1, 2008.
[73] John Price, Leon Sloman, Russell Gardner, Paul Gilbert, and Peter Rohde. The
social competition hypothesis of depression. The British Journal of Psychiatry,
164(3):309–315, 1994.
[74] John Srivastava. Big ￿ve inventory (b￿). http://goo.gl/ayINfy.
[75] Patrick Jordan. Python implementation point-inside-polygon algorithm. http:
//goo.gl/yjirNa. Accessed: 2016-03-07.
[76] Longin Jan Latecki, Aleksandar Lazarevic, and Dragoljub Pokrajac. Outlier de-
tection with kernel density functions. In International Workshop on Machine
Learning and Data Mining in Pattern Recognition, pages 61–75. Springer, 2007.
[77] Oliver P John and Sanjay Srivastava. The big ￿ve trait taxonomy: History, mea-
surement, and theoretical perspectives. Handbook of personality: Theory and
research, 2(1999):102–138, 1999.
[78] Ulf Aslak. Project code repository (github). https://goo.gl/h6oD9O.
[79] Python implementation of the fast aa algorithm. https://pypi.python.
org/pypi/py_pcha. Accessed: 2016-02-07.
[80] Olive Jean Dunn. Multiple comparisons among means. Journal of the American
Statistical Association, 56(293):52–64, 1961.
[81] Karl Pearson. Note on regression and inheritance in the case of two parents.
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, 58:240–242, 1895.
[82] Sci-kit learn ensamble methods. http://scikit-learn.org/stable/
modules/ensemble.html.
==PAGE:67==
Appendices
A
Full List of Extracted Indicators
Complete list of features extracted from the data and used in the analsis, including
explanations. Features may be extracted from the sources call, text, F2F, screen,
stop, either solely, or as combinations utilizing the interaction between measure-
ments. Below, feature names are highlighted in bold, and the types used for each
feature is listed in brackets: []. A bracket in a bracket signi￿es that the feature is
computed from the combination of the datatypes listed in the bracket. A short ex-
amplary explanation is given for the ￿rst feature. Furthermore features are either
computed as summary type which yields mean and standard deviation of a distribu-
tion, or as scalar type yielding a scalar. Id and Data are consistent with function and
datatype names in project code. Asterisk ’*’ marks that the indicator is only a part
of the extended bandicoot version, however note that most of the standard indicators
have also been extended to accept new data-types.
Number of contacts
Number of individuals interacted with. Requires more
than one meeting for an individual to count. Is computed for text and call (to-
gether) and stop, resulting in two measures of number of contacts. For stop it simply
measures the number of di￿erent places an individual goes. This feature captures the
size of an individuals social circle. F2F is not included because correspondent Ids are
inconsistent for non-study-participant correspondents.
Id: number_of_contacts Data: [[text, call], stop] Type: scalar.
Number of interactions
Number of interaction made.
Id: number_of_interactions Data: [[text, call], F2F, stop] Type: scalar.
Ratio of call tra￿c and text tra￿c*
Number of calls made divided by number
of texts sent.
Id: ratio_call_text Data: [[text, call]] Type: scalar.
Duration concentration
Percent of interactions that account for 80% of inter-
action duration. Takes basis in the 80/20 "Pareto" principle.
Id: percent_ei_percent_durations Data: [stop] Type: scalar.
Balance of interactions
Percent of interactions directed outwards.
Id: balance_of_interactions Data: [text] Type: scalar.
58
==PAGE:68==
59
Full List of Extracted Indicators
Duration
Duration of interaction. If datatype has a duration-attribute (call,
screen, stop), this is used, otherwise interactions are grouped into conversations,
i.e. series of breaks no longer than one hour, and the duration of these are used to
compute average duration.
Id: duration Data: [call, text, F2F, screen, stop] Type: scalar.
Percent initiated conversations
Percent conversations initiated. Conversa-
tions are inferred from series of interactions grouped by correspondent, as clusters
with no more than one hour long breaks. Standard deviation across percent initiated
for set of correspondents, yielding standard deviation a measure of "selectiveness" in
who the individual chooses to initiate interaction with. For call, an outgoing missed
call counts as an initiated conversation, whereas an incoming missed call, even
though returned, does not.
Id: percent_initiated_conversations Data: [text, call] Type: summary.
Percent concluded conversations*
Similar to ’Percent initiated conversations’
but for last interaction in conversation, i.e. conclusion. Call is not used because it pro-
duces no informative feature.
Id: percent_concluded_conversations Data: [text] Type: summary.
Response delay
Response delay in conversations grouped by correspondents.
Maximum delay is one hour.
Id: response_delay Data: [call, text] Type: summary.
Response rate
Response rate to conversations initiated by correspondents, grouped
by correspondent. Response counts if returned within the ￿rst hour, otherwise it
counts as a delay.
Id: response_rate Data: [[call, text]] Type: summary.
Overlap of social meetings*
Proportional to average number of people to-
gether with when social. Computed from overlap of conversations. Captures propen-
sity to go in groups.
Id: overlap_conversations Data: [F2F] Type: scalar.
Percent nocturnal
Percent of activity that occurs between 22pm and 6am.
Id: percent_nocturnal Data: [F2F, screen, stop] Type: scalar.
Interevent time
Average time between events. For screen this captures the
average time between phone usage sessions.
Id: ratio Data: [screen] Type: scalar.
==PAGE:69==
60
Full List of Extracted Indicators
Phone use while social*
Amount of phone use while social divided by amount
of phone use while alone.
Id: ratio_social_screen_alone_screen Data: [[screen, F2F]] Type: scalar.
Ratio of interactions at campus vs. elsewhere*
No. interactions that occur
within campus regions divided by no. interactions that occur outside of campus and
inferred home regions.
Id: ratio_interactions_campus_other Data: [[stop, F2F]] Type: scalar.
Percent interactions elsewhere with people from campus*
Percent of all
interactions that occur outside campus, dorms and inferred home regions, which are
made with individuals that were also interacted with at campus. Captures level of
non-curricular social engagement with school mates. Excludes home because a large
group of study participants live at campus dorms, and would exhibit far greater values
in this feature for reasons not necessarily related to social engagement.
Id: percent_outside_campus_from_campus Data: [[stop, F2F]] Type: scalar.
Percent daily time at campus*
Average percent of all daily time (24 h) spent
at campus.
Id: percent_at_campus Data: [stop] Type: scalar.
Daily average number of stranger interactions*
Percentage of F2F conver-
sations, i.e. connections grouped into series of less than 24 hour breaks, that occur
only once. Captures an individuals propensity to engage in social activities with peo-
ple outside of their social circle, such as talking with people in bars, or joining a group
of mixed friends for a weekend in a summer house. May include some noise from non-
social connections made in transportation and other public spaces.
Id: number_of_contacts_less Data: [F2F] Type: scalar.
First seen response rate*
Percent of texts that are responded to during ￿rst
possible session, i.e. right away when observed by the individual.
Id: ￿rst_seen_response_rate Data: [[screen, text]] Type: scalar.
Interaction autocorrelation*
Average autocorrelation of F2F togetherness across
an individuals dyadic relationships. Captures a facet of the kind of relationships an in-
dividual maintains, where a high value means that most relationships ￿t into a sched-
ule and are non-spontaneous and low values means most meetings are improptu. Only
includes dyads that are observed in conversation more than 5 times.
Id: interaction_autocorrelation Data: [F2F] Type: scalar.
==PAGE:70==
B
A Note on Feature Engineering
An important notion to introduce when processing data and designing features for
use in machine learning or signal processing, is that the amount of information, or
entropy, contained in a data source depends not only on its size but also on the pres-
ence of patterns such as mutual information between latent variables and periodicity
in series. In the present Big Data context this rarely enters as a problem of informa-
tion scarcity, but rather as a source of error due to the risk of capturing uninformative
patterns in the feature design, which may go unobserved thus leading to false con-
clusions. To give an intuition of how this can cause problems, consider the following
example.
feature A measures the fraction of time a user is looking at his or her phone
while socially engaged, and feature B measures the unique number of friends that
the user has through a given period. If one were to plot the distribution of these vari-
ables for a set of individuals against eachother, it would yield an almost perfect inverse
correlation, begging the interpretation that looking at your phone while socially en-
gaged means you have less friends. The problem with this analysis is that feature
A is normalized by the summed time socially engaged, which unsurprisingly corre-
lates with feature B. The consequence is that the latent variable the analyst is
trying to get at, namely the propensity to interact with one’s phone while social, van-
ishes in product with a variable that so strongly correlates with the target. At the
same time, removing the normalization term creates the inverse problem, because the
summed time of phone use while socially engaged necessarily depends on how much
a user engages socially and thereby number of unique friends. In the given case, a
better design of feature A would be to measure the amount of phone use while
socially engaged vs. while alone in which case it should behave independently from
other features.
Uninformative patterns are expected for mathematical, systematic or other boring
reasons, and are often undesired since they wash out interesting informative patterns,
like in the example given above. Patterns which are considered most informative are
those that emerge unexpectedly or in line with a hypothesis and demands explana-
tion only through interpretation or further research. In general, careful consideration
must be made to capture mostly patterns that informs the analysis. Features must be
designed to cultivate patterns that express properties of the system which are not en-
tirely self-evident. This excludes not only features capturing uninformative patterns,
but also a large number of other features we as humans know to be mutually informa-
tive or in correlation. Consider how, for a set of individuals, the number of calls made
vs. number of calls received would, aligned with our expectations, be in strong corre-
61
==PAGE:71==
62
A Note on Feature Engineering
lation, but that number of calls made and received vs. percent of calls going out, would
not. Both feature pairs are derived from the same call-log data, but as illustrated in
Fig. B.3, a far more informative pattern is captured with the latter pair.
Figure B.3: Casting features di￿erently changes the pattern they capture. Each plot represents
a di￿erent way of casting the same call-log data, but the right one obviously captures a more
informative pattern. It allows one to make genuinely interesting observations, such as how only
individuals with an outgoing to incoming call ratio between 0.7 and 0.8 make and receive far above
average number of calls.
In practice it is tedious to engineer features to only capture patterns that inform
the analysis. In fact, trying to achieve this often creates problems since the task of
developing the necessary complex features requires signi￿cantly more coding, which
increases the risk of generating uncaught bugs. In this work, it is attempted to strike
a balance between the informative and the simple. In other words, great care has been
taken to understand the data which has led to the realization that it is not feasible to
completely avoid capturing uninformative patterns, and as such features are designed
in a way that attempts to minimize these, not exclude them.
==PAGE:72==
C
Questionnaire Enrichment Table
Slopes of enrichment curves for Big Five questionnaire items near consensus per-
sonality archetypes. Negative slope indicate enrichment and positive slope indicate
depletion. * denotes statistical signi￿cance after Bonferroni correction.
63
==PAGE:73==
64
Questionnaire Enrichment Table
self-
concern
social
achieve-
ment
reciprocal
altruism
xenophobia-
loyalism
freeriding
withdrawal
Get overwhelmed by emotions [N]
0.114*
-0.099*
0.091*
-0.0249
0.0762
-0.110*
Indi￿erent to others’ emotions [!A]
-0.112*
0.0374
0.0588
0.0266
-0.0205
-0.0121
Have a soft heart [A]
0.109*
-0.0426
-0.0423
-0.0326
0.0428
-0.0023
Am out for my own personal gain [!A]
-0.107*
0.0068
0.0541
0.0306
-0.0217
0.0028
Believe that I am better than others [!A]
-0.102*
-0.0109
0.0395
0.0518
-0.0178
0.0010
Feel others’ emotions [A]
0.101*
-0.0604
-0.0593
-0.0211
0.0316
0.0128
My feelings are easily hurt [N]
0.100*
-0.085*
0.084*
-0.0273
0.0696
-0.097*
Am sensitive to the needs of others [A]
0.100*
-0.0416
-0.0612
-0.0209
0.0303
0.0197
Use others for my own ends [!A]
-0.098*
0.0002
0.0544
0.0407
-0.0310
-0.0015
Take advantage of others [!A]
-0.094*
-0.0090
0.0604
0.0273
-0.0234
-0.0200
Look down on others [!A]
-0.087*
-0.0058
0.0728
0.0297
-0.0097
-0.0353
Inquire about others’ well-being [A]
0.084*
-0.0543
-0.0698
-0.0131
0.0201
0.0383
Am a talkative person [E]
0.0287
-0.153*
-0.094*
0.0260
0.0006
0.123*
Can be stirred up easily [N]
0.0587
-0.095*
0.0705
-0.0119
0.0667
-0.0730
Need reassurance [N]
0.0660
-0.082*
0.0707
-0.0227
0.0445
-0.0766
Am often down in the dumps [N]
0.0656
-0.0440
0.142*
0.0069
0.0516
-0.139*
Do too little work [!C]
0.0116
0.0007
0.112*
0.0347
-0.099*
-0.0452
Find it di￿cult to get down to work [!C]
0.0272
-0.0158
0.107*
0.0294
-0.090*
-0.0537
Waste my time [!C]
0.0167
-0.0077
0.102*
0.0236
-0.0753
-0.0543
Neglect my duties [!C]
0.0131
-0.0105
0.098*
0.0290
-0.089*
-0.0398
Get easily agitated [N]
0.0418
-0.0729
0.098*
-0.0121
0.0591
-0.095*
Make careless mistakes [!C]
0.0193
-0.0305
0.088*
0.0200
-0.0661
-0.0331
Feel that most people can’t be trusted [!A]
-0.0599
0.0053
0.078*
0.0155
0.0233
-0.0559
Need a creative outlet [O]
0.0158
-0.0406
-0.0035
0.101*
-0.0245
-0.0123
Am not interested in abstract ideas [!O]
0.0094
0.0062
0.0170
-0.098*
0.0339
0.0063
Know the answers to many questions [O]
-0.0270
-0.0159
-0.0400
0.098*
-0.0207
0.0296
Am full of ideas [O]
-0.0042
-0.0331
-0.0346
0.096*
-0.0156
0.0201
Have a rich vocabulary [O]
-0.0085
-0.0175
-0.0268
0.094*
-0.0226
0.0128
Have a vivid imagination [O]
0.0024
-0.0312
-0.0154
0.087*
-0.0193
-0.0021
Can handle complex problems [O]
-0.0258
-0.0088
-0.0444
0.086*
-0.0144
0.0214
Complete my duties as soon as possible [C]
-0.0036
-0.0034
-0.087*
-0.0349
0.112*
0.0349
Keep things tidy [C]
-0.0224
-0.0002
-0.0732
-0.0417
0.102*
0.0244
Start tasks right away [C]
-0.0149
-0.0109
-0.091*
-0.0154
0.099*
0.0442
Stick to the rules [C]
0.0167
0.0063
-0.0424
-0.0633
0.099*
-0.0104
Do things by the book [C]
-0.0101
0.0236
-0.0314
-0.0577
0.093*
-0.0215
Like order [C]
-0.0049
-0.0028
-0.0369
-0.0352
0.089*
-0.0072
Do things according to a plan [C]
-0.0152
0.0005
-0.0547
-0.0295
0.088*
0.0086
Talk to many di￿. people at parties [E]
0.0119
-0.137*
-0.123*
0.0086
-0.0103
0.153*
Enjoy interactions less than others [!E]
-0.0373
0.122*
0.128*
0.0206
-0.0036
-0.148*
Make friends easily [E]
0.0234
-0.117*
-0.124*
-0.0009
0.0009
0.146*
Keep in background on social occasions [!E]
-0.0080
0.121*
0.105*
-0.0023
0.0237
-0.144*
Can easily get some life into a dull party [E]
0.0043
-0.126*
-0.110*
0.0262
-0.0086
0.141*
Prefer reading to meeting people [!E]
-0.0099
0.102*
0.099*
0.0296
0.0027
-0.137*
Am mostly quiet when with other people [!E]
-0.0084
0.126*
0.103*
-0.0052
0.0070
-0.135*
Start conversations [E]
0.0146
-0.116*
-0.119*
0.0125
0.0072
0.135*
Moods go up and down easily [N]
0.0642
-0.088*
0.130*
0.0022
0.0515
-0.132*
Like mixing with people [E]
0.0258
-0.121*
-0.113*
-0.0050
-0.0105
0.132*
Am a worrier [N]
0.0777
-0.0634
0.088*
-0.0337
0.094*
-0.126*
Enjoy meeting new people [E]
0.0260
-0.109*
-0.102*
0.0106
-0.0122
0.120*
Panic easily [N]
0.081*
-0.0641
0.108*
-0.0251
0.080*
-0.117*
Get upset easily [N]
0.0618
-0.083*
0.098*
-0.0234
0.080*
-0.110*
Am rather lively [E]
0.0210
-0.090*
-0.093*
0.0150
-0.0040
0.108*
Get caught up in my problems [N]
0.0582
-0.0622
0.094*
0.0073
0.0450
-0.099*
==PAGE:74==
D
Basic Human Values Enrichment Table
Slopes of enrichment curves for Basic Human Values near consensus personality
archetypes. Negative slope indicate enrichment and positive slope indicate deple-
tion. * denotes statistical signi￿cance after Bonferroni correction.
self-concern
social achievement
reciprocal altruism
xenophobia-loyalism
freeriding
withdrawal
Power
-0.030*
-0.013*
-0.0008
-0.0048
0.013*
0.010*
Benevolence
0.021*
-0.0043
-0.020*
-0.0043
0.009*
0.007*
Hedonism
-0.008*
-0.016*
-0.0004
0.013*
-0.006*
0.006*
Self-Direction
-0.0049
-0.0068
-0.0074
0.026*
-0.0017
0.0025
Conformity
0.014*
0.001*
-0.023*
-0.024*
0.023*
0.011*
Tradition
0.014*
0.0037
-0.014*
-0.021*
0.010*
0.004*
Universalism
0.012*
-0.008*
-0.012*
0.017*
-0.0002
0.0014
Security
0.0003
-0.004*
-0.012*
-0.015*
0.020*
0.008*
Achievement
-0.011*
-0.010*
-0.017*
0.0075
0.018*
0.012*
Stimulation
-0.011*
-0.017*
-0.018*
0.022*
-0.007*
0.024*
65
==PAGE:75==
E
Behavior Correlation Table
Correlation coe￿cients between distance from CAs and behavioral indicators. * de-
notes statistical signi￿cance after Bonferroni correction.
self-
concern
social
achieve-
ment
reciprocal
altruism
xenophobia-
loyalism
freeriding
withdrawal
Response time to missed calls SD
-0.074837
-0.018582
-0.032529
0.055680
-0.045662
0.062105
Frequently calls and texts
0.035789
-0.21798*
-0.13202*
-0.058639
0.069914
0.13381*
Has many phone contacts
0.024015
-0.20536*
-0.091237
0.026240
-0.017387
0.10454*
Visits many places only once
-0.060862
-0.18401*
-0.065878
0.073681
-0.080670
0.062021
Initiates most phone conversations
-0.014207
-0.17718*
0.006292
0.005671
0.088067
-0.061423
Goes places often
-0.010255
-0.14687*
-0.066594
-0.084382
0.080784
0.058721
Visits many di￿erent places
0.038093
-0.14040*
-0.099973
0.073829
-0.035228
0.039980
Concludes text conversations
-0.009717
-0.13497*
-0.10267*
-0.080921
0.11701*
0.062394
Initiates most text conversations
-0.017914
-0.12941*
-0.044484
-0.035294
0.086148
0.009535
Getting ￿nal word when texting SD
-0.054429
-0.12736*
-0.048257
0.085706
-0.036519
0.071641
Spends short time at locations
-0.013552
-0.12319*
-0.10799*
-0.077596
0.055401
0.076301
Calls some people more than others
-0.061514
0.11050*
0.013780
0.017749
-0.062601
0.030792
Selective text and call response rate
-0.065717
-0.10107*
-0.078203
-0.039442
0.068964
0.040896
Spends long time with people
0.022206
-0.099960
0.044219
0.015243
0.070682
-0.059171
Around people a lot
0.009494
-0.088931
-0.051458
-0.010177
0.053433
0.037501
Mostly goes in groups
0.000515
-0.013708
-0.028966
0.015795
0.023216
-0.021529
Conversation initiation rate SD
-0.039325
-0.063217
0.009150
0.14673*
-0.081758
-0.001845
Returns calls and responds to texts
-0.011807
-0.048248
-0.082415
-0.12769*
0.10628*
0.072745
Has long ongoing text conversations
0.045167
-0.030086
-0.053182
-0.10949*
0.061144
0.022334
Responds quickly to texts
-0.022331
0.092948
0.028020
-0.093492
0.022025
0.031446
Response time to texts SD
-0.027276
-0.025059
-0.007418
0.084515
-0.052311
0.013118
Spends time at campus
0.020200
-0.045188
0.015450
-0.082320
0.053027
-0.019011
Keeps phone sessions short
-0.017042
0.003843
-0.021614
-0.073513
0.036846
0.026214
Makes long calls
0.037902
-0.10913*
-0.009160
-0.018521
0.19279*
-0.085181
Meets with people in weekly patterns
0.019674
0.090653
0.11266*
-0.15568*
0.18400*
-0.14523*
Sends more texts than receives
0.001931
-0.12455*
-0.041272
-0.052693
0.16598*
-0.019525
Interacts with strangers
0.009526
-0.030696
-0.005149
0.048621
-0.15726*
0.051560
Uses phone at night
0.002887
0.049914
-0.025226
0.053391
-0.14350*
0.045076
Responds to texts immediately
-0.024757
0.042422
-0.090559
-0.081023
0.11332*
0.064325
Avoids looking at phone when social
0.018779
-0.006039
-0.057113
-0.007475
0.094036
0.015023
Prefers calling over texting
-0.033625
-0.014632
0.077649
0.075592
-0.084600
-0.052389
Mostly meets people at campus
-0.079546
0.018802
0.14031*
-0.035004
0.044647
0.21230*
Goes many places at night
0.004259
0.008385
-0.11848*
0.076401
-0.14232*
0.18953*
Meets people at night
0.074257
-0.11076*
-0.084527
0.075370
-0.10698*
0.12540*
Doesnt look at phone too often
0.028191
0.10047*
0.083603
0.10003*
-0.046390
0.11075*
Even time-location distribution
0.001487
-0.064028
-0.069595
0.027634
-0.000840
0.10922*
Meets people from uni. outside uni.
0.055556
-0.017454
-0.044660
-0.040767
-0.024956
0.074052
Responds quickly to missed calls
-0.012016
-0.023555
-0.036409
0.041238
0.020437
0.051917
66
==PAGE:76==
F
Theory of Basic Human Values
Self-direction
Power
Spirituality
Freedom
Social power
A spiritual life
Creativity
Wealth
Meaning in life
Independent
Authority
Inner harmony
Choosing own goals
Preserving my public image
Detachment
curious
Social recognition
Self-respect
Benevolence
Security
Helpful
Stimulation
National security
Responsible
An exciting life
Reciprocation of favors
Forgiving
A varied life
Family security
Honest
Daring
Sense of belonging
Loyal
Social order
Mature love
Hedonism
Healthy
True friendship
Pleasure
Clean
Enjoying life
Universalism
Conformity
Equality
Achievement
Obedient
Unity with nature
Ambitious
Self-discipline
Wisdom
In￿uential
Politeness
A world of beauty
Capable
Honoring of parents and elders
Social justice
Successful
Broad-minded
Intelligent
Tradition
Protecting the environment
Self-respect
Respect for tradition
A world at peace
Devout
Accepting my portion in life
Humble
Moderate
67
==PAGE:77==
G
Distributions of Big Five datasets
Trait distributions of each Big Five dataset. Titles are formatted as mean(SD), his-
tograms are normalized and horizontal axes range from minimum to maximum re-
sponse value for the respective inventory.
Facebook
O
C
E
A
N
SAPA SPI
SAPA IPIP
SAPA NEO
MIDUS 1
MIDUS 2
MIDUS 3
SensibleDTU
68
==PAGE:78==
H
Code for enrichment of feautres near archetypes
Listing H.2: "Python code for computing enrichments near archetypes"
1 import numpy as np
2 from collections import Counter
3
4 def compute_a_c_bins(D, T):
5
"""Compute enrichment for features T using precomputed arc.-distances, D.
6
7
Parameters
8
----------
9
D : numpy.2darray (N, M)
10
Precomputed distances between N points and M archetypes.
11
T: pandas.DataFrame (N, K)
12
K features for N individuals matching rows in D. Each
13
feature (column) must have an associatec column label.
14
15
Output
16
------
17
a_c_bins : json-dict
18
JSON data structure storing enrichments near each archetype for each
19
feature.
20
21
Example
22
-------
23
{’0’: {
24
’age’: {
25
# 10 bin averages
26
[34.1, 33.8, 33.2, 33.4, 32.5, 32.0, 32.2, 31.0, 30.9, 30.5],
27
32.35,
# mean
28
30.5,
# minimum
29
34.1,
# maximum
30
1.204,
# SD
31
0.0231
# standard error
32
},
33
...
34
’job status’, {
35
[
36
Counter({’employed’: 42, ... , ’student’: 12}),
37
...
38
Counter({’employed’: 12, ... , ’student’: 42})
39
],
# 10 bin Counter dictionaries
40
set([’employed’, ..., ’student’])
# set of attributes
41
}
42
}}
43
"""
44
a_c_bins = {}
45
# Loop over arcs
46
for a in range(D.shape[1]):
69
==PAGE:79==
70
Code for enrichment of feautres near archetypes
47
Da = D[:, a]
# distances from arc
48
c_bins = {}
49
# Loop over enrichment features and build bins for each (b_bins)
50
for c in df.columns[startfrom:]:
51
# Sort attributes into bins
52
ca = np.vstack([df.loc[indices][c], Da]).T
53
ca = ca[ca[:, 1].argsort()]
54
ca = ca[np.array(map(lambda v: v==v, list(ca[:, 0]))), :]
55
56
N = ca.shape[0]
57
bins = []
58
59
bin_intervals = zip(
60
np.arange(0*N, 1*N, 0.1*N),
61
np.arange(0.1*N, 1.1*N, 0.1*N)
62
)
63
64
# Continuous feature
65
if type(ca[0, 0]) is not str:
66
bins_std, bins_err = [], []
67
for p_low, p_upp in bin_intervals:
68
bins.append(np.mean(ca[p_low:p_upp, 0]))
69
bins_std.append(np.std(ca[p_low:p_upp, 0]))
70
bins_err.append(
71
np.std(ca[p_low:p_upp, 0]) / np.sqrt(len(ca[p_low:p_upp, 0]))
72
)
73
c_bins[c] = (
74
bins, np.mean(ca[:, 0]), np.min(ca[:, 0]),
75
np.max(ca[:, 0]), bins_std, bins_err
76
)
77
78
# Categorical feature
79
else:
80
attrs = set()
81
for p_low, p_upp in bin_intervals:
82
counter = Counter(ca[p_low:p_upp, 0])
83
bins.append(counter)
84
attrs.update(counter.keys())
85
c_bins[c] = (bins, list(attrs))
86
87
a_c_bins[a] = c_bins
88
return a_c_bins
==PAGE:80==
I
Online
a) Go to ulfaslak.com/master_thesis/online_appendix1.pdf.
b) Go to ulfaslak.com/master_thesis/online_appendix2.pdf.
71
