==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Experimental study of tsunami-induced 
scour around monopiles
Lasse Kærgaard Arbøll
Sarah Frigaard Kristoff ersen
July 2016
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This report presents an experimental and numerical study of tsunami-induced scour
around a slender pile. For this purpose, an existing one-dimensional vertical (1DV) bound-
ary layer model, based on the horizontal component of the incompressible Reynolds-
averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS) equations, is used to investigate boundary layer dynam-
ics of a tsunami-scaled wave. A fully coupled (hydrodynamic and morphologic) numerical
model is utilized for the simulation of tsunami-induced scour around a slender pile. The
model is based on solutions to the RANS equations, coupled with the κ −ω turbulence
closure, with additional bed and suspended load descriptions forming the basis for sea bed
morphology.
The tsunami-induced scour is also investigated through experimental tests on a phys-
ical model. To simulate a tsunami-scale wave, time-varying currents with a variation of a
soliton are applied. Utilizing time-varying currents facilitates longer periods than possible
with a traditional piston-type wave maker in the experimental facilities.
A total of 12 diﬀerent experimental test cases were investigated, covering the para-
metric range possible to simulate in the laboratory facilities. 4 of these cases were then
selected to be simulated with the use of numerical models.
The main purpose of the
investigation was to assess the equilibrium scour depth as well as the temporal variation
of the scour. The latter showed to be more of interest in a tsunami aspect, as the equilib-
rium scour depth was reached after approximately 50 successive periods for the considered
test cases. The velocities inside of the boundary layer was also investigated, as this layer
accounts for the main scouring processes.
Generally a good agreement between the numerical and experimental results is seen.
The MatRANS model collectively demonstrates an ability to capture the accurate ﬂow
velocities inside the boundary layer. The measurements of the boundary layer supports
the notion that tsunami-scale waves are both current-like, due to their long duration, and
wave-like as the boundary layer does not necessarily span the entire water column.
The simulated case from the CFD model shows that the model predicts the temporal
variation of the scour hole accurately for the number of simulated periods.
Lastly, the temporal variation of the scour depth as well as the equilibrium scour depth
was compared with a practical model ideal for engineering purposes due to its simplicity.
This comparison collectively shows the practical models ability to captured the temporal-
and equilibrium scour depth for the experimental data sets.
1
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Preface
5
2
List of Symbols
7
I
Project Description
10
3
Introduction
10
4
Literature Review
12
5
Applied Theory
16
5.1
Wave boundary layers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5.2
Scour mechanisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
II
Experimental Studies
24
6
Research Methodology
24
6.1
Test set-up
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
6.2
Experimental procedure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6.3
Test conditions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
6.4
Test set-up validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
7
Experimental Results
34
7.1
Boundary layer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
7.2
Equilibrium scour depth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
7.3
Temporal variation of scour
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
III
Numerical Studies
48
8
CFD Model description
48
8.1
Hydrodynamic and turbulence model description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
8.2
Sediment transport and morphological models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
8.3
Morphological model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
9
MatRANS description
51
10 CFD Model Results
54
IV
Discussion
56
11 Comparison of experimental results with prediction model
56
12 Comparison of experimental and numerical results
61
13 Sources of error
64
13.1 Future research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
3
==PAGE:6==
V
Conclusion
68
VI
Appendices
72
A Appendix A: Calibration
72
B Appendix B: Velocity measurements
76
C Appendix C: Key diagram of ﬂume
86
4
==PAGE:7==
1
PREFACE
1
Preface
This master thesis has been made at the Section of Fluid Mechanics, Coastal and Maritime
engineering at the Technical Unversity of Denmark, DTU. All experiments have been carried
out in building 114.
We would like to thank our supervisors, David R. Fuhrman, Stefan Carstensen and Bjarke
E. Larsen for very competent guidance throughout the project. A project that would not have
been possible without their guidance.
This report is evenly written by Lasse Kærgaard Arbøll and Sarah Frigaard Kristoﬀersen.
An experimental and numerical study of tsunami-induced scour around a slender pile have been
conducted. The proejct is 32.5 ECTS-points.
Kongens Lyngby, July 2016
Sarah Frigaard Kristoﬀersen
Lasse Kærgaard Arbøll
s112839
s112838
5
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
2
LIST OF SYMBOLS
2
List of Symbols
The main symbols are listed below. Due to a large number of symbols used in the report, it
has been decided not to show those symbols used in Part III, as the main purpose of the report
is the experimental study. The numerical model utilised is thus not developed by the authors
of the report, but is used in order to validate their results.
Main symbols
a
amplitude of near-bed wave orbital motion
cD
drag coeﬃcient
D
pile diameter
d
grain size
E
relative error
fw
wave friction factor
FD
drag force
Fd
driving forces on a sediment particle
Fs
stabilizing forces on a sediment particle
g
gravitational constant
KC
Keulegan-Carpenter number
kN
equivalent sand roughness of the bed
ks
surface roughness
L
wave length
p
pressure
Re
Reynolds number
ReD
pile Reynolds number
RE
Reynolds number for the near-bed wave-orbital motion
s
speciﬁc gravity of sediment grains
S
temporal scour variation
Se
equilibrium scour depth
S0
equilibrium scour depth for current (taken as S0/D ≈1.3)
t
time
T
period
Tw
wave period
Ts
time scale of scour
T ∗
s
normalized time scale of scour
u
velocity in the x-direction
u0
free stream velocity
U
wave period averaged velocity
Uf
friction velocity
Um
amplitude of near-bed wave-orbital velocity
W
weight
x
horizontal coordinate
z
vertical coordinate
z0
zero level for velocity (kN/30 at a rough bed)
y
distance measured from seabed and upwards
7
==PAGE:10==
2
LIST OF SYMBOLS
α
ampliﬁcation factor
δ
boundary layer thickness
δ1
Stoke’s length
θ
Shields parameter
θcr
critical value of Shields parameter
κ
von K´arm´an’s constant
ν
kinematic viscosity
ρ
water density
τb
bed shear stress
ψ
eﬀective scouring of a period
ω
angular frequency
8
==PAGE:11==
3
INTRODUCTION
Part I
Project Description
3
Introduction
Tsunamis are long waves with periods lasting several minutes to hours. Tsunamis are caused
by sudden motions of the sea bed, e.g. due to undersea earthquakes or landslides. Tsunami
waves possess a devastating destructive force, and when they reach shore the consequences can
be catastrophic, as has been seen in the past two major tsunami catastrophes, i.e. the tsunami
event that occurred in the Indian Ocean (2004) and the Tohuku tsunami oﬀthe coast of Japan
(2011).
The aim of this project is to investigate scouring eﬀects around slender piles induced by
time-varying currents such as tsunamis. The number of wind farms around the world are in-
creasing, also at sites exposed to tsunamis. It is therefore of interest to understand the scouring
mechanisms for tsunamis, as the potential eﬀects of scour can be devastating.
This report investigates time-varying currents modelled as a soliton with diﬀerent periods
through experiments and numerical modelling.
Scour around monopiles due to waves and
currents have been studied extensively, and the processes leading to scour are therefore well
understood.
The potential scour around monopiles due to time-varying currents, however, has not been
studied previously. To ensure proper design of monopiles in areas with high risks of tsunamis, it
is important to understand the potential scour around such structures. This report investigates
this issue, and is hopefully able to contribute to an increase of the knowledge of potential scour
caused by tsunamis.
The literature concerning boundary layer dynamics and induced sediment transport for tsunami
waves is very limited, while the run-up, inundation and destructive potential of tsunami events
have received considerable attention. Some of the studies concerning tsunami-induced scouring
include that of Chen et al. (2013), who studied tsunami-induced scour at coastal roadways.
The literature concerning experimental studies of tsunami-induced scour around monopiles
is seemingly limited to that of Tonkin et al. (2003), who studied the scour around a monopile
on a sloping beach.
The pieces of literature concerning experimental studies prior to this
project have that in common that they have used piston-type wave-makers to model tsunamis.
This method, however, gives little resemblance to tsunamis due to the limited stroke of the
piston-type wave-maker limiting the range of period and wave height.
This method creates waves resembling wind-generated waves, and not tsunamis when being
scaled up as argued by Madsen et al. (2008). Time-varying currents are therefore chosen to
model tsunami-events in this report, enabling longer periods than possible with a piston-type
wave-maker. The time-varying currents can thus incorporate the most important features of a
tsunami, i.e. the current-like behaviour due to the long duration of tsunami-periods, as well
as the wave-like behaviour as the boundary layer thickness does not necessarily span over the
entire water depth.
The general notion of the boundary layer dynamics of a tsunami, also described by Williams
et al. (2016), is that a tsunami is both current-like due to its long duration, having a period of
minutes to that of hours, however, it does not reach a fully developed boundary layer and is
thus wave-like in this aspect.
The scour experiments conducted will be compared to a CFD model described in Larsen et
9
==PAGE:12==
3
INTRODUCTION
al. (2016), which have been modiﬁed to the experimental set-up utilized in this report.
Furthermore, the thickness of the boundary layer will be investigated as well, and compared
to a numerical investigation based on the MatRANS model, developed by Fuhrman et al.
(2013). The latter investigation is interesting in connection with the scour investigation, as the
boundary layer is the most important feature in connection with scour development.
Another reason is that Williams et al. (2016) has modiﬁed expressions for the boundary layer
thickness to ﬁt tsunamis, based on simulations used with the MatRANS model. It is therefore
interesting to see the ﬁt between the modiﬁed expressions for the boundary layer thickness with
the experiments. This ﬁt will give an indication to whether or not it is possible to generate
tsunami-like features using time-varying currents, as the synthetic wave forms used to simulate
tsunami-waves by Williams et al. (2016) successfully have been compared with two measured
tsunami signals stemming from the 2011 Tohoku tsunami and the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami.
The boundary layer dynamics should therefore also match that of the real geophysical tsunamis.
The report is divided into 5 main parts, where the ﬁrst describes the project, the second con-
cerns the experimental studies, the third concerns the numerical studies, the fourth discusses
the obtained results from the experiments and the numerical models and ﬁnally the last part
is the conclusion. These parts are further divided into a number of diﬀerent sections, brieﬂy
explained in the following.
The ﬁrst part of the report concerns the project description. This part introduces the pur-
pose of the report, as well as presenting relevant literature which is used to justify the research
methodology used in this report. Finally, an overview of relevant theory, in which the most
relevant concepts of the report is described.
This section is intended to equip the reader with the background to understand the remain-
der of the report, and also to show how this report is genuine in its research ﬁeld.
The next part of the report includes the experimental studies. In this part the research method-
ology is presented, explaining the test set-up along with the used equipment, and also the data
processing including underlying assumptions. Finally, the results obtained from the experi-
ments are shown, including boundary layer measurements, equilibrium scour and the temporal
variation of the scour process.
The part regarding the numerical studies follows, in which a thorough description of the used
CFD model is given, along with a briefer description of the MatRANS model. These descrip-
tions are followed by the results obtained from the models.
A comprehensive discussion follows, which intends to give an analytical and critical review
of the primary results. The discussion is divided into two main sections, one which discusses
the how tsunami-induced scour resembles that of steady current scour, including a comparison
of the experimental data against a simple prediction formulae proposed by Larsen et al. (2016).
The other section compares the experimental against the numerical results, including boundary
layer thickness and temporal scour variation.
The ﬁnal section is the conclusion, which summarizes the most important arguments made
in the report.
10
==PAGE:13==
4
LITERATURE REVIEW
4
Literature Review
In order to justify the reasoning behind the used methods in this project, a literature review
is presented in the following. This consists of articles relevant to the subject of tsunami scour,
and articles reviewing diﬀerent approaches to perform experiments with tsunami-waves.
The interaction between seabed and tsunami i.e.
boundary layer dynamics, induced sedi-
ment transport and resultant sea bed morphology, has not been given much attention in the
literature.
This section aims to provide an overview of what has been investigated about these topics
both numerically and experimentally. The devastating eﬀects of tsunamis are well known from
the past two large tsunamis i.e. the 2004 in the Indian Ocean and the 2011 Tohoku. The ﬁrst
article presents some ﬁeld observations after the 2011 tsunami, which shows the importance of
understanding the interaction between sea bed and tsunami. Then the experimental approach
in investigating tsunamis from several authors will be introduced, including an experiment
performed by Schimmels et al. (2016) in a large wave tank. These experimental approaches will
be followed by a discussion of the most used way to model tsunami-waves, i.e. with the use of
solitary waves. Finally, an article regarding a numerical simulation of the wave boundary layer
beneath tsunami-scale waves and a numerical study of tsunami-induced scour around monopile
foundations is presented.
The articles presented will serve as the basis for understanding the reasoning which lies
behind the approach of the performed experiments along with the general approach of investi-
gation in the report.
Scour eﬀects of the 2011 Tohoku-oki tsunami
Wilson et al. (2012) found that the scour
impact of tsunami waves are signiﬁcant even though the epicentre of the event to cause the
tsunami is situated far away. Wilson et al. (2012) accounts for the sediment transport in two
harbours at the coast of California. The impact of the 2011 Tohoku-oki tsunami is investigated,
where it is found that the tsunami-current is signiﬁcant on sediment scour and depositions
within the harbours. The tsunami caused quite some damage, which is expensive to repair.
It is therefore important to investigate the scour process under a time-varying current e.g. in
order to set up future criteria when building structures in and near the coast which at some
point is likely to experience the impact of tsunamis.
Experimental set-ups modelling tsunamis
Chen et al. (2013) and Tonkin et al. (2003)
have investigated the eﬀects of tsunami-induced scour at e.g. coastal roadways and around a
cylinder on a sloping bed. The common denominator for these articles is their way of produc-
ing tsunami-like waves with the use of a piston-type wave-maker. As noticed in the articles,
however, it is diﬃcult to obtain results comparable to real tsunami observations. When scaled
up, the periods are too short and have periods in the order of magnitude of wind-generated
waves. This criticism is also expressed by Madsen et al. (2008). One of the conclusions drawn
by Madsen et al. (2008) is that many of the experimental studies regarding the run-up, the
impact, the scour, the sediment transport or the boundary layers in ﬁnite amplitude solitary
waves in the range of H/h ≈0.05 −0.50 may be interesting from an academic point of view.
However, when scaled up, the events are too short to resemble a tsunami wave, and are more
related to wind-generated waves. So conclusions based on these experiments should be made
with great care in relation to tsunami waves.
The arguments made by Madsen et al. (2008) regarding the limits of scaling down tsunami
in laboratory facilities, however, are disproved by Schimmels et al. (2016). Tsunami-waves are
11
==PAGE:14==
4
LITERATURE REVIEW
successfully generated in a large experimental facility, using a piston-type wave-maker. For the
conducted experiments a scale of 1:100 is utilized, corresponding to Hmax = 6 cm in the ﬂume
and 6 m in nature. The used wave ﬂume is about 300 m long, 5 m wide and 7 m deep, along
with a piston-type wave-maker with a 4 m stroke.
From Schimmels et al. (2016) it is recognized that the generation of tsunami waves is pos-
sible using a piston-type wave-maker, however, it requires a very large experimental facility,
which is not available at DTU. Instead of generating tsunami waves from a piston-type wave-
maker, the variation of velocities under the tsunami wave will be created as a current which
will follow the sech2 distribution. The time-varying current signal can be produced in ﬂume 6
in building 114 at DTU.
Numerical studies
Finally, the articles of Williams et al. (2016) and Larsen et al. (2016)
will be presented, as these are quite essential for this report. Williams et al. (2016) investigates
the boundary layer with use of a one-dimensional vertical boundary layer model, based on
the horizontal component of the incompressible Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes equations,
incorporating a transitional variant of the standard two-equation κ −ω turbulence closure.
The study includes three diﬀerent synthetic tsunami wave descriptions, single-wave (solitary-
like, but with independent periods and wave height), sinusoidal and N-wave descriptions. The
results generally support the notion that the boundary layers induced by tsunami waves are
both current-like, due to their long durations, but also wave-like in the sense that the boundary
layer will not necessarily span the entire water column.
A new expression for the boundary layer thickness from the simulated tsunami scales is
provided for both hydraulically smooth and rough beds. These expressions are presented in
the following section. Using the single wave, the thickness of the boundary layer for the lowest
depth considered in the article, results in δ = h/2. This result will be used as an indicator for
the experiments in this report, with regard to boundary layer thickness.
The article by Larsen et al. (2016) is the most relevant article in relation to this report, as
Larsen et al. (2016) has performed simulations of tsunami-induced scour around a monopile
structure, with use of a fully-coupled (hydrodynamic and morphologic) numerical model. This
model is described in section 8.
The ﬂow, sediment transport and scour processes beneath seven tsunami waves are simu-
lated in succession, in order to develop a simple methodology for the prediction of scour depth
induced by tsunamis. Larsen et al. (2016) emphasizes the importance of incorporating both
current-like and wave-like aspects of the tsunami wave, which is done by predicting the equilib-
rium scour depth with the use of existing steady-current scour depth, after invoking a boundary
layer thickness based on the unsteady tsunami wave.
In this report it is chosen to investigate the tsunami-induced scour by modelling the tsunami
wave as a sech2, where the free stream velocity is deﬁned as
u0 = Umsech2(ωt)
(1)
where Um is the magnitude of the velocity and ω = 2π/T is the angular frequency.
The
tsunami-wave will be generated as a time-varying current instead of creating an actual wave.
The generation of the velocity-varying current will be explained in section 6.
The measured signals from the 2011 Tohuku tsunami and the 2004 Indian Ocean e.g. pre-
sented in Williams et al. (2016), are quite diﬀerent in their form. The 2011 Tohuku tsunami
resembles a solitary wave while the 2004 Indian Ocean resembles an N-wave or sinusoidal wave.
12
==PAGE:15==
4
LITERATURE REVIEW
The sech2 proﬁle is chosen in this report, based on the above listed literature, as well the
generation of this proﬁle being simpler in the laboratory facilities with use of time-varying
currents as the ﬂow does not need to be reversed.
13
==PAGE:16==
==PAGE:17==
5
APPLIED THEORY
5
Applied Theory
The theory section introduces the theoretical background utilized throughout the report. An
overview of the most important concepts involved in sediment transport and the scour process
will be provided. This involves a description of the boundary layer, Shields parameter, ﬂow
and scour around a slender pile in a steady current and in waves.
5.1
Wave boundary layers
As described by Deigaard and Fredsøe (1992) the boundary layer is of great importance for
bringing sediment into suspension above the seabed and further. The boundary layer is of
importance for the vertical distribution of a co-present current. The boundary layer is dependent
on whether the ﬂow is laminar or turbulent.
Furthermore, when the ﬂow is turbulent the
boundary layer also depends on whether the bed is hydraulically smooth or rough.
The laminar boundary layer
First, the laminar boundary layer will be described brieﬂy, in which the velocity is determined
by
u = Um sin (ωt) −Um exp

−z
δ1

sin

ωt −z
δ1

(2)
where Um is the amplitude of near-bed wave-orbital velocity, and
δ1 =
r
2ν
ω
(3)
is the Stokes length, and deﬁnes the thickness of the boundary layer, where ω = 2π/T is the
angular frequency and ν is the viscosity. The bed shear stress can then be determined by
τb = νUm
δ1
sin (ωt) + cos (ωt)
(4)
The turbulent boundary layer
In the case of turbulent boundary layer, the momentum equation showed in Eq. (7) is obtained
from the general ﬂow equation given in Eq. (5) by assuming uniform ﬂow leading to the ﬂow
equation given in Eq. (6)
ρdu
dt = ρ
∂u
∂t + u∂u
∂x + w∂u
∂z

= −∂p
∂x + ∂τ
∂z
(5)
ρ ∂
∂t(u0 −u) = −∂τ
∂z
(6)
−ρ
Z δ+z0
z0
∂
∂t(u0 −u)dz =
Z δ+z0
z0
∂
τ ∂tdz = −τb
(7)
In which τb is the bed shear stress, and z0 is the zero level of velocity.
In the case of a
hydraulically rough bed, the velocity proﬁle is taken to be logarithmic as an approximation
u = Uf
κ ln
 z
z0

(8)
in which Uf =
p
|τb|/ρ is the friction velocity, κ ≈0.40 is von K´arm´an’s constant, and ﬁnally
z0 is the reference level of the bed, which according to Nikuradse (1932) can be taken equal to
kN/30, where kN is the bed roughness.
15
==PAGE:18==
5.1
Wave boundary layers
5
APPLIED THEORY
Rough bed
Solving the momentum equation, Deigaard and Fredsøe (1992) come to the
following expressions for the friction factor and boundary layer thickness.
The theoretical
expression for the friction factor, for rough beds, is given as
fw = 0.04
 a
kN
−1
4
, a
kN
> 50
(9)
where, a, is the free stream amplitude, given by
a = UmT
2π
(10)
For small a/kN values, the friction factor is given by an approximation, according to Kamphius
(1975)
fw = 0.4
 a
kN
−0.75
, a
kN
< 50
(11)
Deigaard and Fredsøe (1992) has derived an expression for the wave boundary layer thickness
in a similar way as for the friction factor, leading to the following deﬁnition
δ
kN
= 0.09
 a
kN
0.82
(12)
Smooth bed
In the case of a hydraulically smooth bed, the momentum equation can be
solved in the same way as in the case of a rough bed. This leads to the following expressions
for the friction factor and the boundary layer thickness.
fw = 0.035RE−0.16
(13)
where RE = Uma
ν
is the Reynolds number for the near-bed wave-orbital motion.
δ
a = 0.086RE−0.11
(14)
Improved equations for δ/a, based on simulation at full tsunami scales
The equations
suggested by Deigaard and Fredsøe (1992) for the boundary layer thickness, given in Eqs. (12)
and (14), for rough and smooth beds, are used for wind-generated waves.
In Williams et
al. (2016), these equations have been improved by ﬁtting results based on simulations at full
tsunami scales. This ﬁtting has lead to the following two equations for smooth and rough beds,
respectively.
δ
a = 0.044Re−0.07
(15)
δ
a = 0.05 a
ks
−0.11
(16)
These latter expressions are adapted in this report, as they have been proven to ﬁt tsunami-
waves better than Eqs. (12) and (14). Later on in the report, these modiﬁed expressions for
the boundary layer will be compared with experimental results and discussed in more detail.
16
==PAGE:19==
5
APPLIED THEORY
5.2
Scour mechanisms
Shields parameter
The Shields parameter is a ratio between the driving forces and stabilizing forces on the sediment
particles. The critical Shields parameter is deﬁned as the threshold of the particle motion. The
driving forces on the sediment particles on a plane horizontal bed are the tractive stress, which
works horizontally, and the lift force working vertically.
The drag force, FD consists of skin friction acting on the surface of the grain and forms
drag due to a pressure diﬀerence on the up -and downstream sides of the grain because of ﬂow
separation. The drag force is determined by
FD = 1
2ρcD
π
4 d2U 2
(17)
where d is the grain diameter, cD is a drag coeﬃcient, known to depend on the local Reynolds
number and U is the near-bed velocity. The driving forces can be expressed by Eq. (18), as
the lift force is given by a similar expression as (17).
Fd = 1
2ρcD
π
4 d2 (αUf)2
(18)
where cD and α are non-dimensional parameters. The stabilizing forces can be modelled as
friction forces acting on a sediment particle.
Fs = ρg(s −1)π
6 d3µs = Wµs
(19)
where W is the weight of the submerged particle, and µs is the measure for the maximum
friction between the grain and the surrounding grains. The sediment particle is thus stable for
Fs > Fdriving, leading to the expression of the Shields parameter, given by
θ =
U 2
f
(s −1)gd
(20)
The critical value is a weak function of the Reynolds number. The variation of the Shields
parameter as function of the grain Reynolds number, given in Eq. (21), is showed in Fig. 1.
Re = Ufd
ν
(21)
5.2
Scour mechanisms
Extensive research has been performed on scour caused by a steady current and waves, of which
the book of Sumer and Fredsøe (2002) gives a great understanding. The following theory on
scour has this book as a reference.
When a structure is placed in a marine environment, the presence of the structure will
change the ﬂow pattern in its immediate neighbourhood, resulting in phenomenons like
• the contraction of ﬂow
• the formation of horseshoe vortex in front of the structure
• the formation of lee-wake vortices behind the structure
• the generation of turbulence
These changes cause an increase in the local sediment transport, and thus leading to scour. In
the following a more detailed assessment of the processes leading to scour will be given. This
assessment includes an explanation of the concepts of equilibrium scour depth, time scale, ﬂow
and scour around a slender pile in both steady current and waves.
17
==PAGE:20==
5.2
Scour mechanisms
5
APPLIED THEORY
100
101
102
103
Re = Uf d/ν
10-2
10-1
100
θ
Figure 1: The Shields diagram giving the treshold value θc for the incipient motion of a sediment
grain as a function of the Reynolds number
Basic concepts of scour
The scour process develops towards an equilibrium depth, deﬁned as the equilibrium scour
depth. The time it takes for a substantial amount of scour to occur, is deﬁned as the time scale
of the scour process. It may take several time scales to reach the equilibrium scour depth. The
conventional way to describe this process is by
S/D = Se/D

1 −exp
−t
Ts

(22)
where Ts is the time scale of the scour process, S is the temporal variation of the scour and Se
is the equilibrium scour depth. The concepts of the scour time scale, and the equilibrium scour
depth are very important in the assessment of the inﬂuence of scour for a given structure. The
time scale is important in the sense of whether a substantial amount of scour will occur during
a storm, or in the case treated in this report, a tsunami wave. In the case of tsunami waves,
the time scale of the scour is approximately the same as the period of the tsunami.
Scour can be classiﬁed into two categories, clear-water scour and live-bed scour. Clear-water
scour occurs for a Shields parameter smaller than the critical value, (θ < θc), and in that case
the sediment will only move in the vicinity of the structure. There will not be any bed-forms
present further away from the structure. In the case of live-bed scour (θ > θc), the sediment
transport will be visible over the entirety of the bed. In the case of very small Shields parame-
ter, no scour will occur because even the ampliﬁed local bed shear stress is too small to cause
sediment transport. However, when going into the live-bed regime and beyond, only small vari-
ation of the scour depth with θ is observed. This is due to the fact that a change of θ results
in corresponding changes in the sediment transport all over the bed, and not solely inside the
scour hole. Eventually this change of the Shields parameter will only give small changes in
the equilibrium scour hole, the time scale on the other hand will of course be inﬂuenced and
decreases for increasing Shields parameter.
18
==PAGE:21==
5
APPLIED THEORY
5.2
Scour mechanisms
Flow around a slender pile
The ﬂow around a slender pile, which is deﬁned as the ratio between the diameter and the
wave length being below D/L < O(0.1), will undergo substantial changes as outlined in the
beginning of the section. An illustration of the process is showed in Fig. 2, where the following
processes are showed. The horseshoe vortex is formed in front of the pile, lee-wake vortices
are formed on the lee-side of the pile. In most cases these lee-wake vortices will shed. The
streamlines will contract at the sides of the pile and in addition to this feature, there will be a
down-ﬂow as a consequence of the de-acceleration of the ﬂow in front of the pile. These changes
of the ﬂow result in an increase in the local sediment transport, which again results in scour
around the pile.
Figure 2: Fig. 3.1 from Sumer and Fredsøe (2002), an illustration of the processes involved in
scour
Horseshoe vortex in steady currents
The horseshoe vortex is caused by the rotation
of the incoming ﬂow. The boundary layer undergoes a tree-dimensional separation along the
dashed line S in Fig. 2. This rotation is inﬂuenced by the adverse pressure gradient induced by
the structure. The separated boundary layer then subsequently rolls up to form the horseshoe
vortex. Studies have demonstrated that the bed shear stress can be ampliﬁed as much as 5-11
times with respect to its undisturbed value. The presence of the horseshoe vortex depends on
two things. The ﬁrst one is an incoming boundary layer and secondly the adverse pressure
gradient induced by the pile must be suﬃciently strong so that the boundary layer on the bed
can separate to generate the horseshoe vortex. The horseshoe vortex mainly depends on the
following non-dimensional parameters
δ/D, ReD and pile geometry
19
==PAGE:22==
5.2
Scour mechanisms
5
APPLIED THEORY
where δ/D is the ratio of the boundary layer thickness to pile diameter, and ReD is the pile
Reynolds number,
ReD = UD
ν
.
With regard to the eﬀect of δ/D a small ratio will delay the separation of the boundary layer
leading to a smaller horseshoe vortex. In the case of a very small boundary layer thickness, the
horseshoe vortex will not be formed, due to the fact that the boundary layer will not separate.
The eﬀect of the Reynolds number is somewhat similar to that of the boundary layer thickness.
In case of a laminar boundary layer, a small Reynolds number implies a large viscosity, leading
to an increase in the resistance which the boundary layer will face when trying to separate.
Therefore, the separation will be delayed for small Reynolds number, resulting in a smaller
horseshoe vortex. However, in the case of turbulent boundary layer the role of the Reynolds
number may be reversed, i.e., the size of the horseshoe vortex will decrease with increasing
Reynolds number. This is caused by an increase in the momentum exchange between the layers
of the ﬂuid in the turbulent boundary layer causing the separation of the boundary layer to be
delayed.
Finally, the variation of the bed shear stress underneath a horseshoe vortex will be presented,
as the bed shear stress is highly important in the process of sediment transport. Sumer and
Fredsøe (2002) have showed that the bed shear stress underneath the horseshoe vortex can be
as large as a factor of 5 just in front of the pile, compared to the undisturbed value. However,
the largest value can be as much as a factor of 11, which is the value of the ampliﬁcation factor
at the front side of the pile. This large increase in the bed shear stress entails a large increase
in the sediment transport as well. This increase in sediment transport in front and on the sides
of the pile leads to the formation of a scour hole.
Horseshoe vortex in waves
In the case of waves, an additional parameter to those given
for the steady current case emerges. This parameter is the Keulegan-Carpenter number deﬁned
by
KC = UmTw
D
(23)
in which Tw is the wave period. For a sinusoidal varying orbital motion
u0 = Um sin(ωt)
(24)
leading to a KC number of
KC = 2πa
D
(25)
where a is the amplitude of the undisturbed orbital motion of the water particles near the bed.
Thus the KC number will be proportional to 2a/D, in which 2a is the stroke of the water
particles near the bed. This expression shows that for a very small KC number, the stroke will
be very small compared to the pile diameter. In this case the horseshoe vortex might not be
formed due to the size of the stroke that will be too small for the incoming boundary layer to
separate. In the case of a large KC number, the stroke of the motion will be large, and thus the
ﬂow will in many ways resemble that of a steady current for each half period. The horseshoe
vortex may therefore be expected to behave much in the same way as the case of a steady
current described in the preceding. Sumer and Fredsøe (2002) has made extensive research
within this ﬁeld, and from experiments with regular waves they found that no horseshoe vortex
20
==PAGE:23==
5
APPLIED THEORY
5.2
Scour mechanisms
exits for KC < 6. This is due to the adverse pressure gradient and depends on the geometry
of the pile. The bed shear stress is the main factor of the formation of the scour hole, and in
waves the bed shear stress increases for increasing KC. The result of this is due to the increased
presence of the horseshoe vortex which is apparent for increasing KC.
Lee-wake vortex ﬂow
The lee-wake vortices are caused by rotation of the boundary layer
over the surface of the pile, as in contrast to the horseshoe vortices which are due to the rotation
of the incoming ﬂow in front of the pile. In the case of steady current, the lee-wake vortices
mainly depend on the Reynolds number and the pile geometry. Like the horseshoe vortex in
the case of waves, the lee-wake vortices also depend on the Keulegan-Carpenter number. In
the case of waves, Sumer and Fredsøe (2002) deﬁnes 4 diﬀerent regimes from which they have
accounted for the vortex-ﬂow regimes based on the KC number. Vortex shedding is present for
KC larger than 6, and if KC is as large as 17, two vortices are shed in each half cycle of the
ﬂow. The lee-wake vortices are essential in waves for the scour characteristics. For increasing
KC the length of the lee-wake increases, which leads to an increased length of the exposed area
of the shed vortices, and therefore the scour processes itself.
Contraction of streamlines
The eﬀect of the contraction of streamlines induces an am-
pliﬁcation of the bed shear stress around the pile. The ampliﬁcation of the bed shear stress
compared to its undisturbed value is α = O(4) in the case of waves, and α = O(10) in the case
of steady current. The reason that the ampliﬁcation factor is much higher in steady current,
compared to waves, is due to the very strong presence of horseshoe vortices in steady currents,
which again can be explained by the incoming boundary layer i.e. constant in a steady current.
Scour around a slender pile in steady current
In steady currents the most important
feature leading to scour is the formation of the horseshoe vortex. Which in combination with
eﬀects of contraction of streamlines at the sides of pile, leads to erosion of a signiﬁcant amount
of sediment. The scour depth is inﬂuenced by multiple parameters, where the most important
in relation to the research in this report is the Shields parameter and boundary-layer-to-pile-size
ratio. It has been shown that an increase in the Shields parameter leads to an increase of the
scour hole, up until the equilibrium scour depth is reached. An increase in boundary-layer-to-
pile-size ratio also results in an increase in the scour depth. This is mainly due to the increase
in the horseshoe vortex for an increase in δ/D. The equilibrium scour depth for steady currents
is
S0
D = 1.3, with σS/D = 0.7
(26)
for live-bed scour (θ > θcr).
Scour around a slender pile in waves
Two substantial changes occur when dealing with
waves. One is the change in the horseshoe vortex, secondly the lee-wake vortices are no longer
just a passive ﬂow feature. The lee-wake vortices act as a convection mechanism to transport
eroded sediment away from the pile during each half period of the motion. These processes are
governed by KC number, so the scour process in waves is thus also governed by the KC number.
For increasing KC number, the horseshoe vortex increases in both size and life span, and the
lee-wake becomes larger as well. These two eﬀects result in an increase in the scour depth. Thus
for increasing KC, the scour hole depth will increase. An equilibrium scour depth is reached
for KC →∞, as the contribution from the lee-wake vortices and the horseshoe vortex goes
towards a constant value. This equilibrium scour depth is the same as that obtained for steady
currents. Sumer and Fredsøe (2002) therefore conclude that the contribution to the equilibrium
scour depth for large KC number,which is KC > O(100), is predominant due to the horseshoe
21
==PAGE:24==
5.2
Scour mechanisms
5
APPLIED THEORY
vortex. However, for small KC numbers, that is KC < O(10), the onset of scour is directly
connected to the lee-wake vortex ﬂow, and the life span and size of the horseshoe vortex are
rather small. Therefore, the scour process is predominantly governed by the lee-wake ﬂow.
Time scale
The time scale of scour has been investigated thoroughly by Sumer and Fredsøe (2002). The
time scale can be written in the non-dimensional form, for steady currents and waves respec-
tively.
T ∗
s = T ∗
s ( δ
D, θ)
(27)
T ∗
s = T ∗
s (KC, θ)
(28)
where T ∗
s is the normalized time scale, deﬁned as in equation 2.44 in Sumer and Fredsøe (2002)
T ∗
s = (g(s −1)d3)1/2
D2
Ts
(29)
The normalized time scale, T ∗
s , decreases for increasing shields parameter, while T ∗
s increases
for increasing KC. Empirical expression has been given in Sumer and Fredsøe (2002) relating
the normalized time scale, T ∗
s , to KC and θ. In the case of steady currents:
T ∗
s =
1
2000
 δ
D
−2.2
(30)
and for waves
T ∗
s = 10−6KC
θ
3
(31)
Modiﬁed equations for time scale and equilibrium scour depth
Larsen et al. (2016) suggests to modify the expression of the time scale for the study of tsunami
waves. As argued by Larsen et al. (2016), the expression in Eq. (30) is based on experiments
spanning the parametric range 0.039 ≤δ/D ≤10 and 0.062 ≤θ ≤0.29, and care must
therefore be taken when using this expression for ﬁeld conditions, where in the case of a tsunami
θ = O(1). Therefore, on the basis of a re-investigation of the experimental data, Larsen et al.
(2016) suggests to slightly modify the expression for the normalized time scale, so that it is
deﬁned as
T ∗
s = Ts
p
g(s −1)d3
D2
=
1
400
 δ
D
0.7
θ−1.5
(32)
This expression is less sensitive when being scaled up, and is based on the same experimental
data as the expression suggested by Sumer and Fredsøe (2002), given in Eq. (30). Also, an
expression for the equilibrium scour depth, as a function of the boundary layer thickness, is
derived by Larsen et al. (2016) based upon Fig. 3.26 in Sumer and Fredsøe (2002).
Se
S0
= 1 −exp

−0.9 δ
D

(33)
This expression will be adopted as the way of determining the equilibrium scour depth, as this
expression can be used for time-varying currents, as the expected tsunami-induced boundary
layer thickness can be utilized here. It is again important to emphasize that a tsunami has both
current and wave-like features. The time scale of the scour caused by a tsunami will be more
steady current-like than wave-like, due to the long duration typical of tsunamis. However, the
boundary layer thickness does not span the entire depth of the water column, and it is thus
more wave-like than steady current-like in this aspect.
22
==PAGE:25==
6
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
Part II
Experimental Studies
6
Research Methodology
The research methodology is presented in this section consisting of a description of the test
set-up, the experimental procedure, test conditions and a validation of the test set-up. The
test set-up gives an overview of the utilized ﬂume, and the set-up used in order to study
tsunami-induced scour. The experimental procedure explains the procedure of conducting the
experiments, where the two diﬀerent experiment procedures used in this report are described.
The test conditions explain the measuring equipment along with the data processing. Finally,
a presentation of two cases of steady current is given, used to validate the test set-up.
6.1
Test set-up
Flume number 6 at DTU has been used to conduct experiments for this report. The ﬂume is a
gravitational ﬂume with a total length of 35 m, width of 2 m and height of 0.5 m. The ﬂume
has glass walls and bottom at the middle of the ﬂume, providing the user with a good view of
the ﬂow. The ﬂow in the ﬂume is created by a pump situated in the basement below the ﬂume.
The manual controlling of the pump is done at a control desk, where the pump is regulated
by 2 buttons, up and down. A pitch is placed in the pump making it possible to reverse the
ﬂow in the ﬂume. The pitch ranges from 0-10, in which 5 is its neutral position, where no
ﬂow is possible. The pitch is also manually controlled at the control desk by 2 buttons, up
and down. An overview of the ﬂume is seen from the picture in Fig. 3, and a key diagram of
the ﬂume is found in Appendix C, Fig. C.1. The ﬂume is used to conduct experiments with
steady currents, however, for this project the ﬂume has been extended to be able to simulate
time-varying currents as well. These time-varying currents are utilized to simulate the current
beneath a tsunami-like wave.
Figure 3: Overview of the test set-up.
A sand bed spanning 8 m is placed with its center at the center of the ﬂume. The center
of the ﬂume is chosen in the case of using the test set-up with a diﬀerent wave signal than the
23
==PAGE:26==
6.2
Experimental procedure
6
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
Figure 4: Side- and top view of the sand bed, placement of pile and micro propeller. The sand
bed is placed such that the pile is placed at the center of the ﬂume.
solitary wave signal e.g. a sinusoidal wave signal, then the conditions would be the same for
the ﬂow in both directions. The sand has a grain size of d50 = 0.18 mm. The width of the sand
bed is the entire width of the ﬂume, 2 m. The thickness of the sand bed is 0.15 m based on the
maximum expected scour depth for currents, Se/D = 1.3.
A pile is placed at the center of the sand bed, with D = 0.1 m. At the ends of the sand bed
a slope of 1 : 8 is made of tiles (0.40 m × 0.40 m), in order to keep the sand in place. The tiles
were covered by stones to create an even slope decreasing the extent of turbulence in the ﬂow.
In the sand bed two straight edges are placed 0.20 m from the walls of the ﬂume used when
planing the bed. The straight edges ensure a smooth surface and an even height of the sand
bed over the entire area for each experiment. The sand bed with placement of slope, pile and
micro propeller is shown in Fig. 4, and a picture of it is shown in Fig. 5.
The inlet of water into the ﬂume has been done with approximately 0.72 l/s, which was
found to be at such a pace that the sand bed would remain undisturbed. Likewise, the outlet
of the water from the ﬂume was done with approximately 2.6 l/s.
6.2
Experimental procedure
Two types of tests have been conducted, one concerning equilibrium scour depth and temporal
scour variation, and the other concerning the boundary layer thickness.
Scour experiments
When conducting experiments with regard to scour, the experimental
procedure was:
1. Levelling the bed, ensuring a smooth surface
2. The initial bed proﬁle is measured by lasers to detect any small diﬀerences in the surface
3. Water is ﬁlled into the ﬂume at a low ﬂux without disturbing the bed
24
==PAGE:27==
6
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
6.3
Test conditions
Figure 5: Picture of the set-up, where the sand bed is shown along with the placement of the
pile.
4. A camera is placed inside the cylinder and the micro propeller is placed in alignment with
the cylinder
5. The pump is started along with the data acquisition, ensuring measurements are synchro-
nized
6. The time-varying current for the deﬁned period is started and repeated until equilibrium
scour is reached
7. The ﬂume is slowly emptied for water at a low ﬂux in order not to disturb the bed
8. The ﬁnal bed proﬁle is measured with lasers
Boundary layer experiments
Conducting experiments with regard to the boundary layer
thickness, the experimental procedure was:
1. Levelling the bed ensuring a smooth surface
2. Water is ﬁlled into the ﬂume at a low ﬂux without disturbing the bed
3. The pitot tubes are placed at the desired water depth
4. The pump is started along with the data acquisition, ensuring measurements are synchro-
nized
5. The time-varying current for the deﬁned period is started and repeated until the velocity
proﬁle is captured satisfactorily
6.3
Test conditions
The test conditions will now be explained, including a description of the measuring equipment
as well as the data processing.
25
==PAGE:28==
6.3
Test conditions
6
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
t [s]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
u0 [m/s]
a)
u0,meas
u0
-50
0
50
t [s]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
u0 [m/s]
b)
u0,meas
u0
Figure 6: The diﬀerence in the time-varying current for the two developed programs with a
target value of T = 150s and Um = 0.40m/s. a) case 3 - Program 1 and b) case 7 - Program 2.
Generation of time-varying currents
The method of generating time-varying currents will be described ﬁrst, as the development of
the 2 programs enabling the ﬂume to generate time-varying currents have been the key to study
tsunami-induced scour in this report.
As described in the preceding, the ﬂow in the ﬂume is controlled by a pitch and a pump
controlled manually from the control desk. The ﬂume is intended to be used for conducting
experiments with steady currents. Therefore the generation of a time-varying current would
entail that the time-varying current had to be created manually at the control desk. This would
be diﬃcult to reproduce. Also creating smooth variations resembling of e.g. a signal with a
solitary form or a sinusoidal form would be diﬃcult. The ﬂume has then been modiﬁed to allow
time-varying currents, on the basis of the development of 2 LabVIEW programs as a part of
this project.
These programs allow the ﬂow in the ﬂume to be controlled automatically, such that the
generation of time-varying currents can be reproduced with more or less the same variation in
velocity and period. The 2 programs have been developed in LabVIEW in collaboration with
the DTU Institute of Mechanical Technology. The department from Institute of Mechanical
Technology was in charge of the coding in LabVIEW, and we speciﬁed the features of the
program, as well as provided the information necessary to code the programs controlling the
pitch and pump. The reason behind developing Program 2 is shown in Fig. 6. The variation
is much smoother for Program 2, and resembles a solitary wave better than the variation given
by Program 1. A description of the underlying principles of the two programs is given in the
following.
Program 1 - CM10 regulator
The ﬁrst program has its basis in controlling an ABB CM10
regulator, which regulates the pump and the pitch to a chosen output in l/s. A correlation
between the velocity in the ﬂume and the discharge of the pump was made. This correlation is
shown in Fig. A.1 in Appendix A.
The inﬂuence of the pitch was also investigated. The response time for the pitch was tested
along with the length of the signal needed to reverse the pitch, and the length to set the pitch
26
==PAGE:29==
6
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
6.3
Test conditions
in its neutral position.
The program is able to read a text ﬁle, in which it is speciﬁed how much ﬂow the pump
has to provide with a maximum of 1200 RPM. At the same time-step, a value for the pitch is
given. The range of the pitch is from 0-10 in steps of 0.5. A time-step is deﬁned, ∆t, which is
the time between each speciﬁcation to the output of the pump.
The signal from the DAQ is treated in the CM10 regulator, and the regulator passes on the
signal to the pump, however, the CM10 regulator only sends an average of the signals collected
in an unknown interval of time, resulting in the peak of e.g. the signal of a solitary form not
being sent to the pump, and hence the ”top” of the velocity variation is ﬂattened out, see Fig.
6. Another program has therefore been developed so that the pump is controlled similarly as
the pitch, and thereby eliminating the limitations of Program 1.
Program 2 - Direct control
In the second LabView program the pump is controlled sim-
ilarly as the pitch i.e. directly. This provides the user with a greater control of the pump,
resulting in a more smooth variation giving a better ﬁt to the desired current-variation, see Fig.
6. The input in the text ﬁle is in form of a step, and not a percentage of the performance of
the pump. The total amount of steps is 48, which means that 1 step = 25 RPM. This number
of steps was chosen as a balance between being able to have a ﬁne resolution of the desired
variation, and the amount of time the program has spend on sending the signal to the pump
in order to control the ﬂow. The correlation used for writing the text ﬁle is presented in Fig.
A.1 in Appendix A. The input has to be an integer in order to be read properly, and the signal
length is extended to 1.2 s, corresponding to the amount of time it takes to increase the pump
by 25 RPM.
Program 2 facilitates experiments with lower periods and a better and more smooth variation
than Program 1. One limitation of Program 2 is very short periods. As these will cause reﬂection
of the ﬂow in the ﬂume. This is especially severe for periods lower than T ≈100 s. The reﬂection
also depends on the velocity of the current. The reﬂected ﬂow will be commented later on in
the report.
Initial and ﬁnal bed proﬁle
The bed proﬁle measurements are performed using two lasers and a draw-wire encoder. The
lasers are connected to DAQ-device NI USB 6218, which transforms the signal from analog to
digital and logs the signal, using a DTU-developed program DataAcquisition. The signal is
measured in Volt, and the lasers have therefore been calibrated in order to convert the signal
from Volt to meter. The maximum frequency for logging is 50 Hz, which has been chosen
as the logging frequency for all the measurements. The y-direction is measured by a draw-
wire encoder A40/41, which is also connected to the DAQ-device NI USB 6218 and logged by
DataAcquisition in Volt. The calibration for these measuring devices is shown in Fig. A.2, in
Appendix A.
The area around the pile is measured prior to and after each experiment to get the bed-
proﬁles, and the depth of the scour hole. An area of 1 m × 0.9 m, with the pile in the center,
is measured with lasers in the x and z-directions, with a grid of approximately 5 mm, and the
y-direction is measured using the draw-wire. These measurements are performed in order to
get the exact scour depth in the area around the pile, along with the initial and ﬁnal bed proﬁle
for each test. The equilibrium scour depth Se is determined from the ﬁnal bed proﬁle.
Temporal scour hole variation
The measurements of the temporal scour variation is performed using a GoPro Hero3+ camera.
The camera is placed inside the cylinder, along with a chart with equally spaced lines of 1cm.
27
==PAGE:30==
6.3
Test conditions
6
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
-50
0
50
t [s]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
u0 [m/s]
u0,meas
u0
Figure 7: The variation of the velocity for all periods until equilibrium scour has been reached
for T = 124 s
The ﬁrst 5 periods have been recorded for each case, enabling an analysis of the scour process
in between these periods. After the ﬁrst 5 periods, pictures have been taken before and after
each period until equilibrium scour was reached. The frames have then been analysed, either
after each period - or with a chosen time-step within a period. The analysis is performed using
the lines from the chart as a calibration of the pixels between the lines. The calibration is
then used to interpolate linearly between the markings of the sand level. The frames have been
loaded in to Matlab where a build-in function, ginput, has been used to ﬁnd the pixels where
the sand level is at each frame, then using the calibration between pixels and centimetres the
temporal variation of the scour depth has been determined.
Reference velocity u0
The velocity of the ﬂow is measured by a micro propeller. The micro propeller is an Armﬁeld
Propeller velocity meter H33-1, serial number 402437-002. The propeller signal is calibrated
using the provided chart from the manufacturer. The propeller is located outside of the bound-
ary layer, so it measures the free-stream velocity u0. For large periods, however, the boundary
layer will extend the entire water column, and thus it is not possible to measure outside of the
boundary layer.
The experiments performed in this report have been run for approximately 50 periods, in
order to reach equilibrium scour, however, the variation of the current for each period is not
identical, which is shown in Fig. 7. The velocity proﬁles for all the periods, to reach equilibrium
scour, for a period of T = 124 s is shown together. It is clear from this ﬁgure that there is a
diﬀerence in both the maximum velocity and the period of the varying current. In Appendix
B the ﬁgures for the performed cases are shown.
The propeller is not able to measure velocities lower than approximately 0.05 m/s, which has
made it impossible to identify a period of the time-varying current from the measured signal.
It has therefore been necessary to estimate a period. In the following the method of estimating
the period is explained.
Processing the measured velocity signal
The measured velocity signal is processed in a
number of steps, in order to ﬁnd the variation of the free stream velocity, along with a period
28
==PAGE:31==
6
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
6.3
Test conditions
to be applied in the calculation process.
First, a Fast Fourier Transformation is performed for the measured signal, in order to see
a power density spectrum. By doing so, it is easy to identify the frequencies containing the
desired information, and the frequencies containing noise from the measuring device. From the
FFT analysis a cut-oﬀfrequency is then found, see Fig. 8 a).
Using a Hamming lowpass digital ﬁlter implemented by ﬁnite impulse response the measured
signal is ﬁltered. The digital ﬁlter leads to a more smooth velocity proﬁle, see Fig. 8 b).
An ensemble-averaged free stream velocity is then found from the ﬁltered velocity, see Fig.
8 c).
Finding a period of the time-varying current, as described in the preceding, was not straight
forward due to the propeller not being able to measure low velocities. Therefore, the analytical
expression for the solitary wave, Eq. (1), is compared with parts of the ensemble-averaged
measured velocity, in order to ﬁnd a period to be used in the calculation process. The period
is found by minimizing the relative error between the measured and the analytical expression
for the free stream velocity. The result is seen in Fig. 8 d).
E = u0,meas −u0,analytical
u0,analytical
· 100%
(34)
The relative error between the measured and analytic expression can be weighted, such that
the period is based on the relative error solely found from a chosen threshold of the velocity.
A threshold is chosen so that the ﬁt is best for the large velocities, as the large velocities are
most important in the scour process yielding more sediment transport.
Two thresholds are chosen, one for the currents created with the use of Program 1 and
another for those created by Program 2. A threshold of 0.90 · u0 is chosen for Program 1, and
0.80 · u0 for Program 2. The ﬁt between the measured and the analytic expression is shown
in Fig. 8 e). The ﬁltered velocity u0,filtered will in the remainder of the report be taken as
u0, while the period found by minimizing the error between the analytical expression and the
measured data will be taken as the period T of the time-varying current.
Boundary layer thickness δ/h
The boundary layer thickness is found by measuring the dynamic pressure with the use of four
pitot tubes, three measuring the stagnation pressure and one measuring the static pressure.
The pitot tube measuring the static pressure accounts for any changes in the water level due to
the increased velocity of the ﬂow during the solitary signal. The pitot tubes are connected to a
transducer that converts the pressure into a signal in Hz. All pitot tubes have been calibrated
in a range of ±1 cm. The calibration is shown in A.3 in Appendix A.
The technique rests on the Bernoulli equation, Eq.
(35), which is valid along a single
streamline in steady, inviscid ﬂows where the continuum approximation holds.
dp
ρ + UdU = 0
(35)
The velocity is then determined from the diﬀerence between the stagnation pressure and the
hydrostatic pressure. The dynamic pressure is calculated as
p0 −p = 1
2ρU 2
(36)
where p0 is the stagnation pressure and p is the static pressure, where
1
2ρU 2 is termed the
dynamic pressure. Thus for incompressible ﬂuid the velocity can be obtained from measuring
the stagnation and static pressure.
29
==PAGE:32==
6.3
Test conditions
6
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
f [Hz]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
PSD [m2/s]
×104
a)
9.25
9.3
9.35
9.4
9.45
9.5
9.55
t [s]
×105
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
u0 [m/s]
b)
Unfiltered u0
Filtered u0
-50
0
50
t [s]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
u0 [m/s]
c)
u0,meas
u0
121
122
123
124
125
T [s]
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Relative error [%]
d)
-50
0
50
t [s]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
u0 [m/s]
e)
u0
u0,fitted
Figure 8: Processing of velocity signal, shown for T = 123 s and Um = 0.46 m/s. a) Power
spectral density, b) variation of measured u0, c) Measured u0 and ensemble-averaged u0, d)
Relative error, e) Fitted u0 and ensemble averaged u0
30
==PAGE:33==
6
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
6.4
Test set-up validation
6.4
Test set-up validation
In order to validate the test set-up, and to familiarize ourselves with the ﬂume and measuring
equipment, two experiments with steady current have been conducted, shown in Table 1. The
steady current is chosen because the results can be compared with the recognized empirical
solution, S0/D = 1.3. Thus the expected scour depth for steady current is used to verify the
set-up, as well as the measuring equipment.
Table 1: Parameters for the two validating cases of steady current
Case
u0 [m/s]
θ
S/D
Clear-water scour
0.25
0.0451
0.08
Live-bed scour
0.41
0.1169
0.12
The ﬁnal bed proﬁles for the two cases of steady current are shown in Fig. 9. It is clear from
the ﬁgure that there are no bed forms present in front of the cylinder for the clear-water scour
case. This is an eﬀect of the Shields parameter being below its critical value, i.e. clear-water
scour. The formation of bed forms are clearly visible in the case of live bed scour which was
expected as θ > θcr.
-0.2
-0.1
0.8
0
z [m]
a)
0.1
0.6
0.6
0.2
0.4
y [m]
0.4
x [m]
0.2
0.2
0
-0.2
-0.08
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
[m]
Figure 9: Final bed proﬁle after steady current. a) clear-water scour and b) live-bed scour.
31
==PAGE:34==
6.4
Test set-up validation
6
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
-0.2
0.8
0
b)
0.6
z [m]
0.6
0.2
0.4
y [m]
x [m]
0.2
0.4
0
0.2
-0.2
-0.08
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
[m]
Figure 9: Continued
32
==PAGE:35==
7
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
7
Experimental Results
Experiments have been performed aiming to simulate the current beneath a tsunami wave in
order to study tsunami-induced scour around a slender pile. Time-varying currents varying
with the shape of a solitary wave has been studied regarding equilibrium scour depth as well
as the temporal variation of the scour process.
The temporal variation of the scour includes the variation after each successive period until
equilibrium scour depth is reached as well as the temporal scour variation for the ﬁrst 5 periods.
The variation of the ﬁrst 5 periods is performed such that frames for every 2 seconds for case
4-8 and for every 5 seconds for case 9 is analysed in order to get the scour variation within
these periods.
The boundary layer has also been investigated for case 10, 11 and 12. The experiments
of these cases are conducted with the same input as for case 5,7 and 9. The pile was taken
out of the ﬂume when conducting the experiments for the boundary layer, and the pitot tubes
were then placed in the same spot as the pile. The boundary layer is investigated as this layer
accounts for the primary scour mechanisms, as well as being able to compare the results with
the MatRANS model and the formulas given in Eqs. (15) and (16).
The predicted boundary layer thickness is taken as the maximum value of Eqs. (15) and
(16), as the bed studied in this report are in between smooth hydraulic bed and rough hydraulic
bed as 5 < k+
s
< 30 for the studied cases.
The results for the boundary layer thickness will be presented ﬁrst, then the results for the
equilibrium scour will follow, and ﬁnally the temporal variation of the scour process is presented.
Dimensional and dimensionless quantities for the performed test cases are shown in table 2.
The measured equilibrium scour depth, as presented in this table, is the one measured from the
ﬁnal bed-proﬁle, this value will be used as the equilibrium scour depth when comparing with
prediction formulas in Part IV.
Table 2: Dimensional and dimensionless quantities for each case, where the boundary layer
thickness δ is estimated from (16). Case 1-3 is made from Program 1, case 4-12 is made from
Program 2. Case 10-12 was solely conducted to measure the boundary layer thickness, and
thus only a limited number of periods were performed. For case 1-9 the mean, µ, and standard
deviation, σ, of the amplitude of the velcoity Um is showed. The mean velocity is used as the
reference value.
Case
T [s]
Um [m/s]
Se/D
δ/h
µ
σ
1
181
0.32
0.012
0.78
0.57
2
202
0.34
0.007
0.89
0.67
3
166
0.40
0.020
0.95
0.65
4
72
0.42
0.018
0.83
0.32
5
80
0.45
0.023
0.86
0.38
6
97
0.40
0.022
0.95
0.40
7
123
0.46
0.014
1.02
0.56
8
148
0.42
0.012
1.18
0.61
9
497
0.42
0.008
1.23
1.00
10
80
0.49
-
-
0.40
11
123
0.51
-
-
0.61
12
497
0.49
-
-
1.00
The Shields parameter as a function of the Reynolds number for case 1-9 is shown in Fig.
10. From which it is evident that the ﬁrst two cases are just on the verge between the line
33
==PAGE:36==
7.1
Boundary layer
7
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
100
101
102
103
Re = Uf d/ν
10-2
10-1
100
θ
Case 1
Case 2
Case 3
Case 4
Case 5
Case 6
Case 7
Case 8
Case 9
Figure 10: The variation of Shields parameter θ, and the Reynolds number Re for all cases
indicating the transition to the live-bed regime, which has to be exceeded in order to have
live-bed scour. The rest of the cases have therefore been performed with a larger velocity. The
ensemble averaged free stream velocity u0, along with the ﬁtted analytical expression u0,fitted
for case 1-9 are shown in Fig. 11. The ﬁt between u0 and u0,fitted is improved signiﬁcantly
for case 4-9 compared to case 1-3, which was the intention by developing Program 2 to create
time-varying currents.
7.1
Boundary layer
The velocity proﬁle has been measured for three cases, case 10, case 11 and case 12 in order to
estimate the size of the boundary layer. These cases were chosen so that a signiﬁcant change
would occur in the boundary layer, such that the diﬀerence between the measured velocity would
be noticeable. As there is some scatter in the measurements performed at each depth. The
three cases also cover the range of the performed periods, ranging from minimum to maximum,
as an exception of case 4 which was not chosen due to the large reﬂective wave in the ﬂume
because of its low period.
The measurements of the velocity proﬁles are shown in Fig. 12. The largest deviation of the
measurements for the three cases is seen to be closest to the bed, which is where there are the
most turbulence. The initial bed was ﬂat prior to conducting the tests, but as the measurements
were repeated bed forms started to appear causing an increase in the turbulence. However, the
bed forms were not of any signiﬁcant magnitude for the ﬁrst 5 measurements from which the
measurements closest to the bed were conducted.
The measurements for each depth are seen to be quite consistent, especially for case 11 and
12. The measurements for case 10, however, are more scattered. This scatter can be caused
by the noise in the measured signal, which increases for decreasing periods, as seen from the
34
==PAGE:37==
7
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
7.1
Boundary layer
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
t [s]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
u0 [m/s]
a)
u0
u0,fitted
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
t [s]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
u0 [m/s]
b)
u0
u0,fitted
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
t [s]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
u0 [m/s]
c)
u0
u0,fitted
-20
-10
0
10
20
t [s]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
u0 [m/s]
d)
u0
u0,fitted
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
t [s]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
u0 [m/s]
e)
u0
u0,fitted
-40
-20
0
20
40
t [s]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
u0 [m/s]
f)
u0
u0,fitted
Figure 11: Variation of the ensemble-averaged free stream velocity u0 with the ﬁtted analytical
value u0,fitted for a) case 1, b) case 2, c) case 3, d) case 4, e) case 5, f) case 6, g) case 7, h) case
8 and i) case 9
35
==PAGE:38==
7.1
Boundary layer
7
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
-50
0
50
t [s]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
u0 [m/s]
g)
u0
u0,fitted
-50
0
50
t [s]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
u0 [m/s]
h)
u0
u0,fitted
-200
-100
0
100
200
t [s]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
u0 [m/s]
i)
u0
u0,fitted
Figure 11: Continued.
power spectral densities for case 1-9 in Appendix B. The more noise, the less data points are
left after ﬁltering the measured signal, potentially leading to a larger variation in the maximum
measured velocities.
It is clear from the measurements that the boundary layer is not fully developed for case 4
and case 7 as expected due to their relative short periods. For case 9 a fully developed boundary
layer is seen because of the long period and thereby resembling a steady current case in this
way.
The logarithmic variation of the velocity proﬁle is visible from the measurements, giving an
indication of the boundary layer thickness as this is where the velocity reaches the free stream
velocity, and is constant from that point and upwards. The velocity proﬁle will be compared
with the MatRANS model, and the thickness of the boundary layer will be compared with the
expressions for the boundary layer thickness δ given in Eq. (15) and (16) in the discussion
section, Part IV of the report. The MatRANS model is described in section 9, which follows
this current section.
The averaged velocity proﬁles are shown together, where it is seen that there only are
small diﬀerences between case 10 and 11, which could be caused by the large scatter in the
measurements for case 10.
36
==PAGE:39==
7
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
7.2
Equilibrium scour depth
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
u [m/s]
0
50
100
150
200
250
y [mm]
a)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
u [m/s]
0
50
100
150
200
250
y [mm]
b)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
u [m/s]
0
50
100
150
200
250
y [mm]
c)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
u [m/s]
0
50
100
150
200
250
y [mm]
d)
Case 10
Case 11
Case 12
Figure 12: Measured velocity proﬁle for Um,max for a) case 10, b) case 11 and c) case 12. The
black line is the averaged velocity at each depth, and is shown together for the three cases in
d).
7.2
Equilibrium scour depth
The equilibrium scour depth, and ﬁnal bed proﬁle have been measured for each case, and are
presented in Fig. 13. The bed proﬁle is measured covering an area of approximately 1m×0.9m.
It is evident from Fig. 13, that case 1 is clearly not in the live-bed regime, as stated in the
preceding since θ is below critical, which was seen from Fig. 10. In some of the bed proﬁles
blank spots are seen, which is caused by some of the stones from the slope that have travelled
on to the sand bed, and thereby causing the measurement of the laser to be inaccurate due
to the sleek surface of the stones. The sleek surface causes a reﬂection of light, which causes
measurements inaccuracies for the laser, this is explained more thoroughly at the end of Part
IV.
Case 2 is only barely into the live-bed regime, and no bed-forms are visible from Fig. 13, as
it was only a small fraction of each period which was in the live-bed regime. Again, it is seen
from Fig. 10 that case 2 is just slightly above the line indicating the incipient motion of the
sediment particles.
The magnitude of the velocity was therefore increased on basis of these ﬁrst two cases, so
37
==PAGE:40==
7.3
Temporal variation of scour
7
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
that the rest of the experiments were performed with ﬂows being in the live-bed regime. This
is also seen from the rest of the bed proﬁles, where bed forms are present.
The scour hole is seen to be steepest in front of the pile, where the slope should be equal
to the angle of repose for sand, which is assumed to be 32◦. On the lee-side of the pile the slope
is less steep, which is due to the ﬂow only going in one direction, thereby the horseshoe vortex
is only formed on the front-side of the pile.
The deposition of the sand is seen to be taken further away for an increase of the period,
which is due to the lee-side vortices. The lee-side vortices increases in length behind the pile
for increasing period. Naturally the size of the scour hole also increases for increasing period,
as both the lee-wake vortices groes and also the lifespan and the size of the horseshoe vortex in
front of the pile increases. The size of the horseshoe vortex increases in size due to the increase
in the boundary layer thickness.
The bed forms can be characterised as something in between ripples and dunes, which
is good accordance with the bed being in between hydraulic smooth and hydraulic rough. As
ripples tend to form for ﬁne sediment, when the tractive force slightly exceeds the critical value.
Another parameter for ripples to form is for hydraulically smooth beds, i.e. when the viscous
sub layer is larger than the grain size. An increase of stream power causes the bed forms to
go from ripples to dunes while further increase eventually would give sheet ﬂow on a roughly
plane bed as the bed forms would be washed out entirely.
7.3
Temporal variation of scour
The temporal variation of the scour has been investigated, both with regard to the variation
until equilibrium scour depth Se is reached, and a more comprehensive analysis of the ﬁrst ﬁve
periods.
The reason behind considering multiple periods is that a real life tsunami may well consist of
a leading wave, and then having additional trailing waves. The eﬀective scour time will also be
increased, which can be relevant for considering tsunamis with longer periods. By reaching the
equilibrium scour depth a comparison between the time-varying current and a steady current
can also be performed, as it would be expected for an inﬁnite long period for a time-varying
current to reach a equilibrium scour depth equal to that of a steady current, i.e. S0/D = 1.3.
The results of the temporal scour variation until equilibrium scour depth is reached are
shown in Fig. 14. The number of periods to reach equilibrium scour depth varies a bit for
the considered periods, but is reached between 35 −50 periods. The state of equilibrium scour
depth was decided on the basis that the scour hole did not change signiﬁcantly when analysing
the recordings of the GoPro camera placed inside the pile. However the scour depth did not
seize to change. This is seen from Fig. 14, where the scour stabilizes, but still varies a bit. This
is due to the expansion of the scour hole, as the angle of repose is reached, and sand starts to
slide into the scour hole.
The equilibrium scour depth is not very relevant in tsunami aspect as the likelihood of
having between 35 and 50 periods is very small. However, the equilibrium scour depth could
become relevant in the case of a tsunami hitting an area where some scour already has occurred
or for very shallow waters. The latter is perhaps not relevant when studying scour around
slender piles such as a monopile, as wind farms using monopiles usually are installed at water
depths ranging from 15 −30 m.
The increase of the period causes a signiﬁcant increase in the amount of scour occurring
after the ﬁrst period, ranging from approximately S/D = 0.1 for case 4 to S/D = 0.3. This
clearly shows the importance of the period, as the scouring time, when taken as a fraction of
the time within a period, is approximately the same regardless of the experimental case studied.
38
==PAGE:41==
7
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
7.3
Temporal variation of scour
This behaviour is clearly a result of having an approximate identical velocity.
The results of the measured scour propagation within the ﬁrst 5 periods are shown in Fig.
15. The scour depth at the front side of the pile is seen to be largest in most cases, and this
can be explained by the ampliﬁcation factor of the bed shear stresses underneath the horseshoe
vortex, which Sumer and Fredsøe (2002) have found to be as large as a factor 11 at the front
side of the pile, and only a factor of 5 in front of the pile.
The time series of the scour process for case 4-9 has been recorded by a GoPro camera
placed inside the pile. The frame of every 2 seconds have been analysed for case 4-8, and for
case 9 every 5 second. For case 4-6 a reﬂected ﬂow in the ﬂume was observed and this reﬂected
ﬂow have therefore also been analysed.
The time series of the scour development in the front of the pile is presented in Fig. 15,
where the reﬂected ﬂow for case 4 and 5 does not cause any backﬁlling, as this area is somewhat
protected by the pile. The time series of the scour development in front side of the pile is
presented in Fig. 16, where it is evident that the most substantial amount of scour occurs, as
explained in the above. The reﬂected ﬂow for case 4 and 5 has a signiﬁcant impact of the scour
depth at the front side of the pile, as the reﬂected ﬂow causes backﬁlling of the scour hole. This
backﬁlling is most severe for case 5.
The ﬁgures showing the temporal variation for the ﬁrst ﬁve periods generally shows a cu-
mulative process i.e. the leading wave creates a large amount of scour followed by additional
build-up of the scour depth by the following successive periods.
The temporal variation of the scour hole until equilibrium scour depth is reached, shows
the build up of the scour hole, and how the variation of the scour hole slowly decays in size for
increasing periods. The build-up of the scour depth caused by the ﬁrst 10 periods are much
more severe than for the remaining periods. The build-up of the scour depth is very slow after
the ﬁrst 10 periods, which is in accordance with the prediction formulas for temporal scour
variation.
The equilibrium scour depth is unlikely to happen in a tsunami event the scour depth
reached after the ﬁrst 5 periods are more realistic to consider. As seen from the ﬁgures over
50 % of the equilibrium scour depth is reached after the ﬁrst 5 periods. This scour depth is
potentially devastating for a monopile, as this would correspond to a scour depth of approxi-
mately 2−4 m when taking the results obtained in this report, and a monopile with a diameter
of D = 6 m. However, in the case of very long tsunami events combined with shallow water,
the scour process will resemble that of a steady current as the boundary layer thickness will
span the entire water column thus resulting in a larger equilibrium scour depth. And even
though equilibrium scour depth may not be reached in such an event, the temporal scour depth
increases much faster, which is evident from the performed experimental cases showed in this
report.
It should be noted that there are small deviations of the variation of the scour depth until
equilibrium scour depth is reached and the variation for the ﬁrst ﬁve periods. This is caused
by the method of analysing the scour depth, from which small variations could occur. These
variation could be caused by not analysing the exact same spot for the two time-series, as well
as the level of the sand has to be found from a subjective point of view, which potentially
can cause small errors. Furthermore, the calibration could also cause some deviation in the
measurements.
There are also a discrepancy between the equilibrium scour depth given in Table 2, and the
equilibrium scour depth in Fig. 14. This could be caused by the sand level being a bit higher
just in front of the pile, than a couple of millimetres away from the pile, as the sand was seen
to pile up against the pile. Another explanation could be that the laser measuring the ﬁnal
39
==PAGE:42==
7.3
Temporal variation of scour
7
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
bed-proﬁle had some measurement inaccuracies making it diﬃcult to determine what was the
scour hole, and what was inaccuracies caused by the laser.
The potential sources of error are discussed in more detail in Part IV of the report.
40
==PAGE:43==
7
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
7.3
Temporal variation of scour
-0.2
0.8
a)
0
z [m]
0.4
0.2
0.6
0.2
y [m]
x [m]
0.4
0
0.2
-0.2
-0.4
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
[m]
-0.2
0.8
0.6
b)
0
z [m]
0.4
0.2
0.6
0.2
x [m]
y [m]
0.4
0
0.2
-0.2
-0.4
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
[m]
-0.2
0.8
c)
0
z [m]
0.4
0.2
0.6
0.2
y [m]
x [m]
0.4
0
0.2
-0.2
-0.4
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
[m]
Figure 13: Final bed proﬁle for a) case 1, b) case 2, c) case 3, d) case 4, e) case 5, f) case 6, g)
case 7, h) case 8 and i) case 9.
41
==PAGE:44==
7.3
Temporal variation of scour
7
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
-0.2
0.8
0
d)
0.6
z [m]
0.2
0.6
0.4
y [m]
x [m]
0.2
0.4
0
0.2
-0.2
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
[m]
-0.2
0.8
0
0.6
z [m]
e)
0.2
0.6
0.4
y [m]
x [m]
0.2
0.4
0
0.2
-0.2
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
[m]
-0.2
0.8
0
0.6
z [m]
f)
0.2
0.6
0.4
y [m]
x [m]
0.2
0.4
0
0.2
-0.2
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
[m]
Figure 13: Continued
42
==PAGE:45==
7
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
7.3
Temporal variation of scour
-0.2
0.8
0
0.6
z [m]
g)
0.2
0.6
0.4
y [m]
x [m]
0.2
0.4
0
0.2
-0.2
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
[m]
-0.2
0.8
0
0.6
z [m]
h)
0.2
0.6
0.4
y [m]
x [m]
0.2
0.4
0
0.2
-0.2
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
[m]
-0.2
0.8
0
0.6
z [m]
i)
0.2
0.6
0.4
y [m]
x [m]
0.2
0.4
0
0.2
-0.2
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
[m]
Figure 13: Continued
43
==PAGE:46==
7.3
Temporal variation of scour
7
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
0
10
20
30
40
50
t/T
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
S/D
a)
Front
Side
0
10
20
30
40
t/T
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
S/D
b)
Front
Side
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
t/T
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
S/D
c)
Front
Side
0
10
20
30
40
50
t/T
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
S/D
d)
Front
Side
0
10
20
30
40
50
t/T
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
S/D
e)
Front
Side
0
10
20
30
40
t/T
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
S/D
f)
Front
Side
Figure 14: Temporal scour depth variation period by period for a) case 4, b) case 5, c) case 6 ,
d) case 7, e) case 8 and f) case 9.
44
==PAGE:47==
7
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
7.3
Temporal variation of scour
0
1
2
3
4
5
t/T
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
S/D
a)
Incoming flow
Reflected flow
0
1
2
3
4
5
t/T
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
S/D
b)
Incoming flow
Reflected flow
0
1
2
3
4
5
t/T
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
S/D
c)
Incoming flow
Reflected flow
0
1
2
3
4
5
t/T
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
S/D
d)
Incoming flow
0
1
2
3
4
5
t/T
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
S/D
e)
Incoming flow
0
1
2
3
4
5
t/T
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
S/D
Incoming flow
Figure 15: Temporal scour depth variation for the ﬁrst 5 periods, measured just in front of
the pile for a) case 4, b) case 5, c) case 6 , d) case 7, e) case 8 and f) case 9. For case 4 and
case 5 the reﬂected ﬂow created in the ﬂume due to their short periods, have been shown as it
inﬂuenced the scour hole formation.
45
==PAGE:48==
7.3
Temporal variation of scour
7
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
0
1
2
3
4
5
t/T
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
S/D
a)
Incoming flow
Reflected flow
0
1
2
3
4
5
t/T
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
S/D
b)
Incoming flow
Reflected flow
0
1
2
3
4
5
t/T
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
S/D
c)
Incoming flow
Reflected flow
0
1
2
3
4
5
t/T
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
S/D
d)
Incoming flow
0
1
2
3
4
5
t/T
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
S/D
e)
Incoming flow
0
1
2
3
4
5
t/T
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
S/D
f)
Incoming flow
Figure 16: Temporal scour depth variation for the ﬁrst 5 periods, measured on the front side
of the pile for a) case 4, b) case 5, c) case 6 , d) case 7, e) case 8 and f) case 9. For case 4 and
case 5 the reﬂected wave created in the ﬂume due to their short periods, hhave been shown as
it inﬂuenced the scour hole formation.
46
==PAGE:49==
8
CFD MODEL DESCRIPTION
Part III
Numerical Studies
8
CFD Model description
The CFD model used in this project is developed by Bjarke Eltard-Larsen, and is described in
Larsen et al. (2016). The model will be described in the following. The description is similar
to that given by Larsen et al. (2016).
The model is a fully-coupled hydrodynamic and morphologic numerical model. The model
is based on solutions to the Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes equations, coupled with κ −ω
turbulence closure, with additional bed and suspended load descriptions forming the bases for
sea bed morphology. The hydrodynamic and turbulence model will be describe ﬁrst, and then
the sediment transport and morphological model is described.
8.1
Hydrodynamic and turbulence model description
The ﬂow is simulated by solving the incompressible Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes equations
(RANS) and the continuity equation, coupled with a two-equation k-ω turbulence model for
closure. The continuity equation and the RANS equations are, respectively, given in (37) and
(38):
∂ui
∂xi
= 0,
(37)
∂ui
∂t + uj
∂ui
∂xj
= −1
ρ
∂p
∂xj
+ ∂
∂xj

2νSji −τij
ρ

,
(38)
where ui are the mean components of the velocities, xi are the Cartesian coordinates, p is the
pressure, t is the time, Sij is the mean strain rate tensor given by
Sij = 1
2
∂ui
∂xj
+ ∂uj
∂xi

,
(39)
and τij is the Reynolds stress tensor, which is expressed according to the Boussinesq approxi-
mation
τij = u
′
iu
′
j = 2νTSij −2
3kδij.
(40)
Here the overbar signiﬁes time (ensemble) averaging, νT is the eddy viscosity, δij is the Kronecker
delta, and
k = 1
2u
′
iu
′
i
(41)
is the turbulent kinetic energy density. In the above a prime superscript denotes turbulent
(ﬂuctuating) velocity components.
To achieve closure, the k-ω turbulence model by Wilcox (2006, 2008) will be utilized. This
model includes the following transport equations for the turbulent kinetic energy density k and
the speciﬁc dissipation rate ω:
∂k
∂t + uj
∂k
∂xj
= τij
ui
xj
−β∗kω + ∂
∂xj

ν + σ∗k
ω
 ∂k
∂xj

,
(42)
∂ω
∂t + uj
∂ω
∂xj
= αω
k τij
∂ui
∂xj
−βω2 + σd
ω
∂k
∂xj
∂ω
∂xj
+ ∂
∂xj

ν + σ k
ω
 ∂ω
∂xj

.
(43)
47
==PAGE:50==
8.1
Hydrodynamic and turbulence model description
8
CFD MODEL DESCRIPTION
The closure coeﬃcients are given as α = 0.52, β = 0.078, β∗= 0.09, σ = 0.5, σ∗= 0.6,
σdo = 0.125, and
σd = H
 ∂k
∂xj
∂ω
∂xj

σdo
(44)
where H (·) is the Heaveside step function, which takes a value of unity if the argument is
positive and zero otherwise.
In this model the eddy viscosity, which is present in the Reynolds stress tensor via the
Boussinesq approximation, is given by
νT = k
˜ω,
(45)
with ˜ω deﬁned according to:
˜ω = max
"
ω, Clim
s
2SijSij
β∗
#
,
(46)
where the second part of the expression is a stress limiting feature, with Clim = 7/8.
The computational domain is discretized into ﬁnite volumes of quadrilateral blocks in vary-
ing shapes and dimensions. The calculation domain, unless otherwise stated, has the following
dimensions: length, l = 20D, width, w = 15D, and height, h = 2D, in which D is the monopile
diameter. The total number of cells comprising the computational domains utilized is 170.496
with the bed cells having a height O(d), in which d is the grain size diameter. The monopile is
located at the center of the domain (x, y) = (0, 0). As an indication of computational expense,
a fully coupled hydrodynamic and morphological calculation lasting 1 min. of physical time for
the three-dimensional scour around a vertical pile problem requires approximately 10 full days
of CPU time, when simulated in parallel on eight modern processors. It is emphasized that
considerable eﬀort has been put into optimizing the computational mesh for the best grid and
time convergence.
Boundary conditions
The boundary conditions for the hydrodynamical model are as fol-
lows: The friction wall boundaries, which are the monopile and the seabed, will have a no-slip
condition imposed so that velocities are zero. The top boundary will be modelled as a fric-
tionless lid meaning that vertical velocities are set to zero, and horizontal velocities and scalar
hydrodynamic quantities have zero gradient.
This means that the top boundary does not
represent the free surface of real waves.
The bottom and the monopile surface will be modelled utilizing a generalized wall function
approach. The friction velocity is determined from the tangential velocity at the nearest cell
center.
u
Uf
= 2
Z y+
c
0
dy+
1 + [1 + 4κ2(y+ + ∆y+
cc)2C]1/2,
(47)
C = [1 −exp(−(y+ + ∆y+
cc)/25)]2,
(48)
∆y+
cc = 0.9
p
k+
s −k+
s exp

−k+
s
6

,
(49)
who generalized the van Driest (1956) proﬁle to incorporate potential roughness eﬀects, with
y+
c = ycUf/ν. The boundary conditions for k and ω are then as described by Fuhrman et al.
(2014)
k
U 2
f
= min

A∆y+2,
1
√β∗

,
(50)
48
==PAGE:51==
8
CFD MODEL DESCRIPTION
8.2
Sediment transport and morphological models
ων
U 2
f
= max

B
∆y+2,
1
√β∗κ∆y+

.
(51)
The ﬁrst arguments in these functions ensure that these variables follow their proper scaling
k ∼y2 and ω ∼1/y2 for near wall cells within the viscous sub-layer, see (Wilcox, 2006).
The values A = 1/(δ+2√β∗) = 0.02466 and B = δ+/(√β∗κ) = 96.885 are utilized, which
ensure a continuous transition to the (fully-turbulent) second arguments at ∆y+ = δ+, where
δ+ = 11.626 is taken as the viscous sub-layer thickness (in dimensionless wall coordinates).
Reasonably, similar boundary conditions for k and ω have been used by Liang and Cheng
(2005a,b) in simulating scour around a pipeline.
The ﬂow is driven by a Dirichlet condition, i.e. the velocity is speciﬁed at the left-hand inlet
boundary, which comes from a separate one-dimensional vertical (1DV) pure boundary layer
simulation, utilizing the same model as described above. In this boundary layer simulation the
ﬂow is driven by a body force which will be speciﬁed in the description of the simulated cases.
From here the velocity proﬁle, as well as the proﬁles for k and ω, are sampled and utilized
as inlet boundary conditions within the scour simulations. Through this approach the special
characteristics of the boundary layer are incorporated directly within the driving inlet ﬂow.
8.2
Sediment transport and morphological models
In this section the sediment transport and morphological models are described. The description
will only include the most essential details since the implementation of the models have already
been described and discussed by Jacobsen (2011), as well as in the recent publication of Jacobsen
et al. (2014).
The model for the bed-load transport corresponds to that of Roulund et al. (2005), who
extended the model of Engelund and Fredsøe (1976) to also include three-dimensional eﬀects
as well as bed-slope modiﬁcations to the Shields parameter.
The suspended load is calculated by solving the advection-diﬀusion equation for the con-
centration, see (Deigaard and Fredsøe, 1992) [p. 238]:
∂c
∂t + (uj −wsδj3) ∂c
∂xj
=
∂
∂xj

(ν + βsνT) ∂c
∂xj

,
(52)
where c is the suspended sediment concentration, ws is the settling velocity, and βs = 1 is
utilized, meaning that the sediment diﬀusivity takes the same value as the eddy viscosity. The
settling velocity is calculated by the approach given in Deigaard and Fredsøe (1992) which is
based on the drag coeﬃcient of the falling sediment grains.
Equation (52) is solved on a sub-set of the main computational mesh where the near-bed
cells below a given reference level b are removed. Typically, a value of b ≈2d, see (Deigaard and
Fredsøe, 1992) is used. At this reference level a reference concentration, cb, boundary condition
is imposed. There are several formulations of cb but here the one by Deigaard and Fredsøe
(1992) is utilized. The concentration at the reference level is given by
cb(θ) =
c0
(1 + 1/λb)3,
(53)
in which c0 = 0.6 is the maximum value for the concentration, and the linear concentration λb
is
λ2
b =
κ2α2
1
0.013sθ

θ −θc −π
6 µdpEF

.
(54)
where
pEF =
"
1 +

πµd
6(θ −θc)
4#−1
4
(55)
49
==PAGE:52==
8.3
Morphological model
8
CFD MODEL DESCRIPTION
and
θ =
τb
ρg(s −1)d =
U 2
f
(s −1)gd
(56)
is the Shields parameter. Throughout the present work the coeﬃcient of dynamic friction is set
to µd = 0.51 and the critical Shields parameter θc is computed from a base value θc0 = 0.05,
accounting for bed-slope, eﬀects as in Roulund et al. (2005).
Following Fuhrman et al. (2014), a reference level of b = α1d = 3.5d is utilized. This is quite
similar to the value b = 3.6d utilized by Liang and Cheng (2005a).
The above formulation of cb is dependent on the θ and in the case where θ = 0, cb will also be
0. Since all the sediment cannot settle at once, but settles depending on the fall velocity there
will be an accumulation of sediment in the lowest computational cell. To prevent un-physical
”overloading” conditions i.e. where the concentration just above the bed exceeds cb calculated
from the reference concentration formula, the solution suggested by Justesen et al. (1986) is
invoked. That is, if the concentration close to the bed exceeds the reference concentration,
the value is in practice taken from the cell adjacent to the boundary. At the top and pipeline
boundaries a zero-ﬂux condition for c is utilized.
8.3
Morphological model
The morphological updating routine is based on the sediment continuity (Exner) equation
∂h
∂t =
1
1 −n

−∂qBi
∂xi
+ D + E

,
i = 1, 2
(57)
where n = 0.4 is the bed porosity and
D = (ws −u3)cb,
E = (ν + βsνT) ∂c
∂x3

x3=b
(58)
are the deposition and erosion coming from the suspended sediment model. The Exner equation
is based on instantaneous sediment transport ﬁelds and therefore the morphological and hydro-
dynamic times are equivalent. The interpolation of the computed bed level change in the face
centres on the bed to the vertices for the boundary condition for the mesh motion (also on the
bed) needs special attention. The inverse linear interpolation scheme is used, as this uniquely
preserves mass. For more speciﬁc details regarding the evaluation of (57) the interested reader
is referred to Jacobsen et al. (2014).
To ensure that the bed slopes do not exceed the angle of repose the sand slide model
described in detail by Roulund et al. (2005) is implemented. In the present work, this model
is activated at positions where the local bed angle exceeds the angle of repose φs = 32◦, and is
de-activated once the local bed angle has been reduced to 31.9◦.
The equations comprising the fully-coupled model outlined above are solved numerically
using the open-source CFD toolbox OpenFOAM R⃝, 1 version 1.6-ext, making use of a ﬁnite
volume spatial discretization with a collocated variable arrangement, in conjunction with a
standard PISO algorithm.
Again, for further details see Jacobsen et al. (2014).
As noted
previously, the fully-coupled model presented above has also been utilized recently by Fuhrman
et al. (2014) and Larsen et al. (2016) in the simulation wave-induced and wave-plus-current-
induced scour beneath submarine pipelines, as well as by Baykal et al. (2015) who simulated the
current-induced scour process around a vertical monopile cylinder. The hydrodynamic model
can likewise be considered a single-phase variant of the two-phase (air-water) model presented
in Jacobsen et al. (2012).
1OpenFOAM R⃝is a registered trade mark of OpenCFD Limited, the producer of the OpenFOAM software.
50
==PAGE:53==
9
MATRANS DESCRIPTION
9
MatRANS description
The MatRANS model is based on the same hydrodynamic and turbulence model as described
in the preceding, however, it is a one-dimensional vertical model. The MatRANS model solves
simpliﬁed versions of the horizontal component of the incompressible Reynolds-averaged Navier-
Stokes (RANS) equations, combined with the two-equation κ −ω turbulence closure model of
Wilcox (2006) and Wilcox (2008). The boundary conditions are as follows: A frictionless rigid
lid is imposed at the top boundary, whereby the vertical velocities will be set to zero. The
bottom boundary is considered a friction wall, and a no-slip boundary condition is applied
here, i.e. the velocity variables u and v are set to zero.
At the bottom a zero-gradient condition is utilized for the turbulent kinetic energy density
k i.e dk/dy = 0, which corresponds to a zero ﬂux of turbulent kinetic energy through the sea
bed.
The form of the bottom boundary condition for the speciﬁc dissipation rate ω is adopted
from Wilcox (2006), where
ω = U 2
f
ν SR, y = 0.
(59)
For a more comprehensive description of the MatRANS model, the reader is referred to Fuhrman
et al. (2013).
51
==PAGE:54==
==PAGE:55==
10
CFD MODEL RESULTS
10
CFD Model Results
Simulations using an advanced fully coupled CFD model have been performed in order to
study tsunami-induced scour around a slender pile. The applied CFD model for this case was
described in the previous section 8, and the results obtained regarding the temporal variation
of the scour depth for the ﬁrst few periods will now be presented.
The dimensional and dimensionless parameters for the simulated case are shown in Table
3. In the later sections of the report the results from both the model and experiments will be
compared. This section solely shows the results obtained from the CFD model. The number of
simulated periods are quite few, which is due to the extensive computational time for the CFD
model.
Table 3: Period and the velocity magnitude of the simulated case, along with the number of
simulated periods
Case
T [s]
Um [m/s]
Smin/D for T1
Smin/D for T2
No. of simulated periods
A
150
0.40
0.189
0.266
2
The temporal scour variation for the number of simulated periods, is shown in Fig. 17 a).
The scour depth just in front of the pile, and the largest scour depth, Smin, are presented in this
ﬁgure. It is seen that the scour deepens in a step-wise fashion during each successive period
i.e. the scour process is taken to be cumulative similarly to that seen from the experiments.
The ﬁrst tsunami wave causes a substantial amount of scour, while the second successive wave
causes less than half of the amount compared to the ﬁrst. This is clearly seen in Fig. 17 and
from Table 3.
time
0
100
200
300
S/D
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
a)
Front
Smin
-5
0
5
-0.5
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
b)
Figure 17: a) Temporal scour variation for the 2 simulated periods for case A. b) Development
of scour hole after all computed periods for a) case A
The proﬁle of the scour hole after the last simulated period is shown in Fig. 17 b). From
the ﬁgure it is seen that the formation of the scour hole is asymmetric due to the use of solitary
waves. A large amount of scour has occurred at the front side of the pile, while only a small
amount of erosion and deposition has happened at the lee-side of the pile. This was also seen
from the experiments, however, after many successive periods the scour hole will also form at
53
==PAGE:56==
10
CFD MODEL RESULTS
the lee-side of the pile creating a more symmetrical hole, but maintaining a steeper slope in
front of the pile than in the back of the pile as the ﬂow is only in one direction.
The simulated scour after each period for case A will be compared with the measured scour
from Fig.15 and 16 in the discussion section in Part IV.
54
==PAGE:57==
11
COMPARISON OF EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS WITH PREDICTION MODEL
Part IV
Discussion
In the previous sections, the experimental and numerical results including the boundary layer
thickness, the equilibrium scour depth and the temporal variation of the scour have been pre-
sented. This part intends to give an analytical and critical review of these results, as well as a
comparison of the numerical and experimental results.
This discussion will concern two main parts, one which focuses on how the tsunami-induced
scour resembles that of a steady current. In this part the equilibrium scour and the temporal
development will be investigated and compared with a practical model for predicting tsunami-
induced scour proposed by Larsen et al. (2016). This model resembles the well known expression
of steady-current scour, but accounts for the eﬀective scouring time in each period, as well as
incorporating the ﬁnite boundary layer thickness into account.
The other part concerns the comparison between the experimental and numerical results
including the velocity inside the boundary layer as well as the temporal variation of the scour
depth for the two simulated periods performed with the CFD model. It is of great interest to
see if the numerical models capture the physics from the experiments adequately, as this will
show whether or not the concepts of tsunami-induced scour are well understood.
11
Comparison of experimental results with prediction
model
The ﬁrst part of the discussion will concern a comparison with a practical model for predicting
tsunami-induced scour. This model is developed by Larsen et al. (2016), and is shown in Eq.
(60)
S
D predicted = Se
D

1 −exp

−ts
Ts

, ts = nψT
(60)
in which ts accounts for the eﬀective scour time in a period, and n represents the period, i.e.
n = 1 will be the leading wave, with n = 2, 3 the accumulated scour of successive waves can be
calculated. The model utilizes existing physical scour process knowledge, while incorporating
additional insight gained from the numerical simulations of tsunami-induced scour around a
slender pile in Larsen et al. (2016). The model resembles the known expression for the temporal
development of the scour process, given in Eq. (22). The factor ψ ≤1 is taken to represent the
eﬀective scouring fraction of a period. This factor is thus very important when predicting the
temporal scour variation. The equilibrium scour depth Se used in the formulae is determined
from Eq. (33), as this formulation incorporates the boundary layer thickness into determining
the equilibrium scour depth.
The practical model has its basis in steady-current scour i.e. it is developed upon existing
experimentally-based expressions used for steady-current scour. Then by invoking the ﬁnite
boundary layer size it incorporates the both current-like and wave-like features of a tsunami,
i.e. by having an inﬁnite long period the equilibrium scour depth should be the same as for a
steady-current S0/D = 1.3.
In Fig. 18 the measured equilibrium scour depth for case 1-9 including the live-bed steady-
current case is shown together with the predicted scour depth with use of the practical model.
The increase of the period results in an increase in the equilibrium scour, and for very long
periods, i.e. case 9 where T = 497 s, the equilibrium scour depth approaches the value of
steady-current. So the model fairly accurately predicts the equilibrium scour depth, and by
invoking a very long period the depth should resemble that of steady current which is seen to
55
==PAGE:58==
11
COMPARISON OF EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS WITH PREDICTION MODEL
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
(S/D)measured
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
(S/D)predicted
Case 1
Case 2
Case 3
Case 4
Case 5
Case 6
Case 7
Case 8
Case 9
Steady Current
Figure 18:
Non-dimensional predicted equilibrium scour depth plotted against the non-
dimensional measured equilibrium scour depth for case 1-9, including a steady current case.
be the case. Furthermore, the range of Se/D from which it was possible to conduct experiments
is seen in Fig. 18. It was not possible to have periods lower than that of case 4 (T = 72 s),
because of the reﬂected water in the ﬂume, and longer periods than case 9 would more or less
be steady-current scour.
It is important to have a good practical model for engineering practice, as it is not always
feasible in practice to perform advanced fully-coupled CFD simulations of tsunami-induced
scour nor providing an experimental test set-up to investigate possible tsunami-induced scour.
In the following an investigation is made for ﬁnding a suitable value of ψ when using the
practical model for the cases studied in this report, and which should be applicable for other
studies using a solitary wave for studying tsunami-induced scour.
Temporal scour variation
The temporal scour variation is mostly interesting for the ﬁrst few periods, as a tsunami is not
likely to have 50 successive periods, which was the approximate number of periods needed to
reach equilibrium scour depth as found in the preceding. The ﬁrst ﬁve periods will thus be
taken into account when comparing the simple prediction model with the experimental results.
56
==PAGE:59==
11
COMPARISON OF EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS WITH PREDICTION MODEL
Table 4: Estimated value of ψ
Case
ψ
4
0.104
5
0.090
6
0.148
7
0.124
8
0.108
9
0.076
µ
0.1086
σ
0.025
Estimating ψ
The value of ψ is estimated prior to the comparison, as this variable takes the
eﬀective scouring time of each period into account. This value has been found by minimizing
the relative error between the expression given in Eq. (60), and the measured data for each
case.
E = S/Dmeasured −S/Dpredicted
S/Dpredicted
(61)
In Table 4, the value of ψ for each case is shown, along with the mean and the standard
deviation. The mean value is used in the following, to compare the temporal variation of the
scour process. In Fig. 19, the comparison of the measured data with the prediction formula
with diﬀerent values of ψ is shown, in order to show the eﬀect of ψ on the predicted temporal
variation of the scour process. Using the mean value of ψ = 0.1086, the temporal variation has
been calculated, and is shown together with the measured scour depth in Fig. 20. The mean
value of ψ is quite small, compared to that found by Larsen et al. (2016) (ψ = 1/3). However,
this was value was found from simulations performed using a sinusoidal wave which then should
cause the diﬀerence. A small value of ψ was expected, as the scouring only occurs for a small
fraction of the period, which was evident from the experimental results regarding the temporal
variation of the scour shown in Fig. 15 and Fig. 16.
A quite good ﬁt between the predicted and the measured value is apparent, however, the
formula tends to over-predict the scour depth. For case 4 and 5, this could be explained by the
backﬁlling which was observed due to the reﬂection of the water in the ﬂume. This lead to a
smaller scour depth than would have been observed without the reﬂection.
The simple prediction model predicts the scour variation and the equilibrium scour depth
consistently well for all the compared cases. The eﬀect of the ﬁnite boundary layer is incor-
porated well, and for the case of steady-current where this eﬀect is negligible is also captured
well by the model. For case 7 and 8 (Fig. 20 d-f) the model under-predicts the scour depth for
the ﬁrst two periods, and then over-predicts it for the next 3, this behaviour indicates that the
measured temporal scour depth occurs slower than the predicted, which also evident for case 9
(Fig. 20 e). This eﬀect would probably be even more pronounced if more periods were included
in the comparison. However, a clear pattern is not seen for all the periods, e.g. case 5 the
measured scour depth is a bit larger than the predicted but this diﬀerence is quite consistent
for all 5 periods showing a similar variation of the build-up of the scour hole.
57
==PAGE:60==
11
COMPARISON OF EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS WITH PREDICTION MODEL
0
1
2
3
4
5
t/T
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
S/D
a)
Front
Side
ψ = 0.06
ψ = 0.08
ψ = 0.1
ψ = 0.12
0
1
2
3
4
5
t/T
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
S/D
b)
Front
Side
ψ = 0.06
ψ = 0.08
ψ = 0.1
ψ = 0.12
0
1
2
3
4
5
t/T
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
S/D
c)
Front
Side
ψ = 0.06
ψ = 0.08
ψ = 0.1
ψ = 0.12
0
1
2
3
4
5
t/T
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
S/D
d)
Front
Side
ψ = 0.06
ψ = 0.08
ψ = 0.1
ψ = 0.12
0
1
2
3
4
5
t/T
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
S/D
e)
Front
Side
ψ = 0.06
ψ = 0.08
ψ = 0.1
ψ = 0.12
0
1
2
3
4
5
t/T
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
S/D
f)
Front
Side
ψ = 0.06
ψ = 0.08
ψ = 0.1
ψ = 0.12
Figure 19: Measured scour depth along with the predicted value. Shown with diﬀerent values
of ψ, for the ﬁrst ﬁve periods. a) case 4, b) case 5, c) case 6, d) case 7, e) case 8, f) case 9.
58
==PAGE:61==
11
COMPARISON OF EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS WITH PREDICTION MODEL
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
(S/D)measured
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
(S/D)predicted
a)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
(S/D)measured
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
(S/D)predicted
b)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
(S/D)measured
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
(S/D)predicted
c)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
(S/D)measured
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
(S/D)predicted
d)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
(S/D)measured
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
(S/D)predicted
e)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
(S/D)measured
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
(S/D)predicted
f)
Figure 20: Measured scour depth along with the predicted value, for ψ = 0.1086 for the ﬁrst
ﬁve periods. a) case 4, b) case 5, c) case 6, d) case 7, e) case 8, f) case 9.
59
==PAGE:62==
12
COMPARISON OF EXPERIMENTAL AND NUMERICAL RESULTS
12
Comparison of experimental and numerical results
The second part of the discussion concerns a comparison between the numerical and the exper-
imental results. This comparison includes the temporal scour variation and the boundary layer
thickness. The equilibrium scour depth has not been possible to compare, because of the long
computation time of the CFD model and the large number of periods to reach it.
The boundary layer data will be compared ﬁrst, followed by a comparison of the temporal
variation.
Boundary layer thickness
The boundary layer has been measured for case 10, 11 and 12, as these cases represents the
interval of periods used to conduct experiments. These cases were performed with the same
input to Program 2 as case 5, 7 and 9, and are thus replica of these cases. However, there is
some discrepancy between the measured velocity using the pitot tubes and the micro-propeller
which will be described further at the end of this section.
The measurements of the boundary layer were presented in the preceding, and are shown in
Fig. 22 along with the results obtained with use of MatRANS. The boundary layer thickness
calculated from Eq. (16) is shown to mark the predicted boundary layer thickness.
A good agreement between the measured and predicted boundary layer thickness is seen,
proving that MatRANS, and thus the CFD model, captures the boundary layer dynamics well.
This also proves the notion of the boundary layer of a tsunami not necessarily spans the entire
water column as discussed by Williams et al. (2016). Moving to shallow water the boundary
layer will span the entire water column, but at water depth were wind farms are located, i.e. up
to water depths ranging from aroud 15−30 m, the ﬁnite boundary layer thickness is important
as this leads to less scour than for a boundary layer spanning the entire water column i.e.
steady-current situation.
As explained in the beginning of the report, the size of the boundary layer is probably the
most important aspect of scour and sediment transport in general, as the boundary layer is of
great importance for bringing sediment in suspension above the seabed and further as explained
by Deigaard and Fredsøe (1992). Furthermore the boundary layer creates the horseshoe vortex
when it is separated due to the adverse pressure gradient induced by the structure.
The
horseshoe vortex increases with increasing boundary layer thickness, thus leading to larger
scour holes.
The eﬀect of the boundary layer thickness on the equilibrium scour depth is shown in
Fig. 21, where the measured equilibrium scour depth for case 1-9 is shown as a function of
the predicted boundary layer thickness, which has shown to be in good agreement with the
measured boundary layer thickness. The expression given in Eq. (33), which is the black line
in Fig. 21, predicts the equilibrium scour depth very well.
Temporal scour variation
The temporal scour variation for period 1-5 will now be compared to the scour depth computed
by the CFD model. This comparison will be made for case 8 of the experimental results and
for the simulated case. It would have been desirable to have had simulated at least 5 periods
for case A, so that the comparison between model and experiments could have been made on
a better basis. However, due to extensive computation expense and limited time, this was not
possible within the deadline of the project.
The temporal scour is compared both at the front and at the front side in Fig. 23. The model
predicts the scour reasonably well, however, there are some small discrepancies between the
60
==PAGE:63==
12
COMPARISON OF EXPERIMENTAL AND NUMERICAL RESULTS
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
δ/D
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Se/S0
1-exp(-0.9 δ/D)
Case 1
Case 2
Case 3
Case 4
Case 5
Case 6
Case 7
Case 8
Case 9
Figure 21: The variation of the ratio between measured equilibrium scour depth and steady
current value for equilibrium scour depth, Se/S0, as a function of the predicted boundary layer
thickness, δ, for all cases.
period and velocity of the compared cases. These diﬀerences are fairly small, as the diﬀerence
in the period is 2 s and the diﬀerence in the magnitude of the velocity is 0.02 m/s.
The
match between the experimental and numerical data is quite well, showing that the CFD model
adequately captures the physics of the experiments. The eﬀective scouring time is also seen to
be captured consistently well by the model, for both the front and the front side of the pile.
The model predicts a larger scour at the front of the pile than measured. After the second
period the results are almost identical for the front.
The measured scour depth at the front side of the pile is slightly larger than the simulated.
61
==PAGE:64==
12
COMPARISON OF EXPERIMENTAL AND NUMERICAL RESULTS
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
u [m/s]
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
y [m]
a)
δ
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
u [m/s]
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
y [m]
δ
b)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
u [m/s]
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
y [m]
c)
δ
Figure 22: Velocity proﬁles for a) case 5, b) case 7 and c) case 9. The red circles are measure-
ments, and the black line is the velocity proﬁle from MatRANS
62
==PAGE:65==
13
SOURCES OF ERROR
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
t/T
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
S/D
a)
Model
Measured
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
t/T
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
S/D
b)
Model
Measured
Figure 23: Time-series of the measured and simulated scour variation. a) in front of the pile,
and b) at the front-side of the pile.
13
Sources of error
The last part of the discussion concerns a discussion of potential sources of error causing dis-
crepancies in the results. The sources of error include a thorough assessment of the discrepancy
between the measured velocity using the pitot tubes and the micro propeller. A discussion of
laser used to measure the equilibrium scour depth is also performed.
The pitot tubes measure a slightly higher velocity than the micro propeller, so when using
the data from the pitot tubes, the mean velocity is calculated based on that measured by the
pitot tubes. The diﬀerence of the measured velocity between case 5 and case 10, and that of
case 7 and case 11, could be explained by one or more of the following.
Calibration of the pitot tubes
The pitot tubes have to measure very small diﬀerences in
the pressure. The diﬀerence in pressure taken as mm water column is approximately 8 mm for
a velocity of 0.40 m/s. Therefore, when calibrating the pressure transducer in mm it potentially
leads to an error of 1/10th of a mm, yielding a potential error of 10 % on the measured velocity.
The discrepancy between the two diﬀerent methods of measuring the velocity is around 10
% for case 5 and 10 and case 7 and 11. However, the discrepancy between case 9 and 12 is
a bit larger, which is probably because the velocity measured using the micro propeller was
performed closer to the bed, than the one measured furthest away with the pitot tubes which
is the one that is stated in Table 2.
Area of the pitot tubes
The size of the pitot tubes violates the conditions of applying
the Bernoulli equation to some extent. Rather than measuring the total pressure due to the
stagnation of a single streamline, the pitot tubes will measure a uniform pressure imposed
by the ﬂow pattern at their nose. A stagnation stream-surface will form inside or in front
of the tubes, and the resulting ﬂow pattern will determine the measured total head. Poor
alignment of the tubes regarding the ﬂow direction will cause further complexity to the tip
ﬂow. This misalignment can be caused by a physical misalignment to the predominant ﬂow,
e.g.
turbulence.
The result of this causes a decrease in the measured pressure caused by
blockage, as described in the above.
63
==PAGE:66==
13
SOURCES OF ERROR
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
x [m]
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
z [m]
a)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
y [m]
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
z [m]
b)
Figure 24: The measured data of the ﬁnal bed proﬁle for case 7, a) along the x-direction and
b) along the y-direction. Visualising the small faults when using the laser to measure the bed
proﬁle, and thus the equilibrium scour depth for case 1-9.
Calibration of the micro propeller
The micro propeller used to measure the velocity was
provided with a calibration chart from the manufacturer, which has been used to calibrate the
micro propeller. If this calibration chart of the propeller, however, is no longer valid due to e.g.
poor maintenance of the micro propeller, this would lead to a potential error when measuring
the velocity of the ﬂow.
Vibration of the micro propeller
The micro propeller has been stiﬀened so that it should
not vibrate, however, small vibrations were detected anyway. If this vibration is in the range
of frequencies of the ﬂow, it will lead to an ampliﬁcation which potentially results in a larger
measured velocity.
The diﬀerence in velocity of case 9 and 12 could be explained by the propeller being situated
in the boundary layer, as this spans the entire water column, i.e. there is no free stream velocity
to measure.
In general, there is a small variation of every period that has been run for every case.
A number of diﬀerent factors could have caused this, e.g. the water in the ﬂume not being
completely still before running a period or the pitch being set to a slightly diﬀerent level from
case to case. Before running a period it was checked that the micro propeller did not measure
any velocity in the ﬂume, however, the micro propeller does not measure with adequate precision
for low velocities. Potentially this could cause an early starting of the next period.
Measuring the scour depth
The laser used to measure the bed proﬁles is sensitive to
reﬂection of light, meaning that if the surfaces on which it measures are sleek, this causes a
reﬂection of the laser ray evidently resulting in a poor measurement. Finding the maximum
scour depth from the experiments is somewhat a case of judgement, as the laser sometimes
”falls out”, yielding a poor and wrong measurement, thus making it hard to identify the exact
maximum scour depth as shown in Fig. 24. The variation of the maximum scour depth is not
large, no matter what depth is chosen from the ﬁgure, but for the small periods small variations
of the maximum scour depth will of course have greater inﬂuence when comparing with the
predicted. As Se/D will decrease for decreasing period.
64
==PAGE:67==
13
SOURCES OF ERROR
13.1
Future research
Temporal variation of scour depth
When determining the temporal variation of the scour
hole, the frames recorded by the GoPro Hero 3+ camera have been analysed. The pixels from
the frames have been calibrated using a chart marked with lines with a spacing of 1 cm. The
calibration when analysing the scour hole variation is quite vital in order to measure the accurate
depth. So if the calibration made from the inserted chart is not entirely similar for the diﬀerent
cases, and for the temporal variation until equilibrium scour depth is reached and the variation
of the ﬁrst 5 periods, there will be some discrepancy in the results.
The lines from the chart was made with a marker, in order to see the lines clearly when
analysing the frames. However, the size of the marker potentially yields some diﬀerence in the
calibration depending on where the line is exactly marked when using Matlab to analyse the
frames. The used build-in function of Matlab, ginput, ﬁnds the pixels of the analysed frames.
The problem with the marked line is that it covers several pixels.
Of course this would only entail small diﬀerences, however, the diﬀerences that is measured
when measuring the temporal variation of the scour hole are quite small. So potential calibration
errors could entail some deviation to the measured depth.
13.1
Future research
The discussion part of the report will be wrapped up by considering thoughts for future research
on the subject treated in the report.
The experiments regarding both the time-variation of the scour as well as the equilibrium
scour depth could be repeated a number of times in order to collect more data for each case.
By doing so more experimental data for each test case would have been collected, making sure
that the outcome of each test have not been the result of a random process, but is consistent
in the measured scour depth.
Also using a sinusoidal varying ﬂow would have been interesting, as it is possible to reverse
the ﬂow in the ﬂume. However, this would entail a new calibration of the pump for the re-
versed ﬂow. As the ﬂume is a gravitational ﬂume, it is made to simulate ﬂow in one direction,
however the pitch in the pump makes it possible to reverse the ﬂow entailing that the pump has
to increase its RPM for the reversed ﬂow for maintaining similar velocity as for the intended
direction of the ﬂow.
If the sinusoidal ﬂow is to be studied, we suggest that the ﬂow is applied in one direction
then ensuring the ﬂow in the ﬂume is at a standstill before applying the reversed ﬂow in the
other direction. This would limit unintended eﬀects.
Regarding measuring equipment it is suggested to ﬁnd another device to measure the ﬂow
velocity instead of the micro propeller. The velocity could be measured with e.g. a Particle
Imagery Velocimetry (PIV) system. The micro propeller started to malfunction towards the
end of the project, as well as the micro propeller not being able to measure low ﬂow velocities.
A PIV system would also increase the accuracy of the measured velocity, and the small
velocities would be measured such that a period could be estimated directly from the measured
signal.
65
==PAGE:68==
==PAGE:69==
Part V
Conclusion
An experimental and numerical study of tsunami-induced scour around monopiles has been
presented in the report. The study includes an investigation of the boundary layer dynamics,
the equilibrium scour depth and the temporal variation of the scour hole. The report presents
the results of the experimental and numerical studies independently ﬁrst and then the results
are compared in a the discussion.
The numerical study includes two existing numerical models. The ﬁrst is an advanced fully-
coupled hydrodynamic and morphological CFD model described by Larsen et al. (2016), and
the second is a one-dimensional vertical model for simulating turbulent boundary layer ﬂows
described in Fuhrman et al. (2013). The CFD model was used to simulate one case regarding
tsunami-induced scour around a slender pile, while the MatRANS model was used to simulate
3 cases regarding boundary layer dynamics. Due to computational expense the CFD model
is simulated at model spatial and temporal scales, as explained by Larsen et al. (2016). This
computational expense is the reason for the limited number of successive periods simulated
using the CFD model.
The experimental part includes a study of 12 cases, where time-varying currents have been
used to simulate the ﬂow underneath a tsunami-like wave. 9 cases relate to the experiments
concerning scour, and the last 3 cases were conducted in order to investigate the boundary layer
thickness.
The equilibrium scour depth was reached after a range of 35 −50 successive periods, so from a
tsunami aspect the equilibrium scour depth is not of great interest, as a tsunami does not con-
sist of that many periods. The temporal variation of the scour hole, however, is very important,
and has thus been studied extensively throughout the report. The temporal variation of the
ﬁrst 5 periods has been compared to a simple practical prediction model proposed by Larsen
et al. (2016), while the case simulated using the CFD model were simulated for two successive
periods and compared with an experimental case with same period and velocity.
The comparison of the experimental data against the prediction formulae shows good agree-
ment. The mean eﬀective scouring time for each period for all for the studied cases was found
to be ψ = 0.1086. The prediction model had a tendency to over-predict the scour depth after
the ﬁrst few periods. A behaviour that shows the temporal variation of the scour hole decreases
faster for the studied experimental cases than for the used prediction model.
The comparison of the experimental data from the boundary layer investigation to the Ma-
tRANS model collectively demonstrates that the MatRANS model is able to produce accurate
ﬂow velocities within the boundary layer, and furthermore the experimental data shows good
agreement with the expressions for the boundary layer thickness suggested by Williams et al.
(2016). The experimental data sets from the boundary layer thereby support the notion of a
tsunami not necessarily having a boundary layer thickness spanning the entire height of the
water column.
A comparison of the temporal scour variation from an experimental data set and the CFD
model was performed on one case. This comparison was limited to one case where two suc-
cessive periods were simulated, with a period of T = 150 s. The CFD model predicted the
scour depth with a reasonable match. The comparison demonstrates the CFD models ability
to capture the physics involved in tsunami-induced scour from the experiments.
67
==PAGE:70==
==PAGE:71==
REFERENCES
REFERENCES
References
Baptista, M. A., 2015. Assessment, Strategy and risk reduction for tsunamis in Europe.
Baykal, C., Sumer, B. M., Furhnman, D.R., Jacobsen, N.G., Fredsøe, J., 2015. Numerical
investigation of ﬂow and scour around a vertical circular cylinder. Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. A
373, 1-21.
Bricker, J. D., Francis, M., Nakayama, A., 2012. Scour depths near coastal structures due to
the 2011 Tohoku Tsunami. J. Hyd. Res. 50, 637-641.
Cebeci, T., Chang, K. C., 1978. Calculation of incompressible rough-wall boundary-layer ﬂows.
AIAA J. 16, 730-735.
Chen, J., Huang, Z., Jiang, C., Deng, B., Long, Y., 2012. An Experimental Study of Changes
of Beach Proﬁle and Mean Grain Size Caused by Tsunami-Like Waves. J. Coast. Res. 284,
1303-1312.
Chen, J., Huang, Z., Jiang, C., Deng, B., and Long, Y., 2013. Tsunami-induced scour at coastal
roadways: A laboratory study. Natural Hazards 69, 655-674.
Chen, J., Jiang, C., Yang, W., Xiao, G., 2015. Laboratory study on protection of
tsunami-induced scour by oﬀshore breakwaters. Natural Hazards. 81, 1229-1247.
Deigaard, R., Fredsøe, J., 1992. Mechanics of coastal sediment transport. World Scientiﬁc. 1992.
Dias, F., Dutykh, D., 2007. Dynamics of Tsunami waves. NATO Security through Science Series
C: Environmental Security 201-224.
Larsen, B.E., Fuhrman, D.R., Baykal, C., Sumer, B. M., 2015. Tsunami induced scour around
monopile foundations. Manuscript.
Engelund, F., Fredsøe, J., 1976. A sediment transport model for straight alluvial channels.
Nordic Hydrology 7, 293-306.
Fuhrman, D.R., Schløer, S., Sterner, J., 2012. RANS-based simulation of turbulent wave
boundary layer and sheet-ﬂow sediment transport processes. Coast. Eng. 73, 151-166.
Fuhrman, D.R., Baykal, C., Sumer, B.M., Jacobsen, N. G., Fredsøe, J. 2014. Numerical
simulation of wave-induced scour and backﬁlling processes beneath submarine pipelines.
Coast. Eng. 94, 10-22.
Jacobsen ,N.G., 2011. A full hydro- and morphodynamic description of breaker bar development.
Ph.D. thesis, Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby.
Jacobsen, N.G., Fredsøe, J., Jensen, J. H., 2014. Formation and development of a breaker bar
under regular waves. Part 1: Model description and hydrodynamics. Coast. Eng. 88, 182-193,.
Jacobsen, N.G., Fuhrman, D.R., Fredsøe, J., 2012. A wave generation toolbox for the
open-source CFD library: OpenFOAM R⃝. Int. J. Number. Meth. Fluids 70, 1073-1088.
Justesen, P., Fredsøe, J., Deigaard, R., 1986.The bottleneck problem for turbulence in relation
to suspended sediment in the surf zone. In: Proc. 20th Int. Conf. on Coastal Engineering.
pp. 1225-1239.
69
==PAGE:72==
REFERENCES
REFERENCES
Kamphius, J.W., 1975.Friction factor under oscillatory waves. J. Waterways, Port, Coastal and
Ocean Eng. Div., ASCE, 101(WW2), 135-144.
Liang, D., Cheng, L. 2005a.Numerical model for wave-induced scour below a submarine pipeline.
J. Waterw. Port C-ASCE 131, 193-202.
Liang, D., Cheng, L. 2005b.Numerical modeling of ﬂow and scour below a pilpeline in currents
Part I. Flow simulation. Coast. Eng. 52, 25-42.
Madsen, P. A., Fuhrman, D.R., Sch¨aﬀer, H.A., 2008. On the solitary wave paradigm for
tsunamis. J. Geophys. Res. 113, C12012/1-22.
Nikuradse, J., 1932. Gesetzm¨assigkeiten der turbulenten Str¨omung in glatted Rohren. VDI-
Forschungsheft 356, Berlin.
Pan, C., Huang, W., 2012. Numerical modeling of tsunami wave run-up and eﬀects on sediment
scour around a cylindrical pier. J. Eng. Mech. 132, number 10, 1224-1235.
Roulund, A. Sumer, B. M., Fredsøe, J., Michelsen, J., 2005. Numerical and experimental
investigation of ﬂow and socur around a circular pile. J. Fluid Mech. 534, 351-401.
Schimmels, S., Sriram, V. and Didenkulova, I., 2016. Tsunami generation in a large scale
experimental facility. Coast. Eng. 110, 32-41.
Fredsøe, J., and Sumer, M. B., 2002. The mechanics of scour in the marine environment. World
Scientiﬁc.
Tonkin, S., Yeh, H., Fuminori, K., Shinji, S., 2003. Tsunami scour around a cylinder. J. Fluid.
Mech. 496, 165-192.
van Driest, E.R., 1956. On turbulent ﬂow near a wall. J. Aeronautical Sciences 23, 1007-1011,
1036.
Wilcox, D.C., 2006. Turbulence Modeling for CFD, 3rd Edition. DCW Industries, Inc., La
Canada, California.
Wilcox, D.C., 2008. Formulation of the k −ω turbulence model revisited. AIAA J. 46, 2823-
2838.
Williams, I.A., Fuhrman, D.R., 2016. Numerical simulation of tsunami-scale wave boundary
layers. Coas. Eng. 110, 17-31.
Wilson, R., Davenport, C., Jaﬀe, B., 2012. Sediment scour and deposition within harbors in
California (USA), caused by the March 11, 2011 Tohoku-oki tsunami. Sedimentary Geology
282, 228-240.
70
==PAGE:73==
A
APPENDIX A: CALIBRATION
Part VI
Appendices
In the appendices the calibration ﬁgures for the measurement devices is shown in Appendix A,
and the velocity measurements for all the tests are showed in Appendix B. Finally, in Appendix
C a key diagram of the ﬂume is presented.
A
Appendix A: Calibration
Calibration of discharge and velocity
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Pump [l/s]
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Probe [m/s]
a)
Data
0.00185x-0.015
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Pump step(1step=25RPM)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Probe [m/s]
b)
Data
0.0226x-0.0197
Figure A.1: Data points and regression line for correlation. a) Correlation between discharge
and velocity measured above the sand bed. b) Correlation between steps and velocity in the
ﬂume above the sand bed.
71
==PAGE:74==
A
APPENDIX A: CALIBRATION
Calibration of laser and wire-encoder
0
2
4
6
8
10
[volt]
0
2
4
6
8
[m]
a)
Data
1.003x-2.067
0
2
4
6
8
10
[volt]
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
[m]
b)
Data
0.125x-0.305
0
2
4
6
8
10
[volt]
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
[m]
c)
Data
0.101x+0.291
Figure A.2: Data points and regression line for each directions. a) x-direction, b) z-direction
and c) y-direction
72
==PAGE:75==
A
APPENDIX A: CALIBRATION
Calibration of pressure pipes
2.5
3
3.5
4
[V]
170
175
180
185
190
195
200
[mm]
a)
Pipe1
Pipe2
Pipe3
Hydrostatic
2.5
3
3.5
4
[V]
180
185
190
195
200
[mm]
b)
Pipe1
Pipe2
Pipe3
Hydrostatic
2.5
3
3.5
4
[V]
180
185
190
195
200
205
[mm]
c)
Pipe1
Pipe2
Pipe3
Hydrostatic
Figure A.3: Data points for calibration of the pipes measuring the pressure. a) case 4, b) 5 and
c) 7.
73
==PAGE:76==
==PAGE:77==
B
APPENDIX B: VELOCITY MEASUREMENTS
B
Appendix B: Velocity measurements
Appendix B includes the processing of the velocity measurements. The measured velocity signal
is ﬁltered using a Hamming lowpass ﬁlter. This ﬁlter is used on the frequencies oﬀrelevance. A
cut-oﬀfrequency to the measured signal is found using a FFT analysis. In the following these
steps will be shown for each test case. The ﬁtted analytical expression is ﬁtted to the measured
signal using a threshold of 0.90 · u0,max for program 1 and 0.80 · u0,max for program 2. These
thresholds are made in order to get a good ﬁt where the velocity is large, which is where the
scour process is most severe. For case 3, however, a threshold of 0.01 · u0,max was used, as this
gave the best ﬁt.
75
==PAGE:78==
B
APPENDIX B: VELOCITY MEASUREMENTS
Case 1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
f [Hz]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
PSD [m2/s]
a)
5.6
5.8
6
6.2
t [s]
×105
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
u0 [m/s]
b)
Unfiltered u0
Filtered u0
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
t [s]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
u0 [m/s]
c)
u0,meas
u0
178
179
180
181
182
183
T [s]
0
200
400
600
800
Relative error [%]
d)
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
t [s]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
u0 [m/s]
e)
u0
u0,fitted
Figure B.1: Velocity signal processing, shown for case 1: T = 181 s and Um = 0.32 m/s. a)
Power spectral density, b) variation of u0, c) Measured u0 and ensemble-averaged u0, d) Relative
error, e) Fitted u0 and ﬁltered u0
76
==PAGE:79==
B
APPENDIX B: VELOCITY MEASUREMENTS
Case 2
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
f [Hz]
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
PSD [m2/s]
a)
5.9
5.95
6
6.05
6.1
6.15
6.2
t [s]
×105
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
u0 [m/s]
b)
Unfiltered u0
Filtered u0
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
t [s]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
u0 [m/s]
c)
u0,meas
u0
198
199
200
201
202
T [s]
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
Relative error [%]
d)
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
t [s]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
u0 [m/s]
e)
u0
u0,fitted
Figure B.2: Velocity signal processing, shown for case 2: T = 202 s and Um = 0.34 m/s. a)
Power spectral density, b) variation of u0, c) Measured u0 and ensemble-averaged u0, d) Relative
error, e) Fitted u0 and ﬁltered u0
77
==PAGE:80==
B
APPENDIX B: VELOCITY MEASUREMENTS
Case 3
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
f [Hz]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
PSD [m2/s]
×104
a)
5.7
5.8
5.9
6
6.1
6.2
t [s]
×105
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
u0 [m/s]
b)
Unfiltered u0
Filtered u0
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
t [s]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
u0 [m/s]
c)
u0,meas
u0
163
164
165
166
167
T [s]
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Relative error [%]
d)
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
t [s]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
u0 [m/s]
e)
u0
u0,fitted
Figure B.3: Velocity signal processing, shown for case 3: T = 166 s and Um = 0.40 m/s. a)
Power spectral density, b) variation of u0, c) Measured u0 and ensemble-averaged u0, d) Relative
error, e) Fitted u0 and ﬁltered u0
78
==PAGE:81==
B
APPENDIX B: VELOCITY MEASUREMENTS
Case 4
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
f [Hz]
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
PSD [m2/s]
a)
1.02
1.03
1.04
1.05
1.06
t [s]
×106
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
u0 [m/s]
b)
Unfiltered u0
Filtered u0
-20
-10
0
10
20
t [s]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
u0 [m/s]
c)
u0,meas
u0
70
71
72
73
74
T [s]
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Relative error [%]
d)
-20
-10
0
10
20
t [s]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
u0 [m/s]
e)
u0
u0,fitted
Figure B.4: Velocity signal processing, shown for case 4: T = 72 s and Um = 0.42m/s. a) Power
spectral density, b) variation of u0, c) Measured u0 and ensemble-averaged u0, d) Relative error,
e) Fitted u0 and ﬁltered u0
79
==PAGE:82==
B
APPENDIX B: VELOCITY MEASUREMENTS
Case 5
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
f [Hz]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
PSD [m2/s]
a)
0.98
0.99
1
1.01
1.02
1.03
1.04
t [s]
×106
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
u0 [m/s]
b)
Unfiltered u0
Filtered u0
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
t [s]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
u0 [m/s]
c)
u0,meas
u0
78
79
80
81
82
T [s]
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Relative error [%]
d)
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
t [s]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
u0 [m/s]
e)
u0
u0,fitted
Figure B.5: Velocity signal processing, shown for case 5: T = 80 s and Um = 0.45 m/s. a) Power
spectral density, b) variation of u0, c) Measured u0 and ensemble-averaged u0, d) Relative error,
e) Fitted u0 and ﬁltered u0
80
==PAGE:83==
B
APPENDIX B: VELOCITY MEASUREMENTS
Case 6
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
f [Hz]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
PSD [m2/s]
×104
a)
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
t [s]
×105
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
u0 [m/s]
b)
Unfiltered u0
Filtered u0
-40
-20
0
20
40
t [s]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
u0 [m/s]
c)
u0,meas
u0
95
96
97
98
99
T [s]
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Relative error [%]
d)
-40
-20
0
20
40
t [s]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
u0 [m/s]
e)
u0
u0,fitted
Figure B.6: Velocity signal processing, shown for case 6: T = 97 s and Um = 0.40 m/s. a) Power
spectral density, b) variation of u0, c) Measured u0 and ensemble-averaged u0, d) Relative error,
e) Fitted u0 and ﬁltered u0
81
==PAGE:84==
B
APPENDIX B: VELOCITY MEASUREMENTS
Case 7
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
f [Hz]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
PSD [m2/s]
×104
a)
9.25
9.3
9.35
9.4
9.45
9.5
9.55
t [s]
×105
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
u0 [m/s]
b)
Unfiltered u0
Filtered u0
-50
0
50
t [s]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
u0 [m/s]
c)
u0,meas
u0
121
122
123
124
125
T [s]
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Relative error [%]
d)
-50
0
50
t [s]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
u0 [m/s]
e)
u0
u0,fitted
Figure B.7: Velocity signal processing, shown for case 7: T = 123 s and Um = 0.46 m/s. a)
Power spectral density, b) variation of u0, c) Measured u0 and ensemble-averaged u0, d) Relative
error, e) Fitted u0 and ﬁltered u0
82
==PAGE:85==
B
APPENDIX B: VELOCITY MEASUREMENTS
Case 8
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
f [Hz]
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
PSD [m2/s]
a)
0.9
0.95
1
1.05
1.1
1.15
1.2
t [s]
×105
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
u0 [m/s]
b)
Unfiltered u0
Filtered u0
-50
0
50
t [s]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
u0 [m/s]
c)
u0,meas
u0
146
147
148
149
150
T [s]
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Relative error [%]
d)
-50
0
50
t [s]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
u0 [m/s]
e)
u0
u0,fitted
Figure B.8: Velocity signal processing, shown for case 8: T = 148 s and Um = 0.42 m/s. a)
Power spectral density, b) variation of u0, c) Measured u0 and ensemble-averaged u0, d) Relative
error, e) Fitted u0 and ﬁltered u0
83
==PAGE:86==
B
APPENDIX B: VELOCITY MEASUREMENTS
Case 9
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
f [Hz]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
PSD [m2/s]
×105
a)
2.06
2.07
2.08
2.09
2.1
2.11
2.12
t [s]
×106
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
u0 [m/s]
b)
Unfiltered u0
Filtered u0
-200
-100
0
100
200
t [s]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
u0 [m/s]
c)
u0,meas
u0
495
495.5
496
496.5
497
497.5
498
T [s]
0
100
200
300
400
500
Relative error [%]
d)
-200
-100
0
100
200
t [s]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
u0 [m/s]
e)
u0
u0,fitted
Figure B.9: Velocity signal processing, shown for case 9: T = 497 s and Um = 0.42m/s. a)
Power spectral density, b) variation of u0, c) Measured u0 and ensemble-averaged u0, d) Relative
error, e) Fitted u0 and ﬁltered u0
84
==PAGE:87==
C
APPENDIX C: KEY DIAGRAM OF FLUME
C
Appendix C: Key diagram of ﬂume
• 
EH I0678 G 
6 METRES OF GLASS 
FITTED 
TO SIDES & BASE OF FLUME. 
DRAIN TO RESERVOIR 
WATER SUPPLY FROM 
HEADER TANK. 
NOTE;- BOTH WLET 
4 
AIR SUPPLY 
Pf^lN SHOWN THIS 
SPE FOR CLARITY-
POSITION ON OPPOSITE 
SIDE OF BEND ON ASSEMBLY 
TUM 
JIS, 
I 
8 
LO 
II 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
31 
32 
33 
34 
35 
V) 
z 
o 
er 
UJ 
K 
DESCRIPTION 
FLUME 
INLET TANK 
SFEUNQLE BAFFLE 
PERFOV^TED PLATE 
HAIR BAFFLE 
SUCTKDN PIPE 
SDPPNIR— 
MAKER 
AXIAL FLiDW PUMP 
mmm ZVR 500 
DELIVERY PIPE 
TAPER PIPE 
DISCHARGE C^UTE 
TAPER PIPE 
DISCHARGE TANK 
AIR OPERATOR VALVE 
SOLENOID 
AV^NE UJBRK::ATOR & FILTER 
DISCHARGE TAIL GATE 
END STOP SWITCHB 
NO FLOW SWITCH 
MOTOR 
50KW 
TACHOMETER GENERATOR 
OIL PUMP 
LINEAR ACTUATOR 
THYRISTOR RECTIFIER 
THYRISTOR RECTIFIER 
ELECTROMAGNETIC FLOWMETER 
SIGNAL CONVERTER 
SCAN-LINE INDICATOR 
TRANSFORMER 
SLOW DRIVING BUTTONS 
FAST DRIVING BUTTONS 
POSITION INDICATOR 
KAHL£ft 
& 
Km 
15TTZ 
SCHWEIZER 
LAC 280 (ASEA) 
BD25K>B ^SEA) 
RASMUSSEN 
& RASM 
IULD^ M. 
FISCHER t 
P^TJ 
FFSEI 
PORTER 
U 
mwr. 
GULDE sra: 
MY^^&^BASM. 
>ULDE 
SHOP ORDÆ 
TRACED AS 
INSTALLED 
B.KM. 
6.3.72 
IP 3044 (DOWTY) 
E 308 
E 2 50 
THYRIFLEX 
IOD I430 A 
L50 ED 4214 BAA 
53 EL 3311 BBIB 
^ E 2IO 
REMARKS 
SOOmm 
500 mm 
SOO mm 
SOOmm TO 16" NB 
4807/I72 
Id'^NB TO SOOmm 
lOOmm INLET VALVE 
OPERATES ITEM 14 
FOR ITEMS 14 & SO 
ON ITEM 23 
ON ITEM 23 
D.C. 
ON ITEM 7 
ASKV. I05/380 
I6"DIA. 
OUTPUT 4 -20 MA DC 
INPUT 
4- 20 MA D.C 
ITTMS 
& 24.— 
V TO 117 V. 5A 
1088/I 
1088 
I088/92 
I088/92 
4807/171 
I088. 
7 
27 
48C7/AS 
I088/I 
I088/I 
i088/l 
I088/I0 
I088/I 
I088/2 
I088/I4 
I088/16 
1088/I9 
T08Q/L6 
i088/l2 
ITEM 
No. 
36 
37 
38 
39 
40 
41 
42 
43 
44 
45 
46 
47 
48 
49 
50 
51 
52 
53 
54 
55 
56 
57 
58 
DESCRIPTION 
AMMETER 
TACHOMETER INDICATOR 
START/STOP CONTROL 
SPEED (X)NTROL 
OPEN/CLOSE CONTROL 
OPEN/CLOSE INDICATOR 
LEVEL INDICATOR 
OPEN/CLOSE CONTROL 
OPEN/CLOSE INDICATOR 
MANUAL/AUTOMATIC SWITCH 
AIR OPERATED VALVE 
SOLENOID 
LEVEL SWITCH 
CONTROL CONSOLE 
STARTER 
SARTJ^TOP BUTTONS & INDICATORS 
SUPPUER 
MAKER 
m. 
THRIGE-TRRAN 
MYHR & RASM. 
THRIGE-TITAN 
D. PATTLE 
D. PATTLE 
D. PATTLE 
0. PATTLE 
D. WTTLE 
D. PATTLE 4 
BREUM 
KAHLER —& 
REUM 
FLYGT 
D. PATTLE 
MYHRWOLD & 
RASMUSSEN 
D. PATTLE 
TYPE 
MVL (A/S LAU 
REMARKS 
FOR ITEM 20 
FILLER VALVE 
FOR ITEM S3 
DRAIN VALVE 
ISO mm DRAIN VALVE 
OPERATES ITEM SO 
FOR ITEM 22 
FOR ITEM 22 
P/LN« 
I088/3 
I088/3 
I088/3 
I088/3 
I08^ 
^58 
1088/286 
1088/311 
I088/ I 
FLUME - 2 METRES 
WIDE 
5 METRES DEEP 
35 METRES LONG OVERALL 
MAX. FLOW - 500 LITRES/SEC. 
-
2 
• 
SHOP ORDER 
ISSUE Na 
• 
NO. OFF 
ISSUE Na 
• 
DATE 
ISSUE Na 
V ROUGH FINISH 
DPVVWN; EK. 
DATE; 7 • I . TO 
MATERIAL 
KEY DIAGRAM 
FLUME No. 6 
DRAWING No. 
EH I0678 G 
W STANDARD FINISH SCALE 
TRACED: BH.M. 
KEY DIAGRAM 
FLUME No. 6 
DRAWING No. 
EH I0678 G 
WVVERY FINE FINISH 
G GRIND FINISH 
LIMITS Unless stated otherwise 
DECIMALS lOlO' FRACTIONS 1 
ARMFIEU) ENGINEERING LIMITED 
RINGWOOD, 
HAMPSHIRE, ENGLAND. 
1 
Figure C.1: Key diagram of ﬂume.
85
