==PAGE:1==
!
 
Sustainability Appraisal in Infrastructure 
Development Projects
-
Applying Certiﬁcation and MCDA on Fehmarn Belt 
Railway Extension
Msc Thesis Project - Spring 2016
Amanda Viklund  
==PAGE:2==
 
 
 
 
 
Thesis information  
University   
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
Faculty 
 
 
 
Management Engineering, 
 
 
 
 
 
2800 Lyngby Denmark 
Author  
 
 
 
Amanda Viklund 
 
 
 
 
 
s152090 
 
 
 
 
 
amanda_viklund@live.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
+46736949640 
Supervisor   
 
 
Per Sieverts Nielsen 
 
 
 
 
 
Senior Researcher, PhD 
 
 
 
 
 
Systems Analysis Division 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DTU Management Engineering 
Submission date   
 
23 June 2016 
Weight  
 
 
 
35 ECTS 
Preface 
This thesis has been written as a requirement for a Master of Science in the field of 
Sustainable Urban Transition at the Technical University of Denmark and as well at KTH 
Royal Institute of Technology in Stockholm, Sweden. This is part of a double degree 
project. The thesis is the result of six months of research, assessments and evaluations to 
contribute in the field of sustainability in infrastructure development.  
I, the author, want to express my gratitude to my supervisor Per Sieverts Nielsen who has 
contributed with valuable support, ideas, suggestions and not least invaluable experience 
to guide me through the research process.  
*Front page figure from miriadna.com  http://miriadna.com/preview/railway-in-the-fog 
!I
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This thesis focus on sustainability appraisal in the field of sustainable infrastructural 
developments. Through the application of two sustainability appraisal tools it was tested if 
this combination could contribute with objectivity and transparency in the process. 
Objectivity an transparency were two identified key concepts considered essential for the 
sustainability performance evaluations credibility. The case this was tested on was the 
Fehmarn Belt Fixed Link and the extension and upgrade of the railway structure on the 
German side. The assessment concerned which alternative for the route that could be 
considered most sustainable. The two applied tools were a simplified certification system 
and a multi-criteria-decision-analysis (MCDA). The simplified certification was inspired by 
DGNB, a German certification system used in the certification of urban districts, and by 
Envision, an American certification system for infrastructure projects. The MCDA-tool was 
an analytical-hierarchical-process-tool (AHP) working with relative comparison of criteria, 
goals and possible alternatives for the case specific development, the different alternatives 
for the upgraded and extended railway route. The thesis concluded that combinations of 
sustainability appraisal tools contribute to transparency in the development process. It 
also concluded that objectivity in the field of sustainability is a difficult challenge that 
should be addressed with transparency in the process. The certification was dependent on 
the MCDA-tool to show transparency. The MCDA-tool was dependent on the certification 
to actually evaluate the sustainability performance of the project of concern. This implies 
that a combination is the appropriate way to approach sustainable infrastructural 
development to measure the sustainability performance using sustainability appraisal 
tools. 
!II
==PAGE:4==
1. Introduction 
1
1.1 Transportation and sustainability 
5
1.2 Fehmarn Belt Fixed Link and the Extension of the Railway Link
10
1.3 Problem formulation and purpose
10
1.4 Limitations
12
2. Method 
14
2.1 Choosing Methodology
14
2.1.1 Certiﬁcation 
15
2.1.2 Decision support tools 
21
AHP - the Analytic Hierarchy Process 
22
3. Framework for Certiﬁcation 
24
3.1 Choosing criteria 
26
Environmental Quality 
28
ENV. 1.4 Biodiversity and interlinking habitats 
28
ENV 2.1 Land use 
29
Economical qualities 
29
ECO 1.2 Fiscal effects on the Region
29
Socio-cultural and functional qualities 
30
SOC2.3 Noise Protection
30
SOC3.2 Inclusive Access
31
Technical qualities 
31
TEC1.1 Energy Technology 
31
TEC3.3 Quality of Public Transport Infrastructure 
32
Process qualities 
32
PRO 1.1 Participation. 
32
4. Additional perspectives of sustainability
34
4.1 Three theoretical concepts of sustainability
35
Weak Sustainability and Strong Sustainability 
35
Social Sustainability
37
4.2 Prioritisation 
38
Prioritisation according to DGNB 
38
Prioritisation according to Weak sustainability 
39
Prioritisation according to Strong sustainability 
40
Prioritisation according to Social sustainability
42
5. Alternatives for the extension of the railway link
44
4.1 Evaluation and Preferred Alternative for each criteria
50
ENV. 1.4 Biodiversity and interlinking habitats
50
!III
==PAGE:5==
ENV 2.1 Land use 
51
ECO 1.2 Fiscal effects on the Region 
52
SOC2.3 Noise Protection
54
SOC3.2 Inclusive Access
54
TEC1.1 Energy Technology 
55
TEC3.3 Quality of Public Transport Infrastructure 
56
PRO 1.1 Participation
57
Summary preferred alternative certiﬁcation
58
5. Data analysis and results 
59
5.1 Results Preferred Alternative with Certiﬁcation 
59
5.2 Results Preferred Alternative with AHP - Expert Choice 
59
5.3 Conclusion data analysis 
65
5.4 Results
65
5.5 Analysis Outcomes
66
6. Discussion 
67
Sustainability and transportation
67
Sustainability appraisal tools and objectivity
67
Certiﬁcation and transparency 
70
Multi-Criteria-Decision-Analysis and transparency
71
Reﬂections - The need for combination of sustainability appraisal tools
72
7. Conclusion 
74
8. References 
75
Articles 
75
Books 
76
Internet 
76
Lectures
78
Reports 
78
!IV
==PAGE:6==
1. Introduction 
The needs for travel and transportation have historically been growing. With the ideas of 
mass production and technical development people, goods and raw material have 
continuously been able to be transferred both longer and quicker than previously. This has 
lead to a society that is dependent on transportation. Transportation has also contributed 
with possibilities for growth. This growth has today reached regional, national and even 
global scales. With the created societal structures of today continuous growth is also a 
requirement for prosperity and welfare. These structures and needs require infrastructure 
systems for movement to operate as efficient as possible and with as little disruption as 
possible. The development of society is therefore highly interlinked with infrastructural 
development. 
Infrastructural investments in physical networks can lead to increased accessibility which 
opens up for expanded markets and thereby an increased possibility for growth. One 
example of increased accessibility as a consequence of an expanded infrastructural 
network is coherent regions. 
One example of a coherent region is the Öresunds region and the construction of the 
Öresund bridge. The Öresund bridge was opened in 2000 and connects Malmö on the 
Swedish side with Copenhagen on the Danish side (Allt i Malmö, 2014). What the 
construction lead to was the possibility to create an even more integrated region, the 
Öresundsregion. The bridge opened up for peoples everyday commuting and travel in ways 
that had previously not been possible (Hansen & Serin, 2010 in Hasselgren, 2013). This 
meant that a more coherent region also meant a coherent market. The exchange and 
collaboration has increased drastically in the region with integration, complementation 
and competition as signs of a more coherent region. Björn Hasselgren et al. (2013) as well 
expresses how this in the long run will generate financial surplus.  
The example of the Öresunds bridge and the creation of a cross boarder region shows 
transportation networks significance to create a coherent region. This is also of relevance 
on the international market. What the bridge additionally contributed to was the 
possibility of linking other northern countries and Europe. Crossing national boarders and 
linking national networks not only helps strengthening those nations markets but it also 
contributes to a network beneficial for a closer and strengthened market on that continent. 
This means a more competitive market on a global scale as well. 
What a closer markets and a more interlinked infrastructural network could also 
contribute to is a more environmental friendly choice for transportation. The organisation 
OECD expresses how there might be potential for railway freight as an alternative to 
aircraft and maritime which could contribute to less emissions. But to really be able to 
compete with other means of transportation barrier crossings is an important aspect to 
!  of !
1
79
==PAGE:7==
consider to get rid of bottlenecks and create a more coherent route with increased 
frequency capacity (OECD, 2010). 
One of the institutions working to create a coherent network is the European Union. The 
European Union has introduced a policy regarding infrastructural development. The aim is 
to get rid of bottlenecks and to create a coherent competitive market. The policy is referred 
to as TEN-T, Trans-European Transport Network- Transport. The TEN-T is a European 
Commission infrastructural policy that was first introduced in the early 90’s (European 
Commission, 2014a). 
As for today the policy concerns and promotes member states of closing the gaps between 
their transport networks, get rid of bottlenecks inhibiting the internal European Single 
Market and resolve and counteract technical barriers. The goal with unbroken transport 
chains working for a smoothly movement of freight and passengers is prevailing for the 
policy.  
The European Commission looks to the policy as a key pillar in the growth of the European 
Union; 
”Smart, sustainable and fully interconnected transport, energy and digital networks are 
a necessary condition for the completion and well-functioning of the European single 
market and for linking Europe with the world market” (European Commission, 2014c). 
What they insinuate more specifically is that without investments for a more competitive 
and strengthened internal market difficult economical situations may appear with 
unemployment, tight public budgets, minimal growth as well as issues with congestions, 
emissions and safety and security (European Commission, 2014c, 2014d).  
Therefore it is important to emphasise that it’s not only expansion in the network that is 
necessary but also expansion that is thought through, smart and sustainable.  
For example better rail is needed, better connections to neighbouring countries and the 
use of innovative technologies to contribute to modal shift which will have beneficial 
outcomes looking at both environmental and socio-economical aspects. 
One of the programs in the EU-policy is the ’core network corridors’. This program 
advocates and will contribute to European cohesion and to the strengthening of the 
Europe's Single Market (European Commission, 2015). The program promotes the 
implementation and construction of nine major transport corridors. These corridors are 
considered to be beneficial for both passengers and businesses through for example 
resources being more reachable as well as locations, sectors and organisations which 
means a wider market (European Commission, 2014d). The EU is also emphasising how 
!  of !
2
79
==PAGE:8==
these corridors are beneficial for, as they expresses it, objects ”beyond the transport sector” 
looking at territorial cooperation, environment, climate and, research and innovation 
(ibid.). Seamless transportation, prosperity and growth is main objectives for the 
implementation of the corridors.  
One of the planned corridor in the program is the Scandinavian – Mediterranean corridor 
stretching from the northern parts of Europe to the most southern parts, Figure 1.1 
(European Commission, 2014d). Within that planned corridor a key project is ’The 
Fehmarn Belt Fixed Link’. The crossing stretches between Rødby in Denmark and 
Puttgarden in Germany and is marked with an arrow in the Figure 1.1.  Today the crossing 
is seen as a main bottleneck prohibiting 
the seamless travel and transport 
through this part of Europe. Related to 
the Fehmarn Belt link is the continuing 
railway through Germany. This 
extension becomes as important as the 
fixed link. As for today the extension only 
consist of a single track. With the 
implementation of a fixed link, as well as 
improvements on the railway structures 
on the Danish side, this part of the 
network becomes the weakest link in this 
section of the corridor. The European 
Commissions goals of seamless 
transportation is considered from a 
network perspective. This means that if 
one section in the link gets improved this 
will put higher pressure on connecting 
transport network as well. The 
importance for improvements in the 
entire corridor is therefore essential.  
What is implied is that development in transportation, if successfully executed, will open 
doors for the creation of a competitive European market, both on international and global 
levels. infrastructural improvements is a prerequisite for this development and essential if 
the goal is a continuous prosperity. 
But what is on the agenda today is that development needs to be done in a sustainable way. 
Growth should not be fully supported if it is done unconsciously and on the expense of 
something or someone else. 
!  of !
3
79
The Fehmarn Belt Fixed 
Figure 1.1 The TEN-T Scandinavian – 
Mediterranean corridor in pink with the Fehmarn 
Belt Fixed Link marked  (European Commission, 
==PAGE:9==
One of the most frequently used definitions of what sustainable development is were 
constituted by the Brundtland Commission or the World Commission on Environment and 
Development (WCED). In 1987 the report ’Our Common Future’ were released with the 
definition of sustainable development stated as following;  
“Sustainable development is development that meets the needs of the present without 
compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs.” (WCED 1987, p. 
43 in Gudmundsson et al., 2016;20). 
This definition is used globally to clearly define what development need to consider. The 
definition embraces the ideas that the natural environment today can not cope with what 
the society requires. Resources are being extracted from earths crust in a to high speed. 
Emissions and pollution is a consequence damaging to both humans and the natural 
environment. This in relation to poverty and inequity being an undeniable reality for a 
great part of the world at the same time as economical growth is important for most 
organisations and nations makes conscious sustainable decisions inevitable. Unsustainable 
development and growth at the expense of the planet Earth or humanity has to be averted 
if life should continue and the endanger for future generations to fulfil their needs should 
be avoided. 
With unsustainable development being something wished to avoid there is a need for 
measurements for how sustainable something is or will be. One way of doing this is by 
applying different sustainability appraisal tools. These tools contributes with techniques 
for how to define, value, approach and rate different aspects of sustainability. Measuring 
or assessing performance can contribute to guiding for what needs to change in for 
example a project where the aim is sustainability.  
This thesis will focus on sustainability appraisal of the specific part of the infrastructural 
development in that Scandinavian – Mediterranean corridor. The project of relevance is 
the complementary project to the construction of the fixed link; the extension of the 
railway structure from Fehmarn, through Puttgarden and to Lübeck. This is as explained a 
target area in need of revision and improvements to cope with the connecting upgraded 
structures. The infrastructure investment project includes an upgrade of the current 
railway structure, either through an extension of current tracks or a relocation and new 
construction. The upgrade will lead to a continued development of the transportation 
network in the European Union and is supposed to create a user and environmental 
friendly network and a network as coherent as possible.  
To ensure that the assessment of projects is not influenced by subjective interests and to 
see that the assessment is done in a correct and fair way objects and concepts such as 
objectivity and transparency becomes important. Objectivity is related to the truth and to 
reality. How the truth should be correspondent to reality in the perspective of a realist. It is 
!  of !
4
79
==PAGE:10==
related to the truth being true even outside of the individuals reality, value and norms. 
Transparency is the concept of openness and accountability and could be defined as ” the 
perceived quality of intentionally shared information from a sender.” (Schnackenberg and 
Tomlinson, 2014;5). These concepts are important in sustainability appraisal to give 
insight in how the sustainability appraisal works and to how it defines sustainability. 
Objectivity and transparency gives the user and/or concerned the possibility to either 
agree or not with that specific definition. It also assures that the process and project and 
tools specific goals are responding and following that defined sustainability target. 
These objects and concepts will be pervading and focused on throughout the thesis.  
1.1 Transportation and sustainability 
This section explains why sustainability within the specific field of transportation is 
important. 
To assess how sustainable transportation could be defined it is necessary to reflect on why 
transportation in first place is needed. Transportation provides society with concepts of 
movement, accessibility and mobility. The need for these concepts to be fulfilled are 
related to travel demand. Travel demand could be explained as follow; ”[j]ourneys are 
undertaken when the value of participating in the activity exceeds the cost to the traveler of 
the journey” (Cowie 2010 in Gudmundsson, 2016;52)”. This shows that transportation is 
providing society with a service. This service support and stimulates peoples travel 
patterns to connect with family, friends and places which is essential for stimulation and 
wellbeing. It also supports markets expansion as long as it is time and cost effective. 
Transportation enables “people or freight to move between origins and destinations” (Hall 
2006, in Gudmundsson, 2016;52). Planning for efficient transportation responds to travel 
demand with lower travel costs and the possibility to reach distant places. Efficient 
transportation is also stimulating from a labor market perspective. Labor markets gets 
more reachable and knowledge can spread longer and faster. Access to specific required 
knowledge at the right place and time makes markets develop faster and become more 
productive (Gudmundss0n, 2016).  
Denmark and its former government gives their view on why developed transportation is 
important and emphasise that mobility is important since it is closely related to growth;  
”A modern society requires high mobility. Mobility is freedom for the individual, but also a 
prerequisite for our welfare. A more efficient and developed traffic infrastructure is 
therefore also a prerequisite for growth.” (Danish Government, 2011 in Gudmundsson, 14 
Sep 2015). 
!  of !
5
79
==PAGE:11==
In the same way Germany is advocating mobility as a basis for growth and employment to 
ensure quality of life and contribute to Germanys competitiveness on the global market 
(FMTBH, 2003). Germany has also shown interest in the development of cross-boarder 
network and the upgrading of the linkage between Scandinavia and Germany has been 
acknowledge as an important aspect in a long-term perspective to improve the chances of 
the Single European Market (ibid.).   
These arguments further implies that productive and developed markets creates 
competition and contributes to welfare and growth and are important for national 
development. To create an efficient transport network to meet the demand is therefore in 
the interest of a lot of different actors and users.  
Sustainability is maybe one of our times greatest challenges. The earth today suffers from 
poverty, environmental degradation and challenges with for example a consumption 
society. In 2015 Earth Overshoot Day landed on August 13 (Global Footprint Network, 
2016). This means that from that day that specific 
year the society is living over the Earths capacity 
to regenerate ecological services and resources 
required for life (ibid.). The human ecological 
footprint exceeds the biocapacity of earth. The 
continuous undermining of the biocapacity 
means that species gets extinguished and the 
biodiversity decreases. This is illustrated as a 
funnel, with the end getting more narrow as time 
passes, as illustrated in Figure 1.2. To avoid 
planetary destruction the ecological footprint 
need to not exceed world biocapacity. The society 
instead needs to learn how to live within the 
planetary boundaries to maintain biodiversity and 
get a more stable living planet index.  
Transportation is a big contributor to degeneration of the planet. Transportation could be 
seen as an open system. The system function as a supportive and interactive system either 
within the system or with other activities in society. Transport is also a system consisting 
of subsystems. These subsystems could for example be specific parts required for the 
function of public transportation, such as physical infrastructure, energy supply, 
information technology, vehicles etc. These subsystems are typical examples of systems 
which could be interactive, supportive or competitive. Disruption in the transportation 
system can be devastating from a socio-economical perspective. A non operating or 
functioning transportation system means impacting both economical and social aspects 
with for example travel time loss. While a operating system have the greatest impact on the 
environment, extracting and using earths resources. Transportation therefore becomes 
!  of !
6
79
Figure 1.2 . The Funnel metaphor 
(WWF, 2014 in Cornet 8 Sep 2015) 
==PAGE:12==
determining for a lot of other 
activities in society, both for the 
public, environment and for 
businesses and organisations. 
Infrastructure as this thesis focus on, 
and more specifically railway 
infrastructure, is a part of the 
transportation system which has an 
impact on all three categories. 
Looking closer at the environmental 
impacts and more specifically 
emissions the United Nations 
Environmental Program in 2011 
presented the following situation for transportation. The status quo was then that 
transportation was consuming ”more than half of global liquid fossil fuels; emits nearly a 
quarter of the world’s energy-related CO2; generates more than 80 per cent of the air 
pollution in cities in developing countries…” (UNEP, 2011;380). The forecast also 
explained how these societal cost were likely to grow with the ”expected growth of the 
global vehicle fleet” (ibid.) Figure 1.3 illustrates Green House Gas emissions from the 
transport sector divided in type of transport. Surely road transportation is the biggest 
contributor but as the different 
types of transport is all part of the 
transport system a holistic 
a p p r o a c h 
s h o w 
t h a t 
transportation in general today is 
a non sustainable sector. 
Further Figure 1.4 shows a 
forecast foretelling the increased 
demand for transportation. The 
graph shows a possible scenario 
without any serious work on policies promoting decreased use of transport (Dulac, IEA, 
2012). 
Parallel to GHG emissions as a consequence from unsustainable movement and growth, 
other social, environmental and economical impacts and damages are as relevant. Henrik 
Gudmundsson et al., (2016) have summarised different negative impacts associated with 
transportation and further Henrik Gudmundsson (14 Sep 2015) as well has established 
more general examples of both negative and positive impacts from transportation. The 
impacts considered most relevant for evaluations of transportation systems are brought up 
in table 1.1. 
!  of !
7
79
Figure 1.3. Transport Global GHG Emissions 
(Gudmundsson, 14 Sep 2015)
Figure 1.4. Forecast transportation development 
(Gudmundsson, 14 Sep 2015) 
==PAGE:13==
This table shows a wide range over different areas where transport has an impact and 
affects the outcome. It emphasises that the transport sector is complex. 
Table 1.1 Impacts transportation (Elaborated fromGudmundsson et al., 2016 and 
Gudmundsson 14 Sep 2015). 
With the presented proof of measured negative environmental impacts and the predicted 
increase in transportation the evidence of an unsustainable situation is clear. These aspects 
in relation to the socio-ecological-economical environment where transport have an 
impact emphasise the challenges when searching for a transition to a more sustainable 
expanded transportation sector. As an example the Danish government has defined targets 
for the shift to only using renewable energy sources by 2050, see Figure 1.5. Visualised is 
that the requirement for only renewable sources within the transport sector is not a goal up 
until 2050. This further emphasis the complexity of the sector and the challenges for the 
sector to shift to a more sustainable sector. It implies that a sustainability agenda or 
strategy is needed to sustain the earth. 
The concept sustainability is today a frequently used term aimed to prevail actions and 
progress in society. It has been identified that growth today has to be equal with 
sustainable growth, for example in the Brundtland definition stated in the introduction. 
!  of !
8
79
Figure 1.5. The Danish government’s energy policy milestones up to 2050 
(The Danish Government, 2011) 
==PAGE:14==
Development is no longer a concept that can be separated, or should no longer be 
separated, from the term sustainability. This is recognised by as well governments as 
private organisations and the public. But sustainable development can be seen and 
acknowledge from different perspectives and thereby in different ways. 
 
One of the most used model of sustainable 
development is the ”Triple Bottom Line”, see 
Figure 1.6. This brings a holistic approach to 
sustainability where the three concepts economy, 
equity and environment is illustrated as to be the 
three relevant pillars and main areas to consider 
when planning for sustainable development. 
When there is balance in-between the concepts 
sustainability is reached and the contribution and 
preparation for a sustainable future is answered 
for. From this perspective the term sustainable 
transport development becomes a concept 
needed to relate to the three concepts and to 
consider when planning for development in the 
transport sector. Choices creating smart and 
efficient environmental friendly networks are 
important. As one example the networks geographical location is important to minimise 
usage of environmental destructive transport, to minimise congestion and to be accessible 
for all. 
One way to apply sustainability in infrastructural development is through different 
sustainability appraisal tools. These contribute with guiding-lines, definitions and methods 
both for example on how to reach sustainability but also with guiding on how to assess and 
evaluate the performance and what would be needed to change to reach sustainability.  
Two of these techniques are project appraisal methods such as for example Multi-Criteria-
Decision-Making tools (MCDA) and sustainability assessment methodologies, such as 
rating systems and frameworks. MCDA is a tool introducing subjectivity in a evaluation 
process in a structured way but the tool does not in itself address all the components of 
sustainability (Bueno et al., 2015). MCDA is a technique to support the decision-making 
process in transport projects. Sustainability assessment methodologies on their hand focus 
on ranking and comparing projects in their environmental performance and are usually 
focused on, or applied in, the construction stage of the project (ibid.). These sustainability 
assessment methodologies are generally not designed to aide decision-making in  planning 
stage about ”most suitable design for sustainability” (ibid.). 
!  of !
9
79
Figure 1.6. The Triple Bottom Line 
(Autodesk, 2015)
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Fehmarn Belt Fixed Link and the Extension of the Railway 
Link
With the case of the Fehmarn Belt Fixed Link being implemented an upgrade of the 
railway link in Germany has been scheduled. Right now the project is investigating 
different alternatives for how this upgrade and extension of the link will be implemented.  
The general goal with the project is that Fehmarn Belt Link and the additional upgrade of 
the railway infrastructure on, in this case, the German side will contribute to a competitive 
form of transportation and strengthen the European Single Market. When the links and 
upgrade are implemented it will as well affect the natural and social environment on 
different macro and micro scales. The way the link and upgrade will be executed is of 
highest concern for different actors and in the end for the entire socio-ecological-
economical environment.  
This thesis will therefore perform a comparative evaluation of the different possible 
alternatives of the scheduled implementation of the railway tracks.  
The project responsible is the DB Netz AG, the rail infrastructure company of the Deutsche 
Bahn AG, the German national rail company. DB Netz AG have provided for assessment 
documents regarding the planned railway structures and the different options considered 
appropriate and possible at the moment. Two different types of sustainability appraisal 
tools will contribute to the evaluation of sustainability differently. These two tools, 
certification and MCDA, will in the thesis be compared and combined in the sustainability 
evaluation to give a result on most preferred option for implementation of the route of the 
railway.  
1.3 Problem formulation and purpose
To strive for an objective and transparent result when the sustainability of a project is 
evaluated, a lot of different aspects need to be taken into consideration. The transport 
sector is a sector concerning a lot of different objects, actors and stakeholders. This spread 
makes the sustainability appraisal of infrastructure projects complex. The thesis focus on 
how sustainability appraisal tools could contribute to meet the need of objectivity and 
transparency in the case of sustainable infrastructural development. 
The first challenge related to the complexity in sustainability appraisal of infrastructure 
projects is the difficulty of choosing a suitable and relevant method or tool. Numerous 
scientific tools are available and possible to apply in sustainability ratings and 
assessments. Knowing which one is most suitable can be difficult. The different tools may 
define and interpret sustainability differently. Different definitions and interpretations 
leads to different sustainability strategies and approaches which will be reflected in the 
!
 of !
10
79
==PAGE:16==
results of the project’s sustainability performance. Knowing if a project is sustainable or 
not becomes relative and subjective. Arguing for objectivity when the possibility to choose 
different sustainability appraisal techniques is available becomes difficult. The object or 
project under evaluation need an appropriate and applicable sustainability structure and 
approach to get credibility in the evaluation and in the results. To choose which technique 
is most appropriate and which technique assures objectivity in the sustainability 
assessment becomes difficult. 
A second challenge related to the complexity in sustainability appraisal of infrastructure 
projects is the wide span of different concerned and involved stakeholders, actors and 
users of the tool and/or of the project. These concerned stakeholders, actors and users may 
represent different discourses, standards and norms. These discourses, standard and 
norms are often context dependent and related to the specific geographical and/or social 
context. With different apprehensions and perspectives there are possibilities for 
interpretations. Even with clear guidance and definitions provided for by a sustainability 
appraisal tool the result of a sustainability evaluation could differ.  
A third identified challenge concerns the complexity of the actual evaluations and 
assessments. The certifying process becomes restricted to a certain group of actors if the 
actual sustainability rating process is complex and knowledge is required. The reason why 
a complex sustainability appraisal process is a risk relates to the risk that transparency is 
not the case for all stakeholders. Even if results are publicly accessible, the process towards 
the result is generally difficult to understand for everyone. The possibility to participate at 
an early stage are restricted even with an process if the rating process is performed by 
experts or experienced users. To fully be considered as transparent the shared information 
should also be possible to understand. Transparency is limited if the rating is done on a 
scientific and complicated level. Interest groups are not necessarily able to contribute to 
the process with opinions since these interest groups might lack relevant knowledge to 
even be able to understand the process and the process and project information. The 
complexity of the tool contributes to the risk of making the evaluation one-sided and not 
inclusive.  
Summarised, the problem is that an objective and transparent sustainability appraisal tool 
for infrastructural development projects is not readily available. The search for an 
objective tool that would fit the infrastructure development context is today not a focused 
area within the literature, and something which is lacking (Bueno et al., 2015). One way to 
meet the need for a more objective and transparent sustainability appraisal could be 
through the combination of already existing tools, which is suggested by Bueno et al. 
(2015).  
!
 of !
11
79
==PAGE:17==
This hypothesis, that combination of existing tool will meet the need for objectivity and 
transparency, will be tested in this thesis. The thesis will test the hypothesis by applying 
and combining sustainability appraisal tools in a sustainability evaluation of an 
infrastructure project. The thesis will analyse the outcomes and possible changes in the 
results when different sustainability evaluation techniques are combined. The 
methodology of this thesis is applied on the case of the Fehmarn Belt Fixed Link and the 
extension of the railway structure that is scheduled to be upgraded at the German side. 
Different alternative routes for how the railway link will be extended are available. The 
thesis will test which alternative is the preferred one from a sustainability perspective 
using a simplified certification appraisal followed by an application of an MCDA-tool. The 
thesis will assess the results of the simplified certification and thereafter compare the 
results with the results from an MCDA-tool, where different sustainability perspectives are 
used. The main reason  is to test  if combinations of sustainability appraisal tools could be 
an applicable method  for a more objective, transparent and ’fair’ decision-making process. 
1.4 Limitations
Since the railway is the core concept in this project infrastructure within the transportation 
system functions as a natural delimitation to focus on. But still when investigating 
sustainability from a system perspective further limitations need to be set since even 
infrastructure is part of a holistic function which can affect other parts of the society both 
directly and indirectly. This makes it necessary to establish how far the investigation will 
go and which time-perspective that will be used necessary to define. As a core element 
environmental inputs and outputs; social inputs and outputs; and economical inputs and 
outputs are identified and analysed and these are then put into relation to the specific 
design of the railway. Each infrastructural development has a life cycle but in this project 
the planning of the design and the specific design and the consequences that brings is of 
relevance. The construction, later operations, maintenance and disposal will therefore not 
be of concern in this analytical process, further than what for example is being planned for 
in operations and maintenance. 
Location-wise the project will focus on concerned and affected local and regional areas, i.e. 
national scale is not as relevant for the certification and determining the effect of the 
project related to the entire nation. Still different scales even going beyond the national 
scale, i.e. european departments, are acknowledged as actors concerned by the project but 
will not be taken into consideration at the same extent as more regional and local effects in 
the actual certification. 
Further, since sustainability is so extensive a few core concepts and objects that will be 
analysed and compared are chosen and defined with respect to sustainable transportation, 
concerned stakeholders and already established certification systems. These are 
determined due to a number of factors described in the methodology section. The thesis is 
!
 of !
12
79
==PAGE:18==
although aware of the fact that these investigated concepts are not enough to cover an 
entire certification. 
With the questions in the problem formulation being formulated openly, e.g. asking if 
there were more than one alternative and if there is more than one perspective on 
sustainability delimitations are as well required here. The alternatives, if more than one, 
will be brought up but probably only one or two will be more thoroughly compared to the 
chosen route, this due to a time limit. This as well goes for the perspectives. The 
perspectives that have been chosen for a more thoroughly comparison is the perspective of 
sustainable transportation from a general scientific point of view. These scientific 
literatures have then been used to further make a division between perspectives. 
Concerned actors of the implementation of the railway will be identified as far as possible 
but their view on sustainability will not be analysed as an own perspective since that would 
be a too difficult investigation for this thesis to take on. 
!
 of !
13
79
==PAGE:19==
2. Method 
This thesis is combining different theoretical methodologies to perform a comparative 
analysis. It is applying these theoretical concepts on an actual case to relate it to something 
concrete and substantial.  
Since theoretical concepts and methodologies are used as a solid ground a literature 
research was first performed.  
Concepts and methodologies needed scientific definitions to be emphasised and explained. 
This was mainly done through the review of scientific literature and articles concerning 
sustainability, sustainable transportation, infrastructure and sustainability appraisal and 
assessment. In this case different methodologies and tools were assessed to see which 
techniques were most appropriate to use in this thesis.  
The literature have mainly been qualitative. Regarding the subject sustainability appraisal 
tools for infrastructure a lot of literature is not available since it is not an area of focus in 
research. Therefore a qualitative literature review was the most appropriate.  
With the thesis being applied partly in an actual case taken from reality a lot of data and 
material regarding the evaluative part is derived from project responsible and from non 
objective sources. But since the documents are mainly national and regional requirements 
documents the risk of them being biased is reduced. This although means that the risk is 
not completely eliminated but the evaluative part of the thesis function more as something 
to apply methodologies and theories than to give actual guidance to project stakeholders.  
The methodology used is a simplification of an already existing certification tool and an 
MCDA-tool. It is explained in the thesis how and why the simplification is done. And why 
an MCDA-tool is applied as well. This is explained to give the reader a clear review of the 
performed work leading up to the results. The methodology applied is explained in relation 
to how and why it is applied, to give the reader insight in how the entire process of the 
thesis have been performed.  
2.1 Choosing Methodology
This section focuses on why the particular methodology was chosen, describes those 
methodologies and the application and creation of the actual methodology to fit the 
purpose of this thesis.  
!
 of !
14
79
==PAGE:20==
2.1.1 Certiﬁcation 
 
This section therefore argue for why this thesis chooses a certification system as a basis to 
create a framework in the evaluation. This chapter is divided in different sections 
responsive to different aspects of the reasons behind chosen methodology. 
The first argument to why this thesis choses to apply certification as methodology concerns 
the general complexity in valuing sustainability. Certification systems and environmental 
rating systems are a well known concept in organisations, authorities and nations 
sustainability work. These are tools setting up targets and requirements to fulfil certain 
classifications and hence give a verification on the, in this case, sustainability performance. 
Certification tools in that sense provides the performer with a service that gives proof or a 
receipt of sustainability performance as well as guidance. 
An evaluation tool as well aims at defining and explaining what sustainability is. Decision 
making today needs to be considerate and acknowledge environmental, economical and 
social consequences in the planning. The International Federation of Consulting 
Engineers, FIDIC, in their ’State of the World 2012 Report’ emphasises decision-making 
”as a way to facilitate sustainable infrastructure”. FIDIC also expresses that by prioritising 
the connections between economy, society and infrastructural services and applying a 
holistic sustainability perspective sustainability encourages the connections criticality  to 
be identified at an early stage and hence they can rather be acknowledged to become 
beneficial in the development of new structures (FIDIC, 2012). Incorporating 
sustainability in infrastructure development gives guidance in the decision making instead 
of sustainability being another competitive objective to consider (FIDIC, 2012). It adds a 
”systematic perspective”, which helps cope with complexity in the balancing between 
objectives and in the prioritisation (ibid.). What FIDIC additionally advocate is that with 
sustainability highlighted and prioritised from the beginning, situations that would have a 
disruptive or costly effect later in the process, if sustainability hadn't been acknowledged, 
are easier to avoid for decision-makers. For example decisions later in the process are 
more required to consider economical and technical conditions. With sustainability being 
part of the originating concept those later choices has an advantage in already being 
sustainable (ibid.).  Sustainability does not need consideration since it is already part of the 
development plan. The benefits of having sustainability as guidance in accordance with 
different actors being involved in the process emphasises the need to have a common 
definition. A certification tool can guide and steer the process and function as a surveying 
frame. The certification can also monitor that the sustainability performance is sufficient 
in every step and at every actor. This is a bilateral advantage. The involved actors can 
control each other and the process. Certification and rating does not only help in the 
evaluation of performance but as well function as support to keep the vision of 
sustainability firm throughout the development process and operation. Another research 
group noted that “...sustainability assessments are used by industry to optimise their 
!
 of !
15
79
==PAGE:21==
operations. These assessments involve characterising the process, identifying potential 
alternatives, evaluating the alternatives and making recommendations.” [(Engle-Cox & 
Fowler 2004/2005 in Shaw et al., 2012:3). Since this thesis focuses on different 
alternatives for the railway extension and the evaluation of these alternatives it becomes 
even more appropriate to use a sustainability appraisal tool.  
Infrastructure and engineering asset management has become an increasingly recognised 
field, where this assessing partly concerns the goal of reducing environmental and social 
impacts deriving from infrastructural maintenance and operations. Scientifically based 
sustainability assessment schemes as well as realistic ones, produced by experts, are 
therefore required to respond to the request to access a method measuring level of 
sustainability in the decision making process. Sustainability in itself isn't sufficient enough 
as a decision basis but a need to assure that relevant and/or correct areas are 
acknowledged, investigated and evaluated is as important in the sustainability assessment 
(Shaw et al., 2012). Rating and certification tools are often produced by respectable 
governmental or non-governmental institutions in accordance with academic institutions, 
which gives them a solid credibility (FIDIC, 2012). The scientific base of certification tools 
increases credibility in the evaluation of sustainability performance and to thereby get 
recognition for their sustainability performance. Recognition and credibility advantageous 
in a competitive matter but also as setting an example for other organisations and sectors, 
both internationally and nationally.  
With this stated, that there is a need to use an elaborated, tested method to investigate and 
assess sustainability in infrastructural projects the next focus is on what tools that are 
available. 
To choose one system to apply in this thesis it is relevant to investigate which systems that 
are available on the market, in which sectors they can be applied and where they originate 
from. When it comes to certification tools for infrastructural and civil engineering this is a 
much more limited area than for the constructing and real estate business. The FIDIC, has 
summarised which tools that are available for sustainability rating and certification for 
transport and general civil infrastructure as well as other sectors, this can be seen in Table 
2. 
Since this thesis will not be able to investigate each tool in itself and since this thesis is not 
either fully executing a certification scheme the reviewing of the different systems is 
mainly based on earlier scientific investigations. The table showing available tools 
functions as a first assortment of tools to more throughly review. The tools focusing on the 
sector ’Buildings and Buildings and Community/precinct’ are not further investigated, 
except for the only system originating from Germany, which is the country of focus.  
!
 of !
16
79
==PAGE:22==
Table 2.1 Sustainability appraisal tools available for application (Elaboration from FIDIC, 
2016). 
The first system in the table, BCA Green Mark originates from Singapore. The Building and 
Construction Authority (BCA) is the agency under the Ministry of National Development in 
Singapore (BCA, 2014). They have developed a system that in fact has intertwined 
infrastructure as part of or as a compliment to the certification. Still the system is generally 
focused on buildings. The infrastructural part of the certification is focusing on more 
environmental parts of sustainability as for example landscape, renewable energy, water 
etc. This makes the system weak from a holistic point of view (BCA, 2009). Further the 
system is primarily designed for a tropical climate which makes it more difficult to adjust 
and apply it to European infrastructure.  
Following there is six system left concerning infrastructure and transport and the one 
system covering districts and buildings from Germany. In  the  report  ”Sustainable 
!
 of !
17
79
==PAGE:23==
Infrastructure Operations: A Review of Assessment Schemes and Decision Support by 
Shaw et al., 2012, those infrastructural and transport certification systems have been 
reviewed and the credits of each criteria divided in different categories relevant for 
sustainability (ibid.). To make a comparison with the German system the DGNB 
certification tool was in the same way divided in the nine categories depending on the 
credits available and indicators/categories responding so the different categories. This is 
shown in Figure 2.1. In the field of sustainable infrastructure appraisal bot a lot of 
literature is available. The report by Shaw et al. was used since this is one of the few 
throughly works carried out in the field of sustainable infrastructure that have been found. 
The calculations for the DGNB system was done through an assessment of the criteria and 
division after which category they could respond to, see an example of the division for the 
first two criteria in Figure 2.2. Then the percentage of the share in accordance to the 
overall evaluation was divided and added to each criteria, giving a final percentage of the 
gathered evaluation divided on each of the nine categories. For example criteria ENV1.1 
Life Cycle Assessment is responsive to 2,7 % in the overall evaluation. When analysing the 
criteria it responded to category ”Community Wellbeing”, ”Ecology and Biodiversity” and 
”Energy and Emissions”. This then meant that each of these categories could add 2,7 
divided by three to their final collection of evaluation weighting. In Figure 2.1 the final 
result is visual. Additional division and summarising for each category can be seen in 
appendix A. 
!
 of !
18
79
Figure 2.1. Certification systems and their division of areas covered (Shaw et al., 2012 
and own calculations for DGNB) 
==PAGE:24==
What the original diagram could show was that both Greenroades and GreenLITES are 
systems that are not covering every theme and this therefore function as a second 
assortment. Additionally Greenroads, GreenLITES and INVEST are all three very road 
focused which makes the argument for elimination even more accurate. INVISION is 
therefore not further investigated either. 
For the three systems generally covering civil infrastructure (IS, CEEQUAL, Envision) 
CEEQUAL is the only one seen as possible to apply internationally. The Infrastructure 
Sustainability (IS or AGIC IS) from Australia was launched i 2012 by the Australian Green 
Infrastructure Council (AGIC) (Shaw et al., 2012). CEEQUAL, the Civil Engineering and 
Environmental Quality Assessment and Award Scheme, was originally developed in the 
United Kingdom , in 2011 the version for international projects was launched (Shaw et. al, 
2012 & FIDIC, 2016). CEEQUAL was also the first rating system entering the market with 
a focus on infrastructure (Shaw et al., 2012).  The Australian system (IS) is also drawn up 
on the work of CEEQUAL, where this function as a third elimination argument. With the 
Australian system being developed from a more internationally reputable used scheme to 
be used on their own continent it seem unreasonable to further investigate this system.  
CEEQUAL has nine categories which is relevant to infrastructural development; 
1.
Project strategy 
2. Project management 
3. People & communities 
4. Land use & landscape 
5.
Historic environment  
6. Ecology & biodiversity  
7.
Water environment  
8. Physical resources: use & management 
9. Transport. 
!
 of !
19
79
Figure 2.2. Example division of criteria and  sustainability categories and calculations 
(DGND, U.D for the example of criteria and weightings and Own elaboration and 
==PAGE:25==
But the more detailed assessment information is not available to others than ”to trained 
Assessors and to Verifiers”. This therefore function as a forth elimination criteria. 
Envision is governed by the Institute for Sustainable Infrastructure (ISI) in the United 
States (Shaw et al., 2012). Envision has a holistic view and is a target based system stating 
different goals as criteria for measurement, such as for example criterium ’Preserve Prime 
Habitat’, ’Reduce Greenhouse Gas Emissions’ and ’Improve Site Accessibility, Safety & 
Wayfinding’ (Envision, 2015). Envision is also a certification system that has CEEQUAL as 
a source in their evaluation guide.  
For the building section it is relevant to highlight DGNB since this is the only system that is 
originating from the concerned country. The other systems are not brought up here. DGNB 
(Deutsche Gesellschaft für Nachhaltiges Bauen), the ’German Sustainable Building 
Council’, is a non-profit, non-governmental organisation. DGNB was founded in 2007 with 
the intention of promoting sustainable and economically efficient constructions within the 
sectors of building and real-estate. Since then the organisation has spread its knowledge 
both nationally and internationally (DGNB, 2016a). DK-GBC in Denmark (Green Building 
Council Denmark) is one of the organisations using the certification systems in their 
sustainability activities in the construction business. 
The DGNB system is available through a request and the Envision is obtainable through a 
free membership on the webpage.  
Further, as been mentioned, sustainability concerns the three dimensions of economy, 
environment and equity. This means that to incorporate all of these concepts an holistic 
approach is necessary and criteria that emphasises this.  
DGNB consists of five basic concepts, so does Envision. They both present categories 
which show that the three concepts of sustainability are interweaved in the system. At this 
stage it could seem logical to choose a system that is actually developed for infrastructure. 
But since this thesis is not focusing in the certification in itself but rather using that as a 
basis for the creation of a simplified framework that is not the case. Instead the most 
relevant aspects according to this thesis is the public awareness of the system, since that 
contributes to transparency, and to use a system possible to relate to. Here DGNB rates 
significantly higher, since this is a common certification tool in Germany. The purpose is 
also to emphasise benefits with a common goal and to stretch over sectors and boarders to 
create a unified approach both nationally and internationally. This advocates the 
application of a system that is covering another sector and that with development could be 
used more widely. Secondly it is the holistic approach and the structure that is essential, 
both systems brings this to the table. Thirdly since the project is located in Germany the 
DGNB system being elaborated with accordance and respect to German laws, guiding, 
!
 of !
20
79
==PAGE:26==
values and norms this further advocates the application of a system already used in the 
country.  
With this stated the decision is taken that the DGNB system will function as a basis, with 
the five concepts seen in Figure 2.3 as first order of structure and the  additional 
subcategories as a solid ground. Envision will although not be dismissed but rather 
function as supportive in the adaption of the DGNB criteria. 
2.1.2 Decision support tools 
This thesis wants to assess what happens if sustainability as a goal in development is 
interpreted and perceived differently. FIDIC (2012) argues that to reach consensus ”sound 
decision-making techniques” is required. Certification as a decision-making technique 
comes with weaknesses. When it comes to the concept of sustainability and certification 
programmes these programmes lack transparency and objectivity in the definitions of 
criteria and in the amounts of credits possible to acquire (Bueno et al., 2015 and Lee et al.,
2011 in ibid.). There is also a level of inconsistency, as has been shown in previous section, 
in-between different types of certification systems. Different sustainability definitions and 
objectives in different certification tools will result in different weighting on different 
criteria or subject of matter. This will reflect a subjective measurement of sustainability 
performance for the infrastructure project of concern. Clevanger et al. explains: “to what 
extent sustainability is achieved remains uncertain since consensus does not exist as to the 
definition of sustainability for highway and infrastructure projects” (Clevenger et al., 
2013;7 in Bueno et al., 2015). Another very relevant point is that certification is rarely used 
in the actual decision-making, but rather in the rating of what is already decided upon and 
not used as a comparative tool (ibid.)  Therefore as a compliment to the created framework 
an additional decision-making tool will be applied. Bueno et al., purposes a combination of 
an MCDA-tool with other tools ”for a more complete sustainability assessment of transport 
projects.”. The result of the certification will therefore be complimentary assessed through 
the application of different perspectives of sustainability. 
!
 of !
21
79
Figure 2.3. The area divisions for DGNB on the left and Envision on the right (DGNB, 
2016a & Envision, 2015).
==PAGE:27==
The tool that has been chosen is referred to as an MCDA, a multi-criteria decision-analysis 
tool. What an MCDA basically does is that it firstly identifies sustainability criteria, this is 
in this thesis done through the use of a certification framework. Secondly it evaluates the 
alternatives, assign weighting coefficients to the different criteria and finalises in the 
ranking of criteria responsive to sustainability and its definition (Bueno et al., 2015). These 
types of tools do not offer certification at the end of the process or any visibility of success. 
This reason makes it a weak tool in the purpose of getting external stakeholders assured of 
the chosen design in the same way as an official certification gives, but nevertheless it is a 
tool that can work with multi-stakeholders, and multi-criteria and in that sense 
experiment with different options (FIDIC, 2012). It is also a tool that could be relevant in 
the inclusion of the public and involving stakeholders (Bueno et al., 2015). Bueno et al. 
further (2015;2) expresses how MCDA ”can introduce subjectivity” in the valuing and 
ranking of criteria, which is valuable in this thesis when different perspectives is of 
relevance. And it is further a technique suitable for complex problems where different 
alternatives are available at the same time as different stakeholders or different 
perspectives. It is also therefore emphasised how they are suitable in the decisions 
concerning ”conflicting objectives,… multiple interests, and perspectives…” (Kowalski, et 
al., 2009;1065 in Bueno et al., 2015;7). In this sense it functions as a compliment to ratings 
and certifications. The certifications focuses on performance, what is targeted and what is 
the actual performance, whilst the decision-making tools focuses on design options and 
their appraisal (ibid.). FIDIC (2012) also argues that these tools are much less adequate in 
the guiding of the design but they can instead be more confirmative and able to work with 
different sustainability principles (ibid.). Browne and Ryan (2011) in Bueno et al., (2015) 
further emphasises the benefits of the MCDA method; For addressing sustainability the 
MCDA with its multi-disciplinary approach means an applied holistic approach capturing 
economic, environmental and social impacts and can thereby deal with different 
components of sustainability (Browne & Ryan, 2011 in Bueno et al., 2015).  
AHP - the Analytic Hierarchy Process  
The official MCDA-tool that will be applied in this thesis is called an AHP-tool. The 
Analytical Hierarchy Process (AHP) is part of a multi-criteria decision analysis technique 
(MCDA). Multi-criteria decision analysis is part of decision support systems (DSS) used as 
a aiding tool providing a technique to identify the ’best’ solution or choice for a problem. 
Important to emphasise is that this is not to be used as an absolute decision tool, but 
rather as guiding lines and as a tool to visualise what a common solution could look like. 
AHP is a well known MCDA tool possible to apply in decisions involving different 
concerned groups and alternatives. What AHP does is that it uses mathematical theory in 
accordance with empirical data and subjective inputs from the decision makers. Various 
objectives gets different weightings in accordance with different preferences of alternatives 
to the solutions resulting in an organised evaluation and a hierarchical structure (AHP 
Appendix IV & Barfod, U. D.) 
!
 of !
22
79
==PAGE:28==
The tool consists of at least three levels: at the top the focus area, or the goal of the 
appointed problem, is stated. In the middle different criteria relevant for the goal is 
defined, and at the bottom level the different competing alternatives are visible, see Figure 
2.4 (Barfod, U. D).  
What AHP does is that it uses pair-wise comparison. The alternatives can in different ways 
through the criteria fulfil the goal or focus. More specifically the criteria is responsive to 
the goal differently depending on which alternative is in focus. Through pairwise relative 
comparison of the criteria in relation to the different alternatives and to meet the goal a 
visualisation built upon prioritisation gets accessible and gives stakeholders insight of 
what criteria is best responsive to which alternatives and which alternative from different 
stakeholder view best meets the goal. A tool available based on the AHP-methodology is 
called Expert Choice and this is what will be used in this thesis. What Expert choice does is 
that is uses the empirical data and subjective judgements to give structure to the different 
preferences and alternatives through a pairwise comparison.  
In the assessing of criteria a ”nine point intensity scale” is used. See Figure 2.5 (Barfod, 
U.D.). This scale will be used when prioritising and relatively comparing data to give 
results responsive to the different alternatives for the infrastructural development and to 
the different sustainability perspectives.  
Figure 2.5. Intensity scale for relative comparison (Barfod, U.D.) 
!
 of !
23
79
Figure 2.4. The different levels for relative comparison. All criteria are compared to 
all alternatives (Own elaboration) 
==PAGE:29==
3. Framework for Certiﬁcation 
Since it now has been explained that DGNB is a well recognised certification system in 
both Germany and Denmark and this project are directly relevant to the German 
population and secondly to Denmark it will be applied in this thesis. Further since this 
thesis seeks an as objective tool and approach towards sustainability as possible and the 
DGNB is well recognised and approved in both countries as such it is suitable. The 
challenge and further what this thesis tries to respond to is although than DGNB today is 
not yet developed for the certification of  infrastructural developments. This thesis will use 
the DGNB certification system as a guiding line to redefine some criteria and apply the 
standard definitions applicable to infrastructure and the main ideas about what 
sustainable development is. Envision, the certification tool from the US will function as 
supportive and compliment DGNB. 
According to DGNB sustainability is defined as following;  
”we understand sustainability as the obligation of the whole of society to shoulder 
responsibility for current problems such as climatic change and resource depletion 
instead of merely leaving them for future generations to deal with.” (ibid.)  
The goal of DGNB is to advocate environmental and health protection as well as 
sociocultural goals (DGNB, 2016a). With the design and usage being in focus for the 
sustainable certification DGNB hopes to contribute to a more sustainable society (ibid.). 
The relevance of increased consciousness in the general public is as well one of the goals 
for the council. The increased societal and environmental impacts as well as the increased 
awareness of the public is done through supportive activities such as research, 
development, and teaching. The organisation itself therefore categorise them self as 
promotors for the public good (DGNB, 2016b). Further the goal to advocate and contribute 
to a more sustainable society is done through the development of the certification of 
subject with sustainability criteria to follow. This is what will be used to elaborate a new 
framework for infrastructure. 
Frameworks are tools used for example measuring or managing progress or to give an 
overview of a current state. To be able to measure something or to give a status quo 
indicators are used to provide information. What the framework does is that it organises 
the indicators to give meaning to the collected information. It describes which indicators 
that should be used and what information they should present. As is quite obvious the 
indicators indicate something. With the structure the framework brings these chosen 
indicators can provide the user with some kind of information giving an idea on what is 
happening or what might need to change. Overall it gives an indication of current state and 
in that sense helps the user of the framework with for example future planning.  
!
 of !
24
79
==PAGE:30==
Frameworks as a start are generally developed through the identification of sustainability 
goals and relevant categories responding to that definition and to the area of concern. This 
could for example be an urban district, an organisation or in this case an infrastructural 
development and more specifically regional railway. The choice of indicator therefore vary 
depending on the definition of what sustainability is or what is relevant for that specific 
user of the framework. With the sustainable definition or goal given criteria can function 
as subcategories responding to the goal and to organise the indicators. 
McLaren (1996) has described indicator frameworks that are appropriate to choose when it 
comes to sustainability reporting. One of these frameworks possible to apply in sustainable 
development is referred to as a ’domain-based framework’. Domain-based frameworks 
identify key areas important for sustainability and then finds indicators suitable for these 
’domains’. Another framework is referred to as ’sectoral framework’. This type of 
framework rather focuses on sectors from a planning perspective relevant for sustainability 
and then find indicators in each sector, the framework becomes compartmentalised. The 
complexity here is that it can sometimes be difficult to see linkages between areas since 
indicators are divided at specific sectors responsible for that specific area (ibid.). Figure 3.1 
shows an example of these two frameworks.  
The framework developed by the DGNB is in somewhat a mix of these two frameworks. As 
a basis they have selected five ’domains’. These five quality sections are; Ecology, economy, 
socio-cultural aspects, technology and process. As a second division they have identifies 
sectors as a sub-category to the domains. In total they are fourteen and can be seen in 
figure 3.2. These are considered the main criteria and are referred to as criteria groups. 
Responsive to these there are indicators. Each sub-category group has a number of specific 
indicators implying when investigated and analysed, how they are performing. 
As can be seen it is a complex matrix, consisting of numerous different objects and topics 
requiring a lot of data to say something about the performance. Therefore only a few of 
them will be selected in this thesis. The goal is to get a somewhat overarching and 
implication about what is going on.  
!
 of !
25
79
Figure 3.1. Examples of sectoral and domain based frameworks (Maclaren, 1996) 
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.2. Criteria and sub-criteria DGNB (DGNB, U. D.) 
3.1 Choosing criteria 
 
With the argument for the use of DGNB being stated and the first structure of the 
framework being in place some further guidance was needed in the selection of specific 
criteria and indicators. With the definition of transportation as a system it is important to 
acknowledge that this system needs resources to function and that the usage of those has 
consequences. Figure 3.3 shows possible inputs and outputs for a railway transport system 
inspired by a lecture with Henrik Gudmundsson (14 Sep 2015) as well as generated from 
components in the table about transportation impacts on page 8. 
Figure 3.3. Inputs and outputs transport system (Own elaboration) 
!
 of !
26
79
==PAGE:32==
Man-made and natural inputs generates outputs. These inputs and outputs affects both the 
socio-economic environment as well as the natural environment (Gudmundsson, 2016). 
These outcomes could be categorised as both negative and positive, partly depending on 
which perspective you apply. What this leads to is that the concept of sustainability needs 
to be acknowledge in conformity with that systems components. This is why the Figure 3.3 
and its objectives functioned as a main guidance in the first selection of criteria to apply in 
the simplified framework. 
In table 3.1 the actual framework is presented. The structure from the DGNB with the five 
qualities as the main criteria group is applied. So is the criteria group and the criterion 
with its main targets. The focus of the different criterion have been partly revised to fit the 
bigger context of regional transport. The content and indicators in each criteria are partly 
adjusted and/or elaborated to fit the purpose of railway transport better. What will be 
described in the following is why the criteria is of relevance in sustainable development, 
according to DGNB and Envision, and what type of measurements that could be applied. 
Table 3.1 Framework applied in this thesis (Own elaboration)  
  
In Figure 3.4 the chosen criteria are put in relation to the nine covering categories that was 
used as scientific guidance when choosing a certification framework. This Figure illustrates 
the covering of this thesis framework with just a few selected categories to assess. The 
figure wants to illustrate that even with the simplified framework every area that were 
considered standard areas for sustainable infrastructure are covered. The Figure was 
created to make sure that the categories were covered in the eight criteria of the 
framework. Covering most areas gives a more credible indication of performance and 
applies to a broader range of stakeholders, which is a main priority in the thesis.   
!
 of !
27
79
==PAGE:33==
Environmental Quality  
ENV. 1.4 Biodiversity and interlinking habitats 
DGNB has stated reasons to why the protection of biodiversity and interlinking habitats is 
important. First biodiversity is a key in the function of biological systems. The protection 
of species and habitats means that for example the function of ecosystems, flower 
pollination is sustained (DGNB, U.D.). These functions are vital for life on Earth. 
Protecting species and habitats is a great deal for research, which can lead to new relevant 
discoveries such as for example new ways to generate energy from biotechnology. In 
summary biodiversity raises life quality and also helps support and increase environmental 
education which is additionally helpful looking at preservation and sustaining in the long 
run.  
The interlinking of habitats is important since the isolation and disruption of remaining 
habitats also means that a genetic exchange no longer is possible, which is important for 
the evolution and the continuing of ecosystems functionality and the maintaining of 
biodiversity providing habitats for wildlife. When land is taken that also mean smaller 
areas for habitats to function and to survive the interlinking becomes crucial. 
What is evaluated is if there is measures taken for the protection of habitats and species, 
the ecological quality (which is basically a measurement of how the area is doing at the 
moment in terms of biodiversity and interlinking habitats), and lastly the quantity and size 
of open spaces and their integration to an overarching network is evaluated.  
!
 of !
28
79
Figure 3.4. Relation between inputs and outputs in a transport system, criteria in this thesis 
framework, and the nine categories representative for sustainability in relation to certification 
(Own elaboration).
==PAGE:34==
What Envision further emphasises (2014) is that improvements to wildlife and habitat 
could as well be rewarded.  
ENV 2.1 Land use 
For sustainable development the limiting of increased settlement and circulation area is 
important. This partly relates to the criteria above stating that less area for habitats means 
less area to function. Decreasing urban sprawl minimises environmental degradation, 
decreased use of transportation means decreased use for e.g. fuels. 
The location for the planning area is investigated and proportion of fallow land, which is by 
DGNB defined as ”areas which have already been used for buildings or transport and are 
currently not used or under used.”, is rewarding since that means that new open space is 
not needed for structural settlement and that undeveloped land gets conserved (DGNB, 
U.D.). This criteria could as well apply for both greyfields and brownfields and rewards 
projects located on these areas (Envision, 2014). 
Land use also concerns contamination. If contaminated land and polluted soil are disposed 
to be improved it will be positively evaluated. 
Since this DGNB criterion furthermost concerns if new open space will be used or not 
further emphasis needs to be put into the possible new land take. Envision highlights 
important aspects of protection of open spaces. What is important is to protect and/or 
maintain functions of wetlands, shorelines and waterbodies as these are important for 
ecosystem services functionality.  Additionally the protection of prime or unique farmlands 
are seen as important, since these have an economical and social function in society as well 
as natural. Evaluation contains if  ”buffer zones”, protective of soil and vegetation, are set 
up on an efficient enough distance from areas important to protect or on the area of 
protection, if any in project area. Within these areas constructions are not allowed and 
different distances rewards with different scoring. Measures for improvements or to 
maintain functions can also generate credits, as for example choosing a brownfield as 
project location which means that contaminated spaces will be cleaned or maintain or 
enhance hydrological connection (Envision, 2014).  
Economical qualities  
ECO 1.2 Fiscal effects on the Region
Initially the criterion in the DGNB is applicable on municipalities, but since this is a 
regional development this criterion looks rather on the entire affected region. 
!
 of !
29
79
==PAGE:35==
DGNB emphasises how municipalities gets influenced by the development of individual 
districts and their possibility to offer mixed used services and facilities. This is highly 
connected to economic power, purchase power and possibilities for employment and 
residential growth (DGNB, U.D.). This goes as well for regions, and regional development 
being linked to districts possibility to grow and attract. What the municipalities and 
regions on their hand have to provide is the necessary infrastructure and costs related to 
that. Actual revenues and expenditure play a great deal in the regional performance. These 
are measurable concrete influential aspects. Fundamentally projects should not burden 
municipal and regional budgets.  
What is evaluated is the measurable financial impact. Direct and indirect costs and 
revenues are taken into account where only an economically beneficial region is seen as a 
sustainable district. Direct costs and revenues are quantifiable while the indirect ones are 
related more to uncertainty and forecasting and hence are measured in a more quantitative 
way. Measurements concern for example additional residents, additional business and new 
jobs, fiscal effects of investment and operational and maintenance costs. The indirect costs 
and revenues, i.e. the qualitative effects concerns aspects such as population growth, 
purchasing power and employment growth. 
Looking at Envision they see this category as a measurement and target of stimulating 
growth and development. Infrastructure investments should lead to e.g. improvements in 
job growth, capacity building, productivity, business attractiveness and identifying local 
assets this to all result in increased liveability. This should of of course be a consistent 
measure and not only be actualised during construction (Envision, 2014). And what 
Envision and DGNB emphasises is that an attractive region attracts people and business 
contributing to prosperity and socioeconomic vitality. This therefore also means that 
additionally to increased infrastructure efficiency cultural and recreational resources are 
important. 
Socio-cultural and functional qualities  
SOC2.3 Noise Protection
Noise pollution is one of the main environmental damaging factor caused by civilisation 
(DGNB U.D.). Noise is also damaging to the public with negative physical and mental 
consequences such as stress, headaches etc. The natural environment can suffer from noise 
in terms of for example disruption in communication and mating habits (Envision, 2014). 
This criterion therefore concerns quality of life as well as the environment.  
What decides performance and generates credits is different noise levels that respond to 
limits in national guidance and laws as well as EU Directive. The quieter the better. Noise 
maps are used, which shows calculations of noise pollution and operating predictions that 
!
 of !
30
79
==PAGE:36==
are put in relation to acceptable levels. The installation of noise mitigations can also 
generate credits (Envision, 2014). 
SOC3.2 Inclusive Access
”Inclusive access in a city district should ensure accessibility, freedom of movement and 
appropriate usability for everyone.” (DGNB, U.D.). One of the target is to ” provide 
universal unhindered access to primary transport routes” (Ibid.). The criteria concerns 
access both in terms of transport means not being prohibiting or unequally accessible 
dependent on e.g. age, disability, gender etc. on the other hand it is a matter of distance 
and being excluded dependent on where you live i.e. all population groups should have 
access to efficient transport regardless of living situation, financial situation or physical 
possibilities. 
What gets investigated is first a quantitative evaluation of accessible infrastructural 
facilities and in this a maximum permitted distance may not be exceeded to be rewarded 
for the performance. Secondly these are reviewed from a qualitative execution referring or 
relating to standards.  
Envision further emphasises how this criteria should also focus on measures to ease traffic 
congestion, prevent urban sprawl and improve community mobility and access and hence 
liveability (Envision, 2014). This requires coordination and also the consideration of 
expected traffic flows and that the location is selected to utilise and improve existing 
structures in transport network and if not that non motorised ways to access the facilities 
are provided. 
Technical qualities  
TEC1.1 Energy Technology 
Emissions are damaging to the socio- and natural environment and the reduction is a 
common goal at many instances globally. ”The German Federal Government has set a 
target of reaching an 80% reduction in CO2 levels by the year 2050” (DGNB, U.D.). For this 
criterion that concerns creating ”favourable conditions for a high degree of energy 
efficiency from the outset” (ibid.), where one action can be to require higher energy 
standards (e.g. efficiency and renewable). This means that early analysis of the potential 
and predicted operational demands is a prerequisite and that an energy concept gets 
established setting some standards and reviewing potential.  
The performance and measurements are here put in relation to the investigation and 
evaluation on ”the feasibility of renewable energy, including nontraditional energy sources, 
!
 of !
31
79
==PAGE:37==
to effectively increase the portion of operational energy that comes from renewable energy 
resources.”, (Envision, 2014). 
TEC3.3 Quality of Public Transport Infrastructure 
In development of districts an attractive and high-quality transport system is necessary 
(DGNB, U.D.). In the development and expansion of infrastructure it is important to look 
at the integration between different means of transport and to integrate the new project to 
existing public transport networks. The goal with public transport is to substantially 
reduce private transport by being more attractive.  
What is of interest is punctuality, reliability in relation to distance to facilities, expected 
travel time and connectivity. Qualitative and quantitative evaluations is performed. There 
should be walking distance between nearest other public transport stop in connection to 
the railway. Intermodal-platforms should be implemented where it in a maximum fixed 
distance should be possible to switch to another transport systems, public or 
environmental friendly. These platforms also have the requirement of being safe, 
comfortable and informative. If there is additional measures that helps promote public 
transport extra credits can be received.  
Process qualities  
PRO 1.1 Participation. 
A projects sustainability character is partly evaluated and rewarded looking at participants 
and participation (DGNB, U.D.). Two reasons for this is that for one participation opens up 
for a greater chance that concerned actors and users are involved in the project start and 
that the project then correspond to their needs and wants. The project will then by 
acknowledging actors open up for opportunities relevant to them. Secondly participation 
and engaging actors and the public means setting the basis for involvement on a bigger 
time scale that contribute to sustainability in a wider perspective and on a longer time-
scale. Participation also contributes to efficient planning which is beneficial for example 
both planners and investors. Participation could also mean that transparency is met which 
makes the process, planning and project possible more acceptable at concerned actors and 
at a more general public scale.  
The evaluation is based on degree of influence granted, for different parties involved. This 
is then divided in the participatory process in access to information, consultation and 
possibility to share opinions, involvement and participation/influence on decisions and 
responsibility with direct opportunities to make decisions or concretely contribute. These 
four concepts are then further divided in when in the process it occurs, in the framework 
development, planning and conceptualisation, in the planning and realisation and in the 
!
 of !
32
79
==PAGE:38==
utilisation phase. The evaluation also concerns the impact the participatory process have 
had and lastly how the participatory process have contributed to the promotion of 
sustainability issues related to the overall DGNB evaluation section. For examples that 
proposals brought up contribute to DGNB criteria.  
Envision in the same way advocates stakeholder involvement and the importance of 
programs produced for stakeholder identification, engagement and involvement in 
decision making. And that relationship building between key stakeholders and public in 
the engagement process.  
!
 of !
33
79
==PAGE:39==
4. Additional perspectives of sustainability
DGNB gives one perspective on sustainability. This chapter represents three additional 
perspectives of sustainability based on theoretical concepts. This chapter represents the 
initial arguments about the world being shaped by social and cultural context etc.  
”…there is no such thing as a generally accepted definition of ‘sustainable transport’, and it 
is doubtful whether one would - or could - ever exist.” (Nijkamp et al., 2001).  
The struggle with a common definition or a definition everyone can relate to always is a de 
facto. This emphasises the need to incorporate or at least acknowledge different definitions 
or perspectives  in the sustainability planning. 
This thesis wants to investigate what happens if you apply different perspectives of 
sustainability to different options and alternatives. And to test if balance is even possible to 
reach or if one is more steering than the others looking at the three pillars of sustainability. 
The perspectives relevant for the case is the perspectives of different actors. Since this 
thesis is in no place to argue for which concerned stakeholder that support what type of 
sustainability perspective or what type of prioritisation of principles each concerned 
stakeholder would agree with three fairly well known different perspectives will be applied. 
Additional reasons for this are due to the fact that the span of stakeholders involved 
stretches far and over multiple levels in society. For example we have the level of the 
European Union, which in consent with Germany and as well Denmark, are striving for a 
more coherent network beneficial for growth, and the request for a sustainable such, of 
Europe. Already here three great stakeholders have their view on sustainable development, 
which could differ. Further these official national views on sustainable development do 
most likely not represent the nations unified opinions. Within nations and in fact on every 
level in society different perspectives and discourses create different preferences and 
opinions. Involved organisations is another important stakeholder who brings additional 
perspectives to consider. These might in the past have had a focus of money and time, but 
have as well in some cases or at some organisations gotten more involved in additional 
aspects to apply, such as environmental and social focus (Shaw et al., 2012). But neither 
here is it in this thesis possible to go further in to the exact opinions on sustainability and/
or which those organisations could be.  
What is further a complexity if to investigate each stakeholders opinion is the risk of 
coming across documents that are greenwashed and more visualising than representative 
of actors actual work on sustainability. The stakeholder representation of the public also 
means that opinions might change depending on location, financial status etc. The 
stakeholder representation of the environment is additionally a stakeholder which not as 
easily can speak for itself and needs fairly representation from perhaps an objective view.  
!
 of !
34
79
==PAGE:40==
This means that an investigation in who these concerned stakeholders are as well as 
investigating their view on sustainability in a credible way that is not coloured by greening, 
money, culture etc. is too complicated in relation to what this thesis is capable of doing. 
Therefore this chapter has chosen three applications on sustainable development, where 
each is to be seen to advocate one of the three pillars of sustainability more than the other 
two. To choose perspectives that differentiates themselves from each other in that way is 
explained by their scientific origin, which brings credibility, and that they clearly 
distinguish themselves from each other, which outset the possibility for the potential 
outcome and result in this thesis to be represented more clearly.  
Lastly it is also an implication of the difficulties with deciding what to sustain, if that is a 
decision required to take, in relation to the three pillars this thesis builds its basic 
sustainability approach on. The three perspectives therefore represent the environment, 
the economy, and equity and as explained by Richard Norgaard (1988;607 in 
Gudmundsson, 2016;33) “[e]nvironmentalists want environmental systems sustained. 
Consumers want consumption sustained. Workers want jobs sustained.”  
4.1 Three theoretical concepts of sustainability
The first split described is about the economic view and the view of natural science and is 
referred to as weak verses strong sustainability.  
Weak Sustainability and Strong Sustainability  
In the introduction the sustainability concept is based on the definition formulated by 
Brundtland as well the ”Triple Bottom Line” shown in Figure 1.6. on page 9. This is a 
generally known way of referring to and present different dimensions important for 
sustainable development. Concentrating on one of these more than the other has resulted 
in different concepts on sustainability. Two of these concepts is referred to as ’weak’ and 
’strong’ sustainability and concerns focusing on either economy or environment. Either 
relating more to for one keeping production capacity of the economy constant or increased 
or for the other to maintain environmental functions and capacities over time (Hediger, 
1999).  
In the view of ’weak’ sustainability the concept of capital is very important. In this way of 
seeing things and approaching sustainable development nature can be captured in the 
term capital, and hence become an asset of natural capital to be transformed into 
manufactured capital or man-made capital (U. Ayres, U.D.) 
Natural capital can with for example some technological refining or transformation 
become human capital, and are thereby both resources of substitutability that in the 
reformation creates capital gainings in another form (Gudmundsson, 2016). This is a very 
!
 of !
35
79
==PAGE:41==
intragenerational perspective on sustainability, which means that current generation is not 
obligated to restore natural resources since they in the creation of alternative resources in 
form of generated human capital. Technology is partly what enables this substitutability of 
resources and is an important part of the weak sustainability. It is also sometimes argued 
that technology will solve the eventuality with scarce resources by technological 
investments that can create substitutes (ibid.).  
Two other important concepts in the ’weak’ approach, along with capital, is the term of 
welfare and growth. In weak sustainability  the essence of welfare and growth are related to 
substantially, hence welfare and growth means sustainability is reached in the same way as 
a decrease in welfare or a stagnating market implies unsustainable development (ibid.).  
Solow (1993 in Gudmundson et al., 2016) explains the basic idea which is that as long as 
the capital stock of manufactured, human, natural and financial capital, is maintained and 
intact future generations are in anyway left with opportunities such as current generations 
with the possibility to govern and make choices about their capital stock.  
Looking at ’strong’ sustainability the model is quite contradictory to the ’weak’ model. The 
’strong’ viewpoint argues that ”many of the most fundamental services provided by nature 
cannot be replaced by services produced by humans or man-made capital” (Daly, 1991b in 
Gudmundsson, 2016;34). Ayres (1978 in Gudmundsson et al., 2016) further expresses how 
many of the actual human-made capital is dependent on natural capital to function, which 
gives it an uneven distribution and a definite need of natural capital for economic process. 
This rather means that the capitals are complementary than substitutable.   
What the ’strong’ view further emphasises is that even if natural capital can be 
transformed and generate different capital there are a lot of services that can not be 
replaced by human or man-made capital (Daly, 1991b in Gudmundsson et al., 2016). This 
rather means that there is a limit to growth and that macro ecological perspective means 
that smaller systems are connected and impacted and impact the greater system. Smaller 
systems must be considered in the greater global system. The production and consumption 
needs to be in balance with extraction of raw materials and waste generation to cope with 
the macro-ecosystem capacity contrary to the ’weak’ view where production and 
consumption should continue to grow. And in the end there is a maximum ecological 
carrying capacity and therefore also a limit to what is technologically feasible with the 
thermodynamic laws (Gudmundsson et al., 2016). Human input/output within the system 
should be limited to stay within the frames of the systems carrying capacity, which means 
technological progress rather means efficiency than production, renewable sources should 
also be used thoughtfully and on an exchange basis rather than risking being extinct as 
they are relevant for the future when non-renewable sources will run out. Harvesting could 
therefore not take place faster than regeneration rates and emissions can not exceed 
assimilation capacity of ecosystem. And the exploitation of non-renewable sources should 
!
 of !
36
79
==PAGE:42==
not  be done in a rate faster than what it takes for the renewable 
sources to be fully reliable as a substitute (Daly 1991a;44,45 in 
Gudmundsson et al., 2016;36).  
Figure 4.1 shows a ’strong’ sustainability view, where economy is 
a concept and product existing within the society and that both 
economy and society are concepts dependent and functions 
dependent on the environment (ibid.). This clearly illustrates 
the ideas about macro-ecological system thinking, and the 
limits to growth within ecosystem capacity. Separately they can 
therefore not exist. 
Social Sustainability 
The last perspective this thesis brings up is the one focusing on the equality perspective 
and the social concept in sustainability. As a basis the Brundtland definition is applicable. 
To meet the ’need’ of current generation, and not being prohibiting of future generations to 
meet their ’needs’ makes it a definition that highlights the people living on the planet quite 
directly in contrast to the environment and economy. The concept ’need’ is clearly then a 
concept prevailing the social sustainability perspective and so is quality of life. But what a 
need is and what the standard for quality of life is differs dependent on many factors such 
as culture, religion, location, norms and values etc. Therefore an attempt is made to find a 
more elaborated definition to apply in this thesis.  
The concept ’need’ requires an explanation and reference in the perspective of social 
sustainability, since it can otherwise be a too subjective term to use in the search for a 
definition of social sustainability.  
Max-Neef, a chilean economist, has created a list of nine fundamental human needs. These 
are the needs of Subsistence, Protection, Affection, Understanding, Participation, 
Creation, Leisure, Identity and Freedom (Max-Neef et al., 1992;199). Within these nine 
fundamental needs basic needs such as for example food and shelter are interweaved as for 
example a satisfier of subsistence and protection. The basic fundamental needs are quite 
few and classifiable, but what is changeable, diverse and wider is how the needs are 
satisfied, the quantity and quality of satisfiers (ibid.). The needs are also satisfied within 
the context of oneself, with regard to social groups and with regard to the surrounding 
environment. 
Social sustainability concerns life-enhancing conditions or measures to achieve that 
condition (McKenzie, 2004). Some key aspects concerns equity to access, equity between 
current generations and future generations, cultural relations and integration, and valuing 
and protecting different cultures, political participation for more than elections, 
!
 of !
37
79
Figure 4.1. A “strong” model 
of sustainable development 
(IUCN, 2004;10 in 
==PAGE:43==
transferring awareness of social sustainability to next generation, sense of community 
responsibility, possibility for a community to identify strengths and needs as well to fulfil 
their needs through action, and where political support and procedure where the 
community can not fulfil its needs just through action (ibid.).  
The Western Australian Council of Social Service has further created a model for how to to 
provide for social sustainability (2000 in McKenzie, 2004). In that model social 
sustainability is defined as something that ”… occurs when the formal and informal 
processes, systems, structures and relationships actively support the capacity of current 
and future generations to create healthy and liveable communities. Socially sustainable 
communities are equitable, diverse, connected and democratic and provide a good quality 
of life.” (ibid.;18). 
4.2 Prioritisation 
This prioritisation applies to the specific case of this thesis. The prioritisation ordered in 
relation to what is considered a realistic order reviewing the different definitions of 
sustainability, key aspects and explanations.  
Prioritisation according to DGNB  
DGNB have made a division of credits possible to attain for each of their five main criteria 
groups. The credits are then secondly divided on the criteria within each group. The four 
main groups have a percentage of 22,5 % in the overall final evaluation, while the last 
group consist of 10 % in the final weighting. This means that as well each criterion is worth 
or influence the final wighting differently. This structure and implication of what DGNB 
consider being the most influential criterions over the sustainability evaluation is here 
applied in the prioritisation from the perspective of DGNB. The overall wighting is applied 
solely to give an order in the prioritisation and not with the official weightings used in 
DGNB. This is as well for the reason that the entire framework is not used and that the 
criteria has been partly revised and modified. It is also a reason to give a more fair and 
comparable prioritisation in relation to the other perspectives used in this thesis. The 
percentage in the overall weighting for the criteria chosen in this thesis framework can be 
seen in table 4.1. 
Table 4.1. DGNB weightings in the overall final evaluation in percentage  
!
 of !
38
79
ENV1.4 - 1,8 %
ENV2.1 - 2,7 %
TEC1.1 - 2,5 %
TEC3.3 - 1,3 %
ECO1.2 - 4,5 %
SOC2.3 - 1,8 %
SOC3.2 - 1,8 %
PRO1.1 - 1,7 %
==PAGE:44==
Which gave the following order for this thesis;  
1. 
ECO1.2 Fiscal effects on the region  
2. 
ENV2.1 Land use  
3. 
TEC1.1 Energy Technology  
4.  
SOC2.3 Noise protection and sound insulation  
4. 
SOC3.2 Inclusive Access 
4. 
ENV1.4 Biodiversity and Interlinking Habitats 
7. 
PRO1.1 Participation  
8. 
TEC3.3 Quality of Public Transport Infrastructure 
Prioritisation according to Weak sustainability  
The proﬁt oriented perspective 
”…focusing on the aggregate stock of capital, a decline in one form of capital is permitted 
so long as there is an equivalent increase in another form of capital.” (Gudmundsson et al., 
2016). 
Key concepts: Growth, Welfare, Profit, Technology 
1.
ECO1.2 Fiscal effects on the the municipality the region - This criteria rewards 
financial growth and profit generated in the region, and as well advocates regions 
initiatives to increase their prosperity  
2. TEC3.3 Quality of Public Transport Infrastructure - This becomes a criteria concerning 
connectivity and efficiency. If there is a question of investments in infrastructural 
projects these investments should be beneficial from a financial perspective. E.g. with 
connectivity and efficiency travel time savings means more efficient time in other 
activities, such as labour and consumption, which leads to financial winnings and 
contributes to growth. 
3. SOC2.3 Noise protection and sound insulation - The criteria if not sufficiently fulfilled 
can within settlements areas lead to health related issues, which means costs for the 
society and in this case the region. Noise pollution can also have an affect on areas to 
make them less attractive, which means less circulation and attraction for tourism and 
settlement. 
4. SOC3.2 Inclusive Access - Well covered accessibility contributes to knowledge centres 
getting more available and linked. It also contributes to knowledgeable peoples ability 
to transport themselves to where they are needed or requested. This will contribute to a 
more efficient and knowledgable labour market and to the spreading of knowledge for 
further for example technological development. 
!
 of !
39
79
==PAGE:45==
5.
PRO1.1 Participation  - Participation are a very abstract criteria hard to measure and to 
value. It is therefore not specifically a criteria of interest since it is hard to turn into 
capital. But participation is a criteria that prevent opposition. Decreasing, minimising 
or avoiding opposition will contribute to minimised costs in approval and consensus 
processes.  
6. TEC1.1 Energy Technology  - The criteria focus on technology for renewable sources. 
The technological focus is relevant for the weak sustainability development and 
relevant for growth, but for now the technologies to be enough efficient in least costs 
only using renewable sources is not there. This means that this criteria is more future 
oriented and therefore not as relevant in the infrastructural development of this case. 
7.
ENV2.1 Land use - Being cautious about claiming before untouched land is not of 
importance. Claiming land is for a good cause, for development, that will contribute to 
prosperity in society and the criteria is not prioritised. It rather needs to make room for 
expansion if that will contribute to growth and no future perspective about 
consequences is really applied.  
8. ENV1.4 Biodiversity and Interlinking Habitats - Biodiversity and habitats is aspects 
difficult to directly give a capital value as preserved from a weak sustainability point of 
view. These in there original form does not contribute to growth or profit. And if 
ecosystems loses its functionality or gets destroyed it is only as a consequence for 
capital gainings in another area. Therefore this criteria rates at the lowest of the 
prioritisation scale. 
Prioritisation according to Strong sustainability  
The perspective of the future and the environment 
”…the economy exists within society…and…both society and the economy depend upon the 
environment.” (Gudmundsson et al., 2016).  
Key Concepts; Future Generations, Ecological Capacity, Macro-ecology - micro-ecology  
1.
ENV1.4 Biodiversity and Interlinking Habitats - Biodiversity and habitats are part of 
the smallest aspects in ecological systems. But these micro-ecological systems affect 
and exist in the greater global macro-ecological systems. This means that impacts on 
the smallest parts will in the end possibly affect the greater systems as well. Today 
there are no certainty or knowledge about what the consequences of extinction and 
degradation to irreversible levels are. From a strong sustainability perspectives it 
therefore become relevant to be cautious and acknowledge this criterion as the highest 
priority preparing for future generation and mitigating environmental destruction. 
!
 of !
40
79
==PAGE:46==
2. ENV2.1 Land use - Acquiring land relates to the above criterion. Calming land means 
less settlements areas for habitats, biodiversity and for other relevant functions in 
ecosystems. The priority is therefore high to limit destruction that are not reversible or 
that will have destructive affects both for today and in the long run.  
3. TEC1.1 Energy Technology 
 - prioritising and preparing for technology that 
incorporates the usage of renewable sources means considering intra- and 
intergenerational perspective and future generations are taken into consideration in 
the development. 
4. SOC2.3 Noise protection and sound insulation - From a strong sustainability 
perspective this criteria in opposite of the weak perspective rather concerns the 
polluting that will have an affect on the natural environment. Noise levels that impact 
habitats and biodiversity and destroys their settlement are to be prevented and 
minimised as far as possible.  
5.
PRO1.1 Participation  - Participation from a strong sustainability point of view is 
relevant since this could function as education for future generation. If participation 
becomes an important part of the sustainability development participants can become 
aware of important concepts for sustainability and hence contribute to more 
sustainable living and preparing for future sustainability and speeding the concept. 
6. TEC3.3 Quality of Public Transport Infrastructure - This criterion is important to focus 
on since a good quality of the public transport system, an efficient and connected 
system, advocate and contributes to limiting private transport, which is generally more 
environmentally destructive. 
7.
SOC3.2 Inclusive Access - Inclusive access is important from an ecological 
sustainability perspective since it can contribute to less traffic congestion. Accessibility 
if sufficiently provided contributes to more distant places and a broader range of the 
public can be reached and hence does not have to choose optional means of 
transportation.  
8. ECO1.2 Fiscal effects on the the municipality the region - The importance of growth 
and profit gets the least priority since these concepts can not be considered targets at 
the expense of the ecological capacity. 
!
 of !
41
79
==PAGE:47==
Prioritisation according to Social sustainability 
The perspective of the people 
”Development and/or growth that is compatible with the harmonious evolution of civil 
society, fostering an environment conducive to the compatible cohabitation of culturally 
and socially diverse groups while at the same time encouraging social integration, with 
improvements in the quality of life for all segments of the population.” (Polése and Stren, 
1999 in McKenzie, 2004:17) 
Key concepts: Access, Equality, Political Participation, Needs, Quality of Life, Health, 
Culture and Integration  
1.
SOC3.2 Inclusive Access - Access is one of the main essential concept in reaching social 
sustainability.  
2. PRO1.1 Participation  - Participation and political involvement and involvement is 
considered important. Participation is as well an inclusive concept which further 
emphasise access. 
3. SOC2.3 Noise protection and sound insulation - Disturbing noise levels from a social 
point of view needs to be prevented due to the risk of health issues. It is not as from a 
weak sustainability point of view related to the financial aspect of heart issues.  
4. TEC3.3 Quality of Public Transport Infrastructure - Good performance in this criterion 
means connectivity is reached which will contribute to integration and minimise 
exclusion. It is as well a criterion directly connected to access through connectivity. 
5.
ECO1.2 Fiscal effects on the region - The fiscal effects  on the region is important from 
a social sustainability perspective since it can contribute to community wellbeing. To 
reach a condition of social sustainability development is essential in for example the 
labour market or in the perspective of health care and other important regional 
facilities which requires financial means to function. 
6. ENV1.4 Biodiversity and Interlinking Habitats - From a social perspective this criterion 
is mainly essential in the terms of the recreational contributions it can give a region. 
educative is stimulating 
7.
TEC1.1 Energy Technology  - Energy technology is primarily a matter of health issues 
due to insufficient energy technology and emissions as a consequence in the social 
sustainability perspective.  
!
 of !
42
79
==PAGE:48==
8. ENV2.1 Land use - This is a criteria concerning land not being claimed and minimising 
space relevant from a people perspective. It can concern open space for recreation or 
other activities. But it can also be a perspective of that land use is argued for if it 
contributes to for example facilities for a more liveable region such as medical 
instances etc. 
!
 of !
43
79
==PAGE:49==
5. Alternatives for the extension of the railway link
This section function as the collection of concrete data necessary for modelling to be able 
to further analyse and answer to the problem formulation. 
The thesis is investigating and comparing different alternatives of the railway structure 
stretching from Puttgarden to Lübeck in Germany. This section presents what has been 
found about the different alternatives related to the different criteria of this thesis 
framework. What wants to be stretched here is that due to the fact that this project takes 
place in Germany the substantial part of available data is only available in German. This 
means that most of the information have been translated from German to English by a non 
native German speaker, and supportive translating tools have therefore been used as 
support. This might reflect the official detailed information that have been found. But as 
the thesis is focusing more on the aspect of definitions and different stakeholders rather 
than trying to be absolute supportive in the decision of which route to choose this is 
considered as acceptable in this report.  
The Fehmarn Belt fixed link is as 
mentioned a key project connecting 
Germany and Denmark with a 
permanent link, more specific an 
immersed tunnel under the baltic sea 
p a s s a g e b e t w e e n R ø d b y a n d 
Puttgarden, crossing the island 
F e h m a r n , s e e F i g u r e 5 . 1 ( D B 
ProjektBau GmbH, 2013). 
In September 2008 Germany and 
Denmark agreed on the joint 
infrastructural project that will connect 
Scandinavia with the rest of Europe 
faster than what today is possible (DB 
Netz AG, 2016a). The project is 
expected to be finalised by 2021 
(STRING, 2012a). 
The success of the link is although highly dependent on road and rail links connected to 
the tunnel and to the intersecting transport networks. Infrastructural development at one 
place means that other parts of the networks as well gets affected. For the network to 
function as seamless as the goal is here, with the development of what today is considered 
a bottleneck, the rest of interconnected infrastructure as well needs to undergo an 
inspection and possibly an upgrade. The TEN-T policy has identified that most journeys 
!
 of !
44
79
Figure 5.1  Map over the Fehmarn Belt crossing 
(DB ProjektBau GmbH, 2013)  
==PAGE:50==
starts or ends in cities or at important nodes and that makes the policy emphasise 
connections to the ”last mile” (European Commission, 2014d). 
With the Fehmarn project being a project that will affect both countries both Germany and 
Denmark are aware of the presumed direct and indirect affects it will have on both side, 
both to the country in whole but also on the transport network. Denmark has therefore 
planned for an upgrade on the railway tracks from Ringsted on Zealand to Rødby on 
Lolland as an extension of the Fehmarn Belt tunnel (Ramboll Group, 2015). In Germany 
current tracks are as well insufficient for future traffic. For the German side the 
construction of the Fehmarn Belt Fixed Link means that the upgrade the immersed tunnel 
brings, with developed railway tracks, will not be compatible with the standards of existing 
extension of the railway tracks running from Puttgarden to Lübeck today. Therefore 
Germany has agreed on an upgrade on this railway link (DB Netz AG, 2016a). The existing 
single-track link Lübeck-Puttgarden (DB line 1100) which stretches over approximately a 
80 km distance will be upgraded to a electrified two-track link with a capacity to keep at 
least 160 km/h (DB Netz AG, 2010).  
To upgrade the railway line investigations have been made on different alternatives to 
choose. These alternatives are presented and further reviewed from the perspectives of the 
criteria that have been set up in the framework. The regional planing procedure that the 
project has gone through (RPP) have been led by the state Schleswig-Holstein. Alternative 
routes have been reviewed in accordance with plans regarding overall objectives for the 
state for regional development. Social, economical and environmental impacts on the 
region were assessed and reports were produced and analysed (DB Netz AG, 2012a). The 
RPP is a supportive procedure to aid and test decisions in the railway connections and 
upgrade. This thesis uses the material the RPP produced and uses those reports from the 
perspective of the eight main criteria from the framework.  
The area of consideration in the Schleswig-Holstein state is Ostholstein, which is part of 
the eastern part of the state.  
The planning area stretches from northern Lübeck to the island Fehmarn, see Figure 5.2, 
and in a corridor with the width varying from 200 - 2000 m, dependent on investigated 
area such as people, landscape, habitat and biodiversity, water, ground, air, climate, 
cultural and other assets. The Federal Railway Authority and their guide ’EBA Guide 2010’ 
has functioned as guiding with some deviations. Of course also regional and national laws, 
development plans and comprehensive plans have been followed and used in the guiding 
of what to investigate and what targets that should be met. 
!
 of !
45
79
==PAGE:51==
The investigated alternatives consists of alternative 1A, A, E and X, see Figure 5.3.  
Alternative 1A consists of an expansion of the existing line with a bypass of Neunstadt in 
Holstein (i.H.) and Oldenburg in Holstein (i.H.), see Figure 5.3 (DB Netz AG, 2012b). The 
passing of Neunstadt i. H.runs through a branch line. The railway line will be electrified 
and expanded to a two-track line, and the design speed will mainly keep 160 km/h. Due to 
the expected negative environmental effects a double track route following the already 
existing track running by the water below Neunstadt i. H. is excluded from the start. The 
change of passing in Oldensburh i. H. is due to speed increase, which also beans a new 
platform is constructed.  
Alternativ X was presented as an alternative to the expansion of existing line, 1A. 
Alternative X consist of a completely new line both in the mid-upper and lower section, see 
Figure 5.3  
!
 of !
46
79
Figure 5.2. Investigated corridor (LEGUAN 2012a)
==PAGE:52==
Alternative A provides an alternative in the passing of Timmendorfer Strand and 
Scharbeutz with an eastern curve passing instead of the existing and the 1A proposal. 
which means a new line in the southern part of the project area.  
Alternative E initially follows the current track but then follows a more western course and 
only then in Sierksdorf aligns with the line 1A. Which means this alternative as well 
foremost consist of a new section of track and only an upgrade of a double track in the first 
southern part.   
The alternatives have as well been divided in sub-alternatives with different combinations 
of the four main routes. This were done to not limit the project to only four options, but 
instead open up to find a best solution. The sub-alternatives have arisen from the 25 
available intersections of one or more route alternatives. In these ”combination-points” a 
principal shift from one alternative to another is technically possible and hence a 
substantial amount of additional alternatives were available. The possibility to reach a 
route with the most advantageous sections were therefore increased significantly. 
!
 of !
47
79
Oldensburg i. H.
Timmendorfer Strand
Sierksdorf
Scharbeutz
Neunstadt i. H.
Figure 5.3. Map over alternatives (STRING, 2012b and own elaboration) 
==PAGE:53==
Additionally the investigation have consisted of a division of four sections of the project 
area. These are; 
Section 1 Bad Schwartau to south Neustadt 
Section 2 south Neustadt up north Altenkrempe  
Section 3 north Altenkrempe to Damlos and  
Section 4 Damlos to Fehmarnsund, see Figure 5.4 
An additional section 5 as well exist, but this is located within a small area of the entire 
project area and is in Figure 5.4 part of section 4 at the very end (DB Netz AG, 2012b). 
In section 1, 3 and 4 combination-points resulted in more than one alternative 
combination. Section 2 only consisted of alternative 1A. Overall, the calculated possible 
combinations resulted in 690 different alignments (DB Netz AG, 2012b). This would mean 
an extensive amount of alternatives to both analyse and to put into the tool Expert-choice. 
The amount of data that then would be generated with the MCDA-tool is to great to fit in 
this thesis. This thesis will therefore continue the evaluation in the first of these four 
sections. This section is the section containing the greatest amount of sub-alternatives and 
also the section with the most differences in-between the alternatives location-wise. After a 
simplification with a preliminary, intermediate and in the end a main comparison it for 
section one resulted in 27 alternatives. These were then additionally narrowed down to 
what was considered four meaningful alternatives, presented in table 5.1 and Figure 5.5. A 
more detailed map showing the different types of terrain etc. can be found in Appendix B. 
!
 of !
48
79
Figure 5.4. The four sections for investigation (DB Netz AG, 2012a)
==PAGE:54==
!
 of !
49
79
Table 5.1. The possible alternatives in section 1 (DB Netz AG, 2012a)
Figure 5.5. Map over the four different alternatives in section one. Colours are not 
representative in this thesis for anything in particular (DB Netz AG, 2012a)
==PAGE:55==
4.1 Evaluation and Preferred Alternative for each criteria
Since it is a simplified and reworked model of the DGNB certification the indicators have 
been given the overall same importance in this evaluation. The exact scoring used in the 
DGNB is not suitable to use at the level of indicators here since the targets for the 
indicators are not exactly the same. Some indicators have as well been merged, changed 
and/or adjusted. 
ENV. 1.4 Biodiversity and interlinking habitats
The Regional Planning Procedure contains an inventory of the protected and concerned 
areas and an evaluation of space affected in relation to an assessment and comparison of 
alternatives. Amongst other special reports an overarching Environmental Impact 
Assessment is performed. The alternatives are therefore equally valued due to the location 
and the area of interest at this stage of the investigation being the same for all of the 
alternatives from a perspective of biodiversity and habitats.   
Due to the early stage of the project official measures for protection are not yet decided 
upon. Although according to the Federal Nature Conservation Act and the Nature 
Conservation Act of Schleswig-Holstein measures to prevent and/or minimise 
environmental impacts is part of the planning approval. Adverse unavoidable effects will 
require compensation or replacement in areas of biodiversity loss, degradation of habitats, 
ground, loss of surface water and groundwater influencing habitats and landscape (DB 
Netz AG, 2012b). The alternatives are as well equally valued here.  
To have large coherent open spaces for green areas is a project specific goal. Green 
corridors is a target to ensure long-term protection of open space towards settlement 
claims. The landscape is diverse with agricultural and horticultural land, open green areas 
and forests, settlement and shores. Looking at quantity of open space it is mainly 
accessible in the first part of the section. Both section 1A.1 and x.1 cuts these areas. Both 
these areas are considered having high ecological value. From the investigation alternative 
1A.1 crosses more zones of high importance or zones with higher importance than to be 
found for option X. But since alternative 1A is an extension of already existing line this 
Alternative  
Indicator
1.1 1.2
1.3 1.4
Inventory analysis project area 
1
1
1
1
Measures for protection/improvements
4
4
4
4
Quantity of open spaces and location/integration
3
1
2
4
Preferred Alternative
3
1
2
4
!
 of !
50
79
==PAGE:56==
alternative still rates higher, due to the already overall establishment. The fact that it is an 
extension means that if implemented protective measurements would be good enough to 
cooperate with preservation and maintaining already established wildlife corridors. 
Implementing alternative X would instead require new open spaces and hence affect 
additional wildlife corridors and disturb new settlements (DB Netz AG, 2012f). The 
intrusion of green spaces are generally then minimised with option 1.2 (ibid.). Alternative 
1.3 that consist of section 1A.4 and 1A.5 are valued as second best. Alternative 1.1 as third, 
with section 1A.1 in the beginning and alternative 1.4 as the least preferred alternative.  
There have been numerous complimentary investigations to the overall investigation, to 
fully get an overview of the area before deciding what direction to go. These investigations 
have showed that both species and areas with high ecological value exist within the area, 
crossed by all relevant alternatives. More or less every section in Appendix B with green 
areas or with wildlife corridor crossings is areas of protection, as well as coastlines. This 
further emphasises the arguments stated above, that the one with least affect is the one 
where an upgrade of existing line is made instead of claiming additional land, hence 
alternative 1.2 rates highest. Implementation of measurements, e.g additional crossing for 
wildlife is required in every scenario since truly no preferred alternative is available from 
the view of biodiversity and interlinking habitats.  
ENV 2.1 Land use 
There is no official data found of the amount of fallow land. Alternative 1A is the 
alternative claiming the least amount of new open space generally in the areas since this 
alternative is the alternative with an upgrade and extension of existing track. In section 1 of 
the project area alternative 1.2 is defined as the alternative performing best. Alternative 1.2 
consist of the greatest part from 1A. The argument of rating alternative 1.2 as the most 
preferred gets supported by the special investigation regarding agriculture. This 
investigation states that alternative 1A is the best from a land use perspective (DB Netz AG, 
2012g). 
Alternative  
Indicator
1.1 1.2
1.3 1.4
Proportion previously used land/Open spaces
3
1
2
4
Measures contaminated land
-
-
-
-
Buffer zones implemented for protection of land
4
4
4
4
Preferred Alternative
3
1
2
4
!
 of !
51
79
==PAGE:57==
With the same arguments as for the biodiversity and interlinking habitats criterion, with 
the different alternatives consisting of segments from alternative 1A, the same preference 
is applied here regarding option 1.1, 1.3 and 1.4.  
From what have been read there is no sign of contaminated land within the investigated 
project area and therefore this indicator will be disregarded. Regarding additional 
protective measures for land use nothing is found, this could be a consequence of regional 
and state plans being used. These plans have already preservation and protection plans 
and zones for land with high ecological value. The project do not need to take further 
responsibility for the implementation of protective areas and zones, rather just adjust to 
the existing zones. Since every alternative crosses zones with high ecological value the 
alternatives are given the lowest grade in the rating. 
ECO 1.2 Fiscal effects on the Region 
The impact on regional development have in the project been evaluated from numerous 
perspectives. The main areas have concerned impact on the spatial context the railway 
tracks would have, e.g. crossing and/or impairing functional relationships, impact on the 
spatial development of the districts and in selected functional areas, e.g. crossing planned 
districts and other development areas, for example agricultural land. 
Alternative 1.4 would with the route connecting to Bad Schwartau, pass Lübeck and 
Sereetz (which is a part of southern Ratekaus) in a more preferable way than the other 
options and keep Bad Schwartaus capacity as a seaside resort due to the good accessibility. 
With the bypass of  the places Timmendorfer Strand and Scharbeutz that means keeping 
the recreational value of these places. The places as tourist attractions would not be 
affected which means revenues to the region (DB Netz AG, 2012d). Alternative 1.2 and 1.3 
rates relatively alike, but due to alternative 1.3 having the same initial passing as 
alternative 1.4, which was described above as beneficial, this makes it rate slightly higher. 
Alternative 1.1 rates the lowest, with lowest positive impact on regional development 
(ibid.). Looking at only costs the extension of railway tracks and hence alternative 1.2 is of 
course the most cost beneficial alternative directly. This alternative would keep the costs 
for land acquisition, roadbed and engineering structures at the lowest. But due to the need 
Alternative  
Indicator
1.1 1.2
1.3 1.4
Costs and revenues
4
3
2
1
Growth - population, employment
-
-
-
-
Efficient investment from a future perspective
-
-
-
-
Preferred Alternative
4
3
2
1
!
 of !
52
79
==PAGE:58==
for noise mitigation measures and sound insulation and the destruction of tourist and 
recreational areas this indirectly can not be considered the most cost beneficial (DB Netz 
AG, 2012a). 
With the construction of the fixed link the Danish state-owned company Femern A/S 
expects that 500 jobs 2015-2021 can be created (DB Netz AG, 2012d). For now the link and 
the crossing is instead provided by a ferry service. In the long run much of the ferry service 
will be phased out and jobs in that sector thereby minimised. Additionally the jobs created 
with the construction of the link are temporary until the completion of the crossing. 
Consequently, promotion and the  development of local businesses in the different sectors 
is important in order to sufficiently maintain jobs at the region or to create new ones 
(ibid.). 
This information makes the confirmation of growth in areas of population and 
employment highly uncertain and no official numbers or data are to be found since it is 
working with predictions. Surely the link and the upgrade of the railway structure will 
increase activity. But for whom or exactly where is difficult to predict and are not more 
thoroughly reflected in the official project plan documents. Therefore since it is even more 
difficult to predict exactly what the different alternatives outcomes will be the information 
is considered insufficient to give a rating. 
The target of reducing the overall travel time in the corridor from Copenhagen to Hamburg 
to about an hour can affect different sectors of the economy positively (DB Netz AG, 
2012d). In the distance from Lübeck to Fehmarn it concerns a shortening of travel time to 
approximately 30 minutes (ibid.).  
An increase in cross-border exchanges between Denmark and Germany may affect the age 
structure in the region and increase the possibility to attract younger residents. This is 
important for the region since current demographics indicates that a greater part of the 
residents are entering their phase of auxiliary and care, especially since life expectancy 
continues to rise. To not suffer from uneven age division and deficient and expensive 
elderly care attracting new younger residents becomes crucial for the prosperity in the 
region (ibid.). 
The regional economy will hopefully be positively affected by the extension of the rail 
hinterland connections for the fixed link. But the extension and upgrade of the railway and 
construction of the link is also related to regional risks. The intensification of freight 
transport by rail indicates financial winnings but the risk for the region to become a transit 
region is also present  (DB Netz AG, 2012b). 
The benefits that an intensified exchange between Germany and Denmark depends on 
integration efforts, among others. For example the exchange could increased settlement of 
Danish workers in Germany with lower property prices and living costs than in Denmark, 
!
 of !
53
79
==PAGE:59==
which will generate incomes to the region. This is though dependent on working for 
favourable conditions for Danish workers and integration measures (DB Netz AG, 2012b).  
With the development it is for the region as well important to focus on regional cultural 
and recreational areas. This makes the region attractive for both tourist purpose but as 
well increases liveability. To maintain and/or increase the attractiveness of the region this 
is highly relevant to minimise the risk of becoming a transit region. 
With these findings on both possible positive and negative outcomes it is difficult to draw 
any conclusions on future efficiency and growth. It is considered that the region most likely 
will benefit from the railway extension and upgrade. But if those benefits only concern 
certain areas, other nations or the entire region is hard to predict. The gathered and found 
information is therefore considered to be insufficient to draw conclusions and value the 
different alternatives.  
SOC2.3 Noise Protection
The noise levels should not exceed limits starting on 47 dB to 59 dB following the Traffic 
Noise Ordinance 16th BImSchV - The Verkehrslärmschutzverordnung. The 16th BImSchV 
is a regulation which sets limit values for noise pollution (DB Netz AG, 2012c). The limits 
depend on if the measurements are done during daytime or nighttime and within which 
location the noise is present, residential/non-residential/open space. 
Alternative 1.1 rates as the most preferred when it comes to noise pollution. Secondly 
alternative 1.2 is placed. This is mainly due to the noise levels exceeding limits in 
recreational areas and that noise mitigations are required. Thirdly alternative 1.3 places 
itself with only a small difference from alternative 1.2. Alternative 1.4 rates fourthly. In this 
alternative the largest area for recreation will be affected by noise pollution (DB Netz AG, 
2012b). 
SOC3.2 Inclusive Access
Alternative  
Indicator
1.1
1.2
1.3 1.4
Noise levels and mitigations if needed to pass limits
1
2
3
4
Alternative  
Indicator
1.1 1.2
1.3 1.4
Inclusion in terms of disability, finances, distance
4
1
2
3
Ease traffic congestion
2
1
2
2
!
 of !
54
79
==PAGE:60==
The criteria is not sufficiently investigated at this stage by the project and project 
responsible. No information of measures for inclusion to create accessibility to all could be 
found. Even so alternative 1A is considered to have a positive impact over access. Project 
documents explain how the communities along the railway tracks will be more accessible 
with alternative 1A (DB Netz AG, 2012b). This can also be supported by Appendix B, where 
settlement areas are shown and alternative 1A crosses most. This also explains why 
alternative 1.3 is the second most preferable alternative using the section 1A.4 and aligning 
and/or crossing settlement areas. Alternative 1.1 increases deterioration of villages (DB 
Netz AG, 2010). Alternative 1.1 rates as a least preferable and hence making alternative 1.4 
slightly more preferable with its crossing of the region instead of a route along the eastern 
side, farthest away from settlements. 
Alternative 1.2 is also argued for in terms of easing traffic congestion. This could be 
explained by the same arguments. Crossing or aligning settlement areas means a higher 
chance that the residents in these areas will use the railway transport compared to if the 
railway were to be located further away (DB Netz AG, 2012b). Considering the other 
alternatives no official information connected to traffic congestion could be found. It could 
be argued for that the same order as above could be applied, since accessibility is one way 
of prohibiting usage of private transport. But since these alternatives means less 
accessibility those above arguments can not be used.   
TEC1.1 Energy Technology 
In the information that have been assessed nothing about measures for decreased energy 
use have been found. The alternative therefore equally rates with a four.  
Regarding favourable conditions for renewable energy this is for this case mainly 
connected to where the routes are located and which areas they intersect. Alternative 1.1 
with section E.2 and E.3 means a route where these sections cut and expand over areas 
that are suitable for wind energy plants. Therefore the route rates badly. Alternative 1.4 as 
Preferred Alternative
4
1
2
3
Alternative  
Indicator
1.1 1.2
1.3 1.4
Measures for decreased energy usage
4
4
4
4
Favourable conditions renewable energy
4
1
2
3
Energy concept
3
3
3
3
Emissions - Predicted consumption 
1
2
2
2
Preferred Alternative
3
1
2
3
!
 of !
55
79
==PAGE:61==
well consist of section E.3 and therefore rates as thirdly preferred alternative. It has also 
been stated that alternative X has negative impacts on wind energy. It is not stated exactly 
where but therefore alternative 1.3 that contains sections of the X-route rates as secondly 
preferred. It is neither considered worse than option 1.1 or 1.4, nor considered better than 
option 1.2 which not crosses any of the areas important for wind energy plants.  
When it comes to an energy concept no specific concept have been defined for the project 
of concern. What is being mentioned in project documents is the EU directive on the 
promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources.  The energy concept of the Federal 
Government and the decisions to accelerate the energy transition to by 2050 mainly to 
ensure the supply of renewable energy is also mentioned (BMU, 2012 in DB Netz AG, 
2012a). It is emphasised that in particular the field of wind power generation has great 
potential in the region Schleswig-Holstein. The regional plans have also locations suitable 
for the use of wind energy, as have been shown. Since it is not a project specific concept but 
the issues in the energy sector is still acknowledged and emphasised the indicator for all 
criteria rates at 3. 
No data on presumed energy consumption have been found. But what have been found is 
information implying that alternative 1.1 is the alternative that will generate least 
emissions. Therefore alternative 1.1 is the most preferred alternative regarding this 
indicator. Since no additional information is available regarding the other alternatives they 
all rate as secondly preferred. 
TEC3.3 Quality of Public Transport Infrastructure 
In project assessment documents it is stated that alternatives E, X and A will contribute to 
degradation of the public transport service of cities and towns along the development axis, 
from Fehmarn to Lübeck. The degradation of the public transport service is mainly related 
to the decrease in reachability for the alternatives E, X and A. The stops for public 
transport are not as accessible in alternative 1.1, 1.3 and 1.4 as in alternative 1.2. It is stated 
that alternative 1.2 will benefit from the project investments of the upgrade regarding mass 
transit and improved connections and accessibility between the settlements in the 
development corridor (DB Netz AG, 2012a). Alternative 1.2 therefore rates as the most 
Alternative  
Indicator
1.1 1.2
1.3 1.4
Quality public regional transport system
2
1
2
2
Connectivity
2
1
2
2
Promotion public transportation
4
4
4
4
Preferred Alternative
2
1
2
2
!
 of !
56
79
==PAGE:62==
preferred result, whilst all the other options rates as second preferred options (DB Netz 
AG, 2012e). The same rating is applied regarding the indicator for connectivity. Alternative 
1.2 is improving connectivity whilst the other options are not expressed to have the same 
positive affect if implemented. With alternative 1.2 the commuting by rail is highly 
improved and passenger traffic can move from road to rail (DB Netz AG, 2012b).  
It is not in project assessment documents clear if public transportation should 
deemphasised and/or promoted. There is vague indications in project documents how a 
shift from road to railway commuting is preferred and that measures for complementary 
and integrating public transport system is considered relevant (DB Netz AG, 2012d). This 
is not elaborated further from what have been able to find, and the alternatives therefore 
rate equally at a four since no actual promoting activities are described.  
PRO 1.1 Participation
This criteria evaluates the participation in the planning phase of the project. 
Information centres representing the project have been set up on the island of Fehmarn, in 
Scharbeutz and on the Danish side. The information at these centres is available in 
German, Danish and English. Spokesmen are as well available at the centres to answer 
questions about the project (DB Netz AG, 2016b). There is also a substantial amount of 
information online and contact details where it is easy to get a reply about the process. The 
information online is although mainly in German which is a disadvantage. The more 
thoroughly information that is available is quite complicated, which could be expected, but 
still decrease the value of the accessible information. The alternatives are therefore valued 
equally, with a 2. The access of information is sufficient, but there is room for 
improvements. 
In the project planning a dialogue forum has been set up. This forum, which primarily is a 
web portal, is supposed to function for exchange of information and sharing of opinions. 
The goal is to have the forum functioning as a central communication platform for all 
stakeholders involved (DB Netz AG, 2016c). The dialogue forum also promotes face to face 
Alternative  
Indicator
1.1 1.2
1.3 1.4
Accessible information
2
2
2
2
Consultation and opinions
2
2
2
2
Participation and influence on project
3
3
3
3
Responsibility in contribution 
4
4
4
4
Preferred Alternative
1
1
1
1
!
 of !
57
79
==PAGE:63==
dialogue and invites stakeholders to actual physical meetings. The forum is supposed to be 
representative of both opponents and representatives of the planned infrastructure 
development and function as a transparent platform. It is difficult to assess how the forum 
is meeting these goals and how the process of consultation and sharing opinions looks like 
with information on the webpage only being available in German. It is although stated that 
it is 32 participant representing different interests of different sectors, stretching from 
representations of residents to conservationists, to planners and businesses. The forum 
meets every two or third month, and have had on an average 70 participants and 
additional 350 following a live stream. This generally seems as a low number of involved in 
a region with over 2 million residents. This makes the alternative for the indicator of 
Consultation and opinions rate with a 2. The project is prepared for consultation and 
participation, but how that process actually looks like and if opinions are heard and 
reflected upon are not enough described to base a rating on.  
The amount of participants are considered too low for the size of the project. It is also 
uncertain with low participation numbers if a possible influence is even reflecting or 
representing enough actors, users etc. It is not clear if actual participation and sharing of 
opinions have had an impact on the project. The criteria rates at three here, participation is 
not totally dismissed within the project, but it is considered that the performance for this 
indicator could be better.  
There is not enough information to evaluate the degree of responsibility in the planning. It 
is not clear if representatives are informed about the projects sustainability ideas and 
concepts. Or if any opinions brought up have been considered. The criteria rates with a 
four for this indicator.  
Summary preferred alternative certification 
  
!
 of !
58
79
TEC3.3
==PAGE:64==
5. Data analysis and results 
This chapter presents the concrete results from the certification and the MCDA-process. 
The results from the certification is a reflection of the results for each criteria for the 
different alternatives. The outcomes of the MCDA have been generated through the usage 
of the program Expert-choice with the priorities and information about preferred 
alternatives inserted and analysed.  
5.1 Results Preferred Alternative with Certiﬁcation 
5.2 Results Preferred Alternative with AHP - Expert Choice 
To do the an assessment with weighting  four scenarios were run with prioritisation's from 
the ’Data Collection’ chapter. The scenarios are presented in the order of ’DGNB’, ’Weak 
Sustainability’, ’Strong Sustainability’ and lastly ’Social Sustainability’. With four different 
perspectives on sustainability four results and sensitivity analyses were generated, See 
Figures and diagrams below. The left y-axis is used to see each objective's priority based on 
the pair wise comparisons. The right y-axis is used to read the alternative priorities with 
respect to each objective following the different coloured lines responding to each 
alternative. The right axis is as well used to see the overall best alternative and how well 
that responds to the goal relatively the other options. When the prioritisation's have been 
recorded between criteria relatively the goal only a one-step scale have been used. Meaning 
that the highest difference that could be acquired between the criteria were 8, very strong 
Alternative 
Indicator
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1
ENV1.4
3
1
2
4
2
ENV2.1
3
1
2
4
3
ECO1.2
4
3
2
1
4
SOC2.3
1
2
3
4
5
SOC3.2
4
1
2
3
6
TEC1.1
3
1
2
3
7
TEC3.3
2
1
2
2
8
PRO1.1
1
1
1
1
Preferred alternative 
without weighting   
3
1
2
4
Preferred alternative 
in percentage 
21 %
32 %
26 %
20 %
!
 of !
59
79
==PAGE:65==
importance relatively the compared criteria. Every criterium rated in a one-step difference 
on this eight-step scale. Only in the case of DGNB three criterium rated equally. In the 
rating between alternatives and criteria the same principles with a one-step scale was 
applied, but the rating instead stretched between 1 to 4. This prioritisation scale was 
applied since only for the DGNB accurate weighting s were available. To make the 
modelling fair and equal it was considered best to use the same scale in every scenario. 
Figure 5.1. Results from the DGNB perspective.  
Alternative 1.2 rates the highest with a 33,6 % preference in relation to the other options. 
The criteria ECO1.2 for economical regional development is considered the most relevant. 
ENV1.4 (Biodiversity and habitats), SOC2.3 (Noise) and SOC3.2 (Access) rates equally on a 
fourth place. The least priority is put on TEC3.3 (Quality of public transport). 
!
 of !
60
79
==PAGE:66==
Figure 5.2. Results from the Weak Sustainability perspective.  
Alternative 1.2 rates the highest with 30,5 % preference in relation to the other options. 
The other three options rate more closely than in the case of DGNB, on a scale from 20 % 
to 26 %. And alternative 1.4 is as well only 4,5 % away from alternative 1.2. The most 
important criteria is ECO1.2 with 33,2 % importance and the lowest ENV1.4 with 2,4 % 
importance.  
!
 of !
61
79
==PAGE:67==
Figure 5.3. Results from the Strong Sustainability perspective.  
As well here alternative 1.2 rates the highest with the biggest preference of all scenarios 
with 41 % relatively the other options. The difference between the other options is as well 
bigger in this case then in the previous ones, differing between 13,7 % for the lowest 
preference to 25,6 % for the second best option. Main criteria is ENV1.4 and the least 
important is ECO1.2, the complete opposite for the perspective of ’Weak’ sustainability.  
!
 of !
62
79
==PAGE:68==
 
Figure 5.4. Results from the Social Sustainability perspective.  
Fourthly alternative 1.2 scores the highest here too. The other three options rates the most 
alike compared to the other scenarios on a scale from 20 % reference to 25 % preference. 
The criteria of first priority is SOC3.2 and the last is ENV2.1. 
!
 of !
63
79
==PAGE:69==
Table 5.1 Summarises the order of the priority in each scenario.  
The initial four modelings show the same preferred alternative, 1.2, of route in relation to 
goal and criteria. The extent of how much more preferred it was although differ. The small 
amount of criteria makes it difficult for any other option to be of highest priority since 1.2 
overall rates high and for example alternative 1.1 and 1.4 only rates the highest in one 
criteria each but also the lowest in two criteria each.  
To see how much weighting  that would be required to change the outcome of preferred 
alternative from 1.2 a sensitivity analysis in the perspective of DGNB shows an additional 
scenario. The weighting  on the criteria ECO1.2 would have to be as high as 50 % in 
relation to the others, see Figure xxxx. The scenario was tested in the case of DGNB since 
that was the initial definition for sustainability used.  
Figure 5.5. Scenario showing a difference in preferred alternative with 50 % priority on 
criteria ECO1.2 
!
 of !
64
79
==PAGE:70==
5.3 Conclusion data analysis 
Every scenario show a different result in how much more preferred the alternatives are in 
relation to each other. The more reoccurring order is the order of alternative 1.2, 1.3, 1.1 
and lastly 1.4. This is the case for the certification without weighting, for the strong 
sustainability perspective as well as the social sustainability perspective. It is not the case 
for the DGNB where the weighting  gives the order of alternative 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.1. Nor is it 
the case for the weak sustainability perspective where the order is alternative 1.2, 1.4, 1.3, 
1.1.  
5.4 Results
The findings in this thesis emphasises and strengthens the initial hypothesis. The problem 
to find an objective tool has been highlighted thorough the description of the complexity in 
finding one suitable tool. The complexity related to the context of sustainability appraisal 
of infrastructure in Germany in relation to a broader context of development in the 
European Union. This emphasises the complexity in finding one objective tool since 
numerous actors and involved stakeholders on different levels in society exist. The 
complexity with numerous actors and different interest is also shown thorough the 
description of different known concepts and views on sustainability.   
Further the thesis also show results of that dependent on which perspective you apply in 
sustainability appraisal the outcome can differ. In the case of this thesis this was shown 
through the different weightings and priority put on different criteria used in a 
certification. The outcome of this showed that perspectives of sustainability affects which 
alternatives that are considered most sustainable.  
What the combination of two sustainability appraisal tools showed was that: 
To meet the problem with not having an objective tool the possibility to apply different 
perspectives gives an insight to the evaluation and shows different possible outcomes. 
With the combination the certification becomes more transparent since criteria, indicators 
and rating must be shared to let participants put weightings on criteria in relation to 
alternatives. Getting a result in an MCDA-tool gives valuable information for participants 
and planners. The results in the MCDA-process also gives the possibility to build up 
arguments concerning chosen alternative since every alternative is reviewed. This 
contributes to transparency. The MCDA-process could either back-up the certification or 
give arguments for revision and redevelopment. Either way the combination of two tools 
gives a method to extend and compliment the certification and vice versa for the MCDA. 
This makes the sustainability appraisal inclusive and gives the possibility for transparent 
reviewing and sharing of opinions before choosing what to implement.  
!
 of !
65
79
==PAGE:71==
5.5 Analysis Outcomes
This section analyses the outcomes from the assessment which gave the results answering 
the problem statement. This is done to reflect upon why the results were given and rather 
focus on the working process and the methodology to see if the thesis has reached credible 
results.  
First of all a need for an assessment is required on the result in relation to the simplified 
certification and the language barriers. As been emphasised the certification and the result 
in itself have not been the main object. The relevant aspect for this thesis was to perform a 
certification to get some sort of result to further continue with the assessment with an 
additional result to be able to do a comparison. The language barrier and the amount of 
information available may have had an impact on the actual outcome, but since this thesis 
is not working to produce guidance to the actual project in itself it is considered as 
sufficient enough. 
Secondly a need of assessment is required in relation to the weighting . It has also been 
explained how the weighting  was done on a one-step scale. This is not a reflection of the 
reality. With additional input from actual actors it would probably not be as simple as each 
criteria separating itself from each other on a one-step scale. But with the thesis only 
carrying out scenarios from the perspectives of different scientific approaches and from the 
DGNB in relation to a simplified certification with few criteria there was not really any 
capacity or arguments to have a much more different scale. It wants to be emphasised how 
theoretical perspectives does not necessarily reflect the real world. The prioritisation in 
this thesis is therefore case specific and not an official or general prioritisation. With the 
definitions and criteria used in this thesis the prioritisation is applicable in the context of 
this case. This have as well been explained before performing the prioritisation. 
Thirdly it is always relevant to emphasise that modelling errors could occur. It could either 
be errors in the modelling program or errors when the data that were inserted. This is not 
suspected but important to highlight.  
With these aspects being emphasised and reflected upon the conclusion about the 
methodology and modelling results is still considered to be realistic and credible. 
!
 of !
66
79
==PAGE:72==
6. Discussion 
This chapter analyses the outcomes and results in the thesis more thoroughly. It reflects 
the thesis findings and relates the findings to a more overarching sustainability 
perspective. 
Sustainability and transportation 
It has been clearly demonstrated that the sustainability concept is not something the 
society can ignore. A shift or a transition to a more sustainable transport sector is required 
if the society do not wish to destroy the planet and undermine future generations ability to 
meet their needs. 
The model on page 9, the ’Triple Bottom Line’, in the section discussing sustainability and 
transportation, represents how an objective holistic approach could look like. The goal is to 
find a sustainable balance between the three concepts of economy, environment and 
equality. If the right balance is achieved it would mean that sustainability is met. Exactly 
how that balance look is as far as this thesis is aware of not yet discovered.  
The research on how to best approach sustainability and how to best implement 
sustainability is as essential as the research concerning how the balance in sustainability 
should be addressed. The research testing and assessing tools, methods and techniques is 
important in the thrive for one developed absolute approach. Finding a suitable approach 
for projects implementation of sustainability could mean that a sustainability balance gets 
easier to apply. Therefore this thesis is a relevant contribution to the thrive to find a more 
suitable way to implement sustainability and getting closer to a sustainability balance. It 
contributes to the research in how to best implement sustainability in the area of 
infrastructural development projects, which is a sector with a big impact on the overall 
sustainable society. 
Sustainability appraisal tools and objectivity 
To address sustainability with credibility within the infrastructural transport sector 
supportive and guiding tools and definitions are required. Assessing and guiding the 
sustainability performance in infrastructure projects will contribute to a considerate 
development in the direction towards a sustainable society.  
Sustainability appraisal is a method convenient to use in guiding, evaluations and 
assessments of the sustainability performance of an infrastructure project. Applying these 
types of methods and techniques gives sustainable guiding for projects and for planners 
!
 of !
67
79
==PAGE:73==
working with development. The sustainability appraisal of a project gives something 
substantial to relate and reflect the sustainability performance to. 
Sustainability appraisal tools are defining sustainability and setting up indicators and 
goals to assure that sustainability is met. Ideally sustainability tools are objective. 
Objectivity is essential to assure that the tools are aiming for a sustainability balance and 
that they are not representing specific interests. But to find an objective tool within the 
field of sustainability becomes difficult.  
Objectivity within the field of sustainability becomes a relative and complex concept. 
Everything is not quantifiable which makes a sustainability evaluation difficult. Using, 
valuing or measuring  non quantifiable concepts proclaim that the quantification origins 
from something or someone. Objectivity can not be assured. Quantifiable terms are as well 
subjects of complexity in relation to sustainability and objectivity. There is not a global and 
objective standard or measurement applicable in every case or scenario for every 
quantifiable term. Reflection on chosen method, chosen definition and/or chosen target 
and goals in relation to the context is therefore required to evaluate the degree of 
objectivity.  
It is questionable if objectivity is even possible within the field of sustainability appraisal. 
The holistic approach in sustainability assessment is needed to put developments in a 
bigger perspective. With a holistic perspective and overarching macro approach it also 
means that a lot of different objects and levels in the society, such as private, public, 
organisational, national, local, regional etc, is affected and concerned by developments. 
Relating a subject to macro and micro social-economical and environmental contexts 
means that different interests are present. Different interests imply that it is difficult to 
reach objectivity in a sustainability assessment where actual implementations, changes or 
development is the goal. These concepts of progress and condition of transition or 
transformation relate to actual outcomes that will have an impact on someone, or 
something or somewhere. Being or relating to one of these concepts means that different 
perceptions on what is to come will exist in an inconsistent world. 
If the problem is to find objectivity in sustainability appraisal, or if the problem is that that 
objectivity might not even be possible to find in the field of sustainability appraisal, 
another approach is required. A more reasonable approach in the search for credible 
sustainability appraisal tools would rather then be to find a way to cooperate with the lack 
of objectivity than to find objectivity. 
The idea here is that a unified approach is used instead of an objective definition. The 
thesis has worked with the hypothesis that combination of sustainability appraisal tools 
could be a way of approaching the problem. 
!
 of !
68
79
==PAGE:74==
To use a unified definition could be seen as a solution to get clear guidance in how to 
evaluate something and to get closer to a certain degree of objectivity. But even if a unified 
definition is used in sustainability appraisal projects, such as the definition from 
Brundtland, there is room for interpretation. Interpretations will more or less always be 
present in an inconsistent and relative world. If a general definition is used that can be 
interpreted to fit the context the tool looses an overarching control over the sustainability 
performance. The project evaluations will separate themselves from other projects 
evaluations. This means that the possibility to compare the different projects with each 
other to see that they are striving to meet the same goals gets lost. This makes the tool 
weak from a holistic sustainability performance perspective. It is thereby hard to ensure 
that objectivity, if the unified definition is considered to be objective in the first place, is 
followed throughout the process of the sustainability evaluation. 
The problem with interpretable definitions can be solved with more specifically defined 
targets and goals. But this becomes complex and difficult as well. Indicators and goals 
telling the story about the sustainability performance are often context dependent. With a 
concrete definition and clearly explained goals and targets the tool looses its adjustability 
to different contexts. This means that the comparability gets questionable even with 
specified targets and goals possible to relate to. In the different contexts where evaluations 
are performed different goals may be of different relevance. It may also be variously 
difficult to reach targets and goals dependent on context. The sustainability appraisal tool’s 
adjustability to reality gets lost. This means that the evaluation of projects responding to 
the same fixed goals is not reflecting the reality they are representing and the comparison 
with other projects therefore looses its purpose. Responding to targets that are not 
adjusted to the context makes the evaluation unfair and limited. It does not support 
projects to develop further in the area of sustainability when initial targets are easy to meet 
in a specific context. And it is unfair for the reason that some targets may for some 
contexts be a lot more difficult to reach than in other contexts.  
Summarised the challenge in finding an objective tool measuring sustainability 
performance is difficult. To overcome the issues with interpretable definitions is 
complicated and suggestions on how to solve it is lacking from a scientific approach. From 
this thesis point of view there are disadvantages both with the usage of interpretable 
definitions and flexibility in targets and goals, and with the usage of clearly defined targets 
and goals to limit interpretation. Both of the approaches are limiting when it comes to 
guarantee that sustainability is met from a holistic point of view. The thesis therefore 
continued the research of appropriate sustainability appraisal tools by applying the 
concept transparency. 
!
 of !
69
79
==PAGE:75==
Certification and transparency  
Certification which was the first applied tool in this thesis is a widely known and well used 
method. It is a rather complex and complicated method for sustainability assessment, the 
thesis can not argue otherwise. It requires a lot of resources to produce and find relevant 
data and in most cases trained users to get a credible result. The first discovery in this 
thesis concerning the application of certification tools is the possible advantages of 
applying a sustainability certification at an early stage. Currently sustainability 
certification tools are not a commonly used tool as support in the decision-making process. 
In the sustainability assessment in this thesis already produced and available documents, 
reports, webpages were used. This meant that if accessible information and data did not 
have information about each indicator within each criteria no further research were 
possible mainly due to time limits and the level of knowledge required. The indicators 
lacking information could therefore not be valued and were rated as ’insufficient 
information for valuing’. If the certification had been applied in an initial stage the 
evaluation process in the project would have been structured in another way. The research 
and production of data and information would have met the exact need for what the 
criteria and indicators require. A structured process responding to a sustainability 
appraisal tool would have increased the quality of the sustainability evaluation. It would 
have also minimised possible expenses for the production of additional data and 
investigations later in the process. It is always least costly and easiest to affect the 
outcomes of the project in the initial stage of a project. Having a sustainability structure 
guiding the planning and development process means that this is acknowledged 
throughout the process. Possible expensive changes to increase sustainability performance 
later in the project could with an early application of sustainability appraisal methods be 
avoided. 
Applying a certification to give structure to the project as well means that the process and 
targets are easy to follow for the concerned actors and users. Even if the actual 
investigation may be difficult in some cases to comprehend the structure a certification 
gives with an overview of concerned areas, criteria and indicators makes it easier. Even for 
a non trained the structure showing what sustainability criteria that gets measured by what 
and what areas that are essential for an overarching sustainability plan gives 
understandable explanations to outcomes. This cooperate with the complexity of how 
transparent evaluations are. Initially it was implied that certification, even if transparent, 
may be one-sided. Sharing the structure and not just the results increases the transparency 
in the process and project. 
Another important aspect of transparency in a certification process is that it as well 
functions as education. DGNB was applied in this thesis since it was argued for that a tool 
already used within the nation for sustainability appraisal was an advantage. To find a 
!
 of !
70
79
==PAGE:76==
unified approach a well known certification tool is one way to go. If users and concerned 
actors gets familiar with the tool and as well more and more aware of what the tool 
advocates those sustainability thoughts can reach further. To see the same certification 
reappearing in development plans and projects over and over again sets a basis for 
involvement and education and the target of transparency is considered to be even closer. 
The thesis wants to highlight that by getting to a point were at least the same objects and 
concepts relevant for sustainability are agreed upon and accepted, transparency is partly 
met. This does not mean that the exact same value of these concepts and objects are agreed 
upon. It although means that generally known concepts and objects used in the 
sustainability approach contributes to the overall approach becoming generally known and 
thereby makes the appraisal easier to follow. 
It is also relevant to express that when in the development process sustainability appraisal 
tools are applied is of course related to how these tools wants to be used. But in the case of 
evaluation as decision support concerning new developments it is with the evidence 
presented in this thesis considered as it should be applied at an early stage. 
The certification is in summary positively viewed upon when it comes to give structure, 
early affecting the outcome and to show participants and users what is being reviewed to 
rate the sustainability performance. 
But here it comes relevant to emphasis why certification is not a good enough tool to 
cooperate with the issue of objectivity and transparency alone. The certification gave 
structure and insight but still only one way of valuing and perceiving things. The world is 
complex, it is not black and withe and the same goes for a sustainability certification and 
its outcomes. The outcomes in an inconsistent world could be shaped and related to 
different social and cultural structures as well as different discourses and perspectives. To 
additionally increase the level of transparency to sufficient levels and to assess the level of 
objectivity it is important that additional emphasis are put on why the valuing is as it is 
and why the outcome is as it is. The outcomes are in need of reflection and an official 
assessment. To assess the objectivity and increase transparency subjectivity was 
introduced. Introducing subjectivity means that the possibility to value the project 
differently than the certification is possible.  
Multi-Criteria-Decision-Analysis and transparency 
An MCDA-tool was introduced in the process to contribute with subjectivity. This 
technique was used to interweave different weightings on different criteria from the 
certification framework. With the introduction of subjectivity this thesis could show that 
subjectivity had an impact on the outcome. With different alternatives available in the 
infrastructure development project and the application of different perspectives on 
!
 of !
71
79
==PAGE:77==
sustainability the outcome regarding the order of preferred alternative for each perspective 
differed itself from the outcome of the certification. 
What the MCDA-tool thereby contributed with was the evidence that perspectives, and 
different interests, have an impact on the outcome, and certification is not always enough 
in a sustainability evaluation if transparency is a goal or requirement. 
This thesis argues, after the evidences presented, that adding an MCDA-tool for 
sustainability appraisal gives more credibility to the certification. The method of applying 
an AHP-tool gives an insight to how complex the decision-making in sustainable 
development is. Different perspectives may always lead to different preferred alternatives. 
But the application of an MCDA-technique at least gives insight to the decisions, and 
increases transparency in the decision and evaluation process. 
The MCDA-tool and more specifically the AHP-tool show that objectivity was not provided 
with the certification and that it is better to find a way to cooperate with the issue with not 
finding objectivity rater than to find objectivity.  
Reflections - The need for combination of sustainability appraisal tools 
The actual method this thesis uses should of course be discussed. The fact that there was a 
substantially decrease in number of criterion used in relation to an actual certification tool 
could very well have an impact on the results. But since the outcomes showed that the 
order that was changing only concerned the three alternatives not considered the most 
preferred, this was the same for every case, it is considered that the method in this case is 
not undermining the outcomes proofing that subjectivity have an impact. The fact that the 
order was different gives credibility to transparency being present, since this means that 
information could be received differently and that information is not required to be 
perceived exactly the same. Information that allows for different opinions gives quality to 
shared information since it is possible to form an opinion and this is important for 
transparency. In this case it became clear that option 1.2 was the most preferred. This gives 
additional support to why an MCDA-tool should be used. Using an MCDA-technique allow 
everybody to share their interests, point of views and thoughts. To result in one option still 
preferred by every perspective should give the decision-makers arguments for 
implementation not a lot of actors and stakeholders can oppose. Transparency is provided 
for through the decision-makers possibility to refer to an MCDA-analysis everybody have 
access to when they make actual decisions. 
On the other hand since the result in this thesis shows that alternative 1.2 is the preferred 
option regardless of the different prioritisation's  this could be an argument stating that the 
certification is an enough sufficient method to use in sustainability evaluation and 
decision-making. But as been stated the MCDA increases the transparency and test the 
!
 of !
72
79
==PAGE:78==
outcome of the certification, which is only positive from both decision-makers and 
concerned stakeholders and actors point of view.  
An interesting reflections related to decisions based on results in the MCDA-tool is the fact 
about how much more preferred something should be considered or rated as to be a good 
choice for implementation. The result of the AHP-process could show that alternative 1.2 
was in one scenario the most preferred alternative with 41 % (strong perspective) and in 
another scenario the most preferred alternative with 30,5 % (weak). Here it becomes 
relevant to assess if the preference should be as high as possible and the preference for the 
other then low. Or if it is good enough to just be a bit more preferred than the others. In 
this case it becomes hard to argue for either. Partly because of the few criteria it is hard to 
predict what would happen if there were more divisions and changes and variations in 
which the preferred alternative would be for each criteria in itself. But mainly because 
there is no where to be seen how the actual performance for each of the alternative 
separately is rated in relation to the goal. Since the AHP-tool in this case functioned as a 
comparative compliment to the certification the rating is done in relation to the goal 
relatively the other alternatives. This shows the weak spot for the MCDA-tool. And 
emphasise the need for a certification as well. The results of the MCDA is as dependent on 
the results of the certification and vice versa. 
The MCDA show, from different perspectives, the most preferred option and gives the 
possibility to argue for the chosen option. This contributes to transparency. But the 
certification is as relevant to see how the options respond to the goal about sustainability. 
This emphasis the hypothesis that it is a combination of tools that is required. 
!
 of !
73
79
==PAGE:79==
7. Conclusion 
This thesis has been performed to test the hypothesis that a combination of sustainability 
appraisal tools can increase the objectivity and transparency in the sustainability 
evaluation processes of infrastructural development projects. 
Objectivity and transparency have been identified as important to assure that assessments 
regarding sustainability performance are not influenced by different interest and to assure 
that sustainability from a holistic perspective is the main objective and goal.  
Objectivity has been identified as problematic and complex to assure in the area of 
sustainability. Different discourses and theoretical perspectives of sustainability could be 
shown in this thesis. It was therefore considered that finding an approach to cooperate 
with the issue of lack of objectivity was more realistic than to find absolute objectivity. 
Transparency was the key concept to approach lack of objectivity. 
This thesis has identified that the application of a sustainability appraisal tool in the 
planning of infrastructural development is a good way to acknowledge the concepts 
objectivity and transparency and to measure the sustainability performance. It was 
although identified that the application of one tool was not enough to assure the 
sustainability performance and to function as decision-support. Only applying one tool was 
too limited in the perspective of objectivity and transparency. The application of a 
certification gave one result and the application of an MCDA-tool with four different 
perspectives gave four additional results on the order of preferred alternative for the 
development of the railway tracks in the case project located in Germany.  
With the combination of two tools the level of transparency increased since it was possible 
to assess the result of the certification applying specific interests and opinions. With the 
combination it was also shown that objectivity was lacking, which support the arguments 
about approaching it subjectively to at least identify and assess what level of objectivity 
that is present.  
The application and combinations of two sustainability appraisal tools have allowed for 
multiple perspectives to be heard in the development process but in a structured way. This 
is of relevance in actual project where more than one interest group is present. 
The results also showed that a combination is required and that the tools are supportive to 
each other. The two tools applied are equally dependent on each other. To strive for 
sustainability in infrastructural development it is considered that sustainability appraisal 
tools should be applied in the initial stage of the planning. It is also considered that a 
combination of certification and MCDA is required to meet the need for transparency and 
objectivity and to further make decisions for the infrastructure development.  
!
 of !
74
79
==PAGE:80==
8. References 
Articles 
Bueno, P.C. , Vassallo, J.M., & Cheung, K., (2015). Sustainability Assessment of Transport 
Infrastructure Projects: A Review of Existing Tools and Methods. Transport Reviews: A 
Transnational Transdisciplinary Journal, DOI: 10.1080/01441647.2015.1041435 
Hediger, W., 1999. "Reconciling “weak” and “strong” sustainability”. International 
Journal of Social Economics, Vol. 26 Iss 7/8/9 pp. 1120 - 1144 Permanent link to this 
document: http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/03068299910245859 
Maclaren, V., W., 1996. Urban Sustainability Reporting. Journal of the American 
Planning Association, 62:2, 184-202 http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01944369608975684 
Max-Neef, M., Elizalde, A., & Hopenhayn, M. (1992). Development and human needs. 
Real-life economics: Understanding wealth creation, 197-213. 
McKenzie, S., 2004. Social Sustainability: Towards Some Definition. Hawke Research 
Institute Working Paper Series No 27. Hawke Research Institute University of South 
Australia Magill, South Australia 
Nijkamp, P., Verhoef, E., Rodenburg., C., Ubbels, B., 2001. Sustainable Mobility. Research 
Memorandum 2001-B, Department of Spatial Economics, Free University Amsterdam De 
Schnackenberg, K., A., & Tomlinson C., E., 2014. Organizational Transparency: A New 
Perspective on Managing Trust in Organization-Stakeholder Relationships. Journal of 
Management DOI: 10.1177/0149206314525202 
Shaw, G., Kenny, J., Kumar, A., & Hood, D., 2012. Sustainable Infrastructure Operations: 
A Review of Assessment Schemes and Decision Support. Science and Engineering Faculty, 
Queensland University of Technology, CRC for Infrastructure and Engineering Asset 
Management, Australia 
U. Ayres, R., U.D. Viewpoint: Weak versus strong sustainability. Center for the 
Management of Environmental Resources, France  
!
 of !
75
79
==PAGE:81==
Books 
Gudmundsson H., P. Hall, R., Marsden, G., Zietsman, J., 2016. Sustainable 
Transportation - Indicators, Frameworks, and Performance Management. Springer 
Heidelberg New York Dordrecht London 
Internet 
Allt i Malmö, 2014. Öresundsbron. Available at: http://www.alltimalmo.se/allt-om-
malmo/ovrigt/oresundsbron [Accessed: 14 April 2016] 
BCA, The Building and Construction Authority, 2014. About BCA. Available at: https://
www.bca.gov.sg/AboutUs/about_bca.html [Accessed: 11 May 2016] 
BCA, The Building and Construction Authority, 2009. BCA Green Mark for 
Infrastructure. Available at: https://www.bca.gov.sg/GreenMark/others/
GM_Infra_V1.pdf. [Accessed 11 May 2016] 
DB Netz AG, 2016a. Rail line of the Fehmarn Belt Fixed Link - Making a dream come true. 
Available at: http://www.anbindung-fbq.de/en/project.html [Accessed: 14 March 2016] 
DB Netz AG, 2016b. Information centres. Available at:  http://www.anbindung-fbq.de/en/
dialogue/with-citizens/information-centres.html [Accessed: 20 May 2016] 
DB Netz AG, 2016c. The dialogue forum. Available at: http://www.anbindung-fbq.de/en/
dialogue/with-citizens/dialogue-forum.html [Accessed: 20 May 2016] 
DGNB, 2016a. German Sustainable Building Council (DGNB). Available at: http://
www.dgnb.de/en/council/dgnb/?pk_campaign=evtiledgnb [Accessed: 17 February 2016] 
DGNB, 2016b. Bylaws of the German Sustainable Building Council (DGNB). Available at: 
http://www.dgnb.de/fileadmin/de/dgnb_ev/Mitgliedschaft/antrag_satzung_gebuehren/
en/DGNBCouncilBylaws_110628_EN.pdf [Accessed: 20 April 2016] 
Dulac, J. IEA - International Energy Agency, 2012. Global transport outlook to 2050 - 
Targets and scenarios for a low-carbon transport sector. Available at: https://
www.iea.org/media/workshops/2013/egrdmobility/DULAC_23052013.pdf [Accessed: 14 
April 2016] 
Envision, 2015. Rating system for sustainable infrastructure. Available at: http://
sustainableinfrastructure.org/portal/files/GuidanceManual.pdf. [Accessed: 11 May 2016] 
!
 of !
76
79
==PAGE:82==
European Commission, 2014a. Infrastructure - TEN-T - Connecting Europe - 20 Years of 
TEN-T Policy. Available at: http://ec.europa.eu/transport/themes/infrastructure/ten-t-
policy/index_en.htm [Accessed: 18 February 2016]  
European Commission, 2014b. Infrastructure - TEN-T - Connecting Europe - The Pillars 
of the TEN-T policy. Available at: http://ec.europa.eu/transport/themes/infrastructure/
ten-t-guidelines/index_en.htm [Accessed: 18 February 2016] 
European Commission, 2014c. Infrastructure - TEN-T - Connecting Europe - The Pillars 
of the TEN-T policy - Building Infrastructure to Strengthen Europe’s Economy. Available 
at: http://ec.europa.eu/transport/themes/infrastructure/ten-t-guidelines/doc/
building_infrastructure_en.pdf [Accessed: 18 February 2016] 
European Commission, 2014d. Infrastructure - TEN-T - Connecting Europe - Country by 
Country - Denmark. Available at: http://ec.europa.eu/transport/themes/infrastructure/
ten-t-guidelines/doc/ten-t-country-fiches/dk_en.pdf [Accessed: 18 February 2016] 
European Commission, 2015. Infrastructure - TEN-T - Connecting Europe - Corridors. 
Available at: http://ec.europa.eu/transport/themes/infrastructure/ten-t-guidelines/
corridors/index_en.htm [Accessed: 20 February 2016] 
FIDIC, 2016. Rating & Certification Tool: CEEQUAL. Available at: http://fidic.org/sites/
default/files/R%26C%20CEEQUAL%20-%20final.pdf [Accessed: 11 May 2016]. 
FMTBH, Federal Ministry of Transport, Building and Housing, 2003. Federal Transport 
Infrastructure Plan 2003. Available at: http://www.bmvi.de/SharedDocs/EN/Anlagen/
federal-transport-infrastructure-plan-2003.pdf?__blob=publicationFile [Accessed: 18 
April 2016] 
Global Footprint Network, 2016. Earth Overshoot Day 2015. Available at: http://
www.overshootday.org [Accessed: 12 April 2016] 
OECD, 2010. Globalisation, Transport and the Environment. Available at: http://
www.keepeek.com/Digital-Asset-Management/oecd/environment/globalisation-
transport-and-the-environment_9789264072916-en#page16 [Accessed 14 March 2016] 
Ramboll Group, 2015. Upgrading of the Ringsted - Fehmarn Railway Line. Available at: 
http://www.ramboll.com/projects/rdk/femern-baelt-railway [Accessed: 6 April 2016] 
STRING, 2012a. A modern transport system between the Öresund Region and Hamburg. 
Available at: http://www.stringnetwork.org/media/32979/
string_infrastructure_270912.pdf [Accessed: 6 April 2016] 
!
 of !
77
79
==PAGE:83==
UNEP, 2011. Transport - Investing in energy and resource efficiency. Available at: http://
www.unep.org/greeneconomy/Portals/88/documents/ger/10.0_Transport.pdf [Accessed: 
14 April 2016] 
Lectures
Gudmundsson, H., 14 Sep 2015. Sustainable Transport. [Lecture] Course 13236 
Sustainable Transport Assessment, Autumn 15 DTU department of Transport  
Cornet, Y., 8 Sep 2015. Sustainability theories – planetary boundaries. [Lecture] Course 
13236 Sustainable Transport Assessment, Autumn 15 DTU department of Transport 
Reports 
AHP Appendix IV. U.A, U.D. Appendix IV: Graphical and technical options in Expert 
Choice for group decision making. p. 374- 396. Provided by Cornet, Y., 15 March 2016. 
Lecturer at DTU, department of Transport. 
Barfod, U. D. The Analytical Hierarchy Process - Technical note by Michael B. Barfod, 
CTT-DTU. Provided by Cornet, Y., 15 March 2016. Lecturer at DTU, department of 
Transport. 
The Danish Government, 2011. Our Future Energy. The Danish Ministry of Climate, 
Energy and Buildings Copenhagen K, Denmark ISBN printed publication 
978-87-7844-915-3  
DB Netz AG, 2010. Raumordnungsverfahren Schienenhinterlandanbindung Feste 
Fehmarnbeltquerung (FBQ) - Gesamtunterlage der Antragskonferenz zum 
Raumordnungsverfahren gemäß §14a Abs.1 Landesplanungsgesetz (LaPlaG). DB 
ProjektBau GmbH, Regionalbereich Nord, Hamburg 
DB Netz AG, 2012a.  Schienenhinterlandanbindung der Festen Fehmarnbeltquerung, 
Strecke 1100 (Lübeck Hbf – Puttgarden) - Antragsunterlagen zum 
Raumordnungsverfahren nach §15 ROG, §§14, 14a LaPlaG SH. DB ProjektBau GmbH, 
Regionalbereich Nord, Hamburg 
 
DB Netz AG, 2012b. Schienenhinterlandanbindung der Festen Fehmarnbeltquerung, 
Strecke 1100 (Lübeck Hbf – Puttgarden) - Antragsunterlagen zum 
Raumordnungsverfahren nach §15 ROG, §§14, 14a LaPlaG SH - 
Allgemeinverständliche Zusammenfassung. DB ProjektBau GmbH, Regionalbereich Nord, 
Hamburg  
!
 of !
78
79
==PAGE:84==
DB Netz AG, 2012c. Sondergutachten zum Raumordnungsverfahren - Schalltechnische 
Untersuchung - Abschnitt 1. DB ProjektBau GmbH, Regionalbereich Nord, Hamburg  
DB Netz AG, 2012d. Schienenhinterlandanbindung der Festen Fehmarnbeltquerung - 
Sonderuntersuchung Auswirkungen auf die gemeindliche Entwicklung. DB ProjektBau 
GmbH, Regionalbereich Nord, Hamburg 
DB Netz AG, 2012e. Gutachten zur verkehrlichen Erschließung der Anliegergemeinden. 
DB ProjektBau GmbH, Regionalbereich Nord, Hamburg 
DB Netz AG, 2012f. Sondergutachten und Erläuterungsbericht zur Wildbiologie. DB 
ProjektBau GmbH, Regionalbereich Nord, Hamburg  
DB Netz AG, 2012g. Sonderuntersuchungen Agrarstruktur. DB ProjektBau GmbH, 
Regionalbereich Nord, Hamburg 
DB ProjektBau GmbH, 2013. The rail infrastructure of the Fehmarn Belt Fixed Link. 
Regionalbereich Nord, Hamburg  
DGNB, U. D. DGNB Criterion - System Basics and Criterion Description. Provided by 
Stephan Anders 10 May 2016. Product Manager Districts - DGNB System - Ein 
Geschäftsbereich der DGNB GmbH.  
Hasselgren, B., Cars, G., Hansen, M., Rostvik, M., 2013. Vision and Reality in the Öresund 
Collaboration - Research report on collaboration and potential for development in the 
Öresund region. Commissioned by: Region Skåne. KTH Royal Institute of Technology, 
Urban Planning and Environment, Stockholm  
LEGUAN 2012a: Sondergutachten Flora & Fauna, Schienenhinterlandanbindung der 
Festen Fehmarnbeltquerung, Gutachten im Auftrag der DB Netz AG, Anlage 7 des 
Erläuterungsberichtes der Antragsunterlage. 
STRING, 2012b. Bottlenecks in the Infrastructure between Scandinavia and Central 
Europe. ISBN number: 978-87-92026-31-6 
 
!
 of !
79
79
