==PAGE:1==
FPGA-based Hardware
Acceleration of
Computationally-intensive
Financial Applications
Bogdan Ioan Sorlea
Kongens Lyngby 2016
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
The goal of the thesis is the implementation of a hardware accelerator on FPGA
technology for a speciﬁc ﬁnancial application, targeted at the Series 7 Xilinx
devices.
By employing FPGA-based hardware acceleration, speciﬁc compute-intensive
tasks that normally run on the CPU are oﬄoaded to the accelerator, which im-
plements the same algorithm and would obtain the same results, while utilizing
a fraction of the time and power required for this processing on general purpose
CPUs.
In implementing the aforementioned acceleration, the setup is based around a
CPU-FPGA communication via a PCIe bus, thus seamlessly integrating this
technology with existing applications, while making the necessary changes to
the software side of the algorithm.
We will extend on previous work in the
ﬁeld by targeting the implementation on newer generation devices 1 and we will
compare the results.
1in our quest we will be targeting the design on a Kintex7 325T device
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁlment of the requirements for
acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering.
The thesis deals with the approach for implementing an FPGA-based hardware
accelerator for a speciﬁc compute-intensive ﬁnancial algorithm and it consists
of the research, design and implementation of a Monte Carlo-based simulation
for ﬁnancial predictions of derivatives (European stock options).
The thesis work was carried out in collaboration with DTU (Technical University
of Denmark), under the supervision of Alberto Nannarelli.
Lyngby, 20-June-2016
Bogdan Ioan Sorlea
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost I would like to thank my supervisor, Alberto Nannarelli,
for all the guidance, motivation and review I received during the inception and
execution of the project and to DTU Compute via Per Friis for lending a host
computer for doing the testing on.
Additional thanks are extended to Angelo Esposito for oﬀering his support and
guidance in using the lab equipment we used taking measurements and to my
colleague István Szőnyi for lending me a back-up development board that I
thankfully never had to make use of as well as for all the encouragement he
oﬀered.
Lastly, I want to thank my parents, Ioan and Viorica, for their manifold support,
my friends Petrică, Diana and Viorica for hosting me whenever I needed a change
of environment as to refresh my motivation and all my colleagues at Tradeshift
that have been asking so many questions about what I am doing lately, especially
to my manager Jesper who let me oﬀthe hook for such long periods of time to
complete this piece of valuable knowledge.
Thank you all,
Bogdan
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
9
2.1
The algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.1
European stock options
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.2
Monte Carlo simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
The hardware platform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2.1
CPU . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2.2
PCI express . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2.3
FPGA Devices and Development Kit . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
Design Methodology
21
3.1
Tools and IDEs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Hardware subsystems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2.1
PCIe communication core . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2.2
Clock signals and clocking resources . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.2.3
Arithmetic cores . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.2.4
Data format . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.2.5
Acceleration core architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.2.6
Hardware testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
4
Preliminary designs and implementations
39
4.1
Random number generator
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2
Floating-point addition tree . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.3
FloPoCo targeting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.3.1
FloPoCo caveat . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.3.2
Performance of the FloPoCo arithmetic cores . . . . . . .
51
4.4
Deducing the optimal frequency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.5
Resource utilization and power estimates . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
4.6
Considerations on using multiple acceleration cores . . . . . . . .
67
5
Monte Carlo simulation accelerator and results
71
5.1
Monte Carlo accelerator speciﬁcations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
5.2
Results and comparison
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
5.3
Future improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
6
Retrospective and conclusions
77
A Source code of the design
81
B Random generator test bench
101
C NetFPGA-1G-CML’s Kintex 7 325T constraints
105
Bibliography
109
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
The computing industry is continuously on the lookout for faster, better, non-
power hungry machines capable of tackling the increasing demands in the various
IT workloads employed both throughout data centers and oﬄine, especially in
embedded applications.
For the last 50 years, the industry’s workhorse consisted in the steady and pre-
dictable improvements of chip technologies based on Moore’s law, as deﬁned
by Gordon E. Moore, co-founder of Intel and Fairchild Semiconductor, in 1965
[Moo65]. By steady improvements to these technologies and continuous experi-
mentation, the transistor has proved to be one of the most important inventions
of humanity and certainly the most important of the 20th century - while having
the best improvement curve of any technology to date.
However, various semiconductor industry forecasters [Wal][Mar], including Gor-
don Moore [Dub], have speculated that Moore’s law would not be applicable
anymore by 2025. This poses a challenge on the traditional transistor technolo-
gies: as Moore pointed out since 2005, the technological improvements based on
the law he coined would eventually not be feasible, as the transistor, by expo-
nentially decreasing in size, would reach physical limitations, eventually having
its channel not wider than just one atom in length [Suh15].
Although some of the smallest possible transistors have been created experimen-
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
tally, it is not just the current inability to go down to sub-atomic lengths that
is topping oﬀMoore’s law. Even before reaching these small dimensions, chip
technologies have reached limitations related to the amount of power they con-
sume: due to the increasingly smaller distances employed in chip technologies,
quantum eﬀects have increased, leading to reduced chip performance. One ex-
ample of such a phenomena is quantum tunneling, an eﬀect of electrons jumping
across an insulator barrier, resulting in increased leakage currents and overall
in more power being consumed by the lower-scale transistor.
Such eﬀects introduce greater and greater challenges in the utilization of the
chips. For one, especially in cloud-based computing, it infers the need of better
power management or more power-hungry data centers and better cooling/ven-
tilation infrastructure, thus increasing the operational costs of these facilities
and making such products less attractive. There are already statements in the
industry that when discussing purely about the economics in relation to the
improvements based on Moore’s law, there are no further improvements being
made [Eco] [Fel]. And to all this we need to note that this approach is not at
all eco-friendly, as it increases the energy consumption and therefore has the
potential to increase pollution. In any case, it is an approach radically diﬀerent
than the latest trends in the industry, as the chip manufacturers have been con-
sistently struggling to reduce power consumption in their products or to make
them more eﬃcient per computing operation.
The second major eﬀect is that even with improved cooling infrastructure, the
current chip technologies contain so many transistors and these quantum eﬀects
have become so important that the overall power density on the chip has reached
unprecedented levels, up to the point where even with the most advanced cooling
infrastructure the silicone on the chip has the capability to melt under the
immense power density.
This latter challenge, being hard to overcome, forces the manufacturers to im-
plement a "downgrade" of the chip capabilities by permanent or temporary
shut-down of speciﬁc parts of the silicon, as to completely stop the heat dissi-
pation on portions of the chip, essentially by reducing the power density. This
approach has been deﬁned in nomenclature as "dark silicon", because on those
speciﬁc parts of the chip there is no electricity running through the wires (or
close to none) and therefore that part of the silicon is kept "in the dark".
The dark silicon approach, although the only solution that can be employed, has
ultimately a big disadvantage in the aforementioned downgrading of the chip
capabilities. Essentially, by disabling parts of the chip, most of the improve-
ments from stepping up to the next technology node are lost and therefore these
products become marginal quite fast.
==PAGE:13==
3
It is true that while chip technologies are getting closer to atom-level dimensions
[Wika] there are other eﬀorts in place in order to provide an alternative. While
some have immediate applicability, some would require extensive research into
the quantum domain and will probably not be readily available in the near
future.
The currently applicable approach is the switch towards FinFET (multi-gate)
technologies [Mer], essentially transforming the layout of the traditional transis-
tors by wrapping the drain-source channel in a layer of silicone over which the
gate layer is placed, thus achieving better electrical control over the channel, ul-
timately reducing the leakage current and overcoming other unwanted electrical
eﬀects. Since 2014 all the major chip manufactures have been oﬀering services
over FinFET technology, even if within some limitations.
A lot of buzz was created especially in the last year around the next generation
computing paradigms, developed based on quantum technologies. Essentially,
the quantum computing approach aims at leveraging more exotic forms of phys-
ical phenomena, within the quantum-mechanical domain, to achieve new com-
pute capabilities, to some extent similar to how the ﬂows of electrons through
transistors, when combined, can generate the necessary behaviors to mimic the
input and output of various logic functions.
Currently, by means of superposition and quantum entanglement, a quantum
computing system is able to - at least theoretically - perform operations on data,
structured and referred to as qubits (quantum bits) - essentially a superposi-
tion of states. It is of utmost importance to note that the current quantum
computer paradigm, still at an experimental level, has more similarities to non-
deterministic and probabilistic computers. This means that at the current level
of understanding of this technology, although it can prove useful in very spe-
ciﬁc, niche applications (like Shor’s algorithm within the ﬁeld of cryptography or
Grover’s algorithm that could speed-up the time for ﬁnding the solution to one
of the still major unknowns in computing, the NP-complete class of problems), it
is still under debate whether it would be able to provide the solution for the next
generation general purpose computing technology, due to the non-deterministic
nature of it.
As brieﬂy noted before, this technology is overall still in its infancy, with the
widest experiments being run on very small numbers of quantum bits, but this
new type of technology has sparked the interest of many national government
and military agencies around the world, who are funding the practical and
theoretical research of these technologies, being especially interested in the ﬁeld
of cryptography (and more speciﬁcally on cryptanalysis - I will not discuss the
ethical implications here).
==PAGE:14==
4
Introduction
Although the FinFET alternative can give an additional boost to the traditional
approach (Moore’s law), it would provide only a temporary alternative to the
problem and while the quantum computing technologies are still in pioneering
phase, will not mature within the near future and even when being commercially
employed would have limitations to the types of applications that can run on it,
neither of these two alternatives can provide a longer-term solution applicable
immediately to mitigate the problems of power consumption and especially the
technological limitations of dark silicon.
In the struggle to workaround these systemic problems, various players in the
industry have tried diﬀerent strategies for improving at least some of these
issues: Facebook has announced the use of low-power ARM-based processors in
their data centers [Ran] [Hea], with the aim of reducing their power consumption
[Cla], while chip designers like Intel are trying a more revolutionary approach to
how the next generation computing chips would look, by empowering them with
re-conﬁgurable fabric that can also be shut down. This approach mitigates quite
well the problem of dark silicon, while enabling the creation and reconﬁguration
of specialized application-speciﬁc processors (ASPs), at the end-user level, by
means of a FPGA-speciﬁc re-conﬁgurable fabric.
The outcome of using a solution based on re-conﬁgurable fabric is that it mit-
igates the problem of dark silicone while providing additional improvements in
power consumption and speed, due to the ability of implementing a more special-
ized core/architecture on the re-conﬁgurable logic. The disadvantage, to some
extent, is that compared to traditional imperative, functional or object-oriented
programming or to the ones related to distributed systems, the tools for devel-
oping hardware architecture as not necessarily as advanced as to enable almost
any imperative programmer to be able to develop his own architecture for the
application at hand - or if the tools exist, then they tend to be proprietary.
In achieving this goal, Intel decided to acquire the second biggest FPGA pro-
ducer, Altera ($1.7 billion in revenue in 2013) [Kin] [Unk] [Pn], in a transaction
valued at $16.7 billion that completed at the end of December 2015 [Int] and
eventually integrate the FPGA technology they provide with their line of pro-
cessors (especially the server lines of processors), while still oﬀering standalone
FPGA products (transitioned to Intel’s chip manufacturing technology, thus
hoping to improve the company’s competitive positioning in the market for
such products) and the development tools for both types of devices [Tan] [Mil].
Besides these technology-speciﬁc limitations, other market dynamics are shift-
ing the focus towards FPGA technologies as opposed to the traditional ASIC
solutions. First, as ASIC devices have evolved they have become more and more
complex, resulting in an increased development and manufacturing cost of inte-
grated circuits. This complexity impacts both the ﬁnancial costs of producing
==PAGE:15==
5
the devices, but also - and maybe more importantly - its time frame. Besides the
increased manufacture complexity, as ASIC chips evolved alongside Moore’s law,
the development times of such devices have also increased, sprouting the need
for newer design methodologies (e.g. utilizing more reusable sub-components).
Another game changer in the industry is the fact that as the trend increased
in terms of types of devices, their capabilities and especially related to their
customization, the headcount and resources capable of doing research and de-
velopment in the ﬁeld cannot keep up with the demand. And assuming all other
limitations can be overcome, this is one limitation that is hard to mitigate. For
example, Intel’s decision of acquiring Altera was based also on the increasing
demand of customized chips for datacenter-speciﬁc applications, requests com-
ing from some of the biggest actors on the market (Google, Amazon, eBay,
Facebook, etc).
Intel estimates that by 2020 around 33% of all cloud service workloads will
be using FPGA technologies, forming a market of around $37 billion. Similar
strategies are being followed by IBM and Advanced Micro Devices (AMD) who
have partnered with the leading FPGA manufacturer, Xilinx ($2.38 billion in
revenue in 2014).
One of the downsides of using this type of technology is the undeveloped tooling
around these kind of devices, that would enable and empower regular developers
to do more in the lower layers of applications. However, it is noteworthy that
both Altera and Xilinx have quite advanced tooling around their devices, with
the latter oﬀering a lot of subsystem (core) generators, support and even C-based
code synthesis to hardware architecture (also known as High-Level Synthesis).
Alongside these, they also oﬀer partial reconﬁguration, which would enable fast,
on-line reconﬁguration of the architecture.
Xilinx also is a few steps ahead
of Intel, as they have been oﬀering for a few years now chips that contain
both CPU processing cores (based on the ARM architecture) and surrounding
FPGA fabric, with the appropriate interface between them - in their Zynq line
of products. Besides the proprietary tools, other open source alternatives are
slowly emerging, like the OpenCL framework that enables writing of programs
that would be able to execute across heterogeneous platforms - being able to run
on central processing units (CPUs), graphics processing units (GPUs), digital
signal processors (DSPs), ﬁeld-programmable gate arrays (FPGAs) or other
processors and speciﬁc hardware accelerators.
The approach of oﬄoading compute-intensive tasks to hardware has been around
for a while, even if not as obvious as the more traditional paradigms in comput-
ing. One of the most impressive data-center conﬁgurations is Microsoft’s Project
Catapult, showcased in 2014 [Put14]. In using the Microsoft Catapult setup,
one essentially oﬄoads heavy tasks to FPGAs connected to regular CPUs via
==PAGE:16==
6
Introduction
PCIe buses. Up to 6 FPGAs can be connected in series via Serial-Attached SCSI
(SAS) for complex algorithms whose architecture would not ﬁt in one FPGA
device. The project oﬀers a wrapper architecture (called "shell") that is capa-
ble of communicating with the other FPGAs via SAS and with the CPUs via
PCIe and has additional auxiliary tools - like the ones related to the data-center
management aspects of this setup (allocation, de-allocation, etc.).
One of the major applications that Microsoft revealed as use-case for the Cat-
apult project is Microsoft’s Bing search engine page ranking. They essentially
oﬄoaded the corresponding Machine Learning algorithms to hardware, tying
several FPGAs together in order to compute the relevant metrics for computing
the scoring. Greatly simpliﬁed, this process starts by doing traditional CPU
computation for receiving the processing request, retrieving the relevant doc-
ument and meta-data, generating a hit-vector describing the locations of the
query words, computing a small number of features relevant to the machine
learning model and is followed by FPGA-based computation of most of the fea-
tures, the result of free-form expressions (FFEs - arithmetic combinations of the
computed features) and the crunching happening inside the machine learning
model based on the results of the FFEs. At the end of this computation an
result is obtained and piggybacked to the initiating CPU.
Other CPU-FPGA implementations over PCIe have been employed before the
recent years, but this kind of hardware acceleration has been booming mostly
over the last 5-10 years, with the launch of more powerful chips and complex
development kits. One such example, developed over Xilinx solutions, is the
acceleration of compute-intensive ﬁnancial tasks of prediction on derivatives,
aimed as a solution for high-frequency trading [Wikb]. More speciﬁcally, of-
ﬂoading the algorithms for predicting stock option prices based on some initial
values, with the use of Monte Carlo simulations and the Brownian Motion model.
This speciﬁc application has been previously implemented on older-generation
Xilinx devices with good results. Now, to both demonstrate the viability of
FPGA technologies in oﬄoading compute-intensive tasks, proving that employ-
ing this type of technology can be a way for the future and to improve the
previous outcomes of this solution by targeting on the newer generations de-
vices, I will implement the Monte Carlo simulation and try to compare the
outcome as best as possible to the previous results.
And this Monte Carlo simulation-based hardware acceleration on newer gener-
ation devices, as aforementioned, is the goal of this thesis.
We have structured this report in several chapters describing the various ex-
periments and results that are part of the project. In Chapter 2 we discuss
the theoretical background of the underlying algorithm, as well introduce the
==PAGE:17==
7
hardware platform. In Chapter 3 we discuss the design methodology, presenting
the various tools we plan to use and the decisions we made in choosing the right
components and cores. In Chapter 4 we present and discuss all the experiments
we ran as to obtain an overview of the possibilities we have in terms of perfor-
mance, resources used, power, etc. - so we can take the best design decisions
for the ﬁnal implementation. In Chapter 5 we present the ﬁnal decision on the
design of the accelerator, discuss and compare the results and introduce further
development ideas for the next development iterations. Lastly, in Chapter 6 we
make a retrospective of our work and draw up the ﬁnal conclusions.
The initial plan for the research of development of our goal consists of various
stages spread around a 6 month period. The ﬁrst month - or more - would be
used for researching the related work as to understand what we aim to imple-
ment, how it was done before and form a general strategy to do so. Together
with doing the base setup for our project, be it as part of Vivado or as part of the
hardware setup, this initial phase would hopefully not exceed 1.5 months. The
last month would consist of documenting our approach and the results, hereby
generating this report. Due to the nature of the project we are considering a
period of at least one month for any unexpected delays, blockers or fallbacks.
In the remaining 2.5 months we expect to successfully generate the arithmetic
cores and gradually introduce them into the pipeline, develop the random num-
ber generator and addition tree (as further described in Chapter 3), implement
the necessary controller for interacting with the FIFO interface and create all
the required pipeline to achieve timing closure, while developing test benches to
aid in getting our results.
The period set aside for unknowns is very important because in these kinds of
projects more than in any other software-only projects the amount of things
that we do not know and especially things that we do not know that we don’t
know tend to be quite high. And precaution is the best strategy in this case.
==PAGE:18==
8
Introduction
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2
Background
2.1
The algorithm
2.1.1
European stock options
Used since ancient times in Greece in relation to olive harvests and coined as
trading instruments at the end of 17th century England, options have become a
standardized ﬁnancial instrument, regulated by options exchanges or as bilateral
contracts between a single buyer and seller. The options are part of a larger
class of ﬁnancial instruments known as derivative products.
An option is a contract giving the buyer (also know as the owner or the holder of
the option) the possibility, without being mandatory, to buy or sell an underlying
asset or instrument (e.g. stock) at a speciﬁed strike price on a speciﬁc date -
depending on the form of the option. The strike price can be ﬁxed at a discount
or at a premium (ﬁxed value) or referenced to the market price of the underlying
security or commodity on the day the option is taken out (e.g. be a speciﬁc
percentage of the price of the security or commodity on the day the option is
exercised).
The seller has the obligation to sell or buy the option, depending on how the
==PAGE:20==
10
Background
owner decides to exercise the option. Options that grants the owner the right
to buy at a speciﬁc price are referred to as "call" options - options granting
the owner the right to sell at a speciﬁc price are referred to as "put" options.
Although both are traded on a regular basis, the call options are discussed more
frequently. In general, transferring ownership of options is done by transactions
that require the buyer to pay to the seller a speciﬁc amount (the "premium"),
but certain ways of granting options is also common: either given out in a
employee incentive scheme or as a share issue.
The right moment for exercising the options, with the intent of doing a lucrative
transaction is when the strike price is below the market value of the underlying
asset (for call options) or when the strike price is above the market value (for the
put options). If the option expiration date is passed without it being exercised,
then the option is considered expired and its buyer would forfeit the premium
to the seller of the option. This represents an income to the seller and usually
a loss of capital to the buyer.
While owning an option, an owner can onsell the option to another buyer in a
secondary market, by either bilateral contract ("over-the-counter" transaction)
or on an options exchange, depending on the details of the option. The price of
American-style options usually follows closely the price of the underlying asset,
representing the diﬀerence between the price of the underlying asset and the
strike price of the option. Of course, other factors contribute to the ﬁnal price
of the option, like option holders requiring to exercise the option as the expiry
date is approaching but not having the capital to exercise the option - or buyers
trying to accumulate a large number of options. Owning an option does not
usually grant the holder any rights associated with the underlying stock, so no
voting rights or income due to dividend are granted.
Although there are a few type of options, the two major types (also known as
vanilla) are American and European. The diﬀerence between the two is that
European ones can be exercised only on the expiration date, while the American
ones can be exercised at any point before the expiration date. For this reason
European stock options are easier to analyze.
The evolution of the price of the underlying asset can be modeled in a risk-
neutral model by the Brownian motion model
dS = µSdt + σSdz
(2.1)
where:
==PAGE:21==
2.1 The algorithm
11
S is the asset (security) price
µ is the drift rate (expected return)
σ is a measure of uncertainty on the return (also referred to as "volatility")
z(t) is a standard Brownian motion process
For t = 0 the value of the security is S0. We divide the lifespan of the option
into intervals of length δt, such that (2.1) becomes
S(t + ∆t) −S(t) = µS(t)∆t + σS(t)ϵ
√
∆t
(2.2)
where ϵ is a random sample from a normal distribution with mean zero and
standard deviation 1.0 [Hul14].
By applying the Black-Scholes-Merton formula [Hul14], the value of the under-
lying asset at time T is
S(T) = S(0) · e
h
µ−σ2
2

T +σϵ
√
T
i
(2.3)
2.1.2
Monte Carlo simulations
The Monte Carlo methods, often used in complex physical and mathematical
problems for which it is diﬃcult or impossible to apply any other mathematical
methods, are a class of computational algorithms based on repeated random
sampling in large iterations, for obtaining numerical results, essentially relying
on the law of large numbers [Wikc].
Being particularly useful in optimization and numerical integration, Monte Carlo
simulations have seen high applicability in physics, mathematics and ﬁnancial
domains. In physics, the methods are used in simulating cellular structures, ﬂuid
dynamics, various materials and even solids, while in mathematics it has proven
its usefulness in evaluating multidimensional deﬁnite integrals that have com-
plicated boundary conditions. Within the ﬁnancial domain, the Monte Carlo
simulations have particular applicability in calculation of risks, including predic-
tions of failure, cost and schedule overruns with a higher certainty than intuition
of highly-trained humans or alternative "soft" algorithms.
==PAGE:22==
12
Background
While there are various ways of applying the Monte Carlo experiments, a com-
mon pattern emerges.
First one is expected to deﬁne the domain of possi-
ble inputs, then generate a rather large number of inputs, randomly, from a
probability distribution, perform a deterministic computation of the inputs and
somehow aggregate the results. A common, simple example for this pattern is
approximating the value of π: start by drawing a square on the ground, in which
a circle is inscribed, then uniformly scatter objects of uniform size (like grains
of rice) over the square, count the number of grains inside the circle and the
total number of grains - the ratio of the two counts would be an estimate of the
ratio of the two areas, which is equal to π/4, so by multiplying the result by 4
we estimate the value of π.
In utilizing the Monte Carlo simulations approach it is important to note the
following:
• the samples need to be uniformly distributed, otherwise the approximation
would be poor
• there should be a large number of samples (inputs), as, in general, the
approximation is more exact the larger the number of inputs are used
Obtaining large amounts of random numbers is therefore critical for the algo-
rithm - this need spurred the development of pseudo-random number generators,
being much quicker than other previous solutions.
In applying the same Monte Carlo simulations approach to our problem we will
evaluate (2.3) in a risk-neutral model [Hul14] and have a similar pattern:
• we deﬁne the following inputs:
S0 is the initial price of the underlying asset (security)
K is the strike price
r is the risk-free interest rate
σ is the volatility of the underlying asset (security)
T is the time to expiration of the option, measured in years
n is the number of Monte Carlo simulations
• we generate random samples in a distribution with mean 0 and a standard
deviation of 1.0 (or close to it), which will be combined with the inputs in
order to obtain random samples over the domain
==PAGE:23==
2.1 The algorithm
13
• we perform the deterministic computation on these inputs, as further de-
scribed in Algorithm 1
• we aggregate the results by averaging them
By combining the Black-Scholes-Merton-based equation obtained above (2.3)
with the Monte Carlo simulation-based approach, we obtain the algorithm de-
scribed below (1). Because we intend to implement this on hardware we aim
at optimizing the algorithm as best as possible.
On a ﬁrst look we can see
that because r and σ are constant over one data set, the V sqrtT, drift and
expRT variables are therefore constant as well and can be pre-computed. The
algorithm notation is consistent with the one in [SHSN12]
Algorithm 1 Monte Carlo simulation algorithm for European option pricing
Ensure: V rnd is generated at each iteration below
V sqrtT = σ
√
T
drift =

r −σ2
2

T
expRT = erT
sum = 0
for i = 1 to n do
St = S0 · e(drift+V sqrtT ·V rnd)
if St −K > 0 then
sum = sum + (St −K) · expRT
end if
end for
S = sum/n
While this algorithm ca be implemented with relative ease in any high-level
programming language that compiles down to a program running purely on
a central processing unit (CPU), the aim of this implementation is to fully
implement Algorithm 1 as a dedicated hardware architecture running on a Xilinx
7 Series FPGA and therefore make use of CPU to FPGA communication via
PCIe. In Section 2.2 we will describe the role of each of these components and the
speciﬁcs of the FPGA devices and boards we aim to use. Aiming to implement
such an acceleration paradigm means that the role of the CPU will be stripped
down to only processing inputs, writing them to the PCIe bus and reading the
results from the PCIe bus - in a manner further described in Subsection 3.2.1.
==PAGE:24==
14
Background
2.2
The hardware platform
2.2.1
CPU
The central processing unit (CPU) within a computer represents the electronic
circuit that executes the instructions of a computer program, essentially per-
forming the basic arithmetic, logical, control and I/O (input/output) operations
speciﬁed by the aforementioned instructions. Traditionally, the term refers to a
processor and more speciﬁcally to its processing and control units, thus distin-
guishing these elements from other, external components, such as main memory
and I/O circuits.
Although CPUs have evolved over the years, the fundamental operations stayed
the same. The CPU consists of an arithmetic logic unit (ALU) that performs
arithmetic and logic operations on operands supplied from processor registers
or immediate value, while the necessary system control is extracted from the
instructions that the processor executes.
CPUs have been designed with the intent of being used for general-purpose
computations, in general being capable of performing any arithmetic or logical
operation (alongside other memory or I/O access operations), even if a complex
operation is decomposed into a set of diﬀerent instructions to be executed by the
CPU in one or more clock cycles. While many aspects of a CPU contribute to
its overall performance in terms of speed (maximum frequency at which it can
run, number of cores, complexity of instructions it can execute, etc), in general,
being designed for general-purpose use, CPUs have become slower compared
with newer "acceleration" technologies.
One of the ﬁrst applications for which CPUs gradually became too slow was
graphics processing. Requiring a large number of matrix-based computations,
graphics systems have migrated from using CPUs to dedicated graphics cards
with custom-designed graphics processing units (GPUs).
These GPUs have
increased in complexity, being able to execute massively parallel workloads,
achieving thousands of GFLOPS (billions of ﬂoating-point operations per sec-
ond) and have become the power horse of the graphics industry. Also, their
massive arithmetic capabilities have shown greater and greater interest in the
artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) domains, having particu-
lar use in fast training of massive mathematical models within the ﬁeld.
For other compute-intensive workloads whose underlying operations cannot be
mapped onto the GPU (e.g. by means of the CUDA API), FPGA-based ac-
celerators have been developed - speciﬁc examples are mentioned in Chapter
==PAGE:25==
2.2 The hardware platform
15
1.
The experiments described in this paper have been run on a Intel Core 2 Duo
E8600 CPU having 2 cores, running at 3.33 GHz with 8 GB memory. The
operating system is a 64-bit Ubuntu 14.04 Linux. Because the entire algorithm
is oﬄoaded to the FPGA, these technical details are not of utmost importance.
Similar CPU has been utilized in [SHSN12] for running the algorithm, at least
in CPU-only mode.
2.2.2
PCI express
The PCI Express (PCIe) bus represents the third generation of the PCI (Pe-
ripheral Component Interconnect) bus, with higher performance and reliability
compared to the previous generation PCI and PCI-X buses. As opposed to these
previous versions, which are parallel buses, PCIe is a serial bus and because of
this it has several advantages, compared to the parallel buses: it features lower
pin count on the integrated circuits and it enables lower complexity reduced
cost for the printed circuit boards that bear a PCIe bus.
The speciﬁcations of the PCIe bus originate from the 3GIO (Third Genera-
tion I/O) bus speciﬁcations, which have been developed by the Arapahoe Work
Group. The group was composed of representatives from Compaq, Dell, HP,
IBM, Intel and Microsoft and the speciﬁcations have been transferred in 2002
to the PCI-SIG (PCI Special Interest Group), a group of around 1000 companies
that has developed and updated the standards of the previous buses and their
corresponding versions. This new bus has been renamed to "PCI Express", re-
ﬂecting both the high speed of the bus and its compatibility (at least in software)
with the previous generation buses (PCI, PCI-X).
The main features that had an advantage in the previous generation buses have
been kept, while newer or improved features were developed. PCIe uses the
same communication model as PCI and PCI-X - the same address spaces are
retained (memory, I/O, conﬁguration) and it allows use of the same types of
transactions (memory read/write, I/O read/write, conﬁguration read/write) -
maintaining compatibility with existing operating systems and drivers.
PCIe standard introduces several improvements for both enhancing the perfor-
mance and reducing costs. Switching over to a serial interconnect, the disadvan-
tages of parallel buses (e.g. diﬃculty to synchronize multiple data lines due to
asymmetrical propagation) are mitigated. Also, being a point-to-point intercon-
nect, the electrical load of the link is reduced, which enables an increase of the
frequency of the clock signal used for the data transfer. The overall performance
==PAGE:26==
16
Background
of the bus is scalable, done so by implementing a variable number of communi-
cation lanes per interconnect, depending on the performance requirements.
The standard allows for interconnecting a large number of peripheral devices,
accomplishing communication between the nodes by means of a switch-based
technology: a packet-based communication protocol is used, one that encapsu-
lates even the interrupt signaling, error handling and the power management
functions, thus reducing the pin count and cost of the devices.
Other features of the PCIe standard include:
• diﬀerentiated quality of service (QoS) - being able to allocate dedicated
resources for certain data ﬂows, to conﬁgure QoS arbitration policies and
to use isochronous transfers for real-time applications
• advanced power management - by instructing the peripheral devices to
switch to a state with a diﬀerent power consumption and receiving notiﬁ-
cations related to the current power state of a peripheral device
• link-level data integrity
• advanced error reporting and handling - improving fault isolation and error
recovery
• hot-plug and hot-swap - being able to remove/replace peripheral devices
without the need of additional signals
The PCI Express bus architecture is structured into 3 layers, excluding the
host-speciﬁc layers:
• physical layer - performs the packet transmission over the PCIe serial link
• data link layer - ensures the integrity of data transfers via CRC-based
(Cyclic Redundancy Check) error detection
• transaction layer - manages the transmission and reception of information
by means of the packet-based protocol
In addition to these, on a PCIe bus controller there would be a PCIe logic
interface and a device core that would provide the internal control and the
interface to the host computer. On the host computer there are two additional
layers: the software layer interacts with the operating system by means of the
drivers (compatible with the conventional PCI bus drivers) and the conﬁguration
==PAGE:27==
2.2 The hardware platform
17
layer enables the management of the PCIe conﬁguration related to initializing,
enumerating and utilizing I/O devices.
The PCIe bus link consists of a number of transmit and receive channels over
which the data and command packets are sent.
Each channel is physically
implemented as a pair of wires over which the information is sent encoded in low-
voltage diﬀerential signaling. Each pair of transmit-receive channels is denoted
as communication lane. When scaling the bandwidth, a PCIe link can aggregate
multiple communication lanes (marked as xN, where N is the link width). The
PCIe bus standard allows the use of x1, x2, x4, x8, x12, x16 and x32 link widths.
PCIe transactions are deﬁned as a series of one or more packet transmissions
required to accomplish an information transfer between an initiator and a target
device. There are 4 types of such transactions:
• memory - e.g. reading/writing the memory
• I/O - e.g. reading/writing the I/O space
• conﬁguration - e.g. reading/writing the conﬁguration registers
• message - speciﬁc to PCIe bus (not supported in earlier PCI standards),
are used for interrupt or error signaling and for power management
During hardware initialization, for each PCIe link the width and the operating
frequency are negotiated - values that are automatically set by the devices at
each end of the link. The ﬁrst version of PCIe (1.0a) was released in 2003 and it
speciﬁed an operating frequency of 2.5 GHz with a maximum data bandwidth
of 250 MB/s per communication lane. Version 1.1, released in 2005, introduced
some bus enhancements, but did not specify any higher data bandwidths. Ver-
sions 2.0 and 2.1 have been released in 2007, doubling the operating frequency
- to 5 GHz, allowing a maximum bandwidth of 500 MB/s per lane - achieving
a maximum theoretical data bandwidth of 16 GB/s for a x32 link. Version 3.0
has been released by PCI-SIG in 2010, increasing the operating frequency to 8
GHz, with a maximum bandwidth of 800 MB/s per communication lane. This
version also introduced improvements to the signaling protocol, data integrity
and error recovery - including by replacing the old 8b/10b encoding with the
newer and more eﬃcient 128b/130b data encoding. At the end of 2011, PCI-
SIG announced v4.0 of the PCIe standard, which would provide a 16 GT/s bit
rate that would double the bandwidth provided by v3.0, while maintaining the
compatibility with the version. Final speciﬁcations are expected to be released
in 2017.
==PAGE:28==
18
Background
Further PCIe-related details speciﬁc to our design will be discussed in Subsection
3.2.1.
2.2.3
FPGA Devices and Development Kit
A ﬁeld-programmable gate array (FPGA) is an integrated circuit designed with
the intent of being conﬁgured and re-conﬁgured by the customer after its man-
ufacturing. Its conﬁguration is speciﬁed using a hardware description language
(HDL). These devices contain an array of programmable logic blocks and many
conﬁgurable interconnects that allow the blocks to be wired together, similar
to a logic gate-based design where various such gates are inter-wired in various
conﬁgurations. These logic blocks are hence conﬁgured to perform any complex
combinatorial logic functions, as well as simple logic. As most hardware archi-
tectures also contain sequential logic, these logic blocks contain also memory
elements, from single ﬂip-ﬂops to larger, more complex blocks of memory.
FPGAs have been traditionally regarded as devices used in very specialized
applications within advance ﬁelds of use. They have the advantage of being
re-conﬁgurable, as opposed to the traditional ASIC-based solutions. Old FPGA
implementations were however inferior to ASICs in terms of area, power and
speed, requiring up to 40 times more area, 12 times more dynamic power and
running at a third of the speed of a corresponding ASIC implementation. How-
ever, newer generation FPGAs, such as the Xilinx 7-series or Altera Stratix
5 devices are rivaling corresponding ASIC solutions by providing signiﬁcantly
reduced power, increased speed, lower costs and increased capabilities of on-the-
ﬂy re-conﬁguration, including only partial reconﬁguration of the chip (while the
rest of the chip continues to run).
Allowing re-conﬁguration in the ﬁeld for ﬁxing potential bugs, FPGAs enable a
shorter time to market and lower non-recurring engineering costs. These devices
also provide the support for developing the design, even if the ﬁnal product will
be manufactured as ASIC.
However, the use of FPGA technology gains a lot of momentum due to the latest
dynamics in the market and corresponding technology, making FPGAs a better
alternative for more high-volume applications than have been historically used
for. More overview related to FPGA use in the domain of cloud computing is
available in Chapter 1.
The previous implementation of the targeted algorithm has been targeted for
Xilinx’s Virtex-5 family of devices, more speciﬁcally on LX50T and LX330T
[SHSN12]. These devices were intended for logic-intensive applications, being
==PAGE:29==
2.2 The hardware platform
19
manufactured on a 65 nm process at 1.0 V. The later Virtex-6 family of FPGAs
is fabricated on a 40 nm process and is claimed to use 15% less power and 15%
improved performance over competing 40 nm FPGAs.
The newer 7 Series family devices are fabricated using TSMC’s 28 nm HKMG
process. They promise improvements in power, performance, capacity and price,
featuring a 50% power reduction compared to the 40 nm devices, while oﬀering
3-4 times more logic cells. As part of the 7 Series, Xilinx introduced the Zynq-
7000 family, a set of devices that integrates a hard ARM Cortex-A9 processor
on a 28 nm FPGA, interconnecting this ARM-based processing system with the
surrounding programmable logic via an AXI interface.
Xilinx later introduced the UltraScale and UltraScale+ families manufactured
using 20 nm and 16 nm FinFET processes, correspondingly.
We aim at implementing a dedicated architecture for the algorithm described
in Subsection 2.1.2 targeted on a PCIe-capable FPGA device from the Xilinx
7 Series family - a newer generation compared to the previous Virtex-5-based
implementation. In doing so we will make use of Digilent’s NetFPGA-1G-CML
development board that features a Xilinx Kintex 7 device, XC7K325T [Dig].
This device and the underlying board features the following features that are of
interest to this application:
• over 325.000 conﬁgurable logic blocks
• low-jitter 200 MHz oscillator - from which the eventual system clock is
derived
• x4 Gen2 PCIe interface - used for bidirectional communication with the
host CPU
• four on-board LEDs - used for visual status reporting and limited debug-
ging
• resistor taps for measuring core power - a resistor exposed with connectors
for analyzing the power consumption of the core (excluding I/O banks)
By comparison, the newer generation Kintex-7 device has increased capabilities
compared to the Virtex-5 devices used in [SHSN12]. This is reﬂected in Table
2.1.
Although the Virtex-5 330T has similar number of CLBs as Kintex-7 325T, the
underlying implementation makes the Kintex-7 device as capable, if not more.
It is important to note that the Kintex-7 device is a mid-range device in the 7
==PAGE:30==
20
Background
Feature
Kintex-7 325T
Virtex-5 50T
Virtex-5 330T
Logic Cells
326,080
46,080
331,776
LUT
203,800
28,800
207,360
Flip-Flops
407,600
28,800
207,360
PCIe
Gen2 on hard IP
Gen1
Gen 1
Table 2.1: Comparison between the previously used FPGA devices and the
one we target
Series family and therefore other devices in the family (e.g. Virtex-7) would be
far superior to the Virtex-5 330T device.
The newer generation Kintex-7 325T device has a PCIe Gen 2 hard core (and
can run PCIe Gen 3 on soft core) and would therefore be able to have faster data
transfers to and from the CPU. However, due to the nature of the algorithm and
the fact that it has a reduced set of input data, this speed tends to be negligible.
The Kintex-7-based development board has been chosen due to accessibility, as
Virtex-based boards are harder to procure and more expensive.
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 3
Design Methodology
3.1
Tools and IDEs
As previously discussed in Chapter 2, the implementation consists of a two part
processing, each mapped to the underlying architecture:
• CPU - the program running on it will be responsible for obtaining the
required inputs (as command-line arguments or from some external source,
e.g. a database), passing them down to the PCIe bus to be sent to the
FPGA and ﬁnally reading and displaying the results returned from the
FPGA via PCIe
• FPGA - will be running the dedicated hardware architecture described
here, architecture which will read the aforementioned inputs from the
PCIe bus, run the processing described in Algorithm 1 and then write
back to the CPU, via PCIe, the results.
Similar to the nomenclature used by Xilinx in describing their Zynq-7000 family
of devices, we will refer to the hard processing core (CPU) as to processing
system and to the FPGA part as to programmable logic, but it is important to
remember that we are not targeting the design to Zynq-7000 devices.
==PAGE:32==
22
Design Methodology
For the processing system part, a simple program that obtains the inputs from
an external source or reads them command-line inputs can be implemented, in
any programming language. To the bare minimum, as further described in Sub-
section 3.2.1, writing to and reading from the PCIe bus can be accomplished by
using a few simple Bash commands, as we are running a Linux-based operating
system (see Subsection 2.2.1). If the need arises to do so we will use, for exper-
imental purposes, C-based software programs, while any other more complex
scenario (e.g. simulating the solution as a web service - as it would run in a
data center) would be developed in Java.
The programmable logic subsystem would consist of a series of cores capable of
doing various types of operations - one core would be capable of doing the read
and write communication via PCIe, most of the cores will implement the various
arithmetical operations described in Algorithm 1, while a ﬁnite state machine
(FSM) would be responsible of controlling the overall system, ensuring correct
reading from the PCIe core interface and writing at the correct moment to the
aforementioned core.
As the target devices chosen are Xilinx 7 Series FPGAs, development will be
based on Xilinx’s Vivado 2015.4 Suite. The Vivado IDE is capable of running
the analysis, synthesis and implementation of hardware description language
(HDL) designs, simulation of test benches, reporting on various metrics related
to the design and generation of programming ﬁles to be loaded on the targeted
devices. It features newer, advanced features, allowing partial reconﬁguration
for the devices and high-level synthesis (HLS) implementations - essentially
being capable of transforming C-like code into dedicated hardware architectures.
However, these features are out of the scope of this implementation. The HDL
used in the design is VHDL - however, as we are to use third party cores for
speciﬁc tasks (e.g. PCIe communication), some ﬁles in the project will not be
VHDL-based. Combining diﬀerent types of HDL in the same project is not a
problem for Vivado and therefore it is capable of compiling designs with various
HDL sources. The Vivado installation and all other related IDEs are running
on a Windows 7 installation, as a previous use of Vivado on Linux (Ubuntu)
indicated that the installation might suﬀer from having a few bugs.
We intend to speed up the development process and we will therefore make use
of third party tools, generators and cores that would enable us to do so. We
describe in 3.2.1 the Xillybus PCIe communication solution chosen for accom-
plishing the PCIe communication - a solution that provides the HDL core with
an easy-to-use FIFO interface to the rest of the architecture, a corresponding
software driver for recognizing the device inside the host and enough documen-
tation/support as to be able to seamlessly develop the application. Because
most of the processing in Algorithm 1 is based around ﬂoating-point arithmetic
operations that have been extensively researched and implemented before, we
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Hardware subsystems
23
will make use of the FloPoCo 2.5 "virtual inﬁnite" library that is capable of
generating ﬂoating-point arithmetic cores [DDDCT08]. As the cores generated
by this library work with numbers represented in its own, proprietary format,
the library will also be able to generate the required format converters - from
IEEE-756 to the FloPoCo format and back. Use of an additional converter is
used, provided by the Xilinx core generators, for transforming values from ﬁxed
point to ﬂoating point format. To quickly gain access to a FloPoCo installation
- that can easily run only on Linux systems - we use a VM based on VirtualBox.
For quick provisioning of the VM as well as quick provisioning of FloPoCo on
the VM we use a combination of Vagrant and Puppet VM and conﬁguration
management tools.
While experimenting, for debugging, reporting and sanity purposes we will be
saving outputs to ﬁles and whenever needed we will be do graphical plots of
the results, for validation. In displaying the data we will make use of Matlab
R2013b’s fast analysis capabilities.
We also aim to report the hands-on power consumption by measuring the volt-
age on exposed resistor indicating the core power consumption, excluding I/O
blocks. In doing so we will make use of an Agilent 34410A digital multimeter
for reading the voltage readings on the aforementioned resistor.
3.2
Hardware subsystems
The FPGA design, at a top level, can be broken down into two major compo-
nents. First, a PCIe communication core would encapsulate the entire transmit-
receive logic for dispatch of packets. It would make use of the GTX transceivers
that are featured on the Xilinx 7 Series devices and it would connect directly
to the pins corresponding to the PCIe transmit and receive lanes. Second, the
actual processing core would make use of the data received from the PCIe core,
apply Algorithm 1 then transmit the results back to the PCIe core to be sent
over to the CPU. We will encapsulate the state logic inside this processing core.
More details on the interfacing between the two cores can be found in Subsection
3.2.1.
3.2.1
PCIe communication core
For achieving the communication over PCIe we decided to chose a ready-made
tool.
As this communication is complex in itself, implementing it ourselves
==PAGE:34==
24
Design Methodology
would not have been an option and it would have been outside the scope of
this paper. PCIe communication cores were already implemented and would
be therefore more reliable than any self-developed solution. Alongside this, the
existing solutions have been extensively tested and are backed up by extensive
support, documentation and community.
Figure 3.1: Placed (and routed) RIFFA core on Kintex-7 325T. The design
contains only the RIFFA framework core, without extra "accel-
eration" processing and therefore we can see that its footprint is
quite large, occupying almost a third of the chip area. Although
the overall resource utilization is closer to 15%, this indicates that
this solution is really costly in terms of resource utilization
We took into consideration two tools for doing this, the RIFFA: Reusable In-
tegration Framework for FPGA Accelerators framework and the Xillybus: An
FPGA IP core for easy DMA over PCIe with Windows and Linux. While eval-
uating the two solutions we took into consideration with utmost importance
the ease of use - including OS support and available software drivers, the avail-
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Hardware subsystems
25
able documentation - including various use cases and examples and the support
provided by the developers or by their community and to a lesser extent the
footprint of each of the two solutions, as we would ideally like to use as much
as possible the available resources for parallelizing Algorithm 1.
We have ﬁrst assessed the RIFFA framework - at the time at version 2.1. The
framework has been developed by Matthew Jacobsen and his team aﬃliated to
The University of California at San Diego, US, published under various versions
since 2012.
The framework works with both Windows and Linux operating
systems and with Altera and Xilinx devices, having user libraries for C/C++,
Python, MATLAB and Java. It communicates the data based on direct memory
access (DMA) transfers and take advantage of interrupt signaling. Executing
a data transfer is simpliﬁed due to the user libraries, thus requiring only a
few lines of code for doing so. Targeted at a x4 Gen 2 PCIe setup, a RIFFA-
based implementation could reach a transfer bandwidth of 1.5 - 2 GB in both
upstream and downstream communication, claiming that it can achieve 80% of
the theoretical bandwidth in almost all cases.
However, two major limitations can be detected by only looking at the RIFFA
details: ﬁrst, the provided software drivers have been tested on Ubuntu versions
up to 12.04 LTS and might pose a problem with Ubuntu 14.04 and its Linux
Kernel version 3.13 and second, at the time of writing this they have only tar-
geted de RIFFA design on a Virtex-7-based development board (Xilinx VC707)
and some older generation devices and therefore do not oﬀer easy support for
Kintex-7-based devices. This poses a big challenge, as porting a third party
framework to work with another type of device tends to be an extremely com-
plex task with many ways to fail: while porting to the new device’s placement
constraints should not be too much of an ordeal, other aspects might prove to
be complete blockers - for example, porting an x8 design (the one targeted on
Xilinx VC707 board) for the x4 NetFPGA-1G-CML board can prove challeng-
ing depending on how well the framework is documented and how easy to use
its interface (e.g. use of generics) is. Another potential challenge in porting the
design to the NetFPGA-1G-CML board might rely with any diﬀerence in the
available clocks on the two boards, as well as the PCIe bus clock. In terms of
support, we were able to ﬁnd only the RIFFA documentation, but no commu-
nity or forum - which could pose a challenge, especially if need be to port one
of the provided designs.
We furthered our investigation by targeting the available RIFFA example onto
the Kintex-7 325T device on the NetFPGA-1G-CML board and proceeded to
adapting the placement constraints for this new device, in order to successfully
synthesize and implement the design. After doing so, we obtained the following
results:
==PAGE:36==
26
Design Methodology
(a) RIFFA post-implementation resource
utilization
(b) Xillybus post-synthesis resource uti-
lization
Figure 3.2: Resource utilization comparison between RIFFA and Xillybus. Al-
though not shown here, the Xillybus solution utilizes the same
amout of GT transceivers. It is expected for the MMCM clocking
resources utilization to be similar, but on all the other categories
the Xillybus solution has a greatly reduced utilization compared
to the RIFFA framework
• the estimated post-implementation total on-chip power (not taking into
account any simulation vectors) has been found to be 2.588 W, with a
junction temperature of 29.9 ◦C
• the estimated post-implementation resource utilization went to over 10%
in all the important categories (ﬂip-ﬂops, look-up tables, block RAM,
mixed-mode clock managers)
While it is hard to currently assess the importance of this power rating, the
resource utilization seems to be quite high, indicating that only this PCIe trans-
mission logic can take up to more than a tenth of the chip area. Indeed, when
observing the placing made during the implementation phase, showin in Figure
3.1, we can observe that a high percentage of the chip surface is used by only
this PCIe core, without any additional acceleration processing taking place.
Observing these limitations and seeing the high resource utilization we decided
to evaluate the Xillybus solution before proceeding with any further investi-
gations or implementation on top of the RIFFA framework. Xillybus describes
itself as "a simple turnkey solution", consisting of the FPGA IP core and the
corresponding software driver - included in Ubuntu Linux distributions and on
Windows 7, basically having all the low-level design ready made. In terms of
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Hardware subsystems
27
portability, besides the easy switch between operating systems, Xillybus sup-
ports, alongside the PCIe bus, the AXI bus, thus having the potential of mov-
ing a Xillybus-based design onto a device in the Zynq-7000 family or onto one
featuring a Microblaze soft processor. It has also been targeted and tested on
both Altera and Xilinx devices, with the latter vendor’s devices tested up to
and including the Virtex and Kintex Ultrascale families. Its ease of use means
that it requires no driver programming, no need to grasp the internals of some
complicated API and it works intuitively on both sides:
• CPU - software programmers require to follow classic UNIX programming
style, the interface being as simple as working with (writing to and reading
from) ﬁles within the userspace
• FPGA - digital systems designers would interface with the IP core by
reading from and writing to standard FIFOs (ﬁrst-in ﬁrst-out memories)
or dual-port memories
These ways to interfacing with the communication core would ultimately impact
the performance: reading from and writing to FIFOs would be a much faster so-
lution, used for applications featuring streams of data. For the FIFO approach,
Xillybus features two pairs of FIFOs, with 8 and 32 bits in data width, corre-
spondingly. Each pair consists of a read and write queue, each of these 4 queues
mapping to a separate device ﬁle (where the read and write denote the action
taken by the CPU side). Alongside these, Xillybus provides also a dual-memory
interface, with 8-bit words, that can be easily accessed from both the CPU and
the FPGA side. This memory also maps as a separate device ﬁle, Xillybus thus
exposing the following device ﬁles:
• /dev/xillybus_read_8 - ﬁle from which 8-bit values received from the
FPGA are being read
• /dev/xillybus_write_8 - ﬁle onto which 8-bit values are written to be sent
to the FPGA
• /dev/xillybus_read_32 - ﬁle from which 32-bit values received from the
FPGA are being read
• /dev/xillybus_write_32 - ﬁle onto which 32-bit values are written to be
sent to the FPGA
• /dev/xillybus_mem_8 - ﬁle onto which 8-bit values are written and read
from, ultimately being sent to or received from the FPGA
==PAGE:38==
28
Design Methodology
For our design, as we are to work with binary32 values, we would have the
32-bit FIFOs and devices within focus.
Having additional 8-bit channels is
advantageous, as we could potentially use these channels for auxiliary purposes,
like status reporting (e.g. current state of the system).
When considering the speed of the PCIe communication achieved through Xilly-
bus, the numbers are similar to RIFFA, achieving 80% of the theoretical band-
width, in both upstream and downstream. As for support, Xillybus provides
extensive documentation on the user side and API, a discussion forum and some
type of email support. Example designs feature simple PCIe-based communi-
cation targeted on Xilinx 7 Series devices (Artix-7, Kintex-7, Virtex-7), Xilinx
Ultrascale (Kintex Ultrascale, Virtex Ultrascale), as well as older generation
devices.
These features and theoretical aspects look quite promising, especially related
to the support, documentation and examples provided.
We have decided to
further investigate the Xillybus solution by setting it up for the Kintex-7 device
on the NetFPGA-1G-CML board. The examples provided did not map exactly
on our needs (at the time of writing this there is no x4 PCIe design targeted at
a Kintex-7 device and most certainly not for the NetFPGA-1G-CML board), so
we had to setup our own custom project. In doing so we observed two available
projects, one targeting at an Artix-7 on a x4 PCIe bus, the other one at an
Kintex-7 on a x8 PCIe bus. By comparing these projects we managed to deduce
that we would be able to reach a working setup for the NetFPGA-1G-CML
board by setting up a Kintex-7 325T project in which we import the Xillybus
NGC core ﬁle (and corresponding Verilog ﬁle) from the Artix-7 project, then
import the rest of the sources from any of the two projects and update the
constraints ﬁle to match the top-level entity’s ports and the exact location of
each pin, inferred from the board’s schematics and the pin placement diagram
of the Kintex-7 325T device.
With this new project all set up we managed to successfully synthesize and
implement this test design. This test design consists of a loop-back functionality,
essentially transmitting back any values transmitted to the FPGA. We managed
to generate the bitstream, load it onto the device and run successful loop-back
tests from the Ubuntu OS. This ultimately proved the high potential of this
solution and its relative ease of use.
The post-synthesis reports have shown much better numbers than in the case
of the RIFFA solution. As shown in Figure 3.2b, we can see that although the
clocking resources (MMCM) have stayed the same, as expected, all the other
resources have dropped in utilization, compared to the RIFFA solution. Thus
Xillybus has a much smaller footprint, while being capable of achieving similar
speeds and oﬀering an easy to use interface both on the operating system side
==PAGE:39==
3.2 Hardware subsystems
29
RIFFA
Xillybus
Kintex-7
325T
utilization
10 - 21 %
1 - 6 %
Transfer speeds
80% of theoretical
maximum
80% of theoretical
maximum
Power consump-
tion
2.558 W
0.957 W
Support
limited
examples,
some
documenta-
tion
extensive documen-
tation, many exam-
ples, forum
Table 3.1: Comparison between the RIFFA framework and the Xillybus FPGA
core. By comparing with the RIFFA framework, we can observe
that the Xillybus solution oﬀers the same performance while having
the beneﬁt of more extensive documentation and support, all while
using a very small fraction of the available resources and beneﬁting
from reduced power consumption
as well as on the FPGA side. This reduced footprint can be seen in the power
report, the Xillybus-based solution consuming only 0.957 W (no simulation
vectors were taken into account when estimating the power), with a junction
temperature of 26.8 ◦C. It is important to note that the utilization and power
results aforementioned are for using all 3 channels - the two FIFO-based chan-
nels, one 32-bit wide and the other 8-bit wide and the dual-port memory-based
channel. This means that if in the ﬁnal architecture we use only one of these
channels (e.g. the 32-bit FIFO-based channel), then the resource utilization and
power consumption would drop even more (for the Xillybus core).
Summarizing the comparison in Table 3.1, we can clearly see that the Xillybus
solution is at least a safer bet, if not a more superior solution. For all the above
considerations and due to the ease of use, we therefore decided to continue using
the Xillybus solution as part of the ﬁnal architecture.
We plan to make extensive use of the 32-bit wide FIFO-based interfaces, while
disconnecting the other interfaces as to reduce resource utilization. As shown
in Figure 3.3, Xillybus reads the data packets from the receive PCIe channels,
then does the necessary transaction processing so that it can make the base
data available onto the input FIFO - from where the data can be read by the
acceleration core and processing can be done on it.
Once the processing is
complete, the result is then written by the acceleration core onto the output
FIFO, from where it is picked up by the Xillybus core, transformed into PCIe
transaction packets and sent over the PCIe transmit medium.
==PAGE:40==
30
Design Methodology
Unit
Function
Latency
FP-add
x + y
2
FP-mul
x · y
4
FP-exp
ex
13
Table 3.2: Latency of the FloPoCo-generated cores. All the cores have been
generate with a target frequency of 100 MHz, with all other options
kept to default. While the latency of the ﬂoating-point addition
and ﬂoating-point multiplication are quite low, the latency of the
ﬂoating point exponential function implementation is very high and
could possibly be further optimized
3.2.1.1
Xillybus caveat
Later in the development process we came across a caveat in utilizing the
Xillybus core. Although minor, it posed a challenge and represented a blocker
for quite some time, especially as it was not documented. In short, the byte-
wise endianness of the 32-bit wide channel was not mentioned anywhere, leading
to behaviors that we believed to be wrong. Even if Xillybus was using FIFOs
for interfacing we expected that the 32-bit wide channel would transmit the
individual bytes in a little-endian manner and that the FIFOs would just enforce
the ordering of the 32-bit values. However, after a lot of trial and error testing
we came to realize that the value that the FPGA receives on the 32-bit FIFO
has the byte ordering ﬂipped (in groups of 4) compared to how it was sent. This
is a very important aspect to take into account, as it aﬀects the sanity when
developing and can lead to major losses in terms of development time.
3.2.2
Clock signals and clocking resources
The PCIe standard, relying on a serial bus, makes use of a diﬀerential clock
signal that is connected to all the involved nodes and whose frequency is ne-
gotiated during hardware initialization. This link frequency (alongside the link
width) is set automatically by the devices at each end of the link - and once set,
each link must only operate at the frequency it has been set. Xillybus senses the
aforementioned pair of diﬀerential clocks and drives its entire logic based on it.
Moreover, Xillybus exposes the corresponding single-signal clock as an output -
oﬀering other cores in the system the ability to use the same clock signal as the
PCIe bus.
Alongside the PCIe bus clock, the NetFPGA-1G-CML features an on-board
==PAGE:41==
3.2 Hardware subsystems
31
low-jitter oscillator running at a frequency of 200 MHz. This translates into
a pair of diﬀerential clock signals that can be harvested by means of a Xilinx
diﬀerential input buﬀer primitive reserved for clock resources (IBUFGDS) and
can be transformed to a diﬀerent frequency using Xilinx’s mixed-mode clock
manager (MMCM) or phase-locked loop (PLL) clocking primitive resources.
In the eventuality of having two clock domains, clock domain crossing techniques
need to be employed.
This can be achieved by registering the cross-domain
signals through ﬂip-ﬂops, with a minimum of two stages of re-synchronization
ﬂip-ﬂops, to avoid issues regarding meta-stability in the destination domain. In
[Xilc] a solution for synchronizing a reset signal with a clock domain is explained
in detail. However, because Xillybus interfaces with the rest of the system via an
input and an output FIFO, the clock domain crossing is achieved based around
the underlying implementation of this dual-port FIFO memory [Xilb].
3.2.3
Arithmetic cores
The processing done in Algorithm 1 is not based on integer operations and there-
fore the values involved in it would require some ﬂoating-point representation.
For the purposes of this implementation we will use the binary32 ﬂoating-point
representation. This is because the range of the binary32 format would most
likely suﬃce in all cases (for our particular application), while a longer for-
mat (e.g. binary64) would just use additional hardware resources at no added
beneﬁt.
As the algorithm consists of common arithmetical operations on binary32 values
- and because these operations are well known and have been implemented in
hardware for a long time - we will be taking advantage of third party solutions
for this. In particular, we will use the "virtually inﬁnite" ﬂoating-point library
FloPoCo. This library acts as a generator for VHDL-based ﬂoating-point arith-
metic cores, enabling us to generate almost all the required operation cores. We
are using FloPoCo 2.5, same version as the one used in [SHSN12]. This decision
has been made because the subsequent versions have either not gone out of beta
(v 3.0) or because are too new and might have unknown bugs (v 4.0) - and
therefore a safe, proven solution was preferable. We have preliminary targeted
the generated FloPoCo cores to be pipelined for a frequency of 100 MHz, similar
to the approach in [SHSN12]. In Table 3.2 we summarize the obtained latency.
The implementation requires a random number generator - generating values
between -1 and 1, with mean zero (0). FloPoCo features a random number
generator but it cannot be used for two reasons: ﬁrst, when trying to generate
the core using FloPoCo 2.5 the execution fails due to a critical failure and second,
==PAGE:42==
32
Design Methodology
even if it would work, the core is poorly documented so it is hard to know how to
conﬁgure it or what is the range that it generates the numbers in. We therefore
implement our own random number generator, as further described in Section
4.1.
3.2.4
Data format
FloPoCo-generated cores work by default with inputs represented in the internal
34-bit FloPoCo ﬂoating-point format, while the main inputs to the accelerator
would be based on the binary32 format. This means that we will require to
make use of converters between the two formats. The FloPoCo generator library
provides such converters and we will use them wherever needed. By default, at
the 100 MHz frequency mentioned above, these converters have a latency equal
to zero (0) clock cycles, but additional pipelining will be required in at the
inputs or the outputs of the converters, depending on the delays to the registers
in the cores that the converters are connected to.
The FloPoCo ﬂoating point format is basically an extension of the IEEE-754
format, having two additional bits that act as ﬂags signaling the various special
cases. Comparing the binary32 format with the FloPoCo ﬂoating point format,
we observe that for bits 31 downto 0 the format is the same, having one bit
for sign (31), an exponent ﬁeld on 8 bits (30 downto 23) and the fraction ﬁeld
on 23 bits (22 downto 0), to which bits 33 and 32 are added as exception ﬁeld,
representing
00 indicates that the underlying value is equal to zero (0)
01 indicates that the underlying value represents a normal number
10 indicates that the underlying value represents an inﬁnite value (±∞, de-
pending on the sign bit)
11 indicates that the underlying value is an invalid number (NaN, "not a num-
ber")
In addition to these conversions, for developing the random number generator,
we will be using a ﬁxed-point to ﬂoating-point (binary32) converter provided by
the Vivado-bundled core generator. This is explained in more detail in Section
4.1.
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Hardware subsystems
33
3.2.5
Acceleration core architecture
As described in [SHSN12], for optimizing the processing done in Algorithm 1
we can adjust the operations a bit. First, instead of multiplying S0 · e(··· ) in
each cycle of the loop, we can precompute or divide oﬀ-line K/S0, followed
by comparing e(··· ) directly to k1 = K/S0. On a similar note, we remove the
multiplication by expRT, which can be moved out of the loop. The correct
value of S will be restored in the last stage by performing the multiplication
by k2 = S0 · expRT · 1
n. The changes to the initial algorithm are reﬂected in
Algorithm 2.
Algorithm 2 Optimized Monte Carlo simulation algorithm for European option
pricing. This is an improved version of Algorithm 1, optimized for reducing the
number of operations that need to be executed in hardware
Ensure: V rnd is generated at each iteration below
V sqrtT = σ
√
T
drift =

r −σ2
2

T
expRT = erT
sum = 0
k1 = K/S0
k2 = S0 · expRT · 1
n
for i = 1 to n do
et = e(drift+V sqrtT ·V rnd)
if et −k1 > 0 then
sum = sum + (et −k1) · expRT
end if
end for
S = sum · k2
When transposing Algorithm 2 onto a simple, single application-speciﬁc pro-
cessor (ASP) implementation we observe that the processing translates to one
sequence of operations, with no path branching (the existing condition in the
algorithm simpliﬁes to a MUX with the constant zero on the else branch), thus
simplifying further analysis of the design (e.g. critical path). This is best ob-
served in Figure 3.4.
Due to the nature of the operations in Algorithm 1, we can employ techniques
for parallelizing as much as possible the resulting architecture. We can observe
that the iteration loop in the algorithm is not recursive, i.e. the values involved
in a subsequent iteration do not depend on the values in a previous iteration,
the loop essentially computing only values that are accumulated but never used
==PAGE:44==
34
Design Methodology
in subsequent iterations. Due to this, we can apply the technique of loop un-
rolling, essentially breaking down the loop into several smaller loops that can
run in parallel, followed by a re-combination of the partial results at the end
of the iterations - in this case by summing up the partial sums.
Therefore,
we can take advantage of the ability to design a massively parallel application
on FPGA and can therefore produce a design where more than one of these
application-speciﬁc processors produce partial results that would later be ag-
gregated by doing the ﬁnal divison. Implementing such an architecture would
consist of having multiple ASPs working in parallel, each producing a partial
term of the ﬁnal sum, then summing up, in parallel all these terms - and ﬁnally
proceeding to do the Monte Carlo aggregation by doing the ﬁnal divison (or
rather multiplication, as shown in Algorithm 2).
To achieve the fast computation of the sum based on these parallel terms we
employ a solution based on an addition tree - where each node in the tree is
a FloPoCo-generated ﬂoating point adder. The resulting architecture is shown
in Figure 3.5. For ease of implementation we would accept only solutions that
makes use of a number N of ASPs that is a power of two, i.e. 2m. This way
the implementation of the addition tree is greatly simpliﬁed, as there is no need
to multiplex the inputs to cover the cases where some of these inputs are not
available. Note that the output of the ASP, as shown in Figure 3.4 is in the
FloPoCo ﬂoating-point format, on 34 bits.
We aim at implementing the two solutions - with one or multiple ASPs - in the
same source code, by making extensive use of the generics and the generate syn-
tax in the VHDL language. Going forward we will therefore consider the design
as being a multiple-ASP implementation, with the number of ASPs mentioned
(even if using only one ASP). All metrics and considerations will be discussed
with mentioning the appropriate scenario (number of ASPs).
3.2.6
Hardware testing
For validating the results we will employ a series of techniques. We will make
extensive use of the testing capabilities in Xilinx Vivado, designing test benches
wherever possible. We will validate the random number generator proposed in
4.1 by running the core in a VHDL test bench that will generate an output ﬁle of
a batch of several thousands output values. We will then read the ﬁle in Matlab
and based on the values obtain the corresponding mean and standard deviation,
which can be plotted as bell curve alongside a histogram of the obtained values.
We will therefore aim at validating that the values generated are ﬂoating-point
between -1 and 1 and that the mean of the distribution is equal - or very close
- to zero (0).
==PAGE:45==
3.2 Hardware subsystems
35
We will not be implementing VHDL test benches for the FloPoCo-generated
cores, as the FloPoCo library is capable of generating test benches for their cores.
Also, to a large extent we will assume the FloPoCo library to not suﬀer from
any inconsistencies in their designs or bugs, but in case we observe any weird
behavior we will rely on the FloPoCo-generated test benches for validating the
functionality of the generated cores. Additional testing will be done manually,
by running the corresponding routine on the CPU as to initiate and execute
a PCIe-based data transfer to the FPGA and read back the outputs.
To a
bare minimum, this can be achieved by running solely Bash commands. For
transmitting a value to the FPGA we make use of:
$ echo −n −e
’\xA1\x40\xEF\x8D ’ > \
$
/dev/ xillybus_write_32
# writes
the
hexadecimal
value A140EF8D to
# the
device
f i l e
and for reading a value back from we store the results in a ﬁle which we after-
wards inspect:
$ cat /dev/ xillybus_read_32 > temporary_file . out
# reads
the
r e s u l t
transmitted and saves
i t
to
# a temporary
f i l e
$ hexdump −C temporary_file . out
# does a hexadecimal dump of
the
r e s u l t s
==PAGE:46==
36
Design Methodology
Figure 3.3: The top-level overview of the system. The highlighted pins are
part of the PCIe interface and are eventually connected to the
PCIe x4 connector on the board. Data will be received by the
Xillybus core and then made available on the "in" 32-bit FIFO.
Then the data is read by our acceleration core, processed as de-
scribed in Algorithm 2 and the result is written back to the "out"
FIFO, which is afterwards read by the Xillybus core that then con-
structs the corresponding PCIe transaction packets and executes
the transmission. The core will take advantage of the 4 on-board
LEDs and will be using them for status reporting. While the ac-
celeration core can use the same diﬀerential clock signals as the
PCIe bus to derive its clock signal, the on-board oscillator provides
an additional pair of diﬀerential clock signals that can be used for
driving the acceleration core.
==PAGE:47==
3.2 Hardware subsystems
37
Figure 3.4: The single application-speciﬁc processor (ASP) implementation of
the algorithm (also referred to as "single-path"). We can observe
that the processing is done in one continuous path, thus simplify-
ing further critical path and timing analysis
==PAGE:48==
38
Design Methodology
Figure 3.5: The algorithm implemented based on multiple application-speciﬁc
processors running in parallel. The produced partial results are
summed up in an adder tree before being Monte Carlo-aggregated
by division. The design requires a number N of ASPs that is a
power of two, such that the implementation of the adder tree is
greatly simpliﬁed. The resulting adder tree would be of binary
form and it would have a depth of m = log2n
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 4
Preliminary designs and
implementations
4.1
Random number generator
In successfully applying Algorithm 2 and ﬁnally validating the implementation
it is critical that we obtain large amounts of random numbers. Moreover, we
require numbers that are generated based on a probability distribution with
mean equal to zero (0) and a standard deviation of one (1) - or as close to one
as possible. Previous solutions (e.g. relying on table-based random generation)
for achieving this are proving too slow and resource hungry to be feasible for our
design. We hereby aim at creating a small area ﬂoating-point pseudo random
generator that we can easily integrate with our design.
We would therefore require to implement a pseudo random generator with the
following features and requirements:
• the overall area of the implemented design should be as minimal as possible
• the implemented design should generate (output) one new pseudo-random
value every clock cycle
==PAGE:50==
40
Preliminary designs and implementations
• the generated value needs to be a ﬂoating-point value, represented in the
binary32 format
• the histogram of the generated values needs to resemble a Gaussian distri-
bution function with mean equal to (or very close to) zero and standard
deviation close to one (also known as Φ(0, 1))
As previously shown in [SHSN12] and as described in Figure 4.1, in obtaining
the random generator core we make use of four Linear Feedback Shift Registers
(LFSRs). These LFSRs produce uniformly distributed numbers, which, after
being averaged together would return value that would form a Gaussian distri-
bution (for four or more LFSRs). The random number generator will have a
period equal to 2n −1, where n is the length of the LFSR output (word length).
In our case we will implement it with a word length of n = 24. As described
in [Xila], in obtaining the next value for each of the LFSRs we transform the
existing value logically based on the deﬁned taps. In our case, we XOR the
existing value with a bit string where positions 22 and 17 are set to logical one,
the rest being set to logical zero.
We parallelize the summing up of the four randomly-obtained words using an
adder tree of two levels in depth. The result will be divided by the number of
initial LFSRs (in our case 4). Because the randomly-generated words do not
follow any special encoding (other than the binary-coded decimal format), these
words can, at this point, be interpreted as integer numbers. Hence, the division
of the sum by the number of LFSRs, provided that we use, every time, a number
of LFSRs equal to a power of two, we can easily achieve this by a simple logical
shift (in our case by right shifting by two positions).
The value we obtained at this step is still a 24-bit unsigned "integer" value
that requires to be converted to a ﬂoating-point binary32 number in the Φ(0, 1)
distribution. The approach taken in [SHSN12] is to map the value in a posi-
tive fractional number, followed by a binary32 ﬂoating-point-based subtraction
of the corresponding oﬀset. In simplifying the implementation we will make
use of Xilinx’s core generator tool and generate a ﬂavor of the Floating-point
(v7.1) that would transform a ﬁxed-point value into the corresponding binary32
ﬂoating-point value. In considering this approach, given the expected input of
the converter (as shown in Figure 4.2a, we will form the ﬁxed-point input to the
aforementioned core as follows:
• the sign bit - would be set to the value of the most signiﬁcant bit (MSB)
of the 24-bit value we previously obtained
• the integer part - would consist of two bits, set to the next two MSBs of
the previously obtained 24-bit value (excluding the sign bit)
==PAGE:51==
4.1 Random number generator
41
Figure 4.1: The internal schematic of the random generator, implemented
based on 4 LFSRs with a word length of 24 bits. While each LFSR
would generate a random binary-coded decimal value, these val-
ues would be eventually evenly distributed across an interval as
ﬂoating-point numbers, depending on how the random bit pattern
is mapped onto the fractional number. Obtaining a Gaussian dis-
tribution of random values is done by averaging several of these
LFSR-generated random values. In doing so, the probability of
random values to be closer to the mean increases, resulting in a
Gaussian distribution. The ﬁnal result is obtained by restructur-
ing the obtained average into a ﬁxed-point value and passing it
through a ﬁxed-point to ﬂoating-point converter
==PAGE:52==
42
Preliminary designs and implementations
(a) For obtaining a gaussian distribution
with a mean of zero and standard de-
viation close to one, we use a con-
verter taking 3 bits for the integer
part (including the sign bit) and 21
bits for the fraction part.
(b) The output format of the ﬁxed-point
to ﬂoating-point converter, having an
exponent width of 8 bits and a frac-
tion width of 24 bits, summing up -
including the sign bit - the 32 bits of
the binary32 ﬂoating-point format
Figure 4.2: The input and output format of the ﬁxed-point to ﬂoating-point
converter. It can be conﬁgured for various widths in both input
and output, as discussed
• the fraction part - would be set to the value of the 24-bit value we previ-
ously obtained, except the aforementioned three bits (i.e. the value would
consists of bits 21 downto 0)
In doing so, we achieve the following:
• the value of the sign bit would be a random value in the bit set {0, 1}
and therefore the resulting value would be positive or negative, but not
all negative or all positive, thus ensuring the oﬀsetting required by the
generator (and alternatively achieved by subtracting by half the resulting
interval)
• the value of the integer part, being set on two bits, ensures that the result-
ing values are, taken as absolute value, limited between zero and four (i.e.
[0; 4), which would ultimately provide the required standard deviation)
• the value of the fraction part, as it is set to the rest of the initial random
value and would consist of a random string of 23 bits, would generate the
actual random value in the ﬂoating-point binary32 format (while the other
two parts ensure the integrity and limit the result)
An additional important design consideration is that the LFSRs are required to
start at diﬀerent values from one another in order to successfully generate an
even distribution of numbers. In order to achieve this, we initialize the values
==PAGE:53==
4.1 Random number generator
43
Figure 4.3: The entity of the random generator. It makes use of generics to
deﬁne the wordlength and the nolfsrs parameters. Based on these
a seeds signal initializes all the LFSRs, while the result will output
the 32-bit ﬂoating-point random value encoded as binary32. The
unit is driven by a clk signal and it is asynchronously reset using
the rst signal (active high).
inside the LFSRs to inputs seeds that we pass to the core when we initialize
the component. The seed string requires to have enough bits as to ﬁll all the
LFSRs in the random generator core and thus requires to have n · no_lfsrs,
where n is the aforementioned word length and no_lfsrs is the total number
of LFSRs employed in the generator. Moreover, it is important to ensure that
the values that will be passed to each of the LFSRs are as random as possible,
as they require to be unique for each LFSR.
Following the best design practices, we aim at implementing this random num-
ber generator as generically as possible. This means that we will make use of
VHDL’s generics and generates in order to create a design that can be eas-
ily changed in terms of behavior by tweaking the generic parameters. We will
consider the following generic parameters:
• no_lfsrs - will indicate the number of LFSRs to be used in the generator.
Needs to be equal to a power of two, as to further reduce the operations
further down the line and therefore simplifying the logic of the addition
tree
• word_length - will indicate the size of each of the LFSRs. We will not
focus much on this generic and use it to the bare minimum as means of
==PAGE:54==
44
Preliminary designs and implementations
(a) The output results of a 1 LFSR ran-
dom generator. Mean value is equal
to -0.0007631
(b) The output results of a 2 LFSRs ran-
dom generator. Mean value is equal
to -0.00086051
(c) The output results of a 4 LFSRs ran-
dom generator. Mean value is equal
to 0.00023711
(d) The output results of a 8 LFSRs ran-
dom generator. Mean value is equal
to 0.00030614
Figure 4.4: Histogram and corresponding distribution ﬁt for several thousands
randomly generated values, for random generators with 1, 2, 4 and
8 LFSRs. We can observe that as more LFSR outputs are part of
the ﬁnal average the resulting random values tend to clog towards
the mean (higher probability of the random values to be closer to
the mean)
code documentation
In our implementation we will make use of such random generators having
no_lfsrs = 4 and word_length = 24 and will therefore assume this setup
whenever discussing around this. Any other comparisons or metrics that are
shown here will be done with mentioning the generic parameters for each in-
volved random number generator core. The resulting entity’s ports are, as shown
==PAGE:55==
4.1 Random number generator
45
in Figure 4.3:
• seeds - a string of random bits, whose length is equal to no_lfsrs ·
word_length
• result - the ﬂoating-point binary32 result, with underlying values in the
interval (-4; 4), on 32 bits
• clk - the clock signal, on one bit
• rst - the asynchronous reset signal, on one bit
By targeting a 4 LFSRs, 24-bit word length random number generator on the
Kintex-7 325T device, we obtain an implementation whose footprint is extremely
reduced. The post-implementation utilization results can be seen in Table 4.1,
proving that the involved area is very small. For validating the functionality of
our implementation, we run the random generator core in a VHDL test bench
which outputs the results to a ﬁle. The data is saved as hexadecimal text, with
one result per line. Then, we import the data to Matlab where we compute
the histogram, mean and distribution.
The Matlab routine for reading and
generating the results is:
>> input_data = typecast (
uint32 (
hex2dec (
strread (
f i l e r e a d ( ’D:\ rnd_results . out ’ ) ,
’%s ’ ,
’ delimiter ’ ,
s p r i n t f ( ’\n ’ )
)
)
) ,
’ single ’ ) ;
>> min( input_data )
% prints
the min value
in
the
set
>> max( input_data )
% prints
the max value
in
the
set
>> mean( input_data )
% prints
the
set ’ s mean value
>> std ( input_data )
% prints
the
standard
deviation
>> h i s t f i t ( input_data ) % plots
the
histogram and the
% corresponding
d i s t r i b u t i o n
f i t
Implementing this Gaussian distribution as described above would render results
like in 4.4. In this case, we reveal the formation of the Gaussian by targeting
the results in the (-1; 1) interval. We can observe that as more LFSRs are being
==PAGE:56==
46
Preliminary designs and implementations
Figure 4.5: The output results of the 4 LFSR random generator targeting a
normal Gaussian distribution. Mean value is µ = −0.0007631 and
standard deviation is σ = 0.8144.
Resource
Utilized
Total
% of Total
Slice LUTs
230
203,800
0.11%
Slice Registers
195
407,600
0.04%
Slices
71
50,950
0.13%
LUT - Flip-Flop pairs
244
203,800
0.12%
Table 4.1: Post-implementation resource utilization of the 4 LFSRs, 24-bit
word length random number generator, targeted on the Kintex-7
325T device. We can observe that the resource utilization is very
low, as the logic involved is quite minimal
used the resulting distribution tends to concentrate more and more towards the
mean, resulting in a Gaussian distribution with increasingly smaller st andard
deviation. Also, as seen in Figure4.4c and Figure 4.4d, the bell curve is formed
once the number of LFSRs in the random generate is four or more (for our
approach that takes into account only the scenarios with a number of LFSRs
equal to a power of two). For our particular case, targeting a Gaussian with
mean close to zero and standard deviation close to one, we have obtain the result
shown in Figure 4.5, having a mean µ = 0.0125 and a standard deviation σ =
0.8144. As the 4 LFSRs design is the one required for our implementation as to
fulﬁll the type of Gaussian we require, there is no need to further compare post-
implementation resource utilization between random generators with diﬀerent
numbers of LFSRs. The resulting design, for the 4 LFSRs instantiation targeted
at a frequency of 125 MHz, requires 4 pipelining registers.
==PAGE:57==
4.2 Floating-point addition tree
47
4.2
Floating-point addition tree
To fully take advantage of the massive parallelism that FPGAs oﬀer, as to
speed up the execution of the Monte Carlo simulations, we can employ a par-
allel technique to the implementation of Algorithm 2. As previously shown in
Subsection 3.2.5, we can unroll the main loop, generating a series of ASPs run-
ning in parallel, each of which will output a partial result. By re-combining the
results based on addition we will obtain the ﬁnal sum which can then be Monte
Carlo-aggregated by the appropriate division/multiplication.
Figure 4.6: The entity of the addition tree. The generic values of path_width
and no_operands are deﬁned to indicate the operand width and
the total number of operands, respectively. The latter would infer
the depth of the adder tree, being conceived as a binary tree
For achieving this summation of the partial results, we employ an approach
based on an addition tree. This ensures that the latency of the addition is kept
to a minimum, as the addition tree has the highest performance for the scenario
presented here. In designing the addition tree used here we need to consider
a few aspects.
First, we consider the output of each of the ASPs as being
a ﬂoating-point value encoded in the FloPoCo ﬂoating-point format. Second,
considering that we target to implement a core that is as generic as possible
- and whose number of ASPs can be customized when the top-level core is
instantiated - we are aiming for having easy ways of generating the underlying
architecture. In the case of the addition tree, the easiest approach that is also
supported by the FloPoCo library is to design the addition tree as a binary tree,
with each addition element performing the operation on two inputs (operands).
Third, although quite possible not mandatory, to further simplify the VHDL-
based generation of the addition tree, we will restrict (by documentation) the
generic inputs to the top-level core, such that the number of ASPs is always
==PAGE:58==
48
Preliminary designs and implementations
(a) The schematics of the addition core
used in a 1-ASP design.
We can
observe that the core, having depth
log21 = 0, does not contain any el-
ements, thus no addition takes place
and the core is completely ignored
(b) The schematics of the addition core
used in a 4-ASP design. We observe
that the core, having depth log24 =
2, is implemented as a binary-tree
of ﬂoating-point adders, as generated
by the FloPoCo library
Figure 4.7: Schematics of the addition core used for 1-ASP and 4-ASP designs.
Each node in the addition tree (labeled "tree_node" above) is a
FloPoCo-generated FPAdd core
a number that is a power of two. This means that the addition tree, being of
binary form, will always have all inputs ﬁlled and that no input multiplexing or
partial generation of the addition tree is required, thus simplifying the overall
generation of the core.
Hence, for the resulting entity, as shown in Figure 4.6 we will deﬁne the following
generic parameters of the core:
• no_operands - a natural value indicating the number of operands taken
as input to the core. The no_operands value will be restricted to a power
of two, as to simplify the generation of the addition tree of binary form
• path_width - a natural value indicating the width in bits of each of the
operands. While not strictly needed, we are using the value for deﬁning
the size of the input vector in the entity’s port declaration, such that
replacing the underlying addition core is done much easier. It also has a
beneﬁt as "documentation as code"
We therefore deﬁne the entity’s ports as follows:
==PAGE:59==
4.3 FloPoCo targeting
49
• inputs - a bit vector (its type is std_logic_vector) of bit length equal to
no_operands · path_width, signal storing all the inputs to the adders in
the leaf nodes
• output - a bit vector (std_logic_vector) of bit length equal to path_width,
storing the result of the addition
• clk - the clock signal, on one bit
• rst - the asynchronous reset signal, on one bit
Implementing the addition tree based on VHDL generics and generate state-
ments, as previously shown in Figure 3.5, means that for all cases where two or
more operands are given as inputs to the addition core a binary tree of adders
are generated for computing the overall result. Such a schematic example can
be seen in Figure 4.7b. However, a special case arises if the input to the core
is represented by only one single operand and hence the depth of the addition
core would be equal to log21 = 0 levels, resulting in the output signal being
connected to the input signal (as in this case they would be of the same bit
width). The resulting schematics for this particular case can be observed in
4.7a. On the synthesis and implementation phase the design is optimized and
such "abnormalities" are eliminated so that, in this particular case, the addition
tree component is completely ignored and its input and output nets are uniﬁed
into a single set of nets that connects the adjacent components in the design.
As each tree node’s underlying implementation consists solely of a FloPoCo
ﬂoating-point adder and because the nature of the tree and that its critical path
goes from the input to the output through any path (passing through each level
in the tree only once), the resulting latency of the addition core is deﬁned as
the latency of the FPAdd component multiplied by the depth of the tree, i.e.
log2nooperands. This will prove handy later on in the design process.
4.3
FloPoCo targeting
In developing the acceleration core we try to make use as much as possible of
reusable components in order to reduce as much as possible the development
process (especially for well-known problems that have been solved and imple-
mented for a long time). In doing so we make use of various "3rd party" libraries
or FPGA cores, targeted at the various parts of the design. For the execution
of the ﬂoating-point operations described in Algorithm 2 we make use of the
FloPoCo library, a library that is capable of generating all types of ﬂoating-
point operations with various speciﬁcations in terms of interface and internals.
==PAGE:60==
50
Preliminary designs and implementations
Design type
Resource
Utilized
Total
% of Total
1 ASPs
N/A
2 ASPs
Slice LUTs
235
203,800
0.11%
Slice Registers
126
407,600
0.03%
Slices
122
50,950
0.23%
LUT-FF pairs
235
203,800
0.11%
4 ASPs
Slice LUTs
1,340
203,800
0.65%
Slice Registers
378
407,600
0.09%
Slices
407
50,950
0.79%
LUT-FF pairs
1,357
203,800
0.66%
8 ASPs
Slice LUTs
3,129
203,800
1.53%
Slice Registers
882
407,600
0.21%
Slices
933
50,950
1.83%
LUT-FF pairs
3,159
203,800
1.55%
16 ASPs
Slice LUTs
6,710
203,800
3.29%
Slice Registers
1,890
407,600
0.46%
Slices
1,977
50,950
3.88%
LUT-FF pairs
6,753
203,800
3.31%
32 ASPs
Slice LUTs
9,898
203,800
4.85%
Slice Registers
3,906
407,600
0.95%
Slices
3,817
50,950
7.49%
LUT-FF pairs
11,210
203,800
5.5%
Table 4.2: Post-implementation resource utilization of the addition tree with
FloPoCo’s FPAdder core (targeted at 100 MHz) as addition unit.
In the case of having only one ASP the design is optimized during
implementation and because the addition tree does not actually
generate anything it will be trimmed altogether. We can observe
that the resource utilization, in most cases, doubles as the number
of underlying ASPs double. This is due to the nature of the binary
tree where adding an additional level to an existing tree almost
doubles the number of nodes compared to the original tree. The
resources that are little harder to predict are the LUT and LUT -
ﬂip-ﬂop pairs, who don’t necessarily follow a consistent quadratic
increase
==PAGE:61==
4.3 FloPoCo targeting
51
We have further discussed previously the arithmetic cores in Subsection 3.2.3
and the related data format in Subsection 3.2.4. We have previously generated
FloPoCo arithmetic cores targeted at 100 MHz, as shown in Table 3.2.
4.3.1
FloPoCo caveat
However, for a long time we were unable to properly generate cores - or rather,
we thought we were able to properly generate them, targeted at diﬀerent fre-
quencies, but the underlying implementation would return the same pipelining
complexity, as reported by the tool. As it turns out this represents a caveat,
as the FloPoCo binary is very restrictive about the parameters its accepts.
Or, more speciﬁcally, it seems that the options (ﬂags) through which the tar-
get conﬁguration is passed to the FloPoCo binary absolutely require to appear
before the type of the operation and its underlying details. This is brieﬂy men-
tioned in the documentation, but it is very easy to miss out. Also, the overall
FloPoCo documentation tends to be inconsistent across diﬀerent sources, con-
tributing even more to the overall confusion. For example, the command-line
help information provides diﬀerent details for the FPExpExpert operator than
the documentation on the oﬃcial website.
It is very important to take the necessary precautions and get well informed
when working this tool, as otherwise it might easy to disprove the tool as being
limited or at least the development time might be aﬀected. This aﬀected our
development process as we discovered the caveat very late - and it required to
scrap and redo quite a lot of work.
4.3.2
Performance of the FloPoCo arithmetic cores
Once the FloPoCo caveat has been discovered we decided to re-target the
FloPoCo cores, investigate their performance and redo our design an implemen-
tation, essentially scrapping part of the project. In doing so we’ve identiﬁed the
relevant switches for tweaking the performance of the individual arithmetic cores
as well as the ﬂags for reporting on the resulting architecture. The FloPoCo
binary options for tweaking the operator core architecture are:
• target - a string value specifying the device family to target against. In
our case, as we use FloPoCo’s current stable version (2.5) and because
the newer versions do not oﬀer yet the option to target for the Xilinx
Series 7 device families, we are focusing on generating cores targeted at
==PAGE:62==
52
Preliminary designs and implementations
DSP_blocks
Latency (clock cycles)
yes
2
2
2
2
no
2
2
2
2
freq. (MHz)
100
101
102
125
(a) The resulting pipeline latency for targeting the FPAdd
core
against
the
Virtex5
device
family
in
both
DSP_blocks modes
DSP_blocks
Latency (clock cycles)
yes
1
1
2
2
no
1
1
2
2
freq. (MHz)
100
101
102
125
(b) The resulting pipeline latency for targeting the FPAdd
core
against
the
Virtex6
device
family
in
both
DSP_blocks modes
Table 4.3: The resulting pipeline latency (in clock cycles) for targeting the
FPAdd core against the Virtex5 and Virtex6 device families at
various frequencies. We can observe that the Virtex6 solution is
slightly better and that the DSP_blocks ﬂag has no impact of the
latency
either Virtex5 or Virtex6 device families. This option has the potential
to impact the core’s pipelining and performance
• DSP_blocks - a string value with allowed values being yes and no that
indicates whether FloPoCo should try to use DSP blocks in describing the
operator core that it’s supposed to generate. This option would impact
the core’s pipelining and the overall performance. We will try to target
with both options and compare
• frequency - a natural value representing the target frequency in MHz at
which the generated core is supposed to operate. This option impacts the
core’s pipelining as well as the overall performance. We will try to target
for frequencies starting at 100 MHz (as previously used in [SHSN12]) and
up
We will also try to make use of the debugging/reporting ﬂags of the FloPoCo
library:
• resourceEstimation - natural value with accepted values 0, 1, 2 and 3,
indicating the level of details that the resource estimation report, if re-
==PAGE:63==
4.3 FloPoCo targeting
53
DSP_blocks
Latency (clock cycles)
yes
0
0
0
1
no
0
0
0
1
freq. (MHz)
100
125
144
145
(a) The resulting pipeline latency for targeting the FPMul-
tiply core against the Virtex5 device family in both
DSP_blocks modes
DSP_blocks
Latency (clock cycles)
yes
0
0
0
0
no
0
0
0
0
freq. (MHz)
100
125
144
145
(b) The resulting pipeline latency for targeting the FPMul-
tiply core against the Virtex6 device family in both
DSP_blocks modes
Table 4.4: The resulting pipeline latency (in clock cycles) for targeting the
FPMultiply core against the Virtex5 and Virtex6 device families
at various frequencies. As before, we can observe that the Virtex6
solution is slightly better and that the DSP_blocks ﬂag has no
impact of the latency
quested, would be presenting. Together with the reDebugging option, we
would try to use this ﬂag to try and estimate the resource utilization
• reDebugging - a string value with allowed values being yes and no that
indicates whether FloPoCo should generate resource utilization debugging
reports
• ﬂpDebugging - a string value with allowed values being yes and no that
indicates whether FloPoCo should generate ﬂoorplanning debug informa-
tion
The operator cores that we will be targeting are performing the ﬂoating-point
addition, multiplication and exponentiation. For achieving this, we investigate
the FPAdd, FPMultiply and FPExp1 operators for a few frequencies and all
1we have tested the generation of the FPExp operation core as well as the more advanced
FPExpExpert core with k = 0 (the number of bits addressing the underlying exponential
LUT, zero indicating a value that FloPoCo picks automatically), d = 2 (the degree of the
polynomial) and g = −1 (the number of guard bits, -1 being the default value) - the results
for the two have been the same and we have decided to continue generating the FPExp core,
as we had no speciﬁc requirements on the internals of the function
==PAGE:64==
54
Preliminary designs and implementations
DSP_blocks
Latency (clock cycles)
yes
2
3
3
3
3
no
2
3
3
3
3
freq. (MHz)
94
95
100
114
115
(a) The resulting pipeline latency for targeting the FP-
Exp core against the Virtex5 device family in both
DSP_blocks modes
DSP_blocks
Latency (clock cycles)
yes
2
2
2
2
3
no
2
2
2
2
3
freq. (MHz)
94
95
100
114
115
(b) The resulting pipeline latency for targeting the FP-
Exp core against the Virtex6 device family in both
DSP_blocks modes
Table 4.5: The resulting pipeline latency (in clock cycles) for targeting the
FPExp core against the Virtex5 and Virtex6 device families at
various frequencies. Same here, we can observe that the Virtex6
solution is slightly better and that the DSP_blocks ﬂag has no
impact of the latency
combinations of device types and DSP utilization. We take a ﬁrst look at these
results in Tables 4.3, 4.4 and 4.5.
By comparing the results in each of the three cases, we observe that the DSP_blocks
option does not have any impact on the result. We have not been able to iden-
tify the reason for this 2 and instead have decided to avoid investigating further
the core performance with diﬀerent DSP_blocks option and just proceed to as-
suming that it is always using them (default option is yes), thus reducing the
complexity. We can also observe that the performance of the architectures tar-
geted for the Virtex6 devices is better than for the Virtex5 device, as the latency
decreases faster for the Virtex6 devices than for the Virtex5 devices as the tar-
get frequency decreases. For this reason and because the Kintex7 resources are
very similar in terms of performance to the Virtex6 devices [Mor], we will also
continue targeting the FloPoCo cores for only Virtex6 devices.
2We cannot exclude the possibility that the weird consistency might be because we are
still misusing the FloPoCo library, being, more than anything, a problem of insuﬃcient doc-
umentation on the FloPoCo side. This idea might be supported by the fact that the results
we obtained especially in Table 4.4a, for the Virtex5 device at 100 MHz are very diﬀerent to
the ones obtained in [SHSN12]
==PAGE:65==
4.4 Deducing the optimal frequency
55
When targeting the cores for the conﬁgurations described in Tables 4.3, 4.4 and
4.5, we aimed at obtaining reports related to utilization or ﬂoorplanning, hoping
that the reports could provide more insights into the generated architecture
and that would enable us to more accurately predict the ﬁnal design based on
the underlying metrics.
However, although we used the resourceEstimation,
reDebugging and ﬂpDebugging ﬂags as indicated in the documentation, we were
not able to obtain any report. Based on the returned error message 3, it seems
that the reports are not available for these operation cores in this version of
FloPoCo. We will therefore ignore these options and proceed without beneﬁting
from this kind of information.
4.4
Deducing the optimal frequency
Based on the previously discovered aspects related to FloPoCo generation we
have therefore ﬁltered down the variables in generating the operation cores. We
are left with generating cores for the Virtex6 device family, with DSP_blocks
option set to yes, for a range of increasing frequencies, starting at 100 MHz.
From Tables 4.3b, 4.4a and 4.5 we can see that the latency for all these cores is
not constant throughout and that, as the frequency increases, at certain points,
the latency steps up. Finding such points would enable us to deﬁne some bands
of operation, frequency ranges on which we could reason about the performance
by knowing the maximum frequency of the band and its constant total latency
of the top-level accelerator core (excluding the FIFOs and the Xillybus PCIe
communication).
By targeting each of the ﬂoating-point operations core against a range of fre-
quencies of 100 MHz or more, including the frequencies at which any of the three
operation cores changes its underlying pipeline depth, we were able to compile
Table 4.6. Analyzing the results, we can note a few things:
• the results of the FPMultiplier indicate that only at higher frequencies the
multiplier becomes pipelined. However, it is quite possible that additional
registers would be required before or after the multiplier, especially for
frequencies close to the boundary frequency of 211 MHz. The two-case
scenario also simpliﬁes the investigation
3"Resource estimation option active for an operator that has NO estimations in place.
Please reconsider your strategy." - same for "resource estimation debuggin option" and "ﬂoor-
planning option", indicating a possible missing/unimplemented functionality in version 2.5 of
FloPoCo
==PAGE:66==
56
Preliminary designs and implementations
• the results of the FPAdd indicate that at frequencies of over 193 MHz
the latency increases a lot, consideration that is of utmost importance
as the addition core is a central piece in the implementation, being used
extensively in the design. This means that going for frequencies of more
than 200 MHz might be prohibitive
• in parallel we can observe that the FPExp also increases a lot as the fre-
quency scales. This is not as critical as the FPAdd, as the exponentiation
operator is used only once on the critical path. However, it is a considera-
tion to take into account, especially because at high frequency additional
pipelining registers might be required
From the results in Table 4.6 we can deduce 9 diﬀerent implementation cases,
for each the ideal case being if the core would be running at the highest pos-
sible frequency within the case’s band. However, we need to take into account
a few considerations before irrationally choosing the seem-to-be perfect, maxi-
mum frequency for each case. First, choosing the absolute highest frequency for
each of the described cases can prove to be counterproductive approach. This
is in part because of the very strict nature of such a design, oﬀering almost
no ﬂexibility for accommodating, for example, net delays - and in part because
we will ultimately target the implementation on a Kintex7 device whereas the
FloPoCo cores are generated with the speciﬁcations of a Virtex6 system. Al-
though very similar, this unknown diﬀerence could mean that the boundaries
are not as exact when applying these cores on a Kintex7 device and therefore
some "buﬀer" zone should be taken into account. Second, we note from the
very beginning that choosing very high frequencies (e.g. over 200 MHz) could
and would most likely infer penalties at implementation-time. This is partly
because the probability of registers being required between the cores is higher
as the clock period decreases and partly because it is harder to accommodate
a design when placing and routing if the permitted delays are low, resulting in
the need of additional registers being required to successfully transmit the sig-
nal between components. On the other hand, we need to remember that due to
the nature of Algorithm 2, a high latency would not aﬀect too much the overall
performance of a pipelined design, the latency aﬀecting more the pipeline ﬁll
and drain time.
==PAGE:67==
4.4 Deducing the optimal frequency
57
Operation
Latency (clock cycles)
ex
2
3
4
5
6
x · y
0
1
x + y
1
2
3
4
freq. (MHz)
101
102
114
115
192
193
201
202
209
210
211
212
248
249
262
263
Case
I
II
III
IV
V
VI
VII
VIII
IX
Table 4.6: The latencies in clock cycles for the FPAdd, FPMultiplier and FPExp we require for our accelerator, for fre-
quencies of 100 MHz or more, with DSP_blocks set to yes, targeted at the Virtex6 device family. We describe
the latencies in terms of ranges, for an easier overview. This also enables us to make easier computations for
the various cases shown here, as we can theoretically target the highest frequency in each part and compute
the overall theoretical performance
==PAGE:68==
58
Preliminary designs and implementations
Before we can further compute the relevant metrics for some, if not all of the nine
cases, we need to deﬁne a model, a function that would take into account our
top-level architecture and its critical path and provide relevant latency metrics
expressed in units of seconds. For this we review Figures 3.4 and 3.5 and try to
deduce the aforementioned model. The critical path, starting bottom-up from
the result, S, passes through an FPMultiplication, an addition tree of depth
equal to m = log2nooperands 4 FPAdders, an additional FPAdd unit, a MUX,
another FPAdd, the only FPExp unit in the ASP, an additional FPAdd and
a ﬁnal FPMultiply.
We are ignoring the FPRndgen component, as once its
pipeline is ﬁlled it would output a new random value at each clock cycle - and
it is most likely that even from a cold start the unit would produce valid output
even before the routine of reading the inputs from the input FIFO completes.
Summing up from the V sqrtT input to the output S, the resulting latency
model (Ltotalfor the acceleration core (excluding the PCIe communication and
FIFO interfacing), described in clock cycles, is shown in Equation 4.1. We are
simplifying the function by considering that the latency of the MUX component
is zero - although not applicable in reality.
Lideal = LF P Multiplier + LF P Add + LF P Exp + LF P Add
+LF P Add + log2no_operands · LF P Add + LF P Multiplier
⇒Lideal = (3 + log2no_operands) · LF P Add
+2 · LF P Multiplier + LF P Exp
(4.1)
We consider this model to be an "ideal" case, one where no additional pipelining
is required between two adjacent ﬂoating-point operation cores. However, we
will consider an additional "real" case where a latency of one is added to each
of the ﬂoating-point cores, to account for any registers that might be needed
between the components. This does not account for any additional registers
required for extreme cases where the place and route needs to make use of
additional registers in order to achieve timing closure. The resulting model,
based on the previous one, is shown in Equation 4.2.
Lreal = (3 + log2no_operands) · LF P Add + 2 · LF P Multiplier
+LF P Exp + (3 + log2no_operands + 2 + 1)
⇒Lreal = (3 + log2no_operands) · LF P Add + 2 · LF P Multiplier
+LF P Exp + (6 + log2no_operands)
(4.2)
4no_operands value is the same as the number of ASPs in the accelerator
==PAGE:69==
4.4 Deducing the optimal frequency
59
ASPs
Delay (10−8s))
1 ASP
5
7.2
4.73
6.8
4 ASPs
7
10.4
6.84
9.2
16 ASPs
9
13.6
8.94
11.6
32 ASPs
10
15.2
10
12.8
freq. (MHz)
100
125
190
250
(a) Delay estimations, in seconds, for the accelerator archi-
tecture running diﬀerent ASP conﬁgurations at the fre-
quencies set to investigate, for the ideal scenario (see
Equations 4.1 and 4.3)
ASPs
Delay (10−8s))
1 ASP
11
12
7.89
9.2
4 ASPs
15
16.8
11.05
12.4
16 ASPs
19
21.6
14.21
15.6
32 ASPs
21
24
15.78
17.2
freq. (MHz)
100
125
190
250
(b) Delay estimations, in seconds, for the accelerator ar-
chitecture running diﬀerent ASP conﬁgurations at the
frequencies set to investigate, for the real scenario (see
Equations 4.2 and 4.3)
Table 4.7: Delay estimations, in seconds. Highlighted values indicate the op-
timum (minimum delay) for each ASP conﬁguration
While having the total latency helps in having an idea of the ensuing perfor-
mance, this is just a relative measure, as it is expressed in clock cycles. To get
an absolute value that we can use as base for our comparison, we compute the
overall delay (expressed in seconds) based on Equation 4.3
D = 1
f · L
(4.3)
where f is the frequency at which the core runs.
Out of the nine original cases, based on the previously described rationale and
further considerations we will decide on a few candidate frequencies for which
we will compute the results of Equation 4.3 for both the ideal and real scenarios.
Although we will probably stay away from higher frequencies and frequencies
at which the latency of the addition core increases (being the most critical
component), we will consider some higher frequency and make the necessary
==PAGE:70==
60
Preliminary designs and implementations
(a) The 3D plot of the function of delay
(b) The 2D projection of the function of
delay
Figure 4.8: 3D plot and 2D projection of the delay function, as expressed
in Equation 4.3, for frequencies between 125 and 190 MHz and
latencies between 5 and 50 clock cycles
computations, for comparison.
One of the frequencies that we will choose by default is 100 MHz - as baseline and
for comparison with [SHSN12]. We observe that out of all the cases, III provides
the highest ﬂexibility, allowing for frequencies from 115 to 192 MHz, which can
prove very valuable both being able to speed up the design or being able to
downgrade the frequency if it helps the pipelining of the accelerator. Also, by
comparison with II, the overall latency is increased by 1 (due to the increased
latency of the exponentiation core), while the frequency increases a lot (thus
more than just balancing out the increased total latency). Out of III we will
choose the 125 MHz (for which Xillybus provides a ready-conﬁgured clock, thus
simplifying the design) and the 190 MHz frequencies. For all cases that start
at 193 MHz it is hard to decide on a frequency to investigate just by observing
Table 4.6, as the increase in latency for the addition and exponentiation core
would keep the resulting performance at about the same level. We will therefore
consider the frequency of 250 MHz so that at least the increased frequency could
provide enough performance boost.
From the results shown in Tables 4.7a and 4.7b we can observe that the solution
running at 190 MHz is superior to the other solutions. This means that case
III as shown in Table 4.6 has the potential to be the optimal solution. The
frequency of 190 MHz is probably too close to the upper bound of the frequency
interval and might not be a feasible solution for the reasons previously explained.
However, the interval has a diﬀerence of 77 MHz, so choosing an value that
works is easier compared to any of the other cases and the performance loss
==PAGE:71==
4.5 Resource utilization and power estimates
61
is easily contained. The frequency of 250 MHz is also not feasible for all the
previously expressed concerns and we would not be choosing to proceed with
this value. On the other hand, the base frequency of 100 MHz, although it
would be quite competitive in an ideal case, as more pipelining is needed the
performance degrades quite a lot.
So for all intents and purposes we would
proceed with a solution based on case III.
However, due to the unknowns in terms of the "safety zone" close to the upper
bound of the interval, we will adopt the safer strategy, choosing to target the
design for a frequency of 125 MHz. In Figure 4.8 we can observe the plot-
ted delay function expressed in Equation 4.3 against frequencies between 125
and 190 MHz and latencies between 5 and 50 clock cycles. We observe that
theoretically the same performance in terms of delay can be obtained at a fre-
quency of 160 MHz with only an increase of 5 cycles compared to the results
on 125 MHz. The inexact (unknown) nature of the FloPoCo-generated cores
(targeted against Virtex6 devices) with respect to the underlying Kintex7 im-
plementation can easily close the gap between the upper and lower frequencies
in the discussed range, eﬀectively requiring additional pipelining registers. And
although the additional resource consumption might not be signiﬁcant, the de-
creased clock period can mean harder to achieve timing closure due to the wire
delay. All in all, the increased frequency comes with trade-oﬀs, but taking into
account a large number of iterations that need to run in this pipelined setup,
it would most likely improve overall performance. However, we will consider
retargeting the design at frequencies of up to 190 MHz as a future improvement
step and we will try to get a 25% performance improvement only from changing
the frequency, for now.
4.5
Resource utilization and power estimates
Before we continue with reasoning about the speciﬁcs of the ﬁnal design, we
require to investigate the potential of our Kintex7 device, to observe how well
the chip can accommodate our accelerator architecture and to what degree.
Although not limited to this, the current envisioned strategy for achieving max-
imum performance is by unrolling the loop in one instance of the algorithm,
therefore by using one or more ASPs for one algorithm instance 5. Later we
5We refer to algorithm instance when we talk about running Algorithm 2 on one set of
input data. Multiple runs of the algorithm, in series or parallel, with diﬀerent data sets, would
therefore be diﬀerent algorithm instances. As shown later, such algorithm instances would run
on an acceleration core implementing the algorithm, while the underlying FPGA device can
implement one or more of these acceleration cores, enabling parallelism of algorithm instances,
as they are independent
==PAGE:72==
62
Preliminary designs and implementations
will extend the theoretical results of parallelizing using more than one of these
accelerators running on the same device, all with the same number of ASPs as
to simplify the architecture and not require any scheduling controller.
The goal here is to get an idea of how much we can ﬁt on the chip (in terms of
number of ASPs), while getting more information about any potential pipelining
that is required.
In doing so we have pipelined the design according to the
"real" approach for which we obtained the delays in Table 4.7b and have then
synthesized and implemented the design using 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32 and 64 ASPs.
For the ASP architecture, in addition to the registers added between each two
arithmetic cores (as described in the "real" scenario), we have added a register
before and a register after the multiplexer (MUX). For the addition tree we have
not added any registers in between the ﬂoating-point adders. In practice we
have discovered that the default multiplier for case III (see Table 4.6) of latency
zero, although it’s connected to registers at both inputs and output, cannot
be successfully placed and routed without violating the timing constraints -
and so we have replaced all the multiplier instances with a pipelined multiplier
of latency 1. This further conﬁrms the hypothesis that the generated cores,
targeted for Virtex6, might not the reported properties when applied on the
Kintex7 device.
The inputs are registered after passing through the ieee-to-
ﬂopoco format converters and the output is registered after running through
the ﬂopoco-to-ieee format converter. This pipelining might seem overzealous,
but it is done to ensure smooth implementations across the targeted designs and
the process in itself has been "reﬁned" after several development iterations in
which we strived to achieve timing closure. It is true that some registers could
possibly be removed, potential candidates being one of the registers adjacent to
the MUX, the register at the output of the last addition in the ASP, the registers
after the ieee-to-ﬂopoco conversion of the inputs and the last register between
the ﬁnal division and the output queue. However, for the reasons explained
before we proceed without making said optimization, as this improvement would
not bring major performance beneﬁts. At this step, the resulting depth of the
critical path is modeled by Equation 4.4.
Lreal_impl = 17 + 2 · log2no_operands
(4.4)
After implementing the said conﬁgurations, based on the values shown in Table
4.9, we observe the following utilization patterns:
• in general, the resource utilization and area increases exponentially, almost
doubling as we double the number of ASPs from one implementation to
the other. This, for all the reasons previously explained, is an expected
behavior and provides a ballpark conﬁrmation that the results are valid
==PAGE:73==
4.5 Resource utilization and power estimates
63
and we are heading in the right direction. This can be easily observed in
Table 4.8a
• as shown in Table 4.8, some of the resource types have constant utilization
• as the resource utilization doubles with each doubling of ASPs and because
the LUT utilization hits 81% when implementing with 64 ASPs, a design
with 128 ASPs would not be implementable - therefore the 64 ASP design
represents the upper bound, a very important aspect to consider
64 ASP - why it is the upper bound
On a side note, while all implementations between 1 and 32 ASPs are successful
in achieving timing closure, the 64 ASPs design does not. This is due to the
high utilization of LUT resources and the underlying routing complexity, result-
ing in increased net delay. We have tried to tackle the problem by running the
synthesis and implementation with diﬀerent strategies, as shown in Table 4.10.
Unfortunately, none of the strategies managed to make the implementation get
timing closure, while most strategies failed to generate an implementation al-
together due to insuﬃcient resources 6. This high utilization and congestion
problem is very well reﬂected in Figure 4.9.
The strategy that managed to generate an implementation can be used in future
iterations to eventually obtain timing closure on the 64 ASPs design. The most
likely solution for ﬁxing the timing violations in this design conﬁguration is to
introduce additional registers that would alleviate the net delays.
Based on
the number of failing endpoints and the worst negative slack (WNS), we can
assume that there are a number of 8-9 locations where registers need to be
introduced to pipeline bit vectors of over 30 bits. Further investigation into
the existing implementation strategies and the overall implementation options
can prove useful in ﬁnding other strategies that work - and hopefully provide
lower WNS (in modulo) and number of failing endpoints. We will not focus on
the 64 ASP design for the ﬁnal implementation, as obtaining timing closure can
prove to be a time-consuming task, with many iterations, for which the synthesis
and implementation takes a long time. Instead, for this particular case we will
present the theoretical results.
The resulting power estimations for the implementations are shown in Table
4.11. The results are estimated only based on the resources utilized and not
based on a SAIF ﬁle resulted from a behavioral simulation. We can observe
that, as expected, the power consumption increases as we use more ASPs.
6the failure message is "The unplaced instances require 37450 slices but only 36676 out of
50950 slices in the device are available, because others may be occupied by placed instances
or blocked by exclude placement"
==PAGE:74==
64
Preliminary designs and implementations
ASP conﬁg.
LUT
FF
BRAM
DSP
1 ASP
4%
2%
3%
1%
2 ASPs
5%
2%
3%
1%
4 ASPs
8%
2%
3%
2%
8 ASPs
14%
3%
3%
3%
16 ASPs
25%
6%
4%
6%
32 ASPs
47%
10%
6%
12%
64 ASPs
89%
18%
10%
23%
(a) Resource utilization for types with variable usage
ASP conﬁg.
LUTRAM
IO
GT
BUFG
MMCM
PCIe
1 ASP
1%
1%
50%
9%
10%
100%
2 ASPs
4 ASPs
8 ASPs
16 ASPs
32 ASPs
64 ASPs
Table 4.8: Resource utilization for types with ﬁxed usage
Table 4.9: Overview of the resource utilization for one accelerator with various
numbers of ASPs.
We can observe that due to the doubling of
LUT utilization (backed by increased complexity in the place and
route routine) and because the 64 ASP design uses 89% of the LUT
resources, having more than 64 ASPs while following the rule that
the numbers of ASPs is a power of two is simply not achievable.
Note that the results for the 64 ASPs design has been obtained
using the Area_Explore implementation strategy, as opposed to
the rest - thus obtaining slightly diﬀerent values
==PAGE:75==
4.5 Resource utilization and power estimates
65
Figure 4.9: The placed 64 LFSRs design indicating high resource utilization
and congestion, implementation resulting in timing violations
==PAGE:76==
66
Preliminary designs and implementations
Implementation strategy
Worst neg-
ative
slack
(ns)
No.
of
failing end-
points
Performance_NetDelay_low
implementation
failed
Performance_Explore
implementation
failed
Performance_Reﬁne_Placement
implementation
failed
Area_Explore
-1.199
14,996
Congestion_SpreadLogic_high
implementation
failed
Congestion_SpreadLogic_low
implementation
failed
Table 4.10: The implementation results for the design with 64 ASPs. Timing
closure is unmet and the related worst negative slack and number
of failing points values are shown here. Only the Area_Explore
strategy managed to successfully generate an implementation,
even if its timing constraints are unmet.
The rest have failed
due to the very high resource utilization
ASP
con-
ﬁg.
Implementation strategy
Total
On-Chip
Power (W)
1 ASP
Performance_Explore
1.519
2 ASPs
Performance_Explore
1.573
4 ASPs
Performance_Explore
1.681
8 ASPs
Performance_Explore
1.889
16 ASPs
Performance_Explore
2.311
32 ASPs
Performance_Explore
3.147
64 ASPs
Area_Explore
3.278
Table 4.11: The on-chip power results for the implementations with varying
number of ASPs and for all targeted implementation strategies for
the 64 ASP design. We can observe that the power increases as
more ASPs are utilized in the design. The Area_Explore strategy
improves the power consumption at the cost of decreased perfor-
mance - as seen in the details of the unmet timing constraints in
Table 4.10
==PAGE:77==
4.6 Considerations on using multiple acceleration cores
67
4.6
Considerations on using multiple acceleration
cores
We have previously deﬁned the top-level architecture as containing one or more
ASPs generating partial results that are later added together using an addi-
tion tree, before executing the ﬁnal division and obtaining the output result,
all of which use one PCIe bus and corresponding Xillybus instance. Although
brieﬂy mentioned before, we are now introducing a new hierarchical level, accel-
eration core, essentially deﬁning a new architecture that could further improve
performance.
This new architecture would also be using the only existing PCIe bus resource
and the corresponding Xillybus instantiation, but would essentially consist of
one or more acceleration cores reading from and writing to the same input and
output queues (FIFOs). Each of these acceleration cores would therefore consist
of one or more ASPs, the corresponding addition tree and ﬁnal multiplication.
As previously shown, the device resources are bound at having a design with
64 ASPs, so having more than one acceleration core implies that its underly-
ing implementation has less than 64 ASPs. For simplicity, as to avoid complex
scheduling controllers, we consider the following restriction on this architecture:
the number of ASPs across all acceleration cores on one device should be the
same. The second, implied restriction is that the number of acceleration cores
multiplied by the number of ASPs in each of these acceleration cores cannot
be larger than 64, for the Kintex7 325T device. Although the number of ac-
celeration core is not required to be a power of two, in comparing performance
between the previously studied one-core solution and this new, proposed multi-
core solution, we will consider designs having a such numbers of cores.
The idea behind how this new architecture can improve performance has to
do with the time it takes for the pipeline of each acceleration core to be ﬁlled
before it can provide useful results at each clock cycle.
Simply put, ﬁlling
twice the pipeline of an acceleration core with smaller ASPs is more fast than
ﬁlling once the pipeline of an acceleration core that has ASPs double the size
than the ASPs of the original core. For comparing the performance of the new
architecture with that of the single-core architecture we will consider that all
implementations are required to achieve the same throughput. This means that,
for example, if we consider for comparison that all devices would need to run
220 = 1, 048, 576 simulations, even if spread over diﬀerent algorithm instances,
then this could mean that a device having one core with 26 = 64 ASPs would
run 214 = 65, 536 simulations per ASP for only one algorithm instance or that
a device with 22 = 4 acceleration cores, each having 24 = 16 ASPs would run
==PAGE:78==
68
Preliminary designs and implementations
214 = 65, 536 simulations for each of the 22 = 4 distinct algorithm instances. It is
important to note that while the ASP-based executions of batches of simulations
that are part of the same algorithm instance happens in parallel and although
the acceleration cores run in parallel, the simulations for the same algorithm
instance cannot be split across diﬀerent acceleration cores (and it would be
counterproductive anyways).
To achieve the same throughput as a solution
with more cores having less ASPs, a solution having less cores with more ASPs
would require to run sets of algorithm instances in a serial manner. Based on
all this, we deﬁne the underlying latency estimation model in Equation 4.5.
Ltotal = no_serial_runs · (Lreal_impl + N −1)
= no_serial_runs
·(17 + 2 · log2no_operands + N −1)
(4.5)
where
no_serial_runs is the number of sets of algorithm instances that are to be
run in series to achieve said throughput (usually used for comparison)
no_operands indicates the number of ASPs in each acceleration core. Can
be estimated based on Equation 4.6
N is the number of simulations per ASP, indicating the number of simulations
that each ASP is required to run. It is to be equal to the total number of
simulations we plan to target divided by the no_operands
no_operands = max_allowed_ASPs
no_cores
(4.6)
where
no_cores is the number of separate acceleration cores to be implemented on
the device
max_allowed_ASPs is the maximum number of ASPs that we were able to
ﬁt on the device, obtained experimentally
==PAGE:79==
4.6 Considerations on using multiple acceleration cores
69
Core conﬁg (# of sets in series, #
of cores, # of ASPs in core)
Latency
(clock
cycles)
1, 64, 1
16 + 220
2, 32, 2
36 + 220
4, 16, 4
80 + 220
8, 8, 8
176 + 220
16, 4, 16
384 + 220
32, 2, 32
832 + 220
64, 1, 64
1792 + 220
Table 4.12: The resulting latencies for running a total of 220 simulations dis-
tributed across 64 diﬀerent algorithm instances. We can observe
that running more cores with less ASPs is more eﬃcient than the
solution running the least number of cores with more ASPs.
In Table 4.12 we summarize the results of running 220 simulations binned over
various numbers of core-ASP conﬁgurations. By comparing the extremes, we
can observe that running more cores (64) with less ASPs (1) is more eﬃcient by
1792−16 = 1776 clock cycles (equivalent of 0.014 ms at the 125 MHz frequency)
than the solution running the least number of cores (1) with more ASPs (64).
This indicates that in the extreme cases the overhead in ﬁlling the pipeline can
represent up to one 590th (for the scenario we just discussed, but could be even
bigger for bigger series) of the overall algorithm. However, this does not mean
that the delay in obtaining the result for one algorithm instance is smaller, quite
the opposite.
On the other hand, even such a design could be pipelined to obtain maxi-
mum performance but in that case the need for separate acceleration cores gets
dropped altogether (the need would be obsolete as it is redundant).
The expected power for such multi-accelerator designs would be roughly equiva-
lent to a single-accelerator design of a similar size (same no_operands·no_cores
for both).
==PAGE:80==
70
Preliminary designs and implementations
==PAGE:81==
Chapter 5
Monte Carlo simulation
accelerator and results
Based on the extensive investigation done in Chapter 4 we can now draw the
ﬁnal description of the accelerator, including discussing the underlying design.
Finally, we compare the performance and power of the designed accelerator
with the ones presented in [SHSN12] and discuss future improvements to the
underlying design.
5.1
Monte Carlo accelerator speciﬁcations
From the investigation on the latencies of FloPoCo-generated cores we were able
to infer what is one of the optimal frequencies, 125 MHz. For our design we
would be using this frequency. From the same source, combined with additional
pipelining done in the development process we were able to coin the value of the
latency of the critical path, as described in Equation 4.4. We have also learned
that resource utilization for LUTs grows exponentially as we use more ASPs,
essentially doubling as the number of ASPs double - and were able to ﬁnd the
upper limit of the Kintex7 325T device, indicating that up to designs having 32
ASPs the model in Equation 4.4 is followed to the point - and that it is possible
to have a design of 64 ASPs by doing some additional pipelining (and therefore
==PAGE:82==
72
Monte Carlo simulation accelerator and results
increasing the latency a little bit). As the pipelining for the 64 ASPs design is a
very time-consuming task we are aiming at presenting the results for designs up
to 32 ASPs and theorize on results for the 64 ASPs design wherever possible.
We have also investigated the idea of having multiple acceleration cores on the
device and concluded that we do not want to follow such an approach as it
can impact the performance of obtaining the result for one algorithm instance,
which is not desired for high-frequency trading applications.
5.2
Results and comparison
Based on the decisions we just took in Section 5.1 we are targeting the design for
all ASP conﬁgurations between 1 and 64, generating the performance metrics
wherever possible and comparing them to the results in [SHSN12]. In Table 5.1
we reﬂect the obtained values and compare the results. We observe a big perfor-
mance increase, in two parts: ﬁrst, as expected, the overall increase due to the
increased frequency translates to 25% decrease in execution time, being equal
to the increase in frequency compared to [SHSN12] and second, the additional
processing power oﬀered by the solutions with 32 cores or more, solutions un-
available in the previous Virtex5 implementation. It is important to remember
that these values refer to only the acceleration core and therefore in an actual
CPU-FPGA application the execution time would be slightly bigger, as it would
take into account the time spent in transit over PCIe.
The utilization overview has been previously shown in Table 4.9.
In Table 5.2 we summarize the power readings taken with the Agilent 34410A
digital multimeter. The values have been obtained by measuring the voltage
drop across a 10mΩKelvin resistor that exists on the FPGA board, being
connected to the VCC = 1V rail that powers the FPGA core.
The average
voltage value of the readings has been taken as basis for computing the power
estimate. The power average Pavg has been obtained by dividing the measured
mean voltage by the value of the resistor, based on Equation 5.1.
P = Vmeas
R
· VCC[W] ⇒
Pavg =
Vavg
10 · 10−3 · 1.0[W]
(5.1)
We observe a power improvement over the previous solutions in [SHSN12] - and
although we don’t have previous results for all the conﬁgurations we proposed,
==PAGE:83==
5.2 Results and comparison
73
ASP
conﬁg.
Execution
time
[ms]
Speed-up compared
to
MicroBlaze
in
[SHSN12]
Speed-up compared
to equivalent design
in [SHSN12]
1 ASP
0.800
2,003
1.25
2 ASPs
0.400
4,007
N/A
4 ASPs
0.200
8,015
1.25
8 ASPs
0.100
16,030
1.25
16 ASPs
0.050
32,060
1.25
32 ASPs
0.025
64,120
N/A
64 ASPs
0.012
128,240 (*)
N/A
Table 5.1: The speed performance results indicate that an overall 25% speed-
up has been obtained due to the frequency increase, while opening
up new possibilities in relation to having designs with many ASPs
on Series-7 Xilinx devices. The values have been obtained on a sce-
nario of running n = 100000 simulations, as deﬁned in [SHSN12].
The speed-up compared to MicroBlaze for the 64 ASPs design is
an approximate value, as the additional pipelining required would
probably increase the execution time by a small constant, decreas-
ing the total speed-up
ASP
conﬁg.
Execution
time [ms]
Pavg[mW]
Pavg[mW]
in
[SHSN12]
Power en-
ergy [µJ]
Power
energy
ratio over
[SHSN12]
1 ASP
0.800
398.2
374.5
318.56
1.174
2 ASPs
0.400
430.4
N/A
172.16
N/A
4 ASPs
0.200
458.3
684.8
91.66
1.865
8 ASPs
0.100
522.8
N/A
52.28
N/A
16 ASPs
0.050
650.8
N/A
32.54
N/A
32 ASPs
0.025
843.3
N/A
21.08
N/A
Table 5.2: The power results indicate an improvement compared to the previ-
ous solution in [SHSN12]
. Although we do not have previous values for all the proposed ASP
conﬁgurations we can only assume that this decrease in power consumption
would improve by comparison
==PAGE:84==
74
Monte Carlo simulation accelerator and results
we can assume that the improvement trend continues for higher-ASP conﬁgu-
rations.
5.3
Future improvements
Based on the experiments we did and the decisions we took, several improve-
ments to the project can be implemented in future iterations.
Probably the most important is to try and target the design at frequencies
higher than 125 MHz. Depending on how reliable the reported latency of the
arithmetic cores is the task can be of easy to medium complexity. On a related
note, pipelining the 64 ASPs design and getting the timing closure would also
provide useful and can be implemented in a future step as a task of medium
complexity.
In order to save some resources - which might be especially useful in the case
of failed implementations due to the high resource utilization, we can remove
the last adder in each ASP (that acts as an accumulator) and instead add it
right after the addition tree. This should be a relatively easy task. Additionally,
implementing the addition trees using 3-input adders or having addition trees
with incomplete set of inputs (less inputs than a number that is a power of
two) could also be interesting, although it would increase the complexity of the
design, making this a task that can be medium to high complexity.
For all the uncertainties we have faced about FloPoCo 2.5, a future iteration,
once the new version 4 is out of beta, could make use of the newest core imple-
mentations, possibly including cores actually targeted for the right family. This
would be a very interesting development of medium complexity.
In terms of power consumption, some active measures to reduce dynamic power
can be employed. Implementing enable functionality or clock gating the design
would further reduce the power dissipation. Analyzing the design to locate all
the components that are to be adjusted and implementing said functionality
should be a medium complexity task.
Lastly, we would probably want to target the design on even newer generation
devices, speciﬁcally on the Ultrascale and maybe Ultrascale+ families. And for
even more parallelism, targeting the design on the setup of Microsoft’s Project
Catapult can prove an interesting experiment. As we have tried to port the
project onto an Kintex Ultrascale device before and seeing the changes required,
this task can prove a high complexity one. Or, at least, targeting on the Altera
==PAGE:85==
5.3 Future improvements
75
devices that power Project Catapult a design that makes use of Catapult’s
"shell’ architecture would deﬁnitely be a high complexity implementation.
==PAGE:86==
76
Monte Carlo simulation accelerator and results
==PAGE:87==
Chapter 6
Retrospective and
conclusions
The overall purpose of the thesis has been to investigate and design a Monte
Carlo method-based prediction algorithm for ﬁnancial derivatives (i.e.
stock
options), targeted on Series 7 Xilinx devices, more speciﬁcally on a Kintex7
device.
In trying to take the best decisions for our design we have navigated through a
series of experiments that have given us better insight into the setup at hand.
We have investigated the tools we aimed at using, discovered their ﬂaws and
sometimes got blocked by them and their incomplete / obscure documentation,
but we have managed to ultimately obtain valuable metrics that could make us
successfully decide on the best course of action, as to avoid having to step into
the unknown and do a lot of trial-and-error testing instead.
We have managed to reason about the size of the design, its resource utilization,
its optimal latency and valid frequency, its ballpark power consumption and we
have managed to propose alternative architectures (compared to the standard,
previously-known approach) and reason about whether to use them or not.
The resulting design had proven to be worth its "blood, sweat and tears", as we
have obtained a big performance boost over the previous implementation, while
still maintaining some unexplored space for future developments. Our results
==PAGE:88==
78
Retrospective and conclusions
are limited to the device at hand, but as the Series 7 family provides even bigger
devices one can obtain even more performance by targeting against them and
using all their parallel performance.
The original rough plan of the project has been forcefully changed (or at least
made more clear) due to the uncertainties and unknowns we met along the way,
especially regarding the blockers in relation to the PCIe communication and
the FloPoCo library that have either brought us to a standstill, testing various
hypotheses in order to ﬁgure out what the problem is, or have made us scrap and
redo chunks of our work, essentially wasting around 1.5 - 2 months on blockers
and scrapped work. However, on the plus side, we gained a lot of knowledge on
a couple of topics that we had limited or no previous experience on. The most
important takeaways are:
• ﬁrst of all we have improved our report and technical paper writing skill
together with the overall knowledge of the LaTeX markup
• we have grasped - to the level humanly possible - the workings of the
FloPoCo 2.5 library
• we have achieved a higher understanding and mastering of the Xilinx tools,
especially of the Vivado Suite, including tweaking the resulting implemen-
tation by working closely with various implementation strategies
• we have learnt a lot about implementing pseudo-random number genera-
tors and addition trees
• we have perfected our FSM development skills, and got a nice exercise in
FIFO-based interaction
• we have achieved hands-on experience with PCIe communication on an
FPGA, a task though of as being extremely complex and hard to do, to
the point where the same solution can be easily reused
And this latter point is very important as it forms a basis for future accelerator
projects, essentially forming a framework for implementing any acceleration core
deemed possible and doing so with relative ease (as of now). Most importantly,
the applicability of such implementations is very high nowadays, with High-
Performance Computing, Machine Learning and Computer Vision being some
of the hottest domains on which the solution can be employed.
In retrospective, the eﬀort invested in the project has been considerable, but
the results are also rather pleasing.
Seeing the hard ﬁght we have put out
in implementing this and the satisfying results we have obtained, we can not
==PAGE:89==
79
be anything but content with our work, pleased to have contributed with our
knowledge and excited for having done so in such an interesting and complex
domain over such amazing use case. We are proud of our work and our results
and consider that we have achieved a high level of proﬁciency in doing this.
==PAGE:90==
80
Retrospective and conclusions
==PAGE:91==
Appendix A
Source code of the design
−−f i l e :
fp_rndgen . vhdl
library IEEE ;
use IEEE .STD_LOGIC_1164.ALL;
use IEEE .NUMERIC_STD.ALL;
entity fp_rndgen
is
generic (
no_lfsrs :
natural := 4;
depth :
natural := 2;
word_length :
natural := 24
) ;
port (
seeds :
in std_logic_vector ( word_length ∗no_lfsrs
−1 downto 0) ;
r e s u l t : out std_logic_vector (31 downto 0) ;
clk ,
r s t :
in
std_logic
) ;
end fp_rndgen ;
architecture
Behavioral
of fp_rndgen
is
component f i x 2 f p
is
==PAGE:92==
82
Source code of the design
port (
s_axis_a_tdata
:
in std_logic_vector (23
downto 0) ;
s_axis_a_tvalid
:
in
std_logic ;
m_axis_result_tdata
: out std_logic_vector (31
downto 0) ;
m_axis_result_tvalid
: out std_logic
) ;
end component;
signal
l f s r s :
std_logic_vector ( word_length ∗no_lfsrs
−1 downto 0) ;
signal
next_lfsrs ,
xord_term :
std_logic_vector (
word_length ∗no_lfsrs −1 downto 0) ;
signal
next_bits :
std_logic_vector ( no_lfsrs −1
downto 0) ;
signal
fp_result ,
fp_result_reg :
std_logic_vector (31
downto 0) ;
signal
p a r t i a l _ r e s u l t :
std_logic_vector ((2 ∗∗( depth
+ 1) −1) ∗( word_length + depth ) −1 downto 0) ;
signal
partial_result_reg :
std_logic_vector ((2 ∗∗(
depth + 1) −2) ∗( word_length + depth ) −1 downto
0) ;
signal
integer_result :
std_logic_vector ( word_length −
1 downto 0) ;
signal
fp_fixed_result :
std_logic_vector ( word_length
−1 downto 0) ;
signal
i ,
j :
natural ;
begin
SEQ:
process ( clk ,
rst ,
seeds ,
next_bits ,
l f s r s )
variable
i :
natural ;
begin
i f
r s t = ’1 ’ then
l f s r s <= seeds ;
partial_result_reg <= ( others => ’0 ’) ;
else
i f
rising_edge ( clk ) then
for
i
in 0 to no_lfsrs −1 loop
l f s r s <= next_lfsrs ;
end loop ;
partial_result_reg <= p a r t i a l _ r e s u l t ((2
==PAGE:93==
83
∗∗( depth + 1) −2) ∗( word_length +
depth ) −1 downto 0) ;
fp_result_reg <= fp_result ;
end i f ;
end i f ;
end process ;
next_value :
for
i
in 0 to no_lfsrs −1 generate
xord_term ( word_length ∗( i + 1) −1 downto
word_length ∗
i ) <= x"000000" when l f s r s (
word_length ∗
i ) = ’0 ’
else x"420000" ;
next_lfsrs ( word_length ∗( i + 1) −1 downto
word_length ∗
i ) <= ( "0" & l f s r s ( word_length ∗
( i + 1) −1 downto word_length ∗
i + 1) )
end generate ;
==PAGE:94==
84
Source code of the design
leaf_layer :
for
j
in 0 to 2 ∗∗( depth −1) −1
generate
p a r t i a l _ r e s u l t (
( word_length + depth ) ∗(((2
∗∗(
depth −1) ) + j −1) + 1) −1
downto ( word_length +
depth ) ∗((2 ∗∗(
depth −1) ) + j −
1)
)
<=
std_logic_vector (
unsigned (
std_logic_vector (
to_unsigned (0 ,
depth ) ) & l f s r s
( word_length ∗(2 ∗j + 1) −1
downto word_length ∗(2 ∗j ) )
)
+ unsigned
(
std_logic_vector (
to_unsigned (0 ,
depth ) ) & l f s r s
( word_length ∗(2 ∗j + 2) −1
downto word_length ∗(2 ∗j +
1) )
)
) ;
end generate ;
tree :
for
i
in 0 to depth −2 generate
tree_layer :
for
j
in 0 to 2 ∗∗
i −1 generate
p a r t i a l _ r e s u l t (
( word_length + depth ) ∗(((2
∗∗
i ) + j −1) + 1) −1
downto ( word_length +
depth ) ∗((2 ∗∗
i ) + j
−1)
)
<=
std_logic_vector (
unsigned (
partial_result_reg (
(
word_length + depth ) ∗(((2
∗∗( i
+ 1) ) + 2 ∗j −1) + 1) −1
downto ( word_length +
depth ) ∗((2 ∗∗(
i + 1) ) + 2 ∗j −
1)
)
)
+ unsigned (
partial_result_reg (
(
word_length + depth ) ∗(((2
∗∗( i
+ 1) ) + 2 ∗j ) + 1) −1
downto ( word_length +
==PAGE:95==
85
depth ) ∗((2 ∗∗(
i + 1) ) + 2 ∗j )
)
)
) ;
end generate ;
end generate ;
integer_result <= partial_result_reg ( word_length +
depth −1 downto depth ) ;
fp_fixed_result <= "0" & integer_result ( word_length −
3 downto 0) & "0" when integer_result ( word_length
−2) = ’1 ’
else "1" & integer_result ( word_length −3
downto 0) & "0" ;
fix_2_fp :
f i x 2 f p
port map (
s_axis_a_tdata => fp_fixed_result ,
s_axis_a_tvalid => ’1 ’ ,
m_axis_result_tdata => fp_result ,
m_axis_result_tvalid => open
) ;
r e s u l t <= fp_result_reg ;
end Behavioral ;
−−f i l e :
asp . vhdl
library IEEE ;
use IEEE .STD_LOGIC_1164.ALL;
entity asp
is
generic (
no_lfsrs :
natural := 4;
depth :
natural := 2;
word_length :
natural := 24
) ;
port (
clk
:
in
std_logic ;
r s t
:
in
std_logic ;
seeds
:
in std_logic_vector ( word_length ∗
no_lfsrs −1 downto 0) ;
VsqrtT
:
in std_logic_vector(8+23+2 downto 0) ;
==PAGE:96==
86
Source code of the design
d r i f t
:
in std_logic_vector(8+23+2 downto 0) ;
K1 :
in std_logic_vector(8+23+2 downto 0) ;
sum : out std_logic_vector(8+23+2 downto 0)
) ;
end asp ;
architecture
Behavioral
of asp
is
component fp_adder_8_23
port (
clk ,
r s t
:
in
std_logic ;
X :
in
std_logic_vector(8+23+2 downto 0) ;
Y :
in
std_logic_vector(8+23+2 downto 0) ;
R : out
std_logic_vector(8+23+2 downto 0)
) ;
end component;
component fp_multiplier_8_23_23
is
port (
clk ,
r s t
:
in
std_logic ;
X :
in
std_logic_vector(8+23+2 downto 0) ;
Y :
in
std_logic_vector(8+23+2 downto 0) ;
R : out
std_logic_vector(8+23+2 downto 0)
) ;
end component;
component fp_exp_8_23 is
port (
clk ,
r s t
:
in
std_logic ;
X :
in
std_logic_vector(8+23+2 downto 0) ;
R : out
std_logic_vector(8+23+2 downto 0)
) ;
end component;
component InputIEEE_8_23_to_8_23
port (
clk ,
r s t
:
in
std_logic ;
X :
in
std_logic_vector (31 downto 0) ;
R : out
std_logic_vector(8+23+2 downto 0)
) ;
end component;
component fp_rndgen
is
generic (
no_lfsrs :
natural := 4;
depth :
natural := 2;
word_length :
natural := 24
) ;
==PAGE:97==
87
port (
seeds :
in std_logic_vector ( word_length ∗
no_lfsrs −1 downto 0) ;
r e s u l t : out std_logic_vector (31 downto 0) ;
clk ,
r s t :
in
std_logic
) ;
end component;
signal random_value_ieee
:
std_logic_vector (31 downto
0) ;
signal random_value ,
random_value_reg ,
VsqrtTVrnd
:
std_logic_vector(8+23+2 downto 0) ;
signal sum_term , sum_term_reg , pSum, pSum_reg ,
exponent , StK1 ,
pSt ,
pSt_reg ,
exponent_reg ,
VsqrtTVrnd_reg
:
std_logic_vector(8+23+2 downto 0)
;
begin
SL :
process ( clk )
begin
i f
r s t = ’1 ’ then
random_value_reg <= ( others => ’0 ’) ;
sum_term_reg <= ( others => ’0 ’) ;
pSum_reg <= ( others => ’0 ’) ;
exponent_reg <= ( others => ’0 ’) ;
VsqrtTVrnd_reg <= ( others => ’0 ’) ;
pSt_reg <= ( others => ’0 ’) ;
e l s i f
rising_edge ( clk ) then
random_value_reg <= random_value ;
−−?
sum_term_reg <= sum_term ;
−−?
pSum_reg <= pSum;
−−?
VsqrtTVrnd <= VsqrtTVrnd_reg ;
−−?
pSt_reg <= pSt ;
exponent_reg <= exponent ;
end i f ;
end process ;
random_generator :
fp_rndgen
generic map (
no_lfsrs => no_lfsrs ,
depth => depth ,
word_length => word_length
)
==PAGE:98==
88
Source code of the design
port map (
seeds => seeds ,
r e s u l t => random_value_ieee ,
clk => clk ,
r s t => r s t
) ;
ieee_to_flopoco_format_random_value :
InputIEEE_8_23_to_8_23
port map (
clk => clk ,
r s t => rst ,
X => random_value_ieee ,
R => random_value
) ;
FP_multiply_VsqrtTVrnd :
fp_multiplier_8_23_23
port map (
clk => clk ,
r s t => rst ,
X => random_value_reg ,
Y => VsqrtT ,
R => VsqrtTVrnd
) ;
FP_add_drift :
fp_adder_8_23
port map (
clk => clk ,
r s t => rst ,
X => VsqrtTVrnd_reg ,
Y => d r i f t ,
R => exponent
) ;
FP_exp : fp_exp_8_23
port map (
clk => clk ,
r s t => rst ,
X => exponent_reg ,
R => pSt
) ;
FP_add_K1:
fp_adder_8_23
==PAGE:99==
89
port map (
clk => clk ,
r s t => rst ,
X => pSt_reg ,
Y => K1,
R => StK1
) ;
sum_term <= StK1 when StK1 (31) = ’0 ’
else
( others =>
’0 ’) ;
FP_add_sum:
fp_adder_8_23
port map (
clk => clk ,
r s t => rst ,
X => sum_term_reg ,
Y => pSum_reg ,
R => pSum
) ;
sum <= pSum;
end Behavioral ;
−−f i l e :
adder_tree . vhdl
library IEEE ;
use IEEE .STD_LOGIC_1164.ALL;
entity adder_tree
is
generic (
path_width :
natural := 34;
−−s i z e
of
the
operands ,
in
b i t s
no_operands :
natural := 1;
−−needs
to
be a
power of two
depth :
natural := 0
−−needs
to
be
equal
to
log2
no_operands
) ;
port (
clk ,
r s t :
in
std_logic ;
inputs :
in std_logic_vector
( path_width ∗
no_operands −1 downto 0) ;
output : out std_logic_vector
( path_width −1
downto 0)
==PAGE:100==
90
Source code of the design
) ;
end adder_tree ;
architecture
Behavioral
of adder_tree
is
component fp_adder_8_23
port (
clk ,
r s t
:
in
std_logic ;
X :
in
std_logic_vector(8+23+2 downto 0) ;
Y :
in
std_logic_vector(8+23+2 downto 0) ;
R : out
std_logic_vector(8+23+2 downto 0)
) ;
end component;
signal
p a r t i a l _ r e s u l t :
std_logic_vector ( path_width ∗
(((2 ∗no_operands ) −2) + 1) −1 downto 0) ;
signal
i ,
j :
natural := 0;
begin
p a r t i a l _ r e s u l t ( path_width ∗(((2 ∗no_operands ) −2)
+ 1) −1 downto path_width ∗( no_operands −1)
)
<= inputs ;
output <= p a r t i a l _ r e s u l t ( path_width −1 downto 0) ;
tree :
for
i
in 0 to depth −1 generate
tree_layer :
for
j
in 0 to 2 ∗∗
i −1 generate
tree_node :
fp_adder_8_23 port map (
X
=> p a r t i a l _ r e s u l t ( path_width ∗(((2
∗∗( i + 1) ) + 2 ∗j −1) + 1) −1
downto path_width ∗((2 ∗∗( i + 1) ) +
2 ∗j −1)
) ,
Y
=> p a r t i a l _ r e s u l t ( path_width ∗(((2
∗∗( i + 1) ) + 2 ∗j ) + 1) −1 downto
path_width ∗((2 ∗∗( i + 1) ) + 2 ∗j )
) ,
R
=> p a r t i a l _ r e s u l t ( path_width ∗(((2
∗∗
i ) + j −1) + 1) −1 downto
path_width ∗((2 ∗∗
i ) + j −1)
) ,
clk => clk ,
r s t => r s t
) ;
end generate ;
end generate ;
end Behavioral ;
−−f i l e :
fsm . vhdl
library IEEE ;
==PAGE:101==
91
use IEEE .STD_LOGIC_1164.ALL;
use IEEE .NUMERIC_STD.ALL;
entity fsm
is
generic (
no_asps :
natural := 1; −−8 −−16 −−32 −−64
adder_depth :
natural := 0; −−3 −−4 −−5 −−6
no_lfsrs :
natural := 4;
depth :
natural := 2;
word_length :
natural := 24
) ;
port (
data_in
:
in std_logic_vector (31 downto 0) ;
data_out
: out std_logic_vector (31 downto 0) ;
rd_en
: out std_logic ;
in_fifo_empty
:
in
std_logic ;
wr_en : out std_logic ;
out_fifo_full
:
in
std_logic ;
clk ,
r s t
:
in
std_logic
) ;
end fsm ;
architecture
Behavioral
of fsm
is
component asp
is
generic (
no_lfsrs :
natural := 4;
depth :
natural := 2;
word_length :
natural := 24
) ;
port (
clk
:
in
std_logic ;
r s t
:
in
std_logic ;
seeds
:
in std_logic_vector ( word_length ∗
no_lfsrs −1 downto 0) ;
VsqrtT
:
in std_logic_vector(8+23+2 downto 0)
;
d r i f t
:
in std_logic_vector(8+23+2 downto 0) ;
K1 :
in std_logic_vector(8+23+2 downto 0) ;
sum : out std_logic_vector(8+23+2 downto 0)
) ;
end component;
component adder_tree
is
==PAGE:102==
92
Source code of the design
generic (
path_width :
natural := 34;
−−s i z e
of
the
operands ,
in
b i t s
no_operands :
natural := 1;
−−needs
to
be a
power of two
depth :
natural := 0
−−needs
to
be
equal
to
log2
no_operands
) ;
port (
clk ,
r s t :
in
std_logic ;
inputs :
in std_logic_vector
( path_width ∗
no_operands −1 downto 0) ;
output : out std_logic_vector
( path_width −1
downto 0)
) ;
end component;
component fp_multiplier_8_23_23_1deep
is
port (
clk ,
r s t
:
in
std_logic ;
X :
in
std_logic_vector(8+23+2 downto 0) ;
Y :
in
std_logic_vector(8+23+2 downto 0) ;
R : out
std_logic_vector(8+23+2 downto 0)
) ;
end component;
component InputIEEE_8_23_to_8_23
port (
clk ,
r s t
:
in
std_logic ;
X :
in
std_logic_vector (31 downto 0) ;
R : out
std_logic_vector(8+23+2 downto 0)
) ;
end component;
component OutputIEEE_8_23_to_8_23 is
port (
clk ,
r s t
:
in
std_logic ;
X :
in
std_logic_vector(8+23+2 downto 0) ;
R : out
std_logic_vector (31 downto 0)
) ;
end component;
type seed_type
is array (0 to 7) of
std_logic_vector
(64 ∗6 ∗4 −1 downto 0) ;
signal seed_pool
:
std_logic_vector (64 ∗4 ∗24 −1
downto 0) ;
signal pSum :
std_logic_vector ( no_asps ∗34 −1
==PAGE:103==
93
downto 0) ;
signal sum :
std_logic_vector(8+23+2 downto 0) ;
type state_type
is
( waitN ,
readN ,
waitVsqrtT ,
readVsqrtT ,
waitDrift ,
readDrift ,
waitK1 ,
readK1 ,
waitK2 ,
readK2 ,
compute ) ;
signal
state ,
next_state :
state_type ;
signal
pipeline_depth
:
integer := 9;
signal
count_stages
:
integer := 0;
signal next_count_stages
:
integer := 0;
signal N,
VsqrtT_ieee ,
drift_ieee ,
K1_ieee ,
K2_ieee
:
std_logic_vector (31 downto 0) ;
signal VsqrtT ,
d r i f t , K1, K2,
result , sum_reg , K2_reg
,
result_reg
:
std_logic_vector(8+23+2 downto 0) ;
signal input ,
output ,
result_ieee
:
std_logic_vector
(31 downto 0) ;
signal
i
:
natural ;
begin
−−random hex
s t r i n g
pool
for max 64 24−b i t LFSRs
−−generated
in
Javascript
using
−−
a = "";
for
( i =0; i <64;
i++) { a = a + Math .
f l o o r (Math . random () ∗16777215) . toString (16) ; }
seed_pool <= x"884
bc38f90e41fb4d5ca805dc110508a7750cedba36e5b0392c2995e2a6c37fbbe7
"
& x"
a16f209bccd49f794f87a0f9a0b939fa712e5ca310b3c57ced06197b4d42
"
& x"30
ceacc5fc8f1f9ba426d95006077e22f24222c1b46dab98277a4172243559
"
& x"52269419
dbe0e8e6dbdf3fc060f92112354ddb7ee34c3a28d57b88c976c76aba97ce
"
& x"652
e422ef8bec71526ff90da66e22ff1c39c83d9bb075c3e8f946e42d023526
"
& x"42
==PAGE:104==
94
Source code of the design
e21bc6c132ec16da76b0b6c22cd7826a9ec1a90e64b984fde87720e5745ccd3
"
& x"81
be6ac2996f062ba944d2fcc1e8f2a6f683735994caaece6f207f38dd52378d1
"
& x"388
c6669f916b4179c1f153c150be78749789a247d5d56a1ab7f7fb39bd71ad676
"
& x"7
ff9e3d2e4135d7a7a7cb35ad0e248e01c2810529849ed12170573cf62c98def
"
& x"44415
b6baca2027fb7d586ef6a07b26f3f20787f72db801d8e93d92054a99caa89df
"
& x"
db1a47b0644addd38ed46df344a4365d43a46807f42b0c7db1a747b0644addd
"
& x"
ea93cdacb99eece6fcf8795c519c8a56a6128558d43c046ddf788b3fd847a0f
"
& x"61811
ce489ca6e018dd0d528652aad0de594aaa3efd0056ea3ac77b2ac996faea453
"
& x"417
d706476834abd6b961288e97e2f60feafe62abbdfb70d765803d7d39da1b868
"
& x"
d1bbdfc732ff84628cb2a1b55da479ab7363ead54e474552cb2a2f280c25604
"
& x"89867
aaed499bfc31995132566eb96336e86d094e54ab2cdfe96413174c3ea90b312
"
& x"3
dedadfe26feb24ec853827278b6bd15420fd90904e143117061691050b59e23
"
& x"2
fca9683a45aaaeb5be9b4993fbd1a9f47e098a1d3406881bb7fdff14d32f3d5
" ;
ieee_to_flopoco_format_VsqrtT : InputIEEE_8_23_to_8_23
port map (
clk => clk ,
r s t => rst ,
X => VsqrtT_ieee ,
==PAGE:105==
95
R => VsqrtT
) ;
ieee_to_flopoco_format_drift : InputIEEE_8_23_to_8_23
port map (
clk => clk ,
r s t => rst ,
X => drift_ieee ,
R => d r i f t
) ;
ieee_to_flopoco_format_K1 : InputIEEE_8_23_to_8_23
port map (
clk => clk ,
r s t => rst ,
X => K1_ieee ,
R => K1
) ;
ieee_to_flopoco_format_K2 : InputIEEE_8_23_to_8_23
port map (
clk => clk ,
r s t => rst ,
X => K2_ieee ,
R => K2
) ;
asps :
for
i
in 0 to no_asps −1 generate
asp_inst :
asp
generic map (
no_lfsrs => no_lfsrs ,
depth => depth ,
word_length => word_length
)
port map (
clk => clk ,
r s t => rst ,
seeds => seed_pool ( word_length ∗no_lfsrs
∗( i + 1) −1 downto word_length ∗
no_lfsrs ∗
i ) ,
VsqrtT => VsqrtT ,
d r i f t => d r i f t ,
K1 => K1,
sum => pSum(34 ∗( i +1) −1 downto 34 ∗
i )
==PAGE:106==
96
Source code of the design
) ;
end generate ;
asp_result_addition :
adder_tree
generic map (
path_width => 34 ,
−−s i z e
of
the
operands ,
in
b i t s
(8+24+2, flopoco
format )
no_operands => no_asps ,
−−needs
to
be a
power of two
depth => adder_depth
−−needs
to
be
equal
to
log2
no_operands
)
port map (
clk => clk ,
r s t => rst ,
inputs => pSum,
output => sum
) ;
FP_multiply_K2 :
fp_multiplier_8_23_23_1deep
port map (
clk => clk ,
r s t => rst ,
X => sum_reg ,
Y => K2_reg ,
R => r e s u l t
) ;
flopoco_format_to_ieee_result :
OutputIEEE_8_23_to_8_23
port map (
clk => clk ,
r s t => rst ,
X => result_reg ,
R => result_ieee
) ;
input <= data_in (7 downto 0) & data_in (15 downto 8) &
data_in (23 downto 16) & data_in (31 downto 24) ;
data_out <= output (7 downto 0) & output (15 downto 8)
& output (23 downto 16) & output (31 downto 24) ;
SL :
process ( clk ,
rst , sum , K2,
next_state ,
next_count_stages ,
state )
==PAGE:107==
97
begin
i f
r s t = ’1 ’ then
state <= waitN ;
count_stages <= 0;
sum_reg <= ( others => ’0 ’) ;
K2_reg <= ( others => ’0 ’) ;
result_reg <= ( others => ’0 ’) ;
e l s i f
rising_edge ( clk ) then
state <= next_state ;
count_stages <= next_count_stages ;
sum_reg <= sum ;
K2_reg <= K2;
result_reg <= r e s u l t ;
i f
state = readN then
N <= input ;
end i f ;
i f
state = readVsqrtT then
VsqrtT_ieee <= input ;
end i f ;
i f
state = readDrift then
d r i f t _ i e e e <= input ;
end i f ;
i f
state = readK1 then
K1_ieee <= input ;
end i f ;
i f
state = readK2 then
K2_ieee <= input ;
end i f ;
output <= result_ieee ;
end i f ;
end process ;
CL:
process ( state ,
in_fifo_empty ,
out_fifo_full ,
count_stages )
begin
case ( state )
is
when waitN =>
i f
in_fifo_empty = ’1 ’ then
next_state <= waitN ;
rd_en <=
’ 0 ’ ;
else
next_state <= readN ;
rd_en <=
’ 1 ’ ;
end i f ;
==PAGE:108==
98
Source code of the design
next_count_stages <= 0;
wr_en <=
’ 0 ’ ;
when readN =>
i f
in_fifo_empty = ’1 ’ then
next_state <= waitVsqrtT ;
rd_en <=
’ 0 ’ ;
else
next_state <= readVsqrtT ;
rd_en <=
’ 1 ’ ;
end i f ;
next_count_stages <= 0;
wr_en <=
’ 0 ’ ;
when waitVsqrtT =>
i f
in_fifo_empty = ’1 ’ then
next_state <= waitVsqrtT ;
rd_en <=
’ 0 ’ ;
else
next_state <= readVsqrtT ;
rd_en <=
’ 1 ’ ;
end i f ;
next_count_stages <= 0;
wr_en <=
’ 0 ’ ;
when readVsqrtT =>
i f
in_fifo_empty = ’1 ’ then
next_state <= waitDrift ;
rd_en <=
’ 0 ’ ;
else
next_state <= readDrift ;
rd_en <=
’ 1 ’ ;
end i f ;
next_count_stages <= 0;
wr_en <=
’ 0 ’ ;
when waitDrift =>
i f
in_fifo_empty = ’1 ’ then
next_state <= waitDrift ;
rd_en <=
’ 0 ’ ;
else
next_state <= readDrift ;
rd_en <=
’ 1 ’ ;
end i f ;
next_count_stages <= 0;
wr_en <=
’ 0 ’ ;
when readDrift =>
i f
in_fifo_empty = ’1 ’ then
==PAGE:109==
99
next_state <= waitK1 ;
rd_en <=
’ 0 ’ ;
else
next_state <= readK1 ;
rd_en <=
’ 1 ’ ;
end i f ;
next_count_stages <= 0;
wr_en <=
’ 0 ’ ;
when waitK1 =>
i f
in_fifo_empty = ’1 ’ then
next_state <= waitK1 ;
rd_en <=
’ 0 ’ ;
else
next_state <= readK1 ;
rd_en <=
’ 1 ’ ;
end i f ;
next_count_stages <= 0;
wr_en <=
’ 0 ’ ;
when readK1 =>
i f
in_fifo_empty = ’1 ’ then
next_state <= waitK2 ;
rd_en <=
’ 0 ’ ;
else
next_state <= readK2 ;
rd_en <=
’ 1 ’ ;
end i f ;
next_count_stages <= 0;
wr_en <=
’ 0 ’ ;
when waitK2 =>
i f
in_fifo_empty = ’1 ’ then
next_state <= waitK2 ;
rd_en <=
’ 0 ’ ;
else
next_state <= readK2 ;
rd_en <=
’ 1 ’ ;
end i f ;
next_count_stages <= 0;
wr_en <=
’ 0 ’ ;
when readK2 =>
next_state <= compute ;
rd_en <=
’ 0 ’ ;
next_count_stages <= 0;
wr_en <=
’ 0 ’ ;
when compute =>
==PAGE:110==
100
Source code of the design
i f
count_stages < pipeline_depth −1 then
next_state <= compute ;
next_count_stages <= count_stages +
1;
rd_en <=
’ 0 ’ ;
wr_en <=
’ 1 ’ ;
else
next_count_stages <= 0;
i f
in_fifo_empty = ’1 ’ then
next_state <= waitN ;
rd_en <=
’ 0 ’ ;
else
next_state <= readN ;
rd_en <=
’ 1 ’ ;
end i f ;
wr_en <=
’ 1 ’ ;
end i f ;
end case ;
end process ;
end Behavioral ;
==PAGE:111==
Appendix B
Random generator test
bench
library IEEE ;
use IEEE .STD_LOGIC_1164.ALL;
use IEEE .STD_LOGIC_TEXTIO.ALL;
library STD;
use STD.TEXTIO.ALL;
entity test_fp_rndgen
is
generic (
no_lfsrs :
natural := 8;
depth :
natural := 3;
word_length :
natural := 24
) ;
end test_fp_rndgen ;
architecture
Behavioral
of test_fp_rndgen
is
−−Component Declaration
for
the
Unit Under Test (UUT
)
==PAGE:112==
102
Random generator test bench
component fp_rndgen
is
generic (
no_lfsrs :
natural := 4;
depth :
natural := 2;
word_length :
natural := 24
) ;
port (
seeds :
in std_logic_vector ( word_length ∗
no_lfsrs −1 downto 0) ;
r e s u l t : out std_logic_vector (31 downto 0) ;
clk ,
r s t :
in
std_logic
) ;
end component;
−−random hex
s t r i n g
pool
for max 64 24−b i t LFSRs
−−generated
in
Javascript
using
−−
a = "";
for
( i =0; i <64;
i++) { a = a + Math .
f l o o r (Math . random () ∗16777215) . toString (16) ; }
signal seed_pool
:
std_logic_vector (64 ∗6 ∗4 −1
downto 0) := x"884
bc38f90e41fb4d5ca805dc110508a7750cedba36e5b03 "
& x"
a16f209bccd49f794f87a0f9a0b939fa712e
"
& x"30
ceacc5fc8f1f9ba426d95006077e22f24222
"
& x"52269419
dbe0e8e6dbdf3fc060f92112354ddb7ee34
"
& x"652
e422ef8bec71526ff90da66e22ff1c39c83d
" ;
−−Inputs
−−"Good" values
for LFSR seeds
are x"a81fd3" x"764
ea1"
signal
seeds
:
std_logic_vector ( word_length ∗
no_lfsrs −1 downto 0) := seed_pool ( word_length ∗
no_lfsrs −1 downto 0) ;
signal
clk
:
std_logic :=
’ 0 ’ ;
signal
r s t
:
std_logic :=
’ 0 ’ ;
−−Outputs
==PAGE:113==
103
signal
r e s u l t :
std_logic_vector (31 downto 0) ;
−−Clock
period
d e f i n i t i o n s
constant clk_period
:
time := 10 ns ;
begin
−−I n s t a n t i a t e
the
Unit Under Test (UUT)
uut :
fp_rndgen
generic map (
no_lfsrs => no_lfsrs ,
depth => depth ,
word_length => word_length
)
port map (
seeds => seeds ,
r e s u l t => result ,
clk => clk ,
r s t => r s t
) ;
−−Clock
process
d e f i n i t i o n s
clk_process :
process
begin
clk <=
’ 0 ’ ;
wait for
clk_period /2;
clk <=
’ 1 ’ ;
wait for
clk_period /2;
end process ;
−−Stimulus
process
stim_proc :
process
variable
outline
:
l i n e ;
variable
i
:
natural ;
f i l e
o u t f i l e : TEXT open WRITE_MODE is "D:\
fp_rndgen . out" ;
begin
r s t <=
’ 1 ’ ;
−−hold
r e s e t
s t a t e
for
100 ns .
wait for 5 ns ;
wait for 10 ns ;
wait for 100 ns ;
==PAGE:114==
104
Random generator test bench
r s t <=
’ 0 ’ ;
wait for
clk_period ;
for
i
in 0 to 1000000 loop
hwrite ( outline ,
result , RIGHT,
8) ;
w r i t e l i n e ( o u t f i l e ,
outline ) ;
wait for
clk_period ;
end loop ;
r s t <=
’ 1 ’ ;
wait for
clk_period ;
wait ;
end process ;
end Behavioral ;
==PAGE:115==
Appendix C
NetFPGA-1G-CML’s Kintex
7 325T constraints
create_clock −name sys_clk −period 10
[ get_pins −
match_style
ucf ∗/ pcieclk_ibuf /O]
create_clock −name core_clk −period
5.000
[ get_pins
core_clock_ibuf /O]
set_false_path −to
[ get_pins −match_style
ucf ∗/
pipe_clock / pclk_i1_bufgctrl . pclk_i1 /S0 ]
set_false_path −to
[ get_pins −match_style
ucf ∗/
pipe_clock / pclk_i1_bufgctrl . pclk_i1 /S1 ]
set_case_analysis 1
[ get_pins −match_style
ucf ∗/
pipe_clock / pclk_i1_bufgctrl . pclk_i1 /S0 ]
set_case_analysis 0
[ get_pins −match_style
ucf ∗/
pipe_clock / pclk_i1_bufgctrl . pclk_i1 /S1 ]
set_property DONT_TOUCH true
[ get_cells −of
[ get_nets −of
[ get_pins −match_style
ucf ∗/ pipe_clock /
pclk_i1_bufgctrl . pclk_i1 /S0 ] ] ]
set_property DONT_TOUCH true
[ get_cells −hier −f i l t e r
{
name=~∗/pipe_clock / pclk_sel ∗}]
==PAGE:116==
106
NetFPGA-1G-CML’s Kintex 7 325T constraints
set_false_path −from
[ get_ports PCIE_PERST_B_LS]
set_property LOC IBUFDS_GTE2_X0Y0 [ get_cells −match_style
ucf ∗/ pcieclk_ibuf ]
set_property −dict "PACKAGE_PIN␣L17␣IOSTANDARD␣LVCMOS33␣
PULLUP␣true "
[ get_ports PCIE_PERST_B_LS]
set_property −dict "PACKAGE_PIN␣W19␣IOSTANDARD␣LVCMOS15"
[ get_ports "GPIO_LED[ 0 ] " ]
set_property −dict "PACKAGE_PIN␣F17␣IOSTANDARD␣LVCMOS33"
[ get_ports "GPIO_LED[ 1 ] " ]
set_property −dict "PACKAGE_PIN␣AF14␣IOSTANDARD␣LVCMOS15"
[ get_ports "GPIO_LED[ 2 ] " ]
set_property −dict "PACKAGE_PIN␣E17␣IOSTANDARD␣LVCMOS33"
[ get_ports "GPIO_LED[ 3 ] " ]
set_property LOC GTXE2_CHANNEL_X0Y3 [ get_cells
{∗/ pcie /
pcie_k7_vivado/U0/ i n s t /gt_top_i/pipe_wrapper_i/
pipe_lane [ 0 ] . gt_wrapper_i/gtx_channel . gtxe2_channel_i
}]
set_property PACKAGE_PIN H1 [ get_ports {PCIE_TX_N[ 0 ] } ]
set_property PACKAGE_PIN J3
[ get_ports {PCIE_RX_N[ 0 ] } ]
set_property PACKAGE_PIN J4
[ get_ports {PCIE_RX_P[ 0 ] } ]
set_property PACKAGE_PIN H2 [ get_ports {PCIE_TX_P[ 0 ] } ]
set_property LOC GTXE2_CHANNEL_X0Y2 [ get_cells
{∗/ pcie /
pcie_k7_vivado/U0/ i n s t /gt_top_i/pipe_wrapper_i/
pipe_lane [ 1 ] . gt_wrapper_i/gtx_channel . gtxe2_channel_i
}]
set_property PACKAGE_PIN K1 [ get_ports {PCIE_TX_N[ 1 ] } ]
set_property PACKAGE_PIN L3 [ get_ports {PCIE_RX_N[ 1 ] } ]
set_property PACKAGE_PIN L4 [ get_ports {PCIE_RX_P[ 1 ] } ]
set_property PACKAGE_PIN K2 [ get_ports {PCIE_TX_P[ 1 ] } ]
set_property LOC GTXE2_CHANNEL_X0Y1 [ get_cells
{∗/ pcie /
pcie_k7_vivado/U0/ i n s t /gt_top_i/pipe_wrapper_i/
pipe_lane [ 2 ] . gt_wrapper_i/gtx_channel . gtxe2_channel_i
}]
set_property PACKAGE_PIN M1 [ get_ports {PCIE_TX_N[ 2 ] } ]
set_property PACKAGE_PIN N3 [ get_ports {PCIE_RX_N[ 2 ] } ]
set_property PACKAGE_PIN N4 [ get_ports {PCIE_RX_P[ 2 ] } ]
set_property PACKAGE_PIN M2 [ get_ports {PCIE_TX_P[ 2 ] } ]
set_property LOC GTXE2_CHANNEL_X0Y0 [ get_cells
{∗/ pcie /
pcie_k7_vivado/U0/ i n s t /gt_top_i/pipe_wrapper_i/
pipe_lane [ 3 ] . gt_wrapper_i/gtx_channel . gtxe2_channel_i
==PAGE:117==
107
}]
set_property PACKAGE_PIN P1 [ get_ports {PCIE_TX_N[ 3 ] } ]
set_property PACKAGE_PIN R3 [ get_ports {PCIE_RX_N[ 3 ] } ]
set_property PACKAGE_PIN R4 [ get_ports {PCIE_RX_P[ 3 ] } ]
set_property PACKAGE_PIN P2 [ get_ports {PCIE_TX_P[ 3 ] } ]
set_property PACKAGE_PIN H6 [ get_ports PCIE_REFCLK_P]
set_property PACKAGE_PIN H5 [ get_ports PCIE_REFCLK_N]
set_property −dict {LOC AA3 IOSTANDARD LVDS}
[ get_ports
CLK_P]
set_property −dict {LOC AA2 IOSTANDARD LVDS}
[ get_ports
CLK_N]
==PAGE:118==
108
NetFPGA-1G-CML’s Kintex 7 325T constraints
==PAGE:119==
Bibliography
[Cla]
Jack Clark. Facebook stretches arm chips in datacentre tests.
[DDDCT08] Florent De Dinechin, Jeremie Detrey, Octavian Creţ, and Radu
Tudoran. When fpgas are better at ﬂoating-point than micropro-
cessors. 2008.
[Dig]
Digilent. Netfpga-1g-cml board reference manual.
[Dub]
Manek Dubash. Moore’s law is dead, says gordon moore.
[Eco]
The Economist. After moore’s law.
[Fel]
Michael Feldman. Life beyond moore’s law.
[Hea]
Nick Heath. Microservers: How arm can challenge intel by be-
friending facebook.
[Hul14]
John C. Hull. Options, Futures and other Derivatives. Pearson,
January 2014.
[Int]
Intel. Intel completes acquisition of altera.
[Kin]
Ian King. Intel’s $16.7 billion altera deal is fueled by data centers.
[Mar]
John Markoﬀ. Smaller, faster, cheaper, over: The future of com-
puter chips.
[Mer]
Rick Merritt. Tsmc taps arm’s v8 on road to 16 nm ﬁnfet.
[Mil]
Rich Miller. Intel begins rollout of fpgas to power the cloud, iot.
==PAGE:120==
110
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Moo65]
Gordon E. Moore. Cramming more components onto integrated
circuits. 1965.
[Mor]
Kevin Morris. Veni! vidi! virtex! (and kintex and artix too!).
[Pn]
Rexly Peñaﬂorida. Intel purchases fpga company altera for $16.7
billion.
[Put14]
Andrew et al. Putnam. A reconﬁgurable fabric for accelerating
large-scale datacenter services. 2014.
[Ran]
Noel Randewich. Facebook cites progress on low-power server tech-
nology.
[SHSN12]
Jonas Stenbrek Hegner, Joakim Sindholt, and Alberto Nannarelli.
Design of power eﬃcient fpga based hardware accelerators for ﬁ-
nancial applications. 2012.
[Suh15]
Kumar Suhas. Fundamental limits to moore’s law. 2015.
[Tan]
Paige Tanner. What is intel’s strategy to integrate altera’s fpga
technology?
[Unk]
Unknown. How intel’s acquisition of altera could transform iot and
the data centre.
[Wal]
M. Mitchell Waldrop. The chips are down for moore’s law.
[Wika]
Wikipedia. 5 nanometer technology.
[Wikb]
Wikipedia. High-frequency trading.
[Wikc]
Wikipedia. Law of large numbers.
[Xila]
Xilinx.
Eﬃcient shift registers, lfsr counters, and long pseudo-
random sequence generators.
[Xilb]
Xilinx. Fifo generator v12.0 - logicore ip product guide.
[Xilc]
Xilinx. Reset bridge.
