==PAGE:1==
Experimental Study of Enhanced
Oil Recovery by Application of
Advanced Chemicals
Jiasheng Hao
Master Thesis
June 2016
Supervised by
Associate Professor, Alexander Shapiro
Ph.D, Alsu Khusainova
Centre for Energy Resources Engineering
Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering
Center for Energy Resources Engineering
Søltofts Plads, building 229,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 2800
kt@kt.dtu.dk
www.kt.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at Centre for Energy Resources Engineering, DTU
Chemical and Biochemical Engineering, during the period from January 2016
to June 2016, in fullment of the requirements for acquiring an M.Sc. degree in
Engineering at Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The project was under
supervision of Associate Professor Alexander Shapiro and Ph.D. student Alsu
Khusainova.
First of all, I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my supervisor, As-
sociate Professor Alexander Shapiro, who has guided me through this project
and gave me the most valuable advise and critical comments. My sincere grati-
tude is given to my co-supervisor, Ph.D. student Alsu Khusainova, who shared
her extensive knowledge in this eld of study and guided me throughout the
experiments.
I am really grateful to technician Tran Thoung Dang for assisting me with
laboratory equipment and helping me to handle various technical tasks. Also,
I would like to thank Zacarias Tecle, John Troelsen, Hector Osvaldo Ampuero
Diaz and Duc Thuong Vu for helping me at dierent stages of this project, thank
you for sharing your knowledge and expertise.
I am really grateful to my mother Hong Shi, thank you for your deepest love,
that encouraged me to experience a dierent life and pursue the beauty of this
world. A huge thank-you to my lovely families for your seless support during
my study at DTU, I could not have the courage and opportunity to pursue a
M.Sc degree without you.
I would like to thank my girlfriend Wenyuan Sun, the laughters and happiness
==PAGE:4==
ii
you brought me helped me through the dark and lonely times in my life. Your
love and intelligence motivated me to be a better person!
Lyngby, 25-June-2016
Jiasheng Hao
==PAGE:5==
Summary
Recently, enzymes have drawn an increasing attention from researchers as novel
agents for enhanced oil recovery (EOR). Several initial eld trials in China, In-
donesia, Venezuela and USA have demonstrated quite promising results. Mean-
while, laboratory studies have also showed some positive results of enzymes as
agents for tertiary recovery. Based on laboratory experiments, the main mech-
anism to explain the positive observations of enzymatic EOR was conrmed
to be the adsorption of enzymes on rock surface and make reservoir rock more
water wet. However, this mechanism could make application of enzymes quite
risky, as the adsorption and retention of enzymes in reservoir rock is severe.
Experimental and modelling results showed that there is a high potential that
all the injected enzyme will be retained around a few centimetres/meters of the
wellbore and will not be able to propagate through the reservoir. The purpose
of this project is to participate in the research of enzymatic EOR, and to nd
the optimum technique to reduce enzyme retention and make enzymatic EOR
possible.
At the rst stage of this work, adsorption and desorption of enzymes on and from
at mineral surfaces were qualitatively examined by static adhesion tests. Chem-
icals that may help to reduce irreversible adsorption of enzymes were tested. It
was proved that in distilled water, desorption of enzymes from solid substrate
was maximum and the fastest. Also, (NH4)2SO4 demonstrated positive eect
on desorbing enzymes.
Further study of adsorption and retention of enzymes in porous materials was
carried out by penetration tests. BSA and enzyme were injected through chalk
and sandstone cores, respectively. Concentrations of BSA and an enzyme in
the euent were quantied.
In order to obtain characteristic parameters of
==PAGE:6==
iv
the transport of enzyme through porous medium, the production histories were
studied by an advanced mathematical model. The results conrmed that dis-
tilled water is better than sea water in terms of reducing irreversible adsorption
of enzyme. However, retention of enzyme in porous medium is still severe. It
was also observed that retention of protein in chalk is much higher than in
sandstone, therefore sandstone holds higher potential for enzymatic EOR.
Next, core ooding experiment was performed to investigate enzymes as EOR
agents. Low salinity water ooding, which is believed to be a potential EOR
method, by altering wettability of reservoir rock, was also tested in the ood-
ing experiment.
Both low salinity water ooding and enzyme ooding were
not successful to produce residual oil in conditions of this work, an additional
oil production of 0.92% and 0.78% OOIP was obtained by these two methods,
respectively. Due to adsorption of the enzyme on oil-water interface, the produc-
tion of the enzyme was much lower in ooding experiment than in penetration
test. Nevertheless, injection of (NH4)2SO4 helped to produced more enzyme,
but no additional oil was produced by (NH4)2SO4 injection.
At last, reversed adhesion tests were performed to investigate the ability of
enzyme to detach oil from mineral surface in static and ambient condition. It
was found that enzyme alone could not release oil from mineral surface. While
with presence of (NH4)2SO4, enzyme solution successfully detached oil from
mineral surface. It can be concluded that co-solvent is needed for enzymatic
EOR, and (NH4)2SO4 might be a promising choice. The use of (NH4)2SO4
for enzymatic EOR needs to be further studied.
Overall, enzymes did not appear to be a promising EOR agents, at least in
conditions similar with this work. More work needs to be done to develop the
technology to reduce irreversible adsorption of enzymes, and therefore make
them to propagate in the reservoir and continuously detach oil by shifting the
wettability of porous medium.
==PAGE:7==
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface
i
Summary
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Structure of enzymes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Enzymes' working mechanisms as catalysts
. . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Enzymes' eect on wettability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.5
Adsorption and retention of enzymes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Adsorption/desorption of protein/enzyme on at mineral sur-
faces
7
2.1
Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.1
Minerals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.2
Fluids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.3
Protein and enzyme samples
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.1
Calcite + [BSA+SW/DW] systems . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.2
Calcite + [NS81249+SW/DW] systems
. . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.3
Quartz + [BSA/NS81249+DW] systems . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3.4
Quartz + [NS81249+salt] systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3.5
Quartz + [NS81249 + salt/DW] systems . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4.1
Dierent behaviours of BSA and enzyme . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.4.2
The eect of salts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.5
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
3
Penetration of the enzyme through porous medium
21
3.1
Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.1.1
Fluids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.1.2
Cores
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2
Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2.1
Preparation of the cores . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2.2
Flow through test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2.3
Euent analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2.4
Modelling of the results of penetration tests . . . . . . . .
29
3.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.3.1
Penetration of enzyme through chalk . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.3.2
Penetration of NS81249 through sandstone
. . . . . . . .
33
3.4
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.5
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4
Investigation of enzyme ooding for enhanced oil recovery
37
4.1
Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.1.1
Fluids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.1.2
The core . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.2
Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2.1
Preparation of the core
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2.2
The injection scheme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2.3
Euent analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.3.1
Oil recovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.3.2
Enzyme recovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.4
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.5
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5
Reversed adhesion test: ability of the enzyme to detach oil from
quartz surface
49
5.1
Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.1.1
Fluids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.1.2
Mineral . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.2
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.3
Results and discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.4
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6
Main conclusions and recommendations for future work
55
6.1
Main conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.2
Recommendations for future work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
References
i
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Literature review
Nowadays, while petroleum reservoirs are depleted around the world, the golbal
demand for oil is increasing with the boosting economy. Enhanced oil recovery
(EOR), also referred as Improved oil recovery (IOR) is becoming increasingly
important to eciently produce oil from existing reservoirs. EOR processes are
generally classied into three categories: chemical ooding, thermal ooding and
gas injection. Each of them could be further divided into several sub-categories.
The earliest application of enzymes in petroleum industry can be traced back
to the 1980s, however their application was limited with well treatment and
generation of useful oileld chemicals (Harris et al, 1998). The application of
enzymes in EOR process (EEOR) was not studied until recently (Feng et al,
2007; Moon, 2008; Nasiri et al, 2009; He and Zhonghong, 2011; Ott et al, 2011).
Enzymes are environmentally friendly, surface active agents which usually work
at low concentrations, these features make them more advantageous than other
agents for EOR purposes.
Some eld tests in China, Myanmar, Venezuela and USA had demonstrated
promising results of EEOR (He and Zhonghong, 2011; Ott et al, 2011; Wu,
2010). Meanwhile, laboratory experiments were also conducted to nd out the
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
underlying mechanisms of EEOR process (Wu, 2010; He and Zhonghong, 2011;
Jain and Sharma, 2012; Nasiri et al, 2009;), the proposed mechanisms include:
1. decrease of the viscosity of oil by decomposition of heavy components. 2.
reduction of oil-water interfacial tension. 3. alternation of the rock surface to
be more water wet.
Nevertheless, in recent experimental studies of oil-brine-enzyme systems (Nasiri
et al, 2009), it was found that enzyme has no eect on oil viscosity. A more
recent study on wettability of calcite surfaces using oil-brine-enzyme systems
(Khusainova et al, 2015) demonstrated that the eects of enzymes on interfacial
tension is insignicant, while static adhesion tests and contact angle measure-
ments in this study showed that enzymes have the ability to tune the mineral
surface to a more water wet state. It was pointed out that wettability alteration
is the main eect of enzymatic EOR.
However, despite the postive ndings that support the application of enzymes
on eld scale, a study of enzyme/protein adsorption in chalk and sandstone
reservoir rocks (Khusainova, Ph.D thesis, 2016) pointed out a potential risk of
enzymatic EOR: the injected enzyme/protein may be lost in the few centime-
tres/metres around the injection well due to signicant irreversible adsorption
of enzymes in reservoir rock. Experimental results showed a low potential to
use enzymes in tertiary recovery, the main problem was the high retention of
enzymes in porous medium. In order to successfully apply enzymes in EOR
process, this problem has to be solved in the rst place.
Control of adsorption and desorption of proteins on solid surface have been
studied extensively in drug and bio industry (Perevozchikova et al, 2015; Del-
croix et al, 2014). The adsorption/desorption of proteins on solid surface is a
complex process and is controlled by various factors (Norde et al, 1985; Kirch-
man et al, 1989), among which the eect of pH and ionic strength have been
most rigorously studied. It was indicated that the adsorption could be mini-
mized by adjusting pH and ionic strength of the solution (Perevozchikova et al,
2015; Delcroix et al, 2014; Barbosa et al, 2010; Norde et al, 1985; Kirchman
et al, 1989). On the other hand, some kosmotropic ((NH4)2SO4, Na2SO4) and
chaotropic (NaSCN, Ca(SCN)2) salts, as well as some nonionic cosolvents (glyc-
erol, sucrose) showed strong positive eects on desorption of proteins from solid
surfaces (Koo et al, 2008; Evers et al, 2009; Evers et al, 2011).
Nonetheless, the applicability of these agents to desorb enzyme/protein from
reservoir rock in the context of EEOR needs to br further investigated. In this
study, various methods will be tested to minimize retention of enzyme in porous
medium, a series of experiments will be conducted to nd a reliable method that
makes enzymatic EOR possible.
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Structure of enzymes
3
1.2
Structure of enzymes
Enzymes are biologically produced globular proteins.
Like all proteins, en-
zymes consist of chains of amino acids that are folded together forming a three-
dimensional structure. They are natural catalysts that accelerate chemical reac-
tions by lowering active energy of the reaction. Like all other catalysts, enzymes
are not consumed in reactions and they can work at very low concentrations.
The size of enzymes are usually much larger than their substrate, however only a
small part of the molecule, named catalytic site, is involved in the catalysis ('The
catalytic site atlas', The European Bioinformatics Institute). The catalytic site
is located on the side of one or more binding sites where residues are oriented
to the substrates, the catalytic site and binding site together form the active
sites. The rest majority portion of the enzyme molecule functions to maintain
the shape and orientation of the active sites (Suzuki, 2015).
Although enzymes are environmentally friendly, highly ecient catalysts, they
are very sensitive to external conditions. Enzymes are not rigid, static struc-
tures, on the contrary, they are 'soft' molecules and their structure is subjected
to alternations of environment. When exposed to high temperature, improper
pH, or chemical denaturants, enzymes are likely to undergo conformational
change, this alternation of shape normally causes a loss of activity (Petsko and
Ringe, 2003).
Considering the complex environment in petroleum reservoir,
such sensitivity of enzymes could be a negative point for their application in
EOR process.
Figure 1.1: General structure of enzyme molecule
==PAGE:14==
4
Introduction
1.3
Enzymes' working mechanisms as catalysts
Enzymes catalyse chemical reactions by binding to their substrates. They are
very specic to what substrate they will bind to and what reaction they can
catalyse. There are two models describing this mechanism:
• The 'Lock and Key' model (Fischer, 1894) proposes that both enzyme and
substrate has a specic geometric shape that complement each other so
the substrate could t into the enzyme. This model explains the specicity
of enzymes, but it fails to explain the transition state of enzymes which is
found out later on (Cooper, 2000).
• The 'Induced Fit' model (Koshland, 1958) is based on the lock and key
model.
Since enzymes are not rigid molecules, the active site of the
molecule could be reshaped through its interaction with substrates. This
is suggesting that the substrate is not binded to a rigid site, but the active
site is molded to make the substrate precisely t into it. The nal shape
and charge of the enzyme is determined when the substrate nally bind
to it (Vasella et al, 2006; Boyer, 2002).
1.4
Enzymes' eect on wettability
The wettability of reservoir rock is believed to be one of the major factors that
controls the ow and distribution of reservoir uids. The relationship between
reservoir wettability and oil recovery has been studied by many researchers. Nu-
merous experimental results have shown that a wettability between intermediate
to slightly water wet is the most favourable for water ooding, while oil wet is
the least favourable (Anderson, 1987; Jadhunandan and Morrow, 1990; Tie and
Morrow, 2005; Kammath et al, 2001). The reason for such an observation given
by Jadhunandan and Morrow (1990) is that the capillary forces are minimized
for neutral wet condition, so the oil is less likely to be trapped in small pores.
As a novel agent for water ooding, enzymes have drawn an increasing attention
from researchers. The advantage to use enzymes rather than other chemicals
in water ooding is that enzymes are biologically produced, environmentally
friendly, surface active agents that could work at extremely low concentrations.
Dierent from surfactants, enzymes work on liquid-solid interface rather than
liquid-liquid interface (Khsainova et al, 2015).
Experimental results (Nasiri, 2009; Wu, 2010) indicate that enzymes are capable
==PAGE:15==
1.5 Adsorption and retention of enzymes
5
of altering the wettability of reservoir rock to be more water wet and separate
oil from the surface. Field tests also showed an incrementation of oil production
after enzyme injection (Feng et al, 2007; Ott et al, 2011; He and Zhonghong,
2011). A more recent investigation of the wettability of calcite surface in oil-
brine-enzyme systems (Khusainova et al, 2015) indicated that lipases/esterases
are the most promising to alter the wettability of mineral surface to be more
water wet and further detach oil from the surface.
Although enzymes are catalysts for chemical reactions, neither the composition
nor the viscosity of crude oil were changed after treatment by enzymes (Nasiri,
2009; Khusainova et al, 2015). From this point of view, during application in
enhanced oil recovery, enzymes worked mostly due to their protein nature rather
than their catalytic activity.
1.5
Adsorption and retention of enzymes
Due to protein nature, enzymes are surface active molecules that tend to adsorb
on solid surfaces. The side chains of amino acids gain or lose charge depending on
the surrounding environment and their own polarity (Purdue, 2011), the charged
sites are mostly located outside of the molecule due to their hydrophilicity where
they can interact with surfaces.
The tendency of protein/enzyme to adsorb on solid surfaces largely depends
on the properties of the material such as surface energy, texture, charge etc.
Large molecules are more likely to adsorb on surfaces since they have a higher
number of sites to interact with surface. The major forces acting during the
adsorption of protein/enzyme include electrostatic forces, hydrogen bondings
and hydrophobic interactions (Ghosh and Bull, 1966).
The ability of enzymes to alter the wettability of mineral surfaces relies on their
adsorption on the surface. For EEOR, it was desired that the enzyme could
adsorb and desorb from the surface continuously so it could propagate in the
reservoir and keep releasing oil from reservoir rock.
However, it was found that this mechanism was challenged when solution of pro-
tein/enzymes were applied into the reservoir rocks. A study of protein/enzyme
adsorption on reservoir rocks (Khusainova, Ph.D Thesis) showed that the irre-
versible adsorption of protein/enzyme in porous medium is a serious problem, a
large fraction of injected protein/enzyme was found to be irreversibly adsorbed
on the surface and they cannot be transported further in the porous medium. In
ow through tests the recovery of protein/enzyme ranged from 0-87%, modelling
==PAGE:16==
6
Introduction
of the ow through results suggested that there is a risk to lose all the injected
enzymes in the rst meter around the wellbore due to irreversible adsorption.
From this point of view, in order to be able to use enzymes for EOR process,
current study focuses on nding a technically and economically feasible way to
reduce the retention of proteins/enzymes in porous medium.
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2
Adsorption/desorption of
protein/enzyme on at
mineral surfaces
The irreversible adsorption of proteins was proved to be the main obstacle of
enzymatic enhanced oil recovery (Khusainova, Ph.D thesis). Current study fo-
cuses on establishing a preliminary understanding of the adsorption/desorption
behaviour of proteins/enzymes on mineral surfaces.
It has been indicated by previous researchers that the adsorption/desorption of
protein on solid surfaces is largely dependent on surface properties, meanwhile
the pH and ionic strength of aqueous solution also have a signicant inuence
(Norde et al, 1985; Kirchman, 1989). It was reported that certain salts could
reduce the adsorption of protein on solid surfaces (Evers et al, 2011; Evers et al,
2009). In this study, we will examine the eciency of these chemicals to reduce
protein adsorption in enzyme-oil-mineral systems.
Before going to ow through tests, static adhesion tests were performed to obtain
characteristic properties of adsorption/desorption behaviour of protein/enzyme
on mineral surfaces in dierent aqueous environments. Even though adhesion
test can provide only qualitative data, it is expected that it would be possible
to predict enzyme/protein behaviour in porous medium to some extent.
==PAGE:18==
8
Adsorption/desorption of protein/enzyme on at mineral surfaces
2.1
Materials
2.1.1
Minerals
Two types of minerals were used in adhesion tests: calcite and quartz. Calcite
was used to mimic chalk reservoirs and sandstone was used to imitate sandstone
reservoirs.
2.1.2
Fluids
Synthetic North Sea water (pH=7.78; composition as given in table 2.1) was
prepared for static adhesion tests. The six salts for seawater (SW) preparation
were purchased from Fluka (purity ≥99.5 %) and were not subjected to further
purication. The SW was prepared by dissolving salts in distilled water (DW).
Table 2.1: Composition of synthetic North Sea water
Salt
Concentration, g/L
NaCl
18.01
NaHCO3
0.17
KCl
0.74
MgCl2 · 6H2O
9.15
CaCl2 · 2H2O
1.91
Na2SO4
3.41
Total dissolved salt
33.39
Additionally, three slats were used to prepare solutions of dierent concentra-
tions for adhesion tests, compositions of these solutions are given in Table 2.2.
Table 2.2: Composition of the slat solutions used in adhesion tests
Salt
Concentration, g/L
Na2SO4
95.17
47.58
(NH4)2SO4
88.53
44.27
NaSCN
54.74
27.37
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Methods
9
The oil used for adhesion tests was a light dead oil recovered from a chalk
reservoir in the Danish sector of the North Sea.
2.1.3
Protein and enzyme samples
Bovine serum albumin (BSA, 98% purity) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich.
The enzyme sample NS81249 belonging to the class of lipase was provided by
Novozymes A/S as puried product. Protein/enzyme solutions were prepared
by dilution of the sample in one of the prepared salt solutions or DW. All the
concentrations given below are weight-to-weight percentage concentrations.
The puried enzyme sample from Novozymes A/S consists of 10-25% enzyme
and the rest is water. Compared to the commercial enzyme product, the puried
enzyme sample does not contain any stabiliser or biocide, so the enzyme sample
needs to be freezed for storage. The enzyme solutions were prepared and utilised
as soon as the sample was defreezed. Some characteristics of the protein and
enzyme applied in this work are given in Table 2.3.
Table 2.3: Characteristics of the protein/enzyme applied in adhesion tests
Protein/enzyme
Molecular size
Isoelectric point
Dimension,
◦
A
Working pH range
BSA
66463 Da
4.7
140×40×40
4-9
NS81249
29500 Da
4.8-5
N/A
5-10
2.2
Methods
Since surface roughness may signicantly aect wettability, which was expected
to lead to alternation of adhesion behaviour of oil drops, the mineral surfaces
was polished to avoid this interference. Before performing every new test, the
mineral was thoroughly cleaned to eliminate any organic compounds that would
potentially interfere the adsorption/desorption of protein/enzyme. The polished
mineral was soaked in acetone and put into ultrasonic water bath for 15 minutes,
afterwards the mineral was taken out and rinsed with ethanol. The cleaned
mineral was dried by air gun and put in a glass beaker sealed by aluminium foil
for later use.
The protein/enzyme solution was prepared right before the test to keep the ac-
tivity of the molecules. The solution was made by dilution of the protein/enzyme
==PAGE:20==
10
Adsorption/desorption of protein/enzyme on at mineral surfaces
in one of the prepared salt solutions or DW, all the protein/enzyme concentra-
tion applied in adhesion tests was always 1%.
The mineral was taken out of the glass beaker and soaked in protein/enzyme
solution for 30 minutes to allow protein/enzyme to interact with the mineral
surface. After 30 minutes' soaking, the mineral was taken out of the vessel,
the attached bulk protein/enzyme solution was removed by gentle shaking of
the mineral. Then the mineral was placed on glass stands in a glass container
(6×6×6 cm3), which was lled with desorption uid. The container was put onto
an anti-vibration platform to ensure a static environment for the oil drops to
interact with the mineral. Timing was launched immediately when the mineral
was placed into desorption uid.
The idea of assessing the adhesion behaviour using oil drops and mineral surfaces
was rst introduced by Buckley and Morrow (1990), the procedure applied in
this work was modied from the original work. A sketch of the set up is given
in Figure 2.1
Figure 2.1: Sketch of the experiment set up: a) glass container b) inverted
needle c) desorption uid d) mineral e) oil drop f) glass stand g)
anti-vibration platform
An oil drop with the size of 1.5-2µl was created by a syringe with an inverted
needle which extended into the desorption uid underneath the mineral. The
volume of oil created by syringe was controlled by the distance of the syringe
handle been pushed, it was calibrated that 1µl of oil corresponds to 0.1 mm
forward movement of the syringe handle. The needle was then moved upward
to allow contact of the oil drop and the mineral surface while the oil drop was
kept connected with the needle without detachment. The contact was kept for 2
minutes (this time is sucient for oil-mineral-brine interaction and feasible for
laboratory practice,(Buckley and Morrow, 1990)), during this time, the oil drop
was slightly pushed by the needle to the surface. Then the needle was slowly
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Methods
11
moved downward to either detach the oil from mineral surface or leave the oil on
the surface. At this stage, three types of behaviour were observed (as shown in
Figure 2.2): 1) non-adhesion: the oil was completely removed from the mineral
and kept attached with the needle. 2) adhesion: the oil stick on the mineral,
the attachment between oil and needle was broken by the downward movement.
3) temporary adhesion: the major portion of the oil drop stayed on the needle
and detached from the surface, leaving a small oil spot on the mineral.
Figure 2.2: Types of adhesion behaviour( Khusainova et al, 2015)
This assessment of adhesion behaviour was launched within 2 minutes after
the mineral was placed into desorption uid. For each set of experiments, the
adhesion test was continued for at least 2 hours.
After each set of the experiments, the mineral was thoroughly cleaned for before
next usage. First, the mineral was rinsed by DW (Distilled Water) to remove
the adsorbed protein and bulk solution of desorption uid, then the mineral
surface was thoroughly swept by paper to make sure the adsorbed protein was
completely removed. Afterwards, the mineral was rinsed by toluene and ethanol
to further remove the organic compound on the surface, then an air gun was
used to dry the mineral.
In order to eliminate every potential inuence for
subsequent experiments, the glass stands and container were also subjected to
this cleaning procedure.
The whole procedure of the adhesion tests was performed under ambient con-
dition. Although temperature and pressure could have some aect on enzyme
activity, they were not expected to change the adhesion behaviour of enzymes.
In addition, it was validated that buoyancy and the 'slight pressing' of the oil
drop to the surface would not aect the adhesion behaviour (Khusainova et
al, 2015). So, the proposed experimental procedure is to a large extend to be
representative of the behaviour of enzymes in reservoir conditions.
==PAGE:22==
12
Adsorption/desorption of protein/enzyme on at mineral surfaces
2.3
Results
Before performing any test, the adhesion behaviour of oil drop on protein-free
mineral surfaces was checked. Both calcite and quartz demonstrated strong oil
anity: all the tested oil drops adhered to mineral surfaces easily. This state was
taken as the reference state, any alternation of wettability would be considered as
the eect of adsorption of proteins. Both calcite and quartz after exposure to the
solutions of BSA and NS81249 demonstrated non-adhesion behaviour. So once
the minerals were placed in desorbing solution, adhesion of oil drops suggests
the protein was desorbed from the mineral, which is the desired behaviour. On
the other hand, non-adhesion or temporary adhesion means the protein kept
adsorbed on the surface or partly desorbed.
In the results provided in this
section, three colors are used to represent the adhesion behaviour of oil drops
as given in Figure 2.2.
2.3.1
Calcite + [BSA+SW/DW] systems
Since bovine serum albumin (BSA) is a widely used as model protein in bio-
chemistry, it was introduced in this work as a reference to study the adsorp-
tion/desorption behaviour of protein in dierent aqueous environments. SW
and DW were used in adsorption and desorption solution separately.
There
were 4 sets of experiments performed with calcite+[BSA+SW/DW] system, the
results are given in Table 2.4:
Table 2.4: Adhesion test result for calcite+[BSA+SW/SW] system
Mineral
No.
Adsorption solution
Desorption solution
Adhesion behaviour
1
1%BSA + SW
SW
0 min  150 min
2
1%BSA + DW
DW
0 min  130 min
3
1%BSA + SW
DW
0 min  120+ min
Calcite
4
1%BSA + DW
SW
0 min  150 min
150+ min
Adsorption and desorption of BSA in SW environment demonstrated no des-
orption of BSA through out the tested period (150 minutes). Adsorption and
desorption of BSA in DW showed an immediate desorption of BSA from cal-
cite surface. These two results indicate that SW has an substantial eect of
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Results
13
inhibition on desorption of BSA. On the other hand, low ionic strength DW is
advantageous for BSA desorption. Further, another two experiments (no. 3 and
4), where SW and DW were applied separately in adsorption and desorption
process, were performed to check in which process (adsorption or desorption)
SW leads to irreversible adsorption of BSA.
In experiment 3, where BSA was adsorbed to calcite in SW and then desorbed
in DW, showed no desorption of BSA from the surface, this result is the same
as experiment no.1. Experiment no.4 showed a transition state for 150 minutes,
in which a mixed behaviour of adhesion, non-adhesion and temporary adhesion
was observed. Then nal desorption was achieved after 150 minutes. From ex-
periment no.1 and 3, it can be deduced that SW mainly works in the adsorption
process, and makes BSA irreversibly adsorbed to calcite. While experiments
no.2 and 4 suggest that SW could also work in the desorption process to 'slow
down' detachment of BSA, nal desorption was still achieved in SW.
It should be noted here that 'complete desorption' (100% reversibility) could
never be reached (Norde, 1986; Kirchman et al., 1989).
In this work, 'nal
desorption' implies the desorption of a signicant fraction of adsorbed protein,
which would turn the mineral surface to be oil-sticky.
2.3.2
Calcite + [NS81249+SW/DW] systems
As it can be seen from previous section high ionic strength uid (SW) is dis-
advantageous for desorption of BSA. At this step, enzyme was introduced to
see whether it behaves similar with BSA. Again, DW and SW were employed
to duplicate experiment no.1 and 2 but with the puried enzyme NS81249, the
results are given in Table 2.5:
Table 2.5: Adhesion test result for calcite+[NS81249+SW/DW] system
Mineral
No.
Adsorption solution
Desorption solution
Adhesion behaviour
5
1%NS81249 + DW
DW
0 min  120+ min
Calcite
6
1%NS81249 + SW
SW
0min  15min
15min  120min
In DW environment, there was no desorption of NS81249. While in SW, nal
desorption was reached after a 15-minute transition period, during which en-
zyme was partly desorbed. This observation is in contrast when compared to
BSA (Table 2.4). BSA and enzyme behaved dierently in both SW and DW
==PAGE:24==
14
Adsorption/desorption of protein/enzyme on at mineral surfaces
environment. Unlikely for BSA, for enzyme, SW might be more advantageous
than DW to desorb from calcite.
2.3.3
Quartz + [BSA/NS81249+DW] systems
Previously the adhesion tests were performed with calcite crystal. In this sec-
tion, quartz was employed to examine the adsorption/desorption behaviour of
protein/enzyme. Only DW was used in order to check the similarity of adsorp-
tion/desorption behaviour of BSA and NS81249. The results are given in Table
2.6:
Table 2.6: Adhesion result for Quartz + [BSA/NS81249+DW] system
Mineral
No.
Adsorption solution
Desorption solution
Adhesion behaviour
7
1%BSA + DW
DW
0 min  120+ min
Quartz
8
1%NS81249 + DW
DW
0min  15min
15min  120+min
It can be seen that the adsorption/desorption behaviours of BSA and NS81249
in DW environment for quartz were slightly dierent. BSA showed immediate
desorption from quartz in DW. While NS81249 showed partly desorption onto
the rst 15 minutes. Afterwards, further desorption of NS81249 occurred, but it
did not result in nal desorption. Although the result seems similar for BSA and
enzyme, there is still a large dierence on the rate and amount of desorption.
It is clear that dierent proteins have dierent behaviour on the same solid sub-
strate. It is also obvious that the adsorption/desorption behaviour of proteins
is dierent on calcite and quartz, the inuence of solid substrate is so important
that it could even lead to the opposite result for the same protein (experiment
no.8 and 5).
2.3.4
Quartz + [NS81249+salt] systems
Since BSA could not represent the behaviour of the enzyme, the following adhe-
sion tests were focused on NS81249. As it was reported by several researchers,
some kosmotropic and chaotropic salts could reduce the degree of protein ad-
sorption on solid surface by disfavouring a conformational adaptation and shield
electrostatic interactions (Evers et al,2009; Evers et al, 2011; Koo et al, 2008).
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Results
15
In this work, three slats were selected to test their eect on reducing enzyme
adsorption: Na2SO4, (NH4)2SO4 and NaSCN; two concentrations were stud-
ied for each salt: 0.67 mol/L and 0.335 mol/L. At this step of study, the salt
solutions were used both in adsorption and desorption solutions. The results
are given in Table 2.7:
Table 2.7: Adhesion test results of quartz+[NS81249+salt] systems
Mineral
No.
Adsorption solution
Desorption solution
Adhesion behaviour
9
1%NS81249+Na2SO4(0.67mol/L)
Na2SO4(0.67mol/L)
0 min  120 min
10
1%NS81249+Na2SO4(0.335mol/L)
Na2SO4(0.335mol/L)
0min  30min
30min  120+min
11
1%NS81249+(NH4)2SO4(0.67mol/L)
(NH4)2SO4(0.67mol/L)
0 min  120 min
12
1%NS81249+(NH4)2SO4(0.335mol/L)
(NH4)2SO4(0.335mol/L)
0min  15min
15min  120min
13
1%NS81249+NaSCN(0.67mol/L)
NaSCN(0.67mol/L)
0min  120min
Quartz
14
1%NS81249+NaSCN(0.335mol/L)
NaSCN(0.335mol/L)
0min  120min
For Na2SO4, no desorption of enzyme was observed at high concentration.
While at low concentration, it was interesting to observe that partial desorp-
tion of enzyme (when temporary adhesion was observed) occurred at the rst
30 minutes which was probably due to dilution of the enzyme, afterwards the
desorbed enzyme adsorbed back on quartz.
A similar process was observed for (NH4)2SO4, but the period of partial des-
orption was shorter than that for Na2SO4. These observations imply that the
salts work more in desorption process by preventing enzyme from detachment,
and this eect is increasing with the increase of salt concentration where the
eect of dilution was shielded. Judging from the shorter period of partial desorp-
tion, (NH4)2SO4 is probably more ecient than Na2SO4 in terms of inhibiting
enzyme desorption.
In terms of NaSCN, a higher concentration resulted in partial desorption of
enzyme, while a lower concentration leaded to non-desorption of enzyme. It
seems NaSCN might have a positive eect on enzyme desorption but it has to
be a high concentration. A lower concentration of NaSCN would rather have
negative eect for enzyme desorption.
2.3.5
Quartz + [NS81249 + salt/DW] systems
As it was found in previous section, the presence of salts would prevent desorp-
tion of the enzyme. In this section, in order to test the eect of salts on enzyme
==PAGE:26==
16
Adsorption/desorption of protein/enzyme on at mineral surfaces
adsorption, the salts were only applied in adsorption solution, and DW was used
as desorption uid. As a reference, SW was also applied as adsorption solution
in one of the tests.
In order to maximize the eect of salts and to make the result more visible,
only higher concentration (0.67mol/L) was studied (except for (NH4)2SO4).The
results are given in Table 2.8:
Table 2.8: Adhesion results for quartz + [NS81249 + salt/DW] system
Mineral
No.
Adsorption solution
Desorption solution
Adhesion behaviour
15
1%NS81249+(NH4)2SO4(0.67mol/L)
DW
0 min  160 min
16
1%NS81249+(NH4)2SO4(0.335mol/L)
DW
0min  8min
8min  120min
17
1%NS81249+Na2SO4(0.67mol/L)
DW
0min  12min
12min  120min
18
1%NS81249+NaSCN(0.67mol/L)
DW
0min  15min
15min  120min
Quartz
19
1%NS81249+SW
DW
0min  5min
5min  120min
In the absence of salts in desorption solution, nal desorption of enzyme was
reached in every set of experiments. (NH4)2SO4 demonstrated better result
than other salts. For the high concentration of (NH4)2SO4 in adsorption pro-
cess, immediate desorption was observed by dilution of DW. On the other hand,
a lower concentration of (NH4)2SO4 in adsorption solution made enzyme des-
orption slower by dilution of DW. Compared with the experiment no.14, in
which SW was used as adsorption solution, it can be seen that application
of (NH4)2SO4 accelerated enzyme desorption to a large extent, and a higher
concentration of (NH4)2SO4 in adsorption solution would result in higher des-
orption rate.
Two other salts, NaSCN and Na2SO4, did not show faster desorption com-
pared to the application of SW. Application of NaSCN in adsorption solution
demonstrated 3 times longer desorption time than SW, Na2SO4 showed shorter
desorption time than NaSCN but still much longer than SW.
2.4
Discussion
As it was conrmed by previous study (Khusainova et al, 2015), the mechanism
of using enzymes in enhanced oil recovery is to alter the wettability of rock
surface. This working mechanism requires continuous adsorption/desorption of
enzymes on rock surface, so enzymes can propagate through the reservoir and
==PAGE:27==
2.4 Discussion
17
continuously alter wettability of reservoir rock. In adhesion tests, two types
of proteins and two types of solid substrates were used, various uids were
tested in adsorption/desorption processes to examine the reversibility of protein
adsorption on minerals.
Some interesting points are to be discussed in this
section.
2.4.1
Dierent behaviours of BSA and enzyme
From the results given in Table 2.4 and 2.5 it can be seen that SW has a
signicant eect on the reversibility of protein adsorption.
Most likely, SW
mainly works in adsorption process of enzyme and make the molecules tightly
attached to the mineral surfaces. This can be seen by comparing experiments
no.2 and 3: the presence of SW in adsorption solution resulted in non desorption
of BSA. When DW was used in adsorption stage and SW in desorption stage
(experiment 4), nal desorption of BSA was reached even though the rate of
desorption was lower. However, the eect of SW on NS81249 was opposite from
BSA (Table 2.5). Final desorption of the enzyme was reached in SW while not
in DW.
The dierent behaviour of BSA and the enzyme on calcite surface suggests
that the adsorption processes of BSA and NS81249 are dierent.
The SW
used in this work has a pH of 7.78, while the isoelectric points of BSA and
NS81249 are 4.7 and 4.8-5, respectively (Table 2.3). It means both proteins
should have similar negative charges in SW environment, while the surface of
calcite crystal has a positive charge in SW (Somasundaran and Agar, 1967).
The electrostatic forces between both BSA and Ns81249 and calcite should be
attractive, so the electrostatic forces should not be the reason for the observed
dierent behaviours.
The most possible explanation for the dierent behaviour of BSA and the en-
zyme on calcite might be the dierent structure of these two proteins. Proteins
in SW adsorb on surface mainly due to hydrophobic interactions (Kirchman et
al, 1989). In aqueous solution, hydrophilic amino acids are in the outer region
of protein, and hydrophobic amino acids dominate in the interior (Schulz and
Schirmer, 1979). Due to the exible nature of BSA, it might undergo a confor-
mational rearrangement to expose its hydrophobic interior to hydrophobic sites
on the surface, meanwhile the molecules could bind with each other forming
a stable structure. The conformational change could be irreversible, so BSA
molecules are tightly bind to the surface through several sites and dicult to
detach. This hypothesis could explain the irreversible adsorption of BSA in SW.
However it fails to explain the behaviour of NS81249 (Table 2.5). It might be
assumed that the high ionic strength of SW somehow helped to maintain the
==PAGE:28==
18
Adsorption/desorption of protein/enzyme on at mineral surfaces
structural stability of NS81249, so the molecules are not so tightly attached to
the surface, this made it possible to desorb when subjected to dilution. In DW,
without the help of ions, NS81249 is more likely to irreversibly adsorb on calcite.
The nature of solid substrate also has an eect on protein adsorption. As it was
shown by experiments no.5 and 8, NS81249 in DW demonstrated non-desorption
on calcite but partial desorption on quartz. This dierence might be attributed
to the strength of enzyme-surface interactions. Since the level of hydrophobicity
of the surface strongly aects the strength of the interaction, protein adsorption
was the highest onto surfaces with higher hydrophobicity (calcite), and lower
with low hydrophobicity surface(quartz) (Kirchman et al, 1989). Indeed, it can
be seen from the results that calcite had more anity to proteins than quartz,
this observation correlates well with the previous study by Khusainova (Ph.D
thesis).
2.4.2
The eect of salts
Three salts were applied in this work to study their eect on protein adsorption
at quartz surface. First, the salts were applied both in adsorption and desorption
solutions. Comparing the results (Table 2.7) with high and low concentrations, it
could be seen that Na2SO4 and (NH4)2SO4 probably have a negative eect on
desorption of the enzyme. At high salt concentration, where the eect of salt is
maximized, no desorption of the enzyme was observed. When the concentration
was lowered, partial desorption of the enzyme was observed during the initial
15-30 minutes, which was probably due to dilution of the protein, it means
that the enzyme adsorption was reversible in salt solution. Then the desorbed
enzyme adsorbed back on quartz. It means the presence of salt in desorption
process caused a re-adsorption of enzyme, this observation suggests the salts
should not be applied to desorb enzymes, however they could be useful for the
purpose of secondary adsorption of enzymes.
As for NaSCN, it is working dierently with the other two salts. The results (Ta-
ble 2.7) indicate it could lead to partial desorption of enzyme, but only at high
concentration of the salt. In contrast, lower concentration of NaSCN resulted in
non-desorption of the enzyme. This observation is opposite compared to the re-
sults for the other two salts, and it is violating the common sense: consider the
behaviour of the enzyme in DW (experiment no.8),the adsorption/desorption
behaviour of enzyme in a solution which has a low salt concentration would be
expected to be similar in case of DW; while at high salt content solution, the ad-
sorption/desorption behaviour should be dierent due to stronger eect of salt.
This hypothesis is supported by the observations for Na2SO4 and (NH4)2SO4
(Table 2.7). For NaSCN, it might be argued that NaSCN chemically altered
==PAGE:29==
2.4 Discussion
19
the properties of the enzyme, so the adsorption/desorption behaviour became
elusive.
Further study of the eects of salts on adsorption process was performed by
applying salt solutions only as adsorption solution (Table 2.8). Surprisingly,
all the experiments showed nal desorption of NS81249. The best result was
given by (NH4)2SO4, which showed immediate desorption of the enzyme. Other
two salts, Na2SO4 and NaSCN, including SW, had a period of non-desorption
before reaching nal desorption. Interestingly, judging from the length of non-
desorption period, Na2SO4 and NaSCN were not that ecient compared to SW
in terms of reducing the strength of enzyme adsorption. For these two salts, it
should be doubted whether the type of salt or the ionic strength played the key
role in the adsorption process.
Reduction of irreversible adsorption due to application of (NH4)2SO4 can be
caused by two factors. The kosmotropic ions (SO2−
4
) reduced the degree of the
protein adsorption by limiting the conformational changes and dehydrated the
protein molecule(they tend to be hydrated). On the other hand, the chaotropic
ions (NH+
4 saturated the hydrophobic patches on the protein surface and ac-
cumulated at the surface (Figure 2.3), so the hydrophobic interactions were
probably shielded (Evers et al, 2009; Evers et al, 2011).
(a) Preferential binding of co-solvents
(b) Reduced protein adsorption with pres-
ence of co-solvents
Figure 2.3: A sketch of desired eect of co-solvent, (Evers et al, 2011)
When the mineral was transferred into DW, both the protein and salt were
diluted to a large extend, this might be reason why desorption occurred in DW
but not in salt solutions.
==PAGE:30==
20
Adsorption/desorption of protein/enzyme on at mineral surfaces
2.5
Conclusions
A series of static adhesion tests were performed to study the adsorption/desorption
behaviour of protein/enzyme on calcite and quartz surfaces. It was found that
BSA and the enzyme behaved dierently on mineral surfaces. The most prob-
able reason for that was dierent molecular structures. Based on the results,
following study of enzymatic EOR should focus on enzyme rather than BSA.
Type of the solid substrate also had a signicant eect on enzyme adsorption.
Calcite showed stronger anity to the enzyme than quartz, so irreversible ad-
sorption on calcite was higher. This means application of enzymes in carbona-
ceous reservoirs might be more problematic than in siliceous reservoirs.
Varying ionic strength could result in dierent levels of reversibility of the pro-
tein adsorption. For the enzyme, it seems high ionic strength was mainly im-
portant in the desorption process preventing proteins from detachment.
Among three tested salts, only (NH4)2SO4 demonstrated strong positive eect
reducing irreversible adsorption. However it should only be used in adsorption
process, application of (NH4)2SO4 in desorption process might lead to non-
desorption of the enzyme.
Low ionic strength uid (DW) was found to be
benecial in desorption process, this might be a result of an eective dilution of
both adsorbed proteins and ions.
DW and (NH4)2SO4 should be further studied as chemicals that might des-
orb enzymes from the solid substrates. The eectiveness of these uids needs
to be carefully studied by dynamic ow through tests, also, reservoir rather
than ambient conditions should be applied. In ow through tests, injected en-
zyme solution will be correlated to adsorption solution in adhesion tests, while
displacing uid will be correlated to desorption solution.
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 3
Penetration of the enzyme
through porous medium
In the previous chapter we studied the adsorption and desorption behaviour of
the enzyme on at mineral surfaces. In this chapter, we will bring the study for-
ward to dynamic ow through experiments with porous media to nd out how
the enzyme propagates through the rock materials. The injection and displacing
uids were chosen based on the results of static adhesion tests. Two rock mate-
rials, chalk outcrop from Stevns Klint (Denmark) and sandstone outcrop from
Obernkirchener (Germany), were used. The production histories were charac-
terised by an advanced mathematical model involving dispersion, reversible and
irreversible adsorption of enzymes.
This chapter is organised as follows: Section 1 introduces the materials used in
the dynamic ow through experiments; the experimental method and scheme are
included in Section 2; Section 3 presents the experimental and modelling results;
Section 4 provides a discussion of the obtained results; nally the conclusion is
presented in Section 5.
==PAGE:32==
22
Penetration of the enzyme through porous medium
3.1
Materials
3.1.1
Fluids
Synthetic North Sea water and distilled water were used in penetration tests.
The composition of sythetic North Sea water is identical with the sea water
previously used in adhesion tests.
Puried enzyme NS81249 (the same as used in adhesion tests) were injected us-
ing 5%wt concentration. The enzyme solution was prepared by diluting puried
NS81249 either in SW or DW.
3.1.2
Cores
In correspondence with calcite and quartz in adhesion test, two types of outcrop
cores were used: chalk and sandstone. The chalk core was drilled from Stevns
Klint chalk (Denmark), the sandstone core was drilled from an Obernkirch-
ener sandstone (Germany) block. Permeability and porosity of the cores were
measured using nitrogen.
The porosity measurements were based on Boyle-
Mariotte's law, permeability was measured with 5 point Klinkenberg correction.
The characteristics of the cores are given in Table 3.1:
Table 3.1: Characteristics of the cores used in penetration tests
Sample
name
Type
Origin
Dry weight,
g
Length,
mm
Diameter,
mm
Permeability,
mD
Pore volume,
ml
C-1
Outcrop
Chalk
Stevns Klint,
Denmark
106.11
70.12
36.73
5.44
34.48
S-1
Outcrop
Sandstone
Obernkirchener,
Germany
177.69
75.53
37.26
0.543
14.63
3.2
Methods
3.2.1
Preparation of the cores
Before the penetration tests, the cores were subjected to a series of procedures
to prepare them for the experiments. The procedures included X-ray computed
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Methods
23
tomography scan, cleaning, porosity and permeability measurements and satu-
ration with SW.
X-ray computed tomography scan was performed rst. The purpose of X-ray
scan was to check the integrity and homogeneity/heterogeneity of the cores, in
order to select suitable cores for further usage, the work was done by technician
Duc Thuong Vu. The scanned pictures of chalk and sandstone cores are given
in Figure 3.1 and Figure 3.2, respectively.
Figure 3.1: X-ray scan images of the chalk core
Figure 3.2: X-ray scan images of the sandstone core
It can be observed from the pictures that both chalk and sandstone cores were
homogeneous, and were founded to be suitable for further experiments.
After X-ray scan, the cores were subjected to cleaning. The cores were assembled
into a Hassler core holder and ooded by toluene and methanol. Sleeve pressure
was applied by an ISCO pump, it was 25 bar for chalk core and 50 bar for
sandstone core. Injection of toluene and methanol were switched after injection
of 20 PV (Pore Volume) of each, the injection cycle of toluene-methanol was
repeated at least 3 times, or until the euent becomes colorless. The purpose
of the cleaning procedure was to remove all the organic compounds inside the
cores which may potentially inuence the experiment. After cleaning, the cores
were put into an oven at 90 Celsius degree for 24 hours (at least) to evaporate
the solvents. The dry mass of the cores were then measured.
==PAGE:34==
24
Penetration of the enzyme through porous medium
Afterwards, the porosity and permeability of the dry cores were measured by
PoroPerm Production of VINCI Technology. The measurement was done by
applying nitrogen, the Boyle-Mariotte's law was used to determine grain density
and pore volume by expansion of a known mass of nitrogen into a matrix cup,
the mathematical form of the method is:
Pref · Vref
Tref
= Pexp · Vexp
Texp
(3.1)
During the experiment, we assumed that the temperature was constant during
a series of measurements: Tref = Texp. So it comes:
Pref · Vref = Pexp · Vexp
(3.2)
Permeability measurements were more complex. The expression for determining
the permeability of a porous medium to gas is of dierent compared to that of
liquid. This is because gas is compressible whereas liquid is not. Gas ows
toward the downstream end of a core sample, its pressure decreases, the gas
expands so its velocity will increase. The Darcy equation for ideal horizontal
laminar ow of gas under steady state isothermal condition is given as follows:
kgas = 2µZTPbLQb
ATb(P 2
1 −P 2
2 )
(3.3)
Where kgas is permeability to gas (D), µ is gas viscosity (cP), Z is mean gas
compressibility factor, T is mean temperature of owing gas, Pb is base or
atmospheric pressure, L is length of the sample (cm), Qb is atmospheric gas
ow rate (cm/s) at base pressure Pb, A is cross sectional area of cylinder (cm2),
Tb is base temperature, P1, P2 are upstream and downstream absolute pressures
respectively.
If the base temperature equals to the mean temperature of the owing gas
and Z is taken as unity, which is approximately true for nitrogen under typical
operating ambient conditions, and since core pressure drop P = P1 −P2; and
core mean pressure Pm = P1−P2
2
then the equation can be reduced to the less
unwieldy expression:
kgas = µPbLQb
A∆PPm
(3.4)
This equation was therefore used to calculate core permeability to nitrogen,
under laminar ow conditions. The 5 point Klinkenberg correction was used in
order to obtain the permeability of the core with regards to liquid.
After porosity and permeability measurements, the cores were saturated with
DW (distilled water) or SW (sea water). To make sure the cores were eectively
saturated, the saturation were done in three steps:
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Methods
25
1. At the rst stage, the core was saturated by inbibition. First, the dry
core was put in a beaker and placed in a vacuum container together with
saturating uid, which was placed in another beaker. The vacuum en-
vironment was provided by a vacuum pump connected to the exicator.
The purpose of this step is to moist the core by the vapour of saturating
uid, so the subsequent inbibition process could be easier and more thor-
ough. After 2.5 hours, a portion of saturation uid was transferred into
the beaker which contained the core, at this step 1
3 of the core was im-
mersed into the saturation uid. The vacuum environment was expected
to enhance and accelerate the inbibition process. This step of inbibition
also lasted for 2.5 hours. Next, more saturation uid was used to saturate
the core, this time 2
3 of the core was immersed in saturation uid. Again,
this step lasted for 2.5 hours. Afterwards, saturation uid was carefully
added to immerse the core and leave the top of the core 1-2 mm above
water level. Finally, after 2.5 hours, the core was turned upside down and
totally immersed in saturation uid, the last step lasted for at least 12
hours (overnight).
Figure 3.3: Sketch of the process of saturation by inbibition
2. Secondly, after saturation by inbibition, the core was further saturated by
pressurizing in a stainless steal cylinder. The core was put in the cylinder
lled with saturating uid, a pressure of 100 bar was applied by ISCO
pump to pressurise the core. In this step, the saturation uid was forced
to go into the pore space by the pressure from all directions. This step
lasted for at least 48 hours.
Figure 3.4: Sketch of saturation by pressurize
==PAGE:36==
26
Penetration of the enzyme through porous medium
3. Finally, the core was saturated by injection of saturating uid. The core
was rapidly transferred into a rubber sleeve and assembled in core holder.
At least 20 PV of saturating uid was ooded through the core with the
ow rate of 0.1 ml/min. The degree of saturation was then determined by
weight method, the result was compared with the value of the pore volume
acquired by the porosimeter. A dierence of less than 5% was considered
to be acceptable.
3.2.2
Flow through test
3.2.2.1
The experiment set up
The ow through experiments were conducted in a core ooding set up. The
experimental set up consisted of four main parts: the injection system, the core
holder, the fraction collector and the data collection system. (Figure 3.5)
Figure 3.5: Core ooding set up used for ow through tests (Khusainova, Ph.D
Thesis)
The injection part consists of an injection cylinder that was lled with the uid
to be injected: saturating uid, protein/enzyme solution or displacing uid. The
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Methods
27
cylinder was thoroughly cleaned by ethanol and distilled water after injection
of each uid. A high precision Teledyne ISCO syringe pump was used to inject
the uids. A pressure transmitter was installed at the outlet of the injection
cylinder to monitor injection pressure.
A Hassler core holder was used to hold the core sample, conning pressure was
applied and kept constant by another ISCO pump. The radial conning pressure
was 25 bar for chalk sample and 50 bar for sandstone sample. The conning
pressure was also monitored by a pressure transmitter. The pressure dierence
between the inlet and outlet of the core holder was measured and monitored
by a dierential pressure transmitter. The core holder was placed in an electric
heating jacket to simulate reservoir temperature, the temperature was kept at
60 degree in this work.
The euent was collected by a rotating euent collector. The period of ro-
tation was controlled by a computer programme, so the fraction size could be
determined.
3.2.2.2
Injection and displacement of protein/enzyme
The penetration test was performed using BSA and NS81249 samples. Before
injection, the core holder was heated by the heating jacket up to 60 degree for 12
hours (at least). The ow-through experiments were started by injection of the
BSA solution into the chalk core. BSA was initially used as a model protein, in
order to develop the experimental procedure. Later, puried enzyme NS81249
was injected through a sandstone core.
In order to be able to quantify the
enzyme concentration in the euent, NS81249 was injected with a concentration
of 5%wt, which is 5 times higher than the enzyme concentration used in adhesion
tests.
Table 3.2: Injection and displacement conditions and schemes of the ow-
through experiments.
Experiment
Protein/
enzyme
tested
Core
Saturating
uid
Injection
Displacing
Solvent
Protein
concentration
PVI
Displacing
uid
PVI
%wt
Relative
to BSA,
mg/ml
A
BSA
Chalk
outcrop
DW
DW
1
9.5
1
DW
10
B
NS81249
Sandstone
outcrop
SW
SW
5
3.76
1
DW
19
==PAGE:38==
28
Penetration of the enzyme through porous medium
The protein/enzyme was injected to a saturated core as a portion of 1 PV, then
displacing uid was injected to displace the protein/enzyme solution. The injec-
tion rate for the protein/enzyme pulse and displacing uid was 0.1 ml/min. The
results obtained during static adhesion tests were extended onto dynamic ow-
through experiments: saturating uid, displacing uid and the solution used to
prepare protein/enzyme solutions were chosen based on adsorption/desorption
results from static adhesion tests. Injection and displacement conditions and
schemes are given in Table 3.2.
The euent was collected in the portions of 1/5 to 1/7 PV. In order to avoid
denaturation of diluted protein/enzyme, the collected euent was transferred
into fridge and analysed as soon as possible.
3.2.3
Euent analysis
The concentration of the protein/enzyme in collected euent was determined
by Bradford Assay (Bradford, 1976). The procedure is based on the formation
of a complex between the dye, Brilliant Blue G, and proteins in solution. The
protein-dye complex causes a shift in the absorption maximum of the dye from
465 to 595 nm. The amount of absorption is proportional to the protein present
in solution. The linear concentration range is 0.11.4 mg/ml of protein, using
BSA (bovine serum albumin) as the standard protein.
In this work, standard 3.1 ml Sigma-Aldrich Assay protocol (that utilises 1:30
protein - Bradford reagent ratio) was used (Sigma-Aldrich, Catalog Number
B6916). The assay procedure can be considered as two parts of work: build
up the standard curve, and measurements of unknown samples, all the mea-
surements were performed in ambient condition. The standard curve (Net ab-
sorbance = f(protein concentration)) was built using BSA and was rebuilt for
every set of measurements, therefore all the determined enzyme concentrations
were concentrations relative to BSA.
The standards were created by serial dilution of a 2 mg/ml BSA protein standard
in 1.5-2 ml micro test tubes. Five points for build up the standard curve were
0 mg/ml, 0.125 mg/ml, 0.25 mg/ml, 0.5 mg/ml and 1 mg/ml. It was checked
that SW components do not interfere the Bradford reagent. For simplicity, DW
was used as a buer for dilution.
3 ml Bradford reagent and o.1 ml of the
standard solutions were mixed in a vial using vortex, the total liquid volume in
each vial was 3.1 ml. The samples were incubated at room temperature for 5-45
minutes, then the samples were transferred to the cuvettes and absorbance at
595nm was measured. Since the protein-dye complex is stable up to 60 minutes,
the measurements should be accomplished within the 60 minutes time limit,
==PAGE:39==
3.2 Methods
29
also, the time interval between each measurement should be no more than 10
minutes. Then an absorbance-concentration curve could be built, an example
of the standard curve is given in Figure 3.6.
Figure 3.6: An example of the standard curve built up using BSA standard
The enzyme concentration was determined by comparing the net absorbance
values against the standard curve. If the protein/enzyme concentration exceeded
1 mg/ml, a serial dilution of 2, 4 or 8 times with DW was performed in order
to t the concentration within the range of 0.1  1 mg/ml.
3.2.4
Modelling of the results of penetration tests
Analysis of the production history of protein/enzyme was needed in order to
evaluate the characteristic parameters of their penetration through porous me-
dia. In this work the model developed by Shapiro and Bedrikovetsky(2008) was
employed to describe the important features of the experimental data.
From the experimental results (discussed in next section), it was observed that
there was a signicant dispersion of the displacing front of protein/enzyme.
This observation was reected by the special and temporal diusion coecients
(Dx, Dt) in the model. Not only traditional diusion-like dispersion, but also
the anomalous dispersion of the travel times was considered in the model.
Also, it was observed that the protein/enzyme production was delayed from
the displacing ux. This means the protein/enzyme molecules were not always
owing with the ux, there was a fraction of time that the molecules was ad-
sorbed on the solid surface, while the rest of time they travelled with the ux.
So, reversible adsorption occurred during the experiments. This behaviour was
characterised by the Henri constant Γ in the model.
==PAGE:40==
30
Penetration of the enzyme through porous medium
The ow through experiments showed that not all of the injected protein/enzyme
was recovered in the euent. Some of the injected protein/enzyme was irre-
versibly adsorbed in the porous medium. This means reversible and irreversible
adsorption occurred simultaneously during the ow through experiments.
The model used in this work has the form of (Shapiro and Bedrikovetsky, 2008):
φ(1 + Γ)∂c
∂t + V ∂c
∂x = Dx
∂2c
∂x2 + Dt
∂2c
∂t2 −ΛV c
(3.5)
In the equation, φ is porosity, Γ is sorption constant rescaled to porous medium,
V is velocity of the ux, Dx, Dt are the special and temporal dispersion coef-
cients respectively, Λ is the ltration coecient taken per unit length.
All
these coecients were considered to be constant and to be adjusted by tting
the modelling data to experimental results. For the purpose of comparison, the
equation was converted to non-dimensional form, with dimensionless distance X
in porous volumes and dimensionless time T in porous volumes injected (PVI):
∂c
∂T +
1
1 + Γ
∂c
∂X = dx
∂2c
∂X2 + dt
∂2c
∂T 2 −λc
(3.6)
X = x
L; T = V t
φL
dx =
Dx
V L(1 + Γ); dt =
DtV
φ2L(1 + Γ); λ =
ΛL
1 + Γ
In order to solve equation 3.6, initial and boundary conditions were needed. The
initial condition corresponded to the state of the core before protein/enzyme
injection:
t = 0 : c = 0
Boundary condition corresponded to the protein/enzyme concentration at the
inlet during injection of 1 porous volume:
X = 0 : c = c0, 0 < T < 1; c = 0, T > 1
Equation 3.6 together with initial and boundary conditions allows nding of
an exact solution (Khsainova, Ph.D Thesis). Briey, the solution for elliptic
problem (which considers temporal dispersion) has the form of:
c(X, T) = c0
π exp

X
2dx(1 + Γ) + T
2dt
 λ1X
√dxdt
Z min(T,1)
0
exp

−T1
2dt
  1
r1
K1(r1) −1
r3
K1(r3)

dt1
(3.7)
Where K1 is the rst derivative of Bessel K function, and
λ1 = λ + 1
4dt
+
1
4(1 + Γ)2dx
==PAGE:41==
3.3 Results
31
r1 =
p
(ξ −ξ1)2 + (τ −τ1)2; r3 =
p
(ξ −ξ1)2 + (τ + τ1)2
τ = T
r
λ1
dt
; ξ = X
r
λ1
dx
Similarly, if we omit the term for temporal dispersion in equation 3.6, the solu-
tion of pure dispersion problem can be arrived:
c(X, T) = c0e
X
2dx(1+Γ)
X
2√πdx
Z T
T −min(T,1)
exp(−(
1
4dx(1 + Γ)2 +λ)τ) 1
τ 3/2 exp(−X2
4dxτ )dτ
(3.8)
The coecients in these solutions had to be optimised to t the experimental
curve.
A minimization function was constructed to optimise the tting, the
function S represents the deviation of of the solution from experimental data
ci
exp at X = 1 at dierent times Ti.
S =
Nexp
X
i=1
(c(X = 1, Ti) −ci
exp)2 + A(Q −Qexp)2
(3.9)
Here Q, Qexp are the total amount of the recovered protein/enzyme calculated
by the model and measured from the experiments. The constant A was selected
to balance the (Q −Qexp)2 with (c(X = 1, Ti) −ci
exp)2.
3.3
Results
3.3.1
Penetration of enzyme through chalk
In experiment A, no sea water was involved. The selection of saturating and
displacing uids were based on experiment no.2 of static adhesion tests, which
demonstrated reversible adsorption of BSA on calcite (see Results section in
Chapter 2). In the ow through test, both saturating and displacing uids were
distilled water and BSA was partly recovered from chalk core.
The production history shows a unimodal distribution of BSA (Figure 3.7),
the maxima concentration (2.4 mg/ml) was observed at 0.74 PV of DW in-
jected. The ratio between concentration maxima and initial protein concentra-
tion (cmax/c0) is 0.25. The recovery of BSA from chalk was delayed comparing
to the displacing uid, the rst portion of BSA was detected after 0.3 PVI of
displacing uid. 14.84% of the total injected BSA was recovered, and the ma-
jor amount (96.56%) of the recovery was accomplished within the rst PVI of
displacing uid. BSA production was nished after 1.74 PV of DW injection.
==PAGE:42==
32
Penetration of the enzyme through porous medium
It can be seen that the recovery of BSA from chalk was rapid and not delayed
too much, this means the fraction of time that BSA was reversibly adsorbed on
surface was small. However the total recovery was rather low, suggesting the
irreversible adsorption played a major role.
Figure 3.7: Production history (left) and recovery plot (right) of BSA through
chalk core
As shown in Figure 3.8, both parabolic and elliptic models failed to give a tting
to the experimental data. The peak of BSA production was disregarded by the
programme, the reason for such a result is unclear. Therefore there is no point
to evaluate the results for adjusted parameters (dx, dt, 1/(1 + Γ), λ).
Figure 3.8: Results of tting of the experimental data on BSA production by
the suggested model
==PAGE:43==
3.3 Results
33
3.3.2
Penetration of NS81249 through sandstone
In order to alter the wettability of the reservoir rock, enzyme has to continuously
adsorb and desorb from the pore wall continuously. Based on the results for the
experiment no.18 of static adhesion tests (described in previous chapter), SW
was used as saturating uid for the core.
SW was also used to prepare the
enzyme solution, so enzyme molecules adsorb on solid surface. In addition, SW
appears to be a reasonable choice for eld applications. DW was used to displace
the injected enzyme, it was expected to improve the desorption of the enzyme.
Figure 3.9: Production history (left) and recovery plot (right) of the enzyme
(NS81249) through sandstone core
Production of NS81249 from sandstone (Figure 3.9) also showed a unimodal
distribution with the maxima concentration of 1.56 mg/ml observed at 1.5 PV
of DW injected. The ratio between concentration maxima and initial protein
concentration (cmax/c0) is 0.415. Production of NS81249 was 0.5 PV delayed
from displacing uid, this value is 1.7 times higher than Experiment A. The large
delay of production resulted in only 1.23% of the enzyme produced in the rst
PVI of displacing uid, the major portion (85.7%) of the recovered enzyme was
collected within 5 PV of DW injection, in total 59.1% of the injected enzyme was
recovered, this is much higher than Experiment A. In contrast with Experiment
A, the production of NS81249 from sandstone lasted for a long time, a long tail
was observed in the production history.
Injection stopped after 9.7 PV of DW injection, then the core was incubated in
the core holder for 6 days before DW was injected again. Injection of DW after
incubation did not help to produce more enzyme. This was conrmed by the
second period of incubation of another 6 days. The observed enzyme production
==PAGE:44==
34
Penetration of the enzyme through porous medium
after incubation was probably due to the adsorbed enzyme in the outlet tube of
the set up.
The models worked well for the data obtained from the Experiment B (Figure
3.10). The dierence between elliptic and parabolic model was quite small. Con-
sidering the experimental imprecision, the precision of the tting was adequate,
although the tail of the experimental data was not captured by the model.
Figure 3.10: Results of tting of the experimental data on NS81249 produc-
tion by the suggested model
The adjusted dimensionless parameters are given in Table 3.3, while recalculated
dimensional values are given in Table 3.4.
Table 3.3: The adjusted dimensionless tted parameters for elliptic and
parabolic tting.
dx
dt
1/(1 + Γ)
λ
Elliptic
0.152
0.0039
0.4507
0.35
Parabolic
0.161
N/A
0.4474
0.3499
Table 3.4: Recalculated
dimensional
tted
parameters
for
elliptic
and
parabolic tting.
Γ
Λ,
m−1
Dx,
10−9m2/s
Dt,
s
Elliptic
0.2188
10.2816
416.04
1.2679
Parabolic
0.2351
10.3545
443.93
N/A
==PAGE:45==
3.4 Discussion
35
Elliptic and parabolic models gave quite similar results for the adjusted param-
eters. The contribution of temporal dispersion was rather small, Dt was in the
order of seconds while the experiment lasted for hours. From this point of view,
the temporal dispersion could be neglected. The values of Γ are not high, but
still considerable, this means the delay of enzyme production due to reversible
adsorption could not be neglected. The values of Λ are acceptable for the lab-
oratory scale, but they are rather substantial for the reservoir scale. The value
of eΛa shows which fraction of the enzyme was lost when it travelled a distance
of a. For laboratory cores, a ≈0.08m, eΛa ≈2.3. However, for a distance of
1m, the value of eΛa becomes 29190 and 31397 for elliptic and parabolic model,
respectively. These values are substantial, they are suggesting that all the in-
jected enzyme will be retained in the rst meters around the injection well, at
least for the types of the reservoir rocks similar to those used in this work.
A summary of the experimental results for both tests is given in Table 3.5
Table 3.5: Summary of the results of dynamic ow through experiments
Protein/
enzyme
Injected
amount,
mg
Core internal
surface area,
m2
Total
recovery,
%
Recovery in rst
displacing PV,
%
cmax/c0
Irreversible
adsorption,
mg/g-rock
Irreversible
adsorption
mg/m2
A
BSA
344.08
212.22
14.84
14.33
0.25
2.68
1.341
B
NS81249
54.9
234.55
54.9
1.24
0.415
0.126
0.095
3.4
Discussion
In ow through tests, two experiments were conducted to study the adsorption
and retention of protein/enzyme in porous media. In Experiment A, BSA was
injected in a chalk core, a small portion of BSA was recovered in the euent.
It should be noted that in previous research by Khsainova (Ph.D Thesis, 2016),
there was no recovery of BSA from chalk cores by using sea water. However in
this work, where distilled water was used instead of sea water, BSA partly pene-
trated the core. Considering the fact that selection of saturating and displacing
uids was based on static adhesion tests, it can be concluded that static adhe-
sion test can be used for uid selection for dynamic ow through tests. However,
since the majority of injected BSA was retained in the core, it should also be
noted that static adhesion test was not able to predict fully the adsorption and
retention of protein/enzyme in porous medium.
As for the Experiment B, where enzyme NS81249 was injected into a sand-
stone core, the total recovery was much higher than in the Experiment A, but
it was still quite low. Besides,the delay of production was rather signicant,
==PAGE:46==
36
Penetration of the enzyme through porous medium
this resulted in a surprisingly low production in the rst displacing PV. Indeed,
modelling results demonstrated similar results, the delay caused by sorption
equilibrium was signicant. High retention of the enzyme in porous medium
makes it risky for the eld application. The long tail observed in production
history suggests that enzyme was desorbing continuously by injecting DW, how-
ever the desorption was at a very low rate.
Judging from the results of both experiments, DW could be a better agent than
SW to desorb the enzyme from solid surface, but large amount of DW needs to
be injected, which is not feasible for eld application.
Compare experiments A with B, it can be seen that the delay of BSA in chalk
was much lower than delay of enzyme in sandstone. However, the irreversible
adsorption and retention of protein in chalk core was signicantly higher than
in sandstone.
3.5
Conclusions
Static adhesion test can be used for uid selection for enzymatic EOR, the
results of adhesion tests and ow trough experiments are correlated. Dynamic
ow through experiments should be performed to provide a quantitative picture
of adsorption and retention of protein/enzyme in porous medium.
DW was proved to be more ecient than SW to displace the injected pro-
tein/enzyme, however the desorption rate was low and a large amount of DW
needed to be injected. Retention of enzyme in porous medium remains a major
obstacle for their application in EOR. Taking into account the low concentration
of injected enzyme, there is a high potential that all the injected enzyme will
be retained in the rst meters around the well bore.
The models gave a reasonable t for the experimental data, the temporal dif-
fusion turned out to be insignicant for the dispersion of protein molecules,
traditional diusion-like dispersion was enough to model the process.
Siliceous reservoirs could be more friendly for application of enzymatic EOR,
but still, to a limited extent. An alternative solution should be found to suppress
the irreversible adsorption of enzyme in porous medium, and make it possible
to apply EEOR on eld scale.
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 4
Investigation of enzyme
ooding for enhanced oil
recovery
The present chapter focuses on core ooding experiment to investigate eect
of the enzyme on oil recovery.
It was proved by static adhesion tests that
enzyme treated minerals can be non oil adhesive due to adsorption of the protein
molecules. The purpose of ooding experiment was to test if injection of enzyme
could detach trapped oil in porous medium and therefore enhance recovery of
oil. In addition, recovery of the injected enzyme was determined to analyse the
behaviour of enzyme in oil-water-rock system.
The results of static adhesion tests and dynamic ow through experiments were
extended to ooding experiment: the uids and injection scheme for ooding
experiment were chosen based on results from adhesion and penetration tests.
Low salinity water ooding, which is also believed to be an eective method
for EOR, was also tested in this work. The results for both low salinity water
ooding and enzyme injection were compared. The experimental set up used
for penetration test was employed for the ooding experiment. The experiment
was performed with the same type of sandstone (Obernkirchener sandstone,
Germany) as in penetration test.
==PAGE:48==
38
Investigation of enzyme ooding for enhanced oil recovery
This chapter is organised as follows: Section 1 introduces the materials used
in the ooding experiment; Section 2 explains the experimental method; the
results of the ooding experiment are included in Section 3; Section 4 and 5
present a discussion and conclusions.
4.1
Materials
4.1.1
Fluids
Synthetic North Sea water (SW) was prepared for ooding experiment, the
chemical composition of synthetic sea water was the same for adhesion and
penetration tests.
Solution of (NH4)2SO4 was prepared by diluting solid (NH4)2SO4 in distilled
water.
The salt concentration was 0.67 mol/L, which means 88.534 g solid
(NH4)2SO4 was needed to prepare 1 litre of the solution. The chemical was
purchased from Sigma-Aldrich with > 99% purity and was not subjected to
further purication.
The injected enzyme solution in this work was prepared by diluting puried
enzyme NS81249 in synthetic North Sea water to make a 5%wt enzyme solution.
The solution was prepared 30 minutes before injection in order to keep the
activity of the enzyme.
The oil used in ooding experiment was light dead oil recovered from a chalk
reservoir from the Danish sector of North Sea.
4.1.2
The core
An outcrop sandstone core from Obernkirchener sandstone (Germany) was used.
The detailed information of the core is given in Table 4.1.
Table 4.1: Characteristics of the core sample used for core ooding experiment
Sample
name
Type
Origin
Diameter,
mm
Length,
mm
Weight of
dry core, g
Permeability,
mD
Pore volume,
ml
S-2
Outcrop
sandstone
Obenkirchener,
Germany
37.30
76.30
108.140
1.05
14.55
==PAGE:49==
4.2 Methods
39
4.2
Methods
4.2.1
Preparation of the core
The core used in this experiment is a homogeneous sandstone core (X-ray
scanned pictures are given in Figure 4.1). The core was cleaned and saturated
according to the procedure described in previous chapter. The core was rst
saturated with sea water. Then the core was placed in core holder and heated
to 60 degrees by the heating jacket.
Figure 4.1: X-ray scan images of S-2
4.2.2
The injection scheme
After the saturation with SW, the core was subjected to injection of dierent
uids. The experimental set up was the same as for penetration tests. The
injection rate for the uids was 0.1 ml/min and was kept constant by a high
precision ISCO syringe pump. A radial conning pressure of 50 bar was applied
by another ISCO pump. Summary of the applied injection scheme is given in
Table 4.2.
Table 4.2: Summary of the injection shceme
Saturating
Fluid
Secondary
recovery
Tertiary recovery
SW
injection
DW
injection
Enzyme injection
Displacing
Solvent
NS81249
concentration
PVI
Fluid
PVI
Fluid
PVI
%wt
mg/ml, relative
to BSA
SW
12.3 PV
8.5 PV
SW
5
4.08
1
DW
10
(NH4)2SO4
10
==PAGE:50==
40
Investigation of enzyme ooding for enhanced oil recovery
4.2.2.1
Saturation by oil
First of all, in order to reach the initial conditions of a petroleum reservoir,
crude oil was injected to saturate the core until irreducible water saturation was
reached. At least 20 PV (pore volume) of crude oil was injected to make sure
there was no water production. The euent was collected in vials with a fraction
size of 1/2 PV, the vials were sealed as soon as possible to prevent evaporation
of the euent. The collected vials were kept vertical and steady in a tube rack
at room temperature for a week (at least) in order to fully separate water and oil
by gravity. The produced amount of water was quantied afterwards (described
in next section), then the oil saturation was determined, simultaneously, the
irreducible water saturation was also established.
4.2.2.2
Secondary recovery by SW injection
After irreducible water saturation was reached, secondary recovery was initiated
by sea water injection. The euent was collected in glass tubes with a fraction
size of 1/4 to 1/5 PV, SW was kept injected through the core until no more oil
was observed in the euent. It should be noted that 'no more oil production'
does not mean absolute absence of oil production, but the amount of produced
oil was so small that it was dicult to measure it. At this point, we considered
the production of oil to be stopped. The collected euent was placed in a tube
rack vertically at ambient condition and sealed by paralm.
4.2.2.3
Tertiary recovery
In this work, tertiary recovery started by low salinity water ooding. Distilled
water was injected until no more oil was produced. Totally 8.5 PV of DW was
injected. The euent was collected with a fraction size of 1/2 - 1/3 PV.
Enzyme was injected after low salinity water ooding. 1 PV of 5% NS81249
enzyme was injected, DW was then injected to displace enzyme. In order to
obtain more data points during enzyme ooding, the fraction size was adjusted
to 1/5 - 1/6 PV. 10 PV of DW was injected in total. The collected euent was
transferred into a fridge as soon as possible to prevent denaturation of diluted
enzyme.
In order to test the ability of (NH4)2SO4 to desorb enzyme, 10 PV of (NH4)2SO4
solution with concentration of 0.67 mol/L was injected, the euent was collected
==PAGE:51==
4.2 Methods
41
with a fraction size of 1/3 - 1/4 PV. The collected euent was also transferred
into fridge for storage.
4.2.3
Euent analysis
4.2.3.1
Determination of irreducible water saturation
Irreducible water saturation was determined by quantifying the amount of pro-
duced water during oil injection. For the collected water that had volume larger
than 1 ml, the volume was read from the tick mark on the vial. For smaller
amounts of water, the volume was determined by comparison: an estimated
amount of water was added into an empty vial by a pipette with an accuracy
of 0.01 ml, the maximum volume of the pipette is 1 ml, so the added volume
of water can be recorded. Next, the two vials were put together to compare
the volumes of water by naked eye. If the volumes of water were dierent, the
added water was removed and described procedure was repeated until the dif-
ference of water volumes was undetectable by naked eye. Once the volume of
produced water was determined, oil saturation and irreducible water saturation
were determined.
4.2.3.2
Quantication of oil
The produced oil was carefully quantied in order to obtain a detailed infor-
mation on oil production. For large amounts of oil (more than 0.3 ml), the
volume was read directly from the tick marks on the tube. For smaller amounts
of oil, the measurement of volume was based on the linear relationship between
the amount of oil and the absorbance of toluene-oil solution at 750 nm UV
wavelength.
Firstly, a standard curve (absorbance at 750 nm = f(oil content)) was built by
dilution of known amounts of oil in 3 ml of toluene, then the absorbance of the
solutions at 750 nm UV wavelength was measured. Unlike Bradford Assay, the
standard curve for oil content measurements was built only once and used for
all the measurements later on. The linear relationship between oil content and
absorbance was found to be absorbance = oilcontent × 4.13 (Khsainova, Ph.D
thesis).
For the measurement of an unknown amount of oil, 3 ml toluene was carefully
added into the tube using a pipette to dissolve the produced oil. The toluene-
oil solution was on top of water due to density dierence between water and
==PAGE:52==
42
Investigation of enzyme ooding for enhanced oil recovery
toluene-oil solution. Solution of oil in toluene was then carefully transferred
by pipette to a cuvette made of fused quartz. Then aborbence of the solution
at 750 nm was measured. The value was then compared against the standard
curve, so the volume of a small amount of oil can be determined.
4.2.3.3
Quantication of the enzyme
The enzyme concentration in ooding experiment was also measured by Brad-
ford Assay, detailed procedure was described in previous chapter.
The additional step in the enzyme concentration measurement during the ood-
ing experiment was extraction of aqueous phase. Since the produced oil was on
top of water phase in collected euent, the produced water cannot be taken
directly from the tube.
The water samples for enzyme concentration measurements were was extracted
using 1 ml pipette. The pipette tip was carefully extended into water phase to
extract 1 ml of the water euent. Then the sample was transferred to a 1.5-2
ml micro test tube, the tube was then sealed and stored in fridge. During this
procedure, some oil was attached to the outer side of the pipette tip, in order
to prevent loss of the oil, the tip was left in the glass tube and rinsed by toluene
during the process of oil quantication.
4.3
Results
4.3.1
Oil recovery
The major portion of the oil was recovered from secondary recovery. 48.54% of
the original oil in place (OOIP) was recovered by injection of SW, 47.6% of OOIP
was produced before water breakthrough (WBT). After water breakthrough,
SW injection only produced 0.96% of OOIP .
Injection of distilled water after secondary recovery produced additional 0.92%
OOIP. However, it can be observed from production plot that the incrementation
of oil production by DW injection was a gradual process, no abrupt incremen-
tation occurred. The low recovery illustrates the inability of low salinity water
ooding to work as a tertiary recovery method, at least under the experimental
conditions of the work.
==PAGE:53==
4.3 Results
43
Enzyme ooding produced 0.78% of OOIP, a minor but abrupt incrementation
of oil production can be observed after injection of 1 PV displacing uid (DW).
Injection of (NH4)2SO4 resulted in 0.41% OOIP production. This is the least
incrementation among three injected uids. Considering the large amount of
injected (NH4)2SO4 solution (10 PV), this amount of production could be over-
looked.
The production plot is given in Figure 4.2.
Figure 4.2: Production plot of oil recovery
4.3.2
Enzyme recovery
Production of the enzyme during the DW displacement showed a unimodal con-
centration distribution, the maximum concentration was 0.95 mg/ml, detected
after 1 PV of DW injection. The ratio of c0/cmax was 0.23. The rst portion
of NS81249 was detected right after injection of displacing uid without delay.
Totally 27.04% of the injected enzyme was recovered, the major portion was
produced within 3 PV of DW injection, 14.4% of the injected enzyme was pro-
duced within 1 PV of DW injection, the production stopped after 5 PV of DW
injection.
Injection of (NH4)2SO4 helped to produce more enzyme.
The rst portion
==PAGE:54==
44
Investigation of enzyme ooding for enhanced oil recovery
of additional enzyme production was detected after 3 PV of (NH4)2SO4 was
injected. In total 7.9% of additional NS81249 was produced by (NH4)2SO4 in-
jection. However the concentration of the additional production (0.1-0.3 mg/ml)
was rather low, and the production did not last for a long time (2.3 PV).
The production history of the enzyme is given in Figure 4.3.
Figure 4.3: Production history of enzyme NS81249
A summary of the results of ooding experiment is given by Table 4.3 .
Table 4.3: Summary of the results obtained from core ooding experiment
Original
saturations
Secondary
recovery
Tertiary recovery
Swi
Soi
Recovery by
SW ooding
Low salinity
water ooding
Enzyme ooding
displaced by DW
(NH4)2SO4
injection
Oil recovery
%OOIP
0.42
0.58
48.54%
0.92%
0.78%
0.41%
Enzyme recovery
% Injected
-
-
-
-
27.04%
7.9%
==PAGE:55==
4.4 Discussion
45
4.4
Discussion
In this work, two tertiary recovery methods were studied: low salinity water
ooding and enzyme ooding. Both methods were proved to be not that ecient
to displace residual oil, at least for the conditions of this work.
The physical and chemical mechanisms behind low salinity water ooding has
been debated in the literature for the last decade, contradicting experimental
results were presented by dierent researchers (Austad et al, 2010; AlQuraishi
et al, 2015; Nasralla et al, 2011). However it was observed by many researchers
that low salinity water shifted the wettability of rock to be more water wet.
In this work, DW injection produced only 0.96% OOIP, and no abrupt incre-
mentation of oil production was observed. This means there was no signicant
wettability improvement by DW injection, the incrementation in oil production
was probably due to the traditional fraction ow theory.
Oil production by enzyme ooding (0.78% OOIP) and low salinity water ooding
(0.96% OOIP) were comparable. However, unlike low salinity water ooding,
injection and displacement of the enzyme showed an abrupt yet insignicant
incrementation of oil production. If we compare the recovery of the oil and the
enzyme (Figure 4.4), it can be observed that the incrementation of oil produc-
tion occurred (almost) simultaneously with the maximum concentration of the
enzyme.
Figure 4.4: Comparison of oil production and enzyme production
==PAGE:56==
46
Investigation of enzyme ooding for enhanced oil recovery
These observations suggest that the presence of the enzyme was eective to
help mobilising a small fraction of trapped oil. From this point of view, enzyme
ooding was more ecient than low salinity water ooding. However, on the
other hand, the low recovery of the enzyme ooding demonstrates the limited
eectiveness of the enzyme as a tertiary recovery agent. Although it was proved
in static adhesion tests that enzyme could signicantly alter the wettability of
the mineral surfaces, injection of the enzyme into porous medium did not help
to produce too much residual oil.
The production history of the enzyme in ooding experiment showed a much
less delay than in penetration test, and the long tail in production history was
no longer observed. On the other hand, in the core ooding experiment, the
total recovery of the enzyme was much lower, only 27.04% was recovered by DW
displacement. This was much lower than the recovery (49.1%) in penetration
test. The reduction of production was probably due to adsorption of the en-
zyme on oil-water interface. It was demonstrated by Khusainova (Ph.D Thesis)
that the enzyme adsorption occurs both on solid-water and oil-water interfaces,
and the extent of adsorption was quite similar. This explains why the enzyme
recovery in ooding experiment was almost half (55.1%) of that in penetration
test, it can be concluded that a signicant amount of the enzyme was adsorbed
on oil-water interface.
The adsorption of the enzyme on oil-water interface also leads to additional
problem: can the injected enzyme eectively work on solid surface, and what
portion of the enzyme is functional? A signicant amount of the enzyme was
hindered from the pore wall by oil lm. In static adhesion tests, the oil stickiness
of mineral surfaces was tested after their interaction with enzyme. However, in
the ooding experiment, the enzyme was injected after the core was saturated
by oil. At this point, some parts of the pore walls had been already covered by
residual oil (Figure 4.5).
Figure 4.5: Illustration of the residual oil in pore space
==PAGE:57==
4.5 Conclusions
47
As it was proved before, enzyme could alter the wettability of rock by adsorbing
on its surface.
However in the scenario of ooding experiment, the injected
enzyme may not have a chance to interact with the pore wall which was already
covered by the residual oil, thus the adhesion state of residual oil in pore space
could not be changed. This explains why the enzyme did not help to mobilise
the trapped oil even though it has proved to eectively alter the wettability of
rock.
Injection of (NH4)2SO4 helped to desorb a great portion (7.9%) of the adsorbed
enzyme. A possible mechanism for this observation is NH+
4 and SO2−
4
precip-
itated on the enzyme and rock surface, weakened or shielded the interaction
between enzyme and rock surface, therefore a fraction of the adsorbed enzyme
could desorb (Evers et al, 2008). However, no more oil was produced along with
this portion of enzyme. It was probably because this portion of the enzyme
could no longer adsorb on solid substrate, due to the precipitation of ions on
the molecules, or, this portion of the enzyme could not eectively work on the
pore wall which was covered by trapped oil, as described before.
4.5
Conclusions
In the ooding experiment, low salinity water ooding and enzyme ooding
were tested as tertiary recovery methods. It was shown that low salinity water
ooding was not an eective method to recover residual oil, at least at the
conditions of this work.
Application of the enzyme also failed to recover more oil as a tertiary recovery
method, the result was no better than low salinity water ooding. Adsorption
of the enzyme on oil-water interface should not be neglected as it can be a great
obstacle for enzyme to work as an EOR agent. This type of adsorption could
signicantly retain enzyme in the reservoir, and reduce its interaction with rock
surface.
(NH4)2SO4 was found to be a promising agent to desorb the enzyme, its appli-
cation as a co-solvent for the enzymatic EOR should be further studied.
Two important problems stand on the way of EEOR, one is retention and irre-
versible adsorption of enzyme in solid-water and oil-water interfaces. Another
vital problem is, to make enzyme work on the pore walls which are occupied by
oil. For sure enzyme could make the rock surface more water wet by adsorption,
however the problem for EEOR is to make enzyme invade to the rock surface
which is covered by oil. More work is required in these directions in order to
==PAGE:58==
48
Investigation of enzyme ooding for enhanced oil recovery
make the EEOR ready for practical applications.
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 5
Reversed adhesion test:
ability of the enzyme to
detach oil from quartz
surface
It was demonstrated in adhesion tests that enzyme treated quartz turned to be
non oil adhesive due to adsorption of the enzyme. However, as it was proposed
in the ooding experiment, it should be doubted if the enzyme has the ability to
alter the wettability of pore walls which are occupied by oil, and further detach
trapped oil in the rock-oil-water system.
The order of the enzyme and oil to interact with solid substrate was dierent
in adhesion test and tertiary recovery. In adhesion test, enzyme interacted with
mineral surface rst, then the oil stickiness of the mineral surface was tested by
trying to adhere oil drops on the surface. However, dierently from adhesion
test, in tertiary recovery, the enzyme was injected into the pore space when the
pore walls were already covered by oil. In order to test the ability of enzyme to
detach oil in conditions similar to the tertiary recovery, reversed adhesion tests
were performed in this study.
This chapter is organised as follows: materials and method are introduced in
==PAGE:60==
50
Reversed adhesion test: ability of the enzyme to detach oil from quartz
surface
Sections 1 and 2, respectively; results and a short discussion are given in Sections
3.
5.1
Materials
5.1.1
Fluids
Three solutions were used in reversed adhesion tests: distilled water (DW),
synthetic North Sea water (SW) and (NH4)2SO4 solution.
Composition of
synthetic North Sea water is consistent with SW used in adhesion experiment.
(NH4)2SO4 solution had a concentration of 0.67 mol/L.
The crude oil used in reversed adhesion test was also the same as used in pre-
viously experiments: a light dead oil recovered from a chalk reservoir in the
Danish sector of North Sea.
Puried enzyme NS81249 was used, which contains 5-25%wt enzyme and no
stabilizer.
5.1.2
Mineral
Only quartz mineral was used in this work, to represent sandstone rock. The
quartz crystal was polished prior to use.
5.2
Method
The experimental set up was the same as for adhesion test. Briey, two glass
stands were used to hold the mineral inside a glass container which was lled
with the solution to be tested. An inverted needle was extended underneath the
mineral to deposit oil drops on mineral surface.
First, the mineral was placed on the glass stands inside the glass container.
The container was lled by one of three uids: distilled water, sea water, or
(NH4)2SO4 solution. Then 30-40 oil drops with a volume of 1.5-2µL was gently
deposited underneath the quartz crystal. The method of depositing an oil drop
was described in the chapter for adhesion tests. In short, an oil drop was created
==PAGE:61==
5.2 Method
51
on top of the needle, then the needle was moved up to slightly press the oil drop
on quartz surface for 2 minutes. Afterwards the needle was slowly moved down,
at this moment, due to the strong oil anity of quartz, the connection between
oil drop and needle will broke and the oil drop will adhered on quartz surface.
Afterwards, the needle was removed from the container, the mineral was care-
fully ipped over without leaving aqueous phase to prevent damage of deposited
oil drops. So the oil drops were on the top surface of the mineral. Three forces
were acting on the oil drop: adhesion force between oil and quartz surface, grav-
ity, and buoyancy. The magnitude of buoyancy was larger than gravity due to
density dierence between oil and the aqueous phase. However, it was observed
that oil drops stayed adhered on quartz surface steadily. This means the third
force, which is the adhesion force between oil and quartz, helped the oil drop to
overcome buoyancy and stick to quartz. So, the adhesion force is the key factor
to determine the adhesion state of the oil drops. Further alteration of adhesion
state was attributed to change of adhesion forces.
Next, puried enzyme NS81249 was gently added into the container by a pipette.
The amount of added enzyme was precisely controlled in order to make enzyme
concentration to be 1%wt inside the container. The added enzyme was care-
fully mixed with the uid inside the container by pipette to make a uniform
solution. Timing was launched immediately when the enzyme was added. After
each experiment, the mineral was carefully cleaned by distilled water, toluene
and ethanol to completely remove organic compounds from the surface.
An
illustration of the method is given in Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: An illustration of method for reversed adhesion test. a) glass con-
tainer, b) inverted needle to create and deposit oil drops, c) DW
or SW or (NH4)2SO4 solution, d) quartz crystal, e) deposited oil
drops, f) glass stands.
==PAGE:62==
52
Reversed adhesion test: ability of the enzyme to detach oil from quartz
surface
Two possible outcomes were expected after the enzyme were added into the
container: 1) the oil drops keep adhered on quartz, which means the bond
between oil and quartz was not broken, added enzyme did not reduce adhesion
forces; 2) the oil drops leave quartz surface and oat up, this means enzyme
decreased the adhesion forces between oil and quartz and further detached oil.
5.3
Results and discussion
Three liquids were tested in reversed adhesion test: distilled water, sea water
and (NH4)2SO4 solution. No detachment of oil drops was observed by adding
enzyme into distilled water and sea water. However in (NH4)2SO4 solution, oil
drops were gradually released from quartz surface after adding enzyme into the
solution. The results are summarized in Table 5.1.
Table 5.1: Summary of the results for reversed adhesion test
Experiment
Tested uid
Number of detached oil drops
detached/total
A
Distilled water
0/35
20 hours
B
Sea water
0/37
20 hours
C
(NH4)2SO4
9/40
13/40
19/40
23/40
31/40
33/40
39/40
1.5 hour
2 hours
3 hours
4 hours
5 hours
6.5 hours
22 hours
It can be seen from Experiment A, simple dilution of the enzyme in distilled
water did not help to detach oil. This means enzyme alone does not have ability
to reduce adhesion forces between oil and quartz.
In sea water, which has a higher ionic strength than DW, the same result was
obtained. The oil drops did not leave quartz surface even after 20 hours soaking
in enzyme-SW solution. This means ionic strength is not the factor that might
help the enzyme to break oil-quartz bond. On the other hand, it may also be
concluded that the chemicals present in sea water did not show any potential
as co-solvents to detach oil from quartz surface, at least at concentrations such
as in SW.
In Experiment C, where (NH4)2SO4 was tested, oil drops gradually detached
from quartz surface. It can be seen from Figure 5.2 that the majority of detached
oil were observed within 5 hours after addition of the enzyme.
The rate of
detachment was high in the rst 5 hours, averagely 6 drops of oil were detached
per hour. After 5 hours, the detachment rate signicantly decreased, only 6 oil
==PAGE:63==
5.4 Conclusions
53
drops detached in the next 17 hours, and there was one oil drop still adhered
on quartz until the end of the experiment.
Figure 5.2: Result of Experiment C
The mechanism of (NH4)2SO4 to assist enzyme to detach oil is not fully un-
derstood. But two hypothesises can be made:
• The pH of 0.67 mol/L (NH4)2SO4 is 5.78, which is more close to the
isoelectric point of NS81249 (4.8-5) than sea water (7.78). This means
enzyme molecules had a lower negative charge in (NH4)2SO4 solution
than in sea water. Probably the lower overall charge of enzyme molecules
made them able to get access to oil-quartz bond and displace oil from
quartz surface.
• On the other hand, precipitation of NH+
4 and SO2−
4
on enzyme molecules
may have some impact on the structure of the molecules, some functional
groups that were folded inside the molecule may be exposed and work
on oil-quartz bonding. Also, precipitation of NH+
4 and SO2−
4
on quartz
may have altered surface properties of the mineral, making the surface
preferential for the enzyme than oil, thus the adhered oil could be replaced
by the enzyme.
5.4
Conclusions
Regardless of its strong ability to change surface wettability, enzyme NS81249
itself could not detach adhered oil from quartz surface, at least in the static
environment of reversed adhesion test.
==PAGE:64==
54
Reversed adhesion test: ability of the enzyme to detach oil from quartz
surface
Sea water environment failed to make enzyme able to detach oil. A promising
agent to work as co-solvent for enzyme in EEOR is (NH4)2SO4. In (NH4)2SO4
solution, oil drops were detached by adding enzyme although the time needed
for the detachment was in the order of hours.However, more work is needed to
understand the mechanism of (NH4)2SO4 to work as a co-solvent.
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 6
Main conclusions and
recommendations for future
work
6.1
Main conclusions
Investigation of an enzyme as an EOR agent was carried out in three steps.
Firstly, adhesion tests were conducted to select eective chemicals that could
help to desorb the adsorbed enzyme from solid surfaces. Secondly, penetration
tests were performed to examine irreversible adsorption and retention of the
enzyme in porous media. Finally, the ability of the enzyme to produce resid-
ual oil was studied by ooding experiment. Some important conclusions are
summarized below:
• Adhesion test is an ecient method to qualitatively study the adsorption
and desorption of enzyme on solid substrate, the results can be correlated
to dynamic ow through tests.
• Distilled water is better than sea water in terms of reducing irreversible
adsorption of enzyme on solid substrate.
==PAGE:66==
56
Main conclusions and recommendations for future work
• Irreversible adsorption of enzyme in chalk is much higher than sandstone,
from this point of view, siliceous reservoirs hold higher potential for enzy-
matic EOR.
• Adsorption of enzyme on water-oil interface is another important cause of
retention of enzyme, it can be conrmed that the amounts of adsorbed
enzyme are similar on oil-water and liquid-solid interfaces.
• Although enzyme could signicantly alter the wettability of rock, enzyme
alone could not detach oil form quartz surface, at least for conditions
similar to this project. Co-solvent is needed to work together with enzyme
to release the trapped oil.
• (NH4)2SO4 showed great potential to release desorb enzyme, also, it is a
promising co-solvent to assist enzyme to detach oil from quartz surface.
• Bot enzyme ooding and low salinity water ooding did not show to be
eective methods for enhanced oil recovery, in conditions of this work.
• Irreversible adsorption of enzyme is a great obstacle for successful appli-
cation of enzymes in EOR process. Modelling results showed a high risk
to lose all the injected enzyme in few meters around wellbore.
6.2
Recommendations for future work
If enzymes are to be studied further for EOR purpose, the rst problem to be
solved is to reduction of irreversible adsorption. The use of (NH4)2SO4 is quite
promising technique and should be studied.
Cores of dierent natures should be tested, as the behaviour of enzyme is largely
dependent on the type of solid substrate.
Enzymes that might use oil as a substrate might be of special interest.
Dierent kinds of co-solvents should be studied to improve the performance of
enzyme.
==PAGE:67==
References
A.A.Shapiro, P.G.Bedrikovetsky, Elliptic random-walk equation for suspension
and tracer transport in porous media. Physica A 2008.
Abhijit Y. Dandekar. Petroleum Reservoir Rock and Fluid Properties, Second
edition, 2013.
A.Khusainova, S.M.Nielsen, H.H.Pedersen, J.M.Woodley, A.Shapiro, Study of
wettability of calcite surfaces using oilbrineenzyme systems for enhanced oil
recovery applications, Journal of Petroleum Science and Engineering, 127 53-64,
2015.
A.Khusainova, Doctoral thesis: Enhanced oil recovery with application of en-
zymes, 2016.
A.A.Aiquraisi, S.N.Aihussinan, H.Q,Aiyami, Ecientcy and mechanism of low
salinity water ooding in sandstone and carbonate reservoirs, the 12th Oshore
Mediterranean Conference, March 2015.
D.L.Kirchman, D.L.Henry, S.C.Dexter, Adsorption of Proteins to Surfaces in
Seawater, Marine Chemistry, 27, 201-217, 1989.
Feng Q., Ma X., Zhou L., Shao D., Wang X., Qin B., EOR pilot tests with
modied enzyme in China, SPE 107128, 2007.
F.Evers, R.Steitz, M.Tolan, C.Czeslik, Reduced Protein Adsorption by Os-
molytes, Langmuir, 2011.
==PAGE:68==
ii
References
F.Evers, R.Steitz, M.Tolan, C.Czeslik, Analysis of Hofmeister Eects on the
Density Prole of Protein Adsorbates: A Neutron Reectivity Study, The Jour-
nal of Physical Chemistry, 8462-8465, 113, 2009.
H.Nasiri, K.Spildo, A.Skauge, Use of enzymes to improve water ood perfor-
mance, International Symposium of the Society of Core Analysts, 2009.
He L., Zhonghong Z., Biology enzyme EOR for low permeability reservoirs, SPE
144281, 2011.
J.S.Buckley, K.Takamura, N.R.Morrow, Inuence of Electrical Surface Charges
on the Wetting Properties of Crude Oils, SPE Reservoir Engineering, August
1989.
J.S.Buckley, N.R.Morrow, Characterization of Crude Oil Wetting Behavior by
Adhesion Tests, SPE/DOE Seventh Symposium on Enhanced Oil Recovery,
April 1990.
J.Koo, T.Gutberlet, C.Czeslik, Control of Protein Interfacial Anity by Non-
ionic Cosolvents, The Journal of Physical Chemistry, 6292-6295, 112, 2008.
Li H., Burn A.P.L., Agyei D., Shen W., Middelberg A.P.J., He L., Stabilizing
and destabilizing of protein surfactant-based foams in the presence of a chem-
ical surfactant: Eect of adsorption kinetics. Journal of Colloid and Interface
Science, 2015.
M.F. Delcroix, S. Laurent, G.L. Huet, C.C. Dupont Gillian, Protein adsorp-
tion can be reversibly switched on and o on mixed PEO/PAA brushes, Acta
Biomaterialia, 2014.
M.J.Shojaei, M.H.Gazanfari, M.Masihi, Relative permeability and capillary curves
for low salinity water ooding in sandstone rocks, Journal of Natural Gas Sci-
ences and Engineering, 25 30-38, 2015.
Norde W. Advances in colloid and interface sciences. 25(1986) 267-340. Elsevier
Science Publishers, B.V.
Operating Manual and Maintenance Manual. PoroPerm Production 2 APP-
125-002-0 for Porosity and permeability determination V1.4. VINCI TECH-
NOLOGIES.
Ott W.K.,Nyo T.,Aung W.N., Khaing A.T., EEOR success in Mann eld,Myanmar,
SPE 144231, 2011.
==PAGE:69==
iii
R.E. Harris, I.D. Mckay, New applications of enzymes in oil and gas production,
SPE 50621, 1998.
Wu W., Experimental study of oil displacement by the bio-enzyme at the third
type reservoirs of Saibei blocks, 2010.
R.A.Nasralla, M.B.Aiotaibi, H.A.Nasr-EI-Din, Eciency of oil recovery by low
salinity water ooding in sandstone reservoirs, SPE 144602, 2011.
T. Jain, A. Sharma, New frontiers in EOR methodologies by application of
enzymes, SPE 154690, 2012.
T.Perevozchikova, H.Nanda, D.P.Nesta, C.J.Roberts, Protein Adsorption, Des-
orption, and Aggregation Mediated by SolidLiquid Interfaces, Journal of Phar-
maceutical Sciences 104:19461959, 2015.
T.Austad, A.R.Doust, T.Puntervold, Study of wettability of calcite surfaces
using oilbrineenzyme systems for enhanced oil recovery applications, SPE
129767, 2010.
T.Moon, Using enzymes to enhance oil recovery, www.spe.org, 2008.
W.Norde, F.Macritchie, G.Norwika, J.Lyklema, Protein adsorption at solid-
liquid interfaces: reversibility and conformation aspects, Journal of Colloid and
Interface Science, Vol. 112, No. 2, August 1986.
