==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Energy Optimization by Utilizing Heat Pumps in 
the Dairy Industry
Pernille Hartmund Jørgensen 
July 2016
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
i
Project Information
English title
Energy optimization by utilizing heat pumps in the dairy industry
Danish title
Energioptimering ved anvendelse af varmepumper i mejerier
Student
Pernille Hartmund Jørgensen, s113356
University
Technical University of Denmark
Education
Master of Science in Sustainable Energy - Thermal line
Type
Master thesis
ECTS Point
35
Submitted
July 4 2016
Defended
July 12 2016
Language
English
Supervisor
Brian Elmegaard, DTU
Co-supervisor
Erasmus Damgaard Rothuizen, DTU
Claus Madsen, DTI
Lars Olsen, DTI
==PAGE:4==
ii
Abstract
Energy savings and reduction in CO2 emissions from burning fossil
fuels are on the political agenda around the world, and increases the mo-
tivation for heat recovery in the industry. This present thesis investigate
the heating demands and the available waste heat from a Danish cheese
dairy, in order to reduced the use of natural gas as heating source in
the production. The waste heat considered is the condensation heat of a
cooling plant at the production site, delivering ice water to the processes
in connection with the production of cheese.
The heating demands considered is for pasteurisation of whey and
milk, preheating of milk before pasteurisation and heating process water.
In total a heating demand of 3000 kWh per production day is consid-
ered. Furthermore an unknown heating demand for cleaning water is
estimated.
In order to utilise the waste heat, several conﬁgurations are investigated,
and a system for thermal storage of the accumulated heat is suggested.
The conﬁgurations for the heat recovery system includes both using the
existing refrigerant cycle as a heat pump, and turning the plant into a
two stage cycle.
The work suggests to increase the condensing pressure of the existing
refrigeration cycle as well as utilising it as a two stage cycle extracting
heat at both pressure levels. This reveals a solution for covering 100 % of
the selected heating demands and furthermore the largest savings from
substituting natural gas is achieved. The investigated conﬁgurations us-
ing a two stage cascade cycle with propane in the top cycle, compared to
ammonia in the top cycle and compared to an open intercooler as well,
revealed the highest yearly net cash ﬂow.
In order to assess the optimal intermediate pressure from a thermody-
namic perspective, and to be able to compare the conﬁgurations with
other work and solutions for heat recovery, it is proposed to calculate
the exergetic eﬃciency as a part of the further work on this system.
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This present thesis is prepared at the Section of Thermal Energy, Depart-
ment of Mechanical Engineering, Technical University of Demark (DTU) in
cooperation with Danish Technological Institute (DTI). The thesis’ fulﬁl the
requirements for a Master of Science of Sustainable Energy - Thermal Energy.
The project is credited with 35 ECTS point and was carried out from 04/01/2016
to 04/07/2016, under supervision of Associate Professor Brian Elmegaard
(DTU), Researcher Erasmus Damgaard Rothuizen (DTU), Senior Project
Manager Claus Madsen (DTI) and Senior Project Manager Lars Olsen (DTI).
A great share of the project time has been used to collect data at Endrup
Dairy. A very warm and humble thanks is given to Mananger Carsten Frand-
sen, dairymen Michael Hansen, Torben Voldsgaard and Klaus Mølvad, the
administrative staﬀ, especially Karin and Anne as well as the house electri-
cian Niels Erik for keeping up with my never ending questions and curiosity.
Without your willing to help and sharing of knowledge this project would
never had have the same solid base in reality.
I want to thank my supervisors at DTU, Brian Elmegaard and Erasmus
Rothuizen, for supporting the project and keeping me on the academic track.
Your guidance and suggestions is fundamental to a project based outside the
university.
I also wants to thank my main supervisor at DTI, Claus Madsen. Your
willingness to answer, explain and discuss endless topics for hours is extremely
valuable for an engineer in spe. Thanks a lot for sharing your practical knowl-
edge, and adding connections between the books and the real world, and thank
you for suggesting the project and for giving me such favourable working con-
ditions.
Thanks to Lars Olsen DTI, for doing your very best to keep my work
structured and aligned. Your academic skills are extremely admirable.
Furthermore I want to thank Christian Heerup, DTI. It can not be said
enough how much it means to have access to an open door where questions
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
PREFACE
and sharing are met with a smile, enthusiasm and great knowledge. Thanks
a lot for your support and for helping me ﬁnd foothold.
In connection to this a warm and sincerely thanks to DTI for letting me
be a part of the company for last year of my studies.
Please do not ever
underestimate the value of the inspiration and motivation your are giving
students when letting us in.
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
iii
Contents
v
Nomenclature
ix
1
Introduction
1
2
Insight into the processes of a cheese dairy
5
2.1
Pasteurisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Cheese production
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Whey treatment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Milk for resale
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.5
Pasteurisation of cream
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.6
Pasteurisation of whey cream . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.7
Cleaning In Place . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Methodology
13
3.1
Physical model for heating and cooling demands
. . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Refrigeration plants
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
Calculation of available waste heat from the refrigeration plant
20
3.4
Concepts for heat recovery and evaluation methods . . . . . . .
21
3.4.1
Extended desuperheater . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.4.2
Two stages cycle: Heat pump on top . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.4.3
Coeﬃcient Of Performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.4.4
Economic assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.4.5
Pinch technology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4
Data collection at Endrup Dairy and further proceeding
33
4.1
A production day . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.2
Energy Storage Tank - an existing heat recovery system . . . .
34
4.3
Heating and cooling demands at Endrup Dairy . . . . . . . . .
37
4.4
Utility systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.5
Pinch analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
CONTENTS
5
System and conﬁguration description
45
5.1
System conﬁguration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.2
Simulation objective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.3
Conﬁgurations and heating demands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.3.1
Assumptions made in the models . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.3.2
Conﬁguration 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.3.3
Conﬁguration 2a . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.3.4
Conﬁguration 3a . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.3.5
Conﬁguration 2b and 3b . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6
Veriﬁcation
57
7
Results
63
7.1
Heating demands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
7.2
CIP
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
7.3
Marginal heat COP and COP for components . . . . . . . . . .
64
7.4
COP for heat and refrigeration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
7.5
Two stage cycle with cascade HEX . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
7.6
Operation cost, NPV and pay back time . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
8
Discussion
77
8.1
Discussion in relation to the results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
8.2
Further discussion with a general perspective . . . . . . . . . .
82
9
Conclusion
83
9.1
Further work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
Bibliography
87
List of Figures
89
List of Tables
92
Bilag
92
A Calculations of the heating and cooling demands at Endrup
Dairy
93
A.1 Summarised cooling demand
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
B EES code for calculation of heating and cooling demands
103
C Refrigeration plant
109
C.1
Delivered cooling to the dairy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
C.2
Evaporator capacity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114
D Pump characteristics
117
==PAGE:9==
CONTENTS
vii
E NG and electricity prices
121
F Calculations for pinch analysis
123
G EES code for conﬁguration 3b with R290
125
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
Nomenclature
Roman letters
g
Standard gravity, m/s2
m
Mass, kg
h
Speciﬁc enthalpy kJ/kg
t
Time, s
x
Vapor quality
d
Day
l
Litres
Q
Heat, kWh
H
head
Q
Volume ﬂow rate, m3/s
n
rpm
P
Pressure, bar
cp
Speciﬁc heat capacity rate, kJ/kgK
r
Discount rate
T
Temperature, ¶C
V
Volume, m3
˙Q
Heat transfer rate, kW
˙W
Work, kW
˙C
Heat capacity rate, kW/K
˙m
Mass ﬂow rate, kg/s
˙V
Volume ﬂow rate, m3/s
Greek letters
ﬂ
Density kg/ m3
÷
Eﬃciency
Á
Eﬀectiveness
∆
Absolute diﬀerence
ix
==PAGE:12==
x
NOMENCLATURE
Subscripts
con
Condenser
evap
Evaporator
com
Compressor
is
Isentropic
q
Heat
w
Work or water
operation
Operation time compressor
ut
Utilised
HEX
Heat exchanger
mar
Marginal
ref
Reference
tot
Total
min
Minimum
IW
Ice water
PC
Pre-cool
sec
Secondary
past
Pasteurisation
ph
Preheat of milk
pw
Process water
h
High pressure
m
Intermediate pressure
Abbreviations
PI project
Process Integration
PI-diagram
Piping and Instrumentation
IWST
Ice water storage tank
EST
Energy storage tank
CIP
Cleaning in place
DX
Direct expansion
PV
Present value
NPV
Net present value
CF
Cash ﬂow
NG
Natural gas
LHV
Lower heating value
OPEX
Operating expense
CAPEX
Capital expenditure
DKK
Danish kroner
PSO
Public service obligation
HEX
Heat exchanger
COP
Coeﬃcient of Performance
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
The utilization of waste heat in the industry has been a hot and widely de-
bated topic in Danish energy policy forums for years. The potential has been
mapped and evaluated several times with diﬀerent perspectives, all concluding
the same bottom line: In a technical perspective the potential is there, but
realizing the potential with an acceptable payback time is deeply depending
on tariﬀs and subsidies, as well as the willingness in the companies to invests
in energy saving projects.
Process Integration (PI) projects aim at achieving ﬁnancial savings by min-
imizing the energy expenses. This includes an investigation of the possibility
to optimize the processes, and to do internal heat exchange the process in be-
tween, as well as utilizing waste heat from utility systems. This topic is more
than ever relevant in order to decrease the consumption of fossil fuels, and
doing actions according to the political agenda within the energy related area.
This project belongs to the category "PI projects" but diﬀers in the method
as new solutions for heat recovery from a refrigeration plant is investigated.
The solutions are based on a small scaled cheese dairy, which in relation
to the topic makes it out for perfect a case. The dairy industry has a long
history in Denmark and the production sites has typical developed through
time. The ever ongoing extension and conversion to new technologies chal-
lenge the cohesiveness in the production and the energy consumption as a
design parameter.
For this reason the potential for energy savings are present at these industries,
and ﬁnding solutions suitable for the industry will be an ever relevant topic
in order to achieve a more sustainable production.
The economical assessment of a heat recovery project is with no doubt
a complicated case. Unstable political direction, requirements and directives
from EU (lately seen with changes of the PSO tariﬀ) and unprecedented low
1
==PAGE:14==
2
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
prices on fossil fuels are all important and often unpredictable factors that
will have an inﬂuence on the result.
Furthermore a special tariﬀlinked to heat recovery systems seems to be a
freighting factor to the industry. The tariﬀs depends on the heat source of the
surplus heat and how the surplus heat is utilized [1], and has been reviewed
and clariﬁed lately by Dansk Fjernvarme [2].
Challenging the system with new solutions and combinations for heat recov-
ery, can hopefully help inform the industry and pinpoint where complications
of the law occurs.
The project is carried out in cooperation with Danish Technological In-
stitute (DTI). The basis and interests for DTI to suggest and support this
project, mainly arises in connection with to other projects; PIPO VP and
FOSCAP. Both projects considers optimized utility of the heat pump con-
cept. The projects have their eligibility in systems with heat recovery from
refrigeration plants, and the knowledge of the heating demands inside a dairy
is essential to investigate this further.
The tendencies for the technical solutions found in this project are there-
fore also of interest for stakeholders of the other ongoing projects. Further-
more the knowledge obtained in connection with the investigation of the dairy
processes is expanding DTIs understanding of the needs and challenges in con-
nection to the energy use at a dairy.
Problem statement
This report gives an introduction to the methods in connection to heat recov-
ery projects, focusing on the suggestions of technical solutions in connection
to the refrigeration plant. The overall aim of the project is to investigate the
possibilities to obtain heat recovery from the refrigeration plant at a cheese
dairy. The study is based on collected data from Endrup Dairy, located in
western part of Denmark.
This results in the following objects:
To what extend is it possible cover the heating demands at the cheese dairy,
with recovered heat from the refrigeration plant? What are the possible tech-
nical solutions to recover the heat and how is the waste heat utilized in the
most optimal way?
This imposes several sub questions to be answered. Each set of sub questions
are related to a project phase.
==PAGE:15==
3
Background information and data collection
What are the heating demands at a cheese dairy?
How much waste heat is available from the refrigeration plant?
What are the current expenses to the utility system?
Possible solutions for heat recovery
How can the heating demands be match with the available waste heat from
the refrigeration plant?
What are the essential parameters for the suggested solutions?
How much can the solutions cover compared to internal heat exchange the
process streams in between?
Assessment of the solutions
What are the COP, electricity consumption and heat delivered for each solu-
tion?
What are the operation cost for each solution?
What are the revenues in terms of saved natural gas?
What are the maximum allowed investment cost for a pay back time of three
years for each solution?
The methods used in the project includes:
• Mapping the heating demand and the cooling demands by studying the
processes in literature, visiting the production site and calculating the
heat transferred in the current heat exchangers.
• Investigate the match between the heating demands and the waste heat
from the refrigeration plant in order to maximise the heat recovered,
with a simulation model.
• Using the pinch analysis for internal heat recovery, in order to compare
the result with the heat recovery from the refrigeration plant.
• Calculating the discounted net cash ﬂows based on the operations cost
for the heat recovery system and the natural gas based alternative in
order to achieve the maximum allowed investment cost.
Readers guide
The thesis consist of 9 chapters:
Chapter 1 introduces the motivation and problem statement for the thesis.
Chapter 2 gives background knowledge about the processes in a cheese dairy.
==PAGE:16==
4
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Chapter 3 outlines the methodologies and theory used in the thesis’.
Chapter 4 presents the collected data for the case study and the following
processing.
Chapter 5 introduces the solutions for heat recovery, the related thermal
storage system and the models for each solution made for simulations.
Chapter 6 presents the veriﬁcation of the models made for the each heat
recovery conﬁguration.
Chapter 7 presents the results of the simulations and the economic assess-
ment.
Chapter 8 discuss the result in the context of the assumptions and limita-
tions, as well as the project in a wider context.
Chapter 9 concludes on the problem statement and gives suggestions for fur-
ther work.
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2
Insight into the processes of a
cheese dairy
In general minor cheese dairies produce several diﬀerent cheeses. This cat-
egorizes the dairy as a multi-product plant. The diﬀerent types of cheeses
has their own recipe, and this causes some variation in the production. Com-
mon for all the cheeses are that they are following the same production path
through the dairy, and makes use of the same equipment.
Furthermore they are produced in batches, meaning that the production starts
up at midnight, and shots down again in the afternoon.
Some dairies will provide the service to standardise milk for other companies
in the milk industry. As standardisation of milk is a process done in cheese
making, this service can be done with the same equipment, only with minor
adjustments in the product path. When the dairy expand their business with
this service, it can be categorised as a multi-purpose plant.
This section aims at giving an insight into the processes of a cheese dairy, with
a focus on processes where exchange of energy between streams takes place.
The description is based on the production at Endrup Dairy, as this dairy is
used as a case study. The information are based on a literature study [3], as
well as interviews with dairymen at Endrup Dairy and own investigation of
the production site.
Both the treatment of milk use for cheese production (further named: cheese
milk), milk for resale and the treatment of two very valuable by-products,
whey and cream, will be presented. Furthermore as an important part of the
production, the Cleaning In Place (CIP) system will be explained.
2.1
Pasteurisation
The principles of a pasteurisation process is the same whether it treats whey,
milk or cream. The product to be pasteurised is heated to a certain tem-
5
==PAGE:18==
6CHAPTER 2. INSIGHT INTO THE PROCESSES OF A CHEESE DAIRY
perature (pasteurisation temperature) and is held at this for a given period
(holding time), before it is cooled down again. The temperature and time
needed are decided by international standards according to the product, and
makes sure that all unwanted micro bacterial growth is killed. The needed
temperature and holding time can be seen in table 2.1.
Table 2.1: Pasteurisation temperatures and holding time
Temperature [¶C]
Holding time [s]
HTST pasturisation of milk
72-75
15-20
HTST pasteurisation of cream
>80
1-5
The design of a heat exchanger used for pasteurisation depends on whether
the product has to be separated (eg. raw milk being divided into skim milk,
cream and removal of impurities) and on how low a temperature the product
needs to reach after pasteurisation. A general concept can be seen in ﬁgure
2.1.
Figure 2.1: A general concept of a heat exchanger used for pasteurisation
The incoming stream enters a regenerative section, where it exchanges
heat with the product just being pasteurised. In case of milk and whey the
product leaves the heat exchanger, going to a separator. Coming back from
the separator or directly from the regenerative section in case of cream, the
product is heated with a heating media from the utility system, and send to
a holding cell. The time it takes for the product to ﬂow through the pipe,
accords with the holding time. The product enters the regenerative section
being cooled down by the incoming stream. The temperature reached depends
on the temperature of the incoming stream. The last section is used to adjust
the ﬁnal outlet temperature.
==PAGE:19==
2.2. CHEESE PRODUCTION
7
2.2
Cheese production
The description of cheese production given here, corresponds to the production
pattern at Endrup Dairy. In other dairies the production pattern might be
diﬀerent, due to other equipment.
The product path from raw milk to storage of cheese is illustrated in ﬁgure
2.2.
Figure 2.2: The product ﬂow in cheese production, based on the proceeding
at Endrup Dairy.
Standardisation of cheese milk
The recipe for the produced cheese determines the content of fat and proteins.
The techniques needed to standardise the cheese milk are many. At Endrup
Dairy this is done by ﬁlling up the cheese vat with an amount of skim milk,
and an amount of milk which is mixed with water and whey cream (further:
whole milk). The mixing with whey cream is optional. If whey cream is not
available, the share of skim milk will just be less.
The quantities are calculated based on the fat and protein content of the raw
milk. A general pattern is that 2/3 is skim milk and 1/3 is whole milk, but
due to variations in the raw milk and the recipe this will ﬂuctuate a lot.
In other dairies the total amount of milk will be skimmed, and then mixed
with some of the cream again to obtain the right fat content.
==PAGE:20==
8CHAPTER 2. INSIGHT INTO THE PROCESSES OF A CHEESE DAIRY
Pasteurisation of cheese milk
The raw milk from the storage tanks is preheated before entering the pasteur.
This can be done with a utility stream from the boiler, by direct heat exchange
with another product stream that needs cooling, or with a stream from an
thermal storage tank.
The outlet temperature of the cheese milk from the pasteur must be 32.5 ¶C.
In order to reduce the heating or cooling needed to obtain this exact outlet
temperature in the last section of the pasteur (see ﬁgure 2.1), the temperature
of the incoming milk must be close to this.
The separator removes impurities from the milk, and can of course also be
adjusted to remove the fat from the milk. All milk used goes through the
separator, but as mentioned only a part of it is skimmed. The temperature
of the milk is measured and logged after the holding cell. If needed the dairy
can document that the pasteurisation temperature of 74.5 ¶C was reached.
To reach an exact outlet temperature from the pasteur, it is preferred that
the milk is cooled ” to much” in the regenerative section and then heated up
again with a utility stream in the last section of the pasteur.
Starter culture
Adding a starter culture in cheese production, is an important step as it
produces lacid acid, CO2 and breaks down proteins.
The procedure for a starter culture varies a lot, but the basic steps are:
• Heat treatment of the medium (eg. skim milk) at 90-95 ¶C in 20 - 45
minutes.
• Cooling to inoculation temperature 20-30 ¶C or 42-45 ¶C depending of
the wanted type of bacteria.
• Inoculation with a bacteria culture
• Incubation. Varies between 3 to 20 hours.
• Furhter cooling to 5 ¶C and storage until use.
Stirring, cutting, heating and pressing
In the vat the skim milk and whole milk is mixed by stirring. After 25 minutes
rennet is added, and a coagulation process of the milk starts, which divide the
milk into two: curd also called coagulum, and whey. After 30 minutes the
curd is a soft solid layer in the vat, which is cut into small pieces.
A great part of the whey is then drained, and kept in a whey buﬀer tank,
before further treatment (see section 2.3). The curd and the remaining whey
is heated up by hot process water, added directly to the vat. The amount of
hot water added and the temperature varies with the type of cheese, but is
most commonly around 1800 liters at 68 ¶C.
==PAGE:21==
2.3. WHEY TREATMENT
9
Further the remaining whey and coagulum is pressed in to steps: ﬁrst in a
pre-press vat where a large solid block is formed under a lay of whey. After-
wards it is cut into smaller blocks, pressed individually in moulds. The cheese
made at Endrup is washed-rind cheese. From here the cheese blocks is cooled
in vats ﬁlled cold water for 24 hours, stored in vats with brine for another 24
hours, treated with a solution of bacteria and stored again for several weeks
at diﬀerent temperatures.
The number of cheese vats produced each production day can be limited by
diﬀerent factors. At Endrup Dairy the cooling of cheese blocks in water vats
set a limit of maximum 10 vats per day.
2.3
Whey treatment
The treatment of whey, might as well as in the case with cheese production,
have some variations between dairies, due to diﬀerent equipment.
This is
again based on the proceeding at Endrup Dairy.
The production path from storage buﬀer tank to ﬁnal product can be seen in
ﬁgure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: The product ﬂow for whey treatment based on the proceeding at
Endrup Dairy.
The whey comes in batches to the storage tank according to the cheese
production. As the treatment of whey is a continuous proceeding, this begins
when the stored amount reaches a certain level.
At this point the whey contains a certain amount of the unwanted protein
casein, so the whey is ﬁned by separation in a ﬁlter, before being pasteurised.
==PAGE:22==
10
CHAPTER 2. INSIGHT INTO THE PROCESSES OF A CHEESE DAIRY
From here it goes to the whey pasteur, where it enters the regenerative section.
The temperature of the whey when entering the pasteur is around 32-35 ¶C.
As the whey has to be cooled to 6 ¶C, after pasteurisation a low temperature
of the incoming whey is desired.
All the whey is separated in order to use the whey cream to standardise the
milk, as described in section 2.2.
Again the temperature after the holding cell is measured and logged to docu-
ment a pasteurisation temperature of 73.0 ¶C.
After being cooled by the regenerative section, the whey needs to be further
cooled from around 40 ¶C to 6 ¶C. This can be done with a utility stream from
the refrigeration plant, by direct heat exchange with another product stream
that needs heating, or with a stream from the thermal storage tank.
After being cooled the whey is pre-concentrated. This is done by Reverse
Osmosis (RO), which is a pressure driven membrane ﬁlter that removes water
from the whey. This process causes a temperature rise, and the whey is there-
fore cooled at the same time. The water removed from the whey goes either
into the sewer or can be reused in the CIP-system as water for pre-ﬂoss.
2.4
Milk for resale
The treatment of milk for resale is very similar to the treatment of cheese
milk.
According to costumers wishes for fat and protein content, a part of the milk
is being skimmed and the other part standardised with water.
The ﬁnal temperature of the milk has to be around 3 ¶C. The milk is not pre-
heated before entering the regenerative section of the pasteur. This minimizes
the need for cooling in the last section of the pasteur, but increases the need
for heating to reach the pasteurisation temperature.
From the pasteur the milk is send to a storage tank where the skim milk and
the whole milk is mixed.
2.5
Pasteurisation of cream
From the separation process of raw milk, there will be a continuous ﬂow of
cream. The cream needs to be pasteurised at a higher temperature than milk,
as fat is a poor heat conductor and the enzyme used to control the quality of
pasteurisation inactivates at a higher temperature, than the enzyme used in
the milk.
When entering the pasteur, the temperature depends on whether the milk is
preheated before entering the milk pasteur.
After being heated in the regenerative section the cream stays in the heat
exchanger, as no further separation is needed. The pasteurisation temperature
==PAGE:23==
2.6. PASTEURISATION OF WHEY CREAM
11
for cream can be as high as 88 ¶C, and only held for 5 seconds. As the cream
enters the regenerative section with a high temperature, the amount of cooling
in the section is limited. In the last section of the pasteur the cream needs to
be cooled from around 65 ¶C to 5 ¶C. This can be done with a utility stream
from the refrigeration plant, by direct heat exchange with another product
stream that needs heating, or with a stream from a thermal storage tank. If
the last section in the heat exchanger can’t provide the required cooling, extra
cooling to the cream storage tank has to provided.
2.6
Pasteurisation of whey cream
The cream separated from the whey is in the case of Endrup Dairy used
to standardise cheese milk. As the whey cream occurs as a by-production
from the cheese production, it is always the cream from the day before being
used. The whey cream is pasteurised while being in the storage tank. The
pasteurisation temperature is 95 ¶C, and is held for a longer period to makes
sure the temperature is obtained for the entire content of the tank. The whey
cream can cool down by natural heat loss from the tank to the room and isn’t
provided any cooling after pasteurisation.
2.7
Cleaning In Place
The automatic cleaning system is called CIP. The cleaning procedure depends
on the process and the equipment.
The cleaning procedure can be pretty
long, and it is often divided in two steps. The ﬁrst step takes place just after
production has been stopped, and the second before it starts again.
The list below gives the general procedure for most of the equipment:
1. Pre-rinsing with cold water to remove loose dirt.
2. Circulation with a lye solution at 70-75 ¶C (Removes fat).
3. Rinsing with cold water.
4. Circulation of an acid solution at 70 ¶C (removes lime).
5. Rinsing with cold clean water.
6. Disinfection with water at 90-95 ¶C (bacteriological clean).
The system consist of three storage tanks, connected to the same lines as
seen in ﬁgure 2.4. The temperature of the tanks are kept at a constant level
through the production day. If the temperature drops, the water is send out
in a closed loop being heated up in the heat exchanger.
When eg.
a lye solution is send to the process that needs to be cleaned,
the concentration of lye in the water in the return line is measured. If the
concentration is lower than a certain set point, the water is led into the sewer.
==PAGE:24==
12
CHAPTER 2. INSIGHT INTO THE PROCESSES OF A CHEESE DAIRY
Figure 2.4: CIP system
If it fulﬁls the set point, then the water is led back into the tank.
Water used for rinsing must be clean water. When this water comes back from
the processes, it is led into the pre-ﬂoss storage tank.
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 3
Methodology
This chapter presents the methodologies used in the project, and how it is
applied to the following study case at Endrup Dairy.
3.1
Physical model for heating and cooling
demands
In order to calculate the heating and cooling demand a physical model is de-
veloped. The model uses physical properties of the products as inputs and
gives in return the change in thermal energy for the current stream.
The models are based on the First law of thermodynamics, the Second law of
thermodynamics and the Law of conservation of mass.
The First law states that energy can be stored within a system, transformed in
to diﬀerent forms and transferred between system, but it can not be destroyed
[4].
The Second law states, in one of many formulations, that heat cannot sponta-
neously ﬂow from a colder body to a hotter body without external heat being
applied to the system [5].
The Law of conservation of mass states that the quantity of mass in a system
is conserved over time, if no matter is removed or added [4].
Together the ﬁrst and second law of thermodynamics states the equation
for energy balance for a control volume at steady state where changes in ki-
netic and potential energy are neglected as:
0 = ˙Qcv ≠˙Wcv +
ÿ
i
˙mihi ≠
ÿ
o
˙moho
(3.1)
where ˙Q is the total net heat ﬂow in kW, ˙W is the total net work in kW, ˙m
are the mass ﬂow rate in kg
s and h is the speciﬁc enthalpy in kJ
kg.
13
==PAGE:26==
14
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
When considering the model for heating and cooling demands only the
thermal energy is considered, and the work can be disregarded. Furthermore
with the approximation of the ﬂuid as an ideal gas with constant speciﬁc en-
ergy at constant pressure equation 3.1 can be simpliﬁed to [6]:
˙Q = ˙mcp(To ≠Ti)
(3.2)
where cp is the speciﬁc heat given in
kJ
kg·C and T is the temperature given
in ¶C.
The law of conservation of mass states the equation for mass balance in a
within a control volume under steady state:
ÿ
i
˙mi =
ÿ
o
˙mo
(3.3)
The heating and cooling demands in a dairy can be calculated from two
diﬀerent perspectives: a total system load or the demand for in single process.
The two perspectives are of course connected as the system load is the sum
of the demands in the processes connected to the system and the loss to the
surroundings occurring between processes.
The model calculates the individually heating and cooling demands for each
process in the dairy.
When considering heat exchange between streams, the eﬀectiveness of the heat
exchanger must be taken into account.
Only considering counterﬂow heat exchangers ﬁrst of all the maximum possible
heat exchange, that would be obtained if the stream with the lowest heat
capacity rate ˙C achieved the incoming temperature of the opposite stream is
calculated from eq. 3.4
˙Qmax = min( ˙Ch; ˙Cc)(Th,i ≠Tc,o)
(3.4)
The eﬀectiveness Á of the heat exchange can then be deﬁned as:
Á =
˙Q
˙Qmax
(3.5)
where ˙Q will the heat transferred, when taken the eﬀectiveness into account
[6].
The eﬀectiveness will depend on the overall heat transfer coeﬃcient, which
is deﬁned in terms of the total thermal resistance for heat transfer between
two streams in a heat exchanger, as well as it will depend on the on mean
temperature diﬀerence.
==PAGE:27==
3.2. REFRIGERATION PLANTS
15
3.2
Refrigeration plants
This section presents both basic refrigeration theory and the methods used
for heat recovery on the refrigeration plant, as well as the method used to
determine the available waste heat from the refrigeration plant.
Refrigeration theory
The art of a refrigeration plant is to create and maintain temperatures lower
than the surroundings.
This implies that heat must be removed from the
media in focus and rejected to a higher temperature sink. According to the
second law of thermodynamics this is only possible if work is applied to the
system. A traditionally system based on this principle is the vapor compres-
sion cycle.
The cycle consist of four components as sketched in ﬁgure 3.1: An evaporator,
a compressor, a condenser and an expansion valve. A refrigerant circulates
in the cycle between a high pressure and a low pressure. At the low pressure
part, the refrigerant will vaporize and absorb heat from the refrigerated me-
dia, extracting the heat corresponding to the latent heat of the refrigerant.
At the higher constant condensing pressure the refrigerant will reject the heat
again to eg. the surroundings as it condenses.
Figure 3.1: The four basic components in a vapor compression cycle.
According to energy balance the heat rejected in the condenser is equal to
the sum of heat extracted from the lower temperature and the work added to
the refrigerant in the compressor. This can be expressed by equation 3.6.
˙Qcon = ˙Qevap + ˙Wcom
(3.6)
A system based on the same technology, where the main object is to utilize
the rejected heat, is called a heat pump.
==PAGE:28==
16
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
To illustrate the cycle in terms of the refrigerants thermodynamically
states, it can be illustrated in a log P,h-diagram and seen in ﬁgure 3.2. In the
following sections each component will be further explained. The state points
and illustrated capacities shown in ﬁgure 3.2 will be used as reference.
Figure 3.2: The vapor compression cycle illustrated in a log P,h diagram.
Evaporator
In state point (4) the refrigerant is a mixture of vapor and liquid with quality,
x4. The quality, x, is deﬁned as the mass fraction of vapor in a liquid/vapor
mixture. When the refrigerant reaches the dew point curve, and the quality
becomes x = 1 the refrigerant will be saturated vapor. By further heating the
refrigerant becomes superheated. Superheat increases the evaporators capac-
ity, and avoid liquid drops to enter the compressor. Furthermore superheat
will increase the speciﬁc volume of the refrigerant and by that increase the
speciﬁc compressor work. In the piping from the evaporator to the compressor
un-utilized superheat can occur, as a consequence of the heat ingress from the
surroundings. This will have a negative impact on the cycle eﬃciency (see
more on this statement in the compressor section just below).
The above description accounts for a DX evaporator. Besides DX, the evapora-
tor can also be ﬂooded. A ﬂooded evaporator in conjunction with a separator
can be seen in ﬁgure 3.3. The separator will separate the gaseous and the
liquid refrigerant, and it will make sure that the evaporator will be feed with
==PAGE:29==
3.2. REFRIGERATION PLANTS
17
Figure 3.3: Flooded evaporator and a separator.
100 % liquid as well as 100 % vapor is entering the compressor. A circulation
number describes how many times a liquid volume must pass through the
evaporator to be fully evaporated. A small circulation number will indicate a
high amount of gas in the liquid leaving the evaporator (eq. x = 0.8).
The liquid column from the separator to the evaporator will create a pressure
rise, and cause a subcooling of the refrigerant. The pressure diﬀerence in a
naturally driven ﬂooded evaporator will be the force that makes the refrigerant
circulating. The pressure diﬀerence has to overcome the pressure loss through
the bottom of the evaporator and the piping in the top before entering the
separator.
Unaﬀected by the type of evaporator, the capacity can be described by eq.
3.7.
˙Qevap = ˙m(h4 ≠h1)
(3.7)
where ˙m in the mass ﬂow rate of the refrigerant in kg
s and h is the enthalpy
in the given state points given in kJ
kg.
Compressor
The compressor can be classiﬁed by compression principle and further again
by motor conﬁguration.
In a industrial refrigerant plant, the compressors
used will typically be a compressor with positive displacement principle, eg.
either reciprocating or screw compressor with an open motor conﬁguration.
For both compressor types a set of principles and equations will apply. The
following equations for the compressor eﬃciency and work, will refer to points
illustrated in ﬁgure 3.4 below.
The isentropic eﬃciency is ratio between the theoretical compressor power
==PAGE:30==
18
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
Figure 3.4: The enthalpies and the speciﬁc compressor work in a log P,h-
diagram.
consumption for an isentropic compression process and the real compressor
work for an process with losses in terms of friction and heat. The isentropic
eﬃciency can be described by equation 3.8
÷is = ˙m∆hs
˙m∆h = ˙m(h2s ≠h1)
˙m(h2 ≠h1)
(3.8)
If illustrated by the pressure ratio this eﬃciency will have an optimum at a
relative low pressure ratio. For a speciﬁc compressor the eﬃciency can be cal-
culated from given compressor polynomials. If the calculations are not based
on a speciﬁc compressor, a average value around 0.7 is a fair assumption, if
the pressure ratios are in a moderate interval.
In connection with calculations on a speciﬁc compressor, the volumetric eﬃ-
ciency, ÷v, should also be considered. The eﬃciency describes the ratio be-
tween the theoretical volume ﬂow rate due to the geometric relations of the
compressor and the volume ﬂow rate right before the compressor. When do-
ing general cycle calculations with a known cooling capacity the volumetric
eﬃciency is not considered.
Besides the loss described by the isentropic eﬃciently an extra heat loss fac-
tor given by an energy balance for the compressor, can be taken into account
when calculation the real power consumption of the compressor. The factor
is given by equation 3.9
fq = ˙m∆hw
˙m∆h = ˙m(h2w ≠h2)
˙m(h2 ≠h1)
(3.9)
==PAGE:31==
3.2. REFRIGERATION PLANTS
19
Where h2w in this case will be the enthalpy calculated from the isentropic
eﬃciency. The enthalpies h2, h2s and h2w, and the speciﬁc compressor work
for each case can be seen in ﬁgure 3.4. In the case where a heat loss factor is
taken into account the compressor work will be given by equation 3.10
˙Wcom = ˙m∆hw = ˙m(h2w ≠h1)
(3.10)
In a refrigeration plant with a varying cooling capacity, the compressor
must be regulated. This can be done in many diﬀerent ways, also depending
on the type of compressor. One common way is frequency control where the
speed (rpm) can be regulated to a higher or lower value. For reciprocating
compressor a stepwise regulation can be done by controlling the valves to the
cylinders.
Condenser
In the condenser the heat absorbed in the evaporator and the energy added by
the compressor must be rejected to the surroundings. In state point (2), when
coming from the compressor the refrigerant is superheated gas. Cooling the
gas from superheated gas to saturated gas with quality x = 1, is called desu-
perheating. Through the condensing the refrigerant ends up being saturated
liquid, with quality x = 0. Cooling the liquid further down, is called subcool-
ing. As a consequence of varying cooling capacity, the amount of refrigerant
in the cycle will also vary. The receiver is basically a storage vessel to hold the
refrigerant not in circulation as a consequence of the load variations. From
the receiver the refrigerant can be send to another heat exchanger, where the
subcooling can be done. Subcooling will increase the cooling capacity in the
evaporator, as the refrigerant send to the evaporator will have a lower quality.
The condenser capacity is the sum of desuperheat, condensation and subcool-
ing given by equation 3.11
˙Qcon = ˙m(h2 ≠h3)
(3.11)
The condenser can be either air cooled, water cooled or an evaporative con-
denser. The most simple installation, which ﬁts to a colder climate like the
Danish, is the air cooled condenser, where heat is rejected to the surrounding
air. If natural convection isn’t enough to make sure the driving temperature
diﬀerence between the air and the refrigerant is there, the volume ﬂow rate
of the air passing through the condenser can be regulated by speed controlled
fans. This is called forced convection.
Expansion valve
The expansion valve lowers the pressure from the condensation pressure to
the evaporation pressure, and leads the refrigerant back into the evaporator.
==PAGE:32==
20
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
During the expansion a part of the refrigerant will evaporate. The expansion
process is considered as a adiabatic process, conserving the enthalpy. In cal-
culations of the cycle this means that h3 = h4.
The expansion valve is a part of the regulation of the cycle, as it, through
diﬀerent concepts according to the type, makes sure the right amount of re-
frigerant is entering the evaporator.
˙Q,T diagram
The changes in temperature of a ﬂuid through a heat exchanger, e.g. a con-
denser or evaporator can be illustrated in a ˙Q,T diagram. An example for
both can be seen in ﬁgure 3.5 and 3.6.
Figure 3.5: Example of a ˙Q,T dia-
gram for an evaporator.
Figure 3.6:
Example of a
˙Q,T-
diagram for an condenser.
The ˙Q,T-diagram has the advantages of illustrating the change in temper-
ature for both ﬂuids in a heat exchanger, as well as it gives a fast impression of
the relative share between diﬀerent sections of the heat exchangers. Further-
more the value of the minimum temperature diﬀerence between the stream
can be seen as the pinch.
3.3
Calculation of available waste heat from the
refrigeration plant
In order to suggest new solutions for a heat recovery system, the available
waste heat from the condenser must be known. One way to determine this
is to carry out a cycle calculation on the existing refrigerant plant. The in-
put to the calculations will be the condensing pressure, evaporation pressure,
isentropic eﬃciency of the compressor and if any the amount of superheat and
subcooling as well as the stated properties of the refrigerant as mentioned for
each component in the sections above. Furthermore either the compressor
==PAGE:33==
3.4. CONCEPTS FOR HEAT RECOVERY AND EVALUATION
METHODS
21
work or the capacity of the evaporator is needed as input.
The compressor work can be obtain through a measurement of the com-
pressors electricity consumption and the capacity of the evaporator can be
calculated as an average based on the system load.
During operation the load, and with that the capacity of the evaporator,
will change. But as the delivered cooling from the evaporator is based on what
the system deliver, the capacity will be an average for the given period.
The capacity of the evaporator is determined from the total delivered cool-
ing (load) and the running time of the compressor by equation 3.12
˙Qevap = Qload,system
toperation
(3.12)
Where Qload is the load of the system or a given time period in kWh, and
toperation is the operation time for the compressor in the same period.
The method to determine the system load will depend on the current sys-
tem and the available data. In relation to a refrigeration plant both the supply
and return temperature will often be measured. To prevent the risk of ice in
a plate heat exchanger when the inlet temperature is too low, the return tem-
perature becomes a critical value in order to avoid production stop.
The control strategy to serve the processes with right capacity, is in the case of
Endrup Dairy, to keep the pressure in the supply line constant. The pressure
in the line will drop whenever a process needs cooling, and the valve to the
given process is opened. The pumps delivering the pressure rise, are frequency
controlled and responds to the pressure change by regulating the speed. The
speed regulation is seen as a change in percentage, where 100 % corresponds
to the highest possible speed.
The ﬂow can be calculated from the characteristic of the pump. The method-
ology for this can be seen together with the calculations for Endrup Dairy in
appendix C.1.
3.4
Concepts for heat recovery and evaluation
methods
In this section the concepts used in the suggested heat recovery solutions will
be presented, as well as the used evaluation methods.
A general thing to consider in case of heat recovery, is the possible advantages
of regulation the cooling plant’s condensing pressure. In order to minimize the
operation cost of the compressor of the cooling plant, the condensing pressure
should be kept as low as possible.
==PAGE:34==
22
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
Increasing the condensing pressure without changing the capacity of the evap-
orator, will result in an increase in the available waste heat, which can be an
advantages in relation to a heat recovery system.
Furthermore turning the refrigerant plant into a two stage cycle, gives the
opportunity to cover heating demands with a higher temperature level and
capacity, again on the expense of an investment and increased operation cost
for compressor work.
The economical evaluation of increasing the operation cost of the compressor
in relation the to the savings obtained by suppressing another heating source
is described in section 3.4.4.
In section 3.4.1 and 3.4.2 the concepts used in the following heat recovery
system will be introduced.
Suggesting a heat recovery system from a cooling plant should be hold up
against the possibility for internal heat exchange between the product streams
in the production. If a larger potential for heat recovery with this method is
revealed, the technical solutions of doing so, should be considered equally with
the suggestions for heat recovery from the cooling plant. In order to take this
consideration into account a pinch analysis is conducted. An introduction to
the tool and the method is given in section 3.4.5.
3.4.1
Extended desuperheater
An extended desuperheater is a heat exchanger that cools down the super-
heated refrigerant and starts to condensate it as well. Compared to a ”normal”
condenser a higher outlet temperature of the heated water can be reached, on
the expense of the capacity of the heat exchanger. The concept should be seen
in relation to a heat recovery system, where the amount of heat not utilized
will be rejected to the surroundings.
The strategy for heating a certain amount of water in an extended desuper-
heat, is based on the choice of heating the entire amount of water to the
highest possible temperature (maximum mass ﬂow rate) or heating as much
water as possible to the target temperature (target temp).
The diﬀerence
between the two options will be the mass ﬂow rate of the water in the heat
exchanger and the outlet temperature. In ﬁgure 3.7 an example of the two
strategies are given. The needed conditions to determine the capacity of the
heat exchanger is a fully determined refrigerant cycle with a given condensing
pressure and the time available for heat recover.
As seen in ﬁgure 3.7 the capacity of the heat exchanger will increase when
the outlet temperature of the water is lowered. Within a given time period,
this means that the achieved amount of heat recovered from a refrigeration
plant will be highest, when the total amount of water is heated to the highest
possible temperature.
This strategy for designing the extended desuperheater should be kept when
increasing the condensing pressure, until the target temperature is reached for
==PAGE:35==
3.4. CONCEPTS FOR HEAT RECOVERY AND EVALUATION
METHODS
23
Figure 3.7: An example of the capacity of the extended desuperheater for the
two strategies.
the entire amount of water.
The disadvantages of heating to the highest possible temperature is the need
of an extra heat exchanger with a hot utility stream in order to reach the
target temperature. But on the other hand this extra heat exchanger might
be installed anyway, as a back up to the heat recovery system.
When increasing the condensing pressure the heat gained will be larger for
the strategy where target temperature is always reached. Figure 3.8 illustrate
this in an example of the COPs for heat (see section 3.4.3) for both strategies.
Figure 3.8: An example of the development in the COP for the two strategies.
In this example the entire amount of water can be heated to the target
temperature at 19.4 bar. As the capacity of the heat exchanger will be the
same at this point, so is the COP. As seen both COPs are increasing, but
diﬀers as the tendency will be either increasing or decreasing.
3.4.2
Two stages cycle: Heat pump on top
When higher temperatures and larger capacities are needed, a heat pump can
be placed ”on top” of the refrigeration plant. If the refrigeration cycle should
reach the same high pressure on it is own, this would be limited by a high
discharged temperature and a large pressure ratio, decreasing the isentropic
eﬃciency. This implies that the two stages cycle are suitable for heating de-
==PAGE:36==
24
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
mands with a high outlet temperature and a large needed capacity.
Adding subcooling to a heat pump increases the heating capacity of the heat
pump, without any additional compressor work. The possible amount sub-
cooling will be limited by the incoming temperature of the media to be heated.
Cascade or intercooler
The two cycles can either be connected with an intercooler or a cascade heat
exchanger. Furthermore, the intercooler can either be opened or closed, and
the cascade heat can either be a DX evaporator or a ﬂooded evaporator.
Regarding the heat recovery solutions presented in this project, only open in-
tercoolers and DX cascade heat exchanger will be considered.
A PI diagram for the conﬁguration with an open intercooler can be seen in
ﬁgure 3.9 and a sketch of the corresponding log P,h-diagram can be seen in
ﬁgure 3.10. The intercooler works as a separator and the refrigeration entering
Figure 3.9: Two stage cycle with
an open intercooler. The ﬁgure is
borrowed from [7].
Figure 3.10: Log P,h diagram
for a two stage cycle with a
closed intercooler.
the compressor in the top cycle will be saturated vapor, based on the same
principle as a ﬂooded evaporator followed by a compressor.
The refrigerant from the top cycle will be expanded to the intermediate pres-
sure, entering the intercooler as a mixture. Further the refrigerant leaves the
intercooler as saturated liquid and expands to the low pressure.
In a two stage cycle with a cascade heat exchanger the refrigerant of the
bottom and top cycle heat exchanger with each other, and will never mix.
A PI-diagram and a log P,h-diagram can be seen in ﬁgure 3.11 and 3.12
respectively.
As the refrigerants does not mix, this gives the opportunity to use diﬀerent
refrigerants in the top and bottom cycle. Focusing on natural refrigerants am-
monia, isobutane and propane can be considered (CO2 is a natural refrigerant
as well, but needs a transcritical cycle when used as a heat pump).
The advantages of using one or the other diﬀers according to the application.
In general ammonia is a commonly used refrigerant because of its great latent
==PAGE:37==
3.4. CONCEPTS FOR HEAT RECOVERY AND EVALUATION
METHODS
25
Figure 3.11: PI-diagram for a
cascade two stage cycle with a
DX evaporator.
The ﬁgure is
borrowed from [8]
Figure 3.12: log P,h diagram for a
cascade two stage cycle.
heat. The amount of superheat for both ammonia and isobutane will be larger
compared to propane in order to ensure that no liquids drops enter or occur
in the compressor.
3.4.3
Coeﬃcient Of Performance
The COP is a performance factor, used to normalise the utilised heat or cool-
ing in relation the applied work. The COP can be deﬁned for the cooling as
in equation 3.13 and for the utilised heating as in equation 3.14.
COPcooling =
˙Qevap
˙Wcom
(3.13)
COPheat =
˙Qcon,ut
˙Wcom
(3.14)
where ˙Qcon,ut is the part of the condensing heat utilized in a heat recovery
system.
The COP can be used to compare diﬀerent system conﬁgurations delivering
heat or cooling between the same temperature levels. However this can be a
challenge for heat recovery systems where heat is utilised at diﬀerent pressure
levels.
When utilizing the evaporator for cooling and (some of) the condensing heat
for heat recovery, a common COP can be deﬁned as well. This is given by
equation 3.15
COPcooling+heat =
˙Qevap + Qcon,ut
˙Wcom
(3.15)
==PAGE:38==
26
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
Care should be taken when using and analysing this COP, as it diﬀers
from the general deﬁnitions, and mixes the utilization of the capacities in the
cycle at diﬀerent temperature levels.
In order to asses the contribution of a single component in a system, a
COP can be deﬁned as the capacity of the component in relation to the work
applied to the system. The is expressed as in equation 3.16.
COPheat =
˙QHEX
˙Wcom
(3.16)
In a heat recovery system where several heat exchangers utilise the waste
heat, this COP for each component gives the opportunity the compare the
performance of the individual HEXs.
For a complex heat recovery system, where heat is utilised at diﬀerent
temperature levels, in a set-up build in order to cover speciﬁed heating de-
mands, it will be diﬃcult to compare the COP with COPs for other systems.
Therefore other options for assessing the system is recommended.
A suggestion to this can be a marginal COP for heat for the system, that cov-
ers the impact for the case where the condensing pressure of a refrigeration
plant is increased in order to increase the amount of available condensation
heat.
The condensation heat available at the condensing pressure for the refriger-
ation plant in normal operation can be seen as ”free/without charge”. The
expense in relation to utilise this heat will not include any extra cost in rela-
tion to the operation cost of the compressor.
The marginal COP for heat will assess the impact of increasing the condens-
ing pressure in relation to a given reference state. In case of a heat recovery
system for a refrigeration plant the reference point will be the ”normal” con-
densing pressure and the available waste heat at this point. The COP can be
deﬁned as in equation 3.17 as the ratio between the additional available heat
and the extra compressor work needed in order to increase the pressure.
COPheat,mar =
˙Qut ≠˙Qut,ref
˙Wcom ≠˙Wcom,ref
(3.17)
If the COPheat,mar is below one it will from all perspectives be an ineﬃcient
option to increase the pressure, as a regular electric element will be better oﬀ.
If the COP is above one, more energy is gained than supplied. A decreasing
tendency for the COP, when increasing the condensing pressure, will indi-
cated that the heat produced becomes more expensive pr. unit. If the COP
is increasing with a higher condensing pressure the unit price will decrease.
The COPheat,mar does not indicate any optimal operation point. The optimal
operation point must be assessed from the potential savings estimated from
==PAGE:39==
3.4. CONCEPTS FOR HEAT RECOVERY AND EVALUATION
METHODS
27
an economical perspective. The COPheat,mar will then only be a tool to un-
derstand and explain the variations that might occur in the economic savings,
when increasing the condensing pressure.
3.4.4
Economic assessment
In order to make an economical assessment of the solutions for heat recovery
the operation cost (OPEX) and investment cost (CAPEX), as well as the
revenue from the energy savings must be known. The word revenue is in this
case not an income, but an expression of the operation cost for the alternative
to the heat recovery system. The over all aim for economic assessment is to
calculate whether the savings in the fuel cost can justify the investment within
a given pay back period.
This section is based on literature given in [9] and [8].
Revenue
The revenue will in this case be calculated as the cost of natural gas (NG) as
this would be the alternative to the heat recovery system.
The heating demand in kWh fulﬁlled by the heat recovery system, is converted
into a amount of natural gas in m3 and timed with the price in DKK
m3 .
NGrevenue = QkWh÷boiler
LHVNG
· NGunitprice
(3.18)
Where LHV is the Lower Heating Value of NG. A standard value of 11 kWh
m3
is assumed. ÷boiler is the eﬃciency of the NG boiler.
OPEX
Generally the OPEX considers all income and expenses in relation to the given
project. In this project the OPEX is limited to the cost of fuel for the heat
recovery system. This will be the extra cost in electricity from running the
compressor at a higher condensing pressure, and optionally running an extra
compressor in a two stage cycle setup.
Electricitycost = Wcom,tot · elunitprice
(3.19)
CAPEX
The CAPEX considered here is the initial occurring capital expenditures. In a
design situation the cost of the purchased equipment (PEC), can be calculated
from a base cost of the component, a design type factor, material factor and
a size correlation. This can be calculated for each component in the system.
The total capital investment will be the sum of the PEC for each component
together with the cost of installation and instrumentation.
The ﬁnal price given from a supplier will in the end depend on the current
discounts given. As the cost of the components will be a decision factor when
==PAGE:40==
28
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
design the system, the designing process and getting tenders from suppliers
should be an iterative process.
Cash ﬂow and Net Present Value
From revenues, OPEX and CAPEX the free cash ﬂow for the lifetime of the
project can be calculated. In the years after investment the cash ﬂow (CF)
considered will be OPEX subtracted from the revenues.
Furthermore the time value of the money can be taken into account by cal-
culating the present value of the further cash ﬂow in the year to come. This
is called discounted cash ﬂow and can be calculated from the a discount rate,
by using eq. 3.20.
PV = CF
1
(1 + r)t
(3.20)
Where PV is the present value of the cash ﬂow CF in t periods of time from
year zero, with the discount rate r . The expression
1
(1+r)t is called the dis-
count factor [9].
The Net Present Value (NPV) is the sum of the discount cash ﬂows in the
subsequent years subtracted from the initial investment. The NPV is given
by equation 3.21
NPV = ≠CF0 +
T
ÿ
i=1
CFt
(1 + r)t
(3.21)
The pay back time of the project is the time period t where the NPV
reaches zero. In this case this will be the year where the sum of the savings
in fuel cost reaches the money invested. The NPV calculated for the entire
technical lifetime of the project will be the present ﬁnal value of the project.
In companies with limited resources to use for investments, a demand for a
certain pay back time will be seen. In the case of the dairy it is very unlikely
that projects with a pay back time higher than 3 years will be accepted.
If a certain pay back time is needed in order to accept a project, the cal-
culations must be done backward with a NPV of zero for a given T. This
means that the sum of the discounted CF after the accepted period, will be
the maximum allowed investment.
3.4.5
Pinch technology
This section gives an introduction to the elements of the PI approach used in
this project. The methodology used is based on [10].
As mentioned in the introduction this is not a fully PI project, as it does
not include the investigation of internal heat exchange between process. The
project should be seen as an exploration of new possibilities in the ﬁeld of heat
recovery from a refrigeration plant. When doing this kind of research in the
==PAGE:41==
3.4. CONCEPTS FOR HEAT RECOVERY AND EVALUATION
METHODS
29
frames of a well-known approach, it is important to notice when and why the
method used diﬀers from the general approach.
When designing the layout of the heat recovery system to a refrigeration
plant, the characteristics of the heating demands must be considered. The
possibilities of heat recovery depends on the needed capacity as well as the
temperature levels of the demands.
When the diﬀerent heating demands of the processes are found, as described
in section 3.1, the most interesting streams to fulﬁl must be chosen.
This can be done according to diﬀerent criteria. In the case study for this
project, the streams with the largest share of the total heating consumption
is chosen.
In order to keep the main focus on heat recovery from a refrigeration plant,
internal heat exchange between the processes was not considered before the
heating demands to fulﬁl was chosen. To compare this decision with a po-
tential heat recovery system the processes in between a pinch analysis is con-
ducted. The method is presented in the section below.
Methodology for pinch analysis
When aiming at the purpose of the PI projects mentioned in the introduction,
the pinch analysis is a powerful tool. The approach and tools used in pinch
analysis are many and have developed during the years.
In this section a
general introduction will be given.
In a process with many streams each having a demand of heating and cooling,
internal heat exchangers can be used to recover some of the energy needed.
What can not be recovered the streams between, must be provided by external
heating and cooling.
The heat exchange between two processes is limited by a minimum allowed
temperature diﬀerence, ∆Tmin. The temperature level at which this minimum
allowed temperature diﬀerence is observed deﬁnes the ”pinch point”.
Considering a set of streams, the heating and cooling process can be illustrated
in a composite curve for both the hot and cold stream.
Hot streams are
deﬁned as streams with a high supply temperature and a colder temperature,
that needs to be cooled down. Cold streams have a cold supply temperature
and a higher target temperature, and needs to be heated up. An example
of a composite curve for both the hot and cold streams can be seen in ﬁgure
3.13. When subtracting the potential for heat recovery on both side of the
pinch temperature, the minimum external heating and cooling demand to the
system can be found.
The potential heat recovery is also called the pinch target, as it is a theo-
retical heat recovery potential. When solutions are chosen and the economy
is considered, only a percentage of the pinch target is obtained.
==PAGE:42==
30
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
Figure 3.13: An example of a composite curve for both the hot and cold
stream. Edited from [11].
To located the pinch temperature an analytical method called Problem
Table Algorithm (PTA) is applied. In order to apply this method, streams
must be mapped. The supply and target temperatures of each stream, as well
as the heat capacity rate and the operation time per day of each stream must
be known. Further a proper ∆Tmin must be chosen.
To make the result easy to compare with the heat recovery system the cal-
culations are based on the amount of energy for each stream on daily basis,
given in the unit kWh per day.
• Establish temperature intervals: The target temperatures of the hot
streams are decreased by ∆Tmin. The resulting temperatures are placed
in descending order, and deﬁnes the temperature intervals are called
sub-networks.
• Energy per day for each sub network: For the streams that occur in each
sub-network, the heat capacity rate timed with the hours of running are
summed.
kWh
dK =
ÿ
i
( ˙mcph)cold,i ≠
ÿ
i
( ˙mcph)hot,i
(3.22)
where ˙mcp is the heat capacity rate of the hot or cold streams occurring
in the sub network, and h is running time for the stream.
• Calculations of deﬁcit: The excess energy for each sub network is calcu-
lated.
Di = (Ti ≠Ti+1)
Ëÿ
( ˙mcph)cold ≠
ÿ
( ˙mcph)hot
È
(3.23)
==PAGE:43==
3.4. CONCEPTS FOR HEAT RECOVERY AND EVALUATION
METHODS
31
where Ti and Ti+1 corresponds to the upper and lower temperatures of
the sub network.
• Sequential balance: The heat output for each sub-network is the input
to the next sub-network. A sequential balance is obtained by assuming
zero energy input to the ﬁrst sub network. The accumulated balance is
calculated with:
Qi+1,i = Qi,i≠1 ≠Di
(3.24)
where the above equation applies for an arbitrary point in the balance.
• Max table: In order to take the needed external heat supply into account
the largest negative value of the heat ﬂow is added as input to the ﬁrst
sub network and a new sequential balance is calculated.
From the sequential balance and the max table three important values can be
obtained:
The minimum external heat supply is the highest negative value in the
sequential balance.
The minimum external cooling supply is the ﬁnal value after the last
sub network in the max table.
The pinch temperature occurs where the heat ﬂow in the max table is zero.
For the case of Endrup Dairy a pinch analysis is carried out including the
same streams considered in the heat recovery system from the refrigeration
plant.
The possible savings from reduced cooling and heating demand obtained with
pinch target, will be compared to the savings obtained with a heat recovery
system from the refrigeration plant.
==PAGE:44==
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 4
Data collection at Endrup
Dairy and further proceeding
Figure 4.1: Endrup Dairy
Endrup Dairy is a small cheese dairy from 1884, owned by 15 shareholders.
The shareholders are local farmers, delivering the milk for cheese production
throughout the year.
The dairy produces many diﬀerent types of cheese, each with varying fat
content, processing and time of storage before selling. The cheese is sold in
diﬀerent shops, across the country, as well as in the dairy’s own shop on the
production site. The amount of cheese sold is approximately 18 000 ton on a
yearly basis.
From the cheese production comes two important by-products: whey and
cream. They are both sold to Arla Foods, and both are important in order to
33
==PAGE:46==
34
CHAPTER 4. DATA COLLECTION AT ENDRUP DAIRY AND
FURTHER PROCEEDING
utilize the milk in an economic and sustainable perspective.
Another business for the dairy is standardization of milk. Milk from the local
farmers are standardized to a certain percentage of fat and protein, and resold
to other dairies for further distribution or production.
On a yearly basis the dairy receives 23 millions litres of milk. 7500 ton of
whey, 0,9 million liters of cream and 6,8 millions litres of standardised milk
are sold.
The production runs 5 days a weekend, all year. Shut downs occur and public
holidays are oﬀas well. In total 250 production days is assumed.
4.1
A production day
The production follows the proceeding described in section 2. The product
ﬂow through the dairy can be seen in ﬁgure 4.2
The dotted lines in ﬁgure 4.2 indicates the variations in the product ﬂow:
1. Whey cream and water is only mixed in the milk when whole milk is
produced.
2. Cream is only separated when the milk is skimmed.
3. The ﬁrst 1000 litres of skimmed milk is used for culture starter.
A production day starts oﬀaround 10.30 pm with cleaning of the equip-
ment, and last until 03.00 pm the next day. A typical production consist of 8
cheese vat each counting 8500 litres of milk.
Between 117 000 and 128 000 tons of raw milk is delivered from local farm-
ers every second day (seasonal variation of 10%). The upconcentrated whey
is picked up every day, and the cream every second day. Milk for resale is
produced according to sale. The sales agreements for milk shifts from week
to week. As a average estimation it is assumed that 10 000 litres of milk for
resale is produced each day.
Before presenting the heating and cooling demands, an existing heat recov-
ery system in the production, called an Energy Storage Tank (further:EST),
is introduced.
4.2
Energy Storage Tank - an existing heat
recovery system
Some of the heating and cooling demands are covered by an Energy storage
tank. This is a general description of the production situations where the
energy storage tank is involved. The capacity available to cover either heating
==PAGE:47==
4.2. ENERGY STORAGE TANK - AN EXISTING HEAT RECOVERY
SYSTEM
35
Figure 4.2: Product ﬂow through the dairy.
or cooling demands, depends on the current temperature in the EST, and the
production situation.
In short three diﬀerent production situations involving the energy storage
tank can occur. The EST water loop for each of the situations is highlighted
in ﬁgure 4.3, 4.4 and 4.5.
1. Preheating of milk - cooling down the EST.
2. Cooling of whey - heating up the EST.
==PAGE:48==
36
CHAPTER 4. DATA COLLECTION AT ENDRUP DAIRY AND
FURTHER PROCEEDING
3. Preheating of milk and cooling of whey at the same time. The mass ﬂow
rate of the water loop is limited by a maximum temperature of 24 ¶C
for the milk after preheat. The loop doesn’t involve the energy storage
tank itself, but the piping system, connects the two processes.
Figure 4.3:
Production situation
one with preheating of milk
Figure 4.4:
Production situation
two with whey cooling
Figure 4.5: Production situation 3 with whey cooling and preheating of milk.
When the tank is cooled down as in situation 1, the ’hot’ water comes from
the top of the tank, and after being cooled it is sent back into the bottom of
the tank. The opposite is the case in situation 2, where the tank is heated
up. The separation line between the hot and the cold part in the tank, drops
during the day as the tank is heated up. Ice water is used to ”reset” the tank
at the end of production day, as ’hot’ water will be taken from the top and
send back into the tank at the bottom after being cooled in a heat exchanger
==PAGE:49==
4.3. HEATING AND COOLING DEMANDS AT ENDRUP DAIRY
37
with ice water. This will make the separation line to rise again.
4.3
Heating and cooling demands at Endrup Dairy
The heating and cooling demands for the processes at the dairy has been
mapped considering the diﬀerent production situations and the running time
of each process.
This calculations are based on a comprehensive data collection. In total a
week (spread out on 4 visits) has been spend on the dairy, getting to know
the processes and the control system to each product. The data collection
is based on conversations with dairymen, craftsmen, administrative staﬀ, the
manager and mostly by observing and following the dairymen during the pro-
duction. A remote access to the control system was established by help from
the company Innotek, who manufactured the control system.
In appendix A the calculations of the heating and cooling demand for each
processes and the related assumptions can be seen. To calculate the heating
and cooling demand a physical model has been developed in the simulation
software ”Engineering Equation Solver”. The model is based on the equations
given in section 3.1, and in appendix B an example of the coding can be seen.
In table 4.1 the calculated heating demands are listed. The numbers are
based on the values presented in appendix A. Furthermore the cooling de-
mands are summarised in table A.9 in appendix A.1.
Selection and recalculation of heating demands
The selection of the heating demands are based on the sum for each category
presented in the bottom of table 4.1. From here it can be seen that the share
of the heating demands with a target temperature higher than 88 ¶C is only
3.1 %. In order to delineate the solutions and to focus on the largest potentials
heating demands for pasteurisation of whey and milk, extra heating of milk
and production of hot water are chosen.
When considering the heating demand ”extra heating of milk” it is seen that
this is mainly a demand in production situation 1. This is because of the low
temperature of the incoming milk in the regenerative section in the pasteur,
as explained in section A. By preheating the milk to the same temperature as
in production situation 3, this heating demand will almost be eliminated.
As seen on the heating demands for pasteurisation, the demand in situation
3 is lower than in situation 1. By moving the heating demand from extra
heating to preheat heat means that the total energy demand will increases a
little bit, but it moves the energy needed to a lower temperature level, which
is a good thing for the heat recovery system.
==PAGE:50==
38
CHAPTER 4. DATA COLLECTION AT ENDRUP DAIRY AND
FURTHER PROCEEDING
Table 4.1: Heating demands
Process
Tin
Tout
˙C
˙Q
t
Q
%
[¶C]
[¶C]
[kW
K ]
[kW]
[s]
[kWh]
Cream sit 1
83.9
88
0.9
3,7
4690
4,9
0.2
Cream resale
83.5
88
0.9
4.1
1379
1,6
0.1
Cream, sit3
84.3
88
0.9
3.4
4690
4,4
0.1
Culture
32
93
3.4
207,9
1200
69,3
2.3
Whey cream
35
95
0.8
46.7
900
11.7
0.4
Milk, skim, sit1
60.2
74.5
10.0
142.5
4690
185.7
6.2
Milk, whole, sit1
65.1
74.5
11.0
103.2
8447
242,2
8.1
Milk resale, whole, pas
63.6
74.5
11.0
119.7
2484
82.6
2.8
Milk resale skim, past
57.8
74.5
10.0
166.5
1379
63.8
2.1
Milk, skim, past, sit3
63.0
74.5
10.0
114.6
4690
149.3
5.0
Milk, whole, past, sit3
66.9
74.5
11.0
83.4
8447
195.8
6,5
Whey
67.3
73.0
11.3
64.6
30600
549.1
18.3
Milk whole, EV, sit1
21.4
32,5
11.0
121.9
8447
286.0
9.5
Milk skim, EV, sit1
21.4
32,5
10.0
110.6
4690
144.1
4.8
Milk whole, EV, sit3
31.6
32,5
11.0
9.9
8447
23.2
0,8
Milk skim, EV, sit3
31.6
32,5
10,0
9.0
4690
11.7
0.4
Process water
10
68
11.9
692.7
5040
969.8
32.4
Sum total
2995.1
100.0
Sum categories %
Cream + culture (32.5-93 ¶C)
3.1
Milk + whey, past (57-74.5 ¶C)
49.0
Milk, Ext.H (21.4-32.5 ¶C)
15.5
Process water (10-68 ¶C)
32.4
Based on this the demands are recalculated. The new values can be seen
in table 4.2.
==PAGE:51==
4.4. UTILITY SYSTEMS
39
Table 4.2: Recalculated relevant heating demands
Process
Tin
Tout
˙C
˙Q
t
Q
%
[¶C]
[¶C]
[kW
K ]
[kW]
[s]
[kWh]
Milk resale, whole, pas
63,6
74,5
11,0
119,7
2484
82,6
2,8
Milk resale skim, past
57,8
74,5
10,0
166,5
1379
63,8
2,1
Milk, skim, past
63,0
74,5
10,0
114,6
9379
298,6
5,0
Milk, whole, past
66,9
74,5
11,0
83,4
16894
391,6
6,5
Whey
67,3
73,0
11,3
64,6
30600
549,1
18,3
Milk skim, EV
31,6
32,5
10,0
9,0
9379
23,4
0,4
Milk whole, EV
31,6
32,5
11,0
9,9
16894
46,4
0,8
Milk Rm, PH, sit 1
12,0
24,0
11,1
133,4
13137
486,8
32,4
Process water
10,0
68,0
11,9
692,7
5040
969,8
32,4
sum
3003,5
100,0
Sum categories %
Milk + whey, past (57-74.5 ¶C)
46.1
Milk, preheat (14-24 ¶C)
16.2
Process water (10-68 ¶C)
32.3
4.4
Utility systems
In this section the utility system and the operation cost for the dairy will be
presented.
When implementing an alternative to the existing heating system in terms of
a heat recovery system, the existing system is still needed in order to cover
the heating demands not included in the heat recovery system. Furthermore
it will act as a back up system for the heat recovery system.
In order to
calculated how much NG the heat recovery system supplants, the eﬃciency of
the boiler has to be taken into account.
The refrigeration plant is presented in order to calculate the delivered cooling
to the processes (system cooling demand) and from this the available waste
heat in the condenser can be calculated.
The prices of both electricity and NG is essential in order to give an economic
assessment of the heat recovery solutions.
Existing central heating system
A 0.98 MW gas boiler from Burmeister&Wain 1997 is producing steam to
fulﬁl the heating demands in the dairy. The boiler is running almost at full
load the entire day of production.
The steam is led into the production site in pipes, and is heating up closed
water loops in heat exchangers, as seen in ﬁgure 4.6. The water loop heats
up the product ﬂow. One water loop, can go to several processes. For the
==PAGE:52==
40
CHAPTER 4. DATA COLLECTION AT ENDRUP DAIRY AND
FURTHER PROCEEDING
production of hot water i.e. CIP and process water the steam is used directly
as heating source.
Figure 4.6: A sketch of the central heating system illustrating the connection
between the steam boiler and the product ﬂow.
It is assumed that the temperature of the steam is 110 ¶C, and the con-
densate coming back to the boiler is 90¶C. To estimate an annual eﬃciency of
the boiler, the calculation program Be10 has been used. In Be10 a nominal
eﬃciency of 87 % from reference [12] table 9.9 for large partly isolated gas
boilers, as well as the mentioned temperatures are used. BE10 calculates an
eﬃciency of 83 % for the coldest months. From this result the eﬃciency of the
boiler used for further calculations will be 85 %, attached with an uncertainty
of 5 %.
Comparison of actual consumption of NG with the calculated
heating demands
Through an insight into the bills that the dairy pays each month for natural gas
and the dairies own reading of the gas metres, and average daily consumption
of 10 000 kWh is revealed. This consumption includes the loss from the entire
system, both from the boiler, pipes, ineﬃcient heat transfer and some of the
heating demands not covered in this study (mainly CIP). Comparing this
value to the calculated heating demand of almost 3000 kWh, it can at least be
concluded that the calculated value is low and conservative. The loss in the
natural gas system should of course not be included in this heating demand,
as the system will be replaced.
Refrigerant plant at Endrup Dairy
Located at the dairy is an ammonia refrigeration system. The refrigeration
system consists of two compressors, two evaporators and an air condenser
unit placed outside. One of the evaporators produces ice inside an Ice Water
Storage Tank (IWST), and the other evaporator pre-cools return water before
==PAGE:53==
4.4. UTILITY SYSTEMS
41
letting this into the same tank. The volume of the IWST is 50 m3, and it can
be considered as a buﬀer tank. The compressor operates between an evapo-
ration pressure of 3.2 bar and a condensing pressure of 9 bar. The isentropic
eﬃciency is assumed constant at 0.7 bar, after consulting the manufacture.
The plant has earlier been used in another company, and is therefore not di-
mensioned for the dairy’s speciﬁc cooling demand. The control system and
the layout of the original system has been changed after the installation.
In order to calculate the available waste heat that the condenser today rejects
to the surrounding, the refrigeration plant needed quite an investigation. The
calculations are based on the short description given in section 3.3 and the
detailed methodology is given in appendix C. The outcome is brieﬂy describe
in this section, and the results are given in table 4.3.
The cooling load in kWh for a week was calculated based on the ﬂow of ice
water sent to the processes and the diﬀerence between the supply and return
temperature. A sketch of the system, how the refrigeration plant operates
as well as an elaborated explanation of the calculation can be found in the
appendix C.
The calculation of the cooling load based on the entire system showed a
load of 18599 kWh per week (5 production days and a weekend). If the cooling
demands from table A.9 are summed for a week, the corresponding demand is
13564 kWh. The diﬀerence between the numbers is about 37 %. The deviation
can partly be explained by the fact that the system-based calculation includes
the loss from the system. Furthermore the system calculation are attached
with a rather large uncertainty on the water ﬂow calculation, as explained in
appendix C.
The calculation of the total evaporator capacity revealed a capacity of
183.6 kW. The calculations are described in details in appendix C.2 and are
as well based on the method presented in section 3.3.
The cycle calculation in order to determine the available waste heat is a inte-
grated part of the models for the suggested heat recovery conﬁgurations and
will be presented in chapter 5. The resulting available waste heat as well as
the compressor work is given here in table 4.3.
Table 4.3: Results in relation to calculation of the available waste heat
System cooling load
18599 kWh per week
Compressor operation time
101.3 hours per week
Evaporator capacity
183.6 kW
Available waste heat
213.8 kW
Compressor work
33.2 kW
==PAGE:54==
42
CHAPTER 4. DATA COLLECTION AT ENDRUP DAIRY AND
FURTHER PROCEEDING
Operation cost for utility systems
From the bills that the dairy pays for NG and electricity the current unit
prices for both have been calculated. The unit price consist of several diﬀerent
contributions. This is explained in details in appendix E. The prices used
further can be seen in table 4.4.
Table 4.4: Unit prices for NG and electricity
Unit price for NG and electricity
NG process
3,38
Ë
DKK
m3
È
NG non-process
5,37
Ë
DKK
m3
È
Electricity
0,69 DKK
kWh
4.5
Pinch analysis
In order to compared the heat recovery solutions from the refrigeration plant,
with the possibility to obtain heat recovery by internal heat exchange the
process streams in between, an pinch analysis in carried out.
The streams included corresponds to the ones presented in table 4.1, without
the streams related to cream and culture. The reason for this is the same
as for the selection of streams to the heat recovery system, as explained in
section 4.3.
The method used is described in section 3.4.5, and the calculations can be
seen in appendix F.
In ﬁgure 4.7 the composite curves for the hot and the cold streams can be
seen, and the key values are presented in table 4.5.
==PAGE:55==
4.5. PINCH ANALYSIS
43
Figure 4.7
Table 4.5: Key values obtained from the pinch analysis.
Minimum external heating
2460
Ë
kWh
d
È
Minimum external cooling
2604
Ë
kWh
d
È
pinch target
334
Ë
kWh
d
È
Yearly saving in operation cost
35250
Ë
DKK
yr
È
The total savings in operation cost from a minimized use of utility streams,
presented in table 4.5 is calculated as described below.
Heat savings:
334 kWh/d
11 kwh/m3 85 % · 3.38 DKK
m3
= 120 DKK/d
where 85 % is the boiler eﬃciency and 3.38 is the unit price for natural
gas.
The cooling savings are based on a shorter operation time for the refrig-
eration plant’s compressor:
Saved operation time for compressor: 334 kWh · 3600 kWh/kJ
183.6 kW
= 1.8 h
Where 183.6 kW is the capacity of the evaporator.
At a normal condensing pressure of 9 bar the cost of electricity to run the
compressor for 1.8 h, is calculated.
==PAGE:56==
44
CHAPTER 4. DATA COLLECTION AT ENDRUP DAIRY AND
FURTHER PROCEEDING
Saved cost of electricity: 33.2kW · 1.8h · 0.69 DKK
kWh = 41 DDK
The total sum of the savings in operation cost is 161 DKK/day added up
to a yearly saving of 32530 DKK/yr.
This value will later be compared to the savings in operation cost when im-
plementing a heat recovery system for the refrigeration plant.
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 5
System and conﬁguration
description
This chapter covers a suggested solution of a thermal storage system in connec-
tion to a heat recovery system and a description of suggested conﬁgurations for
a heat recovery system. To each conﬁguration a simulation model is made. In
relation to this the simulations objective of the models for each conﬁguration
are presented.
5.1
System conﬁguration
A condition for the system conﬁguration is that heat recovery from the re-
frigeration plant takes place in the entire operation time of the compressor.
This means that the heat is accumulated over time in thermal storages. While
the production is from day to day, the heating demand for one day should be
fulﬁlled within the operation time of the refrigeration plant’s compressor in
the same day.
With a operation time of 19.6 hours during a production day the capacities
fulﬁlled by the heat recovery system to each heating demand can be seen in
table 5.1. A sketch of the thermal storage system conﬁguration can be seen in
ﬁgure 5.1. To each heating demand a system as shown in ﬁgure 5.1, is needed.
The heat exchanger connected to the NG based utility stream will secure that
the temperature of the water is at the desired level at all times.
Each heat exchange will add a minimum temperature diﬀerence of 3 K between
the streams. In the heat exchange between the water and the refrigerant this
will be a single pinch temperature somewhere in the heat exchanger. For the
heat exchanger with product ﬂow at water the pinch will be in both ends. The
yields a small mean temperature diﬀerence, and the needed heat transferring
area, will be rather large.
The resulting temperatures of the product ﬂow and the water ﬂow can be
seen in table 5.1. The system in ﬁgure 5.1 shows an ideal situation, without
45
==PAGE:58==
46
CHAPTER 5. SYSTEM AND CONFIGURATION DESCRIPTION
any heat loss. For a real case there will be both a heat loss from the stor-
age tank, and possible some mixing of the water in the storage tank. The
possible mixing of water will be the biggest problem in the system with milk
pasteurisation. The changing temperature of the incoming milk, will aﬀect
the temperature of the cold water added in the bottom of the storage tank. A
possible solution could be to split this system into a hot and cold storage tank
instead. In order to simplify the system at this point, the coldest possible
return temperature of 60 ¶C will be used in the following.
Figure 5.1: System for thermal storage in relation to heat recovery.
Table 5.1: The temperatures of the product ﬂow and the water in the heat
recovery system, as well as the capacity that the system must obtain in order
to cover the demand.
Process
Tprod,out
Tprod,in
Tw,supply
Tw,return
˙Q
[¶C]
[¶C]
[¶C]
[¶C]
[kW]
Pasteurisation, ˙Qpast
74.5
57.8-67.3
77.5
60.8
70.4
Preheat of milk, ˙Qph
24
12
27
15
49.3
Process water, ˙Qpw
68
10
71
13
24.7
In addition to the capacities and the temperature levels listed in the table
5.1, the demand for hot water in the CIP system will also be taken into
account. Heating water for CIP will used as a possibility whenever the system
can be adjusted to deliver a higher capacity. The outcome will be an amount
of water, that can only be assessed reasonable to a certain extent as mentioned
in appendix A, CIP system. To keep it simple the temperature level of the
water used for CIP is assumed to be the same as the water used for process
water.
==PAGE:59==
5.2. SIMULATION OBJECTIVE
47
5.2
Simulation objective
In order to test diﬀerent possibilities for covering the heating demands pre-
sented in table 5.1 4 diﬀerent conﬁgurations for heat recovery system are
investigated. The common simulation objects as well as individual objects for
each conﬁguration is stated below.
• How much of the required heat is it possible to recover from the refrig-
eration plant?
• What are the diﬀerent COPs?
• What are the savings from substitution of natural gas?
• What is the cost in terms of compressor work?
• What are the ﬁnal savings in operation cost?
• How large an investment cost can be accepted for a pay back time of 3
years?
The above questions is answered for all conﬁgurations and compared. For
each conﬁguration the answer to the objects will be considered within a sim-
ulation of a varying condensing pressure of the refrigeration plant.
The above questions will be answered on the basis of one production day.
The results is scaled to a yearly basis subsequently.
For conﬁguration 2 and 3 the diﬀerence between a open intercooler and a
cascade heat exchanger is investigated, as well as the eﬀect of changing the re-
frigerant in the top cycle from ammonia to propane. In the end these changes
will also be assessed in relation to the questions mentioned above.
5.3
Conﬁgurations and heating demands
This section will present the diﬀerent conﬁgurations together with the related
assumptions and conditions. Each conﬁguration deals with diﬀerent heating
demands. The basic concept of the system is to dedicate a heat exchanger to
a certain heating demand.
Table 5.2 gives an overview on this.
5.3.1
Assumptions made in the models
First of all it is important to notice that the models only considers a design
situation, and does not cover the dynamics of a chosen system with real com-
ponents.
==PAGE:60==
48
CHAPTER 5. SYSTEM AND CONFIGURATION DESCRIPTION
Table 5.2: An overview of the heating demands considered for each
conﬁguration and the belonging heat exchanger.
Heating demand
Process
Preheat of
Pasteuri-
Potential
water
milk
sation
CIP
Conﬁguration 1
HEX 1 (Extended desuperheater)
x
(x)
HEX 2 (Condenser)
x
Conﬁguration 2a & 2b
HEX 1 (Extended desuperheater)
x
(x)
HEX 2 (Condenser)
x
HEX 3 (Condenser top cycle)
x
Conﬁguration 3a & 3b
HEX1 (Extended desuperheater)
x
(x)
HEX 2 (Condenser)
x
HEX 3 (Condenser top cycle)
x
HEX 4 (Subcooling top cycle)
x
In ﬁgure 5.2 the conditions for the evaporator and the compressor in the bot-
tom cycle/the existing cooling plant can be seen. These conditions will be
the same for all conﬁgurations. Furthermore the isentropic eﬃciency and heat
loss for the compressor is also applied for the compressor in the top cycle.
Figure 5.2: Den ﬁgur skal rettes
In addition to the assumptions shown in ﬁgure 5.2 the following applies:
• A minimum pinch temperature between water streams and the refriger-
ant is 3 K for all cases.
==PAGE:61==
5.3. CONFIGURATIONS AND HEATING DEMANDS
49
• The lowest possible pressure is 9 bar, and this is also the minimum
operation pressure of the existing cooling plant.
• The refrigerant in the bottom cycle will in all cases be ammonia, as this
is the case for the existing cooling plant.
• Pressure loss in the heat exchangers and pipes are neglected.
• At 18 bar the discharge temperature of the refrigerant is 150 ¶C. This
is considered as the maximum allowed temperature, with respect to the
constraints on material and oil temperature for a reciprocation compres-
sor.
5.3.2
Conﬁguration 1
Conﬁguration 1 is the most simple one, as it only consists of the existing
refrigeration cycle. Instead of only an air condenser as it is the case today,
two additional condensers are added in order to heat up water. A PI diagram
can be seen in ﬁgure 5.3.
Figure 5.3: A PI-diagram for conﬁguration 1.
The ﬁrst HEX is an extended desuperheater (3-5, HEX1) heating water for
process water, the second is a normal condenser (5-6, HEX2) heating water
for preheating milk and the rest of the condensation heat is rejected to the
surroundings is an air condenser (6-7).
The corresponding ˙Q,T-diagram and Log P,h-diagram can be seen in ﬁgure
5.4 and 5.5.
The COPs deﬁned are based on the presented deﬁnitions in section 3.4.3.
A COP for HEX1 and HEX2 is deﬁned as equation 5.1 and 5.2 respectively.
COPHEX1 =
˙QHEX1
˙Wcom1
(5.1)
==PAGE:62==
50
CHAPTER 5. SYSTEM AND CONFIGURATION DESCRIPTION
Figure 5.4: ˙Q,T diagram for conﬁgu-
ration 1.
Figure 5.5: Log P,h-diagram for con-
ﬁguration 1.
COPHEX2 =
˙QHEX2
˙Wcom1
(5.2)
Furthermore the COP for heat and refrigeration is deﬁned by 5.3 and 5.4.
COPheat,config1 =
˙QHEX1 + ˙QHEX2
˙Wcom1
(5.3)
COPcooling =
˙Qevap
˙Wcom1
(5.4)
Furthermore a marginal COP for heat is deﬁned as in equation 5.5, based
on equation 3.17.
COPheat,mar,config1 = ( ˙QHEX1 + ˙QHEX2) ≠( ˙QHEX1,ref + ˙QHEX2,ref)
˙Wcom1 ≠˙Wcom1,ref
(5.5)
An overall COP for both cooling and heat is deﬁned as in equation 5.6
COPheat+cooling =
˙QHEX1 + ˙QHEX2 + ˙Qevap
˙Wcom1
(5.6)
When varying the condensing pressure the capacity of HEX 1 and HEX2
changes. The means that more or less of the heating demand for preheating
of milk and procoess water are fulﬁlled. This relation between capacity and
pressure is modelled as described below.
Modelling HEX 1
The modelling of HEX 1 is based on the ideas presented in section 3.4.1. At
the lowest pressure it is not possible to obtain the wanted outlet temperature
==PAGE:63==
5.3. CONFIGURATIONS AND HEATING DEMANDS
51
and capacity for the process water. In order to fulﬁl the heating demand for
process water as much as possible, the needed amount of water is preheated to
the highest available temperature. When increasing the intermediate pressure,
the outlet temperature will increase until the desired temperature is reached.
When the desired outlet temperature is reached, the heating demand is fulﬁlled
in both capacity and temperature. Increasing the intermediate pressure even
more, gives the possibility to increase the amount of water being heated. As
the temperature of process water is very close to temperatures needed for CIP,
the increasing capacity will be used to produce water for CIP.
In the model the concept is to test whether the split condenser fulﬁls the
heating demand for process water or not. The outcome of this test will then
give the input to a procedure that either will increases the outlet temperature
or start to production of water for CIP, by increasing the mass ﬂow rate.
Modelling HEX 2
The water for preheating the milk is produced in a condenser. At the lowest
condensing pressure it is not possible to reach the desired outlet temperature.
Instead the needed amount of water is heated to the highest possible temper-
ature. When the condensing pressure is increased, the outlet temperature can
be increased as well.
In the model the concept is to test whether the highest possible outlet tem-
perature is higher or lower than the desired outlet temperature. When lower,
the outlet temperature will assume this value, and if higher the outlet tem-
perature will stay at the desired temperature. In this case the pinch between
the condensing temperature and the outlet temperature will increase when
the condensing pressure is increased.
5.3.3
Conﬁguration 2a
In conﬁguration 2a the system is extended to a two stage cycle, with an open
intercooler. The condensing units, HEX 1 and HEX 2, are the same as in
conﬁguration 1.
The condenser in the top cycle (HEX 3, 11-13) heats up
water for pasteurisation processes. A PI diagram can be seen in ﬁgure 5.6 and
a log P,h diagram can be seen in ﬁgure 5.7.
The condensing pressure in the top cycle is always as high as it is neces-
sary to reach the desired outlet temperature of the water. Furthermore the
capacity of HEX 3 is constant in order to cover the entire heating demand for
pasteurisation.
A ˙Q,T-diagram for the top and bottom cycle can be seen in ﬁgure 5.8 and
5.9.
The COP for heat and the COP for the top cycle is deﬁned by 5.7 and 5.8.
COPheat,config2 =
˙QHEX1 + ˙QHEX2 + ˙QHEX3
˙Wcom1 + ˙Wcom,2
(5.7)
==PAGE:64==
52
CHAPTER 5. SYSTEM AND CONFIGURATION DESCRIPTION
Figure 5.6: A PI-diagram of conﬁguration 2a
Figure 5.7: LogP,h-diagram of conﬁguration 2a with a intermediate pressure
at 14 bar.
COPtopcycle,config2 =
˙QHEX3
˙Wcom,2
(5.8)
Furthermore a marginal COP for heat is deﬁned as in equation 5.9. As the
capacity for of HEX 3 does not change with a variation in the intermediate
pressure, the marginal heat only consist of the contribution from HEX 1 and
2.
COPheat,mar,config2 = ( ˙QHEX1 + ˙QHEX2) ≠( ˙QHEX1,ref + ˙QHEX2,ref)
( ˙Wcom1 + ˙Wcom2) ≠( ˙Wcom1,ref + ˙Wcom2,ref)
(5.9)
==PAGE:65==
5.3. CONFIGURATIONS AND HEATING DEMANDS
53
Figure 5.8: ˙Q,T diagram for the bot-
tom cycle of conﬁguration 2a with a
intermediate pressure at 14 bar.
Figure 5.9:
˙Q,T diagram for the top
cycle of conﬁguration 2a.
An overall COP for both cooling and heat is deﬁned as in equation 5.10
COPheat+cooling =
˙QHEX1 + ˙QHEX2 + ˙QHEX3 + ˙Qevap
˙Wcom1 + ˙Wcom,2
(5.10)
5.3.4
Conﬁguration 3a
Conﬁguration 3a is basically the same as model 2, but with an extension of
subcooling in the top cycle. A PI-diagram and a log P,h-diagram can be seen
in ﬁgure 5.10. After the receiver in the top cycle, an extra heat exchanger
(HEX 4) for subcooling is introduced (13-14).
Figure 5.10: A PI-diagram of conﬁguration 3a.
A log P,h-diagram can be seen in ﬁgure 5.11. The ˙Q,T-diagram will be
the same as for conﬁguration 2a. The ˙Q,T-diagram for the top cycle can be
seen in ﬁgure 5.12.
==PAGE:66==
54
CHAPTER 5. SYSTEM AND CONFIGURATION DESCRIPTION
Figure 5.11:
Log P,h-diagram of
conﬁguration 3a with a intermediate
pressure at 14 bar.
Figure 5.12: ˙Q,T diagram for the top
cycle of conﬁguration 2a.
The subcooler is used for heating water to the CIP system. This gives a
relative large subcooling of 58 K. This means that the refrigerant entering the
intercooler (15) is subcooled liquid.
The COP for heat and the top cycle is deﬁned as equation 5.11 and 5.12.
COPheat,config3 =
˙QHEX1 + ˙QHEX2 + ˙QHEX3 + ˙QHEX4
˙Wcom1 + ˙Wcom,2
(5.11)
COPtopcycle,config3 =
˙QHEX3 + ˙QHEX4
˙Wcom,2
(5.12)
An overall COP for both cooling and heat is deﬁned as in equation 5.13
COPheat+cooling =
˙QHEX1 + ˙QHEX2 + ˙QHEX3 + ˙QHEX4 + ˙Qevap
˙Wcom1 + ˙Wcom,2
(5.13)
5.3.5
Conﬁguration 2b and 3b
For both model 2b and model 3b the open intercooler is replaced with a cas-
cade heat exchanger. A PI diagram for conﬁguration 2b can be seen in ﬁgure
5.13. In addition to this conﬁguration 3b will have a subcooler in the top cycle.
The ˙Q,T diagram for the heat exchange between the top and the bottom
cycle can be seen in ﬁgure 5.14. The tendency of the diagram will be the same
for conﬁguration 3b, but the cascade heat exchanger will have a greater share
of the condensation heat, and less will be rejected to the surroundings.
The introduction of a DX cascade heat exchanger will increase the pressure
ratio for top cycle, compared to a setup with an open intercooler. As seen
in ﬁgure 5.14 the pinch between the two cycles will be located between the
==PAGE:67==
5.3. CONFIGURATIONS AND HEATING DEMANDS
55
Figure 5.13: A PI-diagram for conﬁguration 2b with a cascade heat exchanger.
Figure 5.14: ˙Q,T-diagram for conﬁguration 2b.
condensing temperature (6) and the superheated refrigerant (11), and is given
as an input (3 K).
The temperature diﬀerence between the cycles in a cascade heat exchanger
introduce a loss to the system in terms of a entropy generation. In order to
minimize the loss, it is suggested to change the refrigerant in the top cycle
from ammonia (R717) to propane (R290), as this will decrease the amount of
needed superheat (see section 3.4.2).
The amount of superheat is given as 8 K for ammonia and 4 K for propane, and
can be considered as a minimum for both. The decrease in the temperature
diﬀerence between the condensing and evaporation temperature can be seen
in ﬁgure 5.15.
When the pressure ratio (PR) in the top cycle increases, so does the dis-
charge temperature from the compressor. In order to keep this temperature
below 150 ¶C the condensing pressure of the bottom cycle has be 15.3 bar or
above. This gives a limited working range between 15.3 and 18 bar for this
set-up. Other impacts of the introduction of propane as refrigerant in the
top cycle will be assessed regarding the compressor work for the top cycle,
COPheat and COPtopcycle as well as an economic evaluation.
==PAGE:68==
56
CHAPTER 5. SYSTEM AND CONFIGURATION DESCRIPTION
Figure 5.15:
˙Q,T-diagram for cascade HEX for conﬁguration 2b with R717
and R290 in the top cycle.
==PAGE:69==
Chapter 6
Veriﬁcation
In this chapter the components in the diﬀerent conﬁgurations will be veriﬁed.
This is done by checking that the capacity of the heat exchangers (HEX 1,
HEX 2, HEX3, HEX 4) as well as the work of the compressor develop as
excepted when varying the intermediate pressure.
HEX 1 and HEX 2
HEX 1 fulﬁl the heating demand for process water and additionally CIP, and
HEX 2 fulﬁl the heating demand for preheating of milk. The variation of for
the heating capacities when varying the intermediate pressure can be seen in
ﬁgure 6.1. The variations of the capacity shown in ﬁgure 6.1 for HEX 1 and
HEX 2, will be the same in all conﬁgurations.
Figure 6.1: The variation in heat capacities for HEX1 and HEX2 when varying
the condensing pressure.
As seen in ﬁgure 6.1 for HEX 1 ( ˙Qpw) the capacity increases. At 12.2 bar
57
==PAGE:70==
58
CHAPTER 6. VERIFICATION
the desired outlet temperature of the process water is reached and from there
the mass ﬂow rate of water increases instead, producing water for CIP. This
can also be seen in ﬁgure 6.2 where the amount of heat in kWh produced
during a day can be seen. When 12.2 bar is reached, the production of CIP
starts, as the need for process water is fulﬁlled.
The capacity for HEX 2 ( ˙Qph) is increasing until the desired outlet tempera-
ture is reached at 11.7 bar.
Figure 6.2: Heat from HEX 1. At 12.2 bar the heating demand for process
water is covered, and extra capacity is used for CIP.
HEX 3 and HEX 4
HEX 3 fulﬁl the heating demand for pasteurisation, and HEX 4 fulﬁl a heating
demand for CIP water. Both heat exchangers are located in the top cycle.
The capacities of HEX 3 and 4 can be seen in ﬁgure 6.3.
The capacity of HEX 3 for pasteurisation is constant, when varying the
intermediate pressure. This is due to the fact that it does not makes sense to
produce more heat in the heat pump than needed.
In ﬁgure 6.4 conﬁguration 3a can be seen in a log P,h-diagram. As seen the
speciﬁc capacity of the desuperheat will decrease (point 11 moves to the left),
when the intermediate pressure is increased. In order to keep the capacity of
HEX 3 constant, the mass ﬂow rate of refrigerant increases with increasing
intermediate pressure. This implies a greater capacity of the intercooler.
The capacity of HEX 4 is very close to constant. The small increase can
be explained by the increase in the mass ﬂow rate, as well as a minor increase
in the speciﬁc capacity as the condensing pressure increases.
==PAGE:71==
59
Figure 6.3: The variation in heat capacities for HEX 3 and HEX 4
Figure 6.4: Log P,h-diagram for conﬁguration 3a at diﬀerent intermediate
pressures.
Total capacity for conﬁguration 1, 2a and 3a
In ﬁgure 6.5 the total capacity for conﬁguration 1, 2a and 3a can be seen.
The variation in the total capacity is the same for all three conﬁgurations,
but increased with the amount of ˙Qpast (HEX 3) for conﬁguration 2a and
for conﬁguration 3a it increases with both ˙Qpast (HEX 3) and ˙Qcip2 (HEX4),
compared to conﬁguration 1.
The capacity of the air condenser can be seen in ﬁgure 6.6. The amount
rejected to the air will as seen decreases with an increase in the intermediate
pressure.
The addition of subcooling in conﬁguration 3a will increase the
capacity of the intercooler compared to conﬁguration 2a. As seen in ﬁgure 6.6
this implies that less heat is rejected to the air.
==PAGE:72==
60
CHAPTER 6. VERIFICATION
Figure
6.5:
The
total
capacity
for
a
variation
of
the
condens-
ing/intermediate pressure for conﬁg-
uration 1, 2a and 3a.
Figure 6.6:
The variations in the
capacity of the air condenser, when
varying the condensing/intermediate
pressure.
Compressor work
In ﬁgure 6.7 the compressor work for both compressors as well as the total
compressor work for conﬁguration 2a and 3a can be seen. The compressor
work for conﬁguration 1, corresponds to the work of compressor 1. The com-
Figure 6.7: The variation in compressor work when varying the condensing
pressure. The sum of ˙Wcom,1 and ˙Wcom,2 are the total work ˙Wtotal for conﬁg.
2a and 3a.
˙Wcom,1 are the compressor work for conﬁg. 1.
pressor work for conﬁguration 2a and 3a are the same. The compressor work
for the top cycle is decreasing with a higher intermediate pressure. A higher
intermediate pressure will decreases the PR and the speciﬁc compressor work,
but will furthermore also decrease the speciﬁc condensation heat, and by that
increase the mass ﬂow rate of refrigerant, in order to maintain the capacity
of HEX 3 (Qpast). But as mentioned the overall eﬀect is a decrease for the
compressor work in the top cycle. The total compressor work for all three
conﬁgurations is increasing with a higher condensing/intermediate pressure.
==PAGE:73==
61
Conﬁguration 2a compared to 2b
A log P,h-diagram for both conﬁguration 2b together with the top cycle of
conﬁguration 2a can be seen in ﬁgure 6.8.
Figure 6.8: Log P,h-digram for conﬁguration 2b (cascade HEX) and the top
cycle from conﬁguration 2a (intercooler) at 15.3 bar as condensing pressure in
the bottom cycle.
In ﬁgure 6.8 it can as expected be seen that the PR for the top cycle
increases, and in connection to this a higher discharge temperature from the
compressor occur (12 compared to 11*).
The increased PR for the top cycle implies an increase in the speciﬁc compres-
sor work. In order to keep a suﬃcient capacity in HEX 3, the mass ﬂow rate of
the refrigerant in the top cycle will decreases, as the speciﬁc condensation heat
increases. The overall eﬀect is a general higher level of the compressor work
compared to conﬁguration 2a as shown in ﬁgure 6.9. As explained previous
the working range for the top cycle compressor is between 15.3 and 18 bar.
Figure 6.9: The compressor work for the top cycle for conﬁguration 2a and
2b.
==PAGE:74==
==PAGE:75==
Chapter 7
Results
In this chapter the results will be presented. This includes an overview of how
the heating demands are fulﬁlled by the diﬀerent conﬁgurations (se table 5.2
for recap), the COPs for each conﬁguration and ﬁnally an economic evaluation
for each conﬁguration.
7.1
Heating demands
The aim for each of the HEXs is to fulﬁl the capacity presented in table 5.1,
in order to cover the heating demand for one production day.
As seen back in ﬁgure 6.1, this is for HEX 1 obtained at 12.2 bar and for HEX 2
at 11.7 bar. For a lower condensing/intermediate pressure the heating demand
can only be covered partly by the heat recovery system. This means that the
system must be supported by a natural gas (NG) based utility system.
Figure 7.1 and 7.2 shows the share between the delivered heat for the NG
system and the heat recovery system.
Table 7.1: The tables shows how many percentages of the total heating
demand, the conﬁgurations fulﬁl at three diﬀerent condensing/intermediate
pressure.
9 [bar]
11.7 [bar]
12.2 [bar]
Conﬁguration 1
26 %
49 %
51 %
Conﬁguration 2
75 %
98 %
100 %
Conﬁguration 3
75 % +CIP
98 % +CIP
100 % +CIP
Tabel 7.1 presents the percentages fulﬁlled for each conﬁguration. At 9
bar, the lowest pressure, the heating demand for process water is covered by
62 % and the heating demand for preheat of milk is covered by 29 %. The
heating demand for pasteurisation is 100 % covered for conﬁguration 2 and
3, for all variations in the intermediate pressures.
For conﬁguration 3 the
63
==PAGE:76==
64
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
Figure 7.1: Process water (HEX1):
The distribution between the heat
recovery system and the NG utility
system when varying the condens-
ing/intermediate pressure.
Figure 7.2:
Preheating of milk
(HEX2): The distribution between
the heat recovery system and the
NG utility system when varying
the condensing/intermediate pres-
sure.
addition of CIP in HEX 4 is also mentioned, but can not be given as a share
as the demand the is unknown.
7.2
CIP
In the case where the intermediate pressure is above 12.2 bar, HEX 1 will
start to produce water for CIP. Furthermore for the addition of HEX 4 in
conﬁguration 3a there will be a production of water for CIP even at the
lowest intermediate pressure.
The amount of CIP water produced in each
HEX can be seen in ﬁgure 7.3. The total amount of CIP water produced for
conﬁguration 3a is shown as well. For conﬁguration 1 2a and 2b the amount
of CIP water produced corresponds to the production in HEX 1.
7.3
Marginal heat COP and COP for components
Conﬁguration 1
The COPs for HEX 1 and HEX 2 as deﬁned in equation 5.1 and 5.2 can be
seen in ﬁgure 7.4.
Furthermore the marginal COP for heat as deﬁned in equation 5.5 can be seen
in ﬁgure 7.5.
Assessed individually the COP for both HEX1 and HEX2, starts oﬀbelow
one. When increasing the condensing pressure the COP for HEX 2 increases
until 11.7 bar where the capacity of the HEX becomes constant. The COP for
HEX 1 has a positive increase in the tendency at 12.2 bar. At this point the
heating demand for process water is met, and instead of increasing the outlet
==PAGE:77==
7.3. MARGINAL HEAT COP AND COP FOR COMPONENTS
65
Figure 7.3: The amount of CIP produced in HEX 1 and HEX 4, and the total
production for conﬁguration 3a.
Figure 7.4: The COP for HEX 1 and
HEX 2
Figure 7.5:
The marginal COP for
conﬁguration 1
temperature, the mass ﬂow rate increases.
Further to this it is seen that the marginal COP for heat for conﬁguration 1
including these HEXs has a negative tendency, until a condensing pressure of
14.3 bar. This will be discussed further in section 8.1.
Conﬁguration 2a and 3a
The marginal heat COP for conﬁguration 2a and 3a will be the same. The
COP can be seen in ﬁgure 7.6.
The amount of heat gained from an increase in the intermediate pressure
will be the same as in conﬁguration 1, as HEX 3 has a constant capacity, and
the change in the capacity of HEX 4 is negligible.
The extra amount of work added from the reference at 9 bar will increase the
compressor work in the bottom cycle, and decrease for the compressor in the
top cycle. The marginal total compressor work will increase, as the interme-
diate pressure increases.
==PAGE:78==
66
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
Figure 7.6: The marginal COP for heat for conﬁguration 2a and 3a.
The COP for the top cycle for both conﬁguration 2a and 3a can be seen
in ﬁgure 7.7.
Figure 7.7: The COP for the top cycle in conﬁguration 2a and 3a.
The COP for the top cycle is higher for the conﬁguration 3a, as this in-
cludes the capacity of the subcooling (HEX 4).
7.4
COP for heat and refrigeration
Conﬁguration 1, 2a and 2b
The total COP for heat, as deﬁned in equation 5.3, 5.7 and 5.11, can be seen
in ﬁgure 7.8.
The COP for the cooling can be seen in ﬁgure 7.9. As shown the compres-
sor work is the same for conﬁguration 2a and 3a, which results in the same
COP for cooling.
As seen the COPheat increases until the 11.7 bar. From 11.7 to 12.2 bar it
decreases slightly, before increasing again from 12.2 bar. The slightly decrease
==PAGE:79==
7.5. TWO STAGE CYCLE WITH CASCADE HEX
67
Figure 7.8:
COPheat for conﬁgura-
tions 1, 2a and 3a.
Figure 7.9: COPcooling for conﬁgura-
tion 1, 2a and 3a.
is due to capacity of HEX 2, that becomes constant at 11.7 bar.
COPcooling decreases with the variation in intermediate pressure. This is due
to a constant capacity of the evaporator and an increase in total compressor
work for all conﬁgurations.
The total COP for both cooling and heat can be seen for all three conﬁgura-
tions in ﬁgure 7.10.
Figure 7.10: COPheat+cooling for all three conﬁgurations.
7.5
Two stage cycle with cascade HEX
In this section the conﬁguration 2b and 3b with ammonia in the top cycle will
be compared to conﬁguration 2b and 3b with propane in the top cycle.
Conﬁguration 2b
A log P,h- diagram for conﬁguration 2b with propane in the top cycle can
be seen in ﬁgure 7.11. When comparing the speciﬁc condensation heat with
ammonia (ﬁgure 6.8) it is clear that the amount for propane is much smaller.
The implies that the mass ﬂow rate of refrigerant will be higher, in order to
==PAGE:80==
68
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
Figure 7.11: LogP,h diagram for conﬁguration 2b with R290 as refrigerant in
the top cycle.
meet the same capacity of HEX 3. The speciﬁc compressor work will as well
be smaller, but larger mass ﬂow rate will increase will result in an increase in
the compressor work.
Furthermore it is seen that the discharge temperature (12) for propane is much
lower compared to ammonia. In order to compare the cycles in the same work-
ing area, only the range between 15.3 to 18 bar is considered.
The compressor work for both propane and ammonia can be seen in ﬁgure
7.12. Here it can be seen that the compressor work for the top cycle with
propane as refrigerant is at a higher level compared to ammonia. The com-
pressor work will be the same for conﬁguration 3b with ammonia and propane
respectively.
Figure 7.12: Compressor work for the top cycle of conﬁguration 2b and 3b
with propane and ammonia as refrigerant respectively.
The total compressor work for all three conﬁgurations can be seen in ﬁgure
7.13.
Addition of subcooling does not inﬂuence the compressor work, but
changing from open intercooler (2a + 3a) to cascade heat exchanger with
==PAGE:81==
7.5. TWO STAGE CYCLE WITH CASCADE HEX
69
ammonia (2b + 3b R717) increase the work, and furthermore changing the
refrigerant to propane (2b + 3b) increases the work as well.
Figure 7.13: Total compressor work for all conﬁgurations.
The comparison between the COP for heat and for the top cycle alone can be
seen in ﬁgure 7.14 and 7.15.
Figure 7.14: COPheat for conﬁgura-
tion 2b with R717 and R290.
Figure 7.15: COPtopcycle for conﬁgu-
ration 2b with R717 and R290.
The COPheat and COPtopcycle as seen in ﬁgure 7.14 and 7.15, will be at a
lower level for propane compared to ammonia, due to the capacity in HEX 3
and a larger compressor work for propane.
Conﬁguration 3b
A log P,h- diagram for the top cycle in conﬁguration 3b with propane as
refrigerant can be seen in ﬁgure 7.16.
The speciﬁc capacity of the subcooler/HEX 4 will decrease compared to
ammonia. The increase in mass ﬂow rate of the refrigerant will on the other
increase the total capacity.
This is can be seen in ﬁgure 7.17.
The total
capacity for both conﬁguration 3b with ammonia and propane can be seen in
ﬁgure 7.18.
==PAGE:82==
70
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
Figure 7.16: LogP,h diagram for conﬁguration 2b with R290 as refrigerant in
the top cycle.
Figure 7.17: Capacity of HEX 4 for
conﬁguration 3b with R717 and R290
as refrigerant in the top cycle.
Figure 7.18:
Total capacity of the
both the bottom and top cycle for
conﬁguration 3b with R717 and R290
as refrigerant in the top cycle.
The increase of capacity of HEX4 yields a larger production of water for
CIP. At the highest pressure the total volume produced from both HEX 1 and
HEX 4 in conﬁguration 3b with propane is 33 m3, and can still be considered
as reasonable.
The compressor work for both cycles will be the same as in conﬁguration
2b (seen in ﬁgure 7.12) as the addition of a subcooler does not have any
inﬂuence on the this.
The comparison between the COP for heat and for the top cycle alone can be
seen in ﬁgure 7.19 and 7.20.
==PAGE:83==
7.6. OPERATION COST, NPV AND PAY BACK TIME
71
Figure 7.19: COPheat for conﬁgura-
tion 3b with R717 and R290 as re-
frigerant in the top cycle.
Figure 7.20: COPtopcycle for conﬁgu-
ration 3b with R717 and R290 as re-
frigerant in the top cycle.
For both conﬁguration 2b and 3b for with both refrigerants, COPheat+cooling
and COPcooling can be seen in ﬁgure 7.21 and 7.22.
Figure 7.21: COPheat+cooling for both
conﬁguration 2b and 3b with both re-
frigerants.
Figure 7.22: COPcooling for conﬁgu-
ration 2b and 3b for both refrigerants.
The total working area for the conﬁgurations with propane is shown, in
order to compare with conﬁguration 3a and 2a. In ﬁgure 7.21 it can be seen
that the COPheat+cooling rank the same way between the conﬁgurations as the
COPheat. Furthermore as seen in ﬁgure 7.22 the COPcooling decreases with
the increase in total compressor work.
7.6
Operation cost, NPV and pay back time
The results presented in this section is based on the methodology from section
3.4.4.
The revenues from saved NG together with cost from extra compressor work
can be seen in ﬁgure 7.23 for conﬁguration 1, and for conﬁguration 2a and 3a
==PAGE:84==
72
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
in ﬁgure 7.24. Note that the variation in the pressure will be the condensing
pressure for conﬁguration 1 and the intermediate pressure for conﬁguration
2a and 3a.
Figure 7.23: Revenues from saved NG and the additional cost of compressor
work for conﬁg. 1 for one production day.
Figure 7.24: Revenues from saved NG and the additional cost of compressor
work for conﬁg. 2a and 3a for one production day.
For all three conﬁgurations it is seen that the savings from NG exceeds
the additional cost of compressor work. The resulting cash ﬂow (CF) can be
seen in ﬁgure 7.25.
==PAGE:85==
7.6. OPERATION COST, NPV AND PAY BACK TIME
73
Figure 7.25: The possible cash ﬂow per year after investment based on the
extra operation cost and revenues from saved NG.
In ﬁgure 7.25 the bend at 11.7 bar can be explained by the change in the capac-
ity of HEX 2. After this bend it is seen that a certain increase in the capacity
of HEX 1 is needed, before the CF again increase with the increasing pressure.
In ﬁgure 7.26 the revenues from saved NG together with cost from extra com-
pressor work can be seen for conﬁguration 2b for both ammonia and propane
in the top cycle. In ﬁgure 7.27 the same can be seen for conﬁguration 3b.
Figure 7.26: Revenues from saved NG and the additional cost of compressor
work for conﬁg. 2b with R717 and R290 in the top cycle.
The yearly cash ﬂow of both conﬁguration 2b and 3b with both refrigerants
can be seen in ﬁgure 7.28.
==PAGE:86==
74
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
Figure 7.27: Revenues from saved NG and the additional cost of compressor
work for conﬁg. 3b with R717 and R290 in the top cycle.
Figure 7.28: Year cash ﬂow for conﬁg. 2b and 3b with R717 and R290 in the
top cycle.
In order to calculate the maximum accepted investement cost (CAPEX)
for a pay back time of 3 years, the calculations shown ﬁgure 7.29 are made
for model 1. This calculation is based on the maximum possible cash ﬂow pr
year, ie at the highest possible pressure (18 bar).
As the NPV is zero at the accepted pay back time, the sum of the dis-
counted CF is equal to the maximum allowed initial investment cost.
In table 7.2 the minmum and maximum accepted investment cost are listed
for conﬁguration 1, 2a and 3a. The minimum investment cost is based on
the lowest yearly cash ﬂow which for all cases is found at the lowest condens-
ing/intermediate pressure.
In table 7.3 the maximum allowed investment can be seen for the highest
possible pressure (18 bar) for conﬁguration 2b and 3b with both refrigerants.
==PAGE:87==
7.6. OPERATION COST, NPV AND PAY BACK TIME
75
Figure 7.29: The maximum accepted investment for a payback time of 3 year
for conﬁguration 1.
Table 7.2: The minimum and maximum accepted investment cost for a given
pay back time of 3 years, calculated for conﬁguration 1, 2a and 3a.
Min. CAPEX [DKK]
Max. CAPEX [DKK]
Conﬁguration 1
173 006
305 698
Conﬁguration 2a
331 000
534 614
Conﬁguration 3a
415 655
632 260
Table 7.3: The maximum accepted investment cost for a given pay back time
of 3 years, calculated for conﬁguration 2b and 3b with R717 and R290.
Max. CAPEX [DKK]
Conﬁguration 2b R717
179 271
Conﬁguration 2b R290
166 290
Conﬁguration 3b R717
590 032
Conﬁguration 3b R290
748 605
==PAGE:88==
==PAGE:89==
Chapter 8
Discussion
In this chapter a discussion of the results as well as a more wide discussion of
the project will be given.
8.1
Discussion in relation to the results
As seen in ﬁgure 7.1 and 7.2 the heat recovery system can not cover the entire
heating demand for process water and preheating of milk at the lowest given
pressure for the refrigeration plant. This is also shown in table 7.1. When the
conﬁguration is expanded to a two stage cycle, it becomes possible to cover
100 % of the heating demand for pasteurisation.
In order to fulﬁl a larger percentage of the deﬁned heating demand, the con-
densing/intermediate pressure can be increased. The consequences of this is
discussed based on the presented results.
Marginal heat COP
In ﬁgure 7.4 it is seen that the COP values for the individually components
starts oﬀbelow one.
The compressor work for a condensing pressure of 9
bar is the compressor work supplied in order to keep the refrigeration plant
operating. The low COP seen does not necessarily indicate that the utilization
of the heat is a bad idea.
The evaluation of whether the heat should be
utilised at 9 bar with conﬁguration 1 is an economical assessment of the savings
obtained.
The marginal COP for heat seen in ﬁgure 7.5, shows that the unit price of
the recovered heat is increasing with an increase of the condensation pressure.
The large drop at 11.7 bar is caused by the capacity in HEX 2 that becomes
constant at this pressure. In order to explain the increase at 14.3 bar the
marginal COP has to be evaluated for each HEX. This can be seen in 8.1.
77
==PAGE:90==
78
CHAPTER 8. DISCUSSION
Figure 8.1: The marginal COP for heat for HEX 1 and HEX 2.
From ﬁgure 8.1 is can be seen that the marginal COP for HEX 1 changes
from a negative to a positive tendency at 12.2 bar, where the heating demand
for process water is fulﬁlled, at the production of CIP water starts. This ten-
dency complies with the further increase in COP at this point, and can be
explained by the change in strategy, from an increase in the outlet tempera-
ture to an increase in the mass ﬂow rate, as presented in section 3.4.1.
The increase in the total marginal COP for heat at 14.2 bar as seen in ﬁgure
7.5is an expression of the point where the tendency for the increase in heat
produced in HEX 1 exceeds the negative tendency for the HEX 2. From an
overall assessment of the total marginal COP for heat it is seen that heat
produced pr. unit is cheapest at the lowest condensing pressure.
The same conclusion can be drawn from ﬁgure 7.6 for conﬁguration 2a and
3a. Comparing the values, conﬁguration 2a and 3a assume a higher level of
COP. This is explained by the fact that the increase in marginal compressor
work is smaller compared to conﬁguration one. This can also be seen when
comparing the slopes of the total compressor work in ﬁgure 6.7. This increases
the ratio between marginal heat gained and marginal compressor work paid,
and it means that less is paid in order to gain the same extra amount of heat
for conﬁguration 2a and 3a.
Impacts of subcooling
The diﬀerence between conﬁguration 2a and 3a is the additional subcooling
in the top cycle. The subcooling increases the amount of utilized heat in the
top cycle, which is the obvious advantage. This can both be seen in ﬁgure
7.7 and ﬁgure 7.8 where the COP for conﬁguration 3a is larger compared to
conﬁguration 2a. On the other hand the incoming water in HEX4 cools down
the refrigerant to a level where it after expansion will be subcooled as well.
In ﬁgure 8.3 this is shown in a log P,h diagram for conﬁguration 3a. Figure
8.2 shows the log P,h diagram for conﬁguration 2a, where the refrigerant after
==PAGE:91==
8.1. DISCUSSION IN RELATION TO THE RESULTS
79
expansion will be in the two phase region.
Figure 8.2:
Log P,h diagram for
conﬁguration 2a.
Figure 8.3:
Log P,h diagram for
conﬁguration 3a.
Utilizing the subcooling implies a larger capacity of the intercooler. When
comparing conﬁguration 2a and 3a in ﬁgure 8.2 and 8.3 this is seen by point
(7) which moves to the right.
In this case where heat is rejected to the air, this increase in the capacity of
the intercooler, will only decrease the capacity of the air condenser.
In a case where all the available heat at the intermediate pressure is lifted
to the top cycle, and no heat is rejected to the surroundings, the subcooling
would have another impact. For this case the mass ﬂow rate of the top cycle
will be aﬀected.
Conﬁguration 2b and 3b with R717
Changing the two stage cycle from an open intercooler (conﬁg 2a/3a) to a
cascade heat exchanger (2b/3b) still with ammonia in the top cycle introduce
a loss between the two cycles, and increase the compressor work of the top
cycle. By that the total compressor work is increased as seen in ﬁgure 7.13.
The capacity of the conﬁgurations remains unchanged. This means in general
that COPheat, COPtopcycle and COPmar,heat for 2b and 3b will have the same
tendencies as conﬁguration 2a and 3a, but will decrease in the values obtained.
Conﬁguration 2b and 3b with R290
Comparing the compressor work for the top cycle ˙Wcom,2, COPheat and COPtopcycle
for conﬁguration 2b with propane vs ammonia in ﬁgure 7.12, 7.14 and 7.15 it
can be concluded that the decrease in the superheat in the cascade heat ex-
changer is not enough to compensate for the loss of latent heat when changing
the refrigerant from ammonia to propane.
==PAGE:92==
80
CHAPTER 8. DISCUSSION
When comparing conﬁguration 3b with ammonia vs. propane the capacity
of HEX 4 increases quite a lot. This is due to the high mass ﬂow rate needed
in the propane cycle. The COP for the top cycle exceeds the COP for conﬁg-
uration 3b with ammonia as seen in ﬁgure 7.20. Comparing the COP for 3b
with propane with conﬁguration 3a (seen in ﬁg.7.7), it does not exceed. This
is due to a higher compressor work in the top cycle with propane.
As seen in ﬁgure 7.13 the total compressor work will increase when the refrig-
erant is changed to propane, but the total capacity of the cycle in conﬁguration
3b with propane is higher than any of the other conﬁgurations. This results in
a COPheat for conﬁguration 3b with propane that exceeds both conﬁguration
3a with an open intercooler and conﬁguration 3b with ammonia in the top
cycle.
COPheat+cooling is nearly the same for conﬁguration 3a and 3b R290, while
the COPmar,heat achieve a higher level.
Comparing pinch target with the suggested heat recovery
system
The savings found in section 4.5 and presented in table 4.5 by investigating
the potential of pinch target for heat recovery between the process streams,
reveals a relative small economic potential.
This can be seen by comparing the yearly savings of 35 250 DKK from table
4.5, with the lowest yearly cash ﬂow of 67 312 DDK for conﬁguration 1 seen
in ﬁgure 7.25.
The reason for the rather small pinch target is due to the already existing
heat recovery system in terms of the Energy Storage Tank (EST). As the EST
receives as large amount cooling from ice water after end production, the op-
eration of it is a hot topic at the dairy. The extra amount of cooling delivered
to the EST can be seen as a buﬀer capacity of ice water (cooling). Whether
this is a good or bad concept is a discussion of how the ice water storage tank
will operate best, and is beyond the scope for now.
Economic assesment
The economical assessment of conﬁgurations as shown in ﬁgure 7.25 revealed
the largest yearly savings at the highest possible condensing/intermediate
pressure. This emphasizes the fact that the marginal COP for heat does not
suggest a optimal operation point. The small decrease in the annual cash ﬂow
(CF) at 11.7 bar on the other hand be explained by the drop in the marginal
COP for heat as this reveals an increase in the cost of heat produced pr. unit.
Furthermore the combined COP for both cooling and heat, COPheat+cooling,
as seen in ﬁgure 7.10 shows the best COP for the lowest possible condens-
==PAGE:93==
8.1. DISCUSSION IN RELATION TO THE RESULTS
81
ing/intermediate pressure. This is most of all an expression for the fact that
a great share of the available waste heat is still rejected to the surroundings.
This is especially seen in the case of the COP for conﬁguration 1, where most
of the heat is rejected to the surroundings, has the largest decrease, compared
to conﬁguration 2 and 3. The fact that the largest savings occur at the highest
possible pressure, emphasize the need for an economic evaluation to assess the
optimal solution for a heat recovery system.
The COP for heat and the economic assessment for the largest yearly cash
ﬂow and maximum investment both revealed conﬁguration 3b with propane
as refrigerant in the top cycle to be the best option.
However the maximum allowed investment cost with a pay back time of 3
years obtain a rather low value, and without further cost analysis it can be
concluded that the low maximum CAPEX makes it diﬃcult to classify the
solution as feasible. To have an idea of the investment cost of conﬁguration
3b with propane, cost functions as described in section 3.4.4 should applied,
and in the end tenders from suppliers are needed.
Based on the presented results and the following discussion main points can
be summarized:
Choosing optimal right intermediate pressure is a complicated case and for
the evaluations made no uniquely answer is given. This is due to the diﬀerent
perspectives in the evaluation methods. The economic evaluation revealed the
highest savings in operation cost by increasing the intermediate pressure to
the highest possible level. The values for both the NG cost and electricity
cost are based on the market and political agendas, and is therefore not an
assessment of the technical optimal intermediate pressure.
Both COPheat+cooling and COPmar,heat suggests the lowest possible pressure
as the pressure where most heat is gained from the work paid, and could
implied that increasing the intermediate pressure might not lead to a better
performance of the system. Furthermore it can be highlighted that the tech-
nical solution giving the highest cash ﬂow based on operation cost is a two
stage cycle with a cascade heat exchanger using propane as refrigerant in the
top cycle. It should be investigated further, whether this is a case sensitive
result to the capacity needed for pasteurisation or if it would be applicable
for all capacities with the same desired outlet temperature of the water for
pasteurisation and the same inlet temperature for CIP water. In the end this
is a investigation of how to utilise the heat pump if used for pasteurisation
and CIP water in the best possible way.
Compressor considerations
The assumptions of a constant isentropic eﬃciency is indeed a rough assump-
tion, and it is expected that the eﬃciency will have an impact on the simu-
lations and the results. The eﬃciency will obtain lower values when the PR
either becomes very low or rather high. In order to address this a compressor
==PAGE:94==
82
CHAPTER 8. DISCUSSION
with the needed working area could be found from a manufacturer. If a com-
pressor polynomial is available this could be implemented in the model.
8.2
Further discussion with a general perspective
This section includes a wider discussion of topics related to the heat recovery
from a refrigeration plant and energy optimization.
Before considering heat recovery from a refrigeration plant an optimiza-
tion of the cooling demand should go ahead, as well as the optimal operation
of the ice water storage tank should be investigated. Maybe the building-up
of ice as a capacity buﬀer is not the best solution due to a poor heat transfer
on the evaporator, and maybe the operation cost for the compressor could be
lowered if there was a match between low electricity prices and the operation.
These considerations would have an impact on the available waste heat for
heat recovery, and the way to ﬁnd the optimal solution to a system would
consider all aspects in an iterative design process.
This leads to another consideration regarding the simplicity of a heat re-
covery system.
A discouraging factor keeping the industry away from the
heat recovery solutions, also pointed out and proven by H. Dalsgaard in [11],
are the complexity of a system. The willingness in the industry to invested
in heat recovery solutions decreases with the complexity of the system. A
design made for a speciﬁc production might not have the validation in order
to convince the investor, and the company might not have the expertise it
takes to operate the system after installation. This kind of aspects advocate
for standard solutions where the system design can be easily transferred to
another production site. In the design of a more simple solution the recovered
heat is delivered to either a common thermal storage for process heat or for
hot water production.
Compared to the conﬁgurations suggested in this project, it can be discussed
whether the dedication of a speciﬁc heat exchanger to a speciﬁc heating de-
mand is a concept that contains same the advantages as a simple solution.
In addition to this is can be discussed how the solutions suggested in this
project should be compared to other solutions for heat recovery. A comparison
based on the COP in not valid unless the system operates between the same
temperature level. As the suggested solutions utilize heat at diﬀerent levels
the range of systems to compared with will be very limited. In order to obtain
a higher comparability the exergetic eﬃciency should be applied.
==PAGE:95==
Chapter 9
Conclusion
A cheese dairy was investigated regarding its demand for cooling and heating.
The data collection revealed a heating demand in connection to pasteurisa-
tion of both milk and whey, preheating of milk and heating of water to process
water. In total a heating demand of 3000 kWh/d was found to be covered by
a heat recovery system from the cooling plant. Furthermore the dairy has a
hot water consumption for cleaning, that it was not possible to map, but is
considered in addition to the 3000 kWh. In comparison a pinch analysis for
internal heat exchange between the chosen streams revealed a pinch target of
334 kWh/d.
It was found that the refrigeration plant had an average evaporator capacity
of 183 kW, operated 19.6 h per day and had 213 kW available waste a at
normal operating pressure of 9 bar.
Several diﬀerent conﬁgurations, including both single stage and two stage
conﬁgurations was suggested in order to fulﬁl the heating demands. With a
one stage cycle it is possible to fulﬁl 26 % of the total heating demand with
the normal operation pressure at 9 bar. 51 % was achieved when increasing
the pressure to 12.2 bar, which will be the highest possible share for the one
stage conﬁguration.
For a two stage cycle with an open intercooler 75 % of the heating demand
can be fulﬁlled at 9 bar. By increasing the intermediate pressure to 12.2 bar
100 % of the heating demand is fulﬁlled.
When increasing the pressure to a higher level and adding a subcooler to the
two stage cycle, the production of hot water for cleaning is obtained as well,
and this revealed a further optimized solution.
The conﬁgurations is evaluated both in terms of diﬀerent deﬁned COPs as
well as the yearly cash ﬂow and the maximum accepted investment cost for a
pay back time of 3 three years.
The economic assessment suggested the highest intermediate pressure in all
83
==PAGE:96==
84
CHAPTER 9. CONCLUSION
cases as the optimal solution for maximising the cash ﬂow showed on a yearly
basis.
A comparison between an open intercooler and a cascade heat exchanger, also
with ammonia for the conﬁgurations covering the same heating demands is
made. It revealed that for all evaluations it can be concluded that the cascade
heat exchanger limits the working range for the compressor and achieve lower
performance.
Changing the refrigerant in the two stage cascade cycle decreases the loss
but increases the compressor work. Without subcooling this solution achieve
lower values both compared to an open intercooler and a cascade heat ex-
changer with ammonia. Adding subcooling to the top cycle, changes the pic-
ture and this solution exceeds both the conﬁguration with an open intercooler
and the cascade cycle with ammonia in the yearly cash ﬂow, and matches
the COP values. The maximum allowed investment for this solution ended
at 748 605 DKK, which is with all respect for supplier discounts a rather low
investment cost.
Analysing the COPs revealed the need for an exergetic eﬃciency in order to
address the optimal intermediate pressure in a thermodynamic perspective,
and is suggested as part of the further work on analysing and optimizing this
system.
9.1
Further work
As an additional option to the already investigated conﬁgurations a ﬂooded
evaporator should be considered as the cascade heat exchanger. This would
remove the superheat, minimising the loss and decrease the needed compres-
sor work in the top cycle.
In addition to further investigate the technical optimal intermediate pres-
sure an analysis of the exergetic eﬃciency should be carried out. An exergetic
eﬃciency would also make the conﬁgurations more comparable to other con-
ﬁgurations.
In relation to the economic assessment it would be interesting to see how
the economics will change if some of the heated water was used for non-process
purposes such as space heat or domestic hot water. The tariﬀsystem is com-
plicated, and will ad an extra cost to either the heat produced or the electricity
consumed. However the unit price of the natural gas that the heat recovery
system will reduce, will also include a full natural gas tariﬀ. The overall eﬀect
of using a heat recovery system for heating water to non-process purposes can
therefore approximately be a economical fair estimate.
==PAGE:97==
9.1. FURTHER WORK
85
As mentioned earlier the models only consider a design situation, and the
results can be considered as basis for further work with the most promising
conﬁgurations.
In order to obtain a full assessment of the solutions the models should go from
”design” to ”oﬀ-design”.
This will include the dimensioning of a conﬁguration with UA-values for the
chosen HEXs and compressors with given eﬃciencies and capacity control.
From such a model it would be possible to do simulations with variations in
the system based on diﬀerent operating conditions. This could include changes
in the demand for ice water and the variations imposed on the evaporator ca-
pacity and compressor work.
Furthermore the temperature of the surroundings should be taken into ac-
count, and the fact the dairy is running the compressors with a minimum
condensing pressure throughout the year should be challenged. If it is possi-
ble to run the compressor at a lower condensing pressure, the additional cost
of compressor work, in a heat recovery system, where the pressure is increased
in order to maximize the savings, would increase as the reference will be at a
lower pressure.
With an oﬀ-design model it would also be possible to take the dynam-
ics of the belonging thermal storage systems into account. Variations in the
operation of the compressor, would aﬀect the amount of accumulated recov-
ered heat. A sensitivity analyses of the variations, would make it possible to
estimate i.e. the needed capacity of the HEX in order to meet the heating
demands, within the possible operation time of the compressor.
In relation to the thermal storage system seen in ﬁgure 5.1 the optimal storage
temperature of the cold part, can be reconsidered. In order to obtain a min-
imised heat transfer area in total for both the refrigerant-water HEX and the
water-product HEX, the mean temperature diﬀerence for both heat changers
will have to be considered.
Furthermore the dimensioning of the HEX would open up another aspect
of the economic assessment, as the CAPEX would be a important factor to
consider in the design phase. This could imply designing the system in order
to obtain the lowest heat transfer area.
==PAGE:98==
==PAGE:99==
Bibliography
[1]
Viegand Maagoee. Analyse af mulighederne for bedre udnyttelse af overskudsvarme fra
industrien, August 2013.
[2]
JT. Afgifter og oekonomi for eldrevne varmepumper i fjernvarmesystemer, 2016.
[3]
G. Bylund and a panel of Tetra Pak experts. Dairy processing handbook. Tetra Pak
Processing System AB, second, revised edition edition, 2003.
[4]
Michael Moran Adrian Bejan, George Tsatsaronis. Thermal Design and Optimization.
Wiley-Interscience, 1996.
[5]
Aage Birkkjaer Lauritsen. Koeleteknik. Nyt Teknisk Forlag, 2nd edition edition, 2003.
[6]
Incropera Frank P.; Dewitt David P.; Bergman Theodore L.; Lavine Adreienne S.
Foundations of Heat Transfer. Wiley, sixth edition edition, 2013.
[7]
Wiebke Brix Markussen. Two-stage cycles and refrigerants, 2015.
[8]
et al. Eric Granryd. Refrigeration Engineering. Royal Institute of Technology, KTH,
Department of Energy Technology, Division of Applied Thermodynamics and Refriger-
ation, 2011.
[9]
L. Kitzing; M. Munster; J. Katz. Lecture note 2: Evaluating projects - basic economic
principles and methods. Lecture Notes Series - Feasibility Studies and Assessment of
Energy Systems Course 42004 at the Technical University of Denmark.
[10] Masoud Rokni. Introduction to pinch technology, 2006.
[11] H. Dalsgaard. Simpliﬁcation of process integration in medium-size industry. Phd thesis,
Technical University of Denmark, 2002.
[12] Energistyrelsen.
Haandbog
for
energikonsulenter
(hb
2016).
https://www.
retsinformation.dk/forms/R0710.aspx?id=176520, December 2015.
[13] Grundfos
Management.
Centrifugalpumpen.
http://docplayer.dk/
391752-Grundfos-research-and-technology-centrifugalpumpen.html.
Page
53.
[14] Anton Paar.
Density measurement in dairy industry.
http://www.mep.net.au/
foodlab/FL_5/MEP_DMA35_dairy.pdf.
[15] Jin Hu; Osmann Sari; Sara Eicher; A. Rija Rakotozanakajy. Determination of speciﬁc
heat of milk at diﬀerent fat content between 1 c and 59 c using micro dsc. Journal of
Food Engineering 90, July 2008.
[16] Grundfoss.
Cr 45-2-2 a-f-a-e-hqqe.
https://product-selection.grundfos.com/
product-detail.product-detail.html?frequency=50&lang=ENU&productnumber=
96122798&qcid=101683346, February 2016.
87
==PAGE:100==
88
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[17] Grundfos
Management.
Centrifugalpumpen.
http://docplayer.dk/
391752-Grundfos-research-and-technology-centrifugalpumpen.html.
Page
34.
[18] Skat.
E.a.4.6.1.7 opgoerelse af godtgoerelse.
https://skat.dk/SKAT.aspx?oId=
2062215, January 2016.
==PAGE:101==
List of Figures
2.1
A general concept of a heat exchanger used for pasteurisation
. . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
The product ﬂow in cheese production, based on the proceeding at Endrup Dairy.
7
2.3
The product ﬂow for whey treatment based on the proceeding at Endrup Dairy.
9
2.4
CIP system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.1
The four basic components in a vapor compression cycle. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
The vapor compression cycle illustrated in a log P,h diagram.
. . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3
Flooded evaporator and a separator.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.4
The enthalpies and the speciﬁc compressor work in a log P,h-diagram.
. . . . .
18
3.5
Example of a ˙Q,T diagram for an evaporator.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.6
Example of a ˙Q,T-diagram for an condenser. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.7
An example of the capacity of the extended desuperheater for the two strategies. 23
3.8
An example of the development in the COP for the two strategies.
. . . . . . .
23
3.9
Two stage cycle with an open intercooler. The ﬁgure is borrowed from [7]. . . .
24
3.10
Log P,h diagram for a two stage cycle with a closed intercooler.
. . . . . . . . .
24
3.11
PI-diagram for a cascade two stage cycle with a DX evaporator. The ﬁgure is
borrowed from [8] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.12
log P,h diagram for a cascade two stage cycle.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.13
An example of a composite curve for both the hot and cold stream. Edited from
[11]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.1
Endrup Dairy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2
Product ﬂow through the dairy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3
Production situation one with preheating of milk
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.4
Production situation two with whey cooling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.5
Production situation 3 with whey cooling and preheating of milk. . . . . . . . .
36
4.6
A sketch of the central heating system illustrating the connection between the
steam boiler and the product ﬂow. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.7
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.1
System for thermal storage in relation to heat recovery. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.2
Den ﬁgur skal rettes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.3
A PI-diagram for conﬁguration 1. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.4
˙Q,T diagram for conﬁguration 1. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.5
Log P,h-diagram for conﬁguration 1.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.6
A PI-diagram of conﬁguration 2a
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.7
LogP,h-diagram of conﬁguration 2a with a intermediate pressure at 14 bar. . . .
52
5.8
˙Q,T diagram for the bottom cycle of conﬁguration 2a with a intermediate pres-
sure at 14 bar. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
89
==PAGE:102==
90
List of Figures
5.9
˙Q,T diagram for the top cycle of conﬁguration 2a.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.10
A PI-diagram of conﬁguration 3a. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.11
Log P,h-diagram of conﬁguration 3a with a intermediate pressure at 14 bar.
. .
54
5.12
˙Q,T diagram for the top cycle of conﬁguration 2a.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.13
A PI-diagram for conﬁguration 2b with a cascade heat exchanger. . . . . . . . .
55
5.14
˙Q,T-diagram for conﬁguration 2b. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.15
˙Q,T-diagram for cascade HEX for conﬁguration 2b with R717 and R290 in the
top cycle. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6.1
The variation in heat capacities for HEX1 and HEX2 when varying the condens-
ing pressure.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.2
Heat from HEX 1. At 12.2 bar the heating demand for process water is covered,
and extra capacity is used for CIP.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6.3
The variation in heat capacities for HEX 3 and HEX 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6.4
Log P,h-diagram for conﬁguration 3a at diﬀerent intermediate pressures. . . . .
59
6.5
The total capacity for a variation of the condensing/intermediate pressure for
conﬁguration 1, 2a and 3a. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
6.6
The variations in the capacity of the air condenser, when varying the condens-
ing/intermediate pressure.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
6.7
The variation in compressor work when varying the condensing pressure. The
sum of
˙Wcom,1 and
˙Wcom,2 are the total work
˙Wtotal for conﬁg.
2a and 3a.
˙Wcom,1 are the compressor work for conﬁg. 1.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
6.8
Log P,h-digram for conﬁguration 2b (cascade HEX) and the top cycle from
conﬁguration 2a (intercooler) at 15.3 bar as condensing pressure in the bottom
cycle. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6.9
The compressor work for the top cycle for conﬁguration 2a and 2b.
. . . . . . .
61
7.1
Process water (HEX1): The distribution between the heat recovery system and
the NG utility system when varying the condensing/intermediate pressure.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
7.2
Preheating of milk (HEX2): The distribution between the heat recovery system
and the NG utility system when varying the condensing/intermediate pressure.
64
7.3
The amount of CIP produced in HEX 1 and HEX 4, and the total production
for conﬁguration 3a. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
7.4
The COP for HEX 1 and HEX 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
7.5
The marginal COP for conﬁguration 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
7.6
The marginal COP for heat for conﬁguration 2a and 3a.
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
7.7
The COP for the top cycle in conﬁguration 2a and 3a.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
7.8
COPheat for conﬁgurations 1, 2a and 3a. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
7.9
COPcooling for conﬁguration 1, 2a and 3a.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
7.10
COPheat+cooling for all three conﬁgurations.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
7.11
LogP,h diagram for conﬁguration 2b with R290 as refrigerant in the top cycle. .
68
7.12
Compressor work for the top cycle of conﬁguration 2b and 3b with propane and
ammonia as refrigerant respectively. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
7.13
Total compressor work for all conﬁgurations.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
7.14
COPheat for conﬁguration 2b with R717 and R290. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
7.15
COPtopcycle for conﬁguration 2b with R717 and R290.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
7.16
LogP,h diagram for conﬁguration 2b with R290 as refrigerant in the top cycle. .
70
7.17
Capacity of HEX 4 for conﬁguration 3b with R717 and R290 as refrigerant in
the top cycle.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
==PAGE:103==
List of Figures
91
7.18
Total capacity of the both the bottom and top cycle for conﬁguration 3b with
R717 and R290 as refrigerant in the top cycle. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
7.19
COPheat for conﬁguration 3b with R717 and R290 as refrigerant in the top cycle. 71
7.20
COPtopcycle for conﬁguration 3b with R717 and R290 as refrigerant in the top
cycle.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
7.21
COPheat+cooling for both conﬁguration 2b and 3b with both refrigerants. . . . .
71
7.22
COPcooling for conﬁguration 2b and 3b for both refrigerants.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
7.23
Revenues from saved NG and the additional cost of compressor work for conﬁg.
1 for one production day. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
7.24
Revenues from saved NG and the additional cost of compressor work for conﬁg.
2a and 3a for one production day. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
7.25
The possible cash ﬂow per year after investment based on the extra operation
cost and revenues from saved NG. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
7.26
Revenues from saved NG and the additional cost of compressor work for conﬁg.
2b with R717 and R290 in the top cycle. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
7.27
Revenues from saved NG and the additional cost of compressor work for conﬁg.
3b with R717 and R290 in the top cycle. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
7.28
Year cash ﬂow for conﬁg. 2b and 3b with R717 and R290 in the top cycle. . . .
74
7.29
The maximum accepted investment for a payback time of 3 year for conﬁguration
1. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
8.1
The marginal COP for heat for HEX 1 and HEX 2. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
8.2
Log P,h diagram for conﬁguration 2a. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
8.3
Log P,h diagram for conﬁguration 3a. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
A.1
The temperatures of a the milk during a pasteurisation process.
This is an
example of pasteurisation of skimmed milk during production situation 1.
. . .
95
A.2
A sketch of the holding cell used for culture starter. Sketch borrowed from [3]. .
96
A.3
The temperatures of a the whey during a pasteurisation process. This is an
example of pasteurisation of whey during production situation 2, with a cold EST. 97
A.4
Pasteurisation of whole milk for resale
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
A.5
Pasteurisation of cream in production situation 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
C.1
A sketch of the refrigeration delivering ice water to the dairy.
. . . . . . . . . . 110
C.2
Principle for two pumps in parallel [13]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
C.3
Principle for summed pump characteristics [13]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
C.4
Aﬃnity curve for the summed pump characteristic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
C.5
Energy balance around pipe split
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
C.6
The cooling capacity for a given week.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114
==PAGE:104==
List of Tables
2.1
Pasteurisation temperatures and holding time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4.1
Heating demands
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.2
Recalculated relevant heating demands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.3
Results in relation to calculation of the available waste heat
. . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.4
Unit prices for NG and electricity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.5
Key values obtained from the pinch analysis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.1
The temperatures of the product ﬂow and the water in the heat recovery system,
as well as the capacity that the system must obtain in order to cover the demand. 46
5.2
An overview of the heating demands considered for each conﬁguration and the
belonging heat exchanger.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
7.1
The tables shows how many percentages of the total heating demand, the con-
ﬁgurations fulﬁl at three diﬀerent condensing/intermediate pressure. . . . . . . .
63
7.2
The minimum and maximum accepted investment cost for a given pay back time
of 3 years, calculated for conﬁguration 1, 2a and 3a. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
7.3
The maximum accepted investment cost for a given pay back time of 3 years,
calculated for conﬁguration 2b and 3b with R717 and R290. . . . . . . . . . . .
75
A.1
Inputs to calculations from data collection. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
A.2
Heating demands for milk pasteurisation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
A.3
Heating demands for starter culture.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
A.4
Heating and cooling demands for whey treatment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
A.5
Heating and cooling demands for pasteurisation process of milk for resale.
. . .
98
A.6
Heating demands for cream pasteurisation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
A.7
Pasteurisation of whey cream. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
A.8
Hot water production.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
A.9
Cooling demands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
C.1
The conversion of the percentage of pump speed to volume ﬂow rate. . . . . . . 113
F.1
The method used is described in section 3.4.5. Temperature intervals with pinch
point ∆Tmin = 4K included. The cooling and heating demand for each interval
is shown ﬁrst, then the sequential balance, and at last the max table. The pinch
point is marked with green, the external heating and cooling are marked with
red and blue, respectively.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124
92
==PAGE:105==
Appendix A
Calculations of the heating
and cooling demands at
Endrup Dairy
Inputs to the calculations
The inputs to the calculations in this section can be seen in table A.1. The
temperatures mentioned can be seen in the ﬁgures in the following sections.
Furthermore an eﬃciency of 85 % for the regenerative part of the pasteuri-
sation heat exchangers is assumed.
93
==PAGE:106==
94
APPENDIX A. CALCULATIONS OF THE HEATING AND COOLING
DEMANDS AT ENDRUP DAIRY
Table A.1: Inputs to calculations from data collection.
Input
Input
Source
Milk, TR,in, sit 1 & 3
12 /24 ¶C
Control system
Milk, Tout
32.5 ¶C
Display at dairy
Milk, Tin, resale
1.5 ¶C
Display at dairy
Milk, Tcool,2, resale
1.5 ¶C
Display at dairy
Milk, Tpast
74.5 ¶C
Control system
Milk, ˙V
161 litre
min
Dairymen
Cream, ˙V
16 litre
min
Dairymen
Cream, Tpast
88 ¶C
Display at dairy
Cream, Tout
5.5 ¶C
Display at dairy
Whey, Tin
35 ¶C
Dairy men
Whey, Tpast
73 ¶C
Control system
Whey, Tcool,1,
sit 2 cold, 2 warm & sit 3
10 ¶C/22 ¶C/14.5 ¶C
Control system
Whey, Tcool,2
6 ¶C
Control system
Whey cream, Tpast
95 ¶C
Display at dairy
Culture starter, Tin
32.5 ¶C
Display at dairy
Culture starter, Tout, heating
93 ¶C
Display at dairy
Culture starter, Tout, cooling
19 ¶C
Display at dairy
Raw milk, ﬂ38.9
1.023
Ë
kg
l
È
[14]
Raw milk, ﬂ4.4
1.035
Ë
kg
l
È
[14]
Raw milk, ﬂ10
1.033
Ë
kg
l
È
[14]
Skim milk ﬂ
1.026
Ë
kg
l
È
[14]
Cream ﬂ
0.978
Ë
kg
l
È
[14]
Raw milk, cp
4.00
Ë
kJ
kg K
È
[15]
Skim milk, cp
4.02
Ë
kJ
kgK
È
Average T at 52.5 ¶C
used in eq. (2) from [15]
Cream cp
3.5
Ë
kJ
kgK
È
[15]. Attached with great
uncertainty below 40 ¶C
Cheese production
Pasteurisation of cheese milk
The amount of heating needed when pasteurising cheese milk, will depend on
the production situation and whether the milk is skimmed or not.
An example of the pasteurisation process occurring in production situation
1, when the milk is skimmed, can be seen in ﬁgure A.1.
==PAGE:107==
95
Figure A.1: The temperatures of a the milk during a pasteurisation process.
This is an example of pasteurisation of skimmed milk during production sit-
uation 1.
In table A.2 the temperatures, mass ﬂow and capacities for pasteurisation
of skim milk and whole milk for both production situation 1 and 3 can be seen.
In product situation 1 the milk will be preheat to 12 ¶C, and in production
situation 3 to 24 ¶C.
Table A.2: Heating demands for milk pasteurisation.
Process
Tin[¶C]
Tout [¶C]
˙C [kW
K ]
˙Q [kW]
Situation 1, skim milk
Pasteurisation
60.2
74.5
10
142.5
Extra heating
21.4
32.5
10
110.6
Situation 1, whole milk
Pasteurisation
65.1
74.5
11
103.2
Extra heating
21.4
32.5
11
121.9
Situation 3, skim milk
Pasteurisation
63
74.5
10
114.6
Extra heating
31.6
32.5
10
9
Situation 3, whole milk
Pasteurisation
66.9
74.5
11
83.4
Extra heating
31.6
32.5
11
9.9
As seen in table A.2 the heating demand for both pasteurisation and ex-
tra heating is higher at production situation 1. This is due to the decreased
amount of preheat.
==PAGE:108==
96
APPENDIX A. CALCULATIONS OF THE HEATING AND COOLING
DEMANDS AT ENDRUP DAIRY
Starter culture
The skim milk for starter culture in heated in a shrouded, spiral holding tube
as seen in ﬁgure A.2. The heating demand can be seen in table A.3.
Figure A.2: A sketch of the holding cell used for culture starter.
Sketch
borrowed from [3].
Table A.3: Heating demands for starter culture.
Process
Tin[¶C]
Tout [¶C]
˙C [kW
K ]
˙Q [kW]
Heating of skim milk
32.5
93
207.9
Cooling of skim milk
93
19
127.2
Whey treatment
The heating demand for pasteurisation of whey does not change during the
production situations, as the temperature of the incoming whey is constant.
The cooling demand as seen in table A.4 changes with the production situa-
tion, and whether the EST is hot or cold. The process seen during production
situation 2 with a cold EST, can be seen in ﬁgure A.3.
==PAGE:109==
97
Figure A.3: The temperatures of a the whey during a pasteurisation process.
This is an example of pasteurisation of whey during production situation 2,
with a cold EST.
Table A.4: Heating and cooling demands for whey treatment.
Process
Tin[¶C]
Tout [¶C]
˙C [kW
K ]
˙Q [kW]
Pasteurisation, heating
67.3
73
11.3
64.6
Situation 2, cold EST
Extra cooling
10
6
11.3
45.3
Situation 2, warm EST
Extra cooling
22
6
11.3
181.3
Situation 3
Extra cooling
14.5
6
11.3
96.3
Pasteurisation of milk for resale
Pasteurisation of milk for resale, diﬀers from the process for cheese milk, as
the milk is cooled to 1.5 ¶C after the regenerative section. The process can be
seen in ﬁgure A.4 and the heating and cooling demands in table A.5.
Figure A.4: Pasteurisation of whole milk for resale
==PAGE:110==
98
APPENDIX A. CALCULATIONS OF THE HEATING AND COOLING
DEMANDS AT ENDRUP DAIRY
Table A.5: Heating and cooling demands for pasteurisation process of milk
for resale.
Process
Tin [¶C]
Tout[¶C]
˙C [kW
K ]
˙Q [kW]
skim milk
Pasteurisation, heating
63.6
74.5
10
166.5
Cooling
12.5
1.5
10
109.6
whole milk
Pasteurisation, heating
57.8
74.5
11
119.7
Cooling
12.4
1.5
11
120.8
Pasteurisation of cream
The heating and cooling demand in connection to the pasteurisation process
of cream, diﬀers with the varying temperature of the incoming cream. The
incoming temperature is assumed to be the same as the temperature of the
milk entering the separator.
This temperature depends on the production
situation.
In ﬁgure A.5 the pasteurisation process of cream during production situation
1 can be seen. As seen the cooling section of the process consist of a section
with cooling of water form the EST, and further with ice water. The con-
nection to the EST isn’t registered at the dairies control system, so its hard
to tell whether the connection is operation or not. In the further calculation
the cooling of cream will be seen as one cooling demand fulﬁlled by ice water.
The heating and cooling demands can be seen in table A.6.
Figure A.5: Pasteurisation of cream in production situation 1
==PAGE:111==
99
Table A.6: Heating demands for cream pasteurisation.
Process
Tin[¶C]
Tout [¶C]
˙C [kW
K ]
˙Q [kW]
Situation 1
Pasteurisation, heating
83.9
88
0.9
3.7
Cooling
64.7
5.5
0.9
54
Situation 3
Pasteurisation, heating
84.3
88
0.9
3.4
Cooling
67.1
5.5
0.9
56.2
Milk for resale
Pasteurisation, heating
83.5
88
0.9
4.1
Cooling
62.7
5.5
0.9
52.2
Pasteurisation of whey cream
The amount of whey cream is very limited, and the pasteurisation process
takes places in a shrouded, spiral holding tube as seen in ﬁgure A.2.
After pasteurisation the whey cream is not cooled by ice water, but by natu-
rally heat loss. The heating demand can be seen in table A.7.
Table A.7: Pasteurisation of whey cream.
Process
Tin[¶C]
Tout [¶C]
˙C [kW
K ]
˙Q [kW]
Pasteurisation, heating
35
95
46.7
Production of hot water
The production of hot water takes place by heat exchange with the hot utility
stream. As there is no storage tank, the production takes place as the water
is needed.
Process water
The process water that goes in the cheese vat is known both in temperature
level and amount from the recipe of the current cheese being made. Both can
vary but values for the most common example is given in table A.8.
CIP system
The CIP system is similar to the illustrated system in ﬁgure 2.4, with the
addition of an extra line.
In order to measure how much water used in the system the valve opening
of the cold water as well as the valve opening up into the acid and lye tanks
==PAGE:112==
100
APPENDIX A. CALCULATIONS OF THE HEATING AND COOLING
DEMANDS AT ENDRUP DAIRY
should be logged.
The milk and whey pasteurisation process and the piping system in connec-
tion, is not a part of the CIP system. In stead the system can be made as a
closed loop, and the dairy men adds the acid and lye manually.
How much water and heat being reused in this procedure is hard to tell, and
the only estimation is made from a total measured water use of 170 m3 pr day.
From this a consumption of 50 m2 is known as water use to process water and
water for cooling the cheese before storage. Furthermore most of the water
used in the CIP system is not heated. As a guess the heated water to CIP
could be around 60 m3 a day.
Table A.8: Hot water production.
Process
Tin[¶C]
Tout [¶C]
˙C [kW
K ]
˙Q [kW]
Process water, heating
10
68
692.7
Acid storage
10
60
?
?
Lye storage
10
70
?
?
==PAGE:113==
A.1. SUMMARISED COOLING DEMAND
101
A.1
Summarised cooling demand
In table A.9 an overview of the calculated cooling demands can be seen. The
sum is based on a winter situation, and both the cooling demand with and
with the energy storage tank can be seen. When comparing the numbers it is
seen that the storage tank recovers 1126 kWh of cooling.
Table A.9: Cooling demands.
Process
Tin[¶C]
Tout[¶C]
˙C [kW
K ]
˙Q [kW]
t [s]
Q [kWh]
%
Cultur
93
19
1.7
127.2
2400
84.8
3.0
Cream sit 1
64.7
5.5
0.9
54.0
4690
70.4
2.5
Cream, sit3
67.1
5.5
0.9
56.2
4690
73.2
2.6
Cream Resale
62.7
5.5
0.9
52.2
1379
20.0
0.7
Resale wholemilk
12.5
1.5
11.0
120.8
2484
83.4
3.0
Resale skim milk
12.5
1.5
10.0
109.6
1379
42.0
1.5
Whey sit 2, cold, ET
40
10
11.3
340.0
9000
850
whey sit 2, cold, IW
10
6
11.3
45.3
9000
113.3
4.1
Whey Sit 2 warm, ET
40
22
11.3
204,0
7200
408.
Whey Sit 2 warm, IW
22
6
11.3
181.3
7200
362.7
13.0
Whey sit 3, ET
40
14.5
11.3
289.0
14400
1156
Whey sit 3, IW
14.5
6
11.3
96.3
14400
385.3
13.8
RO system
10
4,5
8.1
44.3
16200
199.5
7.1
Energy storage tank
21
11
11.6
116.1
36000
1161.2
42.2
Delivery, winter
3
1.5
55.2
82.8
8640
198.7
7.1
Delivery, summer
5
1.5
55.2
193.2
9720
521.6
Sum without EST
3920,5
Sum with EST
2794.5
100
==PAGE:114==
==PAGE:115==
Appendix B
EES code for calculation of
heating and cooling demands
This appendix gives an example of the EES code used for calculating of the
heating and cooling demand for the cream pasteurisation process. The code
is covering both the production situation 1 and 3, as well as the distinguish
between cream coming from skimming cheese milk and milk for resale.
103
==PAGE:116==
File:C:\Users\pejo\Desktop\Cream_code appendix.EES
12-06-2016 21:37:00  Page 1
EES Ver. 9.992: #0885:  20-user license administered by  Peter Reinholdt Danish Technology Institute
Situation 1, skim
Situation 3, skim
60,61 [C]
83,89 [C]
64,72 [C]
88 [C]
5,5 [C]
63,35 [C]
84,3 [C]
88 [C]
67,05 [C]
5,5 [C]
Heating demand
Cooling demand (both c,PC og c,C)
QcP,sit1 = 3,75 [kJ/s]
QcP,sit3 = 3,375 [kJ/s]
QcC,sit1 = 54,06 [kJ/s]
QcC,sit3 = 56,18 [kJ/s]
83,53 [C]
58,21 [C]
88 [C]
5,5 [C]
62,68 [C]
Milk for resale, skim
QcP,resale = 4,078 [kJ/s]
QcC,resale = 52,2 [kJ/s]
Cooling demand (both c,PC og c,C)
Heating demand
==PAGE:117==
File:C:\Users\pejo\Desktop\Cream_code appendix.EES
12-06-2016 21:37:00  Page 3
EES Ver. 9.992: #0885:  20-user license administered by  Peter Reinholdt Danish Technology Institute
"Densities"
rho_w = 1000 [kg/m^3]
"whey"
 
"wholemilk"
rho_wm1 = 1,023 [kg/l]
"Pasteur + regen"
rho_sm = 1,026 [kg/l]
"skimmed milk"
rho_c = 0,978 [kg/l]
"Cream"
 
"Specific heat capacities"
cp_sm = 4,02 [kJ/(kg*C)]
"skimmed milk" 
cp_wm1 = 4,0 [kJ/(kg*C)]
"Delivery, pasteur, regen"
cp_wm2 = 4,05 [kJ/(kg*C)]
"Preheat"
 
cp_c = 3,5 [kJ/kg*C]
"cream above 40 C"
 
"heat exchanger efficiency"
epsilon_milk = 0,85 [-]
epsilon_cream = 0,85 [-]
epsilon_resale = 0,85 [-]
 
"!Temperatures"
"milk"
T_mtank = 1,5 [C]
"Storage tank for whole milk"
 
T_m_1 = 1,5 [C]
"Whole millk into HEX 30.20.00" 
T_m_2_sit1=12 [C]
"sit1"
T_m_2_sit3 = 24 [C]
"Whole millk out of HEX 30.20.00/into milkpasteur. sit 3"
 
T_m_5 = 75 [C]
"Pasteurisation milk"
T_m_7 = 32,5 [C]
"outlet temperature"
 
"resale"
T_mr_1 = 1,5 [C]
"Whole millk into pasteur" 
 
T_mr_3 = 75 [C]
"Pasteurisation milk"
T_mr_5 = 7,5 [C]
"outlet temperature"
T_mr_6 = 1,5 [C]
 
"Cream" 
T_c_1_resale = T_skim_2
T_c_1_sit1 = T_skim_3_sit1
"out of separator into cream pasteur"
T_c_1_sit3 = T_skim_3_sit3
T_c_3 = 88 [C]
"Pasteurisation cream"
T_c_6= 5,5 [C]
"End cooling T"
 
"Volumen Flows"
V_dot_wm = 161/60 [l/s]
 "From diaryman 161 liter/min"
V_dot_c = 16/60 [l/s]
"From diaryman 16 liter/min"
V_dot_sm = V_dot_wm-V_dot_c
 
V_dot_rw = 10 [m^3/h]
"Whey into centrifuge"
V_dot_w = V_dot_rw/100*99,2
"Whey out of centrifuge/into HEX 30.16.00. 0,8% to whey cream."
V_dot_wc = V_dot_rw - V_dot_w
"Whey cream"
 
"Mass flows"
m_dot_sm= V_dot_sm * rho_sm
"Mass flow rate of skimmed milk"
m_dot_c = V_dot_c * rho_c
"Mass flow rate of cream"
m_dot_wm = V_dot_wm * rho_wm1
"Mass flow of whole milk"
 
m_dot_w = V_dot_w * rho_w * convert('kg/h';'kg/s')
"mass flow of whey"
 
"!Energy balances for milk"
"Preheat fra Energi tanken situation 1 og 3"
Q_dot_ph_sit1 = m_dot_wm * cp_wm2 * (T_m_2_sit1 - T_m_1)
Q_dot_ph_sit3 = m_dot_wm * cp_wm2 * (T_m_2_sit3 - T_m_1)
 
"Situation 1, skimmed"
==PAGE:118==
File:C:\Users\pejo\Desktop\Cream_code appendix.EES
12-06-2016 21:37:00  Page 4
EES Ver. 9.992: #0885:  20-user license administered by  Peter Reinholdt Danish Technology Institute
C_min_sit1_skim = min(cp_sm*m_dot_sm;cp_wm1*m_dot_wm)
Q_dot_mR_sit1_skim_max = C_min_sit1_skim * (T_m_5 - T_m_2_sit1)
epsilon_milk = Q_dot_mR_sit1_skim/Q_dot_mR_sit1_skim_max
 
Q_dot_mR_sit1_skim = m_dot_wm * cp_wm1 * (T_skim_3_sit1 - T_m_2_sit1)     "regen heating"
Q_dot_mR_sit1_skim = m_dot_sm * cp_sm * (T_m_5 - T_skim_6_sit1)      "Regen cooling"
 
Q_mP_sit1_skim = m_dot_sm * cp_sm * (T_m_5 - T_skim_3_sit1)      "Pasteurisation"
 
Q_dot_exH_sit1_skim = m_dot_sm * cp_sm * (T_m_7 - T_skim_6_sit1)    "Extra heat"
 
"Situation 1, whole milk"
 
Q_dot_mR_sit1_whole_max = m_dot_wm * cp_wm1 * (T_m_5 - T_m_2_sit1)
epsilon_milk = Q_dot_mR_sit1_whole/Q_dot_mR_sit1_whole_max
 
Q_dot_mR_sit1_whole = m_dot_wm * cp_wm1 * (T_whole_3_sit1 - T_m_2_sit1)   "regen heat"
Q_dot_mR_sit1_whole = m_dot_wm * cp_wm1 * (T_m_5 - T_whole_6_sit1)   "Regen cool"
 
Q_mP_sit1_whole = m_dot_wm * cp_wm1 * (T_m_5 - T_whole_3_sit1)    "Pasteurisation"
 
Q_dot_exH_sit1_whole = m_dot_wm * cp_wm1 * (T_m_7 - T_whole_6_sit1)   "Extra heat"
 
 
 "Situation 3, skimmed"
C_min_sit3_skim = min(cp_sm*m_dot_sm;cp_wm1*m_dot_wm)
Q_dot_mR_sit3_skim_max = C_min_sit3_skim * (T_m_5 - T_m_2_sit3)
epsilon_milk = Q_dot_mR_sit3_skim/Q_dot_mR_sit3_skim_max
 
Q_dot_mR_sit3_skim = m_dot_wm * cp_wm1 * (T_skim_3_sit3 - T_m_2_sit3)   "regen heat"
Q_dot_mR_sit3_skim = m_dot_sm * cp_sm * (T_m_5 - T_skim_6_sit3)   "Regen cool"
 
Q_mP_sit3_skim = m_dot_sm * cp_sm * (T_m_5 - T_skim_3_sit3)     "Pasteurisation"
 
Q_dot_exH_sit3_skim = m_dot_sm * cp_sm * (T_m_7 - T_skim_6_sit3)    "Extra heat"
 
"Situation 3, whole milk"
 
Q_dot_mR_sit3_whole_max = m_dot_wm * cp_wm1 * (T_m_5 - T_m_2_sit3)
epsilon_milk = Q_dot_mR_sit3_whole/Q_dot_mR_sit3_whole_max
 
Q_dot_mR_sit3_whole = m_dot_wm * cp_wm1 * (T_whole_3_sit3 - T_m_2_sit3)   "regen heat"
Q_dot_mR_sit3_whole = m_dot_wm * cp_wm1 * (T_m_5 - T_whole_6_sit3)   "Regen cool"
 
Q_mP_sit3_whole = m_dot_wm * cp_wm1 * (T_m_5 - T_whole_3_sit3)    "Pasteurisation"
 
Q_dot_exH_sit3_whole = m_dot_wm * cp_wm1 * (T_m_7 - T_whole_6_sit3)
 
 "Preheat in total"
Q_tot_ph_sit1_skim = Q_dot_ph_sit1 + Q_dot_exH_sit1_skim
Q_tot_ph_sit1_whole = Q_dot_ph_sit1 + Q_dot_exH_sit1_whole
Q_tot_ph_sit3_skim = Q_dot_ph_sit3 + Q_dot_exH_sit3_skim 
Q_tot_ph_sit3_whole = Q_dot_ph_sit3 + Q_dot_exH_sit3_whole
 
Q_tot_heat_sit1_skim = Q_dot_ph_sit1 + Q_dot_mR_sit1_skim + Q_mP_sit1_skim 
Q_tot_heat_sit3_skim = Q_dot_ph_sit3 + Q_dot_mR_sit3_skim + Q_mP_sit3_skim
Q_tot_heat_sit1_whole = Q_dot_ph_sit1 + Q_dot_mR_sit1_whole + Q_mP_sit1_whole
Q_tot_heat_sit3_whole = Q_dot_ph_sit3 + Q_dot_mR_sit3_whole + Q_mP_sit3_whole
 
Q_tot_mEx_sit1_skim = Q_dot_ph_sit1 + Q_dot_mR_sit1_skim + Q_mP_sit1_skim + Q_dot_exH_sit1_skim
Q_tot_mEx_sit3_skim = Q_dot_ph_sit3 + Q_dot_mR_sit3_skim + Q_mP_sit3_skim + Q_dot_exH_sit3_skim
 
Q_tot_mEx_sit1_whole = Q_dot_ph_sit1 + Q_dot_mR_sit1_whole + Q_mP_sit1_whole+ Q_dot_exH_sit1_whole
 
Q_tot_mEx_sit3_whole = Q_dot_ph_sit3 + Q_dot_mR_sit3_whole + Q_mP_sit3_whole +Q_dot_exH_sit3_whole
 
 
"!Milk for resale."
==PAGE:119==
File:C:\Users\pejo\Desktop\Cream_code appendix.EES
12-06-2016 21:37:00  Page 5
EES Ver. 9.992: #0885:  20-user license administered by  Peter Reinholdt Danish Technology Institute
"WHole milk"
Q_dot_mR_resale_whole_max = cp_wm1 * m_dot_wm * (T_mr_3 - T_mr_1)
epsilon_resale = Q_dot_mR_resale_whole/Q_dot_mR_resale_whole_max
 
Q_dot_mR_resale_whole = m_dot_wm * cp_wm1 * (T_whole_2 - T_mr_1)   "regen heat"
Q_dot_mR_resale_whole = m_dot_wm * cp_wm1 * (T_mr_3 - T_whole_4)   "Regen cool"
 
Q_mP_resale_whole = m_dot_wm * cp_wm1 * (T_mr_3 - T_whole_2)    "Pasteurisation"
 
Q_dot_mC_whole = m_dot_wm * cp_wm2 * (T_whole_4 - T_mr_5)
 
Q_dot_exC_whole = m_dot_wm * cp_wm1 * (T_mr_5 - T_mr_6)    "Ekstra cooling"
 
Q_dot_tot_C_whole = Q_dot_mC_whole + Q_dot_exC_whole
 
"skimmed milk"
 C_min_resale_skim = min(cp_sm*m_dot_sm;cp_wm1*m_dot_wm)
Q_dot_mR_resale_skim_max = C_min_resale_skim * (T_mr_3 - T_mr_1)
epsilon_resale = Q_dot_mR_resale_skim/Q_dot_mR_resale_skim_max
 
 
Q_dot_mR_resale_skim = m_dot_wm * cp_wm1 * (T_skim_2 - T_mr_1)   "regen heat"
Q_dot_mR_resale_skim = m_dot_sm * cp_sm * (T_mr_3 - T_skim_4)    "Regen cool"
 
Q_mP_resale_skim = m_dot_sm * cp_sm * (T_mr_3 - T_skim_2)     "Pasteurisation"
 
 Q_dot_mC_skim = m_dot_sm * cp_sm * (T_skim_4 - T_mr_5)
 
Q_dot_exC_skim = m_dot_sm * cp_sm * (T_mr_5 - T_mr_6)    "Extra heat"
 
Q_dot_tot_C_skim = Q_dot_mC_skim + Q_dot_exC_skim 
"!Energy balances for Cream pasteur"
 "Situation 1"
Q_dot_cR_sit1_max = m_dot_c * cp_c * (T_c_3 - T_c_1_sit1)
epsilon_cream = Q_dot_cR_sit1/Q_dot_cR_sit1_max
 
Q_dot_cR_sit1 = m_dot_c * cp_c* (T_c_2_sit1 - T_c_1_sit1)
Q_dot_cR_sit1 = m_dot_c * cp_c * (T_c_3 - T_c_4_sit1)
 
Q_dot_cC_sit1 = m_dot_c * cp_c * (T_c_4_sit1 - T_c_6) "This include EST. Split is unknown"
 
Q_dot_cP_sit1 = m_dot_c * cp_c * (T_c_3 - T_c_2_sit1)
 
  "Situation 3"
Q_dot_cR_sit3_max = m_dot_c * cp_c * (T_c_3 - T_c_1_sit3)
epsilon_cream = Q_dot_cR_sit3/Q_dot_cR_sit3_max
 
Q_dot_cR_sit3 = m_dot_c * cp_c * (T_c_2_sit3 - T_c_1_sit3)
Q_dot_cR_sit3 = m_dot_c * cp_c * (T_c_3 - T_c_4_sit3)
 
Q_dot_cC_sit3 = m_dot_c * cp_c * (T_c_4_sit3 - T_c_6) "This include EST. Split is unknown"
 
Q_dot_cP_sit3 = m_dot_c * cp_c * (T_c_3 - T_c_2_sit3)
 
"Resale"
Q_dot_cR_resale_max = m_dot_c * cp_c * (T_c_3 - T_c_1_resale)
epsilon_cream = Q_dot_cR_resale/Q_dot_cR_resale_max
 
Q_dot_cR_resale = m_dot_c * cp_c * (T_c_2_resale - T_c_1_resale)
Q_dot_cR_resale = m_dot_c * cp_c * (T_c_3 - T_c_4_resale)
 
Q_dot_cC_resale = m_dot_c * cp_c * (T_c_4_resale - T_c_6)
"This 
include EST. Split is unknown"
 
Q_dot_cP_resale = m_dot_c * cp_c * (T_c_3 - T_c_2_resale)
==PAGE:120==
File:C:\Users\pejo\Desktop\Cream_code appendix.EES
12-06-2016 21:37:00  Page 6
EES Ver. 9.992: #0885:  20-user license administered by  Peter Reinholdt Danish Technology Institute
SOLUTION
Unit Settings: SI C kPa kJ mass deg
cpc  = 3,5 [kJ/kg*C]
cpsm  = 4,02 [kJ/(kg*C)]
cpwm1 = 4 [kJ/(kg*C)]
cpwm2 = 4,05 [kJ/(kg*C)]
Cmin,resale,skim  = 9,968 [kJ/C-s]
Cmin,sit1,skim  = 9,968 [kJ/(C*s)]
Cmin,sit3,skim  = 9,968 [kJ/C-s]
εcream  = 0,85 [-]
εmilk = 0,85 [-]
εresale  = 0,85 [-]
mc = 0,2608 [kg/s]
msm = 2,48 [kg/s]
mw = 2,756 [kg/s]
mwm  = 2,745 [kg/s]
QcC,resale  = 52,2 [kJ/s]
QcC,sit1  = 54,06 [kJ/s]
QcC,sit3  = 56,18 [kJ/s]
QcP,resale  = 4,078 [kJ/s]
QcP,sit1  = 3,75 [kJ/s]
QcP,sit3  = 3,375 [kJ/s]
QcR,resale  = 23,11 [kJ/s-C]
QcR,resale,max  = 27,19 [kJ/s]
QcR,sit1  = 21,25 [kJ/s-C]
QcR,sit1,max = 25 [kJ/s]
QcR,sit3  = 19,12 [kJ/s-C]
QcR,sit3,max = 22,5 [kJ/s]
QexC,skim  = 59,81 [kJ/s]
QexC,whole = 65,88 [kJ/s]
QexH,sit1,skim = 110,1 [kJ/s]
QexH,sit1,whole = 121,3 [kJ/s]
QexH,sit3,skim = 8,472 [kJ/s]
QexH,sit3,whole = 9,333 [kJ/s]
QmC,skim = 50,09 [kJ/s]
QmC,whole  = 55,87 [kJ/s]
QmR,resale,skim  = 622,7 [kJ/s-C]
QmR,resale,skim,max = 732,6 [kJ/s]
QmR,resale,whole  = 686 [kJ/s-C]
QmR,resale,whole,max  = 807 [kJ/s]
QmR,sit1,skim  = 533,8 [kJ/s]
QmR,sit1,skim,max = 628 [kJ/s]
QmR,sit1,whole  = 588 [kJ/s]
QmR,sit1,whole,max = 691,8 [kJ/s]
QmR,sit3,skim  = 432,1 [kJ/s]
QmR,sit3,skim,max = 508,3 [kJ/s]
QmR,sit3,whole  = 476 [kJ/s]
QmR,sit3,whole,max = 560 [kJ/s]
Qph,sit1  = 116,7 [kJ/s]
Qph,sit3  = 250,1 [kJ/s]
Qtot,C,skim  = 109,9 [kJ/s]
Qtot,C,whole  = 121,7 [kJ/s]
QmP,resale,skim  = 167,3 [kJ/s]
QmP,resale,whole  = 121,1 [kJ/s]
QmP,sit1,skim  = 143,4 [kJ/s]
QmP,sit1,whole  = 103,8 [kJ/s]
QmP,sit3,skim  = 116,1 [kJ/s]
QmP,sit3,whole  = 84 [kJ/s]
Qtot,heat,sit1,skim  = 793,9 [kJ/s]
Qtot,heat,sit1,whole  = 808,5 [kJ/s]
Qtot,heat,sit3,skim  = 798,3 [kJ/s]
Qtot,heat,sit3,whole  = 810,1 [kJ/s]
Qtot,mEx,sit1,skim  = 904,1 [kJ/s]
Qtot,mEx,sit1,whole  = 929,8 [kJ/s]
Qtot,mEx,sit3,skim  = 806,8 [kJ/s]
Qtot,mEx,sit3,whole  = 819,5 [kJ/s]
Qtot,ph,sit1,skim = 226,9 [kJ/s]
Qtot,ph,sit1,whole = 238,1 [kJ/s]
Qtot,ph,sit3,skim = 258,6 [kJ/s]
Qtot,ph,sit3,whole = 259,5 [kJ/s]
ρc = 0,978 [kg/l]
ρsm  = 1,026 [kg/l]
ρw  = 1000 [kg/m3]
ρwm1  = 1,023 [kg/l]
Tc,1,resale = 58,21 [C]
Tc,1,sit1  = 60,61 [C]
Tc,1,sit3  = 63,35 [C]
Tc,2,resale = 83,53 [C]
Tc,2,sit1  = 83,89 [C]
Tc,2,sit3  = 84,3 [C]
Tc,3  = 88 [C]
Tc,4,resale = 62,68 [C]
Tc,4,sit1  = 64,72 [C]
Tc,4,sit3  = 67,05 [C]
Tc,6  = 5,5 [C]
Tmr,1  = 1,5 [C]
Tmr,3  = 75 [C]
Tmr,5  = 7,5 [C]
Tmr,6  = 1,5 [C]
Tmtank  = 1,5 [C]
Tm,1 = 1,5 [C]
Tm,2,sit1 = 12 [C]
Tm,2,sit3 = 24 [C]
Tm,5 = 75 [C]
Tm,7 = 32,5 [C]
Tskim,2 = 58,21 [C]
Tskim,3,sit1 = 60,61 [C]
Tskim,3,sit3 = 63,35 [C]
Tskim,4 = 12,53 [C]
Tskim,6,sit1 = 21,45 [C]
Tskim,6,sit3 = 31,65 [C]
Twhole,2 = 63,98 [C]
Twhole,3,sit1  = 65,55 [C]
Twhole,3,sit3  = 67,35 [C]
Twhole,4 = 12,53 [C]
Twhole,6,sit1  = 21,45 [C]
Twhole,6,sit3  = 31,65 [C]
Vc  = 0,2667 [l/s]
Vrw  = 10 [m3/h]
Vsm  = 2,417 [l/s]
Vw  = 9,92 [m3/h]
Vwc  = 0,08 [m3/h]
Vwm = 2,683 [l/s]
==PAGE:121==
Appendix C
Refrigeration plant
This appendix is a more detailed description of the refrigerant plant at Endrup
Dairy, as an extension of section 4.4 in the main report. As mentioned there,
the purpose of the investigation is to ﬁnd the delivered cooling to the dairy,
and furthermore to calculate the average capacity of the evaporator based on
the methods given in 3.3.
A sketch of the entire system can be seen on ﬁgure C.1.
The system
consist of two evaporators, one located inside the ice water storage tank (fur-
ther:IWST), and the other as a pre-cooling unit before the IWST. Only one
of the compressors run at a time.
For most of the year the reciprocation
compressor is used. A switch to the screw compressor is done whenever the
reciprocating compressor is running more or less continuous during the entire
day, and the capacity seems to small. This is assessed on the supply tem-
perature of the ice water by the crafts men at the dairy. It was not possible
to obtain a compressor polynomial for the compressor, but it was conﬁrmed
by the manufacture (Johnson Controls), that the isentropic eﬃciency was be-
tween 0.71 and 0.75 for the pressure range between 9 bar and 15 bar. Further
an eﬃciency of 0.7 will be used for all PR.
The condenser is air cooled, and rejects heat to the surroundings. Frequency
controlled fans are adjusted in order to maintain a condensing pressure of 9
bar, through out the year.
In general it can be said that the cooling used in the dairy can be calcu-
lated by making a control volume including only the processes in the dairy,
as illustrated in ﬁgure C.1 with the green square. The cooling is of course
produced by the refrigeration plant, in either the evaporator for pre-cooling
or the evaporator in the IWST.
In the following sections the energy balance for the control volume is estab-
lished, and the evaporator load is calculated.
109
==PAGE:122==
110
APPENDIX C. REFRIGERATION PLANT
Figure C.1: A sketch of the refrigeration delivering ice water to the dairy.
C.1
Delivered cooling to the dairy
The supply temperature from the IWST to the dairy is around 1¶C, and the
return temperature varies between 2¶C and 14¶C during the day. The value
of the temperatures are logged every 5 minute.
The ﬂow of ice water to the cooling processes in the dairy is controlled by the
primary pumps, as seen on ﬁgure C.1. The pumps are Grundfos CR pumps
and they are frequency controlled to maintain a pressure of 2.2 bar in the
piping system. The pressure is a relative measurement, and is measured 1.7
meters above the pumps. The water table in the IWST is estimated to be 7
meters above the pumps. Both the pumps are running at the same speed. In
the control system the percentage at which the pumps are running is logged.
If a process needs cooling a valve in the piping system will open, and allow a
ﬂow to enter. This will create a pressure drop, and the primary pumps will
increase the ﬂow in order to maintain the 2.2 bar.
In order to obtain a mass ﬂow rate of the ice water, the percent rate at which
the primary pumps are running must be converted.
First of all this is done by making a summed pump characteristics for the two
==PAGE:123==
C.1. DELIVERED COOLING TO THE DAIRY
111
primary pumps. The characteristic provide by Grundfoss [16] for one pump
can be seen in appendix D. This is a characteristic of the pump running at
maximum rpm, corresponding to a percent rate at 100%. The Q,H curve for
one pump is digitalised, and a new characteristic for both pumps is made after
the principle shown on ﬁgure C.2 and C.3.
Figure
C.2:
Principle
for
two
pumps in parallel [13].
Figure C.3: Principle for summed
pump characteristics [13]
The summed curve for the two primary pumps can be seen as black top
curve on ﬁgure C.4.
To obtain values for ﬂow and the lift at other speeds equation C.1 and C.2
are used [13].
QB = QA
3nB
nA
4
(C.1)
HB = HA
3nB
nA
42
(C.2)
Where Q is volume ﬂow rate, n is rpm and H is head. The index A de-
scribes a known rpm, and the index B is the rpm at which V and H wants to
be known. In this case the rpm at 100 % is known, and the head and volume
ﬂow rate for the percentage between 60 % and 80 % is calculated, and can be
seen in ﬁgure C.4 as well.
==PAGE:124==
112
APPENDIX C. REFRIGERATION PLANT
Figure C.4: Aﬃnity curve for the summed pump characteristic.
The grey vertical line in ﬁgure C.4 indicates the split between the stable
and unstable operation range. The range to the left is attached with great
uncertainty according to the values read from the characteristic, and it is
recommended not to operate in this area.
The head done by the pumps is calculated as by equation C.3 [17].
H = ∆Ptot
ﬂ· g
(C.3)
Where ﬂis the density and g is the standard gravity. The pressure diﬀer-
ence ∆Ptot in this case is the 2.2 bar subtracted with the geodetic pressure
diﬀerence between the water table in IWST and the height of the pressure sen-
sor. With 5.3 metres in height diﬀerence, this corresponds to a pressure of 0.5
bar. Converted to Pascal and inserted in equation C.3 the head is 17.5 metres.
The calculated H is then used with the aﬃnity curves to ﬁnd the ﬂow
rate at a given percentage. As seen on ﬁgure C.3 the calculated H does not
cover the range of 60 % to 80%.
This is expected since a great share of
the percentages located in the unstable range. Basically this means that the
aﬃnity curves give a very poor possibility to convert the percentages into a
volume ﬂow rate.
To support the calculations of the volume ﬂow rate, an energy balance is
established around the split of the water circuit right before the IWST and
the pre-cooling loop. The control volume is indicated as a red square in ﬁgure
C.1, and illustrated in ﬁgure C.5
Assuming that the water ﬂows out of the IWST, whenever the secondary
==PAGE:125==
C.1. DELIVERED COOLING TO THE DAIRY
113
pumps are on, and assuming the temperature of the water is the same at the
water send into the IWST after precooling, the mass ﬂow rate by solving for
QIW in equation C.4.
Qsec · TPC,in = TIW,return · QIW + TPC,out · (Qsec ≠QIW )
(C.4)
Figure C.5: Energy balance around pipe split
By applying the energy balance for operation situations where the tem-
peratures and the measured ﬂow was rather constant, and supported by the
aﬃnity curves from ﬁgure C.4, the conversion of percentages to volume ﬂow
rates can be seen in table C.1.
Table C.1: The conversion of the percentage of pump speed to volume ﬂow
rate.
%
Q
Ë
m3
h
È
%
Q
Ë
m3
h
È
61
7
71
50.4
62
12.6
72
53.9
63
17
73
57.2
64
20.8
74
60.2
65
24.3
75
63.2
66
27.5
76
66.0
67
30.6
77
69.7
68
37.6
78
71.3
69
42.5
79
73.8
70
46.7
80
75.1
From the control system values for every 5th minute can be exported to
excel. A MATLAB code is used to a convert the percentages and calculate
to a mass ﬂow rate. Using eq. 3.2 the capacity of the system for every data
point is calculated. This can be seen for a chosen week with a representative
production schedule in ﬁgure C.6.
==PAGE:126==
114
APPENDIX C. REFRIGERATION PLANT
Figure C.6: The cooling capacity for a given week.
At the end of the week a negative load can been seen. A investigation
of this showed that the return temperature is a couple of degrees lower than
the forward temperature. This gives very little sense, and the negative load
is therefore not a part of the weekly load calculation.
Converted to kWh the total cooling load for the week is 18599 kWh.
C.2
Evaporator capacity
The IWST is divided into a warm and a cold side by a wall in the middle, as
seen on ﬁgure C.1. The evaporator located inside the tank, goes through the
wall and is delivering cooling both to the warm and the cold side. The return
water from the dairy is lead in at the bottom of the tank in the warm side.
The ice is build up on the pipes of the evaporator, and two sensors measures
the thickness of the ice on the warm and cold side respectively. The wanted
thickness of the layer on the cold side is often maintained, while the warm
side is in lack of ice. In practice this means that the ice layer on the warm
side, is the set point for compressor start.
The secondary pumps are on/oﬀcontrolled, and are only running when ice
needs to be build up inside the storage tank AND the return temperature of
the ice water from the dairy is above 3¶C. The running time of the pumps
and the temperatures in this pre-cool water loop is not logged. This makes it
very diﬃcult calculate how much cooling this evaporator delivers.
The compressor is controlled by the suction pressure, which has a set point of
2.2 barg, corresponding to an evaporation temperature of -7.5¶C. As seen on
ﬁgure C.1, there is a valve between both the separators and the compressors.
The valvePC, makes sure that the evaporation pressure for pre-cooling water
does not drop to much, in order to avoid the water in the heat exchanger to
freeze. This is necessary since the evaporation pressure in the other evapora-
==PAGE:127==
C.2. EVAPORATOR CAPACITY
115
tor inside the ice water tank must be much lower, in order to build up ice.
The pressure from pre-cooling will be throttled down to this pressure in the
valvepre-cool.
Concluding from this the evaporators has to been seen a one common load
with an evaporation pressure of 2.2 barg. In ﬁgure C.6 the black line in the
bottom indicates the hours where the compressor is running. Average running
time for the entire week is 364742 s/101.3 hours. Using eq. 3.12.
Qload = 18599
101.3 = 183.6kW
(C.5)
==PAGE:128==
==PAGE:129==
Appendix D
Pump characteristics
The pump characteristics for the primary pumps used in order to obtain the
aﬃnity diagram in appendix C.1. The full data sheet for the pump can be
seen in [16].
117
==PAGE:130==
Firmanavn:
Udfærdiget af:
Telefon:
Dato:
2/12/2016
Udskrift fra Grundfos CAPS [2015.09.024]
Positionsnr.
Antal Beskrivelse
1
CR 45-2-2 A-F-A-E-HQQE
Produktnr.: 96122798
Vertikal flertrins-centrifugalpumpe med suge- og trykstuds på samme niveau (inline) som kan
installeres i et horisontalt etstrenget rørssystem. Topstykket og fodstykket er af støbejern; alle
andre medieberørte dele er af rustfrit stål. En patrontætning sikrer høj driftssikkerhed, sikker
håndtering og let service og adgang. Effekt overføres via en todelt kobling. Rørtilslutning foregår
via DIN-flanger.
Pumpen er forsynet med en 3-faset kappekølet asynkronmotor i fodmotorudførelse.
Medie:
Pumpemedie:
Vand
Væsketemperaturområde:
-30 .. 120 °C
Medietemp.:
20 °C
Massefylde:
998.2 kg/m³
Teknisk:
Hastighed for pumpedata:
2919 omdr/min
Nominelt flow:
45 m³/h
Nominel løftehøjde:
30.6 m
Akseltætning:
HQQE
Godkendelser på typeskilt:
CE,TR
Kurvetolerance:
ISO9906:2012 3B
Materialer:
Pumpehus:
Støbejern
EN-JS1050
ASTM 80-55-06
Løber:
Rustfrit stål
DIN W.-Nr. 1.4301
AISI 304
Bush material:
Graflon
Installation:
Maks. omgivelsestemperatur:
60 °C
Max. tryk ved nævnte temperatur:
16 bar /  120 °C
16 bar /  -30 °C
Flange standard:
DIN
Rørtilslutning:
DN 80
Tryktrin:
PN 16 / PN 25 / PN 40
Flangestørrelse for motor:
FF265
Elektriske data:
Motortype:
132SC
IE Virkningsgradsklasse:
IE3
Antal poler:
2
Mærkeeffekt - P2:
5.5 kW
Effekt (P2) krævet af pumpe:
5.5 kW
Netfrekvens:
50 Hz
1/5
==PAGE:131==
Firmanavn:
Udfærdiget af:
Telefon:
Dato:
2/12/2016
Udskrift fra Grundfos CAPS [2015.09.024]
Positionsnr.
Antal Beskrivelse
Mærkespænding:
3 x 380-415 D V
Mærkestrøm:
11 A
Startstrøm:
1080-1180 %
Cos phi - effektfaktor:
0,87-0,82
Nominel hastighed:
2920-2940 omdr/min
Virkningsgrad:
IE3 89,2%
Motorvirkningsgrad ved fuldlast: 89.2 %
Motorvirkningsgrad ved 3/4 belastning:
90.0 %
Motorvirkningsgrad ved ½ belastning:
89.6 %
Kapslingsklasse (IEC 34-5):
55  Dust/Jetting
Isolationsklasse (IEC 85):
F
Andre:
Mærkat:
Grundfos Blueflux
Min. virkningsgradsindeks, MEI ≥:
0.7
Nettovægt:
104 kg
Bruttovægt:
127 kg
Shippingvolumen:
0.3 m³
2/5
==PAGE:132==
Firmanavn:
Udfærdiget af:
Telefon:
Dato:
2/12/2016
Udskrift fra Grundfos CAPS [2015.09.024]
96122798 CR 45-2-2 50 Hz
H
[m]
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Q [m³/h]
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
eta
[%]
0
20
40
60
80
100
CR 45-2-2, 3*400 V, 50Hz
Pumpemedie = Vand
Medietemperatur = 20 °C
Massefylde = 998.2 kg/m³
P
[kW]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
NPSH
[m]
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
P1
P2
3/5
==PAGE:133==
Appendix E
NG and electricity prices
Natural gas price
The unit price for natural gas (further: NG) consist of several diﬀerent con-
tributions: A gas price and transmission tax paid to the trading company,
public commitments, a distribution tariﬀpaid to the distribution company,
CO2, NOx and natural gas tariﬀs.
In the case of Endrup Dairy the gas price paid to the trading company is a
variable price determined by the Gaspoint Nordic market. The price is only
variable within an upper and lower limit. The lowest possible price is 1.43
DKK
m3
and the highest possible is 2.15 DKK
m3 . As the NG unit price the recent
year has reached a rather low level, the lowest possible price will be used in
the further calculations.
The CO2, NOx, distribution, transmission tariﬀs and public commitments is
summed up to a price of 1.77 DKK
m3 . The NG tariﬀis 2.18 DKK
m3 . Besides a
minimum tariﬀof 8.19 % the NG tariﬀis compensated [18].
The calculation of NG used in m3 will be regulated on a monthly basis ac-
cording to the energy content (net caloriﬁc value) of the NG. Here a standard
value of 36.6 MJ
m3 corresponding to 11 kWh
m3 is used. The ﬁnal minimum price
paid for NG in DKK
m3
can be seen in table 4.4.
Furthermore the dairy has a consumption of NG used for non-process pur-
poses like space heating in the administration building and hot water used
in changing rooms and kitchens. Natural gas used for these purposes is not
compensated, and the ﬁnal price will include a full NG tariﬀ. The minimum
price paid for these purposes can also be seen in table 4.4.
Electricity price
The unit price for electricity consists as well of several diﬀerent contributions:
grid tariﬀs for both the trading company and Energinet.dk, System tariﬀs,
PSO tariﬀ, electricity tariﬀand the electricity price.
121
==PAGE:134==
122
APPENDIX E. NG AND ELECTRICITY PRICES
The electricity price for Endrup Dairy consist of a 50/50 share between a
ﬁxed price and a variable price. The ﬁxed price is now 0.19 DKK
kWh , and will for
2017 be 0.16 DKK
kWh . An example of the variable price is 0.015 DKK
kWh for May
this year.
The grid, system and PSO tariﬀis in total 0.48 DKK
kWh .
The electricity tariﬀis 0.885 DKK
kWh . Besides a minimum tariﬀof 0.004 DKK
kWh ,
this tariﬀis compensated as the electricity is used for processes [18].
A ﬁnal unit price for electricity based on the variable price of May is 0.69
DKK
kWh .
==PAGE:135==
Appendix F
Calculations for pinch
analysis
This appendix shows calculations made for the pinch analysis carried out
for the chosen product streams at Endrup Dairy. The calculations has been
conducted in a Excel spreadsheet.
123
==PAGE:136==
124
APPENDIX F. CALCULATIONS FOR PINCH ANALYSIS
Table F.1: The method used is described in section 3.4.5. Temperature inter-
vals with pinch point ∆Tmin = 4K included. The cooling and heating demand
for each interval is shown ﬁrst, then the sequential balance, and at last the
max table. The pinch point is marked with green, the external heating and
cooling are marked with red and blue, respectively.
i
Temp.
Qcool
Qheat
∆Q
Qi≠1,i
Qi,i+1
Qi≠1,i
Qi,i+1
interval
[kWh/d]
[kWh/d]
[kWh/d]
[kWh/d]
[kWh/d]
[kWh/d]
[kWh/d]
1
89 -74.5
16.6
0.0
16.6
0.0
16.6
2604.7
2621.3
2
74.5 - 73
1.7
133.3
-131.6
16.6
-115.0
2621.3
2489.7
3
73 - 68
5.7
926.1
-920.4
-115.0
-1035.4
2489.7
1569.3
4
68 -66.9
1.3
222.1
-220.9
-1035.4
-1256.3
1569.3
1348.4
5
66.9 - 65.1
2.1
143.7
-141.7
-1256.3
-1398.0
1348.4
1206.8
6
65.1 -63.6
1.7
81.1
-79.4
-1398.0
-1477.4
1206.8
1127.3
7
63.6 -63
1.4
27.9
-26.5
-1477.4
-1503.9
1127.3
1100.8
8
63 - 60.2
9.9
93.9
-84.0
-1503.9
-1587.9
1100.8
1016.8
9
60.2 58.7
5.3
30.8
-25.5
-1587.9
-1613.4
1016.8
991.3
10
58.7 57.8
3.5
18.5
-15.0
-1613.4
-1628.4
991.3
976.3
11
57.8 - 32.5
98.0
423.0
-325.0
-1628.4
-1953.5
976.3
651.3
12
32.5- 31.6
3.5
84.8
-81.3
-1953.5
-2034.8
651.3
570.0
113
31.6 - 21.4
39.5
565.8
-526.3
-2034.8
-2561.1
570.0
43.7
14
21.4 - 18
13.2
56.9
-43.7
-2561.1
-2604.7
43.7
0.0
15
18 - 17
26.5
16.7
9.8
-2604.7
-2594.9
0.0
9.8
16
17 - 15
285.3
33.4
251.9
-2594.9
-2343.0
9.8
261.7
17
15 - 10.5
636.8
75.2
561.6
-2343.0
-1781.5
261.7
823.3
18
10.5 - 10
93.4
8.4
85.1
-1781.5
-1696.4
823.3
908.3
19
10 - 8.5
280.3
0.0
280.3
-1696.4
-1416.1
908.3
1188.6
20
8.5 - 7
297.4
0.0
297.4
-1416.1
-1118.8
1188.6
1485.9
21
7 - 6
82.1
0.0
82.1
-1118.8
-1036.7
1485.9
1568.1
22
6 - 2
586.9
0.0
586.9
-1036.7
-449.8
1568.1
2155.0
23
2 - 1
25.2
0.0
25.2
-449.8
-424.6
2155.0
2180.2
24
1.5 - 1.5
47.7
0.0
47.7
-424.6
-376.9
2180.2
2227.8
25
0.5 - -1
17.1
0.0
17.1
-376.9
-359.8
2227.8
2244.9
26
-1 - -2.5
215.8
0.0
215.8
-359.8
-144.0
2244.9
2460.7
==PAGE:137==
Appendix G
EES code for conﬁguration 3b
with R290
125
==PAGE:138==
File:C:\Users\pejo\Dropbox\Speciale\3b cascade R290.EES
04-07-2016 14:46:19  Page 1
EES Ver. 9.992: #0885:  20-user license administered by  Peter Reinholdt Danish Technology Institute
 $REFERENCE Propane IIR
 $REFERENCE Ammonia IIR
 
Function tph2_fkt(T[5];pinch;T_ph[3])
 "This function increase T_ph[3] until the given input is reached."
If (T[5] <= T_ph[3] + pinch) Then
tph2_fkt = T[5] - pinch
Else
 
 tph2_fkt = T_ph[3]
Endif
End
 
 Procedure q_dot_pwfkt(T_pw[1];T_pw[2];T_pw2test;T_pw[4];cp_w;RT;Q_pw;m_pw;m_dot_ref_l;h[3];h[4]:Q_dot_dsh;
Q_dot_split;T_pw[3];Q_dot_pw;m_dot_pw;Q_pw_gas;Q_dsh;Q_split;Q_cip1_kwh)
 
"This procedure decides the strategy for the exdsh. below 12.2 bar the outlet temperature is increased. Above the 
mass flow rate is increased."
 
If (T_pw[2] < T_pw2test) Then
Q_split = m_pw * cp_w * (T_pw[2] - T_pw[1])
Q_dot_split = Q_split/RT
Q_dot_dsh = m_dot_ref_l * (h[3] - h[4])
Q_dsh = Q_dot_dsh * RT
T_pw[3] = Q_dsh/(m_pw*cp_w) + T_pw[2]
Q_dot_pw = Q_dot_dsh + Q_dot_split
m_dot_pw = Q_dot_pw/ ( cp_w * (T_pw[3] - T_pw[1]))
Q_pw_gas = m_pw * cp_w * (T_pw[4] - T_pw[3])
Q_cip1_kwh = 0
Else
 
T_pw[3] = T_pw[4]
Q_dot_dsh = m_dot_ref_l * ( h[3] - h[4])
m_dot_pw = Q_dot_dsh/ (cp_w * (T_pw[3] - T_pw[2]))
Q_dot_split = m_dot_pw * cp_w *(T_pw[2] - T_pw[1])
Q_dot_pw = m_dot_pw * cp_w * (T_pw[3] - T_pw[1])
Q_pw_gas = m_pw * cp_w * (T_pw[4]-T_pw[3])
Q_dsh = Q_dot_dsh * RT
Q_split = Q_dot_split*RT
RT_pw = Q_pw/Q_dot_pw
RT_cip = RT-RT_pw
Q_cip1_kwh = RT_cip*Q_dot_pw/3600
Endif
End 
 
 Procedure zero(P_m_start;P_l;eta_is;f_q;pinch;sh_1;Q_dot_evap;cp_w:w_dot_com0)
"This procedure finds the reference values at P_m_start (9 bar)."
 
h[1] = enthalpy(R717;P=P_l;x=1)
T[1] = temperature(R717;P=P_l;x=1) 
T[2] = T[1] + sh_1
h[2] = enthalpy(R717;P=P_l;T=T[2])
s[2] = entropy(R717; P=P_l; T=T[2])
 
s_3s = s[2]
h_s[3] = enthalpy(R717;P=P_m_start;s = s_3s)
 
h_w[3] = (h_s[3] - h[2]) /eta_is + h[2]
 
h[8] = enthalpy(R717;P=P_m_start; x=0)
T[8] = temperature(R717;P=P_m_start;x=0)
 
h[9] = h[8]
T[9] = temperature(R717;P=P_l;h=h[9])
 
m_dot_ref_l = Q_dot_evap / (h[1] - h[9])
w_dot_com0 = m_dot_ref_l * (h_w[3] - h[2])
 
==PAGE:139==
File:C:\Users\pejo\Dropbox\Speciale\3b cascade R290.EES
04-07-2016 14:46:19  Page 2
EES Ver. 9.992: #0885:  20-user license administered by  Peter Reinholdt Danish Technology Institute
End
 
Call zero(P_m_start;P_l;eta_is;f_q;pinch;sh_1;Q_dot_evap;cp_w:w_dot_com0)
 
"!Input"
R$ = 'R290'
P_m = 15,3 [bar]
"intermediate pressure"
P_l = 3,2 [bar]
"Evaporation pressure iwst"
P_m_start = 9 [bar]
 
eta_is = 0,7 [-]
f_q = 0,15 [-]
pinch = 3 
sh_1 = 5
"unusefull superheat"
sh_cas = 4
"superheat cas HEX"
 
T_ph[1] = 15 [C]
T_ph[3] = 27 [C]
T_pw[4] = 71 [C]
T_pw[1]= 13 [C]
T_past[1] = 60,8 [C]
T_past[3] = 77,5 [C]
T_cip[1] = 13 [C]
T_cip[2] = 71 [C]
Q_dot_evap = 183,6 [kj/s]
Q_ph_kwh = 486,8 [kWh]
Q_pw_kwh = 969,8 [kWh]
Q_past_kwh = 1385,7 [kWh]
   
RT = 70860,4 [s]
"operation time compressor"
Elec_price = 0,69 [DDK/kWh]
NG_price = 3,38 [DDK/m^3]
 
"!Components"
"Evaporator"   
h[1] = enthalpy(R717;P=P_l;x=1)
T[1] = temperature(R717;P=P_l;x=1) 
T[2] = T[1] + sh_1
h[2] = enthalpy(R717;P=P_l;T=T[2])
s[2] = entropy(R717; P=P_l; T=T[2])
 
"Compressor"
s_s[3] = s[2]
h_s[3] = enthalpy(R717;P=P_m;s = s_s[3])
eta_is = (h_s[3] - h[2])/(h_w[3]-h[2])
f_q = (h_w[3] - h[3])/(h_w[3] - h[2])
 
T[3] = temperature(R717;P=P_m;h=h[3])
 
"Condenser"
h[4] = enthalpy(R717;T=T[4];x=1)
P_m = pressure(R717;T=T[4];x=1)
 
x[5] = quality (R717;P=P_m;h=h[5])
T[5] = temperature(R717;P=P_m;h=h[5])
 
x[6] = quality(R717;P=P_m;h=h[6])
T[6] = temperature(R717;P=P_m;h=h[6])
 
x[7] = quality(R717;P=P_m;h=h[7])
T[7] = T[4]
 
h[8] = enthalpy(R717;P=P_m; x=0)
T[8] = temperature(R717;P=P_m;x=0)
 
"Expansion valve"
h[9] = h[8]
==PAGE:140==
File:C:\Users\pejo\Dropbox\Speciale\3b cascade R290.EES
04-07-2016 14:46:19  Page 3
EES Ver. 9.992: #0885:  20-user license administered by  Peter Reinholdt Danish Technology Institute
T[9] = temperature(R717;P=P_l;h=h[9])
 
"Waterside proces vand"
 P_w = 1 [bar]
cp_w = cp(Water;P=P_w;T=T_pw[1])
Q_pw = Q_pw_kwh * 3600
Q_pw = m_pw * cp_w * (T_pw[4] - T_pw[1])
"mass of water"
T[4] = T_pw[2] + pinch
 
"Test for om Q_dot_pw er opfyldt"
Q_pw_kwh = Q_dot_pwtest * (RT/3600)
Q_dot_pwtest = m_dot_pwtest * cp_w * (T_pw[4] - T_pw[1])
Q_dot_dsh1test = m_dot_ref_l * (h[3] - h[4])
Q_dot_dsh1test = m_dot_pwtest * cp_w * (T_pw[4] - T_pw2test)
 
 Call  q_dot_pwfkt(T_pw[1];T_pw[2];T_pw2test;T_pw[4];cp_w;RT;Q_pw;m_pw;m_dot_ref_l;h[3];h[4]:Q_dot_dsh;
Q_dot_split;T_pw[3];Q_dot_pw;m_dot_pw;Q_pw_gas;Q_dsh;Q_split;Q_cip1_kwh)
 
"Water side - Preheat"
Q_ph = Q_ph_kwh * 3600
m_ph = Q_ph/(cp_w*(T_ph[3]-T_ph[1]))
T_ph[2] = tph2_fkt(T[5];pinch;T_ph[3])
 
Q_ph1 = m_ph * cp_w * (T_ph[2] - T_ph[1])
Q_ph2 = m_ph * cp_w * (T_ph[3] - T_ph[2])
 
Q_dot_ph1 = Q_ph1 / (RT)
Q_dot_ph2 = Q_ph2 / (RT)
 
Q_dot_ph1 = m_dot_ph * cp_w * (T_ph[2] - T_ph[1])
Q_ph1_kwh = Q_dot_ph1 *(RT/3600)
"Only relevant of Q_ph is fulfilled"
 
pinch_test = T[5] - T_ph[3]
  
"Open intercooler" 
 
T[11] = T[6] - pinch
T[10] = T[11] - sh_cas
P_m_l = pressure(R$;T=T[10];x=1)
 
h[10] = enthalpy(R$;P=P_m_l;x=1)
s[10] = entropy(R$;P=P_m_l;x=1)
 
h[11] = enthalpy(R$;P=P_m_l;T=T[11])
s[11] = entropy(R$;P=P_m_l;T=T[11])
 
Q_dot_ic = m_dot_ref_l * (h[6] - h[7])
Q_dot_ic = m_dot_ref_h * (h[11] - h[16])
 
"compressor 2 - HP"
s_s[12] = s[11]
h_s[12] = enthalpy(R$;s=s_s[12];P=P_h)
 
eta_is = (h_s[12]-h[11])/(h_w[12]-h[11])
f_q = (h_w[12] - h[12])/(h_w[12] - h[11])
 
"Top cycle condenser"
T[12] = temperature(R$;h=h[12];P=P_h)
 
T_past[2] = T[13] - pinch
h[13]= enthalpy(R$;T=T[13];x=1)
P_h = pressure(R$;T=T[13];x=1)
 
 
T[14] = temperature(R$;P=P_h;x=0)
h[14] = enthalpy(R$;P=P_h;x=0)
 
"Top cycle subcooler"
==PAGE:141==
File:C:\Users\pejo\Dropbox\Speciale\3b cascade R290.EES
04-07-2016 14:46:19  Page 4
EES Ver. 9.992: #0885:  20-user license administered by  Peter Reinholdt Danish Technology Institute
T[15] = T_cip[1] + pinch
T[14] = T[15] +sc_2
"Subcool in K for info"
h[15] = enthalpy(R$;P=P_h;T=T[15])
 
 "expansion valve"
h[16] = h[15]
T[16] = temperature(R$;P=P_m_l;h=h[16])
 
 "!Q&W"
"Top cycle"
Q_dot_past = Q_past_kwh /(RT/3600)
 
Q_dot_past = m_dot_past * cp_w * (T_past[3] - T_past[1])
Q_dot_dsh_h = m_dot_past * cp_w * (T_past[3] - T_past[2])
 
Q_dot_past = m_dot_ref_h * (h[12] - h[14])
 Q_dot_dsh_h = m_dot_ref_h * (h[12]-h[13])
Q_dot_con_h = m_dot_ref_h * (h[13] - h[14])
 
Q_dot_cip2 = m_dot_ref_h * (h[14] - h[15])
Q_dot_cip2 = m_dot_cip2 *(T_cip[2] - T_cip[1])
 
"bottom cycle"
Q_dot_evap = m_dot_ref_l * (h[1]-h[9])
Q_dot_split = m_dot_ref_l * (h[4] - h[5])
Q_dot_ph1 = m_dot_ref_l * (h[5] - h[6])
Q_dot_air = m_dot_ref_l * (h[7] - h[8])
Q_cip2_sp = (h[14] - h[15])
 
w_dot_com1 = m_dot_ref_l * (h_w[3]-h[2])
w_dot_com2 = m_dot_ref_h *(h_w[12] -h[11])
W_dot_tot = W_dot_com1 + W_dot_com2
 w_com2_sp = (h_w[12] -h[11])
 
Q_dot_tot = Q_dot_ph1 + Q_dot_pw + Q_dot_past + Q_dot_cip2
 
"CIP"
Q_pw_kwh_real = Q_dot_pw*RT/3600 - Q_cip1_kwh
"kwh kun for pw"
 
Q_cip1 = Q_cip1_kwh * 3600
Q_cip1 = m_cip1 * cp_w * (T_cip[2] - T_cip[1])
rho_w = density(Water;T=T_cip[1];P=P_w)
V_cip1 = m_cip1/rho_w
 
Q_cip2_kwh = Q_dot_cip2 * RT/3600
Q_cip2 = Q_cip2_kwh * 3600
Q_cip2 = m_cip2 * cp_w * (T_cip[2] - T_cip[1])
V_cip2 = m_cip2/rho_w
V_cip_tot = V_cip1 + V_cip2
 
"!COP"
COP_refri = Q_dot_evap/(W_dot_com1 + W_dot_com2)
COP_heat = (Q_dot_pw + Q_dot_ph1+Q_dot_past + Q_dot_cip2)/(W_dot_com1 + W_dot_com2)
COP_HP = (Q_dot_past + Q_dot_cip2)/W_dot_com2
COP_all = (Q_dot_tot+ Q_dot_evap)/W_dot_tot
 
"NG still needed"
Q_pw_kwhgas = Q_pw_gas / 3600
 
Q_ph_kwhgas = Q_ph2 / 3600 
 
"Economy"
Q_tot_kwh = Q_pw_kwh_real + Q_cip1_kwh + Q_ph1_kwh + Q_cip2_kwh + Q_past_kwh
 eta_boiler = 0,85
Q_gas_brutto = Q_tot_kwh/eta_boiler
V_gas = Q_gas_brutto /11
Gas_pris = V_gas * NG_price
 
delta_W_dot_com1 = W_dot_com1 -W_dot_com0
==PAGE:142==
File:C:\Users\pejo\Dropbox\Speciale\3b cascade R290.EES
04-07-2016 14:46:19  Page 5
EES Ver. 9.992: #0885:  20-user license administered by  Peter Reinholdt Danish Technology Institute
delta_W_dot_com = delta_W_dot_com1 + W_dot_com2
W_kwh = delta_W_dot_com *RT/3600
 
W_merpris = elec_price * W_kwh
 
Gaspris_yr = Gas_pris * 5 * 50
"5 days 50 weeks"
W_merpris_yr = W_merpris * 5*50
 
Cost_reducing = Gas_pris - W_merpris
 
Cost_reducing_week = Cost_reducing * 5
Cost_reducing_year = Cost_reducing_week * 50
SOLUTION
Unit Settings: SI C bar kJ mass deg
COPall  = 5,371 [-]
COPheat = 2,966 [-]
COPHP  = 6,786 [-]
COPrefri  = 2,405 [-]
Costreducing  = 1025 [DDK]
Costreducing,week  = 5125 [DDK]
Costreducing,year = 256231 
cpw  = 4,185 [kJ/kg-K]
δW,dot,com  = 43,15 [kJ/s]
δW,dot,com1  = 24,56 [kJ/s]
Elecprice = 0,69 [DDK/kWh]
ηboiler  = 0,85 [-]
ηis  = 0,7 [-]
fq  = 0,15 [-]
Gasprisyr  = 402739 [DDK]
Gaspris = 1611 [DDK]
mcip1 = 7666 [kg]
mcip2 = 16273 [kg]
mcip2 = 0,9611 [kg/s]
mpast = 1,007 [kg/s]
mph  = 0,4925 [kg/s]
mpw = 0,3112 [kg/s]
mpwtest  = 0,203 [kg/s]
mref,h = 0,2947 [kg/s]
mref,l  = 0,1722 [kg/s]
mph  = 34898 [kg-K]
mpw = 14384 [kg]
NGprice = 3,38 [DDK/m3]
pinch  = 3 
pinchtest = 12,41 
Ph  = 30,03 [bar]
Pl = 3,2 [bar]
Pm = 15,3 [bar]
Pm,l  = 11,44 [bar]
Pm,start  = 9 [bar]
Pw  = 1 [bar]
Qcip1  = 1,861E+06 
Qcip1,kwh = 516,9 [kWh]
Qcip2  = 3,950E+06 [kJ]
Qcip2,kwh = 1097 [kWh]
Qcip2,sp = 189,1 
Qair  = 24,28 [kJ/s]
Qcip2  = 55,74 [kJ/s]
Qcon,h  = 58,78 [kJ/s]
Qdsh  = 45,04 [kJ/s]
Qdsh1test  = 45,04 
Qdsh,h  = 11,62 
Qevap  = 183,6 [kj/s]
Qic = 110,3 [kJ/s]
Qpast = 70,4 [kj/s]
Qph1  = 24,73 [kJ/s]
Qph2  = 3,119E-15 [kJ/s]
Qpw = 75,53 [kj/s]
Qpwtest  = 49,27 [kJ/s]
Qsplit  = 30,48 [kJ/s]
Qtot  = 226,4 [kJ/s]
Qdsh  = 3,192E+06 [kJ]
Qgas,brutto  = 5243 [kWh]
Qpast,kwh = 1386 [kWh]
Qph  = 1,752E+06 [kJ]
Qph1  = 1,752E+06 [kJ]
Qph1,kwh  = 486,8 [kWh]
Qph2  = 0 [kJ]
Qph,kwh  = 486,8 [kWh]
Qph,kwhgas  = 1,727E-13 [kJ]
Qpw = 3,491E+06 [kJ]
Qpw,gas  = 0 
Qpw,kwh = 969,8 [kWh]
Qpw,kwhgas  = 2,356E-12 [kWh]
Qpw,kwh,real = 969,8 [kWh]
Qsplit  = 2,160E+06 [kJ]
Qtot,kwh  = 4456 [kWh]
R$ = 'R290' 
ρw  = 999,4 [kg/m3]
RT = 70860 [s]
sc2  = 61,74 [K]
sh1  = 5 [K]
shcas = 4 [K]
Tpw2test = 17,97 [C]
Vcip1  = 7,671 [m3]
Vcip2  = 16,28 [m3]
Vcip,tot  = 23,95 [m3]
Vgas = 476,6 [m3]
wcom2,sp  = 63,08 [kJ/kg]
wcom0  = 33,19 [kJ/s]
wcom1  = 57,75 [kJ/kg]
wcom2  = 18,59 [kJ/s]
Wtot = 76,34 [kJ/s]
Wkwh = 849,3 
Wmerpris  = 586 [DDK]
Wmerpris,yr  = 146508 [DDK]
==PAGE:143==
File:C:\Users\pejo\Dropbox\Speciale\3b cascade R290.EES
04-07-2016 14:46:19  Page 6
EES Ver. 9.992: #0885:  20-user license administered by  Peter Reinholdt Danish Technology Institute
73 potential unit problems were detected.
Arrays Table: Main
hi
si
Ti
Tcip;i
Tpast;i
Tph;i
Tpw;i
hs;i
hw;i
xi
[kJ/kg]
[kJ/kg-K]
[C]
[C]
[C]
[C]
[C]
[kJ/kg]
 1
1454 
 
-7,624 
13 
60,8 
15 
13 
 
 
 
 2
1466 
5,771 
-2,624 
71 
74,74 
27 
36,41 
 
 
 
 3
1751 
 
133,1 
 
77,5 
27 
71 
1701 
1802 
 
 4
1490 
 
39,41 
 
 
 
71 
 
 
 
 5
1313 
 
39,41 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0,8394 
 6
1169 
 
39,41 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0,7091 
 7
528,8 
 
39,41 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0,1279 
 8
387,8 
 
39,41 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9
387,8 
 
-7,624 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10
607,7 
2,346 
32,41 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11
616,4 
2,374 
36,41 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12
670 
 
89,12 
 
 
 
 
660,5 
679,5 
 
 13
630,6 
 
77,74 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 14
431,1 
 
77,74 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 15
242 
 
16 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 16
242 
 
16,22 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Arrays Table: Main
ss;i
 1
 
 2
 
 3
5,771 
 4
 
 5
 
 6
 
 7
 
 8
 
 9
 
 10
 
 11
 
 12
2,374 
 13
 
 14
 
 15
 
 16
 
==PAGE:144==
==PAGE:145==
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Section of Thermal Energy
Technical University of Denmark 
Nils Koppels Allé, Bld. 403
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark
Phone (+45) 4525 4131
Fax  (+45) 4588 4325
www.mek.dtu.dk
