==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
MASTER’S THESIS 
WORKPLACE MOBILITY MANAGEMENT: TRAVEL 
BEHAVIOUR AND TRAVEL PLAN INITIATIVES IN A 
UNIVERSITY CAMPUS 
 
 
 
 
Heret Knjazeva (s142129) 
 
 
June 2016 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Front page picture: Life Science and Bioengineering complex in DTU 
[http://www.dtu.dk/english/About/CAMPUSES/Transforming-our-Campus/Future-building-
projects/Building-201-205] 
Project type: Master’s Thesis 
English title: Workplace mobility management: travel behaviour and travel plan initiatives in 
a university campus 
Danish title: Mobilitetsmanagment på arbejdsplads: trafikadfærd og travel plan initiativer i et 
universitetsområde 
Point: 35 ECTS 
Submission date: June 22, 2016 
Author: Heret Knjazeva (s142129)  
Supervisor: Senior Researcher Sonja Haustein, DTU Management Engineering 
Co-supervisors: Thomas Alexander Sick Nielsen, Danish Road Directorate 
 
==PAGE:4==
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
v 
 
 
Preface 
This report constitutes Heret Knjazeva’s master’s thesis. 
The report was conducted at the Centre of Transport in the Department of Management 
Engineering of the Technical University of Denmark in the period from January to June 2016. 
The report constitutes a total of 35 ETCS points. The official supervisors of the project were 
Sonja Haustein and Thomas Alexander Sick Nielsen. 
I would like to express my gratitude to both of my supervisors. Firstly, I would like to thank 
Thomas Alexander Sick Nielsen for the initial idea for the project and the commitment to 
continue his involvement as co-supervisor even after his working relation with the Technical 
University of Denmark ended. I am also very thankful to Sonja Haustein, who agreed to take 
over the role as main supervisor in the middle of the project and, once acquainted with the 
topic, continued to guide my work and very kindly provided administrative support. 
 
  
Heret Knjazeva 
Kongens Lyngby 
June 2016 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
vi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:7==
vii 
 
Abstract 
The subject of this thesis is workplace mobility management.  
Commuting is often in the focus of transport demand management, since it accounts for a 
significant proportion of all traffic and trips to a workplace and back are usually taken during 
peak hours. Therefore, knowing the aspects of workplace mobility management is important 
when targeting more sustainable travel.   
The main objective for the thesis has been the process of developing initiatives that could be 
implemented in the workplace travel plan of Lyngby campus at the Technical University of 
Denmark. Literature review on theoretical aspects of workplace mobility management and 
practical implementation were carried out during the project, and a travel behaviour analysis 
and campus site investigation were performed in order to fulfil the main goal. The proposed 
initiatives were assessed based on their potential to reduce travel-related CO2 emissions among 
employees and students. 
Data for the travel behaviour analysis is based on the survey that was developed and distributed 
by the “Smart Mobilitet i Loop-city” project managed by the Danish organisation Gate21. In 
total, the observations of 1303 employees and 1656 students’ weekly travel from their living 
places to the Lyngby campus were analysed. A campus site investigation was carried out by 
the author in May 2016 with the aim of assessing current traffic arrangement and parking 
facilities at the Lyngby campus.  
Travel behaviour analysis proved that employees and students at DTU are already applying 
sustainable transport behaviour. The most alarming indicator was that car use among 
employees was 23% of all modes used, which is still considerably lower than the average car 
use in most European cities. Cycling, on the other hand, had a relatively high share of total 
mode use, as it comprised 20% of all modes used among employees and 26% of all modes used 
among students. It was also shown that relatively close distances to the Lyngby campus were 
travelled by car, which could be replaced by more sustainable modes without major 
complications.  
The campus site investigation concluded that the general traffic arrangement at the Lyngby 
campus does not support cycling and walking, while at the same time the total car and bicycle 
parking places provided met the estimated demand. Car parking was often prioritised to bicycle 
parking, and bicycle parking facilities did not provide enough security.  
==PAGE:8==
viii 
 
As a result, 13 initiatives were proposed that could be implemented in the Lyngby campus 
travel plan. All initiatives are based on the results of literature review or the analysis performed 
during the project. The proposed initiatives target a reduction in commuting trips, reduction in 
car use, and the encouragement of bicycle and public transport use. Some of the initiatives 
require changes in the working time arrangement or only provision of information, while others 
require investments in improving facilities at the campus. The travel plan launch and especially 
implementation of initiatives that provide limitations on car use should be accompanied by 
supporting communication. It is the hope of the author, that the suggestions made in the current 
project will be taken into consideration when developing the official travel plan for the Lyngby 
campus.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:9==
ix 
 
Resumѐ 
Emnet for dette kandidatspeciale er mobility management på arbejdspladser. 
Pendling mellem hjem og arbejde er ofte i fokus for trafikplanlægning, da den tegner sig for en 
betydelig del af al trafik og finder sted i perioder med spidsbelastning. Forståelse af og indsatser 
i forhold til pendlingen er både vigtige i forhold til at gøre transporten mere bæredygtig og i 
forhold til at løse lokale trængsels og kapacitetsproblemer. 
Hovedformålet med dette speciale har været at foreslå initiativer, der kan medvirke til at gøre 
studerendes og medarbejderes transportmiddelvalg til DTU Lyngby campus mere bæredygtigt. 
Projektet inkluderede litteraturstudie af teoretiske og praktiske aspekter inden for mobility 
management. Derudover gennemførtes analyse af data fra spørgeskemaundersøgelse om 
medarbejderes og studerendes transportvaner.  Analysen af spørgeskemaer suppleret med en 
registrering og analyse af Lyngby campus parkeringsforhold. De foreslåede initiativer blev 
vurderet på grundlag af deres potentiale for at reducere CO2-emissioner fra medarbejdere og 
studerendes pendling til campus. 
Spørgeskemaundersøgelse blev udviklet og distribueret af projektet "Smart Mobilitet” under 
Loop-city, i samarbejde mellem Gate21, Movia og DTU. Der blev ialt analyseret observationer 
af 1303 medarbejderes og 1656 studerendes ugentlige rejser fra deres bopæl til DTU Lyngby 
Campus. Et feltstudie (site survey) blev gennemført af forfatteren i maj 2016 med det formål 
at vurdere den nuværende trafikorganisering og parkeringsfaciliteter på Lyngby campus. 
Analysen af transportvaner viste, at ansatte og studerende på DTU Lyngby campus i høj grad 
allerede anvender bæredygtige transportformer. Brug af bil til campus, den energi og 
miljømæssigt mest negative transportform, stod for 23% af alle ture til campus. Dette er 
betydeligt lavere end den gennemsnitlige bilbrug i de fleste europæiske byer. Cykling ligger 
relativt højt med 20% af den samlede transport for medarbejderne og 26% for studerende. Det 
blev også vist, at bil blev anvendt til relativt korte afstande til DTU Lyngby campus. En del af 
bilkørslen kan derfor relativt let erstattes af mere bæredygtige transportformer. 
Feltstudiet af DTU, Lyngby campus konkluderede, at infrastrukturen på Lyngby campus ikke 
understøtter cykling og gang. Samtidig kan det konkluderes at det samlede antal bil  
parkeringspladser tilstrækkelige, mens der mangler cykelstativer i to campuszoner. 
Bilparkering er højt prioriteret mange steder i forhold til cykelparkering og der mangler sikre 
og overdækkede cykel parkeringfaciliteter. 
==PAGE:10==
x 
 
Der blev foreslået 13 initiativer der kan implementeres af DTU Lyngby campus med henblik 
på at gøre transporten mere bæredygtig. Alle initiativer er baseret på litteraturstudiet eller 
analyser udført i løbet af projektet. De foreslåede initiativer er rettet mod reduktion af pendlings 
ture, reduktion i brug af bil, samt fremme af cykel og brug offentlig transport. Initiativerne går 
fra generelt oplysningsarbejde, ændringer i arbejdstiden, til investeringer i forbedring af 
faciliteter på DTU Lyngby campus.  
Lancering af et mobility management program og gennemførelsen af de foreslåede initiativer, 
der giver begrænsninger i brugen bil, bør ledsages af oplysningsaktiviteter. Forhåbentlig vil 
projektets foreslag blive taget taget i betragtning, når Lyngby campus fremadrettet skal tage 
stilling til hvilken indsats der skal gøres. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:11==
xi 
 
Table of Contents 
 
1 
Introduction and Overview ..................................................................................... 1 
1.1 
Description of the project........................................................................................... 2 
1.2 
Report structure .......................................................................................................... 5 
2 
Transport demand management and sustainable mobility ................................. 7 
2.1 
Demand for transport ................................................................................................. 7 
2.2 
Definitions and historical context .............................................................................. 9 
2.3 
Strategies and tools for Transport Demand Management ........................................ 11 
3 
Workplace mobility management ........................................................................ 15 
3.1 
The context of workplace mobility management ..................................................... 15 
3.2 
Initiatives used for workplace mobility management .............................................. 18 
3.3 
Implementation of workplace mobility management initiatives ............................. 23 
3.4 
What determines success–workplace mobility implementation in practice ............ 27 
4 
Travel behaviour analysis ..................................................................................... 31 
4.1 
Data and methodology ............................................................................................. 31 
4.2 
Descriptive statistics ................................................................................................ 32 
4.3 
Modal split ............................................................................................................... 32 
4.4 
Trip origins............................................................................................................... 37 
4.5 
Trip destination – Lyngby campus .......................................................................... 41 
4.6 
Summary of the chapter ........................................................................................... 44 
5 
Car use and cycling ................................................................................................ 47 
5.1 
Car use ..................................................................................................................... 47 
5.2 
Bicycle use ............................................................................................................... 56 
5.3 
Summary of the chapter ........................................................................................... 64 
==PAGE:12==
xii 
 
6 
Planning the initiatives .......................................................................................... 65 
6.1 
CO2 emissions from daily travel to Lyngby campus............................................... 66 
6.2 
Targets for a travel plan ........................................................................................... 71 
6.3 
Evaluation of targets ................................................................................................ 73 
6.4 
Overview of the campus site .................................................................................... 74 
7 
Proposals initiatives for the DTU Lyngby campus travel plan.......................... 79 
7.1 
Initiatives with a direct influence on car use ........................................................... 80 
7.1.1 Reducing the number of car parking places ............................................................. 80 
7.1.2 Providing facilities for carpooling ........................................................................... 80 
7.1.3 Managing employees’ working time ....................................................................... 81 
7.2 
Initiatives promoting the use of alternative modes .................................................. 82 
7.2.1 Encouraging bicycle use .......................................................................................... 82 
7.2.2 Encouraging public transport use ............................................................................. 87 
7.3 
Marketing the travel plan ......................................................................................... 90 
8 
Discussion and conclusion ..................................................................................... 93 
8.1 
Results of the project ............................................................................................... 93 
8.2 
Limitations ............................................................................................................... 96 
8.3 
Conclusion ............................................................................................................... 98 
References ........................................................................................................................... 99 
Appendix 1 Survey questionnaires ................................................................................... 101 
Appendix 2 Descriptive statistics ...................................................................................... 121 
Appendix 3 Maps .............................................................................................................. 127 
Appendix 4 GHG emissions calculations ......................................................................... 139 
 
==PAGE:13==
1 
 
 
 
Chapter 1 
 
 
Introduction and Overview 
The main challenge of passenger transport planning today is to meet the high expectations for 
mobility, to accommodate the increasing volume of motorised vehicles, and to limit the 
negative impacts of traffic at the same time. Single-use passenger cars present the biggest 
problems when dealing with passenger transport planning issues – the use of personal cars has 
increased constantly during the last decades and the demand for passenger transport in the form 
of passenger cars has increased the most among other transport modes since 2000.1 
In the European Union, cars are responsible for around 12% of the total emissions of carbon 
dioxide (CO2), the main greenhouse gas. Despite the fact that the transport-related emissions 
have steadily decreased since 2007, they are currently still 20.5% higher than in 19902.  
Increasing the supply of transport by increasing infrastructure capacity does not provide the 
solution to ensuring high mobility – improved infrastructure induces even more traffic. Instead, 
activities that focus on regulating the demand for transport are more widely used. Transport 
demand management uses measures that aim at more sustainable travel behaviours. 
Commuting is often in the focus when dealing with transport demand management, as it 
accounts for a significant proportion of all traffic. In addition, trips to a workplace and back 
are usually taken during peak hours, which induces congestion. Workplace mobility 
                                                 
1 Data Source: EEA TERM 2015, file:///C:/Users/Heret/Downloads/TERM%20Report%202015.pdf 
 
2 Data Source: European Commission, http://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/transport/vehicles/index_en.htm 
 
==PAGE:14==
Introduction and Overview 
 
2 
 
management often targets a reduction in private car usage for commuting and can be directed 
towards certain communities or organisations.  
The motivation to develop and implement a workplace travel plan differs by organisation. For 
some the cost related to the parking facilities is the main motivator for mobility management, 
while others see the activity as an important part of their corporate culture and environmental 
responsibility. 
1.1 Description of the project 
The current master’s project is about workplace mobility management. The main focus is on 
the process of working out a workplace travel plan for an organisation, the Technical University 
of Denmark is used as an example.  
The learning objectives of the project were set as follows: 
 To provide an overview of the theory regarding transport demand management in 
general and to describe its aspects.  
 To review relevant literature on employer programmes aiming at more sustainable 
commuting and to describe the cases. 
 To understand the factors that appear to be important in determining success in 
reducing private car use for commuting and the reasons why organisations are 
motivated to be involved in such projects. 
 To analyse the travel behaviour data of DTU employees and students with the aim of 
defining the modal split and to identify relations between travel distance, travel time, 
and travel mode use.  
 To make suggestions for initiatives that can reduce private car use for commuting 
among DTU employees and students.  
 To create suggestions for evaluating the effectiveness of initiatives. 
The overall goal of the project is to make proposals for initiatives that could be implemented 
in the travel plan of the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) at Lyngby campus. In order 
to fulfil the target, the following activities are considered important steps in the process of 
developing a travel plan and will be performed during the project: 
 
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1  
 
3 
 
 a literature review on the theoretical aspects of workplace mobility management and on 
the practical cases where mobility plans were implemented;  
 a travel behaviour analysis on data from a mobility survey of DTU employees and 
students; 
 a methodology for setting the goals for a travel plan; 
 a site investigation at the Lyngby campus for determining the current traffic 
arrangement and parking facilities. 
The basis of the analysis will be the data obtained from a survey that was conducted among 
DTU employees and students during the period from 8 February to 21 February 2016. The 
survey was developed and distributed by the “Smart Mobilitet i Loop-city” project, which was 
managed by the Danish organisation Gate21. In total, the observations of 1303 employees and 
1656 students’ weekly travel from their living places to the Lyngby campus will be analysed. 
The overall aim of the analysis is to define relations between the travel time, travel distance, 
and a choice of travel mode. This will be an important basis for making proposals for the 
initiatives that could be implemented in the DTU travel plan. More detailed mode use analysis 
will be performed for the car and bicycle. Analysis on the use of public transport will be 
performed only on a general level, since the limitations in the survey data do not allow for 
estimating the number of trips taken by bus and train lines that serve the Lyngby station or the 
Lyngby campus. Since there is a plan to provide a new light-rail connection linking the 
Copenhagen outer ring to the Lyngby campus in the nearest future, more comprehensive 
analysis of the public transport use in the area is needed anyway. 
One of the objectives in starting the process to develop the travel plan at DTU was the possible 
reduction of greenhouse gas emissions. Therefore, travel-related CO2 emission calculations 
are used as a tool in setting the goals for a travel plan in the current study. It must be pointed 
out that only daily commuting by employees and daily travel to Lyngby campus made by 
students will be taken into consideration in the CO2 emission calculations. There are business 
trips and occasional trips to home countries made by international students that are not 
considered here. These trips most probably comprise a large share of the total transport-related 
carbon emissions, as flight travel has a high emission factor.  
Since the current project represents an independent study of the field and is not coordinated 
with the management of DTU, no precise goals for the DTU travel plan are proposed. Instead, 
==PAGE:16==
Introduction and Overview 
 
4 
 
examples are provided on how reducing motorised travel is related to the reduction of CO2 
emissions. 
The car and bicycle parking facilities will be counted during the site investigation and the 
number of parking places provided will be compared to the estimated number of car and cycling 
trips arriving daily to the Lyngby campus. Traffic arrangement at the campus will also be 
evaluated from the perspective of proposing improving measures.  
The proposals for initiatives for the DTU Lyngby campus travel plan will be based on the 
findings in the literature review, the analysis of the survey data, and the campus site 
investigation. Implementing the proposed initiatives in a travel plan does not guarantee success 
in decreasing the use of single-use personal cars; the initiatives should be considered tools for 
encouraging the modal shift from personal car use to more sustainable transport modes. 
Therefore, the proposed initiatives will be evaluated by their potential to contribute to the 
general target of the DTU Lyngby campus travel plan: to reduce the CO2 emissions related to 
commuting and study trips. 
Internal marketing is an important stage of launching a workplace travel plan. Implementation 
of the initiatives should be accompanied by supporting communication and promotion. Based 
on the results of the data analysis, target groups for an internal market plan will be defined and 
proposed with the corresponding communication messages. 
Overarching purpose 
The possible application for the outcome of the current project can be divided into two parts. 
The main purpose of the project is the practical implementation of proposed initiatives which 
could be included in the DTU travel plan. This can contribute to more sustainable travel and to 
the DTU’s reputation as a leader in implementing sustainable transport strategies.  
The secondary purpose of the project is to contribute to general knowledge on workplace 
mobility management and to underline its importance as a tool for transport demand 
management. 
 
 
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 1  
 
5 
 
1.2 Report structure 
The report documents the above described project and consists of eight chapters. The structure 
of the report follows the project chronologically. 
Chapter 2 presents an introduction to the topic, in which a general overview of strategies and 
tools of transport demand management is provided. The principles of sustainable mobility are 
described as well, since workplace mobility management is one aspect of the whole concept.  
Chapter 3 presents theoretical aspects of workplace mobility management. The aim of the 
chapter is to describe how the concept of workplace mobility management has evolved over 
time, what the initiatives are that have been used in mobility plans, and what benefits they 
possibly create for an organisation. The findings in Chapter 3 are taken into consideration when 
making proposals for the DTU travel plan. 
Analysis of the survey data is performed in Chapter 4 and Chapter 5. Firstly, the general 
mobility of DTU employees and students is analysed in Chapter 4, with the focus on general 
mode use, trip origins, and trip distribution at Lyngby campus. Chapter 5 continues the analysis 
with the focus on car and bicycle use. The main interest in Chapter 5 is on those car and bicycle 
trips that arrive to Lyngby campus, which is the basis for planning the facilities in the travel 
plan.  
Chapter 6 proposes a methodology in setting the goals for a travel plan. The results of the site 
investigation at Lyngby campus are also presented here. 
Chapter 7 lists the initiatives that could be implemented in the DTU travel plan. Possible target 
groups for internal marketing activities are also developed and presented. 
Chapter 8 provides a summary of the results of the project.  A discussion of possible sources 
of errors is elaborated and suggestions for further studies are made. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:18==
Introduction and Overview 
 
6 
 
 
 
==PAGE:19==
7 
 
 
 
Chapter 2  
2 Transport demand management and sustainable 
mobility 
Transport demand management and sustainable 
mobility 
2.1 Demand for transport 
On the primary level, the purpose of transport is to move people and goods. It is closely related 
to the oft-used term “mobility” in transport studies, which has been defined as the ability to 
“move about”. Mobility describes how fast it is possible to move geographically using a 
transport system in a safe, comfortable, and affordable way (Kristensen, 2014).  High mobility 
is desirable, since it provides more opportunities for activities and improved mobility is 
targeted in most transport policies. 
It is a well-known fact that motorisation is growing in most countries. More cars in use and 
higher expectations from people to be able to move are putting great pressure on transport 
systems. Ownership of cars, like all other consumer goods, will always become cheaper over 
time, so that people can afford to own them (Banister, 2008). Since transport is an important 
stimulator of economic growth, most countries try to implement measures on transport 
planning with the aim of ensuring high mobility both for people and for freight. 
A traditional way of improving mobility is by providing more capacity on roads and other 
transport facilities, but it becomes more and more challenging to meet the needs of steadily 
growing traffic volumes and high travel demand in the form of passenger kilometres and freight 
tonne-kilometres. It has also been proven that a new or upgraded infrastructure induces traffic, 
since drivers usually respond to the new opportunities of improved facilities by making more 
trips (Hills, 1996). 
==PAGE:20==
Transport Demand Management and Sustainable Travel 
 
8 
 
In the wider context, transport is a part of economic, social, and environmental systems and 
has many impacts on those systems, which must be considered when dealing with transport 
planning issues. As previously mentioned, transport is an important aspct of the economy, 
contributes to people’s ability to commute, and several social activities like recreation, 
shopping, or visiting other people are carried out using means of transport. All this can be 
considered a positive impact of transport systems. Problems, on the other hand, are linked to 
the negative impacts that transport has on all three systems mentioned, even though the most 
alarming and most discussed are environmental impacts.  
To describe transport-related environmental impacts in a simplified way, it can be said that the 
transport sector is exhausting natural resources, since it is currently heavily dependent on non-
renewable fossil fuels and emits adverse chemical elements into the atmosphere. The emissions 
disturb ecosystems and contribute to man-made climate change; additional pollution is created 
in the form of noise, light, and vibration. Consumption of land for transport purposes is also 
having several negative consequences.    
Many transport-related pollutants have adverse effects on human health and the direct 
emissions from transport are considered to reduce public health. Car use as passenger transport 
has additional negative impact on people’s well-being by decreasing the level of physical 
movement. There is evidence of strong links between lack of exercise and obesity (Banister, 
2008).   
The different costs that originate from transport represent an economic impact. Several costs 
result from infrastructure building processes, first and foremost the cost for construction and 
for land acquisition. Additional costs occur during the exploitation of transport facilities – 
congestion creates a loss of time which in turn can be expressed as a monetary expense. Putting 
a monetary value on time is a subjective issue, since new technologies allow travel time to be 
used more productively, but a loss or gain of time is still a highly important component of 
transport-related analyses.  
Adverse environmental impacts can also be transformed into money, since in the wider context 
the loss of ecosystems and health damage to people result in activities that require money for 
recovery. Apart from health damage resulting from bad air quality or noise, traffic accidents 
have a more direct and also more severe impact on public health by causing injuries and deaths. 
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 2 
 
9 
 
Transport-related social impacts are aspects that diminish people’s well-being and ability to 
enjoy their everyday life. These can be health issues caused by traffic accidents or lower quality 
of the living environment due to infrastructure objects or high traffic volume.  
2.2 Definitions and historical context 
When dealing with transport planning, the concept of sustainable transport cannot be neglected. 
As one aspect of the general sustainable development, managing transport in a smarter way can 
contribute to desired developments and set targets. Based on reviews of literature and study of 
practical cases, it could be generalised and said that “sustainable transport aims at promoting 
better and healthier ways of meeting individual and community needs while reducing the social 
and environmental impacts of current mobility practises” (Schiller, 2010).  
Several authors and organisations have come out with precise definitions for sustainable 
transport. Some of them conform to the definition of sustainable development in general 
provided by the World Commission on Environment and Development, which says that 
“sustainable development is development that meets the needs of the present without 
compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs”. For example, the 
World Business Council on Sustainable Development has worded the definition for sustainable 
transport as “the ability to meet the needs of society to move freely, gain access, communicate, 
trade and establish relationships without sacrificing other essential human or ecological values 
today or in the future”. 
Besides sustainable transport, the term “transport demand management” is often used when 
dealing with more effective management of transport features. Transport demand management 
has been described as a new paradigm, a different approach to better management and 
maximisation of the benefits of existing transport programmes, infrastructure and services 
(Schiller, 2010). 
In the US, transport demand management has traditionally involved strategies to induce 
commuters to shift to higher-occupancy modes, such as carpooling, vanpooling, and public 
transport (Black & Schreffler, 2010). At the same time, there are also official policies present 
that define transport demand management as a set of financial incentives, travel time 
incentives, technology accelerators, and marketing (Federal Highway Administration, 2004). 
Still, it is claimed that much of North America and Australia–New Zealand use transport 
==PAGE:22==
Transport Demand Management and Sustainable Travel 
 
10 
 
demand management initiatives today as a special response to situations where conventional 
solutions are infeasible (Schiller, 2010). 
The term “mobility management” is used referring to the same concept as transport demand 
management, including different policies, programmes, and planning strategies with the 
intention to use existing transport systems more efficiently and directing users to more efficient 
use of them. The European Platform on Mobility Management (EPOMM), an international 
non-profit organisation operating as a network for European countries that are engaged in 
mobility management, defines mobility management as “a concept to promote sustainable 
transport and manage the demand for car use by changing travellers’ attitudes and behaviour”. 
In some sources managing travel demand has been categorised as a set of soft measures used 
to promote sustainable travel options, it is about providing travellers with travel choices, such 
as work location, route, time of travel, and mode (Black & Schreffler, 2010). EPOMM also 
refers to soft measures as the core of mobility management, which can be in the form of 
information and communication, organising services, and coordinating activities.  
A clear or consistent definition has not yet been developed to identify what constitutes a “soft” 
measure. The word “soft” is sometimes used to distinguish these initiatives from “hard” 
measures, such as physical improvements to transport infrastructure or operations, traffic 
engineering, control of road space and changes in price, although some soft factors do include 
elements of this nature (Cairns, Sloman, Newson, & Anable, 2004). 
When describing the development of transport planning principles from a conventional 
approach to sustainable mobility, it can be noted how the old paradigm is transforming into a 
new and different approach. Shiller (2010) names conventional transport planning “business as 
usual” and describes it as a concept focusing on unimodality, quantity, and expansion of 
transport infrastructure to meet the travel demand. The old concept also uses a predict-and-
provide approach to planning, which means that it plans and builds based on forecasts of likely 
demand. Sustainable mobility, on the other hand, focuses on accessibility and multi-modality, 
and it uses transport demand management to deal with capacity shortcomings and preferred 
future visions for planning. 
 
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 2 
 
11 
 
2.3 Strategies and tools for Transport Demand Management 
In the conventional transport planning approach, the transport is considered to have derived 
demand and it is assumed that people try to maximise their utility when making journeys. 
Derived demand refers to the fact that trips are made because of some other activities and not 
for the sake of the trip itself.  
Since transportation involves the movement of people or goods over space, the opportunity 
cost of transport includes both monetary cost and time cost (McCarthy, 2001), and utility 
maximisation therefore involves minimising the travel time and out-of-pocket cost for a trip.  
Those principles have been taken into consideration in most transport studies and analyses, 
since they explain how travel choices are made and how increased speed of travel has 
outweighed the increased cost of travel (Banister, 2008). 
The sustainable mobility concept puts previously listed fundamental principles into a new light. 
Firstly, it is claimed that transport does not always have a derived demand, but it can be taken 
as a valued activity (Banister, 2008). It is more common to recognise that travel is also an 
activity that generates positive utility (Loo & Chow, 2006).   
Another new paradigm of sustainable mobility concerns minimisation of travel time. The object 
of transport planning is no longer maximum travel speed, but rather reasonable travel time, and 
a certain level of congestion on roads is seen as desirable. The principle of personal utility has 
been put into the wider context of social welfare (Banister, 2008). 
The principles of sustainable mobility highly influence strategies and tools for transport 
planning. For example, the fact that journeys made by bicycle are not judged by the travel time 
only but can be valued as a physical exercise for health purposes is a very important aspect. 
More efficient use of travel time due to new technologies is also important when promoting 
commuting via public transport. The concept of reasonable congestion level, on the other hand, 
draws the focus and financial aid away from transport infrastructure expansion to other 
transport planning tools that manage transport behaviour.  
The sustainable mobility approach in general requires actions to reduce the need to travel, to 
encourage modal shifts, to reduce the trip lengths, and to encourage greater efficiency in the 
transport system (Banister, 2008). Well-known strategies of sustainable transport planning are 
described as a concept of “Avoid–Shift–Improve” (ASI), where the following principles are 
used (Dalkmann & Brannigan, 2007):  
==PAGE:24==
Transport Demand Management and Sustainable Travel 
 
12 
 
 avoid – avoid travel or avoid motorised travel; 
 shift – shift to more environmentally friendly transport modes; 
 improve – improve the energy efficiency of transport modes and vehicle technology. 
Based on the categorisation of ASI, the instruments for sustainable transport are provided, 
which are presented in Table 2-1. 
Table 2-1 Instruments for sustainable transport. Source: (Dalkmann and Brannigan, 2007) 
Planning instruments 
Land-use planning (master planning), planning/providing for public 
transport and non-motorised modes 
Regulatory instruments 
Physical norms and standards (emission limits, safety), traffic organisation 
(speed limits, parking, road space allocation), production processes 
Economic instruments 
Fuel taxes, road pricing, subsidies, purchase taxes, fees and levies, 
emissions trading 
Information instruments 
Public Awareness Campaigns, mobility management and marketing 
schemes, co-operative agreements, eco-driving schemes 
Technological instruments 
Fuel improvement, cleaner technologies, end-of-pipe control devices, 
cleaner production 
Whitelegg (2012) describes four dimensions for the fundamental components of sustainable 
mobility, which are pricing policies, land-use and accessibility planning, highway space 
allocation, and policies that focus on emissions, air quality, and health. 
As previously described, managing travel demand has been categorised as a set of soft 
measures used to promote sustainable travel options. It is still an object of discussion as to 
which tools or instruments proposed by the concept of sustainable transport could be 
categorised as soft methods and which as hard methods, since they all aim at having an effect 
on travellers’ behaviours.   
Hard measures usually include initiatives like physical improvement of transport infrastructure 
or operations, traffic engineering, and control of road space. Pricing as a tool has been 
categorised as a soft or hard measure in different sources.  
On the other hand, soft measures refer to the nature of travellers’ responses; initiatives often 
address psychological motivations for travel choices as well as economic ones (Cairns et al., 
2004). 
An overview of general strategies for transport demand management is provided with 
selections of certain tools in Table 2-2: 
 
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 2 
 
13 
 
Table 2-2 Transport demand management strategies and tools. Source: (Schiller 2010) 
General strategy 
Tools or components 
Improve options 
Better, faster, more reliable, frequent, and prioritised transit; better walking 
and bicycling facilities and priorities; ride-/car-share, taxis; better travel 
information and trip-planner websites. 
Trip avoidance 
Flex time, telework, teleconferencing, videoconferencing. 
Incentives/disincentives 
Road pricing; congestion- and distance-based fees; commuter benefits; 
transit passes, worksite amenities; parking-pricing and regulations; fuel and 
vehicle de-subsidisation; driving and vehicle restrictions. 
Land-use management 
Transit-orientated development; parking management; calming traffic; car-
free planning; mixed-use development; more residential options near major 
employment centres. 
Implementation and 
management programmes 
Commute trip reduction; school/campus transport programmes; mobility 
management and individualised marketing; tourist transport management; 
freight transport management. 
Rye et al. (2012) have provided another categorisation of transport demand management 
measures, which is listed in Table 2-3: 
Table 2-3 Transport demand management measures. Source: (Rye & Ison, 2012) 
Type 
Measures 
Economic measures 
Fuel tax, Road user charges, Parking charges, Tradable permits (combined 
with regulation by quantity), Public transport subsidisation 
Land use 
Land use and transportation strategies such as: car-free developments and 
locations of new developments, park and ride facilities 
Information for travellers 
Travel information before a trip is undertaken, Car sharing 
Substitution of 
Communications for Travel 
Teleworking, E-shopping 
Administrative measures 
Parking controls, Pedestrian zones, Alternative working patterns 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:26==
Transport Demand Management and Sustainable Travel 
 
14 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:27==
15 
 
 
 
Chapter 3  
 
3 Workplace mobility management 
Workplace mobility management 
3.1 The context of workplace mobility management 
Individual mobility is strongly linked to behaviours governed by commuters between homes 
and workplaces. On the one hand this type of mobility is connected to territorial locations of 
activities (housing, employment, public, and commercial facilities) and on the other hand to 
the labour organisation by employers (Favre, 2014). Commuting is often the focus of attention 
when dealing with transport planning issues, since it accounts for a significant proportion of 
all traffic and the majority of trips to work and back are made at peak hours (Cairns, Newson, 
& Davis, 2010). 
Definitions 
In different countries different terms are used to indicate the activities that influence 
employees’ commuting behaviours.  
In the US the term “transport demand management” has been used to refer to activities that 
induce commuters to shift to higher-occupancy modes, such as carpooling, vanpooling, and 
public transport (Black & Schreffler, 2010).  
In the UK “workplace/company travel planning” is used to describe activities addressing 
employees’ commuting habits. A workplace travel plan can be described as a package of 
measures put in place by an employer to encourage more sustainable travel, usually meaning 
less car use, particularly less single-occupancy car use (Cairns et al., 2004).  
==PAGE:28==
Workplace mobility management 
 
16 
 
EPOMM defines mobility management activities on an organisational level as “workplace 
mobility management”. The Pan-European Workplace Mobility Plan Award was issued by 
EPOMM for the best performances amongst applicants in 2008–2010.  
In related literature other terms are used, such as employer transport plans, employer-based trip 
reduction, green commuter plans, etc. In the current project term “workplace mobility 
management” is used when indicating activities that are directed towards regulating commuting 
with the main object of reducing the number of trips made by single-occupancy cars and the 
term “workplace travel plan“ is used to indicate the formulation of workplace mobility 
management initiatives.  
Workplace mobility management can also deal with other travel affecting the worksite besides 
employees – business, visitors, customers or patients, etc. (Cairns et al., 2010). The current 
project focuses on a university campus targeting the travel behaviour of students and employees 
of the DTU Lyngby campus. 
Historical context 
The principles of workplace mobility management in the UK go back as far as the late 1970s 
and early 1980s, where the ideas on how to influence employees’ choice of mode were 
published in “Travel to Work – Opportunities for Employers in the 1980 Transport Act” (Rye, 
1999). In 2008, Transport for London and the Mayor of London issued the “Guidance for 
workplace travel planning for Development”, where the requirement for having a workplace 
travel plan has been specified based on the number of staff employed and/or the area of the 
business site (Transport for London & Mayor of London, 2009). Established Standard Travel 
Plans and Enterprise Scale Travel Plans vary on travel plan submission, promotional activities, 
supporting infrastructural measures, and monitoring. 
Principles of workplace mobility management in The Netherlands became official in 1989, 
when the Second National Structure Plan was published, which also set targets for workplace 
mobility management (Rye, 1999). Amongst other mandatory requirements that concerned 
mobility management in general, employers with more than 50 staff had to implement their 
own mobility management plan within 6 years. Unfortunately, the goals turned out to be too 
ambitious and companies were not interested in the message to “reduce traffic congestion” 
(Metz, 2011). 
Today, mobility management in general and workplace mobility management in The 
Netherlands are being implemented in different way by trying to encourage a cultural shift and 
==PAGE:29==
 
CHAPTER 3 
 
17 
 
bringing changes not through legislation but the active participation of organisations. For 
example, the organisation Taskforce for Mobility Management was set up by the government 
in 2007 with the aim to show that it is possible to reach a much wider application of mobility 
management for commuting and business travel through a voluntary commitment by 
employers to agreements at the national level and in regions (Korver, Pauwels, & Bv, 2010). 
In Belgium a three-yearly mandatory questionnaire for major employers has been enacted since 
2003. Besides providing a valuable source for data, the basic idea of the questionnaire is to 
stimulate a debate on sustainable commuting amongst employers and employees. Of the three 
regions in Belgium, the Brussels capital region requires a mobility plan for employers hiring 
more than 100 staff, whilst the other two regions, Flanders and Walloon, do not require travel 
plans but support companies to make them (Vanoutrive, 2010). 
Sustainable transport principles are common in Danish transport polices on different 
governance levels, but they are usually not labelled as transport demand management or 
mobility management (Høj, 2011). Transport demand management in Denmark can first be 
associated with different policies and activities to promote bicycling.  
In 2011 the “Formula M” project was launched with the overall objective of promoting 
sustainable transport behaviour in Denmark. It involves cooperation between public 
institutions, private companies, and universities whose activities include a series of municipal 
demonstration projects to gain experience in methods, challenges, and effects of using mobility 
management in Denmark. The project contains three main parts: “The green mobility office”; 
“Local mobility projects and planning issues”; and “Strategy and analysis” (Høj, 2011). 
Applications 
Workplace mobility management has been recognised as an important part of general urban 
mobility management. For example, the EU Action Plan on Urban Mobility says that company 
mobility management can help to optimise urban mobility by influencing employee travel 
behaviour. It is proposed that companies and public administrations provide support to more 
sustainable urban planning through financial incentives and parking regulations (European 
Commission, 2009). 
Workplace mobility management initiatives are closely linked to labour legislation and tax 
regimes. The requirements for working time can highly influence the implementation of 
workplace mobility management measures like a flexible working schedule, compressed work 
week, and telecommuting. Valid tax regimes, on the other hand, can encourage or discourage 
==PAGE:30==
Workplace mobility management 
 
18 
 
the use of initiatives like promoting alternative modes apart from cars and regulating car use. 
In Belgium, Denmark, The Netherlands, Finland, France, Germany, and Luxembourg 
commuting is considered a tax-deductible expense, while in UK, USA, and several other 
European countries commuting is treated as a personal expense (Vanoutrive, 2010). 
Rules and legislation on land-use planning can also affect commuting and implementation of 
workplace mobility management measures. First of all, it influences the location and 
accessibility to the site, building permits can also contain restrictions on parking space and 
other mobility-related provisions (Hine, Rye, & Hulse, 2000). 
Workplace mobility management and workplace travel plans can be required to implement due 
to the size or location of an organisation, as some of the previous examples from different 
countries also demonstrated. 
3.2 Initiatives used for workplace mobility management 
A detailed classification of measures used in workplace mobility management has been 
provided by Vanoutrive (2010), which includes most of the initiatives described in related 
literature. The list of initiatives is provided in Table 3-1.  
Table 3-1 Workplace mobility management initiatives. Similar to (Vanoutrive, 2010) Table 1. 
Initiative 
Specific modes/actions 
Promoting alternative modes 
Walking 
Cycling 
Carpooling 
Public transport 
Regulating car use 
Parking regulations 
Company cars 
Managing working time 
Flexible working schedule 
Compressed work week 
Teleworking 
Location strategies 
Workplace (re)location 
Management strategies 
Employee Transport Coordinator 
 
A more detailed description of workplace mobility management initiatives based on the 
literature review and personal opinion/experience of the author is provided in Table 3-2. 
 
==PAGE:31==
 
 
 
Table 3-2 Aspects of workplace mobility management initiatives. Source: author 
Mode/action 
Possible adverse factors 
Possible employer initiatives 
Contribution to sustainable transport principles 
Walking 
Long distance 
Adverse topography 
Adverse meteorological 
conditions 
Providing/improving on-site walking facilities 
(lighting, traffic arrangement) 
Providing changing rooms, showers, and lockers 
Providing accessories (raincoats, umbrellas, etc.) 
Providing information on walking routes 
Does not reduce commuting trips 
Can reduce motorised travel 
Can reduce car travel 
Benefits people’s health 
Cycling  
Long distance 
Adverse topography 
Adverse meteorological 
conditions 
Providing/improving to-site and on-site cycling in-
frastructure (cycle lanes, cycle paths, lighting, traf-
fic arrangement) 
Providing bicycle parking facilities 
Providing bicycle maintenance facilities 
Providing company bicycles for commuting and/or 
for working trips 
Providing changing rooms, showers, and lockers 
Providing accessories (raincoats, helmets, bags) 
Providing information on cycling routes 
Does not reduce commuting trips 
Can reduce motorised travel 
Can reduce car travel 
Benefits people’s health 
 
Carpooling (two or 
more employees drive 
together to work 
using a private or 
company car) 
Increased travel time due to 
extra travel and waiting 
time 
Lack of privacy and flexi-
bility 
 
Organisation of a carpooling network (databases or 
other information sources) 
Preferential parking facilities for carpoolers 
Guaranteed ride home service 
Does not reduce commuting trips 
Can reduce motorised travel 
Can reduce car travel 
Can contribute to social interaction between 
employees 
Public transport 
Insufficient supply (rele-
vant connections between 
home and workplace, satis-
factory frequency, reliabil-
ity) 
High travel cost 
Long travel time 
Providing tickets at lower cost (subsidy, special 
agreements with transport companies) 
Arranging free/low-cost shuttle services to main 
transport centres/residential areas 
Providing information about public transport ser-
vices (also changes in regular plans and emer-
gency) 
Providing on-site ticket selling facilities 
 
Does not reduce commuting trips 
Can reduce motorised travel 
Can reduce car travel 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:32==
 
20 
 
Mode/action 
Possible adverse factors 
Possible employer initiatives 
Contribution to sustainable transport principles 
Company parking 
regulations 
A free parking facility is 
seen as an employee re-
ward, limiting initiatives 
can be taken as a limitation 
on the employee remunera-
tion package 
Increasing/decreasing the number of parking 
places available 
Pricing parking places (hourly, daily, monthly 
fees) 
 
Does not reduce commuting trips 
Can reduce car travel 
Can encourage more car use 
Company car 
Company car enabling is 
seen as an employee re-
ward, limiting initiatives 
can be taken as a limitation 
on the employee remunera-
tion package 
Increasing the number of company cars in use 
Decreasing the number of company cars in use 
Does not reduce commuting trips 
Can reduce car travel 
Can encourage more car use 
Flexible working 
schedule (unfixed 
starting and finishing 
time) 
The nature of the working 
process (production, certain 
types of services that re-
quire presence at fixed 
times) 
Adverse conditions of la-
bour legislation 
Providing the option of a flexible working sched-
ule 
Does not reduce commuting trips 
Since trips can be made outside of rush hours, 
they can contribute to the decrease of conges-
tion 
Since trip times can be regulated and adjusted 
to public transport, can contribute to public 
transport use 
Compressed work 
week 
The nature of the working 
process (production, certain 
types of services that re-
quire presence at fixed 
times) 
Adverse conditions of la-
bour legislation 
Providing the option of a compressed work week 
Reduces commuting trips 
Can reduce car travel 
Teleworking 
The nature of the working 
process (production, certain 
types of services that re-
quire presence at fixed 
times) 
Providing the option of teleworking 
Reduces commuting trips 
Can reduce car travel  
Can contribute to urban sprawl  
Can increase the total distance travelled to the 
workplace 
==PAGE:33==
 
 
 
Mode/action 
Possible adverse factors 
Possible employer initiatives 
Contribution to sustainable transport principles 
Adverse conditions of la-
bour legislation 
Workplace 
(re)location 
High estate (rental) prices 
Adverse legislation due to 
business area limiting the 
choice of business sites 
(zoning rules) 
Pure employee/client acces-
sibility to the site 
(Re)locating the company 
Does not reduce commuting trips 
Can increase the total distance travelled to the 
workplace 
Can decrease the total distance travelled to the 
workplace 
Can contribute to the use of alternative modes 
(walking, bicycling, public transport) 
Can encourage more car use 
==PAGE:34==
Workplace mobility management 
 
22 
 
In addition to the initiatives listed, financial allowances can be put in place to support a certain 
choice of mode. A common employer initiative to encourage cycling, for example, is a cycle 
mileage allowance (Vanoutrive, 2010). The same initiative can also make walking, use of 
public transport, or carpooling more attractive.  
Managerial strategies shall also be grouped as additional initiatives contributing to workplace 
mobility management. Transport coordinators can be hired to work on an operational level – 
providing information services, managing databases, evaluating and analysing the 
effectiveness of applied measures, carrying out promotional events, etc. Planning marketing 
and promotion of workplace mobility management measures can also be viewed as managerial 
strategy – what competences and how many financial resources can be used when planning 
such campaigns.   
Walking and bicycling can reduce the number of trips made by car and at the same time benefit 
public health; therefore, those modes could be favoured from the viewpoint of workplace 
mobility management principles. Carpooling and the use of public transport can also reduce 
the number of trips made by car, but are still not an emission-free way of travelling. Decisions 
related to parking principles in an organisation and the use of company cars can decrease the 
number of trips made by car if parking places are limited or undesirable due to the cost or if 
the use of company cars is diminished.  
When it comes to work time management, a compressed work week and teleworking may 
reduce the number of commuting trips and not only those taken by car. Thus, those initiatives 
could be considered to have an important effect on commuting. A flexible work schedule does 
not reduce the number of trips taken by car, but since it allows regulation of driving time, it 
can contribute to reduced congestion during peak hours or increasing the use of public 
transport. 
Although the general objective to implement workplace mobility management initiatives is to 
reduce the number of commuting trips made by car, it has to be noted that some of the initiatives 
can also have a negative effect on reducing single-occupancy car use. First of all shall be named 
free parking facilities on the company site and enabling company car use (Nijland & Dijst, 
2015). Those measures are often seen as a part of an employee remuneration package to reward 
people and not as instruments for a company’s transport policy (Vanoutrive, 2010). 
Decisions on workplace (re)location can also increase car use, especially when workplaces 
move out of city centres. The result of a decision on (re)location can increase the total distance 
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 3 
 
23 
 
travelled to the workplace. Depending on the site location, the decision can also encourage 
more car use. 
The positive effect of teleworking on commuting has also not been proven, since it encourages 
hiring of employees with longer travel distances and can encourage urban sprawl (Vanoutrive, 
2010). The number of commuting trips most probably decreases in case of teleworking, but the 
total distance travelled to the workplace might increase at the same time. 
There are also many factors that prevent the implementation of selected initiatives. Distance to 
workplace can be an important aspect that influences the mode choice. Even if people don’t 
consider the travel time only as a decisive factor as is assumed in sustainable transport 
principles, the distance can be unreasonably long for walking or biking. Adverse topography 
and climate conditions can have an effect on mode choice decisions based on comfort, lack of 
biking experience, or lower physical fitness, which can provide obstacles.  
Lack of flexibility and privacy are discouraging factors for car sharing (Vanoutrive, 2010). A 
single-occupancy car provides an opportunity for the driver to have his or her own time and 
space and sharing it with other people can be unwanted. The same aspect can also affect the 
decision to use public transport.  
If providing company cars for commuting and free parking facilities are taken as an employee 
benefit, it is difficult to make decisions that change it. Restrictive policies should be 
accompanied by well-published programmes to improve the availability and attractiveness of 
proposed alternatives (Banister, 2008). 
Even working time management is usually a part of general human resource management 
strategies and not a company’s mobility management policy, it enlarges the choice set of 
commuters (Vanoutrive, 2010). Workplace mobility management initiatives that regulate the 
working time can be used only when the nature of the working process allows it and when 
labour laws support it. 
3.3 Implementation of workplace mobility management initiatives 
When workplace mobility management initiatives are implemented either by serving regional 
or organisational interests, it is important to know what result can be expected in terms of 
reducing car driving. Studies focusing on the issue use the number of commuter cars arriving 
to a company site per 100 staff as an indicator. 
==PAGE:36==
Workplace mobility management 
 
24 
 
UK experience proves that it is possible to reduce the proportion of commuting journeys made 
as a car driver by 18%. The result presents the mean average of 20 case study analyses with 
approximately 70 000 employees involved. Literature review carried out by the same authors 
suggests that workplace mobility plans typically reduce car use, with average reduction in the 
order of 15–20%, although results vary substantially from organisation to organisation and 
partly depend on the nature of the plan (Cairns et al., 2010). 
Another survey from the UK estimated that workplace mobility plans have removed up to       
158 888 two-way trips to work from British roads each working day, which totalled 1.143 
billion km per year (Rye, 2002). 
EPOMM launched the Pan-European Workplace Mobility Plan Award from 2008 to 2011, and 
from the applications presented for the award it is possible to see what organisations have 
targeted with a mobility plan and what the measured outcomes were.  
British Sky Broadcasting Ltd submitted an application for the 2010 award and described the 
targets that the mobility plan had set: a decrease in car driving was planned by 8.5% for the 
first 3 years, 9.5% for the next 3 years, and 11% for the last 3 years of the programme. The 
total decrease for 9 years (from 2006 to 2015) was estimated at 29%. Increase in bicycle use, 
for example, was planned to increase 6.5% and walking 1.5%. The first 3 years of practice 
proved that the targeted decrease in car driving was exceeded, and the change was 18% instead 
of 8.5%. Increase in bicycling was measured at 2.5% and walking 1.5%, which also met the 
targets set for the given period (British Sky Broadcasting Ltd to EPOMM, 2010). 
At the same time, Heathrow Airport Ltd targeted a much smaller decrease when it applied for 
the 2010 award: decrease in car use was estimated at 7.13% for four years (from 2008 to 2012), 
increase in car sharing 1.5%, cycling 0.19%, and bus use 3.23% for the same period. Still, the 
evaluation in 2009 showed that car driving had decreased 7.7% for the first year of the 
programme, exceeding also the targeted level for 2012 (Heathrow Airport Ltd to EPOMM, 
2010). 
Merck Serono S.A.’s application for the 2009 award reports a significant decrease in car use – 
55% – during the first year of programme implementation (from 2008 to 2009). During the 
same period the use of public transport increased 34% (Merck Serono S.A. to EPOMM, 2009). 
There are several legal aspects that might force companies to implement principles of 
workplace mobility management. For example, land-use planning policies and the permit rules 
might set several conditions for a company, as they can limit parking places on the site or 
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 3 
 
25 
 
require changes in existing infrastructure. A study among 25 UK companies which focussed 
on the motivation to implement workplace travel plans concluded that planning application 
was by far the most influential aspect as to why companies were involved in the field (68%) 
(Roby, 2010). 
There are also examples of countries where workplace mobility plans are mandatory apart from 
land-use policies. For example, in Belgium, companies located in the Brussels capital region 
must have a mobility plan if they hire 100 staff or more (Vanoutrive, 2014). 
Besides the driving force in the form of legislation or national and regional policies, the need 
or interest to implement workplace mobility management measures can also come from an 
organisation itself. A study of UK companies that have implemented workplace mobility 
management measures names the following benefits gained from the activity (Cairns et al., 
2010), which could be categorised as the following: 
- 
Fulfilment of environmental responsibility and enhancement of company image. 
- 
Relief of a limited number of parking places or congestion to/on-site. Lower cost spent 
on parking facilities, better accessibility to the site. 
- 
Improvement of employees’ travel choices, reduction of commuter stress, attraction to 
wider range of employees to the site. 
Since the framing and implementation of a mobility plan in an organisation consumes 
resources, it is essential to have expectations regarding the benefits. First of all, workplace 
mobility management could contribute to the company’s image, since sustainability is often 
used as a marketing attribute. It would be best if there were a real willingness to support 
sustainable development and sustainable travel, not just to exploit the concept. In studying 
different cases, it can be noted that sustainable transport is often incorporated in organisational 
culture. 
Another field where workplace mobility management can benefit an organisation is cost 
reduction for parking facilities and providing better accessibility to the site for both employees 
and clients. A shortage of parking places can cause problems for clients and dissatisfaction for 
employees; the land used to accommodate parking can also be used for more commercially 
viable purposes. Congestion to/on-site causes loss of time, which can be expressed in monetary 
terms.  
==PAGE:38==
Workplace mobility management 
 
26 
 
Workplace mobility management can also be used to support HR functions. Mobility plan 
initiatives can be favourable circumstances during the recruitment process for new staff and an 
aspect improving well-being for existing employees. 
In the UK, where workplace mobility management has deeper roots, wider benefits from the 
activities have been recognised also at the governmental level. Transport for London has stated 
that “travel planning is an effective business management tool which can be used to generate 
cost savings, lending companies a competitive advantage, and which has additional benefits 
for the environment and the health of employees” (Transport for London, 2005). 
In order to gain maximum benefit from the implementation of workplace mobility management 
initiatives in an organisation, it is important to bear in mind and follow certain strategies and 
principles. Newson & Cairns (2002) have listed 8 strategies and mobility plan design principles 
in the government-approved guide to organisations who are involved in workplace mobility 
management: 
1. Building partnerships with the local authority, public transport operators, and other 
employers.  
2. Identifying site opportunities and barriers by assessing the travel facilities for different 
modes and defining priority routes and locations. 
3. Encouraging progressive change with activities to support sustained use of alternative 
means of travel.  
4. Gaining staff ownership for the plan with appropriate consultation, on-going 
communication, fairness, transparency, and plenty of motivators.  
5. Raising the profile of travel initiatives with imaginative promotion and publicity. 
6. Reaching key groups of staff by segmenting the market for alternative travel and 
providing the right message at the right time to those most likely to respond.  
7. Changing aspects of the organisation’s culture by engaging management commitment, 
involving dedicated staff time from a travel plan “champion”, and ensuring working 
arrangements dovetail with travel needs.  
8. Focussing on results by assessing the impact of individual strategies in reducing car 
use.  
 
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 3 
 
27 
 
3.4 What determines success–workplace mobility implementation 
in practice 
Implementing workplace management measures can be considered as an investment for an 
organisation. In order to gain maximum benefit from the investment, it is useful to know what 
initiatives are those causing the biggest change in car use. Several studies from different 
countries focus on this question and have come out with conclusions. 
Cairns et al. have studied workplace mobility management practices in UK and have also 
written several articles with the main objective to define variables that might be expected to 
influence the success of a workplace mobility plan (Cairns et al., 2004) (Cairns et al., 2010).  
In-depth analyses of the workplace mobility management practices of 20 employers (with a 
total of 70 00 staff involved) were carried out, and the case studies were chosen to represent 
best practices in workplace mobility management in the UK. Since the amount of data available 
was limited, formal statistical analyses were not conducted, instead data were ordered 
according to both the degree of change and the end-level car use achieved in order to identify 
factors associated with greater success. As a total overall result, the workplace mobility plans 
studied managed to reduce car use by more than 14 per 100 staff, which made around an 18% 
reduction in the proportion of commuting journeys being made as a car driver. 15 companies 
managed to reduce car use by more than 10%, whilst 5 had cut car use by at least 20%, and 2 
organisations more than 50% (Cairns et al., 2004). 
The analyses concluded that parking management emerged as the single most important factor 
determining the degree of success achieved through mobility plans. Different organisations 
used different initiatives to address parking – a monthly incentive payment to employees for 
not bringing the car, on-site parking charges, and sophisticated permit systems were assessed 
during the analyses. Other mode-specific measures were applied; for example, success in 
promoting bus use was linked to free shuttle services provided by companies, and bicycle use 
increased in those organisations where high-quality off-site access and improved availability 
for cycle parking and showers/changing facilities were provided. Increased walking was 
associated with high-quality off-site access and on-site conditions, financial incentives, and 
walking promotion. Car-sharing was linked to car-partner matching services provided by 
organisations. In addition to applied initiatives, all case study organisations used extensive 
marketing and communication of the mobility plan to staff, and most of them had senior 
==PAGE:40==
Workplace mobility management 
 
28 
 
management support and a dedicated mobility-plan co-ordinator and targets or a written plan 
of action (Cairns et al., 2010). 
The above described methodology of the analysis has been strongly criticised by another group 
of researchers. They claim that a narrative approach for analysing quantitative data is not 
scientifically correct and have provided meta-analyses on the work of Cairns et al.  
Mixed-effect multivariate meta-regression analyses were performed on the same dataset, which 
concluded that from the set of descriptors only 5 remained statistically significant – cycling 
access, staff with female bias, organisation type, duration of the monitoring process, and 
incentive payments for giving up parking. The conclusion of Cairns et al. that the parking 
regulations have the only effect on the outcome of the travel plan was disproved (Bamberg & 
Möser, 2007). 
Vanoutrive et al. (2010) have studied workplace mobility management implementation in 
Belgium. As described in previous chapters, Belgian companies who employ more than 100 
staff are required to fill out a three-yearly questionnaire about home-to-work-travel activities. 
Besides having information about modal split, work regimes, and accessibility problems, 38 
different workplace mobility management measures are checked in the questionnaire. The 
dataset analysed in 2005 contained 7460 worksites with a total number of 1.3 million 
employees involved. 38% of worksites were located in central cities and 57% in 
agglomerations. 
Using the data from described surveys, the analyses did not focus on results in terms of 
reduction in car use, but rather on defining variables that influence employee commuting. 
Pronounced links between workplace mobility management measures implemented by 
organisations and accessibility remarks and problems were not discovered; it was concluded 
that workplace mobility management in Belgium seems to fall outside rational firm behaviour 
(Vanoutrive, 2010). 
The initiatives most used in Belgium were those supporting the use of bicycles. 
Covered/secured bicycle storages, showers, and changing rooms are implemented in at least 
25% of companies. Another measure that supported cycling was a cycling incentive, which 
was paid to employees in 43% of the companies. On top of that, public transport allowances 
were paid in 24% of companies (Vanoutrive, 2010). 
Another study was composed on the same Belgian dataset in 2008, covering an even greater 
number of observations – 9455 organisations were represented. The first objective of the study 
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 3 
 
29 
 
was to define variables which identify workplaces where the alternative modes of transport 
promoted by the organisations are popular amongst the employees. The second objective was 
an analysis of the results of previously defined classification through a binary choice model in 
order to define what good practices for workplace mobility management are (Van Malderen et 
al., 2012). 
In general, the newer analyses confirmed the results of the previous one: the workplace 
mobility management initiatives most used in Belgium were those supporting bicycling; the 
same level of occurrence was defined for financial incentives to support cycling and the use of 
public transport. More detailed comparison discovered that those workplaces had significantly 
higher use of the modes of transport being promoted for commuting than other workplaces 
(Van Malderen et al., 2012).   
The link between a shortage of parking places at the worksite and higher level of bicycle use 
and public transport use was defined in this study and a conclusion was made that reducing the 
number of parking places appears to be an efficient push measure in workplace mobility 
management practice (Van Malderen et al., 2012). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:42==
Workplace mobility management 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:43==
31 
 
 
 
Chapter 4 
 
4 Travel behaviour analysis 
Travel behaviour analysis 
The aim of the current chapter is to analyse the data from the mobility survey conducted among 
DTU employees and students who had their working/study place at the Lyngby campus.  
The following questions were set as the focus of the analysis: 
 What transport modes were used for travelling to the Lyngby campus? 
 What were the locations from which most of the trips to the Lyngby campus were 
made? 
 How often and at what times of the day did different employees and student groups 
travel to the Lyngby campus and what were the destinations in the campus area? 
4.1 Data and methodology 
The survey was delivered to 6 496 employees and 10 032 students, with a respondent rate of 
18% for students and 20% for employees. Data were collected during the period from the 8th 
of February to the 21st of February. 
The questionnaire consisted of 31 questions as listed in Appendix 1. 
118 observations were excluded from the student survey data, since 118 respondents were not 
representative of students and had received the questionnaire by mistake. Nine observations 
were excluded from employee data due to unreliable information provided by the respondents.  
==PAGE:44==
Travel Behaviour Analysis 
 
 
32 
 
In total, data on 1 303 employees and 1 656 students were analysed regarding one-way travel 
from their living places to the Lyngby campus.  
MS Excel was the main tool used for analysis, and geospatial data were analysed using ArcGIS   
applications ArcMap and ArcScene.  
In order to determine whether there is a significant association between selected variables, Chi-
Square tests were performed at a significance level of 0.05.  
Campus zones in the study are based on the official allocation of the campus area into four 
zones as show in Map 1 in Appendix 3. 
4.2 Descriptive statistics 
Students: 64% of respondents were males and 36% females; the majority were master’s 
students (54%), followed by bachelor students (26%), diploma students (11%), and PhD 
students (9%). Only 0.6% of those who replied were visiting students and 97% of respondents 
declared their place of residence to be in Denmark. 
Employees: 56% of respondents were males and 44% females. 60% of respondents were 
knowledge workers (scientists and teaching staff), followed by office workers (15%) and 
management (10%). 98% of respondents had a place of residence in Denmark. 82% of 
employees had flexible working time, while 42% of them had a set core time. 
The graphs for descriptive statistics are presented in Appendix 2 (Part I). 
4.3 Modal split 
In order to study the general mode use among students and employees, a modal split was 
calculated. The modal split describes the shares of people who use certain modes for travelling 
or shares of trips that are taken using certain modes.  
The data from the survey provided different options for presenting the modal split; three of 
them are described and presented in the current part of the analysis. For further use, one method 
of calculation shall be selected for proper comparison of the data. 
Eleven different modes were considered in the survey on travel to DTU Lyngby campus: 
walking, cycling, electric bicycle, car alone, car with others, bus, train, metro, motorcycle, 
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 4 
 
33 
 
moped, and other. For the current part of the analysis, modes from the survey were partly 
grouped as shown in Table 4-1.  
When analysing the modal split, no differentiation was made between cycle trips taken by 
ordinary bicycles or electric bicycles. Since Lyngby is not directly connected to the metro, 
there was also no distinction made between trips taken by the train and the metro.  
Motorcycles and mopeds were also grouped and since the number of trips made by motorcycles 
or mopeds was very low (0.23% of all modes used by employees and 0.12% of all modes used 
by students), the trips were summed to the group “other”. The reason for the very low 
motorcycle and moped use in the current survey may be related to the fact that the registration 
tax for these vehicles in Denmark can be divided into two yearly parts and be paid for the 
period in which the vehicles are actively used. It can be assumed that motorcycles and mopeds 
are registered as officially used vehicles during warmer times of the year. This indicates that if 
the survey is repeated during another period of the year, shares for motorcycle and moped may 
be higher and might be relevant to consider. 
Table 4-1 Mode grouping for the analysis 
Mode label in the analysis 
Modes included from the 
survey 
Walking 
Walking 
Cycling 
Cycling and electric bicycle 
Car 
Car alone 
Carpooling 
Car with others 
Bus 
Bus 
Train 
Train and metro 
Other 
Motorbike, moped, and other 
 
When presenting the modal split based on the number of trips, tours and trips were defined 
based on the mode used. The following terminology was used:  
 Tour – the whole journey from origin to destination; may consist of trips that are taken 
by different modes. 
 Trip – a part of a tour that was taken using one certain mode. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:46==
Travel Behaviour Analysis 
 
 
34 
 
General mode use (version 1) 
When analysing the data resulting from question 5 in the survey, “What means of transport 
have been part of your journey to your work/study place last week?”, shares for modes used 
differed among students and employees and are presented in Figure 4-1 and Figure 4-2.  
 
It can be seen that the bus and bicycle were dominant transport modes for students, followed 
by the train and walking. Car use among students was at a low level of 5%, while carpooling 
comprised 4% of modes used.  
The bus was also the most frequently used mode among employees, followed by the car, the 
bicycle, the train, and walking. Similarly to students, carpooling was at a low level of 7%. 
Modes used for trips taken during a week (version 2) 
The outcome for the modal split was slightly different when analysing more detailed daily trip 
information. Analysis was based on question 6 in the survey, where all modes and related travel 
distances were defined for all tours taken during 7 days.  
For the purpose of the analysis, all tours were divided into trips taken by different modes and 
the modal split was presented based on the number of trips taken during a week. Walking was 
considered as a trip when the distance walked was 1.5 km or more. Walking trips of less than 
1.5 km were considered as minor parts of other trips or tours (walking to/from a station or 
to/from a parking lot).  
Table 4-2 gives an overview of trips and tours made by students and employees during a week. 
It can be noted that on average 2.2 trips per tour were made by employees and 2.5 trips per tour 
Figure 4-1 Version 1 modal split (employees) 
Figure 4-2 Version 1 modal split (students) 
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 4 
 
35 
 
by students. When considering the grouped modes in the current survey, there were 1.9 trips 
per tour made by employees on average and 2.0 trips per tour made by students. 
Table 4-2 Weekly trips and tours 
 
Students 
Employees 
No. of respondents 
1 656 
1 303 
No. of tours to DTU during a week 
5 627 
5 863 
No. of trips (for all modes in the questionnaire) 
14 056 
13 046 
No. of trips (for grouped modes in the current analysis) 
11 117 
10 899 
 
Mode shares based on the number of trips taken during a week are presented in Figure 4-3 and 
Figure 4-4. 
The shares of modes used have changed slightly, but the order of the preferred modes among 
students has remained the same as in the previous section of the analysis.   
Among employees, the car has become the dominant mode and the share of cycling has 
increased.  
Still, it can be noticed that there is no substantial difference between the two presented ways 
of using the survey data for defining the modal split. 
Main modes (version 3) 
Another way of presenting the modal split proposed in the current study is by defining a “main 
mode” – the mode that was used to perform the longest trip during a tour.  
Figure 4-3 Version 2 modal split (employees) 
Figure 4-4 Version 2 modal split (students) 
==PAGE:48==
Travel Behaviour Analysis 
 
 
36 
 
Shares of the trips taken via a main mode by students and employees are presented in Figure 
4-5  and Figure 4-6.  
It must be noted that for 1.19% of trips taken by students and for 0.92% of trips taken by 
employees the main mode was not defined due to the fact that respondents did not include 
information about the trip length as assumed (those trips are summed to “other”). 
Among employees, the car is the most often-used mode, while the bus and the bicycle are the 
dominant main modes among students.  
Car use is usually targeted with workplace travel plans, and since there is substantial difference 
in the car use among employees and students, it is important to make further analysis of the 
travel data separately for students and employees. 
An overview of all three versions of the modal split calculations is presented in Table 4-3. It 
can be noted that car use has increased as a main mode for employees much more than for 
students. At the same time, bicycle use as a main mode has increased more among students 
than among employees. A conclusion can be made that employees used the bicycle for shorter 
trips than students or in combination with other modes. The car, on the other hand, was used 
more for longer trips by employees than by students. Based on this, an assumption can be made 
that the average living distance from the Lyngby campus is shorter for students than for 
employees. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4-5 Version 3 modal split (employees) 
Figure 4-6 Version 3 modal split (students) 
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 4 
 
37 
 
  
 
 
Table 4-3 Overview of the modal split for three versions 
Mode 
Students 
Employees 
Version 1 
(No. of 
people) 
Version 2 
(No. of 
trips) 
Version 3 
(No. of 
trips/main mode) 
Version 1 
(No. of 
people) 
Version 2 
(No. of 
trips) 
Version 3 
(No. of trips/ 
main mode) 
Walking 
13% 
10% 
6% 
10% 
7% 
2% 
Cycling 
22% 
26% 
30% 
18% 
20% 
19% 
Car 
5% 
6% 
8% 
21% 
23% 
35% 
Carpooling 
4% 
5% 
4% 
7% 
8% 
8% 
Bus 
37% 
31% 
33% 
24% 
21% 
18% 
Train 
18% 
21% 
16% 
16% 
18% 
16% 
Other 
1% 
1% 
2% 
2% 
2% 
2% 
 
Figure 4-7 gives an overview of total kilometres travelled during a week using different modes. 
In accordance to the modal splits presented previously, employees made most of the kilometres 
travelled by car and students most of the kilometres travelled by bus. Total distance cycled and 
travelled by the train were provided almost equally by students and employees.  
4.4 Trip origins 
The objective of the current part of the analysis is to define from which locations trips to the 
Lyngby campus were taken, which modes were used for travelling from those locations, and 
how the travel distance and the travel time were linked to the most often-used main modes. 
Figure 4-7 Weekly distances travelled by different modes, based on the sample 
==PAGE:50==
Travel Behaviour Analysis 
 
 
38 
 
Areas of residence from which all trips to the Lyngby campus were made are presented on Map 
2 in Appendix 3. The most popular living areas were selected for further analysis.  
Travel times from seven 
selected areas of residence to 
the Lyngby campus using car, 
public transport, or cycling 
are presented in Figure 4-8. 
Distances from the residential 
areas to the Lyngby campus 
get shorter when moving to 
the right in Figure 4-8; 
Copenhagen S is located 
farthest from the Lyngby 
campus – ca. 18 km. Travel time data and distances from the residential areas to the Lyngby 
campus are based on travel information from Google Maps, where trips are assumed to arrive 
to the Lyngby campus on a working day at 8 am. 
First of all, it shall be noticed that the travel time from all selected residential areas remains 
less than 1 hour. The average travel-time difference between the car and public transport is 13 
minutes, and the average travel-time difference between the car and cycling is 11 minutes.  
The findings refer to the fact that car use can be replaced with public transport or cycling when 
travelling to the Lyngby campus from the most popular areas of residence. This would result 
in a reasonable increase in the travel time, and distances to the Lyngby campus are not too great 
for cycling. 
When looking at employees and students separately, the living areas from which most of the 
trips were made differ in part. In the following section, the main modes1 that were used to 
perform the trips from the most popular residential areas among employees and students were 
defined. Travel times for three modes from the selected residential areas to the Lyngby campus 
were used to perform the analysis. 
The main modes used for travelling from popular living areas to the Lyngby campus by 
employees are shown in Figure 4-9. The farthest area of residence analysed, Copenhagen S, 
                                                 
1 Main mode – a mode that was used to perform longest trip during a tour 
Figure 4-8 Travel times to Lyngby campus from most popular living areas 
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 4 
 
39 
 
lies ca. 18 km from Lyngby campus; the distances get shorter when moving to the right in 
Figure 4-9. 
It can be noticed that the car is used as a main mode for 20% of all travel from the areas which 
lie close to the Lyngby campus and from which travel time to the Lyngby campus for both 
cycling and public transport is less than 30 min (Kongens Lyngby, Virum and Søborg). 
Frederiksberg and Copenhagen S had also high shares of car users, but from these areas the 
distance and the travel time to the Lyngby campus for alternative modes are longer. Cycling as 
a main mode is used mainly for shorter distances. It is also important to make further analysis 
of the bus connection capacity to the Lyngby campus from Copenhagen N and Copenhagen S, 
since bus travel predominates from these areas of residence. 
Main modes for travelling from popular residential areas to the Lyngby campus by students are 
analysed in Figure 4-10.  Copenhagen S lies ca. 18 km from the Lyngby campus, and distances 
get shorter when moving to the right in Figure 4-10. Unlike employees, students mainly travel 
Figure 4-9 Main modes used for travelling to Lyngby campus (employees) 
Figure 4-10 Main modes used for travelling to Lyngby campus (students) 
==PAGE:52==
Travel Behaviour Analysis 
 
 
40 
 
close distances by bicycle, and use of the car as a main mode is at a low level. A decrease in 
cycling can be noticed when the travel time is more than 40 min. 
The most often-used main modes are analysed in Figure 4-11 and Figure 4-12 for all areas of 
residence based on the distance from the Lyngby campus. 45% of the students living within 10 
km from the campus used cycling as a main mode and 38% of employees did the same.  
Cycling decreased as the distance from Lyngby campus increased, but 9% of students and 9% 
of employees were still willing to cycle distances up to 20 km. Certain increase in cycling as a 
main mode used in longer distances (students 26–30 km and employees 36–40 km) was most 
probably connected with using the bicycle in combination with other modes (train, bus). 
Figure 4-11 Mode use by living distance (employees) 
Figure 4-12 Mode use by living distance (students) 
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 4 
 
41 
 
The car use as a main mode among employees was high in general and also in case of shorter 
distances from the Lyngby campus. The car was used as a main mode on average for 28% of 
all travel from distances up to 20 km from the campus. Among students, the car as a main mode 
comprised an average of 7% of all modes used within distances up to 20 km from the Lyngby 
campus. 
The bus was the most used main mode among students in general, but it can be noted that bus 
trips were taken up to a distance of 30 km. This could be related to the bus connections provided 
or to the fact that time travelled in the bus is often considered not to be productive time. 
4.5 Trip destination – Lyngby campus 
Students visited the Lyngby campus on average 3.4 days per week and employees on average 
4.5 days per week; the visit frequency is presented in Figure 4-13.  
The visits were distributed mainly on working days (Monday to Friday): only 4.5% of visits 
on average for students and 6.5% for employees were made during the weekend. 
When analysing whether there was a significant association between visiting the campus and 
the working regime or work field of employees, it was discovered that there was a significant 
difference between visit frequency and the working regime (p < 0.005) or work field (p < 0.005) 
of the employee.  
The same relation was defined among students – visit frequency was independent of study level 
(p < 0.005) or time studying at DTU (p < 0.005). More detailed graphs are presented in 
Appendix 2 (Part II).  
Figure 4-13 DTU visits, based on the sample 
==PAGE:54==
Travel Behaviour Analysis 
 
 
42 
 
The campus zone visits are presented in Figure 4-14 and Figure 4-15. It can be noted that the 
management and office workers were mainly placed in zone 1 and zone 2. Zone 1 was at the 
same time more often visited by diploma and master’s students; bachelor students visited zone 
3 most often. 
No significant association was defined between zone visits and student study level or employee 
work field – destinations were independent from the employee’s work field  
(p < 0.005) and student’s study level (p < 0.005). 
It is assumed that the working places that employees declared in the survey are their permanent 
working locations. Students move around the campus due to their study activities and it is worth 
analysing the campus destinations on different weekdays. 
In Figure 4-16 it can be seen that working days and the weekend differed. Weekends were most 
probably used for independent studies and zone 1, where the library is located, was visited most 
often. 
Figure 4-14 Campus zones visits by workfield, based on the sample (employees)
Figure 4-15 Campus zone visits by study level based on the sample (students) 
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 4 
 
43 
 
Weekly arrival times of employees and students are shown in Figure 4-17. It can be seen that 
arrival times for both groups peaked at 8 am.  
When analysing the arrival times on the most-used main modes (bus, car, and cycling), it was 
discovered that the mode type did not influence the general pattern of the arrival time, both for 
students and employees.  
 
Working regime also did not have an influence on the arrival times for employees, since 40–
50% of arrivals for all working regimes peaked at 8 am, as seen in Figure 4-18.  
Figure 4-16 Campus zone visits on weekdays, based on the sample (students) 
Figure 4-17 Arrival times to Lyngby campus, based on the sample 
Figure 4-18 Arrival times by working regime, based on the sample (employees) 
==PAGE:56==
Travel Behaviour Analysis 
 
 
44 
 
4.6 Summary of the chapter 
The first objective of the current chapter was to compose the modal split for commuting and 
study travel to Lyngby campus. It was also targeted to analyse the areas of residence from 
which the trips were made and to see how the trips were distributed in the campus area. The 
main conclusions of the analysis are as follows: 
 The modal splits presented differed from the average values for commuting trips and 
educational travel of the City of Copenhagen in 2008–20192 (car 29%, public transport 
28%, biking 36%, and walking 7%). Car use was at a lower level for both employees 
and students at DTU Lyngby campus. Cycling was also less used for travelling to the 
Lyngby campus, while the use of public transport was higher for travelling to Lyngby 
campus than travelling in the City of Copenhagen. Differences in cycling and in public 
transport use were expected due to the location of the campus. 
 The car use among employees was 23% and among students 6%. Due to the substantial 
difference in car use, further analyses for the mode use shall be made separately for 
students and employees. 
 Cycling, carpooling, and walking had similar shares in the modal split of students and 
employees. Public transport had a 52% share for students and a 39% share for 
employees. 
 Most travel by students was made from Copenhagen central area and municipalities 
neighbouring the Lyngby-Taarbæk Municipality, which made the average distance 
travelled relatively short. Commuting trips made by employees were more spread to 
the municipalities lying north of the Lyngby-Taarbæk Municipality, and the average 
trip length was also longer than that of students. 
 45% of students and 38% of employees used cycling from residential areas up to 10 km 
from the Lyngby campus.  
 28% of car travel made by employees and 7% made by students originated up to 10 km 
from the Lyngby campus. 
                                                 
2 Data Source: Cycling Embassy of Denmark, http://www.cycling-embassy.dk/2012/01/20/good-better-best-the-
city-of-copenhagens-bicycle-strategy-2011-2025/ 
 
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 4 
 
45 
 
 The Lyngby campus was mainly visited on working days by both students and 
employees. Visit frequency was independent of the employee’s work field and working 
regime; it was also independent of the student’s study level.  
 Zone 1 and zone 3 of the campus received more commuting and study trips than zones 
2 and 4. No significant association was defined between the trip destinations in the four 
campus zones and employee work field or student study level. 
 Both students and employees arrived to the campus between 7–9 am, with peak arrival 
time at 8 am. The arrivals did not depend on specific mode use, employee working 
regime, or student study level. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:58==
Travel Behaviour Analysis 
 
 
46 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:59==
47 
 
 
 
Chapter 5 
 
5 Car use and cycling 
Car use and cycling 
Car and bicycle use are analysed in the current chapter. This analysis continues Chapter 4, 
using previously described survey data and methodology. It would also be in the interest of the 
current project to analyse the use of public transport, but the limitations in the survey data do 
not allow estimation of the bus trips arriving to the Lyngby campus and the train trips arriving 
to the Lyngby station. Thus, more detailed analysis of public transport use is not provided in 
the current chapter. 
The analysis is performed on weekly car and cycling trips with the following research 
questions: 
 How many cars and bicycles arrived to the Lyngby campus daily, from where did those 
trips originate, and how were the trips distributed in the campus area? 
 What were the main reasons for using the car? 
 What were the most important options that could increase the use of bicycles? 
5.1 Car use 
In analysing car use, first-hand interest in the current project is on those car trips that arrived 
to Lyngby campus. Total car use is important for estimating externalities, but the number of 
cars actually arriving daily to the campus determine the facility planning and also influence 
local congestion. 
==PAGE:60==
Car use and Cycling 
 
48 
 
Assuming that all car trips or tours started from people’s places of residence, those tours that 
were taken by car only or tours that consisted of car and walking trips arrived to the Lyngby 
campus. Travels where trips were taken by car and other modes within one tour are assumed 
to be park-and-ride types of trips.  
62% of the car trips taken by employees and 47% of car trips taken by students are estimated 
to arrive to the Lyngby campus as shown in Figure 5-1. 
Most of the car trips arriving to the Lyngby campus were taken from places of residence that 
lie 11–20 km from the campus, as shown on Figure 5-2. Even the total number of trips taken 
from distances of 21–30 km and 31–40 km was smaller; trip lengths were longer and resulted 
in a high share of total car kilometres travelled.  
In order to have a significant influence on car use, places from those three distance intervals 
shall be targeted first.  
Employees who lived more than 51 km from the Lyngby campus and used the car to reach the 
campus also have an important share of the total car kilometres travelled. These people could 
be also targeted when proposing measures to reduce the impact of cars. 
Figure 5-2 Weekly car trips based on the sample (trips ending at Lyngby campus) 
Figure 5-1 Car trips arriving daily to Lyngby campus based on the sample 
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 5 
 
49 
 
Table 5-1 Car trip lengths based on the sample (car trips arriving to Lyngby campus) 
Distance to Lyngby 
campus (km) 
Employees 
Students 
Average car trip 
length (km) 
Weekly 
trips 
Average car trip 
length (km) 
Weekly 
trips 
1-10 
12 
337 
13 
74 
11-20 
25 
537 
24 
128 
21-30 
43 
286 
35 
63 
31-40 
55 
239 
48 
39 
41-50 
63 
54 
38 
8 
>51 
89 
119 
111 
12 
Average car trip lengths (based on the data that respondents gave about their travels in the 
survey) and the total number of weekly car trips made from distance intervals are presented in 
Table 5-1. Only those trips were taken into consideration that had Lyngby campus as their 
destination. It might be noticed that the average trip lengths are slightly longer than living 
distances from the Lyngby campus. Since the distances to the Lyngby campus were measured 
from the centre of a residential area, based on the postcode, the results are expected to differ. 
Still, it could also be considered to change the survey questionnaire so that the respondents are 
better supported to enter the most precise value for their travel distance (providing control 
numbers for distances based on postcodes, providing the value for total tour length based on 
trips, etc.). 
Those car trips that did not end at the Lyngby campus are analysed in Figure 5-3, they were 
parts of tours taken by several modes. Most trips were also made from the residential areas 
located 11–20 km from the campus.  
Upon comparing Figure 5-2 and Figure 5-3, it can be seen that the number of trips taken does 
not differ greatly, but the total distance travelled is considerably lower for the trips not ending 
at the campus. This confirms the assumption that those trips were part of a park-and-ride type 
of travel and the car trips taken were shorter.  
Figure 5-3 Weekly car trips based on the sample (other trips) 
==PAGE:62==
Car use and Cycling 
 
50 
 
Moving the focus of interest back to those car trips and tours that arrived at Lyngby campus, it 
is possible to determine more exact origins that are presented in Maps 3-5 of Appendix 3. 
Residential areas from which most of the car trips were made differ for students and employees 
and are shown in Figure 5-4 and Figure 5-5.  
Travel times for the car, public transport, and cycling were used in the analysis (based on travel 
information from Google Maps, trips arriving to Lyngby campus on a working day at 8 am). 
The comparison of travel times was performed to analyse how the alternative travel modes 
provide opportunities to travel to the Lyngby campus.  
Among employees (Figure 5-4), a high number of car trips were taken from close distances 
like Kongens Lyngby, Virum, Copenhagen Ø, and Gentofte. 
 
In comparing travel time for the car, public transport, and cycling between selected areas of 
residence and the Lyngby campus, for some locations the time difference between all three 
modes is very small or even marginal (Kongens Lyngby, Gentofte, Virum, Copenhagen S). 
From Roskilde, where more than 80 weekly car trips were taken by employees, travel time for 
the car and public transport show almost no difference. The same goes for Kastrup and 
Hvidovre.  
Figure 5-4 Weekly car trips from areas of residence based on the sample (employees) 
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 5 
 
51 
 
The number of car trips to the Lyngby campus taken by students was considerably lower than 
those taken by employees. Still, it can be noticed that a relatively high number of trips were 
again taken from the residential areas located close to the Lyngby campus, as shown in Figure 
5-5 – Copenhagen N, Copenhagen NV, Herlev, and Søborg. 
Travel time for the car is lower than for public transport and cycling for all residential areas 
located closer than 15 km from the Lyngby campus (except Nærum). For longer distance 
locations like Roskilde and Hvidorve, travel time for the car and public transport show a 
marginal difference. 
Destinations for daily car trips at Lyngby campus are shown in Figure 5-6. Car arrivals to 
certain buildings at the campus are presented in Map 6 in Appendix 3. 
Figure 5-5 Weekly car trips from areas of residence based on the sample (students) 
Figure 5-6 Daily car trips arriving to campus zones based on the sample 
==PAGE:64==
Car use and Cycling 
 
52 
 
Most of the car trips were taken by knowledge workers and master’s students, as shown in 
Figure 5-7 and Figure 5-8. Among management workers, 2.2 weekly car trips were made per 
respondent, while knowledge workers made an average 0.8 weekly car trips per respondent. 
 
Among students, weekly car trips per student at the study level are on a low level; the “other” 
group, which mainly consists of Phd students, have slightly higher values for weekly car trips 
per respondent, which is also expected. The nature of Phd study work is often similar to that of 
knowledge workers. 
Question 18 in the survey provides an opportunity to study selected reasons as to why the car 
trips were taken. The question was formulated as follows: “To what extent do you agree with 
the statement: It influences whether I go by car to work/to my place of study (as a driver or 
passenger), that …”. 12 reasons were provided and the respondent could choose to agree or 
disagree with the statement in 6 ways, as listed in Table 5-2. 
Figure 5-8 Car trips by work field based on the sample (employees) 
Figure 5-7 Car trips by study level based on the sample (students) 
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 5 
 
53 
 
Table 5-2 Question 18 response options 
Car use reasons 
1. It is quickest 
2. It is cheapest 
3. It is flexible 
4. It is too far to bike 
5. I have errands/stops on the trip or when I go back 
6. I need a car during the day 
7. It is too complicated to take the bus and train 
8. Everyone else I know takes the car 
9. I am used to taking the car 
10. I get to decide who I travel with 
11. I enjoy driving by car 
12. The weather is bad 
Answer options 
1. Completely disagree 
2. Disagree 
3. Neither disagree nor agree 
4. Agree 
5. Completely agree 
6. Not relevant/already the case 
Only answers from the employees who made car trips ending at the Lyngby campus were 
analysed and answers “4 - agree” and “5 - completely agree” were counted. 
The shares of reasons with which respondents agreed are presented in Figure 5-9.  
Reason 1 and reason 3 were considered the most important, which stated that car use was the 
quickest way to travel and that it provided flexibility. Reasons 7, 4, and 5 also scored highly, 
where reasons 4 and 7 indicate difficulties in using alternative modes (public transport and 
cycling). 
Figure 5-9 Car use reasons 
==PAGE:66==
Car use and Cycling 
 
54 
 
Reasons 1, 4, and 7 were selected for further analysis to compare whether respondents’s 
perceptions about the travel time and travel distance are in accordance with the travel data 
based on Google Maps. The analysis was performed based on the areas of residence from which 
more than 30 car trips to the Lyngby campus were taken. In total, 724 weekly trips were made 
from these locations, which comprises 45% of all weekly car trips to Lyngby campus.  
In looking at the residential areas of those respondents who considered the car the quickest way 
to travel to Lyngby, Figure 5-10 gives an overview of the shares of trips concurring with reason 
1 for all car trips taken from an area. Travel times for car, public transport, and cycling are 
added.  
For most of the locations the travel time for the car is shorter than for other modes. Still, it can 
be noted that for Kongens Lyngby and Roskilde, from which most of the car trips were actually 
made, there is no difference in the travel time for the car or public transport. Travel time by 
public transport from the Kastrup area is even shorter than the travel time by car. Even the 
travel time comparison is based on general estimated travel time from the centre of a zone and 
does not include the time for walking; this may refer to the fact that employees might not be 
fully aware of travel times from their areas of residence to the Lyngby campus using different 
modes. 
The analysis in Chapter 4 indicated that people are willing to cycle distances up to 15 km. In 
Figure 5-11 it can be seen that the employees living less than 15 km from the Lyngby campus 
still consider the distance too long for biking (Virum, Brønshj, KøbenhavnØ, Horsholm).  
Figure 5-10 Analysis on car use reason 1 – the car is quickest 
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 5 
 
55 
 
The conclusion can be made that individuals’ ability to cycle might differ and seemingly 
reasonable cycling distances might be too challenging for some. 
The shares of car trips taken by employees who think that it is too complicated to use public 
transport from all car trips arriving to the Lyngby campus are presented in Figure 5-12.  
In comparing the travel times for the car and public transport for selected residential areas, it 
can be seen that in the majority of locations the travel time for car is shorter than the travel time 
for public transport. At the same time, there are residential areas where no difference between 
car travel time and public transport travel time exists (Rosklide, Kongens Lyngby, Kastrup, 
Gentofte). This may refer to the fact that the travel time might not always the main factor when 
deciding to use public transport. Accessibility to public transport or travel schedules for 
buses/trains might influence the decision as well. 
Another reason why the car could be used for commuting or for study trips is the need to visit 
several places during a tour. When analysing question 9 in the survey, which indicated if stops 
were made during a tour, it could be seen that employees declared the need for additional stops 
much more than students. 18% of employees and 7% of students who made car trips to the 
Lyngby campus said that they had additional stops on the way.  
Figure 5-11 Analysis of car use Reason 4 – it is too far to bike 
Figure 5-12 Analysis of car use reason 7 – it is complicated to use public transport 
==PAGE:68==
Car use and Cycling 
 
56 
 
5.2 Bicycle use 
General bicycle use was analysed in the Chapter 4, where it was shown that students used 
cycling for 22–30% of all travels and employees 18–20%, depending on the methodology that 
was used to compose the modal split. In the current part of the analysis the focus of interest is 
on those cycle trips and tours that most probably ended at Lyngby campus.  
For the purpose of the analysis an assumption was made that all tours where the bicycle was 
used as an only mode or in combination with any other mode than bus arrived at Lyngby 
campus. In accordance with this, 46% of the bicycle trips made by students and 62% made by 
employees arrived at Lyngby campus as shown in Figure 5-13. 
The majority of weekly cycle trips were made from the residential areas up to 5 km from the 
campus, but the total weekly kilometres cycled were highest from the residential areas 6–15 
km from the campus, as shown in Figure 5-14.  
Figure 5-14 Weekly cycle trips by living distance from Lyngby campus based on the sample 
Figure 5-13 Daily cycle trips arriving to Lyngby campus based on the sample 
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 5 
 
57 
 
The number of trips and total cycled kilometres decreased rapidly from the living areas 16 km 
or more from the campus. It can also be noted that employees made more trips from longer 
distances while students made most of the trips from up to 5-km distances. 
In order to make connections between the cycling trips, cycled distances, and the travel time, 
more exact locations were analysed from which most of the cycle trips were made. Those 
locations differ partly between students and employees. 
Residential areas from which the cycling trips to the Lyngby campus were made are presented 
in Maps 7–9 in Appendix 3. In Figure 5-15 and Figure 5-16 those areas of residence are 
presented from which most of the cycle trips were taken by employees. It can be seen that a 
high number of trips were taken from residential areas up to 13 km from the Lyngby campus 
with travel times of up to 45 min. There were also trips taken from 18 km with travel times of 
more than 1 hour.  
 
Figure 5-15 Weekly cycle trips from residential areas based on the sample (employees)
Figure 5-16 Weekly cycle trips from areas of residence based on the sample (employees) 
==PAGE:70==
Car use and Cycling 
 
58 
 
Residential areas from which most of the cycle trips were taken by students are presented in 
Figure 5-17 and Figure 5-18. Similar conclusions can be made for the employees – most of the 
cycle trips were taken as far as 13 km from the Lyngby campus with travel times of up to 45 
min. There was small share of students who, like employees, were willing to cycle longer 
distances up to 15 km. 
 
Figure 5-17 Weekly cycle trips from areas of residence based on the sample 
Figure 5-18 Weekly cycle trips from living areas based on the sample (students) 
Figure 5-19 Daily cycle trips arriving to campus zones based on the sample 
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 5 
 
59 
 
In order to provide facilities for bicycle parking and also for planning bicycle traffic on the 
campus, it is important to know how the bicycle trips were distributed in the campus area. 
General zone-based destinations are presented in Figure 5-19; a more precise building-based 
analysis is presented in Map 10 of Appendix 3. 
Most of the cycling trips were made by knowledge workers and master’s students, as shown in 
Figure 5-21 and Figure 5-20. Cycling among diploma students is at the lowest level.  
 
 
Question 21 in the survey listed selected options that could increase bicycle use, which provides 
an opportunity to analyse the data resulting from the answers. The question was formulated as 
follows: “What would make you go by bicycle more often to your place of study or for trips 
between campuses? If you already bike, what would make it more attractive? I would bike more 
if…” 13 options were provided for answers with a five-point agreement scale. The factors 
provided for students and employees are listed in Table 5-3. 
Figure 5-21 Bicycle trips by work field based on the sample (employees) 
Figure 5-20 Bicycle trips by study level based on the sample (students) 
==PAGE:72==
Car use and Cycling 
 
60 
 
Table 5-3 Question 21 response options 
Factors increasing 
bicycle use (student 
questionnaire) 
1. There was covered bicycle parking by my place of study 
2. There was covered parking by the bus stop/station 
3. There was bicycle parking by my place of study 
4. There was locked bike parking by the station/bus stop 
5. There were better changing and showering facilities at my place of study 
6. There was a bicycle service at my place of study (maintenance and repairs) 
7. I was given a cash incentive 
8. I could borrow a bicycle at the station/bus stop 
9. I could bike with a friend or a fellow student 
10. There were more and/or better bike paths going to my place of study 
11. I received information on bike paths and routes 
12. I received guidance on how to bike in traffic 
13. I had access to a bicycle 
Factors increasing 
bicycle use (employee 
questionnaire) 
 
There was covered bicycle parking by my workplace 
 
There was covered parking by the bus stop/station 
 
There was bicycle parking by my workplace 
 
There was locked bike parking by the station/bus stop 
 
There were better changing and showering facilities at my place of work 
 
There was a bicycle service at my place of work (maintenance and repairs) 
 
I was given a cash incentive 
 
I could borrow a bicycle at the station/bus stop 
 
I had access to a company car/service vehicle during working hours 
 
I could bike with a friend or colleague 
 
There were more and better bike paths going to my place of work 
For the analysis, answers “4 - agree” and “5 - completely agree” were counted. 
Shares of students who agreed with options 1–13 are presented in Figure 5-22. The most 
important options were considered to be 6, 1, and 7. 
In the following part option 1 (covered bicycle parking), option 5 (changing and showering 
facilities), and option 6 (bicycle maintenance) are studied by different campus zones. Option 8 
(borrow bicycle at the station/bus stop) will be analysed by different trip origins and option 11 
(information about bike paths and routes) by different student groups. More detailed analysis 
Figure 5-22 Options improving cycling based on the sample (students) 
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 5 
 
61 
 
of the selected options were performed with the aim of supporting better planning for the 
initiatives proposed in the travel plan. 
In Figure 5-23 it can be seen that the three selected options were highly agreed by students 
making cycle trips to all four zones. The conclusion can be made that current bicycle parking 
and changing facilities shall be investigated and compared with the estimated number of 
cyclists in all zones, since more than 40% of students found it insufficient.  
 
Students who agreed with option 8 (to borrow a bicycle at the station/bus stop) were analysed 
based on their areas of residence. The nine most popular residential areas are listed in Table 
5-4. 
Table 5-4 Analysis of option 8 improving cycling based on the sample (student) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Living area 
No. of students agreeing with 
option 8 
Kongens Lyngby 
77 
København Ø 
49 
København N 
45 
København NV 
41 
København S 
27 
Nærum 
21 
Frederiksberg 
21 
Brønshøj 
18 
Copenhagen K 
17 
Figure 5-23 Analysis of options 1, 5, and 6 improving cycling based on the sample (students) 
==PAGE:74==
Car use and Cycling 
 
62 
 
Since it is difficult to distinguish between those students who had the train station in the centre 
of Lyngby in mind and those who meant the bus stops near the Lyngby campus, it is difficult 
to make reasonable conclusions.  
When looking at the main modes that the students who agreed with option 8 were using, it was 
possible to define that 42% of them used the bus, 22% cycled, and 19% used the train. Based 
on that, an assumption can be made that students are interested in having the possibility to 
borrow a bicycle both from the train station or from the bus stops for continuing trips or for 
moving around the campus area. 
Option 11, which concerned information about cycling routes and paths, was not scored as 
highly as other options, but it still makes sense to see from which study level students who 
agreed with it come from.  
 
As seen in Figure 5-24 and Figure 5-25, master’s students, diploma students, and English-
speaking students found it important to obtain information about cycling routes to the Lyngby 
campus. 
Figure 5-24 Analysis of cycling improving option 11 based on the sample (student) 
Figure 5-25 Analysis of cycling improving option 11 based on the sample (students) 
==PAGE:75==
CHAPTER 5 
 
63 
 
When looking at the agreed options for improving cycling among employees, and more 
specifically among those employees who made car trips to the Lyngby campus, options 5, 7, 
and 11 were considered as the most important, as shown in Figure 5-26.   
In studying option 1 (covered bicycle parking), option 5 (changing and showering facilities) 
and option 6 (bicycle maintenance) by campus zones, it can be found that all three options were 
most emphasised in zone 4, as shown in Figure 5-27. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5-26 Options improving cycling (employees who used a car) 
Figure 5-27 Analysis of options 1, 5, and 6 improving cycling based on the sample (employees who used a car) 
==PAGE:76==
Car use and Cycling 
 
64 
 
5.3 Summary of the chapter 
The objective of current chapter was to determine how many car and bicycle trips arrived to 
the Lyngby campus and how the trips were distributed in the campus area. The interest of the 
current analysis was also on the residential areas from which the car and cycling trips that 
arrived to the Lyngby campus were made, why the car was used, and what could increase 
bicycle use. 
Main conclusions from the analysis: 
 Based on the sample, 449 car trips and 701 bicycle trips arrived to the Lyngby campus 
daily. 
 Zones 1, 2, and 3 received almost equal shares of the car trips, while the number of car 
trips arriving to zone 4 was smaller. Most of the bicycle trips arrived to zone 1 and zone 
3. 
 Biggest number of the car trips that arrived to the Lyngby campus originated from the 
living areas 11-20 km from the campus. Most of the bicycle trips were made from the 
areas of residence located 1–5 km from the campus. 
 Based on the working field, management workers made the highest number of car trips 
and the lowest number of bicycle trips per employee. Car use was also relatively high 
among technicians and office workers. Bicycle use, on the other hand, was higher 
among knowledge workers, master’s, and Phd students. 
 The most important reason as to why a car was used by the employees who made car 
trips to the Lyngby campus was the travel time – the car was considered the quickest 
mode. The second most important reason listed was the flexibility. 
 Students thought that cycling could increase if a bicycle maintenance centre and more 
covered bicycle parking places were provided. Those employees who used the car to 
reach the Luyngby campus found the most important options for improving the level of 
cycling to be the cash incentive and improved showering/changing facilities. 
 
 
==PAGE:77==
65 
 
 
 
Chapter 6 
 
6 Planning the initiatives  
Planning the initiatives 
Most of the initiatives implemented in a workplace travel plan require resources – money and 
manpower. To get the most out of the cost placed in the process of developing and launching 
a travel plan, the exact goals should be defined in the first place.  
In Chapter 2 several aspects were developed from the literature review that encourage 
organisations to implement workplace travel plans. There are no official sustainability goals or 
targets for the DTU Lyngby campus travel plan, but two aspects were highlighted when 
distributing the travel survey was distributed to employees and students by the executive vice-
president of DTU: 
 to increase accessibility using green transport; 
 to counter climate change by reducing transport-related CO2 emissions. 
In the current chapter, CO2 emissions related to travel to the Lyngby campus are used to 
provide a methodology for setting the goals for a travel plan and also for measuring the 
outcome. Reduction of carbon emissions has made Copenhagen well known, thanks to the City 
of Copenhagen strategy to become carbon neutral by 20251. Although the targets in the climate 
plan are set for Copenhagen Municipality and do not apply to the Lyngby Taarbæk 
Municipality where DTU is located, targeting a reduction in carbon emissions could be a task 
to consider for all municipalities and bigger organisations. 
                                                 
1 Source: Copenhagen Climate Plan for 2025 http://kk.sites.itera.dk/apps/kk_pub2/pdf/983_jkP0ekKMyD.pdf 
 
==PAGE:78==
Planning the Initiatives 
 
66 
 
Another aspect that is important for planning the initiatives for a travel plan is the site 
investigation. Current parking facilities and traffic arrangement at Lyngby campus were 
investigated and the results are presented in the current chapter.  
6.1 CO2 emissions from daily travel to Lyngby campus 
The Greenhouse Gas Protocol Initiative is a multi-stakeholder partnership of businesses, non-
governmental organisations, governments, and others. The organisation is developing 
internationally accepted greenhouse gas accounting and reporting standards for businesses and 
promotes their broader adoption (World Resources Institute, 2000).  
The GHG Protocol Corporate Accounting and Reporting Standard provided by the GHG 
Protocol Initiative is used to make the CO2 calculations in the current chapter.   
The standard divides a company’s emissions into direct and indirect emissions – direct 
emissions are related to the sources that are owned, controlled and used by the company, while 
indirect emissions are the consequences of a company’s activities (World Resources Institute, 
2011). 
Emissions are further divided into three scopes, as presented in Figure 6-1 (World Resources 
Institute, 2011). 
Employee 
commutes 
and 
also 
business travel are categorised under 
Scope 3, which includes the indirect 
emissions. 
Even 
though 
the 
commuting transport is not always 
purchased or reimbursed by a 
company, it is calculated and 
reported by a company because it is 
a service that enables the company’s 
operations, similar to purchased or 
other acquired goods and services.  
Student travel cannot be included in the same emission category, since students can be 
considered customers of DTU and the emissions related to them is a cost resulting from the 
supply of services. There are examples where companies calculate and report emissions from 
customer transport when customer visits to the company have an important impact (World 
Figure 6-1 Overview of GHG Protocol scopes and emissions across the 
value chain 
==PAGE:79==
CHAPTER 6 
 
67 
 
Resources Institute, 2000). These impacts are categorised under the upstreaming activities in 
Scope 3. 
In the following section, emission calculations are performed for employee commutes and 
student travels to Lyngby campus based on “Category 7: Employee Commuting” (World 
Resources Institute, 2011). Two methodologies for calculations are provided in the standard – 
Option 1 as a Company-Specific Method for cases where the company-specific travel data is 
available and Option 2 as an Average-Data Method for cases where the data is not available. 
Option 1 is used in the current report. It must be noted that the standard presents the rules for 
calculations only; emission factors differ by countries and are not provided. 
Modes and emission factors 
All motorised modes from the survey were included in the calculation of total CO2 emissions 
per selected reporting period, as shown in Table 6-1. Since the survey defines the “carpooling” 
mode as “by car with others (e.g. children, colleagues)”, it is not possible to distinguish whether 
a respondent using carpooling was a driver or a passenger. Thus, an assumption was made for 
the current part of the study that carpooling comprises 50% of the CO2 emissions from car use 
– 50% of carpooled kilometres were taken into consideration in the calculations.  
Vehicle-specific emission factors in the calculations are based on the values provided for the 
UK2. The DEFRA database for emission factors is the best free source available for emission 
factors, and since there are no big differences in transport in the UK and in Denmark, the factors 
are used for estimating commuting-related CO2 emissions in Denmark.  
The emission factors for electric vehicles vary by country due to different sources for electricity 
production. Wilson (2013) has provided an analysis for electric vehicle emissions in selected 
countries. Since Denmark was not included in the study, the values for the UK were taken into 
account.  
Still, it can be argued that the energy mix of Denmark and the UK differ substantially; for 
example, 49% of energy production in Denmark and 18% of energy production in the UK are 
related to renewable sources with a low emission factor3. At the same time, 16% of energy in 
the UK is based on nuclear power, where the emission factor is also considered to be low4.  
                                                 
2 Data Source: Department for Environment Food & Rural Affairs, 
http://www.ukconversionfactorscarbonsmart.co.uk/ 
3 Data Source: Eurostat, http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/energy/data/main-tables 
 
4 Data Source: Energy UK, http://www.energy-uk.org.uk/energy-industry/electricity-generation.html 
==PAGE:80==
Planning the Initiatives 
 
68 
 
Based on DEFRA, the emissions related to producing 1 kWh in 2015 in the UK were 0.459 kg 
CO2. The same indicator for Denmark in 2014 was 0.401 kg CO25 
     
 
Table 6-1 Vehicle specific CO2 emission factors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total car and carpooling kilometres from the survey were divided into three categories based 
on the fuel type. The shares for fuel types were achieved from the survey (question 13) and are 
listed in Table 6-2 
When estimating total yearly kilometres travelled, the survey response rates were taken into 
consideration as follows: employees – sample 20%, students – sample 18%. 
The number of yearly working days in Denmark in 2016, 253 days was used in the calculations. 
Table 6-2 Fuel type shares 
Fuel type 
Share (employees) 
Share (students) 
Petrol 
70% 
79% 
Diesel 
29% 
20% 
Electricity 
1% 
1% 
Total distances travelled by vehicle type and the CO2 emissions from commuting and student 
travel were calculated using Formula 6-1 and Formula 6-2 (World Resources Institute, 2011): 
Vehicle/km or passenger/km = Σ (daily one-way distance travelled by vehicle type * 2 * number of 
commuting days per year) 
Formula 6-1 
tCO2e from commuting and student travel = Σ Total distances travelled by vehicle type x vehicle-specific 
emission factor 
Formula 6-2 
The calculations were made for a one-year reporting period. 
                                                 
 
5 Data Source: Energistyrelesen, http://www.ens.dk/info/tal-kort/statistik-nogletal/arlig-energistatistik 
Mode 
Unit 
tCO2e per unit 
Car (average petrol car) 
Km 
0.00019126 
Car (average diesel car) 
Km 
0.00018232 
Car (electric car) 
Km 
0.00018900 
Carpooling (average petrol car) 
Km 
0.00019126 
Carpooling (average diesel car) 
Km 
0.00018232 
Carpooling (electric car) 
Km 
0.00018900 
Bus (local) 
Passenger-km 
0.00007917 
Rail (local) 
Passenger-Km 
0.00005461 
Metro 
Passenger-Km 
0.00005461 
Motorbike 
Km 
0.00011966 
Moped 
Km 
0.00008814 
==PAGE:81==
CHAPTER 6 
 
69 
 
Total greenhouse gas emissions resulting from employee and student travel to Lyngby campus 
are presented in Table 6-3 and Figure 6-2. Even though the number of kilometres travelled by 
car is much lower among students, the biggest share of CO2 emissions still result from the car 
and carpooling trips for both students and employees, as shown in Figure 6-3 and Figure 6-4. 
Table 6-3 Distances travelled annually by different modes and CO2 emissions 
Mode 
Unit 
tCO2 per 
unit 
Employees 
Students 
Total 
Km 
tCO2
Km 
tCO2
Km 
tCO2e 
Car (petrol) 
Km 
0.00019126 
25 545 187 
4 886 
6 121 623 
1 171 
31 666 810 
6 057 
Car (diesel) 
Km 
0.00018232 
10 583 006 
1 929 
1 510 530 
275 
12 093 537 
2 205 
Car (electric) 
Km 
0.00018900 
364 931 
69 
79 502 
15 
444 433 
84 
Carpooling6 (petrol) 
Km 
0.00019126 
2 974 111 
569 
1 257 001 
240 
4 231 112 
809 
Carpooling (diesel) 
Km 
0.00018232 
1 232 132 
225 
310 169 
57 
1 542 301 
281 
Carpooling (electric) 
Km 
0.00018900 
42 487 
8 
16 325 
3 
58 812 
11 
Bus 
Pkm 
0.00007917 
10 716 321 
848 
18 262 080 
1 446 
28 978 401 
2 294 
Train 
Pkm 
0.00005461 
17 906 530 
978 
16 631 377 
908 
34 537 907 
1 886 
Metro 
Pkm 
0.00005461 
602 241 
33 
781 939 
43 
1 384 180 
76 
Motorbike 
Km 
0.00011966 
134 596 
16 
45 540 
5 
180 136 
22 
Moped 
Km 
0.00008814 
0 
0 
56 222 
5 
56 222 
5 
TOTAL 
 
 
70 101 544 
9 561 
45 072 306 
4 168 
115 173 850 
13 729 
 
                                                 
6 50% of carpooled kilometres are taken into account in the calculations for all fuel types 
Figure 6-2 Annual CO2 emissions from commuting and student travel 
==PAGE:82==
Planning the Initiatives 
 
70 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6-5 and Figure 6-6 list the values of annual CO2 emissions per employee/student in a 
work field group and study level. It can be seen that employees in the “tradesman” work field 
have the highest values for CO2 emissions per person. Similar values also follow for the 
management workers, technicians, and office workers. Travel-related annual CO2 emissions 
per student are lower than the lowest value among employees on all four study levels. 
Average CO2 emission per DTU employee is 1.47 tCO2 per year. In comparing this value with 
other organisations that have made their carbon footprint results public, it can be assumed that 
1.47 tCO2 per employee per year is an average performance. Since there is no relevant study 
on the topic and the methodologies that organisations have used for their calculations are 
usually not provided, the conclusion is speculative. 
 
Figure 6-3 Commuting-related CO2 emissions (employees)  
Figure 6-4 Travel-related CO2 emissions (students) 
Figure 6-6 CO2 emissions by work field (employees) 
Figure 6-5 CO2 emissions by study level (students) 
==PAGE:83==
CHAPTER 6 
 
71 
 
6.2 Targets for a travel plan 
Three options are provided to set the targets for a travel plan. Presented scenarios are examples 
for the methodology that can be used when setting the goals for reducing CO2 emissions. It is 
not the aim of the current project to propose the precise targets for the DTU travel plan. 
The biggest share of the greenhouse gas emissions results from car trips and the suggested 
targets are also related to regulating the car trips; the calculations are based on employees’ 
travel data. Three different measures are proposed for reducing the number of car trips – 
switching the trips to emission-free modes or cancelling the trips (Scenario 1), switching the 
trips to the bus (Scenario 2), and switching the trips to the train (Scenario 3). A reduction in 
CO2 emissions was calculated for all three cases and the results are presented in Figure 6-7; 
detailed calculations can be found in Appendix 4.  
 
Scenario 1 – car travel is switched to emission-free modes (walking, cycling) or the car 
trips are cancelled 
As shown in Figure 6-7, switching all car travel to emission-free modes or cancelling the trips 
would cause a 66% reduction in CO2 emissions. If the target for reducing CO2 emissions is 
for example 10% from the base year, 15% of kilometres travelled by car should be moved to 
emission-free modes or cancelled.  
 
 
 
Figure 6-7 Reduction in kilometres travelled by car and in CO2 emissions for three scenarios 
==PAGE:84==
Planning the Initiatives 
 
72 
 
Scenario 2 – car travel is switched to the bus 
It can be seen in Figure 6-7 that targeting a 10% reduction in CO2 levels from the base year 
requires 25% of the kilometres travelled by car to be switched to the bus. Moving all car trips 
to the bus would result in a 39% reduction in CO2 emissions. 
Scenario 3 – car travel is switched to the train 
21% of the kilometres travelled by car shall be switched to the train when targeting a 10% 
reduction in CO2 levels from the base year, as shown in Figure 6-7.  
Since the emission factor for the train is lower than for the bus, the share of kilometres travelled 
by car that shall be switched to the train is also lower than the share of car travel that shall be 
switched to the bus when targeting a 10% reduction in the CO2 emissions. When all car trips 
are switched to the train, then it is possible to achieve a 47% reduction in CO2 emissions. 
It is possible to create more scenarios based on an organisation’s interest, such as a scenario 
where different proportions of kilometres travelled by car are moved to several other modes. 
Selecting conditions for scenarios is closely related to an organisation’s modal split and the 
distances travelled by different modes. It is also important to know information about people’s 
travel behaviours. 
Table 6-4 presents the total kilometres travelled by car per living distance from the Lyngby 
campus. Based on the analysis in Chapter 3, it can be assumed that it is reasonable to target car 
trips taken from residential areas up to 10 km from Lyngby campus when promoting cycling.  
Table 6-4 Annual kilometres travelled by car from residential areas 
Living distance from Lyngby 
campus (km) 
Annual km travelled by car 
Employees 
Students 
Total 
1-10 
2 788 212 
774 180 
3 562 392 
11-20 
9 177 221 
2 206 059 
11 383 280 
21-30 
7 344 792 
1 738 515 
9 083 307 
31-40 
8 036 292 
1 432 992 
9 469 284 
41-50 
1 946 886 
177 100 
2 123 986 
>51 
6 501 442 
809 094 
7 310 536 
TOTAL 
35 794 845 
7 137 940 
42 932 784 
 
3.6 million kilometres are travelled annually from distances 1–10 km from the Lyngby campus. 
Upon switching all those car trips to cycling (Scenario 1), a 13% reduction in kilometres 
==PAGE:85==
CHAPTER 6 
 
73 
 
travelled by car would lead to a 9% reduction in CO2 emissions. When moving 50% of car 
trips from the same distance to emission-free modes, CO2 emissions would decrease by 4%. 
24 million kilometres were travelled annually by car from areas of residence up to 30 km from 
the Lyngby campus. Based on the analysis in Chapter 3, it is possible to make the conclusion 
that people are willing to take a maximum of 30-km bus trips.  
Moving all car trips made from residential areas up to 30 km from the campus to the bus 
(Scenario 2) would result in a 32% reduction in CO2 emissions. A 40% CO2 reduction would 
occur when moving all those car trips to the train (Scenario 3).  
By targeting 50% of the trips to be switched to the bus or train, the following reduction in CO2 
emissions would result: 16% when replacing the car with the bus, and 20% when replacing the 
car with the train. 
6.3 Evaluation of targets 
If the targets for a travel plan are based on greenhouse gas emissions, the evaluation of the 
performances shall also consider the same variable. 
Indicators could be used for evaluation purposes, as they are essential tools to make the notion 
of sustainability measurable. An indicator is a variable or a combination of variables selected 
to represent a certain wider issue or characteristic of interest (Gudmundsson, 2015).  
The indicators presented in Table 6-5 could be used to measure the effect of travel plan 
initiatives: 
Table 6-5 Indicators for performance measures 
Total Co2 emissions 
Car-related CO2 emissions 
1. tCO2e per (full-time) employee 
2. tCO2e per (full-time) employee in a work field 
group 
3. tCO2e per full-time student 
4. tCO2e per full-time student in a study level 
 
1. tCO2e per (full-time) employee 
2. tCO2e per (full-time) employee in a work field group 
3. tCO2e per full-time student 
4. tCO2e per full-time student in a study level 
5. Total car-driven km per (full-time) employee 
6. Total car-driven km per full-time student 
7. Average car tour length per (full-time) employee 
8. Average car tour length per full-time students 
 
==PAGE:86==
Planning the Initiatives 
 
74 
 
6.4 Overview of the campus site 
In the current part of the study three main aspects of the Lyngby campus are analysed – the 
road infrastructure and current car parking facilities compared to the estimated demand, the 
cycling infrastructure, and current bicycle parking facilities compared to the estimated demand 
and current services provided by public transport. 
The car parking places and bicycle parking places on campus were counted by the author on 
11–12.05.2016.  
Road network and car parking facilities 
DTU Lyngby campus is located north of the Copenhagen central area, with car access from the 
north through main roads E47, road No. 201, and road No. 16; car access from the south is 
through main roads E47, Copenhagen outer rings (Roads 02, 03 and 04), and road No 19. 
Typical traffic intensity on a workday morning on access roads to the Lyngby campus based 
on information from Google Maps is shown in Figure 6-8. Medium to heavy congestion is 
found on all smaller access roads and on all main access roads in the north-south direction. 
Traffic flows are directed towards Copenhagen in the morning and the south-north access roads 
to Lyngby campus by road Nos. 19 and E47 are not so heavily occupied. At the end of the 
working day the conditions reverse – roads in the south-north direction are more congested.  
Figure 6-8 Typical workday morning traffic intensity 
==PAGE:87==
CHAPTER 6 
 
75 
 
Estimated numbers of car trips arriving daily to the Lyngby campus and car parking places 
counted in four campus zones are presented in Table 6-6. The total number of parking places 
meets the expected demand, since the estimated number of car trips is smaller than parking 
places provided. 
It must be noted that counting was affected by construction work in zone 2 and the actual 
number of car parking places in zone 2 may be higher. 
Table 6-6 Daily car trips and parking places in campus zones 
Campus zone 
Daily car trips  
Parking 
places  
Employees 
Students 
Total 
Zone 1 
486 
89 
575 
857 
Zone 2 
454 
70 
524 
380 
Zone 3 
405 
148 
553 
1080 
Zone 4 
247 
53 
300 
593 
TOTAL 
1592 
360 
1952 
2910 
 
Bicycle infrastructure and bicycle parking facilities 
The cycling infrastructure is not 
well developed in the campus area; 
bicycle 
paths 
follow 
Anker 
Engelunds Vej and the streets 
around the campus, but in the 
campus 
area 
cycling 
is 
not 
prioritised or regulated with traffic 
management measures.  
The crossing over Anker Engelunds 
Vej (for Knuth-Winterfelds Alle, 
Nils Koppels Alle and Asmussens Alle) has no regulation for cyclists. Since the street area 
includes two lanes for cars and two cycling paths, it dangerous to cross it on bike. Perhaps it is 
meant for cyclists not to cross the intersection on bike but to use the pedestrian crossing next 
to the intersection. In reality, cyclists are crossing the intersection on bike and the traffic in the 
intersection should be better organised. 
Figure 6-9 Knuth-Winterfelds Alle crossing Anker Englelunds Vej. 
Source: Author 
==PAGE:88==
Planning the Initiatives 
 
76 
 
Comments in the survey also highlighted road maintenance during the winter period, which 
was considered insufficient for safe cycling. The general impression of traffic management in 
the campus area is not bicycle-friendly. 
The estimated number of bicycle trips arriving daily to the Lyngby campus and counted bicycle 
parking facilities in four campus zones are presented in Table 6-7. In zones 1 and 2 the 
estimated number of daily bicycle trips is higher than the parking places provided. 
Table 6-7 Daily cycling trips and parking places in campus zones 
Campus zone 
Daily cycling trips  
Parking 
places  
Employees 
Students 
Total 
Zone 1 
313 
446 
759 
745 
Zone 2 
250 
227 
477 
468 
Zone 3 
482 
618 
1100 
1265 
Zone 4 
290 
234 
524 
933 
TOTAL 
1335 
1524 
2859 
3411 
While counting bicycle parking places it was 
established that 85% of all parking facilities were 
simple bicycle parking stands, which do not 
provide protection from rainfall or additional 
security from theft. 15% of the parking stands 
were covered shelters. 
The parking stands used at Lyngby campus 
provide only the opportunity to lock the front 
wheel of a bicycle; it was observed that handrails 
were used for locking the frame of a 
bicycle when possible. 
Secured parking places were provided 
in zone 3 (in front of building 372) and 
in zone 2 (next to building 266). 
Access to these parking place was 
provided by a special key (zone 3) and 
by student card (zone 2). 
Figure 6-11 Secured bicycle parking in zone 3. Source: 
Author 
Figure 6-10 Cycle parking next to building 206. Source: Author 
==PAGE:89==
CHAPTER 6 
 
77 
 
It was also noted by the author 
that car parking was often 
prioritised more than bicycle 
parking. For example, the main 
entrance to the main building at 
Lyngby campus (101) clearly 
did not have enough cycle 
parking places, while most of 
the space in front of the 
building was filled with car 
parking 
places. 
Similar 
situation was noted in other 
three zones.  
The comments in the survey highlighted the fact that there are not enough facilities for 
changing/showering and drying wet clothes on the campus. These comments were made by 
both the students and employees. It is also known to the author that it is a common practice for 
students to hang wet clothes used for cycling in public toilets. 
Examples of comments from the survey made by Danish-speaking students: 
 
The problem is basically the weather. I do not want to cycle 35 km a day in the rain and headwind, alone 
and without company. Furthermore, there is no possibility of storing clothes at DTU in a personal locker. 
So the times I do cycle, I carry around a towel and clothes for changing all day. 
 
There is a need for changing rooms which students can use! 
 
I cycle from Nørrebro every day; it's super good but there is a lack of closets and shower facilities. Plus 
a covered bicycle parking so that my cycling helmet could hang on the bike without getting wet. This 
would make a huge difference !! :) 
Public transport network 
DTU Lyngby campus is located ca. 3 km from the Lyngby station where S-train lines A 
(Hillerød – Solrød Strand) and E (Holte – Køge) depart in both directions every 10 minutes. 
The distance between Lyngby station and DTU Lyngby campus is served by bus lines 180, 
181, 300S, and 190. 
 
 
Figure 6-12 Bicycles standing in front of building 101. Source: Author 
==PAGE:90==
Planning the Initiatives 
 
78 
 
Bus lines serving the Lyngby campus are listed in Table 6-8. 
Table 6-8 Bus lines serving Lyngby campus 
Bus line 
Departures 
15E Nørreport St – Søhuset 
Departures 12 min between 6:47–8:47, 10 min between 13:21–17:01. Travel 
time from Nørreport St to Lyngby campus is 22 min 
30E Ishoj St – DTU 
Departures 6–10 min between 6:06–8:51, 10 min between 13:26–17:05. 
Travel time from Ishoj to Lyngby campus is 42 min. 
40E Høje Taastrup St – 
Skodasbork St 
Departures 9–10 min between 6:05–9.16, 10 min between 14:14–17:24. 
Travel time from Høje Taastrup to Lyngby campus is 51 min 
95N Rådhuspladsen – 
Helsingør St 
Night bus, departure 60 min between 1:35–4:35 
150S Nørreport St – Kokkedal 
St 
Departure 5 min between 7:02–9:02. Travel time from Nørreport St to 
Lyngby campus is 12 min, and from Kokkedal to Lyngby campus 43 min. 
180 Lyngby St – DTU – 
Lyngby St 
Departure 5 min between 7:20–9:15. Travel time from Lyngby St to Lyngby 
campus is 8 min. 
181 Lyngby St – DTU – 
Lyngby St 
Departure 7–10 min between 11:50–17:21. Travel time from Lyngby St to 
Lyngby campus is 8 min. 
190 Holte St – Lyngby St 
Departure 30 min between 6:08–19.50. Travel time from Holte to Lyngby 
campus is 15 min. 
300S Ishoj St – Gl Holte 
Departure 10–13 min 
The number of bus trips or tours taken by the bus lines serving the Lyngby campus were not 
estimated in the current study due to the limitations of the survey data. The capacity analysis 
for these bus lines is also not included.  
Still, some comments on the survey highlighted that the buses are too crowded in the morning 
hours, do not follow the announced time schedule, and are uncomfortable due to hasty driving 
style. Examples from the survey comments provided by English-speaking students: 
 
“More express lines towards DTU would help a lot in rush hours; uncrowded buses allow for better 
utilisation of time on them. S-train line B only goes every 10 mins in rush hour, which is bad”. 
 
“I think overall the transportation is quite good, but in the morning it is extremely crowded!” 
 
“Lack 
of 
train/tram/metro 
connection 
to 
such 
a 
big 
campus 
is 
really 
surprising. 
Apart from that, the bus or bike is a solution to get to campus. If the bus is chosen, one can work/read. 
However, keeping in mind the skills of the bus drivers it is impossible. The bus drivers pull/break and 
accelerate very unevenly, which makes the bus journey very annoying”. 
A more detailed bus use study could be useful for improving bus services to Lyngby campus. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:91==
79 
 
 
 
Chapter 7 
7 Proposals initiatives for the DTU Lyngby campus 
travel plan 
Proposals initiatives for the DTU Lyngby campus 
travel plan 
In the current chapter proposals are made for initiatives that could be implemented in the DTU 
Lyngby campus travel plan. The basis for the proposals are the literature review on workplace 
mobility management, analysis of the survey data, results from the campus site investigation, 
and a reduction in CO2 emissions as a goal.  
As seen in Chapter 6, car trips created the biggest share of travel-related CO2 emission for both 
employees and students, and therefore car travel is targeted in the first place when proposing 
the initiatives. Those initiatives that could decrease commuting/study travel or decrease the 
number of car trips are prioritised.  
Analysis in Chapter 4 and 5 brought out several aspects that could encourage bicycle and public 
transport use. The results of the analysis and campus site investigation presented in Chapter 6 
are the main foundation for making the proposals for initiatives that could be implemented in 
the DTU travel plan.  
The proposed initiatives are presented in two main groups – initiatives that have a direct impact 
on car use and initiatives that encourage the use of alternative modes. Some of the initiatives 
proposed in the current chapter target only employees, since making changes in the working 
regime or supporting commuting are also measures for organisational management. Still, many 
of the initiatives consider students at the same time, and the communication and campaigning 
could be planned in a way that both employees and students are targeted. 
==PAGE:92==
Proposals Initiatives 
 
80 
 
7.1 Initiatives with a direct influence on car use 
7.1.1 Reducing the number of car parking places 
Reducing the number of car parking places provided at the Lyngby campus could be 
implemented in the DTU travel plan. The freed space could be used for improving bicycle 
parking facilities, especially close to the buildings where most of the cycle trips are made.  
This initiative does not reduce commuting/study travel, but it can reduce motorised travel and 
the number of car trips.  
The proposal is based on the results of the literature review in Chapter 3, where the experience 
of travel plan implementation in organisations proved that regulating the existing car parking 
facilities is the most effective measure for reducing car use. The free car parking places 
provided at the Lyngby campus can be seen as an indirect allowance to car users and planned 
limitations shall be taken as an attempt at better management of DTU’s land property. Still, the 
parking limitations will most probably create dissatisfaction. The literature review in Chapter 
2 also pointed out that all limiting initiatives shall be accompanied by other programmes to 
improve the availability and attractiveness of other modes. 
The measures that could be implemented to balance the parking limitation for DTU employees: 
 company bicycles for commuting from distances up to 10 km from the Lyngby campus; 
 company electric bicycles for commuting from distances 10–20 km from the Lyngby 
campus; 
 personalised parking places for carpoolers.    
Proper communication should be planned and provided to give a clear message to car users as 
to why the limitation is implemented and to make the alternatives offered attractive. 
7.1.2 Providing facilities for carpooling 
The promotion of carpooling could be implemented in the DTU travel plan. Carpooling reduces 
the number of commuting/study trips and therefore can reduce motorised travel and car use. 
Carpooling could not be fully regulated and controlled by DTU, since it is very much personal 
preferences that determine the selection of travel companions. An attractive and user-friendly 
web-based platform could be provided for those who are willing to share their car rides with 
others. Personalised car parking places could be provided for the carpooling drivers. 
==PAGE:93==
CHAPTER 7 
 
81 
 
Promotional communication should be planned and provided to make the measure more 
attractive. 
7.1.3 Managing employees’ working time 
When it comes to the management of working time, the flexible working regime that is mainly 
used for DTU employees’ working relations is not reducing the number of commuting trips.   
In the following, two working-time-related initiatives are proposed that could be implemented 
in the DTU travel plan. It must be pointed out that the initiatives that involve changes in the 
working regime are not merely transport-related measures, but also encourage changes in 
organisational culture and management principles. 
 Providing an option for teleworking, where employees can work from home or from 
other locations when personal attendance at the campus is not needed. Teleworking 
reduces the number of commuting trips and can reduce motorised travel and car use. 
Since teleworking is not a current practice at DTU, it requires further analysis regarding 
how to implement it most effectively. The increased independence and the focus on 
working results instead of procedures requires certain changes in the management as 
well.  
 Making use of the current flexible working regime with the aim of using it for a 
compressed working week and for adjusting the arrival times.  
The compressed working week is one of the measures that reduces the number of 
commuting trips; thus, it can also reduce motorised travel and the number of car trips.  
A compressed working week is best suited to employees who are working part-time, 
since full-time working hours are difficult to fulfil in less than five working days.  
Another option that comes with the flexible working regime is adjusting the arrival 
times. The analysis in Chapter 4 showed that most of the car trips reach Lyngby campus 
at 8 a.m., which is also peak time in the local traffic. Adjusting the time when a car trip 
is taken can reduce both the travel time and also the local congestion. Adjusting arrival 
times does not influence car use, but it can have positive effect on the local congestion. 
 
==PAGE:94==
Proposals Initiatives 
 
82 
 
7.2 Initiatives promoting the use of alternative modes 
7.2.1 Encouraging bicycle use 
Bicycle parking 
In Chapter 6 it was shown that the number of bicycle parking places provided at Lyngby 
campus does not meet the estimated daily demand in all campus zones. It was also pointed out 
that most of the bicycle parking facilities are simple, uncovered parking stands, which do not 
provide protection from rainfall and additional security from theft. Improvement of bicycle 
parking facilities could be implemented in the DTU travel plan. 
The initiative does not reduce the number of commuting/study trips, but can encourage more 
bicycle use and reduce motorised travel and car use. 
The Danish Cyclists’ Federation has worked out recommendations for planning bicycle 
parking. The amount of bicycle parking provided at an educational institution should be 0.4–
0.8 parking places per student and 0.4 parking places per employee1. Following this 
recommendation, DTU Lyngby campus should provide ca. 6300 bicycle parking places for 
students and employees.  Upon comparing the bicycle parking facilities presented in Chapter 
6 to the recommended figure, it can be seen that the number of parking places available is 
considerably lower than recommended. This recommendation could be considered when 
planning the bicycle parking facilities at the campus. 
Another recommendation provided by the Danish Cyclists’ Federation relates to the distance 
of bicycle parking from the entrance of a building and the time the parking is used. When the 
parking is used for 1.5–10 hours, the bicycle parking place should be located 10–30 m from 
the entrance of the building. This recommendation could be considered when planning the 
bicycle parking facilities at the campus. 
Comments in the survey highlighted the issue of bicycle theft, and security could be taken into 
consideration when improving the bicycle parking facilities at Lyngby campus. Different 
options for the bicycle parking could be provided based on the level of security they provide.  
                                                 
1 Data Source: http://www.cyklistforbundet.dk/Alt-om-cykling/Cykling/Parkering 
 
==PAGE:95==
CHAPTER 7 
 
83 
 
Individual bicycle lockers could be 
provided for those who are most 
concerned about the safety of their 
bicycles, and the service could be charged. 
Since it is a space-consuming method of 
bicycle parking, the number of lockers and 
their locations should be well-planned. 
The demand for individual bicycle lockers 
can be determined by providing the 
facility and monitoring its use. Comments 
in the survey highlighted the need for securing expensive bicycles, especially among 
employees. This could be taken into consideration when deciding the locations of the facilities; 
individual lockers could be located in every campus zone at a reasonable access distance from 
all buildings. An example of an individual bicycle locker is presented in Figure 7-1 (Cycle-
Works Velo-Safe Lockers installed at Antelope Park, Southampton, UK. Source: 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bicycle_locker) 
Lockable bicycle shelters could be 
provided for medium-secured bicycle 
parking, and the service could be charged. 
The lockable bicycle shelters could be 
provided for certain groups of employees 
or students (based on the main study/work 
location or based on the department) with 
limited access. If available for all users, 
then it should be accompanied with video 
security. When planning the locations of 
secured bicycle shelters, the bus stops on 
Motorway No. 47 and bus stops on Anker 
Engelunds Vej could be also considered. In those locations bus users could store their bikes for 
on-campus use. An example of a lockable bicycle shelter is provided in Figure 7-2 (Lockable 
bicycle shelter provided by Duo-Gard. Source: http://www.duo-gard.com/). The two secured 
parking places currently provided at the Lyngby campus are good examples and the same type 
of parking facilities could be provided for a variety of locations. 
Figure 7-1 Individual bicycle lockers 
Figure 7-2 Lockable bicycle shelter 
==PAGE:96==
Proposals Initiatives 
 
84 
 
Most of the other bicycle parking could be 
provided as unsecured bicycle shelters, 
where an option to use bicycle locks for the 
cycle frame is provided. The unsecured 
bicycle shelters are provided in a large variety 
depending on the availability of space. There 
are shelters that provide high capacity for 
parking bicycles in a small area. An example 
of an ordinary shelter is provided in Figure 
7-3 (Bicycle shelter provided by Langley 
Design Source: http://www.langleydesign.co.uk/). 
Bicycle sharing system 
The analysis in Chapter 5 pointed out that there is a demand for rental bicycles from the Lyngby 
station and also at the Lyngby campus. Establishing a bicycle sharing system could be 
implemented in the DTU travel plan. The initiative does not reduce the number of 
commuting/study trips, but can encourage more bicycle use and can reduce motorised travel 
and car use. 
A part of the bicycle fleet could be 
electric bicycles, and the service 
could be charged. The actual demand 
for 
rental 
bicycles 
could 
be 
determined by providing the facility 
and monitoring its use.  
There are several examples of how 
university campuses have established 
a 
bicycle 
sharing 
system. 
An 
example of the bicycle fleet from the University of Louisiana is presented in Figure 7-4 
(Campus bicycle sharing station at the University of Louisiana Lafayette campus. Source: 
http://www.louisiana.edu/news-events/news/20160321/university-launches-geaux-velo-bike-
share-program).  
Figure 7-3 Unsecured bicycle shelter 
Figure 7-4 Bicycle sharing station 
==PAGE:97==
CHAPTER 7 
 
85 
 
A bicycle sharing system could be bought in from a service provider or organised by the DTU 
as “DTU bicycles”. The rental stations could be located in every campus zone, next to the bus 
stops on the campus and at the Lyngby station. 
Bicycle service point 
The analysis in Chapter 5 found that it is important to have a bicycle service on campus. Since 
currently the facility is not provided, establishing at least one bicycle service point at the 
Lyngby campus could be implemented in the DTU travel plan. The initiative does not reduce 
the number of commuting/study trips, but could encourage more bicycle use and reduce 
motorised travel and car use.  
The service could be brought in from a service provider or organised by the DTU (volunteers, 
etc.). 
Dressing room facilities  
When setting the goal for more active cycle use, it is essential that facilities for showering, 
changing, and drying clothes are provided, and the analysis in Chapter 5 and comments in the 
survey confirmed this need. Improving the current service availability and quality could be 
implemented in the DTU travel plan. The initiative does not reduce the number of 
commuting/study trips, but may encourage more bicycle use and reduce motorised travel and 
car use. 
Introduction to cycling routes 
The analysis in Chapter 5 concluded that there is a need to introduce the cycling routes and 
paths among students, especially among international students. The introduction could also 
involve general rules for cycling in traffic. Denmark has a long cycling culture and it is assumed 
that Danes are used to cycling from their childhood. Many people coming from abroad have 
limited experience with cycling in traffic, and in order to overcome this obstacle an introduction 
to Danish cycling rules, cycling infrastructure, and other topic-related issues could be 
implemented in the DTU travel plan. The initiative does not reduce the number of 
commuting/study trips, but may encourage more bicycle use and reduce motorised travel and 
car use. 
User card for cyclists 
All bicycle-related services at the Lyngby campus could be provided based on a user card. The 
card could allow the access to the shared bicycles, to the secured parking facilities, to the 
==PAGE:98==
Proposals Initiatives 
 
86 
 
bicycle repair, and to the dressing rooms. Different services could be charged in different levels 
or provided for free. Detailed information about all services, the locations of facilities, and the 
service prices could be provided to all who acquire the card. Data from the operations made by 
cyclists using the card is a reliable source for analysis and for adjusting the services. 
Traffic management at Lyngby campus 
The campus area could be designed to be more human- than car-orientated, where the 
pedestrians and the cyclists are prioritised. It is definitely important to make close-distance car 
parking available to disabled people and business visitors, but easy access from a car parking 
lot to a work/study building for employees and students is less relevant. 
The bicycle traffic could be prioritised in the campus area, with a clear message that cyclists 
and their safety are important. On all minor roads in the campus area where car traffic is 
allowed the concept of a “Bicycle Street” (Cyklegade) could be implemented. 
The bicycle streets are functional 
concepts where the motorised traffic is 
calmed and cycling and cyclists are 
prioritised. It is a convenient way to 
provide bicycle-friendly facilities with 
a relatively low cost – the existing 
street sections are shared between 
vehicles and bicycles and do not 
require expensive reconstruction. An 
example of a bicycle street in Belgium is provided in Figure 7-5. 
Since accommodating cyclists and cars on the same street area includes safety risks, it is 
important to make the traffic regulation as clear as possible. The following aspects could be 
considered (Knjazeva, 2015): 
 In Denmark, official traffic signs E47 and E48 (cyklegade) mark the area where the whole 
street is reserved for cyclists, while motorised transport may or may not be allowed. In case 
motorised transport is allowed, their speed must follow the cyclists and not be higher than 
30 km/h. 
 The bicycle street area shall be recognised both by the cyclists and the car drivers, and 
traffic signs shall be accompanied by different pavement type (coloured pavement). 
 The traffic arrangement shall be clear when there is a point of conflict. 
Figure 7-5 Bicycle street in Belgium. Source: http://www.autofans.be 
==PAGE:99==
CHAPTER 7 
 
87 
 
7.2.2 Encouraging public transport use 
Since detailed analysis of the bus use for lines that provide service to the Lyngby campus is 
not a part of the current study, the suggestions for improving bus use quality are also not 
included. Based on the comments in the survey, it can be estimated that bus use is very much 
influenced by the service quality, since many comments highlighted the capacity problems, 
issues with departure time, and travel cost. Those factors are not controllable by DTU and thus 
the measures shouldn’t be part of the organisation’s travel plan. Cooperation could be 
organised with the bus service provider to make further analysis of the bus use and to improve 
the service quality. 
The previously described bicycle sharing system and also secured bicycle shelters close to the 
bus stops can contribute to more use of public transport. Using the rental bicycles or stored 
personal bicycles for travel between the Lyngby station and the campus and for moving around 
in the campus area can encourage more use of trains and buses. 
Providing information about travel cost  
Comments in the survey of students highlighted the high cost of travel by public transport. 
Some of the examples proved that students are not fully aware of the cheaper options for travel 
using the Danish “Ungdomskort”, where the monthly payment of 615 DKK2 allows unlimited 
travel between an area of residence and the place of study. Communicating the public transport 
travel cost to students could be implemented in the DTU travel plan.  
A summary of proposed initiatives that could be implemented in the DTU Lyngby campus 
travel plan are provided in Table 7-1. 
                                                 
2 Source: http://www.ungdomskort.dk/priser/ 
==PAGE:100==
 
 
Table 7-1 Summary of proposed initiatives for the DTU Lyngby campus travel plan 
Target 
Proposed initiative 
Reference in the report 
Contribution to the target (CO2 
reduction) 
Tools and actions 
Limiting car use 
Reducing the number 
of car parking places 
Chapter 3 – literature review  
Chapter 6 – CO2 emission 
calculations 
Chapter 6 – campus site 
investigation 
Medium – does not reduce commuting/study 
trips, can reduce car travel 
Limiting the number of marked 
car parking places in selected 
locations (close to the building 
entrances) 
Providing alternative measures 
for employees (company 
bicycles) 
Limiting 
commuting/study trips 
Promoting carpooling 
Chapter 3 – literature review 
Chapter 6 – CO2 emission 
calculations 
High – reduces commuting/study trips, can 
reduce motorised travel and car travel 
Implementing the information 
system for making ride 
agreements 
Limiting commuting 
trips 
Providing the option 
for teleworking 
Chapter 3 – literature review 
Chapter 6 – CO2 emission 
calculations 
High – reduces commuting trips, can reduce 
motorised travel and car travel 
Making changes in DTU 
working time regulations 
Limiting commuting 
trips 
Providing the option 
for a compressed 
workweek 
Chapter 3 – literature review 
Chapter 6 – CO2 emission 
calculations 
High – reduces commuting trips, can reduce 
motorised travel and car travel 
Providing relevant information 
Improving accessibility, 
relieving local 
congestion 
Adjusting the arrival 
times 
Chapter 4 – analysis 
Low – does not reduce commuting/study 
trips, does not reduce motorised travel and 
car travel, can reduce local congestion 
Providing relevant information 
Encouraging bicycle use 
Improving the bicycle 
parking facilities 
Chapter 5 – analysis  
Chapter 6 – campus site 
investigation 
Medium – does not reduce commuting/study 
trips, can encourage bicycle use and reduce 
motorised travel 
Installing individual bicycle 
lockers, lockable bicycle 
shelters, and covered bicycle 
parking stands 
==PAGE:101==
 
 
 
Target 
Proposed initiative 
Reference in the report 
Contribution to the target (CO2 
reduction) 
Tools and actions 
Encouraging bicycle use 
Establishing a bicycle 
sharing system 
Chapter 5 – analysis 
 
Medium – does not reduce commuting/study 
trips, can encourage bicycle use and public 
transport use, can reduce car travel 
Establishing a bicycle fleet and 
sharing stations 
Encouraging bicycle use 
Establishing a bicycle 
maintenance centre 
Chapter 5 – analysis 
 
Medium – does not reduce commuting/study 
trips, can encourage bicycle use and reduce 
motorised travel 
Establishing a service centre 
Encouraging bicycle use 
Improving the dressing 
room facilities 
Chapter 5 – analysis 
 
Medium – does not reduce commuting/study 
trips, can encourage bicycle use and reduce 
motorised travel 
Improving shower facilities,  
Providing enough personal 
lockers  
Providing clothes drying 
cabinets 
Encouraging bicycle use 
Establishing the user 
card for cycle services 
Chapter 3 – literature review 
Medium – does not reduce commuting/study 
trips, can encourage bicycle use and reduce 
motorised travel 
Implementing a user card system 
Encouraging bicycle use 
Improving the on-site 
cycling infrastructure 
Chapter 6 – campus site 
investigation 
Medium – does not reduce commuting/study 
trips, can encourage bicycle use and reduce 
motorised travel 
Implementing bicycle street 
traffic rules and traffic signs 
Installing coloured pavement on 
campus access streets 
Encouraging bicycle use 
Introducing the cycling 
rules and infrastructure 
Chapter 5 – analysis 
 
Medium – does not reduce commuting/study 
trips, can encourage bicycle use and reduce 
motorised travel 
Providing relevant information 
Encouraging public 
transport use 
Introducing the public 
transport cost structure, 
network, and 
availability 
Chapter 5 – analysis 
 
Medium – does not reduce commuting/study 
trips, can encourage public transport use and 
reduce car travel 
Providing relevant information 
==PAGE:102==
90 
 
7.3 Marketing the travel plan 
Internal marketing of the travel plan is an important part in the implementation process. Two 
objectives could be targeted for the marketing activities: 
 to provide relevant information for the target groups; 
 to motivate the target groups to make changes in their travel behaviours. 
On the most general level, all students and employees could be targeted when launching the 
travel plan as a concept. All good branding practices could be used to make the topic attractive 
– to create a slogan and logo for the project as a whole, etc. The positive image of the general 
message favours the implementation of measures that can firstly create dissatisfaction.    
It is also important to plan the right timing for launching the plan, it could be done before 
implementation of restrictive initiatives, but the time cap between delivering the general 
message and actual implementation of initiatives should not be too long. The marketing plan 
could be part of the travel plan to ensure that the communication is an on-going process 
supporting the travel plan implementation.   
All marketing actions should have a positive tone – messages should not be against car use, but 
for sustainable transport use. Travel habits, like all habits in general, are difficult to change and 
the car use restrictions (limiting the car parking places) should be communicated very carefully, 
since the initiative can cause opposition and negative reactions from car users. 
Communication channels should be planned for all target groups – DTU web-based 
information portals, direct mailing, presentations for group meetings, poster sessions, 
roadshows, etc.  
The proposed target groups with possible messages to communicate are listed in Table 7-2. 
The classification is based on the analysis in Chapter 3 and proposed initiatives for the travel 
plan in the current chapter. Initiatives that can reduce the number of commuting/study trips are 
prioritised. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:103==
 
 
Table 7-2 Target groups for internal marketing and possible communication messages 
Target group 
Possible message to communicate 
Associated initiatives  
All employees and students 
 
DTU as a leader in sustainable transport use 
 
There is a travel plan for DTU, the main 
principles regarding how the plan supports 
sustainable transport use 
 
Encouragement to support implementation of the 
plan 
 
Reducing the number of car parking places in favour of bicycle parking 
 
User card for bicycle users, bicycle sharing system and improved 
facilities for bicycle parking, bicycle maintenance and dressing rooms 
Employees – management 
working field  
(made the highest number of car 
trips and lowest number of 
bicycle trips per employee in a 
work field group) 
 
Being a role model for other employees and 
students in sustainable transport use  
 
Carpooling 
 
Teleworking 
 
Compressed working week 
 
Secured bicycle parking facilities 
 
Improved dressing room facilities 
 
Bicycle sharing system 
Employees – all car users 
 
Reducing car use 
 
Carpooling 
 
Teleworking 
 
Compressed working week 
 
Secured bicycle parking facilities 
 
Improved dressing room facilities 
 
Bicycle sharing system 
Employees – car users living up 
to 20 km from the Lyngby 
campus 
 
To replace the car with (electric) cycling 
 
Reduced car parking places and company bicycles for commuting 
 
Secured bicycle parking facilities 
 
Improved dressing room facilities 
 
Bicycle sharing system 
==PAGE:104==
 
 
 
Target group 
Possible message to communicate 
Associated initiatives  
Employees and students – bicycle 
users 
 
There is a user card for bicycle users that allows 
access to cycling-related services on the campus 
 
User card for bicycle users 
 
Secured bicycle parking facilities 
 
Improved dressing room facilities 
 
Bicycle sharing system 
Employees and students – bicycle 
users 
 
Traffic management at the campus prioritises 
bicycle users 
 
Bicycle street implementation 
Students – bicycle users 
 
Find the optimal cycling route from the area of 
residence to the Lyngby campus 
 
Information about bicycle routes and paths to the Lyngby campus 
International students 
 
Cycling is a good way to get around in Denmark 
 
Information about Danish cycling rules and good practices when cycling 
in traffic 
 
Information about bicycle routes and paths to the Lyngby campus 
Employees and students – bus and 
train users 
 
Continuous tours from the train station and from 
the bus stops could be made by shared bicycles 
 
Bicycle sharing system 
Students – public transport users 
 
There is a student travel car for a cheaper option 
to travel by public transport 
 
Information about the travel price and application procedure 
Employees and students – all car 
users 
 
Awareness of the travel time – adjusting the 
journey timing, checking the travel time for 
alternative modes 
 
Information about travel time calculations at peak and off-peak times in 
traffic 
 
Information about travel time comparisons for alternative modes 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:105==
93 
 
 
Chapter 8 
 
8 Discussion and conclusion 
Discussion and conclusion 
8.1 Results of the project 
The current master’s project focussed on the process of developing a workplace travel plan at 
a university campus with the main objective of proposing initiatives that could be implemented 
in the DTU Lyngby campus travel plan. 
In order to fulfil the objective, the following activities were performed: 
 a literature review on the theoretical aspects of workplace mobility management and on 
the practical cases where mobility plans were implemented;  
 a travel behaviour analysis based on the data from the mobility survey of DTU 
employees and students; 
 a methodology for setting the goals for a travel plan was proposed; 
 a site investigation at the Lyngby campus to determine the current traffic arrangement 
and parking facilities. 
Theoretical aspects of workplace mobility management were obtained from the literature 
review. In Europe, the practice of implementing workplace mobility management in 
organisations has the longest history in the UK; data based on the UK experience were also 
used in many of the analyses reviewed in the current project. Studies based on the experience 
of The Netherlands and Belgium were also reviewed. 
The experience of travel plan implementation claimed that it was possible to reduce the single-
use passenger car as a commuting mode by 15–20% in an organisation. It was also discovered 
that the most efficient measure used in the travel plans was the regulation of parking facilities 
==PAGE:106==
Results and Discussion 
 
94 
 
by limiting the number of free parking places or charging for parking. High bicycle use in 
organisations was linked to initiatives like covered/secured bicycle parking, dressing rooms, 
and financial allowances. At the same time, there were critical studies carried out on the 
methodology used for providing the above-mentioned results. It was concluded that there is no 
scientifically proven evidence to claim that parking regulation is the most influential measure 
in reducing car use. 
The travel behaviour analysis in the current project was performed in two parts. The first part 
aimed at studying the general mode use of DTU employees and students, the origins of trips, 
and the trip distribution at the Lyngby campus. In the second part more detailed analysis was 
performed on car and bicycle use among DTU employees and students. 
Modal split for DTU employees and students was presented in three different ways – based on 
the number of people using a mode, on the number of trips taken by a mode, and the number 
of trips taken by a main mode. In using the values from the modal split based on the number 
of trips taken by a mode, it was shown that the most-used mode among employees was the car 
(23%), followed by the bus (21%), bicycle (20%), and train (18%). Students used the bus most 
often (31%), followed by the bicycle (26%) and train (21%). Car use among students was at 
the low level of 6%. 
Most travel by students was made from the Copenhagen central area and municipalities 
neighbouring Lyngby-Taarbæk Municipality, which made the average distance travelled 
relatively short. Commuting trips made by employees were more spread to the municipalities 
lying north of Lyngby-Taarbæk Municipality, and the average trip length was also longer than 
that of the students. 
45% of students and 38% of employees used cycling from their areas of residence up to 10 km 
from the Lyngby campus. At the same time, 28% of car travel made by employees and 7% 
made by students also originated up to 10 km from the Lyngby campus. 
The Lyngby campus was mainly visited on working days by both students and employees, with 
zone 1 and zone 3 in the campus receiving more commuting and study trips than zones 2 and 
4. Both students and employees arrived to the campus between 7–9 am, with peak arrival time 
at 8 am.  
When analysing the car and bicycle use, the main interest was on the trips that arrived to the 
Lyngby campus. Based on the sample, the number of car and bicycle trips that arrived to the 
campus was estimated, and the distribution of the trips in four campus zones was also defined. 
==PAGE:107==
CHAPTER 8 
 
95 
 
The greatest number of car trips that arrived to the Lyngby campus originated from the 
residential areas 11–20 km from the campus. Most of the bicycle trips were made from the 
residential areas located 1–5 km from the campus. 
Based on the field of work, management workers made the highest number of car trips and the 
lowest number of bicycle trips per employee. Car use was also relatively high among 
technicians and office workers. Bicycle use, on the other hand, was higher among knowledge 
workers and master’s and Phd students. 
The most important reason as to why the car was used by employees who made car trips to the 
Lyngby campus was the travel time – the car was considered the quickest mode. The second 
most important reason listed was flexibility. Students found that cycling could increase if a 
bicycle maintenance centre and more covered bicycle parking places were provided. Those 
employees who used a car to reach the Luyngby campus found the most important options for 
improving the cycling level to be the cash-intensive and improved showering/changing 
facilities. 
In order to plan the initiatives for the DTU travel plan, a campus site investigation was carried 
out. The number of car and bicycle parking places provided were counted and the general traffic 
arrangement in the campus area was assessed.  
It was discovered that the estimated demand for car parking has been met – there are enough 
parking places compared to the estimated number of car trips arriving to the Lyngby campus. 
The bicycle parking provided, on the other hand, was lower than the estimated demand in two 
campus zones. The current bicycle parking places do not provide good options for secured 
parking: most of the parking places were simple parking stands and only 15% of the stands 
were covered shelters. There were two secured parking areas for a limited number of bicycles 
in zone 2 and zone 3. The current traffic arrangement in the campus area does not favour 
cyclists.  
Based on the available information, one of the objectives as to why the travel plan development 
process was initiated at DTU was the reduction in travel-related greenhouse gas emissions. 
Therefore, a reduction in CO2 emissions was used as a target when proposing a methodology 
for setting goals for the travel plan in the current project. Three scenarios were provided, 
showing how the travel-related CO2 emissions decrease when switching car trips for emission-
free modes, when switching car trips for the bus, and when switching car trips for the train. 
==PAGE:108==
Results and Discussion 
 
96 
 
As a result of the literature review, the travel behaviour analysis, and the campus site 
investigation, 13 initiatives that could be implemented in the DTU Lyngby campus travel plan 
were proposed. Each of the initiatives was assessed based on how it could contribute to the 
objective of the travel plan. 
The biggest impact on the reduction of CO2 emissions is from initiatives that could decrease 
the number of commuting trips; in the current project these are initiatives related to work time 
regulations – a compressed working week and teleworking. When proposing initiatives that 
could increase cycling, the security of the bicycle parking was considered an important aspect. 
A bicycle sharing system at the Lyngby campus and cycle user card were also proposed in the 
current project. 
The target groups for internal marketing were also suggested, along with possible 
communication messages. The target groups were suggested based on the result of the travel 
behaviour analysis. 
8.2 Limitations 
There are several aspects that could influence the outcome of the project, which will be 
discussed in the following part. 
Survey data 
The travel survey of DTU employees and students was carried out in February 2016, and the 
timing of the survey most probably had a significant influence on mode choice. The shares for 
cycling are probably underestimated, and the shares of motorised travel are probably 
overestimated compared to the warmer periods of the year. Still, the results of the survey are 
relevant for approximately 5 months per year (November to March). 
The bias in the shares of bicycle use should be taken into consideration when planning the 
amount of bicycle parking, since the maximum demand for parking places is higher than 
estimated in the current study. 
The data regarding modes used and distances travelled for weekly travel (question 6) did not 
enable estimation of the number of trips taken by different modes that arrived to the final 
destination – Lyngby campus. 
Estimation of the number of car trips that arrived to the campus in the current study is most 
probably accurate. Car travel usually starts from the place of residence, and if the car is used 
==PAGE:109==
CHAPTER 8 
 
97 
 
in combination with other modes than walking within the tour, then it is most probably a park-
and-ride type of travel. 
Estimation of the number of bicycle trips in the current study is, on the other hand, more prone 
to biases. All bicycle trips taken as an only mode and the tours that consisted of bicycle use in 
combination any other mode than bus were estimated to arrive to the Lyngby campus. This is 
very a broad assumption and it must be taken into consideration that the number of bicycle 
trips that arrived to the Lyngby campus could have been overestimated. 
The data structure did not enable estimation of the number of bus trips arriving to the Lyngby 
campus and the number of train trips arriving at Lyngby station. Due to this, a useful analysis 
on the use of public transport was not included in the current study.  
Questions 18–21 in the survey were addressed to discover the reasons why a car was used and 
what options could increase the use of alternative modes. Providing selected reasons/options 
for the answers – as was proposed in the survey – does not give the best possible outcome.  
Planning the initiatives 
Since the project represents an individual study, which was not performed in cooperation with 
the management of DTU, the main goal for the travel plan development process was selected 
based on available information. Reduction of travel-related CO2 emissions is generally a good 
indicator for evaluating transport planning measures; still, other goals could be considered 
when targeting the change in mode use (number of parking places provided, lowest possible 
travel time, etc.). Thus, more comprehensive planning based on the objective for the travel plan 
could be performed. 
When planning the initiatives for workplace mobility management, it is usually important to 
analyse the current polices and strategies related to travel regulation in the organisation. An 
analysis of DTU management strategies is not included in the current study. 
The CO2 emission factors used in the calculations in Chapter 6 are based on the values 
proposed for the UK and could differ from the emission factors in Denmark. When comparing 
the emissions related to the production of 1 kWh in Denmark and in the UK, it was discovered 
that the values were 0.459 kg CO2 in the UK in 2015 and 0.401 kg CO2 in Denmark in 2014. 
The conclusion was made that the results are almost equivalent and the use of UK emission 
factors in the calculations for Denmark is well-grounded. Electricity is not only used as a fuel 
for electric cars, the shares of which were relatively small in the modal splits, but also for the 
metro and partly for the train (S-train). 
==PAGE:110==
Results and Discussion 
 
98 
 
8.3 Conclusion 
Mode-use analysis in the current study proved that a great share of employees and students at 
DTU are already applying sustainable transport behaviours. The most alarming indicator, car 
use among employees, was 23% of all modes used, which is still rather low compared to most 
European cities1. It is also lower than the car use in Copenhagen, based on the data for 2008–
2010, where car use represented 29% of all modes used for commuting and visiting educational 
institutions.2 
Cycling, on the other hand, had a relatively high share of total mode use: it was 20% of all 
modes used among employees and 26% of all modes used among students. The fact that 
average residential distance from the Lyngby campus for both students and employees was 
relatively long (18 km for employees and 13 km for students), such high bicycle use is 
definitely positive. 
As expected, many of the bicycle trips were made from places of residence close to the Lyngby 
campus. Unfortunately, there were also many car trips taken from close distances – such a high 
share of car trips made from Lyngby-Taarbæk and the neighbouring municipalities among 
employees was definitely not expected from the analysis and a change in car use could be 
targeted. Bicycle use from close distances to the Lyngby campus could be higher among 
employees. However, when purely focussing on a reduction of CO2 emissions, the expected 
effects would not be very high when focussing on short distances. Longer car trips from 
residential areas located 11–40 km from the Lyngby campus should be switched to transport 
modes with a lower emission factor in order to obtain the greatest effect in reduction of CO2 
emissions. 
Sustainable development, including sustainable transport, is the object of studies in many DTU 
courses. Launching a travel plan aimed at more sustainable travel among employees and 
students would be a good opportunity for the university to establish a reputation as a leader in 
applying sustainable travel principles in practice. A well-marketed and branded workplace 
travel plan could be a part of DTU’s image. 
                                                 
1 Data Source: EPOMM modal split details in European cities, 
http://www.epomm.eu/tems/result_cities.phtml?more=1 
 
2 Data Source: Cycling Embassy of Denmark, http://www.cycling-embassy.dk/2012/01/20/good-better-best-the-
city-of-copenhagens-bicycle-strategy-2011-2025/ 
 
==PAGE:111==
99 
 
References 
Bamberg, S., & Möser, G. (2007). Why are work travel plans effective? Comparing conclusions from narrative 
and meta-analytical research synthesis. Transportation, 34(6), 647–666. 
Banister, D. (2008). The sustainable mobility paradigm. Transport Policy, 15(2), 73–80.  
Black, C., & Schreffler, E. (2010). Understanding Transport Demand Management and Its Role in Delivery of 
Sustainable Urban Transport. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research 
Board, 2163(2163), 81–88. 
British Sky Broadcasting Ltd to EPOMM. (2010). Pan-European workplace mobility plan award 2010 
application form (Employers). 
Cairns, S., Newson, C., & Davis, A. (2010). Understanding successful workplace travel initiatives in the UK. 
Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice, 44(7), 473–494.  
Cairns, S., Sloman, L., Newson, C., & Anable, J. (2004). Smarter choices-changing the way we travel. Final report 
of the research project: “The influence of soft factor interventions on travel demand.” Final Report of the 
Research Project: “The Influence of Soft Factor Interventions on Travel Demand,” 379. 
City of Copenhagen, Technical and Environmental Administration, T. city of C. (2011). Good , Better , Best - the 
City of Copenhagen’s bicycle strategy for 2011-2025. 
Dalkmann, H., & Brannigan, C. (2007). Sustainable Transport: A Sourcebook for Policy-makers in Developing 
Cities. Available at: http://www.gtkp.com/assets/uploads/20091123-095443-1692-5e_TCC.pdf, 509–510.  
European Commission. (2009). Action Plan on Urban Mobility, 1 – 13. 
Favre, B. (2014). Introduction to Sustainable Transports. Wiley-ISTE. 
Federal Highway Administration. (2004). Mitigating Traffic Congestion - The Role of Demand-Side Strategies. 
Gueaco, C. (2012). Mobility Management in Denmark. World Transport, Policy & Practice, 18(April), 1–37. 
Heathrow Airport Ltd to EPOMM. (2010). Pan-European workplace mobility plan award 2010 application form 
(Networks). 
Hills, P. (1996). What is induced traffic? Transportation, 23(1), 5 – 16.  
Hine, J., Rye, T., & Hulse, M. (2000). Using Land-use Planning to Manage Transport Demand: A survey of 
Scottish experience. Local Environment, 5(1), 33–53.  
Høj, J. (2011). Mobility Management Monitors Denmark 2011. EPOMM Plus - Partners Learning Urban 
Sustainability. 
Knjazeva, H. (2015). Bicycle Streets - Paper for the Course 13352 in DTU Transport 
Korver, W., Pauwels, H., & Bv, G. C. (2010). Policy Evaluation Taskforce Mobility Management. 
Kristensen, N., B. (2014). Mobility, Accessibility, Movability - lecture notes from course 13106. 
==PAGE:112==
100 
 
Loo, B. P., & Chow, S. Y. (2006). Sustainable Urban Transportation: Concepts, Policies, and Methodologies. 
Journal of Urban Planning and Development, 132(2), 76–79. 
McCarthy, P. S. (2001). Transportation economics: theory and practice, a case study approach. Blackwell. 
Merck Serono S.A. to EPOMM. (2009). Pan-European workplace mobility plan award 2009 application form 
(Employers). 
Metz, F. (2011). Mobility Management Monitors Netherlands 2011. EPOMM Plus - Partners Learning Urban 
Sustainability. 
Newson, C., & Cairns, S. (2002). Making Travel Plans Work. Lessons from UK case studies. UK Department of 
Transport, 95. 
Nijland, L., & Dijst, M. (2015). Commuting-related fringe benefits in the Netherlands: Interrelationships and 
company, employee and location characteristics. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice, 77, 
358–371.  
Roby, H. (2010). Workplace travel plans: past, present and future. Journal of Transport Geography, 18(1), 23–
30.  
Rye, T. (1999). Employer Transport Plans - A case for Regulation. Transport Reviews, 19(1), 13–31.  
Rye, T. (2002). Travel plans: Do they work? Transport Policy, 9(4), 287–298.  
Rye, T., & Ison, S. (2012). The implementation and effectiveness of transport demand management measures: An 
international perspective. Implementation and Effectiveness of Transport Demand Management Measures: 
An International Perspective, 1 – 262. 
Schiller, B. K. (2010). An introduction to sustainable transportation: policy, planning and implementation. 
Earthscan. 
Transport for London. (2005). Business on the Move: Travel Planning is the Smart Choice for London 
Businesses,. In https://tfl.gov.uk/info-for/media/press-releases/2005/april/business-on-the-move-travel-
planning-is-the-smart-choice-for-london-businesses (accessed 01.03.2016). 
Transport for London, & Mayor of London, T. for L. (2009). Guidance for workplace travel planning for 
development. 
Van Malderen, L., Jourquin, B., Thomas, I., Vanoutrive, T., Verhetsel, A., & Witlox, F. (2012). On the mobility 
policies of companies: What are the good practices? The Belgian case. Transport Policy, 21, 10–19.  
Vanoutrive, T. (2014). Workplace travel plans: can they be evaluated effectively by experts? Transportation 
Planning and Technology, 37(8), 757–774. 
Vanoutrive, T. (2010). Mobility management measures by employers: overview and exploratory analysis for 
Belgium. European Journal of Transport and Infrastructure Research, 10(2), 121 – 141. 
Whitelegg, J. (2012). Quality of Life and Public Management. Quality of Life and Public Management: Redefining 
Development in the Local Environment. Routledge. 
==PAGE:113==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX 1 
Survey questionnaires 
 
==PAGE:114==
 
102 
 
Questionnaire for students: 
Question 1 
Consider the past seven days.  Did you go to DTU Lyngby campus or study somewhere else?  More than one 
mark can be made if you studied in several locations during one day.  
 
Visited DTU Lyngby 
campus 
Studied from 
home 
Studied at another 
address 
Didn't 
study 
Monday 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
Tuesday 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
Wednesday 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
Thursday 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
Friday 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
Saturday 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
Sunday 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
 
Question 1A 
Have you travelled between DTU Lyngby and other campuses (e.g. DTU Ballerup) in the past seven days? 
 
(_1) Monday 
 
(_2) Tuesday 
 
(_3) Wednesday 
 
(_4) Thursday 
 
(_5) Friday 
 
(_6) Saturday 
 
(_7) Sunday 
 
(_99) No travel to other campuses 
Question 4 
How often can you go by car to your place of study? (This includes situations where you do not actually use the 
car, but could if you wanted) 
 
(_1) 5 or more days a week 
 
(_2) 3-4 days a week 
 
(_3) 1-2 days a week 
 
(_4) 1-3 days a month 
 
(_5) More infrequently 
 
(_6) Never 
Question 5 
How have you travelled to DTU Lyngby campus over the past 7 days?   Please select all the means of transport 
that have been part of your journey. 
 
(_1) Walking 
 
(_2) Cycling 
 
(_3) Electric bicycle 
 
(_4) By car alone 
 
(_5) By car with others (e.g. children, colleagues) 
==PAGE:115==
 
103 
 
 
(_6) S-Bus 
 
(_7) Other bus 
 
(_8) Train 
 
(_9) Metro 
 
(_10) Motorbike 
 
(_11) Moped 
 
(_12) Other, please state: 
Question 6 
How far have you travelled using these different means of transport on your journeys to DTU Lyngby campus? 
Please state how many kms you have driven/biked/walked for each day.   Remember that walking is often part 
of the journey when you travel by bus or train. Only consider your journey from home to DTU Lyngby campus. 
Write '0' if you haven't used a mean of transport that day.     If you are unsure of the journey length, use the 
link <a href='http://map.krak.dk/m/S7pRi' target='_blank'> <span style='color:blue; text-
decoration:underline;'>here</span></a> and click on 'Ruteplan'. 
 
Monday 
Tuesday 
Wednesday 
Thursday 
Friday 
Saturday 
Sunday 
Walking 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
Cycling 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
Electric bicycle 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
By car alone 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
By car with others 
(e.g. children, 
colleagues)
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
Bus 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
Train 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
Metro 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
Motorbike 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
Moped 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
{#q5_._12} 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
 
Question 7 
When did you arrive at DTU Lyngby campus and approximately how long did the journey take?   Please answer 
as precisely as possible for your arrival and journey times for the past 7 days. 
1. 
(_1) Monday 
2. 
(_2) Tuesday 
3. 
(_3) Wednesday 
4. 
(_4) Thursday 
5. 
(_5) Friday 
==PAGE:116==
 
104 
 
6. 
(_6) Saturday 
7. 
(_7) Sunday 
Question 8 
How long did it take to travel from home to DTU?   Please state the time for the entire journey from door to 
door, including any stops/errands on the way. (Please state the journey time in minutes)    
Question 9 
Did you have any stops/errands on the journey? 
 
(_1) Yes 
 
(_2) No 
Question 9a 
In which DTU building did your day begin? 
 
 
Monday 
Tuesday 
Wednesday 
Thursday 
Friday 
Saturday 
Sunday 
 
Question 10 
In general, how satisfied are you with your transport to DTU Lyngby campus? 
 
(_1) Very dissatisfied (- -) 
 
(_2) Dissatisfied ( - ) 
 
(_3) Neither satisfied nor dissatisfied ( 0 ) 
 
(_4) Satisfied ( + ) 
 
(_5) Very satisfied ( + + ) 
Question 11 
Which of these means of transport have you used for transport between DTU Lyngby campus and other 
campuses over the past 7 days? 
 
(_1new) Walking 
 
(_2) Bicycle 
 
(_4) Car 
 
(_7) Taxi 
 
(_8) Bus/train passenger 
 
(_10) Other, please state: 
Quetsion 12 
Consider your transport between DTU Lyngby campus and other campuses/educational institutions over the 
past 7 days.   How far have you travelled between campuses using the different means of transport.  Please 
state how many kms you have driven/biked each day.   Write '0' if you haven't used the mean of transport that 
==PAGE:117==
 
105 
 
day.  If you are unsure of the journey length, use the link <a href='http://map.krak.dk/m/S7pRi' 
target='_blank'> <span style='color:blue; text-decoration:underline;'>here</span></a> and click on 'Ruteplan'. 
 
 
 
Monday 
Tuesday 
Wednesday 
Thursday 
Friday 
Saturday 
Sunday 
 
Bicycle 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
 
Car 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
 
Taxi 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
 
Bus/train 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
 
{#q11_._10} 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
 
 
Question 13 
If you drive by car from your home to your place of study (as driver or passenger), which type of fuel does the 
car use?   (Your answer enables the transport CO2 emissions to be calculated) 
 
(_1) Petrol/Gasoline 
 
(_2) Diesel 
 
(_3) Electricity 
 
(_4) Don't know 
 
(_5) Other 
Question 14 
Is the car privately owned or a carsharing car? (Your answer helps to evaluate the importance of new car 
concepts). 
 
(_1) Privately owned/leased 
 
(_3) Shared car or city car 
 
(_4) Other, please state: 
 
(_5) Don't know 
Question 15 
When you go by car from home to your place of study, are there other persons travelling with you in the car?   
I travel with... (Please also answer this question if only part of your journey is by car with others.)   You can give 
more than one answer... 
 
(_1) Spouse/partner 
 
(_2) Child/children/parents 
 
(_3) Fellow student(s) 
 
(_4) I always drive alone 
 
(_5) Other, please state: 
Question 16 
When you drive to your place of study, how often do you experience that...  
 
Every 
time 
Often 
Sometimes 
Rarely 
Never 
Don't 
know 
Finding a parking space at DTU is difficult? 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
You have to park outside DTUs area? 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
==PAGE:118==
 
106 
 
It takes a long time to get  to DTU in the 
morning ? 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
It takes a long time to get out from DTU at 
the end of the working day ? 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
It takes a long time to get on the main 
road network from DTU? 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
 
Question 17 
To what extent do you agree or disagree with the following statements regarding cars and parking?   
 
Completely 
disagree 
Disagree 
Neither 
agree nor 
disagree 
Agree 
Completely 
agree 
Don't 
know 
Generally, I am satisfied 
with the parking 
conditions at DTU 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
Generally, I'm satisfied 
with the conditions of the 
access roads to DTU 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
 
Question 18 
To what extent do you agree with the statements:   It influences whether I go by car to my place of study (as a 
driver or passenger) that...    
 
Completely 
disagree 
Disagree 
Neither 
disagree nor 
agree 
Agree 
Completely 
agree 
Don't 
know 
It's quickest 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
It's cheapest 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
It's flexible 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
It's too far to bike 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
I have errands/stops on 
the trip or when I go 
back 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
I need the car during the 
day 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
It's too complicated to 
take the bus and train 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
Everyone else I know 
takes the car 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
==PAGE:119==
 
107 
 
I'm used to taking the 
car 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
I get to decide who I 
travel with 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
I enjoy driving by car 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
The weather is bad 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
Question 19 
What could make you use carpooling more often to get to your place of study?   If you already carpool every 
day, what would make it more attractive?   I would use carpooling more often if... 
 
Completely 
disagree 
Disagree 
Neither 
disagree 
nor agree 
Agree 
Completely 
agree 
Not 
relevant/already 
the case 
I got help to find 
others to drive with 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
We share the cost 
of travelling 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
I was guaranteed 
transport home if 
the shared journey 
was cancelled 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
There was a central 
designated car park 
for cars where 
journeys were 
shared 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
I got a cash 
incentive to drive 
with others 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
I had more 
predictable meeting 
hours 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
I could drive with 
someone I know 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
I could drive in my 
own car 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
 
Question 20 
What would make you take bus and train more often to your place of study, or for travel between campuses?   
If you take the bus and train every day, what would make it more attractive?   I would take the bus or train 
more often if...   
==PAGE:120==
 
108 
 
 
Completely 
disagree 
Disagree 
Neither 
disagree 
nor agree 
Agree 
Completely 
agree 
Not 
relevant/already 
the case 
There was a bus 
stop/station closer 
to my place of 
study 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
I got better 
information about 
the timetable, 
delays etc. 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
I could borrow a 
bicycle by the 
station/bus stop 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
I received personal 
guidance about 
travelling by train 
and bus 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
It was easier to 
work on the 
journey by 
bus/train 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
There was a direct 
bus/train to my 
place of study 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
The journey by 
bus/train was 
shorter 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
It was cheaper 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
 
Question 21 
What would make you go by bicycle more often to your place of study or for trips between campuses?   If you 
already bike, what would make it more attractive?   I would bike more if ...   
 
Completely 
disagree 
Disagree 
Neither 
disagree 
nor agree 
Agree 
Completely 
agree 
Not 
relevant/already 
the case 
There was covered 
bicycle parking by 
my place of study 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
There was covered 
parking by the bus 
stop/station 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
==PAGE:121==
 
109 
 
There was bicycle 
parking by my place 
of study 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
There was locked 
bike parking by the 
station/bus stop 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
There were better 
changing and 
showering facilities 
at my place of study 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
There was a bicycle 
service at my place 
of study 
(maintenance and 
repairs) 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
I was given a cash 
incentive to bike 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
I could borrow a 
bicycle at the 
station/bus stop 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
I could bike with a 
friend or fellow 
student 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
There were more 
and/or better bike 
paths going to my 
place of study 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
I received 
information on bike-
ways and routes 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
I received guidance 
on how to bike in 
traffic 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
I had access to a 
bicycle 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
 
Question 25 
Are you 
 
(_1) Male 
 
(_2) Female 
Question 26 
Which year were you born? 
==PAGE:122==
 
110 
 
Question 27 
Where do you live? 
 
(_1) In Denmark, state postal code: 
 
(_2) In Sweden, state municipality: 
 
(_3) Another country 
Question 28 
Are you a Diploma, Bachelor or Master student? 
 
(_1) Diploma 
 
(_2) Bachelor 
 
(_3) Master 
 
(_4) Other, please state: 
Question 29 
Are you a visiting student at DTU? 
 
(_1) Yes 
 
(_2) No 
Question 30 
How long have you been studying at DTU Lyngby cmpus? 
 
(_1)  Less than 1 semester 
 
(_2)  1-2 Semesters 
 
(_3)  3-4 Semesters 
 
(_4)  5-6 Semesters 
 
(_5)  More than 6 Semesters 
Question 31 
Prize draw 
 
(_1) Name: 
 
(_2) Email: 
Questionnalire for employees: 
Question 1 
Consider the past seven days.   Please mark which days you worked at your place of work, at home or 
somewhere else?   More than one place can be marked. For example, work at another address can cover 
shorter meetings or customer visits.  
 
Worked at my pace 
of work 
Worked from home 
Worked at another 
address 
Didn't work 
Monday 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
Tuesday 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
Wednesday 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
Thursday 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
Friday 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
Saturday 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
==PAGE:123==
 
111 
 
Sunday 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
 
Question 1A 
In connection with your work, did you have any transport or journeys during working hours? This includes 
transport to meetings, customers, picking up or delivery of materials or similar. 
 
(_1) Monday 
 
(_2) Tuesday 
 
(_3) Wednesday 
 
(_4) Thursday 
 
(_5) Friday 
 
(_6) Saturday 
 
(_7) Sunday 
 
(_99) No travel to other campuses 
Question 2 
Do you have fixed or flexible working hours? Please select the answer that best suits. 
 
(_1) Fixed working hours, the same each day 
 
(_2) Fixed working hours, vary each day 
 
(_3) Flexible working hours with a core time 
 
(_4) Flextime 
Question 4 
How often can you go by car to work? (This includes situations where you do not actually use the car, but 
could if you wanted) 
 
(_1) 5 or more days a week 
 
(_2) 3-4 days a week 
 
(_3) 1-2 days a week 
 
(_4) 1-3 days a month 
 
(_5) More infrequently 
 
(_6) Never 
Question 4x 
How often do you take children to school, kindergarten or day-care in the morning?  
 
(_1) 5 or more days a week 
 
(_2) 3-4 days a week 
 
(_3) 1-2 days a week 
 
(_4) 1-3 days a month 
 
(_5) More infrequently 
 
(_6) Never 
 
Question 5 
How have you travelled to work over the past 7 days?   Please select all the means of transport that have been 
part of your journey. 
 
(_1) Walking 
 
(_2) Cycling 
 
(_3) Electric bicycle 
==PAGE:124==
 
112 
 
 
(_4) By car alone 
 
(_5) By car with others (e.g. children, colleagues) 
 
(_6) S-Bus 
 
(_7) Other bus 
 
(_8) Train 
 
(_9) Metro 
 
(_10) Motorbike 
 
(_11) Moped 
 
(_12) Other, please state: 
Question 6 
How far have you travelled using these different means of transport on your journeys to work? Please state 
how many kms you have driven/biked/walked for each day.   Remember that walking is often part of the 
journey when you travel by bus or train. Only consider your journey from home to DTU Lyngby campus. Write 
'0' if you haven't used a mean of transport that day.     If you are unsure of the journey length, use the link <a 
href='http://map.krak.dk/m/S7pRi' target='_blank'> <span style='color:blue; text-
decoration:underline;'>here</span></a> and click on 'Ruteplan'. 
 
 
Monday 
(km) 
Tuesday 
(km) 
Wednesday 
(km) 
Thursday 
(km) 
Friday 
(km) 
Saturday 
(km) 
Sunday 
(km) 
Walking 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
Cycling 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
Electric bicycle 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
By car alone 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
By car with others 
(e.g. children, 
colleagues) 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
Bus 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
Train 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
Metro 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
Motorbike 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
Moped 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
{#q5_._12} 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
 
Question 7 
When did you arrive at your place of work and approximately how long did the journey take?   Please answer 
as precisely as possible for your arrival and journey times for the past 7 days. 
8. 
(_1) Monday 
9. 
(_2) Tuesday 
10. 
(_3) Wednesday 
==PAGE:125==
 
113 
 
11. 
(_4) Thursday 
12. 
(_5) Friday 
13. 
(_6) Saturday 
14. 
(_7) Sunday 
Question 8 
How long did it take to travel from home to work?   Please state the time for the entire journey from door to 
door, including any stops/errands on the way. (Please state the journey time in minutes)    
Question 9 
Did you have any stops/errands on the journey? 
 
(_1) Yes 
 
(_2) No 
Question 10 
In general, how satisfied are you with your transport to work? 
 
(_1) Very dissatisfied (- -) 
 
(_2) Dissatisfied ( - ) 
 
(_3) Neither satisfied nor dissatisfied ( 0 ) 
 
(_4) Satisfied ( + ) 
 
(_5) Very satisfied ( + + ) 
Question 11 
Which of these means of transport have you used during working hours, work journeys or trips over the past 7 
days? 
 
(_1) Driving as chauffe or courier: bus, truck/van, on delivery route etc 
 
(_1new) Walking 
 
(_2) Private owned bicycle 
 
(_2) Company owned bicycle 
 
(_4) Private Car 
 
(_5) Company Car 
 
(_6) Rental Car 
 
(_7) Taxi 
 
(_8) Bus/train passenger 
 
(_10) Other, please state: 
Quetsion 12 
Consider your transport during working hours over the past 7 days.   How far have you travelled using the 
following measn oftransport during working hours or on business journeys or trips. Please state how many kms 
you have driven/biked each day.   Write '0' if you haven't used the mean of transport that day.  If you are 
unsure of the journey length, use the link <a href='http://map.krak.dk/m/S7pRi' target='_blank'> <span 
style='color:blue; text-decoration:underline;'>here</span></a> and click on 'Ruteplan'. 
 
Monday 
(km) 
Tuesday 
(km) 
Wednesday 
(km) 
Thursday 
(km) 
Friday 
(km) 
Saturday 
(km) 
Sunday 
(km) 
Privately 
owned bicycle 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
Company 
owned bicycle 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
==PAGE:126==
 
114 
 
Private car 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
Company 
owned car 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
Rental car 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
Taxi 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
Bus/train 
passenger 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
Plane 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
{#q11_._10} 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
 
Question 13 
If you drive by car from your home to work (as driver or passenger), which type of fuel does the car use?   
(Your answer enables the transport CO2 emissions to be calculated) 
 
(_1) Petrol/Gasoline 
 
(_2) Diesel 
 
(_3) Electricity 
 
(_4) Don't know 
 
(_5) Other 
Question 14 
Is the car privately owned, company owned or a carsharing car? (Your answer helps to evaluate the 
importance of new car concepts). 
 
(_1) Privately owned/leased 
 
(_2) Company owned/leased 
 
(_3) Shared car or city car 
 
(_4) Other, please state: 
 
(_5) Don't know 
Question 15 
When you go by car from home to work, are there other persons travelling with you in the car?   I travel with... 
(Please also answer this question if only part of your journey is by car with others.)   You can give more than 
one answer... 
 
(_1) Spouse/partner 
 
(_2) Child/children/parents 
 
(_3) Fellow student(s) 
 
(_4) I always drive alone 
 
(_5) Other, please state: 
Question 16 
When you drive to your place of work, how often do you experience that...  
 
Every 
time 
Often 
Sometimes 
Rarely 
Never 
Don't 
know 
Finding a parking space close to you place of 
work is difficult? 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
==PAGE:127==
 
115 
 
You have to park awas from your place of 
work? 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
It takes a long time to get  into your place of 
work in the morning ? 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
It takes a long time to get out from your 
place of work at the end of the working day 
? 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
It takes a long time to get on the main road 
network from the area where the workplace 
is located? 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
 
Question 17 
To what extent do you agree or disagree with the following statements regarding cars and parking?   
 
Completely 
disagree 
Disagree 
Neither 
agree nor 
disagree 
Agree 
Completely 
agree 
Don't 
know 
Generally, I am satisfied 
with the parking conditions 
at my place of work 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
Generally, I'm satisfied with 
the conditions of the access 
roads to the are in which I 
work 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
 
Question 18 
To what extent do you agree with the statements:   It influences whether I go by car to work (as a driver or 
passenger) that...    
 
Completely 
disagree 
Disagree 
Neither 
disagree nor 
agree 
Agree 
Completely 
agree 
Don't 
know 
It's quickest 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
It's cheapest 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
It's flexible 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
It's too far to bike 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
I have errands/stops on 
the trip or when I go 
back 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
I need the car in 
connection with my 
work 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
==PAGE:128==
 
116 
 
It's too complicated to 
take the bus and train 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
Everyone else I know 
takes the car 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
I'm used to taking the 
car 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
I get to decide who I 
travel with 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
I enjoy driving by car 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
The weather is bad 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
 
Question 19 
What could make you use carpooling more often to get to work?   If you already carpool every day, what 
would make it more attractive?   I would use carpooling more often if... 
 
 
 
 
 
Completely 
disagree 
Disagree 
Neither 
disagree 
nor agree 
Agree 
Completely 
agree 
Not 
relevant/already 
the case 
I got help to find 
others to drive with 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
We share the cost 
of travelling 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
I was guaranteed 
transport home if 
the shared journey 
was cancelled 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
There was a central 
designated car park 
for cars where 
journeys were 
shared 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
I got a cash 
incentive to drive 
with others 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
I had more 
predictable working 
hours 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
I could drive with 
someone I know 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
==PAGE:129==
 
117 
 
I could drive in my 
own car 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
 
Question 20 
What would make you take bus and train more often to work, or for journeys in connection with your work?   
If you take the bus and train every day, what would make it more attractive?   I would take the bus or train 
more often if...   
 
Completely 
disagree 
Disagree 
Neither 
disagree 
nor agree 
Agree 
Completely 
agree 
Not 
relevant/already 
the case 
There was a bus 
stop/station closer 
to my place of work 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
I got better 
information about 
the timetable, 
delays etc. 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
The time spent on 
the journey was 
considered paid 
work time 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
I could borrow a 
bicycle by the 
station/bus stop 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
I had access to a 
company 
car/service vehicle 
during working 
hours 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
I had more 
predictable 
working hours 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
I received personal 
guidance about 
travelling by train 
and bus 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
It was easier to 
work on the 
journey by 
bus/train 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
There was a direct 
bus/train to my 
place of work 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
==PAGE:130==
 
118 
 
The journey by 
bus/train was 
shorter 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
It was cheaper 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
 
Question 21 
What would make you go by bicycle more on your journey to and from work or during working hours?   If you 
already bike, what would make it more attractive?   I would bike more if ...   
 
Completely 
disagree 
Disagree 
Neither 
disagree 
nor agree 
Agree 
Completely 
agree 
Not 
relevant/already 
the case 
There was covered 
bicycle parking by 
my place of work 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
There was covered 
parking by the bus 
stop/station 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
There was bicycle 
parking by my place 
of work 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
There was locked 
bike parking by the 
station/bus stop 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
There were better 
changing and 
showering facilities 
at my place of work 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
There was a bicycle 
service at my place 
of work 
(maintenance and 
repairs) 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
I was given a cash 
incentive to bike 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
I could borrow a 
bicycle at the 
station/bus stop 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
I had access to a 
company car/service 
vehicle during 
working hours 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
I could bike with a 
friend or colleague 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
==PAGE:131==
 
119 
 
There were more 
and/or better bike 
paths going to my 
place of study 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
 
Question 22 
What would make you use virtual meetings/video meetings/video conferences more instead of travelling 
during working hours? I would make more use of virtual meetings if...   
 
Completely 
disagree 
Disagree 
Neither 
disagree 
nor agree 
Agree 
Completely 
agree 
Not 
relevant/already 
the case 
There were better 
facilities at my 
workplace for 
holding video 
meetings or 
conferences 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
I was given personal 
guidance on using 
virtual meetings 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
My customers 
/contacts were used 
to virtual meetings 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
⃝ 
 
 
Question 25 
Are you 
 
(_1) Male 
 
(_2) Female 
Question 26 
Which year were you born? 
 
Question 27 
Where do you live? 
 
(_1) In Denmark, state postal code: 
 
(_2) In Sweden, state municipality: 
 
(_3) Another country 
Question 28 
What is the highest level of education you have completed? If you are currently in education, please mark your 
highest level of education to date. 
 
(_1) 8th, 9th or 10th grade 
 
(_2) High school certificate 
 
(_3) Higher commercial examination 
 
(_4) Other school examination 
==PAGE:132==
 
120 
 
 
(_5) Vocational training (apprentieship) 
 
(_6) Short college education (1.5-2 years) 
 
(_7) Medium-lenght higher education (2-5 years) 
 
(_8) Long hige reducation (at least 5 years) 
Question 29 
Which of he following described best your work? 
 
(_1) Management: e.g. management and coorination of general activities 
 
(_2) Knowledge work: e.g. legal consultancy, engineering, doctor, architect, teacher, scientist or 
similar 
 
(_3) Techical: e.g. operations technician, lab assistant, medical secretary, estat eagent, kitchen 
manager, ship captain 
 
(_4) Office work or customer servide: e.g. office tasks, bookkeeping, communication, archiving, 
booking, orders 
 
(_5) Service and sales: e.g. shop assistant, sales assistant, care worker, childminder 
 
(_6) Tradesman: e.g builder,electrician, mechanic 
 
(_7) Fitter and service engineer or transport worker 
 
(_8) Other, please state: 
 
Question 29A 
Which building si your place of work? Please select from the list... 
Question 30 
Comments 
Question 31 
Prize draw 
 
(_1) Name: 
 
(_2) Email: 
==PAGE:133==
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX 2 
Descriptive statistics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:134==
122 
 
Part I 
 
 
==PAGE:135==
123 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:136==
124 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:137==
125 
 
Part II 
 
 
==PAGE:138==
126 
 
 
 
==PAGE:139==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX 3 
Maps 
 
 
==PAGE:140==
128 
 
Map 1 Zones in the Lyngby campus 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:141==
129 
 
Map 2 Residential areas from which all trips to Lyngby campus were made 
based on the sample 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:142==
130 
 
Map 3 Residential areas from which all car trips to Lyngby campus were 
made based on the sample 
 
 
 
==PAGE:143==
131 
 
Map 4 Residentia areas from which car trips to Lyngby campus were made 
by employees based on the sample 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:144==
132 
 
 
 
Map 5 Residential areas from which car trips to Lyngby campus were 
made by students based on the sample 
 
 
==PAGE:145==
133 
 
Map 6 Car trips that arrived to Lyngby campus based on the sample 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:146==
134 
 
 
Map 7 Residential areas from which  all cycling trips to Lyngby campus 
were made based on the sample 
 
 
 
==PAGE:147==
135 
 
Map 8 Residential areas from which cycling trips to Lyngby campus were 
made by employees based on the sample 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:148==
136 
 
 
Map 9 Residential areas from which cycling trips to Lyngby campus were 
made by students based on the sample 
 
 
 
==PAGE:149==
137 
 
Map 10 Cycling trips that arrived to Lyngby campus based on the sample 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:150==
138 
 
 
==PAGE:151==
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX 4 
GHG emissions calculations 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:152==
 
 
Scenario 1 
 
Km (yearly)
tCO2e
Km (yearly)
tCO2e
Km (yearly)
tCO2e
Km (yearly)
tCO2e
Km (yearly)
tCO2e
Km (yearly)
tCO2e
Km (yearly)
tCO2e
Km (yearly)
tCO2e
Km (yearly)
tCO2e
Km (yearly)
tCO2e
0%
28 383 542
5 429
11 758 896
2 144
405 479
77
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
11 514
0%
1%
28 099 706
5 374
11 641 307
2 122
401 424
76
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
11 437
1%
2%
27 815 871
5 320
11 523 718
2 101
397 370
75
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
11 361
1%
3%
27 532 035
5 266
11 406 129
2 080
393 315
74
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
11 284
2%
4%
27 248 200
5 211
11 288 540
2 058
389 260
74
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
11 208
3%
5%
26 964 364
5 157
11 170 951
2 037
385 205
73
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
11 131
3%
6%
26 680 529
5 103
11 053 362
2 015
381 150
72
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
11 055
4%
7%
26 396 694
5 049
10 935 773
1 994
377 096
71
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 978
5%
8%
26 112 858
4 994
10 818 184
1 972
373 041
71
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 902
5%
9%
25 829 023
4 940
10 700 595
1 951
368 986
70
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 825
6%
10%
25 545 187
4 886
10 583 006
1 929
364 931
69
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 749
7%
11%
25 261 352
4 831
10 465 417
1 908
360 876
68
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 673
7%
12%
24 977 517
4 777
10 347 828
1 887
356 822
67
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 596
8%
13%
24 693 681
4 723
10 230 239
1 865
352 767
67
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 520
9%
14%
24 409 846
4 669
10 112 650
1 844
348 712
66
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 443
9%
15%
24 126 010
4 614
9 995 061
1 822
344 657
65
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 367
10%
16%
23 842 175
4 560
9 877 472
1 801
340 602
64
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 290
11%
17%
23 558 339
4 506
9 759 883
1 779
336 548
64
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 214
11%
18%
23 274 504
4 451
9 642 295
1 758
332 493
63
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 137
12%
19%
22 990 669
4 397
9 524 706
1 737
328 438
62
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 061
13%
20%
22 706 833
4 343
9 407 117
1 715
324 383
61
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 984
13%
21%
22 422 998
4 289
9 289 528
1 694
320 329
61
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 908
14%
22%
22 139 162
4 234
9 171 939
1 672
316 274
60
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 831
15%
23%
21 855 327
4 180
9 054 350
1 651
312 219
59
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 755
15%
24%
21 571 492
4 126
8 936 761
1 629
308 164
58
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 678
16%
25%
21 287 656
4 071
8 819 172
1 608
304 109
57
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 602
17%
26%
21 003 821
4 017
8 701 583
1 586
300 055
57
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 525
17%
27%
20 719 985
3 963
8 583 994
1 565
296 000
56
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 449
18%
28%
20 436 150
3 909
8 466 405
1 544
291 945
55
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 372
19%
29%
20 152 314
3 854
8 348 816
1 522
287 890
54
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 296
19%
30%
19 868 479
3 800
8 231 227
1 501
283 835
54
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 219
20%
31%
19 584 644
3 746
8 113 638
1 479
279 781
53
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 143
21%
32%
19 300 808
3 691
7 996 049
1 458
275 726
52
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 066
21%
33%
19 016 973
3 637
7 878 460
1 436
271 671
51
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 990
22%
34%
18 733 137
3 583
7 760 871
1 415
267 616
51
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 913
23%
35%
18 449 302
3 529
7 643 282
1 394
263 561
50
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 837
23%
36%
18 165 467
3 474
7 525 693
1 372
259 507
49
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 760
24%
37%
17 881 631
3 420
7 408 104
1 351
255 452
48
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 684
25%
38%
17 597 796
3 366
7 290 515
1 329
251 397
48
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 607
25%
39%
17 313 960
3 311
7 172 926
1 308
247 342
47
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 531
26%
40%
17 030 125
3 257
7 055 337
1 286
243 287
46
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 454
27%
41%
16 746 289
3 203
6 937 749
1 265
239 233
45
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 378
27%
42%
16 462 454
3 149
6 820 160
1 243
235 178
44
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 301
28%
43%
16 178 619
3 094
6 702 571
1 222
231 123
44
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 225
29%
44%
15 894 783
3 040
6 584 982
1 201
227 068
43
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 148
29%
45%
15 610 948
2 986
6 467 393
1 179
223 014
42
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 072
30%
46%
15 327 112
2 931
6 349 804
1 158
218 959
41
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 995
31%
47%
15 043 277
2 877
6 232 215
1 136
214 904
41
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 919
31%
48%
14 759 442
2 823
6 114 626
1 115
210 849
40
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 842
32%
49%
14 475 606
2 769
5 997 037
1 093
206 794
39
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 766
33%
Reduction in car 
km
Reduction in 
tCO2e
Total 
tCO2e
Car (Petrol)
Car (Diesel)
Carpooling (Petrol)
Carpooling (Diesel)
Bus
Train
Motorbike
Car (Electric)
Carpooling (Electric)
Metro
==PAGE:153==
 
 
 
 
50%
14 191 771
2 714
5 879 448
1 072
202 740
38
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 689
33%
51%
13 907 935
2 660
5 761 859
1 051
198 685
38
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 613
34%
52%
13 624 100
2 606
5 644 270
1 029
194 630
37
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 536
35%
53%
13 340 265
2 551
5 526 681
1 008
190 575
36
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 460
35%
54%
13 056 429
2 497
5 409 092
986
186 520
35
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 383
36%
55%
12 772 594
2 443
5 291 503
965
182 466
34
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 307
37%
56%
12 488 758
2 389
5 173 914
943
178 411
34
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 230
37%
57%
12 204 923
2 334
5 056 325
922
174 356
33
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 154
38%
58%
11 921 087
2 280
4 938 736
900
170 301
32
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 077
39%
59%
11 637 252
2 226
4 821 147
879
166 246
31
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 001
39%
60%
11 353 417
2 171
4 703 558
858
162 192
31
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
6 924
40%
61%
11 069 581
2 117
4 585 969
836
158 137
30
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
6 848
41%
62%
10 785 746
2 063
4 468 380
815
154 082
29
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
6 771
41%
63%
10 501 910
2 009
4 350 791
793
150 027
28
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
6 695
42%
64%
10 218 075
1 954
4 233 202
772
145 972
28
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
6 618
43%
65%
9 934 240
1 900
4 115 614
750
141 918
27
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
6 542
43%
66%
9 650 404
1 846
3 998 025
729
137 863
26
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
6 465
44%
67%
9 366 569
1 791
3 880 436
707
133 808
25
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
6 389
45%
68%
9 082 733
1 737
3 762 847
686
129 753
25
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
6 312
45%
69%
8 798 898
1 683
3 645 258
665
125 699
24
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
6 236
46%
70%
8 515 062
1 629
3 527 669
643
121 644
23
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
6 160
47%
71%
8 231 227
1 574
3 410 080
622
117 589
22
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
6 083
47%
72%
7 947 392
1 520
3 292 491
600
113 534
21
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
6 007
48%
73%
7 663 556
1 466
3 174 902
579
109 479
21
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
5 930
48%
74%
7 379 721
1 411
3 057 313
557
105 425
20
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
5 854
49%
75%
7 095 885
1 357
2 939 724
536
101 370
19
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
5 777
50%
76%
6 812 050
1 303
2 822 135
515
97 315
18
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
5 701
50%
77%
6 528 215
1 249
2 704 546
493
93 260
18
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
5 624
51%
78%
6 244 379
1 194
2 586 957
472
89 205
17
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
5 548
52%
79%
5 960 544
1 140
2 469 368
450
85 151
16
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
5 471
52%
80%
5 676 708
1 086
2 351 779
429
81 096
15
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
5 395
53%
81%
5 392 873
1 031
2 234 190
407
77 041
15
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
5 318
54%
82%
5 109 037
977
2 116 601
386
72 986
14
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
5 242
54%
83%
4 825 202
923
1 999 012
364
68 931
13
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
5 165
55%
84%
4 541 367
869
1 881 423
343
64 877
12
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
5 089
56%
85%
4 257 531
814
1 763 834
322
60 822
11
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
5 012
56%
86%
3 973 696
760
1 646 245
300
56 767
11
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
4 936
57%
87%
3 689 860
706
1 528 656
279
52 712
10
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
4 859
58%
88%
3 406 025
651
1 411 067
257
48 657
9
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
4 783
58%
89%
3 122 190
597
1 293 479
236
44 603
8
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
4 706
59%
90%
2 838 354
543
1 175 890
214
40 548
8
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
4 630
60%
91%
2 554 519
489
1 058 301
193
36 493
7
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
4 553
60%
92%
2 270 683
434
940 712
172
32 438
6
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
4 477
61%
93%
1 986 848
380
823 123
150
28 384
5
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
4 400
62%
94%
1 703 012
326
705 534
129
24 329
5
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
4 324
62%
95%
1 419 177
271
587 945
107
20 274
4
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
4 247
63%
96%
1 135 342
217
470 356
86
16 219
3
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
4 171
64%
97%
851 506
163
352 767
64
12 164
2
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
4 094
64%
98%
567 671
109
235 178
43
8 110
2
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
4 018
65%
99%
283 835
54
117 589
21
4 055
1
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
3 941
66%
100%
0
0
0
0
0
0
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
3 865
66%
==PAGE:154==
 
 
Scenario 2 
 
Km (yearly)
tCO2e
Km (yearly)
tCO2e
Km (yearly)
tCO2e
Km (yearly)
tCO2e
Km (yearly)
tCO2e
Km (yearly)
tCO2e
Km (yearly)
tCO2e
Km (yearly)
tCO2e
Km (yearly)
tCO2e
Km (yearly)
tCO2e
0%
28 383 542
5 429
11 758 896
2 144
405 479
77
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
11 514
0%
1%
28 099 706
5 374
11 641 307
2 122
401 424
76
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
12 312 502
975
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
11 470
0%
2%
27 815 871
5 320
11 523 718
2 101
397 370
75
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
12 717 982
1 007
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
11 425
1%
3%
27 532 035
5 266
11 406 129
2 080
393 315
74
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
13 123 461
1 039
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
11 381
1%
4%
27 248 200
5 211
11 288 540
2 058
389 260
74
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
13 528 940
1 071
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
11 336
2%
5%
26 964 364
5 157
11 170 951
2 037
385 205
73
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
13 934 419
1 103
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
11 292
2%
6%
26 680 529
5 103
11 053 362
2 015
381 150
72
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
14 339 898
1 135
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
11 248
2%
7%
26 396 694
5 049
10 935 773
1 994
377 096
71
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
14 745 377
1 167
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
11 203
3%
8%
26 112 858
4 994
10 818 184
1 972
373 041
71
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
15 150 857
1 199
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
11 159
3%
9%
25 829 023
4 940
10 700 595
1 951
368 986
70
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
15 556 336
1 232
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
11 114
3%
10%
25 545 187
4 886
10 583 006
1 929
364 931
69
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
15 961 815
1 264
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
11 070
4%
11%
25 261 352
4 831
10 465 417
1 908
360 876
68
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
16 367 294
1 296
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
11 026
4%
12%
24 977 517
4 777
10 347 828
1 887
356 822
67
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
16 772 773
1 328
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 981
5%
13%
24 693 681
4 723
10 230 239
1 865
352 767
67
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
17 178 252
1 360
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 937
5%
14%
24 409 846
4 669
10 112 650
1 844
348 712
66
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
17 583 732
1 392
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 892
5%
15%
24 126 010
4 614
9 995 061
1 822
344 657
65
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
17 989 211
1 424
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 848
6%
16%
23 842 175
4 560
9 877 472
1 801
340 602
64
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
18 394 690
1 456
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 804
6%
17%
23 558 339
4 506
9 759 883
1 779
336 548
64
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
18 800 169
1 488
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 759
7%
18%
23 274 504
4 451
9 642 295
1 758
332 493
63
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
19 205 648
1 521
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 715
7%
19%
22 990 669
4 397
9 524 706
1 737
328 438
62
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
19 611 127
1 553
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 671
7%
20%
22 706 833
4 343
9 407 117
1 715
324 383
61
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
20 016 607
1 585
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 626
8%
21%
22 422 998
4 289
9 289 528
1 694
320 329
61
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
20 422 086
1 617
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 582
8%
22%
22 139 162
4 234
9 171 939
1 672
316 274
60
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
20 827 565
1 649
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 537
8%
23%
21 855 327
4 180
9 054 350
1 651
312 219
59
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
21 233 044
1 681
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 493
9%
24%
21 571 492
4 126
8 936 761
1 629
308 164
58
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
21 638 523
1 713
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 449
9%
25%
21 287 656
4 071
8 819 172
1 608
304 109
57
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
22 044 002
1 745
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 404
10%
26%
21 003 821
4 017
8 701 583
1 586
300 055
57
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
22 449 482
1 777
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 360
10%
27%
20 719 985
3 963
8 583 994
1 565
296 000
56
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
22 854 961
1 809
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 315
10%
28%
20 436 150
3 909
8 466 405
1 544
291 945
55
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
23 260 440
1 842
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 271
11%
29%
20 152 314
3 854
8 348 816
1 522
287 890
54
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
23 665 919
1 874
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 227
11%
30%
19 868 479
3 800
8 231 227
1 501
283 835
54
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
24 071 398
1 906
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 182
12%
31%
19 584 644
3 746
8 113 638
1 479
279 781
53
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
24 476 877
1 938
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 138
12%
32%
19 300 808
3 691
7 996 049
1 458
275 726
52
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
24 882 357
1 970
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 093
12%
33%
19 016 973
3 637
7 878 460
1 436
271 671
51
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
25 287 836
2 002
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 049
13%
34%
18 733 137
3 583
7 760 871
1 415
267 616
51
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
25 693 315
2 034
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 005
13%
35%
18 449 302
3 529
7 643 282
1 394
263 561
50
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
26 098 794
2 066
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 960
13%
36%
18 165 467
3 474
7 525 693
1 372
259 507
49
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
26 504 273
2 098
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 916
14%
37%
17 881 631
3 420
7 408 104
1 351
255 452
48
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
26 909 752
2 130
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 871
14%
38%
17 597 796
3 366
7 290 515
1 329
251 397
48
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
27 315 232
2 163
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 827
15%
39%
17 313 960
3 311
7 172 926
1 308
247 342
47
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
27 720 711
2 195
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 783
15%
40%
17 030 125
3 257
7 055 337
1 286
243 287
46
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
28 126 190
2 227
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 738
15%
41%
16 746 289
3 203
6 937 749
1 265
239 233
45
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
28 531 669
2 259
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 694
16%
42%
16 462 454
3 149
6 820 160
1 243
235 178
44
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
28 937 148
2 291
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 650
16%
43%
16 178 619
3 094
6 702 571
1 222
231 123
44
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
29 342 627
2 323
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 605
17%
44%
15 894 783
3 040
6 584 982
1 201
227 068
43
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
29 748 107
2 355
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 561
17%
45%
15 610 948
2 986
6 467 393
1 179
223 014
42
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
30 153 586
2 387
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 516
17%
46%
15 327 112
2 931
6 349 804
1 158
218 959
41
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
30 559 065
2 419
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 472
18%
47%
15 043 277
2 877
6 232 215
1 136
214 904
41
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
30 964 544
2 451
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 428
18%
48%
14 759 442
2 823
6 114 626
1 115
210 849
40
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
31 370 023
2 484
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 383
19%
49%
14 475 606
2 769
5 997 037
1 093
206 794
39
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
31 775 502
2 516
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 339
19%
Total 
tCO2e
Reduction in 
tCO2e
Motorbike
Car (Electric)
Carpooling (Electric)
Metro
Bus
Train
Reduction in car 
km
Car (Petrol)
Car (Diesel)
Carpooling (Petrol)
Carpooling (Diesel)
==PAGE:155==
 
 
 
50%
14 191 771
2 714
5 879 448
1 072
202 740
38
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
32 180 982
2 548
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 294
51%
13 907 935
2 660
5 761 859
1 051
198 685
38
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
32 586 461
2 580
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 250
52%
13 624 100
2 606
5 644 270
1 029
194 630
37
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
32 991 940
2 612
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 206
53%
13 340 265
2 551
5 526 681
1 008
190 575
36
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
33 397 419
2 644
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 161
54%
13 056 429
2 497
5 409 092
986
186 520
35
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
33 802 898
2 676
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 117
55%
12 772 594
2 443
5 291 503
965
182 466
34
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
34 208 377
2 708
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 072
56%
12 488 758
2 389
5 173 914
943
178 411
34
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
34 613 857
2 740
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 028
57%
12 204 923
2 334
5 056 325
922
174 356
33
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
35 019 336
2 772
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 984
58%
11 921 087
2 280
4 938 736
900
170 301
32
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
35 424 815
2 805
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 939
59%
11 637 252
2 226
4 821 147
879
166 246
31
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
35 830 294
2 837
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 895
60%
11 353 417
2 171
4 703 558
858
162 192
31
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
36 235 773
2 869
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 851
61%
11 069 581
2 117
4 585 969
836
158 137
30
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
36 641 252
2 901
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 806
62%
10 785 746
2 063
4 468 380
815
154 082
29
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
37 046 732
2 933
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 762
63%
10 501 910
2 009
4 350 791
793
150 027
28
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
37 452 211
2 965
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 717
64%
10 218 075
1 954
4 233 202
772
145 972
28
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
37 857 690
2 997
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 673
65%
9 934 240
1 900
4 115 614
750
141 918
27
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
38 263 169
3 029
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 629
66%
9 650 404
1 846
3 998 025
729
137 863
26
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
38 668 648
3 061
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 584
67%
9 366 569
1 791
3 880 436
707
133 808
25
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
39 074 127
3 093
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 540
68%
9 082 733
1 737
3 762 847
686
129 753
25
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
39 479 607
3 126
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 495
69%
8 798 898
1 683
3 645 258
665
125 699
24
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
39 885 086
3 158
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 451
70%
8 515 062
1 629
3 527 669
643
121 644
23
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
40 290 565
3 190
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 407
71%
8 231 227
1 574
3 410 080
622
117 589
22
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
40 696 044
3 222
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 362
72%
7 947 392
1 520
3 292 491
600
113 534
21
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
41 101 523
3 254
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 318
73%
7 663 556
1 466
3 174 902
579
109 479
21
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
41 507 002
3 286
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 273
74%
7 379 721
1 411
3 057 313
557
105 425
20
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
41 912 482
3 318
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 229
75%
7 095 885
1 357
2 939 724
536
101 370
19
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
42 317 961
3 350
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 185
76%
6 812 050
1 303
2 822 135
515
97 315
18
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
42 723 440
3 382
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 140
77%
6 528 215
1 249
2 704 546
493
93 260
18
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
43 128 919
3 415
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 096
78%
6 244 379
1 194
2 586 957
472
89 205
17
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
43 534 398
3 447
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 052
79%
5 960 544
1 140
2 469 368
450
85 151
16
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
43 939 877
3 479
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 007
80%
5 676 708
1 086
2 351 779
429
81 096
15
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
44 345 356
3 511
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 963
81%
5 392 873
1 031
2 234 190
407
77 041
15
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
44 750 836
3 543
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 918
82%
5 109 037
977
2 116 601
386
72 986
14
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
45 156 315
3 575
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 874
83%
4 825 202
923
1 999 012
364
68 931
13
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
45 561 794
3 607
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 830
84%
4 541 367
869
1 881 423
343
64 877
12
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
45 967 273
3 639
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 785
85%
4 257 531
814
1 763 834
322
60 822
11
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
46 372 752
3 671
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 741
86%
3 973 696
760
1 646 245
300
56 767
11
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
46 778 231
3 703
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 696
87%
3 689 860
706
1 528 656
279
52 712
10
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
47 183 711
3 736
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 652
88%
3 406 025
651
1 411 067
257
48 657
9
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
47 589 190
3 768
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 608
89%
3 122 190
597
1 293 479
236
44 603
8
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
47 994 669
3 800
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 563
90%
2 838 354
543
1 175 890
214
40 548
8
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
48 400 148
3 832
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 519
91%
2 554 519
489
1 058 301
193
36 493
7
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
48 805 627
3 864
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 474
92%
2 270 683
434
940 712
172
32 438
6
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
49 211 106
3 896
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 430
93%
1 986 848
380
823 123
150
28 384
5
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
49 616 586
3 928
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 386
94%
1 703 012
326
705 534
129
24 329
5
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
50 022 065
3 960
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 341
95%
1 419 177
271
587 945
107
20 274
4
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
50 427 544
3 992
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 297
96%
1 135 342
217
470 356
86
16 219
3
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
50 833 023
4 024
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 252
97%
851 506
163
352 767
64
12 164
2
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
51 238 502
4 057
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 208
98%
567 671
109
235 178
43
8 110
2
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
51 643 981
4 089
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 164
99%
283 835
54
117 589
21
4 055
1
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
52 049 461
4 121
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 119
100%
0
0
0
0
0
0
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
52 454 940
4 153
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 075
==PAGE:156==
 
 
Scenario 3 
 
Km(yearly)
tCO2e
Km(yearly)
tCO2e
Km(yearly)
tCO2e
Km(yearly)
tCO2e
Km(yearly)
tCO2e
Km(yearly)
tCO2e
Km(yearly)
tCO2e
Km(yearly)
tCO2e
Km(yearly)
tCO2e
Km(yearly)
tCO2e
0%
28 383 542
5 429
11 758 896
2 144
405 479
77
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
19 896 145
1 087
669 157
37
149 551
18
11 514
0%
1%
28 099 706
5 374
11 641 307
2 122
401 424
76
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
20 301 624
1 109
669 157
37
149 551
18
11 460
0%
2%
27 815 871
5 320
11 523 718
2 101
397 370
75
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
20 707 103
1 131
669 157
37
149 551
18
11 405
1%
3%
27 532 035
5 266
11 406 129
2 080
393 315
74
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
21 112 582
1 153
669 157
37
149 551
18
11 351
1%
4%
27 248 200
5 211
11 288 540
2 058
389 260
74
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
21 518 062
1 175
669 157
37
149 551
18
11 297
2%
5%
26 964 364
5 157
11 170 951
2 037
385 205
73
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
21 923 541
1 197
669 157
37
149 551
18
11 242
2%
6%
26 680 529
5 103
11 053 362
2 015
381 150
72
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
22 329 020
1 219
669 157
37
149 551
18
11 188
3%
7%
26 396 694
5 049
10 935 773
1 994
377 096
71
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
22 734 499
1 242
669 157
37
149 551
18
11 133
3%
8%
26 112 858
4 994
10 818 184
1 972
373 041
71
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
23 139 978
1 264
669 157
37
149 551
18
11 079
4%
9%
25 829 023
4 940
10 700 595
1 951
368 986
70
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
23 545 457
1 286
669 157
37
149 551
18
11 025
4%
10%
25 545 187
4 886
10 583 006
1 929
364 931
69
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
23 950 937
1 308
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 970
5%
11%
25 261 352
4 831
10 465 417
1 908
360 876
68
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
24 356 416
1 330
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 916
5%
12%
24 977 517
4 777
10 347 828
1 887
356 822
67
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
24 761 895
1 352
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 862
6%
13%
24 693 681
4 723
10 230 239
1 865
352 767
67
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
25 167 374
1 374
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 807
6%
14%
24 409 846
4 669
10 112 650
1 844
348 712
66
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
25 572 853
1 397
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 753
7%
15%
24 126 010
4 614
9 995 061
1 822
344 657
65
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
25 978 332
1 419
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 699
7%
16%
23 842 175
4 560
9 877 472
1 801
340 602
64
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
26 383 812
1 441
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 644
8%
17%
23 558 339
4 506
9 759 883
1 779
336 548
64
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
26 789 291
1 463
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 590
8%
18%
23 274 504
4 451
9 642 295
1 758
332 493
63
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
27 194 770
1 485
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 536
8%
19%
22 990 669
4 397
9 524 706
1 737
328 438
62
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
27 600 249
1 507
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 481
9%
20%
22 706 833
4 343
9 407 117
1 715
324 383
61
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
28 005 728
1 529
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 427
9%
21%
22 422 998
4 289
9 289 528
1 694
320 329
61
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
28 411 207
1 552
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 373
10%
22%
22 139 162
4 234
9 171 939
1 672
316 274
60
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
28 816 687
1 574
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 318
10%
23%
21 855 327
4 180
9 054 350
1 651
312 219
59
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
29 222 166
1 596
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 264
11%
24%
21 571 492
4 126
8 936 761
1 629
308 164
58
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
29 627 645
1 618
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 210
11%
25%
21 287 656
4 071
8 819 172
1 608
304 109
57
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
30 033 124
1 640
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 155
12%
26%
21 003 821
4 017
8 701 583
1 586
300 055
57
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
30 438 603
1 662
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 101
12%
27%
20 719 985
3 963
8 583 994
1 565
296 000
56
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
30 844 082
1 684
669 157
37
149 551
18
10 047
13%
28%
20 436 150
3 909
8 466 405
1 544
291 945
55
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
31 249 561
1 707
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 992
13%
29%
20 152 314
3 854
8 348 816
1 522
287 890
54
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
31 655 041
1 729
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 938
14%
30%
19 868 479
3 800
8 231 227
1 501
283 835
54
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
32 060 520
1 751
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 883
14%
31%
19 584 644
3 746
8 113 638
1 479
279 781
53
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
32 465 999
1 773
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 829
15%
32%
19 300 808
3 691
7 996 049
1 458
275 726
52
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
32 871 478
1 795
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 775
15%
33%
19 016 973
3 637
7 878 460
1 436
271 671
51
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
33 276 957
1 817
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 720
16%
34%
18 733 137
3 583
7 760 871
1 415
267 616
51
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
33 682 436
1 839
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 666
16%
35%
18 449 302
3 529
7 643 282
1 394
263 561
50
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
34 087 916
1 862
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 612
17%
36%
18 165 467
3 474
7 525 693
1 372
259 507
49
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
34 493 395
1 884
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 557
17%
37%
17 881 631
3 420
7 408 104
1 351
255 452
48
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
34 898 874
1 906
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 503
17%
38%
17 597 796
3 366
7 290 515
1 329
251 397
48
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
35 304 353
1 928
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 449
18%
39%
17 313 960
3 311
7 172 926
1 308
247 342
47
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
35 709 832
1 950
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 394
18%
40%
17 030 125
3 257
7 055 337
1 286
243 287
46
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
36 115 311
1 972
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 340
19%
41%
16 746 289
3 203
6 937 749
1 265
239 233
45
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
36 520 791
1 994
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 286
19%
42%
16 462 454
3 149
6 820 160
1 243
235 178
44
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
36 926 270
2 017
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 231
20%
43%
16 178 619
3 094
6 702 571
1 222
231 123
44
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
37 331 749
2 039
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 177
20%
44%
15 894 783
3 040
6 584 982
1 201
227 068
43
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
37 737 228
2 061
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 123
21%
45%
15 610 948
2 986
6 467 393
1 179
223 014
42
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
38 142 707
2 083
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 068
21%
46%
15 327 112
2 931
6 349 804
1 158
218 959
41
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
38 548 186
2 105
669 157
37
149 551
18
9 014
22%
47%
15 043 277
2 877
6 232 215
1 136
214 904
41
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
38 953 666
2 127
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 960
22%
48%
14 759 442
2 823
6 114 626
1 115
210 849
40
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
39 359 145
2 149
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 905
23%
49%
14 475 606
2 769
5 997 037
1 093
206 794
39
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
39 764 624
2 172
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 851
23%
Total 
tCO2e
Reduction in 
tCO2e
Motorbike
Carpooling (Electric)
Metro
Carpooling (Diesel)
Bus
Train
Car (Electric)
Reduction in 
car km
Car (Petrol)
Car (Diesel)
Carpooling (Petrol)
==PAGE:157==
 
 
 
50%
14 191 771
2 714
5 879 448
1 072
202 740
38
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
40 170 103
2 194
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 796
24%
51%
13 907 935
2 660
5 761 859
1 051
198 685
38
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
40 575 582
2 216
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 742
24%
52%
13 624 100
2 606
5 644 270
1 029
194 630
37
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
40 981 061
2 238
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 688
25%
53%
13 340 265
2 551
5 526 681
1 008
190 575
36
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
41 386 541
2 260
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 633
25%
54%
13 056 429
2 497
5 409 092
986
186 520
35
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
41 792 020
2 282
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 579
25%
55%
12 772 594
2 443
5 291 503
965
182 466
34
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
42 197 499
2 304
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 525
26%
56%
12 488 758
2 389
5 173 914
943
178 411
34
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
42 602 978
2 327
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 470
26%
57%
12 204 923
2 334
5 056 325
922
174 356
33
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
43 008 457
2 349
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 416
27%
58%
11 921 087
2 280
4 938 736
900
170 301
32
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
43 413 936
2 371
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 362
27%
59%
11 637 252
2 226
4 821 147
879
166 246
31
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
43 819 416
2 393
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 307
28%
60%
11 353 417
2 171
4 703 558
858
162 192
31
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
44 224 895
2 415
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 253
28%
61%
11 069 581
2 117
4 585 969
836
158 137
30
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
44 630 374
2 437
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 199
29%
62%
10 785 746
2 063
4 468 380
815
154 082
29
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
45 035 853
2 459
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 144
29%
63%
10 501 910
2 009
4 350 791
793
150 027
28
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
45 441 332
2 482
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 090
30%
64%
10 218 075
1 954
4 233 202
772
145 972
28
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
45 846 811
2 504
669 157
37
149 551
18
8 036
30%
65%
9 934 240
1 900
4 115 614
750
141 918
27
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
46 252 291
2 526
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 981
31%
66%
9 650 404
1 846
3 998 025
729
137 863
26
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
46 657 770
2 548
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 927
31%
67%
9 366 569
1 791
3 880 436
707
133 808
25
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
47 063 249
2 570
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 873
32%
68%
9 082 733
1 737
3 762 847
686
129 753
25
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
47 468 728
2 592
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 818
32%
69%
8 798 898
1 683
3 645 258
665
125 699
24
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
47 874 207
2 614
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 764
33%
70%
8 515 062
1 629
3 527 669
643
121 644
23
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
48 279 686
2 637
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 710
33%
71%
8 231 227
1 574
3 410 080
622
117 589
22
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
48 685 166
2 659
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 655
34%
72%
7 947 392
1 520
3 292 491
600
113 534
21
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
49 090 645
2 681
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 601
34%
73%
7 663 556
1 466
3 174 902
579
109 479
21
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
49 496 124
2 703
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 546
34%
74%
7 379 721
1 411
3 057 313
557
105 425
20
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
49 901 603
2 725
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 492
35%
75%
7 095 885
1 357
2 939 724
536
101 370
19
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
50 307 082
2 747
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 438
35%
76%
6 812 050
1 303
2 822 135
515
97 315
18
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
50 712 561
2 769
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 383
36%
77%
6 528 215
1 249
2 704 546
493
93 260
18
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
51 118 041
2 792
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 329
36%
78%
6 244 379
1 194
2 586 957
472
89 205
17
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
51 523 520
2 814
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 275
37%
79%
5 960 544
1 140
2 469 368
450
85 151
16
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
51 928 999
2 836
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 220
37%
80%
5 676 708
1 086
2 351 779
429
81 096
15
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
52 334 478
2 858
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 166
38%
81%
5 392 873
1 031
2 234 190
407
77 041
15
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
52 739 957
2 880
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 112
38%
82%
5 109 037
977
2 116 601
386
72 986
14
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
53 145 436
2 902
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 057
39%
83%
4 825 202
923
1 999 012
364
68 931
13
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
53 550 916
2 924
669 157
37
149 551
18
7 003
39%
84%
4 541 367
869
1 881 423
343
64 877
12
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
53 956 395
2 947
669 157
37
149 551
18
6 949
40%
85%
4 257 531
814
1 763 834
322
60 822
11
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
54 361 874
2 969
669 157
37
149 551
18
6 894
40%
86%
3 973 696
760
1 646 245
300
56 767
11
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
54 767 353
2 991
669 157
37
149 551
18
6 840
41%
87%
3 689 860
706
1 528 656
279
52 712
10
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
55 172 832
3 013
669 157
37
149 551
18
6 786
41%
88%
3 406 025
651
1 411 067
257
48 657
9
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
55 578 311
3 035
669 157
37
149 551
18
6 731
42%
89%
3 122 190
597
1 293 479
236
44 603
8
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
55 983 791
3 057
669 157
37
149 551
18
6 677
42%
90%
2 838 354
543
1 175 890
214
40 548
8
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
56 389 270
3 079
669 157
37
149 551
18
6 623
42%
91%
2 554 519
489
1 058 301
193
36 493
7
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
56 794 749
3 102
669 157
37
149 551
18
6 568
43%
92%
2 270 683
434
940 712
172
32 438
6
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
57 200 228
3 124
669 157
37
149 551
18
6 514
43%
93%
1 986 848
380
823 123
150
28 384
5
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
57 605 707
3 146
669 157
37
149 551
18
6 460
44%
94%
1 703 012
326
705 534
129
24 329
5
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
58 011 186
3 168
669 157
37
149 551
18
6 405
44%
95%
1 419 177
271
587 945
107
20 274
4
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
58 416 666
3 190
669 157
37
149 551
18
6 351
45%
96%
1 135 342
217
470 356
86
16 219
3
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
58 822 145
3 212
669 157
37
149 551
18
6 296
45%
97%
851 506
163
352 767
64
12 164
2
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
59 227 624
3 234
669 157
37
149 551
18
6 242
46%
98%
567 671
109
235 178
43
8 110
2
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
59 633 103
3 257
669 157
37
149 551
18
6 188
46%
99%
283 835
54
117 589
21
4 055
1
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
60 038 582
3 279
669 157
37
149 551
18
6 133
47%
100%
0
0
0
0
0
0
6 609 136
1 264
2 738 071
499
94 416
18
11 907 023
943
60 444 061
3 301
669 157
37
149 551
18
6 079
47%
==PAGE:158==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:159==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
