==PAGE:1==
Vera Löw
Spatial release from masking
in complex acoustical scenes and
the effect of hearing aid processing
Master’s thesis, July 2016
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Electrical Engineering
Hearing Systems Group
Ørsteds Plads, building 352,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3950
www.hea.elektro.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Speech intelligibility in cocktail party scenarios has been the focus of numerous studies
in psychoacoustic research. Spatial release from masking (SRM) has been identiﬁed as a
major contributor to speech intelligibility in these situations. Literature reports SRMs
up to 20 dB when investigating speech reception thresholds (SRTs) in normal-hearing
(NH) listeners, and considerably less in hearing-impaired (HI) listeners. However, many
studies do not consider realistic listening environments, e.g. when testing in anechoic
conditions, applying unnatural masking noise or using unnatural masker conﬁgurations.
Therefore, the size of SRM in realistic scenes has been questioned.
The current study focused on SRM in realistic listening environments. The eﬀect of
reverberation, which was expected to reduce eﬀects of better-ear glimpsing and binaural
unmasking, and the eﬀect of reduced audibility following a hearing impairment on
SRM were investigated. SRTs were measured using target material from the Danish
hearing-in-noise test (HINT), masked by multi-talker babble. The test was conducted
on eleven NH and seven sensorineural HI listeners with a varying number of masking
dialogues (two and four) and diﬀerent reverberation times (0.2 s, 0.6 s, and 1 s). The HI
listeners wore hearing aids that provided diﬀerent levels of ampliﬁcation, gain prescribed
based on the audiogram, or a reduced gain. SRM was quantiﬁed as the diﬀerence
between SRTs measured with colocated and spatially separated target and maskers.
The measurements were conducted in the audio-visual immersion lab (AVIL) at DTU,
which comprises a 64-channel spherical loudspeaker array in an anechoic chamber. The
environments were auralizations of simulated room models.
Signiﬁcant SRM observed for NH listeners ranged from 1 to 4 dB and was thus smaller
than reported in many other studies on SRM. However, the magnitude was similar to
SRM measured in another study that was conducted in a virtual sound environment.
Moreover, in contrast to previous reports, no detrimental eﬀects of reverberation on
SRM were found in the present study. SRTs measured for HI listeners were 12 dB higher
than for NH listeners, while SRM was lower. When only reduced gain was provided to
the HI listeners, even a disadvantage from a separation of sound sources was observed in
the HI group. This eﬀect was mainly ascribed to the omnidirectional microphone setting
in the behind-the ear (BTE) hearing aid. When gain was increased, SRM increased.
However, it remained signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from SRM measured in NH listeners.
A better-ear glimpsing model was applied and could account for all SRM observed for
NH listeners when reverberation time was low, and for parts of the SRM observed in
the more reverberant environments.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
English title:
Spatial release from masking in complex acoustical scenes and the eﬀect of hearing
aid processing
Danish title:
Spatial maskeringsreduktion i komplekse akustiske miljøer og eﬀekten af
høreapparatsprocessering
This report was written by
Vera L¨ow (s141803)
Supervisors:
Adam Westermann1, Torsten Dau2, Jens Cubick2, Marton Marschall2
1Widex A/S
2Hearing Systems Group, Department of Electrical Engineering, Technical University of Denmark
Project period:
January 4 - July 4 2016
ECTS:
35
Education:
M. Sc. Eng.
Field:
Engineering Acoustics
Class:
Public
Edition:
1. edition
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulﬁllment of the requirements
for graduation in the above education at the Technical University
of Denmark.
Copyrights:
© Vera L¨ow, 2016
L¨ow, Vera
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgments
This thesis would not be what it is without my supervisor Adam Westermann. He
supported me along the way, showed enthusiasm for my work and always gave valuable
input. Thank you.
I thank my second supervisor Prof.
Torsten Dau for the enlightening comments,
encouraging words and the support.
I want to thank Jens Cubick and especially Marton Marschall for many helpful discus-
sions on the way.
I thank Jonas for reading this thesis and providing comments and suggestions, for being
my study buddy throughout the past two years, and for the beer.
I also want to thank my family who have supported me throughout my whole student
life and in my pursuit of completing the Master’s degree.
Jacob, you may be my most dedicated reader and critic, and you continuously saved
me from losing my mind. Thank you :)
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Contents
List of Figures
I
Nomenclature
III
1. Introduction
1
2. Background and theory
5
2.1. Real-world listening . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2. Spatial release from masking (SRM) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.1.
Binaural unmasking
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.2.
Better-ear eﬀects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.3.
Informational masking (IM) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3. Hearing aid processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4. Virtual sound environments (VSEs) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.4.1.
Virtual sound environments in hearing research
. . . . . . . . .
19
3. Methods
21
3.1. Stimulus generation and presentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.1.1.
Room simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.1.2.
Sound ﬁeld auralization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.1.3.
Audio-visual immersion lab (AVIL) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.1.4.
Speech intelligibility test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2. Subjects and hearing aids
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3. Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.4. Better-ear glimpsing model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.4.1.
Generation of ear signals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.4.2.
Functionality of the model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4. Results
33
4.1. Objective evaluation of the rooms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2. Speech intelligibility test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3. Better-ear glimpsing model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5. Discussion
45
6. Summary and conclusions
57
A. Appendix
59
==PAGE:8==
A.1. Details on informational masking
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
A.2. Details on virtual sound environments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
A.2.1. Higher-Order Ambisonics (HOA)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
A.2.2. Nearest loudspeaker (NLS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
A.3. Relevant room acoustical parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
A.4. Stimulus processing and spatialization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
A.5. Additional Figures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
A.6. Individual results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
A.7. Better-ear glimpsing results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
Bibliography
73
==PAGE:9==
List of Figures
1.
Target and masker locations in a SRM experiment . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.
SRM-results obtained by Best et al. (2012) for NH and HI listeners
. .
8
3.
SRM-results obtained by Glyde et al. (2013b) for NH and HI listeners .
9
4.
NAL-NL2 optimization process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.
ODEON room models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
6.
Sound source placement in ODEON room model . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
7.
Audiograms of HI test subjects
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
8.
Ear-signal generation diagram for better-ear glimpsing model . . . . . .
31
9.
Better-ear glimpsing model processing diagram . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
10.
Reverberation time and speech clarity in room models . . . . . . . . . .
33
11.
SRTs of NH test subjects in colocated and separated conditions
. . . .
35
12.
SRM-results of NH test subjects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
13.
SRTs of HI test subjects in colocated and separated conditions . . . . .
37
14.
SRM-results of HI test subjects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
15.
SRTs of NH and HI test subjects in colocated and separated conditions
40
16.
SRM-results of NH and HI test subjects compared . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
17.
BEGM-predictions and SRM-results of NH test subjects compared . . .
42
18.
SNR-advantage of better-ear glimpsing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
19.
Reﬂectograms of room models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
20.
Polar plots showing microphone directivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
21.
Hearing aid frequency response for test subject 7
. . . . . . . . . . . .
51
22.
Hearing aid frequency response for test subject 1
. . . . . . . . . . . .
52
23.
Ambisonics directivity patterns
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
24.
LTASS of spectrum-matched target and masker signals . . . . . . . . .
65
25.
BRIR recording in the AVIL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
26.
Measurement conditions in SRM experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
27.
LoRA processing ﬂow by Favrot & Buchholz (2010) . . . . . . . . . . .
68
28.
Individual SRTs of NH and HI test subjects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
29.
SNR-advantage of better-ear glimpsing in 1 kHz-band . . . . . . . . . .
70
30.
SNR-advantage of better-ear glimpsing in 4 kHz-band . . . . . . . . . .
71
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
Nomenclature
ANOVA
Analysis of variances
ANSI
American national standards institute
ASA
Auditory scene analysis
AVIL
Audio-visual immersion lab
BEGM
Better-ear glimpsing model
BKB
Bamford-Kowal-Bench (sentence lists)
BRIR
Binaural room impulse response
BTE
Behind-the-ear (hearing aid)
C50
Clarity (speech)
DRR
Direct-to-reverberant ratio
EC
Equalization-cancellation
EM
Energetic masking
HATS
Head and Torso Simulator
HI
Hearing-impaired
HINT
Hearing in noise test
HOA
Higher-order Ambisonics
HRTF
Head-related transfer function
HTL
Hearing threshold level
ILD
Interaural level diﬀerence
IM
Informational masking
ITD
Interaural time diﬀerence
ITE
In-the-ear
LTASS
Long-term averaged speech spectrum
==PAGE:12==
MHA
Master hearing aid
mRIR
Multi-channel room impulse response
NAL
National acoustic laboratories
NAL-NL2 Nonlinear ﬁtting rationale
NAL-RP
NAL procedure for profound hearing loss
NH
Normal-hearing
NLS
Nearest loudspeaker mapping
PiTU
Speech material of nonsense syllables and sentences with meaning
rH
Critical distance (Reverberation distance)
RIR
Room impulse response
rms
Root-mean-square
SII
Speech intelligibility index
SNR
Signal-to-noise ratio
SRM
Spatial release from masking
SRT
Speech reception threshold
STI
Speech transmission index
TMR
Target-to-masker ratio
VSE
Virtual sound environment
WDRC
Wide dynamic range compression
==PAGE:13==
1. Introduction
One notable ability of the healthy human auditory system is to understand speech from
a single talker in the presence of multiple other talkers. This ability is referred to as
the “cocktail party eﬀect”, a term coined by Cherry (1953). The underlying auditory
mechanisms and their interaction remain as a focus of many research activities, not only
in psychoacoustics (Bronkhorst, 2000). Listening to a single talker in an acoustically
complex environment is challenging. Listeners’ performance in the cocktail party is
inﬂuenced both by the state of their auditory periphery and cognitive factors as well the
acoustic conditions such as reverberation and signal-to-noise ratios. The background
sounds introduce auditory masking, a psychoacoustical phenomenon that deﬁnes the
interfering eﬀect of one sound on another. Furthermore, reverberation in a room can
aﬀect speech intelligibility by smearing out the spectro-temporal representation of the
target signal (e.g. George et al., 2008).
Studies have shown that the spatial separation of sources results in an advantage in
speech intelligibility when multiple sound sources are present (e.g. Freyman et al., 1999;
Arbogast et al., 2002). This eﬀect is called spatial release from masking (SRM) and will
be the main focus in this Master’s thesis. In a real-world multi-talker environment, the
listener is engaged in a dynamic conversation, reverberation is present and other talkers
are located at diﬀerent positions in the room, providing the possibility of SRM. The
eﬀect is commonly quantiﬁed in a speech intelligibility test as the diﬀerence between the
speech reception thresholds (SRT) obtained with colocated (all sources at one location)
vs. spatially separated target and masker signals (e.g. Litovsky, 2012). Studies that
focused on SRM often showed great advantages from the separation of sound sources
and reported SRM of up to 20 dB (Freyman et al., 1999).
The mechanisms that contribute to SRM have been the topic of several studies: Monaural
and spatial auditory processing, like better-ear listening and binaural unmasking, seem
to be involved, but also cognitive processing plays a role in segregating diﬀerent sound
streams (Kidd et al., 2007).
Better-ear listening and binaural unmasking can be ascribed to energetic masking (EM),
“deﬁned as the loss of detectable target information due to the spectral overlap of the
target and masking signals” (Brungart et al., 2005). Better-ear eﬀects reﬂect the ability
to make advantage of a SNR-diﬀerence between the two ears, by attending to the one
with the higher SNR. Binaural unmasking describes a processing strategy of utilizing
binaural localization cues of target and masker signals to improve speech intelligibility.
Room-acoustical settings can inﬂuence these mechanisms (Kidd et al., 2005b).
Segregation of sound streams is a complex mechanism that involves cognitive processing
1
==PAGE:14==
1. Introduction
and helps to overcome eﬀects of so-called “informational masking” (IM). IM relates to
masking that cannot be accounted for by EM and comprises masking eﬀects of a central
nature, including the inability to perceptually segregating sound sources. Many of the
studies on SRM applied unnatural speech corpora with, e.g., nonsense target sentences,
or the listening environments the test subjects were exposed to did not represent real-life
listening scenarios. These unnatural listening conditions may neglect the complex eﬀects
of room acoustics and introduce a large amount of IM, which together lead to a rather
high SRM (Kidd et al., 2007).
The present study aimed at applying more realistic conditions by making use of virtual
sound environments (VSEs).
Many physical properties of these environments are
in accordance with real-life listening situations and yet provide the advantages of a
controllable laboratory situation, which makes them a strong and eﬀective tool for
many psychoacoustic research projects. Westermann & Buchholz (2015b) quantiﬁed
SRM with approximately 3 dB for normal-hearing (NH) test subjects in the presence of
reverberation by making use of a VSE. Understanding the role of SRM and quantifying
it in real-life situations was the primary goal of the present study. Therefore, SRM was
measured under similar conditions as in Westermann & Buchholz (2015b), but also
highlighted the eﬀects that diﬀerent amounts of reverberation have on SRM. This leads
to the ﬁrst research question: How much SRM can be measured in a realistic listening
environment including diﬀerent amounts of reverberation?
Hearing-impaired (HI) listeners often report of diﬃculties understanding speech in
reverberant multi-talker conditions. Studies have shown, that speech intelligibility
is deteriorated in HI listeners, especially in the presence of background sounds (e.g.
Bronkhorst & Plomp, 1992; Glyde et al., 2013b). Also, the performance of HI people in
SRM tasks is mostly reduced compared to NH listeners (e.g. Bronkhorst, 2000) but the
underlying deﬁcits in HI people are not yet fully understood. Whereas supra-threshold
deﬁcits in decoding temporal ﬁne structure (TFS) and reduced frequency selectivity
have been proposed earlier, newer studies focused on reduced audibility as the main
cause for decreased SRM (Glyde et al., 2015). In this study, HI test subjects were given
a basic hearing aid ﬁtting. By using two diﬀerent gain settings, audibility was partly
restored in order to answer the second research question: How do HI listeners beneﬁt
from a spatial separation of sound sources when audibility is partly restored?
The role of IM in real-life situations has been challenged recently (Westermann &
Buchholz, 2015b), suggesting a major contribution of EM eﬀects when measuring SRM
under realistic conditions. This study therefore investigated the impact of EM on
the measured SRM eﬀects. For this purpose, a better-ear glimpsing model (BEGM)
2
==PAGE:15==
was applied, which simulated an auditory processing strategy of exploiting short-term
advantages in signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) between the two ears (Brungart & Iyer, 2012).
These SNR-advantages can occur if multiple sound sources are present in a room.
This leads to the third research question: How much of the SRM in realistic listening
scenarios can be explained by means of better-ear glimpsing?
In order to quantify SRM in realistic multiple-talker scenarios, a speech intelligibility
experiment was set up in the audio-visual immersion lab (AVIL), which is a spherical
64-loudspeaker array placed in an anechoic chamber at the Technical University of
Denmark (DTU). It enabled the realization of three diﬀerent VSEs based on ODEON
(Christensen, 2001) room models.
Outline of the thesis
Chapter 2 provides an overview of SRM, the involved psychoacoustic mechanisms and
its relevance in real-life listening. Furthermore, a brief overview about hearing aid signal
processing is provided and the general concept of VSEs is introduced. Chapter 3
focuses on the methods that were used in this study.
It ﬁrst explains the signal
generation and presentation for the speech intelligibility test, including details on the
speech material, room simulation and sound ﬁeld reconstruction. Then, it introduces the
test subjects who participated in the experiments. The procedure that was applied in
the speech intelligibility measurements is presented and ﬁnally, the functionality of the
better-ear glimpsing model is explained. Chapter 4 presents an objective evaluation of
the room models. It shows the results that were obtained for NH and HI listeners during
the SRM experiments, and a comparison with better-ear glimpsing model predictions..
Chapter 5 includes a general discussion of the methods and results in relation to the
research questions of this project. It provides answers to the research questions that
have been raised in the beginning. Chapter 6 summarizes the main ﬁndings of the
thesis. Conclusions are drawn and the results of this study are integrated in the broader
spectrum of research on SRM.
3
==PAGE:16==
1. Introduction
4
==PAGE:17==
2. Background and theory
This chapter presents the main aspects involved in real-world listening situations. The
role of SRM is explained and psychoacoustic mechanisms that cause and aﬀect SRM are
presented. Later in this chapter, relevant information on hearing aid signal processing
is provided and the concept of VSEs is introduced.
2.1. Real-world listening
Many real-word listening situations are characterized by the presence of one talker, who
is usually facing the listener at a conversational distance, and multiple other sounds
in the background. The background sounds range from ventilation noise, dishes rattle
to speech from other people in the room. Speech intelligibility in such a challenging
listening situation requires the audibility of the target sound, which is impeded by
masking eﬀects in the auditory periphery.
The spatial conﬁguration of target and masking sources has an inﬂuence on the masking
eﬃciency. Many studies have shown that masking eﬀects decrease when target and
maskers are spatially separated rather than colocated, resulting in a spatial advantage of
up to 20 dB (e.g. Kidd et al., 1998; Freyman et al., 1999). Other factors that inﬂuence
speech intelligibility in complex listening situations are spectral diﬀerences between
target and interfering sounds, the number of interfering sound sources, ﬂuctuations in
level (modulations) of the interfering sounds, the acoustics of the environment, and
hearing impairment of the listener (Bronkhorst, 2000). The eﬀects are interconnected.
For example, the acoustics in a room inﬂuence the spectral content and level ﬂuctuations
of the regarded stimuli.
In any room, sound consists of three components: direct sound, early and late reﬂections.
Direct sound moves on a direct path from source to listener. Sound on other paths gets
reﬂected by surfaces in the room and within the ﬁrst 50 to 80 ms, early reﬂections reach
the listener. They are typically not heard as a separate sound event, but rather tend to
reinforce the direct sound percept. The localization towards the perceived location of
the whole sound event is called the “precedence eﬀect” (Litovsky et al., 1999). Direct
sound is essential for speech intelligibility, and early reﬂections are beneﬁcial. This could
be shown by e.g. Bradley & Sato (2002), who found a similar eﬀect of early reﬂections
and an increased direct sound level on speech intelligibility in NH and HI listeners. Early
reﬂections, in combination with individual frequency-dependent absorption coeﬃcients
of diﬀerent surfaces in the room introduce coloration (Salomons, 1995). Coloration
5
==PAGE:18==
2. Background and theory
eﬀects can serve as a segregation cue for target and masker signals, that are separated in
space (Westermann & Buchholz, 2015a). Segregation and perceptual streaming are the
basic principles on which auditory scene analysis (ASA) is based. ASA is a conceptual
framework that explains SRM-eﬀects by means of perceptual streaming and segregation
of target and masker signals. This approach also includes attentional eﬀects and will be
explained in more detail in Section 2.2.3.
Early reﬂections are followed by late reﬂections, which arrive at the listener after 50 ms
and make up the “reverberant” perception of sound. Reverberation impedes speech
intelligibility (e.g. Nabelek, 1989; Lavandier et al., 2012). Reverberation negatively
aﬀects speech intelligibility because it reduces the depth of the intrinsic modulations,
and thereby smears speech segments. In order to account for the negative eﬀect of
reverberation on speech intelligibility, the speech transmission index (STI, Steeneken &
Houtgast, 1980) was developed. It is a measure of the modulation depth, reduced by
reverberation, as a predictor for speech intelligibility. In real-world listening situations,
speech is often masked by other speech, which is the most eﬀective masker compared to
modulated and unmodulated noise with the same long-term spectrum as the speech
(Rosen et al., 2013). Reverberation not only aﬀects speech intelligibility by smearing
the target speech, but inﬂuences masking speech in the same way. It can lead to less
modulation depth in the masking signal and a decreased potential of “listening in the
dips”. Reverberation can reduce speech intelligibility by up to 10 dB in terms of SRT
(Bronkhorst, 2015).
The speech intelligibility of NH listeners do not have problem with understanding their
conversational partner in a coktail party situation. HI people, however, often report of
diﬃculties in these situations, despite wearing hearing aids (Kochkin et al., 2010). It
has been shown that HI listeners beneﬁt less from ﬂuctuations in interfering sounds
than NH listeners (Bronkhorst, 2000; Bernstein & Grant, 2009). Therefore, speech with
its intrinsic modulations is a more eﬀective masker for HI listeners, who seem to have
less access to temporal gaps in the masker signal. This ﬁnding is most often attributed
to reduced audibility, combined with a reduced temporal resolution (Rhebergen et al.,
2010).
In a cocktail party situation with spatially separated sound sources, an increase of
reverberation or of masking talkers, however, has a less detrimental eﬀect on speech
intelligibility for HI listeners than for NH listeners (Bronkhorst, 2000). This is explained
by the decreased head shadow eﬀect observed in HI listeners, due to the often encountered
high-frequency hearing loss. The access to interaural level diﬀerences (ILDs) thus has a
small dynamic range in HI listeners and is robust against disruption by reverberation.
6
==PAGE:19==
2.2. Spatial release from masking (SRM)
2.2. Spatial release from masking (SRM)
In a cocktail-party scenario, a listener can make use of the fact that diﬀerent sound
sources are separated in space. A spatial separation of sound sources leads to SRM
and therefore generally improves speech intelligibility. SRM is typically deﬁned as the
diﬀerence in SRTs measured in a condition with colocated target and masker versus a
condition with spatially separated sound sources. In the colocated condition of a typical
SRM experiment, speech and masking signals are presented from the same direction,
usually the front. In a spatially separated condition, the target is played from the
same (frontal) direction while the masker is shifted along the horizontal plane. Figure 1
depicts the colocated and separated target-masker conﬁgurations, as applied in many
SRM studies.
Figure 1: Target and masker locations in a SRM experiment. Left: Target and masker
are colocated. Right: Masker is shifted along the horizontal plane.
SRM is not only observed for changes in direction, but also for changes in distance
(Shinn-Cunningham et al., 2001; Westermann & Buchholz, 2015a), and head orientation
of the masking talkers (Strelcyk et al., 2014). The amount of SRM is inﬂuenced by the
exact spatial conﬁguration, the number of interfering maskers and the applied speech
corpus (Bronkhorst, 2000; Brungart et al., 2001). Also, the type of masker inﬂuences
how much SRM is observed. A speech masker introduces both, energetic masking
(EM) and informational masking (IM). The long-term spectrum of speech can be quite
similar among diﬀerent talkers, at least for same-sex talkers. This aﬀects the EM of a
speech masker. However, the inherently amplitude-modulated speech also facilitates dip-
listening, an eﬀect that is enhanced when the masker signal is shifted on the horizontal
axis, leading to a masking release. IM, however, is introduced in the colocated condition
by target-masker similarities and attentional eﬀects. In a spatial separation of target
and masking speech, segregation cues such as diﬀerences in localization (Kidd et al.,
7
==PAGE:20==
2. Background and theory
2005a) and fundamental frequencies (e.g. Darwin et al., 2003) enable the release from IM.
In HI listeners, a reduced eﬀect of SRM has been shown in several studies (e.g. Marrone
et al., 2008; Minnaar et al., 2011; Best et al., 2012, 2013; Glyde et al., 2015). Best et al.
(2012) found a diﬀerence in SRM of 5.8 dB between listeners with hearing impairment
and listeners with normal hearing (see Figure 2).
(a) SRTs in dB SNR for NH (black) and HI (white)
listeners, measured in the colocated (left) and
spatially separated (right) condition.
(b) SRM in dB for NH (black) and HI
(white) listeners, using the CRM
corpus.
Figure 2: Results from a SRM experiment conducted by Best et al. (2012)
The large diﬀerence in SRM between NH and HI listeners was mainly due to diﬀerences
in SRTs obtained in the spatially separated condition (see Figure 2a). NH as well as
HI listeners had similarly high thresholds at positive SNRs in the colocated condition.
Several other studies also revealed that increased thresholds in the spatially separated
condition lead to the decreased SRM in HI listeners. Reduced spatial processing ability
compared to NH individuals has been proposed as a potential cause (Gelfand, 1988;
Dubno et al., 2002; Ching et al., 2011). However, e.g. Noble et al. (1997) provided
evidence for an intact processing of binaural cues. Another possible reason for reduced
SRM in HI listeners could be a less eﬀective release from IM. While Agus et al. (2009)
found less IM in HI test subjects, Helfer & Freyman (2008) showed that HI listeners
and NH listeners were equally aﬀected by IM.
Best et al. (2013) measured SRM in NH and HI listeners. The obtained thresholds in
the spatially separated condition did not vary much when the masker type (EM vs. IM)
changed. This suggested, that thresholds were aﬀected by an ”EM-ﬂoor”, where EM
limited the performance. Reduced SRM in HI listeners may thus be a result of a higher
8
==PAGE:21==
2.2. Spatial release from masking (SRM)
“ﬂoor”, as they are more susceptible to noise. This explanation suggests audibility as a
main factor for reduced SRM in HI listeners. Decreased audibility might furthermore
restrict access to binaural cues, which in turn lowers SRM eﬀects.
Glyde et al. (2013b) investigated the spatial-processing ability of NH and HI listeners
with diﬀerent degrees of hearing loss. In their study, test subjects participated in the
Listening in Spatialized Noise-Sentences test (LiSN-S). Audibility was accounted for by
applying an individualized linear ampliﬁcation according to the revised NAL procedure
for profound hearing loss (NAL-RP) directly on the stimuli. The main hypothesis
was, that spatial-processing abilities were degraded in HI listeners with sensorineural
hearing loss. Indeed, they found a negative eﬀect of hearing loss on SRM, despite
the compensation for audibility, when age was controlled for. SRM was negatively
correlated with hearing loss, thus even in the range of 0 −20 dB HL SRM decreased
with threshold (see Figure 3).
Figure 3: SRTs in dB SNR over hearing loss as a four-frequency average in dB HL.
White symbols indicate a same-voice masker, black symbols indicate a
diﬀerent-voice masker. Thresholds were obtained after audibility had been
restored. Regression lines are plotted for the colocated and spatially sep-
arated conditions.
Decreasing distance between the lines with hearing
threshold indicates reduced SRM. From: Glyde et al. (2013b)
Glyde et al. (2013b) argued later that the used ﬁtting rationale did not provide complete
audibility restoration but only some linear gain. Therefore, it was hypothesized that
9
==PAGE:22==
2. Background and theory
reduced audibility was a contributing factor to reduced SRM, observed in the HI
listeners. In a following study, the authors aimed at evaluating the eﬀect of audibility
on SRM. Therefore, diﬀerent levels of ampliﬁcation were applied on top of the NAL-RP
prescription to HI adults (Glyde et al., 2015). Audibility resulting from the combination
of hearing loss and the diﬀerent ampliﬁcation levels was additionally simulated in
NH listeners by ﬁltering the speech material. They observed an increase in SRM
with ampliﬁcation, when listeners were aided with three diﬀerent gain settings. This
observation was made for NH listeners with simulated audibility loss and for the HI
listeners. Audibility could account for the majority of the observed reduction in SRM.
However, the SRM achieved by the NH listeners with simulated audibility loss remained
signiﬁcantly higher than SRM achieved by the HI listeners, suggesting that audibility
alone could not account for reduced SRM in HI.
Another outcome of the study by Glyde et al. (2013b) was, that aging is not signiﬁcantly
correlated with spatial-processing ability. This supports previous ﬁndings from Cameron
et al. (2011) who failed to show any decline in spatial-processing ability with age when
measuring NH aged up to 60 years. However, Dubno et al. (2002) and Dubno et al.
(2008) found that older adults with and without hearing loss have higher thresholds for
speech in steady-state noise and derive less beneﬁt from spatial separation of speech
and noise sources.
2.2.1. Binaural unmasking
It is assumed that the auditory system beneﬁts from binaural processing strategies to
improve speech intelligibility in cocktail party situations. Diﬀerent binaural localization
cues for target and masker can be utilized for improving the“internal SNR”representation
and improve speech intelligibility in a spatially separated condition (e.g. Bronkhorst
& Plomp, 1988; Dubno et al., 2002). One important binaural localization cue is the
interaural time diﬀerence (ITD), which describes the diﬀerence of arrival times of a
signal reaching the two ears of a person. This ITD varies with spatial location on the
horizontal plane with a maximum of 0.69 ms for a sound from a 90° angle. The auditory
system is most sensitive to diﬀerences in arrival times for frequencies between 700 Hz
and 1 kHz (Litovsky, 2012). Above that frequency range, the phase information of
the signals at the two ears gets ambiguous if no onset information is available. ITD
perception is furthermore limited by the loss of temporal ﬁne structure (TFS), i.e. the
rapid oscillations, decoding at high frequencies (Moore, 2008). However, less salient
ITD information can be decoded from the envelope for signal frequencies above 1.5 kHz.
How ITD cues might be used to improve speech intelligibility in the presence of
10
==PAGE:23==
2.2. Spatial release from masking (SRM)
background sounds, has been explained with the help of the Equalization-Cancellation
model (EC-model), ﬁrst presented by Durlach (1963). Due to this model of binaural
interaction, the auditory system is able to “cancel out” interfering sounds in a spatial
conﬁguration of multiple sound sources with diﬀerent interaural relationships of target
and masker. The model relies on a two-steps mechanism. In a ﬁrst step, the signals at
the two ears are transformed so that the masking components are “equalized”. Hereby,
the combination of ITD and interaural level diﬀerence (ILD) cues that produce the
best “equalization” of the masker components present at the two ears is applied. In
a consecutive step, a “cancellation” of the resulting signals by subtracting one from
the other is achieved. The increased speech intelligibility by the utility of binaural
localization cues is called “binaural unmasking”. In the EC-model, compensation for
ITD cues have a much greater impact on predictions than ILD cues.
According to Bronkhorst (2015), SRM ascribed to ITD-processing can amount up to
4 dB. A recent study by Schoenmaker et al. (2016) addressed the binaural contribution
to SRM in multi-talker scenarios. They argue, that there are two potential ways in
which binaural cues may contribute to improved speech intelligibility. One is the eﬀect
of binaural unmasking, described above. This eﬀect recovers target elements that are
dominated by the masker, and that would be inaudible in monaural conditions. Second,
a better segregation of concurrent speech streams with a supra-threshold target might
be achieved. They found evidence, that binaural unmasking contributed marginally to
SRM, favoring a major contribution of stream segregation, enhanced by interaural cues.
Sound source segregation is addressed in Section 2.2.3.
In a real-world situation, reﬂections in a room disrupt ﬁne timing cues that are otherwise
used for the binaural analysis of the encountered stimuli.
Reﬂections in a room
decorrelate the interfering sound at the two ears, i.e. decrease the similarity of the two
waveforms produced at the ears (Hartmann et al., 1998; Lavandier et al., 2012). With
decorrelated masker signals at the two ears, the EC-mechanism will less successfully
“equalize” the two signals and less successfully “cancel” interfering sounds and improve
the internal SNR (Lavandier & Culling, 2008). Furthermore, reverberation modiﬁes the
signal phases at the ears and therefore disrupts ITDs between target and masker. An
environment, which hinders exploitation of ITD-cues by a high amount of reverberation
does not provide a substantial margin for a masking release in the spatial domain based
on binaural unmasking.
Studies with HI test subjects showed, that beneﬁts obtained from a spatial separation
of target and masker sounds are reduced compared to NH listeners (e.g. Glyde et al.,
2013b). A less eﬀective TFS processing in HI listeners could account for a reduced
11
==PAGE:24==
2. Background and theory
binaural unmasking (Moore, 2008), because TFS decoding is essential for ITD extraction.
Literature also suggests that listeners with hearing loss have reduced sensitivity to ITDs
(Fuellgrabe & Moore, 2012), which may reduce their ability to achieve SRM (Gallun
et al., 2005). Bronkhorst (2000), however, argued that the EC-process itself is not
disrupted in HI listeners. Rather, reduced audibility can lead to a restricted access
to localization cues and thereby explain the reduced beneﬁt from spatially separating
target and masker.
2.2.2. Better-ear effects
Long-term better-ear eﬀects
When masking sound is presented to the listener from the side, it reaches the more
distant ear with a reduced level, due to the head shadow. The SNR encountered on
the ear further away from the masking source, the ”better ear”, is improved compared
to a reference condition in which both, target and masking sounds are presented from
the front. ILDs are more pronounced at higher frequencies above 1.5 kHz (Freyman
et al., 1999), which have short wavelenghts and get diﬀracted by the head. For high
frequency sounds, ILDs can amount up to 20 dB (Bronkhorst & Plomp, 1988). The
better-ear-eﬀect has been shown to contribute by up to 20 dB to the masking release
when target and masking sources are widely separated compared to a colocated condition
(Freyman et al., 1999).
Dynamic better-ear eﬀects
The better-ear-eﬀect introduced in the previous paragraph assumes a spatial conﬁgura-
tion of target and masker such that there is an advantage to be gained from attending
the ear with the better signal-to-noise ratio. A large portion of SRM can be attributed
to the head shadow eﬀect that reduces the amount of EM in a spatially-separated
condition. However, this better-ear strategy becomes more diﬃcult when the target is
masked by interfering sources positioned at symmetric locations to the left and right of
the target (Brungart & Iyer, 2012).
In the absence of long-term SNR advantages at either ear, listeners still make use
of short-term SNR advantages by taking “better-ear-glimpses” or “cross-ear glimpses”
(Brungart & Iyer, 2012; Glyde et al., 2013a). Brungart & Iyer (2012) showed that NH
listeners are able to eﬃciently extract information from better-ear glimpses in a SRM
task. When comparing the performance of NH test subjects listening to unprocessed
stimuli and to“ideal-listener signals”, processed based on an optimal better-ear glimpsing
strategy, they found similar results. Thus, SRM in the presence of symmetric masking
12
==PAGE:25==
2.2. Spatial release from masking (SRM)
sources is a result of advantages of moment-by-moment and frequency-by-frequency
variations in the SNR, exploited by selecting the ear with the better SNR in each
individual combination of time segment and frequency band.
These better-ear-glimpses contribute primarily to the spatial release from energetic
masking, as could be shown by Glyde et al. (2013a). In their experiment, most of the
observed SRM (6 dB out of 8 dB) could be explained by a better-ear glimpsing strategy.
Reverberation increases the amount of EM by smearing out temporal gaps. It can
also be shown that reverberation reduces the beneﬁt that is obtained by spatially
separating the target from a ﬂuctuating masker, if that is predominantly energetic in
nature (Freyman et al., 1999). In that case, reverberation can reduce SRM by 6 dB,
as found by Kidd et al. (2005b). In their study, SRTs were found to increase by only
1 dB in the colocated condition when reverberation was introduced, while SRTs were
raised by 6 −7 dB in the separated condition. A possible reason is that ILD cues get
disrupted in reverberant sound environments. This is because sound reﬂections reduce
both the possibility for dip listening (e.g. George et al., 2008) and the magnitude of
head shadowing on which better-ear listening relies (Plomp, 1976). The better-ear
strategy therefore becomes less eﬃcient in a reverberant environment.
HI listeners may have limited access to ILD cues, simply because of reduced audibility,
especially in the high frequencies. The critical band concept furthermore assumes
broader auditory ﬁlters in HI listeners with sensorineural hearing loss, causing a reduced
frequency resolution (de Boer & Bouwmeester, 1974). If a better-ear glimpsing method
is considered to be performed on a band-to-band basis in the auditory periphery, this
glimpsing mechanism would have reduced resolution in HI listeners, due to wider
auditory ﬁlters and thus could account for reduced SRM. Thus, wider auditory bands
as observed in HI listeners may reduce the resolution of the glimpsing and potentially
reduce the SNR beneﬁt (Glyde et al., 2013a). However, when hearing impairment
was modelled by increased bandwidths of auditory ﬁlters and applied to the better-ear
glimpsing model (Glyde et al., 2013a), the obtained results only diﬀered by 1 to 2 dB
from normal-hearing better-ear glimpsing simulations and thus could only partly explain
the reduced SRM found in the HI people.
2.2.3. Informational masking (IM)
Informational masking (IM) is a widely used term for any type of masker that goes
beyond and is often contrasted to EM. The term ’informational masking’ was suggested
by Pollack (1975), because thresholds that were obtained in multiple-talker speech
intelligibility tasks were higher than when using a noise masker. For details on IM, see
13
==PAGE:26==
2. Background and theory
Appendix A.1.
Release from IM does not necessarily involve an SNR advantage, in contrast to release
from EM. When sound sources are separated in space, spatial cues help in streaming
and segregating target and masker and therefore result in a release from IM. Besides
binaural localization cues, monaural localization cues further support source segregation.
However, since spatial separation also introduces the previously discussed eﬀects of
target-masker diﬀerences in terms of internal SNR-representation and objective SNR at
the two ears, it is diﬃcult to determine the contribution of release from IM individually.
Quantifying EM eﬀects, however, is less challenging. In several SRM studies, IM was
diminished and EM was isolated by reversing the masking speech (Freyman et al., 2001),
or by using unintelligible noise with similar peripheral masking characteristics (Brungart
et al., 2001; Best et al., 2013). However, usually only confusion-based IM was considered
in those studies and IM based on attentional eﬀects was probably still present.
Kidd et al. (2005a) measured SRM in the presence of diﬀerent masker types and
reverberation in an anechoic room that was treated with either foam wedges or plexiglas
on the walls to obtain diﬀerent reverberation conditions. Reverberation time led to a
SRT-increase of 6 dB in the presence of a speech masker, referred to as the IM-masker,
when it was colocated with the target. SRTs in the separated condition were raised by
6 −7 dB for all masker types. This increase in threshold with increasing reverberation
found in the separated condition was attributed to a reduction of ITD and ILD cues.
A large advantage from spatial separation of 15 −17 dB was found that was, however,
not aﬀected by reverberation. That suggested that release from IM was robust against
reverberation. In contrast, Culling et al. (2003) showed that reverberation aﬀects
perceptual segregation of the competing talkers’ fundamental frequencies as well as of
spatial locations of the sources, both disrupting SRM.
Many SRM studies have used the Coordinate Response Measure (CRM, e.g. Bolia
et al., 2000; Brungart et al., 2001; Shinn-Cunningham, 2008; Best et al., 2013) or other
speech corpora with high target-masker and contextual similarities. These lead to target
and masker confusions, introducing a high amount of IM. Consequently, these studies
report large SRM eﬀects. A similar eﬀect has been observed for speech-on-speech tests
with the same target and masking talker (e.g. same-voice condition in Listening in
Spatialized Noise-Sentences test; Cameron & Dillon, 2007). It is questionable, however,
how the results of those studies translate into real-life listening situations.
Westermann & Buchholz (2015b) investigated the role of IM in NH listeners using
Bamford-Kowal-Bench (BKB) sentences (Bench et al., 1979) in a reverberant VSE and
concluded that IM related to target-masker confusions is of low relevance in real-life
14
==PAGE:27==
2.2. Spatial release from masking (SRM)
listening. In that study, SRTs were measured using diﬀerent masker signals. SRTs
obtained with a two-dialogue masker were lower than with a corresponding seven-
dialogue masker. The authors argued that diﬀerent individual target-to-masker ratios
(TMRs) might have been the reason, i.e. the level of the target talker compared to the
level of each individual masker. TMRs were higher when seven masking talkers were
presented at the same overall dB SPL than with a two-dialogue masker, suggesting a
lower IM-portion in the seven-dialogue masker. The eﬀect was counteracted by reduced
dip-listening in the seven-dialogue masker condition. The second eﬀect was prevailing
and thus led to increased SRTs with a higher number of masking talkers.
The SRM was found to be 3 dB for a two-dialogue masker and only 1 dB higher with a
seven-dialogue masker. The overall low SRM further suggests a low impact of IM eﬀects.
Following the argumentation of Westermann & Buchholz (2015b), IM in everyday
listening situations is limited in its dynamic range. At low SNRs, it is limited by the EM
the masker brings about. At positive TMRs, diﬀerent loudness of target and maskers
serves as segregation cue and IM is low because of the intelligibility of the target.
Positive TMRs can - depending on the number of masking talkers - even be observed at
negative SNRs when the interfering talkers are not directly facing the listener (Agus
et al., 2009).
It is controversial if hearing impairment directly inﬂuences IM. In a study by Micheyl
and Arthaud(2000) no diﬀerences between NH and HI listeners were found when
investigating IM in tones. Similarly, HI listeners were equally aﬀected by IM as NH
listeners in a study on speech intelligibility by Helfer & Freyman (2008). In contrast,
Agus et al. (2009) investigated the amount of IM in young and elderly listeners for
speech masked by simultaneous speech and found that young and elderly listeners were
equally susceptible to IM, while HI listeners showed less IM. However, the reduced IM
did mainly result in lower SRTs obtained in the colocated reference condition and did
therefore not reveal substantial arguments for the poor performance of HI listeners in a
realistic cocktail party situation where sources are separated in space.
Release from IM by perceptual stream segregation is achieved by successfully decoding
ITD information in the separated condition. Literature suggests that listeners with
hearing loss have either reduced sensitivity to ITDs (Moore, 2008; Fuellgrabe & Moore,
2012) or less access to ITDs and ILDs due to a higher “EM-ﬂoor”, reﬂecting reduced
audibility. This would provide less segregation cues and may therefore explain a reduced
release from IM.
15
==PAGE:28==
2. Background and theory
2.3. Hearing aid processing
Hearing aids are supposed to improve speech intelligibility. However, many hearing aid
users still experience diﬃculties in complex listening situations (e.g. Kochkin et al.,
2010). Hearing aids can provide audibility, but hearing aid signal processing might
also disrupt cues that listeners use in cocktail party situations. Limited bandwidths,
compression as in modern wide dynamic range compression (WDRC) hearing aids,
latencies and the disruption of pinna cues by microphone placement are examples.
ILDs are decoded from high-frequency information in order to improve the SNR at the
two ears (see Section 2.2.2). Providing high-frequency gain thus can improve speech
intelligibility, even if it is not directly needed for making the speech signal audible.
High-frequency information can be missing due to a limited hearing aid bandwidth
(Moore et al., 2010). However, modern hearing aids usually have cutoﬀfrequencies
above the frequency range containing relevant speech information. ILD cues can also be
disrupted by fast-acting compression, leading to a diﬀerent ampliﬁcation in the two ears.
Low acting WDRC (LA-WDRC) can preserve ILD-cues. Moore et al. (2010) studied the
eﬀect of slow- versus fast-acting compression and found that slow compression resulted
in slightly but signiﬁcantly lower thresholds than fast compression, when testing SRTs
in HI subjects in a spatially separated condition.
Inter-ear (IE) compression is a feature for sharing compression settings among the two
communicating hearing aids. It identiﬁes where a sound is coming from and adjusts the
gain in the opposite ear accordingly, in order to preserve localization cues. Korhonen
et al. (2015) studied the impact of IE compression on sound localization. The use of IE
compression in a behind-the-ear (BTE) hearing aid with omnidirectional microphone
setting reduced the error rate of localizing sounds to the sides from 15 ◦to 8 ◦. Limited
ampliﬁcation due to the underlying gain prescription might also inhibit the access to
ILD cues.
BTE hearing aids can also disrupt pinna cues (Best et al., 2009), normally used for
localization and thus helpful for sound source segregation. When the microphone
on the hearing aid is placed on the ear, sound bypasses the pinna. Some hearing
aid manufacturers oﬀer a “digital pinna” feature. This applies a directivity to the
microphones, similar to an in-situ directivity of the unaided pinna. It can result in
better localization performance, predominantly regarding front-back localization, than
an omnidirectional microphone (Keidser et al., 2009; Kuk et al., 2013).
Ampliﬁcation generally improves speech intelligibility, by restoring audibility and by
preserving access to monaural and binaural cues. Ampliﬁcation, however, can also
have negative consequences. Examples of ampliﬁcation drawbacks are uncomfortable
16
==PAGE:29==
2.3. Hearing aid processing
loudness, increased feedback or distortion, and upward or downward spread of masking.
Fitting rationales prescribe insertion gains as a function of frequency and compromise
the diﬀerent demands on ampliﬁcation.
Lybarger (1944, cited in Byrne, 1986) developed the “half-gain rule”, in which the
prescribed gain equaled half the amount of hearing loss at each frequency.
This
procedure resulted in more comfortable listening levels than did the ”mirroring” method
which was introduced earlier and aimed at completely compensating for the hearing loss
in each band. The half-gain rule has been used ever since as the basis for many of the
prescriptive ﬁtting formulas, such as the formula that was presented by the National
Acoustic Laboratories (NAL) Australia in 1976. This approach considered the frequency
range between 400 Hz and 5 kHz, as important for speech intelligibility, and aimed
at providing constant loudness over frequency. The overall aim of the original NAL
ﬁtting formula can be summarized as maximizing intelligibility at the most comfortable
listening level. Over the years, the original NAL rationale has been revised and extended
to NAL-R and NAL-RP (Byrne, 1986).
More recently, the popularity of nonlinear hearing aids has grown. Therefore, pre-
scription procedures were needed that provided gain-frequency responses which were
dependent on input level. NAL-NL2 is a threshold-based procedure that prescribes
the compression ratios at diﬀerent frequencies in WDRC hearing aids. The overall
aim is maximizing speech intelligibility for any input level of speech, while keeping
the loudness at a comfortable level. The NAL-NL2 rationale is therefore based on a
strategy for optimizing intelligibility and loudness (Keidser et al., 2011). Figure 4 shows
the optimization ﬂow. An intelligibility model optimizes the gain-frequency response to
maximize speech intelligibility in a loop. It is based on the speech-intelligibility index
(SII), but revised such that it accounts for severe hearing losses. For that purpose, less
information is extracted from the speech signal, even when it is audible above threshold.
A second loop uses a loudness model to calculate the loudness that would be perceived
with the current gain-frequency response. The calculated loudness is compared to the
loudness perceived by a normal-hearing person for the given level and spectrum of
speech. If the calculated loudness exceeds the NH loudness, the level is decreased.
This optimization was originally carried out on 240 audiograms and the outcome gain-
frequency responses were drawn together by a neural network, yielding the prescription
formula. The overall gain with a NAL-NL2 prescription depends on gender, age, and
the user’s experience with hearing aids. The NAL-NL2 prescription is widely used in
diﬀerent hearing aids today (Keidser et al., 2011).
17
==PAGE:30==
2. Background and theory
Figure 4: The adaptive optimization process for NAL-NL2. Taken from (Keidser et al.,
2011)
2.4. Virtual sound environments (VSEs)
For various research purposes in acoustics, hearing science and hearing aid evaluation,
it can be useful to create measurement scenarios that are realistic, simulating complex
listening situations. At the same time, it is aspired to have control over the test
conditions and ﬂexibility regarding the acoustic conditions. It is impossible to fulﬁll
these contradicting demands completely, but VSEs oﬀer a good compromise between
realism and control over acoustical parameters.
VSEs are concerned with the synthesis of a sound ﬁeld whose perceptual attributes
are indistinguishable from the perception of a natural sound environment. If speciﬁc
hearing aid signal processing is under investigation, also the agreement of acoustical
properties in the VSE with real world acoustics is of interest. Refer to Appendix A.2
for detailed explanations on VSEs.
A VSE can be used to simulate an already existing environment, such as the acoustics
of a real room. However, VSEs can also be used for model-based auralization of rooms
that are non-existent in reality. The perceived acoustical scene can be very diﬀerent
from the physical listening environment the listener is situated in. For example, a
VSE simulating church acoustics could be realized in an anechoic lab. Apart from
simulation-based auralizations, VSEs can be utilized for auralizations of multi-channel
recordings.
One technique that is used to create the perception of reverberant listening environments
18
==PAGE:31==
2.4. Virtual sound environments (VSEs)
is binaural room simulation, in which sound reproduction is realized over headphones.
Most of the experiments mentioned in the previous sections were headphone based.
Another way of reproducing a sound ﬁeld is to use loudspeaker-based reproduction
techniques. In this study, experiments were carried out in a loudspeaker-based VSE,
which enabled sound ﬁeld reproduction using Higher-order Ambisonics (HOA) and
Nearest-loudspeaker mapping (NLS).
2.4.1. Virtual sound environments in hearing research
VSEs are becoming more popular in the hearing research community, since there is a high
demand for the creation of laboratory environments that better simulate challenging
real-world listening situations. Loudspeaker-based VSEs are especially relevant for
hearing aid research, since wearing the hearing aid is possible without constraints.
In order to warrant the usage of VSEs in hearing research, some researchers have focused
on the validation of VSEs by comparing test results obtained in VSEs with results
obtained in real rooms. Cubick & Dau (2016) validated an Ambisonics based VSE.
Next to a comparison between objective room acoustical parameters of a real room and
a model of the same room, auralized in a loudspeaker array, an evaluation of SRTs was
performed. The average reverberation time and clarity for speech measures showed high
agreement between measurements and simulations. SRTs measured in the VSE were on
average 2 to4 dB higher than in the real room. Diﬀerences in the SRTs measured with
diﬀerent hearing aid programs and at diﬀerent distances, however, were comparable.
The beneﬁt from the measured beamformer setting was about 1.5 dB smaller in the
VSE than in the real room. As a reason for this, a more diﬀuse sound ﬁeld in the virtual
room was suggested. The higher diﬀuseness was indicated by diﬀerences in measured
directivity patterns for the hearing aids and interaural cross-correlation coeﬃcients.
Oreinos (2010) recently showed that the accuracy of the HOA system he investigated
was considerably improved when reverberant sound ﬁelds were considered rather than
anechoic environments. He concluded, that diﬀuse reverberation could mask HOA
errors of a target source, and eﬀectively increased the usable frequency range for a ﬁxed
HOA order system.
Oreinos (2010) showed, that most of the real-environment properties can be faithfully
reconstructed by the VSE he considered. His observations further indicated that VSEs
can be applied to test directional HA processing, since the tested directional HA
algorithms were shown to behave and adapt in a similar way as in real rooms. However,
the beneﬁts from HA algorithms showed a tendency to be slightly underestimated in
comparison to their eﬃciency in real environments. This ﬁnding is consistent with the
19
==PAGE:32==
2. Background and theory
ﬁndings from Cubick & Dau (2016).
Loudspeaker-based VSEs have already been used in company-internal hearing aid
research. For example, Minnaar et al. (2011) used a HOA-system to reproduce a
complex listening situation. They investigated the inﬂuence of diﬀerent rooms on speech
intelligibility in noise. The results were compared with subjective ratings of listening
eﬀort and objective measurements of speech transmission index that were made in the
same environments. Speech intelligibility results showed good agreement with both the
subjective ratings and the calculated room parameter.
Westermann & Buchholz (2015b) used a loudspeaker-based VSE to auralize reverberant
sound environments. Based on the same auralization technique that was used in this
study, they created realistic scenes from a room simulation and measured SRM in NH
test subjects with diﬀerent target-masker conﬁgurations.
20
==PAGE:33==
3. Methods
This chapter describes the methods used in this study to evaluate SRM in realistic
listening scenarios. The ﬁrst section of this chapter describes the stimulus generation and
presentation, including information on the room models and auralization process. Next,
the listener groups participating in the study are described, as well as the measurement
procedure. Finally, a better-ear glimpsing model is introduced.
3.1. Stimulus generation and presentation
3.1.1. Room simulations
The room simulations were realized by ﬁrst creating three-dimensional room models
representing the geometries of the regarded rooms. These were loaded into the ODEON
room simulation software and further edited. In ODEON, frequency-dependent acoustic
absorption and scattering coeﬃcients were assigned to each surface in the regarded
rooms. The aim was that resulting acoustic measures, especially reverberation time T30,
would be diﬀerent in each room model to obtain distinct measurement conditions.
For this study, the classroom 019 in building 352 of DTU (180 m3), a rehearsal room
in Copenhagen (100 m3), and Auditorium 21 on DTU campus (1417 m3), as shown
in Figure 5, were simulated in ODEON. The reverberation times (see Figure 5) were
calculated as the mean reverberation time over the four octave bands 250 Hz to 2 kHz.
Source and receiver positions were deﬁned in the room models. One receiver position
(a) T30 = 0.2 s
(b) T30 = 0.6 s
(c) T30 = 1.0 s
Figure 5: ODEON room models. Left: lecture room, middle: rehearsal room, right:
auditorium
was created, where the the listening position would be in the experiments. A natural
directivity pattern, representing a talker with normal vocal eﬀort, was chosen for the
eight interfering sources which were distributed in the room at ±75 ◦, ±90 ◦±105 ◦
21
==PAGE:34==
3. Methods
and ±120 ◦azimuth.
They were grouped into pairs, facing each other, such that
they resembled talkers engaged in dialogues. Another source was placed in front of
the receiver at 0 ◦azimuth, representing the single-talker target. Figure 6 shows the
modeled sources exemplary for one room model. All source positions matched the
direction of a loudspeaker in the array and had a distance to the listener equal to the
loudspeaker array (2.4 m). This facilitated applying the nearest-loudspeaker method
(ref. Section A.2) for presenting the direct sound and early reﬂections (see Section
A.2.2).
Figure 6: Example of room model with sound sources (red), representing talkers at
normal vocal eﬀort and receiver in the middle (blue), representing the listener.
Sources 1,3,8 and 9 represent the two-dialogue condition (ref. Section 6).
The same conﬁguration was used in all ODEON room models.
The room impulse responses (RIRs) for each source-receiver combination were computed
within ODEON. A reﬂectogram which contained information about the direction, latency
and attenuation of the direct sound and early reﬂections was exported as well as the
energy decay curves, revealing information about the late reﬂections. The exported ﬁles
were loaded into the LoRA toolbox and further processed (see Appendix 3.1.2).
3.1.2. Sound ﬁeld auralization
The loudspeaker-based room auralization (LoRA) toolbox was developed at DTU
(Favrot & Buchholz, 2010) to study human perception in reverberant environments. It
is a toolbox that enables the user to combine room acoustic models with auralization
techniques, such as HOA and NLS, for the production of reverberant sound stimuli that
serve as driving signals for a loudspeaker array.
22
==PAGE:35==
3.1. Stimulus generation and presentation
LoRA imported the reﬂectogram and energy decay information provided by ODEON
to create multi-channel (one channel for each of the 64 loudspeakers in the spherical
array) room impulse responses (mRIR) in eight octave bands. In this project, NLS
was used for the auralization of direct sound and early reﬂections. With this method,
a gain of one was applied to the loudspeaker that was nearest to the direction of the
direct sound and each early reﬂection, respectively, and zero to all other loudspeakers.
Late reﬂections were processed with a HOA technique. The LoRA processing ﬂow is
illustrated in Appendix A.5.
In order to create a realistic sound environment, the mRIR were convolved with an
anechoic sound recording in a last step, obtaining a multi-channel sound with the
acoustical properties representing the original room. When this was played back in the
loudspeaker sphere, a sound perception similar to the perception in the real room was
evoked.
3.1.3. Audio-visual immersion lab (AVIL)
The AVIL at DTU is an anechoic chamber of the size 6 m x 7 m x 8 m, lined with foam
wedges of 90 cm length on each surface. It accommodates a virtual sphere of 64 KEF LS
50 studio monitor speakers, mounted on rings in seven diﬀerent heights, with a distance
of 2.4 m from each speaker to the center. A height adjustable seat was located in the
middle of the array. A computer outside the anechoic chamber is connected to two
Biamp Tesira Server-IO DSP modules, which feed three Sonible 24-channel ampliﬁers
connected to the loudspeakers inside the AVIL. The loudspeakers are driven by using
a multi channel-compatible audio player in MATLAB. The DSP-modules require a
sampling frequency of 48 kHz for all output signals.
3.1.4. Speech intelligibility test
Target material
In this study, the target sentences from the Danish HINT were used in a speech-on-speech
paradigm. The original HINT target material is composed of 200 sentences in an open-
word set, distributed in ten phonetically balanced test lists, each containing 20 sentences.
Three additional lists are included in the test corpus for training purposes. The sentences
represent everyday speech communication. They were developed by Nielsen & Dau
(2009), who utilized a sentence-based intelligibility equalization method. The original
test is a standardized speech reception test that measures sentence recognition in
background noise. In this study, however, the target speech material was presented in a
23
==PAGE:36==
3. Methods
masking signal composed of running speech in the form of dialogues.
Masker material
The masker signals were composed of PiTu1 sentences. The sentences were originally
developed as target material for a speech reception test (Christiansen & Henrichsen,
2012). The material is a set of 20 sentences read out from newspaper articles by diﬀerent
talkers. For this study, single sentences of a total number of eight talkers were used
to create four “dialogues”, including turn-takes between two persons. The material
was chosen because of the high number of diﬀerent talkers, enabling the creation of
multiple-talker scenarios. Drawbacks of the material were that the sentences were
read out and thus did not sound like natural, dynamic conversations. The limited
amount of sentences additionally led to multiple repetitions within the masker dialogues
presentation. However, this was not regarded as problematic since studies from the
ﬁeld of cognitive science suggest that the content of unattended speech is not processed
by the listener, who focuses on the target speech (Reisberg, 2007). The evaluation of
test subjects’ subjective feedback on the test material during piloting revealed that
repetition was either not noticed or not drawing the attention of the listeners away
from the target.
For details on the stimulus processing and spatialization, see Appendix A.4.
1(The name PiTu arose from the phoneme material which was developed in the same scope, containing
the nonsense syllables pi-tu.)
24
==PAGE:37==
3.2. Subjects and hearing aids
3.2. Subjects and hearing aids
In total, eleven young, NH test subjects (mean age: 23.3 years, std: 1.2) and seven2
elderly HI test subjects (mean age: 74.6 years, std: 4.8) participated in the study. All
participants were native Danish speakers. The NH test subjects were students at DTU,
while the HI were recruited from the Hearing Systems Group database. All test subjects
were paid for their participation.
The age of the HI listeners ranged between 70 and 84 years. All of them were experienced
hearing aid users, though with diﬀerent wearing duration. Most of them had experience
with listening tests at DTU before. None of them was familiar with the Danish Hearing-
in-Noise-Test (HINT), from which the target sentences in this experiment originated.
Audiograms that had been taken more than one year prior to their participation in this
study were re-measured. All HI test subjects had a symmetrical, moderate to severe,
sloping, sensorineural high-frequency hearing loss. Figure 7 shows the individual air
conduction thresholds of all HI test subjects and the overall mean over ﬁve octaves
from 250 Hz to 4 kHz for the right and left ear, respectively.
Right
Left
Figure 7: Air conduction thresholds in dB HL over frequency in Hz of seven HI test
subjects with sensorineural hearing loss (gray lines). Mean values (black
lines) are shown for the frequencies that were measured in all test subjects.
2Five additional HI test subjects were measured. However, those test subjects had very poor speech
intelligibility so that the high level of the target led to distortion artifacts in the signal presentation.
Therefore, the measurements had to be aborted. For two other participants measurements were
conducted using other measurement conditions than in the remaining HI test subjects, i.e. a
four-dialogue masker instead of a two-dialogue masker. The results were disregarded, because of
two test subjects being too few for a statistical analysis.
25
==PAGE:38==
3. Methods
Hearing aids
A Widex UNIQUE Fusion 440 behind-the-ear (BTE) hearing aid with receiver inside
the ear canal was used for the experiments with HI test subjects. For the ﬁtting, the
Widex ﬁtting software Compass GPS (v2.1) ran on a personal computer. The test
subjects wore the hearing aids during the ﬁtting. For a wireless ﬁtting procedure, the
Widex USB Link was connected to the computer and worn around the test subject’s
neck.
The HI participants were tested in two gain conditions. One condition was a ﬁtting
with a NAL-NL2 prescription (see Section 2.3) based on individual audiograms. This
condition will be referred to as the “full gain” setting. In the other condition the
audiogram in the ﬁtting software was modiﬁed to represent the measured hearing levels
in dB HL divided by 2. The NAL-NL2 prescription was applied on that audiogram.
Ambiguities due to the 5 dB-precision in the audiometry were decided in favor of a
lower threshold. For example, a threshold of 65 dB HL at one frequency would become
a threshold of 30 dB HL. This condition will be referred to as “half-HL gain” setting.
However, since NAL-NL2 follows a non-linear ﬁtting rule, the described procedure for
the “half-HL gain” setting did not result in half the gain of the “full gain” setting.
26
==PAGE:39==
3.3. Procedure
3.3. Procedure
All test subjects had to ﬁll out a participation agreement prior to participating in
the study. They were invited for a single session at DTU. The experiment took place
in the AVIL. The test subjects were seated on a chair placed in the middle of the
loudspeaker array inside the AVIL. The seat height was adjusted such that the test
subject’s ears were on loudspeaker height of the the middle ring in the loudspeaker
array. A microphone for recording test subjects’ responses was placed inside the AVIL,
close to the test subject, and connected over a pre-ampliﬁer to headphones outside the
anechoic chamber. A Danish student from DTU sat outside of the anechoic chamber
and scored the sentences as repeated by the test subjects during the test.
There were twelve measurement conditions for both NH and HI test subjects. Because
the HINT only provides ten test lists, two of the three training lists were used for testing,
leaving one training list available for training. Before the training started, the test
subjects were given a basic instruction on the functionality of the speech intelligibility
test. They were informed that the target speech would be coming from the frontal
speaker, and that each target sentence would be following a beep signal. They were
further instructed not to move, ensuring that they stayed in the “sweet-spot” of the
reconstructed sound ﬁeld. However, head movements were allowed. A few sentences
of the training list were then presented in silence, to accustom the test subject to the
target voice and to the adaptive level procedure. After execution of the training in
silence, the listeners were told to imagine being in a situation with multiple people in a
real room, while still focusing on the target talker. The same training list was re-used to
train the test subjects in presence of the background talkers, always using the spatially
separated two-dialogue masker condition in the room with 0.2 s reverberation time.
After ﬁnishing the training procedure, test subjects were informed that the number of
interfering talkers, their location as well as the room reverberation would vary randomly
from one test list to the next.
During the test, the dialogue-masker signals were
presented at a ﬁxed level of 65 dB SPL, while the level of the HINT target sentences
was changed adaptively. The level adjustment followed the original HINT procedure, i.e.
a one-up-one-down staircase method with a step size of 4 dB for the ﬁrst ﬁve sentence
presentations, lowering to 2 dB afterwards. The SNR at 50 % correct performance was
calculated from the SNRs in the last 15 sentence presentations, based on a sentence
scoring method. The HINT sentence scoring permitted response variations for single
words, speciﬁed for each sentence individually. The order of measurement conditions
was randomized, as well as the order of the presented HINT test lists and the order of
sentences within each list. The measurement conditions and procedures were diﬀerent
27
==PAGE:40==
3. Methods
for NH and HI test subjects (see Appendix A.5).
Normal-hearing (NH) listeners:
The measurement conditions for the NH test subjects varied in the number of masking
dialogues (two or four), the reverberation time (0.2 s, 0.6 s or 1.0 s) and the spatial
arrangement of sources (colocated or separated). The diﬀerent combinations of the
masker-, room- and spatial conditions yielded twelve measurement conditions in total.
After the training was completed, the test started. It was interrupted after six test lists
for a break of about ﬁve to ten minutes. The overall session took approximately 1.5
hours.
Hearing-impaired (HI) listeners:
The session with the HI test subjects started with an otoscopy, in order to ensure that
the ear canal was not blocked with cerumen. Afterwards, the hearing status of the
particular test subject was reassessed, if the last audiogram had been taken more than
one year ago. The hearing aids were ﬁtted to the individual hearing threshold with a
NAL-NL2 prescription (see Section 2.3). An instant double dome ear-tip of the size S,
M or L, depending on the size of the ear canal as observed in the otoscopy, was attached
to the receiver of the hearing aid. The hearing aids were then inserted by either the
test subject or the experimenter, depending on the test subject’s preference. A good ﬁt
of the hearing aid was ensured by visual inspection.
A feedback test inside the ﬁtting software prevented any potential feedback caused by
the leakage of ampliﬁed output sound back to the microphone. It was ensured that
the gain limit did not restrict the prescribed gain, based on the ﬁtting rationale. All
automatic features of the hearing aids were disabled in the ﬁtting software, and an
omnidirectional microphone setting was selected.
Twelve conditions were measured for each HI test subject.
They diﬀered in the
reverberation time (0.2 s, 0.6 s or 1.0 s), the spatial arrangement of sources (colocated
or separated) and in the amount of ampliﬁcation, adjusted directly in the hearing aid
(“full gain” or “half-HL gain”, see Section 3.2). Four of the HI listeners were measured
with the “full gain” setting for the ﬁrst six test lists, and with the “half-HL gain” setting
afterwards. For the remaining HI test subjects, this order was switched. After six test
lists, the measurement was interrupted to ﬁt the hearing aid based on the alternate gain
rule. This interruption also served as a break for the test subjects, lasting approximately
10 −15 minutes. The whole session with a HI test subject lasted 1.5 −2 hours.
28
==PAGE:41==
3.4. Better-ear glimpsing model
3.4. Better-ear glimpsing model
This section introduces the better-ear glimpsing model used in this study, similar to the
one proposed by Brungart (2012). The underlying assumption for the model is that the
human auditory system follows a strategy of always selecting the ear with the better
instantaneous SNR in short time segments per frequency band (see Section 2.2.2). The
following paragraph describes the generation of two-channel input signals in the model,
which represent the signals at the listener’s ears. The subsequent section describes the
operation of the model.
3.4.1. Generation of ear signals
In order to generate input signals to the model that correspond to the signals present
at the listener’s ears during the experiments, BRIRs were measured for each of the
64 loudspeakers, using a logarithmicly increasing sine sweep. A B&K Head and Torso
Simulator (HATS) was placed in the center of the array, on the seat where the test
subjects were seated during the experiments (see Appendix A.5). Two microphones
attached to 711 couplers in the two ear canals of the HATS were connected over a
NEXUS pre-ampliﬁer to a computer. In total, 64 impulse responses were recorded in
two channels.
The obtained BRIRs were then convolved with each multi-channel target and masker
stimulus used in the speech intelligibility test. Figure 8 illustrates the procedure of the
ear signal generation. The convolution was executed on a channel-by-channel basis,
convolving one channel of the mRIR with the corresponding loudspeaker-to-HATS
BRIR in two channels. A summation over all 64 loudspeaker channels in the resulting
64-by-two matrix yielded the simulated two-channel ear signals. The target and masker
ear signals served as separate input signals for the better-ear glimpsing model.
3.4.2. Functionality of the model
It has been suggested that a listener is able to make use of short-term SNR advantages
between the two ears by taking “better-ear-glimpses” (Brungart & Iyer, 2012). The
better-ear glimpsing model is based on this better-SNR selection strategy, as illustrated
in Figure 9. For the processing in the model, 20 HINT sentences were concatenated to
obtain a running-speech target. 20 is the number of sentences that are contained in each
HINT test list and was therefore regarded appropriate for modeling the performance in
the test. The masker signals were truncated to the length of the target signal, which
29
==PAGE:42==
3. Methods
corresponded to a duration of approximately 30 s. The target and masker ear signals
were presented to the model separately, corresponding to an overall SNR of 0 dB. They
were processed by a 18-channels one-third octave ﬁlter bank, representing peripheral
frequency selectivity of the auditory system. The band pass ﬁlters were designed using
IIR 3rd-order Butterworth one-third octave ﬁlters, according to the order-n speciﬁcation
of the ANSI S1.1-1986 standard. Their center frequencies reached from 157.5 Hz to
8 kHz.
To achieve a short-term frequency analysis, the output signals of each frequency channel
were multiplied with a sliding rectangular window of 20 ms duration, which is a commonly
applied window length in short-term frequency analysis of speech (Glyde et al., 2013a).
By subtracting the masker from the target in the corresponding band for each time
frame, the instantaneous SNR per frequency band was obtained for the left and right
ear. To account for the absolute threshold of hearing, segments with a level below the
threshold were excluded from further processing.
The SNR values in the two ears were compared in order to determine which ear provided
the better instantaneous SNR in each frequency band, which was then selected by the
model. Within each time-frequency segment, the weighting factor used in the long-term
speech intelligibility index (SII) was applied. The SII (ANSI S3.5, 1997) provided
individual weighting factors for all 18 frequency bands, summing up to 1. By summing
up all “better-ear-SNRs” over all frequency bands and averaging over time, an overall
mean “better-ear glimpsing-SNR” was obtained.
The SNR-diﬀerence between the better-ear-SNR obtained in the colocated and separated
condition was used as the model prediction of the spatial release of EM that could be
expected in the experiments.
30
==PAGE:43==
3.4. Better-ear glimpsing model
Figure 8: Processing diagram for generating simulated ear signals.
Figure 9: Better-ear glimpsing model processing diagram. Processing stages: Band
pass ﬁlter bank (BP), windowing (W), SNR-calculation, absolute threshold
of hearing (ATH), maximum-SNR calculation, SII-weighting and summation
over frequency.
31
==PAGE:44==
3. Methods
32
==PAGE:45==
4. Results
4.1. Objective evaluation of the rooms
In this section, room parameters were evaluated in the used room models. For an
explanation of the parameters, refer to Appendix A.3.
Figure 10 shows the reverberation time (T30) and speech clarity (C50) over frequency in
octave bands for the three room models, calculated in ODEON.
(a) Reverberation time T30 in seconds
(b) Speech clarity C50 in dB
Figure 10: Room acoustic parameters over frequency in Hz, calculated from the
ODEON software. Line with circles (blue) shows results for the room
with 0.2 s reverberation time, crosses (red) represent the room with 0.6 s
reverberation time and asterisks (yellow) results for the room with 1 s
reverberation time.
Reverberation time decreases with increasing frequency for the two rooms having lower
reverberation times. The reverberation time over frequency in the big auditorium, with
an overall reverberation time of 1 s, follows a bell shape with the longest reverberation
time in the mid frequency range, being important for speech intelligibility. The clarity
parameter shows greatest deviation between the room models in the lower frequencies. It
is striking that speech clarity is higher in the largest room with the highest reverberation
time compared to the smallest room with 0.6 s reverberation time. In the high frequencies
above 2 kHz the curves are almost aligned.
In Table 2, the reverberation distances of the three rooms as well as the STI at the
listener’s position for the target talker, calculated in ODEON, are shown. From Table 2
it can be seen that the critical distance is smallest in the 0.6 s-room, being the smallest
of all regarded rooms. The STI parameter is likewise the lowest in that room. Speech
33
==PAGE:46==
4. Results
Room (T30)
rH(m)
STI
Classroom (0.2s)
1.75
0.61
Rehearsal room (0.6s)
0.69
0.53
Auditorium (1.0s)
2.14
0.58
Table 2: Critical distances and STI measures, calculated from the ODEON software.
intelligibility, according to the STI is best in the room with the lowest reverberation
time.
34
==PAGE:47==
4.2. Speech intelligibility test
4.2. Speech intelligibility test
All box plots shown in this section mark the median value (horizontal bar), as well
as the 25th and 75th percentiles (edges of the box). The whiskers extend to ±2.7 σ.
Outliers are plotted individually as circles.
Normal-hearing (NH) test subjects
Figure 11 shows the median SRTs in dB SNR obtained from eleven NH listeners in
the speech intelligibility test with colocated and separated masker conditions. SRTs
are shown versus reverberation time for the two-dialogue masker and the four-dialogue
masker. Individual data can be found in Appendix A.6. Median SRTs measured with
(a) colocated condition
(b) separated condition
Figure 11: SRTs in dB SNR of eleven NH listeners for three diﬀerent reverberation
times. SRTs were obtained with a two-dialogue masker (light gray) and a
four-dialogue-masker (dark gray).
NH test subjects range from approximately −5 dB SNR in the least reverberant room
with a two-dialogue masker, spatially separated from the target, to 2.5 dB SNR in the
most reverberant room, measured in a colocated condition with a four-dialogue masker.
The SRTs in the four-dialogue masker condition were found to be higher than the
corresponding thresholds obtained with the two-dialogue masker. An exception is found
for the room with 0.2 s reverberation time in the colocated condition. In this condition,
the median SRT is slightly lower for the four-dialogue masker. Thresholds increase
with reverberation time. Only in the separated condition thresholds obtained with the
four-dialogue masker drop by around 1 dB from the room with 0.6 s reverberation time
to the room with 1 s reverberation time. The SRTs showed greater variance in the
35
==PAGE:48==
4. Results
four-dialogue masker condition compared to the two-dialogue masker in most of the
cases. Reverberation time seemed to aﬀect the absolute SRTs in the colocated as well
as in the separated condition for both, two-dialogue and four-dialogue masker.
A three-way repeated-measures analysis of variances (ANOVA) was conducted on the
SRT data using SPSS. Besides a signiﬁcant eﬀect of the spatial condition (colocated or
separated) [F(1, 8) = 249.9, p < 0.001] it showed signiﬁcant eﬀects of reverberation time
[F(1.25, 10.04) = 22.83, p < 0.001] and the number of dialogues [F(1, 8) = 26.67, p =
0.001] on the SRT. For the reverberation time, the Greenhouse-Geisser correction was
applied because Mauchly’s test indicated that the assumption of sphericity had been
violated, χ2(2) = 6.29, p < 0.05. The interaction of reverberation time and spatial
condition was further signiﬁcant [F(2, 16) = 4.83, p < 0.05]. Thus, the relationship
between spatial condition and SRT was diﬀerent, depending on the reverberation time.
Post-hoc analysis conducted on the three main eﬀects with Bonferroni adjustment for
multiple comparisons showed that SRTs were signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from each other
(p < 0.05) for all regarded reverberation times.
The SRM was calculated for each subject individually as the diﬀerence between the SRTs
obtained in the separated and colocated conditions. The median SRM are shown in
Figure 12 for the diﬀerent room and masker conditions. The median SRM reached values
Figure 12: SRM in dB of eleven NH listeners for three diﬀerent reverberation times
when using a two-dialogue masker (light gray) and a four-dialogue-masker
(dark gray).
36
==PAGE:49==
4.2. Speech intelligibility test
between 1.1 dB (0.6 s, 4 dialogues) and 4.2 dB (1 s, 4 dialogues). For most test subjects,
SRTs obtained in a colocated condition were higher than in the spatially separated
condition. However, in three of the six regarded conditions, individual performance
of some listeners resulted in a negative SRM, meaning that speech intelligibility was
reduced in the spatially separated condition, compared to the colocated condition.
In order to evaluate the eﬀects of the diﬀerent factors on SRM directly, a two-way
repeated-measures ANOVA was conducted on the SRM results. A statistically signiﬁcant
eﬀect of reverberation time on SRM was found, [F(2, 16) = 4.83, p < 0.05]. This was
already reﬂected in the interaction eﬀect found in the ANOVA on the SRT results.
A pairwise-comparison t-test was conducted using a Bonferroni adjustment, in order
to compare SRM in the three diﬀerent reverberation conditions. Only a signiﬁcant
diﬀerence between 0.6 s and 1 s was found (p = 0.042), but not for the other combinations.
No signiﬁcant eﬀect was found for the number of dialogues or the interaction between
the two factors.
Hearing-impaired (HI) test subjects
Figure 13 shows the SRTs in dB SNR obtained in the speech intelligibility test with
colocated and separated masker conditions for seven HI listeners. The test subjects’
hearing aids were ﬁtted with a “half-HL gain” and “full gain” setting (see Section 3.2).
HI listeners were only tested in the two-dialogue masker condition. Median SRTs
(a) colocated condition
(b) separated condition
Figure 13: SRTs in dB SNR of seven HI listeners for three diﬀerent reverberation
times. SRTs were obtained with a two-dialogue masker in a “half-HL gain”
(light gray) and a “full gain” (dark gray) hearing aid setting. Individual
thresholds are indicated by the subject ID.
37
==PAGE:50==
4. Results
ranged from 3 dB SNR in the “full gain”-setting in the 0.2 s-room up to 13 dB SNR in
the “half-HL gain”-setting in the 0.6 s-room. The SRTs in the “half-HL gain” condition
tended to be higher than the corresponding thresholds obtained with the “full-gain”
setting. Reverberation time raised absolute SRTs in the colocated as well as in the
separated condition for the two gain settings. The thresholds obtained in the 0.6 s-room
in the “full-gain” condition were an exception to this. Variance of SRTs were high and
tended to be higher for the “half-HL gain” setting compared to the “full gain” setting.
A repeated-measures ANOVA was conducted on the SRT data of the HI test sub-
jects.
The spatial condition (colocated or separated) did not reveal a signiﬁcant
diﬀerence, hence no signiﬁcant SRM was found. The analysis showed signiﬁcant ef-
fects of reverberation time [F(2, 12) = 37.12, p < 0.001] and the gain condition
[F(1, 6) = 13.03, p = 0.011] on the SRT. No interactions were signiﬁcant.
Post-hoc analysis with Bonferroni adjustment for multiple comparisons was conducted
on the main eﬀect reverberation time. The signiﬁcant main eﬀect reﬂected signiﬁcant
diﬀerences (all p < 0.001) between the 0.2 s-room and the two other rooms. The rooms
with reverberation times of 0.6 s and 1 s were not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from each other.
The SRM was calculated for each subject individually as the diﬀerence between SRTs
obtained in the colocated and separated conditions. SRM results are shown in Figure
14. When HI listeners were provided with a hearing aid, but ﬁtted with a gain lower
than was prescribed based on their audiogram, the obtained median SRM was negative
for all three rooms. With a “full-gain” setting the median SRM was higher than with
a “half-gain” setting in all three rooms. However, variances were very large and no
signiﬁcant eﬀects were found for the SRM data when applying a repeated measures
ANOVA.
Comparison of NH and HI data
Figure 15 shows again the SRTs in dB SNR obtained for NH and HI listeners for
the two-dialogue masker in a colocated and spatially separated condition for a direct
comparison. The absolute SRTs were around 10 dB higher for the HI than for the
NH listeners across conditions, with median values of SRT of up to 10 dB SNR for
the HI in the medium reverberant room and colocated target and masker. Applying
repeated-measures ANOVA on this data set revealed that the main eﬀect of hearing
status (NH or HI) was signiﬁcant, [F(1, 15) = 44.602, p < 0.001]. Thus, in spite of the
provision with a hearing aid, the hearing-impaired test subjects showed signiﬁcantly
38
==PAGE:51==
4.2. Speech intelligibility test
Figure 14: SRM in dB of seven HI listeners for three diﬀerent reverberation times.
Results were obtained with a two-dialogue masker in a “half-HL gain” (light
gray) and a “full-gain” (dark gray) setting. Individual SRM are indicated
by the subject ID.
higher SRTs than the NH group.
In Figure 16 the SRM obtained in NH and HI listeners, ﬁtted with a “full-gain”, are
shown for the three room conditions. In order to investigate statistical diﬀerences
between SRM observed in NH and “full gain”-aided HI listeners, a mixed ANOVA
was used to account for the between-groups variable hearing status and the repeated-
measures variable reverberation time. The main eﬀect of hearing status (NH or HI)
revealed a signiﬁcant eﬀect [F(1, 15) = 23.784, p < 0.001]. Thus, even though audibility
was accounted for by providing ampliﬁcation based on the test subject’s audiograms,
the HI test subjects showed signiﬁcantly lower SRM than the NH group.
39
==PAGE:52==
4. Results
(a) colocated condition
(b) separated condition
Figure 15: SRTs of NH (light gray) and “full-gain” aided HI listeners (dark gray) using
a two-dialogue masker.
4.3. Better-ear glimpsing model
In Figure 17, the NH SRM data are shown again, plotted together with the predictions
from the BEGM (see Section 3.4). The model assumed normal-hearing and processed
input signals of 30 s length. The BEGM predicted SRM in all conditions, ranging from
approximately 0.5 dB in the middle room to 3 dB in the least reverberant room. It pre-
dicted decreased SRM when a four-dialogue masker was used instead of a two-dialogue
masker, which is in agreement with the measured results. The model further expected
the “driest” room with 0.2 s reverberation time to show the highest amount of SRM,
though no large diﬀerences were expected across reverberation conditions by the model.
Figure 18 illustrates the glimpsing eﬃciency over a broad frequency spectrum. It shows
the SNR-advantage, calculated as the diﬀerence between better-ear SNR and left ear
SNR over frequency, observed for the three rooms when using a two-dialogue masker.
While the three graphs in the top show the separated conditions, the bottom panels
show graphs for the colocated conditions.
The ﬁgure shows that most diﬀerences in SNRs between better ear and left ear are
found in the “lower” frequencies, irrespective the spatial conﬁguration. However, the
separated compared to the colocated condition reveals more glimpsing opportunities in
the higher frequencies when spatially separating the sources.
In Appendix A.7 additional modeling results are presented for individual frequency
40
==PAGE:53==
4.3. Better-ear glimpsing model
Figure 16: SRM of NH (light gray) compared to SRM of HI in the “full-gain” condition
(dark gray).
bands.
41
==PAGE:54==
4. Results
Figure 17: SRM with two-dialogue masker (light gray) and four-dialogue masker (dark
gray), measured for eleven NH test subjects and predicted by better-ear
glimpsing model.
42
==PAGE:55==
4.3. Better-ear glimpsing model
Figure 18: SNR-advantage (better ear minus left ear) in dB over frequency in kHz,
observed for the three rooms when using a two-dialogue masker. The color
scale indicates the number of occurences for which a given SNR advantage
was observed at each frequency (black representing a number of ≥200).
Top graphs: colocated conditions. Bottom graphs: separated conditions.
43
==PAGE:56==
4. Results
44
==PAGE:57==
5. Discussion
Effects of masker type and reverberation
The results obtained from NH listeners showed that reverberation had a signiﬁcant eﬀect
on speech intelligibility, increasing SRTs from the least to the most reverberant room
by 3 dB for the two-dialogue masker and by 4 dB for the four-dialogue masker in the
colocated condition. SRTs increased by 2 dB for the two masker types in the separated
condition (see Figure 11). The observation that SRTs increase with reverberation was
in line with ﬁndings from e.g. Kidd et al. (2005b) and can be explained by the smearing
of temporal and spectral ﬂuctuations in the target and masker by reverberation, leading
to reduced dip-listening and thereby impeding speech intelligibility (e.g. Lavandier
et al., 2012).
The signiﬁcant impact of the number of talkers on SRT can also be explained by means
of energetic masking. The four-dialogue masker contains fewer spectro-temporal gaps
than the two-dialogue masker, which degrades dip-listening, and therefore results in
more energetic masking of the target speech. A four-dialogue masker as being more
noise-like, was thus a more eﬀective masker. This ﬁnding is in line with ﬁndings from
other studies, such as Westermann & Buchholz (2015b), who found SRTs obtained
with a two-dialogue masker that were 4 −5 dB lower than SRTs obtained when using a
seven-dialogue masker, presented at the same overall level.
The spatial condition (colocated vs. separated) also showed a signiﬁcant eﬀect on
SRT. Thus, SRM was signiﬁcant with a magnitude of 1 −4 dB across conditions
(see Figure 12). Other studies, which used speech corpora that introduced a large
amount of informational masking observed higher SRM (Best et al., 2012; Glyde et al.,
2013a). However, Westermann & Buchholz (2015b) found SRM of similar magnitude
as in this study, when investigating SRTs in the presence of reverberation, using a
loudspeaker-based VSE and a speech-on-speech paradigm with BKB target sentences.
In a study by Kidd et al. (2005b), the eﬀect of reverberation on SRM was investigated
with diﬀerent masker types. A diﬀerent-talker masker, which was referred to as the IM-
masker, led to a SRM of approximately 15 dB, which was not aﬀected by reverberation.
SRM measured when using a noise masker, referred to as the EM, decreased with
reverberation from 7 dB to 2.5 dB. In this study, SRM was overall low, suggesting
no major contribution from IM. This was further supported by the observation that
better-ear glimpsing could - at least in the least reverberant room - account for all of
the observed SRM (see Figure 17). Following the ﬁndings from Kidd et al. (2005b) one
45
==PAGE:58==
5. Discussion
would have expected a negative eﬀect of reverberation on the masking release if it was
purely energetic in nature.
In this study, there was an interaction eﬀect between reverberation time and spatial
condition for NH listeners. In contrast to the ﬁndings from Kidd et al. (2005b) SRM
increased with reverberation time. However, post-hoc analysis found that only the two
rooms with 0.6 s and 1 s reverberation time had a signiﬁcantly diﬀerent eﬀect on the
observed SRM. Investigation of the absolute SRTs (see Figure 11) revealed that the
threshold found in the spatially separated condition with 0.6 s reverberation time using
the four-dialogue masker was particularly high. The high thresholds obtained in that
room may have been a result of low clarity (C50, ref. Section 4.1). On the other hand,
low clarity should result in a general increase in SRTs for that room for all conditions.
The room with 0.6 s reverberation time was the smallest of all regarded rooms. Therefore,
early reﬂections were considered to be diﬀerent from the other rooms. An investigation
of the early reﬂection patterns revealed that the source at 90 ◦azimuth in the room with
0.6 s reverberation time introduced more high-level reﬂections within the ﬁrst 25 ms
than present in the other rooms or for the frontal source (see Figure 19). Thus, in the
room in question, the energy in the early part of the impulse response was higher for
the source placed at 90 ◦than for the source at 0 ◦azimuth. These early reﬂections may
have caused the perception of the masker to be more salient in the separated condition
and in turn may have deteriorated the SRM in this room.
The second room with 0.6 s reverberation time gave rise to early lateral reﬂections and
had a small critical distance of 0.69 m, both negatively aﬀecting SRM. In the largest and
most reverberant room (1 s), however, the source-receiver distance was closest to the
reverberation distance (2.4 m vs. 2.14 m). Therefore, the energy of the direct sound was
almost equal to the energy of the reverberant sound at the listener’s position, potentially
providing additional cues compared to the other rooms where the critical distance was
smaller.
Overall, the results suggest that SRM is limited in its dynamic range in real-life
situations. Reverberation, DRR and clarity inﬂuence the advantage from separating
sound sources in space.
Hearing-impaired test subjects
The SRTs measured in HI listeners were approximately 10 dB higher than the corre-
sponding results of the NH listeners, across all conditions. This was expected as HI
listeners are more susceptible to speech maskers because they beneﬁt less from the
46
==PAGE:59==
(a) early reﬂections of source at 0 ◦
(b) early reﬂections of source at 90 ◦
Figure 19: Early reﬂections in dB versus time in ms, relative to the direct sound.
intrinsic modulations in the speech masker (Festen, 1990; Bronkhorst, 2000).
Minnaar et al. (2011) investigated speech intelligibility in normal-hearing and hearing-
impaired test subjects wearing hearing aids without directional characteristics. In their
study, they simulated two rooms and auralized them in a loudspeaker array based on
a HOA-technique. They measured speech intelligibility by presenting the DANTALE
II target sentences in the presence of a three-talker babble and calculated the SNR at
the 70 %-point on the psychometric function using word-scoring. Results showed an
increase in SRTs of 12 dB for HI listeners compared to the performance of the NH test
subjects across all conditions, similar to the results of this study.
However, while HI test subjects in the study by Minnaar et al. (2011) performed at a
SNR of about 0 dB, median SRTs in the present experiment reached 14 dB SNR. This
is much higher than SRTs that are normally measured in aided HI listeners, such as
0 dB SNR in a study by Glyde et al. (2015), 3 dB SNR (Glyde et al., 2013b) or 5 dB SNR
in Best et al. (2012), depending on the applied speech corpus.
At such high SNRs as measured in this study, the task was very diﬀerent from the
47
==PAGE:60==
5. Discussion
task normal-hearing listeners had. It seems that HI listeners had trouble following the
target sentences, almost independent of the masker level. One reason could be that the
target talker talked relatively fast, as reported by some of the HI listeners. Another
contributor for the relatively high SRTs may have been the speech test procedure. The
sentence material used was chosen because it represented natural, everyday language.
Furthermore, the test is open-set, which is generally regarded as better for quick and
accurate assessment of speech intelligibility, because of relatively small learning eﬀects.
However, the open set paired with the sentence scoring most probably led to the high
thresholds. Performance in the single sentence presentations was not documented, thus
it is not possible to draw conclusions on how word-scoring would have aﬀected the
results. However, Ro et al. (2013) investigated the eﬀect of word scoring versus sentence
scoring when using Danish HINT target sentences in the presence of speech maskers
and found a diﬀerence of 2.6 dB.
The SRM results showed a disadvantage from spatially separating sound sources for the
HI listeners aided with reduced gain (see Figure 14). The deactivation of automatic
features as well as an omnidirectional microphone setting were chosen in order to
obtain comparable results with the least hearing aid-speciﬁc inﬂuences. However, as
described in Section 2.3, a digital pinna feature could have provided an advantage
for speech intelligibility in a condition with separated sound sources compared to the
omnidirectional microphone. Figure 20 shows the directivity patterns for a microphone
placed inside the ear (ITE) of a right ear of a HATS and for an omnidirectional front
microphone of a BTE placed on the HATS’ right ear. The curves obtained with a ITE
imitate the directivity of a natural pinna.
The directivity patterns show an almost omnidirectional behavior for BTE and ITE at
500 Hz. The directivities, however, diverge from 2 kHz onward with a stronger lateral
sensitivity of the BTE microphone. At 2 kHz, the ITE attenuates lateral sounds by
5 dB more than the BTE. At 4 kHz, the diﬀerence is 10 dB. This pattern is reversed
for very high frequencies above 6 kHz, where the BTE microphone attenuates lateral
sounds more than the pinna.
Speech energy is mostly distributed in the frequency range of 250 Hz −5 kHz (Assmann,
2008). The speech spectrum shows a peak at 500 Hz and rolls oﬀabove that frequency
with 6 dB per octave. Thus, at 2 kHz and 4 kHz there is more speech energy than in
the bands above. Furthermore, HI listeners had lower thresholds in the lower frequency
range. The lateral sensitivity in the frequency range important for speech recognition
might therefore explain the observation that SRM was negative, i.e. speech intelligibility
was facilitated in a colocated condition compared to a separated condition, when HI
listeners were aided with a reduced gain setting.
48
==PAGE:61==
(a) 500 Hz
(b) 1 kHz
(c) 2 kHz
(d) 4 kHz
(e) 6 kHz
(f) 8 kHz
Figure 20: Polar plots showing the microphone directivity in-situ (blue line) and of
an omnidirectional front microphone of a BTE (red dotted line) in dB
vs. angle in ◦, rescaled to 0 dB at 15 ◦. Directivity patterns are shown for
diﬀerent frequencies. The plots were generated using the HRTF-database
from Oreinos & Buchholz (2013).
Ahlstrom et al. (2009) investigated the spatial beneﬁt from bilateral hearing aid am-
pliﬁcation in a SRM task using a NAL-NL1 ﬁtting strategy and an omnidirectional
microphone setting. They found that older hearing aid users showed an improved
consonant recognition in noise compared to their unaided performance. They were
also able to take advantage of binaural cues and beneﬁted to a greater degree in the
SRM task with bilateral hearing aids than without ampliﬁcation. There were several
diﬀerences between that study and the present one that may have contributed to
the inconsistent ﬁndings. In the study by Ahlstrom et al. (2009), test subjects were
given an acclimatization period of 3-6 months for the hearing aids used in the speech
test. Furthermore, SRTs were measured in free ﬁeld conditions, presenting the masker
49
==PAGE:62==
5. Discussion
either from the front or from a loudspeaker at 90 ◦, giving rise to long-term better-ear
eﬀects. Apart from that, diﬀerent brand-speciﬁc characteristics of the omnidirectional
microphone settings may have inﬂuenced the eﬀect of a separation of sound sources.
Providing “full gain” to the HI listeners improved SRTs, predominantly in the separated
condition, as well as SRM by up to 4 dB in the most reverberant condition. A study
by Glyde et al. (2015) proposed reduced audibility as the main factor limiting SRM in
HI listeners. By providing extra gain to HI listeners on top of a NAL-RP prescription,
the authors assumed to make the speech target audible as well as to provide access to
ILD cues by high-frequency audibility. A signiﬁcant eﬀect of ampliﬁcation on spatial
advantage was found, which was not the case in the present study. Here, median SRM
improved in all conditions comparing SRM obtained with “half-HL gain” and “full gain”.
However, the eﬀect was not signiﬁcant. It can be hypothesized that audibility was not
fully restored in this study even when providing the “full gain”. Additional ampliﬁcation
to the prescribed gain based on the NAL-NL2 rationale may still show a signiﬁcant
eﬀect of ampliﬁcation on SRM.
Figure 21 shows the measured frequency response in dB HL of a hearing aid ﬁtted to
the left audiogram of the HI listener with the subject ID 7. The input signal was a pink
noise at 65 dB SPL. Also the target, obtained from the ﬁtting software and the hearing
threshold of the test subject are shown. The measured and simulated curves are nearly
aligned, thus the gain was following the NAL-NL2 prescription. The curves indicate
that audibility was warranted only in the frequency range from 250 Hz to 4 kHz. Access
to some binaural segregation cues above 4 kHz may have been limited. The test subject
had median hearing lossm the lowest SRTs of all HI listeners and achieved median SRM.
Figure 22 shows the simulated frequency response in dB HL of a hearing aid ﬁtted to
the left audiogram of the HI listener with the subject ID 1 and his hearing threshold.
This test subject had the highest hearing loss of all HI listeners and achieved the highest
SRTs at positive SNRs of up to 14 dB, where the target had a level of 79 dB SPL.
Therefore, an input level of 90 dB SPL was chosen for the simulations. The curves
indicate that audibility was warranted only in the frequency range up to 3 kHz. Access
to binaural segregation cues above that frequency may have been limited.
These examples show that audibility was not always fully restored when applying the
“full-gain”. It can be hypothesized that additional ampliﬁcation to the prescribed gain
based on the NAL-NL2 rationale may still show a signiﬁcant eﬀect of ampliﬁcation on
SRM.
50
==PAGE:63==
0 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
55 
60 
65 
70 
75 
80 
85 
90 
95 
100 
100 
1000 
10000 
dB HL 
Frequency [Hz] 
HTL 
Measurement 
Target 
Figure 21: Measured output level (black, solid line), simulated output level (black,
dotted line) and hearing threshold of test subject 7 in dB HL over frequency
in Hz. Input signal was pink noise at 65 dB SPL.
It was intriguing that SRM increased with reverberation time in HI listeners in the
present study. Following the considerations by Best et al. (2013) one can argue that
the EM-ﬂoor, limiting SRM in HI listeners, might be the reason (ref. Section 2.2).
In the room with the least amount of reverberation (0.2 s), SRTs reached 3 dB in the
separated condition, when test subjects were prescribed the “full gain”. The eﬀective
SNR due to the microphone setting may have been even lower in that condition. In this
SNR-region, performance in the separated conditions may have been limited by EM so
that no further improvement was possible. In the more reverberant conditions, more
headroom for masking release was present, because SRTs were higher in the colocated
condition. This would have led to low SRM in room with lowest reverberation time,
while SRM increased with reverberation. It should be noted, however, that the eﬀect
was not signiﬁcant and that the variance was highest in the SRM observed in the most
reverberant room.
Better-ear glimpsing
The BEGM showed greater SNR-advantages of the better-ear over a single ear in all
separated conditions compared to the corresponding colocated conditions, ranging from
approximately 0.5 dB in the room with 0.6 s reverberation time up to 3 dB in the least
reverberant room (see Figure 17). Thus, the model showed the most eﬃcient glimpsing
51
==PAGE:64==
5. Discussion
0 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
55 
60 
65 
70 
75 
80 
85 
90 
95 
100 
100 
1000 
10000 
dB HL 
Frequency [Hz] 
HTL 
Target 
Figure 22: Simulated output level (black, dotted line) and hearing threshold of test
subject 1 in dB HL over frequency in Hz. Input signal was pink noise at
90 dB SPL.
in the “driest” room with 0.2 s reverberation time. It accounted for the measured
decrease in SRM when a four-dialogue masker was used instead of a two-dialogue
masker.
It was striking that predicted better-ear advantages were lower for the room with
0.6 s reverberation time than for the most reverberant room. This, however, was in
agreement with the measurement results, and supported by considerations about the
DRR and early reﬂections as inﬂuential eﬀects on SRM. Taking the diﬀerence of better-
ear glimpsing advantage between the colocated and separated conditions as a direct
predictor for SRM, the model was most accurate for the room with 0.2 s reverberation
time and underestimated SRM with increasing reverberation time. Additional SRM,
not accounted for by better-ear glimpsing, might be ascribed to enhanced sound source
segregation and ITD-processing.
Unexpected performance of some NH test subjects, i.e. higher thresholds in the spatially
separated condition than in the corresponding colocated condition, as shown in Figure
11, could not be explained by masking eﬀects.
52
==PAGE:65==
Perspectives and limitations
This study was conducted with the objective of quantifying SRM under realistic
conditions. However, it is impossible to control acoustical parameters under truly
realistic conditions. This study therefore aimed at ﬁnding a compromise between
realism and control.
By using the AVIL, many aspects of realistic cocktail party
situations could be realised. However, there are also limitations, which were partly
revealed by the measurement results.
Some SRT measurements were conducted at SNRs that are not representative of real-life
listening. For NH listeners, only thresholds obtained in the colocated condition reached
positive SNRs. These are SNRs encountered in everyday situations, at least by hearing
aid users (Smeds et al., 2015), but most likely also by NH people. In the HI group,
SNRs were mainly positive. However, thresholds were as high as 14 dB SNR. In this
range, it is questionable if masking eﬀects were still the focus of investigation. However,
taking the directivity of the omnidirectional microphone setting into account, eﬀective
SNRs may have been lower. As one main reason for the high thresholds obtained in
the HI people, sentence scoring was proposed. A word-scoring technique or a sentence
scoring based on weighted word-scores would potentially have reduced SRTs.
Another limitation on realism in this study was the masker material. It represented
everyday language only to a limited extent, since it was read out material rather than
dynamic speech. For future studies, it would be desirable to record dynamic real-life
conversations. Future research might also consider extending the present work on
masking signals other than speech.
Apart from limitations due to the applied speech intelligibility test, the circumstances
under which the speech test was conducted further limited the resemblance with real-life
situations. Although the loudspeaker-based VSE enabled the auralization of realistic
listening environments, visual cues present in real-life situations were not considered. It
has been shown that these have an inﬂuence on speech intelligibility in the presence
of speech maskers (Helfer & Freyman, 2005). Likewise, additional acoustical cues
facilitating target-masker segregation in a realistic situation, such as diﬀerent levels
changing with distance of target and masker were neglected.
Furthermore, the source-receiver distance due to the reproduction technique was limiting
realism in this study. The radius of the loudspeaker array is unrealistically large for a
conversation and thereby also limits the explanatory power of the observed results, due
to the interaction of source-receiver distance with speech intelligibility measures, directly
aﬀected by DRR. Furthermore, Cubick & Dau (2016) showed that diﬀuseness was higher
53
==PAGE:66==
5. Discussion
in the loudspeaker-based VSE investigated in that study than in the corresponding
real room. It is not clear whether this ﬁnding transfers to other VSEs. If it does, it
would be plausible that SRM was limited in this study by to high diﬀuseness in the
reproduced environments.
Another constraint for the validity of the results for everyday listening is the passiveness
of the test subject. In a real conversation, the listener would not only follow the
conversation, but also process what has been said and respond to it. This is, however, a
limitation encountered with almost all speech intelligibility tests. It would be desirable
to engage the test subject to some extent in the scenario, by forcing interaction through
responses or e.g. asking the test subject to score a questionnaire in connection with the
speech test. A study by Best et al. (2016), however, investigated the eﬀect of speech
comprehension in a listening test and revealed that comprehension in real-life scenarios
was highly correlated with the SRTs measured in the presence of speech maskers.
Automatic features were disabled in the hearing aid and an omnidirectional microphone
setting was chosen, to focus on eﬀects of ampliﬁcation and to exclude brand-speciﬁc
inﬂuences on the results. The obtained SRM for HI listeners were inconclusive, because
the omnidirectional microphone setting of the hearing aid introduced unwanted direc-
tionality towards the sides. It became apparent that the omnidirectional microphone
setting in a BTE hearing aid is detrimental in a cocktail party scenario. However,
most hearing aid users probably rely on an automatic adaptation of the microphone
setting so that the hearing aid would switch to the directional mode in a cocktail party
situation. The omnidirectional microphone setting does therefore not resemble the most
realistic microphone setting for the regarded listening environments. It is, however, a
good compromise to compare results of NH and aided HI listeners.
Instead of BTE hearing aids ITE hearing aids could be used for measurements with HI
listeners to reduce the eﬀect of microphone directionality.
Applying gain directly on the loudspeaker array would be another way to investigate the
eﬀect of ampliﬁcation on SRM. On the one hand, this approach would lead to results
that are unaﬀected by hearing aid signal processing. The results would cprovide insight
in the role of audibility in SRM tasks. On the other hand, however, the eﬀect of hearing
aid signal processing would remain unknown. Furthermore, playback levels would be
limited by the maximum output level of the system, and the required gains might not
be reachable in practice.
Another approach focuses on generalized hearing aid signal processing by using the
master hearing aid (MHA, Grimm, 2006). It enables online signal processing on the
54
==PAGE:67==
computer while dummy hearing aids are worn on the test subjects’ ears. That way, the
signal processing is controlled, and universality in the outcomes is provided by using no
brand-speciﬁc hearing aid features.
From the perspective of hearing aid manufacturers, it would be interesting to investi-
gate performance of hearing aid features like beamforming algorithms in reverberant
environments, and their potential beneﬁt in cocktail party scenarios. Veriﬁcation of
these features is largely carried out in environments with very low reverberation times.
The beneﬁt of these features in reverberant, multi-talker real-life scenarios is therefore
understudied.
Generally, it is possible that not only limitations directly related to the auditory system
degraded SRM for HI listeners. Instead, cognitive processing deﬁcits are conceivable as
having an inﬂuence. It would be interesting to measure e.g. working memory capacity
to ﬁnd a possible correlation with SRTs and ultimately also with SRM.
It could furthermore be considered to relate SRM, and the amount to which EM ac-
counts for it, with listening eﬀort. It can be expected that listening eﬀort eases with
the separation of sound sources. These are valuable considerations for the hearing aid
industry.
The applied better-ear glimpsing model could account for the observed SRM in NH
listeners when reverberation time was low. It captured changes in the number of masking
talkers and partly also changes in SRM observed due to changing the room. However,
more SRM was observed in environments with more reverberation than explained
by means of better-ear glimpsing. It would be desirable to incorporate a binaural
processing stage, such as the EC-mechanism in the model in order to gain insight into
the constribution of ITD processing to SRM in realistic environments. For example,
the model by Beutelmann et al. (2010) incorporates better-ear glimpsing and binaural
unmasking and could be applied to the results of the present study.
55
==PAGE:68==
5. Discussion
56
==PAGE:69==
6. Summary and conclusions
This study was conducted with the objective of quantifying SRM under realistic
conditions. A procedure for measuring SRM in virtual sound environments was used.
The study demonstrated that SRM has a limited dynamic range, yet is signiﬁcant in
real-life listening scenarios including reverberation.
With eﬀect sizes ranging from 1 −4 dB SRM is of lower magnitude than when measured
in anechoic conditions, as often presented in literature.
The number of masking
dialogues (two or four) had no eﬀect on SRM. In contrast to ﬁndings from other
studies, reverberation had no detrimental eﬀect on SRM. The regarded rooms, however,
diﬀered not only in reverberation time, but also in other room parameters that were
not controlled. These may have led to interacting and partly compensating eﬀects,
and thus to an overall small dynamic range of the observed SRM. The large radius
of the loudspeaker array might also have contributed to low SRM, by limiting the
nearest sound source to 2.4 m and increasing diﬀuseness in the rooms. Apart from the
constraints due to the array radius, the AVIL proved to be a useful tool for performing
listening experiments in realistic environments.
Model simulations showed that better-ear glimpsing is possible, yet restricted in re-
verberant conditions. The applied better-ear glimpsing model accounted for all SRM
observed in the least reverberant room, and for parts of SRM observed in very reverber-
ant environments. Better-ear glimpsing also captured the eﬀect of detrimental lateral
early reﬂections on SRM.
SRTs measured for aided HI listeners were 10 dB higher than for NH listeners. As one
main reason for the high thresholds obtained in the HI people, sentence scoring was
proposed.
Reduced audibility was suggested in literature as the main cause for reduced SRM in
HI listeners. In order to address this deﬁcit in this study two gain settings were applied,
one gain prescription based on the audiogram and one reduced gain setting. SRTs
changed signiﬁcantly with gain, however, no signiﬁcant relationship was found between
gain setting and SRM. When only reduced gain was provided, a disadvantage from
a separation of sound sources was observed in the HI group. This eﬀect was mainly
ascribed to the omnidirectional microphone setting in the BTE hearing aid, which
was observed to be detrimental in cocktail party scenarios. When gain was increased,
SRM increased. However, it remained signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from SRM measured in
NH listeners. This demonstrates that despite ampliﬁcation based on commonly used
ﬁtting rationales, HI listeners continue to have greater diﬃculty understanding speech
57
==PAGE:70==
6. Summary and conclusions
in multi-talker environments than NH listeners. However, it has been argued that
audibility was not fully restored in either of the gain settings provided for the HI
listeners and that therefore ampliﬁcation might still prove signiﬁcant when gain is
provided additionally to the prescribed gain.
For future studies, diﬀerent room models with controlled acoustical parameters could
be used in order to verify the little eﬀect size of SRM in real-life scenarios found in
this study. For that purpose, a sound presentation technique that allows for closer
source-receiver distances than in the present study should be considered. In order to
investigate the role of audibility on SRM further, more gain should be provided than is
prescribed by conventional ﬁtting rationales.
58
==PAGE:71==
A. Appendix
A.1. Details on informational masking
In some experimental setups, a higher amount of SRM occurs than could be explained
by means of better-ear eﬀects and binaural unmasking. The concept of informational
masking (IM) was therefore introduced, which accounts for the additional masking that
is released in these SRM tasks.
The core concept behind IM originates from auditory scene analysis (ASA, Bregman,
1993), which argues that the auditory system segments and integrates auditory elements
into basic objects from which streams are segregated and selected. An auditory object
hereby means a perceptual entity that is perceived as coming from one physical source.
Auditory objects are streamed over time by means of grouping (similarity, proximity,
continuity) of higher order perceptual features (location, pitch, timbre, meaning). For
sound elements with contiguous spectro-temporal structure, object formation relies on
monaural cues like common on-/oﬀsets, harmonic structure and continuity of frequency
over time. Most physical sounds (like speech) have a rich spectro-temporal structure
that supports short-term object-formation.
According to e.g. Freyman et al. (1999), Shinn-Cunningham (2008) and Watson (2005),
IM denotes perceptual similarity and uncertainty of target and masker signals that
hinder speech intelligibility. Shinn-Cunningham (2008) proposed a conceptual theory
which is based on the ASA and includes bottom-up processes and top-down attention
to systematically diﬀerentiate between two types of IM. Following Shinn-Cunningham
(2008), IM is caused by either false auditory object formation or wrong object selection.
Failures in object formation result from similarities between target and masker, hindering
bottom-up grouping and streaming. This in turn results in confusion between target
and masker. Failures in object selection can occur despite a successful segregation of
diﬀerent streams. However, due to either similarities between diﬀerent streams, or
uncertainty about which one is the target to attend, object selection can fail. Object
selection can also fail because of exogenous factors that draw attention away from the
target (e.g. the masking talker saying a highly familiar word such as your own name,
Bronkhorst, 2015).
59
==PAGE:72==
A. Appendix
A.2. Details on virtual sound environments
One technique that is used to create the perception of reverberant listening environments
is binaural room simulation, in which sound reproduction is realized over headphones.
Recorded sound ﬁles can be convolved with binaural room impulse responses (BRIRs) to
auralize the sounds. The aspired outcome is a resemblance of the created sound with the
sound that would reach the listener’s ears in the real-world situation that is simulated.
For this binaural auralization technique, head-related transfer functions (HRTFs) can
be obtained either with a dummy head or the individual test person. Some researchers
argue that test subjects achieve a higher accuracy, e.g. in localization experiments,
when individual recordings are used (Moller, 1996). However, HRTF recordings take a
long time to be measured individually. Another drawback of headphone-based VSEs
is that head movements need to be incorporated in the model via head tracking for
a convincing simulation (Begault, 2009). Another problem encountered when using
binaural auralization techniques is internalization, the localization of sound sources
inside the head. Furthermore, binaural techniques are impractical for test subjects
wearing hearing aids.
Another way of reproducing a sound ﬁeld is to use loudspeaker-based reproduction
techniques. In contrast to binaural room auralizations, loudspeaker-based VSEs need
large amounts of loudspeakers in order to reproduce the reverberant sound ﬁeld and
preserve localization percepts. Furthermore, an anechoic or highly absorbing room is
needed, which itself should not introduce acoustical artifacts. Loudspeaker-based VSEs,
however, are independent of the listener, they allow for free head movements and enable
the wearing of hearing aids. The commonly used techniques are vector-base amplitude
panning (VBAP), wave-ﬁeld synthesis (WFS), Higher-order Ambisonics (HOA) and
Nearest-loudspeaker mapping (NLS, Oreinos, 2010).
In this study, experiments were carried out in the AVIL at DTU, which enabled sound
ﬁeld reproduction using HOA and NLS.
A.2.1. Higher-Order Ambisonics (HOA)
Ambisonics describe a mathematical concept providing the possibility to decompose a
three-dimensional sound ﬁeld into spherical harmonics and resynthesize it (Favrot &
Buchholz, 2010). The underlying idea is that a three-dimensional sound ﬁeld which is
made up of acoustic waves in space, can be represented as weighted sums of spherical
harmonics, a spherical harmonic expansion. This describes an orthogonal system with
spatial spectra, analogous to a Fourier series, which decomposes periodic functions
60
==PAGE:73==
A.2. Details on virtual sound environments
based on orthogonal frequency spectra. The number of loudspeakers determines the
Ambisonics order, which in turn deﬁnes the spatial directionality of the reproduced
sound ﬁeld. Thus, the HOA decoding system becomes more spatially selective with
increasing order.
A three-dimensional sound ﬁeld which is made up of acoustic waves in space, can be
represented as weighted sums of spherical harmonics, a spherical harmonic expansion.
The pressure inside a source-free region in a spherical coordinate system can be written
as
p (kr, Θ, δ) =
∞
X
m=0
imjm (kr)
m
X
n=0
X
σ=±1
Bσ
mnY σ
mn (Θ, δ) ,
(1)
with jm(kr) being the spherical Bessel function of degree m, Bσ
mn the HOA components,
and Y σ
mn(Θ, δ) the real-valued spherical harmonic functions (SHFs) of degree m and
order n. Θ, δ are the azimuth and elevation angles, respectively. The SHFs are deﬁned
by
Y σ
mn (Θ, δ) =
s
(2m + 1) (2 −δ0,n) (m −n)!
(m + n)!Pmn (sin δ) ·



cos nΘ
if σ = +1
sin nΘ
if σ = −1
,
(2)
with Pmn being Legendre functions of degree m and order n and δ0,n the Kronecker
delta, equal to 1 for n = 0 and 0 otherwise (Oreinos, 2010).
The truncation order of the spherical harmonics decomposition (i.e. the Ambisonics
order) described by Equation 1 depends on the number of loudspeakers and determines
the spatial directionality or resolution of the reproduced sound ﬁeld. For a three-
dimensional reproduction and a uniform or nearly uniform layout, the limitation is
given by
N ≥(M + 1)2,
(3)
with N being the number of loudspeakers available and M the Ambisonics order (Favrot
& Buchholz, 2010). For example, in a 64-loudspeakers spherical HOA, the Ambisonics
order is limited to 7. The spatial directionality of the reproduced sound ﬁeld is directly
related to the Ambisonics order. Directivity plots, or panning functions as shown in
Figure 23 depict loudspeaker gains in any direction to reproduce a frontal incident
plane wave (similar to a far sound source in the same direction). The direction of
incidence is where the main lobe points to. The beam width of Ambisonics directivity
patterns can be interpreted as the highest possible precision in terms of individual
source representation. The beam widths are decreasing with increasing Ambisonics
order, thus the HOA decoding system becomes more spatially selective with increasing
61
==PAGE:74==
A. Appendix
order M.
Figure 23: Three-dimensional Ambisonics directivity patterns for orders M = 1 to 4.
The surface represents the loudspeaker gains in every direction to reproduce
a source in positive x-direction. From: Favrot & Buchholz (2010)
A perceptual artifact known as coloration is caused by the coherence of loudspeaker
signals. The artifact is often observed with Ambisonics sound ﬁeld reproduction, because
Ambisonics create coherent loudspeaker signals. The eﬀect is more pronounced when
the number of speakers exceeds the necessary number to achieve the used Ambisonics
order (see Equation 3, Solvang, 2008).
The reproduction is most accurate in the center of the loudspeaker array, the “sweet
spot”. This relationship is also determined by the Ambisonics order. The reproduction
error increases with decreasing Ambisonics order, increasing distance from the center,
and increasing frequency. As a rule of thumb, a reproduction error of 4 % is obtained
for an Ambisonics order
M = kr.
(4)
The error rate was suggested by Ward and Abhayapala and later conﬁrmed by Poletti
2005 (Ward & Abhayapala, 2001; Poletti, 2005).
However, it is not veriﬁed as a
subjective acceptance limit regarding the perception of the error. Equation 4 imposes a
frequency limit of
flim = Mc
2πr.
(5)
The frequency limit describes the frequency up to which a satisfactory reconstruction
of the sound ﬁeld is obtained. It is dependent on the Ambisonics order as well as on
the distance to the center of the array, indicating that best reproduction is possible
right in the center, or “sweet spot”. Assuming an Ambisonics order of 7, the sound ﬁeld
can be reproduced accurately for frequencies up to 4 kHz in the “sweet spot”, if we take
62
==PAGE:75==
A.2. Details on virtual sound environments
the ear-to-ear distance (14 cm) into account and allow for head movements of 5 cm to
each side. However, this frequency should be seen as a “transition” frequency rather
than a sharp limit. Above the transition frequency a diﬀerent technique, namely an
energy-normalization based, weighted decoding technique is used (Favrot & Buchholz,
2010).
A.2.2. Nearest loudspeaker (NLS)
In contrast to the reproduction of a sound ﬁeld with Ambisonics, the NLS method
regards the direction of each incoming sound wave, i.e.
the direct sound and its
reﬂections, separately and assigns a gain for each reﬂection to the nearest loudspeaker
available. Typically, a gain of 1 is applied to the loudspeaker that is nearest to the
direction of the regarded sound, and 0 to all other loudspeakers, so that only one
loudspeaker is playing at a time. In this way, NLS is a compromise strategy, as it
replaces virtual sources by the nearest available physical source. It therefore avoids
artifacts associated with virtual sources, such as position-dependent interference (comb
ﬁlter eﬀects) or large level variabilities at high frequencies. The latter occur when
multiple loudspeakers are active during playback, as in Ambisonics (Gerzon, 1973).
However, the spatial resolution of NLS systems is lower compared to HOA, introducing
geometrical distortions for arbitrarily positioned sound sources. Cubick & Dau (2016)
recently found that SRTs were lower when using NLS compared to HOA. They suggested
to prefer NLS over HOA for speech intelligibility experiments, when the spatial resolution
is not of particular importance, or when sound source locations are deﬁned at the exact
loudspeaker positions.
63
==PAGE:76==
A. Appendix
A.3. Relevant room acoustical parameters
Reverberation in a room can aﬀect speech intelligibility and decrease the beneﬁt from a
spatial separation of sound sources. The reverberation time T is deﬁned as the time
it takes for the reverberant sound pressure to decay by 60 dB. The Eyring-formula on
reverberation time is given by
T =

0.161 V
−S ln (1 −α)

,
(6)
where S is the total surface area, V the room volume and α the area average random
incidence energy absorption coeﬃcient (Raichel & Hansen, 2003). The direct-to-
reverberant ratio (DRR) describes the energy ratio between the acoustic power due
to the direct path and early reﬂections and the amount of power due to the late reﬂections
(Kuttruﬀ, 2000). Clarity C50 is one way of deﬁning the DRR, and is calculated by
C50 = 10 log
 ´ 50 ms
0
p2(t) dt
´ ∞
50 ms p2(t) dt
!
(7)
(ISO 3382-1(en) 2009). Clarity serves as an indicator for how clearly sounds are perceived.
The time interval of 50 ms is commonly used for speech clarity, whereas 80 ms is the
usual interval for determining clarity in music. The reverberation distance, or critical
distance rH indicates the distance in a room where the sound pressure levels originating
from the direct and reverberant part of a sound are equal. It is dependent on the
reverberation time and the room volume and given by the formula
rH = 0.057
r
V
T
(8)
under the assumption of a monopole source. The speech-transmission index (STI)
is a parameter that predicts speech by measuring the decrease in speech modulation
depth during the sound transmission from source to receiver (Larm, 2006). It is deﬁned
in the IEC 60268 −16 standard.
64
==PAGE:77==
A.4. Stimulus processing and spatialization
A.4. Stimulus processing and spatialization
In order to create the dynamic, spatially distributed masker mixture, the root-mean-
square (rms) levels of the single PiTU masker sentences were equalized, and the sentences
were then processed in LoRA as described in 3.1.2. In order to obtain conversation-like
speech material, 64-channel ﬁles were ﬁrst truncated to remove any silence at the
beginning and at the end of the recordings. Sentences of two turn-taking talkers each
were then concatenated in a random order to form diﬀerent-sex dialogues. In order to
create two diﬀerent multiple-talker mixtures, either two or four dialogues were added
together, ensuring that no sentence would be spoken by diﬀerent persons at a time.
The rms-levels of the masker-mixes were adjusted to obtain 65 dB SPL measured in the
center of the loudspeaker array with a B&K sound level meter (2250), which was initially
calibrated with a B&K sound level calibrator (4230). In order to play a continuous
masker signal, the 1.5 minutes masker-mixes were linearly ramped at the start and the
end with a ramp duration of 1.5 seconds and then looped during the speech intelligibility
test with a 1.5 seconds cross fade.
Figure 24: Long-term averaged speech spectra (LTASS) in rel. dB of the spectrally
matched target sentences and the masker dialogues over frequency in Hz.
The HINT sentences were also processed according to the descriptions earlier in this
section, obtaining three sets with HINT target sentences, one for each of the modeled
rooms. The target sentences and masker dialogues were then spectrally matched. The
equalization was done with a 512-tap FIR ﬁlter, using the ﬁr2 and ﬁlter functions in
MATLAB. The design was based on the diﬀerence in magnitude spectrum between the
two-talker masker-mix and the HINT calibration noise with a duration of 20 seconds.
The noise was used as it matches the level and long-term spectrum of the HINT sen-
65
==PAGE:78==
A. Appendix
tences. Figure 24 shows the matched long-term averaged speech spectra (LTASS) as
relative levels over frequency of the unﬁltered two-dialogue masker mix and the target
speech after ﬁltering.
Finally, the rms-levels of the HINT-targets were adjusted. Therefore, the calibration
noise was processed in LoRA, convolving it with the RIR in each of the three rooms,
using the target talker source position. Three 64-channel calibration noises with the
acoustical characteristics of the corresponding room were obtained. For each of the
three rooms, the calibration noise was played back in the AVIL and the regarding
rms-level was adjusted until 65 dB SPL were measured in the center of the array. All
individual 64-channel HINT-sentences were calibrated by applying the diﬀerence of
the original rms-level of the calibration noise and the rms-level of the calibration noise
when 65 dB SPL were measured in the center of the array to each sentence individually.
By this procedure, the level diﬀerences between individual HINT-sentences due to
intelligibility-matching were maintained.
66
==PAGE:79==
A.5. Additional Figures
A.5. Additional Figures
Figure 25: BRIR recording in the AVIL. The HATS is placed on the listener’s position.
BRIR are measured for each of the 64 loudspeakers.
Figure 26: Measurement conditions in SRM experiment
67
==PAGE:80==
A. Appendix
Figure 27: Simpliﬁed LoRA processing diagram, originally from Favrot & Buchholz
(2010). The discrete part and the reverberant part of the RIR, provided by
the room simulation software, are auralised using two diﬀerent techniques,
NLS and HOA. NLS assigns a gain to each loudspeaker corresponding
to the direction of the direct sound or the early reﬂection, respectively.
For each loudspeaker, the impulse response of each band of a octave-band
ﬁlter bank is multiplied by the corresponding loudspeaker gain and by
the amplitude of the direct sound. The multi-channel direct sound and
early reﬂection parts of the RIR are obtained. Late reﬂections are decoded
using Ambisonics. The obtained loudspeaker-speciﬁc envelopes of the late
reﬂections are multiplied with Gaussian noise to obtain a high natural
desity of late reﬂections. After ﬁltering in eight frequency bands, the three
parts of the RIR (LDS
i
[n], LER
i
[n] and Llate
i
[n]) are added together to obtain
a temporal signal for each loudspeaker channel. A combination of these
channels yields the ﬁnal multi-channel RIR (mRIR) for each source-receiver
cobination. A virtual auditory scene is obtained by auralisation of an
anechoic signal convolved with the mRIR.
68
==PAGE:81==
A.6. Individual results
A.6. Individual results
ID
SRT [dB]
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
HI01
HI02
HI03
HI04
HI05
HI06
HI07
HI08
HI09
NH01
NH02
NH03
NH04
NH05
NH06
NH07
NH08
NH09
NH10
NH11
0.2
0.6
1
0.2
0.6
1
2
4
0.2
0.6
1
0.2
0.6
1
2
4
0.2
0.6
1
0.2
0.6
1
2
4
0.2
0.6
1
0.2
0.6
1
2
4
Number of dialogues / Reverberation time [sec]
Gain (color) and position (symbol):
Full gain
Half gain
Colocated
Separated
Figure 28: SRTs in dB SNR of all test subjects (eleven NH and seven HI) in the
colocated and spatially separated conditions. NH SRTs were obtained for
the diﬀerent masker conditions (two and four dialogues). HI SRTs were
obtained for the diﬀerent gain conditions (“half-HL gain” and “full gain”)
with the two-dialogue masker. See the legend for symbol and colour coding.
Listeners HI08 and HI09 were excluded from further analysis, because only
the four-dialogue masker was measured.
69
==PAGE:82==
A. Appendix
A.7. Better-ear glimpsing results
In order to investigate where the model predictions originated from, histograms were
plotted, showing the SNR advantage by the better-ear glimpsing strategy in the colocated
and spatially separated conﬁguration. Figure 29 shows histograms and median values
of observed SNRs in the 1 kHz-band in the colocated and spatially separated conditions
for all three rooms and a two-dialogue masker. The top three graphs show histograms
examplarily for the left ear, and the bottom panels include graphs for the “better-ear”
signal, thus a combination of all SNRs across time frames and frequency bands in the
instantaneous better-ear, as calculated from the model.
Figure 29: Histograms showing the frequency of observed SNR in the 1 kHz-band as
the amount of time frames over SNR in dB. Histograms are shown for
the spatially separated (black) and colocated (gray) two-dialogue masker
conditions in the three rooms. median SNRs as calculated from the raw
data are given as numbers. Top graphs: left ear. Bottom graphs: better
ear.
Positive SNRs were found more often in the spatially separated condition. That can
be seen when comparing the distributions of the spatially separated compared to the
corresponding colocated conditions. The distributions showing the separated conditions
are shifted towards higher SNRs. This could be observed for the low and medium
reverberant room. In the room with the longest reverberation time, however, the
colocated condition provided more glimpsing opportunities in the 1 kHz-band. Also,
70
==PAGE:83==
A.7. Better-ear glimpsing results
glimpsing eﬀects decrease with increasing reverberation time. Comparing distributions
between the left ear (top graphs) and better-ear (bottom graphs) signals show a shift
towards higher SNRs for the better-ear signal. Masker sources were placed symmetrically
around the listener, so that no diﬀerence (< 0.2 dB) was seen between the left and the
right ear. Figure 30 shows the BEGM-data in histograms for the 4 kHz-band.
Figure 30: Histograms showing the frequency of observed SNR in the 4 kHz-band as
the amount of time frames over SNR in dB. Histograms are shown for
the spatially separated (black) and colocated (gray) two-dialogue masker
conditions in the three rooms. Median SNRs as calculated from the raw
data are given as numbers. Top graphs: left ear. Bottom graphs: better
ear.
Positive SNRs were found more often in the spatially separated condition, such as in
the 1 kHz-band. Again, this is observed across all room conditions, and for the left ear
and better-ear. However, the diﬀerences between medians in colocated and separated
conditions were higher than was observed in the 1 kHz-band. Thus, there are more
glimpsing opportunities in the high frequencies when separating the sound sources.
Comparing distributions between left ear and better-ear signal in the 4 kHz-band show
a shift towards higher SNRs for the better-ear signal, as was observed in the 1 kHz-band.
However, the overall SNRs are lower in the 4 kHz-band. However, more glimpsing
advantages in the spatially separated condition are observed than in the 1 kHz-band.
71
==PAGE:84==
A. Appendix
72
==PAGE:85==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bibliography
Agus, Trevor R, Akeroyd, Michael a, Gatehouse, Stuart, & Warden, David. 2009. Informational
masking in young and elderly listeners for speech masked by simultaneous speech and noise. The
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 126(4), 1926–1940.
Ahlstrom, Jayne B., Horwitz, Amy R., & Dubno, Judy R. 2009. Spatial Beneﬁt of Bilateral Hearing
Aids. Ear and Hearing, 30(2), 203–218.
Arbogast, Tanya L., Mason, Christine R., & Kidd, Gerald. 2002. The eﬀect of spatial separation on
informational and energetic masking of speech. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
112(5), 2086.
Assmann, Peter. 2008. 5 The Perception of Speech Under Adverse Conditions.
Begault, Durand R. 2009. Direct Comparison of the Impact of Head Tracking, Reverberation, and
Individualized Head-Related Transfer Functions on the Spatial Perception of a Virtual Speech
Source.
Bench, John, Kowal, ˚Ase, & Bamford, John. 1979. The Bkb (Bamford-Kowal-Bench) Sentence Lists
for Partially-Hearing Children. British Journal of Audiology, 13(3), 108–112.
Bernstein, Joshua G. W., & Grant, Ken W. 2009. Auditory and auditory-visual intelligibility of
speech in ﬂuctuating maskers for normal-hearing and hearing-impaired listeners. The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 125(5), 3358–3372.
Best, Virginia, Marrone, Nicole, Mason, Christine R., Kidd, Gerald, & Shinn-Cunningham, Bar-
bara G. 2009. Eﬀects of Sensorineural Hearing Loss on Visually Guided Attention in a Multitalker
Environment. Journal of the Association for Research in Otolaryngology, 10(1), 142–149.
Best, Virginia, Marrone, Nicole, Mason, Christine R., & Kidd, Gerald. 2012. The inﬂuence of non-
spatial factors on measures of spatial release from masking. The Journal of the Acoustical Society
of America, 131(4), 3103.
Best, Virginia, Thompson, Eric R., Mason, Christine R., & Kidd, Gerald. 2013. An energetic limit on
spatial release from masking. Journal of the Association for Research in Otolaryngology : JARO,
14(4), 603–10.
Best, Virginia, Keidser, Gitte, Buchholz, J´O§rg M., & Freeston, Katrina. 2016. Development and
preliminary evaluation of a new test of ongoing speech comprehension. International Journal of
Audiology, 55(1), 45–52.
Beutelmann, Rainer, Brand, Thomas, & Kollmeier, Birger. 2010. Revision, extension, and evaluation
of a binaural speech intelligibility model. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 127(4),
2479–97.
Bolia, R S, Nelson, W T, Ericson, M a, & Simpson, B D. 2000. A speech corpus for multitalker
communications research. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 107(2), 1065–1066.
Bradley, John, & Sato, Hiroshi. 2002. The importance of early reﬂections for speech intelligibility in
rooms. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 111(5), 2411.
Bregman, Albert S. 1993. Auditory scene analysis: Theory and phenomena. The Journal of the
73
==PAGE:86==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Acoustical Society of America, 93(4), 2306.
Bronkhorst, A. W., & Plomp, R. 1988. Interaural on Speech Intelligibility in Noise. J. Acoust. Soc.
Am., 83(April 1988).
Bronkhorst, A. W., & Plomp, R. 1992. Eﬀect of multiple speechlike maskers on biaural speech recognition
in normal and hering impaired hearing.
Bronkhorst, Adelbert W. 2000.
The cocktail party phenomenon A review of research on speech
intelligibility in multiple-talker conditions.
Bronkhorst, Adelbert W. 2015. The cocktail-party problem revisited: early processing and selection of
multi-talker speech. Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics, 1465–1487.
Brungart, Douglas S., & Iyer, Nandini. 2012. Better-ear glimpsing eﬃciency with symmetrically-placed
interfering talkers. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 132(4), 2545.
Brungart, Douglas S., Simpson, Brian D., Ericson, M. A., & Scott, K. R. 2001. Informational and
energetic masking eﬀects in the perception of multiple simultaneous talkers. The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 110(5 Pt 1), 2527–2538.
Brungart, Douglas S, Simpson, Brian D, & Freyman, Richard L. 2005. Precedence-based speech
segregation in a virtual auditory environment. J Acoust Soc Am, 118(5), 3241–3251.
Byrne, D. 1986. The National Acoustic Laboratories’ (NAL) new procedure for selecting the gain and
frequency response of a hearing aid. Ear and Hearing, 7(4).
C. Micheyl, P. Arthaud, C. Reinhart. 2000. Informational Masking in Normal-hearing and Hearing-
impaired Listeners. Acta Oto-Laryngologica, 120(2), 242–246.
Cameron, Sharon, & Dillon, Harvey. 2007. Development of the Listening in Spatialized Noise-Sentences
Test (LISN-S). Ear and hearing, 28(2), 196–211.
Cameron, Sharon, Glyde, Helen, & Dillon, Harvey. 2011. Listening in Spatialized Noise-Sentences Test
(LiSN-S): Normative and Retest Reliability Data for Adolescents and Adults up to 60 Years of Age.
Journal of the American Academy of Audiology, 22(10), 697–709.
Ching, Teresa Y C, van Wanrooy, Emma, Dillon, Harvey, & Carter, Lyndal. 2011. Spatial release
from masking in normal-hearing children and children who use hearing aids. The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 129(1), 368–75.
Christensen, Claus Lynge. 2001. Odeon, a design tool for auditorium acoustics, noise control and
loudspeaker systems. Proceedings of Reproduced Sound 17.
Christiansen, Thomas Ulrich, & Henrichsen, Peter Juel. 2012. Sense Meets Nonsense-a dual-layer
Danish speech corpus for perception studies. Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC), 3356–3361.
Cubick, Jens, & Dau, Torsten. 2016. Validation of a Virtual Sound Environment System for Testing
Hearing Aids. Acta Acustica united with Acustica, 102(3), 547 —- 557.
Culling, John F., Hodder, Kathryn I, & Toh, Chaz Yee. 2003. Eﬀects of reverberation on perceptual
segregation of competing voices. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 114(August
2002), 2871–2876.
74
==PAGE:87==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Darwin, Christopher J., Brungart, Douglas S., & Simpson, Brian D. 2003. Eﬀects of fundamental
frequency and vocal-tract length changes on attention to one of two simultaneous talkers. The
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 114(5), 2913.
de Boer, E, & Bouwmeester, J. 1974. Critical bands and sensorineural hearing loss.
Dubno, Judy R., Ahlstrom, Jane B., & Horwitz, Amy J. 2002. Spectral Contribution to the Beneﬁt
From Spatial Separation of Speech and Noise. 1–15.
Dubno, Judy R., Ahlstrom, Jayne B, & Horwitz, Amy R. 2008. Binaural Advantage for Younger
and Older Adults With Normal Hearing Beneﬁt With and Without. Hearing Research, 51(April),
539–556.
Durlach, N. I. 1963. Equalization and Cancellation Theory of Binaural Masking-Level Diﬀerences. The
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 35(8), 1206.
Favrot, Sylvain, & Buchholz, J¨org M. 2010. LoRA: A Loudspeaker-Based Room Auralization System.
Festen, JM. 1990. Eﬀects of ﬂucturating noise and interfering speech on the speech-reception threshold
for impaired and normal hearing. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 88(4).
Freyman, Richard L., Helfer, Karen S., McCall, D. D., & Clifton, R. K. 1999. The role of perceived
spatial separation in the unmasking of speech. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
106(6), 3578–3588.
Freyman, Richard L., Balakrishnan, Uma, & Helfer, Karen S. 2001. Spatial release from informational
masking in speech recognition. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 109(5), 2112–2122.
Fuellgrabe, Christian, & Moore, Brian C J. 2012. Objective and subjective measures of pure-tone
stream segregation based on interaural time diﬀerences. Hearing Research, 291(1-2), 24–33.
Gallun, Frederick J., Mason, Christine R., & Kidd, Gerald. 2005. Binaural release from informational
masking in a speech identiﬁcation task. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 118(3 Pt
1), 1614–1625.
Gelfand, Stanley A. 1988. Sentence reception in noise from one versus two sources: Eﬀects of aging
and hearing loss. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 83(1), 248.
George, Erwin L J, Festen, Joost M, & Houtgast, Tammo. 2008. The combined eﬀects of reverberation
and nonstationary noise on sentence intelligibility. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
124(August 2008), 1269–1277.
Gerzon, Ma. 1973. Periphony - with-height sound reproduction. Journal of the Audio Engineering
Society, 21(1).
Glyde, Helen, Buchholz, Joerg M., Dillon, Harvey, Best, Virginia, Hickson, Louise, & Cameron, Sharon.
2013a. The eﬀect of better-ear glimpsing on spatial release from masking. The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 134(4), 2937.
Glyde, Helen, Cameron, Sharon, Dillon, Harvey, Hickson, Louise, & Seeto, Mark. 2013b. The Eﬀects
of Hearing Impairment and Aging on Spatial Processing. Ear and Hearing, 34(1), 15–28.
Glyde, Helen, Buchholz, J¨org M., Nielsen, Lillian, Best, Virginia, Dillon, Harvey, Cameron, Sharon, &
Hickson, Louise. 2015. Eﬀect of audibility on spatial release from speech-on-speech maskinga). The
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 138(5), 3311–3319.
75
==PAGE:88==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Grimm, Giso. 2006. The Master Hearing Aid: A PC-based platform for algorithm development and
evaluation. Acta Acustica United With Acustica, 92(4).
Hartmann, William M., Constan, Zachary A., & Rakerd, Brad. 1998. Binaural coherence and the
localization of sound in rooms. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 103(5), 3081.
Helfer, Karen S., & Freyman, Richard L. 2005. The role of visual speech cues in reducing energetic
and informational masking. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 117(2), 842.
Helfer, Karen S., & Freyman, Richard L. 2008. Aging and Speech-on-Speech Masking.
Keidser, G., Dillon, H.R., Flax, M., Ching, T., & Brewer, S. 2011. The NAL-NL2 prescription procedure.
Audiology Research, 1(1S), 1–3.
Keidser, Gitte, O’Brien, Anna, Hain, Jens-Uwe, McLelland, Margot, & Yeend, Ingrid. 2009. The
eﬀect of frequency-dependent microphone directionality on horizontal localization performance in
hearing-aid users. International Journal of Audiology, 48(11), 789–803.
Kidd, Gerald, Mason, Christine R., Rohtla, T L, & Deliwala, P S. 1998. Release from masking due to
spatial separation of sources in the identiﬁcation of nonspeech auditory patterns. The Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America, 104(1), 422–431.
Kidd, Gerald, Mason, Christine R., & Gallun, Frederick J. 2005a. Combining energetic and informational
masking for speech identiﬁcation. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 118(2), 982–992.
Kidd, Gerald, Mason, Christine R., Brughera, Andrew, & Hartmann, William M. 2005b. The role of
reverberation in release from masking due to spatial separation of sources for speech identiﬁcation.
Acta Acustica united with Acustica, 91(3), 526–536.
Kidd, Gerald, Mason, Christine R., Richards, Virginia M, Gallun, Frederick J., & Durlach, Nathaniel I.
2007. Informational Masking. Auditory Perception of Sound Sources, 143–189.
Kochkin, S, Beck, D L, Laurel, a, Fligor, B J, Kricos, P B, Mcspaden, J B, Mueller, G, Nilsson, M J,
Northern, J L, Prairie, E, Powers, T a, Sweetow, R W, Taylor, B, & Turner, R G. 2010. MarkeTrak
VIII: The impact of the hearing healthcare professional on hearing aid user success. Hearing Review,
17(April), 12–34.
Korhonen, Petri, Lau, Chi, Kuk, Francis, Keenan, Denise, & Schumacher, Jennifer. 2015. Eﬀects of
Coordinated Compression and Pinna Compensation Features on Horizontal Localization Performance
in Hearing Aid Users. Journal of the American Academy of Audiology, 26(1), 80–92.
Kuk, Francis, Korhonen, Petri, Lau, Chi, Keenan, Denise, & Norgaard, Magnus. 2013. Evaluation of a
Pinna Compensation Algorithm for Sound Localization and Speech Perception in Noise. American
Journal of Audiology, 22(1), 84.
Kuttruﬀ, H. 2000. Stationary propagation of sound energy in ﬂat enclosures with partially diﬀuse
surface reﬂection. Acustica, 86(6).
Larm, P. 2006. Experimental comparison between speech transmission index, rapid speech transmission
index, and speech intelligibility index. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 119(2).
Lavandier, Mathieu, & Culling, John F. 2008. Speech segregation in rooms: monaural, binaural, and
interacting eﬀects of reverberation on target and interferer. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, 123(April), 2237–2248.
76
==PAGE:89==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Lavandier, Mathieu, Jelfs, Sam, Culling, John F., Watkins, Anthony, Raimond, Andrew, & Makin,
Simon. 2012. Binaural prediction of speech intelligibility in reverberant rooms with multiple noise
sources. Journal of the acoustical society of america, 131(1), 218–230.
Litovsky, R Y, Colburn, H.s, Yost, W, & Guzman, S J. 1999. The precedence eﬀect. Journal of
Acoustical Society of America, 106(4 Pt 1), 1633–1654.
Litovsky, Ruth Y. 2012. Spatial Release from Masking. Acoustics Today, 8(2), 18.
Marrone, Nicole, Mason, Christine R., & Kidd, Gerald. 2008. The eﬀects of hearing loss and age on
the beneﬁt of spatial separation between multiple talkers in reverberant rooms. The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 124(5), 3064.
Minnaar, Pauli, Breitsprecher, Claudia, & Holmberg, Marcus. 2011. Simulating Complex Listening
Environments in the Laboratory for Testing Hearing Aids. Forum Acusticum 2011, 27. June - 1.
July, Aalborg, DK.
Moller, H. 1996. Binaural technique: Do we need individual recordings?
Journal of the Audio
Engineering Society, 44(6).
Moore, Brian C J. 2008. The role of temporal ﬁne structure processing in pitch perception, masking,
and speech perception for normal-hearing and hearing-impaired people. JARO - Journal of the
Association for Research in Otolaryngology, 9(4), 399–406.
Moore, Brian C J, F¨ullgrabe, Christian, & Stone, Michael a. 2010. Eﬀect of spatial separation, extended
bandwidth, and compression speed on intelligibility in a competing-speech task. The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 128(1), 360–371.
Nabelek, Anna K. 1989. Reverberant overlap- and self-masking in consonant identiﬁcation. The Journal
of the Acoustical Society of America, 86(4), 1259.
Nielsen, Jens Bo, & Dau, Torsten. 2009. Development of a Danish speech intelligibility test. International
Journal of Audiology, 48(10), 729–741.
Noble, W, Byrne, D, & Ter-Horst, K. 1997. Auditory localization, detection of spatial separateness,
and speech hearing in noise by hearing impaired listeners. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, 102(4), 2343–2352.
Oreinos, Chris, & Buchholz, J¨org M. 2013. Measurement of a Full 3D Set of HRTFs for In-Ear and
Hearing Aid Microphones on a Head and Torso Simulator (HATS). Acta Acustica united with
Acustica, 99(5), 836–844.
Oreinos, Christos. 2010. Virtual Acoustic Environments for the Evaluation of Hearing Devices Christos
Oreinos.
Plomp, R. 1976. Binaural and monaural speech intelligibility of connected discourse in reverberation
as a function of azimuth of a single competing sound source (speech or noise). Acta Acustica united
with Acustica, 34(4), 200–211.
Poletti, M. A. 2005. Three-dimensional surround sound systems based on spherical harmonics. AES:
Journal of the Audio Engineering Society, 53(11), 1004–1024.
Pollack, Irwin. 1975. Auditory informational masking. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
57(S1), S5.
77
==PAGE:90==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Raichel, Daniel R., & Hansen, Uwe J. 2003. The Science and Applications of Acoustics. Vol. 114.
Reisberg, Daniel. 2007. Cognition : exploring the science of the mind. W.W. Norton.
Rhebergen, Koenraad S., Lyzenga, Johannes, Dreschler, Wouter A., & Festen, Joost M. 2010. Modeling
speech intelligibility in quiet and noise in listeners with normal and impaired hearing. Acoustical
Society of America, 127(3), 1570–1583.
Ro, Filip M, Jensen, Niels S, Hietkamp, Renskje K, Pedersen, Julie H, & Others. 2013. Magnitude of
speech-reception-threshold manipulators for a spatial speech-in-speech test that takes signal-to-noise
ratio confounds and ecological validity into account. Page 50069 of: Proceedings of Meetings on
Acoustics, vol. 19. Acoustical Society of America.
Rosen, Stuart, Souza, Pamela, Ekelund, Caroline, & Majeed, Arooj A. 2013. Listening to speech in
a background of other talkers: eﬀects of talker number and noise vocoding. The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 133(4), 2431–43.
Salomons, Aurelia Maria. 1995. Coloration and binaural decoloration of sound due to reﬂections.
Schoenmaker, Esther, Brand, Thomas, & van de Par, Steven. 2016. The multiple contributions of
interaural diﬀerences to improved speech intelligibility in multitalker scenariosa). The Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America, 139(5), 2589–2603.
Shinn-Cunningham, Barbara G. 2008. Object-based auditory and visual attention. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 12(5), 182–186.
Shinn-Cunningham, Barbara G., Schickler, Jason, Kopcco, Norbert, & Litovsky, Ruth. 2001. Spatial
unmasking of nearby speech sources in a simulated anechoic environment. The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 110(2), 1118.
Smeds, Karolina, Wolters, Florian, & Rung, Martin. 2015. Estimation of Signal-to-Noise Ratios in
Realistic Sound Scenarios. Journal of the American Academy of Audiology, 26(2), 183–196.
Solvang, Audun. 2008. Spectral impairment for two-dimensional higher order ambisonics. Journal of
the Audio Engineering Society, 56(4).
Steeneken, H J, & Houtgast, T. 1980. A physical method for measuring speech-transmission quality.
The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 67(1), 318–326.
Strelcyk, Olaf, Pentony, Shareka, Kalluri, Sridhar, & Edwards, Brent. 2014. Eﬀects of interferer facing
orientation on speech perception by normal-hearing and hearing-impaired listeners. The Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America, 135(3), 1419–32.
Ward, Darren B., & Abhayapala, Thushara D. 2001. Reproduction of a plane-wave sound ﬁeld using
an array of loudspeakers. IEEE Transactions on Speech and Audio Processing, 9(6), 697–707.
Watson, Charles S. 2005. Masking on Informational Some Comments. 91(December 2004), 502–512.
Westermann, Adam, & Buchholz, J¨org M. 2015a. The eﬀect of spatial separation in distance on the
intelligibility of speech in rooms. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 137(2), 757–67.
Westermann, Adam, & Buchholz, J¨org M. 2015b. The inﬂuence of informational masking in reverberant,
multi-talker environments. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 138(2), 584–593.
78
