==PAGE:1==
AlGaAs-on-sapphire integrated
nonlinear photonics
Yi Zheng
Supervisors: Prof. Kresten Yvind
a
Dr. Minhao Pu
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Photonics Engineering
Ørsteds Plads, building 345A
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
July 10, 2016
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis is submitted as fulﬁlment of the requirements for obtaining the
degree of Master of Science in Engineering at Technical University of Den-
mark(DTU). The work has been accomplished at Department of Photonics En-
gineering, Nanophotonic devices group headed by Professor Kresten Yvind. The
duration of work was ﬁve and a half months in the period of January 25th to
July 10th corresponding to a credit of 32.5 ECTS points.
I’ve enjoyed my work and learned a lot at DTU Fotonik in my whole master
project period. Without help of people here, I am not able to ﬁnish the project
with satisﬁed results. Therefore, I would like to thank a number of people here.
First and foremost, I want to thank my supervisors Kresten Yvind and Minhao
Pu. I appreciate that they arrange weekly meeting and guide me every step
since the special course period last year. It guarantees the project go eﬃciently.
The profound knowledge provided by them can always solve the problems I
met in time. I would especially thank Minhao Pu, who is always sharing his
experiences in fabrication and willing to spend his on solving my puzzles either
from fabrication or from characterization. Without his help, I would not obtain
what I want know so fast.
Furthermore I would like to thank PhD student Hitesh Kumar Sahoo at Nanopho-
tonic devices group for his help on realizing the bonding between AlGaAs and
sapphire wafers with his knowledge and experience. I would also thank Postdoc
XiaoWei Guan and my colleague Vicent Slembrouk for sharing their knowledge
and experience on Lumerical FDTD software simulation, Senior researcher Lars
Hagedorn Frandsen for showing me how to do simulation on cluster.
==PAGE:4==
ii
Preface
Finally, I would like to thank my family and friwnds for their wonderful support
during the project.
Yi Zheng
Department of Photonics Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
July 9, 2016
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis deals with the realization of AlGaAs-on-sapphire platform, fabrica-
tion of high quality factor and thermal stable device based on realized platform
and characterization of fabricated devices.
The project is built on the recent developed AlGaAs-on-insulator nonlinear in-
tegrated photonic platform, which exhibits superior nonlinear properties and
shows huge potential in nonlinear signal processing. However, the operating
wavelength of this platform is limited below mid-infrared range due to strong
absorption of light in insulator(silica).
It promotes to use another material-
sapphire as substrate to extend the operating wavelength of the platform be-
cause of its large transparent window.
The realization of the AlGaAs-on-sapphire platform includes molecular wafer
bonding and substrate removal. The fabrication process of devices consists of
resist spinning, e-beam lithography, developing, dry etching and cleaving. A lot
of problems appear during the fabrication process such as rough surface during
substrate removal, thick resist, charging eﬀect, stitching problems and sapphire
wafer cleaving. Most of the problems are solved or optimized.
The high quality factor achieved in fabricated devices with diﬀerent ring radius
in AlGaAs-on-sapphire platform.
Also, compared to the standard AlGaAs-
on-silica platform, the thermal stability of the AlGaAs-on-sapphire platform
improves signiﬁcantly. Finally several methods are provided in order to further
improve the quality factor of devices on this platform.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
i
Abstract
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Microring resonator based on AlGaAs-on-sapphire platform
5
2.1
All-pass microring resonator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.1
Transmission characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.2
Spectral characteristics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Motivation of realizing AlGaAs-on-sapphire platform . . . . . . .
10
2.2.1
AlGaAs material . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.2
Sapphire material
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Fabrication of AlGaAs-on-sapphire microring resonator
15
3.1
Process overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
Realization of AlGaAs-on-sapphire platform . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2.1
Wafer bonding
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2.2
Substrate removal
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2.3
Surface roughness inspection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
AlGaAs microring resonator deﬁnition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3.1
Electron beam lithography
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3.2
Inductively coupled plasma etching . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.3.3
Laser cutting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.4
Problems and optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.4.1
Rough surface and its improvement . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.4.2
Resist thickness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.4.3
Charging eﬀect . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
==PAGE:8==
vi
CONTENTS
3.4.4
Charge dissipation and its mechanism . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.4.5
Dose test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.4.6
Multipass exposure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.4.7
AlGaAs residues after dry etching
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.4.8
Sapphire wafer cleaving
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.5
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4
Characterization of fabricated AlGaAs-on-sapphire microring
resonator
41
4.1
Characterization set-up and data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.2
Yield of fabricated devices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.3
Quality factor of multi-pass exposure chips
. . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.3.1
Characterization of devices in chip#2
. . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.3.2
Characterization of devices in chip#6
. . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.4
Quality factor comparison between single-pass and multi-pass chips 48
4.5
Quality factor comparison between diﬀerent rings with and with-
out AZ5214 resist cladding
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.6
Thermal property characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.6.1
Resonance shift of devices with high injected power
. . .
51
4.6.2
Thermal stability comparison between AlGaAs-on-sapphire
platform and AlGaAs-on-silica platfrom . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.6.3
Temperature sensitivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.7
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5
Methods to further improve quality factor
57
5.1
Controlling overetch depth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.2
Coupling coeﬃcient simulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5.3
Possible settings in E-beam lithography system . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6
Conclusion and Outlook
65
A Experimental data
67
B BEAMER settings
71
C E-beam exposure mask
73
Bibliography
77
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
High speed transmission and processing of signal are always desired as global
data traﬃc is growing at astounding rates that are not expected to slow down
in the near future. Due to the fact that conventional way of processing op-
tical signal by electronic devices cannot fulﬁl the requirement, all optical net-
works are very often considered to be the main candidate for constituting the
backbone to carry the global data traﬃc [1]. All optical signal generation and
processing have been successful in many aspects, such as high speed optical
processing [2], on chip multi-wavelength lasers [3], parametric gain [4], optical
switches and so on. The integration of all these photonic devices will greatly
reduce the cost, footprint, energy consumption and improve performance at the
same time. However, all-optical processing is in early stage of development and
slow progress, which is limited by without having a single material platform to
handle everything. Silicon is a strong candidate for all optical network because
of its advantages [5–10]. However, silicon has its own limitations, which makes
it not suitable for all applications. And that is why many other materials plat-
forms are investigated and used to fabricate diﬀerent devices to achieve desired
applications.
Nonlinear photonic chips enables generation and processing of signal using only
light, avoid optical–electrical–optical (O-E-O) conversions, which makes ultra
high speed signal processing possible. Silicon-on-insulator is leading platform
for nonlinear optics, however, two photon absorption at telecom wavelength is
==PAGE:10==
2
Introduction
its main limitation.
Aluminium Gallium Arsenide(AlxGa1−xAs) is regarded as "the silicon of non-
linear optics" [11] because of its excellent nonlinear properties.
It provides
very high nonlinear index coeﬃcient, which is orders of magnitude higher than
the material platform used for nonlinear optics, such as SiN [12], Hydex [13],
AlN [14] and Diamond [15]. In addition, the large and tailable bandgap enables
it to achieve low linear loss and negligible two photon absorption at telecom
wavelengths. Furthermore, its high refractive index allows large index contrast
nonlinear photonics platform. High conﬁnement of light can be achieved in such
a platform. Finally it is an direct bandgap material, which makes integration
of lasers, waveguides and detector on same chip possible. Such excellent prop-
erties undoubtedly enables AlGaAs play an important role in future all optical
photonic chips.
The new AlGaAs-on-insulator nonlinear integrated photonic platform is recently
developed at DTU and it exhibits superior nonlinear properties which has huge
potential in nonlinear signal processing. High quality factor(> 105) microring
resonator and a record low threshold power of 3mW for optical parametric os-
cillation are achieved by this platform. Also, a frequency comb spanning 350
nm is obtained. All in all, although the fabrication technology on AlGaAs is
not mature enough, it is a promising material and can deﬁnitely give impact in
the future.
The realized AlGaAs-on-insulator platform, speciﬁcally AlGaAs-on-silica , shows
a huge potential of many applications. However, the silica in this platform lim-
its its operating wavelength below 2.6µm because SiO2 has a high material loss
at wavelength beyond 2.6µm. For applications at longer wavelength, the silica
becomes more strongly absorbing, which makes the platform not considered as
a candidate for wavelength at mid-infrared range. In order to extend the oper-
ating wavelength into mid-infrared range, a new substrate material like sapphire
should be used because of its large transparent window from 150 nm (UV) to
5500 nm(IR). Beside this advantage, sapphire also provides high thermal con-
ductivity, which makes high thermal stability of this platform possible.
The main object of this project is to realize AlGaAs-on-sapphire platform and
fabricate high quality factor and high thermal stable devices. And in the end,
there are many nonlinear applications such as optical Kerr frequency comb gen-
eration, high speed nonlinear signal processing can be achieved through this
platform.
The tasks to realize AlGaAs-on-sapphire include molecular wafer bonding and
substrate removal. Molecular wafer bonding is newly tried to bond sapphire and
AlGaAs wafer. While substrate removal follows the standard process developed
==PAGE:11==
3
by researchers at DTU Fotonik. After realizing the platform, pattern deﬁnition
is done to achieve microring resonator on the platform. The most challenging
part is to solve and optimize the problems appear during each fabrication step
and ﬁgure out the mechanism behind these problems.
After all fabrication process, the devices are took out of the cleanroom and
characterized. One of the main goals is to fabricate high quality factor devices
so quality factors of each successfully fabricated devices are characterized. In
addition, several comparisons are done to prove the optimizations during the
fabrication have improvement on the quality factor of the device.
Outline of the thesis
The second chapter introduces basic theory of all-pass microring resonator which
is also the ﬁnal device we will fabricate. Then reasons why AlGaAs material
and sapphire material are chosen are discussed.
The third chapter presents the fabrication process, problems appear during fab-
rication and how are they solved. An overview of fabrication process is reviewed
ﬁrst. Then two main tasks of realizing AlGaAs-on sapphire platform include
molecular wafer bonding and substrate removal is presented. After that, pat-
tern deﬁnition is discussed and several main fabrication equipments are intro-
duced. Finally, problems appear during fabrication is presented and solutions
or optimization methods are discussed.
The fourth chapter focus on the characterization of fabricated devices. It starts
with the introduction of characterization setup and data analysis method. Then
yield of devices in whole master project period is given. Afterwards, the charac-
terization results of quality factor of fabricated devices are presented. Following
that several quality factor comparisons include the quality factor of devices
comparison between diﬀerent chips. Quality factor diﬀerence between devices
in multi-pass and single-pass exposure and quality factor diﬀerence of small
and large rings before and after removing AZ5214 resist cladding. Finally, the
thermal stability of the platform is discussed.
The ﬁfth chapter provides methods to further increase the quality factor. It
ﬁrst explains why there is room for further increase the quality factor. And
then three possible methods to increase quality factor are presented.
==PAGE:12==
4
Introduction
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2
Microring resonator based
on AlGaAs-on-sapphire
platform
Microring resonators are versatile wavelength-selective elements that can be
used to synthesize a wide class of functions. They bahave as fundamental build-
ing blocks for a variety of applications in photonics and can be implemented
for such diverse applications such as lasers [16], ampliﬁers [17], sensors [18–20],
optical ﬁlters [5, 21] , modulators [23], switches, and so on. In addition, small
scale-size of microresonators currently achieved by state-of-the-art fabrication
methods based on silicon photonics platform, which enables the integration of
many devices on the same chip, allowing high level functionalities such as ultra-
fast all-optical signal processing. All optical materials display a change in their
optical properties under high-intensity illumination. This change results from
the nonlinear material response to the applied electromagnetic ﬁeld. By com-
bining nonlinear optics and integrated photonics, many applications like optical
Kerr frequency comb generation, high speed nonlinear signal processing can be
realized in a single chip.
Nonlinear integrated platform requires high index contrast, large band gap,
large transparent window and high thermal stability. The AlGaAs-on-sapphire
platform fulﬁls all the the aforementioned properties.
In this chapter, basic
==PAGE:14==
6
Microring resonator based on AlGaAs-on-sapphire platform
theory of all-pass microring resonator is presented. And then the reason why
AlGaAs material and sapphire substrate are chosen is discussed in more details.
2.1
All-pass microring resonator
The generic all pass microring resonator consists of an optical waveguide which
is looped back on itself as shown in Fig.2.1, so that optical waves circulate in-
side the ring resonate when optical path length of the resonator is an integral
number of wavelength, i.e. Nλres = 2πR. N is an integer, λres is the resonant
wavelength and R is the radius of the ring. Therefore, the relationship indi-
cating ring resonator support multiple resonances and the spacing between two
resonances called free spectral range (FSR), which are dependent on the ring
resonator length.
Ein
Eout
r
-iκ
α
E′
R
ER
L
Figure 2.1: Schematic of all-pass ring resonator
2.1.1
Transmission characteristics
The spectral properties of an all-pass ring resonator can be derived by assuming
continuous wave and matching ﬁeld. The light couples to the bus waveguide
and propagates inside it, there is interaction between ring waveguide and bus
waveguide in coupling region which denoted as the dashed circle in Fig.2.1. The
coupling between the external ﬁeld and the cavity is described by a matrix:
 ER
Eout

=

r
−iκ
−iκ
r
  E′
R
Ein

(2.1)
r is the self-coupling coeﬃcient and κ is the cross-coupling coeﬃcient and they
are assumed r2 + κ2 = 1, indicating there is no loss in the coupling region. The
transmission of light in the ring after a round trip is given by:
E′
R = aejϕER
(2.2)
==PAGE:15==
2.1 All-pass microring resonator
7
a is the the single-pass amplitude transmission, which depends on the power
attenuation coeﬃcient α of the ring resonator as a2 = e−αL. ϕ is the single-pass
phase shift as ϕ = 2π
λ neffL, neff is the eﬀective index of the material. It can
introduce an error in transmission if we assume r2 + κ2 = 1, but the width of
resonance is correct as long as all losses are included in the a coeﬃcient. Thereby,
the through port transmission and the ﬁeld built up in the ring resonator are:
Eout = r −aejϕ
1 −arejϕ Ein
(2.3)
ER =
−jκ
1 −arejϕ Ein
(2.4)
And the transmission to the through port can be derived as:
|Eout|2
|Ein|2 =
a2 −2racosϕ + r2
1 −2arcosϕ + (ar)2
(2.5)
The phase shift φ experienced by the light in the ring is shown as:
φ = π + ϕ + arctan
rsinϕ
a −rcosϕ + arctan
rasinϕ
1 −racosϕ
(2.6)
It is periodic in −π ∼π range. ϕ = 0 corresponds to the resonance condition
and there is no resonance at ϕ = ±π. The ring is in resonance as long as phase
shift is a multiple of 2π(ϕ = 2nπ ). The transmission relationship at resonance
can be obtained through q.2.5:
|Eout|2
|Ein|2 = (a −r)2
(1 −ra)2
(2.7)
Fig.2.2 shows the transmission at resonance with diﬀerent coupling coeﬃcient.
a=r, also called critical coupling, is the condition that the loss in the resonator
is equal to the power coupled to the resonator and the transmission at resonance
drops to zero. In order to achieve critical coupling, the power coupled to the
ring resonator should be matched to the losses in the resonator and it is achieved
by certain gap between the bus waveguide and ring waveguide, otherwise either
under-coupling (r > a) or over-coupling(r < a) is obtained.
==PAGE:16==
8
Microring resonator based on AlGaAs-on-sapphire platform
Figure 2.2: Transmission at resonance with diﬀerent coupling coeﬃcient
2.1.2
Spectral characteristics
Typical transmission spectra of all-pass type microring resonator is shown in
Fig.2.3. It is depend on the losses and coupling coeﬃcients. The wavelength
spacing between two resonances or FSR is written as:
FSRλ = λ2
ngL
(2.8)
FSRω = 2πc
ngL
(2.9)
where group refractive index ng is deﬁned as:
ng = neff −λdneff
dλ
(2.10)
FSR is inversely proportional to the optical path length, so that large ring gives
narrow FSR. Strong light conﬁnement can be achieve in high index contrast
platform and it allows very sharp bend which makes large FSR possible. The
full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the resonance for all-pass microring
==PAGE:17==
2.1 All-pass microring resonator
9
resonator can be derived as through Eq.2.5:
FWHM = (1 −ra)λ2
res
πngL√ra
(2.11)
Figure 2.3: Typical transmission spectra of all-pass micring resonator
Another important spectral characteristic of all-pass micriring resonator is qual-
ity factor (Q-factor), which is a measurement of the sharpness of the resonance.
The Q factor of the ring resonator determines the how long time the light can
travel in the ring before being lost. In nonlinear application based on the mi-
croring resonator like wavelength conversion and frequency comb generation,
the ultrahigh Q factor can lead to extremely low threshold power for nonlinear
optical eﬀects [24]. The Q factor is written as:
Q =
λres
FWHM
(2.12)
The physical meaning of the Q factor relates the number of round trip the
ring resonator can keep the light travels in it before being lost to losses and
bus waveguide. The Q factor calculated through transmission spectra is called
loaded Q factor, unloaded Q factor is deﬁned when the ring resonator would
not couple to the bus waveguide. Loaded Q factor can be derived as:
Q =
πngL√ra
λres(1 −ra)
(2.13)
==PAGE:18==
10
Microring resonator based on AlGaAs-on-sapphire platform
The loaded Q factor is strongly dependent on the losses of the ring resonator
including propagation loss, bend loss and coupler loss. It is critical to reduce
losses in the ring resonator in order to increase Q factor. Propagation loss is
critically depend on the sidewall roughness of waveguide. Low propagaion loss
waveguide requires high quality pattern deﬁnition during fabrication to reduce
the potential losses. Increase the ring size can be another choice to increase Q
factor, however, Q factor cannot get sustained increase because propagation loss
also increases. Fig.2.4 shows the relationship between Q factor and ring radius,
optimum Q factor can only be obtained at certain ring radius.
Figure 2.4: Q factor as a function of ring radius with 5dB/cm loss (red) and
1dB/cm loss (blue). Parameter includes ng=3.3, r=0.99,
λres=1550nm.
Moreover, improving the design of coupling section may also lead to a higher Q
factor microring resonator [25]. Q factor can also be improved by enlarging the
gap between the ring resonator and bus waveguide. Mathematically, larger gap
indicates low coupling coeﬃcient results in high Q factor. The physical reason
behind this may due to excess coupler loss decreases with larger gap between
bus waveguide and ring resonator [26].
2.2
Motivation of realizing AlGaAs-on-sapphire
platform
Currently, people are mainly focusing on silicon, in the form of Silicon-on-
insulator(SOI) waveguides, as a platform for integrated optical devices due to it
has a number of advantages compared to other other candidates for all-optical
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Motivation of realizing AlGaAs-on-sapphire platform
11
networks. Silicon has a well-developed and mature low-cost fabrication technol-
ogy, enables optical and electronic devices on the same substrate and SOI plat-
form itself provides high index contrast waveguides. However, silicon has several
limitations: the indirect bandgap property makes it diﬃcult to fabricate active
devices like electrically pump laser on it, and therefore prevents the integration
of light sources and light ampliﬁers [27]. Furthermore, it makes hybride inte-
grateion with other material like III-V semiconductor complex and expensive.
Moreover, the two photon absorption(TPA) and free-carrier-absorption(FCA)
hinders ultrafast nonlinear operations at 1.55µm [28].
2.2.1
AlGaAs material
Aluminium Gallium Arsenide(AlxGa1−xAs) is an attractive and promising ma-
terial for nonlinear waveguides due to its excellent nonlinear performance. It
has a large third order susceptibility results in high Kerr nonlinearity and the
nonlinear index coeﬃcient of AlGaAs is orders of magnitude highr than the ma-
terials that are currently used as nonlinear integrated platform such as SiN [12],
Hydex [13], AlN [14] and Diamond [15]. In addition, it has high refractive index
allowing highly conﬁnement of light propagating in the waveguide. The large
bandgap of AlGaAs (∼1.63eV), much higher than Si bandgap(∼1.1eV), can
avoid absorption at telecom wavelength. And more importantly, its bandgap
can be adjusted by controlling the mole fraction x in the alloy during epitaxial
growth. The two photon absorption coeﬃcient increases as the photon energy
approaches the half-bandgap of the material, however, it can be surpressed by
engineering the the bandgap of the material to achieve eﬃcient nonlinear eﬀects
like four-wave-mixing [29].
Furthermore, AlGaAs is a direct bandgap mate-
rial and allows integration with active devices like light source, waveguides and
photo-detectors on the same chip. Many functionalities has been achieved by
nonlinear eﬀects of AlGaAs including optical wavelength conversion and format
conversion. AlGaAs also has large transparent window from near infrared to
mid-infrared range. All properties shows AlGaAs material platform has a high
potential for all-optical networks.
Many theoretical and experimental works on nonlinear properties of AlGaAs
have been done. The high nonlinear optical coeﬃcient(∼1.6cm2/W at telecom
wavelength) of AlGaAs in the half-band-gap region is reported [30], which con-
ﬁrms the high nonlinearity of the material. In addition, TPA is measured very
low when operating wavelength is tuned below the half band gap, which makes
fabrication of low loss waveguide possible. Furthermore, they provide theoretical
demonstration and experimental data to prove polarization dependent nonlinear
index coeﬃcient. The nonlinear index of transverse electric mode(TE) is higher
which is also the mode we consider in the project.
==PAGE:20==
12
Microring resonator based on AlGaAs-on-sapphire platform
Further investigation of nonlinear index coeﬃcient is done by many researchers.
People demonstrate high nonliear parameter(γ ∼521W−1m−1) of Al0.25Ga0.75As
waveguide cladded by AlGaAs with high Al composition. 4∼5dB/cm propaga-
tion loss is measured and high four wave mixing eﬃciency of -34.7dB is achieved
in continuous wavelength regme with a coupled pump of 13mW [27]. The ex-
cellent nonlinear property makes AlGaAs a strong candidate for stand-alone
nonlinear optical based devices. Other similiar work also reported negligible
TPA coeﬃcient(∼0) and high nonlinear coeﬃcient of 1.45×10−4cm2/GW. Four
wave mixing eﬃciency of -6.8dB is obtained around telecom wavelength [29].
Table.2.1 shows nonlinear properties of material that are currently used for non-
linear integrated photonics. Silicon has large refractive index, high nonlinearity
and low propagation loss. However, there is large TPA coeﬃcient at telecom
wavelength. GaAs also fulﬁls high refractive index and nonlinear coeﬃcient, but
even larger TPA coeﬃcient at telecom wavelength. AS2S3 meet requirements
of high nonlinear coeﬃcient and low TPA coeﬃcient while the refractive is not
high enough. Other materials cannot fulﬁls all the requirements at same time
as well. Only AlGaAs provides high refractive index, high nonlinear coeﬃcient
and low two photon absorption coeﬃcient. These advantages make AlGaAs very
competitive in realizing all-optical networks.
Material
n0
n2(cm2/W)
α2(cm/GW)
Silicon
3.48
4.5 × 10−14 [31]
0.79 [31]
GaAs
3.38 [32]
1.6 × 10−13 [33]
15
AS2S3
2.38 [34]
3.05 × 10−14 [35]
6.2 × 10−4 [36]
SiO2
1.41
2 × 10−16 [37]
0 [37]
Hydex
1.7 [13]
1.2 × 10−19 [13]
Si3N4
2 [12]
2.5 × 10−19 [12]
Al0.18Ga0.82As
3.28
1.43 × 10−13 [38]
0.05 [38]
AlGaAs
1.45 × 10−13 [27]
0 [27]
Table 2.1: Nonlinear properties of materials used for integrated optics. n0, n2
and α2 are refractive index, nonlinear coeﬃcient and two photon
absorption coeﬃcient of the material
The recent developed new nonlinear platform: AlGaAs-on-insulator achieved
high quality factor(> 105) microring resonator and a record low threshold power
of 3mW for optical parametric oscillation. Also, a frequency comb spanning 350
nm is obtained [24]. The result is very promising and promotes the idea to
implement AlGaAs on diﬀerent insulators to realized diﬀerent applications.
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Summary
13
2.2.2
Sapphire material
The developed nonlinear platform (AlGaAs-on-Silica) exhibit superior nonlinear
properties which has huge potential in nonlinear signal processing. However,
the silica in this platform limits its operating wavelength below 2.6µm because
SiO2 has a high material loss at wavelength beyond 2.6µm. For applications at
longer wavelength, the silica becomes more strongly absorbing, which makes the
platform not considered as a candidate for wavelength at mid-infrared range.
In order to extend the operating wavelength into mid-infrared range, a new
substrate material like sapphire (Al2O3) should be used.
Large transparent
window of sapphire, from 150 nm (UV) to 5500 nm(IR), fulﬁlls the requirement.
In addition, much higher thermal conductivity of sapphire(∼32.5 W/(m · K))
[39] than that of silica(∼1.5 W/(m · K)) [40] makes high thermal stability of
AlGaAs-on-sapphire integrated nonlinear platform possible, which is also the
advantage of this platform
2.3
Summary
In this chapter, microring resonator is introduced and basic theory of all pass
microring resonator includes transmission properties and spectral properties are
discussed. Diﬀerent coupling condition can be achieved by adjusting bus-ring
waveguide gap. At critical coupling condition, the extinction ratio reaches to the
maximum and it is the condition that we can compare diﬀerent characterization
results of fabricated devices. Another important property is quality factor, since
one of main objects of the project is to realize high quality factor AlGaAs-on-
sapphire microring resonator. We summarized several factors that can aﬀect
the quality factor including sidewall roughness of waveguide, bend radius, ring
sizes and coupling coeﬃcient.
The AlGaAs oﬀers high nonlinear index coeﬃcient which beneﬁts high eﬃcient
nonlinear interaction. High refractive index contrast allows light tightly conﬁned
in the waveguide, which is helpful to achieve low power threshold nonlinear
application. Morover, large and tailorable bandgap helps to suppress absorption.
The sapphire provides high thermal conductivity, making high thermal stability
of new nonlinear integrated platform possible. And large transparent window
enables operating wavelength extended to mid-infrared range.
==PAGE:22==
14
Microring resonator based on AlGaAs-on-sapphire platform
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 3
Fabrication of
AlGaAs-on-sapphire
microring resonator
The previous realized AlGaAs-on-insulator nonlinear platform shows huge po-
tential in integrated nonlinear photonics because AlGaAs has several advantages
include high nonlinear index coeﬃcient, large refractive index, large and tai-
lorable bandgap and so on. Optical Kerr frequency comb with 350nm bandwidth
and high quality factor AlGaAs microring resonator based on AlGaAs-on-silica
platform are achieved [24]. However, the operating wavelength is limited below
mid-infrared range due to strong absorption of light in silica. Therefore, the
new AlGaAs-on-sapphire platform is promoted because of the large transparent
window of sapphire, which enables the operating wavelength of this platform
extended to mid-infrared region. In addition, high thermal stability of this plat-
form is expected due to large thermal conductivity of sapphire. The materials
used to realize AlGaAs-on-sapphire platform are sapphire wafer which is bought
from universitywafer.com and AlGaAs wafer which is grown at DTU using their
expertise on metalorganic chemical vapour deposition(MOCVD).
This chapter begins with an overview of general fabrication process ﬂow. Then
two main tasks include realization of AlGaAs-on-sapphire platform and pattern
deﬁnition are presented. Several technologies and main fabrication equipments
==PAGE:24==
16
Fabrication of AlGaAs-on-sapphire microring resonator
are also introduced. Following that several problems during fabrication is pre-
sented and how they are solved and optimized.
It should be emphasised that a lot of optimizations have been ﬁnished in previous
realized AlGaAs-on-silica microring resonator by M. Pu and L. Ottaviano in
Device group at Fotonik. The main fabrication steps of AlGaAs-on-sapphire
microring resonator follows the process of previous achieved AlGaAs-on-silica
microring resonator. Most of the work in fabrication is focus on realizing the
new nonlinear integrated platform and solving the problems appeared in the
new AlGaAs-on-sapphire platform.
3.1
Process overview
The fabrication process ﬂow overview of AlGaAs-on-sapphire microring res-
onator is given in Fig.3.1. It generally includes two parts: realization of AlGaAs-
on-sapphire platform and fabrication of microring resonator based on realized
platform.
First, two wafers are separate.
The sapphire wafer is bought from universi-
tywafer.com which fulﬁls the requirement of low surface roughness. AlGaAs
wafer is grown at DTU. Several III-V etch stop layers are grown on top of GaAs
substrate include the ﬁnal AlGaAs layer on the top.
The process starts with cleaning the wafers because any small particles attached
on the wafer surface results in large unbonded areas after wafer bonding. Then
3nm Al2O3 layer is deposited on both AlGaAs wafer and sapphire wafer. Follow-
ing that two wafers are bonded together manually and afterwards annealing at
300◦C under 4kN force. After that, the etch stop layers grown beneath AlGaAs
layer are removed through wet chemical etching. AlGaAs-on-sapphire platform
is then realized after these two main steps.
The next task is to fabricate microring resonator on this platform. First, the
negative electron beam resist hydrogen silsesquioxane(HSQ) is spun on sample
and a layer of aluminium is thermally evaporated on the resist to avoid charging
eﬀect during electron beam lithography. After developing, the sample is loaded
into inductively coupled plasma etching(ICP) chamber to etch AlGaAs areas
where are not protected by remained HSQ resist after developing. The HSQ
pattern is transferred to the AlGaAs layer through ICP dry etching. Finally,
the fabricated sample is cleaved using laser cutting.
==PAGE:25==
3.1 Process overview
17
(a)Sapphire wafer
(b)AlGaAs wafer
(c)Al2O3 deposition
(d)Al2O3 deposition
(e)Wafer bonding
(f)Substrate removal
(g)HSQ spining
(h)E-beam lithography
==PAGE:26==
18
Fabrication of AlGaAs-on-sapphire microring resonator
(i)HSQ developing
(j)ICP etching
Figure 3.1: Schematic overview of fabrication process for
AlGaAs-on-Sapphire microring resonator
3.2
Realization of AlGaAs-on-sapphire platform
Realization of AlGaAs-on-sapphire platform generally consists of wafer bonding
and substrate removal steps. The single polished side sapphire wafer used in
the project was bought from UniversityWafer.com and the AlGaAs wafer was
grown by researchers in DTU Fotonik Nanophotonics Device group.
3.2.1
Wafer bonding
Brieﬂy speaking, wafer bonding is a phenomenon that two solids with suﬃciently
ﬂat surfaces can stick to each other when brought into intimate contact. It can
be divided into two groups: direct bonding, also called molecular bonding and
intermediate layer bonding [41]. The molecular bonding does not have metal,
polymer or other deformable layers at interface and it is the bonding category
we used in the fabrication. High quality molecular bonding requires very clean,
low roughness wafer surface and annealing post treatment.
Successful molecular bonding requires surface roughness of wafers below 0.5nm
[42].
The low surface roughness of our AlGaAs wafer(0.21nm) and sapphire
wafer (0.15nm) makes high quality bonding possible. First, the sapphire wafer is
cleaned through standard RCA cleaning. It is cleaned in RCA1 and RCA2 solu-
tion separately. The RCA1 solution consists of ammonium hydroxide(NH4OH),
hydrogen peroxide(H2O2) and DI water (H2O), which are used to remove or-
ganic ﬁlms, particles and some metals. RCA2 solution includes hydrochloric
acid (HCL), hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), DI water (H2O) used to remove heavy
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Realization of AlGaAs-on-sapphire platform
19
metals alkalis and metal hydroxides. Both solutions are heated up to 70◦C and
sapphire wafer is cleaned in RCA1 for 10min and then RCA2 for another 10min.
After cleaning, the sapphire is dried through nitrogen gun. The cleaning of Al-
GaAs wafer is simply blow with nitrogen gun because we assume it is clean
after growth. However, this is not always the case because we get some bonded
wafers which have a lot of unbonded areas.
The wafer bonding starts with depositing 3nm Al2O3 layer on both wafers
through atomic layer deposition(ALD) at 250◦C. The aim of depositing Al2O3
layer is to ensure enough -OH group on surface due to hydrophilic bonding is
formed between two wafers. Al2O3 is deposited on wafer monolayer by mono-
layer. During Al2O3 deposition, two diﬀerent precurcors include trimethyla-
luminum [Al(CH3)3](TMA) and water are used. The reaction takes place in
cycles. During each cycle a very short pulse of each precursor is introduced into
the ALD reactor in turns, and in-between each precursor pulse the chamber is
purged with nitrogen. All reactions have to take place on the sample surface,
thus it is very important that each precurcor is removed from the chamber before
the next one is introduced. In that way the Al2O3 will be deposited uniformly.
Figure 3.2: Spontaneous bonding process
Two wafers are bonded manually after Al2O3 deposition, AlGaAs side and pol-
ished sapphire wafer side contact with each other and the bonding tool [41]
is used to manually add pressure. This is a spontaneous bonding process and
hydrophilic wafer surface are usually covered with water molecules which in-
==PAGE:28==
20
Fabrication of AlGaAs-on-sapphire microring resonator
teract with surface hydroxyl groups through formation of hydrogen bond. The
illustration of boning spontaneous bonding is shown in Fig.3.2.
Due to low bonding strength of hydrogen bond, it is important to anneal at high
temperature afterwards to obtain Al-O-Al bond. The reaction at the bonding
interface during annealing is:
Al −OH + HO −Al →Al −O −Al + HOH
Strong ionic bonding is expected to present between two Al2O3 layers after
annealing compared to the covalent bonding in Si-Si molecular wafer bonding.
And the bond strength is expected to be over 10J/m2.
The bonded wafers are annealed at 300◦C for 1 hour and under 4kN force at the
same time by using EV Group520 hot embosser. The criterion to evaluate how
good two wafers are bonded together is bond strength. The razor blade crack
length test devised by Maszara [43] (Fig.3.3), also known as the Dual Cantilever
Bending test (DCB), is wildly used.
Figure 3.3: Maszara test(diﬀerent materials) [44]
The formula of bond strength is:
γ =
3t2
bE1t3
ω1E2t3
ω2
16L4(E1t3
ω1 + E2t3
ω2)
(3.1)
tb is the thickness of the blade, E1,E2corresponding to the Young’s modulus
of material 1 and 2, tω2 and tω3 are thickness of wafer 1 and 2, L is the crack
length. By using the formulas above, we can evaluate how good the bonding is
under diﬀerent conditions. The bond strength of AlGaAs wafer and sapphire
wafer bonding is measured around 1J/m2 through this method.
One possible issue during annealing is thermal expansion coeﬃcient diﬀerence
between two diﬀerent materials, which may result in crack or bending if temper-
ature is too high. The thermal expansion coeﬃcients of AlGaAs and sapphire
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Realization of AlGaAs-on-sapphire platform
21
are 5.67×10−6/K [45] and 7.32×10−6/K [39] respectively at 300◦C. Another
issue is water issue because water generated during annealing has no way to
go except it can oxide AlGaAs layer. But the oxidation rate is at least slower
than 2nm/min according to [46]. Fig.3.4(a) shows the wafer after spontaneous
bonding, annealed at 300◦C(b) and annealed at 450◦C(b), respectively. It turns
out no extra unbonded areas appears after annealing at 300◦C, indicating water
issue is not a problem during annealing at least at 300◦C. While there is a lot
of extra unbonded areas appear when the annealing temperature is increased to
450◦C(ﬁg.3.4(c)). Considering issues of thermal expansion coeﬃcient diﬀerence
and water issue, the annealing temperature is set to 300◦C. The temperature
ensures low strain at AlGaAs/sapphire interface during annealing and no extra
unbonded areas appear after annealing.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.4: Bonded wafer after spontaneous bonding(a) and annealed at
300◦C(b) and annealed at 450◦C(c). (a) and (b) are form the
same bonded wafer, (c) is from another bonded wafer
Eight molecular wafer bondings are done in this project, most of them are not
defect free. Since molecular wafer bonding is quite sensitive to particles on the
wafer surface because very small particle can cause large unbonded areas, very
careful attention is needed before bonding to avoid particles as much as possible.
3.2.2
Substrate removal
Substrate removal is equally important as defect free molecular wafer bonding.
In substrate removal step, we aim to remove several etch stop layers on AlGaAs
layer and obtain AlGaAs layer with smooth surface in the end. Fig.3.5 shows
the structure of bonded wafer. It includes (1), (3), (4) and (10) Al2O3 layers
which are deposited on both front side and backside of wafers during ALD
deposition. The structure of AlGaAs wafter consists of Gallium Arsenide(GaAs)
substrate(9), 150nm Indium Gallium phosphide(InGaP) layer(8), 200nm GaAs
==PAGE:30==
22
Fabrication of AlGaAs-on-sapphire microring resonator
layer(7), 50nm InGaP layer(6) and ﬁnal 320nm AlGaAs layer(5). The purpose
of growing etch stop layers(layer(6),(7),(8)) is to reduce surface roughness layer
by layer during substrate removal so they should have a very high selectivity
against the chemical used to etch the layer grown on them.
Figure 3.5: Structure of bonded wafer
Before substrate removal, it is important to remove the Al2O3 layer(layer(10))
on backside of GaAs substrate because Al2O3 is deposited on both AlGaAs
surface(Al2O3 layer(4) in Fig.3.5) and backside of GaAs substrate(Al2O3 layer(10)
in Fig.3.5) during ALD. Otherwise, long etch time and very rough surface are
obtained, which will be further discussed later.
Wet chemical etching is used to remove etch stop layers. GaAs substrate has
thickness of 350µm and the standard process is to remove 200µm in solution
consists of sulfuric acid(H2SO4) and hydrogen peroxide(H2O2).
The etching
is fast in this step and GaAs in some region is completely removed after 1
hour(shown in Fig.3.6(b)).
The etch rate of GaAs by using H2SO4 : H2O2
is around 4µm/min. Then the solution is changed to solution consists of citric
acid((C6H8O7) and hydrogen peroxide to ensure a smooth surface during etching
but it is a rather slow process. The etch rate of GaAs by using C6H8O7 : H2O2
is around 0.2µm/min∼0.4µm/min. The surface appeared to be shinny after ﬁrst
GaAs layer was completely removed(Fig.3.6(c)). The diﬀerent color indicates
thickness diﬀerence across the wafer, indicating not uniformed etching.
The
underneath InGaP layer is removed through hydrochloride(HCl) acid for 30s
and the color is changed to be like indigo(Fig.3.6(d)) and more or less uniform.
Afterwards, 5 minutes etching of second GaAs layer and 15 seconds etching of
second InGaP layer using the same etchant mentioned above. The color of ﬁnal
AlGaAs surface is more like pink(Fig.3.6(f)). The color change can somehow
indicate ﬁnal AlGaAs layer is reached but a more accurate way is simply measure
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Realization of AlGaAs-on-sapphire platform
23
the thickness of the thin ﬁlm.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 3.6: Surface of sample: (a)before etching (b)After etching of 1st GaAs
layer with sulfric acid (c)After etching of 1st GaAs layer with
citric acid (d)After etching of 1st InGaP and (e)After etching of
2nd GaAs layer and (f) After etching of 2nd InGaP layer
3.2.3
Surface roughness inspection
Surface roughness of wafers before bonding and each layer during substrate
removal process is inspected to investigate surface roughness change in the whole
substrate removal process. Fig.3.7(a) and 3.7(b) shows the original sapphire
wafer surface and AlGaAs wafer surface before bonding.
Both wafers have very smooth surface, sapphire wafer has 0.15nm surface rough-
ness and AlGaAs has surface roughness of 0.21nm. Both of them have surface
roughness below 0.5nm, which is a good news for having high quality bonding.
It is equally important to inspect diﬀerent surfaces during substrate removal be-
cause it is signiﬁcant to know how surface roughness transferred during removing
each etch stop layer so we can conclude if these etch stop layers are enough to ob-
==PAGE:32==
24
Fabrication of AlGaAs-on-sapphire microring resonator
tain a ﬁnal smooth AlGaAs surface. Fig.3.7(c) and Fig.3.7(d) show the surface
of 2nd GaAs surface(Fig.3.6(d)) and 2nd InGaP surface(Fig.3.6(e)). The surface
roughness of 2nd GaAs reaches 1.81nm, however, the InGaP surface roughness
decreased to 0.236nm. The great surface roughness reduction shows the eﬀect
of the etch stop layers.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 3.7: Surface of original wafers and during substrate removal.
(a)Original AlGaAs surface, (b)Original AlGaAs surface, (c)2nd
GaAs layer surface, (d)2nd InGaP layer surface and (e)Final
AlGaAs surface
==PAGE:33==
3.3 AlGaAs microring resonator deﬁnition
25
Fig.3.7(e) is the ﬁnal AlGaAs surface, but the roughness increased a little bit
but the 0.5nm roughness is ﬁne to fabricate devices. Obviously, the increased
roughness is not result from substrate removal. It may come from the bonding
process. Table.3.1 summarizes the roughness of each surface. We can conclude
that the three etch stop layers are enough to obtain a smooth AlGaAs and the
little increased AlGaAs surface roughness may come from the bonding process.
Surface
Ra(nm)
Rq(nm)
Original sapphire
0.118
0.151
Original AlGaAs
0.163
0.206
2nd GaAs layer
1.5
1.81
2nd InGaP layer
0.188
0.236
Final AlGaAs layer
0.384
0.495
Table 3.1: Surface roughness of diﬀerent surfaces. Ra is the mean roughness
and Rq is the root mean square roughness in the table.
3.3
AlGaAs microring resonator deﬁnition
By molecular bonding and substrate removal, AlGaAs-on-sapphire platform is
realized. The platform is ended up with a thin and smooth AlGaAs ﬁlm bonded
on the sapphrie substrate. This section is focus on the AlGaAs microring res-
onator deﬁnition on realized platform. The fabrications steps include: resist
spinning, e-beam exposure, developing and ICP dry etching.
The sample is
cleaved through laser cutting after all fabrication process.
Main fabrication
equipments include E-beam writer, ICP and laser micromachine tool are intro-
duced and how they work on our samples are described.
3.3.1
Electron beam lithography
Electron Beam Lithography is a fundamental technique of nanofabrication, al-
lowing direct writing of structures down to sub-10 nm dimensions. In short, it
involves the exposure by a highly focused electron beam to dramatically modify
the solubility of a resist material during a subsequent development step. The
e-beam writer we used is JEOL JBX-9500FSZ in DANCHIP cleanroom. The
spot beam for electron beam writing is generated by a ZrO/W emitter and a
four-stage electron beam focusing lens system. The machine has features like
scanning speeds up to 100MHz and the acceleration voltage is 100kV. The fo-
cused electron beam movement can be controlled by a deﬂection system includes
a sub deﬂector and an underneath main deﬂector. The main deﬂector controls
==PAGE:34==
26
Fabrication of AlGaAs-on-sapphire microring resonator
the beam movement in a maximum 1mm×1mm writing ﬁeld and the sub deﬂec-
tor controls the beam movement in a maximum 4µm×4µm ﬁeld. The equipment
moves the stage if the pattern to be deﬁned is larger than maximum 1mm×1mm
writing ﬁeld, which always have unavoidable stitching errors.
Pattern writing using the e-beam writer is implemented on a wafer or chip which
has been coated with an electron sensitive resist. Both positive and negative
types of resists for pattern writing can be used.
In either case, the dose Q
(µC/cm2) is a function of the beam current, I(A), the pattern writing area,
A (cm2), and the pattern writing time t(s), the relationship between these
parameters is given below:
Q = t × I
A
(3.2)
The e-beam writer has scan speeds up to 100 MHz available. The dose, Q, shot
step, p, and current, I, are chosen to meet the requirement of the pattern to be
written, the writing time available, and also to meet the requirement f<100MHz.
Based on the equations above, a rough estimate of the exposure time can be
easily calculated. The current is carefully chosen since it determines the smallest
feature size that can be deﬁned on the sample and the beam diameter increases
with larger current. All parameters need to be chosen according to the feature
size of the structure.
The negative electron beam resist hydrogen silsesquioxane(HSQ) is used to de-
ﬁne the pattern in this project.
In the last decade, hydrogen silsesquioxane
(HSQ, Flowable Oxide, FOx-12 from Dow Corning) became a excellent candi-
date as high-resolution electron beam resist because of its small line edge rough-
ness, high etching resistance, small molecular size [47] and the convenience of
pattern transfer from resist to various materials [48].
Before e-beam lithography(EBL) exposure, a 350nm HSQ was spun on top of
AlGaAs layer with speed of 7000rpm and 4000rpm/s acceleration rate for 60
seconds. Then the sample is baked at 120◦C for 2 minutes and 220◦C for 2
minutes respectively. After that, a 20nm aluminium(Al) was deposited on top of
HSQ by thermal evaporation to avoid the charging eﬀect during exposure. The
microring resonator and waveguide were deﬁned in the e-beam resist through
e-beam lithography. Multipass exposure and proximity eﬀect correction were
made in order to deﬁne smooth sidewall microring resonator. After exposure,
the sample is developed in 1:3 AZ400K:H2O.
Both Al and unexposed HSQ
region are dissolved in the developer after 3 minutes and 10 seconds.
==PAGE:35==
3.3 AlGaAs microring resonator deﬁnition
27
3.3.2
Inductively coupled plasma etching
AlGaAs layer is etched through inductively coupled plasma(ICP) and HSQ be-
haves as etching mask due to its high resistivity and selectivity during plasma
etching, which is shown in Fig.3.8.
Figure 3.8: Schematic diagram of ICP
The sample sits on top of grounded electrode plate. Diﬀerent gases are pro-
vided by gas lines connected to the ICP chamber and controlled by mass ﬂow
controller. The gas molecules are dissociated into electrons, ions and highly
reactive radicals when RF power is applied. The advantage of ICP dry etching
compared to conventional reactive ion etching(RIE) is it employs separate power
supplies to generate the reactive plasma species and the ion acceleration voltage.
The coil power helps generate the plasma and the platen power controls the ion
bombardment energy.
The most commonly used chemistries to etch AlGaAs/GaAs are halogen-based
(F, Cl, Br, I) [49]. Typical chemistries employ Cl-based source chemicals, such as
Cl2 and BCl3, that are dissociatively excited in the plasma to produce Cl atoms
that react readily with the sample surface. The removal of the products is facil-
itated by the simultaneous ion bombardment that sputters away the products
from the surface, producing much faster etch rates where the ions strike than
in regions without ion bombardment. The highest rates are achieved with Cl2
as the Cl atom source, but Cl2 can produce surface roughness and may exhibit
low reproducibility in etch rates from run to run. BCl3 or BCl3/Cl2 mixtures
tend to produce smoother surfaces than Cl2-only plasmas. BCl3 can also act as
a getter for oxygen atoms that are formed in the plasma from residual O2 or
H2O.
Before doing real etching of sample, 30min cleaning and 30min preconditioning
==PAGE:36==
28
Fabrication of AlGaAs-on-sapphire microring resonator
are done. In 30min cleaning, a dummy Si wafer is used. The cleaning step is to
ensure the residues left by last etching is removed because any extra desired ele-
ment may aﬀect the etching result. Then 30min of preconditioning by executing
the etching recipe on the same dummy Si wafer. After that, the sample to be
etched is crytal bonded to a 4inch Si wafer and the wax is used in this project.
Wax is melt on Si carrier wafer which is put on hotplate and the sample is then
attached on the carrier through wax. After that, the sample is loaded and ready
to be etched. To monitor the etching of AlGaAs, a 980nm laser is directed on
AlGaAs surface for end-point detection. During etching, a sinusoidal curved is
expected to see and the etching process is aborted after certain overetch depth.
The standard recipe for AlGaAs etching here is 20sccm BCl3, 300W coil power
and 50W platen power in order to obtain smooth waveguide sidewall. The etch
rate of AlGaAs varies from 50 nm/min to 94 nm/min. The diﬀerent etch rate
is due to loading eﬀect, small samples usually have higher etch rate than large
samples.
After ICP etching, a layer of AZ5214E resist is spun on the sample as a protective
layer for laser cutting.
3.3.3
Laser cutting
Sapphire is one of the hardest material and it cannot be cleaved properly through
diamond tip scribing. However, the full 2 inch wafer need to be cleaved into
piece with regular shape before e-beam lithography and after all fabrication pro-
cess. One method is thinning the sapphire to realized reliable cleaving but we
are at risk of losing the bonded wafer. Laser cutting is another choice that can
ensure regular piece after cleaving. And it turns out that multiple scribe lines
is suﬃcient to weaken the sapphire and reliably dice it and it does not damage
the bonded wafers. Therefore, laser cutting is chosen to cleave sapphire. The
Laser Micromaching Tool in DANCHIP cleanroom is a microSTRUCT vario
from the company 3D-Micromac AG. It can be used for milling, drilling and
cutting structures with a dimension down to approximately 10µm. The removal
of the material is done by ablation and the type of material that can be pro-
cessed is versatile e.g. metals, ceramics, glass, plastics, composite materials,
etc. The machine has a 50W picosecond laser FUEGO from Time Bandwidth
(TBW) that can emit light at 3 wavelengths: 355nm, 532nm and 1064nm and
a 100W nanosecond laser from IPG with a wavelength of 1064nm. And it has
two optical beam paths (one for 355nm and one for 532nm/1064nm wavelength)
with scannerheads and lenses. The laser we used is picosecond laser with 355nm
wavelength and 103mm objective corresponding to 10.5µm minimum spot di-
ameter. The mask was prepared before laser cutting and sapphire wafer was
==PAGE:37==
3.4 Problems and optimization
29
cleaved properly with three scribe line and 8000 times repetition.
3.4
Problems and optimization
In this section, problems during fabrication of AlGaAs-on-sapphire microring
resonator include roughness wafer surface during substrate removal, thick resist,
charging eﬀect, severe stitching, AlGaAs residues and sapphire wafer cleaving
are presented and the solutions or optimization methods of these problems are
also discussed.
3.4.1
Rough surface and its improvement
As shown in Fig.3.1, Al2O3 was deposited on sapphire wafer and AlGaAs wafer
for molecular bonding. However, Al2O3 was both on front side and backside of
wafers so the ﬁrst surface contact with etchant is Al2O3 layer which is illustrated
in Fig.3.5. Although the thickness of Al2O3 is 3nm, very obvious rough surface
was obtained during etching the ﬁrst GaAs layer(Fig.3.9(a)) by using H2SO4 :
H2O2, indicating very ununiform etching. In addition, it takes over 10 hours to
completely remove the ﬁrst GaAs layer in the end. So the Al2O3 layer should
be removed before doing substrate removal.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.9: Surface of GaAs with (a) and without (b) Al2O3 during etching
the ﬁrst GaAs layer
The Al2O3 layer is etch in ICP etcher by 1 minutes with 4sccm Cl2 and 16sccm
BCl3. The etch rate is around 40nm/min so the 3nm Al2O3 should be completely
==PAGE:38==
30
Fabrication of AlGaAs-on-sapphire microring resonator
etched away. And it turns out that the surface is much improved during ﬁrst
GaAs layer removal(Fig.3.9(b)). Moreover, only around 5 hours are needed to
completely etch ﬁrst GaAs layer away.
3.4.2
Resist thickness
The negative e-beam resist HSQ is used in our process and it behaves as etch
mask during ICP etching. The thickness of HSQ is expected to be around 350nm
in standard process, however, we obtain nearly 800nm thick HSQ after spinning
in sample samples. It can be a big problem in developing and ICP etching and
ﬁnally aﬀect the quality factor of fabricated devices.
Figure 3.10: HSQ residues(red
arrow) after developing
Figure 3.11: HSQ residues(red
arrow) and AlGaAs
residues(blue arrow)
after ICP etching
Figure 3.12: Rough AlGaAs sidewall
On one hand, there still has HSQ residues at gap region after developing (Fig.3.10)
==PAGE:39==
3.4 Problems and optimization
31
because the resist is much thicker while same developing time is used. And they
are not removed even after ICP etching(Fig.3.11). Not removed HSQ leads to
the AlGaAs beneath it still connect to the bus waveguide, which would increase
the loss in this region. On the other hand, rough AlGaAs sidewall was obtained
after ICP etching(Fig.3.12). The reason of rough side wall is due to underde-
velopment of thick HSQ, which results in rough bottom region of HSQ and the
roughness is transferred to AlGaAs during ICP etching.
Both AlGaAs residues in gap region and rough sidewall waveguide increase the
loss and will signiﬁcantly reduce the quality factor of ﬁnal fabricated device.
The standard process for spinning HSQ include bake at 220◦C before spinning
to completely dry the surface and then spin HSQ on. However, the hot sample
during spinning leads to thick HSQ. Therefore, the sample after baking should
cool down. After including the cooling step in process, put on the metal for
5sec, the thickness of HSQ was around 370nm ∼400nm after spinning.
3.4.3
Charging eﬀect
Charging eﬀect normally occurs when the substrate is not conducting. During
E-beam exposure, the sample is irradiated with an electron beam and in case of
non-conducting samples, it causes accumulation of static electric charges on the
specimen surface and hence charging eﬀect arose. This static charges inﬂuence
the next coming electrons and deﬂect them due to the electrical ﬁeld built
by accumulated charges.
Fig.3.13 gives the illustration of charging eﬀect in
AlGaAs-on-sapphire case.
Figure 3.13: Illustration of charging eﬀect
==PAGE:40==
32
Fabrication of AlGaAs-on-sapphire microring resonator
Charging eﬀect is a big problem because it completely distorted the pattern
expected to be. Fig.3.14 shows the distorted rings and photonic crystals. Break
points appear in both small ring and large ring and there is large displacement
in photonic crystals pattern. In addition, larger pattern displacement obtained
in photonic crystals pattern(Fig.3.14(d)) for larger doses, meaning more charges
are accumulated in sapphire substrate.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3.14: Charging eﬀect induced pattern distortion. (a) Small ring with
15000µC/cm2 doses, (b) Large ring with 15000µC/cm2 doses,
(c) Photonic crystal with 5500µC/cm2 doses and (d) Photonic
crystal with 20000µC/cm2 doses
K.D. Cummings et al., did experiment to study the pattern placement errors
due to substrate charging and calculated the deﬂection of an electron beam
from trapped charge in a substrate. [50]. In their experiment, they introduced
charging by exposing a 1mm × 1mm pad area and then exposing crosses near
the pad with diﬀerent distances.
Charging induced errors are measured by
comparing the distance between reference crosses and crosses written with and
without pads. With some simpliﬁcation they obtained the equation of deﬂection
on an electron beam from charge trapped in a substrate:
∆x = kq
2V (1 −
η
p
η2 + 1
)
(3.3)
where k = 9 × 109Nm2/C2, q is the total trapped charge, V is the accelerating
voltage and η is the pad-cross separation divided by the distance from the end of
==PAGE:41==
3.4 Problems and optimization
33
the electron beam column to the resist surface. Eq.3.3 is applied in our case to
calculate theoretical deﬂection caused by charging in sapphire substrate and we
assume all exposing electrons are trapped in the sapphire. Deﬂection caused by
charging is also calculated if other resists are used such as ZEP520 and CSAR.
Figure 3.15: Calculated deﬂection with HSQ resist
Fig.3.15 shows the theoretical deﬂection of areas near 4µm×4µm exposing area.
4µm×4µm area is chosen because it is the maximum subﬁeld of writing area
controlled by sub deﬂector in E-beam system. HSQ resist is used and the total
dose is 11000µC/cm2. The neighbouring region of exposing area has deﬂection
of 80 µm, which is much larger than experimental value. Reason of smaller
deﬂection in experiment could be less charges are trapped in reality because we
assume all exposing charges are accumulated in substrate. It may also relate
to the eﬀect of AlGaAs layer.
Although it is semiconductor, AlGaAs could
shield a small fraction of exposing electrons from trapped charges in sapphire
substrate. Less deﬂection obtained for ZEP and CSAR resists is due to low
dose(∼250µC/cm2) they need, less charges accumulated in the substrate if low
dose is used.
3.4.4
Charge dissipation and its mechanism
Metal coating deposited on top of electron beam resist are usually used to over-
come the charge accumulation in insulating substrate.
We chose to deposit
20nm aluminium(Al) on top of HSQ before exposure to reduce the charging
eﬀect. Fig.3.16 and Fig.3.17 give result of much improved ring pattern after
optimization by depositing Al layer.
==PAGE:42==
34
Fabrication of AlGaAs-on-sapphire microring resonator
Figure 3.16: Improved small ring
pattern after
optimization
Figure 3.17: Improved large ring
pattern after
optimization
However, the mechanism of how the metal layer impacts is not clear because Al
layer is regarded as charge dissipation layer in most literatures. K. D. Cummings
provided a method to explain the eﬀect of metal layer [51]. Fig.3.18 shows the
structure of sample they used. A thick (2.2µm) hard backed resist was placed
directly on a 4 inch Si wafer for the bottom layer of trilevel structure. There
are one 0.3µm image resist and one 0.12µm SiO2 layer as an interface. In their
experiment, charge accumulation are introduced by exposing a 1mm × 1mm
pad area ﬁrst and then expose crosses near the pad with diﬀerent distances.
Charging induced errors are measured by comparing the distance of reference
crosses and crosses written with and without pads [51]. The charge that causes
deﬂection of the electron beam is mainly situated in the bottom resist layer. 0.01
µm deﬂection was measured when 20nm Al layer deposited on imaging resist
or photoresist, however, 0.52µm deﬂections were measured when 20nm Al was
deposited directly on Si substrate or no Al was deposited. It turns out that the
Al layer did not remove charges accumulated in substrate but screen the electric
ﬁeld produced by trapped charges and shield the exposing electron beam from
charges deposited below the ﬁlm.
Figure 3.18: Structure of sample
Al position
Charging induced
deﬂection(µm)
No Al
0.53
On layer(4)
0.52
On layer(3)
0.01
On layer(1)
0.01
Table 3.2: Deﬂection with Al on
diﬀerent layers [51]
==PAGE:43==
3.4 Problems and optimization
35
A range of Al charge dissipation layer thicknesses has been investigated for
electron-beam patterning of polycrystalline diamond substrates by A.I.M. Greer
and D.A.J. Moran [52]. It shows 5 nm thick Al layer and above worked eﬀec-
tively. 20nm Al layer was chosen in our case.
3.4.5
Dose test
Does test was done before exposing the real sample. 5500µC/cm2, 11000µC/cm2,
15000µC/cm2 and 20000µC/cm2 doses were tested respectively to ﬁnd the right
dose so correct pattern dimension can be obtained. Fig.3.19 shows the SEM
image of 466nm designed waveguide width exposed by diﬀerent doses after de-
veloping. It turns out that the result of 11000µC/cm2 dose is closest to the
designed value. So it is chosen to expose real samples.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3.19: Measurement of designed 466nm waveguide after development
of (a) 5500µC/cm2, (b) 11000µC/cm2, (c) 15000µC/cm2 and
(d) 20000µC/cm2 dose. Measured waveguide with are 452nm,
472nm, 493nm and 503nm, respectively
3.4.6
Multipass exposure
In standard E-beam exposure, it exposes the pattern we want to deﬁne with
full dose(here 11000µC/cm2 dose is used in our case). However, severe stitching
==PAGE:44==
36
Fabrication of AlGaAs-on-sapphire microring resonator
problem appears on resist surface(Fig.3.20).
Figure 3.20: Stitching problem
denoted by arrows
Figure 3.21: Optimized result after
multi-pass exposure
The stitchings on the resist surface are gaps and this kind of defects could trans-
fer to the AlGaAs waveguide during ICP etching. Therefore, sidewall roughness
will be introduced lead to increase of propagation loss. Quality factor is signif-
icantly reduced due to the increase of loss, which will be shown later in chap-
ter4. The reason for such severe stitching problem could be resist charging [53].
Fig.3.21 shows much improved resist surface by using multi-pass setting in e-
beam system. The stitching almost disappeared after multi-pass exposure.
Figure 3.22: Standard single-pass
exposure
Figure 3.23: Illustration of
multi-pass exposure
In standard E-beam system, it fractures the pattern into polygons because the
4µm×4µm area is the maximum subﬁeld of writing area controlled by sub de-
ﬂector in E-beam system. And then expose these polygons one by one with full
doses, here we call it single-pass exposure. For instance, a rectangle pattern is
expected to be exposed(Fig.3.22) and it is fractured to three polygons(1,2,3 in
Fig.3.22). During exposure, subﬁeld 1, 2 and 3 are exposed with full dose. How-
ever, in multipass exposure, the total dose is divided into several parts, e.g. four
parts in four-pass exposure. And then expose the pattern by four times. Red,
green, blue, yellow areas correspond to ﬁrst, second, third and fourth exposure
and there is oﬀset of subﬁeld between two exposures. In this way, the stitching
==PAGE:45==
3.4 Problems and optimization
37
problem is solved. And the result in chapter4 shows quality factor of microring
resonator is much improved by multi-pass exposure optimization.
3.4.7
AlGaAs residues after dry etching
The AlGaAs which is not protected by HSQ is etched through ICP etching,
however, the etch rate is not same across the sample because of loading eﬀect.
The etch rate of AlGaAs in areas where there is no pattern on it is normally
larger than the area where is densely covered by deﬁned pattern. Especially in
gap region between ring waveguide and bus waveguide, on the order of several
hundred nanometers, AlGaAs is diﬃcult to completely removed away.
Fig.3.24 shows AlGaAs residues in the gap region with diﬀerent gaps. In the
designed gap of 200nm and 300nm, AlGaAs of the ring waveguide and bus
waveguide still connect with each other after etching. And AlGaAs is almost
completely removed until the gap is increased to 500nm.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3.24: AlGaAs residues after ICP etching. (a)200nm designed gap,
(b)300nm designed gap, (c)400nm designed gap and (d)500nm
designed gap
The AlGaAs residues is a problem if high quality factor of ﬁnal fabricated de-
vices is expected because it increases the coupler loss. Although the residues
==PAGE:46==
38
Fabrication of AlGaAs-on-sapphire microring resonator
is completely removed when the gap is increased to 500nm, the coupling coef-
ﬁcient is very low in such design. The solution of such problem will be further
discussed in chapter5.
3.4.8
Sapphire wafer cleaving
Sapphire is a kind of material which is very diﬃcult to slice using traditional
diamond saws. Normally, in basal-plane(c-plane) sapphire(Fig.3.25), the {11¯20}
planes (a-planes) can be used as vertical cleavage planes. However, these cleav-
age planes are not the plane with the weakest bond strength. The {1¯102} planes
(r-planes) are the preferred cleavage planes for sapphire. The sapphire can be
forced to break along the a-planes, but these planes are close in angular position
to the r-planes. This means it is very easy to couple from one cleavage plane to
another, and thus form a jagged facet.
Figure 3.25: Location of the crystallographic planes of sapphire [45]
The dominant cleavage planes are as follows: c-plane {0001}, m-plane {10¯10}
and r-plane {1¯102}. The theoretical surface energies 6.5 J/m2 are almost equal
for all three cleavage planes. However, the experimental cleavage energies are
as follows [54]:
Cleavage plane
Experimental cleavage energy [J/m2]
c-plane {0001}
21.54
r-plane {1¯102}
6.45
m-plane {10¯10}
11.43
Table 3.3: Cleavage energy of diﬀerent sapphire planes
As Table3.3 shows, the c-plane is the most diﬃcult plane to cleave and r-plane is
the easiest plane to cleave. However, compared to the cleavage energy of other
==PAGE:47==
3.4 Problems and optimization
39
material, the r-plane cleavage energy is still large, e.g. the cleavage energies of
(111) plane of silicon and (110) plane of GaAs are 1.36 and 1.00 J/m2.
The process of cutting the sapphire wafer usually includes three steps. First,
the wafer is thinned to a thickness of about 80-150µm. The wafer is scribed
along the proper shapes using the diamond tips in the second step. Then it is
fractured and split using standard cleaving equipment.
Such steps mentioned above has risks of destroying the layer bonded to sapphire
substrate in our case. So we chose another method, laser cutting, to cleave the
sapphire after all fabrication process in the cleanroom.
After some test, it
turns out that multiple scribe lines made on front(polished) side of sapphire is
suﬃcient to weaken the material and reliably dice it. Fig.3.26 and Fig.3.27 show
the cleaving result by using traditional method and laser cutting, respectively.
In traditional method, the break lines does not break in a straight line which is
a demand to cleave ﬁnal fabricated devices. However, much improved cleaving
result is achieved through laser cutting.
Figure 3.26: Cleaving result through
traditional diamond
scribing
Figure 3.27: Cleaving result through
laser cutting
Figure 3.28: SEM image of cleaved sapphire wafer cross section
Fig.3.28 shows the cross section of cleaved sapphire wafer. Sapphire thickness
==PAGE:48==
40
Fabrication of AlGaAs-on-sapphire microring resonator
is reduced by 180µm in the area where is scribed by laser. The total thickness
of sapphire wafer is 430µm, meaning 260µm thick sapphire wafer can be easily
cleaved. It gives us a rough idea about how thick sapphire wafer should be
bought next time.
3.5
Summary
This chapter presents the fabrication process of AlGaAs-on-sapphire microring
resonator, problems met during the fabrication and how these problems are
solved or optimized.
Molecular wafer bonding and substrate removal are two main steps to realize
AlGaAs-on-sapphire platform. Compared to intermediate layer bonding used to
realized AlGaAs-on-silica platform, molecular wafer bonding is applied in this
project to realize AlGaAs-on-sapphire platform. A thin Al2O3 layer is deposited
on two wafers to be bonded because the bond strength by using this method
can be up to 10 J/m2. Then several etch stop layers grown beneath AlGaAs
layer are removed through wet chemical etching to realize AlGaAs-on-sapphire
platform.
After realizing the platform, pattern is deﬁned through general steps include
resist spinning, e-beam exposure, developing and ICP dry etching. Then the
fabricated device is cleaved through laser cutting.
Most of problems appear during fabrication are solved and optimized. Rough
surface during substrate removal is solved by removing the Al2O3 layer on back-
side of GaAs substrate.
Thicker resist than expected problem is solved by
putting the sample on metal to cool down before spinning.
Charging eﬀect
is solved through depositing an Al layer on resist and how the Al layer works
is also explained. Dose test is done to obtain the right dimension after expo-
sure and developing. Severe stitching problem is optimized through multi-pass
setting in e-beam lithography system. Cleaving problem of sapphire material is
solved by using multi-scribing through laser cutting. AlGaAs residues observed
at gap region after ICP dry etching need further investigation and test, which
will be discussed in chapter5.
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 4
Characterization of
fabricated
AlGaAs-on-sapphire
microring resonator
There are six chips fabricated during this project, all chips work except the
chip#1 and chip#4. The yield of devices in each worked chip is quite high.
Chip#2 is the ﬁrst chip gets working. Chip#3 and chip#4 are from the same
sample and all the fabrication process are same except chip#3 was exposed
using standard single-pass exposure and chip#4 was exposed through multi-
pass exposure during e-beam lithography. However, chip#4 was damaged by
mistake during fabrication. It fell to the ground and all the structures were gone
when dried by nitrogen gun. So another two chips, chip#5 and chip#6 were
fabricated with same fabrication process as chip#3 and chip#4.
There are several designs on chip, including 3µm, 17.2µm, 129µm radius rings
and 810µm long racetrack rings. The purpose of making 3µm radius rings is
to see how large quality factor we can get to compare the high quality ultra
small rings achieved in silicon-on-insulator platform [64]. The results of 17.2µm
radius ring are compared with the results of same ring size in AlGaAs-on-silica
==PAGE:50==
42
Characterization of fabricated AlGaAs-on-sapphire microring resonator
platform. 129µm radius rings and 810µm long racetrack rings are used to check
how high quality factor can be obtained and compare with each other to see the
improvement of multi-pass optimization.
This chapter introduces the experiment setup and data analysis method ﬁrst.
And then the yield of devices in all fabricated chips is given. Following that
several comparisons of quality factor are discussed. Finally, the thermal stability
of the new platform is presented.
4.1
Characterization set-up and data analysis
The fabricated device chip is characterized by using the experiment setup shown
in Fig.4.1. It includes a continuous wave tunable laser with tuning range from
1520nm to 1620nm.
A polarization controller(PC) is used to select certain
mode(TE mode in our case). Lensed ﬁber with tapered down core dimension is
mounted to achieve ﬁber-chip coupling, which increases ﬁber-to-chip coupling
coeﬃcient. And transmission characteristic is measured by an optical spectrum
analyser. In addition, the device chip is mounted on a vacuum holder which is
connected to a temperature controller to keep temperature at 25◦C.
Figure 4.1: Transmission characterization setup and image of cleaved
AlGaAs-on-sapphire chip and zoom-in ﬁber-chip coupling region
To ensure light can couple to the bus waveguide, the width of waveguide is
tapered from 466nm to 4µm and there is a 7 degree rotation to avoid Fabry-
Prot eﬀect.
==PAGE:51==
4.2 Yield of fabricated devices
43
Since achieving high quality factor devices is one of the object of this project, we
measured the transmission spectrum of all devices using the setups described.
And quality factors of all devices are calculated with the help of code provided
by M. Pu. There are two steps to get the quality factor of one speciﬁc resonance.
At ﬁrst, the algorithm inverts the spectrum and right peaks can be found by
adjusting sensitivity and ﬁltering wavelength range in the algorithm.
Some-
times TM mode is not completely suppressed from the measured result so it
is important to adjust these two settings to select the right mode. Then sev-
eral parameters are estimated such as FSR, extinction ration(ER), etc. Fig.4.2
shows the result of transverse electric modes(TE) resonances of one device in
chip#2.
Figure 4.2: Transmission spectrum of 17.2µm with 270nm designed gap in
chip# 2. Red circles are ﬁltered resonant dips and 719.01GHz
FSR is calculated.
In the second algorithm, more accurate estimation of quality factor is obtained.
This algorithm uses Lorentzian shape curve to ﬁt the data. From the ﬁtting,
the linewidth can be extracted and quality factor is calculated through dividing
the resonant wavelength by the extracted linewidth. The ﬁtting of resonance
will be shown later.
4.2
Yield of fabricated devices
Our standard designs include 3µm, 17.2µm, 129µm radius rings and 810µm long
racetrack rings with 630nm ring waveguide width and 466nm bus waveguide
width in all designs. In the whole project, six chips are fabricated. The yield of
devices in each chip is shown in Table.4.1.
Chip#3 and chip#4 are from the same sample, the only diﬀerence is that pat-
terns in chip#3 are deﬁned by single-pass exposure while the patterns in chip
#4 is deﬁned through multi-pass exposure. The purpose of doing diﬀerent expo-
sure is to show how much improvement of quality factor can be achieved through
multi-pass exposure optimization. The reason chip#4 does not work is that the
chip fell to the ground and all structures were gone during fabrication process.
==PAGE:52==
44
Characterization of fabricated AlGaAs-on-sapphire microring resonator
Due to this reason, chip#5 and chip#6 were fabricated. Another reason is the
resist in chip#3 and chip#4 was much thicker than normal values, which results
in very rough sidewalls after fabrication(Fig.3.12).
Chip number
Designs on chip
Yield
Comment
# 1
17.2µm rings and waveguides
0%
Multi-pass
# 2
17.2µm rings and waveguides
100%
Multi-pass
# 3
3µm, 17.2µm, 129µm radius rings
and 810µm long racetrack rings
50%
Single-pass
# 4
3µm, 17.2µm, 129µm radius rings
and 810µm long racetrack rings
0%
Multi-pass
# 5
3µm, 17.2µm, 129µm radius rings
and 810µm long racetrack rings
77%
Single-pass
# 6
3µm, 17.2µm, 129µm radius rings
and 810µm long racetrack rings
84.1%
Multi-pass
Table 4.1: Yield of devices in each chip. Chip#3 and chip#4 are from the
same sample. Chip# 5 and chip# 6 are from the same sample.
4.3
Quality factor of multi-pass exposure chips
In this section, characterization of quality factor of diﬀerent devices in chip#2
and chip#6 is presented. Quality factor comparison of 17.2µm radius ring in
chip chip#2 and chip#6 is done. In addition, we also compare the quality factor
of devices with diﬀerent ring sizes in chip#6. The results of chip#3 will not
be shown because of the thick resist and rough sidewall problems described in
chapter3.
4.3.1
Characterization of devices in chip#2
In chip#2, there are two batches of 17.2µm with diﬀerent bus-ring gaps and each
batch has same designed bus-ring gaps.
8 waveguides with diﬀerent lengths
also included in chip#2, from which we calculate the propagation loss of the
waveguide.
Resonance ﬁtting of microring resonator with diﬀerent gaps are shown in Fig.4.3.
From Fig.4.3(a) to Fig.4.3(f), the devices work from over-coupling region to
under-coupling region and critical coupling condition is obtained when the bus-
ring gap is 210nm(Fig.4.3(c)). The transmission of resonance increases and then
==PAGE:53==
4.3 Quality factor of multi-pass exposure chips
45
decreases and reaches to the maximum value at critical coupling condition with
the increase of the bus-ring gap, which agrees Fig.2.2 in chapter2.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 4.3: Normalized transmission of resonance with diﬀerent gaps.
(a)270nm designed gap, (b)240nm designed gap, (c)210nm
designed gap, (d)180nm designed gap, (e)150nm designed gap
and (f)120nm designed gap.
Fig.4.4 shows the quality factor and extinction ratio(ER) of microring resonators
as a function of bus-ring gaps in chip#2. The quality factor increases as the
gap rises, which is understandable. The coupling coeﬃcient decreases with the
increase of gap results in the lower of transmission and narrow of linewidth. Ac-
cording to Eq. 2.11 and Eq.2.12, quality factor increases as coupling coeﬃcient
decreases, which agrees with the experimental results. The ER increases ﬁrst
and reaches the maximum value at critical coupling and then decreases as the
gap rises. However, there is a little deviation of bath#1 and batch#2, which
may due to the actual gaps of devices in batch#1 are larger than the gaps of
devices in batch#2.
The losses in waveguides with diﬀerent lengths are also measured and it turns
out the propagation loss of waveguides fabricated in chip#2 is around 5dB/cm.
The loss of waveguides is larger than the measured 1.4dB/cm loss of AlGaAs
waveguide in AlGaAs-on-silica platform [24]. Probably the reason for such high
loss is due to sidewall roughness and surface roughness of AlGaAs waveguide,
==PAGE:54==
46
Characterization of fabricated AlGaAs-on-sapphire microring resonator
indicating there is room for optimize the loss of devices.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.4: (a)Quality factor and extinction ratio of devices as a function of
designed bus-ring gap.(b)Propagation loss of waveguide
4.3.2
Characterization of devices in chip#6
In order to compare the quality factor of devices achieved in chip#2, we give
the characterization results of chip#6 because both of these two chips are under
multi-pass e-beam exposure.
Figure 4.5: Quality factor and extinction ratio of 17.2µm radius rings as a
function of designed bus-ring gap in chip#6
Fig.4.5 shows the quality factor and ER of 17.2µm rings with diﬀerent gaps.
Compared to the same ring size devices, the quality factor increases from 65842
to 89990 at critical coupling. As shown in Fig.4.6, the lower quality factor of
==PAGE:55==
4.3 Quality factor of multi-pass exposure chips
47
same device in chip#2 is related to the "particles" attached to the waveguide
because the particles probably increase the loss of the ring resonator.
Figure 4.6: SEM image of ring resonator in chip#2 after ICP etching
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.7: Quality factor and extinction ratio of (a)3µm radius rings,
(b)810µm long racetrack rings and (c)129µm radius rings as a
function of designed bus-ring gap in chip#6
==PAGE:56==
48
Characterization of fabricated AlGaAs-on-sapphire microring resonator
Besides the standard 17.2µm radius rings design, there are also designs include
3µm, 129µm radius rings and 810µm long racetrack rings. The characterized
quality factor results of these designs are shown in Fig.4.7.
At critical coupling, the quality factor of 3µm, 129µm radius rings and 810µm
long racetrack rings reaches 7288, 125236 and 138082. The results can be ex-
pected. Mathematically, low quality factor is obtained in very small radius rings
through calculation based on Eq.2.13. Physically, small bend radius in 3µm ra-
dius rings lead to large bend loss, which reduces the quality factor. Therefore,
high quality factor achieved in large rings is understandable as well, but quality
factor of large ring is not always high because propagation loss dominates at
some point with the increase of ring radius.
The quality factor of 3µm rings still have a large distance of quality factor
achieved in 1.5µm ring based on silicon-on-insulator [64]. It can be increased
by removing the AZ resist cladding because a layer of AZ resist before laser
cutting and it has impact on the quality factor of small rings, which will be
discussed later. It is also possible to further increase quality factor by removing
the AlGaAs residues in the gap region(problem discussed in chapter3).
4.4
Quality factor comparison between single-pass
and multi-pass chips
Fabrication process of chip#5 and chip#6 are exactly same, except chip#5 is
under standard single-pass exposure and chip#6 is under multi-pass exposure
during e-beam lithography.
There are same designs in chip#5 and chip#6,
including 3µm, 17.2µm, 129µm radius rings and 810µm long racetrack rings.
One thing should be mentioned is that all characterized devices are cladded
with AZ resist which is spun as protective layer for laser cutting but it does not
have eﬀect on characterization except increase the index contrast.
The comparison of quality factor diﬀerence between devices in single-pass chip#5
and multi-pass chip#6 is shown in Fig.4.8. Quality factor increases almost by
a factor of two in three diﬀerent cases which are exposed through multi-pass
exposure.
From the comparison, we can conclude that multi-pass exposure optimization in
e-beam lithography gives signiﬁcant improvement of quality factor of microring
resonator. Due to the quality factor is closely related to the loss of the ring, it
veriﬁes our view of the eﬀect of multi-pass exposure, which reduces the sidewall
roughness and therefore increases the quality factor.
==PAGE:57==
4.4 Quality factor comparison between single-pass and multi-pass chips
49
(a)
17.2µm radius
ring
Q-factor:47077
(b)
17.2µm radius
ring
Q-factor:89990
(c)
810µm long
racetrack ring
Q-factor:73000
(d)
810µm long
racetrack ring
Q-factor:138082
(e)
3µm radius ring
Q-factor:2203
(f)
3µm radius ring
Q-factor:4633
Figure 4.8: Quality factor of diﬀerent ring sizes comparison between
single-pass chip and multi-pass chip at critical coupling.
(a),(c),(e) are devices in single-pass chip.(b),(d),(f) are devices in
multi-pass chip
==PAGE:58==
50
Characterization of fabricated AlGaAs-on-sapphire microring resonator
Both 129µm ring and 810µm long racetrack ring have same cavity length and
their quality factors are compared. Figure.4.9 shows that almost same quality
factors of 129µm ring and 810µm long racetrack ring are achieved at critical
coupling. Racetrack ring includes the bending part and straight part(shown in
the inset of Fig.4.9(b)). The bending part is only in small range(17.2µm radius)
and rest of cavity length is consisted of two straight part, however, same quality
factor is achieved in both designs. We can conclude that multi-pass exposure
not only improve the sidewall roughness of bending part, but also improve the
straight part. It is a big improvement in fabrication, especially when deﬁning
the patterns include bending.
(a)
129µm ring
Q-factor:125236
(b)
810µm long
racetrack ring
Q-factor:138082
Figure 4.9: Comparison of quality factor between (a)129µm ring and
(b)810µm long racetrack ring at critical coupling. Inset in (b) is
the design of 810µm long racetrack ring
4.5
Quality factor comparison between diﬀerent
rings with and without AZ5214 resist cladding
An layer of AZ5214 resist is spun on the fabricated sample as a protective layer
for laser cutting. Here, we compare the quality factor of 3µm radius rings and
810µm long racetrack rings before and after removing AZ resist.
Coupling gap in design(nm)
Q-factor with resist
Q-factor without resist
190
1991
2083
220
2496
5038
250
3024
8375
Table 4.2: Quality factor of 3µm radius ring comparison between with and
without AZ resist caldding in single-pass chip#5
==PAGE:59==
4.6 Thermal property characterization
51
Table.4.2 shows that the quality factor of 3µm radius ring improves by factor of
two after removing the resist. The reason is that in such small rings, bending
loss dominates the total losses. The index contrast is lower when the device is
cladded with AZ resist than the device without AZ cladding. Therefore, the
light conﬁnement is weaker in device with AZ cladding, results in more bending
loss.
However, the quality factor is almost same before and after removing AZ resist
in 810µm long racetrack rings, as shown in table.4.3. In such large rings, the
propagation loss dominates so quality factor would not have a big change.
Coupling gap in design(nm)
Q-factor with resist
Q-factor without resist
120
30679
40573
150
39735
55680
180
73209
73802
210
116664
133809
Table 4.3: Quality factor of 810µm long racetrack rings comparison between
with and without AZ resist caldding in single-pass chip#5
4.6
Thermal property characterization
Motivation of using sapphire material as substrate is introduced in chapter2.
High thermal conductivity of sapphire material makes high thermal stability
of AlGaAs-on-sapphire platform possible.
In this section, resonance shift of
fabricated devices with high injected power is presented ﬁrst. Then thermal
stability comparison between standard AlGaAs-on-silica platform and AlGaAs-
on-sapphire platform is discussed.
Finally, temperature sensitivity of device
based on AlGaAs-on-sapphire platform is demonstrated.
4.6.1
Resonance shift of devices with high injected power
The resonance shift of 17.2µm ring and 810µm long racetrack ring in single-pass
and multi-pass with diﬀerent input power is investigated. Fig.4.10 shows the
experimental data. Since more power injected into the ring, more heat is gen-
erated results in changing of AlGaAs refractive index. Therefore, resonance is
shifted. Both resonances of two diﬀerent ring sizes shift to longer wavelength
with increase of injected power.
==PAGE:60==
52
Characterization of fabricated AlGaAs-on-sapphire microring resonator
The resonance shape is not symmetric any more when high power light travels
in the ring. Physically, when the tunable laser scan a range of wavelength light,
little power couples into the ring at the point where the scanning wavelength is
close to the resonance dip. The injected power heat up the ring and makes reso-
nance shift. As the laser scan wavelength which is much closer to the resonance
dip, the power accumulated in the ring makes the resonance continuously shift
until the resonance shift speed cannot catch up the laser scanning speed. Then
the optical spectrum analyser suddenly cannot detect the resonance.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.10: Resonance shift of microring resonator as a input power
increases. (a)17.2µm ring in single-pass chip, (b)17.2µm ring in
multi-pass chip,(c) 810µm long racetrack ring in single-pass
chip and (d)810µm long racetrack ring in multi-pass chip.
The experimental data in Fig.4.10 summarized into Fig.4.11. We can conclude
==PAGE:61==
4.6 Thermal property characterization
53
that resonance shift is lower in large rings because they have larger area contact
with sapphire substrate. However, whether quality factor has impact on the
resonance shift is unknown and further characterization needed to be done in
order to give some conclusions.
Figure 4.11: Resonance shift of diﬀerent devices as a function of input
power. SP and MP here mean single-pass and multi-pass. R17
and L810 mean 17.2µm ring and 810µm long racetrack ring.
Values in parentheses are quality factor
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.12: Resonance shift of microring resonator as a input power
increases. (a)17.2µm AlGaAs-on-sapphire ring with 80000
quality factor and (b)17.2µm AlGaAs-on-silica ring with 95000
quality factor
==PAGE:62==
54
Characterization of fabricated AlGaAs-on-sapphire microring resonator
4.6.2
Thermal stability comparison between AlGaAs-on-
sapphire platform and AlGaAs-on-silica platfrom
Fig.4.12 shows the resonance shift of miroring resonator in AlGaAs-on-sapphire
platform and AlGaAs-on-silica platfrom. The resonance shift is much larger
in AlGaAs-on-silica platform and it reaches almost 1.5nm with 13.5dBm input
power.
The comparison is more obvious in Fig.4.13. It shows much improved thermal
stability is achieved in AlGaAs-on-sapphire platform. At input power around
11mW, the resonance shift of device reduces over a factor of four.
Figure 4.13: Resonance shift comparison between two platform
Figure 4.14: Resonance shift with diﬀerent temperatures
==PAGE:63==
4.7 Summary
55
4.6.3
Temperature sensitivity
Temperature sensitivity of the device is also investigated. Fig.4.14 shows the
temperature sensitivity is 0.113nm/◦C(K−1), which is comparable to the tem-
perature sensitivity achieved in ﬁbre-Bragg-grating temperature sensors [65].
Such temperature sensitivity device has also potential application like temper-
ature sensor.
4.7
Summary
In this chapter the characterization setup and data analysis algorithm are pre-
sented ﬁrst. And then diﬀerent comparison of quality factors between devices
are given. Finally, thermal stability characterization result of this platform is
discussed.
We have several important conclusions after characterization and
comparison.
First, high quality factors of 17.2µm(89990) radius rings, 129µm radius rings(125236)
and 810µm long racetrack rings(138082) are achieved.
Second, the quality factor improved almost by a factor of two in 3µm, 17.2µm
radius rings and 810µm long racetrack rings through multi-pass exposure opti-
mization during e-beam lithography. The multi-pass exposure not only improve
the bend part of waveguide, but also improve the straight part of waveguide.
It is a big improvement in fabrication, especially when deﬁning the patterns
include bend part.
Third, the quality factors improved by a factor of two in 3µm radius rings after
removing AZ resist cladding while they keep same in 810µm long racetrack rings.
It is due to the reason that bend loss dominates the total losses in small rings,
however, propagation loss dominates in large rings.
Fourth, compared to standard AlGaAs-on-silica platform, the thermal stability
of AlGaAs-on-sapphire platform improved signiﬁcantly.
==PAGE:64==
56
Characterization of fabricated AlGaAs-on-sapphire microring resonator
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 5
Methods to further improve
quality factor
Although high quality factor AlGaAs-on-sapphire microring resonator is achieved,
there is still distance to the highest quality factor realized in standard AlGaAs-
on-silica platform. The main reason may due to the AlGaAs residues are not
completely removed in gap region between ring waveguide and bus waveguide,
which is the problem discussed in chapter3. In this chapter, three methods are
provided to solve this problem and therefore further increase the quality factor.
First method is simply increase the overetch depth. Second method is to increase
the gap to give more chance to remove residues because the etch rate is usu-
ally lower in the narrow gap region. Finite diﬀerence in time domain(FDTD)
simulation is done in order to obtain appropriate gap size. Third method is
parameter setting in e-beam system to optimize the charging eﬀect.
5.1
Controlling overetch depth
Increase the overetch depth ensures AlGaAs free gap region, however, angled
sidewall of waveguide(shown in Fig.5.1) could be obtained. If this is the case, the
AlGaAs free gap region results from this method is not a good choice because
==PAGE:66==
58
Methods to further improve quality factor
it increases the loss of the waveguide. The additional loss introduced by angled
sidewall also reduced quality factor of the microring resonator.
So diﬀerent
overetch depth needs to be tested.
Figure 5.1: Illstration of angled sidewall waveguide denoted by green AlGaAs
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.2: SEM image of gap region with (a)40nm overetch depth.
(b)120nm overetch depth and (c)200nm over etch depth. The
measured gap size is 210nm in(a), 203nm in(b) and 195nm in(c).
==PAGE:67==
5.1 Controlling overetch depth
59
Fig.5.2 shows the results of several overetch depth. A lot of residues left in
40nm overetch depth while most of residues are removed after overetch depth
is increased to 120nm, but there is still some residues. Resides are completely
removed when 200nm overetch depth is applied.
It is vital to know how the sidewall angle changes as overetch depth rises. The
sidewall angle is ﬁne even after 200nm overetch depth(shown in Fig.5.3). It
indicates that this method can be tried to achieve AlGaAs free gap region.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.3: Sidewall of waveguide after (a)120nm overetch depth and
(b)200nm overetch depth
Figure 5.4: Illustration of FDTD coupling simulation
==PAGE:68==
60
Methods to further improve quality factor
5.2
Coupling coeﬃcient simulation
Second method is to increase the gap size because large open area is easier
to be etched.
However, simply increase the gap without changing anything
leads to decrease of coupling coeﬃcient.
Therefore, ring waveguide width is
also adjusted to achieve the same coupling coeﬃcient before changing anything.
Fig.5.4 shows the FDTD coupling coeﬃcient simulation region and it is done by
Lumerical FDTD software.
The illustration of what we want to do is shown in Fig.5.5. In the standard de-
sign, the ring waveguide width is 630nm and the bus waveguide width is 466nm.
The coupling coeﬃcient is calculated as 0.0003 if the bus-ring waveguide gap
is 300nm. What the simulation does is to obtain the maximum gap and real-
ize same coupling coeﬃcient at the same time by adjusting the ring waveguide
width.
Figure 5.5: Illustration of simulation purpose
By narrowing the ring waveguide width, the mode propagated inside the waveg-
ide expands more outside the waveguide region. Therefore, more overlap be-
tween ring waveguide mode and bus waveguide mode is achieved in coupling
region results in increase of coupling coeﬃcient.
Fig.5.6 shows the the coupling coeﬃcient as ring waveguide width changes. Same
coupling coeﬃcient(achieved in 300nm gap in standard design) can be obtained
when the gap reaches 370nm and the ring waveguide width is reduced to around
430nm.
Increment of 70nm is achieved by adjusting ring waveguide width.
There is a big chance of removing AlGaAs residues because AlGaAs is almost
completely removed when the gap is 400nm. Two methods can also be combined
to achieve AlGaAs free gap region and minimize the potential side eﬀect by
narrowing ring waveguide width.
==PAGE:69==
5.3 Possible settings in E-beam lithography system
61
Figure 5.6: Coulping coeﬃcient as a function of ring waveguide width
diﬀerent bus-ring waveguide gaps
5.3
Possible settings in E-beam lithography sys-
tem
In the e-beam system, there are a lot of parameters can be edited, some of them
can optimize the pattern we want to deﬁne. In the end of the project, several
parameters are tested and the results show some of them greatly reduce the
charging eﬀect.
Four settings are tested include array compaction, no compaction, follow geom-
etry and writing order. In principle, these four settings tell the e-beam system
how to write the pattern. The detailed explanation of these settings will be
discussed in appendixB. Here, we compare how these settings are apply to ring
pattern writing, which is shown in Fig.5.7.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d
Figure 5.7: The writing strategy of ring pattern with diﬀerent settings.
(a)Array compaction, (b)No compaction, (c)Follow geometry and
(d)Writing order
==PAGE:70==
62
Methods to further improve quality factor
Fig.5.8 shows the results of diﬀerent e-beam settings and the exposure is done
without depositing Al layer on the resist. Fig.5.8(a) is ring exposed without any
optimization and there are obvious breaks. Array compaction setting shows the
worst and the writing strategy is aﬀected more by charging eﬀect. The result of
no compaction setting gives improved pattern. Almost no charging appears in
follow geometry and writing order cases. The results provide information that
the pattern is less aﬀected by charging if ring is written continuously and when
the writing path is along the ring. Although the mechanism behind this is not
fully understood, the possible explanation is given.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d
(e)
Figure 5.8: Developing results of 1.5µm radius ring with diﬀerent e-beam
settings. (a)Without any setting, (b)Array compaction, (c)No
compaction, (d)Follow geometry and (e)Writing order
As introduced in section3.3.1, the main deﬂector controls the beam movement
in a maximum 1mm×1mm writing ﬁeld and the sub deﬂector controls the beam
movement in a maximum 4µm×4µm ﬁeld. Without any setting, the left part of
the ring(Fig.5.8(a)) is written in one ﬁeld ﬁrst, then other patterns which are
at least 4µm away are written by adjusting main deﬂector, afterwards the e-
beam go back to write the right part of the ring by adjusting the main deﬂector
again.
So the charges accumulated in the left part of the ring deﬂects the
beam and obvious breaks appear. However, in setting like follow geometry, the
ring is written continuously, meaning only the sub deﬂector is adjusted.
So
our explanation is that the charging eﬀect aﬀects main deﬂector more than sub
deﬂector. But further investigation needs to be done to explain all things.
It is also very promising when edge roughness of patterns is inspected. The
edge roughness result of writing order(Fig.5.9(d)) is the best which is a surprise
==PAGE:71==
5.4 Summary
63
because good result is obtained without depositing Al layer on it. So in the real
exposure, the edge roughness may be further improved by Al layer deposition.
Due to the waveguide sidewall roughness is very critical to quality factor, the
test result shows it is possible to further improve the quality factor of the ﬁnal
device.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.9: Edge roughness results of four settings (a)Array compaction,
(b)No compaction, (c)Follow geometry and (d)Writing order
5.4
Summary
In this chapter, methods to further increase quality is presented. Control the
overetch depth can achieve AlGaAs free gap region and keep the vertical sidewall
angle at the same time. In the simulation, 300nm gap between 630nm width
ring waveguide and 466nm width waveguide can be increased to around 370nm
and reduce the ring waveguide width to around 430nm at the same time. By
using the parameter setting in the e-beam system, the charging eﬀect is greatly
reduced. Follow geometry and writing order show much improved pattern and
writing order setting gives the smoothest edge. It is possible to improve the
sidewall roughness by using these setting during exposure and therefore improve
the quality factor of ﬁnal devices.
==PAGE:72==
64
Methods to further improve quality factor
==PAGE:73==
Chapter 6
Conclusion and Outlook
In this project, AlGaAs-on-sapphire platform is realized and high quality devices
are fabricated based on the realized platform. Also, compared to the recent
developed AlGaAs-on-silica platform, the thermal stability of the AlGaAs-on-
sapphire platform improves signiﬁcantly.
Motivation to realize the AlGaAs-on-sapphire platform is due to the excellent
nonlinear properties achieved in developed AlGaAs-on-silica platform, which
makes it a strong candidate for nonlinear integrated optics.
However, large
absorption of light in mid-infrared range limits its applications. Sapphire pro-
vides several advantages which is quite suitable to realize another AlGaAs-
on-insulator platform. It enables the operating wavelength extended to mid-
infrared and makes high thermal stability of the platform possible.
The AlGaAs-on-sapphire platform is realized through molecular bonding using
a thin Al2O3 layer and standard substrate removal process. Microring resonator
is fabricated through resist spinning, e-beam exposure, developing, ICP etching
and laser cutting. A lot of problems appear during fabrication include rough
surface during substrate removal, but it is solved by etching the top Al2O3
layer. Thick resist is solved through cooling down the same before spinning. Al
deposition on the resist before e-beam exposure reduces charging eﬀect. Multi-
pass setting in e-beam system helps to optimize the stitching problem and it is
proved a great improvement if the high quality factor of the device is the ﬁnal
==PAGE:74==
66
Conclusion and Outlook
goal. Sapphire wafer is successfully cleaved through laser cutting.
4 chips out of 6 chips are successfully fabricated and all of them have high yield
of devices. From the characterization results, we can conclude that high quality
factors are achieved in 17.2µm radius rings, 129µm radius rings and 810µm long
racetrack rings. They are 89990, 125236 and 138082 at critical coupling. And
the multi-pass optimization during e-beam lithography has almost improved
the quality factor by a factor of two and the comparisons show that the multi-
pass setting not only have improvement on the bending structures, but also
improve the straight structures. Furthermore, the thermal stability of AlGaAs-
on-sapphire platform is much better than developed AlGaAs-on-silica platform.
At input power of 11mW, the resonance shift of device in AlGaAs-on-sapphire
platform is over four times smaller than that of device in AlGaAs-on-silica plat-
form.
AlGaAs residues at the bus-ring gap region limits further improvement of quality
factor. However, three methods are provided to solve this problem and both
of them is feasible.
First, controlling overetch depth, AlGaAs residues can
be completely removed and vertical waveguide sidewall is still kept. Second,
according to the simulation results, gap can be increased a lot. Third, settings
in e-beam system reduces charging eﬀect and improves edge roughness of ring
waveguide even without an Al layer on it.
Since we provide methods to solve the problems, further work can be done
to improve the quality factor of the device.
Also, for now, all the work is
based on linear characterization. In the end, the platform is focus on nonlinear
application like Kerr frequency comb generation in the mid-infrared range and
will be implemented in ultra-fast telecommunication system (beyond Terabit/s)
as a multi-wavelength and ultra-short pulse source. The results achieved in this
project is promising and encourage us to work more on it. AlGaAs-on-sapphire
can play an important role in nonlinear integrated platform and shows great
potential for many applications such as all-optical signal processing, ultra-low-
power all-optical switching, and quantum photonics [66].
==PAGE:75==
Appendix A
Experimental data
Resonance ﬁts of diﬀerent rings with diﬀerent gaps in chip#6 discussed in section
4.3.2 are presented here. And quality factor and extinction ratio(ER) results of
diﬀerent rings with diﬀerent gaps are also summarize.
(a)
(b)
==PAGE:76==
68
Experimental data
(c)
(d)
Figure A.1: Resonance ﬁt of 3µm radius ring with (a)190nm, (b)220nm,
(c)250nm and(d)280nm gaps
Gap(nm)
Q-factor
ER(dB)
190
3279
4
220
4533
6.99
250
7288
6.71
280
13054
3.42
Table A.1: Q-factor and ER of 3µm radius ring with diﬀerent gaps
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure A.2: Resonance ﬁt of 17µm radius ring with (a)150nm, (b)180nm,
(c)210nm and(d)240nm gaps
==PAGE:77==
69
Gap(nm)
Q-factor
ER(dB)
150
14864
2
180
40196
3.8
210
63347
5.6
240
89990
9.0
Table A.2: Q-factor and ER of 3µm radius ring with diﬀerent gaps
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure A.3: Resonance ﬁt of 810µm long racetrack ring with (a)120nm,
(b)150nm, (c)180nm and(d)210nm gaps
Gap(nm)
Q-factor
ER(dB)
120
71944
7.4
150
85384
8.2
180
138082
8.7
210
169572
4.8
Table A.3: Q-factor and ER of 810µm long racetrack ring with diﬀerent gaps
==PAGE:78==
70
Experimental data
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure A.4: Resonance ﬁt of 129µm radius ring with (a)120nm, (b)150nm,
(c)180nm and(d)210nm gaps
Gap(nm)
Q-factor
ER(dB)
120
101119
1.1
150
118547
1.5
180
125236
2.3
210
134841
1.2
Table A.4: Q-factor and ER of 129µm radius ring with diﬀerent gaps
==PAGE:79==
Appendix B
BEAMER settings
An e-beam exposure requires a v30-ﬁle, which contains information on the pat-
tern to write, a jobdeck ﬁle (jdf-ﬁle), and a schedule ﬁle (sdf-ﬁle). The sdf- and
jdf-ﬁle contain information about size and position of substrate, dose, current,
and shot step. The sdf-ﬁle, jdf-ﬁle and v30-ﬁle are compiled to a magazine-ﬁle
(mgn) on the 9500 computer. When a magazine-ﬁle is prepared, the actual shot
time can be estimated by the e-beam computer(9500) [67].
All the ﬁles include v30-ﬁle, jdf-ﬁle, sdf-ﬁle are generated in a software called
BEAMER. BEAMER is a comprehensive software platform for preparing data
ideally for exposure. BEAMER automatically sets the most optimal setting by
default. The user is able to adjust the settings for special cases. There are
a lot of settings in the BEAMER can be edited to arrange E-beam exposure
strategies. We haven’t tried all of them but at least some of the settings helps
pattern deﬁnitions in our samples.
A lot of work have been done on how diﬀerent settings in BEAMER makes
diﬀerence in real exposure. However, e-beam writer does not completely follow
the settings in BEAMER dyring exposure, including the four parameters(array
compaction, no compaction, follow geometry and writing order discussed in
chapter5) we want to investigate. Recently, there is a new command made for
our JBX9500 to turn oﬀthe automatic writing order so the writing order can
be controlled by Beamer settings.
==PAGE:80==
72
BEAMER settings
Therefore, four diﬀerent settings discussed in chapter 5 are explored and ex-
plained in more details here.
The deﬁnitions of array compaction, no com-
paction, follow geometry and writing order in BEAMER manual are as follows:
• No Compaction is the default choice: here the features are exposed in a
ﬁrst-in, ﬁrst-out manner. The layer order can be deﬁned.
• Array Compaction together with Region Size reduces the area in which
features are exposed successively. This reduces the beam jumping or ’Snow
Flake’ eﬀect during exposure.
• Writing Order means that trapezoids are exposed according to a ’next
neighbor’ principle. The next neighbor is deﬁned as the neighbor with the
shortest distance between the origin points of the trapezoids
• Follow Geometry means that contiguous structures are exposed i.e com-
plete lines before exposure of the next structure begins.
By using this four settings, the results of pattern after developing are diﬀerent,
indicating the BEAMER setting can optimize the pattern we want to deﬁne.
==PAGE:81==
Appendix C
E-beam exposure mask
In our standard exposure, there are including 3µm, 17.2µm, 129µm radius rings
and 810µm long racetrack rings. In this appendix, the layout of exposure mask
is presented.
The full mask design is shown in C.1, and elements in the design are given in C.2,
C.3, C.4 and C.5. The left side pattern will be the mask for multi-pass exposure
and the right side pattern is the mask for single-pass exposure. Fig.C.2 is the
desigen, the purpose of design mask in this way to to save space and include
more structures in the sample which is in small size. Fig.C.4 is 500µm×500µm
writing ﬁeld, which is ﬁt to the mainﬁeld oﬀset during e-beam exposure. The
ruler shown in Fig.C.5 is used as alignment mark during laser cutting to ensure
appropriate cleaving.
==PAGE:82==
74
E-beam exposure mask
Figure C.1: Layout of full exposure mask designed in L-edit
==PAGE:83==
75
Figure C.2: Design of 129µm radius ring and 810µm long racetrack ring
region
Figure C.3: Design of 3µm radius ring and 17µm radius ring region
==PAGE:84==
76
E-beam exposure mask
Figure C.4: 500µm×500µm Writing
ﬁeld
Figure C.5: Design of ruler
==PAGE:85==
Bibliography
[1] Altan KOCYGT et.al.,Turk J Elec Engin, VOL.9, NO.2 2001
[2] Leuthold, J., Koos, C. & Freude, W. Nonlinear silicon photonics. Nature
Photon, 4, 535–544 (2010).
[3] Razzari, L. et al. CMOS-compatible integrated optical hyper-parametric os-
cillator. Nature Photon, 4 41-45 (2010).
[4] Foster, M. et al. Broad-band optical parametric gain on a silicon chip.Nature,
441, 04932 (2006)
[5] V. R. Almeida, C. A. Barrios, R. R. Panepucci, and M. Lipson, “All-optical
control of light on a silicon chip,” Nature, 431, 1081–1084 (2004).
[6] S. F. Preble, Q. Xu, B. S. Schmidt, and M. Lipson, “Ultrafast all-optical
modulation on a silicon chip,” Opt. Lett, 30, 2891–2893 (2005).
[7] B. G. Lee, B. A. Small, K. Bergman, Q. Xu, and M. Lipson, “Transmis-
sion of high-data-rate optical signals through a micrometer-scale silicon ring
resonator,” Opt. Lett, 31, 2701–2703 (2006).
[8] R. Salem, M. A. Foster, A. C. Turner, D. F. Geraghty, M. lipson, and A.
L. Gaeta, “Signal regeneration using low-power four-wave mixing on silicon
chip,” Nat. Photonics, 2, 35–38 (2007).
[9] B. J. Lee, A. Biberman, A. C. Turner-Foster, M. A. Foster, M. Lipson, A. L.
Gaeta, and K. Bergman, “Demonstration of broadband wavelength conversion
at 40 Gb/s in silicon waveguides,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett, 21, 182–184
(2009).
==PAGE:86==
78
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[10] W. Mathlouthi, H. Rong, and M. Paniccia, “Characterization of eﬃcient
wavelength conversion by four-wave mixing in sub-micron silicon waveguides,”
Opt. Express, 16, 16735–16745 (2008).
[11] G. I. Stegeman, A. Villeneuve, J. Kang, J. S. Aitchison, C. N. Ironside, K.
Al-Hemyari, C. C. Yang, C.-H. Lin, H.-H. Lin, G. T. Kennedy, R. S. Grant,
and W. Sibett, “AlGaAs below half bandgap: the silicon of nonlinear optical
materials,”. Int. J. Nonlinear Opt. Phys,3 , 347–371 (1994).
[12] J. S. Levy et al., “CMOS-compatible multiple-wavelength oscillator for on-
chip optical interconnects,” Nat. Photon, 4 37 (2010).
[13] L.Razzari et al. CMOS-compatible integrated optical hyper-parametric os-
cillator. Nat. Photon, 4 41 (2010).
[14] H. Jung et al. Optical frequency comb generation from aluminium nitride
microring resonator. Opt. Lett., 38 2810 (2013).
[15] B. J. M. Hausmann et al. Diamond nonlinear photonics. Nat. Photon, 8
369 (2014).
[16] A.W. Fang, H. Park, O. Cohen, R. Jones, M. J. Paniccia, and J. E. Bowers.
Electrically pumped hybrid algainas-silicon evanescent laser. Opt. Express,
14:9203–9210, 2006.
[17] Rizou Z V, Zoiros K E, Hatziefremidis A. Semiconductor optical ampliﬁer
pattern eﬀect suppression with passive single microring resonator-based notch
ﬁlter. Optics Communications, 2014, 329: 206-213.
[18] A. Ksendzov & Y. Lin. Integrated optics ring-resonator sensors for protein
detection. Opt. Lett, 30 (24): 3344–3346.
[19] K. D. Vos, I. Bartolozzi, E. Schacht, P. Bienstman & R. Baets. Silicon-
on-Insulator microring resonator for sensitive and label-free biosensing. Opt.
Express, 15 (12). pp. 7610–7615.
[20] Witzens, J., Hochberg. Optical detection of target molecule induced aggre-
gation of nanoparticles by means of high-Q resonators. Optics Express, 19:
7034–7061.
[21] S. Xiao, M. H. Khan, H. Shen, and M. Qi. A highly compact third-order
silicon microring add-drop ﬁlter with a very large free spectral range, a ﬂat
passband and a low delay dispersion. Opt. Express, 15:14765–14771, 2007.
[22] M. S. Nawrocka, T. Liu, X. Wang, and R. R. Panepucci. Tunable silicon mi-
croring resonator with wide free spectral range. Appl. Phys. Lett., 89:071110,
2006.
==PAGE:87==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
79
[23] D. Marris-Morini, X. Le Roux, L. Vivien, E. Cassan, D. Pascal, M. Halb-
wax, S. Maine, S. Laval, J. M. Fedeli, and J. F. Damlencourt, Opt. Express,
14(22), 10838–10843 (2006).
[24] Pu, Minhao, et al. "AlGaAs-on-insulator nanowire with 750 nm FWM
bandwidth,-9 dB CW conversion eﬃciency, and ultrafast operation enabling
record Tbaud wavelength conversion." Optical Fiber Communication Confer-
ence. Optical Society of America, 2015.
[25] D. T. Spencer et al., “Integrated waveguide coupled Si3N4 resonators in the
ultrahigh-Q regime,” Optica, 1 153 (2014).
[26] D. T. Spencer, Y. Tang, J.F. Bauters, M.J.R. Bowers, “Integrated Si3N4
ultra high Q resonators”, IEEE Photonics Conference, pp. 141-142
[27] Dolgaleva K, Ng W C, Qian L, et al. Compact highly-nonlinear AlGaAs
waveguides for eﬃcient wavelength conversion. Optics express, 2011, 19(13):
12440-12455.
[28] Li F, Jackson S D, Grillet C, et al. Low propagation loss silicon-on-sapphire
waveguides for the mid-infrared. Optics express, 2011, 19(16): 15212-15220.
[29] J. Wathen, P. Apiratikul, C. Richardson, G. Porkolab, G. Carter, and T.
Murphy, Eﬃcient continuous-wave four-wave mixing in bandgap-engineered
AlGaAs waveguides. Opt. Lett, 39, 3161-3164 (2014).
[30] Aitchison J S, Hutchings D C, Kang J U, et al. The nonlinear optical prop-
erties of AlGaAs at the half band gap. IEEE journal of quantum electronics,
1997, 33(3): 341-348.
[31] M. Dinu, F. Quochi, and H. Garcia, Appl. Phys. Lett, 82, 2954(2003).
[32] S. Gehrsitz, F. K. Reinhart, C. Gourgon, N. Herres, A. Vonlanthen, and
H. Sigg, “The refractive index of AlxGa1−xAs below the band gap: accurate
determination and empirical modeling,” J. Appl. Phys, 87, 7825–7837 (2000).
[33] W. Astar, P. Apiratikul, T. E. Murphy, and G. M. Carter, “Wavelength
conversion of 10-Gb/s RZ-OOK using ﬁltered XPM in a passive GaAs-AlGaAs
waveguide,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett, 22, 637–639 (2010).
[34] V. G. Ta’eed, M. Shokooh-Saremi, L. Fu, I. C. M. Littler, D. J. Moss, M.
Rochette, B. J. Eggleton, Y. Ruan, “Self-phase modulation-based integrated
optical regeneration in chalcogenide waveguides,” IEEE J. Sel. Top.Quantum
Electron, 12, 360–370 (2006).
[35] V. G. Ta’eed, M. R. E. Lamont, D. J. Moss, B. J. Eggleton, D.-Y. Choi, S.
Madden, and B. Luther-Davies, “All optical wavelength conversion via cross
phase modulation in chalcogenide glass rib waveguides,” Opt. Express, 14,
11242–11247 (2006)
==PAGE:88==
80
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[36] M. R. E. Lamont, B. Luther-Davies, D.-Y. Choi, S. Madden, X. Gai, and B.
J. Eggleton, “Net-gain from a parametric ampliﬁer on a chalcogenide optical
chip,” Opt. Express 16, 20374–20381 (2008).
[37] G. P. Agrawal, Nonlinear Fiber Optics, 5th ed. (Academic, 2012)
[38] J. S. Aitchison, D. C. Hutchings, J. U. Kang, G. I. Stegeman, and A.
Villeneuve, “The nonlinear optical properties of AlGaAs at the half band
gap,”.IEEE J. Quantum Electron, 33, 341–348 (1997)
[39] E.Dobrovinskaya, L.Lytvynov, V.Pishchik: Sapphire Material, Manufac-
turing, Applications, pp109 (Springer, NY, 2009)
[40] Osamu Wada, Hideki Hasegawa and Csamu Wada, InP-Based Materials
and Devices: Physics and Technology, 1999 John Wiley& Sons. Inc
[41] Shawn J. Cunningham , Mario Kupnik, MEMS Materials and Processes
Handbook, pp 817-877, Springer US, 2011
[42] Fan J, Anantha P, Liu C Y, et al. Thermal characteristics of InP-Al2O3/Si
low temperature heterogeneous direct bonding for photonic device integration.
ECS Journal of Solid State Science and Technology, 2013, 2(9): N169-N174.
[43] Maszara, W.P., et al., Bonding of silicon wafers for silicon-on-insulator,
Journal of Applied Physics, 1988. 64(10): p. 4943-4950.
[44] https : //en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bond_characterization
[45] S.Adachi. Properties of Aluminium Gallium Arsenide, 1st ed, pp43-45 (IN-
SPEC, London, 1993)
[46] Y.Luo, Douglas C. Hall, IEEE Journal of selected topics in quantum elec-
tronics, Vol.11, NO.6, November/December 2005
[47] Grigorescu A E, van der Krogt M C, Hagen C W. Sub-10-nm structures
written in ultra-thin HSQ resist layers using electron-beam lithography. Ad-
vanced Lithography. International Society for Optics and Photonics, 2007:
65194A-65194A-13.
[48] Yang
J
K
W,
Cord
B,
Duan
H,
et
al.
Understanding
of
hy-
drogen silsesquioxane electron resist for sub-5-nm-half-pitch lithography.
2009.J.Vac.Sci.Technol, B 27(6), Nov/Dec 2009.
[49] C. Ashby and A. Baca, Fabrication of GaAs Devices, 1st ed, (Institute of
Engineering and Technology, London, 2005
[50] K. D. Cummings and M. Kiersh. Charging eﬀects from electron beam
lithography. J. Vac. SCI. Technol., B 7, 1536(1989).
==PAGE:89==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
81
[51] K. D. Cummings. A study of deposited charge from electron beam lithog-
raphy. J. Vac. SCI. Technol, B 8(6), NovlDec 1990.
[52] Greer A I M, Moran D A J. Charge dissipation layer optimisation for nano-
scale electron-beam lithography pattern deﬁnition onto diamond. Diamond
and Related Materials, 2012, 29: 13-17.
[53] Kobayashi, N., Goto, K., Wakatsuki, T., Komagata, T. & Nakagawa, Y.
Improvement of position accuracy in mask-writing electron beam lithography
with a multi-pass writing strategy for reducing position errors due to re-
sist charging. Proc. SPIE Photomask and Next-Generation Lithography Mask
Technology XV, 7028 70281Y (2008).
[54] E.Strassburger, P.Patel and J.W.McCauley. "26th International Sympo-
sium", Miami, FL, September 12-16, 2011 J.Vac.Sci.Technol, 16(6), Nov/Dec.
1979.
[55] H. B. Gray, Chemical Bonds: An Introduction to Atomic and Molecular
Structure (University Science Books, 1994).
[56] L. Labadie, and O. Wallner, “Mid-infrared guided optics: a perspective for
astronomical instruments,” Opt. Express, 17(3), 1947–1962 (2009).
[57] P. Werle, F. Slemr, K. Maurer, R. Kormann, R. Mucke, and B. Janker,
“Near- and mid-infrared laser-optical sensors for gas analysis,” Opt. Lasers
Eng, 37(2-3), 101–114 (2002).
[58] J. Wathen, P. Apiratikul, C. Richardson, G. Porkolab, G. Carter and T.
Murphy. Eﬃcient continuous-wave four-wave mixing in bandgap-engineered
AlGaAs waveguides. Optics Lett, Vol. 39, No. 11, June 1, 2014.
[59] G. Y. Chong and C. S. Tan. PE-TEOS Wafer Bonding Enhancement at
Low Temperature with a High-κ Dielectric Capping Layer of Al2O3. Journal
of The Electrochemical Society, 158(2), H137-H141(2011)
[60] D. A. Stocker, E. F. Schubert, and W. Grieshaber. Appl. Phys. Lett, Vol.
73, No. 14, 5 October 1998.
[61] S. Fakhfakh, O. Jbara, M. Belhaj, Z. Fakhfakh, A. Kallel, E.I. Rau.
Dynamic investigation of electron trapping and charge decay in electron-
irradiated Al2O3 in a scanning electron microscope: Methodology and mech-
anisms. Nucl. Instr. and Meth. in Phys. Res, B 197 (2002) 114–127.
[62] A. Melchinger and S. Hofmann. Dynamic double layer model: Description
of time dependent charging phenomena in insulators under electron beam
irradiation. J. Appl. Phys, 78 (10), 15 November 1995.
==PAGE:90==
82
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[63] S. Xiao, M. H. Khan, H. Shen and M. Qi. Compact silicon microring res-
onators with ultra-low propagation loss in the C band.Optics Express, Vol.
15, No. 22, 9 October 2007.
[64] Xu Q, Fattal D, Beausoleil R G. Silicon microring resonators with 1.5-µm
radius. Optics express, 2008, 16(6): 4309-4315
[65] Mizunami T, Tatehata H, Kawashima H. High-sensitivity cryogenic ﬁbre-
Bragg-grating temperature sensors using Teﬂon substrates.Measurement Sci-
ence and Technology, 2001, 12(7): 914.
[66] Hendrickson et al. Integrated nonlinear photonics: emerging applications
and ongoing challenges.J. Opt. Soc, Vol. 31, No. 12 / December 2014
[67] http : //labadviser.danchip.dtu.dk
