==PAGE:1==
Improving game design with eye
tracking
Rasmus Krøyer Jørgensen
Simon Bøge Hemmingsen
Kongens Lyngby 2016
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
The purpose of this thesis is to combine consumer-grade eye tracking technology
with a depth of ﬁeld eﬀect within a 3D virtual environment to create a dynamic
depth of ﬁeld eﬀect. This eﬀect will modify the standard depth of ﬁeld eﬀect,
such that the center of it always is within the users gaze point.
We hypothesize that this eﬀect will have uses for game development by enhanc-
ing realism and allowing for interesting game design. In this project we attempt
to test this hypothesis by implementing the aforementioned eﬀect and carry out
a series of user tests, where we ask the users about the level of realism and test
a certain game design application, among other things.
We were successful in implementing the dynamic depth of ﬁeld eﬀect using
user-grade grade equipment and a common engine, however the implementation
could be improved by some ﬁne tuning of the software parameters. The test
results were, perhaps because of the prototype nature of the software, somewhat
inconclusive. We still feel somewhat conﬁdent in assuming that the eﬀect is
beneﬁcial to realism, but we not able to show its game design potential to a
satisfying degree. Further iterations of user tests would be useful in this regard.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
Formålet med denne afhandling er at kombinere kommerciel øjesporings tekno-
logi med en dybdeskarphedseﬀekt i et virtuelt 3D miljø for at skabe en dynamisk
dybdeskarphedseﬀekt. Denne eﬀekt vil modiﬁcere dybdeskarphedseﬀekten sådan
eﬀektens fokus altid er der hvor brugeren kigger.
Vores hypotese er at denne eﬀekt kan bruges inden for spiludvikling ved at for-
bedre niveauet af realisme og ved at gøre det muligt at lave interesant spildesign.
Vi forsøger at teste disse hypoteser ved at implementere den nævnte eﬀekt og
derefter udføre en række brugertests, hvor vi blandt andet spørger brugerne om
niveaeuet af realisme og tester andvendelsen af en idé til game design.
Vi havde success i vores arbejde med at implementere den dynamiske dybde-
skarphedseﬀekt med brug af kommerciel øjensporings teknologi og en almindelig
andvent spil engine, selvom vores implementation kunne forbedres ved ﬁnjuste-
ring a parametrene. Test resultaterne var, måske på grund af dens tilstand som
prototype, noget usikker i dens konklusioner. Vi føler dog det er tilpas sikkert at
antage at eﬀekten forøger realisme, men vi var ikke i stand til at dokumentere
dens potentiale for game design i tilfredstillende grad. Yderligere iterationer af
tests ville være fordelagtige i forhold til dette.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁlment of the requirements
for acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering. The project started in on the 25th of
Janurary 2016 and concluded on the 10th of July 2016. Associate professor at
DTU Compute Michael Rose has ﬁlled the role of supervisor.
We would like to thank Michael Rose for supervision, Per Bækgaard for assis-
tance with the eye tracking equipment and Eyetribe for lending us the hardware.
Additionally Rasmus Krøyer Jørgensen would like to thank Sarah Bender for
support during the course of the project.
Lyngby, 10-July-2016
Rasmus Krøyer Jørgensen
Simon Bøge Hemmingsen
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
1
Introduction and background
1
1.1
Depth of Field
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
State of the art
7
3
Design and implementation
9
3.1
Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2.1
The Unity Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3.1
Eyetracker . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3.2
Depth-of-Field
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
User validation
19
4.1
Goals of validation session . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.3
Test procedure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.4
Survey results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.5
Survey results discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
5
Game Design Implications
31
5.1
3D Shooters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2
Solving puzzles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6
Discussion and Conclusion
35
6.1
Discussion and further work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.2
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
A User Survey Documentation
41
A.1 Survey used . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
A.2 Survey answers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
B Code
73
B.1
objectSpawner.cs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
B.2
EyeTrackingController.cs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
B.3
UnityGazeUtils.cs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
B.4
GazeDataValidator.cs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
B.5
DistanceController.cs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
B.6
DepthOfField.cs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
Bibliography
95
==PAGE:11==
List of Figures
1.1
Screenshot of The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt, with depth of ﬁeld
enabled
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Screenshot of The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt, with depth of ﬁeld
disabled . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3.1
A comparison of the two eﬀects and no eﬀect. 1: No bokeh or
blur 2: Synthetic bokeh 3: Gaussian blur
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Domain diagram of the setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Dish blur
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4
Synthetic bokeh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.1
The setup as we used it to test our subjects . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2
First step of the eye tracker calibration process. If the user is not
in the correct position the color will change from green to red.
.
21
4.3
During the second part of the calibration process the user has to
follow the cross-hair around the screen. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.4
The calibration is here rated, and the user can test it out by
looking at the circles. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.5
Image of the cube the test subject had to ﬁnd. Dynamic depth
of ﬁeld is enabled here, and focus is on the cube. . . . . . . . . .
23
4.6
Here the cube is in the background and out of focus. It is near
the shadow of the tree in the right side of the image. . . . . . . .
24
4.7
This is the test ground with the dynamic depth of ﬁeld turned
oﬀ. This is how it looked for the user for the second round of tests. 24
4.8
The results for the question "Did the simulation feel more realistic
with the dynamic depth of ﬁeld?
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.9
The results for the question "Was the object harder or easier to
ﬁnd with the dynamic depth of ﬁeld eﬀect?
. . . . . . . . . . . .
26
==PAGE:12==
x
LIST OF FIGURES
5.1
One of the earliest 3D FPS games, Wolfenstein 3D. . . . . . . . .
32
5.2
The player is engaged with the enemy in the yellow circle. Ad-
dition of dynamic depth of ﬁeld might cause the player to have
a harder time detecting the enemy in the red circle. Screenshot
from the game Overwatch. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction and
background
Virtual environments are most of the time meant to be a representation of
reality. For games, the developers are constantly trying to ﬁnd new techniques
to make graphics feel more like reality, while spending a reasonable amount of
performance power. Since games moved from texture based 2D graphics into
the 3D realm, developers have been trying to make the environments look more
like the real thing. For example by using shading techniques to emulate color
changes in material caused by light sources, and shadow maps to make sure that
objects cast realistic shadow when lit upon. Even games that have a style that
is not necessarily photo realistic use rendering techniques like ambient occlusion
to emulate the look of shadows on an object, without using an absurd amount
of GPU power to calculate the shading from a large amount of light sources and
the reﬂection of these against walls and other objects.
It’s not only in the graphics department that realism is a priority. Large amounts
of resources are spent on calculating accurate physics for the most important
objects within the game world and many game engines have built in functionality
that lets a developer easily accelerate an object into the sky and watch it fall with
a perfect curve in relation to gravity. Also in sound design do we see support
being added for surround sound systems that make sure that an explosion sound
can readily be detected without the player ever seeing the explosion. Not to
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction and background
mention all the work that goes into generating and recording realistic sound
features. To be fair, there are also many sound developers that make audio
eﬀects sound like the player would expect, despite them not being true to reality.
As an example, Hollywood has taught us that the sound of an unsheathing sword
has a metallic ring to it, when in reality that might not be the case.
So what is the point of all this realism and expected realism? We postulate
that the reason is immersion. Players will get more engulfed and emotionally
attached to a game and its storyline if what they see is believable. Every time
something looks strange or behaves in a way that seems oﬀ, the player is re-
minded that it is a game, and they are able to distance from the events of the
game. Immersion is very desirable for the developers since the more immersed
their players are, the more likely they are to have memorable experience. A
memorable experience might cause the players to buy more games from the
same developer or to recommend the game to their friends, which in the end
means proﬁt for the creators of the game.
1.1
Depth of Field
The term depth of ﬁelds come from the ﬁeld of optics where it is also called
focus range or eﬀective focus range. [iC]
In photography depth of ﬁeld is the distance between the nearest and the farthest
object in a scene relative to the camera, that appears acceptably sharp. When
using cameras the depth of ﬁeld is controlled by the aperture of the lens, which
can either be static or be set dynamically depending on the lens. A large depth
of ﬁeld is often desirable when photographing large objects, as it is important
to get all details of the scene equally sharp. Conversely, for motifs that have
a deﬁned foreground, middle-ground and background it can be useful to use a
small depth of ﬁeld to emphasize the center of the depth of the image.
Since our eyes also contain a stretchable lens, the concept of depth of ﬁeld is
also relevant to our viewing experience. Within the ﬁeld of biology the term
Accommodation is used to describe this [Alm11].
Some might not notice it
much, but it becomes apparent when looking at a close object which is in front
of a distant background.
In virtual environments such as 3d games the eﬀect is also widely used. Many
games utilize it in the same way that ﬁlmmakers often do, to change focus from
diﬀerent characters and objects during cut-scenes that dispose of the games
story.
==PAGE:15==
1.1 Depth of Field
3
Figure 1.1: Screenshot of The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt, with depth of ﬁeld en-
abled
Figure 1.2: Screenshot of The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt, with depth of ﬁeld dis-
abled
==PAGE:16==
4
Introduction and background
However, some games also have depth of ﬁeld deﬁned as a customizable graphics
setting. In this context depth of ﬁeld is meant to literally add an additional
sense of depth to the scenes within the game by increasingly blurring objects
the farther away they are from the camera. This does pose some problems. The
eﬀect works well when the player focuses on something near the camera, which
will be the case most of the time. However, once the player start focusing on
something far away it seems unnatural that the blur does not disappear. This
problem is shown in ﬁgures 1.1 and 1.2. It might be hard to notice because
of the limitations of this media, but if you try to focus on the towers in the
background you might notice that it feels disturbing to your eyes.
Developers could try to get around this problem by making the focus of the
depth of ﬁeld eﬀect the center of screen, or whatever else makes sense within
the control scheme of the game, but this is not a viable solution since we will
often look somewhere other than the center of the screen when exploring a scene.
A better option is to track where the user is looking on the screen, ray trace to
ﬁnd the exact point in the scene that the user is focusing on and use that point
as the focus point for the depth of ﬁeld algorithm. Traditionally, eye tracking
hardware has been expensive and cumbersome to use, but in recent years many
companies have released consumer-grade eye tracking hardware that could be
realistically obtained by the average computer user.
This makes it possible for the depth of ﬁeld function of virtual environments to
be dynamic and therefore feel more natural to the eye.
1.2
Problem statement
It is the task of improving the depth of ﬁeld eﬀect that we are going to tackle
in this report. We will create a dynamic depth of ﬁeld eﬀect. As explained in
the earlier section using user grade eye tracking equipment. Speciﬁcally, we are
going to create a virtual environment using the game engine Unity, use the eye
tracker data as an input and use the screen position to ﬁnd the correct focus
point of the depth of ﬁeld eﬀect.
We will try to ﬁnd the answers to the following questions: Does it make virtual
environments feel more realistic? Can the eﬀect be utilized to make interesting
gameplay mechanics or level design in games? Does the eﬀect create a comfort-
able experience for the user? It could also be interesting to investigate if there
is some sort of GPU-performance optimization to tie in with this eﬀect.
Answering the questions above will include coding and editing in Unity as well
==PAGE:17==
1.2 Problem statement
5
as performing user surveys in order to assess the eﬀect of the dynamic depth of
ﬁeld function.
==PAGE:18==
6
Introduction and background
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2
State of the art
This project contains a couple of diﬀerent technologies and is trying to combine
them. To understand the premise and how it diﬀerentiates from what has al-
ready been done, it is important to know where we stand before this project.
This chapter will describe a couple of articles and patents related to the subject
and explain how this project stands out.
In a paper published in 1996[Rok96] the author, Przemyslaw Rokita, inves-
tigated the use of depth of ﬁeld in virtual environments. His motivation was
making virtual environments look more realistic. In the article he describes some
of the basics in how the human eye works and how the eﬀect been replicated.
He then describes ways the eﬀect has been achieved in the past and points out
the immense processing power some of these methodes need in order to do this
in real-time. He then proceeds to describe a convolution method which is much
cheaper in time and processing power, making it more suitable for real-time.
The Depth-of-Field method he describes in his article, is similar to a standard
post processing option used in most video games and simulations today.
As early as 2001 a patent was ﬁled in the United State of America for an
application that could create a "Dynamic depth-of-ﬁeld emulation based on
eye-tracking".[Dee]
Combining this technology was investigated scientiﬁcally in 2008 and it was
==PAGE:20==
8
State of the art
found through experiments that this approach could provide favourable results
if used in virtual environments such as a video game.[Cas08] The authors of
this article used a similar approach as we have in this project with wanting to
increase the level of realism and immersion in a game. Like us, they wanted to
combine eyetracking with a DoF blur to increase the realism and immersion for
the players. However, the equipment they were using was more sophisticated
lab equipment. It is more accurate but in turn a lot more expensive than the
equipment we are using.
This aspect is the important distinction from our
project as we wanted to explore the possibilities of using consumer-grade eye
trackers.
Another research article from 2013 found that the current generation of eye
trackers, though aﬀordable, generate too much noise to be reliably used in real
time applications. They propose using an algorithm that uses data on 3D objects
in the scene to predict what the user is trying to focus on, thereby eliminating
false input.[Man13] In this article they used eye tracking in a 3D enviroment to
identify what object the user is looking at. This is similar to what we are doing
but their reasoning and approach for this is quite diﬀerent. Their goal is to
improve the detection the user’s gaze by utilizing clever algorithms to suppress
the noise that is present in the eye tracker signal.
All of these article have some common ground to our project, but diﬀerentiate
on important areas, like motivation and approach. Where the ﬁrst article is
using some sort of blur it is using another type that us, also it isn’t using any
form of eye tracking. In the last two artikels, where they do combines DoF with
eye tracking, are the approach to the problems quite diﬀerent.
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 3
Design and implementation
3.1
Design
In this chapter we will go through our process and explain the decisions we have
made. Before we could start the development, we needed to decide on which
technologies would be the basis for this project. We was already set on a number
of key factors and in this chapter we will try to explain how they work together,
see ﬁgure 3.2 for a overview of how the components connect with one another.
The most important part of this project is the eye tracker, so the ﬁrst decision
was choosing the type and model of the eye tracker we would use for the project.
There exists quite a number of eye trackers on the market currently. Fortunately
for us however, DTU is currently doing a lot of research into the potential use of
eye tracking and because of this, they do have an ongoing collaboration with the
company The Eye Tribe. The company has made several of their eye trackers
available for use for DTU staﬀand students, and it is because of this that we
will be using eye trackers from The Eye Tribe.
The second key part of the project was deciding the development tools we would
use. When it comes to games there are several good game engines available, all of
the with a selection of tools to help improve the development process. Examples
of these are the Unreal engine, Unity and CryEngine. All of them have thier
==PAGE:22==
10
Design and implementation
own set of advantages and disadvantages. In the end we decided on using Unity
because we both had used it previously.
Unity has very expansive free version which makes it ideal to use in courses that
involve game making. As such both of us have had classes where we used Unity
and became acquainted with it. Additionally Rasmus Krøyer Jørgensen spent
a semester at DADIU (The National Academy of Digital Interactive Entertain-
ment) where Unity was also used in a production. Secondly, we know that Unity
can do many of the things we want to do very easily. There are tons of built in
functionality, such as a character controller that sets up camera control, physics
and key bindings such that a player can walk around the world in ﬁrst or third
person. Even more relevant to our current problem we know that Unity has a
set of standard assets which include a depth of ﬁeld script. This will act as a
perfect starting point for our project. Thirdly, The Eye Tribe has made a set of
scripts available on Github that allows the eye tracking data from the The Eye
Tribe drivers readily available within our own scripts in Unity. Lastly, Unity
has a very expansive Asset Store where you can ﬁnd a wide array of assets such
as models, textures and scripts. This is very beneﬁcial to us since neither of us
has any artistic talent or training. Using these models will allow us to built a
world somewhat resembling a real video game, without spending a lot of time
learning how create models and designing them.
Unity allows you to write scripts using either C# or unityscript, which is a
modiﬁed version of Javascript[wik]. We decided to use C# since we are both
well acquainted with the language.
The last of the main components in our project is the Depth-of-Field eﬀect. To
do this we have to decide between the two most common methods in rendering,
Gaussian blur and Syntetic Bokeh, and a newer method called Dish blur, which
is another approach to Bokeh.
Gaussian blur is a very common method in image processing, it is typically
used for noise reduction or to reduce detail. This is done by convoluting the
image with a Gaussian function. In practice this gives a very consistent (right
word?) blur by distorting the edges giving the image a more gradient feel. This
eﬀect is very commonly used because of it’s simplicity and it’s relatively low
computational requirement.
However, this smooth blur is not very realistic if you look at an out-of-focus
camera lens or if your vision is poor. In those cases you can see small artifact and
edges. These are commonly called Bokeh. Bokeh is a term used in photography
and is used to describe the visual artifacts that appear when bright areas of the
image as they fall out of focus. The implementation is named Bokeh because
it is the eﬀect which best resembles the out-of-focus eﬀect of a real camera
==PAGE:23==
3.1 Design
11
Figure 3.1: A comparison of the two eﬀects and no eﬀect. 1: No bokeh or blur
2: Synthetic bokeh 3: Gaussian blur
Figure 3.2: Domain diagram of the setup
==PAGE:24==
12
Design and implementation
lens. It is however the most performance heavy of the three methods, because
it involves rendering a textured quad for each pixel in order to give the out-of-
focus feel. Because of this it is most often used for photos and movies, since
they are prerendered. For movies you will usually use one of the other two.
Bokeh is sometimes used for games, but is often done by down scaling it and
only rendering the it in a quarter of the original resolution. The downscaling
is, in most cases, barely noticeable, but it can sometimes lead to artifacts and
other unwanted results.
Now that we have explored the basics of the two method we will have to decide
upon the most ﬁtting for this project. Since we already are using the Unity
Standard Assets, it makes sense to see what approach they have used. As it
turns out, they us Bokeh, in fact they have two diﬀerent approaches to simulate
Bokeh, the ﬁrst is the standard version which adds small shapes to try and
replicate the Bokeh artifacts, this is the more common method.
The other
method is, what is called, a dish blur (or a Poisson-dish distribution) which
works by sampling, reducing the level of detail. This is a fairly new approach
and is in theory more eﬃcient [Bos14]. Since both options where available to us,
we experimented with both. In the end we decided to use the Dish blur method.
The setup was made simply by having a raytracer extend from the center of the
screen and when it hits a surface the focal length was set to the distance between
the player and the hitpoint making everything not at that distance out-of-focus.
With the eye tracker connected the principle is the same but with origin point
being the gazepoint on the screen, instead of the center of it.
Now that we have some of the most important pieces of our project we need to
combine them and construct a 3D scene for the player to explore. We decided
to make a simple scene and use standard and free assets to setup the scene as
easily has possible. In the scene we decided to make the simulation ﬁrst person,
so we didn’t need the extra model and animations. We then used the standard
control scheme found in the Unity Standard Assets, to make the process simpler.
3.2
Implementation
The project consists of two parts: the EyeTribe driver, containing the eye tracker
interface and the library for the Unity project, and the Unity project itself.
The Eyetribe Ui provides the drivers and the synchronization tools to allow the
eye tracker to communicate with the computer and the library scripts. In the
following sections we will describe the diﬀerent parts of the project and how
they have been implemented.
==PAGE:25==
3.2 Implementation
13
3.2.1
The Unity Project
The purpose of the Unity project is to demonstrate and test the eye tracker and
its uses. To do this we have setup a scene. The scene consists of a couple of
smaller parts: the scene with assets and terrain, the camera with the depth-
of-ﬁeld and control scripts and the eye tracking client scripts which allow the
project to pull and process data from the eye tracker.
3.2.1.1
The Scene
The scene is constructed mainly using standard assets and selected free assets
found in the Unity asset store. The layout of the scene is static and fairly sim-
ple: the main part is the terrain which is a which is generated using tools from
the asset: "Realistic Terrain Collection LITE"[assa]. The asset contains some
premade terrains as well as tools for resculpting the terrain and to handle the
terrain collision it uses splat maps. The objects in the world are taken from
two assets found in the store: "Realistic Tree 9"[assb] and "Simple Medieval
House"[assc].
Both assets are 3D models with textures and a meshcollidor.
These assets were added for a couple of reasons: to give an impression of its
sensitivity and to test how the depth-of-ﬁeld reacted with more complex obsta-
cles. In addition, it helps give some life to the scene and when it comes to our
search test, they work hiding spots for the target cube.
In addition to these found assets the scene also utilizes a couple of the Unity
standard assets[assd]. Speciﬁcally we use the Rigidbody First Person Controller,
this is attached to the camera to provide the standard control scheme used for
the player to move and look around the scene, and most importantly the Depth
Of Field script used to simulate the a camera defocusing, see section 3.2.1.2 for
more details.
Target Cube
Alongside the use of premade scripts, we have also created additional custom
scripts. One of the most important for the test scene, is the target cube. The
cube is spawned into the world at a random location within a certain area of the
terrain. This is done by creating a simple object spawner. An object spawner
in Unity is fairly simple. It contains a controller, one or more object prefab(s)
and one or more spawnlocation(s). The controller is the main part and works
like most Unity scripts at each frame, it checks a couple of parameters and if
the statement is true it spawns an object based on the prefab.
Usually the
parameters involve a timer or if you only want a certain amount, as in our
==PAGE:26==
14
Design and implementation
project, it checks whether or not the object exists. The object is then typically
spawned at a given location, but in our case it has been modiﬁed to add random
spawnlocations on each run.
Instead of spawning the object directly at the
spawnlocation.
At spawnlocation we generated a sphere and pick a random
point within it, then we use a raytacer point straight down and spawn the cube
a the collision point between the raytrace and ﬁrst collider hit. This means that
the cube will usually spawn on the ground but it will at times spawn on top of
another object like a tree or a house. Furthermore, since we use a sphere, we
run the risk of the selected point being underneath the terrain which results in
the raytracer never hitting any collider and the spawner fails. The project will
inform the user to prevent the searching for a non-existing object.
The object spawner is a simple class and its only notable function is the ﬁndSpawnPoint-
function.
ﬁndSpawnPoint
This function is in charge of ﬁnding a spawnlocation for the target cube. It works
by using the Unity function Random.insideUnitSphere-function which returns
a 3D vector where each axis is between one and zero, it is the scaled up a 100
fold. To make the search area larger.
3.2.1.2
Depth of ﬁeld
An important aspect of our project is the use of the depth-of-ﬁeld (DoF) eﬀect,
which generate the blur, the user experience in their peripheral vision. The idea
of DoF is to emulate the eﬀects of a camera lens defocusing. It does achieve this
by applying an after eﬀect, this means that every time the image is rendered we
apply a post processing to the player’s viewport.
The Unity standard assets contains a version of both settings and since we want
to get as close to natural as possible, we originally decided to use the more
common Bokeh implementation, even though we feared that it would use up
too much of our processing power. As expected we did see the project starting
up slower but it seemed to keep a decent frame rate once it was running. There
was however another problem. The Bokeh inserts small object to simulate the
artifacts the eye would normaly see. But the result we experienced was very
grainy and looked more like the ﬁlm grain from old VHS tapes. Because of this
we tried to compare it to the Dish blur, see ﬁgures 3.3 and 3.4. The Bokeh
didn’t really look like an out-of-focus lens, as you can see if you compare it to
ﬁgure 3.1, and we didn’t ﬁnd the Bokeh implementation is very pleasant to look
at. It is possible we could have achieved the desired eﬀect if we tweak it enough,
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Implementation
15
Figure 3.3: Dish blur
Figure 3.4: Synthetic bokeh
==PAGE:28==
16
Design and implementation
however even with us tweaking the setting, we never ended up with the result
we were satisﬁed with. So in the end we chose to use the Dish blur instead.
3.2.1.3
Eyetracking
The most important part of thesis project is related to the eyetracking. It works
by connecting an eyetracker to the computer and installing the provided drivers
for the tracker. When that is done it will need to be calibrated this can be done
using the EyeTribe software. The process has a simple UI where the user will
follow a point moving around the edges of the screen. The software will the use
these measurements to create a virtual model of the eyes range of movements.
It is important to do this before using the device, since diﬀerent sets of eyes
can be very diﬀerent.
This became obvious to us very early in the process,
the tracker is very sensitive and is highly inﬂuenced by external factors like
lighting and it is especially poor if the user is wearing glasses. That was a bit
of an issue since with glasses on, the tracker became so unreliable that it was
no good at all, especially for a program that means to imitate the way an eye
focuses (Maybe rewrite this?). This is caused by the way the tracker actually
measures the eyes. In addition to a camera with some recognition software, the
tracker also contains an infrared light to measure factors like the pupil size and
distance from the tracker, and the curvature of prescription glasses refracts the
light and disrupting the measurements. We also found that eye colour played
a part in the tracker’s performance. For similar reason to the glasses, although
not so prominent, the tracker seems to have a hard time with some eye colours.
We solved the issue with glasses by wearing contacts which eliminated that
problem, however there where not much we could do about the eye colours,
luckily it were a minor issue and the tracker were still usable. While working
with tracker another problem became very apparent. It is quite sensitive to the
user moving their heads after calibration. This may sound like a minor issue
but it could be a problem for long time use. For now the user must keep their
head somewhat still.
Once all the hardware and software have been properly calibrated, they will
start tracking and logging the data. that is done the device will start tracking
the the eyes of the person in front of the screen. It can now be accessed by other
programs like, in our instances, Unity. To do this you’ll need to import a li-
brary. The EyeTribe have already developed the one we are using in this project
(insert footnote). The library adds the class IGazeListener to the project, we
can then make an extension of this class to build upon. The listener adds a new
function to the object lifecycle called OnGazeUpdate. This function is called
everytime new data is collected from the tracker and we can put the update
logic in this function. While it is possible to work exclusively with the library
==PAGE:29==
3.3 Testing
17
and Unity, we have decided to use some additional utility classes developed
for eyetracking and Unity development, UnityGazeUtils and GazeDataValida-
tor. These ﬁles contains some validation functions and function for translating
the raw data into more manageable object structures. The most important is
the getGazeCoordsToUnityWindowCoords-function in UnityGazeUtils and the
Update-function in GazeDataValidator:
getGazeCoordsToUnityWindowCoords
This function translate the raw gaze coordinates from the tracker into the Unity
screen space of the project. This is especially important during our testing phase
where the gamescreen isn’t covering the entire screen, which was a concern
during the early development.
Update
This function is working as a standard Unity Update-function, but instead of
running at every frame it is run whenever the tracker gets new gaze data. What
is important about this function is that it contains a lot of validation logic. It
helps ensuring that the data used by the project is valid. This is important in
order to prevent common bugs and other issues associated poor tracking.
Now that all the preliminary setup is done we can start working with data from
the tracker.
We had at this point already set up the scene, as described in
section 3.2.1.1, and the camera eﬀects, see section 3.2.1.2. So the next step was
combining the depth-of-ﬁeld with the eyetracking. First of all we want the blur
to change depending on what the user is looking at. To handle this we created
the DistanceController. In the ﬁrst iteration we made it very simple and made
a raycast from the center of the viewport and straight ahead of the player. We
then changed the focal length of the DoF to the distance between the player
and the object hit. This turned out to work rather well. So when we needed to
connect it with the eyetracking we took a similar approach. With the gaze data
from the tracker we changed the origin point of the raycaster so that its start
point was the gaze point on the screen. The rest of the process is the same, the
distance is set to distance between the origin and the hit.
3.3
Testing
To validate that everything worked we ran quite a few smoke testing of diﬀerent
parts of the project development. We also did a test round of the entire simu-
lation, see chapter 4. Most of these test where very superﬁcial but provided us
==PAGE:30==
18
Design and implementation
with the information we wanted. We will describe some of the more important
tests in the following sections.
3.3.1
Eyetracker
The eyetracker is one of the most important parts of this project and because of
this we needed to ensure it worked as intended. The ﬁrst part of this was simply
connecting the tracker to the computer and installer all the drivers for it. With
the drivers also comes the syncronisation tools needed to operate the tracker.
We used this to make sure everything worked. After the syncronization-phase
it pauses on a screen with nine dots in a grid. It will then highlight the dot the
user is looking at and that showed us that the tracker was working as intended.
3.3.2
Depth-of-Field
The DoF is the second key part of this project and ensuring that it is working
as intended is essential. The approach we took to this involved a lot of smaller
tests and tweaks. The ﬁrst step was right after the script was added to the
camera. We started up the program and everything that wasn’t right in front
of the viewport had become blurred, as expected. Now the focal length for the
was static, which means that the non-blurred zone will always be in the smae
spot in relation to the player. We then added a raytracer to the camera and
positioned the origin of the ray in the center of the screen. When the ray hit
a collider, we would change the focal length to the distance between the origin
and the hit. The result was that where the center of the screen was pointing
became clear while the rest got blurred as expected.
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 4
User validation
In order to help us conﬁrm whether or not dynamic depth of ﬁeld has the eﬀects
that we contribute to we had a user validation session. This session took place
at DTU and in the home of one of the authors.
4.1
Goals of validation session
The purpose of the validation session was to ﬁnd answers to the following ques-
tions:
• Does the dynamic depth of ﬁeld make the virtual environment feel more
realistic?
• Can you use dynamic depth of ﬁeld to make interesting game design/level
design? Speciﬁcally, does the eﬀect make objects harder to ﬁnd?
• Can the eﬀect be uncomfortable for some users?
• Do users see potential in adding this eﬀect to certain game genres?
==PAGE:32==
20
User validation
Figure 4.1: The setup as we used it to test our subjects
4.2
Setup
Our hardware setup was a laptop connected to user grade eye tracking equip-
ment.
The laptop was a Lenovo Z50 with Windows 10 as the OS. The eye
tracking equipment was an Eyetribe 1st Generation Eyetracker.
We had created a scene in Unity which consisted of some green hill terrain, a
road leading through the middle of it with several trees set up in relatively close
proximity. The scene also had a group a buildings setup in a cluster a small
distance away from the spawn point. There was a directional light added to
the scene for realistic lighting. The eye tracking equipment was integrated into
Unity providing the screen coordinates of the users focus. The dynamic depth
of ﬁeld would be applied with this position projected into the game world as
a focus point. Within the scene a small, white cube would be spawned. The
position of the cube would be random within a circle containing the "test area"
of the scene, since terrain was signiﬁcantly larger than the area that was covered
with trees and houses. This was done to makes sure that the cube was created
within an area that was decently covered with distractions, and also to make
==PAGE:33==
4.3 Test procedure
21
Figure 4.2: First step of the eye tracker calibration process. If the user is not
in the correct position the color will change from green to red.
sure the tester did not have to walk too far to ﬁnd the cube. Additionally, as we
will explain further below, the cube had to have a dynamic position because the
tester had to ﬁnd it several times. If the position was static it would obviously
be to easy to ﬁnd the second time.
4.3
Test procedure
Initially the tester had to go through a calibration process. This is needed be-
cause the eye tracking equipment and drivers require each new user to calibrate
in order to provide accurate data for the speciﬁc user. This process required the
user to look at dots at various positions on the screen, and also instructed the
test subject as to which position they had to sit in, in order for the eye tracker
to properly be able to track their eye movements.
After a successful calibration we started up the test scene through the Unity
editor. As touched upon above, the objective for the test subject was to ﬁnd a
white cube within the scene. As explained, the cube could be spawned anywhere
within the "test area", but we did not inform the subjects of this, unless they
started to wander too far from the designated area.
==PAGE:34==
22
User validation
Figure 4.3: During the second part of the calibration process the user has to
follow the cross-hair around the screen.
Figure 4.4: The calibration is here rated, and the user can test it out by look-
ing at the circles.
==PAGE:35==
4.4 Survey results
23
Figure 4.5: Image of the cube the test subject had to ﬁnd. Dynamic depth of
ﬁeld is enabled here, and focus is on the cube.
We initially let the subject try to ﬁnd the cube three times with the dynamic
depth of ﬁeld eﬀect turned on. After this we turned oﬀthe dynamic test of
ﬁeld eﬀect and let them try to ﬁnd cube again. This was done to determine if
it would be measurably harder to ﬁnd the cube with the dynamic depth of ﬁeld
eﬀect.
After the test we had the subjects answer a survey, which can be found in the
appendix.
4.4
Survey results
In part because of the setup we had to bring with us in order to test a person
and have them complete a survey, only 14 people took part in the test sessions.
This is not enough to provide us with a high statistical certainty regarding the
accuracy with which these answers reﬂect the general population, but it can still
prove to be valuable feedback which can help us answer our validation questions.
It should also be noted that almost all of the people who participated in the
test session are engineering students and they were mostly male.
64.3% of the tested subjects found the dynamic depth of ﬁeld eﬀect to bring
==PAGE:36==
24
User validation
Figure 4.6: Here the cube is in the background and out of focus. It is near the
shadow of the tree in the right side of the image.
Figure 4.7: This is the test ground with the dynamic depth of ﬁeld turned oﬀ.
This is how it looked for the user for the second round of tests.
==PAGE:37==
4.4 Survey results
25
Figure 4.8: The results for the question "Did the simulation feel more realistic
with the dynamic depth of ﬁeld?
an increased sense of realism to the virtual environment. All of those rated the
diﬀerence to be 5 or more on a scale of 1 to ten. Of those that found the eﬀect
aﬀected realism negatively, the diﬀerence was found to be between 1 and 7. The
responses is visualized in ﬁgure 4.8
When asked if the cube was harder to ﬁnd with the dynamic depth of ﬁeld
on, 64.3% found it harder, rating the diﬀerence in diﬃculty from 1 to 8. The
remaining 35.7% rated the diﬀerence between 1 and 7. The result are visualized
in ﬁgure 4.9
64.3% of the tested subjects found that the placement of the object had signif-
icance when rating how hard the object was to ﬁnd.
Again, 35.7% of the tested subjects found that the dynamic depth of ﬁeld eﬀect
was uncomfortable in some of way.
All of the tested subjects pointed out game genres where they thought the
==PAGE:38==
26
User validation
Figure 4.9: The results for the question "Was the object harder or easier to
ﬁnd with the dynamic depth of ﬁeld eﬀect?
==PAGE:39==
4.5 Survey results discussion
27
dynamic depth of ﬁeld eﬀect would be useful, while one person remarked it
would be useful in virtual and augmented reality applications.
One person commented that the eﬀect seemed to not focus where he was looking
and he thought that the calibration process had failed. Another person thought
that the delay time from when he started looking at an object, to the time it
would become sharp was a little too long. Finally a person remarked that they
really liked the eﬀect.
4.5
Survey results discussion
In the following, the conﬁdence interval is calculated by using the following
formulae:
c =
r
Z2p(1 −p)
SS
[Mil11]
Where c is the conﬁdence interval, Z is the conﬁdence level, SS is the sample
size and p is the percentage that picked a certain answer. We use 95% as the
conﬁdence level.
Regarding the question about realism, we calculate the conﬁdence interval to
be 25.1.
This means that the true value for the general population will be
somewhere between 39.2% and 89.4%, with a 95% conﬁdence level. This is a
large span and results in either end of this spectrum would mean very diﬀerent
things to our research. However, if we assume the worst case scenario and the
true value is 39.2% it is still a substantial part of the population that will ﬁnd the
eﬀect to add to realism. We do have some hypothesis regarding why some our
test subject might not have experienced an enhanced sense of reality. One theory
is that the dynamic depth of ﬁeld eﬀect that we added was simply too intense. In
our eﬀort to make the eﬀect bring a signiﬁcant diﬀerence, and to make the blur
able to ’hide’ an object, we might have turned the degree by which blur is added
up too high. In retrospect we have noted that the blurriness of objects in the
background is not very intense when we use our own eyes. In regards to realism
the blur should deﬁnitely have been turned down. The intensity of the blur
might also be the reason as to why some users found the eﬀect uncomfortable,
since the change of focus combined with the small delay that the application
has when focusing on an object might be straining to the eye.
For the question regarding whether the object was harder to ﬁnd with dynamic
depth of ﬁeld, the possible ranges for the true value are exactly the same(since
==PAGE:40==
28
User validation
the distribution was the same). Additionally, 42.9% of the test subjects rated
the severity of their answers to be below 5, possible meaning that they did not
ﬁnd the diﬀerence to be very large. We can choose to interpret these results in
a few diﬀerent ways:
1. Assuming the scenario that the true percentage that found the task harder
is 39.2%, we can hypothesise that the dynamic depth of ﬁeld eﬀect feels
somewhat natural to the majority of the users which indicates that the
eﬀect might enhance realism. Our theory is that since it should logically
be harder to locate the cube when much of the screen is blurred, some
users might ﬁnd it easier despite this, since it is somewhat similar to how
the eyes work. This does, however, undermine our theory that the eﬀect
can be used as a game design tool when players are searching for objects.
2. Conversely, if we assume that the true percentage is 89.4% the result
conﬁrms that the eﬀect might be well suited for game design purposes and
it validates our theory. Whether this suggests that the eﬀect diminishes
realism is uncertain, since our test subjects are used to interact with a
computer without the dynamic depth of ﬁeld eﬀect.
3. Assuming the true percentage lies anywhere within these two values could
lend credibility to both of the interpretations.
Anything near the two
border values will naturally imply somewhat the same as the bordervalue
implies. There might also be patterns in the data that we have not iden-
tiﬁed, since we have not kept track of data such as age or gender.
The fact that several of the tested subjects found the eﬀect uncomfortable in
some way is also valuable data, since this validates that the eﬀect can indeed
be uncomfortable, which is of course not desirable.
We should also consider the calibration process when analyzing our results. We
made sure that everyone got at least an average rating during the calibration,
see ﬁgure 4.4, to ensure that they would experience the the dynamic depth of
ﬁeld eﬀect in the best possible way.
Despite that, there are still diﬀerences
in how well the testers scored in the calibration.
We did not keep track of
that in the survey, which was possible an error since we might see a correlation
between calibration results, and the results of the survey. The positioning of
the testers head is also important. The window in middle of the screen in 4.1
shows the users eye position relative to the eye tracker, and the background will
turn from green to red if the user moves his or her head out of the "target"
area, as explained earlier. However, once the test is started the user was no
longer able to see this window. This means that we would not know whether
their heads moved from the ideal position during the test and thereby aﬀecting
==PAGE:41==
4.5 Survey results discussion
29
the performance of the eye tracker. Since the test was performed on a laptop,
we did not have the opportunity to use a second monitor to display the head
position, which would otherwise have been a good solution.
In regards to the format of the survey itself we regret including the question that
asked whether or not the placement of the object had any eﬀect on the diﬃculty.
We regret this because the answer is logically "yes", almost always. The reason
we did include the question was that since the white cube is randomly placed
in the scene, you could have a situation where the cube is placed in an obvious
position in the three search attempts where the user has dynamic depth of ﬁeld
turned on, and in more hidden locations in the three attempts where the eﬀect
is turned oﬀor vice versa. This would corrupt the data so the question was
added in an attempt to mitigate this. A large majority of the testers responded
positively to this question, but were not able to correlate this to the othe data
in a meaningful way. It might also have been a good idea to track some more
information about the people we tested. We already mentioned the calibration
scores, but it might also have been useful to be able to correlate age, gender,
eyesight, profession and experience with computer games with the other answers
in the survey.
We did not get quite as many people to participate the survey as we would have
liked. It would probably have been more ideal to have had some more questions
that would generate a higher degree of qualitative feedback, since this would
have been useful and also manageable considering the amount of responses that
we got. However, that would also have made the test more time consuming for
the tester, and time seemed to be as issue for most of our testers. Additionally,
we would not have been able to make any statistical validation if we had used
this format. Ideally we would have liked to make an online survey to get a lot
more responses but the hardware requirements for our setup did not make this
possible.
==PAGE:42==
30
User validation
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 5
Game Design Implications
In this chapter we will discuss the implications that the dynamic depth of ﬁeld
eﬀect has on already established standards of game design, and whether it aﬀects
these design patterns. We will also look at which new game design mechanics
are made possible with the addition of dynamic depth of ﬁeld. The analysis in
this chapter builds mainly on the assumption that it is harder to locate objects
in games that utilize the dynamic depth of ﬁeld eﬀect.
5.1
3D Shooters
Shooter games is one of the most well established archetypes of games. Although
by no means the ﬁrst First Person shooter, many remember Wolfenstein 3D as
the mother of all 3D FPS games[Sla02]. Since then a great number of games
have come out that follow basically the same formulae: The player is controlling
a viewport and is moving around in a 3D environment, they are equipped with
some kind of weapon(mostly ranged) and must point the reticle in the middle
of their screen to point on something they want to shoot, then press a button
to shoot[Ada06]. Popular examples of these kind of games are Doom, Counter
Strike, Battleﬁeld, Call of Duty and Overwatch.
==PAGE:44==
32
Game Design Implications
Figure 5.1: One of the earliest 3D FPS games, Wolfenstein 3D.
The addition of dynamic depth of ﬁeld would make a large impact upon how
these kinds of games feel and their diﬃculty level. Depending on the degree
of blur it could become a lot easier for a player to focus on a speciﬁc target
to such a degree that they will not notice a new, larger threat.
Consider a
scenario where a player is engaging an enemy player or AI controlled enemy at
a medium range. The player will presumably focus his screen and eyes on the
enemy and try to aim his weapon at him and shoot. This task is more diﬃcult
than it sounds since both the player and the enemy will constantly move in an
attempt to make themselves harder to hit. With the dynamic depth of ﬁeld
eﬀect this would mean that, from our players perspective, the foreground and
distant background is slightly blurred while the enemy and objects at his depth
are perfectly blurred.
Now imagine that another enemy comes into the area at a large distance away
from our player. He could be carrying a powerful long range weapon and thereby
represent a larger threat to the player than the one he is currently trying to
defeat.
With the distant background being blurred for the player, this new
enemy is harder for him to recognize. This might result in our players demise
if he fails to recognize that he is now outnumbered and should disengage. A
situation resembling this is depicted in ﬁgure 5.2
The scenario above shows us a couple of things when relating it to game design.
==PAGE:45==
5.2 Solving puzzles
33
Figure 5.2: The player is engaged with the enemy in the yellow circle. Addition
of dynamic depth of ﬁeld might cause the player to have a harder
time detecting the enemy in the red circle. Screenshot from the
game Overwatch.
In terms of level design, it makes large areas harder, or more "dangerous",
for the player to maneuver in. The possibility of enemies appearing in many
diﬀerent possible depths means that the player must more actively look around
in the environment, than they would need to if everything was non-blurred. The
idea that large areas are harder for players to survey is of course a consideration
for level designers even without the dynamic depth of ﬁeld eﬀect, but the eﬀect
further emphasizes this. The fact that players can now more easily hide from
each other also means that powerful long range weapons such as sniper riﬂes
become more powerful, since users of these usually thrive when allowed to shoot
without being detected.
The points made in this section also applies to other game types, however we
think the 3D shooter genre is where the impact will be most apparent.
5.2
Solving puzzles
Puzzles is a game design tool that is often used in adventure or role-playing
games. Some more simple games are centered entirely around the solving of
==PAGE:46==
34
Game Design Implications
puzzles, while larger games often have puzzles as a game-within-the-game. Since
dynamic depth of ﬁeld is something that is applied to 3D environments, we will
be investigating the latter of the two. In big-budget 3D games puzzles are often
used as a break in the action. They will often be utilized to block the player
from advancing the plot or to bar him access to a powerful item.
To help me explain my point we will use the game Assassin’s Creed as an
example: The game has the player ﬁlling the role of a very mobile assassin who
is able to perform something that resembles Parkour and is able to climb most
surfaces as long as there is something to grab on to. The last part is often
used to make small puzzles within the game. Sometimes a rewarding object
will be placed on top of something, e.g. a building, and the player has to ﬁnd
a climbing path to get there. A game-play experience somewhat resembling a
vertical maze. Some of the paths often have dead ends so the player either has
ﬁnd a path through trial and error or try to plan a path.
If dynamic depth of ﬁeld was added to this scenario the path would probably
be harder to see in its entirety. Game designers could utilize visual cues that
would penetrate the blur more than its surroundings in order to attract the
players’ attention to an area. In the Assassin’s Creed example you could have
something with a noticeably stronger color and glow than its surroundings and
have a ledge that is important to the climbing puzzle in the same depth. This
way the key to the puzzle is immediately obscured, but the bright objects should
have a natural lure to the player once he starts searching for a solution.
This option is relevant to any puzzle that requires the player to search for
important objects in order to solve the puzzle.
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 6
Discussion and Conclusion
In this chapter we will be discussing what the next steps we should take in order
to evolve the technology and how we think think the project turned out while
ﬁnally present some concluding remarks.
6.1
Discussion and further work
In our problem statement we stated that we wanted to create a dynamic depth
of ﬁeld eﬀect in Unity, while utilizing consumer-grade eye-tracking equipment.
Furthermore we stated that we wanted to investigate whether the eﬀect made
virtual environments feels more realistic, if it could be used to make interesting
game design and if it created a comfortable experience for the user. Lastly we
wanted to explore whether we could tie in the eﬀect with some kind of GPU
performance increase.
We have succeeded in creating a dynamic depth of ﬁeld eﬀect in Unity while
using a comsumer-grade eye tracker, the Eyetribe 1st generation eye tracker. De-
spite previous researchers ﬁnding that additional tracking-algorithms are needed
in order to ﬁlter out noise from the eye tracker[Man13], we found that the hard-
ware performed well without any form of enhancement. There are some situa-
tions in which the eye tracker does have some problems, as stated in chapter 3,
==PAGE:48==
36
Discussion and Conclusion
and especially the eye tracker’s problems with glasses could become an issue if
this eﬀect were ever to be integrated into a commercial product. Despite the is-
sues with eye color we found that the eye tracker performed decently with most
of our test subjects. We did have an issue where the focus of the depth of ﬁeld
algorithm sometimes seemed to be slightly above where the user was looking,
but we suspect that this is either an issue with the software or a calibration
problem, since we seemed unable to reliably reproduce the problem.
We attempted to ﬁnd out whether the eﬀect enhanced the realism by doing
some user surveys, and while the results did indicate that the users agreed with
this statement, it did not rule out the possibility of the opposite to be the case.
However the fact that we have statistical indications that a large proportion of
the general population will ﬁnd the eﬀect beneﬁcial in adding realism is enough
to convince us that, with more work and tuning, the dynamic depth of ﬁeld
eﬀect could have the desired impact on realism. It is also interesting to note
that the severity of the "no" answers is generally lower than that of the "yes"
answers. This indicates that most those who answered "no" did not ﬁnd that
the eﬀect detracted too much in terms of realism of the environment.
Regarding interesting game design applications, we proposed a few ways the
dynamic depth of ﬁeld eﬀect could be used. These ideas build on the fact the
eﬀect would make it harder for a player to scan an area. We tested the hypothesis
in our user tests but the result was unfortunately again not conclusive. We have
made a thorough analysis of this in chapter 5. Like with the previous question,
further user testing would be needed and more software iterations might help us
get a conclusive answer. If the true percentage of people who ﬁnd that scanning
an area for an object with the dynamic depth of ﬁeld eﬀect easier is indeed more
than 50%, then the eﬀect would not have much use in game design. Conversely,
if the number is closer to 20% then we think the eﬀect could have a legitimate
use.
We found that a signiﬁcant amount of the testers did ﬁnd the eﬀect uncomfort-
able. If the best case scenario is assumed, the true percentage of the general
population who ﬁnd the eﬀect uncomfortable is 10.6%. Even this "best case"
number is probably too high for someone who want to release a commercial
product. However we feel conﬁdent that further iterations of the software can
tune the amount of blur and the responsiveness of the algorithm in a way that
will make it more comfortable.
One thing we noticed while working on the project is that all of those involved
with the project are either slightly or very nearsighted. This may have biased our
views on how blurred objects out of focus should be, since nearsighted people
are used to distant objects being more blurred, than for people with normal
eyesight. We did not keep track of our testers’ eyesight so we are not able to
==PAGE:49==
6.1 Discussion and further work
37
make any form of correlation on this and our other data, but it could explain
why some testers did not ﬁnd the eﬀect more realistic.
We have not done any work to try to design a form of performance enhancement
that the dynamic depth of ﬁeld could enable. However, an article from 2004 ﬁnds
that a gaze controlled level of detail(LoD) algorithm can yield positive perfor-
mance results.[Nie04] Additionally they found that noticeable shimmers appear
when models are replaced with other models, with a higher or lower polygon
counts, in the users peripheral vision. The replacement of models happens more
often than they wanted because of noise in the eye tracking signal. They solved
this issue by enforcing a rule on the LoD, that only replaces models once the
gaze has moved more than a certain threshold. They stated that this solved the
problem "for the most part". This problem could possibly be solved entirely by
adding the dynamic depth of ﬁeld eﬀect, since, unless the gaze point and the
model are in the same depth level, the eﬀect will add a blur which might hide
the transition between models.
Since most of our test results are not very conclusive, it is diﬃcult to deter-
mine whether the results are in line with our expectations. Our hypothesis was
that the dynamic depth of ﬁeld eﬀect would add an increased sense of realism
and would make it possible to create new interesting game design. Despite the
vagueness of the results, we believe most of them are in line with our expecta-
tions. The only results that truly surprised us was that the amount of people
who found the cube easier to ﬁnd with the dynamic depth of ﬁeld eﬀect on. We
assumed that the cube would be more diﬃcult to locate in this situation. We
have discussed possible explanations for this in chapter 4
In regards to the surveys themselves we have already mentioned that more
meta data about the testers might have been useful in order to ﬁnd interesting
correlations in the data. However, when we designed the surveys we wanted
them to have a clear focus on the things we wanted to validate, and avoid to
have too much irrelevant data. A bigger problem is that with the hardware
setup needed, in order to carry out the tests, it seemed unrealistic to get the
amount of responses needed for a high precision. On the other hand, qualitative
feedback would only have given us ideas to how we could improve the software,
without giving us any indication of how well it would perform within the general
populace.
The eye tracking hardware we used performed very well despite the diﬃculties
we mentioned. Because of the already existing integration tools for Unity, we
saved a lot of time during our development process. Unity also proved to be
well suited for this task and our previous experience with the software was very
beneﬁcial. Overall we think that we chose the right tools for this task.
==PAGE:50==
38
Discussion and Conclusion
In previous chapters we have touched upon the fact that the implementation of
the dynamic depth of ﬁeld eﬀect is not as good as it needs to be, in order for the
eﬀect to be convincing. Several iterations of the program, with following user
tests, would need to be made in order to ﬁnd the perfect type and setting for
blur to make the eﬀect feel realistic and convincing for the majority of people.
Following this we should conceive tests that allow us to verify if the game design
patterns, we have proposed in chapter 5, would work as imagined. Our current
user tests has showed us that it might be possible for the dynamic depth of ﬁeld
to be used to make object searching more diﬃcult, however further testing is
needed to ensure that the scenarios we propose are viable.
Even though one of our goals with the project is to see if we could achieve dy-
namic depth of ﬁeld with consumer-grade equipment, our focus on realism does
also naturally lead into the realm of virtual and augmented reality. According
to Eyetribe, who has delivered our eye tracker, they have integrated their eye
tracking into virtual reality headsets such as the Oculus Rift.[Eye] Adjusting
our program to work with virtual reality hardware could yield very interesting
results.
6.2
Conclusion
It has been shown that a working dynamic depth of ﬁeld eﬀect can be created
using user grade eye tracking equipment. The technique and technology that
was initially proposed proved to be ﬁtting for the task and the algorithm should
be able to be implemented on other platforms. Through user tests, the dynamic
depth of ﬁeld eﬀect has been shown to add an increased sense of realism to
a virtual environment. The sense of realism should be enhanced greatly with
further iterations and adjustments of the software. Several uses for the dynamic
depth of ﬁeld in terms of game design have been suggested, but the foundation
that these ideas build upon was not able to be conclusively shown. An additional
series of user tests, with possible iteration on the software should be able to
give a conclusive answer.
It was shown that some users will ﬁnd the eﬀect
uncomfortable in its current state, but ideas have been presented that could
minimize this problem. A technique for improving graphics performance while
utilizing the dynamic depth of ﬁeld eﬀect has been suggested.
Dynamic depth of ﬁeld should be able to be integrated into commercial products
for personal computers such as computer games, or into virtual reality software
and enhance the experience. While the game design possibilities have not been
decidedly shown, the potential for enhancing realism seems to substantial. The
==PAGE:51==
6.2 Conclusion
39
fact that the project has been done using consumer-grade equipment and a com-
mon game engine shows that the dynamic depth of ﬁeld eﬀect can be integrated
into most 3D projects.
Future researchers should look into ﬁne tuning the parameters of the blur eﬀect,
such as the type of blur and the responsiveness of the the eﬀect. It might be
possible to create a blur eﬀect that resembles the human eye better. Furthermore
more user testing should be done to ensure conclusive data, as described earlier
in this chapter.
To conclude the authors would like to point out that they think that this project
shows the natural development for the depth of ﬁeld eﬀect. The results here are
similar to those found in a earlier study[Cas08], but the technology used here
is something that the average consumer could much more easily attain for their
home. This shows a potential for use in software for personal use which has not
been documented earlier.
==PAGE:52==
40
Discussion and Conclusion
==PAGE:53==
Appendix A
User Survey Documentation
A.1
Survey used
==PAGE:54==
Eye­tracking survey
Investigation of the effectiveness of dynamic depth of field within a 3D simulation.
1. Did the simulation feel more realistic with the dynamic depth of field?
Markér kun én bolle.
 Yes
 No
2. Please rate on a scale from 1 to 10, the difference, better or worse, in relation to your
previous answer
Markér kun én bolle.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
No
difference
Very
different
3. Was the object easier or harder to find with the dynamic depth of field
Markér kun én bolle.
 Easier
 Harder
4. Please rate on a scale from 1 to 10 how much easier/harder it was.
Markér kun én bolle.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Not at all
Very
5. Did you think the placement of the object made a significant difference in regards to the
difficulty.
Markér kun én bolle.
 Yes
 No
6. Did you find the dynamic depth of field uncomfortable in any way?
Markér kun én bolle.
 Yes
 No
==PAGE:55==
Leveret af
7. Please select the categories of games(if any) that you would think could benefit from
dynamic depth of field.
Markér alle, du er enig i.
 First person shooters
 Third person action­adventure games
 Survival games
 Andet: 
8. Do you have any additional comments or suggestions?
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:56==
44
User Survey Documentation
A.2
Survey answers
==PAGE:57==
Eye-tracking survey
Investigation of the effectiveness of dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld within a 3D simulation.
Yes
No
No difference
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Very different
Easier
Harder
Not at all
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Very
Yes
No
Yes
Did the simulation feel more realistic with the dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld?
Please rate on a scale from 1 to 10, the difference, better or worse, in
relation to your previous answer
Was the object easier or harder to 皣ቚnd with the dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld
Please rate on a scale from 1 to 10 how much easier/harder it was.
Did you think the placement of the object made a signi皣ቚcant difference in
regards to the dif皣ቚculty.
Did you 皣ቚnd the dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld uncomfortable in any way?
==PAGE:58==
No
First person shooters
Third person action-adventure games
Survival games
Andet:
Dette indhold er hverken oprettet eller godkendt af Google.
Please select the categories of games(if any) that you would think could
bene皣ቚt from dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld.
Do you have any additional comments or suggestions?
==PAGE:59==
Eye-tracking survey
Investigation of the effectiveness of dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld within a 3D simulation.
Yes
No
No difference
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Very different
Easier
Harder
Not at all
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Very
Yes
No
Yes
Did the simulation feel more realistic with the dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld?
Please rate on a scale from 1 to 10, the difference, better or worse, in
relation to your previous answer
Was the object easier or harder to 皣ቚnd with the dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld
Please rate on a scale from 1 to 10 how much easier/harder it was.
Did you think the placement of the object made a signi皣ቚcant difference in
regards to the dif皣ቚculty.
Did you 皣ቚnd the dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld uncomfortable in any way?
==PAGE:60==
No
First person shooters
Third person action-adventure games
Survival games
Andet:
Dette indhold er hverken oprettet eller godkendt af Google.
Please select the categories of games(if any) that you would think could
bene皣ቚt from dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld.
Do you have any additional comments or suggestions?
==PAGE:61==
Eye-tracking survey
Investigation of the effectiveness of dynamic depth of 軔手eld within a 3D simulation.
Yes
No
No difference
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Very different
Easier
Harder
Not at all
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Very
Yes
No
Yes
Did the simulation feel more realistic with the dynamic depth of 軔手eld?
Please rate on a scale from 1 to 10, the difference, better or worse, in
relation to your previous answer
Was the object easier or harder to 軔手nd with the dynamic depth of 軔手eld
Please rate on a scale from 1 to 10 how much easier/harder it was.
Did you think the placement of the object made a signi軔手cant difference in
regards to the dif軔手culty.
Did you 軔手nd the dynamic depth of 軔手eld uncomfortable in any way?
==PAGE:62==
No
First person shooters
Third person action-adventure games
Survival games
Andet: Not a speci軔手c genre, but: Activation of certain UI elements when looking
directly at them.
Dette indhold er hverken oprettet eller godkendt af Google.
Please select the categories of games(if any) that you would think could
bene軔手t from dynamic depth of 軔手eld.
Do you have any additional comments or suggestions?
==PAGE:63==
Eye-tracking survey
Investigation of the effectiveness of dynamic depth of ⵻慛eld within a 3D simulation.
Yes
No
No difference
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Very different
Easier
Harder
Not at all
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Very
Yes
No
Yes
Did the simulation feel more realistic with the dynamic depth of ⵻慛eld?
Please rate on a scale from 1 to 10, the difference, better or worse, in
relation to your previous answer
Was the object easier or harder to ⵻慛nd with the dynamic depth of ⵻慛eld
Please rate on a scale from 1 to 10 how much easier/harder it was.
Did you think the placement of the object made a signi⵻慛cant difference in
regards to the dif⵻慛culty.
Did you ⵻慛nd the dynamic depth of ⵻慛eld uncomfortable in any way?
==PAGE:64==
No
First person shooters
Third person action-adventure games
Survival games
Andet: vr and ar
Dette indhold er hverken oprettet eller godkendt af Google.
Please select the categories of games(if any) that you would think could
bene⵻慛t from dynamic depth of ⵻慛eld.
Do you have any additional comments or suggestions?
==PAGE:65==
Eye-tracking survey
Investigation of the effectiveness of dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld within a 3D simulation.
Yes
No
No difference
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Very different
Easier
Harder
Not at all
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Very
Yes
No
Yes
Did the simulation feel more realistic with the dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld?
Please rate on a scale from 1 to 10, the difference, better or worse, in
relation to your previous answer
Was the object easier or harder to 皣ቚnd with the dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld
Please rate on a scale from 1 to 10 how much easier/harder it was.
Did you think the placement of the object made a signi皣ቚcant difference in
regards to the dif皣ቚculty.
Did you 皣ቚnd the dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld uncomfortable in any way?
==PAGE:66==
No
First person shooters
Third person action-adventure games
Survival games
Andet:
Dette indhold er hverken oprettet eller godkendt af Google.
Please select the categories of games(if any) that you would think could
bene皣ቚt from dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld.
Do you have any additional comments or suggestions?
==PAGE:67==
Eye-tracking survey
Investigation of the effectiveness of dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld within a 3D simulation.
Yes
No
No difference
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Very different
Easier
Harder
Not at all
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Very
Yes
No
Yes
Did the simulation feel more realistic with the dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld?
Please rate on a scale from 1 to 10, the difference, better or worse, in
relation to your previous answer
Was the object easier or harder to 皣ቚnd with the dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld
Please rate on a scale from 1 to 10 how much easier/harder it was.
Did you think the placement of the object made a signi皣ቚcant difference in
regards to the dif皣ቚculty.
Did you 皣ቚnd the dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld uncomfortable in any way?
==PAGE:68==
No
First person shooters
Third person action-adventure games
Survival games
Andet:
Dette indhold er hverken oprettet eller godkendt af Google.
Please select the categories of games(if any) that you would think could
bene皣ቚt from dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld.
Do you have any additional comments or suggestions?
==PAGE:69==
Eye-tracking survey
Investigation of the effectiveness of dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld within a 3D simulation.
Yes
No
No difference
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Very different
Easier
Harder
Not at all
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Very
Yes
No
Yes
Did the simulation feel more realistic with the dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld?
Please rate on a scale from 1 to 10, the difference, better or worse, in
relation to your previous answer
Was the object easier or harder to 皣ቚnd with the dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld
Please rate on a scale from 1 to 10 how much easier/harder it was.
Did you think the placement of the object made a signi皣ቚcant difference in
regards to the dif皣ቚculty.
Did you 皣ቚnd the dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld uncomfortable in any way?
==PAGE:70==
No
First person shooters
Third person action-adventure games
Survival games
Andet:
Dette indhold er hverken oprettet eller godkendt af Google.
Please select the categories of games(if any) that you would think could
bene皣ቚt from dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld.
Do you have any additional comments or suggestions?
==PAGE:71==
Eye-tracking survey
Investigation of the effectiveness of dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld within a 3D simulation.
Yes
No
No difference
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Very different
Easier
Harder
Not at all
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Very
Yes
No
Yes
Did the simulation feel more realistic with the dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld?
Please rate on a scale from 1 to 10, the difference, better or worse, in
relation to your previous answer
Was the object easier or harder to 皣ቚnd with the dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld
Please rate on a scale from 1 to 10 how much easier/harder it was.
Did you think the placement of the object made a signi皣ቚcant difference in
regards to the dif皣ቚculty.
Did you 皣ቚnd the dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld uncomfortable in any way?
==PAGE:72==
No
First person shooters
Third person action-adventure games
Survival games
Andet:
Dette indhold er hverken oprettet eller godkendt af Google.
Please select the categories of games(if any) that you would think could
bene皣ቚt from dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld.
Do you have any additional comments or suggestions?
==PAGE:73==
Eye-tracking survey
Investigation of the effectiveness of dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld within a 3D simulation.
Yes
No
No difference
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Very different
Easier
Harder
Not at all
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Very
Yes
No
Yes
Did the simulation feel more realistic with the dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld?
Please rate on a scale from 1 to 10, the difference, better or worse, in
relation to your previous answer
Was the object easier or harder to 皣ቚnd with the dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld
Please rate on a scale from 1 to 10 how much easier/harder it was.
Did you think the placement of the object made a signi皣ቚcant difference in
regards to the dif皣ቚculty.
Did you 皣ቚnd the dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld uncomfortable in any way?
==PAGE:74==
No
First person shooters
Third person action-adventure games
Survival games
Andet:
Dette indhold er hverken oprettet eller godkendt af Google.
Please select the categories of games(if any) that you would think could
bene皣ቚt from dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld.
Do you have any additional comments or suggestions?
==PAGE:75==
Eye-tracking survey
Investigation of the effectiveness of dynamic depth of 먻冉eld within a 3D simulation.
Yes
No
No difference
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Very different
Easier
Harder
Not at all
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Very
Yes
No
Yes
Did the simulation feel more realistic with the dynamic depth of 먻冉eld?
Please rate on a scale from 1 to 10, the difference, better or worse, in
relation to your previous answer
Was the object easier or harder to 먻冉nd with the dynamic depth of 먻冉eld
Please rate on a scale from 1 to 10 how much easier/harder it was.
Did you think the placement of the object made a signi먻冉cant difference in
regards to the dif먻冉culty.
Did you 먻冉nd the dynamic depth of 먻冉eld uncomfortable in any way?
==PAGE:76==
No
First person shooters
Third person action-adventure games
Survival games
Andet:
Seemed not to focus on what i was focusing on. my data is probaply invalid due to wrong 
calibration, cus it was most of the time blurring where i was looking
Dette indhold er hverken oprettet eller godkendt af Google.
Please select the categories of games(if any) that you would think could
bene먻冉t from dynamic depth of 먻冉eld.
Do you have any additional comments or suggestions?
==PAGE:77==
Eye-tracking survey
Investigation of the effectiveness of dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld within a 3D simulation.
Yes
No
No difference
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Very different
Easier
Harder
Not at all
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Very
Yes
No
Yes
Did the simulation feel more realistic with the dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld?
Please rate on a scale from 1 to 10, the difference, better or worse, in
relation to your previous answer
Was the object easier or harder to 皣ቚnd with the dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld
Please rate on a scale from 1 to 10 how much easier/harder it was.
Did you think the placement of the object made a signi皣ቚcant difference in
regards to the dif皣ቚculty.
Did you 皣ቚnd the dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld uncomfortable in any way?
==PAGE:78==
No
First person shooters
Third person action-adventure games
Survival games
Andet:
Dette indhold er hverken oprettet eller godkendt af Google.
Please select the categories of games(if any) that you would think could
bene皣ቚt from dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld.
Do you have any additional comments or suggestions?
==PAGE:79==
Eye-tracking survey
Investigation of the effectiveness of dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld within a 3D simulation.
Yes
No
No difference
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Very different
Easier
Harder
Not at all
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Very
Yes
No
Yes
Did the simulation feel more realistic with the dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld?
Please rate on a scale from 1 to 10, the difference, better or worse, in
relation to your previous answer
Was the object easier or harder to 皣ቚnd with the dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld
Please rate on a scale from 1 to 10 how much easier/harder it was.
Did you think the placement of the object made a signi皣ቚcant difference in
regards to the dif皣ቚculty.
Did you 皣ቚnd the dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld uncomfortable in any way?
==PAGE:80==
No
First person shooters
Third person action-adventure games
Survival games
Andet:
A little problem with lag with thw dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld
Dette indhold er hverken oprettet eller godkendt af Google.
Please select the categories of games(if any) that you would think could
bene皣ቚt from dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld.
Do you have any additional comments or suggestions?
==PAGE:81==
Eye-tracking survey
Investigation of the effectiveness of dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld within a 3D simulation.
Yes
No
No difference
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Very different
Easier
Harder
Not at all
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Very
Yes
No
Yes
Did the simulation feel more realistic with the dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld?
Please rate on a scale from 1 to 10, the difference, better or worse, in
relation to your previous answer
Was the object easier or harder to 皣ቚnd with the dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld
Please rate on a scale from 1 to 10 how much easier/harder it was.
Did you think the placement of the object made a signi皣ቚcant difference in
regards to the dif皣ቚculty.
Did you 皣ቚnd the dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld uncomfortable in any way?
==PAGE:82==
No
First person shooters
Third person action-adventure games
Survival games
Andet:
it was super awesome! I loved it!  
Dette indhold er hverken oprettet eller godkendt af Google.
Please select the categories of games(if any) that you would think could
bene皣ቚt from dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld.
Do you have any additional comments or suggestions?
==PAGE:83==
Eye-tracking survey
Investigation of the effectiveness of dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld within a 3D simulation.
Yes
No
No difference
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Very different
Easier
Harder
Not at all
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Very
Yes
No
Yes
Did the simulation feel more realistic with the dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld?
Please rate on a scale from 1 to 10, the difference, better or worse, in
relation to your previous answer
Was the object easier or harder to 皣ቚnd with the dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld
Please rate on a scale from 1 to 10 how much easier/harder it was.
Did you think the placement of the object made a signi皣ቚcant difference in
regards to the dif皣ቚculty.
Did you 皣ቚnd the dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld uncomfortable in any way?
==PAGE:84==
No
First person shooters
Third person action-adventure games
Survival games
Andet:
Dette indhold er hverken oprettet eller godkendt af Google.
Please select the categories of games(if any) that you would think could
bene皣ቚt from dynamic depth of 皣ቚeld.
Do you have any additional comments or suggestions?
==PAGE:85==
Appendix B
Code
B.1
objectSpawner.cs
1
using
UnityEngine ;
2
using
System.Collections ;
3
4
public
class
ObjectSpawner : MonoBehaviour {
5
6
Vector3
spawnPoint;
7
Object
spawnedObject ;
8
public
GameObject
objectPrefab ;
9
public
GameObject
spawnerCenter ;
10
11
// Use
this
for
initialization
12
void
Start () {
13
spawnPoint = this.transform.position;
14
}
15
16
// Update
is called
once
per
frame
17
void
Update () {
18
if( spawnedObject
== null)
19
{
20
findSpawnPoint ();
21
spawnedObject = Instantiate (objectPrefab ,spawnPoint ,new
Quaternion ());
22
}
23
}
24
==PAGE:86==
74
Code
25
void
findSpawnPoint ()
26
{
27
Vector3
pos = (Random. insideUnitSphere * 100) + new
Vector3
( spawnerCenter .transform.position.x, spawnerCenter .
transform.position.y, spawnerCenter .transform.position.
z);
28
RaycastHit
hit;
29
if (Physics.Raycast(pos , Vector3.down , out hit , 200.0f))
30
{
31
pos = hit.point + new
Vector3 (0, 1, 0);
32
}
33
else
34
{
35
Debug.Log("Failed to place
cube");
36
Application.Quit ();
37
}
38
39
spawnPoint = pos;
40
}
41
}
B.2
EyeTrackingController.cs
1
using
UnityEngine ;
2
using
System. Collections ;
3
using
TETCSharpClient ;
4
using
TETCSharpClient .Data;
5
6
namespace
EyeTrackingAssets
7
{
8
9
public
class
EyetrackingController : MonoBehaviour ,
IGazeListener
10
{
11
12
void
Start ()
13
{
14
// activate C# TET client , default
port
15
GazeManager.Instance.Activate
16
(
17
GazeManager.ApiVersion.VERSION_1_0 ,
18
GazeManager.ClientMode.Push
19
);
20
21
// register
for
gaze
updates
22
GazeManager.Instance. AddGazeListener (this);
23
24
}
25
26
public
void
OnGazeUpdate (GazeData
gazeData)
27
{
28
// Add
frame to
GazeData
cache
handler
29
GazeDataValidator .Instance.Update(gazeData);
==PAGE:87==
B.2 EyeTrackingController.cs
75
30
}
31
32
void
Update ()
33
{
34
35
// handle
keypress
36
if (Input.GetKey(KeyCode.Escape))
37
{
38
Application.Quit ();
39
}
40
}
41
42
public
Vector3
GetGazeScreenPosition ()
43
{
44
Point2D
gp = GazeDataValidator .Instance.
GetLastValidSmoothedGazeCoordinates ();
45
46
if (null != gp)
47
{
48
Point2D
sp = UnityGazeUtils .
getGazeCoordsToUnityWindowCoords (gp);
49
return
new
Vector3 (( float)sp.X, (float)sp.Y, 0f);
50
}
51
else
52
return
Vector3.zero;
53
54
}
55
56
void
OnApplicationQuit ()
57
{
58
GazeManager.Instance. RemoveGazeListener (this);
59
GazeManager.Instance.Deactivate ();
60
}
61
62
void
OnGUI ()
63
{
64
int
padding = 10;
65
int
btnWidth = 100;
66
int
btnHeight = 40;
67
int y = padding;
68
69
if (GUI.Button(new
Rect(padding , y, btnWidth , btnHeight
), "Press to Exit"))
70
{
71
Application.Quit ();
72
}
73
74
if (! GazeManager.Instance. IsActivated )
75
{
76
y +=
btnHeight + padding;
77
78
if (GUI.Button(new
Rect(padding , y, 200,
btnHeight)
, "Connect
To Server"))
79
{
80
// activate C# TET client , default
port
==PAGE:88==
76
Code
81
GazeManager.Instance.Activate
82
(
83
GazeManager.ApiVersion.VERSION_1_0 ,
84
GazeManager.ClientMode.Push
85
);
86
}
87
}
88
else
89
if (! GazeManager.Instance. IsCalibrated )
90
{
91
y +=
btnHeight + padding;
92
GUI.TextArea(new
Rect(padding , y, 190, 20) , "
EyeTribe
Server
not
calibrated!");
93
}
94
else
95
{
96
y +=
btnHeight + padding;
97
98
string
calibText;
99
int
rating;
100
CalibrationResult
result = GazeManager .Instance.
LastCalibrationResult ;
101
CalibrationRatingFunction (result , out rating , out
calibText);
102
GUI.TextArea(new
Rect(padding , y, 220, 20) , "
Calibration
Result: " + calibText);
103
}
104
}
105
106
/// <summary >
107
/// Simple
rating of a given
calibration .
108
/// </summary >
109
/// <param
name =" result">Any
given
CalibrationResult </param
>
110
/// <param
name =" rating">A number
between 1 - 5 where 5 is
the
best
othervise
-1.</param >
111
/// <param
name =" strRating">A string
with a rating
name
othervise
ERROR .</param >
112
public
void
CalibrationRatingFunction ( CalibrationResult
result , out int rating , out
string
strRating)
113
{
114
if (result == null)
115
{
116
rating =
-1;
117
strRating = "ERROR";
118
return;
119
}
120
if (result. AverageErrorDegree
< 0.5)
121
{
122
rating = 5;
123
strRating = "PERFECT";
124
return;
125
}
126
if (result. AverageErrorDegree
< 0.7)
127
{
==PAGE:89==
B.3 UnityGazeUtils.cs
77
128
rating = 4;
129
strRating = "GOOD";
130
return;
131
}
132
if (result. AverageErrorDegree
< 1)
133
{
134
rating = 3;
135
strRating = "MODERATE";
136
return;
137
}
138
if (result. AverageErrorDegree
< 1.5)
139
{
140
rating = 2;
141
strRating = "POOR";
142
return;
143
}
144
rating = 1;
145
strRating = "REDO";
146
}
147
}
148
}
B.3
UnityGazeUtils.cs
1
/*
2
* Copyright (c) 2013 - present , The Eye
Tribe.
3
* All
rights
reserved.
4
*
5
* This
source
code is
licensed
under
the BSD -style
license
found
in the
LICENSE
file in the
root
directory
of this
source
tree.
6
*
7
*/
8
9
using
UnityEngine ;
10
using
System;
11
using
System.Collections .Generic;
12
using
System.Linq;
13
using
System.Text;
14
using
TETCSharpClient ;
15
using
TETCSharpClient .Data;
16
17
namespace
EyeTrackingAssets
18
{
19
class
UnityGazeUtils : GazeUtils
20
{
21
/// <summary >
22
/// Converts a coordinate
on
picture
space to a 3D pose ,
using an
expected
inter -eyes
distance
to
compute
depth
coordinate
23
/// </summary >
24
public
static
Point3D
BackProjectDepth (Point2D
eyePictCoord
, double
eyesDistance , double
baseDist)
25
{
==PAGE:90==
78
Code
26
27
// mapping
cam
panning
to 3:2
aspect
ratio
28
double
tx = ( eyePictCoord .X * 5) - 2.5f;
29
double
ty = ( eyePictCoord .Y * 3) - 1.5f;
30
31
// position
camera X-Y plane
and
adjust
distance
32
double
depthMod = 2 * eyesDistance ;
33
34
return
new
Point3D (( float)tx ,
35
(float)ty ,
36
(float)(baseDist + depthMod));
37
}
38
39
/// <summary >
40
/// Converts a coordinate
on
picture
space to a 3D pose ,
using an
expected
inter -eyes
distance
to
compute
depth
coordinate.
41
/// We follow
the
standard
Pinhole
model
here
42
/// </summary >
43
public
static
Point3D
BackProjectDepthPinhole (Point2D
eyePictCoord , double
pictEyesDistance )
44
{
45
// We use the
pinhole
model , with a depth
related
to
the inter -eyes
distance
46
double
interEyesDistance = 0.06;
// 6cm on
average
47
double
depth = interEyesDistance / Math.Max(
pictEyesDistance , 0.0001F);
48
49
double
tx = ( eyePictCoord .X - 0.5) * depth;
50
double
ty = ( eyePictCoord .Y - 0.5) * depth;
51
52
return
new
Point3D (( float)tx ,
53
(float)ty ,
54
(float)depth);
55
}
56
57
58
/// <summary >
59
/// Maps a GazeData
gaze
point ( RawCoordinates
or
SmoothedCoordinates ) to Unity
screen
space.
60
/// Note
that
gaze
points
have
origo in top
left
corner ,
whilst
Unity
uses
lower
left.
61
/// </summary >
62
/// <param
name ="gp"/>gaze
point to map </param >
63
/// <returns >2d point
mapped
to unity
window
space </ returns
>
64
public
static
Point2D
getGazeCoordsToUnityWindowCoords (
Point2D
gp)
65
{
66
double
rx = gp.X * (( double)Screen.width / GazeManager .
Instance. ScreenResolutionWidth );
67
double
ry = ( GazeManager.Instance.
ScreenResolutionHeight
- gp.Y) * (( double)Screen.
height / GazeManager.Instance.
ScreenResolutionHeight );
==PAGE:91==
B.4 GazeDataValidator.cs
79
68
69
return
new
Point2D(rx , ry);
70
}
71
72
/// <summary >
73
/// Convert a Point2D
to Unity
vector.
74
/// </summary >
75
/// <param
name ="gp"/>gaze
point to convert </param >
76
/// <returns >a vector
representation
of point </ returns >
77
public
static
Vector2
Point2DToVec2 (Point2D
gp)
78
{
79
return
new
Vector2 (( float)gp.X, (float)gp.Y);
80
}
81
82
/// <summary >
83
/// Convert a Unity
Vector3
to a double [].
84
/// </summary >
85
/// <param
name ="gp"/> Vector to convert </param >
86
/// <returns >double
array </ returns >
87
public
static
double []
Vec3ToArray (Vector3
vec)
88
{
89
return
new
double [3] { vec.x, vec.y, vec.z };
90
}
91
92
/// <summary >
93
/// Convert a double [3] to a Unity
Vector.
94
/// </summary >
95
/// <param
name ="gp"/> Array to convert </param >
96
/// <returns >Unity
Vector3 </ returns >
97
public
static
Vector3
ArrayToVec3 (double [] array)
98
{
99
return
new
Vector3 (( float)array [0], (float)array [1], (
float)array [2]);
100
}
101
102
/// <summary >
103
/// Converts a relative
point to screen
point in pixels
using
Unity
classes
104
/// </summary >
105
public
static
Point2D
getRelativeToScreenSpace (Point2D
gp)
106
{
107
return
GetRelativeToScreenSpace (gp , Screen.width ,
Screen.height);
108
}
109
}
110
111
}
B.4
GazeDataValidator.cs
1
/*
2
* Copyright (c) 2013 - present , The Eye
Tribe.
3
* All
rights
reserved.
==PAGE:92==
80
Code
4
*
5
* This
source
code is
licensed
under
the BSD -style
license
found
in the
LICENSE
file in the
root
directory
of this
source
tree.
6
*
7
*/
8
9
using
UnityEngine ;
10
using
System;
11
using
System. Collections .Generic;
12
using
System.Linq;
13
using
System.Text;
14
using
TETCSharpClient ;
15
using
TETCSharpClient .Data;
16
17
namespace
EyeTrackingAssets
18
{
19
class
UnityGazeUtils : GazeUtils
20
{
21
/// <summary >
22
/// Converts a coordinate
on
picture
space to a 3D pose ,
using an
expected
inter -eyes
distance
to
compute
depth
coordinate
23
/// </summary >
24
public
static
Point3D
BackProjectDepth (Point2D
eyePictCoord
, double
eyesDistance , double
baseDist)
25
{
26
27
// mapping
cam
panning
to 3:2
aspect
ratio
28
double
tx = ( eyePictCoord .X * 5) - 2.5f;
29
double
ty = ( eyePictCoord .Y * 3) - 1.5f;
30
31
// position
camera X-Y plane
and
adjust
distance
32
double
depthMod = 2 * eyesDistance ;
33
34
return
new
Point3D (( float)tx ,
35
(float)ty ,
36
(float)(baseDist + depthMod));
37
}
38
39
/// <summary >
40
/// Converts a coordinate
on
picture
space to a 3D pose ,
using an
expected
inter -eyes
distance
to
compute
depth
coordinate.
41
/// We follow
the
standard
Pinhole
model
here
42
/// </summary >
43
public
static
Point3D
BackProjectDepthPinhole (Point2D
eyePictCoord , double
pictEyesDistance )
44
{
45
// We use the
pinhole
model , with a depth
related
to
the inter -eyes
distance
46
double
interEyesDistance = 0.06;
// 6cm on
average
47
double
depth = interEyesDistance / Math.Max(
pictEyesDistance , 0.0001F);
48
49
double
tx = ( eyePictCoord .X - 0.5) * depth;
==PAGE:93==
B.4 GazeDataValidator.cs
81
50
double
ty = ( eyePictCoord .Y - 0.5) * depth;
51
52
return
new
Point3D (( float)tx ,
53
(float)ty ,
54
(float)depth);
55
}
56
57
58
/// <summary >
59
/// Maps a GazeData
gaze
point ( RawCoordinates
or
SmoothedCoordinates ) to Unity
screen
space.
60
/// Note
that
gaze
points
have
origo in top
left
corner ,
whilst
Unity
uses
lower
left.
61
/// </summary >
62
/// <param
name ="gp"/>gaze
point to map </param >
63
/// <returns >2d point
mapped to unity
window
space </ returns
>
64
public
static
Point2D
getGazeCoordsToUnityWindowCoords (
Point2D
gp)
65
{
66
double
rx = gp.X * (( double)Screen.width / GazeManager .
Instance. ScreenResolutionWidth );
67
double
ry = ( GazeManager .Instance.
ScreenResolutionHeight
- gp.Y) * (( double)Screen.
height / GazeManager .Instance.
ScreenResolutionHeight );
68
69
return
new
Point2D(rx , ry);
70
}
71
72
/// <summary >
73
/// Convert a Point2D
to Unity
vector.
74
/// </summary >
75
/// <param
name ="gp"/>gaze
point to convert </param >
76
/// <returns >a vector
representation
of point </ returns >
77
public
static
Vector2
Point2DToVec2 (Point2D
gp)
78
{
79
return
new
Vector2 (( float)gp.X, (float)gp.Y);
80
}
81
82
/// <summary >
83
/// Convert a Unity
Vector3
to a double [].
84
/// </summary >
85
/// <param
name ="gp"/> Vector to convert </param >
86
/// <returns >double
array </ returns >
87
public
static
double []
Vec3ToArray (Vector3
vec)
88
{
89
return
new
double [3] { vec.x, vec.y, vec.z };
90
}
91
92
/// <summary >
93
/// Convert a double [3] to a Unity
Vector.
94
/// </summary >
95
/// <param
name ="gp"/> Array to convert </param >
96
/// <returns >Unity
Vector3 </ returns >
==PAGE:94==
82
Code
97
public
static
Vector3
ArrayToVec3 (double [] array)
98
{
99
return
new
Vector3 (( float)array [0], (float)array [1], (
float)array [2]);
100
}
101
102
/// <summary >
103
/// Converts a relative
point to screen
point in pixels
using
Unity
classes
104
/// </summary >
105
public
static
Point2D
getRelativeToScreenSpace (Point2D
gp)
106
{
107
return
GetRelativeToScreenSpace (gp , Screen.width ,
Screen.height);
108
}
109
}
110
111
}
B.5
DistanceController.cs
1
using
UnityEngine ;
2
using
System. Collections ;
3
using
EyeTrackingAssets ;
4
5
public
class
DistanceController : MonoBehaviour
6
{
7
UnityStandardAssets . ImageEffects . DepthOfField
dof;
8
EyetrackingController
etc;
9
Vector3
eye = new
Vector3 ();
10
// Vector3
oldEye = new
Vector3 ();
11
Transform
cursorObject ;
12
13
// public
float
focusSpeed = 1.0f;
14
public
GameObject
cursorPrefab ;
15
public
Plane
cameraPlane;
16
17
// Use
this
for
initialization
18
void
Start ()
19
{
20
dof = this.GetComponent < UnityStandardAssets . ImageEffects .
DepthOfField >();
21
etc = this.GetComponent <EyetrackingController >();
22
23
cursorObject = Instantiate ( cursorPrefab ).transform;
24
}
25
26
// Update
is called
once
per
frame
27
void
Update ()
28
{
29
eye = etc. GetGazeScreenPosition ();
30
//if (eye != oldEye)
31
//
oldEye = eye;
==PAGE:95==
B.6 DepthOfField.cs
83
32
33
// Vector3
cursorWorldPosition =
ScreenPointToWorldPointOnPlane (eye , cameraPlane , Camera
.main);
34
// cursorObject .position = cursorWorldPosition ;
35
36
Ray ray = Camera.main. ScreenPointToRay (eye); // Camera.main.
ViewportPointToRay (eye);// new
Vector3 (0.5f, 0.5f, 0f))
;
37
// ray.direction = eye;
38
RaycastHit
hit;
39
if (Physics.Raycast(ray , out hit , Mathf.Infinity))// 100))
40
{
41
//dof. focalTransform = hit.transform;
42
// float
old = dof.focalLength ;
43
float
dist = Vector3.Distance(ray.origin , hit.point);
44
dof. focalLength = dist; // Mathf.Lerp(old , dist ,
focusSpeed);
45
}
46
}
47
48
Vector3
PlaneRayIntersection (Plane
plane , Ray ray) {
49
float
dist;
50
plane.Raycast(ray , out
dist);
51
return
ray.GetPoint(dist);
52
}
53
54
Vector3
ScreenPointToWorldPointOnPlane (Vector3
screenPoint ,
Plane
plane , Camera
camera)
55
{
56
// Set up a ray
corresponding
to the
screen
position
57
Ray ray = camera. ScreenPointToRay ( screenPoint );
58
59
// Find
out
where
the ray
intersects
with
the
plane
60
return
PlaneRayIntersection (plane , ray);
61
}
62
}
B.6
DepthOfField.cs
1
using
System;
2
using
UnityEngine ;
3
4
namespace
UnityStandardAssets . ImageEffects
5
{
6
[ ExecuteInEditMode ]
7
[ RequireComponent (typeof(Camera))]
8
[ AddComponentMenu ("Image
Effects/Camera/Depth of Field (Lens
Blur , Scatter , DX11)") ]
9
public
class
DepthOfField : PostEffectsBase {
10
11
public
bool
visualizeFocus = false;
12
public
float
focalLength = 10.0f;
==PAGE:96==
84
Code
13
public
float
focalSize = 0.05f;
14
public
float
aperture = 11.5f;
15
public
Transform
focalTransform = null;
16
public
float
maxBlurSize = 2.0f;
17
public
bool
highResolution = false;
18
19
public
enum
BlurType {
20
DiscBlur = 0,
21
DX11 = 1,
22
}
23
24
public
enum
BlurSampleCount {
25
Low = 0,
26
Medium = 1,
27
High = 2,
28
}
29
30
public
BlurType
blurType = BlurType.DiscBlur;
31
public
BlurSampleCount
blurSampleCount = BlurSampleCount .
High;
32
33
public
bool
nearBlur = false;
34
public
float
foregroundOverlap = 1.0f;
35
36
public
Shader
dofHdrShader ;
37
private
Material
dofHdrMaterial = null;
38
39
public
Shader
dx11BokehShader ;
40
private
Material
dx11bokehMaterial ;
41
42
public
float
dx11BokehThreshold = 0.5f;
43
public
float
dx11SpawnHeuristic = 0.0875f;
44
public
Texture2D
dx11BokehTexture = null;
45
public
float
dx11BokehScale = 1.2f;
46
public
float
dx11BokehIntensity = 2.5f;
47
48
private
float
focalDistance01 = 10.0f;
49
private
ComputeBuffer
cbDrawArgs;
50
private
ComputeBuffer
cbPoints;
51
private
float
internalBlurWidth = 1.0f;
52
53
54
public
override
bool
CheckResources
() {
55
CheckSupport (true); // only
requires
depth , not HDR
56
57
dofHdrMaterial = CheckShaderAndCreateMaterial (
dofHdrShader , dofHdrMaterial );
58
if ( supportDX11
&&
blurType
==
BlurType.DX11) {
59
dx11bokehMaterial = CheckShaderAndCreateMaterial (
dx11BokehShader , dx11bokehMaterial );
60
CreateComputeResources
();
61
}
62
63
if (! isSupported)
64
ReportAutoDisable
();
==PAGE:97==
B.6 DepthOfField.cs
85
65
66
return
isSupported ;
67
}
68
69
void
OnEnable
() {
70
GetComponent <Camera >(). depthTextureMode
|=
DepthTextureMode .Depth;
71
}
72
73
void
OnDisable
() {
74
ReleaseComputeResources
();
75
76
if ( dofHdrMaterial ) DestroyImmediate ( dofHdrMaterial );
77
dofHdrMaterial = null;
78
if ( dx11bokehMaterial ) DestroyImmediate (
dx11bokehMaterial );
79
dx11bokehMaterial = null;
80
}
81
82
void
ReleaseComputeResources
() {
83
if (cbDrawArgs
!= null) cbDrawArgs .Release ();
84
cbDrawArgs = null;
85
if (cbPoints
!= null) cbPoints.Release ();
86
cbPoints = null;
87
}
88
89
void
CreateComputeResources
() {
90
if (cbDrawArgs
== null)
91
{
92
cbDrawArgs = new
ComputeBuffer (1, 16,
ComputeBufferType . DrawIndirect );
93
var
args= new int [4];
94
args [0] = 0; args [1] = 1; args [2] = 0; args [3] = 0;
95
cbDrawArgs.SetData (args);
96
}
97
if (cbPoints
== null)
98
{
99
cbPoints = new
ComputeBuffer
(90000 , 12+16 ,
ComputeBufferType .Append);
100
}
101
}
102
103
float
FocalDistance01 ( float
worldDist) {
104
return
GetComponent <Camera >(). WorldToViewportPoint ((
worldDist -GetComponent <Camera >(). nearClipPlane ) *
GetComponent <Camera >().transform.forward +
GetComponent <Camera >().transform.position).z / (
GetComponent <Camera >().farClipPlane -GetComponent <
Camera >(). nearClipPlane );
105
}
106
107
private
void
WriteCoc ( RenderTexture
fromTo , bool
fgDilate
) {
108
dofHdrMaterial .SetTexture (" _FgOverlap ", null);
109
==PAGE:98==
86
Code
110
if (nearBlur
&&
fgDilate) {
111
112
int rtW = fromTo.width /2;
113
int rtH = fromTo.height /2;
114
115
//
capture
fg coc
116
RenderTexture
temp2 = RenderTexture . GetTemporary (
rtW , rtH , 0, fromTo.format);
117
Graphics.Blit (fromTo , temp2 , dofHdrMaterial , 4);
118
119
//
special
blur
120
float
fgAdjustment = internalBlurWidth *
foregroundOverlap ;
121
122
dofHdrMaterial .SetVector ("_Offsets", new
Vector4
(0.0f, fgAdjustment
, 0.0f, fgAdjustment ));
123
RenderTexture
temp1 = RenderTexture . GetTemporary (
rtW , rtH , 0, fromTo.format);
124
Graphics.Blit (temp2 , temp1 , dofHdrMaterial , 2);
125
RenderTexture . ReleaseTemporary (temp2);
126
127
dofHdrMaterial .SetVector ("_Offsets", new
Vector4 (
fgAdjustment , 0.0f, 0.0f, fgAdjustment ));
128
temp2 = RenderTexture . GetTemporary (rtW , rtH , 0,
fromTo.format);
129
Graphics.Blit (temp1 , temp2 , dofHdrMaterial , 2);
130
RenderTexture . ReleaseTemporary (temp1);
131
132
// "merge up" with
background
COC
133
dofHdrMaterial .SetTexture (" _FgOverlap ", temp2);
134
fromTo. MarkRestoreExpected (); // only
touching
alpha
channel , RT
restore
expected
135
Graphics.Blit (fromTo , fromTo , dofHdrMaterial ,
13)
;
136
RenderTexture . ReleaseTemporary (temp2);
137
}
138
else {
139
//
capture
full
coc in alpha
channel (fromTo is not
read , but
bound to detect
screen
flip)
140
fromTo. MarkRestoreExpected (); // only
touching
alpha
channel , RT
restore
expected
141
Graphics.Blit (fromTo , fromTo , dofHdrMaterial ,
0);
142
}
143
}
144
145
void
OnRenderImage ( RenderTexture
source , RenderTexture
destination) {
146
if (! CheckResources
()) {
147
Graphics.Blit (source , destination );
148
return;
149
}
150
151
// clamp & prepare
values so they
make
sense
152
153
if (aperture
< 0.0f) aperture = 0.0f;
==PAGE:99==
B.6 DepthOfField.cs
87
154
if ( maxBlurSize
< 0.1f) maxBlurSize = 0.1f;
155
focalSize = Mathf.Clamp(focalSize , 0.0f, 2.0f);
156
internalBlurWidth = Mathf.Max(maxBlurSize , 0.0f);
157
158
// focal & coc
calculations
159
160
focalDistance01 = ( focalTransform ) ? (GetComponent <
Camera >(). WorldToViewportPoint ( focalTransform .
position)).z / (GetComponent <Camera >(). farClipPlane
) : FocalDistance01 ( focalLength );
161
dofHdrMaterial .SetVector (" _CurveParams ", new
Vector4
(1.0f, focalSize , aperture /10.0f, focalDistance01 ))
;
162
163
//
possible
render
texture
helpers
164
165
RenderTexture
rtLow = null;
166
RenderTexture
rtLow2 = null;
167
RenderTexture
rtSuperLow1 = null;
168
RenderTexture
rtSuperLow2 = null;
169
float
fgBlurDist = internalBlurWidth *
foregroundOverlap ;
170
171
if ( visualizeFocus )
172
{
173
174
//
175
// 2.
176
//
visualize
coc
177
//
178
//
179
180
WriteCoc (source , true);
181
Graphics.Blit (source , destination , dofHdrMaterial ,
16);
182
}
183
else if (( blurType
==
BlurType.DX11) &&
dx11bokehMaterial )
184
{
185
186
//
187
// 1.
188
//
optimized
dx11
bokeh
scatter
189
//
190
//
191
192
193
if ( highResolution ) {
194
195
internalBlurWidth = internalBlurWidth
< 0.1f ?
0.1f : internalBlurWidth ;
196
fgBlurDist = internalBlurWidth *
foregroundOverlap ;
197
198
rtLow = RenderTexture . GetTemporary (source.
==PAGE:100==
88
Code
width , source.height , 0, source.format);
199
200
var
dest2= RenderTexture . GetTemporary (source.
width , source.height , 0, source.format);
201
202
//
capture
COC
203
WriteCoc (source , false);
204
205
// blur a bit so we can do a frequency
check
206
rtSuperLow1 = RenderTexture . GetTemporary (source
.width >>1, source.height >>1, 0, source.
format);
207
rtSuperLow2 = RenderTexture . GetTemporary (source
.width >>1, source.height >>1, 0, source.
format);
208
209
Graphics.Blit(source , rtSuperLow1 ,
dofHdrMaterial , 15);
210
dofHdrMaterial .SetVector ("_Offsets", new
Vector4
(0.0f, 1.5f , 0.0f, 1.5f));
211
Graphics.Blit (rtSuperLow1 , rtSuperLow2 ,
dofHdrMaterial , 19);
212
dofHdrMaterial .SetVector ("_Offsets", new
Vector4
(1.5f, 0.0f, 0.0f, 1.5f));
213
Graphics.Blit (rtSuperLow2 , rtSuperLow1 ,
dofHdrMaterial , 19);
214
215
//
capture
fg coc
216
if (nearBlur)
217
Graphics.Blit (source , rtSuperLow2 ,
dofHdrMaterial , 4);
218
219
dx11bokehMaterial .SetTexture (" _BlurredColor ",
rtSuperLow1 );
220
dx11bokehMaterial .SetFloat (" _SpawnHeuristic ",
dx11SpawnHeuristic );
221
dx11bokehMaterial .SetVector (" _BokehParams ",
new
Vector4(dx11BokehScale ,
dx11BokehIntensity , Mathf.Clamp(
dx11BokehThreshold , 0.005f, 4.0f),
internalBlurWidth ));
222
dx11bokehMaterial .SetTexture (" _FgCocMask ",
nearBlur ? rtSuperLow2 : null);
223
224
//
collect
bokeh
candidates
and
replace
with a
darker
pixel
225
Graphics. SetRandomWriteTarget
(1, cbPoints);
226
Graphics.Blit (source , rtLow , dx11bokehMaterial
, 0);
227
Graphics. ClearRandomWriteTargets
();
228
229
// fg coc
blur
happens
here (after
collect !)
230
if (nearBlur) {
231
dofHdrMaterial .SetVector ("_Offsets", new
Vector4
(0.0f, fgBlurDist
, 0.0f,
==PAGE:101==
B.6 DepthOfField.cs
89
fgBlurDist ));
232
Graphics.Blit (rtSuperLow2 , rtSuperLow1 ,
dofHdrMaterial , 2);
233
dofHdrMaterial .SetVector ("_Offsets", new
Vector4 (fgBlurDist , 0.0f, 0.0f,
fgBlurDist ));
234
Graphics.Blit (rtSuperLow1 , rtSuperLow2 ,
dofHdrMaterial , 2);
235
236
// merge fg coc
with bg coc
237
Graphics.Blit (rtSuperLow2 , rtLow ,
dofHdrMaterial , 3);
238
}
239
240
// NEW: LAY OUT
ALPHA on
destination
target so
we get
nicer
outlines
for the
high
rez
version
241
Graphics.Blit (rtLow , dest2 , dofHdrMaterial ,
20);
242
243
// box
blur (easier to merge
with
bokeh
buffer)
244
dofHdrMaterial .SetVector ("_Offsets", new
Vector4 (internalBlurWidth , 0.0f , 0.0f,
internalBlurWidth ));
245
Graphics.Blit (rtLow , source , dofHdrMaterial ,
5);
246
dofHdrMaterial .SetVector ("_Offsets", new
Vector4
(0.0f, internalBlurWidth , 0.0f,
internalBlurWidth ));
247
Graphics.Blit (source , dest2 , dofHdrMaterial ,
21);
248
249
// apply
bokeh
candidates
250
Graphics. SetRenderTarget (dest2);
251
ComputeBuffer .CopyCount (cbPoints , cbDrawArgs ,
0);
252
dx11bokehMaterial .SetBuffer (" pointBuffer ",
cbPoints);
253
dx11bokehMaterial . SetTexture ("_MainTex",
dx11BokehTexture );
254
dx11bokehMaterial .SetVector ("_Screen", new
Vector3 (1.0f/(1.0f*source.width), 1.0f/(1.0
f*source.height), internalBlurWidth ));
255
dx11bokehMaterial .SetPass
(2);
256
257
Graphics. DrawProceduralIndirect ( MeshTopology .
Points , cbDrawArgs , 0);
258
259
Graphics.Blit (dest2 , destination ); //
hackaround
for
DX11
high
resolution
flipfun
(OPTIMIZEME )
260
261
RenderTexture . ReleaseTemporary (dest2);
262
RenderTexture . ReleaseTemporary ( rtSuperLow1 );
263
RenderTexture . ReleaseTemporary ( rtSuperLow2 );
==PAGE:102==
90
Code
264
}
265
else {
266
rtLow = RenderTexture . GetTemporary (source.
width >>1, source.height >>1, 0, source.
format);
267
rtLow2 = RenderTexture . GetTemporary (source.
width >>1, source.height >>1, 0, source.
format);
268
269
fgBlurDist = internalBlurWidth *
foregroundOverlap ;
270
271
//
capture
COC & color in low
resolution
272
WriteCoc (source , false);
273
source.filterMode = FilterMode .Bilinear;
274
Graphics.Blit (source , rtLow , dofHdrMaterial ,
6);
275
276
// blur a bit so we can do a frequency
check
277
rtSuperLow1 = RenderTexture . GetTemporary (rtLow.
width >>1, rtLow.height >>1, 0, rtLow.format)
;
278
rtSuperLow2 = RenderTexture . GetTemporary (rtLow.
width >>1, rtLow.height >>1, 0, rtLow.format)
;
279
280
Graphics.Blit(rtLow , rtSuperLow1 ,
dofHdrMaterial , 15);
281
dofHdrMaterial .SetVector ("_Offsets", new
Vector4
(0.0f, 1.5f , 0.0f, 1.5f));
282
Graphics.Blit (rtSuperLow1 , rtSuperLow2 ,
dofHdrMaterial , 19);
283
dofHdrMaterial .SetVector ("_Offsets", new
Vector4
(1.5f, 0.0f, 0.0f, 1.5f));
284
Graphics.Blit (rtSuperLow2 , rtSuperLow1 ,
dofHdrMaterial , 19);
285
286
RenderTexture
rtLow3 = null;
287
288
if (nearBlur) {
289
//
capture
fg coc
290
rtLow3 = RenderTexture . GetTemporary (source
.width >>1, source.height >>1, 0, source.
format);
291
Graphics.Blit (source , rtLow3 ,
dofHdrMaterial , 4);
292
}
293
294
dx11bokehMaterial .SetTexture (" _BlurredColor ",
rtSuperLow1 );
295
dx11bokehMaterial .SetFloat (" _SpawnHeuristic ",
dx11SpawnHeuristic );
296
dx11bokehMaterial .SetVector (" _BokehParams ",
new
Vector4(dx11BokehScale ,
dx11BokehIntensity , Mathf.Clamp(
==PAGE:103==
B.6 DepthOfField.cs
91
dx11BokehThreshold , 0.005f, 4.0f),
internalBlurWidth ));
297
dx11bokehMaterial . SetTexture (" _FgCocMask ",
rtLow3);
298
299
//
collect
bokeh
candidates
and
replace
with a
darker
pixel
300
Graphics. SetRandomWriteTarget
(1, cbPoints);
301
Graphics.Blit (rtLow , rtLow2 , dx11bokehMaterial
, 0);
302
Graphics. ClearRandomWriteTargets
();
303
304
RenderTexture . ReleaseTemporary ( rtSuperLow1 );
305
RenderTexture . ReleaseTemporary ( rtSuperLow2 );
306
307
// fg coc
blur
happens
here (after
collect !)
308
if (nearBlur) {
309
dofHdrMaterial .SetVector ("_Offsets", new
Vector4
(0.0f, fgBlurDist
, 0.0f,
fgBlurDist ));
310
Graphics.Blit (rtLow3 , rtLow ,
dofHdrMaterial , 2);
311
dofHdrMaterial .SetVector ("_Offsets", new
Vector4 (fgBlurDist , 0.0f, 0.0f,
fgBlurDist ));
312
Graphics.Blit (rtLow , rtLow3 ,
dofHdrMaterial , 2);
313
314
// merge fg coc
with bg coc
315
Graphics.Blit (rtLow3 , rtLow2 ,
dofHdrMaterial , 3);
316
}
317
318
// box
blur (easier to merge
with
bokeh
buffer)
319
dofHdrMaterial .SetVector ("_Offsets", new
Vector4 (internalBlurWidth , 0.0f , 0.0f,
internalBlurWidth ));
320
Graphics.Blit (rtLow2 , rtLow , dofHdrMaterial ,
5);
321
dofHdrMaterial .SetVector ("_Offsets", new
Vector4
(0.0f, internalBlurWidth , 0.0f,
internalBlurWidth ));
322
Graphics.Blit (rtLow , rtLow2 , dofHdrMaterial ,
5);
323
324
// apply
bokeh
candidates
325
Graphics. SetRenderTarget (rtLow2);
326
ComputeBuffer .CopyCount (cbPoints , cbDrawArgs ,
0);
327
dx11bokehMaterial .SetBuffer (" pointBuffer ",
cbPoints);
328
dx11bokehMaterial . SetTexture ("_MainTex",
dx11BokehTexture );
329
dx11bokehMaterial .SetVector ("_Screen", new
Vector3 (1.0f/(1.0f*rtLow2.width), 1.0f/(1.0
==PAGE:104==
92
Code
f*rtLow2.height), internalBlurWidth ));
330
dx11bokehMaterial .SetPass
(1);
331
Graphics. DrawProceduralIndirect ( MeshTopology .
Points , cbDrawArgs , 0);
332
333
//
upsample & combine
334
dofHdrMaterial .SetTexture ("_LowRez", rtLow2);
335
dofHdrMaterial .SetTexture (" _FgOverlap ", rtLow3
);
336
dofHdrMaterial .SetVector ("_Offsets",
((1.0f*
source.width)/(1.0f*rtLow2.width)) *
internalBlurWidth * Vector4.one);
337
Graphics.Blit (source , destination ,
dofHdrMaterial , 9);
338
339
if (rtLow3) RenderTexture . ReleaseTemporary (
rtLow3);
340
}
341
}
342
else
343
{
344
345
//
346
// 2.
347
//
poisson
disc
style
blur in low
resolution
348
//
349
//
350
351
source.filterMode = FilterMode .Bilinear;
352
353
if ( highResolution ) internalBlurWidth
*= 2.0f;
354
355
WriteCoc (source , true);
356
357
rtLow = RenderTexture . GetTemporary (source.width
>>
1, source.height
>> 1, 0, source.format);
358
rtLow2 = RenderTexture . GetTemporary (source.width
>> 1, source.height
>> 1, 0, source.format);
359
360
int
blurPass = ( blurSampleCount
==
BlurSampleCount .
High ||
blurSampleCount
==
BlurSampleCount .
Medium) ? 17 : 11;
361
362
if ( highResolution ) {
363
dofHdrMaterial .SetVector ("_Offsets", new
Vector4
(0.0f, internalBlurWidth , 0.025f,
internalBlurWidth ));
364
Graphics.Blit (source , destination ,
dofHdrMaterial , blurPass);
365
}
366
else {
367
dofHdrMaterial .SetVector ("_Offsets", new
Vector4
(0.0f, internalBlurWidth , 0.1f,
internalBlurWidth ));
368
==PAGE:105==
B.6 DepthOfField.cs
93
369
// blur
370
Graphics.Blit (source , rtLow , dofHdrMaterial ,
6);
371
Graphics.Blit (rtLow , rtLow2 , dofHdrMaterial ,
blurPass);
372
373
//
cheaper
blur in high
resolution , upsample
and
combine
374
dofHdrMaterial .SetTexture("_LowRez", rtLow2);
375
dofHdrMaterial .SetTexture(" _FgOverlap ", null);
376
dofHdrMaterial .SetVector ("_Offsets",
Vector4.
one * ((1.0f*source.width)/(1.0f*rtLow2.
width)) * internalBlurWidth );
377
Graphics.Blit (source , destination ,
dofHdrMaterial , blurSampleCount
==
BlurSampleCount .High ? 18 : 12);
378
}
379
}
380
381
if (rtLow) RenderTexture . ReleaseTemporary (rtLow);
382
if (rtLow2) RenderTexture . ReleaseTemporary (rtLow2);
383
}
384
}
385
}
==PAGE:106==
94
Code
==PAGE:107==
Bibliography
[Ada06] Andrew Rollings; Ernest Adams. Fundamentals of Game Design. Pren-
tice Hall, 2006.
[Alm11] Paul L. Kaufman; Francis Heed Adler; Leonard A. Levin; Albert Alm.
Adler’s Physiology of the Eye. Elsevier Health Sciences, 2011. p. 508.
[assa]
Realistic terrain collection lite.
[assb]
Realistic tree 9. https://www.assetstore.unity3d.com/en/!/content/54622.
[assc]
Simple medieval house. https://www.assetstore.unity3d.com/en/!/content/6623.
[assd]
Unity standard assets. https://www.assetstore.unity3d.com/en/!/content/32351.
[Bos14]
Mike
Bostock.
Visualizing
algorithms.
https://bost.ocks.org/mike/algorithms/, 2014.
[Cas08]
S. Hillaire; A. Lecuyer; R. Cozot; G. Casiez. Using an eye-tracking
system to improve camera motions and depth-of-ﬁeld blur eﬀects in
virtual environments. Virtual Reality Conference, 2008. VR ’08. IEEE,
1, 2008.
[Dee]
Michael F. Deering. Dynamic depth-of-ﬁeld emulation based on eye-
tracking. https://www.google.com/patents/US6618054.
[Eye]
Eyetribe. Ces 2016: The eye tribe showcase eye tracking for virtual
reality. https://theeyetribe.com/ces-2016-the-eye-tribe-showcases-eye-
tracking-for-virtual-reality-at-sands-booth-80344/.
[iC]
Cambridge in Colour. Understanding depth of ﬁeld in photography.
http://www.cambridgeincolour.com/tutorials/depth-of-ﬁeld.htm.
==PAGE:108==
96
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Man13] R. Mantiuk; B. Bazyluk; R. K. Mantiuk. Gaze-driven object tracking
for real time rendering. EUROGRAPHICS, 32, 2013.
[Mil11]
Richard Johnson; John Freund; Irwin Miller. Probability and Statistics
for Engineers. Pearson, 2011. p. 208.
[Nie04]
Derrick Parkhurst; Ernst Niebuhr. A feasibility test for perceptually
adaptive level of detail rendering on desktop systems. Applied Percep-
tion in Graphics and Visualization, 73, 2004.
[Rok96] P. Rokita. Generating depth of-ﬁeld eﬀects in virtual reality applica-
tions. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, 16, 1996.
[Sla02]
Andy Slaven. Video Game Bible, (1985 - 2002). Traﬀord Publishing,
2002. p. 53.
[wik]
Unity
wiki.
Unityscript
versus
javascript.
http://wiki.unity3d.com/index.php/UnityScript_versus_JavaScript.
