==PAGE:1==
MASTER THESIS
Application of machine learning techniques for optical
communication system performance monitoring
Authors
Jakob Thrane (s113113)
Jesper Wass (s113136)
Supervisors
Darko Zibar
Molly Piels
Kongens Lyngby july 2016
==PAGE:2==
Copyright © 2016 Jakob Thrane & Jesper Wass
published by dtu photonics
First printing, July 2016
==PAGE:3==
3
Abstract
The efﬁciency of optical WDM systems must be improved to keep up with increasing capacity demands.
In recent years dispersion managed ﬁber links have been replaced by uncompensated links. This in com-
bination with coherent detection and digital signal processing has shown to yield signiﬁcant performance
improvements. To further increase system performance, ongoing research deals with improvements in spectral
efﬁciency by e.g. reducing the inter-channel spacing thus allowing so-called superchannels. Achieving an
understanding of system performance and limitations is necessary for improving system efﬁciency. This
requires use of accurate system performance prediction model and has been an area of great research in
recent years. Various analytical nonlinear propagation models, such as the Gaussian Noise model, have been
proposed for this purpose which could substantially ease the analysis and design of optical systems and
networks. However, these analytical models have generalization issues which require model customization for
different system setups. In this thesis, we investigate the use of Machine Learning techniques such as Neural
Network (NN) and Gaussian Process Regression (GPR) for performance prediction of operational and future
optical WDM systems. We attempt to generalize system performance by measuring the inﬂuence of various
system conﬁguration input parameters on the received signal quality given as a bit error rate (BER) output.
The input parameters involve launch power, inter-channel spacing, transmission speed, and transmission
distance. The investigation is performed on optical signals employing dual polarization QPSK and 16-QAM
using experimental and simulative measurements, respectively.
The results show that the use of machine learning tools can be beneﬁcial for system performance
generalization. On the simulated data, the NN and GPR achieve an almost identical generalized error
when predicting BER from a speciﬁc system conﬁguration. It has been observed that for sparse data sets,
the properties of GPR reduces the risk of over-ﬁtting which lead to more generalized results. The results
indicate that GPR models obtained from training on simulated data can be reused as prediction models on
experimental data with only a slight decrease in predictive performance. Additionally, the models investigated
in this thesis can be extended to include additional system conﬁguration parameters, and are thus considered
competent generalization models for accurate performance prediction.
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis is submitted in partial fulﬁllment of the requirements for a Master’s Degree in Telecommunication
engineering for both authors. The work documented is based on a process from January 28th to July 10th.
This thesis is accompanied by a zipped folder containing source code and weekly slides. The work and results
described and documented are solely composed by the authors under supervision of Darko Zibar and Molly
Piels. Material of research and publications have been acknowledged and we have done our best to provide
with references to these sources. Complete descriptive information about the references cited is available at
the bibliography section at the end of this thesis.
This thesis is a product of two authors, however most chapters and sections have been written individually.
Chapters and sections have been credited accordingly. Sections without credit have been written by the
credited author of the given chapter.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank our supervisors, Darko Zibar and Molly Piels for weekly discussions. This provided
us with fresh ideas, insightful comments, a lot of inspiration and ultimately a path towards the light when
everything seemed impossible and gray. We would also like to thank Ph.d student Rasmus Jones who
attended these weekly meetings for feedback and comments.
Lyngby, July 2016
Jesper Wass,
July 10, 2016
Jakob Thrane,
July 10, 2016
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Contents
1
Introduction
21
1.1 State of the art
22
1.2 Project objective
23
2
Optical communication
25
2.1 Optical communication system
25
2.2 Optical WDM system
32
2.3 WDM System design
35
3
Predictive methods using Machine Learning
41
3.1 Introduction
41
3.2 Model optimization
43
3.3 Neural Network
48
3.4 Gaussian Process Regression
53
3.5 Comparison
59
4
Numerical Simulations
63
==PAGE:8==
8
4.1 Robochameleon framework
63
4.2 System setup
64
4.3 Simulation range
71
5
Experimental investigation
77
5.1 System setup
77
5.2 24 channel WDM experiment
81
6
Implementation of predictive Machine Learning
85
6.1 Data manipulation and available data
85
6.2 Gaussian Process Regression
87
6.3 Neural Network
98
6.4 Training set size
102
6.5 Model Selection
103
6.6 Summary
113
7
Results
115
7.1 Simulation
115
7.2 Experimental
124
8
Discussion
127
9
Conclusion
133
9.1 Future work
134
==PAGE:9==
9
Bibliography
137
Experimental wavelength assignment
141
Implementation of Machine Learning methods
143
Kernels
147
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
List of Figures
2.1 Basic elements in an optical communication system consisting of a
transmitter, channel and receiver
26
2.2 EDFA gain spectrum given an active ﬁber length of 20 cm and a
pump of 200 mW [1][2]
29
2.3 Transmitter of a WDM system consisting of three single-channel
transmitters and a multiplexer for creating the WDM signal
32
2.4 Conceptually example of a WDM multiplexer and the resulting
optical spectrum.
33
2.5 Receiver of a WDM system consisting of a demux and a receiver
component for each wavelength extracted.
35
3.1 Conceptual illustration of 4-fold-CV
46
3.2 Graphical representation of a feed-forward network with one hid-
den layer, M hidden nodes, input dimension D and output dimen-
sions k.
49
4.1 Robochameleon simulation model structure
64
4.2 Structure of single-channel transmitter module
64
4.3 Filter impulse and frequency response
65
4.4 Example of an optical power spectrum of simulated transmitted
WDM signal
66
4.5 Example of an optical power spectrum of simulated demultiplexed
WDM signal
68
4.6 Structure of coherent front-end block
69
4.7 Structure of DSP block
69
4.8 Overview of system input/output
71
==PAGE:12==
12
4.9 Illustration of simulated input dimensions. Each combination of 4
inputs produce a measured BER output
71
4.10 Simulated data shown as slices in the four input dimensions as a
function of BER.
74
5.1 Final experimental setup used to produce results of a 24 channel
setup
80
5.2 (Top ﬁgure) After the ﬁrst ampliﬁer, maintaining gain ﬂattening as
it is propagated to the pre-amp dictating launch power. (Bottom
ﬁgure) Gain ﬂattening performed at WSS 2, placed beyond the last
ampliﬁer of the loop.
81
5.3 OSA Spectrum visualization after entire loop, i.e. 1944km of 24
WDM channels at 50 GHz spacing in the superchannel
81
5.4 Constellation diagram produced from experimental B2B setup with
D f = 50 GHz.
83
5.5 Constellation diagram produced from experimental loop setup
with Ptx = 16 dBm and D f = 50 GHz.
83
5.6 Experimental data showing BER for different slices of the two input
dimensions.
84
6.1 Implemented ﬂow for training and evaluating the GPR method.
88
6.2 Ktest,train and Ktrain given a simple one dimensional example.
93
6.3 Simple 1-dimensional prediction using GPR based on an exponen-
tial kernel
93
6.6 Implementational ﬂow achieving a trained predictive model using
a Neural network.
98
6.7 Topology of the single layered NN structure. Denoted are the
four inputs and a single output with the corresponding input and
output weights.
99
6.8 Initial predictions of a NN given a structure consisting of four
inputs, four hidden nodes and a single output. A slice is shown in
each input dimension at a similar system conﬁguration.
101
6.9 Model generalization error for GPR, and NN as the training set
size increases
102
==PAGE:13==
13
6.10 Kernel evaluation for 4D simulated data showing MLPD per-
formance using LOO-CV, 10-fold-CV and an independent test
set.
105
6.11 Kernel evaluation for 2D experimental data showing MLPD per-
formance using LOO-CV and 10-fold-CV.
106
6.12 Kernel evaluation for 2D simulated data with only Ptx = [−2 : 0]
dBm and D f as input with Rs = 32 GHz and Nspans = 15
107
6.13 Heat map showing MLPD as function of the length-scale hyper-
parameters based on evaluation with LOO-CV. Parameters found
with MAP, MCMC and GridInt are also marked.
110
6.14 Length-scale evaluation for squared exponential kernel using 2-
dimensional simulated data with only Ptx = [−2 : 0] dBm and
D f as input with Rs = 32 GHz and Nspans = 15
111
6.15 Heat map showing the NN performance in terms of 1/RMSE as
function of training set size and number of hidden neurons.
112
7.1 Boxplot of the distribution of length-scale hyperparameters given
100 iterations with a 75:25 training test ratio.
116
7.2 Predictions in each input dimension given as slices of particular
system conﬁgurations based on an optimized exponential kernel.
Shown are training and test points at the given slices along with
the conﬁdence interval of the predictions
119
7.3 Predictions in each input dimension given as slices of particular sys-
tem conﬁgurations based on an optimized NN of 18 hidden nodes.
Shown are training and test points at the given slices.
121
7.4 Absolute summarized error in each of the four input dimensions
given a trained GPR and NN model based on a test set.
123
7.5 Predictions in each input dimension given as slices of system
conﬁgurations.
Shown are training points at the given slices
along with the conﬁdence interval of the predictions for the GPR
model.
125
8.1 Optimal launch power as function of symbol rate for multiple
spacing conﬁgurations.
131
==PAGE:14==
==PAGE:15==
List of Tables
2.1 Overview of some WDM system parameters and their primary
inﬂuence. E.g. Symbol rate have a primary inﬂuence on capacity,
but requires lower loss through the channel medium. *Indicates an
inﬂuence on spectral efﬁciency as given by b/s/Hz
37
4.1 Fixed system parameters.
70
4.2 System conﬁguration parameters consisting of four inputs and
their respective ranges due for simulation.
72
5.1 System conﬁguration parameters consisting of four inputs.
81
6.1 Illustration of pre-processing where NaN entries are removed from
the data set
86
6.2 Raw simulated input data
86
6.3 Pre-processed simulated input data (normalized)
86
6.4 Measurements used for simple prediction example using GPR. Blue
indicates training data, while orange indicates test data.
92
6.5 Hyperparameters of a squared exponential and exponential kernel
obtained using a single MAP estimation on a 75 : 25 training test
ratio on the entire data set.
94
6.6 Overview of investigated kernel indicating numbering and hyper-
parameters to be optimized.
104
6.7 Optimized hyperparameters for the 4D squared exponential kernel
using MAP, MCMC, and GridInt trained on simulated data. The
bottom table indicates results obtain from a manual parameter
sweep.
108
==PAGE:16==
16
6.8 Optimized hyperparameters for the 2D squared exponential kernel
using MAP, MCMC, and GridInt trained on experimental data.
The bottom table indicates results obtain from a manual parameter
sweep.
109
6.9 Optimized hyperparameters for the 2D squared exponential kernel
using MAP, MCMC, and GridInt trained on simulated data. The
bottom table indicates results obtain from a manual parameter
sweep.
111
7.1 Mean of obtained kernel hyperparameters using MAP inference
over 100 iterations with a 75:25 training test ratio. The error is
computed as RMSE and MLPD
116
7.3 Kernel hyperparameters of a squared exponential kernel obtained
using MAP inference over 100 iterations. The performance is given
as MLPD obtained from LOO-CV
124
7.4 Kernel hyperparameters of a squared exponential kernel obtained
using MAP inference over 100 iterations. The performance is given
as MLPD obtained from LOO-CV
126
==PAGE:17==
List of Acronyms
ADC Analogue to Digital Converter
ARD Automatic Relevance Determination
ASE
Ampliﬁed Spontaneous Emission
AW
Alien Wave
AWG Arrayed Waveguide Gratings
AWGN Additive White Gaussian Noise
B2B
Back-to-Back
BD
Bandwidth-distance
BER
Bit Error Rate
CD
Chromatic Dispersion
CMA Constant Modulus Algorithm
CV
Cross Validation
CW
Continuous Wave
CWDM Coarse WDM
DCF
Dispersion-compensated ﬁber
DD
Direct Detection
DMF Dispersion-managed ﬁber
DP
Dual Polarization
DSP
Digital Signal Processing
DWDM Dense WDM
E-GN Enhanced Gaussian Noise (model)
EDFA Erbium-doped Fiber Ampliﬁer
EVM Error Vector Magnitude
FEC
Forward Error Correcting
FIR
Finite Impulse Response
FWM Four-Wave Mixing
ISI
Inter-symbol Interference
GN
Gaussian Noise (model)
GP
Gaussian Process
GPR
Gaussian Process Regression
GridInt Grid Integration
GVD Group Velocity Delay
LED
Light-emitting diode
LO
Local Oscillator
LOO-CV Leave One Out Cross Validation
MAP Maximum a Posterior
MCMC Markov Chain Monte Carlo
ML
Machine Learning
MLPD Mean Log Predictive Density
MOMoT Multi-Domain Optical Modeling Tool
MSE Mean Squared Error
MUX Multiplexer
MZ
Mach-Zehnder
MZM Mach-Zehnder Modulator
NLI
Nonlinear Impairments
==PAGE:18==
18
NLSE Nonlinear Schrödinger Equation
NN
Neural Network
OMA Optical Modulation Analyzer
OOK On-off keying
OSA Optical Spectrum Analyzer
OSNR Optical Signal-to-Noise Ratio
PAM Pulse Amplitude Modulation
PDL
Polarization Dependant Loss
PDM Polarization Division Multiplexing
PLL
Phase-locked Loop
PBS
Polarization Beam Splitter
PM
Polarization Multiplexing
PMD Polarization Mode Dispersion
PRBS Pseudo-random Binary Sequence
PSK
Phase Shift Keying
RMSE Root Mean Squared Error
ROADM Reconﬁgurable Optical Add/Drop
Multiplexer
QAM Quadrature Amplitude Modulation
QoT
Quality of Transmission
QPSK Quadrature Phase Shift Keying
SE
Spectral Efﬁciency
SER
Symbol Error Rate
SMF
Single-mode Fiber
SNR
Signal-to-Noise Ratio
SPM Self-Phase Modulation
VS
Volterra series
WDM Wavelength Division Multiplexing
WSS Wave-selective Switches
XPM Cross-Phase Modulation
==PAGE:19==
19
==PAGE:20==
==PAGE:21==
1 Introduction
The resources provided by current deployed optical communication systems are becoming scarce as capacity
demands increase. Wavelength-division multiplexing (WDM) served as a way of increasing the resource
utilization by allowing multiple channels onto the same optical ﬁber. The additional need for capacity made
way for optical Dense-WDM (DWDM) systems further increasing the resource utilization by reducing the
spacing between channels thus increasing the number of channels possible. Future DWDM systems are
to further reduce the inter-channel spacing and allow for so-called super-channels using efﬁcient spectral
shaping methods. Additionally, it is likely that each channel will take use of advanced modulation formats
such as 16QAM or even 64QAM in combination with high symbol rates further increasing the spectral
efﬁciency.
Reducing spacing between channels and increasing the capacity of each channel require better quality
of transmission (QoT) through the optical channel. The transmission quality is determined by several
transmission properties such as the total transmission distance and the amount of impairments in the ﬁber.
Overcoming the induced propagation loss of the optical ﬁbers is done by increasing the optical launch power
to increase the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). A limit to the optical launch power is however imposed by the
nonlinear impairments (NLI), which impacts the signal propagating. This limitation affects the capacity
and thus the maximum allowed transmission distance which can be quantiﬁed using a performance metric
like the bandwidth-distance (BD) product. The BD product describes the maximum possible transmission
speed at a ﬁxed distance, and is what system operators desire to optimize. Optimizing the BD product is a
complex function of various properties related to QoT. This includes, for instance, parameters such as the
optical launch power which seeks to ensure that propagation noise is overcome without reaching the limit
imposed by ﬁber nonlinearities. However, the optimal optical launch power is inﬂuenced by not only the
distance but also parameters such as the symbol rate and channel spacing. The BD product is in general a
complex function of optimization where all parameters inﬂuencing the QoT are dependent on each other. As
additional capacity is required, this function increases in complexity as severe trade-offs make their entrance.
==PAGE:22==
22
1.1
State of the art
In recent years, the use of coherent detection and digital signal processing (DSP) has improved the performance
obtained through uncompensated ﬁber links, and these ﬁber types have become popular as they have shown to
outperform existing dispersion managed links. It has widely been agreed that the use of uncompensated ﬁber
is necessary for increased system performance and efﬁciency, and all operational WDM systems should thus
adopt this approach. It is generally attractive and of big interest to have accurate and effective performance
prediction tools in order to achieve a better understanding of system performance and limitations. NLI covers
a range of signal impairments during ﬁber propagation and accurate modeling of these effects is necessary to
enable reliable system performance prediction. Various analytical nonlinear propagation models have been
proposed with the potential ability to further improve performance by easing the analysis and design of
optical systems.
Some models have been proposed using truncated Volterra-series that express a closed-form transfer
function of the system which models the NLI entirely in the frequency domain [3][4] or time-domain [5].
Other alternative approaches divide the signal spectrum into its spectral components from which the nonlinear
effects can be analytically expressed [6]. Common for most of these approaches is that they rely on the
assumption that NLI effects are small compared to the signal power, and the analytical solutions for each
model appear somewhat similar. This shows that existing model essentially use different techniques for
achieving the same perturbative solution to the NLI modeling issue.
Inspired from the techniques above, in 2011 Poggiolini et. al proposed a comprehensive model for
assessment of NLI by analyzing the statistical characteristics of PM-QSPK signals after propagation through
uncompensated ﬁber links [7][8][9][10]. The analysis indicated that the four electric ﬁeld components of a
WDM channel together with the constellation points appear to be Gaussian distributed, and approximating
NLI would thus be possible using additive Gaussian noise (GN). The model provides the ability to express
the power of the NLI effects through a closed-form analytical formula derived directly from the assumption
of GN, which can thus be used for received signal quality estimation. This model is commonly referred to as
the GN model and has been veriﬁed by simulative tests.
The GN model above expresses NLI as an additive perturbation and has numerical complexity dramatically
reduced compared with the Volterra-series. However, such an advantage comes at the expense of reduced
accuracy. For instance, it has been shown that the GN model overestimates the variance of the NLI noise
variance in the ﬁrst spans of a ﬁber link. Hence, when the GN model is used to look at the detailed span-
by-span characterization along a link, its predictions may be affected by a substantial error, because the
Gaussian signal assumption is not ideal. To deal with these non-Gaussianity of the signals, in 2014 Carena et.
al. improved the GN model to an enhanced version (E-GN) where a complete set of equations were supplied
to fully correct the GN-model with extensions to include additional NLI components [11][12].
==PAGE:23==
introduction
23
In November 2014, the Multi-Domain Optical Modeling Tool (MOMoT) project was launched with the goal
to investigate the need and requirements for provision of Alien Wavelength (AW) services in the GEANT
community [13][14]. MOMoT includes a modeling tool application for estimation of signal quality in terms of
bit-error-rate (BER) for channels carrying AW. The modeling tool is based on simple theoretical equations
inspired by [15] where the probability of bit errors is evaluated theoretically from various system input
parameters including launch power, neighbor channel launch power, bit rate, modulation format, channel
spacing, ﬁber length, and noise/impairment parameters such as dispersion, attenuation, and ampliﬁer noise
ﬁgures. The formulas account for most physical ﬁber impairments where the main contributing effects are
assumed Gaussian distributed. The modeling tool has been veriﬁed for use on signals employing on-off
keying (OOK) and dual polarization quadrature phase shift keying (DP-QPSK) modulation. Even though
MOMoT offers insight into system performance, the model is customized for use in speciﬁc system setups.
Hence, more general models with modulation format independence are highly encouraged.
1.2
Project objective
The objective of this thesis is to investigate how Machine Learning (ML) models such as Gaussian Process
Regression (GPR) and Neural Networks (NN) can be used to predict system performance of optical WDM
systems. The models seek to generalize system performance by learning from signal quality measurements of
speciﬁc WDM system conﬁgurations. Signal quality is to be measured in terms of BER which is ultimately
inﬂuenced by changes to the QoT. The scope of the thesis is reduced to adjustments of the following system
conﬁguration parameters:
• Optical launch power, denoted Ptx
• Transmission length, denoted Nspans
• Bandwidth, denoted Rs
• Channel spacing, denoted D f
The preliminary goal of the thesis is to construct a computer based model where the performance impact
of the above described parameters can be simulated and predicted from previous measurements. The ﬁrst
objective is thus to set up a simulation-based multi-channel framework which evaluates the inﬂuence of linear
and nonlinear channel impairments and express these affects as a BER measurement by counting bit errors
on the received signal. The scope of the thesis is not to implement the channel impairments and other aspects
related to a simulation-based framework. It is however within the scope of the thesis to investigate a system
that imitates an operational WDM system by using preexisting blocks of the public available Robochameleon
simulation framework and make extensions if required.
Performance measurements are also to be conducted experimentally. This includes the objective of
establishing an experimental setup on which measurements of BER can be made given adjustments to
==PAGE:24==
24
optical launch power and channel spacing. It is within the scope of this thesis to document the work of the
experimental setup, the measurements made and the results obtained.
The main objective is to compare the predictive capabilities of GPR and NN and the error produced given
the simulated and experimental obtained data sets. Furthermore it is desired to investigate how these methods
are able to generalize system performance of a WDM system and if the generalization can be transferred
from the simulated domain to the experimental. Finally, the general applicability of the machine learning
approach is to be discussed in relation to existing performance prediction models such as E-GN and MOMoT.
The thesis structure is outlined below.
Chapter 2, Optical communication: Fundamental and basic theory about optical communication and WDM
systems are presented. The project scope is further clariﬁed and motivated.
Chapter 3, Predictive methods using Machine Learning: ML techniques and terms are introduced and
presented including basic properties and abilities of GPR and NN.
Chapter 4, Numerical simulations: The computer-based model used for producing the simulated results is
introduced and discussed. Raw simulated data is visualized.
Chapter 5, Experimental Investigation: Documents the experimental 24 channel WDM setup used data
measurements. Raw experimental data is visualized.
Chapter 6, Investigation of predictive Machine Learning: This chapter is the core of the thesis and provides
a detailed description on the use of ML methods on simulated and experimental data including the use
speciﬁc optimization techniques and model selection strategies.
Chapter 7, Final results: Final predictive results from the optimized models are presented followed by a
further method evaluation.
Chapter 8, Discussion: The results of the predictive methods are discussed where advantages and concerns
are highlighted. A comparison with methods proposed by literature is also provided.
Chapter 9, Conclusion: A conclusion is drawn based on the ﬁnal predictive results.
==PAGE:25==
2 Optical communication
Author: Jakob Thrane
The requirement for increased capacity has been a continuous issue for the telecommunication industry since
day one of operation. In the 1980s the industry began to migrate most of their physical infrastructure to
ﬁber-optical cables and ever since has optical communications systems been popular and widely used. The
ﬁber-optical cables are light unlike many traditional bulky copper cables and provides low-loss transmission
at particular frequencies, however the most signiﬁcant property is the comprehensive capacity potential.
Through technological advancements and the ever increasing demand for capacity as motivation, WDM
systems emerged along with efﬁcient ampliﬁcation schemes. WDM enables the ability to carry multiple
channels of light on a single ﬁber-optical cable. An extensive capacity increase can be obtained without
further extending the physical infrastructure with more ﬁber-optical cables. This essentially yields a lower
cost per bit as greater utilization of current physical infrastructure can be achieved.
This chapter will present basic theory about optical communication. Section 2.1 introduces the basic
components in an optical communication system and seeks to describe system limitations speciﬁcally induced
by optical channel impairments. Section 2.2 presents the needed system modiﬁcations required to transmit and
receive multiple wavelengths along with the inﬂuence of channel impairments on multichannel transmission.
Section 2.3 seek to outline the design choices of WDM conﬁgurations along with the impact of system
parameters such as, inter-channel spacing, launch power and channel bandwidth on the bandwidth-distance
product.
2.1
Optical communication system
The ability to harness and utilize light waves for data communication requires a set of high speed electronic
elements designed to manipulate light. As with any communication system, an optical communication system
can be systematized as having a transmitter, transmission channel and receiver. Figure 2.1 illustrates this
conceptually along with the basic components required.
==PAGE:26==
26
ECL
SOURCE
MODULATOR
EDFA
FIBER
PHOTO DETECTOR
DSP
DECISION 
CIRCUIT
TRANSMITTER
CHANNEL
RECEIVER
DATA
DATA
Figure 2.1: Basic elements in an optical
communication system consisting of a
transmitter, channel and receiver
2.1.1
Transmitter
The primary objective of the transmitter is to convert an electrical data stream into an optical data stream and
launch it into an optical ﬁber. Once launched it is generally denoted as an optical channel which propagates
at a particular pre-set wavelength. The wavelength is a characterization of the emitted light which can be
described in terms of optical frequency usually in units of Terahertz (THz), which corresponds to wavelengths
in units of nanometers (nm). In order to produce light an optical source is necessary. This is usually either
semiconductor lasers or light-emitting diodes (LEDs) as these optical sources allow for modulation of optical
power, thus providing the possibility of converting electrical pulses into optical pulses.
Modulation
Direct and external modulation are two methods for achieving a conversion of information
from the electrical to the optical domain. The electrical signal is composed of a bit stream that is converted
using multiple steps, the ﬁrst is to ensure a proper bit encoding. Encoding data into an electrical signal
consists ﬁrstly of producing a mapping between bits and an amplitude level or a phase or a combination
of both. Commonly used are Phase-shift Keying (PSK) or Quadrature Amplitude Modulation (QAM). This
mapping produces so called ’symbols’ that consist of a single bit or a combination of bits depending on the
level of modulation. Additionally a pulseshape is applied for interpolation between symbols resulting in an
electrical signal which can then be used to drive the optical source, either directly or externally.
Direct modulation implies modulating the data stream directly on the optical stream using the optical
source itself, however at high bit rates direct modulation imposes disadvantages. For high-speed transmitters
external optical modulator are used which converts electrical pulses into optical pulses carrying identical
information. More speciﬁcally this is obtained by 1) biasing the laser such it emits a constant power over
time also referred to as a continuous-wave (CW) laser and 2) using a Mach-Zehnder (MZ) interferometer and
two LiNbO3 waveguides. This enables optical amplitude and phase modulation as used in PSK or QAM
modulation formats and works as follows; The two waveguides, i.e. the two interferometer arms provide
a phase shift if voltage is applied across one of the arms. If voltage is applied to both arms, the phase
==PAGE:27==
optical communication
27
difference is converted to amplitude modulation, however only if constructive interference is present and
the phases do not cancel each other out. If Polarization Multiplexing (PM) is used, i.e. data is mapped to
the two polarizations states of the light, X and Y, the optical source is split into two orthogonal polarization
components which are modulated by separate MZM and then combined. Such a MZM modulator is illustrated
in Figure 2.1.
For launching the optical signal into the optical ﬁber an ampliﬁer is introduced in the transmitter. This is
used to overcome loss of the ﬁber until the next ampliﬁer is reached. The objective of the cascaded ampliﬁers
throughout the link is to maintain the launch power and compensate for the attenuation between ampliﬁers
induced by the optical ﬁber. However, if the signal is launched with too much power, nonlinearities of the
ﬁber may have an impact. Finding an optimal launch power is an optimization issues with a dependency on
other system parameters. The inﬂuence of launch power is investigated in Section 2.3
2.1.2
Channel
The physical media of optical communication systems are ﬁber-optical cables which, until the late 1970s were
considered rather lossy. A loss of 0.2 dB/km was discovered at 1550 nm wavelength range using Single-mode
Fibers (SMF) which provided the telecommunication industry with a low-loss and high-capacity transmission
medium. Single-mode ﬁbers are usually the choice of optical ﬁbers used in today’s optical communication
systems. Gaining popularity primarily due to absence of so called ’intermodal’ dispersion which is a result
of the single mode construction. Inter-modal dispersion causes considerable broadening of optical pulses
per kilometer, since different modes indicate different paths for different rays and thus requires complex
compensation.
Impairments:
Pulse broadening is present in SMF due to chromatic dispersion (CD), which indicates
that different spectral components travel at different group velocities. Additionally, ﬁber birefringence caused
by variation in the shape of the cylindrical ﬁber core, causes degeneration of the necessary orthogonality
between polarizations. This results in different frequency components to acquire different polarization states
which in turn results in, pulse broadening. This is also deﬁned as polarization-mode dispersion (PMD) and is
along with CD the main causes for link limitations in optical communication systems unless compensated
for. Matters for compensation either include the use of Dispersion-compensated ﬁbers (DCF) or digital
compensation performed at the receiver. However, propagation in an optical ﬁber also suffers from nonlinear
effects, which causes further signal degeneration and is difﬁcult to compensate for.
Pulse propagation in optical ﬁbers can be described by the Nonlinear Schrödringer equation (NLSE) which
can include linear attenuation a in terms of dB/km, dispersion b2, dispersion slope b3 as well as nonlinear
==PAGE:28==
28
impairments introduced by the Kerr effect.
dA
dz + ib2
2
d2A
dt2 −b3
6
d3A
dt3 =
−a
2 A
| {z }
Attenuation
+ ig|A|2A
|
{z
}
Kerr effect
(2.1)
The optical Kerr effect should be highlighted as it describes how the refractive index of the ﬁber is dependent
on the intensity of the optical signal. This results in several propagation effects which are intensity-dependent
however the ones in focus for this thesis, are known as Self-Phase Modulation (SPM), Cross-Phase Modulation
(XPM) and Four-Wave Mixing (FWM).
SPM and XPM relates to the same propagation phenomenon of an intensity dependent phase-shift. The
difference between the two is determined by the amount of optical channels co-propagating within the same
optical ﬁber. SPM occurs as an intensity dependent phase-shift within the signal of a single-channel. Whereas
XPM describes an intensity dependent phase-shift between co-propagating signals. This results in a type of
nonlinear crosstalk. The total phase-shift induced by the channel nonlinearities on a speciﬁc channel is thus
dependent on the intensity of that channel (SPM), but also on the intensity of neighboring channels (XPM).
This essentially results in a chirp and spectral broadening as power increases.
The interaction between the intensities at different optical frequencies might induce new frequencies
which can happen when optical signals over a wide spectral range are propagating through the same ﬁber.
This is also called FWM and primarily occurs between multiple co-propagating channels. This nonlinear
effect occurs when two photons at two separate frequencies are absorbed which produces two other photons
at two different frequencies. However this can also generally be denoted as three waves producing a fourth as
described by wjki = wj + wk −wi thus resulting in a major source of nonlinear crosstalk.
Amplification:
Even though 1550 nm based optical channels provide low-loss transmission, ampliﬁ-
cation are needed during long haul transmission. The interval at which these are placed is a considerable
optimization issue based on a trade-off between e.g. cost and signal quality. It is primarily determined by the
attenuation caused by the optical ﬁber, but also the launch power of the optical signal.
Optical Erbium-doped ﬁber ampliﬁers (EDFA’s) became popular due to their properties of efﬁciently am-
plifying light in the 1500 nm wavelength range. An EDFA works by pumping light from a laser diode
operating at around 980 nm and/or 1450 nm. This excites erbium ions which ampliﬁes light in the 1500
nm wavelength range. This makes them essential for dealing with ﬁber losses in commonly deployed SMF.
Figure 2.2 visualizes a gain spectrum of an EDFA.
Even though EDFAs are used to compensate for ﬁber losses, the EDFAs themselves add noise and
furthermore amplify the noise of the signal. The noise added by EDFAs is primarily known as Ampliﬁed
Spontaneous Emission (ASE) which degrades the signal and thus the quality of transmission. Typically EDFAs
==PAGE:29==
optical communication
29
are described using a noise ﬁgure, which indicates the ratio of loss
between input and output electrical power. A noise ﬁgure of 3 dB
indicates an ideal ampliﬁer, and commercially deployed EDFAs have
noise ﬁgures close to 3 dB. Raman ampliﬁcation is another type of
ampliﬁcation which make use of a phenomenon occurring in silica
ﬁbers, enabling a more customized gain spectrum. The focus of this
thesis is however on EDFAs and the ampliﬁcation schemes.
1450
1500
1550
1600
Wavelength (nm)
-2
0
2
4
6
Gain (dB)
Figure 2.2: EDFA gain spectrum given an
active ﬁber length of 20 cm and a pump
of 200 mW [1][2]
For short range optical communication systems, the loss induced by
the channel medium might be small enough to allow for a single ampli-
ﬁer present at the transmitter. However for long-haul transmission this
is not the case. Cascading the ampliﬁers and dividing the transmission
link into spans is an efﬁcient way of increasing the transmission distance.
This can ensure that the performance is not primarily limited by the
nonlinear impairments of the channel as the optical launch power can
be reduced to only overcome the attenuation of a single span. The next
ampliﬁer in line is then to maintain the signal power by compensating
for only the loss of the span.
2.1.3
Receiver
The primary job of the receiver is to extract the information that is most likely to have originated from the
transmitter of the optical system. In order to provide with an overview of a coherent receiver, it is best to
split it up into four subsystems. 1) An optical front-end consisting of a photodetector which is capable of
converting light into electrical signals. 2) ADC able to sample said electrical signals and provide with discrete
signals. 3) Digital demodulator capable of converting the discrete samples into signals operating at the symbol
rate and 4) a decision circuit capable of producing the bits most likely to have been transmitted. [17]
Front-end
Two schemes of photodetection are considered, direct and coherent detection. Direct detection
(DD) is the simplest of the two and is able to map optical amplitude information to electrical amplitude
information, which is the only requirement for modulation methods based on amplitude level encoding of
information. OOK is an example of a binary modulation format which uses signal amplitude to encode
information. Modulation formats such as Pulse Amplitude Modulation (PAM) allows for more than a single
bit to be transmitted by creating a mapping between symbols, consisting of multiple bits, to various amplitude
levels. The receiver requirements for both modulation formats are essentially being able to convert an
incoming optical amplitude to an electrical amplitude with sufﬁcient information for bit extraction. Using
PAM may impose additional requirements to the photodetection consisting of applying amplitude thresholds
==PAGE:30==
30
which allows for an optical to electrical conversion.
If however also phase is used for information encoding, as used in PSK or QAM modulation, the direct
detection, which only detects the amplitude of the optical ﬁeld, is not enough. Coherent detection involves
the use of a Local Oscillator (LO) to extract also the phase of the optical ﬁeld allowing the use of both the
amplitude and phase of the optical ﬁeld to be utilized. The LO serves as a phase reference, however a
synchronization needs to be performed for approximating the original phase. This is traditionally done by a
Phase-Locked Loop (PLL) in either the electrical or optical domain. For optical signals taking use of both
polarizations, i.e. PM modulated signals, the LO laser is polarized 45 degrees relative to a Polarization Beam
Splitter (PBS) resulting in two separate reference signals, one for each polarization. Each polarization is then,
as extracted by a PBS in combination with the corresponding reference signal, mixed using an optical hybrid.
This produces two signals, one for each polarization, which are composed of ±I and ±Q components. These
signals are then converted to the electrical domain by photodetection.
Coherent detection methods in combination with polarization multiplexing can achieve high spectral
efﬁciency while also maximizing the power efﬁciency. However coherent detection does not itself sufﬁce for
efﬁcient reception. Coherent receivers are accompanied by high cost and complexity, and furthermore highly
susceptible to optical impairments unless compensated for. DSP enables compensation and equalization of
some of the ﬁber impairments, resulting in a far superior capacity potential than compared to DD.
The front-end produces an electrical signal, or two in the case of PM, from the optical ﬁeld based on
photodetection and the above explained process. Converting the analog electrical signal to a set of discrete
digital samples requires some analog-to-digital conversion (ADC) usually performed by a high-speed ADC.
The sampling rate at which the ADC is to sample must be at least the amount of symbols transmitted per
second. However, it is common to sample with a sampling rate of 2 times the symbol rate which supplies
with much needed information for conducting digital timing recovery. Once the digital samples are obtained
some timing mismatch may be present between the signals of symbols, e.g. the two data channels provided
by PM. For this reason deskew algorithms are usually included which works by introducing necessary timing
delays estimated by cross correlating the signals. This essentially ensures symbol synchronization across
channels.
Digital signal processing
Impairment compensation is entirely based on the full ﬁeld information
achieved using coherent detection, allowing channel equalization. Compensating dispersive effects such as
CD can be done by determining the amount of CD present in the transmission channel. This is done by
pre-determining the group delay dispersion of the ﬁber used for transmission. A static FIR ﬁlter using the
known dispersion constant and the total transmitted length is essentially enough for the original signal to be
==PAGE:31==
optical communication
31
recovered, however when considering nonlinear effects some additional modeling is required. Compensation
of PMD requires a dynamic equalization scheme as the state of polarizations are time varying. This is
essentially realized using four FIR ﬁlters in combination with the constant modulus algorithm (CMA) for
optimization of ﬁlter coefﬁcients. The use of CMA for equalization is an area of great importance for digital
receivers however further description is beyond the scope of this thesis.
Once some of the main channel impairments have been dealt with, synchronization of the symbols can be
resolved. The ADC provides samples of the symbols, and often two samples per symbol, however a difference
in the timing of those two samples and the clock used to generate the original symbols is present. Timing
recovery seek to compensate for the difference and provide with an estimate of the clock. This is done using
a combination of interpolation and timing algorithms such as Mueller-Mueller or early-late gate. Given the
frequency and phase of the transmitted signal, differences exist at the receiver due to noise. This is primarily
because transmitter and receivers do not share the same oscillator producing the carrier. Not synchronizing
frequency and phase results in issues extracting symbols as illustrated by a rotated constellation diagram.
This is usually solved in two steps, 1) frequency estimation provided by a maximum likelihood technique
followed by 2) carrier phase estimation often done using feed-forward techniques as described in [18].
Once the optical signal is converted, sampled, dispersion compensated and the symbol clock is recovered
along with required phase and frequency adjustments, symbol estimation and decoding may commence.
Symbol estimation is based on the modulation format used, as this dictates the decision thresholds. If
however Forward error correcting (FEC) is used the type of symbol estimation is dependent on the type of
FEC. Soft-decision FEC requires changes to the symbol alphabet as the FEC enables symbol estimation and
decoding. Hard-decision FEC requires symbol estimation to be based on the original symbol alphabet of the
modulation format. The decoding is then completed primarily by applying a series of decision thresholds
thus extracting the most likely transmitted symbols.
==PAGE:32==
32
2.2
Optical WDM system
Through the previous section a fundamental introduction has been given to optical communication systems
and component requirements at the transmitter, channel and receiver along knowledge of essential ﬁber
impairments. The main perspective of previous section may be seen as a single-channel system. Additions
to the system are required in order to transmit several optical channel simultaneously on the same ﬁber.
This section seek to describe the necessary system changes, how it improves spectral efﬁciency and which
problems arise when doing so.
2.2.1
Multichannel transmission
ECL
SOURCE
MODULATOR
WDM TRANSMITTER
DATA
ECL
SOURCE
MODULATOR
DATA
ECL
SOURCE
MODULATOR
DATA
λ1
λ2
λ3
MUX
Figure 2.3: Transmitter of a WDM system
consisting of three single-channel trans-
mitters and a multiplexer for creating the
WDM signal
No fundamental change is required to the transmitter behind each individual channel in a WDM system.
Components as described in 2.1.1 are still required, they are however a requirement per channel. Figure 2.3
displays a conceptual visualization of a WDM transmitter consisting of three channels operating at three
separate wavelengths. As an addition to the components previously described, such as an optical source and
a MZM modulator, a multiplexer (MUX) is needed to achieve a combined optical signal. In this particular
case consisting of three separate optical channels operating at three different wavelengths, l1, l2 and l3.
The multiplexed optical signal is then launched into the optical ﬁber for transmission. This essentially
enhances the capacity of the communication system by a factor of N channels, but does however require N
single-channel transmitters. The low-loss transmission achieved at wavelengths of 1550 nm stretches in reality
some where from 1460 nm to 1625 nm. The transmission band is commonly divided into the S, C and L band
which seek to generalize ranges of wavelengths. The C band in particular, 1530-1560 nm, is commonly used
for WDM systems of either a coarse (CWDM) of dense conﬁguration (DWDM). It seems logical and cost
==PAGE:33==
optical communication
33
efﬁcient to pack the optical spectra with as many channels as possible thus improving the channel medium
utilization. Commercially deployed DWDM systems are capable of transmitting 40 channels using 100 GHz
of inter-channel spacing and even 80 channels using 50 GHz spacing. ITU-T standardizations recommend
the use of 12.5 GHz spacing grids in effort to improve the ﬂexibility of current WDM systems. However
increasing the amount of channels and thus reducing the spacing between channels have considerable impact
on signal quality. [19]
Discussing WDM systems requires a switch of perspective from a component-based system view, to a
collection of components. Obvious design choices are present in optimization of a single-channel optical
communication system, such as spectral pulseshaping, modulation format choice, ampliﬁcation scheme and
so on. These design choices do not perish when considering WDM systems, more design choices are however
added as the complexity of the communication system increases. Examples of WDM system design choices
include; selection of channel wavelengths, number of channels and inter-channel spacing. Visualized by
Figure 2.4 are three WDM channels originated as three single optical channels but multiplexed together into a
combined WDM signal with a given inter-channel spacing, D f, determined by the wavelength, l1, l2, l3 and
bandwidth, Rs of the individual channels.
λ1
λ2
λ3
MUX
∆f
Rs
Figure 2.4: Conceptually example of a
WDM multiplexer and the resulting opti-
cal spectrum.
A WDM system operating in the C band with an inter-channel spacing of 50 GHz can enable 80 single-channel
transmitters. It is obvious that this increases the capacity 80-fold. It does however become increasingly
difﬁcult to maintain and operate such WDM systems as increasing the number of channels increase the
complexity of the system. Seeking to minimize the amount of optical sources required, approaches such as
integrated arrayed waveguide gratings (AWG) and chip-based multi-wavelength lasers exist.
2.2.2
Channel
Described in 2.1.2 launching an optical channel through an optical ﬁber results in impairments of the linear
and nonlinear kind. As a large spectral range is used in WDM systems, impairments have a system wide
==PAGE:34==
34
inﬂuence rather than a single inﬂuence as given a single-channel case. The impairments considered are linear
impairments such as CD and PMD and nonlinear impairments such as SPM, XPM and FWM. The impairments
co-exist meaning that any dispersive effects and any attenuation also interact with the nonlinear effects,
producing heavy signal degradation or even beneﬁcial interaction. XPM and FWM should be highlighted as
the main impairments for for WDM systems, as they are only present when multiple signals co-propagating.
Not to be confused with which impairments matter the most as that discussion depends highly on the system
conﬁguration.
For WDM systems dispersive effects are to some extent considered beneﬁcial as they help reduce the
non-linear effects of for example FWM. The amount of signal degradation caused by FWM is generally
identiﬁed as the power of the additionally created wave and the resulting crosstalk by interacting with
other propagating channels. The power at which e.g. a fourth wave appear, is determined by a selection of
parameters such as the ﬁber attenuation, propagation distance and effective length but also the efﬁciency of
FWM, h. The efﬁciency is dependent on the amount of accumulated phase mismatch, between the interacting
waves and increases as the phase mismatch converges towards zero - also known as a ’phase matching
condition’. Increasing dispersion leads to a steeper decrease of h which implies less power at the fourth
appearing wave resulting in less crosstalk thus less signal degradation. [20]
The wide wavelength range provided by the gain spectrum of EDFAs is the reason for their wide spread
usage in WDM systems occupying the S, C and L bands. Additionally EDFAs have the ability to provide
ampliﬁcation in all three bands simultaneously, which is ideal for WDM systems as only a single optical
ampliﬁer per span is enough. However, due to the gain spectrum of the EDFA, differences in channel
power are unavoidable. This is problematic as the sequence of EDFAs increase, continuously providing high
ampliﬁcation to the same channels, results in very high gain differences. Methods for gain-ﬂattening are
available using ﬁlter-based techniques placed typically after the ampliﬁer.
In summary, by controlling the amount of dispersion while ensuring an optimized launch power and an
efﬁcient ampliﬁcation scheme many of the nonlinear impairments can be minimized. Section 2.3 will further
explore the system design parameters for maximizing the BD product.
2.2.3
Multichannel receiver
As given by the description of the multichannel transmitter, similar changes are needed to receive multiple
channels. The properties of a single-channel receiver as described by 2.1.3 is a basic requirement per channel
received. However due to the received optical signal being a combined WDM signal some demultiplexing
is required in order to obtain the signal for each of the single-channel receivers. The transmitted signal is
==PAGE:35==
optical communication
35
constructed by a multiplexer component given the individual channels, a demultiplexer is required to reobtain
the individual channels from the combined signal. This includes the need for a particular demultiplexer
component as visualized in Figure 2.5.
PHOTO DETECTOR
DSP
DECISION 
CIRCUIT
DATA
PHOTO DETECTOR
DSP
DECISION 
CIRCUIT
DATA
FRONT END
DSP
DECISION 
CIRCUIT
RECEIVER
DATA
DEMUX
λ1λ2 λ3
Figure 2.5: Receiver of a WDM system
consisting of a demux and a receiver com-
ponent for each wavelength extracted.
A demultiplexer can be considered a wavelength-selective mechanism, that seeks to extract particular
wavelengths from an optical ﬁeld given a bandwidth of the individual wavelengths. Thus the number of
outputs of the demultiplexer corresponds to the amount of optical channels wanted extracted from the
received optical ﬁeld. Several constructions exist for optical demultiplexers however the most common design
is based on optical-ﬁlters which increases the complexity of the demultiplexer as compared to the reverse
function of multiplexing. The optical-ﬁlters require strict design margins such as low-loss, ideal pass-band
ﬁlter shapes and minimized amount of crosstalk. Additionally it is common to use demultiplexers in the
reverse role as multiplexers allowing the use of the same type of component at both the transmitter and the
receiver.
In some cases it may not be desired to ’extract’ or demultiplex all wavelengths from the combined WDM
signal, as capacity may need to be routed differently given a speciﬁc selection of channels. For this particular
reason add/drop multiplexers exist, they enable the possibility of selectively adding or dropping wavelengths
to or from the WDM signal. ROADM (Reconﬁgurable Optical Add/Drop Multiplexer) is an essential element
in WDM networking and capacity routing however considered beyond the scope of this thesis.
2.3
WDM System design
Through the previous section a basic introduction has been given to WDM systems. In particular the
components required for a multichannel optical transmitter and receiver. As a combined WDM signal
propagates through the channel medium, impairments are present and causes signal degradation as further
described in 2.2.2. These impairments are essential to consider when designing an efﬁcient WDM system. This
section seeks to describe which system parameters have a substantial effect on performance and introduce the
==PAGE:36==
36
issue of optimization.
The efﬁciency of a WDM system can be difﬁcult to quantify as it can be evaluated on different areas
such as cost, power consumption and capacity. The scope of this thesis seek to investigate the efﬁciency of
WDM systems with respect to capacity and provide insight in how efﬁciency can be determined in terms
of performance. More speciﬁcally the performance determined by the maximum bit rate possible over a
given distance. The BD product seek to provide a measure of system performance as it quantiﬁes system
conﬁgurations with respect to the maximum capacity possible over a given distance. This allows for it to
be used as a performance metric that indicates which system conﬁgurations composes the highest capacity
efﬁciency thus the best performance on a given transmission distance.
For instance, having a large transmission distance impacts the quality of the transmission due to impair-
ments and channel loss causing signal degradation. This requires a system conﬁguration that is reliable in the
presence of the impeding signal degradation caused by the long-haul transmission. A large BD product may
be obtained if a system conﬁguration suitable for long-haul transmission is selected, thus indicating a high
efﬁciency of the given distance. An equally large BD product may be obtained for much shorter transmission
distances, by applying a system conﬁguration that favors shorter distances. For instance, maximizing the
spectral efﬁciency (SE) is perhaps a possibility as the signal is not as degraded as in the long-haul case. In
other words, the BD product may be deﬁned as the product of the length of a given optical link and the
corresponding maximum optical bandwidth. The system conﬁguration that achieves the highest total capacity
on a ﬁxed transmission length and subsequently can be successfully received. More speciﬁcally achieving a
BER below the threshold of the FEC scheme used.
Designing a WDM system such that the performance is maximized depends on a range of parameters and
settings. A combined WDM signal is essentially made of N single-channel transmitters, it thus makes sense
to provide insight in how the performance can be improved for single-channel systems and which parameters
have signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the BD product.
Single-channel
The trade-off between SE and distance is obvious, an increase in SE usually requires a
better SNR thus less signal degradation. The degradation of the signal is determined the impairments and
loss of the optical channel which limits the maximum possible bit rate. Increasing the SE can either be done
by increasing the level of modulation, the use of PM or increasing the symbol rate. As capacity increases
the loss provided by the optical channel achieve a more extensive inﬂuence on the maximum transmission
thus the BD product may decrease based on a long transmission length. It is desired to obtain an overview
of which system conﬁguration parameters, of a single-channel system, has primary inﬂuence on not only
capacity but also maximum transmission distance as this indicates the maximum capacity.
Modulation format, Polarization-multiplexing and Symbol rate can be seen as the core factors inﬂuencing the
capacity. By increasing the level of modulation or the symbol rate, or both a substantial increase can be
==PAGE:37==
optical communication
37
obtained. E.g. a single-channel 32 Gbaud QPSK modulated signal
provides 2 bits per symbol, resulting in a bit rate of 64 Gbit. If however
polarization-multiplexing also is considered, the bit rate increases by a
factor of 2 to 128Gbit, as two data streams are possible using the same
spectral components. However by enabling PM, effects such as PMD
creates additional signal degradation which inﬂuences the maximum
transmission distance. Increasing the level of modulation from QPSK to
16QAM allows for 4 bits per symbol. Using a symbol rate of 32Gbaud
and PM, a bit rate of 256Gbit may be achieved. This requires however
a combined lower channel loss, as the modulation format of 16QAM
is more susceptible to noise than QPSK. So either a lower channel
loss is obtained, or the maximum distance of transmission is reduced.
In summary, maximizing the capacity boils down to the signal loss
achieved through the optical channel, however some conﬁgurations
may favor different transmission scenarios.
The signal quality obtained through the optical channel is inﬂu-
enced by a broad range of parameters such as; Total transmission length,
Dispersion, Optical launch power and the resulting nonlinear impairments,
Ampliﬁer noise and Fiber construction.
Conﬁguration
Inﬂuence
Modulation format
Capacity
Symbol rate
Capacity
Number of spans
Max. distance
Dispersion
Max. distance
Optical launch power
Max. distance
Ampliﬁer noise
Max. distance
Wavelength assignment
Capacity
Interchannel spacing
Capacity*
Number of channels
Capacity
Table 2.1: Overview of some WDM sys-
tem parameters and their primary inﬂu-
ence. E.g. Symbol rate have a primary
inﬂuence on capacity, but requires lower
loss through the channel medium. *Indi-
cates an inﬂuence on spectral efﬁciency
as given by b/s/Hz
The effect of a combined WDM signal is dependent on the design
choices, and conﬁgurations of each channel in the WDM channel. How-
ever the combination of all channels is what deﬁnes a WDM system
and parameters for conﬁguring a collection of channels must be con-
sidered. These commonly include channel placement, spectral width
and channel spacing and are considered to have a distinctive effect on
the total performance of the combined WDM signal. This can either be
in terms of increasing spectral efﬁciency, or reducing channel crosstalk
through increased channel spacing thus lowering signal degradation.
These parameters can generally be denoted as, Wavelength assignment,
Inter-channel spacing and the resulting number of channels.
Conﬁguration and parameters of WDM systems with a direct inﬂu-
ence on the system performance can be outlined as seen in Table 2.1.
The BD product can be used as an efﬁciency-indicator and allows for
==PAGE:38==
38
comparison between system designs. As listed through this section a broad range of parameters have a direct
inﬂuence on the system performance, and it should be clear that an optimization of all parameters is not
straight forward. The optimization issue can possibly be summarized as; ﬁnding a system conﬁguration which
maximizes the capacity and allows for successful transmission given the distance it is to reach. However,
in order to achieve the best performing system conﬁguration it is required to obtain the resulting BER of
the transmission distance as this decides the maximum capacity given a FEC limit. The resulting BER is
determined by the previously mentioned channel impairments, thus by parameters with a direct inﬂuence on
maximum transmission distance such as the optical launch power.
2.3.1
System optimization
Designing a WDM system to maximize the BD product is one important aspect. Another aspect is the
add/drop multiplexing of wavelengths allowing routing of capacity within WDM-based networks. The
complexity of WDM-based networks is not based on a one-to-one direct A-B transmission, it consists of
several data paths thus a network of one-to-many or many-to-many connections. Capacity has a dynamic
nature, and allocation of capacity is required to be dynamic. The use of ROADMs enables operators to
dynamically add and/or drop wavelengths to and from connections - thus resulting in changes to trafﬁc ﬂows.
In order to effectively be able to reroute wavelengths, i.e. ensuring the reroute is possible, information about
the new route is required. The channel(s) may have limitations due to a maximum transmission distance or
simply be ineffective i.e. acquire a low BD product. A reconﬁguration of the rerouted wavelengths is needed,
however discovering the ideal WDM conﬁguration i.e. an optimizing of the system conﬁguration, is difﬁcult
and sought after. As mentioned previously, the optimization issue consists of maximizing the BD product,
however in order to do so BER measurements are needed as to select the system conﬁgurations that maximize
the BD product. [21]
Currently much of the reconﬁguration and optimization is based on either gathered empirical data or
theoretical data models. These ensure a basic and ﬁnite insight in the achieved BER of system conﬁgurations
based on some of the parameters listed in Table 2.1. An operator may possess a substantial amount of
measurements on his WDM network and by using these measurements it is possible to optimize conﬁgurations
to some extent. The measurements should provide with a broad enough insight in several transmission
scenarios as to discover which conﬁgurations are feasible and may provide with increased capacity or
distance. However if new equipment or new optical links are added to the current network setup and the
measurements are not insightful enough it is required to obtain additional measurements, which is costly.
Obtaining measurements for all parameters listed in Table 2.1 is not feasible and theoretical insight is more
cost efﬁcient and can ideally provide with quality guesses on which BER might be expected given a system
conﬁgurations,
==PAGE:39==
optical communication
39
Section 1.1 summarized existing methods for achieving insight in system performance, i.e. the resulting BER
given a system conﬁguration, through modeling of important nonlinear impairments. The GN model, and
the following E-GN model has become a common and accepted way of understanding system performance of
a given system conﬁguration thus allowing system optimization. The models are however limited in accuracy
when considering the evaluation of span-to-span characteristics, which is inﬂuential for short-range systems.
The E-GN model considers span-to-span characteristics however at the cost of increased computational
runtime. The NLSE Eq. (2.1) are powerful equations that governs the propagation through optical ﬁbers and
can essentially be used directly to compute the resulting impairments and thus signal degradation. However,
analytical solutions to the equation is complex to derive and requires substantial limiting assumptions. It
is instead attractive to approximate a numerical solution for the speciﬁc domain of operation although this
is considered computational heavy. This is typically done using computer-based simulations and based on
methods such as split-step Fourier, or the previously mentioned VS. This thesis seek to conduct computer-
based simulations that take advantage of the NSLE in combination with split-step Fourier approximation
which is further described in Chapter 4. Experimental measurements are also conducted as described in
Chapter 5.
==PAGE:40==
==PAGE:41==
3 Predictive methods using Machine Learning
Author: Jesper Wass
Machine Learning has been around for several decades but the attention towards these techniques has in-
creased rapidly in recent years due to an increasing amount of available data and an increase in computational
power. In the past decade, the Internet has exploded reaching a global annual data trafﬁc of more than a
zettabyte by the end of 2016 [22]. With the enormous use of cellphones, laptops, cars etc., our everyday life
involves a huge amount of data processing which can potentially be used to optimize and solve complex
problems, or even to make predictions for the future. This is the purpose of ML.
This chapter will present basic theory about ML. Section 3.1 introduces the concept of ML including
motivation for application and basic learning principles. Section 3.2 explores model optimization techniques
including introduction to the Bayesian optimization framework. Additionally, the section presents basic
regression theory which is extended to the NN and GPR approach in Section 3.3 and 3.4 respectively. Finally,
the model properties, pros, and cons of NN and GPR are compared in Section 3.5.
3.1
Introduction
ML covers a broad range of techniques and algorithms developed to ease and improve general complex
data analysis. As this deﬁnition is rather loose, the concrete difference between ML and common statistical
modeling can be difﬁcult to detect. However, the basic idea of ML is to have an adaptive model analyze
and "learn" from occurring incidents and then, based on this data, perform prediction/decision of incidents
which have not yet occurred. The models learn from experience. The idea of intelligent learning in machines
is attractive due to their fast data processing capabilities but also due to the impartial nature of machines
which improves the decision making ability as they are not limited by so-called cognitive biases [23]. This can
potentially lead to faster and more accurate solutions for complex problems.
As an example, in the 1950’s Arthur Lee Samuel developed a self-learning checkers-playing program
using learning techniques from the ﬁeld of ML. In principle, building an automated checker-playing program
can be done with "simple" rule writing. However, in checkers, each player can have up to 20 playing pieces
on a board with 100 ﬁelds. The amount of possible position combinations of the playing pieces will sum
==PAGE:42==
42
up to more than a trillion making it impossible to write rules for every possible incident. The number of
dimensions in the data is simply too large. Instead, Samuel used a learning technique where the program
played against itself several thousand times. For every completed game, the program learned from the
occurring incidents and with the new experience, the playing level improved. In a short period of time,
the inexperienced checkers-playing program became almost unbeatable due to the substantial amount of
observed data to learn from [24].
3.1.1
Learning techniques
The example above illustrates the strength of the advanced learning techniques used in ML. Even though the
checkers-playing program is trained and specialized for only one purpose, the learning principle is applicable
for an unlimited amount of systems. ML models use adaptive approaches, where models adjust and optimize
their parameters from an observed set of data called a training set. The training set plays an important role
in these solutions because the algorithms use the data as a representation of a complete system. Hence, the
quality and quantity of the observed data impacts the resulting model accuracy.
Two types of learning methods exist; supervised and unsupervised. With the supervised approach, the
data used to train the adaptive model contain both input and output values with the purpose of learning the
input/output relations. In ML terminology, the data input used for training is also known as features, and
the output data used for training is known as targets. It is important that the chosen features are correlated
with the targets, as otherwise the algorithm will produce poor accuracy due to insufﬁcient information.
The features are not necessarily comprised by raw measured data. This is due to the fact that raw data is
not necessarily optimal as the training input. Therefore, prior to the training phase, the raw data is often
processed and transformed into more useful features to obtain a more obvious correlation to the targets or
alternatively to reduce computational complexity. This process is known as feature extraction.
With unsupervised learning, the input features alone are used for training.
Without target values,
input/output space relation cannot be modeled. Instead, the aim of unsupervised learning is to discover
possible patterns in the input data such as groups or "clusters". This method is also known as clustering.
The supervised learning technique can be used for both regression and classiﬁcation. For classiﬁcation,
outputs are discrete, i.e. only a ﬁnite number of output values (classes) are possible. In case of regression, the
output values are continuous and can assume an inﬁnite number of values.
To generalize performance in optical WDM systems, we wish to monitor BER as a function of the system
conﬁguration parameters stated in Section 1.2. In order to optimize the system performance, continuous BER
measurements are required as to identify the optimal system conﬁguration. This application requires use of
==PAGE:43==
predictive methods using machine learning
43
regression techniques, which will thus be the main focus in this thesis.
3.2
Model optimization
With the learning techniques above, it is possible to ﬁnd an appropriate regression model from the training
set. However, ﬁnding the best possible model depends on the means of which we optimize and evaluate. To
ﬁnd the model with highest accuracy when predicting unseen data, efﬁcient optimization schemes must be
employed. Hence, before actually introducing the NN and GPR, we turn to an explanation of how model
optimization works in general.
3.2.1
Maximum likelihood
Optimizing ML models typically involves adaption of certain model parameters w, and we seek to ﬁnd the
parameters resulting in the best possible prediction model. The maximum likelihood is a common evaluation
scheme for this purpose, where models are evaluated using the so-called likelihood function p(D|w), which
expresses the probability p of observing the data set D given the model parameters w. Using this technique,
we can ﬁnd the model for which the data set is the most likely to be observed.
It is common to model data uncertainty with Gaussian noise, and we therefore turn to the standard
Gaussian likelihood function expressing the maximum likelihood of a standard Gaussian distribution, which
our data is expected to follow. The maximum likelihood is given by [25]:
p(D|µ, s2) =
N
’
n=1
N (xn|µ, s2)
(3.1)
Here xn is the n’th observation in the training set D of size N. The parameters w to optimized in this case
is the s2 and µ depicting the variance and mean of the Gaussian distribution. Since performance is often
provided as an error measurement, minimizing an error function instead of maximizing a likelihood is more
attractive and minimizing the negative log of the likelihood is usually preferred. The negative log of the
likelihood is given by:
−ln p(D|µ, s2) =
1
2s2
N
Â
n=1
(xn −µ)2 + N
2 ln s2 + N
2 ln 2p
(3.2)
Maximizing this equation with respect to the parameters µ and s2, the parameters for the maximum likelihood
solutions can be obtained by:
µML = 1
N
N
Â
n=1
xn
s2
ML = 1
N
N
Â
n=1
(xn −µML)2
(3.3)
The maximum likelihood is a simple way of optimizing adaptive parameters in models, but it involves
==PAGE:44==
44
complications which limits its suitability for some applications. One limitation comes from the fact that the
maximum likelihood solution in Eq. (3.3) has a bias when estimating the variance parameter s2. It is known
that the variance parameter will always be underestimated by a factor of (N −1)/N. With very large training
sets, this bias will become negligible, however, with high dimensional data, the amount of training points
needed to neglect this bias becomes overwhelming, and the bias poses a serious issue for model accuracy.
Optimizing models based solely the maximum likelihood of the training points will generally produce
models with poor predictive capabilities. Overcoming this issue can be challenging, especially for sparse and
noisy data sets as models are likely to ﬁt to the noise rather than the general data patterns. Unless we have a
huge amount of training data, it must be ensured that the model has good properties for generalization. This
issue is known as over-ﬁtting.
The problem with the maximum likelihood solution and over-ﬁtting can be reduced by performing model
selection on various trained models. The purpose of model selection is to ﬁnd the model with best predictive
performance, but as stated above, this can be difﬁcult when data is unseen. One way of performing model
selection is to introduce one or two new observed data sets that are independent from the training set. These
are known as the validation set and test set. The purpose of the validation set is to evaluate (or validate)
different proposed models. As the data are independent of the training set, these will appear unseen to the
proposed models. Evaluating the models on this data set thus provides an indication of their predictive
performance. The purpose of the test set is then to perform a ﬁnal evaluation of the chosen model. The use of
a validation sets to choose between models is commonly known as cross validation (CV).
3.2.2
Bayesian approach
The problem of over-ﬁtting occurs when the model complexity in terms of adaptive parameters and data
dimensionality exceeds the amount of available training data. The fundamental problem is that the only
system knowledge available is the information contained by the training set. If we are "unlucky" and the
observations are very noisy, we end up optimizing a model to unlikely data. The validation set described
above can often reduce this risk dramatically, however, the validation set may also be noisy.
Another possible way of dealing with this issue is to use a Bayesian approach where prior knowledge
of the system is included in the training phase. Instead of optimizing the likelihood function directly, the
likelihood of the data given the model parameters p(D|w) is combined with some prior knowledge p(w)
of the parameters to produce a so-called posterior probability p(w|D) which deﬁnes the probability of the
parameters after the data set has been observed. This is also known as Bayes’ theorem [26]:
p(w|D) = p(D|w)p(w)
p(D)
(3.4)
==PAGE:45==
predictive methods using machine learning
45
The marginal probability p(D) acts as a normalization constant ensuring the posterior probability to be a
valid probability density. It may be difﬁcult to detect the signiﬁcant difference between Bayes’ theorem in
Eq. (3.4) and the likelihood function in Eq. (3.1). If we imagine a weather forecast predicting if it will rain
or not on a speciﬁc day, we can train our model on measurements from the previous week. If the weather
during these week has been unusual with rain every day, the maximum likelihood approach will base its
solution on inductive generalization and predict rain every day. However, with the Bayesian approach, a prior
probability distribution is included in the solution, which determines our prior expectation of how probable
rain is, which will produce more reliable results.
Whether to use the Bayesian approach or the maximum likelihood approach can be ambiguous as it
depends on the speciﬁc application. Even though the Bayesian approach seems like the best choice, deﬁning
realistic and usable priors for the system can be challenging.
3.2.3
Alternative Model Selection
Practically the amount of available data may be limited, and in such situations, dividing the data into
three individual sets may result in a training set with an insufﬁcient number of data points. Hence, this
approach cannot always be adopted. In such situations it is more appealing to use the entire data set as a
training set to give the model optimal training conditions. But here we are back at the main issue that no
validation is performed and results may be over-ﬁtted and data-speciﬁc rather than generalized. Alternative
validation techniques can be used where only a training set is required. The idea is train each proposed
model multiple times using different instances/proportions of the same data set. For each training round
the models are then evaluated on the remaining data not used for training. The primary difference from the
classical training/validation set approach is that training is done multiple times using different perturbations
of the same data. In this way, the risk of having data-speciﬁc models is reduced, since a model with high
performance on a speciﬁc instance of the training set may have equally low performance on a different
instance of the training set. This reveals that the model in general does not have a good predictive nature.
Training models on different instances of the same data set is not optimal, however, with a very scarce data
set these alternative CV techniques are very useful. Two main types exist; leave-one-out CV (LOO-CV) and
k-fold-CV.
==PAGE:46==
46
Data set
Test
Training
Test
Training
Test
Training
Test
Training
Training
Training
Training
Training
Training
Training
Training
Training
Fold 1
Fold 2
Fold 3
Fold 4
Test
Test
Test
Test
Evaluation
Figure 3.1: Conceptual illustration of 4-
fold-CV
K-fold
K-fold-CV approach divides the data set into k folds/partitions [27]. Each proposed model is then
optimized by using k −1 of the folds for training and the remaining fold for evaluation. This process is
performed k times until all k folds have been used for evaluation. The idea of k-fold-CV is illustrated with 4
folds in Figure 3.1.
Each training round leads to a performance measure, and typically, the mean or sum of all evaluations are
used as an approximation of the predictive performance of the model. A draw back of the k-fold-CV is that
the model selection phase becomes slower as multiple training rounds are necessary to obtain a representation
of the predictive performance.
Leave-one-out
LOO-CV is a speciﬁc case of the k-fold-CV where each fold only contains one data point,
and the number of folds k in Figure 3.1 becomes equal to the number of observed data points. Each model
is trained by leaving a single observation out to be used for evaluation. Hence, if 200 training points are
available, only 199 are used for training, after which the the model is evaluated on the remaining data point.
Hereafter, the model is trained again on 199 data points where a different point is left out from the data
set. This approach is particularly attractive for very sparse data sets. Once again, the mean or sum of all
evaluations can be used as an approximation of the predictive performance of the model.
3.2.4
Basic regression
Many adaptive models for solving complex regression problems exist. A simple approach is to use so-called
linear regression models where the input/output relation in the training data is modeled by a linear combination
of ﬁxed functions called basis functions [28]:
y(x, w) =
M−1
Â
j=0
wjfj(x) = wTf(x)
(3.5)
==PAGE:47==
predictive methods using machine learning
47
where w = (w0, ..., wM−1) and f = (f0, ..., fM−1)T. Each basis function in f has a corresponding function
coefﬁcient also known as a weight which controls its importance in the linear combination. The number of
basis functions determines the model complexity and should be chosen based on the training set size to
avoid over-ﬁtting as described above. Even though the prediction function y(x, w) is linear in w, it can be
nonlinear in the input space x by using nonlinear basis functions. This allows the models to solve problems
with nonlinear input/output relations [25]. By incorporating Gaussian noise e into our system, we model
the observed target values t as t = y(x, w) + e and then seek to model the so-called predictive distribution
p(y|x) implicitly into our regression function y(x, w). When noise is assumed to be Gaussian, the predicted
value y becomes the mean of the predictive distribution, as this is the most probable value. The predictive
distribution indicates the prediction uncertainty, but as this is modeled implicitly into the prediction function
y(x, w), it is not directly accessible.
The regression function y(x, w) is found by optimizing the model weights w using maximum likelihood
or the Bayesian approach described above, and either way, evaluation of the likelihood function is required.
In this speciﬁc case, the noise e is assumed Gaussian on each target with variance s2 and mean µ. This leads
to the following likelihood function over all training points [25]:
p(t|x, w, s2) = N (t|y(x, w), s2) )
(3.6)
ln p(t|X, w, s2) = −N
2 ln s2 −N
2 ln 2p −
1
2s2
N
Â
n=1
(tn −wTf(xn))2
(3.7)
This likelihood function is interesting because only the last term actually depends on the weights w. Maxi-
mizing the likelihood function will thus be equivalent to minimizing this term, which is commonly known as
the sum-of-squares error function and is widely used as a performance measurement in ML as a substitute for
the maximum likelihood.
Building a prediction function using the linear regression model framework is attractive due to the simple
analytic properties [25]. We see for instance that the maximum likelihood in Eq. (3.7) becomes a convex
function with an unique closed-form solution, which can be obtained by evaluating its gradient. A Bayesian
approach can easily be adopted by inducing priors on the weights. Practically the linear regression models
have limited applicability on data of high dimensionality due to a lack of scalability as the number of training
points necessary to produce accurate solutions grows exponentially with the dimensionality of the data.
Because the basis functions are static, the number of functions needed to model the increased dimensionality
also grows exponentially which poses a serious problem when data dimensionality increases.
Dealing with high dimensional data is a common challenge in ML. To make the linear regression models
more scalable, some modiﬁcations are necessary. One possible modiﬁcation is to replace the ﬁxed basis
==PAGE:48==
48
functions with adaptive basis functions, where adjustable parameters are incorporated inside the basis
functions. These parameters are then optimized during training. The NN is an example of this approach.
Another possibility is to consider the regression technique above in a function-space view rather than
parameter-space view, which is the case for the GPR. While the standard linear regression models and the NN
are both based on optimization of parametric forms, the GPR uses a non-parametric function-space approach
where inference is done from a distribution over functions rather than parameters. These concepts will be
further explained below.
3.3
Neural Network
The NN approach reuses principles from the linear regression models. NN uses linear combinations of basis
functions, but the basis functions are adaptive rather than ﬁxed and contain parameters that are optimized
during the supervised training phase. As a result, the NN can handle high dimensional data with complex
relations much more efﬁciently.
3.3.1
Basic form
The functional form of the NN requires the basis functions f in Eq. (3.5) to be adaptive; they must depend on
adjustable parameters. Hence, the nonlinear basis functions are extended to involve linear combinations of
the inputs instead of the inputs directly. The weights in these new linear combinations then become adaptive
parameters. The general extensions can be outlined as:
y(x, w) =
M−1
Â
j=0
wjfj(x) )
(3.8)
y(x, w) =
M−1
Â
j=0
wjfj
 
D−1
Â
i=0
wji(xi)
!
(3.9)
This extended version has adaptive basis functions and is the fundamental form of the NN model. In NN
terminology the basis functions fj(·) are referred to as activation functions and denoted h(·). These are
typically chosen to be logistic sigmoid [25]. The output of the activation functions are commonly referred to
as hidden nodes. We get basic NN form:
yk(x, w) =
M−1
Â
j=0
wkjh
 
D−1
Â
i=0
wji(xi)
!
(3.10)
The simple regression form in Eq. (3.5) has been extended to involve two linear combinations in different
"layers" of processing. This can easily be extended further to involve more layers by adding new linear
combinations with adaptive parameters inside the existing linear combinations. This makes the NN a powerful
==PAGE:49==
predictive methods using machine learning
49
wKM
wMD
hM(·)
xD
yK
x0
h0(·)
y1
Hidden layer
Output layer
Input layer
Figure 3.2: Graphical representation of a
feed-forward network with one hidden
layer, M hidden nodes, input dimension
D and output dimensions k.
tool as complexity and depth of the network can be increased according to the data complexity. Additionally,
the number of hidden nodes M in each layer can also be varied to ﬁt model complexity to the data. To
illustrate the multi-layer nature of the neural network, a graphical representation is given in Figure 3.2.
It should be noted that many types of neural networks exist. The formula given in Eq. (3.10) denotes the
basic form of a feed-forward neural network, which has practically shown to be a powerful tool for system
generalization.
3.3.2
Optimization techniques
When training a NN, we wish to adjust all the adaptive weights to optimize the model to the speciﬁc data set.
As we saw with the linear regression models, parameter optimization was straight forward as the likelihood
function had an unique closed-form solution. Further more, equation Eq. (3.7) suggested reducing the
likelihood function to the sum-of-squares error function when optimizing model parameters. Training a
neural network partly follows the same approach as the likelihood function is completely identical to Eq.
(3.7). Hence, minimizing the sum-of-squares error function can be used to ﬁnd the optimal model weights.
The error function is explicitly given as:
E(w) = 1
2
N
Â
n=1
(y(xn, w) −tn)2
(3.11)
==PAGE:50==
50
The procedure of ﬁnding the maximum likelihood solution is more complex here due to the multi-layer
nature of the prediction function. This causes the likelihood function to be non-convex and detected minima
may only be local. Opposed to the linear regression function, ﬁnding the stationary points in Eq. (3.11) is
not possible by evaluating the gradient analytically. Instead these must be found using iterative approaches.
Various iterative techniques exist. A common technique is to initialize the model parameters and then evaluate
the cost function and cost function derivatives. Based on either the ﬁrst or second order derivatives, the
parameter values are updated by stepping in the direction of a lower cost. After the step, the cost function is
evaluated once again until some stopping criterion is met, for instance when the error becomes acceptable.
This basic idea can be expressed as:
w(t+1) = w(t) + Dw(t)
(3.12)
How the speciﬁc parameter update takes place depends on the speciﬁc optimization algorithm in use. Each
algorithm includes a trade-off between accuracy, memory and calculation time, and the algorithm must be
chosen depending on the scenario. The optimization algorithm focused on in this thesis is known as the
Bayesian regularization. The iterative parameter updates in this technique is rather complex and involves
strategies from other optimization algorithms. To explain how the optimization technique work, a small
introduction to some other optimization techniques is necessary.
Gradient descent
One of the simplest techniques is known as the gradient descent, and uses the approach
from Eq. (3.12) by deﬁning the parameter updates as:
Dw(t) = −hrE(w(t))
(3.13)
This algorithm uses the gradient of the error function rE(w) to evaluate the direction of which to update the
parameters. The magnitude of the step is determine by a parameter h also known as the learning rate. The
initial parameter guess and the learning rate are the two important elements in this technique. If the learning
rate is large, the step size will also be large which leads to a faster convergence. However, if the learning rate
is too large, the algorithm may jump too far and never come close to the minimum of the error function. On
the other hand, if the learning rate is small, the accuracy will be great as it may come very close to the actual
minimum, however, the training phase may be way too slow - especially if the initial parameters are far from
the optimal.
Newton optimization
Optimizing the model parameters can also be done using the second order derivatives
also known as the Hessian matrix H, which can be obtained by forcing a Taylor expansion of the error function
given a single parameter point ˆw [25]. The full Newton algorithm uses this approach where both the gradient
==PAGE:51==
predictive methods using machine learning
51
and Hessian matrix is used to deﬁne the parameter update:
w(t+1) = ˆw(t) + (−H−1
ˆw(t)rE( ˆw(t)))
(3.14)
Sometimes a learning rate parameter is also included to control the magnitude of the step size similarly to
the gradient descent technique. The full Hessian matrix can be difﬁcult and heavy to compute, and for this
reason approximations to the Hessian matrix are popular.
The Gauss-Newton algorithm takes advantage of the fact that the sum-of-squared error function is a
common choice for optimization, and the algorithm is specialized for this error function only. The idea of
the Gauss-Newton algorithm is to approximate the Hessian matrix using the Jacobian matrix J which is
a ﬁrst order derivative. When the error function takes the form of Eq. (3.11), the Hessian matrix can be
approximated by [29]:
H = JTJ
(3.15)
and the gradient by:
rE(w) = JTe
(3.16)
Here e is a vector of errors/residuals of the observation t given by the result of each inner subtraction in Eq.
(3.11). The Gauss-Newton parameter update becomes:
w(t+1) = w(t) −(JTJ)−1JTe(t)
(3.17)
We see that the optimization technique is based entirely on the ﬁrst order derivatives thus increasing the
calculation simplicity compared to the full Newton approach. This technique together with the gradient
descent approach form the foundation of the Levenberg-Marquardt technique.
Levenberg-Marquardt
The Levenberg-Marquardt optimization is an extension to the Gauss-Newton tech-
nique and involves a learning rate parameter to have a dynamic inﬂuence of the gradient. The parameter
update then becomes [29]:
w(t+1) = w(t) −(JTJ + l(t)I)−1JTe(t)
(3.18)
Here l is a scalar controlling the inﬂuence of the gradient factor. If the scalar is large, the inﬂuence of the
Hessian matrix will decrease while the gradient factor will have a larger inﬂuence on the parameter update.
The idea of the technique is to decrease the scalar every time an iteration results in an error decrease and
increase the scalar if the iteration results in error increase. Having a dynamic Hessian/gradient inﬂuence is
efﬁcient as the step size is adjusted when we get closer or further from the optimal parameters. However,
the Levenberg-Marquardt is very sensitive to local minima in the cost function and thus depends heavily
on how the weights are initialized. The Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm does not use a Bayesian approach
==PAGE:52==
52
and observations with low probability, such as outliers, are treated with a similar weight as more probable
observations. This leads to a risk of over-ﬁtting, and dealing with this issue requires extensions towards a
Bayesian treatment.
Bayesian regularization
Bayesian regularization deals with the over-ﬁtting issue by adding a weight cost in
the error function, and optimization is done as a linear combination of minimal error and minimal weights.
Hence, the error function from Eq. (3.11) is extended with a weight cost function [30]:
F(w) = aE(w)weight + bE(w)error
(3.19)
The weight cost is given as E(w)weight = ÂM
i=1 w2
i where M is the total number of weights. The combined cost
function F(w) should be minimized by ﬁnding the lowest possible combination of error and weights. In this
way, the network complexity is penalized and the inﬂuence of outliers is reduced. Penalizing the weights
reduces the probability of steep slopes in the ﬁnal regression function and reduces the risk of over-ﬁtting.
The hyperparameters a and b are updated for every iteration and their values are determined using Bayes’
theorem, where the posterior probability of the hyperparameters given the errors and weights is maximized.
Their initial values are drawn randomly from their prior distributions. For every iteration the weights w are
updated using the Levenberg-Marquardt technique from Eq. (3.18), after which the sum-of-squared weights
function is evaluated together with the the sum-of-squares error function. The values of the hyperparameters
a and b are then updated and the algorithm continues. Regularizing the network function is attractive
because the model complexity becomes less dependent on the number of hidden neurons and choosing an
appropriate number of neurons becomes less challenging.
3.3.3
Derivatives and error backpropagation
The section above went through some of the most common optimization techniques including the Bayesian
regularization which will be the main focus of this thesis. Parameter optimization rely on the error function
derivatives in every iteration, which must be calculated before parameters can be updated. Efﬁcient means
for evaluating the error function derivatives are vital to efﬁcient parameter optimization. In the feed-forward
NN, the process of error backpropagation is a popular method for this purpose. Since the NN has weights in
different layers, the error function derivatives must be evaluated on different levels. At the output nodes,
the output error measurements can be used to calculate the gradient of the error function, however, for the
internal layers the error induced by each weight is not directly known, and the error measurement at the
output units must be sent backwards through the network. The backpropagated gradients are then used in
the hidden nodes to determine their affection on the error function and thus the gradient for their weights.
This continues until the gradients have backpropagated through the entire network and all weights have been
evaluated, after which all weights are updated.
==PAGE:53==
predictive methods using machine learning
53
3.3.4
Stopping criteria
The optimization techniques of a neural network use iterative approaches, and deﬁning so-called stopping
criteria is important to avoid inﬁnite run times. As we search for stationary points in the error function, it will
often be appropriate to deﬁne a minimum gradient threshold after which the algorithm should stop. The
threshold determines how close to the stationary point we wish to get. Having a threshold too high will
result in poor accuracy as the algorithm may stop far from the optimal parameters, while a low threshold will
result in exhaustive run times and may never converge. For this reason the maximum number of iterations is
often deﬁned as another stopping criterion as this will ensure a maximum runtime on the algorithm. If set
too high, the algorithm will run for a period without improvements, while if set too low, results may still be
poor when the algorithm stops.
3.4
Gaussian Process Regression
So far this chapter has focused on optimizing adaptive parametric models to obtain a regression function
where posterior probabilities and input/output relations are modeled implicitly. This affects the speed of the
training phase which may be slow if data and model complexity is high. After the training phase, predictions
are based entirely on the regression function and the learned parameters. At this point the training data has
no more use and the prediction process is very fast. The GPR uses a different but equivalent approach where
model inference is done in function-space by evaluating distributions over functions rather than parameters.
The GPR is a so-called kernel method which take use of kernel functions to perform regression. Basically, a
kernel function models similarity between two inputs, which can then be used to perform predictions based
on how similar new data are to observed data. The motivation for using kernel functions rather than basis
functions with adaptive parameters may not be obvious, but kernel functions have interesting properties
which can be favorable in some situations [28]. For instance, the basis functions from the parametric models
may be difﬁcult to manipulate with, especially if they are of high dimensionality. It is therefore attractive
to work with an equivalent approach without having to access the actual basis function, and this is exactly
the purpose of the kernel functions. With these functions we can work in the so-called feature space without
actually evaluating the basis functions. This will be illustrated below.
3.4.1
Kernel trick
The linear combination of parameters from Eq. (3.5) can be transformed into an equivalent linear combination
of kernel functions. The regression model is said to have a dual representation; a parametric and a kernel
representation. To illustrate the concept, we turn to a regularized version of the sum-of-squares error function
==PAGE:54==
54
from Eq. (3.11):
E(w) = 1
2
N
Â
n=1
(wTf(xn) −tn)2 + s2
2 wTw
(3.20)
where s2 is the regularization factor which controls the magnitude of the regularization and thus expresses
the uncertainty in the data. By assuming y(x, w) to be a linear regression model from Eq. (3.5), the optimal
solution for the parameters w can analytically found evaluating the stationary gradient. The solution becomes:
w =
N
Â
n=1
(wTf(xn) −tn)f(xn) = fTa
(3.21)
where the substitution of a = −1
s2 ÂN
n=1(wTf(xn) −tn) has been done. The parameters w can be substituted
into Eq. (3.20) with the expression in Eq. (3.21) to have the error function depend on the parameter vector a
rather than w:
E(a) = 1
2aTffTffTa −aTffTt + 1
2tTt + s2
2 aTffTa
(3.22)
This formulation of the regularized sum-of-squares error function may seem complicated, but by solving for
a, we get the solution:
a = (ffT + s2IN)−1t
(3.23)
The inner product of the basis functions produces matrix, which is generally known as the Gram or Kernel
matrix as is denoted:
K = ffT
(3.24)
with its elements given by the corresponding kernel function:
k(xn, xm) = f(xn)Tf(xm)
(3.25)
By substituting this into the linear regression model from Eq. (3.5), we see that we have two equivalent
formulations of the same model:
y(x, w) = wTf(x)
(3.26)
y(x, w) = k(x)T(K + s2IN)−1t
(3.27)
This reformulation of the linear regression model is the foundation of the kernel methods including the GPR.
One important difference from the parametric model is that the target values t are used for prediction with
kernels. Hence, the training set can no longer be discarded, when training has been done. The Kernel matrix
expresses data similarity in the feature space which are be used for prediction. The trick here is that the
feature space similarities are accessible through the kernel function without actually evaluating the basis
functions. More speciﬁcally, we can analyze the data in feature space without actually working in it. This
==PAGE:55==
predictive methods using machine learning
55
convenient property is commonly known as the kernel trick.
3.4.2
Prediction
The GPR uses the properties of the kernel trick to exploit similarity in the input space to model similarities in
output space. Hence, for the GPR to work, similarity in input and output space must be related such that
similar input data (xm ⇡xn) leads to similar output data (tm ⇡tn). Basically, the GPR models this rule by
assuming that the outputs of the regression function y(x) follow a joint multivariate Gaussian distribution.
As an example, a prior Gaussian distribution of the form N (0, s2) is induced on the parameters w from
the liner regression model in Eq. (3.5). To predict output values y = y1, ..., yN of a ﬁnite group of training
points x = x1, ..., xN, we seek to ﬁnd the joint probability distribution of the output values y for these training
points x. As the output values are produced from linear combinations of Gaussian distributed parameters,
the output values will have a similar distribution. By inducing a Gaussian prior on the model parameters, the
joint distribution of output values is Gaussian and can thus be modeled by only a mean and a covariance.
Regarding the kernel trick, the covariance of the joint distribution becomes [25]:
cov[y] = E[yyT] = 1
affT = K
(3.28)
From this equation we see that the covariance of the output values can be expressed as an inner product of
the basis functions in the parametric model. Using the kernel trick we can deﬁne this inner product of the
basis functions by a kernel matrix as given in Eq. (3.24), which is computed directly from a kernel function.
In the above example, the kernel function is derived from the basis functions. To truly exploit the kernel trick,
the kernel function should be deﬁned directly to implicitly model the inner product
As seen in Eq. (3.27), the target values of the training data is used to perform prediction, as the training
data and prediction data are assumed to have a joint Gaussian distribution. To use the GPR for regression,
the predictive distribution p of a new data point tN+1 is modeled using the training data targets t. Because
this conditional distribution p(tN+1|t) is Gaussian, it is deﬁned by its covariance showings the uncertainty
of the prediction, and mean value determining the most probable prediction value. The parameters of the
conditional Gaussian distribution is generally given by [25]:
µa|b = µa + SabS−1
bb (xb −µb)
(3.29)
Sa|b = Sab −SabS−1
bb Sba
(3.30)
Here a determines the value to be predicted while b is the already observed data. As an example, we consider
N training points, and we wish to perform prediction of the output value tN+1 of a new input point xN+1.
This is done by ﬁnding the mean of the conditional distribution p(tN+1|t). To ﬁnd the mean value, we look
==PAGE:56==
56
for the joint distribution of the training set and the new data point p(tN+1). As this distribution is considered
Gaussian, it is deﬁned by:
p(tN+1) = N (tN+1|0, KN+1)
(3.31)
where KN+1 is the kernel matrix containing values from the kernel function evaluated on all combinations
of data points. However, as the data may be noisy, some uncertainty must be induced when modeling data
similarities. This is usually done by assuming Gaussian noise e on the target values which are modeled as
tn = yn + e. In this way, the GPR becomes aware that prediction should not be done blindly from the target
values. The resulting kernel matrix will be of size N + 1 ⇥N + 1 as it contains combinations of all N training
points and the single test point. The structure of the covariance matrix thus becomes:
KN+1 =
0
@ Ktrain
Ktrain,test
Ktest,train
Ktest
1
A
(3.32)
The elements of the covariance matrix are calculated using the kernel function as:
Ktrain = k(x, x)
(3.33)
Ktrain,test = k(x, xN+1)
(3.34)
Ktest = k(xN+1, xN+1)
(3.35)
Here x denotes all input values in the training set and xN+1 is the input value of the new value to predict. In
case of a single prediction point xN+1, the matrix Ktest becomes a scalar, Ktrain,test becomes a 1 ⇥N vector
and Ktrain becomes N ⇥N.
Substituting these into Eq. (3.29) and (3.30), prediction for the GPR thus becomes:
µ(xN+1) = Ktest,train(Ktrain + s2
nI)−1t
(3.36)
s2(xN+1) = Ktest −Ktest,train(Ktrain + s2
nI)−1KT
test,train
(3.37)
Here, Eq. (3.36) is used for prediction of output value of the new data point and we see that it becomes
identical to the dual representation in of the linear regression function in Eq. (3.27). Once again, s2 denotes
the variance of the Gaussian noise e assumed on the data. The value of this is naturally unknown, however,
as we shall see in later, the kernel matrix arises naturally in the optimization function Eq. (3.43) and the noise
magnitude will thus be optimized during model optimization.
3.4.3
Kernels
Optimizing the predictive performance of the GPR is challenging because the GPR has many variables to
be optimized. First, the GPR is primarily deﬁned by the kernel function used to model the data similarity.
==PAGE:57==
predictive methods using machine learning
57
Choosing how to model the similarity is one of the main challenges when using GPR as many possible
kernel functions exist. Second, when a kernel has been chosen, the kernel functions often involve adaptive
hyperparameters, which should be adjusted to obtain the best possible similarity model. This also involves
choosing priors to induce on these parameters. Third, the predictive performance of the model given the
hyperparameters must be evaluated.
Selecting a kernel/covariance function involves comparison of multiple kernel families. Each kernel family
has its own special characteristic and the number of free hyperparameters vary among the kernel families.
Below, an overview of the most common families and their properties will be presented [31].
Squared exponential kernel:
A popular choice of covariance function is the squared exponential kernel
given as:
k(xi, xj) = s2
sexp exp
 
−1
2
d
Â
k=1
(xi,k −xj,k)2
l2
k
!
(3.38)
where d is the input data dimensionality. The kernel function has the hyperparameters l known as length-scale
parameters. The length-scale parameters are free and should be optimized during the training phase. The
optimized length-scale parameters can be interpreted as an importance indication of each data dimension.
If the length-scale value for a speciﬁc dimension is large, its importance in the covariance function of the
predictive distribution decreases and will only have low inﬂuence on the predicted values. This interpretation
of input feature importance is also known as automatic relevance determination (ARD) [28]. The squared
exponential kernel also has a scaling hyperparameter ssexp which is optimized during training and determines
the overall variability/scaling of the function. The covariance function generally produces smooth regression
functions as it is inﬁnitely differentiable, which means that a resulting prediction function using this covariance
has mean square derivatives of all orders. This leads to very smooth properties [28]. Even though the kernel
is widely used, it has been criticized for producing too smooth solutions for true physical systems.
Exponential kernel:
The exponential covariance function uses the same hyperparameters including length-
scale l and scaling sexp:
k(xi, xj) = s2
exp exp
0
@−
v
u
u
t
d
Â
k=1
(xi,k −xj,k)2
l2
k
1
A
(3.39)
The biggest difference between the exponential and squared exponential kernel is that the exponential
covariance function is continuous but does not have mean square derivatives of all orders. Hence, the
resulting prediction function will have smoothness limitations which leads to very rough solutions.
Matern kernel:
As the squared exponential kernel has very smooth properties, and the exponential kernel
has very rough properties, it can be convenient to explore kernels with properties lying somewhere in between.
==PAGE:58==
58
This gives rise the Matern class of kernels, where a smoothness parameter is introduced. Kernels from the
Matern class generally have the form:
kv(xi, xj) = s2
m
21−v
G(v)
⇣p
2vr
⌘v
Kv
⇣p
2vr
⌘
(3.40)
where r =
✓
Âd
k=1
(xi,k−xj,k)2
l2
k
◆
. The parameter v determines the smoothness of the process and Kv is a modiﬁed
Bessel functions [28][31]. G is a standard gamma function. It should be noted that when the smoothness
parameter v approaches inﬁnity, the kernel function approaches the squared exponential, and the squared
exponential kernel thus constitutes the upper bound of smoothness for the Matern class kernels. In this thesis,
focus will be on the Matern32 and Matern52 kernel, for which the smoothness parameter becomes v = 3
2 and
v = 5
2, respectively. The Matern class hyperparameters include length-scale l and scaling parameters sm.
3.4.4
Optimizing hyperparameters
GPR uses a Bayesian approach where the posterior probability of the hyperparameters is evaluated and
optimized using Bayes theorem from Eq. (3.4). Given the equation, it is observed that the posterior probability
over weights w is not desired for the GPR as inference is done in function-space rather than weight space
and the weights are thus latent in the model. Hence, evaluating this posterior probability over weights is not
an option. Instead it is desired to optimize some informative quantity which is independent of the model
weights. Looking at Bayes’ theorem for the speciﬁc case of GPR we get [28]:
p(w|D, q) = p(D|w)p(w|q)
p(D|q)
(3.41)
In the weight-space view, the posterior probability is only dependent on the observed data set and the
parameter weights, however, in the function-space view the latent model weights are dependent on the
hyperparameters q of the chosen kernel. As stated above, it is desired to evaluate the posterior of the
hyperparameters which is given as:
p(q|D) = p(D|q)p(q)
p(D)
(3.42)
An important property of this Bayesian approach is that the posterior probability of the hyperparameters
requires evaluation of several integrals, and evaluating these integrals analytically can be computationally
heavy. It is often necessary to approximate the posterior probability rather than evaluating it directly. Various
approximation methods exist, all of which include a trade-off between accuracy and computational load.
Some methods use iterative approaches such as the MCMC and GridInt which will be further explained in
Section 6.2.1. An iterative approach can often provide a higher amount of accuracy, however, the runtime
is affected by the increased number of calculation steps. A common approach is to use the scaling factor
(denominator) of Bayes’ theorem from Eq. (3.41) as this forms a likelihood function on the hyperparameters
==PAGE:59==
predictive methods using machine learning
59
and is thus independent of the latent weights. This likelihood function is called the marginal likelihood and is a
common choice for approximation of the hyperparameter posterior. The log marginal likelihood given by:
log p(t|q) = −n
2 log 2p −1
2 log |Ktrain| −1
2tTK−1
traint
(3.43)
Here t are the target values, and Ktrain is the covariance matrix for the targets including Gaussian noise.
n denotes the size of the training set. It should be noticed that the kernel matrix Ktrain arises naturally in
the marginal likelihood function, and thus has a free parameter s2
n denoting the variance of the Gaussian
noise, which is optimized during training. The marginal likelihood will used for approximation of the
hyperparameter posterior in this thesis.
3.5
Comparison
The NN and GPR have many differences, and whether these differences are pros or cons depend on the
application scenario. Below, some of the main differences will be highlighted:
Over-ﬁtting:
The basic NN uses the maximum likelihood directly to estimate model parameters which is
generally known to be subject to over-ﬁtting, especially when only a sparse data set is available. Oppositely,
the GPR uses a Bayesian approach where the maximum likelihood is used in combination with priors induced
on hyperparameters of the kernel. This is favorable when over-ﬁtting is an issue but requires determination of
realistic priors. The over-ﬁtting issue in NN vanishes with increasing data set size, in which case a deﬁnition
of priors is avoided. However, a proper number of hidden neurons inside the hidden layer is necessary to
reduce over-ﬁtting, and additionally a proper parameter update algorithm must be chosen which all have
trade-offs between accuracy and complexity. For GPR, a proper kernel function must be chosen to avoid
over-ﬁtting together with a proper parameter update algorithm. Hence, from the over-ﬁtting perspective, the
model to choose depends on the amount of available data.
Run time:
The best performing model may not always be applicable because run time limitations. The
training phase of the NN can be computational heavy due to the need for error back-propagation and iterative
parameter updates. However, when training is completed, prediction becomes fast as only calculations within
the inferred model are necessary. For the GPR, the training phase can often be fast as training primarily
involves calculation of the kernel matrix. Especially for sparse training sets, the kernel matrix is small and
the number of calculations prior to prediction is unremarkable. However, before these calculations can be
executed, the kernel hyperparameters must be optimized which can involve advanced parameter update
techniques. The largest draw back of the GPR is the prediction time, which can be very long if the kernel
matrix is large. For every new data point to be predicted, the entire kernel matrix must be manipulated which
==PAGE:60==
60
can be computational heavy. Once again, the amount of available data seems to be the deciding factor in the
run time perspective.
Memory:
The two methods have a huge difference from a memory perspective. While the NN discards the
training data when the training phase is completed, the GPR prediction rely on the observed data which is
stored in the kernel matrix. Hence, it is necessary for the GPR to store data throughout the entire process.
Data interpretation:
The NN models all data patterns implicitly into a prediction function and extracting
predictive/posterior probabilities for new data is not directly possible. The uncertainty of each prediction
is simply not available. Further more, from the prediction function it is not possible to perform direct data
interpretation such as ARD. The importance of each dimension is modeled implicitly, and data information
is thus hidden inside the model. Here, the GPR has an advantage as posterior probabilities are calculated
directly due to its Bayesian approach. This Gaussian posterior probability provides insight into the prediction
uncertainty such as a 95 percent conﬁdence interval.
Additionally, the ARD property of length-scale
hyperparameters provides insight into the importance of each dimension. This can, among other things, be
used for reduction of data dimensionality. Reducing data dimensionality can also be done for NN using
so-called pruning techniques. However, this requires application of additional algorithms and extended run
time.
Predictive evaluation:
The purpose of model training is to ﬁnd a model with the best predictive performance.
However, having proper means for evaluating the predictive performance is necessary. The NN models all
probabilities implicitly into a prediction function, and evaluating the model performance on a test set will
often be done by measuring the prediction error, either as an mean-squared-error (MSE) or the root-mean-
squared-error (RMSE). With presence of outliers in the test set, evaluating a point wise error may not always be
informative on the predictive performance, as the result will be biased towards the outliers. For the GPR, the
posterior probability of every observation in the test set can be evaluated, and so, the predictive performance
of the GPR can be evaluated as a probability measure rather than an error measurement. Typically, evaluation
is done using the log predictive density which provides the probability of the test set given the trained GPR
model. In this way, the predictive performance is evaluated as a predictive distribution rather than a single
point prediction.
For instance, using LOO-CV, evaluation of every training instance will be done using an error measurement
for the NN. In case of outliers, one of the training instances will produce an enormous error, which will bias
the ﬁnal result. For the GPR, each training instance is evaluated using a predictive log probability given by:
log p(yi|X, y−i, q) = −1
2 log s2
i −(yi −µi)2
2s2
i
−1
2 log 2p
(3.44)
==PAGE:61==
predictive methods using machine learning
61
which expresses the probability of observing the value yi given the training data and trained model. When
evaluating the predictive performance on a complete test set rather than a single point using LOO-CV, the
predictive log probability of each test point is calculated and averaged to obtain the mean log predictive
density (MLPD) expressing the probability of observing the entire test set given the model. MLPD will be
further described in Section 6.2.2.
==PAGE:62==
==PAGE:63==
4 Numerical Simulations
4.1
Robochameleon framework
Author: Jesper Wass
As described in Chapter 2, propagation of optical signals through ﬁber involves impairments that degrade
the signal quality. To have the best possible transmission conditions, the system must be conﬁgured with the
optimal settings. However, ﬁnding the best possible system conﬁguration can be difﬁcult due to the high
amount of parameters affecting the system performance. A simple approach would be to go through various
different conﬁguration settings and evaluate each one to determine the best, but this brute-force like approach
is extremely time consuming. It is favorable to have the ability to approximate the system performance without
actually evaluating the true setup. This is one of the main purposes of numerical computer simulations. By
running simulations on theoretical models, setups can be tested and evaluated in reduced time and cost and
provides the ability to obtain a system conﬁguration that meets the design requirements or maximizes the
BD product. To use simulations as a replacement for real world system evaluation, the simulation model
must be reliable and reﬂect the real world system with high accuracy. However, because of the amount of
components, parameters, and interactions associated with the transmission system, implementing reliable
models is challenging.
It is convenient to reuse already existing simulation libraries, however, most of these reliable frameworks
are closed-source with no public availability. This is an impediment for world-wide improvements in optical
simulation models, as vital experiences are not disseminated. To break with this conviction, the DSP section
of the High Speed Optical Communication group of the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) has allowed
public availability to the so-called Robochameleon framework to encourage cooperation in the development of
a common high quality simulation tool. The framework contains building blocks for optical communication
systems within the transmitter, channel and receiver. A vast selection of DSP blocks is available allowing a
wide range of data analysis.
The Robochameleon framework has many advantages. First, the framework is open source which allow
==PAGE:64==
64
code sharing among researchers around the world. Second, the offered
components are implemented in accordance with modern theory of
optical communication with proper references. Third, the DSP blocks
included have been validated on real data. Further more, the framework
involves API documentation on all classes and functions leading to a
high amount of ﬂexibility as extensions and modiﬁcations can easily be
made to customize the model for speciﬁc purposes. The framework is
Matlab-based, which can prove to be favorable as it can interact with
any other Matlab-based library or toolbox.
Single Tx
Single Tx
Single Tx
WDM MUX
Splitter
Multichannel 
OSA
Nonlinear 
channel
DEMUX
Coherent 
front-end
Splitter
Multichannel 
OSA
DSP
Figure 4.1: Robochameleon simulation
model structure
With all the elements offered by Robochameleon, the framework
seems an appropriate workbench for the WDM system simulations
desired in this project.
4.2
System setup
Author: Jesper Wass
Robochameleon follows a system-level modeling approach, where
behavior assumptions are modeled into each component to efﬁciently
realize system behavior within acceptable simulation times. The frame-
work is primarily developed as a single-channel simulation tool and
does not contain the necessary additional components for transmission
and reception of a multi-channel WDM signal.
Symbol 
generator
Pulse shaper
Laser
IQ Modulator
Single Tx
Figure 4.2: Structure of single-channel
transmitter module
Hence, we have extended the framework with a few components to
allow WDM system simulation. The system setup with optical modules
can be seen in Figure 4.1.
4.2.1
Transmitter
Multiple single-channel transmitters are required. The structure of a
single-channel transmitter is illustrated in Figure 4.2. Each transmitter
involves components for symbol generation, emulation of PM, upsam-
pling, pulseshaping, and external optical IQ modulation. Hereafter the
multiple single-channel signals should be combined into a single WDM
signal. The model contains three single-channel
==PAGE:65==
numerical simulations
65
transmitters to produce the combined WDM signal. Below, each component will be brieﬂy presented.
Symbol generation
The symbol generation module implements the mapping between a pseudo-random
binary sequence (PRBS) and constellation symbols for the speciﬁc modulation format. As DP is used, the
component outputs two data streams corresponding to the two polarizations of the signal. Random delays
are introduced on the PRBS to ensure decorrelation of transmitted bits in the polarizations. This is equivalent
to an emulated polarization multiplexer where delay is introduced on one of the polarizations. This is done
while still in the digital domain as no power tracking is required. Each polarization contains a real and
imaginary part to be used as the Q and I branch during modulation. The PRBS degree is 15 with a sequence
length of 217 bits.
Samples
Amplitude
Frequency
Amplitude
Figure 4.3: Filter impulse and frequency
response
Pulse shaping
The symbols in each polarization are upsampled with a factor of 32 and then interpolated
using a ﬁnite impulse response (FIR) Raised Cosine ﬁlter with 129 taps. The ﬁlter coefﬁcients are plotted in
Figure 4.3 to illustrate the shape of the impulse response and frequency response. A roll-off factor of 0.5 is
considered.
Laser
The laser component generates a carrier wave onto which the data symbols are modulated. To simulate
a WDM system the three transmitters/channels are implemented using lasers with adjacent wavelengths.
The center channel has a ﬁxed wavelength of 1550 nm, whereas wavelengths of the left and right channel
can be varied depending on the channel spacing to investigate. Additionally, the launch power of each
channel is deﬁned in this component which can also be varied depending on the setup to investigate. The
lasers are implemented using CW laser models also known as Lorentzian lasers. The CW model has simple
implementation properties as it is entirely characterized by its wavelength, linewidth, and the noise generated
by ASE. The latter is modeled as additive white Gaussian noise, and each laser has a linewidth of 100 kHz.
The laser is connected to an external optical IQ modulator.
==PAGE:66==
66
External modulation
The optical modulator is implemented externally as a Mach-Zehnder modulator (see
Section 2.1.1). The modulator receives the output of pulseshaper containing data for each polarization. The
optical transmission ﬁeld is calculated for the I and Q branch for both polarizations which are then combined
into an optical signal.
WDM multiplexer
As presented Figure 2.4, before launching the signals onto the ﬁber, the three channels
must be combined into a single WDM signal. For this purpose we have extended the Robochameleon
framework with a WDM multiplexer that efﬁciently combines the three channels.
Multichannel OSA
The optical signal is split into two identical branches in order to analyze the optical
spectrum of the WDM signal before transmission. We have extended the Robochameleon framework with a
multi-carrier Optical Spectrum Analyzer (OSA) for this purpose. An example of a combined optical power
spectrum can be seen in Figure 4.4. The spectrum is plotted with 32 GBaud symbol rate, -1 dBm channel
launch power, and 50 GHz channel spacing.
4.2.2
Nonlinear Channel
The purpose of the nonlinear channel is to model the effects inﬂuencing the optical signal when propagating
through SMF. The main effects included in the model involve linear effects such as ﬁber attenuation, chromatic
dispersion, and nonlinear effects of SPM, XPM, and FWM (the Kerr effect). The nature of these effects are
described in Section 2.1.2 and 2.2.2 and modeled using the NLSE from Eq. (2.1).
Fiber attenuation is deﬁned using the most common ﬁber attenuation parameter a of 0.2 dB/km for SMF.
This attenuation value is theoretically wavelength-dependent, however, only three WDM neighbor channels
-150
-75
0
75
150
Frequency [GHz]
-160
-110
-60
-20
Power [dBm]
-150
-75
0
75
150
Frequency [GHz]
0
1.5
3
4.5
6
Power [mW]
×10-4
Figure 4.4: Example of an optical power
spectrum of simulated transmitted WDM
signal
==PAGE:67==
numerical simulations
67
are included in the system and this dependency is thus neglected.
Chromatic dispersion is modeled by the impact of the second and third order group velocity delay (GVD)
describing the amount of pulse broadening b2 for a speciﬁc wavelength and its slope b3. These depend
primarily on the dispersion coefﬁcient D and its slope S. For the simulations, a dispersion coefﬁcient D of
17 ps/nm/km is deﬁned for each span of ﬁber. The dispersion slope S is set to 0.2 ps/nm2/km.
The Kerr effect in the ﬁber is expressed through the ﬁber nonlinearity coefﬁcient g, as seen in Eq. (2.1). A
coefﬁcient of 1.3 W−1/km−1 is used to model the Kerr effect.
To incorporate the NLSE equation from Eq. (2.1) in the simulation model, a solution to the equation must
be found. Finding the solution can be accomplished with different methods, however, with the interaction
between the linear and nonlinear effects, ﬁnding an analytical solution to the equation is complex. It is thus
attractive to approximate a numerical solution. In these simulations, the NLSE is approximated using a
split-step Fourier approach where the propagation effects is evaluated iteratively by considering each ﬁber
span in small pieces/steps [20]. When only a small piece of the ﬁber is considered, the interaction between the
linear and nonlinear effects are assumed to be absent, and the solution to the NLSE can thus be approximated
by considering the linear and nonlinear parts independently. A step size of 5 km is used in the simulation
resulting in 16 iterations per ﬁber span.
In addition to the linear and nonlinear impairments, ampliﬁers are required for every ﬁber span. The
length of each span is set to 80 km. The gain of each ampliﬁer is set to compensate for the ﬁber attenuation
on each span, which is determined by its length and the attenuation coefﬁcient. Hence, the gain of each
ampliﬁer is set to 16 dB/span (0.2 dB/km · 80 km/span). ASE noise is produced by the ampliﬁers which must
be incorporated into the channel model. The amount of ASE noise depends on the spontaneous emission
factor which is calculated from the gain and noise ﬁgure of the speciﬁc ampliﬁer. The ampliﬁers are assumed
to be ideal with a noise ﬁgure of 3 dB where the spontaneous emission factor becomes the lowest possible
and reduces the ASE noise to the ideal amount.
4.2.3
Receiver
At the receiving end of the ﬁber, each channel must be received separately by single-channel receivers. For
these simulations, only one of the three adjacent channels are extracted for further signal processing.
Demultiplexing
To reobtain the individual channels, we have extended the receiver with a demultiplexer
with a wavelength selective mechanism. The demultiplexer is designed using an ideal band-pass ﬁlter which
has a brick-wall frequency response where frequencies outside a certain frequency range are completely cut
off. By using this ﬁlter, only the center channel frequencies are allowed to pass through.
==PAGE:68==
68
Multichannel OSA
The optical signal is split into two identical branches in order to analyze the optical
spectrum of the ﬁltered signal at the receiver. The multi-carrier DSO is similar to the one at the transmitter.
An example of a ﬁltered WDM signal is illustrated in Figure 4.5. The spectrum is plotted with 32 Gbaud
symbol rate, -1 dBm channel launch power, and 50 GHz channel spacing after 1200 km of ﬁber.
Coherent front-end
As described in Section 2.1.3, a coherent receiver requires recovery of the electrical ﬁeld of the transmitted
signal. This is done in the coherent front-end, the structure of which is illustrated in Figure 4.6. The coherent
front-end is modeled with a laser module to act as the LO carrier recovery which enables extraction of the
signal phase information. The incoming signal is forwarded to the LO to ensure data format compliance
between the LO and the incoming signal during simulation. As the signal is modulated with two polarizations,
the incoming signal and LO branches are forwarded to separate PBSs to extract each polarization from the
signal. The LO is aligned to 45 degrees at the input of the PBS. The polarization components from the two
PBSs are mixed into two optical hybrids to handle the polarizations separately. The mixing between the
LO output and the received signal produces two output components for each I and Q branch (a positive
and a negative) resulting in four output components per polarization. The output components contain
mixed signals between the LO and the incoming signal. These signals are then forwarded to balanced
photo-detectors to detect the beats between the signal components and the reference ﬁeld provided by the LO.
The photo-detectors perform square-law detection to convert the optical signals to electrical while adding
contributions of shot noise and thermal noise. The outputs of the photo-detectors contain the electrical I and
Q branches of each polarization where amplitude and phase information have been recovered. From here, the
coherent front-end forwards four signal branches for further processing.
-150
-75
0
75
150
Frequency [GHz]
-700
-500
-300
-100
0
Power [dBm]
-150
-75
0
75
150
Frequency [GHz]
0
1
2
3
4
4.5
Power [mW]
×10-4
Figure 4.5: Example of an optical power
spectrum of simulated demultiplexed
WDM signal
==PAGE:69==
numerical simulations
69
ADC & combiner
After the coherent front-end, the signal reaches
the DSP block, the structure of which is illustrated in Figure 4.7. First,
the four branches are sent through an ADC to convert the electrical
analogue signals into digital. The ADC is assumed to be fully syn-
chronized with the transmitter clock. Since simulations are carried out
in Matlab, the signal format is already discrete. Hence, the signal is
ﬁrst spline interpolated and afterwards sampled with a sufﬁcient rate
according to Shannon’s sampling theorem [37].
Splitter
PBS
Laser
Optical hybrid
Coherent
front-end
PBS
Optical hybrid
Photo
Photo
Photo
Photo
Figure 4.6: Structure of coherent front-
end block
For instance, a 32 Gbaud signal is sampled at 80 GHz. After the
ADC, the individual I and Q branches in each polarization are combined
into the full X and Y signals, which are then forwarded for further
processing.
CD compensation
During propagation, CD effects were applied to
the signal, and these effects must be compensated to perform accu-
rate signal demodulation of the symbols. Various compensation tech-
niques exist. For these simulations, the transfer function and amount
of inserted CD is known, and dispersion compensation can thus be
performed by employing the same transfer function with an equal
amount of negative dispersion. Hence, the dispersion coefﬁcient is set
to −17 ps/nm/km.
Resampling & decimation
After compensating CD, timing recovery
is performed by resampling the signal to 12 times the symbol rate and
then decimated to two samples per symbol using the Gardner algorithm
[38].
ADC
Combiner
CD 
compensation
DSP
Timing 
recovery
Carrier 
recovery
Equalizer
BER 
estimation
Figure 4.7: Structure of DSP block
Equalization
CD has already been compensated, however, some trans-
mission channel effects are still present in the received signal such as
inter-symbol interference (ISI). Equalization is applied to the signal
to invert the effects. Here a blind adaptive equalizer is used where
the equalizer iteratively adapts itself to the transmission channel. The
coefﬁcients of the equalization ﬁlter are updated by evaluation on
50e3 training samples using the so-called multimodulus algorithm. The
equalizer contains 30 taps and a learning rate factor µ of 4e −4.
==PAGE:70==
70
PLL
The purpose of the phase locked loop is to perform carrier re-
covery, i.e. to compensate and correct the frequency offset between the
transmitter and the LO at the receiver, as otherwise this would cause
the decision constellation to rotate. During these simulations, the PLL
is assumed ideal with no frequency offset.
BERT
The last block in the simulation model performs signal quality
evaluation. The constellation diagram is produced using soft decision
where constellation points are chosen by clustering with the so-called
k-means algorithm.
From the constellation points, the error vector
magnitude (EVM) is calculated from which the theoretical BER is
calculated. The actual BER is evaluated using direct error counting
over the 217 bits. Counting the BER is done by detecting the number of
bit errors in the received bit sequence, since the transmitted sequence
is known to the system. The counted BER is post-processed using a
hard BER threshold of 0.1. All blocks exceeding this threshold will
be excluded from the calculation. Both the EVM, theoretical BER and
counted BER are determined for each single polarization as well as
combined.
Parameter
Value
Modulation format
16QAM
Pulse shape
Raised Cosine
Rolloff factor
0.5
Upsampling factor
32
Dispersion
17 ps/nm/km
Dispersion slope
0.2 ps/nm2/km
Ampliﬁer noise
3 dB
Wavelength assignment
Capacity
Number of channels
3
Laser linewidth
100 kHz
Fiber attenuation
0.2 dB/km
EDFA gain
16 dB
PRBS order
15
Sequence length
217
Table 4.1: Fixed system parameters.
4.2.4
Variable parameters
The simulation model has many variable parameters which affect the
behavior of the transmission system. The purpose of the simulations
is to investigate how certain system parameters affect the system per-
formance, more speciﬁcally, the BER of the received signal. Primary
parameters with direct inﬂuence on the system performance are given
in Table 2.1. From these parameters we seek to model the affection
of optical launch power, transmission length, symbol rate, and inter-
channel spacing. From the simulations, the inﬂuence of these four input
parameters on the BER will be investigated, and the system can be said
to have four variable input parameters and one output parameter. An
overview can be seen in Figure 4.8. The remaining parameters will be
ﬁxed during all simulations. Most of these have been mentioned above.
An overview of the ﬁxed parameters can be seen in Table 4.1.
==PAGE:71==
numerical simulations
71
With four input dimensions, a large number of simulations must
be executed to investigate the inﬂuence of each input parameter. To
reduce this number as much as possible, the range and resolution of
values to simulate must be chosen with care. This process is further
explained below.
4.3
Simulation range
Author: Jakob Thrane
Simulation model
BER
Ptx
Nspans Rs
∆f
Figure 4.8:
Overview of system in-
put/output
Given the four inputs and the single system output a systematic
selection of input parameter values is required. The systematic selection
of inputs needs to provide with interesting outputs, or at the very least
contain inputs that are interesting to monitor. The range of each input
is based primarily on prior knowledge about commonly deployed setup
conﬁgurations however ranges were also partially investigated. The
resolution of the ranges given the input dimensions is determined
primarily by the ﬁnal runtime required, but also partially with respect
to the application of the data set. It is desired to take use of previously
explained ML algorithms, and for this reason sufﬁcient information for
generalizing the system conﬁgurations is required along with sufﬁcient
information for effectively evaluating the methods. Simulations have
been completed based on the system setup as illustrated by Figure 4.2.
A conceptual visualization of the simulated input and the resulting
dimensionality is observed in Figure 4.9.
Ptx
Nspans
BW
Spacing/BW
Figure 4.9: Illustration of simulated in-
put dimensions. Each combination of 4
inputs produce a measured BER output
The ﬁnal data set provided by the four inputs is composed of the
range selection in each input dimension. As four inputs are considered
a large data set is quickly obtained consisting of many system conﬁgu-
ration combinations with a resulting simulated BER. Hence some effort
is required to the range selection to ensure a data set where the runtime
of the combinations are within reason. A trade-off consists between
runtime and a range of input values that provide with informative out-
puts. This section seeks to describe the reasoning behind the simulated
system conﬁgurations. Additionally visualizations are shown of the
simulated results.
==PAGE:72==
72
4.3.1
System conﬁgurations
As highlighted in Section 2.2 WDM systems can obtain a variety of system conﬁguration. E.g. as the symbol
rate increase or decrease different launch powers are required for optimal transmission. The minimization
of BER and the use of FEC can possibly provide the system operator with a margin to improve SE by e.g.
reducing the spacing between the optical channels - and so on. The system parameters of interest are listed in
Table 4.2. A range of operation is also listed in the table identiﬁed as the parameter ranges of interest as these
cover a broad spectrum of valid and feasible system conﬁgurations.
The channel spacing is given in units of GHz and indicate the spacing between the center wavelength/fre-
quency of the optical WDM channels. However since adjustments to bandwidths are also considered in the
desired simulations, the appliance of spacing in the model must be bandwidth dependent. E.g. a spectral
bandwidth of 32 GHz will suffer from serious cross-talk penalties if the channel spacing was 8 GHz. It might
be a ’valid’ system conﬁguration, it will however not produce a usable result. As a low runtime is desired
simulating a spectral bandwidth of 32 GHz at a spacing of 8 GHz is not feasible. Channel spacing is instead
expressed as a ratio, D f /Rs, dependent on the bandwidth of the channels, and applied numerically to the
system model based on the ratio. This will allow for the same range of channel spacings as the spectral
bandwidth vary allowing a parameter that is comparable across the dimension of spectral bandwidth.
Optical launch power
The optical launch power is denoted as power per channel, and not the total
system power for the combined WDM signal. The intervals of optical launch power is given as 1 dBm.
This allows for 19 different launch powers given the selected range of −12 to −6 dBm. The rather high
resolution allows for a large range of optical launch powers which could prove useful when evaluating the
predictive capabilities of the GPR and NN methods. Thus it is possible to acquire a substantial selection of
conﬁgurations composing the training and test set.
Transmission distance
The transmission distance is given as the number of spans, where each span
is pre-set to 80 km of ﬁber. The range of spans desired for simulations stretches from 2 to 15 spans, which
corresponds to 120 to 1200 km. Intervals of 2 spans were selected allowing a 7 conﬁgurations based on 2 to 14.
The 15th span was appended to the 7 conﬁgurations, resulting in a total of 8 different transmission distances.
Spectral bandwidth
The spectral bandwidth is denoted as the bandwidth of each channel in the
WDM signal given in terms of GHz. The symbol rate dictates the spectral bandwidth, as these are typically
Optical launch power
Ptx
[dBm]
12 to −6 dBm
Transmission distance
Nspans
[km]
120 to 1200 km (2 to 15 spans)
Spectral bandwidth
Rs
[GHz]
8 to 48 Gbaud
Channel spacing
Df
[GHz]
0.8 to 2
Table 4.2: System conﬁguration param-
eters consisting of four inputs and their
respective ranges due for simulation.
==PAGE:73==
numerical simulations
73
identical thus the bandwidth is also denoted in terms of Gbaud. The range of the symbol rates has been
selected to represent commonly chosen bandwidths in WDM systems. The span of bandwidth stretches from
8 to 48 Gbaud with 8 Gbaud as an interval giving a total of 6 different bandwidth conﬁgurations.
Channel spacing
The channel spacing is, as discussed previous, represented as a ratio D f /Rs however
expressed as a channel spacing in terms of GHz dependent on the symbol rate when applied as a system
conﬁguration. The range in interest spans from D f /Rs = 0.8 to 2 with 0.2 as intervals thus resulting in a total
of 7 different spacing conﬁgurations for each of the 8 bandwidth conﬁgurations.
The amount of conﬁgurations quickly add up as four inputs are considered. Given the ranges discussed above
and the intervals in each input dimension the total amount of combinations and thus required simulations
account to
19
|{z}
Ptx
⇥
8
|{z}
Nspans
⇥
6
|{z}
Rs
⇥
7
|{z}
D f /Rs
= 6384 combinations
The total amount of simulations required may seem excessive, it does however possibly provide with
sufﬁcient information for the methods to achieve a sense of generalization. Furthermore it enables the creation
of an either large training set, or large test set allowing for accurate model evaluation. The computation
required and runtime needed for executing 6384 simulations is discussed in further detail in Section 4.3.4.
4.3.2
Simulation results
Figure 4.10 displays a selection of the ﬁnal simulated data set. The data is visualized as slices in each
dimension illustrating how changes to the inputs correspond to a change at the output of log10 BER. The
visualized slices have been chosen for no particular reason other than displaying a large selection of the
ﬁnal simulated data set. It should further be noted that several simulations were done for each combination
of system conﬁgurations as the BER output was a counted BER output rather than determined by a EVM
analysis. For system conﬁgurations not limited by either noise or non-linear impairments, zero counted
bit errors were not uncommon given the sequence length thus requiring multiple repetitions to achieve
a numerical result different from zero. In some cases zero counted bit errors were counted even though
multiple repetitions were completed which is primarily due to high SNR for the given system conﬁguration.
These cases were replaced with NaN placeholders, as to indicate an unusable result. Multiple repetitions
also gave multiple results in many cases, the lowest of which was selected as the BER for the given system
conﬁguration.
==PAGE:74==
74
Transmission distance [km]
a)
b)
c)
d)
Figure 4.10: Simulated data shown as
slices in the four input dimensions as a
function of BER.
a)
Slices of Rs : 16, 32 and 48 Gbaud as launch power varies from −12
to 6 dBm. The transmission distance is given as 1120 km, or 14 spans
and the channel spacing is selected as D f /Rs = 2.
b)
Slices of Rs : 16, 32 and 48 Gbaud as transmission distance varies
from 1 to 15 spans of 80 km. Optical launch power is selected based
on an approximated optimal power for each of the shown bandwidths
given ﬁgure (a), this corresponds roughly to Ptx = −5, −1, 1 dBm at
the respective bandwidth listed in order. Maximum channel spacing is
selected as D f /Rs = 2.
c)
Slices of launch power Ptx : −10, −5 and 0 dBm are illustrated as
bandwidth Rs varies from 8 −48 Gbaud. Additionally this is illustrated
at a transmission distance of 1120 km and a maximum channel spacing
D f /Rs = 2.
d)
Conﬁgurations of Rs : 16, 32 and 48 Gbaud are shown as channel
spacing varies from 1 to 2. Transmission distance is given as 1120 km
along with optimal transmission power for each of the shown symbol
rates, this corresponds roughly to Ptx = −5, −1, 1 dBm at the respective
bandwidth listed in order.
==PAGE:75==
numerical simulations
75
4.3.3
Data sanity check
The data set consists of a large collection of system conﬁgurations. How the four input dimensions affect
the BER is difﬁcult to visualize while maintaining an intuitive understanding to the reader. It is desired to
achieve insight in the quality of the data set, and highlight any strange anomalies. The 2D plots shown in
Figure 4.10 provide some insight in the nature of the data and allow for a superﬁcial sanity check of the ﬁnal
simulated data set.
As the symbol rate increases, the power per symbol decreases if the power is kept constant. As expected,
a higher symbol rate requires an increase in launch power to obtain optimal transmission conditions which is
also indicative from the simulated data as visualized by Figure 4.10(a) and (c) and aligns with work published
in [39]. It is observed for Rs = 16, 32, 48 Gbaud that optimal power values are present, this is indicated
by a BER decrease as power increases until the nonlinear impairments inﬂuences the QoT and produce a
signiﬁcant BER increase. Additional as expected, an increase in the transmission distance results in an increase
of BER, however some anomalies were present in the data set as indicated by Figure 4.10(b) more speciﬁcally
indicated by the drop in BER given 32 GBaud at 14 and 15 spans. Furthermore, as spacing increases above the
symbol rate a lower BER is expected as the possible crosstalk is reduced - this is indicated by Figure 4.10(d).
4.3.4
Simulation runtime
The large amount of system conﬁguration is desired due to the aim of being able to generalize system
performance. The 6384 combinations may seem like an excessive amount, and it is to be investigated if all
combinations are required for generalization using ML methods. The combinations are furthermore desired
due to in-depth model evaluation of the ﬁnal generalizing models. This can provide with results that indicate,
rather broadly, how the ﬁnal model is performing in terms of error since a substantial amount of information
is made available using 6384 combinations. Simulating this amount of system conﬁgurations may not seem
feasible and it is obvious that a high computational runtime is expected.
A runtime of approximately 400 seconds was achieved using the Matlab-based Robochameleon for a single
system conﬁguration, e.g. an optical transmission power of −1 dBm at a symbol rate of 32 Gbaud using a
spacing of 64 GHz propagating 15 spans of 80 km. This corresponds to roughly 7 minutes per simulation
which translates to a total runtime of 7 min ⇥6384 simulations = 31 days assuming a single core CPU for
computation. A parallelization is clearly necessary to achieve a data set of the desired magnitude. This was
accomplished by using high-performance computing made available by DTU allowing roughly the use of 150
cores in parallel. This drastically reduced the total needed runtime by a factor of 150, allowing the completion
of 150 simulations roughly every 7 minute thus obtaining a complete data set consisting of 6384 combinations
in approximately 5 hours.
==PAGE:76==
==PAGE:77==
5 Experimental investigation
Computer-based simulation tools provide valuable insight in possible outcomes. Depending on the quality of
the model, the better the insight. It is always desired to test and investigate how theoretical work can be used
on actual experimental data as this is, to some extend, better and more insightful than any computer-based
model. Experiments were completed over a 3 week period and primarily conducted using a WDM setup of
the type Tellabs 6370 Node system. We seek to experimentally investigate how channel spacing and optical
launch power inﬂuences BER, more speciﬁcally when the nonlinear impairments start to introduce limitations
to the quality of transmission.
This chapter seeks to describe the experimental setup in detail, the experiments completed and provide
with necessary visualizations of the results obtained.
5.1
System setup
Author: Jakob Thrane
The system setup is based on a full WDM system of the type Tellabs 6370 Node system. The system consists
of 80 optical sources spaced with 50 GHz spanning the entire C-band. These were conﬁgured in four separate
racks dividing them into 40 odd and even channels, 20 for each rack. Furthermore the system consisted of
a total of 8 EDFAs. The experimental investigation is based on the WDM system, however additions and
changes were made to the existing setup in order to investigate the effect on BER caused by changes to
channel spacing and optical launch power. Considerations for conducting sweeps in terms of channel spacing
and launch power are highlighted below;
Channel spacing
The 80 lasers provided by the system were non-tunable and designed to operate
at speciﬁc wavelengths with a ﬁxed spacing of 50 GHz. Adjusting the spacing between the channels was
not an option, other than spacing in steps of 50 GHz. In order to adjust spacing to values different from the
50 GHz grid, tunable lasers were needed. 8 tunable lasers were added to the setup, from a component not
originating from the original WDM system. The main purpose; to enable a ’superchannel’ where ﬁne spacing
adjustments could be performed and the resulting BER could be measured. In summary, the initial setup
==PAGE:78==
78
consists of 72 non-tunable lasers, and 8 tunable with 5 of them representing a superchannel.
Launch power
The collection of EDFAs given the WDM system enables span-based experiments with
the ability to adjust launch power. A total of 8 EDFAs was deemed available along with the necessary software
tools for adjusting gain and observing input/output power. This facilitates the use of ﬁber-spools as the gain
can be controlled given each span, which means that adjusting for link loss while maintaining a constant
output power is a possibility. A maximum output power of +20 dBm is documented for each EDFA with a
maximum gain of 31 dB. Additionally -29 dBm per channel is given as the minimum required input power.
In summary, the ﬁrst ampliﬁer in the cascaded ampliﬁcation-setup provided spectrum wide adjustment of
launch power into the loop consisting of ﬁber-spools. Additionally the software tools enabled control and
monitoring of all the ampliﬁers allowing ampliﬁcation based on the attenuation of each ﬁber span. A domain
of operation was established, considering modulation format, pulseshape, symbol rate, total transmission
distance etc. These can be outlined as below:
• Modulation format: PM-QPSK
• Pulseshape: Raised Cosine
• Upsampling: 16
• Symbol rate: 28 Gbaud
• Total transmission distance: 1944 km
• Dispersion coefﬁcient: 17 ps/nm·km
• Wavelength range: C-band, from 1530 to 1565 nm.
The desired system conﬁguration as described above required additional components than what was possible
using only the Tellabs 6370 Node system. Tunable lasers were added to the rest of the channels provided
by the WDM system composing the complete WDM signal. Components such as a , a multiplexer and an
optical modulator were also required and added to the experimental setup. The light sources provided by the
setup in combination with the tunable lasers where split into two individual signals containing odd and even
channels which required multiplexing to create a combined WDM signal.
Data generation
For generating data and the required electrical signal an Arbitrary waveform generator
(AWG) is used. The AWG enables 1) the generation of PRBS sequences. 2) application of desired modulation
format, in this case QPSK and 3) Upsampling and appliance of any desired waveform, in this case a raised
cosine based ﬁlter. The WDM channels are separated in odd and even channels, as the neighboring channels
need to have decorrelated PRBS sequences. This results in an AWG output consisting of two signals (each
composed of an I and Q component), one for the odd channels and one for the even channels.
==PAGE:79==
experimental investigation
79
Optical modulation
For modulating the generated waveforms onto the carrier waves of the lightsources
two Mach-Zehnder modulators were used. One for odd channels and one for the even channels. The setup is
a simpliﬁcation of a traditional and deployed setup where different waveforms, containing different data
would utilize an individual MZM for each channel. However as the goal of the experiment is to measure a
BER, the requirement is a data decorrelation between neighboring channels. Two MZM’s enables the optical
signal decorrelation - as the waveform generated for even channels is modulated onto the even channel
wavelengths using one MZM, and similar for odd channels.
In addition to the optical modulators for odd and even channels. A PM emulator is added for the
combined WDM signal. This emulates PM by rotating and delaying the original signal thus providing two
polarization X and Y for each channel.
Optical channel
The setup of the transmission channel consists of multiple ﬁber-spools. More
speciﬁcally ﬁve spools of ⇡80 km using a cascaded ampliﬁcation-scheme of EDFAs. In order to increase
the transmission distance to beyond 5 ⇥80 km, a loop switch was introduced in the setup. This uses all
ﬁve ﬁber-spools multiple times, and effectively reduces the need for additional EDFAs. As mentioned in
Section 2.1.2 the gain spectrum of EDFAs is not entirely ﬂat and the EDFAs integrated in the setup have gain
differences across the C-band. Two waveshapers denoted as wave-selective switches (WSS) are used to correct
for the non-ﬂatness of the EDFA gain spectrum. One placed before the loop (#1) and the ﬁrst of the ﬁve spans,
and a second (#2) placed after the ﬁve spans. An equalizer scheme is needed to adjust for gain differences
between WDM channels. The method for reducing gain differences consists of attenuating channels with too
high gain, within a threshold, when compared to the channel with the lowest gain. I.e. the method consists of
1) detecting spectral peaks thus identifying the WDM channels and 2) applying an adaptive attenuating ﬁlter
on the wavelength range which iteratively determines the required gain reduction per wavelength.
Demultiplexing
In order to measure the BER, demultiplexing of the desired channels is required. More
speciﬁcally it is required that a particular wavelength, or a selection of wavelengths can be extracted from the
combined and received WDM signal. We seek to measure BER at the channels occupying the constructed
superchannel. As the channels is nothing more than a handful, a tunable optical band-pass ﬁlter will achieve
efﬁcient extraction one channel at a time.
Receiver
Given the used modulation type of PM-QPSK a coherent detection method is required. An
Optical Modulation Analyzer (OMA) is used for coherent detection which allows for full ﬁeld reception. It is
desired that a raw signal trace is acquired for each experiment without any DSP of the OMA applied. Any
DSP can then be applied to the raw signal trace which in this case is done with an ofﬂine DSP. Matlab in
communication with the OMA can extract traces of a required resolution, however limited by the maximum
==PAGE:80==
80
sample rate of the OMA. In this particular case the OMA is able to produce 80 Gsamples which is ⇡2.8
samples per symbol - this is later upsampled to an integer value. The DSP methods used are based on the
Robochameleon framework as described in 4.7 and requires a combination of DSP methods as described in
Section 2.1.3.
Figure 5.1 displays the experimental setup from which the ﬁnal results were obtained. The ﬁrst pre-amp
requires gain ﬂattening as the signal is propagated to the second pre-amp, which controls the optical launch
power. The reasoning behind the use of two pre-amps was due to various component loss and high gain
difference in separate EDFAs. The result of the ﬁrst and second gain ﬂattening performed by the WSSs can
be seen in Figure 5.2 along with peak detection of 24 WDM channels. Illustrated by the last WSS (#2) is the
result of a cascaded EDFA scheme. Each EDFA used had a relatively ﬂat gain spectrum, but the results of the
cascading scheme end up with substantial gain differences as observed on the bottom ﬁgure.
The switches were used to enable or disable the loop, if disabled the measurements would be considered
back-to-back (B2B).
ECL
λ1
ECL
λ11
12x1
AWG
EVEN
ECL
λ1
ECL
λ11
12x1
AWG
ODD
2x1
PRE-AMP #1
∆τ
PM emulator
WSS #1
20dB
EDFA
EDFA
EDFA
80 km
4 x 80 km
POSTAMP OBPF
COHERENT FRONTEND
WSS #2
EDFA
SWITCH
LOOP
CLOCK RECOVERY
POL. DEMUX
CARRIER RECOVERY
CD COMPENSATION
DEMODULATE
DESKEW
OFFLINE DSP
PRE-AMP #2
DSO
Figure 5.1: Final experimental setup used
to produce results of a 24 channel setup
==PAGE:81==
experimental investigation
81
1530
1535
1540
1545
1550
1555
1560
1565
Wavelength [nm]
-60
-50
-40
-30
Power [dBm]
1530
1535
1540
1545
1550
1555
1560
1565
Wavelength [nm]
-70
-60
-50
-40
-30
Power [dBm]
Figure 5.2: (Top ﬁgure) After the ﬁrst
ampliﬁer, maintaining gain ﬂattening as
it is propagated to the pre-amp dictat-
ing launch power. (Bottom ﬁgure) Gain
ﬂattening performed at WSS 2, placed
beyond the last ampliﬁer of the loop.
1530
1535
1540
1545
1550
1555
1560
1565
Wavelength [nm]
-60
-55
-50
-45
-40
-35
Power [dBm]
Superchannel
Figure 5.3: OSA Spectrum visualization
after entire loop, i.e. 1944km of 24 WDM
channels at 50 GHz spacing in the super-
channel
5.2
24 channel WDM experiment
Author: Jesper Wass
The gain ﬂattening in Figure 5.2 shows presence of only 24 WDM channels, and the reason for this will be
explained below together with some thoughts on the experimental measurement range. The main goal of the
experiments was to investigate the affections of varying spacing and launch power values on the BER of the
received signal. The measurement range of these two parameters are given in Table 5.1.
Optical launch power
During the simulations described in Section 4.3, the simulated launch power
values ranged from -12 to 6 dBm per channel. In the experimental case, the launch power controlled by the
pre-ampliﬁer is given as a total system launch power rather than per channel. To compare experimental
measurements to the simulated, we are interesting in performing experiments on a similar range of power
Optical launch power
Ptx
[dBm]
15 to 17 dBm
Channel spacing
Df
[GHz]
25 to 50 GHz
Table 5.1: System conﬁguration parame-
ters consisting of four inputs.
==PAGE:82==
82
values. When translating the launch power from a channel basis to system basis the -12 dBm lower bound
becomes:
Pchannel = 10PdBm/10 = 10−12 dBm/10 = 0.063 mW/channel
(5.1)
Psystem = 0.2512 mW/channel · 80 channels = 5.05 mW
(5.2)
Psystem = 10 · log 10(20.1 mW) = 7.03 dBm
(5.3)
With similar calculations for 6 dBm of launch power per channel, the translated upper bound becomes 25.03
dBm for an 80 channel system. The number of experiments required to measure BER for 19 different power
values on different WDM channels with various spacing values rapidly exceeds what is practically realistic.
Therefore, the primary power range of interest contains values with nonlinear BER behavior. In Figure 4.10,
this range lies somewhere around -6 to 1 dBm per channel for the different slices, and for a single slice,
this behavior lies within a few dBm. As this range is rather narrow, ﬁnding the corresponding range in the
experimental case can be challenging.
The maximum output power of the ampliﬁers is around 20 dBm, which is way below the maximum of
the desired range of measurement as calculated above. Hence, considering the initial system setup with 80
channels it is not possible to generate enough launch power to perform experiments in the entire power range.
With 20 dBm of system launch power, the maximum per channel power is approximately 1 dBm, which is
too low compared to the results of the simulations. Initial experiments were conducted on the 80 channel
system, however, the nonlinear regime of the BER behavior below 1 dBm per channel was not found. To
generate more launch power per channel, the number of channels in the WDM system was reduced to 34.
With this setup, the maximum launch power per channel was increased from 1 dBm to approximately 4.7
dBm. After this shift in power range, new experiments were conducted, however, the nonlinear regime was
still not measurable, and another 10 WDM channels were removed from the setup allowing us to launch 6.2
dBm per channel.
After the second power range shift, the nonlinear BER regime was found within 15 to 17 dBm of total
system launch power corresponding to a range of 1.2 to 3.2 dBm per channel. Hence, 24 WDM channels were
used to conduct the desired experiments. The channels including the superchannel can be observed in Figure
5.3. For every desired launch power value, the gain of the pre-ampliﬁer was adjusted to have the desired
power output, while the gain of the remaining ampliﬁers were adjusted to maintain a steady signal power
throughout the system.
==PAGE:83==
experimental investigation
83
Channel spacing
The 5 channels within the super-channel are
numbered from 13-17 as denoted in Appendix 9. To obtain a realistic
picture of the how channel spacing affects the BER, it is important
that the measured single-channels have immediate neighbors on each
side. Hence, only channel 14-16 are appropriate to measure in these
experiments. For each of these three channels, traces were grabbed for
various launch power and spacing values. The wavelength of channel
13 was ﬁxed at 1546.1349 during all experiments while the wavelengths
of channel 14-17 were adjusted for every desired spacing value given in
Table 5.1.
Figure 5.4: Constellation diagram pro-
duced from experimental B2B setup with
D f = 50 GHz.
The power range was measured with a step size of 0.5 dB and
resulting in 5 values. The spacing range was measured using intervals
of 3.125 GHz. All combinations of launch power and spacing were
measured resulting in 45 experiments per channel and a total of 135
with a ﬁber distance 1944 km.
5
|{z}
Ptx
⇥
9
|{z}
D f
⇥
3
|{z}
channels
= 135 combinations
For benchmarking purposes, similar B2B experiments were conducted.
However, with a ﬁber distance of 0 km, the signal launch power becomes
insigniﬁcant, and thus only experiments with varying spacing values
were performed. This lead to a total of 27 experiments for the B2B
setup.
Figure 5.5: Constellation diagram pro-
duced from experimental loop setup with
Ptx = 16 dBm and D f = 50 GHz.
The traces grabbed from the experimental setup were processed us-
ing the DSP block of the Robochameleon framework thus counting the
BER with the BERT block from Section 4.2.3. Examples of constellation
diagrams produced from the received signals are shown in Figure 5.4
and 5.5 for the B2B and loop mode respectively. As seen, the variance of
the distribution around each constellation increases when propagation
through 1944 km of ﬁber which indicates the signal quality degradation.
The constellation points starts to overlap indicating a higher risk of bit
errors. The BER is counted from these constellation diagrams. Both
constellation diagrams are produced
==PAGE:84==
84
from a 50 GHz spacing conﬁguration and a launch power of 16 dBm. Figure 5.6 displays some of the raw
data obtained from the experiments in loop-mode.
In Figure 5.6 the counted BER of three spacing slices are plotted as a function of optical launch power.
Initially, it is observed that the experiments operate in the nonlinear regime and optimal system launch power
is immediately around 16 dBm. The data follows a similar pattern to the simulated data, as the BER increases
as inter-channel spacing is reduced. With 31.25 GHz spacing, it is observed how the launch power directly
affects whether the BER is above or below the FEC limit, and we see that operation below FEC is still possible
when spacing is only slightly larger than the symbol rate. Also in Figure 5.6, the counted BER of three launch
power slices are plotted as a function of channel spacing, and it is observed that the BER increases rapidly
when spacing approaches the symbol rate regardless of the launch power. Initially, the data seems reliable as
they comply with the theoretical expectations and follow similar patterns to the simulated data.
15
15.5
16
16.5
17
Launch power Ptx [dBm]
-3
-2.9
-2.8
-2.7
-2.6
-2.5
-2.4
log10(BER)
50 GHz
37.5 GHz
31.25 GHz
FEC limit
25
30
35
40
45
50
Spacing [GHz]
-3
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
log10(BER)
17 dBm
16 dBm
15 dBm
FEC limit
Figure 5.6: Experimental data showing
BER for different slices of the two input
dimensions.
==PAGE:85==
6 Implementation of predictive Machine Learning
6.1
Data manipulation and available data
Author: Jesper Wass
Figure 4.10 and Figure 5.6 presented the raw data observations from the numerical simulations and exper-
iments respectively. The next step towards optimal model inference is the pre-processing stage where the
data is processed to ensure optimal training conditions for the adaptive models. The simulations have been
carried out using four variable input dimensions producing a total of 6384 data points. This corresponds to
an average of approximately 9 observations in each input dimension. Due to time limitations, the experiments
have been conducted with only two variable input dimensions resulting in a total of 45 data points per
channel corresponding to approximately 7 observations in each dimension on average.
For optimal training conditions, the data must be pre-processed to convert raw data to best possible input
features. Even though 6384 raw data input combinations are measured, not all combinations result in usable
BER measurements. First, some system conﬁgurations are too bad to allow demodulation of the received
signal. For instance, when the symbol rate exceeds the inter-channel spacing, the channel effects are too
strong to recreate the transmitted signal at the receiver. In these cases, counting the BER of the received
signal is impossible and the output data of these situations are thus represented as NaN values. Second,
some system conﬁgurations are too good to count errors within the length of the simulated bit sequence
leading to an incorrect BER of 0. The BER in these situations are also represented as NaN values to avoid
bias. These conditions lead to an observed data set with 1327 NaN values corresponding to 21 percent of
the total simulated data set, which are useless for subsequent model inference stage. The ﬁrst part of the
pre-processing phase thus deals with removal of the NaN instances. The resulting data set contains 5057
usable data points for the simulations. For the experimental data, the 45 data points are reduced to 30 per
channel removing exactly one third of the data set. The process of NaN entry removal is illustrated in Table
6.1.
==PAGE:86==
86
Input
Output
Ptx
Nspans
Rs
Df/Rs
log 10(BER)
−12
2
8e9
0.8
NaN
−11
4
16e9
1
−1.1478
5
10
16e9
1
NaN
3
15
40e9
2
−2.2699
0
6
48e9
1.6
−3.4441
Table 6.1: Illustration of pre-processing
where NaN entries are removed from the
data set
The second step of the pre-processing stage deals with feature optimization, since the raw input data are
not optimal for model inference. This is because the input dimensions span values of different magnitudes,
and their relative importance when training a model can potentially become biased towards the individual
dimensions. For instance, the channel spacing value range runs from 0.8 to 2 while the spectral bandwidth
runs from 8e9 to 48e9. To level out these differences in magnitude, the raw input data are converted to
training features by normalizing all data to values between 0 and 1 using the following minimum/maximum
normalization:
ˆxi =
xi −min(x)
max(x) −min(x)
(6.1)
Here, ˆxi denotes the normalized input value while xi is the raw input value and x is a vector containing all
measured values for the current input dimension. This process is executed on all input dimensions for both
simulated and experimental data. The conversion into normalized features is illustrated in Table 6.2 and Table
6.3. The conversion is particularly important for the data interpretation using ARD as the the length-scale
hyperparameters denote the importance of each dimension relative to the distances between each data point.
Ptx
−12
−11
. . .
5
6
Nspans
2
4
. . .
14
15
Rs
8
16
. . .
40
48
Df/Rs
0.8
1
. . .
1.8
2
Table 6.2: Raw simulated input data
Ptx
0
0.06
. . .
0.94
1
Nspans
0
0.15
. . .
0.92
1
Rs
0
0.2
. . .
0.8
1
Df/Rs
0
0.17
. . .
0.83
1
Table 6.3: Pre-processed simulated input
data (normalized)
The pre-processed data are combined into a N ⇥D feature matrix, where D is the dimensionality of the
feature space and N is the number of observed data points. Table 6.1 follows this structure where N = 3 after
NaN removal. Every row in the feature matrix corresponds to a speciﬁc conﬁguration of the system, each of
which has a corresponding BER target values. The target values are placed into a N ⇥1 target vector, where
==PAGE:87==
implementation of predictive machine learning
87
each row contains the target value for the same row in the feature matrix. The target vector is also included
in Table 6.1. With the feature matrix and target vector, the data can be used to train the adaptive models.
However, as pointed out in Section 3.2, obtaining a model with the best possible predictive performance
requires that independent data sets are used for training, validation and testing purposes. In many cases, the
validation and test set can be combined into a single set used for both model selection and evaluation.
To avoid over-ﬁtting, it is important to have a reasonable amount of training data. Hence, dividing the
30 experimental data points into independent training and test sets is not convenient as this would increase
the risk of over-ﬁtting. In this case, it is more convenient to use sparse model selection methods such as
the LOO-CV and K-fold-CV described in Section 3.2.3. The data gathered from the simulations are more
dense and are thus more suitable for division into a training and test set. Dividing the data set requires a
choice of division method together with a division ratio determining the amount of data allocated to each
set. This ratio is referred to as the train/test ratio. One way of dividing the data is to use a systematic grid
approach where speciﬁc parts or fractions of the data are allocated to each set depending on the train/test
ratio. However, this would make the model inference less ﬂexible, as the training set would contain the
same points every time a new model is trained. Instead, a random allocation approach is applied where the
data points for each set are chosen randomly depending on the train/test ratio. Practically this is done by
scrambling the order of the entire feature matrix and target vector (conceptually shown in Table 6.1), after
which the data are allocated to the training and test set systematically from the train/test ratio.
6.2
Gaussian Process Regression
Author: Jakob Thrane
The fundamental theory of predicting using GPR is presented in Section 3.4. However, implementing and
training the probabilistic model can be computational heavy and involves additional steps such as data
preprocessing introduced in the previous section. Data preprocessing can be summarized as involving the
steps as following; 1) Cleaning the data and remove any unusable results 2) normalizing the input space and
3) producing a training and test set from the available data set.
Training the GPR model involves additional steps than computing Eq. (3.36) based on the training and test
set. It also involves the selection of a kernel and its hyperparameters. Based on the kernel and hyperparameter
selection, predictions can be conducted however only as good as the kernel and hyperparameter selection
allows. Finding the best performing kernel and its hyperparameters is denoted model selection and is
investigated in detail in Section 6.5.
This section seeks to provide insight in the implementation of GPR and the steps required for usable
predictions. This includes a simple example followed by the initial training and the resulting predictions
given the simulated data set. An overview of the ﬂow required for implementing predictions using GPR is
==PAGE:88==
88
Simulations
Preprocessing
Kernel selection
Hyperparameter 
Inference
Prediction
Visualization 
set
Evaluate
Training set
Test set
Optimized 
Kernel
Model selection
Training set
Figure 6.1: Implemented ﬂow for training
and evaluating the GPR method.
illustrated in Figure 6.1
In order to conduct predictions using the GPR method a training set is required. Discussed and introduced
in Section 6.1 are the possibilities given the simulated data set in terms of dividing it into a training and
test set, either manually selected or divided randomly. As further highlighted by the section, the action of
data preprocessing is best practice for most ML algorithms and rather essential for methods such as GPR.
Maintaining the same numerical values in each input dimension enables the further usage of the length-scale
parameters. Covariance functions that enable length-scale hyperparameters such as the squared exponential
covariance function, can achieve insight in how the input space affect the output space, if and only if the
input data are normalized to the same range of numerical values. The larger the length-scale parameter, the
less inﬂuential the corresponding input dimension is on the output. It is considered best practice to normalize
the input space, even in the absence of length-scale hyperparameters.
The ﬁrst step of predicting involves the computation of the covariance matrix given the training and test
set, as given by Eq. (3.36). The computation of the covariance matrices required, such as Ktest,train, Ktrain
and Ktest can be implemented using simple for-loops. The principle of the covariance matrices is to express
a similarity between the input data points given as either training or test using the selected kernel and its
corresponding parameters. The covariance matrix Ktrain is the covariances evaluated of all pairs in the training
set - i.e. computing the kernel value, K(x, x), for each pair of training points composes the covariance matrix
of the training set. A simple implementation of computing either Ktrain or Ktest,train can be observed in in
Appendix 9, Listing 2. Once the covariance matrix has been computed, predictions can be made although
requiring several matrix operations as presented by Eq. (3.36). Matrix inversion should be highlighted as
being computational heavy especially as the size of the data set expands. A recommended implementation
==PAGE:89==
implementation of predictive machine learning
89
for making predictions is offered by Rasmussen et. al. [28] which takes use of a Cholesky factorization for
matrix inversion, which reduces the computation complexity as the parameter space increases and the data
set expands. Matrix inversion is also required for computation of the log marginal likelihood as given by
Eq. (3.43). The recommended implementation have been implemented using Matlab and can be seen in
Appendix 9, Listing 1.
The predictions made by ﬁrstly computing the covariances and secondly taking use of Eq. (3.36) are only as
good, as the kernel and its hyperparameters. As mentioned, training the GPR also involves kernel selection.
The act of kernel selection is an optimization issue where the best selection produces the lowest error given
the test set. Finding the best performing model among a family of selections can be denoted model selection
and involves, in the case of GPR, the act of selecting the best performing kernel and its best performing
hyperparameters. Furthermore ﬁnding the best performing hyperparameters can be denoted hyperparameter
Inference, i.e. the optimization of parameters given a speciﬁc kernel and the training set, evaluated using the
test set.
6.2.1
Hyperparameter Inference
The task of hyperparameter inference is based on Bayesian rules of probability from Eq. (3.41) and involves the
use of likelihood and prior. The task of the optimization is to ﬁnd hyperparameters such that the probability
of the predicted data is maximized given the trained model. The marginal likelihood can be described as
p(y|X, q) and is straight forward to compute given the standard form for a multivariate Gaussian distribution
as discussed in Section 3.4. By using Bayesian rules of probability, and by introducing a prior over the
hyperparameters a maximization of the most likely hyperparameters can be performed. However, in practice
an approximation may be desired instead of computing the posterior of the hyperparameters. A maximization
of the marginal likelihood with respect to the hyperparameters can provide a posterior approximation that
open up the possibility of over-ﬁtting. The marginal likelihood for GPR does however incorporate a trade-off
between model ﬁt and model complexity which makes it valuable for inference and model selection. This is
also known as as type II maximum likelihood (ML-II).
A substantial amount of methods for inference exist, either by analytically solving the related integrals
or by approximation of the posterior distribution of the integrals needed. Implementing these inference
methods from scratch is beyond the scope of this thesis and hence taking use of a library consisting of veriﬁed
inference methods seem appropriate.
GPstuff is a toolbox for Bayesian modeling available for Matlab which provides a platform for Gaussian
process modeling. The use of GPstuff allows for efﬁcient modeling using computational tricks such as the
one recommended by Rasmussen. It furthermore ensures a veriﬁed platform for making predictions using
GPR.
==PAGE:90==
90
Far more inference methods than required for this thesis are available through GPstuff.
It seems
appropriate to highlight the most common methods such as; ML-II introduced above, Markov chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC), Maximum a posterior (MAP) estimation and Grid Integration (GridInt). These methods will
be the primary ways of conducting hyperparameter inference as presented through the results of this thesis.
MAP estimation
Computing the posterior probability, as is required in a full Bayesian approach, all
unknowns should be integrated over. This however is not always feasible and an approximation to these
integrals can be achieved with MAP estimation. The approximation is more speciﬁcally based on a point
estimation of unobserved data thus maximizing the marginal likelihood, p(y|X, q) over a given prior of p(q).
This results in a log posterior which is differentiable and allows for gradient based optimization. This further
enables the use of gradient based optimization functions as provided by Matlab in combination with the
MAP inference tool of GPstuff [31].
MCMC
Seeks to draw samples from the desired probability distribution we want to approximate, in
this case the posterior probability. As is the case with MAP estimation, the integrals needed to compute the
posterior probability may be difﬁcult or even impossible to evaluate. MCMC seeks to approximate these
integrals by constructing a Markov chain that converges iteratively towards the posterior distribution, in other
words ﬁnding a Markov chain where the stationary distribution of which is the desired posterior distribution.
Metropolis-Hastings is a popular MCMC method for constructing such a Markov chain. In short, it works by
randomly ’walking’ around the sample space and sometimes accepting a move in a given direction. This, as
the chain increases, returns a large number of samples from high-density regions of the desired probability
distribution thus providing an approximation of the posterior distribution [25]. Conducting inference using
MCMC and Metropolis-Hastings is offered by GPstuff.
Grid integration
The method seeks to approximate the entire integral by computing integral values in
speciﬁc points given as a grid. A weight is given for each evaluation point determining the importance of the
integral value. The evidence, as required by the Bayesian treatment for computing the posterior probability, is
then approximated based on a sum of the evaluated points and their weights thus approximating the integral
needed for determining the posterior probability [31].
6.2.2
Model evaluation
By performing hyperparameter inference, qualiﬁed predictions can be made based on the kernel choice. The
performance of the predictions can be said to be limited based on the kernel choice, as the inference seek to
optimize the hyperparameters of the selected kernel. It is desired to compare different kernels to evaluate the
select the better performing kernels. The nature of the data, and any assumptions of the data proves useful in
==PAGE:91==
implementation of predictive machine learning
91
selecting which kernels should be compared. The test set can ensure a proper model evaluation as this set
holds data different from the training set, i.e. unseen data for the trained model. Model evaluation can be
seen as a way of generalizing the error produced by the trained model, and is typically measured in terms of
a mean-squared error computed from the predictions of the model and the known values. This can also be
generalized as; A test set consisting of input values denoted X⇤and corresponding output values denoted Y⇤.
The model is to predict based on X⇤producing predictions denoted ˆy. The error can then computed from Eq.
(6.2).
MSE = 1
N
N
Â
i=1
( ˆyi −y⇤
i )2
(6.2)
The MSE provides the expected numerical squared error produced by the trained model given a speciﬁc
test set. RMSE, also known as the root mean-squared error can be deﬁned as RMSE =
p
MSE is a commonly
used measure of error when considering predictive regression models. However as GPR also computes the
variance of each prediction, i.e. the uncertainty of the prediction - the error of the GPR model is rather deﬁned
by the use of the MLPD which is given by Eq. (6.4). This describes the probability of predicting the output
values of the test set given the input values of the test set and the trained model and is equal to that used by
the LOO-CV in Eq. (3.44). In other words, the probability of the output values given the input values related
to those output values and the trained model.
log p(y⇤
i |x⇤
i , X, Y, q) = −1
2 log s2 −(y⇤−ˆy)2
2s2
−1
2 log 2p
(6.3)
log p(Y⇤|X⇤, X, Y, q) = 1
N
N
Â
i=1
log p(y⇤
i |x⇤
i , X, Y, q)
(6.4)
Model selection involves ﬁnding the best performing model among a selection of models. Ways of
measuring the model performance can be done by using the previously explained RMSE, or MLPD however
only given a speciﬁc training and test set. It is thus desired to cross-validate the model in order to make sure
the performance is a generalization of the available data, and not a product of over-ﬁtting to the training data.
For comparing GPR models the MLPD is used as a generalization error, however for comparing with other
methods such as the NN the RMSE is used.
==PAGE:92==
92
6.2.3
Example of GPR
Given the simulated data, and the described ﬂow for making predic-
tions using GPR a simple example can illustrate how predictions are
made. Additionally it helps understand how predictions are to be con-
ducted in a four dimensional input space. This example is considered
one dimensional, and only considers a data set of 5 BER measurements.
5 neighboring data points were randomly selected, in the same dimen-
sion based on the same system conﬁguration in the other three input
dimensions. The 5 data points are located in the dimension of optical
launch power and furthermore selected as Ptx = 1 to 5 [dBm]. The total
system conﬁguration for the ﬁve power values, i.e. the other input di-
mensions were selected as, Rs = 48 Gbaud, Nspans = 14 and D f /Rs = 2
as also can be observed in Figure 4.10(a). A numerical overview of the
5 measurements can be seen in Table 6.4. The training set, denoted X
is selected at random to consist of Ptx = 1, 2 and 5 [dBm] while the
remaining 3 and 4 [dBm] are selected as the test set X⇤. This results in
a one dimensional input and output.
Table 6.4: Measurements used for sim-
ple prediction example using GPR. Blue
indicates training data, while orange in-
dicates test data.
Input
Output
Ptx [dBm]
Normalized
log10(BER)
1
0.72
−2.85
2
0.77
−2.75
3
0.83
−2.27
4
0.88
−1.9
5
0.94
−1.4
The exponential covariance function is commonly used in GPR,
and is regarded as a versatile and rough kernel function. It is desired
to take use of the exponential covariance function Eq. (3.39) for this
simple example. The kernel function can be simpliﬁed as only a single
dimension is considered which reduces it to the following
k(xi, xj) = s2
exp exp
0
@−
s
(xi −xj)2
l2
1
A
(6.5)
For computing the covariance matrices, Ktest,train and Ktrain the
above described kernel is evaluated as k(X⇤, X) and k(X, X).
The
covariance matrix of Ktest,train and Ktrain are needed to compute the
expected output of a speciﬁc input different from the training set.
this is also given by Eq. (3.36). In other words, Ktest,train and Ktrain
are computed from the inputs of the training and test sets given the
selected kernel and its hyperparameters. The size of Ktest,train and Ktrain
is determined by the training and test points which translate to 2 ⇥3
and 3 ⇥3 respectively. The hyperparameters are given as s2
exp = 1,
==PAGE:93==
implementation of predictive machine learning
93
1
2
3
1
2
(a)
1
2
3
1
2
3
0.6
0.8
1
(b)
Figure 6.2: Ktest,train and Ktrain given a
simple one dimensional example.
l = 0.2 with a noise setting of s2
n = 0.1.
The resulting covariance matrices are illustrated in Figure 6.2. The
ﬁgure illustrates how the covariance function computes a similarity
measure between points in the input space. For instance, (b) illustrates
the covariance values between all training points and implies a high
similarity between the ﬁrst two training points Ptx = 1, 2, compared to
the third Ptx = 5. This further highlights how GPR works, by relating
similarities in input space, to similarities in output space and using
those similarities to generalize and estimate an expected value.
The computation of the covariance matrices allows for predictions
using the target values of the training set. This produces expected
values of the Gaussian process and thus predictions as follows
1
2
3
4
5
Ptx
-3
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
log10(BER)
Training set
Test set
Predictions
Figure 6.3: Simple 1-dimensional predic-
tion using GPR based on an exponential
kernel
µ(x⇤) = Ktest,train(Ktrain + s2
nI)−1 · y =
0
@−2.42
−1.95
1
A
(6.6)
The predictions based on the test set can be evaluated since the
true values are known , either by a RMSE or a predictive probability
as discussed in Section 6.2.2. Thus allowing for optimizing the hyper-
parameters of the selected kernel. No inference has been done in this
example and it is safe to assume the selection of hyperparameters is not
an optimal choice. It might however also be a possibility that another
covariance function is better performing which can be investigated by
applying model selection methods as discussed in Section 3.2.3.
The training and test set, along with the predictions of this simple
example can be observed in Figure 6.3. The Matlab implementation
can be seen in Listing 3 of both Eq. (3.36) and (3.37) compared with the
proposed implementation given by [28].
==PAGE:94==
94
6.2.4
Initial GPR results
The previous example provided insight in how predictions using GPR are made. The predictions were based
on a GPR model where the kernel had ﬁxed parameters and the input space was limited. It is desired to
increase the input space to four dimensions and ﬁnd the best hyperparameters. Making predictions from
the entirety of the simulated data set is conducted essentially in the same way as the simple example. In
order to handle the four dimensions, the kernel need to allow for a four dimensional input. The basic form of
e.g. a squared exponential kernel Eq. (3.38) does so and considers a length-scale hyperparameter for each
dimension.
Even though the entire data set consists of 6384 combinations, not all of them produce a usable result. The
system conﬁgurations unable to produce a usable result were removed as the ﬁrst part of the preprocessing.
This reduces the data set to 5057 data points available for a training and test set. A common ratio of
training and test points are 75 : 25 thus producing a training and test set consisting of 3771 and 1286 system
conﬁgurations and the resulting BER respectively.
For initial predictions a squared exponential kernel, and an exponential kernel was investigated. The
kernels are considered in the same family of kernels and consists of the same amount of free hyperparameters.
By taking use of the GPstuff library, both kernels can be deﬁned with appropriate initial hyperparameter
settings and the desired likelihood. More speciﬁcally this implies the deﬁnition and initialization of 6 free
parameters, 5 of them related to the kernel function (s2, l) and the sixth denotes the amount of noise s2
n to be
assumed given a Gaussian likelihood.
Model inference was completed using MAP estimation for both kernels thus seeking to ﬁnd the best
performing hyperparameters in both cases. The initial choice of MAP estimation was primarily due to the
low run time, however as additional model selection is required, inference methods such as MCMC and Grid
Integration should be investigated. By applying one repetition of MAP estimation, hyperparameters as given
below was estimated with the resulting RMSE, and MLPD given the test set.
It can be observed that the exponential kernel is performing slightly better. However it is important to
keep in mind that the MAP estimation is completed only once on a speciﬁc training and test set. As the
training is conducted on a large selection of the data it is unlikely that the inference result in over-ﬁtting,
although it is impossible to know unless cross-validated over the entire data set.
The purpose of these initial predictions it to achieve insight in the predictions produced by the most
common kernels. More so the error obtained when doing MAP inference and the resulting hyperparameters.
s2
l1
l2
l3
l4
s2
n
RMSE
MLPD
Squared Exponential
3.22
0.21
0.44
0.45
0.27
0.17
0.4465
−0.617
Exponential
2.86
1.27
2.43
2.66
1.55
0.056
0.4428
−0.5934
Table 6.5: Hyperparameters of a squared
exponential and exponential kernel ob-
tained using a single MAP estimation on
a 75 : 25 training test ratio on the entire
data set.
==PAGE:95==
implementation of predictive machine learning
95
However, it is also desired to observe how the predictions behave, as the kernels differ in nature. For this
reason a large visualization set is produced allowing high-resolution predictions in all four input dimensions.
Visualizing four input dimensions and one output dimension is difﬁcult. Slices of system conﬁgurations in
one input, one output dimension seems the best way to illustrate the predictions performed by GPR. This
results in e.g. Figure (6.4) for the squared exponential kernel, and Figure (6.5) for the exponential kernel.
A 95% conﬁdence interval is computed by Eq. (3.37) which results in the variance of each predictive point.
The conﬁdence interval of 95% is then computed by taking use of the standard deviation, s ⇥1.96. This is
visualized illustrating the uncertainty of the predictions where no training point is available. The theory
describes the exponential kernel as more rough which can be observed in detail by the conﬁdence interval of
Figure (6.5) - it seems to under estimate the noise of the data and thus produce a high degree of uncertainty
when predicting in between training points. The squared exponential is described as being more smooth,
which is indicative by the visualization - it seems to generalize the trends in each input dimension much
more than the exponential kernel.
The training and test set of these initial predictions were based on a 75 : 25 ratio which given the data set
size of 5057 results in relative large training and test sets. It is desired to investigate if a more sparse training
set could produce predictions with a similar degree of error. The approach for this investigation and the
results of which are discussed in Section 6.4.
==PAGE:96==
96
-10
-5
0
5
Input power [dBm]
-3.5
-3
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
log10(BER)
Predicted
Training set
Test set
(a) Predictions of Ptx given a system conﬁguration of;
Nspans = 15, Rs = 32Gbaud, D f /Rs = 1.8.
5
10
15
Nspans
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
log10(BER)
(b) Predictions of Nspans given a system conﬁguration
of; Ptx = −1, Rs = 32Gbaud, D f /Rs = 1.8.
10
20
30
40
Bandwidth [GHz]
-4
-3.5
-3
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
log10(BER)
(c) Predictions of Rs given a system conﬁguration of;
Ptx = 0, Nspans = 15, D f /Rs = 1.8.
1
1.5
2
Spacing/Bandwidth
-4
-2
0
2
4
log10(BER)
(d) Predictions of D f /Rs given system conﬁgurations
of Ptx = 0, Nspans = 15, Rs = 32.
Figure 6.4: Predictions in each input dimension given as slices of particular system conﬁgurations based on an optimized
squared exponential kernel. Shown are training and test points at the given slices along with the conﬁdence interval of
the predictions.
==PAGE:97==
implementation of predictive machine learning
97
-10
-5
0
5
Input power [dBm]
-3.5
-3
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
log10(BER)
Predicted
Training set
Test set
(a)
5
10
15
Nspans
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
log10(BER)
(b)
10
20
30
40
Bandwidth [GHz]
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
log10(BER)
(c)
1
1.5
2
Spacing/Bandwidth
-4
-2
0
2
log10(BER)
(d)
Figure 6.5: Predictions in each input dimension given as slices of particular system conﬁgurations based on an optimized
exponential kernel. Shown are training and test points at the given slices along with the conﬁdence interval of the
predictions
==PAGE:98==
98
6.3
Neural Network
Author: Jakob Thrane
The fundamental theory behind Neural Networks is presented in Section 3.3. As is the case using GPR for
predictions, data preprocessing is also required for making predictions with NN. The preprocessing consists
of the same steps, in the same order, as required for GPR - this further allows for a comparison of a ﬁnal
predictive error between NN and GPR.
The NN in question consists of a layered construction able to reproduce the values of the training set using
a set of weights. The task of the layers and their feed-forward ability is to use and ﬁnd a speciﬁc combination
of weights that can be ﬂexible enough to adopt any values required for predictions. In order to provide
predictions using a NN, a layered construction is needed. For this thesis a simple one layered feed-forward
network is considered, as the input space is initially deemed low in complexity. When considering such a
relative NN the task of making predictions can be summarized as optimizing the weights of the hidden layer.
This section seek to provide insight in the implementation of NN and the steps required for usable predictions.
This includes considerations for the structural model complexity and methods for weight optimization. The
implementation ﬂow required for making predictions using NN is illustrated in Figure 6.6
Simulations
Preprocessing
Number of 
hidden nodes
Inference
Prediction
Visualization 
set
Evaluate
Training set
Test set
Optimized 
Weights
Model selection
Figure 6.6: Implementational ﬂow achiev-
ing a trained predictive model using a
Neural network.
Conducting training of a NN consists of adjusting the weights of the layers, in this case, of the single layer. The
single layer however consist of several hidden nodes, each with an input and output weight associated with it
this is visualized in Figure 6.7. The weights are to be adjusted such that the error is minimized as given by Eq.
(3.11) using an iterative approach based on the derivative of either ﬁrst or second order as denoted by Eq.
(3.12). Since the NN consists of a layered structure, it is difﬁcult to compute the error induced by parameters
not directly connected to the output. The error computed at the output is propagated backwards through
the network, allowing an optimization of the input weights. This is also known as error backpropagation.
==PAGE:99==
implementation of predictive machine learning
99
wkj
wji
hj(·)
xi
yk
Ptx
Nspans
Rs
∆f/Rs
log10(BER)
Figure 6.7: Topology of the single lay-
ered NN structure. Denoted are the four
inputs and a single output with the cor-
responding input and output weights.
As discussed previously, different optimization schemes exist however the scope for this thesis is Bayesian
Regularization based on the concept of error backpropagation. The implementation of BR backpropagation is
considered beyond the scope of this thesis, as there are several ways to conduct the backpropagation but also
several ways to construct computational efﬁcient NNs.
If the training set is considered sparse, NN usually have problems of over-ﬁtting. BR seek to reduce the
amount of over-ﬁtting by regularizing the weights, this approach is desired as the input space is initially
deemed sparse which in theory favors GPR in terms of performance. It is expected that the NN will over-ﬁt
to some extend, however as dimensions are added and as the training set is increased the over-ﬁt will likely
be reduced. For this reason it is best practice to make use of cross-validation. It is in interest to observe how
NN may perform on this four dimensional input space, and investigate if the GPR is considerable better even
as complexity increases in terms of available training points.
In summary, the training phase of the NN consists of applying the inference method, in this case BR
backpropagation, on the training data thus achieving optimized weights. The optimized weights are then to
be cross-validated on independent test and validation sets to ensure the validation of our optimized model
and reduce possible over-ﬁtting. These weights, along with the structure of the NN is what is needed to
provide predictions. In order to make predictions using the GPR, the training set needs to be stored, in NN
==PAGE:100==
100
the training set can be discarded when the weights are optimized.
Inference
The Neural Network toolbox provided by Matlab 2015b enables inference using the BR
backpropagation method. It further employs cross-validation using the training and test sets. Additionally
it enables the possibility of conﬁguring the structure of the NN, by changing the amount of hidden nodes
present in the hidden layer. The toolbox provides a veriﬁed and computational efﬁcient NN with a large
ﬂexibility thus making it ideal for the scope of this thesis and for comparing performance with predictions
done with GPR.
Predictions
Initial predictions were conducted using a training test ratio of 75/25 as was the case with
the initial GPR predictions. The structure of the NN was as previously mentioned consisting of one hidden
layer, and initially 4 hidden nodes were selected as is visualized in Figure 6.7. The resulting trained NN was
evaluated given the test set and an RMSE was computed to RMSE = 0.5967 as a ﬁnal error. As discussed
given the GPR predictions, slices in 2D can visualize how the trained model is performing. A selected slice in
each of the four input dimension has been visualized in Figure 6.8.
The RSME error of the trained model is higher than what was obtained for the trained GPR model.
However it is important to keep in mind that no cross-validation across the entire data set was done, thus the
error measure is only for the particular training and test set used. It was initially thought that the NN would
have problems with over-ﬁtting, but as seen from the visualizations it seems like it is under-ﬁtting. This is
indicated by the predictions performed in Figure 6.8(c) and (d). A complexity increase is necessary, either
done by increasing the number of hidden nodes or adding multiple hidden layers. It is desired to investigate
how the error relates to model complexity, and more so when the size of the training set increases.
==PAGE:101==
implementation of predictive machine learning
101
-10
-5
0
5
Input power [dBm]
-4
-3.5
-3
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
log10(BER)
Predicted
Training set
Test set
(a) Predictions of Ptx given a system conﬁguration of;
Nspans = 15, Rs = 32Gbaud, D f /Rs = 1.8.
5
10
15
Nspans
-5.5
-5
-4.5
-4
-3.5
-3
-2.5
log10(BER)
(b) Predictions of Nspans given a system conﬁguration
of; Ptx = −1 dBm, Rs = 32 Gbaud, D f /Rs = 1.8.
10
20
30
40
Bandwidth [GHz]
-4
-3.5
-3
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
log10(BER)
(c) Predictions of Rs given a system conﬁguration of;
Ptx = 0 dBm, Nspans = 15, D f /Rs = 1.6
1
1.5
2
Spacing/Bandwidth]
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
log10(BER)
(d) Predictions of D f /Rs given a system conﬁguration
of; Ptx = 0 dBm, Nspans = 15, Rs = 32 Gbaud
Figure 6.8: Initial predictions of a NN
given a structure consisting of four in-
puts, four hidden nodes and a single out-
put. A slice is shown in each input dimen-
sion at a similar system conﬁguration.
==PAGE:102==
102
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Training set size
0.5
1
1.5
RMSE
Test error vs. training set size
NN 16 HN
GPR
NN 8 HN
Figure 6.9: Model generalization error
for GPR, and NN as the training set size
increases
6.4
Training set size
Author: Jakob Thrane
Predictions using GPR and NN have been described and visualized throughout this chapter. The predictions
in both cases were conducted using a 75:25 training test ratio of the entire data set. In perspective it might
seem that 75% of the entire data is a large amount of required simulations thus it would be of interest to
observe and investigate how performance increases as the training set increases. More so it is of interest to
see how little training data is required to obtain some generalization in the domain of BER predictions.
The initial results of GPR showed the exponential kernel performed slightly better but this is based on the
same training and test set using no cross-validation. In short, it is possible that the exponential performs
better given that speciﬁc combinations of the training set. The initial comparison of the squared exponential
and exponential kernel should only be considered a quick insight into the requirements for model selection.
The initial predictive results of NN showed there is likely a need for increased complexity. The predictions
were obtained using 4 hidden nodes thus, 8 or even 16 hidden nodes would increase complexity of the NN
and likely provide with a lower test error.
The performance of the squared exponential and exponential kernel were very similar, and further investiga-
tion in which is better performing shall be done later. For now, the squared exponential kernel was selected
to obtain insight in how the error decreases as the training set increases in size for GPR. Furthermore, MAP
estimation were used as the inference method as the runtime is low. For NN, 8 and 16 hidden nodes were
investigated, as 4 hidden nodes produced initial predictions that indicated a under-ﬁt thus too low low model
complexity.
For the investigation, the training set size was increased from 1 to 1000 with 25 as a step size. For each
step 20 repetitions of RMSE computation were completed based on independent training and test sets, thus
no training set or test set in each of the 20 repetitions were identical. This enables a broader insight in the
==PAGE:103==
implementation of predictive machine learning
103
general model error and ensures the generalization is with respect to the sheer number of training data,
and not which speciﬁc combinations of training data were used. Figure (6.9) visualize the results of the
investigation for GPR and NN of 8 and 16 hidden nodes.
The error of the GPR seems to reach a stable state at a training set size of around 200. Additionally the
error further decreases as the training set size is increased which is no surprise. The convergence state of the
NN indicates how a low complexity model reaches a stable state with a smaller training set than the model
with a higher complexity. However as the training set size increases the more complex model seems to obtain
an overall lower generalization error. This further seems to indicate the initial NN predictions as being an
under-ﬁt, as a structure of only 4 hidden nodes were used. In summary, the error obtained using the GPR
model is similar to that of the NN using 16 hidden nodes as the training set increases beyond the size of 400.
A stable state is observed at a training set size of ⇠200 for the GPR and ⇠400 for the NN of 16 hidden nodes.
Further investigation is required to conclude the best performing method and model.
6.5
Model Selection
Author: Jesper Wass
The initial predictive results presented above are produced to give an indication of the performance of the
NN and GPR. For the GPR, the ﬁgures display predictions using both the squared exponential kernel from
Eq. (3.38) and the exponential kernel from Eq. (3.39). Initially, both seem to ﬁnd the correct pattern in the
data in every dimension, even though the nature of the exponential kernel seems a bit too rough. However,
the performance of the exponential kernel is almost identical to the squared exponential, and the squared
exponential may therefore be a bit too smooth. For the NN, prediction was done using a single hidden layer
containing 4 hidden neurons, and by looking at the prediction in Figure 6.8, the NN seems to have trouble
ﬁtting the data patterns in all four dimensions. Therefore, the number of hidden neurons was increased to 8
and 16 to investigate the performance of a more complex NN.
In both cases, model choice is based on basic assumptions rather than knowledge, and exploring whether
these models are actually proper choices must be investigated. Hence, a comprehensive model selection stage
is necessary. For the GPR, model selection primarily involves investigation of multiple kernels along with
optimization of their respective hyperparameters. With the Matlab NN toolbox, various model selection
schemes are incorporated in the parameter optimization technique, however, to obtain high performance, a
proper choice of hidden neurons must be supplied to the toolbox.
==PAGE:104==
104
#
Type
Hyperparameters
1
Squared exp
s2
sexp, l2
k
2
Exponential
s2
exp, l2
k
3
Matern32
s2
m, l2
k
4
Matern52
s2
m, l2
k
5
Constant
s2
c
6
Linear
s2
l
7
Periodic
s2
p, g, l2
k
8
Categorical
None
9
Mask
None
Table 6.6: Overview of investigated ker-
nel indicating numbering and hyperpa-
rameters to be optimized.
6.5.1
Gaussian Process: Kernel and parameters
GPStuff offers various kernel functions to be used for inference, and though some of these initially seem
inappropriate considering the nature of our data, it is educational for the model selection stage to evaluate
and compare performance of as many kernels as possible.
Kernel selection
The kernel investigation involves evaluation of nine different kernels, the equation of
which are listed in Appendix 9. Table 6.6 seeks to provide a simple overview. The table indicates the
numbering of each kernel along with the free hyperparameters. Each kernel is evaluated using the Gaussian
likelihood function containing an additional noise hyperparameter s2
n.
First, the kernels are evaluated on the simulated data. The performance of each kernel depends on their
hyperparameter values, which can potentially bias our results if not optimized properly for every kernel.
Hence, prior to the kernel evaluation, hyperparameters of each kernel are optimized identically using the
MAP, MCMC and GridInt techniques described in Section 6.2.1.
Simulation
For the investigation a training set of 200 randomly chosen points from the simulated data
set is used. The number of training point has been chosen based on Figure 6.9. As the ﬁgure shows, above
200 training points, the slope of the performance starts to converge and 200 is thus a stable minimum. It
is convenient to investigate the model performance on such sparse data. To get an indication of the kernel
performance, each kernel is evaluated by three different means:
1. First, each kernel undergoes a standard training phase where hyperparameters are optimized using the
200 training points. This is followed by evaluation on 400 randomly chosen test points providing a MLPD
indication of the predictive performance.
2. Second, each kernel is veriﬁed using LOO-CV, where the kernels are trained 200 with 199 training points,
and for each round of training the kernel is evaluated on the remaining data point. After 200 training
==PAGE:105==
implementation of predictive machine learning
105
rounds, MLPD is calculated.
3. Third, each kernel is veriﬁed using 10-fold-CV, where the training set is divided into 10 folds. For every
fold, the kernels are trained on 9 folds and afterwards evaluated on the remaining fold. After 10 training
iterations, MLPD is calculated.
The most important of these three evaluation schemes is the ﬁrst, where evaluation is based on an independent
test set as this provides the best indication of the predictive performance. However, as a training set with only
200 training points in four dimensions is sparse, it is interesting to compare this scheme with the LOO-CV
and k-fold-CV.
The speciﬁc collection of training points may favor some kernels over others and bias the results. To
eliminate this issue, the training and evaluation processes above are repeated 10 times to ﬁnd a mean
performance for each kernel rather than a single performance on the speciﬁc training and test set. The results
of the kernel investigation can be seen in Figure 6.10. What is noticeable in the ﬁgure is that the ﬁrst four
kernels generally perform more or less identically and are outperforming the last ﬁve kernels comprising
the constant, linear, periodic, cat and mask kernel. Additionally, the performance of each kernel seem to
be similar for all three optimization techniques. The only exception being the constant kernel with the
MAP approximation. Hence, the results exhibit a great amount of reliability of the optimization techniques.
Among the squared exponential, exponential, Matern32, and Matern52 it is difﬁcult to conclude which kernel
performances the best. In particular because the performance on the test set is almost identical for those four.
It should be noticed that the two Matern kernels have not been evaluated with the GridInt optimization, as
no solution for the hyperparameters was found within the desired run time, why the Matern kernels are not
considered to be the best choice of kernel for this situation. The squared exponential is chosen as the best
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Kernels
-8
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
Mean log probability density
MAP
K-fold
LOO
Test
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Kernels
-8
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
Mean log probability density
MCMC
K-fold
LOO
Test
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Kernels
-8
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
Mean log probability density
Grid.Int
K-fold
LOO
Test
Figure 6.10: Kernel evaluation for 4D sim-
ulated data showing MLPD performance
using LOO-CV, 10-fold-CV and an inde-
pendent test set.
==PAGE:106==
106
performing kernel from looking at Figure 6.2.4 and Figure 6.2.4. The nature of the squared exponential kernel
represents the data patterns better than the exponential. As these two kernels perform equally on the test set
in Figure 6.10, the squared exponential kernel appears to be the best choice.
Experimental
For the experimental data, the same investigation has been performed. However, as only
30 data points are available, kernel evaluation has been done solely using the LOO-CV and 10-fold-CV. The
results for the experimental data can be seen in Figure 6.11. The results are similar to the simulated data,
however, it becomes more obvious that the squared exponential outperforms both the exponential and Matern
class kernels. This time the GridInt technique could not optimize the exponential kernel within an acceptable
amount of time. Hence, once again the squared exponential kernel appears to perform best.
Comparison
Before investigating the hyperparameters of the squared exponential kernel, it is interesting to
see whether the simulated data and experimental data share the same optimal kernel when evaluated on the
same dimensions. Above, the simulated data is obtained with 4 variable features, while the experimental
only has 2. It is thus difﬁcult to make result comparisons directly. Therefore, the same kernel evaluation has
been done for 2D simulated data with only optical launch power and channel spacing as variable parameters.
Further more, as only a 3 dB power range is measured in the experiments, a similar power range is considered
for the simulated data. This results in only 18 simulated data points, why LOO-CV and 10-fold-CV has
been used for evaluation. The results are shown in Figure 6.12. It is observed that the Matern class kernels
suddenly becomes the best performing when only considering two of the four input dimensions for the
simulated data. Additionally, the periodic kernel also seems to have high performance. However, as the
periodic kernel had awful performance on both the experimental and the 4D simulated data, the periodic
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Kernels
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
Mean log probability density
MAP
K-fold
LOO
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Kernels
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
Mean log probability density
MCMC
K-fold
LOO
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Kernels
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
Mean log probability density
Grid.Int
K-fold
LOO
Figure 6.11: Kernel evaluation for 2D ex-
perimental data showing MLPD perfor-
mance using LOO-CV and 10-fold-CV.
==PAGE:107==
implementation of predictive machine learning
107
kernel is not considered a proper choice for general purpose application. Another interesting observation is
that the squared exponential kernel once again seems to have good performance and this kernel thus seems to
be a good choice for the system regardless of where the data is obtained from. The properties of the squared
exponential kernel thus seem best for the purpose of generalizing performance in WDM systems.
Hyperparameter selection
The squared exponential kernel has multiple hyperparameters including the
length-scale parameters as described in Section 3.4.3 in addition to a scaling parameter s2
sexp and noise
estimation s2
n. Above, the parameters were optimized using the MAP, MCMC and GridInt techniques.
Whether to use MAP, MCMC and GridInt for the ﬁnal parameter optimization can be difﬁcult to decide, and
investigating their performance and the properties of the parameter space further is thus necessary. The
length-scale parameters are immediately the most interesting due to the carried ARD information.
Simulation
First, performance of the three optimization techniques are compared on the simulated data.
Each optimization technique are given 200 randomly chosen training points to be used for the optimization
of the hyperparameters in the squared exponential kernel. Afterwards, the optimized parameters from
each model are evaluated on 400 randomly chosen test points to indicate the predictive performance of
each optimized model. Once again, the performance of each technique is averaged over 10 repetitions with
different training sets to ensure unbiased results. The kernel has 5 hyperparameters to be optimized together
with the noise parameter from the marginal likelihood function. The optimized parameters for each technique
can be seen in top of Table 6.7.
Looking at these results, none of the three optimization techniques can be said to outperform the others.
MCMC performance is slightly better than the others, however, the run time of both the MCMC and GridInt
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Kernels
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
Mean log probability density
MAP
K-fold
LOO
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Kernels
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
Mean log probability density
MCMC
K-fold
LOO
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Kernels
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
Mean log probability density
Grid.Int
K-fold
LOO
Figure 6.12: Kernel evaluation for 2D sim-
ulated data with only Ptx = [−2
:
0]
dBm and D f as input with Rs = 32 GHz
and Nspans = 15
==PAGE:108==
108
Optimization techniques
l1
l2
l3
l4
s2
sexp
s2
n
MLPD
MAP
0.59
1.38
1.35
0.39
7.32
0.30
-0.941
MCMC
0.64
1.54
1.53
0.41
11.27
0.34
-0.939
GridInt
0.61
1.45
1.34
0.40
8.47
0.31
-0.937
Parameter sweep
l1
l2
l3
l4
s2
sexp
s2
n
MLPD
Single train
0.50
0.70
0.30
0.10
7.32
0.30
-1.124
LOO-CV
0.70
1.30
0.50
0.30
7.32
0.30
-0.965
10-fold-CV
0.70
1.30
0.50
0.30
7.32
0.30
-0.965
Table 6.7: Optimized hyperparameters
for the 4D squared exponential kernel us-
ing MAP, MCMC, and GridInt trained
on simulated data. The bottom table in-
dicates results obtain from a manual pa-
rameter sweep.
technique were signiﬁcantly longer than the MAP estimation even though only 200 points are used for
training. Hence, MAP initially seems like the best choice as this technique has the best trade-off between
runtime and accuracy. The parameter values are very similar for all three optimization techniques. The
most signiﬁcant variation lies in the scaling parameter s2
sexp. All three methods agree on the length-scale
relationship and thus the importance of each dimension.
A brute-force value sweep is also performed. Here all length-scale parameters are sweeped from 0.1 to
2.1 with a step size of 0.2. For every step, the parameter combination is evaluated on the training set using
LOO-CV and k-fold-CV, and the best performing parameter combination is saved and afterwards evaluated
on the test set. The purpose of the sweep is primarily to investigate the efﬁciency of the LOO-CV and the
k-fold-CV. Evaluating the parameters found with LOO-CV and k-fold-CV on the test set will indicate whether
LOO-CV and k-fold-CV can work as an efﬁcient replacement for test set evaluation. The sweep tests 11
different parameter values in each dimension resulting in 14641 parameter combinations. The sweep results
are also included in the bottom of Table 6.7. The sweep is only performed on the length-scale parameters.
The noise parameter s2
n and scaling parameter s2
sexp are pre-chosen to the values obtained from the MAP
estimation.
The results from the parameter sweep are interesting as the kernel optimized directly on the 200 training
points alone (denoted “Single train”) are very different from those obtained for the MAP, MCMC and GridInt
as well as LOO-CV and k-fold-CV. Additionally, the predictive performance of these parameters becomes
much worse. This is partly because the optimization is done solely on the sparse training set, and the
parameters are thus customized to exactly these points and not the system in general. This is a typical
example of over-ﬁtting. As seen in the table, the LOO-CV and 10-fold-CV ﬁnds the exact same parameters
and thus have identical performance, and the problem of over-ﬁtting is reduced as the performance comes
close to that achieved by the MAP, MCMC and GridInt. This observation is convenient for the experimental
==PAGE:109==
implementation of predictive machine learning
109
Optimization techniques
l1
l2
s2
sexp
s2
n
MLPD
MAP
2.69
0.37
4.41
0.002
1.533
MCMC
2.90
0.34
6.59
0.002
1.412
GridInt
2.88
0.39
6.15
0.002
1.428
Parameter sweep
l1
l2
s2
sexp
s2
n
MLPD
Single train
0.50
0.33
4.41
0.002
1.974
LOO-CV
2.70
0.35
4.41
0.002
1.534
Table 6.8: Optimized hyperparameters
for the 2D squared exponential kernel
using MAP, MCMC, and GridInt trained
on experimental data. The bottom table
indicates results obtain from a manual
parameter sweep.
data where evaluation using an independent test set is not possible.
Experimental
Above, the techniques for optimizing the hyperparameters were investigated on the 4D
simulated data, and the MAP optimization had the best properties due to high predictive performance and
short runtime. For the experimental data, only 30 data points are available, and evaluating the predictive
performance on test data is not possible. As seen above, LOO-CV and k-fold-CV compose two great alternative
approaches for model evaluation. The optimization techniques and hyperparameters are now investigated on
the experimental data. The entire data set of 30 observations are used for training, and LOO-CV is used for
evaluation of predictive performance. Once again, MAP, MCMC and GridInt are investigated together with a
parameter sweep of each length-scale parameter. The results are given in Table 6.8.
From the table it should be noticed that evaluating the trained model on the entire training set alone results
in substantially high performance compared to LOO-CV. However, as the parameters found by sweeping
and optimizing with LOO-CV have a lower performance, this is again a typical case of over-ﬁtting. The
parameters found with MAP, MCMC and GridInt are also evaluated using LOO-CV, and the performance of
each technique is generally stable. Once again, only the length-scale parameters are sweeped, and the noise
and scaling parameters are thus obtained by MAP estimation. The results of the parameter sweep evaluated
by LOO-CV is visualized in Figure 6.13.
The heat map indicates the performance of the sweeped length-scale parameters using LOO-CV. The
length-scale parameters found by the MAP, MCMC, and GridInt are also marked in the ﬁgure. All these
methods are consistent on the length-scale parameters. For the experimental data, the MAP shows great
performance and low runtime and is thus the preferred optimization tool. Also, LOO-CV once again shows
great abilities to reduce risk of over-ﬁtting.
Comparison
The simulated and experimental data have been dealt with separately throughout this thesis.
However, an important aspect to investigate is whether the optimal parameters obtained from simulation can
==PAGE:110==
110
be applied on the experimental data. We saw in Figure 6.11 and 6.12 that the squared exponential kernel
is a proper choice for both the simulated and experimental data regardless of input dimensions. To test
whether this also applies for the hyperparameters, a heat map similar to Figure 6.13 is plotted for the 2D
simulated data with only optical launch power and spacing as variable inputs. The optical launch power
range is reduced to a 3 dB interval from -2 to 0 dBm. The 18 training points are used to optimize parameters
with MAC, MCMC, GridInt and a value sweep using LOO-CV. The heat map for the simulated 2D data is
given in Figure 6.14.
As the ﬁgure shows, consistency on the hyperparameters for each optimization technique is no longer
present. The MAP optimization and the value sweep agree on the parameters, while the MCMC and GridInt
agree on different parameters. This can be due to the fact that only 18 training points are available, and
reducing over-ﬁtting can be very difﬁcult. The parameters found for each technique can be observed in Table
6.9. An interesting observation is that the parameters agreed upon between MCMC and GridInt comply
with those from the experimental data from Figure 6.13. However, the parameters found with MCMC and
GridInt have poor performance compared to those found by the MAP estimation and the value sweep as
seen in Figure 6.14. The number of training points thus seems to be too sparse for these methods to work
properly. Even though the MAP and value sweep ﬁnd parameters that are different from the experimental
case, these are still in proximity of the yellow area on Figure 6.13, which indicates close to optimal predictive
performance. Initially, hyperparameter compliance between the simulated and experimental data seem to be
present. This will be further investigated in Chapter 7.
Experimental Pin/Spacing: Mean log predictive density
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
lengthscale d2
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
lengthscale d1
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
Sweep LOO
Sweep single train
MAP
MCMC
Grid.Int
Figure 6.13: Heat map showing MLPD as
function of the length-scale hyperparam-
eters based on evaluation with LOO-CV.
Parameters found with MAP, MCMC and
GridInt are also marked.
==PAGE:111==
implementation of predictive machine learning
111
Optimization techniques
l1
l2
s2
sexp
s2
n
MLPD
MAP
1.34
0.25
6.84
0.005
0.187
MCMC
2.87
0.36
8.78
0.06
-0.409
GridInt
2.94
0.34
6.73
0.05
-0.388
Parameter sweep
l1
l2
s2
sexp
s2
n
MLPD
Single train
1.10
0.17
6.84
0.005
1.349
LOO-CV
1.40
0.25
6.84
0.005
0.189
Table 6.9: Optimized hyperparameters
for the 2D squared exponential kernel us-
ing MAP, MCMC, and GridInt trained
on simulated data. The bottom table in-
dicates results obtain from a manual pa-
rameter sweep.
For now we conclude that the LOO-CV appears to be the most reliable optimization tool when only a
sparse training set is available, and during all parameter optimizations, the MAP estimation seems to follow
the results of the value sweep of the LOO-CV. The sweep has the draw back that a large number of iterations
is required, and the runtime to accuracy trade-off makes the method rather impractical. The MAP estimation
does not suffer from the same trade-off. Hence, for both the experimental and simulated data, the optimal
kernel is chosen to be the squared exponential and the optimal optimization technique is chosen to be the
MAP estimation. For the experimental data, the optimal parameters are those listed in Table 6.8. Improving
these values is not possible as no more data is available. For the simulated data, only a small fraction was
used for this investigation, and the ﬁnal optimal parameters can be found by introducing the use of a larger
Simulated Pin/Spacing: Mean log predictive density
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
lengthscale d2
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
lengthscale d1
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
Sweep LOO
Sweep single train
MAP
MCMC
Grid.Int
Figure 6.14:
Length-scale evaluation
for squared exponential kernel using 2-
dimensional simulated data with only
Ptx = [−2
:
0] dBm and D f as input
with Rs = 32 GHz and Nspans = 15
==PAGE:112==
112
training set. This will be investigated in Chapter 7.
6.5.2
Neural Network: Hidden nodes
For the NN, model selection involves ﬁnding the best possible model parameters, and a parameter update
algorithm to be used with the error back-propagation technique. This also includes a choice of stopping
criterion as mentioned in Section 3.3.4. Additionally, model selection involves choosing a proper amount of
hidden layers and hidden nodes within each layer to avoid under-ﬁtting or over-ﬁtting. In this thesis, focus
has been on a typical feed-forward NN with a single hidden layer, however, the number of hidden neurons in
the NN is not a straight forward decision. The use of Bayesian Regularization reduces the signiﬁcance of
over-ﬁtting, however, as seen in Figure 6.9, a network with 8 hidden neurons achieves lower performance
compared to a network with 16 hidden units, and it appears that the initial choice of 4 hidden units produces
an under-ﬁt. Until now, we have seen 16 hidden units as a good choice. To verify this, 26 networks have
been trained and evaluated each containing different number of hidden neurons ranging from 5 to 30. Each
network has been trained on a randomly chosen training set, after which they have been evaluated on 400
randomly chosen test points. To get further insight into the performance, networks have been trained on data
sets with sizes varying from 200 to 400 data points. Hence, each of the 26 networks has been trained 201
times with different training set sizes. Further more, to generalize results, this process has been averaged over
10 repetitions with different training sets. The results are illustrated as a heat map in Figure 6.15.
The yellow area indicates the combinations of hidden neurons and training set size with best performance.
NN performance: 1/RMSE
5
10
15
20
25
30
# Hidden Neurons
200
220
240
260
280
300
320
340
360
380
400
Training set size
1.5
1.55
1.6
1.65
1.7
Figure 6.15: Heat map showing the NN
performance in terms of 1/RMSE as func-
tion of training set size and number of
hidden neurons.
==PAGE:113==
implementation of predictive machine learning
113
Here, performance is measured as an inverse error (1/RMSE) to illustrate maximum performance rather
than minimum error. Noticeable on the ﬁgure is that a network with 5 hidden neurons seems to have almost
similar performance with 200 and 400 training points. In other words, the network performance does not
really improve when the data set size increases, and so, the model can be said to be close to the maximum
possible performance. Once again this indicates that the model is too simple to represent the full data
behavior. Looking at the networks with more than 12 hidden neurons, we see how the performance follows
the size of the training set. The best performance is achieved between 12 and 30 hidden neurons, however, to
have good performance, more than 350 training points are necessary. If only 250 training points or less are
available, using more than 12 hidden neurons will result in very poor performance, as the model would be
too complex resulting in a severe over-ﬁt.
For now, we see that when a large training set is available, the number of hidden neurons is not than
important as long as we use more than 8 in the network. Hence, 18 hidden neurons is assessed to be a proper
choice for our data set and will be used for ﬁnal prediction.
6.6
Summary
Author: Jesper Wass
In this chapter, it has been observed that the squared exponential kernel is a proper choice in GPR for both
4D simulated data, 2D simulated data, and the experimental data. It has been observed that the optimization
techniques MAP, MCMC, and GridInt generally perform equally well on the data, however, MAP is favorable
due to faster optimization. Furthermore, it has been observed that patterns in the simulated and experimental
data are similar as length-scale parameters found with 2D simulated data are close to to those found with
experimental data.
For the NN, it has been observed that the number of hidden neurons depends on the training set size, and
at least 12 hidden neurons are required for optimal performance, when training set size exceeds 350 data
points. With the large training set available for the simulated data, 18 hidden neurons has been chosen as a
proper number.
In both GPR and NN, it has been observed that at least 200 training points are necessary to achieved a
reasonable performance when considering 4D input data. So far, regression on the experimental data has
solely been done with GPR, as the NN is known to over-ﬁt if data sets are too sparse. However, whether this
is actually true for this system is investigated in the next chapter.
==PAGE:114==
==PAGE:115==
7 Results
Author: Jakob Thrane
Through the previous chapter predictive methods of GPR and NN used on WDM performance data have
been presented and outlined. The performance of each model have been described using a generalized error
metric and additional optimization using model selection methods have been completed. Furthermore this
allows for the selection of the best performing predictive model and thus the best preforming predictive
method based on simulated and experimental data.
This section seeks to document and present the results of the best performing GPR model and the best
preforming NN. More speciﬁcally the ﬁnal predictive error on the simulated and experimental data sets. A
comparison of GPR and NN is conducted as to ﬁnd the best predictive method. Additionally, insight in
the generalization preformed by the predictive models is presented and evaluated. Finally the GPR is used
as a generalization method on simulated data in hope to provide with a predictive model usable on the
experimental data.
7.1
Simulation
The initial predictions of GPR on the simulated data set showed a slight difference in performance between a
squared exponential kernel and a exponential kernel using a MAP estimation inference method. This slight
difference also appeared as the result of applying model selection methods, slightly favoring the performance
of a squared exponential kernel. The inference method of MAP estimation was deemed equivalent to other
methods such as MCMC and Grid Integration in terms of obtaining the hyperparameters yet superior in terms
of runtime. In short, by using a squared exponential kernel function in combination with MAP estimation a
superior performance is achieved on the four dimensional simulated data set.
The initial predictions using NN on simulated data presented a model structure that did not have the
necessary complexity. Investigating the generalized model error as the size of the training set increased,
achieved insight in how the four dimension input space favors additional model complexity. Furthermore the
model selection results seem to indicate a similar but improved performance as the number of hidden nodes
exceeds 18.
==PAGE:116==
116
7.1.1
Optimized models
Gaussian process regression
The hyperparameters of the squared exponential kernel has been
obtained by MAP estimation over 100 repetitions. For each repetition the training and test set has been
different allowing a generalized perspective of the hyperparameters and their ﬁnal predictive error. This
results in an insight in the generalization required by the complete simulated data set and the resulting
generalized error. It does also provide insight in the variance of each hyperparameter indicating if some parts
of the data set requires a different generalization.
Hyperparameters
Test error
l1
l2
l3
l4
s2
sexp
s2
n
RMSE
MLPD
0.2023
0.4429
0.4468
0.2620
3.3066
0.1567
0.4145
−0.5395
Table 7.1: Mean of obtained kernel hy-
perparameters using MAP inference over
100 iterations with a 75:25 training test
ratio. The error is computed as RMSE
and MLPD
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
Optical launch power
Number of Spans
Symbol rate
Channel spacing
Figure 7.1: Boxplot of the distribution of
length-scale hyperparameters given 100
iterations with a 75:25 training test ratio.
The hyperparameters listed in Table 7.1 are the mean of the hyperparameters obtained over 100 iterations
using a training test ratio of 75:25. The distribution of the length-scale hyperparameters are visualized as a
box plot in Figure 7.1 illustrating the mean, variance, minimum and maximum of the obtained length-scales.
The variance, minimum and maximum of the length-scales indicates that there is no substantial difference
in which hyperparameters are required given a training set ratio of 75%. This indicates that the amount
of training data, regardless of which speciﬁc combination of system conﬁgurations it contains, is sufﬁcient
for generalizing the complete data set. The box plot furthermore provides insight in the relevance of each
dimension previously mentioned as ARD. The lower the length-scale the more inﬂuential the given dimension
is deemed to be on the output. In this case, optical launch power is described as being more inﬂuential than
channel spacing, transmission distance and symbol rate on BER. It is important to keep in mind that this
result is only with respect to the range of simulated data set and should not be seen as a generalization of all
WDM systems. It indicates that the range of optical launch powers, given as −12 to 6 dBm with intervals of 1
dBm has a higher inﬂuence on BER than the other input dimensions and their respective ranges.
==PAGE:117==
results
117
Given the hyperparameters a mean predictive error was computed as RMSE = 0.4146 and MLPD = −0.5395.
This is seen as the generalized error achieved using GPR with a squared exponential kernel using MAP
estimation as the hyperparameter optimization method on the simulated data set.
Neural Network
The structure of the best preforming single-layered NN has been indicated to consist
of equal to or above 18 hidden nodes. That measure of complexity seem to be enough for the four dimensional
input space. Using the same 100 repetition approach as completed with the GPR, a generalization of the error
produced by using NN on the simulated data set using a training test ratio of 75:25 can be computed. A
mean predictive error was computed as RMSE = 0.4301 using a NN of 18 hidden nodes based on the four
dimensional simulated data set.
7.1.2
Final model predictions
The preliminary deduction made in the previous chapter was that GPR may outperform the NN. The ﬁnal
predictive error shown above indicates that GPR does outperform NN given the current training set however
only slightly. It is desired to observe how a trained GPR can preform BER predictions given the four
dimensional input space.
Table 7.2 shows a small section of predictions made using a 75:25 training test set ratio. The GPR is trained
and evaluated using normalized input values, these are however presented as the original system input values
for the sake of maintaining a sense of context. The predicted output is listed with the corresponding known
output given the input system conﬁguration. Also shown is a 95% conﬁdence interval as computed by the
covariance of the predictions. Highlighted is a conﬁguration where the predicted BER value is beyond the
lower bound of the conﬁdence interval. The rest of the predictions are within the 95% conﬁdence intervals
and with low predictive error given the true output. The highlighted prediction is observed to have a low
true BER value, much lower than the rest of the presented predictions.
Input
Predicted
True Output
Conﬁdence 95%
Ptx [dBm]
Nspans
Rs [Gbaud]
D f /Rs
log10(BER)
log10(BER)
lower
upper
−1
15
8
0.8
−1.80
−1.70
−2.12
−1.48
−9
12
32
1.8
−1.68
−1.72
−1.88
−1.47
−4
14
40
1.4
−2.90
−3.03
−3.10
−2.69
1
12
16
1
−1.08
−1.05
−1.39
−0.78
2
4
48
1.2
−4.31
−4.94
−4.53
−4.09
4
15
32
1.6
−1.32
−1.43
−1.59
−1.06
Table 7.2: A small section of a test set with the predicted and known BER values given an optimized GPR model trained on 3771 data
points. Highlighted is a prediction outside the computed conﬁdence interval.
==PAGE:118==
118
For visualization purposes as conducted during the initial predictions, randomly selected 2D slices are
visualized for insight in the ﬁnal predictive models of GPR and NN. These can be observed on Figure 7.2 for
GPR and Figure 7.3 for NN. It should be noted that random system conﬁgurations have been selected for
visualization. The intend is to provide a broad insight in the predictions in each input dimension.
Indicated by Figure 7.2(a) is an obtained generalization of optical transmission power as most training
points and test points seems to be observed inside the 95% conﬁdence interval. This is not the case as seen in
(b), where the training points of Nspans = 10, 12 are outside the conﬁdence interval. This is a good indication
of how a generalization is preformed across input dimensions and how the method considers the training
points as being outliers. Furthermore it illustrates how the prediction in the input space of Nspans given a
speciﬁc system conﬁguration is not directly determined by the local training points but across all training
points given various system conﬁgurations. The predictions in (c) illustrates how no training or test point is
available in Rs = 8 Gbaud, yet a reasonable prediction seem to be given as Ptx = 4 dBm is kept constant the
BER is expected to be higher at a lower bandwidth. The predictions shown in Figure 7.2(d) predicts a higher
BER as the spacing decreases without having a training point at the given system conﬁguration. Additionally
the prediction is almost identical to a point of the test set indicating a high prediction performance but also
how it has learned effectively from other neighboring system conﬁgurations.
==PAGE:119==
results
119
-10
-5
0
5
Input power [dBm]
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
log10(BER)
Predicted
Training set
Test set
(a) Predictions of optical launch power given a sys-
tem conﬁguration of; Nspans = 14, Rs = 16Gbaud,
D f /Rs = 1.8.
5
10
15
Nspans
-5.5
-5
-4.5
-4
-3.5
-3
log10(BER)
(b) Prediction of number of spans given a system conﬁg-
uration of; Ptx = 1 dBm, Rs = 40Gbaud, D f /Rs = 1.8.
10
20
30
40
Bandwidth [GHz]
-3.5
-3
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
log10(BER)
(c) Prediction of symbol rate given a system conﬁgura-
tion of; Ptx = 4 dBm, Nspans = 12, D f /Rs = 1.4
1
1.5
2
Spacing/Bandwidth
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
log10(BER)
(d) Prediction of spacing given a system conﬁguration
of; Ptx = −4 dBm, Nspans = 8, Rs = 24Gbaud
Figure 7.2:
Predictions in each input
dimension given as slices of particular
system conﬁgurations based on an op-
timized exponential kernel. Shown are
training and test points at the given slices
along with the conﬁdence interval of the
predictions
==PAGE:120==
120
Figure 7.3(a) illustrates predictions of optical launch power. In comparison to the visualization of the initial
power predictions produced by the 4 hidden node NN structure the increase in complexity can be observed
to produce more likely predictions given the training points available. The majority of the points in the given
slice are training points, however predictions in accordance with the test points can be observed. A test point
is observed to produce a large offset at −11 dBm, however the trend of the predictive model seems to indicate
an increase in BER as power decreases which comply with theoretical expectations. The test point is believed
to be an outlier i.e a measurement with a large degree of noise which the model seems to be able to handle
well and does not result in over-ﬁtting. This is additionally observed on (b), where the training point at
Nspans = 2 seem to be addressed as an outlier. (c) illustrates how the tendency of the predictions have been
learned from neighboring training points, in particular regarding Rs = 8 Gbaud. The same can be said about
(d) given the test points located at D f /Rs = 1.2 and 1.4 . It is indicative that a generalization of the data is
achieved from all four dimensions across.
==PAGE:121==
results
121
-10
-5
0
5
Input power [dBm]
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
log10(BER)
Predicted
Training set
Test set
(a) Predictions of optical launch power given a system
conﬁguration of; Nspans = 8, Rs = 8Gbaud, D f /Rs =
1.4
5
10
15
Nspans
-5.5
-5
-4.5
-4
-3.5
-3
-2.5
-2
log10(BER)
(b) Prediction of number of spans given a system conﬁg-
uration of; Ptx = 3 dBm, Rs = 40Gbaud, D f /Rs = 1.6.
10
20
30
40
Bandwidth [GHz]
-3
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
log10(BER)
(c) Prediction of symbol rate given a system conﬁgura-
tion of; Ptx = 3 dBm, Nspans = 12, D f /Rs = 1.6
1
1.5
2
Spacing/Bandwidth]
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
log10(BER)
(d) Prediction of spacing given a system conﬁguration
of; Ptx = −2 dBm, Nspans = 15, Rs = 24Gbaud
Figure 7.3:
Predictions in each input
dimension given as slices of particular
system conﬁgurations based on an opti-
mized NN of 18 hidden nodes. Shown
are training and test points at the given
slices.
==PAGE:122==
122
The predictive plots for both the case of GPR and NN provides visual insight in some conﬁgurations the
models are able to predict. Additionally it is difﬁcult from the ﬁgures to observe which method is preforming
better and where it might be preforming better. The RMSE indicated that the method of GPR is effectively
better across the entire simulated data set. It is desired to gain insight in the error of each input dimension as
to be able to indicate where additional measurements might be needed, or a large amount of outliers might
be present. A sweep is preformed in the entire range of each dimension consisting of summing the absolute
error across the other input dimensions. E.g. The error described at Ptx = 0 dBm is the absolute error of all
other test points in Nspans, Rs and D f /Rs given the same power conﬁguration. The error in each dimension
is visualized in Figure 7.4 displaying the error produced by a trained GPR and NN method on a test set
consisting of 1286 system conﬁgurations.
Figure 7.4(a) displays the error at system conﬁgurations given values of Ptx. It is observed that there is
an error increase at power values different from the minimum −12 dBm, and the maximum 6 dBm, of the
simulated Ptx range. Denoted by the ARD results, optical launch power has an increased inﬂuence on the BER
as opposed to the other input dimensions. It is possible that there is a relation between low BER achieved
using optimum values of Ptx and an increase in RMSE. Most of the optimal power values furthermore seems
to be located in the range of the error increase indicated by (a). The same pattern is illustrated on (b) which
indicates an RMSE of up to 0.5 at Nspans = 2 and decreases almost monotonically as the number of spans
increase. (c) displays a higher RMSE at lower bandwidths and a decrease in error as the bandwidths increase.
Seen in (d) the lowest RMSE is ⇠0.1 for GPR and 0.15 for the NN at D f /Rs = 1 where the BER is assumed
to be substantial higher than at D f /Rs > 1 as also indicated by Figure 7.2(d)+7.3(d). In summary, an increase
in error is observed as BER seem to decrease.
==PAGE:123==
results
123
-10
-5
0
5
Ptx [dBm]
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
RMSE
GPR
NN
(a)
5
10
15
Nspans
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
RMSE
(b)
10
20
30
40
Rs [GHz]
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
RMSE
(c)
1
1.5
2
∆ f/Rs
0.1
0.2
0.3
RMSE
(d)
Figure 7.4: Absolute summarized error in
each of the four input dimensions given
a trained GPR and NN model based on a
test set.
==PAGE:124==
124
7.2
Experimental
The data obtained using the experimental setup described in Chapter 5 resulted in a data set of 45 BER
measurement by varying optical transmission power and channel spacing. The WDM setup consisted
of 24 PM-QPSK modulated channels transmitted over a distance of 1944 km. The channel spacing was
modiﬁed within a superchannel consisting of 5 channels. Measurements were conducted on 3 channels
within the superchannel resulting in a total of 135 combinations. Predictions are desired on a single-channel
measurement, channel 13 is selected as initially visualized in terms of launch power and spacing. The
corresponding data set consists of 45 measurements which after data preprocessing is reduced to 30 training
points.
The model selection completed in Section 6.5 identiﬁed a squared exponential kernel as the best preforming
kernel for GPR. This was also the case given the simulated data based on the same input dimensions of Ptx
and D f. Hyperparameter inference was completed using MAP estimation on the entire data set thus resulting
in the most likely hyperparameters representing the sparse training set consisting of 30 measurements. The
result of this can be observed in Table 7.3.
Hyperparameters
Performance
l1
l2
s2
sexp
s2
n
RMSE
MLPD
2.69
0.37
4.41
0.002
0.0547
1.533
Table 7.3: Kernel hyperparameters of a
squared exponential kernel obtained us-
ing MAP inference over 100 iterations.
The performance is given as MLPD ob-
tained from LOO-CV
The RMSE and MLPD was obtained using LOO-CV and is an indication of the ﬁnal performance using
the highlighted hyperparameters as no test set is available. A similar RMSE for a trained NN was achieved,
RMSE = 0.0512 using 3 hidden nodes and a single hidden layer. The RMSE was computed based on LOO-CV
as done for GPR.
Visualizing predictions made by the optimized kernel trained on the experimental data is inituitively
doable since the input space consists of two dimensions rather than four. Visualized on Figure 7.5 are
predictions using a trained GPR model a) and b).
It is shown that the predictions of input power is
generalized by a 95% conﬁdence interval that contains the training points. Predictions conducted in the input
space of spacing are also contained within the conﬁdence interval, however substantial smaller than what is
obtained in the input space of input power.
Predictions using a NN consisting of 3 hidden nodes are observed in c) and d). Unlike the GPR, the
predictions of the NN in the dimension of input power are on point of the training points. The predictions
of spacing at Ptx = 16 dBm in both the case of GPR and NN seem much alike. It is observed that the
==PAGE:125==
results
125
trend of the BER predictions are different. The GPR seem to predict that the BER will decrease as power
decreases/increases beyond the range of the training points. Where as the NN seems to indicate the BER
will ﬂatten out when the power decreases beyond the range of the training points. The predictive results of
the NN seem to indicate an over-ﬁt with less generalized property obtained of the power range. The GPR
however seems to be able to generalize how the BER will behave as power is adjusted.
15
15.5
16
16.5
17
Input power [dBm]
-3.1
-3
-2.9
-2.8
-2.7
log10(BER)
Predicted
Training set
(a) GPR based predictions of optical launch power
given a system conﬁguration of; D f = 50 GHz.
25
30
35
40
45
50
Spacing [GHz]
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
log10(BER)
Predicted
Training set
(b) GPR based prediction of channel spacing given a
system conﬁguration of; Ptx = 16 dBm.
15
15.5
16
16.5
17
Input power [dBm]
-3
-2.9
-2.8
log10(BER)
Predicted
Training set
(c) NN based predictions of optical launch power given
a system conﬁguration of; D f = 50 GHz.
25
30
35
40
45
50
Spacing [GHz]
-3.5
-3
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
log10(BER)
Predicted
Training set
(d) NN based prediction of channel spacing given a
system conﬁguration of; Ptx = 16 dBm.
Figure 7.5: Predictions in each input di-
mension given as slices of system con-
ﬁgurations. Shown are training points
at the given slices along with the conﬁ-
dence interval of the predictions for the
GPR model.
==PAGE:126==
126
The generalization and tendency obtained by the GPR seems in line with what can be expected of the BER
as inputs are adjusted. This was also the case with GPR predictions obtained using the simulated data.
It is desired to explore if the tendency learned from the data can be used between domains, in this case
between the experimental and simulated data sets. This was investigated in Section 6.5 which denoted that
the length-scale parameters obtained using a simulated data set, consisting of 2D and a range of values similar
to the experimental data, were similar. In other words, the tendency between inputs and outputs learned by
the simulated data was similar to the tendency observed on the experimental data.
Hyperparameters
Performance
l1
l2
s2
sexp
s2
n
MLPD
MAP exp
2.69
0.37
4.41
0.002
⇠1.5
MAP sim
1.33
0.25
6.84
0.005
⇠1.1
MCMC exp
3.32
0.37
10.12
0.002
⇠1.4
MCMC sim
2.57
0.37
7.34
0.06
⇠0.2
Table 7.4: Kernel hyperparameters of a
squared exponential kernel obtained us-
ing MAP inference over 100 iterations.
The performance is given as MLPD ob-
tained from LOO-CV
Given the 2D simulated data set MAP inference is conducted and hyperparameters has been obtained.
These optimized hyperparameters was then applied to the experimental data and MLPD computed using
LOO-CV. The results of this are shown in Table 7.4 where MAP sim and the corresponding MLPD was
obtained based on MAP estimation inference on the simulated data set and computed using LOO-CV given
the experimental data set. The model obtained by applying MAP estimation and MCMC directly on the
experimental data (MAP exp, MCMC exp) produced a benchmark MLPD value that allows for comparison
between the hyperparameters obtained using only the simulated data. It is observed that applying MAP
estimation inference on the simulated data set produces a set of hyperparameters generalized enough for
obtaining a low predictive error, or as given, MLPD =⇠1.1. The predictive probability of the hyperparameters
obtained using MCMC sim were substantial different than the ones obtained using MAP sim and produced a
low predictive probability of MLPD =⇠0.2. The results show that model inference can be completed on
simulated data, using MAP estimation, and be used on experimental data with a high predictive probability.
Thus a generalized model is obtained by learning the tendency of the simulated data and applying it on the
experimental data with similar predictive probability as the benchmark predictive probability.
==PAGE:127==
8 Discussion
Author: Jesper Wass
Model performance
On the simulated data, the performance of NN and GPR are very similar as seen
in Figure 7.2 and 7.3. Figure 7.4 illustrates that the predictive performance of the GPR outperforms the NN
with a small margin. However, it is interesting that the NN does not seem to over-ﬁt at all, which is due to
the large data set.
NN achieves a slightly better performance using LOO-CV when modeling the experimental data. However,
this does not necessarily mean that the NN is the best model for generalization. If we consider the prediction
ﬁgures in Figure 7.5, it is obvious that the NN ﬁts the training data better than the GPR. However, the problem
here is that, unlike the GPR, the NN does not seem to take noise into account. Assuming zero noise on the
training data can lead to severe over-ﬁtting, which seems to be the case for the NN. For instance, it was
observed in 6.8 that the BER estimation of the NN seems to ﬂatten when system launch power goes below
15 dBm. Considering the simulation results and prior knowledge of WDM system behavior, this is clearly
not what is expected and indicates that a true generalization has not been learned. Hence, if a test set were
available, the NN would most likely produce much higher prediction error compared to the GPR. Both the
GPR and NN ﬁt the data perfectly in the spacing dimension, which indicates that the amount of estimated
noise in this dimension is negligible. This is stressed by the conﬁdence interval of the GPR which almost
coincide with the predicted values. From the experimental predictions, it is difﬁcult to decide which model
performs the best, because only a sparse data set in a narrow power range is available. However, it is obvious
that the nature of GPR seeks to avoid over-ﬁtting which is an advantage in such situations. It should also be
noted that the performance of the NN varies every time the model is trained depending on the convergence
of the optimization algorithm. Oppositely, the GPR ﬁnds the same solution every time it is trained with the
same training set. The GPR can thus be said to produce a cautious generalized solution where data patterns
are assumed to be noisy, which is favorable for sparse data sets.
From these results, it is difﬁcult to decide which model is best suited for generalization of WDM systems.
For very sparse data sets, the GPR has shown to be the best choice, however, for large data sets the choice of
==PAGE:128==
128
model should not be based entirely on the predictive performance, especially when this is almost identical for
the two models. The generalization ability of NN got better when trained on 4 dimensions instead of 2 when
a large data set was available. This complies with the theoretical expectations and it is important to consider
this fact when choosing between models. For instance, if the model is to be extended with even more input
dimensions and a larger amount of data, the NN can potentially overtake the GPR in terms of performance.
Throughout this thesis, focus has been entirely on modeling input parameters with system performance
in terms of BER, and after the training phase, an accurate prediction model is obtained. However, with these
predictions it is assumed that the system performance does not change over time due to system and link
degradation. It is commonly known that network performance shifts with time due to ageing of system
equipment and potential ﬁber cuts can also inﬂuence the system performance [40]. Equipment ageing is
a slow process, but with time it becomes more signiﬁcant, and often a margin of 0.5 dB is included when
estimating signal SNR. Hence, the margin used by MOMoT is not uncommon and is highly recommended as
every single system effect cannot be modeled. However, it is of broad interest to minimize these margins to
improve system efﬁciency, capacity, and reduce cost. Keeping margins low requires advanced monitoring
techniques together with ﬂexible reconﬁgurable equipment.
A concern with the NN is that the model does not provide any information about prediction uncertainty,
and estimating margins is thus challenging. The prediction uncertainty is important in order provide accurate
margin estimates that ensure that the model does not over-estimate performance. Conservative predictions
are always needed and in order to add these margins, it is crucial to gain insight in the prediction uncertainty
such as the conﬁdence interval provided by the GPR.
Data limitations
The squared exponential kernel has been applied for prediction throughout this
thesis, and the kernel has a high performance due to its smoothness properties, which enables the model to
generalize even when only sparse data is available. The performance of both the GPR and NN is generally
limited by the noise present on the observed data and therefore the quality of the data set must also be
evaluated. Model performance on the simulated data is evaluated on a large amount of data, and even if
an inﬁnite amount of training and test data were available, the achieved performance is not expected to be
much higher due to the noise present on the data. If we consider Figure 7.2, two measurements around
10 spans result in the same BER as 4 spans, which is naturally not the general expectation. The simulated
data set is constructed from BER counting which is a way of sampling our way towards the theoretical BER
as our sequence length is not inﬁnite. Hence, the measured BER depends on the distribution of bit errors
along our sequence. The two outliers shown in Figure 7.2 are caused by "lucky" sequences where only few
bit errors occur within the counted sequence, and convergence towards the theoretical expectations is thus
too slow. The data quality could easily be improved by expanding the length of the bit sequence, however,
==PAGE:129==
discussion
129
this would result in increased simulation time. Another possibility is to tailor the gathered data range to
the desired application. For instance, the results show that prediction error in the power domain is worst
between -6 dBm and -1 dBm, which is where the BER is lowest. The reason for this is that small variations
in this range increases the relative noise on the data which can have a inﬂuence on the BER and and risk
of outliers. Hence, omitting measurement in these points may actually be beneﬁcial in case of sparse data.
In this thesis, data measurements cover a broad range in the input space to provide a general insight in the
WDM system behavior. However, the ﬂexible nature of the ML allows the user to customize the measurement
range to the desired application. This is an important property as the more customized the data range is, the
higher the potential prediction accuracy. For instance, application in long-haul WDM systems may never
require predictions on less than 15 spans, and using training data in this range will thus only increase the
model uncertainty.
The goal of performance prediction will often involve maximizing the capacity while maintaining a BER
below the FEC limit. From this perspective, some system conﬁgurations are never realistic as they will lead to
inconsiderable BERs indicating that system capacity is not maximized. Hence, conﬁgurations with low BER
can be unnecessary to measure. In these situations the data should be focused towards the conﬁgurations
operating close to the FEC limit since this poses the upper limit on the system performance. Customizing
the data set in this way can thus lead to higher accuracy close to the FEC limit which is practically the most
attractive.
Automatic relevance determination
Trained GPR models on simulated and experimental data
estimates similar length-scale parameters which indicates the relative importance of each dimension. These
parameters can potentially be used to tailor the training set as described above. For instance, the simulations
suggest the launch power as the most relevant, while the bandwidth and number of spans is more irrelevant
for the BER. If we look at the BER behavior in Figure 7.2 as a function of the latter two features, it is seen that
the BER is constant in half of the simulation range, and the reduced relevance for the BER is not necessarily
because the feature is bad, but because most of the measurement range is not as inﬂuential on the BER. Hence,
the measurement range could easily be reduced without signiﬁcant affection on the results.
In the 4D simulations, the launch power is the most relevant while the spacing is the second most relevant.
However, in the experiments and 2D simulations, the results are inverted. Here, the channel spacing is the
most important feature. This is a consequence of the reduced power range which only covers 3 dBm. In this
narrow power range, the variation of BER is much smaller compared to the full power range. In the spacing
range, the BER variations are unchanged. As a function of spacing, the BER varies over approximately 2 dB
while the BER for the power range only spans about 0.2 dB. Hence, the launch power has only little affection
on the resulting BER value when considering these measurement ranges.
==PAGE:130==
130
Hyperparameter reuse
Figure 7.4 shows how the kernel hyperparameters from the 2D simulation set
can be used on the experimental data with only a small decrease in performance even though the experimental
setup uses a different modulation format. Experimental data is still necessary to to perform predictions
in the experimental domain, as the kernel matrix must contain similarities between the experimental data.
However, as the hyperparameters can be reused, it is possible that the entire kernel matrix can be computed
in the simulated domain and applied on the experimental domain which would completely remove the need
for experimental data. Further investigation is needed to fully explore this ability, but the ability to reuse
hyperparameters indicates good generalization properties of the GPR and squared exponential kernel.
Especially the ability to apply GPR without experimental can be beneﬁcial due to minimized time
consuming and costly.
In this project, the 45 experimental data points per channel were gathered in
approximately 1.5 hour, which results in 2 minutes per data point. As stated in Section 4.3.4, with high-
performance computing, simulating 150 data points could be done in approximately 7 minutes resulting
in 3 seconds per data point which is a signiﬁcant reduction in runtime. Additionally, each experimental
measurement was done by manually adjusting the laser wavelength and launch power values and the need
for human interaction impose a big limitation on the data measurements and also involves risk of human
errors. Hence, reliable simulation tools are highly appreciated as a substitute for experiments.
Model verification
The GPR and NN have both yield great results with the ability to perform system
generalization. With the experimental investigation, the performance of each model have been veriﬁed on a
real system, and next step towards full veriﬁcation would be application in a operational WDM system. Such
a system is not accessible, and veriﬁcation must thus be done with other means. In 2013, Palkopoulou et. al.
investigated the impact of changing system parameters on the network performance in WDM systems [41].
The varying parameters involved for instance the inter-channel spacing, symbol-rate/bandwidth and optical
launch power. One of the results demonstrated the relationship between optimal launch power, symbol-rate
and channel spacing (provided as spacing to bandwidth ratio) for WDM system with 5 and 51 channels. In
Figure 8.1, a similar investigation for the 4D simulated data is demonstrated. The ﬁgure shows the predicted
optical launch power as function of symbol-rate for three different spacing conﬁgurations. Even though the
numerical values differ from [41], the optimal launch power is observed to follow a similar pattern which
indicates realistic system generalization.
Other models
Both the NN and GPR has produced accurate prediction performance, and the properties
of these models were compared above. In Section 1.1 some state of the art performance prediction techniques
were introduced, and it is thus convenient to compare the properties of these models with the machine
learning approach used in this thesis. The NLSE from Eq. 2.1 can generally be used to model NLI, however,
solutions to this equation can be challenging to evaluate. The Robochameleon framework approximated
==PAGE:131==
discussion
131
the solution by using a split-step Fourier, which requires excessive transformations between the time and
frequency domain. The VS techniques mentioned in Section 1.1 are alternative and equivalent techniques,
which only requires evaluation in either time or frequency domain, however, this does not necessarily reduce
computational complexity.
The initial GN model is characterized by a high amount of simplicity as simple assumptions are used
to model NLI, which leads to a model with no free ﬁtting parameters and where all physical parameter
dependencies are derived analytically. Hence, the model is attractive in terms of complexity. At the time of
development, the model was intended to serve as an effective general-purpose system design tool for a very
wide range of system scenarios involving coherent WDM systems using uncompensated ﬁber. The model has
been validated using simulative tests on various modulation formats including DP-QPSK and DP-16QAM
followed by experimental validation on DP-QPSK signals [10]. The high amount of simplicity is mainly due
to the fact that NLI is approximated by Gaussian distributions, however, the GN model has shown to have
shortcomings for some speciﬁc system setups where NLI is overestimated, especially for short range systems.
The shortcomings of the GN model has been corrected in the enhanced version which improves the overall
accuracy and prediction error is thus reduced to a much lower level compared to the GN model. However,
the E-GN model pays a big price in terms of computational complexity for this improved accuracy. For
instance, in [11] it is stated that E-GN model calculations required 15 days of total single-core CPU time,
as the calculation complexity is equivalent to a double integral, which is practically challenging and thus
reduced general applicability. To deal with the increased complexity, a third version of the model has been
developed which approximates the E-GN model [42]. With this model, complexity is reduced, but so is the
predictive performance, and the GN, E-GN and the approximation of E-GN thus serve as three instances of a
trade-off in computational complexity and accuracy. The most promising characteristic of the GN-models
is that they are developed for general purpose use, and the need for customization for every WDM system
setup is thus reduced.
In comparison, the evaluation tool offered by MOMoT is computationally very simple making it convenient
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Rs [Gbaud]
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
Optimal Ptx [dBm]
f/Rs = 1
f/Rs = 1.5
f/Rs = 2
Figure 8.1: Optimal launch power as func-
tion of symbol rate for multiple spacing
conﬁgurations.
==PAGE:132==
132
for real-time and on-demand prediction and evaluation, which is impossible with the E-GN model. However,
the MOMoT framework becomes more rigid as it is customized for use with speciﬁc modulation formats,
which restricts the general applicability, and the framework is thus not developed for general-purpose use.
Additionally, some impairments such as XPM are modeled in a common margin scalar, which penalizes the
calculated OSNR and thus the predicted BER. The margin is convenient to ensure conservative predictions
and avoid overestimating the performance, however, typically the margin is deﬁned as 3 dB to account for the
unmodeled effects which will naturally reduce accuracy of the model. Once again a trade-off in complexity
and accuracy is observed, and the ability to have a real-time application comes with the expense of reduced
model accuracy.
Comparing the MOMoT and GN-models above to the NN and GPR, it is clear that the machine learning
approach involves a similar trade-off between complexity and accuracy. Both the NN and GPR has indicated
high accuracy, however, as more than 6000 simulations were necessary to achieve these results leading to
more than a month of simulation on a single-core CPU. This is mainly due to the four dimensional input
space. Hence, the main observation is that more data points lead to higher performance but also longer
runtime, and more input dimensions lead to higher model complexity which requires a larger amount of
data, which again leads to longer runtime.
The main advantages of the NN and GPR is that it uses universal algorithms to obtain the models, and the
approach is thus highly ﬂexible. Models can be adaptive and continuously updated to keep its performance
at a maximum at all times, and the ﬂexible characteristics offered by this approach are thus attractive when
generalizing performance of WDM systems. Additionally, the trade-off between complexity and accuracy is
not ﬁxed and can be chosen based on individual preferences by varying the input dimensions and number
of training points. Further more, the input parameters can be chosen to include only those desired by the
system manager. Due to this highly ﬂexible nature, the applicability of the machine learning approach for
system generalization does immediately not seem to be limited. The biggest concern for the approach is
to gather a sufﬁcient amount of data with a sufﬁcient quality, if we wish to generalize many conﬁguration
parameters, which can be both time consuming and costly. However, as we have seen, generalization in 2
dimensions is possible with only 30 data points, which is considered cheap. Additionally, results indicate that
models from simulations can potentially be reused for application in real world systems which can reduce
the data measurement challenge a lot.
==PAGE:133==
9 Conclusion
The objective of this thesis was to investigate the use of machine learning regression techniques such as NN
and GPR for generalization and performance prediction in optical WDM systems. The performance has
been modeled by measuring the impact of system conﬁgurations on the received signal quality in terms
of BER. These input parameters include launch power, transmission distance, symbol rate, and channel
spacing. The NN and GPR seek to learn from these measurements and be able to predict and generalize the
relationship between the 4D input space and BER. The models have been trained and tested using simulative
and experimental data from signals employing PM-16QAM and PM-QPSK.
It has been shown that the GPR is able to generalize effectively using above 200 system conﬁgurations
given four inputs. By training the GPR and NN on approximately 4000 simulated system conﬁgurations,
the models are capable of producing generalized predictions with minimized error across the four input
dimensions. The GPR and NN achieve a RMSE of 0.4145 and 0.4301 respectively on the simulated tests. This
model accuracy is limited by the noise in the training data, as some system conﬁgurations have shown to
produce measurements with large variations. The predictive models can be observed to handle these outliers
well resulting in generalized predictions using knowledge from all four input dimensions.
The results furthermore show that GPR hyperparameter obtained on simulated data can be successfully
applied for performance prediction on experimental data with different modulation formats. This indicates
that GPR models trained on a sparse simulated data set are able to generalize the performance and can
ultimately produce efﬁcient predictions for experimental setups. This demonstrates the machine learning
techniques as being attractive as to avoid time consuming measurements on real world systems and proves
the general applicability. Furthermore, the GPR and NN have been used for performance prediction with
2D, 4D and 4D data dimensionality. This stresses its ﬂexible nature, since model complexity can easily be
increased to account for more system parameters.
The investigation of ML methods for performance prediction generalization requires future work, however,
the results in this thesis indicate that such techniques can be beneﬁcial due to model generalization and
ﬂexibility.
==PAGE:134==
134
9.1
Future work
Obtaining hyperparameters on simulated data and applying them on experimental data with accurate results
indicates how a generalization can be learned and reused across domains. Future work would be to train
a complete GPR model, thus not only hyperparameter inference but also the computation of the required
kernel matrices, on simulated data and apply it on experimental data. This thesis has presented experimental
data for PM-QPSK and simulated data for PM-16QAM. Simulated data for PM-QPSK should be obtained for
GPR model training to use on already obtained experimental data as to verify the learned generalization.
==PAGE:135==
conclusion
135
==PAGE:136==
==PAGE:137==
Bibliography
[1] Yasuo Kimura and Masataka Nakazawa. Gain characteristics of erbium-doped ﬁber ampliﬁers with high
erbium concentration. Japanese Journal of Applied Physics, 32(3 R):1120–1125, 1993. ISSN 13474065. doi:
10.1143/JJAP.32.1120.
[2] C. Barnard, P. Myslinski, J. Chrostowski, and M. Kavehrad. Analytical model for rare-earth-doped ﬁber
ampliﬁers and lasers. IEEE Journal of Quantum Electronics, 30(8):1817–1830, 1994. ISSN 00189197. doi:
10.1109/3.301646.
[3] K V Peddanarappagari and M Brandt-Pearce. Volterra series transfer function of single-mode ﬁbers.
Journal of Lightwave Technology, 15(12):2232–2241, 1997. ISSN 07338724. doi: 10.1109/50.643545. URL
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/lpdocs/epic03/wrapper.htm?arnumber=643545.
[4] Jau Tang. The channel capacity of a multispan DWDM system employing dispersive nonlinear optical
ﬁbers and an ideal coherent optical receiver. Journal of Lightwave Technology, 20(7):1095–1101, 2002. ISSN
07338724. doi: 10.1109/JLT.2002.800344.
[5] Antonio Mecozzi, Carl Balslev Clausen, and Mark Shtaif. Analysis of intrachannel nonlinear effects in
highly dispersed optical pulse transmission. IEEE Photonics Technology Letters, 12(4):392–394, 2000. ISSN
10411135. doi: 10.1109/68.839029.
[6] H Louchet, A Hodzic, and K Petermann. Analytical model for the performance evaluation of DWDM
transmission systems. IEEE Photonics Technology Letters, 15(9):1219–1221, 2003. ISSN 1041-1135. doi:
10.1109/LPT.2003.816133.
[7] Pierluigi Poggiolini, Andrea Carena, Vittorio Curri, Gabriella Bosco, and Fabrizio Forghieri. Analytical
modeling of nonlinear propagation in uncompensated optical transmission links.
IEEE Photonics
Technology Letters, 23(11):742–744, 2011. ISSN 10411135. doi: 10.1109/LPT.2011.2131125.
[8] P. Poggiolini, G. Bosco, A. Carena, V. Curri, and F. Forghieri. A simple and accurate model for non-linear
propagation effects in uncompensated coherent transmission links. International Conference on Transparent
Optical Networks, pages 1–6, 2011. ISSN 21627339. doi: 10.1109/ICTON.2011.5971065.
[9] Pierluigi Poggiolini. The GN Model of Non-Linear Propagation in Uncompensated Coherent Optical
Systems. Journal of Lightwave Technology, 30(24):3857–3879, 2012.
==PAGE:138==
138
[10] A. Carena, V. Curri, G. Bosco, P. Poggiolini, and F. Forghieri. Modeling of the impact of nonlinear
propagation effects in uncompensated optical coherent transmission links. Journal of Lightwave Technology,
30(10):1524–1539, 2012. ISSN 07338724. doi: 10.1109/JLT.2012.2189198.
[11] A. Carena, G. Bosco, V. Curri, Y. Jiang, P. Poggiolini, and F. Forghieri. On the Accuracy of the GN-Model
and on Analytical Correction Terms to Improve It. arXiv, jan 2014. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1401.
6946.
[12] A. Carena, G. Bosco, V. Curri, Y. Jiang, P. Poggiolini, and F Forghieri. EGN model of non-linear ﬁber
propagation. Optics Express, 22(13):16335–16362, 2014. ISSN 1094-4087. doi: 10.1364/OE.22.016335. URL
http://www.opticsexpress.org/abstract.cfm?URI=oe-22-13-16335.
[13] Anna Manolova Fagertun, Nicola Sambo, and Martin Petersen. OC7 Multi-Domain Optical Modelling
Tool aka MOMoT. pages 1–21, 2014.
[14] Martin Petersen, Nicola Sambo, Andrea Sgambelluri, and Anna Manolova Fagertun. Open Call Deliver-
able for MOMoT ( Multi-Domain Optical Modelling Tool ) D1 . 1 Final project report. 1, 2015.
[15] Nicola Sambo, Marco Secondini, Filippo Cugini, Giulio Bottari, P. Iovanna, Fabio Cavaliere, and
Piero Castoldi.
Modeling and distributed provisioning in 10-40-100-Gb/s multirate wavelength
switched optical networks.
Journal of Lightwave Technology, 29(9):1248–1257, 2011.
ISSN 07338724.
doi: 10.1109/JLT.2011.2122245.
[16] Govind P. Agrawal. Fiber-optic communication systems. Wiley & Sons, 4th edition, 2010. ISBN 0471215716.
doi: 10.1080/09500349314550971.
[17] S.J. Savory. Digital Coherent Optical Receivers: Algorithms and Subsystems. IEEE Journal of Selected
Topics in Quantum Electronics, 16(5):1164–1179, 2010. ISSN 1077-260X. doi: 10.1109/JSTQE.2010.2044751.
[18] E. Ip and J.M. Kahn. Feedforward Carrier Recovery for Coherent Optical Communications. Journal of
Lightwave Technology, 25(9):2675–2692, 2007. ISSN 0733-8724. doi: 10.1109/JLT.2007.902118.
[19] International Telecommunication Union - ITU-T. G.694.1 (02/2012), Spectral grids for WDM applications:
DWDM frequency grid. Series G.694.1, pages 1–16, 2012. URL http://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-G.694.
1/en$\delimiter"026E30F$nhttp://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-G.694.1-201202-I/en.
[20] Neophytos Antoniades, Georgios Ellinas, and Ioannis Roudas, editors. WDM Systems and Networks.
Optical Networks. Springer New York, New York, NY, 2012. ISBN 978-1-4614-1092-8. doi: 10.1007/978-
1-4614-1093-5. URL http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-1-4614-1093-5.
[21] JM Simmons.
Optical Network Design and Planning.
Optical Networks. Springer US, Boston, MA,
2008.
ISBN 978-0-387-76475-7.
doi: 10.1007/978-0-387-76476-4.
URL http://books.google.com/
books?hl=en{&}lr={&}id=ixdXdJ64A9wC{&}oi=fnd{&}pg=PA1{&}dq=Optical+Network+Design+and+
Planning{&}ots=-sxmK1Rphu{&}sig=8uiDMCTCwd6aR3ktfHt8VUpwcAo$\delimiter"026E30F$nhttp:
==PAGE:139==
bibliography
139
//books.google.com/books?hl=en{&}lr={&}id=ixdXdJ64A9wC{&}oi=fnd{&}pg=PA1{&}dq=Optical+
network+design+an.
[22] Cisco. The Zettabyte Era : Trends and Analysis. (May 2015):1–29, 2016.
[23] Robert Thomson, Christian Lebiere, and Stefano Bennati.
Human, Model and Machine:
A
Complementary Approach to Big Data.
Proceedings of the 2014 Workshop on Human Cen-
tered Big Data Research(HCBDR ’14), pages 27:27–27:31, 2014.
doi: 10.1145/2609876.2609883.
URL
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2609876.2609883$\delimiter"026E30F$nhttp://dl.acm.org/
ft{_}gateway.cfm?id=2609883{&}type=pdf.
[24] E.A. Weiss. Biographies: Eloge: Arthur Lee Samuel (1901-90), 1992. ISSN 1058-6180. URL http:
//ieeexplore.ieee.org/lpdocs/epic03/wrapper.htm?arnumber=150082.
[25] Christopher M Bishop. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, volume 4. 2006. ISBN 9780387310732.
doi: 10.1117/1.2819119. URL http://www.library.wisc.edu/selectedtocs/bg0137.pdf.
[26] Edward C. Molina. Bayes’ Theorem: An Expository Presentation. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 2
(1):23–37, 1931. ISSN 0003-4851. doi: 10.1214/aoms/1177733040.
[27] Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani, and Jerome Friedman. The Elements of Statistical Learning. Data Mining,
Inference, and Prediction. Springer Series in Statistics, 2nd edition, 2013.
[28] Carl Edward Rasmussen and Christopher K. I. Williams. Gaussian processes for machine learning. 2006.
ISBN 026218253X. doi: 10.1142/S0129065704001899.
[29] Jorge Nocedal and Stephen J Wright.
Numerical Optimization.
2006.
ISBN 1431-8598.
doi:
10.1007/978-0-387-40065-5.
URL
http://esc-web.lib.cbs.dk/login?url=http://dx.doi.org/10.
1007/978-0-387-40065-5.
[30] F Dan Foresee and Martin T Hagan. Gauss-Newton approximation to Bayesian regularization. Pro-
ceedings of the 1997 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks, pages 1930–1935, 1997.
doi:
10.1109/ICNN.1997.614194.
[31] Jarno Vanhatalo, Jaakko Riihimäki, Jouni Hartikainen, Pasi Jylänki, Ville Tolvanen, and Aki Vehtari.
Bayesian Modeling with Gaussian Processes using the GPstuff Toolbox. ArXiv e-prints, page 48, 2012.
ISSN 1532-4435. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1206.5754.
[32] M T Hagan, H B Demuth, M H Beale, and Orlando De Jesús. Neural Network Design. page 1012, 1996.
URL http://books.google.ru/books?id=bUNJAAAACAAJ.
[33] Matignon Randall. Neural Network Modeling using SAS Enterprise Miner. Randall Matignon, 2005. ISBN
1418423416.
[34] C M Bishop. Neural networks for pattern recognition. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 92:
482, 1995. ISSN 01621459. doi: 10.2307/2965437.
==PAGE:140==
140
[35] Gavin C Cawley and Nicola L C Talbot. Preventing Over-Fitting during Model Selection via Bayesian
Regularisation of the Hyper-Parameters. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 8:841–861, 2007. ISSN
15324435. URL http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1248659.1248690.
[36] O Baghirli. Comparison of Lavenberg-Marquardt, Scaled Conjugate Gradient And Bayesian Regular-
ization Backpropagation Algorithms for Multistep Ahead Wind Speed Forecasting Using Multilayer
Perceptron Feedforward Neural Network. Dissertation, (June):Uppsala University, 2015.
[37] Abdul J Jerri. The Shannon Sampling Theorem. Proceedings of the IEEE, 65(11):1565–1596, 1977. ISSN
00189219.
[38] Floyd M. Gardner. A BPSK/QPSK Timing-Error Detector for Sampled Receivers. IEEE Transactions on
Communications, 34(5):423–429, 1986. ISSN 00906778. doi: 10.1109/TCOM.1986.1096561.
[39] Darko Zibar, Ole Winther, Niccolo Franceschi, Robert Borkowski, Antonio Caballero, Valeria Arlunno,
Mikkel Nørgaard Schmidt, Neil Guerrero Gonzalez, Bangning Mao, Knud J. Larsen, and Idelfonso Tafur
Monroy. Nonlinear impairment compensation using expectation maximization for PDM 16-QAM systems.
European Conference on Optical Communication (ECOC), (1):Th.1.D.2, 2012. ISSN 1094-4087. doi: 10.1364/E-
CEOC.2012.Th.1.D.2. URL http://www.opticsinfobase.org/abstract.cfm?URI=ECEOC-2012-Th.1.D.
2$\delimiter"026E30F$nhttp://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpls/abs{_}all.jsp?arnumber=6706082.
[40] Yvan Pointurier. Design of Low-margin Optical Networks. In Optical Fiber Communication Conference,
page Tu3F.5, Washington, D.C., 2016. OSA. ISBN 978-1-943580-07-1. doi: 10.1364/OFC.2016.Tu3F.5.
URL https://www.osapublishing.org/abstract.cfm?URI=OFC-2016-Tu3F.5.
[41] E. Palkopoulou, G. Bosco, A. Carena, D. Klonidis, P. Poggiolini, and I. Tomkos. Nyquist-WDM-based
ﬂexible optical networks: Exploring physical layer design parameters. Journal of Lightwave Technology,
2013. ISSN 07338724. doi: 10.1109/JLT.2013.2265324.
[42] P Poggiolini, A Carena, G Bosco, V Curri, Y Jiang, and F Forghieri. A Simple and Effective Closed -
Form GN - Model Correction Formula Accounting for Signal Non - Gaussian Distribution. Journal of
Lightwave Technology, 33(2):1–8, 2015. doi: 10.1109/JLT.2014.2387891.
==PAGE:141==
Experimental wavelength assignment
Channel number
Wavelength
Frequency [THz]
In superchannel
Tunable laser
1
1530.05
195.94
2
1530.75
195.85
3
1531.25
195.78
4
1531.6
195.74
5
1533.5
195.50
x
6
1537.03
195.05
x
7
1537.5
194.99
8
1538.3
194.89
9
1539.9
194.68
10
1541.4
194.49
11
1545.2
194.02
12
1545.42
193.99
13
1546.1349
193.90
x
x
14
1546.519
193.85
x
x
15
1546.94
193.80
x
x
16
1547.3318
193.75
x
x
17
1547.7953
193.69
x
x
18
1549
193.54
19
1550.6
193.34
20
1552.6
193.09
21
1553.05
193.03
22
1553.4
192.99
23
1557.77
192.45
x
24
1559.9
192.19
==PAGE:142==
==PAGE:143==
Implementation of Machine Learning methods
MATLAB implementation of Gaussian Process Regression as given by
[28]
Listing 1: Predictions using Gaussian Process Regression
1 function
[mu, var , marg_loglike , varargout ] = gpr_ras ( x , y , k , x_test , beta_n , varargin )
3 K = covar_f ( x , x , k ) ;
k_0 = covar_f ( x , x_test ’ , k ) ;
5 L = chol (K+beta_n^2* eye ( size (K) ) , ’ lower ’ ) ;
alpha = L . ’ \ (L\y ) ;
7 mu = k_0 . ’ * alpha ;
v = L\k_0 ;
9 var = sqrt ( abs ( diag ( covar_f ( x_test ’ , x_test ’ , k )−v . ’ *v ) ) ) ;
11 marg_loglike = ( −0.5 *y . ’ * alpha )−sum( log ( diag (L) ) ) −(length ( x ) /2) * log (2 * pi ) ; %loglikelihood
13 % I f
validation
set
i s
provided ,
i f
any ( strcmp ( varargin , ’ y_test ’ ) )
15
pos = find ( strcmp ( varargin , ’ y_test ’ ) ) ;
y_test = varargin { pos +1};
17
%Predictice
log
probability
pred_loglike = sum( −0.5 * log ( var ) −(( y_test−mu) .^2./(2 * var ) ) −0.5 * log (2 * pi ) ) ;
19
varargout { 1 } = pred_loglike ;
end
21
end
Listing 2: Covariance matrix computation
function C = covar_f ( x , y , k )
2 C = zeros ( size ( x , 1 ) , size (y , 1 ) ) ;
%Loop to make C matrix
4 for
i =1: size ( x , 1 )
for
j =1: size (y , 1 )
6
C( i , j )=k ( x ( i , : ) ,y ( j , : ) ) ;
end
==PAGE:144==
144
8 end
end
Listing 3: Implementation of simple GPR
1 %% Kernel
d e f i n i t i o n
sigma_f = 1;
3 sigma_n= 0 . 1 ;
l = 0 . 2 ;
5 k = @( xn ,xm)
sigma_f^2* exp ( ( xn−xm) ^2/(−2* l ^2) ) ;
7 %% Creation
of
training and t e s t
data
x_data_norm = r e s u l t s . x1_norm ( find ( r e s u l t s . x1==1) : find ( r e s u l t s . x1==5) )
9 x_data = r e s u l t s . x1 ( 1 4 : 1 8 )
y_data = log10 ( r e s u l t s . y ( 1 4 : 1 8 , find ( r e s u l t s . x2==14) , find ( r e s u l t s . x3==48e9 ) , find ( r e s u l t s . x4==2) ) )
11
x_train_n = x_data_norm ( [ 1
2
5 ] ) ;
13 y_train = y_data ( [ 1
2
5 ] ) ;
x_test_n = x_data_norm ( [ 3
4 ] ) ;
15 y_test = y_data ( [ 3
4 ] )
17 %% Construction
of
covariance
matrices
t i c
19 K_testtrain=mf . covar_f ( x_test_n , x_train_n , k ) ;
K_train = mf . covar_f ( x_train_n , x_train_n , k ) ;
21 K_test = mf . covar_f ( x_test_n , x_test_n , k ) ;
23 % Predictions
using Eq .
( 3 . 3 6 ) and Eq .
( 3 . 3 7 )
for
variance
mu = K_testtrain * inv ( K_train+sigma_n^2* eye ( size ( K_train ) ) ) * y_train
25 var = K_test−K_testtrain * inv ( K_train+sigma_n^2* eye ( size ( K_train ) ) ) * K_testtrain ’
toc
27 % mu =
%
29 %
−2.4215
%
−1.9555
31 %
% var =
33 %
%
0.0155
0.0133
35 %
0.0133
0.0137
% Elapsed time
i s
0.007539
seconds .
37
% Predictions
using implementation recommended by Rasmussen et .
al
39
t i c
[mu, var , marg_loglike ] = mf . gpr_ras ( x_train_n , y_train , k , x_test_n , sigma_n , 1 )
41 toc
% mu =
43 %
%
−2.4215
==PAGE:145==
implementation of machine learning methods
145
45 %
−1.9555
%
47 % var =
%
49 %
0.0155
0.0133
%
0.0133
0.0137
51 %
% marg_loglike =
53 %
%
−5.0940
55 % Elapsed time
i s
0.004003
seconds .
Listing 4: Example of GPstuff usage
1 %% Construct Model
% Squared exponential
kernel with
i n i t i a l
hyperparameters
3 gpcf = gpcf_sexp ( ’ lengthScale ’ ,
[1
1] ,
’magnSigma2 ’ ,
0.05^2) ;
% Set
of
likelihood
function
5 l i k = lik_gaussian ( ’ sigma2 ’ ,
0.2^2) ;
gp = gp_set ( ’ l i k ’ ,
lik ,
’ cf ’ ,
gpcf ) ;
7
9 %% MAP ESTIMATION
% Set
the
options
for
the
optimization
11 opt=optimset ( ’ TolFun ’ ,1 e−10, ’ TolX ’ ,1 e−10) ;
% Optimize with the BFGS quasi−Newton method
13 gp=gp_optim (gp , x_train , y_train , ’ opt ’ , opt , ’ optimf ’ , @fminlbfgs ) ;
15 % Prediction
[ Eft_map ,
Varft_map ] = gp_pred (gp ,
x_train ,
y_train ,
xpred ) ;
17
%% GRID INTEGRATION
19 [ gp_array , P_TH,
th ,
Eft_ia ,
Varft_ia ,
fx_ia ,
x_ia ] =
. . .
gp_ia (gp ,
x_train ,
y_train ,
xpred ,
’ int_method ’ ,
’ grid ’ ) ;
21
23 %% MCMC
[ gp_rec , g , opt ] = gp_mc(gp ,
x_train ,
y_train ,
’ nsamples ’ ,
300 , ’ display ’ ,20) ;
25
% After sampling we delete
the burn−in and thin
the sample chain
27 gp_rec = thin ( gp_rec ,
21 ,
2) ;
29 % Make the
predictions
[ Eft_mc ,
Varft_mc ] = gp_pred ( gp_rec ,
x_train ,
y_train ,
xpred ) ;
31
%% PREDICTIVE PROBABILITY
33 [ Eft_map ,
Varft_map ,
l p y t _ t e s t ] = gp_pred (gp ,
x_train ,
y_train ,
x_test ,
’ yt ’ ,
y_test ) ;
==PAGE:146==
==PAGE:147==
Kernels
Source: [31]
Squared exponential
k(xi, xj) = s2
sexp exp
 
−1
2
d
Â
k=1
(xi,k −xj,k)2
l2
k
!
(1)
Exponential
k(xi, xj) = s2
exp exp
0
@−
v
u
u
t
d
Â
k=1
(xi,k −xj,k)2
l2
k
1
A
(2)
Matern
kv(xi, xj) = s2
m
21−v
G(v)
⇣p
2vr
⌘v
Kv
⇣p
2vr
⌘
(3)
r =
 
d
Â
k=1
(xi,k −xj,k)2
l2
k
!
(4)
Matern32
kv=3/2(xi, xj) = s2
m
⇣
1 +
p
3r
⌘
exp
⇣
−
p
3r
⌘
(5)
Matern52
kv=5/2(xi, xj) = s2
m
✓
1 +
p
5r + 5r2
3
◆
exp
⇣
−
p
5r
⌘
(6)
==PAGE:148==
148
Constant
k(xi, xj) = s2
c
(7)
Linear
k(xi, xj) = s2
l + xT
i Sxj
(8)
S = diag(s2
1, . . . , s2
D)
(9)
Periodic
(xi, xj) = s2
p exp
 
−
d
Â
k=1
2 sin2(p(xi,k −xi,j)/g)
l2
k
!
(10)
g = period parameter
(11)
Categorical
k(xi, xj) =
8
<
:
1
if xi −xj = 0
0
otherwise
(12)
Mask
k(xi, xj) =
8
<
:
1
if xi 6= 0 and xj 6= 0
0
otherwise
(13)
