==PAGE:1==
0 
 
                                                                                    M.Sc. Thesis 
Master of Science in Engineering 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     DTU Environment                                                                                                                     
     Department of Environmental Engineering 
 
Life Cycle Assessment of Mining an Old Danish 
Landfill 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Obianuju A Udodi 
s131409 
 
 
Supervisors:  
Anders Damgaard 
Helge Brattebø  
 
 
 
 
            
                    
==PAGE:2==
i 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Environmental Engineering 
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
ii 
 
Summary 
Most studies on landfill mining have focused on land reclamation and landfill 
remediation, while a limited number of studies have evaluated landfill mining 
combined with resource recovery, and most of these being experimental studies or 
projects with little emphasis on resource extraction. Landfill mining simply means the 
excavation, processing, treatment and or recycling of deposited materials. With a 
growing interest in environmental concerns globally, this project presents an LCA of 
mining of an Old Danish landfill. The 13years old landfill contained mixed waste. The 
objective of the research was to weigh the environmental benefit/cost from mining 
the landfill. EASETECH software was used to run the model. Three scenarios were set 
up – A Do nothing scenario (Baseline), a scenario with– recovery of only ferrous metal 
and combustibles and a scenario with additional recovery of metals, plastics and 
combustibles. All residues from the mining process were subsequently re-landfilled. 
The life cycle inventory data is based on a real landfill mining project implemented at 
AV Miljø, Denmark and additional experimental data were collected from scientific 
papers. 
Within the assumptions made the results show that, the recovery of recyclables 
(metals and plastics) and combustible material delivers net environmental benefits as 
opposed to the baseline scenario. Contribution analysis revealed that waste to energy, 
excavation and sorting process and leachate treatment at a wastewater treatment plant 
were the main contributors to the total impact of the system.  
The sensitivity analysis showed that increase in the following parameters, - electricity 
recovery, biocover efficiency, heat recovery, fuel consumption during the excavation, 
causes a significant change in the result, revealing these as key parameters in the 
system. 
The scenario analysis showed that with a change in the marginal electricity (wind or 
solar electricity) being used and substituted, meant that observed savings were 
reduced and much smaller and this is because the electricity initially substituted for 
were from a dirty source (coal and oil). This scenario analysis further highlights that 
==PAGE:4==
iii 
 
with changes in the marginal electricity in the future for much cleaner energy, the 
baseline scenario presents a better result for global warming potential (GWP) than 
scenario 3, if reduction in GWP is the goal of the project.  
Finally, it was found that even though the environmental cost of setting up a new 
landfill is much smaller than expected, there are also critical socioeconomic 
implications e.g. not in my backyard and the financial costs.   
In conclusion, when the landfill is not mined, is does not just have negative 
environmental impacts but also socioeconomic implications.  
 
==PAGE:5==
iv 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
v 
 
Preface 
 
The Life Cycle Assessment of Mining an Old Danish Landfill thesis was written in 
collaboration with AV Miljø and prepared at the Department of Environmental 
Engineering, Technical University of Denmark and this is in fulfilment of the 
requirement for acquiring a Master’s Degree in Environmental Engineering. 
The research was conducted within a five months’ timeframe, from 15th of February – 
15th of July 2016. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Obianuju Akuabia Udodi  
s131409 
 
==PAGE:7==
vi 
 
Acknowledgements  
 
I would like to express my special appreciation and thanks to my supervisors Anders 
Damgaard and Helge Brattebø, you have both been tremendous mentors to me 
through these past months. I would like to thank you for encouraging my research, 
always available with positive feedbacks to improve my thesis. Thank you Anders for 
being patient with me, your easy going and professional personality made my work 
load so much lighter.  Your advice on both research as well as on my career have been 
priceless.  
I also want to express my gratitude to my contact persons at AV Miljø and ARK, Jonas 
Nedenskov, Per Palle Wellendorph and Jim Struve. You never hesitated to provide 
answers regarding the information I needed.  
 I would also like to thank my dear friend Valentina Bisinella, for the advices she 
provided when I faced obstacles along the project. 
My special thanks to my Husband, Engr. N. Anwara, my parents and family, who 
have always support and prayed for me during my entire program at DTU and 
NTNU. 
I also want to appreciate Karin, Henrik and Jørgen for all your support, there is no 
home in Denmark without you folks. 
Finally, thanks to my 22months old baby, Eleri, who in his own way supported and 
encouraged me. He was always there to cheer me up and gave me space when I 
needed to work. You are my baby but with the mind of an adult. I love you.  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:8==
vii 
 
Contents 
1 
Introduction ...................................................................................................................... 1 
1.1 
Objectives of the study ............................................................................................ 2 
2 
Landfill Mining and Literature Review........................................................................ 4 
2.1 
Landfill Mining (LFM) ............................................................................................. 4 
2.2 
Landfill mining situation in Denmark ................................................................ 13 
2.3 
LCA studies on Landfill mining........................................................................... 17 
3 
Scope and Design of the LCA ...................................................................................... 22 
3.1 
General Principles .................................................................................................. 22 
3.2 
Functional Unit ....................................................................................................... 22 
3.3 
System Boundaries ................................................................................................. 23 
3.4 
Allocation and System Expansion ....................................................................... 24 
3.5 
Environmental Impact Categories, Life Cycle Impact Assessment (LCIA) 
and Interpretation ............................................................................................................. 24 
3.6 
EASETECH LCA Tool ........................................................................................... 26 
3.7 
Data Requirements ................................................................................................. 27 
4 
Scenarios ......................................................................................................................... 29 
4.1 
Scenarios .................................................................................................................. 29 
4.2 
Grouping of Processes ........................................................................................... 31 
5 
Life Cycle Inventories and Modelling in EASETECH .............................................. 33 
5.1 
Modelled processes and Data collection ............................................................. 33 
5.2 
Relevant assumptions and limitations ................................................................ 35 
5.3 
Composition of waste from landfill mining ....................................................... 36 
5.4 
The Excavation and Sorting Process .................................................................... 37 
5.5 
Inventories for the treatment processes .............................................................. 40 
5.6 
Data Quality Indicator for the LCA processes ................................................... 46 
5.7 
Sensitivity and Scenario Analysis ........................................................................ 49 
6 
Result ............................................................................................................................... 51 
6.1 
Characterised Impact Category ............................................................................ 51 
6.2 
Normalised Potential impacts by Scenario ......................................................... 53 
6.3 
Comparison of the total potential environmental impacts .............................. 59 
7 
Discussion ....................................................................................................................... 62 
7.1 
Environmental Impact of constructing a new landfill ...................................... 62 
==PAGE:9==
viii 
 
7.2 
Sensitivity Analysis ................................................................................................ 63 
7.3 
Scenario Analysis ................................................................................................... 67 
7.4 
Overall Findings ..................................................................................................... 68 
8 
Conclusion ...................................................................................................................... 72 
Reference ................................................................................................................................ 74 
Appendix ................................................................................................................................ 78 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:10==
ix 
 
List of Abbreviations 
 
FEP – Fresh Water Potential 
GWP – Global Warming Potential 
HTPc – Human Toxicity Potential, Carcinogenic 
HTPnc - Human Toxicity Potential, non-Carcinogenic 
ILCD - The International Reference Life Cycle Data System 
ISWA - The International Solid Waste Association 
LCA – Life Cycle Assessment 
LFG – Landfill Gas 
LFM – Landfill Mining 
LFT – Landfill Tax 
MEP – Marine Eutrophication Potential 
MSW – Municipal Solid Waste 
PP - Polypropylene 
PVC - Polyvinylchloride 
RDF – Refuse Derived Fuel 
SR – Sensitivity Ratio 
SRF – Solid Recovered Fuel 
TAP – Terrestrial Acidification Potential 
TEP - Terrestrial Eutrophication Potential 
WWTP – Waste Water Treatment Plant 
 
 
 
==PAGE:11==
1 
 
1 Introduction 
Landfills have historically been seen as the ultimate solution for storing waste at 
minimum cost. It is now a well-known fact that such deposits have related 
implications such as long-term methane emissions, local pollution concerns, settling 
issues and limitations on urban development (Frändegård et al., 2013) and (Enhanced 
Landfill Mining, 2016).  Despite the fact that the EU Waste Hierarchy, as put forward 
by the Waste Framework Directive (2008/98/EC), establishes the preference of reuse, 
recycling and recovery of waste above landfilling, 40% of waste is still landfilled in 
EU-27. It is a well-known fact that landfilling contributes to several environmental 
problems such as global warming, acidification, depletion of the quality of ecosystem 
and pollution of surface and groundwater mainly due to the long term methane 
emissions and leachate production. Apart from the direct environmental burdens, 
occupation and requirement of vast land surface for landfills gives rise to land scarcity 
for the development of human society and ecosystems. The landfills, however, could 
also be regarded as potential reservoirs of resources (Danthurebandara et al., 2013) 
and (Fisher, 2013).  
A number of studies related to the research field of industrial ecology revealed that in 
many regions of the world massive amounts of important materials such as metals 
have accumulated in landfills. On a global level, the amount of copper buried in such 
deposits (393 million metric tons) has been estimated as comparable in size to the 
present stock in use within the techno sphere (330 million metric tons) and 
corresponds to more than 30% of the remaining reserves in known ores 
(Danthurebandara et al., 2013) and (Fisher, 2013). As mentioned in the review by 
Krook et al. 2013, apart from metals, the amount of potential waste fuel situated in 
municipal waste landfills of Sweden is enough to cover the district heating demand 
in Sweden for 10 years. Furthermore, landfills typically contain significant amounts of 
fines that can be used as construction materials. 
==PAGE:12==
2 
 
Landfill Mining, LFM, has been suggested as a strategy to address such problems 
created by landfills, and in principle means the excavation, processing, treatment 
and/or recycling of deposited materials (Krook et al., 2012a).  
The first LFM project took place in Israel in 1953  (Rosendal, 2009). Since then, in excess 
of 60 worldwide projects are reported in literature. This is a small number given the 
amount of landfills in existence around the world. Most of these projects have been 
undertaken for drivers other than resource and energy recovery, including moving 
waste to make way for development, void space recovery, pollution mitigation and 
bringing the landfill lining up to required standards (Ford, et al., 2013). Landfill 
mining has primarily been seen as a way to solve traditional management issues 
related to landfills such as lack of landfill space and local pollution concerns. Although 
most initiatives have involved some recovery of deposited resources, mainly cover 
soil and in some cases waste fuel, recycling efforts have often been largely secondary. 
Typically, simple soil excavation and screening equipment have therefore been 
applied, often demonstrating moderate performance in obtaining marketable 
recyclables. Several worldwide changes and recent research findings indicate the 
emergence of a new perspective on landfills as reservoirs for resource extraction. 
Although the potential of this approach appears significant, it is argued that 
facilitating implementation involves a number of research challenges in terms of 
technology innovation, clarifying the conditions for realization and developing 
standardized frameworks for evaluating economic and environmental performance 
from a systems perspective. In order to address these challenges, a combination of 
applied and theoretical research is required (Frändegård et al., 2013). 
1.1 Objectives of the study 
The objectives of this thesis is to perform a life-cycle assessment (LCA) of landfill 
mining from an Old Danish landfill. AV Miljø is a modern waste disposal site 
situated in Avedøre Holme, approx. 10 km south of Copenhagen, Denmark. The 
disposal site was established in 1989 and has a total disposal capacity of 2 mill. m3 
divided into 22 disposal cells. The landfill receives waste from approx. 1.2 mill. 
inhabitants and 80,000 larger and smaller enterprises. This specific project uses the 
==PAGE:13==
3 
 
waste composition of a 13 years old Danish landfill (cell number 2.1.2.2) in AV 
Miljø. The excavation process has already been carried out from 16th of November 
till 1st of December 2015 (Nedenskov, 2016). 
 
Figure 1:  Cross section of Cell 2.1.2.2 (Fredenslund, 2004) 
The starting point for the management system is the excavating of the landfill, 
screening the waste in order to remove the finer and larger fractions, sorting and 
recycling, followed by energy and material recovery and finally re-deposition of 
residues. Due to the age of the landfill, the waste which it holds were not source 
separated/segregated as seen with waste landfill today. The goal is to carry out a LCA 
evaluation of given material recovery and recycling achievements; with treatment 
options actually used in this LFM project. The questions to be answered in this thesis 
are;  
 What are the existing landfill mining technologies and limitations of landfill 
mining? 
 What are the potential environmental benefits of landfill mining compared to 
no such mining? 
 
 
 
==PAGE:14==
4 
 
2 Landfill Mining and Literature Review 
In this chapter, a thorough review of LFM and LFM projects will be discussed. Also 
to be discussed, are the existing LCA studies done on LFM. 
2.1 Landfill Mining (LFM) 
As available land and resources become increasingly scarce, options to harness these 
from alternative sources become more sought after. One of the options available is 
Landfill Mining. LFM is commonly understood to be the extraction of waste from a 
landfill site after that site has closed and is no longer accepting waste (Fisher, 2013) .  
 
Figure 2 Picture of Landfill Mining from the Telegraph- (Gray, 2016) 
 
With a significant proportion of the world’s waste still being disposed of in landfill, 
there is the potential for significant resources to be recovered post-disposal. In the 
future, old landfills are likely to be considered as exploitable material stocks (Fisher, 
2013). 
2.1.1 History of LFM 
Whilst there is frequently more than one driver at any one site, a summary of the 
principal drivers is detailed in Table 1 below. All projects are identified in the Table 1, 
including where the project was to investigate suitability for energy recovery, where 
energy recovery did not occur, where a project was undertaken as a pilot study or 
research project and where a project was considered but not undertaken. Ford et al., 
2013, states that whilst other authors frequently noted that there have been in excess 
==PAGE:15==
5 
 
of 60 LFM projects, the authors of this report have only considered projects that have 
come to their attention, which are 57 in number. 
Table 1 Research drivers of both historic and current Landfill Mining (Ford et al., 2013)  
 
2.1.2 Benefits of LFM 
According to the International Solid Waste Association, ISWA, it appears that there 
are three main strategic reasons for LFM operations:  
 Extraction for recycling potential 
 Extraction for energy recovery  
 Reclamation of land.  
Whilst the first two are clear economic arguments about the potential income from the 
deposited wastes, the third has greater potential for considering environmental and 
wider sustainability drivers. These reasons may be independent drivers for LFM but 
may also be combined to deliver wider benefits and maximise the LFM opportunity. 
==PAGE:16==
6 
 
The extraction of wastes for their recycling potential is highly likely to be driven by 
the material values in the market place for specific recyclables. Metals and plastics are 
those materials which have the highest values and the lowest level of degradation 
within a landfill site. These are, therefore, often cited as targets for LFM (Ford, et al., 
2013). However, there may be others that have a specific local value. The benefits to 
resource security need to be considered. Recovery of material for conversion to energy 
seeks to extract the value of the un-degraded portion of the biomass that has been 
disposed of. Whilst it could not be considered a ‘renewable’ source of energy in the 
purest sense, with dwindling fossil fuels and the need for more sustainable use of 
natural resources, waste landfilled may provide a short- to medium-term resolution 
to energy demand. Waste in landfill sites may also satisfy future demand for waste 
supplies in mass burn incineration facilities in locations where waste minimisation is 
expected to impact on future trends. 
Extending landfill capacity is another driver for LFM:  LFM can extend the life of a 
landfill by recovering void-space. Void-space is recovered as materials are removed, 
for recycling and/or energy generation, and through improved compaction of any 
waste replaced. Most waste deposited in a landfill is compacted using appropriate 
mobile plant (compactor), following tipping. Over time, as waste degrades, the waste 
mass sinks and voids occur as a result of bridging and uneven settlement. These voids 
are eradicated as waste is excavated, sorted and placed back into the landfill. In 
addition to commercial benefit, the effect of extending landfill capacity gives rise to 
environmental benefit by avoiding impacts associated with development and 
construction of a new landfill facility. Such impacts include material consumption, 
material transportation, energy required in construction and potential impact of a new 
development upon the local environment (Ford, et al., 2013) 
Most potential economic benefits associated with landfill reclamation are indirect; 
however, a project can generate revenues if markets exist for recovered materials. 
Although the economic benefits from reclamation projects are facility-specific, they 
may include any or all of the following (Rosendal, 2009):  
 Increased disposal capacity  
==PAGE:17==
7 
 
 Avoided or reduced costs of Landfill closure.  
 Post closure care and monitoring of landfill.  
 Purchase of additional capacity or sophisticated systems.  
 Liability for remediation of surrounding areas.  
Revenues from (Rosendal, 2009):  
 Recyclable and reusable materials (e.g., ferrous metals, aluminium, plastic, and 
glass).  
 Combustible waste sold as fuel.  
 Reclaimed soil used as cover material, sold as construction fill, or sold for other 
uses.  
 Land value of sites reclaimed for other purposes.  
 Current landfill capacity and projected demand.  
 Projected costs for landfill closure or expansion of the site.  
 Current and projected costs of future liabilities 
According to a recent study by Gusca et al (2015), the economics of the landfill 
mining process depends on the following issues:  
• Electricity consumption for technological processes and electricity prices plays 
significant role in overall economic efficiency of the landfill mining projects;  
• The impacts of composition of recovered materials and its prices are less 
important that might be justified with heterogeneity nature of materials;  
• For ex situ mining, transportation distance between landfill and waste 
treatment plant will affect the costs;  
• Use of recovered materials, for ex. electricity production by incineration of 
combustible recovered materials is more beneficial than production of RDF;  
• Geographical location of landfill site and composition of waste stored. Zhou et 
al. (2014), concluded that recycling benefits in China are much lower than for the 
mining projects in European Union; 
==PAGE:18==
8 
 
• Site preparation and land reclamation plays an important role in total cost-
benefit of the mining projects 
2.1.3 Disadvantages of LFM 
According to Fisher, (2013), LFM has the potential to have significant economic and 
environmental impacts. Historic landfill sites have many unquantifiable variables and 
estimates must be made of the wastes within them and the subsequent impacts that 
those wastes may have. It is only in recent years that accurate knowledge, and then 
only in broad terms, is available to assess what wastes a landfill site may contain. This 
lack of knowledge merely increases the risks that would otherwise be present during 
LFM operations. The risks of excavation of a landfill site include:  
 Nuisance (noise from excavating machinery, bad odour etc.) caused during the 
LFM operation  
 Potential for presence of hazardous materials  
  Escape of leachate or landfill gas during LFM operations  
Waste excavation raises a number of potential problems related to the release of gases. 
Methane and other gases, generated by decomposing wastes, can cause explosions, 
fires, odours and risk to human health. Hydrogen sulphide gas, a highly flammable 
and odorous gas, can be fatal when inhaled at sufficient concentrations. The presence 
of biodegradable wastes, the quantity present and the age of the waste are key factors 
that dictate the volume of gas being generated. Many LFM projects undertaken to date 
have been undertaken on relatively old wastes, typically over 25 years old. This is 
because the decomposition of waste will be advanced, giving rise to low levels of gas 
generation. The younger the waste and the higher the production of gas, the greater 
the risk of odour issues and explosion. Ensuring the operation takes place on suitably 
stabilised wastes is a key management method. However, low levels of gas can still 
give rise to issues, in particular the risk of accumulation to explosive or asphyxiating 
levels within confined structures, including beneath and within buildings (Ford, et al., 
2013). Many of these risks are similar to traditional mining operations but are 
enhanced by the heterogeneous nature of the wastes in a landfill. They are also similar 
to the risks posed by landfilling operations but in reverse. If LFM were not to take 
==PAGE:19==
9 
 
place, the waste would remain contained and have limited opportunity to realise the 
hazards caused. The uncertainty of what LFM will produce in terms of the quality and 
marketability of recovered product, is a clear factor for investors and business cases 
to address. Whilst the extremes are the hazardous risks mentioned above, whether the 
materials excavated will be marketable or not is a clear factor to be determined. 
Ensuring that they meet the requirements of end-users and re-processors will ensure 
that the LFM operation is successful. If material recovery is not the aim, and land 
remediation or re-development is, a clear factor is to ensure that there is any residual 
contamination of the land or groundwater is removed as part of the excavation. LFM 
should be avoided in situations where a properly engineered landfill is unavailable to 
receive the remnants of the excavated material that cannot be recovered or treated by 
other means (Fisher, 2013). 
2.1.4 Tools and Machinery required for LFM 
Technically, LFM operations have been undertaken in various parts of the world. 
Provided that adequate controls are in place, including proper assessment of gas risk 
issues, landfill materials can be excavated using conventional excavators. Materials 
recovery operations associated with LFM activities undertaken to-date have primarily 
comprised soil and metals removal, and, on occasion, the preparation of a refuse 
derived fuel and the replacement and compaction of residual materials back in the 
landfill.  It is expected that applying advanced waste separation technologies to 
landfilled waste will give rise to previously unseen challenges associated with 
separation efficiency, breakdown, and high maintenance costs. Furthermore, the use 
of conventional waste separation technologies to extract certain materials (e.g. 
plastics) or provide greater levels of refinement is likely to be very difficult due to the 
differences between regular municipal solid waste streams and the nature of 
excavated landfilled materials (e.g. greater levels of compaction and intermingling). 
The soil and rubble/hard-core materials recovered is likely to be limited to use onsite, 
as end of waste criteria and the quality of these materials are likely to prevent them 
being used away from the site where they were extracted (Ford, et al., 2013). 
==PAGE:20==
10 
 
In the course of the mining process, different mining machines are used. Depending 
on the complexity of the process fewer or more machines can be used. Machinery is 
easily transported on trucks from site to site, mounted on trailers. The following 
machines are added in order in increase of mining complexity (Rosendal, 2009): 
 Excavators  
 Moving floor and elevator conveyor belts  
 A coarse rotating trommel screen  
 A fine rotating trommel screen  
 A magnet  
 Front end loader  
 Odour control sprayer 
An excavator or front end loader uncovers the landfilled materials and places them 
on a moving floor conveyor belt to be taken to the sorting machinery. A trommel is 
used to separate materials by size. First, a large trommel separates materials like 
appliances and fabrics. A smaller trommel then allows the biodegraded soil, small 
fraction to pass through leaving non-biodegradable and recyclable materials on the 
screen to be collected and sorted out. 
 
Figure 3 an example of LFM machineries. Picture from Guy Marsden’s blog, 2014. 
An electromagnet is used to remove the ferrous material from the waste mass as it 
passes along the conveyor belt. 
==PAGE:21==
11 
 
A front end loader is used to move sorted materials to trucks for further processing 
(re-landfilling or recycling processes). 
Odour control sprayers are wheeled tractors with a cab and movable spray arm 
mounted on a rotating platform. A large reservoir tank mounted behind the cab holds 
neutralizing agents, usually in liquid form, to reduce the smell from the excavated 
waste (Rosendal, 2009). 
2.1.5 Environmental impacts and potential mitigation 
According to ISWA, the recovery of waste from historic deposits is beneficial to reduce 
long-term detrimental effects on the environment. It should though not be considered 
as a means of avoiding an appropriate proactive waste management strategy for new 
waste arising using the traditional waste hierarchy.  It would appear to be a false 
economy to allow waste to be landfilled and then seek to recover residual value at a 
later date. Where wastes have already been landfilled, LFM may be used to reduce the 
future negative impacts on the environment. The standard controls for landfilling 
waste (daily cover, odour and dust management plans) will be necessary to minimise 
short-term nuisance and impact on the local environment.  Additional controls to 
manage the escape of landfill gas may also be required during the excavations but this 
depends on the landfill age and composition of waste that was landfilled.  Processing 
the waste for recycling or energy recovery will also impact on the environment and 
these need to be controlled in a similar manner to regular waste operations but with 
extra attention due to the volatility and heterogeneous nature of the excavated waste 
(Fisher, 2013).  
2.1.6 Laws, regulations and Standards 
According to Fisher (2013), because of the emerging nature of LFM operations, there 
are few regulatory controls in place.  Where they do exist, they are set at a local level 
and the perspective they take varies. For example, in the United States, there have 
been state-specific regulations for LFM operations that take into account the LFM 
operation itself, the waste processing of the excavated material and the associated 
environmental impacts.  These are comprehensive and built on research studies of 
LFM. However, by contrast, in the United Kingdom, regulatory controls do not 
==PAGE:22==
12 
 
specifically focus on LFM but merely the processing of the recovered materials and 
rely on existing environmental pollution and nuisance legislation to minimise the risk 
of pollution of the surrounding area.  The Environment Agency in the UK have issued 
guidance that the excavation of the material itself is not a regulated activity where the 
landfill site no longer has an active permit. The most significant set of regulatory 
controls are likely to be local health and safety laws.  LFM could be considered as 
falling under either (or possibly both) landfill and or mining regulatory controls and 
standards due to the unique nature of the activity.  This will impose a variety of 
regulations that may be unusual to the operator, depending on their background. 
There are opportunities to argue that specific allowance for LFM operations should be 
made to incentivise the reclamation of land and the beneficial use of resources. One of 
these arguments is the role of Landfill Tax (LFT): This is a tax, which is paid on waste 
disposed of to a landfill. If that waste is subsequently recovered from the landfill, 
should this tax be reclaimed or refunded? This would be an additional income stream 
to help offset the costs of LFM. However, LFT was implemented primarily to 
encourage waste producers to divert waste from landfill in the first place and it is a 
permanent tax. With landfill’s life span and changes in rates and the introduction of 
taxes in the first place, it would be difficult to prove whether tax had been paid on the 
waste excavated and will it be subject to local interpretation of LFT legislation. 
Subsidies have been available for the remediation of land and these may be 
appropriate where it can be shown that the land is being remediated for a beneficial 
purpose. Tax relief on expenditure made for land remediation may also be available 
depending on the country and objectives of the LFM project. One of the benefits of 
LFM is to remove the risk of future legislative change placing additional burden on 
landfill operators and owners. Avoidance of future pollution risk will avoid the risk 
of future sanctions. There will also be a reduction in the burden of aftercare. In most 
countries, there is no defined period for aftercare liability. Whilst operators are 
advised to make provision for sixty years after the closure of a site, this is not an 
absolute and, if there is still an environmental risk posed, the aftercare period will 
continue indefinitely. A successful LFM project will remediate the land so that a site 
can be surrendered with no further aftercare requirement (Fisher, 2013). 
==PAGE:23==
13 
 
The Council directive 1999/31/EC of 26. April 1999 on the landfill of waste have 
changed the situation in Europe for the future. The directive must be followed by the 
EU member states and those countries that intend to join the EU must be prepared to 
follow the Directive. The directive intends to prevent or reduce the adverse effects of 
the landfill of waste on the environment, in particular the surface water, groundwater, 
soil air and human health. It defines the categories of waste (municipal waste, 
hazardous waste and inert waste) and applies itself to all landfills, defined as waste 
disposal sites for the deposit of waste onto and into land. The EU Landfill Directive 
promotes the reduction of landfilled waste by making provisions that the quantity of 
biodegradable material to be directly landfilled should be reduced to 35 % of 1995 
levels by 2016. Biodegradable waste counts for approximately two thirds of total 
municipal waste quantities (Rosendal, 2009).  
2.2 Landfill mining situation in Denmark 
According to Rosendal (2014), in Denmark, more than 15000 potential contaminated 
sites have been registered and mapped. In 1982, a mapping of landfill done by the 
Danish EPA results in 3115 landfill sites. Denmark has specific protocols for sending 
waste to landfills. Both waste producer and landfill owner hold responsibilities in this 
process and must comply with the Danish waste management regulations. The waste 
producer must create a fundamental characterization, which is a document outlining 
all information regarding specific waste (Rosendal, 2014). 
In Denmark the experience with LFM, are very poor – only two investigations have 
been conducted recently. The investigations were undertaken with different aims 
(Rosendal, 2014): 
 Excavation of waste for recycling and combustible waste suited for incineration 
with energy recovery (Project Waste Minimization at Gerringe Landfill) 
 Recovery of potential resources from landfilled shredder waste (Simple size 
fraction of shredder waste from two mono landfills) 
According to the European Landfill Management project at Gerringe Landfill (Project 
waste minimization), the final approval was given on the 1st of February 2011, the 
==PAGE:24==
14 
 
landfill which was established in 1973 in the southern part of Seeland. The landfill 
includes 750000 tonnes of waste of which 50 to 60 percent is considered biodegradable 
and mainly landfilled from before 1987. The part chosen for excavation was closed in 
1990s. It did not consist of any biodegradable waste but instead of waste suitable for 
combustion and recycling. Due to ongoing landfill gas production, the intention was 
to excavate in the maximum depth of six metres. Thus, it was of most importance not 
to excavate in biodegradable waste landfilled before 1987. The excavated waste was 
separated into the following fractions:  
 Combustible waste - incineration 
 Iron and metal – sale for reuse 
 Bedrock and demolition –sale for reuse 
 Tires – sales and reuse 
 Residual waste – re-landfilled 
The excavation was carried out over a period of eight months. An entrepreneur was 
hired to execute the excavation for free but in return get all material representing a 
positive value along with a fee of 14euros per tonnes of combustible waste delivered 
for incineration. The composition of the waste excavated from the landfill is shown in 
Figure 4: 
till on the Gerringe Landfill project, Figure 5 shows that implementation of the 
LFM project entails more costs than revenues. The cost is rated at 67 Euro per 
tonnes of waste excavated. Based on the economic evaluation, the entrepreneur 
must be categorised as the financial loser because the potential of waste for re-use 
Composition of waste 
Combustibles
Residual
Tires
Bedrock and demolition
Iron and metal
Figure 4: Composition of waste at Gerringe landfill, Denmark Rosendal, 2009. 
==PAGE:25==
15 
 
was lower than expected, the quality was poor and hard to sell for profit, the 
excavation being the most expensive part. 
 
Figure 5: The specific financial aspects of the total Gerringe project 
 
If the project should have economic feasibility, the metal content should have been 
considerable higher. However, it is unlikely to locate a landfill site in Denmark that 
possesses a larger potential than 2-3% metals (EURELCO, 2016).  
Full scale landfill mining projects that are feasible have not yet been seen in Denmark. 
LFM of a traditional Municipal Solid Waste, MSW, landfill based on the results for the 
Danish study, is considered as not feasible, due to too many uncertainties related to 
excavation and recovery of resources and the poor quality of material recovered. 
According to Rosendal, (2009), in order to get better estimates, there is a need to 
initiate further projects in order to improve the technologies used to excavate and sort 
waste. One obvious option would be to establish partnerships between waste 
companies in Denmark with the aim of sharing knowledge and reduce costs. He 
suggests that there is also need to look at regulatory barriers e.g. taxes on energy 
recovery, environmental taxes etc. in order to make it attractive to recover resources 
from landfills. On the other hand, if we wait long enough we may in Denmark run out 
of landfilling capacity and at that time we may be forced to think differently with 
respect to drivers for landfill mining. 
==PAGE:26==
16 
 
All listed Danish LFM projects, basically captured or analysed the economic benefits 
of landfill mining without establishing possible environmental consequences using 
LCA as a tool.  
Life Cycle Assessment, LCA, is a technique to assess the environmental aspects and 
potential impacts associated with a product, process, or service; (B Resource Guide: 
Conducting a Life Cycle Assessment, 2016): 
 compiling an inventory of relevant energy and material inputs and 
environmental releases; 
 evaluating the potential environmental impacts associated with identified 
inputs and releases; 
 interpreting the results to help make a more informed decision about the 
human health and environmental impacts of products, processes, and 
activities. 
There are many reasons to conduct a Life Cycle Assessment. It can be used to reduce 
environmental impact and waste, reduce costs, focus product development, support 
marketing claims, improve product/corporate image and/or identify appropriate 
performance indicators. Further, doing an LCA creates common metrics that can be 
compared and shared across company, or with suppliers and partners. 
 The LCA methodology consists of 4 phases: goal and scope definition, inventory 
analysis, impact assessment and interpretation. During the life cycle inventory phase 
identifying and quantifying the materials and emissions crossing the system 
boundaries are necessary. A model is made of the complex technical system that is 
used to produce, transport, use and dispose of a product. This results in a flow sheet 
or process tree with all the relevant processes. For each process all the relevant inputs 
and outputs are collected. This inventory result is usually a very long list of emissions, 
consumed resources and products. The interpretation of this list is difficult. Life cycle 
impact assessment procedure is designed to help with this interpretation. The primary 
objective of the impact assessment phase is to transform the long list of life cycle 
inventory results, into a limited number of indicator scores. These indicator scores 
==PAGE:27==
17 
 
express the relative severity on an environmental impact category (Danthurebandara 
et al., 2013) 
2.3 LCA studies on Landfill mining 
Despite very few or limited Life cycle assessment of LFM, LFM has become very 
interesting project with respect to land reclamation, material and energy recovery. A 
number of studies has provided substantial environmental benefits of LFM. However, 
the preferred technological solution varies between studies, depending on factors 
such as residue composition, local energy mix and technological capability (Boldrin, 
Alessio et al., 2014). 
A compilation of existing LCA studies addressing LFM has been summarized below 
and the reviewed studies mainly cover Europe; 
An LCA  given below in Table 2, performed by Gusca et al., 2015 shows that for both 
scenarios the greater impacts relate to the resource consumption – mainly fuel for 
excavation, pumping and transportation processes. Waste excavation process was 
responsible for the higher negative effects in “Ecosystems” “Human health” 
categories. This might be argued from one point with the effect of released gases 
during the extraction process. From another point, excavation process (vibration and 
noise from drilling and vehicles, mechanical actions to ground, etc.) disturbed the 
natural processes already established in the cover layer of the landfill (the territory of 
the landfill was covered with grass and some bushes) and in surroundings. Effects to 
“Climate change” category are characterised with (1) use of motor fuel for operation 
of machinery and vehicles and (2) release of methane gas during the waste excavation 
and drilling. The main activities, making sorting of waste outside the mined territory 
less preferable for A.Deglava landfill mining project are: (1) transportation of waste to 
the centralised sorting plant and (2) transportation of  recovered soil back to the 
landfill.   
 
 
==PAGE:28==
18 
 
Table 2 Summary of LCA of landfill mining project in A.Deglava  
Author: Julija Gusca, Maksims Fainzilbergs, Indra Muizniece 
Country of Study: Latvia 
Title: Life cycle assessment of landfill mining project in A.Deglava 
Goal: Develop a life cycle assessment (LCA) model for environmental evaluation of two 
landfill mining alternatives 
Functional Unit: 1m3 of the recovered landfill with the assumption that 1 m3 of excavated 
waste consists of 56.3% of soil 
System Boundary: Starting from excavation of landfill and ending with recovery of 
materials. Further processing of waste is not included 
Composition: Material fraction 
Scenarios: The scenarios considered are; 
 
Scenario A - Is based on assumption that landfill re-cultivation performed using 
recovered waste flow recycling on-site with mobile waste sorting equipment 
 
Scenario B - It is assumed that re-cultivation was performed with ex situ waste 
flow recycling, that is the excavated waste is transported to the waste sorting plant 
- the distance between the landfill and the plant is 12.6 km 
Uncertainty: None  
Result: Scenario A is better than scenario B. Scenario A generated 28% fewer impacts 
to the environment than scenario B.  
 
However, it is expected that validity of the achieved results is sensitive to size of the 
landfill and therefore amount of waste needs to be excavated and separated, 
transportation distance for the used machinery and distance to the centralised plant, 
composition of landfilled waste. Further work needs to be addressed to the analysis 
of the expanded system – to define environmental profitability of landfill mining 
project from perspective of recovered and reused materials. At the same time, 
sensitivity of the model to changes in volumes of waste disposed and its composition, 
transportation distances and economic allocation method needs to be analysed (Gusca 
et al., 2015). 
From Table 3, the conclusion is that the net emission from each environmental impact 
category were lower in the stationary plant scenario compared to the other two 
scenarios and that this scenario shows negative (avoided) emissions as the most 
probable outcome for all four environmental impact factors. These four impact 
category includes; a. global warming potential, b. acidification, c. eutrophication, d. 
photochemical oxidation (Frändegård et al., 2013). 
 
==PAGE:29==
19 
 
Table 3 Outcome of LCA research work of LFM in Sweden 
Author: Per Frändegård, Joakim Krook, Niclas Svensson and Mats Eklund 
Country of Study: Sweden 
Title: A novel approach for environmental evaluation of landfill mining  
Goal: To evaluate the environmental impact of treatment of a certain mass of 
landfilled material, and to evaluate different concepts of treatment by using 
scenarios. 
Functional Unit: Is defined as the treatment of a certain mass of landfilled material 
System Boundary: Starting from excavation to waste processing and reuse 
Composition: Material fraction 
Scenarios: The scenarios considered are; 
 
Scenario A - Remediation only: The scenario without any removal of 
material, includes excavation of the waste, rebuilding the landfill according 
to Swedish landfill standards, and re-depositing the waste for final closure 
of the landfill 
 
Scenario B - Mobile Plant: The scenario where the sorting plant should be 
transportable and separate out as much recyclable materials as possible 
with minimal time and set-up requirements 
 
Scenario C - Stationary plant: The scenario where the excavation from 
landfill is transported to a state-of-the-art technology 
Uncertainty: Monte Carlo. Uncertainties based on; 
• waste composition of landfills 
• efficiency of materials processing technologies 
• efficiency of energy and material recovery 
• markets for materials recovered from landfills and environmental and 
health risks from excavating landfills 
Result: Scenario C is better than scenario B and A.  
 
The result from Table 4 states that the valorisation of industrial waste, IW, results in a 
net benefit for all scenarios, while the valorisation of MSW creates a net benefit only 
when the production of geo-polymers is the valorisation route for the thermal 
treatment residues. However, this benefit is less pronounced compared to the benefits 
gained by the valorisation of IW (Danthurebandara et al., 2013). 
 
 
 
==PAGE:30==
20 
 
Table 4 LCA of Enhanced LFM in Remo, Sweden 
Author: Maheshi DANTHUREBANDARA, Steven VAN PASSEL, Karel VAN ACKER 
Country of Study: Belgium 
Title: Life Cycle Analysis of Enhanced Landfill Mining: Case Study for The Remo Landfill 
Goal: To evaluate the environmental impacts of the valorisation of landfilled waste either 
as materials or as energy 
Functional Unit: Is defined as the valorisation of total wastes present in the selected 
landfill. Some sub-functional units were also defined, as several technological processes 
are included within ELFM e.g. Sub-functional units for excavation and separation 
processes are the excavation of 1 tonne of waste and separation of 1 tonne of excavated 
waste, respectively. 
System Boundary: Starting from excavation to waste processing energy selling, reuse and 
re-landfilling the residues  
Composition: Material fraction 
Scenarios: The scenarios considered are; 
• 
Scenario A – Do nothing 
• 
Scenario B - Valorisation of industrial waste (IW) including wet separation and 
geo-polymer production 
• 
Scenario C - Valorisation of IW including wet separation and blended cement 
production 
 
Scenario D - Valorisation of IW including dry separation and geo-polymer 
production 
 
Scenario E - Valorisation of IW including dry separation and blended cement 
production 
 
Scenario F - Valorisation of Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) & Assimilated 
Industrial Waste (AIW) including wet separation and geo-polymer production 
 
Scenario G - Valorisation of MSW & AIW including wet separation and blended 
cement production 
 
Scenario H - Valorisation of MSW & AIW including dry separation and geo-
polymer production 
 
Scenario I - Valorisation of MSW & AIW including dry separation and blended 
cement production 
Uncertainty: None 
Result: Scenario B, C, D and E is better than A, F, G, H AND I 
 
Authors concluded that environmental impacts of landfill mining depend on (Gusca 
et al., 2015); 
(1.) Efficiency of waste sorting technology, electricity consumed for its operation; and 
composition and quality of the recovered materials;  
(2.) Transportation distance between the different facilities constituting a great part to 
photochemical oxidation effects;  
==PAGE:31==
21 
 
(3.) Final use of recovered materials – combustion or reuse of recovered plastics – and 
thus avoidance of greenhouse gases. Passel et al. 2013 discovered the high potential of 
“Closing the Circle” concept in landfill mining to reduction of greenhouse gas 
emissions – most of the reduction is achieved by the emissions savings from material 
recovery. Marella and Raga, 2014, stressed the importance of evaluation of landfill 
mining projects through such social and environmental benefits as:  
 reduction of environmental footprint and negative effects to air, soil, surface 
and groundwater;  
 decrease of imported energy and materials;  
 restoration of nature and development of recreational areas;  
 social benefits from the urban development in the recovered area 
 
 
==PAGE:32==
22 
 
3 Scope and Design of the LCA 
In this chapter, we take a closer look at the principles and guidelines of carrying out 
an LCA. 
3.1 General Principles 
A consequential life cycle assessment is used in this project and the environmental 
impact calculated in relation to the management of landfill mining. Consequential 
LCAs seek to identify the environmental consequences of a decision or a proposed 
change in a system under study (oriented to the future), which means that market and 
economic implications of a decision may have to be taken into account. In accordance 
with the consequential approach, the assessment makes use of system expansion to 
attribute a gain for any material production avoided and for energy in the background 
system.  The LCA is directed under the principle of ‘best practice’, regarding the choice 
of Life Cycle Impact Assessment (LCIA) methods and environmental impact 
categories and the assessment of data quality. The LCA is completed in accordance to 
ISO standards 14040 and 14044. The selection of LCIA methods and environmental 
impact categories follows recommendations as specified in the ILCD Handbook 
‘Recommendations for Life Cycle Impact Assessment in the European Context’ (Joint 
Research Centre, 2012).  
3.2 Functional Unit 
A functional unit gives a quantitative description of the primary function fulfilled by 
the systems under study and is a guarantee of their comparability whereas the 
reference flow expresses the physical flows required by the systems or scenarios under 
study to fulfil the functional unit (Laurent et al., 2014). 
The functional unit of the present LCA is defined as:  
The treatment (excavating, sorting, material and energy recovery and landfilling of 
residues) of the 2,605,510kg of excavated mixed waste from cell 2.1.2.2 in AV Miljø 
landfill, Denmark. 
 
==PAGE:33==
23 
 
The reference flow of the LCA is defined as: 
The treatment (excavating, sorting, material and energy recovery and landfilling of 
residues) of the 1,000kg of excavated mixed waste from cell 2.1.2.2 in AV Miljø landfill, 
Denmark. 
3.3 System Boundaries 
Figure 6 presents the system boundary of the LCA. The LCA starts from the 
excavation process. In scenarios 2 and 3, the excavated waste is sorted to recover the 
combustibles materials for energy recovery, recovery recyclables (metals and in some 
cases PVC) materials and the fine fraction is re-landfilled. Substitutions for virgin 
materials and energy are shown in the dashed boxes in Figure 6. 
 
Figure 6 shows the system boundary for the LCA of LFM. The avoided material and energy production as shown 
by the dotted arrow and box 
 
In the baseline scenario, we assume that nothing is done apart from the required 
landfill aftercare maintenance and closure. 
==PAGE:34==
24 
 
3.4 Allocation and System Expansion 
In accordance with the recommendation for an LCA (Joint Research Centre, 2012), 
system boundary expansion was applied within this LCA in order to ensure a reliable 
approach and an all-inclusive perspective to support decision making.  System 
boundary which means to add another, not provided function to make to system 
comparable (i.e. system expansion in the stricter sense) or to subtract not required 
function(s) substituting them by the ones that are superseded / replaced (i.e. 
substitution by system expansion. This is a combined concept for ensuring the 
equality of multifunctional systems with each other. In this case, the LFM was credited 
for avoiding emissions that would have occurred in the production of the substituted 
products e.g. energy recovered from incinerating the combustibles recovered from the 
excavated waste at the incinerating plant.  
3.5 Environmental Impact Categories, Life Cycle Impact Assessment (LCIA) and 
Interpretation 
This LCA makes use of environmental impact categories and LCIA method as 
described in the ILCD Handbook (Joint Research Centre, 2012). The LCIA method 
used is the one recommended from the European Commission: “ILCD recommended 
– 2013 NR”. 
The method considers the following Impact Categories: Climate Change (GWP), 
Terrestrial Acidification (TAP), Terrestrial Eutrophication (TEP), Human Toxicity 
(carcinogenic) (HTc), Human Toxicity (non-carcinogenic) (HTnc), Freshwater 
Eutrophication (FEP), Marine Eutrophication (MEP), Eco-toxicity and Resource 
depletion of abiotic resources (fossil). 
 
 
==PAGE:35==
25 
 
Table 5 Impact categories and normalisation references used for this LCA.  
Impact category 
Abbreviation Method 
Normalisati
on 
reference 
Unit 
Climate Change 
GWP100 
IPCC 2007 
8 096 
kg CO2-
eq./PE/year 
Freshwater Eutrophication  
FEP 
ReCiPe 
Midpoint   
0.62 
kg P-
eq./person/year 
Marine eutrophication  
MEP 
ReCiPe 
Midpoint  
9.38 
kg N-eq./PE/year 
Terrestrial eutrophication 
TEP 
Accumulated 
Exceedance 
1 150 
AE/PE/year 
Terrestrial acidification 
AP 
Accumulated 
Exceedance 
49.6 
AE/PE/year 
Human toxicity, 
carcinogenic, W/O Long-
term, DTU updated version 
HT-C 
USEtox  
5.42*10-5 
CTUh*/PE/year 
Human toxicity, non-
carcinogenic, W/O Long-
term, DTU updated version 
HT-NC 
USEtox  
1.1*10-3 
CTUh/PE/year 
Resources, depletion of 
abiotic resources, fossil 
ADP-F 
CML  
6.24*10-4 
MJ/PE/year 
Eco-toxicity, total, W/O 
Long-term, DTU updated 
version 
ET 
USEtox  
665 
CTUe/PE/year 
AE: Accumulated exceedance, CTUh: comparative toxic unit for humans, CTUh: comparative toxic unit for 
humans. CTUe: comparative toxic unit for ecosystem.  
 
Particulate substances that affect breathing, however, are not included in the USEtox 
category for Human Toxicity, so they are therefore modelled as described by ILCD 
(Boldrin, Alessio et al., 2014). Furthermore, the impact category Depletion of Abiotic 
Resources from CML method is incorporated for both fossil and elemental resources 
independently, whereas in the guidelines aggregated impact is used. Human Toxicity 
and Eco Toxicity category in the form of USEtox were included as recommended by 
the ILCD Handbook. Both the toxic and non- toxic impact categories are included. An 
overview of the selected environmental impact categories which are considered 
relevant to this case is shown in Table 5. 
It should be noted that USEtox is subject to some uncertainty, which should be 
considered when interpreting the results. In this LCA, the potential environmental 
impacts will be normalised for each of the impact categories into a single entity in the 
form of per person equivalent (PE), with the actual load divided by the average yearly 
load produced by one person – referred to as ‘normalisation’. The goal of 
==PAGE:36==
26 
 
normalisation is to set a common reference thereby enabling the evaluation of 
difference environmental impacts (Boldrin, Alessio et al., 2014). More information 
about how the normalisation factors are calculated can be found in Laurent et al., 2014.  
3.6 EASETECH LCA Tool 
In this LCA project, the modelling was carried out with EASETECH LCA tool. 
According to Clavreul et al 2014, EASETECH was developed by the Technical 
University of Denmark. EASETECH allows for estimating mass flows, resource 
consumption and emissions from the waste system under assessment, based on a 
detailed physicochemical composition of material fractions in the waste and a number 
of user-defined process parameters. EASETECH includes specific modules for 
modelling source separation, the collection and transportation of waste, material 
recycling facilities, incineration, composting, biogas, combined biogas and 
composting plants, landfills, the use of stabilised organic waste in agriculture, the 
recycling of materials and energy and materials production.   
 
Figure 7 A View of EASETECH 
==PAGE:37==
27 
 
The EASETECH model contains ready-to-use data for a number of selected processes 
and technologies, while the inventory modelling of specific plants can be performed 
and its results stored in the model. Furthermore, scenarios with plural routing options 
can be established for any kind of waste system, starting with waste generation and 
ending with final disposal in a long-term repository, the industrial recycling of 
materials, the spreading on agricultural land of bio-treated organic waste, use in 
power plants or material utilisation. Owing to the market effects induced by material 
recycling, energy recovery or material utilisation, the waste system can be credited for 
resource and environmental savings achieved through the corresponding avoided 
production of virgin materials. EASETECH also contains databases for a number of 
key processes, such as transport, electricity and heat production, and inventory data 
can be imported from commercial databases.    
3.7 Data Requirements 
3.7.1 Material Composition 
Information regarding the material composition for the landfilled been mined was 
from retrieved from AV Miljø. The material composition data was obtained after the 
excavation and sorting of the landfill cell 2.1.2.2. See section 5.3 for full detail. 
3.7.2 Limitations 
The international Standard for LCA (ISO 14040, 14044) was followed and it is 
generally meant to be used as a base for decision-making. In this context, it should be 
stressed that this LCA should not be used as the only instrument for decision support.  
3.7.3 Report format 
The presentation of this report follows the recommended guidelines as provided by 
ISO 14040 and 14044 standards 
3.7.3.1.1 ISO 14040 Standard 
ISO 14040:2006 describes the principles and framework for life cycle assessment (LCA) 
including: definition of the goal and scope of the LCA, the life cycle inventory analysis 
(LCI) phase, the life cycle impact assessment (LCIA) phase, the life cycle interpretation 
phase, reporting and critical review of the LCA, limitations of the LCA, the 
relationship between the LCA phases, and conditions for use of value choices and 
==PAGE:38==
28 
 
optional elements. ISO 14040:2006 covers life cycle assessment (LCA) studies and life 
cycle inventory (LCI) studies. It does not describe the LCA technique in detail, nor 
does it specify methodologies for the individual phases of the LCA. The intended 
application of LCA or LCI results is considered during definition of the goal and 
scope, but the application itself is outside the scope of this International Standard (ISO 
Standards, 2016). 
3.7.3.1.2 ISO 14044 Standard 
ISO 14044:2006 specifies requirements and provides guidelines for life cycle 
assessment (LCA) including: definition of the goal and scope of the LCA, the life cycle 
inventory analysis (LCI) phase, the life cycle impact assessment (LCIA) phase, the life 
cycle interpretation phase, reporting and critical review of the LCA, limitations of the 
LCA, relationship between the LCA phases, and conditions for use of value choices 
and optional elements. ISO 14044:2006 covers life cycle assessment (LCA) studies and 
life cycle inventory (LCI) studies (ISO Standards, 2016).  
3.7.4 Time Frame 
Data on the composition of excavated waste refers to the year 2015 with the waste 
originally landfilled in 2002. The excavation process was carried out from 16th of 
November to 1st of December 2015 (Nedenskov, 2016).  
According to Denmark without waste (2013), over the past 20 years, by far the majority 
of Danish waste has been recycled. The recycling rate went up from 55% in 1994 to 
61% in 2011 while percentage of waste incinerated went from 21% in 1994 to 29% in 
2011 whereas the percentage of waste landfilled dropped considerably from 22% to 
6% during the same period. The low percentage of waste being landfilled is due to a 
mixture of bans against organic waste in landfills and taxes on landfilling (Danish 
Government, 2013). 
The project Denmark without Waste visualizes a Denmark in which, in the long term, 
more waste is recycled while much less waste is incinerated. The same applies for 
landfilling, which in the long term will only be used for materials which are 
uneconomical to recycle or incinerate(Danish Government, 2013) 
==PAGE:39==
29 
 
4 Scenarios  
4.1 Scenarios 
For this LCA project, four potential scenarios were considered and evaluated in order 
to be able to identify the most advantageous scenario from an environmental 
perspective. The different scenarios are; 
Scenario 1: Baseline scenario, representing the current landfill practice 
Scenario 2: Combustibles and ferrous metal are sorted out while the leftover is re-
landfilled 
Scenario 3: Combustibles, Ferrous and non-ferrous metal and Plastics are sorted out 
while the fine fraction mostly soil is re-landfilled 
4.1.1 Scenario 1: Do Nothing 
The Do-nothing scenario presumes that no LFM is done (things are left as they are). 
This is the reference point to the LCA of the LFM that was done; reason being that this 
is the current practice. The aftercare of landfill will be modelled in this case where 
landfill gases and leachate are managed as mandated by the corresponding Danish 
regulatory framework, applying common practices and assuring an adequate periodic 
care and/or replacement of existing structures where necessary.  
 
Figure 8 Pictogram of scenario 1 
==PAGE:40==
30 
 
4.1.2 Scenario 2: Recovery of metal and combustibles excluding Plastics 
Scenario 2 includes the recovery of recyclables (ferrous metals), incineration of 
combustible fractions and then re-landfilling of the larger and finer fractions. 
Recyclables are sent to recycling facilities for the production of secondary metal 
materials. Bottom ashes from the incineration process are treated to enable the further 
recovery of metals, and then they are used for road construction as sub-base materials 
also taking into account the leachate production from the bottom-ash. Fly ashes from 
the air-pollution-control (APC) system of the incineration plant are used as for 
neutralization of waste acid in Norway. Reconstruction of the landfill is done before 
the re-landfilling of the residues. The top cover will of cause need to be reestablished. 
The drainage system will need repairation. By estimation, 5 % of the drainage system 
(drainage pipes and gravel) will need  replacement (Nedenskov, 2016). 
  
 
Figure 9: Pictogram of scenario 2 
4.1.3 Scenario 3: Recovery of Metal, Plastics and Combustibles 
Unlike scenario 2, where the larger fraction which comprises of PVC, PE and PP were 
landfilled, these fraction will be sorted out and recycled in scenario 3. So in addition 
to the sorted metal waste and combustible waste, the plastic waste is also recovered 
and recycled. The recyclables are sent to a recycling facility for the recovery of plastic 
==PAGE:41==
31 
 
and metals while the combustible waste is sent for incineration and subsequently, 
energy recovery. The bottom-ash from the incinerator is further treated and sorted, 
the metal scrap is recovered, the residue is used as sub-base material while the fly-ash 
is sent to Norway for utilization. The unused fraction is landfilled. 
 
 
Figure 10 shows pictorial presentation of scenario 3 
4.2 Grouping of Processes 
The processes that make up the different scenarios will be grouped for the 
contributional analysis. The grouping of these processes is to aid the understanding 
of the contributional analysis while having a vivid insight on the impacts of the 
contribution of the different parameters. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:42==
32 
 
Table 6 and Table 7 describes how the processes are grouped. 
Table 6 Grouped processes and its make up for Scenario 1 
Grouped Processes 
What is composes of 
LFG Biocover Treatment 
LFG collection and treatment with biocover 
Leachate Treatment 
Leachate collection and treatment at WWTP 
Avedore 
Storage of carbon 
residual organic waste in the landfill 
 
Table 7 Grouped processes and its make up for scenario 2 and 3 
Grouped Processes 
What is composes of 
Excavation and sorting 
Vehicle/Equipment used for excavation and 
sorting 
WtE 
Transport to incineration plant, WtE capital 
goods, fly ash utilization, metal recycling facility 
– steel and Al scrap, inert landfill, bottom-ash 
utilization 
PVC recycling 
Transport to PVC recycle facility, PVC recycle 
plant plus capital goods 
PP recycling 
Transport to PP recycle facility, PP recycle plant 
plus capital goods 
Ferrous Metal recycling 
Transport to steel recycle facility, steel recycle 
plant plus capital goods 
Non-Ferrous Metal recycling 
Transport to aluminium recycle facility, 
aluminium recycling plant plus capital goods 
Landfill 
Transport to PVC recycle facility, PVC recycle 
plant plus capital goods 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:43==
33 
 
5 Life Cycle Inventories and Modelling in EASETECH 
In this phase of the LCA, an in-depth explanation of the calculations needed to identify 
the elementary flows of the system is carried out, together with an explanation of the 
system modelling with EASETECH.  
5.1 Modelled processes and Data collection 
In order to understand the data needed, the modelled system will be sectioned into 
five processes, see Table 8 
 Excavated Waste 
 Excavation Process 
 Sorting 
 Transport 
 Waste Treatment – Waste to Energy (WtE), Landfill and Recycling 
This systematic arrangement is very expedient to analyse data quality, to recap the 
assumptions made for each process and to study the overall sensitivity and 
uncertainty analysis for each processes.  
 
 
==PAGE:44==
34 
 
Table 8 List of data collected for the project 
Modelled Process 
Data Needed 
Excavated waste 
 
Waste composition – the different material fractions  
 
The percentage of each waste fraction 
 
Physio-chemical composition 
Excavation Process 
 
Machineries used during excavation 
 
The quantity of fuel consumed during excavation 
 
Possible gaseous emission during excavation 
Sorting 
 
Amount of fuel consumed during sorting 
 
Machineries used for sorting 
 
Sorting efficiency 
Landfill Process – 
scenario 1 
 
Bio-cover efficiency 
 
Carbon storage 
 
Leachate generation – collection efficiency 
 
Treatment of leachate at WWTP 
Transport 
 
Types of trucks used e.g. Euro5 
 
The distance travelled between the sorting location and recycling 
plant 
Waste treatment 
 
Sub-divided into landfill, WtE and recycling 
Recycling 
 
Metals – ferrous and non- ferrous 
 
Plastics – PVC, PP and PE 
Waste to Energy 
 
Incinerator external processes e.g. electricity consumption by the 
plant, use of NaOH for flue gas cleaning etc. 
 
Incinerator elementary processes e.g. emission to air and water 
 
Material recovery from bottom ash - % of steel and aluminium 
scraps recovered 
 
Bottom ash – used as sub-base material 
 
Fly ash utilization for neutralization of acid in Norway  
 
Net electrical and heat recovery efficiency  
Re-landfill 
 
Renovation, repair and operation of landfill 
 
Carbon storage 
 
Decay rates where applicable 
 
Gas collection rate – the amount of produced gas which is 
collected 
 
The efficiency of biocover - Biofilter 
 
Leachate generation –  collection efficiency 
 
Treatment of leachate at WWTP 
 
Natural leachate attenuation rates 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:45==
35 
 
5.2 Relevant assumptions and limitations  
Table 9 is a list of assumptions made in the course of preparing the LCA model. 
Table 9 List of assumptions made on EASETECH 
 
Due to the short timeframe of the project, it was not possible to collect specific data 
for all the processes, therefore assumptions had to be made in order to fill in for the 
lack of data. The limitations include; 
 Lack of physio-chemical properties of the finer fraction and the calorific values 
for the combustible fractions. These data are important in landfill mining in 
order to ascertain the quality (toxicity level) of the finer fraction and also to 
identify the heating value for the combustibles. 
 Lack of information regarding the distance travelled for recycling of plastics 
 Lack of information regarding the emission of gases from the landfill during 
excavation 
Stage 
Assumption made on EASETECH 
Material Fraction 
 
1/3 of the wood fraction is impregnated wood 
Excavation 
 
 
Other driveable machines used to model crusher and sieve with 
generator 
 
No emission of landfill gas during excavation. Its assumed that 
during excavation, there were no emission of any form of gas 
from the landfill.  
Transport 
 
Assumed same travel distance (i.e. from the landfill site to 
recycling plant) for aluminium and iron recycling  
 
Assumed same travel distance (i.e. from landfill site to recycling 
station) for the recycling of the different types of plastic 
Recycling 
 
Assumed that same capital goods, emissions and avoided 
production for PE is applicable to PVC. 
 
Assumed that only 50% of recovered plastic can be used as 
secondary materials that substitute virgin material production.  
WtE 
 
Bottom ash from the incineration is used as sub-base material and 
therefore accounted as avoided production.  
Landfill  
 
Biofilter efficiency is 86% 
 
Assumed 1st order decay rate for carbon in soil is 0.014 
 
That 5% repair is done before depositing the waste back into the 
landfill 
 
Leachates from the landfill is only treated but with no biogas 
produced and this is because of low COD present in the leachate 
due of the age of the landfill (Williams, 2005) 
==PAGE:46==
36 
 
 Since no information were available regarding the aluminium, steel and plastic 
recycling facilities, average processes from the database were applied in 
EASETECH. 
 Lack of data pertaining to recovered plastic quality and hence assumptions 
were made 
5.3 Composition of waste from landfill mining 
Waste compositions vary from country to country as well as landfill composition 
(UNEP/GRID-Arendal, 2016). The composition of the mined landfill is dependent on 
the intake from waste streams while it was still active, so the recovery of waste 
material from the landfill will be different from location to location. Now, the level of 
recovery during a landfill mining, depends on the chemical and physical conditions 
in the landfill, and the efficiency of the equipment used (Cossu, Hogland, & Salerni, 
1996). The soil to waste ratio reported at various excavated landfills differs due to the 
amount of daily and final cover material employed, the size of the openings of the 
screens, type of landfill and waste., degree of compaction, age of landfill, and local 
conditions like moisture content in waste and degree of composition (Rosendal, 2009). 
Table 10 Comparison of material fraction across study 
Waste Type 
%age by weight (Study done in Sweden)  
%age by weight (this study) 
Fine fraction 
50 - 60 
57.98 
Combustibles 
20-30 
35.93 
Inorganics 
≈ 10 
4.9 
Metals 
<5 
1.2 
 
 Ratios in the range between 20:80 to 75:25 were found in different projects (Rosendal, 
2009) 
Although the research indicates, that large amounts of soil can be extracted, the 
chemical composition must be carefully investigated. Geusebroek (2001) reported 
contamination of e.g. mineral oil and PAH, but Hull (2001) emphasized the 
importance of analysing of material for VOC´s, metals, pesticides and PCB´s. 
==PAGE:47==
37 
 
The material fraction used in the LCI (life cycle inventory) is shown in Table 11, is 
based on data given from AV Miljø. 
Table 11 Material composition from the excavated landfill at AV Miljø 
Material Fraction 
Average (%) 
Std. dev 
Wood 
19.94 
0.0424 
Impregnated wood 
10.00 
0.0770 
Other metal 
2.00 
0.0071 
Stone and concrete 
2.10 
0.0707 
Soil 
57.98 
0.0849 
Non-recyclable plastic 
3.99 
0.0071 
PVC 
0.50 
0.0078 
Non-ferrous metal 
0.20 
0.0007 
PP/PE 
2.30 
0.0085 
Ferrous metal 
1.00 
0.0707 
 
The data from the composition of the waste from the AV Miljø landfill is in line with 
the data from the Landfill Mining pilot project at Gerringe (Rosendal R. M., 2012).  
5.4 The Excavation and Sorting Process 
The excavation was done in a period of 16days. Excavators and dumpers where the 
used for this process. It should be noted that there is possibility of little gas emissions 
from the landfill during the excavation even though in this model it was not accounted 
for (Gusca et al., 2015). Cell excavation may raise a number of potential problems 
related to the release of landfill gases such as methane and sulphur dioxide. 
Excavation of one dumpsite area can undermine the integrity of adjacent cells, which 
can sink or collapse into the excavated area (Rosendal, 2009). 
The sorting process is one of the important activity for a successful landfill mining 
activity. The percentage recovery of a landfilled resource depends upon (Rosendal, 
2009):  
 The physical and chemical properties of the resource  
 The effectiveness of the type of mining technology  
==PAGE:48==
38 
 
 The efficiency with which the technology is applied 
 
Figure 11 LFM Sorting process at AV Miljø (Picture from Jim Struve, 2016) 
The excavated waste is first crushed using a crusher, then the metal fractions is 
segregated using a magnet. The fine fractions (0 – 20mm size) is sieved out from the 
sieve with generator equipment. The combustible fractions (+20mm size) is recovered 
from the other end of the generator. The large waste fractions are removed using a 
grapple excavator.  
Crushing of waste 
Burnable waste 
Magnetic 
Segregated iron 
==PAGE:49==
39 
 
 
Figure 12 Picture of segregated soil (Picture from Jim Struve, 2016) 
 
Figure 13 Picture of combustibles from LFM (Picture from Jim Struve, 2016) 
Machines used during excavation and sorting include; 
 Excavators 
 Dumpers 
 Sieve with generator 
 Crusher 
 A Magnet 
Segregated soil 
Combustible 
waste 
==PAGE:50==
40 
 
For the LCA, inventories on distances travelled to the difference recycling plant and 
incineration plant were included as well as the fuel consumed during the excavation 
and sorting processes.    
5.5 Inventories for the treatment processes 
5.5.1 LCI of sorting process 
The sorting of the excavated waste was based on data retrieved from AV Miljø. Sorting 
was performed on the following material: 0-20mm size fraction, >20mm fraction, 
ferrous metal, non-ferrous metal and plastics. As seen below in Figure 14, the 
excavated waste has only undergone a rough sorting using an excavator with grapple 
to remove, among other "large plastic / PVC-like" articles and / or simply too great 
articles. Then, the waste is subjected to magnetic separation of the ferrous metal 
(mainly iron), and finally applied to a star screen, where the waste is separated into 
two size fractions (respectively 0/20 mm and +20 mm). Non-ferrous metal is 
recovered using eddy current separating technique. The fine fraction (0/20 mm) has 
no defined use yet and hence would be re-landfilled. The fraction greater than 20 mm, 
which contain significant quantities of wood, is the fraction which is to be used for 
energy recovery. 
 
Figure 14 Overview of sorting process 
Data for energy consumption in the individual processing units are based on 
information from AV Miljø and shown in Table 12.  
==PAGE:51==
41 
 
Table 12 Fuel consumption by excavating equipment 
 
The sorted materials are sent for remanufacturing, where additional sorting to remove 
impurities can take place. 
5.5.2 LCI of combustibles at an incineration plant 
For all the scenarios with waste going for incineration, it is assumed that the 
combustibles will be incinerated at the Amager Bakke incineration plant. 
 In EASETECH, waste incineration plants are modelled by mapping emissions into 
the air of individual compounds and/or their transfer into other waste products. 
Individual compounds contained in waste are distributed into the air and as solid 
outputs using transfer coefficients (TCs). Air emissions from waste incineration are 
further divided into two types: input-specific emissions and process-specific. The 
former are proportional to the concentration of individual compounds in the waste 
and are thus modelled using TCs. This type of emission includes, for example, heavy 
metals and CO2. Process-specific emissions are largely independent of the 
composition of the waste, and they are solely a function of the plant’s operational 
characteristics. Examples of process-specific emissions include NOx, SO2 and dioxin 
emissions. In addition, the LCI for waste incineration includes internal energy 
consumption, and the consumption of auxiliaries is accounted for, together with the 
substitution value of the energy produced (Boldrin, Alessio et al., 2014).  
In the present study, the incineration of combustibles is modelled and the inventory 
is based on the generic Danish waste incinerator described in Jacobsen et al. (2013) 
and the current ARC 2020 process exchanges (ARC, 2016).     
Name and model of equipment 
Fuel consumption in litres/ton total wet weight 
Excavator A 
0.756 l/ton 
Excavator B 
0.519 l/ton 
Excavator C 
0.302 l/ton 
Dumper 
0.564 l/ton 
Sieve with generator 
0.384 l/ton 
Crusher 
0.460 l/ton 
==PAGE:52==
42 
 
5.5.2.1 
Technology Description 
The incineration plant is modelled on the basis of Jacobsen et al. (2013), who provided 
a comprehensive inventory dataset for a state-of-the-art waste incineration plant in 
Denmark. This inventory is based on data collected from state-of-the-art Line 5 of 
Vestforbrænding I/S for 2011. Line 5 is equipped with a grate-type furnace, and its 
flue gas cleaning system includes wet scrubbing for acid gas removal, an SNCR 
deNOx system and an activated carbon filter for dioxin and Hg removal. This dataset 
was used as a template and update with newer data from the Amager Bakke 
incineration as described in 5.5.2.2. The dataset is based on both process- and input-
specific emissions, depending on whether the emissions are mostly controlled by the 
plant operation or are mainly related to the content of specific compounds in the waste 
input. Leaching from bottom ash (i.e. slag), used for road construction, is estimated 
using results from batch leaching test EN 12457-1, performed at L/S = 2 l/kg. The 
recipient of bottom ash leachate is assumed to be freshwater.   
Bottom ash is treated to recover aluminium and iron. The total recovery depends on 
the efficiency of the sorting process and the degree of oxidation of the separated metal, 
where the latter is determined by the material thickness, as oxidation decreases with 
increasing thickness (Malmgren-Hansen, et al., 2002). The recovery of iron was thus 
assumed to have an efficiency of 85% (Allegrini, et al., 2014). 
Energy contained in waste is recovered and used to produce electricity and heat. The 
net energy recovery efficiencies are 28% for electricity generation and 78% for heat 
production, according to data reported in ‘Technology Data for Energy (ARC, 2016). 
The generated electricity is delivered to the grid, while heat is delivered to a district 
heating network. 
5.5.2.2 Inventory Dataset 
The inventory dataset for the combustion of the excavated waste at Amager Bakke in 
Denmark is presented below. These data are expected values as this is a new 
incineration facility just finishing construction, so the values are based on similar 
facilities with same mechanical setup. The external and elementary processes as 
modelled on EASETECH are shown in Table 3E and F in the appendix.  
==PAGE:53==
43 
 
5.5.3 LCI of disposal of excavated waste residues in Landfill 
For the scenario 1, the landfill process comprises of the landfill gas treatment and 
leachate collection. 
5.5.3.1 
Landfill Gas treatment at AV Miljø 
Greenhouse gas mitigation at landfills by methane oxidation in engineered bio-cover 
systems is believed to be a cost effective technology but so far a full quantitative 
evaluation of the efficiency of the technology in full scale has only been carried out in 
a few cases. A third generation semi-passive bio-cover system was constructed at the 
AV Miljø landfill. The bio-cover were fed by landfill gas pumped out of three leachate 
wells. By using an innovative gas distribution system, the often observed overloaded 
hotspot areas resulting from uneven gas distribution to the active methane oxidation 
layer consisting of garden compost was overcomed (Kjeldsen et al., 2013). The type of 
bio-mitigation system available at AV Miljø is the Bio-filter active, open bed (BF AO). 
BF-AO is system consisting of a volume of bioactive materials where LFG is actively 
pumped from below through a gas distribution layer. The bio-filter surface is open to 
the atmosphere so oxygen can diffuse into the bioactive material from above (Kjeldsen 
and Scheutz, 2014). 
Overall, the CH4 oxidation efficiency of the whole bio-cover varied between 81 and 
100% and showed that the pilot plant bio-cover installed at AV Miljø landfill was very 
efficient in oxidizing the landfill CH4 (Scheutz, et al., 2014). 
Methane balances of the bio-cover by measuring the methane load to the bio-cover 
system and the emitted methane though the bio-cover surface (through integration of 
flux measurements performed in over fifty point on the bio-cover surface) showed 
that the system had a very high methane oxidation efficiency independent of the time 
of the year. – in most cases close to 100% efficiency. The active methane oxidation 
process was further documented by point measurement of the methane oxidation 
capacity using a carbon balance approach and a new-developed method using 
information about methane and tracer fluxes (Scheutz, et al., 2014) 
The Biofilter is assumed to be working at an efficiency of 86%(Pedersen et al., 2012). 
==PAGE:54==
44 
 
5.5.3.2 
Leachate collection 
A leachate collection system is a system designed to remove efficiently and quickly 
any leachate from the liner surface of a landfill, so that at no time there will be a 
hydraulic pressure over the liner surface exceeding 30cm. If this is fulfilled, no 
significant hydraulic pressure will occur on the liner surface. The risk of release of 
leachate through leaks, if any, in the liner is therefore substantially reduced. The 
leachate collection system must be operational throughout the active phase of the 
landfill. A leachate collection system of a landfill is a system of construction elements 
(components) that collect and remove leachate from the landfill. The main 
components of a leachate collection system are (Danish EPA, 2016): 
 Collection unit (drainage gravel layer, side drains and to some extent, the main 
drain); 
 transport unit (main drain and, to some extent, side drains); 
 intake system for the collection well (load distribution plate etc.); 
 collection well, inspection wells, sampling well and, as the case may be, 
pumping well; 
 discharge pipe (gravitation and pressure pipes). 
In accordance with the Danish EPA, ARK has an efficient collection system with 
efficiency of 99.9% (Nedenskov, 2016). Collected leachate are sent to a wastewater 
treatment plant for further treatment before disposal in to surface water. 
The landfill will be undergoing about 5% reconstruction/repair (Nedenskov, 2016).  
For detailed information on data used for modelling, see Table 3G and H in the 
appendix. 
5.5.4 LCI of recycling of recyclables 
The LCI used for both recycling of plastic and metals were adopted from EASETECH.  
For the process recycling, the average of each material were calculated for the data 
listed below:  
 Substituted material – Process imported from EASETECH 
==PAGE:55==
45 
 
 Substitution ratio 
 Secondary material consumption  
 Emissions to water and air 
 Energy 
Metals: According to Ford et al., 2013, primary materials recovered for recycling are 
anticipated to be both ferrous and non-ferrous metals. Metals are likely to be one of 
the simplest materials to be recovered, and also have the highest value. The recovered 
metal is transported to the metal recycling facility in Sweden. 87% of ferrous metal 
and 94% of nonferrous metal recovered is used as secondary material that substituted 
virgin material.  
Plastics: Plastic separated in a LFM is likely to be of poorer quality than plastic from 
non-landfilled MSW. Even where attempts are made to separate film from hard 
plastic, to separate hard plastics by optical sorting, or to clean the plastic, quality is 
still likely to be comparatively poor and the processing cost high (Ford et al., 2013). 
With respect to this finding, it is assumed that only 50% of the plastic recovered can 
be used as secondary material that substituted virgin material. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:56==
46 
 
Overview of inventory datasets for processes used for modelling can be seen in Table 
13 
Table 13 Inventory dataset for processes used in the modelling 
Material 
Process Name 
Type 
Database 
Year 
Reference 
 
 
 
Transport 
Road truck 7.5t – 12t, Euro5 on high way, 
DK, 2009 
Primary 
EASETECH 
2009 
Olesen Andreas, 2013 
Road truck 20t – 26t, Euro5 on high way, DK, 
2009 
Primary 
EASTECH 
2009 
Olesen Andreas, 2013 
Road truck 28t – 32t, Euro5 on high way, DK, 
2009 
Primary 
EASETECH 
2009 
Olesen Andreas, 2013 
 
Plastic - PE 
Plastic (PE) to granulate, DK, 2000 
Recycle 
EASETECH 
2000 
Line Brogaard, 1999 
Polyethylene high density granulate (PE-
HD), RER. ELCD, 1999 
Primary 
Ecoinvent 
1999 
Plastic Europe, 1999 
 
Plastic - PP 
Plastic (PP) to granulate, DK, 2000 
Recycle 
EASETECH 
2000 
Line Brogaard, 2005 
Polypropylene fibres, EU-27, ELCD, 2005 - 
corrected 
Primary 
Ecoinvent 
2005 
PE International, 2005 
 
 
Aluminium 
Aluminium scrap to new alu. Sheet (re-
melting), Sweden, 2007 
Recycle 
EASETECH 
2007 
Clavreul et al., 2014 
Aluminium, Al (Primary), World average, 
2005 
Primary 
EASETECH 
2005 
Clavreul et al., 2014 
 
Iron 
Shredding and reprocessing of steel scrap, 
Sweden, 2007 
Recycle 
EASETECH 
2007 
Clavreul et al., 2014 
Steel sheets (97.75% primary), Sweden, 2008 
Primary 
EASETECH 
2008 
Clavreul et al., 2014 
 
Waste to Energy 
District heating, marginal ave. DK, 2012 
Primary 
EASETECH 
2012 
Irina Naroznova, 2012 
Marginal Electricity consumption inclu. 
Fuel production, coal, energy quality, 2006 
Primary 
Ecoinvent 
2006 
Dong Energy, 2007 
 
Fly-ash  
Utilization for neutralization of acid waste, 
Norway, 2006 
Recycle 
EASETECH 
2013 
Damgaard, A., 2013 
Limited – limestone, CaCO3, EU-27, 2006 
Primary 
Ecoinvent 
2006 
EuLA, 2006 
Landfill 
Landfill Construction and operation 
Primary 
EASETECH 
 
Line Brogaard, 2012 
 
5.6 Data Quality Indicator for the LCA processes 
Data quality is the specific characteristic of data as expressed through information 
about the data (metadata), such as information on its uncertainty (spread and pattern 
==PAGE:57==
47 
 
of distribution), its reliability (depending on the methods used for measurements, 
calculations, assumptions and quality control of data), its completeness (number of 
data collection points and periods and their representativeness of the total 
population), its age (year of the original measurement), the geographical area for 
which the data is representative and the process. The reliability and thus the 
applicability of the results of a life cycle assessment is dependent on the quality of the 
original data providing the background for the assessment. The management of data 
quality must therefore be an integrated part of the life cycle assessment (Weidema & 
Wesnæs, 1996).  
Table 14 Pedigree matrix with five data quality indicators (Weidema & Wesnæs, 1996) 
Indicator/ 
Score 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Reliability 
Verified 
data 
based 
on 
measurement 
Verified 
data 
partly based on 
assumptions 
or 
non-verified data 
based 
on 
measurements 
Non-verified data 
partly based on 
assumption 
Qualified estimate 
e.g by industrial 
expert 
Non-qualified estimate 
Completeness 
Representative 
data 
from 
a 
sufficient sample 
of sites over an 
adequate 
period 
to 
even 
out 
normal 
fluctuations 
Representative 
data 
from 
a 
smaller number of 
sites 
but 
for 
adequate period 
Representative 
data 
from 
an 
adequate number 
of sites but from 
shorter period 
Representative 
data but from a 
smaller number of 
sites and shorter 
periods 
or 
incomplete 
data 
from an adequate 
number of sites 
and periods 
Representativeness 
unknown 
or 
incomplete data from a 
smaller number of sites 
and/or from shorter 
periods 
Temporal 
correlation 
Less than three 
years of difference 
to year of stud 
Less 
than 
six 
years’ difference 
Less 
than 
10 
years’ difference 
Less 
than 
15 
years’ difference 
Age of data unknown 
or more than IS years of 
difference 
Geographical 
correlation 
Data from area 
under study 
Average 
data 
from larger area in 
which the area 
under 
study 
is 
included 
Data from area 
with 
similar 
production 
conditions 
Data from area 
with 
slightly 
similar 
production 
conditions 
Data from unknown 
area or area with very 
different 
production 
conditions 
Technological 
correlation 
Data 
from 
enterprises, 
processes 
and 
materials 
under 
study 
Data 
from 
processes 
and 
materials 
under 
study but from 
different 
enterprises 
Data 
from 
processes 
and 
materials 
under 
study but from 
different 
technology 
Data on related 
processes 
or 
materials 
but 
same technology 
Data 
on 
related 
processes or materials 
but 
different 
technology 
Verification may take place in several ways, e.g. by on-site checking, by recalculation, through mass balances or cross-checks with other 
sources. It includes calculated data (e.g. emissions calculated from inputs to a process), when the basis inputs for calculation is measurement. 
If the calculation is based partly on assumptions, the score should be two or three.  
 
To achieve a quantitative representation of the quality of the processes used in this 
LCA, all the processes were given quality indicator value and can be seen in Table 15 
==PAGE:58==
48 
 
Table 15 Scoring of processes for use in the environmental assessment 
Material 
Data/Process 
Reliability 
Completeness 
Temporal Correlation 
Geographical Correlation 
Technological Correlation 
Processes made for the LCA project 
Excavated waste 
Excavated waste composition 
1 
4 
1 
1 
1 
Chemical composition  
2 
4 
5 
1 
3 
Waste excavation and 
sorting 
Machinery used 
2 
3 
1 
1 
1 
Fuel Consumption 
1 
4 
1 
1 
1 
Transportation - 
Distance from landfill 
site to incineration and 
recycling plants 
Steel 
1 
4 
1 
1 
1 
Al 
3 
4 
1 
1 
1 
PVC material 
3 
5 
5 
5 
3 
PP/PE material 
3 
5 
5 
5 
3 
Combustibles 
1 
4 
1 
1 
1 
Landfill 
LFG - Biofilter efficiency 
2 
4 
2 
1 
2 
leachate collection efficiency 
1 
4 
1 
1 
1 
Landfill reconstruction/repair 
  
4 
1 
1 
2 
Incineration 
Net electrical efficiency 
1 
3 
1 
1 
2 
Net thermal efficiency 
1 
3 
1 
1 
2 
Emission to air 
1 
3 
1 
1 
2 
Recycling 
PP/PE recycle efficiency (quality) 
4 
4 
3 
1 
3 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Process name in database 
Aluminium  
Aluminium scrap to new alu. sheet (re-
melting), Sweden, 2007 
1 
4 
3 
3 
2 
Aluminium, Al (Primary), World average, 
2010 
1 
3 
3 
2 
1 
Iron 
Shredding and reprocessing of steel scrap, 
Sweden, 2007  
1 
4 
3 
3 
2 
Steel sheets (97.75% primary), Sweden, 
2008 
1 
3 
3 
3 
2 
Plastics - PE 
Plastic to PE granulate, DK, 2000 
1 
3 
3 
2 
2 
Ployethylene High Density granulate (PE-
HD), RER, ELCD, 1999 
1 
1 
4 
1 
2 
Plastics - PP 
Plastic to PP granulate, DK, 2000 
1 
3 
3 
2 
2 
Polypropylene fibres (PP), EU-27, ELCD, 
2005 
1 
1 
4 
1 
1 
 
==PAGE:59==
49 
 
5.7 Sensitivity and Scenario Analysis 
5.7.1 Sensitivity Analysis 
According to Laurent et al., 2014, Sensitivity analysis investigates how results are 
inﬂuenced by the model inputs. Sensitivity analysis methods are used to assess how 
results are sensitive to variations in input data and to modelling choices.   
Sensitivity analysis identifies how results vary as a consequence of a change in the 
model input values and is composed by the following: contribution analysis (results 
decomposition into processes and substances), perturbation analysis and calculation 
of sensitivity coefficients. In the perturbation analysis, each parameter is increased by 
a limited numerical amount in a one-at-a-time (OAT) manner while keeping all other 
parameters fixed at their nominal value (Bisinella et al., 2016) 
Sensitivity Ratio, SR is calculated as the ratio between a relative change of the result 
and a relative change of the parameter e.g. 10% increase in parameters of interest. The 
SR are calculated as (Bisinella et al., 2016):  
𝑆𝑅= 
∆𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑢𝑙𝑡
𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙_𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑢𝑙𝑡
∆𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑎𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑟
𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙_𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑎𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑟
 
To compare different SRs in scenario and in each impact category, the concept of the 
normalised sensitivity ratio (NSR) was developed and NSRs were calculated from 
each SR.  
NSR is defined as the ratio between the sensitivity ratio of one parameter in one impact 
category and the maximum absolute value among all the SRs in the same scenario in 
the same impact category (Damgaard, 2016): 
𝑁𝑆𝑅𝑖= 
𝑆𝑅𝑖
max(|𝑆𝑅𝑖|) 
5.7.2 Scenario Analysis 
This sensitivity analysis consists of testing different options individually and 
observing the effect of these changes on the final result. The new result obtained for 
each scenario is then compared with the baseline result to identify the uncertainties 
==PAGE:60==
50 
 
that change some scenario result significantly (Clavreul et al., 2012). Considering the 
importance of electricity and heat in the model and effect on the overall result, 
scenario analysis was performed on the electrical and heat energy consumed and 
substituted in each process. The national average mix is a combination of several 
energy sources e.g. coal, oil, natural gas, renewable energies (wind, biogas etc.). For 
each scenario, the best case national average mix would be used, this can be seen in 
Table 16 
Table 16 Scenario analysis -change in marginal electricity 
Processed from EASETECH 
Process from EASETECH showing average best 
impacts 
Marginal electricity consumption including fuel 
production, coal, energy quality, DK, kWh, 2006 
(coal and oil) 
Average electricity mix in DK, 2015 (coal-19%, 
gas-6%, 
wind-58%, 
biogas-13%) 
(ENERGINET.DK, 2016) 
District heating, marginal ave. (DK) kWh, 2012 
(Combined heat and power plant) 
Heat from biogas, DK, 2010 
 
Another important process is the sorting process; the use of diesel operated 
equipment’s for sorting will be replaced with electricity operated machinery. In the 
scenario analysis, the electricity consumption of 35 kWh/ton of waste which was used 
in (Danthurebandara et al., 2015) for sorting, will be applied.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:61==
51 
 
6 Result  
In this chapter, the overall results are presented. It is important to note that the results 
of an LCA should be analysed as potential environmental impacts, more than 
prediction of the actual effects (Joint Research Centre, 2012). Each impact category has 
its own unit and therefore it is not possible to compare or rank the impact categories 
on the basis of the characterised results. Based on this, the concept of normalisation 
and weighting is therefore very necessary in order to compare across different impact 
categories. A unitary weighting for all the impacts categories is assumed in this report 
to allow comparison across impact categories.  
6.1 Characterised Impact Category 
The Table 17 below show the results of characterised impact potentials. It’s key to note 
that the impacts cannot be compared across the different categories as the units differ. 
Table 17 Characterised impact category for the three scenario. GWP – global warming, TAP – terrestrial 
acidification potential, TEP – terrestrial eutrophication potential, HTPc – human toxicity potential, carcinogenic, 
HTPnc – human toxicity potential, non-carcinogenic, FEP – freshwater potential, MEP – marine eutrophication 
potential. 
  
GWP 
TAP 
TEP 
HTPc 
HTPnc 
FEP 
MEP 
Ecotoxicity 
Resources 
depletion 
fossil 
  
kg CO2-Eq 
AE 
AE 
CTU 
CTU 
kg P-Eq 
kg N-Eq 
CTU 
MJ 
Scenario 1 
-4.93E+02 
5.76E-02 
5.50E-03 
5.57E-08 
3.81E-06 
2.94E-04 
1.51E-01 
7.30E+01 
1.39E+01 
Scenario 2 
-7.12E+02 
1.37E+00 
-3.96E+00 
6.20E-08 
5.76E-07 
1.76E-04 
-2.76E-01 
5.03E+01 
-5.17E+03 
Scenario 3 
-7.40E+02 
5.35E-01 
-4.28E+00 
4.26E-08 
-9.50E-07 
1.38E-04 
-3.11E-01 
4.51E+01 
-5.85E+03 
 
Table 17 shows the characterized results for all the scenarios within the chosen impact 
categories. Positive values indicate net impacts, while negatives values indicate 
savings. From observation, it can be seen that the three scenarios present a savings in 
GWP but a net impact in TAP, HTPc, FEP and eco-toxicity. For almost all impact 
category, scenario 3 have presented a better result in comparison to scenario 2 and 
scenario 1.  
In order to compare between impact categories, scenario 1 that is the baseline scenario 
is taken as a reference and all the other impacts are shown in reference to that. By 
using this technique, one can compare the scenarios to the reference but it should be 
==PAGE:62==
52 
 
stated that the values shown here are not the true values but only a comparative 
difference with scenario 1. 
The relative impact scores, ISc, for each characterized impact are then calculated 
according to the following formula:  
𝐼𝑆𝑐= 𝐼𝑆𝑠𝑐𝑒𝑛𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑜(𝑖)
𝐼𝑆𝑠𝑐𝑒𝑛𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑜(𝑟𝑒𝑓) 
Where:  
ISscenario(i) 
is 
the 
characterized 
impact 
of 
the 
chosen 
scenario;  
IS scenario(ref) is the impact of the reference Scenario 1.  
Figure 15 and Figure 16 gives a clear understanding of the difference between the 
three scenario.  
 
Figure 15 Characterised result for the GWP-Global warming, TAP-Terrestrial Acidification, HTPc – Human toxicity, 
carcinogenic, HTPnc – Human toxicity, non-carcinogenic, FEP – Freshwater Eutrophication, MEP - Marinewater 
Eutrophication, Eco-toxicity impact category. Scenario 1 was used as reference scenario and S2 and S3 are 
present in contrast to it. 
 
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
GWP
TAP
HTPc
HTPnc
FEP
MEP
Ecotoxicity
Scenario 3
Scenario 2
Scenario 1
==PAGE:63==
53 
 
 
Figure 16 Characterised result for the TEP- Terrestrial Eutrophication and resource depletion, fossil, impact 
category. Scenario 1 was used as reference scenario and S2 and S3 are present in contrast to it. 
The graph was spilt into two for a better view of the impact categories due to the large 
scale difference. Furthermore, the positive results do not mean it is a net impact but 
indicates that the real impact for the three scenarios are uniform i.e. either all negative 
or positive values while if the impact is with opposite value of Scenario 1, then a 
negative value is found. 
6.2 Normalised Potential impacts by Scenario 
For this study, the focus will be on the normalized result as it’s possible to compare 
across impact category. Figure 17, Figure 18 and Error! Reference source not found. 
show the normalised results for the different scenario. Each colour in the graph 
represents the aggregated value of a particular process. 
The graphs show the normalised results for the different scenarios, expressed in units 
of person-equivalents (PE) for each process and the net total value. Numerically-
negative values represent avoided environmental impacts – i.e. environmental 
savings related to avoiding the production of material and energy – while 
numerically-positive values represent net impacts (i.e. burdens) on the environment.  
-900
-800
-700
-600
-500
-400
-300
-200
-100
0
100
TEP
depletion of resources, fossil
Scenario 3
Scenario 2
Scenario 1
==PAGE:64==
54 
 
6.2.1 Scenario 1 – S1 
Disaggregated results for Scenario 1 are shown in Figure 17. In general, it is clear 
that the most significant contributions are associated with the treatment of leachate 
at the WWTP. 
 
Figure 17 Normalised potential impacts for scenario 1, (PE = person equivalent, RF =Reference flow). GWP-
Global warming, TAP-Terrestrial Acidification, TEP-Terrestrial Eutrophication, HTPc – Human toxicity, 
carcinogenic, HTPnc – Human toxicity, non-carcinogenic, FEP – Freshwater Eutrophication, MEP - Marine Water 
Eutrophication, Eco-toxicity impact category.  
For the global warming impact category, the storage of biogenic carbon in the landfill 
is a major saving, unlike the emission of methane from the landfill which contributes 
as a burden, this release is due to the fact that only 86% of the methane is oxidized 
while the remaining 14% is released into the air. The benefit from carbon storage can 
be credited to the biogenic carbon that does not degrade and is stored in the 
soil/landfill. In addition to the carbon storage attributable to remaining lignin, not all 
of the cellulose and hemicellulose in MSW components is degraded and these 
compounds also contribute to carbon storage (De la Cruz et al., 2013).  
-0,1
-0,05
0
0,05
0,1
0,15
GWP
TAP
TEP
HTPc
HTPnc
FEP
MEP
Ecotoxicity Depletion
of
resources,
fossil
PE/RF
Normalised Impact Categories for Scenario 1
LFG Biocover Treatment
Leachate Treatment
 Storage of carbon
Net
==PAGE:65==
55 
 
 Apart from global warming, the other impact categories show a load to the 
environment and this is as a result of input and process specific emissions from 
leachate treatment at the waste water treatment plant. Input-specific emissions are a 
direct effect of the waste physicochemical characteristics and emissions depends on 
the composition of waste. The net positive value for human toxicity - carcinogenic and 
non-carcinogenic, fresh and marine water eutrophication and eco-toxicity impact 
categories result from input specific emissions and the causative substances are; HTPc 
– chromium VI and arsenic, HTPnc – zinc and arsenic ion, FEP- phosphate, MEP- 
ammonium ion and eco-toxicity - zinc. Sulphur dioxides, a process specific emission, 
causes an impact on terrestrial acidification. Process specific emission are those 
emissions that arise from other chemical reactions, operation of treatment plant and 
are more dependent on the amount of waste treated rather than its characteristics. The 
consequences of emission of nitrogen oxides and depletion of coal for the production 
of electricity, which is a capital good for WWTP is the undesirable impact on terrestrial 
eutrophication and depletion of resources.  
6.2.2 Scenario 2 -S2 
A breakdown of results for Scenario 2 are shown in Figure 18Figure 17. In general, we 
see that the most significant contributions are associated with energy recovery from 
combustion of waste (WtE) and material recycling –ferrous metal 
Note that in section 6.2.2 and 6.2.3 the savings accrued from recycling of metals and plastics 
is relatively small when compared to the savings from WtE and this is because, the amount of 
metals and plastics sorted out is only 8% of the entire waste mass. With advanced and 
dedicated sorting machinery especially to these fractions, more benefits can be enhanced. 
==PAGE:66==
56 
 
  
Figure 18 Normalised potential impacts for scenario 2, PE = person equivalent, RF – reference flow. GWP-Global 
warming, TAP-Terrestrial Acidification, TEP-Terrestrial Eutrophication, HTPc – Human toxicity, carcinogenic, 
HTPnc – Human toxicity, non-carcinogenic, FEP – Freshwater Eutrophication, MEP - Marine Water 
Eutrophication, Eco-toxicity impact category.  
WtE contributes a major savings in GWP, TAP, TEP, MEP and Depletion of abiotic 
resources (fossil) and this is due to the recovery of electricity and heat from the 
incineration plant that is then accounted for as avoided energy production. The 
emission of sulphur dioxide from the combustion of fuel in the excavators and sorting 
equipment contributes to a net positive value in TAP while the treatment of leachate 
from the re-landfilled waste at WWTP and contributes an impact to FEP, HTPc, HTPnc 
and eco-toxicity potential.  
Table 18 gives a detailed information as regarding the most contributing process to 
each impact category and the causative substances. 
-0,1
-0,08
-0,06
-0,04
-0,02
0
0,02
0,04
0,06
0,08
0,1
GWP
TAP
TEP
HTPc
HTPnc
FEP
MEP
Ecotoxicity Depletion
of
resources,
fossil
PE/RF
Normalised Environmental Impact Potential for 
Scenario 2
Excavation and sorting
WtE
Re-landfill
Ferrous Metal recycling
Net
==PAGE:67==
57 
 
Table 18 List of impact category and the most contributing processes for scenario 2 
Impact Category 
Most contributing process 
Most contributing substance 
GWP 
Savings from WtE and re-
landfilling of waste 
CO2 and methane 
TAP 
Impact from Excavation and 
sorting and savings from WtE 
SO2 
TEP 
Savings from WtE  
NOx and Ammonia 
HTPc 
Impact from WWTP 
Chromium VI and Arsenic 
HTPnc 
Impact from WWTP 
Arsenic and Zinc 
FEP 
Re-landfilling 
Phosphate 
MEP 
Savings from WtE and impact 
from re-landfilling 
NOx and Ammonia 
Ecotoxicity 
Impact from Re-landfilling 
Zinc and Zinc ion 
Depletion of resources, fossil 
Savings from WtE 
Coal and oil 
The recycling of ferrous metal generated some savings in most impact potentials even 
though it can be considered small when compared to savings from WtE. Increased 
savings are associated to the avoided production of marginal energy indicating that 
increased energy recovery is a desirable option for GWP, TAP, TEP, MEP and 
Depletion of abiotic resources (fossil) in comparison to landfilling.  
6.2.3 Scenario 3 – S3 
A breakdown of results for Scenario 3 are shown in Error! Reference source not 
ound.. In general, we note that the most significant contributions are associated with 
energy recovery, WtE, from combustibles fraction, the material recycling of plastic, 
aluminium and steel while majority of the savings are linked to WtE. 
==PAGE:68==
58 
 
 
Figure 19 Normalised potential impacts for scenario 3, (PE = person equivalent), RF – reference flow. GWP-Global 
warming, TAP-Terrestrial Acidification, TEP-Terrestrial Eutrophication, HTPc – Human toxicity, carcinogenic, 
HTPnc – Human toxicity, non-carcinogenic, FEP – Freshwater Eutrophication, MEP - Marine Water 
Eutrophication, Eco-toxicity impact category 
For TAP, WtE contributes a savings even though the impacts from excavation and 
sorting process outweighs the savings from WtE. For HTPc, savings accrue from 
recycling of nonferrous metal and WtE while uncontrolled leachate from bottom-ash 
and re-landfilled waste leachate treatment causes an impact through the release of 
chromium VI and arsenic. 
Table 19 gives a full description of the most contributing processes and substances for 
each impact category. 
 
 
 
 
-0,12
-0,1
-0,08
-0,06
-0,04
-0,02
0
0,02
0,04
0,06
0,08
0,1
GWP
TAP
TEP
HTPc
HTPnc
FEP
MEP
Ecotoxicity Depletion
of
resources,
fossil
PE/RF
Normalised Environmental Impact Potential for 
Scenario 3
Excavation and sorting
WtE
Re-landfill
PVC recycling
PP recycling
Ferrous metal recycle
Non ferrous metal recycle
Net
==PAGE:69==
59 
 
Table 19 List of impact category and the most contributing processes for scenario 3 
Impact Category 
Most contributing process 
Most contributing substance 
GWP 
Savings from WtE and re-
landfilling of waste 
CO2 and methane 
TAP 
Impact from Excavation and 
sorting and savings from WtE 
SO2 and NOx 
TEP 
Savings from WtE  
NOx and Ammonia 
HTPc 
Impact from WWTP 
Chromium VI, and Arsenic 
HTPnc 
Savings from WtE, PVC and PP 
Arsenic and Mercury 
FEP 
Re-landfilling 
Phosphate 
MEP 
Savings from WtE and impact 
from re-landfilling 
NOx and Ammonia 
Ecotoxicity 
Impact from Re-landfilling 
Zinc and Zinc ion 
Depletion of resources, fossil 
Savings from WtE 
Coal and oil 
 
It’s important to note that the recycle of metals yielded savings but with very little 
magnitude. 
6.3 Comparison of the total potential environmental impacts  
Potential impacts for the analysed scenarios are presented in Figure 20 . The treatment 
of excavated waste shows an overall savings for global warming, terrestrial 
eutrophication, MEP and depletion of abiotic resources (fossil), mostly because of the 
benefits that is associated with energy recovery but also recycling of plastics and 
metals fractions.     
==PAGE:70==
60 
 
 
Figure 20  Normalised potential impacts from the treatment of 1 ton of excavated waste in the three analysed 
scenarios (PE = person equivalent) (scenario 1-Baseline, Scenario 2- Plastic excluded, Scenario 3- Plastics 
included) RF-Reference flow 
The result presented in  Figure 20 excludes human toxicity – carcinogenic and non-
carcinogenic impact category because of size of the impacts and the associated 
uncertainty to the characterization factors.  For all impact categories, scenarios with 
material and energy recovery, performed significantly better when compared to the 
baseline -  Do nothing scenario (S1) with exception of TAP and this because of 
emission of sulphur dioxide. The recycling of PVC and PP fraction provides an extra 
benefit for S3 when compared to S2. Taking a closer look at TAP, the major contributor 
of SO2 is the excavation and sorting process which had same value in S2 and S3, S3 
still has a lower impact value when compared to S2 and this is due to the benefit 
associated with the recovery of nonferrous metal, PVC and PP.  S3 shows the best 
environmental performance in almost all impact category due to sorting and recycling 
of extra materials like PVC, PP and nonferrous metal(Al). The only exception it 
presented was in TAP where the baseline scenario performed better. 
The results of the total normalised potentials S2 and S3, are mostly inclined to the 
recycling of the different materials and thermal treatment, while the S1 causes 
potential impacts. The latter is related to the specific nature of the excavated waste, 
GWP
TAP
TEP
FEP
MEP
Ecotoxicity
Depletion of
resources,
fossil
Scenario 1
-0,0609047
0,00116
0,00004786
0,0004745
0,01607
0,1098
0,0002235
Scenario 2
-0,08790277
0,02771589
-0,034435317
0,000284395
-0,029393487
0,075575889
-0,082787662
Scenario 3 -0,091442231
0,010787266
-0,037250128
0,000223036
-0,033147293
0,067790041
-0,093822801
-0,15
-0,1
-0,05
0
0,05
0,1
0,15
PE/RF
Normalised Impact Potential for all scenario
==PAGE:71==
61 
 
meaning that both the emission of gas and the release of metals into leachate are 
restricted to the waste type. Results show that the recovery of energy and recycling of 
plastic and metal fractions yielded a noteworthy benefits and therefore should be 
followed through and where possible be enhanced.  
Finally, among the three scenarios considered, it is clear/obvious that scenario 3 has 
a greater environmental benefit when compared to scenario 1 and 2. Going the extra 
mile to sort out and recycle PVC, PP and nonferrous metal offered scenario 3 a better 
advantage over scenario 2.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:72==
62 
 
7 Discussion 
This chapter presents the results of a sensitivity and scenario analysis in order to 
discuss the most influential parameters present in the model 
7.1 Environmental Impact of constructing a new landfill 
As discussed previously in section 2.1.2 on the benefits of LFM, LFM can extend the 
life of a landfill by recovering void-space. Void-space is recovered as materials are 
removed, for recycling and/or energy generation but what happens when LFM does 
not take place is that a new landfill is built, if needed.  In appendix 6, the potential 
impacts on the environment from setting up a new landfill is shown in detail. The 
capital good data which was used in modelling was retrieved from (Brogaard et al., 
2013). With respect to the two scenario, the savings from not building a new landfill 
is by calculating with respect to the amount of waste removed. 
Scenario 1 (S1): Nothing is removed  
New scenario 1(S1A) = Normalised result from scenario 1 + normalised result from 
constructing a new landfill 
 
Scenario 2:  41% of the excavated waste was removed 
 New scenario 2 (S2A) = Normalised result from scenario 3 + (-0.41 * normalised result from 
constructing a new landfill) 
 
Scenario 3: 44% of the excavated waste was removed 
New scenario 3 (S3A) = Normalised result from scenario 3 + (-0.44 normalised result from 
constructing a new landfill) 
 
By removing 41% and 44% of the excavated waste, the landfill has more space to 
accommodate new waste, hence elongating the lifetime of the landfill. 
 
==PAGE:73==
63 
 
 
Figure 21 Normalized Potential impact showing the benefits of avoided landfill construction 
From Figure 21, a slight difference can be observed. This small difference is as a result 
of the percentage of waste fraction removed, hence the space recovered.  With the 
addition of the benefits from not constructing a new landfill, scenario 3A seems to be 
the best option with respect to this particular project. It is therefore important that the 
physiochemical properties of the fine fraction be analysed, in order to be able to 
determine where and what this fraction can be used for. In literatures reviewed, 
authors thought it was important to recover the fine fraction and use it for road 
construction or even daily landfill cover; hence, an even greater amount of space could 
then be recovered. A detailed view of result plotted is found in appendix 6B. 
Even though the environmental cost of building a new landfill is small, another factor 
to consider is the socio-economic cost. The challenges involved in finding a new 
landfill site e.g. not in my backyard and the economic cost of setting up a new landfill 
are not environmental issues, but a critical socioeconomic issue. 
7.2 Sensitivity Analysis 
Sensitivity analysis is typically employed for identifying parameters, processes and 
datasets which make a significant contribution to the overall impacts of the analysed 
system and can thus be critical for results (Clavreul et al., 2012). From the contribution 
analysis performed in the previous section, a list of parameter was chosen for the SA 
and this can be seen in Table 20. In addition to parameters chosen from the 
-0,15
-0,1
-0,05
0
0,05
0,1
0,15
PE/RF
Normalised Impact Potential
S1
S1A
S2
S2A
S3
S3A
==PAGE:74==
64 
 
contribution analysis, data which were assumed were also tested (distance travelled 
from landfill site to plastic recycling plant). 
7.2.1 Perturbation analysis 
Perturbation analysis was done as described in section 5.7.1. The parameters were 
raised by 10% during the analysis.  
Table 20 Parameters tested in the perturbation analysis  
Parameters Tested 
Default 
value 
SA Value 
(+10%) 
Electricity recovered at incineration plant 
0.28 
0.308 
Heat recovered at incineration plant 
0.78 
0.858 
Substitution ratio for PVC 
0.5 
0.55 
Substitution ratio for PP 
0.5 
0.55 
Substitution ratio steel 
0.87 
0.957 
Substitution ratio aluminium 
0.94 
1.034 
Biocover efficiency 
86 
94.6 
Distance travelled by truck from landfill site to plastic recycling plant 
20 
22 
Fuel consumption by Excavator A 
0.000756 
0.000832 
 
In the case of the substitution ratio for nonferrous metal, which was 0.94 and a 10% 
increase results in 1.034, which in the normal sense is not feasible, the SA and NSR 
were still carried since the objective of SA and NSR is to test the sensitivity of the 
system to a parameter. For better understanding of the perturbation analysis, Table 21 
shows colours and scale which were chosen in order to define when a parameter 
shows a medium, high and very high sensitivity. 
Table 21 Scale of colour to interpret the Normalised Sensitivity Ratio (NSRs) 
 
For each scenario, nine values score 1, as they represent the highest SR value all other 
SRs where normalized by. 
Negligible 
NSR < 0.1 
Low 
0.1 < NSR < 0.5 
Medium 
0.5 < NSR < 0.8 
High 
0.8 < NSR < 0.9 
Very high 
NSR > 0.9 
0.00 
represent no observed change in the result when parameter was increased or 
decreased by 10% 
==PAGE:75==
65 
 
There was no perturbation analysis for scenario 1 since it is only one parameter 
(WWTP) that contributes to all impact category (see section 6.2.1). 
7.2.2 Perturbation Analysis for Scenario 2 
The parameters are shown in Table 22 with the colour scale indicating the magnitude 
of the sensitivity, which can be positive or negative depending on the sign of the result 
score.  
Table 22 Normalised sensitive ratio for scenario 2 with colour indications 
  
GWP 
TAP 
TEP 
HTPc 
HTPnc 
FEP 
MEP 
Eco-
toxicity 
Depletion 
of abiotic 
resource, 
Fossil 
electricity recovery 
efficiency 
0.86 
-0.39 
0.94 
1 
1 
1 
0.94 
1 
1 
heat recovery 
efficiency 
0.36 
-0.51 
1 
0 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
substitution ratio 
ferrous metal 
0.05 
-0.03 
0.05 
0.16 
0.14 
0.04 
0.05 
0.11 
0.04 
biocover efficiency 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Fuel consumption 
by excavator A 
-0.01 
1 
-0.03 
0 
0 
-0.13 
-0.03 
-0.04 
-0.01 
 
GWP, TEP HTPc, HTPnc, FEP, MEP, Eco-toxicity and Depletion of abiotic resources, 
fossil, are sensitive to changes in electricity recovery efficiency and can be explained 
by the avoided emission and resources depletion. Therefore, by increasing the 
electricity recovery efficiency by 10%, the result for these impact category changes and 
this is reflected with increase in the savings. Changes in biocover efficiency presents 
overall no changes in most of the result with exception of the GWP. The sensitivity of 
GWP to changes in biocover efficiency can be related to the fact that biocover is used 
to treat landfill gas (biogenic methane) so by increasing the efficiency, it means more 
landfill gas is treated and hence less methane is released into the atmosphere. A 10% 
increase in heat recovery efficiency presents no changes in HTPc, HTPnc, FEP, 
resource depletion fossil and Eco-toxicity and this can be due to the process – heat 
recovery does not contain many emissions but TEP and MEP are highly sensitive to 
changes in heat recovery efficiency due to the savings in NOx emission while TAP is 
very sensitive to changes in the fuel consumption owing to the emission of SO2 from 
==PAGE:76==
66 
 
combustion of diesel.  Changes in the substitution ratio for metal caused a medium 
change in the result. 
7.2.3 Perturbation analysis for Scenario 3 
The parameters are shown in Table 23. By increasing the substitution ratios in the 
recycling processes for PVC, PP, ferrous and nonferrous metal and recovery efficiency 
of the heat and electricity, a better environmental performance was observed, while 
by increasing the consumption of fuel during excavation TAP worsened. The 
parameters generally most sensitive are the substitution ratios of PP, nonferrous 
metal, fuel consumption, electricity and heat recovery efficiency in FEP, Eco-toxicity, 
TAP, TEP, HTPc, HTPnc, MEP, fossil depletion, TEP and MEP impact categories 
respectively. Lower but still mentionable NSR are the substitution ratio of ferrous 
metal and PVC. 
Table 23 Normalised sensitive ratio for scenario 3 with colour indications 
  
GWP 
TAP 
TEP 
HTPc 
HTPnc 
FEP 
MEP 
Eco-toxicity 
Depletion of abiotic 
resource, Fossil 
electricity recovery 
efficiency 
0.86 
-0.39 
0.94 
1.00 
1.00 
0.26 
0.94 
0.56 
1.00 
heat recovery 
efficiency 
0.36 
-0.51 
1.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
1.00 
0.00 
0.00 
substitution ratio PVC 
0.01 
-0.01 
0.02 
0.00 
0.00 
0.11 
0.02 
0.00 
0.02 
substitution ratio PP 
0.05 
-0.07 
0.08 
0.15 
0.07 
1.00 
0.09 
0.58 
0.10 
substitution ratio 
ferrous metal 
0.05 
-0.03 
0.05 
0.16 
0.14 
0.01 
0.05 
0.06 
0.04 
substitution ratio 
nonferrous metal 
0.04 
-0.13 
0.08 
0.39 
0.28 
0.66 
0.08 
1.00 
0.06 
biocover efficiency 
1.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
distance travelled 
from landfill to plastic 
recycling centre 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
Fuel consumption by 
excavator A 
0.00 
1.00 
-
0.03 
0.00 
0.00 
-0.03 
-0.03 
-0.02 
-0.01 
 
GWP is sensitive to changes in biocover efficiency and electricity recovery.  Distance 
travelled from landfill to plastic recycling centre didn’t have any effect on the output 
result. Changes in substitution ratio of PP and nonferrous metal causes a reaction in  
FEP and Eco-toxicity impact categories respectively. Increase in the substitution ratio 
of PP yields a savings in FEP (reduced phosphate emission) and this is because 
==PAGE:77==
67 
 
phosphate salt is used to increase the flame retardant effect in virgin polypropylene 
(Maier & Calafut, 1998). Also an increase in the substitution ratio of nonferrous metal, 
yields a savings in eco-toxicity impact category due to avoided release of vanadium, 
nickel and selenium during virgin production of aluminium. 
The detailed results for the perturbation analysis can be found in the appendix 7. 
7.3  Scenario Analysis 
Since the earlier results shows that scenario 3 is the best option, the scenario analysis 
will focus on this scenario. In the Figure 22, a comparison is presented of the difference 
in the result if the recovered electricity is substituted by electricity from wind power 
or the 2015 electricity mix in Denmark, if district heating from CHP is substituted for 
heat from biogas and also the changes in result if electrically driven equipment are 
used for sorting instead of the fuel based equipment. The reason for the latter being 
that the use of diesel driven equipment impacts negatively on most impact category.  
 
Figure 22 Showing normalised result for the scenario analysis 
 
Figure 22 highlights that with the change in marginal electricity, Scenario 1 gives more 
savings only in GWP when compared to scenarios with current electricity mix and 
wind power. With changes in the electricity mix, a drastic reduction is seen in the 
-0,1500
-0,1000
-0,0500
0,0000
0,0500
0,1000
0,1500
PE/RF
Normalised Impact Potential
Scenario 3
Current Electricity Mix
Wind Electricity
Heat from Biomass
Electricity sorting
Scenario 1
==PAGE:78==
68 
 
overall net saving. This reduction is due to the substitution of the recovered electricity 
for a cleaner electricity. In scenario 3, electricity recovered was substituted for coal and 
oil based electricity (dirty electricity) hence the huge amount of savings but with the 
change in the marginal electricity (current electricity mix and wind power), the 
substitution is then for a cleaner electricity, hence the savings is a lot less.  
In the overall result, sorting with electricity versus sorting with diesel fuelled 
equipment, there were not much difference in the result outcome for all impact 
category and this is because out of the total amount of diesel equipment used, the 
sorting equipment consumed less fuel when compared to the excavators. 
In the case of heat from biomass, the overall result in comparison with scenario 3 
shows a decrease in the savings across GWP, TEP and MEP, decrease in burden across 
FEP and Eco-toxicity and this is because, the heat recovered is substituted for heat 
from a cleaner source. 
7.4 Overall Findings 
Based on the previous sections, the results of the scenarios and my interpretation of 
these results, the following overall findings can be stated; 
 Excavating waste from landfill for the purpose of material and energy recovery 
provides benefit from an environmental perspective and should thus be 
supported. It is key to analyse the age and material content of the landfill prior 
to excavation. This current project showed to be environmentally viable 
because the composition of the excavated waste included both combustibles 
and recyclables. As future resource reservoirs, landfills also call for a more 
proactive approach in terms of prospecting for the most profitable landfills to 
mine. In many countries, there are thousands of landfills, which vary with 
respect to ownership, location, composition and age – site-specific factors, any 
of which might influence the feasibility of mining. Some, for example, might 
contain large amounts of valuable materials such as metals, almost no 
hazardous waste and be located close to waste treatment and recycling plants, 
while for others the conditions for mining may not be as favourable. In this 
==PAGE:79==
69 
 
case, it could be useful to learn how such implications have been dealt with in 
other lines of business, such as within the traditional mining industry (Krook 
et al., 2012a; Van Der Zee et al., 2004). 
 Sorting and recycling metals and plastics are key to LFM. More attention 
should be given to increasing the metal recovery as this is easily marketable 
and has high substitution ratio and quality when compared to plastics. The 
sorting technology used is according to Krook et al., 2012, of uttermost 
importance to LFM as it tackles the critical uncertainty related to resource 
recovery from landfill i.e. which material can actually be separated out from 
deposited waste and perhaps even more important, at what quality levels. 
More applied research is needed to demonstrate the efficiency, capacity and 
suitability of different technologies for landfill mining in practice, this is 
because in some projects it might be justifiable to use mobile sorting equipment 
whereas in another more advanced stationary processing plants could be an 
option. However, one thing is certain and this is that if the core objective is 
resource extraction, the conventional surface mining technologies that have 
been used in the past will not be sufficient and this can be related to this current 
project as only small amount of metal and plastic were recovered. 
  Incineration seems to be the best treatment option for the combustible fraction 
and it provides benefit due to the energy recovery and recovery of metal scraps 
from the bottom ash. It is also important to note that with changes in marginal 
electricity in Denmark, this option becomes less desirable if the target is to 
reduce the impact on GWP but remains desirable as heat generated contributes 
18% of the total consumed district heating (Reno Sam and Ramboll, 2006). The 
Danish government targets that by 2050, it will become independent from fossil 
fuel and this means having to close down all polluting power plants by then, 
including of course the waste-to-energy incinerators ( ZeroWaste Europe, 
2016). This means that LFM in Denmark will be based solely on material 
recovery and land reclamation, hence the need for improved sorting 
technology.  
==PAGE:80==
70 
 
 With exception of GWP, scenario 3 remains viable for all other impact category 
when compared to S1 even with changes in the marginal electricity and heat 
source. 
 
 A clear conclusion could not be drawn as to the use of the fine fraction since its 
makes up a larger portion of the waste excavated and this is due to lack of 
information as regarding its physiochemical property. It is also important to 
define a use for the fine fraction which in turns increases the amount of 
volume/space recovered thus elongating the lifetime of the landfill. 
 It is vital that the physio-chemical properties of the excavated waste are 
analysed, this is to avoid dispersal of toxic material e.g. in the wood recovered 
there would be trace amount of impregnated wood which when incinerated 
release chromium and arsenic into the environment. Krook et al., 2012b and 
Moberg, 1999 also discussed this obvious risk, that landfill mining might lead 
to an increased dispersal of unwanted substances such as heavy metals, 
especially if the applied technologies fail to separate out the dispersed 
hazardous materials in the landfill. Efficient separation technologies for 
hazardous waste are in fact critical, since they largely determine the usability 
of the produced recyclables. Thus, in order to address the environmental 
performance of this new perspective on landfill mining, there is a need for 
research applying a systems approach (e.g. Life Cycle Assessment), enabling 
the balancing of positive and negative influences taking place on the local, 
regional and global scales. 
 There is also need to ensure that there are no gas leaks during the excavation 
as this, if not taken into account can affect the personnel carrying out the 
excavation and the environment. Ford et al., 2013, discusses the need for 
sampling and measuring the gas released during excavation.  
 In terms of the sensitivity analysis, the system is most sensitive to electricity 
recovery as it affects the result output across most impact category. 
Finally, in order for landfill mining to be feasible for individual companies, 
economic benefits must simply outweigh the costs. So far, this type of project has 
==PAGE:81==
71 
 
mainly been initiated, funded and operated by local authorities, i.e. owners of 
landfills, aiming to solve a specific issue of relevance for their region such as lack 
of landfill space (Van Der Zee et al., 2004). Initiatives emphasizing extraction of 
valuable resources from deposits on commercial grounds are however something 
significantly different. First, such projects should at least not solely be evaluated 
from a waste management perspective but also within a broader resource 
management context, where the feasibility is compared to alternative costs for 
extracting the resources from their natural reservoirs. Furthermore, it is not likely 
that landfill owners on their own are in the position of meeting the technical, 
economic and legislative conditions that will follow such activities. Binding 
different types of expert knowledge to the projects by developing closer 
collaboration with actors belonging to different lines of business might therefore 
be necessary, e.g. materials companies, energy producers, metals recyclers and so 
on (Krook et al., 2012b).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:82==
72 
 
8 Conclusion 
In conclusion, LFM provides an environmental benefit if the goal is material and 
energy recovery.  Proper research on the content of the landfill and chemical 
properties of the waste should be carried out, if LFM is to be successful. There is need 
for thorough evaluation of the proposed LFM site, conducting quality and detailed 
research to understand or have in view the likely outcomes and checks that will be 
needed during the excavation. 
An efficient sorting technology is important for an effective LFM. The outcome of LFM 
depends on the efficiency of the sorting technology to be able to recover all recyclable 
materials. More research is needed in the area of the quality of recovered materials 
and its marketability. 
Incineration seems to be the best option for treatment of combustible fraction and it 
provides benefit due to energy recovery but caution needs to be put in place, as this 
benefit is only as a result of substitution for dirty energy. In the future, these benefits 
will be a lot less or phased out due to a change in the electricity grid to cleaner energy 
sources.   
In general, with respect to reviewed literature, LFM processes are likely to be intricate 
and requires a continuing view of the potential environmental and economic impacts. 
It’s important to note that there are range of factors to consider before engaging in 
LFM as not all landfill mining will yield a positive outcome. Whilst the LFM 
excavation itself is relatively simple, a holistic approach to wastes management and 
mining is required to fully understand the implications (Fisher, 2013).  
Krook et al., 2012 concluded that facilitating implementation of resource recovery 
from landfills involves three main research challenges: technology innovation, 
addressing the underlying conditions for realization and developing standardized 
frameworks for evaluating performance. Applied research such as demonstration 
projects, reviews of experiences from previously conducted projects and interviews 
with societal actors (e.g. legislators and authorities) is essential for understanding the 
capacity of technology and conditions for realization. For example, how much of the 
==PAGE:83==
73 
 
deposited resources can actually be transformed into marketable recyclables, and how 
will current environmental legislation, taxes and subsidies apply to landfill mining?   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:84==
74 
 
Reference 
 
Allegrini, E., Maresca, A., Emil, M., Sommer, M., Boldrin, A., & Astrup, T. F. (2014). 
Quantification of the Resource Recovery Potential of Municipal Solid Waste 
Incineration Bottom Ashes. Waste Management: doi: 10.1016/j.wasman.2014.05.003, 
1627-36. 
Antonellis, D., & VerLee, N. (2011). Estimation of the Aftercare Period of Danish LAndfills. 
Denmark: Worcester Polytechnic Institute. 
ARC. (2016, April 7). Data on external and elementary processes for Amager Bakke 
incinerator. (Obianuju, Interviewer) 
B Resource Guide: Conducting a Life Cycle Assessment. (2016, March 06). Retrieved from B 
Corporation: 
http://nbis.org/nbisresources/life_cycle_assessment_thinking/guide_life_cycle_ass
essment_bcorp.pdf 
Bisinella, V., Conradsen, K., Christensen, T.H., Astrup, T.F., 2016. A global approach for 
sparse representation of uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessments of waste management 
systems. Int. J. Life Cycle Assess. 21, 378–394. doi:10.1007/s11367-015-1014-4 
Boldrin, Alessio, Damgaard, A., Brogaard, L., Astrup, T., 2014. Life cycle assessment of 
shredder residue management. Copenhagen. 
Brogaard, L.K., Riber, C., Christensen, T.H., 2013. Quantifying capital goods for waste 
incineration. Waste Manag. 33, 1390–1396. doi:10.1016/j.wasman.2013.03.007 
Clavreul, J., Baumeister, H., Christensen, T.H., Damgaard, A., 2014. An environmental 
assessment system for environmental technologies. Environ. Model. Softw. 60, 18–30. 
doi:10.1016/j.envsoft.2014.06.007 
Clavreul, J., Guyonnet, D., Christensen, T.H., 2012. Quantifying uncertainty in LCA-
modelling of waste management systems. Waste Manag. 32, 2482–2495. 
doi:10.1016/j.wasman.2012.07.008 
Cossu, R., Hogland, W., & Salerni, E. (1996). Landfill mining in Europe and USA. ISWA Year 
Book, International Solid Waste Association (ed), 107-114. 
Danish Government, 2013. Denmark without waste. doi:978-87-03026-59-5 
Damgaard, A. (2016, June 01). Definition of Normalised Sensitivity Ratio. (O. Udodi, 
Interviewer) 
Danish EPA. (2016, May 02). Leachate Collection. Retrieved from Danish EPA- 
Environmental Protection Agency: 
http://www.statensnet.dk/pligtarkiv/fremvis.pl?vaerkid=5143&reprid=0&filid=37&i
arkiv=1 
Danthurebandara, M., Passel, S.V.A.N., Van, K., 2013. Life Cycle Analysis of Enhanced 
Landfill Mining  : Case Study for the Remo Landfill 1–23. 
==PAGE:85==
75 
 
Danthurebandara, M., Van Passel, S., Vanderreydt, I., Van Acker, K., 2015. Assessment of 
environmental and economic feasibility of Enhanced Landfill Mining. Waste Manag. 45, 
434–447. doi:10.1016/j.wasman.2015.01.041 
De la Cruz, F.B., Chanton, J.P., Barlaz, M.A., 2013. Measurement of carbon storage in 
landfills from the biogenic carbon content of excavated waste samples. Waste Manag. 
33, 2001–2005. doi:10.1016/j.wasman.2012.12.012 
Dean Petrich, R. (2016, March 03). Landfill Mining. Retrieved from Environmental 
Alternatives: http://www.enviroalternatives.com/landfill.html 
Enhanced Landfill Mining. (2016, 07 13). Retrieved from Enhanced Landfill Mining 
consortium: http://www.elfm.eu/ 
ENERGINET.DK. (2016, June 11). Miljødeklarering af 1 kWh el. Retrieved from 
http://www.energinet.dk/: http://www.energinet.dk/DA/KLIMA-OG-
MILJOE/Miljoedeklarationer/Sider/Miljoedeklarering-af-1-kWh-el.aspx 
EURELCO. (2016, March 06). Gerring Landfill - Project Minimation. Retrieved from 
EURELCO - European Enhanced Landfill MInning: 
http://www.eurelco.org/projects/gerring-landfill-%E2%80%93-project-minimation 
Fisher, R., 2013. Key issue paper. Int. Solid Waste Assoc. ISWA. 
Ford, S., Warren, K., Lorton, C., Smithers, R., Read, A., Al, M.H., 2013. Feasibility and 
Viability of Landfill Mining and Reclamation in Scotland 99. 
Frändegård, P., Krook, J., Svensson, N., Eklund, M., 2013. A novel approach for 
environmental evaluation of land fi ll mining. J. Clean. Prod. 55, 24–34. 
doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2012.05.045 
Fredenslund, A.M., 2004. Deponeringsanlaegget AV Miljo. 
Gusca, J., Fainzilbergs, M., Muizniece, I., 2015. Life cycle assessment of landfill mining 
project. Energy Procedia 72, 322–328. doi:10.1016/j.egypro.2015.06.047 
Geusebroek, H. J. (2001). Complete removal of two landfills in Veenendaal (NL). T.H. 
Christensen, R. Cossu, R. Stegman (Eds) Proceedings of Sardinia 91, 8th International 
Landfill Symposium (pp. 561-567). Italy: CISA Publisher Cagliari Italy. 
Gray, L. (2016, April 25). Britain could be mining landfill for gold in a decade'. Retrieved 
from The Telegraph: http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/3160259/Britain-
could-be-mining-landfill-for-gold-in-a-decade.html 
Heijungs, R., & Huijbregts, M. (2004). A Review of Approaches to Treat Uncertainty in LCA. 
Netherlands. 
Heimovaara, T., Oonk, H., Van Der Sloot, H., & Van Zomere, A. (2010). Reduction of the 
Long Term Emission Potential of Existing Landfills. Germany: Dutch Sustainable 
Landfill Foundation. 
ISO Standards. (2016, April 25). ISO 14040:2006. Retrieved from ISO: 
http://www.iso.org/iso/home/store/catalogue_tc/catalogue_detail.htm?csnumber=3
7456 
==PAGE:86==
76 
 
Joakim, K., Niclas, S., & Mats, E. (2013). A novel approach for environmental evaluation of 
landfill mining. Journal of Cleaner Production, (55), 24-34, 24-34. 
Joint Research Centre. (2012). The International Reference Life Cycle Data System 
Handbook. Italy: Joint Research Centre. 
Kjeldsen, P., Scheutz, C., 2014. Reduction of methane emission from landfills using bio-
mitigation systems – from lab tests to full scale implementation. EurAsia Waste Manag. 
Symp. 9. 
Kjeldsen, P., Skov, B., Cassini, F., Scheutz, C., De Shoenmaeker, J., Zishen, 2013. Mitigation 
of methane emissions in a pilot-scale biocover system at the av miljø landfill, denmark: 
system design and gas distribution, … and Landfill …. 
Krook, J., Svensson, N., Eklund, M., 2012a. Landfill mining: A critical review of two decades 
of research. Waste Manag. 32, 513–520. 
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2011.10.015 
Krook, J., Svensson, N., Eklund, M., 2012b. Landfill mining: a critical review of two decades 
of research. Waste Manag. 32, 513–20. doi:10.1016/j.wasman.2011.10.015 
Laurent, A., Clavreul, J., Bernstad, A., Bakas, I., Niero, M., Gentil, E., Christensen, T.H., 
Hauschild, M.Z., 2014. Review of LCA studies of solid waste management systems - 
Part II: Methodological guidance for a better practice. Waste Manag. 34, 589–606. 
doi:10.1016/j.wasman.2013.12.004 
Maier, C., & Calafut, T. (1998). Polypropylene: The Definitive User's Guide and Databook. 
New York: William Andrew. 
Malmgren-Hansen, B., Tønning, K., Cramer, J., Wismann, T., Overgaard, J., & Ottosen, L. M. 
(2002). Genanvendelseseffektivitet af hvidblik- og stålemballager. Copenhagen: 
Miljøstyrelsen, Copenhagen. 
Marella, G., & Raga, R. (2014). Use of the Contingent Valuation Method in the assessment of 
a landfill mining project. Waste Management, 34:1199-1205. 
Nedenskov, J. (2016, April 6). Proposed Scenarios . (O. Udodi, Interviewer) 
Passel, V., Eyckmans, J., Dubois, M., De Gheldere, S., Ang, F., & Jones, T. (2013). The 
economics of enhanced landfill mining: private and societal performance drivers. J 
Clean Production, 55:92-102. 
Pedersen, R.B., Scheutz, C., Kjeldsen, P., Petersen, P.H., 2012. Reduktion af metanemissionen 
fra Klintholm losseplads ved etablering af biocover. 
Reno Sam, Ramboll, 2006. Waste-to-energy in Denmark. Energy. 
Rosendal, R.M., 2014. Country Report – Denmark Landfilling Practices and Regulation 
Situation in Denmark. 
Rosendal, R. M. (2012). Landfill Mining: Excavating and Sorting Waste for Recycling and 
Incineration with Energy Recovery-Gerringe Landfill. Enviro-management 2012 - The 
6th annual international expert conference, At Štrbské Pleso, Slovakia. Slovakia: Danish 
Waste Solution. 
==PAGE:87==
77 
 
Rosendal, R.M., 2009. Landfill Mining - Process, Feasibility, Economy, Benefits and 
Limitations 58. 
UNEP/GRID-Arendal. (2016, April 20). Municipal Solid Waste Composition: For 7 OECD 
Countries and 7 Asian Cities. Retrieved from UNEP/GRID-Arendal Maps and 
Graphics Library: http://www.grida.no/graphicslib/detail/municipal-solid-waste-
composition-for-7-oecd-countries-and-7-asian-cities_f5c4 
VINYLOOP. (2016, May 09). VinyLoop - Smart Recycle Low FootPrint. Retrieved from 
VinyLoop: http://www.vinyloop.com/images/doc/wp/VinyLoop_A4_ENG.pdf 
Van Der Zee, D.J., Achterkamp, M.C., De Visser, B.J., 2004. Assessing the market 
opportunities of landfill mining. Waste Manag. 24, 795–804. 
doi:10.1016/j.wasman.2004.05.004 
Williams, P.T., 2005. Waste Treatment and Disposal. doi:10.1002/0470012668 
 Weidema, B., & Wesnæs, M. S. (1996). Data quality management for life cycle inventories—
an example of using data quality indicators. Journal of Cleaner Production, Volume 4, 
Issues 3–4, 167-174. 
Zhou, C., Gong, Z., Hu, J., Liang, H., & Cao, A. (2014). A cost-benefit analysis of landfill 
mining and material recycling in China. Waste Management, 191-198. 
ZeroWaste Europe. (2016, July 06). The story of Denmark’s transition from incineration to 
Zero Waste. Retrieved from ZeroWaste Europe: 
https://www.zerowasteeurope.eu/2014/01/the-story-of-denmarks-
transition-from-incineration-to-zero-waste/ 
 
 
==PAGE:88==
78 
 
Appendix  
 
1. Material Composition from AV Miljø 
Below are details of the material composition used for the modelling. 
A. Material Fraction that make up 1,035,090kg of combustibles fraction: 
Material 
Percentage 
Amount 
Wood 
75% 
776,317.5 
Metal/stone/soil 
15% 
155,263.5 
Plastic 
10% 
103,509 
 
 
 
 
B. Material fraction that make up 75,280 kg of larger fraction: 
Material 
Percentage 
Amount  
PVC 
15% 
11,292 
Nonferrous metal 
5% 
3,764 
PP/PE 
75% 
56,460 
Stone/soil 
5% 
3,764 
 
C. Estimated distance travelled to the different recycling and incinerating plants: 
Type of truck used 
Distance travelled in 
km/total wet weight 
Metal recycling:  container truck – 30 tons/load 
29 km 
Combustibles: 30 m3 truck – 24 tons/load 
18 km in average 
 
 
==PAGE:89==
79 
 
2. Scenarios as modelled on EASETECH 
Below are screenshots of the different scenarios on EASETECH 
A. Scenario 1 – Do Nothing Scenario 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:90==
80 
 
B. Scenario 2 – Combustibles and Ferrous metal are sorted out and residue, re-landilled 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:91==
81 
 
C. Scenario 3 – Combustibles, Ferrous and non-ferrous metal and plastics are sorted out and residue re-landfilled. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:92==
82 
 
3. External Processes Used in the Modelling 
These are the external processes as modelled on EASETECH 
A. External Process for WtE 
Name 
Amount 
Unit 
Per 
Comment 
District Heating, marginal average, (DK), kWh, 2012 
-0.21667 kWh 
MJ Energy 
78% eff 
Sodium hydroxide (NaOH), RER, ELCD, 1996 - corrected 
1.2/1000 
kg 
kg Total Wet Weight 
  
LIMITED - Activated Carbon 
0.5/1000 
kg 
kg Total Wet Weight 
  
Polyethylene high density granulate (PE-HD), RER, ELCD, 1999 - corrected 
6.00E-07 kg 
kg Total Wet Weight 
  
LIMITED - Hydrated Lime, CaOH2, EU-27, ELCD, 2007 
0.00034 kg 
kg Total Wet Weight 
  
Hydrogen chloride (HCl), gas, RER, ELCD, 2000 - corrected 
0.5/1000 
kg 
kg Total Wet Weight 
  
Process water, RER, ELCD, 2005 - corrected 
0.397 kg 
kg Total Wet Weight 
  
LIMITED - Limestone, CaCO3, EU-27, ELCD, 2006 
11.9/1000 kg 
kg Total Wet Weight 
  
MISSING - TMT 15 
0.000395 kg 
kg Total Wet Weight 
  
LIMITED - Ammonia (NH3) 
2.9/1000 
kg 
kg Total Wet Weight 
  
Marginal Electricity Consumption incl. Fuel Production, Coal, Energy Quality, DK, 
kWh, 2006 
-0.07778 kWh 
MJ Energy 
  
Marginal Electricity Consumption incl. Fuel Production, Coal, Energy Quality, DK, 
kWh, 2006 
0.0857 kWh 
kg Total Wet Weight 
  
 
B. External process for shredding and reprocessing of steel 
Name 
Amount Unit 
Per 
Comment 
Collection Vehicle, 10t Euro3, urban traffic, 1 liter diesel, 
2006 
0.00204 l 
kg Total Wet Weight 
  
Electricity Production, SE, 2001 
0.6 kWh 
kg Total Wet Weight 
  
Hard Coal in Power Plant (prod + comb), EU-15, 2003 
0.00039 MJ 
kg Total Wet Weight 
  
Natural gas, EU-27, ELCD, 2002 - corrected 
0.019 kg 
kg Total Wet Weight 
  
Oxygen, EU-27, ELCD, 2005 - corrected 
0.014 kg 
kg Total Wet Weight 
  
==PAGE:93==
83 
 
Fuel Oil (Light) in Industry Burner (prod + comb), 1-
100MW, DK, 1990 
1.10E-07 kg 
kg Total Wet Weight 
  
Steel Sheets (97.75% primary), Sweden, 2008 
-0.87 kg 
kg Total Wet Weight 
Substitution 
87% 
Water from Waterwork, Sweden, 2008 
0.36 kg 
kg Total Wet Weight 
  
 
C. External process for PE recycling 
Name 
Amount Unit 
Per 
Marginal Electricity Consumption incl. Fuel Production, Coal, Energy Quality, DK, kWh, 
2006 
0.76 kWh 
kg Total Wet 
Weight 
Production and Combustion of Diesel Oil in Truck, EU2, 1998 
0.00047 kg 
kg Total Wet 
Weight 
Waste incineration of plastics (PE, PP, PS, PB), EU-27, ELCD, 2006 - corrected 
0.072 kg 
kg Total Wet 
Weight 
Waste incineration of paper fraction in municipal solid waste (MSW), EU-27, ELCD, 2006 - 
corrected v2 
0.0018 kg 
kg Total Wet 
Weight 
Process water, RER, ELCD, 2005 - corrected 
2.6 kg 
kg Total Wet 
Weight 
Natural Gas in Industry Burner (prod + comb), >100 kW, 1996 
0.89 MJ 
kg Total Wet 
Weight 
Polyethylene high density granulate (PE-HD), RER, ELCD, 1999 - corrected 
-0.5 kg 
kg Total Wet 
Weight 
 
D. External Process for Aluminium recycling 
Name 
Amount Unit 
Per 
Comment 
Water from Waterwork, Sweden, 2008 
0.45 kg 
kg Total Wet Weight 
  
Electricity Production, SE, 2001 
0.18 kWh 
kg Total Wet Weight 
  
LIMITED - Limestone, CaCO3, EU-27, ELCD, 2006 
0.0047 kg 
kg Total Wet Weight 
  
==PAGE:94==
84 
 
Sodium chloride (NaCl), RER, ELCD, 1996 - corrected 
8.80E-02 kg 
kg Total Wet Weight 
  
Aluminum, Al (Primary), World average, 2005 
-0.94 kg 
kg Total Wet Weight 
Substitution 
94% 
Fuel Oil (Light) in Industry Burner (prod + comb), 1-100MW, DK, 
1990 
0.019 kg 
kg Total Wet Weight 
  
Heavy fuel oil, EU-15, ELCD, 2003 - corrected 
0.019 kg 
kg Total Wet Weight 
  
Natural Gas (prod + comb), (for incinerators), Norway, 1994 
1.2 MJ 
kg Total Wet Weight 
  
 
E. External Process for  Amager Bakke incinerator 
Parameter 
Unit 
Value 
Uncertainty range 
Min 
Max 
% 
Electricity recovery (average) 
% 
28 
24.3 
29.7 
± 2 
Heat recovery (average) 
% 
78 
70.2 
85.8 
± 5 
Electricity consumption 
kWh/t waste 
85.7 
81.4 
90.0 
± 5 
Parameter 
Unit 
Value 
Uncertainty range 
Min 
Max 
% 
NaOH 
kg/t waste 
1.2 
1.17 
1.29 
± 5 
Lime CaCO3 
kg/t waste 
11.9 
11.27 
12.45 
± 5 
NH3 
kg/t waste 
2.9 
2.72 
3.00 
± 5 
HCI 
kg/t waste 
0.5 
0.48 
0.53 
± 5 
Activated carbon 
kg/t waste 
0.5 
0.48 
0.53 
± 5 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:95==
85 
 
F. Elementary Exchanges for Amager Bakke incinerator  
Air emissions to the environment, Amager Bakke incinerator 
Parameter 
Unit 
Value 
Uncertainty range 
Min 
Max 
% 
Carbon monoxide 
kg/t waste 
2.56E-02 
2.05E-02 
3.07E-02 
± 20 
Dust 
kg/t waste 
2.16E-03 
1.73E-03 
2.59E-03 
± 20 
HCl 
kg/t waste 
2.16E-03 
1.73E-03 
2.59E-03 
± 20 
HF 
kg/t waste 
2.16E-04 
1.73E-04 
2.59E-04 
± 20 
Manganese 
kg/t waste 
1.12E-02 
8.96E-03 
1.34E-02 
± 20 
NH3 
kg/t waste 
4.31E-03 
3.45E-03 
5.17E-03 
± 20 
Nickel 
kg/t waste 
3.47E-06 
2.78E-06 
4.16E-06 
± 20 
Nitrogen Oxides (NOx) 
kg/t waste 
7.52E-02 
6.02E-02 
9.02E-02 
± 20 
PAH (B[a]P-eq) 
kg/t waste 
4.31E-06 
3.45E-06 
5.17E-06 
± 20 
PCDD/F 
kg/t waste 
4.31E-11 
3.45E-11 
5.17E-11 
± 20 
SO2/SO3 
kg/t waste 
8.63E-03 
6.90E-03 
1.04E-02 
± 20 
 
Emissions to water, Amager Bakke incinerator 
Parameter 
Unit 
Value 
Uncertainty range 
Min 
Max 
% 
Antimony 
kg/t waste 
8.80E-06 
7.04E-06 
1.06E-05 
± 20 
Arsenic 
kg/t waste 
5.60E-07 
4.48E-07 
6.72E-07 
± 20 
Barium 
kg/t waste 
7.20E-06 
5.76E-06 
8.64E-06 
± 20 
Cadmium 
kg/t waste 
4.00E-08 
3.20E-08 
4.80E-08 
± 20 
Calcium 
kg/t waste 
4.16E-02 
3.33E-02 
4.99E-02 
± 20 
Chloride 
kg/t waste 
1.46E-01 
1.17E-01 
1.75E-01 
± 20 
Chromium 
kg/t waste 
4.48E-06 
3.58E-06 
5.38E-06 
± 20 
Cobalt 
kg/t waste 
4.00E-08 
3.20E-08 
4.80E-08 
± 20 
Copper 
kg/t waste 
2.00E-04 
1.60E-04 
2.40E-04 
± 20 
Fluoride 
kg/t waste 
2.08E-03 
1.66E-03 
2.50E-03 
± 20 
Iron 
kg/t waste 
4.00E-05 
3.20E-05 
4.80E-05 
± 20 
Lead 
kg/t waste 
5.60E-07 
4.48E-07 
6.72E-07 
± 20 
==PAGE:96==
86 
 
Magnesium 
kg/t waste 
2.56E-05 
2.05E-05 
3.07E-05 
± 20 
Manganese 
kg/t waste 
6.40E-07 
5.12E-07 
7.68E-07 
± 20 
Mercury 
kg/t waste 
1.60E-08 
1.28E-08 
1.92E-08 
± 20 
Molybdenum 
kg/t waste 
7.20E-05 
5.76E-05 
8.64E-05 
± 20 
Nickel 
kg/t waste 
1.68E-06 
1.34E-06 
2.02E-06 
± 20 
Selenium 
kg/t waste 
1.12E-06 
8.96E-07 
1.34E-06 
± 20 
Silicon 
kg/t waste 
2.40E-04 
1.92E-04 
2.88E-04 
± 20 
Zinc 
kg/t waste 
2.56E-06 
2.05E-06 
3.07E-06 
± 20 
 
G. External Process for the reconstruction of landfill  (Brogaard et al., 2013) 
Process Name 
Amount 
Unit 
Per 
Marginal Electricity Consumption incl. Fuel 
Production, Coal, Energy Quality, DK, kWh, 2006 
0.008*0.05 
kWh 
kg Total Wet 
Weight 
Production and Combustion of Diesel Oil in Truck, 
EU2, 1998 
0.24*0.84*0.05/1000 
kg 
kg Total Wet 
Weight 
Steel Sheets (97.75% primary), Sweden, 2008 
0.00014*0.05 
kg 
kg Total Wet 
Weight 
Aluminium, Al (Primary), World average, 2005 
5.8E-08*0.05 
kg 
kg Total Wet 
Weight 
Polyvinylchloride resin (S-PVC), RER, ELCD, 1998 - 
corrected 
1E-05*0.05 
kg 
kg Total Wet 
Weight 
Polypropylene fibres (PP), EU-27, ELCD, 2005 - 
corrected 
4E-08*0.05 
kg 
kg Total Wet 
Weight 
Polyethylene high density granulate (PE-HD), RER, 
ELCD, 1999 - corrected 
0.00023*0.05 
kg 
kg Total Wet 
Weight 
 
 
 
 
Name 
Compartment 
Sub compartment 
Amount 
Unit 
Per 
Gravel, in ground 
natural resource 
in ground 
0.18*0.05 
kg 
kg Total Wet 
Weight 
Clay, unspecified, in ground 
natural resource 
in ground 
0.082*0.05 
kg 
kg Total Wet 
Weight 
Copper, 0.99% in sulfide, Cu 0.36% 
and Mo 8.2E-3% in crude ore, in 
ground 
natural resource 
in ground 
9.87E-09*0.05 
kg 
kg Total Wet 
Weight 
==PAGE:97==
87 
 
H.  Capital goods for building a new landfill (Brogaard et al., 2013) 
Process Name 
Amount 
Unit 
Per 
Comment 
cable production, unspecified 
1.15E-06 
m 
kg Total Wet 
Weight 
  
mastic asphalt production 
0.000426 
kg 
kg Total Wet 
Weight 
  
clay, at mine, CH 
0.0823 
kg 
kg Total Wet 
Weight 
  
concrete block production 
0.00102 
kg 
kg Total Wet 
Weight 
  
steel production, chromium steel 18/8, hot rolled 
8.68E-05 
kg 
kg Total Wet 
Weight 
  
Steel Sheets (97.75% primary), Sweden, 2008 
4.99E-05 
kg 
kg Total Wet 
Weight 
  
Aluminum, Al (Primary), World average, 2005 
5.84E-08 
kg 
kg Total Wet 
Weight 
  
copper production, primary 
9.87E-09 
kg 
kg Total Wet 
Weight 
  
Polypropylene fibres (PP), EU-27, ELCD, 2005 - corrected 
4.02E-08 
kg 
kg Total Wet 
Weight 
  
Polyvinylchloride resin (S-PVC), RER, ELCD, 1998 - corrected 
9.67E-06 
kg 
kg Total Wet 
Weight 
  
Road, Long haul truck, Euro3, 25t, Generic, 2006 
0.000116+1.33E-06 
l 
kg Total Wet 
Weight 
  
Wheel loader, combustion 1L of diesel, 2003/2011 
0.000126 
l 
kg Total Wet 
Weight 
  
Concrete reuse 
4.95E-05 
kg 
kg Total Wet 
Weight 
  
Steel recycling 
7.59E-05 
kg 
kg Total Wet 
Weight 
  
building construction, hall, steel construction 
8.66E-08/50*10 
m2 
kg Total Wet 
Weight 
50 years of lifetime 10 years of use 
building construction, multi-storey 
3.46E-07/80*10 
m3 
kg Total Wet 
Weight 
80 years of lifetime 10 years of use 
Cable recycling 
1.10E-06 
m 
kg Total Wet 
Weight 
  
==PAGE:98==
88 
 
polyethylene, HDPE, granulate, at plant v2, RER 
0.000233 
kg 
kg Total Wet 
Weight 
  
gravel production, crushed 
0.18 
kg 
kg Total Wet 
Weight 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:99==
89 
 
4. Characterised Impact Potential for the different Scenarios 
The graphs and table below shows the characterised potential impacts for the different scenarios. 
 
A. Scenario 1  
 
-700
-600
-500
-400
-300
-200
-100
0
100
200
Characterised Impact potential - Scenario 1
Leachate - Treatment - Avedøre WWTP (3a)
emission to surface water
Leachate - Generation (1) Medium precipitation
area
Leachate and soil - Storage of carbon (2b)
Leachate - Collection system (2a) Medium
precipitation area
LFG - Treatment with biofilter (4d)
LFG - Landfill gas generation (1) - moderate
conditions
Excavated Waste
==PAGE:100==
90 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Global waTerrestrialTerrestrialPhotochemStratospheHuman toxHuman toxIonising raFreshwateMarine euEcotoxicityResourcesResourcesParticulateTerrestrial
Excavated Waste
LFG - Landfill gas generation (1) - moderate conditions
LFG - Treatment with biofilter (4d)
150.8
0
0
0.06112
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Leachate - Collection system (2a) Medium precipitation area
Leachate and soil - Storage of carbon (2
-645.1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Leachate - Generation (1) Medium precipitation area
Leachate - Treatment - Avedøre WWTP
1.257
0.05755 0.005504 0.004895 3.86E-10 5.57E-08 3.81E-06 0.001053 0.000294
0.1507
73.03
13.94 1.33E-07 0.002728
0.04393
==PAGE:101==
91 
 
B. Scenario 2 
 
 
 
-6000
-5000
-4000
-3000
-2000
-1000
0
1000
Characterised impact potential - scenario 2
Ferrous Metal recycle
Landfill
WtE
Excavation and sorting process
Grouped Processes
Global wa Terrestria Terrestria PhotochemStratospheHuman toxHuman toxIonising raFreshwateMarine euEcotoxicityResourcesResourcesParticulateTerrestrial
Excavation and sorting process
8.862
2.894
0.252
0.2378 8.47E-09 1.27E-10 2.32E-08
0.0222 2.13E-06
0.02304
0.1616
117.6 2.23E-05
0.134
2.209
WtE
-574.442 -1.49996 -4.10799 -1.05823 -6.90E-08 3.03E-08 -1.80E-06 -0.19859 3.48E-06 -0.37705 7.291981 -5109.96 -7.40E-05 -0.07243 -1.13994
Landfill
-118.113 0.033906 0.004732
0.03993 3.25E-10 3.24E-08 2.21E-06 0.000883 0.000171
0.08763
42.3913
14.044 9.43E-08 0.001605 0.025877
Ferrous Metal recycle
-28.0053 -0.05337 -0.10841 -0.02846 -2.90E-09 -7.60E-10 1.11E-07 -0.00817 -6.20E-08 -0.00932 0.410005 -187.528 -2.30E-05 -0.00278
-0.0407
==PAGE:102==
92 
 
 
C. Scenario 3 
 
 
-7000
-6000
-5000
-4000
-3000
-2000
-1000
0
1000
Characterised Impact Potential - scenario 3
Non ferrous metal recycle
Ferrous metal recycle
PP recycling
PVC recycling
Landfill
WtE
Excavation and sorting
==PAGE:103==
93 
 
Global wa Terrestria Terrestria PhotochemStratospheHuman toxHuman toxIonising raFreshwateMarine euEcotoxicityResourcesResourcesParticulateTerrestrial
Excavation and sorting
8.863
2.41
0.251
0.2076
8.47E-09
1.27E-10
2.32E-08
0.0222
2.13E-06
0.02295
0.1617
117.6
2.23E-05
0.1114
1.839
WtE
-574.442
-1.49996
-4.10799
-1.05823 -6.90E-08
3.03E-08 -1.80E-06
-0.19859
3.48E-06
-0.37705 7.291981
-5109.96 -7.40E-05
-0.07243
-1.13994
Landfill
-117.859 0.031981 0.004474 0.039746
3.07E-10
3.05E-08
2.09E-06 0.000834 0.000161 0.082673 39.99123
13.286
8.90E-08 0.001515 0.024408
PVC recycling
-0.12404
-0.01859
-0.02056
-0.01828 -3.00E-08
2.49E-10
1.31E-08
-0.07779 -1.80E-06
-0.00191
-0.00148
-62.562 -7.00E-07
-0.00096
-0.01416
PP recycling
-5.6806
-0.12033
-0.12557
-0.05661 -1.00E-06 -4.40E-09 -2.40E-07
-2.71794 -1.60E-05
-0.0121
-1.06104
-335.243
-0.00025
-0.00619
-0.09167
Ferrous metal recycle
-28.0053
-0.05337
-0.10841
-0.02846 -2.90E-09 -7.60E-10
1.11E-07
-0.00817 -6.20E-08
-0.00932 0.410005
-187.528 -2.30E-05
-0.00278
-0.0407
Non ferrous metal recycle
-23.1856
-0.21463
-0.17577
-0.05593 -2.20E-06 -1.30E-08 -1.20E-06
-4.88994 -1.10E-05
-0.0161
-1.70704
-287.243 -6.20E-05
-0.01815
-0.16364
==PAGE:104==
94 
 
5. Normalised Impact Potential for the different scenarios 
The graphs below show the complete normalised impact for the different scenario 
A. Scenario 1 
 
 
B. Scenario 2 
 
-0,2
-0,15
-0,1
-0,05
0
0,05
0,1
0,15
0,2
0,25
PE/RF
Normalised Impact Potential Scenario 1
LFG - Biocover
WWTP Avedore
Carbon storage
Net
-0,1
-0,08
-0,06
-0,04
-0,02
0
0,02
0,04
0,06
0,08
0,1
PE/RF
Normalised Impact Potential
Ferrous Metal recycle
Landfill
WtE
Excavation and sorting process
==PAGE:105==
95 
 
In scenario 2, the estimated benefits associated with avoided emissions which is 
connected with the replacement of primary productions of materials and energy, are 
namely NOx, Ammonia (for TEP, MEP), Methane and CO2 fossil (GWP) and Coal and 
oil (resource depletion fossil). With regards to burdens (i.e. positive impacts), 
significant contributions originate especially from WWTP (treatment of leachate from 
bottom ash and re-landfilling. The most significant emissions are SOx and NOx (for 
Acidification), Phosphate (for FEP), Chromium VI and Arsenic (for Human Toxicity, 
Carcinogenic), Arsenic and Zinc (for Human Toxicity, non-Carcinogenic) and Zinc 
and Zinc ion (for Eco-toxicity). 
 
C. Scenario 3 
 
For scenario 3, net savings for HTPnc from ferrous and nonferrous metal recycling 
and WtE. Recycling of PVC and PP results in a savings for all impact category with 
exception of HTPc and HTPnc, where PVC recycle causes a burden due to the release 
of chromium VI, mercury and zinc ion.   
Estimated benefits associated with avoided emissions connected with the replacement 
of primary productions of materials and energy, namely NOx, Ammonia (for TEP, 
-0,12
-0,1
-0,08
-0,06
-0,04
-0,02
0
0,02
0,04
0,06
0,08
0,1
Global warming
Terrestrial acidification
Terrestrial eutrophication
Photochemical oxidant…
Stratospheric ozone…
Human toxicity,…
Human toxicity, non-…
Ionising radiation
Freshwater eutrophication
Marine eutrophication
Ecotoxicity
Resources, depletion of…
Resources, depletion of…
Particulate matter,
PE/RF
Normalised Impact Scenario 3
Non ferrous metal recycle
Ferrous metal recycle
PP recycling
PVC recycling
Landfill
WtE
Excavation and sorting
==PAGE:106==
96 
 
MEP), Mercury and Arsenic (for HTPnc) CO2 and Methane fossil (GWP) and Coal and 
oil (resource depletion fossil). With regards to burdens (i.e. positive impacts), 
significant contributions originate especially from WWTP. The most significant 
emissions are SOx and NOx (for Acidification), Phosphate (for FEP), Chromium VI 
and Arsenic (for Human Toxicity, Carcinogenic) and Zinc and Zinc ion (for 
Ecotoxicity). 
D. Overall Normalised Result for the three scenarios 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-0,15
-0,1
-0,05
0
0,05
0,1
0,15
PE/RF
Comparison for the three scenarios
PVC exluded
PVC included
Baseline
==PAGE:107==
97 
 
6. Normalised Potential Impact from building a new landfill 
Gives detail information on the environmental impact associated with constructing a 
new landfill 
 
B. Normalized Potential impact showing the benefits of avoided landfill construction 
  
GWP 
TAP 
TEP 
HTPc 
HTPnc 
FEP 
MEP 
Eco-
toxicity 
Fossil 
depletion 
Scenario 1 
-0.0609 
0.00116 
4.79E-05 0.001028 0.003464 0.000475 
0.01607 
0.1098 
0.000224 
Scenario 1A 
-0.06042 0.001742 0.000721 0.002632 0.003936 0.000733 0.016793 0.112274 
0.002012 
Scenario 2A 
-0.0881 0.027477 
-0.03471 0.000486 
0.00033 0.000179 
-0.02969 0.074561 
-0.08352 
Scenario 2 
-0.0879 0.027716 
-0.03444 0.001144 0.000524 0.000284 
-0.02939 0.075576 
-0.08279 
Scenario 3A 
-0.09165 0.010531 
-0.03755 
8.1E-05 
-0.00107 0.000109 
-0.03347 0.066701 
-0.09461 
Scenario 3 
-0.09144 0.010787 
-0.03725 0.000787 
-0.00086 0.000223 
-0.03315 
0.06779 
-0.09382 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0,00E+00
2,00E-03
4,00E-03
6,00E-03
8,00E-03
1,00E-02
1,20E-02
1,40E-02
1,60E-02
1,80E-02
2,00E-02
PE/RF
Normalised Potential Impact from Building a new 
landfil
Plastic
Transport
Steel and other metals
Gravel
Concrete
Clay
Cables and roads
Buildings at landfill
==PAGE:108==
98 
 
7. Perturbation Analysis 
Detailed information as regards the perturbation analysis conducted. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Perturbation analysis for Scenario 3 
  
GWP TAP 
TEP 
HTPc 
HTPnc FEP 
MEP 
Eco-
toxicity 
Depletion 
of abiotic 
resource, 
Fossil 
electricity recovery 
efficiency 
0.65 
-1.25 
0.49 
-0.82 
4.46 
-0.03 
0.61 
-0.02 
0.91 
heat recovery efficiency 
0.27 
-1.61 
0.52 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.65 
0.00 
0.00 
substitution ratio PVC 
0.01 
-0.04 
0.01 
0.00 
0.01 
-0.01 
0.01 
0.00 
0.02 
substitution ratio PP 
0.04 
-0.23 
0.04 
-0.12 
0.33 
-0.12 
0.06 
-0.02 
0.09 
substitution ratio ferrous 
metal 
0.04 
-0.10 
0.03 
-0.13 
0.63 
0.00 
0.03 
0.00 
0.03 
substitution ration 
nonferrous metal 
0.03 
-0.41 
0.04 
-0.32 
1.23 
-0.08 
0.05 
-0.04 
0.05 
biocover efficiency 
0.75 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
distance travelled from 
landfill to plastic 
recycling centre 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
Fuel consumption by 
excavator A 
0.00 
3.17 
-0.02 
0.00 
-0.01 
0.00 
-0.02 
0.00 
-0.01 
Perturbation analysis for scenario 2 
  
GWP TAP 
TEP 
HTPc 
HTPnc 
FEP 
MEP 
Ecotoxici
ty 
Depletion of 
abiotic 
resource, Fossil 
 electricity recovery 
efficiency 
0.67 
-0.49 
0.53 
-0.56 
-7.33 
-0.02 
0.69 
-0.02 
1.03 
heat recovery 
efficiency 
0.28 
-0.63 
0.56 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.73 
0.00 
0.00 
substitution ratio 
ferrous metal 
0.04 
-0.04 
0.03 
-0.09 
-1.04 
0.00 
0.04 
0.00 
0.04 
biocover efficiency 
0.78 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
Fuel consumption by 
excavator A 
0.00 
1.23 
-0.02 
0.00 
0.01 
0.00 
-0.02 
0.00 
-0.01 
==PAGE:109==
99 
 
8. Scenario Analysis 
A detailed description of results obtained from scenario analysis are presented below 
A. Normalised impact potential for scenario analysis 
  
GWP 
TAP 
TEP 
HTPc 
HTPnc 
FEP 
MEP 
Eco-
toxicity 
Fossil 
depletion 
Scenario 3 
-0.0914 
0.0108 
-0.0373 
0.0008 
-0.0009 
0.0002 
-0.0331 
0.0678 
-0.0938 
Current Electricity 
Mix 
-0.0475 
0.0194 
-0.0269 
-0.0082 
0.0000 
-0.0030 
-0.0207 
0.0568 
-0.0345 
Wind Electricity 
-0.0331 
0.0236 
-0.0196 
-0.0105 
0.0005 
-0.0011 
-0.0135 
0.0555 
-0.0102 
Heat from Biomass 
-0.0682 
0.0260 
-0.0222 
-0.0003 
-0.0011 
0.0001 
-0.0154 
0.0664 
-0.0949 
Electricity sorting 
-0.0917 
0.0106 
-0.0378 
0.0017 
-0.0007 
0.0003 
-0.0337 
0.0688 
-0.0942 
Scenario 1 
-0.0609 
0.00116 
4.79E-
05 
0.001028 0.003464 0.000475 
0.01607 
0.1098 
0.000224 
For eco-toxicity, HTPc and FEP, the potential burden reduced when compared to 
scenario 3 and this is because, the use of renewable energy for electricity is cleaner 
when compared to coal and oil produced electricity. For TAP, it’s a bit complex and 
this is because in scenario 3, the recovery of electricity gave a savings of -0.0135PE 
which in turn reduced the magnitude of the impact caused by excavation and sorting 
process but in the case of the renewable energy, the savings were -0.000773 and -
0.004909 for wind electricity and current electricity mix respectively. This in turn 
didn’t have much effect on the amount of impact caused by excavation and sorting.  
This is a mathematical illustration; 
For TAP(PE): Major Savings (electricity recovery) + Major impact (excavation and 
sorting process) = Overall result  
For scenario 3:  -0.0135 + 0.04859 = 0.03509PE 
For wind electricity: -0.000773 + 0.04859 = 0.047817PE 
For current electricity mix: -0.004909 + 0.04859 = 0.043681PE 
From the mathematically illustration, it shows that there is increased impact for TAP 
and this same principle applies to HTPnc. 
 
 
