==PAGE:1==
Master thesis:
Modelling of Second Harmonic Generation With
Arbitrary Beams
By Mathias Johnsen
Supervisors:
Ole Bjarlin,
ojen@fotonik.dtu.dk
Anders Kragh Hansen,
ankrh@fotonik.dtu.dk
Mathias Christensen,
matchr@fotonik.dtu.dk
July 15, 2016
==PAGE:2==
Contents
1
Abstract
3
2
Resume
3
3
Introduction
4
4
Theory
5
4.1
Propagation of light
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4.2
Polarization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4.3
Three Wave Mixing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.4
Second Harmonic Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.5
Phase Matching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4.6
Boyd-Kleinman Theory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.7
The Non-Linear Coeﬃcient
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
5
Simulation
13
5.1
Propagation of Electromagnetic Fields . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
5.2
Measuring Beam Width . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5.3
Modeling Lenses
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5.4
Resizing the Window . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5.5
Gaussian Beams
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.5.1
Modeling The Non-Linear Crystal
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.5.2
Beam Quality Parameter M2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.6
Hermite Gaussian Beams
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.7
Tapered Diode Laser Beams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.8
Focusing by Spherical Lenses
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.9
Focusing using cylindrical lenses
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6
Experimental Measurements
35
6.1
The Tapered Diode Laser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.2
Experimental Set-up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.3
Experimental Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.4
Phase Matching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
7
Discussion
46
7.1
Gaussian Beams
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
7.2
Hermite Gaussian Beams
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
1
==PAGE:3==
7.3
Tapered Diode Laser Beams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
8
Conclusion and Outlook
50
Appendices
53
A Data sheet of the non-linear crystal
53
B Data sheet of the tapered diode laser
57
C Data sheet for the thermistor
60
==PAGE:4==
1
Abstract
This thesis presents a numerical tool for simulation of second harmonic generation of arbitrary
beams. The numerical tool is able to simulate arbitrary beams through numerical modeling
in Matlab. The simulation spatially divides the beam into smaller pixels. This enables each
pixel to be modeled as a plane wave. The program has been tested by simulating Gaussian
beams and comparing the results to the theory of Boyd and Kleinman with excellent agreement.
The simulation has furthermore examined Hermite Guassian beams, where the results of key
processes such as the beam quality parameter and the mode of the second harmonic generated
beam have corresponded satisfactorily with the theory.
The complex beam of a tapered diode laser have been used to test the numerical tool. A tapered
diode laser beam was measured experimentally and used for simulations. The program has been
able to correctly identify the set of focusing lenses yielding the highest generated veriﬁed by
experimental measurements.
2
Resume
I denne afhandling præsenteres et numerisk værktøj til simulering af anden harmonisk generation
af arbitrære str˚aler.
Det numeriske værktøj er i stand til at simulere arbitrære str˚aler ved
modelering i Matlab. Simuleringen deler str˚alen rumligt op i mindre pixels, der tillader hver pixel
at blive modelleret som en plan bølge. Programmet er blevet testet ved at simulere Gaussiske
str˚aler og sammenligne resultaterne med Boyd og Kleinmans teori med god overensstemmelse. I
simuleringen er der ydermere blevet undersøgt Hermitisk Gaussiske str˚aler, herunder væsentlige
processer som kvaliteten af str˚alen og moden for det genererede lys. Resultaterne har været i
overenstemmelse med teori.
Den komplekse str˚ale fra en taperet diode laser er blevet brugt til at teste programmet. En
tapereret diode laser er blevet m˚alt i laboratoriet og brugt i simuleringerne. Programmet har
været i stand til at identiﬁcere linserne der har resulteret i den højeste genereret eﬀekt. Den
optimale sammensætning af linser er blevet bekræftet igennem eksperimentelle m˚alinger.
3
==PAGE:5==
3
Introduction
High power Green lasers capable of emitting in the watts regime with a near diﬀraction limited
beam have many interesting applications. An example is medical imaging or laser coagulation[1]
where it is used to treat a number of diﬀerent eye diseases. Green diode lasers are however
diﬃcult to produce due to poor materials. One way of solving this problem is to produce a
cheap eﬃcient laser, e.g. an infrared diode laser and converting the light to green laser light.
Infrared light can be converted into green light through a non-linear process. It is essential for
such a process that the infrared light has a high intensity. High intensity is obtained by focusing
the laser light into a small spot within a non-linear crystal, see ﬁgure 1.
Figure 1: A schematic view showing the process of focusing infrared light into a non-linear crystal
creating green light.
Green lasers are typically made by generating green light in a non-linear crystal pumped
by an infrared laser. Most pump lasers are required to produce high power. Solid state lasers
as Nd:YAG lasers are widely used, however they are large, expensive and can only be pumped
optically. Semiconductor diode lasers are cheap, small, can be electrically pumped, have a very
high gain and can easily produce high output powers. Too high power will however burn the facet
of the laser. To overcome this problem a broad area laser can be built by essentially widening
the area of the laser. This solution however greatly reduces the beam quality. To counteract
the reduction of the beam quality, the laser can be split into two sections, one narrow section
producing the signal and one tapered section amplifying the signal. A diode laser with a tapered
amplifying section is called a tapered diode laser. The tapered diode laser does not have perfect
beam quality but is better than broad area lasers. A sketch of a tapered diode laser is presented
in ﬁgure 2. [2]
A special case of non-linear interaction between light and a non-linear crystal is second harmonic
generation where two incoming photons with the frequency ω1 creates a new photon with twice
the frequency: ω1 + ω1 = ω2. Non-linear processes of any arbitrary beam cannot be calculated
analytically. Traditionally, theory of second harmonic generation (SHG) assumes plane waves or
Gaussian shaped laser beams, which is far from the emitted beam of the tapered diode lasers.
Software for simulating this process is not readily at hand. Therefore, the aim of this thesis is
4
==PAGE:6==
Figure 2: Schematic view of a tapered diode laser. Image taken from [2]
to create a program that can simulate second harmonic generation of arbitrary laser beams, in
order to ﬁnd the optimum conditions for generating green light.
For the simulation, the experimental set-up seen on ﬁgure 1, is build virtually. A monochromatic
infrared beam is deﬁned in the program at z = 0 where the laser is located. From that point
the light is propagated towards a lens focusing the light into the non-linear crystal. Inside the
crystal, the infrared beam generates a green beam governed by a set of coupled diﬀerential
equations. The two beams are propagated out of the crystal and their power is measured.
Firstly, the program will be validated by simulating Gaussian beams. The numerical results will
be compared with results of Boyd and Kleinman. Thereafter second harmonic generation of a
tapered diode laser beam will be simulated to identify the set of focusing lenses resulting in the
highest SHG power. Lastly, the results from the simulation will be compared to results of second
harmonic generation of a tapered diode laser in the laboratory.
4
Theory
The chapter will present and derive the necessary equations used to code the program. A sketch
of the set-up used for converting infrared light to green light was presented in ﬁgure 1 where the
essentials of SHG are visualized. The program will simulate these essential parts. The simulation
can be split into 4 key parts:
Propagation of light An essential part of the simulation is propagating a light beam repre-
sented as an electromagnetic ﬁeld across a distance. The axis of the propagation is modeled
as a series of discrete points separated by a ﬁxed distance, ∆z. To move from one point
to another, the electromagnetic ﬁeld will be propagated an integer number of ∆z.
Refraction of light in a lens Generating light by non-linear optical eﬀects require high in-
tensity. Lenses are therefore used to focus the light beam at the center of the crystal. In
order to ﬁnd the optimal conditions for generating green light, several diﬀerent lenses will
be used and modeled in the program.
5
==PAGE:7==
The interaction of light in a non-linear medium The non-linear process in the simulation
is second harmonic generation (SHG). Second harmonic generation is the process of which
an electromagnetic ﬁeld interacts with a non-linear material to generate a new electro-
magnetic ﬁeld. Two lower energy photons generates a photon of double that frequency:
ω1 + ω1 = ω2. SHG is a special case of a more general non-linear process called three wave
mixing.
Phase Matching In order to generate a strong SHG ﬁeld the structure of the non-linear crystal
is important. The structuring is responsible for phase matching the two electromagnetic
ﬁelds. Phase matching means that the generated wave adds up in phase throughout the
length of the crystal, overcoming dispersion. Phase matching is controlled by adjusting
the temperature of the crystal.
Firstly, the transfer function used to propagate light is derived. Thereafter the general theory
of three wave mixing will be presented, followed by the theory of second harmonic generation.
The theory of phase matching is described and lastly the main results of Boyd and Kleinman
will be presented. Boyd-Kleinman were the ﬁrst to accurately model SHG of focused Gaussian
beams. The results of their work will be used to validate the simulations.
4.1
Propagation of light
The propagation of light is described by the transfer function approach. As the simulations
are of single frequency lasers, monochromatic ﬁelds are propagated an arbitrary distance, d.
The propagation is linear due to the Helmholtz equation being linear. The propagation is also
invariant to shifts for homogeneous media. Such a system can be described by a transfer function.
Let the input to the linear system be a harmonic input function f(x, y) corresponding to a plane
wave [3]
f(x, y) = A exp(i(kxx + kyy + kzz))
(1)
where A is the amplitude of the wave wit the wave vector and k = (kx, ky, kz), k the wave
number k =
q
k2x + k2y + k2z = 2π
λ and λ the wavelength. Likewise for the output of the system
a distance d away is written as
g(x, y) = A exp(i(kxx + kyy + kzd))
(2)
By rewriting the wave vectors to spatial frequencies νx = 1/λx and νy = 1/λy kz is rewritten
kz =
q
k2 −k2x −k2y = 2π
q
λ−2 −ν2x −ν2y
(3)
To ﬁnd the transfer function, H, the output ﬁeld is divided by the input ﬁeld
H(νx, νy) = exp

id
q
λ−2 −ν2x −ν2y

(4)
6
==PAGE:8==
For the spatial frequencies ν2
x+ν2
y < λ−2 the exponential function is imaginary and the magnitude
remains 1. The phase is however changing as it propagates. At high spatial frequencies, ν2
x+ν2
y >
λ−2, the square root becomes imaginary leaving the exponent real but negative, causing the ﬁeld
to attenuate and the wave to be an evanescent wave. λ is therefore named the cut-oﬀfrequency
as it distinguishes propagating and evanescent waves.
If the input function, f(x, y) only contains small spatial frequencies compared to the cut-oﬀ
frequency, the plane wave will have a small angle, θ, with the propagation axis:
θ2 = θ2
x + θ2
y ≈λ2(ν2
x + ν2
y)
(5)
and the phase factor can be rewritten
2πd
q
λ−2 −ν2x −ν2y = 2π d
λ
p
1 −θ2
(6)
By performing a Taylor expansion one obtains
2π d
λ
p
1 −θ2 ≈2π d
λ

1 −θ2
2 + θ4
8

(7)
By neglecting higher order terms and inserting θ the transfer function for the Fresnel approxi-
mation is
H(νx, νy) ≈exp(−jkd) exp(jπλd(ν2
x + ν2
y))
(8)
Thus a linear transfer function for propagating waves is found. For a monochromatic input wave
within the cut-oﬀfrequency, the outgoing electrical ﬁeld, g(x, y) can be calculated by multiplying
the incoming electromagnetic ﬁeld f(x, y) with the transfer function:
g(x, y) = H(νx, νy)f(x, y)
(9)
4.2
Polarization
Polarization of a material is key to understanding non-linear eﬀects. Consider the simplest case:
A hydrogen atom consisting of a positively charged proton and a negatively charged electron
bound to the proton. This system is modeled as a dipole. Let the proton have the charge q1 and
position r1 and the electron the charge q2 and position r2. The dipole moment vector is then
given by
p = q1r1 + q2r2
(10)
In a neutral material, this sum should be extended for all dipoles existing in the material. If
all the dipoles are orientated along the same direction, e.g. if an electric ﬁeld is applied to the
material, the total induced polarization vector P of N dipoles per unit volume is described by
P = Np
(11)
7
==PAGE:9==
For weak electric ﬁelds the dipole moment is linearly dependent on the electromagnetic ﬁeld
by the relation P = ϵ0χ(1)E, where ϵ0 is the permittivity of free space and χ(1) is the linear
susceptibility of a material. For stronger electric ﬁelds the relation is non-linear, and higher
orders of polarization occurs.
4.3
Three Wave Mixing
Three wave mixing is the process of which three waves interact with a non-linear material
inducing a polarization in the material. The induced polarization can emit light at a speciﬁc
frequency determined by the incoming ﬁelds. If all three ﬁelds are present, one or two of them
will be ampliﬁed and the remaining will be damped. This process can also occur with only 2
incoming ﬁelds, creating a third ﬁeld. Examples of this can be sum frequency generation, where
the emitted ﬁeld has a frequency that is the sum of the two incoming ﬁelds ωσ = ω1 + ω2 or
diﬀerence frequency generation where the emitted ﬁeld have a frequency corresponding to the
diﬀerence of the frequencies of the incoming ﬁelds ωσ = ω1 −ω2. A special case of three wave
mixing is second harmonic generation where the two incoming ﬁelds are degenerate, having the
same frequency ωσ = ω1 + ω1.
The induced second order non-linear polarization can be written as [4]
P(2)
ωσ = ϵ0
X
ωσ
K(−ωσ; ω1, ω2)χ(2)(−ωσ; ω1, ω2)E0
ω1E0
ω2
(12)
where the prefactor K accounts for the number of distinct permutations of the susceptibility
tensor χ(2)(−ωσ; ω1, ω2), ωσ is the sum of the input frequencies ω1 and ω2, of the corresponding
electromagnetic ﬁelds E0
ω1 and E0
ω2. The superscript (2) of P indicates that it is the second order
induced polarization. The superscript of the susceptibility tensor χ indicates it is the second
order element of the susceptibility tensor. In order to ﬁnd the complete susceptibility, all the
elements will have to be added: χ = 1+χ(1) +χ(2) +χ(3). Since the material used in this project
is a second order non-linear material, all higher orders than 2 are not important.
The prefactor K(−ωσ; ω1, ω2) is a function of the frequencies but will be from now on be written
as K. By assuming monochromatic ﬁelds, a lossless system and far from resonant transitions
within the material, the wave equation for second order non-linear eﬀects can be written as [4]

∇2 + ω2
σn2
c2
E0
ωσ

= −µ0ω2
σ

P(2)
ωσ
2
(13)
where n is the refractive index, µ0 the permeability of free space and c the speed of light.
A scalar electromagnetic ﬁeld of three diﬀerent frequencies can be written as [4]
E(t) = 1
2
X
q=±1,±2,±3
E0
ωσ exp(−iωqt)
(14)
8
==PAGE:10==
where the frequencies obey energy conservation ω3 = ω1 +ω2. Writing the electromagnetic ﬁelds
as scalars is justiﬁed if all three waves are propagating in the same direction. Inserting the
electromagnetic ﬁeld into the wave equation, (13), the induced polarization can be written for
each of the frequencies:
(P 0)(2)(t) = ϵ0Kχ(2)
eﬀ
X
q=±1,±2,±3
E0
ωqE0
ωr exp(−i(ωq + ωr)t)
(15)
The wave equation (13) is split into one for each of the generated frequencies:
(∇2 + k2
1n2
1)E0
ω1 exp(−iω1t) = −ϵ0µ0Kχ(2)
eﬀω2
1E0
ω3(E0
ω2)∗exp(−i(ω3 −ω2)t)
(∇2 + k2
2n2
2)E0
ω1 exp(−iω2t) = −ϵ0µ0Kχ(2)
eﬀω2
2E0
ω3(E0
ω1)∗exp(−i(ω3 −ω1)t)
(∇2 + k2
3n2
3)E0
ω1 exp(−iω3t) = −ϵ0µ0Kχ(2)
eﬀω2
3E0
ω2(E0
ω1)∗exp(−i(ω1 + ω2)t)
(16)
where the asterix ∗indicates the complex conjugate. The three equations form a set of coupled
equations where momentum should be conserved, also known as phase matching: ℏk3 = ℏ(k1 +
k2). The coupled equations are rewritten using the square root of the photon ﬂux, aω, given by
|aω|2 = |E0
ω|2
2ηℏω
(17)
where the impedance is deﬁned as η =
p
µ/ϵ = 120π/n. As the refractive index is wavelength
dependent, the impedance is thus diﬀerent for the two beams
By using the slowly varying envelope approximation (SVEA) the set of coupled wave equations
becomes
daω1
dz
= iKgaω3a∗
ω2 exp(i∆kz)
daω2
dz
= iKgaω3a∗
ω1 exp(i∆kz)
daω3
dz
= iKgaω1aω2 exp(−i∆kz)
(18)
where the gain is deﬁned as g = ϵ0χ(2)
eﬀ
r
1
2η3ω1ω2ω3 where η is the impedance for ω1.
4.4
Second Harmonic Generation
Second harmonic generation is a special case of three wave mixing, where the two input ﬁelds
are degenerate creating a third ﬁeld at twice the frequency. ℏ(ω1 + ω1) = ℏω2.
Second harmonic generation is evaluated just like three wave mixing, but the two input ﬁelds
are degenerate ω1 = ω2 = ω and ω3 = 2ω, this means the three coupled wave equations reduce
to only 2 equations [4]
daω
dz = iK(−ω; 2ω, −ω)ga2ωa∗
ω exp(i∆kz)
da2ω
dz
= iK(−2ω; ω, −ω)gaωaω exp(−i∆kz)
(19)
9
==PAGE:11==
K is diﬀerent in the two equations
K(−ω; 2ω, −ω) = 1
(20)
K(−2ω; ω, −ω) = 1
2
inserting K into the coupled equations leads to the ﬁnal set of coupled wave equations
daω
dz = iga2ωa∗
ω exp(i∆kz)
da2ω
dz
= i
2gaωaω exp(−i∆kz)
(21)
where the gain is
g = ϵ0χ(2)
eﬀ
q
η3ℏω3
1
(22)
where η is the impedance for ω1.
4.5
Phase Matching
The non-linear crystal is made of lithium niobate (LiNbO3) congruently grown with 5% MgO.
The crystal generates green light by SHG when pumped with infrared light. This process is most
eﬃcient when the phase match ﬁts certain criteria.
The phase mismatch parameter ∆k describes the relative phase diﬀerence between the induced
polarization with the incoming electric ﬁeld. For plane waves assuming no depletion, the con-
version eﬃciency can be shown to be [4]
φ3(L) = L2 sin2(∆kL/2)
(∆kL/2)2
(23)
where L is the length of the non-linear crystal. This creates a distinct sinc curve with the period
∆kL. For small values of ∆k the sinus function approximates into the argument and the phase
match is proportional to the length of the crystal squared.
The coherence length is deﬁned as lcoh = 2π/∆k and is the length where the phase has changed
2π. At half the coherence length, the phase shift is π and power will ﬂow from the SHG ﬁeld to
the input ﬁeld. This process is known as back conversion.
If the crystal length exceeds the coherence length, one can turn to quasi phase matching. In
certain ferroelectric materials like lithium niobate the ferroelectric domains within the material
can be permanently converted by applying a voltage to the material during fabrication, see
ﬁgure 3. This eﬀectively changes the sign of the non-linear susceptibility. The structure should
be periodic with a period of Λ corresponding to the coherence length. This means at the point
where back conversion will normally kick in, the sign of the susceptibility is changed and the
SHG ﬁeld will continue to grow.
The periodically poled material eﬀectively gives the structure a wave vector kQPM = 2π/Λ
10
==PAGE:12==
Figure 3: A sketch of the crystal visualizing the ferroelectric domains.
compensating the dispersion in the material. The phase matching may now be written as
∆k = k3 −k1 −k2 ± kQPM
(24)
The refractive index of the crystal depends on the temperature of the crystal according to the
Sellmeier equations [5] and thus changing the optical path length inside the crystal. As the
polarization is assumed to be linear, only the extraordinary refractive index is of interest
n2
e = a1 + b1f +
a2 + b2f
λ2 −(a3 + b3f)2 + a4 + b4f
λ2 −a2
5
−a6λ2
(25)
where the wavelength, λ, should be inserted in µm and f depends on the temperature T in
Celsius
f = (T −T0)(T + T0 + 2 · 273.16◦C),
T0 = 24.5◦C
(26)
The Sellmeier coeﬃcients used in the simulation are from [5].
4.6
Boyd-Kleinman Theory
Boyd and Kleinman were the ﬁrst to build a correct model for second harmonic generation using
focused Gaussian beams. In their article [6] they determine the generated light as a function of
5 dimensionless parameters:
The confocal parameter b, the phase matching parameter σ = 1/2b∆k the focusing parameter
ξ = lcry/b, the location of focus inside the crystal µ = (lcry −2f)/lcry, and the loss κ = 1/2αb.
∆k is the phase matching, lcry is the length of the crystal, f is the focal length of the lens used
to focus the Gaussian beam, and α the loss in the crystal. Boyd and Kleinman’s goal was to
ﬁnd the optimum of the 5 parameters corresponding to the maximum power of generated light.
The generated light is proportional to the input power also known as the pump, P1, squared,
and the length of the crystal lcry
P2 =
16π2d2
eﬀ
ϵ0cλ3
1n1n2
P 2
1 lcryh(σ, β, κ, ξ, µ)
(27)
11
==PAGE:13==
where deﬀis the eﬀective tensor element of the non-linear susceptibility tensor, λ1 the wavelength
of the pump, n the refractive index of the given ﬁeld and h the dimensionless parameter Boyd
and Kleinman optimized called the Boyd-Kleinman parameter
h(σ, β, κ, ξ, µ) = 1
4ξ eµαlcry
Z Z ξ(1+µ)
−ξ(1−µ)
exp(−κ(τ + τ ′) + iσ(τ −τ ′) −β2(τ −τ ′)2)
(1 + iτ)(1 −iτ ′)
dτdτ ′
(28)
The focus of the beam is placed in the center of the crystal causing µ = 0, which Boyd and
Kleinman proved was the desired for highest SHG power. The losses are neglected κ = 0, and
assuming no walk-oﬀ, β = 0, the expression reduces to
h(σ, ξ) = 1
4ξ
Z Z ξ
−ξ
exp(iσ(τ −τ ′))
(1 + iτ)(1 −iτ ′)dτdτ ′
(29)
The maximum value of the Boyd-Kleinman factor, when optimizing for the mentioned parameters
is hm = 1.07 at ξ = 2.84 for focused Gaussian beams. In this thesis the optimization will be a
function of σ and ξ.
4.7
The Non-Linear Coeﬃcient
The second order non-linear coeﬃcient is determined by using the data sheet of the non-linear
crystal found in appendix A. The normalized eﬃciency is stated to be 3.25% W−1 cm−1. This
measurement is made with a multi-mode laser, resulting in twice the eﬃciency that is expected
with a single mode laser. When using a single frequency laser, the incoming photons of wave
one interact with themselves, ω1 + ω1 = ω2. When multiple frequencies or modes are present
within the acceptance bandwidth of the crystal, not only SHG of each mode will occur. Sum
frequency generation of two diﬀerent modes will also happen. As more modes are present many
diﬀerent ﬁelds are generated simultaneously. With this in mind, the eﬃciency is expected to by
a factor 2
η = 1.625%W−1cm−1
(30)
The fabricator of the crystal states that 264.55 mW was used as input power to the crystal and
the output was 1.60 mW SHG light meaning the crystal was operated under no depletion. At
no depletion, the SHG light is proportional to the input power squared and the crystal length
PSHG = ηlcryP 2
IR
(31)
By using η = 1.625%W−1, lcry = 8 mm and PIR = 0.1 W, the expected maximum SHG power
becomes PSHG = 0.14 mW assuming no depletion. The general expression for generated SHG
is stated in equation (27). By isolation deﬀis found:
deﬀ=
s
ϵ0λ3
1n1n2
16π2lcryh
PSHG
(PIR)2
(32)
12
==PAGE:14==
The h value has been found by calculating the ξ parameter corresponding to the beam waist of
26µm reported by the fabricator of the crystal.
ξ =
s
lcry
w2
0
λ1
2πn1
= 0.96
(33)
By plotting the Boyd-Kleinman parameter hm versus ξ, the corresponding hm to ξ = 0.96 is
determined graphically to be hm = 0.76. By inserting this into equation (32) the eﬀective tensor
element becomes deff = 14.99 pm/V corresponding to the second order non-linear susceptibility
of χ(2)
eﬀ= 2deff = 29.98 pm/V.
5
Simulation
In this chapter, the program developed to carry out the simulation will be presented. The pre-
sentation will include the structure of the program and how the equations are solved numerically.
The results of the simulation will be compared to the results obtained by Boyd and Kleinman.
The structure of the simulated system is shown in ﬁgure 4a. Visualizing the same structure in
the program results in ﬁgure 4b. The two lenses in front of the crystal are used to focus the
light into the crystal. The lens after the crystal is used to determine the M 2 value of the two
beams. The distance from the laser at position z0 to the crystal is not important for the process
of SHG by Gaussian beams. The distance is much shorter in the simulation of Gaussian beams
compared to the actual diode laser beam in order to minimize the calculation time. In order to
create the image shown in 4b, the beam is measured in all points. This is not necessary and
will not be done for other simulations. However it has been done in order to visualize the beam
through the system. Due to the linearity of the propagation, the beam is solely required to be
propagated to the positions of the lenses and, in order to calculate the SHG, in all grid points
throughout the crystal. Not having to simulate the beam in every point before the crystal is
important and allows for propagation over longer distances. When simulating the experimental
set-up and using tapered diode laser beams the distance will be about 1 m.
Electromagnetic ﬁelds are described in the program by discrete points in a matrix where the
index in the matrix, described by x and y, are the spatial coordinates and the value of the
matrix element is the electromagnetic ﬁeld strength. The matrices are mesh grids implying that
they are rectangular. The size of the matrix is also called the window. By dividing the beam
into small rectangles, each piece can be approximated to a plane wave, enabling the use of the
coupled equations (21). This will work for any beam, regardless of the structure as long as the
resolution is high enough.
The vector along the propagation axis is the z-vector deﬁned by discrete points based on the
certain step size, ∆z = 50µm. This proved to limit the position of the crystal and the lenses in
13
==PAGE:15==
(a) A schematic view of the system being
modelled in the simulation.
(b) From the simulation: The radius of
the Gaussian beam through the system
calculated from the q parameter.
The
thin gray vertical lines are the lenses and
the large gray square is the crystal.
Figure 4: The simulated system on the left compared with a schematic view of the same system on
the right.
the system as they could only be placed a distance corresponding to an integer value of 50µm
from the laser. This could have been avoided by deﬁning a vector of a certain length, and then
divide it into N points. This solution would however result in diﬀerent step sizes in the three
regions: before the crystal, inside the crystal and after the crystal. The number of steps in x and
y direction was ﬁxed at 1013 = 4096 points in each direction. The reason for such high resolution
will be discussed later in this chapter. Functions have been made to take care of some of the
operations being carried out multiple times in one simulation. The functions will be presented
here followed by the simulations of the diﬀerent beams.
5.1
Propagation of Electromagnetic Fields
A function has been made in order to propagate an electromagnetic ﬁeld along the z axis a
distance of z0 as this is done repeatedly in the simulation. The function creates a new mesh grid
consisting of the spatial frequency vectors fx and fy deﬁned as the inverse of the normal mesh
grid. The vectors can be diﬀerent in x and y axis, enabling a non square window to be used
suitable for non circular beams. The transfer function is calculated as
H = exp
−jπλ
n
z0(F 2
X + F 2
Y )

(34)
where FX and FY are the mesh grid matrices of the spatial frequency vectors and j the imaginary
number. The electromagnetic ﬁeld, u1, and the transfer function, H, are shifted using the Matlab
function ﬀtshift required for Matlab to calculate the fast Fourier transform (ﬀt). The ﬀt of the
14
==PAGE:16==
ﬁeld is calculated and multiplied element wise (not matrix multiplication) with the transfer
function before being inverse Fourier transformed to obtain the new ﬁeld, u2
U1 = F(u1),
U2 = H · U1,
u2 = F−1(U2)
(35)
As the propagation is based on Fourier transforms of the beams, complicated beams requires a
high resolution. It is important that no assumptions are made regarding the spatial or spectral
behavior of the beam in the propagation of beams. The transfer function models Fresnel diﬀrac-
tion, which is suited for near ﬁeld diﬀraction. The system has a maximal optical path length of
about one meter allowing Fresnell diﬀraction to be used.
5.2
Measuring Beam Width
Throughout the simulation the width of the beams are measured, therefore a set of functions
has been determined in order to do so.
It is not trivial to determine the width of any arbitrary beam and several methods are used. The
1/e2 beam radius is the distance of the intensity distribution from the maximum to the point
where the intensity has fallen to 1/e2 of the maximum value. If one measures the 1/e2 width of
an arbitrary beam through the focus, the width can change abruptly since any side lobes might
cross the 1/e2 threshold.
The second moment beam radius (SMBR) of the intensity distribution is deﬁned as[7]
wx =
R
x2I(x, y)dxdy
R
I(x, y)dxdy
(36)
The integrals are calculated numerically as sums of all pixels and multiplied with the area of a
pixel. The SMBR will not change abruptly, but weighs intensity in the outer parts of the beam
highly. This causes the SMBR to result in a slightly larger radius compares to the 1/e2. For
Gaussian beams, the two widths deﬁned above will yield the same result. The 1/e2 is highly
dependent on the resolution of the grid used, as the width will only be an integer number of
pixels. This is not the case for the SMBR.
5.3
Modeling Lenses
Diﬀerent types of lenses are used several times in the simulation, therefore a function used to
create any kind of lens is made. Lenses are modeled as inﬁnitely thin lenses with no aberrations
deﬁned by a transfer function
Hspherical = exp

−ik0
2f (X2 + Y 2)

(37)
where k0 is the wave number of infrared light in free space and (X2 + Y 2) are the mesh grid
matrices creating a circular distribution, see ﬁgure 5. The square of each matrix is calculated
15
==PAGE:17==
Figure 5: The circular shape that is the basis for the lens transfer function.
element wise and is not matrix multiplication. This results in a phase change that depends on
the distance from the center of the lens. Cylindrical lenses are made similarly, using only the X
or Y matrix depending on which axis to focus. Below is an example of a transfer function of a
cylindrical lens focusing the X direction:
Hcylindrical = exp

−ik0
2f X2

(38)
The transfer function is multiplied element wise onto the electromagnetic ﬁeld matrix
u2 = Hu1
(39)
5.4
Resizing the Window
The size of the beam changes through the system. If the window is large enough to ﬁt the
collimated beam before the crystal, the pixel size should be very small in order to describe the
beam accurately at the focus inside the crystal. To deal with this problem, a resizing function
that can redeﬁne the beam in a new window made to ﬁt the new beam, have been made. The
resizing function is used at the facets of the crystal.
The function measures the beam size and deﬁnes a new window ﬁve times the second moment
beam radius of the beam in each direction. The matrix deﬁning the electromagnetic ﬁeld is
rescaled using the interp2 Matlab function interpolating a two dimensional matrix with a mesh
grid structure. The interpolated matrix is rewritten with a given window size and resolution.
By examining the power before and after resizing the window, it proved important that the
resolution of the window before the resizing was very ﬁne in order to conserve energy before and
after the resizing.
16
==PAGE:18==
Figure 6: Visualization of a Gaussian beam in proﬁle. The Rayleigh length, indicated with a zr, which
is the point where the radius is increased by
√
2. Twice the Rayleigh length is called the confocal length,
b. The divergence angle is indicated by Θ, and the divergence half angle is θ = Θ/2. The image was
taken from [8]
5.5
Gaussian Beams
In order to verify the program, the numerical results were compared with the results obtained by
Boyd and Kleinman. Boyd and Kleinman optimized several diﬀerent parameters in order to ﬁnd
the criteria for the maximum generated SHG light for focused Gaussian beams. This program
investigates the dependence of the phase match parameter, σ and the focusing parameter, ξ, on
the power of the second harmonic generated light. The remaining parameters are held constant
at their optimal value. If the results obtained by the simulation corresponds with the results of
Boyd and Kleinman, the program is assumed to be correct and able to predict the behavior of
Gaussian beams.
The Gaussian beam, visualized on ﬁgure 6, is propagated through the system by using the
propagation function described in section 5.1. The initial beam at position z = 0 corresponding
to the laser facet is shown in ﬁgure 7.
The lens system before the crystal contains two lenses, as shown in ﬁgure 4b. The two lenses
before the crystal creates a 4f system, two lenses with the same focal lengths of f = 30 mm a
distance 2f = 60mm apart. This images the beam proﬁle of the laser facet inside the crystal.
This set-up enables one to change the spot size, and therefore the ξ parameter inside the crystal
by varying the spot size of the source without changing the lenses.
The Gaussian beam can be described by a complex q parameter given by [7]
q(z) =
1
1
R(z) −i
λ
πw2(z)
(40)
where w(z) is the radius of the beam and R(z) is the radius of curvature of the wave front
visualized on ﬁgure 8. In focus, the curvature of the wave front is inﬁnite and the q parameter
17
==PAGE:19==
Figure 7: The proﬁle of the Gaussian beam at z = 0. The ﬁgure has been created by summing all the
columns and normalizing the intensity.
Figure 8: Visualization of a Gaussian beam in proﬁle with curved wavefronts. The image is taken from
[7]
18
==PAGE:20==
simpliﬁes to be
q0(z) =
1
−i
λ
πw2(z)
= iπw2(z)
λ
(41)
This equation is used to deﬁne the initial q parameter in focus at z = 0. From the q parameter
the Gaussian shaped electromagnetic ﬁeld given by
u0 = exp

−ik0
 X2
2q0,x
+ Y 2
2q0,y

(42)
The beam can be deﬁned as non circular by deﬁning a diﬀerent q parameter for x and y direction.
Propagation through an optical element like a lens changes the q parameter. To calculate this,
the ABCD matrix notation have been used[7]
q′ = Aq + B
Cq + D
(43)
For a perfect thin lens the ABCD matrix is


1
0
−1/f
1


(44)
The ABCD matrix for propagation through a medium of length d is

1
d
0
1


(45)
Propagation through a distance d is done by addition of the distance to the complex q parameter.
This enables the q parameter to be changed easily regardless of the distance propagated.
In order to determine the analytic width of the beam the w(z) is isolated from equation (40)
w0 =
s
−λ
Im(1/q)π

(46)
Through the set-up, the beam radius is determined from the q parameter by the relation above.
As the imaginary part of the q parameter is negative throughout the system w0 is always real.
It is important to have an analytic expression for the width of Gaussian beams in order to check
the validity of the simulation.
The beam width through the system is calculated from the complex q parameter, the 1/e2 width
and the SMBR as shown in ﬁgure 9a. The Gaussian beam is deﬁned at z = 0 and propagated
forward a single step ∆z at the time. For each step, the beam radius is measured with the SMBR
indicated by the yellow line on the ﬁgure, and with the 1/e2 width indicated by the red dotted
line. The propagation function was described in 5.1. All three methods of measuring the beam
width yield the same beam radius through the set-up. The simulation beam evolution behaves
as expected validating the propagation function, the modeling of the lenses and the layout of
the grid.
19
==PAGE:21==
(a) The radius of the Gaussian beam through
the system.
(b) Close up of the beam proﬁle inside the
crystal.
Figure 9: Simulation of Gaussian beam with ξ = 2.84. The thin gray vertical lines are the lenses and
the large gray square is the crystal. The blue line is the analytic radius, the yellow line the second
moment beam radius and the red dotted line the 1/e2 radius. The green line is the SMBR of the SHG
green light.
5.5.1
Modeling The Non-Linear Crystal
When the beam enters the crystal, the refractive index is changed which in turn changes the q
parameter described by the ABCD matrix

n2
0
0
n1


(47)
where n1 is the refractive index of the material the beam exists e.g. air and n2 the refractive
index of the medium the beam enters e.g. lithium niobate. The ABCD matrix describing the
refractive indices of the two materials only changes the q parameter when the light enters a new
medium, not when the light propagates inside a uniform medium. Multiple sources makes this
mistake.
Refraction is described in the numerical model by simply changing the refractive index as input
to the propagation function.The refraction of light when entering the crystal is seen clearly in
ﬁgure 9b. The SHG beam radius is 1/
√
2 of the infrared beam radius as stated by [4]
Just before the non-linear crystal, the electromagnetic ﬁeld is converted to the square root of
the photon ﬂux, a1, as given by (17). The calculation is done individually for each pixel. The
light is described only by the matrix a throughout the crystal. For each step of size ∆z the
coupled diﬀerential equations (21) are solved, transferring energy in between the ﬁelds before
it is propagated forward by using the same propagation function as mentioned in section 5.1.
This sets a requirement for the resolution of the propagation axis as the two ﬁelds only exchange
energy every ∆z.
20
==PAGE:22==
Initially the equations were solved numerically as ordinary diﬀerential equations using the Euler
method described in [9]
daω = iga2ωa∗
ω exp(i∆kz)∆z
da2ω = i
2gaωaω exp(−i∆kz)∆z
(48)
This method required a small step size and proved to be too demanding in computation time.
The classic fourth order Runge-Kutta method described by [10] was therefore used. This method
has an error of the ﬁfth order of the step size O(∆z)5 where the Euler method has an error of
the square of the step size O(∆z)2.
The 4th order Runge-Kutta method divides one step from an to an+1 into 5 steps:
Step 1: Evaluate the function and ﬁnd the derivative, k1.
k1 = iga2ωa∗
ω exp(i∆kz)
(49)
where z is the distance from the beginning of the crystal to the ﬁrst wave front.
Step 2: Take half a step from an using k1 and evaluate the function and the new derivative, k2
k2 = iga2ω

aω + ∆z
2 k1
∗
exp(i∆k(z + ∆z/2))
(50)
Step 3: Take half a step an using the newly obtained derivative, k2 and ﬁnd the new derivative,
k3.
k3 = iga2ω

aω + ∆z
2 k2
∗
exp(i∆k(z + ∆z/2))
(51)
Step 4: Take a full step size using the newly obtained derivative, k3 and ﬁnd the new derivative,
k4.
k4 = iga2ω (aω + ∆zk3)∗exp(i∆k(z + ∆z))
(52)
Step 5: Calculate the next point from a weighted average of the four derivatives
an+1 = an + ∆z
6 (k1 + 2k2 + 2k3 + k4)
(53)
The equations above are used to describe the change of the infrared light. The equations used to
calculate the change of the SHG light follows the same procedure and will be presented without
further explanation.
k1 = i
2ga2
ω exp(i∆kz)
(54)
k2 = i
2g

aω + ∆z
2 k1
2
exp (i∆k(z + ∆z/2))
(55)
k3 = i
2g

aω + ∆z
2 k2
2
exp (i∆k(z + ∆z/2))
(56)
k4 = i
2g (aω + ∆zk3)2 exp(i∆k(z + ∆z))
(57)
21
==PAGE:23==
Figure 10: Simulation of Gaussian beam with ξ = 2.84. SHG Power as a function of phase mismatch.
The graph resembles a sinc function, but is somewhat skewed due to the strong focus of the infrared
beam. This is also reported by [6].
an+1 = an + ∆z
6 (k1 + 2k2 + 2k3 + k4)
(58)
After converting power between the two beams, the matrices are propagated one step of ∆z
forwards by the propagation function described in section 5.1.
In order to ﬁnd the optimum phase match, a test run through the crystal is conducted for several
diﬀerent temperatures. Each temperature results in diﬀerent phase match criteria as described
in section 4.5. The temperature resulting in the highest SHG power is used this for the actual
simulation. The test runs for the diﬀerent temperatures are run at a lower resolution in order to
reduce computation time. Once the optimal temperature has been identiﬁed the beam is send
through the crystal at a higher resolution. This process could have been optimized by calculating
fewer points around the peak and ﬁtting a suitable function to the data points, e.g. a sinc curve.
The SHG power as a function of phase mismatch is plotted in ﬁgure 10. The phase mismatch is
proportional to the temperature of the crystal. The peak is not located at ∆k = 0 as would be
expected for plane waves. The peak is shifted away from ∆k = 0 as reported by Boyd-Kleinman
[6].
Throughout the crystal, the energies in the two beams are being measured along with their
individual radii. In order to calculate the radius, aω and a2ω is converted to electromagnetic
ﬁelds by the equation [4]
uIR = aω
p
2η1ℏω1 exp(2iπn1λω∆z)
(59)
22
==PAGE:24==
Figure 11: The power of the infrared beam and the SHG green beam as a function of distance traveled
inside the crystal. This graph is made using a Gaussian beam with the optimal ξ = 2.84. The SHG
power at the end of the crystal is 672.4 mW.
for the infrared light beam. The light from the SHG beam is converted to an electromagnetic
ﬁeld by
uSHG = a2ω
p
2η2ℏω2 exp(2iπn2λ2ω∆z)
(60)
From where the intensity is calculated as
I = |u|2cnϵ0/2
(61)
The intensity is used for the functions in order to calculating the beam width.
The power
is calculated by numerical integration where all the elements of the matrix representing the
intensity is summed and multiplied by the pixel area
Z
Idxdy ≈
X
i,j
Ii,j∆x∆y
(62)
where i and j are the matrix indices.
The pump power is set to be P0 = 6W and ξ = 2.84. The power of the infrared and the green
wave created by SHG is recorded throughout the crystal and plotted on ﬁgure 11. The energy
transfer mostly takes place in the center of the crystal. This is explained by the fact that SHG
depends on the intensity squared. As the beam enters the crystal, the radius is large and the
intensity is low. As the beam travels through the crystal it is focused and will be smallest around
the center of the crystal. As the beam diverges again the second harmonic generation is lowered.
In order to compare the resulting SHG power with the results of Boyd-Kleinman, the Boyd-
23
==PAGE:25==
Figure 12: Simulation of Gaussian beams. Normalized SHG power output, hm, as a function of ξ for
diﬀerent depletion levels. The depletion of each data series is the depletion of the maximum point of
that series.
Kleinman factor, hm is isolated from equation (27)
hm = PSHG
P 2
IR
ϵ0cλ3
1n2n1
16π2d2
eﬀlcry
(63)
By solving equation (29) the Boyd-Kleinman results can be calculated and plotted along with
the results of the simulation, see ﬁgure 12. The numerical model corresponds with the results of
Boyd-Kleinman
As Boyd-Kleinman only investigated 0 % pump depletion, the χeﬀwas set to be 0.001% of the
actual value. This ensures the pump will not be depleted, but will otherwise act naturally. As
PSHG is proportional to deﬀtherefore χeﬀthe value of h does not depend on deﬀ, and χeﬀcan
be varied freely to avoid depletion.
By adjusting the χeﬀand sending beams of diﬀerent beam waists through the system, curves
for diﬀerent depletion can be drawn, see ﬁgure 12. As the beam waist is changed far away from
the non-optimal ξ value, the amount of SHG power drops, and the depletion of the pump is
lowered. This explains why the simulations with depletion are similar to the non-depleted case
for low values of ξ. This makes it diﬃcult to interpret the shape of the depleted curves, but the
simulation shows that the optimal focusing remains the same regardless of how much the pump
is depleted in the crystal.
The optimal phase match can likewise be plotted against the ξ value, see ﬁgure 13.
The
optimal phase match follows the results of Boyd-Kleinman for no depletion. However when the
depletion increases the curve is ﬂattened being closer to a linear function. The optimal phase
24
==PAGE:26==
Figure 13: Optimal phase match parameter as a function of the ξ parameter for various levels of
depletion. For low values of ξ, the optimum phase matching is found to be the same for the diﬀerent
depletion levels.
match parameter is deﬁned as
σm =
1
2b∆k
(64)
where b is the confocal parameter of the Gaussian beam. For low values of ξ, the optimum phase
matching is found to be the same for the diﬀerent depletion levels. This is caused by the chosen
temperatures used in the test-run, that served to ﬁnd optimal phase matching condition. The
chosen temperatures should be closely spaced in order to ﬁnd a diﬀerence in the optimum phase
matching for the low ξ values.
5.5.2
Beam Quality Parameter M2
After the crystal, the beam quality parameter M 2 is measured for the infrared and SHG beam.
The beam quality parameter is given by [7]
M 2 = w0π
λ θ
(65)
where w0 is the beam waist after the focusing lens and θ is the divergence half-angle being
approximated to be
θ ≈tan−1
∆w1
∆z1

(66)
where ∆w1 is the is the change in beam radius across a distance of ∆z1.The minimum value
for any real beam is M 2 = 1. After the interaction with the non-linear crystal, properties of
the beam is changed and therefore needs to be refocused in order to determine the waist and
25
==PAGE:27==
divergence angle. It is important not to measure the beam divergence angle too close to the
focus. The position and focal length of the lens is not of signiﬁcant importance, as long as the
beam waist can be measured and the linear divergence is observed.
The beam quality parameter is calculated using second moment beam radius. A fundamental
Gaussian beam, TEM00, has a beam quality parameter of M 2 = 1. The M 2 for the infrared
beam and the SHG beam is presented in the table below
TEM00
IR, Numerical
SHG, Numerical
M 2
1
1.00
0.99
The beam quality parameter M 2 for the two beams are nearly identical. The small diﬀerence
may be ascribed to the resolution not being high enough. By measuring the beam width too
close to the beam waist may otherwise cause the small diﬀerence. Near the beam waist the beam
does not diverge linearly and the M 2 measurement would be lower than expected.
5.6
Hermite Gaussian Beams
In order to bridge the gap between the Gaussian beams and an arbitrary beam, like the one
observed from a tapered diode laser, SHG of Hermite Gaussian beams were simulated in the
program. The results from this can be compared with known theory to further validate the
program.
The electromagnetic ﬁeld of a Gaussian beam is deﬁned as [7]
Em,n(x, y, z) = E0
w0
w(z)Hn
√
2
x
w(z)

exp

−
x2
w(z)2

Hm
√
2
y
w(z)

exp

−
y2
w(z)2

exp

−i

kz −(1 + n + m) arctan
 z
zr

+ k(x2 + y2)
2R(z)

(67)
where w0 is the beam radius at the beam waist, w(z) the beam radius at position z. x and y
are the vectors deﬁning the grid. k is the wave number, zr the Rayleigh distance, and R(z) the
curvature of the wave fronts, see ﬁgure 8. The Hn is the Hermite polynomial with the positive
integer numbers n. The Gaussian beam is a special case where n and m are both 0. The beam
is initialized at z = 0 which causes the last exponential function in the expression to become 1,
see ﬁgure 14 for the beam at z = 0. Matlab requires a large amount of computation time for
calculating Hermite polynomials for a large matrices. the Hermite polynomials were calculated
and the results used to deﬁne the beam. A Hermite Gaussian beam with m = 1, n = 0, also
known as the TEM01 mode is used in the simulated.
The size of the beam through the system is shown in ﬁgure 15. The beam proﬁle in direction of
the x axis, seen on ﬁgure 15a, is just a Gaussian and behaves as the Gaussian beam simulated
earlier. The beam proﬁle in direction of the y axis is presented in ﬁgure 15b. The diﬀerent ways
of calculating the width results in diﬀerent radii. The SMBR deﬁnition yields the largest beam
26
==PAGE:28==
Figure 14: The proﬁle of the Hermite Gaussian beam at z = 0. The ﬁgure on the left hand side has
been made by summing all the columns, the right hand side by summing all the rows.The power has
been normalized.
radius as explained in chapter 5.1. The analytic Gaussian beam is the width based on the q
parameter for a fundamental Gaussian and is included for comparison.
The spots of the infrared beam and the green beam are recorded at the facets of the crystal
and the center of the crystal, see ﬁgure 16. The infraed beam is a TEM01 mode throughout the
crystal. Hasegawa [11] states that the mode of the SHG beam should increase as the simulation
predicts. The green beam is a mix of the fundamental mode and a TEM02 mode. Thus the M 2
value should be somewhere between 1 and 5.
The Hermite Gaussian beams have a beam quality factor of M 2
x = 2n + 1 in the direction of
the x axis and M 2
y = 2m + 1 in the direction of the y axis. The resulting M 2 measurements are
presented in table 1. The TEM01 mode was used in order to have a Gaussian and a non Gaussian
TEM01
IR, Numerical
TEM02
SHG, Numerical
M 2
x
1
1.00
1
1.00
M 2
y
3
2.99
5
3.85
Table 1: Comparing M 2 values of diﬀerent Hermite Gaussian modes.
to simultaneously check the script and compare with the results from simulating a Gaussian
beam. By simulating a Hermite Gaussian beam with ξ = 2.84 the numerically predicted SHG
power is 351.4 mW.
5.7
Tapered Diode Laser Beams
The tapered diode laser beam is very diﬀerent from the Gaussian or the Hermite Gaussian beam.
Comparing the tapered diode laser beam to the Gaussian and Hermite Gaussian beams simu-
lated earlier should therefore be done very carefully. The laser beam deﬁned in the simulation
27
==PAGE:29==
(a) The radius of the Hermite Gaussian beam
through the system in the x direction.
(b) The radius of the Hermite Gaussian beam
through the system in the y direction.
Figure 15: The thin gray vertical lines are the lenses and the large gray square is the crystal. The
blue line indicates the theoretically proﬁle of a Gaussian beam calculated with the ABCD matrices. The
yellow line indicates the second moment beam radius and the red dotted line the 1/e2 width propagated
using the propagation function described in 5.1. The two graphs are made using a Hermite Gaussian
beam with m = 1, n = 0 and ξ = 1.00.
Figure 16: Simulation of Hermite Gaussian beam with ξ = 0.5. The images shows the propagating
beam inside the non-linear crystal. From left to right: the front facet, the center of the crystal and the
end facet. The top row shows the infrared beam and the bottom the SHG beam. The infrared beam is
a TEM01 mode while green beam is a mix of TEM00 and TEM02 mode at the end of the crystal.
28
==PAGE:30==
Figure 17: The proﬁle of the tapered diode laser beam at z = 0. The ﬁgure on the left hand side has
been made by summing all the columns, the right hand side by summing all the rows. The power has
been normalized.
is based on actual measurements of a tapered diode laser in the laboratory. Images of the beam
have been taken through several planes around the focus position by using a beam proﬁler. The
experimental measurements were used to calculate the beam proﬁle on the facet of the laser by
phase retrieval. The phase retrieval calculations were done by Anders Kragh Hansen.
Most of the structure of the simulation remains the same regardless of simulated beam. The few
diﬀerences will be listed here. The initial matrix representing the electromagnetic ﬁeld is ﬁtted
to the speciﬁc grid by interpolating using the Matlab function interp2. This is done because
the matrix representation of the electromagnetic ﬁeld obtained by phase retrieval is in a ﬁxed
window size. The interpolation makes it possible to simulate any window size. The initial ta-
pered diode laser beam at z = 0 used in the simulation is shown on ﬁgure 17. In the slow axis
(x axis) the beam resembles a top hat shape with multiple peaks. In the fast axis (y axis) the
beam somewhat resembles a Gaussian function with shoulders at each side of the peak.
Due to the ﬁne structures of the laser beam in the x direction, the resolution required to ac-
curately describe the laser beam should be very ﬁne. In this simulation the number of pixels
inside the crystal is for x and y direction 211 = 2048 resulting in a pixel size of ∆x = 1.7µm and
∆y = 1.2µm inside the crystal. At the crystal facets the window will be re sized and the pixel
size decreased resulting in a pixel size of ∆x = 0.2µm and ∆y = 0.09µm inside the crystal.
5.8
Focusing by Spherical Lenses
The initial tapered diode laser beam is collimated at z = 0. The beam is now focused by a single
lens instead of two lenses used to focus the Gaussian beam. The position of the focusing lens,
zlens is
zlens = zbef −f + n1lcry/2
(68)
29
==PAGE:31==
where zbef is the distance from the laser to the crystal, f is the focal length of the focusing lens
and n1lcry/2 the optical distance from the facet of the crystal to the center of the crystal. This
theoretically correct distance from the laser to the focusing lens proved not to have the focus at
the center of the crystal. Therefore a simulation was to be run for each lens individually to ﬁnd
the position of the lens focusing the beam at the center of the crystal. This have been done for
each lens used for the tapered diode laser beam. The lens position was chosen to be where the
width of the beam was the smallest, which mimics the alignment procedure in the experimental
set-up. The reason for this error could be misalignment in the experimental set-up resulting in
a somewhat diverging or converging beam instead of a collimated beam. As the beam in the
simulation is recorded experimentally, such an error will follow into the program.
The propagating infrared and green beam has been imaged in ﬁgure 18. At the facets the beam
has a somewhat circular central lobe surrounded by smaller side lobes. In the center the central
lobe is still present but distorted. At the end facet no central lobe is found. The beam is not
symmetrical around the focus position as the Gaussian and Hermite Gaussian beams are.
The power of the two beams has been measured throughout the crystal. The power of the
two beams as a function of distance traveled in the crystal for the optimum focusing is plotted
in ﬁgure 19. Like with the Gaussian beam, most of the non-linear process takes place in the
center of the crystal where the intensity is highest. The generated power of the green beam is
PSHG = 214.3 mW which is signiﬁcantly lower compared to the Gaussian case of PSHG = 672.4
mW. This is explained by the power in the beam is less localized for the tapered diode laser
compared to the Gaussian beam reducing the intensity of the beam.
Each lens used results in a diﬀerent SHG power and a diﬀerent spot size. The SHG power
as a function of the focal lens of the lens will be presented in section 6 and compared with
experimental results. The lens with f = 35mm yielded the highest SHG power.
5.9
Focusing using cylindrical lenses
The spherical focusing lens is now replaced by two cylindrical lenses, with the same initial beam
as before. Since the laser beam is diﬀerent in the fast and the slow axis, the two axes should be
focused independent of each other. Images of the beam through the crystal is presented in ﬁgure
20. The parameter space is now two dimensional, and the spherical lens searches for an optimum
diagonally. At the maximum, the lens resulting in the highest SHG power, a cylindrical lens of
roughly the same focal length focusing the fast axis will replace the the spherical lens. Diﬀerent
cylindrical lenses focusing the slow axis will then be inserted, scanning the two dimensional
parameter space horizontally in order to ﬁnd a new maximum. This might not result in the
global maximum, but it will come close. If the global maximum is to be found, the fast axis
30
==PAGE:32==
Figure 18: Simulation of tapered diode laser beam. The images shows the propagating beam inside
the non-linear crystal. From top to bottom: the front facet, the center of the crystal and the end facet.
The left column is the infrared beam and the right column the SHG beam. A f = 35mm lens have been
used to focus the beam. The beam is not symmetrical around focus.
31
==PAGE:33==
Figure 19: The power of the infrared beam and the SHG green beam as a function of distance traveled
inside the crystal. The SHG power is 214.3 mW and the beam focused by a f = 35 mm lens..
should be scanned once more.
There are no theoretical results to compare the numerical results. The predicted SHG power for
various cylindrical lenses will be presented with the experimental results in section 6.
The beam proﬁle through the crystal calculated numerically is shown on ﬁgure 21. At the front
facet of the crystal, the central lobe is close to circular. At the center of the crystal the beam
the infrared beam have many side lobes. At the end facet of the crystal, no central lobe is found.
The beam focused by the cylindrical lenses does not look signiﬁcantly narrower than the beam
focused by spherical lenses.
The power transfer of the two beams throughout the crystal have been measured, see ﬁgure
21. The SHG power generated using cylindrical lenses is larger compared to spherical lenses as
expected for a non circular beam.
By measuring the SHG power as a function of the phase mismatch the phase match curve have
been plotted, see ﬁgure 22. On one side of the peak the function resembles a sinc with the side
lobe. On the other side the function falls oﬀmore slowly.
This chapter presented the simulation of three diﬀerent beams.. The results of the program
yielded the same results as Boyd and Kleinman with a non depleted Gaussian pump.
The
generated power and optimal phase matching was further investigated at higher depletion levels
of 20% 50% and 80%. The ξ value corresponding to the highest PSHG proved independent of the
depletion level. The program was further tested by simulating Hermite Gaussian beams, where
the beam quality parameter was calculated and the beam proﬁle measured for the infrared beam
32
==PAGE:34==
Figure 20: Simulation of tapered diode laser beam. The images shows the propagating beam inside
the non-linear crystal. From top to bottom: the front facet, the center of the crystal and the end facet.
The left column is the infrared beam and the right column the SHG beam. A f = 30mm lens have
been used to focus the beam in the x direction, and a f = 40mm in the y direction. The beam is not
symmetrical around focus.
33
==PAGE:35==
Figure 21: Simulation of tapered diode laser. The power of the infrared beam and the SHG green
beam as a function of distance traveled inside the crystal. he SHG power is PSHG = 221.4 mW at the
end of the crystal.
Figure 22: SImulation of tapered diode laser beam. The normalized SHG power has been plotted
for diﬀerent phase match conditions. . A f = 30mm lens have been used to focus the beam in the x
direction, and a f = 40mm in the y direction.
34
==PAGE:36==
and the SHG beam. The SHG beam proved to be a mix of the pump beam and a higher mode.
The tapered diode laser beam has been recorded in the laboratory and used for the simulation.
The highest estimated SHG power was simulated to be PSHG = 214.3 when focusing with a
f = 35mm lens. The highest estimated SHG power was simulated to be PSHG = 221.4. This
occurred when focusing with a set of cylindrical lenses, a f = 30mm lens used to focus the beam
in the x direction, and a f = 40mm in the y direction. Focusing the beam with cylindrical lenses
yields in a slightly higher SHG power.
6
Experimental Measurements
The goal of the experimental measurements is to check if the simulations ﬁt actual observations.
If the simulations correspond with experimental results, there is evidence that the program can
accurately model an arbitrary beam. The laser used in the experiments is a tapered diode laser.
The laser has a very diﬀerent beam proﬁle compared to a Gaussian or a Hermite Gaussian
beam. The structure of the laser will be explained in order to understand what shapes the
tapered diode laser beam. Hereafter follows measurements of the spectrum of the laser and
the emitted optical power. Afterwards follows the SHG experiments. Firstly, the experimental
set-up will be presented and explained followed the results of the experiments. The experimental
results will be compared to the numerical results of the tapered diode laser.
6.1
The Tapered Diode Laser
The laser is divided into two sections, a ridge waveguide and a tapered waveguide. The ridge
waveguide creates a well-deﬁned signal and the tapered waveguide ampliﬁes the signal enabling
high output power. The tapered waveguide does however cause the beam to have a non Gaussian
shape, see ﬁgure 23a. The beam resembles a top hat shape with several peaks on top. As the
waveguide is broadened, the strict control of the signal is lost. In focus, the beam is somewhat
Gaussian with a distinct central lobe, nevertheless many smaller side lobes are present, see ﬁgure
23b. This shape is a typical example of the beam proﬁle for a tapered diode laser. The data
sheet for the laser from where the beam proﬁles are found can be seen in appendix B.
The ridge waveguide of the laser emitting the signal was supplied with a ﬁxed current of 300
mA and the tapered section with a ﬁxed current of 12 A. The emitted power of the laser was
measured at several diﬀerent electrical currents to the tapered section of the laser, see ﬁgure
24a. At 12 A the laser emits 7 W of infrared light, and roughly 6.2 W is being delivered to the
crystal after losses in the system mainly due to the isolator. The isolator along with the rest of
the experimental set-up will be introduced and explained later.
The spectrum was measured by placing a multi mode optical ﬁber close to the collimating lenses
35
==PAGE:37==
(a) The spot of the laser beam in near
ﬁeld. The beam proﬁle has a proﬁle sim-
ilar to a top hat shape with many small
peaks.
(b) The spot of the laser beam in focus.
In focus, the beam is somewhat Gaussian
with a distinct central lobe, nevertheless
many smaller side lobes are present.
Figure 23: Graphs from the data sheet of the tapered diode laser..
in front of the laser, see ﬁgure 24b. The small reﬂection from the lens was enough to be captured
by the ﬁber. The spectrum shows a well deﬁned peak at 1063 nm. The two peaks around the
main peak are artifacts or echos from the OSA. The peaks are not present, but still show in the
OSA.
The beam proﬁle of the laser was measured by sending the light into a set of collimating lenses
and into a beam proﬁler. The beam proﬁler holds a focusing lens and a camera that captures
the beam spot around the position of focus. These measurements were used to calculate the
beam proﬁle on the facet of the laser by phase retrieval to be used in the simulation. Anders
Kragh Hansen carried out the phase retrieval calculations.
6.2
Experimental Set-up
The experimental set up used to examine SHG is shown on ﬁgure 25. A set of collimating lenses
is placed in front of the laser. The role of the cylindrical lens is to eliminate astigmatism of
the beam. The beam shape in of the laser is dependent on the supplied current. If the current
supplied to the tapered section of the laser is changed, the astigmatism of the beam will be
changed and the cylindrical lens should be aligned again. To avoid this problem, the power of
the laser was changed by adjusting the wave plates. The wave plates controls the polarization of
the beam. The transmission of the isolator is polarization dependent enabling the transmission
36
==PAGE:38==
(a) The emitted optical power as a func-
tion of current to the tapered part of the
laser. The threshold current is 2 A.
(b) The spectrum of the laser at 12 A. A
distinct peak is located at λ = 1063nm.
Figure 24: Experiments on the tapered diode laser used in the experiment.
to be changed by rotating the wave plates.
The two mirrors were used to adjust the height of the laser beam to ﬁt the isolator, which was
placed at a ﬁxed height above the table. The second wave plate adjusted the polarization for
optimum SHG. The ﬁrst wave plate controls the transmission of the isolator, and hence adjust
the pump power to the crystal. The emitted optical power of the laser can not be adjusted by
changing the power supply, as changing ampliﬁcation in the tapered section would change the
astigmatism of the beam. The role of the isolator is to eliminate the feedback to the laser. The
tapered waveguide have a high gain amplifying the light, and makes tapered diode lasers very
sensitive to feedback. Feedback to the laser can be unpredictable and inﬂuence the beam shape
and hence the SHG power. This have caused problems in the experimental work.
The non-linear crystal is an 8 mm long periodically poled lithium niobate LiNOB3 with 5%
MgO congruently grown and a poling period of 6.92 µm. The crystal is placed in an oven to
adjust the temperature and hence the phase match condition. A 50 mm anti reﬂective coated
lens for both visible and infrared is used to collimate the beam behind the crystal.
Depending on the speciﬁc measurements conducted, one wavelength will be transmitted into
the power meter and the other redirected to the beam proﬁler. Inside the beam proﬁler is a
sensitive camera requiring a low intensity beam. In order to reduce the intensity, a wedge is
placed reﬂecting 1% of the light to the beam proﬁler. The beam proﬁler is used to measure the
spot size and monitor the beam proﬁle inside the crystal. In order to accurately image the beam
inside the crystal the distance between the collimating lens and the lens inside the beam proﬁler
should be the sum of their focal lengths f1 + f2 = 50mm + 300mm = 350mm.
For each focusing lens used, two measurements have been made. The ﬁrst measurement measures
37
==PAGE:39==
Figure 25: The experimental set-up. For each focusing lens used, two measurements have been made.
The ﬁrst measurement measures the SHG power and the beam proﬁle of the infrared beam. The ﬁlter
reﬂects infrared light and transmits green light to only measure the power of the green light. The second
measurement measures the SHG beam. The ﬁrst ﬁlter is removed and replaced by a mirror to redirect
all the light towards the beam proﬁler.
A ﬁlter is placed just in front of the beam proﬁler to only
transmit the green light. This enables the beam proﬁle of the green beam to be examined. The set of
lenses behind the crystal is used to image the beam inside the crystal.
the SHG power and the beam proﬁle of the infrared beam. The ﬁlter reﬂects infrared light and
transmits green light to only measure the power of the green light. This measurement is taking
place with high infrared power. The second measurement measures the SHG beam. The ﬁrst
ﬁlter is removed and replaced by a mirror to redirect all the light towards the beam proﬁler. A
ﬁlter is placed just in front of the beam proﬁler to only transmit the green light. This enables
the beam proﬁle of the green beam to be examined. The set of lenses behind the crystal creates
a magniﬁed image of the beam inside the crystal. The magniﬁcation depends on the collimating
lens and the lens in the beam proﬁler
M = f2
f1
= 300mm
50mm = 6
(69)
The ﬁrst ﬁlters and mirrors after the crystal were placed on magnetic mounts enabling easy
swapping between the two set-ups. Swapping between the two set-ups should not change the
position of focus inside the beam proﬁler. However this proved not to be possible. The infrared
beam and the green beam had slightly diﬀerent positions. The set-up was aligned to focus the
infrared beam at 300 mm from the lens in the beam proﬁler.
Feedback to the laser from reﬂections of the optical components proved to be a challenge to
eliminate, despite the use of an isolator. Lenses, the crystal, wave plates, and the power meter
were slightly misaligned in order to avoid reﬂections.
This resulted in a somewhat diﬀerent
experimental set-up for each measurement.
38
==PAGE:40==
Figure 26: SHG power as a function of pump power for various lenses used to focus the beam. The
SHG power depends on the pump power squared.
6.3
Experimental Results
Spherical lenses with diﬀerent focal lengths were placed in front of the crystal. For each lens
used, the SHG power was measured for diﬀerent pump powers, see ﬁgure 26. The laser is likely
to suﬀer from feedback in these measurements as feedback was ﬁrst examined after this exper-
iment. All other experiments have been performed with no feedback to the laser. Figure 26 is
presented nonetheless to show that the power of the green light created by SHG is dependent on
the pump power squared. The highest achieved SHG power is ≈140 mW. This SHG power was
achieved in two independent experiments. Later on, the maximum power of the SHG created
was 112.1 mW. The cause of this change is unknown.
The focal length along with the measured pump power and maximum SHG power is presented
in table 2. The ﬁrst wave plate was adjusted for maximum transmission for each lens and the
delivered pump power should therefore be the same in each experiment. The measured pump
power however shows small deviations for each lens used to focus the beam. The two lenses with
the shortest focal length were not anti reﬂective coated for infrared light, and hence the power
delivered to the crystal is lower. All other focusing lenses are anti reﬂective coated for infrared
light. The SHG power for each spherical lens measured experimentally along with the numerical
Focal length (mm)
15
25
35
50
60
75
100
SHG power (mW)
56.7
72.2
112.1
94.3
78.5
64.5
32.8
Pump power (W)
5.63
5.67
6.22
6.22
6.17
6.19
6.15
Table 2: Experimental data for spherical focusing lenses
39
==PAGE:41==
Figure 27: Second harmonic generated green power plotted against the lens used for focusing using
spherical lenses. The maximum SHG power is obtained from a lens with the focal length f = 35 mm.
The red line shows the experimental measurements and the blue the results of the simulation.
predicted results is plotted and displayed in ﬁgure 27. The maximum SHG power is obtained
from a spherical lens with the focal length f = 35 mm for both the experimental measurement
and the simulation. The generated power is however higher for the simulated case compared to
the experimental.
The tapered diode laser beam is diﬀerent along the two axes. By focusing the beam using cylin-
drical lenses may result in a higher SHG power. The spherical lens was thus replaced by two
cylindrical lenses. The lens focusing the fast axis (the y direction) was held ﬁxed at f = 40 mm.
Diﬀerent cylindrical lenses were used to focus the slow axis (the x direction). The focal length
along with the measured pump power and SHG power is presented in table 3. It is surprising
that the highest SHG power is achieved by focusing using spherical lenses and not cylindrical
due to the laser having two distinctly diﬀerent axes.
The SHG power for each cylindrical lens measured experimentally is plotted and displayed in
Focal length, slow axis (mm)
20
30
50
80
100
SHG power (mW)
89.2
98.5
81.2
65.8
57.2
Pump power (W)
6.26
6.25
6.25
6.27
6.25
Table 3: Experiment data for spherical focusing lenses
ﬁgure 28 along with the numerical predicted results. The maximum SHG power is obtained
from a cylindrical lens focusing the fast axis with the focal length f = 40 mm and f = 30 mm
for the slow axis. The simulation once again depicts higher expected SHG power compared to
40
==PAGE:42==
Figure 28: Second harmonic generated green power plotted against the lens used for focusing the slow
axis by cylindrical lenses. The fast axis was focused by the same f = 40mm lens in all cases. The red
line shows the experimental measurements and the blue the results of the simulation.
the experimentally observed SHG power. The variation of using diﬀerent lenses is lower when
focusing using cylindrical lenses. This is due to the same lens focusing the fast axis for all the
experiments. The simulation also shows, unlike the experiments, that focusing using cylindrical
lenses yield a higher SHG power than focusing using cylindrical lenses.
In the simulation the lenses and the crystal is perfect, the poling period perfectly suits the
wavelength and the propagation vector is normal to the crystal facet. All this is not the case in
the experiment where the feedback issue caused a deliberate misalignment. From the simulation
the lenses with the focal lengths f = 35mm, f = 50mm and f = 60mm yields almost the same
SHG power. This might be due to the placement of the lenses. In order to have the focus of the
infrared beam centered in the crystal, the lenses were placed manually by introducing an oﬀset
from the expected position. The size of the oﬀset might have been slightly oﬀfrom the position
resulting in the largest SHG power.
6.4
Phase Matching
The SHG output as a function of the temperature, and therefore the phase match was measured,
see ﬁgure 29. The lenses used for this measurements were the cylindrical lenses yielding the
highest SHG power.
The ﬁlter placed in front of the power meter does not reﬂect 100% of
the infrared light. Therefore a background measurement was taken at a high temperature to
measure the infrared transmission of the ﬁlter. The background power was 3.54 mW which
41
==PAGE:43==
Figure 29: SHG Power generated by a tapered diode infrared beam as a function of phase mismatch.
The fast axis was focused by a f = 40 mm lens and the slow axis by a f = 30 mm lens.
have been subtracted from all points. The generated light does however not fall to 0 should be
expected. This is explained by imperfect poling and the fact that the beam consist of many
diﬀerent angular components. The shape of the phase match curve resembles the one predicted
in the simulation, see ﬁgure 22.
The temperature was controlled by a thermistor measuring the temperature as a resistance.
The Steinhart-Hart equation have been used to calculate to the resistance to temperature
1
T = A + B ln(R) + C ln(R)3
(70)
with the coeﬃcients A = 1.12924 × 10−3 , B = 2.34108 × 10−4 and C = 0.87755 × 10−7. The
data sheet for the thermistor can be found in appendix C.
The images of the infrared and green beam spot through the crystal for the optimal phase match
is shown in ﬁgure 30. The crystal is 8 mm long. In order to capture the beam throughout the
crystal, the magniﬁcation and the refractive index should be taken into account. An estimate of
the apparent length of the crystal as seen in the beam proﬁler, by assuming that the refractive
index is 2, is given by M · leﬀ/n = 6 · 8mm/2 = 24mm. The beam proﬁler was set to measure
at ±12 mm around the focus position and should image the beam through the crystal. At the
beginning of the crystal, the beams have many diﬀerent lobes. At the end of the crystal the
beam however forms a distinct central lobe with two side lobes on each side. The actual focus
seem to be at the end facet rather than the center of the crystal.
In order to understand the aﬀects of the phase match condition the beam was measured at
optimum phase matching and non optimal phase matching. Images of the beam have been mea-
sured through the crystal at ﬁve diﬀerent temperatures and plotted in ﬁgure 31. Measurements
42
==PAGE:44==
Figure 30: Experimental measurements of beam spots inside the crystal magniﬁed six times at optimal
phase match. From top to bottom: the beginning of the crystal, the center of the crystal and the end
of the crystal. The left row is the IR beam and the right the SHG beam. A f = 30mm lens have been
used to focus the beam in x direction and f = 40mm in y direction.
43
==PAGE:45==
were taken at phase match conditions corresponding to a SHG power of 50% and 25% of the
maximum power on either side of the peak.
The optimal phase match results in an almost
circular central lobe with smaller side lobes. Outside the optimal phase match diﬀerent angular
components of the beam will experience the highest SHG, and the beam will be distorted.
An experimental set-up was build to examine SHG of a tapered diode laser beam. Several
focusing lenses was used and the resulting SHG power measured. For each measurement images
of the infrared and green beam was taken to monitor the beam through the crystal. The recorded
beam does not resemble the beam found in the simulations. A spherical focusing lens proved to
yield the highest SHG power of PSHG = 112.1 mW. This is about half of the power predicted
by the simulation. As the beam is diﬀerent in the two axes, cylindrical lenses was used to focus
the light. Surprisingly the SHG power of PSHG = 98.5 mW was lower than the spherical case.
The simulation and the experiments found the same set of optimal lenses for SHG for spherical
and cylindrical focusing.
The SHG power was measured for various diﬀerent temperatures to plot the phase match curve.
The shape of the experimental and the numerical phase match curves are similar.
44
==PAGE:46==
Figure 31: Experimental measurements of SHG beam spots inside the crystal magniﬁed 6 times. Each
row shows the beam at diﬀerent temperature. Row 1: T = 31.91◦C, Row 2: T = 33.78◦C, Row 3:
T = 35.83◦C, Row 4: T = 37.8◦C, Row 5: T = 38.7◦C. All images of column 1 are of the beginning
of the crystal, column 2 the center and column 3 the end of the crystal. The optimal phase match is
shown on row 3. A f = 30mm lens have been used to focus the beam in x direction and f = 40mm in
y direction.
45
==PAGE:47==
7
Discussion
In this chapter, the numerical and experimental results will be analyzed and discussed. The
numerical results will be compared with the expected behavior known from theory. For the
elements of the simulation where there exists no prior theory, the simulation results will be com-
pared with the experimental measurements.
7.1
Gaussian Beams
When simulating the Gaussian beam several results obtained from the numerical calculations
were able to be compared with established theory. The numerical propagation of the Gaussian
beam is compared with results obtained by describing the Gaussian beam with the q parameter.
The propagation of the Gaussian beam examined by measuring the beam width through the
system behaved as expected. The diﬀerent methods for of calculating the width of the beam
were all in agreement. The lenses were correctly modeled, collimating and focusing the beam as
expected. The refraction of light when entering a new medium behaved as expected. The beam
quality parameter M 2 was measured to be 1.00, in accordance with theory.
A Gaussian beam with the wavelength λ = 532nm was created in the crystal. The radius of
the SHG beam is 1/
√
2 of the radius of the IR beam as expected. The beam quality parameter
M 2 = 0.99 was 1% oﬀthe expected result of 1.
By changing the temperature, the period of the crystal and the refractive index is altered, in
turn changing the phase match parameter. By measuring the SHG power as a function of tem-
perature, a phase match curve can be plotted. The phase match curve resembles the ones found
in literature, e.g. [4]. The center is not at ∆k = 0 as it is the case for plane waves. The center
is shifted as Boyd-Kleinman states that focused Gaussian beams should.
By changing the beam waist at z = 0, the spot size inside the crystal could be adjusted, changing
the ξ parameter. For each beam waist size, the generated power of the green light was measured,
and from this the Boyd-Kleinman factor, hm, could be calculated. By plotting hm as a function
of ξ a near perfect match was found for the results predicted by the simulation compared to the
results of Boyd and Kleinman. The highest power of green light generated was at ξ = 2.84 with
PSHG = 672.4 mW.
The eﬀect of depleting the pump was measured by changing the eﬀective second order non-linear
coeﬃcient, χ(2)
eﬀ. To the knowledge of the author, this have not been examined before, there does
therefore not exists data that can be compared to the results. For each χ(2)
eﬀ, several diﬀerent
beam waists and hence ξ parameters have been examined. The optimum ξ value of ξ = 2.84
remains the same regardless of the depletion level. As the depletion is not constant for each ξ
46
==PAGE:48==
as explained earlier, the shape of the curve cannot be analyzed.
7.2
Hermite Gaussian Beams
To bridge the gap between Gaussian beams and tapered diode laser beams Hermite Gaussian
beams have been simulated. The goal of the simulation was to check how the diﬀerent deﬁnitions
of the radii behaved and to see if the beam quality parameter was as expected. A TEM01 mode
was chosen as one axis was Gaussian and the other axis a ﬁrst order Hermite Gaussian. The
beam spot was pictured at three key parts of the crystal: the font facet, the center of the crystal
and the end facet. At the front facet, the SHG beam closely resembles the pump with a smaller
spot size. As the beams travels through the crystal the spot size is reduced as it moves towards
the center. At the end facet of the crystal, the SHG beam is no longer a TEM00 mode, but has
a smaller lobe between the two larger ones. The result is a mix of a TEM00 mode and a TEM02
mode. This is conﬁrmed by the beam quality parameter for the SHG beam of M 2 = 3.85. If
the SHG beam was a true TEM02 mode the beam quality parameter would be M 2 = 5. The
generated power is lower at PSHG = 351.4 mW for the Hermite Gaussian beam than for the
Gaussian beam where PSHG = 672.4 mW as expected. The two simulations use the same pump
power at P0 = 6W, but the beam is less localized for the Hermite Gaussian case resulting in a
lower intensity and hence a lower SHG power.
7.3
Tapered Diode Laser Beams
The beam proﬁle of the tapered diode laser beam was measured experimentally and used in the
simulation. The simulations predict a higher SHG power than measured experimentally. The
diﬀerence in power might be explained by the ideal circumstances assumed in the simulation e.g.
no losses, perfect lenses etc. but could also come from error in alignment of the focusing lenses.
Both the experiments and the numerical calculations ﬁnd the same optimal lenses for achieving
the highest SHG power.
The idea of focusing using two cylindrical lenses is based on the fact that the laser is emitting light
in two independent axes. If the lenses are good, the two axes should continue being independent
of each other. The lenses are however not the best for this task as they are known to mix the
two axes. This will result in a lower SHG power, and a more complex beam proﬁle. The optimal
spherical focusing was found to be a f = 35mm lens, but a cylindrical lens of f = 40mm was
used to focus the fast axis. In order to the best focusing lenses, the focusing of both axis should
be examined.
47
==PAGE:49==
The phase match curve has been simulated and measured experimentally. As the absolute value
of the SHG power from the simulation does not correspond to the one found experimentally, the
SHG power has been normalized for the numerical plot, see ﬁgure 22. The shape can however
be compared. The numerical and experimental results show a phase match curve with a similar
shape. Both ﬁgures show that on one side of the peak the function resembles a sinc function,
whereas on the other side of the peak the generated power falls oﬀmore slowly. The reason for
the speciﬁc shape of the phase match curve is unknown.
The tapered diode laser beam in focus resembles a Gaussian distribution surrounded by small
side lobes. The Gaussian or circular shape raises the question if the tapered diode laser could
be modeled as a Gaussian beam with a lower eﬀective energy corresponding to the energy of
the central lobe. When taking into account that SHG is dependent on the square of the pump
power, the side lobes might be negligible to the SHG process. In order to investigate this idea,
the Boyd-Kleinman factor and the ξ parameter should be calculated for the tapered diode laser
beam.
The ξ parameter was calculated based on the equation for Gaussian beams
ξ =
s
lcry
w2
0
λ1
2πn1
(71)
where w0 is the SMBR width of the tapered diode laser beam in the x direction. This is strictly
only true for Gaussian beams, but will be used for comparison.
The central lobe power have been calculated by capturing images of the beam through the
crystal. The focusing lens of 100 mm was used as this results on the larges beam spot and thus
lowest divergence angle. The beam proﬁle were calculated based on the image of the beam in
focus. The intensities were summed along each direction to calculate the beam proﬁle.
The beam proﬁle along the x-direction was used to calculate ξ based on a Gaussian ﬁt. The
Gaussian ﬁt was calculated based the points above half the maximum power. The Gaussian ﬁt
along with the beam proﬁle of the x direction is presented in ﬁgure 32.
For lenses with smallest focal lengths, the measured central lobe power is much higher compared
to the result obtained by focusing using a f = 100 mm lens. This value should not change for the
diﬀerent lenses. The diﬀerence is explained by the very large diﬀraction of the light when focusing
with a very small focal length. A beam focused to a small spot will have a large divergence angle.
The oven containing the crystal is small enough to serve as an aperture cutting the side lobes
of the beam resulting in a higher amount of power in the central lobe. Therefore the fraction of
the total power located in the central lobe is measured using the f = 100 mm lens resulting in
a central lobe power of PCL ≈50% of the total power. This is much lower that expected. The
data sheet of the laser, located in appendix, B states a central lobe power of PCL ≈78% under
the conditions in the experiment. This might be caused by poor quality of collimating optics for
48
==PAGE:50==
Figure 32: The resulting proﬁle from summing all the columns overlapped by the Gaussian ﬁt.
the laser. The low central lobe power also helps explain the lower than expected SHG power.
As the central lobe power is lower, the intensity is lower reducing the SHG power.
The Boyd-Kleinman factor was calculated from the energy of the central lobe.
hm = PSHG
(PCL)2
ϵ0cλ3
1n2n1
16π2d2
eﬀlcry
(72)
This have been done for all spherical focusing lenses, see ﬁgure 33a and for cylindrical lenses,
see ﬁgure 33b.
There is some uncertainty in determining ξ experimentally. Due to the complex structure of
the beam, it is diﬃcult to decide where the focus of the beam is. The alignment procedure used
for the experiment set the focus to be where the central lobe is the smallest or narrowest. The
exact location is cumbersome to locate and is further troubled by the fact that the green and the
infrared beam have somewhat diﬀerent position of focus. In relation to this, comparing exact
points from the experimental plotted graph and the numerical prediction is diﬃcult, although
the lenses used experimentally are the same as the lenses used in the simulation. The overall
tendency of the two predictions are somewhat alike where both predict a maximum using a lens
with the focal length f = 35mm, being the third point from the right hand side.
The optimal focus conditions can be found to be ξ ≈6. ξ is deﬁned by Boyd and Kleinman
as the length of the crystal divided by the confocal parameter.
The optimum found should
therefore be able to be applied for any crystal length. The tapered diode laser beam is however
not symmetrical around focus. The same ξ parameter might not be applicable to any length of
crystal. As the SHG power scales linearly with the crystal length the ξ parameter might not be
able to be scaled in the same way as for Gaussian beams. Therefore a numerical tool able to
simulate the complex beams may prove to be useful.
49
==PAGE:51==
(a) Focusing using spherical lenses.
(b) Focusing using cylindrical lenses. The
fast axis is focused by the same f = 40
mm cylindrical lens for all measurements.
Figure 33: Plotting the Boyd-Kleinman parameter as a function of ξ parameter for the central lobe of
the arbitrary beam.
If the SHG process could be solely ascribed to the Gaussian central lobe the SHG beam pictured
would be Gaussian, which it has proven not to be, both experimentally and from the simulation.
The simulated beam proﬁles through the crystal are not similar to the ones measured exper-
imentally, which is problematic in the validation of the simulation program.
Earlier in the
experimental work, beam proﬁles similar to the ones imaged on the front facet for the numerical
calculations were observed. This experiment was discarded due to feedback to the laser. In
order to eliminate feedback, caused by stray reﬂections from lenses and the crystal, the reﬂective
surfaces were angled a tiny bit. This may have changed the measured beam proﬁles. Due to
time limitations this was unfortunately not investigated further.
8
Conclusion and Outlook
The scope of this thesis was to develop a numerical tool to simulate SHG of arbitrary beams.
The results of the simulations have been compared with theory and experimental work to assess
the reliability of the program. To model an arbitrary monochromatic beam, the electromagnetic
ﬁeld is divided into small pixels modeled by a matrix. Each pixel or matrix element was assumed
to be a monochromatic plane wave. This method of breaking the beam into small planer waves
was veriﬁed by numerically propagating the beam through free space, focusing the beam using
lenses and refraction when entering other materials. None of the equations used in the program
are based on any assumptions regarding the spatial or spectral properties of the beam. This
50
==PAGE:52==
enables the numerical tool to simulate an arbitrary beam.
Three diﬀerent beams have been modeled: Gaussian, Hermite Gaussian and a tapered diode
laser beam. The Gaussian beam was chosen in order to compare the results obtained by the
simulation with the results of Boyd and Kleinman. The simulation of the Gaussian beam was
able to recreate the results of Boyd-Kleinman with almost no deviation including generated
power, beam quality parameter and optimal focusing. Boyd and Kleinman’s theory assumes no
depletion of the pump. As nothing in the underlying theory of the program assumes anything
in relation to depletion, diﬀerent depletion cases were investigated by artiﬁcially changing the
eﬀective non-linearity of the material. The optimal focus remains the same regardless of depletion
of the pump. This have to the knowledge of the author not been investigated earlier.
Hermite Gaussian modes were modeled to bridge the gap between a Gaussian beam and the
more complicated tapered diode laser beam. The model was able to correctly predict the overall
shape of the SHG beam, but as SHG of Hermite Gaussian modes have not been thoroughly
researched, it was diﬃcult to compare the results of the simulations to known theory.
The simulation of the tapered diode laser was able to predict the optimal focusing optics yielding
the highest SHG output.
The simulations did however not mirror the exact results of the
experiment including the SHG power and the shape of the beam. The experimental work has
met complications in the form of feedback to the laser, resulting in a not consistent alignment
with possible experimental error.
The numerical tool is able to correctly predict theoretically known results of Gaussian and
Hermite Gaussian beams. The model is not completely veriﬁed for tapered diode laser beams,
as more experimental work is necessary in order to make deﬁnite conclusions. Dividing beams
into small pixels of monochromatic waves makes it possible to use the same equations regardless
of beam type, but is demanding in calculation time especially for increasingly complex beams.
Boyd and Kleinman’s theory is able to predict the optimal conditions of any Gaussian beam
in any crystal by implementing the hm and ξ parameters. As the tapered diode laser beam is
not symmetrical around focus, describing any arbitrary beam by the same parameters as Boyd-
Kleinman might not be adequate. The same beam might have diﬀerent optimum conditions for
SHG in diﬀerent non-linear crystals. Accurate simulations will be needed in order to ﬁnd these
optimum conditions proving a strong numerical tool useful.
51
==PAGE:53==
References
[1] D. Jedrzejczyk, R. G¨uther, K. Paschke, G. Erbert: ”Frequency doubling of near-infrared
radiation enhanced by a multi-pass cavity for the second-harmonic wave” Proc. of SPIE Vol.
9347
[2] Ab F. Nieuwenhuis, Chris J. Lee, Bernd Sumpf, Peter J.M. van der Slot, G¨otz Erbert, and
Klaus-J. Boller: ”One-Watt level mid-IR output, singly resonant, continuous-wave optical
parametric oscillator pumped by a monolithic diode laser” Optics Express, Vol. 18, Issue 11,
pp. 11123-11131 (2010)
[3] B. E. A. Saleh and M.C. Teich, ”Fundamentals of Photonics”, second edition, 2009
[4] Karsten Rottwitt and Peter Tidemand-Lichtenberg, ”Nonlinear optics: Principles and Ap-
plications”, ﬁrst edition, 2015
[5] O. Gayer, Z. Sacks, E. Galun, A. Arie1: ”Temperature and wavelength dependent refractive
index equations for MgO-doped congruent and stoichiometric LiNbO3” May 2008, Volume 91,
Issue 2, pp 343-348
[6] G. D. Boyd and D. A. Kleinman, ”Parametric Interaction of Focused Gaussian Light Beams”,
1968, Journal of applied physics, volume 39, number 8.
[7] https://www.rp-photonics.com, accessed the 16th of June, 2016.
[8] Svelto Orazio, Principles of lasers 5th edition, 2010, Springer
[9] Lakoba, Taras I., ”Simple Euler method and its modiﬁcations” (Lecture notes for MATH334,
University of Vermont), http://www.cems.uvm.edu/~tlakoba/math337/notes_1.pdf ac-
cessed the 20. of June, 2016
[10] http://tnt.phys.uniroma1.it/twiki/pub/TNTgroup/AngeloVulpiani/runge.pdf
accessed the 20. of June, 2016
[11] Taro Hasegawa, Tadao Shimizu: ” Frequency-doubled Hermite–Gaussian beam and the
mode conversion to the Laguerre–Gaussian beam”, 1 February 1999, Optics Communications
160 (1999). 103–108
==PAGE:54==
Appendices
A
Data sheet of the non-linear crystal
53
==PAGE:55==
1-
F4, No.2TechnologyRoadV.
HsinchuScience Park,Hsinchu300,Taiwan
Tel:+886-3-666-2123Fax+886-3-66-2124
http://www.hcphotonics.com
Email:service@hcphotonics.com
HC
PHOTONICS
CORP.
-
~.
Date:2009/11/10
Chip ID:
AC-Y80101-04-14-01
Chip Physical
Structure
Z
!
I
I
I
/f
/
I
/
I
~
I
/
~
I
/
/
,--
I 81
X
,"
,,,,
y~- ---~JIIIo._-_-
Note: Please handle the chip with the S3/S4 facets.
Note: Please avoid direct contact on both inpuUoutput (S1/S2) surfaces.
HCP Produet Report
Property
Specification
Result
arder number
SC091105287
Checked
Part number
1BKSOLNP010690802001
Checked
Ouantity (pcs)
1
Checked
Grating type
Single
Checked
Material
MCLN
Checked
OPM period(lJm)
6.92
Checked
Dimension(mm)
8*2*0.5
Pass
Dimension grade
P
Pass
Surface grade
A2
Pass
Polishing angle
0°
Pass
Coating Spec
Coated DBAR 1064 (R<0.1%) / 532 (R<0.3%)
Pass
Optical testing
Yes
Checked
Warranty
1 year with condition
==PAGE:56==
,
,",
-
AR Coating
Note: No coating report for wavelengths beyond 2500 nm due to equipment limitation.
Rcflcclance
(%)
70
60
so
40
)0
20
10
o
400
600
800
wavelen~th
(nm)
1000
1200
RefJeclaTICc (%)
2
f==sil
~
o
400
600
800
wavelenith(nm)
1000
1200
DimensionspecUicalion
Grade
p
ParallelismSlIS2(O'i)
3'
Perpendicularily(9:)'i)
15'
Tolerance,LlX(mm)
:tO.2,whenX5mm
:tO.1,whenX<5mm
Tolerance,LlY(mm)
:tO.1
Tolerance,LlZ(mm)
iO.05
Surfacespecification
Grade
A2
S/D(ScralchIDig),based
on
2'J/10
MIL-O.1:E30
C.A.(%).Z
direction
80
C.A.(%).Y duection
90
Chippingin Sl,S2
NochippingwithinC.A
F!atness(
@633nm)
/4
1.8
1.6
1.4
I
sf
1.2
-S2
I I
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
.
l
/
\
I
I
\
I
V
V
==PAGE:57==
/
I
-
Optical Testing
Ti:SapphireLaser
FocusingLens
~- ~~
""'''ro, ~
V
HCP
Ov
8eamsplitter
en
AR
'8.
..
.
.
> . ."..~."'.'32nm
.
.
~..
%
-~
.
Chiplength
·
Deteclor
Newport
11542&dua~channel2832C
powermeler
I
tf
8eam splitter
AR@1064nm, HR@532nm
Note: Our test environment is around room temperature and the chip is placed in an uncovered
oven.
The reason of implementing the measurement around the room temperature is to reduce the
error of measurement.
The pumping source (Ti: Sapphire laser) is the multiple longitudinal modes.
The conversion efficiency measured in this setup is for reference only and might vary with
different optical configuration and laser source.
Reported By:
~/AaW~Xo
-
'I{.
Approved By:_C
lÅ"~(.Il.(~
,0
Input
Output
Normalized
Average Phase Matehing
Effieieney
SN#
A(nm)
Power
A(nm)
Power Temperature(0C)
(%W"lem"l)
Note
(mW)
(mW)
Averaged
AC-Y80101-04-14-01 1061.59 264.55 530.79
1.60
28.0
3.25
PASS
Foeallengthofthelens(D
100mm
Beamradiusatthemiddleofehip
-26um
==PAGE:58==
B
Data sheet of the tapered diode laser
57
==PAGE:59==
==PAGE:60==
==PAGE:61==
C
Data sheet for the thermistor
60
==PAGE:62==
Copyright © 2012, Arroyo instruments. All Rights Reserved.  
 
 
P/N 530-1016 Rev D 
P/N 1600-10K Thermistor 
 
 
The enclosed negative temperature coefficient (NTC) thermistor, p/n 1600-10K, 
works by translating temperature into resistance, with resistance decreasing as 
temperature increases (hence the ‘negative coefficient’). 
 
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
-10.00
10.00
30.00
50.00
70.00
90.00
110.00
Resistance (Ω)
Temperature (°C)
 
Typical Resistance vs. Temperature Graph 
 
As can be seen be the graph, the resistance of the thermistor drops very quickly. 
In the typical control range (0°C to 40°C), 10K thermistors offer good sensitivity 
to changes in temperature, and this is the range in which most 10K thermistors 
are typically used. 10K 
thermistors can be used at 
much higher temperatures, 
but will suffer poorer 
temperature stability 
performance because of 
the lower sensitivity. 
  
The Steinhart-Hart 
Equation 
 
Resistance varies inversely with temperature in a non-linear fashion. This 
relationship can be accurately modeled by the Steinhart-Hart equation: 
3)
ln(
*
)
ln(
*
1
R
C
R
B
A
T



 
 
Where:  A = 1.12924E-03  
B = 2.34108E-04  
C = 0.87755E-07 
 
Thermistor Resistance vs Temperature Chart 
 
 
°C 
R Val (Ω)
°C
R Val (Ω)
°C
R Val (Ω)
°C
R Val (Ω)
°C
R Val (Ω) 
‐80 
7,296,874
‐30
176,683
20
12,493.70
70
1,751.60
120
388.59 
‐79 
6,677,205
‐29
166,091
21
11,943.30
71
1,693.00
121
378.44 
‐78 
6,114,311
‐28
156,199
22
11,420.0
72
1,636.63
12
368.59 
‐77 
5,602,677
‐27
146,959
23
10,922.70
73
1,582.41
123
359.05 
‐76 
5,137,343
‐26
138,322
24
10,449.90
74
1,530.28
124
349.79 
‐75 
4,713,762
‐25
130,243
25
10,000.00
75
1,480.12
125
340.82 
‐74 
4,327,977
‐24
122,687
26
9,572.00
76
1,431.87
126
332.11 
‐73 
3,966,352
‐23
115,613
27
9,164.70
77
1,385.37
127
323.67 
‐72 
3,655,631
‐22
108,991
28
8,777.00
78
1,340.68
128
315.48 
‐71 
3,362,963
‐21
102,787
29
8,407.70
79
1,297.64
129
307.53 
‐70 
3,095,611
‐20
96,974
30
8,056.00
80
1,256.17
130
299.82 
‐69 
2,851,363
‐19
91,525
31
7,720.90
81
1,216.23
131
292.34 
‐68 
2,627,981
‐18
86,415
32
7,401.70
82
1,177.75
132
285.08 
‐67 
2,423,519
‐17
81,621
33
7,097.20
83
1,140.71
133
278.03 
‐66 
2,236,398
‐16
77,121
34
6,807.00
84
1,104.99
134
271.19 
‐65 
2,064,919
‐15
72,895
35
6,530.10
85
1,070.58
135
264.54 
‐64 
1,907,728
‐14
68,927
36
6,266.10
86
1,037.40
136
258.09 
‐63 
1,763,539
‐13
65,198
37
6,014.20
87
1,005.40
137
251.82 
‐62 
1,631,173
‐12
61,693
38
5,773.70
88
974.56
138
245.74 
‐61 
1,509,639
‐11
58,397
39
5,544.10
89
944.81
139
239.82 
‐60 
1,397,935
‐10
55,298
40
5,324.90
90
916.11
140
234.08 
‐59 
1,295,239
‐9
52,380
41
5,115.60
91
888.41
141
228.50 
‐58 
1,200,732
‐8
49,633
42
4,915.50
92
861.70
142
223.08 
‐57 
1,113,744
‐7
47,047
43
4,724.30
93
835.93
143
217.80 
‐56 
1,033,619
‐6
44,610
44
4,541.60
94
811.03
144
212.68 
‐55 
959,789
‐5
42,314.60
45
4,366.90
95
786.99
145
207.70 
‐54 
891,689
‐4
40,149.50
46
4,199.90
96
763.79
146
202.86 
‐53 
828,865
‐3
38,108.50
47
4,040.10
97
741.38
147
198.15 
‐52 
770,880
‐2
36,182.80
48
3,887.20
98
719.74
148
193.57 
‐51 
717,310
‐1
34,366.10
49
3,741.10
99
698.82
149
189.12 
‐50 
667,828
0
32,650.80
50
3,601.00
100
678.63
150
184.79 
‐49 
622,055
1
31,030.40
51
3,466.90
101
659.10
‐48 
579,718
2
29,500.10
52
3,338.60
102
640.23
‐47 
540,530
3
28,054.20
53
3,215.60
103
622.00
‐46 
504,230
4
26,687.60
54
3,097.90
104
604.36
‐45 
470,609
5
25,395.50
55
2,985.10
105
587.31
‐44 
439,445
6
24,172.70
56
2,876.90
106
570.82
‐43 
410,532
7
23,016.00
57
2,773.20
107
554.86
‐42 
383,712
8
21,921.70
58
2,673.90
108
539.44
‐41 
358,806
9
20,885.20
59
2,578.50
109
524.51
‐40 
335,671
10
19,903.50
60
2,487.10
110
510.06
‐39 
314,179
11
18,973.60
61
2,399.40
111
496.08
‐38 
294,193
12
18,092.60
62
2,315.20
112
482.55
‐37 
275,605
13
17,257.40
63
2,234.70
113
469.45
‐36 
258,307
14
16,465.10
64
2,156.70
114
456.76
‐35 
242,195
15
15,714.00
65
2,082.30
115
444.48
‐34 
227,196
16
15,001.20
66
2,010.80
116
432.58
‐33 
213,219
17
14,324.60
67
1,942.10
117
421.06
‐32 
200,184
18
13,682.60
68
1,876.00
118
409.90
‐31 
188,026
19
13,052.80
69
1,812.60
119
399.08
 
