==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Infl uence Of Air-Water Mixture On Oscillating 
Squared Cylinders Force Coeffi  cients
Jonas Mortensen 
July 2016
==PAGE:2==
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Section of Fluid Mechanics, Coastal and Maritime Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Nils Koppels Allé, Bld. 403
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +(45) 4525 1360
www.mek.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis was written as a nal closure of the master program Civil Engi-
neering and Marine Constructions and was completed in a corporation with the
Mechanical Institute, at the Technical University of Denmark. This paper con-
sist with an equivalent work of 32.5 ECTS points. The supervisor of this thesis
was Head of Section Professor Erik Damgaard Christensen along with an Asso-
ciated Professor Stefan Carstensen and PhD Student Malene Hovgaard Vested.
The thesis was carried out in the time window of February 1 - July 16, 2016.
The work done in this thesis is part of the DeRisk research program. The target
group of this paper is students or engineers working within the eld of marine
structures.
I would like to thank my primarily supervisor Erik Damgaard Christensen and
Malene Hovgaard Vested who supported and guided me throughout the project,
and helped to trouble shoot and analyse the gathered data.
Also a special
thanks to my additional supervisor Stefan Carstensen who helped setting up the
equipment and communicated with the needed technicians. At last my thoughts
goes to the technicians Thomas Hornbeck Hald, Poul-Erik Hyldbo and Claus
Grølsted who helped to realize this project, without them this experiment would
never have been accomplished.
Lyngby, 16-July-2016
Jonas H.K. Mortensen
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
In the attempt of gaining a deeper and a more comprehensive knowledge in order
to determine the forces acting on the embedded oshore structure a special
aspect of the waves kinematic, which yet haven't been exploited thoroughly
is process of air entrainment when waves breaks on oshore structures. This
aspect might become more important in the years to come, when oshore wind
farms has to be more feasible, before countries would be willing to change their
primary source of energy.
However, so far the paramount issue of how to gain knowledge regarding this
aspect, has been to set up an experiment, which enables scientists to isolate the
eect of having air trapped in the water, and additionally how to adjust this
air percentage in the uid. Being able to manipulate the presence of air in the
water, could lead to a development of a technique which would allow people to
measure the air content in a wave, thus achieve a better understanding of the
waves kinematic.
In this project temporary walls have been installed in a ume which had a cross
section of 595 x 800 mm, which lead to a test environment of 595 x 800 x 950
mm. Inside this enclosed ume, three UD1000 diusers were installed, their
primary function was to inject air into the enclosed ume. The air was supplied
by a FPZ K05-MS channel blower, which had a maximum capacity of 219 m3/h.
To control the magnitude of the ow which were being injected by the diusers,
a control valve was installed at one of the tubes, supplying air to the UD1000
diusers. Depending on the injected ows magnitude, the amount of air being
trapped in the water would change. By measuring the volume change of the
uid, when subjected to air, an estimation of the air-water content in the water
was made.
While having a specic mixture of air and water, a horizontal or vertical cylinder
was oscillating with a KC = 2 - 11 per se. From these cylinders, force coecients
==PAGE:6==
iv
according to the Morison Equation were subtracted and analysed.
The overall results showed that while injecting air into the water, both cylinders
experienced an instantaneous increase of the drag, which rapidly decreased with
an increasing KC - number.
Depending on the location of the vertical cylinder in the enclosed ume, while
oscillating, its inertia coecients changed.
All the inertia coecients of the
horizontal cylinder decreased when being subjected to an upstream ow. How-
ever the credibility of all the results are uncertain, since it was observed that
circulation and turbulence was presence during the tests. The inuence of these
eects are yet unclear.
==PAGE:7==
List of symbols
This and the following pages contains a list of the symbols used throughout this
thesis. The symbols are sorted according to the alphabet and a small bit of text
has been added to each symbol, explaining the means of it.
Symbol
Description
A
cross sectional area of the cylinder
Ad
cross sectional area of the duct
Air%
measured air percentage
B
Barometric pressure
¯CD
mean drag coecient
Cm
hydrodynamic mass coecient
Cm −error
error estimation of the mass coecient
CM
inertia coecient
D
diameter of the cylinder
Dd
distance from bottom ume to the edge of the injection point
de
diameter of the air bubbles
ϵ2
dierence between measured and predicted force
fd
summation of the drag force parameters
fi
summation of the inertia force parameters
fv
vortex shedding frequency
¯FD
mean drag force
F ′
L
oscillating lift force
Fm
measured force
Fmf
hydrodynamic mass force
==PAGE:8==
vi
List of symbols
Fp
predicted force from the Morison equation
g
gravity acceleration
km
constant of the MFS ow sensor
KC
Keulegan-Carpenter number
κs
Nikuradse's equivalent sand roughness of the cylinder surface
lf
length of the enclosed ume
Lcorr
correlation length
mb
mass of embedded body
µl
dynamic viscosity of the liquid
ω
wave period
p′
uctuating part of the unsteady quantity
∆p
pressure dierence
Qa
air ow through the duct
Re
Reynold number
R(z)
correlation coecient
ρ
density of the uid
ρa
density of the air
ρg
density of gas
ρl
density of liquid
∆ρ
apparent density (ρl −ρg)
St
Strouhal number
tb
time for the bubbles to reach the water surface
Tw
period of the oscillating ow
ub
terminal velocity rise of a single bubble
U
ow velocity
˙U
acceleration of the uid
Um
measured velocity
Umax
maximum velocity in a oscillating ow
∆˙U
acceleration dierence
V
volume of the cylinder
Va
velocity of the air after injection
ν
kinematic viscosity of the liquid
wf
width of the enclosed ume
Wd
start water level
WR
rise of the water level
ζ
spanwise distance
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface
i
Abstract
iii
List of symbols
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
The DeRisk Project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theory
3
2.1
Steady Flow Around Cylinders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Forces On A Cylinder In Steady Current . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Flow Around A Cylinder In Oscillatory Flows . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Forces On A Cylinder In An Oscillating Flow . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5
Adjusting The Morison Equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.6
Determining the CD and CM - Coecients
. . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.7
Inuence Of Air-Water Mixture On Wave Impact Pressure . . . .
11
3
Apparatus and Equipment
13
3.1
The Piston
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
The Diusers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3
The Perforated Plate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.4
The Load Cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.5
The Carriage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.6
The Channel Blower . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.7
The MFS Flow Sensor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.8
The Draw Wire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.9
The Camera and Grid Paper
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
4
Error Estimations Of The Inertia Coecients
31
4.1
Misreading Consequence Of The Draw Wire . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2
Other uncertainties of the CM - coecient . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5
Validation Test
39
6
Estimation of Air Percentage
43
6.1
Reading The Air-Water Percentage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.2
Calculating The Air-Water Percentage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
7
The 5 Dierent Air-Water Percentage and Locations of The
Vertical Cylinder
51
8
Results
57
8.1
A Short Example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
8.2
Evaluated Drag and Inertia Coecients
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
8.2.1
Horizontal Cylinder
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
8.2.2
Vertical Cylinder 125 mm from ume wall . . . . . . . . .
69
8.2.3
Vertical Cylinder 210 mm from ume wall . . . . . . . . .
74
8.2.4
Vertical Cylinder 295 mm from ume wall . . . . . . . . .
79
8.3
Variation of The Wake of The Horizontal Cylinder . . . . . . . .
84
9
Discussion
87
9.1
The Horizontal Cylinder vs. The Vertical Cylinder . . . . . . . .
87
9.2
Forced Induced Vibration In A Cross Flow
. . . . . . . . . . . .
89
9.3
Location of The Vertical Cylinder and Circulation Eects . . . .
92
9.4
Low KC Numbers vs. High KC Numbers
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
9.5
Turbulence In The Fluid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
9.6
Estimation of Air-Water Percentage
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
9.7
Future studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
10 Conclusion
103
A Calibration Of Equipment
107
A.1 Calibration Of Load Cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
A.2 Calibration Of Draw Wire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
B Spectral Analyse of the Signal
113
B.1
Validation of Spectral Analyse
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
B.2
Applying The Spectral Analyse On A Gathered Data Set
. . . . 115
C Natural Frequencies of The Cylinders
119
D Validation of The Cylinders Mass
123
==PAGE:11==
CONTENTS
ix
E Contribution To the
Inline Force
127
F Bubble Injection Process
131
G Drawings of Test Set-up, Cylinders and Grid Paper
135
H Data sheets
143
I
Matlab
149
Bibliography
161
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Mankind's use of wind power goes back to the point of where humans developed
the technique of using sails as their primary source when concurring the seas.
For more than 200 years mankind have taken the advantage of the winds when
water had to be drained from their lands or when grains had to be grounded.
Wind powered pumps have drained the Netherlands and been the primary source
of delivering water for live stocks or steam engines. Today humans uses the wind
to power their houses, companies and infrastructure. And in 2014 wind turbines
were responsible for producing 4% of the world's electricity [Wikipedia, 2016].
The history of electrical wind turbines in Denmark can be traced back to 1891
when Poul la Cour developed some of the worlds rst electrical wind powered
generators. Today he has been given the credit of being the rst to discover
that an optimum windmill consist of 3 wings. He among others discovered that
relying completely on wind generated power would be bold, since periods exist
of no wind at all. To address this problem he charged a tub lled with water,
thus transformed the water into hydrogen and oxygen with use of electrolysis.
By 1908 more than 72 wind turbines were to found on Danish soil, the largest
of them were a 24 m tower with four blades of 23 m. Today the government of
Denmark has decided that before year 2020, more than 30% of the total energy
consumption should be supplied by green energy resources, including oshore
wind turbines [Energinet, 2014].
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction
However, to accomplish this quest a paramount issue has to be faced and dealt
with, which is the cost of producing green energy.
Beside dealing with the
problem of not being enable to properly store the produced energy for later use,
the cost of producing oshore wind turbines, compared to their eciency, is still
lacking behind the cost of producing energy by fossil fuel. Even though there
exist multiple of reasons why an oshore structure is so pricey, one of the main
sinners is the amount of materials used to produce the wind turbines. One of
the main reasons why industries uses a vast amount of steel lies in the fact that
no one so far fully understands the waves kinematic, thus their forces on the
oshore structures.
An aspect of the wave kinematic which has been troubling scientists for decades
is the air entrainment process of a breaking wave. Through the last two decades
scientist such as [Blenkinsopp, 2007], [Blenkinsopp and Chaplin, 2007],
[Deane and Stokes, 2002] and [Kiger and Duncan, 2012] has tried to investigate
the inuence of air entrainment in waves, by measuring the pressure around a
stationary cylinder exposed to breaking waves. However so far no ideal con-
clusion has been made. If scientists would manage to achieve a comprehensive
knowledge of this eect, it may be possible to construct wind turbines cheaper
and thus become more competitive on the marked of energy resources.
This project will try to achieve a connection between the amount air trapped
in the water and the hydrodynamic force of an oscillating cylinder. The hydro-
dynamic force will be based on the Morison Equation, and the behaviour of the
drag and inertia coecients, when subjecting the cylinder to various air-water
mixture will be investigated. The results of this study can then be used to eval-
uate the forces of a breaking wave, and give an estimation of its air percentage.
1.1
The DeRisk Project
This paper is in corporation with the DeRisk Program. The DeRisk project
consist of 9 partners; DTU Wind Energy, DTU Mechanical Engineering, DTU
Compute, DHI, DONG Energy, University of Oxford, University of Stavanger,
Statkraft and Statoil [DeRisk, 2015].
DeRisk's mission is to reduce the cost of oshore wind turbines by providing
advance design methods for the oshore structures, which would reduce the
risk and uncertainties of extreme wave loadings.
Reducing the risk of these
structures would help reducing the cost of production, which would make wind
energy a more favourable choice, when the futures primary energy source has
to be taken.
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Theory
2.1
Steady Flow Around Cylinders
A body exposed to a steady current will experience forces which is directly
related to the relative velocity of the ow. The non dimensional quantity de-
scribing the ow around a cylinder may be expressed according to the Reynold
number. [Sumer and Fredsse, 2006].
Re = DU
ν
(2.1)
For circular bodies it has become common practice to relate individual ow
regimes to the Reynold number Eq. (2.1), a larger number would result in a
more chaotic ow as the ow pattern goes from a laminar to a turbulent ow
case.
The reason of this phenomenon is found in the behaviour of the streamlines
surrounding the exposed body. At extremely low Reynold numbers, no ow
separations would occur, this type of ow is also referred to as the creeping ow
and is strictly laminar. Increasing the Reynold number, vortices is formed in
the wake of the body, at the beginning this wake is still considered stable, and
no shedding occurs at the moment.
==PAGE:16==
4
Theory
A further increasement of the Reynold number would result in an unstable wake,
which leads to the phenomenon vortex shedding.
The next stages of transformation, which the ow undergoes, is primarily fo-
cussed on the behaviour of the vortices, and how and when they reach a turbu-
lence stage. A more detailed explanation is described by [Sumer and Fredsse, 2006].
However in this thesis squared cylinders are used instead of circulars, the ad-
vantage of this implementation is that the separation points always will occur
at the corners of the squared cylinder, in contrast to a circular cylinder, which
separation points will move according to its subjected ow regime.
The sharp edges of a squared cylinder suppresses the boundary-layer of the body,
thus releasing vortices into the wake. Additionally due to the sharp edges, sep-
aration already occurs at low Reynold numbers in contrast a circular cylinder.
Thus the presence of creeping ow around the body may be omitted. By having
a xed location of which vortex shedding is formed, discontinuities of the shed-
ding frequency is not expected for the square cylinder, instead a more constant
Strouhal number is to be expected per se. [Petersen, 2016].
2.2
Forces On A Cylinder In Steady Current
In Sec. 2.1 the steady ow around a cylinder was discussed, and the indepen-
dence of the Reynold number of a squared cylinder was argued. Regardless, a
body which is being exposed to such a ow will exert two force components,
namely an in-line and a transverse force. These forces are mainly referred to as
the drag and lift-force in the hydraulic studies. The origin of these forces are
found in the vortex shedding phenomenon, when shedding occurs the body exert
a periodic pressure distribution, resulting in a periodic force-resultant variation.
Previously studies shows that the drag force consist of two components, a friction
and a form drag. However through numbers of comprehensive studies, it was
shown that the friction drag is less than 2 - 3 % of the total drag force, thus it may
be excluded in most cases. As previously mentioned, the pressure distribution
is periodic changing due to the shedding mechanism, this also implies that the
two force components oscillate with respect to the shedding frequency.
However in many eld studies, it may be a disadvantage to consider a frequently
changing drag force, and a mean value is found instead see Eq. (2.2).
¯FD = 1
2
¯CDρDU 2
(2.2)
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Forces On A Cylinder In Steady Current
5
From which it is seen that the mean drag force, ¯FD, is directly related to the
free stream velocity of the ow. However a disadvantage of Eq. (2.2) is the
means to nd the mean drag coecient, ¯CD.
Various of studies throughout the years has tried to come up with some sort of
an equation, capable of estimating this coecient, however since the coecient
has too many unknown factors such as, velocity of the ow, size and shape of the
embedded member, surface roughness etc. so far researchers have not managed
to come up with an explicit equation.
In fact when designing or evaluating oshore structures and the impact of the
hydrodynamic loads on these, the individual force coecients are found through
various of tests, which is then used to model the forces on these structures. For
further information about the change and behaviour of the drag coecient, one
may look into e.g. [Sumer and Fredsse, 2006].
Additionally by using square cylinders as in this thesis, it has previously been
mentioned that the separation points will occur at the corners of the embedded
member. Having a xed location of the separation, regardless of the ow velocity
per se, it may be assumed that the squared cylinder will experience an almost
constant form drag throughout the tests. However the transition in the wake
from being laminar to turbulent, may have an inuence of the exerted form drag,
however this inuence is disregarded in this thesis and not be further evaluated.
==PAGE:18==
6
Theory
2.3
Flow Around A Cylinder In Oscillatory Flows
In contrast to members exposed to a steady ow, members subjected to an
oscillating ow also exerts other types of forces. Thus it would be inappropriate
describing the ow dependently by the Reynolds number, instead it has become
common practice to describe an oscillating ow according to the Keulegan-
Carpenter number (KC-number), see Eq. (2.3).
KC = UmaxTw
D
(2.3)
A physical explanation of the Keulegan-Carpenter number would be the ratio
of the distance which the water particle moves, versus the size of the cylinder.
For extremely small KC - numbers, separation of the stream lines of a circular
cylinder may not even occur, thus the ow is considered as laminar. However
since this thesis is dealing with squared cylinders, this scenario is rare and it is
considered that ow separation always will be presence.
Regardless, an increase of the KC - number would result in a greater travelling
distance of the water particle with respect to the diameter of the cylinder. This
leads to a separation of the stream lines at the front corners of the squared
cylinder, which doesn't attach to the side faces.
The major dierence between the shedding mechanism in a steady current,
explained in Sec. 2.1 and in an oscillating ow, is the wash-over mechanism.
This mechanism is seen when the water motion changes direction. Here the
formed vortex on the rear side of the cylinder, is washed over the cylinder,
seeking shelter for the incoming ow.
Additionally depending on the oscillating ow and the embedded cylinder, the
number of shedded vortices per half period of the oscillating motion, gives name
to the regimes of which the shedding takes place. e.g. if only one vortex is being
shed each half period, this would be called single-pair regime. If two vortices
was to be shed each half period, this would be called double-pair regime and so
forth.
==PAGE:19==
2.4 Forces On A Cylinder In An Oscillating Flow
7
2.4
Forces On A Cylinder In An Oscillating Flow
Like in the steady current case, the shedding mechanism in the oscillating ow
results in a periodic pressure distribution, this change of pressure, around the
embedded body, leads once again to an in-line and transverse force, moreover
these forces can also be broken down into a mean and oscillating part.
However in contrast to the steady ow, where the uctuating drag force, F ′
D,
was omitted and only the mean drag force, ¯FD, was of interest, the mean drag
force in a pure oscillating ow is equal to zero, thus when considering oscillating
ows, the entire drag force, FD, must be taken into account to evaluate the
maximum force exerting on the member.
FD = 1
2ρCDDU |U|
(2.4)
It must be emphasized that the velocity, U, can't be squared, instead it has to
be multiplied with its own absolute value to ensure that the drag force is in the
same direction as the ow.
Additionally to the drag force, there would be one more contribution presence
of the total in-line force, when having an oscillating cylinder.
This contribution is in accordance to newton second law, and is referred to as
the hydrodynamic mass.
"The hydrodynamic mass is dened as the mass of the uid around the body
which is accelerated with the movement of the body due to the action of pres-
sure.." [Sumer and Fredsse, 2006]
The hydrodynamic force may be expressed as.
Fmf = ρCmA ˙U
(2.5)
The hydrodynamic mass coecients, Cm, is approximately equal to 1, for circu-
lar cylinders, however working with squared cylinders the hydrodynamic mass
coecient is greater than 1.
Previously studies has investigated the inuence of the hydrodynamic mass co-
ecient with various sizes and shapes of dierent members, and today numerous
of tables may give a design mass coecient, appropriate for small KC-values.
Forces measured on a cylinder exposed to an oscillating ow may be compared
to forces of regular waves. However in waves a second force contribution to the
in-line force is presence. This force is known as the Froude-Krylov force, which
==PAGE:20==
8
Theory
is caused by the acceleration of the ow in the outer ow eld, resulting in a
pressure gradient. This pressure gradient may be expressed as a force component
written as.
Fp = −
Z
S
pdS →ρA ˙U
(2.6)
By summing up Eq. (2.4), (2.5), (2.6), would result in an expression of which
the total resulting in-line force of a cylinder held still whilst being exposed to
regular waves is found. This expression is known as the Morison equation.
F = 1
2ρCDDU |U| + ρCMA ˙U
(2.7)
Where CM = Cm + 1 and is referred to as the inertia coecient.
Previously studies has shown that the Morison equation gives a good represen-
tation of the measured in-line force, if the ow may be considered to be inertia
dominated.
However when introducing ow separation, the predicted force of Eq. (2.7) can't
provide a complete basis for the force variation, this problem has been addressed
by [Sarpkaya, 1981] who introduced an extra term to the equation, providing a
better t for the predicted values.
It is concluded that the accuracy of the Morison equation is straightly related
to the exerted ow, thus the KC - value. However in this thesis we neglect the
fourth term by [Sarpkaya, 1981] due to simplicity, and just acknowledge that the
Morison equation doesn't give a complete representation of the actual forces.
2.5
Adjusting The Morison Equation
As mentioned in Sec. 2.4, the Morison equation reported on Eq. (2.7), may
predict the forces formed by regular waves exerting a stationary held cylinder.
However in this thesis a horizontal and vertical cylinder will be set into an
oscillating sinusoidal motion in still water.
This implies that the previously
mentioned Froude Krylov force, caused by the acceleration of the outer-ow
eld will not be presence. Because that the pressure gradient is formed due to
the absolute motion of the uid and not the body.
However the hydrodynamic mass force will still be presence, since the immediate
uid of the cylinder, still will be accelerated around the cylinder, during its
==PAGE:21==
2.6 Determining the CD and CM - Coecients
9
motion. The acceleration forms a pressure gradient around the body, which
through integration, the hydrodynamic force is found and will be equal to the
force found in Eq. (2.5).
Instead of the Froude-Krylov force, another term is introduced, which is the
acceleration of the cylinders mass, which just as the Froude-Krylov force is in
accordance to the Newton 2nd law. By substituting these changes into the pre-
viously reported Morison equation, the expected hydrodynamic force exerting
the cylinders may be written as.
F = 1
2ρCDAU |U| + ρCmV ˙U + mb ˙U
(2.8)
The inertia coecient has been removed from the previously expression and
instead replaced by the hydrodynamic mass coecient, Cm, additionally the
mass of the embedded cylinder, mb, is introduced.
2.6
Determining the CD and CM - Coecients
As previously mentioned, the most optimum way to estimate the force coe-
cients, of an oscillating cylinder in still uid, is by determining them through
experiments. In the following a small explanation of how to determine the drag
and mass coecients, CD and Cm will be given.
This thesis focus on periodic oscillating cylinders in still uid, hence the method
of least squares will be the most appropriate approach of determining the coef-
cients.
To begin with consider Eq. (2.8), here the force formed by the acceleration of
the cylinder will be subtracted from both sides, leaving the force which origin
from the resistance in the uid.
F = 1
2ρCDAU |U| + ρCmV ˙U
(2.9)
This force will be time depended, since the velocity and acceleration will vary in
time. To simplify the equation the non time dependent parameters are dragged
out and will be referred to as.
fd = 1
2ρCDA
,
fi = ρCmV
(2.10)
==PAGE:22==
10
Theory
Inserting the previously expression into Eq. (2.9), the predicted force Fp, may
be written as.
Fp(t) = fdU(t) |U(t)| + fi ˙U(t)
(2.11)
The sum of the dierence between the predicted and measured force will be
named ϵ2, and is found according to.
ϵ2 =
X
[Fp(t) −Fm(t)]2
=
X
[fdU(t) |U(t)| + fi ˙U(t) −Fm(t)]2
(2.12)
Finding the minimum ϵ2
∂ϵ2
∂fd = 0
,
∂ϵ2
∂fi = 0
(2.13)
Solving these two upper equations gives
fd
 P U 4(t)

+ fi
P U(t) |U(t)| ˙U(t)

= P U(t) |U(t)| Fm(t)
and
fd
P U(t) |U(t)| ˙U(t)

+ fi
P ˙U 2(t)

= P ˙U(t)Fm(t)
(2.14)
By Solving for fd and fi simultaneously in Eq. (2.14), for the entire time series,
and substituting these results into Eq. (2.10) the drag and mass coecient, CD
and Cm are found.
==PAGE:23==
2.7 Inuence Of Air-Water Mixture On Wave Impact Pressure
11
2.7
Inuence Of Air-Water Mixture On Wave Im-
pact Pressure
Through the last centuries scientists and researchers have investigated the in-
uence of air-water mixture when pressure formed by a plunging wave clashes
into an oshore construction. Each have been trying to come up with a model,
which includes the complexity of the randomness sea stage and the entrapped
air dynamics during impact, however without any success.
[Chan and Melville, 1988] showed that the variation of the wave pressure exert-
ing on an oshore structure might be decomposed into two elements.
• "A slight shift in the wave breaking location relative to the structure
location." [Chan, 1994]
• "The randomness in the wave breaking kinematics and the entrapped air
dynamics during impact" [Chan, 1994]
It was observed by [Chan, 1994], that during the waves impact on structures,
air is trapped in the incident wave, causing the exerting pressure to oscillate.
Additionally [Chan, 1994] claimed that repeating subjecting a stationary cylin-
der to the same kind of incident waves, would result in various peak pressures
and oscillation frequencies. He argued that the randomness of these measure-
ment were caused by the presence of air pockets in the waves. He also wrote
that the variation would be more signicant when the volume of trapped air is
relative small.
[Oshore et al., 1991] also argued that the size of the air-pocket inuenced the
magnitude of the pressure and the frequency. Bigger air-pockets results in a
lower magnitude and frequency.
Additionally he argued that bigger air pockets might induce signicant larger
structural response. These results were based on a numerical model, and haven't
yet been tested in practice. The advantage of using a numerical model was the
ability to isolate the critical parameters, thus ensuring that others factors would
not inuence the results.
It has also been proved that the increase of pressure beneath waves, may be con-
sidered as non-impulsive, hence only the increase of pressure above the still wa-
ter level is considered to be impulsive. [Oshore et al., 1991] also acknowledged
==PAGE:24==
12
Theory
that small air-pockets seems to contribute to a greater variation in the magni-
tude and frequency of the pressure after a structural impact, whereas larger air-
pockets results in more consistence pressure distribution. This was also observed
by [Chan et al., 1995] [King and Wells, 1974] [Easson and Greated, 1984] and
[Waterway, 1993]
As seen from above, a lot of studies have investigated the pressure on a cylinder,
when air is trapped in the rolling motion of the waves. However none of the
previously mentioned authors have looked into the air-water mixture eect on
the force coecients on an oscillating cylinder. Which is why this paper will
carry out such an experiment.
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 3
Apparatus and Equipment
This chapter goes through a thorough explanation of the entire test setup, used
to investigate the inuence of an air-water mixture, on the force coecients of
an oscillating cylinder.
The measurement of the air-water mixture inuence of the hydrodynamic force
coecients were carried out in an enclosed ume, having the size 950 x 595 x
800 mm. The test set up is shown on page. 14 and 15.
In this enclosed ume, three UD1000 air diusers supplied by PUMPTEKNIK
ApS were installed in the bottom of the ume.
The air supply was generated by a FPZ K05-MS channel blower. To control the
ow being injected into the ume, a regulation valve, was installed in connection
with the channel blower. By adjusting the knob, the ow may be regulated. It
was during the project observed that turbulence and circulation occurred when
injecting air into the ume, this eects was suppressed with various of means,
which will be described later in this paper.
==PAGE:26==
14
Apparatus and Equipment
==PAGE:27==
15
==PAGE:28==
16
Apparatus and Equipment
To evaluate the air percentage in the water, it was assumed that the change of
volume was equal to the amount of air presence in the water. To begin with the
depth of the water level was measured, before injecting air into the ume. On
the outside of the ume wall a grid paper was attached. When injecting air into
the ume, the water level will rise and set at a certain level. Thus the increase
of the water level could then be read according to the grid paper.
However since the water level would not be at rest when injecting air into the
ume, it would be dicult to estimate the "mean" water level. To address this
problem a Panasonic DMC-FZ200 camera was set to lm the location of the
new water level. Afterwards this video was analysed, and an estimation of the
location of the new water depth could be made. Thus the air-water percentage
could be estimated.
To evaluate the hydrodynamic force coecients on an oscillating cylinder, over
a range of KC - numbers, a hydraulic piston as seen on page, was installed and
xed to the walls of the ume. In this paper it was found appropriate to move
the piston with a frequency of 1 Hz, by doing so it seemed that less noise was
produced at this motion.
A carriage was xed at the end of the hydraulic piston. This carriage ran on
two tracks, located on the edge of the umes walls. The cylinders were rigidly
xed to the carriage, with either one or two loads cells, since the horizontal
cylinder used two load cells during the tests. The load cells were produced by
HT - cencors and of the type TAL201.
Additionally a Miniature draw wire encoder A40 made by Kübler, was attached
to the carriage. When the string of the draw wire was pulled out of the box,
a certain voltage resistance was formed, which afterwards could be converted
into a distance through a calibration. Knowing the carriage motion to a specic
time, the velocity and acceleration of the carriage, thus the cylinders could be
found. These were used to evaluate the force coecients.
In this paper the two squared cylinders were used, a vertical and a horizontal.
The geometry of the vertical cylinder was 40 x 40 x 470 mm. The horizontal
cylinder had a geometry of 40 x 40 x 560 mm, and was equipped with two
arms, of which the load cells were attached to. Both the vertical and horizontal
cylinders geometry are reported on page. 138.
The next couple of sections digs into each component mentioned above, addi-
tionally a discussion of the advantage and disadvantage of each will be carried
out.
==PAGE:29==
3.1 The Piston
17
3.1
The Piston
To imitate and simplify the hydrodynamic force of a regular wave, a hydraulic
piston which motions were believed to be sinusoidal was used. The piston would
be xed at the top of the ume, and a control unit would tell the piston how to
move, such a sinusoidal motion would be created. Fig. 3.1 shows a picture of
the hydraulic piston, which is xed at the top of the umes walls.
Figure 3.1: The hydraulic piston.
The piston had a maximum stroke length of 18 cm, however this distance was
inappropriate during testing, because the machine wasn't able to generate a
smooth motion whilst running. Through various of tests it was found that a
stroke length of 12 cm per se, should be the maximum range of which the piston
should move to be able to perform a nice and appropriately motion.
However a consequence of reducing the stroke length of the piston, is a reduction
of the maximum velocity and acceleration of the cylinders, which results in a
decrease of the KC - number, see Eq. (2.3).
The amplitude and frequency of the piston was controlled by a computer, run-
ning a software named CarriageFlume5 A7. The software was made by a profes-
sor at the Technical University of Denmark, and its only purpose was to control
these parameters of the hydraulic piston. The computer was connected to a sig-
nal box, see Fig. 3.3, which worked as a translator between the computer and
the piston. This signal box was designed and constructed by the technicians at
the Technical University of Denmark. After receiving the information from the
computer, the box passes the information to a receiver located on the piston,
see Fig. 3.2, which then tells the piston how to move.
In the software CarriageFlume5 A7, the amplication mode was set to go
through 0.4 Amp to 3.3 Amp, with a skip of 0.1 Amp. Doing so a reasonable
==PAGE:30==
18
Apparatus and Equipment
amount of data were gathered in the range of 2 - 11 KC.
However even though the piston receives an sinusoidal signal, the generated
motion of the piston isn't in fact truly sinusoidal. The reason for this divergent
is partly caused by the receiver of the piston and the control unit, passing the
information to the piston.
Fig.
3.2 and 3.3 respectively shows the receiver
located on the side of the piston and the control unit.
Figure 3.2: The receiver of the piston.
When translating the received signal into an actual motion, a small error is
occurring each time the piston has to change its direction of motion, causing
the piston to create an unsteady motion.
This unsmooth motion results in
various accelerations and velocities of the piston, hence the cylinders.
Additionally the control unit also adds to the problem, originally the control unit
were made for controlling a wave generator back in 1993, apparently the unit
were never meant to serve a piston and small error on the generated signal to the
piston is frequently occurring [Petersen, 2016]. Petersen tried to nd the root of
the problem with this unit, but failed doing so. However [Petersen, 2016] argued
that the noise produced by the jump of the piston, whilst changing direction of
motion, could be neglected by ltering the data, thus a reasonable evaluation
of the forces still could be made.
Of course even after ltering the data for noise, it can't be avoided that this
unstable motion would have some sort of inuence on the gathered data, which
in the worst case scenario might lead to an inappropriate evaluation of the
hydrodynamic forces. However it is believed based on [Petersen, 2016] that the
inuence of the jump would not be a problem of signicance.
==PAGE:31==
3.2 The Diusers
19
Figure 3.3: The control unit which passes the generated signal to the hydraulic
piston.
3.2
The Diusers
To investigate the inuence of an air-water mixture on the force coecients, air
is being mixed in with the water, located in the enclosed ume. To seal o the
ume, two vertical temporary walls have been installed with a distance of 1250
mm from each other. The width of the ume was 595 mm and had a depth of
800 mm. The test set up is reported on page. 136.
The air was injected by three UD1000 diusers, capable of injecting 2 - 24
[m3/s], installed at the bottom of the ume see Fig. 3.4. Further information
regarding the diusers are reported in the appendix, see page 143.
The supplier of the diusers, PUMPTEKNIK ApS, didn't design the diusers
to do a steady and calm air injection, but rather a more violent and turbulent
mixing of air and water. Originally the diusers were made to clean and help
ltering large water tanks [ApS, 2016], thus the intention of having turbulence
in the water.
The behaviour of the water when the diusers are injecting air into the system,
is seen in Fig. 3.6. The uid located directly in-line above the diusers forms
an under pressure caused by a higher velocity gradient. The under pressure
tends to suck-in the adjacent water, which results in a circulation eect inside
the enclosed area.
==PAGE:32==
20
Apparatus and Equipment
Figure 3.4: The three UD1000 diusers.
This circulation eect would signicantly inuence the results of the hydrody-
namic forces read by the load cells, thus it is paramount to isolate and suppress
this eect. One way of reducing the circulation eect would be to reduce the
air supply to the diusers, this would give a smaller velocity gradient hence a
smaller pressure dierence. However since it is necessary to test the cylinders
against a low and high air content in the water, the test set up has to be able
to include a higher air supply without ruining the results.
Another solution of how to address this problem was to implement 3 diusers at
the bottom of the ume, instead of one, which was the rst draft on the project.
Using three diusers would cover a larger air injection area, which reduced the
eect of circulation.
A third option, which also was implemented in this project, was to decrease
the inner area of the enclosed ume.
It was observed that in the longitude
direction, the diuser didn't have the necessary power/ means of distributing
the bubbles till the edge of the walls. Apparently at the mid of the diusers
a greater upstream ow was occurring. Thus again a smaller velocity gradient
will be formed near the walls, compared to the mid of the ume, and once again
a circulated motion will be initiated.
By installing a 150 mm thick aquarium HMF Filter on the inside of each wall,
the velocity gradient near the reduced walls was increased, thus the circulation
eect was heavily suppressed, plus the bubbles were more uniformly distributed.
The HMF lter is reported on Fig. 3.5.
==PAGE:33==
3.2 The Diusers
21
Figure 3.5: 150
mm
HMF Filter
sponge attached to the
inside of a wall, to re-
duce the area.
Figure 3.6: Circulation of the water
due to a higher velocity
gradient.
Figure 3.7: Another example of the circulation eect. Near the walls
a lower velocity gradient exist due to the lack of air being
inject near the ends of the diusers.
However it is not to be argued that the most optimal approach, would have been
to invest in large squared plate, which size would be equal to the bottom of the
concealed ume. This plate would consist of multiple of small holes, of which air
could be injected from. In contrast of having three diusers, which doesn't ll
out the entire bottom area, and additionally having a round curvature, which
adds to the eect of forming unsteady uid motions in the water. Fig. 3.6 and
3.7 illuminates the circulation eect occurring during air injection.
==PAGE:34==
22
Apparatus and Equipment
3.3
The Perforated Plate
As previously mentioned in Sec. 3.2 the diusers tend to inject more air at the
middle than at the ends of the diusers. Which causes a circulation eect of the
uid, and even though it is being suppressed by various means, this circulation
creates the problem of having a non uniform distribution of the bubbles, hence
a non uniform uid density.
So to help distributing the air bubbles over the entire cross section and to
suppress the eect of eddies (which is presence in between the diusers), a
perforated plate was installed directly above the diusers.
The perforated plate had a porosity of 64% with holes of 10 x 10 mm. This
perforated plate seemed to give a reasonable distribution of the bubbles.
The idea behind the plate was that the increased ow resistance, which the plate
would provide, would result in a better distribution of the air bubbles.
The plate has been designed in such a manner, that the distance from the dif-
fusers to the plate, could be adjusted for a specic need.
Multiple companies are capable of delivering perforated plates with various per-
meabilities and porosities.
Figure 3.8: The perforated plate located just above the diusers.
==PAGE:35==
3.4 The Load Cells
23
3.4
The Load Cells
This project used two TAL201 load cells supplied by HT-censors. They have a
maximum measuring capacity of 10 kg, see Fig. 3.9.
The load cells are translating a pressure into an electrical signal, this signal
is then gathered by a computer using the software Data Acquistion, made in
Labview. Afterwards these data were converted into an actual force in Newtons.
The software took 120 measurements per second, and each test took 100 sec-
onds, thus 12.000 readings were gathered.
Afterwards these voltage outputs can then be re-calculated into a force, by know-
ing the linear relation between the measured voltage and the exerted force. In
this project, the maximum exerted force was not near the maximum capac-
ity of the load cells, thus it was assumed that the use of these load cells was
appropriate.
Figure 3.9: TAL201 load cell from HT-cencors.
The downside of these load cells, is that all kinds of exerted pressures on the
load cells are amplied, including the noise from the piston, the carriage etc.
This might lead to some complications when ltering the data.
Depending if the horizontal or the vertical cylinder is tested in the air-water
mixture, either two or one load cell is used. Regardless, the load cells would be
rigidly xed to the carriage, which is reported on Fig. 3.10. At the tip of the
load cells either the horizontal or vertical cylinder is attached. Both cylinders
are reported in the appendix see page 135, Chap. G.
==PAGE:36==
24
Apparatus and Equipment
3.5
The Carriage
To be able to test the two cylinders force coecients, when being oscillated in
an air-water mixture, the cylinders, were attached to a carriage, which wheels
on two tracks on the top of the umes walls, the carriage is reported on Fig.
3.10. The motion of the carriage was controlled by a hydraulic piston, see Fig.
3.1.
Figure 3.10: The carriage which is run by the piston.
Section 3.1 discussed the disability of the piston, here it was emphasised that
the piston lead to various of accelerations and velocities. Additionally it was
mentioned that the carriage also might contribute to a non smooth motion.
When lining up the tracks, it is vital that the tracks runs parallel with each
other, if that demand isn't honoured, the carriage will meet unnecessary resis-
tance during its motion, which would lead to an additionally disturbance and
misleading readings.
However practically it is unrealistic to line up the tracks perfectly, meaning
that a minor unsteady motion will occur during its motion. To omit these force
contributions, generated by this unsteady motion, a lter is applied. This lter
will be elaborated later in this paper.
==PAGE:37==
3.6 The Channel Blower
25
3.6
The Channel Blower
This project used an FPZ K05-MS channel blower capable of producing 219
m3/h and do 2900 rpm and is shown on Fig.
3.11.
The channel blower is
compressing and speeding up the surrounding air, passing it along a channel or
tube. The channel blower doesn't have the ability to control its magnitude while
running, hence it always runs on its maximum intensity. Further information
regarding the FPZ K05 - MS channel blower can be obtained in the appendix,
see page 143. To compromise for this lack, a ow control valve is installed along
one of the tubes, see Fig. 3.12, allowing a "loss" of the airow in the system.
However since this valve is controlled manually by a knob, it is almost impos-
sible to reconstruct a previous airow. Thus repeating a test, with a specic
air percentage, is unrealistic. Also whilst blowing air into the tubes, the air
temperature will increase since a pressure is being build up. This temperature
increase will partly change the magnitude of the air being injected into the en-
closed ume. Also if the moisture content of the average air temperature in the
laboratory would change during the day, a dierent magnitude of air will be
injected into the ume.
An optimal system would be a digital control unit, of which the desired ow
could be entered and delivered. However due to the lack of time, a more simple
approach was chosen.
Figure 3.11: The
FPZ
K05-MS
channel blower.
Figure 3.12: The control valve, al-
lowing a part of the air
to be bleed.
==PAGE:38==
26
Apparatus and Equipment
3.7
The MFS Flow Sensor
To evaluate the magnitude of air being injecting into the enclosed ume, an
MFS Flow Sensor was installed in a tube, right after the channel blower. The
ow sensor is made by a company named MICATRONE, and is able to measure
the air ow in a circular or rectangular duct. The MFS ow sensor, which is
reported on Fig. 3.13, takes an average value of the velocity prole over the
whole depth of the sensor and thus gives the pressure dierence on the front
and rear side. Further information regarding the ow sensor is reported in the
appendix, see page 143
The pressure information was passed onto two units, a pressure dierence reader
which is seen on Fig. 3.14, and a static pressure reader which is seen on Fig.
3.15. The pressure dierence unit is made by Microtrone and has the name
Micaex. The static pressure reader is made by JOFRA.
Figure 3.13: MFS ow sensor after installation, the two output channels gives
the pressure dierence and the static pressure.
The supplier gives an installation and operation manual of how to install and
use their ow sensor appropriately, they even tell that the measuring error can
be expected to be lower than ± 3 % [Mfs and Mf-fd, ].
MICATRONE has uploaded an excel spreadsheet on their website, which is ca-
pable of calculating the airow in the tube. The calculations in the spreadsheet
follows Eq. (3.1) and (3.2).
==PAGE:39==
3.7 The MFS Flow Sensor
27
Figure 3.14: Pressure
dierence
reader, ∆P.
Figure 3.15: Static pressure reader.
ρa = 1.293 ·
B
1013 ·
273
273 + t
(3.1)
Qa = Ad · km ·
r
∆p · 1.2
ρa
(3.2)
Eq. (3.1) gives the dimensionless air density, which relates the measured temper-
ature with an air temperature of 20oC. Here B is the actual barometric pressure
in mbar. Afterwards the air ow in m3/s is found by invoking Eq. (3.2). Here
∆p is the pressure dierence in Pa and km is a constant related to the ow
sensor, this constant is around 0.744 [Mfs and Mf-fd, ].
By knowing the magnitude of the air ow, more data regarding the air-water
mixture could be collected. Additionally it opens up for the possibility of re-
running the tests, again it is emphasized that adjusting the control valve so an
exact air ow, which would be equal to a previously setting, would be impos-
sible. However an air ow with a minor deviation, compared to the previously
ow, would be manageable.
==PAGE:40==
28
Apparatus and Equipment
3.8
The Draw Wire
Even though the signal box, Fig. 3.3, gives the option to monitor and log the
received signal of the hydraulic piston, it doesn't tell the exact motion of the
piston, which was discussed in Sec. 3.1. To address this problem a Miniature
draw wire encoder A40, supplied by Kübler was installed, see Fig. 3.16. This
draw wire enables the user to know the position of the carriage, hence the cylin-
ders, with respect to the time.
Figure 3.16: The Miniature draw wire encoder A40.
The draw wire forms a voltage signal when its is pulled out its box, the longer
the wire is being pulled, the greater is the magnitude of the signal. These voltage
signals is then stored along the other readings in the software Data Acquisition.
By knowing several calibration points, of which a distance matches a specic
voltage, the motion of the carriage during testing may be found, this also implies
that the velocity and the acceleration of the carriage can be found too.
This data will also indicate the unsteady motion of the piston and the carriage,
which would aect the readings of the velocity and the acceleration. Again to
address this problem a lter was applied which removed the noise from the gath-
ered data. According to [Petersen, 2016] doing so will result in appropriately
data, usable for evaluating the force coecients of Eq. (2.8).
==PAGE:41==
3.9 The Camera and Grid Paper
29
3.9
The Camera and Grid Paper
Before testing the inuence of an air-water mixture on the force coecients, the
air-percentage in the enclosed ume has to be known. This was done by assum-
ing that the rise of the water level, when injecting air into the ume, was caused
by the air entrainment. Thus knowing the volume change, the air percentage
may be found.
Besides having the surface to rise when injecting air into the enclosed ume, the
surface will be in a constant motion. Meaning that it was impossible to use a
ruler to estimate the depth of the new water level, thus knowing the size of the
volume change. To address this problem a Panasonic DMC-FZ200 camera was
used to lm the location of the new water level, the camera is reported on Fig.
3.17. The camera is able to do 120 fps which seemed ne for this purpose.
In front of the umes glass wall, a grid paper was attached. The distance be-
tween each gridline was 5 mm. This distance was chosen since it was unrealistic
to estimate the location of the new water level with a ner grid.
This grid paper is reported on Fig. 6.1, page 44. After lming for 30 sec. the
video photage was analysed, and the rise of the water level could be estimated
based on the grid paper.
Figure 3.17: The Panasonic DMC-FZ200 camera.
It should be mentioned that because of a non resting water surface, an accurate
reading of the water level location was not possible. This of course implies that
the estimated air content in the water may not reect the actual air percentage.
Subsequently, at the top of the water level a white foam was formed, here it was
chosen that the water level should represent the line separating the white foam
with the rest of the uid. This white foam is also seen on Fig. 6.1, page 44. A
consequence of this reading is explained in Chap. 6.
Additionally while testing the horizontal cylinder, the ow around the cylinder
was also recorded. The reason for not recording the vertical cylinder was due
==PAGE:42==
30
Apparatus and Equipment
to lack of visibility. Regardless, from these recordings the streamlines for the
dierent air-water percentage may be visualized. However due to the presence of
turbulence in the uid and the limitations of the camera, most of the recordings
was a bit blurry, thus a proper evaluation of the ow was not possible. However
it gave a reasonable indication of how the streamlines changed during the tests.
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 4
Error Estimations Of The
Inertia Coecients
4.1
Misreading Consequence Of The Draw Wire
According to the theory, written in Sec. 2.5, the forces exerting on the cylinders
may be subdivided into three terms, a drag force, Fd, an inertia force, Fi, and
lastly a force formed by the mass of the systems, F = M · a. When evaluating
the drag and inertia coecients of the measured force, the least squared method,
which was explained in Sec. 2.6, is invoking.
However during the project it was observed that if the motion of the carriage,
thus the cylinders, were not probably estimated due to a misreading of the
draw wire, it could severely aect the evaluated force coecients of the horizon-
tal cylinder.
The reason why the misreading mostly would aect the horizontal cylinder in-
stead of the vertical, is because the horizontal cylinder has a weight which is 10
times larger than the vertical cylinder. Thus a misreading of the acceleration
would cause the third term of Eq. (2.8) to become much bigger or smaller,
whereas for the vertical cylinder, this would hardly inuence the evaluated co-
ecients, unless the estimated acceleration would be way out of proportion.
The weight of the horizontal and vertical cylinder is reported in the Appendix,
see Chap. D.
==PAGE:44==
32
Error Estimations Of The Inertia Coecients
To have an idea of how accurate the draw wire needs to measure, before the
evaluated force coecients may be considered to be in the right order, a limit
it chosen saying that the coecients needs to be within ±2% of the true value.
To meet this criteria a simple calculation is executed.
First some assumptions are made.
1. The load cells measures the forces accurately.
2. The KC - numbers lies in the regime from 0 - 12, thus the drag force may
be omitted.
If the hydrodynamic force is governed by the inertia, the force measured by the
load cells will have two contributions, namely the mass term and the inertia
term. Assuming no other physical involvement, this may be written according
to Eq. (4.1).
Factual = ρCMV ˙U + mb ˙U
(4.1)
Here the acceleration ˙U is the true acceleration. However if there exist a mis-
reading of the carriage's motion, the estimated acceleration would not be equal
to the true acceleration of the cylinders.
To evaluate the consequence of such a scenario, the acceleration term is split
up into two components. First the true acceleration of the cylinders ˙U, next
a contribution caused by the misreading motion of the carriage ∂˙U. Thus Eq.
(4.1) may be written as.
Fcalculated = ρCMV ( ˙U + ∂˙U) + mb( ˙U + ∂˙U)
(4.2)
If it should turn out that the draw wire would measure the position of the
carriage, without any errors, thus ∂˙U = 0, the actual force would be identical
to the calculated force.
Factual = Fcalculated ↔ρCMV ˙U +mb ˙U = ρCMV ( ˙U +∂˙U)+mb( ˙U +∂˙U) (4.3)
However assuming that the draw wire includes a small error, it would be neat
to estimate the inuence of ∂˙U on the inertia coecients.
To do so, the mass term is subtracted from both sides of the equal sign, leaving
==PAGE:45==
4.1 Misreading Consequence Of The Draw Wire
33
the force formed by the acceleration of the uid on the left side, which would be
equal to the hydrodynamic force, plus a contribution done by the additionally
unknown acceleration.
ρCMV ˙U = ρCMV ( ˙U + ∂˙U) + mb∂˙U
(4.4)
By isolating the left hand sides inertia coecient, CM, Eq. (4.4) can be written
as.
CM = ρV CM( ˙U + ∂˙U) + mb∂˙U
ρV ˙U
(4.5)
From Eq. (4.5) it is possible to give a simple estimation of ∂˙U inuence on the
inertia coecients.
It is seen that if ˙U = 0 ↔CM = CM. However if ˙U would obtain any other
value, the inertia coecient on the left side would not be equal to the coecient
on the right hand side.
Assuming a density ρ = 1000 kg/m3, and a geometry of the horizontal cylinder
of 0.04 m · 0.04 m · 0.54 m, which gives a volume V = 0.000896 m3 and a weight
mb = 5.2 kg. The consequence of not having the exact motion of the carriage,
while evaluating the inertia coecients, can be estimated.
This is done by plotting the inertia coecient on the left hand side, for varying
CM on the right hand side, see Fig. 4.1. The error on the draw wire is assumed
to be in the same order as the error on the acceleration, thus 3% misreading
of the motion, results in an acceleration which is 3% higher or lower than the
actual acceleration.
Additionally the consequense of a misreading on the draw wire, when evaluating
the inertia coecients of the vertical cylinder has also been plotted on Fig. 4.2.
Here the volume of the cylinder is depending on the depth of embedding, but
assuming a depth of 0.25 m would not be entirely wrong, which would result in
a volume V = 0.004 m3. The weight of the vertical cylinder is mb = 0.5 kg.
Figure 4.1 shows that the deviation of the CM - coecient for the horizontal
cylinder rapidly grows with an error on the draw wire, additionally a larger
inertia coecient also results in a smaller error.
On Fig. 4.2, it is seen that a misreading on the draw wire would not aect
the evaluated inertia coecients of the vertical cylinder, in the same manner
as for the horizontal cylinder. As previously explained, this dierence is caused
by the dierence in weight. The vertical cylinder weights 10 times less than
==PAGE:46==
34
Error Estimations Of The Inertia Coecients
Percentage error on the draw wire
0
1
2
3
4
5
Percentage error on CM
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
CM = 1
CM = 1.5
CM = 2
CM = 2.5
CM = 3
CM = 3.5
Percentage error on the draw wire
0
1
2
3
4
5
Percentage error on CM
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
CM = 1
CM = 1.5
CM = 2
CM = 2.5
CM = 3
CM = 3.5
Figure 4.1: Error of CM - horizon-
tal cylinder.
Figure 4.2: Error of CM - vertical
cylinder.
the horizontal, meaning that the contribution from the mass would result in a
smaller error.
However Fig. 4.1 and 4.2 only shows the deviation of the coecient with respect
to a percentage misreading.
To have an idea of what this means, it would
be appropriate to express the percentage error of the draw wire as an actual
distance.
To do so, the maximum oscillating distance is used. When the cylinders are
oscillating with a KC = 11 per se. The stroke on the hydraulic piston is about
12.5 cm, which gives an amplitude of 62.5 mm.
Multiplying this distance with the percentage error of the draw wire, would give
an indication of the misreading error in mm of the draw wire, see Fig. 4.3 and
4.4.
From Fig. 4.3 and 4.4, it is concluded that the horizontal cylinder is limited to
a deviation of 0.5 mm, to honour a percentage error of ±2% in contrast to the
vertical cylinder, which might have 0.8 mm misreading, whilst still honouring
the ±2% criteria.
To ensure such a precision, the draw wire must be calibrated with an extreme
accuracy, additionally even small disturbances caused by vibrations or temper-
ature changes etc. during the tests, might inuence the measuring precision of
the draw wire, and as a consequence the ± 2% criteria can not be met.
==PAGE:47==
4.2 Other uncertainties of the CM - coecient
35
Misreading error of the draw wire [mm]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Percentage error on CM
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
CM = 1
CM = 1.5
CM = 2
CM = 2.5
CM = 3
CM = 3.5
Misreading error of the draw wire [mm]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Percentage error on CM
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
CM = 1
CM = 1.5
CM = 2
CM = 2.5
CM = 3
CM = 3.5
Figure 4.3: Error of CM with re-
spect to a distance -
horizontal cylinder.
Figure 4.4: Error of CM with re-
spect to a distance -
vertical cylinder.
4.2
Other uncertainties of the CM - coecient
Section 4.1 showed that even a small misreading on the draw wire, might cause
a major error on the CM - coecient, especially when evaluating the inertia
coecients for the horizontal cylinder.
However assuming that the draw wire measures the distance accurately, the
estimated inertia coecients would not be inuenced by the draw wire. Instead
other factors might inuence the evaluated coecients, such as an uncertainty
of the geometry of the cylinder or the density of the water.
Eq. (2.10) gives the non - time dependent parameters of the drag and mass
coecient. These parameters may be multiplied with either the acceleration
or the velocity, found by the draw wire, to calculate the hydrodynamic force.
However assuming that the velocity and the acceleration is found accurately,
these terms may be omitted, since they do not contribute to any deviations of
the coecients. As in Sec. 4.1 only the inertia force is in interest, because of the
low range of KC - numbers. The non time depending parameter of the inertia
force is.
fi = ρCMV ⇔CM = fi
ρV
(4.6)
To asses the uncertainty of the inertia coecient CM shown in Eq. (4.6) it is
rst acknowledged that the total uncertainty of the inertia coecient, would
==PAGE:48==
36
Error Estimations Of The Inertia Coecients
be attributed by the uncertainty of the three variables, fi, ρ and V . The total
uncertainty of CM is the quadratic sum of the partial uncertainties, due to each
separate uncertainties. Which may be written as Eq. (4.7)
∂CM =
s∂CM
∂fi
∂fi
2
+
∂CM
∂ρ ∂ρ
2
+
∂CM
∂d ∂d
2
+
∂CM
∂l ∂l
2
(4.7)
Here the term (∂CM/∂fi · ∂fi) is the uncertainty, or partial uncertainty of CM
caused by the uncertainty of fi alone. The proceeding presented above may
be found in various of books, discussing simple error analysis.
Most of the
knowledge from this project is gathered from [Taylor, 1983].
The next step it to give a proper estimation of the uncertainty of each variable.
If the temperature of the water is in the range of 0 - 20oC it would have a density
of ρ = 1000 ± 2 kg/m3.
To guess the uncertainty of the geometry of the cylinders, it is kept in mind that
in contrast to the vertical cylinder, the horizontal cylinder is fully embedded
into the water, which minimizes the uncertainty of d and l. However it is chosen
that the uncertainty of the diameter is d = 0.04 ± 0.0005 m and its length
l = 0.56 ± 0.001 m.
When evaluating the uncertainty of the vertical cylinder, the problem lies in the
embedding depth, here an uncertainty of the length is l = 0.2 ± 0.01 m and the
uncertainty of the diameter is d = 0.04 ± 0.0005 m.
Lastly is the uncertainty of the time independent parameter fi. However the
problem is that the parameter depends on the inertia coecient. Regardless, to
continue the investigation of the total uncertainty ∂CM, the time independent
parameter for the horizontal cylinder is found as.
fi = ρCMV = 1000 kg/m3 · 2 · 0.0009 m3 = 1.8 kg ± ∂fi
(4.8)
Whereas for the vertical cylinder it would be
fi = ρCMV = 1000 kg/m3 · 2 · 0.00032 m3 = 0.64 kg ± ∂fi
(4.9)
By substituting these latter expressions into Eq. (4.7), an expression of the
total uncertainty of the inertia coecient is found for the horizontal and vertical
cylinder.
∂CMhor =
q
1.245615434 ∂fi
2 + 0.002528755102
(4.10)
==PAGE:49==
4.2 Other uncertainties of the CM - coecient
37
∂CMver =
q
9.765625000 ∂fi
2 + 0.01251600000
(4.11)
Eq. (4.10) and (4.11) have been plotted with respect to the uncertainty of fi
and is shown on Fig. 4.5.
δ fi
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
δ CM
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
δ CM - horizontal
δ CM - vertical
Figure 4.5: The uncertainty of CM for varying ∂fi.
From Fig. 4.5 it is ease to see that the uncertainty of the inertia coecient is
bigger for the vertical cylinder compared to the horizontal cylinder. This dier-
ence is mainly caused by the uncertainty of the embedding depth of the vertical
cylinder. Even if ∂fi = 0 the uncertainty of the inertia coecient would still be
larger than 0.1.
From the gure it is concluded that the disadvantage of using the vertical cylin-
der, to evaluate the inertia coecients, is due to an uncertainty of the embed-
ding depth, whereas the disadvantage of using the horizontal cylinder is due to
a larger mass, of which a misreading on the draw wire, would cause a larger
deviation of the inertia coecient, which was reported in Sec. 4.1.
Lastly the vertical cylinder may also generate a surface motion, which would
introduce accelerations in the outer ow eld, causing an additionally force. This
would also inuence the evaluated inertia coecients. However assuming that
the generated surface motion is small, thus the additional force contribution
may be omitted, Fig. 4.5 would give an indication of the uncertainty of the
inertia coecients of the vertical cylinder.
==PAGE:50==
38
Error Estimations Of The Inertia Coecients
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 5
Validation Test
Before being enable to evaluate the eect of an air-water mixture on the hydro-
dynamic force coecients, a validation test which ensures that the entire test
set-up, calculations etc. may be considered to be appropriate and ready for
testing.
In a previously study made by [Petersen, 2016], who used the same vertical
cylinder as in this thesis, gathered some data points showing the drag and iner-
tia coecients for KC = 0 - 12 per se. The data gathered from this previously
study will be used when validating the cylinders of this project.
When discussing the test set-up in Chap. 3, it was mentioned several of times,
that the hydraulic piston and the carriage might contribute to an unsteady
oscillating motion, which would aect the evaluated force coecients. It was
found that forces which had a frequency above 4.9 Hz was due to noise, thus
by using a Fast Fourier Transformation all frequencies above 4.9 were removed.
Chap. B on page 113 explains and veries the usage of the lter.
Additionally to ensure that both cylinders would not suer from additionally
oscillations in the range of 0 - 4.9 Hz, due to a low natural frequency. Both
cylinders natural frequency, when being embedded in water, was tested and
found to be 8 and 16 Hz, for respectively the horizontal and vertical cylinder.
These tests are reported in Chap.C. Thus when omitting all frequencies above
4.9 Hz, which origin from the noise, oscillations due to the cylinders natural
frequency are also neglected from the evaluated force coecients.
To check the Matlab script which is reported on page 149, Chap. I, containing
==PAGE:52==
40
Validation Test
all the crucial calculations and estimations, as well as the calibration of the
equipment.
The magnitude of the drag and inertia coecients have to resemble the ones
from [Petersen, 2016].
Both the vertical and horizontal cylinder needs to be validated in order to con-
tinue the pursuit of this project. Additionally the vertical and horizontal cylin-
der, should according to the theory give the same results. However as explained
in Sec.
4.1 and 4.2, the horizontal cylinder may be suering from incorrect
accelerations, which might inuence the inertia and drag coecients.
As mentioned in the test set-up, Sec. 3.2 two 150 mm MHF lters were installed
on the inside of each wall, to reduce circulation of the uid and to damp the
generated surface motions of the vertical cylinder. However even though it is
expected that this surface motion will be small, such the accelerations in the
outer ow eld may be omitted, they will still be presence. This minor surface
motion might inuence the evaluated force coecients, additionally the gener-
ated surface motion might also contribute to a temporarily deeper embedding
depth during the tests. Which could cause the coecients to deviate from the
previously project. Figure 5.1 shows the validation of the drag coecients for
the horizontal and vertical cylinder.
KC-Value
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
CD
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
3.2
3.4
3.6
Kasper Pagh - Values
Validation test - Vertical Cylinder
Validation test - Horizontal Cylinder
Figure 5.1: Validation of the drag coecients for the horizontal and vertical
cylinder.
==PAGE:53==
41
Whereas Fig. 5.2 shows the validation for the inertia coecients.
The black line on Fig.
5.1 represents the values found by [Petersen, 2016].
However as seen from Fig. 5.1 and 5.2, only 6 data points were gathered by
[Petersen, 2016], thus a complete representation of the curvature for both force
coecients doesn't exist, instead a line has been drawn between the points.
Here it is assumed that the lines gives an approximately representation of the
CD and CM in this range of KC - numbers.
From Fig. 5.1 it is seen that the drag coecients of the vertical and horizontal
cylinder takes the same value as the ones from [Petersen, 2016] except for a few
deviations. These deviations might be caused by small force contributions by
the acceleration, as explained in Sec. 4.1 or due to a dierent assumed water
density or embedding depth, which was explained in Sec. 4.2. However generally
speaking, these found coecients matches the previously study, and it may be
concluded that the method and calculations for nding and evaluating the drag
coecients is correct.
Fig. 5.2 shows calculated inertia coecients, once again it is noticed that the
evaluated coecients of the horizontal and vertical cylinder deviate slightly from
the values found by [Petersen, 2016].
KC-Value
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
CM
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.7
Kasper Pagh - Values
Validation test - Vertical Cylinder
Validation test - Horizontal Cylinder
Figure 5.2: Validation of the inertia coecients for the horizontal and vertical
cylinder.
==PAGE:54==
42
Validation Test
Once again these deviations might be caused by the same reasons as argued
above.
however the deviation of the inertia coecients might be more crucial than the
deviation of the drag. This is argued by knowing that the hydrodynamic force
is dominated by the inertia at low KC - numbers. Thus a poor evaluations of
these coecients would result in an incorrect estimation of the hydrodynamic
force at low KC - numbers.
Additionally at low KC - numbers, the horizontal cylinder seems to behave
dierently than the vertical cylinder, here the horizontal cylinder experiences a
greater force than the vertical cylinder. However as the KC - number increases
the evaluated inertia coecients of the horizontal cylinder begins to follow the
ones of the vertical cylinder. This behaviour of the horizontal cylinder makes
it questionable if data from the horizontal cylinder might be appropriate to use
for low KC - numbers.
As mentioned previously, [Petersen, 2016] only used 6 data points for his vali-
dation. To address the lack of data from the previously project, these lines have
been connected. However it is unclear why Pagh choose these 6 specic points
for his validation, and furthermore it is unknown how his coecients would have
behaved in between these points. This uncertainty just adds to the problem of
comparing these found validation points with the ones from Pagh.
However since both cylinders values lies within a proper range of [Petersen, 2016]
values, it is concluded that the test set-up, calculations and the lter which was
applied, is sucient to evaluate the force coecients for this thesis.
Additionally it might be said, that the concern of the generated surface motion,
of the vertical cylinder, is minimal, since no additional force contributions was
to be found. Thus the accelerations in the outer ow eld may be neglected.
Moreover the force contribution of the horizontal cylinder, due to a wrong esti-
mation of the acceleration, was neither to be found. Thus the acceleration used
in Eq. (2.8) must be correct.
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 6
Estimation of Air
Percentage
6.1
Reading The Air-Water Percentage
The previously chapters have been focusing on the test-set up, including the
equipment which was used during the tests, additionally a validation of the
cylinders has been veried in Chapter 5. However, the main goal of this paper
is to investigate the inuence of an air-water mixture on the hydrodynamic
forces. To accomplish such a mix, three diusers were installed at the bottom
of the ume, see Fig. 3.4 on page 20, capable of injecting air into the enclosed
ume, controlled by a valve, attached to a tube in continuation of the channel
blower, see Fig. 3.12 and 3.11 on page 25.
This paper has dealt with various of ways, of how to estimate the amount of
air trapped in the uid. However, many of these were discarded, some because
that they introduced diculty of usage, others because of inreliable readings of
the data. In the end a simple approach was chosen, even though it came with
some disadvantages.
To evaluate the amount of air in the water, the rise of the water level was used
as an indication. When the surface rises, it is as a result of the injected air.
==PAGE:56==
44
Estimation of Air Percentage
Hence, being capable of reading the volume change, the amount of air in the
enclosed ume can be found. Of course this approach introduces a couple of
uncertainties. First of all to measure the rise of the water level a measuring
paper was attached to the front of the ume's wall, see Fig. 6.1.
Figure 6.1: Evaluation of the air percentage, at a ow rate of 0.01 m3/s.
Each line represent a distance of 5 mm, the thick black line represents the water
level in the absence of air, thus the rise of the water level may be evaluated.
This picture is extracted from a video photage, which has recorded the "new"
water level for a certain of time. It was decided that the line separating the
white foam with the rest of the uid, should represent the actual water level.
This choice was based on the idea that the white foam mainly consisted of air,
thus its contribution to the hydrodynamic forces may be omitted. However, it
has to be emphasized that this argument, has not been veried in this paper.
Another problem of this approach, is that the water level is not at rest, it
is constantly moving, meaning that when evaluating the location of the new
water level, an average value is taken, based on multiple frames from the video
photage.
A third problem is the reading of the water level, in the absence of air injection.
This depth is measured by a ruler, from the bottom of the ume. However it
was not possible to estimate an accurately water depth, without introducing an
error of ± 3 mm, when measuring.
Additionally the diusers were located a bit above the bottom of the ume.
Meaning that the water "trapped" beneath these injection points, did not ex-
perience any volume change, thus this volume should not be included when
==PAGE:57==
6.1 Reading The Air-Water Percentage
45
evaluating the volume change. Fig. 3.6 shows a sketch of a single diuser, lo-
cated above the bottom of the ume.
However this rises the question of how big of a volume should be subtracted. In
this paper it was chosen that the volume representing the top of the diusers
to the bottom of the ume, would be the most appropriate choice of a constant
water volume. The distance from the top edge of the diusers to the bottom of
the ume was 120 mm per se.
Also as seen from Fig. 6.1 the distance between each line is 5 mm, sometimes
the new water level lies in between two of these lines. Which also introduce an
uncertainty of the actual depth of the new water level.
Lastly it may be important to acknowledge that the injected air bubbles rst
seems to be properly distributed across the width of the enclosed ume, at
a certain distance above the injection points.
Fig.
F.11 and F.12 on page
134 illuminates a "passage" from one end to the other of the ume, here the
existance of bubbles in minimal.
These latter pictures tells that a fully air-water mixture doesn't exist near the
injection points. This would also contributes to an uncertainty of the actual
volume change.
However it is argued that near the injection points, the air
percentage is of a greater magnitude, than the rest of the enclosed ume. Thus
the presence of a higher air percentage, above the injection points, would be
average out in the ume, when including the latter mentioned "passage", located
between the diusers, see Fig. F.11 and F.12 on page 134.
The evaluation of the air percentage in the uid may be written as a simple
equation.
Air% =
WR
Wd −Dd
· 100
(6.1)
Here WR is the rise of the water level, Wd is the beginning water depth, Dd is
the distance from bottom ume to the edge of the diusers, which is around 120
mm. Fig. 6.2 shows an illustration of the various parameters of Eq. (6.1).
==PAGE:58==
46
Estimation of Air Percentage
Figure 6.2: Estimation of the air-water percentage.
By using the same principle as when calculating the uncertainty of the CM
coecient, which was reported in Sec. 4.2, the error estimation of Eq. (6.1) is
found as.
∂Air% =
s∂Air%
∂WR
∂WR
2
+
∂Air%
∂Wd
∂Wd
2
+
∂Air%
∂Dd
∂Dd
2
(6.2)
To be conservative it is assumed that when evaluating the rise of the water level,
there might be an uncertainty of ∂WR = 5 mm. Additionally it is believed that
there is an uncertainty of the water depth of ∂Wd = 3 mm. As latter mentioned,
the distance from the bottom ume to the edge of the diusers was found to be
Dd = 120 ± 5 mm. By substituting these values into Eq. (6.2) it is rewritten
into (6.3)
∂Air% =
s
0.250000

Wd −3
25
−2
+ 0.340000 WR
2

Wd −3
25
−4
(6.3)
Fig. 6.3 illuminates the deviation of the measured air percentage for various
beginning water depths. From the gure it is noticed that as the beginning water
level, Wd, increases, the uncertainty decreases.
Additionally the uncertainty
grows rapidly after WR = 80 mm.
==PAGE:59==
6.2 Calculating The Air-Water Percentage
47
Rise Water Level [mm]
0
20
40
60
80
100
∂ Air%
1.17
1.18
1.19
1.2
1.21
1.22
1.23
1.24
1.25
1.26
1.27
WD = 530 mm
WD = 535 mm
WD = 540 mm
WD = 545 mm
Figure 6.3: Uncertainty of the Air% reported in Eq. (6.3).
6.2
Calculating The Air-Water Percentage
As mentioned in Sec. 6.1 the air-water percentage may be estimated by record-
ing the rise of the water level with a camera, which afterwards by analysing the
video photage, the rise of the water level is found. This would give the volume
change, which then leads to the air-water percentage.
However another approach of estimating the air-water percentage is to know
the magnitude of the air ow being injected into the enclosed ume. Depending
on this magnitude, the rise the water level may be estimated, thus give the
air-water percentage. The results of these calculations may be compared to the
readings, hence a proper evaluation of the method described in Sec. 6.1 can be
done.
[Talaia, 2007] wrote a paper where he came up with three equations which re-
sembles some previously measurements of the terminal velocity of a bubble in
various liquids. Each equation may predict the bubbles' terminal velocity de-
pending on either its size, Reynold number or the dominance of viscosity and
so forth. To predict the size of the bubbles which are injected by the diusers,
videos which were used to evaluate the rise the water level, were analysed to
give a reasonable approximation of the bubbles size. From this it was concluded
that an average bubble was 4 ± 1 mm in diameter.
According to [Talaia, 2007] the following equation may then be used to predict
==PAGE:60==
48
Estimation of Air Percentage
the terminal velocity of a single bubble.
ub =
 
0.289gde∆ρ
ρl
+ 877.193µlg1/2
ρld1/2
e
!1/2
(6.4)
Where de is the bubble size, ∆ρ is the apparent density, ρl is the density of the
liquid, and µl is the dynamic viscosity of the liquid.
Eq. (6.4) gives the terminal velocity of a single bubble in [m/s], and is valid for
bubbles up till 4 mm, which was concluded to be appropriate. All units in the
above equation are given in SI.
Thus omitting the eect of sheltering (the bubbles clump together), or some-
times it is referred to as hindered terminal velocity, the bubbles will not interfere
with each other, which leads to the acknowledgement, that each bubble inside
the ume will experience the same terminal velocity as found in Eq.
(6.4).
Knowing how fast the bubbles will rise to the surface, and the depth of the
beginning water level, the time it takes for the bubbles to reach the surface can
be found according to Eq. (6.5).
tb = Wd −Dd
ub
(6.5)
By knowing the supplied air ow Q [m3/s], which is found according to Eq.
(3.2), on page 27, and the cross section area of the enclosed ume, the velocity
of which the air is being injected into the ume may be found.
Va =
Qa
lf · wf
(6.6)
Where lf and wf is respectively the length and width of the enclosed ume.
Knowing the velocity of the air injection and the time it takes for the bubbles
to reach the surface, the rise of the water level may be found.
WR = Va · tb
(6.7)
Eq. (6.7) gives the theoretically rise of the water level, and by invoking Eq. (6.1)
the air-water percentage of the liquid can be found. If it should turn out that
both the theoretical and practical observations would give the same air-water
percentage, it can be argued that the choice of having the water level to be
==PAGE:61==
6.2 Calculating The Air-Water Percentage
49
the line separating the white foam with the rest of the liquid, as illustrated on
Fig. 6.1, would be appropriate. Additionally the theoretical calculations would
support the argument of how much air is presence in the water during the tests.
The water which was used during the tests had a temperature of 15 oC per
se. Knowing the temperature, the data needed in Eq. (6.4) can be found from
various of tables.
Tab.
6.1 shows the required data needed to estimate the
terminal velocity ub.
Table 6.1: Variables needed to estimate the terminal velocity ub.
Variables for Eq. (6.4)
g
de
ρl
ρg
µl
[m/s2]
[m]
[kg/m3]
[kg/m3]
[Ns/m2]
9.82
0.004
999
1.2250
1.15 ·10−3
Which gives a terminal velocity, ub = 0.2478 [m/s].
Knowing the terminal
velocity of the bubbles Eq. (6.7) and (6.1) may be used to create a relation
between the air ow, Qa, and the air-water percentage, Air%. This relation is
illustrated on Fig. 6.4
Air flow [m3/s]
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
Air-water percentage [%]
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
Figure 6.4: Air ow vs. the theoretical air-water percentage.
By using the function polyt in Matlab, a linear t is applied to the curve in Fig.
6.4, giving the theoretical estimation of the air-water percentage. This relation
is reported in Eq. (6.8).
Air% = Qa · 709.99
Air%
m3/s

(6.8)
==PAGE:62==
50
Estimation of Air Percentage
Of which 709.99 is the slope of the linear curve. Of course as previously men-
tioned, this expression does not take the sheltering eect of the bubbles into
account, also it doesn't consider the distribution of the varying bubble sizes.
Additionally the eect of circulation might also play an important key role, the
circulation would either increase or decrease the terminal velocity of the bub-
bles, thus another Air% will be granted.
Nevertheless Eq. (6.8) would contribute to an approximation of how good the
readings described in Sec. 6.1 has been, and it would help to verify the air-water
percentage inside the enclosed ume.
Chap. 9 discusses and compares the air-water percentages found from the the-
oretical model of Eq. (6.8) and the ones found through the manual reading
process. Additionally deviations between the two estimations are discussed.
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 7
The 5 Dierent Air-Water
Percentage and Locations
of The Vertical Cylinder
The eect of air entrainment on the force coecients CD and CM were tested for
ve dierent air-water percentages. The amount of air entrainment was found
according to Sec. 6.1, by adjusting the magnitude of the supplied air with a
control valve as described in Sec. 3.6. Tab. 7.1 shows evaluated air ows based
on the gathered data from the static pressure reader, the pressure dierence
reader and the temperature reader. The pressure readers were reported on Fig.
3.14 and 3.15 shown on page 27.
Tab. 7.2 shows the individually air-water percentages of the ows. This per-
centage is based on Eq.
(6.1), but as mentioned in Chap.
6 the estimated
air-percentage might not reect the actual air entrainment in the water, but
may vary with ± 1 per se, due to measuring errors. However the evaluated
percentages which are reported in Tab. 7.2 gives a rather good approximation
of the magnitude of air entrainment, whilst testing the cylinders.
Additional in contrast to the horizontal cylinder, which spans over the entire
width of the ume, the vertical cylinder can be located at various points. It was
during the tests decided whether or not the location of the vertical cylinder,
over the width of the ume, would be signicant.
==PAGE:64==
52
The 5 Dierent Air-Water Percentage and Locations of The Vertical
Cylinder
Table 7.1: The injected air ow with the gathered data from the pressure
components and the temperature reader.
Case
Static pressure
Temperature
∆P
Flow
[Bar]
[oC]
[Pa]
[m3/s]
1
0.072
28
2
0.005
2
0.075
28.4
7
0.010
3
0.075
30
15
0.014
4
0.085
32.5
29
0.020
5
0.092
33.6
39
0.023
Table 7.2: The evaluated air-water percentage, and the rise of the water level.
Case
Entire
Water Depth
Corrected
Water Depth
Rise of
Water Level
New
Water Depth
Air-Water
Percentage
[mm]
[mm]
[mm]
[mm]
[%]
1
530
410
10
420
2.5
2
530
410
20
430
5
3
535
415
40
455
10
4
534
414
60
474
14
5
530
410
70
480
17
Theoretically it is assumed that the air-water percentage is evenly distributed
over the entire cross section of the enclosed ume. However as mentioned in
Chap. 3 a perforated plate was installed just above the diusers along with two
aquarium lter sponges of 150 mm, which were attached to the inside of each
wall. Both elements contributed to a better distribution of the bubbles and
suppressed the circulation eect.
Regardless, comparing the horizontal to the vertical cylinder, and ignoring not
knowing the exact embedding depth of the vertical cylinder, whilst testing. The
force coecients of the vertical cylinder would signicantly be inuenced by its
position in the ume, because of the occurrence of smaller or larger circulation
eects, which varies depending on its location.
Additionally the concentration of turbulence might not be considered as a con-
stant over the entire cross section, since it would be aected by its surroundings.
Moreover variation of turbulence over the cross section, might also dier from
each ow case, which were reported in Tab. 7.2. In other words it would be
wrong assuming uniform ow conditions over the entire cross section.
However it may be assumed that the horizontal cylinder would, in contrast to
the vertical cylinder, merely average out all the aects presence over the entire
width of the ume.
==PAGE:65==
53
In the beginning of the experiment, the vertical cylinder was located 125 mm
from the ume wall. Afterwards two more locations were chosen, one where the
vertical cylinder was moved to 210 mm from the ume wall and another where
the cylinder was moved to 295 away from the ume wall. The locations of the
vertical cylinder are shown on Fig. 7.1
By choosing dierent locations for the vertical cylinder, the varying ow condi-
tions may be illuminated.
Figure 7.1: The three locations of the vertical cylinder.
Additionally the horizontal and the vertical cylinder located 125 mm from the
ume wall, was only exposed to ow case 2 - 5 from Tab. 7.2. It was only after
testing the cylinders, a more thorough investigation of the circulation eect was
initiated. By choosing a smaller ow injection (ow case 1), a smaller circulation
of the uid must be present, thus the behaviour of the force coecients could
be studied even further.
==PAGE:66==
54
The 5 Dierent Air-Water Percentage and Locations of The Vertical
Cylinder
Fig. 7.2 shows pictures for the bubble distribution of the 5 dierent ow cases
reported in Tab. 7.2. From the pictures it is clear that as the air ow increases,
a higher bubble concentration is formed. Additionally the surface becomes more
violent with a higher air ow. Which as mentioned in Chap. 6 makes is more
dicult to estimate the rise of the water level, thus give an exact air-water
percentage. Furthermore, the water volume beneath the perforated plate seems
untouched by the injection of air, which supports the argument of not taking
the amount of water beneath the diusers into consideration when estimating
the volume change. Also it can be imagined that as more bubbles is formed a
higher turbulence concentration must be present.
Lastly from all the ow cases, except for ow case 1, the bubbles seems to ll out
the entire cross section of the enclosed ume. It is under this assumption that
a nearly uniform bubble distribution is present, from which it is appropriate
to estimate the force coecients. However as latter explained, the reason why
looking at ow case 1, was to know more about the circulation eects of the
uid.
==PAGE:67==
55
(a) Flow case 1.
(b) Flow case 2.
(c) Flow case 3.
(d) Flow case 4.
(e) Flow case 5.
Figure 7.2: Pictures taken outside the ume, showing the bubble distribution
of the various ow cases reported in Tab. 7.2.
==PAGE:68==
56
The 5 Dierent Air-Water Percentage and Locations of The Vertical
Cylinder
==PAGE:69==
Chapter 8
Results
8.1
A Short Example
In this section, a short example of how to nd the force coecients CD and CM
for the horizontal cylinder, while experiencing 5 percentage of air entrainment,
corresponding to ow case 1 of Tab. 7.2 and a KC - number = 6 per se. is
reviewed.
To evaluate the force coecients, the velocity, acceleration and the measured
force needs to be known, see Eq. (2.14). Both the velocity U and acceleration
˙U is found by the dierentiating the carriage's position, found by the draw wire,
respectively once and twice. The voltage read by the draw wire is reported in
Fig. 8.1.
Afterwards this voltage output is converted into an actual distance, by invoking
Eq. (A.3) on page 111, which gives the relation between the read voltage and
a distance in meters. Fig. 8.2 shows the motion of the carriage measured in
meters per seconds, thus the motion of the horizontal cylinder.
As explained Chap. 3, Sec. 3.1 and Sec. B.2, the piston tends to create a small
"jump" when changing its direction of motion, additional small vibration origin
from running the piston and having the carriage to wheel on its tracks, which if
not lined up perfectly, would create an unsteady motion, of which is being read
==PAGE:70==
58
Results
by the load cells and the draw wire. To eliminate this noise a spectral analyse of
which is described on page 115, Sec. B.2 is put into use. This spectral analyse,
which may be referred to as a lter, cuts of received frequencies above 4.9 Hz.
This lter is applied to the motion of the carriage, reported in Fig. 8.2, which
may be seen on Fig. 8.3, which also shows the motion of the carriage without
applying the lter.
Time [Sec]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Voltage [Volt]
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Time [Sec]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Distance [Meters]
-0.04
-0.03
-0.02
-0.01
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
Figure 8.1: Voltage
output
from
the draw wire.
Figure 8.2: Motion of the carriage
vs. the time in seconds.
From Fig. 8.3 it is seen, as reported in Sec. B.2, that the ltered motion of
the carriage follows the same curvature as the original signal subtracted. Thus
only the noise produced by the machinery is assumed to be eliminated, whereas
the overall motion is kept intact. To nd the velocity U and acceleration ˙U of
the carriage, thus the cylinder, the unltered motion of the carriage as seen on
Fig. 8.2 is respectively being dierentiated once and twice, with the function
gradient in Matlab. First after the dierentiation, the lter of which were applied
previously is invoked, this gives Fig. 8.4 and 8.5 which shows the ltered and
non ltered velocity and acceleration of the carriage.
From Fig. 8.4 and 8.5 it once again seen that the overall curvature of the velocity
and acceleration, after applying the lter, is kept intact. It is noticed that the
uctuating velocity leads to extreme accelerations during the carriage's motion.
From this it has to be emphasized that when exposing the cylinder to a low KC
- number, the dominating hydrodynamic force would be the inertia force, which
is governed by the acceleration. Fig. 8.5 shows the important aspect of clearing
the signal (ltering o the noise) if not, the evaluated force coecients might
not be reecting the actual forces exerted by the uid. Additionally Chap. 5
also proves that this procedure results in coecients which is in accordance with
[Petersen, 2016].
==PAGE:71==
8.1 A Short Example
59
Time [Sec]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Distance [Meters]
-0.04
-0.03
-0.02
-0.01
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
Filtered Motion
Non Filtered Motion
Time [Sec]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Velocity [m/s]
-0.25
-0.2
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
filtered velocity response
Filtered Velocity
Non Filtered Velocity
Figure 8.3: Filtered
and
non
l-
tered motion of the car-
riage vs.
the time in
seconds.
Figure 8.4: Filtered
and
non
l-
tered
velocity
of
the
carriage vs. the time in
seconds.
The last thing which is needed before being enable to estimate the force coe-
cients, CD and CM, is the measured force, Fm, from the load cells. As explained
in Sec. 3.4, the load cells measures a pressure dierence, which then is converted
into a voltage signal. By knowing the relation between the voltage signal [volt]
and the force [newtons], which has been reported on page 107, Sec. A.1, the
force experienced by the load cells is found. Fig. 8.6 shows the voltage signal
from the load cells.
Again it is seen that the subtracted signal from Fig. 8.6 registers a lot of noise,
which supports the previously argument. Once again the lter is being put into
use, to eliminate the noise. The cleared signal along with the non ltered signal
is is shown in Fig. 8.7.
These ltered voltage signals from load cell 6 and 7, seen in Fig. 8.7, seems to
follow an average curvature of the original signal, thus only the signal formed by
the uid resistance is assumed to be remaining. Next is to convert these ltered
signals into a force, by using the Eq. A.1 and A.2 on page 110. These forces
are reported in Fig. 8.8 with the total hydrodynamic force, which simply is the
summation of the forces read by the two load cells.
==PAGE:72==
60
Results
Time [Sec]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Acceleration [m/s2]
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
Filtered Acceleration
Non Filtered Acceleration
Time [Sec]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Voltage [Volt]
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Load Cell 6
Load Cell 7
Figure 8.5: Filtered
and
non
l-
tered acceleration of the
carriage vs. the time in
seconds.
Figure 8.6: Voltage
signal
gener-
ated by the load cells.
Time [Sec]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Voltage [Volt]
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Filtered Voltage LC 6
Non Filtered Voltage LC6
Filtered Voltage LC 7
Non Filtered Voltage LC7
Time [Sec]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Force [Newtons]
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
Load Cell 6
Load Cell 7
Sum Force
Figure 8.7: Filtered
and
non
l-
tered
voltage
signal
generated by the load
cells.
Figure 8.8: Measured force by load
cells.
By knowing the geometry of the horizontal cylinder, its velocity U, acceleration
˙U, the force experienced through its oscillating motion Fm, and the density of
the uid ρ, Eq. (2.14) on page 10 may be invoking, solving two equations with
==PAGE:73==
8.1 A Short Example
61
two unknowns, which gives the following force coecients:
KC
=
5.78
CD
=
3.08
Cm
=
0.71
(8.1)
Where the KC - number is found by Eq. (2.3) on page 6. The maximum velocity
Um is found in Matlab by calling the function max, which nds the maximum
value of the ltered velocity, seen in Fig. 8.4.
Additionally to relate the oscillating force, to a force which is experienced at
sea, the inertia coecien CM will be used instead of the mass coecient Cm,
where CM = Cm + 1, here the last term on the right hand side represents the
Froude Krylov force, see Sec. 2.4.
Lastly, to check rather if the force coecients found above resembles the mea-
sured force Fm, the hydrodynamic force is calculated based on Eq. 2.8 of page
9, with a cylinder mass equal to the one reported on page 123, Chap. D. This
time depending force is plotted along with the measured force on Fig. 8.9
Time [Sec]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Force [Newtons]
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
Measured Force (Sum Force)
Calculated Force - Morisons Formal
Figure 8.9: Measured and calculated hydrodynamic force.
Of which the blue line represents the force measured by the load cells and the
red line represents the calculated force, based on the estimated velocity, accel-
eration and force coecients.
it is seen that the two force curves of Fig. 8.9, despite small variations, matches
each other. Thus, the least squared method reported in Sec. 2.6 seems appro-
priate when it comes to evaluate the force coecients, for larger KC - numbers.
The dependence of how well the calculated force represents the measured force,
for various KC - number will be discussed in Chap. 9.
==PAGE:74==
62
Results
8.2
Evaluated Drag and Inertia Coecients
Section 8.1 goes through a short example of how to estimate the drag CD and
inertia CM coecient for the horizontal cylinder, exposed to about 5 percentage
of air entrainment, with a corresponding KC - number equal to 6 per se.
As previously mentioned in Sec. 7 only the horizontal cylinder and the vertical
cylinder located 125 mm from the ume's wall, was exposed to ow case 2 -
5, see Tab. 7.2, whereas the vertical cylinder when being located 210 and 295
from the ume's wall was exposed to all the ow cases. Regardless, by following
the procedure of Sec. 8.1 the drag and inertia coecients, CD and CM, was
evaluated from each latter mentioned scenario, with a KC - number ranging
from 2 - 11 per se. By doing so, the eect of an air-water mixture on the drag
and inertia coecients, with respect to the KC - number may be illuminated.
8.2.1
Horizontal Cylinder
The evaluated drag and inertia coecients for the horizontal cylinder, exposed
to the ow cases 2 - 5 reported in Tab. 7.2 are seen on Fig. 8.10 and 8.11.
Both gures illuminates the coecients with and without correction of the uid
density, ρ, from Eq. (2.8). Which is decreased when air is trapped in the uid.
KC-Value
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
CD
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Cd Values - 5% - Horizontal Cylinder
Cd Values - 10% - Horizontal Cylinder
Cd Values - 14% - Horizontal Cylinder
Cd Values - 17% - Horizontal Cylinder
Validation test - Horizontal Cylinder
(a) CD vs.
KC-number without cor-
recting for the uid density.
KC-Value
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
CD
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Cd Values - 5% - Horizontal Cylinder
Cd Values - 10% - Horizontal Cylinder
Cd Values - 14% - Horizontal Cylinder
Cd Values - 17% - Horizontal Cylinder
Validation test - Horizontal Cylinder
(b) CD vs.
KC-number with correc-
tion for the uid density.
Figure 8.10: Evaluated CD vs. KC - number for the horizontal cylinder with
and without correction of the uid density ρ.
==PAGE:75==
8.2 Evaluated Drag and Inertia Coecients
63
KC-Value
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
CM
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
Validation test - Horizontal Cylinder
CM Values - 17% - Horizontal Cylinder
CM Values - 14% - Horizontal Cylinder
CM Values - 10% - Horizontal Cylinder
CM Values - 5% - Horizontal Cylinder
(a) CM vs. KC-number without cor-
recting for the uid density.
KC-Value
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
CM
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
Validation test - Horizontal Cylinder
CM Values - 17% - Horizontal Cylinder
CM Values - 14% - Horizontal Cylinder
CM Values - 10% - Horizontal Cylinder
CM Values - 5% - Horizontal Cylinder
(b) CM vs. KC-number with correc-
tion for the uid density.
Figure 8.11: Evaluated CM vs. KC - number for the horizontal cylinder with
and without correction of the uid density ρ.
From both gures it is clear that when correcting for the uid density, ρ, thus
lowering the uid density, both the drag and inertia coecients CD and CM in-
creases. Which is in accordance to Eq. (2.8), since the measured force remains
the same. In contrast to the inertia coecients, seen on Fig. 8.11, the drag
coecients shown on Fig. 8.10, follows the same behaviour regardless of the
ow case.
At low KC - numbers, a high drag is presence, but decreases rapidly with an in-
crease of the KC - number. Moreover, when correcting for the lower density, the
drag coecients has a tendency of merging together, and reaches an asymptotic
value of 2.3 per se. However it has to be kept in mind that at low KC - numbers
the hydrodynamic force is governed by the inertia forces, thus the value of the
drag coecient might include some uncertainties.
In contrast to the drag coecients, the inertia coecients shown on Fig. 8.11,
gives a more scattered picture, and doesn't seem to follow a uniform pattern.
However, according to the validation test of the horizontal cylinder, there might
be some uncertainties regarding the credibility of the force coecients when
subjected to low KC - numbers. Which may be why the evaluated inertia co-
ecients of the horizontal cylinder seems more scattered at low KC - numbers
compared to the vertical cylinder.
Additionally regardless of the ow case, the cylinder experiences a lessor iner-
tia force, compared to the scenario of not injecting air into the enclosed ume.
Moreover, there is a general tendency of having the inertia coecients to obtain
a larger value, with a higher air-water percentage, which is opposite for the drag
coecients, CD.
Also when correcting for the uid density, ρ, the inertia coecients merges to-
==PAGE:76==
64
Results
gether after a KC - number greater than 8, similar to the drag coecients.
However doing so, the coecients below a KC - numbers equal to 8, becomes
more scattered.
In addition of the latter gures, the motion of the carriage, thus the cylinder,
has been plotted for KC = 2, 6 and 11. These graphs are reported in Fig. 8.12,
and shows the registered motion of the cylinder when subjected to 5% of air.
However regardless of the air-water percentage, the motion of the carriage was
unaected by the magnitude of air presence in the uid, hence only the motion
of the carriage, thus the cylinder for 5% air entrainment in reported.
The gure shows the ltered motion, velocity and acceleration of the cylinder for
one oscillation. This was chosen so the reader of this paper, easier could see the
change of the velocity and acceleration, with respect to the KC - number. From
the gures it is easily observed that for KC = 6, the piston seems to produce
the most smooth motion, whereas when running in accordance to KC = 11 a
lot of small "jumps" during its oscillating motion occurs.
Figure 8.13 shows the calculated drag and inertia force, for the horizontal cylin-
der, along the total measured force, when subjected to KC = 2, 6 and 11. The
gure illuminates the contribution of both terms and shows the dominance of
the inertia force at low KC numbers. Additionally comparing the calculated
inertia forces with the acceleration curves reported in Fig. 8.12, it is easily seen
that the force curve follows the same pattern as the acceleration, which is in
accordance with the theory. From Fig. 8.12 it is also observed that the force
contribution of the drag becomes more important as the KC - number increases,
and at KC = 11, it is questionable if it would be proper to exclude the drag
force contribution? Whereas for KC = 6, the inertia force alone resembles the
total measured force.
Figure 8.14 shows the measured and calculated hydrodynamic force. The force
has been calculated by invoking Eq. (2.8), using the drag and inertia coecient,
CD and CM for its respectively motion. The mass of the horizontal cylinder was
veried in Chap. D.
From the gure it is seen that when KC = 2, regardless of the air-entrainment
magnitude, the calculated force doesn't resemble the measured force appropri-
ately, whereas at a higher KC - number of 6 and 11, the calculated force follows
and matches the measured force. Additionally, the gure shows that the hy-
draulic piston runs more optimal at a KC - numbers equal to 6, this argument
is supported by seeing that the curvature of the measured and calculated force
doesn't experience any "jumps" during its piston motion back and forwards.
Also comparing the peaks of the measured force, with the amount of air en-
trainment, the magnitude of the force is more or less the same. However, when
looking at the inertia coecients shown on Fig. 8.11, and assuming that the
==PAGE:77==
8.2 Evaluated Drag and Inertia Coecients
65
hydrodynamic force is fully inertia dominated, these peaks should increase with
a higher air-water mixture, since a greater force is presence according to the
evaluated inertia coecients. However looking at Fig. 8.11 for KC > 8, it is
observed that the coecients almost obtains the same value, thus the change of
the measured force is limited, which may be why the dierence of the measured
force is hardly observed.
==PAGE:78==
66
Results
Time [Sec]
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
Distance [Meters]
-0.015
-0.01
-0.005
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
Filtered Distance
(a) Air = 5%, KC = 2
Distance
Time [Sec]
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
Velocity [m/s]
-0.08
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
Filtered Velocity
(b) Air = 5%, KC = 2
Velocity
Time [Sec]
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
Acceleration [m2/s]
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Filtered Acceleration
(c) Air = 5%, KC = 2
Acceleration
Time [Sec]
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
Distance [Meters]
-0.04
-0.03
-0.02
-0.01
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
Filtered Distance
(d) Air = 5%, KC = 6
Distance
Time [Sec]
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
Velocity [m/s]
-0.25
-0.2
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Filtered Velocity
(e) Air = 5%, KC = 6
Velocity
Time [Sec]
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
Acceleration [m2/s]
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Filtered Acceleration
(f) Air = 5%, KC = 6
Acceleration
Time [Sec]
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
Distance [Meters]
-0.08
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
Filtered Distance
(g) Air = 5%, KC = 11
Distance
Time [Sec]
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
Velocity [m/s]
-0.5
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Filtered Velocity
(h) Air = 5%, KC = 11
Velocity
Time [Sec]
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
Acceleration [m2/s]
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
Filtered Acceleration
(i) Air = 5%, KC = 11
Acceleration
Figure 8.12: The measured motion, velocity and acceleration of the horizontal
cylinder for air-water mixture 5% and KC = 2, 6 and 11.
==PAGE:79==
8.2 Evaluated Drag and Inertia Coecients
67
Time [Sec]
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
Force [Newtons]
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
Measure Force
Caclculated Drag Force
(a) Air = 5%, KC = 2
Drag Force
Time [Sec]
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
Force [Newtons]
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
Measure Force
Caclculated Inertia Force
(b) Air = 5%, KC = 2
Inertia Force
Time [Sec]
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
Force [Newtons]
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
Measure Force
Caclculated Drag Force
(c) Air = 5%, KC = 6
Drag Force
Time [Sec]
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
Force [Newtons]
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
Measure Force
Caclculated Inertia Force
(d) Air = 5%, KC = 6
Inertia Force
Time [Sec]
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
Force [Newtons]
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
Measure Force
Caclculated Drag Force
(e) Air = 5%, KC = 11
Drag Force
Time [Sec]
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
Force [Newtons]
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
Measure Force
Caclculated Inertia Force
(f) Air = 5%, KC = 11
Inertia Force
Figure 8.13: Total measured force vs. the calculated drag and inertia force
for air-water mixture 5% and KC = 2, 6 and 11.
==PAGE:80==
68
Results
Time [Sec]
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
Force [Newtons]
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
Measured Force (Sum Force)
Calculated Force - Morison Equation
(a) Air = 5%, KC = 2
Time [Sec]
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
Force [Newtons]
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
Measured Force (Sum Force)
Calculated Force - Morison Equation
(b) Air = 17%, KC = 2
Time [Sec]
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
Force [Newtons]
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
Measured Force (Sum Force)
Calculated Force - Morison Equation
(c) Air = 5%, KC = 6
Time [Sec]
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
Force [Newtons]
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
Measured Force (Sum Force)
Calculated Force - Morison Equation
(d) Air = 17%, KC = 6
Time [Sec]
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
Force [Newtons]
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
Measured Force (Sum Force)
Calculated Force - Morison Equation
(e) Air = 5%, KC = 11
Time [Sec]
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
Force [Newtons]
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
Measured Force (Sum Force)
Calculated Force - Morison Equation
(f) Air = 17%, KC = 11
Figure 8.14: Measured and calculated hydrodynamic force of the horizontal
cylinder, with 5 and 17% of air entrainment.
==PAGE:81==
8.2 Evaluated Drag and Inertia Coecients
69
8.2.2
Vertical Cylinder 125 mm from ume wall
The evaluated drag and inertia coecients for the vertical cylinder located 125
mm from the ume's wall, as illustrated in Fig. 7.1, exposed to the ow cases 2
- 5 reported in Tab. 7.2 are seen on Fig. 8.15 and 8.16. Both gures illuminates
the coecients with and without correction of the uid density, ρ, of Eq. (2.8).
KC-Value
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
CD
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Cd Values - 5% - Vertical Cylinder
Cd Values - 10% - Vertical Cylinder
Cd Values - 14% - Vertical Cylinder
Cd Values - 17% - Vertical Cylinder
Validation test - Vertical Cylinder
(a) CD vs.
KC-number without cor-
recting for the uid density.
KC-Value
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
CD
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Cd Values - 5% - Vertical Cylinder
Cd Values - 10% - Vertical Cylinder
Cd Values - 14% - Vertical Cylinder
Cd Values - 17% - Vertical Cylinder
Validation test - Vertical Cylinder
(b) CD vs.
KC-number with correc-
tion for the uid density.
Figure 8.15: Evaluated CD vs. KC - number for the vertical cylinder located
125 mm from the ume's wall, with and without correction of
the uid density ρ.
From Fig. 8.15 it is seen that the vertical cylinder resembles the same behaviour
as for the horizontal cylinder, Fig. 8.10. At low KC - numbers the cylinder
experiences a large drag force compared to the scenario of not having any air
entrainment inside the enclosed ume. Then by increasing the KC - number, the
drag rapidly decreases. Another feature which is comparable to the horizontal
cylinder, is that when correcting for the uid density, ρ, the drag coecients
merges more together, and like the horizontal cylinder when KC = 8 they reach
an asymptotic value of 2.3 per se. Which is in accordance to the same value as
the horizontal cylinder
Also as shown for the horizontal cylinder, both the drag and inertia coecients
increases when correcting for the uid density, which as explained previously,
is in accordance to Eq. (2.8), since a lower uid density must result in greater
coecients because the measured force remains the same.
However in contrast to the horizontal cylinder, when increasing the air-water
percentage the drag and the inertia coecients decreases, whereas the inertia
coecients of the horizontal cylinder increased.
==PAGE:82==
70
Results
KC-Value
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
CM
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
Validation test - Vertical Cylinder
CM Values - 5% - Vertical Cylinder
CM Values - 10% - Vertical Cylinder
CM Values - 14- Vertical Cylinder
CM Values - 17% - Vertical Cylinder
(a) CM vs. KC-number without cor-
recting for the uid density.
KC-Value
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
CM
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
Validation test - Vertical Cylinder
CM Values - 5% - Vertical Cylinder
CM Values - 10% - Vertical Cylinder
CM Values - 14- Vertical Cylinder
CM Values - 17% - Vertical Cylinder
(b) CM vs. KC-number with correc-
tion for the uid density.
Figure 8.16: Evaluated CM vs. KC - number for the vertical cylinder located
125 mm from the ume's wall, with and without correction of
the uid density ρ.
From Fig. 8.16 it is seen that the presence of air entrainment causes the inertia
coecients to decrease, compared to the scenario of not having any air entrain-
ment inside the enclosed ume. However compared to the inertia coecients of
the horizontal cylinder, Fig. 8.11, at low KC - numbers a greater air injection
doesn't change the coecients considerably. This is specially visualized when
correcting for the uid density.
Here all the coecients regardless of the KC - number have a tendency of merg-
ing together, in contrast to the horizontal cylinder of which KC - numbers < 8,
resulted in a more scattered data set.
Moreover regardless for the ow case, all the coecients when correcting for
the uid density, no matter the exposed KC - number, lies within the range of
2 - 2.2. Thus there doesn't seem to be any change of the inertia coecients,
over the range of KC = 2 - 11. In contrast the scenario of not having any air
injection, here the inertia coecients increases over the same range.
Figure 8.18 shows the measured and calculated hydrodynamic force of the ver-
tical cylinder, located 125 mm from the ume's wall. As previously mentioned
the force has been calculated by invoking Eq. (2.8), with the drag and inertia
coecients estimated from the measured force. Additionally, the mass of the
vertical cylinder was found and veried in Chap. D shown on page 123.
==PAGE:83==
8.2 Evaluated Drag and Inertia Coecients
71
As when observing the motion of the horizontal cylinder, the motion, velocity
and acceleration of the vertical cylinder when located 125 mm from the ume's
wall is reported on Fig. 8.17. Once again this motion of the carriage, thus the
cylinder is only shown for one period to help the reader visualize the unsteady
motion of the carriage. Again it is seen that when the piston moves according to
a KC = 6, it generates a more smooth motion compared to KC = 11. Again it
is emphasized that the motion is only shown for the scenario of having 5% of air
presence in the uid, however since the motion is unaected by the magnitude
of air entrainment, these readings may be compared to the motion of the other
air-water percentages.
Similar to the force curves of the horizontal cylinder seen on Fig. 8.14, the
calculated force of the vertical cylinder, shown on Fig. 8.18, doesn't seem to
reect the measured force appropriately at low KC - numbers. However when
increasing the KC - number, the calculated force starts following the same pat-
tern as the measured force, just not quite as good as seen from the horizontal
cylinder. The calculated force of the vertical cylinder meets larger deviations
even at KC = 11.
This behaviour of how well the calculated force matches the measured force,
doesn't seem to dependent on the air entrainment magnitude, which is similar
to the observations of the horizontal cylinder. Additionally due to the choice of
plotting the motion of the carriage with respect to one period, the accelerations
doesn't seems to be in accordance with the calculated or measured force. How-
ever if plotting the acceleration in the same time period as the force, the same
pattern will occur.
==PAGE:84==
72
Results
Time [Sec]
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
Distance [Meters]
-0.015
-0.01
-0.005
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
Filtered Distance
(a) Air = 5%, KC = 2
Distance
Time [Sec]
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
Velocity [m/s]
-0.08
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
Filtered Velocity
(b) Air = 5%, KC = 2
Velocity
Time [Sec]
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
Acceleration [m2/s]
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Filtered Acceleration
(c) Air = 5%, KC = 2
Acceleration
Time [Sec]
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
Distance [Meters]
-0.04
-0.03
-0.02
-0.01
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
Filtered Distance
(d) Air = 5%, KC = 6
Distance
Time [Sec]
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
Velocity [m/s]
-0.25
-0.2
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Filtered Velocity
(e) Air = 5%, KC = 6
Velocity
Time [Sec]
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
Acceleration [m2/s]
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Filtered Acceleration
(f) Air = 5%, KC = 6
Acceleration
Time [Sec]
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
Distance [Meters]
-0.08
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
Filtered Distance
(g) Air = 5%, KC = 11
Distance
Time [Sec]
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
Velocity [m/s]
-0.5
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Filtered Velocity
(h) Air = 5%, KC = 11
Velocity
Time [Sec]
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
Acceleration [m2/s]
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
Filtered Acceleration
(i) Air = 5%, KC = 11
Acceleration
Figure 8.17: The measured motion, velocity and acceleration of the vertical
cylinder 125 mm from ume's wall, for air-water mixture 5% and
KC = 2, 6 and 11.
==PAGE:85==
8.2 Evaluated Drag and Inertia Coecients
73
Time [Sec]
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
Force [Newtons]
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Measured Force (Sum Force)
Calculated Force - Morison Equation
(a) Air = 5%, KC = 2.
Time [Sec]
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
Force [Newtons]
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Measured Force (Sum Force)
Calculated Force - Morison Equation
(b) Air = 17%, KC = 2.
Time [Sec]
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
Force [Newtons]
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Measured Force (Sum Force)
Calculated Force - Morison Equation
(c) Air = 5%, KC = 6.
Time [Sec]
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
Force [Newtons]
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Measured Force (Sum Force)
Calculated Force - Morison Equation
(d) Air = 17%, KC = 6.
Time [Sec]
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
Force [Newtons]
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
Measured Force (Sum Force)
Calculated Force - Morison Equation
(e) Air = 5%, KC = 11.
Time [Sec]
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
Force [Newtons]
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
Measured Force (Sum Force)
Calculated Force - Morison Equation
(f) Air = 17%, KC = 11.
Figure 8.18: Measured and calculated hydrodynamic force of the vertical
cylinder located 125 mm from the ume's wall, with 5.5 and
17% of air entrainment.
==PAGE:86==
74
Results
8.2.3
Vertical Cylinder 210 mm from ume wall
The evaluated drag and inertia coecients for the vertical cylinder located 210
mm from the ume's wall, as illustrated in Fig. 7.1, exposed to the ow cases 1
- 5 reported in Tab. 7.2 is seen on Fig. 8.19 and 8.20. Both gures illuminates
the coecients with and without correction of the uid density, ρ, of Eq. (2.8).
KC-Value
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
CD
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Cd Values - 2.5% - Vertical Cylinder
Cd Values - 5% - Vertical Cylinder
Cd Values - 10% - Vertical Cylinder
Cd Values - 14% - Vertical Cylinder
Cd Values - 17% - Vertical Cylinder
Validation test - Vertical Cylinder
(a) CD vs.
KC-number without cor-
recting for the uid density.
KC-Value
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
CD
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Cd Values - 2.5% - Vertical Cylinder
Cd Values - 5% - Vertical Cylinder
Cd Values - 10% - Vertical Cylinder
Cd Values - 14% - Vertical Cylinder
Cd Values - 17% - Vertical Cylinder
Validation test - Vertical Cylinder
(b) CD vs.
KC-number with correc-
tion for the uid density.
Figure 8.19: Evaluated CD vs. KC - number, for the vertical cylinder located
210 mm from the ume's wall, with and without correction of
the uid density ρ.
==PAGE:87==
8.2 Evaluated Drag and Inertia Coecients
75
KC-Value
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
CM
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
3.2
Validation test - Vertical Cylinder
CM Values - 2.5% - Vertical Cylinder
CM Values - 5% - Vertical Cylinder
CM Values - 10% - Vertical Cylinder
CM Values - 14%- Vertical Cylinder
CM Values - 17% - Vertical Cylinder
(a) CM vs. KC-number without cor-
recting for the uid density.
KC-Value
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
CM
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
3.2
Validation test - Vertical Cylinder
CM Values - 2.5% - Vertical Cylinder
CM Values - 5% - Vertical Cylinder
CM Values - 10% - Vertical Cylinder
CM Values - 14- Vertical Cylinder
CM Values - 17% - Vertical Cylinder
(b) CM vs. KC-number with correc-
tion for the uid density.
Figure 8.20: Evaluated CM vs. KC - number, for the vertical cylinder located
210 mm from the ume's wall, with and without correction of
the uid density ρ.
As seen previously from both the horizontal cylinder, Fig. 8.10, and the vertical
cylinder located 125 mm from the ume's wall, Fig. 8.15, the drag coecients
of the vertical cylinder located 210 mm from the ume experiences large drag
coecients at low KC - numbers and by increasing the KC - number these
coecients rapidly decreases, similar to the previously observations. However
when the vertical cylinder was located 210 and 295 mm from the ume's wall,
it was also exposed to ow case 1, which would result in a smaller circulation
and turbulence of the uid.
Regardless, even when having an air entrainment of 2.5%, the behaviour of the
drag is the same. This air injection of 0.005 m3/s also contributes to a rise of
the drag coecients. As previously mentioned, since the hydrodynamic force
at low KC - numbers is dominated by the inertia force, there might be some
uncertainties of the credibility of these. Yet it is clear that the drag coecients
increases when injecting air into the enclosed ume, regardless of the magnitude
of the ow.
Similar to the vertical cylinder located 125 mm from the ume's wall, the drag
and inertia coecients decreases when a higher ow is injected into the ume.
Also when correcting for the uid density, larger force coecients appears as
previously mentioned. A dierence is however noticed between the results of
having the cylinder located 125 and 210 mm from the ume's wall.
When
correcting for the uid density, the coecients doesn't show the same tendency
of merging together, as seen for the horizontal and the vertical cylinder located
125 mm from the ume's wall. Actually when looking at the drag coecients on
==PAGE:88==
76
Results
Fig. 8.19 it looks as if the dierences between the coecients has been amplied.
But once again it has to be remembered that the drag coecients comes with
some uncertainties.
Looking at Fig. 8.20 it is observed that in contrast to the horizontal cylinder,
Fig. 8.11, and the vertical cylinder located 125 mm from the ume's wall, Fig.
8.16, the inertia coecients are generally of a greater magnitude.
At low KC - numbers, ow case 1 and 2, contributes to a greater inertia force
compared to the scenario of not having any air injection. Whereas the inertia
coecients estimated from ow case 4 and 5, gives more or less the same results
as seen from the vertical cylinder located 125 mm from the ume's wall.
Also, when correcting for the uid density, the instant decrease of the inertia
coecients becomes more clear. Flow case 1 - 2 merges together and follows the
same pattern after KC = 8, same tendency is also seen for ow case 4 - 5.
Fig. 8.21 shows the motion of the carriage, velocity and acceleration similar
to the previously plots of the horizontal and vertical cylinder when located 125
mm from the ume's wall. Again the most smooth motion is obtained at KC =
6, and a motion according to KC = 11 reveals a vast amount of jumps.
Figure 8.22 illuminates the measured and calculated hydrodynamic force of the
vertical cylinder located 210 mm from the ume's wall. As seen previously, when
discussing the horizontal cylinder Fig. 8.14, and the vertical cylinder located
125 mm from the ume's wall Fig. 8.18. The calculated hydrodynamic force
isn't appropriately reecting the measured force at low KC - numbers. But as
the the KC - number increases the usage of the Morison equation, Eq. (2.8),
gives a better agreement with the measured force, regardless of the ow case.
Additionally as previously stated, the hydraulic piston seems to run more smoothly
at KC = 6, in contrast to KC = 2 or 11, this argument is supported by not see-
ing all these small jumps during its motion.
Lastly, it is noticed that when increasing the air percentage of the uid, the
magnitude of the force peaks becomes smaller, this is specially the case for KC
= 11, if comparing the scenario of having air = 5 and 17%.
This is in accordance with the evaluated inertia coecients of Fig. 8.20, of which
it was noticed that an instant decrease of the coecients are seen when going
from 5 to 14% of air. Since the hydrodynamic force is dominated by the inertia
force, this dierence in the coecients results in a decrease of the measured and
calculated force. This dierence in the force was not as clear when looking at
the horizontal and vertical cylinder located 125 mm from the ume's wall.
==PAGE:89==
8.2 Evaluated Drag and Inertia Coecients
77
Time [Sec]
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
Distance [Meters]
-0.015
-0.01
-0.005
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
Filtered Distance
(a) Air = 5%, KC = 2
Distance
Time [Sec]
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
Velocity [m/s]
-0.08
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
Filtered Velocity
(b) Air = 5%, KC = 2
Velocity
Time [Sec]
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
Acceleration [m2/s]
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Filtered Acceleration
(c) Air = 5%, KC = 2
Acceleration
Time [Sec]
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
Distance [Meters]
-0.04
-0.03
-0.02
-0.01
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
Filtered Distance
(d) Air = 5%, KC = 6
Distance
Time [Sec]
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
Velocity [m/s]
-0.25
-0.2
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Filtered Velocity
(e) Air = 5%, KC = 6
Velocity
Time [Sec]
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
Acceleration [m2/s]
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Filtered Acceleration
(f) Air = 5%, KC = 6
Acceleration
Time [Sec]
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
Distance [Meters]
-0.08
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
Filtered Distance
(g) Air = 5%, KC = 11
Distance
Time [Sec]
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
Velocity [m/s]
-0.5
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Filtered Velocity
(h) Air = 5%, KC = 11
Velocity
Time [Sec]
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
Acceleration [m2/s]
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
Filtered Acceleration
(i) Air = 5%, KC = 11
Acceleration
Figure 8.21: The measured motion, velocity and acceleration of the vertical
cylinder 210 mm from ume's wall, for air-water mixture 5% and
KC = 2, 6 and 11.
==PAGE:90==
78
Results
Time [Sec]
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
Force [Newtons]
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
Measured Force (Sum Force)
Calculated Force - Morison Equation
(a) Air = 5%, KC = 2.
Time [Sec]
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
Force [Newtons]
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
Measured Force (Sum Force)
Calculated Force - Morison Equation
(b) Air = 17%, KC = 2.
Time [Sec]
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
Force [Newtons]
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Measured Force (Sum Force)
Calculated Force - Morison Equation
(c) Air = 5%, KC = 6.
Time [Sec]
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
Force [Newtons]
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Measured Force (Sum Force)
Calculated Force - Morison Equation
(d) Air = 17%, KC = 6.
Time [Sec]
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
Force [Newtons]
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
Measured Force (Sum Force)
Calculated Force - Morison Equation
(e) Air = 5%, KC = 11.
Time [Sec]
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
Force [Newtons]
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
Measured Force (Sum Force)
Calculated Force - Morison Equation
(f) Air = 17%, KC = 11.
Figure 8.22: Measured and calculated hydrodynamic force of the vertical
cylinder located 210 mm from the ume's wall, with 5.5 and
17% of air entrainment.
==PAGE:91==
8.2 Evaluated Drag and Inertia Coecients
79
8.2.4
Vertical Cylinder 295 mm from ume wall
The evaluated drag and inertia coecients for the vertical cylinder located 295
mm from the ume's wall, as illustrated on Fig. 7.1, exposed to the ow cases 1
- 5 reported in Tab. 7.2 is seen on Fig. 8.23 and 8.24. Both gures illuminates
the coecients with and without correction of the uid density, ρ, of Eq. (2.8).
KC-Value
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
CD
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Cd Values - 2.5% - Vertical Cylinder
Cd Values - 5% - Vertical Cylinder
Cd Values - 10% - Vertical Cylinder
Cd Values - 14% - Vertical Cylinder
Cd Values - 17% - Vertical Cylinder
Validation test - Vertical Cylinder
(a) CD vs.
KC-number without cor-
recting for the uid density.
KC-Value
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
CD
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Cd Values - 2.5% - Vertical Cylinder
Cd Values - 5% - Vertical Cylinder
Cd Values - 10% - Vertical Cylinder
Cd Values - 14% - Vertical Cylinder
Cd Values - 17% - Vertical Cylinder
Validation test - Vertical Cylinder
(b) CD vs.
KC-number with correc-
tion for the uid density.
Figure 8.23: Evaluated CD vs. KC - number for the vertical cylinder located
295 mm from the ume's wall,with and without correction of the
uid density ρ.
As when previously discussing the drag coecients for the horizontal and verti-
cal cylinder located 125 and 210 mm from the ume's wall, the drag coecients
of the vertical cylinder located 295 mm from the wall, or at the mid of the ume,
experiences a great drag force for low KC - numbers and afterwards decreases
rapidly as the KC - number increases.
Once again it is seen that even at ow case 1, giving the lowest air-water per-
centage, the behaviour of the drag is the same as for ow case 5. Thus the
pattern of the drag coecients seems independent of the ow magnitude, which
also was argued previously.
Another feature which has been observed for all the other positions of the ver-
tical cylinder, is that both the drag and inertia coecients, illustrated on Fig.
8.23 and 8.24, decreases with a higher presence of air entrainment, in contrast
to the horizontal cylinder, of which experienced an increase of the inertia coef-
cient, see Fig. 8.11.
==PAGE:92==
80
Results
Also as previously observed, both the drag and inertia coecients increases
when correcting for the uid density. Secondly as seen from the vertical cylin-
der located 210 mm from the wall, when correcting for the uid density, the
dierence between the drag coecients seems amplied, which is in contrast to
the horizontal and vertical cylinder located 125 mm from the ume's wall.
KC-Value
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
CM
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
3.2
3.4
Validation test - Vertical Cylinder
CM Values - 2.5% - Vertical Cylinder
CM Values - 5% - Vertical Cylinder
CM Values - 10% - Vertical Cylinder
CM Values - 14- Vertical Cylinder
CM Values - 17% - Vertical Cylinder
(a) CM vs. KC-number without cor-
recting for the uid density.
KC-Value
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
CM
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
3.2
3.4
Validation test - Vertical Cylinder
CM Values - 2.5% - Vertical Cylinder
CM Values - 5% - Vertical Cylinder
CM Values - 10% - Vertical Cylinder
CM Values - 14- Vertical Cylinder
CM Values - 17% - Vertical Cylinder
(b) CM vs. KC-number with correc-
tion for the uid density.
Figure 8.24: Evaluated CM vs. KC - number for the vertical cylinder located
295 mm from the ume's wall, with and without correction of
the uid density ρ.
The inertia coecients shown on Fig. 8.24, are similar to the evaluated coe-
cients from the vertical cylinder located 210 mm from the ume's wall, see Fig.
8.20. The coecients are generally greater compared to what was seen of the
horizontal and vertical cylinder located 125 mm from the ume's wall. Addi-
tionally it is once again seen, that for ow case 1 and 2, the inertia coecients
are greater compared to the scenario of not having any air injection into the
ume, whereas ow case 4 and 5 contributes to smaller coecients.
A similar observation was seen for the vertical cylinder located 210 mm from
the ume's wall, see Fig. 8.20.
As seen from the vertical cylinder located 210 mm from the ume's wall, there
is an almost instant decrease of the coecients when going from 5% to 14%
of air entrainment. This decrease becomes more clear when correcting for the
uid density, here the coecients of ow case 1 and 2 merges more together, a
similarly tendency is seen for ow case 4 and 5.
Figure 8.26 shows the measured and calculated hydrodynamic force of the ver-
tical cylinder located 295 mm from the ume's wall.
Fig. 8.25 shows the motion, velocity and acceleation of the vertical cylinder
==PAGE:93==
8.2 Evaluated Drag and Inertia Coecients
81
when located 295 mm from the ume's wall. As previously stated the a smooth
motion is obtained at KC = 6, whereas other KC = 2 and 11 seems to introduce
a lot of jumps and shakes during its motion.
As seen previously for the horizontal cylinder along with the other positions for
the vertical cylinder, the calculated force doesn't show a good agreement with
the measured force for small KC - numbers. Also once again it is argued that
the piston runs more smoothly at KC = 6.
A dierence between Fig. 8.26 and the other measured and calculated force
curves, is however observed. For ow case 5, having 17% of air entrainment, the
vertical cylinder doesn't experience the same kind of unsteady piston motion as
seen from the previously results, Fig. 8.14, 8.18 and 8.22.
Also when looking at Fig. 8.26 it is observed, that the measured and calculated
force decreases, when introducing a higher air-water percentage, which is in ac-
cordance with the evaluated force coecients. Similarly tendency was observed
for the vertical cylinder when it was located 210 mm from the ume's wall, see
Fig. 8.22.
==PAGE:94==
82
Results
Time [Sec]
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
Distance [Meters]
-0.015
-0.01
-0.005
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
Filtered Distance
(a) Air = 5%, KC = 2
Distance
Time [Sec]
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
Velocity [m/s]
-0.08
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
Filtered Velocity
(b) Air = 5%, KC = 2
Velocity
Time [Sec]
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
Acceleration [m2/s]
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Filtered Acceleration
(c) Air = 5%, KC = 2
Acceleration
Time [Sec]
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
Distance [Meters]
-0.04
-0.03
-0.02
-0.01
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
Filtered Distance
(d) Air = 5%, KC = 6
Distance
Time [Sec]
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
Velocity [m/s]
-0.25
-0.2
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Filtered Velocity
(e) Air = 5%, KC = 6
Velocity
Time [Sec]
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
Acceleration [m2/s]
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Filtered Acceleration
(f) Air = 5%, KC = 6
Acceleration
Time [Sec]
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
Distance [Meters]
-0.08
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
Filtered Distance
(g) Air = 5%, KC = 11
Distance
Time [Sec]
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
Velocity [m/s]
-0.5
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Filtered Velocity
(h) Air = 5%, KC = 11
Velocity
Time [Sec]
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
Acceleration [m2/s]
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
Filtered Acceleration
(i) Air = 5%, KC = 11
Acceleration
Figure 8.25: The measured motion, velocity and acceleration of the vertical
cylinder 295 mm from ume's wall, for air-water mixture 5% and
KC = 2, 6 and 11.
==PAGE:95==
8.2 Evaluated Drag and Inertia Coecients
83
Time [Sec]
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
Force [Newtons]
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Measured Force (Sum Force)
Calculated Force - Morison Equation
(a) Air = 5%, KC = 2.
Time [Sec]
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
Force [Newtons]
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Measured Force (Sum Force)
Calculated Force - Morison Equation
(b) Air = 17%, KC = 2.
Time [Sec]
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
Force [Newtons]
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Measured Force (Sum Force)
Calculated Force - Morison Equation
(c) Air = 5%, KC = 6.
Time [Sec]
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
Force [Newtons]
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Measured Force (Sum Force)
Calculated Force - Morison Equation
(d) Air = 17%, KC = 6.
Time [Sec]
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
Force [Newtons]
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
Measured Force (Sum Force)
Calculated Force - Morison Equation
(e) Air = 5%, KC = 11.
Time [Sec]
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
Force [Newtons]
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
Measured Force (Sum Force)
Calculated Force - Morison Equation
(f) Air = 17%, KC = 11.
Figure 8.26: Measured and calculated hydrodynamic force of the vertical
cylinder located 295 mm from the ume's wall, with 5.5 and
17% of air entrainment.
==PAGE:96==
84
Results
8.3
Variation of The Wake of The Horizontal Cylin-
der
When testing the horizontal cylinder against the various ow cases reported
in Tab. 7.2, the same camera which recorded the rise of the water level, when
injecting air into the uid, was used to record the oscillating motion of the cylin-
der. Doing so, it was possible to visualize the wake formed by the streamlines,
and to see how the various ow cases and KC - numbers might inuence the
wake. From these videos some frames were taken out, showing how the wake
changed its size and direction during the tests.
Fig. 8.27 shows the horizontal cylinder at KC = 5 and 11 subjected to 4 dier-
ent ow cases. To help reviewing the wakes development, a red box covering the
cylinder has been painted, along with a red line showing the size of the wake.
From Fig.
8.27 it is noticed that the upstream ow forms a lee side of the
horizontal cylinder, which becomes smaller when increasing the magnitude of
the ow or the KC - number. Additionally the wakes direction becomes more
upwards as the upstream ow increases.
When the cylinder is oscillating in
accordance to KC = 11 and subjected to an air entrainment of 17% it is almost
impossible to visualize the wake.
The gures shown on page 85 may give an indication of the horizontal wake's
development, when subjected to a dierent ow case and KC - number, which
can be related to the development of the force coecients shown on Fig. 8.10
and 8.11. However it is remembered that during this project, no pressure mea-
surements of the cylinder was performed. Meaning that when discussing the
behaviour of the coecients it will be based on suggestions and assumptions.
Additionally the pictures also shows that by increasing the ow rate, the grid
of air bubbles becomes ner.
==PAGE:97==
8.3 Variation of The Wake of The Horizontal Cylinder
85
(a) Air = 5%, KC = 5.
(b) Air = 5%, KC = 11.
(c) Air = 10%, KC = 5.
(d) Air = 10%, KC = 11.
(e) Air = 14%, KC = 5.
(f) Air = 14%, KC = 11.
(g) Air = 17%, KC = 5.
(h) Air = 17%, KC = 11.
Figure 8.27: Variation of the wake of the horizontal cylinder, with respect to
the magnitude of air entrainment and KC - number.
==PAGE:98==
86
Results
==PAGE:99==
Chapter 9
Discussion
9.1
The Horizontal Cylinder vs.
The Vertical
Cylinder
As mentioned in Chap. 6 both the horizontal and vertical cylinder will be in-
uenced by the upstream jet formed by the diusers.
However the pressure
distribution around the horizontal and vertical cylinder might become very dif-
ferent when subjecting them to an upstream ow. Whereas the upstream ow
entirely surrounds the vertical cylinder, the horizontal cylinder forms a lee side.
This was noticed when looking at Fig. 8.27, here the wake of the ow is directed
upwards, due to the introduced air ow. The dierence between the scenarios
of not injecting any kind of ow into the ume, and to do, is sketched in Fig.
9.1 and 9.2.
Where Fig. 9.1 illustrates a sketch of the streamlines of the ow, when the
horizontal cylinder oscillates horizontally, as it did during its validation test,
see Chap. 5. Fig. 9.2 illustrates a sketch of the streamlines of the ow when
subjecting the cylinder to an upstream ow, whilst oscillating.
Of course changing the direction of the streamlines would directly inuence the
pressure distribution around the cylinder. Additionally the upstream ow would
move the stagnation point and thus inuence the base pressure of the rear side
of the cylinder.
==PAGE:100==
88
Discussion
Figure 9.1: The horizontal cylin-
der
exposed
to
a
planer ow.
Figure 9.2: The horizontal cylin-
der exposed to a non
planer ow.
[Bearman and D.M.Trueman, 1972] stated that "the base pressure determines
determines the amount of vorticity that is being shed from each side of the body"
moreover [Sumer and Fredsse, 2006] Page. 145, mentioned that the magnitude
of the vortex shedding, might inuence the inertia coecient. Thus it is expected
that the force coecients would dier from the horizontal and vertical cylinder,
due to a separation points and pressure distribution.
However whereas it comes more easy to visualize the wake of the horizontal
cylinder, and somehow give a reasonable relation to the pressure around the
cylinder, having a debate regarding the added mass seems to come more dicult.
First it has to be pointed out that when comparing the horizontal cylinder to
the vertical, both cylinders seems to give the same drag coecients as has been
shown on Fig. 8.10, 8.15, 8.19 and 8.23, however as mentioned several times, the
estimated drag coecients might come with some uncertainties, due to testing
the cylinders in a inertia dominated domain.
This means that if the base pressure of the vertical and horizontal cylinder would
become very dierent, it might not be reected in the estimations properly,
thus it is unclear how big of an impact the upstream ow has on the pressure
distribution around the horizontal vs. the vertical cylinder, and specially when
changing the magnitude of the upstream jet.
Second of all, the assumption of having a constant uid density, ρ, around the
entire horizontal cylinder might not be appropriate. As shown on page 85, Fig.
8.27, a lee side is formed on the top side of the cylinder, here the concentration
of air bubbles would be less, causing a higher density of the uid. This increase
of the density might have a a minor or major inuence on the added mass in
contrast to the vertical cylinder, of which it is assumed that the upstream ow
entirely surrounds the cylinder, thus a constant density is presence.
==PAGE:101==
9.2 Forced Induced Vibration In A Cross Flow
89
9.2
Forced Induced Vibration In A Cross Flow
When the horizontal cylinder was oscillating whilst air continually was being
injected into the ume, the scenario of having an oscillating cylinder in a trans-
verse ow may be in play. During the past decades, multiple of authors have
been investigating the scenario of a cylinder which is forced to vibrate in a cross
ow, to achieve a better understanding of the "amplitude, frequency and phase
of the cylinders undergoing a vortex induced vibration." [KIYA et al., 2001]
However studies focusing on the behaviour of the force coecients are limited,
since most studies are concerned about the change of the natural frequency in
currents or the amplitude response, additionally most of the studies have only
been focusing on blu or circular bodies, rather than squared cylinders.
Even though this paper did not manage to nd any ideal conclusion concerning
the behaviour of the inertia coecients, when subjected an oscillating cylin-
der to a cross ow, [Bearman and Obasaju, 1982] made an experiment where
a squared cylinder, was forced to vibrate in a cross ow. The experiment was
set up in a wind tunnel, and the cylinder was equipped with pressure devices,
such a the pressure distribution around the cylinder could be examined. Fig.
9.3 shows one of the results of [Bearman and Obasaju, 1982] study.
Figure 9.3: A reproduction of [Bearman and Obasaju, 1982] results, of a
squared cylinder oscillating in a cross ow.
Where the non - dotted black line represents the pressure distribution around
the cylinder, without a cross ow. U is the wind velocity, U/ND is the reduced
velocity. It should be noticed that this experiment was carried out for small
==PAGE:102==
90
Discussion
oscillations A/D <0.25.
From Fig. 9.3 it is observed that the pressure on the side face |BC| decreases
when oscillating the cylinder in a cross ow. This side face may be compared to
the rear side of the horizontal cylinder in this project. If the pressure distribution
around the horizontal cylinder in this projects shows a similar behaviour, it
would cause a reduction of its base pressure, which would result in an increase
of the form drag and additionally change the mass coecient.
However the
experiment of [Bearman and Obasaju, 1982] doesn't investigate the behaviour
of the mass coecient, when oscillating the cylinder in a cross ow, thus the
development of this coecient remains unclear.
Instead [Sarpkaya, 1978] investigated the change of the natural frequency of a
circular cylinder exposed to a cross ow, which was depending on the change
of the mass coecient. Here he stated that the natural frequency of a cylinder
oscillating in water in, the absence of a cross ow, may be considered to be in
accordance with.
fn = 1
2π
r
k
m + m′
(9.1)
in which m′ is.
m′ = ρCmA = ρCm
πD2
4
(9.2)
He then stated that the mass coecient of a cylinder would no longer be the
same, when it's subjected to a current. He denoted the new mass coecient in
such a scenario as Cmc. The new mass coecient will be.
m′
c = ρCmcA = ρCmc
πD2
4
(9.3)
Which would give a new natural frequency as.
fnc = 1
2π
s
k
m + m′c
(9.4)
==PAGE:103==
9.2 Forced Induced Vibration In A Cross Flow
91
From which the ratio between the natural frequency in a current and in its
absence is found as.
fnc
fn
=
 1 + Cm/(m/ρD2)
1 + Cmc/(m/ρD2)
1/2
(9.5)
The new mass coecient Cmc has been measured by [Sarpkaya, 1978] for a
circular cylinder forced to oscillate in a cross ow. The results of the study
was reproduced by [Sumer and Fredsse, 2006] and is shown on Fig. 9.4. The
horizontal axis is the reduced velocity dened as.
Vr = U
Df
(9.6)
Here f is the forced vibration of the cylinder, U is the velocity of the cross ow
and D is the diameter of the cylinder.
Figure 9.4: Hydrodynamic mass corcient for a circular cylinder vibrating in
cross ow [Sumer and Fredsse, 2006] [Sarpkaya, 1978].
From Fig. 9.4 it is ease to see that the hydrodynamic force coecient, is chang-
ing with respect to the amplitude of oscillation and the magnitude of the cross
ow.
Even though it is uncertain the exactly inuence of this vibration, of the hor-
izontal cylinder's inertia coecients in this project. It is sure that the added
==PAGE:104==
92
Discussion
mass will undergo a change due to this phenomenon, and perhaps the rapidly
decrease of the inertia coecients of the horizontal cylinder, might be caused
due to this forced induced oscillation in a cross ow?.
9.3
Location of The Vertical Cylinder and Circu-
lation Eects
As described in Chap. 3 and 7, Sec. 3.2 and 3.3, there will be a minor or major
presence of circulation eects of the uid. From this a thesis is set saying that
2 types of circulating eects might be presence inside the enclosed ume, both
of these are illustrated by a sketch shown on Fig. 9.5.
Figure 9.5: A sketch illustrating the expected local and global circulation ef-
fects of the uid.
From which the gure on the left of Fig. 9.5 shows the local circulation eects
governed by the individual jets of the diusers, whereas the gure on the right
shows the anticipated global circulation eects, governed by the net upstream
ow. If it is true that two circulation eects would be presence, the horizontal
cylinder would be subjected to both simultaneously, whereas the location of
the vertical cylinder would be directly inuenced by the local ow conditions of
which each jet forms. Additionally there would be an interaction between these
two types of circulation eects. Regardless, it is suggested that the depending
on the location in the ume, either the global or local circulation will become
==PAGE:105==
9.3 Location of The Vertical Cylinder and Circulation Eects
93
the dominating feature.
Assuming the above argument holds, it is clear that the horizontal cylinder
would average out all the eects in contrast to the vertical cylinder, which as
latter mentioned, would be aected by its local conditions. This claim would
also provide a reason why changing the location of the vertical cylinder would
have an inuence on the inertia coecients CM, which is observed when looking
at Fig. 8.16, 8.20 and 8.24.
Before digging into this subject it is also important to point out that by intro-
ducing an upstream ow would change the boundary conditions and separation
points of both the cylinders.
[Venugopal et al., 2016] stated that experiments performed in either a U-tube
where a squared cylinder would be held still or having it to oscillate in still wa-
ter, could be interpreted as a one dimensional ow subjecting the cylinder. This
would result in a dierent boundary layer and separation points than having a
two dimensional ow. Here a two dimensional ow is considered to be a free
stream velocity, which varies in both the horizontal and vertical direction. This
case is similar to the scenario for both the vertical and horizontal cylinder, when
injecting air into the enclosed ume.
The problem of discussing the scenario of having a circulating ow subjecting an
oscillating cylinder is the lack of knowledge within this eld. In the past decades
authors have been investigated the orbital motion beneath waves, sometimes de-
pending on the shape of this orbit, they are referred to as an elliptic motion or
even a circulating ow. However it is clear that this experiment is not alike the
wave force scenario, where other types of forces would be presence such as the
Froude Krylov Force.
Regardless, scientic papers discussing a circulating ow subjecting an oscillat-
ing cylinder, without introducing waves, is limited and most of these works were
focusing on other aspects than the behaviour of the force coecients. Moreover
this project did not manage to complete any measurement regarding the pres-
sure distribution on the cylinders, nor a measurement of the circulating ows
magnitude, due to lack of time.
However a paper which might scratch the surface of what is going on when
introducing a circulating ow is the paper of [Venugopal et al., 2006]. He in-
vestigated the force coecients on a horizontal rectangular cylinder, exposed
to regular and irregular waves. He discovered that for low KC - numbers the
drag coecient experienced large values, and these also decreased rapidly with
an increasing KC - number. He argued that the high drag coecient was asso-
ciated of an early appearance of vortices and ow separation, which is presence
for cylinders having sharp edges. Additionally he stated that the inertia coef-
cients decreased with an increase of the KC - number due to a presence of a
==PAGE:106==
94
Discussion
circulating ow.
The only comparison between the work of [Venugopal et al., 2006] and this ex-
periment is that both cases introduces a vertical and a horizontal velocity com-
ponent additionally both cases experiences some sort of circulation eects.
However even though that no scientic papers were found discussing how a cir-
culating ow, as similar to what was observed in this project, would inuence
the force coecients.
It might be imagined that going from the scenario of
subjecting the cylinders to a one dimensional ow, as when running the vali-
dation tests, to have a two dimensional ow, when evaluating the inuence of
an air-water mixture of the force coecients, might be one of the reason why
having such a rapidly change of both the drag and inertia coecients for both
cylinders.
It was noticed for the vertical cylinder, located 210 and 295 mm from the ume
wall, that the drag coecients seemed independent of the ow magnitude, see
Fig. 8.19 and 8.23. Here ow case 1 only introduced 0.005 m3/s in contrast to
ow case 5, of which introduced 0.023 m3/s. However looking a the results of
the inertia coecient, it is observed that the dierence in the ow magnitude
denitely aects the evaluated coecients, see Fig. 8.20 and 8.24. However a
generally tendency is that the inertia coecients decreases when increasing the
ow. Assuming the thesis of having two types of ow circulations inside the
enclosed ume, and that the global circulation may be more intense than the
local circulations, due to a greater transport of the uid. It might reveal the
reason for the behaviour of having dierent inertia coecients for the vertical
cylinder, depending on its location.
When the cylinder was located closest to the ume wall, see Fig. 7.1, the vertical
cylinder was mainly exposed to the global circulation. Here it is suggested that
a higher ow case would result in a rapidly growth of the local circulations, the
global wont. This is supported by the argument that if a global and a local
circulation was presence, the global circulation would more or less transport the
same amount of uid in its orbit, whereas the transport of uid in the local
circulation would begin to increase, when having a higher ow case.
Thus it is suggested that when the circulations is dominated by the global
circulation, the pressure distribution around the cylinder would mainly dier
because of the change of the uid density. Since a higher ow case would cause
a decrease of the uid density, the inertia coecients of the vertical cylinder,
located 125 mm from the ume wall, see Fig. 8.16, are merging together when
correcting for this new density, ρ.
In continuation of the thesis, the local circulation eects becomes more dominat-
ing as the distance from the ume's wall increases. Meaning that an increase of
the injected air ow, which increases the uid transport in the local circulations,
==PAGE:107==
9.4 Low KC Numbers vs. High KC Numbers
95
would have a severe inuence on the inertia coecients. Which may be why the
inertia coecients of the vertical cylinder when located 210 and 295 mm from
the ume's wall, dramatically changes when a another ow case is introduces.
It is further suggested that the pressure distributions around the cylinder for
ow case 1-2 and 4-5 may be similar, when correcting for the lowered uid
density. Which may be why the inertia coecients found from these ows tend
to merge together when correcting for the uids density.
Thus the measured force does not only depend on the change of the uid density,
but also the change of the vertical ow, which changes the local circulations.
9.4
Low KC Numbers vs. High KC Numbers
During the project it was observed that circulation and turbulence was occurring
when injecting air into the enclosed ume. It was here questioned if these eects
would contribute to an additionally in-line force and if so, how big would this
contribution be?.
To test this theory, both loads cells were rigidly xed to the carriage and from
one of the load cells, the vertical cylinder was attached. This cylinder was then
embedded into the water and held still, whilst air continually was injected into
the enclosed ume. Here the load cell of the cylinder registered an oscillating in-
line force, which meant that having air injected into the ume would contribute
to an additional in-line force. This test is reported in Chap. E, the result of
this simple experiment is shown on Fig. 9.6
Fig. 9.6 shows the force registered by the vertical cylinder embedded into the
air-water mixture while the red line shows the adjacent load cell, which wasn't
in contact with the uid. From the gure it is ease to see that the vertical
cylinder reads a force oscillating in between ±0.25 Newtons.
However it was argued in the end, that the magnitude of this additional force
would probably be dierent when oscillating the cylinders, thus this force could
not be subtracted from the gathered data. However it was clear that this con-
tribution would aect the evaluated force coecients. But for simplicity, the
knowledge concerning this force was overlooked.
Regardless, looking at the evaluated results of the inertia coecients for the
horizontal and vertical cylinder, it is noticed that for low KC - numbers the
evaluated coecients seems scattered. It is suggested that this additionally os-
cillating in-line force severely aects the measured force at low KC - numbers
rather than when subjecting the cylinder to a higher KC - number.
==PAGE:108==
96
Discussion
Time [Sec.]
0
5
10
15
20
Force [Newtons]
-0.25
-0.2
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Vertical Cylinder In Water
Load Cell Not In Contact With Water
Figure 9.6: Evaluation of the in-line force, generated by the disturbance in the
uid.
When the cylinders were oscillating with a small KC - number, the hydrody-
namic force was less formed by the motion of the cylinders rather than the
introduced disturbance in the uid, caused by the injected water, which may
be the reason why the evaluated coecients becomes scattered for low KC -
numbers.
This would also be in consistence with the force curves reported on Fig. 8.14,
8.18, 8.22 and 8.26. Here it was observed that the calculated force didn't re-
semble the measured force properly for KC = 2, which may origin from the
discussed additional force contribution.
On the other hand, when increasing the stroke length of the cylinders, thus in-
creasing the KC - number, the hydrodynamic force becomes dominated by the
motion of the cylinders and the contribution of the disturbance in the water
becomes neglectable. Which may be seen when observing the force curves for
KC > 6.
In the end, it may be questioned if the evaluated force coecients for low KC -
numbers may be assumed to resemble the hydrodynamic force, for an oscillating
cylinder in an air-water mixture smaller than 17%? The large scatter of the
inertia coecients certainly adds to the uncertainty of these values.
==PAGE:109==
9.5 Turbulence In The Fluid
97
9.5
Turbulence In The Fluid
As mentioned in Chap. 3 the diusers tend to form a fair amount of turbulence
in the uid, however the intensity of the turbulence is unclear, and as suggested
in Chap. 7, the intensity of the turbulence might vary across the width of the
ume, due to e.g. the interaction of circulation eects.
In the past decades several authors has been investigating the force coecients
on various cylinders exposed to dierent turbulence intensities. However dur-
ing this project no papers have been found, where an oscillating cylinder was
exposed to a turbulent ow.
However [Ko and Graf, 1972] looked into how various turbulence intensities might
vary the drag of a circular cylinder. They exposed the cylinder to dierent free
stream turbulence ows, adjusted by using various grids. [Ko and Graf, 1972]
showed that the drag coecient of the cylinder would decrease by adding a tur-
bulence intensity less than 4% per se. Whereas a further increase of u' would
result in a larger drag coecient. Thus they deduces that a free-stream turbu-
lence does indeed aect the drag coecient and that the standard curve of CD
vs. Reynold number, would not be valid to determine the drag in a turbulent
ow.
[Lee, 1975] wrote a paper where he investigated the pressure eld around a
squared prism immersed in a grid produced turbulent uid stream, similar to
[Ko and Graf, 1972]. From which he saw that regardless of the introduced tur-
bulence intensity in the free stream, the pressure on the rear side of the cylinder
would increase, thus give a reduction of the drag. Additionally he showed that
increasing the turbulence intensity in the incident ow, would result in a more
complete pressure recovery towards the rear side of the prism. From which he
deduces that the turbulence would cause a re-attachment of the mean shear
layers to the side faces of the cylinder, which would inhibit the vortex formation
behind the body, causing a weaker vortices to form further downstream, thus
increasing the base pressure, thus reducing the form drag.
Comparing the data from [Lee, 1975] and [Ko and Graf, 1972] it may be con-
cluded that turbulence in the incident ow does not give the same result for a
circular and a squared cylinder. However even if [Lee, 1975] suggest that the
drag coecients should decrease when introducing turbulence in the uid, it
has to be emphasized that [Lee, 1975] exposed the squared cylinder to a one di-
mensional turbulent ow, whereas the two cylinders in this paper, were exposed
to a two dimensional turbulent ow, of which alters the boundary layers and
separation zones, as mentioned by [Venugopal et al., 2016].
Additionally as latter mentioned, no papers have been found investigating the
inuence of turbulence on an oscillating cylinder, thus the impact on the inertia
coecients, in a turbulent uid remains unclear.
It is still believed that the presence of turbulence in the uid when injecting air
==PAGE:110==
98
Discussion
into the ume, is contributing to an altered force coecient.
9.6
Estimation of Air-Water Percentage
Tab. 7.2 shows the dierent air-water percentage subjected to the horizontal
and vertical cylinder. These percentages was found according to the principle
explained in Sec. 6.1, where a camera recorded the rise of the water level and
by analysing these videos, an air percentage was found according to Eq. (6.1)
on page 45.
A minor part of this paper was also to determine if this manual reading process
could be avoided, by calculating the air-water percentage according to procedure
reported in Sec. 6.2. Here the average bubble size was determined to be 4±1
mm, which gave a terminal velocity of 0.2478 [m/s], from which the time it
would take a bubble to reach the surface could be found.
Knowing that time, tb, and the velocity of the injected ow in the enclosed ume,
Va, a relation of the air-water percentage could be deduces. This resulted in Eq.
(6.8) on page 49, from which Fig. 6.4 could be drawn.
Additional Sec. 6.1 also discusses the error on the readings. According to Fig.
6.3 the error depends on both the depth of the beginning water level, and the
measured rise of the water level. Thus when applying Eq. (6.1), the estimated
air-water percentage was not exactly equal to the percentages as reported in Tab.
7.2, but through various of repetition of the same ow injection and readings,
an average value was taken.
To compare these readings with the estimations of the air-water percentage of
Fig. 6.4, the non corrected readings have been plotted along the theoretical
curve in Fig. 9.7.
The gure shows that the theoretical estimations of the air-water percentage is
generally following the measured data points. Which means that the presumed
air-water percentage in the uid is in the right order, and the choice of having
the new water level to be the line separating the white foam with the rest of the
uid was appropriate.
However some deviations from the curve is found at the lowest air ows. Here
the theoretical curve suggest a higher air-water percentage than the readings.
The best match is found for ow case 3 and 4.
Taken the basis of the average air-water percentage of ow case 3, which resulted
in a value of 5% of air, the terminal velocity of an air bubble should be ub =
0.3519 m/s, according to the equations reported in Sec. 6.2, which is almost 1 1
2
times bigger than the calculated value.
==PAGE:111==
9.6 Estimation of Air-Water Percentage
99
Air flow [m3/s]
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
Air-water percentage [%]
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
Estimated Air%
Air% of Horizontal Cylinder
Air% of Vertical Cylinder 125mm
Air% of Vertical Cylinder 210mm
Air% of Vertical Cylinder 295mm
Figure 9.7: Estimated air-water percentage along with the measured readings.
It is suggested that two eects might inuence the terminal velocity value ub.
First of all when injecting the bubbles into the ume, it is suggested that each
bubble will have a minimum starting velocity, which would be similar to velocity
of the injected ow in the ume, Va, see Eq. (6.6). This velocity is not being
taking into consideration when invoking Eq. (6.8), Additionally it is suggested
that the global circulation might also contribute to a greater velocity of the
bubbles.
Secondly continuing to increase the magnitude of the air injection, it is suggested
that the previously conditions still would be presence, however now a higher
bubble concentration is formed. Here it is believed that the bubbles starts to
interact with each other, and the phenomenon of hindered terminal velocity
might occur. At this point an average downwards velocity of the water exist,
resulting in a decrease of the terminal velocity ub. Same theory is used in the
eld of sedimentation transport, here it is called hindered settling velocity.
It is suggested that these two eects might reveal the reason why, at a low
injection magnitudes, the terminal velocity is greater than what was anticipated
from Eq. (6.8), due to the starting velocity of the bubbles and the eect of global
circulation. And when increasing the ow magnitude further, the presence of
hindered terminal velocity would decrease the original terminal velocity and
apparently at this point, the readings of the air-water percentage is in accordance
to the theoretical curve.
==PAGE:112==
100
Discussion
9.7
Future studies
In Sec. 9.3, it was suggested that two types of circulations were presence, a
global and a local. However as mentioned earlier in this paper, no measure-
ments were made to support this argument, due to lack of time. To test this
theory, if a local and a global circulation may be occur simultaneously, and these
would interact with each other, a circulation test should be carried out.
A simple approach of how to do such an experiment, would be to install three
perforated tubes at the bottom of ume, their location should be similar to the
positions of the diusers used in this paper. These tubes then injects water into
the ume, supplied by a water pump, located in the enclosed ume. Doing so a
closed system which hopefully circulates the uid locally and globally is formed.
This test setup should then be capable of measuring the ow of the orbit motion
and the pressure distribution around the cylinders. This would give an indica-
tion if two types of circulations were presence, and if so, how these aected the
force coecients.
Eventually instead of setting up a circulation test, vertical plates could be in-
stalled in between the diusers. If local circulation was presence when injecting
air into the enclosed ume, the plates would suppress the interactions of the
individual jets. Thus remove the local circulations.
In Sec. 9.5 it was discussed if the presence of turbulence would have an inu-
ence on the evaluated force coecients. As previously mentioned, no papers
were found investigating the inuence of having an oscillating cylinder in a tur-
bulent ow. Thus it is unclear how turbulence in this test setup aects the force
coecients. To address this problem, it is suggested that an experiment should
be carried out, which is able to measure the turbulent intensity u' in the uid
and the pressure around an oscillating cylinder. A simple approach of how to
carry out such an experiment, would be to make a free-stream turbulent ow,
which intensity can be adjusted by using dierent grids. In this free-stream
turbulence a cylinder, which has pressure sensors attached to its body, is set to
oscillate normal to the ow. This type of test setup, can also be used to evaluate
the force coecients, on a forced vibrating cylinder in a cross ow.
This experiment may then be used to evaluate the results of this project, addi-
tionally Since turbulence would be presence in a breaking wave, on an oshore
structure, this experiment could also expand the current knowledge within this
eld.
In the end, it could be an advantage to design a perforated plate which covers
the entire bottom of the ume. From each hole of the plate air would be in-
jected into the enclosed ume. Doing so a more optimum distribution of the air
bubbles are formed, giving a better distribution of the uid density and perhaps
suppress the circulation eect.
==PAGE:113==
9.7 Future studies
101
However as latter mentioned, it is still unknown in what degree the turbulence
and circulation aects the evaluated force coecients. Even if designing a plate
covering the entire bottom, it is believed, that these eects would still be pres-
ence, just in a minor scale compared to what was seen in this paper.
Additionally as mentioned in Sec. 9.1, it was observed that the horizontal cylin-
der formed a lee side on top of the cylinder, when being exposed to an upstream
ow. This would cause a non-uniform pressure distribution with respect to the
horizontal plane, additionally it was believed that this lee side would be sub-
jected to a dierent uid density. These observations made it unclear how well
the horizontal cylinder performed, in the quest of seeking the knowledge "how
an air-water mixtures inuences, on the force coecients. And perhaps a dif-
ferent kind of set up should be suggested, if the test should be carried out with
a horizontal cylinder.
As mentioned in Chap. 3, the magnitude of ow generated by the FPZ K05-MS
channel blower, was manually controlled by a valve, which is reported on page
25, Fig. 3.12.
Since the ow is manually controlled, the magnitude of the ow may change in
time, due to a temperature change caused by a change of the pressure in the
tubes. This also means that the estimated air-water percentage may change
during the tests of the cylinders. It is proposed that if a similar study in the
future should be done, a digital control unit should be used instead, capable of
regulating the ow with respect to a chosen magnitude. This would ensure a
constant air-water percentage during the entire test.
==PAGE:114==
102
Discussion
==PAGE:115==
Chapter 10
Conclusion
The inuence of an air-water mixture on the hydrodynamic force coecients has
been tested and evaluated for two squared cylinders, a horizontal and a vertical.
To create the presence of air in the uid, three diusers were installed at the
bottom of the enclosed ume, which injected and trapped air into the uid. The
the air was supplied by a channel blower and the magnitude of the air ow was
controlled by a valve, which could be adjusted by a knob. Through observation
it was deduced that circulations and turbulence were presence during the tests,
which it is believed to inuence the evaluated force coecients. From the force
coecients presented in Chap. 8 the following has been observed.
1. When injecting air into the enclosed ume, an upstream ow was formed,
causing the ow to become 2 dimensional instead of being 1 dimensional,
as when validating the test setup and calculations.
Here the cylinders experienced a high drag at low KC - numbers, which
rapidly decreased when the KC - number increased. This was regardless
of the injected ow magnitude and the use of either the horizontal or
vertical cylinder. Additionally a similar tendency was seen in the paper of
[Venugopal et al., 2006], where a horizontal squared cylinder was exposed
to regular and irregular waves, which also introduces a 2 dimensional ow.
==PAGE:116==
104
Conclusion
2. Both the vertical and horizontal cylinder showed that an increase of the
ows magnitude would cause a smaller drag force. Additionally an increase
of the ows magnitude would cause the inertia coecients of the vertical
cylinder to decrease, whereas for the horizontal cylinder its coecients
would increase. Moreover when correcting for the uid density, both force
coecients increased, which was in accordance to the Morison equation
on page 9, Eq.(2.8). Since a lower uid density would result in a greater
value of the coecients.
3. It was suggested that when the horizontal cylinder was oscillating whilst
air was being injected into the ume, could be compared with the scenario
of having a forced vibrating cylinder in a cross ow. However as mentioned
in the project, no papers were found where authors have been investigated
this inuence on the added mass it self, thus it became dicult to compare
the evaluated coecients, with previous research. However according to
[Sarpkaya, 1978] who investigated the change of the natural frequency of
an oscillating circular cylinder in a cross ow, it was observed that there
was a change of the mass coecient Cmc, depending on the magnitude
of the cross ow and the amplitude of vibration. From this it was de-
duced that the horizontal cylinder may show dierent results in contrast
to the vertical. Thus comparing these cylinder with each other would be
inappropriately.
4. It is suggested that the uid would experience two types of circulations, a
global and a local, when injecting air into the enclosed ume. Additionally
it was suggested that the horizontal cylinder, in contrast to the vertical
cylinder, would average out all the exerting eects, whereas the behaviour
of the vertical cylinder, would be dependent on its local conditions.
From this a thesis was set, saying that when the vertical cylinder was
located closest to the wall of the ume, the global circulation was the
dominating feature, and regardless of the injected ows magnitude, the
uid transported in its orbit, would more or less the same.
Which may be why that the inertia coecients of the vertical cylinder
located 125 mm from the wall, merges together when correcting for the
uid density, because the pressure distribution around the cylinder and
separation points would be more or less the same, when a correction for
the uid density.
Additionally the thesis stated that as the vertical cylinder was moved fur-
ther away from the wall, the dominance of the global circulation becomes
less and instead the local circulations would become the dominating fac-
tor.
It was here suggested that increasing the magnitude of the ow injection,
would result in an increase of the uid transport, of the local circulations.
It is here believed that the pressure distribution and separation points of
ow case 1-2 and 4-5 would be more or less the same, when correction for
==PAGE:117==
105
the uid density. Which may be why the inertia coecients of the vertical
cylinder when located 210 and 295 mm from the ume's wall, didn't show
the same behaviour of merging together as when located 125 mm from the
ume's wall, since these coecients would be depending on the magnitude
of the local circulation and the change of the uid density.
Additionally [Venugopal et al., 2006] argued that a circulating ow would
decrease the inertia coecients, which may be compared to the behaviour
of the vertical cylinder.
Here the inertia coecients decreased, as the
magnitude of the ow injection increased.
It is also suggested that the major decrease of the inertia coecients for
the horizontal cylinder, when injecting air into ume, is caused by the cir-
culating ow or forced vibration in a cross ow, rather than the presence
of air.
5. The presented results doesn't include the uncertainties of the evaluated
inertia or drag coecients. This was partly chosen because the uncer-
tainty of the time independent parameter fi was unknown and because it
is believed that it would deteriorate the shown plots. Regardless, Fig. 4.5
shows that there exist a greater uncertainty of the vertical cylinder, com-
pared to the horizontal cylinder, due to an uncertain embedding depth.
Additionally when injecting air into the ume, which result in a rise of the
water level, would contribute to an even bigger uncertainty of the embed-
ding depth. However it is suggested that for the vertical cylinder, if the
uncertainties were to be removed, the tendency of having the coecients
to merge together would be even more clear, than what has been shown
so far.
6. When increasing the air-water percentage in the uid, the measured and
calculated force curves insinuated a decrease of the hydrodynamic force,
which is in accordance with the decrease of both the evaluated drag and
inertia of the cylinders.
This was specially clear for the vertical cylinder when located 210 and 295
mm from the umes wall.
7. The calculated and measured hydrodynamic force curves shows a good
agreement of the forces when KC > 6 per se. of which it was suggested that
when increasing the stroke length of the cylinders, the additional in-line
force contribution would become less and instead the hydrodynamic force
would be governed by the motion of the cylinders instead. The additional
in-line force was reported on page 127, Chap. E. This suggestion would be
in accordance with the observed force curves of both cylinders, here the
calculated force didn't resemble the measured force for KC = 2. Which
may be why the evaluated inertia coecients seemed to become scattered
at low KC numbers. In the end, it is unclear how valid the evaluated
==PAGE:118==
106
Conclusion
coecients are for low KC - numbers, since the results shows a lot of
scatter.
8. According to the measured and calculated force curves, the piston experi-
enced a less unsteady motion, when moving its piston according to a KC =
6 per se. This argument is supported by seeing less "jumps" and "shakes"
during its motion on Fig. 8.12, 8.17, 8.21 and 8.25. This unsteady mo-
tion has in this paper been presented as noise, which contributes to a less
appropriate evaluation of the force coecients.
9. It was suggested that the presence of turbulence inuenced the evaluated
force coecients, despite the argument presented by [Lee, 1975], that a
free stream turbulence exerting on a square cylinder, would result in an
increase of the base pressure, thus reducing the form drag.
However during this project no papers were found, investigating the in-
uence of turbulence on an oscillating body. Additionally the cylinders
in this paper were subjected to a two dimensional ow, in contrast to the
previously studies made within this eld.
10. The use of Eq. (6.8) to estimate the air-water percentage of the uid,
generally resembles the measured air-water percentages. This means that
the presumed air-water percentage in the uid, during the tests, was in
the right order and the choice of having the new water level to be the line
separating the white foam with the rest of the liquid was appropriate.
However some deviations were to be found, the theoretical model Eq.
(6.8) tended to overestimate the measured air-water percentage for low
injection ows. It was suggested that the deviation was caused by a be-
ginning velocity of the bubbles, when being injected into the ume and a
global circulation which might increase the terminal velocity of the bub-
bles. Moreover it is believed that at a higher bubble concentration, the
bubbles were experiencing some sort of hindered velocity, causing the ter-
minal velocity to decrease.
11. It has been suggested that the horizontal cylinder wasn't suited for being
tested against an air-water mixtures inuence on the force coecients,
with this type of set up. Having an upstream ow resulted in a lee side of
the horizontal cylinder and additionally it was questioned weather or not
this was the same as having an oscillating cylinder in a cross ow. It is
unclear how big these eects had during the tests? Thus the credibility of
the gathered data from the horizontal cylinder is uncertain.
==PAGE:119==
Appendix A
Calibration Of Equipment
This chapter goes through the process of how to calibrate the various compo-
nents used in this project. Advantages and disadvantage of the methods used
will be discussed and arguments of the chosen method will be emphasized.
A.1
Calibration Of Load Cells
Sec. 3.4 briey discusses the load cells, and argue for the advantage and disad-
vantage of them. Before being able to estimate the hydrodynamic force exerting
on the cylinders, a calibration of the load cells are required. This calibration
wil give a relation between the voltage output and the force experienced by the
submerged body.
In Sec. 3.4, it was emphasized that the load cells measures the pressure dif-
ference over a small surface, which triggers the strain gauges, and converts the
pressure into a voltage signal.
By knowing the relation of this conversion between exerted force and voltage,
the user of the load cells will be able to evaluate the force acting on the body.
To nd the relation between the force and voltage output, the load cells will be
exposed to a number of known loads, each load will result in a specic voltage
==PAGE:120==
108
Calibration Of Equipment
output, which will be compiled in a data le.
In the end, a linear relation
between the applied load and its voltage output is generated. Fig. A.1 shows
the procedure of how to calibrate the load cells.
Figure A.1: Calibration process of a load cell.
In this project the load cells were xed to a table by a clam, at the tip of the
load cells weights were attached. This procedure was repeated with various of
weights, until enough data points were gathered. To store the data, the program
Dataacquisition coded in LabView was used.
Tab.
A.1 and A.2 specically
shows the applied weight and the voltage output of load cell 6 and 7.
The dierence between having a positive or negative weight exerting on the load
cells, depends on which side the load cell was turned before adding the mass on
its tip. Afterwards these data points, along with its specic load in newtons,
were plotted in a graph, see Fig. A.2 and A.3
Beside from the weights attached at the tip of the load cells, the strain gauges
are also subjected to there own weight. However since the load cells are wired
together in a stone bridge formation, the additional load equals half of the load
cells own weight. Each load cells weights 178 g per se, thus an additionally
weight of 89 g is exerted on each load cell, whilst calibrating. By assuming a
gravity acceleration of 9.82 m/s2 all the exerted load may be converted into a
force in newtons.
==PAGE:121==
A.1 Calibration Of Load Cells
109
Table A.1: Calibration of load cell 6.
Calibration of load cell 6
Added Mass
Load Cell Mass
Total Mass
Gravitational Force
Voltage
[Kg]
[Kg]
[Kg]
[N]
[V]
- 2
-0.178/2
-2.089
-20.5140
-3.3249
-1.5
-0.178/2
-1.589
-15.6040
-2.6439
-1
-0.178/2
-1.089
-10.6940
-1.9660
-0.5
-0.178/2
-0.589
-5.7840
-1.2825
0
-178/2
-0.089
-0.8740
-0.6052
0
178/2
0.089
0.8740
-0.3666
0.5
178/2
0.5189
5.7840
0.3111
1
178/2
1.089
10.6940
0.9939
1.5
178/2
1.589
15.6040
1.6711
2
178/2
2.089
20.5140
2.3511
Table A.2: Calibration of load cell 7.
Calibration of load cell 7
Added Mass
Load Cell Mass
Total Mass
Gravitational Force
Voltage
[Kg]
[Kg]
[Kg]
[N]
[V]
- 2
-0.178/2
-2.089
-20.5140
-3.6419
-1.5
-0.178/2
-1.589
-15.6040
-2.7801
-1
-0.178/2
-1.089
-10.6940
-1.9220
-0.5
-0.178/2
-0.589
-5.7840
-1.0570
0
-178/2
-0.089
-0.8740
-0.1990
0
178/2
0.089
0.8740
0.0999
0.5
178/2
0.5189
5.7840
0.9593
1
178/2
1.089
10.6940
1.8242
1.5
178/2
1.589
15.6040
2.6846
2
178/2
2.089
20.5140
3.5428
==PAGE:122==
110
Calibration Of Equipment
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
Force [Newtons]
V oltage [V olt]
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
Force [Newtons]
V oltage [V olt]
Figure A.2: Calibration result of
load cell number 6.
Figure A.3: Calibration result of
load cell number 7.
From Fig. A.2 and A.3 it is seen that the relation between the voltage and
the exerted force ts in a linear relation, which is in accordance to a previous
project made by [Petersen, 2016], who also found a similar linear relation.
By calling the function Polyt in Matlab a linear best t of the data points
shown in Tab. A.1 and A.2 are made, giving the relation between the voltage
and the force. This relation is reported in Eq. (A.1) and (A.2).
Load Cell 6:
F = 7.2305
 V
N

· V + 3.5154 [N]
(A.1)
Load Cell 7:
F = 5.7521
 V
N

· V + 0.2795 [N]
(A.2)
The disadvantage of this approach is that the load cells doesn't take the xation,
onto the carriage, into consideration, which creates a minor torque.
After the cylinders are installed onto the carriage, it might not be hanging
vertically, thus a small angle may be presence. This angle can be divided into
two components, a vertical and a horizontal force component, of which the
horizontal component would contribute to an additional in-line force.
However according to Chap. D on page 123, which veries the masses of the
cylinders, the masses found by the load cells resembles the measured forces
when having the cylinders to oscillate in the air. Thus it is concluded that this
calibrating method, honours the forces, which the load cells registers during the
tests.
==PAGE:123==
A.2 Calibration Of Draw Wire
111
A.2
Calibration Of Draw Wire
Section 3.8 discusses the advantage of the draw wire, such as knowing the exact
motion of the carriage with respect to time. However before being enable to
evaluate the motion of the carriage during the tests, a relation between the
registered voltage output generated by the draw wire, and its motion needs to
be found. This relation is found by a simple calibration test.
When the wire is pulled out of its box it generates a voltage signal, depending
on how much the wire is being pulled this signal becomes stronger. Thus by
pulling the wire in a known distance and afterwards store the generated voltage
signal, a set of calibration points are gathered.
The measured voltage signal vs. the pulled distance of the wire is reported in
Tab. A.3. By plotting these points against each other, a linear curve is formed,
which is shown in Fig. A.4. This curve also supports the argument of having a
linear relation between the distance and the voltage output.
Table A.3: The measured distance vs. the read voltage for the draw wire.
Calibration of the draw wire
Distance
[mm]
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Voltage
[Volt]
3.3187
3.5219
3.7199
3.9200
4.1191
4.3208
4.5223
4.7231
In Matlab the function Polyt is called, making a best linear t of the data.
From this Eq. (A.3) is generated, giving the relation between the measured
voltage and the pulled distance of the wire. By applying this relation to the
gathered data from the tests, the velocities and the accelerations of the cylinders
are found.
Dis = 0.099794
 V
m

· V −0.33124 [m]
(A.3)
Additionally it has to be mentioned that the calibration points of the draw wire
was made in the region, of which the hydraulic piston would be working within.
As mentioned in Sec. 4.1, a small misreading of the draw wire could be fatal for
the evaluation of the inertia coecient, CM for the horizontal cylinder. If the
draw wire doesn't run parallel with the carriages motion, meaning that a small
angle exist between the motion of the carriage and the direction of which the
wire is being pulled, a misreading of the carriage position could easily occur.
==PAGE:124==
112
Calibration Of Equipment
Voltage [Volt]
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
Distance [Meters]
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
Figure A.4: Calibration result of the draw wire.
However assuming that the draw wire would be lined up perfectly, thus no angle
exist would be bold. So to include any small angles between the motion of the
carriage and the draw wire, the calibration must be made within the pistons
working range.
==PAGE:125==
Appendix B
Spectral Analyse of the
Signal
B.1
Validation of Spectral Analyse
As previously mentioned in Chap. 3, the gathered data from the load cells con-
tains a lot of noise. Part of this noise arises from the vibration done by the
hydraulic piston, some of the noise are formed due to the friction and unparal-
leled tracks of the carriage and lastly some noise are formed when air is being
mix in with the water. Regardless, this noise results in impossible evaluations
of the hydrodynamic forces and must be terminated.
There exist several approaches of how to terminate or eliminate noise from a
gathered data set, e.g. a hamming lter, which was used by [Petersen, 2016].
However this project choose a more simple approach, which is the spectral anal-
yse. This analyse assess the range of frequencies, of which can be considered to
be without noise, and hence at which frequency a cut o frequency should be
at.
However before using this method to remove the noise from the measured data,
a validation of this procedure has to be veried.
For doing so, a simple irregular wave is made in Matlab, the wave will consist
of 4 sinusoidal waves, each with a dierent frequency. Tab. B.1 illuminates the
==PAGE:126==
114
Spectral Analyse of the Signal
4 waves used in this test while Fig. B.1 shows the plotted wave.
Afterwards this "signal" is converted by a Fast Fourier Transformation (FFT)
and plotted with respect to its frequency domain, see Fig. B.2, from which the
previously 4 chosen frequencies are seen. Afterwards one of the frequencies is
removed from the generated signal, in this example the sinusoidal wave having
a frequency f=2 Hz is removed, see Fig. B.3.
By applying an Inverse Fast Fourier Transformation the original signal minus
the input from the 2 Hz sinusoidal wave is restored. This signal is compared
with an irregular wave, which has been constructed with 3 sinusoidal waves
consisting of 1, 0.667 and 0.5 Hz, see Fig. B.4.
Table B.1: The 4 sinusoidal waves used in the validation process.
Period
Frequency
Sinus Function
[sec]
[Hz]
[η = sin(2π/T · t)]
0.5
2
η1 = sin(4π/0.5 · t)
1
1
η2 = sin(2π · t)
1.5
0.667
η3 = sin(4/3π · t)
2
0.5
η4 = sin(π · t)
Time (seconds)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Received Signal
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
Frequency (Hz)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Spectral Density
50
100
150
200
250
300
Figure B.1: The
irregular
wave
consisting
of
the
4
frequencies
seen
in
Tab. B.1.
Figure B.2: The
spectral
density
after doing a FFT -
analyse.
==PAGE:127==
B.2 Applying The Spectral Analyse On A Gathered Data Set
115
Frequency (Hz)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Spectral Density
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Time (seconds)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Received Signal
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Filtered Data
Irregular wave with 3 frequencies
Figure B.3: The
spectral
density
after removing the 2 Hz
frequency.
Figure B.4: The new received sig-
nal without 2 Hz input.
From the Fig. B.4 it is concluded that the spectral analyse are capable of only
removing the unwanted frequencies and still leave the rest of the signal intact.
The gure shows that both the new generated signal consisting of 3 frequencies
and the old ltered signal lines up perfectly, thus no loss of amplitudes or periods.
By using the same procedure to ltrate the gathered data in this project, the
unwanted noise may be terminated, without disturbing the valuable data.
B.2
Applying The Spectral Analyse On A Gath-
ered Data Set
As mentioned in Sec. B.1, a spectral analyse is carried out to ltrate the un-
wanted noise from the gathered data. The origin of the noise may be found
in the disturbance of the carriage motions and the hydraulic pistons unsmooth
motions, additionally noise caught by the load cells when injecting air into the
ume, also has to be ltered in some extent.
To test the ltration method on actual measures, a simple test of having the
vertical cylinder to oscillate in the air in accordance to a frequency equal 1 Hz
is carried out.
From this test the position of the carriage vs the time, and the load on the
cylinder were logged. After converting the signal from the draw wire into an
actual distance, the position of the carriage vs. the time could be plotted, see
==PAGE:128==
116
Spectral Analyse of the Signal
Fig. B.5
From this gure it is noticed that the acceleration of the carriage whilst moving
forward is bigger than when its moving backwards, thus it must be empha-
sized that the motion of the carriage isn't fully sinusoidal. Additionally, small
disturbances along its motion is seen, which is supported by Fig. B.6.
Time [Sec]
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Distance [Meters]
-0.08
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
Frequency [Hz]
0
2
4
6
8
10
Spectral density
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Filtered FFT
Non Filtered FFT
Figure B.5: Motion of the carriage
vs. time.
Figure B.6: Filtered and non l-
tered FFT analysis of
the carriage motion.
Fig. B.6 shows the frequencies of the voltage output from the draw wire, before
and after it has been ltrated.
As latter mentioned, the cylinder oscillated
according to 1 Hz, which is in accordance of having the strongest signal at this
frequency. However from Fig. B.6 it is also observed that the draw wire registers
frequencies above 1 Hz, and some of these signals origin from the noise done by
the test set up.
If one should remove all the frequencies above 1 Hz, a pure sinusoidal motion of
the carriage would be granted, however this would not reect the actual motion
of the carriage, which is seen on Fig. B.5. Meaning that some of the other
frequencies, seen on Fig. B.6, contributes to this non sinusoidal motion, and
must be preserved.
Again it is emphasized that when ltering the response, its important that the
logged motion is still intact. By applying a lter on all freqiencies above 4.9
Hz, following the same procedure as in Sec. B.1, these frequencies would be
removed. The new generated signal may be seen in Fig. B.7
From which it is seen that the ltered motion of the carriage still keeps the
overall original motion intact, but removes the noise from the machinery etc.
Thus it may be concluded, that by removing all the frequencies above 4.9 Hz,
adequate data for further evaluation are generated.
==PAGE:129==
B.2 Applying The Spectral Analyse On A Gathered Data Set
117
However to be able to assess the drag and mass - coecient, CD and Cm, the
velocity and acceleration of the cylinder, hence the carriage needs to be found.
By using the function gradient in Matlab, these two data sets are generated.
The velocity and acceleration are calculated from the raw unltered data of the
carriages motion. Afterwards the same lter, as used previously, is applied on
these data sets, removing all the frequencies above 4.9 Hz. The velocity and
acceleration are reported on Fig. B.8 and B.9
Time [Sec]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Distance [Meters]
-0.08
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
Filtered Motion
Non Filtered Motion
Figure B.7: Filtered and non ltered motion of the carriage.
Time [Sec]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Velocity [m/s]
-0.5
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Filtered Velocity
Non Filtered Velocity
Time [Sec]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Acceleration [m/s2]
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
Filtered Acceleration
Non Filtered Acceleration
Figure B.8: Filtered and non l-
tered velocity of the
carriage.
Figure B.9: Filtered and non l-
tered
acceleration
of
the carriage.
==PAGE:130==
118
Spectral Analyse of the Signal
Again the argument of not having a clean sinusoidal motion is supported by
Fig. B.8 and B.9. As argued in [Petersen, 2016] thesis, the motion of the car-
riage seems to introduce a small jump during its transition phase, from moving
backwards to forwards, which is seen on the velocity graph, on Fig. B.8. Here
at the peaks of the velocity a jump of the carriage appears. Looking at the
acceleration of the carriage, it doesn't support the idea of having a sinusoidal
motion as rst presumed, instead the small variations of the velocity during the
test are seen.
Next the force measured from the load cells has to be veried. According to
Newtons second law: F = m · a, the measured force must be similar to the
measured acceleration. Additionally the same lter as was applied to the motion
of the carriage, is applied to the load cells, hence frequencies above 4.9 Hz are
removed.
Time [Sec]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Force [Newtons]]
-3
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
Figure B.10: Filtered force of the cylinder.
From the above gure, B.10, showing the exerted force on the cylinder, it is seen
that the measured force matches the observed acceleration, hence the chosen cut
o frequency is valid for both the position of the carriage and force read by the
load cells. This simple test rounds up and concluding that the ltration method
from Sec. B.1, can be applied to the data gathered from the draw wire and the
load cells, for further evaluation of the CD and CM.
==PAGE:131==
Appendix C
Natural Frequencies of The
Cylinders
To evaluate the usage of the horizontal and vertical cylinder, for estimating the
drag and inertia coecient, CD and CM, when being exposed to an air-water
mixture, the natural frequencies of the two cylinders, must not lie within the
testing frequency domain of 0 - 4.9 Hz, which was reported in Sec. B.2. Which
stated that all registered force contributions above 4.9 Hz, will be excluded from
the evaluation, since these frequencies origin from noise. In other words, if the
natural frequency from either the horizontal or vertical cylinder is lower than
4.9 Hz, its oscillations would interfere with the data, causing the the load cells
to register forces, which isn't initiated by the original movement by the carriage.
In this chapter both the vertical and horizontal cylinders natural frequency in air
and in the case of being embedded into the water will be tested. When lowering
the cylinders into the water, an additional damping eect will be introduced,
this will cause a decrease of the natural frequencies of the systems. The approach
to test the natural frequencies, is to x the cylinders to the carriage, and expose
them for a small knock with a hammer or a similar tool, this would set the
cylinders into an oscillating motion.
While oscillating, the load cells would
register its own natural frequency, which an FFT - analyse can illuminate.
Figure C.1 and C.2 shows the registered voltage of both cylinders while oscil-
==PAGE:132==
120
Natural Frequencies of The Cylinders
lating in the air.
Fig.
C.3 and C.4 indicates the natural frequency of both
systems.
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
Horizontal Cylinder - Motion in Air, load cell 6
Horizontal Cylinder - Motion in Air, load cell 7
Time[Sec]
V oltage[V olt]
6
7
8
9
10
11
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Vertical Cylinder - Motion in Air, load cell 6
Time[Sec]
V oltage[V olt]
Figure C.1: Oscillating motion of
the horizontal cylin-
der in air.
Figure C.2: Oscillating motion of
the vertical cylinder
in air.
Frequency [Hz]
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Spectral density
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
Eigen Frequency Horizontal Cylinder in Air, Load Cell 6
Eigen Frequency Horizontal Cylinder in Air, Load Cell 7
Frequency [Hz]
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
Spectral Density
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Eigen Frequency Vertical Cylinder in Air
Figure C.3: Natural frequency of
the horizontal cylin-
der in air.
Figure C.4: Natural frequency of
the vertical cylinder
in air.
From Fig. C.3 and C.4 the natural frequency of the horizontal and vertical
cylinder, when oscillating in air, is respectively 10 and 25 Hz per se. Which is
above the cut o frequency limit of 4.9 Hz. However when embedding both of
these cylinders into water, these frequencies will drop due to the damping eect,
which the water provides.
==PAGE:133==
121
Figure C.5 and C.6 shows the motion of the cylinders when they are embedded
into the water, whilst Fig. C.7 and C.8 shows the natural frequencies of the
water scenario.
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
Horizontal Cylinder - Motion in Water, load cell 6
Horizontal Cylinder - Motion in Water, load cell 7
Time[Sec]
V oltage[V olt]
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
7
7.5
8
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
Vertical Cylinder - Motion in Water, load cell 6
Time[Sec]
V oltage[V olt]
Figure C.5: Oscillating motion of
the horizontal cylin-
der in water.
Figure C.6: Oscillating motion of
the vertical cylinder
in water.
Frequency [Hz]
2
4
6
8
10
12
Spectral density
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
Eigen Frequency Horizontal Cylinder in Water, Load Cell 6
Eigen Frequency Horizontal Cylinder in Water, Load Cell 7
Frequency [Hz]
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Spectral Density
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Eigen Frequency Vertical Cylinder in Water
Figure C.7: Natural frequency of
the horizontal cylin-
der in water.
Figure C.8: Natural frequency of
the vertical cylinder
in water.
From Fig. C.7 and C.8 it is seen that the natural frequency of the horizontal
cylinder has dropped to 8 Hz, while the vertical cylinder now has an natural
frequency of 16 Hz per se. As expected, the natural frequency of both systems
were lowered, however both of these natural frequencies still meet the necessary
demand to be above the cut o frequency limit of 4.9 Hz, thus it will not interfere
==PAGE:134==
122
Natural Frequencies of The Cylinders
with the evaluated force coecients.
However it is emphasized by looking at Fig.
C.7 and C.8, that outside its
amplied response of 8 and 16 Hz, small oscillations is present. These oscillations
will is some degree disturb the measured forces during the tests. However it is
assumed that these contributes can be neglected when evaluating the drag and
inertia coecients.
==PAGE:135==
Appendix D
Validation of The Cylinders
Mass
According to Eq. (2.8) the third contribution to the measured force, is in con-
sistence with newtons second law, F = m·a, which substitutes the original third
term of the Froude Krylov force, in the Morison equation.
To evaluate the masses which is in play during the test, the masses of the cylin-
ders are measured by the load cells. Another way could have been to measure
the masses with a weight, however since the force is measured by the load cells
and these are calibrated with a linear best t curve, they doesn't measure 100
% accurate. To include this inaccuracy from the load cells, the masses will be
determined by the load cells.
To do so, the cylinders and load cells will be xed horizontally to a table with
a known constant acceleration, namely the gravity acceleration ≈9.82 m/s2.
After measuring the voltage output with positive and negative voltages, these
voltage readings are converted into a force, by using the linear relation given in
Eq. (A.1) and (A.1) on page 110. Afterwards a mean value of these forces are
taken, from which the masses of the cylinders plus the bolts and nuts are found.
Tab. D.1 and D.2 respectively shows the readings of the vertical and horizontal
cylinder, LC is an abbreviation for load cell.
==PAGE:136==
124
Validation of The Cylinders Mass
Table D.1: Measured and calculated weight of the vertical cylinder.
Measured and calculated weight of the vertical cylinder
LC 6
LC 6
LC 7
LC 7
Positive
0.1933 Volt
0.4916 Kg
0
0
Negative
-1.1376 Volt
-0.4945 Kg
0
0
Average
0.4931 Kg.
0
Table D.2: Measured and calculated weight of the horizontal cylinder.
Measured and calculated weight of the horizontal cylinder
LC 6
LC 6
LC 7
LC 7
Sum
Positive
1.2669 Volt
1.2886 Kg
7.2412 Volt
4.2408 Kg
5.5294 Kg
Negative
-4.8413 Volt
-3.2067 Kg
-4.0744 Volt
-2.3417 Kg
-5.5484 Kg
Average
5.5389 Kg
Afterwards a validation test is executed, to see if the masses found by the load
cells actually consist with the measured force, when having the cylinders oscil-
lating in air, thus the newtons second law may be applied: F = m · a.
Here the mass would be equal to the recently found mass of either the vertical
or horizontal cylinder, and the acceleration equals the double dierentiated po-
sition of the carriage vs. time, found by the draw wire. This force should be in
consistence with the force read by the load cell.
Fig. D.1 and D.2, illuminates the force measured by the load cells, and the
calculated forces from newtons second law.
From Fig. D.1 and D.2 it is observed, that the calculated and measured forces
matches with each other, thus the masses found from the load cells are in con-
sistence with forces read by the load cells. However small dierences between
the forces are presence, these dierences lies in the fact that the load cells also
register small vibrations of the cylinders. However it may be concluded that the
found masses are assumed be to in the right order.
==PAGE:137==
125
10
10.5
11
11.5
12
Force [Newtons]
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
Calculated Force, F = M x a
measured force
Time[Sec]
10
10.5
11
11.5
12
Force [Newtons]
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Force Measured From Load Cell
Mass x Acceleration
Time[Sec]
Figure D.1: The
measured
and
calculated
force
of
the horizontal cylin-
der.
Figure D.2: The
measured
and
calculated
force
of
the vertical cylinder.
==PAGE:138==
126
Validation of The Cylinders Mass
==PAGE:139==
Appendix E
Contribution To the
Inline Force
Theoretically when air is injected into the uid, it should only generate an
upward directed ow.
However as explained in Sec.
3.2, the diusers were
designed to create some sort of turbulence in the water, to help clean out the
particles and other sorts of bacteria in a basin. Additionally, it was observed
that a circulation of the ow was occurring, when injecting air into the enclosed
ume. The presence of turbulence and circulation contributes to a greater in-line
force. Meaning that when oscillating the cylinders in the air-water mixture, the
force does not only consist of a hydrodynamic force, exerted by the oscillating
cylinders, but also a horizontal force component, formed by the turbulent and
circulating ow.
To evaluate the inuence of this force contribution, the two load cells were
rigidly xed onto the carriage, and from one of them the vertical cylinder was
attached and embedded into the water. Afterwards air was injected into the
enclosed ume. While continuing injecting a constant ow into the ume, the
in-line force of the vertical cylinder was registered. These readings could then
be compared to the adjacent load cell, which wasn't in contact with the uid.
If the injected ow only would result in an upward directed ow, and the pres-
ence of turbulence and circulation didn't exist, the forces found from both load
cells, should be identical and close to zero.
==PAGE:140==
128
Contribution To the
Inline Force
The injected ow is adjusted, such it is in accordance with ow case 5, which
is reported in Tab. 7.2 on page 52, resulting in an air-water percentage of 17%.
This ow case was chosen such, that an evaluation of the maximum inuence of
the turbulent and circulation ow could be illuminated.
Fig. E.1 illuminates the signicance of the turbulent and circulating ow.
Time [Sec.]
0
5
10
15
20
Force [Newtons]
-0.25
-0.2
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Vertical Cylinder In Water
Load Cell Not In Contact With Water
Figure E.1: Evaluation of the in-line force, generated by the disturbance in
the uid.
From Fig. E.1 it is observed that the vertical cylinder registers a force which
oscillates in between ±0.25 Newtons per se.
It was afterwards observed, that the vertical cylinder would experience a max-
imum force of 0.8 newtons per se. when having it to oscillating in the same
air-water mixture, with a KC = 2.
If a linearity between the force, when having the vertical cylinder to be still in
the uid, and when it was oscillating, the maximum force contribution of the
disturbed water would be 31% of the total in-line force.
Of course this force percentage would decrease, when subjecting the cylinder
to a higher KC - number, and assuming a linearisation between the two forces
would be deeply wrong.
Nonetheless, it is emphasized that part of the measured force, when oscillating
the cylinders in the air-water mixture, is directly descendent from the distur-
==PAGE:141==
129
bance in the uid. Additionally it is suggested that for low KC numbers this
may even be the governing force.
This simply experiment concludes that the evaluated drag and inertia coe-
cients doesn't reect the true values of an air rich uid, specially not for low
KC - numbers.
However to continuing conducting this experiment, it is assumed that this force
contribution may be overlooked.
==PAGE:142==
130
Contribution To the
Inline Force
==PAGE:143==
Appendix F
Bubble Injection Process
The pictures reported on 132 - 134, shows the development of the bubble distri-
bution at the bottom of the enclosed ume, after being injected by the diusers.
Each picture illuminates the development per. 0.15 sec.
It is noticed that the camera is located in between the diusers. Here two "walls"
of bubbles are formed, in line above the diusers. The interaction between these
walls are in focus, because it was noticed that eddies and exchange of moments
frequently occurred. Additionally it was questioned how far above the perforated
plate, it may be assumed to have a uniform distribution of the bubbles.
Up until 1.15 seconds after the injection process was initiated, the walls seemed
to be stable and did not interfere with each other. Here on after, the walls
seemed to experience instability, and the ones stable walls may now be assumed
to be in a transition phase, to become unstable.
At 2.15 seconds, the left wall is being dragged over the gap, and it is suggested
that this is caused by an existing pressure dierence between the adjacent water
and right bubble wall.
After 3 seconds, it is unclear if the walls oscillates periodically, or if a full mix
between the walls have occurred. Regardless, a non stable ow is seen after
3 seconds, and it is suggested that this non stable ow adds to the measured
in-line force of the cylinders as was reported in Chap. E, which makes it more
==PAGE:144==
132
Bubble Injection Process
dicult to evaluate the eect of an air-water mixture on the force coecients.
Additionally even after 3 seconds, some part of the perforated plate is still
visible. This clearing of the plate will always be presence, regardless of how
long air is being injected into the ume. This means that to any given time, the
cylinders must be located at a certain distance above the plate, to ensure that
the entire cylinder would experience the same uid density.
Figure F.1: 0.15 sec.
Figure F.2: 0.3 sec.
Figure F.3: 0.45 sec.
Figure F.4: 1 sec.
==PAGE:145==
133
Figure F.5: 1.15 sec.
Figure F.6: 1.30 sec.
Figure F.7: 1.45 sec.
Figure F.8: 2 sec.
==PAGE:146==
134
Bubble Injection Process
Figure F.9: 2.15 sec.
Figure F.10: 2.30 sec.
Figure F.11: 2.45 sec.
Figure F.12: 3 sec.
==PAGE:147==
Appendix G
Drawings of Test Set-up,
Cylinders and Grid Paper
Chapter 3 goes through each component which was used through out the project.
The components advantage and disadvantages was discussed, additionally the
chapter gives some references to some drawings/ sketches of which are reported
here. Besides attaching the basic test set up, excluding the channel blower see
page. 136 and 137, the geometry of both cylinder are also given in this chapter,
see page. 138 and 139.
Also the frame, of which were attached to the carriage, for supporting the cylin-
ders is found on page. 140.
Lastly the grid paper used to measure the elevation of the water level while
injecting air into the enclosed ume is reported on page. 141.
==PAGE:148==
136
Drawings of Test Set-up, Cylinders and Grid Paper
==PAGE:149==
137
==PAGE:150==
138
Drawings of Test Set-up, Cylinders and Grid Paper
==PAGE:151==
139
==PAGE:152==
140
Drawings of Test Set-up, Cylinders and Grid Paper
==PAGE:153==
141
==PAGE:154==
142
Drawings of Test Set-up, Cylinders and Grid Paper
==PAGE:155==
Appendix H
Data sheets
This chapter holds various data sheets from the equipment used to realize this
project.
==PAGE:156==
144
Data sheets
PUMPTEKNIK ApS 
 
 
 
UD-ALU PLADEDIFFUSER.  
 
Pladediffuseren har en unik opbygning, der tilgodeser udskiftningsmuligheder af andre rør- eller 
pladediffusorer.  
Aluminiummet er anodiseret, så det både kan arbejde i salt- og spildevand. Membranerne kan fås 
som EPDM og Silikone med tykkelse på 1,8-2 mm. Tryktabet ligger mellem 20-45 mbar.   
Da UD-ALU har et meget stort beluftningsareal, kan der opnås besparelser på op til 15-30 %, selv i 
forhold til andre plader.  
 
Specifikationer: 
       Længde x bredde [mm]      Perforerings areal [m2]     Antal slidser [stk.]      Ydelse [m3/h]      Nominel ydelse [m3/h] 
UD1000  =  1000 x 168  
           0,168                   12994  
  2-24 
          12 
UD1500  =  1500 x 168 
           0,252                  22089                  4-36 
          18 
UD2000  =  2000 x 168  
           0,336                  32485 
  4-48 
          24 
          
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
==PAGE:157==
145
 
TECHNICAL CHARACTERISTICS 
- Aluminium alloy construction 
- Smooth operation 
- High efficiency impeller 
- Maintenance free 
- Mountable in any position 
  
OPTIONS 
- Special voltages (IEC 38) 
- Surface treatments 
Possible alternative positions, 
please refer to drw SI 1835 
Model 
Maximum 
flow 
m³/h 
Installed 
power 
kW 
Maximum  
differential pressure
  p  hPa ( mbar ) 
Noise level 
Lp dB (A) 
(1) 
Overall 
dimensions 
H (max) 
Weight 
 
(max) 
 
50 Hz 
60 Hz 
50 Hz 
60 Hz 
50 Hz 
60 Hz 
50 Hz 
60 Hz 
 
 
 
2900 rpm 
3500 rpm 
2900 rpm 
3500 rpm 
2900 rpm 
3500 rpm 
2900 rpm 
3500 rpm 
mm 
Kg 
0.37 
0.43 
130 
120 
59.7 
61.7 
241 
11.0 
K03-MS 
74 
89 
0.55 
0.63 
180 
200 
60.0 
62.0 
241 
12.0 
0.75 
0.9 
140 
120 
62.6 
64.6 
282 
15.8 
1.1 
1.3 
200 
175 
62.8 
64.8 
282 
16.5 
K04-MS 
137 
166 
1.5 
1.75 
250 
250 
63.0 
65.0 
310 
19.5 
1.1 
1.3 
130 
100 
68.2 
70.2 
307 
22.5 
1.5 
1.75 
175 
160 
68.5 
70.5 
315 
23.5 
2.2 
2.55 
270 
260 
68.8 
70.8 
345 
26.5 
K05-MS 
219 
265 
3.0 
3.45 
300 
350 
69.1 
71.1 
375 
30.5 
2.2 
2.55 
180 
150 
71.0 
73.0 
400 
31.2 
3.0 
3.45 
250 
220 
71.3 
73.3 
400 
32.5 
K06-MS 
304 
366 
4.0 
4.6 
340 
325 
71.6 
73.6 
400 
41.0 
 
 
- For proper use, the blower should be equipped with inlet filter and safety valve; other accessories available on request. 
- Ambient temperature from -15° to +40°C. 
- Specifications subject to change without notice. 
(1)  Noise measured at 1 m distance with inlet and outlet ports piped, in accordance to ISO 3744. 
LATERAL CHANNEL BLOWERS - COMPRESSORS
SCL K03 / K04 / K05 / K06
MS SERIES - MOR RANGE
SN 1870-7  1/2
® FPZ S.p.A. 
Via F.lli Cervi 16 
20049 Concorezzo - (MB) - ITALIA 
Tel. +39 039 69 09 811 
Fax +39 039 60 41 296 
www.fpz.com 
 
e
a
f 
I 
G
d
c
b
s
p1
o
Øm 
n
r 
q
z
H 
3x120°
øu
t 
Accessory 
Model 
a 
b 
c 
d 
e 
f 
G 
I 
m 
n 
o 
p1 
q 
r 
s 
t 
u 
z 
K03-MS 
241 
268 
147 
43 
230 
205 
G 1” ¼
86 
10 
83 
142 
205 
18 
75 
4 
M6 
140 
12 
K04-MS 
285 
315 
172 
49 
255 
225 
G 1” ½
102 
12 
95 
171 
222 
18 
70 
4 
M6 
175 
18 
K05-MS 
327 
365 
200 
54 
320 
260 
G 2” 
120 
15 
115 
265 
320 
18 
98 
4 
M8 
200 
19 
K06-MS 
376 
393 
205 
54 
325 
290 
G 2” 
125 
15 
140 
272 
334 
18 
85 
4 
M8 
240 
19 
 
Dimensions in mm. 
Dimensions for reference only 
==PAGE:158==
146
Data sheets
 
CAPACITY 
ABSORBED POWER 
TEMPERATURE INCREASE 
® 
LATERAL CHANNEL BLOWERS - COMPRESSORS
SCL K03 / K04 / K05 / K06
MS SERIES - MOR RANGE
SN 1870-7  2/2
Curves refer to air at 20°C temperature and 1013 mbar (abs) atmospheric pressure measured at inlet port. 
V l
f
fl
ti
d t
t
i
+/ 10% t l
 p  hPa (mbar) 
0 
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
0 
50 
100 
150 
200 
250 
300 
350
m³/h
50 Hz 
400
2,2 
K06-MS 
K05-MS 
3,0 
4,0 
1,1 
1,5 
2,2 
3,0 
1,5 
K04-MS 
0,37 
1,1 
0,55 
K03-MS 
0,75 
3,45
2,55
1,75 
1,3 
0
50 
100 
150 
200
250 
300 
350 
400 
0
50 
100 
150 
200 
250 
300 
350 
400 
K05-MS 
m³/h 
 p  hPa (mbar) 
60 Hz 
K06-MS 
2,55 
3,45 
4,6 
K04-MS
0,9
1,3
1,75
K03-MS
0,63
0,43
 p  hPa (mbar) 
0 
0 
50 Hz 
400
K06-MS 
K05-MS 
K03-MS
K04-MS 
 p  hPa (mbar) 
0
60 Hz 
K06-MS 
K05-MS 
K04-MS 
K03-MS 
 p  hPa (mbar) 
0 
0 
20 
40 
°C
50 Hz 
400 
K05-MS 
K06-MS 
K04-MS 
K03-MS 
°C
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
0
20
40
60 
80 
100
60 Hz 
 p  hPa (mbar) 
K06-MS
K05-MS 
K04-MS
K03-MS
250 
50 
100 
150 
200 
300 
350
0,5 
1 
1,5 
2 
2,5
3 
3,5 
4
kW
kW
50 
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
0
0,5
1
1,5
2
2,5
3 
3,5 
4 
4,5
5
50 
100 
150 
200 
250 
300 
350 
60 
80 
100
==PAGE:159==
147
 High accuracy
 High differential pressure
 Low pressure drop
 Standard and special dimensions
 Patented construction
 Possibility to get addional enviro-
mental protective Epoxy coating
 MFS is also available in Acid-proof
stainless
steel
construction
with
maximum length of 1000 mm.
[See separate data sheet Md-1303]
Application
Micatrone flow sensor MFS is developed to meet
the great demand for accurate air flow measure-
ment in all types of airhandling systems.
MFS forms an average of the velocity profile of the
complete channel area. MFS measures the total
pressure (p+) as well as the amplified flow influenced
pressure (p-).
Together these both, p+ and p-, form a differential
pressure from which the flow/velocity are possible
to calculate.
This differential pressure is 2,5 times higher than
the corresponding acquired by Prandtl
measurements.
®
MFS flow sensor for measurement of velocity
or flow of air and other gases
Datasheet:md-1313gb/2006-06-26
Replace:mde-1263/95
MFS
© AB MICATRONE 2006-06-26 [H: \ Apps \ Typeset \ Datablad \ md-1313gb_060626.vp]
p +
p -
Flow
Flow
average
velocity
p+
p-
differential
pressure
==PAGE:160==
148
Data sheets
==PAGE:161==
Appendix I
Matlab
%% −−−−Calibration /
r e l a t i o n
between
v o l t a g e
and
force
s t r i n g
gages −−−−−−
clear
a l l ;
clc ;
close
a l l ;
%% −−−−Loading
data−f i l e −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
%Going
through
a l l
the
f i l e s
in
the
folder ,
an
e x t r a c t i n g
the mean values
% REMEMBER TO CHANGE DICTONARY IN THE LINE MARKED BY A STAR AND CHANGE THE
% NAME OF THE MEAN GAGE TEXTFILE ALSO MARKED BY A STAR
% ALSO THE POLYFIT REGRESSION
% TO MAKE IT WORK, CHANGE THE FOLDER PATH OF WHICH THE FILES ARE LOCATED
%t e x t f i l e s = dir ( ' air_water_mixture/flow_0 .01_4 . 8 8 / . . .
%Horizontal_cylinder_air_water_001_11_05_2016 /∗. txt ' ) ; % −∗−
% −−−frequency
t e s t
%t e x t f i l e s = dir ( ' frequency
t e s t
f o l d e r / . . .
%frequency_test_in_water_19 −05−2016/∗. txt ' ) ; % −∗−
delete =0;
% Set
t h i s
value
equal
to one ,
% i f
you wish
to
d e l e t e
the
f i r s t
three
l i n e s
save_mean_values=1;
% Set
t h i s
value
equal
to one ,
% i f
you wish
to
save
your mean values
of
your
force
save_draw=1;
% Set
t h i s
value
equal
to one ,
% i f
you wish
to
save
piston
array
==PAGE:162==
150
Matlab
save_time=1;
% Set
t h i s
value
equal
to one ,
% i f
you wish
to
save
the
time
array
save_string_gage =1;
% Set
t h i s
value
equal
to one ,
% i f
you wish
to
save
the
s t r i n g
gage
array
%Defining
the
f o l d e r
of
which
the
matlab
functions
are
lo ca ted
addpath ( 'C:\ Users \Pc\Google Drev\ t h e s i s \matlab \ . . .
T h e s i s c a l l i b r a t i o n \ matlab_functions ' )
%% IF THIS STATEMENT IS ACTIVATED,
IT DELETES THE FIRST THREE LINES
%
OF YOUR DATA RESULTS
i f
delete ==1 % I f
the
t e x t f i l e s
already
has
been
c a l i b r a t e d .
for
i =1:length ( t e x t f i l e s )
removelines ( t e x t f i l e s ( i ) . name)
end
end
%% EXTRACTING THE DATA FROM THE TEXTFILES
mean_gage=zeros ( 1 , 1 2 ) ;
for
i =1:length ( t e x t f i l e s )
[ mean_string_gage6 ,
mean_string_gage7 , mean_draw ,
time ,
string_gage6 ,
. . .
string_gage7 ,
draw_wire ] = Extract_Data2 ( t e x t f i l e s ( i ) . name ) ;
mean_gage6 ( i ) = mean_string_gage6 ;
mean_gage7 ( i ) = mean_string_gage7 ;
mean_draw( i ) = mean_draw ;
string_gage_array6 ( : , i )=string_gage6 ;
string_gage_array7 ( : , i )=string_gage7 ;
draw_wire_array ( : , i ) = draw_wire ;
%time_array ( : , i ) = time ;
time_array = time ;
end
%% SAVING ALL THE DATA IN THE RESULT FOLDER
% Saving
a l l
the mean values
% i f
save_mean_values==1
% dlmwrite ( ' r e s u l t s /mean_gage6 . txt ' , mean_gage6) % −∗−
% dlmwrite ( ' r e s u l t s /mean_gage7 . txt ' , mean_gage7) % −∗−
% end
% Saving
a l l
the
piston
movements
i f
save_draw==1
dlmwrite( ' r e s u l t s /draw_wire_array . txt ' , draw_wire_array ) % −∗−
end
%SAVING THE TIME ARRAY
==PAGE:163==
151
i f
save_time==1
dlmwrite( ' r e s u l t s /time . txt ' , time_array ) % −∗−
end
%SAVING THE TIME STRING GAGE
i f
save_string_gage==1
dlmwrite( ' r e s u l t s / string_gage6 . txt ' , string_gage_array6 ) % −∗−
dlmwrite( ' r e s u l t s / string_gage7 . txt ' , string_gage_array7 ) % −∗−
end
==PAGE:164==
152
Matlab
function
removelines ( filename )
%% −−−−THIS SCRIPT REMOVES THE FIRST 4 LINES OF THE DATA SET−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
f i d = fopen ( filename ,
' r ' )
;
% Open source
f i l e .
fgetl ( f i d )
;
% Read/ discard
l i n e .
fgetl ( f i d )
;
% Read/ discard
l i n e .
fgetl ( f i d )
;
% Read/ discard
l i n e .
b u f f e r = fread ( fid ,
Inf )
;
% Read
r e s t
of
the
f i l e .
fclose ( f i d )
f i d = fopen ( filename ,
'w ' )
;
% Open d e s t i n a t i o n
f i l e .
fwrite ( fid ,
b u f f e r )
;
% Save
to
f i l e .
fclose ( f i d )
;
end
==PAGE:165==
153
function
[ mean_string_gage6 ,
mean_string_gage7 , mean_draw ,
. . .
time ,
string_gage6 ,
string_gage7 ,
draw_wire ] = Extract_Data2 ( filename )
%% −−−−THIS FUNCTION ANALYSIS THE GATHERED DATA −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
% EACH COLUMN IN THE DATA SHEETS REPRESENTS A SPECIFIC VARIABLE EG. TIME
% THUS EACH OF THESE COLUMNS HAS TO BE SORTED AND STORED IN NEW ARRAYS FOR
% FURHTER EVALUATION
% READING THE DATA FROM THE GIVEN FILE
M = dlmread( filename ) ; %Matrix
of
the
data−f i l e
[R C] = size (M) ;
%The columns and rows
of
the
given
data
i f C==5
time = M( : , 1 ) ;
%Time column
string_gage6 = M( : , 2 ) ;
%string_gage
( v o l t a g e )
string_gage7 = M( : , 3 ) ;
%string_gage
( v o l t a g e )
draw_wire = M( : , 4 ) ;
%piston
( v o l t a g e )
mean_string_gage6 = mean( string_gage6 ) ; %Mean v o l t a g e
mean_string_gage7 = mean( string_gage7 ) ; %Mean v o l t a g e
mean_draw = mean( draw_wire ) ;
%Mean v o l t a g e
end
i f C==4
time = M( : , 1 ) ;
%Time column
string_gage6 = M( : , 2 ) ;
%string_gage
( v o l t a g e )
string_gage7 = 0;
%string_gage
( v o l t a g e )
draw_wire = M( : , 3 ) ;
%piston
( v o l t a g e )
mean_string_gage6 = mean( string_gage6 ) ; %Mean v o l t a g e
mean_string_gage7 = mean( string_gage7 ) ; %Mean v o l t a g e
mean_draw = mean( draw_wire ) ;
%Mean v o l t a g e
end
i f C<=2
time = M( : , 1 ) ;
%Time column
string_gage = M( : , 2 ) ;
%string_gage
( v o l t a g e )
mean_string_gage = mean( string_gage ) ;
%Mean v o l t a g e
draw_wire=0;
mean_piston=0
end
end
==PAGE:166==
154
Matlab
%% THIS SCRIPT CALCULATES, PLOTS AND SAVES THE EVALUTED FORCE COEFFICIENTS
clc ;
clear
a l l ;
close
a l l ;
set (0 , ' DefaultAxesFontSize ' ,14)
%IF A HORIZONTAL CYLINDER IS BEING EVALUATED,
h o r i z o n t a l = 1;
h o r i z o n t a l = 0;
lv = 227;
%Embedded depth
of
the
c y l i n d e r
%( only
usuable
for
the
v e r t i c a l
c y l i n d e r )
air_per = 0;
%Amount of
air
percentage
in
the
enclosed
g l a s s
tank
%% LOADING ALL THE TEXT FILES
%FIRST THE RESULTS FROM THE DRAWWIRE
draw_wire=dlmread( ' r e s u l t s /draw_wire_array . txt ' ) ;
%CONVERT THE EXTRACTED DRAW WIRE VOLTAGE TO SPECIFIC DISTANCE
draw_wire_fit=dlmread( ' r e s u l t s /draw_wire_fit2 . txt ' ) ;
%RESULTS FROM THE STRING GAGE
string_guage6=dlmread( ' r e s u l t s / string_gage6 . txt ' ) ;
string_guage7=dlmread( ' r e s u l t s / string_gage7 . txt ' ) ;
force_trans=dlmread( ' r e s u l t s / f o r c e _ p o l y f i t . txt ' ) ;
%IMPORTING THE TIME ARRAY
time=dlmread( ' r e s u l t s /time . txt ' ) ;
%LINEAR RELATION BETWEEN VOLTAGE OUTPUT AND NEWTONS (N)
%a IS ANLGE OF THE SLOPE, B IS THE INTERSECTION OF THE Y−AXIS
a = force_trans ( : , 1 ) ;
b=force_trans ( : , 2 ) ;
%% −−−−IF FIGURES NEEDS TO BE PLOTTED −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
p l o t f i g = 0; % I f
f i g u r e s
needs
to
be
p l o t t e d
p l o t f i g = 1
e l s e
0
%% −−−−CONVERTING THE DRAW−WIRE VOLTAGE INTO AN ACTUAL DISTANCE −−−−−−−−−
[ R_draw C_draw ] = size ( draw_wire ) ;
draw_wire=draw_wire∗draw_wire_fit (1)+ draw_wire_fit ( 2 ) ;
% CONVERTING THE DISTANCE INTO THE ACTUAL OSCILLATION
for
i =1:C_draw
draw_wire ( : , i ) = ( draw_wire ( : , i )−mean( draw_wire ( : , i ) ) ) ;
end
% APPARENTLY ONLY THE FIRST 100 SECONDS GIVES REASONABLE DATA
i f
length ( draw_wire)>100∗120
draw_wire=draw_wire ( 1 : 1 0 0 ∗1 2 0 , : ) ;
string_guage6=string_guage6 ( 1 : 1 0 0 ∗1 2 0 , : ) ;
string_guage7=string_guage7 ( 1 : 1 0 0 ∗1 2 0 , : ) ;
time=time (1:100 ∗120);
==PAGE:167==
155
end
for
j =1:C_draw
v e l o c i t y ( : , j )=gradient ( draw_wire ( : , j ) , time ) ;
a c c e l e r a t i o n ( : , j )=gradient ( v e l o c i t y ( : , j ) , time ) ;
end
%% −−−−FFT −ANALYSE OF DRAW WIRE−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
% MAKING AN ARRAY OF THE CUMMULATIVE FREQUENCY PERIOD, UP TO 120HZ
% FINDING THE FFT −VALUES OF THE DRAW WIRE
fft_wire = f f t ( draw_wire ) ;
fft_wire_plot = fft_wire ;
delta_t =1./(max( time ) ) ;
%AVERAGE FREQUENCY
for
i =1:length ( fft_wire )
f_array ( : , i )= i . ∗delta_t ;
end
% EXCLUDING THE NOISE FROM THE TESTS, WITH A CUT OFF FREQUENCY OF 4.9
f i r s t c u t o f f=max( find ( f_array <=4.9));
secondcutoff =2∗(length ( f_array)/2−f i r s t c u t o f f )+ f i r s t c u t o f f ;
A=find ( f_array ( f i r s t c u t o f f )<f_array & f_array<f_array ( secondcutoff ) ) ;
% REMOVING THE NOISE
for
j =1:C_draw
fft_wire (A, j )=0;
end
filtered_draw_wire=i f f t ( fft_wire ) ;
%% −−−−FFT −ANALYSE OF THE VELOCITY −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
% FFT ANALYSE OF THE VELOCITY
f f t _ v e l o c i t y = f f t ( v e l o c i t y ) ;
fft_velocity_plot=f f t _ v e l o c i t y ;
% REMOVING THE NOISE
for
j =1:C_draw
f f t _ v e l o c i t y (A, j )=0;
end
f i l t e r e d _ v e l o c i t y=i f f t ( f f t _ v e l o c i t y ) ;
%
%% −−−−FFT −ANALYSE OF THE ACCELERATION −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
% FFT ANALYSE OF THE ACCELERATION
f f t _ a c c e l e r a t i o n = f f t ( a c c e l e r a t i o n ) ;
fft_acceleration_plot = f f t _ a c c e l e r a t i o n ;
==PAGE:168==
156
Matlab
%REMOVING THE NOISE
for
j =1:C_draw
f f t _ a c c e l e r a t i o n (A, j )=0;
end
f i l t e r e d _ a c c e l e r a t i o n=i f f t ( f f t _ a c c e l e r a t i o n ) ;
plot ( time , a c c e l e r a t i o n ( : , 1 ) , time , f i l t e r e d _ a c c e l e r a t i o n ( : , 1 ) )
%% −−−−FFT −ANALYSE OF THE STRING GUAGE −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
fft_string_guage6 = f f t ( string_guage6 ) ;
fft_string_guage7 = f f t ( string_guage7 ) ;
fft_string_guage_plot6=fft_string_guage6 ;
fft_string_guage_plot7=fft_string_guage7 ;
%REMOVING THE NOISE
for
j =1:C_draw
fft_string_guage6 (A, j )=0;
fft_string_guage7 (A, j )=0;
end
filtered_string_guage6=i f f t ( fft_string_guage6 ) ;
filtered_string_guage7=i f f t ( fft_string_guage7 ) ;
%% −−−−CONVERTING THE STRING GUAGE VOLT TO A FORCE [NEWTONS] −−−−−−−−−−−−−
force6=filtered_string_guage6 ∗a(6)+b ( 6 ) ;
force7=filtered_string_guage7 ∗a(7)+b ( 7 ) ;
addpath ( 'C:\ Users \Pc\Google Drev\ t h e s i s \matlab \ . . .
Thesis
c a l l i b r a t i o n \ matlab_functions ' )
%% −−−−PLOTTING THE DATA −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
i f
p l o t f i g == 1
pl ot tin g_s cript
end
%% −−−−CALCULATING THE DRAG AND INERTIA COEFFICIENTS −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
% IF THE TEST WERE RUNNED WITH A HORIZONTAL CYLINDER, TWO LOAD CELLS WERE
% USED,
IF THE VERTICAL CYLINDER WERE USED, ONLY ONE LOAD CELL WERE USED
% DURING THE TEST
i f
h o r i z o n t a l == 1;
%IF THE TEST ARE RUNNED WITH THE HORIZONTAL CYLINDER
f i n a l _ f o r c e = ( force6+force7 ) ;
else
%IF THE TEST ARE RUNNED WITH THE VERTICAL CYLINDER
f i n a l _ f o r c e = force6 ;
==PAGE:169==
157
end
% CALLING THE FUNCTION CAPABLE OF CALCULATING THE CD AND CM COEFFICIENT
for
i = 1:C_draw
[ Cd, Cm ] = DragMassCoefficient ( f i l t e r e d _ v e l o c i t y ( : , i ) ,
. . .
f i l t e r e d _ a c c e l e r a t i o n ( : , i ) ,
f i n a l _ f o r c e ( : , i ) ,
horizontal ,
lv ,
air_per ) ;
Cd_array ( i ) = Cd; %Storing
the Cd c o e f f i c i e n t
in an array
Cm_array( i ) = Cm; %Storing
the Cm c o e f f i c i e n t
in an array
end
%% −−−−Calculating
the KC −Values −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
%TO CALCULATE THE KC −NUMBER THE BETWEEN EACH OSCILLATION NEEDS TO BE
%FOUND. TO DO SO THE TIME ARRAY WITH THE RESPONS FROM THE DRAW WIRE ARE
%ANALYSED.
for
i = 1:C_draw
[
time_zero ,
delta_time
] = zero_crossing (
time ,
filtered_draw_wire ( : , i )
) ;
time_zero_array ( i , 1 : length ( time_zero )) = time_zero ;
delta_time_array ( i , 1 : length ( delta_time )) = delta_time ;
mean_delta_time_array ( i ) = mean( delta_time ) ; %The average
time
between
each
%o s c i l l a t i o n
end
%CALCULATING THE MAXIMUM PARTICLE VELOCITY OF EACH OSCILLATION
max_velocity=abs( real (max( f i l t e r e d _ v e l o c i t y (1∗120: length ( f i l t e r e d _ v e l o c i t y ) , :
%CALCULATING THE KC −NUMBER
KC_values = ( max_velocity . ∗mean_delta_time_array ) . / ( 4 0 / 1 0 0 0 ) ;
%% −−−−LOADING THE VALIDATION VALUES FROM KASPER PAGH PROJECT −−−−−−−−−−−−
Kasper_KC_Cd = [ 1 . 3
2.4
4.5
6.9
9.1
1 1 . 2 ] ;
Kasper_KC_Cm = [ 1 . 2 2
2.25
4.6
6.9
9.1
1 1 . 5 ] ;
Kasper_Cd = [ 2 . 7 8
3.21
2.2
2.
1.84
1 . 7 ] ;
Kasper_Cm = [ 2 . 1
2.18
2.35
2.5
2.5
2.45
] ;
%% −−−−LOADING THE VALIDATION VALUES FROM THIS STUDY −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
%RESULTS FROM VALIDATION VERTICAL CYLINDER
Cd_validation = dlmread( ' Cd_and_Cm_validation_vertical_cylinder/Cd_values . txt
Cm_validation = dlmread( ' Cd_and_Cm_validation_vertical_cylinder/Cm_values . txt
KC_validation = dlmread( ' Cd_and_Cm_validation_vertical_cylinder/KC_values . txt
%RESULTS FROM VALIDATION HORIZONTAL CYLINDER
Cd_validation_h = dlmread( ' Cd_and_Cm_validation_horizontal_cylinder/Cd_values
Cm_validation_h = dlmread( ' Cd_and_Cm_validation_horizontal_cylinder/Cm_values
KC_validation_h = dlmread( ' Cd_and_Cm_validation_horizontal_cylinder/KC_values
%% −−−−PLOTTING THE CM AND CD −COEFFICIENTS FOUND FROM THE EXPERIMENT −−−
==PAGE:170==
158
Matlab
%PLOTTING THE KC −NUMBER VS. THE DRAG COEFFICIENT
figure (1)
plot (KC_values , Cd_array , ' o ' )
hold on
plot (Kasper_KC_Cd, Kasper_Cd , '−o ' )
plot ( KC_validation , Cd_validation , 'd ' )
plot ( KC_validation_h , Cd_validation_h , 'x ' )
hold
o f f
xlabel ( 'KC−Value ' )
ylabel ( 'CD' )
legend ( 'Cd Values ' , ' Validation
t e s t −Horizontal
Cylinder ' , . . .
' Validation
t e s t −V e r t i c a l
Cylinder ' )
%print −depsc2
validation_cylinders1 . eps %Include
i f
p l o t
needs
to
be
%printed
%PLOTTING THE KC −NUMBER VS. THE INERTIA COEFFICIENT
figure (2)
plot (KC_values , ( Cm_array+1) , ' o ' )
hold on
plot (Kasper_KC_Cm, Kasper_Cm , '−o ' )
plot ( KC_validation , Cm_validation+1, 'd ' )
plot ( KC_validation_h , Cm_validation_h+1, 'x ' )
hold
o f f
xlabel ( 'KC−Value ' )
ylabel ( 'Cm' )
legend ( 'CM Values ' , ' Validation
t e s t −Horizontal
Cylinder ' , . . .
' Validation
t e s t −V e r t i c a l
Cylinder ' )
%print −depsc2
validation_cylinders2 . eps %Include
i f
p l o t
needs
to
be
%printed
%% −−−−CALCULATION OF THE HYDRODYNAMIC FORCES −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
% CALCULATIONS ARE DONE WITH THE RECENTLY FOUND CD AND CM COEFFICIENTS,
% THESE FORCES WILL BE HELD AGAINST THE MEASURED FORCES
i f
h o r i z o n t a l == 1
% VALUES FOR THE HORIZONTAL CYLINDER
L=560/1000;
%Length
of
the
c y l i n d e r
D = 40/1000;
%Diamter
of
the
c y l i n d e r
A = D^2;
%Area
of
the
c y l i n d e r
rho = 1000;
%Density
of
the
water
else
%VALUES FOR THE VERTICAL CYLINDER, REMEMBER TO CHANGE THE DEPTH L
L = lv /1000;
%Length
of
the
c y l i n d e r
D = 40/1000;
%Diamter
of
the
c y l i n d e r
A = D^2;
%Area
of
the
c y l i n d e r
rho = 1000;
%Density
of
the
water
==PAGE:171==
159
end
%CALCULATING THE FORCE
for
jk = 1: length ( Cd_array )
i f
h o r i z o nt al == 1
%THE HORIZONTAL CYLINDER
F( : , jk ) = 1/2 ∗rho ∗Cd_array ( jk ) . ∗D ∗L.∗real ( f i l t e r e d _ v e l o c i t y ( : , jk ) ) . . .
.∗abs( real ( f i l t e r e d _ v e l o c i t y ( : , jk )))+
rho ∗Cm_array( jk )∗D^2∗L ∗. . .
real ( f i l t e r e d _ a c c e l e r a t i o n ( : , jk ))+5.6∗real ( f i l t e r e d _ a c c e l e r a t i o n ( : , jk ) ) ;
else
%THE VERTICAL CYLINDER
F( : , jk ) = 1/2 ∗rho ∗Cd_array ( jk ) . ∗D ∗L.∗real ( f i l t e r e d _ v e l o c i t y ( : , jk ) ) . . . .
∗abs( real ( f i l t e r e d _ v e l o c i t y ( : , jk ) ) ) + rho ∗Cm_array( jk )∗D^2∗L ∗. . .
real ( f i l t e r e d _ a c c e l e r a t i o n ( : , jk ))+0.493∗real ( f i l t e r e d _ a c c e l e r a t i o n ( : , jk ) )
end
end
%% −−−−PLOTTING THE MEASURED FORCE VS. THE CALCULATED FORCE FOUND ABOVE −−
% p l o t ( time , final_force (: ,19) , time ,F( : , 1 9 ) )
% legend ( ' Measured Dorce ' , ' Calculated
Force −Morisons Formal ' )
% xlim ( [ 1 . 6
3 . 2 ] )
% x l a b e l ( 'Time [ Sec ] ' )
% y l a b e l ( ' Force
[ Newtons ] ' )
%% −−−−IF THE CYLINDERS ARE TESTED IN AIR, F = M x a −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
% THE MEASURED FORCE SHOULD BE EQUAL MORE OR LESS TO THE MASS OF THE SYSTEM
% TIMES THE READ ACCELERATION.
% p l o t ( time , f i l t e r e d _ a c c e l e r a t i o n ( : , 2 ) ∗5 . 4 , time , final_force ( : , 2 ) )
% legend ( ' Calculated
Force , F = M x a ' , ' measured
force ' )
% xlim ([0
1 . 6 ] )
% x l a b e l ( 'Time [ Sec ] ' )
% y l a b e l ( ' Force
[ Newtons ] ' )
%% −−−−SAVING THE FOUND CD AND CM VALUES FROM THE WATER AIR MIXTURE TEST
% dlmwrite ( ' air_water_mixture/flow_0 .023_17.1/ KC_values_horizontal . txt ' , KC_v
% dlmwrite ( ' air_water_mixture/flow_0 .023_17.1/ Cd_values_horizontal . txt ' , Cd_a
% dlmwrite ( ' air_water_mixture/flow_0 .023_17.1/ Cm_values_horizontal . txt ' , Cm_a
% dlmwrite ( ' air_water_mixture/flow_0 .023_17.1/ KC_values_vertical . txt ' , KC_valu
% dlmwrite ( ' air_water_mixture/flow_0 .023_17.1/ Cd_values_vertical . txt ' , Cd_arra
% dlmwrite ( ' air_water_mixture/flow_0 .023_17.1/ Cm_values_vertical . txt ' , Cm_arra
==PAGE:172==
160
Matlab
function
[ Cd, Cm ] = DragMassCoefficient ( velocity ,
acceleration ,
. . .
force ,
horizontal ,
lv ,
air_per )
% THIS FUNCTIONS SOLVES AND FINDS THE DRAG AND MASS COEFFICIENT OF THE
% EMBEDDED HORIZONTAL CYLINDER.
%%
i f
h o r i z o n t a l == 1;
M = 5 . 6 ;
%MASS OF THE CYLYNDER INCLUSIVE BOLTS AND
%NUTS[KG]
h o r i z o n t a l
c y l i n d e r
L = 560/1000;
%LENGTH OF THE CYLINDER [METERS]
else
M = 0 . 4 9 3 ;
%Mass of
the
v e r t i c a l
c y l i n d e r
L = lv /1000;
end
U = real ( v e l o c i t y ) ;
%VELOCITY OF THE CYLINDER [M/S ]
U_d = real ( a c c e l e r a t i o n ) ;
%ACCELERATION OF THE CYLINDER [M/S^2]
Fm = real ( f o r c e )−M∗U_d;
%THE MEASURED FORCE [NEWTONS]
rho = 1000∗(1−air_per /100);
%DENSITY OF THE WATER 1000 KG/M3
D = 40/1000;
%DIAMETER OF THE SQUARED CYLINDER [METERS]
A = D^2;
%AREA OF THE CYLYNDER PER METER
%NORMAL TO THE FLOW DIRECTION [M^2]
%% −−−−S e t t i n g
up the
matrix
that
needs
to
be
solved −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
%THE FIRST MATRIX
matrix1 = [sum(U.^4) sum(U.∗abs(U) . ∗U_d ) ; . . .
sum(U.∗abs(U) . ∗U_d) sum(U_d. ^ 2 ) ] ;
%THE SECOND MATRIX
matrix3 = [sum(U.∗abs(U) . ∗Fm ) ; . . .
sum(U_d.∗Fm) ] ;
% SOLVING THE TWO MATRICES, USING THE FUNCTION LINSOLVE,
% AFTERWARDS fd AND f i
IS FOUND
x = l i n s o l v e ( matrix1 ,
matrix3 ) ;
fd = x ( 1 ) ;
f i = x ( 2 ) ;
% CALCULATING THE DRAG AND MASS COEFFICIENT.
ITS BEING ASSUMED THAT THE
% DENSITY OF THE WATER IS EQUAL TO 1000 KG/M3. THE AREA AND DIAMETER OF THE
% CYLINDER ARE TWO KNOWN CONSTANTS.
Cd = fd /(1/2∗rho∗D∗L ) ;
Cm = f i /( rho∗A∗L ) ;
end
==PAGE:173==
Bibliography
[ApS, 2016] ApS, D. P. (2016). UD-ALU PLADEDIFFUSER.
[Bearman and D.M.Trueman, 1972] Bearman, P. and D.M.Trueman (1972). An
Investigation on the Flow around Rectangular Cylinders.
Aeronaut. Q.,
23:229237.
[Bearman and Obasaju, 1982] Bearman, P. W. and Obasaju, E. D. (1982). An
experimental study of pressure uctuations on xed and oscillating square-
section cylinders. J. Fluid Mech., 119:297321.
[Blenkinsopp, 2007] Blenkinsopp, C. E. (2007).
Air entrainment, splash and
energy dissipation in breaking waves.
[Blenkinsopp and Chaplin, 2007] Blenkinsopp, C. E. and Chaplin, J. R. (2007).
Void fraction measurements in breaking waves. Proc. R. Soc. a-Mathematical
Phys. Eng. Sci., 463(2088):31513170.
[Chan and Melville, 1988] Chan, E. and Melville, W. (1988). Deep-water plung-
ing wave pressures on a vertical plane wall. Proc. R. . . . .
[Chan, 1994] Chan, E. S. (1994). Mechanics of deep water plunging-wave im-
pacts on vertical structures. Coast. Eng., 22(1-2):115133.
[Chan et al., 1995] Chan, E. S., Cheong, H. F., and Tan, B. C. (1995). Lab-
oratory study of plunging wave impacts on vertical cylinders. Coast. Eng.,
25(1-2):87107.
[Deane and Stokes, 2002] Deane, G. B. and Stokes, M. D. (2002).
Scale
dependence of bubble creation mechanisms in breaking waves.
Nature,
418(6900):839844.
==PAGE:174==
162
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[DeRisk, 2015] DeRisk (2015). The DeRisk Project.
[Easson and Greated, 1984] Easson, W. and Greated, C. (1984). Breaking wave
forces and velocity elds. Coast. Eng., 8(3):233241.
[Energinet, 2014] Energinet (2014). 30 procent vedvarende energi i 2020.
[Kiger and Duncan, 2012] Kiger, K. and Duncan, J. (2012). Air-entrainment
mechanisms in plunging jets and breaking waves. Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech.
[King and Wells, 1974] King, D. A. and Wells, M. G. (1974). Reaction Mech-
anism in Chemisorption Kinetics: Nitrogen on the {100} Plane of Tungsten.
Proc. R. Soc. London A Math. Phys. Eng. Sci., 339(1617):245269.
[KIYA et al., 2001] KIYA, M., MOCHIZUKI, O., ISHIKAWA, H., GORD-
NIER, R., and VISBAL, M. (2001). Initial pressure distribution due to jet
impact on a rigid body. J. Fluids Struct., 16(15):399413.
[Ko and Graf, 1972] Ko, S. and Graf, W. (1972). Drag coecient of cylinders
in turbulent ow. J. Hydraul. Div.
[Lee, 1975] Lee, B. E. (1975). The eect of turbulence on the surface pressure
eld of a square prism. J. Fluid Mech., 69(02):263282.
[Mfs and Mf-fd, ] Mfs, T. and Mf-fd, M. Flow sensor type MFS-C and MFS-R.
[Oshore et al., 1991] Oshore, I., Conference, P. E., Kingdom, U., Engineers,
P., Chan, E. S., and Cheong, H. F. (1991). Wave impact loads on horizontal
structures in the splash zone. 3(August):1116.
[Petersen, 2016] Petersen, K. P. (2016). Experimental analyses of ow and tur-
bulence in large porous structures - DTU Findit.
[Sarpkaya, 1978] Sarpkaya, T. (1978). FLUID FORCES ON OSCILLATING
CYLINDERS. J. Waterw. Port Coast. Ocean Div., 104(3):275  290.
[Sarpkaya, 1981] Sarpkaya, T. (1981). Morison's Equation and the Wave Forces
on Oshore Structures.
[Sumer and Fredsse, 2006] Sumer, B. M. and Fredsse, J. (2006). Hydrodynam-
ics Around Cylindrical Structures. 26.
[Talaia, 2007] Talaia, M. A. R. (2007). Terminal Velocity of a Bubble Rise in a
Liquid Column. 1(4):220224.
[Taylor, 1983] Taylor, J. R. (1983). An Introduction to Error Analysis: The
Study of Uncertainties in Physical Measurements. Am. J. Phys., 51(2):191.
==PAGE:175==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
163
[Venugopal et al., 2006] Venugopal, V., Varyani, K. S., and Barltrop, N. D. P.
(2006). Wave force coecients for horizontally submerged rectangular cylin-
ders. Ocean Eng., 33(11-12):16691704.
[Venugopal et al., 2016] Venugopal, V., Varyani, K. S., and Westlake, P. C.
(2016). Drag and inertia coecients for horizontally submerged rectangular
cylinders in waves and currents. 223:121136.
[Waterway, 1993] Waterway, J. (1993). where Hb and Lb are incident local wave
height and wave length at the limiting wave steepness : Hb. 119(4):381397.
[Wikipedia, 2016] Wikipedia (2016). Wind Power.
==PAGE:176==
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Section of Fluid Mechanics, Coastal and Maritime Engineering
Technical University of Denmark 
Nils Koppels Allé, Bld. 403
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark
Phone (+45) 4525 1360
Fax  (+45) 4588 4325
www.mek.dtu.dk
