==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Civil Engineering
Master Thesis
Biaxial Bending of Filigree Slabs with
Steel Fiber Reinforced Concrete Overlay
Authors
Simon Mads Vittrup Nielsen
Rikke Witt Demuth Sørensen
Supervisors
Gregor Fischer
Linh Cao Hoang
15 July 2016
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Biaxial Bending of Filigree Slabs with Steel Fiber Reinforced
Concrete Overlay
This thesis was prepared by:
Simon Mads Vittrup Nielsen - S103562
Date
Signature
Rikke Witt Demuth Sørensen - S140044
Date
Signature
Supervisor:
Gregor Fischer, Associate professor at the Department of Civil Engineering, DTU
Co-supervisor:
Linh Cao Hoang, Professor at the Department of Civil Engineering, DTU
DTU Civil Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Civil Engineering
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Project period:
January 2016 - July 2016
ECTS:
30
Education:
Master of Science in Civil Engineering - MSc
Field:
Concrete Constructions - Civil Engineering
Remarks:
This thesis is submitted in accordance with the guidelines set by the
Tecnical University of Denmark.
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The background for this project is the desire of constructing two-way spanning slabs that
are time saving and cost eﬀective. This introduces the combination of ﬁligree slabs with a
steel ﬁber reinforced concrete(SFRC) overlay, where the ﬁligree slabs reduces the form work
and the SFRC replaces the traditional top reinforcement.
The principal aim of this research project is to evaluate the behaviour and performance of
ﬁligree slabs with a SFRC overlay when subjected to loading in pure torsion. This leads
to two primary areas of focus; the performance of steel ﬁbers and the joint connecting
the ﬁligree slabs. For investigation of this purpose an experimental study is carried out
by performing a series of tests on four diﬀerent slab conﬁgurations.
These include two
monolithic cast slabs; one slab with conventional top and bottom reinforcement and one
with conventional bottom reinforcement cast with SFRC. Also two slabs with joint ﬁligree
slabs are produced; one with conventional top reinforcement and the other with a SFRC
overlay.
Evaluation of the tests is carried out by observing the deﬂections and crack development
during testing.
Additionally, the experimentally found capacities were attempted to be
explained and compared to estimations found from theoretical plastic methods.
The test results indicate that the specimens, where the SFRC acts as top reinforcement,
the capacity in torsion cannot compete with conventional reinforcement design. The slab
specimens with SFRC on top only showed little torsional behaviour before failing in bending
at loads signiﬁcantly lower than the conventionally reinforced specimens.
However, the
specimens with SFRC showed a ductile behaviour as they where able to carry load beyond
the emergence of the ﬁrst crack. Further, the results show that the horizontal construction
joint is a critical aspect when using ﬁligree slabs and therefore needs to be suﬃciently
designed.
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgments
First of all we would like to express our gratitude to our supervisor Gregor Fischer for his
guidance and support throughout the project. We are also grateful for the help provided
by Linh Cao Hoang regarding the plate and plasticity theory.
We also appreciate all the help and counseling from the various people in the workshop and
test facilities throughout production, test setup and test of each specimens. Completion of
this project would not have been possible without their expertise and helpfulness. Specially
we would like to accentuate Per Leth and Henrik Børglum.
Per for his knowledge and
helpful hands in the concrete workshop during the reinforcement work and casting of the
specimens, and Henrik for his help and advice during construction of the test setup and
preparation of each test.
Also, we would like to thank FILIGRAN Tragersysteme GmbH & Co. KG for providing us
with the truss girders for the ﬁligree slabs.
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Nomenclature
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Literature Review
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Scope of Research
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Theoretical Background
6
2.1
Fiber Reinforced Concrete . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.1
History of Fiber Reinforced Concrete . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.2
Types of Fibers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.3
Mechanical Properties of SFRC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.4
Determination of SFRC Tensile Strength used in Design . . . . . . .
13
2.1.5
Residual Flexural Tensile Strength . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2
Calculations Applied from Codes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2.1
Lap-bar Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2.2
Shear at the Interface between Precast and In-situ Concrete . . . . .
17
2.2.3
Punching Shear . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3
Plate Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.3.1
Statical Condition for Plates
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.3.2
Yield Criteria for Slabs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.3.3
Yield Conditions for Slabs in Terms of Disk Analogy . . . . . . . . .
23
2.3.4
Expected Torsional Behaviour . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.3.5
Corner Loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3
Experimental Work
27
3.1
Specimens Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.1.1
Design Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.1.2
Technical Drawings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.2
Production of Specimens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
==PAGE:10==
Contents
3.2.1
Concrete Mix-design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.2.2
Reinforcement Preparation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.2.3
Slab Specimens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.2.4
Production of SFRC Beams for Three Point Bending Test . . . . . .
36
3.3
Procedure for Preliminary Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.3.1
Compression Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.3.2
Three Point Bending Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.3.3
Tension Test of Reinforcement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.4
Procedure for Main Slab Tests
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.4.1
Test Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.4.2
Digital Image Correlation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.4.3
Testing Procedure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4
Results
44
4.1
Results from Preliminary Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.1.1
Compressive Strength of Plain Concrete and SFRC . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.1.2
Tensile Strength of SFRC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.1.3
Tensile Strength of Reinforcement Bars
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.2
Introduction to the Slab Failures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.3
Deﬂectional Behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.4
Crack Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.5
Evaluation of Load-Displacement Curves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
4.5.1
Identiﬁcation of Mechanical Load Stages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
4.5.2
Residual Strength of Slabs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
4.5.3
Evaluation of Stiﬀness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
4.5.4
Energy Absorption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
5
Conclusion
72
5.1
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
5.1.1
Improvements and Further Investigations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
5.2
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
Bibliography
78
List of Figures
81
List of Tables
84
Appendices
85
==PAGE:11==
Nomenclature
Abbreviation
Description
SFRC
Steel Fiber Reinforced Concrete
CMOD
Crack Mouth Opening Displacement
DIC
Digital Image Correlation
LVDT
Linear Variable Diﬀerential Transformer
Symbol
Description
As
Cross sectional area of reinforcement steel
Asx
Cross sectional area of reinforcement steel in x-direction
Asy
Cross sectional area of reinforcement steel in y-direction
A′
sx
Cross sectional area of reinforcement steel in y-direction in top
layer
A′
sy
Cross sectional area of reinforcement steel in y-direction in top
layer
Af
ct
Tension zone of cracked cross section
L1
Performance class 1
L2
Performance class 2
p
Load
a
Compression zone
u
Control perimeter
d
Eﬀective thickness of slab
fctm
Axial tensile strength
lb,rqd
Anchorage length
mx
Bending moment in x-direction
my
Bending moment in y-direction
mxy
Torsional moment
mp
Positive yield moment
m′
p
Negative yield moment
==PAGE:12==
Contents
tp
Torsional moment
qx
Shear force in x-direction
qy
Shear force in y-direction
˜qx
Outer shear force in x-direction
˜qy
Outer shear force in y-direction
˜mxy
Outer torsional moment
fy
Yield strength of steel
fc
Compressive strength of concrete
fc,5%
Compressive strength 5% quartile
fct
Axial residual tensile strength of steel ﬁber reinforced concrete
fctd
Design value of axial residual tensile strength of steel ﬁber rein-
forced concrete
υv
Eﬀectiveness factor for concrete in pure shear
υt
Eﬀectiveness factor for concrete in shear subjected from torsion
Φ
Reinforcement degree only considering tensile reinforcement
Φ0
Reinforcement degree considering both compression and tensile
reinforcement
τcxy
Maximum shear stress
β
Factor for determining the basic value of the axial residual tensile
strength/Value for eccentric loaded perimeter
γ
Safety factor
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
In construction today, the expense of labor constitutes a large part of the total construction
cost. For this reason prefabricated elements have been widely prevalent in the construction
industry. The prefabricated elements eliminates the form work, reinforcement work and
casting on site. The downside is that prefabricated slabs can only be transported in limited
dimensions and are restricted to a one-way span compared to in-situ slabs.
By introducing ﬁligree slab elements with an in-situ cast overlay, the form work on site
is largely reduced, while the in-situ overlay allows for the slab to span in two directions.
Filigree slabs consists of a precast concrete plank, typically between 50-70 mm, containing a
net reinforcement, which provides the ﬂexural strength in the ﬁnal design. The ﬁligree slab
is also provided with truss girders, which supply a spanning stiﬀness in the temporary state
of transportation and installing, as well as providing horizontal shear strength between the
plank and the concrete cast on site. An example of a ﬁligree slab is illustrated in Figure 1-1.
The fact that transportation of ﬁligree slab elements is still required from the factory to
site, the element size remain limited. However, as joint connections between several ﬁligree
slabs can be installed on site, the elements are able to act as a united slab. Application of
ﬁligree slabs highly reduces the form work, but reinforcement work and casting on site is
still required.
Figure 1-1: Principal drawing of typical ﬁligree slab.
The wish for eliminating the reinforcement work on site leads to the introduction of discon-
tinuous ﬁbers as an alternative to conventional reinforcement. It is known that steel ﬁbers
improve the properties of concrete, therefore it is interesting to examine to which extent
the ﬁbers can substitute regular reinforcement bars in construction.
Traditionally, steel ﬁber reinforced concrete (henceforth referred to as SFRC) is mainly
1
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 1. Introduction
used for non-structural purposes, such as reducing cracks caused by shrinkage or creep.
However, during recent years SFRC has been used for structural applications as well. The
ﬁbers ability to bridge cracks have been exploited to improve fracture characteristics and
structural behaviour.
A common solution for modern buildings, which have a desire for open and ﬂexible spaces,
is a system of ﬂat slabs and columns or a brace system with beams and columns. The open
spaces require large slab spans, which, as already stated, is achieved much more eﬃciently
with two-way spanning slabs. A critical failure of slabs supported by columns is the biaxial
bending as a result of a asymmetric loading, column failure or settling.
In recent years, plates made with SFRC have been researched, but to the authors knowledge
limited research on SFRC plates subjected to biaxial bending have been conducted. Ad-
ditionally, no studies have been performed on the combination of ﬁligree slabs and SFRC.
This study is therefore interested in observing the behaviour of two-way spanning ﬁligree
slabs with SFRC subjected to biaxial bending. For this project the loading is limited to a
case of pure torsion.
1.1
Literature Review
Conventional reinforced concrete slabs are widely used structural elements in constructions
and have been extensively studied. The studies have theoretically and experimentally doc-
umented the behaviour and performance of slabs subjected to shear and moment, but there
are still a wide range of less discovered topics, since new ways to improve and manufacture
slabs are ongoingly discovered.
In the early 1900, Stephen Timoshenko published thorough material about plate and shell
theory [1]. In this publication the ﬁrst bricks of plate and shell behaviour was founded.
Later, lots of research on reinforced concrete slab behaviour in one- and two-way spanning
have been assessed, and common ways of application have been developed all around the
world eg. Eurocode and ACI.
Torsion in plates were earlier considered as a second order eﬀect, which was assumed to
be transferred through the regular reinforcement designed for bending and shear. With
increasing demands to structural integrity and with increasing integrated structural com-
ponents, torsional moments have been found to be a critical load behaviour. Therefore, the
eﬀects of torsion have to be accounted for in the design.
Comprehensive experimental work was done by P. Marti, P. Leesti and W. Khalifa in 1987,
testing nine orthogonal reinforced concrete slab in pure torsion [2]. The tests indicated
that using stirrups as edge reinforcement improved the capacity greatly. Also, they found,
that corner failures occurred at loads very close to the torsional capacity of the slab spec-
imen. Additionally, it was observed that crack spacing, crack width, magnitude of strains
and compression zone depth were most critical at the top of the specimen. At last, they
investigated the ultimate resistance predicted by yield line theory and the ’American code’s
Torsion Design Provision’, which predicted the capacity between 5-46% lower and 8-117%
greater, respectively. This indication was also found in a previous paper by the same au-
thors. In this paper, a method to predict the uncracked and cracked behaviour of reinforced
concrete slabs subjected to pure torsion was proposed and the results were later proven ex-
perimentally [2].
2
==PAGE:15==
1.1 Literature Review
Same result regarding edge reinforcement was indicated by experimental work performed
by J.F. Jensen et. al. at the Technical University of Denmark [3], where reinforced concrete
slabs with diﬀerent kind of edge reinforcement were subjected to pure torsion. By using
closing u-bars with half the cross sectional area of the longitudinal reinforcement, the slabs
would in most cases fail in torsion and not in a local shear failure near the concentrated
force.
The stiﬀness of reinforced concrete slabs subjected to torsion was investigated by A.V.
Lopes, S. M. R. Lopes and R. F. N. do Carmo [4].
In this work six square slabs with
diﬀerent reinforcement mesh were tested in torsion (not pure torsion), and the tests showed
that the loss in torsional stiﬀness was much larger than for the ﬂexural stiﬀness in the
cracked phase. The loss in stiﬀness determined experimentally questioned the traditional
stiﬀness coeﬃcient for the torsional stiﬀness presented in codes.
A torsional fracture is recognized by its inclined crack pattern, spiralling around the concrete
specimen. In plain concrete, torsional moments induce tensile and compressive stresses in
the concrete, which after the ﬁrst crack results in a brittle collapse.
However, a more
ductile behaviour can obvious be obtained by adding reinforcement to the design. Due to
increasing demand on limiting cracks, achieving ductile behaviour and easy construction,
many beneﬁcial eﬀects can be obtained by using ﬁber reinforced concrete. The enhanced
properties of SFRC is a well researched topics and will be discussed later.
The ﬂexural behaviour of SFRC beams and slabs has been tested comprehensively by several
authors and has in general been proven to enhance the overall performance in terms of
crack development, ductility, deﬂection, rotation, energy absorption, peak load and stress
redistribution.
Full scale experiment on 13 slabs with a reinforcement mesh and steel
ﬁbers were done by Døssland [5] and Pujadas [6]. The slabs exhibited ductile behaviour
and limited crack width. The inﬂuence of ﬁbers was also visible in the deﬂection control,
particularly in the service limit state. Full scale experiments with slabs made only with
SFRC, were done by Alvarez [7] and Michels [8], both obtaining ductile bending failures.
However, Michels discovered that the concrete mixture and dispersion of the ﬁbers in the
concrete had a big inﬂuence on the ﬁbers eﬀectiveness.
It was demonstrated that the
ﬁber orientation was impaired with increasing slab thickness, which lead to a decrease in
the residual tensile strength. The enhancement of redistribution of stresses was tested by
D. Fall et. al. [9] with three full scale two-way spanning slabs. The eﬀects were tested
by diﬀering the distance between the longitudinal reinforcement in both directions of the
slab. An eﬀective redistribution of the stresses was discovered, especially after cracking had
occurred.
The use of steel ﬁbers in slabs subjected to torsional moments is not very documented
theoretically or experimentally, but some authors have tested SFRC beams in torsion. SFRC
beams subjected to pure torsion were tested by R. Narayanan and A. S. Kareem-Palanjian
[10]. Here, 28 beams were tested varying diﬀerent properties of the ﬁbers. The test results
exhibited clear improvements in terms of capacity, post-cracking behaviour and ductility.
Similar tests were conducted by M, A. Mansur and T. Y. Lim [11]. They tested 15 beam with
ranging ﬁber volume, bar and stirrup reinforcement in combination with 20 MPa concrete.
The tests showed that beams reinforced with steel ﬁbers, reinforcement bars and stirrups
produced more narrow and dense cracks and had greater torsional capacity compared to
the test specimens without ﬁbers. However, SFRC specimens without stirrups had only
a negligible inﬂuence on the torsional strength, ductility and toughness. Further research
3
==PAGE:16==
Chapter 1. Introduction
considering pure torsion of SFRC beam was done by T. D. Gunneswara Rao et. al.[12],
considering the inﬂuence of SFRC in over-reinforced beams, and by F. Okay and S. Engin
[13] considering the volumetric content of the ﬁbers. Using ﬁber additions were found to
increase the cracking torque and toughness of the beam. However, it did not increase the
ultimate torsional strength. The tests also indicated a decreasing widths of crack, while the
amount of crack increased.
At last, focus is turned towards ﬁligree slabs. Limited research is available considering two-
way spanning ﬁligree slabs containing a joint, subjected to cross sectional forces. However, J.
Stehle, A. Kanellopoulos and B. L. Karihaloo [14] tested the performance of a joint subjected
to positive and negative bending moment.
The joint exhibited acceptable performance
when designed properly regarding anchorage length and dimension. It was recommended to
provide truss girders in the vicinity of the joint to transfer horizontal shear forces into the
precast slab element. No research is available considering ﬁligree slabs with SFRC overlay,
and, to the authors knowledge, neither has the traditional joint conﬁguration, applying
lap-bars, been tested in torsion.
1.2
Scope of Research
The principal aim of this project is to investigate the behaviour and performance of SFRC as
an alternative to conventional reinforcement design of ﬁligree slabs. It is known, that SFRC
cannot provide the same strength as reinforced concrete. However, based on the elimination
of reinforcement work, the extend of which the steel ﬁbers can replace longitudinal top
reinforcement is of interest.
A case of pure torsion is chosen for investigation. This is chosen because torsion is, as already
mentioned, a critical failure mode and because this load conﬁguration will utilize the tensile
strength of the SFRC. To obtain this, the slabs are designed as square plates supported
in two opposite corners and loaded in the other two. This conﬁguration with conventional
reinforced concrete design has been widely studied and the material behaviour are well
deﬁned in theory along with plate behaviour in torsion. However, the above mentioned
conﬁguration have not yet been tested, which is the motivation for this study. This load
conﬁguration requires suﬃcient capacity of the SFRC overlay as well as the joint between
the ﬁligree slabs.
For the purpose of initial capacity estimations and review, this project will only exploit the
theory of plasticity and try to investigate if this can be applied to SFRC.
The project is limited to consider neither concrete shrinkage nor creep. Likewise, it should
be noted, that the project conﬁnes to only focusing on to which extend the ﬁbers can
substitute the traditional top reinforcement in ﬁligree slab design, and not on how the
ﬁbers could contribute in combination with conventional reinforcement.
1.3
Thesis Outline
This report starts out by giving a theoretical background on steel ﬁber reinforced concrete
and its properties based on reviews of various articles on the subject. This can be found
as the ﬁrst part of Chapter 2. Further, this chapter will shortly present some of the cal-
culation methods applied from standards and guidelines, which will mainly revolve around
4
==PAGE:17==
1.3 Thesis Outline
Eurocode DS-EN 1992-1-1 and the ’Design Guideline for Structural Applications of Steel
Fiber Reinforced Concrete’. In the last part of this chapter the plate theory used for this
study will be presented. This will mainly be based on the theory of plasticity.
In Chapter 3, the experimental work is described, starting out with a presentation of the
slab specimen design and thoughts on the matter.
Moreover, this chapter presents the
production, preparation and testing methods of the various tests performed in this project.
These include cylindrical compression tests, three point bending tests of SFRC beams,
tensile tests of reinforcement bars and the primary torsional tests of slabs.
The results are given, analysed and discussed in Chapter 4. This will be performed by
a thorough review of the failure behaviour, an observation of the deformations and an
investigation of the crack development.
Finally, Chapter 5 summarises and discusses the results and gives some proposals on im-
provements to the design along with ideas to further investigations, before ﬁnishing up with
the ﬁnal conclusion for the use of SFRC as an overlay on ﬁligree slabs subjected to torsion.
5
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 2
Theoretical Background
This chapter contains a description of the various mechanisms of SFRC that contribute to
its properties. It is based on reviews of diﬀerent literature on the subject. Moreover, a
presentation of calculation methods from applied codes and guidelines is given and, lastly,
relevant plate theory used in this project is described.
2.1
Fiber Reinforced Concrete
Concrete is alone a brittle material. Adding ﬁbers improve some of its properties such as
the material stiﬀness, tensile and ﬂexural strength and ductile behavior, while also reducing
cracks. However, there is a lack of accepted design guidelines, which leads to a limited use
of ﬁber reinforced concrete in the structural design. This section will present an overview of
the development of ﬁber reinforced concrete and introduce material properties from already
conducted research.
2.1.1
History of Fiber Reinforced Concrete
Fibers in construction are not a new discovery, already in ancient times, brittle materials
such as bricks and mortar was enhanced by straw and horse hair. Later on, in the late
1950’s the use of glass ﬁbers in concrete was attempted in Russia and in the early 1960’s
experiments with discontinuous steel reinforcement elements in concrete were conducted in
the Unites States. This was the beginning of the development of ﬁber reinforced concrete
as we know today [15].
The most common use of ﬁber reinforced concrete have mainly been for non-structural
purposes, such as limiting cracks in relation to shrinkage and creep in non-elevated ﬂoor-
slabs and pavements. Since then, ﬁbers in concrete have been increasingly applied as a part
of load carrying structures.
2.1.2
Types of Fibers
Several ﬁber types are used for concrete strengthening today. The basic types include steel,
glass, synthetics and natural materials. Common for all is their ability to reduce cracks and
improve the durability of the concrete. For structural purposes, the steel ﬁbers have been
found to be the most eﬀective ﬁber type according to M. Grzybowski and S. P. Shah [16].
Focusing on steel ﬁbers, the choice of ﬁber type and dimensions has a signiﬁcant inﬂuence
6
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Fiber Reinforced Concrete
on the properties of the SFRC. The various steel ﬁber types are illustrated in Figure 2-1
and they include straight, hooked, paddled, chrimped and deformed ﬁbers. Besides the
type, the concentration of ﬁbers as well as their aspect ratio (the ratio between length and
thickness) eﬀects the properties.
Figure 2-1: Illustration of diﬀerent ﬁber types.
A. E. Naaman and H. Najm [17] have performed pull-out and pull-through test of three
diﬀerent steel ﬁber types combined with three diﬀerent concrete strengths and three diﬀer-
ent ﬁber volume fractions in order to evaluate the bond-slip mechanisms of steel ﬁbers in
concrete. Based on the tests, A. E. Naaman and H. Najm found that hooked and deformed
ﬁbers have a higher resistance to pull-out compared to smooth ﬁbers, however, the larger
resistance ﬁrst showed after initial cracking. They also concluded that when the strength
of the concrete increases the bond increases as well.
2.1.3
Mechanical Properties of SFRC
To repeat, SFRC is conventional concrete mixed with discontinuous discrete steel ﬁbers. The
advantages of SFRC extends from the elastic pre-cracking state to the plastic post-cracked
state, improving a wide range of properties of concrete.
To understand the mechanism
of SFRC, it can be considered as a composite material, which properties can be related
to the ﬁber properties in terms of volume percentage, strength, elastic modulus, interface
bond strength, aspect ratio etc. The strength properties of SFRC have been tested through
a variety of experiments where SFRC specimens have been tested through compression,
tension and 3 or 4 point bending test. In general a tendency of improved ﬂexural toughness,
ductile behavior, limited cracking, improved tensile and compressive strength has been
observed through the experimental work of SFRC specimens.
J. Thomas and A. Ramaswamy [18] have tested 60 data sets and analysed various mechan-
ical properties of SFRC. They tested various concrete grades (35MPa, 65MPa and 85MPa)
and the result includes a minimal increase in the compressive strength when adding ﬁbers.
However, the addition of ﬁbers showed an signiﬁcant increase in both the modulus of rup-
ture, the tensile strength and the strain corresponding to the peak compressive strength.
The same results were found by P. S. Song and S. Hwang [19] who carried out tests on high
strength concrete only.
In this section, the essential properties and parameters of SFRC are outlined.
Pull-out Mechanism
Fundamentally, almost all the properties of SFRC depends on the interfacial bond between
the ﬁber and the surrounding concrete matrix. After cracking has initiated in the concrete,
the ﬁbers transfer tensile stresses across cracks into the concrete, which makes the bond
essential. The bond and resistance to pull-out of ﬁbers depends on the adhesion, the friction,
7
==PAGE:20==
Chapter 2. Theoretical Background
the ﬁber interlock and the mechanical anchorage of the ﬁbers. The adhesion is related to
the bonded phase of the ﬁber and concrete matrix before cracking of the concrete and it has
very small pull-out lengths which makes it eligible. In the debonded phase after cracking is
initiated, frictional shear occurs as the ﬁber slips from the concrete matrix and for deformed
and hooked ﬁbers the mechanical anchorage increases the pull-out resistance further. In
fact, A. E. Naaman and H. Najm [17] found, that the pull-out performance of hooked or
deformed ﬁbers reached failure up to 100 times more than of smooth ﬁbers. Additionally,
ﬁbers with a high aspect ratio had a better resistance to pull-out from the concrete matrix
[15]. Several factors aﬀects the pull-out. One is the matrix spalling in case of insuﬃcient
embedment length. Another is the eﬃciency of the anchorage as well as the inclination
of ﬁbers. The spacing of ﬁbers can also eﬀect the pull-out resistance, if the ﬁbers are too
closely spaced in groups, a part of the concrete can break of [5]. Moreover, to avoid a brittle
failure, it is important that the ﬁber pull-out is the dominating mechanism and not the ﬁber
fracture.
Crack Formation and Propagation
The process of how cracks occur in plain concrete is relatively complex and depends on
various factors. Already before loading of the concrete, micro-cracks will occur due to the
fact that the aggregates have a higher stiﬀness than the cement, which causes internal
restraints when exposed to temperature changes and shrinkage. Then when loading the
concrete, additional micro-cracks will start to grow and the stresses will increase along
with the deformations, until the tensile strength of the concrete is reached as shown in
Figure 2-2. When the tensile strength is reached, the post-peak stage is initiated, where the
increase in deformation decreases the stresses. In this stage, cracks will propagate faster
and macro-cracks occur. Within these cracks a toughening mechanism is present in terms
of the aggregate bridging, which allows tensile stresses to be transferred over the crack
leading to a higher toughness. Eventually, the stresses will exceed the tensile strength and
the bridging ability and failure will occur. This part is referred to as the traction free crack
and the stresses will be zero. This model was developed by Hilleborg et al [20] and is called
the Fictitious Crack Model, due to the fact that a real crack is not able to transfer stresses
as the model suggests.
Figure 2-2: Schematic illustration of the stress-crack relation for plain concrete.
8
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Fiber Reinforced Concrete
The eﬀect of adding ﬁbers mainly contributes in the post-cracking state by bridging the
cracks and providing resistance to crack openings. This resistance is provided by the inter-
facial bond between the ﬁbers and the concrete as described in section 2.1.3. Like plain con-
crete, SFRC will form micro-cracks up until the tensile strength of the concrete is reached.
Then in the post-peak state, the eﬀect of the ﬁbers will show, where higher stresses can be
transferred across the cracks due to the ﬁber and aggregate bridging, enhancing the tough-
ness and ductility of the SFRC compared to plain concrete. The Fictitious Crack Model
adjusted to SFRC is shown in Figure 2-3. It should be noted, that the graph is principal,
as diﬀerent ﬁbers exhibits various behavior.
Figure 2-3: Schematic illustration of the stress-crack relation for SFRC.
Another property of adding steel ﬁbers to concrete is that steel ﬁbers allow multiple cracking
to occur and tensile stresses to be transferred across cracks, as well as reducing the width
of the cracks.
Compressive Strength
The compressive strength of concrete is found from compression tests. The failure in com-
pression is linked to the failure in tension, due to the fact that tensile stresses acts perpen-
dicular to the compression load. The tensile strength of the concrete is therefore of interest
when considering the failure of SFRC. Compression tests for plain concrete always involve
sliding failure, which depends on the friction and cohesion of the concrete [21]. P. Schu-
macher [22] has tested the compression failure of SFRC and also comes to the conclusion
that it is the sliding failure which occurs under compression for SFRC.
Compression tests are practically mandatory in experimental tests involving the structural
properties of concrete. A lot of data is therefor available on the compressive strength of
SFRC. Among many, Nataraja et al. [23], J. Thomas and A. Ramaswamy [18] and the ACI
Committee 544 [15] conclude that only a marginal increase of compressive strength occurs
in SFRC. However, the SRFC leads to a less brittle failure compared to plain concrete [15].
Figure 2-4 shows a principal stress-strain curve for concrete in compression. It shows a
slight increase in compressive strength of the SFRC compared with plain concrete. The
more signiﬁcant eﬀect on the compression strength is on the slope after the peak stress,
which is reduced when ﬁbers are added. This indicates that the SFRC are more ductile and
has an improved post-cracking behavior compared to plain concrete.
9
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 2. Theoretical Background
Figure 2-4: Principles of the stress-strain relation in compression for concrete with and without steel ﬁbers.
Tensile and Flexural Strength
As concrete and SFRC are not homogeneous materials, the tensile and ﬂexural strengths
are not the same. Normally, the ﬂexural strength will be higher than the strength in pure
tension. This is due to the fact, that when a material is bent only the extreme ’ﬁbers’ are
at the largest stress and the ﬂexural strength will be controlled by the strength of those
ﬁbers. However, if the same material is subjected to only tensile forces then all the ﬁbers in
the material are at the same stress and failure will initiate when the weakest ﬁber reaches
its limiting tensile stress.
Reports from the ACI Committee 544 [15] states that the tensile strength of SFRC is more
or less the same as for plain concrete, e.g. around 2 to 4 MPa, but that it is the post-cracking
behavior, which diﬀerentiates the two, as the toughness for SFRC can be around two times
larger than plain concrete. This is caused by the pull-out resistance of SFRC explained in
section 2.1.3. In pure tension test it has been observed that the composite material will fail
due to breaking of the ﬁber or by the pull-out mechanism. The stress-strain curve for SFRC
is similar to plain concrete up to the ﬁrst cracking, whereas the descending part depends
on the ﬁber parameters as illustrated in Figure 2-5. Regarding the ﬁbers inﬂuence on the
ﬂexural strength of concrete, the report also states, that it is much greater than for direct
tension and compression. It concludes that by adding a volume of ﬁbers corresponding to
1.5 %, the tensile strength will be enhanced by 30 to 40 % and the ﬂexural strength by 50
to 70 %.
Figure 2-5: Principles of the stress-strain relation in tension for concrete with and without steel ﬁbers.
10
==PAGE:23==
2.1 Fiber Reinforced Concrete
R.S. Olivito and F.A. Zuccarello [24] have performed direct tensile tests and four point
bending tests of SFRC with various ﬁber concentrations and ﬁber lengths in order to test
the tensile strength of SFRC. For direct tension, the largest diﬀerence between SFRC and
plain concrete was the failure mode. The specimens with steel ﬁbers developed symmetrical
micro cracks and bridging of the ﬁbers, leading to a ductile failure. Further, they found
that long ﬁbers had a lower tensile strength but a higher ultimate strength than short
ﬁbers. From the four point bending test they found higher bending stiﬀness and diﬀerent
cracking pattern of SFRC compared to plain concrete. Also, the post-cracking behaviour
was aﬀected by ﬁber length; short ﬁbers had a softening behaviour and long ﬁbers had a
plastic/hardening behavior.
A. G. Kooiman [25] also states, that it is when concrete is exposed to bending that the steel
ﬁbers come fully into eﬀect as the softening response leads to a redistribution of stresses,
which imposes a new state of equilibrium across the cross section after cracking. As a result,
the maximum moment capacity may exceed the maximum moment of plain concrete. The
value of the post-crack stress is called the residual tensile strength and is explained further
in section 2.1.5.
Shear Strength
It can be challenging to determine the shear behavior of SFRC as several parameters are
involved such as the shear span to depth ratio, the ﬁber type, ﬁber volume, scale of the test
specimens and ﬁber orientation etc. The general eﬀect of ﬁbers occurs after the concrete
cracks and the ﬁbers are activated. Then there is a toughening behaviour of the SFRC due
to the ﬁber pull-out, which leads to an increase in shear capacity depending on the amount
of ﬁbers. Some conclusion of the shear capacity is presented in the following based on test
on beams and plates.
Yoon-Keun Kwak et al.[26] conducted test on reinforced concrete beams without stirrups,
varying the volume of steel ﬁbers and the concrete strength. They concluded that the nomi-
nal shear stress at cracking as well as the ultimate shear strength increased when increasing
the volume of ﬁbers and the concrete strength. Another ﬁnding was that increasing the
ﬁber content led from a failure mode in shear to a failure mode in ﬂexure. Hai H. Dinh [27]
tested the shear behaviour of SFRC beams without stirrups as well using diﬀerent types of
hooked end ﬁbers and varying the longitudinal reinforcement ratio, beam depth and ﬁber
volume. He found, that with a volume fraction greather than 0.75 %, the shear strength
increased, the crack patterned inclination enhanced and the shear failure was more ductile.
He concluded, that steel ﬁbers can replace the minimum required stirrup reinforcement
given by ACI Committee 318.
The shear strength of SFRC ﬂat plates has been analysed by A. M. Shaaban and H. Gesund
[28].
Punching shear occurs progressively as only a small part of the slab near a slab-
column intersection is highly stressed in tension before rupture, so by improving the tensile
strength of concrete with ﬁbers, they found, that the punching shear capacity increased.
Additionally, their results showed that the inclination of the shear surface decreased, which
also contributes to a better shear capacity. Similarly, Nguyen-Minh et al. [29] tested 12
small scale slabs with varying dimensions in order to analyse the punching shear capacity of
interior slab-column connection with SFRC. They also found, that the ﬁbers improved the
punching shear capacity and decreased the angle of the punching shear surface. Their test
further showed a reduction of the deﬂections and an improved integrity of the slab in the
11
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 2. Theoretical Background
post-cracking stage. Choi et al. [30] also analysed the punching shear capacity of interior
slab-column connection with SFRC, but they used a theoretical approach and veriﬁed it
with existing test results. They conclude, that the shear capacity of the compression zone
is governed by tension failure rather than compression failure, and as the post-cracking
strength is increased with ﬁbers, the punching shear of slab-column connections is enhanced
signiﬁcantly for ﬁber reinforced concrete.
Inﬂuence of Volume Fraction and Aspect Ratio of Steel Fibers
The eﬀect of increasing the volume fraction of ﬁbers as well as the aspect ratio is elucidated
in several articles. Nataraja et al. [23] have come to the ﬁnding that a higher aspect ratio
as well as a higher volume fraction leads to an increase in the elastic capability as well
as the strain corresponding to the peak stress. Furthermore, they found a decrease of the
slope of stress-strain curve after the peak stress is reached. The same result is reached by
a research performed by Balaguru et al. [31], which shows, that an increase in ﬁbers leads
to an increase in ductility and a ﬂatter post peak load deﬂection response. J. A. O. Barros
and J. A. Figueiras [32] have tested the inﬂuence of the volume fraction of ﬁbers as well,
and they also concluded that the load carrying capacity increased by increasing volume
fraction. Additionally, they found that the ﬁbers led to a decrease in crack openings and
crack spacing.
An important property of the ﬁbers is their ability to bond with the concrete, which also
depends on the aspect ratio. Usually, the aspect ratio is about 20 to 100 where the length
of ﬁbers are between 6.4 mm and 76 mm. For normal SFRC a high aspect ratio are more
eﬃcient when it comes to improving the post-peak performance due to their better resistance
to pull-out from the concrete matrix. The downside of a high aspect ratio is, however, the
higher risk of balling of the ﬁbers during mixing. Balling is when the steel ﬁbers intertwine
and creates small balls of ﬁbers[15].
Fiber Orientation and Distribution
In SFRC structures an even distribution with random orientation is desired, but it is not
easily achieved due to several factors. For self-compacting concrete, the ﬂow during casting
is essential in order to achieve a good distribution of ﬁbers. The pouring direction and
the ﬂow direction tends to orient the ﬁbers, and it has been found, that self-compacting
concrete with ﬁbers should be cast with a uniform ﬂow from one end of the formwork and
not from the middle [5].
For vibrator-compacted concrete, the main factor for an even distribution and orientation
depends on the vibration procedure.
Using a vibration table can cause a certain ﬂow
which tends to orient the ﬁbers perpendicular to the vibration direction according to A.G.
Kooiman [25], however, with short vibration times the inﬂuence should be unnoticeable.
Vibration with an immersion vibrator is in general not recommended, but for full scale
structures this might be the only method. The use of an immersion vibrator causes the
ﬁbers to scatter where the vibrator is placed which weakens these zones. Also, the immersion
vibrator will eﬀect the ﬁber orientation. Therefore, when testing several specimens, the
sequence of using the immersion vibrator should be the same for all specimens in order to
obtain comparable results.
Another factor, applicable to both self-compacting and vibrator-compacting concrete, is
that the concrete does not separate, so that the ﬁber concentration will concentrate in the
12
==PAGE:25==
2.1 Fiber Reinforced Concrete
lower part of the structure during compaction.
With specimens containing reinforcement bars, the ﬁber distribution and orientation is
also aﬀected. The reinforcement can block the ﬁbers and hinder them from being evenly
distributed. Therefore, the bar spacing needs to be considered during the reinforcement
design.
Steel Fibers Inﬂuence on the Bond of Reinforcement
In reinforced concrete it is the bonding between the reinforcing steel bars and the concrete,
which ensures that concrete can be used as a construction material. A good bond leads
to less cracks which protects the reinforcement.
Studies by Ezeldin and Balaguru [33]
shows, that adding ﬁbers signiﬁcantly improve the bond strength between concrete and
reinforcement.
However, mostly at splitting bond failure compared to pull-out failure.
Another study by D. L. Araujo et al.[34] came to a similar ﬁnding. It showed that little
inﬂuence on the pull-out bond strength, but a considerable inﬂuence when rupture occurred
as splitting of the concrete.
2.1.4
Determination of SFRC Tensile Strength used in Design
The use of steel ﬁber reinforced concrete in load carrying structures are still not commonly
spread. Therefore, there is a limited range of accepted design guidelines. In this section, the
guideline ’Design Guideline for Structural Applications of Steel Fiber Reinforced Concrete’
[35] is used. This guideline is an application to Eurocode DS-EN 1992-1-1 and the Danish
Standard DS-EN 14651 [36], which deals with measuring the tensile strength of concrete
with metallic ﬁbers. For this project the guideline is applied in order to estimate the axial
residual tensile strength of SFRC and to estimate the capacity of the specimens.
The design guideline introduces performance classes which deﬁne the residual tensile strength
for the ﬁbers based on their orientation. The ﬁber orientation is the relative amount of ﬁbers
in the diﬀerent directions. If the relative amount of ﬁbers varies in each direction, the tensile
strength will equally vary in diﬀerent directions. The performance classes are speciﬁed in ac-
cordance to the crack mouth opening (hereafter referred to as CMOD), where performance
class 1, also referred to as L1, corresponds to a CMOD of 0.5 mm and performance class 2,
also referred to as L2, corresponds to a CMOD of 3.5 mm. The value found corresponding
to the performance class, is the characteristic value of the residual ﬂexural strength for
the reference ﬁber orientation and the respective CMOD. The characteristic values for the
residual ﬂexural tensile strength are found using DS-EN 14651 supplemented by the design
guideline, as explained in later in section 2.1.5. The ﬂexural tensile strength can then be
converted to the axial residual tensile strength, using equations (2.2) to (2.8), which is used
for cross sectional analysis.
Considering the stress-strain relation for SFRC, the guideline varies depending on which
structural analysis is performed. For the non-linear and for the deformation analysis, linear
progression of the stress-strain curve should be considered up to the mean value of axial
tensile strength, fctm, as shown in Figure 2-6(a). For the cross-sectional analysis, fctm may
be ignored as illustrated in Figure 2-6(b). For both stress-strain curves, the use of either the
complete stress-strain relation (solid line) or the rectangular stress-strain relation (dashed
line), depends on the performance class ratio of L2/L1.
13
==PAGE:26==
Chapter 2. Theoretical Background
(a)
(b)
Figure 2-6: Stress-strain relation of SFRC in the tension zone for (a) non-linear structural analysis and (b)
cross sectional design analysis.
In Figure 2-6(a) the stress-strain relation is based on the calculation values of the axial
residual tensile strengths, ff
ctR, and in Figure 2-6(b), the relation is based on the design
values of the axial residual tensile strengths, ff
ctd.
Initially, the basic values of the axial residual tensile strength can be obtained from the
residual ﬂexural tensile strength by correction values β.
ff
ct0,L1 = ff
cflk,L1 βL1
(2.1)
ff
ct0,L2 = ff
cflk,L2 βL2
(2.2)
ff
ct0,u = ff
cflk,L2 βu
(2.3)
ff
ct0,s = ff
cflk,L1 βs
(2.4)
Where βL1 and βL2 depends on the ratio of the performance class values L2/L1. With a
value larger than 0.7, βL1 = 0.40 and βL2 = 0.25 may be used. Alternately, the rectangular
stress block for the ULS veiﬁcation must be used. The correction factor for the rectangular
stress block is equal to βu = 0.37 and for the SLS the factor is equal to βs = 0.40.
The basic values can then be used to determine the calculation values of the axial residual
tensile strength by correction factors taking the member size and ﬁber orientation into
account.
ff
ctR,L1 = ff
ct0,L1 κf
F κf
G
(2.5)
ff
ctR,L2 = ff
ct0,L2 κf
F κf
G
(2.6)
ff
ctR,u = ff
ct0,u κf
F κf
G
(2.7)
ff
ctR,s = ff
ct0,s κf
F κf
G
(2.8)
Where the correction factor for the member size is equal to κf
G = 1.0 + 0.5 Af
ct ≤1.70 and
the correction factor for the ﬁber orientation is equal to κf
F = 0.5 for slump concrete in
general and κf
F = 1.0 for slump concrete for plane structures cast in horizontal position
with the width larger than 5 times the height.
Finally, the design values of the axial residual tensile strength can be calculated by a
reduction factor αf
c = 0.85, which takes long-term eﬀects on the residual tensile strength of
the steel ﬁbers into account.
14
==PAGE:27==
2.1 Fiber Reinforced Concrete
2.1.5
Residual Flexural Tensile Strength
Plain concrete has limited tensile strength and is therefore normally ignored in the design.
Adding ﬁbers to the concrete will signiﬁcantly increase the tensile strength after cracking
and can therefore advantageously be used in design calculations in order to improve the
bearing capacity. As ﬁbers varies in type, size and quantity, no standard value is available
for SFRC. The residual ﬂexural tensile strength of SFRC is found from three point bending
tests. The results are evaluated using DS-EN 14651 and the Design Guideline for SFRC. In
Figure 2-7 the notations and assumed stress distribution for the test specimen under three
point bending is illustrated.
Figure 2-7: Three point bending principle and assumed stress distribution.
The residual ﬂexural tensile strength is evaluated by measuring the relation between the
applied load and the corresponding CMOD. The load-CMOD curve equal to a CMOD of
0.5, 1.5, 2.5 and 3.5 mm are used to calculate the residual ﬂexural tensile strength and are
shown in Figure 2-8.
Figure 2-8: Evaluation of load-CMOD curve.
Expression of the Limit of Proportionality
The limit of proportionality, ff
ct,L, is the ﬁrst part of the stress-strain curve where the stress
are directly proportional to the strain. The load at the limit of proportionality is noted as
FL and is deﬁned as the highest load in the interval of the CMOD of 0 to 0.05 mm.
The value of ff
ct,L is found by the fact that the bending moment at mid-span of the test
specimen under three point bending corresponding to the center load, FL, is equal to
M = FL
2
l
2
(2.9)
From the linear stress distribution as shown in Figure 2-7, the limit of proportionality can
15
==PAGE:28==
Chapter 2. Theoretical Background
be found by dividing the moment with the elastic moment of resistance.
ff
ct,L = 6ML
bh2sp
= 3FLl
2bh2sp
(2.10)
Expression of the Residual Flexural Tensile Strength
In the same manner as the limit of proportionality, the residual ﬂexural tensile strength,
fR,j, can be expressed in terms of the loads, Fj corresponding to CMODj(j = 1, 2, 3, 4).
fR,j = 6Mj
bh2sp
= 3Fjl
2bh2sp
(2.11)
Stress Distributions
As mentioned, the residual ﬂexural tensile strength in the above is based on a linear elastic
stress distribution, also shown in in Figure 2-9(a). However, in order to calculate a more
realistic stress in the cracked zone, a constant stress in the tensile and compressive zones
could be assumed, as shown in Figure 2-9(b). At last, the more complicated approach in
Figure 2-9(c), with the more accurate stress distribution, also shown in Figure 2-6, could
be used. The cross sectional analysis in this project will be based on the middle stress
distribution, with the fully plastic consideration.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2-9: (a) Linear elastic stress distribution, (b) Fully plastic stress distribution (c) ”Real” stress distri-
bution.
2.2
Calculations Applied from Codes
This section gives a short introduction to the considerations applied from the codes during
design of the specimens.
2.2.1
Lap-bar Design
The joint between the two precast ﬁligree slabs are connected by lap-bars. These have to
eﬃciently transfer forces equal to the longitudinal reinforcement in the ﬁligree slab across
the joint. In order to ensure an equivalent bearing capacity of the lap-bars, a cross sectional
analysis is performed using a reduced eﬀective height, d, which is illustrated in Figure 3-1.
Anchorage of Lap-bars
The lap-bars shall be anchored so that the bond forces are securely transmitted to the
concrete. This are ensured by providing a suﬃcient length of the anchorage bars, using
DS-EN 1992-1-1 [37] section 8.4.2 to 8.4.4. The ultimate bond stress, fbd, for ribbed bars
16
==PAGE:29==
2.2 Calculations Applied from Codes
can be found as
fbd = 2.25 η1 η2 fctd
(2.12)
Where the coeﬃcient η1 takes the quality of the bond conditions and position of the bar
into account. η1 = 1.0 as good bond conditions are assumed. η2 is a coeﬃcient related to
the diameter of the lap-bar. For a diameter less than 32 mm η2 = 1.0. The design value
of the tensile strength, fctd, is taken as the characteristic tensile strength of concrete at 28
days, fctk,0.05.
Then the basic required anchorage length can be found from
lb,rqd = φ
4
σsd
fbd
(2.13)
Where σsd is set equal to the characteristic yield strength of the reinforcement, fy.
At last, the design anchorage length, lbd, can be found from equation (8.4) in DS-EN 1992-
1-1 by correction factors taking into account the eﬀects of bar conﬁguration, concrete cover
and eﬀects of transverse reinforcement.
2.2.2
Shear at the Interface between Precast and In-situ Concrete
Horizontal construction joints requires shear reinforcement at the interface in order to pre-
vent delamination of the two parts. In DS-EN 1992-1-1 [37] section 6.2.5, the design shear
resistance of a horizontal interface can be found from equation
υRdi = c fctd + µ σnρ fyd(µ sinα + cosα) ≤0.5 υv fcd
(2.14)
Where c and µ are factors which depend on the roughness of the interface. σn is the stress
per unit area from the minimum external normal force. ρ is the ratio between the area of
shear reinforcement in the interface surface and the total area of the considered interface.
The inclination of the shear reinforcement to the shear plane is α and should be limited by
45◦to 90◦. υv is the strength reduction factor for cracked concrete in shear.
2.2.3
Punching Shear
There is always a risk of the local failure mechanism, punching shear, when plates are
subjected to concentrated loads. The failure mechanism occurs due to shear stresses in the
concrete, creating a conus formed failure mechanism. The bearing capacity of the punching
shear is estimated using DS-EN 1992-1-1 section 6.4 [37] where the shear stress in the
structure is calculated by
vEd = β VEd
u1 · d
(2.15)
where d is the eﬀective thickness of the slab and u1 is the control perimeter dependent of the
loaded area. For support reaction or loadings acting eccentric on the control perimeter the
β factor is introduced. For plates reinforced in both direction d will be the average eﬀective
height between the reinforcement in the two directions. For loads close to the boundary the
control perimeter is calculated according to Figure 2-10.
17
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 2. Theoretical Background
Figure 2-10: Control perimeter for loading near edges.
The punching capacity is determined along the control perimeter, and may not exceed the
value of VRdmax calculated by
VRdmax = 0.5ννfcd
(2.16)
where νν is the eﬀectiveness factor of concrete in shear. The maximum allowable shear
stress for punching through the control perimeter is determined by
VRd,c = 0.18
γc
k(100ρ1fck)1/3 + 0.1σcp
(2.17)
where γc is a safety factor, k is found as 1 + 200
d
≤2.0 and ρ1 = √ρy · ρx, where ρx and
ρy are the reinforcement ratios in the main directions. If the plate is loaded by additional
forces inducing normal stresses, the contribution to the bearings capacity is included by
σcp = σcy+σcx
2
.
2.3
Plate Theory
In the following, the governing diﬀerential equation for a plate with loading is found and the
main steps in the Kirchkoﬀboundary condition are derived using [38],[39]. Furthermore,
the yield conditions for slabs are described.
2.3.1
Statical Condition for Plates
Plate Equilibrium
The internal forces in a plate is for a inﬁnite small plate part dx·dy, illustrated in a Cartesian
coordinate system in Figure 2-11. The bending and torsional moments per unit length are
abbreviated as mx, my and mxy, the shear forces per unit length is given as qx and qy, and
p is the outer force per area.
The plate theory demands equilibrium for every plate part, and the equilibrium equations
can be found by demanding vertical, horizontal and moment equilibrium of the plate part.
The equilibrium equation are listed below.
qx = ∂mx
∂x + ∂mxy
∂y
(2.18)
qy = ∂my
∂y + ∂mxy
∂x
(2.19)
p = ∂qx
∂x + ∂qy
∂y
(2.20)
18
==PAGE:31==
2.3 Plate Theory
by elimination of qx and qy, the governing diﬀerential equation can be written as
∂2mx
∂x2 −2∂2mxy
∂x∂y + ∂2my
∂y2
= −p
(2.21)
Figure 2-11: Static equilibrium of inﬁnitesimal part of a plate.
Boundary Conditions of Kirchhoﬀ’s Plate Theory
An exact solution to the governing plate equation (2.21) must at all time satisfy the bound-
ary conditions and the diﬀerential equation for a given problem. Since only the deformation
from torsional and bending moments are included in (2.21), two boundary condition are
required in the fourth order diﬀerential equation. The boundary conditions are described
by the geometrical and statical boundary conditions. The geometrical boundary conditions
are in general formulated by the magnitude of the displacement and slope, while the stat-
ical boundary conditions are given by the internal force components consisting of bending
moment, torsional moment and transverse shear. Since the degrees of freedom is limited
to two, the three statical boundary conditions cannot be satisﬁed at once. The amount of
statical and geometrical condition has to be equal to satisfy the boundary conditions stating
the governed problem in the Kirchhoﬀboundary condition.
The statical conditions are reduced from three to two by considering the statical equivalence
of the torsional moment and shear force along a boundary. The shear force per unit length
along an edge can be described of two terms, which consist of the transverse shear and the
eﬀect from the torsional moment, which is presented in equation (2.22).
q∗
x = ˜qx + ∂˜mxy
∂y
and
q∗
y = ˜qy + ∂˜mxy
∂x
(2.22)
where ˜qx and ˜qy are the lateral shear forces. The second term is interesting since it represent
an additional shear force at the edge produced by the torsional moment. Since the torsional
moment is static equivalent to a force pair of magnitude ˜mxy , acting on a boundary strip of
length dx or dy, the torsional moment can be divided into force couples along the boundary
acting of the inﬁnite small section dx and dy as illustrated in Figure 2-12.
19
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 2. Theoretical Background
Figure 2-12: Edge eﬀects from torsional moments.
For a constant moment the force couples will cancel out for each incremental, however, if the
torsional moment along the boundary is not constant, the incremental part of the torsional
moment will produce a line load.
These forces are called Kirchhoﬀshear forces and are caused by the torsional moment.
The boundary condition for an edge can then be written as a function of only transverse
shear force and bending moments, demanding static equivalence between inner and outer
forces along the plate edge, satisfying the governing diﬀerential equation
qx + ∂mxy
∂x
= ˜qx + ∂˜mxy
∂x
mx = ˜mx
(2.23)
qy + ∂mxy
∂y
= ˜qy + ∂˜mxy
∂y
my = ˜my
(2.24)
where ˜mx, ˜my, ˜mxy, ˜qxand ˜qy are outer loads and moment located at the boundary.
For the case of a free edge the boundary condition is reduced to
qx + ∂mxy
∂x
= 0
mx = 0
(2.25)
qy + ∂mxy
∂y
= 0
my = 0
(2.26)
Stating that the boundary should be treated as a boundary beam subjected to a line load
equal to ∂mxy
∂y . The boundary zone is often accepted to be of the width h/2, where h is the
height of the slab [21].
Additional to the line load along the edge, corner forces rises in the corners due to the
torsional moment. Since the torsional moments are equivalent to a force pair, there will be
a point load at the corner as a function of the torsional moments magnitude. The variation
of the moment ∂mxy
∂x dx is of no importance since this part vanish when dx →0. This point
load can be described as the diﬀerence in the torsional moments at each side of the corner1,
1Note P has the physical dimension of force since mnt is Nm per unit length.
20
==PAGE:33==
2.3 Plate Theory
which is illustrated by the shear forces at the corner in Figure 2-12.
P = ∆mxy
(2.27)
If the torsional moments are numerical of the same magnitude, but with opposite signs,
which is the case of corners of 90 deg, the following corner force is obtained
P = 2mxy
(2.28)
2.3.2
Yield Criteria for Slabs
In order to describe the failure of slabs, yield criteria are established. M. P. Nielsen and L.
C. Hoang [21] have listed yield conditions for slabs under the assumptions that the slabs
are reinforced in top and bottom by straight bars which are designed to yield.
An essential term when establishing the criteria is the reinforcement degree which is given
by equation (2.29).
Φ is used when only tensile reinforcement is considered and Φ0 is
used when compressive reinforcement is also taken into account. It should be noted, that
the variation of the eﬀective depth, d, in the two directions are not accounted for in the
establishment of the yield criteria. Also, that eﬀectiveness factors shall be applied to the
compressive strength of the concrete.
Φ = As fy
d fc
Φ0 = As fy
h fc
(2.29)
Initially, the yield criteria for slabs in pure bending are formulated by treating a strip of the
slab as a beam and consider the cross section, as illustrated in Figure 2-13. By equilibrium
of the compression zone of concrete and the tension reinforcement, the yield moment in
pure bending per unit length can be formulated by equation (2.30), where a is the height
of the compression zone.
mp = Asfy

d −1
2a

= Asfyd

1 −1
2Φ

= Φd2fc

d −1
2Φ

(2.30)
mp is the yield moment in regard to the positive moment, exploiting the bottom reinforce-
ment, Asx and Asy. Likewise, the yield moment in regard to the negative moment is denoted
m′
p, exploiting the top reinforcement, A′
sx and A′
sy.
Figure 2-13: Slab subjected to pure bending.
Considering the case of pure torsion, the slab is initially assumed to be isotropic with
the same amount of reinforcement in top and bottom. The principal coordinate system,
21
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 2. Theoretical Background
n- and t-axis, will for the isotropic slab form an angle of 45◦to the x- and y-coordinate
system as shown in Figure 2-14(a). With torsional moments, tp, acting in the direction
of the reinforcement, e.i the x- and y-coordinate system, the principal moments will be
numerically equal with opposite signs. A uniaxial state of compressive stress in the concrete
are assumed, where the second principal direction is in the n-axis at the top and in the t-axis
in the bottom. The second principal stress is set equal to the compressive strength of the
concrete, fc, and the ﬁrst principal stress is zero. The stresses on the compressive zones
can then be expressed as
σcx = σcy = σ′
cx = σ′
cy = −1
2fc
(2.31)
|τcxy| = |τ ′
cxy| = 1
2fc
(2.32)
With a depth, a, of the compressive zones in the top and bottom of the cross section shown
in Figure 2-14(b), equilibrium can be expressed as
1
2fca = Asfy
(2.33)
Assuming that the depth a ≤1
2h, meaning that the reinforcement degree Φ0 ≤0.25, the
torsional moment, tp per unit length can be expressed as
tp = τcxya(h −a) = Φ0h2fc(1 −2Φ0) = Asfyh(1 −2Φ0)
(2.34)
(a)
(b)
Figure 2-14: (a) Slab subjected to pure torsion in the x- and y- direction and (b) cross section for pure
torsion with top and bottom reinforcement.
The general criteria for the torsional moment with orthotopic reinforcement diﬀerent in top
and bottom, has been found to be expressed in terms of the ratio between the sum of area
of reinforcement per unit length in the x- and y-directions.
tmax = 1
2
r
µ + µ′
1 + κ

1−1
2(1+κ+µ+µ′)Asfy
hfc

(1+κ)Asfyh ≃1
2
p
(1 + κ)(µ + µ′)mp (2.35)
Where κ is the ratio of top reinforcement in the x-direction in relation to the bottom
reinforcement in the x-direction. µ and µ′ are the ratio of top- and bottom reinforcement,
22
==PAGE:35==
2.3 Plate Theory
respectively, in the y-direction, also in relation to the x-direction. mp is the yield moment
corresponding to the bottom reinforcement in the x-direction As.
Now, the yield criteria for bending and torsion will be combined only considering the
isotropic reinforcement case. Using a three dimensional coordinate system with the bending
moments mx and my and the torsional moment mxy as the axis’, the yield surface of the
slab can be represented as two cones as shown in Figure 2-15. For the isotropic slab the
bottom reinforcement As corresponds to the yield moment mp and the top reinforcement
A′
s corresponds to the yield moment m′
p. The maximum torsional moment is found from
equation (2.35) where µ = 1 and κ = µ′ ≃m′
p/mp, as
tmax = 1
2
s
1 + m′p
mp

1 + m′p
mp

mp = 1
2(mp + m′
p)
(2.36)
The torsional moment, tmax, is found to act together with bending moments as given in
expression (2.37). These moments represents where the maximum torsional moment arises
in Figure 2-15.
mx = my ≃1
2(mp −m′
p)
(2.37)
Based on equation (2.36), it is clear to see, that if the reinforcement is isotropic and equal
in top and bottom, the torsional capacity is equal to the moment capacity, as
tp = mp
(2.38)
Figure 2-15: Yield criteria for isotropic slab with diﬀerent top- and bottom reinforcement.
2.3.3
Yield Conditions for Slabs in Terms of Disk Analogy
Another way of considering the yield conditions for slabs is by utilizing yield conditions for
disks [21]. However, this can only be applied for slabs with low reinforcement degrees and
with top and bottom reinforcement in the x- and y-direction. With this consideration, the
top and bottom of the slab are treated as two imaginary parallel disks of equal thickness, t.
Figure 2-16(a) illustrates how the slab is considered as two disks. It shows, that the bending
moments, mx and my, are assumed to be transformed into equivalent normal stress (Figure
2-16(b)) and that the torsional moments, mxy, are transformed into equivalent shear stress
(Figure 2-16(c)).
23
==PAGE:36==
Chapter 2. Theoretical Background
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2-16: (a) Slab illustrated in terms of the disk analogy, (b) Transformation of bending moment into
disk and (c) Transformation of torsional moment into disk.
Disk in Pure Shear
Considering the disk analogy just explained, a plate in pure torsion can be treated as two
disks in pure shear in two diﬀerent directions.
In a state of pure shear a stress ﬁeld in the concrete will develop in the principal directions,
where the ﬁrst principal stress will equal zero and the second principal stress will be equal
to −σc. The second principal axis will form an angle α to the x-axis depending on the
reinforcement degree in the two orthogonal directions. The reinforcement is assumed to be
stressed to tensile yielding in both directions. This is illustrated in Figure 2-17, where a
disk is reinforced in the x- and y-direction with a uniaxial concrete compression at an angle
α. For an isotropic reinforced disk the angle would be equal to 45o.
Figure 2-17: Disk with orthogonal reinforcement subjected to pure shear.
The maximum plastic concrete strength is given by σc = νfc, where ν is the eﬀectiveness
factor for concrete, dependent on the given stress state.
24
==PAGE:37==
2.3 Plate Theory
2.3.4
Expected Torsional Behaviour
In order to predict the torsional behaviour the disk analogy combined and the shear ﬂow in
the boundary zone along the edges (see Figure 2-12) are combined as illustrated in Figure
2-18. It shows the compression ﬁeld in the second principal direction on top and shear ﬂow
in the boundary zone. The ﬁgure also illustrate the assumed torsional cracks caused by
shear and tension in the principal directions. The second principal direction in the bottom
is orthogonal to the top (if the slab is isotropic), and the cracks in the bottom will therefore
also be orthogonal to the top.
Figure 2-18: Sketch of predicted torsional behaviour.
2.3.5
Corner Loads
When subjecting corner forces to a slab, the capacity of the slab is either governed by the
torsional moment capacity or by the punching failure.
To avoid an edge failure the forces must be transferred into the plate by eﬀectively applying
edge reinforcement or to transfer the load by a suﬃciently wide control perimeter, which is
used in the punching shear analysis. According to [21] the governing load bearing capacity
will always be the torsional capacity of the slab, if the slab edges are reinforced so that they
can carry the the torsional moment, tp, expressed in terms of the Kirchhoﬀshear forces.
For a isotropic plate loaded in the corners, the plate edge will accordingly to the Kirchhoﬀ
plate theory described in section 2.3.1, be loaded as a beam subjected to shear stresses
equal to the torsional moment per unit length . The Kirchhoﬀedge beam illustrates how
the corner forces are transferred as torsional moments along the plate edge. The torsional
moment balances the corner load when
P = 2tp
(2.39)
As stated earlier, tp = mp for small reinforcement degrees for isotropic plates. However, for
higher reinforcement degrees tp < mp, and tp should be used instead of mp when determining
the load bearing capacity.
To avoid local punching failure in the loaded area, it is stated in [21], that the width of the
loaded area should be at least half the height of the slab (h/2). This is due to the fact that
Kirchhoﬀs edge beam is equally determined to have a width of half the height as mentioned
in section 2.3.1.
From experiments performed by DTU in [3] and discussed in [21], it has been concluded that
by reinforcing the edges for shear, no punching shear analysis is necessary. It was observed
25
==PAGE:38==
Chapter 2. Theoretical Background
that the torsional capacity was always reached if the slab was reinforced suﬃciently for
shear along the boundary, however, punching shear failure was the governing failure mode
for slabs without shear reinforced edges. The edges can be reinforced in several ways, but
the most practical way is to supply u-bars enclosing the longitudinal reinforcement, with
at least one anchorage length into the slab. In the experiment it was found that using
u-bars of half the cross sectional area of the longitudinal reinforcement was suﬃcient as
shear reinforcement.
26
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 3
Experimental Work
The experimental programme was designed to evaluate the behaviour of the ﬁligree slabs in
terms of deﬂection, capacity and crack propagation when subjected to torsion. Initially, this
chapter presents how the slab specimens are designed based on the scope of this project and
the obtained knowledge in chapter 2. Then the procedures for concrete mixing, reinforce-
ment work and casting of the slab specimens as well as preparation of the complementary
test specimens are outlined in section 3.2. In section 3.3 the conduction of preliminary tests
are presented and ﬁnally the test setup and procedure for the slab specimens are described
in section 3.4.
3.1
Specimens Design
In this section, the design of the slabs and the corresponding considerations regarding the
design are presented. For easier reference each slab is numbered. The notation is available
in Table 3.1.
Table 3.1: Specimen notation.
S1
Conventional reinforcement in top and bottom and plain concrete
S2
SFRC with bottom reinforcement
S3
Filigree slab with top and bottom reinforcement and an overlay of plain concrete
S4
Filigree slab with bottom reinforcement and a SFRC overlay
These conﬁgurations are chosen in order to investigate to which extend the SFRC can
replace the conventional reinforcement design. Slab S1 is the reference specimen, as plenty
of theories have dealt with plates in pure torsion with conventional reinforcement, which
makes it easier to predict the result and compare the experiments. The second specimen S2,
is selected to observe the diﬀerences in capacity, behavior and crack pattern compared to
the conventional reinforcement and to see if the known theories somehow can be applied to
SFRC. Specimens S3 and S4 are extensions of specimen S1 and S2, respectively. These have
the same main reinforcement conﬁgurations, but are constructed with two joint ﬁligree slabs
in the bottom, connected with lap-bars. The purpose of these is to see if the performance of
these can achieve the same capacities as monolithic plates and to observe other variations
in behaviour when using ﬁligree slabs.
27
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 3. Experimental Work
3.1.1
Design Considerations
As mentioned, the purpose of the investigation is to observe the behavior of the slabs under
torsional inﬂuence. For this purpose, some initial calculations have been performed in order
to reduce the risk of premature failure mechanism.
It is important to point out, that there are some basic diﬀerences between ﬁligree slabs and
in-situ slabs, even though they overall behave in a similar manner. For in-situ cast elements,
the top and bottom layer of reinforcement are cast on site within the concrete. Filigree slabs
are almost like in-situ slabs, except that there is a horizontal construction joint between the
precast ﬁligree plank and the in-situ concrete, which is linked by a truss girder. Also, there
is a break in the bottom layer of concrete and reinforcement at the joint between the two
ﬁligree planks. This leads to some issues that needs to be taken into account if forces should
be suﬃciently transferred across the joint. This include the anchorage of the reinforcement
in the precast ﬁligree plank, horizontal shear between in-situ and precast concrete as well
as anchorage of the lap-bars in the in-situ concrete. It is attempted to address these issues
in the following.
Lap-bar Quantity and Anchorage
The necessary amount of lap-bars in the joint to obtain the equivalent capacity that the
bottom reinforcement provides are calculated in Appendix H.5. It is found by using cross
sectional analysis with the reduced cross sectional area of reinforcement and a smaller
eﬀective height. The analysis is performed using reinforcement with a diameter of 8 mm, a
yield strength of 550 MPa and a concrete of grade C30/37. A total of 35 lapbars have been
found to be suﬃcient.
Figure 3-1: Reduced eﬀective height for lap-bar design calculations.
The bond length of the lapbars are found using the expressions provided in DS-EN 1992-1-1
presented in section 2.2.1. An additional assumption is that only 75 % of the circumference
are provided in the eﬀective bond. This is due to the fact that the lap bars are placed
directly on the precast ﬁligree slab, which may cause a not fully bond around the bar. The
required lap length, based on the above, are then found to be 325.9 mm, and a rounded
length of 400 mm are chosen for design of the joint. The calculation can equally be found
in Appendix H.5.
Shear at the Interface between Filigree Slab and Concrete Overlay
In the ﬁligree slab, truss girders are placed in order to transfer the horizontal shear between
the interface of the precast and the in-situ concrete, illustrations of this is presented in
Figures 3-7 and 3-8. In the initial design, the truss girder was designed similar to Figure
3-6 with inclined bars with a diameter of 8 mm, an indivitual bar distance of 150 mm,
inclined by α = 68.2◦and a yield strength of 550 MPa. The surface of the precast concrete
are assumed to be smooth (a free surface left without further treatment after vibration),
which leads to roughness factors of c = 0.35 and µ = 0.6. For this girder the capacity of the
shear interface were calculated from the expression given in section 2.2.2 using a concrete
28
==PAGE:41==
3.1 Specimens Design
grade of C30/37, the resistance was predicted to υRdi=972.9kN. To ensure failure of the
joint prior to failure of the shear interface, the shear resistance of the interface should be
greater than the yield strength of the joint reinforcement. The total yield strength of the
35 lap-bars with a 8 mm diameter and grade 550 MPa is found as 967.6 kN, indicating a
yielding failure in the lap-bars.
However, due to a tight time schedule, a standard truss girder well used in the industry was
proposed by the factory Filigran.de for a quicker delivery. The standard girder was similar
to the initially designed but with a diameter of 6 mm and a distance between the bars of
200 mm. Due to the time restrictions this truss girder was accepted well knowing that the
shear capacity using this girder was reduced to 630.4 kN, risking a premature failure in the
concrete interface. The calculation can be found in Appendix H.5.
Punching Resistance and Edge Problems
The punching shear resistance was predicted using DS-EN 1992-1-1 as described in section
2.2.3. The punching shear capacity was determined to 69.9 kN using 12 mm reinforcement
bars.
The control perimeter was loaded eccentric implying a β value of 1.5 for corner
positioned loads. The calculation is presented in Appendix H.3. According to section 2.3.5,
however, no punching analysis is required if the longitudinal reinforcement is closed by
u-bars equal to half the cross-sectional area of the longitudinal bars. Based on this, the
present design was not changed to increase the punching capacity.
According to section 2.3.1, the edge of the slab had to be shear reinforced with either closed
u-bars or truss girders as a ﬁctive boundary beam in shear. To investigate the behavior
of the boundary zone of the slab ie. the edge beam, the capacity was checked. The shear
resistance of the boundary beam was checked according to DS-EN-1992-1-1, using the truss
and u-bars as shear reinforcement, respectively. The bearing capacity of the edge beam was
determined as
VRd = min(VRd,w, VRd,L, VRdC)
(3.1)
where VRd,w and VRd,L, are the maximum load before yielding of shear and longitudinal
reinforcement, respectively, and VRd,C is the crushing of concrete. The minimum capacity
was determined by yielding of shear reinforcement ie. truss girder and u-bars at 68.2 kN.
The calculation is available in Appendix H.4. However, these calculations were performed
posterior to the testing in order to evaluate the failure reasons.
29
==PAGE:42==
Chapter 3. Experimental Work
3.1.2
Technical Drawings
Based on the scope and design considerations mentioned in the above section, the ﬁnal
designs of the specimens were decided on. These are shown in the following Figures 3-
2 to 3-8. Figure 3-2 shows the plan view of specimens S1 and S2 with the main mesh
reinforcement and the closing u-bars.
Figure 3-2: Plan of reinforcement design for slab specimen S1 and S2.
30
==PAGE:43==
3.1 Specimens Design
In Figure 3-3 cross sections of slab S1 are illustrated, showing the top- and bottom rein-
forcement and placement of u-bars. Similarly, Figure 3-4 shows the bottom reinforcement
of specimen S2 with the closing u-bars connected with a single reinforcement bar on top.
A-A
B-B
Figure 3-3: Sections of slab specimen S1.
A-A
B-B
Figure 3-4: Sections of slab specimen S2.
31
==PAGE:44==
Chapter 3. Experimental Work
The plan view of the reinforcement design of specimen S3 and S4 are shown in Figure 3-5.
It shows the location of truss girders along the edges of the ﬁligree slabs, as well as the
positioning of the lapbars along the joint. The lap-bars are not evenly distributed as the
truss girders dictate the positions.
Figure 3-5: Plan of reinforcement design for slab specimen S3 and S4.
The truss girder design are given in Figure 3-6. Their purpose is to keep the two layers cast
at diﬀerent times from delaminating. Also, they are designed so that the top reinforcement
can be tied on the truss directly.
Figure 3-6: Truss girder design and dimensions.
32
==PAGE:45==
3.1 Specimens Design
Figure 3-7 shows the cross section of specimen S3. It presents the two separate concrete
layers; the 50 mm ﬁligree slab in the bottom and the 100 mm plain concrete overlay on
top.
Further, it shows that the lapbars are located directly on the precast ﬁligree slab
and it shows how the main reinforcement net and the truss girders ﬁt. Finally, Figure 3-8
illustrates specimen S4. It shows the ﬁligree slab made with net reinforcement in the bottom
and the SFRC overlay. In the corners, closing L-bars are installed in order to connect the
truss girders for strengthening the corners.
A-A
B-B
Figure 3-7: Sections of slab specimen S3.
A-A
B-B
Figure 3-8: Sections of slab specimen S4.
33
==PAGE:46==
Chapter 3. Experimental Work
3.2
Production of Specimens
3.2.1
Concrete Mix-design
This experimental work aims to see the diﬀerence in the performance of slabs using SFRC
instead of conventional reinforcement. The experimental work therefore exists of two casting
groups; specimens with plain concrete as references and specimens with SFRC. The same
concrete compression strengths are strived for in both groups.
The mixing procedure of the concrete was carried out as follows; ﬁrst the coarse aggregates
was added to the mixer, then the ﬁne aggregates and subsequently the cement and ﬂy ash.
The dry materials were then mixed for approximately 1 minute before adding water and
potential super plasticizer and air entraining. This composition was then mixed for around
3-4 minutes prior to adding steel ﬁbers, if any, during mixing for another 3 minutes. For
this project, hooked-end ﬁbers with a diameter of 0.75 mm and a length of 50 mm were
used as they provide the best pull-out resistance as described in section 2.1.3.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3-9: (a) Measuring of cement, ﬂy ash, various aggregates and potential steel ﬁbers of 1/4 batch, (b)
Slump test and (c) Check of aggregate and steel ﬁber homogeneity.
Initially, test trials were performed in order to obtain the desired slump and workability of
the concrete. Batches of 40 liters were created and tested for the aggregate moisture, slump
and the air content.
The aggregate moisture was measured in order to test if the initial water content should be
reduced if signiﬁcant amount of water was present in the aggregates. With large amounts
of water present, the water-to-cement ratio would increase, which would lead to a drop in
concrete strength. The moisture content was tested by weighing up around 500 grams of
aggregate and microwave the sample for around 7 minutes until the water was evaporated
from the aggregates. It should be noted, that the aggregates should not be heating for longer
than necessary, as the natural moisture of the aggregates would be evaporated as well, which
is not desirable. After microwaving, the sample was weighed again and the weight reduction
then equaled the water content in the aggregates. The moisture was found to be 0.02 % for
the ﬁne aggregates and between 0.1-0.2 % for the coarse aggregates, which was reasonably
low and the reduction of water was therefore disregarded.
The workability of concrete is important to obtain a uniform composition. A simple way
to test the workability of concrete is to perform a slump test(Figure 3-9(b)). For concrete
34
==PAGE:47==
3.2 Production of Specimens
needed to be vibrated, as is the case for the concrete slabs in this project, the slump
should be in the range of 100-250 mm. The workability of the concrete trails was further
checked by ﬁlling 150x300 mm cylinders and then vibrating the sample heavily with a
immersion vibrator. After drying, the cylinders were sawed in half and the homogeneity
were veriﬁed(Figure 3-9(c)).
The ﬁnal mix designs are given in Table 3.2 and more details are shown in Appendix C.
Mixture A is the conventional concrete, which obtained a slump of 130-195 mm. Mixture
B is the SFRC which obtained a slump of 170-195 mm.
Table 3.2: Mix-design for concrete specimens.
Components
Mixture Quantities
A
B
Basis cement CEM-I 52.5 (kg/m3)
326.3
326.3
PFA (ﬂy ash) (kg/m3)
100.0
100.0
Water (kg/m3)
188.2
187.3
Super plasticizer (Dynamon Xtend) (kg/m3)
-
0.87
Mapeair 25 2:3 (kg/m3)
-
0.10
Fine aggregates, sand (0-2mm) (kg/m3)
616.1
611.2
Coarse aggregates, sea-gravel (4-8mm) (kg/m3)
176.0
174.6
Coarse aggregates, sea-gravel (8-16mm) (kg/m3)
968.1
960.4
Steel ﬁbers HE 75/50 (kg/m3)
-
40.0
Fiber content in volume
-
0.50%
Water-to-cement ratio
0.50
0.50
3.2.2
Reinforcement Preparation
The reinforcement for the top and bottom was delivered in large welded steel meshes, these
were cut in the desired sizes using an angle grinder. In the same manner, the truss girders
were cut in the necessary pieces. As stated in section 3.1.2 specimen S1 and S2 were provided
with closing u-bars. These were made from 8 mm bars cut in desired pieces determined by
the anchorage length, heated up and bend in the correct shape. Same procedure took place
when constructing the L-bars for specimen S4.
Subsequently, the u-bars, L-bars and trusses were tied in place as given in the technical
drawings.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3-10: (a) Example of tied reinforcement, (b) reinforcement design for the ﬁligree slabs and (c) ﬁligree
slabs placed in molds.
35
==PAGE:48==
Chapter 3. Experimental Work
3.2.3
Slab Specimens
The four main slab specimens were prepared using tree molds with the dimensions 1.5×1.5×
0.25 meter, however, the molds were only ﬁlled to a desired height of 0.15 meter.
The molds were lubricated with mold oil before placing the reinforcement in the molds.
The reinforcement was placed on 15 mm spacing clamps to ensure the cover. Additional
spacing clamps were positioned on the vertical sides of the reinforcement in order to ensure
that the reinforcement stayed in place during casting and vibration.
The ﬁligree slabs were made by placing a 12 mm wide and 50 mm high wooden strip in the
middle of the mold, so that two individual ﬁligree slabs could be cast in the same mold. The
mold was then cast with conventional concrete to a height of 50 mm and was then covered
and set to cure for four days. Hereafter, the wooden strip was removed and lap-bars were
placed over the joint. For specimen S3 the top reinforcement mesh was placed on top of
the truss girder. At last the concrete overlay was ﬁlled in the mold to a total height of 150
mm. They were then covered in plastic and set to cure.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3-11: (a) Vibration of concrete, (b) Lapbars tied across the joint and (c) Smoothed slab surface with
hooked reinforcement for later transport.
Additional to the main specimens, 12 100×200mm cylinders for compression tests were
made from each concrete batch.
The cylindrical molds were cleaned, washed and oiled
before casting. The molds were ﬁlled 1/3 of the total height and vibrated and then repeated
until they were full. The molds were then locked with a clamp and stored for 3 days before
the concrete specimen was taking out and covered in plastic. The cylinders were stored in
plastic until the test of the main specimen.
Further pictures and details of the specimen production is presented in Appendix A.
3.2.4
Production of SFRC Beams for Three Point Bending Test
The test specimens for the three point bending test were made in accordance to the speci-
ﬁcations set out in DS-EN 14651 [36] and the design guideline for SFRC [35]. The minimal
number of six test specimens were cast and tested in this project. The specimens were cast
in standard iron molds with a nominal size of 150 mm and a length 600 mm. The aggregate
size were no larger than 16 mm and the length of the ﬁbers are larger than 1.5 times the
36
==PAGE:49==
3.3 Procedure for Preliminary Tests
maximum nominal upper aggregate size as the guideline requires. The SFRC was mixed
following the procedure described in section 3.2.1, with the same mix-design as given in
Table 3.2. Filling of concrete was performed as stated in Figure 3-12, where proportion 1
was twice the size of proportion 2. After ﬁlling the mold to 90 % of the total height the
specimen was compacted by external vibration and the last 10 % of concrete was ﬁlled and
levelled oﬀduring compaction. Finally, the specimens were covered with a plastic sheet and
set to cure for 28 days.
Figure 3-12: Filling procedure of mold for slump concrete.
3.3
Procedure for Preliminary Tests
The preliminary tests were conducted in order to predict the performance of the main slab
specimens. These tests include compression tests of both the plain concrete and the SFRC,
three point bending tests for the SFRC and tensile tests for the reinforcement. This section
describes the test setup and procedure for these experiments and the results are given in
section 4.1.
3.3.1
Compression Test
60 cylindrical test specimens related to the slabs were tested. The testing was done in
accordance to the Danish Standard DS-EN 13290-3 [40]. The loading was applied with a
constant rate of 0.6 ± 0, 2MPa/s and the maximum loads are presented in section 4.1.1.
Figure 3-13: Test setup of cylindrical compression test.
37
==PAGE:50==
Chapter 3. Experimental Work
3.3.2
Three Point Bending Test
For the three point bending tests six SFRC beams were produced as described in section
3.2.4. The beams were tested in accordance to DS-EN 14651 [36] and the design guideline
for SFRC [35].
Before testing, all specimens were notched by wet sawing. The notch was sawn in a depth
of 25 mm ±1 mm through the width-surface of the specimen at mid-span. The width of the
notch was 5 mm. In order to measure the CMOD, a displacement transducer was mounted
along the longitudinal axis of the specimen at the mid-width. The test specimen was then
placed in the testing machine and centered so that the longitudinal axis of the specimen was
located at right angles to the longitudinal axis of the rollers. The setup deviates from DS-
EN 14651 when it comes to the size of rollers. The standard speciﬁes that the all the rollers
should have a diameter of 30 mm, but the test machine in the lab has bottom support rollers
of 50 mm and a top roller of 25 mm. However, these deviations are considered negligible.
The test setup is illustrated in Figure 3-14.
The test was performed by controlling the rate of increase of the CMOD. Initially, the
machine was set to increase the CMOD at a constant rate of 0.05 mm/min. When the
CMOD had reached 0.1 mm, the machine was then set to increase the CMOD at a constant
rate of 0.2 mm/min. After reaching a CMOD value of 4 mm, the test was terminated. The
results are given in section 4.1.2.
Figure 3-14: Illustration of the test setup for the three point bending test.
3.3.3
Tension Test of Reinforcement
The testing of the tensile strength of the reinforcement are conducted in accordance with
the Danish Standards DS-EN ISO 15630-1 [41] and DS-EN ISO 6892-1 [42]. The standards
state the requirements for specimens dimension, test setup and loading conﬁguration.
The tensile tests were carried out for the net reinforcement with a 12 mm diameter as well
as for the 8 mm reinforcement bars used for u-bars and lap-bars. Initially, the reinforcement
bars were cut into pieces of 300 mm, which is within the recommended length. Then, the
ribs in the reinforcement were cut oﬀat lengths of 80 mm at each end of the bars. The
reason for the cut oﬀis that the ribs would damage the clamps in the testing machine. To
ensure failure in the middle of the bar, the cross sectional area was reduced as well. The
reduction in diameter and the cut of lengths for the 8 mm and 12 mm bars, respectively,
are illustrated in Figure 3-15.
38
==PAGE:51==
3.4 Procedure for Main Slab Tests
Figure 3-15: Sketch of the length and diameter of the cut-oﬀof the 8 mm and 12 mm reinforcement bars,
respectively.
The bars were then mounted in the testing machine, secured by in screwed grips and
equipped with a strain gauge at the middle piece of the bar, in order to measure the
elongation in the weak zone without being eﬀected by potential slide of the grips. The
setup is shown in Figure 3-16.
Figure 3-16: Setup of the tensile test of reinforcement.
3.4
Procedure for Main Slab Tests
3.4.1
Test Setup
The goal was to load the slab in pure torsion, in order to see how cracks would develop and
to observe how the diﬀerent slabs would behave during loading. A pure torsional moment
was applied by loading the slab by two downward forces positioned in the opposite corners,
while supporting it in the other two corners as illustrated on Figure 3-17.
The test setup was built in the testing facilities at DTU Lyngby. The lab consist of a grid
of mounting holes positioned every one meter, where steel cylinders can be mounted into.
As the 1.5x1.5 meter slabs did not ﬁt into this grid, a conﬁguration of diagonal beams were
designed. On top, a cross beam was installed on which the actuators could be mounted.
Below the slab, at the supports, steel cylinders were ﬁxed by two UNP400 proﬁles in the
diagonal as shown in Figure 3-17.
39
==PAGE:52==
Chapter 3. Experimental Work
Figure 3-17: Illustration of test setup.
The supports were pinned, allowing rotation of the slab, which was obtained by positioning
a bowl with a circular recess, for which a smooth steel ball with a mounted steel plate could
ﬁt into, see Figure 3-18(a). This conﬁguration allowed the plate to freely rotate on top of the
steel ball. To ensure horizontal movement of the slab when loaded, a roller was positioned
to one of the supports, allowing horizontal movement along the diagonal direction. This is
illustrated in Figure 3-18(b). Figure 3-18(c) shows the other support, which was constrained
for horizontal movement by fastening the pinned support to the UNP beam with M20 bolts.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3-18: (a) Closeup of the rotational component of the pinned supports (b) Pinned-rolling support and
(c) Pinned support.
Two cameras were used to take pictures of the slabs, one on top and one below the slab, to
capture the crack development as a function of time and load. The position of the cameras
were the main reason that the slab had to be supported in an elevated state, since an
appropriate distance to the camera was needed to capture images of the entire slab. The
top camera was mounted in between the two diagonal UNP-beams with a angle bracket,
the other camera was positioned on a wood block beneath the slab. Due to cracking of
the concrete, a plexiglas plate was positioned just above the camera to avoid damaging the
camera lens from falling concrete parts.
40
==PAGE:53==
3.4 Procedure for Main Slab Tests
To measure local and global displacement, LVDT sensors were positioned according to
Figure 3-19. The LVDT devices were positioned in order to obtain a good understanding
of the torsional movement of the slab along two meeting boarders and along the diagonals.
LVDT devices were also positioned at the support to correct for support settlements.
Figure 3-19: Placement of LVDT sensors.
The loading was conducted by two 225 kN hydraulic actuators mounted to the UNP 400
proﬁle, positioned in the diagonal of the slab. They were controlled by a spring manometer.
The force was controlled by the oilﬂow directed into the system, which was regulated by
opening and closing a handle. Beneath the piston of the actuator, a bowl with a diameter of
200 mm was mounted to the concrete to ensure a suﬃcient loading area and to maintain a
vertical thrust from the actuators even in a deformed state of the plate. Further illustration
of the test setup is given in Appendix B.
3.4.2
Digital Image Correlation
A traditional way of measuring strains in materials during loading is generally done by
positioning measuring devices, like strain gauges for example, on the specimen. However,
new techniques has in recent year been developed, providing methods to measure the full
strain ﬁeld of a surface.
This method is called Digital Image Correlation (DIC). DIC
can be used in three- and two-dimensional analyses to determine the full strain ﬁeld of
an object. The DIC system uses a sequence of images taken from diﬀerent states of the
loading, to determine surface deformation and surface strain of an object. This is done
by identifying printed patterns on the surface, and tracking the relative movement of each
pattern through the sequence of images. In this project ARAMIS DIC is used. The program
requires a random speckle pattern applied on the surface, which can be identiﬁed on each
of the images through a sequence of image. To identify the changes on each image, all the
images is divided into overlapping grids of facets. Every adjacent facets must be diﬀerent
from each other to identify the change. The facet are tracked in a sequence of images,
41
==PAGE:54==
Chapter 3. Experimental Work
creating datapoints, which is mapped to determine the displacement ﬁeld.
The accuracy of the ARAMIS DIC system has been validated by various experiments, one
was performed by Tong [43], testing if the strains measured using ARAMIS DIC and using
strain gauges around a hole in a steel plate were equal. To obtain accurate result the time
interval between the sequence of images should not be too large, as large deformations can
occur during a short period of time. For the present test setup, images were taken with an
interval of 10 seconds.
Some challenges are met using ARAMIS 2D for analysing structures width large out-oﬀ-
plane deformations. In ARAMIS 2D, the program cannot diﬀerentiate between deforma-
tions out-oﬀ-plane and in-plane, implying that for large deformations away or towards the
direction of the camera position, ARAMIS will misinterpret the movement of the dots since
the distance to the slab is either increasing or decreasing, respectively. This means that
areas with large deformation might yield a wrong result in ARAMIS.
Preparing Specimens for DIC
Due to the special case of pure torsion, where both sides of the specimens act diﬀerently
regarding the crack patterns, both sides of the specimen were prepared for Aramis DIC.
The surface of the specimens was ﬁrst painted white using spray cans, and after drying the
speckle pattern was painted with black spray cans as shown in Figure 3-20. Hereafter, the
specimens were turned using the crane and the other sides were painted in the same way.
Figure 3-20: Example of speckle pattern of the specimens.
3.4.3
Testing Procedure
Before starting the test, the time setting of the two cameras and the computer were synchro-
nized in order to compare the data from LVDT sensors, actuators and pictures in relation
to the time. Right before testing, the cameras were turned on with the chosen shooting
interval of one photo per 10 seconds. At the exact same time, the data-logger and a stop
watch(placed on top of the specimen) were started. Finally, loading of the specimens could
initiate. A loading rate of about 3 kN/min were aimed for. This were met at specimen S1
and S2, but for the last two specimens, S3 and S4, the rate were, not intentionally, slowed
down to around 1.6 kN/min. The loading curves for each specimen are shown in Figure
42
==PAGE:55==
3.4 Procedure for Main Slab Tests
3-21. It shows, that for the ﬁrst specimen, the loading curve is quickly disrupted due to the
fact that this were the ﬁrst run and there were little conﬁdence in using the machinery.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
time [s]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Load [kN]
S1
S2
S3
S4
Figure 3-21: Loading curve of specimens.
The loads can be converted to a resultant torsional moment at a parallel sections to the
test specimen can be calculated from equation 3.2, where l is the length of the lever arm.
T =

P + W
4

l
(3.2)
43
==PAGE:56==
Chapter 4
Results
In this section, the results from the tests are presented and commented on. Starting out
with the results from the preliminary tests, used to obtain the correct strengths of the
various concrete batches and reinforcement. The rest of the section focuses on the results
from the main slab specimens. Firstly, an overall description and discussion of the failures
based on capacities and failure modes are given. Then the deﬂection patterns at various
loads are observed and the load-displacement curves are evaluated regarding the stiﬀness
and energy absorption. At last, the crack development are analysed using the Digital Image
Correlation.
4.1
Results from Preliminary Experiments
4.1.1
Compressive Strength of Plain Concrete and SFRC
From the compressive tests, the failure load of the concrete is found for the various speci-
mens. These loads are converted to compressive strengths presented in Table 4.1 from the
expression below.
fc = F
Ac
(4.1)
where fc is the compressive strength, F is the maximum load at failure and Ac is the
cross-sectional area of the test specimen.
The results show, that the concrete strengths are higher than the aimed strength of 30 MPa,
which is a normal tendency in concrete mixing. Also, the tests show a general tendency that
the plain concrete batches, S1 and S3, have a higher compressive strength than the SFRC
batches, S2 and S4. However, the plain concrete used for the ﬁligree slabs, SF, showed a
lower strength. There are no obvious reason for this deviance. The fact that the SFRC has
a lower strength compared to plain concrete deviates from the behavior described in the
literature presented in 2.1.3, which states that the compressive strength is slightly increased
when ﬁbers are added. The reason for the deviance might be due to small diversities in the
concrete mixtures.
Another observation during the tests were the failure behavior. The plain concrete cylinders
had a less ductile failure compared to SFRC cylinders, due to the fact that the steel ﬁbers
improve the post-cracking behavior as described in the theory.
44
==PAGE:57==
4.1 Results from Preliminary Experiments
The average compressive strengths within each batch are quite consisting. Assuming that
the concrete strength follows the normal distribution, the characteristic 5 % quartiles are
presented along with the average compressive strengths in the table below.
Table 4.1: Compressive strength of concrete batches [MPa].
Specimen
S1
S2
SF
S3
S4
1
54.6
51.3
47.6
49.3
46.7
2
57.7
52.1
40.7
57.9
48.6
3
59.7
48.6
47.2
55.0
47.7
4
45.8
50.8
44.7
53.2
47.2
5
57.2
51.6
50.7
48.1
48.3
6
52.5
52.6
47.9
49.5
44.3
7
52.5
41.9
42.8
56.7
43.9
8
56.4
45.7
44.8
53.0
50.8
9
59.0
46.1
45.6
51.2
49.1
10
52.8
42.9
47.0
57.3
46.0
11
48.9
44.8
46.7
53.6
46.6
12
54.4
46.0
48.6
57.0
49.0
fc,average
54.3
47.9
46.2
53.5
47.4
fc,5%
47.5
41.7
41.8
47.9
44.1
4.1.2
Tensile Strength of SFRC
The test reports and result of the three point bending tests can be found in Appendix D.
These have provided the load-CMOD curves shown in Figure 4-1. As appears from the
ﬁgure, the curves for beam specimens B1, B4 and B5 are interrupted prior to the 4 mm
crack mouth opening. This is because the clip gauge jumped oﬀthe specimen. Specimen
B4 reached a CMOD of 3.5 mm which is suﬃcient for the analysis of the tensile strength.
However, for specimen B1 and B5, the curves are continued by extrapolation of the data
points, in order to get suﬃcient data for the calculations, these assumed values are shown
in cursive in Table 4.2.
0
1
2
3
4
CMOD [mm]
0
5
10
15
20
Load [kN]
B1
B2
B3
B4
B5
B6
Figure 4-1: Load-CMOD curves for test specimens B1-B6.
The ﬁgure shows that the curves follow somehow the same behavior during loading, but
the loads obtained during testing are fairly inconsistent. This is probably caused by the
45
==PAGE:58==
Chapter 4. Results
random distribution of the steel ﬁbers around the crack; if a large concentration with the
right orientation is placed just at the crack, the capacity will obviously be higher. Each
curve shows a ’plastic’ behavior, as the CMOD keeps increasing at an almost constant
load after cracking. This is caused by the bridging of the ﬁbers, obtained by the pull-out
mechanism as explained in section 2.1.3.
The loads corresponding to the CMOD are converted to residual ﬂexural tensile strengths
using equation 2.11. These are shown in Table 4.2 along with the average value used for
further process of the result.
Table 4.2: Residual ﬂexural tensile strength for beam specimens B1-B6.
Beam number
Residual ﬂexural tensile strength, fR,j, at CMODj [MPa]
CMOD1
CMOD2
CMOD3
CMOD4
B1
4.52
4.68
4.63
4.37
B2
5.52
5.57
5.41
5.12
B3
3.63
3.80
3.73
3.48
B4
3.93
3.69
3.48
3.14
B5
4.63
4.74
4.60
4.38
B6
4.66
4.71
4.60
4.13
Average, f f
cflm
4.48
4.53
4.41
4.10
From the mean values in the table, the residual ﬂexural tensile strengths are converted
into residual axial tensile strengths by following equations 2.2 to 2.8. The calculations are
performed in Appendix D.3 and the resulting values are listed in Table 4.3.
Table 4.3: Calculation values of the axial residual tensile strength for the SFRC for the various performance
classes.
f f
ctR,L1
f f
ctR,L2
f f
ctR,u
f f
ctR,s
1.3 MPa
0.7 MPa
1.2 MPa
1.1 MPa
4.1.3
Tensile Strength of Reinforcement Bars
The tensile strength of the reinforcement bars used in the slab specimens have been tested
from the procedure described in section 3.3.3.
The test results are summed up in test
reports in Appendix E. The stress-strain curves for the various test are illustrated in Figure
4-2.
From the graphs, the yield strength can be found as the stress at the end of the elastic state.
This point on the graph can clearly be found for the 8 mm rebars shown in Figure 4-2(a),
as there is a clear kink on the curve after the linear part. Therefore, the yield strength can
be found from this point. However, for the 12 mm rebars, the point of yielding cannot be
red directly from the curve. The yield strength can then be determined as the 0.2 % proof
stress. This is done from the graph by drawing a parallel line to the linear portion of the
curve, intersecting the x-axis at 0.2 %. The intersection between the drawn line and the
stress-strain curve is thus the yield strength. This equivalent to the stress from which 0.2
% plastic elongation occurs.
46
==PAGE:59==
4.1 Results from Preliminary Experiments
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Strain [%]
0
200
400
600
800
Stress [MPa]
RB1
RB2
RB3
RB5
RB6
(a)
0
2
4
6
8
Strain [%]
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Stress [MPa]
0.2%
RB7
RB8
RB9
RB10
(b)
Figure 4-2: Stress-strain curves from the tensile test of reinforcement bars with diameter (a) 8 mm and (b)
12 mm.
In Table 4.4 the maximum applied load, the yield strength and the ultimate tensile strength
obtained in the tests are listed and the average values are found.
RB1-6 refer to the
reinforcement bars used for the lap-bars in the joint and u-bars in the edges. RB7-10 are
samples from the mesh reinforcement. The test result for RB4 is disregarded, which is
because the bar got disconnected from the clamps during testing.
Table 4.4: Tensile strength of reinforcement bars.
Reinforcement bar, diameter=8mm
Specimen identiﬁcation
RB1
RB2
RB3
RB4
RB5
RB6
Avarage Value
Maximum applied load [kN]
19.37
20.45
20.93
-
20.65
20.45
20.37
Yield strength [MPa]
590
625
645
-
630
640
626
Ultimate tensile strength [MPa]
685.2
723.1
740.2
-
730.4
723.3
720.5
Reinforcement bar, diameter=12mm
Specimen identiﬁcation
RB7
RB8
RB9
RB10
Avarage Value
Maximum applied load [kN]
45.57
44.80
44.67
45.63
45.17
Yield strength [MPa]
519
510
507
501
509.3
Ultimate tensile strength [MPa]
580.2
570.4
568.8
581.0
575.1
The kinks on the stress-strain curves occur due to the change in velocities during testing.
As the test result shows, the reinforcement bars with an 8 mm diameter have an ultimate
tensile strength of 720.5 MPa compared to 575.1 MPa for the 12 mm reinforcement bars.
A reason for the variation in strength for the two can be due to the fact that the 12 mm
net reinforcement and the 8 mm lap-bars where produced from two diﬀerent manufacturers.
Also, the two reinforcement bars where tested in two diﬀerent machines due to the clamp
size, which could lead to diﬀerent results.
47
==PAGE:60==
Chapter 4. Results
4.2
Introduction to the Slab Failures
The testing of the slabs resulted in several diﬀerent failure mechanisms. The slabs did not
fail in torsion since premature failure mechanisms occured before the torsional capacity was
reached. The failure modes and loads are presented in Table 4.5 and each slab failure are
further explained in the following section.
Table 4.5: Failure load and failure mechanism of slabs.
Specimen
Load failure
Failure mode
[-]
[kN]
[-]
S1
83.4
Punching
S2
39.7
Bending
S3
72.2
Delamination
S4
47.3
Bending
The capacity of the slab was predicted in prior calculations and adjusted after the obtained
test values were found in the preliminary tests, these can be found in Appendix H.1 and
H.2.
Failure of Specimen S1
Figure 4-3 shows the crack pattern for the reference specimen, S1, and it clearly illustrates
the torsional behaviour of the slab in terms of torsional cracks in the diagonal directions as
describes in section 2.3.4. At the top, the cracks are spread nicely parallel with the diagonal
between the supports, and at the bottom, the cracks are spread parallel with the diagonal
between the actuators, both in an angle close to 45o to the reinforcement direction.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4-3: Crack pattern of specimen S1 at (a) top and sides and (b) bottom.
48
==PAGE:61==
4.2 Introduction to the Slab Failures
The torsional capacity was predicted to a 102.7 kN loading, but the slab failed at an 83.4
kN loading in a local punching failure mechanism, which is 18.9 % less than expected. The
local failure mechanism was obviously undesired and not expected to occur since appropri-
ate dimension of support/loading area was provided according to section 2.3.5, and the slab
was edge reinforced with closed u-bars equal to approximately half the area of the longitu-
dinal reinforcement, which according to [21] would serve suﬃciently to achieve the torsional
capacity of the slab. The analysis was therefore disregarded in the initial estimation.
The local punching failure mode was estimated to 69.9 kN using characteristics values,
implying that the slab exceeded the predicted punching load bearing capacity by 19.2 %.
This underestimation of the punching shear capacity might be due to the reducion factor β
correcting for eccentric loading of corner loads/columns, which conservatively is set to 1.5
by Eurocode.
At the point of failure the slab reinforcement had not yet started yielded, and the torsional
capacity would presumably be reached if the local failure mode was avoided. Despite the
specimen did not achieve the torsional moment capacity, it can still be used as reference
specimen, considering the behavior of the other slabs.
Failure of Specimen S2
The crack pattern of the second specimen, S2, is presented in Figure 4-4. It shows far less
cracks than specimen S1. At the top, two major cracks occurred along a line a bit angled
from the diagonal between the supports along with few smaller cracks parallel to the main
crack. The cracks were not spread throughout the slab, but concentrated along the diagonal
between the supports. Looking at the bottom, only a line of crushing of concrete developed
right at the diagonal between the supports. This pattern indicates that the failure happened
as a bending failure rather than a torsional failure. The immediate reason for this failure is
the large diﬀerence in tensile strength at the top and bottom; obviously, the bottom mesh
reinforcement provides a larger tensile strength than the SFRC overlay.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4-4: Crack pattern of specimen S2 at (a) top and sides and (b) bottom.
49
==PAGE:62==
Chapter 4. Results
Specimen S2 failed at a load of 39.7 kN. The predicted torsional capacity was found to 32.8
kNm/m corresponding to a maximum load of 65.6 kN, which is an overestimation of 65.0
%. However, as explained in the theory section 2.3.2, the diﬀerence in reinforcement in top
and bottom causes the torsional moments to acts along with bending moments. This might
be the explanation for the bending failure at a lower capacity. By applying these moments
to the yield conditions as in Figure 2-15, a torsional capacity is found to be 12.4 kNm/m,
which corresponds to a maximum load of 24.9 kN, which then is an underestimation of 62.6
%. If the estimation was performed considering bending, the same capacity of 12.4 kNm/m
was obtained.
Failure of Specimen S3
Specimen S3 demonstrated a very similar response as specimen S1, regarding crack pattern
and loading.
As illustrated in Figure 4-5, torsional cracks were developed in a closely
distributed mesh at both top and bottom.
Further, it seems that the concentration of
cracks in the bottom were larger at the right just above the joint and at the left just below
the joint (Figure 4-5(b)). This is also where the slab ﬁnally failed.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4-5: Crack pattern of specimen S3 at (a) top and sides and (b) bottom.
The slab failed at a maximum load of 72.2 kN, due to a horizontal shear failure at the
construction joint, inducing horizontal cracks in the interface between the concrete overlay
and ﬁligree planks. The delamination mechanism is illustrated in Figure 4-6 and the reason
for this failure is the excessive horizontal shear stresses in the lap-bar, which needed to be
transferred through the interface of the two concrete casts.
Figure 4-6: Delamination mechanism between precast ﬁligree plank and in-situ overlay.
50
==PAGE:63==
4.2 Introduction to the Slab Failures
In Figure 4-7 a closeup of the slab failure is presented and horizontal cracks between the
two casts are clearly visible. After the precast ﬁligree plank lost contact with the above
concrete overlay, forces from the bottom reinforcement could not be transferred through
the joint. As a result the inclined concrete stresses, illustrated in Figure 2-17, could not
be transferred back into the reinforcement eﬀectively as tension, which induced spalling of
the concrete(see Figure 4-5(b)). The reason for this is that no u-bars were provided at the
edges due to the position of truss girders. The horizontal cracks also hampered the transfer
of forces between precast concrete in the plank and the reinforcement.
To conclude, the major failure mode must have been caused by the transverse shear in the
interface between the precast and in-situ concrete.
Figure 4-7: Closeup of failure for specimen S3.
Speaking in terms of load, the theoretical torsional moment capacity should have been
equal to specimen S1, but it failed at a loading 70.2 % less than predicted. The risk of the
premature transverse shear failure mechanism was well known since the shear capacity at
the interface was predicted to a resistance of 630.4 kN, which correspond to a corner load
of 66.5 kN. The tension force at which the interface shear failure occurred was determined
from the applied resultant torsional moment calculated using equation (3.2). Splitting the
torsional moment into a force pair acting in the bottom joint and in the top reinforcement
a tension force, T, (see Figure 4-6) equal to 641 kN was acting in the joint. This means
that the shear failure was exceeded with 1.7 %.
Failure of Specimen S4
Finally, Figure 4-8 shows the crack pattern for specimen S4, which is similar to the previous
slabs. Considering the pattern on top, fewer cracks were developed compared to specimen
S1 and S3. The fewer amount of cracks could be explained by the fact that there were no
top reinforcement to distribute the cracks throughout the slab. Compared to specimen S2,
on the other hand, more cracks with a wider distribution occurred. The reason for this
is assumed to be caused by the presence of the truss girders along the middle of the slab,
which could transfer some of the tensile forces at the top. In Figure 4-8(a) it shows that
the ﬁnal failure occurred in the large crack at the southeast side of the slab.
At the bottom, the crack pattern was nicely distributed orthogonal to the diagonal between
the supports, but it did not seem to have a larger concentration of crack at the joint as
specimen S3 did. This is most likely caused by the fact that the SFRC at the top failed
before more torsional cracks were allowed to occur. Additional, it can be observed that a
crack orthogonal to the torsional cracks on the bottom was developed at the failure location,
51
==PAGE:64==
Chapter 4. Results
which is due to crushing of the bottom concrete.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4-8: Crack pattern of specimen S4 at (a) top and sides and (b) bottom.
The failure of this specimen happened at a load of 47.3 kN, which compared to specimen S2
was 18.8 % higher. Due to the joint, the capacity of specimen S4 was intuitively assumed to
be lower than S2. However, as the truss girders provided some extend of top reinforcement,
this allowed the slab to distribute the load on top. Looking at the closeup of the cracks at
the sides in Figure 4-9, it can be observed that the ﬁligree plate and the overlay separated.
From Figure 4-9(a), which shows the crack next to the joint, a delamination crack can
clearly be observed. Figure 4-9(b) illustrates that the side with no lap-bar joint has only
limited signs of delamination as the crack goes all the way through the height of the slab.
It should be noted, that the delamination occurred after the bending failure, as a result
of the transverse shear which increased as the deﬂection increased. This means, that the
SFRC overlay has been the weak link in the structure and not the joint.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4-9: Closeup of failure for specimen S4.
52
==PAGE:65==
4.3 Deflectional Behavior
Summary of Failure Mechanism
In Table 4.6 the identiﬁed failure modes and loads are presented. Additional the predicted
torsional capacity are presented together with the capacity of the identiﬁed failure mecha-
nism. It is observed that the slab in general failed in a load of 60.7-81 % of the predicted
torsional capacity. The large error is due to premature failure mechanisms. Assuming a
bending failure of S2 and S4, the capacity was predicted much lower, indicating a bearing
capacity of 159.7 % and 190.0 % respectively.
Table 4.6: Failure loads compared with estimated capacities.
Specimen
Failure load
Failure mode
Estimated capacity
Percentage of
[−]
[kN]
[-]
Mode
[kN]
estimated capacity
S1
83.4
Punching
Torsional
102.9
81.0
Punching
69.9
119.2
S2
39.7
Bending
Torsional
65.6
60.7
Bending
24.9
159.7
S3
72.2
Delamination
Torsional
102.9
70.2
Delamination
66.5
108.6
S4
47.3
Bending
Torsional
65.6
65.5
Bending
24.9
190.0
4.3
Deﬂectional Behavior
The deﬂection is evaluated in this section. Data is obtained from the LVDT sensors at
diﬀerent time and load. In Figure 4-10 the deﬂection patterns at various loads are illustrated
and presented for three diﬀerent load stages.
Considering slab S1 in Figure 4-10(a), the deﬂections in both loaded corners are approxi-
mately equal during the loading until failure. Specimen S2 in Figure 4-10(b), on the other
hand, has a larger deﬂection at one of the loaded corners, which could be caused by potential
eccentricities in the test setup or irregularities in the slab. Further, the plot shows, that from
the ﬁrst deﬂection surface of 30 kN up until 38 kN, no large increase in deﬂection occurs,
however, from 38 kN up to failure at 39.7 kN, the deﬂection developed rapidly. Specimen S3
showed a similar behavior to specimen S1, though with a slightly uneven deﬂection at the
loading points, as illustrated in Figure 4-10(c). The development of deﬂection of specimen
S4 are shown in Figure 4-10(d). In this plot, a fourth deﬂection surface is plotted. This is
due to the fact that one side started to fail as the deﬂection steadily increases (left side of
ﬁgure). However, very close to the maximum load of 47.3 kN, the ﬁnal failure occurred at
the opposite corner (right side of the ﬁgure). This failure will be elaborated in section 4.4,
as it is illustrated more clearly by observing the crack formations.
In Table 4.7 the deﬂection are presented at the load equal to the ﬁrst visible crack and at
the maximum load. As mentioned the bending behaviour of specimen S1 and S2 is easily
observed by the unequal deﬂection of the corner, especially for the ﬁrst stage.
53
==PAGE:66==
Chapter 4. Results
Table 4.7: The deﬂection at the loaded corners (northwest to the left and southeast to the right) at loading
equal to the ﬁrst visible crack and at the point of failure.
First Visible Crack Load
Peak Load
Specimen
Load
Time
Corner deﬂection (nw/se)
Load
time.
Corner deﬂection (nw/se)
[-]
[kN]
[min]
[mm]
[kN]
[min]
[mm]
S1
40.2
11.2
-6.53
-5.22
83.4
26.2
-41.74
-39.88
S2
38.3
14.6
-8.89
0.74
39.7
16.4
-29.85
-5.73
S3
43.8
18.2
-11.47
-4.80
72.2
45.2
-53.79
-33.69
S4
38.0
19.6
-9.13
-0.52
47.3
32.3
-60.50
-20.67
-40
500
-20
[mm]
500
[mm]
0
0
[mm]
0
-500
-500
P = 30kN
P = 50kN
P = 83.4kN
(a) Specimen S1
-40
500
-20
[mm]
500
[mm]
0
0
[mm]
0
-500
-500
P = 30kN
P = 38kN
P = 39.7kN
(b) Specimen S2
-60
-40
500
[mm]
-20
500
[mm]
0
0
[mm]
0
-500
-500
P = 30kN
P = 50kN
P = 72.2kN
(c) Specimen S3
-60
-40
500
[mm]
-20
500
[mm]
0
0
[mm]
0
-500
-500
P = 30kN
P = 40kN
P = 47.3kN
P = 35.4kN
(d) Specimen S4
Figure 4-10: 3D plots of the deﬂection curves at diﬀerent loads for each slab specimen.
In order to compare the slab deﬂections with each other, Figure 4-11 shows each slab in
one 3D plot. Figure 4-11(a) shows the deﬂections at the appearance of the ﬁrst visible
crack and Figure 4-11(b) the deﬂections at maximum load. These plots also show a general
tendency that the deﬂections are larger at the left loading corner compared to the right.
This might be caused by eccentricities in the test setup or some inequalities in the way the
two actuators applied the loading. Figure 4-11(a) shows that specimen S1 and S3 obtain
the ﬁrst crack at a larger deﬂection than specimen S2 and S4.
54
==PAGE:67==
4.3 Deflectional Behavior
-10
500
-5
[mm]
500
[mm]
0
0
[mm]
0
-500
-500
S1
S2
S3
S4
(a)
-40
500
-20
[mm]
500
[mm]
0
0
[mm]
0
-500
-500
S1
S2
S3
S4
(b)
Figure 4-11: 3D plots of the deﬂection curves for all slab specimens at (a) load of initial crack and (b)
maximum load.
From the 3D deﬂection plots, it is diﬃcult to detect the exact shape of the main deﬂection
lines in the diagonals. Therefore, 2D plots of the deﬂections along the diagonals between the
supports are shown in Figure 4-12(a) and between the actuators in Figure 4-12(b). The plots
are based on the deﬂection at maximum loads. Figure 4-12(a) clearly shows, that specimen
S1 and S3 with the top reinforcement obtained a signiﬁcantly larger deﬂection between the
actuators compared to specimen S2 and S4 with the SFRC overlay. This indicates that slab
S1 and S3 were able to twist more than S2 and S4. Further, Figure 4-12(b) shows that slab
S1 and S3 had a more balanced deﬂection at the two corners, opposite specimen S2 and
S4, which deﬂected more in on side. This indicates, that the slabs with top reinforcement
were able to distribute the forced better. It should be noted that specimen S4 failed in the
southeast loaded corner and not in the northwest corner, which deﬂected the most.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Location along diagonal between supports [mm]
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
Deflection [mm]
Northeast
Southwest
S1
S2
S3
S4
(a)
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Location along diagonal between actuators [mm]
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
Deflection [mm]
Northwest
Southeast
S1
S2
S3
S4
(b)
Figure 4-12: Deﬂection curves at maximum load along diagonals of each slab along the (a) diagonal between
supports and (b) diagonal between actuators.
55
==PAGE:68==
Chapter 4. Results
The torsional eﬀects on the slabs are easily observed from the contour plots in Figure 4-13,
since a pure torsional moment will deﬂect the slab in the corners, while the middle of the
slab will form a cross which theoretical will have zero deformation. This cross is easily
identiﬁed for specimen S1 and S3, which also demonstrated the best twisting capability.
Opposite, specimen S2 and S4 have limited deﬂection in the middle, but large deﬂections
at the loaded corners.
-500
0
500
-600
-400
-200
0
200
400
600
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
deflection [mm]
(a) Specimen S1
-500
0
500
-600
-400
-200
0
200
400
600
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
deflection [mm]
(b) Specimen S2
-500
0
500
-600
-400
-200
0
200
400
600
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
deflection [mm]
(c) Specimen S3
-500
0
500
-600
-400
-200
0
200
400
600
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
deflection [mm]
(d) Specimen S4
Figure 4-13: Contour plots at maximum loads.
56
==PAGE:69==
4.4 Crack Development
4.4
Crack Development
A wide range of analysis tools are available in ARAMIS, in this project the crack and
strain development on each side of the slabs is of interest. Due to diﬀerent crack patterns
and failure mechanism of the slabs, diﬀerent cracks and points are of interest. For each
slab signiﬁcant cracks have been picked out for further analysis. The crack openings are
determined using the point-to-point distance function in ARAMIS, calculating the diﬀerence
in distance between two points. This means that strains can be observed even before the
cracks are visible on the surface.
Specimen S1
In Figure 4-14 the crack development of the top of specimen S1 is illustrated at various loads.
The ﬁrst indication of crack formation starts at a loading of around 40 kN originating from
the northern support(corresponding to LVDT 5 in Figure 3-19) marked as C1-1. This is
not a true crack but pre-cracking strains captured by ARAMIS. Hereafter, the formation of
cracks quickly developed and several cracks are visible at a 45 kN loading, notated as the
cracks appear as C2, C3 etc. The crack formation continues to develop with an increasing
amount of cracks until the punching shear failure at 83.4 kN. Unfortunately, the punching
crack is not captured in the frame. The specimen exhibited good abilities in distributing
the forces throughout the slab, demonstrated by the well scattered crack pattern.
(a) First indication of crack formation, 40 kN.
(b) Crack formation at 45 kN.
(c) Crack formation at 80 kN.
.
(d) Crack formation at the point of failure,
83.4 kN.
Figure 4-14: Crack development at the top of specimen S1, displayed from ﬁrst visible crack load to failure
load. ’A’ denotes location of the actuators and ’S’ denotes the location of the supports.
57
==PAGE:70==
Chapter 4. Results
The crack development of the bottom was unfortunately not captured due to wrong camera
settings.
The crack opening developments are illustrated in Figure 4-15, where ﬁve cracks are anal-
ysed. The mean crack opening of each crack are marked on the graphs to the load cor-
responding to the ﬁrst visible crack (ﬁrst crack load) and to the failure load. The crack
opening of the ﬁrst crack C1, has been extracted at the points C1-1, C1-2 and C1-3, as
illustrated in Figure 4-14. A clear trend are observed implying that the crack openings
are uniform and increasing until failure. The same uniform fully developed crack trend are
observed for cracks C4 and C5. However, this uniform crack opening distribution are not
observed when considering crack C2 and C3. These cracks exhibit a ﬂuctuating behaviour
regarding the cracks at the loading point equal to the ﬁrst crack formation. It is possible
that the adjacent cracks are inﬂuencing the crack openings of crack C2 and C3 at points
C2-1 and C3-1, resulting in a limited development of the crack openings throughout the
test. In general Figure 4-15 illustrates a very uniform and linear development of the cracks.
It should be noted, however, that the specimen did not reach its torsional capacity due to
the punching shear failure, which means that the maximum crack openings were not yet
achieved.
0
0.5
1
1.5
Crack opening [mm]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Load [kN]
C1-1
C1-2
C1-3
1st crack
max load
(a) Crack C1.
0
0.5
1
1.5
Crack opening [mm]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Load [kN]
C2-1
C2-2
C2-3
1st crack
max load
(b) Crack C2.
0
0.5
1
1.5
Crack opening [mm]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Load [kN]
C3-1
C3-2
C3-3
1st crack
max load
(c) Crack C3.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Crack opening [mm]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Load [kN]
C4-1
C4-2
C5-2
1st crack
max load
(d) Cracks C4 and C5.
Figure 4-15: Crack openings as a function of load for the top of specimen S1. Illustrating the crack develop-
ment extracted at diﬀerent location of the cracks. presented with mean crack opening at the loading equal
to the ﬁrst visible crack and at failure.
Specimen S2
For specimen S2 only a limited crack pattern was observed before failure as illustrated in
Figure 4-16. In Figure 4-16(a) it shows that the ﬁrst crack initiated at around 37.5 kN.
The load then dropped after initiation of new adjacent cracks as shown in Figure 4-16(c).
However, it regained strength and ﬁnal failure occurred in crack C2 at a load of 39.6 kN,
which demonstrated the post-cracking strength of the ﬁbers.
Only a few indication of
58
==PAGE:71==
4.4 Crack Development
torsional strains were captured by ARAMIS at the bottom of the slab. This was limited
due to the fact that the strength of the top was much lower than the longitudinal reinforced
in the bottom. This implies that the tensile strength of the SFRC was not suﬃcient and
the slab failed in bending.
(a) First indication of visible cracks at the top
at 37.5 kN.
(b) Crack formation at the bottom at 37.5 kN
(no visible crack).
(c) Crack formation after ﬁrst crack formation
at the top at 36.5 kN.
(d) First indication of cracks at the bottom at
36.5 kN.
(e) Crack formation at the top at the point of
failure, 39.7 kN.
(f) Crack formation at the bottom at the point
of failure, 39.7 kN.
Figure 4-16: Crack development of specimen S2, displayed from ﬁrst visible crack load to failure load for the
top(at the left) and bottom(at the right). ’A’ denotes location of the actuators and ’S’ denotes the location
of the supports.
Considering Figure 4-17 it is observed that the crack opening for C1 was negative before
the ﬁrst crack developed due to compression. This indicates that the specimen behaved
diﬀerently as it did not have a top reinforcement mesh.
However, after the ﬁrst crack
59
==PAGE:72==
Chapter 4. Results
formation, the crack opening increased quickly and a few cracks propagated next to C1.
The plots show, that the formation of crack C1 stopped at a crack opening of around 0.8
mm, whereas C2 excessively increased, clearly indicating that ﬁnal failure occurred in crack
C2.
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Crack opening [mm]
0
10
20
30
40
Load [kN]
C1-1
C1-2
C1-3
(a) Crack C1
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Crack opening [mm]
0
10
20
30
40
Load [kN]
C2-1
C2-2
C2-3
(b) Crack C2.
Figure 4-17: Crack openings as a function of load for the top of specimen S2. Illustrating the crack devel-
opment extracted at diﬀerent location of the cracks.
As illustrated in Figure 4-16, ARAMIS captured some strains due to torsional behaviour
at the bottom. The crack openings at the bottom are very ﬂuctuating as illustrated in
Figure 4-18, which is due to the small scale. The graphs show a clear tendency that the
crack openings are increasing until failure load. However, these did not develop into visible
cracks. Conﬁrming that the specimen did not obtain much torsional behaviour.
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Crack opening [mm]
0
10
20
30
40
Load [kN]
C1-1
C1-2
(a) Crack C1.
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Crack opening [mm]
0
10
20
30
40
Load [kN]
C2-2
C2-3
(b) Crack C2.
Figure 4-18: Crack opening as a function of load for the bottom of specimen S2. Illustrating the crack
development extracted at diﬀerent locations of the cracks.
Specimen S3
Specimen S3 behaved similar to specimen S1 regarding load, deﬂection and crack develop-
ment. The ﬁrst visible crack C1 occurred at 41.2 kN on the top of the slab originating from
both supports as seen in Figure 4-19(a). For the same loading the bottom demonstrated
early signs of pre-cracking but no visible crack had yet occurred. As the load increased mul-
tiple cracks developed at both the top and bottom and a dense crack pattern developed.
60
==PAGE:73==
4.4 Crack Development
(a) First indication of cracks at the top at 41.2
kN
(b) Crack formation at the bottom at
41.2 kN.
(c) Crack formation at the top at 45 kN.
(d) Crack formation at the bottom at 45 kN.
(e) Fully developed crack pattern at the top at
70 kN.
(f) Fully developed crack pattern at the bottom
at 70 kN.
(g) Crack formation at the top at the point of
failure, 72.2 kN.
(h) Crack formation at the bottom at the point
of failure, 72.2 kN.
Figure 4-19: Crack development for specimen S3, displayed from ﬁrst visible crack load to failure load for
the top(at the left) and bottom(at the right). ’A’ denotes location of the actuators and ’S’ denotes the
location of the supports.
61
==PAGE:74==
Chapter 4. Results
Considering the crack openings for the top illustrated in Figure 4-20, it is clearly recognized
that the cracks propagate linearly as a function of the load. In Figure 4-20(a) and (b) it
shows, that at a load of approximately 40 kN the crack opening graphs for crack C1 and
C2 ’jump back’ to almost zero. This is probably because adjacent cracks interacting, which
for example can be observed by the abrupt increase in crack opening of C3, C4 and C5
in Figure 4-20(c) and (d). After crack C1 returned to almost zero, there is only a limited
increase in crack openings until the maximum load. The reason must be due to development
of other cracks, which relieves crack C1.
The crack opening along crack C2, shows that at C2-3 it behaves diﬀerent compared to the
locations of C2-1 and C2-2. This could be explained by a new crack propagating just next
to C2-3 as shown in Figure 4-19(e). Similar for most of the cracks is that they all increase
heavily after reaching the maximum load. However, opposite to specimen S2, the curve
after maximum load is decreasing. This was also observed in the load-displacement curves
in Figure 4-27(e-f), which might be due to the joint failure.
0
0.5
1
1.5
Crack opening [mm]
0
20
40
60
80
Load [kN]
C1-1
C1-2
C1-3
1st crack
max load
(a) Crack C1.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Crack opening [mm]
0
20
40
60
80
Load [kN]
C2-1
C2-2
C2-3
1st crack
max load
(b) Crack C2.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Crack opening [mm]
0
20
40
60
80
Load [kN]
C3-1
C3-2
C3-3
1st crack
max load
(c) Crack C3.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Crack opening [mm]
0
20
40
60
80
Load [kN]
C4-2
C5-2
1st crack
max load
(d) Crack C4 and C5
Figure 4-20: Crack openings as a function of load for the top of specimen S3. Illustrating the crack develop-
ment extracted at diﬀerent locations of the cracks, presented with mean crack opening at the loading equal
to the ﬁrst visible crack and at failure.
Considering the graphs of the crack openings at the bottom illustrated in Figure 4-21,
some more messy graphs are observed. This is due to the limited magnitude of the crack
openings. However, a clear tendency of increasing crack openings are easily observed. The
crack openings are negative or zero at the beginning until the ﬁrst visible crack loading due
to compression in the slab.
62
==PAGE:75==
4.4 Crack Development
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Crack opening [mm]
0
20
40
60
80
Load [kN]
C1-1
C1-2
C1-3
C1-4
1st crack
max load
(a) Crack C1.
0
0.5
1
Crack opening [mm]
0
20
40
60
80
Load [kN]
C2-1
C2-2
C2-3
C2-4
1st crack
max load
(b) Crack C2.
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Crack opening [mm]
0
20
40
60
80
Load [kN]
C3-1
C3-2
C3-3
C3-4
1st crack
max load
(c) Crack C3.
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Crack opening [mm]
0
20
40
60
80
Load [kN]
C4-1
C4-2
1st crack
max load
(d) Crack C4.
Figure 4-21: Crack openings as a function of load for the botom of specimen S3. Illustrating the crack
opening development extracted at diﬀerent location of the cracks, presented with mean crack opening at the
load equal to the ﬁrst visible crack and at failure.
To observe how the joint is behaving, the crack opening is also measured from each side of
the joint at position C5-1,C5-2 and C5-3. It is clearly observed from Figure 4-22, that the
present of the joint is inﬂuencing the crack pattern of the slab. First of all, the slab seems
to crack along the joint. From measuring the distance from each side of the joint it can be
concluded that the crack openings in the joint are larger than the surrounding.
Additionally, from observing the bottom crack pattern in Figure 4-19, it is clear that the
torsional cracks from either side of the joint continues on the other side a bit oﬀset. The
oﬀset of the cracks might be due to diﬀerent location of longitudinal reinforcement and the
lap-bars, re-orientating the forces passing the slab. Also, it could be due to the internal
shear forces along the joint caused by twisting of the slab.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Crack opening [mm]
0
20
40
60
80
Load [kN]
C5-1
C5-2
C5-3
max load
Figure 4-22: Crack opening development as a function of load across joint extracted at three locations.
63
==PAGE:76==
Chapter 4. Results
(a) First visible crack formation at the top at
37.2 kN.
(b) Pre-cracking lines at the bottom at
37.2 kN.
(c) Crack formation at the top at 40 kN.
(d) Crack formation at the bottom at 40 kN.
(e) Crack formation at the top at 45 kN.
(f) Crack formation at the bottom at 45 kN.
(g) Crack formation at the top at the point of
failure, 47.3 kN.
(h) Crack formation at the bottom at the point
of failure, 47.3 kN
Figure 4-23: Crack development of specimen S4, displayed from ﬁrst visible crack load to failure load for the
top(at the left) and bottom(at the right). ’A’ denotes location of the actuators and ’S’ denotes the location
of the supports.
64
==PAGE:77==
4.4 Crack Development
Specimen S4
The ﬁrst crack for specimen S4 initiated in a similar way to the other slabs; forming on
the top close to the supports, propagating through the diagonal of the slab as illustrated
in Figure 4-23. The ﬁrst visible crack was captured at a load of 37.2 kN on the top and a
more distributed crack pattern developed up until failure in crack C3 at 47.3 kN.
The bottom demonstrated similar behaviour to the top, where a mesh of torsional cracks
was observed, indicating good twisting capabilities. Specimen S4 exhibited a signiﬁcantly
better distributions of forces compared to specimen S2, which theoretically had the same
resistance. This improvement might be due to the truss girder positioned along the edges
in the ﬁligree plank.
The crack openings on top of the slab are illustrated in Figure 4-24. In the pre-cracking
phase the cracks developed uniformly for all cracks.
Similar to specimen S2, the crack
openings for the ﬁrst cracks, C1 and C2, starts out with negative values, indicating some
compression in the slab. After reaching the ﬁrst visible crack load several cracks start to
propagate. In comparison with specimen S2, this specimen demonstrates more ductility
and resistance after the formation of the ﬁrst crack. This is illustrated by the inclination of
the curves after the ﬁrst crack, indicating reserve strength of the specimen.
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Crack opening [mm]
0
10
20
30
40
50
Load [kN]
C1-1
C1-2
C1-3
1st crack
max load
(a) Crack C1.
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Crack opening [mm]
0
10
20
30
40
50
Load [kN]
C2-1
C2-2
C2-3
1st crack
max load
(b) Crack C2.
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Crack opening [mm]
0
10
20
30
40
50
Load [kN]
C3-1
C3-2
C3-3
C5-1
1st crack
max load
(c) Cracks C3 and C5.
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Crack opening [mm]
0
10
20
30
40
50
Load [kN]
C4-1
C4-2
C4-3
1st crack
max load
(d) Crack C4.
Figure 4-24: Crack development of the top of specimen S4 for cracks C1,C2,C3,C4 and C5 as a function of
load extracted at three diﬀerent positions of the crack, illustrated along with the mean crack opening for
the load equal to the ﬁrst visible crack and the failure load.
In Figure 4-24(d) the crack openings for crack C4 are illustrated. This crack was located
in the area, which had the largest deformation in the ﬁrst part of the test as described in
section 4.2. Opposite to C1, C2 and C3, the curve for C4 propagated steadily already from
the beginning of the test. This crack behaviour does not match the crack propagations
visible in Figure 4-23. Still observing crack C4, it shows, that when reaching a load around
65
==PAGE:78==
Chapter 4. Results
36-37 kN the crack opening increases aggressively. However, at approximately 40 kN, the
development stops. At this same load, the crack opening of C3 quickly starts to increase
continuously until failure, as the graph in Figure 4-24(c) keeps growing. Observing the crack
development of cracks C1, C2 and C5, the crack openings all increase up until a failure load
of 47.3 kN, where they all are interrupted.
As explained in section 2.1.3, the post-cracking strength of the SFRC highly depends on
the orientation and concentration of the ﬁbers. This might explain the unpredictable crack
behaviour.
Considering the crack openings of the bottom of specimen S4 illustrated in Figure 4-25 the
magnitude reached almost 1 mm, opposite to specimen S2 which only reached a magnitude of
0.2 mm. This is another indication, that specimen S4 obtained a better torsional behaviour
than specimen S2.
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Crack opening [mm]
0
10
20
30
40
50
Load [kN]
C1-1
C1-2
C1-3
1st crack
max load
(a) Crack C1.
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
Crack opening [mm]
0
10
20
30
40
50
Load [kN]
C2-1
C2-2
C2-3
C5-1
1st crack
max load
(b) Crack C2 and C5.
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Crack opening [mm]
0
10
20
30
40
50
Load [kN]
C3-1
C3-2
C3-3
1st crack
max load
(c) Crack C3.
Figure 4-25: Crack development of the bottom of specimen S4 of cracks C1,C2,C3 and C5 as a function of
load extracted at three diﬀerent positions of the crack, illustrated together with the mean crack opening for
the load equal to the ﬁrst visible crack and to the failure load.
Based on Figure 4-26, it is noticeable that the crack openings towards the joint in the
left side(C4-1) are larger compared to the right side(C4-2). Comparing the crack opening
across the joint with specimen S3, it is observed that specimen S4 did not reach the same
magnitude. This is in accordance with the fact that slab S3 failed in the joint.
66
==PAGE:79==
4.4 Crack Development
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Crack opening [mm]
0
10
20
30
40
50
Load [kN]
C4-1
C4-2
Figure 4-26: Crack opening development across the joint in specimen S4 illustrated at position C4-1 and
C4-2 together with the mean crack opening.
Summary of Crack Development
The diﬀerent structural conﬁgurations and failure modes, as well as the variation in crack
amount, makes it diﬃcult to compare the cracks directly. However, in order to get a general
overview, Table 4.8 lists the observed number of cracks in ARAMIS and the approximate
crack openings at the maximum loads.
Table 4.8: Overview of crack openings at maximum load.
Top
Bottom
Joint
Specimen
Number of cracks
Crack opening
Number of cracks
Crack opening
Crack opening
[-]
[mm]
[-]
[mm]
[mm]
S1
9-10
1.2-1.8
-
-
-
S2
2-3
0.8-2.5
0
0.1-0.2
-
S3
12-13
0.4-1.4
13-14
0.4-1
2
S4
6-7
0.5-3
11-12
0.1-1.1
0.2-1
To sum up, the specimens with conventional reinforcement design developed far more cracks
than the specimens with SFRC. Also, the SFRC specimens obtained larger crack openings
at the maximum load as the crack openings were distributed on fewer cracks. Comparing
specimen S2 and S4, specimen S4 developed 11-12 cracks on the bottom compared to zero
for specimen S2. Specimen S3 developed slightly more cracks than specimen S1, however,
the crack openings were a bit smaller. This might be due to the wider distribution of cracks
and the inﬂuence of the joint.
In Table 4.9 the crack openings of specimen S1 and S3 are compared. It shows that in
general, specimen S1 has larger cracks for the chosen load. Immediately it was assumed
that they would be similar, however, the cracks in the joint might have relieved the other
cracks.
Table 4.9: Comparision of the largest crack openings of specimen S1 and S3.
Specimen
C1
C2
C3
C4
[mm]
[mm]
[mm]
[mm]
S1
0.66
0.84
0.73
1.21
S3
0.26
0.30
0.76
0.62
67
==PAGE:80==
Chapter 4. Results
4.5
Evaluation of Load-Displacement Curves
4.5.1
Identiﬁcation of Mechanical Load Stages
The load-displacement curves for the loaded corners (northwest and southeast) are presented
in Figure 4-27. These are where the LVDT sensors detected the largest deformations. The
curves are presented along with energy absorption of the specimens, which are evaluated by
integrating the load-displacement curves. The load-displacement curves for all the LVDT
sensors are shown in Appendix G.3.
Specimen S1
From the curves in Figure 4-27 the diﬀerent mechanical stages of the slab can be identiﬁed
and the stiﬀness evaluated. The load-deﬂection curves for the loaded corners of specimen
S1 are presented in Figure 4-27 (a) and Figure 4-27(b), where two stages are identiﬁed.
The ﬁrst stage, E1, present the linear stage from when the loading starts until the concrete
starts to crack. After initiating of the ﬁrst crack the second stage, E2, is observed. In this
stage, the stiﬀness in the slab has decreased, however, the specimen maintains an increasing
resistance until the punching failure. The stiﬀness in the phases are determined by the slope
of the curve conﬁned by two points in the plot. The stiﬀness in each stage are presented in
Table 4.11. As the premature punching failure occurred before the torsional capacity was
reached, a yielding plateau at the curve is not observed. This is an indication that the slab
had not yielded at failure, implying that it could have resisted a larger torsional load if the
punching capacity had been avoided.
Specimen S2
A diﬀerent performance was observed for specimen S2 as presented in Figure 4-27 (c) and
Figure 4-27(d). As discussed in section 4.3, the slab mainly deﬂected in the northeast cor-
ner, which is easily observed by the large diﬀerence in deﬂection. Four stages are identiﬁed
considering the northeast corner. Initially, the linear-phase is observed (E1). Then the
second stage starts after the ﬁrst peak, where the ﬁrst crack initiated. The stresses resisted
by the concrete is here transmitted to the steel ﬁbers by the bridging eﬀect, which resists
the stresses and the ﬁbers start to debond as described in section 2.1.3. The second and
thirds stages, E2 and E3, are characterised by a decrease in stiﬀness for every ’kink’ rep-
resenting formation of new cracks. However, the fully debonded ﬁber still demonstrate a
resistance, when eventually subjected to pull-out. Finally, the fourth stage, E4, is identiﬁed
after reaching the peak load, also recognized as the post-cracking phase. This phase is
characterized by a continuously reduction in the load as the ﬁbers are fully pulled out of
the concrete.
Specimen S3
In Figure 4-27(e) and Figure 4-27 (f) the four stages for specimen S3 are identiﬁed. Initially,
the linear stage, E1, is observed continued by the second stage, E2, after the ﬁrst cracking
of the concrete occurred. A third stage, E3, is reached before the peak load is obtained.
This stage is unexpected, since the behaviour theoretically should be similar to specimen
S1. The third load stage must be caused by the joint and might identify the point where
the joint started to fail. After reaching the peak load stage four, E4, is identiﬁed and the
slab has a decreasing resistance.
68
==PAGE:81==
4.5 Evaluation of Load-Displacement Curves
0
10
20
30
40
50
Deflection [mm]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Load [kN]
E1
E2
Load
Energy
0
1
2
3
4
5
Energy [kNm]
(a) Specimen S1, northwest corner.
0
10
20
30
40
50
Deflection [mm]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Load [kN]
E1
E2
Load
Energy
0
1
2
3
4
5
Energy [kNm]
(b) Specimen S1, southeast corner.
0
20
40
60
80
100
Deflection [mm]
0
10
20
30
40
50
Load [kN]
E1
E2
E3
E4
Load
Energy
0
1
2
3
4
5
Energy [kNm]
(c) Specimen S2, northwest corner.
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
Deflection [mm]
0
10
20
30
40
50
Load [kN]
Load
Energy
0
1
2
3
4
5
Energy [kNm]
(d) Specimen S2, southeast corner.
0
20
40
60
80
100
Deflection [mm]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Load [kN]
E1
E2
E3
E4
0
1
2
3
4
5
Energy [kNm]
Load
Energy
(e) Specimen S3, northwest corner.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Deflection [mm]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Load [kN]
E1
E2
E3
E4
Load
Energy
0
1
2
3
4
5
Energy [kNm]
(f) Specimen S3, southeast corner.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Deflection [mm]
0
10
20
30
40
50
Load [kN]
E1
E2
E3
E4
Load
Energy
0
1
2
3
4
5
Energy [kNm]
(g) Specimen S4, northwest corner.
0
20
40
60
80
100
Deflection [mm]
0
10
20
30
40
50
Load [kN]
E1
E2
E3
E4
0
1
2
3
4
5
Energy [kNm]
Load
Energy
(h) Specimen S4, southeast corner.
Figure 4-27: Load-displacement and corresponding energy-diaplacement curves for the deﬂected corners.
69
==PAGE:82==
Chapter 4. Results
Specimen S4
Four stages are identiﬁed in Figure 4-27(g) and Figure 4-27(h) as well. These stages are
similar to specimen S2, however, both corners are active during the loading. As discussed
in section 4.3 the loaded corners deformed very diﬀerently. Initially, the northeast corner
deﬂected, however, after reaching approximately 46 kN, the forces were redistributed to the
southeast corner of the slab, which started to deﬂect with a limited resistance as illustrated
by the negative decrease at E4 on the curve in Figure 4-27(h).
4.5.2
Residual Strength of Slabs
Considering the slabs resistance after the ﬁrst crack, it is obvious that the residual strengths
of specimen S2 and S4 are limited. After reaching the ﬁrst crack load, the slabs increased
the load up until failure with only 3.9 % and 24.5 %, respectively. This is very low compared
to specimen S1 and S3, which increased the load by 107.4 % and 65 %, respectively.
Table 4.10: Reserve capacity after ﬁrst crack.
S1
S2
S3
S4
First crack load [kN]
40.2
38.3
43.8
38.0
Peak load [kN]
83.4
39.7
72.2
47.3
Improvement [%]
107.4
3.9
65.0
24.5
4.5.3
Evaluation of Stiﬀness
The stiﬀness of the identiﬁed stages in section 4.5.1 are determined as the slope of the ’best
ﬁtted line’ of each stage. The stiﬀness properties for the stages are presented along with the
mean corner stiﬀness in Table 4.11. The stiﬀness values do not represent the true stiﬀness
of the slab as they are only represented by the corner deﬂections. However, it serves the
purpose of comparing the development in stiﬀness of the diﬀerent slabs.
Table 4.11: Stiﬀness of load-displacement curves [kN/mm](the southeast corner for specimen S2 is not
included since it did not deﬂect and will mislead the result).
Corner
E1
E2
E3
E4
S1
Northwest
7.20
1.33
-
-
Southeast
19.35
1.34
-
-
Average
13.27
1.33
-
-
S2
Northwest
4.32
0.42
0.25
-0.07
Southeast
-
0.45
-
-
Average
-
0.43
-
-
S3
Northwest
8.12
1.03
0.39
-1.10
Southeast
14.09
1.39
0.59
-1.35
Average
11.10
1.21
0.49
-1.23
S4
Northwest
3.44
0.62
0.21
0.21
Southeast
-
3.83
0.21
-0.17
Average
3.44
2.22
0.21
0.02
Comparing the stiﬀness of the linear elastic stages, E1, it shows that specimen S1 and S3
in general have a larger stiﬀness. The average stiﬀness of the conventional slabs are 12.2
kN/mm, which is 214% larger than the average stiﬀness of the northwest corner of specimen
S2 and S4, which has an average value of 3.88 kN/mm (the comparison is only made to the
70
==PAGE:83==
4.5 Evaluation of Load-Displacement Curves
northwest corner of S2 and S4 since only this corner deﬂects in stage E1). In the second
stage, E2, the stiﬀness of the conventional slabs are also approximately twice as large as
the SFRC slabs.
The eﬀect of the joint can be observed by comparing specimen S1 and S3. Considering
stages E1 and E2, it is observed that specimen S1 have a larger stiﬀness of respectively
19.5% and 10%.
Finally, comparing specimen S2 and S4 it is observed that the stiﬀness properties are similar
in all four stages, only a slightly larger stiﬀness for specimen S4 is observed. Both specimens
have negative stiﬀness values for the ﬁrst stage as the slab ’rotated’ in the ﬁrst part of the
test, which led to upwards deﬂections. These values are therefore disregarded.
4.5.4
Energy Absorption
As the slabs are resisting the load, energy are absorbed, which are evaluated and illustrated
by the red graphs in Figure 4-27(a-h). For specimen S1 and S3 it is generally observed that
the energy is equal in both corners. This is not the case for the specimen S2 and S4. These
do not distribute the forces equally, which is observed by the large diﬀerence in energy
between the two corners. A large energy absorption indicates that the slab is ductile. It is
observed that the energy absorbed until reaching the peak load is low for specimen S2 and
S4 compared to specimen S1 and S3. The total energy absorbed at peak load is for the four
slabs equal to 4.7 kNm, 1.1 kNm, 4.9 kNm and 3.1 kNm, respectively.
In Figure 4-28(a) the energy curves for all the specimens are presented as sum of the
two corners. It illustrates that specimen S1 and S3 provide the largest energy, which is
demonstrated by the larger slope of the curves.
In Figure 4-28(b) the energy curves are normalized relatively to the amount of steel in the
specimens. In the conventional slabs with a reinforcement mesh in top and bottom the
amount is 157 kg/m3 and for the SFRC conﬁguration with a reinforcement mesh in the
bottom and SFRC on top the amount is 118 kg/m3. This graph shows that the SFRC
concrete slabs actually absorb the same energy relatively to the amount of steel provided
compared to the conventional slabs.
0
50
100
150
Deflection [mm]
0
2
4
6
8
Energy  [kNm] 
S1
S2
S3
S4
(a)
0
50
100
150
Deflection [mm]
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
Energy relative to steel mass [kNm/kgs] 
S1
S2
S3
S4
(b)
Figure 4-28: Energy absorption curves for the total deﬂection in the northwest and southeast corner. At (a)
the total energy and (b) the total energy relative to the amount of reinforcement bars and steel ﬁbers.
71
==PAGE:84==
Chapter 5
Conclusion
5.1
Discussion
Torsional Behaviour
The conventional reinforced slabs S1 and S3 both demonstrated good torsional behaviour.
The slabs clearly twisted as a grid of inclined torsional crack formed on the top and bottom
of the slab as illustrated in Figure 4-3 and 4-5. The twisting was also demonstrated by the
contour-lines in Figure 4-13, where a nice cross of equal deformation was observed.
Specimen S2 and S4 without top reinforcement, however, did not demonstrate the same
amount of twisting behaviour.
Specimen S2 did not obtain any visible torsional cracks
as shown in Figure 4-4 and from the contour plot in Figure 4-13(b) the limited deﬂection
between the supports also imply that the slab did not twist. Comparing the behaviour
of specimen S2 and S4, it is clear that specimen S4 is twisting more as it obtained more
torsional cracks both on top and bottom (see Figure 4-8). This improvement in twisting
behaviour is probably due to the contribution from the truss girder along middle and the
edges of the slab. This provides some extra top and bottom reinforcement, which help
distribute the cracks.
Based on the above, it is clearly demonstrated that the forces are more distributed using top
reinforcement. This can also be concluded from observing the corner deﬂections in Figure
4-12(b). These illustrate uniform deﬂections at each loaded corner for specimens S1 and S3
compared to the SFRC slabs, S2 and S4, where one side is primarily deﬂecting.
Comparison with Experimental Results and Theory
The torsional capacities were estimated using plastic considerations as described in section
2.3.2, but since all the slabs failed in various modes, it has been diﬃcult to compare them
directly.
Starting out by looking at specimen S1, the torsional capacity of the slab was estimated to
withstand a load of 102.9 kN, using the yield criteria for slabs presented in section 2.3.2.
However, before any yielding occurred in the reinforcement, the slab failed in punching shear
at a load corresponding to 81 % of the calculated capacity. The punching shear capacity
was calculated from Eurocode to a value of 69.9 kN (see section 3.1.1). Based on this,
it was clear that the punching failure was governed. However, following the precautions
given in section 2.3.5, it was assumed that the torsional capacity would be reached before
72
==PAGE:85==
5.1 Discussion
punching occurred. According to the section, local failure would be avoided if the slab was
edge reinforced with u-bars of half the cross sectional area of the longitudinal reinforcement.
Also, it stated that the width of the loading and support areas should be at least h/2=75
mm, which was met by providing a width of 200 mm in the test setup.
Additionally,
a relatively low reinforcement ratio of 0.5% was used in order to obtain yielding in the
reinforcement. Even though the slab failed in punching, it could still serve as a reference
specimen, since it reached a larger capacity than the other specimens.
Specimen S2 failed in bending at a load of 39.7 kN after showing limited signs of torsional
behaviour. Initially, the torsional capacity was estimated in the same way as specimen S1,
which led to a torsional capacity load of 65.6 kN, which was an overestimation of almost
65.2%. Predicting the bending capacity of the slab, it was opposite the torsional capacity
profoundly underestimated by 37.3% using a fully plastic stress distribution.
The overestimation of the plastic torsional capacity indicates that the yield criteria cannot
be applied to SFRC slabs. The yield criteria theory assumes that the slab is orthogonal
reinforced in top and bottom. Calculations of the torsional capacity is, for the isotropic
case, given by the average of the positive and negative yield moments as stated in equation
(2.36).
This implies that the lack of continuous top reinforcement in the SFRC might
change the behaviour of the united layers. Furthermore, the theory is based on yielding of
the reinforcement bars, whereas SFRC strength is provided by the pull-out mechanism and
not yielding in the steel.
The failure load did neither match the estimated bending capacity, which might be related
to the fact, that the slab was not subjected to a pure bending case. Likewise, the errors
in predicting the capacity could be assigned to the inconsistency of tensile strength of the
SFRC, which is highly dependent on the ﬁber orientation. As illustrated in Figure 4-1, the
ﬂexural strength of each SFRC test beams clearly deviated even though they were made
from the same concrete batch. The ﬁbers are discrete and have to redistribute the forces
throughout the slab. Therefore, no cross sectional cut will be identical in a SFRC slab.
This implies, that only a single weak part of the slab can initiate failure. This questions
the consistency and credibility of the eﬀective bearing capacity of SFRC elements, which is
why the tensile strength is signiﬁcantly reduced in the guideline.
The predicted torsional capacity of specimen S3 is the same as specimen S1, but it failed
at a load of 72.2 kN, which is 70.2% of the estimated capacity. The failure occurred due
to delamination in the horizontal interface. As explained in section 3.1.1, the risk of this
failure was well known due the design of the truss girders. With this design, the capacity
of the horizontal shear interface was 65.2% of the torsional capacity.
Specimen S4 had an estimated torsional and bending capacity equal to specimen S2. How-
ever, it was improved by the truss girder, as it failed at 47.3 kN, which is a 19% improvement
compared to specimen S2. The specimen also demonstrated a better torsional behaviour
than specimen S2. However, it still failed in bending due to the lack of tensile capacity in
the top.
Crack Development
Specimen S1 and S3 with the conventional reinforcement design have similar cracking be-
haviour. By observing the crack opening graphs for these specimens in section 4.4, a linear
and uniform increase are observed until the ﬁrst visible crack load. After development of
73
==PAGE:86==
Chapter 5. Conclusion
the ﬁrst crack, some clear diﬀerences are identiﬁed. Specimen S1 continues to grow linearly
in Figure 4-15 whereas specimen S3 shows a concave crack development in Figure 4-20.
This must be caused by the constructional diﬀerences between the two. The joint and the
truss girders are unquestionable aﬀecting the behaviour of the slab.
The crack development of specimen S2 and S4 behaves signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from specimen
S1 and S3. The crack opening graphs for the top of specimen S2 and S4 are shown in Figure
4-17 and 4-24. These show negative crack openings in the pre-cracking phase. This could be
explained by the lack of longitudinal top reinforcement. After cracking, the graphs display
post-cracking strength and ductility of the specimens, as the crack opening increases at a
steady load.
The inﬂuence of the joint regarding the crack development of specimen S3 and S4 is il-
lustrated in Figure 4-22 and 4-26, respectively. These both show that the crack opening
across the joint in general are of larger magnitude compared to the torsional cracks at the
bottom. This indicates that there are some weaknesses in the joint. For specimen S3, the
crack opening were approximately twice as large as for specimen S4, which is probably due
to the fact that the specimen carried a higher load and failed in the joint.
The specimens with conventional reinforcement design exhibited lots of strength after they
start to crack. Specimen S1 and specimen S3 reached a maximum load of 107% and 65% of
the ﬁrst visible crack load, respectively. For the specimens with SFRC, however, the residual
strength was limited. They reached an increase of only 3.9% and 24.5%, respectively.
Joint Performance
Prior to the test, concerns were raised on how the joint would perform in pure torsion, how-
ever, as indicated in the results, the traditional lap-bar joint worked well in the construction.
The only visible inﬂuence of the joint was observed by the oﬀset of cracks passing the joint,
but this seems of minor importance. More concerns should be aimed towards the shear in-
terface of the horizontal construction joint between the ﬁligree plank and the overlay. Both
specimen S3 and S4 were aﬀected in the interface at failure. However, for specimen S4, the
delamination occurred posterior to the failure in bending. As a result of the delamination of
specimen S3, the concrete close to the joint spalled. This is probably caused by the inclined
compression ﬁelds in the concrete shown in Figure 2-17, which could not be transferred
eﬀectively back into the longitudinal reinforcement.
Estimation of the delamination capacity were based on Eurocode, which oﬀers guidelines
based on tension in one direction. However, torsional moments aﬀect the horizontal interface
diﬀerently, which induce tensile forces acting in the interface from several directions. This
implies that the estimations cannot be directly compared to the results.
Fiber Properties
The properties of the ﬁbers described from various literature in section 2.1.3 is compared
with the test performed in this project. In both the three point bending tests of SFRC
beams as well as the torsional tests of slab S2 and S4, the post-cracking tensile strength of
SFRC was clearly observed, as they were allowed to deform signiﬁcantly at a constant load.
For the compression tests, however, the results in this project did not match the assumed
behavior.
In various articles it was found, that adding ﬁbers to a concrete mix, would
slightly increase the compressive strength, but the tests in this research showed a slight
74
==PAGE:87==
5.1 Discussion
decrease. This might be caused by small diﬀerences in the concrete-mix design for the two
batches. Some of the ﬁber properties have been diﬃcult to conﬁrm and evaluate, for example
the limiting and distribution of cracks. In the literature it was found that SFRC limits the
crack sizes and the distance between cracks compared with plain concrete. However, as the
two test conﬁgurations consists of either plain concrete with reinforcement bars or of SFRC
without any reinforcement bars, these properties have not been observed. It showed in the
crack development ﬁgures in section 4.4, that the conventional conﬁguration had smaller
and more distributed cracks compared with the SFRC conﬁgurations, if considering the
same load. If a combination of the two had been performed, the properties could have been
conﬁrmed.
5.1.1
Improvements and Further Investigations
Filigree slabs are well incorporated structural elements when designing buildings today,
however, some weak points are found.
First of all the shear interface detailing is very
important in the vicinity of the joint and must be designed properly. For this purpose the
truss girder construction seems suﬃcient if designed properly.
An idea for improving the transverse shear forces could be by constructing a joint, which
do not have to transfer the forces from the reinforcement in the ﬁligree plank through
a horizontal interface and into the lap-bars. Instead an alternative solution is suggested
in Figure 5-1. In this conﬁguration, the joint is performed as u-bars cast in the ﬁligree
slab. Then on the construction site, several ﬁligree planks can be connected by a cross-
over of two u-bars mounted with a bolt.
In this conﬁguration the tensile forces in the
longitudinal reinforcement is kept in the ﬁligree plank and not transferred through the
horizontal interface between the precast and in-situ concrete. Additionally, this joint would
limit the work on site compared to positioning and anchoring lap-bars before casting overlay.
Another advantage of constructing the joint in this way is that the moment arm used in the
capacity calculations, is the same as for the longitudinal reinforcement, and is not increased
as the in case with lap-bars. However, as shown, this joint require more space between the
joining ﬁligree planks to allow the ﬁxing, opposite the lap-bar solution, where planks can
be positioned close to each other.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5-1: (a) Plan view of alternative joint solution (truss girder not shown), (b) Side view of alternative
joint solution.
75
==PAGE:88==
Chapter 5. Conclusion
It is important to apply edge reinforcement in order to transfer compressive concrete stresses
caused by torsion into the longitudinal reinforcement as discussed in section 2.3.5. This is
usually provided by closing the longitudinal reinforcement with u-bars. In ﬁligree slabs, the
truss girders serves as the edge reinforcement. However, these are obviously not as eﬀective
as the u-bars, since they are not closing the longitudinal reinforcement and anchored into
the slab. Constructing the ﬁligree slabs with closed u-bars would improve the overall quality
of the slab. Placement of both truss girders and u-bars in the ﬁligree plank would impede
the manufacturing. However, as observed from the test of specimen S3, the major edge
problem was found in the vicinity of the joint, indicating that a local improvement could be
suﬃcient. Anchor plates next to the joint would eﬀectively transfer the compressive forces
from the concrete into the reinforcement and could be positioned only in the needed areas.
As discussed, in the previous section, the horizontal shear interface between precast and
in-situ cast concrete was a critical aspect and needed extra design attention. A simple way
to improve the interface would be to manufacture an extra rough surface on the ﬁligree
slab, to improve the friction.
The spalling of concrete, which occurred near the edges in specien S3, could be be reduced
by a larger cover layer, which was tested by K. N Rahal, and M. P Collins in [44]. The
authors tested the eﬀect of concrete cover on beams subjected to combined torsion and
bending, where torsion was the dominating load. The test yielded that the a larger cover
layer substantially increased the strength for an element subjected to torsion.
Slabs subjected to pure torsion are very unlikely in structures and is more or less a theo-
retical load aspect. However, to understand how and why structural elements behave when
subjected to combined loading, it is important to identify individual structural clues. These
clues are often simpler to identify when subjected to a pure loading state, such as pure tor-
sion or bending. Additional to this experiment it would therefore be interesting to test how
the ﬁligree slabs subjected to combined torsional and bending moment would behave.
Another interesting aspect for the slabs would be to investigate how they perform con-
sidering the service limit state. This would lead to a focus on the deﬂections and elastic
considerations of the slab, as well long-term eﬀects of the ﬁbers.
76
==PAGE:89==
5.2 Conclusion
5.2
Conclusion
The purpose for this research was to evaluate connected ﬁligree slabs in biaxial bending,
substituting the longitudinal top reinforcement with SFRC. Based on this a special focus
have been aimed towards performance of the joint and the steel ﬁbers.
Four diﬀerent slab conﬁgurations were subjected to pure torsion and evaluated in terms
of capacities, deﬂections and crack behaviour. It was found that substituting longitudinal
top reinforcement with SFRC had a great inﬂuence.
First of all, the twisting behavior
was signiﬁcantly reduced due to the large diﬀerence in strength of the conventional bottom
reinforcement and the SFRC overlay. This led to a bending failure at a much lower capacity
than for the conventional design. Secondly, the amount of cracks were decreased for the
SFRC, indicating a less eﬀective distribution of forces. However, the SFRC exhibited good
ductile behavior.
Additionally, the post-cracking behavior of the slabs was investigated
and it can be concluded, that SFRC slabs have a signiﬁcantly lower residual strength and
stiﬀness compared to slabs with conventional reinforcement design.
The joint between the ﬁligree slabs showed suﬃcient capacity of the lap-bars, when de-
signed to provide the same capacity as the bottom reinforcement. However, the horizontal
construction joint turned out to be the critical aspect. This should be designed to carry
horizontal shear equal to the capacity of the lap-bars, which depends on the truss girder
dimension and friction of the plank.
It can be concluded that the ﬁligree plank in the combination with SFRC had a positive
eﬀect on the torsional performance. It was expected that the monolithic SFRC slab would
achieve a larger capacity compared to the ﬁligree slab, which was not the case. This positive
eﬀect is caused by the truss girders, providing extra reinforcement and stiﬀness.
The test results for the SFRC slabs showed signiﬁcant deviations from the predicted tor-
sional capacities using the yield criteria. The yield criteria assumes orthogonal continuous
top and bottom reinforcement, which is not met by the SFRC. It can therefore be concluded
that the torsional capacity of SFRC slabs cannot be estimated using the yield criteria. Ad-
ditionally, the SFRC showed large inconsistencies in their tensile strengths which impede a
accurate estimation of the capacity in general.
Conclusively, ﬁligree slabs with SFRC overlay does not provide suﬃcient torsional capacity
to substitute conventional top reinforcement.
77
==PAGE:90==
Bibliography
[1] S. Timoshenko. Theory of plates and shells. Theory of Plates and Shells, 1940.
[2] Peter Marti, Peter Leesti, and Waseem U. Khalifa. Torsion tests on reinforced concrete
slab elements. Journal of Structural Engineering, 113(5):994–1010, 1987.
[3] Bach F. Rasmussen J. Jensen, J. F. and M. P. Nielsen. Jernbetonplader med hjørnelast.
Department of Structural Engineering, Technical University of Denmark, 1981.
[4] Adelino V. Lopes, Sergio M. R. Lopes, and Ricardo N. F. do Carmo.
Stiﬀness of
reinforced concrete slabs subjected to torsion. Materials and Structures, 47(1-2):227–
238, 2014.
[5] ˚Ase Lyslo Døssland. Fibre reinforcement in load carrying concrete structures. Norwe-
gian University of Science and Technology, Printed by NTNU Trykk, 2008.
[6] Pablo Pujadas, Ana Blanco, Albert de la Fuente, and Antonio Aguado. Cracking behav-
ior of frc slabs with traditional reinforcement. Materials and Structures, 45(5):707–725,
2012.
[7] Ana Blanco. Characterization and modelling of sfrc elements. Proceedings of the Insti-
tution of Civil Engineers-structures and Buildings, Proceedings of the Ice - Structures
and.
[8] Julien Michels, Daniele Waldmann, Stefan Maas, and Arno Zuerbes. Steel ﬁbers as
only reinforcement for ﬂat slab construction - experimental investigation and design.
Construction and Building Materials, 26(1):145–155, 2012.
[9] David Fall, Jiangpeng Shu, Rasmus Rempling, Karin Lundgren, and Kamyab Zandi.
Two-way slabs: Experimental investigation of load redistributions in steel ﬁbre rein-
forced concrete. Engineering Structures the Journal of Earthquake Wind and Ocean
Engineering, 80:61–74, 2014.
[10] R. Narayanan and A. S. Kareem-Palanjian. Steel ﬁbre reinforced concrete beams in tor-
sion. International Journal of Cement Composites and Lightweight Concrete, 5(4):235–
246, 1983.
[11] M. A. Mansur and T. Y. Lim. Torsional behaviour of reinforced ﬁbre concrete beams.
International Journal of Cement Composites and Lightweight Concrete, 7(4):261–267,
1985.
[12] Gunneswara Rao T.D., Rama Seshu D., and Warnitchai P. Eﬀect of steel ﬁbers on
the behavior of over-reinforced beams subjected to pure torsion. Civil Engineering
Dimension, 12(1):44, 2010.
78
==PAGE:91==
Bibliography
[13] Fuad Okay and Serkan Engin. Torsional behavior of steel ﬁber reinforced concrete
beams. Construction and Building Materials, 28(1):269–275, 2012.
[14] John Stehle, Antonios Kanellopoulos, and Bhushan Lal Karihaloo.
Performance of
joints in reinforced concrete slabs for two-way spanning action.
Proceedings of the
Institution of Civil Engineers-structures and Buildings, 164(3):197–209, 2011.
[15] Shuaib H Ahmad, Charles H Henager Sr, M Arockiasamy, PN Balaguru, Claire Ball,
Hiram P Ball Jr, Gordon B Batson, Arnon Bentur, Robert J Craig, Marvin E Criswell,
et al. State-of-the-art report on ﬁber reinforced concrete. 1988.
[16] Miroslaw Grzybowski and Surendra P Shah. Shrinkage cracking of ﬁber reinforced
concrete. ACI Materials Journal, 87(2):138–148, 1990.
[17] Antoine E Naaman and Husamuddin Najm. Bond-slip mechanisms of steel ﬁbers in
concrete. Materials Journal, 88(2):135–145, 1991.
[18] Job Thomas and Ananth Ramaswamy. Mechanical properties of steel ﬁber-reinforced
concrete. Journal of materials in civil engineering, 19(5):385–392, 2007.
[19] PS Song and S Hwang. Mechanical properties of high-strength steel ﬁber-reinforced
concrete. Construction and Building Materials, 18(9):669–673, 2004.
[20] Arne Hillerborg, Mats Mod´eer, and P-E Petersson. Analysis of crack formation and
crack growth in concrete by means of fracture mechanics and ﬁnite elements. Cement
and concrete research, 6(6):773–781, 1976.
[21] Mogens Peter Nielsen and Linh Cao Hoang. Limit analysis and concrete plasticity.
CRC Press, Taylor and Francis Group, 2011.
[22] Petra Schumacher. Rotation capacity of self-compacting steel ﬁber reinforced concrete.
TU Delft, Delft University of Technology, 2006.
[23] MC Nataraja, N Dhang, and AP Gupta. Stress–strain curves for steel-ﬁber reinforced
concrete under compression. Cement and concrete composites, 21(5):383–390, 1999.
[24] RS Olivito and FA Zuccarello. An experimental study on the tensile strength of steel
ﬁber reinforced concrete. Composites Part B: Engineering, 41(3):246–255, 2010.
[25] Alain Geoﬀr´e Kooiman. Modelling steel ﬁbre reinforced concrete for structural design.
TU Delft, Delft University of Technology, 2000.
[26] Yoon-Keun Kwak, Marc O Eberhard, Woo-Suk Kim, and Jubum Kim. Shear strength
of steel ﬁber-reinforced concrete beams without stirrups.
ACI Structural Journal,
99(4):530–538, 2002.
[27] Hai H Dinh. Shear behavior of steel ﬁber reinforced concrete beams without stirrup
reinforcement. PhD thesis, University of Toronto, 2009.
[28] AM Shaaban and H Gesund. Punching shear strength of steel ﬁber reinforced concrete
ﬂat plates. Structural Journal, 91(4):406–414, 1994.
79
==PAGE:92==
Bibliography
[29] Long Nguyen-Minh, Mari´an Rovˇn´ak, and Toan Tran-Quoc. Punching shear capacity of
interior sfrc slab-column connections. Journal of Structural Engineering, 138(5):613–
624, 2011.
[30] Kyoung-Kyu Choi, Mahmoud M Reda Taha, Hong-Gun Park, and Arup K Maji.
Punching shear strength of interior concrete slab–column connections reinforced with
steel ﬁbers. Cement and Concrete Composites, 29(5):409–420, 2007.
[31] P Balaguru, Ramesh Narahari, and Mehendra Patel. Flexural toughness of steel ﬁber
reinforced concrete. Materials Journal, 89(6):541–546, 1992.
[32] Joaquim AO Barros and Joaquim A Figueiras. Flexural behavior of sfrc: testing and
modeling. Journal of materials in civil engineering, 11(4):331–339, 1999.
[33] A Samen Ezeldin and PN Balaguru. Bond behavior of normal and high-strength ﬁber
reinforced concrete. ACI Materials Journal, 86(5):515–524, 1989.
[34] Daniel Lima Ara´ujo, Alice Ribeiro Danin, Matilde Batista Melo, and Paulo Fernando
Rodrigues. Inﬂuence of steel ﬁbers on the reinforcement bond of straight steel bars.
Revista IBRACON de Estruturas e Materiais, 6(2):307–338, 2013.
[35] Design Guideline for Structural Applications of Steel Fiber Reinforced Concrete. SFRC
Consortium, 2014.
[36] DS EN 14651 + A1:2007 Test method for metallic ﬁbre concrete - Measuring the ﬂex-
ural tensile strength (limit of proportionality (LOP), residual). Danish Standard Foun-
dation, 2007.
[37] DS/S-19000 Eurocode betonkonstruktioner. Eurocode 2: Betonkonstruktioner - Del
1-1: Generelle regler samt regler for bygningskonstruktioner, Eurocode 2: Design of
concrete structures - Part 1-1: General rules and rules for buildings. 2010.
[38] Rudolph. Szilard. Theories and applications of plate analysis : classical, numerical,
and engineering methods. Wiley, 2004.
[39] F. Bach, M.P. Nielsen, ABK., and SRL. Nedrevrdilsninger for jernbetonplader. 1981.
[40] DS/S-328 Betonteknologi. Prvning af hrdnet beton - Del 3: Prvelegemers trykstyrke,
Testing hardened concrete - Part 3: Compressive strength of test specimens. 2009.
[41] DS/S-19000. Steel for the reinforcement and prestressing of concrete - Test methods -
Part 1: Reinforcing bars, wire rod and wire. 2010.
[42] DS/V-001. Metallic materials - Tensile tesing - Part 1: Method of test at room tem-
perature. 2003.
[43] W Tong. An evaluation of digital image correlation criteria for strain mapping appli-
cations. Strain, Strain, Strain, 41(4):167–175, 2005.
[44] Khaldoun N. Rahal and Michael P. Collins.
Eﬀect of thickness of concrete cover
on shear-torsion interaction - an experimental investigation. ACI Structural Journal,
92(3):334–342, 1995.
80
==PAGE:93==
List of Figures
1-1
Principal drawing of typical ﬁligree slab. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2-1
Illustration of diﬀerent ﬁber types. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2-2
Schematic illustration of the stress-crack relation for plain concrete.
. . . .
8
2-3
Schematic illustration of the stress-crack relation for SFRC. . . . . . . . . .
9
2-4
Principal stress-strain relation in compression. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2-5
Principal stress-strain relation in tension.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2-6
Stress-strain relation of SFRC according to guidelines. . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2-7
Principal drawing of three point bending test. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2-8
Evaluation of load-CMOD curve. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2-9
Various stress distribution curves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2-10 Control perimeter for loading near edges.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2-11 Static equilibrium of inﬁnitesimal part of a plate.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2-12 Drawing of edge eﬀects from torsional moments.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2-13 Cross section of slab subjected to pure bending. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2-14 Principal of slab subjected to pure torsion.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2-15 Yield criteria for isotropic slab with diﬀerent top- and bottom reinforcement.
23
2-16 Slab illustrated in terms of the disk analogy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2-17 Disk with orthogonal reinforcement subjected to pure shear. . . . . . . . . .
24
2-18 Sketch of predicted torsional behaviour. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3-1
Illustration of reduced eﬀective height for lap-bar design calculations. . . . .
28
3-2
Plan of reinforcement design for slab specimen S1 and S2. . . . . . . . . . .
30
3-3
Sections of slab specimen S1.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3-4
Sections of slab specimen S2.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3-5
Plan of reinforcement design for slab specimen S3 and S4. . . . . . . . . . .
32
3-6
Truss girder design and dimensions.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3-7
Sections of slab specimen S3.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3-8
Sections of slab specimen S4.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3-9
Photos from the concrete mixing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
81
==PAGE:94==
List of Figures
3-10 Photos of the reinforcement preparation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3-11 Photos of the the casting procedure. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3-12 Filling procedure of mold for slump concrete. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3-13 Test setup of cylindrical compression test. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3-14 Illustration of the test setup for the three point bending test. . . . . . . . .
38
3-15 Cut-oﬀof reinforcement bars for tensile test.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3-16 Setup of the tensile test of reinforcement.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3-17 Illustration of test setup. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3-18 Photos of the support conﬁgurations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3-19 Placement of LVDT sensors. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3-20 Example of speckle pattern of the specimens. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3-21 Loading curve of specimens. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4-1
Load-CMOD curves for test specimens B1-B6. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4-2
Stress-strain curves from the tensile test of reinforcement bars . . . . . . . .
47
4-3
Photos of crack pattern of specimen S1. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4-4
Photos of crack pattern of specimen S2. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4-5
Photos of crack pattern of specimen S3. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4-6
Delamination mechanism between precast ﬁligree plank and in-situ overlay.
50
4-7
Closeup of failure for specimen S3. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4-8
Photos of crack pattern of specimen S4. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4-9
Closeup of failure for specimen S4. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4-10 3D plots of the deﬂection curves at diﬀerent loads for each slab specimen. .
54
4-11 3D plots of the deﬂection curves at load of initial crack and maximum load.
55
4-12 Deﬂection curves at maximum load along diagonals.
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4-13 Contour plots at maximum loads.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4-14 ARAMIS shots of crack development for specimen S1. . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4-15 Crack opening curves for the top of specimen S1. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4-16 ARAMIS shots of crack development for specimen S2. . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4-17 Crack opening curves for the top of specimen S2. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
4-18 Crack opening curves for the bottom of specimen S2. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
4-19 ARAMIS shots of crack development for specimen S3. . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
4-20 Crack opening curves for the top of specimen S3. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
4-21 Crack opening curves for the bottom of specimen S3. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
4-22 Crack opening curves for the bottom of specimen S3 across joint. . . . . . .
63
4-23 ARAMIS shots of crack development for specimen S4. . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
4-24 Crack opening curves for the top of specimen S4. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
82
==PAGE:95==
List of Figures
4-25 Crack opening curves for the bottom of specimen S4. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
4-26 Crack opening curves for the bottom of specimen S4 across joint. . . . . . .
67
4-27 Load-displacement and energy-displacement curves at loaded corners . . . .
69
5-1
Sketch of alternative joint solution. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
83
==PAGE:96==
List of Tables
3.1
Specimen notation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2
Mix-design for concrete specimens. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.1
Compressive strength of concrete batches. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.2
Residual ﬂexural tensile strength for beam specimens B1-B6.
. . . . . . . .
46
4.3
Calculation values of the axial residual tensile strength.
. . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.4
Tensile strength of reinforcement bars. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.5
Failure load and failure mechanism of slabs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.6
Failure loads compared with estimated capacities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.7
Deﬂection at the loaded corners at the ﬁrst visible crack and at failure.
. .
54
4.8
Overview of crack openings at maximum load.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
4.9
Comparision of the largest crack openings of specimen S1 and S3.
. . . . .
67
4.10 Reserve capacity after ﬁrst crack. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
4.11 Slab stiﬀness in various mechanical stages. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
84
==PAGE:97==
Contents of Appendices
A Production of Specimens
87
B Test Setup
93
C Concrete Mix
95
C.1 Concrete Mix for Plain Concrete . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
C.2 Concrete Mix for SFRC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
D Data: Three Point Bending Tests
99
D.1 Test Reports
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
100
D.2 Summary of Tests
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
106
D.3 Calculation of Axial Residual Tensile Strength
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
107
E Data: Tensile Tests of Reinforcement
109
E.1
Test Reports for Ø8mm Reinforcement Bars . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
110
E.2
Test Reports for Ø12mm Reinforcement Bars . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
116
F Data: Compression Tests
121
G Data: Main Slab Tests
123
G.1 Pictures of Slab Failures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
124
G.2 Various Pictures of Slab Production and Failures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
132
G.3 LVDT Measurement Curves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
136
G.4 Displacement Curves at Various Loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
140
H Capacity Calculations
149
H.1 Capacity of the Conventional Reinforces Slab . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
149
H.2 Capacity of the SFRC Slab
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
151
H.3 Punching Shear Calculation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
153
H.4 Edge Beam Calculation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
155
H.5 Joint Calculation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
157
85
==PAGE:98==
Contents of Appendices
I
Drawings
163
I.1
Technical Drawings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
165
I.2
Test Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
173
86
==PAGE:99==
Appendix A
Production of Specimens
Reinforcement work
The net reinforcement was
delivered in large pieces of
3×5m.
These were cut into the
desired measures of 1.45×1.45m
and 1.45×0.70m with an
angle grinder.
For u-bars and lapbars, D8 rein-
forcement was used an cut into
required sizes.
The u-bars were made by
heating them at the location of
the desired corner.
They were then bend 90o twice
to form the u-bar.
A total of 80 u-bars were
prepared, 40 for S1 and S2,
respectively.
87
==PAGE:100==
Appendix A. Production of Specimens
U-bars were tied to the net
reinforcement in slab S1 and S2.
The reinforcement in a corner of
slab S2.
Reinforcement design for the
ﬁligree slabs.
Concrete Mixing
The cement, ﬂy ash, various
aggregates and potential steel
ﬁbers were measures.
The dry parts were initially
mixed before adding water and
plasticizer.
At last, steel ﬁbers were spread
and mixed.
The air content in the concrete
mix was checked in order to
ensure good workability.
The slump of all batches was
additionally checked, also
to ensure good workability.
A supplementary check of the
SFRC concrete was made by
casting a cylinder and vibrating
it intensively to see if the distri-
bution of ﬁbers was satisfactory.
88
==PAGE:101==
Formwork and Casting
The wooden molds were lubri-
cated with form oil.
To produce the ﬁligree slabs, the
mold was seperated by a wooden
strip along the middle.
The concrete cover was ensured
by plastic spacing clamps.
Reinforcement work for slab S1
with plain concrete.
Reinforcement work for slab S2
with SFRC.
Reinforcement work for the ﬁli-
gree slabs used for S3 and S4.
Concrete was poured into the
molds.
For slab S2, the large mixer was
broken and the 400 liters of
concrete were shoveled.
The concrete was ﬁlled to a
height of 150mm and spread.
89
==PAGE:102==
Appendix A. Production of Specimens
Then the concrete was vibrated
with a immersion vibrator.
The slabs were covered in plastic
and set to cure.
Filigree slabs after four days of
curing.
D8 lapbars were ties over the
joint.
For slab S4, D10 L-bars were
connecting the trusses at the
corners.
Final reinforcement design for
slab S4.
Final reinforcement design for
slab S3.
The concrete was smoothened
and hooked reinforcement
placed for later transports.
The slabs were covered in plastic
and set to cure.
90
==PAGE:103==
After some time of curing the
slabs were removed from the
molds.
Then again covered in plastic for
ﬁnal curing before testing.
The slabs were transported from
the basement to the testing
facilities.
The slabs were painted white on
both top and bottom.
At last, a pattern of black dots
were sprayed on the white sur-
face.
An example of the spray
pattern.
Preparation of Additional Specimens
For each batch of concrete,
100x200mm cylinders were cast
for compression tests.
Six beams with SFRC was
prepared for three point
bending tests.
The beams were smoothened
and covered in plastic before
curing.
91
==PAGE:104==
==PAGE:105==
 
TOP CAMERA 
ACTUATOR 
LVDT SENSORS 
LVDT SENSORS 
BOTTOM CAMERA 
PINNED SUPPORT (FAR CORNER) 
PINNED-ROLLING SUPPORT 
Appendix B
Test Setup
93
==PAGE:106==
==PAGE:107==
Appendix C
Concrete Mix
95
==PAGE:108==
Water-to-cement ratio, w/c
0.500
MATERIAL
DESCRIPTION
DENSITY 
QUANTITY
VOLUME
[kg/m3]
[kg]
[l]
Cement
BASIS CEM-I 52,5N
3210
326.300
101.651
Additions
PFA (fly ash)
2200
100.000
45.455
Water
Water
1000
188.150
188.150
Admixtures
Super plasticizer (Dynamon Xtend)
1095
0.000
0.000
0.000 % of cement
Air entrainer (Mapeair 25)
1000
0.000
0.000
0.000 % of cement
Air content
5%
20.000
Steel fibre
Hooked-end
7830
0.000
0.000
-
         
% of volume
644.744
Fine aggregate
Sand 00/02
2600
616.053
225.661
35.000 % of aggregates
Coarse aggregate
Sea-gravel 04/08
2800
176.015
64.474
10.000 % of aggregates
Sea-gravel 08/16
2800
968.084
354.609
55.000 % of aggregates
Total aggregate values
2730
1760.152
644.744
Total values for mix
2374.602
1000.000
BATCH SIZE [l]
100
MATERIAL
QUANTITY
[kg]
BASIS CEM-I 52,5N
32.630
PFA (fly ash)
10.000
Water
18.815
Super plasticizer (Dynamon Xtend)
0.000
Air entrainer (Mapeair 25)
0.000
Sand 00/02
61.605
Sea-gravel 04/08
17.602
Sea-gravel 08/16
96.808
Hooked-end
0.000
Total 
237.460
MATERIAL
Percentage 
of total 
quantity
BASIS CEM-I 52,5N
14%
PFA (fly ash)
4%
Water
8%
Super plasticizer (Dynamon Xtend)
0%
Air entrainer (Mapeair 25)
0%
Sand 00/02
26%
Sea-gravel 04/08
7%
Sea-gravel 08/16
41%
Hooked-end
0%
Total values for mix
100%
Test of aggregates moisture content
MATERIAL
QUANTITY 
SATURATED
QUANTITY 
DRY
MOISTURE
QUANTIT
Y OF 
WATER 
[kg]
[kg]
[%]
[kg]
Sand 00/02
558.770
558.640
0.023
0.143
Sea-gravel 04/08
505.960
504.950
0.200
0.351
Sea-gravel 08/16
494.230
493.690
0.109
1.058
186.598
Necessary volume
Quantities for required batch
Percentage of each material of
total quantity
Water quantity after compensation [kg]
Appendix C. Concrete Mix
C.1
Concrete Mix for Plain Concrete
96
==PAGE:109==
Water-to-cement ratio, w/c
0.500
MATERIAL
DESCRIPTION
DENSITY (SSD)
QUANTITY
VOLUME
[kg/m3]
[kg]
[l]
Cement
BASIS CEM-I 52,5N
3210
326.300
101.651
Additions
PFA (fly ash)
2200
100.000
45.455
Water
Water
1000
187.280
187.280
Admixtures
Super plasticizer (Dynamon Xtend)
1095
0.870
0.795
0.204 % of cement
Air entrainer (Mapeair 25)
1000
0.098
0.098
0.023 % of cement
Air content
5%
20.000
Steel fibre
Hooked-end
7830
40.000
5.109
0.51
      
% of volume
639.613
Fine aggregate
Sand 00/02
2600
611.151
223.865
35.000 % of aggregates
Coarse aggregate
Sea-gravel 04/08
2800
174.614
63.961
10.000 % of aggregates
Sea-gravel 08/16
2800
960.380
351.787
55.000 % of aggregates
Total aggregate values
2730
1746.145
639.613
Total values for mix
2400.692
1000.000
BATCH SIZE [l]
130
MATERIAL
QUANTITY
[kg]
BASIS CEM-I 52,5N
42.419
PFA (fly ash)
13.000
Water
24.346
Super plasticizer (Dynamon Xtend)
0.113
Air entrainer (Mapeair 25)
0.013
Sand 00/02
79.450
Sea-gravel 04/08
22.700
Sea-gravel 08/16
124.849
Hooked-end
5.200
Total 
312.090
MATERIAL
Percentage of 
total quantity
BASIS CEM-I 52,5N
14%
PFA (fly ash)
4%
Water
8%
Super plasticizer (Dynamon Xtend)
0%
Air entrainer (Mapeair 25)
0%
Sand 00/02
25%
Sea-gravel 04/08
7%
Sea-gravel 08/16
40%
Hooked-end
2%
Total values for mix
100%
Test of aggregates moisture content
MATERIAL
QUANTITY 
SATURATED
QUANTITY 
DRY
MOISTURE
QUANTI
TY OF 
WATER 
[kg]
[kg]
[%]
[kg]
Sand 00/02
558.770
558.640
0.023
0.142
Sea-gravel 04/08
505.960
504.950
0.200
0.349
Sea-gravel 08/16
494.230
493.690
0.109
1.049
185.740
Water quantity after compensation [kg]
Necessary volume
Quantities for required batch
Percentage of each material of
total quantity
C.2 Concrete Mix for SFRC
C.2
Concrete Mix for SFRC
97
==PAGE:110==
==PAGE:111==
Appendix D
Data: Three Point Bending Tests
99
==PAGE:112==
Report conductied in 
accordance to 
DS-EN 14651 and Design Guideline for SFRC.
Date of testing
31-05-2016
Place of testing
Techonogical University of Denmark, Lyngby
Persons responsible
Simon Vittrup Nielsen
Rikke Witt Demuth Sørensen
Test specimen number
Total number of tested specimens
Date of manufacture
Concrete type
Fiber type
Concrete mix
Basis cement CEM-I 52.5  
PFA(fly ash)  
Water  
Super plasticizer    
Mapeair 25 2:3  
Fine aggregates (0-2mm)  
Coarse aggregates (4-8mm)  
Coarse aggregates (8-16mm)  
Steel fibers  
326.3 kg/m3
100 kg/m3
187.3 kg/m3
0.87 kg/m3
0.10 kg/m3
611.2 kg/m3
174.6 kg/m3
960.4 kg/m3
40.0 kg/m3
Description of mixing sequence
Method and duration of compaction
Date of notching
Curing history
Average width of specimen to nearest 0.1 mm
Average distance between the tip of the notch 
and the top of the specimen to nearest 0.1 mm
Width of specimen
Height of specimen
Span length of specimen
Rate of increase of CMOD
LOP to nearest 0.1 MPa 
at CMOD1 [MPa]
4.5
at CMOD2 [MPa]
4.7
at CMOD3 [MPa]
4.6
at CMOD4 [MPa]
4.4
Deviations from standard testing method
2.3
Residual flexural tensile strength values 
corresponding to CMODj to nearest 0.1 MPa 
The bottom rollers were 50 mm instead of the recommended 30 mm rollers and 
the top roller beneath the actuator was 25 mm instead of 30 mm.
125mm
150mm
150mm
500mm
0.05 mm/min up to a CMOD of 0.1 mm then 0.2 mm/min throughout
Load-CMOD Curve
First the coarse aggregates was added to the mixer, then the fine aggregates and 
subsequently the cement and fly ash. The dry materials were then mixed for 
approximately 1 minute. This composition was then mixed for around 3 minutes 
prior to adding steel fibers during mixing for another 3 minutes.
The specimens were compaced on a vibration table for a few minutes until no 
large air bubbles showed.
16-05-2016
The specimens cured under room temperature wrapped in plastic. They were open 
once for nutching and then wrapped again. They cured for 56 days.
150mm
Hooked
Test report 
Three Point Bending Test
B1
6
05-04-2016
Slump concrete
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
0
1
2
3
4
Load [kN]
CMOD [mm]
Appendix D. Data: Three Point Bending Tests
D.1
Test Reports
100
==PAGE:113==
Report conductied in 
accordance to 
DS-EN 14651 and Design Guideline for SFRC.
Date of testing
31-05-2016
Place of testing
Techonogical University of Denmark, Lyngby
Persons responsible
Simon Vittrup Nielsen
Rikke Witt Demuth Sørensen
Test specimen number
Total number of tested specimens
Date of manufacture
Concrete type
Fiber type
Concrete mix
Basis cement CEM-I 52.5
PFA(fly ash)
Water
Super plasticizer
Mapeair 25 2:3
Fine aggregates (0-2mm)
Coarse aggregates (4-8mm)
Coarse aggregates (8-16mm)
Steel fibers
326.3 kg/m3
100 kg/m3
187.3 kg/m3
0.87 kg/m3
0.10 kg/m3
611.2 kg/m3
174.6 kg/m3
960.4 kg/m3
40.0 kg/m3
Description of mixing sequence
Method and duration of compaction
Date of notching
Curing history
Average width of specimen to nearest 0.1 mm
Average distance between the tip of the notch 
and the top of the specimen to nearest 0.1 mm
Width of specimen
Height of specimen
Span length of specimen
Rate of increase of CMOD
LOP to nearest 0.1 MPa 
at CMOD1 [MPa]
5.5
at CMOD2 [MPa]
5.6
at CMOD3 [MPa]
5.4
at CMOD4 [MPa]
5.1
Deviations from standard testing method
5.7
Residual flexural tensile strength values 
corresponding to CMODj to nearest 0.1 MPa 
The bottom rollers were 50 mm instead of the recommended 30 mm rollers and 
the top roller beneath the actuator was 25 mm instead of 30 mm.
150mm
150mm
500mm
0.05 mm/min up to a CMOD of 0.1 mm then 0.2 mm/min throughout
Load-CMOD Curve
125mm
Test report 
Three Point Bending Test
B2
6
05-04-2016
Slump concrete
First the coarse aggregates was added to the mixer, then the fine aggregates and 
subsequently the cement and fly ash. The dry materials were then mixed for 
approximately 1 minute. This composition was then mixed for around 3 minutes 
prior to adding steel fibers during mixing for another 3 minutes.
The specimens were compaced on a vibration table for a few minutes until no 
large air bubbles showed.
16-05-2016
The specimens cured under room temperature wrapped in plastic. They were open 
once for nutching and then wrapped again. They cured for 56 days.
150mm
Hooked
0
5
10
15
20
0
1
2
3
4
Load [kN]
CMOD [mm]
D.1 Test Reports
101
==PAGE:114==
Report conductied in 
accordance to 
DS-EN 14651 and Design Guideline for SFRC.
Date of testing
31-05-2016
Place of testing
Techonogical University of Denmark, Lyngby
Persons responsible
Simon Vittrup Nielsen
Rikke Witt Demuth Sørensen
Test specimen number
Total number of tested specimens
Date of manufacture
Concrete type
Fiber type
Concrete mix
Basis cement CEM-I 52.5
PFA(fly ash)
Water
Super plasticizer
Mapeair 25 2:3
Fine aggregates (0-2mm)
Coarse aggregates (4-8mm)
Coarse aggregates (8-16mm)
Steel fibers
326.3 kg/m3
100 kg/m3
187.3 kg/m3
0.87 kg/m3
0.10 kg/m3
611.2 kg/m3
174.6 kg/m3
960.4 kg/m3
40.0 kg/m3
Description of mixing sequence
Method and duration of compaction
Date of notching
Curing history
Average width of specimen to nearest 0.1 mm
Average distance between the tip of the notch 
and the top of the specimen to nearest 0.1 mm
Width of specimen
Height of specimen
Span length of specimen
Rate of increase of CMOD
LOP to nearest 0.1 MPa 
at CMOD1 [MPa]
3.6
at CMOD2 [MPa]
3.8
at CMOD3 [MPa]
3.7
at CMOD4 [MPa]
3.5
Deviations from standard testing method
4.5
Residual flexural tensile strength values 
corresponding to CMODj to nearest 0.1 MPa 
The bottom rollers were 50 mm instead of the recommended 30 mm rollers and 
the top roller beneath the actuator was 25 mm instead of 30 mm.
150mm
150mm
500mm
0.05 mm/min up to a CMOD of 0.1 mm then 0.2 mm/min throughout
Load-CMOD Curve
125mm
Test report 
Three Point Bending Test
B3
6
05-04-2016
Slump concrete
First the coarse aggregates was added to the mixer, then the fine aggregates and 
subsequently the cement and fly ash. The dry materials were then mixed for 
approximately 1 minute. This composition was then mixed for around 3 minutes 
prior to adding steel fibers during mixing for another 3 minutes.
The specimens were compaced on a vibration table for a few minutes until no 
large air bubbles showed.
16-05-2016
The specimens cured under room temperature wrapped in plastic. They were open 
once for nutching and then wrapped again. They cured for 56 days.
150mm
Hooked
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
0
1
2
3
4
Load [kN]
CMOD [mm]
Appendix D. Data: Three Point Bending Tests
102
==PAGE:115==
Report conductied in 
accordance to 
DS-EN 14651 and Design Guideline for SFRC.
Date of testing
31-05-2016
Place of testing
Techonogical University of Denmark, Lyngby
Persons responsible
Simon Vittrup Nielsen
Rikke Witt Demuth Sørensen
Test specimen number
Total number of tested specimens
Date of manufacture
Concrete type
Fiber type
Concrete mix
Basis cement CEM-I 52.5
PFA(fly ash)
Water
Super plasticizer
Mapeair 25 2:3
Fine aggregates (0-2mm)
Coarse aggregates (4-8mm)
Coarse aggregates (8-16mm)
Steel fibers
326.3 kg/m3
100 kg/m3
187.3 kg/m3
0.87 kg/m3
0.10 kg/m3
611.2 kg/m3
174.6 kg/m3
960.4 kg/m3
40.0 kg/m3
Description of mixing sequence
Method and duration of compaction
Date of notching
Curing history
Average width of specimen to nearest 0.1 mm
Average distance between the tip of the notch 
and the top of the specimen to nearest 0.1 mm
Width of specimen
Height of specimen
Span length of specimen
Rate of increase of CMOD
LOP to nearest 0.1 MPa 
at CMOD1 [MPa]
3.9
at CMOD2 [MPa]
3.7
at CMOD3 [MPa]
3.5
at CMOD4 [MPa]
3.1
Deviations from standard testing method
5.1
Residual flexural tensile strength values 
corresponding to CMODj to nearest 0.1 MPa 
The bottom rollers were 50 mm instead of the recommended 30 mm rollers and 
the top roller beneath the actuator was 25 mm instead of 30 mm.
150mm
150mm
500mm
0.05 mm/min up to a CMOD of 0.1 mm then 0.2 mm/min throughout
Load-CMOD Curve
125mm
Test report 
Three Point Bending Test
B4
6
05-04-2016
Slump concrete
First the coarse aggregates was added to the mixer, then the fine aggregates and 
subsequently the cement and fly ash. The dry materials were then mixed for 
approximately 1 minute. This composition was then mixed for around 3 minutes 
prior to adding steel fibers during mixing for another 3 minutes.
The specimens were compaced on a vibration table for a few minutes until no 
large air bubbles showed.
16-05-2016
The specimens cured under room temperature wrapped in plastic. They were open 
once for nutching and then wrapped again. They cured for 56 days.
150mm
Hooked
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
0
1
2
3
4
Load [kN]
CMOD [mm]
D.1 Test Reports
103
==PAGE:116==
Report conductied in 
accordance to 
DS-EN 14651 and Design Guideline for SFRC.
Date of testing
31-05-2016
Place of testing
Techonogical University of Denmark, Lyngby
Persons responsible
Simon Vittrup Nielsen
Rikke Witt Demuth Sørensen
Test specimen number
Total number of tested specimens
Date of manufacture
Concrete type
Fiber type
Concrete mix
Basis cement CEM-I 52.5
PFA(fly ash)
Water
Super plasticizer
Mapeair 25 2:3
Fine aggregates (0-2mm)
Coarse aggregates (4-8mm)
Coarse aggregates (8-16mm)
Steel fibers
326.3 kg/m3
100 kg/m3
187.3 kg/m3
0.87 kg/m3
0.10 kg/m3
611.2 kg/m3
174.6 kg/m3
960.4 kg/m3
40.0 kg/m3
Description of mixing sequence
Method and duration of compaction
Date of notching
Curing history
Average width of specimen to nearest 0.1 mm
Average distance between the tip of the notch 
and the top of the specimen to nearest 0.1 mm
Width of specimen
Height of specimen
Span length of specimen
Rate of increase of CMOD
LOP to nearest 0.1 MPa 
at CMOD1 [MPa]
4.6
at CMOD2 [MPa]
4.7
at CMOD3 [MPa]
4.6
at CMOD4 [MPa]
4.4
Deviations from standard testing method
5.0
Residual flexural tensile strength values 
corresponding to CMODj to nearest 0.1 MPa 
The bottom rollers were 50 mm instead of the recommended 30 mm rollers and 
the top roller beneath the actuator was 25 mm instead of 30 mm.
150mm
150mm
500mm
0.05 mm/min up to a CMOD of 0.1 mm then 0.2 mm/min throughout
Load-CMOD Curve
125mm
Test report 
Three Point Bending Test
B5
6
05-04-2016
Slump concrete
First the coarse aggregates was added to the mixer, then the fine aggregates and 
subsequently the cement and fly ash. The dry materials were then mixed for 
approximately 1 minute. This composition was then mixed for around 3 minutes 
prior to adding steel fibers during mixing for another 3 minutes.
The specimens were compaced on a vibration table for a few minutes until no 
large air bubbles showed.
16-05-2016
The specimens cured under room temperature wrapped in plastic. They were open 
once for nutching and then wrapped again. They cured for 56 days.
150mm
Hooked
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
0
1
2
3
4
Load [kN]
CMOD [mm]
Appendix D. Data: Three Point Bending Tests
104
==PAGE:117==
Report conductied in 
accordance to 
DS-EN 14651 and Design Guideline for SFRC.
Date of testing
31-05-2016
Place of testing
Techonogical University of Denmark, Lyngby
Persons responsible
Simon Vittrup Nielsen
Rikke Witt Demuth Sørensen
Test specimen number
Total number of tested specimens
Date of manufacture
Concrete type
Fiber type
Concrete mix
Basis cement CEM-I 52.5
PFA(fly ash)
Water
Super plasticizer
Mapeair 25 2:3
Fine aggregates (0-2mm)
Coarse aggregates (4-8mm)
Coarse aggregates (8-16mm)
Steel fibers
326.3 kg/m3
100 kg/m3
187.3 kg/m3
0.87 kg/m3
0.10 kg/m3
611.2 kg/m3
174.6 kg/m3
960.4 kg/m3
40.0 kg/m3
Description of mixing sequence
Method and duration of compaction
Date of notching
Curing history
Average width of specimen to nearest 0.1 mm
Average distance between the tip of the notch 
and the top of the specimen to nearest 0.1 mm
Width of specimen
Height of specimen
Span length of specimen
Rate of increase of CMOD
LOP to nearest 0.1 MPa 
at CMOD1 [MPa]
4.7
at CMOD2 [MPa]
4.7
at CMOD3 [MPa]
4.6
at CMOD4 [MPa]
4.1
Deviations from standard testing method
4.8
Residual flexural tensile strength values 
corresponding to CMODj to nearest 0.1 MPa 
The bottom rollers were 50 mm instead of the recommended 30 mm rollers and 
the top roller beneath the actuator was 25 mm instead of 30 mm.
150mm
150mm
500mm
0.05 mm/min up to a CMOD of 0.1 mm then 0.2 mm/min throughout
Load-CMOD Curve
125mm
Test report 
Three Point Bending Test
B6
6
05-04-2016
Slump concrete
First the coarse aggregates was added to the mixer, then the fine aggregates and 
subsequently the cement and fly ash. The dry materials were then mixed for 
approximately 1 minute. This composition was then mixed for around 3 minutes 
prior to adding steel fibers during mixing for another 3 minutes.
The specimens were compaced on a vibration table for a few minutes until no 
large air bubbles showed.
16-05-2016
The specimens cured under room temperature wrapped in plastic. They were open 
once for nutching and then wrapped again. They cured for 56 days.
150mm
Hooked
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
0
1
2
3
4
Load [kN]
CMOD [mm]
D.1 Test Reports
105
==PAGE:118==
CMOD1
CMOD2
CMOD3
CMOD4
B1
14.14
14.62
14.46
13.66
B2
17.26
17.39
16.91
16.01
B3
11.34
11.88
11.66
10.87
B4
12.28
11.54
10.87
9.81
B5
14.47
14.82
14.39
13.67
B6
14.56
14.72
14.37
12.90
CMOD1
CMOD2
CMOD3
CMOD4
B1
4.52
4.68
4.63
4.37
B2
5.52
5.57
5.41
5.12
B3
3.63
3.80
3.73
3.48
B4
3.93
3.69
3.48
3.14
B5
4.63
4.74
4.60
4.38
B6
4.66
4.71
4.60
4.13
Average
4.48
4.53
4.41
4.10
Load-CMOD curves for all tests
3.97
Closeup of the Load-CMOD curve
Loads at CMODj [kN]
Beam 
number
Beam 
number
Residual flexural tensile strength CMODj [MPa]
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Load [kN]
CMOD [mm]
B1
B2
B3
B4
B5
B6
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
Load [kN]
CMOD [mm]
B1
B2
B3
B4
B5
B6
Appendix D. Data: Three Point Bending Tests
D.2
Summary of Tests
106
==PAGE:119==
Residual flexural tensile strengths at CMODj  [MPa] 
fR.1.1
4.52
:=
fR.4.1
4.37
:=
Assumed value
fR.1.2
5.52
:=
fR.4.2
5.12
:=
fR.1.3
3.63
:=
fR.4.3
3.48
:=
fR.1.4
3.93
:=
fR.4.4
3.14
:=
fR.1.5
4.63
:=
fR.4.5
4.38
:=
Assumed value
fR.1.6
4.66
:=
fR.4.6
4.13
:=
Mean residual flexural tensile strength
ff.cflm.L1
4.48MPa
:=
ff.cflm.L2
3.97MPa
:=
Characteristic values of the residual flexural tensile strength
Mean value of the logarithmic
individual test result
Lff.cflk.L1
1
6
ln fR.1.1
(
)
ln fR.1.2
(
)
+
ln fR.1.3
(
)
+
ln fR.1.4
(
)
ln fR.1.5
(
)
+
ln fR.1.6
(
)
+
+
...





1.491
=
:=
Lff.cflk.L2
1
6
ln fR.4.1
(
)
ln fR.4.2
(
)
+
ln fR.4.3
(
)
+
ln fR.4.4
(
)
ln fR.4.5
(
)
+
ln fR.4.6
(
)
+
+
...





1.399
=
:=
Standard deviation of the
logarithmic individual test
results
LsL1
Lff.cflk.L1
ln fR.1.1
(
)
-
(
)
2
Lff.cflk.L1
ln fR.1.2
(
)
-
(
)
2
+
Lff.cflk.L1
ln fR.1.3
(
)
-
(
)
2
Lff.cflk.L1
ln fR.1.4
(
)
-
(
)
2
+
+
...
Lff.cflk.L1
ln fR.1.5
(
)
-
(
)
2
Lff.cflk.L1
ln fR.1.6
(
)
-
(
)
2
+
+
...








6
1
-
0.146
=
:=
LsL2
Lff.cflk.L2
ln fR.4.1
(
)
-
(
)
2
Lff.cflk.L2
ln fR.4.2
(
)
-
(
)
2
+
Lff.cflk.L2
ln fR.4.3
(
)
-
(
)
2
Lff.cflk.L2
ln fR.4.4
(
)
-
(
)
2
+
+
...
Lff.cflk.L2
ln fR.4.5
(
)
-
(
)
2
Lff.cflk.L2
ln fR.4.6
(
)
-
(
)
2
+
+
...








6
1
-
0.176
=
:=
Fractile factor for the unknown
standard deviation of 5%
fractile with 75% confidence
acc. o table G7 in the
guideline.
ks
2.336
:=
Characteristic values of the
residual flexural tensile
strength for slump concrete
ff.cflk.L1
e
Lff.cflk.L1 ks LsL1

-
(
) MPa

3.155 MPa

=
:=
ff.cflk.L2
e
Lff.cflk.L2 ks LsL2

-
(
) MPa

2.685 MPa

=
:=
D.3 Calculation of Axial Residual Tensile Strength
D.3
Calculation of Axial Residual Tensile Strength
107
==PAGE:120==
Basic values of the axial residual tensile strength
ff.cflm.L2
ff.cflm.L1
0.886
=
ff.cflk.L2
ff.cflk.L1
0.851
=
Correction values
βL1
0.40
:=
βL2
0.25
:=
βu
0.37
:=
βs
0.40
:=
Basic values of the axial
residual tensile strength
ff.ct0.L1
ff.cflk.L1 βL1

1.262 MPa

=
:=
ff.ct0.L2
ff.cflk.L2 βL2

0.671 MPa

=
:=
ff.ct0.u
ff.cflk.L1 βu

1.167 MPa

=
:=
ff.ct0.s
ff.cflk.L2 βs

1.074 MPa

=
:=
Calculation values of the axial residual tensile strength
Cross sectional area of the
cracked areas
Af.ct
0.9 150

mm 125

mm
m2
0.017
=
:=
Factor accounting for the
member size on the
coefficient variation
κf.G
1.0
Af.ct 0.5

+
1.008
=
:=
Fiber orientation factor 
κf.F
1.0
:=
For slump concrete for plane structures cast in
horizontal position with width more than 5 times the
height.
Calculation values of the axial
residual tensile strength
ff.ctR.L1
ff.ct0.L1 κf.F

κf.G

1.273 MPa

=
:=
ff.ctR.L2
ff.ct0.L2 κf.F

κf.G

0.677 MPa

=
:=
ff.ctR.u
ff.ct0.u κf.F

κf.G

1.177 MPa

=
:=
ff.ctR.s
ff.ct0.s κf.F

κf.G

1.083 MPa

=
:=
Performance class values
based on table G.2 in the
guideline
L1
3
:=
L2
2.7
:=
L2
L1
0.9
=
With this ratio,the rectangular stress block can be used for
ULS verification! 
Appendix D. Data: Three Point Bending Tests
108
==PAGE:121==
Appendix E
Data: Tensile Tests of
Reinforcement
109
==PAGE:122==
Report conductied in 
accordance to 
DS-EN ISO 6892-1
Date of testing
04-05-2016
Place of testing
Techonogical University of Denmark, Lyngby
Persons responsible
Simon Vittrup Nielsen
Rikke Witt Demuth Sørensen
Test specimen number
Total number of tested specimens
Design of test specimen
Cross sectional area of tested area [mm2]
Testing machine
Other testing device
Testing rates
Test results
Description of test results
Maximum applied load [kN]
Lower Yield Strength [MPa]
Maximum strength [MPa]
Load-Displacement Curve
Stress-Strain Curve
Test report 
Tensile Test of Reinforcement 
Bars, diameter 8mm
INSTRON 8502 100kN
685.2
28.27
19.4
1
6
Clip gauge with extensometer length 51,5 mm
Range 1: 0,00007 s-1 x 65 mm = 0,00455 mm/s
Range 2: 0,00025 s-1 x 65 mm = 0,01625 mm/s
Range 3: 0,002 s-1 x 65 mm = 0,13 mm/s
Range 4: 0,0067 s-1 x 65 mm = 0,4355 mm/s
The test includes measurement of time in seconds, position of upper clamp 
in millimeter and the load in kN. The clip gauge provides strains in 
millimeter, but only in the elastic range.
The results are corrected based on cross sectional area, length og the clip 
gauge and the length of tested specimen.
590.0
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Stress [MPa]
Strains [%] 
0
5
10
15
20
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
Appendix E. Data: Tensile Tests of Reinforcement
E.1
Test Reports for Ø8mm Reinforcement Bars
110
==PAGE:123==
Report conductied in 
accordance to 
DS-EN ISO 6892-1
Date of testing
04-05-2016
Place of testing
Techonogical University of Denmark, Lyngby
Persons responsible
Simon Vittrup Nielsen
Rikke Witt Demuth Sørensen
Test specimen number
Total number of tested specimens
Design of test specimen
Cross sectional area of tested area [mm2]
Testing machine
Other testing device
Testing rates
Description of test results
Maximum applied load [kN]
Lower Yield Strength [MPa]
Maximum strength [MPa]
Load-Displacement Curve
Stress-Strain Curve
INSTRON 8502 100kN
Test report 
Tensile Test of Reinforcement 
Bars, diameter 8mm
2
6
28.27
723.1
Clip gauge with extensometer length 51,5 mm
Range 1: 0,00007 s-1 x 65 mm = 0,00455 mm/s
Range 2: 0,00025 s-1 x 65 mm = 0,01625 mm/s
Range 3: 0,002 s-1 x 65 mm = 0,13 mm/s
Range 4: 0,0067 s-1 x 65 mm = 0,4355 mm/s
The test includes measurement of time in seconds, position of upper clamp 
in millimeter and the load in kN. The clip gauge provides strains in 
millimeter, but only in the elastic range.
The results are corrected based on cross sectional area, length og the clip 
gauge and the length of tested specimen.
20.4
625.0
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Stress [MPa]
Strains [%]
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
E.1 Test Reports for Ø8mm Reinforcement Bars
111
==PAGE:124==
Report conductied in 
accordance to 
DS-EN ISO 6892-1
Date of testing
04-05-2016
Place of testing
Techonogical University of Denmark, Lyngby
Persons responsible
Simon Vittrup Nielsen
Rikke Witt Demuth Sørensen
Test specimen number
Total number of tested specimens
Design of test specimen
Cross sectional area of tested area [mm2]
Testing machine
Other testing device
Testing rates
Test results
Description of test results
Maximum applied load [kN]
Lower Yield Strength [MPa]
Maximum strength [MPa]
Load-Displacement Curve
Stress-Strain Curve
INSTRON 8502 100kN
Test report 
Tensile Test of Reinforcement 
Bars, diameter 8mm
3
6
28.27
740.2
Clip gauge with extensometer length 51,5 mm
Range 1: 0,00007 s-1 x 65 mm = 0,00455 mm/s
Range 2: 0,00025 s-1 x 65 mm = 0,01625 mm/s
Range 3: 0,002 s-1 x 65 mm = 0,13 mm/s
Range 4: 0,0067 s-1 x 65 mm = 0,4355 mm/s
The test includes measurement of time in seconds, position of upper clamp 
in millimeter and the load in kN. The clip gauge provides strains in 
millimeter, but only in the elastic range.
The results are corrected based on cross sectional area, length og the clip 
gauge and the length of tested specimen.
20.9
645.0
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Stress [MPa]
Strains [%]
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
Appendix E. Data: Tensile Tests of Reinforcement
112
==PAGE:125==
Report conductied in 
accordance to 
DS-EN ISO 6892-1
Date of testing
04-05-2016
Place of testing
Techonogical University of Denmark, Lyngby
Persons responsible
Simon Vittrup Nielsen
Rikke Witt Demuth Sørensen
Test specimen number
Total number of tested specimens
Design of test specimen
Cross sectional area of tested area [mm2]
Testing machine
Other testing device
Testing rates
Description of test results
Maximum applied load [kN]
Lower Yield Strength [MPa]
Maximum strength [MPa]
Load-Displacement Curve
Stress-Strain Curve
722.2
Clip gauge with extensometer length 51,5 mm
Range 1: 0,00007 s-1 x 65 mm = 0,00455 mm/s
Range 2: 0,00025 s-1 x 65 mm = 0,01625 mm/s
Range 3: 0,002 s-1 x 65 mm = 0,13 mm/s
Range 4: 0,0067 s-1 x 65 mm = 0,4355 mm/s
The test includes measurement of time in seconds, position of upper clamp 
in millimeter and the load in kN. The clip gauge provides strains in 
millimeter, but only in the elastic range.
The results are corrected based on cross sectional area, length og the clip 
gauge and the length of tested specimen.
20.4
610.0
INSTRON 8502 100kN
Test report 
Tensile Test of Reinforcement 
Bars, diameter 8mm
4
6
28.27
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Stress [MPa]
Strains [%]
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
E.1 Test Reports for Ø8mm Reinforcement Bars
113
==PAGE:126==
Report conductied in 
accordance to 
DS-EN ISO 6892-1
Date of testing
04-05-2016
Place of testing
Techonogical University of Denmark, Lyngby
Persons responsible
Simon Vittrup Nielsen
Rikke Witt Demuth Sørensen
Test specimen number
Total number of tested specimens
Design of test specimen
Cross sectional area of tested area [mm2]
Testing machine
Other testing device
Testing rates
Test results
Description of test results
Maximum applied load [kN]
Lower Yield Strength [MPa]
Maximum strength [MPa]
Load-Displacement Curve
Stress-Strain Curve
INSTRON 8502 100kN
Test report 
Tensile Test of Reinforcement 
Bars, diameter 8mm
5
6
28.27
730.4
Clip gauge with extensometer length 51,5 mm
Range 1: 0,00007 s-1 x 65 mm = 0,00455 mm/s
Range 2: 0,00025 s-1 x 65 mm = 0,01625 mm/s
Range 3: 0,002 s-1 x 65 mm = 0,13 mm/s
Range 4: 0,0067 s-1 x 65 mm = 0,4355 mm/s
The test includes measurement of time in seconds, position of upper clamp 
in millimeter and the load in kN. The clip gauge provides strains in 
millimeter, but only in the elastic range.
The results are corrected based on cross sectional area, length og the clip 
gauge and the length of tested specimen.
20.7
630.0
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Stress [MPa]
Strains [%]
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
Appendix E. Data: Tensile Tests of Reinforcement
114
==PAGE:127==
Report conductied in 
accordance to 
DS-EN ISO 6892-1
Date of testing
04-05-2016
Place of testing
Techonogical University of Denmark, Lyngby
Persons responsible
Simon Vittrup Nielsen
Rikke Witt Demuth Sørensen
Test specimen number
Total number of tested specimens
Design of test specimen
Cross sectional area of tested area [mm2]
Testing machine
Other testing device
Testing rates
Description of test results
Maximum applied load [kN]
Lower Yield Strength [MPa]
Maximum strength [MPa]
Load-Displacement Curve
Stress-Strain Curve
INSTRON 8502 100kN
Test report 
Tensile Test of Reinforcement 
Bars, diameter 8mm
6
6
28.27
723.3
Clip gauge with extensometer length 51,5 mm
Range 1: 0,00007 s-1 x 65 mm = 0,00455 mm/s
Range 2: 0,00025 s-1 x 65 mm = 0,01625 mm/s
Range 3: 0,002 s-1 x 65 mm = 0,13 mm/s
Range 4: 0,0067 s-1 x 65 mm = 0,4355 mm/s
The test includes measurement of time in seconds, position of upper clamp 
in millimeter and the load in kN. The clip gauge provides strains in 
millimeter, but only in the elastic range.
The results are corrected based on cross sectional area, length og the clip 
gauge and the length of tested specimen.
20.5
640.0
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Stress [MPa]
Strains [%]
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
E.1 Test Reports for Ø8mm Reinforcement Bars
115
==PAGE:128==
Report conductied in 
accordance to 
DS-EN ISO 6892-1
Date of testing
04-05-2016
Place of testing
Techonogical University of Denmark, Lyngby
Persons responsible
Simon Vittrup Nielsen
Rikke Witt Demuth Sørensen
Test specimen number
Total number of tested specimens
Design of test specimen
Cross sectional area of tested area [mm2]
Testing machine
Other testing device
Test setup illustration
Testing rates
Test results
Description of test results
Maximum applied load [kN]
Lower Yield Strength [MPa]
Maximum strength [MPa]
Load-Displacement Curve
Stress-Strain Curve
Test report 
Tensile Test of Reinforcement 
Bars, diameter 12mm
INSTRON 8502 250kN
580.2
78.54
45.6
1
4
Clip gauge with extensometer length 51,5 mm
Range 1: 0,00007 s-1 x 65 mm = 0,00455 mm/s
Range 2: 0,00025 s-1 x 65 mm = 0,01625 mm/s
Range 3: 0,002 s-1 x 65 mm = 0,13 mm/s
Range 4: 0,0067 s-1 x 65 mm = 0,4355 mm/s
The test includes measurement of time in seconds, position of upper clamp 
in millimeter and the load in kN. The clip gauge provides strains in 
millimeter, but only in the elastic range.
The results are corrected based on cross sectional area, length og the clip 
gauge and the length of tested specimen.
510.0
y = 1356.7x + 4.0095
y = 1356.7x - 271.34
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Stress [MPa]
Strains [%]
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12 13
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
Appendix E. Data: Tensile Tests of Reinforcement
E.2
Test Reports for Ø12mm Reinforcement Bars
116
==PAGE:129==
Report conductied in 
accordance to 
DS-EN ISO 6892-1
Date of testing
04-05-2016
Place of testing
Techonogical University of Denmark, Lyngby
Persons responsible
Simon Vittrup Nielsen
Rikke Witt Demuth Sørensen
Test specimen number
Total number of tested specimens
Design of test specimen
Cross sectional area of tested area [mm2]
Testing machine
Other testing device
Test setup illustration
Testing rates
Test results
Description of test results
Maximum applied load [kN]
Lower Yield Strength [MPa]
Maximum strength [MPa]
Load-Displacement Curve
Stress-Strain Curve
570.4
Clip gauge with extensometer length 51,5 mm
Range 1: 0,00007 s-1 x 65 mm = 0,00455 mm/s
Range 2: 0,00025 s-1 x 65 mm = 0,01625 mm/s
Range 3: 0,002 s-1 x 65 mm = 0,13 mm/s
Range 4: 0,0067 s-1 x 65 mm = 0,4355 mm/s
The test includes measurement of time in seconds, position of upper clamp 
in millimeter and the load in kN. The clip gauge provides strains in 
millimeter, but only in the elastic range.
The results are corrected based on cross sectional area, length og the clip 
gauge and the length of tested specimen.
44.8
510.0
INSTRON 8502 250kN
Test report 
Tensile Test of Reinforcement 
Bars, diameter 12mm
2
4
78.54
y = 1175.2x + 16.463
y = 1175.2x - 235.04
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Stress [MPa]
Strains [%]
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12 13
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
E.2 Test Reports for Ø12mm Reinforcement Bars
117
==PAGE:130==
Report conductied in 
accordance to 
DS-EN ISO 6892-1
Date of testing
04-05-2016
Place of testing
Techonogical University of Denmark, Lyngby
Persons responsible
Simon Vittrup Nielsen
Rikke Witt Demuth Sørensen
Test specimen number
Total number of tested specimens
Design of test specimen
Cross sectional area of tested area [mm2]
Testing machine
Other testing device
Test setup illustration
Testing rates
Test results
Description of test results
Maximum applied load [kN]
Lower Yield Strength [MPa]
Maximum strength [MPa]
Load-Displacement Curve
Stress-Strain Curve
237.185
568.8
Clip gauge with extensometer length 51,5 mm
Range 1: 0,00007 s-1 x 65 mm = 0,00455 mm/s
Range 2: 0,00025 s-1 x 65 mm = 0,01625 mm/s
Range 3: 0,002 s-1 x 65 mm = 0,13 mm/s
Range 4: 0,0067 s-1 x 65 mm = 0,4355 mm/s
The test includes measurement of time in seconds, position of upper clamp 
in millimeter and the load in kN. The clip gauge provides strains in 
millimeter, but only in the elastic range.
The results are corrected based on cross sectional area, length og the clip 
gauge and the length of tested specimen.
44.7
505.0
INSTRON 8502 250kN
Test report 
Tensile Test of Reinforcement 
Bars, diameter 12mm
3
4
78.54
y = 1125.9x + 12.005
y = 1125.9x - 225.18
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Stress [MPa]
Strains [%]
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12 13
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
Appendix E. Data: Tensile Tests of Reinforcement
118
==PAGE:131==
Report conductied in 
accordance to 
DS-EN ISO 6892-1
Date of testing
04-05-2016
Place of testing
Techonogical University of Denmark, Lyngby
Persons responsible
Simon Vittrup Nielsen
Rikke Witt Demuth Sørensen
Test specimen number
Total number of tested specimens
Design of test specimen
Cross sectional area of tested area [mm2]
Testing machine
Other testing device
Test setup illustration
Testing rates
Test results
Description of test results
Maximum applied load [kN]
Lower Yield Strength [MPa]
Maximum strength [MPa]
Load-Displacement Curve
Stress-Strain Curve
581.0
Clip gauge with extensometer length 51,5 mm
Range 1: 0,00007 s-1 x 65 mm = 0,00455 mm/s
Range 2: 0,00025 s-1 x 65 mm = 0,01625 mm/s
Range 3: 0,002 s-1 x 65 mm = 0,13 mm/s
Range 4: 0,0067 s-1 x 65 mm = 0,4355 mm/s
The test includes measurement of time in seconds, position of upper clamp 
in millimeter and the load in kN. The clip gauge provides strains in 
millimeter, but only in the elastic range.
The results are corrected based on cross sectional area, length og the clip 
gauge and the length of tested specimen.
45.6
510.0
INSTRON 8502 250kN
Test report 
Tensile Test of Reinforcement 
Bars, diameter 12mm
2
4
78.54
y = 1059x + 14.178
y = 1059x - 211.8
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Stress [MPa]
Strains [%]
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12 13
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
E.2 Test Reports for Ø12mm Reinforcement Bars
119
==PAGE:132==
==PAGE:133==
Cylinder diameter [mm]
100
Loading rate [MPa/s]
0.6
Cross sectional area [mm2]
7853.98
Loading rate [kN/s]
4.71
Specimen 
number
Failure load  
Fu [kN]
Compressive 
strength [MPa]
Failure load  Fu 
[kN]
Compressive 
strength [MPa]
Failure load  
Fu [kN]
Compressive 
strength [MPa]
1
429
54.6
403
51.3
374
47.6
2
453
57.7
409
52.1
320
40.7
3
469
59.7
382
48.6
371
47.2
4
360
45.8
399
50.8
351
44.7
5
449
57.2
405
51.6
398
50.7
6
412
52.5
413
52.6
376
47.9
7
412
52.5
329
41.9
336
42.8
8
443
56.4
359
45.7
352
44.8
9
463
59.0
362
46.1
358
45.6
10
415
52.8
337
42.9
369
47.0
11
384
48.9
352
44.8
367
46.7
12
427
54.4
361
46.0
382
48.6
Average
426.3
54.3
375.9
47.9
362.8
46.2
STDEV
32.2
4.1
29.6
3.8
21.0
2.7
Specimen 
number
Failure load  
Fu [kN]
Compressive 
strength [MPa]
Failure load  Fu 
[kN]
Compressive 
strength [MPa]
1
387
49.3
367
46.7
2
455
57.9
382
48.6
3
432
55.0
375
47.7
4
418
53.2
371
47.2
5
378
48.1
379
48.3
6
389
49.5
348
44.3
7
445
56.7
345
43.9
8
416
53.0
399
50.8
9
402
51.2
386
49.1
10
450
57.3
361
46.0
11
421
53.6
366
46.6
12
448
57.0
385
49.0
Average
420.1
53.5
372.0
47.4
STDEV
26.7
3.4
15.8
2.0
Specimen 
number
S1
S2
SF
S3
S4
1
54.6
51.3
47.6
49.3
46.7
2
57.7
52.1
40.7
57.9
48.6
3
59.7
48.6
47.2
55.0
47.7
4
45.8
50.8
44.7
53.2
47.2
5
57.2
51.6
50.7
48.1
48.3
6
52.5
52.6
47.9
49.5
44.3
7
52.5
41.9
42.8
56.7
43.9
8
56.4
45.7
44.8
53.0
50.8
9
59.0
46.1
45.6
51.2
49.1
10
52.8
42.9
47.0
57.3
46.0
11
48.9
44.8
46.7
53.6
46.6
12
54.4
46.0
48.6
57.0
49.0
Average
54.3
47.9
46.2
53.5
47.4
Deviation
4.1
3.8
2.7
3.4
2.0
5 % fractile
47.5
41.7
41.8
47.9
44.1
S4
Compressive strength, fc [MPa]
S1
S2
SF
S3
Appendix F
Data: Compression Tests
121
==PAGE:134==
==PAGE:135==
Appendix G
Data: Main Slab Tests
123
==PAGE:136==
Appendix G. Data: Main Slab Tests
G.1
Pictures of Slab Failures
Specimen S1 - Top
124
==PAGE:137==
G.1 Pictures of Slab Failures
Specimen S1 - Bottom
125
==PAGE:138==
Appendix G. Data: Main Slab Tests
Specimen S2 - Top
126
==PAGE:139==
G.1 Pictures of Slab Failures
Specimen S2 - Bottom
127
==PAGE:140==
Appendix G. Data: Main Slab Tests
Specimen S3 - Top
128
==PAGE:141==
G.1 Pictures of Slab Failures
Specimen S3 - Bottom
129
==PAGE:142==
Appendix G. Data: Main Slab Tests
Specimen S4 - Top
130
==PAGE:143==
G.1 Pictures of Slab Failures
Specimen S4 - Bottom
131
==PAGE:144==
Appendix G. Data: Main Slab Tests
G.2
Various Pictures of Slab Production and Failures
Specimen S1
132
==PAGE:145==
G.2 Various Pictures of Slab Production and Failures
Specimen S2
133
==PAGE:146==
Appendix G. Data: Main Slab Tests
Specimen S3
134
==PAGE:147==
G.2 Various Pictures of Slab Production and Failures
Specimen S4
135
==PAGE:148==
Graphs of displacements for specimen S1
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
20
40
60
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT1
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
10
20
30
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT2
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
10
20
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT3
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
2
4
6
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT4
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
5
10
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT5
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
10
20
30
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT6
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
20
40
60
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT7
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
20
40
60
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT8
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
10
20
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT9
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
2
4
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT10
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
5
10
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT11
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
10
20
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT12
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
20
40
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT13
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
20
40
60
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT14
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
10
20
30
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT15
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
5
10
15
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT16
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
10
20
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT17
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
5
10
15
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT18
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
10
20
30
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT19
Appendix G. Data: Main Slab Tests
G.3
LVDT Measurement Curves
136
==PAGE:149==
Graphs of displacements for specimen S2
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
50
100
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT1
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
50
100
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT2
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
20
40
60
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT3
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
10
20
30
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT4
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
0.00002 0.00004
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT5
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
2
4
6
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT6
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
5
10
15
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT7
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
5
10
15
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT8
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
5
10
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT9
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
1
2
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT10
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
10
20
30
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT11
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
20
40
60
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT12
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
50
100
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT13
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
50
100
150
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT14
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
20
40
60
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT15
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
0.5
1
1.5
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT16
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
2
4
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT17
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
1
2
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT18
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
2
4
6
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT19
G.3 LVDT Measurement Curves
137
==PAGE:150==
Graphs of displacements for specimen S3
0
20
40
60
80
0
50
100
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT1
0
20
40
60
80
0
50
100
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT2
0
20
40
60
80
0
20
40
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT3
0
20
40
60
80
0
10
20
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT4
0
20
40
60
80
0
1
2
3
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT5
0
20
40
60
80
0
10
20
30
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT6
0
20
40
60
80
0
20
40
60
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT7
0
20
40
60
80
0
20
40
60
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT8
0
20
40
60
80
0
10
20
30
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT9
0
20
40
60
80
0
1
2
3
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT10
0
20
40
60
80
0
5
10
15
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT11
0
20
40
60
80
0
10
20
30
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT12
0
20
40
60
80
0
50
100
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT13
0
20
40
60
80
0
50
100
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT14
0
20
40
60
80
0
50
100
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT15
0
20
40
60
80
0
10
20
30
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT16
0
20
40
60
80
0
20
40
60
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT17
0
20
40
60
80
0
10
20
30
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT18
0
20
40
60
80
0
20
40
60
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT19
Appendix G. Data: Main Slab Tests
138
==PAGE:151==
Graphs of displacements for specimen S4
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
50
100
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT1
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
20
40
60
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT2
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
10
20
30
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT3
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
5
10
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT4
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
0.5
1
1.5
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT5
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
5
10
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT6
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
50
100
150
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT7
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
50
100
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT8
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
10
20
30
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT9
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
0.5
1
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT10
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
5
10
15
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT11
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
10
20
30
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT12
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
20
40
60
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT13
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
20
40
60
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT14
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
20
40
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT15
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
5
10
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT16
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
5
10
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT17
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
5
10
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT18
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
10
20
30
Load [kN]
Displacement [mm]
LVDT19
G.3 LVDT Measurement Curves
139
==PAGE:152==
Displacements at various loads for S1
Chosen time
[s]
674
674
687
1000
1574
Load
[kN]
40.15
40.15
39.86
54.52
83.39
LVDT1
[mm]
6.53
6.53
7.05
17.28
41.7355121
LVDT2
[mm]
2.99
2.99
3.40
10.72
27.4134373
LVDT3
[mm]
2.41
2.41
2.69
6.94
16.6090498
LVDT4
[mm]
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.32
4.5904233
LVDT5
[mm]
4.18
4.18
4.21
5.28
6.99310242
LVDT6
[mm]
3.51
3.51
3.85
9.92
19.7954621
LVDT7
[mm]
4.26
4.26
5.02
18.08
39.8810723
LVDT8
[mm]
5.22
5.22
5.92
17.57
37.457147
LVDT9
[mm]
3.60
3.60
3.93
9.50
18.598862
LVDT10
[mm]
1.91
1.91
1.94
2.72
2.38380638
LVDT11
[mm]
2.70
2.70
2.75
3.90
7.66703314
LVDT12
[mm]
4.09
4.09
4.32
8.44
17.7538732
LVDT13
[mm]
5.75
5.75
6.15
14.03
31.5656098
LVDT14
[mm]
6.23
6.23
6.71
16.14
38.4345398
LVDT15
[mm]
5.09
5.09
5.42
11.45
25.8384401
LVDT16
[mm]
2.19
2.19
2.29
5.62
12.1647278
LVDT17
[mm]
3.52
3.52
3.68
7.64
16.0801734
LVDT18
[mm]
2.20
2.20
2.17
5.19
12.0944798
LVDT19
[mm]
4.42
4.42
4.83
12.23
24.5468665
674
674
687
1000
1574
10
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
11
375
2.70
2.70
2.75
3.90
7.67
12
750
4.09
4.09
4.32
8.44
17.75
13
1125
5.75
5.75
6.15
14.03
31.57
14
1500
6.23
6.23
6.71
16.14
38.43
674
674
687
1000
1574
14
0
6.23
6.23
6.71
16.14
38.43
2
375
2.99
2.99
3.40
10.72
27.41
3
750
2.41
2.41
2.69
6.94
16.61
4
1125
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.32
4.59
5
1500
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
674
674
687
1000
1574
5
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
6
750
3.51
3.51
3.85
9.92
19.80
8
1500
5.22
5.22
5.92
17.57
37.46
674
674
687
1000
1574
10
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
9
750
3.60
3.60
3.93
9.50
18.60
8
1500
5.22
5.22
5.92
17.57
37.46
674
674
687
1000
1574
1
28.28
6.53
6.53
7.05
17.28
41.74
14
141.42
6.23
6.23
6.71
16.14
38.43
15
530.33
5.09
5.09
5.42
11.45
25.84
17
1060.66
3.52
3.52
3.68
7.64
16.08
19
1590.99
4.42
4.42
4.83
12.23
24.55
8
1979.90
5.22
5.22
5.92
17.57
37.46
7
2093.04
4.26
4.26
5.02
18.08
39.88
Deflection[mm]
LVDT Number
Location 
[mm]
Deflection[mm]
LVDT Number
LVDT Number
Location 
[mm]
Location 
[mm]
Deflection[mm]
LVDT Number
Location 
[mm]
Deflection[mm]
LVDT Number
Location 
[mm]
Deflection[mm]
Appendix G. Data: Main Slab Tests
G.4
Displacement Curves at Various Loads
140
==PAGE:153==
674
674
687
1000
1574
10
141.42
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
18
530.33
2.20
2.20
2.17
5.19
12.09
17
1060.66
3.52
3.52
3.68
7.64
16.08
16
1590.99
2.19
2.19
2.29
5.62
12.16
5
1979.90
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
Y
674
674
687
1000
1574
0.00
674
674
687
1000
1574
90.00
LVDT Number
Location 
[mm]
Deflection[mm]
0.00
10.00
20.00
30.00
40.00
50.00
0
500
1000
1500
Deflection [mm]
Location along border[mm]
Displacement along left vertical border
674
674
687
1000
1574
0.00
10.00
20.00
30.00
40.00
50.00
0
500
1000
1500
Deflection [mm]
Location along border[mm]
Displacement along top border
674
674
687
1000
1574
0.00
10.00
20.00
30.00
40.00
50.00
0
500
1000
1500
Deflection [mm]
Location along border[mm]
Displacement along right vertical border
674
674
687
1000
1574
0.00
10.00
20.00
30.00
40.00
50.00
0
500
1000
1500
Deflection [mm]
Location along border[mm]
Displacement along bottom border
674
674
687
1000
1574
0.00
10.00
20.00
30.00
40.00
50.00
0
1000
2000
Deflection [mm]
Location along border[mm]
Displacement along the diagonal 
between supports
674
674
687
1000
1574
0.00
10.00
20.00
30.00
40.00
50.00
0
1000
2000
Deflection [mm]
Location along border[mm]
Displacement along the diagonal 
between supports
674
674
687
1000
1574
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Load [kN]
Time [s]
Time and load curve S1
Series1
674 40.15
674 40.15
687 39.86
1000 54.52
1574 83.39
G.4 Displacement Curves at Various Loads
141
==PAGE:154==
Displacements at various loads for S2
Chosen time
[s]
500
870
890
990
1045
Load
[kN]
19.67
38.31
35.33
39.07
37.2413819
LVDT1
[mm]
4.29
8.71
10.22
30.50
71.4463811
LVDT2
[mm]
1.92
4.56
5.69
19.61
50.357767
LVDT3
[mm]
1.30
2.99
3.54
11.27
31.9073676
LVDT4
[mm]
0.29
0.86
0.89
1.80
11.1323585
LVDT5
[mm]
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
5.4164E-06
LVDT6
[mm]
-0.02
0.35
0.40
4.01
2.3948544
LVDT7
[mm]
-0.39
-0.74
-0.74
5.84
6.33104851
LVDT8
[mm]
-0.65
-0.50
-0.39
6.64
7.23547264
LVDT9
[mm]
-0.19
0.15
0.21
4.01
4.34125124
LVDT10
[mm]
0.78
1.48
1.48
1.48
1.47692104
LVDT11
[mm]
1.35
2.63
2.75
4.26
11.0932803
LVDT12
[mm]
2.08
4.31
4.86
13.22
32.7769917
LVDT13
[mm]
3.41
6.87
8.00
22.32
52.8893106
LVDT14
[mm]
4.00
8.13
9.59
27.83
66.0947055
LVDT15
[mm]
2.62
5.37
6.03
14.94
35.8532332
LVDT16
[mm]
0.24
0.81
0.84
0.99
1.27788698
LVDT17
[mm]
1.14
2.46
2.49
2.78
2.77230535
LVDT18
[mm]
0.71
1.55
1.57
1.74
1.73840227
LVDT19
[mm]
0.00
0.54
0.61
4.68
4.1732135
500
870
890
990
1045
10
0
0.78
1.48
1.48
1.48
1.48
11
375
1.35
2.63
2.75
4.26
11.09
12
750
2.08
4.31
4.86
13.22
32.78
13
1125
3.41
6.87
8.00
22.32
52.89
14
1500
4.00
8.13
9.59
27.83
66.09
500
870
890
990
1045
14
0
4.00
8.13
9.59
27.83
66.09
2
375
1.92
4.56
5.69
19.61
50.36
3
750
1.30
2.99
3.54
11.27
31.91
4
1125
0.29
0.86
0.89
1.80
11.13
5
1500
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
500
870
890
990
1045
5
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
6
750
-0.02
0.35
0.40
4.01
2.39
8
1500
-0.65
-0.50
-0.39
6.64
7.24
500
870
890
990
1045
10
0
0.78
1.48
1.48
1.48
1.48
9
750
-0.19
0.15
0.21
4.01
4.34
8
1500
-0.65
-0.50
-0.39
6.64
7.24
500
870
890
990
1045
1
28.28
4.29
8.71
10.22
30.50
71.45
14
141.42
4.00
8.13
9.59
27.83
66.09
15
530.33
2.62
5.37
6.03
14.94
35.85
17
1060.66
1.14
2.46
2.49
2.78
2.77
19
1590.99
0.00
0.54
0.61
4.68
4.17
8
1979.90
-0.65
-0.50
-0.39
6.64
7.24
7
2093.04
-0.39
-0.74
-0.74
5.84
6.33
LVDT Number
Location 
[mm]
Deflection[mm]
LVDT Number
Location 
[mm]
Deflection[mm]
LVDT Number
Location 
[mm]
Deflection[mm]
LVDT Number
Location 
[mm]
Deflection[mm]
LVDT Number
Location 
[mm]
Deflection[mm]
Appendix G. Data: Main Slab Tests
142
==PAGE:155==
500
870
890
990
1045
10
141.42
0.78
1.48
1.48
1.48
1.48
18
530.33
0.71
1.55
1.57
1.74
1.74
17
1060.66
1.14
2.46
2.49
2.78
2.77
16
1590.99
0.24
0.81
0.84
0.99
1.28
5
1979.90
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
Y
500
870
890
990
1045
0.00
500
870
890
990
1045
50.00
LVDT Number
Location 
[mm]
Deflection[mm]
0.00
10.00
20.00
30.00
40.00
50.00
60.00
70.00
80.00
0
500
1000
1500
Deflection [mm]
Location along border[mm]
Displacement along left vertical border
500
870
890
990
1045
0.00
10.00
20.00
30.00
40.00
50.00
60.00
70.00
80.00
0
500
1000
1500
Deflection [mm]
Location along border[mm]
Displacement along top border
500
870
890
990
1045
0.00
10.00
20.00
30.00
40.00
50.00
60.00
70.00
80.00
0
500
1000
1500
Deflection [mm]
Location along border[mm]
Displacement along right vertical border
500
870
890
990
1045
0.00
10.00
20.00
30.00
40.00
50.00
60.00
70.00
80.00
0
500
1000
1500
Deflection [mm]
Location along border[mm]
Displacement along bottom border
500
870
890
990
1045
0.00
10.00
20.00
30.00
40.00
50.00
60.00
70.00
80.00
0
1000
2000
Deflection [mm]
Location along border[mm]
Displacement along the diagonal between 
actuators
500
870
890
990
1045
0.00
10.00
20.00
30.00
40.00
50.00
60.00
70.00
80.00
0
1000
2000
Deflection [mm]
Location along border[mm]
Displacement along the diagonal between 
supports
500
870
890
990
1045
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Load [kN]
Time [s]
Time and load curve S2
Series1
500 19.67
870 38.31
890 35.33
990 39.07
1045 37.24138188
G.4 Displacement Curves at Various Loads
143
==PAGE:156==
Displacements at various loads for S3
Chosen time
[s]
750
2040
2048
2725
2900
Load
[kN]
34.06
64.48
62.81
72.13
54.04
LVDT1
[mm]
4.35
30.71
31.02
54.53
74.0829406
LVDT2
[mm]
1.57
21.01
21.20
38.80
52.9722332
LVDT3
[mm]
1.10
13.01
13.04
23.03
32.1289486
LVDT4
[mm]
0.16
5.14
5.15
9.03
13.6360533
LVDT5
[mm]
0.99
1.24
1.24
1.49
1.86795786
LVDT6
[mm]
0.42
9.57
9.58
15.43
19.52757
LVDT7
[mm]
0.20
19.62
19.66
34.22
49.542178
LVDT8
[mm]
0.17
18.37
18.41
32.08
47.3765911
LVDT9
[mm]
0.11
9.48
9.54
16.15
23.1010906
LVDT10
[mm]
1.46
2.24
2.24
2.34
1.99536504
LVDT11
[mm]
1.28
6.41
6.41
9.21
10.7033174
LVDT12
[mm]
2.13
13.31
13.30
19.77
24.9224443
LVDT13
[mm]
3.41
23.93
24.24
42.98
58.9851041
LVDT14
[mm]
3.98
28.21
28.50
50.62
70.1695759
LVDT15
[mm]
2.66
18.55
19.10
34.05
52.2163224
LVDT16
[mm]
0.41
7.75
7.78
13.37
20.346778
LVDT17
[mm]
0.81
9.86
9.89
17.07
31.7240516
LVDT18
[mm]
0.38
7.07
7.07
11.73
17.5652559
LVDT19
[mm]
0.44
13.25
13.32
23.67
39.6000338
750
2040
2048
2725
2900
10
0
1.46
2.24
2.24
2.34
2.00
11
375
1.28
6.41
6.41
9.21
10.70
12
750
2.13
13.31
13.30
19.77
24.92
13
1125
3.41
23.93
24.24
42.98
58.99
14
1500
3.98
28.21
28.50
50.62
70.17
750
2040
2048
2725
2900
14
0
3.98
28.21
28.50
50.62
70.17
2
375
1.57
21.01
21.20
38.80
52.97
3
750
1.10
13.01
13.04
23.03
32.13
4
1125
0.16
5.14
5.15
9.03
13.64
5
1500
0.99
1.24
1.24
1.49
1.87
750
2040
2048
2725
2900
5
0
0.99
1.24
1.24
1.49
1.87
6
750
0.42
9.57
9.58
15.43
19.53
8
1500
0.17
18.37
18.41
32.08
47.38
750
2040
2048
2725
2900
10
0
1.46
2.24
2.24
2.34
2.00
9
750
0.11
9.48
9.54
16.15
23.10
8
1500
0.17
18.37
18.41
32.08
47.38
750
2040
2048
2725
2900
1
28.28
4.35
30.71
31.02
54.53
74.08
14
141.42
3.98
28.21
28.50
50.62
70.17
15
530.33
2.66
18.55
19.10
34.05
52.22
17
1060.66
0.81
9.86
9.89
17.07
31.72
19
1590.99
0.44
13.25
13.32
23.67
39.60
8
1979.90
0.17
18.37
18.41
32.08
47.38
7
2093.04
0.20
19.62
19.66
34.22
49.54
LVDT Number
Location 
[mm]
Deflection[mm]
LVDT Number
Location 
[mm]
Deflection[mm]
LVDT Number
Location 
[mm]
Deflection[mm]
LVDT Number
Location 
[mm]
Deflection[mm]
LVDT Number
Location 
[mm]
Deflection[mm]
Appendix G. Data: Main Slab Tests
144
==PAGE:157==
750
2040
2048
2725
2900
10
141.42
1.46
2.24
2.24
2.34
2.00
18
530.33
0.38
7.07
7.07
11.73
17.57
17
1060.66
0.81
9.86
9.89
17.07
31.72
16
1590.99
0.41
7.75
7.78
13.37
20.35
5
1979.90
0.99
1.24
1.24
1.49
1.87
750
2040
2048
2725
2900
12
0
2.13
13.31
13.30
19.77
24.92
17
750
0.81
9.86
9.89
17.07
31.72
6
1500
0.42
9.57
9.58
15.43
19.53
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
Y
750
2040
2048
2725
2900
0.00
750
2040
2048
2725
2900
80.00
LVDT Number
Location 
[mm]
Deflection[mm]
LVDT Number
Location 
[mm]
Deflection[mm]
0.00
10.00
20.00
30.00
40.00
50.00
60.00
70.00
80.00
0
500
1000
1500
Deflection [mm]
Location along border[mm]
Displacement along left vertical border
750
2040
2048
2725
2900
0.00
10.00
20.00
30.00
40.00
50.00
60.00
70.00
80.00
0
500
1000
1500
Deflection [mm]
Location along border[mm]
Displacement along top border
750
2040
2048
2725
2900
0.00
10.00
20.00
30.00
40.00
50.00
60.00
70.00
80.00
0
500
1000
1500
Deflection [mm]
Location along border[mm]
Displacement along right vertical border
750
2040
2048
2725
2900
0.00
10.00
20.00
30.00
40.00
50.00
60.00
70.00
80.00
0
500
1000
1500
Deflection [mm]
Location along border[mm]
Displacement along bottom border
750
2040
2048
2725
2900
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
Load [kN]
Time [s]
Time and load curve S3
Series1
750 34.06
2040 64.48
2048 62.81
2725 72.13
2900 54.04
G.4 Displacement Curves at Various Loads
145
==PAGE:158==
Displacements at various loads for S4
Chosen time
[s]
1175
1225
1500
1949
2100
Load
[kN]
37.96
35.64
40.52
46.70
35.38
LVDT1
[mm]
9.10
11.52
26.53
60.96
59.4985516
LVDT2
[mm]
5.41
7.22
17.93
42.08
41.4788848
LVDT3
[mm]
0.00
0.00
5.62
20.23
19.941316
LVDT4
[mm]
0.99
1.17
3.02
7.11
7.25231376
LVDT5
[mm]
0.81
0.81
0.87
1.02
1.02841182
LVDT6
[mm]
0.00
0.00
0.00
3.16
5.2227714
LVDT7
[mm]
0.52
0.71
3.83
21.99
80.3866084
LVDT8
[mm]
0.66
0.87
3.52
19.36
67.741911
LVDT9
[mm]
0.62
0.73
1.54
6.14
16.2579082
LVDT10
[mm]
0.76
0.77
0.71
0.08
2.4978E-05
LVDT11
[mm]
2.30
2.54
4.97
10.17
10.0522768
LVDT12
[mm]
4.08
4.85
10.51
22.43
22.0153186
LVDT13
[mm]
7.20
8.90
19.61
44.12
43.0380111
LVDT14
[mm]
8.46
10.62
24.24
55.32
54.0085512
LVDT15
[mm]
5.89
6.90
14.02
29.46
28.9482836
LVDT16
[mm]
2.38
2.49
4.60
7.47
7.5973748
LVDT17
[mm]
2.54
2.64
4.25
7.96
8.00292912
LVDT18
[mm]
2.73
2.77
3.90
6.12
6.12389928
LVDT19
[mm]
1.40
1.54
3.15
10.06
22.1708476
1175
1225
1500
1949
2100
10
0
0.76
0.77
0.71
0.08
0.00
11
375
2.30
2.54
4.97
10.17
10.05
12
750
4.08
4.85
10.51
22.43
22.02
13
1125
7.20
8.90
19.61
44.12
43.04
14
1500
8.46
10.62
24.24
55.32
54.01
1175
1225
1500
1949
2100
14
0
8.46
10.62
24.24
55.32
54.01
2
375
5.41
7.22
17.93
42.08
41.48
3
750
0.00
0.00
5.62
20.23
19.94
4
1125
0.99
1.17
3.02
7.11
7.25
5
1500
0.81
0.81
0.87
1.02
1.03
1175
1225
1500
1949
2100
5
0
0.81
0.81
0.87
1.02
1.03
6
750
0.00
0.00
0.00
3.16
5.22
8
1500
0.66
0.87
3.52
19.36
67.74
1175
1225
1500
1949
2100
10
0
0.76
0.77
0.71
0.08
0.00
9
750
0.62
0.73
1.54
6.14
16.26
8
1500
0.66
0.87
3.52
19.36
67.74
1175
1225
1500
1949
2100
1
28.28
9.10
11.52
26.53
60.96
59.50
14
141.42
8.46
10.62
24.24
55.32
54.01
15
530.33
5.89
6.90
14.02
29.46
28.95
17
1060.66
2.54
2.64
4.25
7.96
8.00
19
1590.99
1.40
1.54
3.15
10.06
22.17
8
1979.90
0.66
0.87
3.52
19.36
67.74
7
2093.04
0.52
0.71
3.83
21.99
80.39
LVDT Number
Location 
[mm]
Deflection[mm]
LVDT Number
Location 
[mm]
Deflection[mm]
LVDT Number
Location 
[mm]
Deflection[mm]
LVDT Number
Location 
[mm]
Deflection[mm]
LVDT Number
Location 
[mm]
Deflection[mm]
Appendix G. Data: Main Slab Tests
146
==PAGE:159==
1175
1225
1500
1949
2100
10
141.42
0.76
0.77
0.71
0.08
0.00
18
530.33
2.73
2.77
3.90
6.12
6.12
17
1060.66
2.54
2.64
4.25
7.96
8.00
16
1590.99
2.38
2.49
4.60
7.47
7.60
5
1979.90
0.81
0.81
0.87
1.02
1.03
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
Y
1175
1225
1500
1949
2100
0.00
1175
1225
1500
1949
2100
50.00
LVDT Number
Location 
[mm]
Deflection[mm]
0.00
10.00
20.00
30.00
40.00
50.00
60.00
70.00
80.00
0
500
1000
1500
Deflection [mm]
Location along border[mm]
Displacement along left vertical border
1175
1225
1500
1949
2100
0.00
10.00
20.00
30.00
40.00
50.00
60.00
70.00
80.00
0
500
1000
1500
Deflection [mm]
Location along border[mm]
Displacement along top border
1175
1225
1500
1949
2100
0.00
10.00
20.00
30.00
40.00
50.00
60.00
70.00
80.00
0
500
1000
1500
Deflection [mm]
Location along border[mm]
Displacement along right vertical border
1175
1225
1500
1949
2100
0.00
10.00
20.00
30.00
40.00
50.00
60.00
70.00
80.00
0
500
1000
1500
Deflection [mm]
Location along border[mm]
Displacement along bottom border
1175
1225
1500
1949
2100
0.00
10.00
20.00
30.00
40.00
50.00
60.00
70.00
80.00
0
1000
2000
Deflection [mm]
Location along border[mm]
Displacement along the diagonal between 
actuators
1175
1225
1500
1949
2100
0.00
10.00
20.00
30.00
40.00
50.00
60.00
70.00
80.00
0
1000
2000
Deflection [mm]
Location along border[mm]
Displacement along the diagonal between 
supports
1175
1225
1500
1949
2100
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Load [kN]
Time [s]
Time and load curve S4
Series1
1175 37.96
1225 35.64
1500 40.52
1949 46.70
2100 35.38
G.4 Displacement Curves at Various Loads
147
==PAGE:160==
==PAGE:161==
Slab and reinforcement dimensions
Height 
h
150mm
:=
Effective height
d
h
21mm
-
129 mm

=
:=
Width and length
l
1.5m
:=
Reinforcement diameter
ø
12mm
:=
Bar spacing 
s
150mm
:=
Cross sectional area of
reinforcement bars per meter
As
ø2 π

4
1000 mm
m
s

753.982 mm2
m

=
:=
Reinforcement ratio
ρ
As
1000 mm
m
150

mm
0.503 %

=
:=
Material properties
SFRC compressive strength
fc
54.3MPa
:=
Reinforcement bar tensile
strength
fy
575MPa
:=
Reinforcement degree
Φ
As fy

d fc

0.062
=
:=
ϕ0
As fy

h fc

0.053
=
:=
Effectiveness factor
ν
0.7
0.97
fc
300MPa
-
fy
5000MPa
-





0.472
=
:=
According to Limit Analysis and
Concrete Plasticity" formula (7.56) 
Cross sectional analysis for negative moment
Height of compression zone is found from horizontal equlibrium using the material properties.
Height of compressiove zone
ν fc

0.8

x

fy As

=
solve x
, 
float 7
, 
0.02115345 m


x
0.02115345 m

21.153 mm

=
:=
Compressive resultant
C
ν fc

0.8

x

433.54 kN
m

=
:=
Tensile resultant from
reinforcement
T
fy As

433.54 kN
m

=
:=
Appendix H
Capacity Calculations
H.1
Capacity of the Conventional Reinforces Slab
149
==PAGE:162==
Arm between C and T
z
d
x
2
-
118.423 mm

=
:=
Positive moment capacity
m´p
T z
51.341 kN m

m

=
:=
Cross sectional analysis for positive moment
Height of compression zone is found from horizontal equlibrium using the material properties.
Height of compressive zone
ν fc

0.8

x1

fy As

=
solve x1
, 
float 7
, 
0.02115345 m


x1
0.02115345 m

21.153 mm

=
:=
Compressive resultant
C1
ν fc

0.8

x1

433.54 kN
m

=
:=
Tensile resultant from
reinforcement
T1
fy As

433.54 kN
m

=
:=
Arm between C1 and T1
z1
d
x1
2




-
118.423 mm

=
:=
Positive moment capacity
mp
T1 z1

51.341 kN m

m

=
:=
Torsional Capacity
Based on "Limit Analysis and Concrete Plasticity" the torsional capacity is found based on the moment
capacities. 
Torsional capacity
tp
1
2
mp
m´p
+
(
)

51.341 kN m

m

=
:=
Corresponding force
P
2 tp

102.682 kN

=
:=
Appendix H. Capacity Calculations
150
==PAGE:163==
Slab and reinforcement dimensions
Height 
h
150mm
:=
Effective height
d
h
15mm
-
12mm
-
123 mm

=
:=
Width and length
l
1.5m
:=
Reinforcement diameter
ø
12mm
:=
Bar spacing 
s
150mm
:=
Cross sectional area of
reinforcement bars per meter
As
ø2 π

4
1000 mm
m
s

753.982 mm2
m

=
:=
Reinforcement ratio
ρ
As
1000 mm
m
150

mm
0.503 %

=
:=
Material properties
SFRC compressive strength
fc
47.9MPa
:=
SFRC tensile strength
fct
1.167MPa
:=
Reinforcement bar tensile
strength
fy
575MPa
:=
Reinforcement degree
Φ
As fy

d fc

0.074
=
:=
ϕ0
As fy

h fc

0.06
=
:=
Effectiveness factor
ν
0.98
fc
500MPa
-
0.884
=
:=
Cross sectional analysis for negative moment
Height of tensile zone is found from horizontal equlibrium using the material properties.
Height of tensile zone
x
fct x

ν fc

1
2

h
x
-
(
)

=
solve x
, 
142.16553830427429075 mm


:=
Arm between resultants
z
h
x
2


-
h
x
-
(
)
2
-
75 mm

=
:=
Tensile resultant
T
fct x

165.907 kN
m

=
:=
Compressive resultant
C
ν fc

1
2

h
x
-
(
)

165.907 kN
m

=
:=
Negative moment capacity
m´p
T z
12.443 kN m

m

=
:=
H.2 Capacity of the SFRC Slab
H.2
Capacity of the SFRC Slab
151
==PAGE:164==
Cross sectional analysis for positive moment
Height of compression zone is found from horizontal equlibrium using the material properties.
Height of compressive zone
ν fc

0.8

x1

fy As

=
solve x1
, 
float 7
, 
0.01279537 m


x1
0.01279537 m

12.795 mm

=
:=
Compressive resultant
C1
ν fc

0.8

x1

433.54 kN
m

=
:=
Tensile resultant from
reinforcement
Ts
fy As

433.54 kN
m

=
:=
Arm between C1 and Ts
z2
h
x1
2




-
21mm
-
122.602 mm

=
:=
Positive moment capacity
mp
Ts z2

53.153 kN m

m

=
:=
mp
C1 z2

53.153 kN m

m

=
:=
Torsional Capacity
Based on "Limit Analysis and Concrete Plasticity" the torsional capacity is found based on the moment
capacities. 
Torsional capacity
tp
1
2
mp
m´p
+
(
)

32.798 kN m

m

=
:=
Corresponding force P
P
2 tp

65.596 kN

=
:=
Bending Capacity
Bending capacity is equal to
the negative bending capacity,
m´p
12.443 kN m

m

=
Corresponding force P, based
on the yield-line method.
P
2 m´p

24.886 kN

=
:=
Appendix H. Capacity Calculations
152
==PAGE:165==
EC 1992-1-1 section 6.4 is applied
Approximate value of β
β
1.5
:=
Support/actuator diameter
bcolumn
200mm
:=
Height of slab
h
150mm
:=
Concrete cover 
c
15mm
:=
Reinforcement diameter
ø
12mm
:=
Ultimate strength of
reinforcement
fy
575.1MPa
:=
Concrete strength
fc
54.3MPa
:=
Effective height
d
h
c
-
ø
-
123 mm

=
:=
Bar spacing
sxy
150mm
:=
Reinforcement area per m
As
1000 mm
m
sxy
π ø2

4
753.982 mm2
m

=
:=
Concrete area per m
Ac
h 1000

mm
m
150000 mm2
m

=
:=
Reinforcement ratio
ρ
As
Ac
0.503 %

=
:=
Basic control perimeter for
areas close to edge
u1
2 d

(
) 2

π

4
2bcolumn
+
786.416 mm

=
:=
Effectiveness factor
v
0.6
1
fc
MPa
250
-









0.47
=
:=
Values for finding the
punching capacity from EC2
CRd.c
0.18
0.18
=
:=
k1
0.1
:=
k
min
1
200mm
d
+


mm

2mm
, 


2 mm

=
:=
ρ1
ρ
0.503 %

=
:=
σcp
0
:=
Punching shear resistance
vRd.c
CRd.c
k
mm

100 ρ1

fc
MPa





1
3

k1 σcp

+






MPa

1.084 MPa

=
:=
H.3 Punching Shear Calculation
H.3
Punching Shear Calculation
153
==PAGE:166==
Maximum shear stress at
reaction
vEd VEd
(
)
β VEd

u1 d

:=
Solve for finding the maximum
allowable shear stress
tocorresponding to the
capacity
β VEd

u1 d

vRd.c
=
solve VEd
, 
69896.999300443575012 Pa

m2


VEd.
69896.999300443575012 Pa

m2

69.897 kN
=
:=
0
5 104

1 105

0
5 105

1 106

1.5 106

vRd.c
β VEd

u1 d

VEd.
VEd
Appendix H. Capacity Calculations
154
==PAGE:167==
General 
Slab dimension
l
1500mm
:=
w
1500mm
:=
h
150mm
:=
V
l w

h

0.337 m3

=
:=
Volume 
Self load 
ρc
2400 kg
m3
:=
Ultimate tensile strength of
reinforcement
fy
720.5MPa
:=
Concrete compressive strength fc
53.4
47.9
+
(
) 1
2

MPa

50.65MPa
=
:=
Reinforcement area of truss
Asw.t
6mm
(
)2 π

4

4
113.097 mm2

=
:=
4 truss bars
Reinforcement area of U-bars
Asw.w
8mm
(
)2 π

4
50.265 mm2

=
:=
Lowest reinforcement ratio
chosen
Asw
min Asw.w Asw.t
, 
(
)
50.265 mm2

=
:=
Edge beam capacity
Width of edge beam
bw
h
2
:=
Effective height
d
150mm
15mm
-
12mm
2
-
0.129m
=
:=
Compression zone
y
12mm
(
)2 π
4

2 6mm
(
)2 π
4

+


fy

fc bw

32.176 mm

=
:=
Arm between resultants
z
d
y
2
-
112.912 mm

=
:=
Distance between truss
bars/U-bars
s
150mm
:=
Yielding of U-bars/trusses
Slope of crushing angle
cot(θ)=2.5
A
2.5
:=
Capacity 
Vrdw
Asw z
fy

A

s




68.154 kN

=
:=
H.4 Edge Beam Calculation
H.4
Edge Beam Calculation
155
==PAGE:168==
Chrushing of concrete
Effectiveness factor
Vv
0.8
fc
200MPa
-
0.547
=
:=
Capacity 
Vrdc
Vv fc

h z
2

2

A
1
A2
+

161.734 kN

=
:=
Yielding of longitudinal reinforcement bars
Maximum stress
σmax
fy
720.5 MPa

=
:=
Capacity 
VrdL
2 σmax

12mm
(
)2 π
4

2 6mm
(
)2

π
4

+



A
97.784 kN

=
:=
Appendix H. Capacity Calculations
156
==PAGE:169==
General
Slab and reinforcement dimensions
Height 
h
150mm
:=
Width and length
l
1.5m
:=
Reinforcement parameters
Characteristic yield strength 
fy
550MPa
:=
Concrete parameters
Characteristic concrete
compressive strength at 28
days
fc
30MPa
:=
Characteristic tensile
strength of concrete at 28
days
fctk.0.05
2.0MPa
:=
Calculation of lapbar amount for equivalent momemt capacity as
bottom reinforcement. 
Bottom main mesh reinforcement
Reinforcement diameter
ø
12mm
:=
Bar spacing 
s
150mm
:=
Effective height
d
h
15mm
-
12mm
-
123 mm

=
:=
Cross sectional area of
reinforcement bars per meter
As
ø2 π

4
1000 mm
m
s

753.982 mm2
m

=
:=
Lapbars
Reinforcement diameter
ølap
8mm
:=
Effective height
dlap
h
50mm
-
5mm
-
0.095m
=
:=
Cross sectional area of
reinforcement bars per bar
As.1lap
ølap
2 π

4
50.265 mm2

=
:=
Material properties
Reinforcement degree
Φ
As fy

d fc

0.112
=
:=
ϕ0
As fy

h fc

0.092
=
:=
Effectiveness factor
ν
0.7
0.97
fc
300MPa
-
fy
5000MPa
-





0.532
=
:=
Cross sectional analysis for positive moment with mesh reinforcement
Height of compression zone is found from horizontal equlibrium using the material properties.
Height of compressiove zone
ν fc

0.8

x

fy As

=
solve x
, 
float 7
, 
0.03247887 m


x
0.03247887 m

32.479 mm

=
:=
H.5 Joint Calculation
H.5
Joint Calculation
157
==PAGE:170==
Compressive resultant
C
ν fc

0.8

x

414.69 kN
m

=
:=
Tensile resultant from
reinforcement
T
fy As

414.69 kN
m

=
:=
Arm between C and T
z
h
x
2


-
27mm
-
106.761 mm

=
:=
Positive moment capacity
mp
T z
44.273 kN m

m

=
:=
Cross sectional analysis for positive moment with lapbars
Assumed cross sectional area of lapbar reinforcement, which should lead to equvivalent moment capacity as
main mesh reinforcement.
As.lap
1144.1
mm2
1000mm
:=
Height of compressive zone
xlap
ν fc

0.8

x1

fy As.lap

=
solve x1
, 
float 7
, 
49.28376 mm


:=
Compressive resultant
Clap
ν fc

0.8

xlap

629.255 kN
m

=
:=
Tensile resultant from
reinforcement
Tlap
fy As.lap

629.255 kN
m

=
:=
zlap
dlap
xlap
2




-
70.358 mm

=
:=
Arm between C and T
Positive moment capacity
mp.lap
Tlap zlap

44.273 kN m

m

=
:=
The moment capacity with the joint reinforcement is now equivalent to the bottom reinforcement. The amount
of lapbars are then found from the assumed reinforcement area. 
nlapbars
ceil
As.lap
As.1lap
l






35
=
:=
Calculation of necessary bond length for lap bars
Design tensile strength
Characteristic tensile
strength of concrete at 28
days
fctk.0.05
2.0MPa
:=
Coefficient taking account of
long term effects on the
tensile strength and of
unfavourable effects
αct
1.0
:=
Appendix H. Capacity Calculations
158
==PAGE:171==
Design tensile strength 
fctd
αct fctk.0.05

1.0
2 MPa

=
:=
EC2-1-1 (3.16)
Ultimate bond stress
Coefficient for the quality of
the bond condition and
position of the bar during
concreting
η1
1
:=
Coefficient considering the bar
diameter
η2
1.0
ølap
32mm

if
132mm
ølap
-
(
)
100mm
ølap
32mm
>
if
1
=
:=
The design value of the
ultimate bond stress
EC2 8.4.2(2)
fbd
2.25 η1

η2

fctd

4.5 MPa

=
:=
EC2-1-1 (8.2)
Basic anchorage length
Design stress of the bar at
position where anchorage is
measured from
σsd
fy
:=
The basic required anchorage
length
EC2-1-1 8.4.3(2)
lb.rqd
ølap
4
σsd
0.75fbd
325.926 mm

=
:=
Design anchorage length - EC2-1-1 8.4.4
As the bar is placed on the
filigree plate, no concrete
cover is assumed
cd
0mm
:=
Coefficient for shape of bars
α1
1.0
:=
Straight bar
Coefficient for concrete cover
α2
0.7
1
0.15 cd
ølap
-
(
)

ølap
-
0.7

if
1
0.15 cd
ølap
-
(
)

ølap
-
0.7
1
0.15 cd
ølap
-
(
)

ølap
-
<
1

if
1
1
0.15 cd
ølap
-
(
)

ølap
-
1
>
if
1
=
:=
The transverse reinforcement
is not in contact with the lap
bars and is therefore just set
as 1.0
α3
1.0
:=
α4
1.0
:=
α5
1.0
:=
Design anchorage length
lbd.
lb.rqd α1

α2

α3

α4

α5

325.926 mm

=
:=
Chosen length for final design
lbd
400mm
:=
H.5 Joint Calculation
159
==PAGE:172==
Shear at the interface between concrete cast at different times
(original truss)
EC2-1-1 6.2.5
Strength reduction factor
ν
0.6
1
fc
250MPa
-





0.528
=
:=
EC2-1-1 (6.6N)
Angle of shear reinforcement,
to the shear plane
α
atan 75
40


61.928 deg

=
:=
Factors for the roughness of
the interface
c
0.35
:=
μ
0.6
:=
Diameter of shear
reinforcement
øs
8mm
:=
Cross sectional area per
shear reinforcement bar
As
π øs
2

4
50.265 mm2

=
:=
fy
550MPa
:=
Specimen width
lspec
1.5m
:=
Depth of shear interface
dspec
400mm
:=
Reinforcement ratio
ρ
20 As

dspec lspec

0.168 %

=
:=
Design shear resistance at
the interface
νRdi
min c fctd

ρ fy

μ sin α
( )

cos α
( )
+
(
)

+
0.5 ν

fc

, 


1.622 MPa

=
:=
Multiplied with the area
νRdi dspec

lspec

972.92 kN

=
ølap
2 π

4
nlapbars

fy

967.611 kN

=
DEMAND
"OK"
νRdi dspec

lspec

ølap
2 π

4
35

fy


if
"NOT OK"
otherwise
"OK"
=
:=
Appendix H. Capacity Calculations
160
==PAGE:173==
Shear at the interface between concrete cast at different times
(final design truss)
EC2-1-1 6.2.5
Strength reduction factor
ν
0.6
1
fc
250MPa
-





0.528
=
:=
EC2-1-1 (6.6N)
Angle of shear reinforcement,
to the shear plane
α
atan 75
35


64.983 deg

=
:=
Factors for the roughness of
the interface
c
0.35
:=
μ
0.6
:=
Diameter of shear
reinforcement
øs
6mm
:=
Cross sectional area per
shear reinforcement bar
As
π øs
2

4
28.274 mm2

=
:=
Specimen width
lspec
1.5m
:=
Depth of shear interface
dspec
400mm
:=
Reinforcement ratio
ρ
14 As

dspec lspec

0.066 %

=
:=
Design shear resistance at
the interface
νRdi
min c fctd

ρ fy

μ sin α
( )

cos α
( )
+
(
)

+
0.5 ν

fc

, 


1.051 MPa

=
:=
Multiplied with the area
νRdi dspec

lspec

630.44 kN

=
ølap
2 π

4
nlapbars

fy

967.611 kN

=
DEMAND
"OK"
νRdi dspec

lspec

ølap
2 π

4
35

fy


if
"NOT OK"
otherwise
"NOT OK"
=
:=
H.5 Joint Calculation
161
==PAGE:174==
==PAGE:175==
Appendix I
Drawings
163
==PAGE:176==
Appendix I. Drawings
.
164
==PAGE:177==
1:10
15.07.2016
D-S1
Biaxial Bending of Filigree Slabs with Steel Fiber Reinforced Concrete Overlay 
Project
Drawing number
Date
Scale
Design of slab specimen S1
1500
1500
150
150
15
15
15
15
96
112
300
300
1500
1500
 Ø12/150 mm in both sides/both directions
Closing U-bars Ø8/150 mm
in both directions
A
A
B
B
Plain concrete
Section A-A
Section B-B
==PAGE:178==
1:10
15.07.2016
D-S2
Biaxial Bending of Filigree Slabs with Steel Fiber Reinforced Concrete Overlay 
Project
Drawing number
Date
Scale
Design of slab specimen S2
1500
1500
 Ø12/150 mm in the bottom/both directions
Closing U-bars Ø8/150 mm
in both directions
A
A
B
B
Section A-A
Section B-B
15
15
1500
1500
150
150
96
112
300
300
SFRC
 Ø8 longitudinal bar connecting the U-bars
11
 Ø8 longitudinal bars connecting the U-bars
 Ø8 longitudinal bars connecting the U-bars
19
==PAGE:179==
744
12
744
1500
1400
600
 Ø12/150 mm in both sides/both directions
35 Ø8 lapbars distributed along joint
A
A
B
B
1:10
15.07.2016
D-S3
Biaxial Bending of Filigree Slabs with Steel Fiber Reinforced Concrete Overlay 
Project
Drawing number
Date
Scale
Design of slab specimen S3
744
12
744
600
125
100
50
15
15
1400
15
15
1500
100
50
800
Concrete overlay
Filigree slab
Section A-A
Section B-B
==PAGE:180==
744
12
744
1500
1400
600
Ø12/150 mm in the bottom/both directions
35 Ø8 lapbars distributed along joint
A
A
B
B
1:10
15.07.2016
D-S4
Biaxial Bending of Filigree Slabs with Steel Fiber Reinforced Concrete Overlay 
Project
Drawing number
Date
Scale
Design of slab specimen S4
744
12
744
100
50
600
125
15
1400
50
100
1500
15
300
300
800
Filigree slab
SFRC overlay
Section A-A
Section B-B
 Ø10 L-bar connection truss-girders in the corners
 Ø10 L-bar connection truss-girders in the corners
==PAGE:181==
1:20
15.07.2016
D-V1
Biaxial Bending of Filigree Slabs with Steel Fiber Reinforced Concrete Overlay 
Project
Drawing number
Date
Scale
Test Setup, 3D view
==PAGE:182==
1:20
15.07.2016
D-V2
Biaxial Bending of Filigree Slabs with Steel Fiber Reinforced Concrete Overlay 
Project
Drawing number
Date
Scale
Test Setup, elevation and plan view
Pinned-rolling
support
225 kN actuators
2636
1480
1200
Pinned support
500
1828
500
500
1828
500
2000
1500
Mounting holes
for columns
Ø200 loaded area
Ø200 support area
