==PAGE:1==
Application Level Defense
Mechanism Against Denial of
Service Attacks on
Cloud-Based Services
Lyubomir Ivanov
July 2016
1
==PAGE:2==
Contents
1
Introduction
4
2
Denial-of-Service
6
2.1
Deﬁnition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Distributed Denial-of-Service
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Consequences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Attacker model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5
Prevention . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Types of DoS attacks
9
3.1
Network layer attacks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Application layer attacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Attacks due to compromised environments . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.4
Attack strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
DoS Features
17
4.1
Predictable ﬂow rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
Packet/segment/message structure similarities . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.3
Non-semantic ﬂow sequence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5
DoS Defense Mechanisms and Techniques
20
5.1
Prevention . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.2
Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.3
Localization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.4
Mitigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.5
Load-balancing with BGP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
6
Cloud Computing and Cloud-based Services
24
6.1
The Concept of Cloud Computing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
6.2
Cloud Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6.3
Cloud Security
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.4
Denial-of-Service in Cloud Computing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
7
DoS Intrusion Detection and Prevention in Cloud Environ-
ments
29
8
System Design and Modeling
31
8.1
Cloud Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
8.2
DoS Defense System Integration in the Cloud . . . . . . . . . . .
35
9
Detailed Design
38
9.1
IDS Worker Process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
9.2
IDS Master Process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
2
==PAGE:3==
10 Proof of Concept
46
10.1 Development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
10.2 Deployment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
10.3 Robustness
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
11 Conclusion and Future Work
55
Appendices
61
A Cloud simulation environment deployment script in Bash
61
3
==PAGE:4==
1
Introduction
Nowadays, the Internet has become an irreplaceable part of everyday life. The
scalability and interoperability needs of the global network however, come at
the price of decentralization and openness which leave security holes.
With
the increased usage of Internet services, many people and businesses depend
heavily on their availability. Examples of service consumption range from simply
convenience (friends talking to each other over the Internet) to critical safety
systems (railway signaling, air traﬃc control). Those systems might not always
use the Internet as underlying communication mean, but what is common is
that their normal process rely entirely on the availability of a single or a set of
services within their operational networks. Thus, security becomes of a great
concern to both service providers and consumers.
The availability of a service can be threatened by a diverse number of fac-
tors, such as hardware malfunction, software bug, human error, malicious agent,
targeted hacker attack, etc. or a combination of those. An attack on the avail-
ability of a service is called a Denial-of-Service (DoS) attack and is deﬁned as
one or more machines targeting a victim and attempting to prevent it from
doing useful work [1]. Unfortunately, with the rise of the Internet and the de-
velopment of its architecture, security was not on focus, simply because of the
small-scale private context of the ﬁrst networks. Nowadays, DoS attacks are
a severe threat to the normal operation of services. By sending huge volumes
of packets or by sending malicious or malformed packets, DoS attacks deny
legitimate service consumption requests. While both, the volume and the ab-
normality of requests, can do harm they are distinguished and are being tackled
diﬀerently. When instead of one device, a mass of devices produce the malicious
traﬃc we talk about a Distributed Denial-of-Service (DDoS) attack. On many
occasions, these devices are commercial computers and they are supporting the
attack unwillingly. However, there are certain hacktivist groups which might
willingly join a group eﬀort for DDoS attack.
There are many known defense mechanisms against DoS, but unfortunately
there are even more known DoS attacks and new attacks emerge constantly.
The main challenges before defense tools are due to the fact that attacks can
be conducted on various layers from the OSI model, using various protocols, at-
tacking various resources. Even correct and well-deﬁned requests might be used
by attackers with bad intentions. To ﬁght all these attack vectors, numerous
defenses have been put to exploitation, some of which being hardware, others
being software; some being protocol changes or supplements and some being
infrastructural.
DoS attacks are also applicable in the context of cloud computing, but new
threats are introduced and they have to be reviewed and assessed. Cloud services
allow joint usage of resources, thus decreasing IT infrastructure investments as
well as operational and support costs however, those features come at the price
of sharing the risk of attacks. Regardless if a DoS attack aims at a single user
in the cloud or the provider, it is important that providers should be able to
defend their customers and the resources and services they use. Often, an attack
4
==PAGE:5==
with enough power to bring down a service, would have much less power than
the capabilities of the whole cloud. So, a cloud provider could easily ﬁght back,
if only could have detected the attack. Sometimes a DoS attack will try not to
bring down a service completely but disrupt its function by increasing response
time, by increasing the amount of consumed by the service resources, etc. A
cloud provider such as our collaborator in this paper - Oblak.bg - sells a pay-
as-you-use service, however if the provider is able to charge only for legitimate
usage that would be a competitive advantage towards its rivals. Oblak.bg claim
that if they employed a defense mechanism against artiﬁcial consumption that
would be very much appreciated by the cloud provider community.
Last but not least, the cost of a DoS defense mechanism is important to cloud
providers. There exist solutions which address the issues of DoS vulnerabilities,
but none of them can take advantage of the most valuable asset a cloud provider
has - the cloud.
In this paper we are going to review the characterization
of DoS attacks and attackers, we are going to explain what types of attacks
exist and how one can cope with them.
Then we are going to discuss how
does a cloud operate and what are the vulnerabilities that it faces. Once the
analysis is done, we will present a design of a cloud distributed denial-of-service
defense software framework that monitors the inbound and outbound traﬃc
and deﬁnes behavioral patterns for the tenants of the cloud. If patterns are not
followed the framework can take actions, based on predeﬁned rules. The defense
framework will be a scalable, highly available, low overhead software solution
to take advantage of idle general-purpose cloud resources instead.
5
==PAGE:6==
2
Denial-of-Service
2.1
Deﬁnition
Denial-of-Service (DoS) attacks are intended attempts to disrupt or completely
restrict the access of legitimate users to remote resources or services [2]. Two
main types of DoS attacks are distinguished in the literature: resource exhaus-
tion attacks and vulnerability exploits [3]. In the resource exhaustion (also
referred as volumetric) types of attacks, the attacker uses massive volumes of
requests to try to exhaust some of the resources on the server side. Examples are
available operative memory, CPU clock cycles, disk space, network bandwidth,
number of processes or threads, number of simultaneous connection by distinct
clients, etc [1]. The other type of DoS attacks is categorized by its attempt
to use some vulnerability on the remote host or the underlying infrastructure,
in order to block legitimate access. Some famous examples are Ping-of-death,
R-U-Dead-Yet, SYN ﬂood, Slowloris, HTTP POST attack and many more. We
will further discuss the vulnerabilities, requirements, methodology, consequences
and known solutions to these attacks in the following chapters.
2.2
Distributed Denial-of-Service
While some attacks can be conducted from a single machine source, most of
the time multiple attack sources are used. Often, an attacker infects dozens,
hundreds, thousands and sometimes even more devices with malware, worm,
Trojan horse or backdoor. Later, one can orchestrate a multi-source attack to-
wards a single target. This is called a Distributed Denial-of-Service (DDoS)
attack. Usually service hosting devices are dedicated to serving many requests
and many simultaneous connections, therefore most times a volumetric attack
will be a DDoS attack so that a suﬃcient request ﬂow can be created to block
the service. Furthemore, many times a vulnerability exploit is also a DDoS. Of
course, there are cases where a single attack machine is suﬃcient to perform
successful DoS on the victim (e.g. ping-of-death), however very often such vul-
nerabilities are quickly found and ﬁxed by vendors, so providers only need to
patch their systems in order to defend themselves. The main problem comes
from the underlying Internet infrastructure, or more speciﬁcally the Internet
Protocol (IP). Its simplicity, convenience and decentralized nature are exploited
by DDoS attackers. Namely, the lack of authentication at the network layer
allows the creation, and more importantly - the acceptance of false packets with
changed source IP address. This is called IP spooﬁng and one major drawback
of modern Internet architecture is the impossibility for authentication of source
IP addresses, once the packet has arrived at the victim’s site [3]. Accepting such
packets makes it impossible for the victim to take permanent counter-actions
against attackers without disrupting the normal service of legitimate users.
6
==PAGE:7==
2.3
Consequences
DoS attacks are also categorized by the consequences they bring. They could be
a ﬂood on the service, thus denying legitimate requests temporarily (for as long
as the attack goes on). A more severe attack might completely crash a service
or the host’s operating system (OS) itself. That will result to unavailability
of the service even after the attack has been ceased - most of the time until a
service restart or host reboot. Another attack outcome could be the exhaustion
of permanent resources such as disk space or quotas (e.g. DoS attack forces
permanent ﬁle generation on the remote host’s hard drive or exhaustion of
prepaid traﬃc volume provided by a hosting company to a service provider).
Last and most severe, are the attacks which lead to permanent data loss or
hardware damage on the remote host or the underlying infrastructure or both
(e.g. continuous attack, leading to constant high CPU load, thus overheating
and damaging the CPU of the target host).
Consequences are not however, the only mean for detecting and investigating
a DoS attack. Unlike other attacks, such as theft of sensitive data, man in the
middle, etc. the DoS is eventually discovered by the victim, obviously when
the normal operation of the service has been disrupted so that it no longer
can serve its legitimate requests accordingly. However, disruption always leaves
traces such as intensiﬁed network traﬃc or high CPU usage - in other words
- some deviation from the normal operation pattern.
This paper will show
eﬃcient methods for detection of an ongoing DoS attack based on deviation
from network traﬃc trends.
2.4
Attacker model
In computer security, it is important to discuss and analyze not only the tech-
nical aspects of attacks, the vulnerabilities they exploit and the consequences
they bring, but to also take into consideration the business aspect. We now
know what is the basic speciﬁcation of DoS (and DDoS) attacks, but to show
service providers the incentives of why to defend against those threats and how
and when to do it, a deeper look and understanding needs to be done in the not
so technical sides of an attack. Namely, what is the attacker model and what
are the motives behind the decision to perform a DoS attack on any service.
Many of the reported cases of DoS attacks are extortion [4, 5, 6]. An attacker
”hijacks” the ability to serve legitimate users and requests ransom to cease the
attack and allow normal operational ﬂow. Another motive of an attacker is
business rivalry - a company attacks its business competitor with the purpose
of denying customer ﬂow to the rival’s service. Thus, customers seek for re-
placement of the service provider and often turn to the rival. The damage is
both ﬁnancial and reputational - many customers are lost forever.
Occasionally, DoS attacks are not ﬁnancially oriented. Sometimes, an attack
is performed for the simple reason of a junior hacker to show the ability to do
it. Those hackers are called script-kiddies and often have no further incentives.
Their targets are mostly random services and the success of the attack is re-
7
==PAGE:8==
garded as prestigious endeavor. Another type of non-proﬁt targeted attack is
called hacktivism and is politically driven. Its aim is to show political disagree-
ment by taking down one’s medium of propagating a political idea [7, 8].
Last but not least, a DoS attack (or better said incident) might be unin-
tended, either caused by a third party or by the victim itself. Examples could
be when a high-proﬁled and high-traﬃc service somehow references another ser-
vice with much less capabilities. Thus some of the traﬃc is redirected and the
recipient service might be unable to serve all the requests leading to a denial-
of-service. The victim can however be the cause of such a situation too - e.g.
an online retail service promoting a service at a big discount for a short period
of time. Thus, a huge traﬃc concentrates the usage of the service within this
small timeframe and thus the DoS incident.
2.5
Prevention
Due to the diversity of services that can be deployed within a cloud, all attacker
models seem very plausible, so a more general defense solution is needed. How-
ever, unlike most other types of attacks, the DoS attacks can never be fully
prevented. The very nature of the information technologies and Internet com-
munication allows a target to be DoS-ed when traﬃc higher than the bandwidth
of the target is being received. It is impossible a server to be provisioned enough
capacity to withstand traﬃc generated from huge number of devices exceeding
in orders of magnitude the count of requesting devices in a normally operating
environment.
So defending against DoS is not about preventing all possible
attacks, but rather is largely a question of raising the bar suﬃciently high for
malicious traﬃc [1].
For that reason, it is of utmost importance not only to be able to detect
an attack but have a good prevention mechanism. Measures could be proactive
(decrease attacker incentives or higher the costs) or reactive (counter-action
to decrease the impact of the attack).
In the second part of this paper we
brieﬂy discuss how to reactively respond to attacks against cloud-based services,
however the focus of this paper is on attack detection.
8
==PAGE:9==
3
Types of DoS attacks
As discussed, DoS attacks can be categorized by the way the attack is conducted,
the target of the attack, the severity of the damage done and the sources. An-
other categorization type recognized by the security community is based on the
OSI layer the attack uses. Often in this categorization we only talk about net-
work (infrastructure) layer including both the network and transport layers
from the OSI model and application layer that includes anything above the
transport layer [9, 10]. In this chapter we will further review some of the most
widespread DoS attacks and their respective classiﬁcations.
3.1
Network layer attacks
3.1.1
Ping of death
An example of a network layer software vulnerability exploit is the Ping-of-
death [11] denial-of-service attack where a malformed ICMP packet is sent to
the victim. According to the IPv4 speciﬁcation [12] the maximum size of an IP
packet (ICMP being such) may be as large as 65535 bytes, whereas a correct
ICMP packet is 74 bytes in total (20 bytes ethernet header, 8 bytes ICMP
header, 56 bytes payload). Some system implementations are unprepared for
ICMP packets of size, diﬀerent than the 74 bytes deﬁned by standard. This
software unpreparedness might lead to system crash or buﬀer overﬂow, which
might in terms lead to permanent data loss. This is in essence a Denial-of-
Service attack. However, because of its popularity, most modern systems are
prepared for such exploit.
3.1.2
ICMP ﬂood
Another example of a DoS attack using the ICMP protocol is the ICMP ﬂood.
It is again a network layer attack but unlike the ping-of-death it is a network
resource exhaustion and not vulnerability exploit [13]. The aim of the attack is,
as its name implies, to ﬂood the target with ICMP packets making it unable to
serve any other requests because of network bandwidth exhaustion. The ICMP
ﬂood is the most typical and trivial example of how a memory exhaustion attack
is unstoppable if the attacker’s total bandwidth is bigger than the victim’s. In
such case, the attack can always be conducted even with well formed requests.
A distributed ICMP ﬂood attack, especially on low-resource devices, can easily
disrupt normal behavior and lead to a denial-of-service.
An enhancement to the ICMP ﬂood attack is the Smurf attack, where an
attacker uses a vulnerability in the network to make many devices on the net-
work ﬂood the target with ICMP packets. This is done by the attacker sending
ICMP echo requests to the broadcast address of a given network. By doing
so, all members of the network will see the request and will return an ICMP
response message to the caller. However, the attacker has replaced (spoofed)
the source IP of the requests with the victim’s IP, thus all the responses are
sent to the victim instead. The victim might not be able to process all of them
9
==PAGE:10==
and this will result in a DoS attack. This is a vulnerability exploit combin-
ing a weakness in the network resource (allowance of ICMP request broadcasts
[14]) as well as the IP spooﬁng, allowed by the very fundamentals on which the
network communication relies. Many other attacks also use IP spooﬁng.
3.1.3
Teardrop attack
Similarly to the ping-of-death, the teardrop attack is hardly applicable in mod-
ern systems, however it also shows how a vulnerability exploit can deny a service.
It is done by a malformed segmentation of IP packets, making the receiving host
overlap or concatenate oversized segments leading to reading exceptions. This
example, unlike the ICMP ﬂood, shows how once the vulnerability has been
found, it can be patched and further operating system versions will not be
threatened.
3.1.4
SYN Flood
Going up the OSI model’s layers the SYN ﬂood attack is a very popular re-
source exhaustion attack targeting the available memory on the host running
the service. The attack is conducted by not following the TCP protocol and
more precisely the three-way handshake performed for establishing a connec-
tion. The handshake is called three-way, since it has three steps - ﬁrstly, the
client sends SYN message to the server which shows the desire for a connec-
tion to be opened. Then, the server returns a SYN-ACK message which is an
acknowledgement for the connection request. Lastly, the client sends an ACK
which is a client-side acknowledgement and the connection is ﬁnally established.
When the SYN-ACK message is sent, the server reserves resources for a
period of time for the future establishment of the TCP connection. The attack is
exploiting this part of the protocol, by continuously sending connection requests
(SYN ﬂood), thus reserving more and more portions of the available memory
until exhaustion. To bring down a more resourceful machine, a distribution of
the attack will be done to overcome the memory and/or connection limit set
up on the server. Furthermore, very often the attack also uses IP spooﬁng to
prevent ﬁrewall rules blocking incoming connections based on single IP address
or a range of such.
Although there are some solutions, such as SYN cookies (saving connection
metadata on the client side in the form of a cookie), there is no generally ac-
cepted solution to the SYN ﬂood attack with the current IP protocol technology
[15]. Because of this, and the fact that the TCP protocol is in the very essence of
the Internet communication and is very widely spread, there are systems which
remain vulnerable.
3.1.5
UDP Flood
Similarly to the SYN Flood, and the ICMP ﬂood the UDP ﬂood is trying
to exhaust a resource on the remote end [16].
However, it is not using any
10
==PAGE:11==
vulnerabilities, like in the case of the TCP handshake, but simply using brute
force.
The attack is relying on the output request volume of the attacking
machine(s) being bigger than the bandwidth on the receiving end.
3.1.6
DNS ﬂood
This is a DoS attack targeted at speciﬁc resource on the Internet, namely the
domain namespace servers. The aim of the attack is to deny the DNS resolution
service to legitimate users, thus disallowing them to ﬁnd websites or other re-
sources on the Internet. The attack is again memory exhaustion and is making
use of the fact that a DNS response is sometimes much bigger and much more
computationally expensive than the DNS query. The DNS ﬂood attack is in
fact a version of the UDP ﬂood attack, where the victim is ﬂooded with UDP
DNS query requests. Since the creation of a UDP packet and a DNS query is
at very low cost, the overall cost for the attacker remains very low, while the
DNS server has to do an expensive search in response to the query.
3.1.7
DNS Ampliﬁcation
A very eﬃcient way to enhance the power of a DoS attack is to use ampliﬁcation.
The Smurf attack we already discussed, is using ampliﬁcation to increase the
attacking output. A single message to the broadcast address results in an ICMP
response from every device on the network. Thus, the ampliﬁcation is with a
factor of the number of devices.
Similarly, DNS ampliﬁcation attack is amplifying the attack input before
it gets to the victim [17]. Unlike the Smurf attack where the messages’ sizes
are the same but the count of messages is increased, the DNS ampliﬁcation
attack do not change the number of the messages, however the size is increased.
As previously noted, a DNS query can be of much less size than the DNS
response. Therefore, the attacker sends multiple DNS queries with spoofed IPs
(using the victim’s IP) and the DNS responses are of size much bigger than the
input, thus the volume of the attacking input has been ampliﬁed. Naturally,
a distributed attack from many sources and using many DNS servers can be
conducted, resulting into a powerful attack against the remote host.
3.2
Application layer attacks
3.2.1
Application layer ﬂoods
Based on the same principles as the ICMP and the UDP ﬂood attacks, the
application layer attacks attempt to deny serving of legitimate requests by a
remote host [13]. On the application layer however, the attacks are easier to
conduct, because of request input sizes.
Very often application layer ﬂoods
attack web servers, by requesting a resource via HTTP. The request is processed
via the web server and the web application running on the remote host. Most
of the time, the processing is computationally more expensive than the request
11
==PAGE:12==
itself.
Thus, the ampliﬁcation eﬀect comes to play, making the attack very
feasible.
Application layer ﬂoods target mostly CPU cycle consumption, network
bandwidth or memory capacity by sending multiple requests (often distributed)
to the server, where each one is expensive in terms of one of those essential
resources. The exhaustion leads to a denial-of-service.
3.2.2
Slowloris
A speciﬁc kind of application layer attacks is the Slowloris, where HTTP GET
request are used to ﬂood the victim. Although the remote host is ﬂooded, the
attack bandwidth is not too big, as the concept is to open many simultaneous
HTTP sessions on the remote host by sending many HTTP get requests. This
is done by sending partial HTTP requests that continuously and rapidly grow,
slowly update, and never close [2]. By keeping the connections open, at some
point the web server’s connection pool or memory is exhausted, thus no longer
legitimate requests can be processed.
3.2.3
HTTP Fragmentation attack
Similarly to the Slowloris attack, the HTTP fragmentation exhausts the con-
nection pool of a target web server. This is done however, not by updating
headers, but rather sending the HTTP packet in very small fragments and at a
very slow rate. Thus keeping the session up for a long time but utilizing a very
small part of the available bandwidth.
3.2.4
Slow read attack
In the slow read attack, the attacker sets smaller receive window-size on the
client side than the send buﬀer on the server side, thus an exhaustion of the
available sessions is possible and in some cases a buﬀer overﬂow [2]. Usually the
receive window-size is set very low to make the attack as powerful as possible,
requiring as little input resources as possible.
3.2.5
HTTP POST Attack
Very similar to the slow read attack, the HTTP POST attack (also known as
R-U-Dead-Yet or RUDY) is also trying to exhaust the session resources on the
remote host by keeping sessions open for a long time. Opposite to the slow read
attack, the HTTP POST attack does not download the response too slow, but
rather uploads the request (or more speciﬁcally its body) too slow.
Notable for these four attacks, targeting web servers, is the fact that they can
send completely legitimate HTTP requests, making them hard to be detected.
Furthermore, badly set up web server can make the attack very cheap (e.g.
allowing huge HTTP bodies).
12
==PAGE:13==
3.2.6
XML bomb
The XML bomb attack (also known as Billion laughs) exploits bad XML pars-
ing implementations in web applications. It is conducted by sending an XML
document to the server. The document contains an element which is deﬁned as
an entity of ten instances of another entity, they are deﬁned as ten instances of
third entity, etc. Thus, the expanded XML element results in an exponential
size in the number of the entity deﬁnitions (hence the name billion laughs - nine
entities each deﬁned as ten instances of the previous entity - 109).
3.2.7
ReDoS
ReDoS, coming from regular expression denial-of-service, is an attack towards
regular expression engines in applications [18]. The attack takes advantage of
the fact that the worst-case running time is exponential. By creating too many
expensive requests to the engine, the attack can force a slowdown or even crash
due to buﬀer overﬂow. The trivial example is the presence of repetition operators
or look-ahead and look-behind queries.
3.2.8
Peer-to-Peer
All of the attacks presented so far, could be executed as a distributed attack.
However, they mostly rely on infecting a botnet to generate the overwhelming
for the victim traﬃc. In some cases, a volunteer network is used where the
attack sources have actually joined the attacking network willingly. A slightly
diﬀerent approach is used in the so called Peer-to-Peer (P2P) attack, where
users’ requests in a P2P ﬁle sharing network are redirected to the victim’s
site [19].
While the data (the shared ﬁles) is distributed over the network,
the metadata is centralized. Using the metadata, an attacker can redirect all
requests to a single address. The diﬀerence here is that the ”botnet” is created
without installing any malicious code on the infected computer. In fact, the
tool underlying the attack is the P2P software and its installation is desired by
the users.
3.3
Attacks due to compromised environments
So far we discussed DoS attacks which exploit mostly protocol vulnerabilities.
However, there are attacks which are taking advantage of misconﬁgured or
poorly conﬁgured entities within the system - networks, routers, ﬁrewalls, access
lists, etc.
3.3.1
Banana attack
The banana attack makes use of a compromised access point by copying the
source IP address in the destination IP address ﬁeld of outgoing packets. Thus,
the outgoing requests are being blocked by the access point as they are redirected
13
==PAGE:14==
back to the sender. They not only never get to the intended destination but
also might cause ﬂood to the original sender.
3.3.2
Permanent DoS attack
In this kind of attacks, the attacker damages part of the system so that a replace-
ment is needed or a software or hardware reset in order the normal workﬂow
to be reestablished [20]. Usually this is done by reconﬁguration of the compro-
mised system agent in terms of network and access control settings. In some
more advanced attacks, the attacker replaces the device ﬁrmware with a mali-
cious one. This could allow the attacker to monitor some or all of the services
and/or resources provided by this device with the victim having no knowledge
about it. The attacker can also make the device useless as it might no longer
be able to use the hardware with the provided ﬁrmware. The attack is often
conducted where weak security policies are implied, such as access to the net-
work or availability of remote access to a resource, especially in combination
with weak authentication.
3.3.3
NACK attack
The NACK attack takes advantage of the negative acknowledgement used in
some communication protocols. A NACK is sent by the recipient of a request,
whenever the requested resource or service is denied (e.g. unauthorized access
enforced by a security policy). The essence of the attack is to send NACKs to
the client sending requests by forging the source IP with the destination of the
request. Thus, the sender is tricked into believing that the resource has been
denied. The attack is easier to conduct within a compromised network, due
to the inability to surpass the network address translation feature of modern
access points, which blocks the direct communication to the sender.
3.3.4
DNS poisoning
Another exploit due to poorly conﬁgured environment is the DNS poisoning.
Whenever a DNS server receives a request it doesn’t have the resolution to, it
turns to another DNS server and makes the request and the response is cached
on the original server. However, if the response was malicious, then the DNS
server is considered poisoned, since it is going to distribute this wrong name-to-
IP resolution throughout the network it serves [21]. If an attacker is able to be
the one the DNS server turns to (e.g. man-in-the-middle between DNS server
in the network and outside), the attacker can poison the DNS server with the
IP of the victim, thus acquiring a botnet with the size of the network.
Furthermore, the network no longer has access to the service the IP reso-
lution of which has been spoofed. Therefore, we can also consider a denial-of-
service attack over the service at hand, being requested from the network (e.g.
google.com).
14
==PAGE:15==
3.3.5
Fork bomb
With a compromised environment, where the attacker has remote shell access to
a device, an attacker can conduct a fork bomb attack. It is a resource exhaustion
DoS attack, where a process continuously replicates itself until depletion of
available memory, leading to slowdown or crash of the system.
3.3.6
Deauth
In a setup where wireless network communication is present, a compromised
network risks a denial-of-service to be done by a member of the network by
continuously sending a deauthentication frame with spoofed source IP address
- the IP address of the access point. The deauthentication frame sent from the
access point to a device on the network, acknowledges the device that it has
been disconnected from the network and can no longer use the access point,
forcing it to drop oﬀfrom the network. Thus, the device no longer has access
to the resources on the network and/or Internet connection.
3.4
Attack strategies
We discussed types of attacks and their main features. In this part, we will stress
on the strategy an attacker might have while attacking the victim, putting aside
the speciﬁc technological details.
3.4.1
Low bandwidth attack
This is a type of a DoS attack, where the attacker targets the weakest chains
in the victim’s system. Using low bandwidth, the attacker focuses on a point
of the system where a cheap request leads to an expensive processing on the
server side (e.g. expensive statistical or data aggregation requests on big data
in a web application) [22]. Generally, low bandwidth attacks are preferable,
since they are much harder to notice. However, most of them can be reacted
against by patching the system, therefore mostly stealth zero-day exploits can
be conducted.
3.4.2
Hit-and-run
Until now, we looked at DoS attacks as successful only if they manage to bring
down the service by crashing the system or parts of it, or to keep it occupied
for as long as the attack is going on. The goal was to keep the service down for
as much time as possible. However, this is not always the case. Sometimes at-
tackers would do a hit-and-run DoS, where an attack is only running for a small
period of time. This strategy yields many diﬀerent advantages to the attacker,
some of which are: harder to detect, less overall input bandwidth required, in-
creased costs for maintenance or infrastructure (e.g. on-demand DDoS defense
services; cloud-based environments getting more resources provisioned due to
increase in request).
15
==PAGE:16==
A hit-and-run attack might be used to bring down a server and then be
ceased, making it hard to backtrace if there is no or poor system logging. An-
other use case of the hit-and-run principle is when an attacker wants to test the
attack before ”going live” with it by targeting the victim at hand. Last but not
least, the attack might be used to arise confusion and increased costs in terms
of personnel and/or equipment for ﬁghting the threat.
3.4.3
DoS Level II
We also reviewed the DoS attacks as a way to deny the service to all possible
users.
However, an attacker might want to deny the service to a particular
user or group of such (clients). In a situation where a service has DoS defense
mechanisms blocking requests from malicious clients, often the defender blocks
the IP address, an IP address range or a whole subnet where the malicious
traﬃc comes from. However, as discussed, IP spooﬁng takes severe place in
DoS attacks - an attacker might fool the victim’s defense software to block a
legitimate user or network, thus denying the service. Such kind of attack is
called DoS Level II and is a targeted attack where the victim is a legitimate
user rather than the service.
3.4.4
Advanced Persistent Denial-of-Service
Advanced persistent denial-of-service (APDoS) attacks are speciﬁc with its act-
ing agents having vast diversity and big quantity of resources. Furthermore,
they are usually backed up by governmental agencies or big IT vendors. The
APDoS attacks are often done by combining several attacking techniques, using
both ﬂood and vulnerability exploits on diﬀerent parts in systems. Sometimes,
a decoy attack is done to distract and confuse defense mechanisms and agents.
Such attacks are very hard to defend against, simply because of the advanta-
geous knowledge and resources the attacker has over the defender.
Not too
many service vendors nowadays have the capabilities to defend against such an
attack.
16
==PAGE:17==
4
DoS Features
Unlike other attack kinds (like data theft) the victim eventually ﬁnds out about a
DoS attack. One can still protect its assets (infrastructure, resource availability,
etc.) by setting up defense mechanisms. Generally, trying to mitigate an attack
as closest as possible to the source leads to less incurred damage and overall
higher eﬃciency. However, detection is easier at the victim’s end because of the
concentration of attack traﬃc. Also, rarely it is possible to detect and mitigate
far from the destination and close to the source because of the structural setup
of the Internet - independent interconnected networks.
To be able to detect and react to a denial-of-service, a study on the common
features needs to be conducted and extraction of patterns should be done. In
the previous section we reviewed the most common DoS attacks, now we will
systematize their main features. It is important not only to underline the typical
signs of an attack, but to be able to further discriminate a DoS attack from a
ﬂash crowd.
A ﬂash crowd is an unintentional ﬂood on a service, caused
by unusual legitimate traﬃc, due to some event. Examples being many users
visiting a web site which has some one-day promotion of a product or service
or the death of Michael Jackson making people lookup related topics on the
Internet, fooling Google to believe it was a denial-of-service attack [23].
As discussed, the challenge to defend against DoS attacks is that it is hard
to typify them so that a generic measure can be taken, however most of the
them characterize with one or more of the following features - predictable ﬂow
rate, packet (or fragment, or message) structure similarities, non-semantic ﬂow
sequence, etc. Our system design would allow for analysis on the traﬃc based
on these considerations and more.
4.1
Predictable ﬂow rate
While a human being consuming a service on the Internet might follow some
logic of actions, the requests that are created wouldn’t be in a predictable form.
On the other hand, DoS attacks are conducted by software, therefore they are
automated and the actions are pre-programmed. Most of the time, these pro-
grammed actions will have a constant, periodical or increasing ﬂow rate which
are all predictable ﬂow rates [24]. Of course, not every service consumption is
done by a human, but a DoS attack on a web server will most likely have a
predictable ﬂow rate. Using this observation in combination with some other
features will increase the conﬁdence in the presumption of an on-going DoS
attack.
4.1.1
Constant rate
An attack can send harmful packets at a constant (low or high) rate [9]. By
using constant low bandwidth the attack can bypass some of the frequently
used ﬂow rate control DoS defense mechanisms, at the same time the attack
aims at disrupting the normal operational environment performance or to in-
17
==PAGE:18==
crease incurred costs for the service provider by artiﬁcially introducing the need
of higher computational capacity (network bandwidth, CPU power, memory,
storage, etc.)
Another frequent use of constant ﬂow rate is when the attack uses the max-
imum bandwidth of the attack source(s). Usually, the aim is to disrupt the
service by ﬂooding it to the point where it can no longer serve any requests and
not only increase the response time. In any of the scenarios, the attack is using
constant rate of the attack traﬃc and in some cases (like web server hosting
a web application) it is very revealing for the intentions of the traﬃc, even if
being only of well-formed requests.
4.1.2
Increasing rate
A DoS attack might gradually take advantage of the bandwidth by increasing
the attack input slowly (e.g. linearly) or fast (e.g. exponentially) [9]. By not
doing an abrupt increase in the attack traﬃc, the attacker tries to go under the
radar and hide the malicious intentions of the attack traﬃc. On the other hand,
the attacker can use low bandwidth to check the applicability of the attack
and then sharply increase the bandwidth in order to ﬂood the service. Low
bandwidth could be used to study the defense mechanisms and once details are
known, a severe increase in the ﬂow rate could be done.
4.1.3
Periodical rate
The periodical attack rate alternates between low, high or none [9]. The band-
width used by the attacker ﬂuctuates trying to either confuse defense mecha-
nisms or take advantage and do damage on the remote system while the defense
mechanisms are in the process of activation. Periodical attack rates are also
used to disrupt periodical consumption of a service (say an electronic voting
system in the day of the vote).
4.2
Packet/segment/message structure similarities
Using again the argumentation that most of the time a distributed DoS will use
the same piece of software on all members of the botnet, we can assume that
many times the ﬂooding packets, created by the ”zombies” (infected devices
with DoS purposes) will be generated with similar, if not the same, structure.
In the cases of network level attacks that could be common IP headers like the
options. In the cases of transport layer attacks, such as the SYN ﬂood, could be
the source port of the TCP segments being the same for distinct users. In the
application layer DoS attacks, could be that some HTTP headers (say HTTP
cookie) match, which most of the time would not be the case.
4.3
Non-semantic ﬂow sequence
A typical DoS feature is when requests to a service are created in a non-semantic
way. Often services have an established workﬂow that is followed by the con-
18
==PAGE:19==
sumers and rarely deviations from this workﬂow are observed. In a web appli-
cation accessing details about an entity, before knowing about the existence of
the entity might seem strange and could be an identiﬁcation of malicious traﬃc.
Such an example could be in a ﬂight booking service, trying to book an itinerary
before looking up the possible ﬂights. Furthermore, in many applications there
are the so called hot and cold resources [9]. Hot are those, that in a normal
operational environment are accessed often (like the front page of a web site)
and cold are those that are rarely requested (say the donation page of the same
web site). Sometimes, a DoS attack is targeting a cold resource and thus skew
the resource access distribution towards a resource expected to have low access
count. This, can raise suspicion to the service provider and trigger a further
investigation.
Of course, such considerations are very application speciﬁc, however such
observations could be done on lower layers in the OSI models. Very often, prior
to UDP communication, a negotiation between the consumer and the service is
done using TCP. This is a semantic workﬂow of the service, which in normal
cases would leave to an error returned from the service. However, combined with
an extensive UDP ﬂow by multiple sources, might be a sign of a DoS attack.
19
==PAGE:20==
5
DoS Defense Mechanisms and Techniques
Now that we have made observations on what is a denial-of-service attack, what
known types are there, what are the general features of the attacks and what is
the motivation for the attackers to conduct them, we can focus on what mea-
sures which can be taken in order to avoid, defend against or control the damage
done. In this chapter we will present known techniques and mechanisms typiﬁed
according to the stage of the attack at which the defense is triggered. Those are
prevention (immediately after leaving the source process), detection (realiz-
ing denial-of-service attack is going on or about to go oﬀ), location (locate and
identify the attack sources) and mitigation (actively ﬁght the attack). Much
work is done within the ﬁeld of counter-DoS mechanisms. However no unique
solution is found due to the immense diversity of possible protocols that can
be exploited for DoS attacks and the inability to unambiguously discriminate
attack message from legitimate request for any protocol.
5.1
Prevention
The ideal time for an attack to be stopped is at the source, namely the machine
where from the attack request originates. Hardly this is an option, as many
machines are compromised personal computers and devices where the security
is rather low due to the users’ security ignorance. With this consideration, Du
and Nakao [25] propose low complexity and low performance cost egress/ingress
ﬁltering on ISP edge routers. The Internet service provider would check outgoing
packets for IP spooﬁng and discard any packets with source IPs which could not
have originated from a given edge router’s underlying network(s). Furthermore,
if an end host is under attack the edge router would discard messages by applying
an ingress ﬁltering to lower the collateral damage on the infrastructure.
Another proposed way of ﬁghting DoS attacks is by Mirkovic, Prier and
Reiher [26]. D-WARD is a DoS defense system which autonomously detects
and stops attacks as close to the origin as possible (i.e. the edge routers or
the network gateways). It monitors the incoming and outgoing packets for a
given host on the underlying network. D-WARD aggregates the packets on ﬂow
level and compares the data with a predeﬁned normal ﬂow models. If there is
a big deviation between observed and normal ﬂow values, a ﬂow rate limit is
introduced.
Similarly to D-WARD, MULTOPS (Multi-level Tree for Online Packet Statis-
tics) proposed by Gil and Poleto [27] monitors the inbound and outbound con-
nections and traﬃc. This method however, assumes that incoming and outgoing
traﬃc to a single host or network is usually proportional, so MULTOPS calcu-
lates traﬃc ratio and compares it to a threshold. Whenever the threshold is
passed, ﬂow rate limit is introduced. Since MULTOPS uses ratio, it is claimed
to produce less false positives, however it is a subject of enhancement of a
memory exhaustion attack due to the tree data structure used for the data ag-
gregation.
20
==PAGE:21==
The prevention stage operates on the source side, while detection, location
and mitigation work on the target side. Both techniques come with their ad-
vantages and disadvantages. While prevention is advantageous in terms of easy
localization of attack sources and not allowing the attack traﬃc to enter the In-
ternet, it is hard to enforce the introduction of such defense mechanisms, mostly
because they are defending remote locations, rather than the victims directly.
Thus, it is rarely found to be feasible (e.g. for ISPs) to invest in such defense
mechanisms. In the other stages of DoS defense - detection, location and mit-
igation, an attack is much easier to be noticed because of the concentration of
the attack traﬃc. However, due to the high load, mitigation (and sometimes all
of them) could be problematic, because of ﬂood on the system. Furthermore,
traceback to the original sources is hardly possible due to the nature of the
Internet and the IP protocol.
5.2
Detection
There are diﬀerent DoS detection mechanisms, but they are mostly classiﬁed
in two directions - statistical-based and heuristics-based [24]. In the statistical-
based the main goal is to discriminate normal from abnormal traﬃc by assigning
a match value related to a normal operational behavior of the system. This
method could also be considered as signature-based, since the technique tries to
ﬁnd a known-to-be attack traﬃc or unknown legitimate traﬃc within the whole
traﬃc coming in. In the heuristics-based approach the focus is on adjusting the
match score threshold by continuous learning from the network. The thresholds
are gradually risen or lowered, based on the inbound-outbound ﬂows of the
service or the network. Heuristic-based approach in a way ”deﬁnes” what is
normal, however, on a continuous and gradual DoS attack heuristics will be
tricked into believing that no anomaly is observed.
5.3
Localization
The next defense line is to localize the sources of the attack. This paper al-
ready discussed the problems with source traceback that emerge due to the
architecture of the modern Internet protocol. Still, propositions for localization
techniques exist in the literature, such as packet marking [28] and link testing
[29]. Packet marking is a method in which, on each hop a packet is injected
with some of the current’s router information. Thus, a victim will be able to
traceback the route, by unfolding all packet marks of a given packet. The other
technique - link testing - acquires the same result by testing all incoming links
on a router, trying to ﬁgure out where the packet could have come from. This
is done recursively, up the route tree until the source is reached.
Unfortunately, both traceback techniques suﬀer mostly from the challenges
of deployment and operation we highlighted for prevention. In order for any
of those mechanisms to be eﬀective, a great share of the Internet infrastruc-
ture needs to inherit such an operational change. Furthermore, introduction of
authentication mechanisms will be needed, so that the genuineness of a packet
21
==PAGE:22==
can be assured. Last but not least, all these security measurements will intro-
duce overhead in the Internet in terms of network, CPU cycles and protocol
complexity that needs to be analyzed.
5.4
Mitigation
After trying to prevent an attack by passive defense techniques - prevention,
detection and partly localization, active defense mechanisms are used to react
to an on-going DoS attack. Most of the eﬀorts in the literature are focused on
mitigation, since it is not enough to only detect an attack and locate its sources,
but to defend one’s assets.
So far we discussed prevention techniques, which help stopping an attack at
the earliest stage, right after the trigger. These are measures to be employed
to make it harder to start an attack. We also presented possible mechanisms
to detect and locate an on-going attack. However, ﬁnding out that one is a
victim of a denial-of-service attack and not just having an increased service
usage, allows faster counter-actions to be taken. Discovering the sources of an
attack, allows for stronger defense measures to be taken to drop illegitimate
requests and possibly track down the origin of the attack so that legal actions
can be taken.
However, none of the presented mechanisms so far, solve the
main problems we discussed of DoS attacks bringing a service down. Therefore,
mitigation techniques are needed to defend against both volumetric and resource
exhaustion attacks.
5.4.1
Bottleneck Resource Management
Very useful mitigation technique is bottleneck resource management [3]. In any
system it is important to know what are the bottleneck resources that might
cause a denial-of-service attack - in the case of a database server, that could be
memory or CPU; in the case of a ﬁle server - storage or network traﬃc. Man-
aging the bottlenecks by introducing attack mitigation methods could partly
restore a service that has been attacked. If in a system the greatest bottle-
neck is the network links between hosts, then a fail-over solution could be a
network bandwidth management and ﬂow rate when being under attack. If the
bottleneck is the allowed bandwidth, then a bottleneck management could be a
temporal increase in the bandwidth. In the end, the easiest resource to be at-
tacked by a DoS attack will be attacked most often, therefore employed defense
mechanisms addressed at that resource would be most useful.
5.4.2
Upstream Filtering
Another way to mitigate an attack is to simply consume it. For that purpose, one
would need resources with capacity higher than the attack. Upstream ﬁltering
is a mitigation technique where service traﬃc goes through a ”cleaning center”
before arriving at the service. Either the traﬃc is redirected through this center
(by DNS address changes), analyzed, cleaned from malicious content and sent to
22
==PAGE:23==
the service or the service itself is hosted within the center and its management
is given to the upstream ﬁltering service.
In both cases, the repulse of the
DoS attack is helped by the known already methods in this chapter - detection,
localization, statistical or heuristic traﬃc analysis, etc. The extra service is the
big volume of resources that can be used for the assimilation of the attack. Such
providers are Cloudﬂare, Incapsula, F5 Networks, AT&T, Verisign, etc.
5.5
Load-balancing with BGP
The purpose of the Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) is to propagate network
reachability information among autonomous systems [30]. It is used to dynam-
ically change routes due to trace issues, high latency, shorter paths or simply
preferences. With BGP one can ensure load-balancing by redirecting some of
the traﬃc to a diﬀerent location (say other ISP). ISPs often join forces to ne-
glect attacks by combining their infrastructure capacities using BGP, proxying,
multi-protocol label switching (allows for faster and cheaper redirection of traf-
ﬁc, based on labels rather than addresses), etc.
These rerouting techniques
helps in increasing the underlying infrastructure to the capability of both ISPs
combined, thus more sustainable environment is established and stronger attack
needed to bring it down.
5.5.1
Sink-holing and Black-holing
Black-holing is a technique where a packet is sent to a null interface (also called
black hole) on a router. In other words, the packet is dropped and not forwarded.
Thus, malicious traﬃc can be avoided, however legitimate traﬃc is also dropped.
Therefore, it does not protect the victim from denial-of-service attacks, but
protects the infrastructure from collateral damage (e.g. increased latency or
ﬂood of a machine on the same switch). Often users collaborate with ISPs and
have the so called black-holing ﬂag, which is raised by the user (using an API or
manually) and the traﬃc to an IP address, range or subnet is blackholed from
then after.
In sink-holing, much similar to upstream ﬁltering, the traﬃc is redirected to
a process or machine that analysis it and ﬁlters out the bad traﬃc. Sink-holing
is often used to analyze a botnet by inspecting the regular traﬃc, thus allowing
for more appropriate (stealthier) use of the botnet by an attacker. However, it
can be used with good intentions - to analyze and ﬁlter out bad traﬃc. The
diﬀerence between sink-holing and upstream ﬁltering is that the target of an
attack might have no knowledge that traﬃc has been ﬁltered, as it is done
through hidden rerouting on the path, while in the latter case the victim has to
have taken some action (e.g. DNS change) to force the rerouting.
23
==PAGE:24==
6
Cloud Computing and Cloud-based Services
With the emerge of cloud computing and cloud-based services and their recent
increased usage, many computer science problems and their solutions have to be
reviewed in the context of new concepts and technologies. In this chapter we will
discuss main speciﬁcation of cloud infrastructures, how most wide spread cloud-
services work and how threats change (mostly DoS) when replacing operational
environments with a cloud environment.
6.1
The Concept of Cloud Computing
The term cloud is of unknown origin, however it is used to represent an ag-
gregation of interconnected computing resources that are to be distributed to
users based on demand. The main advantage of cloud computing is to pro-
vide vast diversity of technologies to the users and at the same time cut costs
due to economies of scale and self-service [31]. Examples of shared resources
could be numerous, including network bandwidth, software, computing power in
terms of CPU usage and operative memory, etc. Instead of multiple companies
buying expensive, high-bandwidth switches for some occasional inter-company
operations, a cloud provider buys a single switch and provision its capabilities
on-demand to those companies. The total cost is decreased due to the fact that
only one item is bought, installed and supported.
Similarly, cloud computing provides other features such as abstraction, re-
dundancy, geo-locality, scalability, ﬂexibility and security. Depending on the
provided resources, cloud computing services are divided in three main cate-
gories:
• Infrastructure-as-a-Service (IaaS)
• Platform-as-a-Service (PaaS)
• Software-as-a-Service (SaaS)
and each of the before mentioned features is applied diﬀerently within the
frames of the categories.
6.1.1
Infrastructure-as-a-Service (IaaS)
IaaS is the category providing least abstract service suite out of all three. As the
name suggests, providers lease infrastructure to clients, and clients can use it at
their will for any of their needs or operations. At this level of abstraction, users
have the most power in creating and managing the environment of resources
they are renting.
They are given virtual machines with designated comput-
ing resources and connectivity, such as CPU cores, RAM, storage and network
bandwidth. However, the beneﬁts for the user are big, as one has abstracted
away from the actual hardware - its purchase, storage and support. Further-
more, one has eliminated the risk of possessing any piece of hardware, meaning
24
==PAGE:25==
that any damage on the physical environment is on the account of the cloud
provider. Last, but surely not least, the user beneﬁts from having an ”elastic”
environment, meaning that at any time the environment can be expanded or
shrunk by adding or removing resources.
The on-demand feature allows for
users to be more ﬂexible and therefore businesses can meet the demand better.
6.1.2
Platform-as-a-Service
PaaS is one abstraction layer higher than IaaS. For example, hosting providers
are leasing web application hosting software platforms on-demand to their cus-
tomers. Such hosting could be web, database, programming-language executing
environments, operating systems, etc. The user abstracts away from the infras-
tructure level, and is instead given the management of an environment, built for
a speciﬁc purpose. For example, a cloud provider will oﬀer a web server plat-
form, and usually self-manage the acquired CPU and RAM resources in order
to provide the needed quality of service to the customers. Thus, the user no
longer cares about managing the computing resources, but only is interested in
conﬁguring and supporting the platform that is being consumed.
Similarly to IaaS, PaaS makes use of the same joint resource pros that lower
the costs due to economies of scale. PaaS also reallocates the risk of resource
ownership from the user to the provider, thus making it easier for small and
medium-sized enterprises to focus on their main activity rather than IT support.
6.1.3
Software-as-a-Service
Going further, SaaS is at the top of the abstraction hierarchy for cloud-based
services. Here, software is leased to users and this again allows businesses to be
more ﬂexible, by not committing to buying software, but using it on-demand
instead. Cloud service users beneﬁt not only from the fact that they pay only
for what they use, but also that cloud software-as-a-service provides high factor
of mobility through remote access and therefore convenience and speed, which
are important to businesses.
6.2
Cloud Architecture
The cloud computing world is constantly evolving and because of the proprietary
nature of major cloud providers nowadays, little has been exposed in terms of
how clouds are built. However, a cloud would need to provide the necessary
components for a computing device to operate, namely processing unit, memory,
storage and network connectivity. In order to understand how the cloud works,
we will review the infrastructure in terms of hardware components and their
interconnectivity. Furthermore, we will also take a look at the network topology
in order to be able to follow how security threats change.
As discussed, a cloud is a shared pool of computing resources that are pro-
visioned to consumers. CPUs and memory are placed on motherboards along
25
==PAGE:26==
with network interface cards (most of the time more than one). Those moth-
erboards are put on chassis and stored in server rooms or data centers. Unlike
personal computer, or stand-alone server unit, the storage unit is a separate
entity that is accessed by each of the servers remotely (none is connected to the
storage on the same chassis). The connectivity between the servers is done by
a network switch and the routing within the inner networks and between inner
networks and the Internet is done through a router. Some security policies are
implemented before the router - e.g. ﬁrewall.
Figure 1: High-level cloud design
With the high level cloud design in Figure 1, one could easily notice the
reasons for the beneﬁts we highlighted. Firstly, reduced costs for physical stor-
age and maintenance of the necessary equipment. Since all this hardware is
concentrated in one or several server rooms and/or data centers, less number of
facilities and their support will be needed than if all the cloud users had to buy,
store and maintain an equipment of their own. Secondly, the cloud provider
would utilize the resources better than most of the clients.
For example, a
standard user buying storage wouldn’t immediately use the whole capacity of
a modern hard disk. The utilization of the storage space will be most of the
time gradual. However, in a cloud environment, a single storage disk will be
provisioned to several clients, thus increasing the utilization rate of the disk.
Whenever the disk space becomes scarce, additional disk is attached and thus
26
==PAGE:27==
disk space increased. However, the utilization rate would be the combined disk
usage of all clients out of the total.
6.3
Cloud Security
Cloud computing brings many beneﬁts, but the security aspects are altered and
therefore must be reexamined. In a shared pool, not only the resources are
distributed between the consumers, but so are the risks.
Some of the secu-
rity threats are now shared between the users, moreover some new threats are
introduced, due to the nature of cloud computing and remote execution.
First and main security threat comes from the most basic functionality of
cloud computing - shared resources.
RAM chips, storage space, network
devices and CPU cores are shared between multiple tenants and this leads to
the possibility of information leak. An unmanaged memory access might lead to
an information access violation between tenant environments operating on the
same chip. Similarly, a network device on a server might be compromised and
one of its tenants could be monitoring all ongoing traﬃc; stored ﬁles might be
accessed by an unauthorized entity. All these threats are possible in a normal
shared environment and therefore the security policies of cloud providers must
address all these issues in order to provide the conﬁdentiality and integrity of
data, operations and information as a whole.
Second, and highly severe threat to cloud computing providers and con-
sumers, is the physical location of computing devices. We argued that main
advantage of cloud infrastructure is that costs are lowered due to the concentra-
tion of servers and their support in server rooms and data centers. However, this
beneﬁt brings negative eﬀects on security. Consumers are no longer in physical
possession of the servers running their applications, thus they are taking a risk
by delegating the physical security (authorization and access to equipment) to
a third party - the cloud provider. And as some major vendors in the IT ﬁeld
suggest ”if a bad guy has unrestricted physical access to your computer, it’s not
your computer anymore” [32].
Third security issue arisen from the presence of cloud computing is geo-
locality. The feature provides good geo-distribution of both services and data,
thus reducing response time and latency of interactions with the cloud-hosted
resources. However, geo-distribution comes with the implications of laws and
policies of local governments and states. For example, it takes a severe judicial
action to force a company to reveal user data in the USA, like in the case of US
court ordering Apple to provide data about the San Bernardino shooter [33].
Meanwhile in other countries, the government (or maybe even other entities)
might be in power to demand personal data much easily by law. In such cases,
local cloud data centers are subjects of eventual data breach and company secret
disclosure or espionage.
27
==PAGE:28==
6.4
Denial-of-Service in Cloud Computing
So far we mentioned the conﬁdentiality and integrity issues arisen from the
cloud environment, and there are many more which are to be discussed, how-
ever availability is yet another security aspect that needs attention and we will
focus on it further on. More speciﬁcally coping with denial-of-service attacks in
cloud infrastructures and cloud-based services. As we have discussed in previous
chapters DoS is an attack on the availability of a given resource and in a shared
environment the threat of shared damage between tenants is imminent.
The availability requirements of clients are always the same, regardless the
environment in which their services operate. In the case of self-hosting a service,
when the user uses proprietary equipment, the responsibility of DoS protection
lies mostly with the user. Although it makes sense and is highly recommended
one to follow anti-DoS guidelines and deploy some DoS defense features, in the
cloud, the main responsibility lies with the cloud provider who needs to employ
as much as possible anti-DoS policies for several reasons, some of them including:
• A DoS attack on a tenant is in fact, a DoS attack on the infrastructure
of the cloud, meaning it might disturb adjacent tenants, like ones sharing
CPU consumption or network bandwidth with the victim.
• A DoS attack might not completely deny a service, but artiﬁcially increase
the costs due to auto-expanding leased resource policy. Thus, the tenant
might be unsatisﬁed with the cloud service and either switch to a com-
petitor or stop using the service at all. A detection of malicious traﬃc
can protect the tenant and let him or her pay for exactly what is used
(in terms of consumption due to legitimate business requests, rather than
just resource busyness).
• A failure to provide system security, including availability, is a failure to
deliver services for which the provider is being paid, even if this failure is
due to a malicious third-party act. In many cases clients use cloud services
not only for the resources provisioned on-demand, but also because they
can delegate the responsibility of hardware support and availability of
services to the cloud provider.
For those reasons and more, DoS protection is important to cloud providers
and this is the motivation behind this paper - to ﬁnd a DoS defense mechanism to
be employed in a cloud infrastructure so that most of the issues discussed earlier
can be addressed and reacted upon. In more technical terms that would be an
intrusion detection and prevention system focusing on DoS attacks
in cloud infrastructures.
28
==PAGE:29==
7
DoS Intrusion Detection and Prevention in
Cloud Environments
We will further address the problem of how to detect and prevent denial-of-
service attacks in cloud-based services, but ﬁrst we need to set up some ground
assumptions about the environment in which we will try to solve this problem.
• There is an operational cloud system implementing the high-level design
presented in section 6.2.
• The security policy enforcement reaches no further than the boundaries
of the cloud, meaning that no monitoring and/or actions can be done
upon any of the resources operating before the entry point(s) of the cloud
system (most commonly the internet service providers’ edge router acting
as the cloud gateway).
• Any external (for the cloud) volumetric DoS attack with bandwidth higher
than or equal to the entry point with lowest bandwidth capacity is out of
the scope of our defense solution. E.g. when an ICMP ﬂood with power
of 15 Gbps is targeting the cloud and the lowest bandwidth entry point
supports 10 Gbps (assuming no ISP load-balancing).
With these assumptions at hand, we would like the fulﬂll the following re-
quirements for our DoS defense mechanism, as also set by R. Deshmukh and K.
Devadkar [34]:
• Functionality - the system should be able to reduce the impact of a DoS
attack on one or more of the cloud resources, independently on the attack
power (as long as it meets the assumptions).
• Lightness - the system should be with as minimal as possible overhead for
two main reasons - escape DoS ampliﬁcation threat and keep low operation
cost.
• Simplicity - the solution should be simple enough for the cloud system’s
administrator to be able to conﬁgure and deploy with as little eﬀort as
possible.
• Precision - the solution should provide low false positive result rate.
False positives lead to a belief that legitimate traﬃc is malicious and so
the traﬃc is rejected, denied or dropped. Thus, a denial of service occurs
and the solution itself no longer fulﬁlls the main task - to drop malicious
and serve only legitimate traﬃc.
There are some solutions that partially or absolutely fulﬁll the requirements
above, given the assumptions we set - e.g. F5 DDoS Protection Reference Archi-
tecture [35] (multi-component solution incorporating both software and hard-
ware components, based on the level of protection demand; includes hardware
29
==PAGE:30==
IDS or Firewall appliance, software IDS/IPS, remote scrubbing service, IP rep-
utation database, content delivery network). Other products are CheckPoint’s
DDoS Protector [36] (DDoS appliance), Cisco’s Guard XT [37] (DDoS appli-
ance), Incapsula’s Infrastructure Protection [38](CDN). However, all of them in-
volve either severe infrastructure reconstruction, addition of hardware devices,
delegation of such in a sole responsibility (e.g. a physical server which only task
is to monitor) or are just expensive and do not make use of available infrastruc-
ture. That is why, we are going to raise the requirements with the following:
• Utilization of idle resources - instead of investing into more hardware
and thus eventually lowering the overall utilization rate of the system, the
solution should utilize idle resources into the DoS defense.
• Traﬃc monitoring based on tenant usage patterns (rate-based IPS [39])
- the solution should provide a per-tenant behavioral traﬃc monitoring and
detect deviations from the pattern. A self-conﬁguration option should be
available to tenants and/or cloud administrators, but a self-learning be-
havioral analysis will account for easier support and more precise protec-
tion for every speciﬁc tenant.
• Modularity - the solution should provide easy method to include or ex-
clude pieces of the system, which take care of the traﬃc analysis. The
modules should be easy to ”plug and play”, thus providing the capability
of easily expand the protection by the DoS defense system.
• Minimum or none infrastructural changes - the IDS should force no
alterations to the established cloud environment, or if such are needed,
they should be as few as possible and as close to the original.
A solution fulﬁlling all these requirements and working under the assump-
tions we set will contribute to cloud environments by dynamically and inde-
pendently create behavioral patterns on the users’ services and monitor if the
generated or received network traﬃc follows trends. If a trend deviation occurs,
a set of predeﬁned rules and policies could be enforced to tackle the cause -
e.g. block incoming traﬃc from a subnet on the Internet, set lower traﬃc band-
width, instantiate more service instances, de-prioritize ”suspicious” traﬃc or
simply notify some or all the stakeholders (tenant, cloud administrators, ISPs,
etc.) Such a solution will come at no additional cost to the provider, except
for the installation and support of the system and on the contrary it will al-
low savings by using the resources in which the provider has already invested
and didn’t utilize completely. Once deployed, the support should be as easy as
plugging in and out modules in a framework. Last but not least, such a system
should be able to not only detect the anomalies but allow counter-actions to be
taken.
The main advantages of such solution over known solutions are that it will be
easier to setup and maintain since it is software and not hardware. Furthermore,
it will be distributed, thus allowing more ﬂexibility and cheaper scalability to
the owner.
30
==PAGE:31==
8
System Design and Modeling
With all the requirements set and the review of some known solutions addressing
the problem of denial-of-service defense in cloud computing and cloud-based
services, we can now formulate a high-level design of a system that can also
address the problem but at the same time fulﬁll more of our requirements.
Our proposition is a distributed intrusion detection DoS defense system and
is comprised of a set of processes in a master-worker relationship. It also in-
tegrates with an intrusion prevention system to take action in case of attack
detection. The distributed IDS has one logical master1 and many workers each
of which following the paradigm of a software framework. Figure 2 shows an
overview of the framework. The worker processes are the modular piece, and
they have two main responsibilities - sniﬃng and reporting. The sniﬃng task
intercepts any packet that goes through one or more network interface cards
(NICs) on the machine running the worker process. An intercepted packet is
then sent to the ”interested” plugged-in analysis modules collecting data which
is later sent by the reporting task. Reporting is short-term data collection ex-
tracted from the sniﬃng task and sent to the master. It is crucial where the
worker processes will be deployed within the cloud, because combined they have
to have access to all the inter- and intra-cloud communication.
Figure 2: Framework overview
The master process also has two tasks - collecting (harvesting) data from
workers, aggregating it and calculating thresholds, thus drawing behavioral con-
clusions based on heuristic analysis, and secondly - monitoring (guarding) - mak-
ing sure that the collected data keeps up with the behavior. Should a deviation
from the trend occur, an event is ﬁred to the IPS. Harvesting and aggregating
task load is proportional to the number of modules running on each worker,
1In order to achieve redundancy the actual master processes should be more than one, but
only one of them will be active at a time. The rest will be holding a copy of the state of
the system and stand by. If the active master fails, a replica will take its place. The issue of
redundancy of our proposed system is out of the scope of this paper.
31
==PAGE:32==
the number of workers and the number of entities monitored. Moreover, aggre-
gation processing load is also dependent on the execution frequency, while the
aggregation memory used is dependent on the count deﬁnition of metrics within
each module. Having those considerations at hand, a good solution is to have
history module reports stored on some data storage (database or ﬁle system)
and the available operative memory of the machine hosting the master process
to be used for reports of immediate need for behavioral conclusions. Also, we
will assume that no module can demand more granular than ”per second” ag-
gregation of the data passed to the master, thus the average-case scenario time
limit for aggregation of any module’s data for all observed entities becomes one
second. The main consequences of those extra assumptions are that an eventual
trend deviation could be checked no more frequent than every second as well as
no module can aggregate short-term data on periods of less than a second.
We already described a high-level design of a cloud environment and now
showed a high-level design of the DoS defense system. However, more speciﬁc
details about the setup will be needed in order to explain the operational mech-
anism of our application, show how to unambiguously and eﬃciently deploy it
and what are the advantages of the distributed intrusion detection and preven-
tion system in a cloud environment setup.
8.1
Cloud Setup
We discussed that a cloud infrastructure will have a wide-area network (WAN)
entry point, router, switch, one or more server chassis with any number of
motherboards on them. Each of them would have a number of CPUs, RAM
chips and NICs. There would also be a storage unit that serves as non-volatile
memory for the computing resources in the cloud.
Now, in more details, a fairly simple cloud setup would have at least two
wide-area network entry points from two distinct ISPs. Each WAN end enters
at least two routers and network traﬃc is scheduled between them (e.g. round-
robin network scheduling [40]). Further on, there are at least two switches to
distribute the routed traﬃc within the cloud (most of the time managed switches
ensuring quality-of-service, port mirroring, virtual LAN segmentation and man-
agement). All the motherboards (say blade servers or mount-rack servers) are
connected with two of their physical network interfaces to at least two distinct
switches. The reason to have all present resources in couples is redundancy,
therefore reliability, and ocassionaly performance by load-balancing.
If any
router, switch, cable, power supply, blade server’s NIC, etc. fails, the other
resource of the pair can take over. The same goes for the connection to the
ISPs. Last, but not least, every blade server is connected to the storage unit,
again with two traces. The storage unit most often implements a RAID array
[41] either via software, hardware or both. The version is chosen depending on
the provider’s preferences and capabilities. An upgrade to Figure 1 would be
the following:
32
==PAGE:33==
Figure 3: Cloud setup
Figure 3 clearly shows that there is no single point of failure hardware-wise
(assuming redundancy on the hardware running the ﬁrewall).
Now that we have seen a more speciﬁc hardware environment setup, we will
need to have a look at the network setup and get a deeper understanding of how
the cloud network infrastructure works. Before that, however, it is important
to show how the virtual machine pool is built and organized.
Each of the blade servers (blades) is playing the role of a host for mul-
tiple virtual machines. On each of the blades a hypervisor that takes care
of the virtualization is installed and running. The hypervisor [42] is a virtual
machine monitor that creates and manages distinct virtual computing environ-
33
==PAGE:34==
ments within the boundaries of a single physical one. The hypervisor either
manages the VMs on top of an operating system or on its own (on ”bare-
metal”).
In cloud environments, most of the time the second option would
be chosen for stripping down unnecessary layers of complication and also for
performance. Hypervisor vendors nowadays are Microsoft (Hyper-V), VMWare
(vSphere ESXi), Oracle (OracleVM), etc. A single management application that
controls all hypervisors remotely is called an orchestrator and it is provided
with conﬁguration ﬁles for the cloud infrastructure.
A hypervisor not only distributes the resources of a physical machine between
several virtual, but also sets up and manages a virtual network environment
between those. The network environment could be as simple as just bridging the
running virtual machines to the physical network and acting as an unmanaged
switch or as complicated as creating multiple virtual subnets and routing and
natting2 the traﬃc between them, the physical network and the Internet. Most
commercial grade hypervisors can also join virtual machines in virtual local area
networks (VLANs) managed by other instances of the same hypervisor, other
hypervisor vendors and/or physical managed switches.
Often a cloud provider, much like a big enterprise structure with many net-
work attached devices, would organize the network using a VLAN segmentation
of the devices behind a router and most of the time a NAT. A VLAN setup
groups devices using a shared hardware backbone and isolates the groups from
each other [43]. This is done on the Layer 2 of the OSI model by tagging the
frames in transition, thus allowing hosts connected to the same switch to act as
if they were on diﬀerent and those connected on distinct as if they were on the
same switch.
In Figure 4 we observe a simple network topology in a cloud infrastructure.
The physical switch performs VLAN segmentation of the hypervisor hosts, then
the hypervisors segment the hosted virtual machines, creating a two-level virtual
local area network topology. The ﬁrst level is often used to diﬀerentiate big
domains within the same cloud (as an example two cloud environments - staging
and production - one used for actual cloud services used by tenants, and second
used within the cloud provider organization for development, tests or any other
inter-company use). The next level of VLAN segmentation is tagging virtual
machines, creating VLANs for tenant environment isolation within the cloud.
In the ﬁgure, VM boxes with the same pattern are segmented within the same
VLAN.
It is important to mention about some features most cloud providers im-
plement, such as load-balancing and redundancy. When any of the hypervisor
hosts becomes overwhelmed, virtual machines are migrated to less occupied
hosts, thus balancing the load, very similar to process execution scheduling in
multi-core processors or multi-processor devices. Furthermore, virtual machine
ﬁles are continuously backed up with redundant copies, should a running VM
fail. If so, a new instance of the same VM is started, replacing the old on the
2Network Address Translation - a way to share a single IP address between multiple hosts
or an entire network by modifying the address of an IP datagram on leaving of a routing
device in any direction - inbound or outbound.
34
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4: Simple cloud network topology
same or another hypervisor. Those two features provide scalability and ﬂexibil-
ity to the services oﬀered by the cloud, and also serve as proof for the dynamical
environment. Therefore, our solution should also take into consideration these
factors.
8.2
DoS Defense System Integration in the Cloud
Our proposition of a distributed IDS could now be more practically presented
with the generic setup of a cloud environment we showed.
As discussed, a
factor of key importance is the deployment of the worker processes which should
have access to inter- and intra-cloud communication in order to start building
the behavioral patterns. To do this, we will take advantage of the fact that
all communication of the VMs hosted on a single blade, is managed by the
hypervisor, acting as a bridge between the VMs on this and/or other hosts.
Therefore our goal will be to deploy one worker process on each blade, sniﬃng
on these bridges. Collected data will then be sent to the master process which
will do the aggregation and the behavior monitoring.
Main reason for choosing to deploy an instance of the worker process on every
blade is to introduce as little network overhead as possible (after all, most DoS
attacks are due to extensive network traﬃc). This way, the processing unit is as
close as possible to the data source, as the worker not only sniﬀs but executes
the modules which take care of the traﬃc analysis. Should we have chosen to
separate those two duties in processes running on diﬀerent physical machines,
35
==PAGE:36==
Figure 5: DoS IDS-enhanced cloud network topology
then the sniﬃng unit must have sent the sniﬀed packets to the module processing
unit, which should have been done through some communication mechanism
such as TCP or UDP messages. In the current scenario, the ”communication”
is done in the memory, as one thread is sniﬃng while the other is processing
whatever has been captured.
Although, it is possible to start an IDS process on each blade server, running
along with (or within) the hypervisor host, general rule of thumb in business
processes is the separation of duties [44]. Furthermore, running the IDS on the
blade host operating system would lead to developing IDS executables for any
kind of host operating systems and testing the operation of the integrated IDS
with the respective operating system and/or hypervisor. Last but not least, such
a deployment will not beneﬁt from the on-demand nature of cloud computing.
The execution of the IDS process will be hard to be controlled3 if the operating
system hosting it, also takes care of the execution of the hypervisor. So, to get
away from vendor-speciﬁcity in terms of hypervisor software or host operating
system and achieve on-demand IDS process resources we will deploy the process
in a Linux virtual machine box within the hypervisor. This will lead to some
minor infrastructure changes regarding packet routing which would, however,
remain invisible to the hosted virtual machines and the Internet addressing any
of those machines.
In our design, the master process has two tasks - to collect and aggregate
3Many Linux distributions have the concept of Linux containers, which are operating-
system-level virtualization. Containers’ sizes are predeﬁned and hosted applications cannot
overcome the boundaries of the containers. This technology can contain a running process
and provide on-demand shrinking or expanding, however not all operating systems hosting
hypervisors or hypervisor operating systems themselves, support such features.
36
==PAGE:37==
data and to notify the IPS of any events that might occur. For that reason any
virtual machine in the cloud is able to host the master process as long as it has
connectivity to all worker processes and the IPS (e.g. if the master process is
hosted on a hypervisor which is in a VLAN not shared by all other hypervisors,
then no reporting could be done from some of the workers). The network traﬃc
overhead introduced to the cloud network will be minimal, since the short-term
collection within the worker processes is going to signiﬁcantly decrease the num-
ber of reporting messages needed for analyzed captured packets.
Last but not least, the deployment of the prevention part of the system
needs to be addressed. We have not discussed in details what the features of
such a prevention system could be.
We mentioned that a prevention could
be manual, as well as automatic - e.g.
sending a notiﬁcation to tenant or
cloud administrator and letting him or her take action or automatic lowering
the bandwidth capacity of incoming traﬃc. Diﬀerent places of operation could
be appropriate, depending on the functionality of the prevention system. In
the case of bandwidth lowering, the prevention system should be notifying the
hypervisor to limit the connection throughput to a given VM and this could be
done from within the VLAN of the hypervisors or the orchestrator. In the case
when a notiﬁcation should be sent, all the IPS need is for example the e-mail
of the notiﬁcation recipient, which should be available in some internal for the
company database. Therefore any location with access to this database would
be ﬁne. In the case where a remote subnet might be blocked as a prevention
mechanism, the IPS should be able to access the ﬁrewall of the cloud, which
in terms of network administration, often means that the IPS should be able
to control the DMZ, thus be in a subnet with administrative access to network
resources. Since IPS is not in the main scope of our paper, we will assume that
for our purposes notiﬁcation in the form of an e-mail will suﬃce, therefore the
IPS could be deployed to any machine with Internet connection.
37
==PAGE:38==
9
Detailed Design
After identifying the needs and requirements of cloud providers in their struggle
with DoS attacks and creating a high-level system design along with infrastruc-
tural setup plan, we can start paying attention to more speciﬁc and detailed
planning of system’s main components - worker and master IDS processes.
9.1
IDS Worker Process
The worker processes constitute the distributed component in our IDS. Working
independently on disjoint sets of the traﬃc, they join forces to collect module-
speciﬁc data for the cloud and its tenants by being based on key locations within
the cloud. Deploying them on each blade allows capturing traﬃc that goes in,
out and within the blade by the hosted services.
Due to the design we see in Figure 6 the processing load on the worker process
is expected to be proportional to, obviously the processing work done by the
modules, but more importantly for the overall assessment of the performance
of the IDS framework - to the network traﬃc load of the blade. Therefore, it is
important to consider the time and memory needed for the processing of a single
packet. Since our IDS solution is a distributed software solution the best option
would be to pick a low-level programming language with execution as close as
possible to the hardware - e.g. no overhead from automatic garbage collection
or memory allocation that might unexpectedly change the performance of our
system, especially when scaling up to processing millions of packets per second.
For those reasons, we choose to use the C programming language, which allows
direct access to hardware components and no execution overhead due to runtime
environments.
Using the same observations we have to choose an operating
system with as little overhead as possible. Those are some minimal UNIX or
Linux distributions like CentOS minimal or FreeBSD.
Figure 6 shows the detailed design of the worker process. Noticeable is a
sniﬀer thread capturing the traﬃc that goes through a NIC. The sniﬀer then
provides the collector and respectively the running module threads with a ref-
erence in the memory to the captured packets. Module threads will be able to
read the memory where packets are stored and thus be able to do the logical
analysis.
38
==PAGE:39==
Figure 6: Worker process ﬂow diagram
39
==PAGE:40==
Figure 7: Libpcap operational workﬂow (source [45])
In more details, the sniﬃng thread will use a packet capture tool such as
pcap or PF RING (includes and uses pcap under the hood) to provide user-space
packet capture. Working on the data link layer from the OSI model, libpcap (the
linux implementation of pcap [45]) allows the capturing and handling of network
traﬃc from NICs before the kernel’s handle of the protocol stack, thus avoiding
some of the operating system’s overhead - Figure 7 (Kernel Space). The use of
pcap allows modules to process packets with no memory overhead for copying
and temporarily storing captured packets.
At the same time, the intended
recipient of the packet will suﬀer no added latency rather than the network’s,
since the packet will be delivered to the service with no delay. However, when
the circular buﬀer that pcap uses goes a full round, the memory at the processed
location will be overwritten with the bytes of some new packet. Therefore the
IDS needs to ensure either that by the time a new packet is going to override a
packet (or packets) in the buﬀer, no module is still working with it or the module
has its local copy of the packet. To achieve that a module can copy the content
of a packet before starting work on it (however, that would depend on module
development and will increase module’s and respectively worker process memory
consumption) or to increase the buﬀer size of the capturing tool which does not
guarantee that continuous processing delay would not lead to overriding a packet
in the buﬀer eventually. Furthermore, the second option would also increase
the system’s overall memory consumption, by increasing the capturing tool’s
memory. At this point, the main feature of cloud provisioned resources comes
to play - elasticity. What can be done is to integrate the worker process with the
40
==PAGE:41==
hypervisor or the orchestrator and ask for more resources to be provisioned. For
example the machine running the worker process has dedicated CPU power and
RAM and the worker process has deﬁned some value for the capturing buﬀer.
Whenever the usage of the buﬀer is rising and crosses a threshold, the worker
process can ask the hypervisor to provision more resources so that the packet
processing speed can be increased or the buﬀer size or both. This will allow the
worker process to overcome ﬂoods.
Every ”interested” module, running in a separate thread will receive a loca-
tion in the memory, referencing the packet, as well as its length. An ”interested”
module will be such that in its conﬁguration deﬁnes a list of protocols, the pack-
ets of which are to be inspected by the module - e.g. TCP, UDP, HTTP, etc.
Furthermore, a module has to ”implement” the following interface4:
• void got packet(packetBytes, packetLength, ref persistentObject)
• metric report data(ref persistentObject)
• string get module name()
• int get delay definition()
• short get metric count()
• (ref persistentObject) create persistent object()
• void free persistent object(ref persistentObject)
A C code fragment implementing these functions will be able to be plugged
into the framework, and loaded within a worker process to analyze the traﬃc
captured. A module will have some administration-related functions, such as
get module name, get metric count and get delay deﬁnition. The worker process
retrieves the name of the module, the number of metrics that are going to be
sent over to the master process and the frequency at which they are going to
be sent. A module should also deﬁne the two main functions - got packet and
report data, which should contain the behavior of the module. The former will
be called every time a packet of any module’s interest is received and needs to
be handed over to the module, while the latter will be used to generate a report
with metrics about the collected and analyzed by the module data.
Every module will have a set of persistent objects which are in fact provided
to the module’s got packet and report data functions of the worker process. This
set represents a grouping of the network traﬃc based on some distinction of the
cloud-based services and show the current short-term state.
More methods
regarding the creation, ﬂushing and deallocation of those objects could also be
4Referring to the object-oriented programming model where interfaces are the contracts
between two parties and deﬁne the list of methods that are going to be executed. Since the
programming language of our choice C is not an OOP language no strongly typed deﬁnition
of interfaces exist, however the framework will be looking for the mentioned set of method
deﬁnitions to be executed while running the modules
41
==PAGE:42==
deﬁned for module development convenience. However, this will be left as future
work.
Grouping could be organized by tenant, using an external for the IDS appli-
cation program interface (API) which should return a unique tenant identiﬁer,
based on some of the data in any single packet. However, that would be able to
diﬀerentiate an attack on a tenant, and not speciﬁcally on which of the resources
he or she is provisioned. Another way to group traﬃc could be by target’s public
or private IP (in the cloud), although such a grouping is not completely ade-
quate, because in a cloud infrastructure both public and private IPs are usually
dynamic. Third way of grouping is by VM ID, which seems most appropriate
since the relationship VM to tenant will always be static for as long as the VM
exists. Furthermore, even the migration of VMs and the dynamical IP assign-
ment will not change the ability to uniquely identify the group belonging of a
packet. However, such grouping procedure will again require an API to retrieve
unique VM identiﬁers based on some of the data from a IP packet. Fortunately,
many hypervisors provide such APIs like for example Get-VM CLI command in
the vSphere orchestrator [46], where a VM object containing unique identiﬁer is
returned only if the VM matches a ﬁlter such as any of the NICs to be assigned
with a speciﬁc IP address. We can use either the IP source or IP destination
address of a packet and retrieve a VM unique identiﬁer (UID). Of course, many
performance enhancing algorithms can be implemented to reduce the overhead
of this API request, such as caching and/or event-based mitigation of changes
in the IP addresses of the VM set.
We showed that it is possible to make use of cloud APIs that return vari-
ous kinds of tenant data which can be used for grouping and hence tracking.
Such integration can be exposed as an API of the IDS, however such software
development eﬀort is out of the scope of this paper and for simplicity we will
restrain grouping (bucketing) the traﬃc and its analysis data to static public
IP addresses that are assigned to VMs.
9.2
IDS Master Process
The master process, as discussed, has two main tasks - orchestrating and har-
vesting from the worker processes, and building the behavioral patterns based
on the collected data. A single process tracking the behavioral patterns of all
the tenants in the cloud environment would be too ineﬃcient, if not incapable
of handling the data volume. For that reason, a two-level data aggregation is
done - one is short-term distributed collection done by the worker processes, de-
scribed in the previous section, and one is by the master process which monitors
longer periods of time and concludes on the behavioral patterns.
The orchestration of the worker processes faces a number of problems, typical
for any distributed system, namely - high availability, messaging reliability, clock
synchronization, master election, etc. The system should be able to replace a
master node with a running redundant copy, whenever the elected master fails.
Duplication or absence of reported data by a worker process, due to unreliable
42
==PAGE:43==
communication might lead to false conclusions, such as false positives or true
negatives when detecting a possible attack.
Therefore, reliable messaging is
of a severe importance.
Similarly, clock synchronization might also lead to
discrepancies in the reports, hence unjustiﬁed skewness in the statistics. Last
but not least, the orchestrator should be a mean to manage the IDS centrally,
mainly plugging in and out modules, deﬁning conﬁguration settings and the
ability to manually adjust the results of the behavioral pattern, due to known
for the administrator and unknown for the system events.
The second and more speciﬁc task of the master process is building be-
havioral patterns based on the collected data from the modules. A module is
provided packets and concludes results in some short-term metric value based
on speciﬁc logic implemented in the module. These metrics are then reported to
the master. The master’s task is to aggregate them over longer periods of time
and build behavioral pattern, describing a normal operational state for any of
the tracked entities (tenants, virtual machines, IP addresses, etc.) in terms of a
given module’s logic. A simple example could be a module counting the number
of protocol packets used or the share each of them has out of all the packets
sent or received. If the long-term analysis shows that normally only 10% of
the incoming packets to a virtual machine X are UDP and a worker process
reports continuous 70+% usage of UDP packets, then this is a sign of possible
UDP ﬂood DoS attack. A bit more involved module could be monitoring the
incoming DNS responses. The module might be counting the number of DNS
responses per DNS server, thus detect a DNS ampliﬁcation attack if almost
identical DNS responses are received in short time periods. Furthermore, the
IDS worker process module might be monitoring if a DNS query was sent from
the target entity at all.
Last but not least, some very involved modules could be implemented, de-
tecting signature-based DoS attacks like APDoS described in 3.4.4 or Hit-and-
Run in 3.4.2. In such situations the reporting could be as simple as a boolean
metric variable showing the presence of the signature and respectively an on-
going attack. Although, every module is to deﬁne the logic of what is going to
be monitored and the frequency interval of reporting, the master process will
be building the behavioral patterns based on the harvested metrics. For that
reason, a module should choose an adequate frequency interval so that a sta-
tistical sample could be drawn fast enough. A module also has to comply its
reports with a predeﬁned enumeration of possible metrics, so that the master
process can apply some predeﬁned aggregation mechanism based on those. A
possible metric can be a discrete number and the aggregation mechanism for
such could be the normal distribution of the discrete variable. Other possible
metrics could be boolean variable, range or an array of values.
According to Figure 8 the master process runs a server thread to wait in-
coming worker connections. Whenever one arrives, the master sends the module
suite to the worker. Then, the master starts receiving reports for every module
for every worker. Reports are stored with appropriate data structures to keep
high performance and low memory consumption. A received report is checked if
it follows established behavioral patterns with some tolerance. If not, an event
43
==PAGE:44==
Figure 8: Master process ﬂow diagram
44
==PAGE:45==
is triggered and the IPS takes action. An action could also be accepting the de-
viated behavior as a standard one if such policy was deﬁned or explicitly allowed
manually by an authorized agent (e.g. tenant administrator). In that case, the
report is aggregated with old reports and the trend is adjusted accordingly. If
the report follows the established behavioral pattern then it is accepted and
taken into account for future aggregation.
45
==PAGE:46==
10
Proof of Concept
To prove the design of the distributed system we have developed a prototype that
would have helped to repulse a DoS attack on some of the tenants in the cloud
environment of our collaborator Oblak.bg. Oblak.bg provides Infrastructure-
as-a-Service to a number of customers and implements the design we presented
in Section 8.1 with Figure 3. The grounds of the topology of the network are
covered by Figure 4. The company suﬀered from an attack on the infrastructure
and more speciﬁcally, an ICMP ﬂood DDoS targeted at one of its tenants. The
attack’s initial intention was to ﬂood a single tenant. Cloud logs show that
the attack increased dramatically several times. In the beginning being a few
Mbps (0.1 −6), later became around 87 Mbps which forced expansion on the
provisioned network bandwidth resource from 100 Mbps to 1 Gbps. This is an
automatic action deﬁned by Oblak.bg’s default policy of 80% resource usage
threshold. After a while, probably when the attacker noticed that legitimate
requests are still served, the attack was increased to almost 13 Gbps and thus
hitting the network bandwidth cap of 1 Gbps provisioned for the virtual machine
and in combination with legitimate traﬃc, almost acquiring all the capacity of
the blade with two 10 Gbps interface cards. The services running on this VM
were denied by the ICMP network ﬂood and the other tenants on the same
blade were experiencing high response delays.
Of course, many actions could be taken in this case and are generally a rule
of thumb against ICMP ﬂood for online services - e.g. the cloud ﬁrewall can
block ICMP requests to one, many or all the tenants in the cloud, however this
decision might aﬀect dependent services deployed within the cloud. Also, such
a solution needs to be employed manually. Another solution is for example the
way Microsoft has addressed this problem - default deny inbound rule for ICMP
in the ﬁrewall of most Windows distributions. However, in cloud services, users
often rely on manual ICMP checks to test the availability of their VMs.
10.1
Development
Our IDS solution addresses the ICMP network ﬂood attack by incorporating a
module to track protocol usage of every VM (we assumed that every VM has a
single static IP address, so we are grouping by IP). The module intercepts every
IP packet and checks the type of the protocol used (e.g. in ﬁgure 9 the eighth
octet in IPv4 header).
46
==PAGE:47==
Figure 9: IPv4 Header Format (source: Wikipedia)
The module continuously counts the IP packets per type by parsing the
headers of captured packets. In our proof of concept the sniﬀer captures all
IPv4 packets and presents all of them to all modules. The counters are saved in
the respective tenant’s persistent object managed by the worker process. The
piece of code below shows a simple code fragment from the protocount module
implementation (all code could be found in GitHub [47].
#include <n e t i n e t / ip . h>
#include <arpa/ i n e t . h>
struct
PacketCount{
int
icmp ;
int
tcp ;
int udp ;
int
other ;
};
void
got packet ( const char ∗packetBytes ,
int
packetLen ,
void ∗p e r s i s t e n t O b j e c t )
{
struct
PacketCount ∗obj =
( struct
PacketCount
∗)
p e r s i s t e n t O b j e c t ;
const struct
ip
∗packet =
( struct
ip ∗)( packetBytes + SIZE ETHERNET ) ;
switch ( packet−>ip p )
{
case
1:
obj−>icmp++;
break ;
case
6:
obj−>tcp++;
break ;
case
17:
obj−>udp++;
break ;
default :
obj−>other++; break ;
}
}
The frequency at which the module will report data to the master process
via the worker process is retrieved by the get delay deﬁnition function. The
report data function creates the report that is going to be sent in the form
of an instance of the metric struct. It contains a linked list of metric types
with their according values.
In this case those are simple random variables
and discrete numbers being the values for each. The worker calls report data
on frequent intervals and once the report is generated, the worker forces the
47
==PAGE:48==
module to ﬂush the persistent object values using the create persistent object
and free persistent object functions. Any module could have deﬁned additional
local variables to help serve the logic behind it. However, for our protocount
module that was not necessary.
#include <s t r i n g . h>
#include ” . . / c o n f i g . h” // contains MAX METRIC NAME LEN d e f i n i t i o n
const short DELAY DEFINITION = 1 ;
int
g e t d e l a y d e f i n i t i o n ()
{
return DELAY DEFINITION;
}
struct
metric ∗
report data ( void ∗p e r s i s t e n t O b j e c t )
{
struct
metric
∗metrics =
malloc (METRIC COUNT ∗
sizeof ( struct
metric ) ) ;
struct
PacketCount ∗obj =
( struct
PacketCount
∗)
p e r s i s t e n t O b j e c t ;
metrics [ 0 ] . name = malloc (MAX METRIC NAME LEN) ;
strcpy ( metrics [ 0 ] . name ,
”icmp
count ” ) ;
metrics [ 0 ] . value = obj−>icmp ;
metrics [ 1 ] . name = malloc (MAX METRIC NAME LEN) ;
strcpy ( metrics [ 1 ] . name ,
” tcp
count ” ) ;
metrics [ 1 ] . value = obj−>tcp ;
metrics [ 2 ] . name = malloc (MAX METRIC NAME LEN) ;
strcpy ( metrics [ 2 ] . name ,
”udp count ” ) ;
metrics [ 2 ] . value = obj−>udp ;
metrics [ 3 ] . name = malloc (MAX METRIC NAME LEN) ;
strcpy ( metrics [ 3 ] . name ,
” others
count ” ) ;
metrics [ 3 ] . value = obj−>other ;
return
metrics ;
}
short
get metric count ()
{
return METRIC COUNT;
}
void∗
c r e a t e p e r s i s t e n t o b j e c t ( )
{
struct
PacketCount ∗obj = malloc ( sizeof ( struct
PacketCount ) ) ;
obj−>icmp = 0;
obj−>tcp = 0;
obj−>udp = 0;
obj−>other = 0;
return
( void
∗)
obj ;
48
==PAGE:49==
}
void
f r e e p e r s i s t e n t o b j e c t ( void ∗p e r s i s t e n t O b j e c t )
{
struct
PacketCount ∗obj = ( struct
PacketCount
∗)
p e r s i s t e n t O b j e c t ;
f r e e ( obj ) ;
}
The master process prototype we developed, allows the distribution of the
modules when workers connect and the continuous aggregation of reported data.
When the master process is started, it opens a server thread to wait on incoming
connections from workers.
Every time a worker connects, the master sends
over TCP channel the module suite in the form of .so C shared object ﬁles
to the respective worker. Then, using the dlfcn.h library functions for shared
object management, the worker can dynamically read and execute deﬁned in
the module functions.
void
o r c h e s t r a t o r s t a r t ( void ∗args )
{
int
s e r v e r s o c k e t = o p e n l i s t e n i n g s o c k e t (&portno ) ;
while ( keepRunning )
{
//
l i s t e n s
at
most
timeout
seconds
not
to
block
the
thread
i f ( p s e l e c t (FD SETSIZE , &a c t i v e f d s e t ,
NULL, NULL, &timeout , NULL) > 0)
{
//
accepts TCP message on
p e e r s o c k e t
f i l e
d e s c r i p t o r
p e e r s o c k e t = accept ( s e r v e r s o c k e t ,
( struct
sockaddr
∗) &peer addr , &s o c k l e n ) ;
// send
modules
to
worker on
//
the
p eer so c k e t
f i l e
d e s c r i p t o r
send modules to worker ( p e e r s o c k e t ) ;
//
s t a r t s
a
thread
for
worker
communication
s t a r t t h r e a d ( ” harvester ” , &harvesterThread ,
&h a r v e s t e r s t a r t ,
( void
∗)
ipaddress ) ;
}
}
int main ( int
argc ,
char ∗argv [ ] )
{
pthread t
orchestratorThread ;
s t a r t t h r e a d ( ” o r c h e s t r a t o r ” , &orchestratorThread ,
&o r c h e s t r a t o r s t a r t , NULL) ;
//
. . .
}
Once a worker receives and starts execution of modules, it also starts re-
porting. The master process keeps a thread with a TCP socket open for every
49
==PAGE:50==
worker. Reports are received on this TCP socket and then added to thread-
shared collections.
A combination of hashtables and linked lists allows fast
addition, removal, traversal and access of needed data. In this prototype devel-
opment we used only discrete values as possible metrics that the modules can
report and we chose normal distribution as the aggregation function. The nor-
mal distribution shows the probability distribution of random variable’s value.
In other words the normal deviation the variable might have from its mean [48],
hence its synonym - normal deviate. With a suﬃciently large population the
normal deviation becomes more accurate and gives an overview of the trends
(tendencies) that a random variable’s values might follow.
//
aggregates
the
report
and
old
s t a t s
into
a new
s t a t s
record
// adds
the new record
to
the
∗s t a t s
l i n k e d
l i s t
void
aggregate ( struct
report
∗report ,
struct
s t a t s
∗s t a t s ) ;
Whenever a report is received, the aggregate function in the master process
is called and depending on the metrics, an aggregation function is chosen. For
discrete numbers, the mean and the standard deviation of the metric in the
report and the history metric reports are calculated. Once suﬃciently enough
statistic is gathered (depending on a conﬁguration setting in our system, say 6
hours, 1 day, 3 months) on a report reception, before aggregating it with old
data, the metrics in the report are checked against the calculated trends.
//
returns
an
event
code
to
be
used
f u r t h e r
//
for
decision
taking
on counter−actions
int
check trends ( struct
report
∗report ,
struct
s t a t s
∗s t a t s ) ;
In the check trends function, the report is compared to the prior behavior
of the monitored entity and in case of a deviation with a predeﬁned tolerance,
respective event code is returned to the caller. The returned code could also be
sent with some more details to an integrated IPS. For our proof of concept, we
use an error message on the standard output.
Since the reports can be as often as every second, that would suggest huge
history data over time. For that reason our design implementation needs to take
into consideration the storage and the frequent aggregation of many records.
We discussed that a combination of in-memory and some non-volatile memory
storage (ﬁle system, database) will be used. However, the performance of ag-
gregation will be proportional to the number of records and if the reports are
delivered every second, that would be a total traversal of over a billion records
per second for data generated from 3 modules for 1000 entities(VMs) in just 4
days5. For that reason, our design suggested a level-aggregation and we imple-
mented it to extract aggregation data on several layers - per minutes, per hours,
per days, etc. A conﬁguration of the size of a buﬀer allows to conﬁgure the
granularity of calculation of the thresholds for the behavioral analysis. E.g. a
value of 86400 will be the number of records that buﬀer can ﬁt, thus allowing a
whole day of per-second reports to be stored and incorporated in the calculation
54 days have 345600 seconds, each second generates 1000 entries for every entity monitored.
345600 * 1000 * 3 modules = 1 036 800 000 records
50
==PAGE:51==
of the aggregation. The data before that will be used in the form of aggregated
per minutes, hours, days, etc. that has been prior calculated. Thus, the behav-
ior pattern based on the normal distribution of a random variable (say ICMP
packet count) for the last three years could be calculated in the following way:
• on the basis of the last day in per-seconds scale with 86400 records
• on the basis of the previous 2 weeks in per-minutes scale with 20160 records
• on the basis of the previous 3 years in per-hour scale 26280 records
This clearly shows that a more weight will have more recent data and a
minute within the last day will account for more than a minute last week and
especially last year. This is highly justiﬁed as a change in the volume of traﬃc
is more important to be noticed based on observations done recently, than long
time ago. E.g. the UDP traﬃc for the past year has been relatively low, however
for the past day, as a new service has been started, the traﬃc has been gradually
increasing. The packets reported in a single per-second report might be several
times more than reports from a year ago aggregated by the hour, but at the
same time very close to what has been reported for the past day.
With these record counts, the aggregation process will need to aggregate
approximately 133 000 records for each monitored entity for each module in
per-second reporting. That is almost 8000 times less than the example above
with 3 modules and 1000 entities, and at the same time covers 3 years instead
of 4 days.
The best way to have the master process do the aggregation is to utilize fully
the given resources - CPU power and RAM. Thus, the aggregation processing
can consume as much memory and calculate as many instructions per second as
RAM and CPU resource is provisioned. For example, the calculation of normal
distribution is linear and takes O(N) operations, therefore O(N) number of
instructions where N is the number of stored records (buﬀer size). So, it would
be most eﬃcient if the master process can dynamically change the buﬀer sizes
for the diﬀerent scales, based on a calculation of the allocated CPU resource,
the available memory, the number of modules and the number of monitored
entities. Thus, whatever resources have been provisioned, the master process
can calculate what is the optimal amount of records from each scale to be used
so that a statically deﬁned time frame history is used to calculate the behavior.
This however will be work for future reference.
10.2
Deployment
For the deployment of our prototype we combine several technologies to sim-
ulate a cloud environment. Firstly, we use C as the programming language
of our choice for reasons we mentioned before. The compiler is gcc (version
4.8.5 20150623 RHEL 4.8.5-4) the compilation is under the GNU89 standard
within a CentOS 7 minimal (kernel-3.10.0-327.4.5.el7.x86 64). To mimic a net-
work infrastructure we use Linux network namespaces which allow separation
51
==PAGE:52==
of a global network resource - in this case the network components. The most
widespread use of namespaces is in Linux containers, which is a lightweight vir-
tualization, where containers are created and provisioned pieces of the physical
resource. In our case we create the topology as presented in Figure 10 using
a bash script (Appendix A) setting up namespaces, virtual network interfaces
and IP, routing and ﬁrewall conﬁguration.
Figure 10: Prototype Linux namespace network topology
In this diagram, network-wise we have deployed two virtual machines with
a virtual bridge between them, to which the worker process’ sniﬃng thread is
attached. Thus, we have deployed the topology as in Figure 5. Even more, the
IDS worker instance is combined with the virtual switch managing the internal
VLAN segmentation, thus no additional bridging is needed (the IDS bridge in
the ﬁgure). The master process is deployed on the virtualization host directly
(for simplicity) and the host is bridging the internal bridge to the physical
network, transitively the internal network with the external. Whenever a request
is made from the outside to any of the VMs or from any of the VMs to the outside
or from a VM to another VM within the same host, the packets go through the
internal virtual switch with the worker process attached. Thus in all cases, the
traﬃc goes through our worker and analysis could be done. The collected data
is then send to the master process.
10.3
Robustness
In Section 5.1 we introduced the idea of prevention as the best DoS defense
mechanism there is. We referenced the D-WARD and MULTOPS as concepts
for ﬁghting an attack at its origin, which is the most eﬀective way to mitigate
the attack. We also highlighted what are the reasons behind ISPs and network
administrators for their low incentives to implement these concepts - the fact
that both methodologies protect remote networks instead of their own. Our
52
==PAGE:53==
system design uses a much similar idea, presented in both those proposals, by
monitoring the traﬃc and building behavioral analysis based on a set of metrics.
However, we deploy it on the victim end to protect one’s own network, although
it is ineﬀective looking from a bigger scale.
With the design we set for our DoS distributed IDS and the development of
a module to count protocol usage for every IP within the cloud, we showed that
it is possible to monitor the behavior of each IP (respectively tenant resource)
in terms of ongoing network traﬃc. In Section 4 we presented several types of
features that a DoS attack might carry, some of which were predictable ﬂow rate,
message structure similarities, non-semantic ﬂow sequence. With the develop-
ment of the protocount module we showed how the system makes a conclusion
on what the average packet usage is and keeps track if the current usage com-
plies with trends. If we shift our view and monitor only the incoming traﬃc and
its ﬂow rate, we can notice discrepancies in the behavior of the traﬃc whenever
an attack occurs. E.g. building a trend, based on the sequence in which web
application pages are accessed by distinct remote users. If non-semantic ﬂow
sequence occurs in combination with heavy traﬃc load with the same origin,
this might be a sign of an attack. Similarly, observing a constant, periodical
or increasing rate of requests. A weakness of our system is the case of very
slow and gradual increase within the tolerance allowed by the IDS. This can go
under the radar of our detection, however it can be avoided by a combination
of diﬀerent modules and metrics.
Furthermore, our system complies with the notion of heuristic-based ap-
proach as presented in Section 5.2. Since the framework design allows for any
metric from a predeﬁned set to be chosen for report, rather than speciﬁc ones
(packet count, packet size, response time, etc.) one can develop a module that
implements a signature-based detection for ongoing DoS attacks. A very simple
example could be opening many HTTP sessions and having just a single very
long in time request. That could be a sign of Slowloris (3.2.2), HTTP Slow
read (3.2.4) or HTTP POST attack (3.2.5). With the proper extraction of data
from ongoing traﬃc, properly set reporting frequency intervals and local storage
variables, one can report to the aggregation engine the appropriate metric show-
ing presence of a signature-based DoS attack. One can even share more details
about the state, rather then just the presence or absence of the signature.
Another important point we made in this paper is that sometimes, dramatic
increase in resource usage (say network traﬃc) can be due to a ﬂash crowd.
These cases can be addressed by combining several features of our DoS defense
system. As discussed, the prevention system can execute rule-based policies
to mitigate attacks.
Such policies can be enforced based on more than one
parameter - in our case, events risen from the master IDS process due to more
than one module.
A simple example is increased volume of traﬃc, but the
same packet share on average. Of course, the system allows for more involved
considerations, however they all depend on the module suite plugged into the
system.
Last but not least, our distributed IDS forces no changes on the cloud in-
frastructure and does not introduce any restrictions. The features scalability,
53
==PAGE:54==
redundancy, high-availability and load-balancing are untouched and they all can
continue working as they have been, prior to deployment of the IDS. No network
topology change was needed, no software installation - all that was needed was
re-conﬁguration of the hypervisor network routing and the addition of a VM
boxes with running worker or master processes. The distributed IDS product
can eventually be distributed as images, so that a client would not be troubled
with deployment and installation of software, but only extracting an image and
altering a single conﬁguration ﬁle.
54
==PAGE:55==
11
Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper we showed what are the threats before a cloud service provider
in terms of attacks on the availability of the infrastructure. More speciﬁcally
we discussed what are denial-of-service attacks and what is their categorization.
Furthermore, we reviewed how are they applicable and what are the challenges
that cloud providers face in terms of defending against such attacks. We pre-
sented a software design of a distributed intrusion detection system targeting
denial-of-service attacks in cloud infrastructures. The system, being a software
product, allows for easier technical support and management, and its main ad-
vantage over products with the same or similar purpose, is the fact that it makes
use of idle cloud resources with the size of the provider’s preference. The dis-
tributed IDS framework allows cloud service provider to use general-purpose
resources in which they have already invested, instead of buying specialized
hardware which would often be utilized in relatively low rates.
The system implements the master-worker design pattern, where many work-
ers undertake parts of all the work. A master process orchestrates the opera-
tions, consumes the gathered data and draws conclusions. The system also works
as a framework, that allows dynamically plugging in and out logical pieces con-
tributing to the analyzing capabilities of the system. Those we have called mod-
ules and they could be developed, following a standard we have laid down as an
”interface” that has to be implemented. The modules also have various settings,
such as name, reporting interval, reported metric suite, packet ﬁlters (interests),
etc. that allow for more freedom in the logic operations they perform, thus the
analysis they do. The master process draws behavioral conclusions after ob-
servation of metric reports over long periods of time for every observed entity
(tenant, virtual machine, service, etc.) Those conclusions are based on aggre-
gating big volumes of data into a statistical model for every deﬁned metric type.
The aggregation results are considered as thresholds and a continuous threshold
violation leads to conclusions that abnormal traﬃc has been detected. Based on
the deviation from the trend, various events are triggered such as notiﬁcations,
bandwidth management, ﬁrewall rules, etc.
In this paper we not only present the model of the system but we also discuss
a prototype created for the purposes of proving the concept. We implement a
basic functionality for both the worker and the master process, which allows
distribution of modules in a distributed worker environment, feeding modules
with captured packets, orchestrating the reporting and calculating normal dis-
tributions on the single random variable metrics of delivered reports. We have
further implemented a module which counts the number of packets from each of
the following types - ICMP, TCP, UDP - and reports every second the counts
per IP address to the master process. IP address has been chosen as tracked
entity with the assumption that it is static and never reassigned to any other
machine, however we have showed how we can implement a better tracking.
The master process calculates the normal distribution of packet usage for every
IP address and monitors there is a deviation from the trend. If so, an event is
raised and respective predeﬁned rule-based suite of actions is taken depending
55
==PAGE:56==
on the implementation of the prevention system.
As any other prototype, this one also leaves a lot of future work such as - deﬁ-
nition of packet ﬁltering by the modules in order to avoid processing unnecessary
packets; dynamic instead of on-start distribution of modules; dynamic instead
of on-start conﬁguration of appropriate buﬀer sizes and time frame partitioning
for aggregation; multi-level instead of two-level aggregation so that much more
data can be used for the analysis; usage of database and not only in-memory
storage of history reports; and many many more features. However, more im-
portant is what we left oﬀin the design of this system. Firstly, we discussed
only how a single random variable could be used as a metric and only using
the normal distribution as an aggregation of random variable values. However,
some modules might require diﬀerent types of metrics and diﬀerent aggregation
functions. In fact, the threshold calculation could be calculated using an aggre-
gation function deﬁned by the module and consuming metrics, also deﬁned by
the module. Thus, a more generic framework would be built and more freedom
would be given to the analyzing modules, while the distributed IDS framework
would focus on distributing the work, orchestrating the workers and organizing
the formation and monitoring of thresholds. Secondly, designing and modeling
the operation of a module that implements a signature-based DoS detection,
similar to much of the anti-virus software nowadays. Looking deeper into mod-
ules with such purpose is necessary in order to assure that the framework design
can support such functionality. Last but not least, a more speciﬁc design of an
intrusion prevention system is worth discussing further so that events raised by
our distributed IDS solution could be addressed accordingly.
This paper highlights the most important parts in the design and the de-
velopment of a distributed software intrusion detection system targeting denial-
of-service attacks in cloud infrastructures. It makes use of idle general purpose
resources within a cloud, thus its implementation and integration has no extra
investment costs, which makes it a strong competitor to known hardware and
software solutions. Its nature allows changes in vast number of conﬁguration
settings in order to ﬁt the respective environment in which it is deployed. Last
but not least, being a framework, allows the development and plugging in and
out of functionality of both more private and more general purpose.
56
==PAGE:57==
References
[1] M. Handley and E. Rescorla. Internet Denial-of-Service Considerations.
Technical report, IETF, November 2006.
[2] S. Zargar, J. Joshi, and D. Tipper.
A Survey of Defense Mechanisms
Against Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) Flooding Attacks. Technical
report, IEEE, November 2013.
[3] Tao Peng, Christopher Leckie, and Kotagiri Ramamohanarao. Survey of
Network-based Defense Mechanisms Countering the DoS and DDoS Prob-
lems. ACM Comput. Surv., 39(1), April 2007.
[4] M.P.
McQueen.
New
Squeeze:
You’ve
Got
Black-
mail.
Blog
article
-
http://www.wsj.com/articles/
SB10001424052748703819904574555651192059822, 2009.
[5] Kevin Rawlinson.
DDoS extortion gang suspect arrested by European
police.
Blog article - http://www.bbc.com/news/technology-35297536,
2016.
[6] Unknown.
Swiss
Governmental
Computer
Emergency
Response
Team.
Blog article - https://www.govcert.admin.ch/blog/14/armada-
collective-blackmails-swiss-hosting-providers, 2015.
[7] P. Krapp. Teror and Play, or What Was Hacktivism ? March 2006.
[8] Eva Dou. U.S. Coding Website GitHub Hit With Cyberattack. Blog arti-
cle - http://www.wsj.com/articles/u-s-coding-website-github-hit-
with-cyberattack-1427638940, 2015.
[9] Y. Xie and S. Z. Yu. Monitoring the Application-Layer DDoS Attacks for
Popular Websites. February 2009.
[10] Z. Li, X. Chen, J. Yu, and H. Chen. A detection and oﬀense mechanism to
defend against application layer DDoS attacks. Technical report, School of
Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing; School of Computer,
National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, 2007.
[11] CERT. Denial-of-Service Attack via ping. Technical report, CERT, De-
cember 1996.
[12] University of Southern California Information Sciences Institute.
Inter-
net Protocol, DARPA Internet Program, Protocol Speciﬁcation. Technical
report, IETF, September 1981.
[13] CERT. DDoS Quick Guide. Technical report, CERT, January 2014.
[14] D. Senie. Changing the Default for Directed Broadcasts in Routers. Tech-
nical report, IETF, August 1999.
57
==PAGE:58==
[15] CERT. TCP SYN Flooding and IP Spooﬁng Attacks. Technical report,
CERT, September 1996.
[16] CERT.
UDP Port Denial-of-Service Attack.
Technical report, CERT,
February 1996.
[17] CERT. DNS Ampliﬁcation Attacks. Technical report, CERT, 29 2013.
[18] M. Hidalgo and D. Cruz.
Regular Expressions Denial of the Service
(ReDOS) Attacks: From the Exploitation to the Prevention. Blog arti-
cle - https://dzone.com/articles/regular-expressions-denial, June
2015.
[19] R. Lemos. Peer-to-peer networks co-opted for DOS attacks. Blog article -
http://www.securityfocus.com/news/11466, May 2007.
[20] S. Subramani. Denial of Service attacks and mitigation techniques: Real
time implementation with detailed analysis. Master’s thesis, University of
Essex, 2011.
[21] F. Guo, J. Chen, and T. Chiueh.
Spoof Detection for Preventing DoS
Attacks against DNS Servers. 2006.
[22] U. Ben-Porat, A. Bremler-Barr, and H. Levy. Vulnerability of Network
Mechanisms to Sophisticated DDoS Attacks. May 2013.
[23] T. Krazit. Google thought michael jackson traﬃc was attack. Blog ar-
ticle - http://www.cnet.com/news/google-thought-michael-jackson-
traffic-was-attack, June 2009.
[24] T. Thapngam, S. Yu, W. Zhou, and S. Kami Makki. Distributed Denial of
Service (DDoS) detection by traﬃc pattern analysis. June 2011.
[25] Du P. and A. Nakao. DDoS Defense Deployment with Network Egress and
Ingress Filtering. 2010.
[26] J. Mirkovic, G. Prier, and P. Reiher. Attacking DDoS at the Source. 2002.
[27] T. Gil and M. Poletto. MULTOPS: a data-structure for bandwidth attack
detection. August 2001.
[28] Ruiliang Chen, Jung Min Park, and Randolph Marchany. RIM: Router
interface marking for IP traceback. Globecom - Ieee Global Telecommunica-
tions Conference, Globecom Ieee Global Telecommun. Conf, page 4150942,
2006.
[29] H. Burch and B. Cheswick. Tracing anonymous packets to their approx-
imate source. Usenix Association Proceedings of the Fourteenth Systems
Administration Conference (lisa Xiv), pages 319–327, 2000.
58
==PAGE:59==
[30] Y. Rekhter, T. Li, and S. Hares. A Border Gateway Protocol 4 (BGP-4).
Technical report, IETF, January 2006.
[31] P. Mell and T. Grance. The NIST Deﬁnition of Cloud Computing. 2011.
[32] Microsoft.
Ten immutable laws of security.
Technical report.
https:
//technet.microsoft.com/en-us/library/hh278941.aspx.
[33] Danny Yadron.
Apple ordered to decrypt iPhone of San Bernardino
shooter for FBI. Blog article - https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/
2016/feb/17/apple-ordered-to-hack-iphone-of-san-bernardino-
shooter-for-fbi, 2016.
[34] Rashmi V. Deshmukh and Kailas K. Devadkar. Understanding DDoS At-
tack & Its Eﬀect In Cloud Environment. Procedia Computer Science, Proc
Comp S, Procedia Comput Sci, 49(1):202–210, 2015.
[35] The
F5
DDoS
Protection
Reference
Architecture.
https:
//f5.com/Portals/1/Cache/Pdfs/2421/the-f5-ddos-protection-
reference-architecture.pdf.
[36] DDoS
Protector.
https://www.checkpoint.com/products/ddos-
protector/.
[37] Guard
XT
5650.
http://www.cisco.com/c/en/
us/products/collateral/security/guard-xt-5650a/
product data sheet0900aecd800fa55e.html.
[38] Incapsula
Infrastructure
Protection.
https://www.incapsula.com/
infrastructure-ddos-protection-services.html.
[39] Carl Abante. Relationship between Firewalls and Protection against DDoS.
2013.
[40] E. L. Hahne. Round-robin scheduling for max-min fairness in data net-
works. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, 9(7):1024–
1039, 1991.
[41] David A. Patterson, Garth Gibson, and Randy H. Katz. A case for re-
dundant arrays of inexpensive disks (RAID). Acm Sigmod Record, Sigmod
Record, Sigmod Rec, Sigmod Record Acm Special Interest Group on Man-
agement of Data, Acm Sigmod Record, 17(3):109–116, 1988.
[42] Don Revelle. Hypervisors and Virtual Machines. 2011.
[43] Unknown. IEEE 802.1Q Virtual LANs (VLANs). Technical report, 2014.
[44] R. A. Botha and J. H. P. Eloﬀ. Separation of duties for access control
enforcement in workﬂow environments. IBM Systems Journal, 40(3):666–
682, 2001.
59
==PAGE:60==
[45] Luis
Martin
Garcia.
Programming
with
Libpcap
-
Sniﬃng
the
Network
From
Our
Own
Application.
Haking
Magazine,
2008.
Technical
Review
-
http://recursos.aldabaknocking.com/
libpcapHakin9LuisMartinGarcia.pdf.
[46] Technical Support. vSphere PowerCLI Cmdlets Reference. vSphere sup-
port, 2010. Technical documentation - https://www.vmware.com/support/
developer/PowerCLI/PowerCLI41U1/html/Get-VM.html.
[47] Distributed
Intrusion
Detection
Denial
Of
Service
Sys-
tem.
https://github.com/livanov/dsniff/tree/
31b33c9647d610c4d086315c3b52831aa12ffdac.
[48] G. Casella and R.L. Berger. Statistical inference. Wadsworth Group, 2002.
60
==PAGE:61==
Appendices
A
Cloud simulation environment deployment script
in Bash
ip
netns d vhostsw
ip
netns d
s n i f f s w
ip
netns d
c l i 1
ip
netns d
c l i 2
s y s c t l −w net . ipv4 . ip forward=0 > /dev/ n u l l
f i r e w a l l −cmd −−reload > /dev/ n u l l
ip
l
d glob > /dev/ n u l l 2>&1
ip
netns
a vhostsw
ip
netns
a
s n i f f s w
ip
netns
a
c l i 1
ip
netns
a
c l i 2
ip
netns
e
vhostsw
ip
l
s
lo
up
ip
netns
e
s n i f f s w
ip
l
s
l o
up
ip
netns
e
c l i 1
ip
l
s
lo
up
ip
netns
e
c l i 2
ip
l
s
lo
up
ip
l
a
eth0
type
veth
peer name glob
ip
l
s
eth0
netns
s n i f f s w
ip
netns
e
s n i f f s w
ip
l
s
eth0 up
ip
a a
1 0 . 0 . 0 . 1 / 2 4
dev
glob
ip
l
s
glob up
ip
l
a
eth0
type
veth
peer name eth1
ip
l
s
eth0
netns
c l i 1
ip
netns
e
c l i 1
ip
a a
1 0 . 0 . 0 . 1 1 / 2 4
dev
eth0
ip
netns
e
c l i 1
ip
l
s
eth0 up
ip
l
s
eth1
netns
vhostsw
ip
netns
e
vhostsw
ip
l
s
eth1 up
ip
l
a
eth0
type
veth
peer name eth2
ip
l
s
eth0
netns
c l i 2
ip
netns
e
c l i 2
ip
a a
1 0 . 0 . 0 . 1 2 / 2 4
dev
eth0
ip
netns
e
c l i 2
ip
l
s
eth0 up
ip
l
s
eth2
netns
vhostsw
ip
netns
e
vhostsw
ip
l
s
eth2 up
ip
l
a
eth0
type
veth
peer name eth1
ip
l
s
eth0
netns
vhostsw
ip
netns
e
vhostsw
ip
l
s
eth0 up
ip
l
s
eth1
netns
s n i f f s w
ip
netns
e
s n i f f s w
ip
l
s
eth1 up
61
==PAGE:62==
ip
netns
e
vhostsw
b r c t l
addbr
br0
ip
netns
e
vhostsw
b r c t l
addif
br0
eth0
eth1
eth2
ip
netns
e
vhostsw
ip
l
s
br0 up
ip
netns
e
s n i f f s w
b r c t l
addbr
br0
ip
netns
e
s n i f f s w
b r c t l
addif
br0
eth0
eth1
ip
netns
e
s n i f f s w
ip
l
s
br0 up
ip
netns
e
c l i 1
ip
r
a 0/0
via
1 0 . 0 . 0 . 1
ip
netns
e
c l i 2
ip
r
a 0/0
via
1 0 . 0 . 0 . 1
s y s c t l −w net . ipv4 . ip forward=1 > /dev/ n u l l
i p t a b l e s −t
nat −A POSTROUTING −o eno16777736 −j MASQUERADE
i p t a b l e s −A FORWARD −i
eno16777736 −o
glob −j ACCEPT
i p t a b l e s −A FORWARD −i
glob −o eno16777736 −j ACCEPT
62
