==PAGE:1==
Fabrication and characterization
of graphene nanostructures for
plasmonic applications
Author:
Kristoﬀer Skaftved Mathiesen (s103107)
Supervisor:
Nicolas Stenger, Assistant Professor at DTU Fotonik
Master’s thesis
Technical University of Denmark
July 16, 2016
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
The ﬁeld of nanoplasmonics has widespread applications ranging from on-chip
integration of medical diagnostics, biosensing and drug delivery to optical modu-
lation devices. As the boundaries of nanofabrication are continually pushed, it is
now possible to design and fabricate devices with optical properties that are highly
tunable by system design. Graphene has appeared in recent years as an attractive
material for plasmonics, owing primarily to a stronger mode conﬁnement, longer
propagation lengths than in noble metals and lastly the extraordinary advantage
that the optical response of graphene is tunable by electrostatic doping[1, 2].
In this study we aim to further explore this tunability by fabricating novel devices
with graphene nanostructures that are tunable both by the traditional method of
backgating, and by applying an in-plane potential diﬀerence between ribbons, de-
noted sidegating. For this, a novel design with an array of interdigitated nanorib-
bons in the centers of isolated graphene microribbons is developed and fabricated.
The fabrication rely on electron beam lithography and oxygen plasma etching to
deﬁne the graphene nanostructures.
Additionally the proposed design is studied in numerical simulations of graphene
nano-ribbons, which reveals two promising things.
First, an inﬁnite array of
graphene nanoribbons in terms of a repeated unit cell containing two nanorib-
bons with a diﬀerence in their Fermi level will behave optically diﬀerent to the
homogeneous system. In particular we observe a spectral split of each mode into
two. The split modes correspond to an excitation primarily in one of the rib-
bons. Secondly, for nanoribbons with an applied potential diﬀerence we observe a
spatially varying induced charge density. Speciﬁcally we observe a charge pile-up
near the edges of the ribbons, and as such the optical response will diﬀer from the
ungated response.
Establishing electrical contact to the individual microribbons proved to be diﬃcult,
and therefore no experiments were carried out on a device with electrostatic gating.
The fabricated structures were analysed using FTIR, and the data ﬁt to a recent
theoretical model of the optical response of graphene nanoribbons [3]. From the
model the Fermi level of the graphene structures can be extracted and were found
to be 0.7 eV and 0.9 eV for an undoped and chemically doped sample respectively.
The thesis concludes with suggestions on realizing the experiment and some future
prospects are given.
==PAGE:3==
Resumé
Nanoplasmonics har mange anvendelsesmuligheder lige fra on-chip integration af
medicinsk diagnostik, biosensorer og drug delivery til optiske modulatorer. Mu-
lighederne indenfor nanofabrikation bliver hele tiden udvidet, og det er nu muligt
at fremstille nanoplasmoniske enheder med optiske egenskaber, der kan justeres
vha. systemets design. Grafen er i løbet af de seneste år kommet ind i billedet
som et attraktivt materiale til nanoplasmonics, primært på grund af stærkere mode
conﬁnement, længere propageringslængder end i ædle metaller og endelig har det
den ekstraordinære fordel, at den optiske respons er justerbar vha. elektrostatisk
doping[1, 2].
I dette studie vil vi udforske denne justerbarhed yderligere ved at designe nye
enheder med grafen nanostrukturer, som er justerbare både vha. den traditionelle
metode, backgating, og ved at påtrykke en spændingsforskel i planet imellem
nanobånd, betegnet sidegating. Til dette er et nyt design med et array af inter-
digiterede nanobånd i midten af isolerede grafen mikrobånd blevet udviklet og
fabrikeret. Fabrikationen beror elektronstrålelitograﬁog oxygen plasmaætsning
til at deﬁnere grafen nanostrukturerne.
Derudover er det nye design undersøgt ved numeriske simuleringer af grafen nano-
bånd, hvilket medførte to lovende opdagelser. For det første vises det at en uen-
delig række af grafen nanobånd i form af en gentagen enhedscelle indeholdende to
nanobånd med en forskel i deres Fermi niveau opfører sig optisk anderledes end
et homogent system. Der opnås en spektral opdeling af hver mode i to. De delte
modes svarer til en excitation primært i et af båndene. For det andet kan man
ved at påtrykke nanobånd en spændingsforskel opnå en rumligt varierende induc-
eret ladningsdensitet. Speciﬁkt observeres en ladningsophobning nær kanterne af
nanobånd, hvorfor den optiske respons vil afvige fra den intrinsiske respons.
Det viste sig vanskeligt at opnå elektrisk kontakt til de enkelte mikrobånd, og
derfor er der ikke udført eksperimenter en enhed med elektrostatisk gating. De
fabrikerede strukturer blev analyseret med FTIR, og dataene er sammenlignet
med en nylig teoretisk model af den optiske respons af grafen nanobånd[3]. Fra
modellen kan Fermi niveauet af grafen strukturer bestemmes og blev fundet at
være 0,7 eV og 0,9 eV for en ikke-doteret og kemisk dopet prøve henholdsvis. Spe-
cialet afsluttes med forslag til at realisere eksperimentet og nogle fremtidsudsigter
præsenteres.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This 30 ECTS point master’s thesis concludes the authors studies in Physics and
Nanotechnology at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU. This work has
been carried out in the time period 25/1-2016 to 16/7-2016 at the Department of
Photonics Engineering at DTU.
First and foremost I would like to thank my supervisor Assistant Professor Nico-
las Stenger, DTU Fotonik, for his excellent supervision and invaluable guidance
throughout the project period!
My thanks also goes to the Structured Electromagnetic Materials group at DTU
Fotonik for general discussions and advice on my project along the way. I would
like to speciﬁcally thank PhD students Christian Frydendahl, DTU Fotonik, for
aiding me in the experimental parts and with electrical characterization of the
samples and Paulo André Dias Goncalves for ﬁtting the experimental FTIR data
to his model, and intriguing discussion about the results.
Additionally from the Nanocarbon group at DTU Nanotech I would like to thank
researcher David McKenzie for allowing me to use the Nanocarbon lab, his help
with the Raman characterization of the samples and for providing me with sample
substrates. Further I would like to thank postdoc Birong Luo and PhD student
Patrick R. Whelan for their aid in the transfer of graphene. Lastly a thanks goes
to PhD students Lene Gammelgaard and Bjarke Jessen for quick responses on
graphene device fabrication related issues.
Finally, I thank my family and all my friends for their support. A special thanks
goes to my girlfriend for her unwavering support throughout the project. This
accomplishment would not have been possible without you. Thank you.
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Introduction
1
1
Theory
3
1.1
Maxwell’s equations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Surface plasmon polaritons in metals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2.1
The Drude model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2.2
The dielectric function of a metal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2.3
Surface plasmon polaritons at a metal dielectric interface . .
6
1.3
Graphene surface plasmons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.3.1
Electronic dispersion of graphene . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.3.2
Dispersion relation of graphene surface plasmons . . . . . . .
15
1.4
Localized graphene surface plasmons
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
1.5
The inhomogeneously doped medium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2
Simulations
23
2.1
Single ribbon model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.1.1
Basic assumptions and simulation setup
. . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.1.2
Results of the single ribbon model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.1.3
Tests of the model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
2.2
Dual ribbon model with diﬀerent Fermi levels
. . . . . . . . . . . .
33
2.2.1
General results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
2.2.2
Varying the oﬀset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
2.2.3
Varying the ribbon width
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
2.2.4
Varying the spacing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
2.3
Dual ribbon model with spatially varying diﬀerent Fermi levels . . .
39
==PAGE:6==
3
Fabrication and characterization
40
3.1
Samples produced in this work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.2
Sample design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.3
Graphene samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.3.1
Mechanically exfoliated graphene . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.3.2
CVD grown graphene . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.3.3
The quality of the dielectric silica layer . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
3.4
Lithography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
3.4.1
Cleaning the samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
3.4.2
Spinning resist
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
3.4.3
Baking the resist
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
3.4.4
Thermal aluminium layer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
3.4.5
E-beam exposure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
3.4.6
Stripping the aluminium layer and developing the exposed
resist . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
3.5
Gold contacts on the microribbons
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
3.5.1
Stencil method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
3.5.2
Stencil alignment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
3.5.3
Gold deposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
3.6
Inspecting the graphene quality by Raman spectroscopy
. . . . . .
63
3.7
Postprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
3.7.1
Mounting the sample on a circuit board
. . . . . . . . . . .
68
3.7.2
Contact between microribbons and circuit board . . . . . . .
68
3.7.3
Soldering wires to the circuit board . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
3.8
Characterizing the samples electrically
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
4
Results and discussion
71
5
Conclusion and outlook
77
5.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
References
80
Appendix A Theoretical derivations
i
A.1 Recast Maxwell’s equations to wave equation form . . . . . . . . . .
i
==PAGE:7==
Appendix B Process ﬂow
iii
Appendix C Fabrication logbook
vi
Appendix D Matlab code
x
D.1 The conductivity of graphene
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
x
D.2 Code for simulations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
xi
D.2.1
The main script . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
xi
D.2.2
The Builder script
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xvi
D.2.3
The Solver script . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xxiii
D.3 Code for initial L-edit layouts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xxiv
D.3.1
Calling the dumbbell function to generate isolated microrib-
bons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xxiv
D.3.2
The dumbbell function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xxv
D.3.3
Calling the rib_unitcell function to create array of nanorib-
bons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xxvii
D.3.4
The rib_unitcell function
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xxviii
D.4 Edited code for ﬁnal L-edit layouts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xxix
D.4.1
Calling the frame_unitcell function to generate isolated mi-
croribbons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xxix
D.4.2
The frame_unitcell function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xxx
Appendix E Files from the last e-beam exposure
xxxi
E.1
.sdf ﬁle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xxxi
E.2
.jdf ﬁles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xxxii
==PAGE:8==
Introduction
Surface plasmons, the coupling of electromagnetic waves and collective electrons
oscillations at an interface, create electromagnetic modes that are very strongly
conﬁned to the surface. Thus, plasmonics oﬀer strong light-matter interaction,
and allows for surface electromagnetic waves to exist beyond the diﬀraction limit.
The result is the ability to obtain huge ﬁeld enhancement by concentrating elec-
tromagnetic waves in sub-wavelength volumes. The applications for plasmonics
are numerous, ranging from plasmonic integrated circuitry over biosensing to pho-
tovoltaics [2, 4]. Historically surface plasmons have been described as early as
1900[5], but recent advances in micro- and nanofabrication has spurred an in-
creased activity in the ﬁeld.
Many of the applications are already realized by
noble metal-dielectric interfaces in the visible and near-infrared regions, and now
highly doped graphene shows great promise in the THz and mid-infrared range.
Thus, graphene plasmonics has emerged in the last few years as a rapidly evolving
research ﬁeld, combining the exciting properties of the relatively new 2D mate-
rial graphene with the general ﬁeld of plasmonics. Typical plasmonic systems are
tunable in the sense that the geometry of the system can be tailored to ﬁt the
speciﬁc needs. Plasmons in graphene promise an even stronger mode conﬁnement
and longer propagation lengths, compared to traditional plasmons in noble metals,
but perhaps the most powerful aspect of graphene is the unique ability to electro-
statically or chemically tune the optical response. This is dramatically diﬀerent
as a given system is no longer limited by its geometry to a certain response. In
short, the optical response is correlated to the charge carrier density, and it is
this quantity that is tunable by electrostatic gating in graphene. Typically this
is achieved in a capacitive back-gating setup with graphene resting on a thin di-
electric layer on a doped silicon substrate. This results in a homogeneous change
in charge carrier densities across the graphene sheet. The response of electrostat-
ically doped graphene ribbons subject to an external electric ﬁeld is investigated
in [6]. Recently a theoretical model of the response of graphene nanoribbons has
also been developed [3], and experimental results obtained in this work will be
compared to this model.
In this work we propose a novel way of electrostatically gating a graphene plas-
monic system that results in a spatially inhomogeneous change in charge carrier
density across the system. This is done by applying a potential diﬀerence across
an interdigitated array of nanoribbons, see ﬁgure 1 for a sketch of the system. The
1
==PAGE:9==
Figure 1 – Sketch of the interdigitated nanoribbon array with an applied potential
diﬀerence.
In the fabricated samples the width of the ribbons is much smaller
(hundreds of nm) than the length of the ribbons(95 µm).
capacitor-like setup of the interdigitated ribbons will cause a charge pile-up near
the edges, which can then change the plasmonic response of the ribbon. The ar-
ray of nanoribbons sustain graphene surface plasmons (GSPs), and light at normal
incidence can be used to experimentally excite GSPs.
The system is investigated through simulations in the ﬁnite element method pro-
gram COMSOL. Here a simple model is built that simulates the optical response
of an array of graphene nanoribbons. The model is then evolved to ﬁnally in-
corporate the eﬀect of the added potential diﬀerence. The need for a potential
diﬀerence requires the array of nanoribbons to be electrically isolated from the
rest of the graphene sheet, which is not a condition for a standard backgating
setup, but applying the same potential at the contacts and a potential diﬀerence
on the backside of the substrate, traditional backgating homogeneous doping of
the system can still be achieved. Thus the end goal of the project is to fabricate
this versatile tunable plasmonic system of isolated structures with a plasmonically
active region of interdigitated nanoribbons.
This thesis is divided into ﬁve chapters:
Chapter 1 - The fundamental theory of surface plasmons is presented.
The
derivations start from Maxwell’s equations in matter and end with the optical
conductivity of graphene, related to the Fermi level and charge carrier density.
Chapter 2 - The COMSOL simulations are introduced. The models are described
and the results are discussed.
Chapter 3 - This chapter is dedicated to the fabrication process used in this work.
The entire process is presented and the fabricated samples are characterized.
Chapter 4 - Optical measurements of the plasmonic response of the fabricated
samples are measured in Fourier Transformed InfraRed (FTIR) spectroscopy.
Chapter 5 - The thesis ends by concluding on the progress achieved and looking
into future work on this subject.
2
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 1
Theory
This chapter will present the theory necessary to understand the underlying physics
of this project. The main result of this section is understanding how and why the
resonance of graphene plasmons are tunable by doping. Starting from Maxwell’s
equations, the fundamentals of surface plasmon polaritons (SPPs) in metals are
derived. The derived wave equations are simpliﬁed to a two dimensional interface
and boundary conditions are applied to obtain the dispersion relation of surface
plasmon polaritons at a metal-dielectric interface. Readers already familiar with
surface plasmon polaritons, may choose to skip this section. Next, graphene is
introduced by a discussion on the band structure of graphene around the Fermi
level. From this the dependence of the Fermi level of graphene on the electron-hole
density is derived. The dispersion equation of graphene is derived and relevant ap-
proximations for calculations are discussed. Considerations for the experimental
excitation of graphene plasmons are discussed next. Finally the eﬀect of an inho-
mogeneous doped plasmonic material will be discussed. The theory for plasmons
in metal is largely based on "Optical Properties of Solids" By Mark Fox [7], while
the theory for plasmons in graphene draws on the recent book "An introduction
to Graphene Plasmonics" by P. A. D. Gonçalves and N. M. R. Peres [8].
1.1
Maxwell’s equations
Maxwell’s equations are fundamental results of electrodynamics and necessary
for understanding the interaction between electromagnetic waves and metal. In
matter they take the form
∇· D = ρext,
(1.1a)
∇· B = 0,
(1.1b)
∇× E = −∂B
∂t ,
(1.1c)
∇× H = Jext + ∂D
∂t ,
(1.1d)
3
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1. THEORY
where D is the electric displacement ﬁeld, B is the magnetic ﬂux density, E is the
electric ﬁeld, H is the magnetic ﬁeld, and ρext and Jext is the external charge and
current densities respectively. The four macroscopic ﬁelds E & D and H & B are
related by the constitutive equations
D = ε0E + P,
(1.2)
H = 1
µ0
B −M,
(1.3)
where P is the polarization ﬁeld, M is the magnetization ﬁeld, and ε0 and µ0
are the electric permittivity and magnetic permeability of free space, respectively.
Assuming isotropic linear materials the polarization ﬁeld is proportional to the
electric ﬁeld by the relative permittivity, εr as
P = ε0(εr −1)E.
(1.4)
The ﬁrst constitutive equation can then be rewritten as
D = ε0εrE.
(1.5)
Similar arguments follow for the second constitutive equation, and it is noted
that this project will consider non-magnetic materials, in which the magnetic
permeability is µr = 1, such that
B = µ0H.
(1.6)
The electric ﬁeld in this project has the nature of light, and is assumed to have
harmonic time dependence, i.e. E(t) = E0e−iωt. The above equations will be used
in the coming sections to derive the dispersion relation of SPPs. Before such a
derivation it is necessary to discuss electron behaviour in solids.
1.2
Surface plasmon polaritons in metals
First the Drude model of a free electron gas is presented. With the necessary tools
available, the dispersion relation is derived and lastly boundary conditions for a
two dimensional system is appplied.
1.2.1
The Drude model
The Drude model proposed by Paul Drude in 1900 describes the transport prop-
erties of electrons in solids. Consider the Lorentz oscillator model of an electron
subject to an applied electrical ﬁeld E
m¨x + mγ ˙x + mω2
0x = −eE,
(1.7)
4
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 1. THEORY
where m is the electron mass, γ is the damping frequency, ω0 is the natural
resonance frequency, e is the electron charge, and ˙x and ¨x denotes the ﬁrst and
second derivative of x with respect to time, respectively. From this one arrives at
the Drude-Lorentz model by ﬁrst assuming that the electrons do not experience
any restoring forces from the relative immobile ions in the atomic lattice, nor from
any electron it passes. As such the natural resonance frequency is ω0 = 0. Secondly
the nature of the collisions and the frequency dependency in the corresponding
damping frequency is ignored, that is γ(ω) = γ. A free electron following these
assumptions will move in straight lines between instantaneous collisions happening
at an average frequency γ. The resulting equation of motion for the electron is
m¨x + mγ ˙x = −eE.
(1.8)
From here on m is the eﬀective optical mass of the electron, that incorporates
some of the aspects of the band structure of the metal.
1.2.2
The dielectric function of a metal
Consider the equation of motion of a free electron in a plasma sea, subject to an
external ﬁeld E by the Drude-Lorentz model, i.e. equation (1.8). For an external
ﬁeld with harmonic time dependance a solution is given by
x(t) =
e
m(ω2 + iγω)E(t).
(1.9)
The external ﬁeld will cause displacement of some free electrons. These displaced
electrons will contribute to the macroscopic polarization P = −nex, where n is
the electron density. The solution to the equation of motion can be rewritten as
P = −
ne2
m(ω2 + iγω)E.
(1.10)
Inserting this expression for P in the ﬁrst constitutive equation (1.2) gives
D = ε0
 
1 −
ne2
mε0(ω2 + iγω)
!
E,
(1.11)
= ε0
 
1 −
ω2
p
ω2 + iγω
!
E,
(1.12)
where the plasma frequency is introduced as ω2
p =
ne2
mε0. Combining this result
with equation (1.5), the dielectric function of the metal is obtained as
εr = 1 −
ω2
p
ω2 + iγω.
(1.13)
5
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1. THEORY
It is useful to also study the relationship between the dielectric function, εr(ω),
and the conductivity, σ(ω), as this relation is valid for metals and graphene alike
and will be used in later computational methods. Consider the current density J
described both as a product of the charge carriers and their velocity as well as by
Ohm’s law relating it to the conductivity, that is
J = −nev = σE.
(1.14)
Next the equation of motion for the free electron is rewritten in terms of its velocity
v = ˙x as
m ˙v + mv
τ
= −eE,
(1.15)
where τ = 1/γ is the relaxation time of the free electron gas. For a time-harmonic
external ﬁeld a solution is given as
v(t) =
−eτ
m(1 −iωτ)E(t).
(1.16)
Inserting into equation (1.14) the conductivity is obtained as
σ(ω) =
ne2τ
m(1 −iωτ).
(1.17)
Lastly a small rearrangement of equation (1.13) gives
εr = 1 −
ne2
ε0m

ω2 + iω
τ
,
= 1 +
i
ε0ω
ne2τ
m (1 −iωτ),
εr = 1 + iσ(ω)
ε0ω .
(1.18)
This equation describes the simple relation between the dielectric function and
the conductivity.
1.2.3
Surface plasmon polaritons at a metal dielectric in-
terface
1.2.3.1
The wave equations
Before applying Maxwell’s equations to a two dimensional surface, they are recast
in the form of wave equations, relevant for understanding problems with guided
6
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 1. THEORY
Figure 1.1 – The metal-dielectric inteface considered for the theoretical derivations.
electromagnetic waves. The derivation can be found in appendix A.1. The well
known Helmholtz wave equation is given as
∇2E + εrk2
0E = 0,
(1.19a)
∇2H + εrk2
0H = 0,
(1.19b)
where k0 = ω
c is the free space wave vector of the propagating wave. Next, this
partial diﬀerential equation is elaborated for a two dimensional interface.
1.2.3.2
Two dimensional metal-dielectric interface
A metal-dielectric interface as shown in ﬁgure 1.1 is considered. The axes conven-
tion follows the one used in later computational simulations.
We now seek to solve Maxwell’s equations, where the solutions are time-harmonic
waves propagating along the x-direction, and exponentially decaying in the z-
direction away from the surface. We consider ﬁrst a Transverse Magnetic (TM)
mode, i.e. the electric ﬁeld has components along the x-, and y-directions, and
the magnetic ﬁeld along the z-direction. In this form we can write the full ﬁelds
in both the dielectric and the metal as
E2(x, y, t) = [Ex,2, Ey,2, 0]ei(βx−ωt)e−k2y,
(1.20a)
H2(x, y, t) = [0, 0, Hz,2]ei(βx−ωt)e−k2y,
(1.20b)
E1(x, y, t) = [Ex,1, Ey,1, 0]ei(βx−ωt)ek1y,
(1.20c)
H1(x, y, t) = [0, 0, Hz,1]ei(βx−ωt)ek1y,
(1.20d)
where subscript 1 and 2 denote the metal and dielectric respectively, β is the wave
vector in the x-direction and k1, k2 is the y-component of the wave vector in the
metal and dielectric respectively. Next we apply the interface conditions without
7
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1. THEORY
any net free charge density. Then the tangential components of E and H and the
normal component of D must be continuous across the interface. Then
Ex,1 = Ex,2,
(1.21a)
Hz,1 = Hz,2,
(1.21b)
ε1Ey,1 = ε2Ey,2,
(1.21c)
where the ﬁrst constitutive equation (1.5) has been used to reach the third con-
dition. Maxwell’s fourth equation (1.1d) allows us to relate the E- and H-ﬁeld,
speciﬁcally for the TM-polarization we have
∂Hz
∂y = −iωεrε0Ex.
(1.22)
Inserting the ﬁelds in the metal and dielectric from equations (1.20) gives us
k2Hz,2 = −iε2ε0ωEx,2,
(1.23a)
−k1Hz,1 = −iε1ε0ωEx,1.
(1.23b)
We use the interface conditions of equations (1.21) and rearrange
k2
k1
= −ε2
ε1
.
(1.24)
As solutions must be conﬁned to the surface, the real parts of k1 and k2 must be
positive. For SPPs to exist at the interface, equation (1.24) requires ε1ε2 < 0.
This is often fulﬁlled for dielectric and metal interfaces as the dielectric always
has ε2 > 0, but the dielectric function of the metal is negative in some frequency
regions. Similar treatment as above can be applied to transverse electric (TE)
modes, where only the Ez, Hx and Hy are nonzero, and it can be shown that no
solutions exist for this system. The reader is directed to [5] for the derivation.
1.2.3.3
Dispersion relation
The expression for Hz also has to fulﬁll the wave equation (1.19) in both the metal
and the dielectric, which can be rewritten for the TM mode as
∂2
∂y2Hz + (k2
0εr −β)Hz = 0.
(1.25)
From this we then get
k2
1 = β2 −k2
0ε1,
(1.26a)
k2
2 = β2 −k2
0ε2.
(1.26b)
8
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 1. THEORY
Equations (1.24) and (1.26) can be combined and solved for β to obtain
β = k0
s ε1ε2
ε1 + ε2
.
(1.27)
For propagating modes we require that Re{β} > 0 has a real part > 0. Noting
that β is frequency dependent, the sign of Re{β} is governed by the relative
permittivities of the dielectric and metal, by the numerator and denominator
under the square root. To investigate the dispersion relation consider a Drude
metal with negligable damping, i.e. γ →0 in equation (1.13)
ε1(ω) = 1 −ω2
p
ω2.
(1.28)
For simplicity the permittivity of the dielectric is assumed constant for all frequen-
cies, and is always positive. The relative permittivities are then always real-valued,
however the same may not hold for β for all frequencies. Inserting equation (1.28)
in the dispersion relation (1.27) we can rewrite
β = k0
v
u
u
u
t

1 −ω2
p/ω2
ε2
1 −ω2
p/ω2 + ε2
,
β = k0
v
u
u
u
t

ω2 −ω2
p

ε2
ω2 (1 + ε2) −ω2
p
.
(1.29)
This relation can be divided into three frequency regions with distinctly diﬀerent
behavious. For ω > ωp, both the numerator and the denominator are positive and
β is real. For ω < ωp the numerator is always negative, which puts the requirement
of the denominator
ω2 (1 + ε2) −ω2
p < 0,
(1.30)
for β to be positive. From this requirement, we deﬁne the surface plasmon fre-
quency, ωsp, below which β is real, as
ωsp =
ωp
√1 + ε2
.
(1.31)
For frequencies between ωsp < ω < ωp, β is purely imaginary and no propagating
modes exist. Figure 1.2 shows the dispersion relation of SPPs at a metal-dielectric
interface. The surface plasmon frequency ωsp is the asymptotic frequency as β →
∞and is illustrated by the dashed line. For real metals, the damping will be
non-zero and ε1 will no longer be purely real valued, but a complex number. In
the frequency region ωsp < ω < ωp, β will no longer be purely imaginary, but
may have a positive real part in that region. Furthermore, for a real metal with
damping, the dispersion curve will not asymptotically approach ωsp, but reach it
9
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 1. THEORY
Figure 1.2 – Dispersion relation of SPPs at an interface between a Drude metal
(silver) with negligible damping and a dielectric. Figure from [5].
at a ﬁnite cut-oﬀwave vector. Examining ﬁgure 1.2, we see that the dispersion
relation of the SPPs behave like light for small β, but as β gets larger the ﬁeld
conﬁnement gets stronger and the group velocity vg = dω
dβ gets smaller until the
cut-oﬀfrequency is reached. Notice ﬁnally that the dispersion relation of the SPPs
is always to the right of the light line, and it is never possible to directly match the
wave vectors in the dielectric and couple light in the dielectric into SPP modes.
Ways to overcome this will be discussed later in the theory section.
1.3
Graphene surface plasmons
This section aims to introduce the relevant information for understanding surface
plasmons in graphene. First the Fermi level as a function of the conducting elec-
tron density will be derived. Secondly the conductivity of graphene is presented
by a semi-classical model, as well as a random phase approximation (RPA) calcu-
lation, which will serve us in the discussion of the dispersion relation of graphene
plasmons.
1.3.1
Electronic dispersion of graphene
Before discussing the surface plasmon polaritons propagating at a graphene inter-
face, it is necessary to understand the underlying electronic properties of graphene.
10
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 1. THEORY
Figure 1.3 – a) The hexagonal lattice of graphene, with a unitcell containing atoms
A and B, and spanned by the vectors a1 and a2. The three nearest neighbouring
atoms are denoted by the vectors δ1, δ2 and δ3.
b) The ﬁrst Brillouin zone of
graphene, with reciprocal lattice vectors b1 and b2. The Dirac points are denoted
by K and K′. Figure from [10].
In this section the Fermi level as a function of the conduction electron/hole den-
sity will be derived. The derivation will be largely based on a simple tight binding
model, as originally used by Wallace in 1947 [9]. Many newer derivations include
the three nearest and also the six next nearest neighbouring atoms. The next near-
est neighbours are omitted here for simplicity as the added complexity adds little
to the understanding and no signiﬁcant change to the relevant result. The tight
binding model is an apt description of the electrons when they spend most of their
time tightly conﬁned to an atom, and little time hopping between atoms, much
opposed to the free electron behaviour in the Drude model described in section
1.2.1. The section ends with a small discussion of bi- and tri-layer graphene.
Consider the hexagonal honeycomb lattice of graphene, as seen in ﬁgure 1.3a.
The unit cell contains two atoms, denoted A and B, and the lattice consists of
two triangular sub-lattices, both spanned by the lattice vectors a1 and a2 starting
from either atom A or B. The two sublattices are displaced with respect to each
other by the vector d. A unit cell will be labeled by its coordinates (n1, n2) with
respect to the lattice vectors a1 and a2, such that the graphene lattice points
R = n1a1 + n2a2. The vectors are given by
a1 = a
2

3,
√
3

,
a2 = a
2

3, −
√
3

,
d = a(1, 0).
(1.32)
where a ≈1.42 Å is the carbon-carbon bonding length.
The orbitals in graphene hybridize to cause both strong chemical bonds in the
graphene plane, and a single perpendicular pz orbital that contains one electron.
The aim is to describe the 2D gas of the electrons in the pz orbitals, also known as
the π-orbitals. To ﬁnd the quantum energy states we must solve the well known
Schrödinger equation for the motion of the π electrons:
ˆH |ψ⟩= E |ψ⟩,
(1.33)
11
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 1. THEORY
where the wave function in a unit cell at position R is described as
|ψ⟩=



ψA(R)
ψB(R)


.
(1.34)
Since R is any vector spanned by an integer combinations of a1 and a2, the π
position basis is spanned by the states |R⟩and |R + d⟩. The graphene lattice
is translational invariant under any R, i.e. all unit cells are equivalent. Thus,
Bloch’s theorem applies and the eigenvector of the Hamiltonian can be written
using a linear combination of the Bloch states
|k⟩= α |ψA(R)⟩+ β |ψB(R)⟩,
(1.35a)
|ψA(R)⟩= eik1n1eik2n2ψA,
|ψB(R)⟩= eik1n1eik2n2ψB.
(1.35b)
Here A and B refer to the two sublattices and k1 is the projection of the wavevector
in the a1-direction, i.e. k1 = k · a1(similarly for k2).
Next we introduce the hopping matrix element Vppπ, describing an electron hopping
between neighboring π orbitals:
Vppπ = ⟨φπ(A)| ˆH|φπ(B)⟩,
(1.36)
where φπ(A), φπ(B) are the π-orbitals located on the neighbouring atoms A and B.
ˆH is the nearest neighbour Hamiltonian operator describing how electrons initially
on an atom hops to a neighbouring atoms, e.g. from an A to a B atom. A typical
value of the hopping matrix element is Vppπ = −2.7 eV. We can now construct a
tight binding Hamiltonian in second quantization as
ˆH = Vppπ
X
⟨ni,nj⟩,σ

a†
σ,nibσ,nj + H.c

.
(1.37)
Here σ denotes the electron spin, ni and nj are the lattice positions, ℏis Planck’s
reduced constant and H.c denotes the Hermitian conjugate. The operator aσ,ni
(a†
σ,ni) annihilates (creates) a π-electron with spin σ at lattice position Ri on
sublattice A, and similarly for sublattice B. The brackets ⟨ni, nj⟩denote the sum-
mation of neighbouring orbitals. As such the sum in equation (1.37) takes into
account electron transitions between nearest neighbouring atoms with hopping en-
ergy Vppπ. The Hamiltonian is rewritten with equations in the basis of the Bloch
states, equations (1.35), and the operation on the states gives
ˆH(k) =


⟨ψA(R)| ˆH|ψA(R)⟩
⟨ψA(R)| ˆH|ψB(R)⟩
⟨ψB(R)| ˆH|ψA(R)⟩
⟨ψB(R)| ˆH|ψB(R)⟩

.
(1.38a)
=


0
Vppπ

1 + eik1 + eik2

Vppπ

1 + e−ik1 + e−ik2

0

.
(1.38b)
12
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 1. THEORY
The eigenvalues of this Hamiltonian can be found to be
E±(k) = ±Vppπ
1 + eik1 + eik2
,
(1.39a)
= ±Vppπ
q
3 + f(k),
(1.39b)
f(k) = 2 cos(k1) + 2 cos(k2) + 2 cos(k1 −k2),
= 2 cos
√
3kya

+ 4 cos
 √
3
2 kya
!
cos
3
2kxa

,
(1.39c)
where ky and kx denote the x- and y-component of the wavevector k. Note that
the negative solution has the highest energy, and the positive solution the lowest,
as Vppπ < 0. For both atoms A and B in each unit cell there is one π-orbital
containing one π-electron, which means the quantum states are half-ﬁlled. The
band structure of graphene is seen in ﬁgure 1.4 along with the Fermi level and
the Brillouin zone. At zero temperature the lowest energy band of graphene, the
π-band (blue in ﬁgure), is completely full, while the highest energy band, the
π⋆-band (red in ﬁgure), is completely empty, and the Fermi level, EF, is located
directly between the two bands. As seen there are six discrete Dirac points at each
corner of the Brillouin zone in which the two bands meet. By lattice symmetry,
only two of the six points are inequivalent and these points are denoted K and
K′. Their position in momentum space are given by
K =
 2π
3a,
2π
3
√
3a
!
,
K′ =
 2π
3a, −2π
3
√
3a
!
.
(1.40)
Note that close to these Dirac points the dispersion relation is approximately
linear, and it is possible to ﬁnd a simpler expression by doing a Taylor expansion
of equation (1.39a) close to a Dirac point by deﬁning
q = k −K,
(1.41)
where q is small. Then the energy can be described by
E(q) = ±ℏvf|q|,
(1.42)
where vF = 3Vppπa/2ℏ≈106m/s is the Fermi velocity, aptly named so, as it is
also the group velocity of the electrons vg = 1
ℏ
dE
dk = vF.
1.3.1.1
Density of states
Now, the Fermi level as a function of the charge carrier density can be derived.
First the upper π⋆-band of the dispersion relation is considered. An inﬁnitesimal
13
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 1. THEORY
Figure 1.4 – Dispersion relation in k-space of the electrons in graphene. The ﬁrst
Brillouin zone is indicated by the shaded area between the π-bands. Figure from
[2].
increase in the wave vector q gives rise to an inﬁnitesimal increase in the density
of states dρ as
dρ =
22
(2π)2πq d|q| ,
q d|q| =
E
(ℏvF)2 dE ,
dρ =
2E
πℏ2v2
F
dE .
(1.43)
Here the factor of 22 arises from the spin degeneracy and valley degeneracy. The
function can be integrated from 0 to EF to obtain the induced electron density n
as
n =
Z
dρ =
Z EF
0
2E
πℏ2v2
F
dE =
E2
F
πℏ2v2
F
(1.44)
⇒EF = ℏvF
√πn,
EF ≤0.
(1.45)
The same calculation can be carried out for the lower π-band to obtain
EF = −ℏvF
√πp,
(1.46)
where p is the induced hole density. We can combine the two equations (1.45) and
(1.46) to obtain
EF = sign(n)ℏvF
q
π|n|,
(1.47)
14
==PAGE:22==
CHAPTER 1. THEORY
Figure 1.5 – A graphene layer sandwiched between two dielectrics. The optical
properties of graphene is governed by the optical conductivity.
where n is the induced carrier density, i.e. if n > 0 it denotes the induced electron
density and the induced hole density for n < 0. It is clear from equation (1.47)
how the Fermi level of graphene is dependent on the charge carrier density. As
the charge carrier density, or doping level, can be modulated by e.g. electrostatic
doping the Fermi level can be tuned by an external ﬁeld. From here on the Fermi
level will therefore be associated with the doping level of the graphene system.
1.3.2
Dispersion relation of graphene surface plasmons
Graphene surface plasmons (GSPs) at a graphene-dielectric interface shows great
promise, in part due to the tunability of graphene shown above and the long
lifetime of the excited GSPs. The dispersion relation for GSPs is now derived.
The graphene is assumed to be inﬁnitely thin, and it is treated as an interface.
The graphene exists between two dielectric materials, such as air-silica, a setup
which can be seen in ﬁgure 1.5. At the boundary between two dielectrics, the
ﬁelds must obey the Maxwell boundary conditions
ˆn × (E2 −E1) = 0,
(1.48a)
ˆn × (H2 −H1) = Js,
(1.48b)
where Js is the surface current, ˆn is the unit vector normal to the interface and
E1, H1, (E2, H2) are the ﬁelds in the dielectric below (above) the graphene. The
ﬁelds can be split into transverse and normal components, i.e. E = Et + En, and
similarly for H. The cross product of two parallel vectors such as En and ˆn is 0,
and equations 1.48 simplify to
Et2 −Et1 = 0,
(1.49a)
Ht2 −Ht1 = σg(ω)Et,
(1.49b)
15
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 1. THEORY
where Et1 and Et2 is the transverse component of the E-ﬁeld in silica and air,
respectively, and similarly for the H-components. To arrive at the right hand side
of equation (1.49b), Ohm’s law has been used to rewrite the surface current Js,
where σg(ω) is the conductivity of graphene. Consider as in section 1.2.3.2 again
TM ﬁelds bound to the surface
E2(x, y, t) = [Ex,2, Ey,2, 0]ei(βx−ωt)e−k2y,
(1.50a)
H2(x, y, t) = [0, 0, Hz,2]ei(βx−ωt)e−k2y,
(1.50b)
E1(x, y, t) = [Ex,1, Ey,1, 0]ei(βx−ωt)ek1y,
(1.50c)
H1(x, y, t) = [0, 0, Hz,1]ei(βx−ωt)ek1y,
(1.50d)
where subscripts 1 and 2 now refer to the dielectrics below and above the graphene
respectively. Inserting the above into Maxwell’s curl equations allows us to write
the transverse components in both half spaces
Et1 = Ex(y) = iHz,1k1
ωε0ε1
eiβxek1y,
for
y < 0
(1.51a)
Ht1 = Hz(y) = iHz,1eiβxek1y,
for
y < 0
(1.51b)
Et2 = Ex(y) = −iHz,2k2
ωε0ε2
eiβxe−k2y,
for
y > 0
(1.51c)
Ht2 = Hz(y) = iHz,2eiβxe−k2y,
for
y > 0,
(1.51d)
Inserting the above in equations (1.49) at the interface (y = 0) yields the following
−iHz,2k2
ωε0ε2
eiβxe−k2y −iHz,1k1
ωε0ε1
eiβxek1y = 0,
⇒−Hz,1k1
ε1
= Hz,2k2
ε2
,
(1.52a)
Hz,2eiβx −Hz,1eiβx = −iσg(ω)Hz,2k2
ωε0ε2
eiβx,
⇒Hz,2 −Hz,1 = −iσg(ω)Hz,2k2
ωε0ε2
.
(1.52b)
These two equations can be combined to eliminate Hz,1 and Hz,2 which gives
σg(ω)
iωε0
= ε1
k1
+ ε2
k2
.
(1.53)
Recalling how the wave vector k is connected to the propagation constant β
through equations (1.26) it can be written as
σg(ω)
iωε0
=
ε1
q
β2 −k2
0ε1
+
ε2
q
β2 −k2
0ε2
.
(1.54)
16
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 1. THEORY
For surface plasmons in the nonretarded regime, where the phase velocity is much
smaller than the speed of light, i.e. ω/β ≪c, equation (1.54) simpliﬁes to
σg(ω)
iωε0
= ε1
β + ε2
β ,
(1.55)
ω =
σg(ω)β
iε0(ε1 + ε2).
(1.56)
Note that equation (1.53), and similarly equation (1.55), only has real solutions if
the imaginary part of the conductivity is positive. Before moving on to the con-
ductivity of graphene note that unlike the case of a metal-dielectric interface, the
dielectric-graphene-dielectric system allows for a transverse electric solution. The
TE mode has only been probed optically very recently [11], and is not considered
further in this work.
1.3.2.1
Conductivity of graphene
The optical conductivity of graphene is the key to linking the dispersion relation
to the band structure of graphene and ﬁnally understand how the resonances of
a plasmonic graphene system are tunable by gating. Here the non-local eﬀects
are not considered and the conductivity is written in the local-response limit with
contributions from both intraband and interband transitions
σg = σintra + σinter.
(1.57)
The two terms can be derived from linear response theory, and expressed in terms
of Kubo’s formula using the RPA approximation [8]
σintra(ω) =
e2
πℏ2(γ −iω)
h
EF + 2kBT ln

1 + e−EF /kBT i
,
(1.58a)
σinter(ω) = e2
4ℏ
"
G(ℏω/2) + i4ℏω
π
Z ∞
0
dE G(E) −G(ℏω/2
(ℏω)2 −4E2
#
,
(1.58b)
where
G(ε) =
sinh(ε/kBT)
cosh(EF/kBT) + cosh(ε/kBT).
(1.58c)
Here γ denotes the relaxation rate, kB is Boltzmann’s constant and T is the
temperature.
Note that in the low temperature limit, where EF ≫kBT the above equations
simplify to
σintra(ω) =
e2EF
πℏ2(γ −iω),
(1.59a)
σinter(ω) = e2
4ℏ
"
Θ(ℏω −2EF) + i
π ln

ℏω −2EF
ℏω + 2EF

#
,
(1.59b)
17
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 1. THEORY
where Θ(ε) is the Heaviside step-function that takes the values 0 for ε < 0 and
1 for ε > 0. Finally it is noted that for 2EF > ℏω the interband contribution to
the conductivity becomes negligible. This condition is valid under typical doping
condition in the frequency range considered in this work, between 10 and 80 THz.
Thus the conductivity reduces to
σg(ω) ≈
e2EF
πℏ2(γ −iω).
(1.60)
By omparing this to equation (1.17) similarity to the Drude conductivity is ob-
served and thus equation (1.60) is often referred to as the Drude conductivity of
graphene. This can be inserted into equation (1.56) to obtain
ω ≈
β
iε0(ε1 + ε2)
e2EF
πℏ2(γ −iω),
ω ≈
v
u
u
t
e2EFβ
πℏ2ε0(ε1 + ε2),
(1.61)
where the last equation is obtained by neglecting losses, i.e. γ = 0. Equation (1.61)
gives an intuitive feeling for the behaviour of the surface plasmons in graphene, but
for all calculations in this work the full model is used to calculate the conductivity
from equations (1.58). A MATLAB script that evaluates this function at discrete
frequencies can be found in appendix D.1. Figure 1.6 shows the contours of the
imaginary part of the conductivity. In the frequency region investigated in this
work, a region below the 0 contour line in which Im{σ} is negative exists where
GSPs are not allowed. Figure 1.7 shows the dispersion relation of the GSPs in
a graphene sheet in air by three diﬀerent models. As stated above the non-local
model is not covered in this work.
1.4
Localized graphene surface plasmons
In this work we set out to investigate localized GSPs in nanoribbon arrays, as seen
in ﬁgure 1.5. Two methods are prevalent when analyzing localized GSPs. Either
the periodicity of the system is utilized[3, 12], or the system is cast in an eigenvalue
problem of Coulomb’s law, the continuity equation and Ohm’s law[13]. Following
the former the electromagnetic ﬁelds obey Bloch’s theorem and the transverse
magnetic GSP solutions can be written as a Fourier-Floquet series. A rigorous
analysis is not presented here, instead the reader is referred to [8].
The most
important thing to note is how diﬀraction, due to the periodicity of the system,
generates an inﬁnite discrete set of plane wave, with x-components of the wave
vector
kn,x = k sin θ + nG,
n ∈Z,
(1.62)
18
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 1. THEORY
Figure 1.6 – Contour lines of the imaginary part of the surface conductivity of
graphene.
In the region below the 0 contour line, the imaginary part becomes
negative and GSPs are no longer allowed.
where k is the wavevector in the upper dielectric media, and θ is the angle of
incidence, in this work the incidence is normal so θ = 0. Lastly G is the reciprocal
lattice vector
G = 2π
R ,
(1.63)
where R is the period of the grating, i.e. R = w + d, where w is the ribbon
width and d is the spacing between ribbons. Thus the grating can add momentum
to overcome the phase mismatch, and GSPs can be excited. Equation 1.62, can
be used together with equation 1.61, to give rough estimates on the resonance
frequencies of nanoribbon arrays.
1.5
The inhomogeneously doped medium
The previous sections describe plasmon behaviour for homogeneously doped me-
dia.
In particular the assumption that σ(ω, r) = σ(ω) is constant across the
structure is made. This is not the case once an external ﬁeld or potential is ap-
plied to the system. In this project a potential diﬀerence between the individual
nanoribbons will be applied and it is instructive to discuss the theory behind to
include it in the coming simulations. An externally applied ﬁeld such as the light
used to excite the plasmons will cause a charge displacement in the ribbons. This
eﬀect is not included in this work, but the reader is referred to [6].
19
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 1. THEORY
Figure 1.7 – Dispersion relation of GSPs in a graphene sheet in air by three diﬀerent
models. We do not consider the non-local in this work. Figure from [2].
Figure 1.8 – Geometry used in COMSOL with two graphene nanoribbons. Their
response is modelled by the optical conductivity σ(ω), which is diﬀerent in each
ribbon due to a potential diﬀerence.
20
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 1. THEORY
First consider two ribbons of width W placed with a spacing of d in a capacitor-
like setup, with an applied potential diﬀerence of +V on one ribbon and −V on
the other, as seen in ﬁgure 1.8. This system may be solved for the electric ﬁelds,
and ﬁnally apply the electrostatic boundary condition
(D2 −D1) · ˆn = ρs(r),
(1.64)
where ˆn is the unit vector normal to the interface and D1 (D2) is the displacement
ﬁeld in the dielectric below (above) the graphene. ρs(r) is then the surface charge
density at position r induced by the applied potential diﬀerence. Recalling how
the Fermi level of graphene is calculated from equation (1.47) with regards to the
charge density as
EF,tot(r) = sign(ntot(r))ℏvF
q
π|ntot(r)|,
(1.65a)
where
ntot(r) = n0 + ρs(r)
e
(1.65b)
is the total charge density, i.e. the sum of the homogeneous contribution from
the substrate n0 and the spatially varying contribution from the applied potential
ρs(r). Following these calculations, the local Fermi level of the graphene nanorib-
bons can be perturbed. An example of this is shown in ﬁgure 1.9, for two 100 nm
wide coplanar ribbons spaced 100 nm apart with a homogeneous doping from the
substrate of EF0 = 0.35 eV, and an applied voltage between the ribbons of ∆V ,
i.e. the left ribbon has the applied potential −∆V/2 and the right ∆V/2. The
shaded area is the outside of the ribbons, and the divergence of the Fermi level
towards the edges, corresponding to a divergence of the charge carriers towards the
edges of the graphene ribbons is noted. This simulation will be discussed further
in section 2.3.
21
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 1. THEORY
Figure 1.9 – Fermi level for co-planar graphene ribbons with a homogeneous doping
of EF0 = 0.35 eV and an inhomogeneous doping due to a potential diﬀerence of ∆V .
The shaded area is a guide to the eye, to illustrate where the ribbons are in the
xz-plane.
22
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 2
Simulations
This section will present the results of the simulations on the plasmonic response
from graphene nanoribbons when subjected to an external ﬁeld and a potential
diﬀerence. All simulations were carried out in the ﬁnite element method (FEM)
program COMSOL. All simulations on the optical response is done in the frequency
domain in which the response to a harmonic excitation is computed for each
frequency. For all the simulations on the optical response the graphene layer is
modelled as an inﬁnitely thin boundary with a surface charge deﬁned by Js =
σGE, where E is the electric ﬁeld at the interface and σG is the conductivity of
graphene, calculated for each frequency by the expression found in the random
phase approximation as shown in section 1.3.2.1. The boundary conditions used
will be discussed as well as any assumptions made.
The simulations start oﬀ
with a basic model and shows the response to varying parameters such as the
ribbon width, spacing between ribbons and Fermi level of the graphene. Next the
two ribbons are assumed to have diﬀerent Fermi levels, but that the Fermi levels
remain homogeneous throughout the entire ribbon. Finally a simulation is carried
out with graphene as a perfect conductor and subject to an applied potential.
The resulting ﬁelds are analysed according to section 1.5 to obtain a spatially
dependent Fermi level.
2.1
Single ribbon model
The geometry and mesh of the model for 100 nm ribbons with a 100 nm spacing
can be seen in ﬁgure 2.1. The MATLAB scripts necessary to do the simulation
can be found in appendix D.2.
2.1.1
Basic assumptions and simulation setup
To reduce computational time, some approximations have been made. Firstly, the
system is modelled in 2D, with semi-inﬁnite graphene nanoribbons, i.e. inﬁnitely
23
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 2. SIMULATIONS
Figure 2.1 – The geometry and mesh of the single ribbon COMSOL model. The
area around the graphene is shown in a close-up, with and without mesh. The ports,
periodic boundaries, and graphene (surface current density), has been highlighted
by diﬀerent colors. Lengths on the axes are in µm.
24
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 2. SIMULATIONS
long in the z-direction. In the fabricated samples the length of the ribbons is
around 100 µm, which is orders of magnitude larger than the ribbon widths that
vary between 100 nm and 300 nm. Secondly, periodic boundary conditions have
been imposed, and the result is a simulation that considers an inﬁnite amount
of ribbons. The simplifcation to a repeated unit cell problem is reasonable if the
samples considered have a large amount of individual ribbons. The fabricated
samples contain more than nrib = 100 µm/(300 nm + 300 nm) > 160 individual
ribbons. The simpliﬁcation is necessary as it requires signiﬁcant computational
power to create and solve for a mesh spanning 100 µm but with small enough el-
ements to incorporate all eﬀects of the individual ribbons. Another option would
have been to simulate a single ribbon and implement Perfectly Matched Layers
(PMLs) at the boundaries, which ensures that all ﬁelds are zero at the boundaries,
and nothing is scattered back into the simulation domain. As it requires less com-
putational power and as we have a large amount of individual ribbons, simulating
a unit cell with periodic boundaries was chosen rather than using PMLs. We note
that neither of these setups would contain that we have a ﬁnite amount of ribbons
on the fabricated samples.
The periodic boundaries are described by Floquet periodicity which is applicable as
we are studying how plane waves interact with periodic structures. The incoming
ﬁeld is excited at the port in the top of the simulation domain, while the bottom
port absorbs the incoming ﬁeld to ensure that nothing is reﬂected from the bottom
port and back into the simulation domain. The incoming ﬁeld is set to Hz = 1
A/m, corresponding to a TM mode.
2.1.1.1
Meshing the simulation
In general when doing FEM modelling, the lowest computational time is obtained
when the amount of ﬁnite elements is lowered to an absolute minimum at which the
solution is still converged. To achieve robust simulations across diﬀerent setups
however, the amount of elements is usually larger than the minimum number
required.
One way of lowering the amount of elements is to divide the entire
simulation volume into smaller domains in which the mesh element size depends
on the speciﬁc geometry of the domain, i.e. we will use a coarse mesh away from
the graphene nanoribbon, and an extremely ﬁne mesh close to the nanoribbons, as
seen in ﬁgure 2.1. The domain for a ﬁner mesh is 1/10th of the entire simulation
height. The increased meshing density at the nanoribbons also provides better
resolution in that area as the solution is only calculated at the mesh nodes, which
means that the resulting ﬁgures will show interpolations between node points. It
follows that less interpolation is carried out with an increasing amount of node
points. For some simulation domains the maximum size of meshing elements have
also been varied across a simulation space. Speciﬁcally for the simulation with
varying spacings it is necessary to deﬁne the maximum size as a function of the
spacing, to obtain converged solutions for the smallest spacings, while being able
to compute the solution for the largest in a reasonable amount of time.
25
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 2. SIMULATIONS
2.1.2
Results of the single ribbon model
Three results are derived from the single ribbon model. First the resonance fre-
quency dependence on the width of the system is investigated. Next, we investigate
how the the resonance frequency change with varying Fermi level of the graphene
ribbon. Finally, we check how the system behaves under varying spacings between
the ribbons. To summarize the next sections simulate and discuss
• The resulting electric ﬁelds at the graphene nanoribbons.
• How the optical response changes with the doping level.
• How the optical response changes with the width of the nanoribbons.
• How the optical response changes with the spacing between nanoribbons.
Before that a brief introduction of how we arrive at the results in this chapter is
presented.
2.1.2.1
General results
COMSOL calculates the scattering S-parameters of the two ports from the elec-
tromagnetic ﬁelds at the ports. From this we can calculate the transmittance,
reﬂectance and absorbance at each frequency simulated as
T = |S21|2,
(2.1)
R = |S11|2,
(2.2)
A = 1 −|S21|2 −|S11|2.
(2.3)
Here S11 and S21 are the S-parameters at the two ports, top and bottom respec-
tively.1
Figure 2.2 shows the optical response, in terms of transmittance, reﬂectance and
absorbance, of an inﬁnite array of 100 nm wide graphene nanoribbons with EF =
0.35 eV and a 100 nm spacing for frequencies 10 THz-80 THz. We observe three
distinct modes at 33.7 THz, 64.5 THz and 79.5 THz. The norm of the electric ﬁeld
as well as the x- and y-components of the electric ﬁeld for the three modes are
shown in ﬁgure 2.3. The ﬁrst mode resembles a dipole, the second a quadrupole,
and the third is a higher order mode. All the ﬁeld strengths have been normalized,
but not on the same scale, e.g. the normalized x-component at 33.7 THz is found
by dividing all data points by the maximum absolute value of Ex at 33.7 THz. We
note from ﬁgure 2.2 that the dipole-like mode is the strongest resonance, and that
it is the only mode where the reﬂectance has a signiﬁcant change which means it
can be excited and observed in an experimental reﬂection setup.
1Note that COMSOL with MATLAB only exports the real part of a parameter, unless ex-
plicitly told otherwise. Speciﬁcally use mphglobal(model,’emw.S11’,’complexout’,’on’).
26
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 2. SIMULATIONS
Figure 2.2 – Reﬂectance, transmittance and absorbance of 100 nm ribbons, with
100 nm spacing and a Fermi energy of EF = 0.35 eV. Three distinct resonance peaks
are seen at 33.7 THz, 64.5 THz and 79.5 THz.
27
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 2. SIMULATIONS
(a) Norm of the E-ﬁeld
(b) X-component, Ex
(c) Y-component, Ey
(d) Norm of the E-ﬁeld
(e) X-component, Ex
(f) Y-component, Ey
(g) Norm of the E-ﬁeld
(h) X-component, Ex
(i) Y-component, Ey
Figure 2.3 – The norm and x- and y-components of the electric ﬁeld for simulations
on 100 nm ribbons with EF = 0.35 eV, with 100 nm spacing for each of the three
resonance modes. The ﬁrst mode resembles a dipole, the second a quadrupole, and
the third is a higher order mode. All ﬁeld strengths have been normalized, but not
on the same scale.
28
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER 2. SIMULATIONS
a)
b)
Figure 2.4 – a) Absorbance of a 100 nm ribbon, with 100 nm spacing of diﬀerent
Fermi levels.
b) Fit of the dipole mode shows the square root proportionality
between the resonance frequency and Fermi level.
2.1.2.2
Ribbons with diﬀerent doping
As shown in section 1.3.2.1 the conductivity of graphene is related to the Fermi
level and the charge carrier density. As the charge carrier density can be tuned
by e.g. a back-gate capacitive setup it is interesting to simulate the response of
graphene nanoribbons for diﬀerent Fermi levels. Figure 2.4a shows the evolution
of the absorption when varying the Fermi level from 0.1 eV-0.5 eV for a 100 nm
wide ribbon with 100 nm spacing. Figure 2.4b shows only the dipole mode of the
same simulation as well as a ﬁt to the mode. We see a square root proportionality
between EF and the dipole resonance frequency, i.e. fdip ∝√EF, as described in
[14].
2.1.2.3
Ribbons of diﬀerent width
Figure 2.5a shows the evolution of the absorption when varying the width of the
simulated ribbons. For these simulations, the spacing is always kept the same size
as the ribbons. For ribbons the plasmon resonance frequency and ribbon width
are proportional as
fdip ∝√q ∝
r π
W ,
(2.4)
where fdip is the resonance frequency of the dipole mode, q is the plasmon wavevec-
tor and W is the width of the nanoribbon[15, 16]. This proportionality is high-
lighted in ﬁgure 2.5b, where only the dipole mode is included, along with a ﬁt
following equation (2.4).
29
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 2. SIMULATIONS
a)
b)
Figure 2.5 – a) Absorbance of ribbons of sizes 25 nm-500 nm. All simulations use
a Fermi level of 0.35 eV, and the spacing between ribbons is the same as the width of
the ribbons. b) Fit of the dipole mode shows the inverse square root proportionality
between resonance frequency and Fermi level.
2.1.2.4
Ribbons with varying spacing
The resonance wavelength does not only relate to the width of the ribbons, but
also for the period, i.e. the sum of the ribbon width and the spacing. Furthermore
the modes in the ribbons may couple if they are suﬃciently close to each other.
Figure 2.6a shows how the absorbance changes upon varying the spacing between
100 nm wide ribbons from 10 nm to 300 nm. For this simulation to run a small
adaptation to the mesh had to be implemented. Particularly, for spacings smaller
than the ribbon width we require that the no mesh element is larger than half the
spacing, rounded down to nearest integer, and for spacings equal to or larger than
the ribbon width, no mesh element can be larger than one third the ribbon width.
This makes the simulation run smoothly for all spacings without the computational
time soaring for large simulation volumes. However one of the solutions in the set
of simulations is seen to stand out a bit. This is due to a mesh discrepancy at
this particular build.
Figure 2.6b shows the simulated reﬂectance for selected
ribbon widths. A blue-shift of the plasmon resonances is observed for increased
spacing. Furthermore, the intensity decreased simply owing to the fact that there
is proportionately less graphene in the simulation volume.
2.1.2.5
Graphene ribbons on silica
All the simulations carried out in this project treat graphene as a free standing
interface in air. In reality the graphene rests on a dielectric thin ﬁlm of silica on a
silicon substrate. Recall the equation for GSPs in the nonretarded regime (1.56)
ω =
σg(ω)β
iε0(ε1 + ε2).
30
==PAGE:38==
CHAPTER 2. SIMULATIONS
a)
b)
Figure 2.6 – a) Absorbance of a 100 nm ribbons with varying spacings from 10
nm to 300 nm. All simulations use a Fermi level of 0.35 eV. One of the simulations
has a discrepancy due to the mesh. b) The reﬂectance of selected spacings. Notice
a blue-shift of the resonance frequency as the spacing increases. The intensity also
decreases as spacing increase as there is less graphene in the simulation volume.
From this we see that if the dielectric functions ε1 and ε2 are constant in the
frequency range, they simply act as a scaling parameter. For air, this is true,
whereas the dielectric function for silica varies greatly in the frequency range
simulated in this work, see the real and imaginary parts of the complex refractive
index in ﬁgures 2.7a and 2.7b from the work by Kitamura et al. [17]. Furthermore
the plasmons in graphene resting on polar substrates have been found to couple
to the substrate phonons creating hybridized plasmon-phonon modes[16, 18, 19].
This eﬀect can be seen in ﬁgure 2.7c. In short it is necessary to include both
of these eﬀects for the results of the simulations to be as close to the fabricated
results. For the simulations in this project for which the goal ultimately is to
investigate the eﬀect of applying a potential diﬀerence, it is suﬃcient to know that
these eﬀects will occur in experiments done. As such, no eﬀects of the substrate
are included in the simulations presented here.
2.1.3
Tests of the model
A quick sanity check of the periodic boundaries can be done by simulating more
than one ribbon, with the same boundary condition. If the boundaries act accord-
ingly, the result should not change. This test can be seen in ﬁgure 2.8. The results
are seen to comply, noting a small change due to diﬀerences in the meshes of the
two simulations. Convergence test of the model, and the mesh has been done for
100 nm wide ribbons with varying spacings of 10 nm-50 nm. The solutions of R,
T and A for the simulation is robust even for mesh elements on the same size scale
as the spacing and ribbon width.
31
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 2. SIMULATIONS
Figure 2.7 – a) Real and b) Imaginary part of the complex refractive index ob-
tained experimentally in [17]. c) Hybridized plasmon-phonon modes due to coupling
of the graphene plasmons and the substrate SiO2 phonons[16].
a)
b)
c)
Figure 2.8 – Comparison of results from models with one (solid lines) or two ribbons
(dashed lines) in the unit cell. a) Reﬂectance. b) Transmittance. c) Absorbance.
32
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 2. SIMULATIONS
Figure 2.9 – The geometry of the double ribbon COMSOL model. The two ribbons
are deﬁned by diﬀerent surface conductivities calculated from diﬀerent Fermi levels.
2.2
Dual ribbon model with diﬀerent Fermi lev-
els
Having investigated the most basic setup we turn our attention to a system with
two ribbons in the unit cell. The purpose is to determine how the system behaves
if the two ribbons have diﬀerent Fermi levels. The setup of the simulations is very
similar to that described above, and the simulation volume close to the graphene
can be seen in ﬁgure 2.9, where the two ribbons are distinguished by their con-
ductivities σ1 and σ2. The Fermi levels of the two ribbons are calculated as an
oﬀset ∆EF to a set Fermi level EF0, that is
EF1 = EF0 + ∆EF,
EF2 = EF0 −∆EF.
(2.5)
This eﬀect of course translates to the simulations through the calculation of the
conductivity of graphene from the Fermi level. Phenomenologically the setup can
be considered as removing charges from one ribbon while adding charges to the
other.
2.2.1
General results
Again the general results of the model is discussed before any parameter space is
investigated. Reﬂectance, transmittance and absorbance for a simulation with 100
nm wide ribbons, with 100 nm spacing in between, a set Fermi level of EF0 = 0.35
eV and a Fermi level oﬀset ∆EF = 0.05 eV can be seen in ﬁgure 2.10a. The
absorbance can be seen in ﬁgure 2.10b where vertical lines have been added at the
resonance frequencies simulated with two ribbons at the same Fermi levels, the
Fermi levels correspond to EF = EF0 ± ∆EF.
It is clear that having diﬀerent Fermi levels in neighboring ribbons cause more
resonances to appear.
In total we have ﬁve, corresponding to the same three
33
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 2. SIMULATIONS
a)
b)
Figure 2.10 – Simulation of 100 nm ribbons with 100 nm spacing, a set Fermi
level of EF0 = 0.35 eV and a Fermi level oﬀset ∆EF = 0.05 eV. a) Reﬂectance,
transmittance and absorbance. b) Absorbance, with added vertical lines to indicate
the resonance frequencies of ribbons with Fermi levels EF0 = 0.3 eV and EF0 = 0.4
eV.
modes seen in the basic simulation repeated in each of the ribbons with diﬀerent
Fermi level, except the highest mode for the highest Fermi level is above the
frequency spectrum simulated. Next we examine the electric ﬁelds at the ribbons
at the resonance frequencies of the ﬁrst four resonances shown in ﬁgure 2.11.
Indeed we observe a dipole and quadropole mode, excited primarily in either of
the two ribbons. As expected the modes in the ribbon with the lowest Fermi level
is excited at the lowest frequency. A curious observation to be made from ﬁgures
2.10 and 2.11 is that a set of modes are not each others exact opposite, and no
longer symmetric.
34
==PAGE:42==
CHAPTER 2. SIMULATIONS
(a) Norm of the E-ﬁeld
(b) X-component, Ex
(c) Y-component, Ey
(d) Norm of the E-ﬁeld
(e) X-component, Ex
(f) Y-component, Ey
(g) Norm of the E-ﬁeld
(h) X-component, Ex
(i) Y-component, Ey
(j) Norm of the E-ﬁeld
(k) X-component, Ex
(l) Y-component, Ey
Figure 2.11 – The norm and x- and y-components of the electric ﬁeld for simula-
tions on 100 nm ribbons with EF = 0.35 eV and 100 nm spacing for the ﬁrst four
resonance modes. The ﬁrst two resonances resemble a dipole mode in the ribbon
with the lowest and highest Fermi level, respectively. The same trend is seen for the
third and fourth resonance where a quadropole-like mode is excited in either of the
two ribbons. All ﬁeld strengths have been normalized, but not on the same scale.
35
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 2. SIMULATIONS
a)
b)
Figure 2.12 – The absorbance of 100 nm wide ribbons with 100 nm spacing and a
set Fermi level of EF0 = 0.35 eV a) with varying oﬀset from 0 eV to 0.1 eV in steps
of 0.01 eV and b) with varying oﬀset from -0.05 eV to 0.05 eV in steps of 0.005 eV.
As soon as the oﬀset is non-zero, the resonances split.
2.2.2
Varying the oﬀset
Next we investigate the inﬂuence of the size of the oﬀset on the absorbance. The
result for 100 nm wide ribbons with 100 nm spacing, a set Fermi level of EF0 = 0.35
eV with varying oﬀset from 0 eV to 0.1 eV in steps of 0.01 eV can be seen in ﬁgure
2.12a. The result for the same geometry and a set Fermi level of EF0 = 0.35 eV
but varying the oﬀset from -0.05 eV to 0.05 eV in steps of 0.01 eV can be seen in
ﬁgure 2.12b. From the ﬁgures we conclude that as soon as the oﬀset is non-zero,
the resonances will eﬀectively split, and even for small variations on the Fermi
level a diﬀerence is observable.
2.2.3
Varying the ribbon width
As in the basic model we also vary the ribbon width and investigate the results.
The absorbance for ribbons of varying widths from 25 nm to 500 nm, with 100
nm of spacing and a Fermi level EF1,2 = 0.35 eV ± 0.05 eV can be seen in ﬁgure
2.13a. The resonance frequencies still follow the same trend as in the basic model
as predicted by theory.
It appears that the Fermi level oﬀset has the largest
impact on the resonances for small ribbons as is illustrated in ﬁgure 2.13b. Here
the frequency diﬀerence between the two dipole modes have been calculated and
plotted against ribbon width.
36
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER 2. SIMULATIONS
a)
b)
Figure 2.13 – a) The absorbance for ribbons of varying widths from 25 nm to 500
nm, with 100 nm of spacing and a Fermi level EF1,2 = 0.35 eV ± 0.05 eV. As in
the basic model, the resonance frequencies follow the trend predicted by teory. b)
The induced frequency diﬀerence between the two dipole modes for diﬀerent ribbon
widths. The eﬀect is largest for smaller ribbons.
2.2.4
Varying the spacing
Lastly we also vary the spacing while keeping the ribbon width constant. The
result for 100 nm wide ribbons with a Fermi level EF1,2 = 0.35 eV ± 0.05 eV and
varying spacings of 10 nm to 300 nm can be seen in ﬁgure 2.14. It appears as
though the diﬀerence in resonance frequency of the dipole modes are very similar
for spacings larger than 100 nm, i.e. spacings wider than the ribbon. Note there
is a single simulation in the set that has a discrepancy due to a meshing problem
at this particular build.
37
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 2. SIMULATIONS
Figure 2.14 – The absorbance of 100 nm wide ribbons with a Fermi level EF1,2 =
0.35 eV ± 0.05 eV and varying spacings of 10 nm to 300 nm. As in the basic model,
one of the simulations has a discrepancy due to the mesh.
38
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 2. SIMULATIONS
a)
b)
Figure 2.15 – The eﬀect of applying a potential diﬀerence between neighbouring
ribbons on the a) total charge carrier density as a function of position and b) Fermi
level as a function of position. While the potential induces and removes charge
carriers equally in the two ribbons the Fermi level is not symmetrically displaced as
it is ∝
p
|ntot|.
2.3
Dual ribbon model with spatially varying
diﬀerent Fermi levels
Having studied how the system behaves for ribbons of diﬀerent Fermi levels, we set
out to investigate the possibilities of modulating the charge densities of nanorib-
bons subject to an applied potential. The simulations are carried out in the COM-
SOL electrostatics module and the simulated geometry is kept similar to the one in
the previous section, see ﬁgure 2.9. The main diﬀerence is that the graphene rib-
bons are no longer described by its optical conductivity (σ) but as perfect electric
conductors with a potential of ±V . The boundary conditions change slightly as
this simulation is purely electrostatic. Thus no plane waves are traversing the sys-
tem and Floquet boundaries are no longer required. Thus the periodic boundary
conditions only require continuity of the ﬁelds. Following the method described in
section , the total charge carrier density as a function of position can be obtained,
and is depicted in ﬁgure 2.15a for multiple potential diﬀerences ∆V . The charge
carrier density diverges towards the edges of the ribbon, and it should be noted
that there exists an upper level of charge carriers sustainable at the graphene
edges but as the ﬁnite element simulations naturally cuts oﬀthis divergence we
will not investigate this further. The Fermi level as a function of position can be
determined from the charge carrier density and which is depicted in ﬁgure 2.15b.
Note how the amount of induced charge carriers are equal in the two ribbons,
and symmetric while the corresponding Fermi levels are not as it depends on the
square root of the total charge carrier density. These results serve to indicate that
the simulated results in the previous section can be obtained experimentally.
39
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 3
Fabrication and characterization
This chapter goes through the entire fabrication process of the samples. For each
fabrication step, the parameters used in the process are presented and discussed.
The process ﬂow created for the approval of Danchip can be found in appendix B.
When applicable, alternative methods in the fabrication process that were consid-
ered in this project are presented and discussed. The description of each step is
meant to be extensive enough to enable this chapter as a starting point for further
experiments. Throughout the chapter the fabricated samples will also be char-
acterized using an optical microscope as well as a scanning electron microscope,
to determine if the fabrication is developing according to the design. The quality
of the graphene on the fabricated samples can be characterized by Raman spec-
troscopy and a Raman scan of the sample PW1 will be presented and discussed.
We end with a discussion on methods to characterize the electrical properties of
the samples.
3.1
Samples produced in this work
Twenty-one samples were fabricated during this work. An overview of their journey
through the cleanroom and laboratories can be seen in table 3.1. This overview is
not extensive, so the full logbook for the fabrication can be found in appendix C.
3.2
Sample design
The basic idea behind the sample is a 100 × 100 µm2 "active" region with an
array of interdigitated nanoribbons of widths 100 nm-300 nm in the center of
large 100 µm2 × 500 µm2 isolated microribbons.
They were all created by use
of electron beam lithography (EBL). The microribbons serve as a platform for
conduction electrodes, and they are isolated from the surrounding graphene to
allow a potential diﬀerence to be applied between the interdigitated ribbons. The
40
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER 3. FABRICATION AND CHARACTERIZATION
Table 3.1 – Samples fabricated in this work and how far they came in the fabrication
process. Thus √denotes success while x denotes something went wrong, which is
shortly elaborated in the notes column.
Sample tag
Pre-exposure
Exposure
Post exposure
Gold contacts
Post processing
Notes
Ba1_S1α
x
Resist uneven after spinning.
Ba1_S2α
√√x
Graphene came oﬀafter PMMA strip.
Old_Ba5_S1β
√x
√
Underexposed in E-beam.
Old_Ba5_S2β
√x
√
Underexposed in E-beam.
Ba2_S1α
x
Graphene came oﬀduring cleaning.
Ba2_S2α
x
Graphene came oﬀduring cleaning.
Ba2_S3α
√√√
Graphene quality very poor.
Ba3_S1α
√√√
Flakes came oﬀafter PMMA strip.
Ba3_S2α
√√√
Flakes came oﬀafter PMMA strip.
Ba3_S3α
x
Never processed further, poor graphene.
Ba4_S1β
√√√x
Stencil mask had wrong design.
Ba4_S2β
√√√x
x
No adhesion layer, contacts did not stick.
Ba4_S3β
√√√x
x
No adhesion layer, contacts did not stick.
Ba5_S1β
√√√
First PEC exposure.
Ba5_S2β
√√√
First PEC exposure.
PW1γ
√√√x
x
No adhesion layer, PEC.
PW2γ
√√√√x
Wirebonded one gold pad, PEC.
Ba6_S1δ
√√x
Graphene came oﬀin Developer: TMAH
Manual, PEC.
Ba6_S2δ
√√
PEC. Not enough time to process.
Ba7_S1δ
√√
Final PEC design, multiple exposures on
each chip. Not enough time to process.
Ba7_S2δ
√√
Final PEC design, multiple exposures on
each chip. Not enough time to process.
α Graphene from 1x1 cm2 chips.
β Chips cut from 2"x2" CVD graphene on 4" wafer.
γ,δ Graphene grown by Birong Luo and transferred by Patrick Whelanγ or the authorδ.
41
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 3. FABRICATION AND CHARACTERIZATION
entire structure rests on 285 nm - 300 nm thick silica layer on a doped silicon
wafer to allow electrostatic backgating of the graphene. The original idea of the
sample design has not changed during the project period, but diﬀerent steps of
the fabrication has been altered to optimize the produced devices. The design
can be seen in ﬁgure 3.1. The coloured parts are the areas that will be exposed
by the electron beam.
As the resist used is positive, these exposed areas can
then be removed, and the revealed graphene underneath etched away. The top
microribbon without any nanoribbons serves as a reference ribbon to perform
electrical characterization of a sample. The design for the EBL exposure was done
in L-Edit, a program that builds shapes from polygons. As the nanoribbon array
consists of many individual ribbons, Matlab scripts were written to automatize
the creation of the polygons. The two Matlab scripts each call a Matlab-function
to create polygon coordinates of either the frames around the microribbons or the
array of nanoribbons and save it to a .txt ﬁle, which can be run straight from
L-Edit. Notice the overlaps on the frames isolating the microribbons (appears as
thin black lines in the ﬁgure), which are created to make sure that the overlap
was suﬃciently exposed. The Matlab codes used to create the original design in
L-Edit can be found in appendix D.3.
3.3
Graphene samples
The ﬁrst thing to consider when fabricating the samples is where to get the
graphene from. Two methods are prevalent when producing graphene samples
for optoelectronic purposes. In this project all samples have graphene grown by
Chemical Vapor Deposition (CVD), but the method of mechanical exfoliation will
also brieﬂy be introduced. Some of the samples were purchased with graphene
already on silica, while other samples were made by a wet transfer of graphene on
a copper foil to a substrate with a high quality oxide layer. The importance of
the oxide quality will be discussed later in section 3.3.3.
3.3.1
Mechanically exfoliated graphene
Graphene was ﬁrst experimentally discovered by A. Geim and K. Novoselov[20] in
2004 they used mechanical exfoliation of small pieces of highly oriented pyrolytic
graphite (HOPG) until very few layers of carbon remained. This method of ob-
taining graphene by removing layers is known as the scotch tape method. The
main advantages of this method is its simplicity and ability to produce high quality
monolayer graphene with few residues. The main disadvantage is the size of the
resulting graphene ﬂakes. While ﬂakes of sizes up to 1.5 mm2 have been obtained,
the usual ﬂake sizes are smaller than 2000 µm2.1 The entire design structure seen
in ﬁgure 3.1 has a cross sectional area of 2.6 mm2, and a single nanoribbon array in
1http://www.grapheneindustries.com/?Products
42
==PAGE:50==
CHAPTER 3. FABRICATION AND CHARACTERIZATION
Figure 3.1 – a) The ﬁrst design made in L-Edit. b) A close-up of the 300nm
nanoribbon array. c) a close-up of one of the nanoribbon unit cells repeated to
create the full array.
43
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 3. FABRICATION AND CHARACTERIZATION
this project is 10 000 µm2. Obtaining ﬂakes to ﬁt the entire design by mechanical
exfoliation is not feasible, and even consistently obtaining monolayer ﬂakes that
ﬁt a single nanoribbon array (without room for contacts) requires both training
and luck. Alternatively, ﬂakes can be bought from a commercial supplier such as
Graphene Industries,1 but the size problem still persists.
3.3.2
CVD grown graphene
Graphene grown by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) can reach signiﬁcantly larger
size than what is obtainable by mechanical exfoliation. Furthermore, it is cheaper
to upscale the production, so the resulting samples are cheaper to buy. On the
downside, the electrical quality of CVD grown graphene is usually lower than for
mechanically exfoliated, primarily due to grain boundaries and the wet transfer
method. When growing graphene with CVD the process starts at nucleation sites
e.g. small defects or grain boundaries in the copper foil. The layer then expands
along the edge until it hits another layer which started its growth at a diﬀerent
nucleation site. Only after this has happened, the second layer of graphene will
start to form. Because of this, the growth can be stopped after a single layer has
been deposited, and a fully covered 1 cm2 chip with more than 95%[21, 22] single
layer graphene can be obtained. Note that the resulting graphene sheet consists
of diﬀerent grains of graphene with diﬀerent orientations and edge conﬁgurations.
This leads to electron scattering at grain boundaries which ultimately lowers the
conductivity. The amount of grain boundaries in graphene, and the sizes of the
grains will be reﬂected by the ﬂatness of the growth media surface. Ideally, the
growth surface should have a single nucleation site, from which the graphene layer
would grow outwards. This would result in a perfect single layer of graphene.
Typically, graphene is grown on a thin copper foil, with as few impurities as pos-
sible. Secondly, after the graphene is grown on copper it needs to be transferred
to the target substrate, which is typically done by wet transfer using a polymer
such as polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA). This transfer method leaves residues
and creates chemical bindings that lowers the conductivity of the graphene sheet.
Recently, a dry transfer method has been suggested using hexagonal Boron Nitride
(h-BN)[23] to encapsulate the graphene, hereby preserving its electronic proper-
ties.
Graphene samples used in this project.
The ﬁrst three sample batches used in this project were 1 cm2 chips with ≈95%
monolayer graphene on 285 nm silica on p-doped silicon and bought from Graphene
Supermarket,2.
These samples suﬀered from poor adhesion, and the graphene
came oﬀthe substrate in large ﬂakes during the fabrication process.
For batches four and ﬁve we returned to a 4" wafer with a 2"x2" graphene ﬂake
previously bought from Graphene Supermarket. The substrate was 285nm silica
on p-doped silicon. We knew the adhesion on this substrate was good, but there
2Graphene Supermarket: Monolayer Graphene on 285 nm SiO2 Wafer: 5 pack
44
==PAGE:52==
CHAPTER 3. FABRICATION AND CHARACTERIZATION
were only enough left of the sample to divide it into ﬁve chips.
Considering the poor quality of the latest samples from Graphene Supermarket, we
looked for other options for the next samples, and joined forces with the Nanocar-
bon group at DTU Nanotech. The research group is proﬁcient in producing sam-
ples with high quality graphene by CVD. First, we obtained two samples, denoted
PW1 and PW2, where the graphene had been grown by Birong Luo[24, 25] and
transferred by Patrick Rebsdorf Whelan. The graphene was transferred to chips
with a high quality 300nm oxide that was bought from Novawafers. The chips
already had gold alignment marks on them, which made it easier to expose a spot
with good quality graphene in the e-beam step.
Later, I continued transferring graphene myself, after receiving training from
Birong Luo. The substrates were supplied by the Nanocarbon group and were
the same 300nm oxide on Si from Novawafers as used by Patrick before, but they
did not have alignment marks. This resulted in the 6th and 7th batch of samples.
The transfer method used is outlined below.
3.3.2.1
Transfer of CVD graphene grown on copper foil
1. A piece of copper foil with CVD graphene is cut into the desired size and
attached to a 2" sticky carrier wafer.
2. PMMA resist (4 wt%) in anisol is spincoated onto the foil at 1000RPM for
60s.
3. The resist is soft-baked at 100 ◦C for 30 min.
4. After the bake the copper foil is removed from the carrier wafer, and all four
edges are removed, to avoid a continuous PMMA ﬁlm from the top of the
graphene to bottom of the copper.
5. A solution of 5% HCl and 5-7 drops of H2O2 is prepared to etch away the
copper. The copper foils with resist are left overnight.
6. The next day the copper is etched away and PMMA is ﬂoating in the solution
with graphene on the bottom. The graphene is transferred with a glass slide
to fresh Milli-Q water, and transferred another time to fresh Milli-Q water.
Lastly, the PMMA/graphene is transferred to the substrate. The nitrogen
gun is used to remove most of the water, but care should be taken not to
break the sheet.
7. The sample is baked for at gradually increasing temperatures. The sample
should bake for 30 minutes at each temperature: 30 ◦C, 60 ◦C, 80 ◦C, 110 ◦C.
8. The PMMA is stripped by leaving it in acetone for 30 minutes.
9. The sample is cleaned by spinning it at 2000RPM for a minute, while is is
sprayed with acetone and isopropyl alcohol (IPA) simultaneously.
45
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 3. FABRICATION AND CHARACTERIZATION
a)
b)
Figure 3.2 – Optical micrographs after the resist is stripped from samples a)
Ba3_S2 and b) Ba4_S1. Both taken at 5x magniﬁcation. The graphene is removed
in large ﬂakes from sample Ba3_S2, while Ba4_S1 looks much closer to design.
The poor quality of the graphene in the ﬁrst batches is well highlighted in a
comparison of optical micrographs with a sample from batch four after the resist
has been stripped. Such a comparison can be seen in ﬁgure 3.2, and it is clear that
the graphene has come oﬀin large ﬂakes from Ba3_S2, while Ba4_S1 is much
closer to the actual design.
3.3.3
The quality of the dielectric silica layer
When fabricating optoelectronic devices with graphene, with an aim to backgate
the device, the quality of the dielectric layer becomes very important. The electro-
static doping by backgating is done in a parallel plate capacitor like setup, where
the graphene acts as a top plate, and the doped silicon as the bottom.
Thus
a single pinhole in the dielectric under the fabricated structure that allows cur-
rent to ﬂow between the heavily doped silicon and the graphene, will hinder the
electrostatic gating. Besides pinholes, the uniformity of the silica also inﬂuence
the optical measurements, and a uniform layer is preferred. The quality of silica
grown in the cleanroom at DTU Danchip is generally too low to avoid pinholes,
and people who fabricate backgateable structures recommend using wafers from
Nova, with a high quality oxide.
3.4
Lithography
This section delves into the diﬀerent steps of the EBL process used in the project.
The polymer polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) is used as the resists for the EBL.
It is a high-resolution positive electron-beam resist, which means the resist can
46
==PAGE:54==
CHAPTER 3. FABRICATION AND CHARACTERIZATION
be removed selectively from the areas that have been exposed by the electron
gun. The resist can then act as an etching mask, protecting the graphene pattern
underneath, while exposed graphene is removed.
3.4.1
Cleaning the samples
Before anything is done to the samples, they must be properly cleaned, as any
particles on the substrate will transfer to the resist and the electrons may scatter
on these impurities. This is done by submersing it and moving it back and forth in
acetone for 20 seconds, and afterwards in IPA for 20 second. The sample is then
blown dry with the nitrogen gun and inspected visually in an optical microscope.
This step is repeated as necessary. Originally the cleaning started with 20 seconds
in water to utilize its high surface tension to eﬀectively remove particles, but
this step was removed when we encountered the problems with the adhesion of
graphene.
3.4.2
Spinning resist
Before the samples are spincoated, they are baked at 200 ◦C for at least 20 minutes
to remove leftover traces of acetone, IPA and water.
This step improves the
adhesion of the resist. PMMA 996k (2 wt%) dissolved in anisol is used as the
electron-beam resist. It is spincoated by 5 seconds at 500 rpm, with an acceleration
of 200 rpm/s, and 60 seconds at 4000 rpm, with an acceleration of 4000 rpm/s.
The ﬁrst speed is generally used to dispense the resist across an entire wafer, but
for chips we dispense the resist in a puddle on top of the entire chip before starting
the process. After the 60 seconds at 4000 rpm, the resulting layer is around ≈74
nm thick.
3.4.3
Baking the resist
After the spin coating the devices are soft-baked by three steps listed below. The
softbake is important as all solvent must be evaporated before the samples are
allowed into the electron beam chamber that is under ultra high vacuum.
1. Ramp from room temperature to 120 ◦C, ramp time is 50 minutes, baking
time 30 minutes.
2. Ramp from 120 ◦C to 180 ◦C, ramp time is 30 minutes, baking time 60 min-
utes.
3. Allow the samples to cool oﬀslowly for duration longer than 30 minutes.
47
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 3. FABRICATION AND CHARACTERIZATION
This process was originally proposed by PhD student Bjarke Jessen, from the
Nanocarbon group at DTU Nanotech. It minimizes the induced strain in the resist
layer allowing small structures and good uniformity for long structures (such as
our nanoribbons) to be realized.
It must be noted that the recipe adopted takes more than three and a half hours
to complete and therefore used an automated hotplate in the cleanroom, which
was moved before this project started. After the move a temperature limit of
110 ◦C was imposed.3 Because the hotplates turn on as soon as the temperature
goes below the limit it overshoots and the limiting temperature is closer to 115 ◦C.
Unfortunately the new temperature limit never appeared in the manual of the
hotplates. Because of this I started the heating process and returned after it was
ﬁnished, not realising the temperature never raised above 115 ◦C until I was baking
the PW1 and PW2 samples. These samples got more than ﬁve hours at 115 ◦C
and lastly two minutes at 180 ◦C, after which they were allowed to cool of slowly.
3.4.4
Thermal aluminium layer
As the graphene rests on a 285 −300 nm thick oxide layer charges will build up
in this dielectric during the electron beam exposure. This charge build-up will
screen the electrons coming after, and thus distort the exposure. To avoid this
a 15 nm thick layer of aluminium is thermally evaporated onto the surface of the
resist. When mounted in a cassette for exposure in the e-beam write a small pin
penetrates this layer from the top to ensure connection to the grounded cassette.
This thin layer allows the charges to dissipate while the high energy electrons pass
through.
3.4.5
E-beam exposure
A brief introduction of electron beam lithography necessary to understand the
proximity eﬀect is presented below. The JEOL JBX-9500FS e-beam writer at
the Danchip cleanroom is used for the exposure. It accelerates highly focused
high energy 100 keV electrons onto the sample surface. The electron path through
the sample is determined by the amount and types of scattering processes it will
undergo before it either comes to a stop, or leaves the sample again. We consider
two classes of scattering, elastic and inelastic.
• Elastic scattering: The kinetic energy of the electron is conserved. This
is typically large angle scattering on the relative immobile substrate nuclei,
and dominates at high electron energies. The result is that electrons that
go far into the substrate can in fact be scattered all the way back to the
surface.
3The temperature limit was imposed as the hotplates are primarily for baking the SU8 resist
which becomes impractical to remove from the hotplate itself if heated above 120 ◦C
48
==PAGE:56==
CHAPTER 3. FABRICATION AND CHARACTERIZATION
Figure 3.3 – An example of electron trajectories in the sample illustrating diﬀerent
scatterings. Notice how electrons end up far away from the incident beam spot.
Figure borrowed from lecture notes on EBL in course 33422.
• Inelastic scattering: The electron loses energy. This is typically small
angle scattering on other electrons, and is more dominant at low energies.
The result is that secondary electrons are excited upon collision, while the
primary electron is gradually slowed down until it is stopped.
Some electron trajectories can be seen in ﬁgure 3.3.
Note how backscattered
electrons can excite secondary electrons close to the surface far away from the
incident spot. The positive PMMA resist consists of long polymer chains therefore
electrons with the right energy can act as scissors, cutting the polymer chains
into shorter chains, that are then soluble in the developer. It is important to
understand that it is primarily the secondary electrons, with much lower kinetic
energy than the primary electrons, that are able to cut the polymer chains.
The point of understanding the electron paths and their interaction with the re-
sist is to be able to fabricate structures that are the same as the design. Often
one determines a point spread function (PSF) to describe the number of electrons
deposited per area at a distance, r, away from the incident spot. This is typi-
cally done by a sum of Gaussian distributions, and for a sum of two Gaussian
distributions it takes the form
f(r) =
1
π(1 + η)
 1
α2 exp
 −r2
α2
!
+ η
β2 exp
 −r2
β2
!!
,
(3.1)
where α is the radius of the incident electron beam, β is the approximated radius
of the backscattered electrons and η is the ratio of the primary and backscattered
49
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 3. FABRICATION AND CHARACTERIZATION
electrons contributions to the total integrated electron dose. The parameters can
be determined to some extent by simulating many electron trajectories and will
be done in section 3.4.5.2.
The EBL step is the most complicated part of the fabrication. It is also one of
the few pieces of equipment in the cleanroom where students do not get training
to become autonomous. Because of this the exposures were always carried out
by my supervisor, while I developed an intimate understanding of the process
from the sideline. After a couple of exposures we decided to look into proximity
eﬀect corrections, and in order for me to do this on my own time, I received a
short training on the machine, after which I was allowed to do everything but
the calibration of the machine and the actual exposure. The machine is heavily
booked, and in shorter periods in use all hours of the day, which requires planning
well ahead in time. In this planning time for delays in the fabrication steps leading
up to exposure must be included, as missing a booking on the e-beam write because
of downtime on another process can cause a two week delay. Creating the ﬁles for
the exposure is quite a task and requires the design made in L-Edit to exported to
.GDSII, which can then be imported in the program Beamer, that can export the
design as a .v30 ﬁle speciﬁcally written for the JEOL JBX-9500FS e-beam writer.
Along with the .v30 ﬁle a .sdf and a .jdf ﬁle must also be created. The .sdf ﬁle loads
the .jdf ﬁle and contains the basic settings of the exposure, such as the cassette tag,
the acceleration voltage, stepsize between individual shots, the condition ﬁle, and
the base dose to expose. The .jdf ﬁle loads the .v30 ﬁle and contains information
on where to expose the pattern contained in the .v30 ﬁle, and modiﬁcations to
the base dose. The modiﬁcations of the base dose are percentage additive, e.g. if
a base dose of 250 µC/cm2 is deﬁned and a dose modulation of 80% is applied the
resulting dose will be the base dose times 1.8 250 µC/cm2 × 1.8 = 450 µC/cm2. A
set of .jdf and .sdf ﬁles used for exposure can be seen in appendix E.
3.4.5.1
Using two diﬀerent currents
The time, T, required for an exposure can be calculated from the TIDA equation
T = DA
I ,
(3.2)
where D is the dose, A is the area to be exposed and I is the beam current. It
is apparent that increasing the current will reduce the time. An increase in the
current will also increase the spotsize and can also cause charge build-up as well
as local heating of the sample, all of which can reduce resolution. In the design
we need high resolution for the nanoribbon array, and therefore a low current of
2 nA is used. For the frames that isolate the microribbons from the surrounding
graphene resolution is less important and a high current of 60 nA is used on the
frames to lower the total exposure time. For most exposures the base dose for the
frames was 600 µC/cm2 while the base dose for the nanoribbons was 250 µC/cm2,
50
==PAGE:58==
CHAPTER 3. FABRICATION AND CHARACTERIZATION
a)
b)
Figure 3.4 – SEM images of the 300 nm nanoribbon array on Ba2_S3 at diﬀerent
magniﬁcations. The black spots all over the sample is a result of multiple layers,
that have not been suﬃciently etched. a) The overall quality of the nanoribbon
array is quite poor. b) The e-beam exposure is however well deﬁned.
but the dose for the nanoribbons was always modulated by 80% or 100%, resulting
in a dose of 450 µC/cm2 or 500 µC/cm2 respectively.
The match between what was designed and what has been fabricated was regularly
checked in scanning electron microscopes. Figure 3.4 shows how the overall quality
of the 300 nm array on Ba2_S3 is low, due to a low graphene quality, but the
e-beam pattern is well deﬁned.
3.4.5.2
Proximity eﬀect corrections
After an exposure with a base dose modulation of 80% and 100% on the low current
we realized that the exposure of the frame "spilled" into the nanoribbon array,
which is clearly seen in ﬁgure 3.5 where the array had only received a suﬃciently
high dose, and as such is only properly deﬁned, close to the surrounding frame.
Observing this proximity eﬀect prompted us to use a dose of 500 µC/cm2 for the
nanoribbon array, but we also implemented proximity eﬀect corrections (PEC), to
ensure a more uniform exposure of each ribbon across the array.
Monte Carlo simulations of the electron paths
To correct for the proximity eﬀect we need to know how many electrons per area
develops the resist a distance away from the incident spot, or a point spread func-
tion. To obtain this we use the program CASINO to do Monte Carlo simulations
of four million individual electron trajectories. In the CASINO the beam radius
is set to 5nm and the sample is deﬁned as 75 nm of PMMA on 285 nm silica on
a silicon substrate. Each electron interaction in each layer is determined by the
51
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 3. FABRICATION AND CHARACTERIZATION
a)
b)
Figure 3.5 – 200 nm ribbon array exposed with diﬀerent doses. Note how the
sample exposed at a lower dose is only suﬃciently exposed close to the surrounding
frame. a)Ba4_S1: 80% modulation. b) Ba4_S2: 100% modulation.
density and chemical composition of the layer. The ﬁrst 1000 electron trajecto-
ries of a simulation can be seen in ﬁgure 3.6a, where the blue lines are electrons
that are stopped in the sample while the red ones are backscattered electrons who
escape from the sample surface. A close-up of the same 1000 electrons and their
path in the ﬁrst 2000nm can be seen in ﬁgure 3.6b and it is clear that the electrons
scatter little in the resist, and primarily in the silicon substrate. From CASINO
we ﬁnally obtain the simulated electron hits per area a given distance, r, away
from the incident beam spot. This data can be seen in ﬁgure 3.7. Note how the
resolution decrease close to the incident beam spot, but this is not too important
as the behaviour here is well described by the Gaussian distribution of the incident
beam.
Implementation in Beamer
After obtaining the simulation data, it is imported into Beamer, that has a prox-
imity eﬀect correction feature. First a PSF is obtained by ﬁtting a sum of four
Gaussian distributions to the data in Beamer. The α accounts for primary elec-
trons, β accounts for backscattered electrons and γ1, γ2 accounts for midrange
electrons. This resulted in
f(r) =
1
π(1 + η + ν1 + ν2)(gα + ηgβ + ν1gγ1 + ν2gγ2),
(3.3a)
where e.g.
gα = 1
α2e
 −r2
α2
!
,
52
==PAGE:60==
CHAPTER 3. FABRICATION AND CHARACTERIZATION
a)
b)
Figure 3.6 – A thousand electron trajectories simulated in CASINO. a) The entire
range of the electrons in the sample. b) Close-up of trajectories near the surface
reveal the broadening of the primary beam through the diﬀerent layers.
Figure 3.7 – The data obtained from the Monte Carlo simulations in CASINO.
The resolution decrease close to the incident beam spot, but the behaviour here is
well deﬁned by the Gaussian electron beam proﬁle.
53
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 3. FABRICATION AND CHARACTERIZATION
(a) The 300 nm frame of the original de-
sign imported to Beamer. The two colors
signify two diﬀerent layers.
(b) Same design after the proximity eﬀect
corrections. The colors represent diﬀerent
dosecorrection factors.
Figure 3.8 – Using the Beamer software with Monte Carlo simulations to correct
for proximity eﬀects. Note how the overlap in the frames of the original design
incorrectly carries through the PEC.
and the parameters ﬁtted are given as
α = 0.007,
β = 26.142,
η = 14.9,
γ1 = 0.8,
ν1 = 0.1755,
γ2 = 2.04548,
ν2 = 0.46.
(3.3b)
Next Beamer will correct the doses of the design, by splitting it into smaller
domains with varying doses. We set a maximum of 256 diﬀerent doses. It must
be noted that Beamer does not know the actual dose used during the exposure
but simply corrects by a percentage factor, that is then easily input into the .jdf
ﬁles. As the frames and the nanoribbon arrays at this point receive the diﬀerent
doses of 600 µC/cm2 and 500 µC/cm2 the ﬁrst attempt at PEC only corrects the
frames. The change can be seen for a single frame of with the 300nm nanoribbon
array in ﬁgure 3.8 where the diﬀerent colors correspond to a correction to the base
dose. Note how the overlaps in the frames seen in ﬁgure 3.1 seem to be incorrectly
designed after the PEC, i.e. the dose correction factor is very low, therefore this
area will be underexposed.
This is also observed in the fabricated samples as
seen in ﬁgure 3.9a taken in an optical microscope after development of the resists.
However the resist is also etched during the graphene etch and after this etch and
stripping the PMMA, the bridges are no longer prominent, as seen in ﬁgure 3.9b.
Batch 5, the PW samples and Batch 6 were exposed with this design.
Even though the bridges from the overlap were mostly removed during the graphene
etch, we decided to change the L-Edit design to use a single polygon design for
the frames. The redesigned Matlab function for the frames can be found in ap-
pendix D.4. The new design for the frame with 300 nm nanoribbons can be seen
in ﬁgure 3.10a. Lastly we implemented the PEC for both the currents used, that
is a correction on the entire design. The resulting dose proﬁles in Beamer for the
frame with 300 nm nanoribbons can be seen in ﬁgure 3.10b. Batch 7 was exposed
with this ﬁnal design.
54
==PAGE:62==
CHAPTER 3. FABRICATION AND CHARACTERIZATION
a)
b)
Figure 3.9 – Optical micrographs of the 300nm structure on the sample Ba5_S1.
a) After development. The small overlap in the surrounding frame is clearly seen,
as the four purple strips that are less developed. Taken at 10x magniﬁcation. b)
After graphene etch and PMMA stripping. The small overlap in the surrounding
frame is no longer prominent, and mostly etched away. Taken at 20x magniﬁcation.
(a) The 300 nm frame of the ﬁnal design
imported to Beamer. The two colors sig-
nify two diﬀerent layers.
(b) Same design after the proximity eﬀect
corrections. The colors represent diﬀerent
dosecorrection factors.
Figure 3.10 – Using the Beamer software with Monte Carlo simulations to correct
for proximity eﬀects in the ﬁnal design. Note how the corrections vary from earlier
with the PEC done for both the frame and the nanoribbon array, and compare with
ﬁgure 3.5a to see the problem is corrected.
55
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 3. FABRICATION AND CHARACTERIZATION
(a) Choosing a spot with uniform single
layer graphene without too many defects
prior to exposure.
(b) After exposure and development the
microribbons are perfectly aligned on the
chosen spot.
Figure 3.11 – Optical micrographs of the PW2 sample showcasing the alignment
by electron microscopy. Both taken at 5x magniﬁcation.
3.4.5.3
Sample alignment, or hitting the right spot
As mentioned earlier, the substrate used by Patrick Whelan for samples PW1 and
PW2 already had some alignment marks on them prior to the graphene transfer.
With the e-beam writer it is possible to align the samples to these markings using
the electron beam as an electron microscope. Thus you can place the structures
of design exactly where you want them.
This prompted us to investigate the
graphene sheet thoroughly before processing and pick an area where the graphene
quality seemed to be uniform, consisting mostly of single layer and without too
many defects. The marks and the spot chosen for exposure on the PW2 sample
can be seen in ﬁgure 3.11a. It is required that there is no resist on the marks
used for alignment. In practice we stripped the resist with acetone on a cotton
swab on the edges of the sample and used a mark on either side to align to. This
requirement is because the resist can release particles when exposed to the SEM
beam, and those particles can enter the electron gun column causing a breakdown.
Because of this it is also necessary to do a pre-alignment on an optical microscope
with the samples mounted in the cassette. The alignment was successful, and
ﬁgure 3.11b shows a micrograph of PW2 after exposure and development of the
resist, where the microribbons align well with the marks. This exposure resulted
in the most well deﬁned resist mask hitherto. Close-ups of the nanoribbon arrays
can be seen in ﬁgure 3.12 where the lines are very well deﬁned. Notice however
the presence of bi- and trilayer graphene scattered across the sample.
Unfortunately the Nanocarbon group had no more chips available with alignment
marks as well as the good quality oxide. We did however continue using the optical
pre-alignment equipment for batches 6 and 7. As this equipment is only meant to
be a quick guide to ﬁnd the positions of the alignment marks the microscope is
not very good, and there is a discrepancy between the global positions determined
56
==PAGE:64==
CHAPTER 3. FABRICATION AND CHARACTERIZATION
(a) 100 nm wide nanoribbon array.
(b) 150 nm wide nanoribbon array.
(c) 200 nm wide nanoribbon array.
(d) 300 nm wide nanoribbon array.
Figure 3.12 – Optical micrographs of the individual nanoribbon arrays on the
PW2 sample after exposure and development. The lines are well deﬁned, notice
however the presence of bilayer and trilayer ﬂakes. All micrographs are taken at
50x magniﬁcation.
57
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 3. FABRICATION AND CHARACTERIZATION
by the optical microscope and the scanning electron microscope. As such precise
alignment using only the optical setup is impossible, but it is generally possible
to avoid hitting areas where the graphene is visible damaged.
3.4.5.4
Multiple pattern exposures on each chip
By now we had determined that getting just a single really good nanoribbon array
on a chip required hitting the right spot, which was proving diﬃcult without the
alignment marks. Thus we turned to statistics and simply exposed the design
multiple places on the same chip, hoping for one of the spots to be good uniform
single layer graphene, without too many defects. This procedure was followed only
on the last batch of samples, Batch 7.
3.4.6
Stripping the aluminium layer and developing the
exposed resist
Before the resist can be developed the thermally deposited aluminium layer must
be stripped. Most of the chemicals in the cleanroom that etch aluminium without
aﬀecting the resist contains Tetramethylammonium hydroxide (TMAH), a nerve
toxin and must be handled with appropriate care. For batches 1 and 2 this was
done by submersing the sample in the chemical MF CD-26 for 60 seconds, then
rinsing the sample in IPA for 30 seconds. The chemical was slowly being outphased
in the cleanroom and development switched to use AZ 726 MIF with the same
parameters, at no apparent change. This was done for batches 3-5 as well as the
PW samples. Later in the project period the regulations for manually handling
TMAH increased and the "Developer: Manual TMAH" dedicated for the use of AZ
726 MIF had to be used. This machine will automatically dispense the chemical
and leave it for 60 seconds,4 after which the sample along with the rest of the
machine chamber will be sprayed with water and the sample will be violently spin
dryed.
This method was tried on sample one of batch 6, and the result after
development can be seen in ﬁgure 3.13. It was clear, even before the development
was done that the spinning part of the manual developer recipe was very violent,
and it tore of the graphene in places were there were wrinkles from the transfer.
The result is that the underlying silica is exposed as can be seen in the ﬁgure.
Chips where an exposures would hit a spot with wrinkles would however not
likely end up being high quality samples and as such it is not necessarily very
critical.
After the aluminium is stripped, the resist is developed for 60 seconds in an
MIBK:IPA, 1:3 solution. To stop the development the sample is rinsed in IPA
for 30 seconds, and blown dry with the nitrogen gun. After this the development
4Recipe used: SP 60s
58
==PAGE:66==
CHAPTER 3. FABRICATION AND CHARACTERIZATION
Figure 3.13 – Micrograph of the S1 sample from batch 6 at 2.5x magniﬁcation. In
some places the resist and graphene has been ripped away from the sample, thus
exposing the underlying silica. The exposed areas remain largely unaﬀected by this.
is checked in an optical microscope, and additional development steps of 30 sec-
onds MIBK:IPA as well as 30 seconds in IPA was applied, repeatedly if necessary.
Most of the samples were developed after 60+30 seconds of MIBK:IPA time, but
after the proximity eﬀect corrections were put in place the development time in-
creased to 60+30+30 seconds. Note that while it is mathematically true, in case
of development 60 + 30 does not necessarily equal 90. When checking the progress
of the development we look for the blue color of the underlying silica to appear in
all the nanoribbon arrays.
It should be noted that 100 nm and 300 nm wide lines, with a ﬁll factor of 0.5,
exposed with the same base dose do not generally recieve the same dose, due
to proximity eﬀects, and as such they do not develop at an equal rate. While
the ﬁnal PEC attempts to ﬁx the dose issue, there could still be a diﬀerence in
developing time, due to the diﬀerent geometries, and the dose and development
time continues to be closely related. For this reason I recommend doing a dose
test in the future, which would include the designed pattern (possibly with even
smaller features), repeated along one direction many times on a wafer with varying
doses. If the lines are repeated along the second direction, the wafer can be cut
into strips before development allowing diﬀerent development times for the same
structures. That way it should be possible to obtain a combination of doses for
each of the nanoribbon arrays that will be correctly exposed and subsequently be
developed in the same amount of time.
59
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 3. FABRICATION AND CHARACTERIZATION
Table 3.2 – Ribbon widths measured from SEM images and compared to design
for samples Ba2_S3, Ba4_S2 and PW2.
Ribbon widths [nm]
Design
100 150 200 300
Ba2_S3 83
133 186 279
Ba4_S2 76
110 155 250
PW2
69
115 168 273
3.4.6.1
Etching the exposed graphene
After developing the resist, the graphene is exposed in the areas beneath exposure
and can be removed by the dry etch method, Reactive-ion Etching (RIE). In RIE a
chemically active plasma is created by electromagnetic ﬁelds, and the high energy
ions of the plasma are accelerated towards the sample, where they attack and
remove the graphene. The resist is also attacked by the ions, but the resist is
selective and the etch rates of graphene is higher than that of the resist. It is still
important that the resist is suﬃciently thick to ensure it is not removed before the
graphene has been suﬃciently etched. The recipe5 used for the graphene etching
was originally developed by Bo-Hong Li, and uses oxygen and argon gasses ﬂowing
into the chamber at rates of 45 SCCM and 5 SCCM respectively. The process is
done at a pressure of 100 mTorr and the RF power is 10 W. Batches 1-3 were
etched for 30 seconds, while the etch time was upped to 40 seconds for later
batches as SEM imaging revealed the produced graphene ribbons were smaller
than designed.
3.4.6.2
Stripping the remaining resist
After the graphene has been selectively etched away from speciﬁc areas, the resist
mask has served its purpose and is removed by submersing the sample into acetone
for at least 25 minutes. Afterwards the sample is rinsed in IPA and blown dry
with the nitrogen gun.
After the resist has been removed the fabricated lines can be inspected in a SEM.
The 200 nm ribbon array on the PW2 sample can be seen in ﬁgure 3.14. From the
SEM images it is possible to measure the actual ribbon widths. Measurements of
the ribbon widths for samples Ba2_S3, Ba4_S2 and PW2 can be seen in 3.2. In
all three cases the fabricated ribbon widths are smaller than design. The widths
of Ba2_S3 are closer to the design, which can be explained as this sample was
etched for 30 seconds, while the PW2 sample was etched for 40 second. From this
we conclude that a trade-oﬀexists between etching suﬃciently long to remove any
bi- and trilayer, while not overetching too much.
5The recipe is called bhl_grph.set.
60
==PAGE:68==
CHAPTER 3. FABRICATION AND CHARACTERIZATION
a)
b)
Figure 3.14 – SEM images of the 200 nm nanoribbon array on PW2. a) Provides
an overview and like the optical micrograph the bilayer ﬂakes are visible. b) Close-
up of the lines used to determine the actual width of the ribbons, ≈168 nm.
3.5
Gold contacts on the microribbons
Having obtained isolated graphene microribbons the challenge at hand becomes
contacting these to an external power supply. A few steps are necessary in order
to achieve good contact and unfortunately it remained mostly unsolved for the
duration of this project. The method attempted will be discussed in the next
sections.
3.5.1
Stencil method
First gold contacts are deposited at the end of the microribbons. This is done using
the stencil method where a shadow mask is used to cover the sample everywhere
but above the ends of the microribbons where the gold contacts should be. The
shadow mask, made of Polycarbonate (PC), is micromilled and contains ten holes
of 200 µm diameter.
3.5.2
Stencil alignment
For the sample and mask to be allowed into the metal deposition machine, both
must be properly secured to a carrier wafer. This is done using Kapton tape, that
is stable in a large temperature range. First the sample is taped to the carrier
wafer. Next the mask is aligned under a microscope in the cleanroom and secured
with four pieces of tape. For each piece of tape applied the alignment must be
carefully checked. Obtaining proper alignment for a single sample easily takes 45
minutes, but repeated practice gives a feel for the tape and decreases this time.
Figure 3.15 shows the shadow mask properly aligned on top of the PW2 sample.
61
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 3. FABRICATION AND CHARACTERIZATION
Figure 3.15 – Micrograph of the alignment of the shadow mask above the PW2
sample. The micrograph is taken at 2.5x magniﬁcation.
3.5.3
Gold deposition
With the shadow mask properly aligned and secured on top of the sample the
contacts can be deposited. The metal is deposited in the Alcatel machine in the
cleanroom which uses an electron beam to evaporate metal in small particles that
traverse the vacuum and condense on the surface of the sample. The contacts were
placed at the very end of the microribbons, with a small overlap of the graphene,
and a large overlap on the silica. This was done as adhesion to silica should be
better than adhesion to graphene. The ﬁrst test was done on Ba4_S1, but the
designed shadow mask did not have the proper dimensions in the vertical direction.
As Danchip Personnel was assisting me in the process we went ahead and deposited
150 nm gold contacts. This proved the contacting method viable and we returned
with new shadow masks that ﬁt the design later. Samples Ba4_S2 and Ba4_S3
were aligned on the same carrier wafer and had 175 nm thick gold contacts. The
result can be seen in ﬁgure 3.16, where a good and poor alignment of the shadow
masks can be seen on Ba4_S2 and Ba4_S3 respectively. The sample PW1 also
had 175nm gold deposited and was aligned well.
3.5.3.1
Adhesion layer
It was not until we made an attempt of wirebonding as discussed in section 3.7.2.2
the apparent lack of an adhesion layer between the gold and the sample became
apparent. The gold contacts simply came oﬀvery easily both during wirebonding
62
==PAGE:70==
CHAPTER 3. FABRICATION AND CHARACTERIZATION
(a) Ba4_S2
(b) Ba4_S3
Figure 3.16 – Optical micrographs of the Ba4 S2 and S3 samples after deposition
of gold contacts. Note how the gold pads align well on the ends of the microribbons
for sample S2, but are not hitting the microribbons as well on sample S3. Both
taken at 5x magniﬁcation.
and also when manually contacted with metallic pins.
It is standard practice
to add an adhesion layer below gold contacts and after a discussion with David
Mackenzie from the Nanocarbon group I decided on adding a 5 nm thick chromium
layer before depositing 200 nm gold on top. This was carried out for the PW2
sample.
3.6
Inspecting the graphene quality by Raman
spectroscopy
The quality of the graphene in terms of defects and number of layers can be
probed by Raman spectroscopy [26–28]. The peaks of importance are the disorder
induced ’D’ peak, which is vanishing in defect free graphene, and increases with
the amount of defects. The ’2D’ peak relates to the stacking order, and can be
related to the amount of graphene layers. The ’G’ peak which probes the in-plane
vibrations of the sp2 carbon atoms. An example of a Raman scan can be seen
in ﬁgure 3.17, taken from [26], in which they determine the eﬀect of an oxygen
plasma etch on the quality of the graphene. Note how the D peak grows from
nearly vanishing to dominant while the 2D peak diminishes for increasing cycles
of etch, Ne.
In order to probe the entire microribbon we scan across the individual frames
to create a map, and present the D/G and 2D/G data obtained. It is common
practice to normalize the intensities of the D and 2D peaks to the G peak, in which
case a 2D/G>1 equals mostly single layer graphene. All the Raman maps are from
the PW1 sample. The maps of the reference microribbon without a nanoribbon
array can be seen in ﬁgure 3.18. The D/G peak intensity shows a low density of
63
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 3. FABRICATION AND CHARACTERIZATION
Figure 3.17 – Raman scan of single layer graphene, after Ne number of oxygen
plasma etch cycles. Notice how the D peak grows from almost vanishing to domni-
ant, while the 2D peak diminishes as the graphene is etched by the plasma. Figure
from [26].
defects in the graphene. The 2D/G peak intensity shows the graphene consists
mostly of single layer, but there are areas with a higher number of layers.
The Raman maps of the remaining four microribbons can be seen in ﬁgure 3.19.
Note from the D/G ﬁgures how the nanoribbon array is etched, and this is char-
acterized as "defects" in this terminology. From the 2D/G ﬁgures we observe how
the single layer coverage varies greatly across the diﬀerent microribbons.
Lastly we discuss the error on the ﬁts to the D and 2D peaks in the above men-
tioned Raman maps. A high error indicate that the ﬁt is bad, i.e. the peak is
not very prominent. The maps can be seen in ﬁgure 3.20, and are from the 200
nm array. Firstly, a high error on the graphene microribbon in the D peak on the
graphene is a good thing, as it corresponds to a low defect density. Secondly, the
error in the 2D peak can correlate to the amount of graphene left after etching.
Note that there seem to be many residues left in the surrounding frame. There-
fore it should be tested electrically, whether the microribbons are isolated from
eachother.
64
==PAGE:72==
CHAPTER 3. FABRICATION AND CHARACTERIZATION
a)
b)
Figure 3.18 – Raman maps of the reference microribbon without a nanoribbon
array. a) The D/G peak intensity shows a low density of defects in the graphene.
b) The 2D/G peak intensity shows the graphene consists mostly of single layer, but
there are areas with a higher number of layers.
65
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 3. FABRICATION AND CHARACTERIZATION
a)
b)
c)
d)
e)
f)
g)
h)
Figure 3.19 – Raman maps of the microribbons on PW1.
a,c,e,g) D/G and
b,d,f,h) 2D/G peak intensities for the 100 nm, 150 nm, 200 nm and 300 nm ribbon
array respectively. Note from the D/G ﬁgures how the nanoribbon array is "defect"
in this terminology and from the 2D/g ﬁgures how the single layer coverage varies
greatly across the diﬀerent microribbons.
66
==PAGE:74==
CHAPTER 3. FABRICATION AND CHARACTERIZATION
a)
b)
Figure 3.20 – Error to the ﬁts of the a) D and b) 2D peaks. A high error indicates
a poor ﬁt, i.e. the peak is not very prominent. The maps are from the 200 nm
array. Firstly, a high error on the graphene microribbon in the D peak is a good
thing, as it corresponds to a low defect density. Secondly, the error in the 2D peak
can correlate to the amount of graphene left after etching. Note that there seem to
be many residues left in the surrounding frame.
67
==PAGE:75==
CHAPTER 3. FABRICATION AND CHARACTERIZATION
a)
b)
Figure 3.21 – a) The circuit board used for electrical connections, containing four
large pads for connection to the backside of the sample as well as small gold pads
connected to gold covered holes used for soldering. b) Sample PW2 mounted on
a circuit board, with one successful wirebonding, and three other microwires glued
onto the gold pads on the sample. Wires are soldered to allow for contact to external
power supply.
3.7
Postprocessing
After the gold contacts the samples were taken out of the cleanroom and electrical
contact between the sample and a circuit board was attempted. It proved to be a
diﬃcult step in the fabrication process and the methods used are discussed below.
3.7.1
Mounting the sample on a circuit board
The circuit board (CB) was previously designed by Christian Frydendahl and can
be seen in ﬁgure 3.21a. Firstly the sample was mounted using conducting silver
epoxy making sure the backside of the sample was in contact with the gold pads
in the center. The sample is then left overnight on a hotplate at 50 ◦C. Note that
the samples have an oxide layer on the backside as well, so the backside should be
scratched with a diamond pen before glued to the CB to ensure connection to the
silicon substrate.
3.7.2
Contact between microribbons and circuit board
With the sample secured and connected to the CB we attempted to make wire-
connections between the CB and the individual microribbons.
68
==PAGE:76==
CHAPTER 3. FABRICATION AND CHARACTERIZATION
3.7.2.1
Using silver epoxy
The ﬁrst attempt did not have gold contact pads and silver epoxy was to be used
directly on the microribbons. A small amount should be dispensed at the ends of
the microribbons (same position as the gold pads) and wires should be attached
under microscope with tweezers. This setup had two ﬂaws, ﬁrst the graphene
microribbons were not visible under the lighting and microscope conditions in the
setup for the silver epoxy. This problem was solved by adding the gold contacts
with a much higher contrast. Secondly the silver epoxy takes very long time to
dry under ambient conditions. When the epoxy is freshly mixed it is very runny
and the viscosity change to the completely solid state happens very gradually
over several days under ambient condition. If the epoxy is too thin and runny
the deposited contacts will expand and possible connect the microribbons to the
surrounding graphene. Another problem using too runny epoxy is that the wires
simply will not stay stuck when placed in the puddle. This can result in the epoxy
ending up places on the sample where it is not wanted.
3.7.2.2
Using ball-wirebonding
To avoid this trouble with the epoxy we attempted to use the K&S 4524 Ball
wire-bonder. The ball wire-bonder melts one end of the wire into a small ball,
to increase adhesion and limit the possible damage to the sample, e.g. the wire
could puncture the thin oxide layer. The second part of the bond is created by
wedge bonding that jams the wire into the gold pads. As we were not worried
about puncturing the gold pads on the CB the second bond were made here. As
mentioned above the lack of an adhesion layer between the sample and the gold
contacts became apparent during this attempt. The small gold ball simply picked
up the gold on the sample and left a hole in its place. On the sample PW2, with
a thin 5 nm Cr adhesion layer we were able to successfully bond to one of the gold
pads. Three more wires were sucessfully connected by bonding them to the circuit
board and using a much more viscous silver glue applied to the other ends of the
wires place them on the gold contacts, where they stuck. It should be noted that
the sample is heated to 120 ◦C which helps to make the silver glue harden fast
once it hits the sample. Figure 3.21b shows the PW2 sample mounted on a circuit
board.
3.7.3
Soldering wires to the circuit board
The last thing to do is to attach some wires to the CB for connection to an external
power supply. This was quite simply done with soldering, as can be seen in ﬁgure
3.21b.
69
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 3. FABRICATION AND CHARACTERIZATION
3.8
Characterizing the samples electrically
The simplest electrical characterisation involves a multimeter tool, to determine
if a current can ﬂow from point A to B, and the associated resistance.
This
determined that the microribbons were isolated from one another. Furthermore
the electrical characterization can be used across a microribbon to determine if
the ribbons are interdigitated or short circuits exists between nanoribbons, that
allows current to ﬂow between the two contacts.
For most of the nanoribbon
arrays, current could ﬂow across, which indicates the ribbons are not isolated. If
this is partly due to remains of multilayer graphene, the oxygen plasma etch time
could be increased to counter this, at the sacriﬁce of ribbon width.
Using the reference microribbon without a nanoribbon array, it is possible to do
a simple IV-characterization with a backgated system. From this one can obtain
the carrier mobility of the graphene, which is a good indicator of the graphene
quality. While the Nanocarbon group has a setup for doing that, timing did not
allow for any samples to be characterized in this way.
70
==PAGE:78==
Chapter 4
Results and discussion
In this chapter, the results of the optical measurements on the fabricated samples
are presented and discussed.
The Fourier Transformed InfraRed spectroscopy
(FTIR) on the samples are carried out in a Bruker Vertex 70 spectrometer. The
Vertex is coupled to a Hyperion microscope, which allows the beam spot to be
focused directly onto the nanoribbon array. The noise of the system, and thus
the resolution of measurements, is good enough to resolve the plasmonic response
in the spectral range of 600 cm−1 to 2000 cm−1, and thus this frequency range
between 18 THz and 60 THz will be investigated experimentally. The reﬂectance
shown in the following ﬁgures is always calculated as
R = Rsample −Rsubstrate
Rsubstrate
,
(4.1)
where Rsample is the reﬂected signal from the total sample and Rsubstrate is the
reﬂected signal from the substrate, i.e. without graphene. If the measurement
is carried out using a polarization ﬁlter, it is done for both the sample and sub-
strate measurement. Some of the measurements were carried out by my supervisor
Nicolas Stenger which will be indicated by a †.
Polarization dependence of nanoribbon arrays
The beam can be passed through a polarization ﬁlter which allows us to illuminate
the samples with a given polarization, particularly we are interested in a polar-
ization perpendicular to theribbons. We begin by investigating this polarization
dependence of the fabricated samples. Figure 4.1a shows FTIR data from the 150
nm ribbon array on Ba4_S2†without polarization ﬁlter, with polarization paral-
lel (along the ribbons) and with polarization perpendicular to the ribbons. Note
from this how using a polarization perpendicular to the ribbons produce a better
contrast between substrate and sample, as the plasmonic response is stronger. For
completeness ﬁgure 4.1b shows the two diﬀerent polarizations measured on a bare
71
==PAGE:79==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
a)
b)
Figure 4.1 – FTIR measurements at diﬀerent polarizations. a) Measurement on
the 150 nm nanoribbon array on Ba4_S2†, where the best contrast is seen for light
polarized perpendicular to the ribbons. b) Measurement on a bare gold thin ﬁlm,
which act as a mirror.
We see a small diﬀerence in intensities induced by the
polarizer.
gold thin ﬁlm, which essentially acts as a mirror. We conclude that there is a
small intensity diﬀerence induced by the polarization ﬁlter. The following results
were all made with the polarization perpendicular to the ribbons.
Nanoribbon arrays of diﬀerent widths
Next we compare FTIR measurement data for the ribbons of varying widths.
Figure 4.2a shows the results of the sample Ba4_S2†. We observe two peaks, one
below 1000 cm−1 and another above 1350 cm−1. Consider ﬁrst the lowest energy
mode, we observe a redshift for increasing widths of the ribbons, as predicted by
the theory where q ∝1/W, and the resonance frequency is proportional to the
square root of q. Looking closely, it is possible to observe the hybridization between
the plasmons in graphene and the phonons in the silica. It is clearest for the 200
nm and 300 nm ribbons, where the lowest energy mode splits into two peaks
around 800 cm−1 as is also seen in [16]. We do not observe the same sharp peak
as they denote peak 3 in [16], possibly owing to them measuring transmission and
we are measuring reﬂectance. Figure 4.2b shows the results of the sample PW1.
It is immediately clear that something is very diﬀerent for this sample. While the
highest energy mode at 1300 cm−1-1500 cm−1 follows the theoretical prediction
more than the other sample, there is a very sharp peak at 1000 cm−1 which does
not move for varying ribbon widths.
To understand this a measurement on the two diﬀerent substrates was done†,
which can be seen in ﬁgure 4.3. The measurements are normalized with respect to
a mirror (Al for the GS sample and Au for the Nova sample). Observe the onset
72
==PAGE:80==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
a)
b)
Figure 4.2 – FTIR measurements at perpendicular polarization for all the nanorib-
bon arrays on sample a) Ba4_S2†and b) PW1.
of a plasma edge already at much higher energy for the Nova sample than for
the GS sample. This can be explained by the diﬀerent doping of the underlying
silicon substrates, where the Nova has a higher doping which in turn screens the
plasmonic eﬀect far into the region we are interested in. We can conclude that
while we switched to Nova samples for their electric purposes, this is hindering
the optoelectronic properties in the end. As we have not yet made any electric
gating on the substrates we can not reject the GS samples on this basis, but a
safer route for further experiments would be to obtain a sample from Nova, with
a high quality silica, but on a lower doped silicon substrate.
Imposing a theoretical model on the data
Lastly we try to ﬁt the experimental data obtained to the theoretical model for
plasmons in graphene nanoribbons from [3]. The ﬁtting done by P. A. D. Gonçalves
is presented and discussed here for the Ba4_S2†sample as well as for old measure-
ments on a sample with ribbons of similar sizes here denoted Old_Ba6_S2 to
distinguish from the samples produced in batch 6 of this work.
Fits to the data from Old_Ba6_S2 can be seen in ﬁgure 4.4. For all the widths the
shape and position of the resonances are contained fairly well within the theoretical
model. Using the widths determined by SEM, the theoretical model can be ﬁtted
to obtain the Fermi level of the system. For this sample the model estimates it
at around 1 eV which is very high. P. A. D. Gonçalves notes that the analytical
theory used overestimates, and that the value probably is closer to 0.7 eV. This
value seems reasonable as this speciﬁc sample was doped by nitric acid which
increase the Fermi level. Similarly the ﬁts of the model to the data from Ba4_S2
can be seen in ﬁgure 4.5. Again the positions of the resonances and the shapes
are nicely determined by the theoretical model. Once again the model is used
73
==PAGE:81==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 4.3 – FTIR measurements on the two substrates from Nova and Graphene
Supermarket (GS), normalized to a mirror of either gold or aluminium respectively†.
What is clear is the onset of a plasma edge at a much higher energy for the Nova
substrate than for the GS, due to the higher doping of the underlying silicon sub-
strate. This eﬀectively means the substrate screens any eﬀect we would excite as
GSPs below 1000 cm−1.
to estimate the Fermi level which is found to be 0.9 eV. Again the true value
is probably closer to 0.7eV. This still seems a bit high for samples such as this,
and another possible explanation is that the ribbon widths measured in the SEM
does not accurately describe the ribbon width. Recall that for a given resonance
frequency, a smaller ribbon width would also correspond to a lower Fermi level.
Previous studies on graphene nanoribbons fabricated by EBL and oxygen plasma
etching has determined an eﬀective width to be 28 nm smaller [16]. This can be
due to introduction of defects, as well as hydrocarbon bonds at the edges, which
eﬀectively renders the outermost part of the edge electrically inactive. While this
28 nm value ﬁts their data, it is only an indicator that might explain what we
observe.
The theoretical model predicts a very intense peak at a higher energy, which is
not seen to be very prominent in the data measured on either sample. It is how-
ever observed by [16], and can possibly be explained by diﬀerences in measuring
transmittance vs. reﬂectance. Another possible explanation may be oﬀered by
the diﬀerence in substrates between this work and that of [16].
Lastly, we note that for all the ﬁts a damping rate of γ = 50 meV has been used.
Recall from the Raman analysis that the quality of the graphene varies for the
74
==PAGE:82==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
a)
b)
c)
d)
Figure 4.4 – Theoretical ﬁt of the model from [3] to data from sample Old_Ba6_S2.
a) 100 nm wide ribbons. b) 150 nm wide ribbons. c) 200 nm wide ribbons. d) 300
nm wide ribbons.
diﬀerent microribbons, and certainly for the diﬀerent nanoribbon arrays. Thus it
might be another factor to ﬁt in order to obtain a good indication of the parameters
of the fabricated samples.
75
==PAGE:83==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
a)
b)
c)
d)
Figure 4.5 – Theoretical ﬁt of the model from [3] to data from sample Ba4_S2†.
a) 100 nm wide ribbons. b) 150 nm wide ribbons. c) 200 nm wide ribbons. d) 300
nm wide ribbons.
76
==PAGE:84==
Chapter 5
Conclusion and outlook
The aim of this work was to fabricate graphene nanostructures for plasmonic
applications where the resonance frequency was tunable by both backgating and
by applying an in-plane potential diﬀerence, denoted sidegating. Although this
goal was not achieved within the project period, I have taken important steps
towards realizing this goal.
I have presented the basic theoretical background for understanding the plasmonic
response of graphene nanoribbons. From basic electrodynamics I have derived a
method to calculate the eﬀect of applying an in-plane potential diﬀerence on the
charge carrier density in isolated graphene nanoribbons in a capacitor-like system.
Furthermore I have made a COMSOL with MATLAB simulation platform, that
fast and robustly calculates the plasmonic response of graphene nanoribbons for
various system parameters. This platform can include the capacitor-like setup
of the sidegated graphene nanoribbons. The simulations gave promises of new
and interesting plasmonic responses diﬀerent from that of homogeneously doped
graphene structures.
These new plasmonic responses appeared even for small
potential diﬀerences that are physically obtainable. Thus the sidegating adds a
new layer to the already exciting tunability of graphene plasmonics.
I have developed a fabrication process to produce isolated microribbons with an
array of smaller interdigitated nanoribbons. The process relies on e-beam lithog-
raphy to deﬁne all the structures and has proximity eﬀect corrections to arrive
at more uniform nanoribbons. The proximity eﬀect corrections were implemented
based on a Monte Carlo simulation of electron trajectories in a sample similar
to the ones used in the project. The design evolved iteratively over the course
of 21 samples by characterizing the individual fabrication steps using optical and
scanning electron microscopes. Thorough characterization through the fabrica-
tion process using optical and scanning electron microscopes developed the design
iteratively over a total of 21 samples to arrive at the end design, which produces
uniform ribbon arrays of high quality. It should be noted that the fabricated ribbon
widths were always smaller than designed, and this could be corrected by further
investigation into the oxygen plasma etch. Furthermore, Raman spectroscopy was
77
==PAGE:85==
CHAPTER 5. CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
used to investigate the graphene quality after the oxygen plasma etch. Electrical
contact from the sample proved a large obstacle towards the main goal, and was
not accomplished in the duration of the work. The ﬁnal attempt allowed for one
successful contact made by wirebonding, and three others by use of conducting
glue. This result gives promise to further the work along the same direction.
Lastly, the optical response of two samples was measured using FTIR. From this
we realized that the level of substrate doping can be too high so that a plasma edge
blueshifts further into the frequency region available at our experimental setup,
screening in the exact area where the plasmonic dipole mode of the structures
would be.
The result of the FTIR from this study as well as results from an
earlier sample was then compared to a very recent theoretical model by P. A.
D. Gonçalves [3]. The model is seen to predict the resonance positions and the
peak shapes well, and provides a way to determine the Fermi level of a fabricated
graphene device.
5.1
Future work
Fabrication wise the natural continuation of this project involves ﬁnishing the
fabrication of the exposed samples that remain undeveloped at the thesis dead-
line. As the Nova substrate has a plasma edge right at the dipole resonance of
the plasmonic structures the samples of Batch 5 emerges, which are the last re-
maining chips on the Graphene Supermarket substrate, as the next samples where
contacting should be attempted.
Considering the experimental setup, the optical response of the remaining samples
with the graphene supermarket substrate should be measured. For the samples
on the Nova substrate it could be attempted to dope the samples using nitric acid
which could possibly blueshift the dipole resonance away from the plasma edge,
allowing it to be observed.
On the mostly unsolved obstacle of creating good
contacts to the sample, mechanical 3D-microstages were located in an adjoining
reasearch laboratory at the very end of the project period, and these could be
used to contact directly to the gold pads, eliminating the need for the diﬃcult
glue/wirebonding step. The contacting arms of the microstages would need to be
redesigned, as they don’t ﬁt under the microscope objective as is.
As soon as reliable contact can be achieved, it would be interesting to probe
the charge carrier density directly while the sample is under an applied potential
diﬀerence. This could be done using Kelvin Point Force Microscopy (KPFM)[29].
It should be noted that an AFM/KPFM setup is available on the opposite side
of the optical table from the FTIR, but no expertise in using the setup for other
applications than AFM exists in the research groups using the equipment.
For the simulations it would be interesting to include the dielectric function of
the silica, including the phonon-nature, in order to arrive at a very realistic model
78
==PAGE:86==
CHAPTER 5. CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
for GSPs in nanoribbons on silica. A full model could also be compared to the
theoretical model applied here only to the measured data.
Finally further simulations with a spatially dependent local Fermi level across the
ribbons could be done to investigate the limit, where GSPs are only allowed at cer-
tain coordinates, possibly allowing the eﬀective plasmonic mode to be speciﬁcally
tailored.
79
==PAGE:87==
References
1F. H. L. Koppens, D. E. Chang, and F. J. García De Abajo, “Graphene plasmon-
ics: A platform for strong light-matter interactions”, Nano Letters 11, 3370–3377
(2011).
2S. Xiao, X. Zhu, B.-h. Li, and N. A. Mortensen, “Graphene-plasmon polaritons:
From fundamental properties to potential applications”, Frontiers of Physics 11,
117801 (2016).
3P. A. D. Goncalves, E. J. C. Dias, Y. V. Bludov, and N. M. R. Peres, “Modeling
the Excitation of Graphene Plasmons in Periodic Grids of Graphene Ribbons:
An Analytical Approach”, Submitted for peer-review. Not published at this date.
(2016).
4K. S. Novoselov, V. I. Falko, L. Colombo, P. R. Gellert, M. G. Schwab, and K.
Kim, “A roadmap for graphene”, Nature 490, 192–200 (2012).
5S. A. Maier, Plasmonics : Fundamentals and applications (Springer, 2007).
6S. Thongrattanasiri, I. Silveiro, and F. Javier García De Abajo, “Plasmons in
electrostatically doped graphene”, Applied Physics Letters 100 (2012).
7M. Fox, Optical Properties of Solids, 2nd (Oxford University Press, 2010).
8P. A. D. Gonçalves and N. M. R. Peres, An Introduction to Graphene Plasmonics
(World Scientiﬁc, June 2016).
9P. R. Wallace, “The band theory of graphite”, Physical Review 71, 622–634
(1947).
10A. H. Castro Neto, N. M. R. Peres, K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, and F. Guinea,
“The electronic properties of graphene”, Reviews of Modern Physics 81, 109–162
(2009).
11S. G. Menabde, D. R. Mason, E. E. Kornev, C. Lee, and N. Park, “Direct Optical
Probing of Transverse Electric Mode in Graphene”, Scientiﬁc Reports 6, 21523
(2016).
12A. Y. Nikitin, F. Guinea, F. J. Garcia-Vidal, and L. Martin-Moreno, “Surface
plasmon enhanced absorption and suppressed transmission in periodic arrays of
graphene ribbons”, Physical Review B 85, 081405 (2012).
80
==PAGE:88==
REFERENCES
13W. Wang, T. Christensen, A.-P. Jauho, K. S. Thygesen, M. Wubs, and N. A.
Mortensen, “Plasmonic eigenmodes in individual and bow-tie graphene nanotri-
angles”, Scientiﬁc Reports 5, 9535 (2015).
14F. Javier García De Abajo, “Graphene Plasmonics: Challenges and Opportuni-
ties”, 24 (2014).
15S. A. Mikhailov and N. A. Savostianova, “Inﬂuence of contacts on the microwave
response of a two-dimensional electron stripe”, Physical Review B - Condensed
Matter and Materials Physics 74, 1–6 (2006).
16H. Yan, T. Low, W. Zhu, Y. Wu, M. Freitag, X. Li, F. Guinea, P. Avouris, and F.
Xia, “Damping pathways of mid-infrared plasmons in graphene nanostructures”,
Nature Photonics 7, 394–399 (2013).
17R. Kitamura, L. Pilon, and M. Jonasz, “Optical constants of silica glass from
extreme ultraviolet to far infrared at near room temperature”, Applied Optics
46, 8118 (2007).
18T. G. Pedersen, S. Xiao, J. Zi, and N. A. Mortensen, “Plasmon Phonon Coupling
in Large-Area Graphene Dot and Antidot Arrays Fabricated by Nanosphere
Lithography”, Nano Letters (2014).
19C. Gan, I. Luxmoore, P. Liu, F. Valmorra, P. Li, J. Faist, and G. Nash, “Obser-
vation of strong coupling between graphene plasmons and THz surface optical
phonons”, Frontiers in Optics, FiO 2014 (2014).
20K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos,
I. V. Grigorieva, and A. A. Firsov, “Electric ﬁeld eﬀect in atomically thin carbon
ﬁlms.”, Science (New York, N.Y.) 306, 666–9 (2004).
21X. Li, W. Cai, J. An, S. Kim, J. Nah, D. Yang, R. Piner, A. Velamakanni,
I. Jung, E. Tutuc, S. K. Banerjee, L. Colombo, and R. S. Ruoﬀ, “Large-area
synthesis of high-quality and uniform graphene ﬁlms on copper foils.”, Science
(New York, N.Y.) 324, 1312–4 (2009).
22Z. Li, Y. Wang, A. Kozbial, G. Shenoy, F. Zhou, R. McGinley, P. Ireland, B.
Morganstein, A. Kunkel, S. P. Surwade, L. Li, and H. Liu, “Eﬀect of airborne
contaminants on the wettability of supported graphene and graphite”, Nature
Materials 12, 925–931 (2013).
23L. Banszerus, M. Schmitz, S. Engels, J. Dauber, M. Oellers, F. Haupt, K. Watan-
abe, T. Taniguchi, B. Beschoten, and C. Stampfer, “Ultrahigh-mobility graphene
devices from chemical vapor deposition on reusable copper”, Science Advances
1, 1–6 (2015).
24D. Geng, L. Meng, B. Chen, E. Gao, W. Yan, H. Yan, B. Luo, J. Xu, H. Wang, Z.
Mao, Z. Xu, L. He, Z. Zhang, L. Peng, and G. Yu, “Controlled Growth of Single-
Crystal Twelve-Pointed Graphene Grains on a Liquid Cu Surface”, Advanced
Materials 26, 6423–6429 (2014).
81
==PAGE:89==
REFERENCES
25D. Geng, B. Luo, J. Xu, Y. Guo, B. Wu, W. Hu, Y. Liu, and G. Yu, “Self-Aligned
Single-Crystal Graphene Grains”, Advanced Functional Materials 24, 1664–1670
(2014).
26I. Childres, L. A. Jauregui, J. Tian, and Y. P. Chen, “Eﬀect of oxygen plasma
etching on graphene studied using Raman spectroscopy and electronic transport
measurements”, New Journal of Physics 13, 025008 (2011).
27Z. Ni, Y. Wang, T. Yu, and Z. Shen, “Raman spectroscopy and imaging of
graphene”, Nano Research 1, 273–291 (2008).
28I. Childres, L. A. Jauregui, W. Park, H. Cao, and Y. P. Chen, “Raman Spec-
troscopy of Graphene and Related Materials”, in New developments in photon
and materials research, edited by J. I. Jang (2013), pp. 1–20.
29C. Maragliano, S. Lilliu, M. S. Dahlem, M. Chiesa, T. Souier, and M. Stefancich,
“Quantifying charge carrier concentration in ZnO thin ﬁlms by Scanning Kelvin
Probe Microscopy.”, Scientiﬁc reports 4, 4203 (2014).
82
==PAGE:90==
Appendix A
Theoretical derivations
A.1
Recast Maxwell’s equations to wave equa-
tion form
Maxwell’s equations can be recast in the form of wave equations, relevant for
understanding problems with guided electromagnetic waves. To do so, ﬁrst take
the curl of the Maxwell-Faraday equation (1.1c)
∇× ∇× E = −∇× ∂B
∂t .
(A.1)
Secondly using the identity ∇× ∇× E ≡∇(∇· E) −∇2E to rewrite the left hand
side and the second constitutive equation (1.6) along with Amperé’s law without
an external current density, equation (1.1d) to rewrite the right hand side
∇(∇· E) −∇2E = −µ0
∂2D
∂t2 .
(A.2)
Next the Gauss’ Law, equation (1.1a), without external charge along with the ﬁrst
constitutive equation (1.5) is used to reduce the left hand side as
∇· D = ∇· (ε0εrE) = ε0E · ∇εr + ε0εr∇· E = 0,
(A.3)
⇒∇· E = −1
ε0
E · ∇εr.
(A.4)
Assuming negligable spatial variation of the dielectric function ∇εr = 0 and once
again using equation (1.5), then equation (A.1) reduces to
i
==PAGE:91==
APPENDIX A. THEORETICAL DERIVATIONS
∇2E = µ0
∂2D
∂t2 ,
(A.5)
= µ0ε0εr
∂2E
∂t2 .
(A.6)
Introducing the speed of light as c =
1
√µ0ε0 the equation becomes
∇2E −εr
c2
∂2E
∂t2 = 0.
(A.7)
As stated the applied electric ﬁeld has harmonic time dependence, i.e.
E =
E0e−iωt, then
∇2E + εrk2
0E = 0,
(A.8)
where k0 =
ω
c is the free space wave vector of the propagating wave.
Having
derived this partial diﬀerential equation, known as the Helmholtz wave equation,
it is next elaborated for a two dimensional interface.
ii
==PAGE:92==
Process flow title 
Rev. 
Date of revision 
Contact email 
Graphene structures by e-beam lit 
Final 
8-Jul-16 
S103107@student.dtu.dk 
 
 
Figure 
Caption 
Step 
Figure 
1 
 
After resist deposition 
2.2 
 
2 
 
After E-beam lithography 
2.9 
 
3 
 
After oxygen etch and 
strip 
3.2 
 
4 
 
After gold contacts 
4.2 
 
5 
 
After wire bonding 
6.2 
 
Color code: 
Grey: Silicon; light blue: SiO2; black: graphene; deep blue: PMMA E-beam resist, yellow: Gold contacts, orange: wire 
bonding, green: Circuit board. 
 
Appendix B
Process ﬂow
iii
==PAGE:93==
Process flow title 
Rev. 
Date of revision 
Contact email 
Graphene structures by e-beam lit 
Final 
8-Jul-16 
S103107@student.dtu.dk 
 
Not confidential 
File name: WORD_20160708_Processflow_MSc_final 
Page 3 of 5 
 
Step Heading 
Equipment 
Procedure 
Comments 
1 Preparation 
 
1.1 Chips 
 
Remove chips from sealed bag 
Note the chip IDs in the 
batch traveler 
1.2 Clean the 
chips 
Fumehood 
Clean in acetone(20s) + IPA (20s). 
Blow dry 
Inspect dirt in OM and repeat 
if necessary. 
2 Electron beam lithography 
 
2.1 Dehydration 
bake 
Hotplate   
Bake wafer at 200o C for 15 min. 
 
2.2 PMMA resist 
coating 
Spinner: 
Manual 
standard 
resist 
Coat a test wafer 
75 nm PMMA resist 
Recipe: PMMA 996k (2 weight-% PMMA) in anisol 
for 1 minute at 4000 RPM 
 
2.3 Wafer bake 
Hotplate  
Ramp up from room temperature to 120o C 
Bake wafer at 120o C for 30 min 
Ramp up to 180o C 
Bake wafer at 180o C for 1 hour 
Ramp down to room temperature 
 
2.4 Measure 
thickness 
VASE 
Ellipsometer 
Measure resist thickness 
Note on measurement sheet 
2.5 Dehydration 
bake 
Hotplate  
Bake chip at 200o C for 15 min. 
Ramp down to 120 o C  (15min turned off) 
 
2.6 PMMA resist 
coating 
Spinner: 
Manual 
standard 
resist 
Coat the device chips 
75 nm PMMA resist 
Recipe: PMMA 996k (2 weight-% PMMA) in anisol 
for 1 minute at 4000 RPM 
Chip is 1 cm by 1 cm 
2.7 Chip bake 
Hotplate 
Ramp up from room temperature to 120o C  
Bake chip at 120o C for 30 min 
Ramp up to 180o C  
Bake chip at 180o C for 1 hour 
Ramp down to room temperature 
 
2.8 Al thermal 
deposition 
Wordentec 
15 nm of Aluminium 
 
2.9 Exposure 
JEOL E-beam 
writer 
Write graphene structures with different 
parameters, 100nm-300nm lines and varying doses 
 
2.10 Al stripping 
Manual 
developer: 
TMAH 
AZ 726 MIF for 60s 
Recipe: SP60s 
 
2.11 PMMA 
development 
Fumehood 
MIBK:IPA 1:3 for 60-90 s 
IPA to rinse for 30 s 
Blow dry 
 
3 Etching 
 
3.1 Etch 
graphene 
RIE2 
Etch graphene for 25-50 s 
Recipe: bhl_grph. 02 10W  
 
3.2 Strip resist 
Fumehood 
Acetone for 25 min 
IPA to rinse for 30 s 
Blow dry 
 
4 Deposit contacts 
 
4.1 Create 
stencil mask 
CO2-laser or 
micro milling 
Stencil shadow mask in PC with holes for contact 
deposition 
 
APPENDIX B. PROCESS FLOW
iv
==PAGE:94==
Process flow title 
Rev. 
Date of revision 
Contact email 
Graphene structures by e-beam lit 
Final 
8-Jul-16 
S103107@student.dtu.dk 
 
Not confidential 
File name: WORD_20160708_Processflow_MSc_final 
Page 4 of 5 
 
4.2 Deposit gold 
Alcatel 
5nm Cr and 200nm Au deposited. Stencil mask 
aligned in microscope and secured with Kaptontape. 
Has to be approved by 
Danchip personnel before 
deposition. 
5 Characterization 
 
5.1 Optical 
inspection 
Nikon 
ECLIPSE L200 
Overview of fabricated structures (check for 
development) 
 
5.2 SEM 
inspection 
SEM-Supra 3 
Closer inspection of fabricated structures 
 
6 Post processing 
 
6.1 Attachment 
to circuit 
board 
 
Glue to the premade circuit board with conducting 
silver glue (For contact to the backgate) 
 
6.2 Wirebonding 
K&S 4524 
Ball wire-
bonder 
Wirebond from deposited contacts on nanoribbons 
to the premade circuit board (For contact to the 
individual ribbons) 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX B. PROCESS FLOW
v
==PAGE:95==
Appendix C
Fabrication logbook
On the following pages the logbook over the sample fabrication done in this work
can be found.
vi
==PAGE:96==
Date
Time ID
Process
Machine
Parameters
Master
Comment
User
PlaceNo
IsAccomplished
10/02/2016 14:20 CHIP_20160210_SdGt_Rib_Ba1_s1
Cleaning
Fumehood
2x(Acetone for
From graphene supermarket. On 285nm SiO2
krsma
1 yes
10/02/2016 14:20 CHIP_20160210_SdGt_Rib_Ba1_s2
Cleaning
Fumehood
2x(Acetone for
From graphene supermarket. On 285nm SiO2
krsma
2 yes
11/02/2016 08:45 CHIP_20160210_SdGt_Rib_Ba1_s1
Baking
Hot Plate, E5
krsma
1 yes
11/02/2016 08:45 CHIP_20160210_SdGt_Rib_Ba1_s2
Baking
Hot Plate, E5
krsma
2 yes
11/02/2016 09:00 CHIP_20160210_SdGt_Rib_Ba1_s1
Resist spinning
Manual Spinner
Didn't look right. The resist was un krsma
1 no
11/02/2016 09:00 CHIP_20160210_SdGt_Rib_Ba1_s2
Resist spinning
Manual Spinner
krsma
2 yes
11/02/2016 09:30 CHIP_20160210_SdGt_Rib_Ba1_s2
Baking
Hot plate 1(SU8
krsma
1 yes
15/02/2016 13:15 Old_Ba5_S2
E-beam exposure
Ebeam Writer J
LowDose only got basedose of 25 krsma
1 yes
15/02/2016 13:15 Old_Ba5_S1
E-beam exposure
Ebeam Writer J
LowDose only got basedose of 25 krsma
2 yes
16/02/2016 10:15 Old_Ba5_S2
Al stripping
Fumehood
krsma
1 yes
16/02/2016 10:15 Old_Ba5_S1
Al stripping
Fumehood
krsma
2 yes
16/02/2016 14:20 Old_Ba5_S2
PMMA development Fumehood
krsma
1 yes
16/02/2016 15:20 Old_Ba5_S1
PMMA development Fumehood
krsma
2 yes
16/02/2016 14:15 Old_Ba5_S2
Graphene etching
RIE2
Still greenish
krsma
1 yes
17/02/2016 14:50 Old_Ba5_S1
Graphene etching
RIE2
This sample looks much more etc krsma
2 yes
17/02/2016 15:30 Old_Ba5_S2
PMMA stripping
Fumehood
krsma
1 yes
17/02/2016 15:30 Old_Ba5_S1
PMMA stripping
Fumehood
krsma
1 yes
22/02/2016 10:30 CHIP_20160222_SdGt_Rib_Ba2_s1
Cleaning
Fumehood
2x(Acetone for
From graphene supermarket. On 285nm SiO2
The graphene was removed by th krsma
1 no
22/02/2016 10:35 CHIP_20160222_SdGt_Rib_Ba2_s2
Cleaning
Fumehood
2x(Acetone for
From graphene supermarket. On 285nm SiO2
The graphene was removed by th krsma
0 no
22/02/2016 10:50 CHIP_20160222_SdGt_Rib_Ba2_s3
Cleaning
Fumehood
2x(Acetone for
From graphene supermarket. On 285nm SiO2
krsma
1 yes
22/02/2016 11:00 CHIP_20160222_SdGt_Rib_Ba2_s1
Baking
Hot Plate, E5
krsma
1 yes
22/02/2016 11:00 CHIP_20160222_SdGt_Rib_Ba2_s3
Baking
Hot Plate, E5
krsma
1 yes
22/02/2016 11:35 CHIP_20160222_SdGt_Rib_Ba2_s1
Resist spinning
Manual Spinner
krsma
1 yes
22/02/2016 11:50 CHIP_20160222_SdGt_Rib_Ba2_s3
Resist spinning
Manual Spinner
krsma
1 yes
22/02/2016 12:00 CHIP_20160222_SdGt_Rib_Ba2_s1
Baking
Hot plate 2(SU8
krsma
1 yes
22/02/2016 12:00 CHIP_20160222_SdGt_Rib_Ba2_s3
Baking
Hot plate 2(SU8
krsma
1 yes
22/02/2016 18:00 CHIP_20160222_SdGt_Rib_Ba2_s3
Metal Deposition
Wordentec
krsma
1 yes
23/02/2016 09:00 CHIP_20160210_SdGt_Rib_Ba1_s2
E-beam exposure
Ebeam Writer J
LowDose 80% Modulation
krsma
1 yes
23/02/2016 09:00 CHIP_20160222_SdGt_Rib_Ba2_s3
E-beam exposure
Ebeam Writer J
LowDose 100% Modulation
krsma
1 yes
23/02/2016 15:10 CHIP_20160210_SdGt_Rib_Ba1_s2
Al stripping
Fumehood
krsma
1 yes
23/02/2016 15:15 CHIP_20160222_SdGt_Rib_Ba2_s3
Al stripping
Fumehood
krsma
2 yes
23/02/2016 15:40 CHIP_20160210_SdGt_Rib_Ba1_s2
PMMA development Fumehood
Not completely developed
krsma
1 yes
23/02/2016 15:55 CHIP_20160222_SdGt_Rib_Ba2_s3
PMMA development Fumehood
Not completely developed
krsma
2 yes
25/02/2016 08:40 CHIP_20160210_SdGt_Rib_Ba1_s2
PMMA development Fumehood
Looks good
krsma
1 yes
25/02/2016 08:45 CHIP_20160222_SdGt_Rib_Ba2_s3
PMMA development Fumehood
Dropped the chip in MIBK:IPA(1:3) krsma
2 yes
25/02/2016 09:10 CHIP_20160210_SdGt_Rib_Ba1_s2
Graphene etching
RIE2
Process halted after 11s process ti krsma
1 no
25/02/2016 09:10 CHIP_20160222_SdGt_Rib_Ba2_s3
Graphene etching
RIE2
Process halted after 11s process ti krsma
2 no
25/02/2016 09:10 CHIP_20160210_SdGt_Rib_Ba1_s2
Graphene etching
RIE2
ok
krsma
1 yes
25/02/2016 09:10 CHIP_20160222_SdGt_Rib_Ba2_s3
Graphene etching
RIE2
ok
krsma
2 yes
26/02/2016 08:40 CHIP_20160226_SdGt_Rib_Ba3_s1
Cleaning
Fumehood
20s Acetone, 30 From graphene supermarket. On 285nm SiO2
krsma
1 yes
26/02/2016 08:45 CHIP_20160226_SdGt_Rib_Ba3_s2
Cleaning
Fumehood
20s Acetone, 30 From graphene supermarket. On 285nm SiO2
krsma
2 yes
26/02/2016 08:50 CHIP_20160226_SdGt_Rib_Ba3_s3
Cleaning
Fumehood
20s Acetone, 30 From graphene supermarket. On 285nm SiO2
krsma
3 yes
26/02/2016 09:10 CHIP_20160226_SdGt_Rib_Ba3_s1
Baking
Hot Plate, E5
krsma
1 yes
26/02/2016 09:10 CHIP_20160226_SdGt_Rib_Ba3_s2
Baking
Hot Plate, E5
krsma
2 yes
26/02/2016 09:10 CHIP_20160226_SdGt_Rib_Ba3_s3
Baking
Hot Plate, E5
krsma
3 yes
26/02/2016 09:50 CHIP_20160226_SdGt_Rib_Ba3_s1
Resist spinning
Manual Spinner
krsma
1 yes
26/02/2016 09:55 CHIP_20160226_SdGt_Rib_Ba3_s2
Resist spinning
Manual Spinner
krsma
2 yes
26/02/2016 10:00 CHIP_20160226_SdGt_Rib_Ba3_s3
Resist spinning
Manual Spinner
krsma
3 yes
26/02/2016 10:10 CHIP_20160226_SdGt_Rib_Ba3_s1
Baking
Hot plate 2(SU8
Stuck a bit to the hotplate, flipped krsma
1 yes
26/02/2016 10:10 CHIP_20160226_SdGt_Rib_Ba3_s2
Baking
Hot plate 2(SU8
krsma
2 yes
26/02/2016 10:10 CHIP_20160226_SdGt_Rib_Ba3_s3
Baking
Hot plate 2(SU8
krsma
3 yes
29/02/2016 15:50 CHIP_20160226_SdGt_Rib_Ba3_s1
Metal Deposition
Wordentec
krsma
1 yes
29/02/2016 15:50 CHIP_20160226_SdGt_Rib_Ba3_s2
Metal Deposition
Wordentec
krsma
2 yes
29/02/2016 15:50 CHIP_20160226_SdGt_Rib_Ba3_s3
Metal Deposition
Wordentec
krsma
3 yes
29/02/2016 16:00 CHIP_20160210_SdGt_Rib_Ba1_s2
PMMA stripping
Fumehood
graphene came off, maybe during krsma
1 yes
29/02/2016 16:00 CHIP_20160222_SdGt_Rib_Ba2_s3
PMMA stripping
Fumehood
Quality is not very good. Inspect in krsma
2 yes
01/03/2016 13:00 CHIP_20160226_SdGt_Rib_Ba3_s1
E-beam exposure
Ebeam Writer J
LowDose 80% Modulation. Proble krsma
1 yes
01/03/2016 13:00 CHIP_20160226_SdGt_Rib_Ba3_s2
E-beam exposure
Ebeam Writer J
LowDose 100% Modulation
krsma
2 yes
03/03/2016 09:50 CHIP_20160226_SdGt_Rib_Ba3_s1
Al stripping
Fumehood
krsma
1 yes
03/03/2016 09:50 CHIP_20160226_SdGt_Rib_Ba3_s2
Al stripping
Fumehood
krsma
1 yes
03/03/2016 10:00 CHIP_20160226_SdGt_Rib_Ba3_s1
PMMA development Fumehood
Accidentally used acetone instead krsma
1 no
03/03/2016 10:00 CHIP_20160226_SdGt_Rib_Ba3_s2
PMMA development Fumehood
krsma
1 yes
03/03/2016 10:00 CHIP_20160226_SdGt_Rib_Ba3_s2
Graphene etching
RIE2
krsma
1 yes
03/03/2016 11:00 CHIP_20160226_SdGt_Rib_Ba3_s1
PMMA stripping
Fumehood
Acetone evaporated after 24 minut krsma
1 no
03/03/2016 11:00 CHIP_20160226_SdGt_Rib_Ba3_s2
PMMA stripping
Fumehood
Acetone evaporated after 24 minut krsma
1 no
03/03/2016 11:25 CHIP_20160226_SdGt_Rib_Ba3_s1
PMMA stripping
Fumehood
Extra time, because of evaporatio krsma
1 yes
03/03/2016 11:25 CHIP_20160226_SdGt_Rib_Ba3_s2
PMMA stripping
Fumehood
Extra time, because of evaporatio krsma
1 yes
03/04/2016 10:50 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba4_s1
Cleaning
Fumehood
krsma
1 yes
03/04/2016 10:55 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba4_s2
Cleaning
Fumehood
krsma
2 yes
03/04/2016 11:10 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba4_s1
Baking
Hot Plate, E5
krsma
1 yes
03/04/2016 11:10 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba4_s2
Baking
Hot Plate, E5
krsma
1 yes
03/04/2016 11:10 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba4_s3
Baking
Hot Plate, E5
krsma
2 yes
03/04/2016 11:35 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba4_s3
Resist spinning
Manual Spinner
krsma
1 yes
03/04/2016 11:40 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba4_s1
Resist spinning
Manual Spinner
krsma
1 yes
03/04/2016 11:45 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba4_s2
Resist spinning
Manual Spinner
krsma
2 yes
03/04/2016 12:10 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba4_s3
Baking
Hot plate 2(SU8
krsma
1 yes
03/04/2016 12:10 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba4_s1
Baking
Hot plate 2(SU8
Seems to have a bit of dirt. Inspec krsma
1 yes
03/04/2016 12:10 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba4_s2
Baking
Hot plate 2(SU8
krsma
2 yes
06/03/2016 14:15 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba4_s3
Metal Deposition
Wordentec
krsma
1 yes
06/03/2016 14:15 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba4_s1
Metal Deposition
Wordentec
krsma
1 yes
06/03/2016 14:15 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba4_s2
Metal Deposition
Wordentec
krsma
2 yes
08/03/2016 09:00 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba4_s1
E-beam exposure
Ebeam Writer J
LowDose 80% Modulation
krsma
1 yes
08/03/2016 09:00 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba4_s2
E-beam exposure
Ebeam Writer J
LowDose 100% Modulation
krsma
2 yes
11/03/2016 09:45 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba4_s1
Al stripping
Fumehood
krsma
1 yes
11/03/2016 09:45 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba4_s2
Al stripping
Fumehood
krsma
2 yes
11/03/2016 10:15 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba4_s1
PMMA development Fumehood
krsma
1 yes
11/03/2016 10:15 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba4_s2
PMMA development Fumehood
krsma
2 yes
11/03/2016 11:00 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba4_s1
Graphene etching
RIE2
ok
krsma
1 yes
11/03/2016 11:00 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba4_s2
Graphene etching
RIE2
ok
krsma
2 yes
14/03/2016 15:00 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba4_s1
PMMA stripping
Fumehood
krsma
1 yes
14/03/2016 15:00 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba4_s2
PMMA stripping
Fumehood
Got two minutes in IPA
krsma
2 yes
06/05/2016 13:00 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba5_s1
Cleaning
Fumehood
krsma
1 yes
Set temp = 222deg, act temp = 200
Set temp = 222deg, act temp = 200
PMMA 996k (2 weight-% PMMA) in anisol - 5s, 500rpm, acc200rpm/s,
PMMA 996k (2 weight-% PMMA) in anisol  - 5s, 500rpm, acc200rpm/s, 60s, 4000rpm, acc 4000rpm/s
Ramp to 120deg from room temp, ramp time 50min, heat 120 for 30min, ramp to 180, ramp time 30 min
60nA_ap7, actual: 61nA; 2nA_ap5, actual: 2nA; 3C
60nA_ap7, actual: 61nA; 2nA_ap5, actual: 2nA; 3C
MF CD-26 for 60s, then IPA 30s
MF CD-26 for 60s, then IPA 30s
MIBK:IPA(1:3) 60s, IPA 30s, MIBK:IPA(1:3) 30s, IPA 30s, MIBK:IPA(1:3) 30s, IPA 30s.
MIBK:IPA(1:3) 60s, IPA 30s, MIBK:IPA(1:3) 30s, IPA 30s
Recipe: bhl_grph.set, p=100mTorr, 02=45sccm, Ar=5sccm, Power=10
Recipe: bhl_grph.set, p=100mTorr, 02=45sccm, Ar=5sccm, Power=10
Acetone for 35 minutes, then rinse in IPA, and lastly DI water
Acetone for 35 minutes, then rinse in IPA, and lastly DI water
Set temp = 222deg, act temp = 200
Set temp = 222deg, act temp = 200
PMMA 996k (2 weight-% PMMA) in anisol  - 5s, 500rpm, acc200rpm/s, 60s, 4000rpm, acc 4000rpm/s
PMMA 996k (2 weight-% PMMA) in anisol  - 5s, 500rpm, acc200rpm/s, 60s, 4000rpm, acc 4000rpm/s
Ramp to 120deg from room temp, ramp time 50min, heat 120 for 30min, ramp to 180, ramp time 30 min
Ramp to 120deg from room temp, ramp time 50min, heat 120 for 30min, ramp to 180, ramp time 30 min
Thermal dep of Al, thickness = 15nm, rate 1.6 Å/s, P=1e-6mbar, 3 Pellets, 1hour pump time, 5 min proces
60nA_ap7, actual: 61nA; 2nA_ap5, actual: 2nA; 3C
60nA_ap7, actual: 61nA; 2nA_ap5, actual: 2nA; 3C
MF CD-26 for 60s, then IPA 30s
MF CD-26 for 60s, then IPA 30s
MIBK:IPA(1:3) 60s, IPA 30s, MIBK:IPA(1:3) 30s, IPA 30s
MIBK:IPA(1:3) 60s, IPA 30s, MIBK:IPA(1:3) 30s, IPA 30s
MIBK:IPA(1:3) 15s, IPA 30s
MIBK:IPA(1:3) 120s, IPA 35s
Recipe: bhl_grph.set, p=100mTorr, 02=45sccm, Ar=5sccm, Power=10
Recipe: bhl_grph.set, p=100mTorr, 02=45sccm, Ar=5sccm, Power=10
Recipe: bhl_grph.set, p=100mTorr, 02=45sccm, Ar=5sccm, Power=10
Recipe: bhl_grph.set, p=100mTorr, 02=45sccm, Ar=5sccm, Power=10
Set temp = 222deg, act temp = 200
Set temp = 222deg, act temp = 200
Set temp = 222deg, act temp = 200
PMMA 996k (2 weight-% PMMA) in anisol  - 5s, 500rpm, acc200rpm/s, 60s, 4000rpm, acc 4000rpm/s
PMMA 996k (2 weight-% PMMA) in anisol  - 5s, 500rpm, acc200rpm/s, 60s, 4000rpm, acc 4000rpm/s
PMMA 996k (2 weight-% PMMA) in anisol  - 5s, 500rpm, acc200rpm/s, 60s, 4000rpm, acc 4000rpm/s
Ramp to 120deg from room temp, ramp time 50min, heat 120 for 30
Ramp to 120deg from room temp, ramp time 50min, heat 120 for 30min, ramp to 180, ramp time 30 min
Ramp to 120deg from room temp, ramp time 50min, heat 120 for 30min, ramp to 180, ramp time 30 min
Thermal dep of Al, thickness = 15nm, rate 1.7 Å/s, P=1.7e-6mbar, 3 Pellets, 1.2hour pump time, 5 min pro
Thermal dep of Al, thickness = 15nm, rate 1.7 Å/s, P=1.7e-6mbar, 3 Pellets, 1.2hour pump time, 5 min pro
Thermal dep of Al, thickness = 15nm, rate 1.7 Å/s, P=1.7e-6mbar, 3 Pellets, 1.2hour pump time, 5 min pro
Acetone for 25 minutes, then rinse thoroughly in IPA
Acetone for 25 minutes, then rinse thoroughly in IPA
60nA_ap7, actual: 59.9nA; 2nA_ap5, actual: 2nA; 3C
60nA_ap7, actual: 59.9nA; 2nA_ap5, actual: 2nA; 3C
AZ 726 MIF for 60s, then IPA 30s
AZ 726 MIF for 60s, then IPA 30s
MIBK:IPA(1:3) 65s, IPA 30s
MIBK:IPA(1:3) 65s, IPA 30s
Recipe: bhl_grph.set, p=100mTorr, 02=45sccm, Ar=5sccm, Power=10W, etch time = 30s
Acetone for 25 minutes
Acetone for 25 minutes.
Acetone for 10 minutes, then let sit in IPA for 60s
Acetone for 10 minutes.
2x(Acetone for 20s, IPA for 20s)
2x(Acetone for 20s, IPA for 20s)
Set temp = 222deg, act temp = 200
Set temp = 222deg, act temp = 200
Set temp = 222deg, act temp = 200
PMMA 996k (2 weight-% PMMA) in anisol  - 5s, 500rpm, acc200rpm/s, 60s, 4000rpm, acc 4000rpm/s
PMMA 996k (2 weight-% PMMA) in anisol  - 5s, 500rpm, acc200rpm/s, 60s, 4000rpm, acc 4000rpm/s
PMMA 996k (2 weight-% PMMA) in anisol  - 5s, 500rpm, acc200rpm/s, 60s, 4000rpm, acc 4000rpm/s
Ramp to 120deg from room temp, ramp time 50min, heat 120 for 30min, ramp to 180, ramp time 30 min
Ramp to 120deg from room temp, ramp time 50min, heat 120 for 30
Ramp to 120deg from room temp, ramp time 50min, heat 120 for 30min, ramp to 180, ramp time 30 min
Thermal dep of Al, thickness = 15nm, rate 1.7 Å/s, P=7.8e-7mbar, 3 Pellets, 2.5hour pump time, 5 min pro
Thermal dep of Al, thickness = 15nm, rate 1.7 Å/s, P=7.8e-7mbar, 3 Pellets, 2.5hour pump time, 5 min pro
Thermal dep of Al, thickness = 15nm, rate 1.7 Å/s, P=7.8e-7mbar, 3 Pellets, 2.5hour pump time, 5 min pro
60nA_ap7, actual: 59.7nA; 2nA_ap5, actual: 2nA; 3C
60nA_ap7, actual: 59.7nA; 2nA_ap5, actual: 2nA; 3C
AZ 726 MIF for 60s, then IPA 30s
AZ 726 MIF for 60s, then IPA 30s
MIBK:IPA(1:3) (1)60s+(3)30s, IPA (2)30s+(4)30s
MIBK:IPA(1:3) (1)60s+(3)30s, IPA (2)30s+(4)30s
Recipe: bhl_grph.set, p=100mTorr, 02=45sccm, Ar=5sccm, Power=10
Recipe: bhl_grph.set, p=100mTorr, 02=45sccm, Ar=5sccm, Power=10
Acetone for 25 minutes, let sit in IPA for 1 minute
Acetone for 25 minutes, let sit in IPA for 1 minute
2x(Acetone for 20s, IPA for 20s)
APPENDIX C. FABRICATION LOGBOOK
vii
==PAGE:97==
Date
Time ID
Process
Machine
Parameters
Master
Comment
User
PlaceNo
IsAccomplished
06/05/2016 13:00 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba5_s2
Cleaning
Fumehood
krsma
2 yes
06/05/2016 13:50 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba5_s1
Baking
Hot Plate, E5
krsma
1 yes
06/05/2016 13:50 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba5_s2
Baking
Hot Plate, E5
krsma
2 yes
06/05/2016 14:20 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba5_s1
Resist spinning
Manual Spinner
krsma
1 yes
06/05/2016 14:30 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba5_s2
Resist spinning
Manual Spinner
krsma
2 yes
06/05/2016 15:30 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba5_s1
Baking
Hot plate 2(SU8
krsma
1 yes
06/05/2016 15:30 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba5_s2
Baking
Hot plate 2(SU8
Small circle of dirt, try to avoid wh
krsma
2 yes
09/05/2016 11:30 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba4_s1
Gold contacts
Alcatel
The stencil mask didn't fit. New o
krsma
1 yes
09/05/2016 13:30 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba4_s3
E-beam exposure
Ebeam Writer J
LowDose 100% Modulation
krsma
1 yes
10/05/2016 12:30 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba4_s3
Al stripping
Fumehood
krsma
1 yes
10/05/2016 12:45 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba4_s3
PMMA development Fumehood
krsma
1 yes
10/05/2016 13:10 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba4_s3
Graphene etching
RIE2
ok
krsma
1 yes
10/05/2016 13:40 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba4_s3
PMMA stripping
Fumehood
krsma
1 yes
23/05/2016 19:10 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba5_s1
Metal Deposition
Wordentec
krsma
1 yes
23/05/2016 19:10 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba5_s2
Metal Deposition
Wordentec
krsma
1 yes
24/05/2016 15:15 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba5_s1
E-beam exposure
Ebeam Writer J
PEC test
krsma
1 yes
24/05/2016 15:15 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba5_s2
E-beam exposure
Ebeam Writer J
PEC test
krsma
2 yes
25/05/2016 15:00 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba5_s1
Al stripping
Fumehood
krsma
1 yes
25/05/2016 15:00 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba5_s2
Al stripping
Fumehood
krsma
2 yes
25/05/2016 15:20 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba5_s1
PMMA development Fumehood
Needed longer than usual becaus krsma
1 yes
25/05/2016 15:45 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba5_s2
PMMA development Fumehood
Needed longer than usual becaus krsma
2 yes
25/05/2016 16:30 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba5_s1
Graphene etching
RIE2
ok
krsma
1 yes
25/05/2016 16:30 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba5_s2
Graphene etching
RIE2
ok
krsma
2 yes
26/05/2016 15:55 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba5_s1
PMMA stripping
Fumehood
krsma
1 yes
26/05/2016 15:55 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba5_s2
PMMA stripping
Fumehood
krsma
2 yes
30/05/2016 09:40 CHIP_20160530_SdGt_Rib_PW_S1
Cleaning
Fumehood
krsma
1 yes
30/05/2016 09:40 CHIP_20160530_SdGt_Rib_PW_S2
Cleaning
Fumehood
krsma
2 yes
30/05/2016 13:30 CHIP_20160530_SdGt_Rib_PW_S1
Baking
Hot Plate, E5
krsma
1 yes
30/05/2016 13:45 CHIP_20160530_SdGt_Rib_PW_S2
Baking
Hot Plate, E5
krsma
2 yes
30/05/2016 14:00 CHIP_20160530_SdGt_Rib_PW_S1
Resist spinning
Manual Spinner
krsma
1 yes
30/05/2016 14:05 CHIP_20160530_SdGt_Rib_PW_S2
Resist spinning
Manual Spinner
krsma
2 yes
30/05/2016 14:20 CHIP_20160530_SdGt_Rib_PW_S1
Baking
Hot plate 1(SU8
The final hotplate was 115deg, wh krsma
1 yes
30/05/2016 14:20 CHIP_20160530_SdGt_Rib_PW_S2
Baking
Hot plate 1(SU8
The final hotplate was 115deg, wh krsma
2 yes
31/05/2016 09:00 CHIP_20160530_SdGt_Rib_PW_S1
Baking
Hot plate 2(SU8
Turns out the SU8 hotplates are li krsma
1 yes
31/05/2016 09:00 CHIP_20160530_SdGt_Rib_PW_S2
Baking
Hot plate 2(SU8
Turns out the SU8 hotplates are li krsma
2 yes
31/05/2016 09:00 CHIP_20160530_SdGt_Rib_PW_S1
Baking
Hot Plate, E5
krsma
1 yes
31/05/2016 09:00 CHIP_20160530_SdGt_Rib_PW_S2
Baking
Hot Plate, E5
krsma
2 yes
31/05/2016 16:50 CHIP_20160530_SdGt_Rib_PW_S1
Metal Deposition
Wordentec
krsma
1 yes
31/05/2016 16:50 CHIP_20160530_SdGt_Rib_PW_S2
Metal Deposition
Wordentec
krsma
2 yes
01/06/2016 15:15 CHIP_20160530_SdGt_Rib_PW_S1
E-beam exposure
Ebeam Writer J
PEC + alignment
krsma
1 yes
01/06/2016 15:15 CHIP_20160530_SdGt_Rib_PW_S2
E-beam exposure
Ebeam Writer J
PEC + alignment
krsma
2 yes
03/06/2016 13:40 CHIP_20160530_SdGt_Rib_PW_S1
Al stripping
Fumehood
krsma
1 yes
03/06/2016 13:50 CHIP_20160530_SdGt_Rib_PW_S2
Al stripping
Fumehood
krsma
2 yes
03/06/2016 14:10 CHIP_20160530_SdGt_Rib_PW_S1
PMMA development Fumehood
Fresh MIBK mix
krsma
1 yes
03/06/2016 14:20 CHIP_20160530_SdGt_Rib_PW_S2
PMMA development Fumehood
Fresh MIBK mix
krsma
2 yes
06/06/2016 14:00 FOIL_20160606_Birong_Batch6_S1
Resist spinning
Spin coater, La
krsma
yes
06/06/2016 14:00 FOIL_20160606_Birong_Batch6_S2
Resist spinning
Spin coater, La
krsma
yes
06/06/2016 14:10 FOIL_20160606_Birong_Batch6_S1
Baking
Hotplate, Lab20
krsma
yes
06/06/2016 14:10 FOIL_20160606_Birong_Batch6_S2
Baking
Hotplate, Lab20
krsma
yes
06/06/2016 15:00 FOIL_20160606_Birong_Batch6_S1
Copper etch
Fumehood
krsma
yes
06/06/2016 15:00 FOIL_20160606_Birong_Batch6_S2
Copper etch
Fumehood
krsma
yes
07/06/2016 11:00 CHIP_20160606_SdGt_Rib_Batch6_S Transfer
Fumehood
FOIL_20160606_Birong_Batch6_S1
Blow softly with nitrogen gun, to e
krsma
1 yes
07/06/2016 11:00 CHIP_20160606_SdGt_Rib_Batch6_S Transfer
Fumehood
FOIL_20160606_Birong_Batch6_S2
Blow softly with nitrogen gun, to e
krsma
2 yes
07/06/2016 11:30 CHIP_20160606_SdGt_Rib_Batch6_S Baking
Hotplate, Lab20
krsma
1 yes
07/06/2016 11:30 CHIP_20160606_SdGt_Rib_Batch6_S Baking
Hotplate, Lab20
krsma
2 yes
07/06/2016 13:55 CHIP_20160606_SdGt_Rib_Batch6_S PMMA stripping
Fumehood
got 1h15min
krsma
1 yes
07/06/2016 13:55 CHIP_20160606_SdGt_Rib_Batch6_S PMMA stripping
Fumehood
got 1h15min
krsma
2 yes
07/06/2016 14:10 CHIP_20160606_SdGt_Rib_Batch6_S Spin drying
Spin coater, La
krsma
1 yes
07/06/2016 14:10 CHIP_20160606_SdGt_Rib_Batch6_S Spin drying
Spin coater, La
krsma
2 yes
07/06/2016 16:00 CHIP_20160606_SdGt_Rib_Batch6_S Cleaning
Fumehood
krsma
1 yes
07/06/2016 16:00 CHIP_20160606_SdGt_Rib_Batch6_S Cleaning
Fumehood
krsma
2 yes
07/06/2016 16:20 CHIP_20160606_SdGt_Rib_Batch6_S Baking
Hot Plate, E5
krsma
1 yes
07/06/2016 16:20 CHIP_20160606_SdGt_Rib_Batch6_S Baking
Hot Plate, E5
krsma
2 yes
07/06/2016 17:00 CHIP_20160606_SdGt_Rib_Batch6_S Resist spinning
Manual Spinner
krsma
1 yes
07/06/2016 17:05 CHIP_20160606_SdGt_Rib_Batch6_S Resist spinning
Manual Spinner
krsma
2 yes
07/06/2016 17:10 CHIP_20160606_SdGt_Rib_Batch6_S Baking
Hot plate, E5
krsma
1 yes
07/06/2016 17:10 CHIP_20160606_SdGt_Rib_Batch6_S Baking
Hot plate, E5
krsma
2 yes
07/06/2016 18:30 CHIP_20160530_SdGt_Rib_PW_S1
Graphene etching
RIE2
ok
krsma
1 yes
07/06/2016 18:30 CHIP_20160530_SdGt_Rib_PW_S2
Graphene etching
RIE2
ok
krsma
2 yes
07/06/2016 18:50 CHIP_20160530_SdGt_Rib_PW_S1
PMMA stripping
Fumehood
It seems the graphene did not adh krsma
1 yes
07/06/2016 18:50 CHIP_20160530_SdGt_Rib_PW_S2
PMMA stripping
Fumehood
It seems the graphene did not adh krsma
2 yes
07/06/2016 19:10 CHIP_20160606_SdGt_Rib_Batch6_S Metal Deposition
Wordentec
krsma
1 yes
07/06/2016 19:10 CHIP_20160606_SdGt_Rib_Batch6_S Metal Deposition
Wordentec
krsma
2 yes
08/06/2016 16:00 CHIP_20160606_SdGt_Rib_Batch6_S E-beam exposure
PEC + optical alignment
krsma
1 yes
08/06/2016 16:00 CHIP_20160606_SdGt_Rib_Batch6_S E-beam exposure
PEC + optical alignment
krsma
1 yes
14/06/2016 16:30 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba4_s2
Gold contacts
Alcatel
krsma
1 yes
14/06/2016 16:30 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba4_s3
Gold contacts
Alcatel
krsma
1 yes
16/06/2016 11:00 CHIP_20160606_SdGt_Rib_Batch6_S Al stripping
Developer: TMA
Some flakes came off. Possible du krsma
1 yes
16/06/2016 12:00 CHIP_20160606_SdGt_Rib_Batch6_S PMMA development Fumehood
krsma
1 yes
16/06/2016 15:00 FOIL_20160606_Birong_Batch6_S3
Resist spinning
Spin coater, La
krsma
yes
16/06/2016 15:00 FOIL_20160606_Birong_Batch6_S4
Resist spinning
Spin coater, La
krsma
yes
16/06/2016 15:10 FOIL_20160606_Birong_Batch6_S3
Baking
Hotplate, Lab20
krsma
yes
16/06/2016 15:10 FOIL_20160606_Birong_Batch6_S4
Baking
Hotplate, Lab20
krsma
yes
16/06/2016 16:00 FOIL_20160606_Birong_Batch6_S3
Copper etch
Fumehood
krsma
yes
16/06/2016 16:00 FOIL_20160606_Birong_Batch6_S4
Copper etch
Fumehood
krsma
yes
17/06/2016 13:00 CHIP_20160617_SdGt_Rib_Batch7_S Transfer
Fumehood
FOIL_20160606_Birong_Batch6_S3
Blow softly with nitrogen gun, to e
krsma
1 yes
17/06/2016 13:00 CHIP_20160617_SdGt_Rib_Batch7_S Transfer
Fumehood
FOIL_20160606_Birong_Batch6_S4
Blow softly with nitrogen gun, to e
krsma
2 yes
17/06/2016 13:30 CHIP_20160617_SdGt_Rib_Batch7_S Baking
Hotplate, Lab20
krsma
1 yes
17/06/2016 13:30 CHIP_20160617_SdGt_Rib_Batch7_S Baking
Hotplate, Lab20
krsma
2 yes
17/06/2016 15:00 CHIP_20160617_SdGt_Rib_Batch7_S PMMA stripping
Fumehood
got 1h15min
krsma
1 yes
17/06/2016 15:00 CHIP_20160617_SdGt_Rib_Batch7_S PMMA stripping
Fumehood
got 1h15min
krsma
2 yes
17/06/2016 15:50 CHIP_20160617_SdGt_Rib_Batch7_S Spin drying
Spin coater, La
krsma
1 yes
2x(Acetone for 20s, IPA for 20s)
Set temp = 222deg, act temp = 200
Set temp = 222deg, act temp = 200
PMMA 996k (2 weight-% PMMA) in anisol  - 5s, 500rpm, acc200rpm/s, 60s, 4000rpm, acc 4000rpm/s
PMMA 996k (2 weight-% PMMA) in anisol  - 5s, 500rpm, acc200rpm/s, 60s, 4000rpm, acc 4000rpm/s
Ramp to 120deg from room temp, ramp time 50min, heat 120 for 30min, ramp to 180, ramp time 30 min
Ramp to 120deg from room temp, ramp time 50min, heat 120 for 30
Stencil mask, 150nm
60nA_ap7, actual: 59.7nA; 2nA_ap5, actual: 2nA; 3C
AZ 726 MIF for 60s, then IPA 30s
MIBK:IPA(1:3) (1)60s+(3)30s, IPA (2)30s+(4)30s
Recipe: bhl_grph.set, p=100mTorr, 02=45sccm, Ar=5sccm, Power=10
Acetone for 25 minutes, let sit in IPA for 1 minute
Thermal dep of Al, thickness = 15nm, rate 1.7 Å/s, P=7.8e-7mbar, 3 Pellets, 1.25hour pump time, 5 min pr
Thermal dep of Al, thickness = 15nm, rate 1.7 Å/s, P=7.8e-7mbar, 3 Pellets, 1.25hour pump time, 5 min pr
60nA_ap7, actual: 59.7nA; 2nA_ap5, actual: 2nA; 3C
60nA_ap7, actual: 59.7nA; 2nA_ap5, actual: 2nA; 3C
AZ 726 MIF for 60s, then IPA 30s
AZ 726 MIF for 60s, then IPA 30s
MIBK:IPA(1:3) (1)60s+(3)30s+(5)30s, IPA (2)30s+(4)30s+(6)30s
MIBK:IPA(1:3) (1)60s+(3)30s+(5)30s, IPA (2)30s+(4)30s+(6)30s
Recipe: bhl_grph.set, p=100mTorr, 02=45sccm, Ar=5sccm, Power=10
Recipe: bhl_grph.set, p=100mTorr, 02=45sccm, Ar=5sccm, Power=10
Acetone for 25 minutes, let sit in IPA for 1 minute
Acetone for 25 minutes, let sit in IPA for 1 minute
2x(Acetone for 20s, IPA for 20s)
2x(Acetone for 20s, IPA for 20s)
Set temp = 222deg, act temp = 200
Set temp = 222deg, act temp = 200
PMMA 996k (2 weight-% PMMA) in anisol  - 5s, 500rpm, acc200rpm/s, 60s, 4000rpm, acc 4000rpm/s
PMMA 996k (2 weight-% PMMA) in anisol  - 5s, 500rpm, acc200rpm/s, 60s, 4000rpm, acc 4000rpm/s
Ramp to 120deg from room temp, ramp time 50min, heat 120 for 30
Ramp to 120deg from room temp, ramp time 50min, heat 120 for 30
Ramp to 120deg from room temp, ramp time 50min, heat 120 for 30
Ramp to 120deg from room temp, ramp time 50min, heat 120 for 30
Set temp = 200deg, act temp = 180, 2min
Set temp = 200deg, act temp = 180, 2min
Thermal dep of Al, thickness = 15nm, rate 1.7 Å/s, P=3.9e-6mbar, 3 Pellets, 1.25hour pump time, 5 min pr
Thermal dep of Al, thickness = 15nm, rate 1.7 Å/s, P=3.9e-6mbar, 3 Pellets, 1.25hour pump time, 5 min pr
60nA_ap7, actual: 57nA; 2nA_ap5, actual: 1.7nA; 3B
60nA_ap7, actual: 57nA; 2nA_ap5, actual: 1.7nA; 3C
AZ 726 MIF for 60s, then IPA 30s
AZ 726 MIF for 60s, then IPA 30s
MIBK:IPA(1:3) (1)60s+(3)30s+(5)30s, IPA (2)30s+(4)30s+(6)30s
MIBK:IPA(1:3) (1)60s+(3)30s+(5)30s, IPA (2)30s+(4)30s+(6)30s
1000RPM, 60s,  (4 weight-%) PMMA in anisol.
1000RPM, 60s,  (4 weight-%) PMMA in anisol.
100degC, 30min
100degC, 30min
5-7 drops of H2O2 in HCl, leave overnight
5-7 drops of H2O2 in HCl, leave overnight
30degC, 60degC, 80degC, 110degC. 30 minutes at each temp
30degC, 60degC, 80degC, 110degC. 30 minutes at each temp
Acetone for 30min
Acetone for 30min
2000 RPM spray with IPA and Acetone to remove particles.
2000 RPM spray with IPA and Acetone to remove particles.
2x(Acetone for 20s, IPA for 20s)
2x(Acetone for 20s, IPA for 20s)
Set temp = 222deg, act temp = 200
Set temp = 222deg, act temp = 200
PMMA 996k (2 weight-% PMMA) in anisol  - 5s, 500rpm, acc200rpm/s, 60s, 4000rpm, acc 4000rpm/s
PMMA 996k (2 weight-% PMMA) in anisol  - 5s, 500rpm, acc200rpm/s, 60s, 4000rpm, acc 4000rpm/s
Set temp 132degC, actual 120degC for 30 min. Ramp to set temp 199degC, act. 180degC. Ramp power 10
Set temp 132degC, actual 120degC for 30 min. Ramp to set temp 199degC, act. 180degC. Ramp power 10
Recipe: bhl_grph.set, p=100mTorr, 02=45sccm, Ar=5sccm, Power=10
Recipe: bhl_grph.set, p=100mTorr, 02=45sccm, Ar=5sccm, Power=10
Acetone for 30 minutes, let sit in IPA for 1 minute
Acetone for 30 minutes, let sit in IPA for 1 minute
Thermal dep of Al, thickness = 15nm, rate 1.6 Å/s, P=2e-6mbar, 3 Pellets, 1.15hour pump time, 5 min pro
Thermal dep of Al, thickness = 15nm, rate 1.6 Å/s, P=2e-6mbar, 3 Pellets, 1.15hour pump time, 5 min pro
Ebeam Writer JBX-9500
Ebeam Writer JBX-9500
Stencil mask, 175nm, rate 10 Å/s, Crystal X1 health: 87%
Stencil mask, 175nm, rate 10 Å/s, Crystal X1 health: 87%
Recipe: 60s SP + 15 SP
MIBK:IPA(1:3) (1)60s+(3)30s+(5)30s, IPA (2)30s+(4)30s+(6)30s
1000RPM, 60s,  (4 weight-%) PMMA in anisol.
1000RPM, 60s,  (4 weight-%) PMMA in anisol.
100degC, 30min
100degC, 30min
5-7 drops of H2O2 in HCl, leave overnight
5-7 drops of H2O2 in HCl, leave overnight
30degC, 60degC, 80degC, 110degC. 30 minutes at each temp
30degC, 60degC, 80degC, 110degC. 30 minutes at each temp
Acetone for 30min
Acetone for 30min
2000 RPM spray with IPA and Acetone to remove particles.
APPENDIX C. FABRICATION LOGBOOK
viii
==PAGE:98==
Date
Time ID
Process
Machine
Parameters
Master
Comment
User
PlaceNo
IsAccomplished
17/06/2016 15:50 CHIP_20160617_SdGt_Rib_Batch7_S Spin drying
Spin coater, La
krsma
2 yes
21/06/2016 13:10 CHIP_20160617_SdGt_Rib_Batch7_S Cleaning
Fumehood
krsma
1 yes
21/06/2016 13:10 CHIP_20160617_SdGt_Rib_Batch7_S Cleaning
Fumehood
krsma
2 yes
21/06/2016 13:10 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba4_s4
Cleaning
Fumehood
krsma
1 yes
21/06/2016 13:30 CHIP_20160617_SdGt_Rib_Batch7_S Baking
Hot Plate, E5
krsma
1 yes
21/06/2016 13:30 CHIP_20160617_SdGt_Rib_Batch7_S Baking
Hot Plate, E5
krsma
2 yes
21/06/2016 13:30 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba4_s4
Baking
Hot Plate, E5
krsma
1 yes
21/06/2016 14:30 CHIP_20160617_SdGt_Rib_Batch7_S Resist spinning
Manual Spinner
krsma
1 yes
21/06/2016 14:35 CHIP_20160617_SdGt_Rib_Batch7_S Resist spinning
Manual Spinner
krsma
2 yes
21/06/2016 14:40 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba4_s4
Resist spinning
Manual Spinner
krsma
1 yes
21/06/2016 14:50 CHIP_20160617_SdGt_Rib_Batch7_S Baking
Hot Plate, E5
krsma
1 yes
21/06/2016 14:50 CHIP_20160617_SdGt_Rib_Batch7_S Baking
Hot Plate, E5
krsma
2 yes
21/06/2016 14:50 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba4_s4
Baking
Hot Plate, E5
krsma
1 yes
22/06/2016 10:15 CHIP_20160617_SdGt_Rib_Batch7_S Metal Deposition
Wordentec
krsma
1
22/06/2016 10:15 CHIP_20160617_SdGt_Rib_Batch7_S Metal Deposition
Wordentec
krsma
2
22/06/2016 10:15 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba4_s4
Metal Deposition
Wordentec
krsma
1
22/06/2016 13:00 CHIP_20160617_SdGt_Rib_Batch7_S E-beam exposure
Final PEC + optical alignment + mu krsma
1 yes
22/06/2016 13:00 CHIP_20160617_SdGt_Rib_Batch7_S E-beam exposure
Final PEC + optical alignment + mu krsma
1 yes
22/06/2016 13:00 CHIP_20160304_SdGt_Rib_Ba4_s4
E-beam exposure
Final PEC + optical alignment + mu krsma
1 yes
27/06/2016 13:30 CHIP_20160530_SdGt_Rib_PW_S1
Gold contacts
Alcatel
krsma
1 yes
05/07/2016 15:30 CHIP_20160530_SdGt_Rib_PW_S1
Gold contacts
Alcatel
krsma
1 yes
2000 RPM spray with IPA and Acetone to remove particles.
2x(Acetone for 20s, IPA for 20s)
2x(Acetone for 20s, IPA for 20s)
2x(Acetone for 20s, IPA for 20s)
Set temp = 222deg, act temp = 200, at least 20 min
Set temp = 222deg, act temp = 200, at least 20 min
Set temp = 222deg, act temp = 200, at least 20 min
PMMA 996k (2 weight-% PMMA) in anisol  - 5s, 500rpm, acc200rpm/s, 60s, 4000rpm, acc 4000rpm/s
PMMA 996k (2 weight-% PMMA) in anisol  - 5s, 500rpm, acc200rpm/s, 60s, 4000rpm, acc 4000rpm/s
PMMA 996k (2 weight-% PMMA) in anisol  - 5s, 500rpm, acc200rpm/s, 60s, 4000rpm, acc 4000rpm/s
Starting temp: 58.7degC act, Set temp 132degC, act. 120degC, Ramp power 60%, ramp time 8min. Baking
Starting temp: 62.3degC act, Set temp 132degC, act. 120degC, Ramp power 60%, ramp time 8min. Baking
Starting temp: 55.5degC act, Set temp 132degC, act. 120degC, Ramp power 60%, ramp time 8min. Baking
Thermal dep of Al, thickness = 15nm, rate 1.7 Å/s, P=1.7e-6mbar, 3 Pellets, 1.2hour pump time, 5 min pro
Thermal dep of Al, thickness = 15nm, rate 1.7 Å/s, P=1.7e-6mbar, 3 Pellets, 1.2hour pump time, 5 min pro
Thermal dep of Al, thickness = 15nm, rate 1.7 Å/s, P=1.7e-6mbar, 3 Pellets, 1.2hour pump time, 5 min pro
Ebeam Writer JBX-9500
Ebeam Writer JBX-9500
Ebeam Writer JBX-9500
Stencil mask, 175nm, rate 10 Å/s, Crystal X2 health: 71%
Stencil mask, 5nm Cr, rate 4 Å/s 200nm Au, rate 5 Å/s, Crystal X2 health: 85%
APPENDIX C. FABRICATION LOGBOOK
ix
==PAGE:99==
Appendix D
Matlab code
D.1
The conductivity of graphene
The following code can be used to calculate the conductivity of graphene at discrete
frequency values.
function [sig_real ,sig_imag] = Gperm_valid(wl ,EF)
% RPA calculation of the conductivity for graphene
factor =1;
C=3*10^8; % speed of light in unit of m/s
H=1.054571726*10^ -34; % reduced Planck constant in unit
of J.s
kB =1.3806488*10^ -23;
%Boltzmann
constant in unit of
Jk^-1
e=1.602176565*10^ -19;
% electron charge in unit of
Coulumb
T=300; %Temperature
mu = 1; %DC mobility of graphene , 10^4 cm^2/Vs
vF = 10^6; %Fermi velocity in graphene
tau = mu*EF/(e*vF^2);
% tau= uEf/evf^2, tau =0.1 ps when
Ef =0.1
gamma =1/ tau; %10^13; % Damping frequency;
epsilon0 =8.85*10^ -12; %Vacuum
permittivity
um=10^ -6; %Unit conversion
THz =10^12; %Unit conversion
wavelength = wl; %Wavelength
omega =2*pi*C./ wavelength; % Angular frequency
t=0.33*10^ -9; % Thickness of graphene
frequency=C./ wavelength;%wave number
x
==PAGE:100==
APPENDIX D. MATLAB CODE
% RPA calculation for fixed EF
sigma1 =2*e^2*kB*T/(pi*H^2) * 1i./( omega +1i*gamma).*log
(2* cosh(EF /(2* kB*T)));
Hfunc = @(eps) 1./( cosh(EF/(kB*T))./ sinh(H*eps/(kB*T))+
coth(H*eps/(kB*T)));
sigma2 = e^2/(4*H) .* Hfunc(omega ./2);
sigma3=zeros(1,length(omega));
for ii=1: length(omega);
gH = (@(x)(Hfunc(x.* omega(ii))-Hfunc(omega(ii)/2))
./(1 -4*x.^2));
iGH = quadgk(gH ,0,inf ,'RelTol ',1e -12);
sigma3(ii)=e^2/(4*H) * (4*1i)/pi * iGH;
end;
sigma =( sigma1+sigma2+sigma3)*factor; % RPA calculation
sigma_cl =( sigma1)*factor; %Semiclassical model
% Dielectric
funtion
eps_graphene =1+1i*sigma ./ omega/t/epsilon0;
sig_real = real(sigma (1,:));
sig_imag = imag(sigma (1,:));
end
D.2
Code for simulations
The following codes can be used to replicate the results of the basic model.
D.2.1
The main script
The main script calls a builder and a solver function and does the plotting. The
two are split to avoid spending time on building the geometry and mesh every
time if it does not change.
clc
clear all
close all
xi
==PAGE:101==
APPENDIX D. MATLAB CODE
e=1.602176565*10^ -19; %Electron charge
h=4.135667662*10^ -15; %Plancks constant in eV s
freq_step = 0.1 e12; % Frequency spacing used in COMSOL
model
freq_start = 10e12; % Starting
frequency
freq_end = 80e12; % Ending frequency
freq = freq_start:freq_step:freq_end; % List of chosen
frequencies to simulate
wavelength = 3e8./ freq;
EF = 0.35*e;
rib_width =100;
spacings = 100;
R = nan(length(freq),length(spacings)); % Preallocation
T = nan(length(freq),length(spacings)); % Preallocation
A = nan(length(freq),length(spacings)); % Preallocation
pd = cell(length(spacings) ,1); % Preallocation
pd2 = cell(length(spacings) ,1); % Preallocation
pd3 = cell(length(spacings) ,1); % Preallocation
%% Run the simulation
for k = 1: length(spacings);
%Build the model
tic
model = Basic_builder(freq_start ,freq_step ,freq_end ,
rib_width ,spacings(k));
time = toc;
disp (['Model built in ' num2str(time) ' seconds '])
totaltime = time;
tic
%Solve the model
[R(:,k),T(:,k),A(:,k),pd{k},pd2{k},pd3{k}] =
Basic_solver(model ,freq_start ,freq_step ,freq_end ,
EF);
time = toc;
if k == 1
xii
==PAGE:102==
APPENDIX D. MATLAB CODE
disp (['Step ' num2str(k) '/' num2str(length(
spacings)) ' Completed in... ' num2str(time)
' seconds '])
disp (['Expected time until completion ... '
num2str(floor(length(spacings)*time /60)) '
minutes and ' num2str (( length(spacings)*time
/60- floor(length(spacings)*time /60))*60) '
seconds '])
else
disp (['Step ' num2str(k) '/' num2str(length(
spacings)) ' Completed in...' num2str(time) '
seconds '])
end
totaltime = time+totaltime;
end
disp (['Simulation
completed in ' num2str(floor(
totaltime /60)) ' minutes and ' num2str (( totaltime
/60- floor(totaltime /60))*60) ' seconds ']);
%% Finding the resonance frequencies
[resonance_A ,resonance_I] = findpeaks(A);
reonance_freq = freq(resonance_I)
resonance_E = freq(resonance_I).*h;
%Interpolate data at the resonances:
[xq , yq] = meshgrid (0:0.5:2* rib_width ,720:0.5:880);
Vq = cell(length(resonance_I) ,3);
warning('off');
for ii = 1: length(resonance_I);
Vq{ii ,1} = griddata(pd{1 ,1}.p(1,:),pd{1 ,1}.p(2,:),pd
{1 ,1}.d1(resonance_I(ii) ,:),xq ,yq , 'cubic ');
Vq{ii ,2} = griddata(pd2 {1 ,1}.p(1,:),pd2 {1 ,1}.p(2,:),
pd2 {1 ,1}.d1(resonance_I(ii) ,:),xq ,yq , 'cubic ');
Vq{ii ,3} = griddata(pd3 {1 ,1}.p(1,:),pd3 {1 ,1}.p(2,:),
pd3 {1 ,1}.d1(resonance_I(ii) ,:),xq ,yq , 'cubic ');
end
warning('on');
%% Normalise the data:
NormVq = Vq;
for ii = 1: length(resonance_I);
NormVq{ii ,1} = Vq{ii ,1}./ max(max(abs(Vq{ii ,1})));
NormVq{ii ,2} = Vq{ii ,2}./ max(max(abs(Vq{ii ,2})));
xiii
==PAGE:103==
APPENDIX D. MATLAB CODE
NormVq{ii ,3} = Vq{ii ,3}./ max(max(abs(Vq{ii ,3})));
end
%% Plotting the fields
for ii = 1:3;
for jj = 1:3;
% ii = 1; %Choose the mode to plot
% jj = 3; %1 for normE , 2 for Ex , 3 for Ey
doPrint = 1; %Set to one to save the file accoring to
the file name
figure
% contourf(Vq , 10, 'Edgecolor ', 'none ');
surf(xq ,yq ,NormVq{ii ,jj},'EdgeColor ','None', 'facecolor '
, 'interp ');
hold on
plot3 ([50 150] ,[800 800] ,[1 1],'m','LineWidth ' ,2) %Plot
the ribbon at the top for visualization
if jj == 1
caxis ([0 1])
title (['|E| at f = ' num2str(freq(resonance_I(ii))/1
e12) ' THz'])
filename = ['Figures\Basic_NormE_ ' num2str(ii)];
elseif jj == 2
caxis ([-1 1])
title (['E_x at f = ' num2str(freq(resonance_I(ii))/1
e12) ' THz'])
filename = ['Figures\Basic_Ex_ ' num2str(ii)];
elseif jj == 3
caxis ([-1 1])
title (['E_y at f = ' num2str(freq(resonance_I(ii))/1
e12) ' THz'])
filename = ['Figures\Basic_Ey_ ' num2str(ii)];
end
view (2);
colorbar
xlabel('X-position [nm]')
ylabel('Y-position [nm]')
ax = gca;
ax.FontSize = 24; %24 fontsize fits 3 figs per row.
% ax.FontWeight = 'bold ';
ax.XTick = [0 50 100 150 200];
ax.YTick = [720 800 880];
xiv
==PAGE:104==
APPENDIX D. MATLAB CODE
ax.YLim = [720 880];
if doPrint
print(filename ,'-dpng')
close all
end
end
end
%% Save the fig
% filename = 'Figures\Basic_Ex_2 ';
% print(filename ,'-dpng ')
%% Plotting the other modes
figure
% contourf(Vq , 10, 'Edgecolor ', 'none ');
surf(xq ,yq ,NormVq {2,2},'EdgeColor ','None');
% caxis ([0 1])
colormap(parula (256))
view (2);
colorbar
title (['f = ' num2str(freq(resonance_I (2))/1e12) ' THz'
])
xlabel('X-position [nm]')
ylabel('Y-position [nm]')
ax = gca;
ax.FontSize = 12;
figure
% contourf(Vq , 10, 'Edgecolor ', 'none ');
surf(xq ,yq ,NormVq {3,2},'EdgeColor ','None');
% caxis ([0 1])
colormap(parula (256))
view (2);
colorbar
title (['f = ' num2str(freq(resonance_I (3))/1e12) ' THz'
])
xlabel('X-position [nm]')
ylabel('Y-position [nm]')
ax = gca;
ax.FontSize = 12;
%% Plotting the results:
xv
==PAGE:105==
APPENDIX D. MATLAB CODE
figure
plot(freq .*1e-12,R,'r','LineWidth ' ,2)
hold on
plot(freq .*1e-12,T,'b','LineWidth ' ,2)
plot(freq .*1e-12,A,'g','LineWidth ' ,2)
legend('R','T','A','Location ','NorthEast ')
xlabel('Frequency [THz]')
ylabel('R / T / A')
ax = gca;
ax.FontSize = 18;
print('Figures\Basic_RTA ','-dpng')
%% Save the results.
% clear model % Clear model in order to save the matfile
result.
% matfilename =[' Results\ws \20160510 _RTA_20_50_01.mat '];
% save(matfilename);
D.2.2
The Builder script
The following script build the COMSOL model with the geometry, mesh and all
system parameters.
function out = Basic_builder(freq_start ,freq_step ,
freq_end ,rib_width ,spacing)
import com.comsol.model .*
import com.comsol.model.util .*
model = ModelUtil.create('Model ');
model.modelPath('C:\ Users\s103107\Dropbox\
PROJ_20160104_MasterThesis \Comsol\Simulations for the
report\Single ribbon simulation\Basic simulation');
model.label('Basic.mph');
model.comments (['Untitled\n\n']);
model.param.set('rib_width ', [num2str(rib_width) '[nm]'
]);
model.param.set('sio2_height ', '300[ nm]');
model.param.set('si_height ', '500[ nm]');
xvi
==PAGE:106==
APPENDIX D. MATLAB CODE
model.param.set('sys_height ', '(sio2_height+si_height)*2
');
model.param.set('T_ev', 'T*k_B_const ');
model.param.set('T', '300 [K]');
model.param.set('freq', [num2str(freq_end) '[Hz]']);
model.param.set('spacing ', [num2str(spacing) '[nm]']);
model.param.set('sys_width ', 'rib_width+spacing ');
model.modelNode.create('comp1 ');
model.geom.create('geom1 ', 2);
model.mesh.create('mesh1 ', 'geom1 ');
model.geom('geom1 ').lengthUnit('nm');
model.geom('geom1 ').selection.create('csel1 ', '
CumulativeSelection ');
model.geom('geom1 ').selection('csel1 ').label('sub_si ');
model.geom('geom1 ').selection.create('csel2 ', '
CumulativeSelection ');
model.geom('geom1 ').selection('csel2 ').label('sub_sio2 ')
;
model.geom('geom1 ').selection.create('csel3 ', '
CumulativeSelection ');
model.geom('geom1 ').selection('csel3 ').label('grphn ');
model.geom('geom1 ').selection.create('csel4 ', '
CumulativeSelection ');
model.geom('geom1 ').selection('csel4 ').label('Finemesh ')
;
model.geom('geom1 ').create('r1', 'Rectangle ');
model.geom('geom1 ').feature('r1').label('Simulation
volume ');
model.geom('geom1 ').feature('r1').set('size', {'
sys_width ' 'sys_height '});
model.geom('geom1 ').create('r2', 'Rectangle ');
model.geom('geom1 ').feature('r2').active(false);
model.geom('geom1 ').feature('r2').label('SubstrateSi ');
model.geom('geom1 ').feature('r2').set('size', {'2*
rib_width ' 'si_height '});
model.geom('geom1 ').feature('r2').set('contributeto ', '
csel1 ');
model.geom('geom1 ').create('r3', 'Rectangle ');
model.geom('geom1 ').feature('r3').active(false);
xvii
==PAGE:107==
APPENDIX D. MATLAB CODE
model.geom('geom1 ').feature('r3').label('SubstrateSiO2 ')
;
model.geom('geom1 ').feature('r3').set('size', {'2*
rib_width ' 'sio2_height '});
model.geom('geom1 ').feature('r3').set('contributeto ', '
csel2 ');
model.geom('geom1 ').feature('r3').set('pos', {'0' '
si_height '});
model.geom('geom1 ').create('b1', 'BezierPolygon ');
model.geom('geom1 ').feature('b1').set('p', {'0.5* spacing
' '0.5* spacing+rib_width '; 'sio2_height+si_height ' '
sio2_height+si_height '});
model.geom('geom1 ').feature('b1').set('contributeto ', '
csel3 ');
model.geom('geom1 ').feature('b1').set('w', {'1' '1'});
model.geom('geom1 ').feature('b1').set('degree ', {'1'});
model.geom('geom1 ').create('r4', 'Rectangle ');
model.geom('geom1 ').feature('r4').label('Meshbox ');
model.geom('geom1 ').feature('r4').set('size', {'
sys_width ' '1/10* sys_height '});
model.geom('geom1 ').feature('r4').set('contributeto ', '
csel4 ');
model.geom('geom1 ').feature('r4').set('pos', {'0' '
sys_height /2 -0.5*1/10* sys_height'});
model.geom('geom1 ').run;
model.selection.create('emw_dst_pc1 ', 'Explicit ');
model.selection('emw_dst_pc1 ').label('Destination
selection for ''Periodic
Condition 1''');
model.material.create('mat1', 'Common ', 'comp1 ');
model.material('mat1').propertyGroup('def').func.create(
'eta', 'Piecewise ');
model.material('mat1').propertyGroup('def').func.create(
'Cp', 'Piecewise ');
model.material('mat1').propertyGroup('def').func.create(
'rho', 'Analytic ');
model.material('mat1').propertyGroup('def').func.create(
'k', 'Piecewise ');
model.material('mat1').propertyGroup('def').func.create(
'cs', 'Analytic ');
model.material('mat1').propertyGroup.create('
RefractiveIndex ', 'Refractive index');
xviii
==PAGE:108==
APPENDIX D. MATLAB CODE
model.physics.create('emw', 'ElectromagneticWaves ', '
geom1 ');
model.physics('emw').create('port1 ', 'Port', 1);
model.physics('emw').feature('port1 ').selection.set ([7])
;
model.physics('emw').create('port2 ', 'Port', 1);
model.physics('emw').feature('port2 ').selection.set ([2])
;
model.physics('emw').create('pc1', 'PeriodicCondition ',
1);
model.physics('emw').feature('pc1').selection.set ([1 3 5
9 10 11]);
model.physics('emw').create('scu1', 'SurfaceCurrent ', 1)
;
model.physics('emw').feature('scu1').selection.named('
geom1_csel3_bnd ');
model.mesh('mesh1 ').create('ftri2 ', 'FreeTri ');
model.mesh('mesh1 ').create('ftri3 ', 'FreeTri ');
model.mesh('mesh1 ').feature('ftri2 ').selection.named('
geom1_csel4_dom ');
model.mesh('mesh1 ').feature('ftri2 ').create('size1 ', '
Size');
model.mesh('mesh1 ').feature('ftri3 ').create('size1 ', '
Size');
model.material('mat1').label('Air');
model.material('mat1').set('family ', 'air');
model.material('mat1').propertyGroup('def').func('eta').
set('pieces ', {'200.0 ' '1600.0 ' ' -8.38278E
-7+8.35717342E-8*T^1 -7.69429583E -11*T^2+4.6437266E
-14*T^3 -1.06585607E-17*T^4'});
model.material('mat1').propertyGroup('def').func('eta').
set('arg', 'T');
model.material('mat1').propertyGroup('def').func('Cp').
set('pieces ', {'200.0 ' '1600.0 ' '
1047.63657 -0.372589265*T^1+9.45304214E-4*T
^2 -6.02409443E-7*T^3+1.2858961E -10*T^4'});
model.material('mat1').propertyGroup('def').func('Cp').
set('arg', 'T');
model.material('mat1').propertyGroup('def').func('rho').
set('args', {'pA' 'T'});
model.material('mat1').propertyGroup('def').func('rho').
set('expr', 'pA *0.02897/8.314/T');
xix
==PAGE:109==
APPENDIX D. MATLAB CODE
model.material('mat1').propertyGroup('def').func('rho').
set('dermethod ', 'manual ');
model.material('mat1').propertyGroup('def').func('rho').
set('plotargs ', {'pA' '0' '1'; 'T' '0' '1'});
model.material('mat1').propertyGroup('def').func('rho').
set('argders ', {'pA' 'd(pA *0.02897/8.314/T,pA)'; 'T'
'd(pA *0.02897/8.314/T,T)'});
model.material('mat1').propertyGroup('def').func('k').
set('pieces ', {'200.0 ' '1600.0 ' '
-0.00227583562+1.15480022E-4*T^1 -7.90252856E-8*T
^2+4.11702505E -11*T^3 -7.43864331E -15*T^4'});
model.material('mat1').propertyGroup('def').func('k').
set('arg', 'T');
model.material('mat1').propertyGroup('def').func('cs').
set('args', {'T'});
model.material('mat1').propertyGroup('def').func('cs').
set('expr', 'sqrt (1.4*287*T)');
model.material('mat1').propertyGroup('def').func('cs').
set('dermethod ', 'manual ');
model.material('mat1').propertyGroup('def').func('cs').
set('plotargs ', {'T' '0' '1'});
model.material('mat1').propertyGroup('def').func('cs').
set('argders ', {'T' 'd(sqrt (1.4*287*T),T)'});
model.material('mat1').propertyGroup('def').set('
relpermeability ', {'1' '0' '0' '0' '1' '0' '0' '0' '1
'});
model.material('mat1').propertyGroup('def').set('
relpermittivity ', {'1' '0' '0' '0' '1' '0' '0' '0' '1
'});
model.material('mat1').propertyGroup('def').set('
dynamicviscosity ', 'eta(T[1/K])[Pa*s]');
model.material('mat1').propertyGroup('def').set('
ratioofspecificheat ', '1.4');
model.material('mat1').propertyGroup('def').set('
electricconductivity ', {'0[S/m]' '0' '0' '0' '0[S/m]'
'0' '0' '0' '0[S/m]'});
model.material('mat1').propertyGroup('def').set('
heatcapacity ', 'Cp(T[1/K])[J/(kg*K)]');
model.material('mat1').propertyGroup('def').set('density
', 'rho(pA[1/Pa],T[1/K])[kg/m^3]');
model.material('mat1').propertyGroup('def').set('
thermalconductivity ', {'k(T[1/K])[W/(m*K)]' '0' '0' '
0' 'k(T[1/K])[W/(m*K)]' '0' '0' '0' 'k(T[1/K])[W/(m*K
)]'});
xx
==PAGE:110==
APPENDIX D. MATLAB CODE
model.material('mat1').propertyGroup('def').set('
soundspeed ', 'cs(T[1/K])[m/s]');
model.material('mat1').propertyGroup('def').addInput('
temperature ');
model.material('mat1').propertyGroup('def').addInput('
pressure ');
model.material('mat1').propertyGroup('RefractiveIndex ').
set('n', '');
model.material('mat1').propertyGroup('RefractiveIndex ').
set('ki', '');
model.material('mat1').propertyGroup('RefractiveIndex ').
set('n', {'1' '0' '0' '0' '1' '0' '0' '0' '1'});
model.material('mat1').propertyGroup('RefractiveIndex ').
set('ki', {'0' '0' '0' '0' '0' '0' '0' '0' '0'});
model.physics('emw').feature('wee1').set('materialType ',
'from_mat ');
model.physics('emw').feature('port1 ').set('
PortExcitation ', 'on');
model.physics('emw').feature('port1 ').set('PortType ', '
Periodic ');
model.physics('emw').feature('port1 ').set('InputType ', '
H');
model.physics('emw').feature('port1 ').set('H0', {'0'; '0
'; '1'});
model.physics('emw').feature('port1 ').set('Eampl ', {'0';
'1'; '0'});
model.physics('emw').feature('port1 ').set('Hampl ', {'0';
'0'; '1'});
model.physics('emw').feature('port1 ').set('fmax', 'freq'
);
model.physics('emw').feature('port2 ').set('PortType ', '
Periodic ');
model.physics('emw').feature('port2 ').set('InputType ', '
H');
model.physics('emw').feature('port2 ').set('Eampl ', {'0';
'1'; '0'});
model.physics('emw').feature('port2 ').set('Hampl ', {'0';
'0'; '1'});
model.physics('emw').feature('port2 ').set('fmax', 'freq'
);
model.physics('emw').feature('pc1').set('PeriodicType ',
'Floquet ');
xxi
==PAGE:111==
APPENDIX D. MATLAB CODE
model.physics('emw').feature('pc1').set('Floquet_source '
, 'FromPeriodicPort ');
model.mesh('mesh1 ').feature('size').set('hauto ', 4);
model.mesh('mesh1 ').feature('ftri2 ').feature('size1 ').
set('hauto ', 1);
model.mesh('mesh1 ').feature('ftri3 ').feature('size1 ').
set('hauto ', 7);
model.mesh('mesh1 ').run;
model.study.create('std1');
model.study('std1').create('freq', 'Frequency ');
model.sol.create('sol1');
model.sol('sol1').study('std1');
model.sol('sol1').attach('std1');
model.sol('sol1').create('st1', 'StudyStep ');
model.sol('sol1').create('v1', 'Variables ');
model.sol('sol1').create('s1', 'Stationary ');
model.sol('sol1').feature('s1').create('p1', 'Parametric
');
model.sol('sol1').feature('s1').create('fc1', '
FullyCoupled ');
model.sol('sol1').feature('s1').feature.remove('fcDef ');
model.study('std1').feature('freq').set('plist ', ['range
(' num2str(freq_start) ',' num2str(freq_step) ','
num2str(freq_end) ')']);
model.sol('sol1').attach('std1');
model.sol('sol1').feature('s1').feature('aDef').set('
complexfun ', true);
model.sol('sol1').feature('s1').feature('p1').set('punit
', {'Hz'});
model.sol('sol1').feature('s1').feature('p1').set('
plistarr ', {['range(' num2str(freq_start) ',' num2str
(freq_step) ',' num2str(freq_end) ')']});
model.sol('sol1').feature('s1').feature('p1').set('pname
', {'freq'});
model.sol('sol1').feature('s1').feature('p1').set('
preusesol ', 'auto');
model.sol('sol1').feature('s1').feature('p1').set('
pcontinuationmode ', 'no');
xxii
==PAGE:112==
APPENDIX D. MATLAB CODE
out = model;
D.2.3
The Solver script
The following script solves the COMSOL model and calls the Gperm script to
calculate the surface conductivity of graphene at discrete frequencies, which is
then interpolated.
function [R,T,A,pd ,pd2 ,pd3] = Basic_solver(model ,
freq_start ,freq_step ,freq_end ,EF)
freq = freq_start:freq_step:freq_end;% List of chosen
frequencies to simulate
wavelength = 3e8./ freq;
[sig_real , sig_imag] = Gperm(wavelength ,EF);
model.func.remove('int1'); %Remove previous
interpolations
model.func.remove('int2'); %Remove previous
interpolations
model.func.create('int1', 'Interpolation '); %
Interpolation of the surface
conductivity
model.func.create('int2', 'Interpolation '); %
Interpolation of the surface
conductivity
model.func('int1').model('comp1 ');
model.func('int1').label('sig_real ');
model.func('int1').set('argunit ', 'Hz');
model.func('int1').set('table ', sig_real);
model.func('int1').set('fununit ', 'S');
model.func('int1').set('funcname ', 'sig_real ');
model.func('int2').model('comp1 ');
model.func('int2').label('sig_imag ');
model.func('int2').set('argunit ', 'Hz');
model.func('int2').set('table ', sig_imag);
model.func('int2').set('fununit ', 'S');
model.func('int2').set('funcname ', 'sig_imag ');
model.variable.remove('var1'); %Remove previous
model.variable.create('var1');
model.variable('var1').model('comp1 ');
xxiii
==PAGE:113==
APPENDIX D. MATLAB CODE
model.variable('var1').set('sig_G ', 'sig_real(freq) - j*
sig_imag(freq)');
model.physics('emw').feature('scu1').set('Js0', {'sig_G*
Ex'; '0'; '0'});
model.sol('sol1').runAll;
%Evaluate the S parameters
S11 = mphglobal(model ,{'emw.S11'},'complexout ','on');
S21 = mphglobal(model ,{'emw.S21'},'complexout ','on');
%Calculate the Reflactance , Transmittance and Absorbance
R = (abs(S11)).^2;
T = (abs(S21)).^2;
A = 1 - R - T;
%Evaluate the electric fields in the meshbox
pd = mpheval(model ,{'emw.normE '}, 'selection ', '
geom1_csel4_dom ');
pd2 = mpheval(model ,{'emw.Ex'}, 'selection ', '
geom1_csel4_dom ');
pd3 = mpheval(model ,{'emw.Ey'}, 'selection ', '
geom1_csel4_dom ');
end
D.3
Code for initial L-edit layouts
D.3.1
Calling the dumbbell function to generate isolated
microribbons
The script was written by Christian Frydendahl, and calls the dumbbell.m func-
tion, to create frames and create isolated microribbons. The coordinates of the
created polygons are saved to a ﬁle which can be imported directly into L-edit.
clc , clear all , close all
%clear target file
filename = sprintf('frames.txt');
fopen(filename , 'w');
fileID = fopen(filename , 'at');
formatSpec = '%s\n';
xxiv
==PAGE:114==
APPENDIX D. MATLAB CODE
%Generate
dumbbell framess using the function dumbbell.m
for n=0:4
[frames ,beams] = dumbbell (0 ,500*n);
% NOTE NOTE NOTE This requires a layer in L-edit called
HighDose
strfr = strcat('polygon
-! ',num2str(frames), ' -l
HighDose ');
strbe = strcat('polygon
-! ',num2str(beams), ' -l
HighDose ');
fprintf(fileID ,formatSpec ,strfr (1,:));
fprintf(fileID ,formatSpec ,strfr (2,:));
fprintf(fileID ,formatSpec ,strbe (1,:));
fprintf(fileID ,formatSpec ,strbe (2,:));
end
fclose all;
D.3.2
The dumbbell function
The function was written by Christian Frydendahl, and takes arguments X and Y
as the lower left corner of the frame.
function [out ,out2] = dumbbell(X,Y)
%This functions
creates the dumbbell frame for the
bowtie structure ,
%starting from coordinates X,Y:
%First frame coordinates:
%Sidelength of frame:
F = 400;
%Width of graphene trench:
A = 100;
%Penetration depth in frame:
D = 100;
pt1 = [0+X 0+Y];
pt2 = [0+X F+Y];
pt3 = [F+X F+Y];
xxv
==PAGE:115==
APPENDIX D. MATLAB CODE
pt4 = [F+X (F/2 + A/2)+Y];
pt5 = [F-D+X (F/2 + A/2)+Y];
pt6 = [F-D+X (F/2 + A/2)-A+Y];
pt7 = [F+X (F/2 + A/2)-A+Y];
pt8 = [F+X 0+Y];
%Top beam:
%Overlap with frame:
d = 5;
%Width of buffer for graphene trench:
B = 250;
%Length of buffer for graphene trench:
l = 300;
pt1t = [F-d+X (F/2 + A/2)+Y];
pt2t = [F+d+l+X (F/2 + A/2)+Y];
pt3t = [F+d+l+X (F/2 + A/2)+(B-A)+Y];
pt4t = [F-d+X (F/2 + A/2)+(B-A)+Y];
%Bottom beam:
pt1b = [F-d+X (F/2 + A/2)-B+Y];
pt2b = [F+d+l+X (F/2 + A/2)-B+Y];
pt3b = [F+d+l+X (F/2 + A/2)+(B-A)-B+Y];
pt4b = [F-d+X (F/2 + A/2)+(B-A)-B+Y];
%Second frame coordinates
pt12 = [0+X+2*F+l 0+Y];
pt22 = [0+X+2*F+l F+Y];
pt32 = [-F+X+2*F+l F+Y];
pt42 = [-F+X+2*F+l (F/2 + A/2)+Y];
pt52 = [-F+D+X+2*F+l (F/2 + A/2)+Y];
pt62 = [-F+D+X+2*F+l (F/2 + A/2)-A+Y];
pt72 = [-F+X+2*F+l (F/2 + A/2)-A+Y];
pt82 = [-F+X+2*F+l 0+Y];
%Creating output:
coord = [pt1 , pt2 , pt3 , pt4 , pt5 , pt6 , pt7 , pt8];
coord2 = [pt12 , pt22 , pt32 , pt42 , pt52 , pt62 , pt72 , pt82
];
xxvi
==PAGE:116==
APPENDIX D. MATLAB CODE
coordt = [pt1t , pt2t , pt3t , pt4t ];
coordb = [pt1b , pt2b , pt3b , pt4b ];
out = [coord;coord2 ];
out2 = [coordt;coordb ];
end
D.3.3
Calling the rib_unitcell function to create array of
nanoribbons
Calling the rib_unitcell.m function to create polygons for the interdigitated nanorib-
bon array and save the coordinates to a .txt ﬁle, that can be executed by L-edit.
clc , clear all , close all
%clear target file
filename = sprintf('ribbons.txt');
fopen(filename , 'w');
fileID = fopen(filename , 'at');
formatSpec = '%s\n';
%Call the array of unitcells at the various locations
rib_print = rib_unitcell (495.5 ,150 ,0.3);
for i = 1: size(rib_print);
fprintf(fileID ,formatSpec ,rib_print(i,:));
end
rib_print = rib_unitcell (495.5 ,650 ,0.2);
for i = 1: size(rib_print);
fprintf(fileID ,formatSpec ,rib_print(i,:));
end
rib_print = rib_unitcell (495.5 ,1150 ,0.15);
for i = 1: size(rib_print);
fprintf(fileID ,formatSpec ,rib_print(i,:));
end
rib_print = rib_unitcell (495.5 ,1650 ,0.1);
for i = 1: size(rib_print);
fprintf(fileID ,formatSpec ,rib_print(i,:));
end
xxvii
==PAGE:117==
APPENDIX D. MATLAB CODE
fclose all;
D.3.4
The rib_unitcell function
The rib_unitcell creates n repeated polygons(unitcells), until an area larger than
100x100µm has been covered. The polygons start in the lower left corner at X and
Y and the width of the ribbons are given as w. The spacings are automatically set
as the width of the ribbon creating a designed ﬁlling factor of 1/2. The ribbons
are 95µm long, and there are 5µm at the end of each ribbon to avoid contact to
the other contact.
function [rib_unitcell] = rib_unitcell(X,Y,w)
%NOTE NOTE NOTE This requires a layer in L-edit called
LowDose already
%created.
l = 95; %Length of the nanoribbons
w = w; %width of the nanoribbons
sx = 5; %spacing between end of nanoribbons and
microribbons
sy = w; % spacing between
nanoribbons
h = l + sx; %Total height of array (a square array is
assumed here)
n = ceil(h/(2*(w+sy))); %Number of nanoribbon
unitcells
to array
iCoord = nan(n ,10*2); %Pre -allocation
%Create the n unit cells
for iCell = 0:n-1
%
X = X;
iY = Y + iCell *(2*w+2*sy);
pt1 = [X iY];
pt2 = pt1 + [sx 0];
pt3 = pt2 + [0 w];
pt4 = pt3 + [l 0];
pt5 = pt4 + [0 sy+w+sy];
pt6 = pt5 + [-sx -l 0];
pt7 = pt6 + [0 -sy];
pt8 = pt7 + [l 0];
pt9 = pt8 + [0 -w];
pt10 = pt9 + [-l 0];
xxviii
==PAGE:118==
APPENDIX D. MATLAB CODE
iCoord(iCell +1,:) = [pt1 pt2 pt3 pt4 pt5 pt6 pt7 pt8 pt9
pt10 ];
end
rib_unitcell = strcat('polygon
-! ',num2str(iCoord), ' -
l LowDose ');
end
D.4
Edited code for ﬁnal L-edit layouts
For the ﬁnal design the frames were redeﬁned as a single polygon.
D.4.1
Calling the frame_unitcell function to generate iso-
lated microribbons
Just as before this function calls a function repeatedly at diﬀerent x and y coor-
dinate sets.
clc
clear all
close all
%clear target file
filename = sprintf('frames.txt');
fopen(filename , 'w');
fileID = fopen(filename , 'at');
formatSpec = '%s\n';
%Setup the array
n = 5; %number of frames
yspac = 500; %Spacing between frames
ycorners = 0:500:(n-1) *500; %Y-coordinates of the frame
bottom
%Call an array of the unit cells
for ii = 1:n
frame_print = frame_unitcell (0, ycorners(ii));
for i = 1: size(frame_print);
fprintf(fileID ,formatSpec ,frame_print(i,:));
end
end
fclose all;
xxix
==PAGE:119==
APPENDIX D. MATLAB CODE
D.4.2
The frame_unitcell function
Given coordinate a set of (X,Y), the function will return a frame with the lower
left corner based at (X,Y).
function [frame_unitcell] = frame_unitcell(X,Y)
%NOTE NOTE NOTE This requires a layer in L-edit called
HighDose already
%created.
%% Define the sizes for the frame in um
il = 500; %Inner length
xspacing = 300; %Edge spacing , x
ol = il+2* xspacing; %Outer length
ih = 100; %Inner height
yspacing = 150; %Edge spacing , y
oh = ih + 2* yspacing; %Outer height
%% Create unit cell:
pt1 = [X Y];
pt2 = pt1 + [ol 0];
pt3 = pt2 + [0 oh];
pt4 = pt3 + [-ol 0];
pt5 = pt4 + [0 -yspacing ];
pt6 = pt5 + [xspacing+il 0];
pt7 = pt6 + [0 -ih];
pt8 = pt7 + [-il 0];
pt9 = pt8 + [0 ih];
pt10 = pt9 + [-xspacing 0];
pt11 = pt10 + [0 -ih -yspacing ];
iCoord = [pt1 pt2 pt3 pt4 pt5 pt6 pt7 pt8 pt9 pt10 pt11
];
frame_unitcell = strcat('polygon
-! ',num2str(iCoord), '
-l HighDose ');
end
xxx
==PAGE:120==
Appendix E
Files from the last e-beam
exposure
This appendix contains the composition of the ﬁles needed for e-beam exposure.
The only thing missing to repeat the exposure is the .v30 ﬁle which is not a simple
code ﬁle.
E.1
.sdf ﬁle
The .sdf ﬁle that calls the .jdf ﬁles for each of the two cassette slots (b and c).
First it will call the low currents denoted lb and lc respectively. Secondly the high
current .jdf ﬁles will be called denothed lb and lc.
niste20160622.sdf:
MAGAZIN 'MFM'
;---------------------------
#10
%3B
JDF
'niste20160622lb ',1
ACC 100
CALPRM '2na_ap5 '
RESIST 500
SHOT A,8
OFFSET (0,0)
#10
%3C
JDF
'niste20160622lc ',1
ACC 100
CALPRM '2na_ap5 '
xxxi
==PAGE:121==
APPENDIX E. FILES FROM THE LAST E-BEAM EXPOSURE
RESIST 500
SHOT A,8
OFFSET (0,0)
;---------------------------
#10
%3B
JDF
'niste20160622hb ',1
ACC 100
CALPRM '60 na_ap8 '
RESTOR 1
RESIST 600
SHOT A,40
OFFSET (0,0)
#10
%3C
JDF
'niste20160622hc ',1
ACC 100
CALPRM '60 na_ap8 '
RESIST 600
SHOT A,40
OFFSET (0,0)
;---------------------------
END 10
E.2
.jdf ﬁles
We only show one set of .jdf ﬁles (lb and hb), as the only diﬀerence changing
between cassette slots is the position of exposures.
niste20160622lb.jdf:
JOB/W
'PMMASM ',2
;inch wafer
PATH DRF5M
ARRAY
(5800 ,2 ,1500) /(3700 ,2 ,3500)
ASSIGN P(1) ->((1,1),SHOT1)
ASSIGN P(1) ->((2,2),SHOT1)
AEND
ARRAY
(2000 ,2 ,1500) /(3200 ,2 ,3500)
xxxii
==PAGE:122==
APPENDIX E. FILES FROM THE LAST E-BEAM EXPOSURE
ASSIGN P(1) ->((1,1),SHOT1)
ASSIGN P(1) ->((2,2),SHOT1)
AEND
ARRAY
(1600 ,2 ,1500) /( -3300 ,2 ,3500)
ASSIGN P(1) ->((1,1),SHOT1)
ASSIGN P(1) ->((2,2),SHOT1)
AEND
ARRAY
( -3700 ,2 ,1500) /( -2000 ,2 ,3500)
ASSIGN P(1) ->((1,1),SHOT1)
ASSIGN P(1) ->((2,2),SHOT1)
AEND
ARRAY
( -3700 ,2 ,1500) /(3400 ,2 ,3500)
ASSIGN P(1) ->((1,1),SHOT1)
ASSIGN P(1) ->((2,2),SHOT1)
AEND
ARRAY
( -6700 ,2 ,1500) /(4200 ,2 ,3500)
ASSIGN P(1) ->((1,1),SHOT1)
ASSIGN P(1) ->((2,2),SHOT1)
AEND
PEND
LAYER
1
P(1)
'niste20160622_l.v30'
SPPRM 4.0,,,,1.0,1
STDCUR
2
; nA
SHOT1:
MODULAT (( 0,
-48.2 ) , ( 1,
-47.6 ) , ( 2,
-47.1 )
-
, ( 3,
-46.6 ) , ( 4,
-46.0 ) , ( 5,
-45.5 )
-
, ( 6,
-45.0 ) , ( 7,
-44.4 ) , ( 8,
-43.8 )
-
, ( 9,
-43.3 ) , ( 10,
-42.7 ) , ( 11,
-42.1 )
-
, ( 12,
-41.6 ) , ( 13,
-41.0 ) , ( 14,
-40.4 )
-
, ( 15,
-39.8 ) , ( 16,
-39.2 ) , ( 17,
-38.6 )
xxxiii
==PAGE:123==
APPENDIX E. FILES FROM THE LAST E-BEAM EXPOSURE
-
, ( 18,
-38.0 ) , ( 19,
-37.4 ) , ( 20,
-36.7 )
-
, ( 21,
-36.1 ) , ( 22,
-35.5 ) , ( 23,
-34.8 )
-
, ( 24,
-34.2 ) , ( 25,
-33.5 ) , ( 26,
-32.8 )
-
, ( 27,
-32.2 ) , ( 28,
-31.5 ) , ( 29,
-30.8 )
-
, ( 30,
-30.1 ) , ( 31,
-29.4 ) , ( 32,
-28.7 )
-
, ( 33,
-28.0 ) , ( 34,
-27.3 ) , ( 35,
-26.5 )
-
, ( 36,
-25.8 ) , ( 37,
-25.1 ) , ( 38,
-24.3 )
-
, ( 39,
-23.6 ) , ( 40,
-22.8 ) , ( 41,
-22.0 )
-
, ( 42,
-21.2 ) , ( 43,
-20.5 ) , ( 44,
-19.7 )
-
, ( 45,
-18.9 ) , ( 46,
-18.0 ) , ( 47,
-17.2 )
-
, ( 48,
-16.4 ) , ( 49,
-15.6 ) , ( 50,
-14.7 )
-
, ( 51,
-13.9 ) , ( 52,
-13.0 ) , ( 53,
-12.1 )
-
, ( 54,
-11.3 ) , ( 55,
-10.4 ) , ( 56,
-9.5 )
-
, ( 57,
-8.6 ) , ( 58,
-7.7 ) , ( 59,
-6.7 )
-
, ( 60,
-5.8 ) , ( 61,
-4.8 ) , ( 62,
-3.9 )
-
, ( 63,
-2.9 ) , ( 64,
-2.0 ) , ( 65,
-1.0 )
-
, ( 66,
0.0 ) , ( 67,
1.0 ) , ( 68,
2.0 )
-
, ( 69,
3.0 ) , ( 70,
4.1 ) , ( 71,
5.1 )
-
, ( 72,
6.2 ) , ( 73,
7.2 ) , ( 74,
8.3 )
-
, ( 75,
9.4 ) , ( 76, 10.5 ) , ( 77, 11.6 )
-
, ( 78, 12.7 ) , ( 79, 13.8 ) , ( 80, 14.9 )
-
, ( 81, 16.1 ) , ( 82, 17.3 ) , ( 83, 18.4 )
-
, ( 84, 19.6 ) , ( 85, 20.8 ) , ( 86, 22.0 )
-
, ( 87, 23.2 ) , ( 88, 24.5 ) , ( 89, 25.7 )
-
, ( 90, 27.0 ) , ( 91, 28.2 ) , ( 92, 29.5 )
-
, ( 93, 30.8 ) , ( 94, 32.1 ) , ( 95, 33.5 )
-
, ( 96, 34.8 ) , ( 97, 36.1 ) , ( 98, 37.5 )
-
, ( 99, 38.9 ) , ( 100, 40.3 ) , ( 101, 41.7 )
-
, ( 102, 43.1 ) , ( 103, 44.5 ) , ( 104, 46.0 )
-
, ( 105, 47.4 ) , ( 106, 48.9 ) , ( 107, 50.4 )
-
, ( 108, 51.9 ) , ( 109, 53.4 ) , ( 110, 54.9 )
-
, ( 111, 56.5 ) , ( 112, 58.1 ) , ( 113, 59.6 )
-
, ( 114, 61.2 ) , ( 115, 62.8 ) , ( 116, 64.5 )
-
, ( 117, 66.1 ) , ( 118, 67.8 ) , ( 119, 69.4 )
-
, ( 120, 71.1 ) , ( 121, 72.8 ) , ( 122, 74.6 )
-
, ( 123, 76.3 ) , ( 124, 78.1 ) , ( 125, 79.9 )
-
, ( 126, 81.7 ) , ( 127, 83.5 ) , ( 128, 85.3 )
-
, ( 129, 87.2 ) , ( 130, 89.1 ) , ( 131, 90.9 )
-
, ( 132, 92.9 ) , ( 133, 94.8 ) , ( 134, 96.7 )
-
, ( 135, 98.7 ) , ( 136, 100.7 ) , ( 137, 102.7 )
-
, ( 138, 104.7 ) , ( 139, 106.8 ) , ( 140, 108.8 )
-
, ( 141, 110.9 ) , ( 142, 113.0 ) , ( 143, 115.2 )
-
, ( 144, 117.3 ) , ( 145, 119.5 ) , ( 146, 121.7 )
-
, ( 147, 123.9 ) , ( 148, 126.1 ) , ( 149, 128.4 )
xxxiv
==PAGE:124==
APPENDIX E. FILES FROM THE LAST E-BEAM EXPOSURE
-
, ( 150, 130.7 ) , ( 151, 133.0 ) , ( 152, 135.3 )
-
, ( 153, 137.7 ) , ( 154, 140.0 ) , ( 155, 142.4 )
-
, ( 156, 144.9 ) , ( 157, 147.3 ) , ( 158, 149.8 )
-
, ( 159, 152.3 ) , ( 160, 154.8 ) , ( 161, 157.4 )
-
, ( 162, 159.9 ) , ( 163, 162.5 ) , ( 164, 165.2 )
-
, ( 165, 167.8 ) , ( 166, 170.5 ) , ( 167, 173.2 )
-
, ( 168, 175.9 ) , ( 169, 178.7 ) , ( 170, 181.5 )
-
, ( 171, 184.3 ) , ( 172, 187.1 ) , ( 173, 190.0 )
-
, ( 174, 192.9 ) , ( 175, 195.8 ) , ( 176, 198.8 )
-
, ( 177, 201.8 ) , ( 178, 204.8 ) , ( 179, 207.8 )
-
, ( 180, 210.9 ) , ( 181, 214.0 ) , ( 182, 217.2 )
-
, ( 183, 220.3 ) , ( 184, 223.5 ) , ( 185, 226.8 )
-
, ( 186, 230.0 ) , ( 187, 233.3 ) , ( 188, 236.7 )
-
, ( 189, 240.0 ) , ( 190, 243.4 ) , ( 191, 246.9 )
-
, ( 192, 250.3 ) , ( 193, 253.9 ) , ( 194, 257.4 )
-
, ( 195, 261.0 ) , ( 196, 264.6 ) , ( 197, 268.2 )
-
, ( 198, 271.9 ) , ( 199, 275.6 ) , ( 200, 279.4 )
-
, ( 201, 283.2 ) , ( 202, 287.0 ) , ( 203, 290.9 )
-
, ( 204, 294.8 ) , ( 205, 298.7 ) , ( 206, 302.7 )
-
, ( 207, 306.7 ) , ( 208, 310.8 ) , ( 209, 314.9 )
-
, ( 210, 319.1 ) , ( 211, 323.3 ) , ( 212, 327.5 )
-
, ( 213, 331.8 ) , ( 214, 336.1 ) , ( 215, 340.4 )
-
, ( 216, 344.8 ) , ( 217, 349.3 ) , ( 218, 353.8 )
-
, ( 219, 358.3 ) , ( 220, 362.9 ) , ( 221, 367.5 )
-
, ( 222, 372.2 ) , ( 223, 376.9 ) , ( 224, 381.7 )
-
, ( 225, 386.5 ) , ( 226, 391.4 ) , ( 227, 396.3 )
-
, ( 228, 401.3 ) , ( 229, 406.3 ) , ( 230, 411.3 )
-
, ( 231, 416.5 ) , ( 232, 421.6 ) , ( 233, 426.8 )
-
, ( 234, 432.1 ) , ( 235, 437.4 ))
END
niste20160622hb.jdf:
JOB/W
'PMMALARGE ',2
; inch wafer
PATH DRF5M
ARRAY
(5800 ,2 ,1500) /(3700 ,2 ,3500)
ASSIGN P(1) ->((1,1),SHOT1)
ASSIGN P(1) ->((2,2),SHOT1)
AEND
ARRAY
(2000 ,2 ,1500) /(3200 ,2 ,3500)
ASSIGN P(1) ->((1,1),SHOT1)
xxxv
==PAGE:125==
APPENDIX E. FILES FROM THE LAST E-BEAM EXPOSURE
ASSIGN P(1) ->((2,2),SHOT1)
AEND
ARRAY
(1600 ,2 ,1500) /( -3300 ,2 ,3500)
ASSIGN P(1) ->((1,1),SHOT1)
ASSIGN P(1) ->((2,2),SHOT1)
AEND
ARRAY
( -3700 ,2 ,1500) /( -2000 ,2 ,3500)
ASSIGN P(1) ->((1,1),SHOT1)
ASSIGN P(1) ->((2,2),SHOT1)
AEND
ARRAY
( -3700 ,2 ,1500) /(3400 ,2 ,3500)
ASSIGN P(1) ->((1,1),SHOT1)
ASSIGN P(1) ->((2,2),SHOT1)
AEND
ARRAY
( -6700 ,2 ,1500) /(4200 ,2 ,3500)
ASSIGN P(1) ->((1,1),SHOT1)
ASSIGN P(1) ->((2,2),SHOT1)
AEND
PEND
LAYER
1
P(1)
'niste20160622_h.v30'
SPPRM 4.0,,,,1.0,1
STDCUR
53
; nA
SHOT1: MODULAT (( 0,
-48.2 ) , ( 1,
-47.6 ) , ( 2,
-47.1
)
-
, ( 3,
-46.6 ) , ( 4,
-46.0 ) , ( 5,
-45.5 )
-
, ( 6,
-45.0 ) , ( 7,
-44.4 ) , ( 8,
-43.8 )
-
, ( 9,
-43.3 ) , ( 10,
-42.7 ) , ( 11,
-42.1 )
-
, ( 12,
-41.6 ) , ( 13,
-41.0 ) , ( 14,
-40.4 )
-
, ( 15,
-39.8 ) , ( 16,
-39.2 ) , ( 17,
-38.6 )
xxxvi
==PAGE:126==
APPENDIX E. FILES FROM THE LAST E-BEAM EXPOSURE
-
, ( 18,
-38.0 ) , ( 19,
-37.4 ) , ( 20,
-36.7 )
-
, ( 21,
-36.1 ) , ( 22,
-35.5 ) , ( 23,
-34.8 )
-
, ( 24,
-34.2 ) , ( 25,
-33.5 ) , ( 26,
-32.8 )
-
, ( 27,
-32.2 ) , ( 28,
-31.5 ) , ( 29,
-30.8 )
-
, ( 30,
-30.1 ) , ( 31,
-29.4 ) , ( 32,
-28.7 )
-
, ( 33,
-28.0 ) , ( 34,
-27.3 ) , ( 35,
-26.5 )
-
, ( 36,
-25.8 ) , ( 37,
-25.1 ) , ( 38,
-24.3 )
-
, ( 39,
-23.6 ) , ( 40,
-22.8 ) , ( 41,
-22.0 )
-
, ( 42,
-21.2 ) , ( 43,
-20.5 ) , ( 44,
-19.7 )
-
, ( 45,
-18.9 ) , ( 46,
-18.0 ) , ( 47,
-17.2 )
-
, ( 48,
-16.4 ) , ( 49,
-15.6 ) , ( 50,
-14.7 )
-
, ( 51,
-13.9 ) , ( 52,
-13.0 ) , ( 53,
-12.1 )
-
, ( 54,
-11.3 ) , ( 55,
-10.4 ) , ( 56,
-9.5 )
-
, ( 57,
-8.6 ) , ( 58,
-7.7 ) , ( 59,
-6.7 )
-
, ( 60,
-5.8 ) , ( 61,
-4.8 ) , ( 62,
-3.9 )
-
, ( 63,
-2.9 ) , ( 64,
-2.0 ) , ( 65,
-1.0 )
-
, ( 66,
0.0 ) , ( 67,
1.0 ) , ( 68,
2.0 )
-
, ( 69,
3.0 ) , ( 70,
4.1 ) , ( 71,
5.1 )
-
, ( 72,
6.2 ) , ( 73,
7.2 ) , ( 74,
8.3 )
-
, ( 75,
9.4 ) , ( 76, 10.5 ) , ( 77, 11.6 )
-
, ( 78, 12.7 ) , ( 79, 13.8 ) , ( 80, 14.9 )
-
, ( 81, 16.1 ) , ( 82, 17.3 ) , ( 83, 18.4 )
-
, ( 84, 19.6 ) , ( 85, 20.8 ) , ( 86, 22.0 )
-
, ( 87, 23.2 ) , ( 88, 24.5 ) , ( 89, 25.7 )
-
, ( 90, 27.0 ) , ( 91, 28.2 ) , ( 92, 29.5 )
-
, ( 93, 30.8 ) , ( 94, 32.1 ) , ( 95, 33.5 )
-
, ( 96, 34.8 ) , ( 97, 36.1 ) , ( 98, 37.5 )
-
, ( 99, 38.9 ) , ( 100, 40.3 ) , ( 101, 41.7 )
-
, ( 102, 43.1 ) , ( 103, 44.5 ) , ( 104, 46.0 )
-
, ( 105, 47.4 ) , ( 106, 48.9 ) , ( 107, 50.4 )
-
, ( 108, 51.9 ) , ( 109, 53.4 ) , ( 110, 54.9 )
-
, ( 111, 56.5 ) , ( 112, 58.1 ) , ( 113, 59.6 )
-
, ( 114, 61.2 ) , ( 115, 62.8 ) , ( 116, 64.5 )
-
, ( 117, 66.1 ) , ( 118, 67.8 ) , ( 119, 69.4 )
-
, ( 120, 71.1 ) , ( 121, 72.8 ) , ( 122, 74.6 )
-
, ( 123, 76.3 ) , ( 124, 78.1 ) , ( 125, 79.9 )
-
, ( 126, 81.7 ) , ( 127, 83.5 ) , ( 128, 85.3 )
-
, ( 129, 87.2 ) , ( 130, 89.1 ) , ( 131, 90.9 )
-
, ( 132, 92.9 ) , ( 133, 94.8 ) , ( 134, 96.7 )
-
, ( 135, 98.7 ) , ( 136, 100.7 ) , ( 137, 102.7 )
-
, ( 138, 104.7 ) , ( 139, 106.8 ) , ( 140, 108.8 )
-
, ( 141, 110.9 ) , ( 142, 113.0 ) , ( 143, 115.2 )
-
, ( 144, 117.3 ) , ( 145, 119.5 ) , ( 146, 121.7 )
-
, ( 147, 123.9 ) , ( 148, 126.1 ) , ( 149, 128.4 )
xxxvii
==PAGE:127==
APPENDIX E. FILES FROM THE LAST E-BEAM EXPOSURE
-
, ( 150, 130.7 ) , ( 151, 133.0 ) , ( 152, 135.3 )
-
, ( 153, 137.7 ) , ( 154, 140.0 ) , ( 155, 142.4 )
-
, ( 156, 144.9 ) , ( 157, 147.3 ) , ( 158, 149.8 )
-
, ( 159, 152.3 ) , ( 160, 154.8 ) , ( 161, 157.4 )
-
, ( 162, 159.9 ) , ( 163, 162.5 ) , ( 164, 165.2 )
-
, ( 165, 167.8 ) , ( 166, 170.5 ) , ( 167, 173.2 )
-
, ( 168, 175.9 ) , ( 169, 178.7 ) , ( 170, 181.5 )
-
, ( 171, 184.3 ) , ( 172, 187.1 ) , ( 173, 190.0 )
-
, ( 174, 192.9 ) , ( 175, 195.8 ) , ( 176, 198.8 )
-
, ( 177, 201.8 ) , ( 178, 204.8 ) , ( 179, 207.8 )
-
, ( 180, 210.9 ) , ( 181, 214.0 ) , ( 182, 217.2 )
-
, ( 183, 220.3 ) , ( 184, 223.5 ) , ( 185, 226.8 )
-
, ( 186, 230.0 ) , ( 187, 233.3 ) , ( 188, 236.7 )
-
, ( 189, 240.0 ) , ( 190, 243.4 ) , ( 191, 246.9 )
-
, ( 192, 250.3 ) , ( 193, 253.9 ) , ( 194, 257.4 )
-
, ( 195, 261.0 ) , ( 196, 264.6 ) , ( 197, 268.2 )
-
, ( 198, 271.9 ) , ( 199, 275.6 ) , ( 200, 279.4 )
-
, ( 201, 283.2 ) , ( 202, 287.0 ) , ( 203, 290.9 )
-
, ( 204, 294.8 ) , ( 205, 298.7 ) , ( 206, 302.7 )
-
, ( 207, 306.7 ) , ( 208, 310.8 ) , ( 209, 314.9 )
-
, ( 210, 319.1 ) , ( 211, 323.3 ) , ( 212, 327.5 )
-
, ( 213, 331.8 ) , ( 214, 336.1 ) , ( 215, 340.4 )
-
, ( 216, 344.8 ) , ( 217, 349.3 ) , ( 218, 353.8 )
-
, ( 219, 358.3 ) , ( 220, 362.9 ) , ( 221, 367.5 )
-
, ( 222, 372.2 ) , ( 223, 376.9 ) , ( 224, 381.7 )
-
, ( 225, 386.5 ) , ( 226, 391.4 ) , ( 227, 396.3 )
-
, ( 228, 401.3 ) , ( 229, 406.3 ) , ( 230, 411.3 )
-
, ( 231, 416.5 ) , ( 232, 421.6 ) , ( 233, 426.8 )
-
, ( 234, 432.1 ) , ( 235, 437.4 ))
END
xxxviii
