==PAGE:1==
Designing Social 
Sustainability
Towards an operationalization of social sustainability 
concepts in an integrated design process
Master thesis
Aleksander Probst Otovic
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Civil Engineering
Section for Building Design 
Master Thesis
Designing Social Sustainability:Towards an operationalization of 
social sustainability concepts in an integrated design process.
Submitted 16 July 2016
© Aleksander Probst Otovic, July 2016
Supervisor:
Lotte Bjerregaard Jensen, Associate Professor, Department of Civil 
Engineering, Technical University of Denmark
Front page image: Map of Upplands Väsby, Sweden, by Märta Helander 
and Amanda Dahl.
==PAGE:3==
Designing Social Sustainability
Towards an operationalization of social sustainability 
concepts in an integrated design process
Master thesis
Aleksander Probst Otovic
==PAGE:4==
4 | 
==PAGE:5==
 | 5
Preface
When I chose to study architectural engineering, it was out of a fascination 
with architecture — specifically its interface with engineering and how the 
two professions can work together creatively in a design process. In this thesis I 
have tried to follow that initial fascination into unknown waters. Traditionally, 
the issues covered by social sustainability have not been a part of the respon-
sibility of the engineer, but rather as a part of the working process of the 
architect, so why have I chosen this subject? Because addressing sustainability 
is inherently an interdisciplinary task, and in this context social sustainability 
provides a new and exciting possibility for architects and engineers to cooper-
ate in order to solve complex issues.
In the end, this research has only managed to take a few steps in the right 
direction, and these steps could only have been taken based on the insight 
of existing literature and with the help of a number of individuals who have 
assisted me in my work:
First of all, I would like to thank my supervisor, Lotte Bjerregaard Jensen, 
for trusting in this project from the beginning and for providing me with the 
level of freedom necessary to explore a topic that was initially on the boarder 
of my knowledge.
I would also like to thank Amanda Dahl and Märta Helander, for their 
company, invaluable input and for allowing me to participate in their design 
project and use their material and experiences for my case study. Participat-
ing in your design process and observing your approach to the field of social 
sustainability and design solutions has been truly inspiring. Also a thank you 
to Kristoffer Negendahl and Anne Beim, for knowledgeable insight and for 
providing the opportunity to work with students from KADK and participate 
in lectures.
I also wish to thank everyone else who have been involved in this project 
and provided knowledgeable input, either in interviews, meetings or discussion 
sessions. Elise Grosse, Robin Andersson, Sofie Weidemann, Liane Thuvander, 
Paula Femenías, Peter Andreas Sattrup, Sofie Kirt Strandbygaard, Mathilde 
Landgren, Nina Koch-Ørvad and all the participants at the STED confer-
ence: Thank you!
Finally, I would like to thank my girlfriend, my family and friends for main-
taining an interest in my studies, for valuable sparring and discussion and for 
providing emotional support throughout the process.
Aleksander Probst Otovic
Copenhagen, 15 July 2016
==PAGE:6==
6 | 
==PAGE:7==
 | 7
Abstract
This thesis investigates how a design process can be supported to secure 
more socially sustainable solutions in the transformation of Nordic post-war 
social housing projects. While the concept of social sustainability is gaining 
relevance along with increasing globalization and urbanization, the field is still 
widely recognized as being underdeveloped as well as lacking a solid frame-
work to operationalize it. Yet within the built environment, a link between 
changes in the physical makeup of socially disadvantaged areas and a subse-
quent increase in social sustainability is being established, and it seems likely 
that a transformation of buildings and neighbourhoods can have positive ef-
fects on both existing and future residents (Bjørn & Holek 2014).
The investigation is done through a literature study and subsequent case 
study. The literature study investigates the fundamental theory of social sus-
tainability, how existing conceptual frameworks deal with it, and how the con-
cept can be operationalized in a design process. The case study is then used to 
test a preliminary framework for the implementation of social sustainability in 
a design process, which is developed based on the literature review and inter-
views with Nordic social sustainability researchers and practitioners.
It was found that social sustainability could best be described through a 
range of defining themes and characteristics, which include, i.a., equity, social 
mixing, cohesion, empowerment, participation, well-being, and quality of life. 
The concept is then primarily conceptualised through a breakdown of these 
characteristics into more tangible indicators, and design process integration 
thus depended on how these indicators were weighted, selected and analysed 
as well as on their scale, visualisation, comparison of results and inclusion of 
residents in design processes.
Hence, this report suggests an approach for systematic enquiry into social 
sustainability, which covers the key topics using a compilation of themes with 
associated sub-criteria and indicators. Based on the conditions surrounding 
the individual project, these indicators can be weighted to direct focus towards 
the most relevant issues, and by analysing the indicators and converting quali-
tative and quantitative results to a common scale, the social sustainability per-
formance of design proposals can be visualised to support the design process 
and secure more socially sustainable solutions in the transformation of Nordic 
post-war social housing projects.
==PAGE:8==
8 | 
Preface
5
Abstract
7
1  Introduction
11
Background
14
The Problems
19
Objective
22
Delimitation
23
Research Question and Methodology
25
2  Social Sustainability in Theory
29
Sustainability and the Social Sciences
30
The Link to Architecture
37
In Conclusion
42
3  Concepts for Quantification
43
Why Quantify?
45
Conceptualisations
46
Key Considerations
55
In Conclusion
58
4  The Design Process
59
The Design Process
61
Design Support Frameworks
65
The Importance of Community Involvement
67
In Conclusion
68
5  Model for Operation
69
Drafting a Model
71
Design Process Operation
77
Additional Considerations
83
In Conclusion
85
Table of Contents
==PAGE:9==
 | 9
6  Case Study: Fyrklövern
87
Case Study Proposition and Approach
88
Introduction to Case Study: Fyrklövern
90
Defining Scope
96
Analysis
100
Design Proposal and Scoring
104
Discussion
108
In Conclusion
112
7  Lessons and Revision
113
Lessons from Case Study
114
Feedback from Professionals
116
Learnings from STED Network Conference
117
Revision of Model
119
In Conclusion
122
8  Discussion and Conclusion
123
Discussion
124
Conclusion
127
Future Research Perspectives
129
References
131
Appendices
137
==PAGE:10==
10 | 
==PAGE:11==
The field of sustainability is a fast-growing research discipline that has re-
ceived increasing amounts of attention over past decades. As decision makers 
have begun to realise the need for action, the change in discourse has led to 
a more solution-oriented public debate. Similarly, as practitioners in the field 
of building and urban design have realised the importance of sustainability 
in their work, so building owners and property developers have begun to un-
derstand its value, creating a demand for sustainable architecture and urban 
design as well as methods for its certification. Thus, international certification 
systems such as DGNB, LEED and BREEAM are gaining wide momentum as 
value drivers for development, giving out ratings of sustainable design based 
on a range of pre-defined criteria. To help produce sustainable designs that 
are able to achieve top certification ratings, tools are continually being devel-1
Introduction
==PAGE:12==
12 | Introduction
oped to tie current knowledge of sustainable practice to the early phases of 
construction project design processes, thus closing the gap between theory and 
practice.
Still, the sustainability debate seems to overlook certain elements. Since 
the World Commission on Environment and Development (WCED) present-
ed its definition of sustainable development in the report Our Common Future 
(WCED 1987) — and even before this — focus within the field of sustain-
able development (or simply sustainability) has been largely two-dimension-
al, namely on the environmental challenge, within an economic-centred way 
of thinking (Partridge 2005) and thus the call for change has often resulted 
in little more than new and greener ways of generating revenue. Due to the 
financial growth prerogative, the environmental benefits have even been so 
questionable in some cases as to give rise to the term green-washing.
To put this into perspective, sustainability is now often described as con-
sisting of an interrelationship between environmental, economic and social as-
pects (McKenzie 2004). Of these aspects, social sustainability has been largely 
neglected in urban planning, renovation and building design, as initiatives to 
improve social cohesion, equity, diversity and quality of life have been side-
tracked by a largely energy-oriented building strategy. Only within the last 
decade has the social aspect gained a foothold within the discussion of sustain-
ability (Partridge 2005).
In construction and planning today, the concept of social sustainability 
continues to be the most elusive part of the triad of sustainability. In theory, 
it might be commonly represented as an equally important part of the whole, 
but in reality, architects have been struggling to come up with ways to integrate 
F 1.1	 Transformation of so-
cial housing complex 
Fyrklövern, Upplands 
Väsby, Sweden. 
This side: Existing. 
Opposite: Visualis-
ation. 
Socially sustainable or 
not? Photo and image 
by White Architects.
==PAGE:13==
﻿ | 13
socially sustainable practice in their design while taking into account environ-
mental and economic considerations.
 Still, it is arguably the most important and the easiest one to understand. 
In contrast to environmentally and/or economically sustainable architecture, 
which often has to rely on marketing or superficial aesthetic measures, such 
as green roofs and façades, to communicate their sustainable profile to their 
surroundings, socially sustainable architecture can have a direct (albeit sub-
conscious) effect on the people who come in contact with it. In other words: 
In terms of architecture, social sustainability encompasses that, which can be 
felt. Thus, no other part of the framework for sustainable development is so 
intuitively relevant to the happiness of human beings — so intrinsically linked 
to the fundamental needs of safety and belonging, presented by Maslow (1954) 
— as the successful creation and maintenance of socially sustainable commu-
nities.
So — what exactly is social sustainability? Can it even be influenced by ar-
chitecture? And if so, how do we design for it, measure it, create it? These sim-
ple questions form the core platform upon which this thesis builds its research. 
This chapter briefly introduces the background of sustainability, investigat-
ing the development that has led to the social sustainability we have today. It 
then explores the common barriers that currently stand in the way of social 
sustainability, leading to the formulation of a research objective. By translating 
the objective, this chapter finally arrives at a research question and subsequent 
methodology. In the last section, the structure of the thesis is presented to pro-
vide an overview of the content.
==PAGE:14==
14 | Introduction
Background
The previous section introduced some of the central themes and problems 
surrounding social sustainability today. These will be touched upon in more 
depth in subsequent chapters. First, however, it is necessary to build an under-
standing of how the concept of sustainability has come to be, and what polit-
ical and scientific agendas have shaped the term and the way it is used today.
Emergence of sustainability
The use of the term sustainability in scientific discussions does not have a 
well-defined origin. Rather, the term has emerged alongside a general increase 
in awareness towards environmental issues, especially during the last decades 
of the 20th century. As mentioned, the WCED, also known as the Brundtland 
Commission, presented its definition of sustainable development in 1987. Al-
though the report was preceded in terms of its concern for the environment 
— e.g. by Limits to Growth by the Club of  Rome (Meadows et al. 1972) — its 
definition has since become one of the most oft-cited: “Sustainable develop-
ment is to ensure that we meet the needs of the present without compromising 
the ability of future generations to meet their own needs.” (WCED 1987). 
Subsequent international summits such as the Rio de Janeiro Earth Summit 
in 1992 and a follow-up conference in Johannesburg in 2002 have furthered 
this international agenda of environmental protection through sustainable re-
source management (McKenzie 2004).
Although the Brundtland Commission’s definition of sustainable devel-
opment is still the go-to source whenever an explanation of the concept of 
sustainability is necessary, it is not without its critics. Most importantly, the 
inherent use of the word sustainable development presupposes that develop-
ment is a necessary condition. Instead of entertaining the idea of maintaining 
status quo as a viable solution, sustainability becomes a new form of growth, 
F 1.2	 Common models 
representing envi-
ronmental, social 
and economic as-
pects of sustainabil-
ity (after Barron & 
Gauntlet 2002).
Environment
Society
Economy
E
n
v
i
r
o
n
m
e
n
t
S
o
c
i
e
t
y
E
c
o
n
o
m
y
The Brundtland 
Commission:
“Sustainable develop-
ment is to ensure that 
we meet the needs of 
the present without 
compromising the ability 
of future generations to 
meet their own needs”
==PAGE:15==
Background | 15
and focus thus lies wherever development is most needed 
(ibid.). Partridge (2005) argues that where pre-Brundtland 
conceptions of sustainability contained an inherent ten-
sion between the preservation of the natural environment 
and the idea of perpetual economic growth, the 1987 defi-
nition was conceived within a global neo-liberal context, 
which it supported by confronting ecological problems 
with unsustainable economic growth without questioning 
the economic framework itself.
The social aspect
Emerging out of the two-dimensional focus of envi-
ronment and economy, a social aspect is now commonly 
accepted as being part of an interrelated sustainability tri-
ad. Citing Bader (2008), Boonstra (2013) ascribes the 1992 
Rio Earth Summit as a key event in shifting emphasis to-
wards social sustainability, while Koning (2001) also notes 
a more pronounced social dimension in Agenda 21, the 
United Nations programme of action after the conference. 
Figure F 1.2 shows that the interrelationship between the 
three pillars of sustainability can be represented in several 
ways. One model uses three concentric circles to represent 
the hierarchical dependency of the different aspects upon 
each other, supposing different levels of sustainability, while 
another more recent model uses three overlapping circles 
to represent them more equally (McKenzie 2004; Barron 
& Gauntlet 2002). According to this model, true sustaina-
bility is to be understood as consisting of an equilibrium 
between three interrelated and equally important aspects. 
This equal representation does however contrast with re-
ality, as the three aspects rarely receive equal amounts of 
attention. Often, despite the intention of the model, focus 
is directed back towards the conventional two-dimensional 
discourse. There seems to be a general consensus among 
writers in the field of sustainability that the social aspects 
still suffers from a lack of attention (Koning 2001; McKen-
zie 2004; Partridge 2005; Barron & Gauntlet 2002; Widok 
2009; Colantonio 2009).
Colantonio (2009) represents the development, starting 
in the 1980s, using the sustainability triad model. This rep-
resentation has been interpreted in Figure F 1.3, with slight 
changes. Although the development is moving towards a 
F 1.3	 Development of focus within sustainability. (after 
Colantonio 2009; Boonstra 2013).
Environment
Society
Economy
Environment
Society
Economy
?
1972
Club of Rome: 
Limits to Growth
1987
WCED: Our Com-
mon Future
1992
UN: Rio Earth 
Summit
2002
UN: Johannesburg 
Earth Summit
2012
UN: Rio Earth 
Summit
1980
2000
2010
1990
1970
Environment
Economy
Society
==PAGE:16==
16 | Introduction
more balanced focus with increasing attention towards the 
social part (Widok 2009), the field of social sustainability 
is still widely recognized as being underdeveloped as well 
as lacking a solid framework to properly operationalize the 
concept.
Why social sustainability?
As we have seen, social sustainability is gaining mo-
mentum in the new millennium, as the rationale is get-
ting increasingly clear: Societal changes on a global scale 
call for new ways of dealing with social issues. Koning 
(2001) states that “globalization, glocalization, new risks 
and uncertainties, new social forms and inequalities, and 
wide-ranging urbanization form the context for discussing 
sustainable development and social sustainability,” and in 
Agenda 21, the United Nations programme of action af-
ter the 1992 Rio Earth Summit, the global problems are 
described as “a perpetuation of disparities between and 
within nations, a worsening of poverty, hunger, ill health 
and illiteracy, and the continuing deterioration of the eco-
systems on which we depend for our well-being“ (UNCED 
1992). The main themes incontrovertibly seem to be social.
It can seem odd that the concept of social sustainability 
should be the last of the three aspects to become opera-
tional — after all, people are indisputably at the centre of 
the sustainability discussion. In its definition of sustainable 
development, the Brundtland Commission talks about the 
needs of future generations, not the needs of the environ-
ment or economy. As much as social sustainability depends 
on the successful mitigation of global environmental and 
economic issues, evidently, those issues are only relevant 
within a social context, as noted by Becker et al. (1999). 
In other words, it is ultimately the fear of humanitarian 
consequences that drives sustainable development. Along 
the same lines, Koning (2001) also wonders about the lack 
of attention towards the social agenda, both in policy and 
in academic writing, “especially because sustainable devel-
opment is so closely linked with well-being, future genera-
tions [and] quality of life.” 
F 1.4	 Social issues on a global scale.
Globalization
?
New risks and 
uncertainties
New social forms
Disparity
Urbanization
Inequality
Illitteracy
Poverty
Hunger
Ill health
Glocalization:
“The practice of conducting 
business according to both 
local and global considerations.
Blend of Global + Localization”
(Stevenson & Lindberg 2010)
==PAGE:17==
Background | 17
The role of the built environment
Having discerned the way in which social sustainability has developed its 
position within the total sustainability framework as well as the global im-
portance of social sustainability issues, a pertinent question might be in what 
way architecture and the built environment relate to the social sustainability 
of communities and how they might positively influence it. The scale of the 
global issues might suggest that they are beyond the influence of any local ini-
tiatives — much less ones that seem mainly to be concerned with the shaping 
of our physical environment and not with people. The seemingly artistic and 
aesthetic focus of architecture (Thuvander et al. 2011) might appear to have 
little relevance in regards to social issues, which seem rather to be solvable di-
rectly through social efforts. It is also true that architecture and urban planning 
can only contribute to a certain extent in a global social sustainability context. 
Their value, however, should not be neglected — given the amount of time the 
average person spends either indoors or in an urban setting and the amount 
of subliminal meaning embedded in our physical surroundings, the structure 
of the built environment is bound to have a tremendous impact on the way 
people live their lives. 
Despite this, the influence of the built environment on social sustainabil-
ity remains a fairly unexplored topic, although scattered attempts have been 
made at demonstrating the link. To this effect, Danish urbanist Niels Bjørn 
has co-authored  several publications on the social effects of physical interven-
tions in social housing areas (Bjørn 2008; Bjørn & Holek 2014). Along with 
contributions from other authors, these publications have served to corrob-
orate what was initially a conjecture: That a physical transformation of the 
built environment can serve to transform the social environment within it, 
thus strengthening the social sustainability of a community. The subsequent 
chapter will go into more detail regarding the link between architecture, urban 
planning and social sustainability and the available evidence that supports it.
Why is social sustainability not widely 
practiced?
In conclusion of the background, social sustainability has emerged fairly 
recently out of an otherwise two-dimensional sustainability discourse. Where 
efforts towards sustainability used to be comprised of environmental consid-
erations conceived within a neo-liberal growth paradigm, the social aspect has 
gathered momentum and is now considered, theoretically, as an equally im-
portant part of the modern three-piece sustainability framework. As such, the 
concept of social sustainability is gaining relevance along with the emergence 
of new social issues, which sprout as a result of global trends, such as increas-
ing globalization and urbanization. 
==PAGE:18==
18 | Introduction
Within the context of the built environment, recent studies have begun to 
establish a link between changes in the physical makeup of socially disadvan-
taged areas and a subsequent increase in their social sustainability. It seems 
more and more likely that, when designing and renovating new and existing 
buildings and districts, a due consideration of the factors influencing social 
sustainability can have significant positive effects on both existing and future 
residents (Bjørn & Holek 2014).
The question arises: Why is social sustainability not practised to the same 
extent as the other pillars of sustainability? What problems stand in the way?
==PAGE:19==
The Problems | 19
The Problems
Although the arguments for social sustainability seem compelling, the 
change in impetus needed to make the concept operational has been widely 
lacking. Considering the question posed by the previous section, several bar-
riers  can be identified that continue to prevent social aspects from becoming 
a viable part of design practice. This section summarises some of the current 
barriers that limit the extent to which the concept of social sustainability can 
be operationalized.
No clear definition
Particularly pertinent to this discussion is the fundamental question of how 
to define the concept, and thus how to compare solutions. As previously es-
tablished, the social aspect suffers from a lack of attention, and this is not only 
the case within sustainability research itself. Partridge (2005) also identifies a 
lack of willingness within the social sciences to engage with the concept of 
sustainability, and she states that “sustainability and the environment remain 
marginal concerns for the social sciences”. Although some sources do offer in-
sight into possible definitions, there is no clear and common understanding of 
the concept, nor is there consensus on a definition. This fundamental problem 
stands as an initial barrier whenever the need to include social sustainability 
concerns arises.
Contextual bias
To make matters worse, the contexts within which many of the proposed 
definitions have been conceived can be considered more important than the 
wording itself (McKenzie 2004). Attempts at including social concepts have 
often been conducted within other pre-biased models, and it is then included 
mainly as an addition to further the existing agenda, which might be either 
environmental or economic (ibid.).
In the case of Triple Bottom Line reporting (Elkington 1999) an underlying 
business-oriented agenda tends to direct focus away from the social perfor-
mance and towards the bottom line that supports the business most directly, 
i.e. the economical one (Partridge 2005; McKenzie 2004).
In a similar way, the conventional approach to sustainability tends to fo-
cus on the environmental issues, including the social aspect only as an “after-
thought” (Partridge 2005). Although the problem is the same as with Triple 
Bottom Line reporting, in this case “social processes are considered only from 
the point of view of environmental targets or goals which have been previ-
ously defined in non-social terms and to which societal processes are to be 
adjusted” (Becker et al. 1999).
==PAGE:20==
20 | Introduction
Lack of hard evidence
In consequence of the problems presented, efforts to provide an effective 
and unbiased conceptual framework have been impeded. Although advances 
have been made in the last 15 years, the words of Koning (2001) regarding 
a “lack of a suitable framework to operationalize the concept of social sus-
tainability” still ring true. In part, this is due to a lack of means with which to 
quantify social impacts and thus qualify social efforts.
The challenge is complex for several reasons. Although many interlinks 
with environmental and economic sustainability aspects exist, providing the 
evidence is not a simple matter. The long time-scale and subtle nature of many 
social efforts make it hard to pinpoint their effect, and problems with v incen-
tive — also called principal-agent problems (IEA 2007) — where sustaina-
ble initiatives do not directly benefit the investor, can make it hard to muster 
support. Furthermore, ethical values often come into play when dealing with 
social issues, and to quantify those poses new problems (Widok 2009). Never-
theless, quantification is necessary to be able to communicate results and make 
the concept less abstract in order for the social sustainability agenda to gain 
relevance and more widespread commitment in a competitive industry (ibid.).
What can be done?
A large part of the barriers opposing social sustainability as a part of de-
sign practice relate mainly to the vagueness of the term. The basic definition 
is unclear, yet a multitude of more or less biased sustainability frameworks 
attempt to conceptualise the social dimension in different ways, adding to the 
overall confusion. It seems there is a fundamental problem with the tangibility 
of social sustainability that needs to be addressed before a truly effective con-
ceptualisation can be developed.
In continuation of this argument, it seems the ability to practice social sus-
tainability hinges not only on a more clear definition, but also on the abili-
ty, within this definition, to translate findings into quantifiable results, which 
could serve to justify the inclusion of social sustainability concerns in the de-
F 1.5	 The identified problems help 
maintain the gap between 
theory and practice. In order 
to close the gap, issues 
on both sides need to be 
addressed. Hence social 
sustainability both needs to 
be more well-defined and 
quantifiable before it can be 
used in a practical situation.
Theory
Practice
Lack of common definition
Lack of quantification tools
Long time scale
Lack of evidence
Problems
Gap
Contextual bias
Problems
==PAGE:21==
The Problems | 21
sign process, as well as identify interrelationships and cross-benefits between 
all three sustainability aspects.
Recent developments within design method research have successfully pro-
posed the integration of energy and comfort criteria in the design of new 
buildings and urban planning (Nielsen 2012; Strømann-Andersen 2012). The 
road has thus been partly paved for the integration of other (e.g. social) criteria 
in the design process. However, the question remains whether it is possible to 
improve the practicability and tangibility of social sustainability to this end?
==PAGE:22==
22 | Introduction
Objective
Based on the above mentioned problems, this research aims to address 
some of the factors currently inhibiting the successful application of socially 
sustainable principles in building and urban design. These factors are many-
fold, as several different aspects offer explanations as to why the social aspect 
is lagging behind in the sustainable development: The lack of a clear and 
common definition in available literature can make the concept seem incoher-
ent and intangible to designers who need a goal to work towards. The often 
long time-scale  of socially sustainable initiatives can bring their  financial and 
environmental soundness into question in projects with a short-term scope 
— making socially sustainable projects a tough sell. The low availability of 
well-established methods of quantifying the wide effects of social sustainabil-
ity, as well as linking them to their environmental and economic co-benefits, 
can weaken the socially sustainable argument in an industry where tools for 
calculating environmental and financial sustainability are readily available. 
Common for all these factors, however, is the fact that they weaken the posi-
tion of social sustainability as a driver for design in the early phase, where the 
decisions are made that  will shape the way people live and interact for decades 
to come.
Hence, the main objective of this research is to improve the tangibility and 
practicability of social sustainability in the design process by way of theoreti-
cal as well as practical investigations.
Objective: 
To improve the tangibility 
and practicability of so-
cial sustainability in the 
design process by way 
of theoretical as well as 
practical investigations.
?
==PAGE:23==
Delimitation | 23
Delimitation
Although the intangible quality of social sustainability requires the liter-
ature study to be reasonably wide in scope to adequately reflect the varied 
existing theory, its application is limited to the study of architecture  and urban 
planning. Here the examination of practical cases limits itself to the reno-
vation and transformation post-war modernist social housing. This imposes 
some limitations upon the scope of the research in terms of building typology 
and project type and location.
Typology
The studied typology consists of large-scale social housing projects. This 
modernist typology was born out of post-war housing shortages and poor liv-
ing conditions, resulting in an idealistic zeal among architects for providing 
the public with space, light, air and greenery (Bjørn 2008). Mostly built in the 
1960 or early 1970s, this typology is still represented in various forms all over 
the western world. Today, many of these housing projects suffer from poor 
outdoor environments, low technical quality and are often beset by social and 
economic problems (Bjørn 2008; Hall & Vidén 2005).
Project type
The second limitation assumes a renovation project. Although some coun-
tries have traditionally opted to demolish and rebuild, there is a Nordic prec-
edence not to urge for the tabula rasa and many social housing projects have 
already undergone extensive renovation since their construction (Bjørn 2008; 
Jensen 2015). Traditionally, focus has been on mending their often poor phys-
ical condition, sometimes adding a few bright colours in the process. Recently, 
however, focus has changed towards a more holistic transformation of the 
physical environments, including improved living conditions (Jensen 2015).
T 1.1	 Research delimitation.
Limitation
Description
Typology
Post-war social housing
Location
Nordic countries
Project type
Renovation/Transformation
==PAGE:24==
24 | Introduction
Location
The research is set within a Nordic context with a specific focus on a 
Swedish setting. Since the 1940s the government rejected low-income social 
housing as a viable solution and focused instead on providing good quality 
homes for the entire population. As a result, many housing projects were built 
by municipally owned housing companies and were originally intended for 
everyone to inhabit (Hall & Vidén 2005). In many instances the Nordic model 
of tenant-owner’s associations also prevailed in Sweden (ibid.). Although the 
majority of the developed large-scale social housing areas are not high-rise 
(Hall & Vidén 2005; Bech-Danielsen 2013), today many social housing areas 
in Sweden and the other Nordic countries are suffering from some of the same 
problems that have become symptomatic for the typology all over the world.
 Even though the scope of the project is limited to Sweden and the Nordic 
countries, the universality of the post-war social housing typology affords a 
certain extent of general applicability.
==PAGE:25==
Research Question And Methodology | 25
Research Question and 
Methodology
In the review of the background of social sustainability, the question of 
why the field is lacking behind in the sustainability agenda was raised. The 
subsequent analysis — spurred on by successful developments in integrated 
design — led to the formulation of an objective to improve the tangibility and 
practicability of social sustainability in the design process.
Main research question
The need for operationalization is recognized by several authors. Koning 
(2001) and McKenzie (2004) review various conceptualisations of social sus-
tainability and agree that more work needs to be done in order for them to 
be effective. Even so, the focus seems always to be descriptive; investigations 
into how social sustainability might be created or implemented are few and 
far between (McKenzie 2004). With this in mind, the main research objective 
translates, within the given delimitation, into the main research question:
How can a design process be supported to secure more socially sustainable solu-
tions in the transformation of  Nordic post-war social housing projects?
Perspectives
The main research question offers several different perspectives relating to 
the various barriers that were identified. The three perspectives pursued in this 
research thus relate to the current intangibility of social sustainability, to the 
lack of a framework for its quantification and to its possible implementation 
inside a design process. The perspectives approach the subject on different lev-
els of abstraction, moving from the general to the concrete, as shown in Figure 
F 1.6. Hence the research attempts to approach an operationalization of social 
sustainability by investigating three sub research perspectives:
1.	 Theory: What is social sustainability, what characterises socially sustain-
able solutions and how can the concept be made more tangible?
2.	 Conceptualisation: How can social sustainability be evaluated and/or 
quantified and how can this inform a design process?
3.	 Design process: How can a design process be organised in order to in-
clude the social dimension?
Improving tangibility
The first perspective focuses on social sustainability theory and its relation 
to architecture and urban planning. The intention is to provide an overview of 
the way social sustainability research has developed as well as current trends. 
Possible definitions will be introduced and reviewed in order to gain an over-
Research question:
How can a design 
process be supported 
to secure more socially 
sustainable solutions in 
the transformation of 
Nordic post-war social 
housing projects?
==PAGE:26==
26 | Introduction
view of current research in the field. Focus is on providing 
a clearer definition that can lead to a better understanding 
of the concept.
Increasing measure-ability
The second perspective deals with how the concept of 
social sustainability can be quantified. Various current sus-
tainability conceptualisations and proposals for indicator 
sets are critically reviewed in relation to their possible ap-
plicability in a design process. Focus is specifically on in-
creasing the measure-ability of social sustainability within 
the defined architectural context.
Integrating in design process
The third perspective is on the design process itself 
and how it is best organised to include social sustainability 
concerns. Topics of multi- vs. interdisciplinary work and 
design team integration are central to this discussion. The 
aim is to strengthen the position of social sustainability in 
the design process.
Methodology
In pursuit of an answer to the main research question, 
the three sub research perspectives are first analysed in a 
literature review. The findings from each individual per-
spective are summarised in partial conclusions, which form 
the foundation for the research. As a result, a preliminary 
framework for the implementation of social sustainability 
in a design process is developed. In relation to the liter-
ature review, the opinions of leading social sustainability 
researchers and practitioners were obtained through inter-
views and formal and informal meetings.
The subsequent part of the report constitutes the case 
study research. This case study is used as a test bed for the 
theoretical framework resulting from the literature review. 
The theoretical foundation for the applied methodology 
has been described by Yin (2003), and will be further elab-
orated upon in the relevant chapter.
The approach applied in this research is interpretive. 
This term implies that the positivist methods of natural 
science are inadequate to the study of social reality, as dif-
ferent human subjects ascribe different meanings to the 
objects, concepts and actions they are subjected to (Lee, 
1991). In the case of the design process, the involvement 
F 1.6	 The three research perspectives range 
from general theory to concrete design 
process.
T
h
e
o
r
y
C
o
n
c
e
p
t
u
a
li
s
a
t
i
o
n
D
e
s
i
g
n
 
p
r
o
c
e
s
s
Operationali-
zation
==PAGE:27==
Research Question And Methodology | 27
and interaction of multiple actors require a view that acknowledges multiple 
realities rather than one objective reality (Guest et al. 2013).
Although an interpretive approach implies the use of qualitative research, 
this is not to be confused with the types of data analysed. Just as qualitative 
data can be analysed from a positivist approach (Schweber & Leiringer 2012), 
so quantitative data can be analysed from an interpretive approach. This re-
search deals with both.
Collaboration
Throughout the project, various actors have contributed to the research 
with different types of input. In this context, the Sustainable Transformation 
and Environmental Design (STED) project, sponsored by the Nordic Built 
programme, has worked as a central hub for getting into contact with relevant 
actors, communicating results and receiving feedback. The nine STED mem-
bers are:
Universities:	 Chalmers University of  Technology (Sweden)
	
	
	
Norwegian University of  Science and Technology (NTNU)
	
	
	
The Royal Danish Academy of  Fine Arts Schools of  	
	
	
	
Architecture, Design and Conservation (KADK) 
	
	
	
Technical University of  Denmark (DTU)
Studios:	 	
White Arkitekter (Sweden)
	
	
	
Vandkunsten Arkitekter (Denmark)
	
	
	
Helen & Hard (Norway)
	
	
	
Studio Granda (Iceland) 
	
	
	
Office For Peripheral Architecture (OOPEAA) (Finland)
	
	
	
(Negendahl 2016)
Of these, Chalmers, KADK and White have been particularly involved in 
the project through personal correspondence, meetings, interviews and case 
study work.
F 1.7	 Method for report 
in terms of ap-
proach and data 
collection.
Interpretive
Positivist
Qualitative
Quantitative
Methodology 
of report
Data
Approach
Nordic Built
Nordic initiative to accel-
erate the development 
of sustainable building 
concepts. Running 
2012-2014 with subse-
quent funding program.
(Nordic Built 2016)
The STED project
Initiated by Peter An-
dreas Sattrup at DTU in 
2014, the STED project 
works towards innova-
tion in design methods 
for sustainable transfor-
mation of the existing 
Nordic building stock, 
focusing on energy, en-
vironmental design and 
life cycle thinking.
(Negendahl 2016)
==PAGE:28==
28 | Introduction
Thesis Structure
This thesis is structured into 8 chapters. The structure of the report is rep-
resented diagrammatically in Figure F 1.8.
It begins with a literature review divided into three separate chapters in 
accordance with the perspectives outlined above. These chapters provide the 
necessary background on current social sustainability theory, conceptualis-
ations and design process theory to establish an outline of what can be consid-
ered best practice today. The literature review is concluded in Chapter 5 with 
a proposal for a preliminary model of social sustainability and method for its 
practical application.
Chapters 6 and 7 constitute the practical part of the research. The prelim-
inary model resulting from the literature review is tested in a case study, and 
the findings lead to a subsequent revision of the model.
The report ends with a discussion and conclusion in Chapter 8, picking 
up the threads of the previous chapters and elaborating on their partial con-
clusions. Finally the report is summarised into a conclusion in an attempt to 
answer the main research question.
F 1.8	 Schematic overview 
of thesis structure.
Chapter 1:
Introduction
Chapter 6:
Case Study: Fyrklövern
Chapter 8:
Discussion and Conclusion
Literature
Review
Case Study:
The Million Programme
Chapter 2:
Social Sustainability in Theory
Chapter 3:
Concepts for Quantification
Chapter 4:
The Design Process
Chapter 5:
Model for Operation
Chapter 7:
Lessons and Revision
==PAGE:29==
In order to justify an investigation into the architectural means of socially 
sustainable transformation of social housing, a couple of theoretical links first 
have to be established. Primarily, a connection needs to be made between the 
social sciences and the concept of sustainability as a whole in order to gain in-
sight into what a definition of social sustainability might be. Secondly, another 
link must be established, this time between social sustainability and the built 
environment — or more precisely: The ability of architecture to influence the 
people within it. Hence this chapter provides the theoretical foundation for the 
research, which it builds on the above theoretical chain through a review of 
pertinent literature. 2
Social 
Sustainability in 
Theory
==PAGE:30==
30 | Social Sustainability In Theory
Sustainability and the Social 
Sciences
Starting with the relationship between the social sciences and the sustaina-
bility debate, a central distinction is made by several authors between the ana-
lytical, normative and political implications of sustainability (Becker et al. 1999; 
Littig & Grießler 2005). On the analytical level, Becker et al. (1999) argue that 
sustainability weakens the otherwise dominant link between development and 
economic growth because it claims that societal development must be cou-
pled with the reproduction of its natural prerequisites. The normative features 
include a call for justice on behalf of future generations, a subordination of 
economic processes to social and ecological constraints and an awareness of 
intragenerational social justice, gender equity and democratic participation in 
decision-making processes (Becker et al. 1999; Partridge 2005). The political 
context exists as a results of the commitment to action imposed by sustain-
ability — a commitment directed towards “reshaping the relations between 
human beings and their environment” (Becker et al. 1999).
Lind & Mjörnell (2015), drawing on Littig & Grießler (2005), also note this 
distinction between analytical and normative conceptions of social sustain-
ability and elaborate on the implications, yet in a more pragmatic wording: 
They asses that — apart from an academic interest in defining social sustaina-
bility and the factors that constitute it as well as how to make them operational 
— there is also a political interest in defining concrete goals for these various 
factors, in order to assess various interventions and commitments.
The lack of a clear differentiation between the analytical, normative and 
political aspects has implications in terms of difficulties in conceptualizing so-
cial sustainability (Littig & Grießler 2005). As mentioned in the previous chap-
ter, a fundamental problem with social sustainability is its lack of a common 
definition that can be widely agreed upon. As a result of this vagueness, the 
depiction of the three interconnected dimensions representing the concept of 
sustainability (see Figure F 1.2 on page 14) has given rise to discussion over 
the nature of the relation between the three dimensions. Thus some perceive 
them as being partially in conflict, necessitating a payoff between them, while 
others, oppositely, see them as being mutually dependant — one cannot be 
fulfilled without the others (McKenzie 2004). The previous chapter also high-
lighted contextual bias as a key barrier for the operationalization of social 
sustainability, meaning that the context in which conceptualisations were con-
ceived often determined the true focus of the models. Lind & Mjörnell (2015) 
expand on this, looking at current approaches and theoretical frameworks for 
social sustainability. They argue for a trend towards a more human-oriented 
approach to the concept, focusing on standard of living and well-being. They 
conclude that “people at the same time both affect and are affected by actions 
Architecture
Sustainability
Social
sciences
F 2.2	 The aim of this 
chapter: Architec-
ture and sustaina-
bility are connected 
through the social 
sciences. 
T
h
e
o
r
y
C
o
n
c
e
p
t
u
a
l
i
s
a
t
i
o
n
D
e
s
i
g
n
 
p
r
o
c
e
s
s
Operationali-
zation
F 2.1	 Position of the 
chapter within the 
research structure.
==PAGE:31==
Sustainability And The Social Sciences | 31
designed to increase sustainability, whether interpreted as sustainability in the 
strict environmental sense of the word, or as part of a broader concept of 
sustainability” (trans. by author, Lind & Mjörnell 2015) and then propose an 
alternative model of social sustainability, conceived by Spangenberg (2002), 
which more intuitively illustrates sustainable development using the concept of 
Environmental Space (ES; Figure F 2.3). According to this model, a sustainable 
economic development needs to be kept at a high enough level to be socially 
sustainable, but low enough to be environmentally sustainable. Arguably, this 
model better represents the interaction between the environmental, economic 
and social dimensions of sustainability, but  even though Spangenberg (2002) 
suggests that the ES concept can be used to guide local participatory process-
es, it offers no general targets or indicators. Thus there is still a need to more 
closely define the social dimension, if it is eventually to be analysed and rated.
Definitions
Many different definitions of social sustainability have been proposed over 
the years, yet there seems to be no consensus on what terms to include or what 
focus to adopt. Partridge (2005) comments that the extremely wide field of 
ideas and connotations associated with the term perhaps makes it almost as 
difficult to define as the concept of society itself.  Looking at the development 
in defining social sustainability, Colantonio & Dixon (2011) argue that there 
has been a tendency for definitions to be conceived within the contexts of par-
ticular disciplines or studies, making them largely discipline-specific. On this 
account, wider, more general definitions are harder to achieve and thus fewer 
in numbers. Below a few definitions with varying specificity and focus are pre-
sented to provide an outline of the field; however, the aim of this research is 
not to attempt to provide any additional or final definition, but simply to ap-
proach the concept from different angles in order gain a better understanding.
Starting off, Koning (2001) does not so much propose a definition as a 
characterisation of social sustainability. She suggests that social sustainability 
refers to “a society that is just, where there is no exclusion of social groups, 
F 2.3	 The Environmental 
Space (ES) concept. 
After Spangenberg 
(2002)
Overconsumption:
Environmentally unsustainable
Poverty and need:
Socially unsustainable
Sustainable 
lifestyles
{
Available ES 
per capita
Max. permitted 
use of ES per 
capita
Min. socially 
necessary use 
of ES per capita
==PAGE:32==
32 | Social Sustainability In Theory
with a decent livelihood for all, and a society characterized 
by emancipation, freedom and solidarity.”
Although the themes and terms included in this for-
mulation paint an accurate and agreeable picture of a 
society in social balance, it does not include the tempo-
ral dimension, which has become an essential part of the 
sustainability concept (e.g. in the Brundtland Commissions 
definitions of sustainability, see page 14). Consequently, 
Partridge (2005) argues that it is indeed not a description 
of social sustainability, but of social justice, the difference 
being a focus on the future contained within the sustain-
ability perspective. Along these lines, both Åhman (2013) 
and McKenzie (2004) identify a fundamental difference in 
literature between whether social sustainability is seen as a 
development towards a socially sustainable minimum level 
or as the maintenance of a desirable state that has already 
been reached; yet he argues that a truly sustainable society 
could be reached through the dynamic mediation between 
the two viewpoints. Either way the  focus on the future re-
mains an important aspect. With these things in mind, the 
working definition suggested by McKenzie (2004), although 
it is less specific, includes the focus on the future. Accord-
ing to him, social sustainability is:
“A life-enhancing condition within communities, and a 
process within communities that can achieve that condi-
tion.”
McKenzie compliments his definition with a series of 
features, which can work as indicators for the stated con-
dition, while the definition itself remains very general. We 
will take a closer look at the indicators in the next section. 
In spite of his very wide definition, McKenzie (2004) prob-
lematises the idea of implementing a single definition, and 
instead calls for the adoption of multiple approaches.
Incited by the lack of sociological theory in the field, 
Littig & Grießler (2005) propose a sustainability concept, 
which is based on the concept of needs, inspired by the 
Brundtland Report. This includes not only basic needs, 
such as food, housing, access to water, safety, etc., but also 
other needs such as education, recreation/leisure, social 
relationships and self-fulfilment. The concept of work acts 
as an activity to fulfil these needs, partially through ma-
terial exchanges with nature and partially as a means to 
F 2.4	 Schematic portrayal of sustainable devel-
opment and the relationships between 
society and nature. After Littig & Grießler 
(2005).
N
a
t
u
r
e
S
o
c
i
a
l
 
n
e
e
d
s
Material
reproduction
Cultural 
practices and 
interpretative 
patters
Political 
decision making 
and implemen-
tation
Work
Sustainability
==PAGE:33==
Sustainability And The Social Sciences | 33
structure society. At the same time, social coherence within societies is both 
the condition and outcome of the economic, political and cultural systems; three 
systems which serve to enable the fulfilment of human needs. The above con-
siderations are illustrated using the schematic in Figure F 2.4 (which shares 
certain similarities with the model in Figure F 2.3 in the sense that sustainabil-
ity is depicted as a state of social and environmental balance). Thus, Littig & 
Grießler (2005) propose the following definition:
“Social sustainability is a quality of societies. It signifies the nature-society re-
lationships, mediated by work, as well as relationships within the society. Social 
sustainability is given, if work within a society and the related institutional ar-
rangements satisfy an extended set of human needs [and] are shaped in a way 
that nature and its reproductive capabilities are preserved over a long period 
of time and the normative claims of social justice, human dignity and partici-
pation are fulfilled.”
Apart from attempts at improving the general sociological theory on sus-
tainability, as the ones mentioned above, there has been numerous investiga-
tions into social sustainability in relation to communities and the built environ-
ment, ranging from district to city and region level. Polèse & Stren (2000) thus 
define social sustainability for a city as:
“Development (and/or growth) that is compatible with harmonious evolution 
of civil society, fostering an environment conducive to the compatible cohab-
itation of culturally and socially diverse groups while at the same time en-
couraging social integration, with improvements in the quality of life for all 
segments of the population.”
Quite similarly, indeed using some of the very same terms, Barron & 
Gauntlet (2002) of the Western Australian Council of Social Service (WA-
COSS) use the following definition for their Model of  Social Sustainability:
“Social sustainability occurs when the formal and informal processes; systems; 
structures; and relationships actively support the capacity of current and future 
generations to create healthy and liveable communities. Socially sustainable 
communities are equitable, diverse, connected and democratic and provide a 
good quality of life”.
Both definitions include a focus on the future and on diversity, quality of 
life as well as other community factors. Writing about social sustainability in 
renovation, Lind & Mjörnell (2015) identify similar themes in writings on ur-
ban renewal and regeneration by Colantonio & Dixon (2011) and Chan & 
Lee (2008). They emphasise social sustainability as a process aimed towards 
harmonious living environments, reducing social inequality and improving 
quality of life through a common effort. The following section investigates the 
general characteristics that can be said to constitute social sustainability.
==PAGE:34==
34 | Social Sustainability In Theory
Characteristics
Despite its apparent vagueness, the concept of social sustainability is widely 
used, often in political contexts and without sufficient empirical or theoretical 
backing to justify the choice of objectives (Lind & Mjörnell 2015). Rather than 
theory, they are often based on current political agendas and a practical un-
derstanding of causality (Littig & Grießler 2005). There does, however, seem 
to be a range of themes and concepts that appear across multiple sources, and 
which might lead the way to a clearer understanding of social sustainabili-
ty. Several of the definitions mentioned above, and especially those relating 
to socially sustainable communities and urban regeneration, seem to use the 
same themes to characterise the concept. Indeed, it is common for literature 
to focus on these characteristics instead of a definition, or at least to use them 
as a compliment to the definition.
One attempt that has inspired subsequent characterisations, like Abbas 
(2012), was formulated by Barron & Gauntlet (2002) as an elaboration on their 
definition (on page 33). They explain the five themes as follows:
“Equity: The community provides equitable opportunities and outcomes 
for all its members, particularly the poorest and most vulnerable mem-
bers. While equity is listed as a separate principle, it is such a funda-
mental component that it is really an artificial separation. Equity in fact 
operates like a filter through which all other principles are viewed. For 
example, while quality of life includes people’s sense of connection with 
nature, this needs to be understood in terms of the extent to which all 
people have access to a positive environment.
Diversity: The community promotes and encourages diversity.
Quality of  life: The community ensures that basic needs are met and fos-
ters a good quality of life for all members at the individual, group and 
community level.
Interconnectedness: The community provides processes, systems and struc-
tures that promote connectedness within and outside the community at 
the formal, informal and institutional level.
Democracy and governance: The community provides democratic processes 
and open and accountable governance structures.”
As mentioned, McKenzie (2004) also complimented his wide definition 
with a series of features or indicators. These are as follows:
“Equity of access to key services (including health, education, transport, 
housing and recreation).
Equity between generations, meaning that future generations will not be 
disadvantaged by the activities of the current generation.
A system of cultural relations in which the positive aspects of disparate 
cultures are valued and protected, and in which cultural integration is 
supported and promoted when it is desired by individuals and groups.
Equity:
“The quality of being fair 
and impartial.”
(Stevenson & Lindberg 
2010)
==PAGE:35==
Sustainability And The Social Sciences | 35
The widespread political participation of citizens not only in electoral pro-
cedures but also in other areas of political activity, particularly at a local 
level.
A system for transmitting awareness of social sustainability from one gen-
eration to the next.
A sense of community responsibility for maintaining that system of trans-
mission.
Mechanisms for a community to collectively identify its strengths and needs.
Mechanisms for a community to fulfil its own needs where possible through 
community action.
Mechanisms for political advocacy to meet needs that cannot be met by 
community action.”
Relating them to McKenzie’s definition (on page 32), they are to be un-
derstood as indicators of a life-enhancing condition, while the process consists 
of steps towards their establishment. The features above include several key 
themes such as equity, integration and participation as well as an explicit focus 
on processes to facilitate the transmission of knowledge to future generations. 
By stating a series of features or indicators for social sustainability, the concept 
becomes more solid, and the characteristics also allow for the adaptation to 
local conditions. Still, Lind & Mjörnell (2015) identify several issues: Firstly, 
including the indicators of social sustainability in the definition itself entails a 
problem of causality — are the indicators the cause of social sustainability, or 
are they just a result of it? Secondly, a weak definition causes social sustaina-
bility to lack own meaning, allowing indiscriminate integration of other, more 
well known themes into its framework (ibid.) thus weakening its credibility in 
political and normative contexts. Nonetheless, the approach has been popular 
in literature and has brought about several attempts at pinpointing the defining 
characteristics of social sustainability with varying degrees of specificity. This 
chapter will remain at the general level, while the next chapter will go more 
into detail with the contents of concrete conceptualisations and indicator sets.
In their review of the development of social sustainability themes, Colan-
tonio & Dixon (2011) corroborate Barron & Gauntlet’s (2002) emphasis on 
equity and basic needs as a fundamental part of social sustainability, and they 
argue that there has been a change in focus towards a new set of softer, emerg-
ing themes. The themes are summarised in Table T 2.1, which also serves to 
provide a general overview. While some of these themes have been described 
above, others deserve a swift introduction.
Social capital
The concept of social capital is often mentioned in relation to a discussion 
of social sustainability (Koning 2001; Colantonio & Dixon 2011; McKenzie 
2004), the reason being that it encompasses the prerequisites for a wide ar-
ray of the themes often viewed as main constituents of social sustainability. 
According to Colantonio & Dixon (2011), social capital comprises the set of 
==PAGE:36==
36 | Social Sustainability In Theory
social norms of conduct, knowledge, mutual obligations and expectations, rec-
iprocity and trust that are widespread within a given region or community. 
As such, social capital is a non-physical quality of society, as it exists only in 
peoples minds and relations, yet it governs the way in which people interact 
and the extent to which mutually beneficial cooperation is possible. In terms 
of the benefits of social capital, Koning (2001) lists economic gain, enhanced 
well being, a sense of identity and belonging, social status and prestige, while 
Colantonio & Dixon (2011) focus on self-reliance, collective actions and collec-
tive decision making. The broadness of the term would require a breakdown 
into subcategories in order to quantify. Social capital has also been criticised, 
as increased social capital is not necessarily positive if it leads to increased iso-
lation and barriers between groups Lind & Mjörnell (2015). Participation 
and empowerment
Colantonio & Dixon (2011) state that public participation and involvement 
in governance and planning has recently become an integral part of social sus-
tainability for three reasons: Firstly, public participation in governance allows 
the needs of communities to feed into policy making, delivering and monitor-
ing processes. Secondly, this public involvement is an exercise of democratic 
rights, which are seen as intrinsically good. Thirdly, if the policy delivery pro-
cess is more aligned with society, it could result in both greater efficiency and 
effectiveness. Furthermore, if governance does not stem from a struggle for 
power, policies can be locally anchored to a higher extent (ibid.).
Social mixing
Finally, social mixing and diversity within communities is frequently high-
lighted as a key component of social sustainability (Koning 2001; Colantonio 
& Dixon 2011). The concept includes both the aspect of buildings and their 
size, form, use, value and rent level, and the aspect of people and their ethnic-
ity, age, jobs, tenure, etc. Although increased resilience and adaptability of a 
community have been raised as arguments for social mixing, lately the direct 
link to sustainability has been brought into question, as it has been argued that 
mixing people does not alone lead to sustainability without additional meas-
ures to ensure that people actually interact (Colantonio & Dixon 2011). 
Traditional
Emerging
Basic needs, including housing and 
environmental health
Demographic change (ageing, migration 
and mobility)
Education and skills
Social mixing and cohesion
Employment
Identity, sense of place and culture
Equity
Empowerment, participation and access
Human rights and gender issues
Health and safety
Poverty
Social capital
Social justice
Well-being, happiness and quality of life
T 2.1	 Key themes within 
social sustainability 
research (Colanto-
nio & Dixon 2011).
==PAGE:37==
The Link To Architecture | 37
The Link to Architecture
The link between architecture and the social sciences is a problem that 
has been approached from both sides of the field. Architecture is a field of 
study highly engaged with the effects that spaces and buildings have on people 
(and vice versa), while the social sciences have also ventured, albeit more re-
cently, into the psychological effects of the built environment (Roessler 2015). 
This section attempts to establish the link by drawing upon literature that has 
shown a connection. First the discipline of architectural psychology is intro-
duced. Then the effects on occupants are investigated, expanding the scale 
from room to urban level until arriving at the modernist social housing typol-
ogy, which has been investigated through a series of case studies.
Environmental psychology
The field of environmental psychology is a fairly new one. In the late 1940s 
specialists began working on theoretical concepts, and while focus throughout 
the 1950s and 1960s was mainly on psychiatric hospitals and their influence 
on patient recovery, in the 1970s and 1980s the field was established as an 
independent discipline, at which time focus had moved towards the more gen-
eral relationship between people and spaces, buildings and districts (Roessler 
2015). Today, the field of environmental psychology has made its way into 
practice; large architectural firms collaborate with the social sciences on user 
involvement, where user behaviour and needs are analysed and the commu-
nication between architects and users is moderated. On the other hand, envi-
ronmental psychology research continues to investigate general regularities in 
the relationship between man and environment (ibid.).
Roessler 2015 identifies three fundamental approaches to the relationship 
between architecture and man (Figure F 2.5):
Architecture affects and Man adapts: Man is subordinated the architectural 
agenda, which has been put in place to achieve a certain effect. Exam-
F 2.5	 The interrelation-
ship between man 
and architecture 
(based on Roessler 
2015).
A
r
c
h
i
t
e
c
t
u
r
e
 
a
f
f
e
c
t
s
 
m
a
n
M
a
n
 
a
ff
e
c
t
s
 
a
r
c
h
it
e
c
t
u
r
e
Man and architecture 
in dialogue
==PAGE:38==
38 | Social Sustainability In Theory
ples are churches, prisons (e.g. the Panopticon by Bentham) and monu-
mental architecture such as that built by the Nazis.
Man affects and Architecture adapts: This approach is based on peoples 
physical and psychological needs and tries to shape the architecture to 
facilitate those; naturally, this is not without its risks. Examples include 
therapeutic or healing architecture and, arguably, Le Corbusier’s ma-
chine à habiter.
Man and architecture in dialogue: A dynamic dialogue between architecture 
and people that gives both choice, possibilities and restraints. Flexibility 
allows architecture to act as a background for life as movable walls and 
floors can be continually re-configured. Similarly, unassigned spaces can 
be taken up by e.g. graffiti artists and skateboarders (Figure F 2.6).
Architecture and mental health
In a 2012 paper for the Global Journal of Health Science, Danish psychol-
ogy professor Kirsten Roessler emerges herself into three very distinct envi-
ronments (a big city square, a health garden and a fitness studio) with the aim 
of analysing their psychological effects. She concludes that the psychological 
effects of the environments vary widely, from fear of isolation and separation 
to a sense of freedom (Roessler 2012). Following this recent example it should 
seem that there is a straightforward connection between physical environment 
and perceived comfort, which could positively manifest itself if taken into 
careful consideration.
F 2.6	 Street art in Hosier Lane, Melbourne, Australia: Man and architecture in dialogue. Google Images.
==PAGE:39==
The Link To Architecture | 39
In the case of the Department of Psychiatry in Esb-
jerg, Denmark, a change of physical environment has been 
translated into positive results. Use of glass doors have in-
creased visibility and together with access to enclosed gar-
dens, this has helped reduce the number of forced fixations 
of patients by 69,9 % and cases of forced ingestion of sed-
atives by 61,4 % (Psykiatrien i Region Syddanmark 2015). 
Although the results cannot be wholly attributed to archi-
tectural changes, neither can they be reasonably explained 
without them.
As mentioned, the practice of designing medical facil-
ities to optimise patient recovery has been a part of envi-
ronmental psychology agenda since the 1950s. Frandsen et 
al. (2009) conducted a comprehensive literature study (in-
cluding 200 articles) of the effects of the physical environ-
ment on patient recovery (healing architecture), presenting 
work related to the method of evidence based design, which 
is to be understood as design based on scientific methods 
across the natural, social and human sciences. The study 
found literature supporting a range of physiological, psy-
chological and economic effects relating to different as-
pects of architecture. These relations were sorted into fac-
tors (Table T 2.2), which formed the connection between 
architecture on one side and effects on the other, which 
ranged from pain, sleep and mortality to stress, security 
and privacy (for a full list of effects along with architectural 
focus areas see Frandsen et al. (2009) or Roessler (2015) for 
English version).
One of the most diversely influential factors highlight-
ed by Frandsen et al. (2009) was light. In an earlier litera-
ture study, Edwards & Torcellini (2002) specifically studied 
the effects of natural light on building occupants in a range 
of environments, including hospitals, offices and schools, 
finding beneficial effects across the line such as decreased 
stress levels, improved health and improved patient recov-
ery rates.
Although a criticism of these evidence based approach-
es has been that they lack en explanation of the physio-
logical mechanisms that couple the built environment to 
healing and thus treat the body as a black box (Roessler 
2015), the evidence they offer is enough to warrant closer 
attention to the effect on people when dealing with archi-
tecture.
T 2.2	 Factors linking architecture and effect on 
occupants in hospitals. The factors vary in 
general applicability: Some can justifiably 
be used outside of hospital architecture, 
while others, such as “errors and injuries” 
and “hygiene” have a highly targeted use. 
Regardless, they illustrate a quantifiable 
connection between architecture and 
man. After Frandsen et al. (2009).
Group
Factors
Body
Light
Art
Sound
Air
Movement
Relations
Personal space
Social space
Outdoor space
Safety
Hygiene
Errors and injuries
==PAGE:40==
40 | Social Sustainability In Theory
Urban Scale and Social Housing
Expanding the scope from the study of healing architecture and effects 
on building occupants to an urban context, Berry (2007) offers an interesting 
perspective on an urban level. In a review of literature linking disadvantaged 
urban environments with mental health problems, she establishes the connec-
tion by citing both quantitative and qualitative studies of disadvantaged neigh-
bourhoods. Hence urban environments have the capacity to influence mental 
health in four ways (Berry 2007):
Substandard housing, which affects peoples perception about their neigh-
bourhood, increasing residential instability.
Physical incivilities such as litter, vandalism, excessive traffic and a high 
proportion of shared recreational spaces.
Socio-demographic disadvantages such as unemployment, poor education, 
ethnicity and poverty. 
Social incivilities such as crime, gangs, noise and diminished social capital.
Notably, although the intention was to connect urban environments and 
mental health, the consequences of the above mentioned disadvantages are 
clearly more wide reaching in a social sustainability perspective, including det-
rimental effects to social cohesion, sense of place, well-being, happiness and 
quality of life. Looking back at Table T 2.1 (on page 36), the studies ex-
amined until now have mainly coupled architecture to the basic, quantifiable 
needs of people such as health and safety, whereas the more complex, qual-
itative themes such as equity, identity and empowerment have to be further 
specified to be included. This specification is the subject of the next chapter.
In an effort to provide evidence that physical changes to disadvantaged 
housing areas can generate social effects, Bjørn & Holek (2014) performed a 
T 2.3	 The physical interventions and effects in the 27 cases. The interventions and effects are listed according to popu-
larity, the numbers signifying in how many cases they were identified. Effects also list the percentage of cases that 
acieved positive results. After Bjørn & Holek (2014).
No. cases
Physical interventions
No. cases
Effects
Success rate
18
Increased opportunity for enjoyment
15
Reduced unemployment
88 %
18
Demolition
13
Reduced crime rate
100 %
17
New development
13
Higher income
93 %
16
Defining uses
11
Increased safety
100 %
16
Establishing new functions
11
Increased satisfaction with area
100 %
15
Changing urban structure
11
Positive economic effects (rise in hous-
ing prices, increased investment)
79 %
13
Crime prevention initiatives
12
Renovating existing buildings
9
Increased community participation
100 %
12
Breaking down scale
9
Increased attractiveness of area
69 %
11
Re-zoning private/public
7
Increased trust
88 %
7
Interior upgrades
6
Increased education level
100 %
3
Improving public transport
6
Fewer on public benefits
67 %
1
Breaking down barriers to surrounding city
6
Improvement in image
67 %
1
Unspecified urban renewal
1
Stronger connection to area
100 %
==PAGE:41==
The Link To Architecture | 41
review of available social impact studies. A total of 27 cases from 9 countries 
were ultimately compared across a series of physical interventions and social 
effects. The result of the study was positive, but even more interestingly it 
concluded that a far bigger social effect could be expected if the physical in-
terventions in question were structural in nature, i.e. altered the architectural 
logic of the urban plan by changing road networks or in the building structure 
by changing exits and entrances. If structural changes were made to the area, 
combined with social initiatives, the positive effects included reduced unem-
ployment and crime levels and higher education and income levels (ibid.). Lists 
of interventions and effects are shown in Table T 2.3. The study shows that 
people are invariably affected by their physical surroundings, and that care-
fully considering social impacts when planning the physical transformation 
of a disadvantaged social housing area can ensure the changes have positive 
consequences. However, the fact that only 27 cases were available worldwide 
tells a story of a global lack of commitment to measuring the social effects of 
physical intervention.
Many of the effects achieved in the 27 cases relate directly to the charac-
teristics and themes of social sustainability identified earlier in this chapter. It 
thus serves to substantiate the alleged connection between architecture and 
social sustainability, which justifies the further investigation into socially sus-
tainable transformation of Nordic social housing.
==PAGE:42==
42 | Social Sustainability In Theory
In Conclusion
This chapter establishes a connection between the sustainability agenda 
and the social sciences, presenting various authors’ attempts at defining the 
concept. It does not attempt to arrive at a final definition, but compares defini-
tions of varying specificity, commenting that while subject-specific definitions 
might be necessary to make social sustainability sufficiently suited for practical 
work, a more general definition would help the concept gain own value and 
prevent it from becoming a container for terms from other subjects. Following 
the example of the literature, the definitions were complimented by a range of 
characteristics that more closely described the concept of social sustainability. 
These included among others equity, social justice, social mixing, cohesion, 
empowerment, participation, social capital, well-being, happiness and quality 
of life.
The influence of architecture on people was then investigated through a 
study of literature. The bi-directional relationship between architecture and 
people was established and the ability of the physical environment to influ-
ence people’s health was established. By widening the scope to include an 
urban context, it was possible to identify the aspects of the built environment 
that were detrimental in a mental health perspective, and thus also to social 
sustainability. Finally, by reviewing evidence on the social effects of physical 
changes to disadvantaged housing areas, it was possible to link concrete ar-
chitectural transformations to pertinent social sustainability issues — paving 
the way for an architectural design process to result in a socially sustainable 
transformation of Nordic social housing.
==PAGE:43==
Having approached an understanding of social sustainability as a concept 
and established the underlying themes and characteristics that set it apart from 
sustainability as a whole, the question of how these might be properly trans-
lated and analysed arises. Within the fields of environmental and economic 
sustainability, methods have been developed that allow designers to accurately 
assess the sustainability of their designs: Through life cycle assessment (LCA) 
and life cycle costing (LCC) analyses, sustainability can be partially quantified 
(Mjörnell, Malmgren, Boss et al. 2014), and new design tools allow for pro-
gressively earlier implementation of these assessments. In contrast, social sus-
tainability lacks a conceptual framework for quantification that is comparable, 
and hence integrating social sustainability analyses in a design process is all the 
more difficult. This chapter tackles the question of how social sustainability 3
Concepts for 
Quantification
==PAGE:44==
44 | Concepts For Quantification
concerns can be analytically approached in a design process and reviews a 
range of conceptualisations of sustainability that have been proposed as ways 
to integrate the social dimension on equal terms. Although these conceptu-
alisations generally aim to provide a holistic overview of sustainability — in-
cluding the environmental and economic aspects — due to the scope of this 
report, this chapter focuses and draws inspiration on the social elements of the 
conceptualisations. This is done in order to establish an understanding of how 
the social sustainability theory reviewed in the previous chapter can be oper-
ationalized, and which common considerations have to be made. Before this, 
however, it is necessary to look at what motivates the pursuit of measurability 
within social sustainability. 
F 3.1	 Position of the 
chapter within the 
research structure.
T
h
e
o
r
y
C
o
n
c
e
p
t
u
a
l
i
s
a
t
i
o
n
D
e
s
i
g
n
 
p
r
o
c
e
s
s
Operationali-
zation
F 3.2	 Quantification is important in order to communicate findings and support stakeholders’ decision making process.
.............................
.............................
$$
2
4
$
§
==PAGE:45==
Why Quantify? | 45
Why Quantify?
The need to quantify social sustainability may not seem straightforward 
given the tendency within the social sciences to work with qualitative research 
methods (Guest et al. 2013), and indeed, for reasons which will be made ap-
parent towards the end of this chapter, qualitative data must remain a vital 
part of socially sustainable renovation projects. However, there are a number 
of solid arguments in favour of quantification, which cannot be ignored.
First off, there is a need to be able to rate different strategies over each 
other — if there is a possibility to achieve two different socially sustainable 
outcomes, it should be possible to say, which one is better (Widok 2009). This 
calls for a method that can compare sustainable solutions in a holistic way. Such 
a method would have to be able to measure social sustainability in a traceable 
and reproducible way, and could help with communication of results, which 
could in turn generate increased competition (ibid.). Quantification also seems 
to be necessary, if the social sustainability agenda is to transfer from the ana-
lytical to the normative level. Hence, the provision of quantitative targets is a 
necessity if social sustainability goals are to be integrated into policy-making 
processes (Littig & Grießler 2005).
On 5 April 2016 at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU), a meeting 
was organised by associate professor Lotte Bjerregaard Jensen and the author 
on the topic of how to quantify social sustainability. Participants included as-
sociate professor Liane Thuvander from Chalmers University of Technology, 
Sweden, senior sustainability consultant Peter Andreas Sattrup from the Dan-
ish Association of Architectural Firms and postdoctoral researcher at DTU 
Kristoffer Negendahl, along with Ph.D. and postgraduate students from both 
DTU and the Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts School of Architecture.
During the meeting, the question of why social sustainability needs to be 
quantified was discussed. Three main points were widely agreed upon:
1.	 Gathering empirical knowledge from urban transformation projects is a 
key effort if the link to social sustainability is to be strengthened. Having 
theory accompanied by hard (economic) evidence would greatly im-
prove the argument for social sustainability. 
2.	 Implementing and communicating knowledge depends on a framework of 
results that is easily comprehensible. Transforming tacit knowledge into 
explicit (quantifiable) knowledge is part of this.
3.	 Supporting stakeholders’ decision-making is ultimately what makes sure 
that the right solutions are chosen. In this respect, having quantifiable 
results, which can be translated into an economic gain will help create 
incentive.
In conclusion, increased quantification and measurability helps communi-
cate knowledge in a way that better supports the decision-making processes, 
which are ultimately decisive for sustainability (Figure F 3.2).
==PAGE:46==
46 | Concepts For Quantification
Conceptualisations
Quite a few attempts have been made at providing a 
framework for quantification of social sustainability, how-
ever none have yet reached a level of general applicabil-
ity within social issues to tangent that of LCA and LCC 
within the environmental and economic aspects of sus-
tainability. Often these frameworks constitute attempts at 
approximating a holistic description of sustainability, and 
in some cases this results in the social aspect being simpli-
fied or under-represented. Furthermore, depending on the 
context in which the frameworks exist, the sustainability 
concept adopts different scopes and system boundaries. 
Hence, although a distinct method for social life cycle as-
sessment (S-LCA) has been developed (Benoît & Mazijn 
2009), which is based on a methodology similar to that of 
environmental  LCA (E-LCA), its is not as exhaustive, and 
other kinds of analysis are required to fully elucidate social 
sustainability. This argument, which is elaborated below, 
becomes the point of departure for this review of social 
sustainability conceptualisations.
Social LCA
Until recently, no commonly accepted methodology ex-
isted for the assessment of the social impacts of production 
of goods and services (Benoît & Mazijn 2009; Jørgensen et 
al. 2008). This might have been due to the fact that very lit-
tle research had been published in peer-reviewed journals, 
while consensus was lacking with regards to many central 
aspects of the methodology such as scope, system bounda-
ries, indicators and the origin of social impacts (Jørgensen 
et al. 2008). However, in 2009 the Life Cycle Initiative by 
the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and 
the Society of Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry 
(SETAC) presented their Guidelines For Social Life Cycle 
Assessment Of  Products, which presented a unified meth-
odology (Benoît & Mazijn 2009). In order to consolidate 
LCA procedures and methods, the methodology is based 
on the International Organisation for Standardization’s 
(ISO) standards on environmental management, as out-
lined in Figure F 3.3 (ISO 14040 2008; ISO 14044 2008). 
Although it advanced the position of the S-LCA method-
Interpretation
Goal and 
Scope defini-
tion
Inventory 
analysis
Impact 
assessment
F 3.3	 The S-LCA framework is based on the four 
phases of LCA identified in ISO 14040 and 
14044.
==PAGE:47==
Conceptualisations | 47
ology within social sustainability research, the guideline did not settle several 
of the central issues of disagreement: The guideline could neither determine 
any final sets of generally accepted impact categories, nor could any charac-
terization model between subcategories and impact categories be generally 
accepted by S-LCA practitioners (Benoît & Mazijn 2009).
Is S-LCA a viable option when designing the transformation of social 
housing, then? Partly, and as we shall see later, Mjörnell, Malmgren, Boss et 
al. (2014) did apply the method, albeit with a limited scope, in their evaluation 
of renovation alternatives. The reservation on their part regarding the use of 
the method resulted mainly from an observation that a negligible amount of 
research has been done applying an S-LCA methodology on renovation pro-
jects (ibid.).
The application of S-LCA in a building context appears to be an inter-
esting, yet underresearched subject. Dong & Ng (2015) present a Hong Kong 
based Social-impact Model of Construction (SMoC), but here the predomi-
nant focus is on the construction phase, including indicators of worker’s health, 
working hours and freedom of association. Social sustainability is essentially 
about people, and hence its scope is broad and multi-faceted. When dealing 
with buildings and urban structures, this fact does not allow for the same prod-
uct-life-cycle method as E-LCA, but instead calls for an equally multi-faceted 
approach, which includes the direct effects that (building) products also have 
on people (as established in the previous chapter). Imagine that after meticu-
lously calculating the environmental impact of a building over its lifetime, its 
mere existence caused a complex range of additional impacts. Due to the fact 
that people occupy and live in buildings, this is exactly the case with social 
sustainabiltiy in the built environment. Hence, in their guideline for S-LCA, 
Benoît & Mazijn (2009) also include the reservation that S-LCA is still under-
going development, and that assessments of sustainability may also lie beyond 
the scope of E-LCA, LCC and S-LCA.
Assessment methods
One approach to sustainability in urban development that has been around 
since the early 1990s, but which has been rapidly gaining momentum since 
2008, is the (environmental) assessment method, often accompanied by a cer-
tification scheme (Cole 2005; Schweber & Haroglu 2014). Although original-
ly conceived to mitigate the stress on natural systems by increasing environ-
mental performance of buildings, certification schemes such as BREEAM by 
the UK Building Research Establishment, LEED by the US Green Building 
Council and DGNB by the German Sustainable Building Council now offer 
frameworks for sustainable building that include various aspects of social sus-
tainability (Cole 2005; Hamedani & Huber 2012). 
Characterization:
The calculation of 
indicator results (char-
acterization) involves the 
conversion of LCI results 
to common units and 
the aggregation of the 
converted results within 
the same impact cate-
gory.
(ISO 14044 2008)
==PAGE:48==
48 | Concepts For Quantification
Many of the assessment methods share a range of 
common characteristics: First of all, assessment methods 
tend to be based on varying frameworks of organised 
performance criteria, usually within resource use, ecolog-
ical loadings, health and comfort in individual buildings. 
The performance criteria are assigned points or weight-
ings, and a full engagement with a particular assessment 
method often involves obtaining some sort of certification. 
Furthermore, the application of LCA methodologies are 
increasingly used to underpin and refine assessments (Cole 
2005).
A tendency towards environmental emphasis in the 
large international assessment methods (BREEAM and 
LEED) seems apparent from the analysis of the rating 
systems performed by Madsen & Beim (2015), in which 
the assessment criteria of a range of different rating sys-
tems were translated into a common scale (Figure F 3.4). 
The version of the German Sustainable Building Coun-
cil (DGNB) assessment method adopted by the Green 
Building Council Denmark (DK-GBC) strikes a seeming-
ly better balance between economic, environmental and 
social factors, yet like the other two certification schemes 
it seems to ignore cultural factors altogether. Table T 3.2 
summarises the performance criteria for the sociocultural 
and functional quality part of the DGNB system, which 
exists for either buildings or districts (DGNB 2014). Com-
paring the criteria sets with the characteristics and themes 
of social sustainability identified in Chapter 2, several 
clear connections can be identified relating to e.g. com-
fort, social mix, interconnectedness, health and well-being, 
safety and quality of life, while other themes such as sense 
of place, democracy and governance, empowerment, par-
ticipation and culture seem less well-represented. Overall, 
there seems to be a predominant focus on comfort criteria 
for buildings, and the fact that building and district are re-
garded in separate assessments reduce the holistic quality 
of the certification scheme.
   On the other hand, assessment methods without a 
certification scheme such as the Design Quality Indicator 
(DQI), developed in England by the Construction Indus-
try Council, and the Survey of Architectural Values in the 
Environment (SAVE), developed by the Danish Planning 
Agency and intended for municipal use, have a focus which 
Certification Tool
Year
Country
BREEAM
1990
UK
HQE
1996
France
LEED
1998
USA
CASBEE
2001
Japan
Green Star
2002
Australia
DGNB
2009
Germany
T 3.1	 Overview of different major certification 
schemes in chronological order. After 
Hamedani & Huber (2012).
Environment
Social
Culture
Process
Economy
0%
80%
Legend
BREEAM
LEED
DGNB
DQI
SAVE
F 3.4	 Division of focus within selected categories 
of different assessment methods. Analysis 
and graphs by Madsen & Beim (2015).
==PAGE:49==
Conceptualisations | 49
is much more culturally and socially oriented (Madsen & Beim 2015). Yet even 
though DQI and SAVE seem more appropriate for projects oriented towards 
social sustainability, there are other problems associated with the use of assess-
ment methods in a design process. Either way, the significant variations in the 
focus of assessment frameworks problematise the ability of this methodology 
to provide a sufficiently balanced and holistic evaluation.
Implications for design process
There is a multitude of benefits and drawbacks related to the use of assess-
ment methods and certification schemes in the building industry in general. 
The focus of this report, however, is on the ability of design process support to 
foster socially sustainable projects. In this context, a more specific range of is-
sues emerge. In a literature review exploring the initial, current and future role 
of environmental performance assessment methods, Cole (2005) comments 
on the effect these methods have on the design process. While assessment 
methods have made sustainability accessible to a wider range of stakeholders, 
excessive focus on certification adversely affects the diversity and innovation 
within the sustainability debate; in the same sense, assessment methods may 
inhibit creativity and innovation in a design process: 
“[If] assessment methods are used as design tools, even though they may not 
have been specifically designed to do so … they potentially institutionalize a 
limited definition of environmentally responsible building practices at a time 
when exploration and innovation should perhaps be encouraged” (Cole 2005).
The unfortunate results of this institutionalisation include cases where 
building owners require designers to produce a design that obtains a high per-
formance-score within a specific assessment method (ibid.). This issue is espe-
cially relevant in the context of social sustainability. Since the term is still in 
Buildings
Districts
Thermal Comfort
Indoor Air Quality
Acoustic Comfort
Visual Comfort
User Control
Quality of Outdoor Spaces
Safety and Security
Inclusive Access
Public Access
Cyclist Facilities
Design and Urban Quality
Integrated Public Art
Layout Quality
Social and Functional Mix
Social and Commercial Infrastructure  
Objective / Subjective Safety
Public Space Amenity
Sound Emissions and Sound Insulation  
Open Space Offer
Inclusive Access
Development Layout and Flexibility
Urban Integration
Urban Design
Use of Existing Structures
Art in Public Space
T 3.2	 Core criteria set for sociocultural and functional quality in buildings and 
districts according to DGNB (2014).
==PAGE:50==
50 | Concepts For Quantification
the process of being defined and operationalized, it is of great importance that 
designers do not settle for a convenient yet incomplete definition, and instead 
continue to explore the subject further.
In a recent investigation into the effect of BREEAM assessment on de-
sign processes based on eight case studies, Schweber & Haroglu (2014) found 
that design professionals with a strong profile in sustainability successfully used 
BREEAM for design support and development, while individuals with less 
experience with sustainable projects tended to treat it merely as an assessment 
method. It would thus seem that the ability of assessment methods to success-
fully integrate social sustainability aspects hinges heavily on the design team 
members prior experience with social sustainability and hence their capacity 
to abstract from the more mechanistic assessment framework. Consequently, 
assessment methods fail to provide more generally useful design support for 
social sustainability, which can also be used by non-specialists.
A final comment emphasises the importance of design team integration 
and cross-disciplinary teamwork. Schweber & Haroglu (2014) state the im-
portance of project team collaboration, communication and coordination as 
well as high levels of commitment and early involvement of key actors to the 
design effect of assessment methods. As these methods inherently suggests that 
the best solution is to be found by individually optimising a selected range 
of weighted sustainability factors, this creates a space of solutions, which is 
intended to satisfy a pre-defined sustainability certification baseline. Although 
this might be in the immediate interest of building owners, it does not neces-
sarily lead to the most sustainable building. Instead, assessment methods need 
to be part of a cross-disciplinary discussion:
“Simply adding social criteria to the current mix of environmental perfor-
mance measures may not necessarily expose the way that one influences and 
is influenced by others. It can only do so if the method or tool is used as part 
of the deliberations between various stakeholders, i.e. synergies are achieved 
through active, cross-disciplinary use of the tool, rather than by simply the 
structure of the tool itself ” (Cole 2005).
Although this remark is directed at environmental assessment tools, it ap-
plies more generally. The question of how to include the social aspect in the 
design of buildings and districts should thus not be reduced to a checklist 
without careful considerations by stakeholders — considerations which might 
advantageously include project specific weighting of assessment criteria. Al-
though it might compromise the certifications schemes in terms of compara-
bility between projects, a bespoke weighting has the potential to direct focus in 
the design towards the areas where it is most needed, creating a more optimal 
space of solutions.
==PAGE:51==
Conceptualisations | 51
Telos
Another conceptualisation, although with a different 
scope and aim, is the Telos method for monitoring sustain-
able development. Telos, a network organization consist-
ing of Tilburg University, Eindhoven University of Tech-
nology, Etin consultants, PON Institute for Research and 
Development, and the Province of Noord Brabant, devel-
oped the method for monitoring sustainable development 
in the Dutch province of Brabant. Although the scope and 
goal of the method is fundamentally different from the one 
in this report, its conceptualisation of social sustainability 
is still of interest, as it was one of the first attempts to in-
clude the social dimension in a sounder way and on more 
equal terms (Koning 2001).
In short, the method presents an overview of sustaina-
bility based on the environmental-economic-social under-
standing of the concept. The three aspects (called capitals 
in the Telos model) are each divided into a limited num-
ber of stocks (Table T 3.3), which are again divided into 
quantifiable indicators. The scores of the individual indi-
cators are summarised in a triangular diagram, as shown 
in Figure F 3.5. In this way, although it is part of a holistic 
framework, social sustainability is evaluated, quantified 
and visualised as a separate entity.
In making the model, Koning (2001) describes that 
various concepts, including social capital, social infrastruc-
ture, well-being, culture, and social sustainability, were ex-
Social-cultural capital
Stocks
Social Cohesion
Participation
Arts and Culture
Health
Safety
Living Environment
Education
T 3.3	 Stocks constituting the social-cultural cap-
ital of the Telos method. After Zoeteman 
et al. (2014).
Ecological
capital
Social-cultural
capital
Economic
capital
Stocks
Indicators
F 3.5	 The Telos triangle 
consists of three 
capitals and their 
underlying stocks 
and indicators. Indi-
cators are rated in 
four classes. After 
Koning (2001).
==PAGE:52==
52 | Concepts For Quantification
plored and used as a theoretical basis for the stocks1. The themes identified in 
relations to social capital and social sustainability were, among others, social 
justice, social cohesion, participation and solidarity between and within socie-
ties, while the investigation into well-being led to normative considerations of 
equal opportunities, individual considerations of independence and self-real-
ization as wells as policy considerations in the fields of employment, housing, 
health, education, social participation, culture, mobility and leisure time. The 
stocks in Table T 3.3 were chosen on the basis of these considerations.
The stocks were further specified using a set of requirements, indicators and 
norms (benchmarks for the indicators). However, given the narrower scope of 
this report, these will not be further examined. Instead, emphasis should be 
placed the framework for breaking down social sustainability into subcatego-
ries, which can again be broken down into measurable indicators. A similar 
approach was used by the certification schemes, yet the Telos method focuses 
more explicitly on the use of individual context-dependant weighting by divid-
ing a total of 100 points over the number of stock or indicators (Koning 2001).
When the weighting of stocks and indicators is carried out by both stake-
holders and groups of specialists, Koning (2001) argues that it helps stimulate a 
more integrative sustainability debate among policy makers and stakeholders. 
A similar argument has been raised regarding the certification schemes’ ability 
to improve integration in the design process (Schweber & Haroglu 2014), the 
difference being the designers capacity to influence the weighting.
Finally, Koning (2001) emphasises the need for further elaboration and re-
search into the operationalization of indicators, as well as discussion of the 
problems of quantifying social dimensions.
The ReBo model
With the aim of approaching the scope and context of this research, two 
local, Swedish conceptualisations of social sustainability in renovation practice 
are reviewed. Their advantage lies mainly in their insight into local conditions.
One attempt to conceptualise social sustainability, which is better aligned 
with the scope of this report, has been developed at Chalmers University of 
Technology. The ReBo model, presented by Thuvander et al. (2011), focuses 
on strategies for sustainable renovation of culturally valuable pre-boom mul-
ti-family building stock from the era known in Sweden as the Peoples Home 
(Folkhemmet) period from about 1940–1960. Drawing on existing value and 
indicator models, the ReBo model proposes a framework consisting of 7-10 
1	
Note the juxtaposition of the concept of social sustainability with those of e.g. social capital 
and well-being. This report assumes the position of social sustainability as an overarching 
concept, a viewpoint which is shared by the majority of the researched literature. However, 
there seems to be no formal hierarchy, and hence many of the concepts dealt with in Chap-
ter 2 can be (and have been) explored independently.
==PAGE:53==
Conceptualisations | 53
value areas, which are described in four Parameter Levels (PL) of increasing 
specification, ranging from the value areas themselves (PL1) to concrete indi-
cators (PL4) (Table T 3.4). Thuvander et al. (2011) describe a “tentative meth-
odological framework” for the model, proposing a list of PL 1-4. As the list for 
PL4 is incomplete (and tentative) it has been omitted here. The ReBo model 
emphasises project-specific weighting of parameters:
“A crucial part of the parameter discussion is the balancing of the values in 
general, and balancing of the parameters in particular, since they are crucial 
for different renovation scenarios. An assessment of the criteria should include 
a weighting of the parameters on PL1-PL4.” (Thuvander et al. 2011)
Additionally, the authors propose a strategy matrix, cross-matching Value 
Areas with buliding components to identify action packages for each buliding 
component (Thuvander et al. 2013).
RenoBuild
In a recent report for the Technical Research Institute of Sweden, Mjör-
nell, Malmgren, Boss et al. (2014) present a framework for the evaluation of 
the sustainability of different renovation alternatives with the goal of finding 
the most optimal combination of measures to achieve a cost-effective energy 
renovation with a low environmental impact and without adversely affecting 
the social conditions of the residents. Like Telos, the method is based on the 
environmental-economic-social understanding of sustainability, and it evalu-
ates renovation alternatives using distinct methodological frameworks for each 
PL1: Value area
PL2: Intervention Points
PL3: Aspects of PL2
Social value
Equity
Affordability
Freedom of choice
Connection/Accessibility
Street network
Accessibility for disabled
Access to local services and jobs
Pride and sense of place
Public image in media
Residents’ image of the area
Cohesion
Social mix
Stability
Social networks
Living quality and health
Indoor climate
Lifestyle choices
Housing standard
Comfort
Safety and security
-
Democracy, comprehension, action
Participation
Education
Communication
Information
T 3.4	 Specification of social value area 
of the ReBo model. Based on 
Thuvander & Femenías (2014) 
and additional material provided by 
Liane Thuvander.
PL1: Value areas
General
Architectural
Cultural historical
Social
Technical
Environmental
Economic
==PAGE:54==
54 | Concepts For Quantification
aspect. Specifically the method involves the use of an LCA 
tool to calculate the environmental performance and an 
LCC tool to calculate the economic consequences of the 
renovations alternative, while another methodology alto-
gether is used for the social aspect, namely the following:
To quantify social impacts, Mjörnell, Malmgren, Boss 
et al. (2014) suggest using the Social Impact Analysis matrix 
developed by the City of Göteborg (Wistrand et al. 2011; 
Mjörnell, Malmgren, Boss et al. 2014), which analyses six 
social aspects across five different scales (Table T 3.5; see 
also City of Göteborg (2016) for a fuller description of the 
tool). To make the model more suited for evaluation, the 
social aspects were developed further to include quantifia-
ble indicators (Table T 3.6).
Furthermore, as the environmental and economic as-
pects were analysed in a life-cycle perspective, the method 
bases the evaluation of the social aspect on S-LCA in the 
sense that it attempts to address impacts across the whole 
life-cycle (Mjörnell, Boss et al. 2014). However, case studies 
performed by Mjörnell, Malmgren, Elfborg et al. (2014) 
have shown that the analysis should be limited to focusing 
on the renovation phase and the use phase. The social im-
pacts of the materials used during the renovation, as well 
as social influences during the demolition and disposal of 
materials, were also estimated to be too difficult to man-
age both methodologically and in terms of resources. Al-
though the Social Impact Analysis matrix has five scales, 
Mjörnell, Malmgren, Elfborg et al. (2014) also conclude 
that the scale should be limited to the building level and 
neighbourhood level, as it would be methodologically dif-
ficult to conduct a realistic analysis at levels above these 
(such as district, city and region).
Although all indicators are equally weighted in the Re-
noBuild method, different alternatives for weighting are 
considered by Mjörnell, Malmgren, Boss et al. (2014). The 
most promising alternative suggests that a number of prin-
ciples for the weighting process should be developed by the 
Reno Build-researchers. On the basis of these principles, 
the indicators could then be weighted individually from 
case to case by residents and other stakeholders.
T 3.6	 Indicators of social aspects. After Mjörnell, 
Malmgren, Boss et al. (2014).
Social aspect
Indicator
Cohesive City
Variation in apartment sizes
Variation in rent levels
Variation in forms of ownership
Number of businesses
Variation of businesses
Suited to special needs
Social Interaction and 
Meetings
Common meeting places
Common facilities
Well-Functioning 
Everyday Life
Renovation causes no significant 
disturbance
Adequate communication to tenant 
about renovation
Reasonable rent increase
Adequate living standard
Access to parking and storage
Good indoor environment
Safety and Openness
Measures to increase safety
Identity and Expe-
rience
Heritage and physical form
Health and Green 
Urban Environments
Access to playgrounds
Impact on green spaces
Impact on ability to cultivate
Access to balcony and outdoor spaces
Impact on outdoor noise level
Building
Neigh-
bour-
hood
District
City
Region
Cohesive City
Social Inter-
action and 
Meetings
Well-Function-
ing Everyday 
Life
Safety and 
Openness
Identity and 
Experience
Health and 
Green Urban 
Environments
T 3.5	 Social Impact Analysis matrix. After 
Wistrand et al. (2011) and Malmgren, 
Boss et al. (2014).
==PAGE:55==
Key Considerations | 55
Key Considerations
A number of key themes and considerations can be extracted from the 
above review of social sustainability conceptualisations. This section attempts 
to synthesise some of the issues that are most commonly dealt with.
Quantification
In order to assess the defined indicators, the reviewed concepts apply dif-
ferent strategies of quantitative and qualitative analysis. These include calcu-
lations of technical performance, statistics analysis and points rating based 
on qualitative analysis of various factors. For example, the Danish version of 
the DGNB system uses both qualitative (e.g. perceived layout of access routes) 
and quantitative (e.g. indoor thermal comfort) methods for points assessments 
(DK-GBC 2015), although the space for interpretation is kept to a minimum. 
The same goes for the Telos method, which bases its ratings on comparisons 
of quantitative and qualitative scores/measurements to normative targets 
(Koning 2001), and RenoBuild, which uses a scale of one to five to compare 
alternatives (Mjörnell, Malmgren, Elfborg et al. 2014). The ReBo method uses 
a wide range of reports, maps, tables, and images (Thuvander & Femenías 
2014). Consequently, it seems rating systems are useful tools for translating 
both quantitative and qualitative analysis into comparable results and making 
social sustainability operational.
Scale and Scope
Several authors emphasise the need to address problems of social sustaina-
bility on a variety of scales (DGNB 2014; Koning 2001; Mjörnell, Malmgren, 
Boss et al. 2014). The conceptualisations also work within different contexts 
and thus apply different scopes within their methods. The DGNB system ex-
plicitly works within a variety of building typologies and has expanded its 
Scale
Scope
Neighbourhood
Building
District
City
Region
Narrow
Wide
DGNB
Buildings
Districts
RenoBuild
ReBo
Telos
F 3.6	 Comparison of 
scale and scope of 
selected conceptu-
alisations.
==PAGE:56==
56 | Concepts For Quantification
method to inclue district scale assessments (DK-GBC 2015; Hamedani & Hu-
ber 2012). Oppositely, the Telos method has expanded its framework down-
wards from the region level to include assessments of sustainable cities, at the 
same time expanding the scope from a Dutch to a global context, including 
a wider variety of issues (Zoeteman et al. 2014). The RenoBuild and Rebo 
method apply a much narrower scope, focusing on renovation projects on 
building and neighbourhood level. The ReBo model’s focus on a specific ty-
pology further limits its scope, however its indicators suggest inclusion of the 
neighbourhood scale although this is not explicitly elaborated by Thuvander et 
al. (2011). Still, according to Koning (2001), the issue of scale lies mostly in the 
choice of indicators. As such, the Telos stocks can be considered of relevance 
for all levels, and should be considered even on building and neighbourhood 
scale.
Weighting
The prospect of project-specific weighting has been elaborated above. 
There seems to be a broad consensus that some degree of weighting should be 
carried out, yet authors disagree on who should carry out the weighting and 
how project specific it should be. Suggestions range from general weightings 
carried out by specialists to project-specific weightings by designers and/or 
stakeholders.
Visualisation
In the beginning of this chapter, a key motivation for quantifying social 
sustainability was identified as the need to communicate knowledge and sup-
port stakeholders’ decision making. In this context, effective visualisation of 
results is a simple yet valuable tool. The Telos and RenoBuild methods are the 
most explicit in their use of visualisations; both use almost identical, schematic 
representations consisting of a partially filled-out triangle with environmen-
tal, economic and social aspects represented by the corners (Koning 2001; 
Mjörnell, Malmgren, Boss et al. 2014). Although the Telos triangle is intended 
to represent the level of sustainability in relation to a defined absolute level 
(where the triangle would be completely filled out), whereas RenoBuild uses 
the triangle only to compare alternatives (best alternative gets score of 100%), 
this type of visualisation is still effective in providing a clear overview. In com-
parison, the ReBo method uses more ad hoc approaches to visualise individual 
aspects of social sustainability, such as maps, tables, images or even an interac-
tive point cloud model (Thuvander & Femenías 2014). It seems a combination 
of visualisations of individual aspects combined with a more general overview 
would provide a strong framework for communication.
==PAGE:57==
Key Considerations | 57
Culture and Process
In the analysis of rating systems performed by Madsen & Beim (2015), 
cultural value, describing building-cultural and aesthetic qualities, and process 
value, describing qualities associated with the development and construction 
process, were used as independent parameters from the environmental, social 
and economic ones. Yet in interviews about the design process with architects 
and sustainability professionals, the importance of resident inclusion in de-
sign processes has consistently been emphasised as being essential to social 
sustainability, and in some literature the cultural parameter also seems to be 
intertwined with social sustainability. It is of interest to this report to briefly 
investigate these concepts, their meaning and the way they are commonly con-
ceptualised.
The conceptualisations reviewed in this chapter differ in their approach 
to culture and process as being either independent parameters or integrated 
parts of social sustainability. In the Telos method culture is included, but not to 
a satisfactory degree, as Koning (2001) states. She identifies culture as a term 
that refers to:
… symbols and meaning, norms and values, habits and learning, politics of 
identity, tradition, artefacts and so on. It covers the process of intellectual, men-
tal and aesthetic development, it represents a certain way of life of a people, a 
period or a group, and it also corresponds to the products of artistic activities.
As it was shown in the analysis by Madsen & Beim (2015; see Figure F 3.4 
on page 48), the cultural aspect seems to be very weak within the certifica-
tion schemes. In the DGNB system, apart from the public art indicator, the 
cultural elements are only implicitly described in the other indicators. Still, 
process is a category for itself with community consultation and municipal 
involvement as separate indicators, although it is only weighted at 10% — less 
than half the weight of the other four categories, which have 22,5% each 
(DK-GBC 2014). The ReBo model includes cultural and process as separate 
value areas2, whereas RenoBuild describes that cultural heritage should be 
taken into consideration in cooperation with residents (Mjörnell, Malmgren, 
Boss et al. 2014; Mjörnell, Boss et al. 2014).
It seems there is some agreement that aspects of culture have an influ-
ence on social sustainability, and that inclusion of residents into the design/
planning process is beneficial or even indispensable. Regarding culture, var-
ious terms (such as art, heritage, tradition, architecture) are used to describe 
it, however the definition above seems to more clearly link culture to social 
sustainability. To evaluate cultural values, the SAVE evaluation method has 
proven highly effective (Madsen & Beim 2015).
2	
Process quality is included in some versions of the method, see e.g. Thuvander et al. (2011).
==PAGE:58==
58 | Concepts For Quantification
In Conclusion
After briefly arguing for the need for quantification, this chapter introduces 
four distinct approaches to conceptualise social sustainability: The environ-
mental assessment method (including certification schemes), the Telos method 
for monitoring sustainable development, the ReBo method and the RenoBuild 
method. While the former two provide a global perspective, the latter two give 
a more local insight into the Swedish research context. Furthermore, there 
seems to be some convergence regarding the indicators, characteristics and 
themes used to describe social sustainability in the different methods. Espe-
cially themes of social cohesion, health and safety, social mix, participation, 
accessibility, identity and comfort have been specified.
Furthermore, a number of key considerations have been identified that 
need to be taken into account in conceptualising social sustainability. These 
include deliberations on how to quantify, the scale and scope of conceptual-
isations, the weighting of indicators and how it should be carried out and the 
visualisation and comparison of results as well as reflections on the role of 
culture and inclusion of residents in design processes. In conclusion, none of 
the reviewed conceptualisations manage to exhaustively describe how social 
sustainability can be included in the design process, yet each one offers insight 
into different aspects of the problem. Hence the task of this report will mainly 
be an attempt to synthesise these learnings. 
==PAGE:59==
Although it has now been shown how social sustainability can be concep-
tualised in various ways and to different ends, it is necessary to look closer at 
the design process in order to understand how these conceptualisations might 
be implemented. Before we delve into any concrete proposals for how to oper-
ationalize the social sustainability concept, it is thus necessary to look at how 
buildings and districts are currently designed, as well as how other parts of 
sustainability have recently made their way into the design process.
Several elements influence the way in which input is absorbed and dealt 
with in the design process: Motivation, communication between disciplines 
and information transfer can affect project continuity (Löhnert et al. 2003), 
and the availability of analytical tools can enable designers to analyse their 
designs at ever-earlier stages. In that context, methods and tools have been de-4
The Design 
Process
==PAGE:60==
60 | The Design Process
veloped for the integration of a range of sustainability aspects. Predominantly, 
these have focused on indoor climate, daylight and minimisation of the energy 
use through optimisation of the building geometry and systems (Nielsen 2012), 
but another attempt at integrating life cycle assessment capabilities in an ear-
ly-stage design tool has also proven to be practicable (Otovic et al. 2016). On 
the other hand, tools and methods for including the social dimension in design 
considerations seem to be lagging behind. Although much of the framework 
for design process integration is already there, the introduction of social sus-
tainability dimensions within this framework is lacking. With the intention of 
identifying potentials for the operationalization of social sustainability, this 
relatively short chapter investigates the design process, how it has been devel-
oped to take additional parameters into account, and how social sustainability 
aspects could possibly be included.
F 4.1	 Position of the 
chapter within the 
research structure.
T
h
e
o
r
y
C
o
n
c
e
p
t
u
a
l
i
s
a
t
i
o
n
D
e
s
i
g
n
 
p
r
o
c
e
s
s
Operationali-
zation
==PAGE:61==
The Design Process | 61
The Design Process
In the field of building design, the design process has suffered from a sepa-
ration of architecture and technology, which has resulted in a division between 
aesthetic and performance based goals (Nielsen 2012). Whereas system and 
rationality often govern the processes of engineers and industrial designers, a 
mainly argumentative and empirical approach is found in the field of archi-
tecture and planning (ibid.). In order to bring together these approaches, the 
concept of integrated design is proposed. Since this concept began to surface in 
the field of building design, it has manifested itself in various frameworks for 
the design process, some of which will be touched upon in this chapter. Fur-
thermore, the importance of multidisciplinary collaboration for the inclusion 
of sustainability goals is investigated in more detail.
Traditional design process
Löhnert et al. (2003) of the International Energy Agency (IEA) critically 
review the traditional design process and its shortcomings: As a simplification, 
they argue that design can traditionally be understood as a linear process, in 
which several actors work on a design in an independent, sequential manner. 
Typically, the architect is the one to produce the actual design in consultation 
with the client, including geometry, fenestration, orientation and general ex-
terior and interior appearance; optimisation only occurs at a later stage, when 
engineers are tasked with implementing the design. The individual, decou-
pled optimisation attempts have a limited ability to produce a solar-optimised 
building envelope, which has consequences in terms of e.g. energy use, day-
light, thermal comfort and cost.
Although Löhnert et al. (2003) — being guided by the research agenda of 
the IEA — focus on the consequences in terms of energy use, arguably the 
consequences are more far-reaching. As we have seen, the physical charac-
teristics of buildings and neighbourhoods have a profound impact on social 
sustainability as well. It is thus safe to say that the traditional design process is 
not well-suited to operationalize social sustainability.
Integrated design
The concept of integrated design is not new; on the contrary, the approach 
has been analysed from different perspectives for quite a while (Löhnert et al. 
2003; Nielsen 2012; Cross 2001). More recently, however, suggestions on how 
to formalise and structure the process to achieve higher building energy effi-
ciencies have greatly increased in number. Frameworks go by names such as 
the Integrated Design Process (IDP, by IEA; Löhnert et al. 2003; Knudstrup 
2004), the Integrated Building Design Systems (IBDM, by Koen Steemers 
from Cambridge University; Santamouris 2006) and Integrated Energy De-
==PAGE:62==
62 | The Design Process
sign (IED, by the INTEND project if Intelligent Energy Europe; Andresen et 
al. 2009). In this report, the term integrated design process (IDP) will be used 
to denominate the concept of integrated design. What the different frame-
works have in common is a call for early actor involvement, use of integrated, 
cross-disciplinary design teams, joint decision making, design iterations ear-
ly on and a focus on team motivation. Although the frameworks mentioned 
above tend to focus on the energy related and thus technical benefits of IDP, 
Nielsen (2012) emphasises the role of IDP as a more holistic concept:
“… [IDP] has the potential to contribute to a more holistic performance eval-
uation of the built environment and thereby illustrating that true architecture 
can amount to something greater than the sum of its individual parts — it can 
thrill, excite and improve the quality of life.”
It seems this approach is indeed better suited for the integration of social 
sustainability performance requirements, as it aims more broadly at all param-
eters that are relevant to the success of a building. 
IDP differs from the traditional design process in a number of ways: Firstly, 
it emphasises the creation of performance goals at the beginning of a design 
process by the involved specialists, which can be used to set up preliminary 
strategies and as benchmarks for later performance assessment (Andresen et al. 
(2009) suggest setting up a Quality Control Plan). Secondly, it focuses on provid-
ing a process that is able to facilitate the pursuit of the specified performance 
goals. The beginning of this section hinted at the difference in approach be-
tween the architect and the engineer. Löhnert et al. 2003 argues that the engi-
neer works in a very analytical and linear way, disassembling the problem into 
sub-problems, which can be individually solved and assembled into a solution. 
On the other hand, the architect works in an iterative way, investigating both 
solution and problem at the same time and working with several alternatives 
in parallel. In order to bringing together these different process approaches of 
architecture and engineering, IDP suggests a design process, which is based 
Pre-design
Concept
design
Design
development
Pre-design
Concept
design
Design
development
Assessment
Assessment
Assessment
Objective
F 4.2	 Traditional (top) 
and integrated 
(bottom) design 
approaches. After 
Nielsen (2012) 
and Löhnert et al. 
(2003).
==PAGE:63==
The Design Process | 63
on a sequence of iterative design loops, separated by as-
sessments of compliance with performance criteria (Fig-
ure F 4.2). This iterative design process supports the need 
for continuously changing perspectives between individual 
and overall problems/solutions (Figure F 4.3). This way of 
thinking is also closely related to the conceptualisations re-
viewed in the previous chapter, which operated specifically 
by breaking down social sustainability into a set of man-
ageable sub-problems, which could be synthesised into a 
socially sustainable solution.
By following this design process, the role of the engi-
neer/specialist moves from performance assessment and 
evaluation of a finished design towards actively supporting 
and optimising the design by assessing alternatives in col-
laboration with other specialists in other disciplines. Since 
this collaboration is what lies at the heart if IDP, it deserves 
a bit of further attention.
Interdisciplinary integration
Several authors writing about social sustainability call 
for a re-evaluation of the way different disciplines work 
together (McKenzie 2004; Partridge 2005; Becker et al. 
1999; Becker et al. 1997; Stember 1991). They use terms 
such as cross-, multi- and interdisciplinary to describe the 
required mode of collaboration. Before going any further, 
it is first necessary to clarify what is meant by these terms. 
Stember (1991) identifies a hierarchy of 5 distinct levels of 
disciplinary integration (Table T 4.1), of which interdisci-
plinary comes second, only surpassed by transdisciplinary. 
She states that:
“Interdisciplinary 
integration 
brings 
interdepend-
ent parts of knowledge into harmonious relationships 
through strategies such as relating part and whole or the 
particular and the general.”
This correspond to the framework described in Figure 
F 4.3, and also supports the analytical framework that was 
predominant within the social sustainability conceptualis-
ations in the previous chapter. 
McKenzie (2004), Partridge (2005) and Cole (2005) all 
describe interdisciplinary integration as a necessity, if so-
cial sustainability is not to be treated merely as an add-on 
F 4.3	 The fundamental need of continuous and 
quickly changing perspectives between 
solution and problem on the one hand and 
between the totality and particularity on 
the other is supported by the iterative de-
sign process. After Löhnert et al. (2003) 
and Nielsen (2012).
Analysis
Synthesis
Overall problem
Individual solution
Sub-problem
Sub-solution
Overall solution
==PAGE:64==
64 | The Design Process
to existing models. The conceptualisations only gain value when they are used 
and appreciated by all the actors in the design process. For this to be possible, 
the actors need to acknowledge, explicate and resolve their epistemological 
and methodological differences (Stember 1991; Becker et al. 1999). Conse-
quently, interdisciplinary integration and the strategies for its implementation 
contained within the IDP, seem to be strong prerequisites for the effective op-
erationalization of social sustainability.
Level
Description
Transdisciplinary
The unity of intellectual frameworks beyond the disciplinary 
perspectives
Interdisciplinary
Integration of the contributions of several disciplines to a 
problem or issue
Multidisciplinary
Several disciplines who each provide a different perspective 
on a problem or issue
Cross-disciplinary
Viewing of one discipline from the perspective of another
Intradisciplinary
Within own discipline
T 4.1	 Levels of disciplinary integration. After Stember (1991).
==PAGE:65==
Design Support Frameworks | 65
Design Support 
Frameworks
Within the IDP, a range of tools have been developed 
that are able to calculate different aspects of building per-
formance. As stated in the beginning of this chapter, these 
are mostly aimed at analysing technical performance such 
as indoor climate, daylight, energy or aspects of the build-
ing life cycle; however, they also have the potential to in-
form aspects of social sustainability (investigation of this 
potential is a topic in the subsequent chapters).
Modelling methods
In order to optimise the ability of design tools to sup-
port the design process, different frameworks have been 
proposed to connect the different tools that inform the de-
sign process. Using the terms design tool for a CAD tool 
dedicated to exploring design options, building performance 
simulation (BPS) tool for a tool that analyses performance 
in the early design stages and middleware for a component 
that translates data between the design tool and BPS tool, 
Negendahl (2015) proposes three constellations of tool in-
tegration (Figure F 4.4):
The combined model method uses a single program or en-
vironment that includes both design and BPS tools. 
Although this ensures a high level of integration, it 
also limits the functionality to what is offered by the 
model environment.
The central model method, such as that used in a build-
ing information model (BIM), uses a shared data 
schema to store building information. In this way, 
convergence between the design and BPS tool is se-
cured, but unless the simulations are done by the 
designer, this does not necessarily result in relevant 
performance feedback.
The distributed model method can be seen as an attempt 
to decentralise modelling efforts. To keep the tools 
integrated, a middleware component is used to trans-
late data between the design and BPS tools. Using 
bi-directional links between the tools and the mid-
dleware allows the designer to receive run-time per-
formance feedback.
BPS
tool
Tool
Tool
Tool
Tool
Design 
tool
Shared
data
schema
BPS
tool
Sub
tool
Sub
tool
Sub
tool
Sub
tool
Design 
tool
Main tool
BPS
tool
Tool
Tool
Tool
Middle-
ware
Design 
tool
F 4.4	 Methods for coupling of design and calcu-
lation tools. After Negendahl (2015).
Combined model
Central model
Distributed model
==PAGE:66==
66 | The Design Process
An integrated dynamic model, then, is a distributed model where the middle-
ware consists of a visual programming language (VPL) such as Grasshopper 
by Robert McNeel & Associates (2016). Theoretically, this allows anyone to 
build new project-specific links between the design tool and new types of BPS 
tools and gives the ability to integrate various social sustainability performance 
evaluations into an integrated dynamic model, which could be highly useful 
for designers. This makes it an interesting framework to consider in relation to 
the operationalization of social sustainability.
Multi-Criteria Decision-Making
Another interesting aspect in relation to design process support is the con-
cept of Multiple-Criteria Decision-Making (MCDM), which has been the sub-
ject of interest across different fields for a long time1, with recorded use as 
far back as the 18th century (International Society on MCDM 2016). More 
recently, the IEA developed a MCDM tool to use along with their guide for 
IDP (Balcomb et al. 2002; Löhnert et al. 2003). The method essentially offers 
a framework for structuring the goal-setting, weighting, assessing and deci-
sion-making processes of IDP, which allows for a visual representation of the 
overall performance of design alternatives. The MCDM method supports the 
iterative approach of IDP, as it help create performance requirements for opti-
misation. It also uses a similar approach to that of the social sustainability con-
ceptualisations, breaking down criteria into assessable indicators. What makes 
MCDM well-suited for projects focusing on social sustainability aspects it the 
fact that it does not necessarily require quantitative input for scoring:
“In some cases [scoring] might require performing computer simulations to 
determine energy use. In others it might require estimating construction costs, 
determining probable indoor air quality, judging relative architectural merit, or 
forecasting how adaptable each scheme would be to changes in building use or 
clients.” (Balcomb et al. 2002)
In a sense, we have already dealt with types of MCDM in the previous 
chapter. The Telos method and the RenoBuild methods both included ele-
ments that were fairly similar to those usually associated with MCDM. The 
star diagrams used to visualise results in these methods are also recommended 
by Balcomb et al. (2002). Using this method for evaluation of design can thus 
potentially help quantify social sustainability and make it visible to stakehold-
ers.
1	
See http://www.mcdmsociety.org for an extensive bibliography of literature pertaining to 
MCDM.
F 4.5	 The VPL Grasshopper3d pro-
grams data and geometry by 
connecting visual components 
on a canvas. Image by Robert 
McNeel & Associates (2016).
Specify 
criteria
Weight 
criteria
Generate 
alternatives
Estimate
performance
Evaluate
Iteration
F 4.6	 Steps using MCDM in an inte-
grated design process. After 
Balcomb et al. (2002).
Goal
Main criteria
Sub-criteria
Indicators
F 4.7	 MCDM: Breaking down design 
criteria into measurable 
indicators. After Balcomb et al. 
(2002).
==PAGE:67==
The Importance Of Community Involvement | 67
The Importance of Community 
Involvement
In continuation of the call for an interdisciplinary design process, it is of 
key interest to look at the possibility and importance of including the users of 
the design in the process. In their paper on designing for social sustainability, 
Palich & Edmonds (2013) argue that it is as much about the process as the 
outcome; an inclusive design process that integrates the input of the commu-
nity in the decision making processes is in itself increasing social sustainability 
by improving social networks and empowering people, and is more likely to 
produce designs that are aligned with the wishes and needs of the people that 
are going to use it.
In interviews with architect Elise Grosse and sustainability specialist Robin 
Andersson at architectural firm White’s Stockholm office on 11 March 2016, 
as well as with architect Åsa Bjerndell at White’s Malmö office on 11 May 
2016, a consistent emphasis was placed on the importance of community in-
volvement and integration of users in the design process. Addressing the need 
to quantify, Andersson anticipates a development in the ability to predict eco-
nomic benefits of social sustainability, but warns about excluding the partici-
patory processes:
“I don’t think you could or should ever exclude what kinds of positive effects 
the actual physical meetings with the people have. That meeting is very valua-
ble and that’s hard to put a price tag on.”
Åsa Bjerndell also sees economic benefits to social sustainability in the form 
of lower operation and maintenance cost for building owners, which can be 
caused by an increased sense of ownership among residents. She sees com-
munity involvement as way to give the users ownership of a project. For her, a 
major part of the work lies in identifying interests that are shared by both the 
owners and the community:
“[The owners] have a budget for things that they want to do, so we find one 
of those projects and combine it with someone in the area who wants to do 
something … then we have a budget, there’s actually someone who wants to 
put money into it, but we also have someone who is the receiver of it, and to 
put those things together, then you can start.”
She describes an inclusive design process as one that alternates between 
discussing and designing: While the discussion with the community is impor-
tant, having it lead to concrete design solutions would not be “responsible”, 
according to Bjerndell. Instead, the participatory process is comprised of sev-
eral iterations of seeking community input on design proposals to maintain 
participation, ownership and trust.
==PAGE:68==
68 | The Design Process
In Conclusion
This chapter introduces a number of concepts related to the design pro-
cess. After briefly reviewing the traditional approach to building design and 
recognising its shortcomings, the integrated design process (IDP) is established 
as a viable alternative, which seems more promising as a way to integrate 
an operationalization of social sustainability. The concept of interdisciplinary 
integration is examined further in a social sustainability context, and is found 
to be essential. Next, frameworks to help support the design process by dig-
ital modelling and by evaluation of design alternatives are investigated. The 
integrated dynamic model seems to be of special interest due to its ability to 
integrate new tools and provide run-time performance feedback, while mul-
ti-criteria decision-making (MCDM) provides a solid framework for compar-
ing results and thus for the integration of social sustainability parameters on 
equal terms with more traditional areas of focus.
Finally, community involvement was seen as essential to the design process 
by several professionals working with social sustainability in Sweden, the rea-
son being that an alignment of investor and community interests could lead 
to an increased sense of ownership, with a range of positive effects in terms 
of sustainability. Throughout this chapter, iteration was seen as a central, uni-
fying element, ideally with community involvement as a part of every design 
iteration.
==PAGE:69==
In the preceding chapters we have seen how social sustainability has been 
defined in different ways by various authors, and some of the common themes 
that characterise it have been identified. We have seen how this has been trans-
lated into conceptualisations with their accompanying methods and models, 
each with its own intended use and understanding of social sustainability and 
hence limitations in terms of scope and scale. We have also established a provi-
sional framework for design process integration, drawing mainly on the strat-
egies of IDP. As a whole, this has hopefully provided us with a more profound 
understanding of social sustainability, what it is and how a better description 
of it may be used to help guide a design process.
But whereas the previous chapters have mainly been concerned with the 
prerequisites for social sustainability in a design process, this chapter intends to 5
Model for 
Operation
==PAGE:70==
70 | Model For Operation
synthesise these learnings into a suggestion as to how it might be implemented. 
As such it responds to the research question by proposing an operationaliza-
tion of social sustainability, which is aimed specifically at supporting the design 
process. For this, inspiration is mostly drawn directly from the concepts and 
methods reviewed in Chapter 3 and adapted to the particular context of 
this project, i.e. Nordic post-war social housing. In order to substantiate the 
chosen model, parallels are also drawn to the key themes identified in Chapter 
2.
The conceptualisations reviewed in Chapter 3 were also evaluated on 
their scope and scale of operation. In the same way, this chapter focuses on 
scope and scale in order to produce a set of tentative indicators for social sus-
tainability, which can potentially be used in a design process.
Finally, central aspects pertaining to the integration of the model in a de-
sign process are discussed in an effort to make the proposed model operational.
F 5.1	 Position of the 
chapter within the 
research structure.
T
h
e
o
r
y
C
o
n
c
e
p
t
u
a
l
i
s
a
t
i
o
n
D
e
s
i
g
n
 
p
r
o
c
e
s
s
Operationali-
zation
==PAGE:71==
Drafting A Model | 71
Drafting a Model
In the search for a model of social sustainability, this 
project follows the methodology of RenoBuild and thus at-
tempts to follow the general framework associated with the 
research perspective of social LCA (S-LCA), as presented 
by e.g. Benoît & Mazijn (2009). This includes stages of goal 
and scope definition, inventory analysis and impact assess-
ment, although the content of these stages will be adapted 
to this particular context. To assist with the first two stages, 
this report proposes a model consisting of a set of themes 
and underlying criteria for social sustainability, correspond-
ing to impact- and sub-categories in S-LCA. The proposed 
model results from an attempt to maintain a manageable 
number of general themes with a high level of abstraction, 
in this case five, which are then rapidly expanded into a 
larger number of more tangible criteria. As was the case 
with the Telos model, these criteria are in theory applica-
ble across all scales, and need to be specified into concrete 
indicators. First, however, theoretical deliberations are nec-
essary in order to give some substance to the preliminary 
model.
Theoretical foundation
As mentioned, the themes and criteria in the model 
(Table T 5.1) are derived partly from theory, partly from 
the reviewed conceptualisations, although some significant 
changes have been made to their hierarchy and placement. 
Thus, trying to cover the theoretical aspects described in 
Chapter 2, the themes contained in the model are de-
scribed as follows:
Equity/Quality of  Life: This theme has been broadened 
to include several criteria that constitute top-lev-
el themes in e.g. the ReBo and Telos models, such 
as safety, health and education. The criteria within 
this theme relate both to the fundamental needs of 
people, but also to more existential needs, such as 
the ability to choose and influence your own envi-
ronment. While equity was in fact established as a 
much broader component, through which all the 
other themes could be viewed, it has been included 
Themes
Criteria
Social Sustainability
Equity / Quality of Life
Affordability
Solidarity
Freedom of choice
Comfort
Health
Education
Safety / Security
Connection / Accessibility
Transportation
Urban connection
Disabled access
Services/jobs
Pride and sense of place
Public image
Residents image
Social cohesion
Social diversity
Stability
Social networks
Democracy
Participation
Communication
T 5.1	 Preliminary model of social sustainability 
consisting of key themes and criteria.
==PAGE:72==
72 | Model For Operation
here along with quality of life to keep focus on an equitable fulfilment 
of basic needs. 
Connection/Accessibility: A recurring theme in the reviewed conceptualis-
ations and theory, connections and access are key factors for the inter-
connectedness of communities. Here, emphasis is on the ability of the 
built environment to strengthen interconnectedness by providing neces-
sary facilities and functions.
Pride and sense of  place: A loan from the ReBo model, this theme deals with 
internal and external opinions and the (mainly physical) factors that 
influence them. It is also an almost verbatim translation of one of the 
emerging key themes on page 36, which is also closely connected to 
cultural aspects.
Social cohesion: Another recurring theme, cohesion is given different mean-
ings in the various conceptualisations. Here, the ReBo model is used 
again, as it is best aligned with the theory. The term is thus used to 
denote the social prerequisites for interconnectedness, such as mix/di-
versity, stability and networks (as opposed to the physical prerequisites 
included within connection/accessibility).
Democracy: Finally, democracy is used as a theme to denote both participa-
tory processes and the means of communication that are necessary to 
support them. As both Chapter 2 and 4 have shown, these are 
strong prerequisites for community empowerment and sense of owner-
ship.
The model is, of course, a simplification, as social sustainability cannot be 
exhaustively described in this way. Hence, some criteria might be connected 
to several themes, while other criteria might not have been included at all. On 
the other hand, the model provides a strong starting point for the description 
of social sustainability in the transformation of social housing projects, as it 
addresses a wide variety of pertinent issues for further exploration.
Scope and scale
The next step in making the model operational involves a specification of 
indicators. The choice of indicators was influenced by the aim and scope of 
this project, i.e. transformation of Nordic modernist social housing, but the 
indicators themselves can be regarded as universal. This has resulted in the 
tentative compilation of indicators in Table T 5.2, some of which have been 
collected from the social sustainability conceptualisations in Chapter 3, 
while others are based on the social sustainability theory in Chapter 2. In 
order to adapt the model to the scope of this project, it was critically reviewed 
and edited by the author in collaboration with postgraduate students Mär-
ta Helander and Amanda Dahl of the Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts 
==PAGE:73==
Drafting A Model | 73
T 5.2	 Expanding the preliminary model: Proposed tentative model of social sus-
tainability in the transformation of post-war social housing. Some indicators 
have been defined by the author based on indicated literature.
Themes
Criteria
Indicators
Source(s)
Social Sustainability
Equity / Quality of Life
Affordability
Rent level
Heating cost
Individual metering
Possibilities for food production
Good quality apartments
1/2
1
1
1
1/2/3
Freedom of choice
Variation in apartment sizes
Variation in tenure
Apartments for residents with special needs
Access to balcony
Access to green/recreational areas
Access to storage
Ability to shape own space
Ability to cultivate/grow
2
1/2
2
2
2
2
7/6
2
Comfort
Daylight
Heating
Indoor climate
Noise
Wind
Human scale
4
1/4
1/2/4
2/4
7/4
6/7
Health
Ability to exercise
Access to health facilities
Awareness of own health
3/7
3
3
Education
Access to elementary schools
Access to secondary education schools
3
3
Safety / Security
Vandalism
Road safety
Measures to create feeling of security (lighting etc.)
Natural surveillance
Visibility
3
3
2/4
6/7
6/7
Connection / Accessibility
Transportation
Public transport
Carpool
Balance of modes of movement 
1
1
1
Urban connection
Connection to city
Garbage collection
Entrances
Car access to area 
Parking facilities
Pedestrian plan
Bike paths
Meeting places
Foot traffic to and through area
Area used by non-residents
Common facilities
4/6/7
1
6/7
1 
1/2
1
1/4
2/4
6/7
6/7
2
Disabled access
Possibility to stay in your own home
Accessibility indoors/outdoors
1/2
1/2
Services/jobs
Presence of local amenities
Range of service
Local job opportunities
Support system for entrepreneurs
1/4
1
1
1
Pride and sense of place
Public image
Tone and frequency
Name of streets
Stigma
Public landmarks
Differentiation of private and public
Definition of uses (programming)
1
1
1
7
6/7
6/7
Residents image of area
Maintenance and care
What residents think about the area
Local landmarks
1
1
7
Social cohesion
Social diversity
Social mix
Social inclusiveness
1/4
3
Social networks
Volunteers
Local societies/communities
Residents’ association
Including residents in processes
3
2
2/7
2
Democracy
Participation
Residents included in decision processes
2
Communication
Access to information/internet
1/7
(1) ReBo — Material provided personally by Liane Thuvander. (2) Renobuild — Mjörnell, Malmgren, Boss et al. (2014). (3) Telos — Zoeteman et al. 
(2014). (4) DGNB (2014). (5) Frandsen et al. (2009). (6) Bjørn & Holek (2014). (7) Defined by author.
==PAGE:74==
74 | Model For Operation
School of Architecture1. Their comments as a result of the discussions, can be 
observed in the form of a revision paper with hand-written notes in Appendix 
A, page 138. The chosen indicators in Table T 5.2 thus delimit the general 
scope of the model, which can then be adapted to specific projects through 
judicious selection and weighting of key indicators. This process, along with 
the deliberations and discussions that it is supposed to generate, is intended to 
parallel the S-LCA stages of goal and scope definition and inventory analysis, 
although in a highly simplified and streamlined form more suitable for a de-
sign process.
The scales on which the model can operate are implicitly contained within 
the indicator set. Some indicators, such as connection to city, clearly operate 
on a neighbourhood/district scale, while others, such as human scale, may be 
interesting to examine across several scales. Figure F 5.2 explicates this by po-
sitioning the social sustainability criteria within a context of scale. The criteria 
are placed according to the scales they most directly reflect, although some 
criteria might have a more complex application (e.g. safety/security, which can 
also have implications for the individual apartments and the way they overlook 
public spaces). Even though this is an imprecise way of representing the scale 
of operation for the individual criteria, it is useful in providing an overview of 
the proposed model as a whole. As such, there is a clear tendency within the 
criteria to focus on the urban scale and its interfaces with the other two scales, 
whereas criteria exclusively engaged with the building and apartment level are 
lacking. Although this might be seen as a disadvantage or deficiency within the 
proposed model, it is often in the interfaces between apartment, building and 
neighbourhood that social sustainability can be most successfully supported, 
1	
The same students with whom the case study in Chapter 6 was conducted.
F 5.2	 The social sustainability 
criteria cover several 
scales across apart-
ment, building and 
district. Format based 
on Strømann-Andersen 
(2012) and Nielsen 
(2012).
N
e
i
g
h
b
o
u
r
h
o
o
d
A
p
a
r
t
m
e
n
t
B
u
il
d
i
n
g
Affordability
Solidarity
Freedom of choice
Comfort
Health
Public image
Education
Residents image
Safety / Security
Social diversity
Transportation
Stability
Urban connection
Social networks
Disabled access
Participation
Services/jobs
Communication
==PAGE:75==
Drafting A Model | 75
an observation backed by the findings of Bjørn & Holek (2014) described on 
page 40, which have inspired this model to include such indicators as differ-
entiation of  private and public and definition of  uses (relating to the program-
ming of spaces). Their findings also favoured interventions on the urban scale, 
especially those which improved the structural logic, as they seemed to yield 
the most tangible results.
In order to work with scales in a design process, a table such as the one pro-
posed in T 5.3 can prove useful as a tool to plan and manage the effort on  sev-
eral scales. Similar methods were used by the ReBo and RenoBuild methods 
in Chapter 3, i.e. the strategy matrix and the social impact analysis matrix, 
respectively. As it was then explained, experience from practice with the social 
impact analysis matrix has shown that analyses of scales above neighbourhood 
level are methodologically difficult to manage (Mjörnell, Malmgren, Elfborg et 
al. 2014). Drawing on their insight, this model expands the focus downwards 
instead, including an apartment scale and limiting itself to the building and 
neighbourhood scales (note that this does not mean an exclusion of consider-
ations on district, city or region level per se, only that the scope of renovation 
projects lies mostly within the boundaries of these scales). The decision to 
adopt a more narrow focus might result from considerations of practicality, 
however reflections on the community dialogue process  also support it. In that 
regard, in the interview on 11 May 2016, Åsa Bjerndell emphasised the im-
portance of serving the immediate needs of the residents, instead of “adding 
qualities for other people [emphasis by author]”:
“You can have a long-term plan, but when you talk to people, it’s the urgent — 
the right-now things — that are the things where you can have a dialogue or 
a discussion … Start making it work for the people already living there before 
you start adding new things.”
Themes
Example
indicators
Scale
Apartment
Building
Neighbourhood
Equity / Quality of Life
Daylight (internal)
X
X
Connection / Accessibility
Connection to city
X
Pride and sense of place
Name of streets
X
Social cohesion
Local societies/
communities
X
X
Democracy
Inclusion
X
X
X
T 5.3	 Matrix tool for 
cross-referencing 
scales. Chosen ex-
amples illustrate how 
each category can be 
considered on several 
different scales.
Time scale
Spatial Scale
Neighbourhood
Apartment
Building
Immediate
Long-term
Focus/Effort
F 5.3	 Focusing on the immediate 
issues before the more 
general, long-term efforts can 
help improve commitment by 
the community to the inclusive 
design process.  Space-time 
graph inspired by Spacescape 
& Evidens (2011).
User
Architect
==PAGE:76==
76 | Model For Operation
Hence, even though Bjørn & Holek (2014) favour structural alterations on 
a larger scale, this might not always be the best starting point. Instead, an en-
gagement with the issues that are immediately relevant to the users can help 
secure a sense of ownership and commitment to the participatory process.
In closing, there are solid arguments for working in both ends of the scale, 
and the scale levels emphasised in this model are chosen to reflect that within 
the defined scope. Further, the notion that specific space and time scales may 
relate to different phases of an inclusive design process is interesting for the 
operation of the model.
Description of indicators
While environmental sustainability operates with quantifiable indicators, 
social sustainability indicators can also be described using semi-quantitative 
and qualitative data (Benoît & Mazijn 2009). Indeed, many social impacts 
are best described through qualitative indicators, a viewpoint which is shared 
across the reviewed social sustainability conceptualisations; their different 
strategies of qualitative and quantitative analysis were briefly outlined on page 
55. In short, quantitative indicators describe an issue through numbers; ex-
amples from the model include the rent level or the number of local shops or 
meeting places. Geographic information systems (GIS) have the capability to 
provide quantitative data on a wide variety of indicators. Qualitative indica-
tors can describe an issue through words (accompanied by images, maps, etc.); 
public image indicators such as stigma, name of streets or the tone of reports 
in media might best be described this way. For many of the proposed indica-
tors, it has not been specified whether they are quantitative or qualitative, e.g. 
the variation in apartment sizes might be described by an analysis of the layout 
or by looking at area tables. The qualitative indicators can be translated into 
semi-quantitative indicators by categorising the results into a scale or scoring 
system. This way it is possible to aggregate results across both quantitative and 
qualitative indicators.
For the model proposed in this report, the description of indicators has a 
dual purpose in supporting the design process:
1.	 Design process information: Direct use of individual results and visual-
isations to support the design process. The selection of indicators and 
analyses performed to assess each indicator can be used directly to guide 
the design towards a higher level of social sustainability.
2.	 Decision making support: Aggregation of indicator scores to decide be-
tween design alternatives and to support the final design.
As an example, analyses and visualisation of daylight access have proven 
useful in guiding an integrated design team towards more optimal solutions 
(Nielsen 2012). At the same time its quantification within the criteria of com-
fort can help assess designs against each other.
==PAGE:77==
Design Process Operation | 77
Design Process Operation
The list of indicators in Table T 5.2 is too extensive for every design process 
to optimise them all. Oppositely, it might not be comprehensive enough to 
include all aspects of social sustainability relevant to any particular design pro-
cess. Instead, the list is intended to serve as a point of departure, from which a 
given design process is able to define its own focus through a structured process 
of selection and weighting of indicators.
Selection of indicators
A key aspect of the proposed model is its insistence on adapting to local 
context when working with social sustainability in the design process. This is 
a result of a perceived consensus among the interviewed professionals that a 
site-specific approach is necessary. It can also be perceived as a counter re-
sponse to the ubiquitous modernist social housing typology, which applied one 
more or less de-contextualised solution.
In order for the project team to decide, which indicators are the most im-
portant and which need the most urgent attention, this project suggests the fol-
lowing methods, which are already part of many architects’ working practices:
Research into the historical development of the area might yield invaluable 
information regarding the original plans and intentions of the project. 
This can help reveal hidden potential and/or barriers to social sustain-
ability, which can be addressed in the choice of indicators.
Site visits can give a clear indication of current conditions that cannot be 
experienced by looking at maps or drawings. It allows the design team 
to get a ‘feel’ of the place, which can help identify potentials for im-
provement across a wide variety of criteria such as comfort, safety/se-
curity, connection, services, etc. 
Stakeholder involvement has already been argued for in several contexts. Ac-
cording to Åsa Bjerndell, including the perspective of the residents can 
often provide unexpected and counter-intuitive input, which makes it 
valuable in the definition of focus and subsequent choice of indicators. 
For this reason, in discussions with community representatives, the so-
cial sustainability model should not act as a questionnaire determining 
the direction of the debate, but rather as a tool for the design team to 
refer to in order to keep a wide perspective.
The proper involvement of community representatives might then enable 
the design team to identify the low hanging fruit, i.e. the themes, criteria and 
indicators that need to be most urgently addressed. The practice of involving 
stakeholders in the process of selecting, weighting and evaluating criteria is 
supported by the S-LCA methodology: Benoît & Mazijn (2009) suggest a com-
bination of top-down and bottom-up methods, defining broad social issues 
==PAGE:78==
78 | Model For Operation
and the indicators to assess them on one hand, while inquiring with stake-
holders about relevant indicators on the other. They also acknowledges the 
fact that the process of defining focus and constructing/selecting indicators is 
in part subjective, as it inevitably includes value judgements and assumptions.
Inspired by the MCDM method proposed by Balcomb et al. (2002) in con-
nection with the IDP framework by Löhnert et al. (2003), this report recom-
mends that no more than 8 criteria are used, with the number of indicators 
not exceeding 30 to keep complexity at a reasonable level.
Characterisation of indicators
The characterisation process is intended to parallel the S-LCA stage of 
impact assessment. The lack of generally accepted impact- and sub-categories 
and characterisation models within the S-LCA methodology makes it up to 
this model to characterise the social sustainability indicators. As opposed to 
E-LCA, the characterisation in S-LCA can include both weighting and scoring 
of indicators (Benoît & Mazijn 2009).
Weighting
Like with the selection of indicators, the subsequent weighting of both 
criteria and indicators can advantageously be carried out in consultation with 
key stakeholders. Based on Balcomb et al. (2002), it is recommended to use a 
scale of 4-10 for weighting (indicators with a weight below 4 being deselected 
from the beginning).
Scoring
Similarly, a scale of 4-10 can be used to score indicators. This can help 
assess the ‘meaning’ of diverse types of data and transfer it to a common nu-
merical scale (Benoît & Mazijn 2009). To do this, Balcomb et al. (2002) suggest 
developing ‘measurement’ scales for individual indicators, which can be com-
pared to the same qualitative scale (see Figure T 5.4 and T 5.5). As an example, 
a daylight factor of 5% in the centre of the room might be considered ‘ex-
cellent’, while 1% might be ‘marginally acceptable’. Again, the development 
of measurement scales and final scoring of indicators might also be based on 
input from stakeholders.
Final score and visualisation
For the purpose of aggregating and visualising the weights and scores, 
a simple tool has been developed in Microsoft Excel, based on the MCDM 
methodology by Balcomb et al. (2002). The tool visualises the results using a 
radar diagram like the one in Figure F 5.4 (see tool in Appendix B).
Design process integration
So far, this chapter has proposed a model and sketched out a methodology 
for dealing with aspects of social sustainability in a structured way, when work-
Score
Judgement
10
Excellent
9
Good to excellent
8
Good
7
Fair to good
6
Fair
5
Acceptable to fair
4
Marginally acceptable
T 5.4	 Qualitative scale 
suggested by Bal-
comb et al. (2002)
Score
Daylight factor
10
5%
9
4,3%
8
3,6%
7
3%
6
2,3%
5
1,6%
4
1%
T 5.5	 Example of meas-
urement scale for 
interior daylight: 
Daylight factor in 
centre of room.
==PAGE:79==
Design Process Operation | 79
ing with a transformation of social housing projects. Still, the connection to 
the IDP has not been directly described. The method for operation in an IDP, 
as proposed by this report, is outlined in Figure F 5.5.  The method divides the 
effort into two stages:
Stage 1
The first stage takes place during the basics and pre-design phases of the 
IDP and is centred around the social sustainability model and its breakdown 
of themes into criteria and indicators. The intention is that this list of indica-
tors is able to initiate, stimulate and support discussions among stakeholders as 
to the goal and scope of the social sustainability concern within the project. It 
also serves as a point of departure for the selection process, where indicators 
that are specifically relevant to the context of the project are selected, while 
others can be discarded. The relative importance of the chosen indicators 
is expressed through weighting and development of measurement scales. In 
stage 1 the base is built for the analyses in stage 2.
Stage 2
The second stage begins, to a certain degree, in the pre-design phase and 
continues through the concept design and design development phases. Here, focus 
moves from selection of indicators to their analysis and scoring. To assist in 
selecting analyses that cover as many of the relevant scales as possible, the pro-
posed matrix tool can prove useful. In line with the IDP, designs are evaluated 
at the end of every design iteration, and the scoring is intended to assist in this 
process by providing a visual overview of the social sustainability of design 
alternatives. Of course, the scores can also be used inside the design iteration 
itself to guide the design towards the optimal solutions. Every design iteration 
thus alternates between three main activities: Designing, analysing/scoring and 
evaluating in dialogue with the community.
Design team
The IDP calls for a versatile, interdisciplinary design team, which can ad-
dress a wide range of issues from the beginning of the design process. At the 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
Criterion 1 
Criterion 2 
Criterion 3 
Criterion 4 
Criterion 5 
Criterion 6 
Criterion 7 
F 5.4	 Radar diagram for visualisation of criteria scores.
==PAGE:80==
80 | Model For Operation
F 5.5	 A method for operation: Recommended steps in the IDP when working with social sustainability.
Selection of indicators
Weighting of indicators
C
o
m
m
u
n
i
t
y
 
i
n
v
o
l
v
e
m
e
n
t
Second community involve-
ment. Presentation of ideas. 
Input from community.
Indicators and criteria are 
weighted on a scale of 4-10 
based on input from designers 
and stakeholders. The pro-
ject-specific weighting ensures 
that the local conditions can be 
taken into account.
Indicators and criteria are selected based on input from designers and stakeholders. The exten-
sive list of indicators is narrowed down to a more concrete list. The selection can be based on:
• Research
• Site visits
• Stakeholder involvement
Evaluation
Full model
Selected indicators
Themes
Criteria
Indicators
Social Sustainability
Equity / Quality of Life
Affordability
Rent level
Heating cost
Individual metering
Possibilities for food production
Good quality apartments
Freedom of choice
Variation in apartment sizes
Variation in tenure
Apartments for residents with 
special needs
Access to balcony
Access to green/recreational areas
Access to storage
Ability to shape own space
Ability to cultivate/grow
Comfort
Daylight
Heating
Indoor climate
Noise
Wind
Human scale
Health
Ability to exercise
Access to health facilities
Awareness of own health
Education
Access to elementary schools
Access to secondary educa-
tion schools
Safety / Security
Vandalism
Road safety
Measures to create feeling of security 
(lighting etc.)
Natural surveillance
Visibility
Connection / Accessibility
Transportation
Public transport
Carpool
Balance of modes of movement 
Parking space per household
Urban connection
Connection to city
Garbage collection
Entrances
Car access to area 
Parking facilities
Pedestrian plan
Bike paths
Meeting places
Foot traffic to and through area
Area used by non-residents
Common facilities
Disabled access
Possibility to stay in your own home
Accessibility indoors/outdoors
Services/jobs
Presence of local amenities
Range of service
Local job opportunities
Support system for entrepreneurs
Pride and sense of place
Public image
Tone and frequency
Name of streets
Stigma
Public landmarks
Differentiation of private and public
Definition of uses
Residents image 
of area
Maintenance and care
What residents think about the area
Local landmarks
Social cohesion
Social diversity
Social mix
Social inclusiveness
Social networks
Volunteers
Local societies/communities
Residents’ association
Including residents in processes
Democracy
Participation
Residents included in decision 
processes
Communication
Access to information/internet
Themes
Criteria
Indicators
Social Sustainability
Equity / Quality of Life
Freedom of choice
Ability to shape own space
Comfort
Daylight
Human scale
Safety / Security
Feeling of security
Natural surveillance
Visibility
Connection / Accessibility
Urban connection
Connection to city
Entrances
Meeting places
Foot traffic to and 
through area
Area used by non-residents
Common facilities
Pride and sense of place
Public image
Differentiation of private 
and public
Residents image of area
Maintenance and care
Local landmarks
Social cohesion
Social networks
Local societies/com-
munities
Target values can be set and 
measurement scales can be 
developed for the indicators.
Target values
Stage 1
Integrated design process
Pre-design
Basics
Analysis /
Scoring
Evaluation /
Dialogue
Design
==PAGE:81==
Design Process Operation | 81
Fourth community involve-
ment. Presentation of 
design proposals.
Evaluation
Indicators are analysed across different scale levels. In the 
example below, a shadow diagram informs about the light lev-
els (and this comfort) in the neighbourhood and apartments.
Analysis
Based on the analyses and measurement 
scales, indicators are scored on a scale of 
4-10 and alternatives are visualised.
Scoring of indicators
Score
Judgement
Daylight factor
10
Excellent
5%
9
Good to excellent
4,3%
8
Good
3,6%
7
Fair to good
3%
6
Fair
2,3%
5
Acceptable to fair
1,6%
4
Marginally acceptable
1%
Third community involve-
ment. Presentation of design 
proposals.
Evaluation
Analysis of indicators can include (but is not limited to):
• Interviews
• Statistics
• Qualitative considerations/discussions
• Urban structure analysis
• Analysis of architectural quality
• Analyses of indoor and outdoor comfort
• Technical simulations/calculations (e.g. daylight 
analyses, thermal comfort)
• Connectivity analyses
• Use of GIS
• etc.
Concept
design
Design
development
Construction
Operation
Stage 2
N
e
i
g
h
b
o
u
r
h
o
o
d
A
p
a
r
t
m
e
n
t
B
u
il
d
i
n
g
Affordability
Solidarity
Freedom of choice
Comfort
Health
Public image
Education
Residents image
Safety / Security
Social diversity
Transportation
Stability
Urban connection
Social networks
Disabled access
Participation
Services/jobs
Communication
Example: Shadow diagram
Themes
Scale
Apartment
Building
Neighbour-
hood
Equity / Quality of Life
X
X
Connection / Accessibility
X
Pride and sense of place
X
Social cohesion
X
X
Democracy
X
X
X
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
Freedom of choice 
Comfort 
Safety 
Urban connection 
Public image 
Residents image 
Social networks 
Main design criteria score 
Cross-referencing with scales
Example: Sketching 
urban structure
==PAGE:82==
82 | Model For Operation
core of the team we find  structural, energy and mechanical engineers along 
with the architect (Löhnert et al. 2003). Any experts related to social sustain-
ability could potentially be positioned inside the core team, although their 
position would more likely be as a team specialist to facilitate community in-
volvement processes and to assist in the selection and evaluation of indicators. 
Especially in the early stages of the design processes, these experts would need 
to take on a more active role in guiding the goal and scope towards a harmo-
nization of the interests of building owners and users.
Ch
an
gin
g 
te
a
m 
sp
ec
ia
lis
ts
C
o
r
e
 
t
e
a
m
Architect
Structural 
engineer
Energy 
engineer
Me-
chanical 
engineer
Specialists
Users
Social 
sustainability 
expert
Client
Experts
F 5.6	 IDP design team with possible position of a social sustainability expert. After 
Löhnert et al. (2003).
==PAGE:83==
Additional Considerations | 83
Additional Considerations
Striving for measurability
Given the qualitative nature of many of the themes related to social sus-
tainability, it seems in order to question the ability of the engineer to contribute 
to the field in a meaningful way — after all, he is mainly concerned with the 
quantitative aspects of the built environment. Yet, as it has been shown, many 
of the indicators, that are considered qualitative might also advantageously 
be described in a quantitative manner.  Hence, the role of the engineer in 
the operation of the proposed model is mostly focused towards increasing the 
measurability of the indicators. This can be done by developing new tools and 
performing technical analyses, which can be used to support the argument 
for social sustainability by describing it in more concrete terms — a primary 
purpose being the ability to identify effects across environmental and econom-
ic sustainability. Especially the latter — i.e. describing social sustainability in 
terms of economic consequences — is important for stakeholder communica-
tion (cf. the arguments on page 45), but all three aspects are important if the 
design team is to apply a holistic view of sustainability.
Inclusion of culture
As Chapter 3 has shown, there is no consensus in literature about the 
aspect of culture and how it is included. While some conceptualisations in-
clude social sustainability and cultural aspects side by side, others separate the 
concepts. Early versions of the proposed model included culture as a sepa-
rate theme (see Appendix A), however after deliberations on the subject it was 
dropped. Instead, indicators relating to culture (such as local and public land-
marks) are now included only by virtue of their capacity to increase the social 
sustainability of an area by adding to the public identity and sense of place. 
The rationale behind this is that culture is not inherently positive for social sus-
tainability and that sometimes local community sentiments can have a more 
significant role, which should be the priority in terms of social sustainability. 
Still, culture can be evaluated separately, and tools to evaluate culture, such as 
the SAVE, can still be highly useful.
Model flexibility
The proposed model of social sustainability along with the related suggest-
ed methodology provides a general framework for the design process, which 
balances between broad over-simplification on one side and a narrow, exces-
sive level of detail on the other. It is important to be able to see both the whole 
picture and the individual aspects without losing focus on either. Describing 
==PAGE:84==
84 | Model For Operation
the Telos method, Spangenberg (2002) calls this a “compromise between inap-
propriate harmonization on the one hand and unrelated reports from related 
areas on the other.” In this regard, the three levels of abstraction (themes, cri-
teria and indicators) can help designers move quickly back and forth between 
the specific and the general in the same way as was described in Figure F 4.3 
on page 63.
Holistic sustainability perspectives
Although the model proposed in this chapter focuses on social sustainabil-
ity, a holistic design process needs to also take environmental and economic 
sustainability into account. The aforementioned frameworks for their quantifi-
cation are LCA and LCC, respectively, and together with the proposed model 
they are able to describe all three aspects of sustainability. The combination 
of these three types of tools was proposed by Mjörnell, Malmgren, Boss et al. 
(2014) in their RenoBulid method. By using the MCDM-approach outlined 
in this chapter, aggregating scores to a single number within each category, 
design proposals can then be compared based on their overall sustainability 
performance. This could be utilised in an iterative design loop such as the one 
outlined in Figure F 5.7, although it should be noted that this report focuses 
specifically on the social aspect.
Data
Theory
Method
Integrated Design Process
LCA
LCC
Social Sust. Model
Qualitative
Quantitative
Environment
Economic
Social
Common scale
Evaluation
User involvement
Integrated Dynamic Model
F 5.7	 Prooposed methodological overview of an iterative design loop for an integrated design process (including potential 
position of an integrated dynamic model). The integrated design process is informed through both qualitative and 
quantitative data using the developed model for social sustainability. Focus in this report is on the highlighted path.
==PAGE:85==
In Conclusion | 85
In Conclusion
This chapter utilises the knowledge that has been gained through the 
preceding three chapters and addresses the research question by proposing 
an operationalization of social sustainability aimed at supporting the design 
process. It proposes a compilation of themes to cover the key topics of social 
sustainability. The themes, each with a set of associated criteria, are further 
specified into a list of indicators, and all together they constitute a model of 
social sustainability for use in the transformation of Nordic post-war social 
housing. Through a process inspired by the S-LCA framework, a methodology 
for the operation of the model is also introduced:
By thoroughly selecting relevant indicators based on context-specific ob-
servations, the project scope can be focused towards the most relevant issues, 
and based on a conversion and comparison of indicator analysis results (both 
qualitative and quantitative), the ensuing design process can then be supported 
based on the social sustainability performance of design proposals.
The proposed social sustainability model and method of operation are in-
tended for use in an integrative design process, which means that collaboration 
with the community should be an essential part of the design process.
==PAGE:86==
86 | Model For Operation
==PAGE:87==
The last chapter responded to the research question by proposing an op-
erationalization of social sustainability. In this chapter, an attempt is made to 
test this proposal in an actual design process, to see whether it can be integrat-
ed into the decision-making and design-support processes to produce a more 
socially sustainable outcome. This is done through a case study of a relevant 
design project at the Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts School of Architec-
ture, Design and Conservation (KADK).
This choice of project has resulted from a seeming lack of available pro-
jects in architectural studios that deal specifically with social sustainability as a 
main priority, combined with the fact that student projects have more freedom 
to test new ways of designing without being restricted by business commit-
ments. This made the project well suited for a first case study.6
Case Study: 
Fyrklövern
==PAGE:88==
88 | Case Study: Fyrklövern
Case Study Proposition and 
Approach
The case study is based on the author’s participation in a postgraduate-lev-
el design project at KADK from 11 February to 22 June 2016, dealing with 
the transformation of the area known as Fyrklövern in Upplands Väsby north 
of Stockholm. The project participants wanted a strong focus on social sus-
tainability from the start, which made the project ideal as a case study for the 
implementation of the proposed model.
The case study is thus based on the main research question (page 25), 
adding the central proposition that the model proposed in Chapter 5 will be 
able to provide the necessary design support.
Case study method
The method used in this report is largely based on the case study research 
perspectives presented by Yin (2003). Although the methods and practices he 
presents originate from a social science tradition, they are intended to be used 
in a much broader range of research fields. Furthermore, Yin recommends the 
case study strategy in situations where the research is based on a how or why 
question, and it can thus be considered suitable for this particular application. 
Within his case study research methodology, Yin touches upon a range of key 
aspects, the most relevant of which will be explicated here:
Firstly, it is important to note, that the focus of the case study is the design 
process and not just the specific design issues that it tries to solve. The unit of  
analysis is thus the process itself, including all that pertains to it: The partici-
pants, activities, results, etc.
Secondly, the fact that the case study was conducted by a participating 
agent (the author) means that sources of evidence include both documenta-
tion produced in the design process (i.e. written documents, drawings, imag-
es, models, etc.) and observations made by the author — what Yin denotes 
participant-observation. The latter assumes that the investigator takes on an 
active role within a case study situation, an approach most frequently used in 
anthropological studies but which is also used for the study of organizations or 
small groups (Yin 2003).
Thirdly, the single-case study setup might be regarded as questionable in 
terms of external validity (i.e. the ability to generalise). In response, it can be 
argued that the first-time use of a new design support methodology in practice 
has a certain revelatory quality, meaning that it has made it possible to observe 
things not previously available. This makes the study more about identifying 
new potentials and weaknesses and less about replicating or corroborating any 
existing results.
F 6.1	 Position of the 
chapter within the 
research structure.
T
h
e
o
r
y
C
o
n
c
e
p
t
u
a
l
i
s
a
t
i
o
n
D
e
s
i
g
n
 
p
r
o
c
e
s
s
Operationali-
zation
==PAGE:89==
Case Study Proposition And Approach | 89
Collaboration
Through the Nordic Built STED project, certain actors have been particu-
larly helpful in carrying out the case study.
KADK
Contact between the author and KADK was facilitated through the STED 
network in an organised meeting between students from DTU and KADK. 
During this meeting common interests were identified, and KADK students 
Amanda Dahl and Märta Helander were kind enough to allow me to partici-
pate in their design project. It is this collaboration that has constituted the case 
study.
Furthermore, KADK has provided the opportunity to participate in lec-
tures and workshops dealing with architectural and cultural valuation, which 
have proven to be useful tools in relation to the evaluation of social sustaina-
bility in the case study.
White Architects
In connection with a visit to the site in Upplands Väsby, architect Elise 
Grosse of White’s Stockholm office invited us to share perspectives on social 
sustainability and solutions for the area in question. Grosse has also provided 
material, input and feedback in different contexts throughout the study. 
F 6.2	 Project design team setup
Ch
an
gin
g 
te
a
m 
sp
ec
ia
lis
ts
C
o
r
e
 
t
e
a
m
Architect 1
Architect 2
Users
Author
Project 
supervisor
Experts
==PAGE:90==
90 | Case Study: Fyrklövern
Introduction to Case Study: 
Fyrklövern
In the decades following the Second World War, Sweden suffered from a 
growing housing shortage. Having completed the transformation into a highly 
industrialised society, the years of prosperity after 1945 combined with in-
creasing urbanisation also meant that Sweden experienced a rapid change in 
the need for housing, which could not be accommodated within the old hous-
ing stock. Instead, drastic measures had to be taken to ensure the availability 
of good quality homes for the new welfare state.
The Million Programme
The Swedish parliament’s response to the housing shortage became an 
ambitious plan to build one million new dwellings in ten years, between 1965 
and 1974. The Million Programme, as the public housing policy came to be 
known, was part of a more general tendency for large investments prevalent 
in the 1960s and early 1970s, a period known as the ‘record years’ (which Hall 
& Vidén (2005) confine more specifically to 1961–75).
The rapid development of the new housing areas and their often periph-
eral locations went hand in hand with the advancing modernistic ideal and 
industrial approach. Prefabrication, standardisation and mass production in-
creased construction efficiency but also left their clear marks on the architec-
ture; many buildings were spaced equally to make efficient use of the crane 
tracks, and the prefabricated concrete dominated the façades and made for 
a drab impression. Critical voices soon began to question the new typology, 
drawing attention to its many shortcomings, such as the monotonous visual 
expression, desolate external environment and lack of local services, which 
allegedly lead to alienation and isolation (Hall & Vidén 2005). In addition, the 
fast pace and scale of construction meant that little effort went into adapting 
the buildings to the specific site.
Especially the outdoor environment was given low priority in the planning 
of the new housing areas. The extensive alterations to the landscape often 
ruined the conditions for plant life, and poor vegetation and planning of the 
footpaths and playgrounds between the buildings along with the placement 
of vast parking lots to separate the area from the rest of the city made the 
outdoor  environment unattractive to residents and unreachable to outsiders 
(ibid.).
Despite these shortcomings, only a minority of the buildings from the Mil-
lion Programme have been demolished; instead, routine maintenance and 
smaller, aesthetic facade changes have been prevalent (ibid.). Yet in a 1985 
study of the qualities, flaws and potentials for renovation of pre-1975 apart-
ments buildings in Sweden, Vidén et al. (1985) focus on continuous care for 
==PAGE:91==
Introduction To Case Study: Fyrklövern | 91
the common indoor and outdoor environments and comment that “efforts 
in terms of renovations and additions and new soil treatment and vegetation 
can often be necessary to make the environment more attractive” (trans. by 
author). Today, an increasing focus on sustainability has led to increased ap-
preciation of the inherent potentials of the Million Program housing areas as 
well as the people who live there:
“A growing awareness of the qualities to be found is encouraging more careful 
additions and alterations to develop the areas in a more sustainable direction, 
physically and socially… [and] the importance of taking the residents into ac-
count, in planning as well as in the management and development of existing 
housing, has been realized…” (Hall & Vidén 2005).
Fyrklövern
In her report on the cultural environment in the neighbourhood Fyrklövern 
in Upplands Väsby, Sundström (2010) outlines the history of the new city cen-
tre, built as a part of the Million Programme in its later years:
The new Väsby centre was inaugurated in 1972, designed and built in line 
with the modernistic planning ideas. As such, it was not just intended to be 
a commercial centre for trade, but also a central location for other kinds of 
services such as schools, libraries and dwellings. Residential buildings were 
subsequently built close to the shopping mall in order to gain a customer base 
for the commerce and to create a basis for social life in the centre. The build-
ings were then planned to give as many residents as possible close access to 
the shopping mall. Consequently, the commercial centre and the proximity 
of the residential buildings led to close development of the area, and it came 
to be characterized by the Million Programme’s large scale, rectangular areas 
of identical houses, car-free courtyards and large parking lots. The high-rise 
buildings are characteristic for the early 1970s with bright colouring and blue 
sheet-metal façades (instead of concrete), yet despite efforts to improve the 
quality of the outdoor environment through added equipment and vegetation, 
the area still appears bleak and uncared for.
F 6.4	 The Fyrklövern area seen from 
above. Image from Google.dk.
F 6.3	 Upplands Väsby in relation to 
Stockholm. Image courtesy of 
the design team.
Upplands Väsby
Stockholm
1955-67
2011-14
Project focus
F 6.5	 Comparison of Upplands Väsby before and after the construction of the new city centre. The case study project 
focuses on the four highlighted buildings. Maps from Eniro.se.
Drawing material
1:300 drawings of blue 
houses available in Ap-
pendix D, page 144
==PAGE:92==
Laundry
Väsby centre 
(shopping mall)
Playground Football 
field
Parking
Parking
Temporary area
==PAGE:93==
F 6.6	 Visiting Fyrklövern. Photographs by 
the author. 
Opposite page: The “Blue Houses” 
within Fyrklövern. The four southern-
most buildings were the focus of the 
project. Map by Google Maps. 
This page: Existing plans in scale 
1:300 of ground floor and first floor 
of one of the high-rise buildings. 
Variations in apartment sizes occur 
between buildings.
Ground floor
First floor
1:300
==PAGE:94==
94 | Case Study: Fyrklövern
The eight high-rise buildings that dominate the visual impression of 
Fyrklövern were constructed with seven floors with a basement and penthouse. 
The buildings are all parallel and the courtyards in between are equipped with 
playgrounds, vegetation and large trees. Each house has five south-facing en-
trances and contains around 500 apartments ranging from one to five rooms 
and kitchen, although the majority has three rooms. The buildings with rented 
apartments can accommodate a range of different needs, including assisted 
living, nursing homes and retirement homes.
Design project focus
For the sake of the design project, the architecture students chose to delimit 
their focus to the four southernmost high-rise buildings and the area around 
them. Although their initial intention was to work mainly with the outdoor 
spaces between the buildings and possibly the ground floors, this was later 
changed to a focus on…
… the space between the buildings,
… the ground floor and
… the facade.
This can be regarded as an acceptable focus in terms of social sustaina-
bility, as it addresses the main scales of neighbourhood, building and apartment.
Site visit
In order for the design team members to form an impression of the area 
and possibly identify its challenges and potentials, a study trip to Stockholm 
was arranged from 9–12 March 2016. During that period, we were able to visit 
the area of Fyrklövern on two separate occasions, in the morning/at noon and 
in the afternoon/evening. The main activities conducted during these visits 
were inspection and sketching of the buildings and outdoor spaces and ob-
servation of the residents including their walking paths and use of the space. 
Condition
Overall, the buildings seemed to be in good condition considering the 
amount of time they have endured without a refurbishment. Except from the 
majority of the balconies, which have been progressively glazed beginning in 
the early 1990s, the houses stand mostly unchanged (Sundström 2010). Still, 
a lack of routine maintenance, both in the facade and in the outdoor en-
vironment, characterises the general impression. Most notably, many of the 
blue metal sheets and yellow tiles in the façades have been damaged and left 
without repair, even though their design allows for easy replacement. The high 
amount of damages related to vandalism also seem to indicate a missing sense 
of ownership or belonging, at least among some residents.
F 6.7	 The buildings suffered from a 
general lack of routine mainte-
nance. Images by author.
Dirt in lamp
Rebar protruding
Facade sheet metal bent
Tilework damaged
==PAGE:95==
Introduction To Case Study: Fyrklövern | 95
Walking paths
By far the most dominant walking path was the north-south oriented path-
way leading from the southern entrance of the Väsby centre shopping mall, 
along the eastern gables of the blue high-rise buildings to Fyrklövern’s south-
ern entrance tunnel. This single pathway facilitated the flow of people walking 
between the high-rise buildings and the Väsby centre. As a result, the easiest 
way of entering the area seemed to be through the Väsby centre itself. 
Amenities
In continuation, the only shop apart from the Väsby centre was a small 
newsagent in one of the gables. All other amenities were concentrated in the 
Väsby centre. This stood in sharp contrast to the old city centre by the railway 
station, where all the buildings had services and amenities in the ground floors. 
Residents
Interaction with interested residents was occasional and limited to short 
conversations, during which a sceptical attitude towards ‘architects’ in general 
became apparent. Although it points to a lack of awareness about the issues 
that are present, to a certain degree this seeming resistance to external influ-
ences also indicates a sense of identity within the community. Although an in-
terview with a resident had been planned beforehand, a last-minute cancella-
tion prevented any further in-depth interaction as well as access to apartments. 
Proposal by White
During the visit to Stockholm, a day was spent at the office of White 
architects discussing issues related to social sustainability and the Million 
Programme. A proposal by White for the Fyrklövern area, Väsbys vertikala 
trädgårdar [The vertical gardens of Väsby], was also presented by architect 
Sofie Weidemann for inspiration on how to address the issues. 
Learnings
Although the Väsby centre stands as the commercial centre of the Million 
Programme areas of Upplands Väsby, including Fyrklövern, the old city centre 
by the railway station still feels more like the city centre. This can be ascribed 
to a number of issues in the Fyrklövern area relating to, e.g., physical isolation, 
lack of identity-strengthening features, poor outdoor environments, etc.
These impressions, challenges and potentials identified during the study 
trip were discussed within the design team, and they have formed the basis for 
the definition of scope in the next section.
==PAGE:96==
96 | Case Study: Fyrklövern
Defining Scope
Based on the study trip, the visit to White’s office and on researched liter-
ature, drawings and other material made available by White, a range of con-
crete issues were identified. Using the proposed model of social sustainability, 
these issues could then be explicated into more concrete indicators.
Selection of prioritised indicators
A prioritised set of indicators (Table T 6.1) was chosen from the general 
model to cover the main issues of Fyrklövern. These indicators defined the fo-
cus of the project in terms of social sustainability. The meaning and motivation 
for each indicator were discussed with the author within the design team and 
are explained below (for the original indicator sources, see page 73):
Ability to shape own space relates to the freedom of the residents to influ-
ence their surroundings and thus to create their own space that reflects 
their identity, both inside and outside. This was considered as a big po-
tential for improvement, especially in the existing outdoor environment, 
which did not allow for much interaction. 
Daylight here refers to the access to daylight in the apartments. As the large 
balconies cause the rooms behind to be withdrawn from the facade, the 
daylight level also has potential for improvement.
Human scale has not been included in the original planning, and the area 
suffers from too large-scale outdoor spaces and buildings with monoto-
nous façades.
Feeling of  security is here mostly related to the proper lighting of paths in 
the area, which were found to be too dark in the evening, creating a 
feeling of insecurity.
T 6.1	 Moving from a general model to a project-specific breakdown of prioritised indicators.
Themes
Criteria
Indicators
Social Sustainability
Equity / Quality of Life
Freedom of choice
Ability to shape own space
Comfort
Daylight
Human scale
Safety / Security
Feeling of security
Natural surveillance
Visibility
Connection / Accessibility
Urban connection
Connection to city
Entrances
Meeting places
Foot traffic to and through area
Area used by non-residents
Common facilities
Pride and sense of place
Public image
Differentiation of private and public
Residents image of area
Maintenance and care
Local landmarks
Social cohesion
Social networks
Local societies/communities
General model
Prioritised model
Discussion
==PAGE:97==
Defining Scope | 97
Natural surveillance refers to the feeling that there are ‘eyes on the street’, 
which can be a deterrent to crime (Bjørn & Holek 2014). This was re-
garded as a main problem in the area, as there were too many places, 
corners and recesses that were out of view of the façades, including the 
entrances and some of the common areas. The balconies did not help 
in this regard, as they limited the view to the outside courtyard from the 
living rooms and kitchens.
Visibility refers to the layout of the outdoor spaces in a way that gives the 
users an overview of their surroundings, without major obstructions to 
the field of view. Although the area was planned out with long, straight 
lines of sight, the retracted entrances, many sharp corners and level 
differences still make this an area of potential improvement.
Connection to city consists of roads, pedestrian and bicycle paths. This indi-
cator takes a more general view of these, looking at the overall connec-
tivity of the area to the surrounding city. Fyrklövern follows the layout 
of earlier Million Programme projects, and thus suffers from a general 
lack of roads and paths that connect the area to the outside. Instead, 
major roads block off the area on two sides, with only a few paths lead-
ing out through tunnels.
Entrances have a major effect on many of the other indicators. Good qual-
ity entrances can thus add to a sense of safety and identity as well as 
function as nodes for interaction between residents. The current en-
trances do not utilize this potential.
Meeting places are the public places where people can casually meet and 
interact. The current area does not offer a sufficient number or variety, 
and most public amenities are concentrated in the shopping centre.
Foot traffic to and through area is important in order to help create a feeling 
of life and of being an integrated part of the city. Partially in conse-
quence of the issues stated above, foot traffic is today limited to the 
main walkway, and the area offers neither occasion nor opportunity for 
casual visits.
Area used by non-residents relates to the area being used not only by the 
people who live there. It is closely related to the above indicator, and has 
to do with the area’s ability to attract external crowds. As of now, there 
are no big attractors.
Common facilities are the private spaces, where residents can meet for 
casual, spontaneous or regular activities. This includes access to func-
tion rooms or rooms for multiple uses that are available to all residents. 
The penthouses were initially intended as common rooms, but have 
since been converted. Now, the area is in need of these kinds of spaces.
Differentiation of  private and public is important if residents are to gain a 
sense of ownership of both the indoor and outdoor spaces. Currently, 
==PAGE:98==
98 | Case Study: Fyrklövern
the courtyards and common areas are not really utilised by anyone, be-
cause they are not private nor completely public.
Maintenance and care is a given. As observed during the site visit, the area is 
suffering in this area.
Local landmarks can include pieces of public art, a certain tree, a play-
ground or other things that have become characteristic of a specific 
place. These can be effective in creating an identity for a place. Con-
trarily, excessive standardisation of the outdoor environment can have 
the opposite effect, which is mostly the case around the blue houses in 
Fyrklövern. 
Local societies/communities can certainly exist despite shortcomings in the 
physical environment, however the range of activities and types of soci-
eties that can be accommodated can be expanded if considered in the 
design. This is closely connected to the private common facilities, but 
also includes access to facilities in the outdoor environment. 
These indicators were identified as being the most critical, and thus the 
ones that should be focused on, although other indicators could certainly have 
been included. Many of these chosen indicators deal with some of the same 
elements within the built environment (such as the entrances, façades, foot-
paths, etc.). This is unavoidable, and it gives an initial idea of the type of 
changes that need to be made to the design; in other words it shows a pattern.
Scale
As mentioned earlier, the project focused on the space between the build-
ings, the ground floors and the façades. Based on the careful examination by 
Sundström (2010), the apartments were generally regarded as being of a rea-
sonable size distribution and good condition, so emphasis was not placed di-
Indicators
Scale
Apartment
Building
Neighbour-
hood
Ability to shape own space
X
X
X
Daylight (internal)
X
X
Human scale
X
X
Feeling of security
X
X
Natural surveillance
X
X
Visibility
X
Connection to city
X
Entrances
X
Meeting places
X
Foot traffic to and through area
X
Area used by non-residents
X
Common facilities
X
X
Differentiation of private and public
X
X
Maintenance and care
X
X
Local landmarks
X
Local societies/communities
X
X
T 6.2	 Distribution of focus for 
each indicator within 
different scales. The 
predominant focus is on 
the neighbourhood scale 
and its connections to 
building scale, but apart-
ments are also affected 
in a few cases.
==PAGE:99==
Defining Scope | 99
rectly on the apartment scale, save changes caused by alterations in the facade. 
The choice of focus is also supported by Table T 6.2, which shows a clear 
emphasis on the building and neighbourhood scales. 
Weighting
Due to limited time and outreach potential of the design team, the possibil-
ity to include users in the weighting of criteria and indicators was not present. 
Instead, the weighting (Table T 6.3) is a result of a discussion between the 
design team and the author following the selection of indicators. This element 
adds an extra layer of nuance to the indicators, defining which are the most 
important, however most indicators were considered to be of high importance 
and thus score around 8-10. 
Developing measuring scales
In accordance with the method described in the last chapter, measurement 
scales were developed for each indicator, relating their qualitative and quanti-
tative results to a common, qualitative scale ranging from 4-10 (see Appendix 
C page 142). The scales were developed based on what was considered to be 
the best and worst possible outcomes for each indicator as well as the criteria 
to determine that outcome, and revisions were made when necessary.
Criteria
Weight Indicator
Weight
Freedom of choice
10
Ability to shape own space
10
Comfort
9
Daylight
Human scale
8
10
Safety
10
Feeling of security
Natural surveillance
Visibility
10
7
8
Urban connection
9
Connection to city
Entrances
Meeting places
Foot traffic to and through area
Area used by non-residents
Common facilities
8
9
9
7
6
10
Public image
9
Differentiation of private and public
9
Residents image 
of area
8
Maintenance and care
Local landmarks
8
8
Social networks
10
Local societies/communities
10
T 6.3	 Weighting of individ-
ual indicators and 
criteria.
==PAGE:100==
100 | Case Study: Fyrklövern
Analysis
A variety of different analytical methods were applied to the project in 
order to examine the condition of the various indicators. As mentioned in 
the previous chapter, these analyses were intended both to support and guide 
the design process and to inform the scoring of the indicators and subsequent 
comparison of proposals.
Many indicators were not able to be analysed using established methods, 
e.g. the ability of the residents to shape their own space is currently best de-
scribed in a qualitative scale. Conversely, some indicators could be analysed 
in several ways using different methods; e.g. daylight, which can be described 
using various common quantitative metrics. Only the analyses that were able 
to directly and quantitatively inform an indicator were used for this purpose. 
Most of the analyses with such a potential relate to the indoor environment, 
such as analyses of indoor air quality, acoustics, etc., whereas focus in this 
project was on a larger scale. Hence, daylight was ultimately the only indicator 
with a quantitative method of analysis used directly to score an indicator. The 
other indicators were informed through various forms of analysis.
Urban structure analysis
Based on a three day course at KADK from 5–7 April 2016 in the use of 
the Danish Planning Agency’s Survey of Architectural Values in the Environ-
ment (SAVE; Stenak 2011), the methodologies behind the survey along with 
methods developed by Lynch (1960) were used to investigate the environment 
around Fyrklövern in terms of dominant features of the landscape and urban 
structure, building patterns and building elements as well as major and minor 
paths, edges, nodes, districts and landmarks1. These analyses resulted in a better 
understanding of the areas historical context, its connection to the rest of 
the city, its dynamics, people flows and identity drivers. Figure F 6.8 shows 
three such analyses, which were considered central to the understanding and 
improvement of several main indicators. Other relevant analyses (including a 
mental map) are included in Appendix E.
Daylight analysis
Analyses of daylight access were performed in several stages and levels 
of detail. Initial shadow analyses were intended to investigate the outdoor 
environment upon return from the study trip, and later analyses of annual 
insolation confirmed the suspected issues of shade in the courtyards. The dis-
tribution of the vegetation was so that the green areas received far less direct 
sunlight over the course of a year than the asphalt-covered vehicle access areas 
1	
The five elements used by Lynch (1960) to make mental maps.
==PAGE:101==
Analysis | 101
F 6.8	 Analyses of the urban struc-
ture inspired by the SAVE anal-
ysis framework. Illustrations 
by Amanda Dahl and Märta 
Helander, used by permission
Green areas
Offentlige institutioner 
Miljonprogramsboliger
Boliger
Industri
Kirke
Boliger med erhverv i stuen
Næring
Parkering
Typologies
Jernbane                            Bygade                            Vej                           StiforløbVej                           Motorvej
Infrastructure
The town of Upplands 
Väsby is located between 
the railroad in the west and 
the motorway in the east. 
The main street runs from 
the railway station in the 
north-west through the old 
city centre and turns south 
towards Fyrklövern, where 
pedestrians are led off 
the road and through the 
Väsby centre.
Million Programme 
projects are located in 
the south-eastern part of 
Upplands Väsby, separated 
from the railway station by 
an area of smaller sin-
gle-family houses. The only 
buildings with commercial 
ground floors are located 
close to the railway station 
in the old city centre.
Fyrklövern is closed off on 
three sides by major roads, 
and although they are 
relatively close, the large 
green areas to the east 
and south have not been 
made an integrated part of 
the area.
Connection / Accessibility
Urban connection
Connection to city
Entrances
Meeting places
Foot traffic to and through area
Area used by non-residents
Pride and sense of place
Residents image of area
Local landmarks
Relevant indicators
==PAGE:102==
102 | Case Study: Fyrklövern
F 6.9	 Various analyses of daylight access. Shadow 
diagrams by Amanda Dahl and Märta Helander, 
used by permission.
Equity / Quality of Life
Comfort
Daylight
Safety
Visibility
Relevant indicators
Insolation analysis, total annual direct radiation
Shadow analysis, 2 hour intervals
Ecotect
Wather data Stockholm
Including all context
Default material settings
21 March
21 June
21 December
EN
Vegetation/grass
Asphalt
Daylight factor analysis
Upon visiting the site, 
concerns about the impact 
of the buildings on solar 
access in the green spaces 
were discussed. Especially 
the courtyards seemed to 
have been planned in an un-
favourable way, leaving the 
green spaces in shadow 
much of the year. Subse-
quent shadow analyses 
performed by the architec-
ture students investigated 
this issue.
A more detailed insolation 
analysis of total annual 
direct solar radiation in 
the courtyards confirmed 
that the southern parts of 
the courtyards where the 
green areas and vegeta-
tion was located received 
significantly less sun over 
the course of a year than 
the northern parts, which 
was largely covered with 
asphalt for vehicle access.
Daylight factor analyses of 
standard three room apart-
ments on the second floor 
showed a similar trend 
to the courtyards. The 
benefit of large windows 
in the southern façades 
was offset by the shading 
caused by the large balcony 
and the extra set of glazing. 
The result was that while 
the balcony enjoys a high 
daylight factor throughout, 
it is at the expense of the 
daylight levels in the living 
rooms and kitchens behind 
it, which generally suffer 
from a very low daylight fac-
tor, below 1% in the back 
half of the rooms.
Velux Daylight Visualizer
Including building context
Second floor at 800mm
CIE overcast sky
Ground reflectance
0.21
Interior and exterior surface 
reflectance
0.84
Glass transmittance
0.78
==PAGE:103==
Analysis | 103
in front of the entrances, where there were very few opportunities to sit or 
linger. The effect of this was unknowingly seen during the site visit in March, 
where people were observed standing in the entrances in the late afternoon 
enjoying the sun, while no one was using the benches or green areas, which 
were in shade (see Figure F 6.6).
Analyses of the daylight factor in the apartments also yielded expected 
poor results in the south-facing living rooms and kitchens, which were with-
drawn behind the large balconies (Figure F 6.9).
CPTED
Many indicators relate directly or indirectly to the concept of crime preven-
tion through environmental design (CPTED). The concept has been adopted 
in many forms, and is often used to reduce crime on public transport (Cozens 
& van der Linde 2015). Bjørn & Holek (2014) discuss several issues that are 
highly related to the concept, and the Danish Council for Crime Prevention 
[Det Kriminalpræventive Råd] have issued a guide for crime prevention meas-
ures in urban planning, which is largely based on CPTED (Skou & Madsen 
2014). The main principles of crime prevention contained within CPTED are:
Surveillance: Increasing visibility and ‘eyes on the street’.
Territoriality: Creating a sense of ownership among residents/users.
Access control: Defining and enforcing private and public space.
Target hardening: Increasing the effort required to commit a crime by using, 
locks, stronger doors, alarms, etc.
Image management: Maintenance and care makes an area appear more or-
derly and supervised.
Activity support: Attracting safe and legitimate users and activities.
Geographical juxtaposition: The influence of nearby land uses and activities.
(Cozens & van der Linde 2015)
Working with principles of CPTED and similar frameworks has constitut-
ed the analytical approach for a large part of the chosen indicators.
Daylight factor
The ratio, often given 
in percent, of the illumi-
nance due to daylight at 
a point on a given plane 
indoors to the simultane-
ous outdoor illuminance 
on a horizontal plane 
from an unobstructed 
hemisphere of overcast 
sky.
(Iversen et al. 2013)
Motivated 
perpetrator
Suited situa-
tion/place
Accessible 
victim/item
F 6.10	The necessities for 
crime. CPTED deals 
mainly with the 
issue of situation/
place. After Skou & 
Madsen 2014)
Equity / Quality of Life
Comfort
Human scale
Safety / Security
Feeling of security
Natural surveillance
Visibility
Connection / Accessibility
Urban connection
Entrances
Meeting places
Foot traffic to and through area
Area used by non-residents
Common facilities
Pride and sense of place
Public image
Differentiation of private and public
Residents image of area
Maintenance and care
Social cohesion
Social networks
Local societies/communities
Relevant indicators
Territoriality
Activity
support
Image
management
Target
hardening
Access
control
Surveillance
CPTED
G
e
o
g
r
a
p
hi
c
a
l 
j
u
x
t
a
p
o
si
ti
o
n
F 6.11	Principles of CPTED. After Cozens & van der Linde (2015).
==PAGE:104==
104 | Case Study: Fyrklövern
Design Proposal and Scoring
The project design proposal was gradually developed by the architects 
along with the investigation and analysis of issues relating to the different in-
dicators. In order for the proposal to increase the social sustainability of the 
area, the intention was to increase the score of each indicator, thus substan-
tiating an overall improvement. The architectural concept is illustrated dia-
grammatically and visually in Figure F 6.13 and F 6.14. Moving from large 
scale neighbourhood  considerations to smaller scale changes to the façades, 
the proposal follows a logic that addresses all chosen indicators:
1.	 A new structural hierarchy increases the integration of the neighbour-
hood with the surrounding city. By raising the ground up to the first 
floor in two of the courtyards, a level connection is made with the green 
area to the west, and the road no longer acts as a barrier. At the same 
time the middle courtyards is accentuated as a different and more pub-
lic space, which allows people flows in and out of the area.
2.	 One staircase in each building is opened up completely to allow a pas-
sage through the building. This breaks up the rigid, one-directional path 
system and allows for more casual, diverse people flows between the 
buildings. It also sets each building apart from the others in a visually 
characteristic way.
3.	 New student housing positioned in the western end of the courtyards 
replaces the removed building mass from the staircases and partially 
closes off the two elevated courtyards, further accentuating them as 
semi-public spaces.
4.	 Entrances are connected through to both sides of the buildings, and the 
staircases are expanded to include functional common spaces on each 
floor. New apartments, including two floor studios, are accommodated 
in the ground and first floors, connecting directly to the elevated court-
yards. This creates a private zone around the edge of the elevated green 
courtyards, and together with the updated facade design, the buildings 
are oriented more towards each other, creating a semi-private space.
In discussion with the architects, the design proposal was given a rating 
from 4-10 for each indicator, based on its performance on the developed meas-
urement scales. The individual ratings are shown in Table T 6.4 and the scales 
can be seen in Appendix C. Using the MCDM Excel tool that had been devel-
oped, the results have been visualised in Figure F 6.12.
T 6.4	 Scores for existing and proposed design for indicators and criteria.
Themes
Criteria
Ex.
Prop. Indicators
Ex. Prop.
Equity / Quality of Life
Freedom of choice
4,00
8,00
Ability to shape own space
4
8
Comfort
4,56
7,11
Daylight
Human scale
4
5
6
8
Safety / Security
6,16
7,88
Feeling of security
Natural surveillance
Visibility
7
4
7
7
9
8
Connection / Accessibility
Urban connection
4,73
9,08
Connection to city
Entrances
Meeting places
Foot traffic to and through area
Area used by non-residents
Common facilities
4
5
4
7
5
4
9
10
8
9
8
10
Pride and sense of place
Public image
5,00
10,00
Differentiation of private and public
5
10
Residents image of area
5,50
9,00
Maintenance and care
Local landmarks
5
6
8
10
Social cohesion
Social networks
4,00
9,00
Local societies/communities
4
9
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
Freedom of choice 
Comfort 
Safety 
Urban connection 
Public image 
Residents image 
Social networks 
F 6.12	Scoring graph of design proposal (green) 
versus existing conditions (red). Produced by 
aggregating scores in the Excel MCDM tool.
Drawing material
1:400 drawings of de-
sign proposal available in 
Appendix F, page 150
==PAGE:105==
Design Proposal And Scoring | 105
Existing conditions.
Landscape dragged into the 
courtyards and public con-
nection is made in the middle 
courtyard.
By removing building mass the 
building blocks are opened up 
and a north-south people flow is 
facilitated.
New volumes are places in the 
two semi-private courtyards.
New green courtyards are 
created with new entrances and 
façades causing buildings to 
face towards each other.
Diagram of architectural concept
New open staircase
New courtyard and facades
F 6.13	Proposal for transformation of the blue houses in Fyrklövern. Daylight factor simulations use the same setup as the 
precious. All material (except daylight factor analyses) by Amanda Dahl and Märta Helander, used by permission.
1.0% avg.
1.0% avg.
0.8% centre
0.7% centre
Kitchen
Living room
Living room
Kitchen
Existing facade
5.0% avg.
1.5% avg.
2.5% centre
1.2% centre
Kitchen
Living room
Living room
Kitchen
Proposed facade
In the proposed façades 
either the living room or 
kitchen of each apartment 
is extended outwards, 
reducing the area of the 
balconies by half. At the 
same time the balconies 
are opened and the glazed 
area is increased to allow 
more daylight to enter. 
The daylight factor in the 
centre of the living room is 
increased from 0.7–0.8% 
to 1.2–2.5%.
Daylight factor analysis
1 New spatial hierarchy
2 New connections
3 New volumes
4 New courtyards and façades
==PAGE:106==
East sections, 1:800
East elevations, 1:800
North elevation, 1:800
South elevation, 1:800
==PAGE:107==
Tagetage
5. sal
Studiebolig
5. sal
1. sal
Stue
Studiebolig
Stue
Entré
Entré
Entré
Entré
Entré
Entré
Entré
Entré
5 v.
2 v.
1 v.
1 v.
4 v.
4 v.
4 v.
4 v.
2 v.
4 v.
2 v. +
studio
2 v. +
studio
2 v. +
studio
2 v. +
studio
Teknik-
rum
Fælles
Opbevaring
6 v.
4 v.
1 v. +
studio
4 v.
1 v.
1 v.
1 v.
1 v.
1 v. +
studio
1 v. +
studio
7 v. 
1 v.
1 v.
1 v.
F 6.14	Project proposal. Opposite page: Section and elevations. This page: Site plan with floor plans. All material by Aman-
da Dahl and Märta Helander, used by permission.
Site plan with ground floor, first and 5th floor, 1:800
==PAGE:108==
108 | Case Study: Fyrklövern
Discussion
The scoring of the indicators was performed by the architects and the 
author based on the developed measurement scales. This process, like the 
development of the measurement scales themselves, is sometimes inevitably 
subjective. Although an accurate objective description can be preferable, sub-
jective input from users or designers should not always be bypassed in favour 
of increased objectivity (Benoît & Mazijn 2009). Especially when the model is 
used to support architects in their early design considerations, subjective input 
can be sufficient to decide between design proposals, however considering the 
need to qualify social sustainability in terms of economic benefits, increased 
objectivity and measurability should still be on the agenda.
Looking at the graph in Figure F 6.12, the score of the design proposal far 
exceeds that of the existing conditions  for most of the indicators. Given that 
the indicators were chosen for their poor performance, this comes as no sur-
prise. The usefulness of this type of graph — showing only the final proposal 
and initial conditions alongside each other — is also questionable, however it 
demonstrates how the scoring and visualisation of performance could work. 
Due to restraints which will be explained below, it was not feasible to undergo 
this process of scoring for every design concept that was conceived, but this is 
eventually what is pursued.
Model development and integration
The model of social sustainability was continually developed during the 
course of the case study. As a result, not all elements of the methodology 
were fully utilised at the correct times in the process. Instead, the process and 
the model have mutually informed each other to build a methodology, which 
could then be used only on the later stages of the process. This was unavoid-
able due to the parallel time scopes of both projects and it limits the usability 
of the case study in the earliest phases where the model could have helped 
introduce some clarity and focus. The architects held the same view, noting 
that “many of the things on the list were discussed on the way, but having 
the indicators formulated in a list would have made some of the process a 
lot more straightforward.” The architects also showed interest in the idea of 
including reference projects and examples of how to work with the individual 
indicators. Although a reference for each indicator to various sources of liter-
ature has been made, it seems crucial in this context to provide more succinct 
specifications. Having a more detailed specification for each indicator would 
reduce the time needed for a specialist, who might then focus on user engage-
ment instead. These indicator specifications, however, would likely have to be 
the result of a broader engagement of experts from various fields, and not the 
work of engineers or architects alone.
==PAGE:109==
Discussion | 109
Indicator analysis and objectivity
For the architects, the list of social sustainability indicators was seen first 
and foremost as a useful list to “remind you which main issues needed to be 
worked on” as they noted, yet they were also conscious of the need for analy-
sis. But unlike the environmental sustainability indicator of Global Warming 
Potential (climate change), which depends very much upon the single factor of 
greenhouse gas emissions, the social sustainability indicators require a more 
varied approach to analysis. As of yet there exists no database containing 
physical interventions and their social consequences for each indicator, so a 
method similar to LCA can not be efficiently used. Instead, the indicators 
must be analysed using available methods, some of which were used in the 
case study. Following the completion of the project, architect on the project 
Amanda Dahl noted:
I think it is a good idea to have a list of indicators of social sustainability as a 
tool to analyse architecture. The list will however need to be very general if it 
is to be used as a general tool, and therefore it is difficult to get in depth with 
the concrete case. And so the list cannot stand alone but must be supported by 
other analytical tools.
This report has started down the path of identifying and/or creating useful 
tools that are able to inform social sustainability indicators, but more research 
needs to be done in this area before a full range of analytical tools can be avail-
able. Specifically, the possible use of GIS has been discussed in this context.
Use of analytical tools would certainly help make indicators increasingly 
quantifiable, however as mentioned using more specific indicators could also 
help in this regard without necessitating tools; as Dahl commented on the 
scoring process:
Themes
Criteria
Indicators
Method / Unit of analysis 
Qual.
Quant.
Social Sustainability
Equity / Quality of Life
Freedom of choice
Ability to shape own space
Variety of available options
X
Comfort
Daylight
Human scale
Daylight factor
Range of scales that relate to human body
X
X
Safety / Security
Feeling of security
Natural surveillance
Visibility
Percentage area properly lit
Percentage area with natural surveillance / no. enclosed spaces
Percentage area with good visibility
X
X
X
Connection / Accessibility
Urban connection
Connection to city
Entrances
Meeting places
Foot traffic to and through area
Area used by non-residents
Common facilities
Number and types of connections (path, roads) into area
Distinctiveness, openness, brightness, facing direction, privacy
Number (per building), variation
Volume (no. people), attraction, facilitation
Volume (no. people), attraction, facilitation
Number (per building), ease of access, variation of use
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Pride and sense of place
Public image
Differentiation of private and public
Level of graduation, use of semi-private spaces
X
Residents image of area
Maintenance and care
Local landmarks
Expected quality/ease
Number, variation
X
X
X
Social cohesion
Social networks
Local societies/communities
Capacity/facilities to support groups/activities
X
T 6.5	 Taking the next step towards a specification of the indicators: Method/units of analysis for indicators and indica-
tion of whether they can be qualitatively or quantitatively determined.
==PAGE:110==
110 | Case Study: Fyrklövern
It was very difficult to be objective when we were scoring our renovation of the 
Million Programme in Upplands Väsby. For example regarding the number of 
meeting places in the area, because how do you define a meeting place? The 
indicators should be more defined; this would make it easier to be objective.
This demand for specificity/objectivity contrasts the demand for generality 
in the previous quote. This relates to the issue of model flexibility discussed 
in the end of the previous chapter. Arguably, using more objective indicators 
could increase the validity of the model results, yet a too specific model also 
loses its general appeal. The three levels (themes, criteria and indicators) were 
intended to address this, but the model might need yet another level of detail. 
To accommodate the need for objectivity and to take the next step towards 
developing analytical tools, a specification of method (and unit) of analysis is 
proposed based on the case study (see Table T 6.5).
Limitations to user involvement
Because of the nature of the project and limited resources, it was not pos-
sible to conduct any user involvement processes apart from the direct interac-
tion performed on-site in Upplands Väsby. This is a major drawback, as an 
inclusive design process has repeatedly been highlighted as a prerequisite for 
social sustainability. However, this did not affect the ability of the case study 
to examine the practical use and outcomes of the proposed model and meth-
odology. Regarding the outcome of the project, the architects felt that closer 
contact with the residents would definitely have had an impact on their pro-
posal in terms of understanding the users, yet the solutions to the issues would 
not necessarily have come from them. Hence, looking at the model both as a 
tool to support the design process and as a tool to facilitate user integration, 
the former has been investigated here, while the latter has yet to be examined.
Educational project setting
The fact that the project was carried out in an educational setting and not 
in a professional context had several implications. In the words of the archi-
tects:
In a school project you have more time to go in depth, more time to discuss and 
investigate different solutions. In a competition you have to make decisions fast-
er, but often you also have a bigger knowledge foundation do base the decision 
on, since you are a bigger team with more experience. In a school project you 
can, like in our case, choose a focus to work with and draw from, such as social 
sustainability. This you can do based on your own interests. But in the real 
world you need to take clients and the wording in the competition programme 
into account. If the client has emphasised environmental sustainability it is 
hard to get the time to work thoroughly with both aspects.
==PAGE:111==
Discussion | 111
So the ability to work thoroughly with social sustainability was largely en-
abled by the freedom of the school project, however the results can only be 
regarded as preliminary, as the conditions may not be representative of the 
conditions in a real design competition.
==PAGE:112==
112 | Case Study: Fyrklövern
In Conclusion
This chapter presents a case study in the use of the proposed model of 
social sustainability, describing how it was used in a design process at KADK 
to produce a proposal for the transformation of part of the social housing area 
Fyrklövern in Upplands Väsby north of Stockholm. Initial research and visits 
to the site led to the selection of a focus on the space between the buildings, 
façades and ground floors, which was further underpinned by discussing, se-
lecting, weighting and analysing indicators from the proposed social sustaina-
bility model.
The design proposal deals with the identified issues and analysis results on 
all relevant scales by changing the internal structure of the area, improving 
integration with the surrounding city, redesigning and reorienting the ground 
floors and façades, breaking down scales and using level differences and a 
graduation of private, semi-private and public to introduce a more logical 
hierarchy of the outdoor spaces.
The design process was successfully supported by the proposed model of 
social sustainability, however as part of the model was developed in parallel, 
it could not be fully implemented in early phases of the process. Although 
the model was considered to be useful by the architects, they also called for 
increased indicators specificity and analytical tools in order to validate and 
justify their design outside of the design process.
Finally, the educational setting of the case study did not take many factors 
into account that would affect professional projects, such as more limited time, 
the client and larger design team, nor did it allow for any significant involve-
ment of users. However, the freedom of focus and increased attention to detail 
made the setting well-suited for an initial test and development of the social 
sustainability model.
==PAGE:113==
This short chapter is a continuation and widening of the discussion in the 
last chapter. It picks up on the learnings from the case study and combines 
them with input from professionals and researchers to revise and refine the 
proposed tentative model of social sustainability and the framework around it.
The first sections take a step back and look at what did and did not work 
and more importantly what should be changed as a result. The final section 
presents a revised and expanded version of the model of social sustainability, 
which is intended as a worksheet for the design process and as a platform for 
further development. 7
Lessons and 
Revision
==PAGE:114==
114 | Lessons And Revision
Lessons from Case Study
Lessons and revisions to the social sustainability model resulting from the 
case study are presented here.
Revised indicator selection strategy
A main drawback from the case study was the missed opportunity to test 
the social sustainability model as a guidance and support in the earliest de-
sign process phases. As architects noted, it might have introduced some much 
needed clarity. Still, they elaborated on the way indicators should be selected 
and weighted and proposed an alternative approach, in which all indicators in 
the model were discussed and weighted in the beginning of the process:
1.	 All indicators are reviewed in the beginning of the project.
2.	 Based on its relevance in the specific case, each indicator is given a 
weighting from 1-10.
3.	 All indicators with a weight below 4 are disregarded.
4.	 The rest of the indicators denote the primary issues and thus the focus 
of the project.
By following this process, a more thorough examination of the relevance 
of each indicator is ensured, and the number of chosen indicators will also 
reflect the extent of the social sustainability concerns within the project. This 
would make it possible to use the model in the beginning of all projects to 
test whether social sustainability is an issue. For example, a project with few 
social sustainability issues might only identify one or two relevant indicators 
and focus can be directed elsewhere, whereas another project might discover 
pertinent social sustainability issues that had not been addressed before.
Time scale
Chapter 5 described the importance of addressing the immediate 
needs of the residents before commencing with large scale changes. This con-
sideration was not possible to make in the case study due to insufficient user 
interaction. It is interesting to note, however, that the design concept proposed 
major changes to the landscape and buildings as a first step in the transforma-
tion. As these are long-term changes, residents would be unlikely to see any 
short-term benefits, and the smaller scale changes to the facade and courtyards 
were only likely to happen after the big changes were completed. These issues 
might have been avoided through an earlier consideration of the time scale of 
the different interventions and their order of implementation. 
==PAGE:115==
Lessons From Case Study | 115
Tools
A need for more measurable indicators was clearly expressed by the ar-
chitects, and thus the model was expanded to specify the method and unit of 
analysis.
Indicators
Revisions have been made to some of the indicators used in the case study. 
The revisions are made due to overlaps in what is covered by some indicators, 
specifically the ones relating to connection to the city, foot traffic in the area 
and meeting places. The intention was to avoid overlaps and too general indi-
cators by making each indicator more specific. Also, heritage value has been 
added as an indicator of public image to better include cultural/historical 
parameters in a context that is relevant to social sustainability. 
==PAGE:116==
116 | Lessons And Revision
Feedback from Professionals
Robin Andersson, sustainability specialist at White architects’ Stockholm 
office, reviewed the social sustainability model. His comments were mostly 
related to themes of identity and meeting places:
Somewhere I would like to add ‘identity’, which I find very important when 
I interview people. Every part of every city has some kind of identity (can be 
both good and bad), and this tends to be very important for people to either 
get rid of or maintain/enhance … Also I would recommend a theme called 
‘meeting places/public places’ — both commercial and non commercial, pro-
grammed and non-programmed. People find it important to be able to just 
‘hang around’, both young and old. Especially young girls need places to ‘hide’ 
from the public and programmed environment.
In terms of identity, the intention behind the model was that these issues 
would be addressed under the theme pride and sense of  place, which deals with 
indicators affecting the image of the area, both internally among residents and 
externally in media and the general public (as these two are not necessarily the 
same, especially in stigmatised areas). As a result of Anderssons comment, the 
theme is renamed to identity of  place, which more appropriately describes that 
it deals with the identity which residents and the public attach to the place in 
question. Also, the indicator common facilities has been removed in favour of 
private meeting places, which deals more generally with the spaces available for 
the residents to meet casually and formally, as opposed to public meeting plac-
es, which are not only available to residents. These indicators might benefit 
from a more detailed investigation into the specific types of meeting places, as 
was also mentioned by Amanda Dahl in the case study.
Åsa Bjerndell corroborated Anderssons focus on meeting places and 
shared spaces as central drivers for socially sustainable behaviour. She referred 
to Granovetter (1973), describing the importance of having many weak ties 
to other people and argued that the physical environment can stimulate the 
generation of these ties by inducing and facilitating social interaction; in this 
respect, public shared spaces are key.
==PAGE:117==
Learnings From Sted Network Conference | 117
Learnings from STED 
Network Conference
On 9 June 2016, the Nordic Built Sustainable Transfor-
mation & Environmental Design (STED) Network Con-
ference was held at the Norwegian University of Science 
and Technology (NTNU) in Trondheim, Norway. The first 
part of the conference consisted of short, individual post-
er sessions with presentations by students, professors and 
representatives from architectural studios. The second part 
of the conference consisted of more in-depth discussion 
sessions, where participants had the chance to discuss and 
elaborate on the issues presented during the poster sessions 
in smaller, subject-specific groups. One of these sessions 
were on the topic of social sustainability, and the discus-
sion participants were able to provide interesting perspec-
tives on social sustainability in the design process and on 
the proposed model1.
Include solutions
The first perspective that was offered relates to the us-
ability of the model in the design process. It was proposed 
that the model be expanded to include a compilation of 
attractors or solutions for improvement juxtaposed to the in-
dividual indicators. This might work as inspiration for the 
design, and by collecting empirical evidence in and after 
the design process, over time it might become a knowledge 
bank, with a database of example projects and possible 
strategies for improvement of social sustainability. In that 
sense, the case study in the previous chapter can be regard-
ed as a first collection of data, although it is not possible to 
collect real evidence of the effects of the transformation.
User engagement strategy
Part of the discussion was on strategies to include resi-
dents in a more efficient way. Specifically, it was discussed 
how the use of mobile applications might facilitate contact 
1	
A scaled-down version of the poster presented at the STED Net-
work Conference as well as an example of the feedback hand-out 
that was distributed to participants during the discussion session are 
included in Appendix G.
F 7.1	 Proposing a more ‘flat’ user engagement 
curve, increasing the overall level in the 
entire design process.
A1
A2
A2 > A1
Present at discussion, among others:
Elise Grosse
White architects
Paula Femenias
Chalmers
Peter Andreas Sattrup
Danish Assoc. of Arch. Firms
Lotte Bjerregaard Jensen
DTU
==PAGE:118==
118 | Lessons And Revision
between residents and the design process. By maintaining a more constant 
contact throughout the design process, users might feel more involved with less 
effort, and their input could inform the design process in a more continuous 
way, resulting in a more ‘flat’ user engagement curve. Additionally, the overall 
user involvement level would most likely be higher.
A specific tool for this was suggested in the form of Maptionnaire, a sub-
scription-based software tool to create map-based questionnaires and civic 
participation platforms (Maptionnaire 2016). Such a tool could also help pro-
vide deeper information about an area.
Quantification — urban analysis tool
In terms of quantification, the Swedish company Spacescape was mentioned 
as a possible source of inspiration regarding analyses of urban structures. The 
Swedish company works with urban planning and applies several methodolo-
gies and analysis tools for quantitative analysis of urban environments, includ-
ing proximity analyses, access analyses, grid analyses, area analyses and  urban 
life analyses (Spacescape 2016). These sorts of analyses also have a potential to 
quantify social sustainability in terms of economic effects, such as the effects 
of amenities on property value. Still, such analyses require development of 
complex axial maps as well as access to methodologies and software, which the 
company might not be expected to share freely.
On the other hand, there exists a variety of tools that are freely available 
online, and which might be able to perform some of these analyses to a satis-
factory degree. Specifically, it is interesting to look at tools that could function 
inside an integrated dynamic model, such as plug-ins for Grasshopper and 
Rhino, examples being the SpiderWeb tool or the Urban Modelling Interface 
(UMI 2016; SpiderWeb 2016).
Perspectives
A final perspective of interest addresses the list-form of the proposed mod-
el, which essentially works by explicating the contents of social sustainability. 
As Peter Andreas Sattrup noted, most of the indicators in the model of social 
sustainability are already a tacit part of an architect’s working process: “Ar-
chitects always address social sustainability — and they quantify it every time 
they draw a line.”
This understanding of the problem focuses on the drawing as the end 
product and thus as the materialisation of the social sustainability strategy. 
It emphasises the architect’s role as the one who produces the drawings, and 
the proposed model of social sustainability then works as a method towards 
structuring the architect’s argument, e.g. by making concrete economic con-
nections. At the current stage, however, more research and empirical data is 
needed in order to operationalize this aspect of the model.
==PAGE:119==
Revision Of Model | 119
Revision of Model
The revision proposals have been incorporated into a new revised version 
of the social sustainability model, which includes an expanded set of param-
eters and condenses all the aspects into Table T 7.1. The table is intended as 
a control panel for the social sustainability based design support by requiring 
the user to reflect on its content and write down methods and tools for analy-
sis and strategies for possible solutions as well as their physical scale and time 
scale. The left side of the table has space to record weightings of the individ-
ual criteria and indicators as well as the indicator scores. The table should be 
used in combination with the developed MCDM Excel tool, or could be made 
available in a digital version that connects results to a visualisation.
The revised model has also been included in an A4 leaflet, which is intend-
ed to briefly present the model and methodology as well as the research behind 
it. The leaflet is included in Appendix H.
==PAGE:120==
120 | Lessons And Revision
Themes
Criteria
Weight
Indicators
Weight
Score
Social Sustainability
Equity / Quality of Life
Affordability
Rent level
Heating cost
Individual metering
Possibilities for food production
Good quality apartments
Freedom of choice
Variation in apartment sizes
Variation in tenure
Apartments for residents with special needs
Access to balcony
Access to green/recreational areas
Access to storage
Ability to shape own space
Ability to cultivate/grow
Comfort
Daylight
Heating
Indoor climate
Noise
Wind
Human scale
Health
Ability to exercise
Access to health facilities
Awareness of own health
Education
Access to elementary schools
Access to secondary education schools
Safety / Security
Vandalism removal
Road safety
Lighting
Natural surveillance
Visibility
Connection / Accessibility
Transportation
Public transport
Carpool
Balance of modes of movement 
Urban connection
Garbage collection
Entrances
Parking facilities
Car access to area 
Pedestrian access
Bike access
Area used by non-residents
Public meeting places
Private meeting places
Disabled access
Possibility to stay in your own home
Accessibility indoors/outdoors
Services/jobs
Presence of local amenities
Range of service
Local job opportunities
Support system for entrepreneurs
Identity of place
Public image
Name of streets
Public stigma (media reports)
Public landmarks
Heritage value
Differentiation of private and public
Definition of uses (programming)
Residents image of area
Maintenance and care
Resident’s opinions
Local landmarks
Social cohesion
Social diversity
Social mix
Social inclusiveness
Social networks
Volunteers
Local societies/communities
Residents’ association
Democracy
Participation
Residents included in decision processes
Communication
Access to information/internet
T 7.1	 Revised and expanded model of social sustainability including added parameters and a 
condensation of the case study results.
==PAGE:121==
Revision Of Model | 121
Method / Unit of analysis 
Qualitative
Quantitative
Tools
Attractors/Solutions
Scale
Time scale
Apart.
Build.
Neigh.
Variety of available options
X
Flexible design, private outdoor spaces, user influence 
X
X
X
Short to long
Daylight factor
Range of scales that relate to human body
X
X
Velux Daylight Visualizer
CPTED/SAVE
Increased glazing area, new facade
New, smaller buildings, varied facade
X
X
X
X
Medium
Medium to long
Percentage area properly lit
Percentage area with natural surveillance / no. enclosed spaces
Percentage area with good visibility
X
X
X
CPTED
CPTED
CPTED/SAVE
New/improved lighting
Active ground floor
Reduce corners
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X 
X
Short
Medium
Medium to long
Distinctiveness, openness, brightness, facing direction, privacy
Volume (no. people), attraction, facilitation
Number (per building), variation
Number (per building), ease of access, variation of use
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
CPTED/SAVE
SAVE
Mental map
Mental map
Increase glazing, create semi-private zone
Increase number of amenities
Playgrounds, benches, shops, cafés, playing fields
Common rooms, laundry rooms, roomy staircases
X
X
X
X
X
Medium
Long
Medium
Medium to long
Level of graduation, use of semi-private spaces
X
CPTED
Semi-private areas, level differences
X
X
Medium to long
Expected quality/ease
Number, variation
X
X
X
CPTED
Mental map
Easily cleaned/replaceable materials
Artwork, architecture, a special tree, a special shop
X
X
X
Medium
Short to long
Capacity/facilities to support groups/activities
X
Common facilities, playing fields, green areas
X
X
Medium to long
==PAGE:122==
122 | Lessons And Revision
In Conclusion
Based on the learnings from the case study and opinions from professionals 
and researchers, this chapter presents a revised and expanded version of the 
model of social sustainability. Among the revisions are changes to the indica-
tors, which have been done mostly in order to avoid overlaps, and a revised 
strategy for selection of indicators, which requires all indicators to be weighted 
in the beginning of the design process. Among the expansions are specifica-
tions of the method and unit of analysis, tools and possible attractors/solu-
tions, which can also serve as a reference for future projects, along with con-
siderations of both space and time scale. Finally, considerations of new user 
involvement strategies and more advanced, quantitative analysis tools point 
towards these areas as the natural next steps in the development of the model.
==PAGE:123==
8
Discussion and 
Conclusion
The discussion was initiated in the case study chapter and subsequently ex-
panded in scope in Chapter 7. This final chapter rounds off the discussion, 
maintaining a wide perspective, and tries to address the more fundamental 
questions regarding social sustainability in a design process.
After a brief conclusion, this chapter also takes a final view at some of the 
possibilities for further research that have been identified in this research.
==PAGE:124==
124 | Discussion And Conclusion
Discussion
Should all projects be socially sustainable?
The short answer is yes. Although it is important to build environmentally 
sustainable and profitable buildings, it is worth considering that the end goal 
of the sustainability agenda is essentially social. Is it then enough to focus on 
environmental sustainability with the long term goal of preventing the social 
effects of future climate change? Or should there also be a more immediate 
focus on creating societies that are equitable, diverse, connected and demo-
cratic and provide a good quality of life? The answer seems obvious: Social 
sustainability is always a parameter, and it is important to address it on both 
the short and long term, on the large and small scale. 
Having said that, different projects require different levels of focus on so-
cial sustainability depending on their preconditions. This is especially true for 
renovation projects. The model of social sustainability within this report offers 
one approach to creating a focus within a given context. Although it has been 
developed bearing Nordic social housing in mind, the proposed indicators are 
aimed at a much wider application, and the list can be easily customised to a 
different setting. 
Indicator specification
As of now, many of the indicators are only vaguely specified in terms of 
how they should be quantified or evaluated. In consequence, the specification 
happens on project level, which project participants in the case study felt was 
too subjective. Although a specification of the method and unit of analysis 
adds a new layer to the model, it is necessary to conduct more research into 
each indicator in order to properly substantiate their individual methods of 
quantification. Such research would also clarify potentials regarding the use 
of tools. 
The link to economic sustainability
Parallel to an increased specification of each indicator, it is of central in-
terest to relate their social sustainability benefits to an economic perspective. 
Although it has not been the subject matter of this research, this is an is-
sue that has continually surfaced throughout the report in literature, inter-
views and meetings, and economy constitutes much of the foundation for the 
need to quantify social sustainability in the first place (see arguments on page 
45). With this in mind, it is not straight-forward how the issue should be 
approached.
==PAGE:125==
Discussion | 125
There seems to be two sides to the argument: A need to determine how 
much is benefited from social sustainability in economic terms, and a need to 
determine who benefits.
Starting with the latter, it was mentioned in the introduction chapter that 
problems of split incentive could pose a barrier to social sustainability. This 
was also emphasised by Elise Grosse at the STED Network Conference: “The 
return of investment in social sustainability does not come to ‘us’ but the re-
turn is ‘over there’.” In the subsequent discussion, proposals to up the incen-
tive for social sustainability included a calculation of the economic benefits of 
social sustainability (e.g. of improved health) on a national level possibly fol-
lowed by subsidies for socially sustainable projects, a change in the way leases 
are written to ensure the building owner benefits from the improvements, or 
even an investigation into the branding value for the clients investing in social 
sustainability. 
In terms of how much is benefited, it is difficult to point to any common 
economic denominator for all the indicators of the model. Rather, economic 
benefits seem to be scattered all over: Will high levels of comfort and access to 
high quality outdoor spaces keep residents healthy for longer, reducing hospi-
tal bills? Will a better public image and thriving local services and amenities 
create jobs and increase revenues? Åsa Bjerndell suggested that a higher level 
of safety and security and increased sense of ownership could reduce vandal-
ism and secure better maintenance.
As a result, approaches to determine the economic benefits of social sus-
tainability are highly diverse, and such investigations should not be carried 
out without considering first whether the return on investment helps create 
incentive towards social sustainability. 
Tacit knowledge and subjectivity
The current tendency towards IDP means that engineers are increasing-
ly included as active participants in the early phases of the design process. 
However, according to the IDP frameworks, engineers still work as specialists, 
whereas it is the architect who assumes the holistic perspective.
In the social sustainability model, however, engineers must also participate 
in the weighting and selection of indicators in the beginning of the process, 
in order to broaden the professional basis of the weighting process. This in-
cludes making qualitative assessments of what is most important to a project, 
based on preliminary analyses and professional opinion. Naturally, this also 
means that all projects are not assessed against the same criteria. The rationale 
behind the selection process is that a more focused optimisation of the most 
important parameters will results in a better project than a broad optimisation 
of all available parameters.
==PAGE:126==
126 | Discussion And Conclusion
But how to decide what indicators are most important? Architects are 
trained in making qualitative assessments of their designs. Many of these as-
sessments hinge partly on tacit knowledge and professional experience, and 
are a natural part of the architects working process. Engineers on the other 
hand will likely feel hesitant at the notion of having to decide early on, which 
design parameters are the most important, since the subsequent optimisation 
seems then to be based on a subjective foundation. But this view fails to rec-
ognise the importance of the informed professional opinion. As it was men-
tioned in the case study discussion, subjectivity should not always be bypassed 
in favour of increased objectivity, especially if the objective parameters fail to 
capture the full picture. In the early design process phases, when all the cards 
are still on the table, any number of specific quantitative enquiries is unlikely 
to provide an adequate basis for decision. This is due both to the multitude 
of parameters, and to the fact that many parameters (such as those relating 
to architectural value) are inherently qualitative. Instead, a synthesis of the 
combined tacit (and explicit) insight of all project participants — including en-
gineers — seems more likely to yield fruitful results in the form of a judicious 
choice of project focus.
Limitations to quantification
The need to retain a subjective perspective is not limited to the initial 
weighting and selection process. Paradoxically, while the architect is moving 
towards increased quantifiability, the engineer must increasingly acknowledge 
the value of the inherently qualitative parameters that govern architecture.
It is important to keep in mind that the role of the model is design support 
in order for it not to become a mere lookup list for standardised solutions to 
individual problems. Instead, it should constitute a vehicle for breaking down 
and analysing design issues and synthesising design solutions across the differ-
ent indicators. The danger lies in a mechanistic translation between indicator 
unit of analysis and design solution. If issues with entrances, interior daylight 
levels and human scale are identified (such as in the case study) these should 
not be addressed separately; rather it should be considered whether a new 
facade design could potentially improve all three. The architectural concept 
then improves the indicators, but is not dictated by them. Working with differ-
ent scales might help identify these potentials.
==PAGE:127==
Conclusion | 127
Conclusion
This research has looked at how to improve the tangibility and practica-
bility of social sustainability in the design process by way of theoretical as 
well as practical investigations. Specifically, it has investigated how a design 
process can be supported to secure more socially sustainable solutions in the 
transformation of Nordic post-war social housing projects. It is based on three 
perspectives: The fundamental theory of social sustainability, current concep-
tualisations and the design process integration. 
1. What is social sustainability, what characterises socially 
sustainable solutions and how can the concept be made 
more tangible?
It was found that social sustainability is still a contested concept, and while 
many attempts have been made to define it, no commonly accepted definition 
exists. Instead, in the absence of a comprehensive definition, a number of 
defining themes and characteristics were more well-suited for practical appli-
cations. The main findings of this chapter thus relate to the identification and 
specification of these characteristics, which include, i.a., equity, social mixing, 
cohesion, empowerment, participation, well-being, and quality of life. Fur-
thermore, literature on environmental psychology, evidence based design in 
health care as well as evidence collected from international cases of transfor-
mation of social housing projects, strongly suggest that a link exists between 
architecture and social sustainability.
2. How can social sustainability be evaluated and/or 
quantified and how can this inform a design process?
Finding that S-LCA, the framework most similar to E-LCA and LCC, had 
major limitations to its use in a design process, four other conceptualisations 
of sustainability were investigated to determine an approach that was suited 
for the purpose of design support. A convergence was found, both in some 
of the indicators used by the four frameworks and in the way they were rep-
resented: Recurring themes of social cohesion, health and safety, social mix, 
participation, accessibility, identity and comfort were broken down into more 
tangible indicators. It was also found that the most central issues in terms of 
design process integration were related to how indicators were analysed, their 
scale, weighting, visualisation and comparison of results as well as inclusion of 
residents in design processes, yet none of the considered frameworks offered a 
comprehensive model that could be used to effectively integrate social sustain-
ability into a design process.
3. How can a design process be organised in order to 
include the social dimension?
The integrated design process (IDP) was found to be promising as a way 
to integrate an operationalization of social sustainability, especially the con-
==PAGE:128==
128 | Discussion And Conclusion
cept of interdisciplinary integration and a focus on an iterative process were 
found to be essential. For the integration of social sustainability parameters on 
equal terms with more traditional areas of focus, multi-criteria decision-mak-
ing (MCDM) provides a solid framework. Community involvement was also 
seen as essential to the design process, especially since an alignment of investor 
and community interests could lead to an increased sense of ownership among 
residents.
How can a design process be supported to secure more 
socially sustainable solutions in the transformation of 
Nordic post-war social housing projects?
Utilising the knowledge that had been gained from the three research per-
spectives above, this report has proposed a compilation of themes to cover the 
key topics of social sustainability, each with a set of associated criteria and a 
list of indicators, constituting a model of social sustainability for use in the 
transformation of Nordic post-war social housing. Based on the conditions of 
the individual project, the indicators can be weighted to direct focus towards 
the most relevant issues. Then, based on an analysis of the indicators and a 
conversion of qualitative and quantitative results to a common scale, the social 
sustainability performance of design proposals can be visualised to support the 
design process.
Despite a lack of community involvement, a case study in the application 
of this model to a KADK project, dealing with a design for the transformation 
of a social housing project near Stockholm, yielded mostly positive results, as 
the design process was successful supported and resulted in a design proposal 
in which significant improvements to social sustainability could be substanti-
ated and visualised. Still, it was also found that more specific indicators and 
analytical tools were needed in order to validate and justify the design outside 
of the design process. 
Addressing the research question, a design process can be supported to se-
cure more socially sustainable solutions in the transformation of Nordic post-
war social housing projects by applying the revised and expanded version of 
the model of social sustainability that resulted from the case study and from 
input from professionals and researchers. However, in terms of measurability, 
this report has only taken the first step by providing a framework of what is to 
be measured. A discussion of what can and should be measured and further 
research into the specifics of each indicator are necessary next steps. 
Hence, although this research has not succeeded in conveying a complete 
(or even comprehensive) model for the integration of social sustainability in a 
design process, it has developed an analytical approach that can prove useful 
for further systematic enquiry into socially sustainable transformation of the 
built environment.
==PAGE:129==
Future Research Perspectives | 129
Future Research Perspectives
The following list contains perspectives for further research that would con-
tinue and support the work of this project:
Further investigation into indicators (such as meeting places, to more care-
fully specify the kinds of meeting places that are needed) and looking at 
how each indicator can be quantified.
Getting experts from various fields together to discuss the content of so-
cial sustainability in the built environment and to specify indicators and 
methods of measurement.
Determining the economic benefits of improving each indicator, as well as 
who benefits.
Examining the possibility to integrate the model of social sustainability with 
LCA and LCC methodologies, investigating cross-benefits.
Looking at the importance of community involvement processes for social sus-
tainability.
Looking at the potential of  GIS (or other tools) in the quantification of so-
cial sustainability.
Testing the method in a real design competition.
==PAGE:130==
130 | Discussion And Conclusion
==PAGE:131==
References
==PAGE:132==
132 | ﻿
Abbas, M. T. (2012). Chapter 2: Social Sustainability: Principles and Definitions. In Ahmad, 
M. H. (ed.) Sustainability in Built Environment 1. Institute Sultan Iskandar, Universiti 
Teknologi Malaysia. ISI Publications.
Andresen, I., Hestnes, A. G., Kamper, S., Jørgensen, P. F., Bramslev, K., Hammer, E., Før-
land-Larsen, A., Lehrskov, H., Rynska, D., Holanek, N. & Synnefa, A. (2009). Integrated 
Energy Design. INTEND Project, Intelligent Energy Europe.
Bader P. (2008). Sustainability: Conceptual Approaches. From Principle To Practice, Goethe Insti-
tut.
Balcomb, D., Andresen, I., Hestnes, A. G. & Aggerholm, S. (2002). MCDM-23: A method for 
specifying and prioritising criteria and goals in design. Booklet. IEA SHC Task 23 - Sub-
task C.
Barron, L. & Gauntlett, E. (2002). WACOSS Housing and Sustainable Communities Indicators 
Project. Western Australian Council of Social Service. Retrieved from: http://www.re-
gional.org.au/au/soc/2002/4/barron_gauntlett.htm [25-4-2016].
Bech-Danielsen, C., Bøgh, S. & Østergaard, J. (2013). Kvaliteter i almene bebyggelser fra 1940’erne 
og 1950’erne. Bygningskultur Danmark.
Becker, E., Jahn, T. & Stiess, I. (1999). Exploring uncommon ground: Sustainability and the 
social sciences. In Becker, E. & Jahn, T. (ed.) Sustainability and the Social Sciences: a 
cross-disciplinary approach to integrating environmental considerations into theoretical reori-
entation, Zed Books, London, UNESCO and ISOE, pp.1-22.
Becker, E., Jahn, T., Stiess, I. & Wehling, P. (1997). Sustainability: A Cross-disciplinary Concept for 
Social Transformations. MOST Policy papers No. 6.
Benoît, C. & Mazijn, B. (2009). Guidelines for social life cycle assessment of  products. UNEP/
SETAC Life Cycle Initiative. United Nations Environment Programme.
Berry, H. L. (2007). ‘Crowded suburbs’ and ‘killer cities’: a brief  review of  the relationship between 
urban environments and mental health. NSW Public Health Bulletin, Vol. 18, No. 11–12, 
222-7.
Bjørn, N. (ed.) (2008). Arkitektur der forandrer : Fra ghetto til velfungerende byområde. Gads Forlag.
Bjørn, N. & Holek, A. (2014). Evidens for sociale effekter af  fysiske indsatser i udsatte områder. 
Copenhagen Municipality and Danish Association of Architects.
Boonstra, D. (2013). Sustainable office renovation: Integrated design processes in Norwegian 
practice. Delft University of Technology.
City of Göteborg. (2016). Stadsutveckling. Social Resource Management. Retrieved from: 
http://stadsutveckling.socialhallbarhet.se [17-5-2016].
Chan, E. & Lee, G. K. L. (2008). Critical factors for improving social sustainability of  urban renew-
al projects, Social Indicators Research, Vol. 85, No. 2, pp. 243-56.
Colantonio A. (2009). Social Sustainability: Linking Research to Policy and Practice. Oxford Insti-
tute for Sustainable Development (OISD), Oxford Brookes University.
Colantonio, A. & Dixon, T. (2011). Urban Regeneration and Social Sustainability: Best Practice 
from European Cities. Hoboken, GB: Wiley-Blackwell.
Cole, R. J. (2005). Building environmental assessment methods: redefining intentions and roles. Build-
ing Research & Information, 33:5, pp. 455-67.
Cozens, P. & van der Linde, T. (2015). Perceptions of  Crime Prevention Through Environmental 
Design (CPTED) at Australian Railway Stations. Journal of Public Transportation, Vol. 
18, No. 4.
==PAGE:133==
﻿ | 133
Cross, N. (2001) Designerly Ways of  Knowing: Design Discipline Versus Design Science. Design 
Issues. Vol. 17, No. 3, pp. 49-55.
DGNB (2014). Excellence defined. Sustainable building with a systems approach. Brochure. Ger-
man Sustainable Building Council.
DK-GBC (2014). Mini-guide til DGNB: Certificering af bæredygtige byområder i Danmark. 
Green Building Council Denmark.
DK-GBC (2015). DGNB system Denmark manual for Kontorbygninger. Green Building Council 
Denmark.
Dong, Y. H. & Ng, S. T. (2015). A social life cycle assessment model for building construction in 
Hong Kong. Int. J LCA Vol. 20 pp. 1166–1180.
Edwards, L. & Torcellini, P. (2002). A Literature Review of  the Effects of  Natural Light on Building 
Occupants. Technical report prepared under Task No. BEC2.4002. National Renewable 
Energy Laboratory, U.S. Department of Energy.
Elkington, J. (1999). Triple bottom line revolution: reporting for the third millennium. Australian 
CPA.
Frandsen, A. K., Mullins, M., Ryhl, C., Folmer, M. B., Fich, L. B., Øien, T. B. & Sørensen, N. 
L. (2009). Helende arkitektur. Aalborg University. Institute for Architecture and Media 
Technology.
Granovetter, M. S. (1973). The Strength of  Weak Ties. American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 78, 
No. 6, pp. 1360-1380.
Guest, G., Namey, E. E. & Mitchell, M. L. (2013). Collecting qualitative data: A field manual for 
applied research. SAGE Publications, Thousand Oaks.
Hall, T. & Vidén, S. (2005). The Million Homes Programme: a review of  the great Swedish planning 
project, Planning Perspectives, Vol. 20, No. 3, pp. 301-28.
Hamedani, A. Z., Huber, F. (2012). A comparative study of  “DGNB” , “LEED” and “BREEAM” 
certificate system in urban sustainability. Paper presented at the 7th International Confer-
ence on Urban Regeneration and Sustainability 2012.
Ibrahim, C. K. C., Costello, S. B. & Wilkinson, S. (2011). Key Practice Indicators of  Team Integra-
tion in Construction Projects: A Review. 2nd International Conference on Construction 
and Project Management IPEDR, Vol.15.
International Energy Agency (2007). Mind the gap: Quantifying Principal-Agent Problems in En-
ergy Efficiency. International Energy Agency.
International Society on MCDM (2016). Short MCDM History. Retrieved from: http://www.
mcdmsociety.org/content/short-mcdm-history-0 [20-5-2016].
ISO 14040 (2008): Environmental management – Life cycle assessment – Principles and framework. 
International Organisation for Standardization, Geneva, Switzerland.
ISO 14044 (2008): Environmental management – Life cycle assessment – Requirements and guide-
lines. International Organisation for Standardization, Geneva, Switzerland.
Iversen, A., Roy, N., Hvass, M., Jørgensen, M., Christoffersen, J., Osterhaus, W. & Johnsen, K. 
(2013). Daylight calculations in practice. Danish Building Research Institute, SBi 2013:26.
Jensen, K. B. (2015). How to understand architectural quality when working with social housing are-
as. In Boundaries|Encounters|Connection: Papers presented at the Housing & Welfare 
Conference, Copenhagen, 7-9 May 2015.
Jorn, A. (1949). Menneskeboliger eller Tankekonstruktioner i Jernbeton. Arkitekten, Vol. XLIX, No. 
16-17, pp. 61-68.
==PAGE:134==
134 | ﻿
Jørgensen, A., Le Bocq, A., Nazarkina, L., Hauschild, M. (2008). Methodologies for Social Life 
Cycle Assessment. Int. J LCA Vol. 13 (2) pp. 96–103.
Knudstrup, M.-A. (2004). Integrated Design Process in Problem-Based Learning. In Kolmos, 
A., Fink, F. K. & Krogh, L. (ed.). The Aalborg PBL Model: Progress, Diversity and Chal-
lenges. Aalborg University Press.
Koning, J. (2001). Social sustainability in a globalizing world: context, theory and methodology ex-
plored. Tilburg University, The Netherlands. Paper prepared for the UNESCO/MOST 
meeting, 22-23 November 2001, The Hague, Netherlands.
Lee, A. S. (1991). Integrating positivist and interpretive approaches to organizational research. Or-
ganization Science, Vol. 2, No. 4, pp. 342-65.
Lind, H. & Mjörnell, K. (ed.) (2015). Social hållbarhet med fokus på bostadsrenovering — en anto-
logi. Sustainable Integrated Renovation, Report 2015:4.
Littig, B. & Grießler, E. (2005). Social sustainability: a catchword between political pragmatism 
and social theory, International Journal of Sustainable Development, Vol. 8, No. 1/2, 
pp. 65-79.
Lynch, K. (1960). The image of  the city. The MIT Press.
Löhnert, G., Dalkowski, A. & Sutter, W. (2003). Integrated Design Process - A Guideline For Sus-
tainable And Solar-Optimised Building Design. IEA SHC Task 23 - Subtask B. Version 
1.1.
Madsen, U. S. & Beim, A. (2015). Værdiskabelse i bygningsrenovering: En minianalyse af  udvalgte 
koncepter for vurdering af  egenskaber og kvaliteter i byggeri. Centre for Industrial Architec-
ture, The Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts, School of Architecture.
Maptionnaire (2016). Maptionnaire. Retrieved from: http://www.maptionnaire.com [10-7-
2016].
Maslow, A. (1954). Motivation and personality. New York, NY: Harper.
McKenzie, S. (2004). Social sustainability: towards some definitions. Hawke Research Institute 
Working Paper Series No 27, University of South Australia, Magill, South Australia.
Meadows, D. H., Meadows, D. L., Randers, J. & Behrens III, W. W. (1972). The limits to growth. 
Club of Rome. New York. Universe.
Mjörnell, K., Boss, A., Lindahl, M. & Molnar, S. (2014). A Tool to Evaluate Different Renovation 
Alternatives with Regard to Sustainability. Sustainability. Vol. 6, No. 7, pp. 4227–4245.
Mjörnell, K., Malmgren, L., Boss, A., Lindahl, M., Molnar, S. & Eneqvist, E. (2014). Renobuild 
- en metodik för att utvärdera olika renoveringsalternativ med avseende på hållbarhet. SP 
Report 2014:69. SP Technical Research Institute of Sweden.
Mjörnell, K., Malmgren, L., Elfborg, S. & Carpener, C-M. (2014). Verifiering av Renobuild, en 
beslutsmetodik för hållbar renovering - fyra fallstudier. SP Report 2014:70. SP Technical 
Research Institute of Sweden.
Negendahl, K. (2015). Building performance simulation in the early design stage: An introduction to 
integrated dynamic models. Automation in Construction, Vol. 54, pp. 39–53.
Negendahl, K. (2016). What is STED? STED Network. Retrieved from: http://www.stednet-
work.org/index.php?p=/articles [20-6-2016].
Nielsen, M. V. (2012). Integrated Energy Design of  the Building Envelope. Technical University 
of Denmark.
Nordic Built (2016). What is Nordic Built. Nordic Innovation. Retrieved from: http://www.
nordicinnovation.org/da/nordicbuilt/about-nordic-built/ [20-6-2016].
==PAGE:135==
﻿ | 135
Otovic, A., Jensen, L. B. & Negendahl, K. (2016). Expansion in Number of  Parameters: Simulation 
of  Energy and Indoor Climate in Combination with LCA. Abstract from 2016 ASHRAE 
Annual Conference, St. Louis, MO, United States.
Palich, N. & Edmonds, A. (2013). Social sustainability: creating places and participatory pro-
cesses that perform well for people. Environment Design Guide, 78 NP.
Partridge, E. (2005). ‘Social sustainability’: a useful theoretical framework? Paper presented at 
the Australasian Political Science Association Annual Conference 2005, Dunedin, New 
Zealand, 28-30 September 2005.
Polèse, M. & Stren, R. (2000). The Social Sustainability of  Cities. Diversity and Management 
of  Change. MOST Project Socially Sustainable Cities. Toronto, Canada: University of 
Toronto Press.
Psykiatrien i Region Syddanmark (2015). Tvang er på vej ned i Esbjerg. Retrieved from: http://
www.psykiatrienisyddanmark.dk/wm473228 [3-5-2016].
Rittel, H. W. J. & Melvin, M. W. (1973). Dilemmas in a General Theory of Planning. In Working 
Papers from the Urban & Regional Development. University of California, Berkeley.
Robert McNeel & Associates (2016). Grasshopper3d. Retrieved from: http://www.grasshop-
per3d.com [20-5-2016].
Roessler, K. K. (2012). Healthy Architecture! Can environments evoke emotional responses? Global 
Journal of Health Science, Vol. 4, No. 4; 2012.
Roessler, K. K. (ed.) (2015). Arkitektur og Psykologi: Casestudier i sygehuse, arbejdspladser og by-
rum. Institute of Psychology, University of Southern Denmark.
Santamouris, M. (2006). Environmental Design of  Urban Buildings. Earthscan.
Schweber, L. & Haroglu, H. (2014). Comparing the ¢t between BREEAM assessment and design 
processes. Building Research & Information, Vol. 42, No. 3, pp. 300–317.
Schweber, L. & Leiringer, R. (2012). Beyond the technical: a snapshot of  energy and buildings re-
search. Building Research & Information, Vol. 40, No. 4, pp. 481-492.
Skou, H. M. & Madsen, C. N. (2014). Byplanlægning, der skaber tryghed. Danish Council for 
Crime Prevention (DKR) and TrygFonden.
Spacescape (2016). Analysverktyg. Retrieved from: http://www.spacescape.se [10-7-2016].
Spacescape & Evidens (2011). Värdering av stadskvaliteter. Report for i.a. the City of Stock-
holm Office of Urban Management. Available at: http://www.spacescape.se/send/
PM_Stadskvaliteter.pdf [27-5-2016].
Spangenberg, J. (2002). Environmental space and the prism of  sustainability: frameworks for indica-
tors measuring sustainable development. Ecological Indicators, Vol. 2, No.. 3, pp. 295-309.
SpiderWeb (2016). SpiderWeb. Retrieved from: http://www.grasshopper3d.com/group?id=29
85220%3AGroup%3A440170 [10-7-2016].
Stember, M. (1991). Advancing the Social Sciences Through the Interdisciplinary Enterprise. The 
Social Science Journal, Vol. 28, No. 1, pp. 1-14.
Stenak, M. (2011). SAVE: Kortlægning og registrering af  bymiljøers og bygningers bevaringsværdi. 
Kulturministeriet, Kulturarvsstyrelsen.
Stevenson, A. & Lindberg, C. A. (ed.) (2010). New Oxford American Dictionary. Third Edition, 
Oxford University Press.
Strømann-Andersen, J. B. (2012). Integrated Energy Design in Master Planning. Technical Uni-
versity of Denmark.
==PAGE:136==
136 | ﻿
Sundström, L. (2010). Kvarteret Fyrklövern. Stockholms läns museum, Rapport 2010:39.
Thuvander, L., Femenías, P. (2014). Strategies for Sustainable Renovation – Focus on the Period 
”Folkhemmet”. Brief Report on Research 2014, No. 1. Chalmers University of Tech-
nology.
Thuvander, L., Femenías, P., Danielsson, A. & Wannerskog, A. S. (2013). Testing a multi-value 
approach to support decision making in renovation in the pre-design phase: A housing area 
in Sweden from the 1940s. Central Europe towards Sustainable Building, 2013, Prague.
Thuvander, L., Femenías, P. & Meiling, P. (2011). Strategies for an Integrated Sustainable Renova-
tion Process: Focus on the Swedish Housing stock ‘People’s Home’. Proceedings of the 2011 
World Sustainable Building Conference, October 18th-21st, Helsinki.
United Nations Conference on Environment & Development (1992) Earth Summit Agenda 21: 
the United Nations Programme of  Action from Rio. New York. United Nations.
United Nations General Assembly (2005). 2005 World Summit Outcome. Resolution A/60/1, 
adopted by the General Assembly on 15 September 2005.
UMI (2016). UMI. Retrieved from: http://urbanmodellinginterface.ning.com/ [10-7-2016].
Vidén, S., Schönning, K. & Nöre, K. (1985). Flerbostadshusen i Sverige: Kvaliteter och brister, om-
byggnadsbehov och möjligheter. Rapport R95, Statens råd för byggnadsforskning, Stock-
holm.
Widok, A. (2009). Social Sustainability: Theories, Concepts, Practicability. HTW Berlin, Univer-
sity of Applied Sciences.
Wistrand, L., Signal, A., Svensson, A., Elofsson, R., Lundquist, U., Larberg, V., Olsson, S., 
Sondén, G. C. & Grahn, L. (2011). Social Konsekvensanalys. Booklet. City of Göteborg.
World Commission on Environment and Development (1987). Our common future, Oxford Uni-
versity Press, Oxford.
Yin, R. K. (2003). Case study research: Design and methods. Third edition, Sage Publications.
Zoeteman, K., Slabbekoorn, J., Mommaas, H., Dagevos, J. & Smeets, R. (2014). Sustainability 
Monitoring of  European Cities. Telos, Brabant centre for sustainable development.
Åhman, H. (2013). Social sustainability – society at the intersection of  development and mainte-
nance, Local Environment: The International Journal of Justice and Sustainability, Vol. 
18, No.. 10, ss 1153-1166.
==PAGE:137==
Appendices
==PAGE:138==
138 | ﻿
A.	 Revision paper
The revision paper on the opposite side was the result of a discussion with 
postgraduate students Märta Helander and Amanda Dahl of the Royal Dan-
ish Academy of Fine Arts School of Architecture about the scope and content 
of the tentative model of social sustainability presented on page 73.
==PAGE:139==
Revision Paper | 139
==PAGE:140==
140 | ﻿
B.	 MCDM Excel Tool
The simple MCDM tool developed in Excel is able to aggregate scores and 
weights of indicators and calculate the score of each criteria. The tools uses 
the three Excel sheets shown here.
1. Weighting of criteria and aggregation of indicators scores
==PAGE:141==
Mcdm Excel Tool | 141
1. Weighting and scoring of indicators
3. Visualisation of results
==PAGE:142==
142 | ﻿
C.	 Measurement scales
Measurement scales used in the case study to convert quantitative and 
qualitative results to a common qualitative scale. Numbers in red and green 
denote the score of the existing condition and design proposal, respectively.
Score
Judgement
Human scale is observed in
10
Excellent
Neighbourhood plan, building size, plan, 
façades and outdoor spacesv
9
Good to excellent
Building size, plan, façades and outdoor 
spaces
8 
Good
Building plan, façades and outdoor spaces
7
Fair to good
Building plan and façades
6
Fair
Building plan and ground floor
5
Acceptable to fair
Building plan and entrances
4 
Marginally acceptable
Building plan
Score
Judgement
Feeling of security (lighting)
10
Excellent
Lighting in all areas
9
Good to excellent
8
Good
Lighting in all main paths
7 7
Fair to good
6
Fair
Lighting at main access path
5
Acceptable to fair
4
Marginally acceptable
Lighting at entrances
Score
Judgement
Natural surveillance of
10
Excellent
All areas + no narrow, enclosed spaces
9
Good to excellent
Most areas + no narrow, enclosed spaces
8
Good
Most areas + only few narrow, enclosed 
spaces
7
Fair to good
Some areas + only few narrow, enclosed 
spaces
6
Fair
Some areas + some narrow, enclosed 
spaces
5
Acceptable to fair
Only few areas + some narrow, enclosed 
spaces
4
Marginally acceptable
Only few areas + a considerable amount of 
narrow, enclosed spaces
Score
Judgement
Good visibility in
10
Excellent
All areas
9
Good to excellent
All but few areas
8
Good
Most areas
7
Fair to good
Half of the area
6
Fair
Some areas
5
Acceptable to fair
Few areas
4
Marginally acceptable
Main access route only
Score
Judgement
Connection to city
10
Excellent
Good, level-less connection by roads, pedes-
trian and bike paths.
9
Good to excellent
Good connection by roads, pedestrian and 
bike paths.
8
Good
Connection by roads, pedestrian and bike 
paths.
7
Fair to good
Good connection by roads and pedestrian 
paths
6
Fair
Connection by roads and pedestrian paths
5
Acceptable to fair
Good connection by pedestrian paths
4
Marginally acceptable
Connection by pedestrian paths
Score
Judgement
Entrances
10
Excellent
Distinctive, open, light, connect through 
building, towards public area
9
Good to excellent
8
Good
Distinctive, connect through building, 
towards public area
7
Fair to good
6
Fair
Towards public area, open
5
Acceptable to fair
Withdrawn
4
Marginally acceptable
Door
Score
Judgement
Ability to shape own space
10
Excellent
Abundant options in apartment and on 
building and neighbourhood level
9
Good to excellent
Many options in apartment and on building 
and neighbourhood level
8
Good
Some options in apartment and on building 
and neighbourhood level
7
Fair to good
Some options in apartment and on building 
level
6
Fair
Limited options in apartment and on 
building level
5
Acceptable to fair
Few options in apartment and on building 
level
4
Marginally acceptable
Few options in apartment
Score
Judgement
Daylight factor in centre of living room
10
Excellent
3,5–4%
9
Good to excellent
3–3,5%
8
Good
2,5–3%
7
Fair to good
2–2,5%
6
Fair
1,5–2%
5
Acceptable to fair
1–1,5%
4
Marginally acceptable
0,5–1%
==PAGE:143==
Measurement Scales | 143
Score
Judgement
Area used by non-residents
10
Excellent
High volumes effectively attracted and 
facilitated
9
Good to excellent
8
Good
Moderate volumes attracted and facilitated
7
Fair to good
6
Fair
Low volumes attracted and facilitated
5
Acceptable to fair
4
Marginally acceptable
Very small volumes
Score
Judgement
Differentiation of private and public
10
Excellent
Graduated transition between private, 
semi-private and public outdoor spaces
9
Good to excellent
Transition between private, semi-private and 
public outdoor spaces
8
Good
Graduated transition between private and 
public outdoor spaces
7
Fair to good
Transition between private and public 
outdoor spaces
6
Fair
Graduated transition between private indoor 
and public outdoor
5
Acceptable to fair
Transition between private indoor and public 
outdoor
4
Marginally acceptable
Sharp transition between private indoor and 
public outdoor
Score
Judgement
Local landmarks
10
Excellent
Abundance
9
Good to excellent
More than one per building
8
Good
One per building
7
Fair to good
Few
6
Fair
More than one
5
Acceptable to fair
One
4
Marginally acceptable
None
Score
Judgement
Meeting places
10
Excellent
Abundance of highly varied meeting places
9
Good to excellent
More than one per building, highly varied 
types
8
Good
More than one per building, varied types
7
Fair to good
One per building, varied types
6
Fair
One per building
5
Acceptable to fair
Less than one per building
4
Marginally acceptable
One meeting place available
Score
Judgement
Common facilities
10
Excellent
Several easy-access multi-use common 
spaces per building
9
Good to excellent
Several easy-access common spaces per 
building
8
Good
One easy-access common space per 
building
7
Fair to good
One common space per building
6
Fair
Less than one common space per building
5
Acceptable to fair
One common space
4
Marginally acceptable
One restricted-access common space
Score
Judgement
Qual. of maintenance and care
10
Excellent
< -
9
Good to excellent
< -
8
Good
< -
7
Fair to good
< -
6
Fair
< -
5
Acceptable to fair
< -
4
Marginally acceptable
< -
Score
Judgement
Local societies / communities
10
Excellent
Capacity to support high number of formal 
and informal groups and activities 
9
Good to excellent
8
Good
Capacity to support moderate number of 
formal and informal groups and activities
7
Fair to good
6
Fair
Capacity to support low number of formal 
and informal groups
5
Acceptable to fair
4
Marginally acceptable
Capacity for resident’s association only
Score
Judgement
Foot traffic to and through area
10
Excellent
High volumes effectively attracted and 
facilitated
9
Good to excellent
8
Good
Moderate volumes attracted and facilitated
7
Fair to good
6
Fair
Low volumes attracted and facilitated
5
Acceptable to fair
4
Marginally acceptable
Very small volumes
==PAGE:144==
144 | ﻿
D.	 Case Study Existing Drawing 
material
Plans and elevations of the blue houses in Fyrklövern, Upplands Väsby.
FASAD MOT VÄSTER
1:200
1
2
3
FASAD MOT ÖSTER
1:200
1 2
3
Elevation east, 1:300
Elevation west, 1:300
==PAGE:145==
Case Study Existing Drawing Material | 145
Plan first to fifth floor, 1:300
Plan ground floor, 1:300
==PAGE:146==
146 | ﻿
FASAD MOT NORR
1:200
1
1
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
Elevation north, 1:300
==PAGE:147==
SÖDER
1
1
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
Elevation south, 1:300
==PAGE:148==
148 | ﻿
E.	
Urban Structure Analyses 
and Mental Maps
Analyses inspired by SAVE (Stenak 2011) and Lynch (1960). Drawings 
courtesy of the design team. 
Buildings and their associated outdoor spaces
Walking paths around the blue houses
North-south section of Fyrklövern through the blue houses.
==PAGE:149==
Urban Structure Analyses And Mental Maps | 149
Mental map inspired by Lynch (1960)
West-east section of Upplands Väsby
==PAGE:150==
150 | ﻿
F.	
Case Study Proposal 
Drawing Material
Plans and elevations of the case study proposal for transformation of the 
blue houses in Fyrklövern, Upplands Väsby. West elevations are not included 
but are similar to east elevations.
1. sal
Stue
Studiebolig
Stue
Entré
Entré
Entré
Entré
Entré
Entré
Entré
Entré
2 v. +
studio
2 v. +
studio
2 v. +
studio
2 v. +
studio
Teknik-
rum
Fælles
Opbevaring
6 v.
4 v.
1 v. +
studio
4 v.
1 v.
1 v.
1 v.
1 v.
1 v. +
studio
1 v. +
studio
7 v. 
Plan ground floor, 1:400
Plan first floor, 1:400
Building 1
Building 2
==PAGE:151==
Case Study Proposal Drawing Material | 151
Tagetage
5. sal
Studiebolig
5. sal
5 v.
2 v.
1 v.
1 v.
4 v.
4 v.
4 v.
4 v.
2 v.
4 v.
1 v.
1 v.
1 v.
Plan fifth floor, 1:400
Plan roof, 1:400
Building 3
Building 4
==PAGE:152==
152 | ﻿
Elevation north, 1:400
Elevations east, 1:400
Building 1
Building 2
==PAGE:153==
Case Study Proposal Drawing Material | 153
Elevation south, 1:400
Building 3
Building 4
==PAGE:154==
154 | ﻿
G.	 STED Network Conference 
Poster and Discussion Group 
Hand-out
This poster was presented by the author at the Nordic Built Sustainable 
Transformation & Environmental Design (STED) Network Conference at the 
Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU), Trondheim, Nor-
way, on 9 June 2016.
==PAGE:155==
Sted Network Conference Poster And Discussion Group Hand-out | 155
Designing Social Sustainability
Master thesis
Building Design
Selection of indicators
Weighting of indicators
C
o
m
m
u
n
i
t
y
 
i
n
v
o
l
v
e
m
e
n
t
Second community involve-
ment. Presentation of ideas. 
Input from community.
Indicators and criteria are 
weighted on a scale of 4-10 
based on input from designers 
and stakeholders. The pro-
ject-specific weighting ensures 
that the local conditions can be 
taken into account.
Indicators and criteria are selected based on input from designers and stakeholders. The exten-
sive list of indicators is narrowed down to a more concrete list. The selection can be based on:
• Research
• Site visits
• Stakeholder involvement
Assessment
Fourth community involve-
ment. Presentation of de-
sign proposals.
Assessment
Indicators are analysed across different scale levels. In the 
example below, a shadow diagram informs about the light lev-
els (and this comfort) in the neighbourhood and apartments.
Analysis
Based on the analyses and measurement 
scales, indicators are scored on a scale of 
4-10 and alternatives are visualised.
Scoring of indicators
Score
Judgement
Daylight factor
10
Excellent
5%
9
Good to excellent
4,3%
8
Good
3,6%
7
Fair to good
3%
6
Fair
2,3%
5
Acceptable to fair
1,6%
4
Marginally acceptable
1%
Third community involve-
ment. Presentation of design 
proposals.
Assessment
Analysis of indicators can include:
• Analyses of indoor and outdoor comfort
• Daylight analyses
• Connectivity analyses
• Use of GIS
• etc.
Towards an operationalization of social sustainability 
concepts in an integrated design process
Aleksander Probst Otovic
Full model
Selected indicators
Themes
Criteria
Indicators
Social Sustainability
Equity / Quality of Life
Affordability
Rent level
Heating cost
Individual metering
Possibilities for food production
Good quality apartments
Solidarity
Equal opportunities
No discrimination
Descent living standard
No excessive income disparity
Freedom of choice
Variation in apartment sizes
Variation in tenure
Apartments for residents with special 
needs
Access to balcony
Access to green areas
Access to storage
Ability to shape own space
Ability to cultivate/grow
Comfort
Daylight
Heating
Indoor climate
Noise
Wind
Human scale
Health
Ability to exercise
Access to health facilities
Awareness of own health
Education
Access to elementary schools
Access to secondary education 
schools
Safety / Security
Vandalism
Road safety
Measures to create feeling of security 
(lighting etc.)
Natural surveillance
Visibility
Connection / Accessibility
Transportation
Public transport
Carpool
Balance of modes of movement 
Parking space per household
Urban connection
Connection to city
Garbage collection
Entrances
Car access to area 
Parking facilities
Pedestrian plan
Bike paths
Meeting places
Foot traffic to and through area
Area used by non-residents
Common facilities
Disabled access
Possibility to stay in your own home
Accessibility indoors/outdoors
Services/jobs
Presence of local services/shops
Range of service
Local job opportunities
Support system for entrepreneurs
Pride and sense of place
Public image
Tone and frequency
Name of streets
Stigma
Public landmarks
Differentiation of private and public
Definition of uses
Residents image of area
Maintenance and care
What residents think about the area
Local landmarks
Social cohesion
Social diversity
Social mix
Social inclusiveness
Variation in income
Variation in ethnicity
Variation in age
Stability
No poor households
Social mobility
Social networks
Volunteers
Local societies/communities
Residents’ association
Including residents in processes
Democracy
Participation
Residents included in decision pro-
cesses
Communication
Access to internet
Access to newspapers
Access to television
Themes
Criteria
Indicators
Social Sustainability
Equity / Quality of Life
Freedom of choice
Ability to shape own space
Comfort
Daylight
Human scale
Safety / Security
Feeling of security
Natural surveillance
Visibility
Connection / Accessibility
Urban connection
Connection to city
Entrances
Meeting places
Foot traffic to and through 
area
Area used by non-residents
Common facilities
Pride and sense of place
Public image
Differentiation of private 
and public
Residents image of area
Maintenance and care
Local landmarks
Social cohesion
Social networks
Local societies/commu-
nities
How can a design process be supported to secure more socially sustainable 
solutions in the transformation of Nordic post-war social housing projects?
Research question
• What is social sustainability, what characterises socially sustaina-
ble solutions and how can the concept be made more tangible?
• How can social sustainability be evaluated and/or quantified and 
how can this inform a design process?
• How can a design process be organised in order to include the 
social dimension?
Target values can be set and 
measurement scales can be 
developed for the indicators.
Target values
Stage 1
Integrated design process
Pre-design
Concept
design
Design
development
Construction
Operation
Basics
Specify 
criteria
Weight 
criteria
Generate 
alternatives
Estimate
performance
Evaluate
MCDM
Stage 2
N
e
i
g
h
b
o
u
r
h
o
o
d
A
p
a
r
t
m
e
n
t
B
u
il
d
i
n
g
Affordability
Solidarity
Freedom of choice
Comfort
Health
Public image
Education
Residents image
Safety / Security
Social diversity
Transportation
Stability
Urban connection
Social networks
Disabled access
Participation
Services/jobs
Communication
Shadow diagram
Themes
Scale
Apartment
Building
Neighbour-
hood
Equity / Quality of Life
X
X
Connection / Accessibility
Pride and sense of place
Social cohesion
Democracy
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
Freedom of choice 
Comfort 
Safety 
Urban connection 
Public image 
Residents image 
Social networks 
Main design criteria score 
Tools
Themes
Scale
Apartment
Building
Neighbour-
hood
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
Freedom of choice 
Comfort 
Safety 
Urban connection 
Public image 
Residents image 
Social networks 
Main design criteria score 
Cross-referencing with scales
Model of social sustainability indicators
Multi-criteria decision-making
Cross-referencing scale
Operation
==PAGE:156==
156 | ﻿
This handout was used to supplement the author’s poster presentation in 
the subsequent discussion groups to facilitate feedback on the model. Several 
indicators have since been altered/removed.
==PAGE:157==
Sted Network Conference Poster And Discussion Group Hand-out | 157
Themes
Criteria
Indicators
Social Sustainability
Equity / Quality of Life
Affordability
Rent level
Heating cost
Individual metering
Possibilities for food production
Good quality apartments
Solidarity
Equal opportunities
No discrimination
Descent living standard
No excessive income disparity
Freedom of choice
Variation in apartment sizes
Variation in tenure
Apartments for residents with special needs
Access to balcony
Access to green areas
Access to storage
Ability to shape own space
Ability to cultivate/grow
Comfort
Daylight
Heating
Indoor climate
Noise
Wind
Human scale
Health
Ability to exercise
Access to health facilities
Awareness of own health
Education
Access to elementary schools
Access to secondary education schools
Safety / Security
Vandalism
Road safety
Measures to create feeling of security (lighting etc.)
Natural surveillance
Visibility
Connection / Accessibility
Transportation
Public transport
Carpool
Balance of modes of movement 
Parking space per household
Urban connection
Connection to city
Garbage collection
Entrances
Car access to area 
Parking facilities
Pedestrian plan
Bike paths
Meeting places
Foot traffic to and through area
Area used by non-residents
Common facilities
Disabled access
Possibility to stay in your own home
Accessibility indoors/outdoors
Services/jobs
Presence of local services/shops
Range of service
Local job opportunities
Support system for entrepreneurs
Pride and sense of place
Public image
Tone and frequency
Name of streets
Stigma
Public landmarks
Differentiation of private and public
Definition of uses
Residents image of 
area
Maintenance and care
What residents think about the area
Local landmarks
Social cohesion
Social diversity
Social mix
Social inclusiveness
Variation in income
Variation in ethnicity
Variation in age
Stability
No poor households
Social mobility
Social networks
Volunteers
Local societies/communities
Residents’ association
Including residents in processes
Democracy
Participation
Residents included in decision processes
Communication
Access to internet
Access to newspapers
Access to television
Themes
Criteria
Indicators
Social Sustainability
Suggestions for additional content
Comments
==PAGE:158==
158 | ﻿
H.	 Design Guide leaflet
This leaflet is intended as a condensation of the social sustainability model 
into a pocket format.
==PAGE:159==
rESULTS: CASE STUDy
SOCIAL SUSTAInABILITy
AIM OF rESEArCH
Environment
Society
Economy
?
“Social sustainability occurs when the formal and informal pro-
cesses; systems; structures; and relationships actively support 
the capacity of current and future generations to create healthy 
and liveable communities. Socially sustainable communities are 
equitable, diverse, connected and democratic and provide a good 
quality of life.”
Western Australian Council of Social Service
The case study is based on the author’s participation in a 
postgraduate-level design project at KADK from 11 Febru-
ary to 22 June 2016, dealing with the transformation of 
the area known as Fyrklövern in Upplands Väsby north of 
Stockholm.
Initial research and visits to the site led to the selection of 
a focus on the space between the buildings, façades and 
ground floors, which was further underpinned by discuss-
ing, selecting, weighting and analysing indicators from the 
proposed social sustainability model (see opposite side).
The design proposal deals with the identified issues and 
analysis results on all relevant scales by changing the in-
ternal structure of the area, improving integration with the 
surrounding city, redesigning and reorienting the ground 
floors and façades, breaking down scales and using level 
differences and a graduation of private, semi-private and 
public to introduce a more logical hierarchy of the outdoor 
spaces. The scores of the ex-
isting (red) and proposed 
(green) designs are 
visualised below.
The main objective of this research is to improve the tangi-
bility and practicability of social sustainability in the design 
process by way of theoretical as well as practical investi-
gations:
research question:
How can a design process be supported to secure 
more socially sustainable solutions in the transforma-
tion of nordic post-war social housing projects?
To answer the research question, it looks at how to improve 
tangibility by looking into existing theory, how to increase 
measure-ability by looking at existing conceptualisations and 
evaluation frameworks and how a design process can be 
organised in order to include the social dimension.
This is done through a literature review and a case study, as 
well as through interviews and meetings with leading nordic 
social sustainability researchers and practitioners
Social sustainability is the least re-
searched of the three aspects of sus-
tainability.
The concept is however gaining rel-
evance along with the emergence 
of new social issues, which sprout 
as a result of global trends, such as 
increasing globalization and urbani-
zation.
Although there is no consensus on the defini-
tion of social sustainability, one that is often referred to is 
the following by WACOSS:
Proposed design process
E
v
a
l
u
a
t
i
o
n
S
c
o
r
i
n
g
A
n
a
l
y
s
i
s
Indicator
selection/weighting
Design process
Dialogue
Operation
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
Freedom of choice 
Comfort 
Safety 
Urban connection 
Public image 
Residents image 
Social networks 
Towards an operationalization 
of social sustainability in an 
integrated design process
DESIgnIng SOCIAL 
SUSTAInABILITy
Master thesis by Aleksander Probst Otovic
Technical University of Denmark
This leaflet contains a condensation of the findings of the master 
thesis “Designing Social Sustainability: Towards an operationaliza-
tion of social sustainability in an integrated design process “ by 
Aleksander Probst Otovic, handed in to the Technical University 
of Denmark on the 16 July 2016. For more information or for a 
copy of the thesis, contact the author at s112936@student.dtu.dk.
==PAGE:160==
themes
criteria
Weight
indicators
Weight
score
social sustainability
Equity / Quality 
of Life
Affordability
rent level
Heating cost
Individual metering
Possibilities for food production
good quality apartments
Freedom of choice
Variation in apartment sizes
Variation in tenure
Apartments for residents with special needs
Access to balcony
Access to green/recreational areas
Access to storage
Ability to shape own space
Ability to cultivate/grow
Comfort
Daylight
Heating
Indoor climate
noise
Wind
Human scale
Health
Ability to exercise
Access to health facilities
Awareness of own health
Education
Access to elementary schools
Access to secondary education schools
Safety / Security
Vandalism removal
road safety
Lighting
natural surveillance
Visibility
Connection / 
Accessibility
Transportation
Public transport
Carpool
Balance of modes of movement 
Urban connection
garbage collection
Entrances
Parking facilities
Car access to area 
Pedestrian access
Bike access
Area used by non-residents
Public meeting places
Private meeting places
Disabled access
Possibility to stay in your own home
Accessibility indoors/outdoors
Services/jobs
Presence of local amenities
range of service
Local job opportunities
Support system for entrepreneurs
Identity of 
place
Public image
name of streets
Public stigma (media reports)
Public landmarks
Heritage value
Differentiation of private and public
Definition of uses (programming)
residents image of area
Maintenance and care
resident’s opinions
Local landmarks
Social cohesion
Social diversity
Social mix
Social inclusiveness
Social networks
Volunteers
Local societies/communities
residents’ association
Democracy
Participation
residents included in decision processes
Communication
Access to information/internet
Method / unit of analysis 
Qualitative
Quantitative
tools
attractors/solutions
scale
time scale
apart.
build.
neigh.
Variety of available options
X
Flexible design, private outdoor spaces, user influence 
X
X
X
Daylight factor
range of scales that relate to human body
X
X
Velux Daylight Visualizer
CPTED
Increased glazing area, new facade
new, smaller buildings, varied facade
X
X
X
X
Medium
Medium to long
Percentage area properly lit
Percentage area with natural surveillance / no. enclosed spaces
Percentage area with good visibility
X
X
X
CPTED
CPTED
CPTED
new/improved lighting
Active ground floor
reduce corners
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Short
Medium
Medium to long
Distinctiveness, openness, brightness, facing direction, privacy
Volume (no. people), attraction, facilitation
number (per building), variation
number (per building), ease of access, variation of use
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
CPTED
Increase glazing, create semi-private zone
Increase number of amenities
Playgrounds, benches, shops, cafés, playing fields
Common rooms, laundry rooms, roomy staircases
X
X
X
X
X
Medium
Long
Medium
Medium to long
Level of graduation, use of semi-private spaces
X
CPTED
Semi-private areas, level differences
X
X
Medium to long
Expected quality/ease
number, variation
X
X
X
CPTED
Easily cleaned/replaceable materials
Artwork, architecture, a special tree, a special shop
X
X
X
Medium
Short to long
Capacity/facilities to support groups/activities
X
Common facilities, playing fields, green areas
X
X
Medium to long
Proposed model of social sustainability including a condensation of the case study results.
==PAGE:161==
Design Guide Leaflet | 161
==PAGE:162==
==PAGE:163==
==PAGE:164==
