==PAGE:1==
 
Coffee Milk and impact of feeding – DTU 2016 
 
 
      Danish Technical University 
Master thesis 
Food Technology       
Influence of methionine-enriched feed on the 
composition and flavour of bovine milk 
 
 
 
 
Photograph: Jonathan Simpson 
Master thesis 
 
 
 
         Technical University of Denmark 
Food Technology 
 
 
 
 
    
 
   DTU FOOD 
Line Knutsson           
 
 
 
 
                22.07.2016 
Coffee Milk 
==PAGE:2==
 
Coffee Milk and impact of feeding – DTU 2016 
 
 
I 
Title page 
 
 
Danish title: 
Indvirkning af methionin-beriget foder på sammensætningen og smagen af 
komælk 
English title: 
Influence of methionine-enriched feed on the composition and flavour of 
bovine milk 
 
 ESCT point: 
35 
Start date 
 
 
01.02.2016 
Delivery date:  
 
22.07.2016 
Cooperative institute: 
Department of Food Science (AU, Årslev), Department of Food Science (KU) 
Cooperative company:  
CoffeeMind, The Estate Dairy, Brades Farm 
Supervisor: 
Senior Research Scientist Grethe Hyldig, DTU FOOD (grhy@food.dtu.dk) 
External supervisor: 
Morten Münchow, CoffeeMind (morten@coffee-mind.com) 
Co-supervisor:  
 
Associate Professor Mikael Agerlin Petersen, Department of Food Science (KU) 
 
 
 
 
Postdoc Ulrik Kræmer Sundekilde, Department of Food Science (AU, Årslev) 
Education: 
MSc programme in Food Technology, DTU – Technical University of Denmark 
Department: 
DTU Food – National Food Institute, Technical University of Denmark    
Author: 
 
 
Line Knutsson (s112816) 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
_________________________________  
Line Knutsson  
22.07.2016 
==PAGE:3==
 
Coffee Milk and impact of feeding – DTU 2016 
 
 
II 
Preface 
 
 
This master thesis is composed as the final project in civil engineering at the Technical University of Denmark – 
The National Food Institute – from February 2016 to July 2016 
This project is part of a product development for the small English company The Estate Dairy. It is not a 
development of a brand new product but an improvement of an existing product. The aim is to improve the flavour 
of the Estate Dairy coffee milk designed especially for the coffee industry focusing on cafés and baristas in London.  
Coffee has through many years played an important role in the society and over the past 10 years the focus on 
coffee has become more specialized and the coffee experience has developed. The many factors having an impact 
on coffee, has been studied to get the best coffee experience, but since a lot of coffee drinkers prefer to add milk 
to their coffee, it is important that also the milk is of a good quality and fits the coffee flavour. With this study The 
Estate Dairy tries to improve the milk flavour and the story behind the product.  
There are many people whom I would like to thank for their corporation and help during the conduct of this study. 
The project has been possible through an extensive co-operation between the collaborators in England, the two 
companies (The Estate Dairy and CoffeeMind) working within the coffee industry, and three Danish universities 
(DTU, KU, and AU). 
Firstly, I would like to thank Morten Münchow (CoffeeMind), who made this project possible by offering good 
connections, a project idea and foundation for the traveling and great support during the project. Secondly a very 
big thanks to the Towers family at Brades Farm, Farleton. John and April who led me into their home and led me 
stay during my visit in Farleton, as was I a part of their family. Also thanks to Joe and Edward for helping me out 
with the trial and all the practical stuff. Especially Edward did a huge job managing the feeding trial and all the 
animal management. 
I would also like to thank Ida Steen (CoffeeMind) for helping me conduct the sensory evaluation in London and 
for helping me with the subsequent data analyses. Thanks to Shaun Young (The Estate Dairy) for taking part in this 
project and gathering people for the sensory evaluating. Associate professor Mikael Agerlin Petersen (KU) and 
Postdoc Ulrik Kræmer Sundekilde (AU, Årslev) are acknowledged for providing skilful technical assistance with, 
respectively the GC-MS and NMR analyses and the following data processing. Last but not least a special thanks to 
my supervisor Senior Research Scientist Grethe Hyldig for being open to this project, contributing with many 
valuable advices and for offering help during the process.  
 
==PAGE:4==
 
Coffee Milk and impact of feeding – DTU 2016 
 
 
III 
Abstract 
 
 
The coffee industry is constantly looking to improve the coffee experience and now the time has come to further 
develop the coffee milk and especially the flavour of the milk. The aim of this project is to investigate how the 
feeding of the cows with supplemental methionine can affect the milk composition especially with regard to the 
flavour composition.  
A small dose-response study was made, feeding four groups of cows with the same test supplement added rumen 
protected methionine (HMBi) in different concentrations (0, 21.25, 41.25, and 62.5 g/day). On day 24 after the 
feeding began, milk samples for sensory and chemical analyses were collected.   
The milk was pasteurized and fresh samples were transported to London to conduct a sensory evaluation of the 
milk over a two-day period. Frozen samples were transported to Denmark, where the milk was analysed by 
MilkoScan, GC-MS and 1H NMR.  This was done to study, if there had been any changes in the milk composition 
and flavour, and to see if the sensory results would match the chemical results.    
From the sensory analysis the results from the two days were quite different, but the results from both days 
indicated, that the sweetness of the milk from the cows fed 62.5 g HMBi/day (dose 3), had increased compared to 
the control, though it was not significantly. In addition, the dose 3 were perceived significantly more buttery, yellow 
and with more mouthfeel than the other 3 samples.  
More than 100 different compounds were identified by the chemical analyses of which many had flavour properties. 
From the 1H NMR a significantly difference was found in the fat content, and dose 3 contained more than 100% 
more fat than the control, a result, which was also indicated by the results from the MilkoScan, though a specific 
fat quantity was not established.   
The lactose content from the MilkoScan analysis on dose 3 showed a significantly increase in the lactose content, 
while the protein content in dose 3 was significantly decreasing compared to the control. 
By looking at all the results from the chemical analyses, it was difficult to see a connection or pattern between the 
increased feeding of HMBi, and the change in the chemical flavour composition as well as the sensory profile of 
the milk.  
==PAGE:5==
 
Coffee Milk and impact of feeding – DTU 2016 
 
 
IV 
Resume 
 
 
Kaffeindustrien forsøger hele tiden at forbedre kaffeoplevelsen og nu er tiden kommet til at videreudvikle mælken 
som bruges i kaffe, især med henblik på smagen. Målet med dette projekt er at undersøge hvorvidt fodring med 
methionin til malkekøer kan påvirke sammensætning af mælk, netop med henblik på smagskomponenterne. 
Et simpelt dose-respons forsøg blev udført, hvor fire grupper af malkekøer blev fodret med foder tilsat methionin 
(HMBi) i forskellige koncentrationer (0, 21,25, 41,25, og 62,5 g / dag). På dag 24 efter fodring begyndte, blev 
mælkeprøver til sensoriske og kemiske analyser udtaget. 
Mælken blev pasteuriseret og friske prøver blev transporteret til London, hvor der i løbet af to dage blev afholdt en 
sensorisk smagstest af mælken. Frosne prøver blev transporteret til Danmark, hvor mælken blev analyseret med 
MilkoScan, GC-MS og NMR. Dette blev gjort for at se, om der var sket nogen ændring i mælkens sammensætning 
og smag og for at se, om de sensoriske resultater ville matche de kemiske.  
Resultaterne fra den sensoriske analyse var forholdsvist forskellige fra de to dage, men resultaterne fra begge dage 
indikerede, at mælken fra dosis 3, fra køerne fodres mest HMBi, var sødere sammenlignet med kontrollen, selvom 
det ikke var signifikant. Derudover blev dosis 3 opfattet signifikant mere smøragtig, mere gul og med mere 
mundfylde end de andre tre prøver.  
Mere end 100 forskellige stoffer blev identificeret ved hjælp af kemiske analyser, og mange af disse stoffer havde 
smagsegenskaber. Fra 1H NMR analysen blev der fundet signifikant mere fedt i dosis 3, der blev fundet mere end 
100% mere fedt sammenlignet med kontrollen. Dette resultat blev også indikeret af resultaterne fra MilkoScan, 
selvom der ikke blev fundet en specifik fedt koncentration. 
Laktose indholdet målt med MilkoScan viste en signifikant stigning i dosis 3 sammenlignet med kontrollen, mens 
protein indholdet faldt signifikant.   
For alle resultaterne fra de kemiske analyser, var det vanskeligt at se en sammenhæng eller mønster mellem den 
øgede fodring med HMBi, og ændringen i den kemiske aromasammensætning samt den sensorisk bedømmelse af 
mælken. 
==PAGE:6==
 
Coffee Milk and impact of feeding – DTU 2016 
 
 
V 
Abbreviations 
 
 
AA 
 
Amino acid(s) 
DHS 
 
Dynamic headspace 
DM 
 
Dry matter 
ED 
 
The Estate Dairy 
EPR 
 
Endoplasmic reticulum  
FA 
 
Fatty acid(s) 
FFA 
 
Free fatty acids 
GC 
 
Gas chromatography 
GC-MS  
Gas chromatography – Mass spectroscopy 
HMB   
2-Hydroxy-4-(methylthio)-butanoic acid 
HMBi  
Isopropyl ester of 2-hydroxy-4-(methylthio) butanoic acid 
IS 
 
Intern standard 
Lys 
 
Lysine 
Met 
 
Methionine 
MiS 
 
MilkoScan 
MP 
 
Metabolizable protein 
MS 
 
Mass spectroscopy  
NMR  
Nuclear magnetic resonance 
PC 
 
Principal components 
PCA 
 
Principal component analysis 
SBSE   
Stir Bar Sorptive Extraction 
Vit. 
 
Vitamin  
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:7==
 
Coffee Milk and impact of feeding – DTU 2016 
 
 
VI 
Table of contents 
 
 
 
1 Introduction 
1 
1.1 THE HISTORY BEHIND THIS PROJECT 
1 
1.2 PROBLEM STATEMENT – GOALS AND AIMS 
2 
2 Theory on milk 
3 
2.1 MILK COMPOSITION 
3 
2.1.1 THE MILK FAT 
4 
2.1.2 PROTEIN 
4 
2.2 FORMATION OF MILK 
5 
2.2.1 RUMEN METABOLISM 
6 
2.2.2 MILK SYNTHESIS 
6 
2.2.2.1 SYNTHESIS OF LACTOSE 
6 
2.2.2.2 PROTEIN SYNTHESIS 
7 
2.2.2.3 FAT SYNTHESIS 
7 
2.2.3. MILK EXCRETION 
8 
2.3 FLAVOUR 
8 
2.3.1 FLAVOUR PERCEPTION 
8 
2.3.2 MILK FLAVOUR 
9 
3 Study considerations 
10 
3.1 CHOICE OF EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN 
10 
3.2 CHOICE OF FEEDING 
11 
4 Materials and methods 
13 
4.1 ANIMAL MANAGEMENT AND TREATMENTS 
13 
4.1.1 EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN 
14 
4.2 SAMPLING 
15 
4.2.1 PASTEURIZATION 
15 
4.2.2. SAMPLE HANDLING AND TRANSPORTATION 
15 
4.3 SENSORY ANALYSIS 
16 
4.4 CHEMICAL ANALYSES 
18 
4.4.1 SAMPLE PREPARATION 
18 
4.4.1.1 DYNAMIC HEADSPACE 
18 
4.4.1.2 STIR BAR SORPTIVE EXTRACTION 
19 
4.4.2 GC-MS 
19 
4.4.3 MILKOSCAN 
20 
4.4.4 NMR SPECTROSCOPY 
21 
4.5 DATA ANALYSIS 
22 
5 Results and discussion 
24 
5.1 THE IMPACT ON THE FLAVOUR FROM THE FEEDING 
25 
5.2 IMPACT ON THE COMPOUNDS FOUND BY 1H NMR SPECTROSCOPY 
28 
5.2.1 THE IMPACT ON THE FAT CONTENT 
32 
5.2.2 QUANTIFICATION OF THE COMPOUNDS IDENTIFIED BY 1H NMR SPECTROSCOPY 
35 
==PAGE:8==
 
Coffee Milk and impact of feeding – DTU 2016 
 
 
5.2.3 MILK COMPOUNDS AND FLAVOUR 
37 
5.3 INFLUENCE OF THE FEEDING ON THE AROMA 
39 
5.3.1 DIFFERENCES IN THE COMPOSITION OF VOLATILES COMPOUNDS WHEN USING DHS 
39 
5.3.2 THE DOSE-RESPONSE RELATIONSHIP 
44 
5.3.3 DIFFERENCES IN THE COMPOSITION OF VOLATILES COMPOUNDS WHEN USING TWISTER 
45 
5.4 RESULTS ON LACTOSE, FAT AND PROTEIN MEASURED BY MIS 
47 
6 Conclusion 
51 
7 Future perspectives 
52 
8 References 
53 
9 Appendix 
56 
APPENDIX 1 – METASMART – PRODUCT SPECIFICATION 
57 
APPENDIX 2 – THE GROUPING OF THE COWS 
61 
APPENDIX 3 – SPECIFIED DECLARATION ON THE FEED 
63 
APPENDIX 4 – ANALYSES OF THE SILAGE 
64 
APPENDIX 5 – PRESTIGE 18 SPECIFICATION 
66 
APPENDIX 6 – PICTURES FROM THE FARM 
67 
APPENDIX 7 – TEMPERATURE DURING THE TRANSPORT AND STORAGE OF THE FROZEN SAMPLES 
68 
APPENDIX 8 – TEST OF THE TRANSPORT BAG 
69 
APPENDIX 9 – PROGRAM AND DISTRIBUTION OF THE SAMPLES FOR THE SENSORY EVALUATION 
70 
APPENDIX 10 – SCHEMA FOR THE DISCRIMINATION 
71 
APPENDIX 11 – 15 CM LINE-SCALE FROM THE CALIBRATION SESSION DAY 2 
72 
APPENDIX 12 – SCREENSHOT OF THE ELECTRONIC EVALUATION SCHEMA 
73 
APPENDIX 13 – PICTURES FROM THE SENSORY EVALUATION 
74 
APPENDIX 14 – THE LINE-UP FOR THE DHS AND TWISTER. 
75 
APPENDIX 15 – NMR SPECIFICATION 
76 
APPENDIX 16 – STATISTICAL RESULTS FROM THE SENSORY PROFILING 
77 
APPENDIX 17 – ZOOM OF THE SPIDER PLOTS FROM THE SENSORY EVALUATION 
78 
APPENDIX 18 – QUANTIFICATION AND P-VALUES FOR THE COMPOUNDS IDENTIFIED BY 1H NMR ANALYSIS. 79 
APPENDIX 19 – RESULTS FROM THE MILKOSCAN ANALYSES 
80 
APPENDIX 20 – RESULTS ON FAT, PROTEIN AND UREA FROM ENGLAND 
81 
APPENDIX 21 – PCA LOADINGS PLOT FROM THE 1H NMR ANALYSIS 
82 
APPENDIX 22 – COMPOUNDS IDENTIFIED BY DHS COMBINED WITH GC-MS 
83 
APPENDIX 23 – COMPOUNDS FOUND IN SIGNIFICANT DIFFERENT AMOUNTS (DHS) 
87 
APPENDIX 24 – PCA LOADINGS PLOT FROM THE GC-MS ANALYSIS (DHS) 
88 
APPENDIX 25 – COMPOUNDS IDENTIFIED BY TWISTER COMBINED WITH GC-MS 
89 
APPENDIX 26 – COMPOUNDS FOUND IN SIGNIFICANT DIFFERENT AMOUNTS (TWISTER) 
91 
APPENDIX 27 – PCA LOADINGS PLOT FROM THE GC-MS ANALYSIS (TWISTER) 
92 
APPENDIX 28 – ANALYSIS RESULTS FROM THE JERSEY TANK 
93 
APPENDIX 29 – GRAPHS ON THE LACTOSE, FAT AND PROTEIN CONTENT MEASURED BY MILKOSCAN 
94 
APPENDIX 30 – RAW DATA FROM THE QUANTITATIVE 1H NMR 
95 
APPENDIX 31 – RAW DATA FROM THE DHS COMBINED WITH GC-MS 
96 
APPENDIX 32 – RAW DATA FROM THE TWISTER COMBINED WITH GC-MS 
98 
 
==PAGE:9==
 
Coffee Milk and impact of feeding – DTU 2016 
1 
 
1 
Introduction 
 
 
Bovine milk has been used for coffee for many years, but without much focus on the quality or flavour of the milk. 
As the coffee industry has grown and become more specialized with more focus on the flavour and sensory 
experience, the focus on the quality of the milk used for cappuccino and other coffee varieties has raised. Primarily, 
the focus was mainly on the foaming qualities, which is essential for a good cappuccino, but recently the focus has 
also been towards the flavour of the coffee milk. 
1.1 The history behind this project 
A new coffee milk called The Estate Dairy (ED) reached the British market in January 2016. It is a coffee milk sold 
and directly delivered to baristas and cafés in London. Behind the product stand Shaun Young and the Towers 
Family at Brades Farm, Farleton, UK. Shaun wanted to produce a high quality milk for the coffee industry and 
Brades Farm could deliver the milk. To get a milk high in protein and fat, the Towers needed to extend their 
livestock with Jersey cows, which they imported from Denmark in November 2015. The first samples of milk were 
tested at different cafés in London before Christmas and then launched in January 2016. The milk is available in 
two different types, whole milk and skimmed milk containing 80% Jersey milk and 20% Holstein milk.  The milk is 
an un-homogenised milk with 3,6% protein, which provides a good foaming ability (Beard 2016; Anon 2016b). The 
milk is not organic or biodynamic, but un-homogenized milk is often perceived as a more natural product since it 
is less processed compared to homogenized milk, and thereby it fits better to the brand of the ED.  
Like most other companies, ED aims to get an even bigger market share by selling to more cafés in London and 
they are already expanding to cafés within England. They are also working on a project providing milk for cheese 
and ice cream production. Production of Skyr is also being considered as well as launching the coffee milk product 
on the retail market, were ED due to its quality and history could probably reach a higher price, than normal milk, 
since consumers are often willing to pay a higher price, if there are some kind of history behind the product, which 
could indicate an improvement in the composition or flavour of the milk (Mette K. Larsen et al. 2012). 
ED will continue improving their product based on feedback from the baristas and costumers, as well as by looking 
at how factors like feed influence the flavour of the milk. This is where this project comes in. 
==PAGE:10==
 
Coffee Milk and impact of feeding – DTU 2016 
2 
 
1.2 Problem statement – goals and aims 
The aim of this project is to further develop and optimize the ED coffee milk. The ED coffee milk is already a 
popular milk within the barista business in London, but ED is continuously focussing on improving their product 
to expand their small business. The ED coffee milk has very good foaming qualities which makes it perfect for 
cappuccinos, but ED would like somewhat more sweetness in the flavour to enable them to better compete with 
their main competitor, the Northiam.  
The aim was to change the sensory profile of the ED milk by feeding the cows with a specific supplement. Because 
some changes in flavour can only be detected by the human sense of taste and not by chemical analyses, and vice 
versa. The milk was analysed both by chemical methods and by a sensory panel evaluation, to detect changes in 
yield, fat, protein, lactose, volatile and non-volatile flavour compounds. 
The sensory evaluation was conducted by CoffeeMind and is not a direct part of this thesis, but the results are 
important as they are used for comparison with the chemical results to investigate the effect of the feeding by the 
use of two different methods.  
By changing the flavour or composition of the milk, with the aim to develop an improved version, ED has a chance 
to become a stronger player on the market. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:11==
 
Coffee Milk and impact of feeding – DTU 2016 
3 
 
2 
Theory on milk 
 
 
Dairy farmers around the world have for decades improved and developed their production to get a better yield, 
higher fat and higher protein, since this is how they can earn more money on their products. But now this however 
is no longer enough since the consumers and in this case also the coffee industry, are asking for more.  
It is in the meantime not simple to change the composition and flavour of milk, as the composition of milk is 
influenced by a wide range of factors. This include the breed as well as the individual genetics of the cows within 
breeds. The differences in feed composition, the stage of the lactation and number of lactations, the age, the season 
of the year, and the weather are all influencing factors (Sundekilde et al. 2013; Bylund 1995b; Pieter Walstra et al. 
2006a). Apart from all these factors in relation to the production of the milk, there are also other factors such as 
chemical, enzymatic and physical factors (milking technique, equipment and temperature), which can influence the 
composition of the fresh milk (SEGES 2015; Pieter Walstra et al. 2006b). Because of all these factors impacting the 
milk composition, it is important to only change one factor at the time, when studying the effect of one specific 
factor, and make sure to handle the fresh milk properly to limit factors affecting the fresh milk. But even though a 
change - detected by chemical methods - has occurred in the composition, this does not mean that the consumers 
will be able to detect and distinguish this change compared to other milks. 
2.1 Milk composition 
Milk is a very complex product and contains a wide range of components – macronutrients (proteins, lipids, sugars), 
essential micronutrients (vitamins and minerals) and non-essential micronutrients (bioactive components and 
miscellaneous components often in trace amounts). The primary components in milk are water, fat, proteins, lactose 
and minerals, but milk does also contains pigments, vitamins (Vit.), and gasses (Bylund 1995b; Pieter Walstra et al. 
2006a).  
The composition of the milk influences the sensory and physical properties of the milk. When it comes to coffee 
milk it is the protein and to some extend the fat, which influences the quality of the foam. In cafés, milk for café 
latte and cappuccinos is added to the coffee as a steam-frothed foam, and here the proportion of protein and fat 
has an impact on the quality of the foam (Münchow et al. 2015). In the study by Münchow et al. they found that to 
improve the foam, a high protein content is essential to make a good foam and that the more fat the milk contain, 
the more stable the foam is. However, despite this, the main factor affecting the foaming ability is the degree of 
==PAGE:12==
 
Coffee Milk and impact of feeding – DTU 2016 
4 
 
lipolysis in the milk, since the free fatty acids (FFA) and glycosides significantly decreased the foaming ability 
(Münchow et al. 2015; Deeth & Smith 1983; Deeth 2006). 
2.1.1 The milk fat 
The composition of milk fat is very complex and contains more than 400 different fatty acids (FA) of which only 
12 are present in concentrations above 1% (Jensen 2002). Milk fat is of great importance to the flavour of the milk 
by giving mouthfeel and creaminess, but at the same time fat can also have a negative impact on the flavour by off-
flavours as a result of processes as oxidation and enzymatic degradation. All fats are esters of FA, consisting of 
alcohols and acids. The FA are variating a lot, with chain lengths from 2-20 carbon atoms and with 0-4 double 
bonds with different position (Pieter Walstra et al. 2006a; Pieter Walstra et al. 2006b; Bylund 1995b). 
The milk fat exists as globules or droplets surrounded by a protein membrane which stabilizes and protects the 
globules from degradation. The membrane consists of phospholipids, glycosphingolipids, cholesterol and proteins, 
and the structure and quality of the membrane proteins is especially impacted by the lactation stage and high fat 
concentration. More frequent milking leads to bigger and more sensitive globules due to limited amounts of protein 
membranes  (SEGES 2015; Singh 2006; Pieter Walstra et al. 2006b). The milk fat consists of triglycerides (98%), di- 
and mono-glycerides, FA, sterols, carotenoids, vitamins and other minor components. Milk fat also contain 
relatively large amounts of butyric (C4) and caproic acid (hexanoic acid, C6). The fat globules are the largest particles 
in milk, but at the same time they are also the lightest, which means, that they over time rise to the surface (Bylund 
1995b; Pieter Walstra et al. 2006b).  
During storage different chemical changes will occur in the milk fat, normally due to oxidation and lipolysis causing 
off-flavour.  It is the double bonds of the unsaturated FA, which are oxidized and several compounds can be formed 
from these oxidation products. Some of these compounds can cause off-flavours as tallowy, fatty (oily and butter), 
fishy, metallic and cardboard-like flavours in milk (Pieter Walstra et al. 2006b).  
Lipolysis is an enzymatic reaction and one more way for the fat to be broken down. By lipolysis triglycerides are 
hydrolysed and degraded into mono- and di-glycerides and FFA by the enzyme lipases. It is only if the fat globules 
are damaged that the lipases have access to hydrolyse the fat molecules. As well as oxidized fat, lipolysed fat also 
has a rancid off-flavour due to FFA and particularly the short and medium chain length FFA (4-12 carbon atoms), 
have a strong and undesirable soapy-rancid flavour.  (Bylund 1995b; P Walstra et al. 2006; Deeth 2006) 
2.1.2 Protein 
Proteins are essential for both humans and cows, as they through the digestion are broken down into amino acids 
(AA) and used as building blocks in the body. Milk contains many different types of protein, including a wide range 
of enzymes. The protein can be divided into casein (80%), whey proteins and fat globule membrane proteins (Bylund 
1995b). 
==PAGE:13==
 
Coffee Milk and impact of feeding – DTU 2016 
5 
 
As fat, protein can also undergo oxidation when exposed to light. The AA methionine (Met) is oxidized and 
degraded to methional, in the presence of riboflavin (Vit. B2), which causes “sunlight flavour”(Bylund 1995b; Pieter 
Walstra et al. 2006c). Enzymatic degradation of proteins does also occur, where proteolytic enzymes degrades casein 
to peptides and AA of which several have distinct, bitter flavour. Oxidative rancidity, “tallowy” flavour from 
polyunsaturated aldehydes and “cardboard” flavour from autoxidation of phospholipids can also occur (Pieter 
Walstra et al. 2006c), as well can changes due to heat treatment. The heat treatment during pasteurization changes 
the milk constituents by aggregation and denaturation of the proteins, and the higher temperature and the longer 
duration of the heat treatment, the more prominent the changes are. The casein is not affected, while β-lactoglobulin 
is heat sensitive above 65˚C and when sulphurous compounds are released from β-lactoglobulin and other sulphur-
containing proteins, a “cooked” smell and taste can occur (Bylund 1995b).  
2.2 Formation of milk 
Mostly, milk compounds are formed in the mammary gland (the udder) from precursors formed during digestion 
of the feed. By the use of enzymes, the feed is digested into simple, soluble, low-molar-mass components as 
monosaccharides, small peptides, AA, FA, and mono-glycerides. All these substances are absorbed into the blood 
together with salts, glycerol, organic acids etc. Via the blood the substances are transported around the body to all 
the organs including the mammary gland, to provide energy and precursors for metabolisms as the protein and lipid 
synthesis (Pieter Walstra et al. 2006a). Figure 1 shows an overview of the feed component through the cow, which 
will be explained in the following.  
 
 
Figure 1: Conversion of protein, carbohydrate and fat to milk components through the cow 
==PAGE:14==
 
Coffee Milk and impact of feeding – DTU 2016 
6 
 
2.2.1 Rumen metabolism 
The first stomach, the rumen, is a large and very complex bio-fermenter, where the pre-digestion by microbial 
fermentation occurs to a high extend. These micro-organisms are able to digest cellulose and thereby break down 
plant cell wall to energy and release cell components. Cellulose and carbohydrates are converted to acetic, propionic, 
butyric, and lactic acid. The ratio of these organic acids depends on the composition of the feed (Pieter Walstra et 
al. 2006a). 
AA are formed by the degradation of proteins in the rumen, or are synthesized from low-molar-mass nitrogenous 
compounds. The AA are then used by the rumen flora to build new proteins. AA are also formed, when the 
microbes are digested further on in the digestive tract (Pieter Walstra et al. 2006a).   
Lipids are hydrolysed in the rumen and partly metabolized by the microorganisms. All these metabolites can reach 
the mammary gland (Pieter Walstra et al. 2006a). Palmitic acid (C16) and stearic acid (C18) passes through the rumen 
unchanged, while most unsaturated FA are saturated, since double bounds are biohydrogenated by the reducing 
environment in the rumen, caused by the microorganisms. This results mainly in stearic acid and a small amount of 
trans isomers of oleic acid (C18:1). Stearic acids from the diet are also partly converted to oleic acid by stearoyl CoA 
desaturase in the intestines and in mammary tissue (Paton & Ntambi 2009). 
The rumen microbiota also produces β-hydroxybutyrate and acetate from the carbohydrate fermentation, which are 
then later on used in the mammary gland for the fat synthesis (Pieter Walstra et al. 2006b).  
Other components as e.g. water, serum albumin, and minerals can go directly from the blood to the lumen by 
different kind of transport mechanisms  and channels (Pieter Walstra et al. 2006a). 
2.2.2 Milk synthesis 
The milk is secreted in the udder, which is divided into quarters with a mammary gland and a teat in each. In the 
gland the glandular secretory tissue with the milk-producing cells are found. (Bylund 1995a).  
The milk synthesis including the synthesis of lactose, protein and fat, primary occurs in the secretory cells of the 
mammary gland, where the metabolites from the digestion process are absorbed from the blood and secreted into 
the lumen (Pieter Walstra et al. 2006b).  
 2.2.2.1 Synthesis of lactose 
Lactose is unique to milk and is synthesized from uridine-diphosphate-galactose and glucose in the Golgi vesicles 
of the lactating cells due to the protein α-lactalbumin. The milk also contains traces of e.g. glucose and galactose, 
but no polysaccharides (Pieter Walstra et al. 2006b).      
==PAGE:15==
 
Coffee Milk and impact of feeding – DTU 2016 
7 
 
2.2.2.2 Protein synthesis 
The proteins synthesis takes place in the endoplasmic reticulum (EPR), where the genetic code gives rise to the 
formation of a protein from a sequence of AA, the primary structure. However, the sequence of AA undergoes 
further changes where secondary, tertiary or quaternary structures are formed giving the protein their specific 
characteristics and properties. From the EPR the proteins are transported to the Golgi vesicles in which most of 
the soluble milk compounds are found and later on the vesicles are opened up and the content is released into the 
lumen (Pieter Walstra et al. 2006a; Pieter Walstra et al. 2006b).  
2.2.2.3 Fat synthesis  
The fat globules are formed in the cytoplasm of the secretory cells of the mammary gland. Triglycerides are 
synthesized in, or on the surface of the rough EPR membrane, and then forming small globules that grows during 
the transport through the cytoplasm to the apical end of the cell. The globules are enrobed by the outer cell 
membrane before they are pinched off from the epithelia cell into the lumen (Pieter Walstra et al. 2006a; Singh 
2006).  
In the mammary gland β-hydroxybutyrate and acetate are used for synthesizing FA containing 4-14 carbon atoms. 
This pathway is called synthesis de novo, and is a kind of recycling where simple molecules such as AA or sugars are 
used for the synthesis of more complex molecules (Paton & Ntambi 2009). β-hydroxybutyrate is used for 
synthesizing butyric acid, and butyric acid together with acetate forms C6-C14 acids (Pieter Walstra et al., 2006b). A 
portion of palmitic acid is synthesized de novo, while another portion is extracted from blood and originates from 
the diet or from adipose tissue (fat tissue, which stores triglycerides) (Paton & Ntambi 2009). A high milk fat is 
linked to a high de novo synthesis (Weisbjerg et al. 2008) 
FA containing above 16 carbon atoms as C16 and C18 are extracted by the mammary glands from blood triglycerides 
through the milk-blood barrier. In the mammary gland, short-chain FA are synthesized in large quantities. A 
desaturase is also found in the mammary gland and converts the saturated stearic acid (C18) into the unsaturated 
oleic acid (C18:1) and to a smaller extend palmitic acid (C16) into palmitoleic acid (C16:1). It is due to the many different 
synthetic pathways that the FA composition of the feed has a huge impact on the milk fat. Large quantities of stearic 
acid will give a relatively unsaturated milk fat due to the formation of oleic acid, whereas much palmitic acid will 
result in a low proportion of unsaturated FA residues (Pieter Walstra et al. 2006b). 
If the cows are fed high proportions of concentrates there will be little acetate in the rumen and thereby relatively 
few short-chain acids, whereas a feed with a high proportion of roughage results in a lot of acetate and a lot of 
short-chain acids. Along with the ratio of the feed, also the physical form has an effect on the composition of milk 
fat. Unsaturated FA in large and hard bits can escape the hydrogenation and result in relative high proportions of 
polyunsaturated milk fat (Pieter Walstra et al. 2006b).   
==PAGE:16==
 
Coffee Milk and impact of feeding – DTU 2016 
8 
 
2.2.3. Milk excretion 
The glandular tissue in the udder is made up of about 2 billion alveoli which are tiny balloon-like structures placed 
in groups of 8-120. The milk-producing cells are located on the inner wall of these alveoli and from these the fresh 
milk is secreted into the lumen of the alveoli. From the alveolus capillaries join into larger and larger milk ducts 
ending in a cavity, the cistern of the udder, about the teat (see Figure 2) (Bylund 1995a). The excretion of the milk 
occurs when the alveoli contracts by the contraction of muscle tissue around the alveoli and forces the milk down 
into the teat cistern by the pressure. This muscle contraction is induced by the hormone oxytocin. Oxytocin is 
released into the blood by stimulation of the teats (Pieter Walstra et al. 2006b; Bylund 1995a). 
 
Figure 2: Sectional view of the udder showing a mammary gland. 1: Cistern of the udder. 2: Teat cistern. 3: Teat cannel. 4: 
Alveolus. 5: milk producing cells (Bylund 1995a) 
2.3 Flavour 
Humans have three different kinds of receptors in the mouth sensitive to mechanical, thermal and chemical energy. 
The mechanoreceptor react to touch (mouthfeel and physical structure), the thermoreceptors sense temperature 
and the chemical receptors react to taste and odour, all contributing to the perception of the food or drinks (Engelen 
2012). Receptors in the mouth and nose are respectively sensitive to specific water-soluble and volatile compounds. 
When it comes to flavour, two chemical senses, taste (the five basic tastes - sweet, sour, salt, bitter and umami) and 
odour (olfactory stimuli which are divided into orthonasal and retronasal olfaction perceiving aromas), are 
distinguished, and when these are combined it leads to the perceived flavour (Pieter Walstra et al. 2006c).  
2.3.1 Flavour perception 
Flavour perception is highly complex and many compounds contribute to the flavour sensation. At the same time 
the perception variates from person to person. The minimum concentration of flavour compounds to be perceived, 
==PAGE:17==
 
Coffee Milk and impact of feeding – DTU 2016 
9 
 
the threshold value, is typically between 10-3-10-4 mg/kg, but variates dependant on the matrix and individuals. 
Often compounds in a matrix can mask each other, and have a higher threshold in milk than in e.g. water. The 
concentration of the flavour component has a high impact on, how it is perceived. Often many flavouring 
compounds are pleasant in low concentration and unpleasant in higher concentration. The whole experience around 
the tasting does also affect, how the food is perceived (Pieter Walstra et al. 2006c) and because of this ISO standards 
are made for tested and trained panels, when conduction sensory analysis.     
2.3.2 Milk flavour 
The chemical composition of milk and the reactions connected to these compounds largely determines the flavour 
of the milk (Pieter Walstra et al. 2006a). Milk flavour is generally considered mild, especially when the milk is cold. 
When milk reach room temperature a whole lot of other flavour nodes reveals. In milk the main non-volatile flavour 
compounds are lactose and dissolved salts causing the sweet and salty taste, though the sweetness is camouflaged 
by the salts and the micellar casein in the milk. Nonetheless, the sweet taste is generally strongest unless the Cl-
/lactose ratio is high, as in mastitic or late-lactation milk. Lactose is approximately 0.3 times as sweet as sucrose, but 
if it is hydrolysed to glucose and galactose, the sweetness is considerably increased. The lactose together with some 
AA can also cause off-flavours during the heating, where maltol, isomaltol and some furanones are formed during 
the Maillard reaction (Pieter Walstra et al. 2006c).  
Dimethyl sulphide, diacetyl, 2-methylbutanol and some aldehydes add the characteristic “fresh raw milk” flavour, 
while the fat globules are responsible for the rich or creamy flavour, to some extend in combination with  fat-soluble 
compounds (lactones, free capric and lauric acid, indole, skatole, and 4-cis-heptanal) (Pieter Walstra et al. 2006c). 
Fresh milk may have some off-flavours (e.g. clover or garlic flavour), which comes via feed or from the air. If the 
cow suffers from ketosis (if the feed is deficient in protein, the ketone (especially acetone) level in the milk will 
increase), the milk will get a “cowy” flavour. If the milk has been contaminated with microorganisms, microbial 
spoilage may produce flavour defects such as taste of acidic, fruity, ester, malty or burnt, phenolic, bitter, rancid etc.  
As mentioned in 2.1.1 and 2.1.2. enzymatic spoilage and oxidation of fat and proteins can also cause the formation 
of off-flavours.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:18==
 
Coffee Milk and impact of feeding – DTU 2016 
10 
 
3 
Study considerations 
 
 
3.1 Choice of experimental design 
The choice of study design was mainly influenced by the facilities at the farm. Primarily the idea was to conduct a 
parallel trial and physically spilt the cows into groups, feeding the groups in different ways. But due to the decor of 
the stable, it was only possible to create two study groups. As an alternative to only having two groups, it was 
suggested to make a small dose-response study with a control group and three groups given different doses of the 
test supplement as outlined in Figure 3. This was possible due to the presence of outer parlour feeders, automatic 
feeders, supplying each cow with the right amount of supplement in the form of pellets.  
 
Figure 3: Schematic overview of the feeding trial 
A physical separation of the cows into groups would have had a huge negative social and environmental impact on 
the cows, so the use of the outer parlour feeder was chosen, as it was the best way of stressing the cows as little as 
possible. Simultaneously, all four groups would be influenced by the exact same factors (season, weather, length of 
day, differences in the basic feed during the trial (distribution of the different components and the differences in 
the silage, since this is an ongoing microbial process), minerals in the water etc.). The only variating factor within 
Basic feed: Silage, straw mixed with supplement, minerals and molasses  
Prestige 18 
Prestige 18 
Prestige 18 
Prestige 18 + 
62.50 g 
Metasmart  
  
  
Prestige 18 + 
41.25 g 
Metasmart 
Prestige 18 + 
21.25 g 
Metasmart  
     Control                        Group 1                      Group 2                        Group3 
    (Group 4) 
==PAGE:19==
 
Coffee Milk and impact of feeding – DTU 2016 
11 
 
the four groups was the amount of test supplement formulated into the pellets. By conducting the experiment this 
way, it was as close to the real conditions at the farm as possible, and thereby the changes would be ready to 
implement in the feed for the whole herd, depending on the results of the study.        
3.2 Choice of feeding  
Many research projects with results on the effect of different feeding on the milk composition have been studied to 
define a design and strategy for this study. At first feeds with a “sustainable perspective” were studied e.g. the use 
of waste products as whey (Salem & Fraj, 2007) or brewer’s grain (Moate et al. 2011), but this was not possible to 
get a hold of and store at the farm. Then studies on changing the composition of fat or other compounds in the 
milk, or the flavour of the milk, were studied. By looking at these studies it was at first suggested to make pellets on 
a base of Lucerne or legumes hay (Wiking et al. 2010; Urbach 1990; Girard et al. 2015), add caraway oil or oregano 
oil (Sundekilde et al. 2015; Lejonklev 2013) and cottonseeds (Anderson et al. 1979; Anderson et al. 1984), rapeseed 
or linseed (Gómez-Cortés et al. 2009; M.K. Larsen et al. 2012; Alstrup et al. 2015). To obtain an effect on the 
flavour, essential oil with terpenes had in particular shown good results (Lejonklev 2013). But due to limited time, 
the small amount of pellets needed for the study and what was possible for the feed company to formulate, it was 
decided to pursue different study methods. An additional reason for not choosing the mixed feed with a lot of 
compounds was that it would be difficult to differentiate which of the compounds were actually affecting the milk 
composition.    
Instead it was decided to add Met to the concentrated feed pellets and test if a supplement of Met would have any 
effect on the milk, as Met is an essential and limiting AA, affecting the protein synthesis (Hanigan et al. 2000; Fraser 
et al. 1991; Fisher 1972; Robinson et al. 1998; Brosnan & Brosnan 2006). A meta-analysis on the performance of 
dairy cows receiving supplemental Met (Zanton et al. 2014) concluded that Met supplementation in different 
versions could increase the yield, protein and fat content of the milk, and at the same time Met had shown to have 
a positive effect on the N efficiency and thereby having a positive effect on the environment (Alstrup et al. 2015).  
The same results for yield, fat and protein was found in several studies on Met together with lysine (Lys) (Appuhamy, 
Knapp, Becvar, Escobar, & Hanigan, 2011; Armentano, Bertics, & Ducharme, 1997; Robinson et al., 1998). Since 
it was only possible to look at one component and since the current feed already contained 7.0 g Lys/100 g MP 
(metabolizable protein), Met was chosen. As mentioned, many studies have been conducted on the addition of Met, 
but how Met supplement affects the flavour of the milk has not yet been studied, from what have been possible to 
find during the literature studies.  
Since Met is an essential AA, this means, that the cow cannot synthesised it by its own, and there for it needs to be 
added through the feed. At the same time, to make sure the Met reaches the udder, where it is used as a metabolite, 
the Met needs to be protected, so it is not degraded in the rumen by the gastric juice or the microorganisms. In this 
study the Met was formulated into the pellets (Prestige 18) as ruminal protected Met called Metasmart (Isopropyl 
==PAGE:20==
 
Coffee Milk and impact of feeding – DTU 2016 
12 
 
ester of hydroxyl analogue of methionine (HMBi Monomer) with vanilla flavouring, Kemin Industries, Inc., U.S.A). 
See specifications in Appendix 1. A common used source of Met is HMB (2-Hydroxy-4-(methylthio)-butanoic acid), 
but as this becomes degraded early in the rumen, the isopropyl ester of HMB, HMBi is used, as it has shown to be 
less degradable in the rumen and thereby the degradation of the HMB molecule, by the microorganism in the rumen, 
is less (Schwab 2001). HMBi is absorbed through the rumen wall and hydrolysed into HMB and isopropyl alcohol, 
and then converted to Met and acetone. As the product specifications on the Metasmart says, 50% of the HMBi 
are absorbed through the rumen wall (Appendix 1), which has also been concluded by literature (Graulet et al. 2005). 
Different studies have been made, feeding dairy cows with a supplement of Lys and Met in different variations, 
ratios, and concentrations from 6-12 g/d Met and 19-180 g/d Lys (Appuhamy et al. 2011; King et al. 1991; 
Armentano et al. 1997; Robinson et al. 1998; Robinson et al. 1995) and Met supplement form 3.5-67.9 g. Met/d. 
(Zanton et al. 2014). At first it was planned to give the four groups respectively 0, 25, 50 and 75 g Metasmart and 
only in 3 kg pellets, but with advice and recommendation from the nutritionist it was decided to use 0, 21.25, 41.25 
and 62.5 g Metasmart/day divided into 5 kg. pellets, since there were concerns in relation to the cows not liking the 
new feed. By studying literature (Appuhamy et al. 2011; King et al. 1991; Armentano et al. 1997; Robinson et al. 
1998; Zanton et al. 2014) and taking the timeframe of this study into consideration, it was decided to feed the cows 
for 23 days and on day 24 the sampling was done during the morning milking. Figure 4 shows a simple timeframe 
for the study.   
 
Figure 4: Simple timeframe for the study. 
  
 
 
 
16. Maj 
Beginning of feeding 
the Met-enriched diet.  
                         8. June 
                   Sampling day  
                 + pasteurization 
9.+10. June 
Sensory profiling 
of the fresh milk 
==PAGE:21==
 
Coffee Milk and impact of feeding – DTU 2016 
13 
 
4 
Materials and methods 
 
 
The materials and methods section contains a description of all the work done at the farm and information in 
relation to the trail, the handling of the samples, sample preparation and description of the methods used for the 
analyses.  
4.1 Animal management and treatments 
The trial was conducted on 77 Jersey cows on a farm in Lune Valley, England. The herd of cows lived in an open 
shed with slatted floorings and cubicles with sand. At the beginning of the trial, the cows were between 23.8-80.1 
months of age (ava. 32.67 months)1, they had been 32-264 days in milking (DIM) (ava. 111 days)1, 65 of the cows 
had had one lactation while the rest had had 2-5 lactations (ava. 1,35 lactations) and the yield was between 13.9-25.2 
L (ava. 18.6 L)1 (Appendix 2).  
The cows were fed with a basic diet containing roughage as a mixture of silage (21.5 kg/cow/day) and wheat straw 
(0.6 kg/cow/day) added minerals (ARN Availa4 Health TMR Mins 0.125 kg/cow/day), molasses (QLF Easy Cane 
0.5 kg/cow/day) and a supplement (ACM 3.5 kg/cow/day) in total 26.025 kg/cow/day (see Appendix 3). The trial 
diet was set up on the results of the analyses on the silage from the shear face after the first-cut (wet) and second-
cut (dry) (analysis results Appendix 4), but during the trial the silage was changed (third-cut), which was just a 
practical thing and had nothing to do with the quality of the silage. The composition of the silage was changes a bit 
(Appendix 4), but any effect of this would impact the whole herd of cows.  
Apart from the basic roughage with added concentrates, the cows were fed concentrated feed as pellets (TICK-
Prestige 18) made of  different grains, soya, maize, minerals and sugar sources (see Appendix 5). The pellets were 
fed to the cows through an outer parlour feeders controlled by a chip on each cow to control the amount of 
concentrated feed given. The reason for not supplying all the concentrates though the outer parlour feeders is, that 
it might create problems, if the cows gets too much concentrates in one dose. Also the cows are more relaxed and 
                                                     
1 The numbers are from the 9th of May. The trial started the 16th of May, but the numbers from this day were unfortunately not available. The cows were 
divided into groups according to these data.  
==PAGE:22==
 
Coffee Milk and impact of feeding – DTU 2016 
14 
 
eats more forage, when the ACM is mixed in the forage. During the trial period, the cows did not have access to 
fresh grass.  
4.1.1 Experimental design 
The 77 Jersey cows were split into four groups, 18-20 in each group, based on number of lactations and the DIM 
(see Appendix 2). The choice of these two parameters as the most important factors, instead of yield or age, was 
due to literature (Lu et al. 2013; Garnsworthy et al. 2006; Larsen & Moyes 2014) and the impact the lactation stage 
and the DIM has on the composition of the milk.  
All cows had free access to the silage mixture and water but different volume of normal pellets (Prestige 18 Appendix 
5) and test pellets (Prestige 18 + Metasmart (HMBi) Appendix 1). All cows were fed a total of 5 kg supplement/day. 
The four different diets were almost identical in energy, protein etc. It was only the addition of the HMBi and the 
Lys:Met ratio, which was differentiating the groups. The sampling was done on day 24 after feeding the Met-
enriched diet.  
In Table 1 the distribution of the feed for the four groups is shown and Figure 3 shown earlier, gave a schematic 
overview over the feeding trial. A more detailed table on the feeding can be found in Appendix 3. 
Table 1: An overview of the different feedings. 
Cows 
Normal supplement 
Prestige 18 
Test supplement 
Prestige with Metasmart 
MLys 
(g/100g MP) 
MMet 
(g/100g MP) 
MLys:MMet 
Group 1 
(dose 1) 
19 cows 
3.3 kg/day 
1.7 kg/day 
21.25 g Metasmart 
7.0 
2.1 
3.3 
Group 2 
(dose 2) 
18 cows 
1.7 kg/day 
3.3 kg/day 
41.25 g Metasmart 
7.0 
2.3 
3.0 
Group 3 
(dose 3) 
20 cows 
0 kg/day 
5.0 kg/day 
62.5 g Metasmart 
7.0 
2.5 
2.8 
Group 4 
(Control) 
20 cows 
5 kg/day 
0.0 kg/day 
0.0 g Metasmart 
7.0 
2.0 
3.6 
 
 
 
==PAGE:23==
 
Coffee Milk and impact of feeding – DTU 2016 
15 
 
4.2 Sampling  
For practical reasons the pasteurization could only be done during the day, therefore the milking was done in the 
morning, though there can be some differences in the morning and afternoon milk (Sahana et al. 2008). The day 
before sampling day, all the cows had been marked with colours, to make it easier to split them into the four groups 
before milking, which was the first time during the trial the cows was physically separated. The separation was done 
calmly and quietly to avoid any kind of stress. The cows were milked in four laps (one lap for each group) in the 
milking pit with room for 24 cows on each side. The milking was done as usual, but on the way to the tank, the milk 
was cut off and 2 x 4 litres were tapped of into 4 L. colostrum bags (udder bags). The tapping was done after the 
pump had run the first loop, to make sure, that all cows was in the milking and to avoid any carry over from the 
previous group. Between each group the piping was emptied for milk, to make sure, that the milk was not mixed 
within the groups. Pictures from the sampling are shown in Appendix 6.  
This way of sampling was the most effective, simple, and hygienic, because the physical handling of the samples 
was limited, all cows contributed to the sample equally and randomly, the cows did not feel any difference in the 
milking procedure, and the risk of contamination was at an absolutely minimum, which the direct tapping into the 
udder bags enabled, since the bags were sealed and only opened for the sensory analysis and when pouring milk 
into sample tubes.  
Immediately after the tapping, the udder bags were cooled in a 4˚C water bath in the cooling room before it was 
transported for pasteurization. From the time of milking to the time of pasteurization, it was important, that the 
cold chain was not broken as this would cause a risk of the microorganisms in the milk starting multiplying and 
thereby producing different metabolites and enzymes which would influence the quality of the milk (Bylund 1995c). 
4.2.1 Pasteurization  
The cold milk was transported in a cooling box to be pasteurized. The milk was pasteurized directly in the udder 
bags, whereby the milk was exposed to minimal oxygen, microorganisms and other contaminants. It was a LTLT 
(Low Temperature Long Time) pasteurization; 30 min. at 63˚C, which is a standard for milk pasteurization (Adams 
& Moss 2008; Bylund 1995c; Pieter Walstra et al. 2006d). The pasteurization was done to avoid growth of 
microorganisms and to inactivate enzymes e.g. lipase degrading lipids to FFA (Bylund 1995b; Bylund 1995c).      
4.2.2. Sample handling and transportation 
After pasteurization the milk was again cooled to 4˚C. One 4 L. udder bag was cooled for the sensory analysis in 
London the following two days. Milk for the chemical analyses was poured into 50 mL sampling tubes and frozen. 
The freezing was done to prevent any changes in the milk composition due to microorganisms, release or formation 
of volatiles and storage (Deeth 2006; Bylund 1995c). The samples were transported from England to Denmark in a 
cooling bag with a temperature logger to make sure that the samples were kept below the freezing point until the 
==PAGE:24==
 
Coffee Milk and impact of feeding – DTU 2016 
16 
 
chemical analyses (the temperature log can be seen in Appendix 7). The quality of the transport bag was tested 
before transportation to make sure, that it was able to keep the samples below the freezing point for at least 7 hours 
(Appendix 8). As shown in Appendix 7, the temperature in the transport bag shortly reached 7˚C and for some time 
the temperature was above the freezing point during the transport to London, but it was assumed, that this did not 
affect the samples significantly, and if it had, then the temperature increase had effected all four samples.       
4.3 Sensory analysis 
To study the human response to the possible changes in the milk, a sensory analysis was conducted to evaluate the 
milk. A sensory evaluation does not only focus on the taste, but it is the whole experience – appearance, smell, taste, 
aroma, mouth feeling etc. The evaluation to profile the milk, was done over the course of two days. As it will be 
mentioned later on, the evaluation was done on pure Jersey milk, only pasteurized to kill any pathogens, but not 
standardized with regard to fat or protein. On day 1 the milk was 1 day old and 2 days old the second day. Both 
days all samples were served at room temperature (23-27˚C), as cold milk is very mild and without much flavour 
(see 2.3.3). The samples were served in small plastic cups and everything in relation to the samples, were identical. 
All the samples were given random 3-digit numbers (blind-labelled) to avoid the panellist to create any kind of 
inherent bias. 
The sensory evaluation was conducted by skilled coffee people but not by a trained panel, but it was done very 
objective, as the panellists were not familiar with the test method, the purpose or the product. At the same time 
there was limited time to train the panel and under ideal circumstances, reference samples representing the flavour 
of each of the descriptors, would have been needed, to ensure, that the panellists could relate equally to the 
descriptors and have the same criteria for conducting the evaluation.    
The first sensory evaluation (day 1) was conducted by a panel of six persons (five males and one female), and was 
used for finding descriptors for the second tasting (day 2). The sensory evaluation was spilt into three parts; The 
first one served as descriptor development – a small discriminative test, where the differences between the samples 
were identified and descriptors found. The second part served as training and calibration of the panel, and the third 
part served as the sensory evaluation – a descriptive test to rate the intensity of the differences within the samples. 
Discriminative and descriptive tests are usually used for trained panels, why the training and calibration was a part 
of this test (Program and sample distribution are found in Appendix 9).    
The development of the descriptors started with a small training session, tasting references (the five basic tastes) in 
water and in milk, to give the panellists an idea of, how the tastes would be and how it might change in the matrix. 
After training the basic tastes, the panel tasted the five samples – control, dose 1, 2 and 3, and then the Northiam 
milk (the competitor), to see, if there were any difference between the four samples and between the two brands. 
The panel tasted the samples in pairs to compare the samples and discriminate any differences (in Appendix 10 a 
picture is shown of the comparison between two samples). The aim was, that the panellists should come up with 
==PAGE:25==
 
Coffee Milk and impact of feeding – DTU 2016 
17 
 
the most pronounced descriptors on appearance, smell, basic taste (the response from the taste receptors on the 
tongue), retronasal aroma (response from the aroma in the back of the nose), mouth feeling, aftertaste and others. 
When all five samples had been evaluated the panel chose 13 descriptors, which could be used for discriminating 
the five samples. The chosen descriptors can be found in Table 2.  
Table 2: The 13 descriptors for the sensory evaluation. 
Group 
Descriptor 
Definition 
Reference 
Appearance 
Yellow 
 
No 
Basic taste 
Sweet 
 
Sucrose solution 12 g/L 
 
Sour 
 
Citric Acid solution: 0.6 g/L  
 
Salt 
 
NaCl solution: 1 g/L 
Retronasal aroma 
Caramel 
 
No 
 
Nutty 
 
No 
 
Hay/farm  
Dusty smell at the farm 
No 
 
Grassy  
Freshly cut grass 
No 
 
Cereals/cookies 
 
No 
 
Buttery 
Smell of butter 
No 
 
Cheesy 
A bit fermented 
No 
Mouthfeel 
Body 
 
No 
Aftertaste 
Lingering 
 
No 
 
The second part of the training was the calibration to the 13 descriptors in relation to the five samples. The panel 
tasted the samples in pairs and should for each of the descriptors rank them on a 15 cm line-scale from “not at all” 
to “a lot” (see Appendix 11). The training and calibration was done to define the descriptors so all panellists used 
the same criteria for the evaluation, and to teach the panel how to use the scale and make them familiar with the 
samples before the sensory evaluation.      
After a break the panel did the actually evaluation, tasting all five samples in triplicates during two rounds, with a 
small break between each round (see the distribution of the samples in Appendix 9). Each panellist did the tasting 
in a unique random order. It was a descriptive evaluation, where the panellists rated each sample from 1-15 in 
intensity, corresponding to a 15 cm line-scale. This was done for each of the chosen descriptors. The panellists were 
asked to do the tasting process identically for each sample and to clean their mouth with a bite of plain toast bread 
and rise their mouth with water (room temp.) between each sample, to reduce or avoid carry over effects. The 
evaluation was done electronically via tinyurl.com/milkround1 and tinyurl.com/milkround2 leading to a google doc 
in Google Forms (see Appendix 12).     
Originally, it was planned to do the second tasting (day 2) on coffee with the milk, but since the panel only counted 
six participants the first day, it was decided to repeat a similar tasting on day 2, with the use of the 13 descriptors 
from day 1.  
==PAGE:26==
 
Coffee Milk and impact of feeding – DTU 2016 
18 
 
Day 2 the panel counted 13 people (ten males and three females). They all worked in the coffee industry, but were 
not trained tasters, and there had not been any specific selection of the panellists with regard to their sensory abilities 
or ability to describe and evaluate. Day 2 did also start with tasting references (water + milk) and subsequently the 
13 descriptors from day 1 were used for training and calibration. From the sensory evaluation day 1, it was found, 
that the difference between sample 1, 2 and 4 was very small. Therefore, the training was conducted, so the samples 
were served in a chosen order to avoid convergence effect, where large differences between samples, could mask 
small differences between other samples. Therefore, sample 1, 2 and 4 were compared in the first set up, to make it 
easier for the panellists to perceive the small differences between these samples. Day 2 the calibration was done on 
three samples at a time, three times, which gave the untrained panellists a bit more training. After a break the exact 
same sensory evaluation was done as on day 1 (see pictures from the evaluation Appendix 13).  
The raw data from the two descriptive sensory analysis was computed in Excel and arranged to fit into PanelCheck 
“visual performance monitoring” (version 1.4.2, Nofima Mat, Norway), where the data was analysed making PCA 
plots, spider plots and calculating and finding significant differences between the samples using 2-way ANOVA. 
4.4 Chemical analyses 
Since different analyses method provides different types and numbers of information, it is preferable to combine 
and use different methods. Three different spectroscopic methods were used, MilkoScan, GC-MS and NMR.  
The analyses were conducted on the samples, which had been frozen for six days (GC-MS), six days (MilkoScan), 
and 12 days (NMR). It should be noted, that all the analyses, sensory and chemical, were done on the milk which 
had only been pasteurized but not standardized to a specific fat or protein content. It would not be practical possible 
to standardize such small sample volumes without increasing the risk of bias and contamination. At the same time 
the fat and protein content are some of the parameters believed to change due to a supplement of Met. 
4.4.1 Sample preparation 
For the GC-MS samples Dynamic Headspace and Twister were chosen to be able to analyse both the volatiles and 
the semi- and non-volatile component. Pictures from the sample preparation can be found in Appendix 14. The 
running time for the sample preparation was prolonged to make sure that the volatiles were released due to the fact, 
that compounds bound to fat have an increased release time (Mikael A. Petersen, 2016.   
4.4.1.1 Dynamic Headspace 
To detect any changes in the aromatic profile of the milk as a result of the four different feedings, Dynamic 
Headspace (DHS) was performed. DHS is used for trapping the volatiles from the samples into a matrix in small 
traps. 30 mL of sample and 1 mL internal standard (IS) (5 ppm 4-methyl-1-pentanol) was transferred to 100 mL gas 
washing bottles with a purge head. Each of the four samples were made in triplicates. On the outlet of the purge 
head the traps (Tenax-TA) were attached and a flow tube was attached to the inlet. To lead the volatiles from the 
==PAGE:27==
 
Coffee Milk and impact of feeding – DTU 2016 
19 
 
milk into the trap, the samples was purged with nitrogen (151 mL/min) for 60 min. To simulate the mouth 
temperature, the gas washing bottles were placed in a water bath at 37 °C with stirring at 200 rpm. To remove any 
possible water from the traps after the DHS, the traps were dry-purged with nitrogen (151 mL/min) for 10 min. 
After this the samples were ready for the GC-MS analysis. 
4.4.1.2 Stir Bar Sorptive Extraction 
Stir Bar Sorptive Extraction (SBSE) also called Twister, is a small magnet with a sorbent coating, which can extract 
organic compounds from aqueous matrices and thereby absorb the non- and semi-volatiles in the milk samples. 
The extraction technique is solvent-free which makes it fast and at the same time the SBSE is a sensitive method 
due to a more sorbent volume and a large sample volume due to the efficient stirring (Anon 2016a).  
After the traps from the DHS had been disconnected from the gas washing bottles, a twister (PDMS-film thickness 
1.0 mm, length 20 mm, PDMS volume: 127 μL, Gerstel GmbH & CO.KG) was placed in each bottle and the bottles 
were placed on a stirring plate (1000 rpm) for 60 min. at room temperature.  
After the 60 min. the twister magnets were removed from the sample and cleaned carefully with cold water and a 
quick dip in hot water to remove fatty matrices on the surface of the twister, but without desorbing other 
compounds. Before the twister were placed in steel tubes, they were dried free from water. The steel tubes were 
similar to the traps used for DHS, just with a small net to keep the twister in the middle of the tube and without the 
matrix inside, to make room for the twister magnet.   
4.4.2 GC-MS 
GC-MS (Gas Chromatographic-Mass Spectroscopy) can be used as a method for analysing volatile and semi-volatile 
organic compounds. It is a very sensitive method, which is used for identification and quantification of compounds 
in complex mixtures (Simonsen 2006a).  
The analytes trapped during DHS and SBSE were desorbed from the traps and the twisters using thermal 
desorption, which is a technique where volatiles are extracted from the non-volatile matrix. The desorption consists 
of a primary and a secondary desorption. At first the volatiles need to be transferred to a smaller “cold trap”, which 
can be heated to the right temperature faster than the original traps and thereby allow a rapid transfer of the volatiles 
to the GC (PerkinElmer 2007). The specifications for the desorption and the GC-MS can be found in Table 3.  
In the GC the compounds are carried on gaseous form through the colon, where they are separated according to 
size, boiling point or polarity depending on the kind of colon (Simonsen 2006a). From the colon the separated 
compounds are led into the MS detector, where the molar mass and the structure of the molecule are found. It is a 
very sensitive and flexible method only requiring small sample volumes. By irradiation of the molecules with an 
electron flow, the molecules are ionized and partly degraded into fragments. The fragments have different sizes and 
therefore they can be divided by molecule mass using a mass filter (Simonsen 2006b). 
==PAGE:28==
 
Coffee Milk and impact of feeding – DTU 2016 
20 
 
Table 3: GC-MS specifications 
GC-MS specifications 
Primary trap 
Tenax-TA trap with 200 mg Tenax-TA. Size 60/80  and density 0.37 g mL-1 (Markes 
International, Llantrisant, UK) 
Desorption 
TurboMatrix 350, Perkin Elmer, Shelton, USA.  
GC-MS spectrometer 
GC-MS, 7890A GC-system. 5975C VL MSD with a Triple-Axis detector. Agilent Technologies, 
Palo Alto, California 
Primary desorption 
250°C and flow 50 mL H2 /min  for 15.0 min.  
Secondary trap 
Tenax TA cold trap (30 mg at 5°C)  
Secondary desorption 
At 300°C for 4 min (outlet split 1:10). 
Temp. of the transfer line to the 
column  
225°C 
Column 
ZB-Wax capillary column. Length 30 m. x 0.25 mm internal diameter. Thickness of the coating 
0.50 µm.  
Pressure and carrier gas 
Pressure: 2.3 psi.                     Flow: 1.4 mL H2/min.  
Temp. program for the column 
10 min at 30°C               Increase in temp. 240°C with 8°C/min          5 min at 240°C. 
Electron ionisation state mode 
70 eV.  
Mass-to-charge ratio 
15-300 
Software program 
PARADISe based on PARAFAC2  
Database for identification 
NIST11 (NIST/EPA/NIH Mass Specral Library, NIST, US) 
 
The data from the GC-MS analysis, was used to identify and quantify the different aroma compounds in the milk 
samples. For this purpose, the software program PARADISe was used. It uses PARAFAC2 modelling for 
identification and qualification of the peaks in the GC-MS chromatogram. PARADISe is a new data processing 
tool, which can extract pure spectra of compounds and quantify these using the NIST11 database. The data was 
further investigated with principal component analysis (PCA) using SIMCA 14.1 (Umetrics Suite, MKS Data 
Analytics Solutions, Sweeden).     
4.4.3 MilkoScan 
The MilkoScan (MiS) is an accurate, effective, simple and very fast analysing instrument for dairy samples. For milk, 
the MiS can be used for analysing a range of constituents e.g. the content of fat, protein, lactose etc. (A. FOSS 2016; 
FOSS 2016a).  
The MiS (MilkoScanTM FT2, FOSS, Denmark) is an infrared milk analyser based on Fourier Transform infrared 
(FTIR) measurement principle. FTIR spectroscopy is based on an interferometer to generate the spectrum from 
the data and works across longer wavelengths compared to NIR (Near Infrared) and scans the mid-infrared 
spectrum. By using longer wavelengths the analysis can give more specific chemical information from the samples 
(FOSS 2016b).  
The MiS was calibrated to milk and before the sampling, the system was set to zero using the zero-setting function. 
Between each sample the system was cleaned. The MiS made two measurements from each sample requiring around 
==PAGE:29==
 
Coffee Milk and impact of feeding – DTU 2016 
21 
 
30-35 mL of liquid sample, which was automatically pumped into the system, and the results were directly show on 
the computer screen. As the samples had been frozen the fat had clumped together and the samples were 
inhomogeneous when thawed. Therefore, it was tried to heat up the samples first to 40˚C and shake them extensively 
to homogenise the samples, but as the samples were still not homogeneous, a new measurement was done where 
the samples were heated to 45˚C, and this time the samples seemed homogenous. A fourth measurement was done 
on fresh milk. Originally, MiS was not intended to be done on fresh milk, but since leftovers from the tasting were 
available, the measurement was conducted on fresh milk as well as frozen, hoping this could give better results 
4.4.4 NMR spectroscopy  
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is a spectroscopic analytical method which can be used for 
determining the chemical component in a sample. NMR is a very complex tool which is based on the nuclei spin of 
the atoms. The NMR spectrometer consist of a powerful magnet, a radio transmitter and receiver (Radio frequency 
(RF) receiver). By placing a sample inside the powerful magnetic field the sample is radiated with electromagnetic 
radiation in the radio waveband and spin is obtained. Depending on the wavelength and the frequency of the 
radiation, the substances in the sample are affected differently (Rank et al. 2006).   
  
Only atomic nuclei with a magnetic spin can be analysed by NMR, and 1H and 13C NMR are the most commonly 
used NMR nuclei (Rank et al. 2006). When the nucleus is hit by an impulse the nucleus excites and the spin state is 
changed. Later the energy, which the nucleus has absorbed, can be released as radio radiation with a frequency 
corresponding to the resonance frequency of the nucleus. The RF receiver registers the radio waves which are 
recorded as free induction decay (FID) and is Fourier transformed (FT) to get at spectrum. Based on the location 
of the peaks, the multiplicity (line shape) and other characteristics the different compounds in the sample can be 
identified.  
Prior to the NMR spectroscopy three different sample types were prepared. One type was made on the full fat milk 
without any further preparation, another no skimmed milk and the third type was skimmed and filtered. 58 g. of 
milk were centrifuged in sample tubes at 3,405 G for 30 min. at around 4˚C. The fat layer on the top was removed 
and the milk was filtered to remove lipids and protein using Amicon Ultra 0.5 mL 10 kDa spin filters (Millipore, 
USA). The filters were filled with 0,5 mL skimmed milk and spun at 10,000 G 4˚C for 30 min. This was done twice 
to produce a sample of at least 500 μL filtered milk. 500 μL sample was added to 100 μL D2O with 0.025% IS (TSP) 
and mixed in the NMR-tubes. D2O is necessary to lock the magnetic field, and the IS is a chemical shift reference. 
All four samples were made in triplicates for the filtered, skimmed and full fat milk, and analysed by 1H NMR 
spectroscopy. The specifications for the NMR spectroscopy can be found in Table 4 and additional specifications 
can be found in Appendix 15. The method is a used method for NMR analysis of milk (Sundekilde et al. 2013; 
Sundekilde et al. 2015) 
 
 
==PAGE:30==
 
Coffee Milk and impact of feeding – DTU 2016 
22 
 
Table 4: NMR specifications used for the 1H NMR spectroscopy 
NMR specifications 
 
Spectrometer: 
Burker Advance III 600 spectrometer 
1H frequency:  
600.13 MHz 
Probe  
5-mm 1H TXI probe (Burker BioSpin, Rheinstetten, Germany) 
Temperature:  
25°C 
Pulse sequence:  
Noesypr1d 
Number of scans:  
64 scans 
Receiver gain:  
28,5 
Relaxation delay (d1):  
5 sec. 
Recording time pr. scan  
(acqusition time):  
1.3631488 sec 
Spectral width: 
20.0276 ppm 
Processing:  
32 K points are recorded           Zero-filled to 64 K points 
Reference:  
0,24187 Mm (0,025%; TSP 172,27 g/mol in deuterium oxide) 
TSP: Sodium trimethylsilyl-[2,2,3,3-2H4]-1-propionate (Sigma-Aldrich, Brøndby, Denmark) 
Water suppression was achieved by irradiating the water peak during the relaxation delay. The 64 scans were 
gathered to 32 K data points. To the processing of the 1H NMR spectra zero-filling was conducted to make the FT 
better and improve the spectrum. The 1H NMR spectra from the filtered milk samples were referenced to the TSP 
signal at 0 ppm, while the full fat milk samples were referenced to the lactose peak at 5.23 ppm, as the TSP standard 
binds to peptides and protein, and therefore the TSP peak is not shown on the spectra. After the samples had been 
referenced, the spectra were manually phase- and baseline corrected using Topspin 3.2 (Burker BioSpin, 
Rheinstetten, Germany). The identification and integration of the metabolites was also done manually using 
Chenomx NMR suite (Chenomx Inc, Edmonton, Canada). This procedure was only conducted on the filtered 
samples, since the resonance from the lipids is wider and leads to spectral overlapping, and thereby it is impossible 
to see the resonances overlapped by the lipids. 
Instead, the spectra from the full fat samples were processed in MATLAB 7.13 (Math Works Inc., Natick, MA, 
USA), to quantify the total lipid content. Data from Chenomx was transferred to SIMCA 14.1 (Umetrics Suite, 
MKS Data Analytics Solutions, Sweeden), to make PCA.    
4.5 Data analysis  
SIMCA 14.1 (Umetrics Suite, MKS Data Analytics Solutions, Sweeden) was used for the statistical analysis by 
principal component analysis (PCA) based on the results from the NMR, GC-MS and sensory analyses.  
PCA is a statistic tool, which extracts the principal components (PC), which is done by analysing all the variables 
simultaneously. The PCA are shown as loadings plot and score plots. The loading describes the correlation between 
the PC and the original variable – expressing the relevant information about the variables – and the score plot shows 
the correlation between variables – all the relevant information about the samples. The closer the value are to 1, the 
==PAGE:31==
 
Coffee Milk and impact of feeding – DTU 2016 
23 
 
better the component is aligned with the original variable, while a value close to zero shows that the it has no 
influence, and a negative value indicates an opposite influence. By comparing the loadings plot to the score plot it 
is possible to understand how the variables relate to the observations, since the score plot shows the correlation 
between observations. It is also from the score plot that any trends or grouping can be observed. By looking at the 
scores and the loadings, a correlation between samples and variables can often be established (Münchow et al. 2015; 
UMETRICS 2016).  
PCA can be used for seeing tendencies in large or small sample sets and can visualize interlinkages between different 
samples. The largest  variance is shown as the first coordinate (PC1) and the second largest at the second coordinate 
(PC2) and so on (Smith 2002). In this study PCA was used for looking at differences between the control milk and 
the milk from the three different groups of cows fed Met-enriched feed. The PCA results (loadings and scores) are 
not completely accurate, as a rule of thumb is, that PCA requires four actual samples per variable. But since the four 
samples in this study are made in triplicates, it adds up to 12 samples, which can be used for two variables (PC1 and 
PC2), though this is not completely correct (Ulrik K. Sundekilde, 2016). 
The “raw” NMR data for the PCA was scaled using Pareto scaling, which is most often used for NMR data because 
of the major dynamic range between small and large peaks. The Pareto scaling is often used for continuous data, 
while auto scaling (UV (unit-variance) scaling) is used for discrete data. By using auto scaling the PCA finds the 
variable variating the most, which is not necessary the main component. Pareto on the other hand is more a 
compromise, where numerical quantities still has a rather large effect on the model (Ulrik K. Sundekilde, 2016). The 
GC-MS data and the qualitative data from the NMR, was UV scaled before the PCA analysis.     
To search for significant differences in the quantity of each of the compounds in the samples, an unpaired two-
sample t-test was conducted. The t-test was done by the t-test function in Excel (=TTEST(vector1; vector2; tails, 
type)). Vector1 represents the results from the triplicate from one compound in one sample, while vector2 
represents the results from a triplicate from the same compound in another sample. A 2-tailed test was made, 
because although there was a difference between the amount of the specific compound in the two samples, it was 
not sure, which of the samples had the highest content of the compound. The type, is type 3, as the data comes 
from two different samples with different variance (heteroskedastic). This t-test was done for all compounds 
between the three doses and the control.  
 
==PAGE:32==
 
Coffee Milk and impact of feeding – DTU 2016 
24 
 
5 
Results and discussion 
 
 
As it appears from previously, a lot of data has become available from the study. Following is a list of the data used 
for the results and discussion. Data on the sensory profile of the milk from the sensory evaluation, the GC-MS 
results primary on the aroma compounds, the NMR results on some of the macro components, the MiS results on 
fat, protein and lactose and in addition the data from the daily yield from each cow during the trial.  
As mentioned, the samples were collected in the morning, because of practicalities, despite that studies (Sahana et 
al. 2008) have shown that there is a difference in the milk composition from the morning and afternoon milking, 
since the cows are affected by different factors during the daytime and nighttime. Therefore, it would have been 
more optimal to take samples from both the morning and afternoon milking to even out these differences. At the 
same time, this would be more realistic compared to the procedure at the farm, where the milk from both milkings 
are pooled.  
It was clear just by looking at the milk that there at least was a difference in the fat content. The first day of the 
sensory evaluation, the dose 3 sample, was significantly more yellow than the other samples. The increased amount 
of fat could also be seen after the DHS, where a larger amount of oil was floating on the surface of sample 3 (dose 
3) compared to sample 4 (control). And when the milk had been skimmed, the fat layer was about twice as thick on 
the sample 3 (dose 3) compared to the other samples (Picture 1). So by these indications, differences between the 
samples should be possible to obtain. Since many compounds has been identified by the chemical analyses, the main 
focus will be on the compounds significantly different within the four samples, as well as the compounds which has 
assigned flavour descriptors, so it is possible to compare the effect on the chemical changes to the results from the 
sensory analysis.  
    
 
Picture 1: (Left) difference in the fat layer on top of the samples from the control (little fat) and from dose 3 (much fat) after the 
DHS.  (Right) picture from the skimmed samples from left to right: Control, dose 1 to 3 
==PAGE:33==
 
Coffee Milk and impact of feeding – DTU 2016 
25 
 
5.1 The impact on the flavour from the feeding 
From the descriptive evaluations day 1 and day 2, PCA biplots were made on the consensus data, which shows that 
the two panels perceived the milk quite different (Figure 5). On day 1 the sensory panel perceived sample 3 (dose 
3) as significantly (p<0.001) more yellow than the other samples, and that it had significantly (p<0.05) more 
mouthfeel and buttery flavour than the other three samples (Appendix 16). At the same time, dose 3 was perceived 
sweeter than the other samples, while sample 1 was cheesier, none of them significantly.  
On day 2 the evaluation turned out differently (Figure 5, right). The sensory panel perceived sample 1 (dose 1) 
significantly (p<0.01) more yellow than the other samples, and sample 3 was perceived significantly (p<0.05) less 
buttery than the other three samples (Appendix 16). The plot will be used further on for comparison with the 
findings in the chemical analyses. 
Sample 4 (control) was perceived slightly saltier, more sour, cheesier, grassier and with more hay/farm flavour 
compared to the other samples. On the PCA score plot from day 1, PC1 describes 80.7% of the variance, while 
PC1 only describes 47.1% of the variance from day 2. This picture of how the milk was perceived by the two panels, 
can also be seen in the spider plot (Figure 6), where it is clear, that sample 3 was perceived a lot more different from 
the other samples on day 1, and that the samples on day 2 were perceived very similar. These differences between 
the two days are either an expression of, how fast the milk composition and flavour is changing, or it was due to 
differences in the two panels.  
For the sensory evaluation the Northiam milk was also evaluated, since this milk is, by baristas, said to be more 
sweet than the ED milk. Therefore, one of the aims was by feeding the cows with a supplement to obtain a sweeter 
milk, which was achieved. The results from day 1 (Figure 7, left), showed that the dose 3 milk was perceived sweeter 
than the Northiam, though it was not significantly. And the Northiam (sample 5) was perceived significantly lower 
Figure 5: Biplots on the consensus data from the sensory evaluations day 1 (left) and day 2 (right). Sample 1 = dose 1, sample 
2 = dose 2, sample 3 = dose 3 and sample 4 = control 
==PAGE:34==
 
Coffee Milk and impact of feeding – DTU 2016 
26 
 
in cheesiness than the rest of the samples (p < 0.05). On day 2 (Figure 7, right) this had change, and the Northiam 
was perceived the as the sweetest (not significantly).  
Over all the results indicates, that though it was not significant, the ED (dose 3) had become more sweet compared 
to the control, which was one of the goals. Another thing is the significance in the yellow colour (day 1), which 
indicates a higher fat content in sample 3, which fits to the chemical results which will be explained later on. The 
change in the yellow colour from day 1 to day 2 may be due to a higher fat deposition in the udder bag, and thereby 
making the milk seem less yellow on day 2. A zoom of the four spider plots can be found in Appendix 17. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6: Spider plot on the consensus data from the two sensory evaluations day 1 (left) and day 2 (right). 
Sample 1 = dose 1, sample 2 = dose 2, sample 3 = dose 3 and sample 4 = control 
==PAGE:35==
 
Coffee Milk and impact of feeding – DTU 2016 
27 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The sensory results showed that milk is not a simple matrix to evaluate, and that it might change very fast during 
storage. At the same time the panel needs to be trained for the specific purpose to obtain valid results, but in this 
case this was not doable.   
Since the difference between the two evaluations were quite obvious, it was decided to use the sensory profile 
obtained by the sensory evaluation on day 1, for the further work and the comparison with the results obtained by 
the chemical analyses, because the panellist seemed like more experienced tasters and they were the ones choosing 
the descriptors. This was decided despite the small panel size. 
Simultaneously, the fat had not deposited on day 1 and on day 2 it seemed like the milk had less aromas and had 
changed during storage, though it was only over the course of one day. Concurrently, the milk used for the chemical 
analyses was assumed more comparable to the milk from day 1, since the milk had been frozen to minimize any 
changes in the milk composition and no volatiles had been able to evaporate. 
    
 
 
Figure 7: Spider plot from the sensory evaluation including the Northiam milk (sample 5). Day 1 (left) and day 2 (right) 
Sample 1 = dose 1, sample 2 = dose 2, sample 3 = dose 3 and sample 4 = control 
==PAGE:36==
 
Coffee Milk and impact of feeding – DTU 2016 
28 
 
5.2 Impact on the compounds found by 1H NMR spectroscopy 
By using 1H NMR spectroscopy 36 chemical compounds were identified and quantified in the milk samples – 31 
compounds were comparable to compounds found by 1H NMR in bovine milk from other studies (Buitenhuis et 
al. 2015; Klein et al. 2010; Sundekilde et al. 2013; Sundekilde et al. 2015). The last 5 compounds; adenosine, cytidine, 
3-hydroxyisovalerate, pantothenate and mannose could not be found in literature on 1H NMR, but pantothenate, 
which is vitamin B5, is a common vitamin in milk (Pieter Walstra et al. 2006b) and adenosine, cytidine and mannose 
have been identified using GC/MS and LC/MS (Boudonck et al. 2009). 
All 36 compounds are listed in Table 5 with compound name, the classification, 1H chemical shift (ppm), assignment 
(meaning to which proton in the molecule the peak, for the chemical shifts mentioned, are assigned to), and odour 
and taste description. The odour and taste description is added to be able to compare the 1H NMR results to the 
results from the sensory evaluation later on. 
As mentioned earlier, the identification and quantification was done on the filtered samples to be able to identify as 
many compounds as possible. This was due to the fact, that a lot of the compounds have protons signal with a 
chemical shift in the same region as the lipids, and since the signal of the lipids results in very wide and intense 
peaks, they cover a major share of the 10 ppm proton spectra, which we are looking at. At the same time the IS 
binds to proteins and peptides and especially the milk proteins, so since 1H NMR measures the mobile protons in 
the sample, the IS cannot be measured and thereby the compounds in the full fat samples could not be quantified 
relative to the IS. Of course another IS could have been used, but then there would still be the problem with the 
very broad lipid-signals. 
In Figure 8, a section of the 1H NMR spectra from one of the samples are shown. As seen it is the lactose dominating 
the picture, since it is one of the great compounds in milk. Together with lactose, the most abundant compounds 
identified are citrate, orotic acid and phosphocholine. Apart from the compounds identified, some oligosaccharides 
were present in the 5.50-5.00 ppm region (Sundekilde et al. 2016), and the peak at 4.78 ppm is the residual water 
from the water suppression, which is necessary to get a useful spectra, since the milk contains around 87% water 
(Pieter Walstra et al. 2006a; Bylund 1995b). 
 
==PAGE:37==
 
Coffee Milk and impact of feeding – DTU 2016 
29 
 
  
Figure 8: Section of the 1H NMR spectra from the 6.2-2.0 ppm region from one of the filtered dose 1 samples. The zoom in the left upper corner shows unidentified oligosaccharides (1) 
in the 5.50-5.00 region. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
==PAGE:38==
 
Coffee Milk and impact of feeding – DTU 2016 
30 
 
Table 5: Compounds identified by 1H NMR spectroscopy on the milk samples. The odour and taste descriptors of each compound is given when possible.  
Metabolite 
Classification 
(Direct parent) 
1H chemical shift 
(ppm) 
Assignment 
Odour description 
Taste description 
 
Benzenoids 
 
 
 
 
 
Hippurate  
(Hippuric acid) 
Hippuric acids 
7.54, 7.63, 7.83 
CH2-3,5, CH-4, CH2-2,6 
- 
- 
 
Nucleosides, nucleotides, and analogues 
 
 
 
 
 
Adenosine 
 
Purine nucleosides 
6.05 
CH-1 
- 
- 
Cytidine 
Pyrimidine nucleosides 
6.05, 7.83 
CH, CH 
 
 
 
Lipids and lipid-like molecules 
 
 
 
 
 
3-Hydroxybutyrate  
(3-hydroxybutanoic acid) 
Hydroxy fatty acids 
1.19 
CH3 
- 
- 
3-Hydroxyisovalerate  
(3-Hydroxyisovaleric acid) 
Hydroxy fatty acids 
1.24 
2 x CH3 
- 
- 
Carnitine 
(L-Carnitine) 
Hydroxy fatty acids 
3.21 
3 x CH3 
- 
- 
sn-Glycero-3-phosphocholine 
(Glycerophosphocholine) 
Lycerophosphocholines 
3.21, 4.31 
N-CH2, O-CH2 
- 
- 
Threonine  
(L-Threonine) 
Hydroxy fatty acids 
1.32 
CH3 
Mild savory* 
Sweet* 
 
Organic acids and derivatives 
 
 
 
 
 
2-Oxoglutarate  
(Oxoglutaric acid) 
γ-keto acids and derivatives 
3.0, 2.43 
CH2, CH2 
- 
- 
Acetate  
(Acetic acid) 
Carboxylic acids 
1.91 
CH3 
Sharp, pungent, vinegar, sour* ** 
Pungent, sour, overripe fruit* 
Alanine, Ala  
(L-Alanine) 
L-α-amino acids 
1.47 
CH3 
Odourless* ** 
Sweet* ** 
Betaine 
 
α-amino acids 
3.26 
3 x CH3 
Bland* 
- 
Cis-aconitate  
(Cis-aconitic acid) 
Tricarboxylic acids and derivatives 
3.13 
CH2 
Bland* 
Wine, acid* 
Citrate  
(Citric acid) 
Tricarboxylic acids and derivatives 
2.52, 2.69 
CH2,CH2 
Odourless* 
Strong acidic* 
Creatine 
 
α-amino acids and derivatives 
3.03 
CH2 
- 
- 
Fumarate  
(Fumaric acid) 
Dicarboxylic acids and derivatives 
6.51 
CH 
Odourless* 
- 
Glutamate, Glu  
(L-Glutamic acid) 
 
L-α-amino acids 
2.36 
γ-CH2 
Mild, yeasty, baked bread* 
- 
==PAGE:39==
 
Coffee Milk and impact of feeding – DTU 2016 
31 
 
Lactate  
(L-lactic acid) 
α-hydroxy acids and derivatives 
1.32 
CH3 
Odourless* ** 
Sour* pleasant acid* ** 
Malonate  
(Malonic acid) 
Dicarboxylic acids and derivatives 
3.12 
CH2 
- 
- 
Methionine, Met  
(L-Methionine) 
D-α-amino acid 
2.13 
γ-CH2, S-CH3 
Acidic* characteristic odour** 
- 
Orotic acid, Vit. B13  
(Orotate) 
Pyrimidinecarboxylic acids 
6.18 
CH 
- 
- 
Pantothenate, Vit. B5  
(Panthohenic acid) 
β-amino acids and derivatives 
0.88, 0.92 
CH3, CH3 
- 
- 
Pyruvate  
(Pyruvic acid) 
α-keto acids and derivatives 
2.37 
CH3 
Sharp, caramel* sour, acetic* ** 
Caramel, brown sugar* 
pleasant, sour, sweet** 
Succinate  
(succinic acid) 
Dicarboxylic acids and derivatives 
2.4 
2 x CH2 
Odourless* 
Sour, acidic* 
Urea 
 
Ureas 
5.77 
NH2 
- 
- 
Valine, Val  
(L-Valine) 
D-α-amino acid 
0.98, 1.03 
CH3, CH3 
Odourless* ** 
- 
 
Organonitrogen compounds 
 
 
 
 
 
Choline 
 
Cholines 
3.19 
3 x CH3 
- 
- 
O-Phosphocholine  
(Phosphorylcholine) 
Phosphocholines 
3.21 
3 x CH3 
- 
- 
 
Organooxygen compounds 
 
 
 
 
 
Acetone  
(propane-2-one) 
Ketones 
2.22 
CH3 
Solvent, ethereal, apple, pear* aromatic** 
Pungent, sweet** 
Fucose  
(L-Fucose) 
Monosaccharides 
1.23 
CH3 
- 
- 
Galactose  
(D-galactose) 
Monosaccharides 
4.57 
CH-1 
- 
Sweet* 
Glucose  
(D-glucose) 
Monosaccharides 
5.19 
CH2 
- 
Sweet* 
Glucose-1-phosphate  
(Glucose 1P) 
Monosaccharide phosphates 
5.45 
CH-1 
- 
- 
Lactose  
(α-Lactose) 
O-glycosyl compounds 
3.28, 4.44, 5.22 
CH-2,  CH-1’, CH-2 
- 
Sweet* 
Mannose  
(D-mannose) 
Monosaccharides 
5.17 
CH-1 
- 
Sweet* 
 
 
 
 
 
Identification based on the spectra from Chenomx NMR suite (Chenomx Inc, Edmonton, Canada).  
1H chemical shift and assignments are checked and compared to the HMDB databases and literature (Sundekilde et al. 2013; Sundekilde et al. 2015; Klein et al. 2010; The Metabolomics Innovation Centre (TMIC) 2016) 
Classification (The Metabolomics Innovation Centre (TMIC) 2016) 
*(Bill 2016) 
**(Acree & Arn 2016) 
 
==PAGE:40==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
32 
 
5.2.1 The impact on the fat content  
On the spectra from the analysis of the full fat samples, the lipids were dominating in the 2.43-0.7 ppm region and 
thereby compounds as glutamate, acetate, methionine, fucose, lactate, alanine, valine, hydroxybutyrate and 3-
hydroxyisovalerate were overlapped by the lipids cf. the previous section.     
Since the IS had bound to the milk proteins in the full fat samples, the quantification of the fat could not be absolute, 
but instead a relative quantification was done, so a relationship between the amount of fat in the samples could be 
obtained. As it appears on Figure 9 the amount of fat in sample 3 (dose 3) was much higher than the other three 
samples.  
 
Figure 9: Image of the lipid region between 2.43-0.7 ppm. from all the 1H NMR spectra (full fat spectra) gathered in one. The 
three samples with the highest peaks are from sample 3 (dose 3) 
This difference in the fat content in dose 3, is also shown from the relative quantification of the lipids in the three 
doses compared to the control (Table 6). As seen dose 3 contains more than 100% more fat than the control, while 
dose 2 contains 20% more fat. The fat content in the control and dose 1 are more or less the same.  
 
 
Sample 3 
Sample 1, 2 and 4 
==PAGE:41==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
33 
 
Table 6: The relative quantification of the lipids in the three doses compared to the control 
Sample 
Area under the curve 
Change compared to the control 
Change in % 
Std. div. compared to the control 
Dose 1 
5.89E+08 
0.988 
-1% 
0.128 
Dose 2 
7.13E+08 
1.195 
20% 
0.164 
Dose 3 
1.24E+09 
2.083 
108% 
0.037 
Control 
5.96E+08 
1 
0% 
0.052 
 
 
 
Figure 10: A) PCA score plot with PC1 and PC2, describing 86% and 8.7%, respectively, of the total variation in the compounds 
found by 1H NMR. Green: filtered samples, blur: full fat samples, red: skimmed samples. B) The corresponding loadings plot. 
By creating a PCA score plot for all the samples (Figure 10A), the difference in the fat content was also easy to see 
and the samples were divided into groups corresponding to the sample treatment. In the full fat samples (blue) it 
can be seen, that sample 7, 8 and 9 – the triplicate of dose 3 – were much higher in fat than any of the other samples. 
A 
B 
Citrate 
Lactose 
==PAGE:42==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
34 
 
The PCA score plot shows the two first and most important components, PC1 describes 86% of the total variance 
in the sample and PC2 describes 8.7%. By looking at the loadings Figure 10B, it is seen, that PC1 and thereby 86% 
of the total variation comes from the variation in the lipid content, while PC2 describes the variation in the lactose. 
Analysis of the loadings plot for the present PCA, reveals the variables of importance, and the positive peaks present 
the lipids as the most dominant protons measured. The loadings plot also clearly shows the peaks from the lactose 
and citrate, but opposite the lipids, indicating that the weight of lactose and citrate is low compared to the lipids. 
The same trend was seen, when looking at the PCA score plot and loadings from the full fat samples only (Figure 
11). Here PC1 (the lipids) describes 88.2% of the total variation and PC2 (lactose) describes 6.4% of the total 
variation. These result on the lipid content between the different samples, fits to the indications from the MiS, which 
will be explained later on in section 5.4.   
 
 
Figure 11: A) PCA score plot with PC1 and PC2, describing 88.2% and 6.4%, respectively, of the total variation in the compounds 
found by 1H NMR on the full fat samples. B) The corresponding loadings plot.  
 
A 
B 
Lactose 
==PAGE:43==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
35 
 
Since acetate plays an important role in the fat synthesis, it is interesting to see, how the content of acetate in the 
milk has evolved. As explained in section 2.2.1 and 2.2.2.3 acetate is formed in the rumen, when the microbiota 
ferment carbohydrate, and are later on used in the mammary gland for synthesising C4-C14 FA. Since the fat content 
in the milk had increased my hypothesis was, that this might result in a decrease in the acetate content in the milk, 
since more acetate is used for the fat synthesis. But by looking at the results from both 1H NMR and DHS combined 
with GC-MS no significant difference was found in the acetate content (the raw data can be found in Appendix 30 
and Appendix 31). Thereby it seems, that the acetate content in the milk, is not affected by a higher fat content.  
5.2.2 Quantification of the compounds identified by 1H NMR spectroscopy  
As mentioned 36 compounds were quantified and the p-values were calculated to see, if any of the compounds were 
present in significantly different quantities between the samples (Appendix 18). To be able to quantify the 
compounds, the spectra were manually phase- and baseline corrected and the peaks for each compound was 
manually integrated, as mentioned in the section 4.4.4, which may have added some error to the quantification. This 
error is though neglected since the error is considered rather small, see the error bars on Figure 12.   
Nine of the 36 compounds (choline, citrate, creatinine, galactose, glucose, lactose, orotic acid, sn-glycero-3-
phosphocoline, and urea) were found in quantities above 50 mg/L and of these only the urea content was 
significantly different between the samples. All three doses were significantly lower in urea compared to the control, 
but the quantity in the three doses were not significant different. When this is said, 1H NMR is not a very valid 
method for quantifying urea, since proton exchange takes place between urea and water (Lingyan Liu 2012). The 
urea measured by 1H NMR was between 74.09 and 96.95 mg/L (Appendix 18). Compared to this, the urea measured 
with MiS was a bit higher, with quantities between 87.3 and 112.7 mg/L Appendix 19). Though the measurement 
from the MiS was a bit higher than the 1H NMR results, both results were lower than the results from the farm 
(0.019% = 195.7 mg/L Appendix 28) and the average urea content in bovine milk found from literature is 250 mg 
in 1 kg. milk (Pieter Walstra et al. 2006b). The 1H NMR results looks like they are decreasing, while the MiS are 
increasing. Therefore, it is not possible to conclude on the impact of HMBi on milk urea.     
Lactose were found as the major compound, but the four samples were not significant different regarding lactose. 
Dose 1: 3.75 g/dl, dose 2: 3.73 g/dl, dose 3: 3.89 g/dl and the control: 4.04 g/dl. This was a bit low, and for all 
three doses, the lactose content were significant lower than both the normal average for Jersey cows on 4.9% lactose 
(Pieter Walstra et al. 2006b) corresponding to 5.05 g/dl since the density of milk is 1.03 kg/L, and the results from 
the MiS in section 5.4. The reason for the smaller lactose contents quantified by NMR may be due to the fact, that 
the water suppression also affects the lactose peak with a chemical shift at 4.66 ppm (Ulrik K. Sundekilde, 2016). 
At the same time the MiS are calibrated specially to milk including lactose, which may make it a more precise method.   
From the 36 identified compounds, nine were found in significant concentrations (Appendix 18) and only for four 
of these compounds, it was possible to find flavour descriptors (Table 7). These four compounds contribute with 
==PAGE:44==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
36 
 
sweetness and caramel flavour, but also some umami taste and sour/acidic flavour. Acetone was significant higher 
in all three doses compared to the control. And between the doses, dose 1 was significant lower than both dose 2 
and 3, which means, that the acetone content is increasing when more HMBi is fed, like a dose-response relationship. 
The difference between all four doses were almost significant, it was only between dose 2 and 3, that the increase 
in the acetone content was not significant (p = 0.098). Figure 12 shows the dose-response relationship of the mean 
content of acetone in the four samples. From the 36 identified compounds it was only acetone, which shows a dose-
response relationship compared to the amount of HMBi fed to the four groups (see raw data Appendix 30).   
Table 7: Compounds identified and quantified by 1H NMR spectroscopy significant in their quantity between the four samples.  
Compound 
 
aOdour descriptor 
aTaste descriptor 
bOdour 
threshold 
bTaste 
threshold 
cSignificance compared to the control 
Dose 1  
Dose 2 
Dose 3 
Acetone  
(propane-2-one) 
Solvent, ethereal* 
aromatic** 
Pungent, sweet** 
40-476 
ppm** 
n/a 
p<0.05 
p<0.01 
p<0.01 
Galactose  
(D-galactose) 
- 
Sweet* 
 
 
n.s. 
p<0.05 
n.s. 
Glutamate, Glu  
(L-Glutamic acid) 
Mild, yeasty, baked 
bread* **  
sweet meat-like (umami)** 
n/a 
n/a 
n.s. 
p<0.05 
n.s. 
Pyruvate  
(Pyruvic acid) 
Sharp, caramellic* sour, 
acetic* ** sweet** 
Caramel, brown sugar* acidic, 
sour, creamy** 
- 
5 ppm** 
p<0.05 
n.s. 
n.s. 
 
aOdour and taste descriptions: *(Bill 2016) **(Burdock & Fenaroli 2010)  
bOdour and taste threshold values: *(Bill 2016) **(Burdock & Fenaroli 2010) 
cThe p-values are found by conducting at a 2-tailed t-test in Excel as described in section 4.5.  
Acetone is also significant different between dose 1 and dose 2, and dose 1 and dose 3. 
The increase in acetone might lead to an increased “cowy” (or farm) flavour in the milk, which could be due to a 
deficiency in protein cf. section 2.3.2. This could be due to the fact, that Met is the initiating AA in the synthesis of 
almost all proteins in eukaryotes (Brosnan & Brosnan 2006) and since Met is available in greater amount, it is not 
limiting any synthesis and therefore more protein are needed through the diet. Another reason for this increased 
acetone could be due to the fact, that HMB is degraded into Met and acetone cf. section 3.2, and when more HMBi 
is fed, more HMB will be degraded into more acetone and Met, which are used in the protein synthesis. 
 
Figure 12: Development in the acetone content in the milk for the four groups. Control, dose 1, 2 and 3. The content is the mean 
of the triplicate. The error bars show the ±SD on the triplicates for each dose.  
Control                          Dose 1                         Dose 2                         Dose 3            
                                                     g HMBi/day 
==PAGE:45==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
37 
 
5.2.3 Milk compounds and flavour 
15 of the identified compounds shown in Table 5 have one or more flavour descriptors comparable of the 
descriptors used for the sensory evaluation. Most of the compounds, especially the carbohydrates provide sweetness, 
while the organic acids provide acidity and sourness. When it comes to the other descriptors used in the sensory 
analysis, the caramel flavour could come from pyruvate, while glutamate provides yeasty or baked bread odour, 
which could fit to the cheesy or fermented descriptor while the baked bread could fit to the cereal/cookies 
descriptor. Of course all this depends on the quantity of the compounds, their threshold value and their interactions 
with other compounds. An example is lactose, which is found as the primary compound except from lipids, in the 
milk. Lactose is sweet, but not very sweet compared to glucose or galactose. At the same time, the milk proteins 
decrease the sweetness, which is why e.g. whey is sweeter than milk, since the caseins (milk proteins) are removed 
(Pieter Walstra et al. 2006c). Therefore, even though lactose had been found in different quantities within the doses, 
it is not sure this difference would have been possible to perceive by the human sense of taste.  
A PCA analysis was performed to examine possible separation of the four different doses in relation to their flavour, 
using all identified compounds and their flavour descriptors. This was done to look for a relation between the 
sensory profile obtained by the sensory analysis and the profile obtained by the 1H NMR analysis. Figure 13A shows 
the PCA score plot with PC1 and PC2 explaining 47.8% and 13%, respectively, of the total variation in the profile 
of the compounds.  
From the score plot it is seen, that the four doses are almost separated each in their quadrant of the PCA score plot. 
PC1 explains the variation in the lactose content. However, because of the large dynamic range between lactose and 
less abundant compounds such as citrate, orotic acid and phosphocholine this may influence the grouping.  
By looking at the score plot and the loadings plot, it is difficult to see any specific pattern in the samples compared 
to the flavour, but the results indicate, that both dose 3 (red) and the control (yellow) contains the majority of the 
compounds compared to dose 1 and 2. It is indicated that the control has the majority of sweet compounds, while 
dose 3 has more acidic compounds (a bigger picture of the loadings plot can be found in Appendix 21).  
Comparing this to the sensory profile, dose 3 was perceived highest in almost all descriptors and was perceived 
slightly more sour than the control. Dose 3 was also perceived sweeter than the control, which does not directly fit 
to the 1H NMR results. Therefore, it is difficult to see a relationship between the two results. But by taking a look 
at the quantitative data from the different compounds within the samples (Appendix 18), it is seen that dose 3 and 
the control contains the highest quantity of most of the compounds. For many of the compounds, dose 1 and 2 
resulted in a decrease compared to the control, while dose 3 either increased or stayed at almost the same level as 
the control. To give a more specific analysis of the connection, the threshold values and quantities have to be 
examined closer, but this is not done in this project. 
==PAGE:46==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
38 
 
In addition, the PCA would most likely have been more precise, if it had been made by using the mean values for 
each component in the four samples, but since this would only give four samples in total, and each PC in the PCA, 
in theory, uses four samples (cf. section 4.5), it would not be possible to conduct a PCA. Therefore, it would have 
been better, to have more samples from each of the four groups e.g. individual samples from each cow, among 
other things to get better PCA plots. 
 
Figure 13: A) PCA score plot with PC1 and PC2, describing 47.8% and 13%, respectively, of the total variation in the compounds 
found by 1H NMR. Green: dose 1, blue: dose 2, red: dose 3, and yellow: control. B) The corresponding loadings plot with all the 
compounds identified by 1H NMR except cis-aconitate, which was not identified in all 4 samples. The flavour descriptors are 
added in relation to their respective compounds. Yellow: sweet; red: sour, acidic; blue: caramel, orange: bread, yeast.   
A 
B 
Sweet 
Sour, acidic 
Caramel 
Bread, yeast 
==PAGE:47==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
39 
 
5.3 Influence of the feeding on the aroma 
From the GC-MS spectroscopy 80 volatile compounds were identified when combined with DHS (Appendix 22) 
and 29 compounds when combined with Twister (Appendix 25). Of these compounds many have been identified 
in other studies analysing milk by GC-MS (Toso et al. 2002; Jansson et al. 2014). Apart from the identification of 
the compounds, the software did also integrate the peaks from each compound, giving a relative area, but not relative 
to the IS. This means, that the values do not indicate how big the peak are compared to a peak from another 
compound. Therefore, the comparison of the values can only be done between the same compounds in the different 
samples, which is also what takes place in PCA. It should also be noted, that since we used steel traps, possible 
volatile sulphur-containing compounds in the milk may have been degraded and thereby not detected, since they 
react with the steel (Mikael A. Petersen, 2016).  
5.3.1 Differences in the composition of volatiles compounds when using DHS 
All 80 volatile compounds identified in the milk samples are listed in the table in Appendix 22. 39 of the 80 
compounds were found in significantly different amounts between the control and one or more of the three doses 
(see Appendix 23). Since it is the sensory changes in the milk, we primary are looking at, only compounds with 
odour or taste descriptors and in significant amounts were looked closer at, giving 22 compounds (Table 8).     
To visualise how the HMBi influences the aroma composition in the milk samples, a PCA score plot and loading 
for all identified compounds is shown in Figure 14, where the two first components PC1 and PC2 describes 33.3% 
and 22%, respectively, of the total variations. The samples are grouped according to the dose of HMBi and are 
almost placed in each their quadrant. Dose 3 (red) is placed slightly away from the others in the right side of the 
score plot.    
To be able to see, if there are any relationship between the aroma compounds measured by GC-MS and the sensory 
evaluation on the four milk samples, the flavour descriptors were placed on the PCA loadings plot (Figure 14B). 
But even though the four different groups of samples were divided on the score plot, the aroma compounds did 
not group according to any specific flavour properties, which makes it difficult to say, that some samples had specific 
sensory properties compared to the other samples, based upon the PCA loadings. Though it can be said, that the 
compounds in the quadrants represents the samples in the respective quadrant on the score plot.   
Even though no specific groupings were seen, the loadings plot, showed two big groupings. In first and second 
quadrant the fatty flavours are dominating, while the sweet flavours are dominating third quadrant. In the right side 
of the loadings plot at couple of fermented, cheesy flavours are present. All this could indicate, that dose 2 is a bit 
sweeter and less fatty than the other samples as well as dose 1 and 3 having more fatty and cheesy flavours (a bigger 
picture of the loadings plot can be found in Appendix 24).  
 
==PAGE:48==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
40 
 
The high amount of fatty, cheesy flavours in dose 1 fits to the sensory profile, where dose 1 were perceived as the 
most cheesy sample and dose 3 was significant more buttery than the other samples and with significant more 
mouthfeel. About the sweetness once again dose 3 does not seem to have many sweet flavour compounds though 
it was perceived the sweetest of the samples. This could be explained by the high fat content in dose 3, which might 
impact how the sweetness is perceived, since fat has a great impact on flavour and the synergy between fatty and 
sweet, where an increase in fat can increase the perception of sweetness (Hoppert et al. 2012; Mattes 2007). On the 
other hand it has been shown, that the oil coating in the mouth caused by a high fat content can supress the sensation 
of sweetness (Lynch et al. 1993). 
Once again this is difficult to compare with the results from the sensory evaluation and it shows how complex a 
matrix milk is. Some compounds are increasing while others are decreasing, when feeding HMBi (see raw data in 
Appendix 31) and as mentioned in section 5.2.3 on the 1H NMR-results, the flavour does also very much depend 
on the threshold and the interactions between the compounds.    
==PAGE:49==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
41 
 
 
 
Figure 14: A) PCA score plot with PC1 and PC2, describing 33.3% and 22%, respectively, of the total variation in all the 
compounds found by DHS combined with GC-MS . Green: dose 1, blue: dose 2, red: dose 3, and yellow: control. B) The 
corresponding loading plot. The flavour descriptors are added relative to their respective compounds and coloured according to 
their descriptors. Yellow: sweet; red: fatty; blue: cheesy, fermented; grey: musty, woody; green: grass, green; black: sour.   
A 
B 
==PAGE:50==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
42 
 
Table 8: Volatile compounds identified in the four milk samples by using DHS combined GC-MS. Only the significant volatiles with flavour descriptors are shown. All 80 volatile 
compounds and their significance can be found in Appendix 22.  
Compounds 
aOdour description 
aTaste description 
bAroma threshold 
bTaste 
threshold 
Significance between the 
control and the three doses 
Between 
dose 
 1 and 2 
Between 
dose 
 1 and 3 
Between 
dose 
 2 and 3 
Dose 1 
Dose 2 
Dose 3 
1-Octanol 
Waxy, green, sweet, fatty* moss, 
nut*** fresh** 
 
Waxy, green* ** oily, sweet slightly 
herbaceous** 
42-480 ppb** 
 
2 ppm** 
n.s. 
p<0.05 
n.s. 
 
 
 
1-Pentanol 
(Amyl alkohol) 
Fermented, bready, yeasty* sweet** 
Fermented, bready and cereal * ** 
1.6 to 70 ppm** 
50 ppm* ** 
n.s. 
n.s. 
p<0.01 
 
 
 
2-Butanone 
Ethereal with a camphoreous 
nuance* sweet** 
Green* ** 
n/a 
5 ppm* ** 
n.s. 
p<0.05 
n.s. 
 
 
 
2-Heptanone 
Cheese, ketonic, with a creamy 
nuance*  
Cheese, waxy, green* 
240-410 ppb** 
20 ppm* 
n.s. 
n.s. 
p<0.01 
 
 
 
2-Methyl-1-
propanol 
(Isobutanol) 
Etheral* 
 
- 
360 ppb to 3.3 ppm** 
 
n/a 
p<0.05 
n.s. 
n.s. 
 
 
 
2-Methyl-2-
propanol 
Camphor* 
- 
- 
- 
p<0.05 
p<0.01 
n.s. 
n.s. 
 
 
2-Pentyl-
cyclopentanone 
Oily, fern, green, herbal* 
- 
- 
- 
p<0.05 
p<0.01 
p<0.01 
p<0.05 
p<0.01 
p<0.001 
3-Methyl-1-butanol 
(Isoamyl alcohol) 
Oily* 
 
Fermented, ethereal* ** 
250 ppb to 4.1 ppm** 
50 ppm* ** 
n.s. 
n.s. 
p<0.01 
 
 
 
3-Nonanone 
Fresh, sweet*  leafy, herbaceous* ** 
- 
12-22 ppb** 
n/a 
p<0.05 
p<0.05 
p<0.05 
n.s. 
p<0.001 
p<0.01 
6-Methyl-2-
heptanone 
Camphoreous* 
- 
- 
- 
n.s. 
p<0.05 
n.s. 
 
 
 
Acetic acid, butyl 
ester 
(n-butyl acetate) 
Ethereal, solvent* 
Sweet* ** green* 
10 to 500 ppb** 
30 ppm* 
n.s. 
p<0.01 
p<0.001 
 
 
p<0.001 
Acetone 
(Propane-2-one) 
Ethereal* aromatic** 
 
Sweet** 
40-476 ppm** 
 
n/a 
n.s. 
n.s. 
p<0.01 
 
 
 
Acetophenone 
Marzipan, nutty and vanilla-like 
nuance* sweet* ** almond* *** 
Musty*** 
Bitter almond, vanilla-like* Sweet, 
nutty, musty notes** 
detection 170 ppb** 
recognition 2-9 ppm** 
3.5-10 ppm* ** 
n.s. 
n.s. 
p<0.05 
 
 
 
Benzaldehyde 
Burnt sugar*** 
Sweet* ** Bitter almond* ** *** 
Bitter almond, sweet, oily, nutty, 
woody** 
Detection 100 ppb-4.6 ppm** 
Recognition 330 ppb-4.1 ppm** 
50 ppm** 
p<0.05 
p<0.05 
p<0.05 
n.s. 
n.s. 
n.s. 
Cyclopentanone 
Minty, peppermint-like* ** 
Musty, toasted, nutty, meaty** 
n/a 
20 ppm** 
n.s. 
p<0.01 
p<0.01 
 
 
p<0.001 
Decanal 
Tallow*** sweet, waxy, fatty* ** 
Sweet, waxy and slightly woody** 
Detection: 0.1-6 ppb** 
Recognition: 9 ppb** 
10 ppm** 
n.s. 
n.s. 
p<0.05 
 
 
 
Heptane 
(N-heptane) 
Sweet, ethereal* walnut, green, 
fatty** 
 
n/a 
n/a 
n.s. 
n.s. 
p<0.05 
 
 
 
Mesitylene 
Sweet, aromatic* 
- 
- 
- 
p<0.05 
p<0.001 
p<0.001 
p<0.05 
p<0.001 
p<0.01 
==PAGE:51==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
43 
 
Nonanal 
Waxy, fresh* fatty* ** *** green*** 
Fatty, waxy** 
1-8 ppb** 
2 ppm** 
p<0.05 
p<0.05 
n.s. 
n.s. 
 
 
Octanal 
(octylaldehyde)  
Waxy* green* *** fatty* ** ***, 
honey** 
Green* ** 
1.4-6.4 ppb** 
25 ppm* ** 
p<0.01 
n.s. 
p<0.05 
 
n.s. 
 
Pyrazine 
Sweet, corn-like, roasted hazelnut, 
barley* spinach** 
Cooked spinach, rancid peanuts** 
300 ppm** 
n/a 
n.s. 
n.s. 
p<0.01 
 
 
 
Toluene 
Sweet* 
Sweet* 
- 
- 
n.s. 
n.s. 
p<0.05 
 
 
n.s. 
aOdour and taste descriptions: *(Bill 2016) **(Burdock & Fenaroli 2010) ***(Acree & Arn 2016) 
bOdour and taste threshold values: *(Bill 2016) **(Burdock & Fenaroli 2010) 
The p-values are calculated by conducting at a 2-tailed t-test in Excel as described in section 4.5. 
 
 
==PAGE:52==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
44 
 
5.3.2 The dose-response relationship 
Since this is a dose-response study, it is also interesting to see, if there are any of the compounds, which increases 
or decreases as the amount of HMBi fed increases. By looking through all the results on the compounds analysed 
by DHS combined with GC-MS, only a few of these compounds indicates a dose-response relationship. In Figure 
15, 10 compounds are shown with a dose response relationship. The quantity of heptane, octane and acetic acid are 
increasing, when the amount of HMBi increases, while 2,2,4,6,6-pentamethyl-heptane, decane, p-xylene, 
ethylbenzene, pyrazine, 3-methyl-3-buten-1-ol and mesitylene are decreasing, when the amount of HMBi increases. 
Of these compounds five were significantly different (Appendix 23). For pyrazine and heptane, it was only in dose 
3, that the amount of these were significantly different from the control. For ethylbenzene and p-xylene there were 
almost a significant difference between all four samples. And only between dose 1 and 2, the decrease was not 
significant. The last compound, mesitylene, showed a significantly decreasing dose-response relationship between 
all four doses. It has not been possible to find any information on mesitylene in relation to bovine milk, so the 
function of this compound is unknown. Mesitylene is an aromatic compound, a derivative of benzene, and is located 
in the cellular membrane (The Metabolomics Innovation Centre (TMIC) 2016).  
 
 
 
    Control   Dose 1   Dose 2   Dose 3 
     Control   Dose 1   Dose 2   Dose 3 
Figure 15: Graphs showing the dose-
response relationship between the 
amount of HMBi fed to the cows and the 
decrease and increase of 10 compounds. 
==PAGE:53==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
45 
 
5.3.3 Differences in the composition of volatiles compounds when using Twister 
By looking closer at the compounds identified from the Twister combined with GC-MS (Appendix 25), and at the 
same time was found in significantly different levels between the samples (Appendix 26), eight compounds were 
obtained. Of these eight compounds it was only possible to find flavour descriptors for the four of them (Table 9). 
None of the compounds identified with Twister combined with GC-MS showed a dose-response relationship (raw 
data Appendix 32).   
Table 9: Compounds found by Twister and GC-MS with significance compared to the other samples. The descriptors are adjusted 
from those listed in the table Appendix 25, so they fit the ones used in the sensory evaluation. 
Compound  
aOdour descriptor 
aTaste descriptor 
bOdour 
threshold 
bTaste 
threshold 
Dose 1 
Dose 2 
Dose 3 
2-Pentadecanone 
Dairy-like fatty and 
waxy** 
Fatty* ** hay-like green, with a dairy-like 
aftertaste** 
1-7 ppb** 
50 ppm** 
p<0.01 
p<0.05 
n.s. 
2-Tridecanone 
Fatty, waxy, and earthy* 
oily, herbaceous** 
Fatty and earthy with a fatty mouthfeel and 
a dairy, ketonic and cheesy nuance* ** 
creamy** 
n/a 
10 ppm* 
** 
p<0.05 
p<0.05 
n.s. 
Octanoic acid 
(Caprylic acid) 
Fatty waxy rancid, oily* 
cheesy* ** *** 
unpleasant, creamy, dairy, 
sweaty, fatty** 
 
Unpleasant, rancid, fatty* cheesy** 
sour, creamy, waxy, dirty, dairy** 
910 ppb to 19 
ppm** 
10 ppm** 
n.s. 
p<0.05 
n.s. 
δ-tetradecalacetone 
(Tetrahydro-6-
nonyl-2H-pyran-2-
one) 
Waxy, creamy, oil, fatty, 
sweet, milky and dairy* 
Buttery, fatty, creamy, sweet milky and dairy 
nuances* 
- 
- 
p<0.05 
n.s. 
n.s. 
 
 
 
All four compounds contributes with fatty, dairy-like flavours, mouthfeel and creamyness. Together with the milk 
fat, the lactones and some fatty acids are giving the milk the rich and creamy flavour cf. section 2.3.2. By looking at 
the raw data (Appendix 32) it was found, that dose 3 and the control had almost the same level of the four 
compounds, while dose 1 and 2 had decreasing levels compared to the control.  
As for the results from DHS combined with GC-MS, a PCA score and loadings plot were conducted, and the 
sensory descriptors associated with the compunds, were added to the PCA loadings plot. Unfortunately only a 
dublicate was obtained for dose 3, and due to lack of time, it was not possible to repeat the analysis.  
As seen from the PCA score plot (Figure 16) PC1 explains 56.6% of the total variance, while PC2 explains 15.3%. 
The samples were not very well grouped, but it seemes like there are a tendency that the samples are laying on a 
diagonal line from lower left corner to the upper light cornor. The two dose 3 samples are seperated, why it was 
decided only to look at sample 9, which fitted best to the results uptained so fare. By looking at the PCA loadings 
it can be seen that the majority of the fatty acids, ketones and lactones are gathered in the right side of the PCA 
loading all with fatty, creamy, dairy, buttery, and cheesy flavours and mouthfeel. By combining the score plot and 
the loadings plot, it is seen, that dose 3 is found in this area whith all the fatty and buttery flavours. As for the other 
loadings shown earlier, the control and dose 3 is found relatively close to eachother. In the sensory profile dose 3 
aOdour and taste descriptions: *(Bill 2016) **(Burdock & Fenaroli 2010) ***(Acree & Arn 2016) 
bOdour and taste threshold values: *(Bill 2016) **(Burdock & Fenaroli 2010) 
The p-values are found by conducting at a 2-tailed t-test in Excel as described in section 4.5. Significance 
between the two significant samples (dose 1 and 2) are not significant. The significance is between the 3 
doses and the control. 
==PAGE:54==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
46 
 
were percieved significantly more buttery and with more mouthfeel than the other samples, which fits to these 
results. The control were perceived relatively cheesy which can explain, why it is found close to dose 3. Dose 1 were 
percieved high in cheesey, but from this PCA analysis it seems like it is the one with less cheesey flavour compounds. 
A bigger picture of the loadings score can be found in Appendix 27.  
 
Figure 16: A) PCA score plot with PC1 and PC2, describing 56.6% and 15.3%, respectively, of the total variation in all the 
compounds found by Twister combined with GC-MS. Green: dose 1, blue: dose 2, red: dose 3, and yellow: control. B) The 
corresponding loadings plot. The flavour descriptors are added relative to their respective compounds and coloured according 
to their descriptors. Red: fatty; yellow: sweet; blue: balsamic, waxy; brown: musty, woody; purple: floral. 
B 
A 
Fatty, creamy, cheesy, buttery 
Sweet 
Balsamic, waxy 
Floral 
Musty, woody 
==PAGE:55==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
47 
 
5.4 Results on lactose, fat and protein measured by MiS 
MiS were supposed to be used for determining the specific fat, protein and lactose content, but especially the results 
on the fat content did not seem reliable, since the samples had been frozen. The freezing had, as mentioned earlier, 
made the milk inhomogeneous, since the fat had clump together and was stuck to the inner wall of the sample tubes.  
Normally you would expect a fat content around 5.3% from Jersey milk (Pieter Walstra et al. 2006b). And by looking 
at the weekly milk analyses done on the farm to ensure the milk quality, the fat content for the pooled Jersey milk 
used to have at average fat content around 5.22% (see Appendix 28). The results from the frozen samples peaked 
at 4.9% and had a value of 1,61% at the lowest (Table 10). Even by sending extra samples, stored in the freezer at 
the farm, to the National Milk Laboratories in England, it did not produce more reliable results of the fat content 
(see Appendix 20).  
Table 10: Fat, protein and lactose results (% w/w) from the MiS analysis. For more MiS results see Appendix 19 
From Figure 17 it is shown, that the fat measurements from the fresh milk were in general higher than in the frozen 
samples, though they were still not as high as expected, which must be due to the fact that the milk had been stored 
in the udder bags for 6 days and therefore, the fat had deposit in the bags despite the fact, that it had been shaken.  
Therefore, a precise fat content could unfortunately not be obtained. Though, there were some clear tendencies in 
the MiS results from the frozen samples. It seemed like the dose 3 milk (sample 3) contains twice as much fat, as 
the three other samples (Figure 17 and Table 10). This result fits to the results from the NMR, where the fat content 
in dose 3 were around 100% higher than the control, and it also fits to the visual indications given after the DHS 
and after the milk had been skimmed (Picture 1). The increase in fat by feeding HMBi did also fit with what had 
been found in other studies (St-Pierre & Sylvester 2005; Chen et al. 2011) 
Since the farmer is not only payed relative to the amount of milk, but also the fat and protein content, an increased 
fat content will result in a higher price on the milk. This increase in income can hopefully compensate for the 
expenses in relation to the Met-enriched.  
Dose 1 
Fat 
Protein 
Lactose 
 
Dose 3 
Fat 
Protein 
Lactose 
Fresh 
4.51 
3.69 
4.80 
 
Fresh 
3.47 
3.80 
4.77 
Frozen 
1.93 
3.59 
4.55 
 
Frozen 
4.90 
3.70 
4.80 
Frozen, 40˚C  
1.61 
3.81 
4.79 
 
Frozen, 40˚C 
4.34 
3.74 
4.76 
Frozen, 45˚C 
1.97 
3.54 
4.53 
 
Frozen, 45˚C 
4.64 
3.71 
4.81 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dose 2 
Fat 
Protein 
Lactose 
 
Control 
Fat 
Protein 
Lactose 
Fresh 
3.71 
3.77 
4.78 
 
Fresh 
3.53 
3.83 
4.73 
Frozen 
1.70 
3.85 
4.77 
 
Frozen 
2.24 
3.89 
4.70 
Frozen, 40˚C 
1.62 
3.79 
4.70 
 
Frozen, 40˚C 
1.83 
3.90 
4.70 
Frozen, 45˚C 
1.79 
3.85 
4.78 
 
Frozen, 45˚C 
2.08 
3.89 
4.70 
==PAGE:56==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
48 
 
 
Figure 17: The results of the fat measurement by MiS in the 4 samples treated in 4 different ways. The average is the normal 
average for Jersey milk found in literature. 
 
Figure 18: The protein content (% w/w) in the four samples measured by MiS. The average is the normal average for Jersey 
milk found in literature. 
When it comes to the protein and lactose content, the measurements were more stable within the samples, except 
dose 1 (relative std. div. protein/lactose: dose 1; 3%/3% dose 2; 1%/1%, dose 3;1%/0% , control; 1%/0%) (see 
Appendix 29). The protein content ranged between 3.54% and 3.90% (Table 10) which seems a bit low compared 
to the average 4.0% for Jerseys (Pieter Walstra et al. 2006b). But by comparing to the average protein from the 
analyses on the farm (Appendix 28) which were 3.77% protein for the pooled milk, the results from the MiS seems 
reasonable.  
By looking at the results on the protein content (Figure 18), especially dose 2 and 3 (dose 1 is left out due to the 
high variability in the measurements) it is found, that dose 2 is decreasing, not significantly (p=0.056) and dose 3 is 
==PAGE:57==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
49 
 
significantly decreased (p<0.01) compared to the control. Contradicting the shown results, the literature are pointing 
to an increase in the protein content, when feeding dairy cows with HMBi (St-Pierre & Sylvester 2005; Chen et al. 
2011; Noftsger et al. 2005). The analysis on protein are though assumed to be more precise, if made on fresh milk.  
 
Figure 19: The lactose content (% w/w) for the four samples measured by MiS. The average is the normal average for Jersey 
milk found in literature. 
When it comes to lactose, as Figure 19 shows that variability within the analyses on lactose, except dose 1, were 
much smaller, than the results on fat. It is also shown, that the lactose content in dose 2 and 3 had increased 
compared to the control. As Figure 19 shows, the lactose content in the control was in average 4.71%, while it in 
dose 2 in average was 4.76% and 4.79% in dose 3, which is significantly more than the control (p<0.01). The 
quantitative results on the lactose from the NMR analysis (Appendix 18) did only show lactose contents between 
3.73% and 4.37% and without any significant differences between the samples. The normal average for the lactose 
content in Jersey milk is 4.9% (Pieter Walstra et al. 2006b). As for the protein MiS should have been made on fresh 
samples, which is why these results are not completely reliable.  
Apart from the changes in fat and protein, an increase in yield, have previously been reports at the result from 
feeding HMBi to dairy cows (St-Pierre & Sylvester 2005; Chen et al. 2011). By looking at the data on the yield during 
the trial (Figure 20) there are some variation, but the variation seems to follow somehow the same curve for all four 
groups. For the first 10 days of the trial, the yield increases a lot, but then it starts to decrease and at the end of the 
trial, all groups except group 2 (dose 2) has decreased to a lower level than the starting point (Dose 1: -1.73%, Dose 
2: status quo, Dose 3: -4.62% and Control: -3.13%). 
Though dose 2, seem to have the best and less negative effect on the yield, it is difficult to make any conclusions 
on the effect of the feeding on the yield. For this purpose, a longer test period would be needed, to be able to 
differentiate the actual effects of the feeding from the natural variations and variations due to other factors as e.g. 
silage. 
==PAGE:58==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
50 
 
As mentioned in the method section, the silage was changes during the trial, which might have resulted in the 
decrease in the yield around the 25th-26th of May. Unfortunately, it is not known what specific date the silage was 
changed, but the change in the silage composition can be found in (Appendix 4).    
Figure 20: The development in the yield during the trial. Shown as an average yield (L/day/cow) for the four groups. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:59==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
51 
 
6 
Conclusion 
 
 
As the results reveal, milk is a very complex product affected by many factors. Some factors impact milk compounds 
positively, while other factors have a negative impact. Some compounds add flavour to the milk, while other add 
structure or has a nutritional value.  
From the sensory analysis the results from the two days were quite different, but the results from both days 
indicated, that the sweetness of the milk from the cows fed 62.5 g HMBi/day (dose 3), had increased compared to 
the control. Though the increased sweetness was not significantly, this was one of the goals by this study. In addition, 
the dose 3 were perceived significantly more buttery, yellow and with more mouthfeel than the other 3 samples 
according to the first sensory evaluation.  
From the GC-MS analyses 80 compounds were identified by the use of DHS, while 29 compounds were found by 
using Twister. The compounds identified by Twister were mainly fatty, creamy, and buttery flavour compounds. 36 
compounds were identified by 1H NMR mainly providing acidity and sweetness to the milk. Acetone was 
significantly increasing and showed a dose-response relationship. From the 1H NMR a significantly difference was 
found in the fat content, where the dose 3 contained more than 100% more fat than the control, a result, which was 
also indicated by the results from the MilkoScan, though a specific fat quantity was not established. And it can be 
concluded that by feeding HMBi to Jersey cows as a supplement in different concentrations, it is possible to impact 
the fat content in milk significantly 
The lactose content from the MilkoScan analysis on dose 3 showed a significantly increase in the lactose content, 
while the protein content in dose 3 was significantly decreasing compared to the control. Regarding the yield, it was 
difficult to see any impact, and it was not possible to conclude anything specific.  
In all the results from the chemical analysis, it was difficult to see a connection or pattern between the increased 
feeding of HMBi, and the change in the chemical flavour composition as well as the sensory evaluation of the milk. 
Dose 3 and the control seemed quite similar, though dose 3 had more fatty, cheesy, dairy, and butter flavour 
compounds and the control had more sweet flavour compounds. And it was not possible to demonstrate a direct 
correlation between the sensory evaluation of the milk and the chemical evaluation of the flavour compounds in 
the milk. To make any further conclusion on the effect of feeding HMBi on the sensory profile, further studies 
must be made.  
 
==PAGE:60==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
52 
 
7 
Future perspectives 
 
 
This study gave rise to numerous results, which can be useful in future studies. First of all, it would be very 
interesting to define the actual fat content in the samples, to see how the fat content is gradually increasing. Secondly, 
it would be interesting to demonstrate, if the composition of the fat changes along with increased fat content   
It would also be interesting to continue the study with a special focus on some of the compounds which 
demonstrated a significantly change in the milk due to the HMBi feed, especially those compounds which have 
shown a dose-response relationship or the compounds with flavours of particularly importance for milk. Here it 
would also be interesting to study which of the compounds with the greatest impact on sweetness.  
When it comes to the sensory comparison between the sensory evaluation and the chemical analyses, it would 
provide more scientific value to conduct the analyses on The Estate Dairy milk with 80% Jersey and 20% Holstein 
milk and have the fat content adjusted to the same levels, so it is not the difference in the fat content, which affects 
the flavour, but the actual change in the chemical flavour composition. 
Apart from the parameters, which would be interesting to investigate further, it would also be relevant to change 
the study design by prolonging the period of the feeding, in order to compensate the influence on the milk by 
various variables other than the feed additive. At the same time, it would be interesting to collect more samples 
during the trial, and maybe even sample each individual cow to demonstrate if feeding HMBi influences the cows 
equally. More sample material would in addition provide more data for the statistical work.    
Because this milk is used for coffee, as a special coffee milk, it would also be interesting to demonstrate, if any of 
the identified flavour compounds in the milk were comparable to any coffee flavour compounds. If milk and coffee 
share flavour compounds, this could maybe be used for flavour pairing. And if some of these compounds 
supplement each other in a positive way, it might be these compounds the industry should try to develop and 
increase in the milk to make a milk perfect for coffee.  
The coffee industry is currently experiencing a substantial growth which will likely result in an increased focus on 
the quality and composition of coffee milk. Therefore, further research and development within this area is highly 
relevant and recommendable.   
 
 
==PAGE:61==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
53 
 
8 
References 
 
 
Acree, T. & Arn, H., 2016. Flavornet and human odor space. Available at: http://www.flavornet.org/flavornet.html [Accessed July 9, 2016]. 
Adams, M.R. & Moss, M.O., 2008. Microbiology of Primary Food Commodities. In Food Microbiology. RSC Publishing, p. page 128. 
Alstrup, L. et al., 2015. Milk yield, feed efficiency and metabolic profiles in Jersey and Holstein cows assigned to different fat supplementation 
strategies. Livestock Science, 178, pp.165–176. Available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.livsci.2015.06.026. 
Anderson, M.J. et al., 1984. Comparison of Whole Cottonseed, Extruded Soybeans, or Whole Sunflower Seeds for Lactating Dairy Cows. 
Journal of Dairy Science, 67(3), pp.569–573. Available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.3168/jds.S0022-0302(84)81340-5. 
Anderson, M.J. et al., 1979. Feeding Whole Cottonseed to Lactating Dairy Cows. Journal of Dairy Science, 62(7), pp.1098–1103. Available at: 
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022030279833810. 
Anon, 2016a. GERSTEL Twister / Stir Bar Sorptive Extraction. Available at: http://www.gerstel.com/en/twister-stir-bar-sorptive-
extraction.htm [Accessed March 25, 2016]. 
Anon, 2016b. The Estate Dairy. Available at: https://theestatedairy.com/ [Accessed April 20, 2016]. 
Appuhamy, J. a D.R.N. et al., 2011. Effects of jugular-infused lysine, methionine, and branched-chain amino acids on milk protein synthesis 
in high-producing dairy cows. Journal of dairy science, 94(4), pp.1952–1960. Available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.3168/jds.2010-3442. 
Armentano, L.E., Bertics, S.J. & Ducharme, G. a, 1997. Response of lactating cows to methionine or methionine plus lysine added to high 
protein diets based on alfalfa and heated soybeans. Journal of dairy science, 80(6), pp.1194–1199. Available at: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.3168/jds.S0022-0302(97)76047-8. 
Beard, K., 2016. The Estate Dairy: Milk For Coffee In The UK. Sprudge. Available at: http://sprudge.com/estate-dairy-milk-coffee-uk-
95990.html [Accessed April 20, 2016]. 
Bill, 2016. The Good Scents Company. Available at: http://www.thegoodscentscompany.com/ [Accessed July 10, 2016]. 
Boudonck, K.J. et al., 2009. Characterization of the biochemical variability of bovine milk using metabolomics. Metabolomics, 5(4), pp.375–
386. 
Brosnan, J. & Brosnan, M., 2006. The Sulfur-Containing Amino Acids: An Overview. The Journal of nutrition, 136(6), pp.16365 –16405. 
Available at: https://www.pkdiet.com/pdf/eaa/aminoacidwrksp.pdf. 
Buitenhuis, B. et al., 2015. Estimation of genetic parameters and detection of quantitative trait loci for minerals in Danish Holstein and Danish 
Jersey milk. BMC genetics, 16(1), p.52. Available at: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2156/16/52. 
Burdock, G.A. & Fenaroli, G., 2010. Fenaroli’s handbook of flavor ingredients 6th ed., CRC Press. 
Bylund, G., 1995a. 1. Primary prodution of milk. In Teknotext, ed. Dairy processing handbook. Tetra Pak Processing Systems AB, p. 436. 
Bylund, G., 1995b. 2. The chemistry of milk. In Teknotext, ed. Dairy processing handbook. Tetra Pak Processing Systems AB, p. 436. 
Bylund, G., 1995c. 6. Building-blocks of dairy processing. In Teknotext, ed. Dairy processing handbook. Tetra Pak Processing Systems AB, p. 
436. 
Chen, Z.H. et al., 2011. Effect of feeding different sources of rumen-protected methionine on milk production and N-utilization in lactating 
dairy cows. Journal of Dairy Science, 94(4), pp.1978–1988. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21426989. 
Deeth, H.C., 2006. Lipoprotein lipase and lipolysis in milk. International Dairy Journal, 16(6), pp.555–562. 
Deeth, H.C. & Smith, R.A.D., 1983. Lipolysis and Other Factors Affecting the Steam Frothing Capacity of Milk. Australian Journal of Dairy 
Technology, 38(June), pp.14–19. Available at: <Go to ISI>://A1983QP04000003. 
Engelen, L., 2012. Oral Receptors. Food Oral Processing: Fundamentals of Eating and Sensory Perception, pp.15–43. 
Fisher, L.J., 1972. Response of Lactating Cows To the Intravenous Infusion of Amino Acids. Canadian Journal of Animal Science, 52(2), pp.377–
384. 
FOSS, 2016a. MilkoScanTM FT2 advanced infrared milk analyser for profit in dairy production. Available at: http://www.foss.dk/industry-
solution/products/milkoscan-ft2/ [Accessed May 8, 2016]. 
FOSS, 2016b. Why use FTIR analysis solutions for high product quality? Available at: http://www.foss.dk/campaign/technologies/ftir 
[Accessed May 8, 2016]. 
FOSS, A., 2016. The MilkoScan FT2 - Opportunity through innovation, Available at: http://fossna.com/industry-solution/products/milkoscan-
ft2/. 
Fraser, D.L. et al., 1991. Limiting amino acids in dairy cows given casein as the sole source of protein. Livestock Production Science, 28(3), pp.235–
252. 
Garnsworthy, P.C. et al., 2006. Variation of milk citrate with stage of lactation and de novo fatty acid synthesis in dairy cows. Journal of dairy 
science, 89(5), pp.1604–12. Available at: http://www.journalofdairyscience.org/article/S0022030206722275/fulltext. 
Girard, M. et al., 2015. Ability of 3 tanniferous forage legumes to modify quality of milk and Gruyère-type cheese. Journal of Dairy Science, 
99(1), pp.205–220. Available at: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022030215008449. 
Gómez-Cortés, P. et al., 2009. Effects of extruded linseed supplementation on n-3 fatty acids and conjugated linoleic acid in milk and cheese 
from 
ewes. 
Journal 
of 
dairy 
science, 
92(9), 
pp.4122–34. 
Available 
at: 
==PAGE:62==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
54 
 
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022030209707374. 
Graulet, B., Richard, C. & Robert, J.C., 2005. Methionine availability in plasma of dairy cows supplemented with methionine hydroxy analog 
isopropyl 
ester. 
Journal 
of 
dairy 
science, 
88(10), 
pp.3640–9. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.journalofdairyscience.org/article/S0022030205730496/fulltext [Accessed July 21, 2016]. 
Hanigan, M.D. et al., 2000. Evaluation of a Representation of the Limiting Amino Acid Theory for Milk Protein Synthesis. In J. P. McNamara, 
J. France, & D. E. Beever, eds. Modeling Nutrient Utilization in Farm Animals. Wallingford: CABI Publishing, pp. 127–144. 
Hoppert, K. et al., 2012. Quantification of sensory difference thresholds for fat and sweetness in dairy-based emulsions. Food Quality and 
Preference, 26(1), pp.52–57. Available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.foodqual.2012.03.008. 
Jansson, T. et al., 2014. Volatile component profiles of conventional and lactose-hydrolyzed UHT milk - A dynamic headspace gas 
chromatography-mass spectrometry study. Dairy Science and Technology, 94(4), pp.311–325. 
Jensen, R.G., 2002. The composition of bovine milk lipids: January 1995 to December 2000. Journal of dairy science, 85(2), pp.295–350. Available 
at: http://dx.doi.org/10.3168/jds.S0022-0302(02)74079-4. 
King, K.J. et al., 1991. An Assessment of Absorbable Lysine Requirements in Lactating Cows1,2. Journal of Dairy Science, 74(8), pp.2530–2539. 
Available at: http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0022030291784300. 
Klein, M.S. et al., 2010. Nuclear magnetic resonance and mass spectrometry-based milk metabolomics in dairy cows during early and late 
lactation. Journal of dairy science, 93(4), pp.1539–1550. Available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.3168/jds.2009-2563. 
Larsen, M.K. et al., 2012. Fatty acid, tocopherol and carotenoid content in herbage and milk affected by sward composition and season of 
grazing. Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture, 92(14), pp.2891–2898. 
Larsen, M.K. et al., 2012. Milk fatty acid composition and production performance of Danish Holstein and Danish Jersey cows fed different 
amounts 
of 
linseed 
and 
rapeseed. 
Journal 
of 
Dairy 
Science, 
95(7), 
pp.3569–3578. 
Available 
at: 
http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0022030212003384\nfiles/69/Larsen et al. - 2012 - Milk fatty acid composition and 
production perform.pdf. 
Larsen, T. & Moyes, K.M., 2014. Are free glucose and glucose-6-phosphate in milk indicators of specific physiological states in the cow? 
Animal : an international journal of animal bioscience, pp.1–8. Available at: http://journals.cambridge.org/abstract_S1751731114002043. 
Lejonklev, J., 2013. Transfer of aroma compounds and fatty acids from feed to bovine milk. Aarhus University. Available at: 
http://pure.au.dk/portal/files/55419889/Thesis.pdf. 
Lingyan Liu, H.M.S.W.D.R., 2012. Quantitative analysis of urea in human urine and serum by 1H nuclear magnetic resonance. The Analyst, 
137(3), p.595. 
Lu, J. et al., 2013. Changes in milk proteome and metabolome associated with dry period length, energy balance, and lactation stage in 
postparturient dairy cows. Journal of Proteome Research, 12(7), pp.3288–3296. 
Lynch, J. et al., 1993. A time—intensity study of the effect of oil mouthcoatings on taste perception. Chemical Senses, 18(2), pp.121–129. 
Available at: http://chemse.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/doi/10.1093/chemse/18.2.121 [Accessed July 21, 2016]. 
Mattes, R.D., 2007. Effects of linoleic acid on sweet, sour, salty, and bitter taste thresholds and intensity ratings of adults. American journal of 
physiology. Gastrointestinal and liver physiology, 292(5), pp.G1243–8. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17290007. 
Moate, P.J. et al., 2011. Influence of cold-pressed canola, brewers grains and hominy meal as dietary supplements suitable for reducing enteric 
methane emissions from lactating dairy cows. Animal Feed Science and Technology, 166, pp.254–264. 
Münchow, M. et al., 2015. Steam-frothing of milk for coffee: Evaluation for foam properties using video analysis and feature extraction. 
International Dairy Journal, 51, pp.84–91. Available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.idairyj.2015.07.009. 
Noftsger, S., St-Pierre, N.R. & Sylvester, J.T., 2005. Determination of rumen degradability and ruminal effects of three sources of methionine 
in lactating cows. Journal of dairy science, 88(1), pp.223–237. Available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.3168/jds.S0022-0302(05)72680-1. 
Paton, C.M. & Ntambi, J.M., 2009. Biochemical and physiological function of stearoyl-CoA desaturase. American journal of physiology. 
Endocrinology and metabolism, 297(1), pp.E28–37. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19066317 [Accessed July 2, 2016]. 
PerkinElmer, 
2007. 
TurboMatrix 
Series, 
Thermal 
Desorbers 
User’s 
Guide, 
Available 
at: 
https://www.perkinelmer.com/lab-
solutions/resources/docs/GDE_TurboMatrixTDATDUsersGuide.pdf. 
Petersen, M. A., 2016, personal communication 
Rank, C., Eriksen, K. & Gotfredsen, C.H., 2006. Spektroskopisk analyse - læsning af et strukturelt puslespil. In Kemiske Horisonter. pp. 140–
154. Available at: file:///C:/Users/Tenna/Downloads/spekanalyse (9).pdf. 
Robinson, P.H. et al., 1995. for Lactating Dairy Cows Fed a Diet Designed to Meet Requirements for Microbial and Postruminal Protein. 
Journal of Dairy Science, 78(3), pp.582–594. Available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.3168/jds.S0022-0302(95)76669-3. 
Robinson, P.H. et al., 1998. Ruminally protected lysine or lysine and methionine for lactating dairy cows fed a ration designed to meet 
requirements 
for 
microbial 
and 
postruminal 
protein. 
Journal 
of 
dairy 
science, 
81(5), 
pp.1364–73. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9621240. 
Sahana, J. et al., 2008. Milk composition as affected by time limited grazing combined with restricted indoor feeding. Milchwissenschaft, 63(3), 
pp.235–238. 
Salem, M. Ben & Fraj, M., 2007. The effects of feeding liquid acid whey in the diet of lactating dairy cows on milk production and composition. 
, 1(August), pp.7–10. 
Schwab, C.G., 2001. Use of milk protein concentrations to estimate the &quot;methionine bioavailability&quot; of two forms of 2-hydroxy-
4-methylthio butanoic acid (HMB) for lactating cows. Journal of Dairy Science, 84(Supplement 1). 
SEGES, 2015. Frie Fedtsyrer i Mælk (FFA) Rådgivningsmanual, Available at: https://www.landbrugsinfo.dk/kvaeg/maelkekvalitet/sider/ffa-
manual-frie-fedtsyrer-i-maelken.pdf. 
Simonsen, F., 2006a. Analyseteknik - instrumentering og metoder 2nd ed., Nyt Teknisk Forlag. 
Simonsen, F., 2006b. Analyseteknik - instrumentering og metoder 2nd ed., Nyt Teknisk Forlag. 
Singh, H., 2006. The milk fat globule membrane-A biophysical system for food applications. Current Opinion in Colloid and Interface Science, 11(2-
3), pp.154–163. 
Smith, 
L.I., 
2002. 
A 
tutorial 
on 
Principal 
Components 
Analysis 
Introduction. 
Statistics, 
51, 
p.52. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.mendeley.com/research/computational-genome-analysis-an-introduction-statistics-for-biology-and-health/. 
==PAGE:63==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
55 
 
St-Pierre, N.R. & Sylvester, J.T., 2005. Effects of 2-hydroxy-4-(methylthio) butanoic acid (HMB) and its isopropyl ester on milk production 
and 
composition 
by 
Holstein 
cows. 
Journal 
of 
dairy 
science, 
88(7), 
pp.2487–97. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15956311. 
Sundekilde, U. K, 2016, personal communication 
Sundekilde, U. et al., 2016. The Effect of Gestational and Lactational Age on the Human Milk Metabolome. Nutrients, 8(5), p.304. Available 
at: http://www.mdpi.com/2072-6643/8/5/304. 
Sundekilde, U.K. et al., 2015. Addition of essential oils to cows’ feed alters the milk metabolome - NMR spectroscopic studies of “Nature’s 
perfect food.” In F. Capozzi, L. Laghi, & P. S. Belton, eds. Magnetic Resonance in Food Science: Defining Food by Magnetic Resonance. pp. 161–
170. 
Sundekilde, U.K., Larsen, L.B. & Bertram, H.C., 2013. NMR-Based Milk Metabolomics. Metabolites, 3(2), pp.204–22. Available at: 
http://www.mdpi.com/2218-1989/3/2/204/htm. 
The Metabolomics Innovation Centre (TMIC), 2016. HMDB - The Human Metabolome Database, version 3.6. Available at: 
http://www.hmdb.ca/ [Accessed July 10, 2016]. 
Thivend, P., 1977. Use of whey in feeding ruminants - with particular reference to pollution problems. World Animal Review, (23), pp.20–24. 
Available at: http://www.fao.org/docrep/004/x6512e/x6512e09.htm [Accessed February 28, 2016]. 
Toso, B., Procida, G. & Stefanon, B., 2002. Determination of volatile compounds in cows’ milk using headspace GC-MS. The Journal of dairy 
research, 69(4), pp.569–77. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12463694 [Accessed July 20, 2016]. 
UMETRICS, 2016. F.A.Q. SIMCA-P and Multivariate Analysis, Available at: http://umetrics.com/sites/default/files/kb/multivariate_faq.pdf 
[Accessed July 17, 2016]. 
Urbach, G., 1990. Effect of Feed on Flavor in Dairy Foods. Journal of Dairy Science, 73(12), pp.3639–3650. Available at: 
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022030290790674. 
Walstra, P., Wouters, J.T.M. & Geurst, T.M., 2006. Dairy Science and Technology 2nd ed., Taylor & Francis Group, LLC. 
Walstra, P., Wouters, J.T.M. & Geurts, T.J., 2006a. 1. Milk: Main Characteristics. In Dairy Science and Technology. Taylor & Francis Group, LLC, 
p. 763. 
Walstra, P., Wouters, J.T.M. & Geurts, T.J., 2006b. 2. Milk Components. In Dairy Science and Technology. Taylor & Francis Group, LLC, p. 763. 
Walstra, P., Wouters, J.T.M. & Geurts, T.J., 2006c. 4. Milk Properties. In Dairy Science and Technology. Taylor & Francis Group, LLC, p. 763. 
Walstra, P., Wouters, J.T.M. & Geurts, T.J., 2006d. 7. Heat Treatment. In Dairy Science and Technology. Taylor & Francis Group, LLC, p. 763. 
Weisbjerg, M.R. et al., 2008. Effects of supplemental dietary fatty acids on milk yield and fatty acid composition in high and medium yielding 
cows. Journal of Dairy Research, 75(02), pp.142–152. Available at: http://www.journals.cambridge.org/abstract_S002202990800318X 
[Accessed July 2, 2016]. 
Wiking, L. et al., 2010. Effect of grazing fresh legumes or feeding silage on fatty acids and enzymes involved in the synthesis of milk fat in 
dairy 
cows. 
Journal 
of 
Dairy 
Research, 
77(03), 
pp.337–342. 
Available 
at: 
http://journals.cambridge.org/action/displayAbstract?fromPage=online&aid=7818194&fulltextType=RA&fileId=S0022029910000
21X\nhttp://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20450529. 
Zanton, G.I. et al., 2014. Meta-analysis of lactation performance in dairy cows receiving supplemental dietary methionine sources or 
postruminal 
infusion 
of 
methionine. 
Journal 
of 
dairy 
science, 
97(11), 
pp.7085–101. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022030214006365. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:64==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
56 
 
9 
Appendix 
 
 
Appendix 1 – Metasmart – product specification ............................................................................................................... 57 
Appendix 2 – The grouping of the cows .............................................................................................................................. 61 
Appendix 3 – Specified declaration on the feed .................................................................................................................. 63 
Appendix 4 – Analyses of the silage ...................................................................................................................................... 64 
Appendix 5 – Prestige 18 specification ................................................................................................................................. 66 
Appendix 6 – Pictures from the farm ................................................................................................................................... 67 
Appendix 7 – Temperature during the transport and storage of the frozen samples ................................................... 68 
Appendix 8 – Test of the transport bag ............................................................................................................................... 69 
Appendix 9 – Program and distribution of the samples for the sensory evaluation ..................................................... 70 
Appendix 10 – Schema for the discrimination .................................................................................................................... 71 
Appendix 11 – 15 cm line-scale from the calibration session day 2 ................................................................................ 72 
Appendix 12 – Screenshot of the electronic evaluation schema ...................................................................................... 73 
Appendix 13 – Pictures from the sensory evaluation ......................................................................................................... 74 
Appendix 14 – The line-up for the DHS and Twister. ...................................................................................................... 75 
Appendix 15 – NMR specification ........................................................................................................................................ 76 
Appendix 16 – Statistical results from the sensory profiling ............................................................................................. 77 
Appendix 17 – Zoom of the spider plots from the sensory evaluation .......................................................................... 78 
Appendix 18 – Quantification and p-values for the compounds identified by 1H NMR analysis. ............................. 79 
Appendix 19 – Results from the MilkoScan analyses ......................................................................................................... 80 
Appendix 20 – Results on fat, protein and urea from England ........................................................................................ 81 
Appendix 21 – PCA loadings plot from the 1H NMR analysis ........................................................................................ 82 
Appendix 22 – Compounds identified by DHS combined with GC-MS ....................................................................... 83 
Appendix 23 – Compounds found in significant different amounts (DHS) .................................................................. 87 
Appendix 24 – PCA loadings plot from the GC-MS analysis (DHS).............................................................................. 88 
Appendix 25 – Compounds identified by Twister combined with GC-MS ................................................................... 89 
Appendix 26 – Compounds found in significant different amounts (Twister) .............................................................. 91 
Appendix 27 – PCA loadings plot from the GC-MS analysis (Twister) ......................................................................... 92 
Appendix 28 – Analysis results from the Jersey tank ......................................................................................................... 93 
Appendix 29 – Graphs on the lactose, fat and protein content measured by MilkoScan ............................................ 94 
Appendix 30 – Raw data from the quantitative 1H NMR ................................................................................................. 95 
Appendix 31 – Raw data from the DHS combined with GC-MS ................................................................................... 96 
Appendix 32 – Raw data from the Twister combined with GC-MS ............................................................................... 98 
 
 
 
==PAGE:65==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
57 
 
Appendix 1 – Metasmart – product specification 
 
==PAGE:66==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
58 
 
==PAGE:67==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
59 
 
 
==PAGE:68==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
60 
 
 
==PAGE:69==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
61 
 
Appendix 2 – The grouping of the cows 
Numbers from the 09/05-16 
Feeding started 16/05-16 
 
 
 
 Cow 
Tag number 
Age (month) 
Days in Milk 
Yield (L) 
Lactation No. 
Group 
 
3600 DK04531503600 
25,4 
32 
20,6 
1 
1 
 
3590 DK04531503590 
26 
52 
20,7 
1 
1 
 
3626 DK04531503626 
24 
57 
17,4 
1 
1 
 
3572 DK04531503572 
26,7 
58 
22,2 
1 
1 
 
3630 DK04531503630 
23,9 
66 
17,4 
1 
1 
 
3569 DK04531503569 
26,9 
77 
20,2 
1 
1 
 
3555 DK04531503555 
27,6 
81 
17,4 
1 
1 
 
3540 DK04531503540 
28,5 
86 
19,3 
1 
1 
 
3525 DK04531503525 
29,3 
91 
15,8 
1 
1 
 
3581 DK04531503581 
26,4 
100 
19,7 
1 
1 
 
3534 DK04531503534 
28,7 
110 
17,4 
1 
1 
 
3553 DK04531503553 
27,6 
119 
18,6 
1 
1 
 
3528 DK04531503528 
29,1 
134 
13,9 
1 
1 
 
3513 DK04531503513 
29,8 
157 
15,3 
1 
1 
 
3500 DK04531503500 
30,4 
165 
17,9 
1 
1 
 
3510 DK04531503510 
30 
181 
20,8 
1 
1 
 
1554 UK181311701554 
39,3 
262 
19,1 
1 
1 
 
1392 UK181311601392 
55,5 
175 
21,3 
3 
1 
 
1315 UK181311601315 
63,5 
154 
17 
4 
1 
 
3623 DK04531503623 
24,3 
64 
16,8 
1 
1 
 
Control gr.  
31,15 
111,05 
18,44 
1,25 
20 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
3579 DK04531503579 
26,5 
39 
15,3 
1 
2 
 
3574 DK04531503574 
26,6 
46 
20,3 
1 
2 
 
3542 DK04531503542 
28,4 
57 
22,6 
1 
2 
 
3620 DK04531503620 
24,5 
62 
17,5 
1 
2 
 
3515 DK04531503515 
29,8 
70 
19,9 
1 
2 
 
3578 DK04531503578 
26,5 
72 
19,6 
1 
2 
 
3599 DK04531503599 
25,4 
84 
20,1 
1 
2 
 
3517 DK04531503517 
29,6 
87 
22,4 
1 
2 
 
3477 DK04531503477 
31,2 
91 
23,5 
1 
2 
 
3591 DK04531503591 
25,8 
93 
19,4 
1 
2 
 
3476 DK05431503476 
31,2 
110 
19,1 
1 
2 
 
3551 DK04531503551 
27,6 
126 
14,9 
1 
2 
 
3505 DK04531503505 
30,2 
140 
15,8 
1 
2 
 
3547 DK04531503547 
27,8 
152 
20 
1 
2 
 
3532 DK04531503532 
28,9 
165 
19,2 
1 
2 
 
1662 UK181311301662 
30 
183 
17,8 
1 
2 
 
3330 DK04531503330 
38,2 
131 
15,3 
2 
2 
 
1396 UK181311301396 
55,2 
128 
25,2 
3 
2 
 
698 UK103789600348 
80,1 
128 
24,8 
5 
2 
 
Group 1  
32,82 
103,37 
19,62 
1,37 
19 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3556 DK04531503556 
27,6 
40 
16,2 
1 
3 
 
3602 DK04531503602 
25,3 
47 
23,4 
1 
3 
 
3632 DK04531503632 
23,8 
53 
18,3 
1 
3 
 
3612 DK04531503612 
24,7 
70 
21,6 
1 
3 
 
3594 DK04531503594 
25,6 
73 
14,6 
1 
3 
==PAGE:70==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
62 
 
 
3576 DK04531503576 
26,5 
79 
18,5 
1 
3 
 
3539 DK04531503539 
28,6 
90 
20,2 
1 
3 
 
3519 DK04531503519 
29,6 
91 
17,5 
1 
3 
 
3554 DK04531503554 
27,6 
93 
18,3 
1 
3 
 
3549 DK04531503549 
27,7 
103 
16,1 
1 
3 
 
3545 DK04531503545 
27,9 
134 
15,8 
1 
3 
 
3435 DK04531503435 
33,4 
142 
15,4 
1 
3 
 
3527 DK04531503527 
29,2 
152 
18 
1 
3 
 
3530 DK04531503530 
28,9 
160 
14,9 
1 
3 
 
1645 UK181311701645 
31,2 
190 
15,6 
1 
3 
 
1520 UK181311101520 
42,3 
145 
19,9 
2 
3 
 
1356 UK181311501356 
57,8 
158 
21,6 
3 
3 
 
1277 UK181311301277 
67 
264 
14,9 
3 
3 
 
Group 2  
32,48 
115,78 
17,82 
1,28 
18 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3571 DK04531503571 
26,8 
46 
16,4 
1 
4 
 
3597 DK04531503597 
25,5 
48 
19,7 
1 
4 
 
3613 DK04531503613 
24,6 
56 
17,2 
1 
4 
 
3585 DK04531503585 
26,3 
58 
21,9 
1 
4 
 
3601 DK04531503601 
25,3 
71 
20,5 
1 
4 
 
3606 DK04531503606 
25 
76 
17,4 
1 
4 
 
3588 DK04531503588 
26,2 
80 
19,8 
1 
4 
 
3589 DK04531503589 
26,1 
85 
18,4 
1 
4 
 
3566 DK04531503566 
27,2 
91 
16,8 
1 
4 
 
3570 DK04531503570 
26,8 
97 
18,3 
1 
4 
 
3563 DK04531503563 
27,4 
106 
15,9 
1 
4 
 
3544 DK04531503544 
28,2 
117 
17 
1 
4 
 
3496 DK04531503496 
30,5 
146 
15,8 
1 
4 
 
3546 DK04531503546 
27,8 
156 
18,1 
1 
4 
 
3520 DK04531503520 
29,6 
163 
15,8 
1 
4 
 
3512 DK04531503512 
29,9 
166 
15 
1 
4 
 
1477 UK181311701477 
45,3 
213 
22 
2 
4 
 
1370 UK181311501370 
57 
165 
24 
3 
4 
 
1246 UK181311701246 
69 
142 
20,4 
4 
4 
 
7349 UK103789700349 
79,8 
164 
19,4 
5 
4 
 
Group 3  
34,215 
112,3 
18,49 
1,5 
20 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 All cows: 
 
Age (month) 
DIM (days) 
Yield (L) 
Lactation no. 
 
  
Mean 
32,7 
110,6 
18,6 
1,4 
 
  
Lowest 
23,8 
32 
13,9 
1 
 
  
Highest 
80,1 
264 
25,2 
5 
 
 
==PAGE:71==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
63 
 
Appendix 3 – Specified declaration on the feed  
 
 
==PAGE:72==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
64 
 
Appendix 4 – Analyses of the silage  
 
==PAGE:73==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
65 
 
 
==PAGE:74==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
66 
 
Appendix 5 – Prestige 18 specification 
 
 
==PAGE:75==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
67 
 
Appendix 6 – Pictures from the farm  
   
 
The outer parlour feeder. Five stations with two pipes connected to each – one pipe for the Prestige 18 and one for 
the Met-enriched pellets (Prestige 18 with Metasmart).  
  
  
 
The cows had been colour marked, were separated and milked in four groups. 
 
    
Udder bag used for the sampling  
 
==PAGE:76==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
68 
 
Appendix 7 – Temperature during the transport and storage of the frozen samples 
 
==PAGE:77==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
69 
 
Appendix 8 – Test of the transport bag 
 
Test of the transport bag- 
The temperature in the transport bag 
was below 0˚C for 7½ hour. 
==PAGE:78==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
70 
 
Appendix 9 – Program and distribution of the samples for the sensory evaluation 
 
Day 1 
 
Descriptor development:  
Welcome + tasting references (water + milk) 
 
Sample 1 + 2  
 
sample called 451 + 923 
Sample 3 + 4  
 
sample called 802 + 758 
Sample 5 + 4  
 
sample called 685 + 667 
 
Training and calibration: 
Sample 1 + 3  
 
sample called 201 + 562 
Sample 2 + 4  
 
sample called 656 + 341 
Sample 5 + 3  
 
sample called 023 + 445 
 
Sensory evaluation: 
Two rounds, each panellist got the samples in a to them unique, random order. 
 
 
Round 1 
Round 2 
Sample 1 
Dose 1 
132 
243 
978 
Sample 2 
Dose 2 
341 
552 
675 
Sample 3 
Dose 3 
882 
756 
309 
Sample 4 
The control 
471 
233 
557 
Sample 5 
The Northiam 
708 
991 
454 
 
  
 
 
Day 2 
 
Training and calibration: 
Welcome + tasting references (water + milk) 
 
Sample 4 + 1 + 2 
 
 
sample called 451 + 802 + 685 
Sample 4 + 2 + 3 
 
 
sample called 923 + 758 + 667 
Sample 4 + 5 + 3 
 
 
sample called 201 + 656 + 023 
 
Sensory evaluation: 
Two rounds, each panellist got the samples in a to them unique, random order. 
 
Same schema as for day 1. 
 
==PAGE:79==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
71 
 
Appendix 10 – Schema for the discrimination 
 
==PAGE:80==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
72 
 
Appendix 11 – 15 cm line-scale from the calibration session day 2 
 
 
==PAGE:81==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
73 
 
Appendix 12 – Screenshot of the electronic evaluation schema   
 
 
 
==PAGE:82==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
74 
 
Appendix 13 – Pictures from the sensory evaluation 
Photograph: Jonathan Simpson (www.jonathan-simpson.com) 
  
        
Training on taste references 
 
 
 
 Finding the descriptors  
     
    
Before the sensory profiling 
 
 
               The profiling was done electronically   
==PAGE:83==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
75 
 
Appendix 14 – The line-up for the DHS and Twister.  
 
 
Dynamic headspace line-up 
                 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The steel trap and the twister magnet. 
 
 
Stir bar sorptive extraction. The milk samples with the 
twister magnet on the stirring plate.  
==PAGE:84==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
76 
 
Appendix 15 – NMR specification 
Wed Jun 22 11:31:03 CEST 2016 
 
Acquisition parameters of dataset:  
Z:/data/uksu/nmr/2016LineKnutsson/130/pdata/1 
 
 
Experiment 
 
PULPROG 
noespypr1d 
AQ_mod 
DQD 
TD 
32768 
DS 
4 
NS 
64 
TD0 
1 
Width 
 
SW [ppm] 
20.0276 
SWH [Hz] 
12019.230 
AQ [sec] 
1.3631488 
FIDRES [Hz] 
0.733596 
FW [Hz] 
125000.00 
Receiver 
 
RG 
28.5 
DW [μsec] 
41.600 
DWOV [μsec] 
0.025 
DECIM 
1664 
DSPFIRM 
sharp (standard) 
DIGTYP 
DRU 
DIGMOD 
Digital 
DR 
22 
DDR 
10 
DE [μsec] 
6.50 
HPPRGN 
normal  
PRGAIN 
High 
DQDMODE 
Add 
PH_ref [degree] 
0 
OVERFLW 
Ignore 
FRQLO3N 
0 
Nucleus1 
 
NUC1 
1H 
O1 [Hz] 
2820.61 
O1P [ppm] 
4.700 
SFO1 [MHz] 
600.1328206 
BF1 [MHz] 
600.1300000 
Nucleus 2 
 
NUC2 
Off 
 
 
==PAGE:85==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
77 
 
Appendix 16 – Statistical results from the sensory profiling 
Day 1: Significant descriptors  
 
Day 2: Significant descriptors 
                 
 
==PAGE:86==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
78 
 
Appendix 17 – Zoom of the spider plots from the sensory evaluation 
 
 
Day 1 with the Northiam milk 
 
 
 
 
 
 Day 1 without the Northiam milk 
 
Day 2 with the Northiam milk  
 
 
 
 
 
Day 2 without the Northiam milk 
 
 
 
 
              Mouthfeel         Yellow          Aftertaste 
 
  Sweet                                                              Cheesy 
 
 
 
  Sour                                                                          Buttery 
 
 
 
 
  Salt                                                                      Cereal/ 
 
 
 
 
 
        Cookie 
 
  
     Caramel           Nutty         Hay/farm         Grassy  
      
              Mouthfeel         Yellow          Aftertaste 
 
  Sweet                                                              Cheesy 
 
 
 
  Sour                                                                          Buttery 
 
 
 
 
  Salt                                                                      Cereal/ 
 
 
 
 
 
        Cookie 
 
  
     Caramel           Nutty         Hay/farm         Grassy  
      
              Mouthfeel         Yellow          Aftertaste 
 
  Sweet                                                              Cheesy 
 
 
 
  Sour                                                                          Buttery 
 
 
 
 
  Salt                                                                      Cereal/ 
 
 
 
 
 
        Cookie 
 
  
     Caramel           Nutty         Hay/farm         Grassy  
      
              Mouthfeel         Yellow          Aftertaste 
 
  Sweet                                                              Cheesy 
 
 
 
  Sour                                                                          Buttery 
 
 
 
 
  Salt                                                                      Cereal/ 
 
 
 
 
 
        Cookie 
 
  
     Caramel           Nutty         Hay/farm         Grassy  
      
==PAGE:87==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
79 
 
Appendix 18 – Quantification and p-values for the compounds identified by 1H 
NMR analysis. 
Compound 
Concentration (mg/L) 
Significance compared to the 
control  
Between 
 1 and 2 
Between  
1 and 3 
1  
2 
3 
 
Dose 1 
Dose 2 
Dose 3 
Control 
n.s. 
n.s. 
n.s. 
 
 
2-Oxoglutarate 
5,80 
9,88 
11,67 
13,18 
p<0.05 
p<0.01 
n.s. 
n.s. 
 
3-Hydroxybutyrate 
1,26 
1,38 
1,33 
1,67 
n.s. 
n.s. 
n.s. 
 
 
3-Hydroxyisovalerate 
0,34 
0,16 
0,14 
0,71 
n.s. 
p<0.01 
p<0.01 
 
n.s. 
Acetate 
0,99 
0,98 
1,00 
1,15 
n.s. 
n.s. 
n.s. 
 
 
Acetone 
1,22 
1,94 
2,32 
0,75 
p<0.05 
p<0.01 
p<0.01 
p<0.001 
p<0.05 
Adenosine 
1,02 
0,75 
0,97 
0,73 
n.s. 
n.s. 
p<0.05 
 
 
Alanine 
2,61 
2,54 
2,80 
2,91 
n.s. 
n.s. 
n.s. 
 
 
Betaine 
4,41 
6,26 
4,92 
6,10 
n.s. 
n.s. 
n.s. 
 
 
Carnitine 
10,10 
9,50 
15,06 
13,87 
n.s. 
n.s. 
n.s. 
 
 
Choline 
48,56 
51,30 
50,41 
51,79 
n.s. 
n.s. 
n.s. 
 
 
Citrate 
1.415,44 
1.492,33 
1.480,96 
1.507,44 
n.s. 
n.s. 
n.s. 
 
 
Creatine 
68,25 
63,51 
70,69 
71,74 
n.s. 
n.s. 
n.s. 
 
 
Creatinine 
8,02 
7,98 
8,51 
8,07 
n.s. 
n.s. 
n.s. 
 
 
Cytidine 
3,32 
4,15 
4,28 
4,03 
n.s. 
n.s. 
n.s. 
 
 
Fucose 
7,20 
6,88 
7,77 
8,50 
n.s. 
n.s. 
n.s. 
 
 
Fumarate 
2,60 
2,48 
2,78 
2,68 
n.s. 
n.s. 
n.s. 
 
 
Galactose 
118,91 
144,75 
153,30 
174,83 
n.s. 
p<0.05 
n.s. 
 
 
Glucose 
113,00 
118,26 
108,19 
140,88 
n.s. 
n.s. 
n.s. 
 
 
Glucose-1-phosphate 
9,01 
8,19 
9,13 
8,40 
n.s. 
n.s. 
n.s. 
 
 
Glutamate 
17,31 
16,92 
20,36 
21,05 
n.s. 
p<0.05 
n.s. 
 
 
Hippurate 
12,88 
11,56 
12,97 
13,10 
n.s. 
n.s. 
n.s. 
 
 
Lactate 
1,94 
3,37 
1,77 
3,02 
n.s. 
n.s. 
n.s. 
 
 
Lactose 
37.519,57 
37.316,97 
38.899,81 
40.367,67 
n.s. 
n.s. 
n.s. 
 
 
Malonate 
2,95 
3,08 
3,65 
4,02 
n.s. 
n.s. 
n.s. 
 
 
Mannose 
10,08 
21,34 
16,88 
15,89 
n.s. 
n.s. 
n.s. 
 
 
Methionine 
7,09 
6,80 
7,08 
7,42 
n.s. 
n.s. 
n.s. 
 
 
O-Phosphocholine 
20,11 
26,51 
26,45 
18,93 
n.s. 
n.s. 
n.s. 
 
 
Orotic acid 
486,38 
440,71 
500,59 
537,70 
n.s. 
p<0.05 
n.s. 
 
 
Pantothenate 
3,59 
4,15 
4,75 
5,66 
n.s. 
n.s. 
n.s. 
 
 
Pyruvate 
0,79 
1,09 
1,58 
1,84 
p<0.05 
n.s. 
n.s. 
 
 
Succinate 
2,00 
1,65 
1,68 
1,92 
n.s. 
n.s. 
n.s. 
 
 
Threonine 
1,18 
0,96 
2,04 
3,06 
n.s. 
n.s. 
n.s. 
 
 
Urea 
77,74 
74,09 
75,21 
96,93 
p<0.05 
p<0.01 
p<0.05 
 
 
Valine 
0,97 
0,96 
1,04 
1,32 
n.s. 
n.s. 
n.s. 
 
 
cis-Aconitate 
15,03 
- 
16,64 
- 
n.s. 
n.s. 
n.s. 
 
 
sn-Glycero-3-phosphocholine 
167,17 
175,22 
220,56 
218,34 
n.s. 
n.s. 
n.s. 
 
 
==PAGE:88==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
80 
 
Appendix 19 – Results from the MilkoScan analyses 
 
Group 1 
Fat 
(% w/w) 
Protein 
(% w/w) 
Casein 
 
Lactose 
(% w/w) 
TS (Total 
solids) 
SNF (Solids-
non-fat) 
Urea 
(mg/L) 
Citric acid 
FPD  
 
FFA  
Density 
Acidity 
Fresh 
4.51 
3.69 
1.61 
4.80 
13.50 
8.91 
110.4 
0.22 
466 
2,326 
1.028,7 
6,73 
Frozen 
1.93 
3.59 
2.10 
4.55 
10.87 
8.79 
85.5 
0.18 
454 
0,620 
1.029,2 
11,99 
frozen 40 degrees 
1.61 
3.81 
2.40 
4.79 
10.99 
9.29 
89.1 
0.18 
490 
0,350 
1.031,6 
13,24 
frozen 45 degrees 
1.97 
3.54 
2.07 
4.53 
10.83 
8.72 
87.4 
0.17 
449 
0,658 
1.028,8 
11,32 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Group 2 
Fat 
Protein 
Casein 
Lactose 
TS 
SNF 
Urea 
Citric acid 
FPD  
FFA 
Density 
Acidity 
Fresh 
3.71 
3.77 
1.85 
4.78 
12.85 
9.07 
104.6 
0.21 
474 
0.702 
1,029.7 
8.55 
Frozen 
1.70 
3.85 
2.42 
4.77 
11.09 
9.32 
88.2 
0.19 
491 
0.391 
1,031.6 
12.93 
frozen 40 degrees 
1.62 
3.79 
2.38 
4.70 
10.92 
9.19 
87.9 
0.18 
482 
0.337 
1,031.0 
13.18 
frozen 45 degrees 
1.79 
3.85 
2.41 
4.78 
11.19 
9.30 
92.1 
0.18 
489 
0.432 
1,031.4 
12.79 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Group 3 
Fat 
Protein 
Casein 
Lactose 
TS 
SNF 
Urea 
Citric acid 
FPD  
FFA 
Density 
Acidity 
Fresh 
3.47 
3.80 
1.93 
4.77 
12.65 
9.09 
101.8 
0.20 
477 
1.639 
1,029.9 
8.73 
Frozen 
4.90 
3.70 
1.55 
4.80 
13.88 
8.86 
113.6 
0.22 
463 
2.532 
1,028.0 
5.93 
frozen 40 degrees 
4.34 
3.74 
1.72 
4.76 
13.39 
8.94 
110.6 
0.21 
468 
2.283 
1,028.8 
7.87 
frozen 45 degrees 
4.64 
3.71 
1.65 
4.81 
13.64 
8.90 
114.0 
0.22 
465 
2.324 
1,028.1 
6.06 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Group 4 (control) 
Fat 
Protein 
Casein 
Lactose 
TS 
SNF 
Urea 
Citric acid 
FPD  
FFA 
Density 
Acidity 
Fresh 
3.53 
3.83 
1.91 
4.73 
12.71 
9.05 
104.1 
0.21 
474 
1.707 
1,029.5 
8.92 
Frozen 
2.24 
3.89 
2.32 
4.70 
11.56 
9.20 
94.0 
0.19 
483 
0.759 
1,030.8 
11.62 
frozen 40 degrees 
1.83 
3.90 
2.40 
4.70 
11.19 
9.26 
92.7 
0.18 
488 
0.516 
1,031.2 
12.98 
frozen 45 degrees 
2.08 
3.89 
2.37 
4.70 
11.40 
9.21 
96.5 
0.18 
485 
0.654 
1,030.7 
11.96 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FPD (Freezing point depression) is for screening purposes to detect water addition 
 
 
 
==PAGE:89==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
81 
 
Appendix 20 – Results on fat, protein and urea from England 
 
Dose 1 
Dose 2 
Dose 3 
==PAGE:90==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
82 
 
Appendix 21 – PCA loadings plot from the 1H NMR analysis 
 
 
==PAGE:91==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
83 
 
Appendix 22 – Compounds identified by DHS combined with GC-MS 
IDa 
Compounds 
Classificationb 
(direct parent) 
Odour descriptionc 
Taste descriptionc 
Aromad threshold 
Tasted 
threshold 
Benzenoids 
 
 
 
 
 
15137 
(1-Methylethyl)-benzene 
(Isopropylbenzene) 
Cumenes 
- 
- 
- 
- 
28584 
[1,1':3',1''-Terphenyl]-2'-ol 
(2,6-Diphenylphenol) 
Phenols and derivatives 
- 
- 
- 
- 
14773 
Acetophenone 
Acetophenones 
Marzipan, coumarinic, nutty, heliotropin-like vanilla 
nuance* sweet, cherry* ** almond* *** Musty, flower 
*** Pungent, medical** 
Powdery, bitter almond, cherry, coumarinic and fruity nuances* 
Sweet, nutty, benzaldehyde with musty, fruity notes** 
Detection 170 ppb 
Recognition 2-9 ppm** 
3.5-10 ppm* ** 
15411 
Benzaldehyde 
Benzoyl derivatives 
Strong, sharp, bitter, cherry* burnt sugar*** 
Sweet* ** Almond* ** *** 
Bitter almond, sweet, oily, cherry, nutty, woody** 
Detection100 ppb-4.6 ppm** 
Recognition 330 ppb-4.1 ppm** 
50 ppm** 
22436 
Biphenyl 
Biphenyls and 
derivatives 
Pungent, rose* ** green, geranium* 
Neroli, bergamot, cinnamon, natural* 
0.5 ppb** 
n/a 
12438 
Ethylbenzene 
Benzene and 
substituted derivatives 
- 
 
 
- 
- 
- 
72949 
Mesitylene 
Benzene and 
substituted derivatives 
Sweet, aromatic* 
- 
- 
- 
187755 
Phenindamine 
Indenes and isoindenes 
- 
Spicy, phenolic, tobacco, musty, woody, medicinal, smoky** 
5.5 ppm** 
3 ppm** 
13301 
Phenol 
Phenols and derivatives 
Phenolic* ** *** plastic rubber* smoky, sweet, tarry, 
medical, creosote, spicy, leather-like, notes of fried meat 
and coffee** 
Spicy, phenolic, tobacco, musty, woody, medicinal, smoky, tarlike, 
slightly spicy clove-like** 
5.5 ppm** 
3 ppm** 
12453 
p-Xylene 
Benzene and 
substituted derivatives 
- 
- 
- 
- 
55012 
Toluene 
Toluenes 
Sweet* Paint* *** 
Sweet* 
- 
- 
Hydrocarbons 
 
 
 
 
 
959 
(Z)-3-Dodecene 
Acyclic olefins 
- 
- 
- 
- 
34044 
(Z)-3-Methyl-2-undecene 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
188476 
1,2,3,6,7,8,9,10,11,12-
Decahydrobenzo[e]pyrene 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
63454 
1-Ethyl-4-methylcyclohexane 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
18543 
1-Methyl-2-(4-methylpentyl)-
cyclopentane 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
5975 
2,2,4,6,6-Pentamethyl-Heptane 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
5145 
2-Methyl-1-pentene 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1804 
3-Methyl-hexane  
(2-Ethylpentane) 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
==PAGE:92==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
84 
 
34054 
3-Methylene-nonane 
(2-Ethyl-1-octene) 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
23540 
3-Methyl-nonane 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
7292 
3-Methyl-heptane 
Acyclic alkanes 
- 
- 
- 
- 
22595 
4-Methyl-1-decene  
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
2464 
4-Methyl-heptane  
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
20884 
8-Methylene-pentadecane 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
63440 
Cis-1,3-dimethyl-cyclohexane 
(cis-hexahydro-m-xylene) 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
22349 
Decane 
(N-Decane) 
Acyclic alkenes 
Alkane*** 
- 
- 
- 
22550 
Dodecane 
(N-Dodecane) 
Acyclic alkenes 
Alkene*** 
- 
- 
- 
47601 
Ethyl-cyclohexane  
Aliphatic 
- 
- 
- 
- 
5501 
Heptane 
(N-heptane) 
Acyclic alkenes 
Sweet, ethereal* walnut, cognac, green, fatty** 
alkane*** 
 
n/a 
n/a 
5717 
n-Hexane 
(Hexane) 
Acyclic alkenes 
Grass** Alkene*** 
Fruity** 
- 
- 
5765 
Octane 
Alkanes 
Gasoline* Alkene*** 
- 
- 
- 
Hydroxyl compounds and derivatives 
 
 
 
 
 
6849 
2,3-Dimethyl-2-butanol  
Alcohol 
- 
- 
- 
- 
2456 
2,4-Dimethyl-1-heptene 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Lipids and lipid-like molecules 
 
 
 
 
 
5209 
1-Octanol 
(Octanol) 
Fatty alcohols 
Waxy, green, citrus, aldehydic, and floral with a sweet, 
fatty, coconut nuance* moss, nut, mushroom*** fresh, 
orange-rose** 
 
Waxy, green, citrus, orange and aldehydic with a fruity nuance* ** 
sweet, oily, slightly herbaceous** 
 
42-480 ppb** 
 
2 ppm** 
7141 
Butanoic acid 
(Butyric acid, C4) 
Straight chain fatty 
acids 
Sharp, dairy-like, buttery with a fruity nuance* cheesy* 
*** rancid, cheese, sweat*** rancid, butter-like** 
Acidic sour, cheesy, dairy, creamy with a fruity nuance* ** 
 
240 ppb to 4.8 ppm** 
250 ppm** 
7134 
Hexanoic acid 
(L-Hexanoylcarnitine) 
Acyl carnitines 
Sour, fatty, sweat, cheese* ** rancid, sharp, pungent, 
unpleasant** 
Cheesy fruity phenolic fatty goaty* acrid** 
93 ppb to 10 ppm** 
n/a 
28433 
Octanoic acid 
(Caprylic acid) 
Medium-chain fatty 
acids 
Fatty waxy rancid oily vegetable* cheesy* *** sweat*** 
Fruity-acid** 
 
Unpleasant rancid, soapy, cheesy, fatty, bandy* 
Sour, creamy, waxy, dirty, sweaty, dairy cheese-like** 
910 ppb to 19 ppm** 
10 ppm** 
8211 
Squalene 
Acyclic triterpenoids 
- 
- 
- 
- 
5687 
Tetradecanal 
(myristaldehyde) 
Fatty aldehydes 
Fatty, waxy, dairy, creamy and fishy with a fruity, pear 
nuance* orris-like** 
Sweet, fatty, citrus peel**  fatty, lactonic, coconut, woody, fishy, 
fruity** 
n/a 
10 ppm** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:93==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
85 
 
Organic acids and derivatives 
5724 
3-Hydroxy-dodecanoic acid 
Medium-chain hydroxy 
acids and derivatives 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1935 
Acetic acid 
(acetate) 
Carboxylic acids 
Sharp, pungent, vinegar* ** sour* *** 
Pungent, overripe fruit* sour* ** acidic tangy** 
At 1.0%** 
15 ppm** 
2089 
Acetic acid, butyl ester 
(n-butyl acetate) 
Acetate salts 
Ethereal, solvent, banana* 
Strong fruity* ** 
Sweet, ripe banana, tutti-frutti, tropical and candy-like with green 
nuances* burning, sweet, pineapple** 
10 to 500 ppb** 
30 ppm* 
37112 
Cis-9-octadecenoic acid, (2-phenyl-
1,3-dioxolan-4-yl)methyl ester  
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1940 
Ethyl Acetate 
Acetate salts 
Ethereal, weedy, green* fruity, sweet* ** pineapple*** 
 
Ethereal, fruity, sweet, with a grape and cherry nuance* ** 
5ppb-5ppm** 
100 ppm* ** 
23155 
Hexadecanoic acid, 2-methylpropyl 
ester 
(palmitic acid isobutyl ester) 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
7863 
n-Propyl acetate 
(propyl acetate) 
Acetate salts 
Solvent-like pungency, lifting, fusel, amyl alcohol, sweet 
and fruity* pear-raspberry** 
Fruity, ethereal, tutti-frutti, banana and honey* ** pleasant, 
bittersweet** 
2.7-11 ppm** 
10-15 ppm* ** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Organoheterocyclic compounds 
 
 
 
 
 
44997 
Pyrazine 
Pyrazines 
Pungent, sweet, corn-like, roasted hazelnut, barley* 
spinach** 
Cooked spinach, rancid peanuts** 
300 ppm** 
n/a 
49920 
Tetrahydro-2-(12-
pentadecynyloxy)-2H-pyran  
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
2987 
Tetrahydro-2,2,4,4-tetramethyl-furan                     - 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Organooxygen compounds 
 
 
 
 
 
4447 
1-Pentanol 
(Amyl alkohol) 
Primary alcohols 
Pungent, fermented, bready, yeasty, winey and solvent-
like* fusel-like** * sweet** 
Intense fusel, fermented, bready and cereal with a fruity 
undernote* ** burning taste** 
1.6 to 70 ppm** 
50 ppm* ** 
2617 
2-Butanone 
(Butanone) 
Ketones 
Ethereal with a camphoreous nuance, slightly fruity* 
sweet, apricot-like** 
Chemical-like and slightly fruity green* ** 
n/a 
5 ppm* ** 
7615 
2-Heptanone 
Ketones 
Cheese, ketonic, with a creamy nuance* 
fruity, banana* ** cinnamon, slightly spicy** 
Cheese, fruity, coconut, waxy, green* ** 
240-410 ppb** 
20 ppm* ** 
5560 
2-Methyl-1-propanol 
(Isobutanol or isobutyl alcohol) 
Primary alcohols 
Etheral, cortex* winey* ** *** 
 
Fusel, whiskey* 
360 ppb to 3.3 ppm** 
 
n/a 
6826 
2-Methyl-2-propanol 
Tertiary alcohols 
Camphor* 
- 
- 
- 
7626 
2-Nonanone 
(β-nanonone) 
Ketones 
Fruity, sweet, waxy, soapy, cheese, green, herbaceous, 
coconut like* 
Cheesy, green, fruity, dairy, dirty, buttery* rose and tea-like* ** 
5-200 ppb** 
20 ppm* ** 
25959 
2-Pentadecanone 
Ketones 
Fresh, jasmine, celery* chemical-like, fruity green, dairy-
like fatty and waxy** 
Spicy, floral* berry, blueberry fruity, waxy hay-like, green with a 
dairy-like aftertaste** Fatty* ** 
1-7 ppb** 
50 ppm** 
48676 
2-Pentylcyclopentanone 
Ketones 
Coconut, jasmine, oily, rose, fern, green, herbal* 
- 
- 
- 
25713 
2-Tridecanone 
Ketones 
Fatty, waxy, mushroom, coconut and earthy with a mild 
chicken fat nuance* warm, oily, herbaceous** 
Fatty and earthy with a fatty mouthfeel and a dairy, ketonic and 
cheesy nuance* ** creamy, coconut** 
n/a 
10 ppm* 
6036 
3,7,11-Trimethyl-1-dodecanol  
Alcohol 
- 
- 
- 
- 
183 
3-Hydroxy-butanal  
(Aldol) 
Aldehyde 
- 
- 
- 
- 
==PAGE:94==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
86 
 
4778 
3-Methyl-1-butanol 
(Isoamyl alcohol) 
Primary alcohols 
Fusel, oil, alcoholic, fruity, banana* fusel oil, pungent** 
whiskey* ** 
Fusel, fermented, fruity, banana, ethereal and cognac* ** 
250 ppb to 4.1 ppm 
50 ppm* ** 
1832 
3-Methyl-2-butanone 
(Methyl isopropyl ketone) 
Ketone 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1009 
3-Methyl-3-buten-1-ol 
Primary alcohols 
Sweet, fruity* 
- 
- 
- 
2235 
3-Nonanone 
Ketones 
Fresh, sweet, jasmine, spicy* pungent** 
leafy, herbaceous and fruity* ** 
- 
12-22 ppb 
 
n/a 
49387 
5,5-Dimethyl-3-(2-methylpropoxy) 
-2-cyclohexen-1-one 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
7680 
5-Methyl-2-heptanone 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
2288 
6-Methyl-2-heptanone 
- 
Camphoreous 
- 
- 
- 
1279 
6-Methyl-5-hepten-2-ol  
(Coriander heptenol) 
- 
Sweet, oily, green, coriander* 
- 
- 
- 
3058 
α,α-Dimethyl-benzenemethanol 
(2-Phenylpropan-2-ol) 
- 
Mild, green, sweet, earthy* 
- 
- 
- 
6940 
Amylene hydrate 
(2-Methyl-2-butanol) 
Tertiary alcohols 
Pungent* 
- 
- 
- 
2271 
Acetone 
(Propane-2-one) 
Ketones 
Solvent, ethereal, apple, pear* aromatic** 
 
Pungent, sweet** 
40-476 ppm* 
 
n/a 
17657 
Cyclopentanone 
Cyclic ketones 
Minty, peppermint-like* ** 
Musty, toasted, nutty, meaty** 
n/a 
20 ppm** 
5713 
Decanal 
Medium-chain 
aldehydes 
Aldehydicl* soap, tallow*** orange peel* *** sweet, 
citrus waxy, floral* ** fatty** 
Floral, sweet, citrus body, orange, waxy and slightly woody** 
Detection: 0.1-6 ppb** 
Recognition: 9 ppb** 
10 ppm** 
14597 
Hexanal 
Medium-chain 
aldehydes 
Fresh, aldehydic, leafy, sweat* grassy, fatty, green, 
fruity* ** cardboard-like off flavour in milk**** 
Green, woody, vegetative, apple, grassy, citrus and orange with a 
fresh, lingering aftertaste* ** 
4.1-22.8 ppb** 
2.5 ppm* ** 
33792 
Heptanal 
Medium-chain 
aldehydes 
Fresh, aldehydic, green, herbal, wine-like, ozone* fatty* 
** *** citrus, rancid***  strong, harsh, pungent** 
Fatty** 
3-60 ppb** 
n/a 
1042 
Nonanal 
Medium-chain 
aldehydes 
Waxy, aldehydic, rose, fresh, orris, orange peel* fatty* 
*** citrus, green*** fatty, orange and rose** 
Fatty, citrus-like, waxy, melon-like** 
1-8 ppb** 
2 ppm** 
864 
Octanal 
(octylaldehyde)  
Medium-chain 
aldehydes 
Aldehydic, waxy, orange peel, green* citrus, fatty* ** 
*** Soap*** honey** 
Aldehyde, green with a peely citrus orange note* ** 
1.4-6.4 ppb** 
25 ppm* ** 
Other 
 
 
 
 
 
2648 
2-Methyl-2-undecanethiol 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
14059 
n-Decyl 
methylphosphonofluoridate 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
aCompound ID according to the NIST11 software (NIST/EPA/NIH Mass Spectral Library, NIST, US) 
bClassification according to the HMDB database (The Metabolomics Innovation Centre (TMIC) 2016) 
cOdour and taste descriptions: *(Bill 2016) **(Burdock & Fenaroli 2010) ***(Acree & Arn 2016) ****(The Metabolomics Innovation Centre (TMIC) 2016) 
dOdour and taste threshold values: *(Bill 2016) **(Burdock & Fenaroli 2010) 
 
==PAGE:95==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
87 
 
Appendix 23 – Compounds found in significant different amounts (DHS) 
 
Compounds 
Significance between the control and the 3 doses 
Between dose  
1 and 2 
between dose 
1 and 3 
between dose 
2 and 3 
Dose 1 
Dose 2 
Dose 3 
 3-methyl-nonane 
p<0.05 
n.s. 
n.s. 
 
 
 
 4-Methyl-heptane 
p<0.01 
p<0.05 
n.s. 
n.s. 
 
 
(1-methylethyl)-Benzene 
p<0.05 
p<0.05 
n.s. 
n.s. 
 
 
(Z)-3-Dodecene 
p<0.05 
n.s. 
p<0.01 
 
p<0.001 
 
(Z)-3-methyl-2-Undecene 
p<0.01 
p<0.05 
p<0.01 
p<0.05 
p<0.001 
p<0.001 
1-Octanol 
n.s. 
p<0.05 
n.s. 
 
 
 
1-Pentanol 
n.s. 
n.s. 
p<0.01 
 
 
 
2,4-Dimethyl-1-heptene 
p<0.01 
p<0.01 
n.s. 
n.s. 
 
 
2-Butanone 
n.s. 
p<0.05 
n.s. 
 
 
 
2-Heptanone 
n.s. 
n.s. 
p<0.01 
 
 
 
2-methyl-1-Propanol 
p<0.05 
n.s. 
n.s. 
 
 
 
2-methyl-2-propanol 
p<0.05 
p<0.01 
n.s. 
n.s. 
 
 
2-methyl-2-Undecanethiol 
p<0.05 
p<0.05 
p<0.05 
n.s. 
n.s. 
n.s. 
2-Pentylcyclopentanone 
p<0.05 
p<0.01 
p<0.01 
p<0.05 
p<0.01 
p<0.001 
3-hydroxy-Dodecanoic acid 
p<0.05 
n.s. 
n.s. 
 
 
 
3-methyl-1-Butanol  
n.s. 
n.s. 
p<0.01 
 
 
 
3-methyl-2-Butanone 
n.s. 
n.s. 
p<0.05 
 
 
 
3-Nonanone 
p<0.05 
p<0.05 
p<0.05 
n.s. 
p<0.001 
p<0.01 
4-methyl-1-Decene  
n.s. 
p<0.05 
n.s. 
 
 
 
5,5-dimethyl-3-(2-methylpropoxy)-2-
Cyclohexen-1-one 
p<0.01 
p<0.05 
p<0.01 
n.s. 
p<0.001 
p<0.001 
6-methyl-2-Heptanone  
n.s. 
p<0.05 
n.s. 
 
 
 
8-methylene-Pentadecane  
p<0.05 
p<0.05 
n.s. 
p<0.05 
 
 
Acetic acid, butyl ester 
n.s. 
p<0.01 
p<0.001 
 
 
p<0.001 
Acetone 
n.s. 
n.s. 
p<0.01 
 
 
 
Acetophenone 
n.s. 
n.s. 
p<0.05 
 
 
 
Benzaldehyde 
p<0.05 
p<0.05 
p<0.05 
n.s. 
n.s. 
n.s. 
Cyclopentanone 
n.s. 
p<0.01 
p<0.01 
 
 
p<0.001 
Decanal 
n.s. 
n.s. 
p<0.05 
 
 
 
Dodecane 
n.s. 
n.s. 
p<0.01 
 
 
 
Ethylbenzene 
p<0.05 
p<0.01 
p<0.001 
n.s. 
p<0.05 
p<0.05 
Heptane 
n.s. 
n.s. 
p<0.05 
 
 
 
Mesitylene 
p<0.05 
p<0.001 
p<0.001 
p<0.05 
p<0.001 
p<0.01 
n-Decyl methylphosphonofluoridate 
n.s. 
n.s. 
p<0.05 
 
 
 
Nonanal 
p<0.05 
p<0.05 
n.s. 
n.s. 
 
 
Octanal 
p<0.01 
n.s. 
p<0.05 
 
n.s. 
 
p-Xylene 
p<0.05 
p<0.01 
p<0.001 
n.s. 
p<0.01 
p<0.01 
Pyrazine 
n.s. 
n.s. 
p<0.01 
 
 
 
tetrahydro-2-(12-pentadecynyloxy)-
2H-Pyran  
n.s. 
p<0.05 
n.s. 
 
 
 
Toluene 
n.s. 
n.s. 
p<0.05 
 
 
n.s. 
The p-values are found by conducting at a 2-tailed t-test in Excel as described in section 4.5. 
==PAGE:96==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
88 
 
Appendix 24 – PCA loadings plot from the GC-MS analysis (DHS) 
 
 
 
==PAGE:97==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
89 
 
Appendix 25 – Compounds identified by Twister combined with GC-MS 
IDa 
Compounds 
Classificationb 
(direct parent) 
Odour descriptionc 
Taste descriptionc 
Aromad 
threshold 
Tasted 
threshold 
Benzenoids 
 
 
 
 
 
22436 
Biphenyl 
Biphenyls and derivatives 
Pungent, rose* ** green, geranium* 
Neroli, bergamot, cinnamon, natural* 
0.5 ppb** 
n/a** 
13301 
Phenol 
Phenols and derivatives 
Phenolic* *** plastic rubber* smoky, spicy, sweet, 
tarry** medical, creosote, smoky, spicy, phenolic, 
leather-like, notes of fried meat and coffee** 
Spicy, phenolic, tobacco, musty, woody, medicinal, 
smoky, tarlike, slightly spicy clove-like** 
5.5 ppm** 
3 ppm** 
Hydrocarbons 
 
 
 
 
 
54491 
2-(Hydroxymethyl)-norbornadiene 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
27971 
m-Terphenyl 
(1,3-Diphenylbenzene) 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
5836 
Nonadecane 
Acyclic alkanes 
Alkene*** 
Bland* 
- 
- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lipids and lipid-like molecules 
 
 
 
 
 
5763 
3,7,11,15-tetramethyl-1-Hexadecanol  
Fatty alcohols 
- 
- 
- 
- 
9045 
Dodecanoic acid 
(Lauric acid) 
Medium-chain fatty acids 
Mild, fatty, coconut, bay oil* 
Fatty** 
Waxy, fatty and oily, tallowlike, creamy and dairy-like 
with a coating mouthfeel** 
- 
5 ppm** 
7134 
Hexanoic acid 
(L-Hexanoylcarnitine) 
Acyl carnitines 
Sour, fatty, sweat, cheese* 
Sweaty, rancid, spur, sharp, pungent, cheesy, 
fatty** 
Cheesy, fruity, phenolic, fatty, goaty* 
Acrid** 
93 ppb to 10 
ppm** 
n/a 
9050 
Decanoic acid 
(Capric acid, C10) 
Medium-chain fatty acids 
Unpleasant, rancid, sour, fatty, citrus* 
Rancid, fat*** fatty, unpleasant, rancid** 
Soapy, waxy, fruity* 
2.2-102 ppm** 
n/a 
7156 
n-Hexadecanoic acid 
(Palmitic acid, C16) 
Long-chain fatty acids 
Low heavy, waxy, with a creamy, candle waxy 
nuance* 
Waxy, creamy, fatty, soapy with a crisco like fatty, 
lard and tallow like mouth feel and a dairy nuance* 
10 ppm 
50-100 
ppm* 
28433 
Octanoic acid 
(Caprylic acid) 
Medium-chain fatty acids 
Fatty waxy rancid oily vegetable* cheesy* *** 
sweat*** unpleasant, creamy dairy, sweaty, fatty 
cheesy, fruity-acid** 
 
Unpleasant, rancid, soapy, cheesy, fatty, bandy* 
Burning, rancid, sour, creamy, waxy, dirty, sweaty, 
dairy cheese-like** 
910 ppb to 19 
ppm** 
10 ppm 
35090 
Phytol 
Acyclic diterpenoids 
delicate floral balsam powdery waxy* 
flower*** floral** 
- 
Low strength 
odour 
n/a 
9042 
Tetradecanoic acid 
(Myristic acid) 
Long-chain fatty acids 
faint, waxy and fatty with a hint of pineapple and 
citrus peel* faint, waxy, oily** 
Waxy, fatty, soapy, creamy, cheesy with a good 
mouthfeel* 
n/a 
10 ppm** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Organic acids and derivatives 
 
 
 
 
 
 34222 
[R-[R*R*-(E)]]-3,7,11,15-tetramethyl-
2-Hexadecene  
(Phytyl acetate) 
Diterpenes 
Mild, waxy, fruity, balsam* 
Balsamic** 
- 
Low strength 
odour 
n/a 
==PAGE:98==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
90 
 
5724 
3-Hydroxy-dodecanoic acid 
Medium-chain hydroxy acids and 
derivatives 
- 
- 
- 
- 
23155 
Hexadecanoic acid, 2-methylpropyl 
ester 
(Isobutyl palmitate) 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
100683 
Hexanedioic acid, mono(2-ethylhexyl) ester                           - 
(2-Ethylhexyl hydrogen adipate) 
- 
- 
- 
- 
24398 
Octadecanoic acid, octyl ester 
(Octyl stearate) 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Organohetrocyclic compounds 
 
 
 
 
 
49627 
γ-Dodecalactone 
(5-octyloxolan-2-one) 
Lactones 
Fatty, peach, sweet, metallic, fruity* 
Fruity, peach-like** 
Creamy, fatty, oily, buttery sweet, coconut, fruity and 
peach-like** 
1-11 ppb** 
10 ppm** 
65573 
δ-dodecalactone 
(6-Heptyltetrahydro-2H-pyran-2-one) 
Delta valerolactones 
Fatty, sweet, creamy, dairy, fruity, peach, apricot, 
milky and buttery* powerful, fresh, coconut-fruit, 
oily** 
Creamy, fatty, dairy, rich buttery, fruity, peach and 
nutty* peach-, pear-, plum-like flavour** 
Strong fatty creamy, stale milky lactonic massoia 
notes with at dairy mouthfeel** 
- 
10 ppm* 
65568 
δ-tetradecalacetone 
(Tetrahydro-6-nonyl-2H-pyran-2-
one) 
Delta valerolactones 
Waxy, creamy, oil, fatty, sweet, milky and dairy* 
Buttery, fatty, creamy, with a sweet milky and dairy 
nuances* 
- 
- 
65597 
δ-decalactone  
(Tetrahydro-6-pentyl-2H-pyran-2-
one)) 
- 
Sweet, creamy, lactonic, fatly, coconut, milky* 
Oily, peach** 
Coconut, creamy, fatty, buttery, milky and nutty with 
a slightly fruity nuance* Oily, peach, waxy, coconut, 
lactonic, fatty, creamy, nutty, fruity** 
100 ppb** 
2 ppm** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Organooxygen compounds 
 
 
 
 
 
25959 
2-Pentadecanone 
Ketones 
Fresh, jasmine, celery* chemical-like, fruity green, 
dairy-like fatty and waxy** 
Fatty, spicy, floral* berry, blueberry fruity, waxy fatty, 
hay-like green with a dairy-like aftertaste** 
1-7 ppb** 
50 ppm** 
25713 
2-Tridecanone 
Ketones 
Fatty, waxy, mushroom, coconut and earthy with a 
mild chicken fat nuance* warm, oily, herbaceous** 
Fatty and earthy with a fatty mouthfeel and a dairy, 
ketonic and cheesy nuance* ** creamy, coconut** 
n/a 
10 ppm* 
7679 
6,10,14-Trimethyl-2-pentadecanone 
(Hexahydrofarnesyl acetone) 
- 
 
Oily, herbal, jasmine, celery woody* 
- 
- 
- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Other 
 
 
 
 
 
6436 
2,3-Dihydro-3,5-dihydroxy-6-methyl-
4H-pyran-4-one 
(xi-2,3-Dihydro-3,5-dihydroxy-6-
methyl-4H-pyran-4-one) 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
23230 
2-Hydroxy-gamma-butyrolactone 
(3-Hydroxyoxolan-2-one) 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
27581 
Hexadecamethyl-heptasiloxane 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
 
aCompound ID according to the NIST11 software (NIST/EPA/NIH Mass Spectral Library, NIST, US) 
bClassification according to the HMDB database (The Metabolomics Innovation Centre (TMIC) 2016) 
cOdour and taste descriptions: *(Bill 2016) **(Burdock & Fenaroli 2010) ***(Acree & Arn 2016) 
dOdour and taste threshold values: *(Bill 2016) 
 
==PAGE:99==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
91 
 
Appendix 26 – Compounds found in significant different amounts (Twister) 
Compounds 
Significance between the control and the 3 doses 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
2 
3 
 
 
 
2-Pentadecanone 
p<0.01 
p<0.05 
n.s. 
Difference between 1 and 2 not signif. 
2-Tridecanone 
p<0.05 
p<0.05 
n.s. 
Diff between 1 and 2 not signif. 
3-hydroxy-Dodecanoic acid 
p<0.05 
n.s. 
n.s. 
 
 
 
Hexadecanoic acid, 2-methylpropyl ester 
p<0.05 
n.s. 
p<0.01 
Difference between 1 and 3 not signif. 
Hexanedioic acid, mono(2-ethylhexyl)ester 
p<0.05 
n.s. 
p<0.05 
Difference between 1 and 3 signif. (p<0.001) 
Octadecanoic acid, octyl ester 
p<0.05 
n.s. 
n.s. 
 
 
 
Octanoic acid 
n.s. 
p<0.05 
n.s. 
 
 
 
tetrahydro-6-nonyl-2H-Pyran-2-one 
p<0.05 
n.s. 
n.s. 
 
 
 
The p-values are found by conducting at a 2-tailed t-test in Excel as described in section 4.5. 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:100==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
92 
 
Appendix 27 – PCA loadings plot from the GC-MS analysis (Twister) 
 
==PAGE:101==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
93 
 
Appendix 28 – Analysis results from the Jersey tank 
  
  
Analysis results from the farm. The samples marked with a * is Jersey milk, but is from the tank, where all the milk 
are pooled together including some Jersey milk from another farm. 
Average protein (Jersey milk): 3.77% 
Average butterfat (Jersey milk): 5.22 %  
Average urea (Jersey milk): 0.019% 
 
 
*
*
*
*
*
==PAGE:102==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
94 
 
Appendix 29 – Graphs on the lactose, fat and protein content measured by MilkoScan  
 
 
 
0,000
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
5,000
6,000
Fat
Protein
Lactose
% w/w
Dose 1
Fresh
frozen
frozen 40 degrees
frozen 45 degrees
0,000
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
5,000
6,000
Fat
Protein
Lactose
% w/w
Dose 2
Fresh
frozen
frozen 40 degrees
frozen 45 degrees
0,000
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
5,000
6,000
Fat
Protein
Lactose
% w/w
Dose 3
Fresh
frozen
frozen 40 degrees
frozen 45 degrees
0,000
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
5,000
Fat
Protein
Lactose
% w/w
Control
Fresh
frozen
frozen 40 degrees
frozen 45 degrees
==PAGE:103==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
95 
 
Appendix 30 – Raw data from the quantitative 1H NMR  
Concentrations (mg/dL)  
ID 
 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
31 
32 
33 
34 
35 
36 
Sample 
 
1 
1 
1 
2 
2 
2 
3 
3 
3 
4 
4 
4 
2-Oxoglutarate 
0.7445 
0.6361 
0.3588 
0.9836 
0.9916 
0.9877 
1.2725 
1.0953 
1.1319 
1.3348 
1.3521 
1.2675 
3-Hydroxybutyrate 
0.1194 
0.116 
0.1437 
0.1389 
0.1406 
0.1343 
0.1381 
0.1254 
0.1354 
0.2012 
0.1657 
0.1331 
3-Hydroxyisovalerate 
0.0882 
0.0076 
0.0071 
0.0129 
0.024 
0.0099 
0.0179 
0.0114 
0.012 
0.0784 
0.0713 
0.062 
Acetate 
0.0946 
0.0974 
0.1047 
0.1008 
0.0934 
0.0987 
0.0999 
0.1127 
0.0867 
0.1285 
0.1091 
0.1074 
Acetone 
0.1197 
0.12 
0.1269 
0.1912 
0.1899 
0.201 
0.2577 
0.2129 
0.2247 
0.0873 
0.0766 
0.0611 
Adenosine 
0.1672 
0.0668 
0.0706 
0.0745 
0.0758 
0.074 
0.105 
0.0954 
0.0895 
0.0764 
0.08 
0.0638 
Alanine 
0.2607 
0.2516 
0.2692 
0.2525 
0.2525 
0.2557 
0.3074 
0.2656 
0.2683 
0.3339 
0.2894 
0.2511 
Betaine 
0.3804 
0.4683 
0.474 
0.6242 
0.6186 
0.6338 
0.512 
0.4977 
0.4661 
0.7901 
0.5353 
0.5039 
Carnitine 
0.9264 
0.6777 
1.4263 
0.7597 
1.3467 
0.7448 
1.0201 
2.3065 
1.1918 
1.5452 
1.6703 
0.9455 
Choline 
4.9955 
4.7936 
4.7792 
5.6291 
4.7127 
5.048 
5.2382 
5.0252 
4.8594 
5.7961 
5.1111 
4.6284 
Citrate 
137.27 
146.5695 
140.7953 
147.1945 
147.6344 
152.8715 
151.0735 
155.4065 
137.8075 
159.2249 
152.6158 
140.3908 
Creatine 
6.8494 
6.803 
6.8215 
6.3782 
6.1912 
6.4839 
7.565 
6.865 
6.7766 
8.0227 
7.1827 
6.3179 
Creatinine 
0.8087 
0.7913 
0.8045 
0.7903 
0.776 
0.827 
0.8904 
0.8339 
0.829 
0.8951 
0.808 
0.7177 
Cytidine 
0.2565 
0.3552 
0.3832 
0.3698 
0.4578 
0.4184 
0.4753 
0.4467 
0.3618 
0.4971 
0.4353 
0.2753 
Fucose 
0.7208 
0.7101 
0.7294 
0.7203 
0.6639 
0.6792 
0.8676 
0.7025 
0.7618 
0.9573 
0.8758 
0.7161 
Fumarate 
0.2901 
0.241 
0.2489 
0.249 
0.2475 
0.2477 
0.2994 
0.2706 
0.2643 
0.3002 
0.2666 
0.2383 
Galactose 
6.0082 
14.0604 
15.605 
15.2674 
13.5987 
14.5602 
16.5825 
15.0468 
14.3594 
18.8598 
16.7024 
16.8867 
Glucose 
13.233 
9.6419 
11.0259 
11.2115 
11.1953 
13.0713 
11.8306 
9.6295 
10.9968 
15.6928 
14.301 
12.2696 
Glucose-1P 
0.9086 
0.9543 
0.8403 
0.8298 
0.8065 
0.8217 
0.8958 
1.2135 
0.63 
0.9933 
0.8259 
0.6995 
Glutamate 
1.8117 
1.651 
1.7306 
1.576 
1.686 
1.8137 
2.0879 
2.0262 
1.9931 
2.2869 
2.1216 
1.9068 
Hippurate 
1.2547 
1.3355 
1.2739 
1.0651 
1.214 
1.1896 
1.2877 
1.3346 
1.2687 
1.3385 
1.308 
1.2821 
Lactate 
0.1959 
0.1686 
0.2189 
0.2468 
0.4731 
0.2912 
0.2319 
0.2186 
0.0813 
0.3911 
0.2609 
0.2528 
Lactose 
3768 
3718.4733 
3769.3762 
3632.2651 
3699.504 
3863.321 
4052.8903 
3894.91 
3722.142 
4430.018 
4074.779 
3605.505 
Malonate 
0.3011 
0.2854 
0.2997 
0.2998 
0.3189 
0.3041 
0.3564 
0.3755 
0.3635 
0.4324 
0.414 
0.3598 
Mannose 
1.3652 
0.6697 
0.9879 
1.0484 
1.4304 
3.9233 
1.8487 
1.5433 
1.6707 
1.8077 
1.732 
1.2266 
Methionine 
0.714 
0.6935 
0.7196 
0.6954 
0.6487 
0.6956 
0.7771 
0.6492 
0.6965 
0.8334 
0.7408 
0.6521 
O-Phosphocholine 
1.312 
2.3838 
2.3382 
2.4616 
2.7509 
2.7406 
2.751 
2.5969 
2.5865 
2.2521 
1.959 
1.4679 
Orotic acid 
48.376 
48.4919 
49.0469 
44.2186 
43.8153 
44.1804 
52.7613 
49.4138 
48.0017 
57.5386 
53.7048 
50.0669 
Pantothenate 
0.3851 
0.3354 
0.3553 
0.4189 
0.3694 
0.4562 
0.5403 
0.4536 
0.4296 
0.6905 
0.5474 
0.4592 
Pyruvate 
0.0755 
0.0661 
0.0954 
0.105 
0.1208 
0.1022 
0.1651 
0.1133 
0.1953 
0.2205 
0.1898 
0.1411 
Succinate 
0.1682 
0.2077 
0.2251 
0.1841 
0.1496 
0.1623 
0.161 
0.2639 
0.0784 
0.2073 
0.1768 
0.193 
Threonine 
0.1226 
0.1133 
0.1182 
0.1057 
0.0924 
0.0913 
0.1364 
0.1193 
0.3575 
0.6188 
0.1783 
0.1213 
Urea 
7.7815 
8.2167 
7.3232 
6.9871 
7.5888 
7.6498 
8.2572 
7.8149 
6.4901 
10.353 
9.454 
9.2711 
Valine 
0.0983 
0.0938 
0.0985 
0.0963 
0.0941 
0.0969 
0.1185 
0.0944 
0.0985 
0.1521 
0.1246 
0.1188 
cis-Aconitate 
1.5404 
- 
1.4655 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1.7637 
1.5644 
- 
- 
- 
sn-Glycero-3-phosphocholine 
14.16 
18.1021 
17.889 
16.907 
17.0206 
18.6382 
23.0523 
22.0239 
21.0925 
24.3016 
21.6824 
19.5188 
==PAGE:104==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
96 
 
Appendix 31 – Raw data from the DHS combined with GC-MS 
ID 
 
1a 
1b 
1c 
2a 
2b 
2c 
3a 
3b 
3c 
4a 
4b 
4c 
n-Hexane 
0.260523 
0.257843 
0.234043 
0.340041 
0.237603 
0.298071 
0.344726 
0.358367 
0.304721 
0.335447 
0.21492 
0.226067 
Hexane. 3-methyl- 
0.221467 
0.257493 
0.246978 
0.273842 
0.218106 
0.286723 
0.329798 
0.39434 
0.312821 
0.356994 
0.242534 
0.265494 
1-Pentene. 2-methyl- 
0.233056 
0.272192 
0.208488 
0.327163 
0.189691 
0.277669 
0.341264 
0.348652 
0.306476 
0.357871 
0.261433 
0.282213 
Butanal. 3-hydroxy- 
0.287445 
0.325559 
0.285499 
0.28175 
0.297457 
0.345506 
0.254193 
0.254151 
0.322218 
0.279651 
0.263707 
0.24872 
Heptane 
0.255216 
0.278291 
0.285855 
0.26865 
0.257651 
0.287042 
0.342594 
0.368344 
0.31384 
0.293413 
0.237994 
0.245929 
Heptane. 4-methyl- 
0.208339 
0.227232 
0.232096 
0.238401 
0.225655 
0.270231 
0.36447 
0.379005 
0.320972 
0.337223 
0.294513 
0.300581 
Heptane. 3-methyl- 
0.248459 
0.272658 
0.279213 
0.272707 
0.26205 
0.300923 
0.330769 
0.360979 
0.309302 
0.305605 
0.246383 
0.250782 
Octane 
0.266265 
0.278991 
0.287896 
0.270208 
0.265408 
0.286949 
0.340429 
0.34273 
0.298316 
0.272342 
0.265004 
0.275396 
Cyclohexane. 1.3-dimethyl-. cis- 
0.257763 
0.265785 
0.271182 
0.278941 
0.261323 
0.299565 
0.321475 
0.329354 
0.30128 
0.33117 
0.273252 
0.25809 
Acetone 
0.258194 
0.198074 
0.163409 
0.547526 
0.294319 
0.360216 
0.347954 
0.3117 
0.289866 
0.159674 
0.114699 
0.101653 
Cyclohexane. ethyl- 
0.256062 
0.264202 
0.27532 
0.28026 
0.271698 
0.299348 
0.314961 
0.325221 
0.303032 
0.323412 
0.271666 
0.267691 
2.4-Dimethyl-1-heptene 
0.193825 
0.211022 
0.211744 
0.223883 
0.218688 
0.258393 
0.355516 
0.374163 
0.330451 
0.355147 
0.319203 
0.323641 
2-Butanone 
0.212904 
0.216452 
0.17483 
0.48402 
0.342948 
0.45596 
0.267 
0.292698 
0.262829 
0.229351 
0.143192 
0.135348 
Ethyl Acetate 
0.221244 
0.2677 
0.22184 
0.40033 
0.297912 
0.398012 
0.2084 
0.249495 
0.235454 
0.417254 
0.219794 
0.198037 
1-Ethyl-4-methylcyclohexane 
0.244627 
0.284551 
0.278002 
0.283994 
0.271404 
0.312922 
0.302223 
0.329742 
0.299011 
0.318811 
0.264285 
0.262121 
2-Propanol. 2-methyl- 
0.424621 
0.427451 
0.330883 
0.315695 
0.266599 
0.322463 
0.168369 
0.250679 
0.222189 
0.188813 
0.175248 
0.21415 
Heptane. 2.2.4.6.6-pentamethyl- 
0.28052 
0.307452 
0.303615 
0.272753 
0.276281 
0.310294 
0.254806 
0.283633 
0.271092 
0.327609 
0.280176 
0.287927 
1-Decene. 4-methyl- 
0.22382 
0.278446 
0.263398 
0.353294 
0.334879 
0.364231 
0.226922 
0.264164 
0.253152 
0.320404 
0.262102 
0.276859 
Nonane. 3-methyl- 
0.313056 
0.308056 
0.316526 
0.263288 
0.273347 
0.286947 
0.293883 
0.288924 
0.264588 
0.269782 
0.28848 
0.290993 
2-Butanone. 3-methyl- 
0.220976 
0.255133 
0.260724 
0.251347 
0.24813 
0.261126 
0.335687 
0.384466 
0.378581 
0.288791 
0.257736 
0.267427 
n-Propyl acetate 
0.268854 
0.308892 
0.295894 
0.299272 
0.282135 
0.30258 
0.260929 
0.286362 
0.280398 
0.311693 
0.277426 
0.284963 
Decane 
0.297944 
0.296234 
0.286962 
0.272145 
0.277437 
0.292341 
0.288458 
0.2806 
0.255656 
0.287818 
0.312062 
0.311616 
Amylene hydrate 
0.367939 
0.373804 
0.318088 
0.272064 
0.273967 
0.289689 
0.177304 
0.255902 
0.252563 
0.326951 
0.257183 
0.238671 
Pentadecane. 8-methylene- 
0.263715 
0.298568 
0.240177 
0.397505 
0.297927 
0.383574 
0.217238 
0.243286 
0.207483 
0.331619 
0.25829 
0.252213 
Nonane. 3-methylene- 
0.31893 
0.315812 
0.311426 
0.276594 
0.288342 
0.295448 
0.272283 
0.270331 
0.249648 
0.269879 
0.293539 
0.293401 
Toluene 
0.246445 
0.266626 
0.273501 
0.308132 
0.310451 
0.334336 
0.247346 
0.275492 
0.246726 
0.333287 
0.293882 
0.30801 
Acetic acid. butyl ester 
0.270177 
0.296937 
0.276785 
0.356254 
0.360732 
0.357888 
0.211555 
0.216075 
0.201582 
0.273762 
0.289551 
0.29365 
Hexanal 
0.291258 
0.332594 
0.350949 
0.222898 
0.242721 
0.194421 
0.237941 
0.335407 
0.372899 
0.223352 
0.292752 
0.302044 
2-Undecanethiol. 2-methyl- 
0.229752 
0.237186 
0.205574 
0.236746 
0.243551 
0.262579 
0.283282 
0.271273 
0.244184 
0.335901 
0.411448 
0.410854 
1-Propanol. 2-methyl- 
0.381135 
0.407157 
0.302691 
0.288426 
0.262151 
0.297749 
0.184366 
0.275524 
0.266282 
0.294903 
0.213937 
0.207901 
2-Butanol. 2.3-dimethyl- 
0.305468 
0.352696 
0.317778 
0.265033 
0.300547 
0.278361 
0.193785 
0.269566 
0.268505 
0.328651 
0.277015 
0.276032 
Ethylbenzene 
0.283607 
0.277183 
0.283499 
0.267859 
0.285475 
0.29041 
0.247283 
0.251628 
0.229956 
0.327805 
0.338582 
0.354038 
Benzene. (1-methylethyl)- 
0.35553 
0.380819 
0.459307 
0.294377 
0.378259 
0.390823 
0.119882 
0.13611 
0.158797 
0.155259 
0.15496 
0.169999 
p-Xylene 
0.291907 
0.285437 
0.286503 
0.276061 
0.276008 
0.285861 
0.236736 
0.236503 
0.215924 
0.336234 
0.338247 
0.362023 
Cyclopentanone 
0.277168 
0.300236 
0.284497 
0.317658 
0.320256 
0.332587 
0.24411 
0.262954 
0.248876 
0.283409 
0.282213 
0.295593 
Heptanal 
0.292492 
0.453377 
0.353432 
0.3419 
0.272601 
0.255473 
0.27389 
0.217746 
0.23768 
0.208721 
0.225033 
0.233206 
2-Heptanone 
0.231899 
0.236563 
0.22439 
0.194816 
0.217209 
0.197058 
0.408003 
0.427372 
0.41554 
0.221969 
0.262716 
0.275441 
Dodecane 
0.324572 
0.308307 
0.299283 
0.301998 
0.309605 
0.320736 
0.225777 
0.210442 
0.195453 
0.290045 
0.322513 
0.31384 
Pyrazine 
0.277859 
0.307902 
0.30359 
0.300824 
0.307109 
0.319683 
0.225346 
0.252221 
0.242347 
0.311263 
0.295196 
0.302756 
1-Butanol. 3-methyl- 
0.299792 
0.34314 
0.294485 
0.289485 
0.282143 
0.292462 
0.248131 
0.258314 
0.242646 
0.304146 
0.303135 
0.291807 
==PAGE:105==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
97 
 
3-Dodecene. (Z)- 
0.35146 
0.347717 
0.321557 
0.306805 
0.291265 
0.301349 
0.209516 
0.216863 
0.191958 
0.272606 
0.29977 
0.300737 
2-Undecene. 3-methyl-. (Z)- 
0.354853 
0.353354 
0.332665 
0.308486 
0.326737 
0.322054 
0.185978 
0.19097 
0.173626 
0.256017 
0.283715 
0.292699 
3-Buten-1-ol. 3-methyl- 
0.262978 
0.292482 
0.266603 
0.384555 
0.24594 
0.300259 
0.22011 
0.259016 
0.237149 
0.399602 
0.263976 
0.273044 
1-Pentanol 
0.219639 
0.265377 
0.245422 
0.230957 
0.227712 
0.234846 
0.375475 
0.417384 
0.392122 
0.235631 
0.247926 
0.273524 
2-Heptanone. 6-methyl- 
0.281623 
0.456037 
0.258868 
0.336941 
0.296607 
0.251761 
0.37487 
0.233542 
0.243587 
0.163201 
0.212309 
0.23389 
1-Methyl-2-(4-methylpentyl)cyclopentane 
0.262991 
0.345304 
0.266716 
0.3469 
0.325811 
0.350639 
0.186578 
0.256772 
0.198815 
0.259372 
0.292502 
0.312923 
Mesitylene 
0.321858 
0.321092 
0.299304 
0.260269 
0.263809 
0.257312 
0.216667 
0.220494 
0.20551 
0.34319 
0.348105 
0.351322 
n-Decyl methylphosphonofluoridate 
0.318369 
0.311622 
0.318751 
0.294084 
0.335046 
0.317722 
0.229384 
0.228734 
0.217639 
0.269422 
0.291712 
0.300426 
Octanal 
0.330408 
0.4666 
0.410138 
0.277353 
0.26979 
0.175768 
0.239563 
0.269271 
0.347364 
0.097004 
0.182806 
0.175808 
2-Heptanone. 5-methyl- 
0.262999 
0.318197 
0.314936 
0.262768 
0.262405 
0.285822 
0.286212 
0.288473 
0.277976 
0.272362 
0.309366 
0.313857 
1-Pentanol. 4-methyl- 
0.322539 
0.332895 
0.322377 
0.327398 
0.327094 
0.335619 
0.25673 
0.24903 
0.233141 
0.231174 
0.228682 
0.257651 
5-Hepten-2-ol. 6-methyl- 
0.148354 
0.265627 
0.191291 
0.458293 
0.187467 
0.490545 
0.125231 
0.192379 
0.156052 
0.458898 
0.20013 
0.23947 
3-Nonanone 
0.381482 
0.354025 
0.350755 
0.306699 
0.349456 
0.336169 
0.166575 
0.147351 
0.153551 
0.225543 
0.270269 
0.282778 
2-Nonanone 
0.300789 
0.311865 
0.2857 
0.23691 
0.268963 
0.238114 
0.347522 
0.340944 
0.35127 
0.196096 
0.265958 
0.275469 
Nonanal 
0.336287 
0.451523 
0.409301 
0.340232 
0.293575 
0.243057 
0.300811 
0.179782 
0.232452 
0.150492 
0.164196 
0.16745 
2-Pentylcyclopentanone 
0.300236 
0.334561 
0.312659 
0.387914 
0.383967 
0.393332 
0.134984 
0.128801 
0.131887 
0.239502 
0.25999 
0.265318 
2-Cyclohexen-1-one. 5.5-dimethyl-3-(2-methylpropoxy)- 
0.332584 
0.356105 
0.347458 
0.325801 
0.327659 
0.327499 
0.180033 
0.165937 
0.164609 
0.261732 
0.283411 
0.291923 
Pentadecane. 8-methylene- 
0.31742 
0.325476 
0.318852 
0.306746 
0.297533 
0.294441 
0.276965 
0.270669 
0.267935 
0.242619 
0.263598 
0.268738 
Acetic acid 
0.25901 
0.244329 
0.311467 
0.213155 
0.072232 
0.199795 
0.691184 
0.134431 
0.160817 
0.151505 
0.133916 
0.350825 
Decanal 
0.288204 
0.532358 
0.307839 
0.259805 
0.231652 
0.191838 
0.307112 
0.330125 
0.321782 
0.117311 
0.192218 
0.152483 
Benzaldehyde 
0.351282 
0.273799 
0.336212 
0.263867 
0.347312 
0.337109 
0.343719 
0.346934 
0.267354 
0.155706 
0.160159 
0.157549 
1-Octanol 
0.305573 
0.524861 
0.322073 
0.371329 
0.30915 
0.238107 
0.347522 
0.138167 
0.182198 
0.118887 
0.158206 
0.158241 
Butanoic acid 
0.219562 
0.190524 
0.473324 
0.020261 
0.013611 
0.036897 
0.050879 
0.22059 
0.226144 
0.011884 
0.072651 
0.762687 
Acetophenone 
0.375215 
0.254056 
0.432148 
0.208661 
0.454291 
0.331903 
0.250341 
0.276957 
0.197225 
0.133463 
0.152768 
0.168564 
Dodecanoic acid. 3-hydroxy- 
0.390347 
0.358586 
0.545754 
0.183674 
0.202214 
0.137308 
0.477126 
0.094455 
0.196891 
-0.06838 
0.196455 
0.095449 
Furan. tetrahydro-2.2.4.4-tetramethyl- 
0.321791 
0.245057 
0.425272 
-0.04488 
0.256019 
0.301159 
0.308244 
0.289911 
0.256927 
-0.06292 
0.276042 
0.414791 
Benzenemethanol. à.à-dimethyl- 
0.241094 
0.268217 
0.521536 
0.121001 
0.278593 
0.447351 
0.28883 
0.217071 
0.317874 
0.074153 
0.127155 
0.228694 
2-Tridecanone 
0.322358 
0.354341 
0.391015 
0.129828 
0.210968 
0.130436 
0.267822 
0.324345 
0.53081 
-0.05404 
0.186086 
0.207418 
1-Dodecanol. 3.7.11-trimethyl- 
0.265621 
0.347696 
0.391582 
0.148475 
0.157439 
0.170057 
0.36678 
0.309054 
0.460524 
-0.0838 
0.208891 
0.294418 
Hexanoic acid 
0.126831 
0.17971 
0.482214 
0.009013 
0.010928 
0.029383 
0.070205 
0.180393 
0.220932 
0.010835 
0.073663 
0.791327 
2H-Pyran. tetrahydro-2-(12-pentadecynyloxy)- 
0.276963 
0.538194 
0.242437 
0.227187 
0.205128 
0.287651 
0.558563 
0.094546 
0.244399 
-0.01776 
0.092512 
0.094297 
Tetradecanal 
0.248256 
0.230962 
0.428559 
0.035573 
0.174535 
0.011808 
0.130451 
0.416662 
0.628641 
-0.03602 
0.210728 
0.194878 
Biphenyl 
0.352799 
0.282097 
0.328246 
0.276165 
0.315726 
0.259614 
0.299256 
0.254936 
0.296305 
0.236264 
0.299532 
0.238696 
Phenol 
0.345733 
0.237183 
0.336352 
0.236052 
0.389083 
0.321849 
0.287293 
0.334159 
0.23795 
0.21504 
0.22115 
0.233277 
2-Pentadecanone 
0.276378 
0.215267 
0.399892 
-0.01623 
0.151603 
0.029663 
0.104473 
0.406964 
0.64273 
-0.03251 
0.205072 
0.245942 
Octanoic acid 
0.142324 
0.352699 
0.400076 
0.014988 
0.020555 
0.026449 
0.087893 
0.113744 
0.185674 
-0.02293 
0.077046 
0.795198 
Dodecanoic acid. 3-hydroxy- 
-0.02575 
0.076979 
0.525425 
-0.03624 
0.022231 
-0.02726 
0.039967 
0.077381 
0.104521 
0.066608 
0.073156 
0.828547 
1.2.3.6.7.8.9.10.11.12-Decahydrobenzo[e]pyrene 
-0.00957 
0.548682 
-0.00248 
0.341773 
-0.00383 
0.156228 
-0.00781 
0.098178 
0.37364 
-0.13755 
0.600726 
-0.16888 
9-Octadecenoic acid. (2-phenyl-1.3-dioxolan-4-yl)methyl ester. cis- 
0.364508 
-0.1172 
0.3888 
0.077857 
0.371372 
0.232261 
0.376284 
0.277363 
-0.12119 
0.329298 
-0.2145 
0.341549 
Squalene 
0.028691 
0.291434 
0.05431 
-0.01209 
0.011287 
-0.01431 
-0.01595 
-0.0202 
0.055938 
-0.12194 
0.941777 
-0.07217 
Phenindamine 
0.01564 
-0.0488 
0.049863 
-0.00914 
0.044387 
0.016851 
0.045703 
0.092448 
-0.09884 
0.696322 
-0.07738 
0.693753 
Hexadecanoic acid. 2-methylpropyl ester 
0.05504 
0.027296 
0.042785 
0.017701 
0.020297 
0.047404 
0.128773 
0.173124 
0.835616 
0.161042 
0.410935 
0.227622 
[1.1':3'.1''-Terphenyl]-2'-ol 
0.013259 
0.327945 
0.377256 
0.295291 
0.282846 
0.270759 
0.264839 
0.261426 
0.309552 
0.296971 
0.323734 
0.286608 
 
==PAGE:106==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
98 
 
Appendix 32 – Raw data from the Twister combined with GC-MS 
ID 
1a 
1b 
1c 
2a 
2b 
2c 
3a 
3b 
3c 
4a 
4b 
4c 
Tw-Nonadecane 
0.025916 
0.044152 
0.110368 
0.059487 
0.098264 
0.102562 
0.130093 
. 
0.808423 
0.155115 
0.290301 
0.427408 
Tw-2-Tridecanone 
0.064153 
0.130876 
0.251682 
0.126072 
0.217106 
0.184927 
0.183814 
. 
0.59327 
0.353949 
0.321963 
0.451095 
Tw-Hexanoic acid 
0.081367 
0.243948 
0.271832 
0.211439 
0.335067 
0.242438 
0.206723 
. 
0.356087 
0.374144 
0.417793 
0.400196 
Tw-2-Hexadecene. 3.7.11.15-tetramethyl-. [R-[R*.R*-(E)]]- 
0.135695 
0.159922 
0.127883 
0.236461 
0.305376 
0.070242 
0.441762 
. 
0.294743 
0.469637 
0.516676 
-0.12655 
Tw-1-Hexadecanol. 3.7.11.15-tetramethyl- 
-0.01394 
-0.00508 
0.053783 
-0.00743 
0.018606 
0.081411 
0.005385 
. 
0.883937 
0.012081 
0.130568 
0.437369 
Tw-2-(Hydroxymethyl)norbornadiene 
0.316619 
0.385881 
0.369678 
0.293416 
0.275202 
0.242946 
0.248825 
. 
0.184545 
0.453018 
0.196127 
0.231675 
Tw-Phytol 
0.021877 
0.037441 
0.083333 
0.066347 
0.100297 
0.095306 
0.121266 
. 
0.833924 
0.146626 
0.297783 
0.383825 
Tw-Dodecanoic acid. 3-hydroxy- 
-0.04669 
-0.0407 
0.158056 
0.099863 
0.157315 
0.135287 
0.123925 
. 
0.729493 
0.17314 
0.358786 
0.460367 
Tw-Phenol 
0.296457 
0.287633 
0.396249 
0.264382 
0.284285 
0.295326 
0.234976 
. 
0.327333 
0.305069 
0.302675 
0.295624 
Tw-Biphenyl 
0.37081 
0.304595 
0.278964 
0.349325 
0.308676 
0.25559 
0.338482 
. 
0.246362 
0.317378 
0.273908 
0.241346 
Tw-2-Pentadecanone 
0.05764 
0.137155 
0.133191 
0.122255 
0.225309 
0.187786 
0.185287 
. 
0.598559 
0.376792 
0.325468 
0.467597 
Tw-Heptasiloxane. hexadecamethyl- 
0.32692 
0.332397 
0.319801 
0.282312 
0.304088 
0.272307 
0.246314 
. 
0.334214 
0.32013 
0.276544 
0.287599 
Tw-Octanoic acid 
0.134106 
0.239414 
0.34442 
0.245659 
0.296522 
0.293081 
0.228011 
. 
0.381555 
0.320637 
0.354608 
0.381803 
Tw-2-Pentadecanone. 6.10.14-trimethyl- 
-0.04308 
0.037728 
0.152534 
-0.04929 
0.066539 
0.113094 
0.095613 
. 
0.849439 
0.137912 
0.262384 
0.367768 
Tw-2-Hydroxy-gamma-butyrolactone 
-0.01464 
0.010732 
0.99812 
-0.00444 
0.011026 
0.012622 
0.008206 
. 
0.031727 
0.037237 
0.010858 
0.023412 
Tw-2H-Pyran-2-one. tetrahydro-6-pentyl- 
0.19677 
0.21206 
0.347038 
0.242538 
0.228351 
0.342627 
0.291055 
. 
0.38564 
0.318847 
0.28691 
0.38743 
Tw-Hexanedioic acid. mono(2-ethylhexyl)ester 
0.372507 
0.341078 
0.345448 
0.27078 
0.351587 
0.334479 
0.185119 
. 
0.169215 
0.315705 
0.260253 
0.29403 
Tw-n-Decanoic acid 
0.148134 
0.223093 
0.368809 
0.260205 
0.252873 
0.371817 
0.240524 
. 
0.371678 
0.286786 
0.322404 
0.374405 
Tw-4H-Pyran-4-one. 2.3-dihydro-3.5-dihydroxy-6-methyl- 
0.022217 
0.069931 
0.920865 
0.069571 
0.07089 
0.067647 
0.062033 
. 
0.187311 
0.284545 
0.069653 
0.086197 
Tw-ç-Dodecalactone 
0.15836 
0.231613 
0.36826 
0.189724 
0.251019 
0.316226 
0.200121 
. 
0.42326 
0.261258 
0.317611 
0.44534 
Tw-2H-Pyran-2-one. 6-heptyltetrahydro- 
0.156357 
0.212369 
0.306968 
0.217496 
0.253282 
0.314965 
0.246233 
. 
0.426713 
0.310276 
0.314623 
0.433117 
Tw-Dodecanoic acid 
0.144189 
0.233152 
0.366175 
0.233272 
0.262831 
0.36525 
0.230203 
. 
0.359218 
0.2765 
0.333803 
0.404913 
Tw-m-Terphenyl 
-0.02935 
0.277525 
0.249285 
0.294063 
-0.34768 
0.305093 
0.366697 
. 
0.304195 
0.359586 
0.321406 
0.316128 
Tw-2H-Pyran-2-one. tetrahydro-6-nonyl- 
0.111222 
0.185721 
0.22341 
0.202522 
0.237523 
0.283474 
0.230939 
. 
0.509811 
0.316126 
0.313999 
0.462239 
Tw-Tetradecanoic acid 
0.103457 
0.219622 
0.33501 
0.205914 
0.25457 
0.388696 
0.187879 
. 
0.387856 
0.269779 
0.369834 
0.41863 
Tw-Hexadecanoic acid. 2-methylpropyl ester 
0.528299 
0.731412 
0.348667 
0.066582 
0.113988 
0.178642 
0.070079 
. 
0.066439 
0.047901 
0.040879 
0.041677 
Tw-Octadecanoic acid. octyl ester 
0.606457 
0.663796 
0.322566 
0.097379 
0.131908 
0.169733 
0.086662 
. 
0.093224 
0.081885 
0.071907 
0.06138 
Tw-n-Hexadecanoic acid 
0.08178 
0.236926 
0.301245 
0.204267 
0.277023 
0.352816 
0.184785 
. 
0.383862 
0.310708 
0.401315 
0.405456 
Tw-Octadecanoic acid. octyl ester 
0.551068 
0.70214 
0.337913 
0.068808 
0.139365 
0.178379 
-0.06547 
. 
0.114051 
0.075991 
0.076718 
0.064867 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:107==
 
Coffee Milk and effect of feeding – DTU 2016 
99 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
