==PAGE:1==
Christian Josef Köppl
Thermal Imaging from Unmanned
Airborne Vehicles
Master Thesis
Department of Environmental Engineering
Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
Supervision
Peter Bauer-Gottwein
Monica Garcia
Filippo Bandidi
July 2016
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Using unmanned airborne vehicles as a data acquisition platform for environmental
mapping surveys allows for very high spatial resolution mapping.
This enables
researchers to explore new elds of applications. A hexacopter unmanned airborne
vehicle platform with a payload consisting of a thermal infrared camera, a six band
multispectral camera, a digital photo camera and a global positioning system (GPS)
unit was utilized to investigate two applications: Detecting groundwater inltration
into streams and acquiring high precision, high resolution land surface temperature
maps, which can be used as data input for high resolution land surface models.
In order to achieve precise surface temperature values with the thermal infrared
camera, it was calibrated using a black body temperature target. Calibration was
conducted for each pixel and resulted in a root mean square error of 0.95 K. The
main source of inaccuracy lies in internal thermal instabilities of the camera.
To detect groundwater inltration, temperature is used as a tracer and the surface
temperature of the stream is analyzed. Analysis over longer stream stretches, in-
cluding multiple thermal images, does not yield any information, as thermal camera
inaccuracy eects are dominating. Investigation of single stream locations reveals
many signicant and interesting temperature signals, but determination between
groundwater inltration and other environmental eects poses a challenge.
To acquire high precision land surface temperature maps, the following procedure
is implemented: Generation of a digital elevation model (DEM) from digital pho-
tos through structure from motion (SfM), which provides a base for projection of
the resulting maps; acquiring a brightness temperature land surface map with a
root square mean error of 3.74 K; estimation of land surface emissivity map from
normalized dierence vegetation index (NDVI), derived from multispectral imagery;
correcting brightness temperature for emissivity and atmospheric long wave radi-
ation eects. The resulting temperature maps (5 cm to 15 cm spatial resolution)
contain signicant information, resolve single crops and are expected to have su-
cient accuracy to be used as data input for land surface models.
i
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
v
Acknowledgment
vii
Nomenclature
ix
1
Introduction
1
2
Materials and Methods
5
2.1
Unmanned Airborne Vehicle Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Platform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
Payload . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.3
Software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Thermal Camera Calibration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Field Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3.1
Field Sites . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3.2
Ground Control Points . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.3.3
Unmanned Airborne Vehicle Flight . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.3.4
Black Body and Sky Thermal Imagery . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.3.5
In-situ Spectral Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.3.6
In-situ Validation Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.4
Map Creation from Acquired Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.4.1
Digital Elevation Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.4.2
Brigtness Temperature Map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.4.3
Multispectral Map
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.5
Drone Systems Data Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.6
Brightness Temperature to Kinetic Temperature . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
2.6.1
Land Surface Emissivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
2.6.2
Down Welling Long Wave Radiation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3
Results and Discussion
33
3.1
Thermal Camera Calibration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.1.1
Calibration Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
iii
==PAGE:6==
3.1.2
Calibration Accuracy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.1.3
Drone Systems Camera Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.2
River Applications
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.2.1
Small Stream - Lille Skensved . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.2.2
Larger River - Grindsted . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
3.3
Agricultural Field Application - Risø . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
3.3.1
Temperature Correction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
3.3.2
Findings from Land Surface Temperature . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
3.3.3
Land Surface Temperature Accuracy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
3.4
Digital Elevation Model Accuracy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
4
Conclusions
69
Bibliography
73
A Additional Thermal Images of Lille Skensved Å
77
B Additional Maps
83
B.1 Ortho Photo Mosaics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
B.2 Digital Elevation Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
B.3 NDVI Maps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
B.4 Emissivity Maps
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
B.5 Brightness Temperature Maps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
B.6 Correction Procedure Temperature Change . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
C Additional Formulas
95
D Drone Systems Report
97
List of Figures
105
List of Tables
109
==PAGE:7==
Preface
The work presented in this master thesis was conducted at the Department of En-
vironmental Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark during six month,
from 25th January 2016 until 25th July 2016. The master thesis accounts for 35
ECTS and the project is part of the "Smart UAV" project, funded by the Dan-
ish National Advanced Technology Foundation. Before the start of this thesis, a 5
ECTS special course was conducted, to evaluate the feasibility of this thesis (Köppl,
2016).
Parts of this work were done in collaboration with the company Drone Systems:
they provided the data for the analysis of the site in Grindsted (Chapter 3.2.2) and
a joint thermal camera calibration was executed (Chapter 3.1.3).
In order to conduct the eld work, the author was trained in piloting the UAV
during the project.
The project was presented by the author and fellow "Smart UAV" project members
during the course of this thesis:
Wang, S., Köppl, C. J., Bandini, F., Garcia, M., Bauer-Gottwein, P., Antonicelli,
M., Jakobsen, J., Olesen, D., Knudsen, P., Messerschmidt, M. (2016). UAV-based
Remote Sensing for Monitoring and Understanding Environment. Presentation at
Nordic UAS event, Odense, Denmark.
Köppl, C. J., Wang, S., Bandini, F., Bauer-Gottwein, P., Garcia, M. (2016).
Thermal mapping from UAVs. Presentation at DTU Drone Day, Kongens Lyngby,
Denmark.
Köppl, C. J., Wang, S., Bandini, F., Bauer-Gottwein, P., Garcia, M. (2016).
Thermal Mapping from UAVs for Hydrological Applications. Poster at DTU Green
Challenge, Kongens Lyngby, Denmark.
Wang, S., Bandini, F., Köppl, C. J., Ibrom, A., Bauer-Gottwein, P., Garcia, M.
(2016). Use UAV and satellite remote sensing data to simulate evapotranspiration
(ET) in a Danish willow site. Poster at DTU Drone Day, Kongens Lyngby, Den-
mark.
v
==PAGE:8==
Wang, S., Bandini, F., Köppl, C. J., Ibrom, A., Bauer-Gottwein, P., Garcia, M.
(2016). Hyperspatial mapping of water, energy and carbon uxes with Unmanned
Aerial Vehicles.
Presentation at DTU Drone Day, Kongens Lyngby, Denmark.
Christian J. Köppl, s141720
Kongens Lyngby, 25th July 2016
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgment
I would like to sincerely thank my thesis supervisors Peter Bauer-Gottwein, Monica
Garcia and Filippo Bandini for their strong support and helpful advice during the
project.
Furthermore I would like to thank Filippo Bandini for his great help in UAV payload
setup and UAV maintenance, the UAV ights he conducted and his help during the
eld campaigns.
I also would like to thank Sheng Wang for his energetic support during the eld
data acquisition, the processing of the multispectral data and the opportunity he
gave me for the joint presentation at the Nordic UAS event.
A big thanks goes to Jakob Jakobsen, who trained me on the UAV piloting and who
was a great source for UAV platform advice.
Thank you to Sune Yde Nielsen and Henrik Karmisholt Grosen from Drone Systems,
for providing the thermal data from Grindsted and collaborating with the thermal
camera calibration.
Finally I would specially like to thank Ursula S. McKnight and her students from
"12003 Introductory Environmental Field Course" for their in-situ data collection
in Lille Skensved and for their active work in cutting down tree branches for hours.
Our eld data acquisition would have been impossible at that site without their
help.
vii
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
Nomenclature
Symbols
a
NDVI constant
[-]
b
NDVI constant
[-]
B
Flir calibration parameter
[K]
Bp
Spectral radiance
[W m−3 sr−1]
C
Cloud cover
[-]
Cf
Stretch factor
[K−1]
e
Vapor pressure
[hPa]
es
Saturation vapor pressure
[hPa]
F
Flir calibration parameter
[-]
f
Flir linear coecient
[m−1]
fE
Radiation conversion
[W m−3 DN−1]
fR
Reectivity conversion
[DN−1]
j
Emissive Power
[W m−2 sr−1]
Kfs
Thermal conductivity
[J s−1 m−1 K−1]
l
Flir linear coecient
[W DN−1 m−3 sr−1]
MAX
Maximum temperature
[K]
MIN
Minimum temperature
[K]
MS
Multispectral camera reading
[DN]
NDV I
Normalized Dierence Vegetation Index
[-]
R
Flir calibration parameter
[DN]
R
Radiation
[W m−2]
R(λ)
Reectivity
[-]
RH
Relative humidity
[-]
O
Flir calibration parameter
[DN]
O′
Oset term
[DN]
Oc
Radiation oset term
[W m−3]
ix
==PAGE:12==
qz
Specic discharge
[m s−1]
T
Temperature
[K]
Tc
Camera core temperature
[DN]
tc
Linear radiation term
[W DN−1 m−3]
TL
Groundwater temperature
[K]
T0
Streambed temperature
[K]
t′
Flir calibration parameter
[-]
W
Flux measured by thermal camera
[DN]
z
Depth
[m]
ε
Emissivity
[-]
ϵT
Conversion error
[-]
λ
Wavelength
[m]
ρ
Infrared reectivity
[-]
ρfcf
Volumetric heat capacity
[J m−3 K−1]
Constants
h
Planck constant
6.626×10−34 J s
c
Speed of light
2.998×108 m s−1
C1
Saturation pressure const. 1
-7.85951
C2
Saturation pressure const. 2
1.84408
C3
Saturation pressure const. 3
-11.78665
C4
Saturation pressure const. 4
22.68074
C5
Saturation pressure const. 5
-15.96187
C6
Saturation pressure const. 6
1.80122
ec
Critical vapor pressure
2.206×105 hPa
Tc
Critical Temperature
647.096 K
kB
Boltzmann constant
1.381×10−23 J K−1
σ
Stefan-Boltzmann constant
5.670×108 W m−2 K−4
Indicies
16bit
16 bit rounded
a
Air
ave
Average
BB
Black body
==PAGE:13==
Br
Brutsaert method
c
Critical
C
Total
CBr
Brutsaert cloud method
case
Camera casing
exp
Expected
f
Data acquired in-situ
eld
Data acquired in-situ
L
Long wave
Ll ↑
Long wave lower atmosphere up welling
Ll ↓
Long wave lower atmosphere down welling
Lu ↑
Long wave upper atmosphere up welling
Lu ↓
Long wave upper atmosphere down welling
L ↓
Total long wave down welling
NIR
Near infrared spectrum
object
Target object
R
Reected
RED
Red spectrum
S
Land surface
sensor
Camera Sensor
sp
Spectralon
Acronyms and Abbreviations
BB
Black Body
BBB
BeagleBone Black
CAD
Computer Aided Design
CF
Compact Flash
CRC
Cyclic Redundancy Check
DC
Direct Current
DN
Digital Number
DTU
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
DTU cam
Camera owned by DTU
DS cam
Camera owned by Drone Systems
ECTS
European Credit Transfer System
FFC
Flat Field Correction
FOV
Field of View
==PAGE:14==
GCP
Ground Control Point
GPIO
General-Purpose Input/Output
GPS
Global Positioning System
ISO
Light Sensitivity
JPEG
Joint Photographic Experts Group
LiPo
Lithium Polymer
LST
Land Surface Temperature
MCA
Multiple Camera Array
m.a.s.l.
Meters Above Sea Level
NDVI
Normalized Dierence Vegetation Index
NIR
Near Infrared
PVC
Polyvinyl Chloride
RAM
Random-Access Memory
RC
Radio Control
RGB
Red-Green-Blue
RMSE
Root Mean Square Error
RTK
Real Time Kinematic
SD
Secure Digital
SfM
Structure From Motion
TCE
Trichloroethane
TIF
Tagged Image File Format
UAV
Unmanned Airborne (Aerial) Vehicle
USB
Universal Serial Bus
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Unmanned airborne vehicles (UAVs) air gaining popularity in the scientic commu-
nity as a platform for environmental surveying and mapping (Anderson and Gaston,
2013). Among other applications, they are used for thermal mapping (Homann et
al., 2016), multispectral mapping (Berni et al., 2009), hyperspectral mapping (Aasen
et al., 2014), photometric elevation mapping (Rippin, Pomfret and King, 2015) and
water level surveying (Bandini et al., 2016). The main advantage of using UAVs
is the high spatial and temporal resolution of the acquired data, compared to data
acquired from satellites. For example land surface temperature (LST) maps from
the MODIS satellite mission (NASA, 2015) have a spatial resolution of 1 km and a
temporal resolution of 1 day. A combination of sensor resolution, sensor optics and
distance to the target, determine the spatial resolution of the resulting maps. As
UAVs can y very close to the land surface compared to satellites, they can achieve
very high spatial resolution maps. While the temporal resolution of satellites is xed
by the revisit times, the temporal resolution with UAVs can be freely adjusted to
the data demand. While rotorcraft and xed-wing manned aircraft are also able to
provide high resolution data through low ying altitudes, their operation is expen-
sive, less exible and noise emission at low altitudes might be bothersome to local
population.
The high resolution of the acquired data opens up the possibility for new applica-
tions. This thesis explores two applications of high resolution thermal data acquired
from an UAV: Detecting groundwater inltration into streams and acquiring high
precision LST maps, which can be used as a data input for high resolution land
surface models.
When the temperature of surface water diers from the temperature of the ground-
water, temperature can be used as a tracer to detect and quantify groundwater
inltration into the surface water. Dierent methods have been developed which
use this principle: Schmidt et al. (2007) acquire vertical temperature proles of the
stream bed and t that data on the analytical solution of the one dimensional heat-
1
==PAGE:16==
2
advection-diusion equation, which yields the groundwater discharge. This method
is precise, but can only cover discrete points of the stream.
Mamer and Lowry
(2013) install ber-optical cables on the stream bed and use them to acquire high
resolution one dimensional temperature data. This method provides high resolution
inltration data in one dimension along the stream, but fails to deliver information
about the inltration change in the river's cross section.
A new possibility is to use two dimensional stream surface temperature data to
calculate groundwater ux into the stream. Liu et al. (2015) acquired a river surface
temperature map using a thermal infrared camera, deployed on a manned xed-wing
aircraft, over the Heihe river in China. A similar study was carried out by Loheide
and Gorelick (2006) over a stream in California, utilizing a manned rotory wing
aircraft as data acquisition platform. Both studies succeeded in estimating a precise
groundwater inltration, which was validated with in-situ measurements.
This thesis aims to detect groundwater inltration into streams by acquiring two di-
mensional stream surface temperatures as well, but utilizing an UAV for data acqui-
sition instead. Advantages are low operational costs and high operational exibility.
On the other hand, short UAV battery live limits the spatial extent of investiga-
tions. Furthermore, weight restrictions on the payload have negative implications on
the precision of the used thermal camera. Area of investigation is the stream Lille
Skensved Å, Denmark, which sees substantial inltration of trichloroethane (TCE)
contaminated groundwater (McKnight et al., 2010). Also third party acquired ther-
mal data from the company Drone Systems was analyzed. This data was taken over
the river Grindsted Å, where groundwater contaminated from a chemical factory is
inltrating into the river (Rasmussen et al., 2015).
Detecting and quantifying groundwater inltration into rivers is of importance for
multiple reasons. Groundwater inltration data can be used to inform river routing
models and to improve their accuracy (Koch, McKnight and Neupauer, 2011). The
development of aquatic live in streams is closely coupled to the groundwater ux
through the temperature eects the inltration causes (Loinaz et al., 2014) and water
quality of streams can be eected when contaminated groundwater is inltrating
(McKnight et al., 2010).
LST data has a wide range of applications in the eld of environmental science and
hydrology. It can be used for example to calculate a surface energy balance (Bonan,
2008) or to analyze the water stress of agricultural crops (Moran et al., 1994). It
can also be used to inform land surface models or the data can be assimilated to
land surface models (Lakshmi, 1999).
Land surface models have the capability,
amongst other outputs, to calculate water uxes and carbon uxes (Anav et al.,
2010). Increasing the spatial resolution of these models can improve their accuracy
and information value, but also requires high resolution data input.
This thesis aims to acquire high precision and high resolution LST maps, which
can be used by land surface models at a later stage. This data is acquired from an
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 1. Introduction
3
UAV at a willow plantation in Risø, Denmark. This location is chosen, as it has a
ux tower, which measures various weather and climate data, as well as carbon and
water uxes. This data will be valuable in verifying the land surface models.
Data acquired from thermal infrared cameras needs to be corrected for other sources
of incident long wave radiation as well as for the land surface emissivity. Various
correction methods are well established for thermal mapping from satellites (Li et
al., 2013) and need to be adopted for thermal data collection from UAVs.
Various study groups have acquired LST data from UAVs: Homann et al. (2016)
collected LST data from a xed-wing UAV as data input for two-source energy
balance and dual-temperature-dierence models. While calculating the LST, unity
emissivity of the land surface was assumed and atmospheric long wave radiation ef-
fects neglected. Gonzalez-Dugo et al. (2015) used LST brightness temperature, cal-
ibrated against in-situ thermal-gun temperature measurements and acquired from
an UAV platform, to calculate the spatially distributed crop water stress index of a
pistachio farm to improve irrigation. Berni et al. (2009) employed a payload of mul-
tispectral camera and thermal camera on a UAV platform in order to estimate crop
water stress. The acquired brightness temperature was corrected for atmospheric
eects as well as emissivity, setting emissivity to a constant value of 0.98.
The focus of this thesis lies in the accuracy of the absolute temperature values of the
land surface. Therefore, a robust brightness temperature correction work ow is es-
tablished, which includes the calculation of spatially distributes land surface emissiv-
ity and extensive calibration procedures of the thermal camera are conducted.
==PAGE:18==
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2
Materials and Methods
2.1
Unmanned Airborne Vehicle Setup
2.1.1
Platform
Figure 2.1: UAV in operation with mounted payload at Lille Skensved
The UAV is a Tarot t810 hexacopter frame made from carbon ber with motors
from Tarot. The control unit including a Global Positioning System (GPS) device,
compass and radio control (RC) receiver is a Naza-M V2 setup from the DJI com-
pany. The remote controller is an Aurora 9 from Hitec. Centrally under the UAV,
between the landing gear and batteries, four aluminum rods with screw holes in the
5
==PAGE:20==
6
2.1. Unmanned Airborne Vehicle Setup
end are suspended, which are used as xing points for exchangeable payloads.
The weight of the UAV with batteries attached and without any payload is ap-
proximately 5 kg. Two Lithium polymer (LiPo) battery packs with six cells and
a capacity of 5000 mAh each, are used. A ight time of ca. 10 minutes can be
achieved, depending on the weight of the payload.
2.1.2
Payload
The payload is designed to accommodate four sensors: a thermal camera, a multi-
spectral camera, a Red-Green-Blue (RGB) sensor photo camera and a GPS system.
The thermal camera is a Tau 2 from FLIR. It is an uncooled camera core with a
resolution of 324 × 256 pixels, which have a pitch of 25 µm and the camera captures
electromagnetic radiation in the infrared range with a spectral band from 7.5 µm to
13.5 µm wavelength. The cameras scene range temperature is -25 °C to 135 °C in
high gain setting and -40 °C to 550 °C in low gain setting. A lens with a focal length
of 9 mm is mounted on the camera, which yields a eld of view (FOV) of 48.5° ×
39.1°. The camera can store snapshots in a compressed format with a bit depth of
14 bits.
Wavelength [nm]
400
450
500
550
600
650
700
750
800
MCA bands
Figure 2.2: Spectral bands of the multispectral camera
The multispectral camera is a Tetracam Miniature Multiple Camera Array (Mini-
MCA). It consists of an array of 6 cameras, of which each has a dierent band pass
lter between lens and sensor. Each camera has a lens with a focal length of 9.6
mm and a monochromatic sensor with a resolution of 1280 × 1024 pixels. The FOV
angles are 38.3° × 32°. The band pass lter wavelengths range from blue to near
infrared with the following wavelengths: 470 nm, 530 nm, 570 nm, 670 nm, 710 nm
and 810 nm (see Figure 2.2). Six compact ash (CF) memory cards are inserted in
the Mini-MCA, so each channel stores its images on a separate card.
The digital RGB photo camera is a Sony RX-100 compact camera. It has a relatively
large sensor (13.2 mm × 8.8 mm) with a resolution of 5472 × 3648 pixels. The lens
has an adjustable focal length of 10.4 mm to 37.1 mm, which yields FOV angles
from 64.8° × 45.9°to 20.2° × 13.5°. The shutter speed is adjustable from 0.5 ms to
30 s and the camera has a manual focus option. When taking images in a loss-less
raw image format, the maximum image frequency is ca 0.8 images s−1. The camera
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 2. Materials and Methods
7
is used with a 64 GB Lexar Professional 1000x Secure Digital (SD) Card, which has
a writing speed of up to 75 MB s−1.
The GPS receiver is a EVK-6 module from UBlox, connected to an UBlox ANN-MS
active GPS antenna. It sends the current position through a serial RS232 connection
every second. The nominal horizontal precision is 2.5 m.
A BeagleBone Black (BBB) low-power single-board computer is used to trigger
the RGB and multispectral cameras, to collect the data from the GPS unit and to
control and collect data from the thermal camera. The BBB has a single core 1 GHz
processor, 512 MB DDR3 random-access memory (RAM) and 4 GB on-board ash
storage. For communication with the sensors it has a Universal Serial Bus (USB)
interface and 2 × 46 pin headers and for data storage it has a slot for a microSD
card. As an operating system the Debian Linux distribution is installed.
Multispectral camera, thermal camera, GPS and the BBB are powered through the
batteries supplying power for the UAV. The voltage supplied by the UAV batteries
ranges from 22.2 V to 25.2 V and is dierent from the voltage requirements by the
devices. Therefore, three power converters are used: Traco Power TEN 10-2411
with an output voltage of 5 V direct current (DC) and maximum output current of
2 A for the BBB; Traco Power THL 10-2412W1 with an output voltage of 12 V DC
and maximum output current of 830 mA for the GPS unit and Traco Power TEN
5-2411W1 with an output voltage of 5 V DC and maximum output current of 1 A
for the thermal camera.
npn Transistor
R1
R2
GPIO
Camera Load
Orig. Trigger
0V / +3.3V
Battery: +3.6V
Battery: GND
Figure 2.3: Electric circuit layout for triggering digital photo camera with BBB
Triggering the multispectral camera and the RGB camera is done by emulating
pressing the trigger. This is done with a transistor circuit, connected to both sides of
the physical trigger button, controlled by the general-purpose input/output (GPIO)
pins of the BBB. In order to access the connections of the trigger of the Sony RX-
100, the camera had to be completely disassembled, before welding wires to the
trigger connectors. The transistor circuit layout can be seen in Figure 2.3.
All components of the payload have to be mounted on a 180 mm × 300 mm polyvinyl
chloride (PVC) plate, which can then be attached to the UAV. The arrangement
==PAGE:22==
8
2.1. Unmanned Airborne Vehicle Setup
of the dierent components onto the base plate was planned using SOLIDWORKS
2015 computer-aided design (CAD) software. The three cameras were mounted on
the downward facing side (see Figure 2.4), while the other components were mounted
on the upward facing side (see Figure 2.5).
1
4
3
2
1
2
3
4
Thermal Camera
Multispectral Camera
RGB Camera
Protector
Figure 2.4: CAD model of the payload
showing the downward facing side with
the cameras
1
6
5
4
3
2
1
2
3
4
5
6
GPS Reciever
BeagleBone Black
Mini-MCA Trigger
RGB Camera Trigger
Power Converters
USB-power connect.
Figure 2.5: CAD model of the payload
showing the upward facing side
Figure 2.6: Detailed view of mounting
of the thermal camera
Figure 2.7: Detailed view of mounting
help for the RGB camera
The multispectral camera is mounted with four screws onto the base plate. For the
thermal camera a solution for fast mounting and unmounting in the eld was found
(see Figure 2.6). Two U-bolts were used for xing the camera. Each thread of the
bolts was secured with one nut on each side of the base plate, so that the U-bolts
stay xed in place, also when the thermal camera is detached. The thermal camera
can then be attached through four holes and be fastened with four wing nuts. The
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 2. Materials and Methods
9
advantage of the U-bolts is, that the bolt is secured for turning and the camera can
be attached with the wing nuts without any tools.
A mounting help for the RGB camera needed to be created (see Figure 2.7). The
Sony RX-100 has a 0.25 inch screw mount in its bottom, but attaching it directly
through that to the base plate would make the camera forward looking instead of
downward looking. Therefore, a L-shaped aluminum prole was used, to which the
camera can be xed through its screw mount and the prole has four additional
holes, which are used to mount it to the base plate. The prole has thin rubber
sheets glued onto the contact areas with the camera.
On the downward facing side of the base plate are two protectors installed to prevent
damage on the camera, if the landing gear of the UAV should collapse during landing.
The rest of the equipment is xed on the upward facing side of the base plate. The
GPS receiver is glued, while the BBB and the welding plates with the electronic
circuits are screwed on with spacers.
2.1.3
Software
In order to control and to communicate with the dierent sensors, a program was
written in C language for the BBB. The program has four dierent threads: one for
the multispectral camera, one for the RGB camera, one for the GPS and one for the
thermal camera.
Multispectral and RGB Camera
Multispectral and RGB camera are triggered in the same way. The GPIO pin has
to be switched to ON (+3.3 V) and the transistor circuit emulates a pressed trigger
and with the GPIO pin switched to OFF (0 V), the trigger is emulated to not being
pressed. The routine of the thread is switching the GPIO ON, writing the current
Linux time and the unique number of the current trigger event to a log le, keeping
the GPIO ON, switching it OFF, pause and repeat. For the multispectral camera
the GPIO pin is switched to ON for 0.7 s and to OFF for 1 s, which gives a frame
rate of 0.59 Hz. For the RGB camera the ON time is 0.5 s and the OFF time 1.5 s,
which gives a frame rate of 0.5 Hz.
GPS
The GPS unit communicates with the BBB through the serial RS232 protocol and
the connection is realized through one GPIO pin of the BBB and a connection to
common ground. In this setup the GPS unit has a master position and sends a
==PAGE:24==
10
2.1. Unmanned Airborne Vehicle Setup
message to the BBB in time intervals, which are dened on the GPS unit; in this
case it is 1 s.
Every incoming message is stored in a comma separated log le
together with the Linux time, at which the message was received. The message is
a string of signed chars and contains information about the GPS time, longitude,
latitude, altitude, number of satellites and position quality.
Thermal Camera
open_connection()
synchronize_baud_rate()
snap_number = 0
while(1):
 
chech_ﬀc()
 
time = read_time()
 
take_snapshot()
 
t = read_core_temperature()
 
info.[adress; size] = retrieve_adress()
 
retrieve_snap(snap_number, time, ...
 
 
 
 t, info)
 
base_info = read_base_address()
 
erase_snapshot(info, base_info)
 
snap_number += 1
ﬁlename = generate_name(snap_number)
remaining = info.size
image = initilize(remaining)
local_wait = 8500
while (remaining > 0):
 
[buﬀer; local_wait] = read_256_bytes(...
 
 
 
info.adress, local_wait)
 
image = [image; buﬀer]
 
info.adress += 256
 
remaining -=256
save_image(image, t, time, ﬁlename)
[start; end] = block_calc(info, base_info)
for (block: start --> end)
 
delete_block(block)
 
status = read_bytes_to_process()
 
while(status > 0):
 
 
sleep(1000)
 
 
status =read_bytes_to_process()
1:
2:
3:
4:
5:
6:
7:
8:
9:
10:
11:
12:
13:
10a:
10b:
10c:
10d:
10e:
10f:
10g:
10h:
10i:
10k:
12a:
12b:
12c:
12d:
12e:
12f:
12g:
Green: commands to camera
Red: loops
Blue: function content
command=create_command(info.address)
START: answer=initilize()
send_rs232(command)
usleep(local_wait)
answer=recieve_rs232()
if((CRC_check(answer) == 0) || (answer == 0))
 
local_wait += 50
 
goto START
10f i:
10f ii:
10f iii:
10f iv:
10f v:
10f vi:
10f vii:
10f viii:
Figure 2.8: Main structure of thermal camera thread with focus on critical func-
tions; written in pseudo code
The thermal camera communicates with the BBB through the RS232 protocol and
the connection is realized with an USB cable.
The communication is a master-
slave relationship, with the camera being the slave. Through this communication,
commands can be given to the camera and data received from the camera. The
communication protocol is described in more detail by Köppl (2016).
The main thread of controlling the camera (see Figure 2.8) rst initializes the con-
nection and synchronizes the baud rate. Afterwards a loop is initiated which runs,
until the BBB is shut down.
First the need for a at eld correction (FFC) is
checked and if necessary a FFC conducted. The need for a FFC is determined by
the camera itself, based on number of images taken and the camera's core tempera-
ture drift. Then the current Linux time is read and stored, the capture of a snapshot
is commanded, which will be stored on the cameras internal memory, and the cur-
rent camera core temperature is read and stored. Afterwards the current snapshot
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 2. Materials and Methods
11
is transferred to the BBB and stored in a binary le and the core temperature and
Linux time associated with that snapshot is stored in a text le, before the snapshot
is erased from the internal nonvolatile memory of the camera.
The most time consuming part of that routine is the transfer of the image onto the
BBB and storing it, therefore this part had to be optimized for time (Figure 2.8;
lines 10a - 10k). For each request of sending data from the camera to the BBB, a
maximum of 256 bytes of data can be transferred, but the size of one snapshot ranges
from 70 kB to 100 kB, so the image has to be transferred piece by piece through
multiple data transfer requests. The main issue is, that the readiness time of the
camera to answer, which is the time from sending the command to the camera, until
it is ready to answer, is not stable. If an answer is requested before the camera is
ready, the answer will not be valid. Giving the camera 20 ms, before requesting an
answer is always enough, but for approx. 95 % of the requests, a time span of 8.5 ms
is enough. Therefore, a solution was implemented, where receiving a valid answer is
tried after 8.5 ms and then its validity is checked by evaluating and comparing its
cyclic redundancy check (CRC) bytes and by evaluating its status bytes (line 10f vi).
If the answer is invalid, the waiting time is increased 0.05 ms for all consequential
requests for that snap shot and the answer for these bytes requested again (line 10f
viii). With this method a transfer time of ca. 3.5 s could be achieved for one image,
which leads to a total circle time for one image of ca. 4.5 s, a frequency of 0.22
images s−1.
Attention has to be paid while deleting the snapshot (lines 12a - 12g). Sending
certain commands to the camera, while it is still erasing images, can corrupt the
camera or will lead to improper storage of consequential snapshots. To delete an
image, rst its occupying memory blocks are calculated using its storage address,
size and information about the cameras nonvolatile memory. Then the blocks are
deleted one by one, making sure the erasing process is nished, before the next block
is to be deleted.
2.2
Thermal Camera Calibration
The thermal camera was calibrated using a Landcal P80P black body (BB) in a
temperature controlled chamber. The camera measures the long-wave radiation ux
(7.5 µm to 13.5 µm) in digital numbers (DN) for each pixel, so a transfer function
needs to be found to convert this ux into temperature. From previous work it
is known, that the DN values depend on the cameras core temperature, that they
drift strong at the startup of the camera, when it did not reach thermal equilibrium
and that the camera shows signicantly dierent DN values across the sensor, even
though it is pointed at a BB with a uniform temperature (Köppl, 2016). On the
basis of that, a calibration procedure is designed, where the room temperature and
the BB temperature are varied. Three dierent room temperatures were used: 10 °C,
==PAGE:26==
12
2.2. Thermal Camera Calibration
Table 2.1: Dierent temperature combinations of ambient air temperature and BB
temperature, used for calibration of the FLIR Tau 2 thermal camera
Room temp. [°C]
Used BB temperatures [°C]
10
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
20
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
30
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
20 °C and 30 °C. The BB temperature was changed for each room temperature in
5 K increments from 0 °C (10 °C) to 45 °C, with the limitation, that the minimum
BB temperature of the Landcal P80P cannot be more than 20 K smaller, compared
to the ambient temperature.
The used temperature combinations can be seen in Table 2.1. For each temperature
combination 20 snap shots of the BB were taken in 30 s intervals and a FFC was
conducted right before every snapshot. The maximum distance between BB cavity
opening and camera lens is 4.36 cm, in order to cover the whole FOV of the camera
with the small BB target (round, 5 cm diameter). So the camera was placed very
close to the BB during taking the snapshot (approx. 1 cm to 2 cm). To prevent
a high inuence of the BB's temperature on the thermal state of the camera, it
was placed in a mount ca. 70 cm away from the BB in between the snap shots
and was placed in photo position 5 s prior to taking the snapshot. Before taking
the rst snapshot of a series, the thermal camera was powered on for at least 15
minutes to reach a thermal equilibrium. In total 560 images were taken for the
calibration.
For validation purposes, in total 90 snapshots were acquired of the BB for target
temperatures from 5 °C to 45 °C in 5 K intervals. For each target temperature 10
snapshots were taken, with 20 s intervals between each snapshot and automated
FFC check before each snapshot. The experiment was conducted in a laboratory
without ambient temperature control. The air temperature was approximately 24
°C.
For purposes of camera comparison, 51 thermal images of the BB were taken under
uncontrolled ambient air temperature conditions with a Flir Tau 2 336 camera,
owned by Drone Systems. The time interval between each snapshot was 15 s and a
FFC was conducted before each snapshot. BB target temperatures of 5 °C, 15 °C,
25 °C and 35 °C were used.
The manufacturer describes the following relationship between the camera's DN
values and the targets brightness temperature (FLIR, 2014):
W =
R
exp
( B
T
)
−F + O
(2.1)
Where W is the measured long wave radiation ux in DN, T the targets brightness
temperature in K and R, B, F, and O calibration parameters.
The calibration
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 2. Materials and Methods
13
parameters can be read out from the Flir Tau 2 to obtain a manufacturer calibration.
When using the camera in low gain, which is the setting used for the calibration,
the parameter F has the value 1, according to the cameras read out. Equation
2.1 relates to Planck's Law, which is the physical equation to relate an object's
brightness temperature to the spectral emitted radiation:
Bp (λ, T) = 2hc2
λ5
1
exp
(
hc
λkBT
)
−1
(2.2)
Where Bp is spectral radiance in W m−3 sr−1, h the Planck constant in J s, c the
speed of light in m s−1, λ the wavelength in m, kB the Boltzmann constant in J K−1
and T the temperature in K. FLIR (2014) states that the DN values W, displayed
by the camera, are linear to the spectral radiance. Assuming O is an oset term lets
formulate:
Bp = l (W −O)
(2.3)
Where l is a linear coecient in W DN−1 m−3 sr−1 and the oset O has the unit
DN. Substituting Bp in equation 2.2 with equation 2.3 yields:
W = 2hc2
λ5l
1
exp
(
hc
λkBT
)
−1
+ O
(2.4)
Three obvious substitutions lead to the parameters R, B and F from equation
2.1:
R = 2hc2
λ5l
(2.5)
B = hc
λkB
(2.6)
F = 1
(2.7)
R has the units DN, B is in K and F is dimensionless. Substituting F with the
value 1 is done, because this value is given by the FLIR manufacturer calibration.
The default values for the other parameters are R = 366545 DN, B = 1428 K and O
= 342 DN. Rearranging equation 2.6 for the wavelength λ and inserting the values
for the physical constants and the default value for B yields λ = 10.0755 µm. With
this value the linear factor l can be calculated from equation 2.5 which results in l
= 3129.4 W DN−1 m−3 sr−1, which is also the resolution of spectral radiance for the
FLIR Tau 2 in low gain mode, assuming default calibration parameters.
The previous analysis shows, that this default calibration assumes the read values W
are linear to the spectral radiance of one specic wavelength Bp(10.0755µm), but the
cameras sensor detects electromagnetic waves in the range from 7.5 µm to 13.5 µm,
so if the sensor had a constant sensibility over that range, it would be expected that
==PAGE:28==
14
2.2. Thermal Camera Calibration
 Wavelength λ [m]
× 10 -5
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
Spectral radiance B [W/m3/sr]
× 10 6
4
6
8
10
12
14
0°C
5°C
10°C
15°C
20°C
25°C
30°C
35°C
40°C
45°C
Maxima
FLIR eqi. λ
Figure 2.9: Spectral radiance plotted over wavelength for the range of the FLIR
Tau 2 camera. The maxima are marked as well as the wavelength 10.0755 µm
W was linear to
∫13.5µm
7.5µm B (λ) dλ. Figure 2.9 shows the spectral radiance over the
wavelength, which the sensor detects and for the target temperature range, which is
of interest for the calibration. The default wavelength chosen by Flir lies close to the
maxima of the spectral radiance curves. Comparing the values of the integral of the
spectral radiance over the sensors sensible wavelength range, which is the emissive
power j in DN−1 m−2 sr−1, to the spectral radiance at 10.0755 µm shows, that the
relationship is quasi linear (see Figure 2.10). This allows to formulate:
Bp (10.0755µm, T) ≈f
∫13.5µm
7.5µm
Bp (λ, T) dλ,
0◦C ≤T ≤45◦C
(2.8)
Where f is a linear factor in m−1. A simple curve tting assigns a value of f =
178509.9 m−1 and gives a maximum error of 0.54 % for the given temperature range.
This shows, that it is reasonable to use Planck's law for calibrating the sensors read
j at 7.5µm - 13.5µm [W/m2/sr]
30
40
50
60
70
80
Bp at 10.0755µm [W/m3/sr]
×107
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
Evaluated values
Curve fitting
Figure 2.10: Spectral radiance at λ = 10.0755 µm plotted over the integral of
spectral radiance from 7.5 µm to 13.5 µm, which is the emissive power j, detected
by the thermal sensor
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 2. Materials and Methods
15
≈
3
2
1
≈
1
2
3
Lens
Drawing break
Ext. radiation source 
Radiation from ext. source
Radiation from casing
Camera casing
Sensor
FFC shutter position
Figure 2.11: Schematic of sources of long wave radiation reaching one point on
the thermal camera's sensor
DN values to temperature, and to approximate the emissive power with the spectral
emissivity at 10.0755 µm. The factor f will be absorbed in factor l.
Also the cameras temperature can eect the sensors measured values. This can be
explained by incident long wave radiation on the cameras sensors emitted by the
cameras body, as can be seen in the schematic in Figure 2.11. One point of the sensor
receives focused long wave radiation through the lens from the object of interest,
but it also receives diuse long wave radiation from the inside of the cameras body
and that intensity depends on the camera body's temperature. So:
Bp;sensor = Bp;object + Bp;case
(2.9)
Where Bp;sensor is the spectral radiance detected by the sensor, Bp;object the spectral
radiance contribution from the object of interest and Bp;case the spectral radiance
contribution from the cameras casing. For simplicity Bp;case is approximated with a
linear function:
Bp;case = tcTc + Oc
(2.10)
Where tc is a linear factor term in W DN−1 m−3, Tc the camera's core temperature
read out in DN and Oc an oset term in W m−3. Substituting Bp;sensor in equation
2.9 with equation 2.3 and Bp;case with equation 2.10 gives:
Bp;object = (W −O) l −tcTc −Oc
(2.11)
==PAGE:30==
16
2.3. Field Data Collection
This can be simplied to:
Bp;object = (W −O′ −t′Tc) l
(2.12)
With O′ = O−Oc·l−1 in DN and t′ = tc·l−1 as a dimensionless number. Substituting
B in equation 2.2 with equation 2.12 and rearranging for W gives:
W = 2hc2
λ5l
1
exp
(
hc
λkBT
)
−1
+ O′ + t′Tc
(2.13)
Solving this equation for T and applying the substitutions with the constants R, B
and F yields the nal calibration equation:
T =
B
log
(
R
W−O′−t′Tc + F
)
(2.14)
The calibration was done for each single pixel of the FLIR Tau 2 camera sensor.
Variables given from the calibration data set are T, W and Tc. Variable B was
xed to the default parameter, as it only depends on physical constants and the
well-chosen wavelength λ and F was xed to 1, as this default value is necessary to
keep the Planck equation valid. Using the curve tting capability of the software
MatLab, the parameters R, O′ and t′ were determined for each pixel.
2.3
Field Data Collection
Table 2.2: Overview of eld campaigns conducted
Date
Field Site
Objective
Comment
09.03.2016
Risø
Agricultural investigation
Willows not cut
16.03.2016
L. Skensved
GW inltration
RGB camera added
11.04.2016
Risø
Agricultural investigation
BB measurements added
12.04.2016
L. Skensved
GW inltration
Water temp valid. added
02.05.2016
Risø
Agricultural investigation
Thermal gun valid. added
12.05.2016
Risø
Agricultural investigation
25.05.2016
Risø
Agricultural investigation
19.06.2016
L. Skensved
GW inltration
Coord. with eld course
In total eight eld campaigns were conducted (see Table 2.2) with dierent objec-
tives. The objective in Risø is to acquire thermal and multispectral maps of an
agricultural site for evapotranspiration and CO2 ux modeling. At Lille Skensved
the objective is to acquire the stream surface temperature in order to detect spots
of ground water inltration. The general work ow of a eld campaign has the
following structure:
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 2. Materials and Methods
17
 Distribute ground control points (GCP)
 Acquire GPS position of GCPs
 Fly UAV over area of interest
 Take thermal images of BB and sky
 Measure spectrum of Spectralon calibration target
 Acquire validation points for digital elevation model (DEM) and thermal im-
ages
2.3.1
Field Sites
Risø Flux Tower
300m
Flux tower
Willow ﬁeld
Risø Site
100km
a
e
d
c
b
Figure 2.12: Overview of Risø eld site: a) Location of Risø in Denmark; b) Extend
of willow eld with ux tower position; c) Image of the ux tower; d) Willows at
beginning of growth; e) Sample willows on the eld grown to ca. 4 m
==PAGE:32==
18
2.3. Field Data Collection
The Risø ight site is a 10 ha willow eld located in Zealand, Denmark, close to the
city of Roskilde at the east coast of the Roskilde Fjord (Christensen, 2013). Willows
(Salix sp) were planted in 2010 and harvested in February 2011, winter 2012/13 and
in spring 2016.
The willows are harvested as a source of bioenergy.
In 2010 a
meteorological station was installed at the center of the willow eld (55.680682°N;
12.101398°E). It has a 12 m high ux tower and measures air and soil temperatures,
relative humidity, wind speed and direction (at 3 m and 10 m height), soil water
contents in dierent depths, incoming and reected short and long wave radiation
as well as photon ux densities of photosynthetically active radiation. Further on,
Eddy covariance ux measurements of CO2 and H2O are currently taken (InGOS,
2014). Data is available live through an online feed and can be supplied historical
with a time step of 10 minutes. The ux tower is connected to the European Fluxes
Database with the station code DK-RCW (Cluster, 2016).
At this site multispectral data is collected in order to populate hydrological surface
models and LST data is collected to use for data assimilation in these models.
The models will predict evapotranspiration and CO2 uxes and this data can be
compared to the measured data of the ux tower. The aim is a dynamic model over
time, so the objective is to collect UAV data regularly, every one to two weeks.
Lille Skensved
The eld site of investigation is a stretch of Skensved stream, located east of Lille
Skensved on the island of Zealand, Denmark. A study by McKnight et al. (2010)
shows a problem with water contamination: At the stretch of interest, groundwater
contaminated with the solvent TCE is leaching into the stream.
The source of
contamination is a leaching storage tank, which was discovered in 1993, from a
car paint shop. The plume of contaminated groundwater reaches the stream and
leads to TCE concentrations of up to 17.4 µg L−1 in the stream water. The mean
stream discharge of the stream is 157 L s−1, but it has a high variability during
the year. Measurements of groundwater seepage velocity into the river at dierent
points range from 84 L m−2 d−1 to 336 L m−2 d−1.
Groundwater temperature in Denmark is approximate 9 °C year round. In winter the
water stream temperature is much lower than the groundwater temperature, while
in summer the stream temperature is much higher. Therefore spots of groundwater
inltration will have a lower (higher) temperature in summer (winter) (Compare
with Köppl (2016), with examples of modeling stream surface temperature changes
due to groundwater inltration). Flights with the UAV are conducted over the river,
to identify spots of groundwater inltration due to changes in river surface temper-
ature. Four days before the ight conducted on 19.06.2016, in-situ measurements of
groundwater inltration were conducted during a DTU eld course, led by Ursula
McKnight.
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 2. Materials and Methods
19
200m
200km
a
b
c
Skensved Site
TCE source
Investigation area
TCE plume in GW
Grinsted Stream
Figure 2.13: Overview of Lille Skensved eld site: a) Focus on investigation area,
showing the source of groundwater contamination, contamination plume and ight
area; b) Position of eld site in Denmark; c) Image of the eld site
Grindsted
The river Grindsted Å is located in Jutland, Denmark, close to the town of Grind-
stedt. A nearby factory contaminated the local groundwater with a wide range of
chemicals, which are leaking with the groundwater into the river. Therefore it is
of high interest to determine the groundwater discharge into that river. Rasmussen
et al. (2015) estimated the groundwater inltration based on temperature gradient
measurements in the river bed and found inltration uxes of up to 5×10−6 m s−1
and a river discharge of 1.46 m3 s−1. Thermal data of the river was acquired by the
company Drone Systems on 18.01.2016, using a DJI S900 UAV and a Flir Tau 2
336 thermal infrared camera, with the objective of identifying spots of groundwater
inltration through warm temperature signals. Two kind of thermal videos with a
frame rate of 30 Hz were acquired: thermal videos with a stationary UAV, focusing
on a specic part of the river and thermal videos with the UAV moving along and
covering the whole river stretch. Handling of the acquired data was dierent from
the general data handling in this thesis and is explained in Section 2.5.
==PAGE:34==
20
2.3. Field Data Collection
2.3.2
Ground Control Points
Two dierent kinds of objects were used to mark the GCPs. Metal panels with a
smooth surface and a size of ca. 50 cm × 30 cm were used to be easily identied
in the thermal images. Smooth metal has a very low emissivity and therefore the
detected brightness temperature is very low compared to the surrounding, which
makes the metal panels stand out clearly in the thermal images.Teon panels of
the same size were used as markers for the multispectral images. Teon has a high
diuse reectance over all wavelength of visible light and the near infrared spectrum.
This makes the Teon panels highly visible in the multispectral images throughout
all six bands. Both kinds of markers are easily detectable in the RGB photos. One
corner of each metal panel is marked with a stripe code of blue tape. This code is
identiable on the RGB photos and serves the purpose of clearly identifying each
marker and to mark the corner, at which the GPS position is taken, as always one
corner of a panel is chosen for GPS referencing. At the center of the eld site, a
Spectralon is placed on the ground.
As a system to determine the GCP positions, a Trimble R8s GNSS Receiver together
with a TSC3 Controller was used to acquire GPS positions. Real time kinematic
(RTK) measurements were used, where data is transmitted from a reference station
network to the receiver through the internet, which the receiver accesses through a
built in cellular unit. This set up reaches a precision of 8 mm in horizontal direction
and 15 mm in vertical direction.
2.3.3
Unmanned Airborne Vehicle Flight
Before the survey is started, the thermal camera is connected to power for at least
15 minutes, in order to reach a thermal equilibrium. The RGB camera is set to
manual focus, with focal distance set to innity. The distance between the ground
and camera is high enough, so that this setting always ensures a sharp image. Using
an automatic focus would lower the frame rate and increase the risk for unfocused
images. The focal length is set to 10.4 mm and the shutter time to 0.5 ms. Aperture
opening and light sensitivity (ISO) are set to automatic to ensure balanced image
brightness, while the ISO is limited to the range 125 to 400 to prevent image noise.
In order to prevent noise, images are also taken in the .arw raw image le format
and not converted to the color-compressed .jpg Joint Photographic Experts Group
(JPEG) format. After the sensors are ready, the BBB controller is powered up and
data acquisition starts. The thermal camera takes images at its highest possible
frame rate, which is approx. 4.5 s image−1, the multispectral camera at 1.7 s image−1
and the RGB camera at 2 s image−1. The UAV is piloted in shifted straight lines
over the area of interest with a ight speed and line shift distance, which ensures
overlapping of the imagery to all sides. The battery of the UAV only lasts 10 min
to 15 min, so when the battery is empty before the whole area is surveyed, the
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 2. Materials and Methods
21
UAV is landed, the batteries are exchanged (approx. 3 min) and the UAV started
again.
2.3.4
Black Body and Sky Thermal Imagery
After the ight the thermal camera is unmounted from the payload and images of
the BB, which is set to a temperature close the expected LST, are taken. During
calibration in the laboratory quasi uniform temperature of the camera body can
be ensured. In the eld, temperature dierences throughout the camera body can
occur, which are not accounted for by the camera core temperature measurement.
The temperature dierences can be caused for example through convection caused
by wind from one direction or by radiation from the sun. This can cause unique
long wave radiation patterns on the cameras sensor emitted from the camera casing.
Therefore the BB imagery will be used to correct the thermal images for that (see
also section 2.4.2).
Also thermal imagery of the sky is taken, which is used to approximate the hemi-
spherical down welling long wave radiation.
2.3.5
In-situ Spectral Measurements
The spectral emissivity of the Spectralon is measured, to use that data for calibrating
the multispectral data (see section 2.4.3). A Spectralon from Labsphere with a size of
127 mm × 127 mm and a nominal reectance value of 99 % is used. A Spectralon has
a near Lambertian surface, which means its luminance is isotropic, so the apparent
brightness does not depend on the viewing angle. To measure the spectral emissivity,
a mobile optical spectrometer is used.
2.3.6
In-situ Validation Data
Digital Elevation Model
To validate the resulting DEM, validation points are sampled. Therefore, random
points of the eld site's topography are measured with the GPS unit and their
elevation is compared with the elevation given by the DEM.
==PAGE:36==
22
2.3. Field Data Collection
Land Surface Temperature
At random points throughout the eld site the brightness temperature of the land
surface is measured using a Xintest HT-817 infrared thermometer. The position of
these points is registered using the GPS unit. The ratio of target distance to measure
spot diameter is 10:1, so holding the thermal gun at approximate knee level, gives
a spot diameter of ca. 5 cm. The accuracy for the applied LST range is ±2.5 K
according to the manufacturer. The thermal gun is also tested on the Landcal P80P
BB from 5°C to 45°C in 5 K intervals.
Water Temperature
The thermodynamic water temperature is sampled using a submersible electronic
temperature probe at dierent locations of the stream. Further on the water temper-
ature is measured using four vanEssen Instruments Mini-Diver data loggers which
are placed in the river at the stream bed. They are set to record the water temper-
ature every 10 s. The manufacturer given accuracy is ±0.1 K.
The brightness temperature of the water surface is measured using an Apogee In-
frared Temperature Sensor, coupled with a data logger, recording the brightness
temperature every 3 s. The GPS unit measures the position every second and is
carried close to the sensor, while moving slowly upstream to obtain a temperature
prole. The time stamp of the data logger is matched with the time stamp of the
GPS positions, to obtain the location of every temperature measurement.
Groundwater Inltration
Groundwater inltration into the stream is measured by a DTU eld course con-
ducted by Ursula McKnight. Therefore, the groundwater temperature, stream bed
temperature and sediment temperature at a depth of 20 cm is measured with a
submersible electronic temperature probe. Based on the analytical solution to the
one-dimensional steady-state heat-diusion-advection equation, the groundwater in-
ltration can be calculated with this temperature data as presented in Schmidt et al.
(2007):
qz = −Kfs
ρfcfz ln
(T(z) −TL
T0 −TL
)
(2.15)
Where qz is the specic discharge in m s−1, Kfs the thermal conductivity of the
solid-uid system in J s−1 m−1 K−1, ρfcf the volumetric heat capacity of the uid in
J m−3 K−1, z the depth under the stream bed in m, T(z) the streambed temperature
at depth z in K, TL the groundwater temperature in K and T0 the water temperature
at the streambed in K.
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 2. Materials and Methods
23
2.4
Map Creation from Acquired Data
RGB 
photo
Digital 
Elevation 
Model
Dense 
point 
cloud
Opt Cam 
Location 
+Georef
Sparse 
Point 
Cloud
RGB 
Camera 
Positions
Ground 
Control 
Points
Align-
ment
Rasterize
SfM
Refer-
encing
IR Flux 
Images 
in DN
Tempera-
ture
Map
Opt Cam 
Location
+Georef
Sparse 
Point 
Cloud
Tempera-
ture 
Images
Camera 
Core 
Temp.
Thermal 
Camera 
Positions
Conver-
sion
Ortho-
rectify
Align-
ment
Thermal 
Calibra-
tion
Multi-
spectral 
Images
Opti-
mized 
MS Map
Mul-
tispectral 
Map
Opt Cam 
Location 
+Georef
Sparse 
Point 
Cloud
MS
Camera 
Positions
Teﬂon
GCPs
Align-
ment
Band Al-
ignment
Ortho-
rectify
Refer-
encing
Metal 
GCPs
Refer-
encing
Figure 2.14: Flow chart for data post processing. Green eld: input data; Red
eld: nal output; Blue eld: intermediate result; Orange arrow: Processing step;
Turquoise arrow: Data feed
Figure 2.14 shows the general procedure of how the collected data from the eld
is processed in order to obtain the nal products of DEM, brightness temperature
map and multispectral map.
2.4.1
Digital Elevation Model
The rst step is to create a DEM from the images obtained with the RGB photo
camera. The images are taken in the .arw format, which is a proprietary raw image
format of Sony. The freeware Image Data Converter Ver.4.2.04 from Sony is used
to convert the images into the uncompressed Tagged Image File Format (.tif). The
time stamp of each image is compared to the on board GPS log le and a GPS
position matched to each image. The GPS position is logged every second, so linear
interpolation is used to determine the position, from which the image was taken.
==PAGE:38==
24
2.4. Map Creation from Acquired Data
The positions and images are loaded into the software Agisoft Photoscan and in a
rst processing step, which is known as Structure from Motion (SfM), the images
are aligned, the camera position optimized and yaw, pitch and roll of the camera
estimated, as well as a sparse three dimensional point cloud generated. Therefor
points are identied in each picture and corresponding points matched.
As one
point appears in multiple images, enough information is available to reconstruct
the point's location and the camera parameters (Robertson and Cipolla, 2009). On
base of the sparse point cloud a rough surface mesh is generated and afterwards
the position of the GCPs are marked in the images. Marking a GCP in one image
projects it into all other images, in which it is occurring, with help of the mesh
and then its position has to be ne adjusted in each image.
With help of the
dened GCPs, Agisoft optimizes the camera locations and calibrates the camera
lens properties and the whole model gets denite geo-referenced.
With exact dened camera positions, rotation and lens properties a pixel wise pro-
cess is executed to build a dense point cloud. Each pixel of the camera has an angle
in relation to the camera sensors plane dened. Knowing the cameras position and
orientation, this gives a straight line on which the point corresponding to that pixel
has to lie in the three dimensional space. If the point appears in at least two images
which are taken from dierent positions, at least two lines are dened, so the points
location can be determined by calculating the intersection of these lines. As there
might be small errors in camera calibration and orientation, the lines might not
intersect, so the position of the smallest distance between the lines can be assumed
as the position of that point.
Having acquired a dense point cloud, it can be rasterized in a last processing step
in order to obtain a DEM. This DEM is then exported into GeoTIFF format.
2.4.2
Brigtness Temperature Map
The thermal images are stored in a compressed 14 bit binary .bin le format. An
adapted python script by Filippo Bandini is used to decompress the les and store
the DN values for every pixel in a comma-separated value le (.csv). The les are
then loaded into MatLab, visually inspected and the relevant thermal images chosen.
The info text les (.txt) for each image are read and a camera core temperature and
Linux time stamp associated with each thermal image. Then the BB images from
the eld are analyzed. Using the BB temperature and the core temperature for
each image, the expected DN value Wexp for each pixel can be calculated, solving
equation 2.14 for W:
Wexp =
R
exp
(
B
TBB
)
−1
+ O′ + t′Tc
(2.16)
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 2. Materials and Methods
25
Where TBB is the BB temperature. For each pixel an oset Ofield can be calcu-
lated:
Ofield = W −Wexp
(2.17)
Multiple BB images are available from each eld campaign, so the Ofield values
are averaged over all available images, which gives Ofield;ave. To avoid introducing
noise, a moving window averaging algorithm, with a window size of 21 × 21 pixels,
is applied to Ofield;ave, which yields O′
f. This oset is accounting for the special
thermal conditions of the thermal camera on that specic eld campaign and is used
in calculating a temperature value Tf for each pixel in each thermal image:
Tf =
B
log
(
R
W−O′−O′
f−t′Tc + F
)
(2.18)
These temperature values are oat numbers, but Agisoft Photoscan can only handle
integer image data. Therefore, the temperature values are transformed using the
whole value range of 16 bits, in order to lose as little information as possible and to
make the thermal images as high contrast as possible. A stretch factor Cf in K−1 is
introduced:
Cf =
216 −1
MAX −MIN
(2.19)
Where MAX is the maximum temperature value occurring in the whole chosen
image set for the eld campaign and MIN is the minimum occurring temperature
value. The 16 bit transformation is done as following:
T16bit = round ((Tf −MIN) Cf)
(2.20)
Where T16bit is the converted 16 bit temperature value. The process of rounding the
value introduces an error ϵT in K. The size of the error is known:
|ϵT| ≤0.5
Cf
(2.21)
The 16 bit data is saved as a .tif le and loaded into Agisoft Photoscan.
The
next processing steps are similar to the DEM creation: Interpolating camera GPS
positions, aligning the images, building a mesh, marking the GCPs from the metal
panels and optimizing camera calibration and camera position.
Then the previous created DEM is imported. Knowing the thermal camera cali-
bration, the image positions and orientations, allows to project the thermal images
onto the DEM. At places where multiple cameras are projected onto one place of the
DEM, the values are linearly averaged. This result is exported as an orthorectied
and georeferenced map into the 16 bit GeoTi format. This le is then reopened
in MatLab and converted into absolute oat temperature values, reversing equation
2.20.
==PAGE:40==
26
2.5. Drone Systems Data Processing
2.4.3
Multispectral Map
The multispectral images are loaded into Agisoft Photoscan with their raw DN
values. Each image is a .tif container le, containing the images from all six bands.
Agisoft lets the user choose one master channel, on which the user processing is done
and the other bands are processed automatically by the software at the same time.
Similar to the thermal image processing, the images are aligned, georeferenced and
projected onto the DEM. The resulting maps are six bands of DN values. Their
alignment is visually checked and if necessary improved to t the rst band.
To calculate reectance from the DN values, it is assumed, that DN value and re-
ectance behave linear and that the Spectralon has a reectivity of 100%. That leads
to a linear conversion factor fR(λ) in DN−1 for every band with the transmitting
wavelength λ in m:
fR(λ) =
1
MSsp(λ)
(2.22)
Where MSsp(λ) is the value in DN, measured by the multispectral camera at the
location of the Spectralon. The conversion of DN to reectance R(λ) is:
R(λ) = fR(λ)MS(λ)
(2.23)
Where MS(λ) is the value read by the multispectral camera in DN. Also emitted
electromagnetic radiation can be calculated for every band. Again, linearity between
radiation and measured DN number is assumed. The conversion factor fE(λ) in W
m−3 DN−1 is described as:
fE(λ) =
Bsp(λ)
MSsp(λ)
(2.24)
Where Bsp(λ) in W m−3 is the radiation measured in the eld of the Spectralon.
That gives for calculating the electromagnetic radiation B(λ):
B(λ) = fE(λ)MS(λ)
(2.25)
2.5
Drone Systems Data Processing
The thermal data from Drone Systems are videos, which have a temperature value
stored for each pixel and each frame. The temperature value is calculated through
the inaccurate default calibration and setting default values for emissivity and fur-
ther parameters, which do not represent the environmental conditions at the time
of the UAV ight. Therefore these values were handled as arbitrary temperature
values.
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 2. Materials and Methods
27
For the stationary ight videos, containing 100 to 200 frames, the frames were
aligned to the rst frame of the video, using the hugin-project image manipulation
software. After the alignment, the average value for each pixel from all frames of
one stationary video was calculated.
The 2519 single frames from the moving video were loaded into the AgisoftPhotoscan
software.
As no GCPs are set out in the thermal images, it is not possible to
georeference the images exactly and to project them onto a DEM. Therefore a surface
mesh is created in AgisoftPhotoscan using SfM on the thermal images. Afterward
the thermal images are projected onto the surface mesh, orthorectied and averaged
in order to create a thermal map.
2.6
Brightness Temperature to Kinetic Tempera-
ture
The temperature determined so far is the brightness temperature, which assumes
that the surfaces behave like a BB and that the surface does not reect any radia-
tion. To obtain the radiometric temperature, the surface's emissivity and reectance
have to be accounted for. Emissivity is the ratio of emitted radiation at a given tem-
perature to the blackbody radiation at the same temperature (Van De Griend and
Owe, 1993). The radiation which reaches the thermal camera can be seen in Figure
2.15. Using Stefan-Boltzmann law (Cardoso and Castro, 2005) and emissivity gives
the following expression for the emitted radiation power by the land surface RS in
W m−2:
RS = εσT 4
S
(2.26)
Where ε is the dimensionless emissivity of the land surface, σ the Stefan-Boltzmann
constant in W m−2 K−4 and TS the thermodynamic temperature in K of the land
surface in equilibrium. Under the assumptions that the surface is not transmit-
ting, the surface's infrared reectivity ρ can be related to the emissivity (Li et al.,
2013):
ρ ∼= 1 −ε
(2.27)
That gives for the reected radiation RR:
RR = (1 −ε)RL↓
(2.28)
Where RL↓is the total atmospheric down welling radiation. The upwelling atmo-
spheric radiation from the atmosphere above the sensor level RLu↑cannot reach
the camera and the contribution of the upwelling atmospheric radiation from the
atmosphere below the sensor level RLl↑is very small due to the low ying altitudes
(below 100 m) and can be neglected. So the radiation reaching the camera RC is
==PAGE:42==
28
2.6. Brightness Temperature to Kinetic Temperature
Landsurface (TS , ε)
Sensor level
Lower Atmosphere
Upper Atmosphere
RLu
RLl
RLu
RLl
RL
RS
RR
RC
Figure 2.15:
Illustration of long wave radiation paths: RLu↑is the upwelling
radiation of the atmosphere above ight level and RLu↓the down welling part. RLl↑
and RLl↓are the upwelling and down welling parts of the atmosphere below the
camera. RL↓is the total down welling radiation reaching the land surface and RR
the reected part. RS is the radiation emitted by the land surface and RC the total
radiation received by the thermal infrared camera.
the sum of the emitted radiation from the surface RS and the reected down welling
atmospheric radiation RR. Using equations 2.26 and 2.28 gives:
RC = (1 −ε)RL↓+ εσT 4
S
(2.29)
Solving this equation for the LST TS yields:
TS =
(RC −(1 −ε) RL
εσ
) 1
4
(2.30)
This equation shows that the emissivity and down welling atmospheric radiation
need to be determined in order to obtain an accurate LST.
2.6.1
Land Surface Emissivity
Direct measurements of emissivity, for example with an emissivity box (Becker et al.,
1987) require some eort and are not able to give spatial distributed high resolution
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 2. Materials and Methods
29
data.
Therefore, the approach by Van De Griend and Owe (1993) is chosen to
estimate the emissivity of the thermal infrared band, using the normalized dierence
vegetation index (NDVI). Van De Griend and Owe (1993) showed that there is a
high correlation between NDVI and emissivity. Their experimental data set of 59
measurements ranges from bare soil (ε=0.914; NDVI=0.157) to completely covered
Shrub (ε=0.986; NDVI=0.727) and shows following approximation is valid over the
whole range with R2=0.886:
ε = a + b ln (NDVI)
(2.31)
With a=1.0094 and b=0.047. The NDVI is dened as:
NDVI = ρNIR −ρRED
ρNIR + ρRED
(2.32)
With ρNIR being the surface reectance of the near infrared band (NIR) and ρRED
being the surface reectance of the red band.
In this thesis, the data from the multispectral camera is used to calculate the NDVI
and to approximate the surface emissivity. As NIR reectance, band 6 of the cam-
era with its bandpass lter of 810 nm was chosen and band 4 with a bandpass lter
of 670 nm was chosen for red reectance. The reectance maps are resampled to
the resolution of the brightness temperature map and then the NDVI map calcu-
lated, from which the emissivity map is derived according to equation 2.31. For
outlying NDVI values, cuto values are implemented. The lower cuto value lies at
NDVI=0.157, which is the value for bare soil in the study by Van De Griend and
Owe (1993). Values below are considered bare soil and get ε=0.922 assigned, which
is the result of inserting the cuto value NDVI in equation 2.31. The maximum
emissivity of a canopy is given between 0.98 (Fuchs and Tanner, 1968) and 1 (Idso
et al., 1969) by dierent authors and a value of ε=0.99 is chosen as a cuto value,
so where NDVI > 0.6618, ε=0.99 is assigned.
2.6.2
Down Welling Long Wave Radiation
Down welling long wave radiation data is acquired with three dierent methods:
direct measurement, estimation from air temperature and vapor pressure and esti-
mation from sky temperature measurement with the thermal infrared camera.
Direct Measurement
A Kipp&Zonen CNR 4 Net Radiometer is installed at the ux tower at the Risø eld
site at a height of 10 m and it directly measures upwelling and down welling long
wave and shortwave radiation. The pyrgeometer, measuring hemispherical down
welling long wave radiation, has a sensitive band width of 4.5 µm to 42 µm and a
FOV of 180°.
==PAGE:44==
30
2.6. Brightness Temperature to Kinetic Temperature
Estimation from Air Temperature and Vapor Pressure
Studies have shown, that the emissivity of the atmosphere can be estimated using air
temperature and water vapor pressure. A widely used approximation by Brutsaert
(1975) gives following estimation of atmospheric emissivity εBr:
εBr = 1.24
( e
Ta
) 1
7
(2.33)
Where e is the water vapor pressure in hPa and Ta the air temperature in K. This
equation is only valid for clear sky conditions. In cases of cloud cover, which increases
the down welling long wave radiation, the emissivity has to be adjusted. Brutsaert
(1982) suggests following correction:
εCBr = εBr (1 + 0.22C)
(2.34)
Where εCBr is the atmospheric emissivity under cloudy conditions and C the cloud
cover fraction. To obtain down welling long wave radiation from the emissivity, the
Stefan-Boltzmann equation is applied to the air temperature:
RL↓= εBrσT 4
a
(2.35)
Measurements of the water content of air are often relative humidity measure-
ments instead of vapor pressure measurements, so a conversion is necessary (Gatley,
2016):
e = esRH
(2.36)
Where es is the saturation vapor pressure in hPa and RH the relative humidity.
es depends on the temperature and can be approximated according to Wagner and
Pruÿ (2002):
ϑ = 1 −T
Tc
(2.37)
es = ec exp
(Tc
T
(
C1ϑ + C2ϑ1.5 + C3ϑ3 + C4ϑ3.5 + C5ϑ4 + C6ϑ7.5))
(2.38)
Where T is the temperature in K, Tc the critical temperature in K, ec the criti-
cal pressure in hPa and C1 to C6 are empirical coecients (see constant declara-
tion).
Estimation from Measured Sky Temperature
The thermal camera can be used to measure the sky temperature and this tem-
perature can be converted to down welling long wave radiation. The atmospheric
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 2. Materials and Methods
31
radiation changes with the zenith angle and the hemispherical radiation is the value
of interest, whereas the thermal camera only allows for measurements of a certain
area. Mathematical (Kondratyev, 1969) and experimental (Göttsche, Olesen and
Bork-Unkelbach, 2013) it can be shown, that the radiation measured at a zenith
angle of 53° equals the hemispherical radiation under isothermal atmospheric condi-
tions. Rubio, Caselles and Badenas (1997) show experimental that the hemispherical
radiation can also be estimated from a radiation measurement at zenith, which can
be converted with a linear factor:
RL↓∼= 1.3RL(0◦)
(2.39)
Where RL(0◦) is the down welling long wave radiation measured at zenith. In the
eld the Flir Tau 2 camera is directed into the sky at approximate zenith.
As
atmospheric radiation increases with the zenith angle, the minimum temperature
of the sky image is assumed to be the zenith sky temperature. This temperature
is converted into radiation using the Stefan-Boltzmann equation and then equation
2.39 is applied.
==PAGE:46==
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 3
Results and Discussion
3.1
Thermal Camera Calibration
3.1.1
Calibration Results
For calibration of the Flir Tau 2 thermal camera, rst of all the eect of the ambient
room temperature is investigated. Therefore, each room temperature data set is
tted to equation 2.1 solved for Temperature T, with R and O as free variables and
B and F xed to their default values. This is done global and not per pixel, so the
mean read ux W of each thermal image represents one data point. This approach
does not take into account the camera's core temperature for determining the BB
temperature, but the core temperature is similar throughout each data set, as the
Read ﬂux W [DN]
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
4500
5000
BB temp [°C]
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
FLIR calibration
Fit RT=10°C
Meas. RT=10°C
Fit RT=20°C
Meas. RT=20°C
Fit RT=30°C
Meas. RT=30°C
Figure 3.1: Global calibration of Flir Tau 2 for each room temperature set, omitting
camera core temperature, displaying the 2σ data condence interval
33
==PAGE:48==
34
3.1. Thermal Camera Calibration
ambient temperature is constant and the camera is in thermal equilibrium.
The resulting tting can be seen in Figure 3.1.
The three tting curves have a
similar shape, just with an oset between them.
This can also be shown with
the resulting tting parameters (see Table 3.1): The slope determining constant R
is similar in all three cases, whereas the oset constant O decreases signicantly
with an increasing room temperature.
For great shifts in ambient temperature,
the read ux values dier signicant, as can be seen in the condence intervals in
Figure 3.1. The 2σ condence intervals of the calibration data points do not overlap
comparing ambient temperatures 10°C and 30°C, but there is a slight overlap of
condence intervals at ambient room temperature 20°C to both sides. This justies
incorporating the ambient temperature through the camera core temperature into
the camera calibration, by adjusting the oset parameter O, as this is the aected
parameter, in the way presented in Equation 2.14.
Comparing these global calibrations with the Flir default factory calibration shows
great dierences. The slope of the default calibration does not match the acquired
data points; it is too steep. At a BB temperature from 30 °C to 45 °C, the default
calibration crosses the measured data points, but at lower BB temperatures the de-
fault calibration underestimates the temperature and lies outside of the condence
intervals of the data points. At an ambient temperature of 20°C and a BB tem-
perature of 0°C, the default calibration underestimates the temperature by 9.1 K.
The uniformity of pixel behavior throughout the thermal camera's sensor was inves-
tigated. Figure 3.2 shows the deviation of W of each pixel from the thermal image's
mean W value. At a BB temperature of 10°C and ambient temperature of 30 °C, the
left side of the sensor reads higher ux values than the right side of the sensor, with
the maximum values being located at the bottom left corner. The maximum value
dierence throughout this image is 120 DN. Further on, a ring feature, with higher
values at the center of the thermal image, is visible. At a BB temperature of 35 °C
the thermal image behaves more uniform with a maximum deviation of 49 DN. A
BB temperature of 45 °C shows a higher deviation again with an inverted pattern
compared to the behavior at a BB temperature of 10 °C. Minimum ux values are
located in the lower left corner of the sensor, while maximum values are located in
Table 3.1: Flir camera global calibration parameters for dierent ambient room
temperatures
Room temp. [°C]
10
20
30
Default
Calibration
R [DN]
430081
431993
430766
366545
O [DN]
-245.82
-336.09
-393.17
342
B [K]
1428
1428
1428
1428
F [-]
1
1
1
1
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 3. Results and Discussion
35
TBB=10°C; T
Room=30°C
Deviation from mean [DN]
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
TBB=35°C; T
Room=30°C
Deviation from mean [DN]
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
TBB=45°C; T
Room=30°C
Deviation from mean [DN]
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
Figure 3.2: Deviation of each pixel from thermal image mean read ux, at BB
temperatures 10°C, 35°C and 45°C at ambient temperature 30°C. Black circles mark
points evaluated in Figure 3.3
the upper right area of the sensor. A ring feature with lower ux values is located
in the center of the image. The maximum total deviation is 65 DN here. These pat-
terns are reproducible at dierent ambient temperatures and dierent orientations
of the thermal camera in the experimental setup. This excludes outside inuences
or uniformity issues of the BB being the cause for these patterns.
In order to investigate the signicance of these deviations, the behavior of two rep-
resentative pixels is analyzed. Pixel 1 has the coordinates (109; 273) on the sensor
and pixel 2 the coordinates (251; 0), where the coordinate origin lies in the top left
corner and the rst coordinate denes the vertical direction and the second coordi-
nate the horizontal direction. The pixel positions can be seen in Figure 3.2: Pixel
1 lies in the middle right and pixel 2 in the bottom left of the sensor. The pixel
deviation from the image mean value is plotted over the BB temperature for the
three dierent ambient temperatures in Figure 3.3. The 2σ condence interval of
each data point is displayed. The behavior at ambient temperature 30°C is cor-
responding to the behavior observable in Figure 3.2. The values of the two pixels
dier very signicant at low BB temperatures, become similar at higher BB temper-
atures before crossing over and diering again at high BB temperatures. The same
behavior is observable at the other ambient temperatures with a shift on the BB
==PAGE:50==
36
3.1. Thermal Camera Calibration
BB temp [°C]
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
Deviation from mean [DN]
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
80
Pixel 1; RT=10°C
Pixel 2; RT=10°C
Pixel 1; RT=20°C
Pixel 2; RT=20°C
Pixel 1; RT=30°C
Pixel 2; RT=30°C
Figure 3.3: Read ux deviation of single pixel from image mean value of BB target,
for dierent BB target temperatures and ambient room temperatures
temperature axis. The crossover BB temperature, where the sensor signal is most
uniform, depends on the ambient temperature. When the BB temperature is ca. 10
K higher than the ambient temperature, the sensor signal is most uniform. It can be
seen, that the pixel behavior is signicant dierent throughout the sensor and that
the pixel deviation changes with target temperature. Therefore, it is necessary to
conduct a calibration for each single pixel, in order to achieve reliable temperature
measurements throughout the sensor with varying target temperatures.
4500
4000
Read Flux [DN]
3500
3000
2500
2000
Core Temperature [0.1°C]
100
150
200
250
40
0
10
20
30
BB Temperature [°C]
Data points
Fit
Figure 3.4: Input data points and resulting tting for global camera calibration
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 3. Results and Discussion
37
A global calibration including the camera's core temperature after Equation 2.14
yields following parameters: R = 430424 DN; O′ = -190.57 DN and t′ = -0.73. The
resulting tting and the input data points can be seen in Figure 3.4. The shape of the
calibration curve is able to follow the data points very well and to represent the data
sets from the three dierent ambient temperatures. The negative value of variable t′
is interesting. That means, the higher the ambient temperature is, the lower is the
camera's read ux. It would be expected that more radiation reaches the camera's
sensor at higher ambient temperatures, as for example a warmer camera body emits
more radiation onto the sensor. This contradicting behavior hints, that the camera
internally tries to compensate for the core temperature, but the compensation is too
strong, which leads to a negative t′.
Parameter R
R [DN]
×10 5
4.2
4.25
4.3
4.35
Parameter O
O [DN]
-250
-200
-150
-100
Parameter t
t [-]
-0.85
-0.8
-0.75
-0.7
-0.65
-0.6
-0.55
Root mean square error
RMSE [K]
0.44
0.46
0.48
0.5
0.52
Figure 3.5: Resulting parameter maps and tting RMSE for pixel wise calibration
of Flir Tau 2 thermal camera
The resulting parameters of a pixel wise calibration, according to Equation 2.14,
while using default values for parameters B and F, can be seen in Figure 3.5 and
Table 3.2. The distribution of the parameters follows the observations of the pixel
deviations on the BB thermal images. A clear left to right trend and a circle in
the center is observable for all parameters. Parameter R increases from left to right
and has lower values at the circle around the sensor center, while parameters O′
and t′ decrease from left to right and have higher values in the circle regions. The
noise in the parameter values is small compared to the general trend behavior. The
==PAGE:52==
38
3.1. Thermal Camera Calibration
Table 3.2:
Resulting parameter values and distributions for pixel wise camera
calibration
R [DN]
O′ [DN]
t′ [-]
RMSE [K]
Mean
430438
-190.68
0.7300
0.4740
Std
4884
31.79
0.0701
0.0157
Minimum
415651
-250.32
0.5147
0.4395
Maximum
439956
-98.65
0.8724
0.5379
root mean square error (RMSE) of the tting is higher in the bottom right corner
compared to the rest of the sensor, which indicates a higher uncertainty in this
sensor region.
The variation of parameter O′ over the sensor is the highest of the three parameters.
Its standard deviation is in the same order of magnitude as its mean value. The
standard deviation of parameters t′ and R are one order of magnitude smaller than
their mean values, with R having the smallest variation.
3.1.2
Calibration Accuracy
BB Temp. [°C]
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Temperature [K]
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
RMSE
Bias
2 σ
Maxdiff
Figure 3.6: Measures of calibration accuracy over dierent target temperatures
Evaluation of a set of 90 thermal images of a BB target, acquired under a natural
ambient temperature of ca. 24 °C, results in an overall RMSE of 0.9505 K and
an overall bias of 0.9068 K, applying the calibration function from above. Figure
3.6 shows the calibration accuracy over dierent target temperatures.
The bias
and RMSE do not show any variation related to the target temperature. The 2σ
condence interval, constructed from all pixels of all images at the same target
temperature, decreases from 5°C to 15°C target temperature, before being nearly
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 3. Results and Discussion
39
constant. The maximum dierence, which is the maximum dierence of pixel tem-
perature values acquired under one target temperature, behaves the same way as
the condence interval. The value of the 2σ interval is a measure for reliability
of temperature variations across one thermal image. Which means for example, a
temperature hot spot on a water surface, which diers more than 2σ from the mean
water temperature, is an actual signal with a reliability greater than 95%. At target
temperatures 5°C and 10 °C, the 2σ value is 1.1544 K and 0.6312 K respectively and
for larger target temperatures the 2σ value is smaller than 0.5 K. The fact that the
2σ value is lower than the RMSE shows, that the relative temperature reliability in
one image is greater than the absolute temperature reliability. The fact, that the
bias value moves very close to the RMSE indicates, that the temperature error is
induced by a systematic oset instead of random temperature errors.
RMSE
RMSE [K]
0.88
0.9
0.92
0.94
0.96
0.98
1
1.02
Bias
Bias [K]
0.85
0.9
0.95
Figure 3.7: RMSE and bias for each pixel from calibration validation
The same conclusions can be derived investigating the bias and RMSE of each
individual pixel (see Figure 3.7). Variation of RMSE and bias between pixels is
very small. The standard deviation of the RMSE distribution is 0.019 K and the
standard deviation of the bias distribution is 0.022 K. The mean dierence between
RMSE and bias is 0.044 K. These results show, that the applied calibration is very
ecient in counteracting dierent behavior between the single pixels of the thermal
camera sensor, but is less accurate in providing absolute temperature values.
An explanation for the error of absolute temperature can be found looking at the
start up behavior of the Flir Tau 2 camera (see Figure 3.8). While starting up, the
camera's core temperature increases fast for approximately 5 minutes and increases
further before being quite stable after ca. 20 minutes. After the camera is turned
on, the measured target temperature rapidly drops 2 K, before increasing back to
measured temperatures, which are in the range of the rst measurement. This period
of increasing measured target temperature lasts ca. 15 minutes, at which time also
the cameras core temperature is quite stable. This behavior could be explained with
an internal correction of the camera, which depends on the rate of change of the core
temperature, where an increase in core temperature induces a decrease of measured
==PAGE:54==
40
3.1. Thermal Camera Calibration
Time [min]
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Measured BB Temp. [°C]
19
20
21
22
Core Temp. [0.1°C]
170
180
190
200
210
220
Mean Temp. measured by Flir camera
Flir camera core temp.
FFC before this measurement
Figure 3.8:
Behavior of camera core temperature during camera start up and
measured temperature of a BB target at 20°C, averaged over each image
ux. The total change in core temperature during start up is ca. 3 K, whereas
the core temperature changed 20 K during the dierent ambient conditions while
calibrating, but the eect of these 3 K dynamic change are by far greater than the
eect of 20 K change under equilibrium condition. This means, small instabilities
of the cameras thermal equilibrium can have a signicant eect on the measured
temperature. Slight drifts in core temperature during calibration or validation can
be the reason for the bias in the validation. During experiments, the body heat of
the experiment conducting person or small local environmental dierences in the BB
experiment area and camera storage area, might introduce small drifts in camera
core temperature.
Even when the thermal camera's core temperature is stable, shifts and changes in
the measured target temperature occur. Shifts occur often in connection with a
FFC, but can also occur unrelated to an FFC, for example at minute 22 in Figure
3.8.
3.1.3
Drone Systems Camera Comparison
Another similar thermal camera, a Flir Tau 2 336 owned by Drone Systems (DS
cam) and used for the image acquisition at Grindsted, was used to compare against
the camera from DTU (DTU cam) used for data acquisition in this thesis. Figure 3.9
shows the deviation of the mean measured ux at dierent BB target temperatures
of the DS cam. A feature similar to DTU cam is the circle at the center of the
sensor. At target temperature 5°C, which is lower than the ambient temperature, a
higher ux is measured in the circle area, while at target temperature 70°C, which
is higher than the ambient temperature, a lower ux is measured in the circle area.
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 3. Results and Discussion
41
TBB=5°C
Deviation from mean [DN]
-50
0
50
TBB=25°C
Deviation from mean [DN]
-50
0
50
TBB=70°C
Deviation from mean [DN]
-50
0
50
Figure 3.9: Deviation of each pixel from thermal image mean read ux, at BB tem-
peratures 5°C, 25°C and 70°C at uncontrolled ambient temperature of approximately
24°C
At a target temperature of 25°C, close to ambient air temperature, the measured
ux is more uniform than in the other cases. A clear left to right trend in measured
ux throughout the sensor, as it is the case with DTU cam, is not observable.
Measurements of the BB target with the DS cam are only available at uncontrolled
ambient air temperature, so the camera calibration could not include the camera's
core temperature, as there is no signicant change in that variable. A global cal-
ibration of the DS cam after Equation 2.1, xing parameters B and F to default
values, yields O = 7.30 DN and R = 407796 DN. This calibration is compared to
the calibration of the DTU cam data set at ambient air temperature 20°C, without
taking into account the camera core temperature, as this comes closest in available
data to the DS cam data. The parameters for DTU cam are O = -393.17 DN and R
= 431993 DN and the default values are O = 342 DN and R = 466545 DN (compare
Table 3.1). The values of the DS cam dier signicantly from the DTU cam values,
as well as from the default calibration values. The behavior of these calibrations
can be seen in Figure 3.10. The slope of the DS cam agrees more with the default
calibration than the DTU cam, but the behavior still diers signicant.
The camera comparison shows, that a common feature of the cameras' behavior is
==PAGE:56==
42
3.2. River Applications
Flux [DN]
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
4500
BB Temp. [°C]
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
Calibration Drone Systems camera
Calibration DTU camera @ T
Room=20°C
Default manufacturer calibration
Figure 3.10: Global calibration of DTU cam and DS cam omitting core tempera-
ture
the central ring feature on the sensor, but other sensor specic patterns are unique.
Also the values of the global camera calibration are unique, so the calibration of one
camera is not transferable to another camera.
3.2
River Applications
3.2.1
Small Stream - Lille Skensved
April Survey
A thermal mapping ight was conducted over the stream Lille Skensved Å on
12.04.2016. The digital photo camera and the thermal camera were employed on
that ight. Average ight attitude was 16.6 m and 79 thermal images were used for
the construction of a thermal map with a resolution of 3.9 cm, which covers a 190 m
stretch of the stream. Coverage of the stream ranges from 2 to 7 thermal images per
position. The cloud cover was patchy and fast changing. Groundwater temperature
is estimated to approximately 8°C, while in-situ stream temperature measurements
indicated a temperature of 6°C. The aim of the ight was to detect groundwater
inltration by using temperature as a tracer, so groundwater inltration would give
a warm signal in the stream under the present conditions. The temperature dif-
ference between groundwater and stream water is small, so the signal strength of
groundwater inltration is expected to be small.
Figure 3.11 shows a stitched and orthorectied photo of the investigated area. The
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 3. Results and Discussion
43
±
0
10
20
30
5
Meters
Figure 3.11: Stitched and orthorectied
photo of investigated river stretch
±
0
10
20
30
5
Meters
Brightness Temp.
°C
20
4
Figure 3.12:
Brightness temperature
map of investigated river stretch
stream ow is from north to south. The northern part of the stream stretch has
patches of oating vegetation. The following straight stretch has trees on the western
river bank, which are overhanging the stream. The trees are without any leaves, so
only bare branches are over the river.
This is followed by stretch without any
vegetation on or above the stream surface. The southern 90° bend is overgrown by
trees again. Riparian vegetation is generally low, as only little growth occurred after
the winter until that point in time.
Figure 3.12 shows the brightness temperature of the stream surface as well as the
surrounding river banks. The stream temperature is lower than the surrounding
land surface, so the river is visible as a blue stretch. The LST, where bare soil is
exposed, reaches up to 20 °C, while the apparent river brightness temperature ranges
from 4 °C, to 9 °C. It appears that the northern stream temperature is higher, before
==PAGE:58==
44
3.2. River Applications
20°C
4°C
Figure 3.13: Close up of central river
stretch
brightness
temperature
map,
where the stream is overhung by trees
20°C
4°C
Figure 3.14:
Close up of the down-
stream river stretch brightness tempera-
ture, where temperature shifts are visible
a cooler stretch follows, which is followed again by a short warmer section at the
end.
The higher apparent temperature at the central stretch is caused by the overhanging
branches. A close up look (see Figure 3.13) shows that branches are identiable. The
DEM used as a projection base is not able to reproduce the single branches of the
tree, they are too small to be resolved. The DEM has the value of the river surface in
this location, which means the branches in the thermal image are projected onto the
river surface. Multiple thermal images, taken from dierent positions are averaged
in the mapping process. Due to their dierent positions, the branches are projected
onto a dierent point of the stream from each image. The averaging consequently
causes a blurry increase in stream temperature. The more images are covering a
section, the stronger is the blurriness.
Investigating the end stretch of the stream (see Figure 3.14) shows sharp shifts in
stream surface temperature. These shifts cause temperature dierences of up to 1
K between two neighboring pixels in the river. They must be synthetic and cannot
occur in-situ, as resulting temperature gradients of 25 K m−1 are unrealistic for a
natural stream. The shifts occur when dierent thermal images, showing a dierent
temperature on the same stream location, are stitched together. The fewer images
cover one point of the river, the stronger this eect is apparent, because it does not
get averaged out through multiple images. The end of the investigation stretch has
a low image coverage, which makes this eect very visible here.
There are two possible reasons for the camera to display a dierent brightness tem-
perature for the same part of the river. The cloud cover was changing signicantly
that day, which means there is a strong temporal change in down welling long wave
radiation and changing long wave radiation changes the brightness temperature,
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 3. Results and Discussion
45
even when the target's thermodynamic temperature stays constant. But a simple
investigation on the amplitude of that aect, assuming the long wave radiation to
change from 200 W m−2 to 300 W m−2, the water surface emissivity having the low-
est reasonable value of 0.96 and the thermodynamic water temperature to be 6°C,
yields a change of 0.82 K in brightness temperature. This does not fully explain the
magnitude of occurring shifts. Also the time needed for a change in down welling
long wave radiation, as assumed in the estimation before, is greater than the time
between the capture of images covering one area.
The more likely reason lies in a thermal instability of the thermal camera. Small
drifts in core temperature can cause signicant shifts in measured target temper-
ature (Dugdale, 2016). Changing ambient conditions during the ight, specially
shortly after takeo of the UAV, are a plausible cause for changes in the camera
core temperature.
During that eld investigation no signicant temperature dierences could be de-
tected in the river surface, which are doubtlessly caused by groundwater inltration.
The groundwater to surface water temperature dierence was small and overhang-
ing vegetation and camera eects had a stronger signal. The shifts in measured
temperature make comparisons of river temperature between dierent locations un-
reliable.
June Survey
On 19.06.2016 another eld investigation was conducted at Lille Skensved Å, uti-
lizing the digital photo camera and the thermal camera. Detailed data on river
temperature and groundwater inltration was collected on 15.06.2016 and is avail-
able for data comparison. During this eld investigation the riparian vegetation was
very strong, overhanging parts of the stream. The canopy of the trees overgrowing
the river was very dense, making it impossible to get a direct view of the stream
from above the trees. The earlier in-situ investigations show that the areas of high-
est groundwater inltration lie in the areas of tree overgrow. Therefore, two UAV
ights were conducted in two locations of interest (see Figure 3.15), ying very low
over the stream (2 m to 3 m) under the tree canopy. The low ight altitude resulted
in a small FOV of the acquired images and consequently in a lack of overlap be-
tween the images. Therefore, mapping the thermal images to a continuous map is
not possible. Groundwater temperature was 9°C, while the stream temperature was
approximately 15°C, so groundwater inltration is expected to be visible through a
cold signal.
For comparison of the dierent collected data, it is plotted over the stream chainage
(see Fig. 3.15 for denition of the chainage) in Figure 3.16. Available data are
river surface brightness temperature, measured with the Apogee sensor, thermody-
namic water temperature measured with the divers, thermodynamic river tempera-
==PAGE:60==
46
3.2. River Applications
!(
!(
!(
!(")
!(
")")
!(
!(
")
!(
!(
!(
!(
!(
!(!(
!(
!(
!(
!(
!(
!(
!(
!(
!(!(
!(!(
!(
!(
!(
Pos 9
Pos 9
Pos 8
Pos 8
Pos 7
Pos 7
Pos 6
Pos 6
Pos 5
Pos 5
Pos 4
Pos 4
Pos 3
Pos 3
Pos 2
Pos 2
Pos 1
Pos 1
Pos 10
Pos 10
Pos 15
Pos 15
Pos 14
Pos 14
Pos 12
Pos 12
Pos 11
Pos 11
Pos 13
Pos 13
¯
0
10
20
30
5
Meters
Legend
UAV flight
Divers
Apogee measurement
!(
In-situ infiltration meas.
Chainage definition
Images of Interest
In Appendix
")
Here
Figure 3.15:
Map of data collection locations for eld investigation in Lille
Skensved in June
ture measured with temperature probes at varying locations, acquired 4 days before
ight, groundwater inltration ux calculated from temperature gradient, measured
4 days before the ight, as well as the brightness temperature acquired with the Flir
Tau 2 camera.
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 3. Results and Discussion
47
Chainage [m]
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
Temperature [°C]
12
12.5
13
13.5
14
14.5
15
15.5
16
16.5
GW Infiltration [m/s]
×10 -6
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
Apogee sensor
Diver
Thermal Cam
TSW Probe
Groundwater flux
Figure 3.16: Comparison of collected data over stream chainage
The divers show temperatures between 14.8 °C and 14.9 °C on the upstream stretch
and between 15.4 °C and 15.9 °C on the downstream stretch. The divers record
temperature data every 10s, so the displayed mean value of each diver refers to the
mean temperature during the UAV ight and the 2σ condence intervals refer to the
variation of acquired temperature readings throughout the UAV ight. The tem-
perature readings at the upstream location are close to each other with overlapping
condence intervals, which would make a constant temperature possible, while at
the downstream location signicant variations in temperature can be observed. The
divers are located on the stream bed. At locations with signicant lower stream bed
temperature, groundwater inltration is expected. The higher stream temperature
downstream is caused by the point of time of measurement. The ight on the down-
stream location was conducted over 1 h after the ight in the upstream location and
analysis of the temporal stream temperature data shows an increase of 0.5 K min−1,
caused by the diurnal temperature change of the stream.
The variation in stream temperature is strong according to the measurements con-
ducted with the temperature probes in dierent locations. The measurements range
from 14°C to 16.1°C. Variation seems lower at the central stretch, ranging from
60 m to 120 m of chainage. These measurements lack information about the time
of recording, so the temperature variations could be caused by the timing of the
measurements and the diurnal temperature change of the river, instead of spatial
variations in stream surface temperature. As this data is recorded four days before
the UAV ight, it can be only used for detecting relative temperature patterns and
not for the validation of absolute temperature.
Groundwater inltration ux varies along the investigated river stretch. The up-
stream section form 20 m to 60 m of chainage sees high groundwater inltration
with ux values of up to 1.4×10−6 m s−1, the middle section from 60 m to 120 m
of chainage shows comparable low groundwater inltration not exceeding 0.4×10−6
m s−1, followed by the last section of the river (chainage 120 m to 160 m), which
==PAGE:62==
48
3.2. River Applications
sees high groundwater uxes of up to 1.4×10−6 m s−1. This shows clearly two zones
of groundwater inltration, separated by a zone with low groundwater inltration.
Even though the measurements were conducted 4 days before the UAV ight, the
identied zones of groundwater inltration still hold true, due to the slow dynamics
of groundwater ow.
Brightness temperature was measured at one part of the river (30 m to 60 m) using
an Apogee sensor. The brightness temperature seems to decrease fast with a drop of
more than 1 K over the given stretch of 30 m. This behavior cannot be veried with
any of the other measurements and appears unlikely. One probable cause might be
a sensor drift over time, as the read temperature increases with time. Change in
sensor temperature caused by warm hands holding it could be one reason for that
drift.
The two zones identied with highest groundwater inltration were covered with the
thermal camera during the UAV ights. As a continuous thermal map is not given,
the average brightness temperature, together with the 2σ condence interval, of the
covered water surface in a given thermal image is determined and registered to the
position, from where the image is taken. The measured temperature values range
from 13.3°C to 15.8°C. Along the stream, no trend behavior of the temperature mea-
sured with the thermal camera is observable. The brightness temperature measured
by camera agrees well with the thermodynamic diver temperature measurements at
the upstream stretch, while downstream the brightness temperature is lower. Under
open sky conditions, the brightness temperature is normally lower than the ther-
modynamic temperature. With the strong tree overgrow, down welling long wave
radiation increases a lot, which increases the brightness temperature and can explain
similar values in brightness and thermodynamic temperatures. Thermal images of
stream parts, which are not overgrown, are included at the downstream stretch.
This can explain, why the brightness temperature is lower than the thermodynamic
temperature. With the high scattering of the thermal camera measurement and its
uncertainty in absolute values, it is not possible to detect a stream surface temper-
ature trend and to gain information about groundwater inltration from this.
Delineating the water surface of each thermal image in order to calculate the average
temperature of the water surface, was done by analyzing the distribution of tem-
peratures in each image. Due to the weather conditions, the land surface is warmer
than the water surface. The histogram of a thermal image, including parts of the
stream as well as parts of the riverbank, shows a clear peak at 15.1°C, which is the
temperature of the river surface (see Figure 3.17.a+b). In a rst assumption, the
coldest signicant peak is assumed to be the mean temperature of the river surface.
As the water is cooler than the land surface, all elements cooler than that peak are
assumed to be water. A possible symmetric distribution of water temperature is
constructed, with the peak as mean and symmetry axis, and the lower trailing of
the peak is mirrored at the peak (see Figure 3.17.d). Mean and standard deviation
of that synthetic distribution are calculated and the 3σ interval is assumed to be
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 3. Results and Discussion
49
Temp [°C]
16
18
20
22
Counts [-]
0
5000
10000
15000
Orig. Image
Temp [°C]
14.6
14.8
15
15.2
15.4
15.6
Counts [-]
0
1000
2000
3000
Predicted Water
Temp [°C]
14.6
14.8
15
15.2
15.4
15.6
Counts [-]
0
1000
2000
3000
Erodet Water
Value limited
Temp. [°C]
14.6
14.8
15
15.2
15.4
15.6
Orig. Image
Temp. [°C]
16
18
20
22
After Erosion
Temp. [°C]
14.6
14.8
15
15.2
15.4
15.6
a)
f)
e)
d)
c)
b)
Figure 3.17: Delineation of water surface: a) Original thermal image; b) Original
temperature distribution; c) Land masking through temperature value cuto; d)
Assumed distribution for water surface; e) Masking after erosion; f) Distribution of
water temperatures after nal masking
water. Applying this masking yields good results in dening the water surface (see
Figure 3.17.c). In order to improve the masking, an erosion is applied to the mask
with a radius of three pixels. This ensures that the fringes of the land surface and
vegetation are not included as water surface. The resulting nal masking can be
seen in Figure 3.17.e and the resulting histogram in Figure 3.17.f. The distribution
from this histogram is used to calculate the statistics for comparison. This process
of water surface delineation showed to be very stable under the given conditions.
==PAGE:64==
50
3.2. River Applications
Position:5
Temperature [°C]
9.8
10
10.2
10.4
10.6
10.8
11
Figure 3.18: Thermal image and photo at position 5: GCP and cold spot visible
Single thermal images show interesting temperature patterns. Four images are pre-
sented here, their position can be seen in Figure 3.15, further images are presented
in Appendix A. At position 5 (see Figure 3.18) a placed GCP is visible on the river-
bank in the digital photo as a silver plate and in the thermal image on the right side
as a cold signal. In the center of the thermal image is a cool spot, close to the lower
riverbank. That cold signal is larger than 0.5 K and therewith it is signicant. The
cold signal is at a position, where the stream bed appears dark, compared to the
surrounding in the photo image, caused by shadows cast by the riparian vegetation.
A cast shadow over a stream is very unlikely to cause a local temperature minimum,
as the water moves and the time the water resides in a specic shadow is too short to
introduce a visible local temperature deviation. The stream ow was very low, but
not stagnant. The cold spot is surrounded by mostly submerged vegetation, which
also reaches the water surface at places. It is possible, that the not submerged plant
parts warm up and cause a warmer signal around the cold spot. Another possibility
is, that cold groundwater is inltrating at that spot, causing the cold signal in the
river surface temperature. This is plausible, as this thermal image is taken at a
position with expected groundwater inltration.
The thermal image at position 7 (see Figure 3.19) exposes multiple interesting fea-
tures. The fringe between the lower riverbank and the stream is more than 1 K
cooler than the stream. A likely cause is exposed soil, which is covered by shade
for a long time. Two larger and more diuse cold spots are visible on the stream,
with temperatures approx. 0.5 K below stream average. The right cold spot shows
the same patterns as the ripples on the stream surface, caused by the wind from
the rotors of the UAV. The center of the ripples is cold. There are two possible
reasons for this eect: The stream ow was very slow, nearly stagnant. On warm
days this allows for a warm boundary layer being formed on top of the water column
(Dugdale, 2016), which gets disturbed and mixed by the downwards directed wind
of the UAV rotors. Further on, the downwards directed wind causes ripples, which
might introduce angular reectivity eects of the water surface. Water reects radi-
ation towards a direction and not diuse as a land surface, so both sides of a ripple
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 3. Results and Discussion
51
Position:7
Temperature [°C]
13.4
13.6
13.8
14
14.2
14.4
14.6
14.8
Figure 3.19: Thermal image and photo at position 7: cold fringes at the lower river-
bank, and cold spots on the stream visible. Disturbance of water surface through
UAV rotors visible in photo
can reect long wave radiation from dierent sources to the thermal camera. If one
part reects the radiation from the overhanging trees with strong down welling long
wave radiation and another part reects long wave radiation from the open sky, the
part which reects more long wave radiation shows a higher brightness temperature.
The thermal patterns of position 8 (see Figure 3.20) are similar to position 7. A
very cool spot is visible directly at the riverbank, while two less sharp cool spots lie
on the stream. The right cool spot coincides with the center of the ripples caused
by the UAV rotors. The left cool spot might also be caused by surface ripples, as it
can be seen, that the surface has dierent ripple patterns at this location. As there
is a time delay of up to 1 s between thermal image and photo, a slight change in
ripple patterns from thermal image to photo is possible.
Position:8
Temperature [°C]
13
13.5
14
14.5
15
Figure 3.20: Thermal image and photo at position 8: cold fringes at the lower
riverbank, and cold spots on the stream visible.
==PAGE:66==
52
3.2. River Applications
Position:13
Temperature [°C]
12
12.5
13
13.5
14
14.5
15
Figure 3.21: Thermal image and photo at position 13: Cold spot from outow of
drainage pipe clearly visible
At position 13 (see Figure 3.21) a drainage pipe is leading water from an adjacent
agricultural eld into the stream. The point of inow is clearly visible as a cold
spot, with a temperature of ca. 12 °C, while the stream shows a temperature of
around 14.5 °C. The stream bulge around the inow has a 0.7 K cooler temperature
compared to the rest of the river surface. This is caused by mixing of the cold inow
water and the stream water.
3.2.2
Larger River - Grindsted
During the ight at Grindsted on 18.01.2016, the land surface is snow covered, the
stream temperature is slightly above freezing and the groundwater is approx. 8 °C.
Groundwater inltration is expected to show warm signals in the river surface tem-
perature therefore. As the acquired thermal images cannot be used to determine
absolute temperature, arbitrary temperature values are used for analysis. Figure
3.22 shows a thermal map covering the whole investigated stretch of the river, uti-
lizing the thermal video from the moving ight. Two signicant temperature jumps
are visible along the river. Moving west to east along the river, the rst jump is
from warm to cold in the river bend, which also has a river breakthrough. The next
temperature jump is in the same bend, just before the breakthrough point, from
cold to warm. These temperature jumps are caused by the thermal camera. The
thermal camera is not in a thermal equilibrium and temperature drifts, until a FFC
is conducted and the measured temperature jumps. These jumps can be clearly seen
in the video at the locations of the jumps in the map.
The temperature map shows strong artifacts and appears not to be smooth. This is
caused by the mesh, used as a base for orthorectication. No GPCs are present at
this UAV survey and the missing georeferencing prevents the use of an external DEM
as an orthorectication base. The base mesh is generated through SfM processing
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 3. Results and Discussion
53
0
20
40
60
80
10
Meters
¯
Temperature
Arbitraty value
46000
31000
Figure 3.22: Thermal map of investigated river stretch at Grindsted, data acquired
by moving ight
of the thermal images. The low resolution of the thermal camera yields very poor
results and noise and patterns of the stream surface lead to a very uneven river
surface. This low quality mesh introduces the artifacts in the thermal map during
the orthorectication and averaging process.
Apart from these signals introduced by the thermal camera and the data process-
ing, no hotspots or temperature trends are apparent, which could be accounted to
temperature eects caused by groundwater inltration into the river.
The stationary videos are used for investigating specic points of the river. Looking
at a single thermal image from the stationary video shows a warm spot in the middle
of the river bend (see Figure 3.23). The temperature distribution appears noisy, with
artifacts and not smooth. Averaging all 133 thermal images as they are, assuming the
UAV was perfectly still during shooting the thermal video, shows a result, which is
less noisy than a single image and shows similar temperature distribution patterns.
Aligning the thermal images before averaging, counteracting small movements of
the stationary UAV, yields a result, which is less noisy and more smooth than the
single image and the averaged image without alignment. The dierent noise level
can be explained through the pixel oset while aligning, which is up to 11 pixels and
causes, that values of dierent sensor pixels are averaged for a single image pixel.
Skipping alignment causes each image pixel to represent each sensor pixel. When
pixels have a constant oset behavior, this behavior is carried on during averaging
without alignment, while the alignment introduced pixel shift causes that kind of
noise behavior to smooth out.
==PAGE:68==
54
3.2. River Applications
Single image
Temp [-]
×10 4
3.65
3.7
3.75
3.8
3.85
Simple overlay
Temp [-]
×10 4
3.65
3.7
3.75
3.8
3.85
Aligned overlay
Temp [-]
×10 4
3.65
3.7
3.75
3.8
3.85
Map section
Temp [-]
×10 4
3.65
3.7
3.75
3.8
3.85
Figure 3.23: Temperature of river surface with dierent processing methods: Sin-
gle image; Averaging of stationary video; Averaging of stationary video after prior
alignment; Section of thermal map from moving video
Comparing these images to the corresponding thermal map section (bottom right
Figure 3.23) shows great dierences. On the left side, strong temperature artifacts
are visible, and the general temperature trend shows an increase in temperature
from right to left, instead of a hot spot in the center of the bend. Inspection of the
raw ux readings of this thermal camera over a uniform BB, shows a higher ux
reading in the center of the image for cool target temperatures. The conditions for
that eect are given and there is no correction in this data processing to correct for
that, so this eect can show higher temperatures in the image center for a uniform
target and might explain the temperature hotspot in the image center. On a map
created from images from a moving UAV, these eects are not expected to be seen,
as the warm image center moves along the river and that eect would be smoothed
down through the averaging process. The increase in the map section from right to
left could be caused by a thermal camera drift over time.
None of the analysis of Grindsted Å shows a clear identiable temperature signal
caused by groundwater inltration.
==PAGE:69==
Chapter 3. Results and Discussion
55
3.3
Agricultural Field Application - Risø
Table 3.3: Conditions and operational parameters of UAV missions at Risø
Date
11.04.2016
02.05.2016
12.05.2016
25.05.2016
Time
9:33-10:15
14:20-14:57
10:14-11:05
10:01-10:33
Air temperature [°C]
9.62
15.26
16.92
21.21
Cloudiness
Clear
Clouds
Clear
Clear
Area [m2]
3424
5104
14839
13845
Flight altitude [m]
25.3
20.7
39.1
55.8
Resolution [cm]
6.34
5.37
10.55
14.71
Used images
124
175
160
142
Thermal mapping of the Risø willow plantation was conducted four times during
spring 2016 (see Table 3.3). The UAV ight time was usually during later mornings,
except for the ight on 12.05.2016, which was conducted in the afternoon. The air
temperature increased with each ight, from 9.62 °C during the rst ight to 21.21
°C during the last ight. Except for the 02.05.2016, where there was a shifting cloud
cover, the sky was cloudless. The rst two ights mapped a smaller area at a lower
ight altitude, resulting in a high resolution, while the last two ights covered a
larger area at higher ight altitude, resulting in a coarser spatial resolution. The
resulting spatial resolutions for the thermal maps range from 5.37 cm to 14.71 cm.
0
20
40
60
10
Meters
¯
Ortho Map
Figure 3.24: Map of stitched and or-
thorectied photos from Risø eld site,
taken on 25.05.2016
0
20
40
60
10
Meters
¯
Digital Elevation Model
Sink Area
Elevation
m.a.s.l.
16.6
12
Figure 3.25: DEM of Risø eld site, ac-
quired on 25.05.2016
==PAGE:70==
56
3.3. Agricultural Field Application - Risø
Figure 3.24 shows a map of stitched and orthorectied photos from the ight on
25.05.2016. To the east, the border of the willow eld is clearly visible as a dark
green line, which is a grass overgrown access road. The willow eld itself consist
of gray to brown soil, covered lightly by green willow leaves. The density of the
green cover varies throughout the eld. The straight lines, in which the willows are
planted are visible and single plants can be identied. In the center a small patch of
not cut willows and their shadows is visible. Further on, the ux tower and a power
supply can be identied in the center of the map, as well as silver GCPs, which are
scattered throughout the map.
The resulting DEM from that day's investigation (see Figure 3.25) ranges from
12 meters above sea level (m.a.s.l.)
to 16.6 m.a.s.l., with a general slope from
the southeast of the map down to lower elevations at the northwest. The straight
plantation lines and single plants can be identied. In the center a tall object can
be seen, which is the power supply of the ux tower. The ux tower itself is not
visible, as it only consists of a very thin metal structure and is ltered out in the
DEM generation process. The edges of the DEM show artifacts, which are caused
by the small number of images overlapping at the edges.
At the northern part of the investigation area are two sinks, which means all sur-
rounding land surface has a higher elevation, thus water cannot run o from there.
The actual extend of the sinks might be larger, as the DEM border restricted the
computed extend by providing an articial run o possibility.
3.3.1
Temperature Correction
Emissivity
Table 3.4: Mean NDVI and Emissivity at dierent ights in Risø
Date
11.04.2016
02.05.2016
12.05.2016
25.05.2016
Mean NDVI
0.0503
0.0239
-0.0249
0.1920
Mean est. Emissivity
0.9249
0.9224
0.9253
0.9410
The mean calculated NDVI from the multispectral camera images is close to zero
for the rst three ights, with the mean NDVI of the eld on the last ight being
0.19. This behavior is according to the in-situ observation: For the rst three ights
the willows did not start growing yet and nearly no green vegetation was present
on the willow eld. Before the last ight, new green leaves were sprouting from
the cut willow stems, increasing the amount of green vegetation cover on the eld
substantially.
The calculated emissivity moves along with the NDVI. For the rst three ights
the mean emissivity lies just very slightly above the emissivity of 0.922, which is
==PAGE:71==
Chapter 3. Results and Discussion
57
0
20
40
60
10
Meters
¯
Normalized Difference Vegetation Index
NDVI
[-] 0.8
-0.2
Figure 3.26: NDVI map of Risø eld
site, acquired on 25.05.2016
0
20
40
60
10
Meters
¯
Estimated Emissivity
Emissivity
[-] 0.99
 
0.922
Figure 3.27:
Emissivity map of Risø
eld site, calculated from NDVI map
assigned to bare soil cover, with vegetation cover having a higher emissivity. On the
last ight, with increased vegetation cover of the ground, the emissivity increased
to 0.941.
The spatial distribution of the NDVI on 25.05.2016 can be seen in Figure 3.26 and
follows the observations from the ortho photo map. To the east, the grass overgrown
access road and the neighboring wheat eld have a high NDVI value of ca. 0.8. The
willow eld itself has patches with higher NDVI values and patches with lower NDVI
values. Single plants can be identied as small spots with high NDVI values between
the soil with low NDVI values. The spatial distribution of the high NDVI values
makes the straight willow planting lines visible.
The emissivity follows the NDVI map, as it is calculated from the NDVI map.
Places with a low NDVI have a low emissivity and places with high NDVI have a
high emissivity. The minimum value for emissivity is 0.922, which is the value for
bare soil and the maximum value is 0.99, which is the maximum value assigned for
complete plant cover. Large areas are assigned the bare soil value, while the eastern
border has the maximum vegetation value assigned.
Down Welling Long Wave Radiation
The down welling long wave radiation is acquired using three dierent methods:
Direct measurement from the ux tower, estimation after Brutsaert using air tem-
perature and air humidity and estimation from thermal sky image. The resulting
down welling long wave radiation (Lwin) can be seen in Table 3.5.
As the pyr-
==PAGE:72==
58
3.3. Agricultural Field Application - Risø
Table 3.5: Measured and estimated down welling long wave radiation for Risø eld
site
Date
11.04.2016
02.05.2016
12.05.2016
25.05.2016
Lwin Flux tower [W m−2]
262.78
336.83
291.92
354.37
Air temperature [°C]
9.62
15.26
16.92
21.21
Air humidity [%]
58.00
48.44
47.12
62.41
Lwin Brutsaert [W m−2]
266.83
295.88
305.95
357.89
Error Brutsaert [%]
1.54
-12.16
4.81
0.99
Min. Sky Temp. [°C]
-44.48
-36.22
-43.42
-27.69
Lwin Thermal Cam [W m−2]
201.54
232.28
205.30
267.58
Error Thermal Cam [%]
-23.30
-31.04
-29.67
-24.49
geometer installed at the ux tower measures Lwin directly, while the other two
methods provide estimations, the measurement from the pyrgeometer is regarded
most accurate. With raising air temperature, the long wave radiation measured by
the pyrgeometer increases. One exception is the 02.05.2016, where Lwin is nearly as
high as on 25.05.2016. This is due to the partial cloud cover on 02.05.2016. The
values for Lwin range from 262.78 W m−2 to 354.37 W m−2.
The Lwin estimated by the method introduced by Brutsaert (1975) follows the air
temperature very closely. This is expected, as the air humidity does not see much
variation on the dierent dates, varying between 47.12% and 62.41%.
On clear
sky conditions this method works very well, with errors compared to the pyrge-
ometer measurement being smaller than 5%. On the day with partial cloud cover
(02.05.2016) this method underestimates Lwin by 12.16%.
This is expected, be-
cause the cloud cover was not accounted for. This problem could be approached by
introducing a correction for the cloud cover.
Sky temperature
Temperature [°C]
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
Figure 3.28: Thermal image of the sky under near zenith direction in Risø on
25.02.2016
==PAGE:73==
Chapter 3. Results and Discussion
59
The apparent sky temperature is expected to be lowest at zenith and to increase
concentric towards the horizon. This is conrmed in a thermal image of the clear
sky on 25.05.2016 (see Figure 3.28). The temperature is coolest in the center of the
image, which is approximate zenith and increases towards the outside of the image.
The coolest point is marked with a red cross and has a temperature of -27.69 °C.
This point is assumed to be zenith temperature and is used to calculate down welling
long wave radiation. The thermal image also shows some high willow trees, but they
do not pose a problem, as they are not accounted for in this approach.
The resulting Lwin underestimates the radiation signicant, from -23.3% to -31.04%.
A possible reason is that the relationship between the down welling long wave radi-
ation from the zenith and the hemispherical down welling long wave radiation was
established in another location by Rubio, Caselles and Badenas (1997). So a dier-
ent location might require a local conversion factor. The underestimation is quite
constant, so a new factor could prove to be more accurate, but the sample num-
ber is too small for verication. Another reason might be, that the measured sky
temperatures are out of the thermal camera's range. Applying the custom camera
calibration, the lowest reliable measurable temperature under high gain setting is
-10 °C. This problem could be addressed by using the low gain setting, which would
require an implementation of switching gain during survey as well as a calibration
for the low gain setting. The low gain setting nominally can measure temperatures
as low as -40 °C.
Another issue of that method is the handling of a partially cloudy sky. Handling of
clear and completely overcast sky allows to choose the coolest spot as zenith angle,
but under partly cloud cover the coolest spot would be clear sky and the cloud cover
would be ignored in the Lwin calculation. Integration over the image might yield
more accurate results, even though the image does not cover the whole sky, which
would be necessary for a correct hemispherical integration.
Correction Eects
Combining the emissivity map with the Lwin estimation and the brightness temper-
ature map, allows to calculate the corrected thermodynamic LST. As the emitted
radiation from the land surface is larger than the down welling long wave radiation,
the correction procedure results in an increased LST. The amplitude of that cor-
rection for the dierent scenarios can be seen in Table 3.6. The mean introduced
temperature correction ranges from 1.66 K to 3.21 K. Using the Lwin estimate from
the thermal cam leads to greater temperature corrections than the other two esti-
mates, as the amplitude of Lwin is lower with this method. The correction eects
of Lwin estimation after Brutsaert and Lwin measurement from the ux tower are
similar on clear skies with a maximum dierence between these methods of 0.18
K. On 02.05.2016 with patchy cloud cover, the mean correction dierence between
these methods is 0.37 K. The Brutsaert method introduces a higher correction, as
==PAGE:74==
60
3.3. Agricultural Field Application - Risø
Table 3.6: Total resulting temperature correction for the dierent methods of Lwin
estimations
Lwin Est.
Date
11.04.2016
02.05.2016
12.05.2016
25.05.2016
Mean Bright.
Temp. [°C]
12.00
18.72
24.85
27.91
Brutsaert
Mean Cor. Dif. [K]
1.66
2.14
1.89
2.04
Camera
Mean Cor. Dif. [K]
2.64
3.08
3.21
2.69
Flux
Tower
Mean Cor. Dif. [K]
1.72
1.77
2.07
1.93
Std Cor. Dif. [K]
0.22
0.11
0.34
0.84
Mean LST [°C]
13.72
20.49
26.92
29.85
Std LST [K]
0.95
1.29
1.54
2.85
Min. LST [°C]
-31.85
-26.15
-13.77
-4.69
Max. LST [°C]
20.88
30.27
35.08
43.40
it has a lower Lwin estimation on this occasion.
For further analysis, the correction with Lwin measurements from the ux tower
are applied, as they are expected to be most precise. The mean introduced tem-
perature correction lies between 1.72 K and 2.07 K. The spatial standard deviation
of the correction increases towards the last ight. The reason lies in an increased
dynamic in emissivity (growth of patchy vegetation) as well as an increased dynamic
in measured brightness temperature.
0
20
40
60
10
Meters
¯
Measured Brightness Temperature
Temperature
°C 37
20
Figure 3.29:
Uncorrected brightness
temperature map in Risø acquired on
25.05.2016
0
20
40
60
10
Meters
¯
Corrected Temp. Difference (Flux Tower)
Temp. difference
K
3.5
0
Figure 3.30: Temperature dierence in-
troduced by emissivity and Lwin correc-
tion applied to brightness temperature
(compare Fig. 3.29)
==PAGE:75==
Chapter 3. Results and Discussion
61
The spatial distribution of the introduced temperature correction (see Figure 3.30)
follows the emissivity closely (see Figure 3.27). Low emissivity leads to a higher
increase in temperature than high emissivity. The absolute value of land surface
brightness temperature also inuences the correction amount, but less than the
emissivity, and thus the visual correlation between land surface brightness temper-
ature (see Figure 3.29) and introduced temperature correction is smaller.
3.3.2
Findings from Land Surface Temperature
0
30
60
90
15
Meters
¯
Covered Area
Flux Tower
Area 25.05.16
Area 12.05.16
Area 02.05.16
Area 11.04.16
Figure 3.31: Overview of coverage of thermal mapping for the dierent investiga-
tion dates
The area covered by the thermal mapping diered on each ight. The areas covered
by each ight are displayed in Figure 3.31. The extend and position of the mapping
was mostly inuenced by operational factors of the UAV ight as ight altitude,
ight speed and UAV battery life. All ights but the rst ight cover the ux tower
location.
The resulting LST maps, based on the temperature correction utilizing the Lwin
data from the ux tower, can be seen in Figure 3.32 to Figure 3.35. The resulting
mean LST increases with each ight and reaches from 13.72 °C on the rst ight
to 29.85 °C on the last ight. The standard deviation of LST and with that the
spreading of LST increases along with the mean temperature. The cool spots with
temperatures below 0 °C are caused by the GCPs, as they have a very low emissivity,
but are treated as soil in the emissivity estimation process.
==PAGE:76==
62
3.3. Agricultural Field Application - Risø
0
10
20
30
5
Meters
¯
Corrected Temp. 11.04.2016
Temperature
°C 17
10
Figure 3.32: LST map of Risø willow
eld on 11.04.2016
0
10
20
30
5
Meters
¯
Corrected Temp. 02.05.2016
Temperature
°C 25
15
Figure 3.33: LST map of Risø willow
eld on 02.05.2016
0
20
40
60
10
Meters
¯
Corrected Temp. 12.05.2016
Temperature
°C 32
20
Figure 3.34: LST map of Risø willow
eld on 12.05.2016
0
20
40
60
10
Meters
¯
Corrected Tem. 25.05.2016
Sink Area
Temperature
°C 37
20
Figure 3.35: LST map of Risø willow
eld on 25.05.2016 with indication of sink
area
Each LST map clearly shows the straight lines in which the willow plants are po-
sitioned. Single plants can be identied as cool spots. This is clearer in the rst
two maps, likely caused by the higher spatial resolution of these maps. There are
mainly two eects causing the plants to be cooler than the surrounding soil: The
heat capacity of water is higher than the heat capacity of soil. As the plants have
a high water content compared to soil, they warm up more slowly than soil by the
sun radiation. The surveys are conducted between morning and afternoon, which is
==PAGE:77==
Chapter 3. Results and Discussion
63
the time of the day, where LST is usually increasing by solar radiation. Further on,
the plants are evapotranspirating water, which cools the plant down, as evaporation
is an endothermic process.
The visibility of the planting lines is caused by their geometry.
The plants are
planted on small elevated lines, running north to south with small depressions be-
tween them. Together with the presence of the plants, this causes the dierent sides
of the planting elevation lines to receive dierent amounts of solar radiation, which
leads to dierences in LST.
All LST maps, except for the map from 11.04.2016, exhibit a cooler feature in the
northern part. This feature is placed in the location of the two sinks derived from the
DEM. These depressions lead to the formation of puddles after rain and to increased
soil moisture afterward, as the rain water cannot run o from there. On site, the
increased soil moisture in these locations was clearly visible, but not measured.
The higher water content in the soil in these locations leads to an increased heat
capacity of the soil and therewith to a slower temperature gain under solar radiation.
This lower temperature is visible in the LST maps. Analysis of the LST map from
25.05.2016 shows, that the mean LST in the sink area is 1.5 K lower than in the
rest of the investigated area.
Round warm features are visible throughout the LST maps and are caused by black
plastic buckets distributed throughout the willow eld. A cool small feature running
east to west is visible in the last three ights, caused by the shadow of the ux tower
power supply, next to thinner cold features, caused by metal protections for cables.
Northeast of the power supply shadow is a larger cool feature, caused by a patch of
high growing willows (ca. 4 m) and their shadows.
The LST maps seem to show no signs of noise and to be without artifacts, compared
to the thermal images acquired over water surfaces. This is caused by the higher
temperature dynamic of the land surface, which leads to a much higher signal to
noise ratio in respect of temperature dierences. Further on, the LST maps are
based on a higher overlap of thermal images, which makes thermal image stitching
eects smaller.
3.3.3
Land Surface Temperature Accuracy
Validating the acquired LST maps poses a challenge, as the thermodynamic surface
temperature was not directly measured.
Also direct measurements of emissivity
are not available. Therefore, the precision of the acquired brightness temperature
is evaluated with brightness temperature spot measurements, conducted with the
thermal gun. Testing the thermal gun with the BB gives a RMSE of 0.7 K and no
signicant bias in the range 5 °C to 45 °C target temperature. To see the agreement
of thermal gun and thermal camera measurements, the brightness temperature ac-
==PAGE:78==
64
3.3. Agricultural Field Application - Risø
Brightness Temp. Thermal Gun [°C]
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Brightness Temp. Flir Cam [°C]
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Ideal Behaviour
11.04.2016
02.05.2016
12.05.2016
25.05.2016
Total Regression
Figure 3.36: Regression of brightness temperature from brightness temperature
map of thermal images over brightness temperature acquired with thermal gun spot
measurements
quired with the thermal camera is plotted over the temperature measured with the
thermal gun (see Figure 3.36). It is apparent, that the thermal camera overestimates
the lower temperatures of each ight and underestimates the higher temperatures
of each ight. This is also represented in the slope of the regression tting, which
ranges from 0.08 to 0.60 for the independent ights. There are two explanations for
this eect: Aiming the thermal gun at extreme temperature features (single leave,
or dry bare soil) from a close distance gives a very high resolution of that feature and
yields its pure temperature. When this feature has a smaller size than the spatial
resolution of the thermal camera, the respective camera sensor pixel also receives
radiation from the surrounding area and averages the radiation from the dierent
sources. Further on all available thermal images are averaged in order to construct
a thermal map. If the single images are not perfectly aligned, averaging them would
lower the signicance of temperature maxima / minima, as the surrounding area
has a temperature closer to the mean of the map.
The brightness temperature bias ranges from -1.33 K to 1.69 K for the single ights
and the absolute bias is 0.80 K. The standard deviation of the error ranges from 2.05
K to 4.30 K for the single ights and the total standard deviation of the measurement
errors is 3.69 K. The deviation of the error is greater than the calculated bias, which
means the bias is of small inuence in comparison to the other eects. The total
RMSE of the brightness temperature regression is 3.74 K. Measurements with the
thermal gun were conducted after the UAV ight, so the temporal delay can induce
changes in the LST, as LST is very dynamic.
A possible source of temperature measurement errors with the Flir Tau 2 thermal
camera is the thermal instability of the camera core. Figure 3.37 shows ight altitude
and the camera's core temperature over time during the UAV mapping session on
==PAGE:79==
Chapter 3. Results and Discussion
65
Time [min]
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Core Temp. [0.1°C]
160
180
200
220
Flight Altitude [m.a.s.l]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Flir camera core temp.
Flight Altitude of UAV
Figure 3.37:
Thermal camera core temperature and UAV elevation over ight
mission time on 25.05.2016
25.05.2016. After turning on the data acquisition, the UAV stays stationary on the
ground at an elevation of 14.8 m.a.s.l. for 2.3 minutes, before ascending 52.5 m for
the rst ight section of 10.5 minutes. When the battery voltage becomes too low,
the UAV is landed for an exchange of batteries, which takes 4.1 minutes, before
ascending again 59.6 m for the second and last ight section of 7.1 minutes.
On startup of the data acquisition, the thermal camera is already powered up for
more than 15 minutes and reached thermal equilibrium at a core temperature of
19.5 °C. When the UAV takes o, the camera core temperature decreases, as air
temperature decreases at higher altitudes and heat convection is increased through
higher natural wind speeds at higher elevation, as well as wind produced by the UAV
rotors. This cooling down lasts for 5.2 minutes, before an equilibrium is reached at
16.5 °C core temperature. As soon as the UAV is landed, the core temperature
increases until the UAV takes o again. After 5.8 minutes of ight time, the core
temperature is quasi stable again. As soon as the nal UAV descend begins, the
core temperature increases again until data acquisition is turned o.
As rapidly dropping camera core temperatures decrease the measured target tem-
perature, it is very likely, that the measured LST is underestimated at the beginning
of each ight section. The in-situ camera oset correction with the BB is done after
the nal UAV landing, while the core temperature is increasing. This bears the
danger of introducing errors through the oset correction.
As the thermal camera validation shows that the camera calibration yields very
uniform temperatures over a uniform temperature body and the main error is a
bias, a feasible solution would be to descend the UAV over the BB and just use
==PAGE:80==
66
3.4. Digital Elevation Model Accuracy
one pixel value for oset correction, which is completely covered by the BB target.
This would ensure a thermal equilibrium of the camera when determining the oset
correction.
3.4
Digital Elevation Model Accuracy
RTK Elevation over Reference Measurement [m]
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
DEM Elevation over Reference [m]
0
0.5
1
1.5
Ideal Behaviour
12.04.2016
11.04.2016
02.05.2016
12.05.2016
Figure 3.38:
Elevation extracted from DEM plotted over elevation spot mea-
surements with RTK unit. Zero elevation refers to minimum elevation in m.a.s.l.
measured with RTK unit for each data set
The accuracy of the DEMs is important for the exact orthorectication of the ther-
mal maps. The accuracy of the DEMs is investigated for the ight at Lille Skensved
on 12.04.2015 and the three rst ights in Risø. The DEMs acquired in Risø show a
higher accuracy than the DEM acquired at the stream in Lille Skensved (see Figure
3.38). The RMSE of the DEMs at Risø varies between 3.5 cm and 7.5 cm (see Table
3.7), which is very good, compared to the vertical precision of the RTK unit of 1.5
cm. The RMSE of the DEM at the stream in Lille Skensved is signicant larger
with 13.8 cm. A small bias occurs at all DEMs to either side and the total bias
Table 3.7: Accuracy of acquired DEMs
Site
Lille
Skensved
Risø
All data
combined
Date
12.04.2016
11.04.2016
02.05.2016
12.05.2016
RMSE [m]
0.138
0.075
0.042
0.035
0.091
Bias [m]
-0.031
0.068
-0.015
0.022
0
Regression
slope [-]
0.89
1.09
1.01
1.02
==PAGE:81==
Chapter 3. Results and Discussion
67
of all control points is zero. The two DEMs in Risø on 02.05.2016 and 12.05.2016,
which have the largest number of regression points, have a regression slope very
close to one (1.01 and 1.02). The other two DEMs show regression slopes of 0.89
and 1.09.
Overall the achieved accuracy of the DEMs is very high and fullls all required
specication as a base for the high resolution thermal and multispectral mapping.
Two reasons lead to a lower accuracy at the stream location: The UAV ight path
follows along the stream in one direction. That means the acquired photos only
overlap in forward and backward direction and not to the sides. This decreases the
amount of information for each ground point and therewith decreases the accuracy
of the DEM. Another reason is the topography at this location. The river banks
have steep slopes and parts of the investigation area are covered by trees.
==PAGE:82==
==PAGE:83==
Chapter 4
Conclusions
Using an UAV as a mapping platform requires the use of lightweight sensors. In
case of the Flir Tau 2 thermal infrared camera this causes some drawbacks. The
main drawback of that camera is that it is not cooled, so it is exposed to eects
caused by changes in the ambient air temperature. Visible eects of that are jumps
in measured target temperature and drift in measured target temperature. FFCs
conducted by the thermal camera and internal corrections, based on absolute values
and rate of change of the core temperature, try to counteract, but these corrections
are not very ecient. Due to that it is impossible to determine absolute target
temperatures precisely or to compare the temperature values between images.
Applying a custom calibration to the thermal camera allows for uniform temperature
measurements of a uniform target. Analysis shows, that a temperature signal of 0.5
K in a thermal image is signicant. If small temperature variations are of interest,
analysis should be conducted on a single thermal image.
This camera behavior has implications on detecting groundwater inltrations into
rivers. Analysis of single thermal images shows a variety of signicant brightness
temperature signals from the stream surface.
But it is dicult to assign these
signals denitely to groundwater inltration, as there are other sources, which can
cause these temperature eects: reected long wave radiation from overhanging
vegetation, mixing of the water column caused by UAV rotors, uncertainty if signal
is from stream or land surface and vegetation inside the stream.
Analysis of single thermal images from a stream clearly showed drainage water ow-
ing into the stream. As the ux of the drainage is stronger and spatially very con-
centrated, the signal of this eect is much stronger than the signal from groundwater
inltration and makes it clearly identiable.
Comparing the temperatures acquired with the thermal camera in dierent images
over a longer stream stretch, does not yield any signicant information. The tem-
69
==PAGE:84==
70
perature dynamic is controlled by camera eects, as temperature drifts and jumps.
This poses a problem as groundwater inltration might only be detectable compar-
ing surface temperatures over a long distance. Groundwater inltration is diuse.
If it is not concentrated in single spots, it is not possible to detect it in single im-
ages if the resulting temperature signal is smaller than 0.5 K. The mayor thermal
eect in the river caused by groundwater inltration might be a slow change over
distance.
Previous studies, which successfully determined ground water inltration, used xed
wing aircraft or helicopter as ying platforms. That allows for much higher payload
weights than using small rotary wing UAVs. Thus heavier thermal cameras, which
are cooled and more precise, could be used and allowed to detect and quantify
groundwater inltration into rivers.
An ecient work ow, for mapping LST in high resolution from UAVs and correcting
the LST for emissivity and reected down welling long wave radiation, was estab-
lished. Using an estimation of down welling long wave radiation is necessary if no
pyrgeometer is available at the investigation site. Using an estimation by Brutsaert
(1975) showed the best result. Performance is best under clear sky conditions. The
estimated emissivity of the land surface was not veried, therefor it is not possible
to verify the accuracy of the total LST correction.
The camera eects, causing errors in absolute temperature measurements for water
applications, are also expected to be present here.
The brightness temperature
verication of the land surface showed, that the thermal camera is underestimating
temperature maxima and overestimating temperature minima, but no substantial
bias in the measurements was detected.
The resulting LST maps contain plenty of information. Analyzing them, without
feeding them into land surface models, reveals information about soil moisture and
individual plant temperatures. The maps have a high signal to noise ration and
eects of temperature jumps and drifts are not visible. This is caused by the high
dynamic of the LST compared to the water temperature application. The acquired
LST maps are very promising and expected to improve the accuracy of high resolu-
tion land surface models.
There are plenty of opportunities to improve data acquisition in the future and to
further develop the here presented methods. The greatest improvement potential lies
in the accuracy of the thermal camera. In order to avoid target temperature drifts
and jumps, a very stable thermal equilibrium of the thermal camera is required. In
the current conguration this is not given, specially in situations of UAV ascend or
descend. Controlling the outside temperature of the thermal camera might be able to
ensure a thermal equilibrium of the camera under continuous operation. Technically
this could be realized using semiconductor Peltier cooling elements on the outside
of the camera body. A drawback of that solution is a higher energy consumption of
the payload and therewith shorter UAV ight times. Another option would be to
==PAGE:85==
Chapter 4. Conclusions
71
disable the internal camera corrections by disabling the FFC option. It would be
necessary to have an object of uniform and known temperature on board the UAV.
It could be placed periodically in the FOV of the thermal camera. That information
could then be used to manually correct for occurring temperature drifts in the post
processing.
In order to detect groundwater inltration into rivers with the current setup, a very
favorable investigation site and time are necessary. The eld site should not have
any trees or tall vegetation on the riverbanks, in order to have a free choice of ight
altitude and to avoid additional, uneven distributed long wave radiation impacting
the river. The river should have points of strong ground water inltration and a
small runo, in order to increase the groundwater to river water ratio, to increase
the groundwater temperature signal.
A favorable time of investigation should be found with respect to the following fac-
tors: The sky should be clear to reduce the temporal change in down welling long
wave radiation. Further on, the river should be close to its maximum or minimum
temperature in the annual temperature cycle, in order to have a maximum temper-
ature dierence between river water and groundwater. The river runo should be
at a minimum to ensure a high ratio between groundwater inltration versus river
runo. Analysis of the collected data should focus on local temperature signals, as
absolute temperature changes over longer stretches are not reliable with the current
thermal camera setup.
For improving the acquisition of LST, the accuracy of the emissivity correction
should be validated. One option would be to use an emissivity box as presented by
Becker et al. (1987). In order to address the issue of underestimated (overestimated)
temperature maxima (minima), two approaches can be tested: Flying the UAV at
a lower altitude, in order to achieve higher spatial resolution and to resolve the
extrema better. Another approach could be to stitch the thermal images during
map creation, without averaging multiple images. A comparison between a stitched
and averaged thermal map could show, if averaging decreases temperature extrema.
The disadvantage of stitching could be the appearance of distinct temperature jumps
at the stitch lines throughout the thermal map.
Upwelling radiation from the atmosphere between the land surface and camera was
neglected so far, as it is not expected to have a signicant contribution to the
radiation received by the thermal camera. Nonetheless it could be helpful to quantify
this eect, for example using the MODTRAN5 atmospherical model.
==PAGE:86==
==PAGE:87==
Bibliography
Aasen, H., Bendig, J., Bolten, A., Bennertz, S., Willkomm, M. & Bareth, G. 2014.
Introduction and preliminary results of a calibration for full-frame hyperspectral
cameras to monitor agricultural crops with UAVs. In: International Archives of
the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences - Isprs
Archives 40 (7).
Anav, A., D'Andrea, F., Viovy, N. & Vuichard, N. 2010. A validation of heat and
carbon uxes from high-resolution land surface and regional models. In: Journal
of Geophysical Research - Part G - Biogeosciences 115 (G4).
Anderson, K. & Gaston, K. J. 2013. Lightweight unmanned aerial vehicles will
revolutionize spatial ecology. In: Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment 11
(3).
Bandini, F., Olesen, D. M., Jakobsen, J., Reyna-Gutiérrez, J. A. & Bauer-Gottwein,
P. 2016. Measuring orthometric water heights from lightweight Unmanned Aerial
Vehicles (UAVs). In: Geophysical Research Abstracts 18.
Becker, F., Nerry, F., Ramanantsizehena, P. & Stoll, M. P. 1987. Importance of a
remote measurement of spectral thermal infrared emissivities; presentation and
validation of such a determination. In: Advances in Space Research 7 (11).
Berni, J. A. J., Zarco-Tejada, P. J., Suarez, L. & Fereres, E. 2009. Thermal and Nar-
rowband Multispectral Remote Sensing for Vegetation Monitoring From an Un-
manned Aerial Vehicle. In: Ieee Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing
47 (3).
Bonan, G. B. 2008. Ecological Climatology: Concepts and Applications. 2nd. Chap. 13
Surface energy uxes.
Brutsaert, W. 1982. Evaporation into the Atmosphere.
Brutsaert, W. 1975. On a Derivable Formula for Long-Wave Radiation From Clear
Skies. In: Water Resources Research 11 (5).
Cardoso, T. R. & Castro, A. S. d. 2005. The blackbody radiation in a D-dimensional
universes. In: Revista Brasileira de Ensino de Física 27 (4).
Christensen, H. S. 2013. Risø Campus Carbon. [Online]. Available: http://www.
eco.kt.dtu.dk/Research/Research_Facilitites/ [7 June 2016].
Cluster, E. F. D. 2016. Site details. [Online]. Available: http : / / www . europe -
fluxdata.eu/home/site-details?id=575 [7 June 2016].
73
==PAGE:88==
74
Bibliography
Dugdale, J. S. 2016. A practitioner's guide to thermal infrared remote sensing of
rivers and streams: recent advances, precautions and considerations. In: Wiley
Interdisciplinary Reviews: Water 3 (2).
FLIR. 2014. Advanced Radiometry Application Note. Version 120.
Fuchs, M. & Tanner, C. B. 1968. Surface Temperature Measurements of Bare Soils.
In: Journal of Applied Metrology 7 (2).
Gatley, D. F. 2016. A proposed full range relative humidity denition. In: Ashrae
Journal 58 (3).
Gonzalez-Dugo, V., Goldhamer, D., Zarco-Tejada, P. J. & Fereres, E. 2015. Im-
proving the precision of irrigation in a pistachio farm using an unmanned airborne
thermal system. In: Irrigation Science 33 (1).
Göttsche, F.-M., Olesen, F.-S. & Bork-Unkelbach, A. 2013. Validation of land sur-
face temperature derived from MSG/SEVIRI with in situ measurements at Gob-
abeb, Namibia. In: International Journal of Remote Sensing 34 (9-10).
Homann, H., Nieto, H., Jensen, R., Guzinski, R., Zarco-Tejada, P. & Friborg, T.
2016. Estimating evaporation with thermal UAV data and two-source energy
balance models. In: Hydrology and Earth System Sciences 20 (2).
Idso, S. B., Jackson, R. D., Ehrler, W. L. & Mitchell, S. T. 1969. A method for
determining the infra-red emittance of leaves. In: Ecology 50 (5).
InGOS. 2014. Risø-DTU willow eld and tall mast RIWI (Super Site). [Online].
Available: http: // www. ingos- infrastructure. eu/ riso- willow - field -
super-site/ [7 June 2016].
Koch, J. C., McKnight, D. M. & Neupauer, R. M. 2011. Simulating unsteady ow,
anabranching, and hyporheic dynamics in a glacial meltwater stream using a cou-
pled surface water routing and groundwater ow model. In: Water Resources
Research 47 (5).
Kondratyev, K. Y. 1969. Radiation in the Atmosphere.
Köppl, C. J. 2016. Feasibility of estimating groundwater discharge into rivers using
thermal imagery from an UAV. Special Project. Department of Environmental
Engineering at Technical University of Denmark.
Lakshmi, V. 1999. Surface temperature assimilation in land surface models. In:
International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium 4.
Li, Z.-L., Tang, B.-H., Wu, H., Ren, H., Yan, G., Wan, Z., Trigo, I. F. & Sobrino,
J. A. 2013. Satellite-derived land surface temperature: Current status and per-
spectives. In: Remote Sensing of Environment 131.
Liu, C., Liu, J., Hu, Y., Wang, H. & Zheng, C. 2015. Airborne Thermal Remote
Sensing for Estimation of Groundwater Discharge to a River. In: Groundwater.
Loheide, S. P. & Gorelick, S. M. 2006. Quantifying stream-aquifer interactions
through the analysis of remotely sensed thermographic proles and in situ tem-
perature histories. In: Environmental Science and Technology 40 (10).
Loinaz, M. C., Gross, D., Unnasch, R., Butts, M. & Bauer-Gottwein, P. 2014. Mod-
eling ecohydrological impacts of land management and water use in the Silver
Creek Basin, Idaho. In: Journal of Geophysical Research 119 (3).
==PAGE:89==
Bibliography
75
Mamer, E. A. & Lowry, C. S. 2013. Locating and quantifying spatially distributed
groundwater/surface water interactions using temperature signals with paired
ber-optic cables. In: Water Resources Research 49 (11).
McKnight, U. S., Funder, S. G., Rasmussen, J. J., Finkel, M., Binning, P. J. &
Bjerg, P. L. 2010. An integrated model for assessing the risk of TCE groundwater
contamination to human receptors and surface water ecosystems. In: Ecological
Engineering 36 (9).
Moran, M., Clarke, T., Inoue, Y & Vidal, A. 1994. Estimating Crop Water-Decit
Using the Relation between Surface-Air Temperature and Spectral Vegetation
Index. In: Remote Sensing of Environment 49 (3).
NASA. 2015. MODIS Land Surface Temperature and Emissivity. [Online]. Available:
http://modis.gsfc.nasa.gov/data/dataprod/mod11.php [22 July 2016].
Rasmussen, J. J., McKnight, U. S., Sonne, A. T., Wiberg-Larsen, P. & Bjerg, P. L.
2015. Legacy of a Chemical Factory Site: Contaminated Groundwater Impacts
Stream Macroinvertebrates. In: Archives of Environmental Contamination and
Toxicology 70 (2).
Rippin, D. M., Pomfret, A. & King, N. 2015. High resolution mapping of supra-
glacial drainage pathways reveals link between micro-channel drainage density,
surface roughness and surface reectance. In: Earth Surface Processes and Land-
forms 40 (10).
Robertson, D. P. & Cipolla, R. 2009. Practical Image Processing and Computer
Vision. Ed. by J. Wiley. Chap. Structure from Motion.
Rubio, E, Caselles, V. & Badenas, C. 1997. Emissivity Measurements of Several
Soils and Vegetation Types in the 8-14 µm Wave Band: Analysis of Two Field
Methods. In: Remote Sensing of the Environment 59 (3).
Schmidt, C., Conant, B., Bayer-Raich, M. & Schirmer, M. 2007. Evaluation and
eld-scale application of an analytical method to quantify groundwater discharge
using mapped streambed temperatures. In: Journal of Hydrology 347 (3-4).
Van De Griend, A. A. & Owe, M. 1993. On the relationship between thermal
emissivity and the normalized dierence vegetation index for natural surfaces.
In: International Journal of Remote Sensing 14.6.
Wagner, W. & Pruÿ, A. 2002. The IAPWS Formulation 1995 for the Thermody-
namic Properties of Ordinary Water Substance for General and Scientic Use.
In: Journal of Physical and Chemical Reference Data 31 (2).
==PAGE:90==
==PAGE:91==
Appendix A
Additional Thermal Images of Lille
Skensved Å
77
==PAGE:92==
78
!(
!(
!(
!(")
!(
")")
!(
!(
")
!(
!(
!(
!(
!(
!(!(
!(
!(
!(
!(
!(
!(
!(
!(
!(!(
!(!(
!(
!(
!(
Pos 9
Pos 9
Pos 8
Pos 8
Pos 7
Pos 7
Pos 6
Pos 6
Pos 5
Pos 5
Pos 4
Pos 4
Pos 3
Pos 3
Pos 2
Pos 2
Pos 1
Pos 1
Pos 10
Pos 10
Pos 15
Pos 15
Pos 14
Pos 14
Pos 12
Pos 12
Pos 11
Pos 11
Pos 13
Pos 13
¯
0
10
20
30
5
Meters
Legend
UAV flight
Divers
Apogee measurement
!(
In-situ infiltration meas.
Chainage definition
Images of Interest
In Appendix
")
Here
Figure A.1: Map of data collection locations for eld investigation in Lille Skensved
in June, for identication of location of following thermal images
==PAGE:93==
Appendix A. Additional Thermal Images of Lille Skensved Å
79
Position:1
Temperature [°C]
12.9
13
13.1
13.2
13.3
13.4
13.5
13.6
Position:2
Temperature [°C]
11.9
12
12.1
12.2
12.3
12.4
12.5
12.6
Position:3
Temperature [°C]
11.6
11.7
11.8
11.9
12
12.1
12.2
==PAGE:94==
80
Position:4
Temperature [°C]
11.1
11.2
11.3
11.4
11.5
11.6
Position:6
Temperature [°C]
10
10.1
10.2
10.3
10.4
10.5
10.6
10.7
10.8
Position:9
Temperature [°C]
14.8
15
15.2
15.4
15.6
==PAGE:95==
Appendix A. Additional Thermal Images of Lille Skensved Å
81
Position:10
Temperature [°C]
14.8
14.9
15
15.1
15.2
15.3
15.4
15.5
Position:11
Temperature [°C]
15.6
15.8
16
16.2
16.4
16.6
Position:12
Temperature [°C]
13
13.2
13.4
13.6
13.8
14
==PAGE:96==
82
Position:14
Temperature [°C]
14
14.5
15
15.5
16
Position:15
Temperature [°C]
14
14.2
14.4
14.6
14.8
15
15.2
15.4
15.6
==PAGE:97==
Appendix B
Additional Maps
B.1
Ortho Photo Mosaics
0
20
40
60
10
Meters
¯
Figure B.1: Ortho Photo Mosaic: Lille Skensved, 16.03.2016
83
==PAGE:98==
84
B.1. Ortho Photo Mosaics
¯
0
10
20
30
5
Meters
Figure B.2: Ortho Photo Mosaic: Risø, 11.04.2016
¯
0
10
20
30
5
Meters
Figure B.3: Ortho Photo Mosaic: Risø, 02.05.2016
==PAGE:99==
Appendix B. Additional Maps
85
¯
0
20
40
60
10
Meters
Figure B.4: Ortho Photo Mosaic: Risø, 12.05.2016
B.2
Digital Elevation Models
0
20
40
60
10
Meters
DEM
m.a.s.l.
50
43.5
¯
Figure B.5: DEM: Lille Skensved, 16.03.2016
==PAGE:100==
86
B.2. Digital Elevation Models
0
10
20
30
5
Meters
¯
DEM
m.a.s.l.
10
7
Figure B.6: DEM: Lille Skensved, 12.04.2016
¯
0
10
20
30
5
Meters
DEM
m.a.s.l.
High : 16
Low : 13
Figure B.7: DEM: Risø, 11.04.2016
==PAGE:101==
Appendix B. Additional Maps
87
¯
0
10
20
30
5
Meters
DEM
m.a.s.l.
15.5
12.5
Figure B.8: DEM: Risø, 02.05.2016
¯
0
20
40
60
10
Meters
DEM
m.a.s.l.
16
12.5
Figure B.9: DEM: Risø, 12.05.2016
==PAGE:102==
88
B.3. NDVI Maps
B.3
NDVI Maps
¯
0
10
20
30
5
Meters
NDVI
[-]
0.8
-0.2
Figure B.10: NDVI: Risø, 11.04.2016
¯
0
10
20
30
5
Meters
NDVI
[-]
0.8
 -0.2
Figure B.11: NDVI: Risø, 02.05.2016
==PAGE:103==
Appendix B. Additional Maps
89
¯
0
20
40
60
10
Meters
NDVI
[-]
0.8
-0.2
Figure B.12: NDVI: Risø, 12.05.2016
B.4
Emissivity Maps
¯
0
10
20
30
5
Meters
Emissivity
[-]
0.99
0.922
Figure B.13: Emissivity: Risø, 11.04.2016
==PAGE:104==
90
B.4. Emissivity Maps
¯
0
10
20
30
5
Meters
Emissivity
[-]
0.99
 
0.922
Figure B.14: Emissivity: Risø, 02.05.2016
¯
0
20
40
60
10
Meters
Emissivity
[-]
0.99
 
0.922
Figure B.15: Emissivity: Risø, 12.05.2016
==PAGE:105==
Appendix B. Additional Maps
91
B.5
Brightness Temperature Maps
0
20
40
60
10
Meters
¯
Brightness Temp.
°C
24
0
Figure B.16: Brightness temperature: Lille Skensved, 16.03.2016
¯
0
10
20
30
5
Meters
Brightness Temp
°C
15
8
Figure B.17: Brightness temperature: Risø, 11.04.2016
==PAGE:106==
92
B.5. Brightness Temperature Maps
¯
0
10
20
30
5
Meters
Brightness Temp.
°C
23
13
Figure B.18: Brightness temperature: Risø, 02.05.2016
¯
0
20
40
60
10
Meters
Brightness Temp.
°C 30
18
Figure B.19: Brightness temperature: Risø, 12.05.2016
==PAGE:107==
Appendix B. Additional Maps
93
B.6
Correction Procedure Temperature Change
¯
0
10
20
30
5
Meters
Temp. Dif.
[K]
3.5
0
Figure B.20: Temperature dierence: Risø, 11.04.2016
¯
0
10
20
30
5
Meters
Temp. diff.
K
3.5
0
Figure B.21: Temperature dierence: Risø, 02.05.2016
==PAGE:108==
94
B.6. Correction Procedure Temperature Change
¯
0
20
40
60
10
Meters
Temp. dif.
K
3.5
0
Figure B.22: Temperature dierence: Risø, 12.05.2016
==PAGE:109==
Appendix C
Additional Formulas
Window Averaging Algorithm
O′
f(i, j) =
b∑
i=a
d∑
j=c
Ofield;ave(i, j)
(1 + b −a)(1 + d −c)
with
a =
{
i −10,
i ≥11
1,
i < 11
b =
{
i + 10,
i ≤246
256,
i > 246
c =
{
j −10,
j ≥11
1,
j < 11
d =
{
j + 10,
j ≤314
324,
j > 314
(C.1)
Algorithm applied to smooth calculated oset, for sensor size of 256 × 324 pixels. i
and j dene the sensor pixel coordinate.
Flir Calibration Equation for Low Gain
Equations 2.3 and 2.4 and subsequently related equations are only valid for high gain
setting of the Flir Tau 2 camera, where F = 1. For low gain the default calibration
parameters are: F = 1.272, B = 1497.3, R = 37095 and O = 335.82. This yields
the eective wavelength λ = 9.61 µm and l = 39173.8 W DN−1 m−3 sr−1. Now two
new variables are introduced:
Fl = F −1
(C.2)
Rl = 2hc2
λ5
= Rl
(C.3)
95
==PAGE:110==
96
These denitions together with equation 2.6 lets formulate the Planck equation 2.2
rearranged as:
T =
B
log
(
Rl
Bp + 1
)
(C.4)
and the standard Flir calibration equation 2.1 can be written as:
T =
B
log
(
Rl
l(W−O) + Fl + 1
)
(C.5)
Equating the two previous equations and solving for the spectral radiance Bp gives
the camera sensor relation between read ux DN value and incident spectral radi-
ance:
Bp =
1
1
l(W−O) + Fl
Rl
(C.6)
This shows that for the camera's low gain setting, the relationship between spectral
radiance and read ux is not linear anymore. Figure C.1 visualizes this relationship
for dierent F values.
Read flux W [DN]
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
16000
18000
Spectral radiance B [W/m3/sr]
×108
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
F =0.5
F =1
F =1.272
F =1.5
F =2
Figure C.1: Relationship between camera's ux reading in DN and incident spec-
tral radiance for low gain setting, where F diers from 1
==PAGE:111==
Appendix D
Drone Systems Report
97
==PAGE:112==
98
1 
voÇ•]•}(š‰Œ}À]ÇŒ}v•Ç•šu• 
Christian Köppl; s141720@student.dtu.dk; Department of Environmental Engineering, DTU 
Provided Data 
A series of thermal videos taken from an UAV hexacopter with a FLIR Tau 2 camera over the stream Grindsted 
Å in Denmark was provided. Two kinds of videos were provided: videos where the drone is stationary with 
approx. 100 to 200 frames and videos where the drone is moving, covering a longer stretch of the river (ca. 
450 m) with approx. 2000 frames. 
The videos are in a .seq format, which is a video format proprietary to FLIR. The single values are temperature, 
obtained through standard manufacturer calibration. Some parameters for temperature calculation are set 
to default values, which are unrealistic for the current scenario, for example atmospheric temperature at 
20°C in a scenario with snow covered ground before sunrise. 
For each video a comma separated file is provided which contains GPS information of the drone during flight. 
For each taken video frame a GPS coordinate with a corresponding timestamp can be found. 
In the videos a relatively strong drift of temperature over time can be observed as well as temperature jumps 
over time, which occur when a flat field correction (FFC) is conducted. 
Data handling methods 
Only FLIR software is able to read and interpret the proprietary .seq files. FLIR software is not fully suitable 
for all analysis requirements and is expensive to obtain. Therefore a 30 days trial version of ThermaCam 
Researcher Professional 2.10 was used to convert the videos into MatLab files. Each frame was converted 
into a single file, holding the temperature values and additional information like the frame time stamp. 
Stationary videos  
Single frames of the river show temperature artefacts, which can be seen in the video as flickering. To handle 
the flickering along with temperature drifting, all images of one video sequence were averaged. Two 
approaches were used: In the first approach the image values were just averaged as they were, so the values 
for a pixel at position x, y averaged over all available frames to obtain the averaged value of pixel x, y.  
The second approach was to align the different frames before averaging. Therefore the single frames were 
extrapolated and exported to the tiff format and then aligned with the open source Hugin project. Afterwards 
they were reimported into MatLab and averaged. 
Moving videos 
A video taken from the moving drone following the river was used to create an averaged temperature map 
of the covered area. Therefore all video frames were exported into tiff format and loaded into Agisoft 
Photoscan. A file containing the GPS position of each frame was created and used to reference the images in 
the Photoscan software. Then a subset of images containing every tenth image was used for a first image 
alignment. The resulting point cloud surface showed a strong spherical surface due to the fisheye optic 
properties of the 9mm lens used on the FLIR camera. Calibration parameters of the optical properties of the 
lens are not available. To obtain a rough calibration, five outstanding points were identified through the 
covered river section. These were the vertexes of the river bends and a bridge. These points were optical 
roughly matched with a digital elevation model (DEM), which has a resolution of 0.4m, to obtain rough 
==PAGE:113==
Appendix D. Drone Systems Report
99
2 
ground control points (GCP). These GCP were then marked in the single images and used to conduct a rough 
lens calibration. 
Agisoft works inefficient in aligning images, if the amount of images is too high. Therefore the image set was 
divided into six different chunks.  For each chunk the images were aligned using the previous lens calibration. 
Afterwards the chunks could be aligned and merged into one model. Thereafter a dense point cloud was 
generated using the structure from motion principle and these points were used to generate a surface mesh. 
Afterwards all images were projected and orthorectified onto that mesh and a map created, where the values 
of overlapping images were linearly averaged. 
Data results 
Stationary videos 
 
 
Figure 1: Single frame from stationary video 
Figure 2: Average of stationary video sequence without 
alignment, showing only the river 
Figure 3: Average of stationary video after image alignment, showing only the river 
Figure 1-3 show the effect of averaging over time on the obtained river temperature. Without any averaging, 
the temperature appears patchy and shows artifacts (Figure 1). Averaging over time without alignment 
reduces the patchiness (Figure 2), but averaging over time after image alignment yields the smoothest 
temperature results (Figure 3). All figures show a temperature hot spot located in the river bend. The main 
issue of averaging over time without prior alignment is an induced random spatial averaging. This can be 
seen in Figure 4 and Figure 5. The land surface and river border in Figure 4, which has no alignment, look 
blurry compared to the land surface and river border after alignment in Figure 5. Furthermore all pixels which 
==PAGE:114==
100
3 
were not covered by all frames in Figure 5 have NaN value. This shows that the maximum offset in the images 
induced by small random drone movements is up to 11 pixels. 
 
Figure 4: Averaging of stationary sequence without any 
alignment 
Figure 5: Averaging of stationary sequence with prior image 
alignment 
Moving videos 
The resulting temperature map from the moving drone video can be seen in Figure 6. One sharp temperature 
jump can be seen after the last river bend on the eastern site. This is caused by a FFC of the Flir Tau 2 camera. 
The river can be identified as the warmest surface in the map. Every pixel in the map is the average value 
from 100 to 300 frames. 
 
Figure 6: Temperature map result from moving drone flight, including land areas 
Focusing on the river temperature shows three temperature sections: from the left, first comes a long stretch 
with similar temperature, then follows a cold section in the bend and then a last warm stretch. The 
==PAGE:115==
Appendix D. Drone Systems Report
101
4 
temperature differences are not real differences in the river surface temperature, but are caused by 
temperature shifts after FFCs. 
 
Figure 7: Temperature map result from moving drone flight with focus on river surface temperature 
To see the temperature dynamics in the river, a small stretch of the river needs to be analyzed. In Figure 8, 
a temperature hot spot can be identified in the central river bend. Also some patches and artifacts become 
visible. These are induced by orthorectification onto the mesh, which is produced with the thermal images. 
The resolution of the thermal camera is too low to create a reliable mesh and the noise of the water 
surface causes wrong matches of points in the dense cloud generation, which causes an uneven mesh. A 
possible solution to avoid the artifacts caused by the mesh would be to use an external DEM for 
orthorectification, but this requires some verified ground control points, otherwise it is impossible to match 
the thermal images onto the DEM. 
 
Figure 8: Focus on small river stretch from Figure 7 
==PAGE:116==
102
5 
Figure 9 shows the same river stretch as displayed in Figures 1-5 from the moving drone video processing in 
a similar color coding. The hot spot in the river bend is not as clearly identifiable as in the stationary videos. 
One reason are the warm artifacts on the left side. Another explanation can be the different time of the flight, 
so it is possible the temperature pattern changed in the meanwhile. Another reason might be, that the hot 
spot is not as real as the images from the stationary video suggest. Previous calibration experiments of a Flir 
Tau 2 camera have shown, that the temperature display of the camera of a uniform black body is not always 
uniform, which means the camera sensor can induce hot spots. In the stationary video averaging the same 
pixel of the senor measures always a similar area on the ground throughout the whole sequence, which 
means sensor hotspots would not be eliminated. This is different with the moving drone. The movement of 
the drone leads to one spot of the ground being measured by different pixels of the sensor. That means 
averaging these video sequences would lower the effect of hotspots induced by the sensor. 
 
Figure 9: Averaging of moving drone sequence images with focus on the area, which is analyzed in the stationary video 
Suggestions for further flights 
Obtain the videos in raw digital numbers 
If it is possible with the current payload setup to obtain raw thermal sensor data in digital numbers (DN), this 
would be favorable as it allows to apply an own temperature calibration of the sensor. Also if it can be 
obtained directly, further analysis would not depend on data conversion through expensive FLIR software 
avoiding the seq format. 
Use moving drone videos instead of stationary drone videos 
Before averaging the stationary drone videos, they need to be aligned, to prevent loss of information and 
random spatial averaging. When alignment is necessary in any case, it can also be applied to a video of the 
whole river stretch of interest and will yield a continuous map. Moving drone sequences can also prevent 
false positive hotspots as discussed above. 
==PAGE:117==
Appendix D. Drone Systems Report
103
6 
Conduct frequent FFCs 
Frequent FFCs prevent a strong drifting in temperature and the more frequent the FFCs are, the smaller the 
temperature jump after an FFC is. This might even allow to compare river temperature over a whole river 
stretch. 
Use Ground Control Points 
Ground control points bring a lot of benefits. Efficient markers for GCPs can be metal panels. They have a low 
emissivity and therefore can be easily detected in thermal images through the resulting low radiometric 
temperature. A mission with plenty (ca. 10) precise GCPs and known camera locations can be used for 
calibration of the lens in Agisoft Photoscan. GCPs also allow precise georeferencing, which then allows to use 
external DEMs for orthorectification, which would solve the issue of temperature artifacts. The 
georeferencing would also provide a correct spatial scaling of the temperature map, which makes more 
suitable for quantitative analyzes in the future. 
Use the same drone altitude 
The current altitude of the drone for thermal image acquisition seems to be suitable. It provides a high 
enough resolution of the river surface (ca. 10 cm) and it provides enough thermal image area of the 
surrounding land surface, which is necessary for a correct and efficient image alignment. 
==PAGE:118==
==PAGE:119==
List of Figures
2.1
UAV in operation with mounted payload at Lille Skensved . . . . . .
5
2.2
Spectral bands of the multispectral camera . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Electric circuit layout for triggering digital photo camera with BBB .
7
2.4
CAD model of the payload showing the downward facing side with
the cameras . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
CAD model of the payload showing the upward facing side . . . . . .
8
2.6
Detailed view of mounting of the thermal camera
. . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.7
Detailed view of mounting help for the RGB camera . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.8
Main structure of thermal camera thread with focus on critical func-
tions; written in pseudo code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.9
Spectral radiance plotted over wavelength for the range of the FLIR
Tau 2 camera. The maxima are marked as well as the wavelength
10.0755 µm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.10 Spectral radiance at λ = 10.0755 µm plotted over the integral of
spectral radiance from 7.5 µm to 13.5 µm, which is the emissive power
j, detected by the thermal sensor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.11 Schematic of sources of long wave radiation reaching one point on the
thermal camera's sensor
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.12 Overview of Risø eld site: a) Location of Risø in Denmark; b) Extend
of willow eld with ux tower position; c) Image of the ux tower; d)
Willows at beginning of growth; e) Sample willows on the eld grown
to ca. 4 m . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.13 Overview of Lille Skensved eld site: a) Focus on investigation area,
showing the source of groundwater contamination, contamination plume
and ight area; b) Position of eld site in Denmark; c) Image of the
eld site . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.14 Flow chart for data post processing. Green eld: input data; Red
eld: nal output; Blue eld: intermediate result; Orange arrow:
Processing step; Turquoise arrow: Data feed . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
105
==PAGE:120==
106
List of Figures
2.15 Illustration of long wave radiation paths: RLu↑is the upwelling radi-
ation of the atmosphere above ight level and RLu↓the down welling
part. RLl↑and RLl↓are the upwelling and down welling parts of the
atmosphere below the camera. RL↓is the total down welling radiation
reaching the land surface and RR the reected part. RS is the radia-
tion emitted by the land surface and RC the total radiation received
by the thermal infrared camera. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.1
Global calibration of Flir Tau 2 for each room temperature set, omit-
ting camera core temperature, displaying the 2σ data condence interval 33
3.2
Deviation of each pixel from thermal image mean read ux, at BB
temperatures 10°C, 35°C and 45°C at ambient temperature 30°C.
Black circles mark points evaluated in Figure 3.3 . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.3
Read ux deviation of single pixel from image mean value of BB
target, for dierent BB target temperatures and ambient room tem-
peratures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.4
Input data points and resulting tting for global camera calibration .
36
3.5
Resulting parameter maps and tting RMSE for pixel wise calibration
of Flir Tau 2 thermal camera
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.6
Measures of calibration accuracy over dierent target temperatures
.
38
3.7
RMSE and bias for each pixel from calibration validation . . . . . . .
39
3.8
Behavior of camera core temperature during camera start up and
measured temperature of a BB target at 20°C, averaged over each
image
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.9
Deviation of each pixel from thermal image mean read ux, at BB
temperatures 5°C, 25°C and 70°C at uncontrolled ambient tempera-
ture of approximately 24°C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.10 Global calibration of DTU cam and DS cam omitting core temperature 42
3.11 Stitched and orthorectied photo of investigated river stretch
. . . .
43
3.12 Brightness temperature map of investigated river stretch . . . . . . .
43
3.13 Close up of central river stretch brightness temperature map, where
the stream is overhung by trees
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.14 Close up of the downstream river stretch brightness temperature,
where temperature shifts are visible . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.15 Map of data collection locations for eld investigation in Lille Skensved
in June . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
3.16 Comparison of collected data over stream chainage
. . . . . . . . . .
47
3.17 Delineation of water surface: a) Original thermal image; b) Origi-
nal temperature distribution; c) Land masking through temperature
value cuto; d) Assumed distribution for water surface; e) Masking
after erosion; f) Distribution of water temperatures after nal masking 49
3.18 Thermal image and photo at position 5: GCP and cold spot visible
.
50
3.19 Thermal image and photo at position 7: cold fringes at the lower
riverbank, and cold spots on the stream visible. Disturbance of water
surface through UAV rotors visible in photo
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
==PAGE:121==
List of Figures
107
3.20 Thermal image and photo at position 8: cold fringes at the lower
riverbank, and cold spots on the stream visible.
. . . . . . . . . . . .
51
3.21 Thermal image and photo at position 13: Cold spot from outow of
drainage pipe clearly visible . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
3.22 Thermal map of investigated river stretch at Grindsted, data acquired
by moving ight . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
3.23 Temperature of river surface with dierent processing methods: Sin-
gle image; Averaging of stationary video; Averaging of stationary
video after prior alignment; Section of thermal map from moving
video . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
3.24 Map of stitched and orthorectied photos from Risø eld site, taken
on 25.05.2016 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
3.25 DEM of Risø eld site, acquired on 25.05.2016 . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
3.26 NDVI map of Risø eld site, acquired on 25.05.2016 . . . . . . . . . .
57
3.27 Emissivity map of Risø eld site, calculated from NDVI map . . . . .
57
3.28 Thermal image of the sky under near zenith direction in Risø on
25.02.2016 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
3.29 Uncorrected brightness temperature map in Risø acquired on 25.05.2016 60
3.30 Temperature dierence introduced by emissivity and Lwin correction
applied to brightness temperature (compare Fig. 3.29)
. . . . . . . .
60
3.31 Overview of coverage of thermal mapping for the dierent investiga-
tion dates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
3.32 LST map of Risø willow eld on 11.04.2016 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
3.33 LST map of Risø willow eld on 02.05.2016 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
3.34 LST map of Risø willow eld on 12.05.2016 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
3.35 LST map of Risø willow eld on 25.05.2016 with indication of sink area 62
3.36 Regression of brightness temperature from brightness temperature
map of thermal images over brightness temperature acquired with
thermal gun spot measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
3.37 Thermal camera core temperature and UAV elevation over ight mis-
sion time on 25.05.2016 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
3.38 Elevation extracted from DEM plotted over elevation spot measure-
ments with RTK unit. Zero elevation refers to minimum elevation in
m.a.s.l. measured with RTK unit for each data set . . . . . . . . . . .
66
==PAGE:122==
==PAGE:123==
List of Tables
2.1
Dierent temperature combinations of ambient air temperature and
BB temperature, used for calibration of the FLIR Tau 2 thermal camera 12
2.2
Overview of eld campaigns conducted . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1
Flir camera global calibration parameters for dierent ambient room
temperatures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.2
Resulting parameter values and distributions for pixel wise camera
calibration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.3
Conditions and operational parameters of UAV missions at Risø . . .
55
3.4
Mean NDVI and Emissivity at dierent ights in Risø . . . . . . . . .
56
3.5
Measured and estimated down welling long wave radiation for Risø
eld site . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
3.6
Total resulting temperature correction for the dierent methods of
Lwin estimations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
3.7
Accuracy of acquired DEMs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
109
